 Distinct neural circuits for the formation and retrieval of episodic 
memories
Dheeraj S. Roy1,5, Takashi Kitamura1,5, Teruhiro Okuyama1, Sachie K. Ogawa1, Chen Sun1, 
Yuichi Obata2, Atsushi Yoshiki2, and Susumu Tonegawa1,3,4,6,*
1RIKEN-MIT Center for Neural Circuit Genetics at the Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, 
Department of Biology and Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, U.S.A.
2RIKEN BioResource Center, 3-1-1 Koyadai, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan
3Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, 
U.S.A.
4RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan
SUMMARY
The formation and retrieval of a memory is thought to be accomplished by activation and 
reactivation, respectively, of the memory-holding cells (engram cells) by a common set of neural 
circuits, but this hypothesis has not been established. The medial temporal-lobe system is essential 
for the formation and retrieval of episodic memory for which individual hippocampal subfields 
and entorhinal cortex layers contribute by carrying out specific functions. One subfield whose 
function is poorly known is the subiculum. Here, we show that dorsal subiculum and the circuit, 
CA1 to dorsal subiculum to medial entorhinal cortex layer 5, plays a crucial role selectively in the 
retrieval of episodic memories. Conversely, the direct CA1 to medial entorhinal cortex layer 5 
circuit is essential specifically for memory formation. Our data suggest that the subiculum-
containing detour loop is dedicated to meet the requirements associated with recall such as rapid 
memory updating and retrieval-driven instinctive fear responses.
INTRODUCTION
It is generally thought that formation and retrieval of a memory are accomplished by 
activation and reactivation of memory-holding cells (engram cells), respectively, by a largely 
common set of neural circuits that convey relevant sensory and/or processed information. 
However, this hypothesis has not been well studied. One of the best neural systems to prove 
this issue is the medial temporal lobe (MTL), including the hippocampus (HPC) and 
*Correspondence: tonegawa@mit.edu.
5Co-first author
6Lead contact
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
D.S.R., T.K., and S.T. contributed to the study design. D.S.R., T.K., T.O., S.K.O., and C.S. contributed to the data collection and 
interpretation. D.S.R. and T.K. conducted the surgeries, behavior experiments, and histological analyses. Y.O. and A.Y. generated the 
dorsal subiculum mouse line. D.S.R. and S.T. wrote the paper. All authors discussed and commented on the manuscript.
Published as: Cell. 2017 August 24; 170(5): 1000–1012.e19.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 entorhinal cortex (EC), which plays crucial roles in episodic memory (Eichenbaum et al., 
2007; Squire, 1992). Numerous studies have identified specific and crucial roles of 
individual HPC subfields and EC layers to the overall mnemonic function (Deng et al., 2010; 
Hasselmo and McClelland, 1999; Hitti and Siegelbaum, 2014; Moser et al., 2014; Nakazawa 
et al., 2004). However, the essential function of one HPC subfield, subiculum (Sub), is 
poorly known. The mammalian HPC formation is organized primarily as a unidirectional 
circuit, where information transferred from the EC’s superficial layers to the dentate gyrus 
(DG) is processed successively in CA subfields: CA3, CA2, and CA1. Dorsal CA1 (dCA1) 
sends its primary projections directly to medial EC layer 5 (EC5) or indirectly via dorsal 
subiculum (dSub) (a detour circuit). One of the interesting differences between the direct 
and indirect HPC output pathways is that in the latter, dSub projects not only to EC5, but 
also to many cortical and subcortical brain regions (Ding, 2013; Kishi et al., 2000).
Using functional magnetic resonance imaging of human subjects, several studies have 
suggested that the DG and CA subfields are selectively activated during episodic memory 
formation, whereas subiculum (Sub) is active during the recollection of an episode (Eldridge 
et al., 2005; Gabrieli et al., 1997). In rodents, ibotenic acid lesions of the CA1 subfield or 
Sub caused impairments in the acquisition of place navigation (Morris et al., 1990). 
However, since human imaging studies provide only correlative, rather than causal, evidence 
and rodent lesions are not well targeted to a specific hippocampal subregion, especially 
given the close proximity of CA1 and dSub, it has not been possible to identify the essential 
function of Sub in episodic memory. Furthermore, previous studies did not address the 
potential purpose of the parallel diverging and converging dCA1 to medial EC5 and dCA1 to 
dSub to medial EC5 circuits in memory formation versus retrieval.
In the present study, we addressed these issues by creating a mouse line expressing Cre 
recombinase specifically in dSub neurons. Combined with circuit tracing and optogenetic 
manipulations during behavioral paradigms, we found differential roles of dSub projections 
in hippocampal memory retrieval and retrieval-induced stress hormone responses. We 
demonstrate that dSub and the circuit, CA1→dSub→EC5, is selectively required for 
memory retrieval, while the dSub to mammillary bodies (MB) circuit regulates stress 
hormones following memory retrieval. In contrast, the direct CA1→EC5 circuit is essential 
for hippocampal memory formation, but not recall. Our study reveals a functional double-
dissociation between parallel hippocampal output circuits that are important for memory 
formation versus memory retrieval.
RESULTS
Generation of FN1-Cre Mice
We took advantage of the finding that fibronectin-1 (FN1) gene expression is restricted to 
dSub neurons (Lein et al., 2004) and created a transgenic mouse line (FN1-Cre) that 
expresses Cre recombinase under the FN1 promoter (Figure 1A, and see Methods). When 
infected with a Cre-dependent adeno-associated virus containing an eYFP gene, eYFP 
expression was highly restricted to dSub neurons and was completely absent in neighboring 
dCA1 excitatory neurons identified by WFS1 (Figure 1B). The expression of eYFP was 
restricted to CaMKII+ excitatory neurons in both the deep and superficial layers of dSub 
Roy et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 (Figures 1C–1D, and see Figure S1A). This eYFP expression accounted for over 85% of all 
excitatory neurons in this brain region, and was dSub-specific along the entire medial-lateral 
axis (Figures 1E–1K). Further, Cre expression was absent in ventral subiculum (vSub) and 
medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) in this mouse line (Figures S1B–S1K). Using in situ 
hybridization, we confirmed that Cre expression in this mouse line is highly restricted to 
dSub, and the dorsal tegmental nucleus (DTg) in the brain stem (Figure S1L). Thus, FN1-
Cre mice allows for the genetic manipulation of dSub excitatory neurons with unprecedented 
specificity.
Input-Output Organization of dSub Neurons
We next examined the inputs to dSub excitatory neurons as well as their anterograde brain-
wide projection pattern. Monosynaptic retrograde tracing experiments using a Cre-
dependent helper virus combined with rabies virus (RV) expressing mCherry (Wickersham 
et al., 2007), labeled 78% of dSub cells relative to all cells (i.e., DAPI+ cells). The results 
confirmed that dCA1 provides the major input to dSub excitatory neurons (Figures 2A–2C) 
(Ding, 2013; Kishi et al., 2000). Other brain areas that provide inputs to dSub include 
parasubiculum (PaS), retrosplenial agranular cortex (RSA), superficial layers of EC (MEC 
II/III), nucleus of the diagonal band (NDB), nucleus accumbens shell (Acb Sh), and several 
thalamic nuclei (Thal Nucl) (Figure 2D, and see Figure S1M).
A Cre-dependent channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2)-eYFP virus combined with light sheet 
microscopy of CLARITY (Chung et al., 2013, see Methods)-processed brain samples 
revealed that major efferents of dSub neurons were directed to RSA, mammillary bodies 
(MB), medial EC5, and postrhinal cortex (Pos) (Figures 2E–2F). No projections from dSub 
were observed in the superficial layers (II/III) of MEC (Figure 2G). These dSub neurons 
converged on both medial and lateral regions of MB (Figure 2H). Using a Cre-dependent 
synaptophysin virus to label dSub axonal terminals, we found that these Cre+ neurons 
express vesicular glutamate transporters 1 and 2 (Kaneko et al., 2002), reflecting their 
excitatory nature (Figures S1N–S1P). Injection of a retrograde tracer, cholera toxin subunit 
B (CTB), into the MB revealed a gradient of CTB555 with higher intensity labeling in the 
proximal part of dSub (i.e., closer to CA1), whereas injection into medial EC5 showed a 
gradient of CTB488 with higher intensity labeling in the distal part of dSub (i.e., away from 
CA1) (Figures 2I–2M, and see Figure S1Q) (Witter et al., 1990). However, neurons in both 
proximal and distal parts of dSub were weakly labeled by CTB injected into MB or EC5. 
Together, these results indicate that dCA1 serves as the main input structure to dSub, and 
that the majority of dSub neurons send projections to multiple downstream target structures.
The dSub→EC5 Circuit Bidirectionally Regulates Episodic Memory Retrieval
To examine the functional role of dSub neurons and their circuits, we performed optogenetic 
inhibition experiments using a Cre-dependent eArch3.0-eYFP virus. During the contextual 
fear-conditioning (CFC) paradigm, we confirmed that green light inhibition of dSub 
decreased behavior-induced immediate early gene cFos-positive neurons (Figures S2A–
S2L). Inhibition of dSub neurons during CFC training had no effect on footshock-induced 
freezing behavior or long-term memory formation (Figure 3A). In contrast, dSub inhibition 
during CFC recall tests decreased behavioral performance (Figure 3B). Inhibition of dSub 
Roy et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 neurons had no effect on motor behaviors in an open-field assay (Figure S2M). Inhibition of 
dSub terminals in medial EC5, but not in MB, also revealed a memory retrieval deficit 
(Figure 3C). Since the behavioral effect of dSub inhibition in this mouse line is based on 
eArch expression in approximately 85% of excitatory neurons in this brain region, we 
examined the effect of a more complete inhibition of dSub neurons. Inhibition of 
dSub→EC5 terminals in wild type mice using an EF1α-eArch3.0-eYFP virus revealed a 
greater memory retrieval deficit (Figure S3 vs. Figure 3C). Further, inhibition of 
vSub→EC5 terminals showed normal levels of memory recall (Figure S3).
Conversely, optogenetic activation of ChR2-eYFP-expressing dSub projections to medial 
EC5 during CFC recall tests increased recall-induced freezing behavior in the training 
context, but not in a neutral context (Figure 3D, and see Figure S4A). This result indicates 
that dSub is involved in hippocampal memory retrieval in a context-specific manner. 
Activation of dSub→EC5 in mice that did not receive footshocks during training lacked 
freezing behavior during the recall test, supporting the specificity of increased memory 
retrieval in CFC-trained animals. Our interpretation of these optogenetic activation 
experiments is that in the training context natural recall cues reactivate engram cells in all 
subfields of the hippocampus, like DG, CA3, and CA1, but also in dSub. When the activity 
of dSub projections to EC5 is further increased by ChR2 this leads to enhanced freezing due 
to increased activation of dSub engram cells. On the other hand, in a neutral context lacking 
the specific natural recall cues to reactivate dSub engram cells, the ChR2 activation without 
engram labeling is not sufficient to induce memory recall. In another hippocampus-
dependent memory paradigm, trace fear-conditioning, dSub→EC5 inhibition impaired 
memory recall (Figure 3E, and see Figures S4B–S4C). In contrast, inhibition of dSub→EC5 
had no effect on the recall of a hippocampus-independent memory formed during delay fear-
conditioning (Figures S4D–S4E). Together, these experiments indicate that the dSub→EC5 
circuit regulates episodic memory retrieval bidirectionally. We confirmed that the 
dSub→EC5 projection is also necessary for the retrieval of a positive-valence, 
hippocampus-dependent (Raybuck and Lattal, 2014) memory formed in a conditioned place 
preference (CPP) paradigm (Figure 3F, and see Figures S2N, S4F–S4G).
The dSub→MB Circuit Regulates Retrieval-Induced Stress Hormone Responses
During both CFC training and recall, levels of the stress hormone corticosterone (CORT) 
increases in the blood (Figure 3G), which is believed to be important to prepare the animal 
for a predicted immediate danger (Kelley et al., 2009). Given our finding that dSub neurons 
are required for memory retrieval, but not memory formation, we investigated whether the 
dSub→MB circuit is involved in retrieval-induced stress hormone responses. Optogenetic 
inhibition of dSub→MB projections following CFC recall, but not following CFC training, 
prevented the CORT increase (Figure 3G, and see Figure S2N). This deficit was specific to 
dSub→MB terminal inhibition, since dSub→EC5 terminal inhibition had no effect. In 
addition, optogenetic activation of ChR2-expressing dSub→MB projections following CFC 
recall increased CORT levels, revealing a bidirectional regulation of blood stress hormone 
levels by the dSub→MB circuit following fear memory retrieval. Interestingly, we did not 
observe increased CORT levels following CPP memory retrieval (Figure S4H). From our 
finding that the dSub→EC5 circuit is crucial for CPP memory retrieval (Figure 3F), it is 
Roy et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 clear that dSub neurons are activated and therefore both downstream EC5 and MB circuits 
would be activated. The lack of increased CORT levels following CPP memory retrieval 
suggests that the dSub→MB circuit is necessary but not sufficient to induce CORT. These 
experiments uncovered a neural circuit originating from dSub that regulates stress hormone 
responses to conditioned cues.
Heterogeneity of dCA1 Neurons that Project to dSub and EC5
The dCA1 neurons send primary projections directly to medial EC5, or indirectly via dSub 
(Ding, 2013). We examined whether the same dCA1 neurons send divergent projections to 
both dSub and EC5, or whether these two circuits involve distinct subpopulations of dCA1 
neurons. To test these possibilities, we conducted monosynaptic retrograde tracing by 
injecting a Cre-dependent helper virus combined with rabies virus expressing mCherry 
(Wickersham et al., 2007) into dSub of FN1-Cre mice combined with CTB488 injected into 
medial EC5 (Figures 4A–4C, and see Figure S1Q). The dCA1 cells revealed a gradient of 
RV-mCherry with higher intensity labeling in the distal part of dCA1 (i.e., closer to dSub) 
(Figure 4B) and a gradient of CTB488 with higher intensity labeling in the proximal part of 
dCA1 (i.e., away from dSub) (Figure 4C). The higher intensity labeling of distal dCA1 by 
RV-mCherry and proximal dCA1 by CTB488 are consistent with earlier observations 
(Knierim et al., 2013), and suggests their stronger projections to dSub and EC5, respectively. 
However, in counting the total number of labeled cells regardless of labeling intensity, we 
did not find any significant difference in the number of RV-mCherry-positive dCA1 cells nor 
in the number of CTB488-positive dCA1 cells along the proximal-distal axis (Figure S5J). 
This suggests that the strength of the projections from dCA1 to dSub and from dCA1 to EC5 
are not reflected in the total number of projecting dCA1 cells, but in their labeling intensity. 
Such differences in projection strength and targets of the distal vs. proximal dCA1 cells may 
provide the basis for their differential roles in behaviors. It has been suggested that proximal 
and distal dCA1 may play differential roles in memory formation (Nakazawa et al., 2016).
Importantly, we observed three neuronal populations distributed throughout the proximal-
distal axis of dCA1, namely RV-mCherry-positive dCA1 cells, CTB488-positive dCA1 cells, 
and double-positive dCA1 cells (Figures 4D–4F), indicating that dCA1 neurons project 
collaterally to both dSub and medial EC5 (22%), project to dSub alone (18%), or to medial 
EC5 alone (23%) (Figure 4G, and see Figures S5A–S5H). A significant proportion of the 
remaining dCA1 neurons most likely send primary projections to the deep layers of the 
lateral EC (LEC5) (Knierim et al., 2013), which we confirmed using CTB retrograde tracing 
(Figure S5I). Thus, these data demonstrate that, although there are distinct dCA1 
subpopulations that project to either dSub or EC5, a significant proportion of dCA1 neurons 
projecting to dSub and EC5 are shared between these two circuits.
The dCA1→EC5 Circuit is Crucial for Episodic Memory Encoding
Given the selective role of the dSub→EC5 circuit in memory retrieval and our finding that 
heterogeneous subpopulations of dCA1 neurons project to dSub and medial EC5, 
respectively, we next investigated the behavioral contributions of the direct dCA1→EC5 
circuit. The injection of a Cre-dependent H2B-GFP virus into dCA1 of CA1 pyramidal cell-
specific Cre transgenic mice, TRPC4-Cre (Okuyama et al., 2016), resulted in GFP 
Roy et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 expression restricted to dCA1 pyramidal cells without any expression in dSub (Figure 4H). 
Terminal inhibition of CA1 axons at medial EC5 during CFC training impaired long-term 
memory formation (Figure 4I), whereas the same manipulation during CFC recall had no 
effect on behavioral performance (Figure 4J). Further, consistent with the role of dSub in 
CFC recall, terminal inhibition of dCA1→dSub during CFC recall, but not during CFC 
training, decreased behavioral performance (Figures 4K–4L). Therefore, the direct 
dCA1→EC5 circuit plays a crucial role in the encoding, but not recall, of CFC long-term 
memory, whereas the indirect dCA1→dSub→EC5 circuit is crucial for memory recall, but 
not encoding.
Distinct Roles for the Direct and Indirect Circuits in Memory Updating
A potential purpose of the parallel diverging and converging direct dCA1→EC5 and indirect 
dCA1→dSub→EC5 circuits could be to support rapid memory updating (Lee, 2010). To 
test this possibility, we performed the pre-exposure mediated contextual fear-conditioning 
(PECFC) paradigm with optogenetic terminal inhibition of CA1→EC5 (Figure 4M) or 
dSub→EC5 (Figure 4N) during the pre-footshock period (context retrieval) only or 
footshock period (fear association) only, on Day 2. CA1→EC5 inhibition specifically during 
the footshock period of Day 2 impaired the context-shock association evidenced by 
decreased freezing on Day 3, whereas inhibition during the pre-footshock period had no 
effect (Figure 4M). In contrast, dSub→EC5 inhibition during the pre-footshock period of 
Day 2 impaired the context-shock association on Day 3, while inhibition restricted to the 
footshock period had no effect (Figure 4N). Together, these data indicate that the 
dSub→EC5 circuit is crucial for the rapid recall in order to perform memory updating, 
while the CA1→EC5 circuit is crucial for encoding new information into a long-term 
memory.
cFos Activation in dCA1 and dSub during Memory Encoding and Retrieval
Expression of immediate-early genes (IEGs) has been used to map specific functions onto 
neuronal activity in a given brain region (Kubik et al., 2007). In order to acquire cellular 
level evidence supporting the dedicated role of dSub in recall rather than encoding of CFC 
memory, we monitored IEG cFos activation in dCA1 and dSub during CFC behavior. To 
measure cFos activation by training or recall, we took advantage of a virus-mediated strategy 
(Roy et al., 2016) using a cocktail of c-Fos-tTA and TRE-H2B-GFP viruses (Figures 5A–
5B). Wild type mice raised on a doxycycline (DOX) diet to prevent activity-dependent 
labeling by the injected virus cocktail were taken off DOX 24 hr before CFC encoding or 
recall to visualize H2B-GFP labeling in CA1 and dSub (Figures 5C–5E). There was 
significant cFos activation in both CA1 and dSub following encoding or recall epochs as 
compared to the home cage group (Figure 5F). Interestingly, in dSub, memory recall epochs 
enhanced cFos activation more compared with encoding epochs, whereas there was no 
difference of cFos activation in CA1 neurons elicited by these epochs (Figure 5G).
Further, we examined the overlap between behavior-induced cFos in CA1 and CA1 cells that 
were retrogradely labeled by injection of CTB555 into dSub or medial EC5 (Figure S1Q). 
Consistent with the optogenetic manipulation experiments, CA1 neurons projecting to EC5 
showed higher levels of cFos activation during CFC encoding rather than retrieval, whereas 
Roy et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 CA1 neurons projecting to dSub showed higher levels of cFos activation during retrieval 
(Figure 5H, and see Figures S5K–S5N). To examine CA1 memory engram cell reactivation 
following recall, among dSub and EC5 projecting subpopulations, we tagged CA1 engram 
cells formed during CFC encoding using a virus cocktail of c-Fos-tTA and TRE-ChR2-eYFP 
(Liu et al., 2012), while simultaneously labeling CA1 cells projecting to dSub or medial EC5 
with CTB555. One day after training, we quantified the overlap between recall-induced cFos 
in CA1 and CA1 engram cells that were retrogradely labeled (Figures 5I–5L). Strikingly, 
dSub-projecting CA1 engram cells showed higher cFos reactivation following memory 
retrieval compared to EC5-projecting CA1 engram cells (Figure 5M). Next, following CFC 
recall, we measured cFos activation levels in the basolateral amygdala (BLA), which plays 
crucial roles in fear memory encoding and recall (Hall et al., 2001). Terminal inhibition of 
the dSub→EC5 circuit, but not the dCA1→EC5 circuit, decreased cFos levels in the BLA 
(Figure 5N), further indicating that the direct and indirect dCA1 output circuits have 
differential functional roles in memory retrieval.
In Vivo Calcium Imaging of dCA1 and dSub Neurons
We also investigated activation of dSub and dCA1 pyramidal cells in response to training 
and recall by monitoring in vivo calcium (Ca2+) transients using a miniaturized 
microendoscope (Kitamura et al., 2015; Sun et al., 2015; Ziv et al., 2013). For this purpose, 
Cre-dependent GCaMP6f virus was injected into the dSub of FN1-Cre mice to specifically 
express the Ca2+ indicator in dSub cells (Figure 6A, and see Figures S6A–S6B). As 
expected, expression of GCaMP6f was restricted to dSub, with no expression in CA1 
neurons in these mice (Figures 6B, 6D). Similarly for dCA1 neurons, GCaMP6f virus was 
injected into the dCA1 of dCA1-specific WFS1-Cre mice (Kitamura et al., 2014, and see 
Methods) (Figures 6C, 6E). With the open field paradigm (Figures S6C–S6G, and see 
Movies S1–S2), CA1 neurons showed homogeneous activation profiles, whereas dSub 
neurons displayed two types of activation profiles (Geva-Sagiv et al., 2016; Sharp and 
Green, 1994; Staff et al., 2000; Taube, 1993): short-tail cells whose profiles were similar to 
those of CA1 cells, and long-tail cells in which the post-stimulation activity persisted as long 
as 15 s (Figures 6F–6G). Consistent with a previous study (Sharp and Green, 1994), dSub 
neurons exhibited place fields, which were larger in both types of dSub cells compared to 
CA1 pyramidal cells (Figure 6H, and see Figure S6H).
Next, we investigated Ca2+ activity patterns as mice went through the CFC paradigm (Figure 
6I, and see Figures S6I–S6K). CA1 showed an increased percentage of active cells during 
both training and recall periods compared to the pre-footshock period in the context in 
which a footshock was subsequently delivered. The dSub neurons showed an increased 
percentage of active cells during recall compared to the pre-footshock or training periods, 
and no significant difference of active cell percentages was observed between the latter two 
periods (top row, Figure 6I). We then divided the training and recall periods into two epochs
—non-freezing (NF) and freezing (F)—in order to differentiate an effect of the animal’s 
movement state (Ranck, 1973) on the proportion of active cells. During training, the 
proportion of active CA1 cells was greater during F epochs compared to the NF epochs, 
whereas these proportions were similar during recall. In contrast, the proportions of active 
dSub cells were greater during recall compared to training regardless whether the mice were 
Roy et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 in F or NF epochs. We then subdivided active dSub cells into short-tail and long-tail cells, 
and found that the proportion of active short-tail cells were greater during recall compared to 
training regardless whether mice were in F or NF epochs. In contrast, the proportion of 
active long-tail dSub cells was greater specifically during recall-induced F epochs, compared 
to the other three types of epochs (bottom row, Figure 6I). Together, and consistent with the 
behavior and cFos activation experiments, these data demonstrate distinct contributions of 
dCA1 and dSub cells to memory encoding and memory recall, respectively.
DISCUSSION
It has been established that CA1 and Sub serve as the major output structures of the 
hippocampus (O’Mara, 2006); however, the functional role of Sub in hippocampus-
dependent episodic memory has remained elusive. Here, we have shown that optogenetic 
inhibition of dSub during recall, but not during encoding, impairs behavioral performance in 
three hippocampal-dependent memory paradigms: CFC, trace fear-conditioning, and 
conditioned place preference. The activity of dSub neurons is capable of regulating memory 
recall bidirectionally: its inhibition impairs recall and its activation enhances recall. To our 
knowledge, this is the first identification of the specific causal role of dSub neurons in 
episodic memory recall.
Previously, lesions (Morris et al., 1990) as well as optogenetic inhibition (Goshen et al., 
2011) showed that in rodents, neuronal activity in the CA1 subfield is necessary for both the 
encoding and retrieval of long-term memories. In this study, we employed optogenetic 
inhibition of specific terminals of CA1 cell projections and found that the CA1→dSub 
circuit is crucial for memory recall but not for encoding, whereas the CA1→EC5 circuit is 
crucial for memory encoding but not for recall. Supporting this role of the CA1→dSub 
circuit is the finding that inhibition of the downstream dSub terminals in medial EC5 also 
impairs memory recall selectively. Together, these data indicate that the hippocampal output 
pathways are functionally segregated: episodic memory encoding uses primarily the direct 
dCA1→EC5 circuit, while episodic memory retrieval uses primarily the indirect 
dCA1→dSub→EC5 circuit. The functional dissociation between these two dCA1 output 
circuits is especially striking given that a significant proportion of dCA1 neurons projecting 
to dSub and EC5 are overlapping, and that the overall difference in cFos activation levels 
between dCA1 neurons projecting to dSub versus EC5 during either training or recall epochs 
is approximately 2% of all dCA1 cells. Further, it is intriguing that we found that about 20% 
of dCA1 engram cells, those projecting to EC5, are not reactivated by memory recall and 
thus do not contribute to this behavioral epoch. What could be the purpose of these dCA1 
engram cells? We speculate that these engram cells are the stable holder of the original 
memory, which are undisturbed by a retrieval process, and contribute to the generation of 
engrams in downstream regions, such as remote memory engram cells in the prefrontal 
cortex.
The dSub neurons displayed two types of activation profiles—short-tail cells and long-tail 
cells. These cells may not correspond to the previously reported non-bursting cells and 
bursting cells (Geva-Sagiv et al., 2016; Sharp and Green, 1994; Staff et al., 2000; Taube, 
1993), because the temporal dynamics of bursting activity measured by previous 
Roy et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 electrophysiological studies was 10–20 msec, which is different from the long-tail cells 
identified by calcium transients lasting as long as 6–15 sec. Interestingly, the proportion of 
active long-tail dSub neurons is greater specifically during recall-induced freezing epochs 
compared to training-induced freezing epochs. This may be because activation of long-tail 
cells requires more powerful drive than short-tail cells, and because such a potent drive may 
be provided only by reactivation of previously formed CA1 engram cells by recall cues 
(Tonegawa et al., 2015), and not by activation of naïve CA1 cells which occurs during 
training.
What advantages would the distinct circuits for memory encoding and recall provide? One 
possible merit may be related to episodic memories with negative valence. Fear memory 
retrieval by conditioned cues induces not only an instinctive fear response (anxiety, 
avoidance, freezing, etc.), but also an increase in blood stress hormones that organizes 
multiple body systems to prepare the animal for a predicted immediate danger (Kelley et al., 
2009). While a recent study showed that an area of the rodent’s olfactory cortex plays a key 
role in the hormonal component of the instinctive fear response to volatile predator odors 
(Kondoh et al., 2016), neural circuits responsible for triggering both episodic memory 
retrieval and retrieval-induced stress hormone responses have remained unknown. In this 
study, we have identified two neural circuits originating from dSub that independently 
regulate freezing behavior and stress hormone responses to conditioned cues: the 
dSub→EC5 circuit mediates appropriate freezing behavior during memory retrieval, while 
the dSub→MB circuit is crucial for memory retrieval-induced stress responses via bed 
nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) and the hypothalamic corticotropin hormone-
releasing neurons (Herman et al., 1998). The preferential activation of long-tail dSub 
neurons by recall cues may contribute to a sustained enhancement of hormonal release from 
these downstream areas (Bourque et al., 1993). It has been known that glucocorticoid 
hormone synthesis is enhanced during memory consolidation (Roozendaal, 2002). Similarly, 
the retrieval-induced enhancement of CORT may promote memory reconsolidation triggered 
by recall. Therefore, the Sub→MB pathway may regulate memory retrieval-based emotions 
and together with the Sub→EC5 pathway that controls the retrieval-based instinctive fear 
response, would allow for more flexible actions that improve the animal’s survival during 
challenging events in nature.
Another possible merit of distinct circuits for encoding and retrieval of memory may be to 
perform rapid memory updating. When a new salient stimulus (such as footshock) is 
delivered while a subject is recalling a previously acquired memory, the original memory is 
known to be modified (or updated) by incorporating the concurrently delivered salient 
stimulus. The diverging followed by converging CA1→dSub→EC5 and CA1→EC5 
circuits seem to be ideal for this mnemonic processing: the content of the previously formed 
memory is retrieved by dSub and a stimulus transmitted directly from CA1 will be co-
delivered to EC5 to make a new association resulting in memory updating. It has previously 
been suggested that such memory updating takes place in the PECFC paradigm by 
converting the previously acquired contextual memory to a context-dependent fear memory 
(Lee, 2010). Our findings, that in the PECFC paradigm, conversion of a contextual memory 
to a context-dependent fear memory is impaired by either the inhibition of dSub→EC5 
terminals targeted to the short (8 sec) context recall period, or inhibition of CA1→EC5 
Roy et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 terminals targeted to the period when an association of the recalled context memory with 
footshock takes place, supports the crucial role of dSub in memory updating.
Our study is on hippocampus-dependent episodic (or episodic-like) memories, which 
involves information processing by the hippocampus and other medial temporal lobe 
structures. Additional work is required to examine whether distinct circuits for encoding and 
retrieval is a property shared by brain regions responsible for the formation of non-episodic 
memories, which would involve structures other than the temporal lobe. In this context, it is 
interesting that a recent study with a worm (Caenorhabditis elegans) showed that aversive 
long-term memory formation and retrieval are carried out by distinct neural circuits (Jin et 
al., 2016). Therefore, it is possible that distinct circuits for long-term memory formation 
versus retrieval may be an evolutionarily conserved feature in many species that are capable 
of learning. With regards to cognitive disorders, it is widely believed that subiculum is 
among the earliest brain regions affected in Alzheimer’s disease patients (Hyman et al., 
1984). Our findings contribute to a better understanding of neural mechanisms underlying 
episodic memory formation and may provide insights into pathological conditions affecting 
memory retrieval.
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for reagents may be directed and will be fulfilled by the 
corresponding author Susumu Tonegawa (tonegawamit.edu).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Animals
The C57BL/6J wild type male mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory. For 
optogenetic behavioral manipulations of dCA1 neuronal terminals, we used the previously 
described CA1-specific TRPC4-Cre transgenic mouse line (Okuyama et al., 2016). For in 
vivo Ca2+ imaging of dCA1 neurons, we used the previously described dCA1-specific 
WFS1-Cre transgenic mouse line (Kitamura et al., 2014). WFS1-Cre mice were used for 
dCA1-specific Ca2+ imaging experiments due to their lower levels of transgene expression 
compared to TRPC4-Cre mice, which was crucial for stable long-term recordings. All 
transgenic mouse lines were maintained as hemizygotes. Mice had access to food and water 
ad libitum and were socially housed in numbers of two to five littermates until surgery. 
Following surgery, mice were singly housed. For behavioral experiments, all mice were male 
and 3–5 months old. For virus-mediated activity-dependent labeling experiments (Roy et al., 
2016), male mice had been raised on food containing 40 mg kg−1 doxycycline (DOX) for at 
least one week before surgery, and remained on DOX for the remainder of the experiments 
except for 24 hr preceding the target labeling day. For CLARITY and in vivo Ca2+ imaging 
experiments, male mice were 4–6 months old at the time of surgery. All experiments were 
conducted in accordance with U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) guidelines and the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Department of Comparative Medicine and Committee 
of Animal Care.
Roy et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Generation of FN1-Cre mice
Bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) recombineering was carried out using the EL250 
bacterial strain, provided by Dr. Neal Copeland at the Houston Methodist Research Institute. 
BAC clone RP24-211L16 containing the whole FN1 (NM_001276408.1, Mus musculus 
fibronectin 1) was obtained from Invitrogen and transferred into EL250. To introduce the 
Cre sequence in-frame following the first exon of FN1, a BAC modifying cassette was 
prepared: a 5’ homology arm, Cre, the kanamycin resistance gene flanked by FRTs, and a 3’ 
homology arm. The modifying cassette was electroporated into EL250 carrying the BAC 
clone. Resistant clones were selected and confirmed for appropriate homologous 
recombination, after which kanamycin was removed using the site-specific recombinase 
FLP. Purified DNA from the selected clone containing the modified BAC was digested with 
NotI, which cut both ends of the insert. Insert DNA was purified (1 ng/µl) and microinjected 
into C57BL/6JCrlj male pronuclei of fertilized eggs. Two-cell stage embryos were 
transferred to pseudopregnant recipient female mice. The C57BL/6J-Tg(FN1-
Cre)41(RBRC03020) transgenic mice were established and maintained in the same 
background. Cre mRNA expression was visualized by in situ hybridization as previously 
described (Okuyama et al., 2016).
METHOD DETAILS
Viral constructs
The AAV9-EF1α-DIO-eYFP, AAV9-EF1α-DIO-ChR2-eYFP, and AAV9-EF1α-DIO-
eArch3.0-eYFP viruses were acquired from the University of North Carolina (UNC) at 
Chapel Hill Vector Core. The AAV9-EF1α-DIO-mCherry, AAV9-EF1α-DIO-eArch3.0-
mCherry, and AAV9-EF1α-eArch3.0-eYFP viruses were acquired from Vector BioLabs. The 
AAV2-Syn-DIO-GCaMP6f and AAV5-Syn-DIO-GCaMP6f viruses were acquired from the 
University of Pennsylvania Vector Core. The AAV8-CMV-DIO-Synaptophysin-mCherry 
construct was provided by Dr. Rachael Neve at the MIT Viral Gene Transfer Core and 
packaged at the University of Massachusetts Medical School Gene Therapy Center and 
Vector Core. The pAAV-EF1α-DIO-H2B-GFP plasmid was constructed by cloning the 
histone H2B gene into a pAAV-EF1α-DIO-GFP backbone, which was serotyped with AAV9 
coat proteins and packaged at Vigene Biosciences. The c-Fos-tTA (Roy et al., 2016) and 
TRE-H2B-GFP (Okuyama et al., 2016) vectors were serotyped with AAV9 and AAV5 coat 
proteins respectively, and packaged at the University of Massachusetts Medical School Gene 
Therapy Center and Vector Core. The TRE-ChR2-eYFP (Liu et al., 2012) vector was 
serotyped with AAV9 coat proteins and packaged at Vigene Biosciences. We used our 
previously established method (Roy et al., 2016) for labeling memory engram cells using a 
virus cocktail of c-Fos-tTA and TRE-H2B-GFP or c-Fos-tTA and TRE-ChR2-eYFP (Figure 
5J). Viral titers were 1.2 × 1013 genome copy (GC) ml−1 for AAV9-EF1α-DIO-eYFP, 4 × 
1012 GC ml−1 for AAV9-EF1α-DIO-ChR2-eYFP, 1.6 × 1013 GC ml−1 for AAV9-EF1α-
DIO-eArch3.0-eYFP, 3 × 1013 GC ml−1 for AAV9-EF1α-DIO-mCherry and AAV9-EF1α-
DIO-eArch3.0-mCherry, 1 × 1011 GC ml−1 for AAV9-EF1α-eArch3.0-eYFP, 4 × 1012 GC 
ml−1 for AAV2-Syn-DIO-GCaMP6f and AAV5-Syn-DIO-GCaMP6f, 1.1 × 1013 GC ml−1 for 
AAV8-CMV-DIO-Synaptophysin-mCherry, 2 × 1014 GC ml−1 for AAV9-EF1α-DIO-H2B-
Roy et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 GFP, 4 × 1013 GC ml−1 for AAV9-c-Fos-tTA, 1.4 × 1013 GC ml−1 for AAV5-TRE-H2B-GFP, 
and 1.5 × 1013 GC ml−1 for AAV9-TRE-ChR2-eYFP.
Surgery and optic fiber implants
Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane or 500 mg kg−1 avertin for stereotaxic injections. 
Injections were targeted bilaterally to the dCA1 (−2.1 mm AP, +/− 1.5 mm ML, −1.4 mm 
DV), dSub (−3.08 mm AP, +/− 1.5 mm ML, −1.5 mm DV), vSub (−4.2 mm AP, +/− 3.25 
ML, −4.0 mm DV), medial EC5 (−4.63 mm AP, +/− 3.36 mm ML, −2.55 mm DV), MB 
(−2.8 mm AP, +/− 0.35 mm ML, −4.9 mm DV), and lateral EC5 (−3.40 mm AP, +/− 4.0 mm 
ML, −4.30 mm DV). Injection volumes were 400 nl for dCA1, 200 nl for dSub and vSub, 
300 nl for medial EC5, 300 nl for MB, and 400 nl for lateral EC5. Viruses were injected at 
70 nl min−1 using a glass micropipette attached to a 10 ml Hamilton microsyringe. The 
needle was lowered to the target site and remained for 5 min before beginning the injection. 
After the injection, the needle stayed for 10 min before it was withdrawn. Custom dSub and 
MB implants containing two optic fibers (200 mm core diameter; Doric Lenses) was 
lowered above the injection site (dSub: −3.08 mm AP, +/− 1.5 mm ML, −1.2 mm DV; MB: 
−2.8 mm AP, +/− 0.35 mm ML, −4.8 mm DV). Single optic fiber implants (200 mm core 
diameter; Doric Lenses) were lowered above the EC5 injection sites (−4.8 mm AP, +/− 3.36 
mm ML, −2.20 mm DV). The implant was secured to the skull with two jewelry screws, 
adhesive cement (C&B Metabond) and dental cement. An opaque cap derived from the top 
part of an Eppendorf tube protected the implant. Mice were given 1.5 mg kg−1 metacam as 
analgesic and allowed to recover for 2 weeks before behavioral experiments. All injection 
sites were verified histologically. As criteria, we only included mice with virus expression 
limited to the targeted regions.
Retrograde neuronal tracing
Cholera toxin subunit B—To characterize neuronal populations in dSub and dCA1 based 
on downstream projection targets, we used cholera toxin subunit B (CTB) conjugated to 
Alexa-488 or Alexa-555 diluted in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) solution at a final 
concentration of 1% wt vol−1. Diluted CTB was aliquoted and stored at −20°C. For tracing 
experiments, 50–200 nl CTB was unilaterally injected into target sites. Six days after 
injections, mice were perfused for histology and imaging.
Rabies virus—To identify major inputs to dSub Cre+ neurons, we used a monosynaptic 
retrograde tracing approach via a Cre-dependent helper virus combined with rabies virus 
(RV) technology. The first component was an AAV vector that allowed simultaneous 
expression of three genes: TVA, eGFP, and RV glycoprotein (G). Briefly, this vector was 
constructed by deleting the sequence between the inverse terminal repeats of pAAV-MCS 
(Stratagene), and replacing it with a cassette containing the following: human synapsin-1 
promoter (Syn, Genbank NG_008437); the Kozak sequence; a FLEX cassette containing the 
transmembrane isoform of TVA (lacking a start codon), eGFP, and G separated by the highly 
efficient porcine teschovirus self-cleaving 2A element; the woodchuck post-transcriptional 
regulatory element (WPRE) and a bovine growth hormone polyadenylation site. This vector 
was termed pAAV-synP-FLEX-sTpEpB (i.e., the helper virus), serotyped with AAVrh8 coat 
proteins, and packaged at the University of Pennsylvania Vector Core. The second 
Roy et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 component was a deletion-mutant RV produced by replacing the eGFP gene in 
cSPBN-4GFP with the mCherry gene (i.e., the RVΔG-mCherry virus, also known as the 
rabies virus), which was packaged with the ASLV-A envelope protein. For tracing 
experiments, 50 nl of the Cre-dependent helper virus was unilaterally injected into dSub of 
FN1-Cre mice. One week later, 50 nl of RVΔG-mCherry virus was unilaterally injected into 
the same dSub. Six days after the second viral injection, mice were perfused for histology 
and imaging.
Immunohistochemistry—Mice were dispatched using 750–1000 mg kg−1 avertin and 
transcardially perfused with PBS, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). Brains were 
extracted and incubated in 4% PFA at room temperature overnight. Brains were transferred 
to PBS and 50 µm coronal slices were prepared using a vibratome. For immunostaining, 
each slice was placed in PBS + 0.2% Triton X-100 (PBS-T), with 5% normal goat serum for 
1 hr and then incubated with primary antibody at 4°C for 24 hr. Slices then underwent three 
wash steps for 10 min each in PBS-T, followed by a 2 hr incubation with secondary 
antibody. After three more wash steps of 10 min each in PBS-T, slices were mounted on 
microscope slides. All analyses were performed blind to the experimental conditions. 
Antibodies used for staining were as follows: CA1-specific excitatory neurons were stained 
with rabbit anti-WFS1 (1:400, Proteintech) and anti-rabbit Alexa-555 (1:500), excitatory 
neurons were stained with mouse anti-CaMKII (1:200, Abcam) and anti-mouse Alexa-555 
(1:300), inhibitory neurons were stained with mouse anti-GAD67 (1:500, Millipore) and 
anti-mouse Alexa-555 (1:300), nuclei were stained with DAPI (1:3000, Sigma), neuronal 
nuclei were stained with mouse anti-NeuN (1:200, Millipore) and anti-mouse Alexa-555 
(1:300), parvalbumin inhibitory neurons were stained with mouse anti-PV (1:500, Swant) 
and anti-mouse Alexa-555 (1:300), Wisteria floribunda lectin was stained with biotinylated 
WFA lectin (1:3000, Vector Labs) and streptavidin Alexa-555 (1:200), calbindin was stained 
with mouse anti-CALB (1:500, Swant) and anti-mouse Alexa-555 (1:300), vesicular 
glutamate transporter 1 was stained with rabbit anti-VGLUT1 (1:1000, Synaptic Systems) 
and anti-rabbit Alexa-488 (1:300), vesicular glutamate transporter 2 was stained with rabbit 
anti-VGLUT2 (1:500, Synaptic Systems) and anti-rabbit Alexa-488 (1:300), vesicular 
glutamate transporter 3 was stained with guinea pig anti-VGLUT3 (1:1000, Millipore) and 
anti-guinea pig Alexa-488 (1:500), myelin basic protein (MBP) was stained with rabbit anti-
MBP (1:1000, Abcam) and anti-rabbit Alexa-546, cFos was stained with rabbit anti-cFos 
(1:400, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and anti-rabbit Alexa-488, and TRE-ChR2-eYFP (Figure 
5J) was stained with chicken anti-GFP (1:1000, Life Technologies) and anti-chicken 
Alexa-633.
CLARITY—Mice were anesthetized with 750–1000 mg kg−1 avertin and transcardially 
perfused with a hydrogel monomer solution containing 4% acrylamide, 0.05% bis-
acrylamide, 0.25% VA-044 initiator, and 4% PFA in PBS. Brains were incubated in the 
monomer solution at 4°C for 48–72 hr. For hydrogel tissue embedding, the brains were 
degassed in a desiccation chamber replacing all the gas with nitrogen, after which 
polymerization was initiated by raising the solution temperature to 37°C for 1 hr. Brains 
were extracted from the hydrogel, and washed in clearing solution containing 200 mM boric 
acid, 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and sodium hydroxide (pH 8.5) at 37°C for 24 hr. 
Roy et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Brains were placed in a custom-built electrophoretic tissue-clearing (ETC) chamber, as 
previously described (Chung et al., 2013). Clearing solution was circulated through the ETC 
chamber at 37°C for 3 days along with 15V application across the brain sample. After 
clearing, brains were washed twice for 24 hr each in PBS-T at room temperature. Before 
imaging, brains were incubated in FocusClear solution for 2 days at room temperature to 
achieve the optimal refractive index of 1.45. Whole brain fluorescence z-stacks were 
acquired using a light sheet fluorescence microscope (5×). Stitching and high resolution 
rendering of z-stacks was performed using an Arivis Vision4D software package at the 
Harvard Center for Biological Imaging (HCBI).
Cell counting—To quantify the number of neurons in each brain region projecting to dSub 
Cre+ neurons, rabies virus (RV)-mCherry+ neurons in each target structure were counted 
from 4–5 sagittal slices per mouse (n = 4 mice). To quantify the number of dCA1 neurons 
projecting to lateral EC5, CTB555+ neurons were counted from 5–6 coronal slices per 
mouse (n = 3 mice). Fluorescence images were acquired using a Zeiss AxioImager.Z1/
ApoTome microscope (10, 20, or 40×). Automated cell counting analysis was performed 
using ImageJ software. DAPI+ counts were approximated from 5 sagittal slices using 
ImageJ. Percentage of neurons in each brain region projecting to dSub was calculated as 
((mCherry+) / (Total DAPI+)) × 100. To characterize dSub Cre+ eYFP neurons, the overlap 
between eYFP and several molecular markers (labeled with mCherry-tagged antibodies) 
were examined. The number of eYFP+, mCherry+, and eYFP+ mCherry+ neurons were 
counted from 4–5 sagittal slices per mouse (n = 3 mice per group). Percentage of dSub Cre+ 
neurons expressing the different molecular markers was calculated as ((eYFP+ mCherry+) / 
(Total eYFP+)) × 100. A similar quantification strategy was used to examine the overlap of 
cholera toxin subunit B (CTB) 488 and 555 from different downstream brain regions in dSub 
and dCA1, as well as the overlap of RV-mCherry and CTB488 from different downstream 
brain regions in dCA1. For these retrograde tracing experiments, the percentage of overlap 
was calculated as ((eYFP+ mCherry+) / (Total DAPI+)) × 100. Chance overlap calculated as 
((eYFP+ / Total DAPI+) × (mCherry+ / Total DAPI+)) × 100, where eYFP+ and mCherry+ 
represents the total population of cells labeled by eYFP and mCherry, respectively. For 
activity-dependent labeling experiments using cFos (as TRE-H2B-GFP signal) or cFos 
staining, cFos+ neurons were counted from 5–7 sagittal or coronal slices per mouse (n = 5–6 
mice). The cell body layers of dCA1, dSub, EC5, MB, or basolateral amygdala (BLA) were 
outlined as regions of interest (ROIs) and the percentage of cFos+ neurons were calculated 
as ((cFos+) / (Total DAPI+)) × 100. For cFos+ CTB555+ neurons in dCA1, percentage 
overlap was calculated as ((cFos+ CTB555+) / (Total DAPI+)) × 100. Chance overlap 
calculated as ((cFos+ / Total DAPI+) × (CTB555+ / Total DAPI+)) × 100, where cFos+ and 
CTB555+ represents the total population of cells labeled by cFos and CTB555, respectively. 
For cFos+ ChR2+ CTB555+ neurons in dCA1 (Figure 5M), percentage overlap was 
calculated as ((cFos+ ChR2+ CTB555+) / (Total DAPI+)) × 100. The numbers of 
fluorophore-positive cells per section were quantified after applying a threshold above 
background fluorescence. Data were analyzed using Microsoft Excel with the Statplus plug-
in, or Prism 6 software. All counting experiments were conducted blind to experimental 
group. Researcher 1 trained the animals, prepared slices and randomized images, while 
Researcher 2 performed semi-automated cell counting. Statistical comparisons were 
Roy et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 performed using unpaired t tests, one-sample t tests, and Fisher’s exact tests: *P < 0.05, **P 
< 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
In vivo calcium imaging
Microendoscope surgery—We used our previously established method (Kitamura et al., 
2015; Sun et al., 2015) for microendoscope surgeries. Briefly, for Ca2+ imaging 
experiments, unilateral injections were targeted to the right dSub of FN1-Cre mice or the 
right dCA1 of WFS1-Cre mice. Mice were injected with AAV2-Syn-DIO-GCaMP6f (FN1-
Cre) or AAV5-Syn-DIO-GCaMP6f (WFS1-Cre). One month after AAV injection, we 
implanted a microendoscope lens (1 mm diameter) above the dorsal region of CA1 (−2.0 
mm AP, +/− 1.5 mm ML, −1.2 mm DV), specifically targeting the medial region along the 
proximodistal axis, or the dorsal region of Sub (−3.1 mm AP, +/− 1.5 mm ML, −1.0 mm 
DV). These microendoscope lenses have a working distance of 0.3 mm (Inscopix, Inc.). One 
month later, the baseplate for a miniaturized microscope camera (Ziv et al., 2013) was 
attached above the implanted microendoscope. Following baseplate surgeries, mice were 
habituated to investigator handling and the attachment of a microscope camera for 2 weeks.
Imaging during open field and CFC—Mice were housed in a reverse light cycle room 
(dark period: 9 am to 9 pm). This is different from the light cycle room for the optogenetic 
behavior experiments (see below). This was necessary in order to maximize the animal’s 
movement during the open field experiments for best coverage of the arena, which was 
crucial to examine spatial information and place field properties. All Ca2+ imaging 
experiments were performed during the dark cycle. Open field tests were conducted using a 
50 × 50 cm white plastic platform, which lacked walls and was raised by 15 cm above the 
table. Under dim light conditions, Ca2+ activity in the open field arena was collected for 30 
min per mouse in order to obtain sufficient numbers of transients for adequately powered 
statistical analyses. Contextual fear conditioning (CFC) tests were conducted using a 29 × 
25 × 22 cm chamber with grid floors, dim white lighting, and scented with 1% acetic acid. 
Mice were conditioned (300 s exploration, one 0.75 mA shock of 2 s duration at 300 s, 120 s 
post-shock period). One day later, mice were returned to the conditioned chamber (7 min) to 
assess memory recall-induced freezing behavior. Before and between runs in the open field 
and CFC paradigms, the experimental apparatus was cleaned with quatricide. Mouse 
behavior, specifically position tracking and freezing epochs, was recorded using an 
automated infrared (IR) detection system (EthoVision XT, Noldus). As we previously 
described (Kitamura et al., 2015; Sun et al., 2015), Ca2+ events were captured at 20 Hz on an 
Inscopix miniature microscope.
Image processing and cell identification—We used our previously established 
method (Sun et al., 2015) for image processing and single cell identification analyses. 
Briefly, Ca2+ imaging movies were motion corrected using Inscopix Mosaic software: 
translation and rotation; reference region with spatial mean (r = 20 pixels) subtracted, 
inverted, and spatial mean (r = 5 pixels) applied. Using ImageJ software, each image was 
divided one pixel at a time by a low pass (r = 20 pixels) filtered version, after which the 
ΔF/F signal was calculated. Two hundred cell regions of interest (ROIs) were carefully 
selected from the resulting movie by PCA-ICA method (300 output PCs, 200 ICs, 0.1 
Roy et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 weight of temporal information in spatio-temporal ICA, 750 iterations maximum, 1 × 10−5 
fractional change to end iterations) in Inscopix Mosaic software, and the independent 
components (ICs) were binarized using a threshold of 0.5 of the maximum intensity. Non-
circular ROIs (i.e., if its length exceeded its width by greater than 2 times) were not included 
in the analysis. Ca2+ events were detected by applying a threshold (greater than 2 standard 
deviations from the ΔF/F signal) at the local maxima of the ΔF/F signal. Since we employed 
GCaMP6f, our analysis used a threshold of >=5 frames (~250 ms). Events that occurred 
within 250 ms of a previous Ca2+ event were excluded from the analysis. For ICs that 
satisfied all criteria, Ca2+ traces during behavior were computed. For open field, using this 
high resolution spatial map, the distribution of Ca2+ events were calculated, while event rate 
heat maps were calculated by binning the behavioral arena into 50 × 50 array bins, each of 
which covered a 2 × 2 cm area. Smoothed rate heat maps were constructed with each pixel 
boxcar averaged over the surrounding 5 × 5 pixel area using a Gaussian smoothing kernel (σ 
= 2 pixels). For CFC, 8–15 s epochs during pre-footshock periods (Pre), and non-freezing 
(NF) and freezing (F) periods of training and recall were examined. The total duration 
examined within each test session was held constant across mice. For the NF and F epoch 
analysis, the total time was held constant across each of the test sessions, which was 
necessary in order to make meaningful comparisons between these epochs. On average, 10–
20 epochs per mouse were analyzed. Active cells (Figure 6I) were defined as those 
exhibiting at least 15 significant Ca2+ events during a given recording session. We confirmed 
that these active cell results show robustness to change around this value (15) in the range of 
10–18 significant Ca2+ events.
Spatial information, place field size, and sparsity—We used our previously 
established method (Sun et al., 2015) for these analyses. Briefly, the behavior position 
tracking data was sorted into 5 × 5 cm spatial bins. Ca2+ event rate per spatial bin was 
calculated for all dCA1 and dSub cells. Individual spatial bins were accepted if their event 
rate exceeded 0.2 Hz. Bins that had mouse occupancy duration less than 100 ms were not 
included in the analysis. Without smoothing, the spatial information rate in bits per second 
was calculated for each cell according to (Skaggs et al., 1992):
where pi is the probability of the mouse occupying the i-th bin for all i, λi is the mean Ca2+ 
event rate in the i-th bin, and λ is the overall Ca2+ event rate. Cells with significant spatial 
information were identified as those above the 95th percentile of all shuffles (all cell event 
times were shuffled 100 times, for a total of approximately 20,000 shuffles per mouse). To 
identify a place field, the criterion was at least 4 contiguous spatial bins (16 cm2). For each 
place cell, only the largest place field was considered for the place field size analysis. Single 
cell sparsity is defined as <R>2 / <R>2, where R is the calcium activity rate in a particular 
spatial bin, and **< > denotes the average value over all spatial bins. A sparsity of 0.15 
indicates that the cell is active in 15% of the open field arena (Treves and Rolls, 1992).
Roy et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Classification of short and long tail cells—For each dCA1 and dSub cell, Ca2+ 
events that were greater than 4 standard deviations were included for this analysis. For each 
cell and each Ca2+ event, the total time to decay to 0.33 the maximum value was defined as 
the event width. Cells that had an average decay time of less than 3.5 s were categorized as 
short tail cells, while cells that had an average decay time of greater than 3.5 s were 
categorized as long tail cells. We confirmed that these cell type classification results show 
robustness to change around this value (3.5 s) in the range of 3.0–4.0 s. The distributions of 
individual calcium transient durations for the entire population of dCA1 and dSub cells were 
plotted (the x-axes used a logarithmic scale for optimal visualization of the data). A line fit 
was included in each population distribution (black lines). The cell type classification results 
are supported by the fact that dSub calcium transient durations showed a bimodal 
distribution (Figure S6C).
Corticosterone assay—To measure stress responses following behavior, we used a 
CORT enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA; Enzo Life Sciences). One hour after 
training or testing sessions, we collected trunk whole blood. For sample collection following 
optogenetic manipulations (Figure 3G), ChR2 activation (40 min blue light on) and eArch 
inhibition (10 min green light on, 2 min green light off, repeated for 40 min) was carried out 
immediately after CFC training or recall. Specifically, once mice were removed from the 
CFC training context, they were returned to their home cages, optic fibers were attached, and 
optogenetic manipulations were initiated. Details of the laser light sources and power are 
provided in the optogenetic manipulations section (see below). Samples remained on ice 
until centrifugation (2000 × g, for 10 min) to isolate blood plasma. Plasma samples were 
aliquoted and stored at −80°C. 1–3 days after plasma collection, ELISA assays were 
performed.
Behavior assays—Experiments were conducted during the light cycle (7 am to 7 pm). 
Mice were randomly assigned to experimental groups for specific behavioral assays 
immediately after surgery. Mice were habituated to investigator handling for 1–2 minutes on 
three consecutive days. Handling took place in the holding room where the mice were 
housed. Prior to each handling session, mice were transported by wheeled cart to and from 
the vicinity of the behavior rooms to habituate them to the journey. For natural memory 
recall sessions, data were quantified using FreezeFrame software. Optogenetic 
manipulations interfered with motion detection, and therefore freezing behavior in these 
experiments were manually quantified. All behavior experiments were analyzed blind to 
experimental group. Unpaired student’s t-tests were used for independent group 
comparisons, with Welch’s correction when group variances were significantly different, or 
two-way ANOVAs followed by Bonferroni post-hoc tests were used. Given behavioral 
variability, initial assays were performed using a minimum of 10 mice per group to ensure 
adequate power for any observed differences. Following behavioral protocols, brain sections 
were prepared to confirm efficient viral labeling in target areas. Animals lacking adequate 
labeling were excluded prior to behavior quantification.
Contextual fear-conditioning—Two distinct contexts were employed (Roy et al., 2016). 
The conditioning context were 29 × 25 × 22 cm chambers with grid floors, dim white 
Roy et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 lighting, and scented with 0.25% benzaldehyde. The neutral context consisted of 30 × 25 × 
33 cm chambers with white perspex floors, red lighting, and scented with 1% acetic acid. 
All mice were conditioned (180 s exploration, one 0.75 mA shock of 2 s duration at 180 s, 
120 s post-shock period), and tested (3 min) one day later. Experiments showed no 
generalization in the neutral context. Floors of chambers were cleaned with quatricide before 
and between runs. Mice were transported to and from the experimental room in their home 
cages using a wheeled cart. The cart and cages remained in an anteroom to the experimental 
rooms during all behavioral experiments. For activity-dependent labeling using cFos (as 
H2B-GFP signal), mice were kept on regular food without DOX for 24 hours prior to 
training or recall. When training or recall was complete, mice were switched back to food 
containing 40 mg kg−1 DOX.
Trace and delay fear-conditioning—The conditioning context were 29 × 25 × 22 cm 
chambers with grid floors, bright white lighting, and scented with 1% acetic acid. The recall 
test context consisted of 30 × 25 × 33 cm chambers with white perspex floors, red lighting, 
and scented with 0.25% benzaldehyde. For trace fear-conditioning, mice were conditioned 
(240 s exploration, 20 s tone, 20 s trace period, a 0.75 mA shock of 2 s duration at 280 s, 60 
s post-shock period, repeated 3 more times). For delay fear-conditioning, mice were 
conditioned (240 s exploration, 20 s tone co-terminating with a 0.75 mA shock of 2 s 
duration, 60 s post-shock period, repeated 3 more time). For both paradigms, memory recall 
was tested (14 min; 2 min exploration, 60 s tone, 120 s post-tone period, repeated 3 more 
times) one day later. The tone was calibrated to 75 dB SPL, with a frequency of 2 kHz. 
Experiments showed no generalization in the recall test context.
Conditioned place preference—The conditioned place preference (CPP) behavior 
chamber was a rectangular arena (40 × 15 cm), divided into three quadrants (left, middle, 
right). The left and right quadrants were 15 cm long, while the middle quadrant was 10 cm 
long. The left quadrant had grid floors and a pattern (series of parallel lines) on the wall. The 
right quadrant had smooth polypropylene floors and a pattern (series of circles) on the wall. 
On day 1 (pre-exposure), mice were allowed to explore the entire arena for 30 min. 
Experiments showed no preference to any one quadrant. On day 2 (training), mice were 
confined to the left or right quadrants for 20 min following cocaine (20 mg kg−1) or saline 
intraperitoneal administration. On days 3–7 (training continued), mice were conditioned in 
opposite quadrants in an alternating manner (i.e., cocaine left-saline right-cocaine left, etc.) 
until every mouse received 3 cocaine and 3 saline pairings. For every behavioral cohort, half 
the mice were conditioned with cocaine in the left quadrant, while the remaining mice 
received cocaine in the right quadrant. On day 8, memory recall was measured by preference 
to the left or right quadrant (10 min). All sessions were performed with dim white lighting. 
Mouse behavior, specifically position tracking and duration, was recorded using an 
automated infrared (IR) detection system (EthoVision XT, Noldus). The tracking software 
plotted heat maps for each mouse, which was averaged to create representative heat maps for 
each group. Raw data was extracted and analyzed using Microsoft Excel.
Memory updating—We employed the pre-exposure mediated contextual fear-
conditioning (PECFC) paradigm to examine memory updating. The behavior context were 
Roy et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 29 × 25 × 22 cm chambers with grid floors, dim white lighting, and scented with 0.25% 
benzaldehyde. On day 1, mice were allowed to explore the context for 6 min. On day 2, mice 
were conditioned (8 s exploration, one 0.75 mA shock of 2 s duration at 8 s, no post-shock 
period), and tested for 3 min one day later (day 3).
Open field assay—Spontaneous motor activity was measured in an open field arena (52 × 
26 cm) for 10 min. Mice were transferred to the testing room and acclimated for 30 min 
before the test session. During the testing period, lighting in the room was turned off. The 
apparatus was cleaned with quatricide before and between runs. Total movement (distance 
traveled and velocity) in the arena was quantified using an automated infrared (IR) detection 
system (EthoVision XT, Noldus). The tracking software plotted heat maps for each mouse, 
which was averaged to create representative heat maps for each group. Raw data were 
extracted and analyzed using Microsoft Excel.
Optogenetic manipulations—All behavioral paradigms were performed as described 
above. For experiments that included optogenetic manipulations, the behavior chamber 
ceilings were customized to hold a rotary joint (Doric Lenses) connected to two 0.32 m optic 
fibers. All mice had optic fibers attached to their optic fiber implants prior to training and 
recall tests. For ChR2 experiments, dSub terminals were stimulated at 20 Hz (15 ms pulse 
width) using a 473 nm laser (10–15 mW, blue light), for the entire duration (3 min) of CFC 
recall tests or neutral context tests (Figures 3D, S4A). For eArch experiments, dSub cell 
bodies/terminals, vSub terminals, and dCA1 terminals were inhibited using a 561 nm laser 
(10 mW, constant green light). For CFC experiments (Figures 3A, 3B, 3C, 4I, 4J, 4K, 4L; 
Figures S2, S3), green light inhibition was performed during the entire duration (3 min) of 
training or recall tests. For TFC and DFC training experiments (Figures S4B, S4D), green 
light inhibition was performed during the entire duration from tone initiation through shock 
delivery (for all tone-shock pairings). The following day, tone-induced memory recall was 
tested without green light. For TFC and DFC recall experiments (Figures 3E, S4C, S4E), 
green light inhibition was performed during the first and third tones (each tone is 60 s) in 
half the mice, while the remaining mice received inhibition during the second and fourth 
tones. This reflects a counter-balanced experimental design. For CPP training experiments 
(Figure S4F), green light inhibition was performed during days 2–7, for the entire 20 min 
session per day (9 min green light on, 1 min green light off, 10 min green light on). For CPP 
recall experiments (Figures 3F, S4G), green light inhibition was performed during the entire 
duration (10 min) of recall tests on day 8. For memory updating experiments (Figures 4M, 
4N), green light inhibition was performed during the entire pre-footshock periods (first 8 s 
on day 2, left panels) or during the footshock periods alone (last 2 s on day 2, right panels). 
For open field experiments (Figure S2M), green light inhibition was performed during the 
entire duration (10 min).
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Data are presented as mean values accompanied by SEM. No statistical methods were used 
to predetermine sample sizes. Data analysis was performed blind to the conditions of the 
experiments. Data were analyzed using Microsoft Excel with the Statplus plug-in and Prism 
6 software. Two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post-hoc test, unpaired t test, Fisher’s 
Roy et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 exact test, one-sample t test, and paired t test were used to test for statistical significance 
when appropriate. Statistical parameters including the exact value of n, precision measures 
(mean ± SEM), and statistical significance are reported in the figure legends. The 
significance threshold was placed at α = 0.05 (NS, P > 0.05; *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, 
P < 0.001).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank S. LeBlanc, S. Huang, A. Arons, J. Martin, L. Smith, F. Bushard, A. Hamalian, W. Yu, and C. Lovett for 
help with experiments; N. Mise and Y. Koga for help with generating the dorsal subiculum mouse line; M. 
Morrissey for comments; L. Brenner for proofreading; and all members of the Tonegawa laboratory for their 
support. We thank Ian Wickersham for providing rabies virus, Ki Goosens for sharing a microplate reader, and the 
Harvard Center for Biological Imaging for access to a light sheet fluorescence microscope. This work was 
supported by the RIKEN Brain Science Institute, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and the JPB Foundation (to 
S.T.).
References
Bourque CW, Oliet SH, Kirkpatrick K, Richard D, Fisher TE. Extrinsic and intrinsic modulatory 
mechanisms involved in regulating the electrical activity of supraoptic neurons. Ann. N. Y. Acad. 
Sci. 1993; 689:512–519. [PubMed: 8396876] 
Chung K, Wallace J, Kim SY, Kalyanasundaram S, Andalman AS, Davidson TJ, Mirzabekov JJ, 
Zalocusky KA, Mattis J, Denisin AK, et al. Structural and molecular interrogation of intact 
biological systems. Nature. 2013; 497:332–337. [PubMed: 23575631] 
Deng W, Aimone JB, Gage FH. New neurons and new memories: how does adult hippocampal 
neurogenesis affect learning and memory? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2010; 11:339–350. [PubMed: 
20354534] 
Ding SL. Comparative anatomy of the prosubiculum, subiculum, presubiculum, postsubiculum, and 
parasubiculum in human, monkey, and rodent. J. Comp. Neurol. 2013; 521:4145–4162. [PubMed: 
23839777] 
Eichenbaum E, Yonelinas AP, Ranganath C. The medial temporal lobe and recognition memory. Annu. 
Rev. Neurosci. 2007; 30:123–152. [PubMed: 17417939] 
Eldridge LL, Engel S, Zeineh MM, Bookheimer SY, Knowlton BJ. A dissociation of encoding and 
retrieval processes in the human hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 2005; 25:3280–3286. [PubMed: 
15800182] 
Gabrieli JD, Brewer JB, Desmond JE, Glover GH. Separate neural bases of two fundamental memory 
processes in the human medial temporal lobe. Science. 1997; 276:264–266. [PubMed: 9092477] 
Geva-Sagiv M, Romani S, Las L, Ulanovsky N. Hippocampal global remapping for different sensory 
modalities in flying bats. Nat. Neurosci. 2016; 19:952–958. [PubMed: 27239936] 
Goshen I, Brodsky M, Prakash R, Wallace J, Gradinaru V, Ramakrishnan C, Deisseroth K. Dynamics 
of retrieval strategies for remote memories. Cell. 2011; 147:678–689. [PubMed: 22019004] 
Hall J, Thomas KL, Everitt BJ. Fear memory retrieval induces CREB phosphorylation and Fos 
expression within the amygdala. Eur. J. Neurosci. 2001; 13:1453–1458. [PubMed: 11298807] 
Hasselmo ME, McClelland JL. Neural models of memory. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 1999; 9:184–188. 
[PubMed: 10322183] 
Herman JP, Dolgas CM, Carlson SL. Ventral subiculum regulates hypothalamo-pituitary-
adrenocortical and behavioural responses to cognitive stressors. Neuroscience. 1998; 86:449–459. 
[PubMed: 9881860] 
Roy et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Hitti FL, Siegelbaum SA. The hippocampal CA2 region is essential for social memory. Nature. 2014; 
508:88–92. [PubMed: 24572357] 
Hyman BT, Van Hoesen GW, Damasio AR, Barnes CL. Alzheimer’s disease: cell-specific pathology 
isolates the hippocampal formation. Science. 1984; 225:1168–1170. [PubMed: 6474172] 
Jin X, Pokala N, Bargmann CI. Distinct circuits for the formation and retrieval of an imprinted 
olfactory memory. Cell. 2016; 164:632–643. [PubMed: 26871629] 
Kaneko T, Fujiyama F, Hioki H. Immunohistochemical localization of candidates for vesicular 
glutamate transporters in the rat brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 2002; 444:39–62. [PubMed: 11835181] 
Kelley JB, Balda MA, Anderson KL, Itzhak Y. Impairments in fear conditioning in mice lacking the 
nNOS gene. Learn. Mem. 2009; 16:371–378. [PubMed: 19470653] 
Kishi T, Tsumori T, Ono K, Yokota S, Ishino H, Yasui Y. Topographical organization of projections 
from the subiculum to the hypothalamus in the rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 2000; 419:205–222. 
[PubMed: 10722999] 
Kitamura T, Pignatelli M, Suh J, Kohara K, Yoshiki A, Abe K, Tonegawa S. Island cells control 
temporal association memory. Science. 2014; 343:896–901. [PubMed: 24457215] 
Kitamura T, Sun C, Martin J, Kitch LJ, Schnitzer MJ, Tonegawa S. Entorhinal cortical ocean cells 
encode specific contexts and drive context-specific fear memory. Neuron. 2015; 87:1317–1331. 
[PubMed: 26402611] 
Knierim JJ, Neunuebel JP, Deshmukh SS. Functional correlates of the lateral and medial entorhinal 
cortex: objects, path integration and local-global reference frames. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. 
Biol. Sci. 2013; 369:20130369. [PubMed: 24366146] 
Kondoh K, Lu Z, Ye X, Olson DP, Lowell BB, Buck LB. A specific area of olfactory cortex involved 
in stress hormone responses to predator odors. Nature. 2016; 532:103–106. [PubMed: 27001694] 
Kubik S, Miyashita T, Guzowski JF. Using immediate-early genes to map hippocampal subregional 
functions. Learn. Mem. 2007; 14:758–770. [PubMed: 18007019] 
Lee JL. Memory reconsolidation mediates the updating of hippocampal memory content. Front. Behav. 
Neurosci. 2010; 4:168. [PubMed: 21120142] 
Lein ES, Zhao X, Gage FH. Defining a molecular atlas of the hippocampus using DNA microarrays 
and high-throughput in situ hybridization. J. Neurosci. 2004; 24:3879–3889. [PubMed: 15084669] 
Liu X, Ramirez S, Pang PT, Puryear CB, Govindarajan A, Deisseroth K, Tonegawa S. Optogenetic 
stimulation of a hippocampal engram activates fear memory recall. Nature. 2012; 484:381–385. 
[PubMed: 22441246] 
Morris RG, Schenk F, Tweedie F, Jarrard LE. Ibotenate lesions of hippocampus and/or subiculum: 
dissociating components of allocentric spatial learning. Eur. J. Neurosci. 1990; 2:1016–1028. 
[PubMed: 12106063] 
Moser EI, Roudi Y, Witter MP, Kentros C, Bonhoeffer T, Moser MB. Grid cells and cortical 
representation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2014; 15:466–481. [PubMed: 24917300] 
Nakazawa K, McHugh TJ, Wilson MA, Tonegawa S. NMDA receptors, place cells and hippocampal 
spatial memory. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2004; 5:361–372. [PubMed: 15100719] 
Nakazawa Y, Pevzner A, Tanaka KZ, Wiltgen BJ. Memory retrieval along the proximodistal axis of 
CA1. Hippocampus. 2016; 26:1140–1148. [PubMed: 27068122] 
O'Mara S. Controlling hippocampal output: the central role of subiculum in hippocampal information 
processing. Beh. Brain Res. 2006; 174:304–312.
Okuyama T, Kitamura T, Roy DS, Itohara S, Tonegawa S. Ventral CA1 neurons store social memory. 
Science. 2016; 353:1536–1541. [PubMed: 27708103] 
Ranck JB. Studies on single neurons in dorsal hippocampal formation and septum in unrestrained rats. 
I. Behavioral correlates and firing repertoires. Exp. Neurol. 1973; 41:461–531. [PubMed: 
4355646] 
Raybuck JD, Lattal KM. Differential effects of dorsal hippocampal inactivation on expression of recent 
and remote drug and fear memory. Neurosci. Lett. 2014; 569:1–5. [PubMed: 24686177] 
Roozendaal B. Stress and memory: opposing effects of glucocorticoids on memory consolidation and 
memory retrieval. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 2002; 78:578–595. [PubMed: 12559837] 
Roy et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Roy DS, Arons A, Mitchell TI, Pignatelli M, Ryan TJ, Tonegawa S. Memory retrieval by activating 
engram cells in mouse models of early Alzheimer's disease. Nature. 2016; 531:508–512. [PubMed: 
26982728] 
Sharp PE, Green C. Spatial correlates of firing patterns of single cells in the subiculum of the freely 
moving rat. J. Neurosci. 1994; 14:2339–2356. [PubMed: 8158272] 
Skaggs WE, McNaughton BL, Gothard KM. An information-theoretic approach to deciphering the 
hippocampal code. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 1992; 5:1030–1037.
Squire LR. Memory and the hippocampus: a synthesis from findings with rats, monkeys, and humans. 
Psychol. Rev. 1992; 99:195–231. [PubMed: 1594723] 
Staff NP, Jung HY, Thiagarajan T, Yao M, Spruston N. Resting and active properties of pyramidal 
neurons in subiculum and CA1 of rat hippocampus. J. Neurophysiol. 2000; 84:2398–2408. 
[PubMed: 11067982] 
Sun C, Kitamura T, Yamamoto J, Martin J, Pignatelli M, Kitch LJ, Schnitzer MJ, Tonegawa S. Distinct 
speed dependence of entorhinal island and ocean cells, including respective grid cells. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2015; 112:9466–9471. [PubMed: 26170279] 
Taube JS. Electrophysiological properties of neurons in the rat subiculum in vitro. Exp. Brain Res. 
1993; 96:304–318. [PubMed: 7903643] 
Tonegawa S, Liu X, Ramirez S, Redondo R. Memory engram cells have come of age. Neuron. 2015; 
87:918–931. [PubMed: 26335640] 
Treves A, Rolls ET. Computational constraints suggest the need for two distinct input systems to the 
hippocampal CA3 network. Hippocampus. 1992; 2:189–199. [PubMed: 1308182] 
Wickersham IR, Lyon DC, Barnard RJ, Mori T, Finke S, Conzelmann KK, Young JA, Callaway EM. 
Monosynaptic restriction of transsynaptic tracing from single, genetically targeted neurons. 
Neuron. 2007; 53:639–647. [PubMed: 17329205] 
Witter MP, Ostendorf RH, Groenewegen HJ. Heterogeneity in the dorsal subiculum of the rat. Distinct 
neuronal zones project to different cortical and subcortical targets. Eur. J. Neurosci. 1990; 2:718–
725. [PubMed: 12106290] 
Ziv Y, Burns LD, Cocker ED, Hamel EO, Ghosh KK, Kitch LJ, El Gamal A, Schnitzer MJ. Long-term 
dynamics of CA1 hippocampal place codes. Nat. Neurosci. 2013; 16:264–266. [PubMed: 
23396101] 
Roy et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Genetic targeting of dSub neurons using FN1-Cre mice
(A) FN1-Cre mice were injected with a Cre-dependent virus expressing eYFP into dSub.
(B) Cre+ dSub neurons (eYFP, green) do not overlap with dCA1 excitatory neurons (labeled 
with WFS1, red). Sagittal image (left), higher magnification image of boxed region (right). 
Dashed white line denotes CA1/dSub border (right).
(C, D) Cre+ dSub neurons (eYFP, green), in sagittal sections, express the excitatory neuronal 
marker CaMKII (red; C). Over 85% of all CaMKII+ neurons in the dSub region also 
expressed eYFP (n = 3 mice). Images are taken with a 20× objective. Cre+ dSub neurons do 
not express the inhibitory marker GAD67 (red; D). White arrows indicate GAD67+ cell 
Roy et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 bodies (D). Images are taken with a 40× objective. See also Figure S1A. DAPI staining in 
blue.
(E–K) Medial to lateral (ML, in millimeters relative to Bregma) sagittal sections show that 
eYFP signal is restricted to dSub neurons. DAPI staining (blue). No eYFP signal was 
observed in ventral subiculum (vSub) or medial entorhinal cortex (MEC). Dashed white line 
denotes perirhinal cortex/MEC border (J, K).
Roy et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Input-output organization of dSub excitatory neurons
(A) Monosynaptic retrograde tracing of dSub inputs used a Cre-dependent helper virus 
(tagged with eGFP) combined with a rabies virus (RV, mCherry) injected into dSub of FN1-
Cre mice. Avian leukosis and sarcoma virus subgroup A receptor (TVA) and rabies 
glycoprotein (G).
(B, C) Representative ipsilateral sections confirmed efficient overlap of helper and RV-
infected dSub neurons. Sagittal image (left; B), higher magnification images of boxed region 
(right; B). Quantification revealed that 78% of dSub cells, relative to DAPI+ neurons, were 
RV-positive (n = 4 mice), which is the starting population for retrograde tracing. Dashed 
Roy et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 white lines denote dSub Cre+ neuron target region. Both ipsilateral and contralateral sagittal 
sections revealed that dorsal CA1 provides the major input to dSub Cre+ neurons (C).
(D) Inputs to dSub Cre+ neurons were quantified based on percentage of neurons in the 
target brain region relative to DAPI+ neurons (n = 4 mice). Ipsilateral (Ipsi) and contralateral 
(Contra) counts. Parasubiculum (PaS), retrosplenial agranular cortex (RSA), MEC layers 
II/III (MEC II/III), nucleus of the diagonal band (NDB), nucleus accumbens shell (Acb Sh), 
and thalamic nuclei (Thal Nucl).
(E) FN1-Cre mice expressing ChR2-eYFP (Cre-dependent virus) in dSub neurons were used 
for CLARITY followed by light sheet microscopy (top). 2.5 mm optical section in sagittal 
view shows projections to RSA and mammillary bodies (MB, bottom).
(F) Whole-brain, stitched z-stack (horizontal view) shows all major projections from dSub 
Cre+ neurons including RSA, MB, EC5, and postrhinal cortex (Pos).
(G, H) Standard sagittal brain sections of FN1-Cre mice expressing ChR2-eYFP (Cre-
dependent virus) in dSub neurons showing dSub projections to EC5 and Pos (G), as well as 
medial and lateral MB (H).
(I–M) Representative standard sagittal brain sections showing dSub neuronal populations 
projecting to MB (red, CTB555; I) or EC5 (green, CTB488; J). The respective CTB was 
injected into MB or EC5. Overlap image (K). Quantification, including weakly labeled 
CTB+ neurons, revealed that 81% of dSub cells were double positive (n = 4 mice). Scale bar 
in panels I–J applies to panel K. Dashed white line denotes CA1/dSub border. Higher 
magnification images of boxed regions indicated in Figure 2K (L–M).
Roy et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Differential roles of dSub projections in hippocampal memory retrieval and retrieval-
induced stress hormone responses
(A, B) FN1-Cre mice were injected with a Cre-dependent virus expressing eArch3.0-eYFP 
into dSub. Optogenetic inhibition of dSub neurons during contextual fear conditioning 
(CFC) training had no effect on long-term memory (n = 12 mice per group; A). Inhibition of 
dSub neurons during CFC recall impaired behavioral performance (n = 12 mice per group; 
B). A two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post-hoc tests revealed a behavioral epoch-
by-eArch interaction and significant eArch-mediated attenuation of freezing (A–B: F1,44 = 
5.70, P < 0.05, recall). For dSub optogenetic manipulation experiments, injections were 
targeted to dSub cell bodies and the extent of virus expression is shown in Figures 1E–1K.
Roy et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 (C) Terminal inhibition of dSub projections to EC5 (bottom left), but not MB (bottom right), 
disrupted CFC memory recall (n = 11 mice per group). A two-way ANOVA followed by 
Bonferroni post-hoc tests revealed a dSub terminal-by-eArch interaction and significant 
eArch-mediated attenuation of freezing (F1,40 = 7.63, P < 0.01, dSub→EC5 terminals).
(D) FN1-Cre mice were injected with a Cre-dependent virus expressing ChR2-eYFP into 
dSub. Optogenetic activation of dSub→EC5 terminals during CFC memory recall increased 
freezing levels (left), which was not observed in a neutral context (middle) or using no shock 
mice (right, n = 10 mice per group).
(E) Inhibition of dSub→EC5 terminals during trace fear conditioning (TFC) recall 
decreased tone (Tn)-induced freezing levels (n = 12 mice). A two-way ANOVA followed by 
Bonferroni post-hoc tests revealed a behavioral epoch-by-eArch interaction and significant 
eArch-mediated attenuation of freezing (E and Figure S4A: F1,44 = 7.11, P < 0.05, recall). 
Pre-tone baseline freezing (Pre). Recall-induced freezing levels during individual tone 
presentations (left panel), averaged freezing levels during the two light-off tones and the two 
light-on tones (right panel).
(F) Inhibition of dSub→EC5 terminals during cocaine-induced conditioned place preference 
(CPP) recall impaired behavioral performance (n = 14 mice per group). Behavioral schedule 
(left, top part). Average heat maps showing exploration time during pre-exposure and recall 
trials (left, bottom part). Dashed white lines demarcate individual zones in the CPP 
apparatus. Pre-exposure preference duration (right, top graph) and recall preference duration 
(right, bottom graph). Saline (S or Sal), cocaine (C or Coc). A two-way ANOVA followed 
by Bonferroni post-hoc tests revealed a drug group-by-eArch interaction and significant 
eArch-mediated attenuation of preference duration (F1,52 = 5.16, P < 0.05, cocaine). For 
CPP training inhibition, see Figure S4F. NS, not significant.
(G) Stress hormone: Terminal inhibition of dSub projections to MB, but not EC5, following 
CFC memory recall tests decreased stress responses as measured by corticosterone (CORT) 
levels. Optogenetic activation of dSub→MB terminals following CFC memory recall 
increased CORT levels (n = 10 mice per group). Context (ctx). CORT levels in CPP 
paradigm are shown in Figure S4H.
Unless specified, statistical comparisons are performed using unpaired t tests; *P < 0.05, 
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Roy et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Projection from CA1 to EC5 is crucial for encoding, but not for retrieval, of 
hippocampal memories
(A–C) Retrograde monosynaptic identification of dCA1 neurons projecting to dSub (in FN1-
Cre mice) using a Cre-dependent helper virus combined with a rabies virus (RV). The extent 
of RV-positive dSub cells, which is the starting population for retrograde tracing, is shown in 
Figure 2B. Simultaneous retrograde monosynaptic identification of dCA1 neurons projecting 
to EC5 using CTB. DAPI (blue; A), RV-mCherry (red; B), CTB488 (green; C). 
Representative sagittal sections, dashed white line denotes CA1/CA2 border.
(D–F) Higher magnification images of boxed regions indicated in Figure 4C.
Roy et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 (G) Percentage of dCA1 neurons labeled with mCherry (dSub only), CTB488 (EC5 only), or 
mCherry and CTB double positive (dSub+EC5, n = 4 mice). Dashed line indicates chance 
level (6%), calculated from a control experiment (Figures S5A–S5H, and see Methods). 
One-sample t tests against chance level were performed.
(H) Representative sagittal sections of hippocampus from TRPC4-Cre mice showing dCA1 
neurons labeled with a Cre-dependent histone H2B-GFP virus (green, bottom) and stained 
with DAPI (blue, top).
(I, J) TRPC4-Cre mice were injected with a Cre-dependent virus expressing eArch3.0-eYFP 
into dCA1. Terminal inhibition of CA1→EC5 during CFC training impaired long-term 
memory (n = 10 mice per group; I). Inhibition of CA1→EC5 terminals during CFC recall 
had no effect on behavioral performance (n = 10 mice per group; J). A two-way ANOVA 
followed by Bonferroni post-hoc tests revealed a behavioral epoch-by-eArch interaction and 
significant eArch-mediated attenuation of freezing (I–J: F1,36 = 9.19, P < 0.01, training).
(K, L) Terminal inhibition of CA1→dSub during CFC training had no effect on long-term 
memory (n = 13 mice per group; K). Inhibition of CA1→dSub terminals during CFC recall 
disrupted behavioral performance (n = 13 mice per group; L). A two-way ANOVA followed 
by Bonferroni post-hoc tests revealed a behavioral epoch-by-eArch interaction and 
significant eArch-mediated attenuation of freezing (K–L: F1,48 = 5.16, P < 0.05, recall).
(M, N) Memory updating. Experimental schedule (top) for pre-exposure mediated 
contextual fear conditioning (PECFC) with optogenetic terminal inhibition of CA1→EC5 
(using TRPC4-Cre mice; M) and dSub→EC5 (using FN1-Cre mice; N) during the pre-
footshock period (left panels) or footshock period alone (right panels) on Day 2. Freezing 
levels during recall tests (Day 3) to the conditioned context (bottom). eYFP and eArch 
conditions (n = 12 mice per group). NS, not significant. Immediate shock (Imm. shk). A 
two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post-hoc tests revealed a behavioral epoch-by-
eArch interaction and significant eArch-mediated attenuation of freezing (M: F1,44 = 9.81, P 
< 0.01, recall in right panel; N: F1,44 = 4.75, P < 0.05, recall in left panel).
Unless specified, statistical comparisons are performed using unpaired t tests; *P < 0.05, 
**P < 0.01. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Roy et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Distinct cFos activation patterns in CA1 and dSub neurons
(A) Virus-mediated cFos+ neuronal labeling strategy using a cocktail of c-Fos-tTA and TRE-
H2B-GFP (left). Wild-type mice raised on doxycycline (DOX) food were injected with the 
two viruses bilaterally into CA1 and dSub (right).
(B) Behavioral schedule and H2B-GFP labeling (see Methods). Beige shading indicates 
animals are maintained on DOX food.
(C–E) Representative sagittal section of hippocampus showing H2B-GFP-labeled cell bodies 
(green) in CA1 and dSub counterstained with DAPI (blue), following CFC training (C). 
Roy et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Boxed regions in C are shown in higher magnification for CA1 (D) and dSub (E). Dashed 
white line denotes CA1/dSub border (E).
(F) H2B-GFP+ (cFos+) cell counts in CA1 (left) and dSub (right) from home cage, CFC 
training (encoding), and CFC recall groups (n = 6 mice per group). NS, not significant.
(G) Ratio of recall to training H2B-GFP+ neurons in CA1 and dSub (cell counts from Figure 
5F). A ratio of 1.0 indicates comparable H2B-GFP+ counts during training and recall 
epochs. Statistical comparison used a Fisher’s exact test.
(H) Overlap between CFC-induced cFos and CA1 neurons projecting (labeled by CTB555) 
to dSub (left) or EC5 (right). Representative overlap images are shown in Figures S5K–S5N. 
Dashed lines indicate chance levels (n = 5 mice per group, see Methods). One-sample t tests 
against chance level were performed (#P < 0.05).
(I–M) Wild-type mice raised on DOX were used for these experiments. Representative 
coronal section of CA1 showing DAPI staining (I), CFC training-induced cFos-positive 
engram cells labeled with a cocktail of c-Fos-tTA and TRE-ChR2-eYFP (J), cFos antibody 
staining following CFC recall tests performed one day after training and engram labeling 
(K), and CA1 neurons projecting to either dSub or EC5 visualized by retrograde CTB555 
labeling (L). The circled region with a single asterisk (*) shows an engram cell that is cFos− 
but CTB555+ and the region with two asterisks (**) shows an engram cell that is cFos+ and 
CTB555+. White arrows show additional examples of CA1 engram cells that are both cFos+ 
and CTB555+. Overlap of recall-induced cFos, CA1 engram cells labeled during training, 
and circuit specific CA1 projection neurons (n = 6 mice per group; M).
(N) Representative coronal section of basolateral amygdala (BLA) showing cFos activation 
following memory recall (left). cFos+ cell counts (n = 6 mice per group) in BLA following 
natural recall, and recall with eArch inhibition of the CA1→EC5 or dSub→EC5 circuits 
(right). TRPC4-Cre mice were used for CA1 circuit manipulations and FN1-Cre mice were 
used for dSub circuit manipulations.
Unless specified, statistical comparisons are performed using unpaired t tests; *P < 0.05, 
**P < 0.01. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Roy et al.
Page 32
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. dSub neurons exhibit enhanced neuronal activity during hippocampal memory 
retrieval
(A–C) Implantation of a microendoscope right above dSub of FN1-Cre mice (A) or dCA1 of 
WFS1-Cre mice. For dCA1, the medial region along the proximodistal axis was targeted 
(see also Figures S6A–S6B). Calcium (Ca2+). Representative sagittal sections of 
hippocampus from FN1-Cre (B) and WFS1-Cre (C) mice showing GCaMP6f-labeled cells 
(green) and DAPI staining (blue).
(D, E) Representative maximum intensity projection images, as seen through the 
microendoscope camera, of dSub neurons expressing GCaMP6f (D) or CA1 neurons 
Roy et al.
Page 33
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 expressing GCaMP6f (E) acquired during a 30 min recording session in an open field arena 
(see Methods).
(F, G) Representative Ca2+ traces of CA1 cells (left, labeled in E) and two types of dSub 
cells (middle and right, labeled in D) from the open field paradigm (F), and cell type 
quantification (n = 759 CA1 cells, n = 428 dSub short tail cells, n = 371 dSub long tail cells, 
n = 4 mice per group; G). See also Figure S6G.
(H) Representative place field Ca2+ events (red dots, left panels) and heat maps (right 
panels) for CA1 and dSub cells (cell counts in Figure 6G), along with quantification. See 
also Figure S6H and Methods. ND, not detected.
(I) Ca2+ activity during CFC. Pre-footshock levels (Pre). Percentage of active cells (see 
Methods) during Pre, training, and recall tests (top), including non-freezing (NF) and 
freezing (F) epochs (bottom), in CA1 and dSub (n = 550 CA1 cells, n = 429 dSub short tail 
cells, n = 203 dSub long tail cells, n = 3 CA1 mice, n = 4 dSub mice). Within session NF 
and F comparisons used paired t tests. Comparisons across sessions used a two-way ANOVA 
with repeated measures followed by Bonferroni post-hoc tests. See also Figures S6I–S6K.
For statistical comparisons, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Roy et al.
Page 34
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 24.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
