 Engineering T cells with Customized Therapeutic Response 
Programs Using Synthetic Notch Receptors
Kole T. Roybal1,2,3, Jasper Z. Williams1,2,3, Leonardo Morsut1,2,3, Levi J. Rupp1,2,3, Isabel 
Kolinko1,2,3, Joseph H. Choe1,2,3, Whitney J. Walker1,2,3, Krista A. McNally1,2,3, and Wendell 
A. Lim1,2,3,*,#
1Department of Cellular & Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94158, USA
2UCSF Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
3Howard Hughes Medical Institute, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
Abstract
Redirecting T cells to attack cancer using engineered chimeric receptors provides powerful new 
therapeutic capabilities. But the effectiveness of therapeutic T cells is constrained by the 
endogenous T cell response: certain facets of natural response programs can be toxic, whereas 
other responses, such as the ability to overcome tumor immunosuppression, are absent. Thus, the 
efficacy and safety of therapeutic cells could be improved if we could custom sculpt immune cell 
responses. Synthetic Notch receptors induce transcriptional activation in response to recognition of 
user-specified antigens. We show that synNotch receptors can be used to sculpt custom response 
programs in primary T cells: they can drive a la carte cytokine secretion profiles, biased T cell 
differentiation, and local delivery of non-native therapeutic payloads, such as antibodies, in 
response to antigen. SynNotch T cells can thus be used as a general platform to recognize and 
remodel local microenvironments associated with diverse diseases.
Graphical abstract
*correspondence: wendell.lim@ucsf.edu.
#lead author
STAR METHODS
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Reagent requests should be directed and will be fulfilled by lead author Wendell Lim (Wendell.lim@ucsf.edu). To ensure a fast 
response, please copy Noleine.Blizzard (noleine.blizzard@ucsf.edu) and Joan Garbarino (joan.garbarino@ucsf.edu) in any requests 
related to the paper.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
K.R. and W.L. conceived of the study. K.R. performed and analyzed all experiments with the exception of the following. L.M. worked 
with K.R. to develop synNotch system. J.W. performed and analyzed antibody production experiments. L.R. aided in in vivo IL-2 
experiments. L.R. and I.K. performed and analyzed Flagellin production experiments. J.C. performed IL-12 production experiments. 
W.W., and K.M. provided technical support. K.R. and W.L. wrote the paper.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 October 6; 167(2): 419–432.e16. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.011.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 INTRODUCTION
Immune cells have evolved the remarkable ability to monitor and sense abnormalities in the 
body – including pathogenic insult or divergence from homeostasis, and in response they 
initiate protective and restorative programs (Chovatiya and Medzhitov, 2014). For example, 
T cells can traffic through the body, sense disease, and initiate a potent response to eliminate 
infections or cancer (Lämmermann and Sixt, 2008). T cells also have the capacity to 
generate long-lived memory to disease, in principle, preventing recurrence over the course of 
years or a lifetime (Kalos et al., 2011; Maus et al., 2014; Mueller et al., 2013). The ability to 
survey and respond to disease makes T cells an attractive platform for cell therapies.
Currently, major advances in engineering T cell therapeutics for treatment of cancer have 
focused on redirecting the native T cell response against disease cells. T cells can be 
engineered to recognize novel disease antigens using tumor-specific T cell receptors (TCRs) 
or chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) (Figure 1A) (Barrett et al., 2014a; Gill and June, 2015; 
June et al., 2009; Maus et al., 2014; Miller and Sadelain, 2015). While these redirected T 
cell therapies have been extremely successful for a limited set of cancers, their effectiveness 
remains constrained by the nature of endogenous T cell response programs. First, T cell 
response programs are multi-faceted, and not all facets are beneficial in a given disease 
context. Particular subresponses can contribute to toxic side effects (Barrett et al., 2014b; 
Brentjens et al., 2013; Grupp et al., 2013; Porter et al., 2011), which in some cases can be as 
dangerous as the disease itself (Davila et al., 2014; Lamers et al., 2006; Magee and Snook, 
2014; Morgan et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2009). Moreover, native T cell response programs 
lack certain ideal properties (Barrett et al., 2014b). For example, even when redirected to 
recognize tumors, T cells have limited capabilities to overcome the immunosuppressive 
microenvironment of the tumor (Gajewski et al., 2013).
Roybal et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Thus, for future T cell therapies, it would be ideal to be able to sculpt new classes of 
behaviors that are induced by user-specified environmental cues (e.g. tumor antigens) but 
drive customized cellular programs – programs that are both edited to minimize toxicity, and 
expanded to incorporate new, non-native responses that increase therapeutic efficacy (Figure 
1A). If cell-based therapies are to be used more broadly to treat diseases beyond terminal 
cancers such as autoimmunity, new precision cellular control mechanisms such as these 
must be developed to improve safety (Fischbach et al., 2013; Lim, 2010).
Recently developed synthetic Notch (synNotch) receptors provide a potential way to flexibly 
sculpt customized and inducible immune cell responses. SynNotch receptors contain the 
core regulatory domain from the cell-cell signaling receptor Notch, but have synthetic 
extracellular recognition domains (e.g. single chain antibodies) and synthetic intracellular 
transcriptional domains (Gordon et al., 2015; Morsut et al., 2016). When it engages the 
cognate antigen, the synNotch receptor undergoes induced transmembrane cleavage, akin to 
native Notch activation (Bray, 2006; Selkoe and Kopan, 2003), thereby releasing the 
intracellular transcriptional domain to enter the nucleus and activate expression of target 
genes regulated by the cognate upstream cis-activating promoter. Thus, synNotch circuits 
can be used to generate synthetic cell response programs in which a customized antigen 
recognition event can drive a customized gene expression program (Figure 1B).
Here we have built synNotch receptors capable of sensing disease-related and orthogonal 
inputs, and linked their activity to customized gene regulation in primary human T cells 
(Figure 1A). T cells engineered with synNotch receptors have robust and highly controlled 
custom behaviors. We show that synNotch receptors can drive T cells to produce custom a la 
carte cytokine profiles, undergo defined differentiation programs, and locally deliver natural 
and synthetic therapeutic payloads (e.g. cytotoxic proteins, antibodies, bispecific engagers, 
immune stimulators, immune supressors), all bypassing the requirement of canonical T cell 
activation. We also show that T cells encoding synNotch circuits are able to specifically 
target solid tumors in vivo to locally deliver their custom payloads.
The wide-range of synNotch applications shown here demonstrates their versatility as a 
platform to customize and refactor T cell function. The unprecedented programmability of 
synNotch cells to recognize and remodel microenvironments associated with diverse 
diseases could have applications in the design of therapeutic cells to treat a broad range of 
diseases including and extending beyond cancer and autoimmunity.
RESULTS
synNotch Receptors Can Drive Antigen-Induced Transcription in CD4+ and CD8+ Human 
Primary T Lymphocytes
The native Notch receptor has three critical components: 1) the ligand-binding epidermal 
growth factor (EGF) repeats, 2) the core regulatory region that controls cleavage of the 
receptor during activation, and 3) the Notch intracellular domain (NICD) that is released and 
regulates transcription (Gordon et al., 2007; Mumm et al., 2000; Selkoe and Kopan, 2003). 
To build a synNotch receptor platform that allows for fully customizable receptor sensing 
and transcriptional regulation, we utilized the Notch core regulatory region that controls 
Roybal et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ligand-dependent cleavage and activation as a minimal scaffold, but then append a 
customized input recognition (extracellular) and output transcriptional (intracellular) module 
(Figure 1B) (Morsut et al., 2016). The Notch core regulatory region includes the Lin12-
Notch repeats (LNRs) that control the accessibility of the S2 cleavage site to 
metalloproteases, the heterodimerization domains (HD), and transmembrane domain (TMD) 
that contains the γ-secretase cleavage site required for release of the Notch intracellular 
domain (NICD) (Selkoe and Kopan, 2003). The extracellular EGF repeats, normally 
involved in recognition of the natural ligand Delta, were removed and replaced with a single-
chain variable fragment (scFv) directed towards the cancer antigen CD19 or Her2 or 
nanobodies to orthogonal antigens, such as surface displayed GFP (Figure 1B and 1C). The 
NICD that is normally required for transcriptional regulation was replaced with the Gal4 
DNA binding domain fused to the tetrameric viral transcriptional activator domain, VP64 
(Lecourtois and Schweisguth, 1998; Struhl and Adachi, 1998). This general approach can be 
used to engineer synNotch receptors to any surface antigen of interest and link receptor 
activity to a customized cellular output controlled by orthogonal transcription factors and 
their associated response elements. A range of other extracellular and intracellular domains 
were also shown to function with synNotch (Morsut et al., 2016).
To show that synNotch receptors can function in relevant cell types for cell-based therapy, 
we engineered primary human CD4+ and CD8+ T cells with synNotch receptors directed 
towards the cancer-related antigens CD19 and Her2 or to an orthogonal antigen – surface 
displayed GFP. CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were engineered to express each synNotch receptor 
and the associated promoter (5× Gal4 response elements) controlling expression of a BFP 
reporter gene (Figure 1C and 1D). CD4+ and CD8+ T cells engineered with the α-CD19 
synNotch receptor drove BFP reporter expression in 80 to 90% of the T cells within 24 
hours of co-culture with cells expressing the cognate ligand CD19 -- either Daudi B cell 
lymphoblast tumors, which naturally express CD19, or K562 myelogenous leukemia cells 
with ectopically expressed CD19 (Figure 1A-D and Figure S1A-C). These T cells did not 
show BFP expression when unstimulated or treated with cells that did not express the 
cognate CD19 antigen. These data show that synNotch receptors can function in a controlled 
and antigen-dependent manner in primary T cells, and can detect natural levels of antigen on 
the surface of cancer cells. The synNotch receptors also have equivalent function in CD4+ 
and CD8+ T cells, which are often used in together for T cell immunotherapies (Figure 1D 
and 1C and Figure S1A-S2C).
For the cancer antigen Her2, an affinity panel of scFvs exists with which we made a series of 
receptors with different affinities for Her2 (Liu et al., 2015). This allowed us to determine if 
there are affinity requirements for synNotch receptors to function and whether affinity for 
ligand is parameter that could be tuned to shape the magnitude of the customized T cell 
response. The scFvs span nearly five orders of magnitude of affinity from 0.6 nM to 3.91 µM 
(Liu et al., 2015). CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were engineered with the four affinity variants of 
the α-Her2 synNotch receptor and the same BFP reporter as described above. All of the α-
Her2 synNotch receptors were expressed in T cells and could drive expression of the BFP 
reporter in response to MCF7 breast cancer cells, a low Her2 expressing breast cancer cell 
line (Figure 1D and Figure S1D-S2E) (Liu et al., 2015). This suggests that even cancer 
antigens expressed at minimal levels can be recognized and efficiently activate synNotch 
Roybal et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 receptors. The α-Her2 synNotch receptors in the nanomolar affinity range all drove reporter 
expression in 50-60% of T cells, but the lowest affinity receptor only activated 35% of the T 
cells Figure 1D and Figure S1E). These data show that changing the affinity of the synNotch 
receptors towards the target antigen is a viable approach to titrate and control synNotch-
mediated cellular response programs.
We also tested whether T cells could be engineered to recognize orthogonal surface proteins 
by constructing synNotch receptors that recognized surface expressed GFP. We used two α-
GFP nanobodies that have low (Kd = 50 nM) or high affinity (Kd = 0.036 nM) (Fridy et al., 
2014). These receptors stimulated reporter expression upon exposure to K562 cells 
expressing surface GFP (but not with cells lacking the antigen). The resulting transcriptional 
response was similar to that observed for the α-CD19 synNotch, highlighting the modularity 
of the synNotch platform (Figure 1D and Figure S1F-S1H). The higher affinity α-GFP 
nanobody synNotch receptor drove a greater fraction of T cells to upregulate reporter 
expression upon exposure to K562 sender cells, when compared to the lower affinity 
receptor, yet both receptors activated gene expression in over half of the T cells (Figure 1D 
and Figure S1G). These results, much like the α-Her2 synNotch receptor affinity panel, 
suggest that varying the affinity of the synNotch ligand-binding domain can fine-tune the 
magnitude of the cellular response.
synNotch Receptors Can Drive Customized T Cell Cytokine Profiles
Immune cells and tissues throughout the body secrete soluble proteins known as cytokines to 
communicate and regulate cell behavior and shape the overall immune response. The 
specific cytokine profile is critical for eradicating pathogens and tumors (Dranoff, 2004; 
Iwasaki and Medzhitov, 2015). In many cases different sets of cytokines have the opposite 
effect of suppressing the immune response (Sakaguchi et al., 2008). Moreover, in certain 
scenarios where cytokines could boost immunity towards cancers or suppress damaging 
inflammation in an autoimmune setting, these cytokines are absent (Dranoff, 2004; O'Shea 
et al., 2002). Ideally we would like to precisely shape what cytokines therapeutic T cells 
secrete. However, when T cells are activated through CARs or the natural T cell receptor, 
there is little control over the cytokines that are produced and often cytokine profile depends 
on the disease and activation context as well as the receptor characteristics (Figure 2A and 
2B) (Dotti et al., 2014; Gill and June, 2015). For many T cell therapies, it may be beneficial 
to bias towards the production of specific cytokines to tailor the immune response for the 
specific disease or therapeutic need.
With this in mind, we engineered CD4+ T cells with the α-CD19 synNotch receptor and the 
corresponding transcriptional response element controlling the expression of a single 
cytokine. Under these conditions, T cells selectively produced only a defined “a la carte” 
cytokine profile in response to the CD19 antigen (Figure 2C-G). synNotch receptors drove 
high-level production of the T cell stimulatory cytokine IL-2 with no basal secretion prior to 
antigen sensing (Figure S2A-S2D). The amount of IL-2 produced by synNotch activation is 
similar to what is produced in response to CAR or TCR stimulation (α-CD3/α-CD28 beads) 
of T cells (Figure S2D). Unlike normal stimulation of T cells through the TCR pathway, 
Roybal et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 synNotch-driven cytokine production is independent of T cell activation, shown by the lack 
of upregulation of the canonical activation marker CD69 (Figure S2E).
We also engineered synNotch T cells to produce the immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10 
(Figure 2E and Figure S2F-S2H), the immunostimulatory cytokine IL-12 (Figure 2F), and a 
combined cytokine and chemokine program (Figure 2G). These results highlight the ability 
of synNotch receptors to control a spectrum of therapeutically relevant cytokines that could 
be useful for diverse disease types. synNotch controlled production of IL-10 or other 
suppressive cytokines could be used to locally suppress inflammation in autoimmune or 
inflammatory disease (O'Garra et al., 2008). Locally concentrated IL-12 production, or that 
of other immune stimulatory factors, in tumors could drive potent innate immune responses 
to cancer while reducing the chances of highly toxic effects that have been observed with 
systemic administration of IL-12 (Lacy et al., 2009). Combined cytokine and chemokine 
programs such as the local production of IL-2 and MIP-1α could both enhance T cell 
survival and proliferation and recruit more T cells and innate immune cells such as 
macrophages to the tumor, respectively. The customizability and precision of synNotch 
circuits in T cells should allow for local control of immune system functions that rely on 
autocrine and paracrine cellular communication to effectively coordinate a response to 
disease.
synNotch Receptors Can Drive Antigen-Dependent Skewing of T cell Differentiation to the 
Anti-Tumor Th1 Fate
Another way to precisely shape the output of a therapeutic T cell is to control its 
differentiation. Beyond producing protein effectors like cytokines, T cells undergo specific 
differentiation programs important for mounting an effective subtype immune response. 
These subtype differentiation programs are normally determined by the mechanism of T cell 
activation, the cytokine milleu, and ultimately the regulation of master regulator 
transcription factors that initiate the specific T cell fate (O'Shea and Paul, 2010). T helper 
cell 1 (Th1) or T helper cell 2 (Th2) T cells are two canonical CD4+ T cell fate choices that 
are controlled by the master regulator transcription factors, Tbet and GATA3, respectively 
(Figure 3A) (O'Shea and Paul, 2010). Th1 cells are important for cellular immunity towards 
pathogens and cancer whereas Th2 cells are involved in stimulation of antibody production 
(Kara et al., 2014). In many diseases, the local environment skews the differentiation of T 
cells along the wrong path such that they are rendered ineffective. This is especially true in 
cancer where T cells can be pushed into a suppressive phenotype, hampering the immune 
response and leading to tumor expansion (Amarnath et al., 2011; Zou, 2006).
Given the importance of T cell fate choice for cancer clearance, we wanted to determine if 
synNotch receptors could skew T cells to differentiate into IFNγ producing Th1 cells, 
important for anti-cancer immunity. IFNγ is critical for activation of innate immune cells 
that aid in tumor clearance, such as macrophages and dendritic cells, and direct exposure of 
cancer cells to IFNγ can enhance their susceptibility to the cytotoxic T cells. To skew T cell 
differentiation, we engineered CD4+ T cells with the α-CD19 synNotch receptor that 
controlled the expression of the Th1 transcription factor, Tbet (Figure 3B). Since ectopic 
expression of Tbet is known to be sufficient to drive the Th1 fate choice in CD4+ T cells, we 
Roybal et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 reasoned that synNotch could provide local, antigen-dependent control over Th1 fate 
regulation by regulating the levels of Tbet in response to the tumor antigen CD19 (Sundrud 
et al., 2003).
To test this, the engineered primary CD4+ T cells were co-cultured with either CD19+ target 
K562 cells or CD19-control K562 cells for 11 days to induce differentiation. As comparative 
controls, a matched population of CD4+ T cells was either treated with a cocktail of Th1 
differentiation agents (IL-12 and α-IL-4) or subject to Tbet constitutive overexpression. 
These two conditions allowed for the comparison of synNotch driven Th1 differentiation to 
previous gold standards in the field. The engineered synNotch CD4+ T cells induce the GFP 
reporter of Tbet expression specifically in response to CD19 within 24 hours of stimulation 
(Figure 3C and Figure S3A). After 11 days of long-term co-culture with CD19+ K562s, the 
T cells were stimulated with Phorbal myristate acetate (PMA) and ionomycin for 
intracellular cytokine staining to reveal whether the T cells had become Th1 cells. For the T 
cells that had been stimulated with CD19+ K562 cell for 11 days, >60% were found to be 
IFNγ+ Th1 cells (Figure 3D). This magnitude of skewed differentiation was equivalent to 
what was observed with treatment with the Th1 differentiation cocktail and constitutive Tbet 
overexpression (Figure 4E and Figure S3A-S3E). Thus, synNotch receptors can be used to 
skew T cells to the anti-tumor Th1 fate, and could in principle be used to skew T cells to 
many of the known T cell fates (e.g. Th2, Treg, Th17) as long as the expression of the defining 
master regulator transcription factor is sufficient for fate determination (O'Shea and Paul, 
2010).
SynNotch Driven T cell Delivery of Custom Therapeutics - TRAIL Production
Another important component of future T cell therapeutics is to engineer T cells with new 
capabilities that allow them to deliver customized therapeutic payloads, even ones that are 
non-native. Natural CD8+ T cells or CAR T cells directly recognize infected cells or cancer 
cells and kill them through the delivery of lytic granules (Figure 4A) (Stinchcombe and 
Griffiths, 2007). As a proof of principle experiment, we asked whether we could engineer 
CD4+ T cells – a T cell subset that is minimally cytotoxic – into a customized synthetic 
“killer T cell” by designing it to produce an apoptosis-inducing payload. We used the α-GFP 
nanobody synNotch receptor and response elements controlling production of TNF-related 
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), an inducer of apoptosis and a cancer therapeutic (Figure 
4B) (Johnstone et al., 2008; Lemke et al., 2014). T cells normally do not produce TRAIL 
upon TCR stimulation, therefore, if synthetically expressed in a controlled manner, this 
could aid in their cytotoxic activity (Figure S4A). Soluble forms of TRAIL are effective at 
killing the highly susceptible colon cancer cell line HCT116, but for other cancer lines like 
K562 cells, soluble TRAIL does not induce apoptosis even at high doses (Figure S5A-D) 
(Kim et al., 2000; Park et al., 2009). However, a recent study showed that if TRAIL is 
delivered in a membrane anchored form (e.g., a supported lipid bilayer or liposome), it is 
more effective at inducing apoptosis, even for resistant cancer cells such as K562 cells (Nair 
et al., 2015). Therefore, we engineered the CD4+ T cells to produce one of two TRAIL 
variants: 1) a secreted form of TRAIL fused to the GCN4 trimeric leucine zipper (LZ-
TRAIL) known to be more potent than soluble monomeric TRAIL, or 2) a natural surface 
displayed TRAIL (Figure S4E-S4H) (Walczak et al., 1999).
Roybal et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 synNotch T cells driving TRAIL production were co-cultured with TRAIL-resistant K562 
cells to determine if T cells were an effective delivery platform that enhanced the apoptotic 
effects of TRAIL. synNotch T cells drove cell surface TRAIL expression (Figure 4C) and 
LZ-TRAIL secretion within 24 hours of co-culture (Figure S4F-H), but only cell surface 
TRAIL initiated K562 cell death, indicated by their uptake of the live/dead stain SYTOX 
blue. In contrast, synNotch T cells that secreted LZ-TRAIL were not effective at killing the 
resistant K562 cells, consistent with recent studies (Figure 4D-E). Overall, these findings 
suggest that synNotch T cells can be efficient and effective delivery agents for therapeutics 
such as TRAIL and potentially other biologics that are ineffective or toxic when 
systemically delivered.
SynNotch T cells can Drive Antigen-dependent Production of Antibodies and BiTEs
To go beyond sculpting natural T cell behavior with synNotch circuits, we also wanted to 
show the ability of synNotch T cells to drive non-natural therapeutic responses that could 
have a wide-range of applications for treatment of disease. Antibody therapies for cancer 
that help to elicit an anti-tumor immune response by releasing the breaks on T cells are 
having unprecedented curative effects in patients with cancers that were otherwise 
considered terminal (Sharma and Allison, 2015). These antibodies known as ‘checkpoint 
blockade’ inhibitors target inhibitory receptors on T cells such as programmed cell death-1 
(PD-1) (Pembrolizumab) and cytotoxic-T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) 
(Tremelimumab) or their ligands. While these antibodies are often effective, many patients 
do not show a response or have significant adverse effects from treatment (Postow et al., 
2015). A potential way to increase the effectiveness of the therapeutic antibodies and reduce 
adverse events is to have T cells locally produce the antibodies in tumors. These antibodies 
could enhance the activity of therapeutic T cells and at the same time elicit a response from 
endogenous tumor-infiltrating T cells. Thus, we engineered primary human CD4+ T cells 
with the anti-GFP synNotch receptor controlling production of both Pembrolizumab and an 
scFv directed towards CTLA-4. The T cells reliably produced high levels of the antibodies 
and the secreted antibodies bound and coated antigen-expressing targets (Figure 5A). We 
also have engineered T cells to singly produce Pembrolizumab and Tremelimumab at high 
levels (Figure S5A-5C). Therefore, synNotch T cells are a viable platform for the controlled 
delivery of important clinical administered antibodies, both individually and in 
complementary combinations.
This approach is also effective for the production of bi-specific antibodies (e.g. bispecific T 
cell engagers -- BiTEs) that simultaneously bind tumor antigens and the CD3 chain of the 
TCR, effectively redirecting T cell activity toward tumor cells (Figure 5B) (Nagorsen et al., 
2012). synNotch T cells were engineered to produce the anti-CD19/CD3 BiTE, 
Blinatumomab, in response to anti-GFP synNotch stimulation. When stimulated with GFP
+CD19+ K562 cells, the resulting Blinatumomab production led to canonical TCR 
activation of the T cells, assayed by upregulation of the activation marker CD69 (Figure 5B). 
These synNotch → BiTE T cells required the presence of combinatorial antigens to activate 
-- both the synNotch antigen (GFP) and the tumor antigen (CD19) targeted by the BiTE 
(Figure 5B). Therefore, this is yet another way to engineer T cells with AND logic where T 
cells must sense multiple antigens to activate (Kloss et al., 2013; Roybal et al., 2016). By 
Roybal et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 confining BiTE production to the tumor, synNotch controlled T cells could potentially 
reduce the toxicity of bi-specific antibodies that are targeted to tumor antigens that are also 
expressed on bystander tissues.
SynNotch T cells can Drive Antigen-dependent Production of Adjuvants
Adjuvants are another class of therapeutics that being actively studied for cancer therapy. 
Microbial products have long been used as adjuvants and have a history of stimulating 
immune response to tumors (Temizoz et al., 2016). There are many microbial products that 
are genetically encodable, including the bacterial flagellum component, flagellin, a product 
of genes such as FliC from S. Typhi (Figure 5C). Flagellin can enhance an immune response 
to cancer by stimulating innate immune cells that express Toll-like receptors (TLR) such as 
TLR5 that recognize flagellin (Akira and Takeda, 2004; Leigh et al., 2014). These innate 
cells include professional antigen presenting cells (APCs) such as dendritic cells that though 
TLR5 simulation can drive immune responses that are otherwise suppressed in the tumor 
microenvironment. The anti-GFP synNotch receptor reliably controlled the production of 
Flagellin, and the amount of secreted Flagellin (~10 ng/mL) strongly stimulated a TLR5 
expressing reporter cell line (Figure 5C). This again shows the ability of synNotch T cells to 
control the production of a therapeutic agent that could have substantial toxicity if given 
systemically, but which when produced locally could significantly enhance the immune 
response to solid tumors.
SynNotch T cells can Drive Antigen-dependent Production of Immunosuppressive Agents
synNotch T cells may also have important applications outside of cancer, where they can 
play an immunosuppressive role in an autoimmune setting. Therefore, we engineered 
synNotch T cells that drive the simultaneously production of paracrine inhibitory signal such 
as the cytokine, IL-10, and the T cell inhibitory ligand, PD-L1, which could drive cell-to-
contact inhibition (Chen, 2004; Ouyang et al., 2011). The anti-CD19 synNotch receptor was 
able to drive both suppressive agents in response to stimulation with CD19+ K562s (Figure 
5D and Figure S5D and S5E). All of these examples of synNotch receptor T cells 
controlling non-native synthetic T cell responses highlight the vast possibilities to use 
synNotch engineered cells to produce a spectrum of therapeutic agents that could enhance 
the effectiveness of the therapeutic cells or help to reeducate and modulate a tissue or 
disease environment to restore homeostasis and natural function.
In vivo Expression of Cytokine in a Solid Tumor via synNotch Receptor Engineered T cells
Since synNotch receptors could precisely regulate a spectrum of T cell responses in vitro, 
we wanted to determine whether the receptors could enable T cells to selectively produce a 
custom payload such as the cytokine IL-2 in a synNotch ligand-expressing solid tumor. For 
these experiments, we established a bilateral K562 xenograft solid tumor model in 
immunocompromised NOD scid IL-2Rγ−/− (NSG) mice where a non-target CD19- tumor 
and a target CD19+ tumor were implanted subcutaneously in the left flank and right flank, 
respectively (Figure 6A). The tumors were allowed to establish for four days and then we 
intravenously (i.v.) injected CD4+ and CD8+ T cells engineered with the α-CD19 synNotch 
receptor and response elements in control of IL-2 expression and an IRES mCherry reporter 
(Figure 6A).
Roybal et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 After six days the tumors were harvested and the tumor infiltrating CD4+ and CD8+ T cells 
were analyzed for expression of the mCherry reporter (Figure 6A – 6B and Figure S6A-6C). 
Only the T cells localized in the target CD19 tumor expressed IL-2 IRES mCherry, and the 
reporter level was similar to what was observed for the same T cells when stimulated in vitro 
(Figure S6C and S6D). While the frequency of T cells was not high in the tumor (Figure 
S6E), the activity of the T cells was highly specific to the target tumor (Figure 6B and 
Figure S6B and S6C). In addition to i.v. injection of synNotch → IL-2 T cells, we also 
directly injected the T cells into non-target and target tumors. The tumors were then 
harvested and analyzed via flow cytometry two days after injection and also showed 
selective expression of the IL-2 reporter in the target tumor at similar levels to matched in 
vitro stimulated T cells (Figure S6D and S6F). While the ability of synNotch T cells to 
infiltrate these tumors could still be improved, these data clearly show that synNotch T cells 
can selectively induce production of a therapeutic agent in a target solid tumor. Thus, 
synNotch engineered T cells may prove effective for the delivery of a wide-range of 
genetically encodable therapeutics that could benefit from local delivery both to enhance 
effectiveness and reduce toxicity of systemic administration.
SynNotch T cell Production of Bi-specific Antibodies to Drive Solid Tumor Clearance
We then asked if synNotch T cells could drive clearance of a solid tumor in vivo, using 
synNotch induced local production of the anti-CD19/CD3 BiTE, Blinatumomab. To test 
these cells, a bilateral subcutaneous tumor model was established in NSG mice, similar to 
the model used for localized IL-2 secretion. However, in this model we wanted to determine 
if T cells could distinguish a single antigen bystander tumor expressing the BiTE antigen 
CD19 from a tumor expressing the synNotch antigen (GFP – priming antigen) and BiTE 
antigen (CD19 – killing antigen). To perform these experiments, we established a CD19+ 
single antigen tumor on the left flank and a GFP+CD19+ dual antigen tumor on the right 
flank. After the tumors had established, we i.v. injected primary human CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells engineered with the anti-GFP synNotch circuit controlling the expression of 
Blinatumomab (Figure 6C and 6D). The synNotch T cells should only activate their 
cytotoxic program in the GFP+CD19+ tumor due to GFP induced synNotch activity and 
Blinatumomab production. Tumor growth was monitored by caliper, and we observed the 
selective clearance of the dual antigen tumor over the course of 25 days (Figure 6D). 
synNotch T cells are thus capable of producing biologically relevant levels of a therapeutic 
that can effectively drive tumor clearance. We observed minimal slowed growth of the single 
antigen tumor, indicating that BiTE expression was reliably and spatially gated by synNotch 
activity (Figure 6D and Figure S6G). Overall, synNotch receptors are viable controllers of 
therapeutic delivery and are able to provide a spatially defined responses to disease in vivo.
DISCUSSION
Hacking Immune Cell Function with synNotch Circuits: A Programmable Platform for the 
Generation of Smarter Cellular Therapeutics
Most immune therapy strategies today focus on modulating the immune system to enhance 
its ability to attack cancer. Even canonical CAR T cell therapy, one of the most radical forms 
of immune therapy, primarily involves redirecting the native T cell response towards cancer. 
Roybal et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Here we describe a fundamentally different approach that involves hacking the function of 
immune cells. We show how synNotch circuits allow one to construct radically new antigen-
driven response programs in immune cells that can supplement and extend beyond the 
endogenous response capabilities of these cells.
Building these novel response programs using synNotch represents a strategy of refactoring 
T cell responses. Refactoring is a term used in computer programming and synthetic 
biology, and describes rebuilding a complex program or system from the bottom up in a 
more modular and logical way that allows for a higher degree of control, predictability and 
extensibility (the ability to extend the system to perform more complex functions) (Smanski 
et al., 2014). In particular, it is important that synNotch circuits allow one to control T cell 
sensing and response in a manner that can be completely independent from canonical TCR 
or co-stimulatory receptors of the immune system. Thus, this approach removes constraints 
of the endogenous system, allowing programming of more diverse responses that, in 
principle, have both a higher degree of controllability as well as new capabilities. SynNotch 
circuits can be used to control diverse classes of responses, both natural and non-natural, as 
shown in Figure 7A.
This approach of more deeply rewiring cell response programs is particularly powerful when 
combined with T cells and other immune cells, because T cells have the intrinsic ability to 
autonomously traffic through the body, to infiltrate tissues, and to survey their 
microenvironment for their cognate molecular signals. Since synNotch circuits are used to 
create synthetic programs to detect and respond to tissue based microenvironmental signals, 
this is an ideal pairing of a cell type and molecular sensor system, allowing the engineering 
of what amounts to living, programmable nanodevices that can carry out highly localized 
actions in the complex environment of the body (Figure 7B)
synNotch Receptors could be used to improve current T cell therapies
An immediate application of synNotch circuits could be to improve existing T cell therapies. 
synNotch receptors can act as an additional environmental sensing system for TCR and 
CAR T cell therapies and help to modulate the activity of the cells to improve their 
effectiveness and safety profile. We have demonstrated that synNotch receptors can be used 
to control expression of directly cytotoxic factors (CARs, BiTEs). But, in addition, an 
important use of synNotch receptors could be the control the local production of immune 
stimulatory factors, such as IL-12 or other innate immune adjuvants, in TIL or engineered T 
cell therapies. This type of local delivery and enhancement may be particularly important, 
given, that factors like IL-12 are potent at driving anti-tumor immunity, but are too toxic for 
systemic administration (Lacy et al., 2009). The inability of many of the current T cell 
therapies to infiltrate and eliminate solid tumors could be greatly improved by utilizing 
synNotch receptors to help the T cells to prime the local disease environment to make it 
more susceptible to both the cellular therapeutic and the endogenous immune response 
(Tang et al., 2016). We have also shown that synNotch circuits can be used to locally 
produce combinations of checkpoint blockade antibodies, showing that a host of different 
factors could be produced to both enhance immune response and to overcome the 
immunosupresive blockade raised by many tumors.
Roybal et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Beyond Cancer: synNotch T cells as remodelers of Disease Microenvironments
Because T cells can traffic throught he body and have access to many disease tissues, 
synNotch T cells could in principle by used to address diverse disease needs beyond cancer, 
especially localized diseases that require spatial sensing and localized microenvironment 
remodeling. The examples of customized T cell behavior described here could be used to 
help T cells control and disrupt diverse diseases. For example, synNotch engineered cells 
could also be deployed for the control of autoimmune or inflammatory diseases. In this case, 
however, the engineered cells would now be engineered to have a suppressive role that could 
promote immune tolerance. While T regulatory cells can in principle be used towards this 
goal, there may be distinct control and predictability advantages in using a refactored 
synNotch T cell to sense auto-antigens and deliver a customized and controlled set of 
immunosuppressive factors. synNotch engineered cells may have even broader applications 
as general delivery agents that can locally produce any genetically encoded bio-therapeutic 
that has systemic toxicity (Figure 7B).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Source of Primary Human T cells
Blood was obtained from Blood Centers of the Pacific (San Francisco, CA) as approved by 
the University Institutional Review Board. Primary CD4+ and CD8+T cells were isolated 
from anonymous donor blood after apheresis (described in METHOD DETAILS).
Animal Model Details
Animal studies were conducted with the UCSF Preclinical Therapeutics Core under a 
protocol approved by the UCSF Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. NOD scid 
gamma (NSG) (female, 8~12 weeks old, Jackson Laboratory #005557) mice were used for 
all in vivo mouse experiments.
METHOD DETAILS
synNotch Receptor and Response Element Construct Design
synNotch receptors were built by fusing the CD19 scFv (Grupp et al., 2013), Her2 set of 
scFvs (Liu et al., 2015), LaG17 (lower affinity), or LaG16_2 (high affinity) GFP nanobody 
(Fridy et al., 2014) to the mouse Notch1 (NM_008714) minimal regulatory region (Ile1427 
to Arg1752) and Gal4VP64. All synNotch receptors contain an n-terminal CD8α signal 
peptide (MALPVTALLLPLALLLHAARP) for membrane targeting and a myc-tag 
(EQKLISEEDL) for easy determination of surface expression with α-myc A647 (cell-
signaling #2233). The receptors were cloned into a modified pHR’SIN:CSW vector 
containing a PGK promoter for all primary T cell experiments. The pHR’SIN:CSW vector 
was also modified to make the response element plasmids. Five copies of the Gal4 DNA 
binding domain target sequence (GGAGCACTGTCCTCCGAACG) were cloned 5’ to a 
minimal CMV promoter.
The human IL-2, IL-10, flexi IL-12 (Anderson et al., 1997), MIP-1α, Tbet, or TRAIL, and 
PD-L1_T2A_IL-10 codon optimized mRNA sequence was cloned into a MCS downstream 
Roybal et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of the Gal4 inducible promoter and 5’ of an IRES mCherry reporter. All constructs were 
cloned via In fusion cloning (Clontech #ST0345)).
Primary Human T cell Isolation and Culture
Primary CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were isolated from anonymous donor blood after apheresis 
by negative selection (STEMCELL Technologies #15062 & 15023). T cells were 
cryopreserved in RPMI-1640 (UCSF cell culture core) with 20% human AB serum (Valley 
Biomedical Inc., #HP1022) and 10% DMSO. After thawing, T cells were cultured in human 
T cell medium consisting of X-VIVO 15 (Lonza #04-418Q), 5% Human AB serum and 10 
mM neutralized N-acetyl L- Cysteine (Sigma-Aldrich #A9165) supplemented with 30 
units/mL IL-2 (NCI BRB Preclinical Repository) for all experiments.
Lentiviral Transduction of Human T cells
Pantropic VSV-G pseudotyped lentivirus was produced via transfection of Lenti-X 293T 
cells (Clontech #11131D) with a pHR’SIN:CSW transgene expression vector and the viral 
packaging plasmids pCMVdR8.91 and pMD2.G using Fugene HD (Promega #E2312). 
Primary T cells were thawed the same day, and after 24 hours in culture, were stimulated 
with Dynabeads Human T-Activator CD3/CD28 (Life Technologies #11131D) at a 1:3 
cell:bead ratio. At 48 hours, viral supernatant was harvested and the primary T cells were 
exposed to the virus for 24 hours. At day 4 post T cell stimulation, Dynabeads were removed 
and the T cells expanded until day 9 when they were rested and could be used in assays. T 
cells were sorted for assays with a FACs ARIA II.
Cancer Cell Lines
The cancer cell lines used were K562 myelogenous leukemia cells (ATCC #CCL-243), 
Daudi B cell lymphoblasts (ATCC #CCL-213), MCF7 adenocarcinoma breast cancer cells 
(ATCC #HTB22), and HCT116 colon cancer cells (ATCC #CCL-247). K562s were 
lentivirally transduced to stably express human CD19 at equivalent levels as Daudi tumors. 
CD19 levels were determined by staining the cells with α-CD19 APC (Biolegend #302212). 
K562s were also transduced to stably express surface GFP (GFP fused to the PDGF 
transmembrane domain). All cell lines were sorted for expression of the transgenes.
In vitro Stimulation of synNotch T cells
For all in vitro synNotch T cell stimulations, 2×105 T cells were co-cultured with sender 
cells at a 1:1 ratio. After mixing the T cells and sender cells in round bottom 96-well tissue 
culture plates, the cells were centrifuged for 1 min at 400×g to force interaction of the cells 
and the cultures were analyzed at 24 hours for reporter expression or expression of custom 
gene induction via flow cytometry with a BD LSR II. All flow cytometry analysis was 
performed in FlowJo software (TreeStar).
Luminex MAGPIX Cytokine Quantification
Primary CD4+ T cells expressing the α-CD19 synNotch Gal4VP64 receptor and 5× Gal4 
response elements controlling either human IL-2, IL-10, IL- 12, or IL-2/MIP-1α expression 
were stimulated as described above with K562 myelogenous leukemia cells (CD19- or 
Roybal et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CD19+). As references, CD4+ T cells expressing the α-CD19 4-1BBζ CAR were stimulated 
along with untransduced T cells stimulated with α-CD3/CD28 Dynabeads at a 1:3 ratio. The 
supernatant was collected at 24 hours and analyzed with a Luminex MAGPIX (Luminex 
Corp.) Human Cytokine Magentic 25-plex Panel (Invitrogen ref#LHC0009M) according to 
the manufacturer’s protocol. All cytokine levels were calculated based on standard curves 
with Her2 software (Luminex Corp.).
IL-2 Intracellular Cytokine Staining and CD69 Staining
synNotch T cells controlling IL-2 production were assayed to determine if they basally 
produced IL-2 by intracellular cytokine stain (ICS). The synNotch T cells and untransduced 
T cell controls were cultured for 6 hours in the presence of GolgiPlug (BD Biosciences 
#555029). The T cells were then stained with α-IL-2 FITC (BD #340448) with a BD 
Biosciences ICS kit (#555028). The levels of IL- 2 were analyzed via flow cytometry with a 
BD LSRII.
To assess whether synNotch receptors activated the T cells, the T cells were stained after 
stimulation for the activation marker CD69. CD69 expression was determined by staining 
the cells with α-CD69 APC (Biolegend #310910).
synNotch Driven T cell Differentiation
Primary human CD4+ T cells were stimulated with Dynabeads Human T- Activator CD3/
CD28 as described above. To differentiate T cells into the Th1 subset during the activation, 
the cells were cultured as described above but with the addition of 2.5 ng/mL recombinant 
IL-12 (R&D Systems) and 12.5 µg/mL α- IL-4 clone MP4-25D2 (BD Pharmigen #554481). 
IL-12 and α-IL-4 were added at least twice weekly. In parallel, primary CD4 T cells were 
lentivirally transduced to express human Tbet T2A mCherry (TBX21, NCBI #EAW94804.1) 
and cultured normally in T cell medium supplemented with IL-2. CD4+ T cells expressing 
the α-CD19 synNotch Gal4VP64 receptor and 5× Gal4 response elements controlling Tbet 
T2A GFP expression were cultured in the presence of CD19- or CD19+ K562 sender cells 
24 hours after viral transduction. The synNotch T cells were cultured in the presence of 
K562s in T cell medium supplemented with IL-2. All T cells were cultured for 11 to 14 days 
and then subject to intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) to determine the percentage of Th1 T 
cells.
For ICS, the T cells were first treated with 50 ng/mL Phorbal myristate acetate and 1 µg/mL 
ionomycin (both from Sigma) for 6 hours in the presence of GolgiPlug. The T cells were 
then stained with α-Tbet BV421 (Biolegend #644816) and α-IFNγ APC (Biolegend 
#502512). The levels of Tbet and IFNγ were analyzed via flow cytometry with a BD LSRII.
Sensitivity of Cancer Cell lines to Recombinant TRAIL and synNotch Driven TRAIL 
Production in Primary T cells
HCT116 colon cancer cells and K562s were treated with recombinant TRAIL (from 1 to 200 
ng/mL, 1:2 dilution series) for 24 hours (RND Systems #375-TEC-010). The cells were then 
harvested and stained with the live/dead stain, SYTOX Blue (Thermo Scientific #S34857) 
and the fraction of dead cells was determined by flow cytometry on a BD LSR II. The level 
Roybal et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of the death receptor 4 (DR4) expressed by K562s was assessed by staining with α-TRAIL 
R1 (DR4) APC (Biolegend #307208).
For synNotch driven TRAIL cytotoxicity assays, primary human CD4+ T cells were 
transduced to express the α-GFP nanobody (LaG17) synNotch Gal4VP64 receptor and 5× 
Gal4 response elements controlling the expression of LZ-TRAIL or cell surface wild-type 
TRAIL. The synNotch TRAIL killer cells were co-cultured with surface GFP+ or GFP- 
K562s for 24 hrs and death was determined by staining with SYTOX Blue. Surface levels of 
TRAIL was determined by staining T cells with α-TRAIL (CD253) APC (Biolegend 
#308210). Production and secretion of LZ-TRAIL was determined by TRAIL ELISA (R&D 
systems #DTRL00).
Antibody Response Element Construct Design
The pembrolizumab (http://www.drugbank.ca/drugs/DB09037), tremelimumab (http://
www.google.com/patents/US20090074787), and blinatumomab (http://www.drugbank.ca/
drugs/DB09052) codon optimized mRNA sequences were cloned into a MCS downstream 
of the Gal4 inducible promoter via Infusion cloning. Both antibody constructs consist of 
(from n-terminus to c- terminus): an n-terminal human IgG heavy chain signal peptide 
(MDWTWRVFCLLAVTPGAHP) for secretion, a myc-tag for easy detection of binding to 
target cells with α-myc AF647, the antibody heavy chain sequence, a furin cleavage site and 
T2A peptide, a human IgG light chain signal peptide (MAWSPLFLTLITHCAGSWA), a 
HA-tag as an alternative detection means, and the antibody light chain sequence. The 
Blinatumomab construct contained an n- terminal human IgK signal peptide 
(MDMRVLAQLLGLLLLCFPGARC). The dual α-PD-1/α-CTLA-4 construct consists of 
(from n-terminus to c-terminus): an n- terminal human IgG heavy chain signal peptide 
(MDWTWRVFCLLAVTPGAHP) for secretion, the pembrolizumab heavy chain sequence, a 
furin cleavage site and T2A peptide, a HA-tag for detection of binding with α-HA A647 
(CST #3444S), the Pembrolizumab light chain sequence, a Furin cleavage site and P2A 
peptide, a human IgK signal peptide, a myc-tag, and the α-CTLA-4 scFv sequence.
synNotch Driven Antibody Production
Primary human CD4+ T cells were transduced to express the α-GFP nanobody (LaG17) 
synNotch Gal4VP64 receptor and a second vector expressing a user-defined antibody under 
the control of a 5× Gal4 response element. 2 × 105 transduced T cells were co-cultured 1:1 
with GFP+ or GFP− K562s for 24, 48, or 72 hours to induce antibody production and 
secretion. Cell culture supernatant was harvested and stored for analysis at −80°C.
To detect secreted antibody in cell culture supernatant, a cell-based binding assay was 
employed. K562 cells were lentivirally transduced to stably express human PD-1 or human 
CTLA-4, so that these cells could serve as ‘target cells’ for cell-based binding assays to 
detect antibody secreted from synNotch T cells. 5 × 104 target cells were blocked with 
human BD Fc Block (BD #564220) prior to incubation with cell culture supernatant from 
co-cultures of synNotch antibody-producing T cells and inducer K562 cells. Following 
incubation with cell culture supernatant, target cells were stained with α-myc AF647 to 
detect bound antibody (which was myc-tagged). Flow cytometry was performed to quantify 
Roybal et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the fluorescence intensity (which correlated with amount of antibody produced by synNotch 
T cells) of antibody-labeled target cells.
To quantify the amount of secrete antibody in cell culture supernatant, a standard curve was 
generated for the cell-based binding assay. E6-1 Jurkat T cells (ATCC #TIB-152) were 
lentivirally transduced to create a stable cell line that constitutively secretes α-PD-1 
pembrolizumab. Supernatant was harvested from a culture of pembrolizumab-secreting 
Jurkat T cells. The concentration of α-PD- 1 in the supernatant was determined via human 
IgG4 ELISA (Life Technologies #991000). The supernatant with a known concentration of 
α-PD-1 was then serially diluted and incubated with PD-1+ K562 target cells to generate a 
standard curve. Target cell binding of supernatants from co-cultures of synNotch antibody-
producing T cells and inducer K562 cells was then compared to the standard curve to 
determine the concentration of α-PD-1 produced by synNotch T cells co-cultured with 
different inducer cells.
synNotch Driven Blinatumomab Production
Primary human CD4+ T cells were transduced with the α-GFP nanobody (LaG17) synNotch 
Gal4VP64 receptor and 5× Gal4 response elements controlling α-CD19/CD3 BiTE, 
Blinatumomab expression. synNotch BiTE T cells were stimulated with either surface GFP+ 
or GFP- K562s for 24 hours and supernatant was harvested. The T cells were also collected 
and stained with α- CD69 APC (Biolegend #310910) to determine if they were activated.
synNotch Driven Flagellin Production
Primary human CD4+ T cells were transduced with the α-GFP nanobody (LaG17) 
nanobody synNotch Gal4VP64 receptor and 5× Gal4 response elements controlling S. Typhi 
FliC expression. 2 × 105 transduced T cells were co-cultured 1:1 with GFP+ or GFP− K562s 
for 24 hours to induce flagellin production. Cell culture supernatant was harvested 24 hours 
after stimulation and added to wells containing HEK-Blue hTLR5 reporter cells (Invivogen) 
that express secreted alkaline phosphatase (SEAP) under control of a TLR5 inducible NF-
κB promoter. Recombinant FliC (Invivogen) was utilized as a positive control. Twenty-four 
hours later supernatant was harvested from HEK-TLR5 cells and alkaline phosphatase 
activity quantified in a colorimetric assay using QUANTIBLUE detection reagent 
(Invivogen) with a Flexstation III (Molecular Devices).
synNotch Driven PD-L1 and IL-10 Production
Primary human CD4+ T cells were transduced with the α-CD19 synNotch Gal4VP64 
receptor and 5× Gal4 response elements controlling human PD-L1 T2A IL-10 expression. 
The synNotch T cells were stimulated with either surface CD19+ or CD19- K562s for 24 hr 
and supernatant was harvested for IL-10 ELISA analysis (eBiosciences #BMS215/2). The T 
cells were also collected and stained separately for intracellular IL-10 with α-IL-10 APC 
(Biolegend #501410) and for surface PD-L1 with α-PD-L1 BV421 (Biolegend #329714).
Xenograft Tumor Model, Cell Isolation, and Flow Cytometry
Animal studies were conducted with the UCSF Preclinical Therapeutics Core under a 
protocol approved by the UCSF Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. NOD scid 
Roybal et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 gamma (NSG) (female, 8~12 weeks old, Jackson Laboratory #005557) mice were used for 
all in vivo mouse experiments. Primary CD4+ and CD8+ T cells expressing the α-CD19 
synNotch Gal4VP64 receptor and 5× Gal4 response elements controlling human IL-2 IRES 
mCherry were sorted and used in the experiments.
For in vivo synNotch driven localized IL-2 production experiments, NSG mice were injected 
on day 0 with 5×106 CD19- and CD19+ K562s subcutaneously on the left flank and right 
flank of the mice, respectively. The tumors were allowed to establish for 4 days and T cells 
were injected via the tail vein (i.v.) on day 4 or intratumoral on day 8. The T cells were 
suspended in PBS for all injections. CD4+ and CD8+ synNotch T cells were injected at a 
1:1 ratio. For i.v. injections, 6×106 total T cells were injected, and for intratumoral 
injections, 5×105 total T cells were injected.
Tumors were harvested at day 10 into RPMI supplemented with 1% FBS (UCSF Cell 
Culture Core). The tumors were then minced by razor blade and digested for an hour in 
RPMI with 0.1 mg/mL DNase (Roche #10104159001) and 0.2 mg/mL collagenase P (Roche 
# 11249002001) at 37°C. After incubation, the digested tumors were passed over a 75 µm 
cell strainer and the tumor cells were collected by centrifugation. The cells were then treated 
with red blood cell lysis buffer (Biolegend #420301) and washed with PBS. The tumors 
were then stained with a LIVE/DEAD Green (Thermo Scientific #34969) and α-CD4 A647 
(BD 557707) and α-CD8 BV786 (BD #563823) to analyze the tumor infiltrating T cells. 
Expression of IL-2 IRES mCherry was assessed in the CD4+ and CD8+ T cell populations 
with a BD LSR II.
For in vivo synNotch driven localized Blinatumomab experiments, NSG mice were injected 
on day 0 with 5×106 CD19+ only and surface GFP/CD19+ K562s subcutaneously on the left 
flank and right flank of the mice, respectively. The tumors were allowed to establish for 4 
days. Primary human CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (6 × 106 total T cells 1:1 CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells) transduced with the α-GFP nanobody (LaG17) synNotch Gal4VP64 receptor and 5× 
Gal4 response elements controlling the α-CD19/CD3 BiTE, Blinatumomab, expression or 
untransduced T cells were injected via the tail vein (i.v.) on day 4. Tumor growth was 
monitored by caliper for 25 days after tumor cell implantation.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical significance was determined by Student’s t-test (two-tailed) unless otherwise 
noted. All statistical analysis was performed with Prism 7a (Graphpad) and p values are 
reported (n.s. = p > 0.05, * = p ≤ 0.05, ** = p ≤ 0.01, *** = p ≤ 0.001, **** = p ≤ 0.0001). 
All error bars represent either S.E.M. or S.D.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank members of the Lim lab, Arthur Weiss and members of the Weiss lab for helpful discussions 
and comments on the manuscript. We thank the Preclinical Therapeutics Core at UCSF for help with in vivo studies 
Roybal et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and I. Sterin, C. Ghosh for technical assistance. This work was supported by a Jane Coffin Childs Memorial Fund 
Postdoctoral Fellowship A121505 (K.T.R.), a Human Frontiers of Science Program Postdoctoral Fellowship (L.M.), 
and NIH grants P50GM081879, R01 GM055040, R01 CA196277, and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
(W.A.L).
REFERENCES
Akira S, Takeda K. Toll-like receptor signalling. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2004; 4:499–511. [PubMed: 
15229469] 
Amarnath S, Mangus CW, Wang JCM, Wei F, He A, Kapoor V, Foley JE, Massey PR, Felizardo TC, 
Riley JL, et al. The PDL1-PD1 axis converts human TH1 cells into regulatory T cells. Sci Transl 
Med. 2011; 3:111ra120–111ra120.
Anderson R, Macdonald I, Corbett T, Hacking G, Lowdell MW, Prentice HG. Construction and 
biological characterization of an interleukin-12 fusion protein (Flexi-12): delivery to acute myeloid 
leukemic blasts using adeno-associated virus. Hum. Gene Ther. 1997; 8:1125–1135. [PubMed: 
9189770] 
Barrett DM, Singh N, Porter DL, Grupp SA, June CH. Chimeric antigen receptor therapy for cancer. 
Annu. Rev. Med. 2014a; 65:333–347. [PubMed: 24274181] 
Barrett DM, Teachey DT, Grupp SA. Toxicity management for patients receiving novel T-cell engaging 
therapies. Curr. Opin. Pediatr. 2014b; 26:43–49. [PubMed: 24362408] 
Bray SJ. Notch signalling: a simple pathway becomes complex. 2006; 7:678–689.
Brentjens RJ, Davila ML, Rivière I, Park J, Wang X, Cowell LG, Bartido S, Stefanski J, Taylor C, 
Olszewska M, et al. CD19-targeted T cells rapidly induce molecular remissions in adults with 
chemotherapy-refractory acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Sci Transl Med. 2013; 5:177ra38–177ra38.
Chen L. Co-inhibitory molecules of the B7-CD28 family in the control of T-cell immunity. Nat. Rev. 
Immunol. 2004; 4:336–347. [PubMed: 15122199] 
Chovatiya R, Medzhitov R. Stress, inflammation, and defense of homeostasis. Mol. Cell. 2014; 
54:281–288. [PubMed: 24766892] 
Davila ML, Rivière I, Wang X, Bartido S, Park J, Curran K, Chung SS, Stefanski J, Borquez-Ojeda O, 
Olszewska M, et al. Efficacy and toxicity management of 19-28z CAR T cell therapy in B cell 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Sci Transl Med. 2014; 6:224ra25–224ra25.
Dotti G, Gottschalk S, Savoldo B, Brenner MK. Design and development of therapies using chimeric 
antigen receptor-expressing T cells. Immunol. Rev. 2014; 257:107–126. [PubMed: 24329793] 
Dranoff G. Cytokines in cancer pathogenesis and cancer therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2004; 4:11–22. 
[PubMed: 14708024] 
Fischbach MA, Bluestone JA, Lim WA. Cell-based therapeutics: the next pillar of medicine. Sci Transl 
Med. 2013; 5:179ps7–179ps7.
Fridy PC, Li Y, Keegan S, Thompson MK, Nudelman I, Scheid JF, Oeffinger M, Nussenzweig MC, 
Fenyö D, Chait BT, et al. A robust pipeline for rapid production of versatile nanobody repertoires. 
Nat. Methods. 2014; 11:1253–1260. [PubMed: 25362362] 
Gajewski TF, Schreiber H, Fu Y-X. Innate and adaptive immune cells in the tumor microenvironment. 
Nat. Immunol. 2013; 14:1014–1022. [PubMed: 24048123] 
Gill S, June CH. Going viral: chimeric antigen receptor T-cell therapy for hematological malignancies. 
Immunol. Rev. 2015; 263:68–89. [PubMed: 25510272] 
Gordon WR, Vardar-Ulu D, Histen G, Sanchez-Irizarry C, Aster JC, Blacklow SC. Structural basis for 
autoinhibition of Notch. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 2007; 14:295–300. [PubMed: 17401372] 
Gordon WR, Zimmerman B, He L, Miles LJ, Huang J, Tiyanont K, McArthur DG, Aster JC, Perrimon 
N, Loparo JJ, et al. Mechanical Allostery: Evidence for a Force Requirement in the Proteolytic 
Activation of Notch. Dev. Cell. 2015; 33:729–736. [PubMed: 26051539] 
Grupp SA, Kalos M, Barrett D, Aplenc R, Porter DL, Rheingold SR, Teachey DT, Chew A, Hauck B, 
Wright JF, et al. Chimeric antigen receptor-modified T cells for acute lymphoid leukemia. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 2013; 368:1509–1518. [PubMed: 23527958] 
Iwasaki A, Medzhitov R. Control of adaptive immunity by the innate immune system. Nat. Immunol. 
2015; 16:343–353. [PubMed: 25789684] 
Roybal et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Johnstone RW, Frew AJ, Smyth MJ. The TRAIL apoptotic pathway in cancer onset, progression and 
therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2008; 8:782–798. [PubMed: 18813321] 
June CH, Blazar BR, Riley JL. Engineering lymphocyte subsets: tools, trials and tribulations. Nat. Rev. 
Immunol. 2009; 9:704–716. [PubMed: 19859065] 
Kalos M, Levine BL, Porter DL, Katz S, Grupp SA, Bagg A, June CH. T cells with chimeric antigen 
receptors have potent antitumor effects and can establish memory in patients with advanced 
leukemia. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:95ra73–95ra73.
Kara EE, Comerford I, Fenix KA, Bastow CR, Gregor CE, McKenzie DR, McColl SR. Tailored 
immune responses: novel effector helper T cell subsets in protective immunity. PLoS Pathog. 
2014; 10:e1003905. [PubMed: 24586147] 
Kim K, Fisher MJ, Xu SQ, el-Deiry WS. Molecular determinants of response to TRAIL in killing of 
normal and cancer cells. Clin. Cancer Res. 2000; 6:335–346. [PubMed: 10690508] 
Kloss CC, Condomines M, Cartellieri M, Bachmann M, Sadelain M. Combinatorial antigen 
recognition with balanced signaling promotes selective tumor eradication by engineered T cells. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 2013; 31:71–75. [PubMed: 23242161] 
Lacy MQ, Jacobus S, Blood EA, Kay NE, Rajkumar SV, Greipp PR. Phase II study of interleukin-12 
for treatment of plateau phase multiple myeloma (E1A96): a trial of the Eastern Cooperative 
Oncology Group. Leuk. Res. 2009; 33:1485–1489. [PubMed: 19243818] 
Lamers CHJ, Sleijfer S, Vulto AG, Kruit WHJ, Kliffen M, Debets R, Gratama JW, Stoter G, 
Oosterwijk E. Treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma with autologous T-lymphocytes 
genetically retargeted against carbonic anhydrase IX: first clinical experience. J. Clin. Oncol. 
2006; 24:e20–e22. [PubMed: 16648493] 
Lämmermann T, Sixt M. The microanatomy of T-cell responses. Immunol. Rev. 2008; 221:26–43. 
[PubMed: 18275473] 
Lecourtois M, Schweisguth F. Indirect evidence for Delta- dependent intracellular processing of notch 
in Drosophila embryos. Curr. Biol. 1998; 8:771–774. [PubMed: 9651681] 
Leigh ND, Bian G, Ding X, Liu H, Aygun-Sunar S, Burdelya LG, Gudkov AV, Cao X. A flagellin-
derived toll-like receptor 5 agonist stimulates cytotoxic lymphocyte-mediated tumor immunity. 
PLoS ONE. 2014; 9:e85587. [PubMed: 24454895] 
Lemke J, von Karstedt S, Zinngrebe J, Walczak H. Getting TRAIL back on track for cancer therapy. 
Cell Death Differ. 2014; 21:1350–1364. [PubMed: 24948009] 
Lim WA. Designing customized cell signalling circuits. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2010; 11:393–403. 
[PubMed: 20485291] 
Liu X, Jiang S, Fang C, Yang S, Olalere D, Pequignot EC, Cogdill AP, Li N, Ramones M, Granda B, et 
al. Affinity-Tuned ErbB2 or EGFR Chimeric Antigen Receptor T Cells Exhibit an Increased 
Therapeutic Index against Tumors in Mice. Cancer Res. 2015; 75:3596–3607. [PubMed: 
26330166] 
Magee MS, Snook AE. Challenges to chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cell therapy for cancer. 
Discov Med. 2014; 18:265–271. [PubMed: 25425467] 
Maus MV, Fraietta JA, Levine BL, Kalos M, Zhao Y, June CH. Adoptive immunotherapy for cancer or 
viruses. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2014; 32:189–225. [PubMed: 24423116] 
Miller JFAP, Sadelain M. The Journey from Discoveries in Fundamental Immunology to Cancer 
Immunotherapy. Cancer Cell. 2015; 27:439–449. [PubMed: 25858803] 
Morgan RA, Yang JC, Kitano M, Dudley ME, Laurencot CM, Rosenberg SA. Case report of a serious 
adverse event following the administration of T cells transduced with a chimeric antigen receptor 
recognizing ERBB2. Mol. Ther. 2010; 18:843–851. [PubMed: 20179677] 
Morsut L, Roybal KT, Xiong X, Gordley RM, Coyle SM, Thomson M, Lim WA. Engineering 
Customized Cell Sensing and Response Behaviors Using Synthetic Notch Receptors. Cell. 2016; 
164:780–791. [PubMed: 26830878] 
Mueller SN, Gebhardt T, Carbone FR, Heath WR. Memory T cell subsets, migration patterns, and 
tissue residence. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2013; 31:137–161. [PubMed: 23215646] 
Mumm JS, Schroeter EH, Saxena MT, Griesemer A, Tian X, Pan DJ, Ray WJ, Kopan R. A ligand-
induced extracellular cleavage regulates gamma-secretase-like proteolytic activation of Notch1. 
Mol. Cell. 2000; 5:197–206. [PubMed: 10882062] 
Roybal et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Nagorsen D, Kufer P, Baeuerle PA, Bargou R. Blinatumomab: a historical perspective. Pharmacol. 
Ther. 2012; 136:334–342. [PubMed: 22940266] 
Nair PM, Flores H, Gogineni A, Marsters S, Lawrence DA, Kelley RF, Ngu H, Sagolla M, Komuves L, 
Bourgon R, et al. Enhancing the antitumor efficacy of a cell-surface death ligand by covalent 
membrane display. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.a. 2015; 112:5679–5684. [PubMed: 25902490] 
O'Garra A, Barrat FJ, Castro AG, Vicari A, Hawrylowicz C. Strategies for use of IL-10 or its 
antagonists in human disease. Immunol. Rev. 2008; 223:114–131. [PubMed: 18613832] 
O'Shea JJ, Paul WE. Mechanisms underlying lineage commitment and plasticity of helper CD4+ T 
cells. Science. 2010; 327:1098–1102. [PubMed: 20185720] 
O'Shea JJ, Ma A, Lipsky P. Cytokines and autoimmunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2002; 2:37–45. 
[PubMed: 11905836] 
Ouyang W, Rutz S, Crellin NK, Valdez PA, Hymowitz SG. Regulation and functions of the IL-10 
family of cytokines in inflammation and disease. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2011; 29:71–109. 
[PubMed: 21166540] 
Park S-J, Kim M-J, Kim H-B, Sohn H-Y, Bae J-H, Kang C-D, Kim S-H. Cotreatment with apicidin 
overcomes TRAIL resistance via inhibition of Bcr-Abl signaling pathway in K562 leukemia cells. 
Exp. Cell Res. 2009; 315:1809–1818. [PubMed: 19268463] 
Porter DL, Levine BL, Kalos M, Bagg A, June CH. Chimeric antigen receptor-modified T cells in 
chronic lymphoid leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 2011; 365:725–733. [PubMed: 21830940] 
Postow MA, Callahan MK, Wolchok JD. Immune Checkpoint Blockade in Cancer Therapy. J. Clin. 
Oncol. 2015; 33:1974–1982. [PubMed: 25605845] 
Roybal KT, Rupp LJ, Morsut L, Walker WJ, McNally KA, Park JS, Lim WA. Precision Tumor 
Recognition by T Cells With Combinatorial Antigen-Sensing Circuits. Cell. 2016; 164:770–779. 
[PubMed: 26830879] 
Sakaguchi S, Yamaguchi T, Nomura T, Ono M. Regulatory T cells and immune tolerance. Cell. 2008; 
133:775–787. [PubMed: 18510923] 
Selkoe D, Kopan R. Notch and Presenilin: regulated intramembrane proteolysis links development and 
degeneration. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2003; 26:565–597. [PubMed: 12730322] 
Sharma P, Allison JP. Immune checkpoint targeting in cancer therapy: toward combination strategies 
with curative potential. Cell. 2015; 161:205–214. [PubMed: 25860605] 
Smanski MJ, Bhatia S, Zhao D, Park Y, Woodruff L, Giannoukos G, Ciulla D, Busby M, Calderon J, 
Nicol R, et al. Functional optimization of gene clusters by combinatorial design and assembly. Nat. 
Biotechnol. 2014; 32:1241–1249. B A. [PubMed: 25419741] 
Stinchcombe JC, Griffiths GM. Secretory mechanisms in cell- mediated cytotoxicity. Annu. Rev. Cell 
Dev. Biol. 2007; 23:495–517. [PubMed: 17506701] 
Struhl G, Adachi A. Nuclear access and action of notch in vivo. Cell. 1998; 93:649–660. [PubMed: 
9604939] 
Sundrud MS, Grill SM, Ni D, Nagata K, Alkan SS, Subramaniam A, Unutmaz D. Genetic 
reprogramming of primary human T cells reveals functional plasticity in Th cell differentiation. J. 
Immunol. 2003; 171:3542–3549. [PubMed: 14500650] 
Tang H, Qiao J, Fu Y-X. Immunotherapy and tumor microenvironment. Cancer Lett. 2016; 370:85–90. 
[PubMed: 26477683] 
Temizoz B, Kuroda E, Ishii KJ. Vaccine adjuvants as potential cancer immunotherapeutics. Int. 
Immunol. 2016; 28:329–338. [PubMed: 27006304] 
Walczak H, Miller RE, Ariail K, Gliniak B, Griffith TS, Kubin M, Chin W, Jones J, Woodward A, Le 
T, et al. Tumoricidal activity of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand in vivo. 
Nat. Med. 1999; 5:157–163. [PubMed: 9930862] 
Zhao Y, Wang QJ, Yang S, Kochenderfer JN, Zheng Z, Zhong X, Sadelain M, Eshhar Z, Rosenberg 
SA, Morgan RA. A herceptin-based chimeric antigen receptor with modified signaling domains 
leads to enhanced survival of transduced T lymphocytes and antitumor activity. J. Immunol. 2009; 
183:5563–5574. [PubMed: 19843940] 
Zou W. Regulatory T cells, tumour immunity and immunotherapy. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2006; 6:295–
307. [PubMed: 16557261] 
Roybal et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Engineering Antigen Triggered T cell Responses with Diverse SynNotch Receptors
(A) TCRs and CARs activate kinase-based signaling cascades that drive the native T cell 
activation program providing little control over reshaping the T cell response. synNotch 
receptors recognize cell-surface antigens (e.g. disease related antigens) and directly regulate 
custom transcriptional programs with more precise control over the T cell response. Thus, in 
principle, synNotch receptors could be used to engineer a la carte responses.
(B) synNotch receptors have a custom ligand binding domain that detects a cell- surface 
antigen of interest (e.g. scFvs targeted to CD19 or Her2 or nanobodies to GFP), the core 
regulatory region of Notch that controls proteolysis, and a cytoplasmic orthogonal 
transcription factor (e.g. Gal4 VP64). The corresponding response elements for the 
orthogonal transcription factor controlling custom transcriptional programs are also 
engineered into the T cell.
(C) CD4+ AND CD8+ primary human T cells were engineered with the α-CD19 synNotch 
Gal4VP64 receptor and 5× Gal4 response elements controlling the expression of a BFP 
reporter. Histogram showing selective induction of the BFP reporter in α-CD19 synNotch 
receptor receiver CD4+ T cells in response to stimulation with sender cells with CD19- or 
CD19+ K562s.
(D) CD4+ AND CD8+ primary human T cells were engineered with either the α- CD19, α-
GFP (LaG17 or LaG16_2) nanobody, or α-Her2 (scFv affinity variants) synNotch 
Gal4VP64 receptors and 5× Gal4 response elements controlling the expression of a BFP 
reporter. The percentages of synNotch T cells that upregulate the BFP reporter after 24 hours 
Roybal et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of stimulation with the indicated sender cells is given (n ≥ 3 for all conditions, error bars = 
SEM).
Roybal et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. synNotch Receptors can Drive Antigen-Induced Custom Cytokine Programs
(A) CAR activation drives CD4+ T cells to produce a diverse set of cytokines.
(B) A scatter plot showing the level (pg/mL) of 24 cytokines (see panel C for list of 
cytokines) produced by primary human α-CD19 CAR CD4+ T cells activated with target 
CD19+ K562 cells (y-axis) or negative control CD19- K562s (x-axis) after 24 hours of 
stimulation (n=3, error bars = SEM). The level of 24 cytokines produced by CD4+ α-CD19 
CAR T cells stimulated by target CD19+ K562s (n=3, error bars = SEM).
(C) CD4+ T cells were engineered with the α-CD19 synNotch Gal4VP64 receptor and the 
corresponding response elements controlling the expression of either IL- 2, IL-10, IL-12, or 
combined IL-2/MIP-1α. The cells were co-cultured with target CD19+ K562s or CD19- 
non-target K562s.
(D) Scatterplots showing the production of synNotch regulated cytokines in response to 
CD19+ vs. CD19- K562 stimulation (n=3, error bars = SEM). The level of cytokines 
produced by α-CD19 synNotch T cells driving IL-2, IL-10, Flexi IL-12, or IL-2/MIP-1α 
production in response to CD19+ K562 cells is given. Only the synNotch regulated 
cytokines were produced above background levels. For synNotch CD4+ T cells driving 
IL-12 production, IFNγ was also produced as IL-12 can cause CD4+ T cells to differentiate 
into Th1 IFNγ-producing T cells (n=3, error bars = SEM).
Roybal et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. synNotch Receptors Can Drive Antigen-Dependent Skewing of T Cell Differentiation to 
the Anti-Tumor Th1 Fate
(A) When CD4+ T cells are activated through engagement of pathogen-derived peptides 
presented by MHC molecules on antigen-presenting cells they differentiate into particular T 
cell subtypes depending on the infection. Th1 and Th2 are canonical CD4+ T cell fates that 
drive different immune responses. Th1 cells express the transcription factor Tbet, produce 
IFNγ, and aid in cellular immunity and tumor clearance. Th2 cells produce IL-4, an 
important cytokine for stimulation of antibody production by B cells.
(B) CD4+ α-CD19 synNotch T cells were engineered to regulate the expression Tbet and 
thus Th1 fate choice by T cells. The synNotch T cells were co-cultured with target CD19+ or 
non-target CD19- K562 cells for 11 days to determine if synNotch driven Tbet expression 
could skew CD4+ T cells to Th1 fate in a CD19- dependent manner.
(C) Histograms showing the selective expression of Tbet T2A EGFP after 24 hours of CD4+ 
α-CD19 synNotch T cells with CD19+ K562s (representative of at least 3 experiments).
(D) Two dimensional dot plots of intracellular stained CD4+ α-CD19 synNotch Gal4VP64 
T cells for Tbet and IFNγ after 11 days of culture with either CD19+ or CD19- K562s. T 
cells were stimulated with PMA/Ionomycin for 4 hrs prior to staining to drive cytokine 
production (representative of at least 3 experiments).
(E) The percentage of IFNγ+ (Th1) T cells after 11 days of the indicated treatment (n ≥ 3 for 
all treatments, error bars = SEM, significance determined by Student’s t-test, n.s. p≥0.05).
Roybal et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Customized Killer T Cells – synNotch Driven TRAIL Production
(A) CD8+ cytotoxic T cells recognize infected cells via their TCR and directly kill the 
infected cell by creating pores in the cell with perforin allowing for the delivery of 
granzymes that initiate programmed cell death.
(B) CD4+ T cells were engineered with the α-GFP synNotch controlling the expression of 
the apoptotic regulator TRAIL in response to surface GFP.
(C) Histograms showing the selective expression of surface TRAIL after 24 hours of CD4+ 
α-GFP synNotch T cell incubation with surface GFP+ K562s.
(D) Histograms showing surface GFP+ K562 cell death via uptake of the dead stain SYTOX 
blue after 24hr. co-culture with the indicated T cell type (T cell:Target Cell Ratio = 1:1).
(E) Percentage target cell survival calculated from replicate data shown in panel D (n=4, 
error bars = SEM, significance determined by Student’s t-test ** p≤0.01)
Roybal et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. synNotch T Cell Delivery of Immunotherapeutics – Antibodies, Adjuvants, and 
Immunosuppressive Agents
(A) CD4+ T cells were engineered with the α-GFP synNotch controlling the expression of 
Pembrolizumab (α-PD-1 HA) and a myc-tagged α-CTLA4 scFv (both antibodies were 
expressed as a single transcript with a T2A sequence between). After 24 hours of stimulation 
of the T cells with surface GFP+ or GFP- K562s, the supernatant was collected and used to 
stain PD-1+ or CTLA4+ K562s. Secreted antibody binding to target cells was monitored via 
flow cytometry after secondary staining with α-HA A647 (α-PD-1) or α-myc A647 
(CTLA-4 scFV) antibodies (representative of 3 replicates).
(B) CD4+ T cells were engineered with the α-GFP synNotch receptor controlling the 
expression of Blinatumomab, an α-CD19/CD3 bi-specific antibody that retargets T cells to 
CD19+ tumors. Histograms showing CD69 (activation marker) expression on the synNotch 
T cells after co-culture with surface GFP+ only, CD19+ only, or surface GFP+CD19+ 
K562s. The T cells strongly activate in the presence of the surface GFP+CD19 K562s and a 
small percentage of the T cells activate when incubated with CD19+ only K562s due to low 
levels of basal leakage of Blinatumomab expression (representative of 3 independent 
experiments).
(C) CD4+ T cells were engineered with the α-GFP synNotch receptor controlling the 
expression of Flagellin. Supernatant was harvested from the T cells after co- culture with 
surface GFP+ or GFP- K562s and added to hTLR5 HEK-blue secreted alkaline phosphatase 
Roybal et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (SEAP) reporter cells. After 24 hours SEAP activity was monitored and the level of 
Flagellin in the supernatant was measured a purified Flagellin standard (n=3, error bars = 
SD).
(D) CD4+ T cells were engineered with the α-CD19 synNotch receptor controlling the 
expression of PD-L1 and IL-10. Quantification of the percentage of synNotch T cells that 
express PD-L1 and intracellular IL-10 after co-culture with CD19+ or CD19- K562s for 24 
hrs is given. The amount of IL-10 in the supernatant was also determined by ELISA (n=3, 
error bars = SEM).
Roybal et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. In vivo Local Expression of Cytokines and Bi-specifc Tumor- targeted Antibodies in 
Solid Tumors Via synNotch T cells
(A) NSG mice were subcutaneously injected with CD19- non-target K562s and target 
CD19+ in the left and right flank, respectively. α-CD19 synNotch T cells in control of IL-2 
iRES mCherry expression were injected into the mice after tumors were established and 
tumors were harvested at the indicated time point to determine whether the synNotch T cells 
had infiltrated the tumor and expression of IL-2 and mCherry reporter was induced.
(B) Histograms of IL-2 IRES mCherry reporter levels in tumor and spleen infiltrated CD4+ 
synNotch T cells injected i.v. showing selective expression of the mCherry reporter in target 
CD19+ tumors (data representative of 3 replicate mice).
(C) NSG mice were subcutaneously injected with CD19- non-target K562s and target 
CD19+ in the left and right flank, respectively. α-GFP synNotch T cells in control of 
Blinatumomab (α-CD19/CD3 BiTE) expression were injected i.v. into the mice 4 days after 
tumor implantation. The tumors were measured by caliper over for 25 days.
(D) Bilateral CD19+ and GFP/CD19+ K562 tumor growth curves in mice treated with 
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells engineered with the α-GFP synNotch receptor controlling 
Blinatumomab (α-CD19/CD3 BiTE) expression. The dual antigen GFP/CD19+ tumor is 
selectively cleared (n=5 mice, error = SEM, significance determined by Student’s t-test ** 
p≤0.01).
Roybal et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. SynNotch Circuits Allow Versatile Reprogramming of T cells to Monitor and 
Selectively Modulate Their Microenvironment
(A) synNotch receptors can drive diverse behaviors in primary human T cells. We show that 
synNotch receptors can drive custom cytokine production profiles, effectively deliver non-
native therapeutics, and control T cell differentiation, all in an antigen-dependent and T cell 
activation independent manner.
(B) synNotch are sufficient to target T cells in vivo to locally produce a therapeutic payload. 
Future T cell therapies could utilize synNotch receptors to target T cells to disease-related or 
tissue-specific antigens for local delivery of therapeutics that are ineffective or toxic as 
systemically administered agents in humans.
Roybal et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
