 Cancer Survivorship Care in Advanced Primary Care Practices
A Qualitative Study of Challenges and Opportunities
Ellen B. Rubinstein, PhD; William L. Miller, MD; Shawna V. Hudson, PhD; Jenna Howard, PhD;
Denalee O’Malley, PhD; Jennifer Tsui, PhD; Heather Sophia Lee, PhD; Alicja Bator, MPH; Benjamin F. Crabtree, PhD
IMPORTANCE Despite a decade of effort by national stakeholders to bring cancer survivorship
to the forefront of primary care, there is little evidence to suggest that primary care has
begun to integrate comprehensive services to manage the care of long-term cancer survivors.
OBJECTIVE To explain why primary care has not begun to integrate comprehensive cancer
survivorship services.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS Comparative case study of 12 advanced primary care
practices in the United States recruited from March 2015 to February 2017. Practices were
selected from a national registry of 151 workforce innovators compiled for the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation. Practices were recruited to include diversity in policy context and
organizational structure. Researchers conducted 10 to 12 days of ethnographic data collection
in each practice, including interviews with practice personnel and patient pathways with
cancer survivors. Fieldnotes, transcripts, and practice documents were analyzed within and
across cases to identify salient themes.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Description of cancer survivorship care delivery in
advanced patient-centered medical homes, including identification of barriers and
promotional factors related to that care.
RESULTS The 12 practices came from multiple states and policy contexts and had a mix of
clinicians trained in family or internal medicine. All but 3 were recognized as National
Committee on Quality Assurance level 3 patient-centered medical homes. None of the
practices provided any type of comprehensive cancer survivorship services. Three
interdependent explanatory factors emerged: the absence of a recognized, distinct clinical
category of survivorship in primary care; a lack of actionable information to treat this patient
population; and current information systems unable to support survivorship care.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE To increase the potential for primary care transformation
efforts to integrate survivorship services into routine care, survivorship must become a
recognized clinical category with actionable care plans supported by a functional information
system infrastructure.
JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(12):1726-1732. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.4747
Published online September 25, 2017.
Invited Commentary
page 1732
Related article page 1855
Supplemental content
Author Affiliations: Research
Division, Department of Family
Medicine and Community Health,
Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School, New Brunswick, New
Jersey (Rubinstein, Hudson, Howard,
O’Malley, Lee, Bator, Crabtree); now
with Department of Family Medicine,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
(Rubinstein); Lehigh Valley Health
Network, Allentown, Pennsylvania
(Miller); Rutgers Cancer Institute of
New Jersey, New Brunswick (Tsui).
Corresponding Author: Ellen B.
Rubinstein, PhD, Department of
Family Medicine, University of
Michigan, 1018 Fuller Street, Ann
Arbor, MI 48104 (ellen.rubinstein
@aya.yale.edu).
Research
JAMA Internal Medicine | Original Investigation
1726
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 T
here are 15.5 million cancer survivors in the United
States, a number expected to increase over the next
decade.1 Survivors include individuals who have re-
ceived a cancer diagnosis, are undergoing active treatment, or
are in the posttreatment phase.2 The majority of survivors live
well beyond their diagnosis, and only one-third continue to
seek care from cancer-related specialists 5 years after
diagnosis.3 Seventy-five percent of survivors are seen in pri-
mary care,3 demonstrating a reliance on primary care to ad-
dresstheirneeds;however,thoseneedsarenotcurrentlybeing
met. A national cross-sectional survey of survivors identified
16separatedomainsofunmetneeds,withphysicalneedsbeing
most prevalent,4 while a smaller study identified unmet psy-
chosocial and spiritual needs.5 Furthermore, survivors’rates
of preventive and cancer surveillance screening are lower than
optimal given increased cancer risk.6
The 2006 Institute of Medicine7(p188) report, From Can-
cer Patient to Cancer Survivor: Lost in Transition, outlined the
4 key components of high-quality cancer survivorship care: (1)
preventive screenings for new cancers, (2) surveillance for re-
currence, (3) interventions for late and long-term effects from
cancer and its treatments, and (4) care coordination between
specialty and primary care. Professional medical groups have
begun emphasizing the need for interdisciplinary collabora-
tion to support primary care’
s integration of cancer survivor-
ship services,8,9 and the American Cancer Society has re-
leased primary care–focused survivorship care guidelines for
breast, prostate, colon, and head and neck cancers.10-13
In countries with strong primary care foundations, pri-
mary care–based cancer survivorship models have proven
effective and acceptable to patients.14-18 In the United States,
however, survivorship models rely mainly on specialists’
expertise.19,20 Other proposed models envision integrating
primary care clinicians into oncology settings,21-23 but we are
unaware of studies analyzing the implementation of cancer
survivorship models within community-based primary care
practices.
The patient-centered medical home (PCMH) is an
American practice redesign model introduced in 2007 to
enhance existing primary care practices’ability to address
the emerging complexity of patients’health needs.24 Core
attributes of the PCMH include improved first-contact
access to care, more proactive and effective coordination
and integration of care, assurance of comprehensive and
personalized care, and boosted use of information technol-
ogy at the point of care.24 The PCMH represents a potential
means for primary care to address the comprehensive needs
of cancer survivors.25
With few exceptions,23,26-28 research on survivorship care
has neglected systems-level issues; however, understanding
the primary care context is crucial for developing services
that enhance practices’capacity to deliver population-based
care. Despite a decade of effort from national stakeholders to
improve the quality of cancer survivorship care, efforts to
partner with and support primary care are more recent. It is
therefore necessary to assess the confluence of primary care
practice redesign and the adoption of comprehensive cancer
survivorship services.
Methods
This analysis is based on the qualitative data collected as part
of a mixed-methods comparative case study of 12 primary care
practices throughout the United States. The practices were se-
lectedfromanationalregistryof151workforceinnovatorscom-
piled for the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation in 2011 through
2012.29Theregistrywasdevelopedusingsnowballsamplingby
first contacting the authors of 331 articles identified in a litera-
ture review of workforce innovations in US primary care since
2000.29 Authors nominated 435 potential practices for initial
screening; practice leaders in 227 practices were subsequently
interviewed regarding the degree of innovation and sustain-
ability. The existence of cancer survivorship–related activities
was not included in the sampling criteria. Deidentified, 2-page
practice profiles were constructed from interview notes.
An executive steering committee ranked the profiles to
sample for variation in policy context, workforce innovation,
andorganizationalstructure.Thecoreresearchteamthenclus-
tered highly ranked profiles by state. Lead clinicians or prac-
tice managers were invited via email and/or telephone to par-
ticipate in the study. The first practices were selected in
neighboring states (New York and Pennsylvania) for proxim-
ity to the New Jersey–based research team for training and data
quality control. The next practices were selected for maxi-
mum variation in practice type, setting, and geographic re-
gion. Recruitment was iterative and proceeded alongside
data analysis to search for barriers and facilitators to com-
prehensive survivorship care. The iterative nature also pro-
vided a way to seek out potential disconfirming evidence of
emerging findings.
Of the 17 practices responding to our invitation, 12 partici-
pated, 2 declined, and 3 were unresponsive after initially ex-
pressing interest. Practices provided written consent prior to
theresearcher’
sarrivalonsite,andresearchersindividuallycon-
sented patients and interviewees throughout each visit. This
study was approved by the Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sci-
ences Institutional Review Board.
Data Collection
Over 23 months in 2015 through 2017, 1 of 4 researchers vis-
itedeachpracticefor10to12businessdays,spendingupto8h/d
Key Points
Question Why has primary care not widely adopted
comprehensive services targeting long-term cancer survivors?
Findings The qualitative data in this mixed methods comparative
case study of 12 advanced primary care practices in the United
States revealed the absence of a recognized, distinct clinical
category of cancer survivorship in primary care; a lack of
actionable information to treat this patient population; and
current information systems unable to support survivorship care.
Meaning Primary care has not adopted comprehensive cancer
survivorship services because of the dynamic interplay of 3 factors
that must be remedied to change the current situation.
Cancer Survivorship Care in Advanced Primary Care Practices
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
December 2017
Volume 177, Number 12
1727
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 conducting ethnographic research and interviews.30 Re-
searchtripsconsistedof2visitperiods.Thefirstweek-longvisit
included direct observation of practice functions and systems
usinganobservationtemplate(eMethodsintheSupplement),30
keyinformantinterviewsofpracticemembers,31and5to10“pa-
tient pathways” of cancer survivors, identified with each prac-
tice, who were observed throughout their visit and inter-
viewed about their experiences.30,32,33 Following the Institute
of Medicine’
s recommendations for who should receive survi-
vorship care,7 survivors were defined as individuals who were
no longer in the diagnosis or acute treatment phase (eg, sur-
gery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy).
Afterthefirstvisit,theresearcherdebriefedwiththequali-
tative analysis team to determine areas requiring further clari-
fication and to identify practice staff for ethnographic
interviews.34Apurposivesamplingstrategywasusedtochoose
interviewees.35 We sampled for clinicians and administrators
in leadership roles (past or current), plus staff who had a mul-
tiyear work history and/or represented an instance of work-
force innovation (eg, health coach, patient services represen-
tative, care coordinator). Researchers conducted 54 digitally
recordedethnographicinterviewsintotal,36ranging1to3hours
in length (Box 1). Although not all staff were formally inter-
viewed, the researcher’
s extended stay at each practice en-
abled frequent, informal communication with most staff, cap-
tured in extensive fieldnotes. Verbatim interview transcripts
and practice documents (eg, flow sheets, mission state-
ments, protocols, annual reports) supplemented fieldnotes.
The practice manager or lead clinician also completed a Prac-
tice Information Form about practice characteristics. The Prac-
tice Information Form was originally developed for the Direct
Observation of Primary Care Study37,38 and was refined
throughout subsequent studies.39
Data Analysis
Data analysis proceeded through a collaborative, interpretive
process of “immersion/crystallization.”40 Based on the same
inductive reasoning that characterizes grounded theory,41 im-
mersion/crystallization requires iterative cycles of reading the
data until salient themes, and variations thereof, begin to
emerge. Unlike grounded theory, it does not require the cre-
ation of a formal coding structure but rather allows for dy-
namic interaction among 5 stages of interpretation40 (Figure).
After each visit, debriefing sessions of approximately 1.5
hourswereheldwiththefieldresearcherandtheanalysisteam
to review incoming data and identify emerging themes. We
used the method by Yin42 of treating each individual case (ie,
practice) as a separate study in its own context, which en-
tailed organizing the data from practices and debriefing ses-
sions into case summaries of 5 to 10 pages to highlight distinc-
tive practice features and approaches to cancer survivorship
services (Box 2).
Box 1. Practice Staff Ethnographic Interview
Grand Tour Questions
Practice Culture/Context
•Briefly tell me about the history and evolution of this practice.
•Where do new ideas about services come from, and how are they
implemented?
•Tell me about your current staffing and other unique features of
your care team.
•What do you see as barriers to care innovation?
Cancer Survivorship Care
•Describe how you view your role in cancer survivorship care for
your patients.
•Where do you refer patients for cancer care? How do you decide
where to refer?
•What do you know about the survivorship care guidelines
recently issued by oncology organizations?
•What do you think it would take to put cancer survivorship on
your radar?
Figure. Immersion/Crystallization Process
Describing
Field notes
Debriefing session notes
Practice Information Form
Stage
Analysis materials/events
Organizing
Case summaries
Connecting
Ongoing debriefing sessions
Two 2-day analysis retreats
Corroborating/legitimating
Auditor check
Iterative recruitment process
Search for dis/confirming
evidence
Representing the account
Box 2. Case Summary Template
Practice Culture/Context
•The practice’s motivation for change/innovation
•The practice’s integration with the larger health care
neighborhood
•Local options for cancer and other specialty care
•The roles and identities of the practice workforce
•Nontraditional roles, or traditional roles used in innovative ways
Cancer Survivorship Care
•Cancer survivors’ experiences of care in this practice
•The practice’s approach to care for cancer survivors
•The practice’s comprehensive approach to survivorship care,
including favorable conditions and infrastructure, or
•The practice’s capacity to implement comprehensive
survivorship care (eg, disease registries, care coordination,
communication with specialists)
Structural Influences
•The role of insurance and reimbursement in care
•Barriers and/or challenges to implementing change in this
practice
•Care innovations for other conditions that may translate to
cancer survivorship
Research Original Investigation
Cancer Survivorship Care in Advanced Primary Care Practices
1728
JAMA Internal Medicine
December 2017
Volume 177, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Two-dayanalysisretreatswiththeexecutivesteeringcom-
mittee were held in September 2015 and August 2016 to dis-
cuss each practice in detail and begin cross-case comparisons
using the case summaries.43 Themes that emerged within and
across practices were recorded and consulted throughout sub-
sequent data collection; ongoing debriefing sessions pro-
vided opportunities to modify or expand on these themes.44
To validate the accuracy of our findings, practice data, case
summaries, and nascent analyses were sent to an external au-
ditor every 3 to 4 months to ensure that findings were mini-
mally affected by preconceptions or bias.45-47
Results
The 12 practices included in this study came from multiple
states (Colorado, Illinois, Maine, New York, Pennsylvania, and
Washington), medical networks, and policy contexts and had
a mix of clinicians trained in family or internal medicine. While
not a requirement of the study, all but 3 of the practices were
recognized as National Committee for Quality Assurance level
3 PCMHs (Table).
Noneofthesepracticeshadanycomprehensivecancersur-
vivorship services. Instead, survivors received care equiva-
lent to that of nonsurvivors. We identified 3 themes across all
12 practices that speak to potential barriers of implementing
comprehensivesurvivorshipcare:(1)cliniciansdonottreatsur-
vivors as a distinct population or clinical category; (2) clini-
cians receive limited information or follow-up guidance on pa-
tients’cancer care; and (3) current information systems are
insufficient to support survivorship care.
Clinicians Do Not Treat Survivors as a Distinct Population
or Clinical Category
Clinicians had difficulty articulating what made cancer survi-
vorship a meaningfully differentiated clinical category. There
was confusion over what survivorship care entailed beyond
monitoring for recurrence, as well as how to measure the care
provided. As 1 physician in practice 11 (P11) said, “We’
re al-
ways going to be attendant to things that are obviously impor-
tantbutalsomeasurable.Sowhatwouldyoumeasurewithcan-
cer? Is it their holistic care, their emotional stability?”
Some clinicians believed that their care was comprehen-
sive enough to address the needs of all patients, without spe-
cial consideration for cancer survivors. The lead physicians in
P1 and P4 identified cancer as a chronic medical condition to
be monitored regularly like other chronic conditions, with P1’
s
lead physician commenting, “There are more patients who live
with cancer or who live with having survived cancer, and it just
becomes part of their chronic medical illness.” The lead phy-
sician in P4 echoed this sentiment, saying, “I certainly don’
t
think of [these patients] as cancer survivors. I think of them
as people living with a history that’
s not terribly unlike the his-
tory of diabetes or any other chronic disease.”
In most practices there seemed to be a different clinical
norm for cancer compared with other conditions, a kind of
“cancer exceptionalism.” On diagnosing cancer, clinicians re-
ferred their patients to oncology and soon became disen-
gaged; the cancer diagnosis superseded all other medical con-
ditions, effectively rendering oncology responsible for the
totality of patients’care. As a P8 physician said, “The pa-
tients pop in, they have cancer, we see them, we take care of
their problem, but really, it has been—almost like the psychia-
trists have carved out mental health, I think.
” Primary care cli-
nicians lost touch with these patients as they “disappeared”
into oncology, and survivorship remained a concept with little
practical meaning in the primary care setting.
Clinicians Receive Limited Information
or Follow-up Guidance on Patients’ Cancer Care
Some practices received cancer-related information about
their patients, but it was either inadequate or not actionable.
Table. Practice Characteristics
Practice
ID
Location
Type
Time in
Existence, y
NCQA
Status
Physicians, No.
NPs/PAs,
No.
No. Patient Visits
(Year)
1
Suburban
Private
12
Level 3
5 FM + 5 IM + other
7
84 000 (2014)
2
Suburban
Private
35
Level 3
6 FM + other
2
19 993 (2014)
3
Suburban
Multisited medical group
20
Level 3
5 FM + 1 IM + other
4
37 828 (2014)
4
Rural
FQHC
31
Level 3
7 FM + other
2
25 000 (2014)
5
Small city
Multisited medical group
27
Level 3
2 IM
1
9447 (2014)
6
Rural
FQHC health network
42 (Network);
<1 (practice)
Level 3
6 FM + IM + other
8
33 233 (Projected
for 2016)
7
Suburban
Nurse-led FQHC
5
NA
1
3
11 035 (2015)
8
Suburban
Private
≥25
Level 3
3 FM + other
3
15 684 (2015)
9
Urban
Nonprofit serving union
employees
≥100
Level 3
1 FM + 5 IM
3
44 000 (2015)
10
Suburban
Hospital-owned
academic health center
6
Level 3
12 IM + other
3
26 000 (2015)
11
Suburban
Veterans Affairs
community-based
outpatient center
19
NA
5 IM
0
9151 (2016)
12
Urban
Private direct
primary care
10
NA
5 FM
1
9557 (2016)
Abbreviations: FHQC, federally qualified health center; FM, family medicine; IM, internal medicine; NA, not applicable; NCQA, National Committee on Quality
Assurance; NP, nurse practitioner; PA, physicians assistant.
Cancer Survivorship Care in Advanced Primary Care Practices
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
December 2017
Volume 177, Number 12
1729
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Practice 2 was located in one of the most highly cancer-
resourced areas in the country, which included 4 National
Cancer Institute–designated cancer centers within a 30-mile
radius. The practice was networked with 2 of these centers,
which facilitated obtaining patients’oncology records. Still,
these records did not provide enough information for pri-
mary care generalists to take appropriate actions. As a P2
physician said, “I want to make sure I understand what treat-
ment they had, but it kind of happens in a black box…, so I
feel a little intimidated by it, to be honest with you.
”
In addition to their unfamiliarity with many cancer treat-
ments, primary care clinicians described limited guidance for
long-term follow-up care. One P3 physician noted how quickly
oncologists’dischargesummariesbecameoutdated,astheypro-
videdguidelinesforthe“nextimmediatestep”butfailedtoad-
dress potential future concerns. Another P3 physician said she
learned about patients’cancer histories through “active ques-
tioning”atannualexaminations—butonlyiftherewerenottoo
many recent problems to address. By then, the cancer might
have occurred so long ago that communicating with the on-
cologist was no longer possible. One of her patients had re-
portedreceivingahysterectomyin1985totreathercervicalcan-
cer. “What are you supposed to be doing for your follow-up
of that?” the physician asked. “Realistically, it’
s that many
years ago. Maybe it doesn’
t play into it at all, but I don’
t have
any guidance for that, really, so you kind of make it up on
your own.
”
Current Information Systems Are Insufficient
to Support Survivorship Care
All 12 practices had well-established electronic health rec-
ords (EHR) systems; however, these EHR systems were inad-
equateforimplementingpopulation-levelinterventionsincan-
cer survivorship. Clinicians mentioned an inability to identify
patients with a history of cancer, which led to a further inabil-
ity to create a registry and track survivors as they could track
other patient populations.
Patients were responsible for reporting their cancer his-
tories to their clinicians, and medical records were some-
times lost as patients changed clinicians over the years.
Even when a patient’
s cancer history made it into the EHR,
it was not always easy to find. Practice 5’
s nurse practitioner
noted that EHR problem lists were not “user-friendly,”
which meant that she had to search through multiple
screens to find any mention of cancer. “In the olden days,
when you had a paper chart and you opened it, the problem
list … was on the left side, and it was handwritten,” she said.
“And it might be 2 or 3 pages, but it was there at a glance.
With the electronic medical record, sometimes it’
s a needle
in a haystack.”
Inadditiontotrackingsurvivors,therewasaneedtomoni-
tor changing information in oncology. A P6 physician noted,
“I think we [in primary care] would like to take on that role as
custodian of the survivorship plan, knowing that we would al-
ways have access to the oncologist. But I think the outstand-
ing question is how do we make sure those plans are up-to-
date and front-and-center and not lost in the busyness of
modern medical records?”
Other clinicians observed that an inability to track survi-
vors through the EHR made the extent of their survivor popu-
lation unknown. Some EHRs lacked any specific acknowledg-
ment of cancer histories, and tracking survivors meant
manually creating an ancillary database outside the EHR. Ac-
cordingto1P5physician,animportantimplicationofnottrack-
ing cancer survivors was the difficulty in identifying popula-
tions at risk for treatment sequelae or secondary cancers: “I
think when you read books about cancer, and you read that
there are all these secondary cancers, and you sit here and
think, ‘
Gosh, I wonder if any of my patients could get second-
ary cancers,’there’
s no way to look it up.”
Discussion
Despite the push from national organizations to enhance can-
cer survivorship care capacity in primary care, findings from
this study suggest that cancer survivorship care does not in-
tegrate easily into advanced primary care. At this time, there
seems to be no recognized receptor site for cancer survivor-
ship services in primary care.
Survivorship remains a diffuse concept with multiple
meanings that may complicate clinical care.48,49 Survivor-
ship lacks clear codified diagnostic criteria, care protocols, and
expectations, without which clinicians had no sense of what
survivorship care looked like. In the International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, Tenth
Revision (ICD-10), the closest diagnostic code for cancer sur-
vivorship is Z85, an aftercare code indicating personal his-
tory of malignant neoplasm that is not directly billable. Codi-
fying survivorship as a distinct clinical category that belongs
onproblemlistswithpayment-linked(fee,valuebased,orcapi-
tated) care services is a critical first step toward bringing com-
prehensive cancer survivorship services to primary care.
As noted in the Results (theme 1), primary care clinicians
let go of their cancer patients more easily than other patients.
Their comments about oncology referrals were different than
those about other referrals, in which conversations ad-
dressed the boundaries and expectations of shared vs consul-
tative care. With cancer, there was a tacit willingness to con-
cede all care to oncology. We refer to this distinction as cancer
exceptionalismbecausethediagnosisofcancerseemedtoover-
ride all other problems. A diagnostic code for survivorship may
be a first step toward changing cancer’
s exceptional state.
Once primary care recognizes cancer survivorship as a dis-
tinct clinical category, there need to be easily accessible, ac-
tionable care strategies.23 Primary care clinicians have differ-
ent needs than oncologists in providing survivorship care,27
yet those needs remain unacknowledged in current survivor-
ship care planning discussions. A British study on the rel-
evance of survivorship care plans to general practitioners sug-
gested incommensurability between oncology-driven
guidelines and the realities of primary care.50 A disease- (and
cancer site–) specific model, while suitable for specialists, con-
tains too much detail for a generalist.51 Most primary care pa-
tients, including cancer survivors, have multiple comorbidi-
ties, thereby requiring a comprehensive approach to care.52
Research Original Investigation
Cancer Survivorship Care in Advanced Primary Care Practices
1730
JAMA Internal Medicine
December 2017
Volume 177, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 Highlightingspecificriskinformationrelatedtosecondarycan-
cers and treatment sequelae, along with recommended sur-
veillance for recurrence, may prove more useful.
Without a diagnostic code for survivorship on the pa-
tient’
s problem list or customizable protocols to remind clini-
cians of necessary follow-up, the EHR remained more hin-
drance than resource. As EHR clinical decision support tools
becomeincreasinglypowerfuldriversofclinicalcare,53thelack
of developed supports for survivorship means that survivor-
ship cannot compete for attention with chronic diseases that
already have robust technologies and quality measures.54,55
Limitations
This study is not without limitations, specifically in its small
samplesize.Furthermore,whileethnographicinterviewsdem-
onstrated a gap in clinicians’knowledge about the Institute of
Medicine’
s 4 key components of survivorship care,7 this study
didnotdirectlyassessthisgap,nordiditassessclinicians’base-
line knowledge of cancer survivorship. Regardless, findings
about the lack of comprehensive services were consistent
across practices, all but 3 of which were well-established level
3 PCMHs from diverse policy and organizational contexts. Fur-
ther research is necessary to determine whether these results
apply to other contexts.
Conclusions
Comprehensive cancer survivorship care is not happening in
advanced PCMHs. The absence of this care is from the lack of
concrete solutions to needs that precede the development and
implementation of models of care. There is no discrete clini-
cal category of cancer survivorship for primary care. Even with
such a category, primary care clinicians rarely receive action-
able information to care for this patient population. Finally,
actionable information for individual patients does not trans-
late to population health because of the lack of adequate in-
formation systems. By correcting these 3 deficiencies, com-
prehensive cancer survivorship services could more easily
integrate into current primary care transformation efforts.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: May 22, 2017.
Published Online: September 25, 2017.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.4747
Author Contributions: Drs Rubinstein and
Crabtree had full access to all of the data in the
study and takes responsibility for the integrity of
the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Miller, Hudson, Howard,
Crabtree.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: All
authors.
Drafting of the manuscript: Rubinstein, Miller,
Hudson, Howard, O'
Malley, Tsui, Crabtree.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: All authors.
Statistical analysis: Bator.
Obtained funding: Crabtree.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
O’Malley, Lee, Bator.
Supervision: Miller, Hudson, Crabtree.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Funding/Support: Funding for this research was
provided by National Cancer Institute grant R01
CA176545, “PCMH Implementation Strategies:
Implications for Cancer Survivor Care”(primary
investigator: Dr Crabtree).
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The National Cancer
Institute had no role in the design and conduct of
the study; collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
Additional Contributions: We thank the members
of the executive steering committee (Kurt Stange,
MD, PhD, Case Western Reserve University; Kevin
Oeffinger, MD, Duke Cancer Institute; Paul Nutting,
MD, retired; Carlos Jaen, MD, PhD, University of
Texas Health Science Center; and Larissa
Nekhlyudov, MD, Harvard Medical School) for their
input on our study design and sampling framework,
as well as the external auditors (Kris Gowen, PhD,
and Elisabeth Hicks, MA, Oregon Health and
Sciences University) for interpretation of data. All
individuals were compensated for their time.
REFERENCES
1. Miller KD, Siegel RL, Lin CC, et al. Cancer
treatment and survivorship statistics, 2016.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2016;66(4):271-289.
2. Office of Cancer Survivorship. Definitions,
statistics and graphs. National Cancer Institute.
https://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/ocs/statistics
/index.html. Accessed May 8, 2017.
3. Pollack LA, Adamache W, Ryerson AB, Eheman
CR, Richardson LC. Care of long-term cancer
survivors: physicians seen by Medicare enrollees
surviving longer than 5 years. Cancer. 2009;115(22):
5284-5295.
4. Burg MA, Adorno G, Lopez ED, et al. Current
unmet needs of cancer survivors: analysis of
open-ended responses to the American Cancer
Society Study of Cancer Survivors II. Cancer. 2015;
121(4):623-630.
5. Geller BM, Vacek PM, Flynn BS, Lord K, Cranmer
D. What are cancer survivors’ needs and how well
are they being met? J Fam Pract. 2014;63(10):E7-E16.
6. Hudson SV, Hahn KA, Ohman-Strickland P,
Cunningham RS, Miller SM, Crabtree BF. Breast,
colorectal and prostate cancer screening for cancer
survivors and non-cancer patients in community
practices. J Gen Intern Med. 2009;24(suppl 2):S487-
S490.
7. Hewitt M, Greenfield S, Stovall E, eds. From
Cancer Patient to Cancer Survivor: Lost in Transition.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2005.
8. Oeffinger K. Cancer survivors need FPs,
subspecialists to collaborate. American Academy of
Family Physicians; January 4, 2017.
http://www.aafp.org/news/opinion
/20170104cancerguested.html. Accessed February
28, 2017.
9. Cancer Survivorship Symposium: Advancing
Care and Research. American Society of Clinical
Oncology. http://survivorsym.org/about. Accessed
May 1, 2017.
10. Skolarus TA, Wolf AM, Erb NL, et al. American
Cancer Society prostate cancer survivorship care
guidelines. CA Cancer J Clin. 2014;64(4):225-249.
11. El-Shami K, Oeffinger KC, Erb NL, et al.
American Cancer Society Colorectal Cancer
Survivorship Care Guidelines. CA Cancer J Clin.
2015;65(6):428-455.
12. Runowicz CD, Leach CR, Henry NL, et al.
American Cancer Society/American Society of
Clinical Oncology Breast Cancer Survivorship Care
Guideline. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(6):611-635.
13. Cohen EE, LaMonte SJ, Erb NL, et al. American
Cancer Society head and neck cancer survivorship
care guideline. CA Cancer J Clin. 2016;66(3):203-239.
14. Grunfeld E, Mant D, Yudkin P, et al. Routine
follow up of breast cancer in primary care:
randomised trial. BMJ. 1996;313(7058):665-669.
15. Grunfeld E, Levine MN, Julian JA, et al.
Randomized trial of long-term follow-up for
early-stage breast cancer: a comparison of family
physician versus specialist care. J Clin Oncol. 2006;
24(6):848-855.
16. Del Giudice ME, Grunfeld E, Harvey BJ, Piliotis
E, Verma S. Primary care physicians’ views of
routine follow-up care of cancer survivors. J Clin
Oncol. 2009;27(20):3338-3345.
17. Cheung WY, Aziz N, Noone AM, et al. Physician
preferences and attitudes regarding different
models of cancer survivorship care: a comparison of
primary care providers and oncologists. J Cancer
Surviv. 2013;7(3):343-354.
18. Walter FM, Usher-Smith JA, Yadlapalli S,
Watson E. Caring for people living with, and
beyond, cancer: an online survey of GPs in England.
Br J Gen Pract. 2015;65(640):e761-e768.
19. Grant M, Economou D, Ferrell B, Bhatia S.
Preparing professional staff to care for cancer
survivors. J Cancer Surviv. 2007;1(1):98-106.
20. Halpern MT, Viswanathan M, Evans TS, Birken
SA, Basch E, Mayer DK. Models of cancer
survivorship care: overview and summary of
current evidence. J Oncol Pract. 2015;11(1):e19-e27.
Cancer Survivorship Care in Advanced Primary Care Practices
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
December 2017
Volume 177, Number 12
1731
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
 21. Oeffinger KC, McCabe MS. Models for delivering
survivorship care. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(32):5117-5124.
22. Jacobs LA, Shulman LN. Follow-up care of
cancer survivors: challenges and solutions. Lancet
Oncol. 2017;18(1):e19-e29.
23. Nekhlyudov L, O’Malley DM, Hudson SV.
Integrating primary care providers in the care of
cancer survivors: gaps in evidence and future
opportunities. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18(1):e30-e38.
24. Joint principles of the patient-centered medical
home. American Academy of Family Physicians,
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College
of Physicians, American Osteopathic Association;
2007. http://www.aafp.org/dam/AAFP/documents
/practice_management/pcmh/initiatives
/PCMHJoint.pdf. Accessed January 23, 2017.
25. Hudson SV, Miller SM, Hemler J, et al. Cancer
survivors and the patient-centered medical home.
Transl Behav Med. 2012;2(3):322-331.
26. Bober SL, Recklitis CJ, Campbell EG, et al.
Caring for cancer survivors: a survey of primary care
physicians. Cancer. 2009;115(18)(suppl):4409-4418.
27. Virgo KS, Lerro CC, Klabunde CN, Earle C, Ganz
PA. Barriers to breast and colorectal cancer
survivorship care: perceptions of primary care
physicians and medical oncologists in the United
States. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(18):2322-2336.
28. O’Malley D, Hudson SV, Nekhlyudov L, et al.
Learning the landscape: implementation challenges
of primary care innovators around cancer
survivorship care. J Cancer Surviv. 2017;11(1):13-23.
29. Friedman A, Hahn KA, Etz R, et al. A typology
of primary care workforce innovations in the United
States since 2000. Med Care. 2014;52(2):101-111.
30. Bogdewic SP. Participant observation. In:
Crabtree BF, Miller WL, eds. Doing Qualitative
Research. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications; 1999:47-69.
31. Gilchrist VJ, Williams RL. Key informant
interviews. In: Crabtree BF, Miller WL, eds. Doing
Qualitative Research. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications; 1999:71-88.
32. Williams RL, Crabtree BF, O’Brien C, Zyzanski
SJ, Gilchrist VJ. Practical tools for qualitative
community-oriented primary care community
assessment. Fam Med. 1999;31(7):488-494.
33. Pommerenke FA, Dietrich A. Improving and
maintaining preventive services. part 1: applying the
patient path model. J Fam Pract. 1992;34(1):86-91.
34. McCracken G. The Long Interview. Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage Publications; 1988.
35. Kuzel AJ. Sampling in qualitative inquiry. In:
Crabtree BF, Miller WL, eds. Doing Qualitative
Research. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications; 1999:33-45.
36. Spradley JP. The Ethnographic Interview. New
York, NY: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich; 1979.
37. Stange KC, Zyzanski SJ, Jaén CR, et al.
Illuminating the ‘
black box’: a description of 4454
patient visits to 138 family physicians. J Fam Pract.
1998;46(5):377-389.
38. DOPC Writing Group. Conducting the Direct
Observation of Primary Care Study. J Fam Pract.
2001;50(4):345-352.
39. Crabtree BF, Nutting PA, Miller WL, et al.
Primary care practice transformation is hard work:
insights from a 15-year developmental program of
research. Med Care. 2011;49(suppl):S28-S35.
40. Miller WL, Crabtree BF. The dance of
interpretation. In: Crabtree BF, Miller WL, eds.
Doing Qualitative Research. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications, Inc; 1999:127-143.
41. Corbin J, Strauss A. Grounded theory research:
procedures, canons, and evaluative criteria. Qual
Sociol. 1990;13(1):3-21.
42. YinRK.CaseStudyResearch:DesignandMethods.
3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2003.
43. Nutting PA, Crabtree BF, Miller WL, Stewart EE,
Stange KC, Jaén CR. Journey to the patient-centered
medical home: a qualitative analysis of the
experiences of practices in the National
Demonstration Project. Ann Fam Med. 2010;8(suppl
1):S45-S56, S92.
44. Crabtree BF, Miller WL, Stange KC.
Understanding practice from the ground up. J Fam
Pract. 2001;50(10):881-887.
45. Cohen DJ, Crabtree BF. Evaluative criteria for
qualitative research in health care: controversies and
recommendations. Ann Fam Med. 2008;6(4):331-339.
46. Creswell JW. Research Design: Qualitative,
Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches. 4th
ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2014.
47. Creswell JW, Klassen AC, Clark VLP, Smith KC.
Best practice for mixed methods research in the
health sciences. https://obssr.od.nih.gov/training
/mixed-methods-research/. Accessed August 2017.
48. Khan NF, Rose PW, Evans J. Defining cancer
survivorship: a more transparent approach is
needed. J Cancer Surviv. 2012;6(1):33-36.
49. Jain SL. Malignant: How Cancer Becomes Us.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press; 2013.
50. Dahlhaus A, Semlitsch T, Jeitler K, Horvath K,
Siebenhofer A. Relevance to family practice of
English-language guidelines on breast, colorectal
and prostate cancer: a review. Fam Pract. 2015;32
(5):483-491.
51. Stange KC. The problem of fragmentation and
the need for integrative solutions. Ann Fam Med.
2009;7(2):100-103.
52. Ogle KS, Swanson GM, Woods N, Azzouz F.
Cancer and comorbidity: redefining chronic
diseases. Cancer. 2000;88(3):653-663.
53. Institute of Medicine. The Computer-Based
Patient Record: An Essential Technology for Health
Care. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1991.
54. Berner ES. Clinical Decision Support Systems:
State of the Art. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality; 2009.
55. O’Connor PJ, Desai JR, Butler JC, Kharbanda
EO, Sperl-Hillen JM. Current status and future
prospects for electronic point-of-care clinical
decision support in diabetes care. Curr Diab Rep.
2013;13(2):172-176.
Invited Commentary
IntegrationofCancerSurvivorshipCare
andPrimaryCarePractice
Emily S. Tonorezos, MD, MPH; Joseph Conigliaro, MD, MPH
More than 10 years ago, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) re-
leased a seminal report, From Cancer Patient to Cancer Survi-
vor: Lost in Transition.1 In this publication, the IOM high-
lighted the now more than 15 million US adults with a history
of cancer2 and outlined nec-
essary components of high-
qualitysurvivorshipcare.Not
unexpectedly, implementa-
tion of the IOM recommendations relied on the availability of
well-informed and responsive primary care survivorship cli-
nicians. Yet, in the time since that report, the primary care
and oncology workforce has shrunk (and will continue to do
so),3 while clinician uncertainty and survivorship knowledge
gaps persist.4,5 Therefore, although oncologists, patients, and
other stakeholders are looking toward a primary care context
for high-quality and life-sustaining survivorship care, uneven
survivorship care delivery has continued. Unfortunately, fail-
ure to meet the health care needs of cancer survivors seems
to result in adverse outcomes.6
In this issue of JAMA Internal Medicine, Rubinstein and
colleagues7describetheresultsofaunique,high-quality,quali-
tative study of survivorship care in 12 advanced primary care
practicesandpatient-centeredmedicalhomesacrosstheUnited
States.Thepurposesofthestudyweretobetterunderstandthe
primary care environment for cancer survivors and to iden-
tify opportunities for improvement or enhancement.
Related article page 1726
Research Original Investigation
Cancer Survivorship Care in Advanced Primary Care Practices
1732
JAMA Internal Medicine
December 2017
Volume 177, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/03/2019
