 Metabolic Surgery in the
Treatment Algorithm for Type 2
Diabetes: A Joint Statement by
International Diabetes
Organizations
Diabetes Care 2016;39:861–877 | DOI: 10.2337/dc16-0236
BACKGROUND
Despite growing evidence that bariatric/metabolic surgery powerfully improves
type 2 diabetes (T2D), existing diabetes treatment algorithms do not include
surgical options.
AIM
The 2nd Diabetes Surgery Summit (DSS-II), an international consensus conference,
was convened in collaboration with leading diabetes organizations to develop
global guidelines to inform clinicians and policymakers about benefits and
limitations of metabolic surgery for T2D.
METHODS
A multidisciplinary group of 48 international clinicians/scholars (75% nonsur-
geons), including representatives of leading diabetes organizations, participated
in DSS-II. After evidence appraisal (MEDLINE [1 January 2005–30 September
2015]), three rounds of Delphi-like questionnaires were used to measure consen-
sus for 32 data-based conclusions. These drafts were presented at the combined
DSS-II and 3rd World Congress on Interventional Therapies for Type 2 Diabetes
(London, U.K., 28–30 September 2015), where they were open to public comment
by other professionals and amended face-to-face by the Expert Committee.
RESULTS
Given its role in metabolic regulation, the gastrointestinal tract constitutes a
meaningful target to manage T2D. Numerous randomized clinical trials, albeit
mostly short/midterm, demonstrate that metabolic surgery achieves excellent
glycemic control and reduces cardiovascular risk factors. On the basis of such
evidence, metabolic surgery should be recommended to treat T2D in patients with
class III obesity (BMI ‡40 kg/m2) and in those with class II obesity (BMI 35.0–39.9
kg/m2) when hyperglycemia is inadequately controlled by lifestyle and optimal
medical therapy. Surgery should also be considered for patients with T2D and BMI
30.0–34.9 kg/m2 if hyperglycemia is inadequately controlled despite optimal
treatment with either oral or injectable medications. These BMI thresholds should
be reduced by 2.5 kg/m2 for Asian patients.
CONCLUSIONS
Although additional studies are needed to further demonstrate long-term benefits,
there is sufficient clinical and mechanistic evidence to support inclusion of metabolic
surgery among antidiabetes interventions for people with T2D and obesity. To date, the
DSS-II guidelines have been formally endorsed by 45 worldwide medical and scientific
societies. Health care regulators should introduce appropriate reimbursement policies.
1King’s College London, London, U.K.
2Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
3University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, CO
4Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH
5Imperial College London, London, U.K.
6Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia
7University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
8Peking University, Beijing, China
9Diabetes India, Mumbai, India
10University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
11Philadelphia, PA
12University of Washington, Seattle, WA
Corresponding authors: Francesco Rubino,
francesco.rubino@kcl.ac.uk, and David E.
Cummings, davidec@u.washington.edu.
This article contains Supplementary Data online
at http://care.diabetesjournals.org/lookup/
suppl/doi:10.2337/dc16-0236/-/DC1.
F.R. and D.E.C. chaired the writing committee for
this report.
*The 2nd Diabetes Surgery Summit voting dele-
gates are listed in Table 2.
© 2016 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the work
is properly cited, the use is educational and not
for profit, and the work is not altered.
See accompanying articles, pp. 857, 878,
884, 893, 902, 912, 924, 934, 941, 949,
and 954.
Francesco Rubino,1 David M. Nathan,2
Robert H. Eckel,3 Philip R. Schauer,4
K. George M.M. Alberti,5 Paul Z. Zimmet,6
Stefano Del Prato,7 Linong Ji,8
Shaukat M. Sadikot,9
William H. Herman,10
Stephanie A. Amiel,1 Lee M. Kaplan,2
Gaspar Taroncher-Oldenburg,11
and David E. Cummings,12
on behalf of the Delegates of
the 2nd Diabetes Surgery Summit*
Diabetes Care Volume 39, June 2016
861
METABOLIC SURGERY
 Several gastrointestinal (GI) operations,
including partial gastrectomies (1,2) and
bariatric procedures (Fig. 1) (3–5), pro-
mote dramatic, durable improvement of
type 2 diabetes (T2D). Given the magni-
tude and rapidity of the effect of GI
surgery on hyperglycemia, along with
experimental evidence that rearrange-
ments of GI anatomy similar to those
in some bariatric procedures directly
affect glucose homeostasis (6), GI inter-
ventions have been suggested as a treat-
ment for T2D (7).
In 2007, the delegates from the 1st
Diabetes Surgery Summit (DSS-I), an inter-
national consensus conference, reviewed
available clinical and mechanistic evi-
dence and recommended expanding
the use and study of GI surgery to treat
diabetes, including for individuals with
only mild obesity (5,8). In the ensuing
years, the concept of “metabolic sur-
gery” or “diabetes surgery” has become
widely recognized in academic circles,
and, accordingly, most major world-
wide bariatric surgery societies have
changed their names to include the word
“metabolic” (9).
Since DSS-I, a substantial body of addi-
tionalevidencehasaccumulated,including
from numerous randomized clinical trials
(RCTs), demonstrating that bariatric/
metabolic surgery achieves superior glyce-
mic control and reduction of cardiovascu-
lar risk factors in obese patients with T2D
compared with various medical/lifestyle
interventions (10–25). Further research
on mechanisms of action of these proce-
dures (5,6,26–34) has corroborated evi-
dence in animal studies demonstrating
animportantrolefortheGItractinglucose
homeostasis (35), providing a biological
rationale for the use of GI-based interven-
tions to treat T2D. Available data, based
predominantly on modeling studies, sug-
gest that bariatric/metabolic surgery is
also cost-effective, especially in patients
with diabetes (36,37).
On the basis of this mounting evidence,
several international professional organiza-
tions and government agencies have re-
cently suggested expanding the indications
for bariatric/metabolic surgery to include
patients with inadequately controlled T2D
and BMI as low as 30 kg/m2, and down to
27.5 kg/m2 for Asians (8,9,38,39).
However, whereas obesity guidelines by
national and international societies and
government agencies recommend the
use of bariatric surgery in individuals with
T2D (9,40), clinical guidelines for diabetes
care paradoxically provide little or no men-
tion of a role for surgical interventions for
T2D, even in patients with severe obesity
(41). Despite the growing popularity of this
topic in scientific communities (9) and the
media (42), most diabetes care providers
and patients are still inadequately in-
formed about the indications, benefits,
and potential risks of surgical treatments
for diabetes. Moreover, insurance reim-
bursement policies for bariatric/metabolic
surgery continue to reflect only body
weight–centric criteria and do not in-
clude diabetes-related metrics or cost-
effectiveness. Consequently, access to
surgery for patients with diabetes is not
adequately prioritized. In fact, no existing
treatment algorithm for T2D includes a
role for surgical intervention.
Using surgery as a diabetes interven-
tion, however, implies conceptual and
practical differences from the traditional
practice of bariatric surgery for obesity.
For instance, the criteria currently used
toselectcandidatesforbariatric/metabolic
Figure 1—Diagrams of the four bariatric/metabolic operations currently in common clinical use.
BPD can be performed as the classic type (shown) or with the duodenal switch variant. Reprinted
with permission from the Cleveland Clinic Foundation (CCF).
862
Metabolic Surgery in the Treatment Algorithm for T2D
Diabetes Care Volume 39, June 2016
 surgery do not include metrics of meta-
bolic disease severity, predictors ofsuccess
of treatment, or an evaluation of risks and
benefits of surgery as contrasted to those
of alternative diabetes treatment options.
In addition, preoperative diagnostics,
perioperative management, and postop-
erative follow-up of traditional bariatric
surgery are not consistent with the need
to identify and monitor diabetes-related
parameters and complications. Further-
more, there are no strategies yet for in-
tegrating complementary pharmaceutical
and surgical therapies to optimize out-
comes of diabetes management.
Whereas selection criteria for bariatric
surgery have been standardized worldwide
for many years through an influential Na-
tional Institutes of Health (NIH) consensus
statement (43), that document is now con-
spicuously outdated, and there is no refer-
ence for surgical treatment of diabetes to
globally raise the standards of such practice.
Recognizingtheneedtoinformdiabetes
care providers about the benefits and lim-
itations of metabolic surgery, the 2nd
Diabetes Surgery Summit (DSS-II) was con-
vened in collaboration with six leading in-
ternational diabetes organizations: the
American Diabetes Association, Interna-
tional Diabetes Federation, Chinese Dia-
betes Society, Diabetes India, European
Association for the Study of Diabetes, and
Diabetes UK. The overarching aim of this
consensus conference was to review avail-
able evidence and to develop global rec-
ommendations that integrate medical and
surgical therapies in a rational treatment
algorithm for T2D. Specific goals included
providing guidance for selection of surgical
candidates and use of diabetes-specific
measures in the preoperative workup and
postoperative follow-up of patients.
At the time this article went to press,
the DSS-II consensus statements and
guidelines had been officially endorsed by
45 leading professional societies across
the globe, of which 30 are primarily med-
ical (diabetes, endocrinology, and gastro-
enterology) and 15 are primarily surgical
organizations (Table 1). Additional medical
and scientific societies are currently con-
sidering endorsing these results as well.
These recommendations reflect cur-
rently available data and will need to be
updated as new evidence is developed in
the future.
Here we report the methods for DSS-II,
the resulting recommendations, and their
supporting evidence.
Executive Summary
T2D is associated with complex metabolic dysfunctions, leading to increased morbid-
ity, mortality, and cost. Although population-based efforts through lifestyle inter-
ventions are essential to prevent obesity and diabetes, people who develop
this disease should have access to all effective treatment options.
Given its role in metabolic regulation, the GI tract constitutes a clinically and bi-
ologically meaningful target for the management of T2D.
A substantial body of evidence has accumulated, includingnumerous, albeit mostly short/
midterm RCTs, demonstrating that metabolic surgeryddefined here as the use of GI
surgery with the intent to treat T2D and obesitydcan achieve excellent control of
hyperglycemia and reduce cardiovascular risk factors.
Although additional studies are needed to further demonstrate long-term benefits,
there is now sufficient clinical and mechanistic evidence to support inclusion of met-
abolic surgery among antidiabetes interventions for people with T2D and obesity.
Complementary criteria to the sole use of BMI, the traditional criterion used to select
candidates for bariatric surgery, need to be developed to achieve a better patient
selection algorithm for metabolic surgery.
Metabolic surgery should be a recommended option to treat T2D in appropriate sur-
gical candidates with class III obesity (BMI $40 kg/m2), regardless of the level of
glycemic control or complexity of glucose-lowering regimens, as well as in patients
with class IIobesity (BMI35.0–39.9 kg/m2) with inadequately controlled hyperglycemia
despite lifestyle and optimal medical therapy.
Metabolic surgery should also be considered to be an option to treat T2D
in patients with class I obesity (BMI 30.0–34.9 kg/m2) and inadequately con-
trolled hyperglycemia despite optimal medical treatment by either oral or in-
jectable medications (including insulin).
All BMI thresholds should be reconsidered depending on the ancestry of the patient.
For example, for patients of Asian descent, the BMI values above should be reduced
by 2.5 kg/m2.
Metabolic surgery should be performed in high-volume centers with multidisciplinary
teams that understand and are experienced in the management of diabetes and GI
surgery.
Ongoing and long-term monitoring of micronutrient status, nutritional supplementation,
and support must be provided to patients after surgery, according to guidelines for
postoperative management of bariatric/metabolic surgery by national and
international professional societies.
Metabolic surgery is a potentially cost-effective treatment option in obese patients with
T2D. The clinical community should work together with health care regulators to recognize
metabolic surgery as an appropriate intervention for T2D in people with obesity and to
introduce appropriate reimbursement policies.
METHODS
DSS-II Partners and Selection of
Voting Delegates
The DSS-II organizing committee and the
partner diabetes organizations tasked a
multidisciplinary group of 48 interna-
tional authorities to develop a set of
evidence-based recommendations. This
DSS-II Expert Committee included scholars
representing diabetology, endocrinology,
internal medicine, cardiology, gastroen-
terology, primary care, nutrition, and
surgery, including official representa-
tives of partner diabetes organizations
(Table 2). To ensure maximum scholarship,
voting delegates were chosen entirely
from academicians, with no representa-
tives from industry. To further minimize
potential conflicts of interest, nonsur-
geons were purposefully overrepresented
(75%) and were complemented by aca-
demic surgeons with relevant publication
records. Two independent, nonvoting
moderators/adjudicators developed
care.diabetesjournals.org
Rubino and Associates
863
 and administered questionnaires for
the Delphi process and chaired the face-
to-face meeting of voting delegates (vide
infra).
Methods for Collection and Evaluation
of Evidence
Criteria used for evidence searching
were based on methods used in previous
consensus development conferences and
systematic reviews of evidence (44,45),
adapted to serve the DSS-II objectives.
We used a highly selective, diabetes-
focused approach (only level-1 evidence
from RCTs) to assess comparative effec-
tiveness of surgery versus nonsurgical
therapies for T2D and to compare the
glycemic effects of different operations.
A broader evidence base was used (RCTs
plus high-quality observational studies)
for matters such as durability of glycemic
control, surgical safety, and cardiovascu-
lardisease (CVD)riskreduction. Economic
implications of bariatric/metabolic sur-
gery were assessed using available stud-
ies of cost-effectiveness and systematic
reviews with specific reference to patients
with T2D.
Questions for evidence assessment in-
cluded the following: 1) long-term effects
of surgery on glycemic control in patients
with T2D; 2) effectivenessofsurgery com-
pared withmedical/lifestyleinterventions
on glycemic control; 3) comparative
effectiveness of different procedures on
T2D; 4) effects of surgery on microvas-
cular complications of diabetes, CVD risk,
CVD events, and mortality; 5) short- and
long-term surgical safety; and 6) compara-
tive safety profile of different operations.
MEDLINE from 1 January 2005 through
15 June 2015 was searched to generate
the first draft of the consensus document.
New evidence published by 30 September
2015 was available for discussion in face-
to-face DSS-II meetings and is incorpo-
rated into this document, using the same
inclusion/exclusion criteria for evidence
evaluation as in the initial draft.
Studies considered to appraise the evi-
dence included RCTs and observational
studies (case-control and case-series), as
appropriate for specific questions (vide
infra). For both RCTs and observational
studies, only reports documenting at least
1-year follow-up and with 80% retention
at 2 years and 70% beyond 2 years were
included. These criteria are adapted from
the methods of recent systematic reviews
of bariatric surgery (46).
Table 1—International societies that have ratified and/or endorsed the DSS-II
consensus statements and guidelines
Partner diabetes organizations that helped develop and have ratified
the DSS-II consensus statements and guidelines:
Country
American Diabetes Association (ADA)
USA
International Diabetes Federation (IDF)
International
Diabetes UK (DUK)
UK
Chinese Diabetes Society (CDS)
China
Diabetes India (DI)
India
Other organizations that formally endorse the DSS-II consensus
statements and guidelines (to date):
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists (AACE)
USA
American College of Surgeons (ACS)
USA
American Gastroenterological Association (AGA)
USA
American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (ASMBS)
USA
Argentinian Society of Diabetes (SAD)
Argentina
Argentinian Society for Bariatric and Metabolic Surgery (SACO)
Argentina
Asia-Pacific Bariatric and Metabolic Surgery Society (APBMSS)
International
Association of British Clinical Diabetologists (ABCD)
UK
Australian Diabetes Society (ADS)
Australia
Belgian Diabetes Association (ABD)
Belgium
Brazilian Society of Diabetes (SBD)
Brazil
Brazilian Society of Bariatric and Metabolic Surgery (SBCBM)
Brazil
British Obesity and Metabolic Surgery Society (BOMSS)
UK
Czech Society for the Study of Obesity (CSSO)
Czech Republic
Chilean Society of Endocrinology and Diabetes (SCED)
Chile
Chilean Society for Bariatric and Metabolic Surgery (SCCBM)
Chile
Endocrine Society
USA
European Association for the Study of Obesity (EASO)
International
French Society of Diabetes (SFD)
France
French Society of Bariatric and Metabolic Surgery (SOFFCO)
France
German Diabetes Society (DDG)
Germany
German Society for Obesity Surgery (CA-ADIP)
Germany
Hellenic Diabetes Association (HDA)
Greece
International Federation for the Surgery of Obesity & Metabolic
Disorders (IFSO)
International
Israel Diabetes Association (IDA)
Israel
Italian Society of Bariatric & Metabolic Surgery (SICOB)
Italy
Italian Society of Diabetology (SID)
Italy
Japan Diabetes Society (JDS)
Japan
Latin American Association of Diabetes (ALAD)
International
Mexican College of Bariatric and Metabolic Surgery (CMCOEM)
Mexico
Mexican Society of Nutrition and Endocrinology (SMNE)
Mexico
Qatar Diabetes Association (QDA)
Qatar
Saudi Diabetes and Endocrine Association (SDEA)
Saudi Arabia
Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES)
USA
Society for Endocrinology (SfE)
UK
Society for Surgery of the Alimentary Tract (SSAT)
USA
South African Society for Surgery Obesity and Metabolism (SASSO)
South Africa
Spanish Society for Bariatric and Metabolic Surgery (SECO)
Spain
Spanish Society of Diabetes (SED)
Spain
The Obesity Society (TOS)
USA
This table indicates the societies that, at the time this article went to press, had officially ratified
and/or endorsed the DSS-II consensus statements and guidelines. Additional international
medical and scientific societies are currently considering endorsing these results as well.
864
Metabolic Surgery in the Treatment Algorithm for T2D
Diabetes Care Volume 39, June 2016
 Table 2—The DSS-II voting delegates
DSS-II delegate
Affiliation
Nationality
Specialty
K. George M.M. Alberti*
Imperial College London
U.K.
Diabetology
Nizar Albache
Aleppo University
Syria
Endocrinology
Stephanie A. Amiel*
King’s College London
U.K.
Diabetology
Rachel L. Batterham
University College London
U.K.
Endocrinology
Deepak L. Bhatt
Harvard Medical School
U.S.
Cardiology
Camilo Boza
Cl´
ınica Las Condes
Chile
Surgery
William T. Cefalu
Pennington Biomedical Research Center,
Louisiana State University
U.S.
Diabetology
Ricardo V. Cohen*
Oswaldo Cruz Hospital
Brazil
Surgery
Anita P. Courcoulas
University of Pittsburgh
U.S.
Surgery
David E. Cummings*†
University of Washington
U.S.
Endocrinology
Stefano Del Prato
University of Pisa
Italy
Diabetology
Sean F. Dinneen
Galway University Hospitals
Ireland
Endocrinology
John B. Dixon*
Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute
Australia
General Medicine
Robert H. Eckel
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus
U.S.
Endocrinology
Ele Ferrannini
University of Pisa
Italy
Diabetology
Paola Fioretto
University of Padova
Italy
Endocrinology
Gema Fr¨
uhbeck
University of Navarra, CIBERobn
Spain
Endocrinology
Michel Gagner
Florida International University and Hˆ
opital du
Sacr´
e-Coeur de Montr´
eal
U.S. and Canada
Surgery
Richard W. Grant
Kaiser Permanente Division of Research
U.S.
Internal Medicine
William H. Herman
University of Michigan
U.S.
Endocrinology
Sayeed Ikramuddin
University of Minnesota
U.S.
Surgery
Linong Ji*
Peking University
China
Diabetology
Desmond G. Johnston
Imperial College London
U.K.
Diabetology
Lee M. Kaplan*†
Harvard Medical School
U.S.
Gastroenterology
Sangeeta R. Kashyap
Cleveland Clinic
U.S.
Endocrinology
Tracy Kelly
Diabetes UK
U.K.
Nutrition
Tomasz Klupa
Jagiellonian University
Poland
Diabetology
Judith Korner
Columbia University
U.S.
Endocrinology
Blandine Laferr`
ere
Columbia University
U.S.
Endocrinology
Harold E. Lebovitz
State University of New York
U.S.
Diabetology
Wei-Jei Lee
Min-Sheng General Hospital
Taiwan
Surgery
Carel W. le Roux*
University College Dublin
Ireland
Metabolic Medicine
Jeffrey I. Mechanick
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
U.S.
Endocrinology
Geltrude Mingrone*
Catholic University of Rome
Italy
Internal Medicine
John M. Morton
Stanford University
U.S.
Surgery
David M. Nathan
Harvard Medical School
U.S.
Diabetology
Walter J. Pories
East Carolina University
U.S.
Surgery
Robert E. Ratner*
American Diabetes Association,
Chief Scientific and Medical Officer
U.S.
Diabetology
Gerry Rayman
Ipswich Hospital NHS Trust
U.K.
Diabetology
Francesco Rubino*†
King’s College London and King’s College Hospital
U.K.
Surgery
Shaukat M. Sadikot*
Diabetes India
India
Diabetology
Philip R. Schauer*†
Cleveland Clinic
U.S.
Surgery
Harvey J. Sugerman
Virginia Commonwealth University
U.S.
Surgery
Luc Van Gaal
University of Antwerp
Belgium
Endocrinology
Josep Vidal
Hospital Clinic
Spain
Endocrinology
Jianping Weng
Sun Yat-sen University
China
Diabetology
Bruce M. Wolfe*
Oregon Health & Science University
U.S.
Surgery/Nutrition
Paul Z. Zimmet*
Monash University
Australia
Diabetology
†DSS-II conference codirectors. *DSS-II conference organizing committee.
care.diabetesjournals.org
Rubino and Associates
865
 Question-Specific Inclusion Criteria
c For evidence related to the effective-
ness of surgery versus medical/lifestyle
interventions to control T2D, only RCTs
were considered. A comprehensive al-
gorithm was used to identify all RCTs
published by 30 September 2015 re-
porting the effects of bariatric/metabolic
surgery in patients with diabetes. Evi-
dence listed includes studies of patients
with BMI $35 kg/m2 and ,35 kg/m2. A
simple meta-analysis was performed
to present an integrated picture of ex-
isting evidence.
c For evidence regarding comparative ef-
fectiveness of different surgical proce-
dures on T2D, data were obtained only
fromRCTsinwhich different procedures
were used expressly to treat diabetes.
c For evidence regarding the effect of GI
surgery on CVD events and CVD risk re-
duction, data were obtained from RCTs
when available, as well as from long-
term case-control studies, and from
the most recent relevant meta-analyses.
c For evidence regarding the durability of
postoperative glycemic control, surgical
safety in general, and comparative
safety profiles of different operations,
data were obtained from RCTs when
available, from longitudinal case-series
and case-control studies, and from the
most recent relevant meta-analyses.
Descriptors of Level of Evidence
Herein we use standard level of evidence
(LoE) descriptors, defined as follows:
IA, evidence from meta-analysis of RCTs;
IB, evidence from at least one RCT; IIA,
evidence from at least one controlled
study without randomization; IIB, evi-
dence from at least one other type of
quasi-experimental study; III, evidence
from nonexperimental descriptive
studies (e.g., comparative, correlation,
or case-control); IV, evidence from expert
committee reports, opinions or clinical
experience of respected authorities, or
both.
Consensus Development Process
After review and appraisal of evidence,
two independent moderators developed
online Delphi-like questionnaires (47,48)
to measure the degree of consensus for a
set of statements and recommendations
that were believed to summarize and re-
flect available evidence. For each of these,
we sought to achieve consensus, defined
as agreement by a supermajority ($67%)
of voting delegates, consistent with other
medical consensus conferences (49). DSS-II
delegates who did not agree with pro-
posed statements were asked to state
their reasons and propose amendments.
Three rounds of questionnaires were ad-
ministered to test various amendments to
the original statements that could increase
consensus levels from the group. Draft
conclusions generated through this itera-
tive process were presented at the com-
bined DSS-II and 3rd World Congress on
Interventional Therapies for Type 2 Dia-
betes (WCITD 2015, London, U.K., 28–30
September 2015). Proceedings were open
to public comment by other experts in the
field (members of the Faculty of WCITD)
and by the entire audience through opin-
ion polls, using real-time electronic voting.
Approximately 630 professionals and stake-
holders from 50 nations on five conti-
nents contributed to those discussions.
Finally, on 30 September 2015, voting
DSS-II delegates met face-to-face to de-
fine a final consensus document. Several
relevant professional organizations and
stakeholders were invited to observe the
proceedings by sending official representa-
tivestoWCITD2015/DSS-II(Supplementary
Table 1). The document with conclusions
reached by the experts underwent a final
review by DSS voting delegates and was
then submitted to the appropriate commit-
tees and executive boards of partner orga-
nizations for formal approval (Table 1).
Grade of Consensus
We used a supermajority rule to define
consensus. Consistent with other stud-
ies (8,50), consensus was considered
to have been reached when $67% of
the experts agreed on a given topic.
However, language was iteratively mod-
ified to maximize agreement, and the
degree of consensus for each statement
was graded according to the following
scale: grade U 5 100% agreement
(unanimous); grade A 5 89–99% agree-
ment; grade B 5 78–88% agreement;
grade C 5 67–77% agreement (Table 3).
This grading scale is meant to indicate
statements that reflect unanimous or
near-unanimous opinions (grade U
and grade A), strong agreement with
little variance (grade B), or a consensus
statement that reflects an averaging of
more and possibly extremely diverse
opinions (grade C). We report here both
the grade of consensus and the exact per-
centage of agreement for each statement.
SUMMARY OF EVIDENCE:
CLINICAL AND BIOLOGICAL
RATIONALE FOR SURGICAL
TREATMENT OF T2D
Evidence Supporting Surgical
Treatment of T2D
The GI tract is an important contributor
to normal glucose homeostasis (35), and
mounting evidence, especially over the
past decade, has demonstrated benefits
of bariatric/metabolic surgery to treat
and prevent T2D (3,5,10–25,51–53).
Beyond inducing weight loss–related
metabolic improvements, some opera-
tions engage mechanisms that improve
glucose homeostasis independent of
weight loss (6), such as changes in gut
hormones, bile acid metabolism, micro-
biota, intestinal glucose metabolism, and
nutrient sensing (5,6,26–34). Bariatric/
metabolic surgery confers sustained favor-
ableeffectsonglycemiadupto20yearsin
one observational study (52)dalthough
benefits can decrease over time, with or
without weight regain (3,51,52,54–56).
Data from a growing number of re-
cent RCTs in patients with T2D (10–25),
including mainly individuals with BMI
$35 kg/m2 (the most commonly used
threshold for traditional bariatric sur-
gery) as well as some patients with BMI
,35 kg/m2 (range 25–35 kg/m2), consis-
tently demonstrate superior efficacy
of bariatric/metabolic surgery in re-
ducing weight and lowering glycemia
compared with a variety of medical/
lifestyle interventions (LoE IA) (Fig. 2A).
Although the antidiabetes benefits of
surgery often wane over time, the rela-
tive superiority of surgery over medical/
lifestyle interventions in RCTs is similar
throughout a range of 1–5 years (Fig. 2B).
Our analysis of these trials shows a median
HbA1c reduction of 2.0% for surgery versus
0.5% for conventional therapies (P ,
0.001) (Figs. 2C and 3A). Each of the 11
existing surgery-versus-medicine/lifestyle
RCTs reported greater HbA1c reduction
following surgery (Figs. 2C and 3B). In all
of these trials, final HbA1c in the surgical
groupswasnear6.0%,regardlessofthelevel
of baseline HbA1c (Fig. 3C). However, the
majority of these RCTs have only examined
1- to 2-year results, and only a handful of
them have examined results for 3–5 years.
Several classic “bariatric” operations
cause T2D remissionddefined as achiev-
ing nondiabetic HbA1c levels off all diabe-
tes medicationsdin a majority of cases
866
Metabolic Surgery in the Treatment Algorithm for T2D
Diabetes Care Volume 39, June 2016
 Figure 2—A: Forest plot of Peto odds ratios (ORs) of main glycemic end points, as defined in each trial, from published RCTs of bariatric/metabolic
surgery compared with medical/lifestyle treatments for diabetes. Data are arranged in order of ascending mean baseline BMI; the dotted line
separates trials performed with cohorts exhibiting an average baseline BMI above or below 35 kg/m2. Study duration and HbA1c end point thresholds
are shown in brackets in column 1, where “off meds” indicates a threshold achieved off all diabetes medications; otherwise, end points represent
HbA1c thresholds achieved with or with such medications. ORs .1 indicate a positive effect of surgery compared with medical/lifestyle treatment.
For each study, the OR is shown with its 95% CI. The pooled Peto ORs (95% CI) for all data were calculated under the assumption of a fixed-effects
model. Weights represent inverse variance of ORs (or mean differences [MDs]) and provide an indirect measure of the relevance of each study within
the meta-analysis, as a function of individual study size and variance. B: Forest plot of the trials depicted in Fig. 2A, with data arranged in order of
increasing length of follow-up. C: Forest plot of MDs of HbA1c serum levels after bariatric/metabolic surgery compared with medical/lifestyle
treatments in published RCTs related to diabetes. Data are arranged in order of increasing follow-up time. Negative MDs denote lower HbA1c levels
following surgery than medical/lifestyle treatment. Data for each study are shown as the MD with its 95% CI. A random-effects model was used to
calculate the pooled standardized MD. Glyc. Endp., glycemic end point; mo, month; SG, sleeve gastrectomy.
care.diabetesjournals.org
Rubino and Associates
867
 (LoE IA) (Fig. 2A). Numerous RCTs with
postoperative follow-up ranging between
1 and 5 years have consistently docu-
mented sustained diabetes remission in
30–63% of patients (LoE IB) (10–25). Avail-
able data suggest an erosion of diabetes
remission over time: 35–50% or more of
patients who initially achieve remission of
diabetes eventually experience recur-
rence. However, the median disease-free
period among such individuals with Roux-
en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) is 8.3 years
(52,56). With or without diabetes relapse,
thelarge majorityof patientswhoundergo
surgery maintain substantial improve-
ment of glycemic control from baseline
for at least 5 (LoE IB) (20) to 15 (LoE IIA)
(52,55–59) years.
Baseline duration of diabetes (e.g.,
.8 years) (LoE IB) (19), use of insulin,
and poorer glycemic control (LoE IIA)
are consistently associated with lower
rates of diabetes remission and/or
higher risk of recidivism (19,52,58).
Baseline visceral fat area may also help
to predict postoperative outcomes, es-
pecially among Asian patients with
T2D, who typically have more visceral
fat compared with Caucasians with di-
abetes of the same BMI (60).
Beyond improving glycemia, bariatric/
metabolic surgery has been shown to
confer additional health benefits in
RCTs, including greater reductions com-
pared with medical/lifestyle interven-
tions in other CVD risk factors (10–25),
and enhancements in quality-of-life
measures (LoE IB) (15,19,20). Improve-
ments in other critical outcomes, such as
micro- and macrovascular complications
of diabetes, CVD, cancer, and death, have
been observed only in nonrandomized
studies (LoE IIA) (3,52,57,61–65).
Small retrospective analyses and a
recent prospective multicenter non-
randomized study (LoE IIA) (66) sug-
gest that bariatric/metabolic surgery
may induce similar benefits in obese ad-
olescents with T2D. Teenagers appear to
experience similar degrees of weight
loss, diabetes remission, and improve-
ment of cardiometabolic risk factors
for at least 3 years after surgery (66).
No randomized trials, however, have
yet compared the effectiveness and
safety of surgery to those of conven-
tional treatment options in adolescents.
Available datafromeconomic analyses,
albeit predominantly based on modeling
Figure 3—A: Box plot comparing the average changes in HbA1c between surgery and medical/lifestyle
treatments in the first reports of the 11 RCTs published to date. The plot shows 15 sample points because
some RCTs reported results from two different surgical arms separately. Center lines show medians; box
limits indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles, as determined by R software; whiskers extend 1.5 times the
interquartile range from the 25th and 75th percentiles. Data points are plotted as open circles. B: Change
frombaselineHbA1cineachofthe11RCTsdisplayedinFig.3A.Intrialswheremorethanonetypeofsurgery
was studied, each operation is displayed separately, compared with the medical/lifestyle group. C: Dot plot
comparing baseline with final HbA1c levels following surgery in each of the 11 RCTs displayed in Fig. 3A.
868
Metabolic Surgery in the Treatment Algorithm for T2D
Diabetes Care Volume 39, June 2016
 studies, support cost-effectiveness of
bariatric/metabolic surgery, especially in
patients with T2D (37). Cost per quality-
adjusted life-year (QALY) of bariatric/
metabolic surgery in general is approxi-
mately $3,200–$6,300, well below the
range of $50,000/QALY deemed appro-
priate for coverage (36,67). In a U.S.
study of obese patients, RYGB had incre-
mental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs)
of $7,000/QALY for newly diagnosed di-
abetes and $12,000/QALY for estab-
lished diabetes (68). As a comparison,
other treatments for diabetes, such as
intensive glycemic and lipid control, have
ICERs of $41,384/QALY and $51,889/
QALY, respectively (69). Although some
models have suggested that bariatric
surgery may even be cost-saving, direct
measurements of health care costs from
clinical studies have not demonstrated
that surgery decreases overall health care
expenditures.
A long-term assessment of health
care costs in subjects enrolled in the
Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS) study
was performed according to diabetes
status at baseline, providing a compari-
son of drug-related and total health care
expenditure for patients who undergo
bariatric surgery versus matched con-
trol participants over 15 years (37). Drug
costs were lower for the surgery patients
who started with prediabetes ($3,329
less per patient) or diabetes ($5,487
less per patient). Although total health
care costs for the surgery group were
higher for patients with euglycemia or
prediabetes, there was no difference be-
tween the surgery and conventional
treatment groups for patients with dia-
betes at baseline. These findings further
support the economic value of bariatric/
metabolic surgery, specifically in patients
with obesity and T2D. There are, how-
ever, several limitations of economic
studies in this field, warranting further
research (vide infra).
Safety of Bariatric/Metabolic Surgery
Procedures used in bariatric/metabolic
surgery are characterized by distinct
anatomic rearrangements (Fig. 1). This
implies differences in technical com-
plexity, mechanisms of action, clinical
outcomes, and safety profiles. Safety
of bariatric/metabolic surgery also
varies across hospitals and surgeons.
Empirical data suggest that profi-
ciency of the operating surgeon is an
important factor determining mortal-
ity, complications, reoperations, and
readmissions (70).
Safety of bariatric/metabolic surgery
in general has improved significantly
over the last two decades, with contin-
ued refinement of minimally invasive
approaches (laparoscopic surgery), en-
hanced training and credentialing, and
involvement of multidisciplinary teams.
Mortality rates with bariatric/metabolic
operations are typically 0.1–0.5%, simi-
lar to cholecystectomy or hysterectomy
(71–75). Morbidity has also dramatically
declined with laparoscopic approaches.
Major complications rates are 2–6%,
with minor complications in up to 15%
(71–79), comparing favorably with other
commonly performed elective opera-
tions (75).
There are, however, still complica-
tions of surgery that may require re-
operations and rehospitalizations. A
recent multicenter study showed early
reoperation and readmission rates after
laparoscopic operations of 2.5% and
5.1% for RYGB, versus 0.6% and 2.0%
for laparoscopic adjustable gastric
banding (LAGB), versus 0.6% and 5.5%
for vertical sleeve gastrectomy (VSG),
after a median 3-year follow-up (76).
Long-term studies (.5 years) demon-
strate low rates of reoperation after
most bariatric/metabolic procedures
except LAGB, which is associated with
removal or revision rates of .20% over
5–10 years (72,77–79). Biliopancreatic
diversion (BPD), classic type or duode-
nal switch (BPD-DS), is the most com-
plex procedure, requires longer operative
time, and is associated with the highest
perioperative mortality and morbidity
rates (80). Compared with RYGB, BPD re-
sults in more surgical complications and
greater incidence of GI side effects (81),
as well as nutritional deficiencies (20)
(LoE IB).
Long-term nutritional and micronutrient
deficiencies with related complications,
such as anemia, bone demineralization,
and hypoproteinemia, may occur with
variable frequency depending on the
type of procedure, requiring lifelong
vitamin/nutritional supplementation
(82,83). Iron deficiency after bariatric
surgery, with or without clinical ane-
mia, has been observed in 5–64% of
adults (84). One study reported iron
deficiency in up to 50% of operated ad-
olescents (66). Of note, iron deficiency
has been observed in up to 44% of
adults prior to bariatric surgery (85).
Hence, differences in baseline iron sta-
tus may explain the large variability in
reported rates of postoperative iron
deficiency.
Nutritional complications, as well as
bone demineralization, are more likely
with intestinal bypass operations, par-
ticularly BPD (20), and less common/
severe with standard RYGB, LAGB, and
VSG. Risk of bone fractures after surgery
is unclear. One retrospective cohort
study showed no increased fracture
risk, whereas another reported a 1.2-
fold increase in the surgery versus control
groups (86,87). Postprandial hypogly-
cemia can also occur, especially with
RYGB (83,88). The exact prevalence of
symptomatic hypoglycemia is unknown.
In one study, it affected 11% of 450
patients who had undergone RYGB or
VSG (88). Severe hypoglycemia resistant
to conservative therapy, however, is
rare (89).
Novel Device-Based Interventions for
Diabetes
There has recently been increased inter-
est in device-based GI interventions
designed to reproduce some of the ben-
efits of metabolic surgery. Small human
studies have examined numerous ap-
proaches, including space-occupying
endoluminal devices (90), gastric elec-
trical stimulation (91), duodenal and
gastroduodenal endoluminal barriers
(92,93), and duodenal mucosal resurfac-
ing (clinical trial reg. no. NCT01927562,
clinicaltrials.gov). Preliminary short-term
results show variable degrees of efficacy,
depending on the device, in improving gly-
cemic and metabolic control in patients
with obesity and T2D. Because of limita-
tions in sample size and/or relatively
short-term follow-up of existing studies,
however, the current LoE for these de-
vices was not yet deemed sufficient for
formal recommendation.
Knowledge Gaps
Available RCTs do not allow an assess-
ment of the relative role of surgery ver-
sus conventional therapies in many
clinical scenarios, including the long-
term effects of the most commonly per-
formed current procedure (VSG), or of
the effectiveness of surgery in different
stages of disease severity. Factors pre-
dicting glycemic control after surgery
care.diabetesjournals.org
Rubino and Associates
869
 are incompletely characterized, and
there is insufficient evidence from
RCTs to clearly define cutoffs in diabetes
duration and/or laboratory markers
that could quantitatively predict the
success of treatment over time. Fur-
thermore, the number of patients with
BMI ,35 kg/m2 studied in RCTs is still
modest, and there are even fewer pa-
tients with BMI ,30 kg/m2. Few RCTs
have compared surgical procedures
head-to-head, specifically to treat T2D.
Further studies are needed to under-
stand the roles of different operations
in specific clinical scenarios, especially
in adolescents and patients with BMI
,35 kg/m2, and to determine what
exactly constitutes failure of medical/
lifestyle management before surgery is
considered. The current LoE is not suf-
ficient to determine the role of surgery
as a first-line treatment in most clinical
scenarios, especially in mildly obese or
merely overweight patients.
Although it is likely that major glyce-
mic improvements and/or prolonged
diabetes remission after bariatric/
metabolic surgery lead to reductions in
diabetes-related complications, data
regarding micro- and macrovascular
events, cancer, and mortality can be ex-
trapolated only from nonrandomized
trials (3,52,57,61–65,94). There are no
available long-term RCTs directly com-
paring surgery versus modern phar-
macological therapies with diabetes
complications or CVD events as primary
end points, or with sufficient size, dura-
tion, and completeness of follow-up
to conclusively determine the effects
of surgery on these hard outcomes.
Such trials, which are clearly war-
ranted, should ideally be randomized,
with adequate power and follow-up to
examine microvascular and CVD out-
comes as primary end points.
Although long-term safety and efficacy
of metabolic surgery have been demon-
strated in several studies (20,52,55–59),
investigations with follow-up beyond
5 years are limited. This is particularly rel-
evant for some procedures such as VSG
because of their relatively recent introduc-
tion into clinical practice. Further evalua-
tion of long-term outcomes of bariatric/
metabolic surgery, particularly in compari-
son with available alternative treatments of
diabetes, should be pursued. The surgeon’s
experience appears to influence outcomes
(70),andthereisaneedtoidentifyeffective
strategies for assessing the expertise of
teams/centers providing metabolic surgery
to increase standardization of outcomes
across hospitals and geographic areas.
There is also limited evidence regard-
ing the appropriate frequency of moni-
toring of nutritional status and the
effectiveness of different types and dos-
age of nutritional and vitamin supple-
mentations. The exact prevalence and
causes of severe hypoglycemia after
bariatric/metabolic surgery remain un-
known (89); hence, studies investigating
the best means of preventing and treat-
ing this condition are warranted.
There is a paucity of studies investi-
gating the role of multimodality therapy
with integration of pharmaceutical and
surgical treatment to optimize out-
comes of diabetes management. In par-
ticular, little is known about the role of
complementary postoperative lifestyle
and pharmaceutical interventions to in-
crease and maintain diabetes remission
or enhance glycemic control and lower
the risk of diabetes complications.
Although available data suggest that
metabolic surgery may be as effective in
adolescents as in adults (66), there is
presently no level-1 evidence to assess
the effectiveness of surgery compared
with conservative treatment in this pop-
ulation. In particular, there are minimal
long-term data regarding the safety of
metabolic surgery and the potential
negative impact of nutritional deficits
on growth.
Although preliminary clinical evi-
dence for some device-based GI inter-
ventions is promising, appropriate
RCTs with adequate end points, sample
size, and follow-up are necessary for for-
mal consideration of such approaches in
the treatment algorithm for T2D. Studies
should investigate the role of these ap-
proaches in specific clinical scenarios,
alone or in combination with medica-
tions and/or lifestyle interventions, and
their potential value to predict surgical
outcomes (e.g., screening of surgical
candidates).
Although most studies suggest a sig-
nificant positive economic impact of
bariatric/metabolic surgery, especially
in patients with T2D, current evidence
has limitations. Most assessments of the
economic impact of bariatric/metabolic
surgery derive from modeling studies
rather than from direct measurements
of economic costs from clinical trials.
Modeling studies are prone to risks of
overestimating cost-savings because
they make assumptions about the dura-
bility of clinical benefits from metabolic
surgery. For instance, weight regain and
diabetes relapse have not been prop-
erly accounted for in many economic
analyses. Variations in nonsurgical treat-
ments of obesity and diabetes, plus
costs across different types of payers
(private versus public) and across coun-
tries, also are likely to determine differ-
ent levels of return on investment.
Uncertainty also exists about the cost-
effectiveness or savings of bariatric/
metabolic surgery for patients with
lower BMIs. On the other hand, most
studies so far examined patients re-
ceiving bariatric surgery primarily for se-
vere obesity and with a relatively low
prevalence of diabetes; these studies
might underestimate economic value of
surgery because cost-effectiveness ap-
pears to be greater in obese patients
with diabetes at baseline compared
with those without diabetes (37). Addi-
tional cost-effectiveness studies of spe-
cific metabolic surgery procedures in
different clinical scenarios, and based
on RCT data, would greatly facilitate
the decision-making process of policy-
makers determining insurance coverage
for surgical treatment of T2D.
Finally, although numerous physio-
logical consequences of GI operations
appear to contribute to the antidiabetes
and weight-reducing benefits of bariatric/
metabolic surgery (5,6,26,28–34), the
exact mechanisms mediating diabetes
remission after various procedures are
not fully known. Studies designed to
further elucidate these mechanisms
represent an important research prior-
ity. Such knowledge holds promise to
inform decisions regarding the choice
of procedures for individual patients,
to optimize surgical design, and hope-
fully to provide targets for novel device-
based and/or pharmaceutical approaches
to T2D.
STATEMENTS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
(See Table 3.)
Metabolic Surgery Versus Traditional
Bariatric Surgery
Although obesity and T2D are often
associated with one another, T2D is a dis-
ease entity with significant heterogeneity
870
Metabolic Surgery in the Treatment Algorithm for T2D
Diabetes Care Volume 39, June 2016
 that presents distinct challenges for clin-
ical care. Therefore, the traditional model
of bariatric surgery practice, which is
shaped around the goal to induce weight
loss and treat severe obesity, is not con-
sistent with the principles and standards
of modern diabetes care. A few examples
below provide an idea of the conceptual
and practical ramifications of using a dis-
ease-specific model of care when surgery
is used specifically to treat T2D.
Offering GI surgery with the primary
intent to treat T2D, instead of just as a
weight reduction therapy, can influence
the demographic characteristics and
baseline disease states of patients who
elect to undergo surgery. Patients
choosing bariatric surgery are typically
young, predominantly female, with re-
latively low prevalence of T2D for
their BMI (3,4,95). In contrast, a study
comparing patient populations in a
“metabolic surgery” program versus a
traditional “bariatric surgery” program
within the same academic center
showed that despite being similarly
obese, patients who sought metabolic
surgery were older, were more often
male, and had more severe T2D and
CVD at baseline (95). Although not
surprising, these differences can signif-
icantly influence the outcomes of sur-
gery (e.g., rates of diabetes remission/
control, cost-effectiveness, etc.), and
they have important ramifications for
all aspects of patient care. These implica-
tions, rather than the BMI of the target
population, represent the fundamen-
tal distinction between bariatric and
metabolic surgery, necessitating the
development of a new, disease-based
model of practice.
Traditional bariatric surgery is primar-
ily conceived of as an intervention that
reduces the risk of future disease (i.e., to
prevent metabolic or CVD complications
of severe obesity) rather than as an ap-
proach to treat established disease.
Such (mis)conception is reflected in
the fact that most guidelines and criteria
for coverage of bariatric surgery today
make no recommendation for early in-
tervention and often delay access to
surgery. However, T2D is a progressive
disease associated with increased risk
for CVD and microvascular complica-
tions. Furthermore, evidence shows
that metabolic improvement following
surgery in patients with T2D correlates
with shorter diabetes duration at
baseline, possibly reflecting more pre-
served b-cell function (19,52,96). This
suggests that unnecessarily delaying ac-
cess to surgery might reduce health ben-
efits and cost-effectiveness of surgery in
patients with diabetes. Moreover, exist-
ing criteria used for coverage of bariatric
surgery are of low relevance for meta-
bolic surgery. For example, because BMI
is not a standard diagnostic parameter
or a measure of severity of T2D, using
BMI thresholds as stand-alone criteria
for metabolic surgery does not allow
health care providers to appropriately
select candidates for such operations
or to define criteria for prioritization of
this type of approach.
Defining Goals and Success of
Metabolic Surgery
The loss of 50% of excess body weight
(a somewhat arbitrary metric) is considered
to be a successful outcome of tradi-
tional bariatric surgery. T2D, however,
describes a continuum of hyperglyce-
mic states, is a heterogeneous disorder,
and is associated with complex meta-
bolic dysfunctions that increase CVD
risk, as well as morbidity and mortality.
Thus, it is necessary to define meaning-
ful definitions of goals and successful
treatment when surgery is used with
the primary intent to treat T2D. Because
even temporary (months to years) nor-
malization of glycemic control or major
long-term improvement of glycemia with-
out remission confers potential benefits
for patients with T2D, remission of diabe-
tes, although desirable, should not be
regarded as the only goal of metabolic
surgery or the only measure of success.
The success of metabolic surgery needs
to be defined in the larger context of
comprehensive diabetes care plans.
Metabolic surgery should be considered
a means to achieve the glycemic control
necessary to reduce risk of microvascu-
lar complications and CVD. To date, no
high-quality (RCT) data have directly
demonstrated reductions in microvas-
cular complications or CVD events, com-
pared with standard therapy.
An ADA expert panel in 2009 defined
partial and complete remission of T2D
as achievement of HbA1c ,6.5% and
,6.0%, respectively, off all diabetes
medications, and maintenance of these
glycemic levels for at least 1 year (97).
Although these definitions have helped
to improve standardization of reporting
outcomes, their applications in routine
clinical practice and research are prob-
lematic. The DSS delegates felt that re-
mission as currently defined should not
be considered to be the sole clinical ben-
efit justifying metabolic surgery usage,
especially since remission requires re-
moval of all diabetes medications, and
metformin is often used in individuals
without diabetes. Furthermore, comple-
mentary pharmaceutical therapies such
as metformin should not be discontin-
ued simply to meet the definition of
remission, and metformin as well as
ACE inhibitors and statins should be
maintained as needed to sustain ade-
quate glycemic control and prevent
diabetes complications. Additional stud-
ies are warranted to identify more reli-
able biological and/or clinical markers for
an exact definition of remission and/or
cure in diabetes.
Patient Selection
Patient selection for metabolic surgery
should be based on balancing surgical
and other long-term risks with potential
long-term benefits to individual pa-
tients, as with any operation (Fig. 4).
This trade-off needs to take into account
factors such as baseline CVD risk due to
metabolic disease and hyperglycemia
that do not adequately respond to non-
surgical treatments, as well as condi-
tions that could contraindicate any
elective operation, such as prior abdom-
inal surgery, risk of anastomotic dehis-
cence, or risks of deep vein thrombosis
and pulmonary embolism.
In addition, preoperative indicators
other than BMI should be established
to make patient selection for metabolic
surgery diabetes relevant. There are
no data showing that baseline BMI pre-
dicts metabolic surgery success. In-
stead, strong evidence indicates that
preoperative BMI, at least within the
obese range, does not predict the
benefits of GI surgery with regard to di-
abetes prevention (51,57), remission
(11,20,52,53,56,98,99), relapse after
initial remission (20), or the magni-
tude of its effects on CVD events
(62,100), cancer (61), or death (LoE IIA)
(51,53,56,61–63,98). Of note, a recent
meta-analysis of all studies reporting
diabetes remission rates following bari-
atric surgerydincluding 94,579 surgical
patients with T2Ddshowed that the rate
of remission was equivalent among the
care.diabetesjournals.org
Rubino and Associates
871
 60 studies in which mean preoperative
BMI was $35 kg/m2 compared with
the 34 studies with mean preoperative
BMI ,35 kg/m2 (71% versus 72%, re-
spectively) (98). Overall, the surgical
value seems to be more related to
improved glucose homeostasis than
weight loss per se (11,12,51,54,55,
61–63).
Although baseline BMI per se does
not predict outcomes in metabolic sur-
gery, available evidence, including all
existing RCTs, is based on studies that
have included BMI ranges among their
primary criteria for eligibility. The number
of patients with BMI ,35 kg/m2 in such
studies is also limited. Inevitably, and
until additional studies identify more
robust predictors of outcomes, BMI
ranges remain necessary to select pa-
tients who might benefit from metabolic
surgery, based on extant data. However,
additional diabetes-specific parameters
should help to identify clinical scenarios
where surgical treatment of T2D should
be prioritized.
Preoperative Workup
Indications for surgical treatment of T2D
should be evaluated by a multidisciplinary
clinical team following a comprehensive
preoperative assessment of diabetes and
metabolic health. Exact diagnosis of the
type of diabetes, screening for diabetes
complications, and measurement of resid-
ual insulin secretory reserve have special
relevance for the practice of metabolic
surgery. This knowledge can inform
clinicians about patients’ counseling
(e.g., the likelihood of diabetes remis-
sion after surgery), risks of postoperative
diabetic ketoacidosis (for patients with
unrecognized type 1 diabetes [T1D]),
planning the frequency of postoperative
monitoring of glycemic control and
diabetes complications, and use of
complementary postoperative medical
therapy.
Choice of Procedure
The choice of surgical procedure should
be based on evaluation of the risk-to-
benefit ratio in individual patients,
weighing long-term nutritional hazards
versus effectiveness on glycemic control
and CVD risk.
It is too early to establish a gold stan-
dard operation for metabolic surgery be-
cause of the paucity of RCTs comparing
surgical procedures head-to-head. How-
ever, available RCTs and nonrandom-
ized studies specifically designed to
compare different procedures against
Figure 4—Algorithm for the treatment of T2D, as recommended by DSS-II voting delegates. The indications above are intended for patients who are
appropriate candidates for elective surgery. meds, medications.
872
Metabolic Surgery in the Treatment Algorithm for T2D
Diabetes Care Volume 39, June 2016
 Table 3—Statements and recommendations
Grade; LoC
Generalities
1. Given its role in metabolic regulation, the GI tract constitutes a clinically and biologically meaningful target for
the management of T2D.
Grade U; LoC 100%
2. There is now sufficient clinical and mechanistic evidence to support inclusion of GI surgery among antidiabetes
interventions for people with T2D and obesity.
Grade A; LoC 97%
3. Algorithms for treating T2D should include specific scenarios in which metabolic surgery is considered to be a
treatment option in addition to lifestyle, nutritional, and/or pharmacological approaches.
Grade A; LoC 92%
4. The development of an integrated chronic disease care model of lifestyle, nutritional, pharmacological, and
surgical approaches is an important priority for modern diabetes care.
Grade U; LoC 100%
5. The clinical community should work together with health care regulators to recognize metabolic surgery as a
valid intervention for T2D in people with obesity and to introduce appropriate reimbursement policies.
Grade U; LoC 100%
Metabolic surgery versus traditional bariatric surgery
6. Metabolic surgeryddefined here as the use of GI surgery with the intent to treat T2D and obesitydrequires
the development of a diabetes-based model of clinical practice consistent with international standards of
diabetes care.
Grade U; LoC 100%
7. Complementary criteria to the sole use of BMI, the traditional criterion used to select candidates for bariatric
surgery, need to be developed to achieve a better patient selection algorithm for metabolic surgery.
Grade U; LoC 100%
8. RYGB, VSG, LAGB, and BPD classic or duodenal switch variant (BPD-DS), are common metabolic operations, each
with its own risk-to-benefit ratio. All other metabolic operations are considered to be investigational at this time.
Grade A; LoC 91%
9. Metabolic surgery should be performed in high-volume centers with multidisciplinary teams that understand
and are experienced in the management of diabetes and GI surgery.
Grade U; LoC 100%
Defining goals and success of metabolic surgery
10. Although more studies are needed to further demonstrate long-term benefits, evidence exists for GI surgery to
be considered as an additional approach beyond lifestyle modifications and current medical therapies to
reduce complications of T2D.
Grade A; LoC 97%
11. The aimof metabolicsurgeryinpeoplewithT2Dand obesityistoimprovetheir hyperglycemia andothermetabolic
derangements, while reducing their complications of diabetes, in order to improve their long-term health.
Grade A; LoC 97%
Patient selection
12. Patients’ eligibility for metabolic surgery should be assessed by a multidisciplinary team including surgeon(s),
internist(s) or diabetologist(s)/endocrinologist(s), and dietitian(s) with specific expertise in diabetes care.
Also, depending on individual circumstances, other relevant specialists could be consulted to evaluate the
patient.
Grade B; LoC 85%
13. Contraindications for metabolic surgery include diagnosis of T1D (unless surgery is indicated for other reasons,
such as severe obesity); current drug or alcohol abuse; uncontrolled psychiatric illness; lack of comprehension
of the risks/benefits, expected outcomes, or alternatives; and lack of commitment to nutritional
supplementation and long-term follow-up required with surgery.
Grade A; LoC 93%
14. Metabolic surgery is recommended as an option to treat T2D in patients with the following conditions:
c
Class III obesity (BMI $40 kg/m2), regardless of the level of glycemic control or complexity of glucose-
lowering regimens.
Grade U; LoC 100%
c
Class II obesity (BMI 35.0–39.9 kg/m2) with inadequately controlled hyperglycemia despite lifestyle and
optimal medical therapy.
Grade A; LoC 97%
15. Metabolic surgery should also be considered to be an option to treat T2D in patients with class I obesity (BMI
30.0–34.9 kg/m2) and inadequately controlled hyperglycemia despite optimal medical treatment by either
oral or injectable medications (including insulin).
Grade B; LoC 87%
16. All BMI thresholds used in these recommendations should be reconsidered depending on the ancestry of the
patient. For example, for patients of Asian descent, the BMI values above should be reduced by 2.5 kg/m2.
Grade B; LoC 86%
17. Given the lack of level-1 evidence involving the effects of metabolic surgery on T2D in adolescent patients, the
DSS-II committee feels a recommendation for use of GI surgery in this population is inappropriate at present.
However, the committee does consider this a high priority for future research.
Grade U; LoC 100%
Preoperative workup
18. Preoperative patient evaluation should include assessment of endocrine, metabolic, physical, nutritional, and
psychological health.
Grade U; LoC 100%
19. Preoperative evaluation should include a combination of routine clinical tests and diabetes-specific metrics.
The following tests are recommended by the DSS-II expert group:
Grade A; LoC 98%
c
Standard preoperative tests used for GI surgery at individual providers’ institutions.
c
Recent tests to characterize current diabetes statusdfor example, but not limited to, HbA1c, fasting
glucose, lipid profile, and tests for retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy.
c
Tests to distinguish T1D from T2D (fasting C-peptide; anti-GAD or other autoantibodies).
20. In order to reduce the risk for postoperative infection due to hyperglycemia, an attempt should be made to
improve glycemic control before surgery.
Grade A; LoC 95%
Choice of procedure
21. RYGB is a well-standardized surgical procedure, and among the four accepted operations for metabolic
surgery, it appears to have a more favorable risk-benefit profile in most patients with T2D.
Grade U; LoC 100%
Continued on p. 874
care.diabetesjournals.org
Rubino and Associates
873
 medical/lifestyle interventions or
other operations in patients with T2D
show a gradient of efficacy among the
four accepted surgical approaches
for weight loss and diabetes remission,
as follows: BPD.RYGB.VSG.LAGB.
The opposite gradient exists for com-
parative safety of these operations
(10–25,72,76–79,101–104). Evidence
from these studies can be summarized
as follows:
c RYGB versus BPD: BPD promotes
greater T2D remission but more
metabolic complications compared
with RYGB (LoE IB).
c RYGB versus LAGB: RYGB achieves
greater diabetes remission com-
pared with LAGB (LoE IA). RYGB is
associated with higher risk of early
postoperative complications but
lower risk of long-term reoperations
(LoE IIA).
c RYGB versus VSG: Compared with VSG,
RYGB promotes higher diabetes remis-
sion rates (LoE IA), better lipid control
(LoE IA), similar risk of reoperation
(LoE IA), better quality of life (LoE IB),
and higher incidence of postoperative
complications (LoE IA).
Postoperative Follow-up
Regardless of the level of diabetes
control and/or remission achieved by
patients following surgery, diabetes
management should includedin addition
to optimizing glycemic controldmonitoring
and ameliorating CVD risk factors,
such as hypertension and dyslipide-
mia, because it is reasonable to assume
that these patients remain at higher risk
of CVD complications and disease
Table 3—Continued
Grade; LoC
22. Although longer-term studies are needed, current data suggest that VSG is an effective procedure that results
in excellent weight loss and major improvement of T2D, at least in the short to medium term (1–3 years) in
which outcomes have been measured in RCTs. It could be a valuable option to treat diabetes, especially in
patients for whom concerns exist about the risk of operations that involve bowel diversion.
Grade B; LoC 80%
23. LAGB is effective in improving glycemia in patients with obesity and T2D, to the degree that it causes weight
loss. The procedure, however, is associated with greater risk for reoperation/revision compared with RYGB
due to failure or band-related complications, e.g., slippage/migration, erosion, etc.
Grade B; LoC 85%
24. Although clinical evidence suggests that BPD/BPD-DS may be the most effective procedure in terms of
glycemic control and weight loss, the operation is associated with significant risk of nutritional deficiencies,
making its risk-benefit profile less favorable than that of the other bariatric/metabolic procedures for
most patients. BPD/BPD-DS should be considered only in patients with extreme levels of obesity (e.g.,
BMI .60 kg/m2).
Grade B; LoC 83%
Postoperative follow-up
25. After surgery, patients should continue to be managed by multidisciplinary teams including diabetologists/
endocrinologists, surgeons, nutritionists, and nurses with specific diabetes expertise.
Grade A; LoC 98%
26. Postoperative follow-up should include surgical and nutritional evaluations at least every 6 months, and more
often if necessary, during the first 2 postoperative years and at least annually thereafter.
Grade U; LoC 100%
27. Unless patients have a documented, stable condition of nondiabetic glycemia, glycemic control should be
monitored with at least the same frequency as in standard diabetes care of nonoperated patients.
Grade U; LoC 100%
28. In patients who have reached stable normalization of hyperglycemia for at least 6 months, monitoring of
glycemic control should be performed with the same frequency as recommended for patients with
prediabetes because of the potential for relapse.
Grade A; LoC 95%
29. Patients with a stable condition of nondiabetic glycemia for less than 5 years should be monitored for
complications of diabetes at the same frequency as before remission. Once remission reaches the 5-year
mark, monitoring of complications can be done at a reduced frequency, depending on the status of each
complication. Complete cessation of screening for a particular complication should be considered only if
nondiabetic glycemia persists and there is no history of that complication.
Grade B; LoC 85%
30. Within the first 6 months after surgery, patients should be carefully evaluated for glycemic control and
antidiabetes medication(s) tapered according to the professional opinion of the physician(s). Further medical
treatment of T2D after this initial 6-month period should be dosed accordingly, but not discontinued until
laboratory proof of stable glycemic normalization is obtained. Stable nondiabetic glycemia (i.e., HbA1c in the
normal range) should be documented for at least two 3-month HbA1c cycles (6 months in total) before
considering complete withdrawal of glucose-lowering drugs, although withdrawal of certain frontline
medications (e.g., metformin) should be considered more carefully.
Grade B; LoC 82%
31. In the event of plasma glucose levels rapidly approaching the normal range early postoperatively, appropriate
adjustments to medical therapy (medication types and dosage) should be implemented to prevent
hypoglycemia. Metformin, thiazolidinediones, GLP-1 analogs, DPP-4 inhibitors, a-glucosidase inhibitors, and
SGLT2 inhibitors are suitable drugs for early postoperative diabetes management due to their low risk of
inducing hypoglycemia.
Grade A; LoC 98%
32. Ongoing and long-term monitoring of micronutrient status, nutritional supplementation, and support must be
provided to patients after surgery, according to guidelines for postoperative management of metabolic/
bariatric surgery by national and international societies (for example, AACE/TOS/ASMBS, IFSO, BOMSS).
Grade U; LoC 100%
Grade U 5 100% agreement (unanimous); grade A 5 89–99% agreement; grade B 5 78–88% agreement; grade C 5 67–77% agreement. AACE,
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists; ASMBS, American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery; BOMSS, British Obesity & Metabolic
Surgery Society; DPP-4, dipeptidyl peptidase 4; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1; IFSO, International Federation for the Surgery of Obesity and
Metabolic Disorders; LoC, level of consensus; SGLT2, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2; TOS, The Obesity Society.
874
Metabolic Surgery in the Treatment Algorithm for T2D
Diabetes Care Volume 39, June 2016
 relapse than does the general popula-
tion. Thus, until surgery-specific pre-
dicting factors of diabetes relapse are
better developed, patients should con-
tinue to be monitored by primary care
physicians, endocrinologists, and inter-
nal medicine specialists as appropriate
and have regular postoperative screen-
ing for development and/or progression
of microvascular complications of T2D
(e.g., retinopathy, nephropathy, and
neuropathy). Because sudden im-
provement of prolonged hyperglyce-
mia can acutely worsen microvascular
disease, particularly intensive early
postoperative monitoring is warranted
in patients known to be afflicted
(Table 3).
Future Research
The DSS delegates identified the follow-
ing arenas for future research in meta-
bolic surgery:
1. Develop and evaluate criteria for
surgery that are more appropriate
than BMI alone in people with
T2D.
2. Investigate the long-term effect of
surgery on microvascular disease
and CVD in high-quality studies
(RCTs especially and prospective,
well-matched case-control studies).
3. Refine the structure of therapeutic
algorithms to incorporate meta-
bolic surgery.
4. Establish appropriate national/
international registries of metabolic
surgery in patients with T2D, es-
pecially designed to facilitate
standardized collection of quality
long-term data about CVD, mortal-
ity, and other relevant outcomes.
5. Investigate the long-term effec-
tiveness and safety of metabolic
surgery in adolescents as com-
pared with alternative treatment
options.
6. Determine which operation is the
optimal choice for individual
patients.
7. Determine the optimal time to inter-
vene in individual patients.
8. Identify specific clinical scenarios in
patients with diabetes that warrant
escalation of treatment and earlier
consideration of surgery.
9. Define the optimal use of therapies
thatcombinesurgical,pharmacological,
and postoperative lifestyle-based
treatments.
10. Identify optimal definitions of out-
come to be used across treatment
modalities.
11. Increase understanding of surgical
mechanisms, so as to improve use of
currenttreatmentoptionsanddevelop
effective, new alternative therapies.
12. Investigate the role of device-based
GI interventions (“interventional
diabetology”) to treat T2D, in combi-
nation with lifestyle and/or pharma-
ceutical approaches.
13. Investigate cost-effectiveness of
specific procedures and of the use
of surgery in distinct clinical scenar-
ios to inform policymakers about
optimal strategies to prioritize sur-
gical access.
Funding and Duality of Interest. The DSS-II
and WCITD 2015 were supported by the In-
ternational Diabetes Surgery Task Force
(a nonprofit organization), King’s College Lon-
don, King’s College Hospital, Johnson &
Johnson, Medtronic, Novo Nordisk, Fractyl,
DIAMOND MetaCure, Gore, MedImmune, and
NGM Biopharmaceuticals. These sponsors
played no role in the selection of voting dele-
gates, the Delphi process, the DSS-II and WCITD
2015 programs, or the writing of this article.
None of the DSS-II codirectors, members of
the organizing committee, or voting delegates
received payment for their efforts. No other
potential conflicts of interest relevant to this
article were reported.
Author Contributions. F.R. and D.E.C. chaired
the writing committee for this article and spear-
headed its development. D.M.N., R.H.E., P.R.S.,
K.G.M.M.A., P.Z.Z., S.D.P., L.J., S.M.S., W.H.H.,
S.A.A., L.M.K., and G.T.-O. contributed to the
preparation of this report. The 48 voting dele-
gates listed in Table 2 participated in a 4-month-
long Delphi-like process to craft the 32 consensus
statements, culminating in the DSS-II conference
in London, U.K. F.R., D.E.C., P.R.S., and L.M.K.
served as codirectors of DSS-II.
References
1. Leyton O. Diabetes and operation: a note on
the effect of gastrojejunostomy upon a case of
mild diabetes mellitus with a low renal thresh-
old. Lancet 1925;206:1162–1163
2. Friedman MN, Sancetta AJ, Magovern GJ.
The amelioration of diabetes mellitus following
subtotal gastrectomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1955;
100:201–204
3. Sj¨
ostr¨
om L, Lindroos AK, Peltonen M, et al.;
Swedish Obese Subjects Study Scientific Group.
Lifestyle, diabetes, and cardiovascular risk fac-
tors 10 years after bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med
2004;351:2683–2693
4. Pories WJ, Swanson MS, MacDonald KG,
et al. Who would have thought it? An operation
proves to be the most effective therapy for
adult-onset diabetes mellitus. Ann Surg 1995;
222:339–350; discussion 350–352
5. Rubino F, Schauer PR, Kaplan LM, Cummings
DE. Metabolic surgery to treat type 2 diabetes:
clinical outcomes and mechanisms of action.
Annu Rev Med 2010;61:393–411
6. Rubino F, Marescaux J. Effect of duodenal-
jejunal exclusion in a non-obese animal model
of type 2 diabetes: a new perspective for an old
disease. Ann Surg 2004;239:1–11
7. Rubino F, Gagner M. Potential of surgery for
curing type 2 diabetes mellitus. Ann Surg 2002;
236:554–559
8. Rubino F, Kaplan LM, Schauer PR, Cummings
DE; Diabetes Surgery Summit Delegates. The
Diabetes Surgery Summit consensus conference:
recommendations for the evaluation and use of
gastrointestinal surgery to treat type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Ann Surg 2010;251:399–405
9. Cummings DE, Cohen RV. Beyond BMI: the
need for new guidelines governing the use of
bariatric and metabolic surgery. Lancet Diabe-
tes Endocrinol 2014;2:175–181
10. Dixon JB, O’Brien PE, Playfair J, et al. Adjust-
able gastric banding and conventional therapy
for type 2 diabetes: a randomized controlled
trial. JAMA 2008;299:316–323
11. Mingrone G, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, et al.
Bariatric surgery versus conventional medical
therapy for type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2012;
366:1577–1585
12. Schauer PR, Kashyap SR, Wolski K, et al.
Bariatric surgery versus intensive medical ther-
apy in obese patients with diabetes. N Engl J
Med 2012;366:1567–1576
13. Ikramuddin S, Korner J, Lee WJ, et al. Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass vs intensive medical management
for the control of type 2 diabetes, hypertension,
and hyperlipidemia: the Diabetes Surgery Study
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2013;309:2240–
2249
14. Courcoulas AP, Goodpaster BH, Eagleton JK,
et al. Surgical vs medical treatments for type 2
diabetes mellitus: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA Surg 2014;149:707–715
15. Halperin F, Ding SA, Simonson DC, et al.
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery or lifestyle
with intensive medical management in patients
with type 2 diabetes: feasibility and 1-year re-
sults of a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Surg
2014;149:716–726
16. Liang Z, Wu Q, Chen B, Yu P, Zhao H, Ouyang
X. Effect of laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric by-
pass surgery on type 2 diabetes mellitus with
hypertension: a randomized controlled trial.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2013;101:50–56
17. Wentworth JM, Playfair J, Laurie C, et al.
Multidisciplinary diabetes care with and with-
out bariatric surgery in overweight people: a
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2014;2:545–552
18. Parikh M, Chung M, Sheth S, et al. Random-
ized pilot trial of bariatric surgery versus inten-
sive medical weight management on diabetes
remission in type 2 diabetic patients who do
NOT meet NIH criteria for surgery and the role
of soluble RAGE as a novel biomarker of suc-
cess. Ann Surg 2014;260:617–622; discussion
622–624
19. Schauer PR, Bhatt DL, Kirwan JP, et al.;
STAMPEDE Investigators. Bariatric surgery
care.diabetesjournals.org
Rubino and Associates
875
 versus intensive medical therapy for diabetesd
3-year outcomes. N Engl J Med 2014;370:2002–
2013
20. Mingrone G, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, et al.
Bariatric-metabolic surgery versus conventional
medical treatment in obese patients with type 2
diabetes: 5 year follow-up of an open-label,
single-centre, randomised controlled trial. Lan-
cet 2015;386:964–973
21. Ikramuddin S, Billington CJ, Lee WJ, et al.
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for diabetes (the Di-
abetes Surgery Study): 2-year outcomes of a
5-year, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Di-
abetes Endocrinol 2015;3:413–422
22. Ding SA, Simonson DC, Wewalka M, et al.
Adjustable gastric band surgery or medical man-
agement in patients with type 2 diabetes: a ran-
domized clinical trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2015;100:2546–2556
23. Cummings DE, Arterburn DE, Westbrook
EO, et al. Gastric bypass surgery vs intensive
lifestyle and medical intervention for type
2 diabetes: the CROSSROADS randomised
controlled trial. Diabetologia 2016;59:945–
953
24. Courcoulas AP, Belle SH, Neiberg RH, et al.
Three-year outcomes of bariatric surgery vs life-
style intervention for type 2 diabetes mellitus
treatment: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Surg 2015;150:931–940
25. Gloy VL, Briel M, Bhatt DL, et al. Bariatric
surgery versus non-surgical treatment for obe-
sity: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomised controlled trials. BMJ 2013;347:
f5934
26. Thaler JP, Cummings DE. Minireview: hor-
monal and metabolic mechanisms of diabetes
remission after gastrointestinal surgery. Endo-
crinology 2009;150:2518–2525
27. Madsbad S, Dirksen C, Holst JJ. Mechanisms
of changes in glucose metabolism and body-
weight after bariatric surgery. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2014;2:152–164
28. Salehi M, Woods SC, D’Alessio DA. Gastric
bypass alters both glucose-dependent and
glucose-independent regulation of islet hor-
mone secretion. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2015;
23:2046–2052
29. Tremaroli V, Karlsson F, Werling M, et al.
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and vertical banded
gastroplasty induce long-term changes on the
human gut microbiome contributing to fat
mass regulation. Cell Metab 2015;22:228–238
30. Dirksen C, Jørgensen NB, Bojsen-Møller KN,
et al. Mechanisms of improved glycaemic con-
trol after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Diabetologia
2012;55:1890–1901
31. Breen DM, Rasmussen BA, Kokorovic A,
Wang R, Cheung GW, Lam TK. Jejunal nutrient
sensing is required for duodenal-jejunal bypass
surgery to rapidly lower glucose concentrations
in uncontrolled diabetes. Nat Med 2012;18:
950–955
32. Ryan KK, Tremaroli V, Clemmensen C, et al.
FXR is a molecular target for the effects of ver-
ticalsleevegastrectomy.Nature2014;509:183–188
33. Liou AP, Paziuk M, Luevano JM Jr,
Machineni S, Turnbaugh PJ, Kaplan LM. Con-
served shifts in the gut microbiota due to gastric
bypass reduce host weight and adiposity. Sci
Transl Med 2013;5:178ra41
34. Saeidi N, Meoli L, Nestoridi E, et al. Repro-
gramming of intestinal glucose metabolism and
glycemic control in rats after gastric bypass. Sci-
ence 2013;341:406–410
35. Drucker DJ. The role of gut hormones in glu-
cose homeostasis. J Clin Invest 2007;117:24–32
36. Picot J, Jones J, Colquitt JL, et al. The clinical
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of bariatric
(weight loss) surgery for obesity: a systematic
review and economic evaluation. Health Tech-
nol Assess 2009;13:1–190, 215–357
37. Keating C, Neovius M, Sj¨
oholm K, et al.
Health-care costs over 15 years after bariatric
surgery for patients with different baseline glu-
cose status: results from the Swedish Obese
Subjects study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2015;3:855–865
38. Zimmet P, Alberti KG, Rubino F, Dixon JB.
IDF’s view of bariatric surgery in type 2 diabetes.
Lancet 2011;378:108–110
39. Kasama K, Mui W, Lee WJ, et al. IFSO-APC
consensus statements 2011. Obes Surg 2012;
22:677–684
40. National Institute for Health and Care Excel-
lence. Obesity: identification, assessment and
management of overweight and obesity in chil-
dren, young people and adults. London, National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2014
41. National Institute for Health and Care Ex-
cellence. Algorithm for blood glucose lowering
therapy in adults with type 2 diabetes. London,
National Institute for Health and Care Excel-
lence, 2015
42. Grady D. Surgery for diabetes may be better
than standard treatment. The New York Times,
26 March 2012
43. Consensus Development Conference Panel.
NIH conference. Gastrointestinal surgery for severe
obesity. Ann Intern Med 1991;115:956–961
44. Burns PB, Rohrich RJ, Chung KC. The levels
of evidence and their role in evidence-based
medicine. Plast Reconstr Surg 2011;128:305–310
45. Shekelle PG, Woolf SH, Eccles M, Grimshaw
J. Developing clinical guidelines. West J Med
1999;170:348–351
46. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, et al.;
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines;
Obesity Society. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline
for the management of overweight and obesity
in adults: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity
Society. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;63(25 Pt B):
2985–3023
47. Dalkey N, Helmer O. An experimental appli-
cation of the DELPHI method to the use of ex-
perts. Manage Sci 1963;9:458–467
48. Milholland AV, Wheeler SG, Heieck JJ. Med-
ical assessment by a Delphi group opinion tech-
nic. N Engl J Med 1973;288:1272–1275
49. Gabel MJ, Shipan CR. A social choice ap-
proach to expert consensus panels. J Health
Econ 2004;23:543–564
50. Kleynen M, Braun SM, Bleijlevens MH, et al.
Using a Delphi technique to seek consensus re-
garding definitions, descriptions and classifica-
tion of terms related to implicit and explicit
forms of motor learning. PLoS One 2014;9:
e100227
51. Carlsson LM, Peltonen M, Ahlin S, et al.
Bariatric surgery and prevention of type 2
diabetes in Swedish obese subjects. N Engl J
Med 2012;367:695–704
52. Sj¨
ostr¨
om L, Peltonen M, Jacobson P, et al.
Association of bariatric surgery with long-term
remission of type 2 diabetes and with microvas-
cular and macrovascular complications. JAMA
2014;311:2297–2304
53. Sj¨
oholm K, Pajunen P, Jacobson P, et al. In-
cidence and remission of type 2 diabetes in re-
lation to degree of obesity at baseline and 2 year
weight change: the Swedish Obese Subjects
(SOS) study. Diabetologia 2015;58:1448–1453
54. Sj¨
ostr¨
om L. Review of the key results from
the Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS) trialda pro-
spective controlled intervention study of bari-
atric surgery. J Intern Med 2013;273:219–234
55. Cohen RV, Pinheiro JC, Schiavon CA, Salles
JE, Wajchenberg BL, Cummings DE. Effects of
gastric bypass surgery in patients with type 2
diabetes and only mild obesity. Diabetes Care
2012;35:1420–1428
56. Arterburn DE, Bogart A, Sherwood NE, et al.
A multisite study of long-term remission and
relapse of type 2 diabetes mellitus following
gastric bypass. Obes Surg 2013;23:93–102
57. Adams TD, Davidson LE, Litwin SE, et al.
Health benefits of gastric bypass surgery after
6 years. JAMA 2012;308:1122–1131
58. Brethauer SA, Aminian A, Romero-Talam´
as
H, et al. Can diabetes be surgically cured? Long-
term metabolic effects of bariatric surgery in
obese patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Ann Surg 2013;258:628–636; discussion 636–
637
59. Hsu CC, Almulaifi A, Chen JC, et al. Effect of
bariatric surgery vs medical treatment on type 2
diabetes in patients with body mass index lower
than 35: five-year outcomes. JAMA Surg 2015;
150:1117–1124
60. Yu H, Di J, Bao Y, et al. Visceral fat area as a
new predictor of short-term diabetes remission
after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery in Chi-
nese patients with a body mass index less than
35 kg/m2. Surg Obes Relat Dis 2015;11:6–11
61. Sj¨
ostr¨
om L, Gummesson A, Sj¨
ostr¨
om CD,
et al.; Swedish Obese Subjects Study. Effects
of bariatric surgery on cancer incidence in obese
patients in Sweden (Swedish Obese Subjects
Study): a prospective, controlled intervention
trial. Lancet Oncol 2009;10:653–662
62. Sj¨
ostr¨
om L, Peltonen M, Jacobson P, et al.
Bariatric surgery and long-term cardiovascular
events. JAMA 2012;307:56–65
63. Sj¨
ostr¨
om L, Narbro K, Sj¨
ostr¨
om CD, et al.;
Swedish Obese Subjects Study. Effects of bari-
atric surgery on mortality in Swedish obese sub-
jects. N Engl J Med 2007;357:741–752
64. Adams TD, Gress RE, Smith SC, et al. Long-
term mortality after gastric bypass surgery. N
Engl J Med 2007;357:753–761
65. Arterburn DE, Olsen MK, Smith VA, et al.
Association between bariatric surgery and long-
term survival. JAMA 2015;313:62–70
66. Inge TH, Courcoulas AP, Jenkins TM, et al.;
Teen-LABS Consortium. Weight loss and health
status 3 years after bariatric surgery in adoles-
cents. N Engl J Med 2016;374:113–123
67. Laiteerapong N, Huang ES. The public
health implications of the cost-effectiveness of
bariatric surgery for diabetes. Diabetes Care
2010;33:2126–2128
876
Metabolic Surgery in the Treatment Algorithm for T2D
Diabetes Care Volume 39, June 2016
 68. Hoerger TJ, Zhang P, Segel JE, Kahn HS,
Barker LE, Couper S. Cost-effectiveness of bari-
atric surgery for severely obese adults with di-
abetes. Diabetes Care 2010;33:1933–1939
69. CDC Diabetes Cost-effectiveness Group.
Cost-effectiveness of intensive glycemic con-
trol, intensified hypertension control, and se-
rum cholesterol level reduction for type 2
diabetes. JAMA 2002;287:2542–2551
70. Birkmeyer JD, Finks JF, O’Reilly A, et al.;
Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative. Surgi-
cal skill and complication rates after bariatric
surgery. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1434–1442
71. Flum DR, Belle SH, King WC, et al.; Longitu-
dinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS)
Consortium. Perioperative safety in the longitu-
dinal assessment of bariatric surgery. N Engl J
Med 2009;361:445–454
72. Courcoulas AP, Christian NJ, Belle SH, et al.;
Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery
(LABS) Consortium. Weight change and health
outcomes at 3 years after bariatric surgery
among individuals with severe obesity. JAMA
2013;310:2416–2425
73. Arterburn DE, Courcoulas AP. Bariatric sur-
gery for obesity and metabolic conditions in
adults. BMJ 2014;349:g3961
74. Young MT, Gebhart A, Phelan MJ, Nguyen
NT. Use and outcomes of laparoscopic sleeve
gastrectomy vs laparoscopic gastric bypass:
analysis of the American college of surgeons
NSQIP. J Am Coll Surg 2015;220:880–885
75. Aminian A, Brethauer SA, Kirwan JP,
Kashyap SR, Burguera B, Schauer PR. How safe
is metabolic/diabetes surgery? Diabetes Obes
Metab 2015;17:198–201
76. Birkmeyer NJ, Dimick JB, Share D, et al.;
Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative. Hospi-
tal complication rates with bariatric surgery in
Michigan. JAMA 2010;304:435–442
77. Altieri MS, Yang J, Telem DA, et al. Lap band
outcomes from 19,221 patients across centers
and over a decade within the state of New York.
Surg Endosc. 23 July 2015 [Epub ahead of print].
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-015-4402-8
78. Hutter MM, Schirmer BD, Jones DB, et al.
First report from the American College of Sur-
geons Bariatric Surgery Center Network: laparo-
scopic sleeve gastrectomy has morbidity and
effectiveness positioned between the band
and the bypass. Ann Surg 2011;254:410–420;
discussion 420–422
79. Nguyen NT, Slone JA, Nguyen XM, Hartman
JS, Hoyt DB. A prospective randomized trial of
laparoscopic gastric bypass versus laparoscopic
adjustable gastric banding for the treatment of
morbid obesity: outcomes, quality of life, and
costs. Ann Surg 2009;250:631–641
80. Morino M, Toppino M, Forestieri P,
Angrisani L, Allaix ME, Scopinaro N. Mortality
after bariatric surgery: analysis of 13,871 mor-
bidly obese patients from a national registry.
Ann Surg 2007;246:1002–1007; discussion
1007–1009
81. Risstad H, Søvik TT, Engstr¨
om M, et al. Five-
year outcomes after laparoscopic gastric bypass
and laparoscopic duodenal switch in patients
with body mass index of 50 to 60: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA Surg 2015;150:352–361
82. Mechanick JI, Kushner RF, Sugerman HJ,
et al.; American Association of Clinical Endocri-
nologists; Obesity Society; American Society for
Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery. American Asso-
ciation of Clinical Endocrinologists, The Obesity
Society, and American Society for Metabolic &
Bariatric Surgery medical guidelines for clinical
practice for the perioperative nutritional, met-
abolic, and nonsurgical support of the bariatric
surgery patient. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2009;17
(Suppl. 1):S1–S70
83. Mechanick JI, Youdim A, Jones DB, et al.;
American Association of Clinical Endocrinolo-
gists; Obesity Society; American Society for
Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery. Clinical practice
guidelines for the perioperative nutritional,
metabolic, and nonsurgical support of the
bariatric surgery patientd2013 update: co-
sponsored by American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists, The Obesity Society, and
American Society for Metabolic & Bariatric Sur-
gery. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2013;21(Suppl. 1):
S1–S27
84. Del Villar Madrigal E, Neme-Yunes Y,
Clavellina-Gaytan D, Sanchez HA, Mosti M,
Herrera MF. Anemia after Roux-en-Y gastric by-
pass. How feasible to eliminate the risk by
proper supplementation? Obes Surg 2015;25:
80–84
85. Flancbaum L, Belsley S, Drake V, Colarusso T,
Tayler E. Preoperative nutritional status of patients
undergoing Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for morbid
obesity. J Gastrointest Surg 2006;10:1033–1037
86. Lalmohamed A, de Vries F, Bazelier MT,
et al. Risk of fracture after bariatric surgery in
the United Kingdom: population based, retro-
spective cohort study. BMJ 2012;345:e5085
87. Lu CW, Chang YK, Chang HH, et al. Fracture
risk after bariatric surgery: a 12-year nationwide
cohort study. Medicine (Baltimore) 2015;94:
e2087
88. Lee CJ, Clark JM, Schweitzer M, et al. Preva-
lence of and risk factors for hypoglycemic symp-
toms after gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy.
Obesity (Silver Spring) 2015;23:1079–1084
89. Service GJ, Thompson GB, Service FJ,
Andrews JC, Collazo-Clavell ML, Lloyd RV. Hy-
perinsulinemic hypoglycemia with nesidioblas-
tosis after gastric-bypass surgery. N Engl J Med
2005;353:249–254
90. Ponce J, Woodman G, Swain J, et al.;
REDUCE Pivotal Trial Investigators. The REDUCE
pivotal trial: a prospective, randomized con-
trolled pivotal trial of a dual intragastric balloon
for the treatment of obesity. Surg Obes Relat Dis
2015;11:874–881
91. Lebovitz HE, Ludvik B, Yaniv I, Schwartz T,
ZelewskiM,GuttermanDD;MetacureInvestigators.
Treatmentofpatientswithobesetype2diabeteswith
Tantalus-DIAMOND gastric electrical stimulation:
normal triglycerides predict durable effects for at
least 3 years. Horm Metab Res 2015;47:456–462
92. Rohde U, Hedb¨
ack N, Gluud LL, Vilsbøll T,
Knop FK. Effect of the EndoBarrier Gastrointes-
tinal Liner on obesity and type 2 diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes
Obes Metab 2016;18:300–305
93. Schouten R, Rijs CS, Bouvy ND, et al. A
multicenter, randomized efficacy study of the
EndoBarrier Gastrointestinal Liner for presurgi-
cal weight loss prior to bariatric surgery. Ann
Surg 2010;251:236–243
94. Iaconelli A, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, et al.
Effects of bilio-pancreatic diversion on diabetic
complications: a 10-year follow-up. Diabetes
Care 2011;34:561–567
95. Rubino F, Shukla A, Pomp A, Moreira M,
Ahn SM, Dakin G. Bariatric, metabolic, and di-
abetes surgery: what’s in a name? Ann Surg
2014;259:117–122
96. NguyenKT,BillingtonCJ,VellaA,etal.Preserved
insulin secretory capacity and weight loss are the
predominant predictors of glycemic control in pa-
tients with type 2 diabetes randomized to Roux-
en-Y gastric bypass. Diabetes 2015;64:3104–3110
97. Buse JB, Caprio S, Cefalu WT, et al. How do
we define cure of diabetes? Diabetes Care 2009;
32:2133–2135
98. Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, Carnicelli A,
Mingrone G. Predictors of remission of diabetes
mellitus in severely obese individuals under-
going bariatric surgery: do BMI or procedure
choice matter? A meta-analysis. Ann Surg 2015;
261:459–467
99. Panunzi S, Carlsson L, De Gaetano A, et al.
Determinants of diabetes remission and glyce-
mic control after bariatric surgery. Diabetes
Care 2016;39:166–174
100. Eliasson B, Liakopoulos V, Franz´
en S, et al.
Cardiovascular disease and mortality in patients
with type 2 diabetes after bariatric surgery in
Sweden: a nationwide, matched, observational co-
hort study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2015;3:
847–854
101. M¨
uller-Stich BP, Senft JD, Warschkow R,
et al. Surgical versus medical treatment of
type 2 diabetes mellitus in nonseverely obese
patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ann Surg 2015;261:421–429
102. Lee WJ, Chong K, Ser KH, et al. Gastric
bypass vs sleeve gastrectomy for type 2 diabe-
tes mellitus: a randomized controlled trial. Arch
Surg 2011;146:143–148
103. Li JF, Lai DD, Ni B, Sun KX. Comparison of
laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass with lap-
aroscopic sleeve gastrectomy for morbid obe-
sity or type 2 diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Can J Surg 2013;
56:E158–E164
104. Lee WJ, Chong K, Lin YH, Wei JH, Chen
SC. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy versus
single anastomosis (mini-) gastric bypass for
the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus:
5-year results of a randomized trial and study
of incretin effect. Obes Surg 2014;24:1552–
1562
care.diabetesjournals.org
Rubino and Associates
877
