 A Multicenter Study of Volumetric Computed Tomography for 
Staging Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma
Valerie W. Rusch, MD1, Ritu Gill, MD2, Alan Mitchell, MS3, David Naidich, MD4, David C. 
Rice, MD5, Harvey I. Pass, MD6, Hedy Kindler, MD7, Marc De Perrot, MD8, Joseph Friedberg, 
MD9,10, and on behalf of the Malignant Mesothelioma Volumetric CT Study Group*
1Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Department of Surgery, New York, NY
2Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Department of Radiology, Boston, MA
3Cancer Research and Biostatistics, Seattle, WA
4New York University School of Medicine, Department of Radiology, New York, NY
5MD Anderson Cancer Center, Department of Surgery, Houston, TX
6New York University School of Medicine and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of 
Surgery, New York, NY
7The University of Chicago, Department of Medicine, Chicago, IL
8Toronto General Hospital and Princess Margaret Hospital, Department of Surgery, Toronto, 
Canada
9University of Pennsylvania, Department of Surgery, Philadelphia, PA
Abstract
Background—Standard imaging modalities are inaccurate in staging malignant pleural 
mesothelioma (MPM). Single institution studies suggest that volumetric computed tomography 
(VolCT) is more accurate but labor intensive. We established a multicenter network to test 
interobserver variability, accuracy (relative to pathologic stage) and prognostic significance of 
semi-automated VolCT.
Methods—Six institutions electronically submitted clinical and pathologic data to an established 
multicenter database on patients with MPM who had surgery. Institutional radiologists reviewed 
Address correspondence to: Valerie W. Rusch, MD, Thoracic Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, 1275 York Ave. New York, NY, 10065, ruschv@mskcc.org.
*Group Information: A complete list of the members of the Malignant Mesothelioma Volumetric CT Study Group appears at the end 
of this article.
10Current address: Division of Thoracic Surgery, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Presented at the Fifty-second Annual Meeting of The Society of Thoracic Surgeons, Phoenix, AZ, Jan 23–27, 2016.
Set conflict box: Dr Rice discloses a financial relationship with the Olympus Corporation.
Query author on spelling of Dr Hedi L Kindler’s first name – Hedi or Hedy.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Ann Thorac Surg. 2016 October ; 102(4): 1059–1066. doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2016.06.069.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 preoperative CT scans for quality then submitted via electronic network (AG mednet) to 
biostatistical center (BC). Two reference radiologists, blinded to clinical data, performed semi-
automated tumor volume calculations using commercially available software (Vitrea Enterprise 
6.0), then submitted readings to BC. Study endpoints included: feasibility of network; 
interobserver variability for VolCT; correlation of tumor volume to pTN stages, and overall 
survival (OS).
Results—Of 164 cases, 129 were analyzable and read by reference radiologists. Most tumors 
were <500cm3. A small bias was observed between readers, as one provided consistently larger 
measurements than the other (mean difference=47.9, p=.0027), but for 80% of cases, the absolute 
difference was ≤ 200cm3. Spearman correlation between readers was 0.822. Volume correlated 
with pTN stages and OS, best defined by 3 groups with average volumes of: 91.2, 245.3, 
511.3cm3, associated with median OS of 37, 18, 8 months respectively.
Conclusions—For the first time, a multicenter network was established and initial correlations 
of tumor volume to pTN stages and OS shown. A larger multicenter international study is planned 
to confirm results and refine correlations.
Keywords
Computed tomography; staging mesothelioma
Accurate clinical staging of malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is known to be 
problematic. Patients thought to have early stage, potentially resectable tumor by computed 
tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) are frequently found to 
have more advanced disease at surgical exploration.[1] Discrepancies between clinical and 
pathological staging are largely related to the diffuse and irregular anatomy of MPM which, 
unlike many solid tumors, precludes reliable single or bidimensional tumor measurements. 
In addition, the current primary tumor (T) staging system for MPM[2]is more easily applied 
to surgical and pathological rather than clinical staging because it defines the local extent of 
disease according to the depth and extent of involvement of the pleura and adjacent 
structures, features which are often hard to define on CT, FDG-PET or magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI).
Nearly 20 years ago, Pass and colleagues reported the use of three-dimensional CT 
reconstructions of preresection tumor volume in MPM patients who underwent extrapleural 
pneumonectomy (EPP) or pleurectomy/decortications (P/D). [3]Tumor volume was found to 
be representative of T stage and to predict overall and progression-free survival. Since then, 
several studies have explored the use of manual and semi-automated methods of calculating 
tumor volume on CT, most frequently for response assessment in MPM patients receiving 
chemotherapy.[4–11] However, earlier studies required specialized equipment not available 
at most institutions and were highly labor intensive. The advent of commercially available 
radiology software and improvements in radiology workflow through the use of hybrid 
workstations now potentially permit efficient and reproducible calculations of tumor volume 
in MPM patients.[12]
Rusch et al.
Page 2
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Better staging of MPM would improve patient selection for treatment and evaluation of 
outcomes in a notoriously difficult malignancy. The International Association for the Study 
of Lung Cancer (IASLC) and the International Mesothelioma Interest Group (IMIG) have 
collaborated on the development of a large international database (“IASLC MPM database”) 
that is being used to inform revisions of the MPM staging system in the upcoming 8th 
editions of the AJCC (American Joint Commission on Cancer) and the UICC (International 
Union Against Cancer) staging manuals.[1,13] This clinical database, coordinated and 
analyzed by a well established biostatistical center, Cancer Research and Biostatistics 
(CRAB), offered the opportunity to create a multicenter network to evaluate volumetric CT 
in the context of TNM staging for MPM. The present feasibility study, a collaboration 
among six North American institutions, is the prelude to a planned larger international study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The multicenter network
Participating investigators represented six North American institutions that treat a high 
volume of MPM patients, including Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York 
University, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, the University of 
Pennsylvania, the University of Chicago, and the University of Toronto. Each site had a 
designated thoracic surgeon or oncologist, and a diagnostic radiologist. Two reference 
radiologists, one from the Brigham and Women’s Hospital and one from New York 
University, and both highly experienced in reading CT scans in MPM patients, were 
responsible for performing the volumetric CT readings. The sites submitting scans and data 
had Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval from their institutions and appropriate data 
transfer agreements in place. IRB waiver was obtained at the sites analyzing the volumetric 
CT scans.
Study Objectives, Patient Eligibility and Data Flow
The primary objective of the study was to determine the feasibility of developing a 
multicenter network to use volumetric CT as a uniform measurement of clinical T stage in 
newly diagnosed MPM. Secondary objectives were to determine interobserver variability in 
estimating tumor volume; to estimate the difference between standard CT and volumetric 
CT in assessing the clinical T stage; to determine whether tumor volume corresponds to 
pathologic T and N stages; and to determine whether tumor volume correlates with overall 
survival (OS) and histological subtype. OS was measured from the date of surgery. The 
study was not designed to assess the impact of VolCT in prognostic models including known 
important variables other than tumor stage.
Eligible cases were required to have pathologically proven MPM and to have had a 
preoperative chest CT scan followed by surgical exploration providing definitive surgical 
and pathological staging within 30 days of the CT. In order to generate information in a 
timely manner for this feasibility study, retrospective clinical and imaging data were used. 
Therefore, operations were performed between January 1, 2005 and December 31, 2013. 
Previously untreated patients were preferred but for patients who received induction 
chemotherapy, the CT submitted was required to be the post chemotherapy, immediate 
Rusch et al.
Page 3
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 preoperative CT. Patients receiving preoperative radiotherapy were excluded. Contrast CT 
scans with 3mm cuts were preferred but non-contrast scans and cuts up to 5mm thickness 
were accepted. Allowing up to 5mm thickness cuts took into consideration that during the 
time frame of this study many Radiology departments did not routinely retain finer cuts in 
recording CT imaging. Submitted cases were required to have all of the essential clinical 
information electronically submitted to the IASLC MPM database.
The study schema is shown in Figure 1. The surgeon and radiologist at each institution 
selected eligible cases. Each CT was reviewed by the participating institutional radiologist to 
ensure that it was of adequate quality for submission. The institutional radiologist also 
assigned a clinical T stage after reviewing each scan. After clinical data (including clinical 
and pathological stage information) were verified to be complete at CRAB, CT scans devoid 
of patient identifiers were submitted to CRAB via a secure internet connection using AG 
Mednet (www.agmednet.com). The two reference radiologists were then provided access to 
the scans by CRAB and independently performed their reviews which were then submitted 
back to CRAB for assessment of interobserver variability and correlation to clinical data. 
Volumetric CT assessment was performed by each reference radiologist using Vitrea 
Enterprise suite 6.0 (Vital Images, Minnesota, USA), a PowerPoint presentation detailing the 
methodology for performing volumetric assessment was created and shared between the two 
reference radiologists prior to the volumetric assessment. A demonstration of the technique 
was performed with a detailed discussion on exclusion of effusion and manual inclusion of 
any discontinuous areas of tumor and correction of the semi-automatic segmentation (based 
on Hounsefield units ranging between 20–80 HU) to include all areas of pleural thickening 
representing tumor. Three WebEx sessions with detailed discussion and demonstration of the 
methodology, using 8 training cases were organized prior to the volumetric assessments. An 
independent consensus root cause analyses of the discrepant cases were performed after the 
final statistical analysis by the 2 reference radiologists.
Statistical Considerations
A minimum of 120 cases (15 to 30 from each institution) was considered necessary to meet 
the primary and secondary objectives, in particular the estimation of interobserver variability 
and the correlations between volumetric CT T stage and surgical/pathological Tstage which 
would be critical to planning a subsequent larger scale trial. The surgical/pathological T 
stage was considered the “gold standard” for statistical assessment. The planned sample size 
estimated the endpoints with reasonable statistical precision as measured by the 95% 
confidence intervals for the estimates. Spearman correlation was used to compare volume 
estimates by the two reference radiologists. Histogram analyses of volume distributions were 
compared between both reference radiologists. The relationship of volumetric CT to other 
secondary endpoints was considered the subject of exploratory analyses only.
RESULTS
A total of 164 cases were registered to the study. Eight cases were used as training cases and 
2 cases were excluded based on CT quality (one due to metal artifact, and one due to poor 
image quality). Out of the 154 cases with CT quality deemed adequate, both reference 
Rusch et al.
Page 4
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 radiologists analyzed 130 and one case was excluded from the final analysis as it was an 
extreme outlier with respect to volume calculations between the reference radiologists. On 
subsequent consensus review, this difference was found to be secondary to data entry error. 
Thus, 129 cases were examined by both reference radiologists and form the basis for this 
report. Clinical stage as defined by the institutional radiologists, final surgical/pathological 
stage and tumor histology data are shown in Table 1. The majority of patients had either 
clinical stage II (29%) or III (49%) disease. Considerable tumor upstaging occurred at 
surgery with most patients having either stage III (42%) or IV (45%) disease. The most 
common histological subtype was epithelioid (81% of cases). Most submitted scans (n=74, 
57%) had a slice thickness of 5 mm with the remainder having slice thicknesses ranging 
from 2.5 to 3.5mm.
Radiology-specific results are reported elsewhere and are not discussed in detail here.[14] 
Briefly, despite their considerable experience in reading CT scans in MPM patients, the 
reference radiologist frequently differed in their estimate of clinical T stage (using the 
AJCC, TNM criteria) with one assigning T3 or T4 to 80% and the other to 28% of patients.
With respect to CT volume calculations, the majority of tumors were confirmed to be 
<500cm3 (84 by both readers, 103 by at least one reader). In 80% of cases the absolute 
difference in volume between the two radiologists was ≤ 200cm3 and in more than 40% of 
cases the difference was less than ± 60cm3. Approximately 67% agreement was seen 
between the two readers when measured in the context of the 4 volume categories. The 
overall correlation between the two radiologists was good (Spearman Corr.=0.822). A small 
measurement bias was observed between the readers, as one reader tended to provide 
consistently larger measurements than the other (mean = 47.9, paired t-test for no difference 
p= .0027). Detailed root cause analyses of the discrepant cases were performed after the 
final statistical analyses and have been discussed in detail in the Radiology manuscript.
Given the strong predominance of epithelioid tumor histology in this study, it was not 
feasible to measure the association between tumor volume and histology. However, as shown 
in Figures 2a and 2b, volume correlated with surgical/pathological T stage (range of median 
volumes = 23.8cm3 for pT1 to 387.9cm3 for pT4) and with pN stage. Tumor volume also 
correlated with OS. We did not explore linear or other functional relationships between the 
continuous volumetric CT measurements and overall survival as we feel this would extend 
beyond realistic expectations of the data. However, a trend between volumetric CT and 
survival can be seen in Figure 3 with largest tumors (volumetric CT >511.3 cm3) having the 
shortest median survival and the smallest tumors (<91.2 cm3) having the longest median 
survival. Initially this was assessed by dividing tumor volume into quartiles. Survival was 
very similar for tumors between the first and third quartile, which suggested to us that 
collapsing these cases into a single group would provide the best fit. The log-rank p-value 
without the context of Figure 3 would certainly not be enough to support statements about 
observed differences between groups. However, given the context of Figure 3, it is plain to 
see where those differences occur. Pairwise p-values confirm the visual observations 
ne(Table 2). Given the small number of cases, we believe that these results provide 
reasonable evidence of a trend in overall survival for a 3 group model.
Rusch et al.
Page 5
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 COMMENT
To our knowledge, this is the first study to show the feasibility of creating a multicenter 
network aimed at evaluating the use of volumetric CT in the clinical staging of MPM. Our 
experience defines factors that will be critical for the design of a larger definitive trial and 
demonstrates relationships between tumor volume, surgical/pathological stage and OS that 
have been suggested by previous single institution studies. We show that the known 
inaccuracies and variability in clinical T staging based on assessment of standard CT may be 
obviated or supplemented by the use of volumetric evaluation.[1]
The seminal paper by Pass et al. in 1998 included 48 patients who underwent cytoreductive 
surgery by either EPP (n=25) or P/D (n=23) and had three dimensional CT reconstructions 
of preresection and postresection tumor volume.[3] Median OS correlated significantly with 
pre- and postoperative tumor volumes, reflecting the impact of both the initial tumor burden 
and the extent of cytoreduction. Patients who had a preoperative tumor volume less than 100 
cm3 had a median OS of 22 months while those with a larger tumor volume had a median 
OS of 11 months. The presence of lymph node metastases, the tumor stage and progression-
free survival also correlated with preoperative tumor volume. However, calculations of 
tumor volume required that a single radiologist manually outline tumor borders with a hand-
controlled mouse on an individual work station which was then used to calculate three-
dimensional volume. The technological limitations at that time meant that these individual, 
highly labor intensive results could not be extrapolated to a multicenter setting. Nonetheless, 
they prompted an interest in this area and stimulated efforts to develop more automated and 
reproducible methods of assessing tumor volume in MPM.
During the past decade, efforts have focused on developing and evaluating less labor 
intensive, semi-automated methods of volumetric CT analysis.[4,6–11,15] All of these 
reports are small, single institution studies utilizing for the most part “home grown” software 
algorithms for volumetric estimation, and frequently focusing on response assessment in 
patients receiving chemotherapy. A more recent single institution study applied the 
commercially available software used in this study to volumetric CT assessment of 88 MPM 
patients who underwent EPP at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital.[12] By univariate and 
multivariable analyses that included clinical variables (e.g. hemoglobin, platelet count and 
adjuvant therapy) known to be important, tumor volume was independently associated with 
OS. The most significant breakpoint in OS appeared to be a tumor volume of 500cm3 or 
greater. The current study supports a tumor volume greater than 500cm3 as being associated 
with a poor OS but, somewhat in line with the report from Pass and colleagues, also 
identifies low and intermediate volume groups that have significantly different outcomes.
Technological advances including commercially available software for volumetric CT 
evaluation, internet-based systems that allow transmission and sharing of data-dense 
imaging studies in ways that maintain patient confidentiality, and improvements in radiology 
work flow now enable this type of multicenter international study. The involvement of a 
biostatistical center highly experienced in clinical trials and in managing large datasets is 
also pivotal to study feasibility. The availability of the large, high quality IASLC MPM 
database utilizing electronic data submission will be essential for accurate clinical 
Rusch et al.
Page 6
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 correlations. However, the current study highlights areas that should be addressed in the 
planned, larger international study. Stricter criteria for CT quality with the routine use of 
intravenous contrast and retention of fine cut CT images (2.5mm or less in thickness) will 
enhance radiological interpretation.[16] The addition of a third experienced reference 
radiologist, more extensive group training in software use and further standardization in 
reporting may reduce variations in final volume calculations.
Refinement of volumetric CT in the clinical staging of MPM and incorporation of this into 
routine clinical practice has implications that are not merely academic. Large numbers of 
MPM patients are too elderly or too frail to be considered for major surgical resections. With 
an increasing range of nonsurgical treatment options for MPM including new 
chemotherapies, immunotherapy and novel radiotherapy approaches, accurate clinical 
staging for treatment selection and accurate assessment of response have become important. 
For better risk patients, more precise methods of clinical staging are needed to select 
surgical intervention and multimodality therapy. Although other imaging modalities such as 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and PET have been evaluated for staging and response 
assessment, CT is less costly and more widely available.[17,18] Therefore, validation of our 
results in a larger international study will likely have a significant impact on the 
management of this challenging disease.
DISCUSSION
170. A MULTICENTER STUDY OF VOLUMETRIC COMPUTED 
TOMOGRAPHY FOR STAGING MALIGNANT PLEURAL MESOTHELIOMA. 
Paper presented by Harvey I. Pass, M.D., New York, New York. E-mail: 
harvey.pass@med.nyu.edu
Discussion by Todd L. Demmy, M.D., New Brunswick, New Jersey.
E-mail: todd.demmy@cinj.rutgers.edu
Dr. T. Demmy (New Brunswick, New Jersey):
Great presentation. One of the cool things about this software is the ability to not only 
calculate a volume but also the shape, maybe even create an STL file for 3D printing.
Do you plan to take this to another level, not just looking at volume but patterns of growth or 
regression, shapes of how the tumor spreads that might provide some sort of prognostic 
information? Thank you.
170. A MULTICENTER STUDY OF VOLUMETRIC COMPUTED 
TOMOGRAPHY FOR STAGING MALIGNANT PLEURAL MESOTHELIOMA. 
Response by Harvey I. Pass, M.D., New York, New York. E-mail: 
harvey.pass@med.nyu.edu
DR. PASS Yes. I think that would be very interesting to do. It’s a longitudinal study to see 
how the tumors regress so that you can get an idea with not only surgical patients but chemo 
patients.
Rusch et al.
Page 7
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 I think that this will also be important to actually serve as a quality control for the operations 
on mesothelioma because you can also take this and measure it after you’ve operated on the 
patient and look at those subtle changes and then see how much volume you have left and 
see if that correlates with survival.
With regard to the reconstructions and being able to figure out where things are, that’s a 
future hope.
DR. DEMMY One other quick comment is that one can actually print the 3D rib cage 
anatomy to plan an adjuvant therapy like PDT. Such preplanning would enhance use of 
onlay adjuvant therapy after an EPP or radical decortication. DR. PASS: I’m hoping that 
those three-dimensional images will also give us a greater idea that could compete with MRI 
with regard to invasion.
170. A MULTICENTER STUDY OF VOLUMETRIC COMPUTED 
TOMOGRAPHY FOR STAGING MALIGNANT PLEURAL MESOTHELIOMA. 
Paper presented by Harvey I. Pass, M.D., New York, New York. E-mail: 
harvey.pass@med.nyu.edu
Discussion by Joseph S. Friedberg, M.D., FACS, Baltimore, Maryland.
E-mail: jfriedberg@smail.umaryland.edu
Dr. J. Friedberg (Baltimore, Maryland):
Harvey, that was fantastic. I was just wondering. As we were discussing the other day, 
sometimes these tumors are rock hard, some of them are kind of soft. I mean, you started 
this whole thing with the volumetrics. Have you ever looked at the density of the tumors?
170. A MULTICENTER STUDY OF VOLUMETRIC COMPUTED 
TOMOGRAPHY FOR STAGING MALIGNANT PLEURAL MESOTHELIOMA. 
Response by Harvey I. Pass, M.D., New York, New York. E-mail: 
harvey.pass@med.nyu.edu
DR. PASS I think that’s a really good point, and I think that CT can do many things in 2015. 
We can not only measure volume, but in lung cases we can actually segment, and we can see 
the histologic characteristics by using segmentation techniques like CANARY that you’ll 
read from the Mayo Clinic that you can actually prognosticate based on a part-solid nodule.
I think you can apply these techniques to this and be able to see histologic, potentially 
morphologic changes that may characterize a hard bulky versus a soft bulky, which we all 
know the soft bulkies are what we always want.
DR. FRIEDBERG Because we all suffer, and I just presented the thing where I think we 
had an 18% surgical biopsy rate that said it was epithelial, and then you take out the whole 
thing and you have these sarcomatous elements, which I wouldn’t have operated had I 
known. And they do tend to be harder, at least has been empirically my experience, and I 
wonder if this would be the way to get around that.
Rusch et al.
Page 8
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DR. PASS I don’t know whether that will actually be that refined with regard to the CT 
being able to segment. I think that MRI is doing a pretty good job now of trying to do this, 
distinguishing biphasic from epithelial, and that’s going to continue.
I think that the ability of CT, besides volume, will be able to segment and see characteristics 
that are different that may add to the volumetric measurement with regard to prognosis.
DR. FRIEDBERG This was great. Thank you.
170. A MULTICENTER STUDY OF VOLUMETRIC COMPUTED 
TOMOGRAPHY FOR STAGING MALIGNANT PLEURAL MESOTHELIOMA. 
Paper presented by Harvey I. Pass, M.D., New York, New York. E-mail: 
harvey.pass@med.nyu.edu
Discussion by Wickii T. Vigneswaran, M.D., M.B.A., Maywood, Illinois.
E-mail: wickii.vigneswaran@lumc.edu
Dr. W. Vigneswaran (Maywood, Illinois):
We are currently looking at the density of tumor using Hounsfield units on the CT scan. 
There seems to be some correlation between the histology and the Hounsfield units in the 
CT scan. We hope to present the data soon.
170. A MULTICENTER STUDY OF VOLUMETRIC COMPUTED 
TOMOGRAPHY FOR STAGING MALIGNANT PLEURAL MESOTHELIOMA. 
Response by Harvey I. Pass, M.D., New York, New York. E-mail: 
harvey.pass@med.nyu.edu
DR. PASS I am glad that the IASLC is every year now. We’ll be able to hear that soon.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Lynn Shemanski, Ph.D. at Cancer Research and Biostatistics for her oversight of data analyses 
and review of the manuscript. The authors also thank Melody Owens, Ph.D. for her assistance in manuscript 
preparation. This article was authored on behalf of Malignant Mesothelioma Volumetric CT Study Group:
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center: Dr. Valerie Rusch, Dr. Michelle Ginsberg; University of Texas and MD 
Anderson Cancer Center: Dr. David Rice, Dr. Jeremy Erasmus; New York University Medical Center: Dr. Harvey 
Pass, Dr. David Naidich; The University of Chicago: Dr. Hedy L, Kindler, Dr. Samuel Armato, Dr. Christopher 
Strauss, Dr. Wickii Vigneshwaran; Penn Presbyterian Medical Center: Dr. Joseph Friedberg, Dr. Sharyn Katz; 
University of Toronto: Dr. Marc de Perrot, Dr. Demetrios Pastios; Cancer Research and Biostatistics: Dori Giroux, 
M.S., Lynn Shemanski, Ph.D., Alan Mitchell, M.S. This study was supported in part by the Mesothelioma Applied 
Research Foundation. Dr. Valerie Rusch’s work is supported in part by National Institutes of Health/National 
Cancer Institute Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA008748.
References
1. Rusch VW, Giroux D, Kennedy C, et al. Initial analysis of the International Association for the 
Study of Lung Cancer Mesothelioma Database. J Thorac Oncol. 2012; 7:1631–9. [PubMed: 
23070243] 
2. Rusch, VW. Pleural mesothelioma. In: Edge, SB.; Byrd, DR.; Compton, CC., et al., editors. Cancer 
Staging Manual. New York: American Joint Commission on Cancer; 2010. p. 271-7.
3. Pass HI, Temeck BK, Kranda K, et al. Preoperative tumor volume is associated with outcome in 
malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1998; 115:310–8. [PubMed: 9475525] 
Rusch et al.
Page 9
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 4. Sensakovic WF, Armato SG III, Straus C, et al. Computerized segmentation and measurement of 
malignant pleural mesothelioma. Med Phys. 2011; 38(1):238–44. [PubMed: 21361192] 
5. Pass HI, Brewer GJ, Dick R, et al. A phase II trial of tetrathiomolybdate after surgery for malignant 
mesothelioma: Final results. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008; 86:383–90. [PubMed: 18640301] 
6. Liu F, Zhao B, Krug LM, et al. Assessment of therapy responses and prediction of survival in 
malignant pleural mesothelioma through computer-aided volumetric measurement on computed 
tomography scans. J Thorac Oncol. 2010; 5:879–84. [PubMed: 20421814] 
7. Mollberg NM, Parsad NM, Armato SG III, et al. Three-dimensional stereoscopic volume rendering 
of malignant pleural mesothelioma. Int Surg. 2012; 97:65–70. [PubMed: 23102002] 
8. Frauenfelder T, Tutic M, Weder W, et al. Volumetry: An alternative to assess therapy response for 
malignant pleural mesothelioma? Eur Respir J. 2011; 38(1):162–8. [PubMed: 21273389] 
9. Ak G, Metintas M, Metintas S, et al. Three-dimensional evaluation of chemotherapy response in 
malignant pleural mesothelioma. Eur J Radiol. 2010; 74(1):130–5. [PubMed: 19268516] 
10. Armato SG III, Oxnard GR, Kocherginsky M, et al. Evaluation of semiautomated measurements of 
mesothelioma tumor thickness on CT scans. Acad Radiol. 2005; 12:1301–9. [PubMed: 16179207] 
11. Armato SG III, Oxnard GR, MacMahon H, et al. Measurement of mesothelioma on thoracic CT 
scans: A comparison of manual and compuer-assisted techniques. Med Phys. 2004; 31(5):1105–
15. [PubMed: 15191298] 
12. Gill RR, Richards WG, Yeap BY, et al. Epithelial malignant pleural mesothelioma after 
extrapleural pneumonectomy: stratification of survival with CT derived tumor volume. Am J 
Roentgenol. 2012; 198:359–63. [PubMed: 22268178] 
13. Rusch VW, Chansky K, Nowak A, et al. Initial analysis of the IASLC malignant pleural 
mesothelioma database:Implications for the 8th editions of the AJCC and UICC staging manuals. 
Journal of Thoracic Oncology. 2015; 10(9 Suppl 2):S223. (Abstract). 
14. Gill RR. North American multicenter volumetric CT study for clinical staging of malignant pleural 
mesothelioma: Feasibility and logistics of setting up a quantitative imaging study. J Thorac Oncol. 
2016 in press. 
15. Plathow C, Klopp M, Thieke C, et al. Therapy response in malignant pleural mesothelioma – role 
of MRI using RECIST, modified RECIST and volumetric approaches in comparison with CT. Eur 
Radiol. 2008; 18(8):1635–43. [PubMed: 18369634] 
16. Winer-Muram HT, Jennings SG, Meyer CA, et al. Effect of varying CT section width on 
volumetric measurement of lung tumors and application of compensatory equations. Radiology. 
2003; 229:184–94. [PubMed: 14519875] 
17. Nowak AK, Francis RJ, Phillips MJ, et al. A novel prognostic model for malignant mesothelioma 
incorporating quantitative FDG-PET imaging with clinical parameters. Clin Cancer Res. 2010; 
16(8):2409–17. [PubMed: 20371686] 
18. Giesel FL, Bischoff H, von Tengg-Kobligk H, et al. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI of malignant 
pleural mesothelioma. A feasibility study of noninvasive assessment, therapeutic follow-up, and 
possible predictor of improved outcome. Chest. 2006; 129:1570–6. [PubMed: 16778277] 
Rusch et al.
Page 10
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Study schema showing data flow for multicenter study of volumetric CT for staging 
malignant pleural mesothelioma
Rusch et al.
Page 11
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figures 2. 
a and b: Correlation between tumor volume and pathologic T stage (Figure 2a). There are 
too few T1 cases to provide reliable estimates for this group but otherwise data suggest that 
tumor volume increases with pathologic T category. Correlation between tumor volume and 
pathologic N stage (Figure 2b). Only N0, N2 and NX had sufficient numbers to provide 
reliable estimates but results indicate that volume measurements for N2 tumors are larger 
than those measured for N0 tumors.
Rusch et al.
Page 12
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Initial separation of tumor volumes into quartiles show that the best correlation between 
tumor volume and overall survival is seen with three groups of average volume 
measurements (91.2, 245.35 and 511.35cm3).
Rusch et al.
Page 13
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Rusch et al.
Page 14
Table 1
Data for clinical stage (as defined by the institutional radiologists), surgical/pathological stage
Number of cases (%)
Clinical Stage
 I
4 (3.1%)
 II
37 (28.7%)
 III
63 (48.8%)
 IV
18 (14.0%)
Pathological Stage
 I
4 (3.1%)
 II
9 (7.0%)
 III
54 (41.9%)
 IV
58 (45.0%)
Histological Subtype
 Epithelioid
105 (81.3%)
 Biphasic
12 (9.3%)
 Sarcomatoid or NOS1
12 (9.3%)
Incomplete staging data from participating sites at the level of T and N descriptor detail required by the IASLC electronic data capture system were 
available in a small number of cases (4 surgical/pathological stage). For study purposes, clinical T stage was assigned in all cases by the 
institutional radiologists and was again re-read in a blinded manner by the reference radiologists.
1NOS = not otherwise specified.
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Rusch et al.
Page 15
Table 2
Pairwise p values confirming visual observations in Figure 3.
Pairwise Comparison
Pairwise log-rank p-value
min – Q1 vs Q1 – Q2 (red vs green)
0.0018
Q1 – Q2 vs Q2 – Q3 (green vs yellow)
0.7350
Q2 – Q3 vs Q3 – max (yellow vs blue)
0.0639
Ann Thorac Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
