 Mental Health in Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender 
(LGBT) Youth
Stephen T. Russell1 and Jessica N. Fish2
1Department of Human Development and Family Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
Texas 78712
2Population Research Center, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712
Abstract
Today’s lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) youth come out at younger ages, and 
public support for LGBT issues has dramatically increased, so why do LGBT youth continue to be 
at high risk for compromised mental health? We provide an overview of the contemporary context 
for LGBT youth, followed by a review of current science on LGBT youth mental health. Research 
in the past decade has identified risk and protective factors for mental health, which point to 
promising directions for prevention, intervention, and treatment. Legal and policy successes have 
set the stage for advances in programs and practices that may foster LGBT youth mental health. 
Implications for clinical care are discussed, and important areas for new research and practice are 
identified.
Keywords
LGBT; sexual orientation; gender identity; youth
INTRODUCTION
In the period of only two decades, there has been dramatic emergence of public and 
scientific awareness of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) lives and issues. This 
awareness can be traced to larger sociocultural shifts in understandings of sexual and gender 
identities, including the emergence of the “gay rights” movement in the 1970s and the 
advent of HIV/AIDS in the 1980s. Yet the first public and research attention to young 
LGBTs focused explicitly on mental health: A small number of studies in the 1980s began to 
identify concerning rates of reported suicidal behavior among “gay” youth, and a US federal 
report on “gay youth suicide” (Gibson 1989) became controversial in both politics and 
research (Russell 2003). During the past two decades there have been not only dramatic 
shifts in public attitudes toward LGBT people and issues (Gallup 2015), but also an 
stephen.russell@utexas.edu, jessica.fish@utexas.edu
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the 
objectivity of this review.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Published in final edited form as:
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2016 March 28; 12: 465–487. doi:10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-021815-093153.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 emergence of research from multiple and diverse fields that has created what is now a solid 
foundation of knowledge regarding mental health in LGBT youth.
LGBT is an acronym used to refer to people who select those sexual or gender identity 
labels as personally meaningful for them, and sexual and gender identities are complex and 
historically situated (Diamond 2003, Rosario et al. 1996, Russell et al. 2009). Throughout 
this article, we use the acronym LGBT unless in reference to studies of subpopulations. 
Most of the knowledge base has focused on sexual identities (and historically mostly on gay 
and lesbian identities), with much less empirical study of mental health among transgender 
or gender-nonconforming youth. Sexual identities are informed by individuals’ romantic, 
sexual, or emotional attractions and behaviors, which may vary within persons (Rosario et 
al. 2006, Saewyc et al. 2004). Further, the meanings of LGBT and the experiences of LGBT 
people must be understood as intersecting with other salient personal, ethnic, cultural, and 
social identities (Consolacion et al. 2004, Kuper et al. 2014). An important caveat at the 
outset of this article is that much of the current knowledge base will be extended in coming 
decades to illuminate how general patterns of LGBT youth mental health identified to date 
are intersectionally situated, that is, how patterns of mental health may vary across not only 
sexual and gender identities, but also across racial and ethnic, cultural, and social class 
identities as well.
In this article, we review mental health in LGBT youth, focusing on both theoretical and 
empirical foundations of this body of research. We consider the state of knowledge of risk 
and protective factors, focusing on those factors that are specific to LGBT youth and their 
experiences as well as on those that are amenable to change through prevention or 
intervention. The conclusion considers legal, policy, and clinical implications of the current 
state of research. First, we provide context for understanding the lives of contemporary 
LGBT youth.
UNDERSTANDING CONTEMPORARY LGBT YOUTH
We begin by acknowledging a paradox or tension that underlies public discourse of LGBT 
youth and mental health. On the one hand there have been dramatic social changes regarding 
societal acceptance of LGBT people and issues, and yet on the other hand there has been 
unprecedented concern regarding LGBT youth mental health. If things are so much “better,” 
why are mental health concerns for LGBT youth urgent?
Historical trends in social acceptance in the United States show, for example, that 43% of 
US adults agreed that “gay or lesbian relations between consenting adults should be legal” in 
1977; by 2013 that number had grown to 66% (Gallup 2015). The pace of change in the 
United States and around the world has been dramatic: The first country to recognize 
marriage between same-sex couples was the Netherlands in 2001; as of this writing, 22 
countries recognize marriage for same-sex couples. The pink shaded area in Figure 1 (along 
the x-axis) illustrates this change in the increasing social acceptance of LGBT people across 
historical time. Seemingly orthogonal to this trend is the decreasing average age at which 
LGBT youth “come out” or disclose their sexual or gender identities to others (Floyd & 
Bakeman 2006). This is illustrated with data on the average ages of first disclosure or 
Russell and Fish
Page 2
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 coming out (the y-axis in Figure 1) taken from empirical studies of samples of LGB persons. 
Data from samples collected since 2000 show an average age of coming out at around 14 
(D’Augelli et al. 2010), whereas a decade before, the average age of coming out was 
approximately 16 (Rosario et al. 1996, Savin-Williams 1998), and a study from the 1970s 
recorded coming out at an average age of 20 (Troiden 1979). Although they appear 
orthogonal, the trends are complementary: Societal acceptance has provided the opportunity 
for youth to understand themselves in relation to the growing public visibility of LGBT 
people.
Contrast these trends with developmental patterns in child and adolescent interpersonal 
relations and social regulation, represented by blue shading in Figure 1. The early adolescent 
years are characterized by heightened self- and peer regulation regarding (especially) gender 
and sexuality norms (Mulvey & Killen 2015, Pasco 2011). During adolescence, youth in 
general report stronger prejudicial attitudes and more frequent homophobic behavior at 
younger ages (Poteat & Anderson 2012). Young adolescents may be developmentally 
susceptible to social exclusion behavior and attitudes, whereas older youth are able to make 
more sophisticated evaluative judgments regarding human rights, fairness, and prejudice 
(e.g., Horn 2006, Nesdale 2001). Therefore, today’s LGBT youth typically come out during 
a developmental period characterized by strong peer influence and opinion (Brechwald & 
Prinstein 2011, Steinberg & Monahan 2007) and are more likely to face peer victimization 
when they come out (D’Augelli et al. 2002, Pilkington & D’Augelli 1995). Such 
victimization has well-documented psychological consequences (Birkett et al. 2009, Poteat 
& Espelage 2007, Russell et al. 2014).
In sum, changes in societal acceptance of LGBT people have made coming out possible for 
contemporary youth, yet the age of coming out now intersects with the developmental period 
characterized by potentially intense interpersonal and social regulation of gender and 
sexuality, including homophobia. Given this social/historical context, and despite increasing 
social acceptance, mental health is a particularly important concern for LGBT youth.
MENTAL HEALTH IN LGBT YOUTH
To organize our review, we start by briefly presenting the historical and theoretical contexts 
of LGBT mental health. Next, we provide an overview of the prevalence of mental health 
disorders among LGBT youth in comparison to the general population, and various 
psychosocial characteristics (i.e., structural, interpersonal, and intrapersonal) that place 
LGBT youth at risk for poor mental health. We then highlight studies that focus on factors 
that protect and foster resilience among LGBT youth.
Prior to the 1970s, the American Psychiatric Association’s (APA’s) Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) listed homosexuality as a “sociopathic 
personality disturbance” (Am. Psychiatr. Assoc. 1952). Pioneering studies on the prevalence 
of same-sex sexuality (Ford & Beach 1951; Kinsey et al. 1948, 1953) and psychological 
comparisons between heterosexual and gay men (Hooker 1957) fostered a change in 
attitudes from the psychological community and motivated the APA’s removal of 
homosexuality as a mental disorder in 1973 (although all conditions related to same-sex 
Russell and Fish
Page 3
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 attraction were not removed until 1987). Over the past 50 years, the psychological discourse 
regarding same-sex sexuality shifted from an understanding that homosexuality was 
intrinsically linked with poor mental health toward understanding the social determinants of 
LGBT mental health. Recent years have seen similar debates about the diagnoses related to 
gender identity that currently remain in the DSM (see sidebar Changes in Gender Identity 
Diagnoses in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders).
Minority stress theory (Meyer 1995, 2003) has provided a foundational framework for 
understanding sexual minority mental health disparities (Inst. Med. 2011). It posits that 
sexual minorities experience distinct, chronic stressors related to their stigmatized identities, 
including victimization, prejudice, and discrimination. These distinct experiences, in 
addition to everyday or universal stressors, disproportionately compromise the mental health 
and well-being of LGBT people. Generally, Meyer (2003) posits three stress processes from 
distal to proximal: (a) objective or external stressors, which include structural or 
institutionalized discrimination and direct interpersonal interactions of victimization or 
prejudice; (b) one’s expectations that victimization or rejection will occur and the vigilance 
related to these expectations; and (c) the internalization of negative social attitudes (often 
referred to as internalized homophobia). Extensions of this work also focus on how 
intrapersonal psychological processes (e.g., appraisals, coping, and emotional regulation) 
mediate the link between experiences of minority stress and psychopathology (see 
Hatzenbuehler 2009). Thus, it is important to recognize the structural circumstances within 
which youth are embedded and that their interpersonal experiences and intrapersonal 
resources should be considered as potential sources of both risk and resilience.
We illustrate multilevel ecological contexts in Figure 2. The young person appears as the 
focus, situated in the center and defined by intrapersonal characteristics. This is surrounded 
by interpersonal contexts (which, for example, include daily interactions with family and 
peers) that exist within social and cultural contexts. The arrow along the bottom of the figure 
suggests the historically changing nature of the contexts of youth’s lives. Diagonal arrows 
that transverse the figure acknowledge interactions across contexts, and thus implications for 
promoting LGBT youth mental health at the levels of policy, community, and clinical 
practice, which we consider at the end of the manuscript. We use this model to organize the 
following review of LGBT youth mental health.
Prevalence of Mental Health Problems Among LGBT Youth
Adolescence is a critical period for mental health because many mental disorders show onset 
during and directly following this developmental period (Kessler et al. 2005, 2007). Recent 
US estimates of adolescent past-year mental health diagnoses indicate that 10% demonstrate 
a mood disorder, 25% an anxiety disorder, and 8.3% a substance use disorder (Kessler et al. 
2012). Further, suicide is the third leading cause of death for youth ages 10 to 14 and the 
second leading cause of death for those ages 15 to 24 (CDC 2012).
The inclusion of sexual attraction, behavior, and identity measures in population-based 
studies (e.g., the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health and the CDC’s 
Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System) has greatly improved knowledge of the 
prevalence of LGB mental health disparities and the mechanisms that contribute to these 
Russell and Fish
Page 4
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 inequalities for both youth and adults; there remains, however, a critical need for the 
development and inclusion of measures to identify transgender people, which thwarts more 
complete understanding of mental health among transgender youth. Such data illustrate 
overwhelming evidence that LGB persons are at greater risk for poor mental health across 
developmental stages. Studies using adult samples indicate elevated rates of depression and 
mood disorders (Bostwick et al. 2010, Cochran et al. 2007), anxiety disorders (Cochran et al. 
2003, Gilman et al. 2001), posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (Hatzenbuehler et al. 
2009a), alcohol use and abuse (Burgard et al. 2005), and suicide ideation and attempts, as 
well as psychiatric comorbidity (Cochran et al. 2003, Gilman et al. 2001). Studies of 
adolescents trace the origins of these adult sexual orientation mental health disparities to the 
adolescent years: Multiple studies demonstrate that disproportionate rates of distress, 
symptomatology, and behaviors related to these disorders are present among LGBT youth 
prior to adulthood (Fish & Pasley 2015, Needham 2012, Ueno 2010).
US and international studies consistently conclude that LGBT youth report elevated rates of 
emotional distress, symptoms related to mood and anxiety disorders, self-harm, suicidal 
ideation, and suicidal behavior when compared to heterosexual youth (Eskin et al. 2005, 
Fergusson et al. 2005, Fleming et al. 2007, Marshal et al. 2011), and that compromised 
mental health is a fundamental predictor of a host of behavioral health disparities evident 
among LGBT youth (e.g., substance use, abuse, and dependence; Marshal et al. 2008). In a 
recent meta-analysis, Marshal et al. (2011) reported that sexual minority youth were almost 
three times as likely to report suicidality; these investigators also noted a statistically 
moderate difference in depressive symptoms compared to heterosexual youth.
Despite the breadth of literature highlighting disparities in symptoms and distress, relatively 
lacking are studies that explore the presence and prevalence of mental health disorders or 
diagnoses among LGBT youth. Using a birth cohort sample of Australian youth 14 to 21 
years old, Fergusson and colleagues (1999) found that LGB youth were more likely to report 
suicidal thoughts or attempts, and experienced more major depression, generalized anxiety 
disorders, substance abuse/dependence, and comorbid diagnoses, compared to heterosexual 
youth. Results from a more recent US study that interviewed a community sample of LGBT 
youth ages 16 to 20 indicated that nearly one-third of participants met the diagnostic criteria 
for a mental disorder and/or reported a suicide attempt in their lifetime (Mustanski et al. 
2010). When comparing these findings to mental health diagnosis rates in the general 
population, the difference is stark: Almost 18% of lesbian and gay youth participants met the 
criteria for major depression and 11.3% for PTSD in the previous 12 months, and 31% of the 
LGBT sample reported suicidal behavior at some point in their life. National rates for these 
diagnoses and behaviors among youth are 8.2%, 3.9%, and 4.1%, respectively (Kessler et al. 
2012, Nock et al. 2013).
Studies also show differences among LGB youth. For example, studies on LGB youth 
suicide have found stronger associations between sexual orientation and suicide attempts for 
sexual minority males comparative to sexual minority females (Fergusson et al. 2005, 
Garofalo et al. 1999), including a meta-analysis using youth and adult samples (King et al. 
2008). Conversely, lesbian and bisexual female youth are more likely to exhibit substance 
use problems when compared to heterosexual females (Needham 2012, Ziyadeh et al. 2007) 
Russell and Fish
Page 5
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and sexual minority males (Marshal et al. 2008); however, some reports on longitudinal 
trends indicate that these differences in disparities diminish over time because sexual 
minority males “catch up” and exhibit faster accelerations of substance use in the transition 
to early adulthood (Hatzenbuehler et al. 2008a).
Although not explicitly tested in all studies, results often indicate that bisexual youth (or 
those attracted to both men and women) are at greater risk for poor mental health when 
compared to heterosexual and solely same-sex-attracted counterparts (Marshal et al. 2011, 
Saewyc et al. 2008, Talley et al. 2014). In their meta-analysis, Marshal and colleagues 
(2011) found that bisexual youth reported more suicidality than lesbian and gay youth. 
Preliminary research also suggests that youth questioning their sexuality report greater levels 
of depression than those reporting other sexual identities (heterosexual as well as LGB; 
Birkett et al. 2009) and show worse psychological adjustment in response to bullying and 
victimization than heterosexual or LGB-identified students (Poteat et al. 2009).
Relatively lacking is research that explicitly tests racial/ethnic differences in LGBT youth 
mental health. As with general population studies, researchers have observed mental health 
disparities across sexual orientation within specific racial/ethnic groups (e.g., Borowsky et 
al. 2001). Consolacion and colleagues (2004) found that among African American youth, 
those who were same-sex attracted had higher rates of suicidal thoughts and depressive 
symptoms and lower levels of self-esteem than their African American heterosexual peers, 
and Latino same-sex-attracted youth were more likely to report depressive symptoms than 
Latino heterosexual youth.
Even fewer are studies that simultaneously assess the interaction between sexual orientation 
and racial/ethnic identities (Inst. Med. 2011), especially among youth. One study assessed 
differences between white and Latino LGBQ youth (Ryan et al. 2009) and found that Latino 
males reported more depression and suicidal ideation compared to white males, whereas 
rates were higher for white females compared to Latinas. Although not always in relation to 
mental health outcomes, researchers discuss the possibility of cumulative risk as the result of 
managing multiple marginalized identities (Díaz et al. 2006, Meyer et al. 2008). However, 
some empirical evidence suggests the contrary: that black sexual minority male youth report 
better psychological health (fewer major depressive episodes and less suicidal ideation and 
alcohol abuse or dependence) than their white sexual minority male counterparts (Burns et 
al. 2015). Still other studies find no racial/ethnic differences in the prevalence of mental 
health disorders and symptoms within sexual minority samples (Kertzner et al. 2009, 
Mustanski et al. 2010).
In summary, clear and consistent evidence indicates that global mental health problems are 
elevated among LGB youth, and similar results are found for the smaller number of studies 
that use diagnostic criteria to measure mental health. Among sexual minorities, there are 
preliminary but consistent indications that bisexual youth are among those at higher risk for 
mental health problems. The general dearth of empirical research on gender and racial/ethnic 
differences in mental health status among LGBT youth, as well as contradictory findings, 
indicates the need for more research. Specific research questions and hypotheses aimed at 
understanding the intersection of multiple (minority) identities are necessary to better 
Russell and Fish
Page 6
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 understand diversity in the lived experiences of LGBT youth and their potentials for risk and 
resilience in regard to mental health and well-being (Russell 2003, Saewyc 2011).
Risk Factors
Two approaches are often used to frame and explore mechanisms that exacerbate risk for 
LGBT youth (Russell 2005, Saewyc 2011). First is to examine the greater likelihood of 
previously identified universal risk factors (those that are risk factors for all youth), such as 
family conflict or child maltreatment; LGBT youth score higher on many of the critical 
universal risk factors for compromised mental health, such as conflict with parents and 
substance use and abuse (Russell 2003). The second approach explores LGBT-specific 
factors such as stigma and discrimination and how these compound everyday stressors to 
exacerbate poor outcomes. Here we focus on the latter and discuss prominent risk factors 
identified in the field—the absence of institutionalized protections, biased-based bullying, 
and family rejection—as well as emerging research on intrapersonal characteristics 
associated with mental health vulnerability.
At the social/cultural level, the lack of support in the fabric of the many institutions that 
guide the lives of LGBT youth (e.g., their schools, families, faith communities) limits their 
rights and protections and leaves them more vulnerable to experiences that may compromise 
their mental health. To date, only 19 states and the District of Columbia have fully 
enumerated antibullying laws that include specific protections for sexual and gender 
minorities (GLSEN 2015), despite the profound effects that these laws have on the 
experiences of youth in schools (e.g., Hatzenbuehler et al. 2014). LGBT youth in schools 
with enumerated nondiscrimination or antibullying policies (those that explicitly include 
actual or perceived sexual orientation and gender identity or expression) report fewer 
experiences of victimizations and harassment than those who attend schools without these 
protections (Kosciw et al. 2014). As a result, lesbian and gay youth living in counties with 
fewer sexual orientation and gender identity (SOGI)-specific antibullying policies are twice 
as likely to report past-year suicide attempts than youth living in areas where these policies 
were more commonplace (Hatzenbuehler & Keyes 2013).
Along with school environments, it is also important to consider youths’ community context. 
LGBT youth who live in neighborhoods with a higher concentration of LGBT-motivated 
assault hate crimes also report greater likelihood of suicidal ideation and attempts than those 
living in neighborhoods that report a low concentration of these offenses (Duncan & 
Hatzenbuehler 2014). Further, studies show that youth who live in communities that are 
generally supportive of LGBT rights [i.e., those with more protections for same-sex couples, 
greater number of registered Democrats, presence of gay-straight alliances (GSAs) in 
schools, and SOGI-specific nondiscrimination and antibullying policies] are less likely to 
attempt suicide even after controlling for other risk indicators, such as a history of physical 
abuse, depressive symptomatology, drinking behaviors, and peer victimization 
(Hatzenbuehler 2011). Such findings demonstrate that pervasive LGBT discrimination at the 
broader social/cultural level and the lack of institutionalized support have direct implications 
for the mental health and well-being of sexual minority youth.
Russell and Fish
Page 7
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 At the interpersonal level, an area that has garnered new attention is the distinct negative 
effect of biased-based victimization compared to general harassment (Poteat & Russell 
2013). Researchers have demonstrated that biased-based bullying (i.e., bullying or 
victimization due to one’s perceived or actual identities including, but not limited to, race, 
ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, and disability status) 
amplifies the effects of victimization on negative outcomes. When compared to non-biased-
based victimization, youth who experience LGB-based victimization report higher levels of 
depression, suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, substance use, and truancy (Poteat et al. 
2011, Russell et al. 2012a), regardless of whether these experiences are in person or via the 
Internet (Sinclair et al. 2012). Retrospective reports of biased-based victimization are also 
related to psychological distress and overall well-being in young adulthood, suggesting that 
these experiences in school carry forward to later developmental stages (Toomey et al. 
2011). Importantly, although rates of bullying decrease over the course of the adolescent 
years, this trend is less pronounced for gay and bisexual compared to heterosexual males, 
leaving these youth vulnerable to these experiences for longer periods of time (Robinson et 
al. 2013). Further, these vulnerabilities to SOGI-biased-based bullying are not unique to 
LGBT youth: Studies also indicate that heterosexual youth report poor mental and 
behavioral health as the result of homophobic victimization (Poteat et al. 2011, Robinson & 
Espelage 2012). Thus, strategies to reduce discriminatory bullying will improve well-being 
for all youth, but especially those with marginalized identities.
Positive parental and familial relationships are crucial for youth well-being (Steinberg & 
Duncan 2002), but many LGBT youth fear coming out to parents (Potoczniak et al. 2009, 
Savin-Williams & Ream 2003) and may experience rejection from parents because of these 
identities (D’Augelli et al. 1998, Ryan et al. 2009). This propensity for rejection is 
evidenced in the disproportionate rates of LGBT homeless youth in comparison to the 
general population (an estimated 40% of youth served by drop-in centers, street outreach 
programs, and housing programs identify as LGBT; Durso & Gates 2012). Although not all 
youth experience family repudiation, those who do are at greater risk for depressive 
symptoms, anxiety, and suicide attempts (D’Augelli 2002, Rosario et al. 2009). Further, 
those who fear rejection from family and friends also report higher levels of depression and 
anxiety (D’Augelli 2002). In an early study of family disclosure, D’Augelli and colleagues 
(1998) found that compared to those who had not disclosed, youth who had told family 
members about their LGB identity often reported more verbal and physical harassment from 
family members and experiences of suicidal thoughts and behavior. More recently, Ryan and 
colleagues (2009) found that compared to those reporting low levels of family rejection, 
individuals who experienced high levels of rejection were dramatically more likely to report 
suicidal ideation, to attempt suicide, and to score in the clinical range for depression.
Finally, some youth may have fewer intrapersonal skills and resources to cope with minority 
stress experiences or may develop maladaptive coping strategies as a result of stress related 
to experiences of discrimination and prejudice (Hatzenbuehler 2009, Meyer 2003). 
Hatzenbuehler and colleagues (2008b) found that same-sex-attracted adolescents were more 
likely to ruminate and demonstrated poorer emotional awareness compared to heterosexual 
peers; this lack of emotion regulation was associated with later symptoms of depression and 
anxiety. Similarly, LGB youth were more likely to experience rumination and suppress 
Russell and Fish
Page 8
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 emotional responses on days that they experienced minority stressors such as discrimination 
or prejudice, and these maladaptive coping behaviors, including rumination, were related to 
greater levels of psychological distress (Hatzenbuehler et al. 2008b).
A solid body of research has identified LGBT youth mental health risk factors at both the 
structural or societal levels as well as in interpersonal interactions with family and peers 
when they are characterized by minority stress. Less attention has focused on intrapersonal 
characteristics of LGB youth that may be accentuated by minority stress, but several new 
studies show promising results for identifying vulnerability as well as strategies for clinical 
practice.
Protective Factors
Despite adversity, most LGBT youth develop into healthy and productive adults (Russell & 
Joyner 2001, Saewyc 2011), yet research has focused predominantly on risk compared to 
protective factors or resilience (Russell 2005). Here we discuss contextual factors that affirm 
LGBT youths’ identities, including school policies and programs, family acceptance, dating, 
and the ability to come out and be out.
Studies clearly demonstrate the benefit of affirming and protective school environments for 
LGBT youth mental health. Youth living in states with enumerated antibullying laws that 
include sexual orientation and gender identity report less homophobic victimization and 
harassment than do students who attend schools in states without these protections (Kosciw 
et al. 2014). Further, mounting evidence documents the supportive role of GSAs in schools 
(Poteat et al. 2012, Toomey et al. 2011). GSAs are school-based, student-led clubs open to 
all youth who support LGBT students; GSAs aim to reduce prejudice and harassment within 
the school environment (Goodenow et al. 2006). LGBT students in schools with GSAs and 
SOGI resources often report feeling safer and are less likely to report depressive symptom, 
substance use, and suicidal thoughts and behaviors in comparison with students in schools 
lacking such resources (Goodenow et al. 2006, Hatzenbuehler et al. 2014, Poteat et al. 
2012). The benefits of these programs are also seen at later developmental stages: Toomey 
and colleagues (2011) found that youth who attended schools with GSAs, participated in a 
GSA, and perceived that their GSA encouraged safety also reported better psychological 
health during young adulthood. Further, these experiences with GSAs diminished some of 
the negative effects of LGBT victimization on young adult well-being.
Along with studies that highlight the benefits of enumerative policies and GSAs, research 
also demonstrates that LGBT-focused policy and inclusive curriculums are associated with 
better psychological adjustment for LGBT students (Black et al. 2012). LGBT-inclusive 
curriculums introduce specific historical events, persons, and information about the LGBT 
community into student learning (Snapp et al. 2015a,b) and have been shown to improve 
students’ sense of safety (Toomey et al. 2012) and feelings of acceptance (GLSEN 2011) 
and to reduce victimization in schools (Kosciw et al. 2012). Further, LGBT-specific training 
for teachers, staff, and administrators fosters understanding and empathy for LGBT students 
and is associated with more frequent adult intervention in biased-based bullying (Greytak et 
al. 2013, Greytak & Kosciw 2014). Beyond formal school curriculum and clubs, recent 
studies document the ways that such school strategies influence interpersonal relationships 
Russell and Fish
Page 9
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 within schools through supportive peers and friends. For example, Poteat (2015) found that 
youth who engage in more LGBT-based discussions with peers and who have LGBT friends 
are more likely to participate in LGBT-affirming behavior and intervene when hearing 
homophobic remarks (see also Kosciw et al. 2012).
At the interpersonal level, studies of LGBT youth have consistently shown that parental and 
peer support are related to positive mental health, self-acceptance, and well-being (Sheets & 
Mohr 2009, Shilo & Savaya 2011). D’Augelli (2003) found that LGB youth who retained 
friends after disclosing their sexual identity had higher levels of self-esteem, lower levels of 
depressive symptomatology, and fewer suicidal thoughts than those who had lost friends as a 
result of coming out. Similarly, LGB youth who reported having sexual minority friends 
experienced less depression over time, and the presence of LGB friends attenuated the 
effects of victimization (Ueno 2005). Noteworthy is support specifically related to and 
affirming one’s sexual orientation and gender identity, which appears to be especially 
beneficial for youth (compared to general support; Doty et al. 2010, Ryan et al. 2010). 
Snapp and colleagues (2015c) found that sexuality-related social support from parents, 
friends, and community during adolescence each uniquely contributed to positive well-being 
in young adulthood, with parental support providing the most benefit. Unfortunately, many 
LGBT youth report lower levels of sexuality-specific support in comparison to other forms 
of support, especially from parents (Doty et al. 2010), and transgender youth report lower 
social support from parents than their sexual minority counterparts (Ryan et al. 2010). 
Studies that explicitly explore the benefits of LGB-specific support show that sexuality-
specific support buffers the negative effects of minority stressors (Doty et al. 2010, Rosario 
et al. 2009). For example, Ryan et al. (2010) found that parents’ support of sexual 
orientation and gender expression was related to higher levels self-esteem, less depression, 
and fewer reports of suicidal ideation or suicide attempts.
Romantic relationships are understood as normative and important developmental 
experiences for adolescents (Collins et al. 2009), but LGBT youth may experience a number 
of social barriers related to dating same-sex partners that may have implications for their 
development during adolescence and at later stages of the life course (Frost 2011, Mustanski 
et al. 2014, Russell et al. 2012b). These barriers include potentially limited access to 
romantic partners, minority stressors specific to pursuing relationships with same-sex 
partners, and the restriction of same-sex romantic behavior in educational settings. These 
obstacles, in turn, can steer youth to other social settings, such as bars and clubs, that may 
increase risk for poor health and health behavior (Mustanski et al. 2014). LGB youth report 
more fear and less agency in finding suitable romantic partners and dating in general 
(Diamond & Lucas 2004). Yet findings demonstrate that dating same-sex partners is related 
to improved mental health and lower substance use behavior for LGB youth (Russell & 
Consolacion 2003, Russell et al. 2002). Results from a three-year longitudinal study showed 
that in comparison to LGB youth who dated other-sex partners, those who dated same-sex 
partners experienced an increase in self-esteem and a decrease in internalized homophobia 
for men and women, respectively (Bauermeister et al. 2010). In a more recent study, Baams 
and colleagues (2014) found that the presence of a romantic partner buffered the effects of 
minority stress on the psychological well-being of same-sex-attracted youth.
Russell and Fish
Page 10
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Finally, coming out as LGBT involves dynamic interplay between intrapersonal 
development and interpersonal interaction and disclosure. Research consistently shows that 
coming out puts youth at greater risk for verbal and physical harassment (D’Augelli et al. 
2002, Kosciw et al. 2014) and the loss of close friends (D’Augelli 2003, Diamond & Lucas 
2004); however, studies of adults who disclose their sexual identities to others show positive 
psychosocial adjustment (Luhtanen 2002, Morris et al. 2001) and greater social support from 
family members (D’Augelli 2002). In a recent study, Russell et al. (2014) found that despite 
higher risk for LGBT-based school victimization, those who were out during high school 
reported lower levels of depression and greater overall well-being in young adulthood (the 
results did not differ based on gender or ethnicity). Further, those who reported greater 
concealment of their LGBT identity were still susceptible to victimization but did not show 
the same benefits in psychosocial adjustment. Such findings demonstrate the positive 
benefits of coming out in high school despite the risks associated with discriminatory 
victimization (see sidebar Supporting Youth Through Coming Out).
In summary, there is clear evidence for compromised mental health for LGBT youth, and 
research in the past decade has identified both risk and protective factors at multiple levels of 
influence. Important gaps remain, for example, in studies that identify intrapersonal 
strengths or coping strategies that may enable some LGBT youth to overcome minority 
stress. Yet this body of research has begun to provide guidance for action at multiple 
contextual levels.
IMPLICATIONS
Dramatic advances in understanding LGBT youth mental health during the past decade 
(Saewyc 2011) offer multiple implications for actions. Returning to Figure 2, the contexts 
that shape the lives of LGBT youth have corresponding implications for supporting mental 
health at multiple levels, from laws to clinical practice. Existing research shows encouraging 
findings regarding laws and policies and for education and community programs, yet we are 
only just beginning to build a research base that provides strong grounding for clinical 
practice.
Law and Policy
Although only a small number of studies directly address the connection among laws, 
policies, and mental health, it is widely understood that laws and policies provide the broad, 
societal-level contexts that shape minority stress and, consequently, mental health. Studies 
have documented higher psychiatric disorders among LGB adults living in US states that 
banned marriage for same-sex couples (Hatzenbuehler et al. 2010) and higher psychological 
distress for LGB adults who lived in states in the months following an election cycle where 
constitutional amendments to ban marriage for same-sex couples were on the ballot 
(Rostosky et al. 2009). In recent years, several states have debated or enacted legislation 
specifically relevant for LGBT youth mental health. At one extreme, the Tennessee 
legislature failed to pass the “Don’t Say Gay” bill, which would have made it illegal for 
teachers to discuss homosexuality with students; at the other, the “Mental Health Services 
for At-Risk Youth” bill in California allows youth ages 12 to 17 to consent to mental health 
Russell and Fish
Page 11
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 treatment without parental permission and was designed to enable LGBT youth to seek 
mental health services independent of parental consent. As of this writing, several US states 
have debated or banned sexual orientation and gender identity change efforts for minors 
(often called conversion or reparative therapies). These and other legislative efforts likely 
have mental health implications for LGBT youth, but no studies to date have specifically 
documented the link between these laws and youth mental health. However, a number of 
studies have documented the association of local laws and policies with LGBT youth mental 
health. A study of youth in Oregon showed that multiple indicators of the social environment 
were linked to lower suicide risk for LGB students, including the proportion of same-sex 
couples and registered Democrats at the county level (Hatzenbuehler 2011, Hatzenbuehler & 
Keyes 2013).
School and Community Programs and Practice
Because school attendance is mandatory for youth, and because of consistent evidence of 
discriminatory bullying and unsafe school climate for LGBT students, education policy is 
particularly relevant for LGBT mental health. A strong body of research has identified 
school policies and practices that promote positive school climate and individual student 
well-being, including feelings of safety, achievement, and positive mental health. Strong 
evidence indicates that the presence of SOGI-inclusive nondiscrimination and antibullying 
laws or policies is associated with student safety and adjustment (Hatzenbuehler & Keyes 
2013, Russell et al. 2010) and provides a foundation that enables school teachers, 
administrators, and other personnel to establish an institutional climate that supports the 
policies and practices noted above (Russell & McGuire 2008). At the level of educational 
programs and practice, teachers clearly play a key role in establishing a positive school 
climate for LGBT and all students (Russell et al. 2001), and there is new evidence regarding 
the benefits of teacher training and classroom curricula that are explicitly inclusive of LGBT 
people and issues (Snapp et al. 2015a,b) in promoting LGBT student well-being. Finally, at 
the level of individual student daily experiences and interpersonal interactions, the presence 
and visibility of information and support on LGBT issues in school, as well as the presence 
of student-led groups or clubs such as GSAs, are strongly correlated with more affirming 
interactions with peers, positive school climate, and better student adjustment (Poteat 2012, 
2015; Toomey et al. 2011).
This body of evidence regarding school policies represents a major advance in the past 
decade; much less is known about effective program and practice strategies for community-
based organizations (CBOs), even though the number of CBOs that specialize in LGBT 
youth or offer focused programs for LGBT youth has grown dramatically in the United 
States and around the world. Clearly, many school-based strategies may be transferable to 
the CBO context; given the numbers of programs and youth who attend CBOs, an important 
area for future research will be identifying guiding principles for effective community-based 
programs for LGBT youth.
Clinical Practice
There is a significant body of clinical writing on LGBT mental health (Pachankis & 
Goldfried 2004), including guidelines for LGBT-affirmative clinical practice from many 
Russell and Fish
Page 12
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 professional associations (see Am. Psychol. Assoc. 2012, McNair & Hegarty 2010; see also 
the Related Resources at the end of this article). These resources typically focus on the 
general population of LGBT persons and may attend to contexts for which there are LGBT-
specific challenges: identity development, couples relationships, parenting, and families of 
origin (Pachankis & Goldfried 2004). Although most existing guidelines are not specifically 
designed for youth, the recommendations and discussions of adult LGBT needs are typically 
relevant for LGBT youth. These guidelines, drawn from the best available descriptive 
evidence from the research on LGBT mental health, have been important for establishing a 
professional context that challenges heterosexism and bias in clinical practice (Pachankis & 
Goldfried 2004).
We review two broad areas of emerging research evidence related to clinical practice. First, 
promising new research points to specific mental health constructs that appear to be key 
indicators of compromised mental health for LGBT persons and offer pathways for 
intervention and treatment. Second, a small number of very new studies document the 
clinical efficacy of specific treatment strategies to address LGBT mental health (including 
for youth).
Psychological mechanisms and processes—An emerging body of studies has been 
designed to investigate constructs related to minority stress and other theoretical models 
relevant to LGBT youth mental health. Such constructs—rumination, rejection sensitivity, 
and perceived burdensomeness—have implications for approaches to LGBT-affirmative 
mental health clinical practice. First, a recent set of studies provides evidence for a causal 
role of rumination in the association between minority stress and psychological distress 
(Hatzenbuehler et al. 2009b): Drawing from two adult samples (average ages in the early 
twenties), two studies confirmed that LGB participants who reported more stigma-related 
stressors also experienced more psychological distress, but that the association was strongest 
for those who reported more rumination following stigma-related stress. These findings 
highlight the role of emotion regulation in minority stress processes and the potential of 
clinical approaches that directly address rumination and other maladaptive cognitive 
responses related to LGBT stigma.
Another recent study tested two key mechanisms from the interpersonal psychological 
theory of suicide (perceived burdensomeness and thwarted belongingness; Joiner et al. 2009) 
informed by minority stress in a large sample of LGB youth (Baams et al. 2015). Findings 
showed that the link between minority stress (measured as LGB victimization and stress 
related to coming out) and mental health (measured as depression and suicide ideation) was 
mediated by perceived burdensomeness. That is, experiences of minority stress prompted 
youth to feel that they were a burden to the important people in their lives, and it was these 
feelings of being a burden that were key correlates of depression and suicide ideation. 
Further, the association between thwarted belonging and mental health was fully explained 
by perceived burdensomeness. This latter finding is important because much of the discourse 
on LGBT mental health has focused on belonging (i.e., social isolation, family rejection, or 
lack of school belonging), yet results from this study suggest that belonging may not be the 
critical mechanism. Rather, LGBT-specific approaches to decrease feelings of being a 
burden to others may be a particularly fruitful area for clinical investigation.
Russell and Fish
Page 13
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Finally, a recent study conceptualized gay-related rejection sensitivity as an indicator of 
psychological functioning (Pachankis et al. 2008): In a sample of adult gay men, experiences 
of parental sexual orientation–related rejection was a strong predictor of gay-related 
rejection sensitivity, especially among those who reported high levels of internalized 
homophobia. Results of another study of black, Hispanic, LGB, and female adults’ 
responses to biased-based discrimination show that those who fail to acknowledge 
discrimination, or who avoid discussing discriminatory experiences, are more likely to have 
psychiatric disorders (McLaughlin et al. 2010). Although these studies were conducted with 
adults (and in one case was limited to gay men), results point to the potential of clinical 
interventions that focus on analysis of the meanings and experiences associated with stigma-
related rejection. Thus, this emerging body of research identifies several psychological 
mechanisms that may be strategic constructs to address in clinical settings with LGBT 
youth.
Approaches to treatment—A small number of studies have begun to test treatment 
approaches that address the specific mental health needs of LGBT populations, including 
youth. First, although not specific to clinical treatment per se, one study directly asked LGB 
adolescents with clinically significant depressive and suicidal symptoms to describe the 
causes of their psychological distress (Diamond et al. 2011). Interviews with 10 youth 
identified family rejection of sexual orientation, extrafamilial LGB-related victimization, 
and non-LGB-related negative family life events as the most common causes of 
psychological distress. Most adolescents in the study also reported social support from at 
least one family member and from peers or other adults. Several clinically relevant 
considerations emerged from the interviews, including youths’ wishes that parents were 
more accepting, and a willingness to participate in family therapy with their parents.
The clinical literature also includes a number of case studies (e.g., Walsh & Hope 2010), as 
well as investigations of promising approaches for clinical intervention. For example, a 
study of 77 gay male college students showed that young gay men’s psychosocial 
functioning (including openness with their sexual orientation) was improved through 
expressive writing that targeted gay-related stress, especially for those who reported lower 
social support or who wrote about more severe topics (Pachankis & Goldfried 2010).
A new study by Pachankis and colleagues (2015) reports on the first randomized clinical 
control trial to assess the efficacy of an adapted cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) 
approach with young adult gay and bisexual men. The 10-session CBT-based intervention 
(called Effective Skills to Empower Effective Men, or ESTEEM) focused on stigma-related 
stressors. Participants reported decreases in depressive symptoms and alcohol use six 
months after treatment. Notably, the treatment also reduced sensitivity to rejection, 
internalized homophobia, and rumination, and increased emotional regulation, perceived 
social support, and assertiveness. The results are exciting and offer the potential for 
adaptation for women and for LGBT youth.
The research on the critical role of parental rejection and acceptance in LGBT youth mental 
health (Ryan et al. 2009, 2010) has led to recommendations to educate and engage parents 
and family in interventions that affirm their LGBT identities (Subst. Abuse Ment. Health 
Russell and Fish
Page 14
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Serv. Admin. 2014). Diamond and colleagues (2012) presented preliminary results from the 
first empirically tested family-based treatment designed specifically for suicidal LGB 
adolescents. The treatment was based on an adaptation of attachment-based family therapy 
that included time for parents to process feelings regarding their child’s sexual orientation 
and raise awareness of their undermining responses to their child’s sexual orientation. 
Significant decreases in suicidal ideation and depressive symptoms among adolescent 
participants coupled with high levels of retention demonstrated the success of this approach 
to treating LGB adolescents and their families.
In summary, few empirical studies have tested clinical approaches to improving the mental 
health of LGBT youth. However, the small number of existing studies are grounded in the 
current literature on risk and protective factors as well as psychological mechanisms 
implicated in minority stress, and they represent an important basis for future clinical 
research and practice.
CONCLUSIONS AND NEXT STEPS
Much has been learned in the past decade to advance understanding of LGBT youth mental 
health. Societal changes have led to legal, policy, and structural changes, most of which will 
ultimately improve the lives and mental health of LGBT youth. But structural change takes 
time, and in the interim, individual LGBT youth need support and care in order to thrive. 
There have been important advances in theoretical understandings of LGBT lives, most 
notably through the framework of minority stress. These advances, and associated empirical 
research on key mechanisms and processes, point to the relevance of approaches that directly 
address and interrogate minority stress in the lives of youth and how minority stress 
processes affect youth well-being. At the same time, given the magnitude of mental health 
problems experienced by LGBT youth, it is alarming that there are so few empirically 
supported approaches for working with LGBT youth across a variety of settings, ranging 
from schools and CBOs to clinical treatment.
There have been extraordinary changes in public understanding and acceptance of LGBT 
people and issues, and significant advances have been made in scientific understanding of 
LGBT youth mental health. At the same time, critical gaps in knowledge continue to prevent 
the most effective policies, programs, and clinical care from addressing mental health for 
LGBT young people. We have outlined strategies at multiple levels for which there is 
encouraging evidence and which provide the basis for action. As scholars and clinicians 
continue work to identify strategies at multiple levels to address LGBT youth mental health
—from policy to clinical practice—the existing research already provides a basis for action: 
Across fields and professions, everyone can be advocates for the legal, policy, program, and 
clinical changes that promise to improve mental health for LGBT youth.
Glossary
LGBT
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender; some scholars include Q to 
refer to queer or questioning
Russell and Fish
Page 15
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mental health
broadly defined to include mental health indicators (i.e., depression, 
anxiety, suicidality) and behavioral health correlates (i.e., substance 
use)
Gender identity
one’s sense and subjective experience of gender (maleness/
femaleness), which may or may not be consistent with birth sex
Sexual 
orientation
enduring sense of emotional, sexual attraction to others based on 
their sex/gender
SOGI
sexual orientation and gender identity
GSA
Gay-Straight Alliance school club
Sexual identity
self-label to describe one’s sexual orientation, such as lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, or straight
CBO
community-based organization
LITERATURE CITED
Am. Psychiatr. Assoc.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. Am. Psychiatr. Assoc.; 
Washington, DC: 1952. 
Am. Psychiatr. Assoc.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 3rd ed. Am. Psychiatr. 
Publ.; Washington, DC: 1980. 
Am. Psychiatr. Assoc.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 3rd ed., rev.. Am. 
Psychiatr. Publ.; Washington, DC: 1987. 
Am. Psychiatr. Assoc.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 4th ed. Am. Psychiatr. 
Publ.; Washington, DC: 1994. 
Am. Psychiatr. Assoc.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Am. Psychiatr. 
Publ.; Washington, DC: 2013. 
Am. Psychol. Assoc. Guidelines for Psychological Practice with Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Clients. 
Am. Psychol. 2012; 67:10–42. [PubMed: 21875169] 
Baams L, Bos HM, Jonas KJ. How a romantic relationship can protect same-sex attracted youth and 
young adults from the impact of expected rejection. J. Adolesc. 2014; 37:1293–302. [PubMed: 
25291236] 
Baams L, Grossman AH, Russell ST. Minority stress and mechanisms of risk for depression and 
suicidal ideation among lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth. Dev. Psychol. 2015; 51:688–96. [PubMed: 
25751098] 
Bauermeister JA, Johns MM, Sandfort TG, Eisenberg A, Grossman AH, D’Augelli AR. Relationship 
trajectories and psychological well-being among sexual minority youth. J. Youth Adolesc. 2010; 
39:1148–63. [PubMed: 20535536] 
Birkett M, Koenig B, Espelage DL. LGB and questioning students in schools: the moderating effects 
of homophobic bullying and school climate on negative outcomes. J. Youth Adolesc. 2009; 
38:989–1000. [PubMed: 19636741] 
Black WW, Fedewa AL, Gonzalez KA. Effects of “safe school” programs and policies on the social 
climate for sexual-minority youth: a review of the literature. J. LGBT Youth. 2012; 9:321–39.
Borowsky IW, Ireland M, Resnick M. Adolescent suicide attempts: risks and protectors. Pediatrics. 
2001; 107:485–93. [PubMed: 11230587] 
Bostwick WB, Boyd CJ, Hughes TL, McCabe SE. Dimensions of sexual orientation and the 
prevalence of mood and anxiety disorders in the United States. Am. J. Public Health. 2010; 
100:468–75. [PubMed: 19696380] 
Russell and Fish
Page 16
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Brechwald WA, Prinstein MJ. Beyond homophily: a decade of advances in understanding peer 
influence processes. J. Res. Adolesc. 2011; 21:166–79. [PubMed: 23730122] 
Burgard SA, Cochran SD, Mays VM. Alcohol and tobacco use patterns among heterosexually and 
homosexually experienced California women. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2005; 77:61–70. [PubMed: 
15607842] 
Burns MN, Ryan DT, Garofalo R, Newcomb ME, Mustanski B. Mental health disorders in young 
urban sexual minority men. J. Adolesc. Health. 2015; 56:52–58. [PubMed: 25294230] 
CDC (Cent. Dis. Control Prev.). 10 Leading Causes of Death by Age Group, United States—2013. 
CDC; Atlanta, GA: 2012. www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/leadingcauses.html
Cochran SD, Mays VM, Alegria M, Ortega AN, Takeuchi D. Mental health and substance use 
disorders among Latino and Asian American lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults. J. Consult. Clin. 
Psychol. 2007; 75:785–94. [PubMed: 17907860] 
Cochran SD, Sullivan JG, Mays VM. Prevalence of mental disorders, psychological distress, and 
mental health services use among lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults in the United States. J. Consult. 
Clin. Psychol. 2003; 71:53–61. [PubMed: 12602425] 
Cohen-Kettenis PT, Pfäfflin F. The DSM diagnostic criteria for gender identity disorder in adolescents 
and adults. Arch. Sex. Behav. 2010; 39:499–513. [PubMed: 19838784] 
Collins WA, Welsh DP, Furman W. Adolescent romantic relationships. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2009; 
60:631–52. [PubMed: 19035830] 
Consolacion TB, Russell ST, Sue S. Sex, race/ethnicity, and romantic attractions: multiple minority 
status adolescents and mental health. Cult. Divers. Ethn. Minor. Psychol. 2004; 10:200–14.
D’Augelli AR. Mental health problems among lesbian, gay, and bisexual youths ages 14 to 21. Clin. 
Child Psychol. Psychiatry. 2002; 7:433–56.
D’Augelli AR. Lesbian and bisexual female youths aged 14 to 21: developmental challenges and 
victimization experiences. J. Lesbian Stud. 2003; 7:9–29. [PubMed: 24831382] 
D’Augelli AR, Grossman AH, Starks MT, Sinclair KO. Factors associated with parents’ knowledge of 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual youths’ sexual orientation. J. GLBT Fam. Stud. 2010; 6:178–98.
D’Augelli AR, Hershberger SL, Pilkington NW. Lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth and their families: 
disclosure of sexual orientation and its consequences. Am. J. Orthopsychiatry. 1998; 68:361–71. 
[PubMed: 9686289] 
D’Augelli AR, Pilkington NW, Hershberger SL. Incidence and mental health impact of sexual 
orientation victimization of lesbian, gay, and bisexual youths in high school. Sch. Psychol. Q. 
2002; 17:148–67.
Diamond GM, Diamond GS, Levy S, Closs C, Ladipo T, Siqueland L. Attachment-based family 
therapy for suicidal lesbian, gay, and bisexual adolescents: a treatment development study and 
open trial with preliminary findings. Psychotherapy. 2012; 49:62–71. [PubMed: 22181026] 
Diamond GM, Shilo G, Jurgensen E, D’Augelli A, Samarova V, White K. How depressed and suicidal 
sexual minority adolescents understand the causes of their distress. J. Gay Lesbian Ment. Health. 
2011; 15:130–51.
Diamond LM. New paradigms for research on heterosexual and sexual-minority development. J. Clin. 
Child Adolesc. 2003; 32:490–98.
Diamond LM, Lucas S. Sexual-minority and heterosexual youths’ peer relationships: experiences, 
expectations, and implications for well-being. J. Res. Adolesc. 2004; 14:313–40.
Díaz, RM.; Bein, E.; Ayala, G. Homophobia, poverty, and racism: triple oppression and mental health 
outcomes in Latino gay men. In: Omoto, AM.; Kurtzman, HS., editors. Sexual Orientation and 
Mental Health: Examining Identity Development in Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual People. 
Contemporary Perspectives on Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Psychology. Am. Psychol. Assoc.; 
Washington, DC: 2006. p. 207-24.
Doty ND, Willoughby BLB, Lindahl KM, Malik NM. Sexuality related social support among lesbian, 
gay, and bisexual youth. J. Youth Adolesc. 2010; 39:1134–47. [PubMed: 20593304] 
Drescher, J. Gender identity diagnoses: history and controversies. In: Baudewijntje, PCK.; Steensma, 
PD.; de Vries, ALC., editors. Gender Dysphoria and Disorders of Sex Development: Progress in 
Care and Knowledge. Springer; New York: 2014. p. 137-50.
Russell and Fish
Page 17
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Duncan DT, Hatzenbuehler ML. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender hate crimes and suicidality 
among a population-based sample of sexual-minority adolescents in Boston. Am. J. Public Health. 
2014; 104:272–78. [PubMed: 24328619] 
Durso, LE.; Gates, GJ. Serving Our Youth: Findings from a National Survey of Service Providers 
Working with Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Youth who are Homeless or At Risk of 
Becoming Homeless. Williams Inst. True Colors Fund, Palette Fund; Los Angeles, CA: 2012. 
Eskin M, Kaynak-Demir H, Demir S. Same-sex sexual orientation, childhood sexual abuse, and 
suicidal behavior in university students in Turkey. Arch. Sex. Behav. 2005; 34:185–95. [PubMed: 
15803252] 
Fergusson DM, Horwood J, Beautrais AL. Is sexual orientation related to mental health problems and 
suicidality in young people? Arch. Gen. Psychiatry. 1999; 56:876–80. [PubMed: 10530626] 
Fergusson DM, Horwood LJ, Ridder EM, Beautrais AL. Sexual orientation and mental health in a birth 
cohort of young adults. Psychol. Med. 2005; 35:971–81. [PubMed: 16045064] 
Fish JN, Pasley K. Sexual (minority) trajectories, mental health, and alcohol use: a longitudinal study 
of youth as they transition to adulthood. J. Youth Adolesc. 2015; 44:1508–27. [PubMed: 
25956289] 
Fleming TM, Merry SN, Robinson EM, Denny SJ, Watson PD. Self-reported suicide attempts and 
associated risk and protective factors among secondary school students in New Zealand. Aust. N Z 
J. Psychiatry. 2007; 41:213–21. [PubMed: 17464702] 
Floyd FJ, Bakeman R. Coming-out across the life course: implications of age and historical context. 
Arch. Sex. Behav. 2006; 35:287–96. [PubMed: 16804747] 
Ford, CS.; Beach, FA. Patterns of Sexual Behavior. Harper; New York: 1951. 
Frost DM. Similarities and differences in the pursuit of intimacy among sexual minority and 
heterosexual individuals: a personal projects analysis. J. Soc. Issues. 2011; 67:282–301.
Gallup. Gay and Lesbian Rights. Gallup; 2015. http://www.gallup.com/poll/1651/gay-lesbian-
rights.aspx
Garofalo R, Wolf RC, Wissow LS, Woods ER, Goodman E. Sexual orientation and risk of suicide 
attempts among a representative sample of youth. Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 1999; 153:487–93. 
[PubMed: 10323629] 
Gibson, P. Report of the Secretary’s Task Force on Youth Suicide. Vol. 3. Alcohol, Drug Abuse, 
Mental Health Admin., US Dep. Health Human Serv.; Washington, DC: 1989. Gay male and 
lesbian youth suicide; p. 115-42.
Gilman SE, Cochran SD, Mays VM, Hughes M, Ostrow D, Kessler RC. Risk of psychiatric disorders 
among individuals reporting same-sex sexual partners in the National Comorbidity Survey. Am. J. 
Public Health. 2001; 91:933–39. [PubMed: 11392937] 
GLSEN (Gay Lesbian Straight Educ. Netw.). Teaching Respect: LGBT-Inclusive Curriculum and 
School Climate (Research Brief). GLSEN; New York: 2011. 
GLSEN (Gay Lesbian Straight Educ. Netw.). State Maps. GLSEN; New York: 2015. http://
www.glsen.org/article/state-maps
Goodenow C, Szalacha L, Westheimer K. School support groups, other school factors, and the safety 
of sexual minority adolescents. Psychol. Sch. 2006; 43:573–89.
Greytak EA, Kosciw JG. Predictors of US teachers’ intervention in anti-lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
transgender bullying and harassment. Teach. Educ. 2014; 25:410–26.
Greytak EA, Kosciw JG, Boesen MJ. Educating the educator: creating supportive school personnel 
through professional development. J. Sch. Violence. 2013; 12:80–97.
Hatzenbuehler ML. How does sexual minority stigma “get under the skin”? A psychological mediation 
framework. Psychol. Bull. 2009; 135:707–30. [PubMed: 19702379] 
Hatzenbuehler ML. The social environment and suicide attempts in lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth. 
Pediatrics. 2011; 127:896–903. [PubMed: 21502225] 
Hatzenbuehler ML, Birkett M, Van Wagenen A, Meyer IH. Protective school climates and reduced risk 
for suicide ideation in sexual minority youths. Am. J. Public Health. 2014; 104:279–86. [PubMed: 
24328634] 
Russell and Fish
Page 18
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hatzenbuehler ML, Corbin WR, Fromme K. Trajectories and determinants of alcohol use among LGB 
young adults and their heterosexual peers: results from a prospective study. Dev. Psychol. 2008a; 
44:81–90. [PubMed: 18194007] 
Hatzenbuehler ML, Keyes KM. Inclusive anti-bullying policies and reduced risk of suicide attempts in 
lesbian and gay youth. J. Adolesc. Health. 2013; 53:S21–26. [PubMed: 23790196] 
Hatzenbuehler ML, Keyes KM, Hasin DS. State-level policies and psychiatric morbidity in lesbian, 
gay, and bisexual populations. Am. J. Public Health. 2009a; 99:2275–81. [PubMed: 19833997] 
Hatzenbuehler ML, McLaughlin KA, Keyes KM, Hasin DS. The impact of institutional discrimination 
on psychiatric disorders in lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations: a prospective study. Am. J. 
Public Health. 2010; 100:452–59. [PubMed: 20075314] 
Hatzenbuehler ML, McLaughlin KA, Nolen-Hoeksema S. Emotion regulation and internalizing 
symptoms in a longitudinal study of sexual minority and heterosexual adolescents. J. Child 
Psychol. Psychiatry. 2008b; 49:1270–78. [PubMed: 18564066] 
Hatzenbuehler ML, Nolen-Hoeksema S, Dovidio J. How does stigma “get under the skin”? The 
mediating role of emotion regulation. Psychol. Sci. 2009b; 20:1282–89. [PubMed: 19765237] 
Herdt, G.; Boxer, A. Children of Horizons. Beacon; Boston: 1993. 
Hooker E. The adjustment of the male overt homosexual. J. Proj. Tech. 1957; 21:18–31. [PubMed: 
13417147] 
Horn SS. Heterosexual adolescents’ and young adults’ beliefs and attitudes about homosexuality and 
gay and lesbian peers. Cogn. Dev. 2006; 21:420–40.
Inst. Med. The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People. 2011Natl. Acad. 
PressWashington, DC Influential and authoritative report on LGBT health.
Joiner TE, Van Orden KA, Witte TK, Selby EA, Ribeiro JD, et al. Main predictions of the 
interpersonal-psychological theory of suicidal behavior: empirical tests in two samples of young 
adults. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 2009; 118:634–46. [PubMed: 19685959] 
Kertzner RM, Meyer IH, Frost DM, Stirratt MJ. Social and psychological well-being in lesbians, gay 
men, and bisexuals: the effects of race, gender, age, and sexual identity. Am. J. Orthopsychiatry. 
2009; 79:500–10. [PubMed: 20099941] 
Kessler RC, Amminger GP, Aguilar-Gaxiola S, Alonso J, Lee S, Ustin TB. Age of onset of mental 
disorders: a review of recent literature. Curr. Opin. Psychiatry. 2007; 20:359–64. [PubMed: 
17551351] 
Kessler RC, Avenevoli S, Costello J, Georgiades K, Green JG, et al. Prevalence, persistence, and 
sociodemographic correlates of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey 
Replication adolescent supplement. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry. 2012; 69:372–80. [PubMed: 22147808] 
Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Merikangas KR, Walters EE. Lifetime prevalence and age-
of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Arch. 
Gen. Psychiatry. 2005; 62:593–602. [PubMed: 15939837] 
King M, Semlyen J, Tai SS, Killaspy H, Osborn D, et al. A systematic review of mental disorder, 
suicide, and deliberate self harm in lesbian, gay and bisexual people. BMC Psychiatry. 2008; 8:70. 
[PubMed: 18706118] 
Kinsey, AC.; Pomeroy, WB.; Martin, CE. Sexual Behavior in the Human Male. Indiana Univ. Press; 
Bloomington: 1948. 
Kinsey, AC.; Pomeroy, WB.; Martin, CE.; Gebhard, PH. Sexual Behavior in the Human Female. 
Indiana Univ. Press; Bloomington: 1953. 
Kosciw, JG.; Greytak, EA.; Bartkiewicz, MJ.; Boesen, MJ.; Palmer, NA. The 2011 National School 
Climate Survey: The Experiences of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Youth in Our 
Nation’s Schools. GLSEN; New York: 2012. 
Kosciw, JG.; Greytak, EA.; Palmer, NA.; Boesen, MJ.; Palmer, NA. The 2013 National School Climate 
Survey: The Experiences of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Youth in Our Nation’s 
Schools. GLSEN; New York: 2014. 
Kuper LE, Coleman BR, Mustanski BS. Coping with LGBT and racial-ethnic-related stressors: a 
mixed-methods study of LGBT youth of color. J. Res. Adolesc. 2014; 24:703–19.
Luhtanen RK. Identity, stigma management, and well-being. J. Lesbian Stud. 2002; 7:85–100. 
[PubMed: 24815716] 
Russell and Fish
Page 19
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Marshal MP, Dietz LJ, Friedman MS, Stall R, Smith HA. Suicidality and depression disparities 
between sexual minority and heterosexual youth: a meta-analytic review. J. Adolesc. Health. 2011; 
49:115–23. [PubMed: 21783042] Comprehensive meta-analysis of studies of depression and 
suicidality among sexual minority youth.
Marshal MP, Friedman MS, Stall R, King KM, Miles J, et al. Sexual orientation and adolescent 
substance use: a meta-analyses and methodological review. Addiction. 2008; 103:546–56. 
[PubMed: 18339100] 
McDonald GJ. Individual differences in the coming out process for gay men: implications for 
theoretical minds. J. Homosex. 1982; 8:47–60. [PubMed: 7183725] 
McLaughlin KA, Hatzenbuehler ML, Keyes KM. Responses to discrimination and psychiatric 
disorders among black, Hispanic, female, and lesbian, gay, and bisexual individuals. Am. J. Public 
Health. 2010; 100:1477–84. [PubMed: 20558791] 
McNair RP, Hegarty K. Guidelines for the primary care of lesbian, gay, and bisexual people: a 
systematic review. Ann. Fam. Med. 2010; 8:533–41. [PubMed: 21060124] 
Meyer IH. Minority stress and mental health in gay men. J. Health Soc. Behav. 1995; 36:38–56. 
[PubMed: 7738327] Articulation of the influential theory for research related to LGBT youth 
mental health.
Meyer IH. Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations: 
conceptual issues and research evidence. Psychol. Bull. 2003; 129:674–97. [PubMed: 12956539] 
Meyer IH, Schwartz S, Frost DM. Social patterning of stress and coping: Does disadvantaged social 
status confer more stress and fewer coping resources? Soc. Sci. Med. 2008; 67:368–79. [PubMed: 
18433961] 
Morris JF, Waldo CR, Rothblum ED. A model of predictors and outcomes of outness among lesbian 
and bisexual women. Am. J. Orthopsychiatry. 2001; 71:61–71. [PubMed: 11271718] 
Mulvey KL, Killen M. Challenging gender stereotypes: resistance and exclusion. Child Dev. 2015; 
86:681–94. [PubMed: 25382748] 
Mustanski B, Birkett M, Greene GJ, Hatzenbuehler ML, Newcomb ME. Envisioning an America 
without sexual orientation inequities in adolescent health. Am. J. Public Health. 2014; 104:218–
25. [PubMed: 24328618] 
Mustanski BS, Garofalo R, Emerson EM. Mental health disorders, psychological distress, and 
suicidality in a diverse sample of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youths. Am. J. Public 
Health. 2010; 100:2426–32. [PubMed: 20966378] 
Needham BL. Sexual attraction and trajectories of mental health and substance use during the 
transition from adolescence to adulthood. J. Youth Adolesc. 2012; 41:179–90. [PubMed: 
22076077] 
Nesdale, D. The development of prejudice in children. In: Augoustino, M.; Reynolds, KJ., editors. 
Understanding Prejudice, Racism, and Social Conflict. Sage; London: 2001. p. 57-73.
Nock MK, Green JG, Hwang I, McLaughlin KA, Sampson NA, et al. Prevalence, correlates, and 
treatment of lifetime suicidal behavior among adolescents. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013; 70:300–10. 
[PubMed: 23303463] 
Pachankis JE, Goldfried MR. Clinical issues in working with lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients. 
Psychother. Theory Res. Pract. 2004; 41:227–46.
Pachankis JE, Goldfried MR. Expressive writing for gay-related stress: psychosocial benefits and 
mechanisms underlying improvement. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2010; 78:98–110. [PubMed: 
20099955] 
Pachankis JE, Goldfried MR, Ramrattan ME. Extension of the rejection sensitivity construct to the 
interpersonal functioning of gay men. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2008; 76:306–17. [PubMed: 
18377126] 
Pachankis JE, Hatzenbuehler ML, Rendina HJ, Safren SA, Parsons JT. LGB-affirmative cognitive-
behavioral therapy for young adult gay and bisexual men: a randomized controlled trial of a 
transdiagnostic minority stress approach. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2015; 83:875–89. [PubMed: 
26147563] 
Pascoe, CJ. Dude, You’re a Fag: Masculinity and Sexuality in High School. Univ. Calif. Press; 
Berkeley: 2011. 
Russell and Fish
Page 20
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Pilkington NW, D’Augelli AR. Victimization of lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth in community 
settings. J. Community Psychol. 1995; 23:34–56.
Poteat VP. Individual psychological factors and complex interpersonal conditions that predict LGBT-
affirming behavior. J. Youth Adolesc. 2015; 44:1494–507. [PubMed: 25663623] 
Poteat VP, Anderson CJ. Developmental changes in sexual prejudice from early to late adolescence: 
the effects of gender, race, and ideology on different patterns of change. Dev. Psychol. 2012; 
48:1403–15. [PubMed: 22250998] 
Poteat VP, Aragon SR, Espelage DL, Koenig BW. Psychosocial concerns of sexual minority youth: 
complexity and caution in group differences. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2009; 77:196–201. 
[PubMed: 19170465] 
Poteat VP, Espelage DL. Predicting psychosocial consequences of homophobic victimization in middle 
school students. J. Early Adolesc. 2007; 27:175–91.
Poteat VP, Mereish EH, DiGiovanni CD, Koenig BW. The effects of general and homophobic 
victimization on adolescents’ psychosocial and educational concerns: the importance of 
intersecting identities and parent support. J. Couns. Psychol. 2011; 58:597–609. [PubMed: 
21859187] 
Poteat VP, Russell ST. Understanding homophobic behavior and its implications for policy and 
practice. Theory Pract. 2013; 52:264–71.
Poteat VP, Sinclair KO, DiGiovanni CD, Koenig BW, Russell ST. Gay-straight alliances are associated 
with student health: a multi-school comparison of LGBTQ and heterosexual youth. J. Res. 
Adolesc. 2012; 23:319–30.
Potoczniak D, Crosbie-Burnett M, Saltzburg N. Experiences regarding coming out to parents among 
African American, Hispanic, and white gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, and questioning 
adolescents. J. Gay Lesbian Soc. Serv. 2009; 21:189–205.
Robinson JP, Espelage DL. Bullying explains only part of LGBTQ-heterosexual risk disparities: 
implications for policy and practice. Educ. Res. 2012; 41:309–19.
Robinson JP, Espelage DL, Rivers I. Developmental trends in peer victimization and emotional distress 
in LGB and heterosexual youth. Pediatrics. 2013; 131:423–30. [PubMed: 23382442] 
Rosario M, Meyer-Bahlburg HFL, Hunter J, Exner TM, Gwadz M, Keller AM. The psychosexual 
development of urban lesbian, gay, and bisexual youths. J. Sex Res. 1996; 33:113–26.
Rosario M, Schrimshaw EW, Hunter J. Disclosure of sexual orientation and subsequent substance use 
and abuse among lesbian, gay, and bisexual youths: critical role of disclosure reactions. Psychol. 
Addict. Behav. 2009; 23:175–84. [PubMed: 19290704] 
Rosario M, Schrimshaw EW, Hunter J, Braun L. Sexual identity development among lesbian, gay and 
bisexual youths: consistency and change over time. J. Sex Res. 2006; 43:45–58.
Rostosky SS, Riggle EDB, Horne SG, Miller AD. Marriage amendments and psychological distress in 
lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) adults. J. Couns. Psychol. 2009; 56:56–66.
Russell ST. Sexual minority youth and suicide risk. Am. Behav. Sci. 2003; 46:1241–57.
Russell ST. Beyond risk: resilience in the lives of sexual minority youth. J. Gay Lesbian Issues Educ. 
2005; 2:5–18.
Russell ST, Clarke TJ, Clary J. Are teens “post-gay”? Contemporary adolescents’ sexual identity 
labels. J. Youth Adolesc. 2009; 38:884–90. [PubMed: 19636733] 
Russell ST, Consolacion TB. Adolescent romance and emotional health in the United States: beyond 
binaries. J. Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol. 2003; 32:499–508. [PubMed: 14710458] 
Russell ST, Driscoll AK, Troung N. Adolescent same-sex romantic attraction and relationships: 
implications for substance use and abuse. Am. J. Public Health. 2002; 92:198–202. [PubMed: 
11818291] 
Russell ST, Joyner K. Adolescent sexual orientation and suicide risk: evidence from a national study. 
Am. J. Public Health. 2001; 91:1276–81. [PubMed: 11499118] 
Russell ST, Kosciw J, Horn S, Saewyc E. Safe schools policy for LGBTQ students. Soc. Res. Child 
Dev. Soc. Policy Rep. 2010; 24(4) http://www.srcd.org/sites/default/files/documents/
spr_24_4_final.pdf. 
Russell and Fish
Page 21
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Russell, ST.; McGuire, JK. The school climate for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) 
students. In: Shinn, M.; Yoshikawa, H., editors. Changing Schools and Community Organizations 
to Foster Positive Youth Development. Oxford Univ. Press; New York: 2008. p. 133-58.
Russell ST, Seif HM, Truong NL. School outcomes of sexual minority youth in the United States: 
evidence from a national study. J. Adolesc. 2001; 24:111–27. [PubMed: 11259074] 
Russell ST, Sinclair KO, Poteat VP, Koenig BW. Adolescent health and harassment based on 
discriminatory bias. Am. J. Public Health. 2012a; 102:493–95. [PubMed: 22390513] 
Russell ST, Toomey RB, Ryan C, Diaz RM. Being out at school: the implications for school 
victimization and young adult adjustment. Am. J. Orthopsychiatry. 2014; 84:635–43. [PubMed: 
25545431] 
Russell, ST.; Watson, R.; Muraco, J. The development of same-sex intimate relationships. In: Collins, 
WA.; Laursen, B., editors. Relationship Pathways: From Adolescence to Young Adulthood. Sage; 
Los Angeles, CA: 2012b. p. 215-34.
Ryan C, Huebner D, Diaz RM, Sanchez J. Family rejection as a predictor of negative health outcomes 
in white and Latino lesbian, gay, and bisexual young adults. Pediatrics. 2009; 123:346–52. 
[PubMed: 19117902] 
Ryan C, Russell ST, Huebner D, Diaz R. Family acceptance in adolescence and the health of LGBT 
young adults. J. Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Nurs. 2010; 23:205–13. [PubMed: 21073595] 
Saewyc EM. Research on adolescent sexual orientation: development, health disparities, stigma, and 
resilience. J. Res. Adolesc. 2011; 21:256–72. [PubMed: 27099454] 
Saewyc EM, Bauer GR, Skay CL, Bearinger LH, Resnick MD, et al. Measuring sexual orientation in 
adolescent health surveys: evaluation of eight school-based surveys. J. Adolesc. Health. 2004; 
35:345.e1–15. [PubMed: 15830439] 
Saewyc EM, Skay CL, Hynds P, Pettingell S, Bearinger LH, et al. Suicidal ideation and attempts in 
North American school-based surveys: Are bisexual youth at increasing risk? J. LGBT Health 
Res. 2008; 3:25–36. [PubMed: 19835039] 
Savin-Williams, RC. “… And Then I Became Gay”: Young Men’s Stories. Routledge; London: 1998. 
Savin-Williams RC, Ream GL. Suicide attempts among sexual-minority male youth. J. Clin. Child 
Adolesc. Psychol. 2003; 32:509–22. [PubMed: 14710459] 
Sheets RL, Mohr JJ. Perceived social support from friends and family and psychosocial functioning in 
bisexual young adult college students. J. Couns. Psychol. 2009; 56:152–63.
Shilo G, Savaya R. Effects of family and friend support on LGB youths’ mental health and sexual 
orientation milestones. Fam. Relat. 2011; 60:318–30.
Sinclair KO, Bauman S, Poteat VP, Koenig B, Russell ST. Cyber and bias-based harassment: 
associations with academic, substance use, and mental health problems. J. Adolesc. Health. 2012; 
50:521–23. [PubMed: 22525118] 
Snapp SD, Burdge H, Licona AC, Moody R, Russell ST. Students’ perspectives on LGBTQ-inclusive 
curriculum. Equity Excell. Educ. 2015a; 48:249–65.
Snapp SD, McGuire J, Sinclair K, Gabrion K, Russell ST. LGBTQ-inclusive curriculum: why 
supportive curriculum matters. Sex Educ. 2015b; 15:580–96.
Snapp SD, Watson RJ, Russell ST, Diaz RM, Ryan C. Social support networks for LGBT young 
adults: low cost strategies for positive adjustment. Fam. Relat. 2015c; 64:420–30.
Steinberg L, Duncan P. Work group IV: increasing the capacity of parents, families, and adults living 
with adolescents to improve adolescent health outcomes. J. Adolesc. Health. 2002; 31:261–63. 
[PubMed: 12470923] 
Steinberg L, Monahan KC. Age differences in resistance to peer influence. Dev. Psychol. 2007; 
43:1531–43. [PubMed: 18020830] 
Subst. Abuse Ment. Health Serv. Admin. A Practitioner’s Resource Guide: Helping Families to 
Support Their LGBT Children. HHS Publ. No. PEP14-LGBTKIDS. 2014Subst. Abuse Ment. 
Health Serv. Admin.Rockville, MD Resource designed to help parents of LGBT children support 
mental health.
Talley AE, Hughes TL, Aranda F, Birkett M, Marshal MP. Exploring alcohol-use behaviors among 
heterosexual and sexual minority adolescents: intersections with sex, age, and race/ethnicity. Am. 
J. Public Health. 2014; 104:295–303. [PubMed: 24328614] 
Russell and Fish
Page 22
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Toomey RB, McGuire JK, Russell ST. Heteronormativity, school climates, and perceived safety for 
gender nonconforming peers. J. Adolesc. 2012; 35:187–96. [PubMed: 21481925] 
Toomey RB, Ryan C, Diaz RM, Russell ST. High school gay-straight alliances (GSAs) and young 
adult well-being: an examination of GSA presence, participations, and perceived effectiveness. 
Appl. Dev. Sci. 2011; 15:175–85. [PubMed: 22102782] 
Troiden RR. Becoming homosexual: a model of gay identity acquisition. Psychiatry. 1979; 41:362–73. 
[PubMed: 504515] 
Ueno K. Sexual orientation and psychological distress in adolescence: examining interpersonal 
stressors and social support processes. Soc. Psychol. Q. 2005; 68:258–77.
Ueno K. Same-sex experience and mental health during the transition between adolescence and young 
adulthood. Sociol. Q. 2010; 51:484–510. [PubMed: 20607911] 
Walsh K, Hope DA. LGB-affirmative cognitive behavioral treatment for social anxiety: a case study 
applying evidence-based practice principles. Cogn. Behav. Pract. 2010; 17:56–65.
Ziyadeh NJ, Prokop LA, Fisher LB, Rosario M, Field AE, et al. Sexual orientation, gender, and alcohol 
use in a cohort study of U.S. adolescent girls and boys. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2007; 87:119–30. 
[PubMed: 16971055] 
Zucker, KJ. The DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for gender dysphoria. In: Trombetta, C.; Liguori, G.; 
Bertolotto, M., editors. Management of Gender Dysphoria: A Multidisciplinary Approach. 
Springer; Milan: 2014. p. 33-37.
RELATED RESOURCES
American Academy of Family Physicians. Recommended Curriculum Guidelines for Family Medicine 
Residents: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender Health. http://www.aafp.org/dam/AAFP/
documents/medical_education_residency/program_directors/Reprint289D_LGBT.pdf
American Medical Association. Create an LGBT-friendly practice. 2015. http://
www.amaassn.org/ama/pub/about-ama/our-people/member-groups-sections/glbt-advisory-
committee/glbt-resources/create-lgbt-friendly-practice.page
Association of American Medical Colleges. Implementing curricular and institutional climate changes 
to improve health care for individuals who are LGBT, gender nonconforming, or born with DSD. 
2015. http://offers.aamc.org/lgbt-dsd-health
Coleman E, Bockting W, Botzer M, Cohen-Kettenis P, DeCuypere G, et al. Standards of Care for the 
Health of Transsexual, Transgender, and Gender-Nonconforming People, Version 7. Int. J. 
Transgenderism. 2012; 13(4):165–232. http://www.wpath.org/uploaded_files/140/files/IJT
%20SOC,%20V7.pdf. 
Gay and Lesbian Medical Association. Guidelines for Care of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and 
Transgender Patients. http://glma.org/_data/n_0001/resources/live/GLMA%20guidelines
%202006%20FINAL.pdf
Makadon, HJ.; Mayer, KH.; Potter, J.; Goldhammer, H. The Fenway Guide to Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, 
and Transgender Health. 2nd ed. Am. Coll. Physicians; Philadelphia, PA: 2015. 
The Trevor Project. A national 24-hour toll-free confidential suicide hotline for LGBT youth. http://
www.thetrevorproject.org
Russell and Fish
Page 23
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CHANGES IN GENDER IDENTITY DIAGNOSES IN THE DIAGNOSTIC AND 
STATISTICAL MANUAL OF MENTAL DISORDERS
The psychiatric categorization of gender-variant behavior and identity has evolved since 
the introduction of gender identity disorder (GID) of children (GIDC) and transsexualism 
in the third edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-
III) (Am. Psychiatr. Assoc. 1980). The DSM-IV (Am. Psychiatr. Assoc. 1994) eliminated 
the nontranssexual type subcategory of GID [added to the DSM-III-R (Am. Psychiatr. 
Assoc. 1987)] and combined diagnoses of GIDC and transsexualism into GID. Because 
of critiques regarding the limitations and stigmatization of GID (see Cohen-Kettenis & 
Pfäfflin 2010), the DSM-5 (Am. Psychiatr. Assoc. 2013) introduced gender dysphoria in 
its place (with separate criteria for children and adolescents/adults).
Among other improvements, the adoption of gender dysphoria reflected (a) a shift away 
from inherently pathologizing the incongruence between one’s natal sex and gender 
identity toward a focus on the distress associated with this discordance, and (b) 
recognition of a gender spectrum with many gender identities and expressions (see 
Zucker 2014). Despite advances, many argue that diagnoses unduly label and pathologize 
legitimate and natural gender expressions (Drescher 2014). Others voice concerns that the 
loss of a gender identity diagnosis altogether might restrict or eliminate insurance 
coverage of affirming medical services, including body modification and hormone 
treatment.
Russell and Fish
Page 24
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SUPPORTING YOUTH THROUGH COMING OUT
Coming out is associated with positive adjustment for adults, yet for youth, coming out is 
often a risk factor for discrimination and victimization. Can coming out be healthy, 
despite the risks?
It is developmentally normal for youth to develop an understanding of sexual orientation 
and identity. Today’s youth come out at younger ages than ever before. Prior cohorts 
came out as adults and young adults, often after they were financially and legally 
independent, and at a different stage of life experience and maturity.
When a young person is ready to come out, many adults may think, “Can’t you wait… ?” 
Yet they never ask a heterosexual youth to wait to be straight. Adults worry for the well-
being and safety of youths who come out.
The role of adults is to support youth to think carefully about how they come out. Rather 
than come out through social media or to many people at once, youth should be 
encouraged to identify one or two supportive friends, adults, or family members to whom 
they can come out. Beginning with people they trust, they can build a network of support, 
which can be leveraged if they experience rejection as they come out to others.
Russell and Fish
Page 25
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SUMMARY POINTS
1.
Contemporary youth come out as LGBT at younger ages than in prior cohorts of 
youth.
2.
Younger ages of coming out intersect with a developmental period characterized 
by concerns with self-consciousness, conformity, and peer regulation.
3.
Coming out is typically stressful for LGBT youth but is also associated with 
positive mental health, especially over the long run.
4.
LGBT mental health must be understood in the context of other salient personal 
identities: gender, ethnic, cultural, and religious.
5.
Significant advances in knowledge of policies and practices have created 
supportive school environments and contributed to positive mental health for 
LGBT youth.
Russell and Fish
Page 26
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FUTURE ISSUES
1.
Significant gaps remain in knowledge of clinically proven models for reducing 
mental health problems and promoting mental health in LGBT youth.
2.
Serious gaps remain in knowledge regarding mental health for transgender 
youth.
3.
Strong evidence indicates that bisexual youth have higher rates of compromised 
mental health, and more research and theory are needed to understand these 
patterns.
4.
Intersectional approaches are needed to better understand the interplay of sexual 
orientation and gender identity with race and ethnicity, social class, gender, and 
culture.
Russell and Fish
Page 27
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Historical trends in societal attitudes, age trends in peer attitudes, and the decline in ages at 
which lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) youth come out. Circles (with associated publication 
references) indicate approximate average ages of first disclosure in samples of LGB youth at 
the associated historical time when the studies were conducted.
Russell and Fish
Page 28
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Conceptual model of contextual influences on lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender 
(LGBT) youth mental health and associated implications for policies, programs, and 
practice. The arrow along the bottom of the figure indicates the historically changing nature 
of the contexts of youth’s lives. Diagonal arrows acknowledge interactions across contexts, 
thus recognizing opportunities for promoting LGBT youth mental health at policy, 
community, and clinical practice levels.
Russell and Fish
Page 29
Annu Rev Clin Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
