 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
870 
MMWR / August 26, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 33
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
ongoing psychosocial support and assistance with coordina-
tion of care. Infants with laboratory evidence of congenital 
Zika virus infection without apparent abnormalities should 
have ongoing developmental monitoring and screening by the 
primary care provider; repeat hearing testing is recommended. 
This guidance will be updated when additional information 
becomes available.
Zika virus infection during pregnancy is a cause of micro-
cephaly and other serious brain anomalies (3); however, the 
clinical spectrum of the effects of Zika virus infection dur-
ing pregnancy is not yet known. A wide range of neurologic 
abnormalities, in addition to microcephaly, has been observed 
among infants with presumed or confirmed congenital Zika 
virus infection (2,4). Reported neuroimaging findings include 
intracranial calcifications; ventriculomegaly and extra-axial 
fluid; abnormal gyral patterns (e.g., polymicrogyria); decreased 
brain parenchymal volume; cortical atrophy and malformation; 
hypoplasia of the cerebellum, cerebellar vermis or brainstem; 
delayed myelination; and thinning or hypoplasia of the corpus 
callosum (5,6). Neurologic abnormalities apparent on exami-
nation of these infants have included hypertonia, hypotonia, 
spasticity, hyperreflexia, severe irritability, and seizures (2,4). 
Zika virus appears to primarily target neural progenitor cells 
resulting in cell death and disruption of neuronal proliferation, 
migration and differentiation, which slows brain growth and 
affects neural cell viability (7–9). Ocular findings reported 
in infants with presumed or confirmed congenital Zika virus 
infection have included chorioretinal atrophy or scarring, 
pigmentary changes, optic nerve hypoplasia, optic disc pallor, 
increased optic disc cupping, hemorrhagic retinopathy and 
abnormal retinal vasculature (10–12). Some infants with pre-
sumed or confirmed congenital Zika virus infection have had 
a phenotype consistent with fetal brain disruption sequence, 
characterized by severe microcephaly, collapse of the skull, over-
lapping cranial sutures, prominent occipital bone, redundant 
scalp skin, and severe neurologic impairment (13,14). Other 
findings seen in infants with congenital Zika virus infection 
have included clubfoot and contractures of single or multiple 
joints (arthrogryposis), presumably secondary to central ner-
vous system damage (4).
Experience with other congenital infections can provide 
insight to guide clinical management until more data emerge 
Update: Interim Guidance for the Evaluation and Management of Infants with 
Possible Congenital Zika Virus Infection — United States, August 2016
Kate Russell, MD1,2; Sara E. Oliver, MD1,3; Lillianne Lewis, MD1,4; Wanda D. Barfield, MD5; Janet Cragan, MD6; Dana Meaney-Delman, MD7;  
J. Erin Staples, MD, PhD8; Marc Fischer, MD8; Georgina Peacock, MD9; Titilope Oduyebo, MD5; Emily E. Petersen, MD5; Sherif Zaki, MD, PhD10; 
Cynthia A. Moore, MD, PhD6; Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD11; Contributors
On August 19, 2016, this report was posted as an MMWR 
Early Release on the MMWR website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr). 
CDC has updated its interim guidance for U.S. health 
care providers caring for infants born to mothers with pos-
sible Zika virus infection during pregnancy (1). Laboratory 
testing is recommended for 1) infants born to mothers with 
laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection during pregnancy 
and 2) infants who have abnormal clinical or neuroimag-
ing findings suggestive of congenital Zika syndrome and a 
maternal epidemiologic link suggesting possible transmis-
sion, regardless of maternal Zika virus test results. Congenital 
Zika syndrome is a recently recognized pattern of congenital 
anomalies associated with Zika virus infection during preg-
nancy that includes microcephaly, intracranial calcifications 
or other brain anomalies, or eye anomalies, among others 
(2). Recommended infant laboratory evaluation includes 
both molecular (real-time reverse transcription–polymerase 
chain reaction [rRT-PCR]) and serologic (immunoglobulin 
M [IgM]) testing. Initial samples should be collected directly 
from the infant in the first 2 days of life, if possible; testing 
of cord blood is not recommended. A positive infant serum 
or urine rRT-PCR test result confirms congenital Zika virus 
infection. Positive Zika virus IgM testing, with a negative rRT-
PCR result, indicates probable congenital Zika virus infection. 
In addition to infant Zika virus testing, initial evaluation of all 
infants born to mothers with laboratory evidence of Zika virus 
infection during pregnancy should include a comprehensive 
physical examination, including a neurologic examination, 
postnatal head ultrasound, and standard newborn hearing 
screen. Infants with laboratory evidence of congenital Zika 
virus infection should have a comprehensive ophthalmologic 
exam and hearing assessment by auditory brainstem response 
(ABR) testing before 1 month of age. Recommendations for 
follow-up of infants with laboratory evidence of congenital 
Zika virus infection depend on whether abnormalities con-
sistent with congenital Zika syndrome are present. Infants 
with abnormalities consistent with congenital Zika syndrome 
should have a coordinated evaluation by multiple specialists 
within the first month of life; additional evaluations will be 
needed within the first year of life, including assessments of 
vision, hearing, feeding, growth, and neurodevelopmental 
and endocrine function. Families and caregivers will also need 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / August 26, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 33 
871
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
regarding outcomes associated with congenital Zika virus 
infection. Infants with congenital infections, such as cyto-
megalovirus (CMV) and rubella, can develop a range of clinical 
manifestations, including hearing loss, seizures, neurodevel-
opmental delays and diabetes mellitus later in life (15,16), 
even without apparent clinical manifestations of congenital 
infection at birth (17).
Diagnostic testing for congenital Zika virus infection can be 
challenging. Whereas a positive molecular (rRT-PCR) testing 
result in an infant can confirm Zika virus infection, a nega-
tive result does not exclude infection. Viral shedding can be 
prolonged in congenital CMV and rubella infections (18,19); 
however, little is known about the duration of viral shedding in 
infants with congenital Zika virus infection. IgM results might 
assist in making the diagnosis, but can be difficult to interpret 
because of false-positive results occurring from cross-reacting 
IgM antibodies or nonspecific reactivity (20). Because mater-
nal IgG crosses the placenta, the presence of IgG in an infant 
specimen cannot be used as evidence of congenital infection.
Currently, there are >1,000 pregnant women with labora-
tory evidence of possible Zika virus infection in the United 
States and U.S. territories (http://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/
pregwomen-uscases.html). Pediatric health care providers 
need information to guide appropriate laboratory testing 
and clinical evaluation and management of infants born to 
these mothers. On July 21–22, 2016, CDC, in collaboration 
with the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), convened a 
meeting to obtain individual input from experts and partners 
to inform the development of guidance for the evaluation 
and management of infants with congenital Zika virus infec-
tion. In attendance were experts in pediatrics, infectious 
diseases, neurology, developmental and behavioral pediatrics, 
ophthalmology, audiology, physical medicine and rehabili-
tation, neonatology, lactation and nutrition, maternal-fetal 
medicine, clinical genetics, hospitalist medicine, neonatol-
ogy, and endocrinology, and representatives from principal 
partner groups (Box 1). Discussion focused on three areas: 
1) initial evaluation and laboratory testing of infants born 
to mothers with laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection 
during pregnancy, 2) outpatient management and follow-up 
of infants with microcephaly or other findings consistent with 
congenital Zika syndrome, and 3) outpatient management 
and follow-up of infants with laboratory evidence of con-
genital Zika virus infection but without findings consistent 
with congenital Zika syndrome.
This guidance aims to assist health care providers in the 
evaluation and management of infants with congenital Zika 
virus infection based on currently available data on congeni-
tal infections with Zika virus and other pathogens. As more 
information becomes available, this guidance will be updated.
Updated Recommendations for the Initial 
Laboratory Testing and Evaluation of Infants with 
Possible Congenital Zika Virus Infection
Infant diagnostic testing. Laboratory testing for congenital 
Zika virus infection is recommended for infants born to moth-
ers with laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection, and for 
infants with findings suggestive of congenital Zika syndrome 
and a maternal epidemiologic link suggesting possible transmis-
sion, regardless of maternal testing results (Figure). Laboratory 
evidence of maternal Zika virus infection includes Zika virus 
RNA detected in any maternal clinical specimen by rRT-PCR 
and positive Zika virus IgM with confirmatory neutralizing 
antibody titer for Zika virus or flavivirus, not otherwise specified. 
Zika virus rRT-PCR testing should be performed on both infant 
serum and urine, and Zika virus IgM enzyme-linked immuno-
sorbent assay (ELISA) should concurrently be performed on 
infant serum. If cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is obtained for other 
studies, rRT-PCR testing for Zika virus RNA and Zika virus 
IgM should be performed on CSF
. Laboratory testing should be 
performed on infant specimens; cord blood is not recommended 
because it can yield false positive results through contamination 
with maternal blood and might also yield false negative results 
(21). Infant laboratory testing for Zika virus should be performed 
within the first 2 days after birth; if testing is performed later, 
distinguishing between congenital, perinatal, and postnatal 
infection will be difficult. If the timing of infection cannot be 
determined, infants should be managed as if they have congenital 
Zika virus infection.
A Zika rRT-PCR positive result in an infant sample confirms 
the diagnosis of congenital Zika virus infection (Table 1). Zika 
virus IgM detected in an infant, without detectable Zika virus 
RNA, should be interpreted as probable congenital Zika virus 
infection. The plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT) 
measures virus-specific neutralizing antibodies and is used to 
confirm the specificity of the IgM antibodies against Zika virus 
and rule out a false positive IgM result (20). If the infant’s initial 
sample is IgM-positive, but PRNT was not performed on the 
mother’s sample, PRNT should be performed on the infant’s 
initial sample. However, PRNT cannot distinguish between 
maternal and infant antibodies. Because of this, it might be 
necessary to wait until the child is at least age 18 months, 
when maternal antibodies are expected to wane, to confirm 
congenital infection. PRNT should be performed on a sample 
collected from a child aged ≥18 months whose initial sample 
was IgM positive if Zika-specific neutralizing antibodies were 
detected by PRNT on either the infant’s or mother’s sample. 
If the infant’s initial sample is negative by both IgM ELISA 
and rRT-PCR but clinical concerns remain (e.g., microcephaly 
with negative evaluation for other known causes), PRNT at age 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
872 
MMWR / August 26, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 33
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
18 months can be considered. If PRNT results at 18 months 
are negative, the child is considered to not have congenital 
Zika virus infection. If PRNT results are positive, congenital 
Zika infection is presumed, but postnatal infection cannot be 
excluded, especially for children living in an area with active 
Zika virus transmission.
In many cases, infant laboratory testing results will not 
be available before hospital discharge. In these cases, infants 
should be presumed to have congenital Zika virus infection 
until test results are available. For the purposes of this guid-
ance, infants with confirmed or probable Zika virus infection 
should be managed in the same manner.
Detection of Zika virus RNA in the placenta can confirm the 
presence of maternal infection, but cannot distinguish between 
maternal and congenital infection. For circumstances in which 
maternal testing was not previously performed, performed 
more than 12 weeks after exposure (22), or was not defini-
tive (e.g., flavivirus not otherwise specified) (20), a positive 
placental rRT-PCR result can confirm maternal Zika virus 
infection. Based on unpublished CDC data, placentas from 
mothers with Zika virus infection during pregnancy can have 
detectable Zika virus RNA at the time of delivery, regardless 
of the timing of maternal infection. Clinical implications for 
an infant with Zika virus RNA detected in the placenta, in 
the absence of laboratory evidence of Zika virus in the infant, 
are unknown.
Limited data are currently available regarding perinatal Zika 
virus transmission (23). Guidelines for evaluation and manage-
ment of infants and children with postnatally acquired Zika virus 
disease (1) will be updated as more information is available.
Clinical evaluation of infants. Infants born to mothers 
with laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection should receive 
a comprehensive physical examination, including precise 
measurement of head (occipitofrontal) circumference,* length 
and weight, assessment of gestational age, and examination for 
neurologic abnormalities and dysmorphic features (Table 2). 
A postnatal head ultrasound should be performed on all 
infants born to mothers with laboratory evidence of Zika 
virus infection before discharge from the hospital, including 
those infants with normal prenatal ultrasound findings, 
because some abnormal findings associated with congenital 
Zika syndrome might not be readily apparent on prenatal 
ultrasounds. All infants should receive a hearing screen 
per universal screening recommendations before hospital 
discharge. Infants with laboratory evidence of congenital 
Zika virus infection should be referred for a comprehensive 
ophthalmologic exam and evaluation of hearing by ABR 
testing before 1 month of age. Other evaluations should be 
performed as clinically indicated.
Infants with negative IgM and negative rRT-PCR testing 
born to a mother with laboratory evidence of Zika virus 
BOX 1. Areas of expertise and organizations represented at the 
Clinical Evaluation and Management of Infants with Congenital Zika 
Virus Infection meeting — Atlanta, Georgia, July 21–22, 2016
Specialties represented
Audiology
Clinical genetics
Critical care
Developmental and behavioral pediatrics
Endocrinology
Hospitalist medicine
Infectious disease
Lactation and infant feeding
Maternal-fetal medicine
Neonatology
Neurology
Nutrition
Ophthalmology
Orthopedics
Pediatrics
Physical medicine and rehabilitation
Partner organizations
American Academy of Family Physicians
American Academy of Pediatrics (including representation 
from the Puerto Rico chapter)
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
Association of Maternal & Child Health Programs
Family Voices, Inc.
March of Dimes
National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners
Parent to Parent of Georgia
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine
Federal agencies
Administration for Children and Families
CDC
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
Maternal and Child Health Bureau, Health Resources 
and Services Administration
National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and 
Response
* Standard head circumference charts are based on measurements taken within 
24 hours of birth. Additional information on child growth standards is available 
at http://www.who.int/childgrowth/en/. Additional information on head 
circumference measurement is available at https://www.cdc.gov/zika/pdfs/
microcephaly_measuring.pdf.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / August 26, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 33 
873
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
infection should receive routine care, including monitoring of 
head circumference at every well child visit and age-appropriate 
developmental screening (24). Health care providers should 
report information on pregnant women in the United States 
and the U.S. territories with laboratory evidence of Zika virus 
infection and their infants (regardless of infant test results) to 
state, tribal, local, or territorial health departments for inclu-
sion in the U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry (http://www.cdc.
gov/zika/hc-providers/registry.html), or the Puerto Rico Zika 
Active Pregnancy Surveillance System (ZAPSS) (http://www.
cdc.gov/zika/public-health-partners/zapss.html).
For all infants with abnormal findings consistent with con-
genital Zika syndrome, an extensive evaluation is recommended 
TABLE 1. Interpretation of results of laboratory testing of infant’s 
blood, urine and/or cerebrospinal fluid for evidence of congenital 
Zika virus infection 
Infant test results*
Interpretation
rRT-PCR
IgM
Positive
Positive or Negative
Confirmed congenital Zika virus infection
Negative
Positive
Probable congenital Zika virus infection†
Negative
Negative
Negative for congenital Zika virus infection†
Abbreviations: rRT-PCR = real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction; 
IgM = immunoglobulin M.
* Infant serum, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid.
† Laboratory results should be interpreted in the context of timing of infection during 
pregnancy, maternal serology results, clinical findings consistent with congenital 
Zika syndrome, and any confirmatory testing with plaque reduction neutralization 
testing (PRNT).  
FIGURE. Recommended Zika virus testing and evaluation of infants born to mothers with laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection 
during pregnancy *
Mother with laboratory evidence of Zika virus 
infection during pregnancy
Perform a comprehensive physical exam on 
infant, head ultrasound, standard newborn 
hearing assessment and infant Zika virus 
laboratory testing (Table 1)
Infant with fndings consistent with 
congenital Zika syndrome
Infant without fndings consistent with 
congenital Zika syndrome
Initial evaluation (Box 2)
Infant with laboratory confrmed 
or probable congenital Zika 
virus infection
Infant negative for 
congenital Zika virus 
infection
Infant with 
laboratory-confrmed or 
probable congenital Zika 
virus infection
Infant negative for 
congenital Zika virus 
infection
Routine newborn care. 
Additionally, perform an ABR and 
ophthalmology exam within 
1 month of life
Routine care
Outpatient management 
and follow-up (Box 3)
Continue to evaluate 
for other causes of 
congenital anomalies
Outpatient management 
and follow-up (Box 4)
Abbreviation: ABR = auditory brainstem response.
* Laboratory evidence of maternal Zika virus infection includes 1) Zika virus RNA detected by real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) in 
any clinical specimen; or 2) positive Zika virus immunoglobulin M (IgM) with confirmatory neutralizing antibody titers. Mothers should be tested by rRT-PCR within 
2 weeks of exposure or symptom onset, or by IgM within 2–12 weeks of exposure or symptom onset. Because of the decline in IgM antibody and viral RNA levels 
over time, negative maternal testing 12 weeks after exposure does not rule out maternal infection. Source: Oduyebo T, Igbinosa I, Petersen EE, et al. Update: interim 
guidance for health care providers caring for pregnant women with possible Zika virus exposure—United States, July 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:739–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6529e1.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
874 
MMWR / August 26, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 33
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(Box 2). Transfer to a facility with access to pediatric subspe-
cialty care might facilitate this evaluation. However, the deci-
sion should not be based solely on the presence of maternal 
Zika virus infection during pregnancy. Health care providers 
should consider both the immediate needs of the infant and 
the potential negative impact of possible separation from his or 
her family. The recommended evaluation includes a complete 
blood count and metabolic panel, including liver function 
tests, a comprehensive examination by an ophthalmologist, 
ABR testing, and consideration of advanced neuroimaging in 
consultation with a neurologist. In addition, infants should 
be evaluated for other causes of microcephaly or intracranial 
calcifications, including genetic conditions and other con-
genital infections.
TABLE 2. Initial evaluation and recommended outpatient management during the first 12 months of life for infants with possible congenital 
Zika virus infection, based on maternal and infant laboratory tests and infant clinical findings
Mother
Infant clinical 
exam
Before hospital 
discharge
Infant testing
2 wks.
1 mo.
2 mos.
3 mos.
4–6 mos.
9 mos.
12 mos.
Laboratory 
evidence of 
Zika virus 
infection*
No evidence of 
abnormalities
Routine newborn care: 
PE, HC, weight/
length, and 
neurologic exam
Hearing screen
Head US
Infant Zika virus 
testing (Table 1)
Negative for Zika 
virus infection
Routine care, including monitoring of OFC and development at every well child visit 
and age-appropriate developmental screening
Laboratory 
evidence of Zika 
virus infection*
Ophthalmology exam 
ABR
Consider 
repeat ABR
Behavioral 
audiology if ABR 
not done at  
4–6 mos.
Monitoring of OFC and development at every visit and age-appropriate 
developmental screening (Box 4)
Abnormalities 
consistent 
with 
congenital 
Zika 
syndrome
As above plus:
Consider transfer to 
hospital with 
subspecialty care
CBC, metabolic panel, 
LFTs, ophthalmology 
exam
ABR
Consider advanced 
neuroimaging  
(Box 2)
Negative for Zika 
virus infection
Evaluate for other causes of congenital anomalies
Further management as clinically indicated
Laboratory 
evidence of Zika 
virus infection*
Thyroid 
screen
Neurologic 
exam
Neurologic 
exam
Thyroid screen, 
ophthalmology 
exam
Repeat ABR
Routine preventive health care including monitoring of feeding and growth
Routine and congenital infection-specific anticipatory guidance
Referral to specialists, including evaluation of other causes of congenital anomalies as 
needed (Box 3)
Not tested, or 
tested 
outside of 
appropriate 
window†
No evidence of 
abnormalities
Maternal Zika virus 
testing†
Consider Zika virus 
placental testing
Routine newborn care: 
PE, HC, weight/length 
and neurologic exam
Hearing screen
Head US
Perform infant 
Zika virus 
testing if 
evidence of Zika 
virus infection 
on maternal 
testing*,†
Outpatient management for appropriate infant clinical exam and test results
Abnormalities 
consistent 
with 
congenital 
Zika 
syndrome
As above, plus:
Consider transfer to 
hospital with 
subspecialty care.
CBC, metabolic panel, 
LFTs, ophthalmology 
exam
ABR
Consider advanced 
neuroimaging
Infant Zika virus 
testing (Table 1)
Negative for Zika 
virus infection
Evaluate for other causes of congenital anomalies
Further management as clinically indicated
Laboratory 
evidence of Zika 
virus infection*
Refer to outpatient management for infant with abnormalities consistent with 
congenital Zika syndrome
Abbreviations: ABR = auditory brainstem response; CBC = complete blood count; LFTs = liver function tests; HC = head (occipitofrontal) circumference; PE = physical 
examination; rRT-PCR = real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction; US = ultrasound.
* Laboratory evidence of maternal Zika virus infection includes 1) Zika virus RNA detected by real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) in 
any clinical specimen; or 2) positive Zika virus immunoglobulin M (IgM) with confirmatory neutralizing antibody titers. Confirmatory neutralizing antibody titers are 
needed in addition to IgM for maternal Zika virus infection.
† Mothers should be tested by rRT-PCR within 2 weeks of exposure or symptom onset, or by IgM within 2–12 weeks of exposure or symptom onset. Because of the 
decline in IgM antibody titers and viral RNA levels over time, negative maternal testing 12 weeks after exposure does not rule out maternal infection. Source: 
Oduyebo T, Igbinosa I, Petersen EE, et al. Update: interim guidance for health care providers caring for pregnant women with possible Zika virus exposure—United 
States, July 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:739–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6529e1. Mothers should be tested by rRT-PCR within 2 weeks 
of exposure or symptom onset, or by IgM within 2–12 weeks of exposure or symptom onset. Because of the decline in IgM antibody titers and viral RNA levels over 
time, negative maternal testing 12 weeks after exposure does not rule out maternal infection. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6529e1.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / August 26, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 33 
875
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Infants born to mothers with risk factors for maternal 
Zika virus infection (travel to or residence in an area of Zika 
virus transmission or sex with a partner who traveled to or 
resided in such an area) and for whom maternal testing was 
not performed before delivery, should have a comprehensive 
physical examination, including standardized measurement 
of head circumference. Maternal diagnostic testing should be 
performed (20,22), and testing of the placenta for Zika virus 
PCR should be considered (http://www.cdc.gov/zika/hc-
providers/test-specimens-at-time-of-birth.html); infant testing 
should be performed if maternal testing is consistent with 
laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection. If an infant appears 
clinically well, further evaluation, including head ultrasound, 
ophthalmologic assessment, and infant laboratory Zika virus 
testing, can be deferred until maternal test results are available. 
However, if there is concern about infant follow-up, head 
ultrasound, ophthalmologic assessment and infant Zika virus 
testing should be performed before hospital discharge. CDC 
recommends standard precautions in all health care settings to 
protect both health care personnel and patients from infection 
with blood-borne pathogens, including Zika virus (25).
Although Zika virus has been detected in breast milk (26), 
no cases of Zika virus infection associated with breastfeeding 
have been reported, and current evidence suggests that the 
benefits of breastfeeding outweigh the theoretical risks of Zika 
virus transmission. All women with Zika virus infection during 
pregnancy should be encouraged and supported to breastfeed 
their infants, regardless of infant Zika virus testing results.
Outpatient Management of Infants with 
Laboratory Evidence of Zika Virus Infection and 
Abnormalities Consistent with Congenital  
Zika Syndrome
The care of infants with abnormalities consistent with con-
genital Zika syndrome requires a multidisciplinary team and 
an established medical home to facilitate the coordination of 
care, which is critical to ensuring that these infants receive 
necessary testing and consultations (Box 3), and that abnor-
mal findings are detected and appropriately addressed (27). 
If abnormalities are noted on prenatal evaluation, counseling 
specific to congenital Zika syndrome should occur during 
pregnancy, preferably with the involvement of obstetric and 
pediatric providers. Before the infant’s discharge from the 
birth hospital, follow-up appointments with specialists and 
services recommended during initial evaluation should be 
made. Consideration should be given to using preexisting 
coordinated multidisciplinary care clinics.
Infants should receive routine preventive pediatric health care, 
including regularly scheduled immunizations (24). Families of 
infants with congenital Zika syndrome should receive infor-
mation that includes discussion of concerns for development, 
function, feeding and growth, and prognosis. Standardized 
measurement of growth parameters, including head circumfer-
ence, weight, and length, should occur regularly through the 
first year of life.
Breastfeeding should be encouraged and supported for nutri-
tion and enhanced bonding. Primary care providers should 
assess the infant for evidence of feeding difficulties and refer 
for consultations related to lactation, occupational therapy, 
speech therapy, nutrition, and/or gastroenterology for poor 
suck, swallowing dysfunction, gastroesophageal reflux, and 
aspiration. Swallowing dysfunction might not be evident 
initially and feeding should be monitored closely.
A neurologic examination should be performed at age 1 month 
and 2 months by a primary care provider and subsequently as 
BOX 2. Initial clinical evaluation and management of infants with 
laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection and abnormalities 
consistent with congenital Zika syndrome  
• Consultation with:
 
– Neurologist for determination of appropriate 
neuroimaging and additional evaluation.
 
– Infectious disease specialist for diagnostic evaluation 
of other congenital infections (e.g., syphilis, 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus infection, 
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection, and 
herpes simplex virus infection).
 
– Ophthalmologist for comprehensive eye exam and 
evaluation for possible cortical visual impairment 
prior to discharge from the hospital or within 
1 month of birth.
 
– Endocrinologist for evaluation for hypothalamic 
or pituitary dysfunction.
 
– Clinical geneticist to evaluate for other causes of 
microcephaly or other anomalies if present.
• Consider consultation with:
 
– Orthopedist, physiatrist, or physical therapist for 
the management of hypertonia, club foot or 
arthrogrypotic-like conditions.
 
– Pulmonologist or otolaryngologist for concerns 
about aspiration.
 
– Lactation specialist, nutritionist, gastroenterologist, 
or speech or occupational therapist for the 
management of feeding issues.
• Perform auditory brainstem response to assess hearing.
• Perform complete blood count and metabolic panel, 
including liver function tests.
• Provide family and supportive services.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
876 
MMWR / August 26, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 33
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
needed depending on the infant’s clinical status. If not already 
initiated, neurology referral should occur for evaluation of any 
abnormalities, including sleep problems and excess irritability. 
If the ophthalmology exam performed within the first month of 
life was normal, another exam (including retinal assessment) is 
recommended at age 3 months. ABR testing is the preferred test 
to detect hearing loss resulting from neurologic damage. If the 
initial newborn hearing screen was performed using only oto-
acoustic emission testing, the infant should be referred for ABR 
screening before 1 month of age. If the newborn hearing screen 
was normal, an ABR should be performed at age 4–6 months. 
If vision or hearing results are abnormal, referrals to appropriate 
specialists should occur as soon as possible.
Infants with abnormal brain development can be at risk for 
hypothalamic dysfunction leading to pituitary insufficiency, 
and early manifestations of endocrine dysfunction might not 
be detected by routine newborn screening (28). Thyroid screen-
ing, including measurement of thyroid stimulation hormone 
(TSH) and thyroxine (either free T4 or both total T4 and 
estimated free T4) should be performed at age 2 weeks and 
again at age 3 months. If either of these results is abnormal, 
further evaluation of pituitary function should be performed 
by an endocrinologist.
Developmental monitoring should occur at each routine visit, 
and standardized, validated screening tools should be used to 
assess the presence of developmental delay (24). Referral to a 
developmental specialist and early intervention services should 
occur as soon as possible. It is important that primary care pro-
viders continue to monitor the child’s development and progress 
with standardized, validated developmental screening tools to 
ensure that the child’s developmental needs are addressed.
Overall, families and caregivers of infants with congenital Zika 
syndrome will require ongoing psychosocial assessment and sup-
port. Health care providers should work closely with parents to 
ensure that the care plan that is developed is consistent with the 
infant’s needs and the family’s wishes. Monitoring for depres-
sion among caregivers should occur during primary care visits, 
because depression or family stress might be associated with the 
infant’s complex medical needs. Families might also face finan-
cial stressors, social stigma, and other forms of discrimination. 
Existing national and local resources for families of children with 
complex care needs should be made available to families (29).
Referrals for abnormal findings should occur as clinically 
indicated, either to a pediatric specialist or a specialist with 
expertise in the care of children. In areas with limited access 
to pediatric subspecialty care, the numerous services recom-
mended for infants with congenital Zika syndrome might not 
be readily available; in these situations, telehealth might be 
explored as a potential means of providing subspecialty care 
and support to families in areas with limited access (30).
Outpatient Management of Infants with 
Laboratory Evidence of Zika Virus Infection but 
Without Abnormalities Consistent with 
Congenital Zika Syndrome
Infants with laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection but 
without apparent abnormalities at birth are recommended to 
have additional monitoring (Box 4), until further information 
is available regarding outcomes, because some neurologic 
sequelae of congenital Zika virus infection (e.g., seizures, 
cognitive impairment, and vision and hearing abnormalities) 
might be subtle or have delayed onset. During routine infant 
follow-up with primary care providers, a standardized, 
validated developmental screening tool should be used at 
age 9 months, as currently recommended by the American 
Academy of Pediatrics (24), or sooner, if there are any 
developmental concerns. Referral to a developmental specialist 
and early intervention programs should be considered as soon 
as caregiver or provider concerns are noted, and additional 
referrals to specialists should be made as clinically indicated.
BOX 3. Outpatient management of infants with laboratory evidence 
of Zika virus infection and abnormalities consistent with congenital 
Zika syndrome    
• A medical home should be established, and visits with 
primary care provider should occur monthly for at 
least the first 6 months of life.
 
– Follow growth parameters; monitor development; 
provide routine immunizations, anticipatory 
guidance, and psychosocial support; and ensure 
infants receive necessary testing and consultations.
• Neurologic examination by the primary care provider 
at 1 and 2 months of age. Refer to neurology for any 
abnormalities, or for any parental or provider 
concerns.
• Refer to developmental specialist and early intervention 
services.
• Repeat comprehensive ophthalmologic exam at age 
3 months, and refer to ophthalmology for any abnormal 
findings, or for any parental or provider concerns.
• Repeat auditory brainstem response testing at age 
4–6 months, and refer to audiology for any abnormal 
findings, or for any parental or provider concerns.
• Repeat testing for hypothyroidism at age 2 weeks and age 
3 months, even if the initial testing results were normal. 
Refer to endocrinology for any abnormal findings.
• Provide family and supportive services.  
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / August 26, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 33 
877
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
A vision screening, including assessment of visual regard, 
should be performed at each well child visit, and referral to an 
ophthalmologist should be made for any caregiver or provider 
concerns. Infants with abnormalities on initial hearing screen 
should be referred to an audiologist for a complete evaluation. 
Later development of hearing loss in infants without other clin-
ical findings has been observed in other congenital infections 
(15); however, the likelihood that an infant with congenital 
Zika virus infection without clinical findings consistent with 
congenital Zika syndrome and with an initial normal hearing 
screen will develop hearing loss is unknown. ABR testing of 
infants at age 4–6 months can be considered, although the 
risk from sedation needs to be taken into account. Infants who 
passed an initial ABR and without an ABR at age 4–6 months 
should be referred for behavioral audiologic diagnostic testing 
at age 9 months, or sooner for any hearing concerns. Behavioral 
audiologic testing is recommended because of the potential 
need for sedation with ABR testing in infants.
As a critical component of patient care and to facilitate early 
identification of developmental delays, families should be 
empowered to be active participants in their child’s monitoring 
and care. Anticipatory guidance provided to caregivers should 
emphasize developmental milestones, feeding and growth, 
sleep, irritability, and seizure recognition.
A disproportionate burden of congenital Zika virus infection 
might affect families with already limited access to health care. 
Families might face language and cultural barriers, financial 
barriers, and inadequate access. Rural populations might have 
difficulty accessing specialists. Barriers to care for all affected 
infants and their families should be addressed through linkage 
to national, state, and local health programs.
Contributors
Michael Agus, MD, Boston Children’s Hospital; Donald B. 
Bailey, PhD, RTI International; Jim Bale, MD, University of Utah; 
Katherine A. Beckmann, PhD, Administration for Children and 
Families; Jatinder Bhatia, MD, Augusta University; Jennifer Bolden 
Pitre, JD, Family Voices, Inc.; Timothy J. Brei, MD, Seattle Children’s 
Hospital; Lekisha Daniel-Robinson, MSPH, Center for Medicaid 
and CHIP Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; 
Eric Dziuban, MD, CDC; Marcus Gaffney, MPH, CDC; Dixie D. 
Griffin, MD, Tift Regional Health System; Alyson B. Goodman, 
MD, CDC; Manda Hall, MD, Texas Department of State Health 
Services; R. Phillips Heine, MD, Duke University; Amy Houtrow, 
MD, PhD, University of Pittsburgh; Lisa Hunter, PhD, Cincinnati 
Children’s Hospital; Susan L. Hyman, MD, University of Rochester 
Medical Center; Wanda K. Jones, DrPH, Office of the Assistant 
Secretary for Health; Bill G. Kapogiannis, MD, National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development; Sharon S. Lehman, MD, 
Nemours Children’s Health System, Sidney Kimmel Medical College 
of Thomas Jefferson University; Aaron Lopata, MD, Maternal and 
Child Health Bureau, Health Resources and Services Administration; 
Yvonne Maldonado, MD, Stanford University; Edward McCabe, 
MD, PhD, March of Dimes; Rima McLeod, MD, University of 
Chicago; Joan Y. Meek, MD, Florida State University College of 
Medicine; Michael E. Msall, MD, University of Chicago Medicine-
Comer Children’s Hospital; Lynne M. Mofenson, MD, Elizabeth 
Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation; Sitara Nayak, Parent to Parent 
of Georgia; Scott Needle, MD, Healthcare Network of Southwest 
Florida; Susan Reef, MD, CDC; Sydney Rice, MD, University of 
Arizona; Scott Rivkees, MD, University of Florida; Jeannie Rodriguez, 
PhD, Emory University; Elizabeth Rosenblum, MD, University of 
California, San Diego; Pablo Sanchez, MD, Nationwide Children’s 
Hospital; Renate Savich, MD, University of Mississippi Medical 
Center; Angela Scheuerle, MD, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center; Lee Segal, MD, University of Wisconsin, Madison; 
Camille Smith, EdS, CDC; Parminder S. Suchdev, MD, Emory 
University; V. Fan Tait, MD, American Academy of Pediatrics 
(AAP); Edwin Trevathan, MD, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine; Camila V. Ventura, MD, Altino Ventura Foundation; 
Richard Whitley, MD, Children’s of Alabama, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham; Susan Wiley, MD, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital 
Medical Center; Fernando Ysern, MD, Puerto Rico Chapter, AAP
.
BOX 4. Outpatient management of infants with laboratory evidence 
of Zika virus infection, but without abnormalities consistent with 
congenital Zika syndrome  
• A medical home should be established.
 
– Follow growth parameters, and perform developmental 
screening at each well child visit.
 
– Emphasize anticipatory guidance for families 
regarding developmental milestones, feeding and 
growth, sleep and irritability, and abnormal 
movements.
• Use a standardized, validated developmental screening 
tool at 9 months as currently recommended, or earlier 
for any parental or provider concerns.
• Referral to ophthalmology for comprehensive eye 
exam within one month of birth. Perform vision 
screening and assess visual regard at every well child 
visit, and refer to ophthalmology for any abnormal 
findings, or for any parental or provider concerns.
• Perform auditory brainstem response within one 
month of birth. Consider repeat auditory brainstem 
response at age 4–6 months or perform behavioral 
diagnostic testing at age 9 months and refer to 
audiology for any abnormal findings, or for any 
parental or provider concerns.
• Provide family and supportive services.  
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
878 
MMWR / August 26, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 33
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Acknowledgments
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP); Laura Aird, MS, AAP; 
Giovanna Beauchamp, MD, University of Florida; Denise Boggs, 
CDC; Kristin Dayton, MD, University of Florida; Sean Diederich, 
AAP; Michelle Z. Esquivel, MPH, AAP; Jessica Franks, MPH, CDC; 
Margaret A. Honein, PhD, CDC; Irogue Igbinosa, MD, CDC; 
David W. Kimberlin, MD, University of Alabama at Birmingham; 
Kara Polen, MPH, CDC; Ingrid Rabe, MBChB, CDC.
 1Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC; 2Influenza Division, National Center for 
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC; 3Division of Viral Diseases, National 
Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC; 4Division of 
Environmental Hazards and Health Effects, National Center for Environmental 
Health, CDC; 5Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic 
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC; 6Division of Congenital and 
Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
Disabilities, CDC; 7Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging and 
Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 8Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, National 
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 9Division of Human 
Development and Disability, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
Disabilities, CDC; 10Infectious Diseases Pathology Branch, Division of High-
Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic 
Infectious Diseases, CDC; 11Division of Public Health Information Dissemination, 
Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, CDC.
Corresponding authors: Kate Russell, kerussell@cdc.gov, 404-718-1178; Sara E. 
Oliver, seoliver@cdc.gov, 404-639-1204.
References
 1. Fleming-Dutra KE, Nelson JM, Fischer M, et al. Update: interim guidelines 
for health care providers caring for infants and children with possible Zika 
virus infection—United States, February 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2016;65:182–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6507e1
 2. França GV, Schuler-Faccini L, Oliveira WK, et al. Congenital Zika virus 
syndrome in Brazil: a case series of the first 1501 livebirths with complete 
investigation. Lancet 2016. Epub June 29, 2016.
 3. Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA, Petersen LR. Zika virus and 
birth defects—reviewing the evidence for causality. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:1981–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsr1604338
 4. Miranda-Filho DB, Martelli CM, Ximenes RA, et al. Initial description 
of the presumed congenital Zika syndrome. Am J Public Health 
2016;106:598–600. http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2016.303115
 5. de Fatima Vasco Aragao M, van der Linden V, Brainer-Lima AM, et al. 
Clinical features and neuroimaging (CT and MRI) findings in presumed 
Zika virus related congenital infection and microcephaly: retrospective case 
series study. BMJ 2016;353:i1901. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i1901
 6. Hazin AN, Poretti A, Turchi Martelli CM, et al.. Computed tomographic 
findings in microcephaly associated with Zika virus. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:2193–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc1603617
 7. Li C, Xu D, Ye Q, et al. Zika virus disrupts neural progenitor development 
and leads to microcephaly in mice. Cell Stem Cell 2016;19:120–6. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2016.04.017
 8. Garcez PP
, Loiola EC, Madeiro da Costa R, et al. Zika virus impairs growth 
in human neurospheres and brain organoids. Science 2016;352:816–8. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf6116
 9. Tang H, Hammack C, Ogden SC, et al. Zika virus infects human cortical 
neural progenitors and attenuates their growth. Cell Stem Cell 
2016;18:587–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2016.02.016
 
10. Ventura CV, Maia M, Bravo-Filho V, Góis AL, Belfort R Jr. Zika virus 
in Brazil and macular atrophy in a child with microcephaly. Lancet 
2016;387:228. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00006-4
 
11. Ventura CV
, Maia M, Ventura BV
, et al. Ophthalmological findings in infants 
with microcephaly and presumable intra-uterus Zika virus infection. Arq Bras 
Oftalmol 2016;79:1–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/0004-2749.20160002
 
12. Miranda HA 2nd, Costa MC, Frazão MA, Simão N, Franchischini S, 
Moshfeghi DM. Expanded spectrum of congenital ocular findings in 
microcephaly with presumed Zika infection. Ophthalmology 
2016;123:1788–94. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2016.05.001
 
13. Schuler-Faccini L, Ribeiro EM, Feitosa IM, et al. Possible association between 
Zika virus infection and microcephaly—Brazil, 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2016;65:59–62. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6503e2
 
14. Corona-Rivera JR, Corona-Rivera E, Romero-Velarde E, Hernández-
Rocha J, Bobadilla-Morales L, Corona-Rivera A. Report and review of 
the fetal brain disruption sequence. Eur J Pediatr 2001;160:664–7. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s004310100813
 
15. Fowler KB, Stagno S, Pass RF
, Britt WJ, Boll TJ, Alford CA. The outcome 
of congenital cytomegalovirus infection in relation to maternal antibody 
status. N Engl J Med 1992;326:663–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/
NEJM199203053261003
 
16. Sever JL, South MA, Shaver KA. Delayed manifestations of congenital 
rubella. Rev Infect Dis 1985;7(Suppl 1):S164–9. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/clinids/7.Supplement_1.S164
 
17. Fowler KB, McCollister FP
, Dahle AJ, Boppana S, Britt WJ, Pass RF. 
Progressive and fluctuating sensorineural hearing loss in children with 
asymptomatic congenital cytomegalovirus infection. J Pediatr 
1997;130:624–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-3476(97)70248-8
 
18. Cannon MJ, Hyde TB, Schmid DS. Review of cytomegalovirus shedding 
in bodily fluids and relevance to congenital cytomegalovirus infection. 
Rev Med Virol 2011;21:240–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/rmv.695
 
19. Rawls WE, Phillips A, Melnick JL, Desmond MM. Persistent virus 
infection in congenital rubella. Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:430–3. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1001/archopht.1967.00980020432003
 
20. Rabe IB, Staples JE, Villanueva J, et al. Interim guidance for interpretation 
of Zika virus antibody test results. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:543–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6521e1
 
21. Masuzaki H, Miura K, Miura S, et al. Labor increases maternal DNA 
contamination in cord blood. Clin Chem 2004;50:1709–11. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1373/clinchem.2004.036517
 
22. Oduyebo T, Igbinosa I, Petersen EE, et al. Update: interim guidance for 
health care providers caring for pregnant women with possible Zika virus 
exposure—United States, July 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:739–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6529e1
 
23. Besnard M, Lastere S, Teissier A, Cao-Lormeau V, Musso D. Evidence 
of perinatal transmission of Zika virus, French Polynesia, December 
2013 and February 2014. Euro Surveill 2014;19:20751. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES2014.19.13.20751
 
24. Committee on Practice and Ambulatory Medicine and Bright Futures 
Periodicity Schedule Workgroup. 2016 recommendations for preventive 
pediatric health care. Pediatrics 2016;137:1–3.
 
25. Olson CK, Iwamoto M, Perkins KM, et al. Preventing transmission of 
Zika virus in labor and delivery settings through implementation of 
standard precautions—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2016;65:290–2. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6511e3
 
26. Dupont-Rouzeyrol M, Biron A, O’Connor O, Huguon E, Descloux E. 
Infectious Zika viral particles in breastmilk. Lancet 2016;387:1051. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00624-3
 
27. Kuo DZ, Houtrow AJ, Arango P
, Kuhlthau KA, Simmons JM, Neff JM. 
Family-centered care: current applications and future directions in 
pediatric health care. Matern Child Health J 2012;16:297–305. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10995-011-0751-7
 
28. Birkebaek NH, Patel L, Wright NB, et al. Endocrine status in patients 
with optic nerve hypoplasia: relationship to midline central nervous 
system abnormalities and appearance of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis 
on magnetic resonance imaging. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2003;88:5281–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/jc.2003-030527
 
29. American Academy of Pediatrics. Healthy children. Elk Grove Village, IL: 
American Academy of Pediatrics; 2016. https://www.healthychildren.org
 
30. Marcin JP
, Shaikh U, Steinhorn RH. Addressing health disparities in 
rural communities using telehealth. Pediatr Res 2016;79:169–76. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1038/pr.2015.192  
