 Articles
www.thelancet.com   Vol 390   July 8, 2017 
145
Diagnostic accuracy of post-mortem CT with targeted 
coronary angiography versus autopsy for coroner-requested 
post-mortem investigations: a prospective, masked, 
comparison study 
Guy N Rutty*, Bruno Morgan*, Claire Robinson, Vimal Raj, Mini Pakkal, Jasmin Amoroso, Theresa Visser, Sarah Saunders, Mike Biggs, 
Frances Hollingbury, Angus McGregor, Kevin West, Cathy Richards, Laurence Brown, Rebecca Harrison, Roger Hew
Summary
Background England and Wales have one of the highest frequencies of autopsy in the world. Implementation of post-
mortem CT (PMCT), enhanced with targeted coronary angiography (PMCTA), in adults to avoid invasive autopsy 
would have cultural, religious, and potential economic benefits. We aimed to assess the diagnostic accuracy of PMCTA 
as a first-line technique in post-mortem investigations.
Methods In this single-centre (Leicester, UK), prospective, controlled study, we selected cases of natural and non-
suspicious unnatural death referred to Her Majesty’s (HM) Coroners. We excluded cases younger than 18 years, 
known to have had a transmittable disease, or who weighed more than 125 kg. Each case was assessed by PMCTA, 
followed by autopsy. Pathologists were masked to the PMCTA findings, unless a potential risk was shown. The 
primary endpoint was the accuracy of the cause of death diagnosis from PMCTA against a gold standard of autopsy 
findings, modified by PMCTA findings only if additional substantially incontrovertible findings were identified. 
Findings Between Jan 20, 2010, and Sept 13, 2012, we selected 241 cases, for which PMCTA was successful in 
204 (85%). Seven cases were excluded from the analysis because of procedural unmasking or no autopsy data, as were 
24 cases with a clear diagnosis of traumatic death before investigation; 210 cases were included. In 40 (19%) cases, 
predictable toxicology or histology testing accessible by PMCT informed the result. PMCTA provided a cause of death 
in 193 (92%) cases. A major discrepancy with the gold standard was noted in 12 (6%) cases identified by PMCTA, and 
in nine (5%) cases identified by autopsy (because of specific findings on PMCTA). The frequency of autopsy and 
PMCTA discrepancies were not significantly different (p=0·65 for major discrepancies and p=0·21 for minor 
discrepancies). Cause of death given by PMCTA did not overlook clinically significant trauma, occupational lung 
disease, or reportable disease, and did not significantly affect the overall population data for cause of death (p≥0·31). 
PMCTA was better at identifying trauma and haemorrhage (p=0·008), whereas autopsy was better at identifying 
pulmonary thromboembolism (p=0·004).
Interpretation For most sudden natural adult deaths investigated by HM Coroners, PMCTA could be used to avoid 
invasive autopsy. The gold standard of post-mortem investigations should include both PMCT and invasive autopsy.
Funding National Institute for Health Research.
Copyright Copyright © The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under the CC BY 4.0 licence.
Introduction
Studies1–5 of post-mortem investigations of both natural 
and unnatural death have shown that the diagnostic yield 
increases when post-mortem CT (PMCT)1 is added 
to autopsy, specifically for detection of fractures, 
haemorrhage, and gas collections, such as pneumothorax.2–4 
The use of PMCT as an alternative to autopsy was first 
suggested in 1994,5 but it has not yet been established.6–10
In 2014, 89 875 autopsies requested by Her Majesty’s 
(HM) Coroners were done in England and Wales.11 
Autopsy—ie, internal post-mortem examination—is the 
established gold standard for the investigation of cause 
of death; however, because of religious, cultural, 
economic, and workforce reasons, replacement of the 
invasive component of these investigations by PMCT 
might be preferable in some circumstances. One major 
problem associated with the use of PMCT is the inability 
to accurately diagnose coronary artery disease, the most 
common cause of sudden death in adults.4,6 This 
problem has been addressed by the addition of 
angiography (PMCTA), either targeting the coronary 
arteries only or the whole body (figure 1).12,13 Small, 
controlled 
studies 
of 
PMCTA 
have 
produced 
encouraging 
results, 
reporting 
good 
correlation, 
statistically and visually, with autopsy for identification 
of coronary artery disease.14–16 A feasibility study,17 done 
between 2011 and 2012, suggests this technique can 
reduce the frequency of autopsies; 120 cases were 
Lancet 2017; 390: 145–54
Published Online 
May 24, 2017 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(17)30333-1
See Comment page 100
*Both authors contributed 
equally
University of Leicester, East 
Midlands Forensic Pathology 
Unit (Prof G N Rutty MD, 
J Amoroso MA, T Visser, 
M Biggs FRCPath, 
F Hollingbury FRCPath), 
Radiology Department 
(Prof B Morgan PhD, 
C Robinson MSc), and 
Pathology Department 
(A McGregor MD, 
Prof K West FRCPath, 
C Richards FRCPath, 
L Brown FRCPath, 
R Harrison FRCPath, 
R Hew FRCPath), Leicester Royal 
Infirmary, Leicester, UK; 
Department of Imaging, 
Narayana Health City Campus, 
Bangalore, India (V Raj FRCR); 
Department of Medical 
Imaging, Toronto General 
Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada 
(M Pakkal FRCR); and 
Histopathology Department, 
Royal Devon and Exeter NHS 
Foundation Trust, Church 
Road, Exeter, Devon, UK 
(S Saunders MD)
Correspondence to: 
Prof Bruno Morgan, University 
of Leicester, Radiology 
Department, Leicester Royal 
Infirmary, Leicester LE1 5WW, UK 
bm11@le.ac.uk
 Articles
146 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 390   July 8, 2017
assessed by PMCT (of which 35 were assessed by 
targeted coronary PMCTA) and only 55 cases had an 
autopsy control. PMCT and PMCTA services are now 
available in a few sites across the UK, but no large, 
autopsy-controlled study has investigated the effec-
tiveness of targeted coronary PMCTA as an alternative 
to autopsy in the investigation of sudden death in adults 
by HM Coroners. Other specific weaknesses of PMCT, 
not addressed by targeted coronary angiography, are the 
inability to identify pulmonary infections and emboli, 
non-ischaemic heart disease, gastrointestinal haemor-
rhage, and sepsis.17,18
We investigated the effect of replacing autopsy with 
targeted coronary PMCTA (referred to as PMCTA1 for the 
rest of our Article). Our aims were to assess the diagnostic 
accuracy of cause of death derived by PMCTA, the 
sensitivity and specificity of PMCTA in identifying 
common causes of death, the potential reduction in the 
frequency of autopsies for HM Coroner cases, and the 
potential effect of introducing PMCTA on statistics for 
overall cause of death.
Methods
Study design and cases
This prospective, controlled comparison study was done 
at a single centre in Leicester, UK. The appendix (p 3) 
shows our study flow chart. The study protocol was 
approved by the local research ethics committee 
(04_Q2501_64).
We prospectively selected study cases, including both 
natural and non-suspicious unnatural deaths, referred 
and authorised for invasive autopsy examination by HM 
Coroners from two jurisdictions (North and South 
Leicestershire, covering the whole region). The cases were 
selected in a consecutive manner on the basis of the first 
suitable referral for a post-mortem investigation received 
by a secure fax machine on a chosen study day. Study days 
were chosen on the basis of staff availability and other 
ongoing trials. Cases were excluded if they were aged 
younger than 18 years, known to have had a transmittable 
disease (eg, tuberculosis, HIV, or hepatitis C), or weighed 
more than 125 kg (because of CT scanner weight limit). 
Cases were recruited only if oral consent by telephone was 
For the study protocol and 
ethics approval see 
http://www2.le.ac.uk/
departments/emfpu/research/
pm-ct-research-study
Research in context
Evidence before this study
Post-mortem CT (PMCT) has been used as an adjunct to assist 
in post-mortem investigations since 1983, but has also been 
proposed as an alternative to invasive autopsy since 1994. We 
searched PubMed databases (between July 3, 2009, and 
Nov 20, 2015) with the terms “post-mortem imaging”, 
“minimally (and non) invasive autopsy”, “computed 
tomography (CT)”, “magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)”, and 
“angiography and contrast media”, with no language 
restrictions. Discussions at the UK National Department of 
Health representative groups and subsequently at the 
International Society of Forensic Radiology and Imaging (ISFRI) 
revealed that several centres were doing routine PMCT as an 
adjunct to autopsy at the time of study initiation. Published 
studies mainly focused on unnatural death, but often included 
cases of natural death, and there was one large ongoing study 
of 200 cases in England and Wales proposing non-contrast-
enhanced PMCT as an alternative to autopsy in natural death. 
These studies suggested that although PMCT is a useful adjunct 
to autopsy by diagnosing more pathology and particularly 
trauma, it has a major weakness in diagnosing parenchymal 
disease, and particularly in diagnosing coronary vascular 
disease, the most common cause of adult sudden death. Over 
the past decade, several teams worldwide have addressed this 
independently by adding angiography (PMCTA) with a variety 
of techniques including multiphase whole-body PMCTA, and, in 
the case of this study, targeted coronary angiography. These 
techniques have shown promise for the diagnosis of 
cardiovascular disease, and one English study of 120 cases 
showed that this approach can be used in the setting of Her 
Majesty’s (HM) Coroners. However, this study used angiography 
in only about 30% of cases and autopsy control in fewer than 
half of cases, which was dependent on the imaging result. 
Currently, all studies have either involved fewer than 20 cases, 
were not independently autopsy-controlled, or were not 
applicable to the HM Coroner system in England and Wales. 
Therefore, to our knowledge, no large, fully autopsy-controlled 
study investigating PMCTA as an alternative to autopsy in the 
investigation of adult sudden death has been published.
Added value of this study
Assessment of both autopsy and PMCT errors was possible 
because they were considered independently, both with access 
to all information that was available non-invasively, which 
allowed an independent gold standard to be created on the 
basis of the positive results from both tests. We showed that 
PMCTA can provide a cause of natural death in 92% of cases 
investigated by the HM Coroner, without missing trauma, 
occupational lung disease, or reportable disease, with no 
significant difference in the overall population data for cause of 
death. The frequency of discrepancies with the gold standard 
(errors) between the two approaches was not significantly 
different, but the types of discrepancy were different: PMCTA 
was better at identifying trauma and haemorrhage, and 
autopsy better at identifying pulmonary thromboembolism.
Implications of all the available evidence
For most natural and some trauma-related adult deaths 
investigated by HM Coroners in England and Wales, in which 
the degree of evidence required is on the balance of 
probabilities, PMCTA can be used to avoid invasive autopsy. 
Furthermore, when a higher burden of proof is required, the 
gold standard of post-mortem investigation should include 
both PMCTA and invasive autopsy.
See Online for appendix
 Articles
www.thelancet.com   Vol 390   July 8, 2017 
147
gained for study participation from the relatives of the 
deceased. 19 Time of death was recorded if known. If a case 
met any of the exclusion criteria, or if consent could not be 
obtained, then either the next suitable referral was chosen 
or no case was recruited on that particular study day.
Procedures
All cases were given a unique anonymisation code at 
study entry. This code was used as the case identifier for 
all image data and other relevant information that 
related to the post-mortem examination, including the 
autopsy report and any further tests done by the study 
coordinator.
Our detailed protocol is shown in the appendix (p 2). 
All study cases were cannulated within a mortuary 
licensed by the Human Tissue Authority, principally with 
a 14Fr silicone-coated, male urinary catheter (Bardia 
Foley catheter, Bard Medical, Crawley, UK) inserted into 
the ascending aorta, just above the aortic valve, via the 
left common carotid artery, by means of a cutdown 
procedure.
PMCT and PMCTA were done with a Toshiba Aquilion 
64 slice scanner (Toshiba Medical Systems, Otawara, 
Japan) by radiographers experienced in forensic imaging 
(led by CRo). Pre-contrast scans were done in three 
overlapping blocks: head and neck; chest, abdomen, and 
pelvis; and pelvis and legs. Contrast runs through the 
heart used five separate sequences, with air for the first 
three sequences, followed by two sequences of Urografin 
150 mg/mL (positive contrast; Bayer, Newbury, UK) 
diluted 1/10. The first 150 cases involved manual injection 
via a standard 60 mL bladder syringe with gentle constant 
A
D
B
C
RCA
LCx
LAD
RCA
LAD
*
*
*
LV
Figure 1: Images from post-mortem CT with targeted coronary angiography in a case of myocardial infarction
Post-mortem CT with targeted coronary angiography (PMCTA) of a male ex-smoker aged 62 years with borderline type 2 diabetes who died suddenly and 
unexpectedly. PMCTA reconstructed images with straightened curved multiplane reconstructions of the positive (A) and air (B) contrast runs, and a 3D-volume 
reformat (C), all showing a critical stenosis of the proximal left anterior descending artery, as indicated by an asterisk. The myocardium showed an anteroseptal 
perfusion deficit, indicated by a dashed line (D). In the absence of artery calcification, these findings were diagnosed as a soft plaque occlusion leading to acute 
myocardial infarction. RCA=right coronary artery. LAD=left anterior descending. LCx=left circumflex. LV=left ventricle.
 Articles
148 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 390   July 8, 2017
hand pressure and the remaining cases involved use of a 
Medrad Stellant dual head pump injector system 
(Medrad UK Ltd, Ely, UK), with the intention to improve 
coronary artery filling and distension.
Invasive autopsy was planned for the next working 
day after PMCTA and any delay was recorded. The 
pathologists were not aware of the PMCTA findings, 
unless PMCT showed potential risk to them, such as 
tuberculosis infection. All pathologists (MB, FH, AM, 
KW, CRi, LB, RHa, and RHe) agreed to take part in the 
study and undertake the autopsy following standard 
practice (Royal College of Pathologists generic and 
cause of death specific guidelines).20 The history of the 
case compiled by the HM Coroner was available 
to the pathologist. Any further investigation—eg, 
supplementary laboratory investigations, including 
toxicology and histology—required explicit permission 
from the HM Coroner. The decision about the number 
and extent of any further tests was made during the 
investigation, at the discretion of the pathologist on 
duty.
All PMCT and PMCTA images were reported initially 
by a radiologist (BM) who had 4 years’ experience in 
PMCT at the beginning of the study (involving more 
than 200 PMCT cases in which the findings could be 
compared with those from the autopsy). For most cases, 
PMCT was also reported by a cardiac radiologist (VR and 
MP) and a consensus report generated. This initial 
PMCTA report also made use of the coroner-compiled 
case history provided to the pathologist undertaking the 
autopsy.
All cases were re-reported by the radiologist together 
with a pathologist (GNR) who had experience of using 
PMCT but who was not involved in the autopsy, with any 
additional external examination and clinical history 
information extracted from the autopsy report. If 
possible, in each case a cause of death was recorded by 
the radiologist and pathologist in consensus on the basis 
of a balance of probabilities, which is the principle of 
English and Welsh HM Coronial Law. The PMCTA 
reviewers also made a decision termed triage to autopsy 
if they had low confidence in the PMCTA-derived cause 
of death. After this stage, the internal examination 
findings and autopsy-identified cause of death were 
revealed to the PMCTA reviewers.
Two anonymous reports were created by the study 
manager (TV): a full report and a reduced PMCTA report 
that excluded the internal examination findings, but 
included external examination details and any additional 
medical history. Toxicology and biochemistry information 
was given to the radiologist if requested and available. 
Likewise, histology information was given to the 
radiologist for the PMCTA report after direct request, 
and only for tissue that could easily be accessed by CT-
guided biopsy. The full report with autopsy-derived cause 
of death was used for comparison (by BM, GNR, and 
CRo) with the equivalent PMCTA-derived report.
We took the autopsy-identified cause of death and 
findings to be the gold standard unless modified by one 
of four factors (appendix p 4): (1) PMCTA showed a clear 
and incontrovertible finding, such as fracture or major 
haemorrhage, for which PMCT can be considered 
specific; (2) a clinically significant finding was identified 
by PMCT, increasing the relevance of similar findings 
on autopsy, adding to the cause of death (eg, autopsy 
detects a finding, but PMCT shows it to be more 
extensive than appreciated at autopsy); (3) specific pre-
mortem investigations and findings that were not 
acknowledged in the autopsy report that contradict the 
autopsy diagnosis; or (4) cause of death was constructed 
incorrectly on the basis of the autopsy findings.21 We 
assessed autopsy errors resulting from one or more of 
these factors in the discrepancy analysis.
When a discrepancy existed between the findings of 
the two investigations, the PMCT images, the autopsy 
report, and any previously available ante-mortem 
laboratory and imaging investigations were reviewed 
(by GNR, BM, and CRo) to establish the nature of the 
discrepancy and the validity of the autopsy findings. 
Differences were categorised into major (eg, overlooked 
clinically significant trauma or any potentially fatal 
finding), minor (eg, same findings, but different cause 
of death given), no discrepancy (eg, same causes of 
death, but given in a different order), or were recorded 
separately and not included in the discrepancy analysis 
(appendix pp 4–8). A trivial change is when the gold 
standard result is changed from the autopsy result, but 
does not result in a discrepancy between the autopsy 
and gold standard.
Outcomes
The primary endpoint of this study was to assess, in cases 
in which PMCTA could give a cause of death, the accuracy 
of this cause of death diagnosis against a gold standard of 
autopsy findings, modified by PMCTA findings only if 
additional substantially incontrovertible findings were 
identified. Secondary endpoints included the success of 
coronary angiography (defined by successful catheter 
placement with subsequent opacification of coronary 
arteries by contrast), the proportion of cases in which 
cause of death could be given by PMCTA, the sensitivity 
and specificity of PMCTA and autopsy for specific 
common 
diseases, 
including 
unexpected 
trauma, 
ischaemic heart disease, and pulmonary thrombo-
embolism, and the potential effect of PMCTA on overall 
mortality statistics.
Statistical analysis
All cases were included in the assessment of technical 
success of the procedure. Cases in which the cause of 
death was known and clearly traumatic—eg, road traffic 
collisions, hanging, and gunshot wounds—were excluded 
from the analysis of the diagnostic accuracy of PMCTA in 
determining the cause of death. Demographic data are 
 Articles
www.thelancet.com   Vol 390   July 8, 2017 
149
presented as mean (SD), median (IQR), and range. We 
used McNemar’s test to calculate p values for paired 
proportions and χ² tests for p values of unpaired 
proportions using SPSS version 22.0. We calculated the 
sensitivity and specificity of both autopsy and the PMCTA-
first approach (ie, PMCTA findings, or autopsy results if 
PMCTA did not give a cause of death) against the gold 
standard. A diagnosis was only considered to be a false 
positive if the gold-standard investigation neither gave it 
as a cause of death nor mentioned it in the findings. For 
example, if PMCTA gave a diagnosis of cardiac disease in 
a patient who died of pulmonary thromboembolism but 
who also had clinically significant cardiac disease in the 
autopsy findings, the cardiac diagnosis for cause of death 
on PMCTA counted as a false negative for pulmonary 
thromboembolism but not a false positive for cardiac 
disease. We calculated sensitivity and specificity of 
PMCTA and autopsy for four diagnoses (pulmonary 
thromboembolism, trauma, respiratory disease, and 
cardiac disease), and provide the accompanying 95% CIs 
(MedCalc version 15.0).
Role of the funding source
The funder of the study had no role in the study design, 
data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or 
writing of the report. The co-chief investigators (GNR 
and BM) had full access to all the data in the study and 
had final responsibility for the decision to submit for 
publication.
Results
Between Jan 20, 2010, and Sept 13, 2012, we selected 
241 cases for the study. No exclusions occurred as a result 
of weight or infectious disease. Details of the few cases 
for which consent was not obtained before selection have 
been published separately.19 Cases were aged 18–96 years; 
158 (66%) were men and 83 (34%) women (table 1). 
PMCT was successful in all 241 cases. PMCTA was 
successful in 204 (85%) cases, with success increasing to 
127 (90%) of 141 cases if the first 100 cases (which we 
consider as early experience) were excluded. No adverse 
events occurred to the scanned bodies.
24 cases referred with a clear traumatic cause of death 
were excluded from the accuracy analysis (15 road-traffic 
and overt trauma deaths, eight deaths caused by hanging, 
and one self-inflicted gunshot wound; table 1) because, as 
expected, no difference occurred between the autopsy-
diagnosed and PMCTA-diagnosed causes of death in 
All cases 
(n=241)
Diagnostic accuracy 
population (n=210)*
Age, years 
Median (range)
69 (18–96)
72 (26–96)
Mean (SD)
66 (19)
69 (16)
Sex
Men
158 (66%)
132 (63%)
Women
83 (34%)
78 (37%)
PMCTA success
Fail†
37 (15%)
29 (14%)
Successful
204 (85%)‡
181 (86%)‡
Poor
14 (6%)
12 (6%)
Good
190 (79%)
169 (80%)
Death-to-scan interval, h 
Known§
NA
169
Mean (SD) 
NA 
45 (27) 
Median (range)
NA 
37 (8–144)
Day autopsy was done¶
Day 1
NA 
1 (<1%)
Day 2
NA 
193 (92%)
Day 4
NA 
13 (6%)
Day 6
NA 
3 (1%)
Reporting of initial PMCTA report
Single
NA 
51 (24%)
Consensus
NA
159 (76%)
Data are n (%), unless otherwise specified. PMCTA=post-mortem CT with targeted 
coronary angiography. NA=not analysed. *Excluding cases with clear traumatic 
cause of death (n=24), with no autopsy report at the time of analysis (n=4), or for 
which the autopsy was undertaken by the trial team (n=3). †Failures of PMCTA 
(37 cases) were due to catheter progression into the descending aorta in 20 (54%) 
cases, difficult vascular anatomy or disease in ten (27%) cases, catheter failure in 
three (8%) cases, a different protocol in three (8%) cases, and abandoned 
procedure as a result of suspected tuberculosis in one (3%) case. Poor angiography 
was due to poor balloon seal in eight early cases, which was corrected by use of a 
bigger balloon, two cases of failure to follow correct contrast injection protocol, 
one case of failed image archive, one case of coronary artery bypass grafting, one 
case of catheter failure, and one case of catheter progression into the left ventricle. 
‡Success improves to 90% if first 100 cases are excluded. §Time of death known 
within 24 h. ¶PMCTA was done on day 1.
Table 1: Demographic characteristics of study populations and success 
and features of PMCTA and autopsy
Extent of difference
Major 
Minor 
Trivial 
Total autopsy errors
9
17
23
Clear PMCTA finding
Haemorrhage
2
1
··
Trauma
4
1
··
Trauma and haemorrhage
1
··
··
Perforated viscous 
(pneumoperitoneum and fluid)
1
1
··
Aspirated gastric contents
··
1
··
Review of autopsy report with PMCTA 
Review of autopsy report 
supported by PMCTA findings
1
10
7
PMCTA finding, and imaging and 
investigations before death
··
3
··
Review of autopsy report 
Changed order of causes of death
··
··
8
Removed factors of low clinical 
significance
··
··
8
PMCTA=post-mortem CT with targeted coronary angiography. 
Table 2: Number of cases in which the gold standard outcome was 
different from the autopsy finding, and reasons for the change
 Articles
150 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 390   July 8, 2017
these cases. A further seven cases were excluded from 
this analysis, either because no autopsy report was 
available at the time of analysis (four cases) or they were 
unmasked (three cases in which autopsy was done by the 
same team who reported the PMCTA). Therefore, the 
study group included in the diagnostic accuracy analysis 
consisted of 210 cases.
In six (3%) cases, the PMCTA reporting team received 
inappropriate information as part of the extended clinical 
and external examination details received. In one of these 
cases, toxicology details were supplied to the PMCTA 
reporting team, despite not being requested. However, 
the toxicology information was normal and did not 
contribute to findings. In five (2%) cases, histology 
information was also made available to the PMCTA 
reporting team when not requested. We did not consider 
these errors to have had an effect on the cause-of-death 
decision in these cases. Two of the cases already had a 
pre-mortem diagnosis of asbestosis and mesothelioma, 
and in the three other cases, the unrequested histology 
information had no effect on the initial cause-of-death 
decision (two were cardiac related and for one the 
histology suggested pulmonary infection, which was 
ignored by the radiologist, who gave a single diagnosis of 
end-stage fibrotic lung disease rather than infection).
Full results for histology and toxicology testing are in 
the appendix (pp 9–11). Regardless of whether done or 
not, for 42 (20%) cases the PMCTA reporting team 
requested either toxicology or biochemistry results on 
the basis of the case’s history, or histology or microbiology 
results (if they could be obtained by CT-guided biopsy) on 
the basis of the history or PMCTA scan. The frequency of 
PMCTA discrepancies in these cases compared with the 
whole group were not significantly different (p=0·90; 
appendix p 11). In 40 (19%) cases, predictable toxicology 
or histology testing accessible by PMCT informed the 
result.
The gold-standard cause-of-death diagnosis was taken 
from the autopsy report verbatim in 161 (77%) of 
210 cases. Trivial changes to the autopsy findings, which 
were not deemed to affect the discrepancy analysis, were 
made in 23 (11%) cases. 26 (12%) non-trivial changes 
were made (table 2, figures 2, 3).
A cause of death was given by PMCT or PMCTA in 
193 (92%) cases. Of these cases, the PMCTA reporting 
team had low confidence in 19 (10%) cases in which, 
despite giving a cause of death, they would still have 
triaged to autopsy (appendix p 12).
Table 3 shows the number of major and minor 
discrepancies with the gold standard cause of death for 
PMCTA and autopsy. PMCTA had slightly more 
discrepancies with the gold standard than did autopsy, 
but this difference was not statistically significant 
(p=0·65 for major discrepancies and p=0·21 for minor 
discrepancies). In the 193 cases for which a cause of 
death was given, major errors occurred in 12 (6%) cases 
for PMCTA and nine (5%) cases for autopsy (table 3). 
Exclusion of the 19 triage to autopsy cases did not 
significantly improve the occurrence of major errors in 
the PMCTA diagnosis (11 [6%] of 174; p=0·97). Therefore, 
we used all 193 cases in which PMCTA gave a cause of 
death for further comparisons.
Table 4 shows a breakdown of discrepancies with the 
gold-standard diagnosis. This breakdown also includes 
cases with missed findings that were relevant to the 
cause of death investigation, such as an acute wrist 
fracture seen on PMCT in a case possibly relating to 
uncontrolled epilepsy, and a potentially lethal coronary 
artery anatomy variant seen on PMCTA (both considered 
minor discrepancies). PMCTA was significantly worse in 
the diagnosis of pulmonary thromboembolism than was 
autopsy, and minor discrepancies with regard to the 
A
D
B
C
Figure 2: Images from post-mortem CT with targeted coronary angiography in three cases of haemorrhage
(A) Axial brain image in a 73-year-old woman who collapsed and then had a cardiac arrest after a short interval. 
The autopsy report described a small amount of subarachnoid blood and normal cerebral cortex, but did not 
describe the cerebellum, whereas post-mortem CT with targeted coronary angiography (PMCTA) showed a clear 
clinically significant cerebellar haemorrhage, as indicated by an asterisk. Autopsy gave coronary artery disease as the 
cause of death, which, although also detected by PMCTA, was clearly incorrect. (B) Axial brain image of a 33-year-old 
man with type 1 diabetes and alcohol addiction. Toxicology showed evidence of clinically significant diabetic 
ketoacidosis, and both PMCTA and autopsy give the primary cause of death as diabetic ketoacidosis, but autopsy 
failed to report the clear subarachnoid haemorrhage, as indicated by an asterisk, which although not extensive 
enough to definitely cause death, might have substantially contributed to death. (C, D) An 84-year-old woman who 
was taking anticoagulation treatment with documented declining haemoglobin concentrations in the days leading 
to her death. She died from myocardial insufficiency secondary to hypovolaemia and anaemia agreed on both 
autopsy and PMCTA. However, autopsy did not find a bleeding source and attributed it to gastric erosions. PMCTA 
clearly showed a left scapula fracture (arrow) with approximately 1 L of blood in the left chest wall (dashed line).
 Articles
www.thelancet.com   Vol 390   July 8, 2017 
151
diagnosis of respiratory disease were more common with 
PMCTA than with autopsy. Autopsy was significantly 
worse than PMCTA in the identification of trauma and 
haemorrhage (table 4). The sensitivity and specificity 
calculations for identification of pulmonary thrombo-
embolism and trauma also found similar results 
(appendix p 13). Analysis of the cause of death statistics 
showed that PMCTA plus autopsy as required would lead 
to fewer cases of pulmonary thromboembolism being 
reported, and autopsy alone would lead to fewer cases of 
trauma being reported, compared with our gold standard 
(based on PMCTA and autopsy). However, these 
differences were not statistically significant (p=0·31 for 
trauma and p=0·68 for pulmonary thromboembolism; 
appendix p 14).
Discussion
The results of our study show that PMCTA provided a 
cause of death in 92% of cases. In 11% of these cases, a 
major difference occurred between the autopsy or 
PMCTA findings and the gold standard. However, in 
nearly half of these cases (5% of all cases) PMCTA 
showed clear, clinically significant findings not reported 
by autopsy, which led to a change in our gold-standard 
diagnosis. The presumed occurrence of major errors was 
not significantly different between the tests. However, 
causes of discrepancy with the gold-standard method 
were different between PMCTA and autopsy. PMCT was 
better at detecting trauma and clinically significant soft-
tissue haemorrhage, and autopsy was better at detecting 
pulmonary thromboembolism and respiratory disease. 
This outcome is consistent with previous reports,22,23 and 
supports our belief that the new gold standard for post-
mortem investigation is PMCT (with targeted coronary 
angiography) followed by autopsy.
Our study is unique in that the PMCTA and autopsy 
findings are reported separately, allowing a gold standard 
to be created independently; the study was set up 
prospectively with permission from HM Coroners and 
consent from the next of kin to have an independent 
PMCT investigation. In other similar international 
studies,4,14 PMCT is done before autopsy on the 
instruction of the investigating authority, and the PMCT 
results have to inform the autopsy for legal and ethical 
reasons.
The occurrence of minor discrepancies was also not 
significantly different between PMCTA and autopsy. 
Autopsy did have numerically fewer minor discrepancies 
than did PMCT, but this outcome was to be expected 
because the gold-standard diagnosis was, by default, 
taken from the autopsy findings and, for minor 
discrepancies, PMCTA was less likely to be considered 
definitive enough to change the gold standard.
We believe that one of the most important findings is 
that if PMCTA were used as a first-line technique in post-
mortem investigation, as many as 92% of autopsies might 
be avoided without missing clinically significant trauma 
A
D
B
C
Figure 3: Images from post-mortem CT with targeted coronary angiography in two cases of trauma 
(A, B) An 86-year-old woman who was found dead in the rear doorway to her home on a cold day in February. 
PMCTA agreed with autopsy on the presence of ischaemic heart disease, but autopsy failed to report the trauma, 
which was potentially relevant in this case. (A) 3D-bone reconstruction with anterior dislocation of the shoulder 
(arrow shows the direction of dislocation). (B) Coronal brain multiplanar reconstruction image with subcutaneous 
haematoma (*). (C, D) A 91-year-old woman with an agreed primary cause of death of myocardial insufficiency due 
to aortic stenosis. However, PMCTA recorded in part 2 of the death certificate (associated conditions) an (C) acute 
pathological fracture of the left femur (asterisk) and (D) lung metastases (arrows), not reported on autopsy, which 
were thought likely to have acutely exacerbated her chronic cardiac condition. PMCTA=post-mortem CT with 
targeted coronary angiography.
Cases for 
which cause of 
death given by 
PMCTA 
(n=193)
Cases for which cause 
of death given by 
PMCTA, excluding low 
confidence cases 
(n=174)
Major discrepancy
PMCTA
12 (6%)
11 (6%)
Autopsy
9 (5%)
9 (5%)
Minor discrepancy
PMCTA
21 (11%)
17 (10%)
Autopsy
13 (7%)
12 (7%)
Discrepant findings were recorded per case, not per finding. Minor discrepancies 
in both the PMCTA and autopsy diagnosis were apparent in six cases. 
PMCTA=post-mortem CT with targeted coronary angiography.
Table 3: Discrepancies in cause of death against the gold standard
 Articles
152 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 390   July 8, 2017
(and therefore most types of unnatural death that could 
be identified at autopsy), occupational lung disease, or 
reportable disease, without significantly changing the 
overall population data for cause of death. Although 
identification of pulmonary thromboembolism is a 
weakness in this study of PMCTA, in general, this only 
applies when pulmonary thromboembolism occurs in 
the presence of another clinically significant pathological 
abnormality, such as advanced cancer or coronary artery 
disease. When pulmonary thromboembolism occurs in 
isolation with no other pathology, PMCTA will either 
provide the correct diagnosis or find no cause of death, in 
which case the body would be referred to autopsy.
Although reporters of PMCTA were asked to give a 
confidence judgment in their decision of cause of death, 
diagnostic accuracy was not significantly higher when 
the low-confidence group (triaged to autopsy) were 
excluded from the analysis. Furthermore, in many cases 
in which PMCTA did not give a cause of death, autopsy 
seemed to give only a so-called last-resort diagnosis, such 
as left ventricular hypertrophy or cardiomegaly, which 
had also been identified by PMCTA but not considered 
severe enough to be a definite cause of death.
We expected PMCT to be poor at identifying sepsis 
without obvious abscess or origin, but in this case series, 
PMCTA failed to diagnose the location of sepsis in only 
one case. This failed diagnosis was a case of meningitis 
in which the PMCTA report diagnosed sepsis as the 
cause of death, on the basis of pre-mortem history and 
investigations, but requested an autopsy to identify the 
source. This was the only case of sepsis in this study 
without a clear source, such as pneumonia, abscess 
formation, or gastrointestinal perforation.
If toxicology or histology testing is likely to be required 
on the basis of the history (mainly toxicology cases in this 
study), then these results might be delayed, and therefore 
the decision of whether autopsy is required might also be 
delayed, which might prolong the release of the body to 
the next of kin. For this reason, some centres would not 
do PMCTA as a potential alternative to autopsy in these 
cases, or would have to introduce rapid overnight 
toxicology testing.24 Our data show no evidence that the 
combination of PMCTA with toxicology or histology, or 
both, when requested for specific reasons, resulted in an 
increased frequency of discrepancy with the gold 
standard. However, the histology specimens used in this 
study, which we propose are replaceable by CT-guided 
biopsy, were obtained at autopsy, and therefore, would be 
considerably larger than standard 16G cores from a 
CT-guided cutting needle.
Caution should be taken in the interpretation of 
discrepancies as the occurrence of error for PMCTA and 
autopsy. PMCTA was reported by up to three observers in 
consensus with the opportunity to review reports, with 
no time constraint. However, in general, autopsies were 
done on routine autopsy lists for HM Coroners, with no 
extra time or staffing, and were therefore affected by both 
time constraints and numbers of cases per day. Therefore, 
many of the autopsy errors would probably have been 
avoided if more time had been available. Furthermore, 
PMCT might do worse in routine practice with only one 
observer than in our study. Autopsy, similar to PMCT, is 
potentially susceptible to the well recognised diagnostic 
error of satisfaction of search25—eg, dissection and 
further tests might be restricted once a clear, clinically 
significant coronary artery pathology is found, in a case 
with an appropriate history.
This study uses only one technique for angiography. 
Other techniques, such as whole-body angiography,12 might 
possibly give different results in particular circumstances, 
such as abdominal disease or pulmonary thrombo-
embolism. Scans can also be reviewed immediately to 
decide whether angiography is required,17 or even what type 
of angiography to use. We attempted coronary angiography 
in all cases and did not make protocol decisions at the time 
of scanning because in general, scans are done outside of 
Discrepancy between 
PMCTA and gold 
standard
Discrepancy 
between autopsy 
and gold standard
p value
Major
Minor
Major
Minor
Autopsy diagnosis more accurate
Pulmonary thromboembolism
··
··
··
··
0·004
Sole diagnosis
1
0
0
0
··
With comorbidity
4
1
0
0
··
False positive
2
1
0
0
··
False positive or negative respiratory disease
2
7
0
3
··
Gastrointestinal haemorrhage 
with comorbidities
1
0
0
0
··
Missed cerebral infarct
1
0
0
0
··
Myocardial infarction
1
0
0
0
··
Source of sepsis not identified
0
1
0
0
··
PMCTA diagnosis more accurate
Clinically significant trauma with or without 
haemorrhage
0
0
6
2
0·008
Missed cerebral haemorrhage
0
0
2
0
··
Wrong site of haemorrhage
0
1
0
1
··
Clinically significant coronary anatomy variant
0
0
0
2
··
No overt difference between autopsy and PMCTA diagnosis
False positive or negative heart disease
0
9
0
8
··
Aspiration of gastric contents*
0
1
0
2
··
Pancreatitis or other abdominal disease*
0
2
0
0
··
Perforated viscus*
0
0
1
1
··
Not included in discrepancy analysis
Pleural fluid not reported
.. 
1
..
30
··
Rib fractures probably related to resuscitation 
not reported
..
1
..
21
··
Coronary artery disease given instead of 
myocardial infarction as cause of death
..
16
..
..
··
PMCTA=post-mortem CT with targeted coronary angiography. *No significant difference (separately and if all 
abdominal diseases considered together).
Table 4: Discrepancies with the gold standard in cause of death or clinically significant findings of the 
cause of death
 Articles
www.thelancet.com   Vol 390   July 8, 2017 
153
standard clinical hours. Therefore, we have not assessed 
the added value of angiography and whether it could be 
avoided in some cases.
In our study, the autopsy result was taken as the gold 
standard, unless it was clearly contradicted by imaging 
findings, such as by clinically significant haemorrhage or 
fracture, or changed by a combination of the PMCTA 
report and autopsy findings. The reviewers felt that the 
PMCTA report was probably more accurate than autopsy 
in many cases, and reanalysis of the results with a 
PMCTA as the primary gold standard, unless contradicted 
by clear autopsy findings, would give different results, 
mainly within the minor discrepancies.
No inter-reporter or intra-reporter analysis was done, 
but this type of analysis was not a study question. It will 
become a bigger issue as the use of imaging to replace 
autopsy in different centres, with different levels of 
experience and training, becomes more common.
We did not calculate the required sample size because 
to show statistical equivalence of PMCTA and autopsy 
would require considerable numbers, a gold standard 
independent of both PMCTA and autopsy, and a specific 
definition of balance of probabilities (the level of evidence 
required by the HM Coroner’s court).26 Therefore, 
numbers were chosen within staffing and financial 
constraints, in line with the previous UK validation study 
that did not use angiography.6 This study does not 
address the financial consequences of using PMCTA as a 
triage test to replace autopsy. PMCT costs are highly 
dependent on throughput, and autopsy service costs are 
variable across the country and dependent on local 
contractual agreements.
PMCT is now becoming established as a genuine 
alternative to autopsy in England and Wales, and the 
public has a right to request it if available.27 Our data 
show that replacing the internal (autopsy) component of 
a full post-mortem investigation with PMCTA could 
replace most HM Coroners’ autopsies, without missing 
autopsy-identifiable unnatural causes of death and 
reportable diseases, and would not significantly change 
population statistics for cause of death. PMCTA should 
not be reported in isolation, but imaging findings must 
be interpreted on the balance of probabilities, with 
assessors doing a full review of the medical history and 
an external examination, with toxicology and histology if 
required.
Contributors
GNR and BM contributed equally to the conception and design of the 
work, as well as the analysis and interpretation of data. GNR and BM, 
mindful of the opinions of the other authors, developed the manuscript 
with all other authors contributing to the final manuscript. JA was 
responsible for the acquisition of most of the consents from relatives. 
The other authors contributed to the development of the protocol, body 
preparation, and acquisition of post-mortem CT or autopsy data.
Declaration of interests
GNR, BM, VR, and SS are coauthors for a post-mortem CT enhanced 
with targeted coronary angiography catheter (patent PCT/
GB2012/050359). All other authors declare no competing interests. 
Acknowledgments
This Article presents independent research funded by the National 
Institute for Health Research under its RISC Programme 
(grant reference number, RC-PG-0309–10052). The views expressed are 
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Health 
Service, the National Institute for Health Research, or the Department of 
Health. We thank the relatives who gave consent for their recently 
departed loved ones to be part of this study. We also thank Her Majesty’s 
Coroners’ offices for North and South Leicestershire for their support of 
this project, as well as all the porters, anatomical pathology 
technologists, and radiographers.
References
1 
Rutty GN, Brogdon G, Dedouit F, et al. Terminology used in 
publications for post-mortem cross-sectional imaging. 
Int J Legal Med 2013; 127: 465–66.
2 
Westphal SE, Apitzsch J, Penzkofer T, Mahnken AH, Knuchel R. 
Virtual CT autopsy in clinical pathology: feasibility in clinical 
autopsies. Virchows Arch 2012; 461: 211–19.
3 
Leth PM, Struckmann H, Lauritsen J. Interobserver agreement of 
the injury diagnoses obtained by postmortem computed 
tomography of traffic fatality victims and a comparison with autopsy 
results. Forensic Sci Int 2013; 225: 15–19.
4 
Wichmann D, Obbelode F, Vogel H, et al. Virtual autopsy as an 
alternative to traditional medical autopsy in the intensive care unit: 
a prospective cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2012; 156: 123–30.
5 
Donchin Y, Rivkind AI, Bar-Ziv J, Hiss J, Almog J, Drescher M. 
Utility of postmortem computed tomography in trauma victims. 
J Trauma 1994; 37: 552–56.
6 
Roberts IS, Benamore RE, Benbow EW, et al. Post-mortem imaging 
as an alternative to autopsy in the diagnosis of adult deaths: 
a validation study. Lancet 2012; 379: 136–42.
7 
Baglivo M, Winklhofer S, Hatch GM, Ampanozi G, Thali MJ, 
Ruder TD. The rise of forensic and post-mortem radiology—
analysis of the literature between the year 2000 and 2011. 
J Forensic Radiol Imaging 2013; 1: 3–9.
8 
Jalalzadeh H, Giannakopoulos GF, Berger FH, et al. Post-mortem 
imaging compared with autopsy in trauma victims—a systematic 
review. Forensic Sci Int 2015; 257: 29–48.
9 
Dirnhofer R, Jackowski C, Vock P, Potter K, Thali MJ. 
VIRTOPSY: minimally invasive, imaging-guided virtual autopsy. 
Radiographics 2006; 26: 1305–33.
10 
Watts G. Imaging the dead. BMJ 2010; 341: c6600.
11 
Ministry of Justice. Coroners Statistics 2014 England and Wales. 
2015. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/file/427720/coroners-statistics-2014.pdf (accessed 
Jan 21, 2016).
12 
Grabherr S, Grimm J, Dominguez A, Vanhaebost J, Mangin P. 
Advances in post-mortem CT-angiography. Br J Radiol 2014; 
87: 20130488.
13 
Grabherr S, Grimm JM, Heinemann A. Atlas of postmortem 
angiography. London: Springer International Publishing, 2016.
14 
Michaud K, Grabherr S, Doenz F, Mangin P. Evaluation of 
postmortem MDCT and MDCT-angiography for the investigation of 
sudden cardiac death related to atherosclerotic coronary artery 
disease. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging 2012; 28: 1807–22.
15 
Morgan B, Biggs MJ, Barber J, et al. Accuracy of targeted 
post-mortem computed tomography coronary angiography 
compared to assessment of serial histological sections. 
Int J Legal Med 2013; 127: 809–17
.
16 
Roberts IS, Benamore RE, Peebles C, Roobottom C, Traill ZC. 
Technical report: diagnosis of coronary artery disease using 
minimally invasive autopsy: evaluation of a novel method of 
post-mortem coronary CT angiography. Clin Radiol 2011; 
66: 645–50.
17 
Roberts IS, Traill ZC. Minimally invasive autopsy employing 
post-mortem CT and targeted coronary angiography: evaluation of 
its application to a routine coronial service. Histopathology 2014; 
64: 211–17
.
18 
Kasahara S, Makino Y, Hayakawa M, Yajima D, Ito H, Iwase H. 
Diagnosable and non-diagnosable causes of death by postmortem 
computed tomography: a review of 339 forensic cases. 
Leg Med (Tokyo) 2012; 14: 239–45.
 Articles
154 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 390   July 8, 2017
19 
Saunders SL, Amoroso J, Morgan B, Rutty G. Consent of the 
recently bereaved to post-mortem targeted angiography research: 
207 adult cases. J Clin Pathol 2013; 66: 326–29.
20 Leadbeatter S, Lucas S, Lowe J. Royal College of Pathologists 
Standards for Coroners’ pathologists in post-mortem examinations 
of deaths that appear not to be suspicious. 2014. https://www.
rcpath.org/asset/1B02CFB9%2D000A%2D4B2F%2DB6B80256B719
A5EE/ (accessed Jan 21, 2016).
21 
Lucas SB, Cooper H, Emmett S, Hargraves C, Mason M. 
The Coroner’s autopsy: do we deserve better? A report of the 
National Confidential Enquiry into Patient Outcome and Death. 
2006. www.ncepod.org.uk/2006Report/Downloads/summary.pdf 
(accessed Jan 21, 2016).
22 Jeffery A, Raj V, Morgan B, West K, Rutty GN. The criminal justice 
system’s considerations of so-called near-virtual autopsies: 
the East Midlands experience. J Clin Pathol 2011; 64: 711–17
.
23 Rutty GN, Morgan B, O’Donnell C, Leth PM, Thali M. 
Forensic institutes across the world place CT or MRI scanners or 
both into their mortuaries. J Trauma 2008; 65: 493–94.
24 
Woodford N. 2014/15 annual report: Victorian Institute of Forensic 
Medicine (page 51). 2015. http://www.vifm.org/wp-content/
uploads/2015/10/VIFM-Annual-Report-2014-15.pdf (accessed 
Nov 1, 2016).
25 Berbaum KS, Franken EA Jr, Dorfman DD, et al. Satisfaction of 
search in diagnostic radiology. Invest Radiol 1990; 25: 133–40.
26 Dorries C. Coroners’ courts: a guide to law and practice. 2nd edn. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.
27 
Royal Courts of Justice. Charles Rotsztein v HM senior coroner for 
Inner London [2015] EWHC 2764 (Admin) (Mitting J). 2015. https://
www.judiciary.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/r-rotsztein-v-
hm-senior-coroner-for-inner-london-2015-ewhc-2764-admin.pdf 
(accessed Oct 17, 2016).
