 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Chromosomal instability during neurogenesis in
Huntington’s disease
Albert Ruzo1,*, Gist F. Croft1,*, Jakob J. Metzger1,2,*, Szilvia Galgoczi1, Lauren J. Gerber1, Cecilia Pellegrini1,
Hanbin Wang, Jr1, Maria Fenner1, Stephanie Tse1, Adam Marks1, Corbyn Nchako1 and Ali H. Brivanlou1,‡
ABSTRACT
Huntington’s disease (HD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease caused
by expansion of CAG repeats in the Huntingtin gene (HTT). Neither its
pathogenic mechanisms nor the normal functions of HTT are well
understood. To model HD in humans, we engineered a genetic allelic
series of isogenic human embryonic stem cell (hESC) lines with graded
increases in CAG repeat length. Neural differentiation of these lines
unveiled a novel developmental HD phenotype: the appearance of
giant multinucleated telencephalic neurons at an abundance directly
proportional to CAG repeat length, generated by a chromosomal
instabilityand failed cytokinesis over multiple rounds of DNA replication.
We conclude that disrupted neurogenesis during development is an
important, unrecognized aspect of HD pathogenesis. To address the
function of normal HTT protein we generated HTT+/− and HTT−/− lines.
Surprisingly, the same phenotype emerged in HTT−/− but not HTT+/−
lines. We conclude that HD is a developmental disorder characterized
by chromosomal instability that impairs neurogenesis, and that HD
represents a genetic dominant-negative loss of function, contrary to the
prevalent gain-of-toxic-function hypothesis. The consequences of
developmental alterations should be considered as a new target for
HD therapies.
KEY WORDS: Huntington’s disease, CRISPR, Human embryonic
stem cells, Disease modeling, Chromosomal instability,
Neurogenesis, DNA damage and repair
INTRODUCTION
Huntington’s
disease
(HD)
is
a
dominant
autosomal
neurodegenerative disease that is caused by an increase in the
number of CAG repeats, which expands a polyglutamine (polyQ)
tract in the Huntingtin (HTT) protein (Ross and Tabrizi, 2011).
Despite the fact that HTT was among the first disease-causing genes
to be cloned over 20 years ago, no therapy yet exists to treat HD
(Ross and Tabrizi, 2011). It is estimated that the disease affects 1 in
10,000 Americans. The discovery of any drug that can prevent or
delay the onset of HD or prolong the life of patients will make a
significant contribution to the HD field in particular, but also have a
major impact on neurodegenerative disease treatments in general.
HTT protein is expressed continuously in all cells from the
fertilized egg onward; however, the expanded polyQ mutation
notably causes the degeneration of specific populations of neurons
in the brain: medium spiny neurons and cortical projection neurons
(Ross and Tabrizi, 2011). Although animal models of HD, from
Drosophila to mouse, have been useful in understanding many
aspects of cellular deterioration, they have not fully resolved the
disease mechanisms or provided any effective therapies. This is
likely to be due in part to species-specific differences and human-
specific traits, which manifest at the molecular, cellular and tissue
levels. For example, the human forebrain is greatly increased in cell
number and complexity, and the normal HTT CAG repeat length is
expanded from 7 in rodent to ∼20 in humans. In addition, we
recently reported that the human HTT locus encodes multiple
mRNA isoforms, thus generating multiple HTT proteins, some of
which are present only in higher apes and humans (hominids; Ruzo
et al., 2015). Thus, HD cannot be fully studied in existing
non-human model systems.
Traditionally, HD pathology has been attributed to neuronal
dysfunction and death occurring during adult life. However, recent
reports have begun to suggest that HTT has important roles in the
developing brain, indicating that HD pathogenesis might start
during embryogenesis (Godin et al., 2010; HD iPSC Consortium,
2012; Lopes et al., 2016; Molero et al., 2009, 2016). As a
consequence, impaired neurodevelopment would compromise
neuronal homeostasis in adulthood, leading to increased cellular
vulnerability to late-life stressors (Ramocki and Zoghbi, 2008).
Indeed, expression of polyQ-expanded HTT uniquely during
embryogenesis results in a close recapitulation of all typical
biochemical and behavioral HD phenotypes in adult mice
(Molero et al., 2016). Although difficult to study in humans
in vivo, neurons differentiated in vitro from induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs) derived from HD patients display alterations in
their developmental speed, electrophysiology, metabolism, cell
adhesion and, ultimately, cell death, consistent with an impairment
during human neurogenesis (HD iPSC Consortium, 2012, 2017).
Nevertheless, whether the polyQ-expansion constitutes a gain or a
loss of normal HTT functions is still a matter of debate. Historically,
aggregates of either full-length or N-terminal fragments of mutant
HTT have been considered the leading cause of HD pathogenesis
(Zuccato et al., 2010), although there are no studies comparing the
phenotypes of polyQ-expanded versus HTT knockout human cells
that could help properly dissect these mechanisms. While polyQ-
expanded mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) differentiate
normally to neural plate stage, mESCs deficient for HTT were
unable to generate neural rosettes, demonstrating that, at least for
this particular phenotype and species (mouse), mutant HTT is acting
through a gain-of-function mechanism (Lo Sardo et al., 2012).
Contrary to that hypothesis, a recent report using shRNA-mediated
downregulation or exogenous overexpression of mutant HTT hinted
that some HD phenotypes, such as a misregulation of the mitotic
spindle angle in neural stem cells, may indeed be caused by a loss of
HTT functions in a dominant-negative manner (Lopes et al., 2016).
Received 2 July 2017; Accepted 3 December 2017
1Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology and Molecular Embryology, The Rockefeller
University, New York, NY 10065, USA. 2Center for Studies in Physics and Biology,
The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work
‡Author for correspondence (brvnlou@rockefeller.edu)
A.H.B., 0000-0002-1761-280X
1
© 2018. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2018) 145, dev156844. doi:10.1242/dev.156844
DEVELOPMENT
 In order to fully untangle the molecular mechanisms of HD
pathology in humans, more precise tools are needed, avoiding the
use of exogenous gene expression modulators (shRNAs or plasmid
transfections) or lines with different genetic backgrounds that might
confound the conclusions.
Here we report the generation of the first collection of isogenic
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) modeling HD as a classical
genetic allelic series. Since disease onset and severity are directly
proportional to polyQ length, we used CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing
to engineer hESC lines that are genetically identical except for the
length of the polyQ expansion. We found that these HD-hESCs
recapitulate some previously reported neuronal phenotypes, thus
validating the model. Importantly, they revealed an unexpected, new
phenotype. Chromosomal instability during forebrain neurogenesis
resulted in the generation of multinucleated neural progenitors and
neurons, at a frequency proportional to polyQ length. These novel
findings support the idea that HD is not just an adult-onset disease,
but also a neurodevelopmental disorder. In addition, we found that
these HD phenotypes were similar to those of HTT−/−, but not
HTT+/−, hESCs, thus assigning a new function for wild-type HTT
during neurodevelopment and demonstrating that HD pathology
begins far earlier than expected as a dominant-negative loss-of-
function, rather than through the broadly accepted gain-of-toxic-
function mechanism. Collectively, these findings generate a new
model for early HD pathology in which disrupted forebrain
neurogenesis renders brain circuits specifically vulnerable to
subsequent effects of mutant HTT or lifetime stressors. Finally, our
results validate the utility of this novel HD toolkit, and we predict that
it will enable the HD research community to explore further aspects
of HD in other cell types and at other time points with unprecedented
genetic power.
RESULTS
Generation of an HD allelic series in hESCs
In order to precisely model the correlation between polyQ length
and disease severity, and elucidate the embryonic function of wild-
type HTT, we combined CRISPR/Cas9 technology (Cong et al.,
2013; Jinek et al., 2012; Mali et al., 2013) with ePiggyBac
transposition (Lacoste et al., 2009) to edit the genome of the RUES2
hESC line [NIH0013 (James et al., 2006; Rosa et al., 2009)]. Five
different polyQ lengths (45, 50, 58, 67 and 74 Q) were introduced
into one of the two alleles to generate genotypes RUES2-45Q,
RUES2-50Q, RUES2-58Q, RUES2-67Q and RUES2-74Q in order
to model the spectrum found in HD patients, including two extreme
lengths (67 and 74 Q) that cause juvenile-onset HD (Andrew et al.,
1993; Duyao et al., 1993). To ensure that our gene-editing process
itself did not influence any readout, we used the same approach to
reinsert the normal 22Q repeat, thus creating a sixth isogenic line
by regenerating wild-type RUES2, i.e. RUES2-22Q (Fig. 1A,
Fig. S1A,B). To address the embryonic function of HTT we also
used CRISPR/Cas9 to delete HTT exon 1, generating heterozygous
(RUES2-HTT+/−) and homozygous null (RUES2-HTT−/−) HTT
mutants (Fig. 1A, Fig. S1C-E).
Two to three independent pluripotent hESC clones were
thoroughly characterized for each genotype. First, their HTT
alleles were sequenced to confirm correct targeting and correct
sequence of the non-targeted allele (Fig. S1B). Western blot
confirmed expression of the appropriate wild-type and expanded
full-length HTT protein, or its absence in HTT−/− lines. There was a
slight variation in overall full-length HTT expression level between
lines, but without association to genotype, except for HTT+/− lines,
which showed ∼60% of normal level (Fig. S1D,F). Importantly, in
lines with a polyQ expansion, there was equivalent expression from
each allele (Fig. S4D-F). Immunofluorescence further confirmed
the lack of full-length HTT protein in HTT−/− lines and the reduced
expression in HTT+/− lines, and showed pan-cytoplasmic non-
nuclear subcellular distribution, which was unaffected by polyQ
length (Fig. 1B, Fig. S1G). All lines were validated for the absence
of off-target effects in the top five predicted off-target loci (data not
shown). In addition, we performed whole-genome sequencing of
the core set of lines (22Q, 50Q, 58Q, HTT+/− and HTT−/−; data
available at rues.rockefeller.edu), and demonstrated that no
mutations in any of the CRISPR/Cas9 predicted off-target loci or
any consistent modifications of the genome were generated by the
gene-editing procedure (Table S1). Karyotype and the ability of
the cells to self-renew or maintain pluripotency were unaffected
(Fig. S2A,B, data not shown). Additionally, since karyotype and
whole-genome sequencing analysis cannot detect copy number
variation (CNV), we also screened all lines using array comparative
genomic hybridization (aCGH). This demonstrated that neither
CAG expansion nor loss of HTT affects the basic properties of
embryonic stem cells. This collection of isogenic HD-hESC lines
therefore constitutes a unique genetic toolkit that allows, for the first
time, a comparison of molecular and cellular differences that are
specifically due to graduated HD mutation or knockout to be made,
with minimal background variability, directly in human pluripotent
cells, which can differentiate to all human cell types.
HD and HTT−/− hESCs show dysregulation of neural plate
mitotic spindle orientation
Since HD is characterized by the selective degeneration of several
categories of forebrain neurons, we first used the allelic series to ask
whether HTT mutations, both for the CAG expanded collection, as
well as for loss of HTT function, had any effect on early neural
development. The formation of the nervous system begins by neural
induction, which occurs by an evolutionarily conserved ʻdefault
mechanism’ that involves inhibition of both the SMAD1/3/5 and
SMAD2/3 branches of TGFβ signaling during early embryogenesis
(Muñoz-Sanjuán and Brivanlou, 2002). This dual SMAD inhibition
can be accomplished by exposing pluripotent embryonic cells, such
as hESCs, to two small compound inhibitors: SB-431542 and
LDN-193189. This inhibition leads to a direct fate conversion of
hESCs after a few days of culture, from pluripotency to neuronal
fates of anterior telencephalic character, and the emergence of
rosette-like structures after 14 days. At day 19 after default neural
induction, all isogenic lines generated typical neural rosettes
(Fig.
1C,D,
Fig.
S2A),
with
no
significant
difference
in
morphology or in the expression of pan-neural [PAX6, SOX1 and
nestin (NES)] or telencephalic-specific (FOXG1) markers (Fig.
S2B). HTT protein was still localized in the cytoplasm of the neural
progenitors at this stage, regardless of polyQ length (Fig. S2B), and
appeared to be relatively enriched in the apical cytoplasm
surrounding the rosette lumen. We concluded that expansion of
polyQ or lack of HTT does not interfere with the initial stages of
neural differentiation or positional identity in human cells. The fact
that HTT−/− hESCs could undergo neural induction and self-
organize into rosettes contrasts with the observation made in Htt−/−
mESCs, and thus might represent a species-specific difference
(Lo Sardo et al., 2012).
Our previous study and those of others have demonstrated a link
between HTT, cell polarity and cell division in animal models
(Godin and Humbert, 2011; Godin et al., 2010; Haremaki et al.,
2015).
Since
rosettes
are
composed
of
highly
polarized
neuroepithelial cells, with centrosomes and apical membrane
2
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2018) 145, dev156844. doi:10.1242/dev.156844
DEVELOPMENT
 proteins clustered to form a neural tube-like apical lumen, we first
asked whether the size of the rosette lumen was affected by HTT
genotype. At day 19 we found no significant difference between
genotypes in the mean or population distribution of lumen areas;
however, when cultures were maintained for an additional 7 days
and lumen sizes increased, polyQ-expanded and HTT−/− lines
showed a significantly reduced fraction of larger rosettes
compared with the control (Fig. 2A). To address the mechanism
underlying this difference, we first examined cell division polarity.
As in the developing brain, nuclei undergo interkinetic nuclear
migration and move to the apical pole for cell division, which then
occurs adjacent to the rosette lumen, which is the in vitro
manifestation of the neural tube. Early neuroepithelial cell
divisions are symmetrical (Bayer and Altman, 2007) and occur
with an orthogonal mitotic plane with respect to the lumen
(Fig. 2B). Wild-type and HTT+/− lines showed predominantly
orthogonal cell divisions as expected, whereas polyQ-expanded
and HTT−/− lines exhibited randomized mitotic angles, suggesting
dysregulation of mitotic spindle orientation (Fig. 2C). A decrease
in regulated, symmetrical divisions provides an explanation for the
failure of the mutant and knockout rosettes to expand at pace with
controls (Fig. 2A). In agreement with this mitotic dysregulation,
both expanded polyQ and HTT−/− lines displayed occasional
multipolar
metaphase
figures
(Fig.
2D)
and
cells
with
supernumerary centrosomes (Fig. 2E). Our data support previous
studies in mouse models and human fibroblasts (Keryer et al.,
2011; Molina-Calavita et al., 2014; Sathasivam et al., 2001) and
additionally suggest that mitotic angle defects and centrosomal
dysregulation
occur
at
the
earliest
stages
of
human
neurodevelopment, even with physiological levels of HTT
protein and common polyQ tract lengths. Finally, since the
expanded polyQ HD mutants phenocopied the HTT−/−, but not the
HTT+/− lines, we conclude that, at least in this developmental
context, HD mutations represent a loss of function.
Fig. 1. Generation and validation of isogenic HD model hESC lines. (A) (Left) Strategy for generating the isogenic HD model hESC cell lines. CRISPR/Cas9-
targeted homologous recombination generated hESC clones with increasing lengths of the CAG repeat region in exon 1 of the HTT gene, and a selection
cassette flanked by ePiggyBac (ePB) terminal repeats. The ePB selection cassette was subsequently removed by transfecting an excision-only piggyBac
transposase plasmid, which regenerated a ‘pristine’ polyQ-expanded allele. (Right) Strategy used for generating HTT+/− and HTT−/− RUES2 hESCs. A pair of
sgRNAs was used to specifically delete exon 1 of the HTT gene. Two to three independent clones of each polyQ length and HTT dosage were isolated, screened
for quality control, then subjected to default neural differentiation by SB-431542 plus LDN-193189 to rosette stage forebrain neuroepithelia (day 19) and
lower cortical layer neurons (day 45) to search for polyQ length-dependent phenotypes. (B) Immunostaining for HTT protein (D7F7 antibody, green) and DNA
staining (DAPI, red) shows that HTT is localized to the cytoplasm in hESCs and its intracellular localization is unaffected by the increasing polyQ lengths. The lack
of HTT signal in HTT−/− clones validates the efficiency of HTT knockout. (C) Clones of all polyQ lengths and HTT dosages were able to differentiate to
neural rosettes. Immunostaining of day 19 cultures showed uniform expression of neuroepithelial protein markers. (Top) Intermediate filament NES (green), and
apical protein N-cadherin (red) identifying neural tube-like lumens. (Bottom) Pan-neural transcription factors PAX6 (green) and SOX1 (red) in the nuclei.
(D) Clones of all polyQ lengths generated similarly organized neural rosettes. High-resolution images of individual neural rosettes, immunostained for the lumen
marker N-cadherin (red), the cilia and cytoskeleton marker acetylated tubulin (cyan), and with DAPI (blue). Scale bars: 50 μm in B; 100 μm in C; 5 μm in D.
3
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2018) 145, dev156844. doi:10.1242/dev.156844
DEVELOPMENT
 Fig. 2. HD mutations drive early neural rosette phenotypes. (A) Inverted cumulative percentage plot of rosette lumen size shows no difference between
genotypes at day 19 of differentiation (5 days after reseeding), but that lumens evolve to be substantially smaller in polyQ-expanded lines and HTT−/− by day 28
(14 days after seeding). n=2-3 lines/genotype. Arrow indicates statistical comparison (*P<0.05). (B) Expanded polyQ and HTT−/−, but not HTT+/−, lines
exhibited a randomization of the angle of the mitotic plane, as compared with wild-type controls that are typically orthogonal. Immunostaining for centrosomes
(pericentrin, green) and DNA staining (DAPI, white). (C) Quantification of mitotic plane angles relative to the center of the rosette lumen. Individual data points
and median are shown. *P<0.05, **P<0.01, Kruskal–Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparison post-test. Moreover, both a linear regression and a non-
parametric test for trend (Jonckheere-Terpstra test) showed a significant correlation of polyQ length with the magnitude of spindle angle dysregulation
(P=2.2×10−4 and P=1×10−4, respectively). (D,E) Expanded polyQ clones exhibited defects in mitosis, including (D) multipolar mitoses (arrowheads) and
(E) supernumerary centrosomes (arrowheads). Staining for DNA (DAPI, white) and immunostaining for centrosomes (pericentrin, green) and acetylated tubulin
(red). (F,G) Analysis of inter-rosette self-organization. (F) The distribution of nearest-neighbor distances between neural rosette lumens (N-cadherin foci) is
significantly different (arrow, d) compared with a random distribution in wild-type cultures, demonstrating high-level inter-rosette self-organization. (G) Expanded
polyQ and HTT−/−, but not HTT+/−, lines show a significantly more random spatial distribution of rosettes compared with control. n=2-3 lines/genotype. *P<0.05,
**P<0.01, ANOVA. Scale bars: 10 μm in B,D; 5 μm in E.
4
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2018) 145, dev156844. doi:10.1242/dev.156844
DEVELOPMENT
 Neural rosette spatial self-organization is impaired in HD and
HTT−/− hESCs
We next theorized that the mitotic spindle dysregulation might impact
the global spatial organization of neural rosettes, and therefore
analyzed their higher order self-organization. Interestingly, rosettes in
control lines displayed a highly regular organization, in which the
nearest-neighbor distance distribution differed significantly from
random (Fig. 2F). This demonstrates, for the first time, that cultured
neural rosettes have an intrinsic, quantifiable ability to self-organize in
space. Surprisingly, neural rosettes from expanded polyQ and HTT−/−
lines showed significantly diminished self-organization (Fig. 2F,G,
Fig. S2C,D). HTT+/− lines were not significantly different from
control, but showed an intermediate level of organization, suggesting
potential sensitivity to HTT gene dosage at this developmental stage.
We thus concluded that HTT regulates global morphogenetic self-
organization during early neural development, thus identifying a
novel
early
function
in
self-organization
during
embryonic
development. These results also suggest that HD mutations affect
the earliest stages of human neurodevelopment, rather than acting
primarily in adulthood, as commonly assumed.
Appearance of aberrant multinucleated neurons and
progenitors during neurogenesis in HD and HTT−/− hESCs
We next examined the extent to which our HTT alleles affect
neurogenesis downstream of neural induction, when neuroepithelial
cells transition to radial glia and their mitoses begin to produce
postmitotic neurons or intermediate progenitors (Shi et al., 2012).
At day 45 of in vitro neural differentiation, we detected no
significant difference between control and mutant genotypes in the
abundance of neural progenitors (SOX2+, NES+) or postmitotic
neurons (CTIP2+, MAP2+) (Fig. 3A, Fig. S3A,B). Surprisingly, we
detected a number of dramatic, abnormal cellular phenotypes in
both progenitors and postmitotic neurons from polyQ-expanded and
HTT−/− as compared with control or HTT+/− genotypes (Fig. 3).
First, progenitor cells (NEShigh MAP2low) displayed enlarged cell
somas, with multiple nuclei, disorganized filaments, and vacuoles
(Fig. 3B,C, Movies 1,2). Second, neurons (MAP2high NESlow) were
seen with multiple nuclei tethered by strands of DNA into bouquet
shapes, and multiple concentrically located centrosomes (Fig. 3B,
D, Movie 3). Cells from polyQ-expanded and HTT−/− lines with
bouquet nuclei or large oblong nuclei showed multiple centrosomes
and severe aneuploidy (Fig. 3D, Fig. 4D, Movie 4). The frequency
of these abnormal phenotypes in polyQ-expanded or HTT−/− was
higher than in control or HTT+/− genotypes, and displayed a
statistically significant correlation to the length of the polyQ
expansion (P=0.013 in a linear regression model and P=0.012 in the
Jonckheere–Terpstra non-parametric trend test). As in the rosette
phenotypes, HTT+/− lines showed a mild phenotype (Fig. 3E,
Fig. S3C). These data are again consistent with a dominant-negative
loss-of-function model for this aspect of HD. Collectively, these
cellular phenotypes are characteristic of chromosomal instability,
which can result from defects in many aspects of the mitotic
apparatus or unresolved DNA damage.
Chromosomal instability was not observed during pluripotency
in any of our lines, suggesting that this is a time-specific event.
During pluripotency, HTT protein(s) were selectively localized
in the cytoplasm and excluded from the nucleus before or
during cell divisions. We therefore evaluated the levels and
subcellular localization of HTT proteins by western blot and
immunofluorescence in neural progenitors and neurons. Western
blot analysis established that HTT protein expression was increased
from pluripotency to day-22 neural rosettes, and subsequently
decreased at day 40 during neurogenesis (Fig. S4D). We note that
the stoichiometric ratio of wild-type HTT to expanded CAG HTT
remains unchanged from pluripotency (Fig. S1F) to the last time
point of neurogenesis (day 40, Fig. S4D,E). Immunofluorescence
revealed several differences in HTT protein distribution. First, in
postmitotic neurons (MAP2+ CTIP2+) HTT protein was detected in
both the cytoplasm and, in contrast to pluripotent cells, in the
nucleus (Fig. 3F, top). In progenitor cells (SOX2+ NES+), HTT was
more enriched and punctate in the apical perinuclear cytoplasm
(Fig. 3F, HTT+/−). HTT also showed a stereotypical subcellular
localization during mitosis: enriched at both apical poles as well as
the midplane at anaphase (Fig. 3F, HTT+/−, arrowhead). In polyQ-
expanded lines the HTT signal was greatly increased in the
abnormal multinucleated cells, displaying large, bright puncta
suggestive of aggregates, both in the cytoplasm and the nuclei, with
a particularly dense enrichment at the multicentrosomal location
described above (Fig. 3F, 45Q and 74Q, arrows).
Both polyQ expansion and loss of HTT lead to chromosomal
instability
To determine the mechanisms for the emergence of aberrant neurons,
we first asked if multinucleation arose from cell fusion or dysregulated
cell division. Time-lapse imaging of mixed RFP-labeled and GFP-
labeled cultures showed no cell fusion events in any genotype (data
not shown). However, whereas control clones exhibited normal cell
cycle progression (Movie 5), polyQ-expanded and HTT−/− lines
displayed failed cytokinesis over multiple rounds of karyokinesis
(Fig. 4A, Movies 6,7). These unsuccessful divisions usually failed at
the terminal separation of daughter cells (abscission). Failed
abscission can result from defects in the assembly of the telophase
midbody, but we found that the key abscission proteins citron kinase
and aurora B kinase constituted normal midbodies in all genotypes
(Fig. 4B, data not shown). However, polyQ-expanded and HTT−/−
anaphases and telophases showed lagging chromosomes and
chromatin bridges, respectively (Fig. 4B), which are known to lead
to abscission failure if unresolved by DNA repair proteins
(Steigemann et al., 2009). Importantly, we detected lagging
chromosomes even in the context of normal ploidy (Fig. 4C,
Movie 8), whereas all multinucleated cells with DNA strands had high
levels of aneuploidy (Fig. 4D). These findings further support the
hypothesis that both HD polyQ-expansion mutations and the loss of
HTT can lead to chromosomal instability. Furthermore, they suggest
that HTT normally prevents DNA damage, and loss of this function
leads to the chromosomal instability phenotypes that we describe.
DISCUSSION
A novel genetic toolkit
We have created a novel genetic toolkit in hESCs that, for the first
time, allows the comparison of molecular and cellular differences
that are specifically due to either graduated HD mutation or to HTT
knockout.
Using
CRISPR/Cas9 gene-editing
technology
we
generated a series of lines with different CAG lengths, with
minimal genetic background variability. Because these cells are of
human origin, and are based on a precisely edited endogenous HTT
locus, they offer significant advantages over previous cell models in
other species and other expression systems, as our lines maintain
endogenous regulation of gene dosage and contain common,
clinically significant CAG lengths. Because they are pluripotent
they provide the means to access all human cell types at all
developmental stages, including specific neural lineages classically
known to be affected in HD. We have validated our allelic series as
an HD model by confirming previous reports of mitotic angle
5
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2018) 145, dev156844. doi:10.1242/dev.156844
DEVELOPMENT
 dysregulation in polyQ-expanded and HTT−/− forebrain neural
progenitor cells, and have further demonstrated its unique power by
providing entirely novel insight into HTT function and HD
pathology during early neural development. We believe that this
new allelic series will become a valuable resource for studying HTT
and HD biology in many specific cell types and developmental
stages, in a human genetic, molecular and cellular background. In
the future, it will also be of extreme interest for the HD community
to expand this HD allelic series to other hESC lines. This will allow
comparison between different genders and genetic backgrounds, to
assess the possibility that some phenotypes are particularly
enhanced in a specific genetic background.
Fig. 3. See next page for legend.
6
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2018) 145, dev156844. doi:10.1242/dev.156844
DEVELOPMENT
 HD has a developmental origin
We present new evidence for a strong developmental component of
HD. Little attention has traditionally focused on embryonic
development in HD; however, our data support and expand on a
growing body of literature that has begun to define important effects
at multiple stages of neurodevelopment (Barnat et al., 2017; Molero
et al., 2009, 2016; Molina-Calavita et al., 2014; Nopoulos et al.,
2011; White et al., 1997). Notably, a study of mouse forebrain
neurogenesis reported a series of phenotypes remarkably similar to
those we describe in vitro, including an increased volume of
progenitor cells, and irregular, fused, misshapen nuclei (Molero
et al., 2009). Our findings now suggest that chromosomal instability
is a key cellular mechanism underpinning these phenotypes, and
future studies in HD mice should test this possibility directly.
Another study provided perhaps the most convincing genetic
evidence of key pathological events during development by
demonstrating that conditional expression of mutant HTT in mice
during development alone reproduces the near-complete adult-onset
HD phenotypes (Molero et al., 2016). Our data shed light on the
molecular mechanism behind these phenotypes in a human neural
developmental context, and support the contention that HD is
indeed a developmental disease.
Our results suggest that the chromosomal instability phenotype
displays cell type and developmental stage specificity, since it is not
present during pluripotency or early neuronal induction, but only
when progenitor cells initiate neurogenesis. It will be important to
exploit this specificity in future work to determine what makes these
cells specifically dependent on HTT function. The answer might
point to an evolutionary function for HTT in the enlargement and
diversification of the human forebrain, which was accomplished in
large part by an increasing diversification of progenitor cell types
and modes of division, ultimately expanding both the total number
and diversity of neurons (Namba and Huttner, 2017). Furthermore,
this presents an opportunity to test whether this mechanism might
be responsible for the selective vulnerability of cortical and medium
spiny neurons in HD. Both are forebrain CTIP2+ cell types, and
thus it will be important to determine if chromosomal instability
affects the ventral and dorsal forebrain CTIP2+ lineage in a similar
manner.
Cause of chromosomal instability
Chromosomal instability can result from a variety of organelle and
molecular defects, including those affecting chromosome positioning
during anaphase (via defects in microtubules), motor proteins,
kinetochores or centrosomes, which could be related to mitotic
spindle angle regulation as previously suggested in HD (Elias et al.,
2014; Haremaki et al., 2015; Lopes et al., 2016; Molina-Calavita
et al., 2014). However, the chromosomal instability that we describe,
especially given the observation of lagging DNA in the context of
normal centrosome and spindle organization, suggests that one of the
primary defects could be increased DNA damage or dysfunctional
DNA replication/repair, which would lead to entangled or dicentric
chromosomes. Several lines of evidence support this DNA damage/
repair model. First, recent genome-wide association studies identified
DNA repair genes, such as FAN1, as the main genetic modifiers that
significantly accelerate or delay the age of disease onset regardless of
CAG length (GeM-HD Consortium, 2015; Jones et al., 2017; Lu
et al., 2014). Indeed, increased baseline chromosomal instability
might provide a new explanation for the significantly reduced
incidence of cancer in HD patients (Sørensen et al., 1999), since it
typically leads to apoptotic elimination of pre-cancerous cells in the
early stages of transformation (Funk et al., 2016). These findings
support our implication that DNA damage/repair is a more likely
primary
cause
for
these
novel
chromosomal
instability
neurodevelopmental alterations, but future work will test this
hypothesis.
Integration with previous reports and models
Our conclusions are consistent with, and expand, previous
observations made in human HD-iPSCs and other HD models.
These include the detection of abnormal nuclear morphology
(Nekrasov et al., 2016) and early neural rosette phenotypes where
differences in adhesion with long CAG expansions was observed
(HD iPSC Consortium, 2012). Additionally, our observations are
also consistent with a role of HTT in nuclear pore function, as seen
in neurons from HD mice, human iPSCs and human HD brain
samples, where misshapen nuclei, HTT aggregates, and increased
double-stranded breaks were also observed (Gasset-Rosa et al.,
2017; Grima et al., 2017). In light of our results, it is tempting to
speculate that early DNA damage during neurogenesis sets the stage
for later nuclear envelope and nuclear pore defects.
Our observations on rosette organization and neurogenesis are
also consistent with a role of HTT in the establishment/maintenance
of polarity. Our data on rosette size and secondary organization
should be considered along with reports of reduced cell adhesion in
HD-iPSC neural progenitor cells, neural tube defects in zebrafish
embryos, randomization of epithelial polarity in the skin of frog
embryos, and reduced rosette formation in mESCs (Haremaki et al.,
2015; HD iPSC Consortium, 2012; Lo Sardo et al., 2012). Of
particular interest is an assessment of the possible involvement of
the ADAM10/N-cadherin pathway in the phenotypes that we
observe (Lo Sardo et al., 2012).
Gain- or loss-of-function and proportionality to polyQ length
Whether the HD mutation represents a gain- or loss-of-function has
been the subject of debate, and remains controversial. Historically,
Fig. 3. Expanded polyQ and HTT−/− lines show abnormal cellular
phenotypes in early neurogenesis phase. (A) Immunofluorescence for
progenitors (NES, red), neurons (MAP2, green) and DNA staining (DAPI, blue)
identifies two mutant cellular phenotypes in expanded polyQ and HTT−/−
clones: large progenitor cells (arrows) with large soma, multiple nuclei,
disorganized filaments and vacuoles; and neurons with multiple nuclei
(arrowheads). 3D rendering of 40× confocal z-stacks. (B) Higher resolution
(100× confocal image, Imaris 3D rendering) of (top) an aberrant progenitor cell
(NEShigh MAP2low) from the RUES2-58Q line, showing multinucleation,
vacuolation and filament disorganization; and (bottom) an aberrant postmitotic
neuron (NESlow MAP2high) from the RUES2-50Q line, with a typical nuclear
bouquet structure (yellow arrow). (C) Expanded polyQ and HTT−/− lines
display an increase in larger NEShigh cells. Shown is a cumulative probability
curve of NES+ cell areas, the sum of two to three lines/genotype. (D) Aberrant
polarization of abnormal postmitotic neurons. Centrosomes (pericentrin,
magenta) are located in the center of the soma, surrounded by subnuclei (100×
confocal z-section). DAPI, gray. (E) Quantification of the frequency of aberrant
cells, showing mean±s.e.m. percentage of cells with abnormally large cell
soma among all DAPI-stained cells; n=2-3 lines/genotype. Both a linear
regression and a non-parametric test for trend (Jonckheere–Terpstra test)
showed significant correlation between the length of the polyQ expansion and
the abundance of multinucleated cells (P=0.013 and P=0.012, respectively).
(F) Unlike in pluripotency and at early neural rosette stage,
immunofluorescence of HTT (D7F7 antibody, green) in postmitotic neurons
shows a granular, but uniform, signal in nucleus and cytoplasm (22Q). In
polyQ-expanded multinucleated neurons and progenitors, the HTT signal
accumulates in bright puncta, in the nuclear cleft region where
multicentrosome clusters are located (45Q and 74Q, arrows). Interestingly, in
mitotic figures at this stage, HTT was enriched at spindle poles and in between
the separating chromosomes during anaphase (HTT+/−, arrowhead). Scale
bars: 40 μm in A; 5 μm in B.
7
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2018) 145, dev156844. doi:10.1242/dev.156844
DEVELOPMENT
 HD had been considered a toxic gain-of-function, supported
initially by the fact that homozygous and heterozygous HD
patients display the same age of symptom onset and clinical
course, which indicates that the presence of a wild-type allele is not
beneficial (Wexler et al., 1987), as well as by the fact that the
embryonic lethality of Htt knockout in mice can be rescued by
mutant HTT (Leavitt et al., 2001). On the other hand, recent
evidence supports loss-of-function as being the basis of, or at least
involved in, HD. These include studies of polarity and cell division
in amphibian embryos, mouse mammary stem cells, and human
cortical progenitor cells derived from non-isogenic hESC lines,
which suggest a loss-of-function and dominant-negative effect of
HD CAG expansion mutations (Elias et al., 2014; Haremaki et al.,
2015; Lopes et al., 2016). These studies, however, did not have the
luxury of an isogenic HTT−/− line to directly and quantitatively
compare the CAG expansion with complete loss-of-function
phenotypes in human cells as we have in our study. Although we
strongly believe this to be the case, the ultimate and most stringent
evidence for a true dominant-negative effect requires rescue
experiments, in which the observed effects of CAG expansion
and HTT−/− can be reverted by co-expression of wild-type HTT.
One of the most tantalizing genetic questions in HD biology is the
remarkably direct inverse correlation between polyQ length and
disease onset (Duyao et al., 1993). We designed our platform to have
the potential to finally allow a mechanistic understanding of the timing
and severity of the disease. We demonstrate that both spindle
orientation
dysregulation
and
multinucleated
cell
generation
increased with CAG length. However, it is possible, even likely, that
HTT has multiple functions at multiple developmental stages and in
different cell types, and thus that the overall clinical phenotype might
be acombination of multiple molecularorcellular phenotypes. Finally,
while a dominant-negative loss-of-function model does not necessarily
require polyQ length proportionality (Lopes et al., 2016), we note that
there is a linear relationship with our observed phenotypes.
Implications for clinical aspects of HD
How could these new discoveries based on isogenic HD-hESC lines
contribute to an understanding of HD pathology and to bringing
Fig. 4. Expanded polyQ and HTT−/− neurogenesis phenotypes are caused by defects in cytokinesis. (A) Representative frames from continuous time-
lapse imaging of NLS-marked nuclei (green) between days 29 and 32, showing that supernumerary nuclei are generated by nuclear replication and failed
cytokinesis. Time stamp is h:min. (B) Mitotic anaphases and telophases in expanded polyQ and HTT−/− lines show lagging DNA and chromatin bridges (insets,
yellow arrows) through the cleavage furrow and midbody (marked by aurora B kinase, red). (C) A dividing cell with normal centromere counts (92) displaying
lagging chromosomes in RUES2-58Q. CREST is a centromeric protein. (D) Multinucleated cells are aneuploid. Representative image of a RUES2-58Q cell with a
large horseshoe-shaped nucleus containing 128 chromosomes (by centromere staining, CREST) and multiple centrosomes (gamma-tubulin). (B,C) 3D Imaris
rendering of 100× confocal z-stacks; (D) a rendered 20 μm oblique virtual slice from a larger stack. Scale bars: 5 μm in B,C.
8
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2018) 145, dev156844. doi:10.1242/dev.156844
DEVELOPMENT
 patients one step closer to a much-needed therapy? It is tempting to
speculate that the multinucleated neuronal progenitors are destined to
undergo cell death, and gradually over decades. This hypothesis is in
agreement with the phenotype of the citron kinase knockout mouse,
where cortical neurons show nuclear bouquets and multiple
centromeres, phenocopying our neuronal phenotype. In these mice,
multinucleated cortical neurons are gradually eliminated by apoptosis
(Anastas et al., 2011; Mitchell et al., 2001). If this were the case in
human HD, the total cortical neuron pool would gradually diminish,
therefore enhancing vulnerability to accumulated homeostatic
burdens of age. Additionally, dying cells might leave scarring or
residual
inflammation.
Another
possibility
is
that
surviving
multinucleated HD neurons might integrate into circuits, perturbing
their normal function and eventually leading to degeneration.
Most fundamentally, our findings collectively argue that the
consequences of early defects must be considered when developing
therapies for HD, even when symptoms only appear decades later.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Generation of an isogenic set of HD model hESC lines
In order to establish an optimal platform for understanding the effects of HD
mutations, we used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to generate a set of isogenic
hESC lines that would differ only in the HTT locus, bearing different lengths
of the CAG tract. The already established, registered and validated RUES2
hESC line (NIH hESC-09-0013) was used as the parental line. Genetic
analysis of the HTT gene in RUES2 showed that it contained 20 and 22
CAGs. The homology donors for the CRISPR/Cas9-mediated homologous
recombination were designed to contain ∼1 kb homology arms flanking
HTT exon 1, a piggyBac transposable element containing a Puro-TK
cassette (for both negative and positive selections), and various versions of
HTTexon 1 containing different lengths of the CAG tract (20, 42, 48, 56, 67,
72 CAGs). To construct the homology donors, we first generated a parental
plasmid using Gibson assembly, in which we could easily swap the length of
the CAG tract. All fragments needed for the assembly were amplified using
Q5 high-fidelity polymerase (NEB) or the GC-RICH PCR System (Sigma-
Aldrich) using the primers listed in Table S3.
This resulting ʻbase’ homology donor plasmid contained a 20 CAG repeat
tract, which could easily be swapped using the flanking XmnI and BbsI sites.
To create the homology donor plasmids with expanded CAG lengths, we
PCR amplified the HTT exon 1 region from genomic DNAs obtained from
iPSCs or fibroblasts derived from HD patients, and cloned them into the
ʻbase’ plasmid using XmnI and BbsI. The primers used for the CAG tract
amplification were polyCAG_Fw CCAAGATGGACGGCCGCTC and
polyCAG_Rv AGGACAAGGGAAGACCCAAG. The origin of the
templates used for each CAG length are summarized in Table S4.
For the CRISPR/Cas9-mediated targeting, multiple sgRNAs were
designed to recognize sequences near the CAG tract, but gene targeting
attempts using a single sgRNA were unsuccessful. However, an optimized
strategy that combined two sgRNAs targeting sequences that flanked the
CAG tract proved to be much more efficient in generating the desired
homologous
recombination:
hHTT_sgRNA25
and
hHTT_sgRNA14
(Table S5). These two sgRNAs were cloned into a Cas9 nickase expression
vector (pX335 from the Feng Zhang lab, Addgene plasmid #42335). Both
CRISPR plasmids, together with the appropriate homology donor, were
nucleofected into RUES2 cells using a Nucleofector II instrument and Cell
Line Nucleofector Kit L (Lonza). Puromycin was added to the cultures 5 days
after nucleofection, and kept in for 5 more days to ensure selection of correctly
targeted clones. Puromycin-resistant cells were then nucleofected with an
excision-only piggyBac transposase (Transposagen), and a subsequent
ganciclovir treatment selected clones in which the selection cassette had
been correctly removed, leaving a minimal footprint (one extra nucleotide in
the 5′UTR). Colonies derived from single cells were picked and expanded for
screening. PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing identified correctly
targeted clones, with no mutations in the CRISPR/Cas9 target sites or the
piggyBac excision site. All positive clones were heterozygously targeted,
which is a common finding in long genetic insertions via CRISPR/Cas9-
mediated homologous recombination, and there appeared to be no preference
as to which allele had been targeted. We selected two to three independent
clones for each CAG length to serve as independent biological replicates.
Normal HTT expression was confirmed by western blot, and all lines were
karyotyped by G-banding and aCGH analyses to assess their genomic
integrity and CNV. We found a variety of CNVs and loss of heterozygosity,
within and outside of normal ranges (Fig. S2C, Table S2), but these did not
correlate with any of the observed phenotypic differences and were not the
result of gene editing per se, as they were also present in genetically
unmodified clones. Whole-genome sequencing was performed at NY
Genome Center (NYGC) using the TruSeq DNA PCR-Free Kit for Library
Preparation and run in an Illumina HiSeqX sequencer. Around 1000 unique
single-nucleotide polymorphisms were identified in each line, probably
caused by a founder effect from a genetically variable parental RUES2 cell
line. The pluripotency status and absence of differentiation of the clones were
validated through immunofluorescence staining of cells seeded and cultured
on micropatterned coverslips (CYTOO).
Generation of isogenic HTT+/− and HTT−/− hESC lines
We used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to generate a set of isogenic hESC lines
with different HTT gene dosages (HTT+/+, HTT+/−, HTT−/−). RUES2 hESC
(NIH hESC-09-0013) was used as the parental line. To create HTT−/− and
HTT+/− lines, CRISPR/Cas9 was used to delete the first exon of HTT,
ensuring that no protein fragment would be produced in the targeted (ʻnull’)
allele. An optimized strategy that combined two sgRNAs that flanked the
first exon proved to be efficient in generating the desired deletion:
hHTT_sgRNA22 and hHTT_sgRNA14 (Table S5). These two sgRNAs
were cloned into an SpCas9 expression vector (pX330 from the Feng Zhang
lab), modified to coexpress a puromycin cassette to facilitate selection of
transfected cells, thus maximizing the percentage of targeted colonies. Both
CRISPR plasmids were nucleofected into RUES2 cells using a Nucleofector
II instrument and Cell Line Nucleofector Kit L (Lonza). Puromycin was
added to the cultures 24 h after nucleofection, and kept in for a further 24 h
to select for transfected cells. Colonies derived from the puromycin-resistant
cells were picked and expanded for screening. PCR amplification and
Sanger sequencing identified correctly targeted clones with the desired exon
1 deletion. Two to three clones per genotype were identified and further
validated as above.
Neural differentiation
Isogenic lines were subjected to a default neural induction protocol adapted
from Shi et al. (2012). In short, cultures were seeded in suspension, or in
confluent adherent culture, at 0.5-1×106 cells/ml and fed every other day
with N2B27 serum-free medium with ROCK inhibitor (20 μM, Abcam) for
the first 2 days, TGFβ inhibition (10 μM SB-431542, Sigma and 0.2 μM
LDN-193189, StemGent) for the first 10 days, treated with 5 ng/ml FGF8
(R&D Systems) from day 12-22 to maximize the frequency of CTIP2
(BCL11B)-positive cells, dissociated and seeded on adherent substrate
(polyornithine/laminin, Ibidi) at day 14, fixed and analyzed at day 19 or
continued in culture with added BDNF (R&D Systems) and IGF1 (R&D
Systems, 10 ng/ml), cAMP (1 μM, R&D Systems) and ascorbic acid
(200 μM, Sigma), until dissociation and reseeding on substrate at day 40,
and fixation and analysis at day 45.
Immunostaining and imaging
Cultures were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA), rinsed twice with
PBS, and then permeabilized and quenched with wash buffer (PBS+0.1%
Triton X-100) containing 100 mM glycine and 0.1% sodium azide, blocked
(wash buffer, 10% normal donkey serum, 0.1% sodium azide) for 30 min,
incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C (for primary antibodies
and dilutions, see Table S6), washed three times in wash buffer for 5 min
each, incubated with secondary antibodies (Alexa 488, 555, 594, 647,
Molecular Probes; 1:500) and DAPI nuclear counterstain for 1 h at room
temperature, and then washed as above.
For mitotic synchronization and microtubule visualization, cultures were
synchronized at G-to-M transition with nocadazole (0.2 μM; Abcam) for
18 h, then rinsed and released for 2 h, fixed for 5 min at room temperature in
culture medium with 2% PFA, then incubated for 30 min at 37°C in
9
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2018) 145, dev156844. doi:10.1242/dev.156844
DEVELOPMENT
 microtubule stabilization buffer [0.1 M PIPES pH 6.9, 5 mM MgCl2,
2.5 mM EGTA, 2% formaldehyde, 0.1% Triton X-100, 1 μM paclitaxel
(Sigma), 10 U/ml aprotinin (Sigma) and 50% deuterium oxide (Messinger
and Albertini, 1991)] before quench and blocking as above. Z-stack images
were acquired on a Leica SP8 inverted confocal microscope at 12 bits in
1024 pixels ×1024 pixels using an HCX PL APO CS ×20/0.75 NA air-
immersion objective, an HC PL APO CS2×40/1.10 NA water-immersion
objective, or an HC PL APO ×100/1.4 oil-immersion objective (Leica) at
Nyquist spacings. Images were then deconvolved with a 3D blind algorithm
(ten iterations) using AutoDeblur X software (Autoquant) and rendered in
Imaris (Bitplane). 3D rendering channels were subject to uniform non-linear
adjustment across the entire volume to highlight salient details; adjustments
were identical across genotypes.
Analysis of neural rosette spatial distribution
Rosettes were identified by training a classifier on N-cadherin antibody
stains using Ilastik (Sommer et al., 2011). N-cadherin-positive areas were
thresholded in size (15 µm2) to eliminate small N-cadherin spots that were
not fully developed rosettes. The quantification results were not dependent
on the specific value chosen for the threshold. The nearest-neighbor
distributions were obtained using the k-d tree implementation in scikit-learn
(http://scikit-learn.org) and were compared with the random distribution
using the one-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov distance between them. The
cumulative nearest-neighbor distribution F for a random set of points in two
dimensions can easily be calculated as
FðdÞ ¼ 1 � e�lpd2;
where λ is the 2D density of foci, and d is the distance between two
neighbors. We rescaled the data for the individual lines separately according
to their λ.
Time-lapse imaging
Neural cultures were dissociated to single cells at day 25, and reseeded at
0.5×106/cm2 on polyornithine laminin-coated 35 mm imaging dishes
(Ibidi). One day later, cultures were transduced with GFP and RFP
nucleus-labeling baculoviruses (CellLight BacMam 2.0, ThermoFisher
Scientific) for 24 h. Two days later, when the nuclear signal was clearly
observable, a time-lapse imaging acquisition was carried out for 3 days
using
a
CellVoyager
CV1000
spinning-disk
confocal
microscope
(Yokogawa).
Acknowledgements
We thank the members of the A.H.B. laboratory for advice and criticism, and
especially Alessia Deglincerti for early work on the allelic series; Alison North, Kaye
Thomas, Tao Tong and Christina Pyrgaki of the Rockefeller University Bioimaging
Research Center for superlative technical advice and support on microscopy and
image analysis; Eric Siggia for constructive criticism; Hironori Funabiki for crucial
scientific advice; Jean-Marx Santel for administrative assistance; Amir Brivanlou for
critical reading of the manuscript; Dr Sarah Tabrizi for sharing HD patient-derived
fibroblasts; and we appreciate thoughtful criticisms and comments on work at all
stages of this project from CHDI, especially from Tom Vogt, Dan Felsenfeld and
Ignacio Muñoz-Sanjuán.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: A.R., G.F.C., A.H.B.; Methodology: A.R.; Software: J.J.M.;
Validation: A.R.; Formal analysis: A.R., G.F.C., J.J.M.; Investigation: A.R., G.F.C.,
J.J.M., S.G., L.J.G., C.P., H.W., M.F., S.T., A.M., C.N.; Resources: A.R.; Data
curation: A.R., G.F.C.; Writing - original draft: A.R., G.F.C.; Writing - review & editing:
A.R., G.F.C., J.J.M., A.H.B.; Visualization: A.R.; Supervision: A.H.B.; Project
administration: A.R., A.H.B.; Funding acquisition: A.H.B.
Funding
This work was funded by the CHDI Foundation (A-9423), New York State Stem Cell
Science (NYSTEM) (C028128), RUMI Scientific, The Robertson Foundation and
Rockefeller University.
Data availbility
The whole-genome sequence data have been uploaded to the Sequence Read
Archive at NCBI under Accession number SRP130095 or bioProject number
PRJNA430518.
Supplementary information
Supplementary information available online at
http://dev.biologists.org/lookup/doi/10.1242/dev.156844.supplemental
References
Anastas, S. B., Mueller, D., Semple-Rowland, S. L., Breunig, J. J. and Sarkisian,
M. R. (2011). Failed cytokinesis of neural progenitors in citron kinase-deficient rats
leads to multiciliated neurons. Cereb. Cortex 21, 338-344.
Andrew, S. E., Goldberg, Y. P., Kremer, B., Telenius, H., Theilmann, J., Adam,
S., Starr, E., Squitieri, F., Lin, B. and Kalchman, M. A. (1993). The relationship
between trinucleotide (CAG) repeat length and clinical features of Huntington’s
disease. Nat. Genet. 4, 398-403.
Barnat, M., Le Friec, J., Benstaali, C. and Humbert, S. (2017). Huntingtin-
mediated multipolar-bipolar transition of newborn cortical neurons is critical for
their postnatal neuronal morphology. Neuron 93, 99-114.
Bayer, S. A. and Altman, J. (2007). The Human Brain During the Early First
Trimester, 1st edn. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Cong, L., Ran, F. A., Cox, D., Lin, S., Barretto, R., Habib, N., Hsu, P. D., Wu, X.,
Jiang, W., Marraffini, L. A. et al. (2013). Multiplex genome engineering using
CRISPR/Cas systems. Science 339, 819-823.
Duyao, M., Ambrose, C., Myers, R., Novelletto, A., Persichetti, F., Frontali, M.,
Folstein, S., Ross, C., Franz, M. and Abbott, M. (1993). Trinucleotide repeat
length instability and age of onset in Huntington’s disease. Nat. Genet. 4, 387-392.
Elias, S., Thion, M. S., Yu, H., Sousa, C. M., Lasgi, C., Morin, X. and Humbert, S.
(2014). Huntingtin regulates mammary stem cell division and differentiation. Stem
Cell Reports 2, 491-506.
Funk, L. C., Zasadil, L. M. and Weaver, B. A. (2016). Living in CIN: mitotic infidelity
and its consequences for tumor promotion and suppression. Dev. Cell 39,
638-652.
Gasset-Rosa, F., Chillon-Marinas, C., Goginashvili, A., Atwal, R. S., Artates,
J. W., Tabet, R., Wheeler, V. C., Bang, A. G., Cleveland, D. W. and Lagier-
Tourenne, C. (2017). Polyglutamine-expanded huntingtin exacerbates age-
related disruption of nuclear integrity and nucleocytoplasmic transport. Neuron 94,
48-57.e4.
Genetic Modifiers of Huntington’s Disease (GeM-HD) Consortium: Lee, J.-M.,
Wheeler, V. C., Chao, M. J., Vonsattel, J. P. G., Pinto, R. M., Lucente, D., Abu-
Elneel, K., Ramos, E. M., Mysore, J. S., Gillis, T. et al. (2015). Identification of
genetic factors that modify clinical onset of Huntington’s disease. Cell 162,
516-526.
Godin, J. D. and Humbert, S. (2011). Mitotic spindle: focus on the function of
huntingtin. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 43, 852-856.
Godin, J. D., Colombo, K., Molina-Calavita, M., Keryer, G., Zala, D., Charrin,
B. C., Dietrich, P., Volvert, M.-L., Guillemot, F., Dragatsis, I. et al. (2010).
Huntingtin
is
required
for
mitotic
spindle
orientation
and
mammalian
neurogenesis. Neuron 67, 392-406.
Grima, J. C., Daigle, J. G., Arbez, N., Cunningham, K. C., Zhang, K., Ochaba, J.,
Geater, C., Morozko, E., Stocksdale, J., Glatzer, J. C. et al. (2017). Mutant
huntingtin disrupts the nuclear pore complex. Neuron 94, 93-107.e6.
Haremaki, T., Deglincerti, A. and Brivanlou, A. H. (2015). Huntingtin is required for
ciliogenesis and neurogenesis during early Xenopus development. Dev. Biol.
408, 305-315.
HD iPSC Consortium: Mattis, V. B., Svendsen, S. P., Ebert, A., Svendsen, C. N.,
King, A. R., Casale, M., Winokur, S. T., Batugedara, G., Vawter, M., Donovan,
P. J. et al. (2012). Induced pluripotent stem cells from patients with Huntington’s
disease show CAG-repeat-expansion-associated phenotypes. Cell Stem Cell 11,
264-278.
HD iPSC Consortium: Lim, R. G., Salazar, L. L., Wilton, D. K., King, A. R.,
Stocksdale, J. T., Sharifabad, D., Lau, A. L., Stevens, B., Reidling, J. C.,
Winokur, S. T. et al. (2017). Developmental alterations in Huntington’s disease
neural cells and pharmacological rescue in cells and mice. Nat. Neurosci. 20,
648-660.
James, D., Noggle, S. A., Swigut, T. and Brivanlou, A. H. (2006). Contribution of
human embryonic stem cells to mouse blastocysts. Dev. Biol. 295, 90-102.
Jinek, M., Chylinski, K., Fonfara, I., Hauer, M., Doudna, J. A. and Charpentier, E.
(2012). A programmable dual-RNA-guided DNA endonuclease in adaptive
bacterial immunity. Science 337, 816-821.
Jones, L., Houlden, H. and Tabrizi, S. J. (2017). DNA repair in the trinucleotide
repeat disorders. Lancet Neurol. 16, 88-96.
Keryer, G., Pineda, J. R., Liot, G., Kim, J., Dietrich, P., Benstaali, C., Smith, K.,
Cordelières, F. P., Spassky, N., Ferrante, R. J. et al. (2011). Ciliogenesis is
regulated by a huntingtin-HAP1-PCM1 pathway and is altered in Huntington
disease. J. Clin. Invest. 121, 4372-4382.
10
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2018) 145, dev156844. doi:10.1242/dev.156844
DEVELOPMENT
 Lacoste, A., Berenshteyn, F. and Brivanlou, A. H. (2009). An efficient and
reversible
transposable
system
for
gene
delivery
and
lineage-specific
differentiation in human embryonic stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 5, 332-342.
Leavitt, B. R., Guttman, J. A., Hodgson, J. G., Kimel, G. H., Singaraja, R., Vogl,
A. W. and Hayden, M. R. (2001). Wild-type huntingtin reduces the cellular toxicity
of mutant huntingtin in vivo. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68, 313-324.
Lo Sardo, V., Zuccato, C., Gaudenzi, G., Vitali, B., Ramos, C., Tartari, M., Myre,
M. A., Walker, J. A., Pistocchi, A., Conti, L. et al. (2012). An evolutionary recent
neuroepithelial
cell
adhesion
function
of
huntingtin
implicates
ADAM10-
Ncadherin. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 713-721.
Lopes, C., Aubert, S., Bourgois-Rocha, F., Barnat, M., Rego, A. C., Deglon, N.,
Perrier, A. L. and Humbert, S. (2016). Dominant-negative effects of adult-onset
huntingtin mutations alter the division of human embryonic stem cells-derived
neural cells. PLoS ONE 11, e0148680.
Lu, X.-H., Mattis, V. B., Wang, N., Al-Ramahi, I., van den Berg, N., Fratantoni,
S. A., Waldvogel, H., Greiner, E., Osmand, A., Elzein, K. et al. (2014). Targeting
ATM ameliorates mutant Huntingtin toxicity in cell and animal models of
Huntington’s disease. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 268ra178.
Mali, P., Yang, L., Esvelt, K. M., Aach, J., Guell, M., Dicarlo, J. E., Norville, J. E.
and Church, G. M. (2013). RNA-Guided human genome engineering via Cas9.
Science 339, 823-826.
Messinger, S. M. and Albertini, D. F. (1991). Centrosome and microtubule
dynamics during meiotic progression in the mouse oocyte. J. Cell. Sci. 100,
289-298.
Mitchell, B. D., Gibbons, B., Allen, L. R., Stella, J. and D’Mello, S. R. (2001).
Aberrant apoptosis in the neurological mutant Flathead is associated with
defective cytokinesis of neural progenitor cells. Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 130,
53-63.
Molero, A. E., Gokhan, S., Gonzalez, S., Feig, J. L., Alexandre, L. C. and Mehler,
M.
F.
(2009).
Impairment
of
developmental
stem
cell-mediated
striatal
neurogenesis and pluripotency genes in a knock-in model of Huntington’s
disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 21900-21905.
Molero, A. E., Arteaga-Bracho, E. E., Chen, C. H., Gulinello, M., Winchester,
M. L., Pichamoorthy, N., Gokhan, S., Khodakhah, K. and Mehler, M. F. (2016).
Selective expression of mutant huntingtin during development recapitulates
characteristic features of Huntington’s disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113,
5736-5741.
Molina-Calavita, M., Barnat, M., Elias, S., Aparicio, E., Piel, M. and Humbert, S.
(2014). Mutant huntingtin affects cortical progenitor cell division and development
of the mouse neocortex. J. Neurosci. 34, 10034-10040.
Muñoz-Sanjuán, I. and Brivanlou, A. H. (2002). Neural induction, the default
model and embryonic stem cells. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 271-280.
Namba, T. and Huttner, W. B. (2017). Neural progenitor cells and their role in the
development and evolutionary expansion of the neocortex. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.
Dev. Biol. 6, e256.
Nekrasov, E. D., Vigont, V. A., Klyushnikov, S. A., Lebedeva, O. S., Vassina,
E. M., Bogomazova, A. N., Chestkov, I. V., Semashko, T. A., Kiseleva, E.,
Suldina, L. A. et al. (2016). Manifestation of Huntington’s disease pathology in
human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons. Mol. Neurodegener.
11, 27.
Nopoulos, P. C., Aylward, E. H., Ross, C. A., Mills, J. A., Langbehn, D. R.,
Johnson, H. J., Magnotta, V. A., Pierson, R. K., Beglinger, L. J., Nance, M. A.
et al. (2011). Smaller intracranial volume in prodromal Huntington’s disease:
evidence for abnormal neurodevelopment. Brain 134, 137-142.
Ramocki, M. B. and Zoghbi, H. Y. (2008). Failure of neuronal homeostasis results
in common neuropsychiatric phenotypes. Nature 455, 912-918.
Rosa, A., Spagnoli, F. M. and Brivanlou, A. H. (2009). The miR-430/427/302
family controls mesendodermal fate specification via species-specific target
selection. Dev. Cell 16, 517-527.
Ross, C. A. and Tabrizi, S. J. (2011). Huntington’s disease: from molecular
pathogenesis to clinical treatment. Lancet Neurol. 10, 83-98.
Ruzo, A., Ismailoglu, I., Popowski, M., Haremaki, T., Croft, G. F., Deglincerti, A.
and Brivanlou, A. H. (2015). Discovery of novel isoforms of huntingtin reveals a
new hominid-specific exon. PLoS ONE 10, e0127687.
Sathasivam, K., Woodman, B., Mahal, A., Bertaux, F., Wanker, E. E., Shima,
D. T. and Bates, G. P. (2001). Centrosome disorganization in fibroblast cultures
derived from R6/2 Huntington’s disease (HD) transgenic mice and HD patients.
Hum. Mol. Genet. 10, 2425-2435.
Shi, Y., Kirwan, P., Smith, J., Robinson, H. P. C. and Livesey, F. J. (2012). Human
cerebral cortex development from pluripotent stem cells to functional excitatory
synapses. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 477-86, S1.
Sommer, C., Straehle, C., Kothe, U. and Hamprecht, F. A. (2011). Ilastik:
Interactive learning and segmentation toolkit. In Proceedings Eighth IEEE
International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), pp 230-233. IEEE.
Sørensen, S. A., Fenger, K. and Olsen, J. H. (1999). Significantly lower incidence
of cancer among patients with Huntington disease: an apoptotic effect of an
expanded polyglutamine tract? Cancer 86, 1342-1346.
Steigemann, P., Wurzenberger, C., Schmitz, M. H. A., Held, M., Guizetti, J.,
Maar, S. and Gerlich, D. W. (2009). Aurora B-mediated abscission checkpoint
protects against tetraploidization. Cell 136, 473-484.
Wexler, N. S., Young, A. B., Tanzi, R. E., Travers, H., Starosta-Rubinstein, S.,
Penney, J. B., Snodgrass, S. R., Shoulson, I., Gomez, F. and Ramos
Arroyo, M. A. (1987). Homozygotes for Huntington’s disease. Nature 326,
194-197.
White, J. K., Auerbach, W., Duyao, M. P., Vonsattel, J.-P., Gusella, J. F., Joyner,
A. L. and MacDonald, M. E. (1997). Huntingtin is required for neurogenesis and is
not impaired by the Huntington’s disease CAG expansion. Nat. Genet. 17,
404-410.
Zuccato, C., Valenza, M. and Cattaneo, E. (2010). Molecular mechanisms and
potential therapeutical targets in Huntington’s disease. Physiol. Rev. 90, 905-981.
11
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2018) 145, dev156844. doi:10.1242/dev.156844
DEVELOPMENT
