 Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 
St. Petersburg Polytechnical University Journal: Physics and Mathematics 2 (2016) 240–246 
www.elsevier.com/locate/spjpm 
The effect of acoustic shielding of the region of a dolphin’s 
mental foramina on its hearing sensitivity 
Vyacheslav A. Ryabov 
T. I. Vyazemsky Karadag Scientific Station – Nature Reserve of RAS, 24 Nauki St., Kurortnoye, Feodosiya, 298188, Russian Federation 
Available online 21 August 2016 
Abstract 
The effect of acoustic shielding of the mental foramina of a bottlenose dolphin ( 
Tursiops truncatus 
) on its auditory thresholds 
has been experimentally studied using the method of instrumental conditioned reflexes with food reinforcement. The detection 
thresholds of short broadband acoustic pulses deteriorated significantly (by 30–50 
dB) under conditions of acoustic shielding 
in the region of the mental foramina over the whole frequency band of the dolphin’s hearing. Therefore, the mental foramina 
of its lower jaw take part in receiving and conducting the sounds into the mandibular fat in the entire frequency range of the 
dolphin’s hearing. The obtained results give an experimental proof for the assumption that the morphological structures of the 
lower jaw play a role of the peripheral part of a dolphin’s hearing. Now there are grounds to assume that Odontoceti have the 
similar peripheral part of their hearing. This assumption is based on the similarity of their morphology. 
Copyright © 2016, St. Petersburg Polytechnic University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license. ( 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 
) 
Keywords: Dolphin; Hearing threshold; Mental foramina; Shielding; Acoustics; Lower jaw. 
Introduction 
The sound conduction mechanisms in the middle 
ear of toothed whales have been studied in numerous 
papers. Several researchers of this problem believe that 
sound travels to the cochlea through the external au- 
ditory canal and the middle ear; another viewpoint is 
that the ear canals cannot at all participate in con- 
ducting sound to the middle ear [1] or serve for car- 
rying signals with frequencies below 30 
kHz [2] 
. Other 
studies suggest that sound can be directly transmitted 
through the mandibular fat to the tympanic bone, by- 
E-mail address: ryabofff@inbox.ru 
. 
passing the external auditory canals and the tympanic 
ligament [1–4] 
. 
Norris suggested [3] that sound can be transmit- 
ted to the mandibular fat through the mental foram- 
ina. Although this author later advanced another hy- 
pothesis about the pathway of sound transmission into 
the mandibular fat, directly through the posterolateral 
wall of the mandibular bone, in a specific place he 
called ‘an acoustic window’ [4] 
. Sound is transmitted 
through the mandibular fat to the lateral wall of the 
tympanic bone, where its thickness is minimal, and the 
wall acts as an eardrum, transmitting sound waves to 
the malleus of the middle ear [3–6] 
. It was also estab- 
lished that acoustic stimulation of the mandible excites 
significant evoked potentials in the central auditory 
system of the dolphin [1,4] 
. However, Refs. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.spjpm.2016.08.003 
2405-7223/Copyright © 2016, St. Petersburg Polytechnic University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article 
under the CC BY-NC-ND license. ( 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 
) 
(Peer review under responsibility of St. Petersburg Polytechnic University). 
 V.A. Ryabov 
/ 
St. Petersburg Polytechnical University Journal: Physics and Mathematics 2 (2016) 240–246 
241 
[1,4,7,8] disagreed on the location of the area of max- 
imum sensitivity to the sounds emitted by a point 
source on the surface of the mandible, and the findings 
do not explain the mechanism of sound conduction. 
There is also a number of studies in which the au- 
thors claim that toothed whales receive echo signals by 
their teeth [9] 
. In these studies, each tooth is regarded 
as a passive resonator excited by the reflected echo 
signal and tooth nerves as acoustic pressure transduc- 
ers. Each row of teeth is considered to be an equidis- 
tant antenna array consisting of receivers with a nar- 
row directivity, whose signals are transmitted via the 
tooth nerves directly into the central nervous system 
(bypassing the cochlea). 
The results of the studies on the subject are thus 
rather ambiguous and contradictory, and the main 
question about the mechanisms of sound reception 
and conduction to the middle ear of toothed whales is 
currently unanswered. However, the findings of Refs. 
[10,12,13] suggest that sound travels to the mandibular 
fat of the dolphin through the mental foramina (MF) 
of the mandible. 
The results of studying the morphology of the 
dolphin’s mandible and the subsequent modeling of 
the mechanisms of sound reception and conduction 
through the mandibular canals to the middle ear con- 
firm this assumption. Moreover, in terms of acoustics 
and the theory of group antennas, each row of the 
MF acts as an acoustic antenna of the traveling wave, 
located in the throat of an acoustic catenoidal horn 
(whose role is played by the corresponding mandibu- 
lar canal). The concept of the mandible as a system of 
two traveling wave antennas explains the mechanisms 
of reception and conduction of sound to the middle 
ear. In view of this, the morphological structures of 
each of the halves of the lower jaw (mental foramina, 
mandibular canal and mandibular fat) are treated as the 
components of the hypothetical peripheral division of 
the dolphin’s hearing. 
The purpose of this study is to experimentally ex- 
plore the role of mental foramina in the dolphin’s hear- 
ing. The specific tasks consisted of determining the 
effect of acoustic shielding of mental foramina on the 
auditory thresholds of detecting acoustic pulses with 
peak energies at different frequencies. 
The subject of the study, materials and 
experimental procedures 
The experiments were carried out at the T.I. 
Vyazemsky Karadag scientific station – Nature Re- 
serve of RAS (Feodosia) in an enclosed concrete 
Fig. 1. Experimental setup: dolphin 1 in the starting position, start 
arm 2 
, transducer of acoustic stimuli 3 
, signal arm 4 
, experimenter’s 
walkway 5 
. 
27 
m 
×9 
m 
×4.5 m-sized pool. An adult Black Sea 
bottlenose dolphin ( 
Tursiops truncatus 
) who had not 
previously participated in acoustic experiments acted 
as the experimental subject. We employed the tech- 
nique of instrumental conditioned reflexes with food 
reinforcement using the ‘go/no-go’ paradigm [14] 
. 
On a signal from the trainer (position 5 in 
Fig. 1 
), the dolphin was trained to swim to the walk- 
way, where the trainer placed (or did not place) a 
sound-shielding hood on the rostrum of the animal 
in the MF area. After that, the dolphin was signaled 
to swim to start arm 2 suspended at a depth of 1 
m, 
and remained at that depth with almost no movement 
(quasi-stationary), touching the tip of the start arm 
with its rostrum. After a few seconds the experimenter 
turned on the auditory stimulus (shown in Fig. 2 
) that 
the dolphin found (or did not). If the stimulus was 
produced and the dolphin found it, the dolphin left the 
starting position (go) and pressed its rostrum against 
signal arm 4 (located near the surface of the water), 
thus indicating that it had found the stimulus. If the 
stimulus was not presented, the dolphin remained at 
the starting position until receiving a signal from the 
trainer (no-go). In these cases, the dolphin received 
food reinforcement for correctly solving the problem. 
If necessary, the trainer removed the shielding hood 
from the dolphin’s rostrum for that purpose every time. 
The cases when a stimulus was produced but the dol- 
phin did not approach the signal arm, or there was no 
 242 
V.A. Ryabov 
/ 
St. Petersburg Polytechnical University Journal: Physics and Mathematics 2 (2016) 240–246 
Fig. 2. Examples of waveforms U 
( 
t 
) and the corresponding frequency spectra | 
G 
( 
f 
)| of acoustic pulse signals with the maxima at frequencies 
around 100 
kHz ( 
a 
), 30 
kHz ( 
b 
) and 8 
kHz ( 
c 
). Signals were used as acoustic stimuli. 
stimulus but the dolphin approached the signal arm 
(a false alarm) were regarded as errors and were not 
rewarded. 
In each test, the order of the positive and negative 
stimuli (i.e., the stimuli were either produced or not) 
was random (but no more than three identical stimuli 
could be produced in a row). 
Each threshold value of the sound pressure level 
(SPL) of the stimulus was determined by at least three 
sessions. Each session consisted of about 60 tests. 
Typically, the stimuli with the SPL significantly ex- 
ceeding the threshold were produced in the first tests 
of each session. Throughout the session, the SPL of 
the stimuli gradually decreased (with a step of 3 
dB) 
to the threshold values (50% of the level of correct 
responses). The SPL of a stimulus then increased by 
4–6 
dB, up to the correct reactions of the animal, and 
the threshold (a decrease in the SPL of the stimulus) 
was again approached with a step of 3 
dB steps. The 
threshold SPL value of the stimuli corresponding to 
75% of correct answers was calculated by averaging 
between the maximum subthreshold and the minimum 
superthreshold values of their SPL. The latter were 
obtained by repeatedly crossing the threshold. 
To reduce the effect of interference of the direct 
signal and of those reflected by the pool on the results 
of the experiments, short broadband acoustic pulse sig- 
nals from a special transmitter (position 3 in Fig. 1 
) 
 V.A. Ryabov 
/ 
St. Petersburg Polytechnical University Journal: Physics and Mathematics 2 (2016) 240–246 
243 
located at a distance of 2 
m from the start arm, and 
at a depth of 1 
m were used as stimuli. The distance 
between transducer 3 and the wall of the pool was 
3 
m. 
Stimuli with the energy peaks at frequencies of 30, 
60 and 100 
kHz were formed through a reaction of 
spherical acoustic transducers made of piezoelectric 
ceramics, 50, 30 and 20 
mm in diameter, to rectangu- 
lar pulses of 17, 9 and 5 
μs, respectively. A trans- 
ducer with a diameter of 50 
mm was used for ob- 
taining pulses with energy peaks at frequencies of 8 
or 16 
kHz. The transducer was excited by a rectan- 
gular pulse with the duration of 56 or 36 microsec- 
onds through an octave band filter with the central 
frequency of 8 or 16 
kHz, respectively. Examples of 
the stimuli applied are shown in Fig. 2 
. The wave- 
forms were detected with the emitter and the receiver 
submerged to a depth of 1 
m, at a distance of 1 
m 
away from each other. The amplitude of the rect- 
angular pulse exciting the emitter was 20 
V. A cali- 
brated 8103 hydrophone with a precision 2650 am- 
plifier (40 
dB gain) by the B&K company was used 
as a receiver. The duration of the stimuli did not ex- 
ceed three periods of the corresponding frequency of 
the peak acoustic pulse energy. In this case, the re- 
flections of the stimulus from the pool walls and the 
water surface did not overlap with the direct stimulus, 
as they arrived with a sufficient time delay and were 
significantly attenuated compared to it. For the thresh- 
old SPL values of the stimulus, the reflection levels 
were below the auditory pulse detection threshold of 
the dolphins, which allowed to perform measurements 
without special sound-absorbing coatings. 
The acoustically opaque hood for the MF ( 
Fig. 3 
) 
was made in the shape of the dolphin’s rostrum and 
was snugly fit over it. The length of the hood was 
about 15 
cm. It was made from a 5 mm-thick sheet of 
neoprene foam with closed pores. This material has a 
high strength and high water and oil resistance. Due to 
these properties it can retain its sound-shielding prop- 
erties provided by gas bubbles within its pores for a 
long time. The efficiency of this sound-shielding mate- 
rial was measured prior to the experiments. The atten- 
uation of the peak sound pressure for wideband short 
pulses with energy maxima at frequencies of 10, 55 
and 170 
kHz as the pulses were shielded by one layer 
of this material for normally incident sound reached 
28, 32 and 36 
dB, respectively. 
We should note that the wavelengths corresponding 
to the frequencies of the energy peaks of the stimuli 
used in the experiment lie in the range from 1.5 to 
20 
cm, so the linear dimensions of the shield at low 
acoustic frequencies become smaller than the stim- 
uli wavelengths. Because of this, in order to improve 
the shielding efficiency, the hood had the appropriate 
shape, covering both the upper and the lower jaws 
(see Fig. 3 
). If the hood were made to match only 
the shape of the outer surface shape of the lower jaw, 
the effectiveness of such a shield would be lower even 
at a frequency of 100 
kHz (1.5 
cm wavelength) due to 
diffraction. Shielding by such a device would not oc- 
cur at all at frequencies well below 8 
kHz (wavelength 
of more than 19 
cm), since the distance from the edge 
of the hood to the MF would be less than 2 
cm. 
Experimental results 
In this paper, we measured the auditory thresholds 
at which the dolphin can detect short broadband acous- 
tic pulses with energy peaks at frequencies of 8, 16, 
30, 60 and 100 
kHz, as well as the detection thresholds 
for the same pulses under acoustic shielding of the 
MF. The measurement results ( 
Fig. 4 
) are represented 
as a function showing the relative deterioration of the 
auditory thresholds for detecting the stimuli, caused by 
the acoustic shielding of the MF. Taking into account 
that the stimuli were broadband (see Fig. 2 
), shielding 
efficiency was high over the entire frequency range 
examined (6–160 
kHz), and increased with frequency 
from 30 to 50 
dB. 
For better clarity of the results obtained, the same 
figure shows the calculated dependence of sound 
wavelength in water versus frequency. It is noteworthy 
that the dependence of MF shielding efficiency versus 
frequency is the mirror image of the frequency depen- 
dence of the sound wavelength in water. This result 
indicates that the shielding efficiency is inversely pro- 
portional to the wavelength and hence is determined 
by the wavelength of sound. 
The measurement results for the absolute values of 
the stimuli detection thresholds in this experiment are 
consistent with the audiogram of the bottlenose dol- 
phin [15] taking into account the phenomenon of en- 
ergy summation [16–18] 
. This further proves that the 
dolphin studied in our experiment had normal hearing. 
The specifics of the dolphin’s mandibular foram- 
ina, namely their dimensions, shape and architecture 
are governed by acoustic feasibility [10,12,13] 
. This 
natural conclusion, based on the results of the morpho- 
logical study and the results of modeling the mecha- 
nisms of sound reception and conduction through the 
mental foramina to the middle ear of the dolphin, is 
confirmed to a large extent by the experimental re- 
sults obtained (see Fig. 4 
). Under MF shielding, the 
 244 
V.A. Ryabov 
/ 
St. Petersburg Polytechnical University Journal: Physics and Mathematics 2 (2016) 240–246 
Fig. 3. Photograph of the dolphin with an acoustically opaque hood covering the area of its mandibular foramina; made near the walkway. 
mean values of the auditory thresholds for detecting 
pulses with energy peaks at frequencies of 8, 16, 30, 
60 and 100 
kHz grow by 30, 34, 40, 46 and 50 
dB, 
respectively. This means that such shielding signifi- 
cantly impairs the sensitivity of the dolphin’s hearing 
in the 6–160 
kHz frequency range (taking into to ac- 
count that the stimuli are broadband), i.e., over the 
whole frequency band of the dolphin’s hearing. There- 
fore, the mental foramina are involved in receiving and 
conducting sounds to the mandibular fat, and are the 
only sound-conducting channel for the sounds of all 
frequencies used in the experiment. 
At the same time, a decrease in the MF shielding 
efficiency with a decrease in stimuli frequency reach- 
ing 20 
dB can be attributed to the increasing pene- 
tration of sound into the hood with an increase in the 
stimuli wavelength as a result of diffraction. The sound 
wavelength increases significantly with a decrease in 
frequency (see curve 2 in Fig. 4 
). Moreover, while the 
dimensions of the acoustic shielding at frequencies of 
about 100 
kHz exceed the wavelength of the stimu- 
lus sound by 10 times, the linear dimensions of the 
shield become comparable to the wavelength at fre- 
quencies around 16 
kHz, and are even smaller than the 
wavelength of sound at a frequency of about 8 
kHz. It 
follows from the theory and the results obtained that 
shielding efficiency is the highest at a maximum ratio 
of the shield dimensions to the wavelength (the value 
 V.A. Ryabov 
/ 
St. Petersburg Polytechnical University Journal: Physics and Mathematics 2 (2016) 240–246 
245 
Fig. 4. Frequency dependences for the attenuation range of the dol- 
phin’s auditory thresholds with the special hood used ( 
1 
) and for the 
wavelength of sound in water ( 
2 
). The quantity δ is the ratio of the 
mean auditory threshold for the dolphin detecting acoustic pulses 
under MF shielding to the corresponding value without shielding; f 
is the peak energy frequency of the acoustic pulses | 
G 
( 
f 
)| and the 
frequency of sound in water. 
at 100 
kHz in Fig. 4 
). Additionally, for a hood with 
these dimensions, the sound-shielding efficiency be- 
comes even higher than the shielding efficiency of the 
material from which the hood is made. This is due 
to the fact that sounds are transmitted the mandible 
(and hence to the hood) almost tangentially and travel 
a path in the material that is substantially longer than 
its thickness. 
If we take into account the effect of diffraction, it 
becomes clear that the efficiency of MF shielding at 
the measured frequencies would have been the same at 
a constant ratio of the screen size to the wavelength. 
This is also attested by the fact that the threshold val- 
ues change inversely proportional to the wavelength 
(see Fig. 4 
). Unfortunately, at low frequencies, it is 
difficult to provide the same ratio between the shield 
dimensions and the stimuli wavelength as for the fre- 
quency of 100 
kHz, as the shield dimensions would 
be too large in this case (for example, 1.9 
m for a fre- 
quency of 8 
kHz), and because of this, the efficiency 
of the hood used decreases with the decreasing fre- 
quency. 
The original results obtained in this study indicate 
that the MF are involved in receiving and conducting 
sounds to the mandibular fat and further to the tym- 
panic wall, i.e., to the middle ear, providing a unique 
sound-conducting channel. This fact excludes the pos- 
sibility of sound conduction through other channels 
[4,7,8,19–23] 
. 
MF shielding efficiency at frequencies below 6 
kHz 
was not measured in the present study, but we can 
assume that sound is received and conducted by the 
same unique channel, i.e., through the MF, at low fre- 
quencies as well. This is supported by the constant 
slope (9–10 
dB/octave) of the low-frequency branch 
of the dolphin’s audiogram [15] 
, which starts at about 
0.1 
kHz and extends up to 20–30 
kHz. 
Conclusion 
This paper examined the effect of acoustic shield- 
ing of the dolphin’s mental foramina on the auditory 
thresholds for detecting acoustic pulses with energy 
peaks at different frequencies. 
The results of measuring these auditory thresholds 
with the mental foramina area shielded and unshielded 
provide further experimental confirmation for the hy- 
pothesis advanced concerning the decisive role of the 
morphological structures of the dolphin’s mandible as 
a new peripheral region of its auditory system [11–
13,24–26] 
. This hypothesis was based on the results 
of a morphological study and of modeling the system 
under consideration. 
Thus, mental foramina act as the new outer ear 
canals. They are involved in receiving and conduct- 
ing sounds to the mandibular fat in the whole fre- 
quency range of the dolphin’s hearing (0.1–160 
kHz). 
The mandibular fat transmits the sounds to the lat- 
eral wall of the tympanic bone, i.e., to the middle ear 
and the cochlea, which is consistent with Refs. [3–6] 
. 
The results of this study give reason to assume that 
the toothed whales (Odontoceti) possess this new pe- 
ripheral hearing region due to the similarity of their 
morphology. 
References 
[1] J.G. McCormick 
, E.G. Wever 
, J. Palin 
, S.H. Ridgway 
, Sound 
conduction in the dolphin ear, J. Acoust. Soc. A. 48 (6-2) 
(1970) 1418–1428 
. 
[2] T.H. Bullock 
, A.D. Grinell 
, E. Ikezono 
, et al. 
, Electrophysio- 
logical studies of central auditory mechanisms in cetaceans, Z. 
Vergl. Physiol. 59 (2) (1968) 117–156 
. 
[3] K.S. Norris 
, Some problems of echolocation in cetaceans, in: 
W. Tavolga (Ed.), Marine bio-Acoustics, Pergamon Press, New 
York, 1964, pp. 316–336 
. 
[4] K.S. Norris 
, The evolution of acoustic mechanisms in Odonto- 
cete Cetaceans, in: E. Drake (Ed.), Evolution and Environment, 
New Haven-Lond: Jail Univ. Press, 1968, pp. 297–324 
. 
[5] S. Hemila 
, S. Nummela 
, T. Reuter 
, A model of the odontocete 
middle ear, Her. Res. 133 (1-2) (1999) 82–97 
. 
[6] H.N. Koopman 
, S.M. Budge 
, D.R. Ketten 
, S.J. Iverson 
, Topo- 
graphical distribution of lipids inside the mandibular fat bod- 
ies of Odontocetes: remarkable complexity and consistency, J. 
Ocean. Eng. 31 (1) (2006) 95–106 
. 
[7] B. Møhl 
, W.W.L. Au 
, J. Pawloski 
, P.E. Nachtigall 
, Dolphin 
hearing: relative sensitivity as a function of point of application 
 246 
V.A. Ryabov 
/ 
St. Petersburg Polytechnical University Journal: Physics and Mathematics 2 (2016) 240–246 
of 
a contact sound 
source in the jaw and head region, J. Acoust. 
Soc. A. 105 (6) (1999) 3421–3424 
. 
[8] R.L. Brill, P.W.B. Moore, D.A. Helweg, L.A. Dankiewicz, In- 
vestigating the dolphin’s peripheral hearing system: acoustic 
sensitivity about the head and lower jaw, Tehnical Report 1865. 
(2001) 1–14. 
[9] P.F. Dobbins 
, Dolphin sonar – modelling a new receiver con- 
cept, Bioinspir. Biomim. 2 (2007) 19–29 
. 
[10] V.A. Ryabov 
, Osobennosti akusticheskogo polya me- 
shayushchikh otrazheniy i ekholokatsionnyy slukh delfina, 
Biofizika 53 (3) (2008) 504–512 
. 
[11] V.A. Ryabov 
, A dolphin lower jaw is a hydroacoustic antenna 
of the traveling wave, Abstracts of 146 meeting of ASA, J. 
Acoust. Soc. Amer. 114 (4) (2003) 2414–2415 
. 
[12] V.A. Ryabov, Lower jaw – peripheric part of the dolphin 
echolocation hearing/Belkovich V.M. Marine Mammals of the 
Holarctic. Collection of scientific papers. Moscow: KMK, 
2004. p. 483–489. 
[13] V.A. Ryabov 
, Mechanisms of a dolphin’s echolocation hear- 
ing, in: S. Dible, P. Dobbins, J. Flint, E. Harland, P. Lepper 
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Institute of Acoustics (Fourth In- 
ternational Conference on Bio-Acoustics Bio-Acoustics 2007), 
29, Loughborough University, UK, 2007, pp. 283–293 
. 
[14] R.J. Schusterman 
, Behavioral methodology in echolocation by 
marine mammals, in: R.-G. Busnel, J.F. Fish (Eds.), Animal 
Sonar Systems, Plenum Publishing Corp, New York, 1980, 
pp. 11–41 
. 
[15] C.S. Johnson 
, Sound detection thresholds in marine mammals, 
in: W.N. Tavolga (Ed.), Marine Bio-Acoustics, II. Oxford, 
Pergamon Press, 1967, pp. 247–260 
. 
[16] C.S. Johnson 
, Masked tonal threshold in the bottlenose por- 
poise, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 44 (4) (1968) 965–967 
. 
[17] E.S. Babushina 
, Zvukovaya retseptsiya morskikh mlekopi- 
tayushchikh v zavisimosti ot parametrov i putey provedeniya 
zvuka [The sound reception of marine mammals as a function 
of parameters and the ways of sound conduction], Biofizika 44 
(6) (1999) 1101–1108 
. 
[18] E.S. Babushina 
, Zvukovaya retseptsiya morskikh mlekopi- 
tayushchikh v zavisimosti ot parametrov i putey provedeniya 
zvuka [The sound reception of marine mammals as a function 
of parameters and the ways of sound conduction], Biofizika 45 
(5) (2000) 927–934 
. 
[19] F.W. Reysenbach de Haan 
, Hearing in whales’, Acta Otolaryn- 
gol. Suppl. 134 (1957) 1–114 
. 
[20] F.C. Fraser 
, P.E. Purves 
, Hearing in the cetaceans: Evolution 
of the accessory air sacs and the structure and function of the 
outer and middle ear in recent cetaceans, Bull. Brit. Museum 
Nat. History, Zool. 7 (1) (1960) 1–140 
. 
[21] W.H. Dudok van Heel 
, Sound and cetacean, Neth. J. Sea. Res. 
1 (4) (1962) 407–507 
. 
[22] L.K. Rimskaya-Korsakova 
, N.A. Dubrovskiy 
, Uchastiye dvukh 
putey provedeniya zvukov k ulitke v formirovanii pros- 
transtvennogo slukhovogo obraza u delfinov [Sharing of the 
two ways of the sound conduction to the coclea when spatial 
hearing image forms in dolphins], Sensornyye sistemy 12 (4) 
(1998) 497–506 
. 
[23] V.V. Popov 
, A.Y. Supin 
, V.O. Klishin 
, et al. 
, Evidence for 
double acoustic windows in the dolphin, Tursiops truncates, 
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 123 (1) (2008) 552–560 
. 
[24] V.A. Ryabov 
, Properties of the dolphin’s mandible horn, in: 
A.N. Boltunov (Ed.), Marine Mammals of the Holarctic, Astro- 
print Publishing House, Odessa, 2008, pp. 468–473. Collection 
of Scientific Papers 
. 
[25] V.A. Ryabov 
, Role of the mental foramens in dolphin hearing, 
Nat. Sci. 2 (6) (2010) 646–653 
. 
[26] V.A. Ryabov 
, Mexanizmy priyema i provedeniya zvuka u del- 
fina [Mechanisms of sound reception and conducting in a dol- 
phin], Biofizika 59 (3) (2014) 579–590 
. 
