 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 7 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Introduction
The function of the micturition reflex is to store urine and then 
to completely empty urine (i.e., void) at socially appropriate 
times. Supralumbar spinal cord injury (SCI) results in significant 
urinary bladder dysfunction leading to life-threatening urinary 
retention and renal failure without appropriate management (1). 
SCI rostral to the lumbosacral spinal cord disconnects the brain 
from the spinal cord, resulting in (a) discoordination between 
the urinary bladder and external urethral sphincter (i.e., detru-
sor sphincter dyssynergia [DSD]); (b) inability to inhibit the 
storage circuits; (c) incomplete activation of voiding circuits; 
and (d) voiding dysfunction. Over time, the urinary bladder 
becomes “overactive” (active at low and high bladder volumes), 
producing small, intermittent contractions of the bladder and 
unwanted leakage (urinary incontinence) with prominent DSD 
but highly inefficient voiding (1). Impaired bladder emptying, 
which results in urinary retention with high bladder pressure, is 
a significant problem in the care of individuals with SCI (1). The 
underlying mechanisms that contribute to voiding dysfunction 
following SCI are due to dramatic changes in the properties of 
C-fiber bladder afferents (2). There are no drugs approved for 
the treatment of SCI-induced bladder dysfunction. It is impera-
tive to identify targets that can enhance elimination reflexes and 
reduce morbidity following SCI.
Nerve growth factor (NGF) has for some time been a focus 
for treating various urological conditions, such as overactive blad-
der and interstitial cystitis/painful bladder syndromes, as it was 
known to contribute to bladder overactivity (3). In particular, an 
increase in NGF levels was reported in the urine after SCI as well 
as in overactive bladder and interstitial cystitis/painful bladder 
syndromes (3, 4), prompting studies to block its action as a way 
to improve overall bladder function (5). Whether the site of NGF 
action is only at the urinary bladder or also in the spinal cord is, 
however, unclear. Previous studies demonstrated that intrathe-
cal delivery of an NGF-blocking antibody attenuates abnormal 
urethral pressure increases that occur during voiding (i.e., DSD) 
in SCI animals (5), and sequestering urinary NGF with TrkA-Fc 
decreased both nonvoiding contractions and overall voiding fre-
quency under cystitis conditions (6).
p75 is a receptor for the neurotrophins NGF, BDNF, and 
NT3/4. Although first discovered as a survival-promoting recep-
tor for neurotrophins during nervous system development, recent 
advances in the field clearly demonstrate that p75 conversely 
induces apoptosis and degeneration under pathological condi-
tions that increase its expression (7). Under these pathological 
conditions, the preferred ligands that activate p75 are proneu-
rotrophins that are secreted without undergoing intracellular 
processing. Thus, the current view is that mature neurotrophins 
activate the complex of cognate Trk receptors and p75, promoting 
Loss of bladder control is a challenging outcome facing patients with spinal cord injury (SCI). We report that systemic 
blocking of pro–nerve growth factor (proNGF) signaling through p75 with a CNS-penetrating small-molecule p75 inhibitor 
resulted in significant improvement in bladder function after SCI in rodents. The usual hyperreflexia was attenuated with 
normal bladder pressure, and automatic micturition was acquired weeks earlier than in the controls. The improvement was 
associated with increased excitatory input to the spinal cord, in particular onto the tyrosine hydroxylase–positive fibers in the 
dorsal commissure. The drug also had an effect on the bladder itself, as the urothelial hyperplasia and detrusor hypertrophy 
that accompany SCI were largely prevented. Urothelial cell loss that precedes hyperplasia was dependent on p75 in response 
to urinary proNGF that is detected after SCI in rodents and humans. Surprisingly, death of urothelial cells and the ensuing 
hyperplastic response were beneficial to functional recovery. Deleting p75 from the urothelium prevented urothelial death, but 
resulted in reduction in overall voiding efficiency after SCI. These results unveil a dual role of proNGF/p75 signaling in bladder 
function under pathological conditions with a CNS effect overriding the peripheral one.
Role of proNGF/p75 signaling in bladder dysfunction 
after spinal cord injury
Jae Cheon Ryu,1 Katharine Tooke,2 Susan E. Malley,2 Anastasia Soulas,1 Tirzah Weiss,1 Nisha Ganesh,1 Nabila Saidi,1  
Stephanie Daugherty,3 Uri Saragovi,4 Youko Ikeda,5 Irina Zabbarova,5 Anthony J. Kanai,5 Mitsuharu Yoshiyama,6  
H. Francis Farhadi,7 William C. de Groat,3 Margaret A. Vizzard,2 and Sung Ok Yoon1
1Department of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. 2Department of Neurological Sciences, Larner College of Medicine, University of Vermont, Burlington, 
Vermont, USA. 3Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. 4Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada. 5Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. 6Department of Urology, University of Yamanashi Graduate School of Medical Science, Chuo, Japan. 
7Department of Neurological Surgery, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: October 3, 2017; Accepted: February 8, 2018.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2018;128(5):1772–1786. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI97837.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 7 3
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
jured patient urine. Together, these results suggest that proNGF is 
a major form of NGF appearing in the urine after SCI in rodents 
and humans, and the released proNGF is likely to elicit similar 
responses in mammals after SCI.
NGF expression has been detected in the bladder tissue itself, 
and its RNA levels were reported to increase after SCI and CYP-
induced cystitis (12). In agreement with this report, NGF was 
detected in both the urothelium and the detrusor muscle in the 
naive, uninjured state (Supplemental Figure 1A; supplemental 
material available online with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/
JCI97837DS1). At 7 hours after injury, when urinary proNGF lev-
els were high (Figure 1), NGF immunoreactivity was significantly 
reduced in both the urothelium and the detrusor muscle in com-
parison with the naive sample (Supplemental Figure 1, A and B). In 
agreement with immunofluorescence data, overall proNGF levels 
were reduced in the urothelium at 1–4 hours after injury, with a 
gradual increase until 5 days after injury based on Western blot-
ting (Supplemental Figure 1C). In the detrusor muscle, proNGF 
levels were increased at 3–5 days after injury (Supplemental Fig-
ure 1D). These results suggest that urinary proNGF is likely to have 
been released from the urothelium and detrusor muscle.
We next asked whether the expression of its signaling recep-
tor, p75, is also similarly regulated in the urothelium and detrusor 
muscle. p75 was detected in both the urothelium and the detrusor 
muscle, with a significantly greater expression in the detrusor mus-
cle than in the urothelium based on Western blotting (Supplemental 
Figure 2A). A similar expression pattern was demonstrated with Trk 
receptors, with a majority of Trk receptors detected in the detrusor 
muscle and minimal expression in the urothelium. It is noted that 
although we suspect the signal observed reflects that from TrkA, we 
cannot confirm this since we used a pan-Trk antibody here.
We next examined with immunohistochemistry which cells 
in the bladder express p75 both in the naive state and after SCI. 
In the naive state, p75 immunoreactivity was detected mainly 
among the urothelial umbrella cells, colocalizing with uroplakin, 
a marker for these cells (Supplemental Figure 2, B and C). In addi-
tion, p75+ sensory nerve fibers that project to the urothelium were 
also detected (Supplemental Figure 2B, arrows), as published (8, 
9). In the detrusor muscle, an increase in p75 immunoreactivity 
was detected at 7 hours after injury and persisted up to 5 days after 
injury (Supplemental Figure 2B). Based on the morphology, this 
staining most probably represents nerve fiber projections to the 
muscle, which demonstrated an overall increase in p75 expres-
sion after injury. Sortilin, a coreceptor for p75 in binding proNGF, 
was also expressed both in the urothelium and the muscle (data 
not shown). In the urothelium, the patterns of p75 expression 
changed greatly after injury: p75 immunoreactivity was detect-
able in umbrella cells lining the bladder lumen at 7 hours and 1 day 
after injury, with some p75 immunoreactivity appearing to label 
dying cells that were being sloughed off from the urothelial layer 
(Supplemental Figure 2B). Umbrella cells were reported to under-
go desquamation as early as 2 hours after injury, with almost com-
plete loss by 1 day after injury after SCI (13). The loss of umbrella 
cells was followed by a hyperplastic response of the urothelial 
basal cells at 3 days after injury, during which p75+ cells appeared 
as rows that follow the contour of the hyperplastic urothelial layer 
(Supplemental Figure 2B), with many of them expressing a mitotic 
survival and differentiation, whereas proneurotrophins bind p75 
selectively and with a higher affinity, inducing apoptosis.
Although p75 expression has previously been identified in 
micturition reflex pathways, few studies have examined the poten-
tial role(s) of p75 in urinary bladder reflexes (8, 9). The functional 
role of p75 has been addressed in lower urinary tract reflexes in the 
context of urinary bladder inflammation (8, 9). Previous studies 
demonstrated that p75 blockade at the level of the urinary bladder 
increased voiding frequency in control rats and further increased 
voiding frequency in rats treated with cyclophosphamide (CYP) to 
induce cystitis (9). Thus, one function of proNGF
/p75 interactions 
may be to reduce bladder activity or to offset increased voiding fre-
quency induced by CYP-induced cystitis (9). The contribution(s) 
of proneurotrophins (e.g., proNGF) to micturition reflex function 
have not been explored in the context of health, injury, or dis-
ease. Thus, determination of the roles of proNGF
/p75 signaling 
in normal micturition circuitry and urinary bladder morphology 
may provide additional insights into their contributions to urinary 
bladder dysfunction after SCI. We hypothesized that proNGF
/p75 
signaling in the periphery as well as in the CNS regulates bladder 
dysfunction after SCI. In this study, we have used preclinical mod-
els and human tissues to evaluate the contributions and roles of 
proNGF and p75 to urothelial cell apoptosis and urinary bladder 
morphology after SCI. In addition, we evaluated the functional 
contributions of proNGF
/p75 signaling to micturition reflexes in 
spinal-intact and SCI mice using (a) conditional deletion of p75 
from urothelial cells and (b) pharmacological blockade with the 
small molecule LM11A-31 (10, 11). Our results suggest that p75 
signaling plays important roles in micturition under spinal-intact 
and SCI conditions in both the CNS and the PNS. Our study of the 
mechanisms by which proNGF
/p75 signaling contributes to blad-
der dysfunction after SCI will help facilitate rapid development of 
LM11A-31 or its analog as a viable therapeutic agent to treat blad-
der dysfunction in the near future.
Results
ProNGF is detected in the urine in rodents and humans within hours of 
SCI. We subjected urine samples collected at different times after 
SCI to Western blotting using a proNGF-specific antibody as well 
as a pan-NGF antibody to detect both mature and proNGF. While 
mature NGF was not detectable at the time points tested, proNGF 
was detected in the urine as early as 1 hour after injury, and its lev-
els remained high up to 7 hours after injury (Figure 1, A and B). The 
lack of mature NGF in the urine was confirmed by mouse mature 
NGF-specific ELISA (data not shown). A similar time course of uri-
nary proNGF was obtained using mouse proNGF-specific ELISA, 
which detected urinary proNGF levels in the range of 6.2–10.7 ng/
mg of proteins at 1–7 hours after injury (Figure 1C). The proNGF 
reactive band was indeed proNGF, as indicated by immunoprecipi-
tation with a monoclonal 27/21 NGF antibody followed by blotting 
with a proNGF antibody (Figure 1D). It should be noted that SCI-
induced increases in urinary proNGF were not limited to mice or 
the type of SCI: proNGF was detected within 1–7 hours after injury 
after contusion injuries in mice, and also in rats and humans (Fig-
ure 1, E–G). The amount of urinary proNGF in 2 human patients 
was 1 and 46 pg/mg of proteins, respectively, based on a human-
specific proNGF ELISA. No proNGF was detected in control, unin-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 7 4
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
p75 is responsible for umbrella cell apoptosis in response to urinary 
proNGF after SCI. We next asked whether the loss of umbrella 
cells after SCI is due to apoptosis by performing TUNEL reactions. 
TUNEL reactions on injured bladder tissues revealed a robust 
apoptotic response mostly in uroplakin-positive and p75+ umbrella 
cells (Figure 2A). Based on the number of TUNEL+ umbrella cells, 
the apoptotic response was most robust at 7 hours after injury, and 
then subsided rapidly to the background level by 3 days after inju-
ry (Figure 2B). To determine whether p75 is involved in inducing 
the apoptosis of umbrella cells, we subjected p75KO mice to SCI. 
Remarkably, umbrella cell apoptosis was completely blocked in 
p75KO mice at 7 hours after injury to 3 days after injury (Figure 2B). 
marker, phospho–histone 3 (pH3, Supplemental Figure 2C). After 
an injury or infection that results in the loss of umbrella cells, the 
basal cells of the urothelium are known to undergo regeneration, 
thus replenishing the lost layer (14). At 5 days after injury, after 
the hyperplastic response had subsided, p75 immunoreactivity 
was detected in the basal cell layer that abuts the laminin-positive 
staining (Supplemental Figure 2B and Supplemental Figure 2C), 
and the cells were also dividing as indicated by BrdU and pH3 
immunoreactivity (Supplemental Figure 2C). These results sug-
gest that p75 signaling, perhaps in response to the urinary proNGF 
released after the injury, plays a role in the loss of umbrella cells 
and regeneration of the urothelium.
Figure 1. ProNGF is released into the urine in rodents and humans within hours of SCI. (A) ProNGF is released into the urine almost immediately after 
spinal cord transection in mice. The blots were probed with anti-proNGF and pan-NGF antibodies. There was little mature NGF detectable in the urine at 
these time points. (B) Quantification of proNGF by Western blotting. Within-subject comparison was significant at P = 0.003 based on repeated measures 
of 1-way ANOVA after Greenhouse-Geisser correction, which resulted in P < 0.01. Subsequent pairwise comparisons were made using Bonferroni correction. 
(C) Quantification of proNGF detected in mouse urine by proNGF-specific ELISA. Note that mature NGF was not detected by mature NGF-specific ELISA. 
(D) Immunoprecipitation/Western analyses of urine samples illustrate that the bands detected with proNGF antibody in A are indeed proNGF. Mouse urine 
samples were immunoprecipitated with 27/21 mature NGF antibody and probed with proNGF antibody. (E) ProNGF is detected in the urine after contusion 
injuries in mice. (F) ProNGF is present in the urine after spinal cord transection in rats. Mature NGF was not detected by mature NGF-specific ELISA. (G) 
ProNGF was also detected in human urine after SCI. The upper blot was probed with proNGF-specific antibody (*artifact), while the lower blot was probed 
with pan-NGF antibody (H-20). Note that recombinant proNGF and mature NGF were included as controls. Based on human proNGF-specific ELISA, the 
amount of proNGF was 1 and 46 pg/mg for 3 and 6 hours after injury, respectively. Note that 3- and 6-hour urine samples were collected from 2 different 
individuals. ELISA assays also failed to detect mature NGF as in Western blotting. C, urine from healthy control without SCI.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 7 5
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
LM11A-31 (10), but fails to cross the blood-brain barrier, and was 
thus presumed unlikely to cross the urothelial barrier. LM11A-24 
as well as proNGF-blocking antibody, but not the control anti-
body, completely inhibited the apoptosis at 7 hours after injury 
(Figure 2, B and C). Together, these results indicate that it is the 
proNGF released into the urine that activates p75 on the surface 
of umbrella cells, thereby initiating apoptosis.
In seeking additional support for the critical role of p75 signal-
ing in umbrella cell apoptosis, we examined the morphology of the 
luminal surface of mice instilled with LM11A-31 and p75KO mice 
via scanning electron microscopy analysis. Without injury, the 
luminal surface of the bladder exhibited the well-characterized 
polyhedral morphology with ridges that demarcate cell bound-
aries (Figure 3A, blue lines and arrows; ref. 15). At 7 hours after 
injury, however, the surface morphology was drastically altered, 
with loss of the characteristic junctional ridges (Figure 3A). By 2 
days after injury, umbrella cells were regenerated, but they were 
smaller in size than those without injury, although they estab-
lished polyhedral morphology (Figure 3A, red arrows). With intra-
vesical instillation of LM11A-31 immediately after SCI, however, 
These results suggest that p75 is involved in inducing umbrella cell 
apoptosis after SCI. After SCI in p75KO mice, proNGF was detect-
ed in the urine at levels similar to those detected in WT SCI mice 
(data not shown).
We next determined whether blocking proNGF signaling 
with LM11A-31, which inhibits proNGF action through p75 in 
vitro and in vivo (10, 11), will inhibit umbrella cell apoptosis. 
Indeed, systemic administration of LM11A-31 via oral gavage at 
4 hours after injury reduced the number of TUNEL+ urothelial 
cells at 7 hours after injury by 55% (Figure 2B). LM11A-31 had no 
effect at 1 day after injury, in agreement with a significant drop 
in urinary proNGF levels detected by Western blotting (Figure 
1B). When LM11A-31 was delivered immediately after SCI via 
intravesical instillation, apoptosis of umbrella cells at 7 hours 
after injury was completely blocked (Figure 2B), suggesting that 
it is proNGF in the urine that is inducing apoptosis. To confirm 
whether urinary proNGF is indeed acting as an apoptosis factor, 
we instilled intravesically either a proNGF-blocking antibody 
or LM11A-24, immediately after SCI. LM11A-24 is capable of 
interfering with proNGF binding to p75 to the same extent as 
Figure 2. p75 is responsible for umbrella cell apoptosis in response to 
urinary proNGF after SCI. (A) Uroplakin-positive (UP+) umbrella cells are 
the major cell types that undergo apoptosis at 7 hours after SCI. The blad-
ders were processed for TUNEL reaction and subsequently stained with 
UP or p75 antibodies. Urothelial and muscle layers of the bladder wall are 
indicated by U and M, respectively, and the bladder lumen is indicated by 
L. Scale bar: 150 μm. (B) p75 is responsible for umbrella cell apoptosis after 
SCI as indicated by the lack of TUNEL+ cells in the p75KO. The data were 
analyzed using repeated measures of 2-way ANOVA after Greenhouse-
Geisser correction, which resulted in P < 0.001 comparing the vehicle and 
LM11A-31 treatments and the WT and p75-null mice. Subsequent pairwise 
comparisons were made using Bonferroni correction. (C) Intravesical instil-
lation of proNGF blocking antibody blocked umbrella cell apoptosis com-
pletely at 7 hours after injury. The data were analyzed by Student’s t tests.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 7 6
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
arrows). The effect of LM11A-31 was also prolonged, as revealed 
by H&E histology at 10 days after injury, where urothelial hyper-
plasia and detrusor hypertrophy were largely prevented (Figure 
3D). These results together suggest that proNGF
/p75 signaling is 
responsible for the loss of umbrella cells after SCI.
umbrella cell loss was completely blocked with intact polyhedral 
ridges at both 7 hours and 2 days after injury (Figure 3B, blue lines 
and arrows). Also in p75KO mice at 7 hours after injury, the luminal 
surface remained almost identical to uninjured control tissue with 
distinct polyhedral junctional ridges (Figure 3C, blue lines and 
Figure 3. Hexagonal morphology of umbrella cells is preserved in p75KO mice and with LM11A-31 administration after SCI. (A) Without injury, the luminal 
surface of the bladder exhibited the well-characterized polyhedral morphology with ridges that demarcate cell boundaries (blue lines and arrows; ref. 15). 
At 7 hours after injury, however, the surface morphology was drastically altered, with loss of the characteristic junctional ridges. By 2 days postinjury (dpi), 
umbrella cells were regenerated, but they were smaller in size than those without injury, although they established polyhedral morphology (red arrows). 
(B) With intravesical instillation of LM11A-31 immediately after SCI, however, umbrella cell loss was completely blocked, with intact polyhedral ridges 
at both 7 hours and 2 days after injury (blue lines and arrows). (C) At 7 hours after injury, the luminal surface of the bladder from p75KO mice was visu-
ally indistinguishable from that of the control bladder. Blue dotted lines mark the hexagonal boundaries of umbrella cells. Higher-magnification images 
illustrate the cell boundaries between neighboring cells (arrows). (D) H&E staining of the control and LM11A-31–treated bladders. Note the preservation 
of the urothelium at 1 day after injury with LM11A-31, while very few urothelial cells are visible in vehicle-treated bladder. LM11A-31 also prevented chronic 
urothelial hyperplasia and detrusor hypertrophy of the bladder at 10 days after injury. The bladder morphology appears similar to that of the uninjured con-
trol bladder. Urothelial and muscle layers of the bladder wall are indicated by U and M, respectively, and the bladder lumen is indicated by L. Scale bar: 250 
μm. Experiments were performed 3 times, and representative ones are shown.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 7 7
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Selective deletion of p75 among umbrella cells influences mictu-
rition. p75 is also expressed in nerve fibers located in the lamina 
propria below the urothelium and extending into the umbrella cell 
layer in the urothelium (9). Because this neuronal p75 could con-
tribute to the changes in the umbrella cells after SCI, we generated 
a conditional p75 knockout mouse line in which p75 is deleted only 
among umbrella cells by crossing p75fl/fl mice with an inducible 
uroplakin 3a (UP3a)–CreGFP/ERT2 (16). p75fl/fl mice have been 
described (17). The experimental line, UP3a-CreGFP/ERT2+/– 
 
p75fl/fl, and a control line, UP3a-CreGFP/ERT2+/– p75–/–, will be 
referred to as p75Δ-UP3a and p75c-UP3a, respectively, for brevity 
(Figure 4A). To verify the selective deletion of p75 among umbrella 
cells and not in other cell types of the bladder, urothelial cells from 
tamoxifen-treated p75Δ-UP3a and p75c-UP3a mice were isolated, 
and their genomic DNA was subjected to PCR reactions using P1 
and P2 primers (Figure 4A), which will yield a product only when 
Cre is activated. The bladder minus urothelium from both geno-
types was also used as controls. Indeed, a PCR band was detected 
only from urothelial cells, and not from the bladder minus uro-
thelium, in p75Δ-UP3a mice (Figure 4B). The PCR band was also 
absent in the urothelial cells as well as the bladder minus urothe-
lium from p75c-UP3a mice. Similarly, p75 immunoreactivity was 
detectable in the innervating fibers in the detrusor muscle, but was 
absent in the urothelium of p75Δ-UP3a mice, while it was present in 
both layers in p75c-UP3a mice (Figure 4C). These results illustrate 
that p75 is selectively deleted only among urothelial cells in p75Δ-
UP3a mice. When p75c-UP3a mice were 
subjected to SCI, the number of TUNEL+ 
apoptotic cells increased at 7 hours after 
injury, while it remained at the basal lev-
el in p75Δ-UP3a mice (Figure 4D). These 
results suggest that it is p75 signaling in 
the urothelium that is responsible for 
inducing umbrella cell apoptosis.
The urothelium serves as an impor-
tant permeability barrier, but also exhib-
its sensory and signaling abilities by 
releasing many neuromodulators and 
expressing their receptors, such as nico-
tinic, muscarinic, tachykinin, adrener-
gic, bradykinin, and transient receptor 
potential (TRP) vanilloid receptors (1). 
These properties allow the urothelium 
to regulate the excitability and release 
of neurotransmitters from adjacent 
capsaicin-sensitive, unmyelinated affer-
ent nerves in the bladder. We thus asked 
whether protecting the urothelium from 
disruption that normally accompanies 
SCI would influence voiding function. 
Since anesthesia influences voiding 
function, urodynamic parameters were 
measured in freely moving conscious 
mice as published (18). Surprisingly, 
p75Δ-UP3a mice exhibited increased 
voiding frequency with reduced inter-
micturition intervals and increased 
bladder pressures compared with naive p75c-UP3a mice (Figure 
5, A–E). The overall voiding efficiency, however, remained simi-
lar between the 2 genotypes. This is consistent with a previous 
study in which pharmacological blockade of NGF binding to p75 
increased voiding frequency in control rats and those with CYP-
induced cystitis (8). After SCI, however, p75Δ-UP3a mice exhibited 
worse bladder function than the control with an increase in inter-
micturition intervals and infused volumes, and an overall 32% 
reduction in voiding efficiency (Figure 5, A–E). We interpret these 
results as suggesting that p75 signaling in the urothelium contrib-
utes to micturition in both naive and injured conditions. More 
importantly, these results suggest that the normal turnover of the 
urothelium that involves umbrella cell apoptosis plays a protective 
role for bladder function after SCI.
The phenotype of p75Δ-UP3a mice is opposite to that of 
naive TrpV4KO, which showed reduced voiding frequency with 
increased intermicturition intervals (19). TrpV4 is one of the Trp 
family of receptors that is expressed in umbrella cells as well as 
the intermediate and basal cells of the urothelium (20). We thus 
hypothesized that p75 signaling counteracts TrpV4 signaling in 
the urothelium. The hypothesis was tested in primary mouse uro-
thelial cells that express TrpV4 and respond to agonist addition by 
increasing calcium influx (21, 22). In response to its selective ago-
nist GSK1016790A, Ca2+ flux was increased (Figure 5F), and was 
dependent on extracellular calcium (data not shown). Preincu-
bation with 10 ng/ml proNGF 30 minutes before GSK1016790A 
Figure 4. Selective deletion of p75 among umbrella cells results in complete block of umbrella cell 
apoptosis. (A) Diagram of the targeting vectors in p75Δ-UP3a and p75c-UP3a mice. Red triangles repre-
sent loxP sites, and green P1 and P2 arrows represent PCR primers used in B. (B) Selective deletion of p75 
in urothelial cells. Urothelial cells from tamoxifen-treated p75Δ-UP3a and p75c-UP3a mice were scraped 
into a tube, and the isolated genomic DNA was subjected to PCR using P1 and P2 primers. The primers 
generate PCR product only when Cre is activated. Note that the PCR band is present only in umbrella 
cells and not in the bladder minus urothelium in p75Δ-UP3a mice, indicating a selective p75 deletion in 
the urothelium. (C) p75 is not detected in umbrella cells (U), while it is clearly present in the muscle (M). 
L, bladder lumen. Scale bar: 150 μm. (D) Umbrella cell apoptosis was completely blocked in p75Δ-UP3a 
compared with that in p75c-UP3a mice.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 7 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 7 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
LM11A-31 administration resulted in significant improvement 
in voiding function with the overall voiding efficiency reaching 
that of spinal-intact mice, and the bladder capacity and pressure 
also returned to levels as under naive conditions (Figure 6, A–C). 
Accordingly, the infused volume and intermicturition intervals 
were also reduced by 50% and 55%, respectively (Figure 6, D and 
E). Bladder weight was also reduced with LM11A-31 treatment 
(69–74 ± 4 mg for spine-intact mice; 123 ± 3 mg for SCI-vehicle 
mice; 87 ± 4 mg for SCI–LM11A-31). These changes culminated 
in a greater number of mice recovering automatic micturition 
earlier than the vehicle control after SCI (Figure 6F). As we have 
shown that LM11A-31 targets p75 in vivo (11), these results togeth-
er suggest that proNGF signaling through p75 in the spinal cord 
contributes significantly to disruption of voiding function after 
SCI, and blocking proNGF action through p75 can lead to signifi-
cant improvement in bladder control after SCI.
Systemic LM11A-31 increases glutamatergic inputs onto tyro-
sine hydroxylase–positive neurons after SCI. It was reported that 
NGF regulates synaptic organization in the sympathetic system, 
where TrkA promoted while p75 inhibited postsynaptic specializa-
tion (25). We next asked whether the micturitional improvement 
observed with LM11A-31 was also accompanied by synaptic chang-
es. As the first step, we assessed the number of c-fos+ cells in the 
area of the dorsal commissure (DCM) of L6 spinal cords, choos-
ing these in particular since their numbers were shown to increase 
with bladder distention among preganglionic neurons (26, 27). At 
28 days after injury, the number of c-fos+ cells increased at least 
2-fold, while LM11A-31 administration reduced the number to that 
in no-SCI control (Figure 7, A and B). This is reminiscent of reports 
that capsaicin treatment reduced the number of c-fos+ cells (27) 
after SCI, and increased voiding efficiency (28), suggesting that 
capsaicin-sensitive C-fiber afferents are involved in initiation of 
detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia and/or detrusor hyperreflexia. We 
thus looked for proteins that are expressed in small-diameter dor-
sal root ganglion (DRG) neurons that project to the DCM of L6/
S1 spinal cords, and whose expression overlaps with p75. A pro-
tein that fit the criteria was tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) (Figure 7, 
C and D): Small-diameter neurons expressed both p75 and TH in 
L6/S1 DRG regardless of SCI, and their projections were detected 
in the DCM of the L6/S1 spinal cords. These TH+ neurons have 
been characterized as the ones representing the cutaneous low-
threshold mechanoreceptors (29). After SCI, many of these fiber 
projections appeared lost (Figure 7D), and instead a distinct group 
of neurons emerged with clear cell soma morphology in the area of 
the DCM, expressing both p75 and TH. In accordance with these 
data, modulating dopamine production has recently been shown 
to influence micturition after SCI (30).
We asked whether LM11A-31 modulated synaptic inputs onto 
these TH+ neurons in the DCM. Since glutamate is the main neu-
rotransmitter released by afferent fibers, we first measured the 
extent of glutamatergic inputs to the L6 spinal cord by quantify-
ing the number of vGlut1+ synaptic puncta using Fiji following 
immunohistochemistry (Figure 8, A and B). The area occupied by 
vGlut1+ puncta was increased after SCI with LM11A-31 treatment 
compared with the vehicle-treated control, suggesting that block-
ing proNGF action through p75 facilitated the increase in gluta-
matergic inputs. The vGlut1 inputs to TH+ neurons also increased, 
addition attenuated the Ca2+ flux significantly as shown by 57% 
reduction in the peak amplitude, suggesting that proNGF signaling 
antagonizes TrpV4 activation by GSK1016790A (Figure 5, F and 
G). In support, GSK1016790A-mediated Ca2+ flux was unaffected 
in p75KO urothelial cultures (Figure 5, F and G). It should be noted 
that measurements of the area under the curve of Ca2+ flux failed 
to show any significant differences among the 4 groups (data not 
shown). In order to understand the mechanism by which proNGF 
inhibits TrpV4 activity, we tested whether cell-surface expression 
of TrpV4 is regulated by its agonist, and whether proNGF modu-
lates it in 293T cells that were transfected with p75, sortilin, and 
TrpV4. GSK1016790A addition increased the trafficking of TrpV4 
to the cell surface, with its peak at 30 minutes (Figure 5H). The 
addition of proNGF prior to GSK1016790A application reduced 
the amount of TrpV4 targeted to the cell membrane without influ-
encing its transport kinetics. Addition of LM11A-31 along with 
proNGF in turn counteracted the effect of proNGF addition, with 
increased levels of TrpV4 detected on the cell surface. ProNGF 
alone failed to have any effect. These results together suggest that 
urinary proNGF can influence TrpV4 activity in the urothelium, 
thereby regulating voiding frequency.
Systemic LM11A-31 significantly improves overall bladder func-
tion. Surprised at our unexpected results with p75Δ-UP3a mice, we 
decided to test the effect of systemic LM11A-31 administration, 
since we have reported that proNGF is the major form of NGF that 
is released into the cerebrospinal fluid after CNS injuries includ-
ing SCI (23, 24), potentially influencing the central and peripheral 
circuits that control micturition. In addition, LM11A-31 crosses 
the brain–spinal cord barrier efficiently after SCI (11). For these 
experiments, LM11A-31 was orally delivered at 100 mg/kg begin-
ning 4 hours after injury, and once daily thereafter for 4 weeks. 
Figure 5. Selective deletion of p75 among umbrella cells influences 
micturition. (A) Representative recordings of intravesical pressure during 
continuous intravesical infusion of saline and an open urethral outlet 
in conscious, unrestrained p75c-UP3a and p75Δ-UP3a mice with no SCI 
and SCI (2 weeks). (B) Overall voiding efficiency in no-SCI p75Δ-UP3a and 
p75c-UP3a mice was similar, although after SCI, p75Δ-UP3a mice exhibited 
worse bladder function than p75c-UP3a mice with a 32% drop in voiding 
efficiency (n = 3–5). (C and D) Under no-SCI condition, p75Δ-UP3a mice had 
significantly decreased infused volumes (IVs) that induced micturition 
and intermicturition intervals compared with those observed in p75c-UP3a 
mice. SCI significantly reduced intermicturition intervals (C) and IVs (D) in 
p75c-UP3a mice, and these effects were reversed in p75Δ-UP3a mice. Note 
that left y axes represent no SCI, while right y axes represent SCI groups. 
(E) No-SCI p75Δ-UP3a mice exhibited significantly increased average, 
minimum, and threshold bladder pressures compared with control, with 
no change in maximum micturition pressure. Comparisons among groups 
were made using ANOVA. When F ratios exceeded the adjusted critical 
value (P ≤ 0.0125), Bonferroni’s multiple-comparisons test was used to 
compare means among groups. (F) ProNGF/p75 signaling negatively influ-
ences TrpV4-mediated Ca2+ flux in primary mouse urothelial cells. Urothe-
lial cells were incubated with 10 ng/ml of proNGF or vehicle for 30 minutes 
before Fluo-4 AM loading and GSK1016790A addition at 50 nM (red arrows; 
n = 4 independent experiments). (G) Quantification of the average peak 
amplitude of ΔF/F. Comparisons among groups were made using ANOVA, 
and pairwise comparisons were made by Tukey’s multiple-comparisons 
test (3–8 cells were included per treatment). (H) GSK1016790A facilitates 
cell-surface targeting of TrpV4 in HEK293T cells, which is inhibited by 
proNGF. ProNGF-mediated inhibition is lifted with LM11A-31 preincubation.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 8 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
flexia was significantly attenuated, and automatic micturition was 
acquired weeks earlier than in the vehicle controls. The improve-
ment was in part attributed to an increased afferent glutamatergic 
synaptic input onto newly emerged TH+ neurons in the DCM and 
their projections. Surprisingly, p75 also plays a role in modulat-
ing frequency of voiding in the naive bladder without SCI, but its 
effect is opposite to SCI conditions, as selective deletion of p75 
in the urothelium resulted in hyperreflexia. We demonstrate that 
the mechanism by which urothelial p75 influences voiding fre-
quency involves modulating TrpV4 activity: addition of proNGF 
to primary urothelial cells led to attenuation of TrpV4 activity. 
Since the inhibition was in response to proNGF, we surmise that 
urinary proNGF is present normally but below our detection limit 
of 78–156 pg/ml. After SCI, however, p75Δ-UP3a mice exhibited 
as the area occupied with vGlut1+ puncta among TH+ fibers was 
increased within the DCM with LM11A-31 administration (Figure 
8C). These results suggest that activation of proNGF
/p75 signal-
ing after SCI contributes to the reflex circuit that is responsible 
for detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia and/or detrusor hyperreflexia, 
and blocking their action is a way to alleviate bladder dysfunction 
that accompanies SCI.
Discussion
Here, we report that proNGF
/p75 signaling plays multiple roles in 
micturition after SCI. Overall, proNGF
/p75 signaling is detrimen-
tal to bladder function following SCI: with systemic administra-
tion of LM11A-31 that blocks proNGF action through p75, bladder 
capacity and pressure dropped to an almost normal level, hyperre-
Figure 6. Systemic LM11A-31 greatly 
improves bladder function after SCI 
in mice. (A) Representative bladder 
function recordings in conscious, unre-
strained vehicle- or LM11A-31–treated 
mice with continuous intravesical 
instillation of saline with an open 
outlet at 28 days after injury. Upper 
recordings were from SCI mice that 
were treated with vehicle, while lower 
ones were from SCI mice that were 
treated with 100 mg/kg LM11A-31. 
Boxed areas: Representative single-fill 
cystometry recordings (arrow, infu-
sion start) in conscious, unrestrained 
vehicle- or LM11A-31–treated mice from 
2 different experiments. (B) After SCI, 
LM11A-31 significantly reduced bladder 
capacity, reaching that of spinal-
intact mice. (C) Micturition pressures 
(threshold, average, maximum) were 
significantly reduced compared with 
those in vehicle-treated mice. (D and 
E) Infused volume and intermicturi-
tion intervals were reduced compared 
with those in vehicle-treated mice in 
both spinal-intact and SCI groups. (F) 
Greater numbers of mice treated with 
LM11A-31 recovered automatic micturi-
tion significantly earlier than vehicle-
treated mice after SCI. Time (days) to 
recovery of automatic micturition for 2 
groups was compared using a 2-tailed 
unpaired Student’s t test. P ≤ 0.05 was 
considered statistically significant. 
Comparisons of cystometric param-
eters among groups (B–E) were made 
using ANOVA. When F ratios exceeded 
the adjusted critical value (P ≤ 0.0125), 
Bonferroni’s multiple-comparisons 
test was used to compare means 
among groups.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 8 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Figure 7. Colocalization of tyrosine 
hydroxylase among p75+ neurons in DRG 
and L6/S1 spinal cords after SCI. (A) 
LM11A-31 reduced the number of c-fos+ 
cells in L6 spinal cords after SCI. DCM, 
dorsal commissure; cc, central canal; 
MDH, medial dorsal horn. Scale bar: 150 
μm. (B) Quantification of A. Compari-
sons among groups were made using 
1-way ANOVA (P ≤ 0.001), and pairwise 
comparisons were made by Tukey’s 
multiple-comparisons test. (C) p75 is 
expressed among tyrosine hydroxylase–
positive (TH+) sensory neurons in L6/S1 
DRG. DRGs were processed for double 
immunohistochemistry for TH and p75. 
Scale bars: 150 μm. The boxed areas are 
shown in the far right column; scale bars: 
37.5 μm. (D) Colocalization of TH and p75 
in fibers and neuronal soma in the DCM 
of L6/S1 spinal cords. Scale bars: 150 μm. 
The boxed areas are shown in the far right 
column; scale bars: 37.5 μm. Experiments 
were performed 3 times, and representa-
tive ones are shown.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 8 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
effect on uninjured animals, it was hypothesized that normally 
“silent” C-fiber bladder afferents acquired mechanosensitivity 
and initiated automatic micturition (31). Although the mechanism 
by which capsaicin improves bladder function is still unclear, these 
results highlight the fact that sensory afferent projections are 
likely to be involved. Indeed, we found that excitatory glutamater-
gic inputs to the L6/S1 spinal cord are increased with LM11A-31 
administration, and also onto TH+ cell bodies and fiber projec-
tions. These TH+ neurons appear to participate in bladder reflex 
circuitry after SCI, since transneuronal labeling from the bladder 
wall labeled TH+ cells in similar regions to those identified in the 
current study (30). In addition, 6-hydroxydopamine treatment not 
only reduced the number of these TH+ neurons but also reduced 
voiding efficiency (30). Although the characteristics of these 
TH+ neurons need further study, this suggests that these neurons 
underlie the emergence of automatic micturition after SCI. A 
complete spinal cord transection injury, rostral to the lumbosacral 
spinal cord (i.e., upper motoneuron injury), irreversibly impairs 
urinary bladder function by affecting storage and elimination neu-
ral circuitry. Following SCI, detrusor sphincter dyssynergia (DSD) 
worsened micturition behavior compared with the control. We 
attribute the phenotype to inhibition of urothelial reorganiza-
tion that is initiated by apoptosis of umbrella cells that depend 
on urinary proNGF binding to p75 on umbrella cells: proNGF 
antibody and LM11A-31 instillation immediately after SCI com-
pletely blocked umbrella cell apoptosis as well as ensuing urothe-
lial hyperplasia and detrusor hypertrophy. This unexpected result 
suggests that the usual turnover of the urothelium that is initiated 
by the loss of lumen-lining umbrella cells plays a protective role 
for overall micturition after SCI, perhaps by engaging important 
ion channels and receptors whose activities change with SCI in 
the urothelium (1). A rise in urinary proNGF is then a critical sig-
nal facilitating regeneration of the urothelium. It is unclear at the 
moment to what extent proNGF
/p75 signaling in the urothelium 
contributed to overall bladder function after SCI, which requires 
further study. Regardless, it appears that the role that proNGF
/
p75 signaling plays in the CNS to inhibit bladder function after SCI 
overrides any peripheral contribution.
It was reported that acute subcutaneous delivery of capsaicin 
improved bladder function after SCI (28). Since capsaicin has no 
Figure 8. Systemic LM11A-31 increases glutamatergic inputs 
after SCI in mice. (A) Representative images of TH and vGlut1 
immunostaining of L6/S1 spinal cords. Scale bars: 75 μm. The 
boxed areas are shown in 3 columns to the right; scale bars: 
30 μm. (B) LM11A-31 increased the vGlut1+ synaptic puncta. 
Comparisons among groups were made using 1-way ANOVA, 
and pairwise comparisons were made by Tukey’s multiple-
comparisons test. (C) LM11A-31 increased glutamatergic inputs 
to TH+ fibers. Comparisons among groups were made using 
1-way ANOVA (P ≤ 0.05), and pairwise comparisons were made 
by Tukey’s multiple-comparisons test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 8 3
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
spinal cord retract under the surgical microscope. The space between 
the retracted ends of the spinal cord was packed with sterile Gelfoam 
(Pharmacia and Upjohn), and the incision was sutured. Carprofen (5 
mg/kg, s.c.) was given at the time of surgery and for 2 days after injury 
at 24-hour intervals. The T9 epicenter was chosen to avoid the rostral 
lumbar and caudal lumbosacral spinal cord, which are involved in the 
storage and elimination phases of the voiding reflex, respectively. Our 
experience indicates that a T9 epicenter injury creates a reproduc-
ible upper motoneuron injury that is useful to evaluate the recovery 
of urinary bladder function. The complete transection model of SCI is 
useful to study recovery of urinary bladder function without the possi-
bility of plasticity processes bypassing the lesion. LM11A-31 was orally 
delivered at 100 mg/kg beginning 4 hours after injury, and once daily 
thereafter for 4 weeks. Urinary bladders were manually expressed 
2–3 times a day. We used female mice because manual expression of 
bladder (Credé maneuver) is more easily accomplished because of 
the shorter and wider urethra in female compared with male mice. 
We recorded presence or absence of automatic micturition days after 
injury at the first daily manual expression. Automatic micturition is 
defined as the period following spinal shock with the emergence of a 
micturition reflex at the spinal level and the appearance of spontane-
ous, involuntary bladder contractions. Thus, some function is restored 
although voiding frequency and volume are altered.
Sham animals (laminectomy, spinal cord intact) were not sub-
jected to any further manipulation. For contusion injuries, an Infinite 
Horizon Impactor (Precision Systems and Instrumentation LLC) was 
used at a controlled force-defined impact at 50 kdyn at the thoracic 9 
position as previously described (11). We used 2 different models of 
SCI (contusion injury and complete transection injury) to determine 
the generalizability of proNGF release in the urine. Although a pre-
clinical contusion injury may have more translational relevance, we 
used a more severe (complete transection) model, because it allows 
the evaluation of bladder function after injury without the possibility 
of plasticity processes bypassing the lesion.
SCI in rats. Complete transection was performed at T9 as previ-
ously described under isoflurane anesthesia (35). Briefly, after a T8–
T10 laminectomy, the dura and spinal cord were cut with scissors and 
a sterile sponge was placed between the severed ends of the spinal 
cord. The overlying muscle and skin were sutured and maintained at 
23°C–25.5°C. To prevent any infection, mice were treated with daily 
subcutaneous dosing of 100 mg/kg ampicillin for 10–14 days.
Collection of human urine. Urine samples were collected from 2 indi-
viduals, after placement of Foley catheters, frozen immediately, and 
stored at –80°C until analyses. Patient 1 was a 71-year-old male with a 
C6-level American Spinal Injury Association Impairment Scale (AIS) C 
injury following a motorcycle crash, with urine collected at 3 hours after 
injury. Patient 2 was a 44-year-old male with a C5-level AIS D injury fol-
lowing a fall from more than 20 feet, with urine collected at 6 hours after 
injury. The control urine was from a healthy male with no injury.
Implantation of intravesical catheter for conscious cystometry. A low-
er midline abdominal incision was performed under general anesthe-
sia and secured in place with a 6-0 nylon purse string suture at 14 days 
(p75Δ-UP3a and p75c-UP3a) or 28 days after injury (LM11A-31 and vehi-
cle). The distal end of the tubing was sealed, tunneled subcutaneously, 
and externalized at the back of the neck, out of the animal’s reach. 
Abdominal and neck incisions were closed with 4-0 nylon suture. Ani-
mals were maintained for 48 hours to ensure complete recovery from 
and detrusor hyperreflexia (DH) eventually develop, resulting 
in highly inefficient voiding with high intravesical pressures and 
large residual urine volumes as the bladder tries to empty against 
a closed outlet. It has been demonstrated that neutralizing NGF 
in the lumbosacral spinal cord with NGF-specific antibody sup-
pressed the development of DSD (5) and reduced DH (32). Since 
it is proNGF and not mature NGF that is released in the cord after 
SCI (23), it is likely that it was in fact proNGF rather than mature 
NGF that was neutralized by the antibody, which would have neu-
tralized proNGF as well, owing to shared mature NGF domain. 
If that were the case, it would suggest that p75 action was being 
blocked by the NGF neutralization in the spinal cord, which is in 
line with LM11A-31–mediated improvement observed. We thus 
surmise that proNGF
/p75 signaling may be involved in formation 
of DSD and that blocking their action with a small-molecule drug, 
such as LM11A-31, is a viable therapeutic strategy.
Methods
Human and animal studies. All procedures for human sample collec-
tion were approved by the Institutional Review Board at Ohio State 
University, and followed Department of Health and Human Services 
and FDA regulations. Written informed consent was received from 
participants prior to inclusion in the study. All animal studies were 
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the 
Ohio State University the University of Vermont, and followed NIH 
guidelines for the proper use and care of laboratory animals.
Global and conditional p75 knockout mice. A congenic C57BL/6 line 
that carries a mutation in exon 3 of the p75 gene was used for the study 
(33). Its genotype was determined by PCR analyses of tail DNA (34). 
Conditional p75 knockout mice in C57BL/6 background were gener-
ated by crossing of p75fl/fl mice with a UP3a-GFP/Cre/ERT2 line also in 
C57BL/6 background (16, 17). The experimental line, UP3a-CreGFP/
ERT2+/– p75fl/fl, and a control line, UP3a-CreGFP/ERT2+/– p75–/–, are 
referred to as p75Δ-UP3a and p75c-UP3a, respectively, for brevity. To 
delete p75 from the urothelium, adult mice were treated with 160 mg/
kg tamoxifen for 5 days via daily oral gavage, and subjected to experi-
mentation 10–14 days later. Except for cystometric studies, which used 
only female mice, both males and females that were older than 2–3 
months were used for the study.
Genomic PCR of the urothelium following tamoxifen administra-
tion. At 1–2 weeks after tamoxifen administration, bladders were iso-
lated from p75c-UP3a and p75Δ-UP3a mice, and placed onto a sterile 
wax plate in MEM media. The bladders were cut longitudinally and 
stretched flat with the urothelium side up using 0.1 mm × 1 cm pins, 
and incubated with 2 mg/ml dispase in MEM for 30 minutes at 37°C. 
The urothelial layer was then gently scraped with a spatula and col-
lected to extract genomic DNA. The rest of the bladder lacking the 
urothelium was also collected as a control. PCR reactions on isolated 
genomic DNA were performed as described in ref. 17.
SCI and postoperative care. Spinal cord transections were per-
formed under isoflurane anesthesia (2%–3% in a balance of oxygen 
for induction and 1%–2% for maintenance) in adult female mice. A 
laminectomy was performed at the T8–T10 level followed by complete 
transection of the dura and spinal cord using iris scissors under visual 
guidance with a surgical microscope. DRGs, rami, and rami commu-
nicantes were not transected. We confirmed complete transection 
of the spinal cord by observing the rostral and caudal cut ends of the 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 8 4
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
serum, 1× TBS, and 0.02% Na azide. Antibodies used for immunohis-
tochemistry include p75 (9650, a gift from Moses Chao, New York Uni-
versity, New York, New York, USA), pan-uroplakin (AUN, a gift from 
Tung-Tien Sun, New York University) as a marker for umbrella cells, 
vGlut1 (a gift from Julia Kaltschmidt, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California, USA), c-fos (2250, Cell Signaling Technology), NGF (H-20, 
Santa Cruz Biotechnology), phospho–histone 3 (53348, Cell Signaling 
Technology), laminin (Abcam), BrdU (555627, BD Biosciences), and 
tyrosine hydroxylase (2017-THSHP, PhosphoSolutions, and MAB318, 
Millipore). Slides were counterstained with TOTO-3 for nuclei (Invit-
rogen), mounted in Slow Fade Diamond Antifade Mountant (Invitro-
gen), and imaged using a Leica TCS SL confocal microscope.
Quantification of immunofluorescence images. To quantify TH and 
vGlut1 signals, the images from dorsal and ventral spinal cord hemi-
spheres were first merged using Fiji (https:/
/fiji.sc). The merged images 
were thresholded from 1 to 255 and processed to binary mode. The gray 
matter areas were selected, and signals within the selected area were 
measured. The pixels within the area were calculated by division of the 
RawIntDen by the maximum, 255, and the data were plotted after divi-
sion of the pixels by the area of each sample. For quantifying TH and 
vGlut1 overlapped signals, after each image was made into binary, the 
overlapped signals were identified by the multiply function of Fiji.
Quantification of c-fos+ cells. Every ninth section of the spinal cords 
was processed for c-fos staining, and the number of positive cells was 
quantified in the DCM areas.
Immunoprecipitation and Western blotting. Mouse bladders were 
separated into the detrusor muscle and urothelium plus lamina propria, 
and snap-frozen in liquid N2. For protein extraction, tissues were pul-
verized, and subsequently homogenized in RIPA buffer containing 1% 
NP-40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 2 mM 
EDTA, plus 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 25 mM NaF, 10 mg/ml leu-
peptin, 10 mg/ml aprotinin, and 2 mM PMSF. The procedures for West-
ern blotting were as previously described (37). The antibodies used in 
the study include p75 (9650, detecting extracellular domain), p75 (BC, 
detecting intracellular domain; a gift from Bruce Carter, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA), proNGF (ANT005, Alomone, 
and S-080-100, Biosensis), NGF (SC-548, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), 
pan-Trk (SC-11, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), α-actin (SC-32251, Santa 
Cruz Biotechnology), and Uroplakin II (SC-15178, Santa Cruz Biotech-
nology). For immunoprecipitation of proNGF, dialyzed urine samples 
were incubated overnight at 4°C on a rotator with 1 mg/ml of control or 
27/21 anti-mouse antibody (a gift from Yves Barde, Cardiff University, 
Cardiff, United Kingdom). The immune complexes were pulled down 
with protein A/G beads, washed in the RIPA buffer, and subjected to 
SDS-PAGE. The blots were probed with the indicated NGF antibodies. 
See complete unedited blots in the supplemental material.
TUNEL labeling and quantification. For TUNEL assays, the sec-
tions were treated with 0.1% citric acid and 0.1% Triton X-100 before 
incubation with TUNEL solutions at 37°C for 1 hour. TUNEL reaction 
was performed using a Roche TUNEL kit. For quantification, every 
third section was processed and counted.
ELISA assays. ELISA kits for detecting mouse mature and proNGF 
as well as human proNGF were purchased from Biosensis. Both 
proNGF ELISA kits are specific to proNGF and do not detect mature 
NGF. The ELISA kit for human mature NGF was purchased from Sigma- 
Aldrich. The assays were performed according to the manufacturers’ 
instructions using diluted urine samples.
the surgery prior to cystometry. Cystometry in conscious mice was per-
formed according to previously published methods (36). Animals were 
placed unrestrained in recording cages with a balance and pan for urine 
collection and measurement placed below. In conscious mice, room-
temperature saline was infused into the urinary bladder via a catheter 
placed in the bladder dome. Saline solution was infused at room tem-
perature into the bladder at a rate of 25 μl/min to elicit repetitive blad-
der contractions. Slow-fill (10 μl/min), single cystometry cycles were 
also recorded in some animals. At least 6 reproducible micturition 
cycles were recorded after the initial stabilization period of 25–30 min-
utes. The following cystometric parameters were recorded in each ani-
mal: baseline pressure (pressure at the beginning of the bladder filling), 
threshold pressure (bladder pressure immediately prior to micturition), 
peak micturition pressure (peak intravesical pressure during voiding), 
intermicturition interval (time between micturition events), infused 
volume, and void volume (VV). After VVs were collected, the infusion 
was stopped and residual volume (RV) was determined: residual saline 
was withdrawn through the intravesical catheter. Bladder capacity (BC) 
was calculated as the sum of VV and RV. Based on these values, voiding 
efficiency (%) = [(VV/BC) × 100] was estimated. Two hours after saline 
infusion, animals were euthanized via transcardial perfusion, and the 
lumbosacral spinal cord and DRGs were harvested for immunohisto-
chemistry studies. Experiments were conducted at similar times of the 
day to avoid the possibility that circadian variations were responsible 
for changes in bladder measurements. An individual blinded to geno-
type or treatment analyzed the cystometric data; groups were decoded 
after data analysis.
Intravesical instillation. For intravesical instillation of 100 mg/
kg of LM11A-31 and proNGF blocking antibody that was diluted 1:20 
in sterile saline, lubricated PE10 tubing that was connected to a 1-ml 
syringe via a 30-gauge Hamilton needle was gently inserted into the 
bladder through the urethra of operated female mice immediately after 
SCI. Reagents were slowly instilled into the bladder in 100 μl volume.
Scanning electron microscopy of the bladder surface. Mice were per-
fused transcardially with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buf-
fer (pH 7.2). Bladders were dissected, placed in fixative at 4°C for 72 
hours, and then rinsed in 0.1 M Na phosphate buffer. The tissues were 
subjected to a sequential dehydration procedure that was followed 
by hexamethyldisilazane drying. Samples were then placed into the 
chamber of a sputter coater and coated with a film of gold/palladium 
before examination using FEI Nova NanoSEM 400 at the Campus 
Microscopy & Imaging Facility at Ohio State University.
Immunohistochemistry. Mice were transcardially perfused with 
3% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.2); bladders 
and spinal cords were isolated and postfixed in the same fixative for an 
additional 2 hours prior to overnight cryopreservation in 20% sucrose 
in 0.1 M phosphate buffer. The bladders were then filled with OCT 
compound, frozen on dry ice, cut at 30 μm thickness from the dome 
toward the urethra, and mounted on glass slides coated with 0.15% 
gelatin and 0.1 mg/ml poly-d-lysine. Spinal cords corresponding to 
L6 and S1 were dissected using L6 and S1 DRGs as guide, mounted 
in OCT compound, and cryosectioned at 25 μm thickness. For immu-
nohistochemistry, sections were incubated for 2 hours at room tem-
perature in blocking solution, which contained 0.3% Triton X-100, 5% 
BSA, and 5% goat, 5% horse serum in 1× Tris-buffered saline (TBS). 
Primary antibodies were applied overnight at room temperature in a 
solution containing 0.1% Triton X-100, 1% BSA, 1% goat, 1% horse 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 8 5
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
Statistics. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM. GraphPad Prism 
7 or SPSS (IBM) software was used to perform the statistical analysis. 
ProNGF protein levels and the number of TUNEL counts were com-
pared using repeated measures of 1-way ANOVA after Greenhouse-
Geisser corrections (P ≤ 0.05 and 0.001), with pairwise comparisons 
using Bonferroni test. Multiple comparisons were performed using 
1-way ANOVA (P ≤ 0.05) with Tukey’s multiple-comparisons test, 
while paired Student’s t tests were used to determine 2-tailed signifi-
cance. For cystometric data analyses involving comparisons of more 
than 2 groups, 1-way ANOVAs were used according to the experimen-
tal design with Bonferroni’s multiple-comparisons tests. P values less 
than or equal to 0.0125 were considered statistically significant.
Author contributions
JCR, KT, SEM, AS, NS, TW, NG, SD, YI, IZ, AJK, and HFF con-
ducted experiments and acquired and analyzed data. US provided 
critical reagents. MY and WCDG provided critical consultation. 
MAV and SOY analyzed data and wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the National Insti-
tute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK; 
R01DK051369 and R01DK060481) and the National Institute 
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS; R25NS090623) 
to M.A. Vizzard; and from the NIDDK (R56DK104137 and 
R21NS098362), the Lone Star Paralysis Foundation, the Alzheim-
er’s Drug Discovery Foundation, and the NINDS (5P30NS045758) 
to S.O. Yoon. We thank Jamie Jontes for help with MATLAB analy-
ses and Paula Monsma for Fiji-based quantification. We also thank 
Jerry Silver and Bruce Carter for reading the manuscript.
Address correspondence to: Margaret A. Vizzard, D405A Given 
Research Building, 89 Beaumont Avenue, Larner College of Medi-
cine, Burlington, Vermont 05405, USA. Phone: 802.656.3209; Email: 
Margaret.Vizzard@uvm.edu. Or to: Sung Ok Yoon, 184 Rightmire 
Hall, Ohio State University, 1060 Carmack Road, Columbus, Ohio 
43210, USA. Phone: 614.292.8542; Email: sung.yoon@osumc.edu.
Calcium imaging of primary mouse urothelial cultures. Primary 
mouse urothelial cultures were obtained as previously described (21, 
38) but with modifications. The stretched adult bladders were incu-
bated with 2 mg/ml dispase II in MEM for 30 minutes at 37°C, and the 
urothelial cells were scraped and gently resuspended before plating 
in CnT-PR medium (CELLnTEC) on plastic dishes that were coated 
with Coating Matrix Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). At 3–5 days in 
vitro, cells were washed 3 times with calcium imaging buffer (CIB), 
which contained 105 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2, 0.6 mM 
MgCl2, 10 mM HEPES, 1.2 mM NaHCO3, 100 mM mannitol, and 10 
mM glucose at pH 7.45 (39), and loaded with 3 μM Fluo-4 AM in the 
presence of 0.02% Pluronic F-127 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After 
30 minutes of incubation at 37°C, cells were again washed 3 times 
with CIB, and incubated for an additional 30 minutes at 37°C for 
de-esterification. For live imaging, dishes were maintained at 37°C 
using a temperature-controlled imaging setup that was associated 
with a Zeiss Axio Observer Inverted Z1 equipped with Zen 2 software. 
Following 3 minutes of initial imaging, the endogenous TrpV4 was 
activated by addition of 50 nM GSK1016790A, followed by continu-
ous imaging for 30 additional minutes. For NGF addition, cells were 
incubated with 10 ng/ml of recombinant pro-NGF (Alomone) for 30 
minutes after Fluo-4 AM loading, imaged for 3 minutes, then treated 
with 50 nM GSK1016790A followed by 30 minutes of imaging. The 
calcium imaging data were analyzed using MATLAB (MathWorks) 
and Prism (GraphPad Software).
Cell-surface biotinylation assays. Before surface biotinylation 
assays, 293T cells that were transfected with FLAG-TrpV4 (40), 
HA-p75, and sortilin were incubated with 10 ng/ml of proNGF at 37°C 
for 30 minutes, then with 50 nM GSK1016790A for the indicated 
times. At the end of incubation, cells were washed 3 times with ice-
cold PBS plus 0.1% glucose, and subjected to biotinylation using EZ-
Link Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin (Pierce) for 30 minutes with a gentle shak-
ing on ice. The biotinylation reaction was stopped by addition of an 
equal volume of 50 mM Tris (pH 7.4), and the resulting lysates were 
subjected to NeutrAvidin pull-down followed by Western blotting for 
FLAG to detect TrpV4 (Sigma-Aldrich). To detect p75, the blot was 
stripped and reprobed for p75.
 1. Fowler CJ, Griffiths D, de Groat WC. The neu-
ral control of micturition. Nat Rev Neurosci. 
2008;9(6):453–466.
 2. de Groat WC, Yoshimura N. Mechanisms under-
lying the recovery of lower urinary tract func-
tion following spinal cord injury. Prog Brain Res. 
2006;152:59–84.
 3. Ochodnicky P, Cruz CD, Yoshimura N, Cruz F. 
Neurotrophins as regulators of urinary bladder 
function. Nat Rev Urol. 2012;9(11):628–637.
 4. Ochodnický P, Cruz CD, Yoshimura N, Michel 
MC. Nerve growth factor in bladder dysfunction: 
contributing factor, biomarker, and therapeutic 
target. Neurourol Urodyn. 2011;30(7):1227–1241.
 5. Seki S, et al. Suppression of detrusor-sphincter 
dyssynergia by immunoneutralization of nerve 
growth factor in lumbosacral spinal cord in spinal 
cord injured rats. J Urol. 2004;171(1):478–482.
 6. Hu VY, et al. Decrease in bladder overactivity 
with REN1820 in rats with cyclophosphamide 
induced cystitis. J Urol. 2005;173(3):1016–1021.
 
7. Teng KK, Felice S, Kim T, Hempstead BL. 
Understanding proneurotrophin actions: 
recent advances and challenges. Dev Neurobiol. 
2010;70(5):350–359.
 8. Klinger MB, Girard B, Vizzard MA. p75NTR 
expression in rat urinary bladder sensory neurons 
and spinal cord with cyclophosphamide-induced 
cystitis. J Comp Neurol. 2008;507(3):1379–1392.
 9. Klinger MB, Vizzard MA. Role of p75NTR in 
female rat urinary bladder with cyclophospha-
mide-induced cystitis. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 
2008;295(6):F1778–F1789.
 10. Massa SM, et al. Small, nonpeptide p75NTR 
ligands induce survival signaling and 
inhibit proNGF-induced death. J Neurosci. 
2006;26(20):5288–5300.
 11. Tep C, et al. Oral administration of a small 
molecule targeted to block proNGF binding to 
p75 promotes myelin sparing and functional 
recovery after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci. 
2013;33(2):397–410.
 12. Vizzard MA. Changes in urinary bladder neuro-
trophic factor mRNA and NGF protein follow-
ing urinary bladder dysfunction. Exp Neurol. 
2000;161(1):273–284.
 13. Apodaca G, Kiss S, Ruiz W, Meyers S, Zeidel M, 
Birder L. Disruption of bladder epithelium bar-
rier function after spinal cord injury. Am J Physiol 
Renal Physiol. 2003;284(5):F966–F976.
 14. Shin K, et al. Hedgehog/Wnt feedback supports 
regenerative proliferation of epithelial stem cells 
in bladder. Nature. 2011;472(7341):110–114.
 15. Khandelwal P, Abraham SN, Apodaca G. Cell 
biology and physiology of the uroepithelium. Am J 
Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009;297(6):F1477–F1501.
 16. Gandhi D, et al. Retinoid signaling in progenitors 
controls specification and regeneration of the 
urothelium. Dev Cell. 2013;26(5):469–482.
 17. Bogenmann E, et al. Generation of mice with a 
conditional allele for the p75(NTR) neurotrophin 
receptor gene. Genesis. 2011;49(11):862–869.
 18. Zvara P, Vizzard MA. Exogenous overexpression 
of nerve growth factor in the urinary bladder 
produces bladder overactivity and altered mic-
turition circuitry in the lumbosacral spinal cord. 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 8 6
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 5   May 2018
BMC Physiol. 2007;7:9.
 19. Gevaert T, et al. Deletion of the transient 
receptor potential cation channel TRPV4 
impairs murine bladder voiding. J Clin Invest. 
2007;117(11):3453–3462.
 20. Yu W, Hill WG, Apodaca G, Zeidel ML. Expres-
sion and distribution of transient receptor poten-
tial (TRP) channels in bladder epithelium. Am J 
Physiol Renal Physiol. 2011;300(1):F49–F59.
 21. Mochizuki T, et al. The TRPV4 cation channel 
mediates stretch-evoked Ca2+ influx and ATP 
release in primary urothelial cell cultures. J Biol 
Chem. 2009;284(32):21257–21264.
 22. Jin M, et al. Determinants of TRPV4 activ-
ity following selective activation by small 
molecule agonist GSK1016790A. PLoS One. 
2011;6(2):e16713.
 23. Beattie MS, et al. ProNGF induces p75-mediated 
death of oligodendrocytes following spinal cord 
injury. Neuron. 2002;36(3):375–386.
 24. Harrington AW, et al. Secreted proNGF is a 
pathophysiological death-inducing ligand after 
adult CNS injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2004;101(16):6226–6230.
 25. Sharma N, et al. Long-distance control of syn-
apse assembly by target-derived NGF. Neuron. 
2010;67(3):422–434.
 26. Birder LA, de Groat WC. Increased c-fos 
expression in spinal neurons after irritation 
of the lower urinary tract in the rat. J Neurosci. 
1992;12(12):4878–4889.
 27. Vizzard MA. Increased expression of spinal cord 
Fos protein induced by bladder stimulation after 
spinal cord injury. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp 
Physiol. 2000;279(1):R295–R305.
 28. Cheng CL, Ma CP, de Groat WC. Effect of capsaicin 
on micturition and associated reflexes in chronic 
spinal rats. Brain Res. 1995;678(1–2):40–48.
 29. Li L, et al. The functional organization of cutane-
ous low-threshold mechanosensory neurons. 
Cell. 2011;147(7):1615–1627.
 30. Hou S, Carson DM, Wu D, Klaw MC, Houlé JD, 
Tom VJ. Dopamine is produced in the rat spinal 
cord and regulates micturition reflex after spinal 
cord injury. Exp Neurol. 2016;285(pt B):136–146.
 31. Häbler HJ, Jänig W, Koltzenburg M. Activation 
of unmyelinated afferent fibres by mechanical 
stimuli and inflammation of the urinary bladder 
in the cat. J Physiol (Lond). 1990;425:545–562.
 32. Seki S, et al. Immunoneutralization of nerve 
growth factor in lumbosacral spinal cord reduces 
bladder hyperreflexia in spinal cord injured rats.  
J Urol. 2002;168(5):2269–2274.
 33. Lee KF, et al. Targeted mutation of the gene 
encoding the low affinity NGF receptor p75 leads 
to deficits in the peripheral sensory nervous sys-
tem. Cell. 1992;69(5):737–749.
 34. Bentley CA, Lee KF. p75 is important for axon 
growth and schwann cell migration during devel-
opment. J Neurosci. 2000;20(20):7706–7715.
 35. Artim DE, Kullmann FA, Daugherty SL, Bupp 
E, Edwards CL, de Groat WC. Developmental 
and spinal cord injury-induced changes in nitric 
oxide-mediated inhibition in rat urinary bladder. 
Neurourol Urodyn. 2011;30(8):1666–1674.
 36. Schnegelsberg B, et al. Overexpression of NGF in 
mouse urothelium leads to neuronal hyperinner-
vation, pelvic sensitivity, and changes in urinary 
bladder function. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp 
Physiol. 2010;298(3):R534–R547.
 37. Harrington AW, Kim JY, Yoon SO. Activation of 
Rac GTPase by p75 is necessary for c-jun N-ter-
minal kinase-mediated apoptosis. J Neurosci. 
2002;22(1):156–166.
 38. Birder LA, et al. Altered urinary bladder function 
in mice lacking the vanilloid receptor TRPV1. Nat 
Neurosci. 2002;5(9):856–860.
 39. Wheeler MA, et al. Genetically targeted magnetic 
control of the nervous system. Nat Neurosci. 
2016;19(5):756–761.
 40. Shukla AK, et al. Arresting a transient receptor 
potential (TRP) channel: beta-arrestin 1 mediates 
ubiquitination and functional down-regulation of 
TRPV4. J Biol Chem. 2010;285(39):30115–30125.
