 Report
Maternal Metabolic Syndrome Programs
Mitochondrial Dysfunction via Germline Changes
across Three Generations
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Inbred mice fed a high-fat/high-sucrose (HF/HS) diet develop
metabolic syndrome
d F1, F2, and F3 offspring from HF/HS-fed dams develop
mitochondrial dysfunction
d Proteins involved in mitochondrial dynamics and ETC are
misexpressed in F1–F3 pups
d Mitochondrial changes are seen in F1–F2 oocytes,
suggesting germline transmission
Authors
Jessica L. Saben, Anna L. Boudoures,
Zeenat Asghar, ..., Andrew Cusumano,
Suzanne Scheaffer, Kelle H. Moley
Correspondence
moleyk@wustl.edu
In Brief
Saben et al. demonstrate that maternal
diet-induced metabolic syndrome in an
inbred mouse model results in
transgenerational inheritance of aberrant
mitochondria. Abnormal expression of
mitochondrial ETC complex and dynamic
proteins are seen in F1–F3, despite the
fact that they are eating a regular diet. The
transmission appears to be germline and
through aberrant oocytes.
Saben et al., 2016, Cell Reports 16, 1–8
June 28, 2016 ª 2016
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.05.065
 Cell Reports
Report
Maternal Metabolic Syndrome Programs
Mitochondrial Dysfunction via Germline Changes
across Three Generations
Jessica L. Saben,1 Anna L. Boudoures,1 Zeenat Asghar,1 Alysha Thompson,1 Andrea Drury,1 Wendy Zhang,1 Maggie Chi,1
Andrew Cusumano,1 Suzanne Scheaffer,1 and Kelle H. Moley1,*
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Washington University School of Medicine, 425 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA
*Correspondence: moleyk@wustl.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.05.065
SUMMARY
Maternal obesity impairs offspring health, but the
responsible mechanisms are not fully established.
To address this question, we fed female mice a
high-fat/high-sugar diet from before conception until
weaning and then followed the outcomes in the next
three generations of offspring, all fed a control diet.
We observed that female offspring born to obese
mothers had impaired peripheral insulin signaling
that was associated with mitochondrial dysfunction
and altered mitochondrial dynamic and complex pro-
teins in skeletal muscle. This mitochondrial pheno-
type persisted through the female germline and
was passed down to the second and third genera-
tions. Our results indicate that maternal program-
ming of metabolic disease can be passed through
the female germline and that the transfer of aberrant
oocyte mitochondria to subsequent generations may
contribute to the increased risk for developing insulin
resistance.
INTRODUCTION
The Developmental Origins of Health and Disease Hypothesis
states that exposures during embryonic and fetal life are critical
to the developmental patterning of tissues. Maternal obesity and
metabolic disease are two of the most prominent of these poten-
tial exposures, as over two-thirds of reproductive-age women in
the US are overweight or obese (Flegal et al., 2012). Offspring (first
generation [F1]) born to obese mothers are at an increased risk for
being born large for gestational age (Carlsen et al., 2014) and
for developing obesity, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes in
adulthood (Tanvig, 2014), thus potentiating the obesity epidemic.
The grandchildren (F2) and great grandchildren (F3) of obese
women may also inherit risk of metabolic disease, even if they
are not directly exposed to the metabolic insult. This type of inher-
itance occurs when phenotypes acquired from an initial exposure
(in the F1) are transmitted to thenext generations (F2and F3) in the
absenceofanycontinuedexposure(Skinner,2011).Tobeconsid-
ered transgenerational, the inherited traits must be apparent in the
F3 generation because the F1 embryo and F2 primordial germ
cells are directly exposed to a given environmental factor in utero.
Evidence exists to suggest that the transmittance of disease risk
can penetrate through both the maternal (Ponzio et al., 2012)
and paternal germlines (Dunn and Bale, 2011; Song et al., 2014).
However, a recent study showed that associations between
maternal and offspring BMI persisted through three generations,
but similar associations did not exist between paternal and
offspring BMI (Murrin et al., 2012), suggesting a stronger relation-
ship between maternal BMI and offspring adiposity.
The maternal, but not paternal, transmission of obesity risk may
be explained by the fact that mitochondria, which regulate meta-
bolism, apoptosis, cellular redox homeostasis, and numerous
biochemical pathways, are maternally inherited. Although the
contribution of mitochondrial dysfunction to development of
metabolic disease remains in debate (Montgomery and Turner,
2015),itisclearthatdefectsinmitochondrialhealthareassociated
with obesity, insulin resistance, diabetes, and cardiovascular dis-
ease (Crescenzo et al., 2015; Kelley et al., 2002; Montgomery and
Turner, 2015). Mitochondrial health is preserved through fission
and fusion, collectively called mitochondrial dynamics. Impor-
tantly, an imbalance in mitochondrial dynamics has been associ-
ated with metabolic disease (Galloway and Yoon, 2013).
We previously presented evidence that diet-induced metabolic
syndrome alters mitochondrial dynamics in the oocyte. Briefly,
we demonstrated that female mice with diet-induced metabolic
syndrome had abnormal oocyte mitochondrial morphology char-
acterized by fewer, more-disarrayed cristae, decreased electron
density of the matrix, increased swelling, and more vacuoles
(Luzzo et al., 2012). Additionally, oocyte mitochondria from
mice fed a high-fat/high-sugar (HF/HS) were less round and
more dumbbell shaped than their chow-fed counterparts, sug-
gesting a defect in mitochondrial dynamics (Boudoures et al.,
2016). These defects in mitochondrial morphology were accom-
panied by impaired beta oxidation (Boudoures et al., 2016),
decreased mitochondrial membrane potential (Reynolds et al.,
2015), and altered ATP and citrate levels (Boudoures et al.,
2016; Luzzo et al., 2012; Reynolds et al., 2015). Adult offspring
bore to obese mothers developed characteristics of metabolic
syndrome (Jungheim et al., 2010), suggesting that the maternal
germline can transmit changes to offspring metabolic function.
The transgenerational inheritance of altered mitochondrial phe-
notypes through the maternal germline has not been explored. In
this study, we examined whether maternal diet-induced metabolic
syndrome in an inbred mouse model can cause transgenerational
Cell Reports 16, 1–8, June 28, 2016 ª 2016
1
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
 inheritanceofaberrantmitochondria.Ourdatashowthatmicewith
diet-induced metabolic syndrome before and during pregnancy
can transmit impaired mitochondrial dynamic and complex pro-
teins through the female germline to the F3 generation. Impor-
tantly, our study indicates that oocyte mitochondria passed from
mother to offspring may carry information that programs mito-
chondrial dysfunction throughout the entire organism.
RESULTS
Exposure to Maternal Metabolic Syndrome Induces
Peripheral Insulin Resistance in F1 Female Offspring
Female C57BL/6 mice fed a HF/HS diet (F0-HF/HS) were obese
(Figures 1A and 1B), glucose intolerant (Figure 1C), and had higher
fasting levels of circulating glucose (Figure 1C), triglycerides (Fig-
ure 1E), and cholesterol (Figure 1F) than chow-fed controls (F0-
Con). To test the effects of maternal metabolic syndrome on risk
Figure
1. Maternal
Metabolic
Syndrome
Leads to Glucose Intolerance and Altered
Insulin Signaling in the F1 Female Offspring
Metabolic parameters were measured in F0-HF/
HS and F0-Con mice prior to mating (A–F) and
in the F1 female offspring (G–J). Body weight
(A and G); body composition presented as percent
fat mass (FM) and fat-free mass (FFM) (B); glucose
tolerance test (C and H); and serum insulin (D and I),
triglyceride (E), and cholesterol (F) were measured
in mice after a 6-hr fast. Western blot analysis
of tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS1(tyr895) and
serine phosphorylation of AKT(ser473) in F1 mixed
fiber muscle (J) is shown. All data are expressed
as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05 by Student’s t test.
for developing metabolic disease in the
offspring, we examined glucose disposal
and insulin signaling in the F1 of female
offspring bore to HF/HS-fed mice (F1-HF/
HS). Although these mice (which were
fed control chow after weaning) were not
obese (Figure 1G), they showed slight
but significant impairments in glucose
tolerance (Figure 1H) and had significantly
higher fasting insulin levels (Figure 1I) than
F1-Con mice. Consistent with the hy-
perinsulinemia, F1-HF/HS offspring had
impaired basal insulin signaling in their
visceral adipose (Figure S1) and mixed fi-
berskeletalmuscle(Figure1J)asindicated
by decreased tyrosine phosphorylation
of IRS-1 (Tyr895) and decreased serine
phosphorylation of AKT (Ser473).
Mitochondrial Dysfunction and
Imbalanced Mitochondrial
Dynamics Occur in F1-HF/HS
Skeletal Muscle
We
hypothesized
that
mitochondrial
dysfunction was involved in the altered
insulin signaling observed in F1-HF/HS skeletal muscle. So
we examined mitochondria morphology and function in soleus
(slow-twitch; oxidative; type I/ IIA) and lateral gastrocnemius
(fast-twitch; glycolytic; type IIX/ IIB; Bloemberg and Quadrilatero,
2012) muscle to determine whether or not specific muscle fiber
types were affected differently by exposure to maternal HF/HS
diet. Previous studies have indicated that mitochondrial dynamics
are dependent on the oxidative capacity of the different muscle
fiberssuchthatfusioneventsaremorecommoninoxidativefibers,
creating long strings of connected mitochondria (Mishra et al.,
2015). Conversely, mitochondria in glycolytic fibers have a more-
punctate appearance. Ultrastructure analyses of the F1-Con so-
leus (Figures 2A and S2A) and lateral gastrocnemius (Figures 2F
and S2B) were consistent with these morphologic phenotypes.
However, F1-HF/HS mice had significantly larger mitochondria in
both the soleus (Figures 2A and S2C) and lateral gastrocnemius
muscles (Figures 2F and S2D) than did F1-Con mice.
2
Cell Reports 16, 1–8, June 28, 2016
 In the F1-HF/HS soleus, mitochondria appeared disorganized,
and macro-mitochondria were almost always associated with
lipid droplets (Figures 2A and S2A). Image analysis confirmed
that F1-HF/HS soleus contained significantly more intramuscular
lipid than F1-Con soleus did (Figure 2C). This observation led us
to hypothesize that fatty acid oxidation was impaired in the F1-
HF/HS soleus. Consistent with this idea, the activity of hydrox-
yacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase, type II, the rate-limiting
enzyme in beta-oxidation, was lower in F1-HF/HS soleus than
in F1-Con soleus (Figure 2D). Consistent with elevated lipid and
mitochondrial dysfunction, soleus muscle from F1-HF/HS con-
tained significantly more lipid peroxide products than the F1-
Con muscle (Figure 2B), suggesting a state of oxidative stress.
Furthermore, ADP-dependent (state 3) oxygen consumption
was significantly lower in F1-HF/HS soleus than in F1-Con soleus
(Figures 2E and S3A), indicating impairments in mitochondrial
respiration that were not a result of decreased mitochondrial
Figure
2. Mitochondrial
Function
and
Morphology Are Altered in F1-HF/HS Skel-
etal Muscles
Soleus (A–E) and lateral gastrocnemius (F–H) were
isolated from 8-week-old F1 mice.
(A and F) Representative transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) images of soleus (A) and lateral
gastrocnemius (F) are shown. Arrowheads depict
lipid droplets, star indicates mitochondria under-
going fission, and arrows denote abnormal inner
mitochondrial membrane morphology.
(B) Lipid peroxidation content measured by ma-
londialdehyde (MDA) in soleus muscle is shown.
(C) Morphological analysis of TEM images lipid
content in soleus muscle is shown.
(D and E) HADHA activity (D) and mitochondrial
respiration (E) in soleus muscle are shown.
(G) Western blot analysis of DRP1, P-DRP1(ser616),
P-DRP1/DRP1 (ratio), and OPA1 in lateral gastroc-
nemius (G) and electron transport chain complex
content (CI, NDUFB8; CII, total complex; CIII, core
protein 2; CIV, subunit I; CV, alpha subunit; H)
is shown. All data are expressed as mean ± SEM.
*p < 0.05 by Student’s t test.
content (Figure S2E). Consistent with
impaired mitochondrial function, we also
observed a trending lower (p = 0.06) respi-
ratory control ration (RCR) in the F1-HF/
HS offspring (Figure S3B).
Mitochondria in the F1-HF/HS lateral
gastrocnemius were arranged abnormally.
Elongated
mitochondria
that
seemed
to stretch longitudinally across the mus-
cle fiber (Figure S2B) were observed.
Additionally, mitochondria in the lateral
gastrocnemius of F1-HF/HS mice showed
a very distinct inner mitochondrial mem-
brane(IMM) phenotype(Figure 2F).Cristae
appeared bloated and disorganized, and
the electron density of the inner mitochon-
drial matrix was almost completely absent
(Figure 2F). Some mitochondria contained onion-shaped cristae
and vacuoles (Figure 2F).
The increased mitochondrial size and abnormal cristae led us
to hypothesize that mitochondrial dynamics were altered in the
F1-HF/HS muscle. Thus, we examined the protein levels of the
four main guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) required for
mitochondrial fusion (MFN1, MFN2, and OPA1) and fission
(DRP1). Total levels of the mitofusins (MFN1 and MFN2) were
equivalent between F1-HF/HS and F1-Con gastrocnemius
(Figure S2), indicating that increased outer mitochondrial mem-
brane (OMM) fusion could not explain the enlarged mitochondria
observed in F1-HF/HS muscle. Conversely, activity of DRP1 was
significantly reduced in F1-HF/HS lateral gastrocnemius muscle
as measured by a decrease in the ratio of phosphorylated-DRP1
(ser616) to total DRP1 levels (Figure 2G), suggesting that mito-
chondrial fission was impaired. We next examined expression
of optic atrophy 1 (OPA1), which regulates IMM fusion and
Cell Reports 16, 1–8, June 28, 2016
3
 cristae formation (Frezza et al., 2006), and found that F1-HF/HS
muscle contained significantly less total OPA1 than F1-Con
muscle did (Figure 2G). Finally, we observed a significant reduc-
tion in the levels of electron transport chain complex II (succinate
dehydrogenase), complex III-core protein 2, and the alpha sub-
unit of complex V in the F1-HF/HS lateral gastrocnemius muscle
(Figure 2H). A reduction in these subunits suggests impairment
in complex assembly, which has been associated with altered
cristae formation (Cogliati et al., 2013).
Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Altered Mitochondrial
Dynamics Occur in the F1-HF/HS Oocytes
To determine whether or not abnormal mitochondria could be
passed to subsequent generations, we next examined the mito-
chondria in oocytes of F1 mice (F1 oocytes). Mitochondrial
morphology in oocytes differs from that of somatic cells; they
are characteristically round to oval-shaped, have a dense matrix
and sparse circular cristae, and occasionally contain regular-
shaped vacuoles (Wakai et al., 2014; Han et al., 2008) as
observed in F1-Con oocytes (Figure 3A). We observed character-
istically poor oocyte mitochondrial morphology (Han et al., 2008)
in F1-HF/HS oocytes; mitochondria were significantly larger (Fig-
ure 3B) and less round (Figure 3C) than those of F1-Con oocytes,
Figure
3. Mitochondrial
Function
and
Morphology Are Altered in F1-HF/HS Oocytes
(A–C) Oocytes were collected from 8-week-old F1
mice. Mitochondrial morphologies were analyzed
from TEM images (A–C). Representative low-
magnification TEM images of mitochondria for F1-
Con and F1-HF/HS oocytes (A, left) are shown.
High-magnification (A, right) images depict normal
mitochondria in F1-Con (upper right panel) and
abnormal mitochondria (lower right
panel) in
F1-HF/HS oocytes. Yellow arrowheads depict lipid
droplet, yellow arrows denote abnormal inner
mitochondrial membrane morphology, and red
arrows indicate normal circular cristae. TEM image
analysis for mitochondrial size (B) and mean
roundness (C) is shown.
(D) Western blot analysis of OPA1 via western
blotting.
(E–H) mtDNA copy number (20 single oocytes;
n = 6 mice; E), ATP (F), citrate (G), and phospho-
creatine (H) from 60 oocytes; n = 4 per group. All
data are expressed as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05
by Student’s t test.
and we observed a number of mitochon-
dria containing irregular vacuoles enclos-
ing lamellar membranes (Figure 3A).
Giventhesefindingsand thoseobserved
in the skeletal muscle of F1-HF/HS mice,
we hypothesized that expression of mito-
chondrial dynamics proteins would be
altered in the oocytes of F1-HF/HS mice.
Consistent with this hypothesis, F1-HF/
HS oocytes expressed significantly less
OPA1 protein than F1-Con oocytes (Fig-
ure 3D). Chronic OPA1 depletion has
been shown to significantly reduce mtDNA copy number (Cogliati
et al., 2013), which may impair cellular metabolism independent of
changes to mitochondrial morphology. Thus, it was not surprising
that F1-HF/HS oocytes had significantly reduced mtDNA copy
number (Figure 3E), intracellular citrate (Figure 3G), and phospho-
creatine (Figure 3H). However, ATP levels were not affected
(Figure 3F).
Our findings in this section suggest that maternal HF/HS diet
prior to and during gestation promotes mitochondrial dysfunc-
tion in F1 female offspring tissues. These defects are transmitted
to the F1 oocytes, which have abnormal mitochondrial morphol-
ogies, decreased OPA1 expression, and impaired mitochondrial
metabolism.
F2- and F3-HF/HS Offspring Inherit Defects in
Mitochondrial Dynamics that Penetrate through the
Female Germline and Somatic Tissue
The drastic reduction in OPA1 protein levels in F1 oocytes led
us to suspect that programming of impaired mitochondrial dy-
namics proteins may occur in the F2 generation. Accordingly,
the mitochondria in F2-HF/HS lateral gastrocnemius muscle
had almost identical morphologic phenotypes as observed in
the F1-HF/HS gastrocnemius (compare Figure 4A to Figure 2F).
4
Cell Reports 16, 1–8, June 28, 2016
 Specifically, we observed enlarged mitochondria (Figure S4)
containing aberrant IMMs and matrix that was significantly less
electron dense than in F2-Con muscle (Figure 4A). Additionally,
we observed lower DRP1 activity and OPA1 expression in F2-
HF/HS muscle than in F2-Con muscle (Figure 4B). Similarly, we
observed a significant reduction in all the electron transport
chain complexes in F2-HF/HS lateral gastrocnemius muscle
(Figure 4C), suggesting a reduction in complex assembly, lead-
ing to impaired cristae formation. Furthermore, F2-HF/HS
oocytes had significantly lower levels of total DRP1, P-DRP1
(ser6161), and OPA1 protein than F2-Con oocytes (Figure 4D),
indicating that mitochondrial dynamics were likely impaired in
the F2-HF/HS oocytes.
If the mitochondrial effects we observed were truly transge-
nerational, we would detect them in the mice whose great grand-
mothers had diet-induced metabolic syndrome (F3-HF/HS).
Indeed, we found that the lateral gastrocnemius muscle of
Figure 4. Altered Mitochondrial Morphology
and Dynamics and Complex Proteins Are
Transferred to F3-HF/HS Mice through the
F2-HF/HS Female Germline
Lateral gastrocnemius muscle was isolated from
8-week-old F2 (A–C) and F3 (D–G) offspring.
Oocytes were collected from the F2 mice (D).
Representative transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) images of lateral gastrocnemius muscle
(F2:A; F3: E) areshown.Star indicates mitochondria
undergoing fission, and arrows denote abnormal
inner mitochondrial membrane morphology. West-
ern blot analysis DRP1, P-DRP1(ser616), and OPA1
in lateral gastrocnemius muscle (F2: B; F3: F) and
F2-oocytes (C) and electron transport chain com-
plex content (CI, NDUFB8; CII, total complex; CIII,
core protein 2; CIV, subunit I; CV, alpha subunit;
F2: C; F3: G) is shown. All data are expressed as
mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05 by Student’s t test.
F3-HF/HS mice had significantly larger
mitochondria than did that of F3-Con
mice (Figures 4E and S5). However, the
IMM
phenotype
was
less
severe
in
F3-HF/HS than in the F1 and F2 genera-
tions. However, cristae formation ap-
peared abnormal, and in some cases,
cristae were lacking in F3-HF/HS muscle
mitochondria (Figure 4E). Levels of both
total DRP1 and P-DRP1 (ser616) were
lower in F3-HF/HS than in F3-Con mus-
cle, but the ratio of P-DRP1 to total
DRP1 was not affected (Figure 4F). This
reduced level of DRP1 likely contributed
to the enlarged mitochondria phenotype
(Figure S4). Finally, OPA1 protein levels
were lower in F3-HF/HS than in F3-
Con lateral gastrocnemius muscle, even
though the IMM morphology was not as
malformed as it was in the F1- and F2-
HF/HS muscle (Figure 4E). Consistent
with a milder IMM phenotype in the F3-
HF/HS offspring, we did not observe any differences in the elec-
tron transport chain complexes between F3-Con and F3-HF/HS
offspring (Figure 4G). Finally, it is possible to hypothesize that the
mitochondrial phenotype was merely a result of inherited hyper-
insulinemia; however, these mitochondrial defects occurred in
the absence of altered circulating insulin (0.33 ± 0.09 and
0.35 ± 0.05; F3-Con and F3-HF/HS, respectively).
Together, these findings indicate that maternal metabolic syn-
drome programs defects in glycolytic muscle fiber mitochondria
that are characterized by impaired fission and decreased OPA1
expression that persists across three generations of offspring
and is transmitted through the female germline.
DISCUSSION
Here, we used an inbred mouse model to examine the impact
of maternal metabolic syndrome on health of the ensuing
Cell Reports 16, 1–8, June 28, 2016
5
 generations. We found that, despite consuming a normal diet,
the first, second, and third generations of female offspring devel-
oped mitochondrial dysfunction and abnormal mitochondrial
morphology in their skeletal muscle. Moreover, the mitochon-
drial dynamic proteins DRP-1 and OPA1 were misexpressed in
the skeletal muscles of F1, F2, and F3 mice, suggesting an imbal-
ance of fission and fusion. Mitochondrial abnormalities were also
present in the germ cells of F1 and F2 females, suggesting that
transmission of the mitochondrial phenotype occurred through
the maternal germline.
Transgenerational inheritance occurs when an environmental
exposure alters the germline epigenome, resulting in altered
gene expression that persists through generations that were
not directly exposed (i.e., F3; Skinner, 2011). A great deal of ev-
idence supports the notion that early life exposure to maternal
obesity alters the nuclear epigenome of the exposed offspring
and may promote metabolic disease (Zheng et al., 2014). How-
ever, given that mtDNA is inherited from the mother, effects of
maternal obesity on germline mitochondria must also be consid-
ered as a mechanism for transmission of metabolic dysfunction.
Although epigenetic modifications in mtDNA have not been
explored in this context, two types of epigenetic modifications
have been detected in mtDNA. First, studies in mouse oocytes
demonstrated that methylation occurring at both CpG and
non-CpG sites in mtDNA positively correlates with gene expres-
sion (Kobayashi et al., 2012). Second, the recently discovered
epigenetic mark hydroxymethylated cytosine (5hmC) is widely
distributed in all types of tissues with varying degrees of abun-
dance, and the highest density of 5hmC was found in the mtDNA
(Sun et al., 2013). Although we did not examine the epigenetic
mechanisms leading to inheritance of abnormal mitochondrial
phenotypes, our data showing altered mitochondrial meta-
bolism, morphology, and OPA1 expression in offspring germ
cells suggest that both modification of nuclear-encoded mito-
chondrial genes and altered mtDNA play a role.
Maintaining normal IMM structure is essential for mitochon-
drial function, as abnormal cristae formation is associated with
decreased membrane potential (Bornho
¨ vd et al., 2006), altered
metabolite diffusion, and impaired regulation of apoptosis (Man-
nella et al., 2013). Although the molecular regulators of IMM
topology are still being uncovered, it is clear that OPA1 plays a
dominant role (Mannella et al., 2013). Here, decreased OPA1
expression in F1-, F2-, and F3-HF/HS offspring may explain
the bloated cristae phenotype, as ablation of OPA1 leads to
decreased mtDNA copy number, disorganized cristae (Frezza
et al., 2006), and impaired respiratory chain supercomplex as-
sembly (Cogliati et al., 2013). Moreover, studies from Cogliati
et al. (2013) showed a functional relationship between respira-
tory chain supercomplex assembly and respiratory capacity
that are negatively affected by acute OPA1 depletion, suggest-
ing a link between decreased oxygen consumption and lower
OPA1 levels in F1-HF/HS skeletal muscle. Our findings that the
F1- and F2-HF/HS exposed offspring have altered expression
of numerous complex subunits support the idea that impaired
supercomplex assembly is an underlying mechanism driving
the extreme cristae phenotype in these mice. Importantly, muta-
tions in mtDNA, mtDNA depletion, or epigenetic modification to
mtDNA can lead to altered levels of complex assembly, suggest-
ing a key role for the inheritance of aberrant mitochondria in pro-
gramming mitochondrial dysfunction throughout generations.
Despite its importance, the decreased OPA1 level cannot
account for all of the changes to mitochondrial morphology we
observed in HF/HS offspring. Whereas OPA1 knockdown
causes extensive mitochondrial fragmentation (Frezza et al.,
2006), we observed enlarged mitochondria, suggesting that
fission may also be impaired. Consistent with this idea, cells
lacking both OPA1 and Drp1 have large mitochondria with dis-
rupted cristae structures or onion-like inner membrane struc-
tures (Otera et al., 2010). We detected decreased activation of
Drp1 in F1- and F2-HF/HS muscle and decreased total Drp1 pro-
tein in F3-HF/HS muscle, suggesting a reduction in mitochon-
drial fission. Fission is essential for targeting and degrading
damaged mitochondria through mitophagy (Rambold et al.,
2011), and yeast lacking the homologs of both Drp1 and OPA1
(Dnm1 and Mgm1, respectively) have decreased mitophagy
and a shorter replicative lifespan (Bernhardt et al., 2015). More-
over, the mitophagy proteins PINK and Parkin promote mito-
chondrial fission (Poole et al., 2008), suggesting a complex
crosstalk between mitophagy and mitochondrial fission. Inter-
estingly, impaired Parkin action results in a similar mitochondrial
phenotype observed in this study enlarged (Drew et al., 2014).
Although we did not address whether or not mitophagy was
altered following exposure to maternal metabolic syndrome,
this may be one mechanism by which damaged mitochondria
are passed from one generation to the next. Future work will
be focused on addressing this possibility.
In conclusion, our study demonstrates that early life exposure
to maternal metabolic syndrome programs impaired mitochon-
drial health that is transmitted transgenerationally through the
female germline. Importantly, the F1, F2, and F3 animals in our
study all consumed control diets. In humans, in whom the diets
of children closely parallel those of their parents, the effects of
maternal metabolic syndrome may be greater than in this mouse
model.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Mouse-Breeding Scheme, Feeding Paradigm, and Metabolic
Analysis
All procedures in this study were approved by the Animal Studies Committee
at Washington University School of Medicine and conformed to NIH guide-
lines. Four-week-old female C57Bl/6 mice were fed either a HF/HS (Test
Diet 58R3; 59% fat, 26% carbohydrates [17% sucrose], and 15% protein) or
standard chow (Con; PicoLab Rodent diet 20; 13% fat, 62% carbohydrates
[3.2% sucrose], and 25% protein for 6 weeks; Boudoures et al., 2016; Rey-
nolds et al., 2015). Con- and HF/HS-fed F0 mice were mated with chow-fed
male mice to produce the F1. All offspring (F1, F2, and F3) were weaned
onto chow diets and mated with chow-fed males. Serum, skeletal muscle (so-
leus and lateral gastrocnemius), and germinal vesicle (GV)-stage oocytes were
collected in non-mated F1, F2, and F3 8-week-old mice as described in Sup-
plemental Experimental Procedures. Denuded GV oocytes were pooled from
three animals per litter for each dietary exposure. Skeletal muscle and oocytes
from six to eight litters were used for the experiments described below. All
metabolic parameters were determined as described in Supplemental Exper-
imental Procedures.
Protein Isolation and Western Blotting
Lateral gastrocnemius tissue lysates from individual offspring bore to F0-Con or
F0-HF/HS dams (n = 5–6 per group) were prepared in radioimmunoprecipitation
6
Cell Reports 16, 1–8, June 28, 2016
 assay (RIPA) buffer. Oocyte proteins were prepared by boiling a pool of 200 GV
oocytes (from three offspring per litter, from four litters per group) for 5 min in 23
Laemmli buffer (Bio-Rad no. 161-0737) plus 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma). West-
ern blotting was performed following standard procedures. See Supplemental
Experimental Procedures for details.
Transmission Electron Microscopy
Soleus, lateral gastrocnemius, and GV-stage oocytes were fixed and stained
following standard protocols. See Supplemental Experimental Procedures
for details. Ten images from six offspring selected from six litters per group
were analyzed by three independent, blinded observers for the average mito-
chondrial size, mitochondrial shape, and the number of lipid droplets per
image.
Hydroxyacyl-Coenzyme A Dehydrogenase, Type II Enzymatic
Activity
Soleus muscles were collected from eight offspring selected from eight litters
per group and homogenized with a glass homogenizer in enzyme extraction
buffer (20 mM Pi buffer [pH 7.4] [16 mM Na2HPO4 dibasic/4 mM NaH2PO4
monobasic], 0.02% BSA fraction V protease free, 0.5 mM EDTA [pH 7.0],
5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, and 25% glycerol). HADHA enzyme activity was
measured by enzyme-linked cycling assays as previously described (Henriks-
son et al., 1986).
Metabolite Microanalytic Assays
GV-stage oocytes (pooled from three offspring per litter, from four litters per
group) were frozen on a glass slide by dipping in isopentane equilibrated
with liquid nitrogen. After freeze-drying overnight under vacuum at 35�C, the
oocytes were extracted in a nanoliter volume under oil. ATP, citrate, and phos-
phocreatine were measured by performing an enzyme-linked assay as previ-
ously described (Chi et al., 1988).
Malondialdehyde Quantification
Soleus lipid peroxidation was assessed using the OxiSelect TBARS Assay Kit
(Cell Biolabs) per manufacturer’s instructions.
Preparation of Permeabilized Muscle Fibers and High-Resolution
Respirometry
Soleus muscle fibers (n = 4 offspring from four separate litters per group) were
isolated and permeabilized with saponin. Mitochondrial respiration was
measured using an Oxygraph 2K (OROBOROS Instruments). Cytochrome C
was used as a control for permeabilization. See Supplemental Experimental
Procedures for details.
mtDNA Copy Number in GV Oocytes
Quantitative real-time PCR was used to determine mtDNA abundance in single
oocytes. See Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details.
Statistical Methods
Data are expressed as means ± SEM. All experiments were performed in trip-
licate. Differences between control and experimental values were compared
using appropriate parametric and non-parametric tests for continuous vari-
ables, including the Student’s t test for normally distributed data and the
Mann-Whitney U test for non-normally distributed data. Significance was
defined as p < 0.05.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures
and four figures and can be found with this article online at http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.celrep.2016.05.065.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, J.L.S. and K.H.M.; Methodology, J.L.S. and K.H.M.; Inves-
tigation, J.L.S., Z.A., A.T., A.D., W.Z., M.C., and S.S.; Writing – Original Draft,
J.L.S.; Writing – Review & Editing, J.L.S. and K.H.M.; Funding Acquisition,
K.H.M.; Resources, K.H.M.; Supervision, J.L.S. and K.H.M.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Deborah J. Frank (Obstetrics and Gynecology, Washington
University in St. Louis) for critical reading and editing of this manuscript. We
acknowledge the Diabetes Research Center, Diabetes Models Phenotyping
Core, for the serum metabolite analysis and body composition analysis (sup-
ported by NIH grant P30 DK020579) and the Nutrition Obesity Research Cen-
ter, Adipocyte Biology and Molecular Nutrition Core (supported by NIH grant
P30 DK056341) for the studies measuring mitochondrial respiration using
the OROBOROS instrument. We also would like to thank the molecular micro-
biology imaging facility for the Electron Microscopy service. Grants supporting
this research are R01HD065435 (to K.H.M.) and T32HD049305 (to J.L.S.).
Received: December 14, 2015
Revised: April 4, 2016
Accepted: May 16, 2016
Published: June 16, 2016
REFERENCES
Bernhardt, D., M€
uller, M., Reichert, A.S., and Osiewacz, H.D. (2015). Simulta-
neous impairment of mitochondrial fission and fusion reduces mitophagy and
shortens replicative lifespan. Sci. Rep. 5, 7885.
Bloemberg, D., and Quadrilatero, J. (2012). Rapid determination of myosin
heavy chain expression in rat, mouse, and human skeletal muscle using multi-
color immunofluorescence analysis. PLoS ONE 7, e35273.
Bornho
¨ vd, C., Vogel, F., Neupert, W., and Reichert, A.S. (2006). Mitochondrial
membrane potential is dependent on the oligomeric state of F1F0-ATP syn-
thase supracomplexes. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 13990–13998.
Boudoures, A.L., Chi, M., Thompson, A., Zhang, W., and Moley, K.H. (2016).
The effects of voluntary exercise on oocyte quality in a diet-induced obese
murine model. Reproduction 151, 261–270.
Carlsen, E.M., Renault, K.M., Nørgaard, K., Nilas, L., Jensen, J.E., Hyldstrup,
L., Michaelsen, K.F., Cortes, D., and Pryds, O. (2014). Newborn regional body
composition is influenced by maternal obesity, gestational weight gain and the
birthweight standard score. Acta Paediatr. 103, 939–945.
Chi, M.M., Manchester, J.K., Yang, V.C., Curato, A.D., Strickler, R.C., and
Lowry, O.H. (1988). Contrast in levels of metabolic enzymes in human and
mouse ova. Biol. Reprod. 39, 295–307.
Cogliati, S., Frezza, C., Soriano, M.E., Varanita, T., Quintana-Cabrera, R., Cor-
rado, M., Cipolat, S., Costa, V., Casarin, A., Gomes, L.C., et al. (2013).
Mitochondrial cristae shape determines respiratory chain supercomplexes
assembly and respiratory efficiency. Cell 155, 160–171.
Crescenzo, R., Bianco, F., Mazzoli, A., Giacco, A., Liverini, G., and Iossa, S.
(2015). Mitochondrial efficiency and insulin resistance. Front. Physiol. 5, 512.
Drew, B.G., Ribas, V., Le, J.A., Henstridge, D.C., Phun, J., Zhou, Z., Soley-
mani, T., Daraei, P., Sitz, D., Vergnes, L., et al. (2014). HSP72 is a mitochondrial
stress sensor critical for Parkin action, oxidative metabolism, and insulin sensi-
tivity in skeletal muscle. Diabetes 63, 1488–1505.
Dunn, G.A., and Bale, T.L. (2011). Maternal high-fat diet effects on third-gen-
eration female body size via the paternal lineage. Endocrinology 152, 2228–
2236.
Flegal, K.M., Carroll, M.D., Kit, B.K., and Ogden, C.L. (2012). Prevalence of
obesity and trends in the distribution of body mass index among US adults,
1999-2010. JAMA 307, 491–497.
Frezza, C., Cipolat, S., Martins de Brito, O., Micaroni, M., Beznoussenko, G.V.,
Rudka, T., Bartoli, D., Polishuck, R.S., Danial, N.N., De Strooper, B., and Scor-
rano, L. (2006). OPA1 controls apoptotic cristae remodeling independently
from mitochondrial fusion. Cell 126, 177–189.
Galloway, C.A., and Yoon, Y. (2013). Mitochondrial morphology in metabolic
diseases. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 19, 415–430.
Cell Reports 16, 1–8, June 28, 2016
7
 Han, Z., Vassena, R., Chi, M.M., Potireddy, S., Sutovsky, M., Moley, K.H., Su-
tovsky, P., and Latham, K.E. (2008). Role of glucose in cloned mouse embryo
development. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 295, E798–E809.
Henriksson, J., Chi, M.M., Hintz, C.S., Young, D.A., Kaiser, K.K., Salmons, S.,
and Lowry, O.H. (1986). Chronic stimulation of mammalian muscle: changes in
enzymes of six metabolic pathways. Am. J. Physiol. 251, C614–C632.
Jungheim, E.S., Schoeller, E.L., Marquard, K.L., Louden, E.D., Schaffer, J.E.,
and Moley, K.H. (2010). Diet-induced obesity model: abnormal oocytes and
persistent growth abnormalities in the offspring. Endocrinology 151, 4039–
4046.
Kelley, D.E., He, J., Menshikova, E.V., and Ritov, V.B. (2002). Dysfunction of
mitochondria in human skeletal muscle in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 51,
2944–2950.
Kobayashi, H., Sakurai, T., Imai, M., Takahashi, N., Fukuda, A., Yayoi, O., Sato,
S., Nakabayashi, K., Hata, K., Sotomaru, Y., et al. (2012). Contribution of intra-
genic DNA methylation in mouse gametic DNA methylomes to establish
oocyte-specific heritable marks. PLoS Genet. 8, e1002440.
Luzzo, K.M., Wang, Q., Purcell, S.H., Chi, M., Jimenez, P.T., Grindler, N.,
Schedl, T., and Moley, K.H. (2012). High fat diet induced developmental de-
fects in the mouse: oocyte meiotic aneuploidy and fetal growth retardation/
brain defects. PLoS ONE 7, e49217.
Mannella, C.A., Lederer, W.J., and Jafri, M.S. (2013). The connection between
inner membrane topology and mitochondrial function. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 62,
51–57.
Mishra, P., Varuzhanyan, G., Pham, A.H., and Chan, D.C. (2015). Mitochondrial
dynamics is a distinguishing feature of skeletal muscle fiber types and regu-
lates organellar compartmentalization. Cell Metab. 22, 1033–1044.
Montgomery, M.K., and Turner, N. (2015). Mitochondrial dysfunction and insu-
lin resistance: an update. Endocr. Connect. 4, R1–R15.
Murrin, C.M., Kelly, G.E., Tremblay, R.E., and Kelleher, C.C. (2012). Body mass
index and height over three generations: evidence from the Lifeways cross-
generational cohort study. BMC Public Health 12, 81.
Otera, H., Wang, C., Cleland, M.M., Setoguchi, K., Yokota, S., Youle, R.J., and
Mihara, K. (2010). Mff is an essential factor for mitochondrial recruitment of
Drp1 during mitochondrial fission in mammalian cells. J. Cell Biol. 191,
1141–1158.
Ponzio, B.F., Carvalho, M.H., Fortes, Z.B., and do Carmo Franco, M. (2012).
Implications of maternal nutrient restriction in transgenerational programming
of hypertension and endothelial dysfunction across F1-F3 offspring. Life Sci.
90, 571–577.
Poole, A.C., Thomas, R.E., Andrews, L.A., McBride, H.M., Whitworth, A.J., and
Pallanck, L.J. (2008). The PINK1/Parkin pathway regulates mitochondrial
morphology. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 1638–1643.
Rambold, A.S., Kostelecky, B., and Lippincott-Schwartz, J. (2011). Fuse or
die: shaping mitochondrial fate during starvation. Commun. Integr. Biol. 4,
752–754.
Reynolds, K.A., Boudoures, A.L., Chi, M.M., Wang, Q., and Moley, K.H. (2015).
Adverse effects of obesity and/or high-fat diet on oocyte quality and meta-
bolism are not reversible with resumption of regular diet in mice. Reprod. Fertil.
Dev. 27, 716–724.
Skinner, M.K. (2011). Role of epigenetics in developmental biology and trans-
generational inheritance. Birth Defects Res. C Embryo Today 93, 51–55.
Song, Y., Wu, N., Wang, S., Gao, M., Song, P., Lou, J., Tan, Y., and Liu, K.
(2014). Transgenerational impaired male fertility with an Igf2 epigenetic defect
in the rat are induced by the endocrine disruptor p,p0-DDE. Hum. Reprod. 29,
2512–2521.
Sun, Z., Terragni, J., Borgaro, J.G., Liu, Y., Yu, L., Guan, S., Wang, H., Sun, D.,
Cheng, X., Zhu, Z., et al. (2013). High-resolution enzymatic mapping of
genomic 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in mouse embryonic stem cells. Cell Rep.
3, 567–576.
Tanvig, M. (2014). Offspring body size and metabolic profile - effects of lifestyle
intervention in obese pregnant women. Dan. Med. J. 61, B4893.
Wakai, T., Harada, Y., Miyado, K., and Kono, T. (2014). Mitochondrial dy-
namics controlled by mitofusins define organelle positioning and movement
during mouse oocyte maturation. Mol. Hum. Reprod. 20, 1090–1100.
Zheng, J., Xiao, X., Zhang, Q., and Yu, M. (2014). DNA methylation: the pivotal
interaction between early-life nutrition and glucose metabolism in later life.
Br. J. Nutr. 112, 1850–1857.
8
Cell Reports 16, 1–8, June 28, 2016
