  
At the Intersection of Health, Health Care and Policy
doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2015.1025
 
, 35, no.3 (2016):471-479
Health Affairs
Detectable Effect On Providers
Medicare Letters To Curb Overprescribing Of Controlled Substances Had No
Adam Sacarny, David Yokum, Amy Finkelstein and Shantanu Agrawal
Cite this article as: 
 
 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/content/35/3/471.full.html
available at: 
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is
 
For Reprints, Links & Permissions: 
 
http://healthaffairs.org/1340_reprints.php
 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/subscriptions/etoc.dtl
E-mail Alerts : 
 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/subscriptions/online.shtml
To Subscribe: 
written permission from the Publisher. All rights reserved.
mechanical, including photocopying or by information storage or retrieval systems, without prior 
may be reproduced, displayed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
Affairs 
Health
Foundation. As provided by United States copyright law (Title 17, U.S. Code), no part of 
 by Project HOPE - The People-to-People Health
2016
Bethesda, MD 20814-6133. Copyright © 
is published monthly by Project HOPE at 7500 Old Georgetown Road, Suite 600,
Health Affairs 
Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution
at Kungl. Tekniska högskolan
 on March 8, 2016
Health Affairs
 by 
content.healthaffairs.org
Downloaded from 
at Kungl. Tekniska högskolan
 on March 8, 2016
Health Affairs
 by 
content.healthaffairs.org
Downloaded from 
 By Adam Sacarny, David Yokum, Amy Finkelstein, and Shantanu Agrawal
Medicare Letters To Curb
Overprescribing Of Controlled
Substances Had No Detectable
Effect On Providers
ABSTRACT Inappropriate prescribing is a rising threat to the health of
Medicare beneficiaries and a drain on Medicare’s finances. In this study
we used a randomized controlled trial approach to evaluate a low-cost,
light-touch intervention aimed at reducing the inappropriate provision of
Schedule II controlled substances in the Medicare Part D program.
Potential overprescribers were sent a letter explaining that their practice
patterns were highly unlike those of their peers. Using rich
administrative data, we were unable to detect an effect of these letters on
prescribing. We describe ongoing efforts to build on this null result with
alternative interventions. Learning about the potential of light-touch
interventions, both effective and ineffective, will help produce a better
toolkit for policy makers to improve the value and safety of health care.
I
nappropriate prescribing threatens pa-
tients’ health and increases health care
costs. A body of evidence, ranging from
academic studies to investigative re-
ports by the Government Accountability
Office and the Office of Inspector General for the
Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS), has described overprescribing of many
pharmaceuticals, including controlled substanc-
es (such as opioids), benzodiazepines, and anti-
psychotics.1–4 These substances are associated
with a host of adverse health consequences from
accidental falls to overdose and death; their mis-
use also triggers costly health care use.5–7
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Ser-
vices (CMS) is exploring a variety of innovative
approaches to combat overprescribing behavior.
This study evaluated one approach: an inexpen-
sive intervention to affect questionable prescrib-
ing by sending an informative letter to health
care providers suspected of improperly writing
prescriptions for controlled substances through
Medicare Part D, the prescription drug insur-
ance program for Medicare beneficiaries. Along-
side the evaluation of this initial effort, the study
furtherconsideredhowtheletterapproachcould
be continuously adapted and analyzed so that it
may be more effective in the future.
Insurers frequently communicate with their
providers to ensure billing is accurate and medi-
cally necessary. The Medicare program, for ex-
ample, regularly sends billing reports to physi-
cians and hospitals. Our study was the first
attempt that we know of to rigorously evaluate
an informative letter aimed at reducing poten-
tially inappropriate medical practices. This ap-
proach was worth exploration given the existing
literature showing that such letters can affect a
wide range of outcomes, including health care
outcomes such as physicians’ vaccinating their
patients and legal compliance outcomes such as
individuals’ payment of delinquent taxes.8–10 In
much of the literature, these effects are found
even when the letters do not mention penalties
for noncompliance, which matches our ap-
proach in this study.
Letters such as these are one potential tool in
the arsenal that insurers might use to encourage
provider compliance with appropriate practices.
Inthe case ofthe Medicareprogram,these letters
are aimed at reducing inappropriate prescribing
behavior with dual objectives of saving costs and
doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.2015.1025
HEALTH AFFAIRS 35,
NO. 3 (2016): 471–479
©2016 Project HOPE—
The People-to-People Health
Foundation, Inc.
Adam Sacarny (ajs2102@
columbia.edu) is an assistant
professor in the Department
of Health Policy and
Management at the Mailman
School of Public Health,
Columbia University, in New
York City.
David Yokum is a fellow at
the White House Social and
Behavioral Sciences Team and
director of the Office of
Evaluation Sciences in the
General Services
Administration, both in
Washington, D.C.
Amy Finkelstein is the Ford
Professor of Economics in the
Department of Economics at
the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology; co–scientific
director of J-PAL North
America; and codirector of the
Public Economics Program at
the National Bureau of
Economic Research, all in
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Shantanu Agrawal is deputy
administrator and director of
the Center for Program
Integrity at the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid
Services, in Baltimore,
Maryland.
March 2016
35:3
Health Affairs
471
Prescription Drugs & Medical Marijuana
at Kungl. Tekniska högskolan
 on March 8, 2016
Health Affairs
 by 
content.healthaffairs.org
Downloaded from 
 protecting the health of beneficiaries. They com-
plement efforts such as audits and investigations
to fight fraud and abuse. Informative letters, if
effective, could offer a low-cost, collaborative
approach to reducing improper prescribing be-
havior. They allow CMS to target a larger group
of providers than would normally be practical
with traditional methods such as audits and in-
vestigations. This is an important advantage giv-
en that more than half a million practitioners are
associated with Medicare Part D prescriptions
for the most addictive controlled substances ev-
ery year.
Medicare Part D is an ideal setting in which to
test the impact of such letters. It is the largest
singleinsurer for prescription drugs, and itsdata
are updated often and with a minimal lag, allow-
ing for fast evaluation. To implement this study,
the White House Social and Behavioral Sciences
Team facilitated a research effort with CMS and
academic researchers at the Massachussetts In-
stitute of Technology (MIT) and Columbia Uni-
versity. CMS used Part D data to identify “outlier
prescribers”—physicians and other practitioners
who prescribed vastly more controlled substanc-
es (more than 400 percent more, on average)
than their peers.We then randomized these pre-
scribers into a treatment group and a control
group. The treatment group received a letter de-
picting their level of prescribing in comparison
to their peers (see online Appendix Exhibit A1),11
while the control group received nothing. Using
Part D administrative data, we tracked the effect
of the letter on prescribing behavior during the
following ninety days.
We were able to perform preliminary evalua-
tions of the letters just months after they were
sent. This article presents our full evaluation,
which took less than one year.We found no evi-
dence of an impact of the letter on prescribing
behavior. Indeed, our estimates suggested a sta-
tistically insignificant and substantively small
increase in prescribing of the targeted drugs;
our confidence intervals allowed us to reject ef-
fects bigger than a 1.4 percent reduction in pre-
scribing of these drugs. However, given the low
cost of this intervention and the success of simi-
lar letters in related domains such as vaccina-
tions and tax compliance,8–10 we believe that ad-
ditional randomized trials of alternative letter
designs are warranted. These results have al-
ready informed a series of changes for future
letters that are actively being tested, making this
study part of a process that harnesses Medicare
data to continuously improve CMS’s efforts to
lower improper payments.
Background
Inappropriate Prescribing And Schedule II
Drugs Overprescribing of pharmaceuticals has
been found across a variety of substances, expos-
ing patients—seniors in particular—to unneces-
sary risks. For example, seniors often are pre-
scribed benzodiazepines for extended periods of
time, even though this puts them at risk of de-
bilitating falls,3 and antipsychotics are often pre-
scribed to seniors with dementia, even though
these drugs may increase the chance of falls and
death.4 Overprescription can raise health care
expenditures as a result of the direct cost of the
drugs and from the resulting avoidable health
care use caused by adverse outcomes.
At the extreme, inappropriate prescribing may
include outright fraud, such as taking kickbacks
from patients in exchange for prescriptions or
using a stolen prescribing pad to write prescrip-
tions for drugs (or selling the prescribing pad for
this purpose). But deliberate deception is not
necessary for prescribing to be inappropriate.
Other examples of inappropriate prescribing in-
clude physicians’ provision of addictive drugs at
the request of drug-seeking or -abusing patients
without proper medical evaluation and physi-
cians’ provision of medications without properly
monitoring patients for adverse outcomes. Over-
prescribing may also result from misinformation
if, for example, a doctor were influenced by bi-
ased marketing or continuing medical education
to provide addictive drugs to patients who did
not stand to benefit from them clinically.12
This study focused on inappropriate prescrib-
ing of Schedule II controlled substances, a set of
medications that carry particularly largerisks for
patients and that policy makers widely believe
are overprescribed. The Drug Enforcement Ad-
ministration classifies substances on the basis of
their potential for abuse and dependency; Sched-
ule II is the highest-risk category for which a
prescription is still legal. The category includes
opioid pain relievers such as morphine and
oxycodone (branded as OxyContin or Percocet),
as well as stimulants such as amphetamines
(branded as Dexedrine or Adderall) and methyl-
phenidate (branded as Ritalin). The use and
abuse of opioid pain relievers has risen dramati-
cally since the late 1990s.5,6 The opioid overdose
death rate more than quadrupled between 1999
and 2014,13 and more than one-third of Medicare
Part D enrollees now fill an opioid pain reliever
prescription each year.14 Prescribing of these
drugs is also widespread, with more than
600,000 clinicians responsible for prescriptions
for the drugs in Medicare Part D annually. How-
ever, the most frequent prescribers make up
much of the total volume; the prescribers in
our study accounted for about 10 percent of
Prescription Drugs & Medical Marijuana
472
Health Affairs
March 2016
35:3
at Kungl. Tekniska högskolan
 on March 8, 2016
Health Affairs
 by 
content.healthaffairs.org
Downloaded from 
 the Schedule II prescribing in Medicare in 2012
but represented just 0.2 percent of practitioners
who wrote any prescription for these substances
in the program that year.
Policy makers have become increasingly con-
cerned that a rise in inappropriate prescribing
has driven the increase in opioid pain reliever
abuse. Two recent HHS reports identified phar-
macies and physicians whose Schedule II pre-
scribing practices appeared anomalous.1,2 These
reports highlighted the role of a small number of
unusually high-volume prescribers and were the
basis for CMS’s approach to identifying prescrib-
ers of Schedule II substances. On the legislative
side, the Affordable Care Act contains provisions
raising penalties for false medical claims and
requiring state Medicaid and Children’s Health
Insurance Programs to bar providers when
Medicare does. Nearly all states and the District
of Columbia have created or begun to roll out
prescription drug monitoring programs to track
the dispensing of certain drugs, facilitating the
detection of inappropriate prescribing and drug
abuse in real time.15 Alongside informative let-
ters, CMS has used its rulemaking authority in a
variety of ways to curb drug abuse in the Part D
program. Initiatives include giving the agency
authority to bar abusive prescribers from the
entire Medicare program and providing anti-
fraud contractors with streamlined access to
all prescribing records.16
Informative Letters Medicare has been
sending informative letters with peer compari-
sons to physicians regarding their Part B billing
behavior since at least 2010 and similar reports
to hospitals since at least 2003. The letters about
Part B billing behavior are the most similar to the
overprescribing letters studied here. These let-
ters, known as comparative billing reports, tar-
get providers who bill high volumes for a partic-
ular Medicare Part B (outpatient) service. The
letters are designed to educate providers and
encourage them to “self-audit” to correct im-
proper payments. To this end, they include in-
formation on how many units the target provider
billed of the service and how the provider’s bill-
ing compares with that of his or her peers (for
example, other providers in that specialty or ge-
ography). Although receiving a comparative bill-
ing report is not a direct indication that a pro-
vider will be subject to an audit, it may act as a
warning sign because antifraud investigators of-
ten employ similar approaches to selecting their
targets.17 We know of no rigorous evaluation of
comparative billing report letters to date.
The letter we studied targeting questionable
prescribers represents CMS’s initial foray into
expanding the comparative billing report ap-
proach to prescribing in Medicare Part D (see
Appendix Exhibit A1 for a sample of the letter).11
It states, in several ways, that the prescriber’s
actions were highly dissimilar to those of his
or her peers, using both text and graphics to
show that the prescriber has supplied far more
Schedule II controlled substances than peer-
group providers have.
There are several mechanisms whereby this
type of letter might induce providers to reduce
their inappropriate prescribing of Schedule II
substances. First, the letters may educate pre-
scribers whose practice patterns have inadver-
tently drifted from medical standards. In this
way, the letters could represent a form of con-
tinuing medical education, signaling that pre-
scribers must reevaluate their treatment meth-
ods. Second, the letter may impose moral costs,
by informing or reminding individuals that they
have drifted away from medical norms.9,18 Final-
ly, the letter may serve as a signal that CMS is
actively monitoring Schedule II prescribing and
(although the letter does not say so explicitly)
that it is willing to undertake audits or even more
severe administrative actions. As a result, it may
increase the prescriber’s perception of the ex-
pected penalty from continuing his or her cur-
rent prescribing behavior.
To our knowledge, these informative letters to
outlier prescribers have not previously been eval-
uated. However, in other settings, randomized
evaluations have found that such letters can be
effective, particularly those involving peer com-
parisons. For example, letters showing a house-
hold’s energy consumption relative to its neigh-
bors cause people to use less energy.19 In the legal
compliance realm, a randomized evaluation in
the United Kingdom sent a variety of messages to
delinquent taxpayers and found the strongest
effect from a statement that said that they were
“in the very small minority of people who have
not paid.”9 Several other studies in Europe and
Letters are one
potential tool in the
arsenal that insurers
might use to
encourage provider
compliance with
appropriate practices.
March 2016
35:3
Health Affairs
473
at Kungl. Tekniska högskolan
 on March 8, 2016
Health Affairs
 by 
content.healthaffairs.org
Downloaded from 
 South America looked at the impact of letters on
tax and fee collection and found that they im-
proved reporting and payment behavior by indi-
viduals and firms;10,20–22 one exception was a
study that found that letters raised firms’ report-
ing of taxable income but that this was largely
offset by more reporting of deductable costs.23
Our work also relates to the practice of provid-
ing automated feedback to physicians as a form
of continuing medical education.24 In a classic
study from the 1990s that is particularly related
to our context, CMS (then known as the Health
Care Financing Administration) oversaw a ran-
domized evaluation of peer-comparison letters
to physicians. This intervention tested a stan-
dard letter that listed a physician’s scores on
several quality metrics (for example, the physi-
cian’s influenza vaccination rate) against a mod-
ified letter that included comparisons of the
physician’s performance relative to his or her
top-performing peers. The study found that add-
ing the peer comparison to the letter raised the
odds, by a statistically significant 57 percent,
that the influenza vaccine would be provided
(the study’s four other quality scores also
showed improvements, half of which were sta-
tistically significant).8
Looking more broadly beyond peer-compari-
son letters, there is longstanding evidence that
computer-based reminders and certain other
methods of auditing and providing feedback
can raise physicians’ compliance with recom-
mended practices.25–27 A host of studies found
clinically and economically meaningful effects
of reminders, including effects on prescribing
behavior (the subject of our study). In a central
example from this literature, a randomized en-
couragement intervention provided computer-
generated reminders to physicians to vaccinate
their patients for influenza. The reminders in-
duced physicians to double their influenza vac-
cination rates and may have reduced hospital-
izations.28–30
A
recent
systematic
review
of
audit and feedback interventions found that they
yielded “small but potentially important im-
provements” with greater effectiveness in cer-
tain contexts, such as when the targeted pro-
viders were performing poorly already.27
Study Data And Methods
Research Design And Implementation In Ju-
ly 2014 CMS conducted an analysis to identify
questionable—outlier—prescribers of Schedule
II controlled substances in the Medicare Part D
administrative data (analogous to an insurance
claims file). (For a full accounting of this analy-
sis, see Appendix A.)11 The analysis selected
1,525 individuals who prescribed much more
of these substances than their peers (defined
as providers in the same state and specialty) in
at least two of the three years 2011, 2012, and
2013. The average prescriber from the selected
group was responsible for 406 percent more pre-
scription drug fills than comparible peers.
The idea behind this approach was that ex-
tremely high levels of prescribing most likely
reflected inappropriate prescribing behavior, in-
stead of properly monitored prescribing to pa-
tients actually in need of these substances. The
threshold for identifying an outlier prescriber
was set to select prescribers at or above approxi-
mately the 99.7th percentile of prescribing vol-
ume in each year among prescribers of Schedule
II drugs in Medicare Part D. Consistent with the
idea that this method was likely to identify pre-
scribers engaged in questionable practices even
without more complicated adjustments for pa-
tient characteristics, we observed that 21 percent
of these prescribers had already been investigat-
ed for fraud or abuse by mid-2014. We view this
finding as a significant cross-validation that our
approach selected prescribers whose practice
patterns had drifted from appropriate standards
of care.
We received approval from the MIT Committee
on the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects
(Protocol No. 1409006595) and the Harvard
Committee on the Use of Human Subjects (Pro-
tocol No. IRB14-3112). In August 2014 we ran-
domly assigned 50 percent of the 1,525 outlier
prescribers to the treatment group that received
a letter from CMS and the remainder of the pre-
scribers to the control group that received no
intervention (the randomization was performed
in Stata software and is described in Appen-
dix B).11 Seven prescribers (two in the treatment
group and five in the control group) had died
before the outlier analysis was conducted; there-
fore, they were removed from the analysis.
About 85 percent of the 1,518 surviving pre-
scribers in our study population were outliers in
2013, and about 60 percent were outliers in all
three years (Exhibit 1). The average prescriber
was associated with about 1,444 Schedule II pre-
scription fills in 2013, amounting to nearly
$200,000 in payments by Part D plans and ben-
eficiaries for these drugs. Three-fifths of the
prescribers were general care practitioners,
one-fifth were nurse practitioners or physician
assistants, and one-fifth were in the remaining
six categories of physician specialists. Naturally,
because of the randomization, these character-
istics were very similar, on average, between the
treatment and control arms, both including and
excluding the seven deceased prescribers; on av-
erage, the treatment and control arms were sta-
tistically indistinguishable.
Prescription Drugs & Medical Marijuana
474
Health Affairs
March 2016
35:3
at Kungl. Tekniska högskolan
 on March 8, 2016
Health Affairs
 by 
content.healthaffairs.org
Downloaded from 
 Peer comparison letters were mailed to the
treatment-group prescribers (n ¼ 760) in mid-
September 2014.31 Of these letters, 131 were re-
turned to sender. We resolved the addresses of
letters that were returned and resent the letters
to the new addresses in batches through mid-
November.
Data We tracked the behavior of prescribers
through our access to the CMS Integrated Data
Repository, the warehouse for Medicare data
used by CMS and its program integrity contrac-
tors. The repository includes beneficiary enroll-
ment information as well as administrative data
on health care use in Medicare Parts A, B, C, and
D. This study used the Part D data, which include
records for all prescription drug fills that the
program covers and note the prescriber who
was responsible for each fill. With this data, we
tracked dispensing of Schedule II substances.
Analytical Approach We publicly registered
this trial and uploaded a plan for our analysis in
January 2015, before we accessed any postinter-
vention study data.32 Our approach, as stated in
the plan and further described in Appendix C,11
was to use linear regression to estimate the cor-
relation between prescriber outcomes (Schedule
II prescription fills) and assignment to the treat-
ment group (being sent a letter). Some letters
were returned to sender and delivered late, and
some may not have been received at all.We ana-
lyzed the full set of providers to whom we mailed
letters, which included those who may not have
successfully received or opened the letter. The
approach is what is often called an “intention to
treat” analysis. In ourcase, the study revealed the
effect that implementation of this type of inter-
vention was likely to have in the real world,
where address data are inevitably spotty. Our
results are, therefore, policy relevant for future
letters designed to fight improper payments.
Since we were using a randomized controlled
trial approach, our results were unbiased esti-
mates of the impact of our intervention, even
without including control variables to try to cap-
ture potential differences between the treatment
and control groups. However, controls can im-
prove the power of our statistical analysis. There-
fore, we show results both with and without
controls. The analysis with a control variable
controlled for the volume of Schedule II prescrib-
ing in the months before the letters were sent.
This was our preferred specification since (as
expected) the inclusion of the control variable
improved the precision of our estimates.
We focused our analysis on the impact on total
Schedule II prescription drug fills because it is
through changes in prescribing volume that the
letters might potentially drive improvements in
patient outcomes and reductions in improper
payments. We examined total Schedule II pre-
scribing at thirty- and ninety-day time windows
following the mailing of the letters. We defined
this outcome as the number of Schedule II pre-
scription fills attributed to the prescriber, and we
adjusted the fills by the days’ supply of the
prescriptions—we counted a fill as its days’ sup-
ply divided by thirty, so that a thirty-day fill
counted as 1.0 and a fifteen-day fill counted as
Exhibit 1
Summary statistics on outlier Schedule II controlled substance prescribers from the Medicare study group population,
2011–13
Overall
(N = 1,518)
Treatment group
(n = 760)
Control group
(n = 758)
Outlier
In 2013
84.2%
83.7%
84.8%
In all three years, 2011–13
59.7
59.7
59.6
Average number of Schedule II Rx fillsa
In 2013
1,444
1,403
1,486
In all three years, 2011–13
4,205
4,160
4,251
Average Schedule II total dollars paidb
In 2013
$198,076
$189,914
$206,259
In all three years, 2011–13
596,553
586,063
607,070
Type of provider
General care practitioner
58.6%
57.8%
59.4%
Nurse practitioner or physician assistant
20.1
18.8
21.4
Physician specialist
21.4
23.4
19.3
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of Medicare Part D administrative data on prescription drug fills in 2011–13. NOTE An F-test of the equality
of means of all variables between treatment and control groups was unable to reject the null of equality (p ¼ 0:42), as expected when
treatment is randomly assigned. aPrescription fills count each time a Part D beneficiary filled a Schedule II prescription associated with
a prescriber in the study during 2011–13 and were not adjusted for the days’ supply of the fills. bTotal payments for prescriptions,
including payments from the Part D plan as well as out-of-pocket payments by the beneficiary, on average per prescriber.
March 2016
35:3
Health Affairs
475
at Kungl. Tekniska högskolan
 on March 8, 2016
Health Affairs
 by 
content.healthaffairs.org
Downloaded from 
 0.5, for example. This measure is called thirty-
day-equivalentprescribing. Because itaccounted
for prescription duration, we selected thirty-day-
equivalent prescribing over the ninety days fol-
lowing the mailing of the letter as our primary
study outcome.
The average outlier prescriber in our study
control group had 155.5 Schedule II prescription
drug fills attributed over the thirty days follow-
ing the mailing and 461.1 Schedule II prescrip-
tion drug fills over the ninety-day time window—
more than five fills per day (Exhibit 2).
Study Results
Exhibit 3 presents our main results in table form,
and Exhibit 4 presents them graphically. The
lines in the graphic trace out the cumulative av-
erage prescribing for the treatment and control
groups in the days following the mailing of the
letters. The estimates of the effect of the letters in
the columns of the table (Exhibit 3) marked “No
extra control” equal the distances between the
lines at the thirty- and ninety-day marks in Ex-
hibit 4. In Exhibit 4, the lines for treatment and
control groups appear to diverge slightly, but the
regression results in Exhibit 3 show that this
divergence is not statistically significant.
To improve our power to detect effects of the
letters, in the columns of Exhibit 3 marked “Ex-
tra control” we included a control variable:
Schedule II prescribing in the thirty or ninety
days prior to the mailing of the letters. The re-
sults remain statistically insignificant. In other
words, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the
letters had no effect on prescribing behavior.
Our thirty-day time window estimates indicat-
ed that the letters reduced Schedule II prescrib-
ing by a statistically insignificant 0.8 fills
(0.5 percent of the average). At the ninety-day
window, we estimated that the letters caused a
statistically insignificant increase of 3.5 fills
(0.8 percent of the average). Moreover, we were
able to rule out subsantial reductions in prescrib-
ing as a result of the letters. With a 95 percent
confidence level, we rejected that they caused a
decline of more than 6.4 fills (1.4 percent of the
average) over the ninety days.
In advance of viewing the study data, we pre-
registered that the primary outcome was Sched-
ule II prescription fills (adjusted for days’ sup-
ply) over the ninety days following the mailing,
meaning that our primary focus was on whether
the letters reduced prescribing according to this
metric.We were unable to detect an effect on this
primary outcome. The results were unchanged
even if we removed the adjustment for the days’
supply of the fills (that is, counted all fills as one
regardless of their duration; see Appendix Ex-
hibit A2).11 We also failed to detect effects in the
secondary analyses we ran, including looking
Exhibit 2
Prescription drug fill outcomes for control group of outlier
Schedule II controlled substance prescribers in days after
informative letters sent, 2014
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of Medicare Part D administrative data
on prescription drug fills in 2014. NOTES N ¼ 758. The diamond
indicates the mean prescribing level for control-group prescrib-
ers, and the whiskers show the range of one standard deviation
below to one standard deviation above the mean. The box spans
the interquartile range of prescribing with the dividing line mark-
ing the median. Prescriptions are adjusted for the days’ supply of
the fills.
Exhibit 3
Estimated effect of informative letters on prescribing habits of outlier Schedule II controlled substance prescribers, within
thirty days and ninety days after letters sent, 2014
Outcome time window
30 days
90 days
Control variable
No extra control
Extra control
No extra control
Extra control
Effect of letter on Schedule II Rx fills
−4.41
−0.79
−11.05
3.53
Confidence interval of effect
(−19.46, 10.64)
(−3.68, 2.10)
(−56.07, 33.97)
(−6.35, 13.40)
Average Schedule II Rx fills in control group
155.5
155.5
461.1
461.1
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of Medicare Part D administrative data on prescription drug fills in 2014. NOTES N ¼ 1; 518. For
specifications looking at thirty-day (ninety-day) outcomes, we used prescribing in the thirty days (ninety days) before the letters
were sent as the extra control variable. The column headings indicate which estimates used this control variable. The confidence
interval shows the margin of error for the estimates at the 95% confidence level and uses robust standard errors. None of the
estimates were statistically significant at the 5 percent or 10 percent levels. Prescriptions were adjusted for the days’ supply of
the fills.
Prescription Drugs & Medical Marijuana
476
Health Affairs
March 2016
35:3
at Kungl. Tekniska högskolan
 on March 8, 2016
Health Affairs
 by 
content.healthaffairs.org
Downloaded from 
 just at subgroups such as prescribers who were
high or low outliers or those who had or had not
already been investigated for fraud.33
Discussion
In this study we used a randomized controlled
trial to evaluate whether letters can reduce pre-
scribing of highly addictive substances by ques-
tionable prescribers in Medicare Part D.We were
unable to detecta statistically significanteffect of
this intervention: The letters were associated
with a (statistically insignificant) increase of
3.5 prescription fills over ninety days, or 0.8 per-
cent. At the 95 percent confidence level, we could
rule out that they lowered prescribing by more
than 6.4 fills, or 1.4 percent, over that time
window.
Given the low cost of this intervention, the
potentially deleterious effects of inappropriate
prescribing on beneficiary health and Medicare
spending, and the existing track record of an
impact of similar informative letters in health
care and non–health care contexts, these results
suggest that further work is needed to investi-
gate whether alternative informative letters can
be more effective in reducing overprescribing
behavior. The current study has shown that these
letters can be evaluated rigorously, cheaply, and
rapidly in the Medicare context. CMS is now
incorporating such evaluations as part of a proc-
ess to continuously innovate, test, and improve
its approach to reducing improper payments.
Indeed, our study team is implementing addi-
tional letter-based randomized interventions
targeting other substances at risk of inappropri-
ate prescription. These subsequent interven-
tions take an evidence-based approach to our
goal of designing letters that cost-effectively tar-
get questionable prescribing. They address con-
cerns that the initial study uncovered and con-
sider
new
methods
of
intervening
with
prescribers based on academic literature.
To redesign the letters for subsequent rounds
of the study, we considered the most likely rea-
sons that we failed to detect an effect in this
initial round. Broadly, one set of issues involves
whether the letters reached their intended tar-
gets. A second class of issues involves whether
the letters, even if appropriately targeted, were
effective at altering behavior.
With the new letters, we have made a host of
changes to address these concerns. One set of
changes is operational: We are working across
divisions in CMS to use the best provider address
data possible, thereby reducing returns to send-
er.We are also taking advantage of the high-fre-
quency data that CMS collects to identify the
most recent outlier prescribers for targeting, in-
stead of relying on data from previous years as in
the current study.
Another set of changes takes advantage of in-
sights from behavioral and psychological re-
search to try to design ex ante more effective
letters. For example, the design of a current in-
formative letter campaign that is already in the
field for questionable prescribers of quetiapine
(branded Seroquel), an antipsychotic, drew on
research that found that the effects of letters
became more persistent when individuals were
repeatedly contacted.19 The Seroquel letter cam-
paign therefore follows up multiple times with
prescribers to impress upon them that they are
being monitored. We have also altered the lan-
guage of our letters to emphasize the negative
consequences of inappropriate prescribing be-
havior. This change follows research that has
found messages emphasizing penalties to have
more dramatic effects on tax compliance than
messages that mention the fairness and equity
of making required payments.20
Conclusion
Through this ongoing collaboration, we will con-
tinuously innovate and evaluate low-cost, light-
touch interventions designed to reduce inappro-
priate
prescribing
behavior
and
improper
payments in the Medicare system. An approach
that does affect prescribing or other health care
provider behavior would be a useful tool for
CMS, other insurers, and perhaps providers in
financial risk arrangements. It could also signif-
icantly affect policy approaches to curtailing
waste, abuse, and fraud. ▪
Exhibit 4
Schedule II controlled substance prescribing in days after
informative letters sent, 2014
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of Medicare Part D administrative data
on prescription drug fills in 2014. NOTES Lines depict cumulative
average prescribing for treatment and control prescribers, start-
ing from the day the letters were sent. Prescriptions are adjusted
for the days’ supply of the fills. The thirty- and ninety-day marks
are analogous to the columns for “No extra control” in Exhibit 3.
March 2016
35:3
Health Affairs
477
at Kungl. Tekniska högskolan
 on March 8, 2016
Health Affairs
 by 
content.healthaffairs.org
Downloaded from 
 An earlier version of this research was
presented at the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation Scholars in Health Policy
Research program’s annual meeting, San
Diego, California, June 4, 2015. The
authors acknowledge funding through J-
PAL North America from the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation and the Laura and
John Arnold Foundation. Amy Finkelstein
is a member of the Congressional
Budget Office Panel of Health Advisers.
She has no relevant or material financial
interests that relate to the research
described in this article. Adam Sacarny,
David Yokum, and Shantanu Agrawal
have no relevant or material financial
interests that relate to the research
described in this article. This study was
registered on the American Economic
Association Randomized Controlled
Trials Registry and ClinicalTrials.gov (see
Note 32). The views expressed in this
article represent those of the authors
and not their respective organizations,
including the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS). The contents
of this article were reviewed for
compliance by CMS.
NOTES
1 Department of Health and Human
Services, Office of Inspector General.
Retail pharmacies with questionable
Part D billing. Washington (DC):
HHS; 2012 May. (Technical Report
No. OEI-02-09-00600).
2 Department of Health and Human
Services, Office of Inspector General.
Prescribers with questionable pat-
terns in Medicare Part D. Washing-
ton (DC): HHS; 2013 Jun. (Technical
Report No. OEI-02-09-00603).
3 Olfson M, King M, Schoenbaum M.
Benzodiazepine use in the United
States. JAMA Psychiatry. 2015;
72(2):136–42.
4 Government Accountability Office.
Antipsychotic drug use: HHS has
initiatives to reduce use among older
adults in nursing homes, but should
expand efforts to other settings.
Washington (DC): GAO; 2015 Jan.
(Technical Report No. GAO-15-211).
5 Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Vital signs: overdoses of
prescription opioid pain relievers—
United States, 1999–2008. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2011;60(43):
1487–92.
6 Frenk SM, Porter KS, Paulozzi LJ.
Prescription opioid analgesic use
among adults: United States, 1999–
2012. NCHS Data Brief. 2015;(189):
1–8.
7 Hampton LM, Daubresse M, Chang
HY, Alexander GC, Budnitz DS.
Emergency department visits by
adults for psychiatric medication
adverse events. JAMA Psychiatry.
2014;71(9):1006–14.
8 Kiefe CI, Allison JJ, Williams OD,
Person SD, Weaver MT, Weissman
NW. Improving quality improvement
using achievable benchmarks for
physician feedback: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2001;
285(22):2871–9.
9 Hallsworth M, List J, Metcalfe R,
Vlaev I. The behavioralist as tax
collector: using natural field experi-
ments to enhance tax compliance.
Cambridge (MA): National Bureau of
Economic Research; 2014 Mar.
(NBER Working Paper No. 20007).
10 Kleven HJ, Knudsen MB, Kreiner
CT, Pedersen S, Saez E. Unwilling or
unable to cheat? Evidence from a tax
audit experiment in Denmark.
Econometrica. 2011;79(3):651–92.
11 To access the Appendix, click on the
Appendix link in the box to the right
of the article online.
12 Here is an example of the potential
for biased materials to influence
prescribing behavior away from best
practices. Van Zee A. The promotion
and marketing of OxyContin: com-
mercial triumph, public health
tragedy. Am J Public Health. 2009;
99(2):221–7.
13 Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Wide-ranging Online
Data for Epidemiologic Research
(WONDER), multiple cause of death,
2000–2014 [Internet]. Atlanta (GA):
CDC; 2015 [cited 2016 Feb 8].
Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/data/health_policy/AADR_
drug_poisoning_involving_OA_
Heroin_US_2000-2014.pdf
14 Suzuki S. Potentially inappropriate
opioid use in Medicare Part D [In-
ternet]. Washington (DC): Medicare
Payment Advisory Commission;
2014 Oct 9 [cited 2016 Feb 1].
Available from: http://www
.medpac.gov/documents/october-
2014-meeting-presentation-
potentially-inappropriate-opioid-
use-in-medicare-part-d-.pdf
15 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services. The role of a prescription
drug monitoring program in reduc-
ing prescription drug diversion,
misuse, and abuse [Internet]. Balti-
more (MD): CMS; 2014 Jun [cited
2016 Feb 1]. Available from: http://
www.cms.gov/Medicare-Medicaid-
Coordination/Fraud-Prevention/
Medicaid-Integrity-Education/
Downloads/prescriptiondrug-
monitoring-factsheet.pdf
16 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services. CMS strategy to combat
Medicare Part D prescription drug
fraud and abuse [Internet]. Balti-
more (MD): CMS; 2014 Jan 6 [cited
2016 Feb 1]. Available from: https://
www.cms.gov/Newsroom/Media
ReleaseDatabase/Fact-sheets/2014-
Fact-sheets-items/2014-01-06-2
.html
17 Fehn AK, Colagiovanni J. Compara-
tive billing reports: what providers
should know. RAC Monitor [serial
on the Internet]. 2011 Aug 3 [cited
2016 Feb 1]. Available from: http://
www.racmonitor.com/news/3-
feature-aritcles/625-comparative-
billing-reports-what-providers-
should-know.html
18 Levitt SD, List JA.What do laboratory
experiments measuring social pref-
erences reveal about the real world? J
Econ Perspect. 2007;21(2):153–74.
19 Allcott H, Rogers T. The short-run
and long-run effects of behavioral
interventions: experimental evi-
dence from energy conservation. Am
Econ Rev. 2014;104(10):3003–37.
20 Castro L, Scartascini C. Tax compli-
ance and enforcement in the Pam-
pas: evidence from a field experi-
ment. Washington (DC): Inter-
American Development Bank. 2013
Dec. (IDB Working Paper Series
No. IDB-WP-472).
21 Fellner G, Sausgruber R, Traxler C.
Testing enforcement strategies in
the field: threat, moral appeal, and
social information. J Eur Econ As-
soc. 2013;11(3):634–60.
22 Pomeranz D. No taxation without
information: deterrence and self-
enforcement in the value added tax.
Cambridge (MA): National Bureau of
Economic Research. 2013 Jul.
(NBER Working Paper No. 19199).
23 Carrillo P, Pomeranz D, Singhal M.
Dodging the taxman: firm misre-
porting and limits to tax enforce-
ment. Cambridge (MA): National
Bureau of Economic Research. 2014
Oct. (NBER Working Paper
No. 20624).
24 This review article presents Catarina
I. Kiefe and colleagues’s study
(Note 8) as an example of the value
of benchmarking and other forms of
feedback in continuing medical ed-
ucation. Mazmanian PE, Davis DA.
Continuing medical education and
the physician as a learner: guide to
the evidence. JAMA. 2002;288(9):
1057–60.
25 Arditi C, Rège-Walther M, Wyatt JC,
Durieux P, Burnand B. Computer-
generated reminders delivered on
paper to health care professionals;
effects on professional practice and
health care outcomes. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2012; 12. DOI:
10.1002/14651858.CD001175.pub3
26 Soumerai SB, McLaughlin TJ, Avorn
J. Improving drug prescribing in
primary care: a critical analysis of the
experimental literature. Milbank Q.
Prescription Drugs & Medical Marijuana
478
Health Affairs
March 2016
35:3
at Kungl. Tekniska högskolan
 on March 8, 2016
Health Affairs
 by 
content.healthaffairs.org
Downloaded from 
 1989;67(2):268–317.
27 There is a long history of attempting
to use audits and feedback to raise
quality of care; for an early system-
atic review and discussion of the
literature, see Note 26. This article
presents a more recent systematic
review. Ivers N, Jamtvedt G, Flottorp
S, Young JM, Odgaard-Jensen J,
French SD, et al. Audit and feedback:
effects on professional practice and
healthcare outcomes. Cochrane Da-
tabase Syst Rev. 2012;6:CD00D259.
28 McDonald CJ, Hui SL, Tierney WM.
Effects of computer reminders for
influenza vaccination on morbidity
during influenza epidemics. MD
Comput. 1992;9(5):304–12.
29 McDonald CJ, Hui SL, Smith DM,
Tierney WM, Cohen SJ, Weinberger
M, et al. Reminders to physicians
from an introspective computer
medical record. A two-year random-
ized trial. Ann Intern Med. 1984;
100(1):130–8.
30 Hirano K, Imbens GW, Rubin DB,
Zhou XH. Assessing the effect of an
influenza vaccine in an encourage-
ment design. Biostatistics. 2000;
1(1):69–88.
31 The prescribers were not notified
that they were taking part in the
study because such a message would
need to indicate that the prescriber
was an outlier, disclosing the infor-
mation that we intended to test. The
intervention was reviewed exten-
sively by the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services to ensure that
it was appropriate for the popu-
lation.
32 The analysis plan is available at the
study’s page on the Amercian Eco-
nomic Association Randomized
Controlled Trials Registry (ID:
AEARCTR-0000525). Finkelstein A,
Sacarny A, Yokum D. The effect of
informative letters on the prescrip-
tion and receipt of Schedule II con-
trolled substances [Internet]. Nash-
ville (TN): American Economic
Association Randomized Controlled
Trials Registry; 2015 Jan 20 [cited
2016 Feb 1]. Available from: https://
www.socialscienceregistry.org/
trials/525
33 We also ran subanalyses by pre-
scriber specialty and geographic re-
gion, both of which failed to detect
effects. We expanded the outcome
window of Exhibit 3 to 180 days,
which also did not uncover effects.
Of all the analyses we ran, the only
statistically significant result was the
thirty-day time window prescribing
for low outliers, which showed an
increase at the 10 percent level.
March 2016
35:3
Health Affairs
479
at Kungl. Tekniska högskolan
 on March 8, 2016
Health Affairs
 by 
content.healthaffairs.org
Downloaded from 
