 CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510 
July 18, 2017
e1
ABSTRACT: Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading global cause 
of death, accounting for 17.3 million deaths per year. Preventive 
treatment that reduces CVD by even a small percentage can substantially 
reduce, nationally and globally, the number of people who develop 
CVD and the costs of caring for them. This American Heart Association 
presidential advisory on dietary fats and CVD reviews and discusses the 
scientific evidence, including the most recent studies, on the effects 
of dietary saturated fat intake and its replacement by other types of 
fats and carbohydrates on CVD. In summary, randomized controlled 
trials that lowered intake of dietary saturated fat and replaced it with 
polyunsaturated vegetable oil reduced CVD by ≈30%, similar to the 
reduction achieved by statin treatment. Prospective observational studies 
in many populations showed that lower intake of saturated fat coupled 
with higher intake of polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fat is 
associated with lower rates of CVD and of other major causes of death 
and all-cause mortality. In contrast, replacement of saturated fat with 
mostly refined carbohydrates and sugars is not associated with lower 
rates of CVD and did not reduce CVD in clinical trials. Replacement of 
saturated with unsaturated fats lowers low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, 
a cause of atherosclerosis, linking biological evidence with incidence 
of CVD in populations and in clinical trials. Taking into consideration 
the totality of the scientific evidence, satisfying rigorous criteria for 
causality, we conclude strongly that lowering intake of saturated fat and 
replacing it with unsaturated fats, especially polyunsaturated fats, will 
lower the incidence of CVD. This recommended shift from saturated 
to unsaturated fats should occur simultaneously in an overall healthful 
dietary pattern such as DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) 
or the Mediterranean diet as emphasized by the 2013 American Heart 
Association/American College of Cardiology lifestyle guidelines and the 
2015 to 2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans.
Frank M. Sacks, MD, 
FAHA, Chair
Alice H. Lichtenstein, DSc, 
FAHA
Jason H.Y. Wu, PhD, MSc
Lawrence J. Appel, MD, 
MPH, FAHA
Mark A. Creager, MD, 
FAHA
Penny M. Kris-Etherton, 
PhD, RD, FAHA
Michael Miller, MD, FAHA
Eric B. Rimm, ScD, FAHA
Lawrence L. Rudel, PhD, 
FAHA
Jennifer G. Robinson, MD, 
MPH, FAHA, Vice Chair
Neil J. Stone, MD, FAHA
Linda V. Van Horn, PhD, 
RD, FAHA, Vice Chair
On behalf of the Ameri-
can Heart Association
Dietary Fats and Cardiovascular Disease
A Presidential Advisory From the American Heart Association
© 2017 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Key Words: AHA Scientific 
Statements ◼ blood cholesterol 
◼ cardiovascular diseases, 
atherosclerosis ◼ cholesterol, 
LDL ◼ dietary fats ◼ fatty 
acids, saturated ◼ fatty acids, 
unsaturated
AHA PRESIDENTIAL ADVISORY
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sacks et al
July 18, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510
e2
C
ardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading glob-
al cause of death, accounting for 17.3 million 
deaths per year, comprising 31.5% of total global 
deaths in 2013. Nearly 808 
000 people in the United 
States died of heart disease, stroke, and other CVDs 
in 2014, translating to about 1 of every 3 deaths. The 
annual direct and indirect costs of these deaths total 
more than $316.1 billion, including health expenditures 
and lost productivity.1 Preventive treatment that reduc-
es CVD by even a small percentage can substantially 
reduce, nationally and globally, the number of people 
who develop CVD and the costs of caring for them.
Since 1961, the American Heart Association (AHA) 
has recommended reduction in dietary saturated fat 
to reduce the risk of CVD.2,3 The purpose of this AHA 
presidential advisory on dietary fats and CVD is to 
review and discuss the scientific evidence, including 
the most recent studies, on the effects on CVD of di-
etary saturated fat and its replacement by other types 
of fats and carbohydrates. A presidential advisory is 
initiated by the AHA president to address a topic of 
special current importance. This report discusses the 
major classes of dietary fatty acids, except for the very-
long-chain n-3 fatty acids in fish, which are covered by 
other AHA reports.
The scientific rationale for decreasing saturated 
fat in the diet has been and remains based on well-
established effects of saturated fat to raise low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, a leading cause of athero-
sclerosis4; to cause atherosclerosis in several animal spe-
cies, especially nonhuman primates5; to clear the ath-
erosclerosis in animals6 when it is reduced in the diet; 
and likewise to reverse atherosclerosis in humans.7,8 In 
addition, reducing saturated fat and replacing it with 
polyunsaturated fat in randomized controlled trials has 
reduced the incidence of CVD.9,10 Populations with very 
low saturated fat intake such as in East Asian and Medi-
terranean countries have very low rates of CVD,11 and 
members of many single populations who have low 
saturated and high unsaturated fat intake have lower 
future incidence of CVD compared with those with 
high saturated and low unsaturated fat intake.12 The 
current AHA/American College of Cardiology guideline 
is to decrease intake of saturated fat to 5% to 6% of 
total daily energy (calorie) intake for individuals with 
elevated LDL cholesterol concentration.3 The 2015 to 
2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend 
consuming <10% of calories from saturated fat for the 
general population and replacing saturated fat with un-
saturated fat.13 The average intake of saturated fat in 
adults in the United States is 11% of total daily energy 
intake13,14; only about 5% of adults consume <7%, and 
30% to 40% consume <10%.14 Thus, most adults need 
to reduce saturated fat to reduce their risk of CVD. The 
implementation strategy recommended to achieve this 
reduction is to shift food choices from those high in 
saturated to those high in polyunsaturated and mono-
unsaturated fats.3,13
In the past few years, meta-analyses of observa-
tional studies and randomized clinical trials have come 
to discordant conclusions about the relationship be-
tween dietary saturated fat and risk of CVD.9,10,12,15–17 
This has created confusion among patients, their phy-
sicians, and the public. In this article, we analyze and 
discuss the methodology and interpretation of results 
reported by these researchers and the reasons for the 
divergent findings.
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
Dietary saturated fat, like any macronutrient, supplies 
energy (calories) to the diet. In randomized clinical tri-
als on saturated fat, the group that is assigned a diet 
lower in saturated fat is taught how to replace it with 
foods higher in ≥1 other macronutrients, typically car-
bohydrates or unsaturated fats, to maintain the same 
total energy intake. Other trials, often called controlled 
feeding trials, actually provide to the research partici-
pants their assigned diet high or low in saturated fat 
balanced with a similar amount of energy from an-
other macronutrient. Essential to the interpretation of 
the results from these trials (and the reason for the 
divergent results in meta-analyses noted above) is the 
macronutrient composition of the comparator diet. 
Clinical trials that used polyunsaturated fat to replace 
saturated fat reduced the incidence of CVD.9,10 In con-
trast, trials that used mainly carbohydrates to replace 
saturated fat did not reduce CVD. However, the types 
of carbohydrate-containing foods were often unspeci-
fied and typically included sugar and other refined car-
bohydrates to maintain energy balance. Evidence from 
prospective observational studies indicates that carbo-
hydrates from whole grains reduce CVD when they re-
place saturated fat.18
Prospective observational studies, also called cohort 
studies, are conducted in large populations in which di-
etary intake is assessed at the beginning of the study 
and in some studies reassessed repeatedly during the 
follow-up periods, and CVD is assessed at various points 
during follow-up. In prospective observational stud-
ies, the participants eat whatever diet they themselves 
choose, and the researchers request that participants re-
port their recent or past dietary history. Research partici-
pants in observational studies who eat a large amount 
of saturated fat eat less of various other macronutri-
ents, usually carbohydrates, unsaturated fat, or both, 
to maintain energy intake. Participants who eat a com-
paratively small amount of saturated fat eat more car-
bohydrates or unsaturated fats. Because carbohydrates 
and unsaturated fats differ in their metabolic effects, 
it is necessary to evaluate the effects of low and high 
saturated fat intakes in the context of the replacement 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dietary Fats and Cardiovascular Disease
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510 
July 18, 2017
e3
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
macronutrient. This is easier in a clinical trial because the 
trial controls the dietary intake but more complicated in 
observational studies in which the participants control 
their own diets.
Meta-analyses of prospective observational studies 
aiming to determine the effects on CVD of saturated 
fat that did not take into consideration the replace-
ment macronutrient have mistakenly concluded that 
there was no significant effect of saturated fat intake 
on CVD risk.15,16 In contrast, meta-analyses that spe-
cifically evaluated the effect of replacing saturated fat 
with polyunsaturated fat found significant benefit, 
whereas replacing saturated fat with carbohydrates, 
especially refined carbohydrates, yielded no significant 
benefit to CVD risk.12,17,18 Thus, again, differences in 
the effects of the replacement or comparator nutri-
ents, specifically carbohydrates and unsaturated fats, 
are at the root of the apparent discrepancies among 
studies and meta-analyses on whether lowering satu-
rated fat reduces the risk of developing CVD. In fact, 
the evidence to recommend reduction of saturated fat 
and its replacement by polyunsaturated and monoun-
saturated fat has strengthened as better methodology 
is more widely adopted for the analysis of dietary in-
take in observational studies.
We judge the evidence to favor recommending 
n-6 polyunsaturated fat, that is, linoleic acid, stronger 
than monounsaturated fat to replace saturated fat 
because of the positive results of randomized clinical 
trials that used polyunsaturated fat compared with 
the paucity of trials that used monounsaturated fat10; 
the greater relative risk reduction for polyunsaturated 
fats in observational studies12,17,18; the greater reduc-
tion in LDL cholesterol with polyunsaturated fat4; and 
the regression of atherosclerosis in nonhuman pri-
mates by polyunsaturated but not monounsaturated 
fat.5 However, progress in reducing CVD would be 
enhanced by replacing saturated fat by either type of 
unsaturated fat.
FATTY ACID COMPOSITION OF FATS 
AND OILS
The fatty acid composition of major fats and oils in the 
diet is shown in the Table.19 The main sources of sat-
urated fat to be decreased are dairy fat (butter), lard 
(pork), beef tallow, palm oil, palm kernel oil, and coco-
nut oil. Polyunsaturated fats are contained in canola oil, 
corn oil, soybean oil, peanut oil, safflower oil, sunflow-
er oil, and walnuts. However, original high-linoleic va-
rieties of safflower and sunflower oils are uncommon. 
High-oleic varieties of safflower and sunflower oil, olive 
oil, avocados, and tree nuts such as almonds, cashews, 
hazelnuts, pistachios, and pecans have mainly monoun-
saturated fats and are low in saturated fat.
CVD OUTCOMES: RANDOMIZED 
CLINICAL TRIALS THAT LOWERED 
DIETARY SATURATED FAT
The randomized clinical trial, when designed appro-
priately to answer the research question and executed 
with high quality, is the cornerstone for health and 
medical guidelines and policy. However, a randomized 
trial of a food or nutrient must achieve a biologically 
meaningful difference in intake between treatment and 
control groups and sustain it for a long enough time to 
deliver a valid result. Participants may find it difficult 
to maintain intake of a diet to which they are not ac-
customed and may revert to their original more familiar 
diet. In some trials, the difference in dietary saturated 
fat was maintained for many years,20–22 but in others, 
the difference fell well short of planned.23–25 In addition, 
the comparator nutrient that replaced saturated fat, 
polyunsaturated fat or carbohydrates, differed among 
trials. Reviewers who evaluate these trials must take 
into account the specific nutritional experiment that 
was conducted and the level of its adherence through-
out the follow-up period.
Low Saturated, High Polyunsaturated  
Fat Diets
In the mid-1950s, 4 research groups reported that re-
placing saturated fat from animal products with polyun-
saturated fat from vegetable oils substantially reduced 
serum cholesterol levels.26–29 Soon, controlled trials fol-
lowed to test whether the reduction in serum cholesterol 
caused by substituting polyunsaturated for saturated fat 
prevented CVD. We examined several recent systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses9,10,16 from which we identified 
and here discuss 4 trials20–22,30 that make up the core evi-
dence on this important question on the basis of quality 
of study design, execution, and adherence. These trials 
compared high saturated with high polyunsaturated fat 
intake; did not include trans unsaturated fat as a major 
component; controlled the dietary intake of the interven-
tion and control groups; had at least 2 years of sustained 
intake of the assigned diets; proved adherence by objec-
tive biomarkers such as serum cholesterol or blood or 
tissue levels of polyunsaturated fatty acids; and collected 
and validated information on cardiovascular or coronary 
disease events. The reason for the 2-year minimum dura-
tion is that changes in polyunsaturated fatty acids very 
slowly equilibrate with tissue fatty acid levels; it takes 
≈2 years to achieve 60% to 70% of the full effect.20,30 
Trials of serum cholesterol–lowering agents show that 
a reduction in coronary heart disease (CHD) incidence 
occurs with a lag of 1 to 2 years.31 These systematic re-
views9,10,16 together found and analyzed 6 additional tri-
als7,23,32–35 that replaced saturated with polyunsaturated 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sacks et al
July 18, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510
e4
fat but did not have ≥1 of these characteristics crucial to 
testing the hypothesis. We also discuss these “noncore” 
trials and evaluate their potential impact on the overall 
result on dietary saturated and polyunsaturated fat and 
risk of CVD.
Core Trials on Replacing Saturated With  
Polyunsaturated Fat
The Wadsworth Hospital and Veterans Administration 
Center in Los Angeles (Dayton et al20) conducted a 
high-quality, double-blind, well-controlled trial. There 
were 846 men with a mean age of 65 years, and 30% 
had CVD. The experimental diet used corn, soybean, 
safflower, and cottonseed oils, all high in polyunsatu-
rated linoleic acid, to replace saturated fat in the con-
trol diet. The participants were served their meals at 
the center, with each diet group in a separate dining 
room. Adherence was confirmed by objective measures 
demonstrating enrichment with linoleic acid in blood, 
adipose tissue, and atherosclerosis specimens in the 
coronary arteries and aorta. Moreover, the investigators 
established double-blind conditions. The average dura-
tion was 8 years. The experimental diet reduced serum 
cholesterol by 13%. There were 20% fewer primary 
events, myocardial infarction or sudden death, in the 
diet group than in the control group, not a statistically 
significant difference. The diet significantly reduced the 
CVD end point, definite myocardial infarction, sudden 
death, or ischemic stroke, by 34% (P=0.04) and total 
CVD events by 31% (P=0.01). There were 41% fewer 
men who had an ischemic stroke in the diet group than 
in the control group (P=0.055).
By contemporary standards, the trial needed more 
participants to reach a definitive conclusion. However, 
the strict dietary control and 8-year-long intervention 
period ensured both a large difference in the dietary 
fatty acid intakes and enough CVD events to reach a 
statistically significant treatment effect for the second-
ary CVD outcomes, which were more highly powered 
because of their larger numbers of events.
The Oslo Diet-Heart Study21 assigned at random 
412 men who had had a myocardial infarction to ei-
ther a control group who continued their usual high-
saturated fat diet or an experimental group who 
changed to a low saturated, high polyunsaturated 
fat diet. The men in the experimental group and their 
wives were taught in their homes how to select and 
prepare foods that were low in saturated fat and high 
in polyunsaturated vegetable oils. The polyunsatu-
rated fat diet lowered serum cholesterol by 14% (41 
mg/dL), thereby confirming adherence, and this effect 
was sustained throughout the 5-year trial. The poly-
unsaturated fat diet significantly reduced the primary 
outcome, recurrent myocardial infarction and new 
cases of angina pectoris or sudden death, significantly 
by 29% (P=0.011). Among the components of the 
primary outcome, myocardial infarction and angina 
pectoris were significantly reduced by 37% and 66%, 
respectively, whereas incidence of sudden death was 
the same in both groups. The end point,  
myocardial 
Table. Fatty Acid Composition of Fats and Oils
Saturated, g/100 g
Monounsaturated, g/100 g
Polyunsaturated, g/100 g
Total
Lauric (12:0), 
Myristic (14:0), 
Palmitic (16:0)
Stearic 
(18:0)
Total
Oleic
(18:1)
Total
Linoleic
(18:n-6)
α-Linolenic
(18:3n-3)
Canola oil
7
4
2
63
62
28
19
9
Coconut oil
82
67
3
6
6
2
2
0
Corn oil
13
11
2
28
27
55
53
1
Dairy fat (butter)
63
39
12
26
21
4
3
0
Lard (pork)
39
25
14
45
41
11
10
1
Olive oil
14
11
2
73
71
10
10
1
Palm oil
49
45
4
37
37
9
9
0
Palm kernel oil
82
72
3
11
11
2
2
0
Peanut oil
17
10
2
46
45
32
32
0
Safflower oil (high linoleic)
6
4
2
14
14
75
75
0
Safflower oil (high oleic)*
8
5
2
75
75
13
13
1
Soybean oil
16
10
4
23
23
58
50
7
Sunflower oil (high linoleic)
10
6
4
20
20
66
66
0
Sunflower oil (high oleic)*
10
5
4
84
83
4
4
0
Tallow (beef)
50
30
19
42
36
4
3
1
A zero value equals <0.5 g/100 g.
*Primary safflower and sunflower oils of commerce.
Data from US Department of Agriculture food composition tables.19
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dietary Fats and Cardiovascular Disease
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510 
July 18, 2017
e5
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
infarction or sudden death, was reduced by 25% 
(P=0.05). There were fewer cardiovascular deaths in 
the experimental group by 27% (P=0.09). The low 
saturated, high polyunsaturated fat group continued 
to experience reduced cardiovascular mortality com-
pared with the high saturated fat control group for an 
additional 6 years after the trial ended.
The British Medical Research Council compared a 
diet containing soybean oil, 86 g/d, with a diet with 
saturated fat from animal products in 393 men after 
myocardial infarction.22 They were instructed to drink 
half the soybean oil allotment with fruit juice and use 
half in cooking, and they were counseled on how to 
reduce the saturated fat in their diet so that the to-
tal fat contents of the intervention and control groups 
were similar. Replacing animal fat with soybean oil low-
ered serum cholesterol by 16%. The primary outcome 
was first relapse (myocardial infarction, angina, sud-
den death). After 4 years, 62 of 199 in the soybean oil 
group had had a recurrent coronary event compared 
with 74 of 194 in the high saturated fat group; the dif-
ference, −18% (95% CI, −38 to 7), was not statistically 
significant.
The Finnish Mental Hospital Study compared a diet 
high in polyunsaturated fat, mainly from soybean oil, 
with a diet high in saturated fat in 1222 patients at 
2 psychiatric hospitals.30,36,37 In 1 hospital, the high 
polyunsaturated fat diet was given first, followed by 
the saturated fat diet; in the other hospital, the diets 
were given in the reverse order. Each diet period lasted 
6 years. There were 2 cohorts. One comprised the en-
tire patient populations of the 2 hospitals; 25% had 
evidence of CHD on an ECG, and 57% were women. 
The other cohort included only patients who had no 
evidence of CHD, that is, a primary prevention cohort. 
Women made up 44%. Serum cholesterol was 38 mg/
dL (14%) lower on the high polyunsaturated fat diet 
than on the high saturated fat diet. Adherence was 
also demonstrated by 3-fold enrichment of linoleic acid 
in adipose tissue. In the mixed primary and secondary 
prevention cohort, CHD death, the primary outcome, 
was significantly lower by 41% (95% CI, −26 to −53) 
during the polyunsaturated than the saturated fat diet 
(Figure 1). In the primary prevention cohort, CHD death 
or myocardial infarction was the primary outcome, and 
the incidence was significantly lower also by 41% (95% 
CI, −17 to −58) during the polyunsaturated than during 
the saturated fat periods. In each hospital, CHD events 
were lower during the times when the polyunsaturat-
ed fat diet was given. Results were similar in men and 
women.
We performed a fixed-effects meta-analysis of these 
4 core trials using the primary outcome chosen by each 
trial (Figure 2). This approach ensures that the results 
of the meta-analysis are based on prospectively defined 
primary outcomes, thereby having more validity than 
an alternative approach that redefines a new common 
outcome for all the component trials. This alternative 
approach would have a serious weakness, the selection 
of a new outcome that is post hoc and potentially influ-
enced by researchers’ bias. We included the entire Finn-
ish trial population, primary and secondary prevention, 
women and men combined.
The results showed that lowering saturated fat and 
replacing it with vegetable oil rich in polyunsaturated 
fat, primarily soybean oil, lowered CHD by 29%. This 
effect on CHD is consistent with the effect of the exper-
imental diet on serum cholesterol.31 Each trial achieved 
a crucial element in clinical trial execution, producing 
and maintaining the required difference in diets as ob-
jectively documented by blood and tissue fatty acid bio-
markers and serum cholesterol, that was needed to test 
the study aim. However, these trials were conducted 
in the 1960s, before widespread use of statins, when 
serum cholesterol levels were higher than now, as was 
the saturated fat content of the diet.
In addition to replacing dietary saturated fat with poly-
unsaturated fat, these clinical trials lowered dietary cho-
lesterol. The cholesterol content of the diets was listed in 
3 of the core trials.20,22,30 We used the Keys38 equation to 
estimate that the decreased cholesterol intake lowered 
serum cholesterol by ≈5 to 8 mg/dL, making up 15% 
to 20% of the total reduction in serum cholesterol. For 
example, in the Dayton et al20 study, cholesterol intake 
decreased from 653 to 365 mg/d, and serum cholesterol 
decreased from 233 to 203 mg/dL, a 30-mg/dL differ-
ence, of which 6 mg/dL was accounted for by reduced 
dietary cholesterol. Because many foods that are high in 
saturated fat also contain cholesterol, the benefits to se-
rum cholesterol lowering by reducing saturated fat will 
be augmented by consequent reduction in dietary cho-
lesterol.
Noncore Trials on Replacing Saturated With 
Polyunsaturated Fat
In addition to the 4 core trials, several other trials aimed 
to test the hypothesis that replacing saturated with 
polyunsaturated fats reduces CHD.7,23,32–35 We did not 
include these trials in our core group because they had 
a mixed dietary intervention in which polyunsaturated 
and carbohydrate replaced saturated fat and had in-
sufficient duration, low adherence, few events, and/or 
serious flaws in study design. STARS (Saint Thomas Ath-
erosclerosis Regression Study) was a 3.3-year trial that 
achieved its primary aim of reducing the severity of ste-
noses (blockages) in the coronary arteries.7 The dietary 
treatment lowered saturated fat intake and replaced it 
with carbohydrates and polyunsaturated fat. The diet 
lowered serum cholesterol by 11%. CVD events (fatal 
CHD or nonfatal myocardial infarction) occurred in 2 of 
27 participants in the diet group versus 5 of 28 in the 
control group.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sacks et al
July 18, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510
e6
The Welsh DART study (Diet and Reinfarction Trial)23 
compared the effect of fat advice with no fat advice 
on CVD during 2 years. The fat advice group reduced 
saturated fat from 15% to 11% of total calories, in-
creased polyunsaturated fat from 7% to 9%, and in-
creased carbohydrate intake from 44% to 46%. These 
changes fell well short of intended and produced only 
a 3.5% reduction in serum cholesterol. There were 8% 
fewer men with CHD death or nonfatal myocardial in-
farction in the fat advice group compared with the no-
fat advice group, not statistically significant but similar 
to what is predicted from the small decrease in serum 
cholesterol.31
Houtsmuller et al32 conducted a 6-year trial in pa-
tients with newly diagnosed diabetes mellitus that re-
duced saturated fat and replaced it with mainly polyun-
saturated fat. Serum cholesterol decreased significantly 
by 7%. The high polyunsaturated, low saturated fat 
diet reduced the progression of diabetic microvascular 
disease, which was the primary outcome. CVD events 
were determined by electrocardiography; however, 
those reading the ECGs were not blinded to treatment 
assignment. For this reason, this trial was not included 
in the core group. The high polyunsaturated, low satu-
rated fat group experienced significantly fewer CVD 
events, 8 of 51 versus 24 of 51, a 67% reduction, much 
greater than the 12% predicted by the modest lower-
ing of serum cholesterol.
Rose et al33 conducted a trial in male patients with 
CVD that replaced saturated fat with polyunsaturated 
Figure 2. Meta-analysis of core 
trials on replacing saturated with 
polyunsaturated fat.
Significant reduction in coronary heart 
disease (CHD). Relative risk (RR) of the 
primary CHD outcome of each trial. 
Findings across studies were pooled by 
inverse-variance fixed-effects meta-
analyses. Risk reduction is the same 
with random-effects meta-analysis: RR, 
0.71 (95% confidence interval [CI], 
0.61–0.83). Data are from Dayton et 
al,20 Oslo Diet-Heart Study,21 Medical 
Research Council,22 and Finnish stud-
ies.30,36,37 Result from the Finnish trial 
used the total cohort (ie, patients who 
participated in the primary or secondary 
prevention cohorts). Meta-analysis by 
Drs Yanping Li and Jason H.Y. Wu.
Figure 1. Finnish Mental Hospital 
Study.30,36,37 
Significant reduction in coronary 
heart disease (CHD) by replacing 
saturated with polyunsaturated fat. 
Results are shown separately for par-
ticipants in the primary and second-
ary CHD prevention cohorts of the 
trial and participants who were in 
the primary CHD prevention cohort. 
Relative risks (RRs) of the primary 
CHD outcome, CHD death, were cal-
culated on the basis of age-adjusted 
deaths rates, and results were pooled 
across sex by inverse-variance fixed-
effects meta-analyses. CI indicates 
confidence interval. Meta-analysis by 
Drs Yanping Li and Jason H.Y. Wu.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dietary Fats and Cardiovascular Disease
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510 
July 18, 2017
e7
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
corn oil. There were 26 patients in the control group 
and 28 in the corn oil group. The mean duration for 
receiving corn oil was 1.5 years. There were 12 cardio-
vascular events in the corn oil group versus 6 in the 
control group, not a statistically significant difference. 
The small number of participants and short duration of 
the trial excluded it from the core group.
The Minnesota Coronary Survey34 compared high 
polyunsaturated with high saturated fat diets in patients 
hospitalized for mental illness. The participants were 
given the assigned diets only when they were patients 
in the hospital. Because hospitalization for mental illness 
became less common and less prolonged after the study 
started, as a national trend, the patients received the as-
signed diets intermittently, contrary to the intent of the 
researchers, and for a much shorter time than planned. 
The researchers originally enrolled 9570 participants 
in the trial and intended to study them for at least 3.6 
years to be able to adequately test the effect of the di-
ets. However, the trend toward outpatient treatment of 
mental illness resulted in ≈75% of the participants being 
discharged from inpatient care during the first year of 
the study. Only about half the remaining patients stayed 
in the study for at least 3 years. The average duration 
was only 384 days. The incidence of CHD events was 
similar in the 2 groups, 25.7 and 27.2 per 1000 person-
years in the control and polyunsaturated fat groups, re-
spectively. A recent reanalysis of this trial restricted to 
the participants who remained in the trial for at least 1 
year also found no significant differences in CHD events 
or CHD deaths.39 We excluded this trial from the core 
group because of the short duration, large percentage 
of withdrawals from the study, and intermittent treat-
ment, which is not relevant to clinical practice. Anoth-
er concern is the use of lightly hydrogenated corn oil 
margarine in the polyunsaturated fat diet. This type of 
margarine contains trans linoleic acid, the type of trans 
fatty acid most strongly associated with CHD.40
The Sydney Heart Study35 was unique among the diet 
trials on CVD because a margarine high in trans unsatu-
rated fat was a major component of the diet for partici-
pants assigned to the high polyunsaturated diet. When 
this trial was conducted, there was little recognition of 
the harms of trans unsaturated fat in partially hydroge-
nated vegetable oils, so the researchers inadvertently 
tested substitution of saturated with an even more ath-
erogenic trans fat. As predicted from current knowledge 
about trans unsaturated fat, CVD events were higher in 
the experimental group. If anything, this trial confirmed 
the results of observational studies that also report 
higher CVD risk from results from regression models in 
which trans unsaturated fat replaced saturated fat.41,42 
We did not include this trial in our evaluation of the 
effects of lowering dietary saturated fat because trans 
fats are not recommended3,13 and are being eliminated 
from the food supply.43
Two meta-analyses9,16 analyzed the 4 core trials plus 
Minnesota,34 STARS,7 and DART.23 Both meta-analyses 
showed a significant reduction in CVD of 19% by re-
placing saturated with polyunsaturated fat. Another 
systematic review and meta-analysis10 included the 
Dayton et al study,20 the Oslo Diet-Heart Study,21 the 
Medical Research Council study,22 the study by Hout-
smuller et al,32 the Rose et al study,33 and the Sydney 
Diet Heart Study35 and excluded the Finnish trial.30,36,37 
The Finnish trial was not included because it had 2 
hospitals rather than at least 6 in the cluster random-
ization scheme, as required by the researchers con-
ducting this meta-analysis.10 In this group of trials, re-
duced saturated fat and increased polyunsaturated fat 
significantly lowered CVD events by 27% (see Table 
9 in Reference 10). The extent of reduction in dietary 
saturated fat was significantly associated with the 
extent of decrease in CVD events among the trials. 
Reduction in serum cholesterol, as a consequence of 
reduced saturated fat and increased polyunsaturated 
fat, explained virtually all the variation among the trials 
in CVD event reduction.
The core trials reviewed in this section were started 
in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Readers may won-
der why at least 1 definitive clinical trial has not been 
completed since then. Reasons include the high cost of 
a trial having upward of 20 
000 to 30 
000 participants 
needed to achieve satisfactory statistical power, the 
feasibility of delivering the dietary intervention to such 
a large study population, technical difficulties in estab-
lishing food distribution centers necessary to maintain 
high adherence for at least 5 years, and declining CVD 
incidence rates caused by improved lifestyle and better 
medical treatment. These linked issues, which must be 
managed to obtain a definitive result, remain the cen-
tral considerations for dietary trials on CVD and indeed 
are the overarching reason why few of these trials have 
ever been done. Finally, by the 1980s, with rising rates of 
breast and colon cancer, the US government committed 
to conducting the WHI (Women’s Health Initiative),24 a 
trial that studied a diet aimed at decreasing total fat in 
the diet to 20% with the expectation that saturated fat 
would likewise be substantially decreased. Consequent-
ly, carbohydrates were increased in the diet. Details are 
discussed subsequently.
In summary, randomized controlled trials that low-
ered intake of saturated fat and replaced it with polyun-
saturated vegetable oil reduced CVD events by ≈30%, 
similar to the reduction achieved by statin treatment.31 
Adding trials weakened by a short duration, low ad-
herence, or use of trans unsaturated fat partially dilut-
ed the effect of the higher-quality core trials, but the 
results of meta-analyses that included both core and 
noncore trials still showed significant and substantial 
reduction in CVD when saturated fat is replaced with 
polyunsaturated fat.9,10,16
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sacks et al
July 18, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510
e8
Low-Fat, High-Carbohydrate Diets
Few trials have studied the effect of reducing saturated 
fat and replacing it mainly with carbohydrates, with-
out including with the diet other treatments such as 
antihypertensive or lipid-lowering medication. The Brit-
ish Medical Research Council25 studied 252 men after 
myocardial infarction aiming to reduce total fat from 
41% to 22% and maintaining it at 41% in the control 
group. The type of fat was similar in the high- and low-
fat groups, mainly saturated fat from dairy products 
and meat. The low-fat, high-carbohydrate diet lowered 
serum cholesterol by 5%, less than expected from the 
planned reduction in saturated fat. The researchers re-
marked that the low-fat diet was unpleasant and dif-
ficult to tolerate. There were 48 CHD events in the con-
trol group compared with 46 in the low-fat group. The 
specific carbohydrate-containing foods in the low-fat 
diet group were not described except that sugar intake 
and skim milk were increased and biscuits and cakes 
were decreased.
DART, described previously,23 lowered total fat from 
35% to 31% by reducing saturated fat, replacing it 
partly with carbohydrates and partly with polyunsatu-
rated fat. The reduction in CHD events, 8%, was not 
significant.
Originally designed as a diet study to prevent breast 
and colon cancer, the WHI tested the hypothesis that 
reducing all types of fats and replacing them with high-
carbohydrate foods, particularly fruits and vegetables, 
decreases CVD.24 Enrolled between 1993 and 1998 and 
conducted in postmenopausal women 50 to 79 years 
of age, this trial assigned 30 
000 women at random to 
maintain their usual high-fat diet (37% of total energy 
intake) and 20 
000 to a low-fat diet (20% of energy 
intake). They were followed up for 8 years. This trial 
was not a test of reduction purely in saturated fat be-
cause monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats were 
also reduced to meet the primary dietary objective of 
decreasing total fat. The emphasis on reduction of all 
types of fat came from its primary aim to test the hy-
pothesis that decreasing dietary fat of any kind reduces 
breast and colon cancer. The effect of this type of diet 
on CVD was a secondary aim. After 5 years, the low-
fat diet group lowered LDL cholesterol by 4 mg/dL, an 
≈3% reduction, similar to the British Medical Research 
Council trial25 and DART.23 Similar to those studies, the 
participants in the low-fat group did not achieve the 
goal for reducing dietary fat (24% after the first year 
and 29% after the eighth year compared with 35% 
and 37%, respectively, in the control group). Also like 
the earlier studies, the low-fat diet in the WHI had no 
significant effect on coronary events or stroke.
A systematic review and meta-analysis10 identi-
fied 6 trials that reduced saturated fat, replacing it 
mainly with carbohydrates. In contrast to the favor-
able results of trials using polyunsaturated fat as the 
replacement macronutrient reported in the same ar-
ticle,10 the low-fat, high-carbohydrate approach did 
not significantly reduce CVD events (relative risk, −7%; 
95% CI, −21 to 8).
In summary, a dietary strategy of reducing intake of 
total dietary fat, including saturated fat, and replacing 
the fats mainly with unspecified carbohydrates does 
not prevent CHD. In contrast to trials of polyunsatu-
rated fat, adherence to the low-fat regimen fell short of 
the intention, impairing the ability of the trials to test 
a biologically based or efficacy hypothesis. The authors 
of these and other dietary trials20,23,25 remarked on the 
difficulty experienced by participants in adhering to and 
maintaining goals to reduce dietary total fat. Finally, we 
note that a trial has never been conducted to test the 
effect on CHD outcomes of a low-fat diet that increases 
intake of healthful nutrient-dense carbohydrates and 
fiber-rich foods such as whole grains, vegetables, fruits, 
and legumes that are now recommended in dietary 
guidelines.
CVD OUTCOMES: PROSPECTIVE 
OBSERVATIONAL STUDIES
Prospective observational studies of diet and disease 
refer to research in which large populations provide in-
formation on their diet, lifestyle, health, and other char-
acteristics and behaviors at the beginning and then are 
followed up for many years for the occurrence of dis-
ease.44 This research technique has several key advantag-
es over randomized controlled trials but also important 
weaknesses. Compared with clinical trials, prospective 
observational studies include larger and potentially more 
representative populations and have longer durations. 
Most important, participants choose their own intake of 
foods and beverages and do not have to adapt their diet 
to randomized diet assignment; therefore, the problem 
of sustaining adherence has no relevance. Furthermore, 
prospective observational studies can update dietary in-
formation periodically during the follow-up period. Ob-
servational studies are much less expensive than random-
ized controlled trials (expressed as cost per participant or 
cost per hypothesis tested). However, the observational 
approach likewise has weaknesses. Participants who 
have a high intake of saturated fat may have dietary and 
nondietary characteristics that differ from those with low 
intake of saturated fat, and these differences could af-
fect CVD, creating a confounding situation. Incomplete 
or inaccurate ascertainment of dietary components can 
affect associations with disease. Meticulous collection of 
diet and health information and the statistical methods 
used can reduce or even eliminate the influence of con-
founding to isolate the effect of the nutrient itself. In 
summary, randomized controlled trials and prospective 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dietary Fats and Cardiovascular Disease
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510 
July 18, 2017
e9
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
observational studies are complementary research ap-
proaches. When the results are similar, the assumption 
of causality is strengthened between consumption of a 
dietary component and disease.
Fundamentally, methodology in observational analy-
ses of diet and disease differs from that in analyses of 
biomarkers and genetic markers in relation to disease 
risk and is less familiar to scientists who work in other 
fields of epidemiology or in clinical trials. Observational 
studies in nutrition have special complexities, especially 
when studying foods or macronutrients such as fat and 
carbohydrates that make up a substantial portion of 
daily energy intake. For example, a low saturated fat in-
take occurs in the context of different dietary patterns, 
including low-fat, high-carbohydrate diets or Mediter-
ranean diets high in unsaturated fat.
In North America and many European countries, 
the diets of people who eat a low-saturated fat diet 
typically are high in refined carbohydrates and low in 
unsaturated fats. For this reason, comparing CVD inci-
dence in those with high and those with low saturated 
fat intakes primarily compares saturated fat with carbo-
hydrates, most coming from refined grains, fruit juice, 
sweet desserts and snacks, sugar-sweetened beverag-
es, and other foods. Well-publicized results of a meta-
analysis reporting that saturated fat is not associated 
with CVD implicitly compare a high saturated fat diet 
with commonly eaten diets low in saturated fat and 
high in carbohydrate-containing foods made with re-
fined carbohydrates and added sugars that themselves 
are associated with CVD.15,16
Further adding complexity, high-carbohydrate foods 
are very heterogeneous and may have beneficial or 
harmful associations with disease. For example, high-
carbohydrate diets that include whole grains and cereal 
fiber are associated with lower rates of CVD, whereas 
refined grains and added sugars are associated with 
higher rates (Figure 3).18
Therefore, it is critical to the interpretation of findings 
in nutritional epidemiological studies that the contrast 
in dietary patterns between high and low saturated fat 
intake be well characterized. Simply comparing disease 
rates between people in a population who have low com-
pared with high intake of saturated fat is fraught with po-
tential for misinterpretation and misunderstanding.
Willett44 developed a statistical framework for multi-
variable regression analysis that isolates effects of spe-
cific macronutrient exchanges. The method compares 
high saturated fat intake separately with high polyun-
saturated fat, monounsaturated fat, trans unsaturated 
fat, and carbohydrates. The multivariable analysis equal-
izes other prognostic factors. In this way, the method 
simulates a randomized trial that compares 5 diets dif-
fering in type and amount of fat and carbohydrates. To 
determine the relationship of saturated fat with CVD 
outcomes in prospective observational studies, we used 
systematic reviews and meta-analyses published from 
2009 to 2015,12,17 the 2015 US Dietary Guidelines Ad-
visory Committee Report,13 and studies published after 
the report was released.18,45 We considered studies that 
used multivariable regression analysis that isolates ef-
fects of specific nutrient exchanges.
The results showed that replacing 5% of energy in-
take from saturated fats with equivalent energy intake 
from polyunsaturated fats, monounsaturated fats, or 
carbohydrates from whole grains was associated highly 
significantly with a 25%, 15%, and 9% lower risk of 
CHD, respectively (Figure 3).18 Replacing saturated fats 
with carbohydrates from refined starches/added sugars 
was not significantly associated with CHD risk (1% high-
er incidence). This pattern of results on dietary fats and 
CHD continued in analyses of total and cause-specific 
deaths; replacement of saturated fat by polyunsaturated 
fat (mainly linoleic acid) or monounsaturated fat was as-
sociated with lower rates of not only CVD death but 
also all deaths, deaths resulting from CVD, cancer, neu-
rodegenerative disease, and lung disease (Figure 4).45
Key Points: Randomized Clinical 
Trials and Prospective Observational 
Studies on Replacement of Dietary 
Saturated Fat With Polyunsaturated or 
Monounsaturated Fat or Carbohydrates
• Four core randomized trials replacing saturated 
fat with polyunsaturated fat had at least 2 years’ 
Figure 3. Replacement of saturated fat with other 
types of fat or carbohydrates.
Association with risk of cardiovascular disease in the Nurses’ 
Health Study and Health Professionals Follow-Up Study. 
Multivariable adjustment. MUFA indicates monounsaturated 
fatty acids; PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acids; and SFA, 
saturated fatty acids. Modified from Li et al18 with permis-
sion from The American College of Cardiology Foundation. 
Copyright © 2015, The American College of Cardiology 
Foundation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sacks et al
July 18, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510
e10
duration, good adherence proven by blood or 
tissue levels of cholesterol and/or polyunsatu-
rated fat, and standard outcome ascertainment. 
Meta-analysis showed a 29% reduction in CHD 
events.
• Six additional trials were not considered core tri-
als because of short duration, low adherence, or 
nonstandard outcome ascertainment. However, 
meta-analyses that included several of these trials 
along with some or all of the core trials also found 
a significant reduction in CHD events on the poly-
unsaturated fat diet.
• The Sydney Diet Heart Study showed that using a 
margarine rich in trans unsaturated fat to replace 
saturated fat increased CHD events, confirming 
similar adverse results in epidemiological studies.
• Several trials that replaced saturated fat with car-
bohydrates did not show reduced CHD. Adherence 
was much less than expected in these trials.
• Prospective observational studies consistently 
found the following:
–  
Lower risk of CHD when saturated fat was 
replaced with polyunsaturated or monounsat-
urated fat, more so for polyunsaturated than 
monounsaturated.
–  
No decrease in risk of CHD when saturated fat 
was replaced with carbohydrates, especially car-
bohydrates from refined grains and added sug-
ars. However, replacement with whole grains 
was associated with reduced CHD.
–  
Lower risk of death resulting from CVD and all 
causes with replacement of saturated with poly-
unsaturated or monounsaturated fat.
DIETARY PATHOGENESIS OF 
ATHEROSCLEROSIS IN NONHUMAN 
PRIMATES
Because of their evolutionary similarities to human be-
ings, nonhuman primate species were studied to de-
termine the effects of diet on atherosclerosis. In these 
experiments,5,46 to induce hypercholesterolemia and 
atherosclerotic lesion formation, one group of mon-
keys typically was fed lard or palm oil at 35% of their 
daily energy intake and dietary cholesterol to raise 
serum cholesterol levels into the 300- to 400-mg/dL 
range to model hypercholesterolemia in human beings 
at high risk for CHD. A second group of monkeys was 
fed a monounsaturated fat, high-oleic safflower oil, 
and a third group was fed a polyunsaturated fat lin-
oleic acid–rich diet using safflower oil. Saturated fatty 
acids promoted higher LDL cholesterol concentrations 
and more coronary artery atherosclerosis. Linoleic acid 
lowered LDL cholesterol concentrations and decreased 
the amount of coronary artery atherosclerosis. In the 
oleic acid group, LDL cholesterol concentrations were 
lowered to an extent similar to that in the linoleic acid 
group, but paradoxically, the amount of coronary ar-
tery atherosclerosis was more like that in the saturated 
fat group.5,47 In the oleic acid–rich diet group, the LDL 
particles of the monkeys were enriched in cholesteryl 
oleate and bound to arterial proteoglycans more avidly 
compared with the polyunsaturated fat diet group, an 
action that may be viewed as promoting atherosclero-
sis.47,48 In humans as well, intake of high-oleic canola 
oil enriches LDL with cholesteryl oleate, but opposite 
to the findings in monkeys, this LDL has reduced bind-
0.3 
0.5 
1.0 
2.0 
Hazard ratio 
Total mortality 
MUFAs, 5% of energy 
PUFAs, 5% of energy 
trans fat, 2% of energy 
Cardiovascular disease 
mortality 
MUFAs, 5% of energy 
PUFAs, 5% of energy 
trans fat, 2% of energy 
Cancer mortality 
MUFAs, 5% of energy 
PUFAs, 5% of energy 
trans fat, 2% of energy 
Neurodegenerative disease 
mortality 
MUFAs, 5% of energy 
PUFAs, 5% of energy 
trans fat, 2% of energy 
Respiratory disease 
mortality 
MUFAs, 5% of energy 
PUFAs, 5% of energy 
trans fat, 2% of energy 
Figure 4. Replacement of saturated fat with other 
dietary fats.
Total and cause-specific mortality. Hazard ratio (95% confi-
dence interval) for substituting energy from saturated fat by 
the same energy from specific types of fat. Nurses’ Health 
Study and Health Professionals Follow-up Study. MUFA 
indicates monounsaturated fatty acids; and PUFA, polyun-
saturated fatty acids. Modified with permission from Wang 
et al.45 Copyright © 2016, American Medical Association. All 
rights reserved.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dietary Fats and Cardiovascular Disease
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510 
July 18, 2017
e11
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
ing to vascular proteoglycan, a potentially beneficial 
mechanism.49 Atherosclerosis extent has consistently 
been positively correlated with high LDL proteoglycan 
binding affinity.48,50
Finally, a diet typical of the 1980s in the United 
States, high in saturated fat, fed to rhesus monkeys 
for 2 years increased serum cholesterol to 383 mg/dL 
and caused atherosclerosis that had complex patho-
logical features similar to atherosclerosis in young hu-
man adults who died of trauma.51 In contrast, a “pru-
dent” diet recommended by the AHA to prevent CHD, 
low in saturated and high in polyunsaturated fat, pro-
duced lower serum cholesterol levels, 199 mg/dL, and 
less atherosclerosis.
In summary, in rhesus monkeys, African green 
monkeys, and cynomolgus monkeys, dietary satu-
rated fat promoted coronary atherosclerosis during 1 
to 5 years, whereas polyunsaturated fat reduced LDL 
cholesterol and coronary atherosclerosis.5,6,46–51 The 
results strongly support the strong atherogenicity of 
saturated fatty acids through effects to raise LDL cho-
lesterol concentrations compared with the effects of 
n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids. Although monoun-
saturated fatty acids promoted atherosclerosis despite 
lowering LDL cholesterol, mechanisms related to LDL 
binding to proteoglycan may differ in humans. Gen-
eralization from these studies is limited by the high 
serum cholesterol levels produced by the atherogenic 
diets. Clearly, in >50 years of studies in nonhuman 
primates, saturated fat has proven to be atherogenic 
compared with polyunsaturated fat.
LDL CHOLESTEROL–MEDIATING 
DIETARY EFFECTS ON CVD
Dietary saturated and polyunsaturated fats are notable 
for their established opposing connections to LDL cho-
lesterol levels. Reducing LDL cholesterol is a primary fo-
cus for preventive therapy. Replacing dietary saturated 
fat with unsaturated fat decreases LDL cholesterol lev-
els, n-6 polyunsaturated fat more than monounsatu-
rated fat.4
The LDL theory of atherosclerosis and CVD has 
support from the widest range of research studies52: 
studies that compare populations that vary in LDL 
cholesterol52; studies in single populations52; genetic 
studies of high LDL cholesterol caused by mutations 
impairing the action of LDL receptors to remove LDL 
from the blood circulation and lower LDL cholesterol 
levels52; studies of mutations in numerous other genes 
that affect LDL cholesterol by other mechanisms53,54; 
pharmacological studies that lower LDL cholesterol 
by decreasing cholesterol synthesis and increasing 
synthesis of LDL receptors by statins,31 decreasing 
cholesterol absorption,55 or inhibiting proprotein con-
vertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 to increase LDL recep-
tors56; studies of mutations in genes that interfere 
with assembly of LDL and its precursor very-low-den-
sity lipoprotein (VLDL) in the liver that decrease the 
amounts that are secreted into the circulation; cor-
relations between LDL cholesterol and CVD reduction 
in meta-analyses of randomized clinical trials of statin 
and other LDL cholesterol–lowering treatments31,55; 
animal models that increase LDL cholesterol by diet 
or by genetic manipulation6,57; and studies of the pro-
cesses by which atherosclerosis starts, progresses, and 
regresses in arterial vessels and cells.57–59 Taking into 
consideration the totality of evidence, LDL cholesterol 
links saturated fat and its replacement macronutri-
ents to CVD by very strong scientific evidence that 
satisfies rigorous criteria for causality.60 Three inde-
pendent guidelines committees rated this evidence as 
Level A, Strong.3,13,61
QUANTITATIVE EFFECTS OF DIETARY 
FATS AND CARBOHYDRATES ON LDL 
CHOLESTEROL
A systematic review and meta-regression analysis pub-
lished last year identified and evaluated 84 random-
ized controlled trials including 2353 participants that 
studied the effect of dietary fats on LDL cholesterol, 
triglycerides, and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cho-
lesterol.4 The results were expressed as the amount of 
change in these lipids caused by a decrease in satu-
rated fats of 1% of total daily calories and a 1% in-
crease in polyunsaturated fat, monounsaturated fat, 
or carbohydrates. Polyunsaturated fat lowered LDL 
cholesterol by 2.1 mg/dL, monounsaturated fat by 
1.6 mg/dL, and carbohydrates by 1.3 mg/dL (Figure 5, 
left). Replacing saturated with polyunsaturated fat is 
the most effective of these exchanges because the 
change from saturated to polyunsaturated fat com-
bines a reduction in a LDL cholesterol–raising fat, satu-
rated fat, with an increase in a LDL cholesterol–lower-
ing fat, polyunsaturated fat. The independent effect 
of polyunsaturated fat is demonstrated by comparing 
it with carbohydrates: Replacing carbohydrates with 
polyunsaturated fat, 1% of daily energy, lowers LDL 
cholesterol by 0.9 mg/dL. The reductions in total or 
LDL cholesterol after diet change correlate well with 
the extent of reductions in CVD.10
The lifestyle report of the AHA and American College 
of Cardiology summarized studies that assessed the ef-
fect of dietary patterns on LDL cholesterol.3 The report, 
taking an efficacy-based biological approach, reviewed 
“feeding trials” that composed complete diets and gave 
them to the study participants. These trials were DASH 
(Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension),62 DASH-
Sodium,63 and DELTA (Dietary Effects on Lipoproteins 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sacks et al
July 18, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510
e12
and Thrombogenic Activity).64 Taken together, the trials 
found that a reduction in saturated fat in the context 
of dietary patterns intended to benefit lipid and other 
CVD risk factors lowered LDL cholesterol by amounts 
similar to those predicted by the meta-analysis.4
LDL Sizes
Some observational studies found that the concentra-
tion or proportion of large LDL predicts higher rates 
of CVD,65–67 whereas other studies reported that small 
LDL predicts CVD68,69 or both large and small LDLs pre-
dict CVD.70,71 Still other studies found that LDL size, 
per se, does not predict CVD in a multivariable analysis 
that includes triglycerides or LDL concentration.65,72–76 
Dietary fat, in an equal combination of saturated and 
polyunsaturated replacing carbohydrates, increased 
the concentration of larger LDL and decreased smaller 
LDL sizes.77 In another study, monounsaturated fat, re-
placing carbohydrates, reduced medium and small LDL, 
also shifting the distribution to the larger size.78 There-
fore, the effects of replacing carbohydrates with vari-
ous kinds of fats qualitatively at least may be similar by 
increasing larger and decreasing smaller LDL sizes. Re-
placing saturated with monounsaturated fat lowered 
the concentrations of large, medium, and small LDL.79 
Replacing monounsaturated fat from olive oil with 
polyunsaturated fat from corn oil significantly lowered 
the concentrations of the total LDL cholesterol concen-
tration, intermediate-density lipoprotein cholesterol, 
large LDL cholesterol, and nonsignificantly small LDL 
cholesterol.80 Replacing trans unsaturated soybean oil 
with n-6 polyunsaturated corn oil lowered the concen-
tration of small LDL.81 In conclusion, this sparse set of 
findings suggests that replacement of saturated with 
monounsaturated or polyunsaturated fat reduces the 
concentration all sizes of LDL.
HDL CHOLESTEROL AND 
TRIGLYCERIDES: ADDITIONAL LIPID 
MEDIATORS
HDL Cholesterol
The aforementioned meta-analysis4 also computed the 
effects of dietary fats and carbohydrates on 2 other 
blood lipid biomarkers of CVD risk, HDL cholesterol 
and triglycerides. A low HDL cholesterol level is associ-
ated with a high incidence of CVD in the context of a 
wide variety of concomitant conditions such as diabetes 
mellitus and obesity.82 HDL can stimulate the removal of 
cholesterol from cells, including those involved in ath-
erosclerosis, and can deliver the cholesterol to the liver 
where some of it may be secreted in bile and excreted, 
a process called reverse cholesterol transport.83 However, 
unlike LDL cholesterol, genetic variation that affects HDL 
cholesterol is not associated with expected differences in 
Figure 5. Effects of dietary fat and 
carbohydrates on blood low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, triglyc-
erides, and high-density lipoprotein 
(HDL) cholesterol (mg/dL) in meta-
regression analysis. 
Left, Replacing saturated fat (Sat) with 
polyunsaturated fat (Poly) (n-6), mono-
unsaturated fat (Mono), or carbohydrates 
(Carb). Right, Replacing carbohydrates 
with individual saturated fatty acids, lauric, 
myristic, palmitic, or stearic acid. Error 
bars show 95% confidence intervals. Data 
from Mensink.4
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dietary Fats and Cardiovascular Disease
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510 
July 18, 2017
e13
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
CVD unless LDL cholesterol or triglyceride is also affected 
by the genetic variants84 or reverse cholesterol transport is 
impaired.85 Still, these genetic studies, often called men-
delian randomization, may not be capturing important 
loci for the protective effect of HDL that may be reflective 
in HDL cholesterol raising by dietary fats compared with 
carbohydrates. Although increases in HDL cholesterol by 
some pharmacological treatments have not decreased 
CVD,86,87 this does not directly pertain to the effects of 
dietary fat because the underlying mechanisms of effects 
of drugs such as a cholesterylester transfer protein inhibi-
tor and nicotinic acid are probably not the same as those 
affected by dietary fats and carbohydrates. The HDL field 
is working toward a functional approach to CVD risk pre-
diction and treatment. For example, a small experimental 
study showed that consumption of saturated fat reduces 
the anti-inflammatory potential of HDL and impairs ar-
terial endothelial function. In contrast, the anti-inflam-
matory activity of HDL improves after consumption of 
polyunsaturated fat.88
Replacing saturated fat with polyunsaturated or 
monounsaturated fat (1% daily energy exchanged) 
lowers HDL cholesterol slightly by 0.2 and 0.1 mg/
dL (Figure 5, left).4 Using carbohydrates as a replace-
ment lowers HDL cholesterol more by 0.4 mg/dL. Car-
bohydrates also lower HDL cholesterol when replacing 
monounsaturated or polyunsaturated fats. Both low- 
and high-glycemic-index carbohydrates lower HDL cho-
lesterol.89,90
Triglycerides
The plasma level of triglyceride is a well-established in-
dependent biomarker of CVD risk,91 and triglyceride-
rich lipoproteins have atherogenic properties. Triglycer-
ide predicts CVD in a wide range of circumstances. Its 
association with CVD risk is partly attenuated by adjust-
ment for HDL cholesterol, with which it is moderately 
correlated.92 Genetic variation associated with lifelong 
low triglyceride levels is associated with a lower inci-
dence of CVD.90 Triglyceride is carried primarily within 
large lipoproteins, chylomicrons, and VLDL, which are 
also rich in cholesterol and like LDL can enter the arteri-
al wall and stimulate atherosclerosis. These triglyceride-
rich lipoproteins carry various atherogenic proteins such 
as apolipoprotein C-III, itself associated with atheroscle-
rosis and CVD.93
Replacing 1% of daily energy intake from saturated 
fat with polyunsaturated or monounsaturated fat low-
ers triglyceride by 0.9 or 0.4 mg/dL, respectively (Fig-
ure 5, left),4 perhaps more in those with hypertriglyc-
eridemia.91 Replacing the 1% saturated fat with 1% 
carbohydrates raises serum triglycerides by ≈1 mg/dL. 
Dietary carbohydrates raise plasma triglyceride levels by 
increasing the production by the liver of triglycerides 
and subsequent incorporation into VLDL.91 The magni-
tude that dietary carbohydrates increase plasma triglyc-
eride is similar whether the carbohydrate has a high or 
low glycemic index.89
INDIVIDUAL SATURATED FATTY ACIDS
The Mensink4 meta-regression analysis determined the 
effects on blood lipids of replacing carbohydrates with 
the individual saturated fatty acids that are in common 
foods, including lauric, myristic, palmitic, and stearic ac-
ids. Lauric, myristic, and palmitic acids all had similar ef-
fects in increasing LDL cholesterol and HDL cholesterol 
and decreasing triglycerides when replacing carbohy-
drates (Figure 5, right).
Stearic acid makes up ≈20% of the fat in beef, 30% 
of the fat in pure cocoa (chocolate), and 10% to 15% 
in lard (pork fat) and lamb fat (Table). In contrast to 
the other saturated fatty acids, stearic acid does not 
increase LDL cholesterol or HDL cholesterol or decrease 
triglycerides when replacing carbohydrates (Figure 5, 
right). However, replacing stearic acid with unsaturated 
fat lowers LDL cholesterol.4
In summary, the common individual saturated fats 
raise LDL cholesterol. Their replacement with monoun-
saturated or polyunsaturated fats lowers LDL cholester-
ol. Differences in the effects of the individual fatty acids 
are small and should not affect dietary recommenda-
tions to lower saturated fat intake.
COCONUT OIL
A recent survey reported that 72% of the American 
public rated coconut oil as a “healthy food” compared 
with 37% of nutritionists.94 This disconnect between 
lay and expert opinion can be attributed to the mar-
keting of coconut oil in the popular press. The fatty 
acid profile of coconut oil is 82% saturated, about half 
lauric acid, and the rest myristic, palmitic, stearic, and 
short-chain fatty acids (Table). Lauric acid replacing car-
bohydrates increases LDL cholesterol but by about half 
as much as myristic and palmitic acids (Figure 5, right). 
Lauric acid increases HDL cholesterol about as much as 
myristic but more than palmitic acid. The net effect of 
increasing lauric acid and decreasing carbohydrates is a 
slight reduction in the ratio of LDL cholesterol to HDL 
cholesterol. However, as discussed earlier in this report, 
changes in HDL cholesterol caused by diet or drug treat-
ments can no longer be directly linked to changes in 
CVD, and therefore, the LDL cholesterol–raising effect 
should be considered on its own. Furthermore, with re-
spect to CVD, the informative comparison is between 
coconut oil and vegetable oils high in monounsaturated 
and polyunsaturated fats. A carefully controlled experi-
ment compared the effects of coconut oil, butter, and 
safflower oil supplying polyunsaturated linoleic acid.95 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sacks et al
July 18, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510
e14
Both butter and coconut oil raised LDL cholesterol com-
pared with safflower oil, butter more than coconut oil, 
as predicted by the meta-regression analysis of individu-
al dietary saturated fatty acids (Figure 5, right). Another 
carefully controlled experiment found that coconut oil 
significantly increased LDL cholesterol compared with 
olive oil.96 A recent systematic review found 7 controlled 
trials, including the 2 just mentioned, that compared 
coconut oil with monounsaturated or polyunsaturated 
oils.97 Coconut oil raised LDL cholesterol in all 7 of these 
trials, significantly in 6 of them. The authors also noted 
that the 7 trials did not find a difference in raising LDL 
cholesterol between coconut oil and other oils high in 
saturated fat such as butter, beef fat, or palm oil. Clinical 
trials that compared direct effects on CVD of coconut oil 
and other dietary oils have not been reported. However, 
because coconut oil increases LDL cholesterol, a cause 
of CVD, and has no known offsetting favorable effects, 
we advise against the use of coconut oil.
DAIRY PRODUCTS
Dairy fat is composed of 27% palmitic acid, 12% stea-
ric acid, 9% myristic acid, and 3% lauric acid, for a total 
of 51% saturated fatty acids that raise LDL cholester-
ol compared with the unsaturated fatty acids (Table). 
Short-chain saturated fatty acids total 11%; monoun-
saturated, 26%; and polyunsaturated, 4%. Dairy fat 
also contains a very small amount of odd-chain fatty 
acids, 15:0 and 17:0, ≈0.5% to 1% of total fatty acids, 
and trans unsaturated fat, 4%, both made by bacteria 
in the ruminant gut. As we discuss subsequently, trans 
unsaturated fat made by ruminants has adverse effects 
on lipid risk factors similar to those of trans made indus-
trially by partial hydrogenation.
Recent epidemiological studies measured blood lev-
els of odd-chain fatty acids; one study found that they 
are associated with lower risk of CHD,98 whereas anoth-
er did not find such a relation.99 It is not clear whether 
blood levels of odd-chain fatty acids represent intake of 
dairy fat or an effect of fat absorption and metabolism 
because the correlations between dairy fat intake and 
blood levels of odd-chain fatty acids (15:0, 17:0) are low 
(0.3).99 Because of increasing consumption of low- and 
reduced-fat milk and other dairy products and decreas-
ing consumption of full-fat dairy, especially whole milk, 
in the US population, the amount of dairy fat from low-
fat compared with full-fat dairy is likely to have substan-
tially increased. Therefore, dairy fat biomarkers may re-
flect both high- and low-fat dairy consumption patterns 
in the population. To the best of our knowledge, there 
are no biological mechanisms that link odd-chain fatty 
acids to protection against atherosclerosis and CVD.
For many years, there has been sporadic specula-
tion that cheese is a unique food category, protective 
against CVD because it is manufactured by fermen-
tation. To the best of our knowledge, no information 
from controlled studies supports the hypothesis that 
fermentation adds beneficial nutrients to cheese that 
counteract the harmful effects of its saturated fat. Re-
cently, a clinical trial compared 3 diets, one with a high 
content of cheese, another with a high content of beef, 
and a third that was low in all types of fat, saturated, 
monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated.100 The cheese 
and beef diets had higher amounts of saturated, mono-
unsaturated, and polyunsaturated fatty acids. Neither 
the beef nor the cheese diet increased LDL cholesterol 
compared with the low-fat diet, as expected because of 
the counteracting effects of saturated and unsaturated 
fats on LDL cholesterol. Both the cheese and meat diets 
increased HDL cholesterol, consistent with the known 
effects of dietary fat to raise HDL cholesterol.4 There-
fore, the findings from this study do not support the 
hypothesis that cheese has special protective effects 
compared with beef on lipid risk factors for CVD.
Many controlled trials showed that dairy fat, often the 
major source of saturated fat in a study, increased LDL 
cholesterol compared with monounsaturated and poly-
unsaturated vegetable oils, reflecting the preponderance 
of saturated fatty acids, as reviewed previously in this 
report. Prospective observational studies found that the 
substitution of polyunsaturated fat for dairy fat, 5% of 
total daily calories, was associated with a 24% to 25% 
lower risk of CHD and stroke.101 In contrast, substituting 
refined carbohydrates for dairy fat was not associated 
with reduced risk of CVD, whereas substituting carbo-
hydrates from whole grains for dairy fat was associated 
with a 34% lower incidence of CHD and a 16% lower 
incidence of stroke. This analysis demonstrates again 
that it is essential to analyze the effects of unsaturated 
fats, refined carbohydrates, and whole grains separately 
to reach an informed and useful result for dietary advice.
In Finland, a successful nationwide health project to 
lower the very high rate of CHD mortality, started in 
1972, had as a major goal the reduction in the high 
intake of saturated fat.102 The project reduced intake 
of high-fat milk and butter, which lowered serum cho-
lesterol by 13% in men and 18% in women. By 1992, 
CHD death rates decreased by 55% in men and 68% in 
women. Reduction in serum cholesterol accounted for 
≈50% of the total reduction in CHD mortality.103 Other 
dietary changes that may have contributed to the lower 
CHD mortality included increased fruits and vegetables, 
increased fish, decreased sugar, a shift from fatty to 
lean meats, and reduced sodium.
TRANS UNSATURATED FATS AND CVD
Trans unsaturated fatty acids are monounsaturated or 
polyunsaturated fatty acids containing at least 1 double 
bond in the trans configuration. There are 2 major types 
of trans fatty acids: naturally occurring found in meat and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dietary Fats and Cardiovascular Disease
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510 
July 18, 2017
e15
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
milk of ruminant animals (eg, cattle and sheep), called 
ruminant trans fatty acids, and produced by chemical 
and enzymatic action for use in partially hydrogenated 
vegetable oils, called industrial trans fatty acids.40,41 Both 
sources of trans fatty acids contain a range of fatty acid 
isomers, and there is considerable overlap. Food manu-
facturers have taken advantage of the low cost, long 
shelf-life, and the ability of trans fatty acids to withstand 
repeated heating and use partially hydrogenated veg-
etable oil in a variety of processed foods, including mar-
garines, baked foods, and commercial deep-fried foods.
Clinical trials have consistently documented the ad-
verse effects of trans fatty acids on the lipid risk factors 
for CVD. Replacement of calories from other types of 
fats with trans fatty acids raises LDL cholesterol, apo-
lipoprotein B, triglycerides, and lipoprotein(a), as well 
as lowering HDL cholesterol and apolipoprotein A1.104 
Such effects are particularly large when trans fatty acids 
replace monounsaturated or polyunsaturated fatty ac-
ids but also occur when substituted for saturated fatty 
acids. The effects of trans fatty acids on blood lipids are 
potentially mediated through mechanisms including a 
reduction in the catabolism of LDL apolipoprotein B-100 
and an increase in the catabolism of HDL apolipoprotein 
A-I, as well as enhancement of cholesteryl ester trans-
fer protein activity.105–107 Although most human trials 
were conducted with partially hydrogenated vegetable 
oil, emerging evidence suggest the ruminant trans fatty 
acids have similar adverse effects on blood lipids.108–110
Prospective observational studies have consistently 
concluded that higher total trans fatty acid intake is as-
sociated with elevated risk of CHD. A recent systematic 
review and meta-analysis of observational studies re-
ported that higher intake of total trans fatty acid intake 
was associated with a 21% higher risk in total CHD 
(95% CI, 10–33; n=6 studies) and a 28% higher risk in 
CHD mortality (95% CI, 9–50; n=5 studies).111 Although 
industrial trans fatty acids were consistently associated 
with total CHD and CHD death in observational stud-
ies, ruminant trans fatty acids were generally not.112 The 
exact reason for these discrepant relationships remains 
unknown but may relate to the very low levels of ru-
minant trans fatty acids in these studied populations 
(mean intake, ≈0.7% of total energy),112 differences in 
trans fatty acid isomers between ruminant and indus-
trial trans fatty acids that have diverse biological effects, 
or confounding by the high amount of saturated fat in 
the major source of ruminant trans fatty acids.
In summary, the concordance between the adverse 
effects of trans fatty acids on lipid risk factors for CVD 
and the robust association of higher trans fatty acid 
intake with elevated CHD risk in observational studies 
provides the impetus for current policy actions of many 
local and national jurisdictions to reduce industrial trans 
fatty acids in the food supply.113 Recognizing the need 
to act, in addition to requiring the trans fatty acid con-
tent of packaged foods to be listed on the Nutrition 
Facts label, the US Food and Drug Administration has 
recently revoked the generally recognized as safe status 
of partially hydrogenated vegetable oil, which should 
ensure further reductions in the population-level indus-
trial trans fatty acid intake.43
N-3 (OMEGA-3) FATTY ACIDS
Polyunsaturated fatty acids exist in the n-3 or n-6 iso-
meric configuration. Both isomers are essential nutri-
ents and have different biological effects. N-3 and n-6 
fatty acids are not interconverted. Dietary n-6 polyun-
saturated fatty acids, primarily linoleic acid, are much 
more prevalent than n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in 
vegetable oils and the total diet. α-Linolenic acid, a di-
etary n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid, is present in soy-
bean and rapeseed (canola) oil, walnuts, some green 
vegetables in very small amounts, chickens fed high–α-
linolenic acid feed and their eggs, and grass-fed beef. 
Fish oil contains the very-long-chain n-3 polyunsatu-
rated fatty acids, eicosapentaenoic acid, docosapentae-
noic acid, and docosahexaenoic acid.
α-Linolenic Acid (Vegetable Omega-3)
A systematic review identified 4 randomized controlled 
trials that tested α-linolenic acid 2 to 6 g/d.16 The Al-
pha-Omega trial tested the effect of α-linolenic acid 2 
g/d compared with the same amount of oleic acid (both 
from 20 g margarine) in an older Dutch population with 
CHD.114 There were ≈2400 participants in the α-linolenic 
acid and the oleic acid groups. After an average of 3.4 
years of follow-up, the incidence of major cardiovascu-
lar events was 13.2% compared with 14.5% in the α-
linolenic acid and control group, a 9% difference, not 
statistically significant. Two trials were conducted in Nor-
way, one in 200 men who had CHD115 and another in 
13 
400 men who were healthy and without CHD.116 α-
Linolenic acid 5 g/d supplied by flaxseed or linseed oil 
was tested and compared with sunflower oil, which has 
mainly n-6 linoleic acid. α-Linolenic acid did not signifi-
cantly reduce CHD in either trial.
A meta-analysis of 7 prospective observational 
studies on dietary α-linolenic acid found an overall rel-
ative risk of 1.02 for CHD (nonsignificant).16 However, 
there is consistent evidence that higher α-linolenic 
acid intake and higher blood levels of α-linolenic acid 
are associated with lower risk of fatal CHD.117,118 α-
Linolenic acid does not lower LDL cholesterol, but it 
has been shown to have antiarrhythmic properties in 
experimental studies.119,120
It has been proposed that α-linolenic acid affects 
CVD mainly in the low part of its range in the diet or 
when the background diet of the population under 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sacks et al
July 18, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510
e16
study is almost completely devoid of eicosapentaenoic 
acid and docosahexaenoic acid.121,122 This interesting 
hypothesis requires evidence from clinical trials.
In summary, randomized controlled trials and ob-
servational studies do not provide clear evidence that 
α-linolenic acid reduces the overall incidence of CVD, 
although higher intake of α-linolenic acid may reduce 
fatal CHD.
Eicosapentaenoic Acid, Docosapentaenoic 
Acid, and Docosahexaenoic Acid
The n-3 marine fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid, doc-
osapentaenoic acid, and docosahexaenoic acid are pres-
ent in fish and dietary supplements having a >10-fold 
range of n-3 fatty acid contents. High-dose prescription 
forms are also available to treat hypertriglyceridemia. 
The n-3 fatty acids contribute little energy to the daily 
diet and do not pertain closely to the topic covered by 
the present advisory. We refer readers who have inter-
est in this complex topic to the AHA’s library of guide-
lines, statements, and advisories.
MEDITERRANEAN DIETS, LYON HEART 
STUDY, AND PREDIMED
The Seven Countries Study kindled interest in Mediter-
ranean diets.11 Total fat intake was highest in Crete, 
Greece, at 43%, mainly from olive oil, where prevalence 
of CVD was lowest worldwide. Traditionally, Mediterra-
nean diets had an abundance of plant foods, includ-
ing vegetables, legumes, nuts, fruits, and grains, and 
fish.123 As dietary patterns trended away from a tradi-
tional Mediterranean diet in Greece, individuals who 
maintained traditional diets experienced lower rates of 
death resulting from CVD, cancer, and all causes.124
The Lyon Heart Study125 was a randomized controlled 
trial that provided α-linolenic acid 2 g/d as part of a 
Mediterranean diet intervention in 605 men with acute 
myocardial infarction. The Mediterranean diet replaced 
animal fat with polyunsaturated vegetable oil rich in α-
linolenic acid; meat, butter, and cream were reduced, 
and fish, legumes, bread, fruits and vegetables were 
increased. A control group was assigned a low-fat diet. 
Mean follow-up was 27 months. Cardiovascular death 
or nonfatal myocardial infarction totaled 8 in the Medi-
terranean group and 33 in the control group, a signifi-
cant difference. Although the researchers emphasized 
the α-linolenic acid component of the diet as contribut-
ing to the benefit, many other dietary changes occurred 
as part of the Mediterranean diet, making it impossible 
to determine to what extent α-linolenic acid contrib-
uted to the reduction in recurrent CHD.
The PREDIMED trial (Prevencion con Dieta Mediter-
ranea) was a parallel-group, multicenter randomized 
trial in Spain conducted among 7447 men (age, 55–80 
years) and women (age, 60–80 years) free of CVD at 
baseline and having either type 2 diabetes mellitus or 
3 other risk factors for CVD.126 They were assigned at 
random to a Mediterranean diet supplemented with 
50 g extra virgin olive oil, a Mediterranean diet sup-
plemented with 30 g nuts (half walnuts, one fourth 
almonds, and one fourth hazelnuts), or a reduced-fat 
control diet. Follow-up was 4 to 5 years. The primary 
end point, a composite of myocardial infarction, stroke, 
and death resulting from CVD, was lower significant-
ly by 30% in the olive oil group and 29% in the nut 
group. The olive oil group increased intake of olive oil, 
partly replacing their usual kind of olive oil low in poly-
phenols with extravirgin olive oil high in polyphenols. 
The nuts group increased intake of α-linolenic acid and 
linoleic acid. Saturated fat intake was low, 9% of daily 
energy in all 3 groups during the trial. Monounsatu-
rated fat intake was 21% to 22% in the Mediterranean 
groups compared with 19% in the reduced-fat group. 
Total fat was 41% in the Mediterranean and 37% in 
the reduced fat group. As intended by the researchers, 
the dietary changes reflected the aim to test a Medi-
terranean dietary pattern, not a specific alteration in 
dietary fat intake. Intake of fruits, vegetables, legumes, 
nuts, wine, and fish increased in the Mediterranean diet 
groups compared with the control diet group.
In summary, observational studies and 2 randomized 
clinical trials together suggest that a Mediterranean di-
etary pattern in which unsaturated fats predominate 
lowers the incidence of CVD.
CHILDREN
In 2012, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
published the “Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovas-
cular Health and Risk Reduction in Children and Ado-
lescents.”127 An expert panel reviewed the evidence 
building from the 2010 US Dietary Guidelines Advisory 
Committee Report.128 Although evidence for dietary fat 
and cardiovascular risk in children was limited, key epi-
demiological studies provided the strongest data avail-
able. The Bogalusa Heart Study found that in children 
intake of animal fat, the major source of dietary satu-
rated fat, was associated with higher body weight.129
The Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns study (Young 
Finns) was a multicenter longitudinal cohort study of 
3956 individuals 3 to 18 years of age in 1980 who had 
ongoing follow-up assessment of diet and blood lipids 
over 21 years.130 Two major dietary patterns emerged, 
a “traditional” pattern including rye, potatoes, butter, 
sausages, milk, and coffee and a “health-conscious” 
pattern including vegetables, legumes and nuts, rye, 
cheese and other dairy products, and alcoholic bever-
ages. In both men and women, at the end of follow-up, 
those following the traditional diet had higher levels of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dietary Fats and Cardiovascular Disease
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510 
July 18, 2017
e17
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
total serum cholesterol and LDL cholesterol. Higher lev-
els of LDL cholesterol in childhood predicted increased 
common carotid artery intima-media thickness, an indi-
cator of atherosclerosis.131
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Na-
tional Growth and Health Study recruited 2379 black 
and white 9-year-old girls in 3 different US cities and 
followed up their diets, growth, and development for 
a decade.132 Girls who consumed a dietary pattern 
higher in fruits and vegetables, dairy products, and 
fiber-rich grains and lower in sugar, fried foods, burg-
ers, pizza, and total fat for >10 years had lower body 
mass index, percentage of body fat, and waist circum-
ference; these differences were significant for white 
girls.132 Body mass index and central adiposity were 
correlated with LDL cholesterol.133
The STRIP trial (Special Turku Coronary Risk Factor In-
tervention Project for Babies) with >20 years of follow-up 
is the only randomized study that examined and reported 
improved long-term health effects from a multifactorial 
program that included a reduction in saturated fat start-
ing in infancy compared with usual dietary intake and 
lifestyle among normal children from infancy through 
adolescence.134,135 LDL cholesterol levels were lower in the 
intervention compared with the control group through 
14 years of age, significant in boys but not girls.135
Likewise, the Diet Intervention Study in Children136,137 
was a randomized controlled trial designed to assess the 
safety and efficacy of a reduced-fat dietary intervention 
among prepubertal children with elevated LDL cholester-
ol levels (between the 80th and 98th percentiles) at base-
line. A behavior-based, nutritionist-tailored intervention 
advocated adherence to a diet with 28% of energy from 
fat, <8% from saturated fat, and <9% from polyunsatu-
rated fat. Saturated fat intake decreased in the interven-
tion group compared with the control group throughout 
7 years of follow-up.136,137 LDL cholesterol was lower in 
the intervention compared with the control group, sig-
nificant at 1 and 3 years but not at 5 and 7 years.
The PDAY study (Pathobiological Determinants of 
Atherosclerosis in Youth) provided crucial evidence that 
risk factors for developing CHD in adults were associ-
ated with atherosclerosis in men and women 15 to 34 
years of age who died of accidents, homicide, or sui-
cide.138,139 Atherosclerosis was measured directly in the 
right coronary artery and abdominal aorta. The concen-
tration of VLDL and LDL cholesterol was significantly 
directly associated and HDL cholesterol was inversely 
associated with early and intermediate lesions in both 
arteries. These results suggest that dietary factors that 
raise VLDL and LDL cholesterol produce atherosclerosis 
in teenagers and young adults.
Overall, these results suggest that reduced saturated 
fat intake within a healthful dietary pattern is feasible 
and effective for sustaining lower LDL cholesterol, a 
preventive effort against CVD in growing children.
CONCLUSIONS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS
The key evidence to reduce saturated fat and replace it 
with polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fat is sum-
marized below:
• Randomized clinical trials showed that polyunsatu-
rated fat from vegetable oils replacing saturated 
fats from dairy and meat lowers CVD.
• A dietary strategy of reducing intake of total 
dietary fat, including saturated fat, and replacing 
the fats mainly with unspecified carbohydrates 
does not prevent CHD.
• Prospective observational studies in many popu-
lations showed that lower intake of saturated fat 
coupled with higher intake of polyunsaturated 
and monounsaturated fat is associated with lower 
rates of CVD and all-cause mortality.
• Saturated fat increases LDL cholesterol, a major 
cause of atherosclerosis and CVD, and replacing 
it with polyunsaturated or monounsaturated fat 
decreases LDL cholesterol
• Replacing saturated with polyunsaturated or 
monounsaturated fat lowers blood triglyceride lev-
els, an independent biomarker of risk for CVD.
• Replacing saturated with polyunsaturated fat pre-
vents and regresses atherosclerosis in nonhuman 
primates.
• Overall, evidence supports the conclusion that 
polyunsaturated fat from vegetable oils (mainly 
n-6, linoleic acid) reduces CVD somewhat more 
than monounsaturated fat (mainly oleic acid) 
when replacing saturated fat.
Evidence has accumulated during the past several 
years that strengthens long-standing AHA recommen-
dations to replace saturated fat with polyunsaturat-
ed and monounsaturated fat to lower the incidence 
of CVD. Reduction in total dietary fat or a goal for 
total fat intake is not recommended. This shift from 
saturated to unsaturated fats should occur simultane-
ously in an overall healthful dietary pattern such as 
the DASH or Mediterranean diet as emphasized by the 
2013 AHA/American College of Cardiology lifestyle 
guidelines and the 2015 to 2020 Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans.
FOOTNOTES
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid 
any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise 
as a result of an outside relationship or a personal, profes-
sional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. 
Specifically, all members of the writing group are required to 
complete and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all 
such relationships that might be perceived as real or potential 
conflicts of interest.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sacks et al
July 18, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510
e18
This advisory was approved by the American Heart As-
sociation Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee 
on March 15, 2017, and the American Heart Associa-
tion Executive Committee on April 17, 2017. A copy of 
the document is available at http://professional.heart.org/
statements by using either “Search for Guidelines & State-
ments” or the “Browse by Topic” area. To purchase addi-
tional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@
wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this docu-
ment be cited as follows: Sacks FM, Lichtenstein AH, Wu JHY, 
Appel LJ, Creager MA, Kris-Etherton PM, Miller M, Rimm EB, 
Rudel LL, Robinson JG, Stone NJ, Van Horn LV; on behalf of 
the American Heart Association. Dietary fats and cardiovascu-
lar disease: a presidential advisory from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000510.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conduct-
ed by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA 
statements and guidelines development, visit http://professional.
heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” 
drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, en-
hancement, and/or distribution of this document are not per-
mitted without the express permission of the American Heart 
Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at 
http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permission-
Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright 
Permissions Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing 
Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Frank M. 
Sacks
Harvard School of Public 
Health Nutrition
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Jennifer G. 
Robinson
University of Iowa 
Epidemiology
Amarin, Amgen, 
AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, 
Esai, Glaxo-Smith 
Kline, Merck, Pfizer, 
Regeneron/Sanofi, 
Takeda†
None
None
None
None
Amgen, Eli Lilly 
Pfizer, Regeneron/
Sanofi†; Akcea/
Ionis*; Merck*; Dr 
Reddy*
None
Linda V. Van 
Horn
Northwestern University 
Preventive Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Lawrence J. 
Appel
Johns Hopkins University 
Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Mark A. 
Creager
Dartmouth-Hitchcock 
Medical Center Heart and 
Vascular Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Penny M. Kris-
Etherton
Pennsylvania State University, 
Department of Nutritional 
Sciences
California Walnut 
Commission†; 
Ag Canada and 
Canola Oil Council†; 
National Cattlemen’s 
Beef Association†
None
None
None
None
Seafood Nutrition 
Partnership*; 
California Walnut 
Commission*; 
TerraVia*; Avocado 
Nutrition Science 
Advisors*
None
Alice H. 
Lichtenstein
Tufts University 
Cardiovascular Nutrition
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Michael Miller
University of Maryland
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Eric B. Rimm
Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Lawrence L. 
Rudel
Wake Forest University School 
of Medicine Pathology
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Neil J. Stone
Northwestern University 
Cardiology
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Jason H.Y. 
Wu
The George Institute for 
Global Health, the University 
of New South Wales
None
Unilever† 
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives 
$10 
000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or 
owns $10 
000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
DISCLOSURES
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dietary Fats and Cardiovascular Disease
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510 
July 18, 2017
e19
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
REFERENCES
 1. Benjamin EJ, Blaha MJ, Chiuve SE, Cushman M, Das SR, Deo R, de Ferranti 
SD, Floyd J, Fornage M, Gillespie C, Isasi CR, Jimenez MC, Jordan LC, Judd 
SE, Lackland D, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth L, Liu S, Longenecker CT, Mackey RH, 
Matsushita K, Mozaffarian D, Mussolino ME, Nasir K, Neumar RW, Palaniap-
pan L, Pandey DK, Thiagarajan RR, Reeves MJ, Ritchey M, Rodriguez CJ, 
Roth GA, Rosamond WD, Sasson C, Towfighi A, Tsao CW, Turner MB, Virani 
SS, Voeks JH, Willey JZ, Wilkins JT, Wu JHY, Alger HM, Wong SS, Muntner 
P; on behalf of the American Heart Association Statistics Committee and 
Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart disease and stroke statistics—2017 
update: a report from the American Heart Association [published correction 
appears in Circulation. 2017;135:e646]. Circulation. 2017;135:e146-e603. 
DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000485.
 2. Dietary fat and its relation to heart attacks and strokes: report by the 
Central Committee for Medical and Community Program of the American 
Heart Association. JAMA. 1961;175:389–391.
 3. Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, de Jesus JM, Houston Miller N, Hubbard 
VS, Lee IM, Lichtenstein AH, Loria CM, Millen BE, Nonas CA, Sacks FM, 
Smith SC Jr, Svetkey LP
, Wadden TA, Yanovski SZ. 2013 AHA/ACC guide-
line on lifestyle management to reduce cardiovascular risk: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines [published corrections appear in Circulation. 
2014;129(suppl 2):S100–S101 and Circulation. 2015;131:e326]. Circulation. 
2014;129(suppl 2):S76–S99. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000437740.48606.d1.
 4. Mensink RP
. Effects of Saturated Fatty Acids on Serum Lipids and Lipopro-
teins: A Systematic Review and Regression Analysis. Geneva, Switzerland: 
World Health Organization; 2016.
 5. Rudel LL, Parks JS, Sawyer JK. Compared with dietary monounsaturated 
and saturated fat, polyunsaturated fat protects African green monkeys 
from coronary artery atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 
1995;15:2101–2110.
 6. Wolfe MS, Sawyer JK, Morgan TM, Bullock BC, Rudel LL. Dietary polyun-
saturated fat decreases coronary artery atherosclerosis in a pediatric-aged 
population of African green monkeys. Arterioscler Thromb. 1994;14: 
587–597.
 7. Watts GF, Lewis B, Brunt JN, Lewis ES, Coltart DJ, Smith LD, Mann JI, 
Swan AV. Effects on coronary artery disease of lipid-lowering diet, or diet 
plus cholestyramine, in the St Thomas’ Atherosclerosis Regression Study 
(STARS). Lancet. 1992;339:563–569.
 8. Ornish D, Brown SE, Scherwitz LW, Billings JH, Armstrong WT, Ports 
TA, McLanahan SM, Kirkeeide RL, Brand RJ, Gould KL. Can lifestyle 
changes reverse coronary heart disease? The Lifestyle Heart Trial. Lancet. 
1990;336:129–133.
 9. Mozaffarian D, Micha R, Wallace S. Effects on coronary heart disease 
of increasing polyunsaturated fat in place of saturated fat: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. PLoS Med. 
2010;7:e1000252. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000252.
 10. Hooper L, Martin N, Abdelhamid A, Davey Smith G. Reduction in satu-
rated fat intake for cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015:CD011737. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD011737.
 11. Keys A. Seven Countries: A Multivariate Analysis of Death and Coronary 
Heart Disease. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980.
 12. Farvid MS, Ding M, Pan A, Sun Q, Chiuve SE, Steffen LM, Willett WC, 
Hu FB. Dietary linoleic acid and risk of coronary heart disease: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Circulation. 
2014;130:1568–1578. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.010236.
 13. Scientific Report of the 2015 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee. 
Washington, DC: US Department of Agriculture; 2015. https://health.gov/
dietaryguidelines/2015-scientific-report/. Accessed January 4, 2017.
 14. Rehm CD, Peñalvo JL, Afshin A, Mozaffarian D. Dietary intake among 
US adults, 1999-2012. JAMA. 2016;315:2542–2553. doi: 10.1001/
jama.2016.7491.
 15. Siri-Tarino PW, Sun Q, Hu FB, Krauss RM. Meta-analysis of prospec-
tive cohort studies evaluating the association of saturated fat with car-
diovascular disease. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010;91:535–546. doi: 10.3945/
ajcn.2009.27725.
 16. Chowdhury R, Warnakula S, Kunutsor S, Crowe F, Ward HA, Johnson L, 
Franco OH, Butterworth AS, Forouhi NG, Thompson SG, Khaw KT, Mozaf-
farian D, Danesh J, Di Angelantonio E. Association of dietary, circulating, and 
supplement fatty acids with coronary risk: a systematic review and meta-
analysis [published correction appears in Arch Intern Med. 2014;160:658]. 
Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:398–406. doi: 10.7326/M13-1788.
 17. Jakobsen MU, O’Reilly EJ, Heitmann BL, Pereira MA, Bälter K, Fraser 
GE, Goldbourt U, Hallmans G, Knekt P, Liu S, Pietinen P, Spiegelman 
D, Stevens J, Virtamo J, Willett WC, Ascherio A. Major types of di-
etary fat and risk of coronary heart disease: a pooled analysis of 11 
cohort studies. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009;89:1425–1432. doi: 10.3945/
ajcn.2008.27124.
 18. Li Y, Hruby A, Bernstein AM, Ley SH, Wang DD, Chiuve SE, Sampson 
L, Rexrode KM, Rimm EB, Willett WC, Hu FB. Saturated fats compared 
with unsaturated fats and sources of carbohydrates in relation to risk 
of coronary heart disease: a prospective cohort study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2015;66:1538–1548. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.07.055.
 19. US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, National Nu-
trient Database for Standard Reference, release 28, 2016. https://ndb.nal.
usda.gov/ndb/search/list. Accessed May 23, 2017.
 20. Dayton S, Pearce ML, Hashimoto S, Dixon WJ, Tomiyasu U. A controlled 
clinical trial of a diet high in unsaturated fat in preventing complications 
of atherosclerosis. Circulation. 1969;40(suppl II):II-1–II-63.
 21. Leren P
. The Oslo Diet-Heart Study: eleven-year report. Circulation. 
1970;42:935–942.
 22. Controlled trial of soya-bean oil in myocardial infarction. Lancet. 
1968;2:693–699.
 23. Burr ML, Fehily AM, Gilbert JF, Rogers S, Holliday RM, Sweetnam PM, 
Elwood PC, Deadman NM. Effects of changes in fat, fish, and fibre intakes 
on death and myocardial reinfarction: Diet and Reinfarction Trial (DART). 
Lancet. 1989;2:757–761.
 24. Howard BV, Van Horn L, Hsia J, Manson JE, Stefanick ML, Wassertheil-
Smoller S, Kuller LH, LaCroix AZ, Langer RD, Lasser NL, Lewis CE, Lim-
acher MC, Margolis KL, Mysiw WJ, Ockene JK, Parker LM, Perri MG, Phil-
lips L, Prentice RL, Robbins J, Rossouw JE, Sarto GE, Schatz IJ, Snetselaar 
LG, Stevens VJ, Tinker LF, Trevisan M, Vitolins MZ, Anderson GL, Assaf 
AR, Bassford T, Beresford SA, Black HR, Brunner RL, Brzyski RG, Caan B, 
Chlebowski RT, Gass M, Granek I, Greenland P
, Hays J, Heber D, Heiss G, 
Hendrix SL, Hubbell FA, Johnson KC, Kotchen JM. Low-fat dietary pattern 
and risk of cardiovascular disease: the Women’s Health Initiative Random-
ized Controlled Dietary Modification Trial. JAMA. 2006;295:655–666. doi: 
10.1001/jama.295.6.655.
 25. Low-fat diet in myocardial infarction: a controlled trial. Lancet. 
1965;2:501–504.
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Sergio Fazio
Oregon Health and 
Science University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Edward A. 
Fisher
New York University 
School of Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Theodore 
Mazzone
North Shore University 
Health System
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 
000 or more 
during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns 
$10 
000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sacks et al
July 18, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510
e20
 26. Bronte-Stewart B, Antonis A, Eales L, Brock JF. Effects of feeding different 
fats on serum-cholesterol level. Lancet. 1956;270:521–526.
 27. Keys A, Anderson JT, Grande F. Prediction of serum-cholesterol responses 
of man to changes in fats in the diet. Lancet. 1957;273:959–966.
 28. Ahrens EH Jr, Insull W Jr, Blomstrand R, Hirsch J, Tsaltas TT, Peterson 
ML. The influence of dietary fats on serum-lipid levels in man. Lancet. 
1957;272:943–953.
 29. Malmros H, Wigand G. The effect on serum-cholesterol of diets contain-
ing different fats. Lancet. 1957;273:1–7.
 30. Turpeinen O, Karvonen MJ, Pekkarinen M, Miettinen M, Elosuo R, 
Paavilainen E. Dietary prevention of coronary heart disease: the Finnish 
Mental Hospital Study. Int J Epidemiol. 1979;8:99–118.
 31. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaborators, Mihaylova B, Ember-
son J, Blackwell L, Keech A, Simes J, Barnes EH, Voysey M, Gray A, Collins 
R, Baigent C. The effects of lowering LDL cholesterol with statin therapy 
in people at low risk of vascular disease: meta-analysis of individual data 
from 27 randomised trials. Lancet. 2012;380:581–590.
 32. Houtsmuller AJ, van Hal-Ferwerda J, Zahn KJ, Henkes HE. Favorable influ-
ences of linoleic acid on the progression of diabetic micro- and macroan-
giopathy in adult onset diabetes mellitus. Prog Lipid Res. 1981;20:377–
386.
 33. Rose GA, Thomson WB, Williams RT. Corn oil in treatment of ischaemic 
heart disease. Br Med J. 1965;1:1531–1533.
 34. Frantz ID Jr, Dawson EA, Ashman PL, Gatewood LC, Bartsch GE, Kuba K, 
Brewer ER. Test of effect of lipid lowering by diet on cardiovascular risk: 
the Minnesota Coronary Survey. Arteriosclerosis. 1989;9:129–135.
 35. Ramsden CE, Zamora D, Leelarthaepin B, Majchrzak-Hong SF, Faurot KR, 
Suchindran CM, Ringel A, Davis JM, Hibbeln JR. Use of dietary linoleic acid 
for secondary prevention of coronary heart disease and death: evaluation 
of recovered data from the Sydney Diet Heart Study and updated me-
ta-analysis [published correction appears in BMJ. 2013;346:f903]. BMJ. 
2013;346:e8707.
 36. Miettinen M, Turpeinen O, Karvonen MJ, Pekkarinen M, Paavilainen E, 
Elosuo R. Dietary prevention of coronary heart disease in women: the 
Finnish Mental Hospital Study. Int J Epidemiol. 1983;12:17–25.
 37. Miettinen M, Turpeinen O, Karvonen MJ, Elosuo R, Paavilainen E. Effect 
of cholesterol-lowering diet on mortality from coronary heart-disease 
and other causes: a twelve-year clinical trial in men and women. Lancet. 
1972;2:835–838.
 38. Keys A. Serum cholesterol response to dietary cholesterol. Am J Clin Nutr. 
1984;40:351–359.
 39. Ramsden CE, Zamora D, Majchrzak-Hong S, Faurot KR, Broste SK, Frantz 
RP
, Davis JM, Ringel A, Suchindran CM, Hibbeln JR. Re-evaluation of the 
traditional diet-heart hypothesis: analysis of recovered data from Minne-
sota Coronary Experiment (1968-73). BMJ. 2016;353:i1246.
 40. Wang Q, Imamura F, Lemaitre RN, Rimm EB, Wang M, King IB, Song 
X, Siscovick D, Mozaffarian D. Plasma phospholipid trans-fatty acids 
levels, cardiovascular diseases, and total mortality: the Cardiovascular 
Health Study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014;3:e000914 doi: 10.1161/JAHA. 
114.000914.
 41. Lichtenstein AH. Dietary trans fatty acids and cardiovascular disease risk: 
past and present. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2014;16:433. doi: 10.1007/
s11883-014-0433-1.
 42. Mozaffarian D, Katan MB, Ascherio A, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC. Trans fat-
ty acids and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:1601–1613. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMra054035.
 43. US Food and Drug Administration. FDA News Release: The FDA takes step 
to remove artificial trans fats in processed foods. http://www.fda.gov/
newsevents/newsroom/pressannouncements/ucm451237.htm. Accessed 
January 14, 2016.
 44. Willett W. Nutritional Epidemiology. 3rd ed. New York, NY: Oxford Univer-
sity Press; 2013:1–16, 317–319.
 45. Wang DD, Li Y, Chiuve SE, Stampfer MJ, Manson JE, Rimm EB, Willett WC, 
Hu FB. Association of specific dietary fats with total and cause-specific 
mortality. JAMA Intern Med. 2016;176:1134–1145. doi: 10.1001/jamain-
ternmed.2016.2417.
 46. Rudel LL, Parks JS, Hedrick CC, Thomas M, Williford K. Lipoprotein 
and cholesterol metabolism in diet-induced coronary artery athero-
sclerosis in primates: role of cholesterol and fatty acids. Prog Lipid Res. 
1998;37:353–370.
 47. Rudel LL, Haines J, Sawyer JK, Shah R, Wilson MS, Carr TP
. Hepatic origin 
of cholesteryl oleate in coronary artery atherosclerosis in African green 
monkeys. Enrichment by dietary monounsaturated fat. J Clin Invest. 
1997;100:74–83. doi: 10.1172/JCI119524.
 48. Manning JM, Gebre AK, Edwards IJ, Wagner WD, Rudel LL, Parks JS. Di-
etary polyunsaturated fat decreases interaction between low density lipo-
proteins and arterial proteoglycans. Lipids. 1994;29:635–641.
 49. Jones PJ, MacKay DS, Senanayake VK, Pu S, Jenkins DJ, Connelly PW, La-
marche B, Couture P, Kris-Etherton PM, West SG, Liu X, Fleming JA, Hant-
gan RR, Rudel LL. High-oleic canola oil consumption enriches LDL particle 
cholesteryl 
oleate 
content 
and 
reduces 
LDL 
proteoglycan 
binding 
in 
humans. 
Atherosclerosis. 2015;238:231–238. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis. 
2014.12.010.
 50. Melchior JT, Sawyer JK, Kelley KL, Shah R, Wilson MD, Hant-
gan RR, Rudel LL. LDL particle core enrichment in cholesteryl ole-
ate increases proteoglycan binding and promotes atherosclerosis.  
J Lipid Res. 2013;54:2495–2503. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M039644.
 51. Wissler RW, Vesselinovitch D, Hughes R, Turner D, Frazier L. Arterial le-
sions and blood lipids in rhesus monkeys fed human diets. Exp Mol Pathol. 
1983;38:117–136.
 52. Gidding SS, Champagne MA, de Ferranti SD, Defesche J, Ito MK, Knowles 
JW, McCrindle B, Raal F, Rader D, Santos RD, Lopes-Virella M, Watts GF, Wi-
erzbicki AS; on behalf of the American Heart Association Atherosclerosis, 
Hypertension, and Obesity in Young Committee of the Council on Cardio-
vascular Disease in Young, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, 
Council on Functional Genomics and Translational Biology, and Council on 
Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health. The agenda for familial hypercho-
lesterolemia: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association 
[published correction appears in Circulation. 2015;132:e397]. Circulation. 
2015;132:2167–2192. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000297.
 53. Teslovich TM, Musunuru K, Smith AV, Edmondson AC, Stylianou IM, Kose-
ki M, Pirruccello JP
, Ripatti S, Chasman DI, Willer CJ, Johansen CT, Fouch-
ier SW, Isaacs A, Peloso GM, Barbalic M, Ricketts SL, Bis JC, Aulchenko 
YS, Thorleifsson G, Feitosa MF, Chambers J, Orho-Melander M, Melander 
O, Johnson T, Li X, Guo X, Li M, Shin Cho Y, Jin Go M, Jin Kim Y, Lee JY, 
Park T, Kim K, Sim X, Twee-Hee Ong R, Croteau-Chonka DC, Lange LA, 
Smith JD, Song K, Hua Zhao J, Yuan X, Luan J, Lamina C, Ziegler A, Zhang 
W, Zee RY, Wright AF, Witteman JC, Wilson JF, Willemsen G, Wichmann 
HE, Whitfield JB, Waterworth DM, Wareham NJ, Waeber G, Vollenweider 
P
, Voight BF, Vitart V, Uitterlinden AG, Uda M, Tuomilehto J, Thompson 
JR, Tanaka T, Surakka I, Stringham HM, Spector TD, Soranzo N, Smit JH, 
Sinisalo J, Silander K, Sijbrands EJ, Scuteri A, Scott J, Schlessinger D, Sanna 
S, Salomaa V, Saharinen J, Sabatti C, Ruokonen A, Rudan I, Rose LM, 
Roberts R, Rieder M, Psaty BM, Pramstaller PP
, Pichler I, Perola M, Penninx 
BW, Pedersen NL, Pattaro C, Parker AN, Pare G, Oostra BA, O’Donnell CJ, 
Nieminen MS, Nickerson DA, Montgomery GW, Meitinger T, McPherson 
R, McCarthy MI, McArdle W, Masson D, Martin NG, Marroni F, Mangino 
M, Magnusson PK, Lucas G, Luben R, Loos RJ, Lokki ML, Lettre G, Lan-
genberg C, Launer LJ, Lakatta EG, Laaksonen R, Kyvik KO, Kronenberg 
F, König IR, Khaw KT, Kaprio J, Kaplan LM, Johansson A, Jarvelin MR, 
Janssens AC, Ingelsson E, Igl W, Kees Hovingh G, Hottenga JJ, Hofman 
A, Hicks AA, Hengstenberg C, Heid IM, Hayward C, Havulinna AS, Hastie 
ND, Harris TB, Haritunians T, Hall AS, Gyllensten U, Guiducci C, Groop 
LC, Gonzalez E, Gieger C, Freimer NB, Ferrucci L, Erdmann J, Elliott P
, 
Ejebe KG, Döring A, Dominiczak AF, Demissie S, Deloukas P
, de Geus EJ, 
de Faire U, Crawford G, Collins FS, Chen YD, Caulfield MJ, Campbell H, 
Burtt NP
, Bonnycastle LL, Boomsma DI, Boekholdt SM, Bergman RN, Bar-
roso I, Bandinelli S, Ballantyne CM, Assimes TL, Quertermous T, Altshuler 
D, Seielstad M, Wong TY, Tai ES, Feranil AB, Kuzawa CW, Adair LS, Taylor 
HA Jr, Borecki IB, Gabriel SB, Wilson JG, Holm H, Thorsteinsdottir U, Gud-
nason V, Krauss RM, Mohlke KL, Ordovas JM, Munroe PB, Kooner JS, Tall 
AR, Hegele RA, Kastelein JJ, Schadt EE, Rotter JI, Boerwinkle E, Strachan 
DP
, Mooser V, Stefansson K, Reilly MP
, Samani NJ, Schunkert H, Cupples 
LA, Sandhu MS, Ridker PM, Rader DJ, van Duijn CM, Peltonen L, Abecasis 
GR, Boehnke M, Kathiresan S. Biological, clinical and population relevance 
of 95 loci for blood lipids. Nature. 2010;466:707–713. doi: 10.1038/na-
ture09270.
 54. Holmes MV, Asselbergs FW, Palmer TM, Drenos F, Lanktree MB, Nelson CP
, 
Dale CE, Padmanabhan S, Finan C, Swerdlow DI, Tragante V, van Iperen EP
, 
Sivapalaratnam S, Shah S, Elbers CC, Shah T, Engmann J, Giambartolomei 
C, White J, Zabaneh D, Sofat R, McLachlan S, UCLEB Consortium, Doe-
vendans PA, Balmforth AJ, Hall AS, North KE, Almoguera B, Hoogeveen 
RC, Cushman M, Fornage M, Patel SR, Redline S, Siscovick DS, Tsai MY, 
Karczewski KJ, Hofker MH, Verschuren WM, Bots ML, van der Schouw 
YT, Melander O, Dominiczak AF, Morris R, Ben-Shlomo Y, Price J, Kumari 
M, Baumert J, Peters A, Thorand B, Koenig W, Gaunt TR, Humphries SE, 
Clarke R, Watkins H, Farrall M, Wilson JG, Rich SS, de Bakker PI, Lange LA, 
Davey Smith G, Reiner AP
, Talmud PJ, Kivimäki M, Lawlor DA, Dudbridge F, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dietary Fats and Cardiovascular Disease
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510 
July 18, 2017
e21
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Samani NJ, Keating BJ, Hingorani AD, Casas JP
. Mendelian randomization 
of blood lipids for coronary heart disease. Eur Heart J. 2015;36:539–550. 
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/eht571.
 55. Cannon CP, Blazing MA, Giugliano RP, McCagg A, White JA, Ther-
oux P, Darius H, Lewis BS, Ophuis TO, Jukema JW, De Ferrari GM, 
Ruzyllo W, De Lucca P, Im K, Bohula EA, Reist C, Wiviott SD, Tersha-
kovec AM, Musliner TA, Braunwald E, Califf RM; IMPROVE-IT Inves-
tigators. Ezetimibe added to statin therapy after acute coronary syn-
dromes. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:2387–2397. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa 
1410489.
 56. Chapman MJ, Stock JK, Ginsberg HN; PCSK9 Forum. PCSK9 inhibitors and 
cardiovascular disease: heralding a new therapeutic era. Curr Opin Lipidol. 
2015;26:511–520. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0000000000000239.
 57. Bartels ED, Christoffersen C, Lindholm MW, Nielsen LB. Altered metabo-
lism of LDL in the arterial wall precedes atherosclerosis regression. Circ 
Res. 2015;117:933–942.
 58. Tabas I, García-Cardeña G, Owens GK. Recent insights into the cellular 
biology of atherosclerosis. J Cell Biol. 2015;209:13–22. doi: 10.1083/
jcb.201412052.
 59. Williams KJ, Tabas I, Fisher EA. How an artery heals. Circ Res. 
2015;117:909–913. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.307609.
 60. Bradford Hill A. President’s address: the environment and disease: associa-
tion or causation? Proc R Soc Med. 1965;295–300.
 61. Jacobson TA, Ito MK, Maki KC, Orringer CE, Bays HE, Jones PH, McKenney 
JM, Grundy SM, Gill EA, Wild RA, Wilson DP
, Brown WV. National lipid as-
sociation recommendations for patient-centered management of dyslip-
idemia, part 1: full report. J Clin Lipidol. 2015;9:129–169. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacl.2015.02.003.
 62. Obarzanek E, Sacks FM, Vollmer WM, Bray GA, Miller ER 3rd, Lin PH, 
Karanja NM, Most-Windhauser MM, Moore TJ, Swain JF, Bales CW, Pro-
schan MA; DASH Research Group. Effects on blood lipids of a blood 
pressure-lowering diet: the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension 
(DASH) Trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2001;74:80–89.
 63. Sacks FM, Svetkey LP, Vollmer WM, Appel LJ, Bray GA, Harsha D, 
Obarzanek E, Conlin PR, Miller ER 3rd, Simons-Morton DG, Karanja 
N, Lin PH; DASH-Sodium Collaborative Research Group. Effects 
on blood pressure of reduced dietary sodium and the Dietary Ap-
proaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet. DASH-Sodium Collab-
orative Research Group. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:3–10. doi: 10.1056/
NEJM200101043440101.
 64. Berglund L, Lefevre M, Ginsberg HN, Kris-Etherton PM, Elmer PJ, Stewart 
PW, Ershow A, Pearson TA, Dennis BH, Roheim PS, Ramakrishnan R, Reed 
R, Stewart K, Phillips KM; DELTA Investigators. Comparison of monoun-
saturated fat with carbohydrates as a replacement for saturated fat in 
subjects with a high metabolic risk profile: studies in the fasting and post-
prandial states. Am J Clin Nutr. 2007;86:1611–1620.
 65. Sacks FM, Campos H. Clinical Review 163: low density lipoprotein 
size and cardiovascular disease: a reappraisal. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2003;88:4525–4532.
 66. Campos H, Moye LA, Glasser SP
, Stampfer MJ, Sacks FM. Low-density 
lipoprotein size, pravastatin treatment, and coronary events. JAMA. 
2001;286:1468–1474.
 67. Campos H, Roederer GO, Lussier-Cacan S, Davignon J, Krauss RM. Pre-
dominance of large LDL and reduced HDL2 cholesterol in normolipid-
emic men with coronary artery disease. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 
1995;15:1043–1048.
 68. Austin MA, Rodriguez BL, McKnight B, McNeely MJ, Edwards KL, 
Curb JD, Sharp DS. Low-density lipoprotein particle size, triglycerides, 
and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol as risk factors for coronary 
heart disease in older Japanese-American men. Am J Cardiol. 2000;86: 
412–416.
 69. Gardner CD, Fortmann SP
, Krauss RM. Association of small low-density 
lipoprotein particles with the incidence of coronary artery disease in men 
and women. JAMA. 1996;276:875–881.
 70. Mora S, Otvos JD, Rifai N, Rosenson RS, Buring JE, Ridker PM. Lipoprotein 
particle profiles by nuclear magnetic resonance compared with standard 
lipids and apolipoproteins in predicting incident cardiovascular disease 
in women. Circulation. 2009;119:931–939. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULA-
TIONAHA.108.816181.
 71. Mora S, Szklo M, Otvos JD, Greenland P
, Psaty BM, Goff DC Jr, O’Leary 
DH, Saad MF, Tsai MY, Sharrett AR. LDL particle subclasses, LDL particle 
size, and carotid atherosclerosis in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atheroscle-
rosis (MESA). Atherosclerosis. 2007;192:211–217. doi: 10.1016/j.athero-
sclerosis.2006.05.007.
 72. Parish S, Offer A, Clarke R, Hopewell JC, Hill MR, Otvos JD, Armitage J, Col-
lins R; on behalf of the Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. Lipids 
and lipoproteins and risk of different vascular events in the MRC/BHF Heart 
Protection Study. Circulation. 2012;125:2469–2478. doi: 10.1161/CIRCU-
LATIONAHA.111.073684.
 73. Jungner I, Sniderman AD, Furberg C, Aastveit AH, Holme I, Walldius G. 
Does low-density lipoprotein size add to atherogenic particle number in pre-
dicting the risk of fatal myocardial infarction? Am J Cardiol. 2006;97:943–
946. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2005.10.062.
 74. Kamigaki AS, Siscovick DS, Schwartz SM, Psaty BM, Edwards KL, Rag-
hunathan TE, Austin MA. Low density lipoprotein particle size and 
risk of early-onset myocardial infarction in women. Am J Epidemiol. 
2001;153:939–945.
 75. Stampfer MJ, Krauss RM, Ma J, Blanche PJ, Holl LG, Sacks FM, Hennekens 
CH. A prospective study of triglyceride level, low-density lipoprotein par-
ticle diameter, and risk of myocardial infarction. JAMA. 1996;276:882–
888.
 76. Blake GJ, Otvos JD, Rifai N, Ridker PM. Low-density lipoprotein particle 
concentration and size as determined by nuclear magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy as predictors of cardiovascular disease in women. Circula-
tion. 2002;106:1930–1937.
 77. Faghihnia N, Tsimikas S, Miller ER, Witztum JL, Krauss RM. Changes in 
lipoprotein(a), oxidized phospholipids, and LDL subclasses with a low-fat 
high-carbohydrate diet. J Lipid Res. 2010;51:3324–3330. doi: 10.1194/jlr.
M005769.
 78. Krauss RM, Blanche PJ, Rawlings RS, Fernstrom HS, Williams PT. Sepa-
rate effects of reduced carbohydrate intake and weight loss on ath-
erogenic dyslipidemia [published correction appears in Am J Clin Nutr. 
2006;84:668]. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;83:1025–1031; quiz 1205.
 79. Mangravite LM, Chiu S, Wojnoonski K, Rawlings RS, Bergeron N, Krauss RM. 
Changes in atherogenic dyslipidemia induced by carbohydrate restriction in 
men are dependent on dietary protein source. J Nutr. 2011;141:2180–2185. 
doi: 10.3945/jn.111.139477.
 80. Maki KC, Lawless AL, Kelley KM, Kaden VN, Geiger CJ, Palacios OM, Dick-
lin MR. Corn oil intake favorably impacts lipoprotein cholesterol, apolipo-
protein and lipoprotein particle levels compared with extra-virgin olive oil. 
Eur J Clin Nutr. 2017;71:33–38. doi: 10.1038/ejcn.2016.169.
 81. Vega-López S, Matthan NR, Ausman LM, Ai M, Otokozawa S, Schaefer 
EJ, Lichtenstein AH. Substitution of vegetable oil for a partially-hydro-
genated fat favorably alters cardiovascular disease risk factors in mod-
erately hypercholesterolemic postmenopausal women. Atherosclerosis. 
2009;207:208–212. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.03.039.
 82. Emerging Risk Factors Consortium. Major lipids, apolipoproteins and risk 
of vascular disease. JAMA. 2009;302:1993–2000
 83. Rosenson RS, Brewer HB Jr, Davidson WS, Fayad ZA, Fuster V, 
Goldstein J, Hellerstein M, Jiang XC, Phillips MC, Rader DJ, Re-
maley AT, Rothblat GH, Tall AR, Yvan-Charvet L. Cholesterol efflux 
and atheroprotection: advancing the concept of reverse choles-
terol transport. Circulation. 2012;125:1905–1919. doi: 10.1161/ 
CIRCULATIONAHA.111.066589.
 84. Voight BF, Peloso GM, Orho-Melander M, Frikke-Schmidt R, Barbalic M, 
Jensen MK, Hindy G, Hólm H, Ding EL, Johnson T, Schunkert H, Samani 
NJ, Clarke R, Hopewell JC, Thompson JF, Li M, Thorleifsson G, Newton-
Cheh C, Musunuru K, Pirruccello JP
, Saleheen D, Chen L, Stewart A, Schil-
lert A, Thorsteinsdottir U, Thorgeirsson G, Anand S, Engert JC, Morgan T, 
Spertus J, Stoll M, Berger K, Martinelli N, Girelli D, McKeown PP
, Patterson 
CC, Epstein SE, Devaney J, Burnett MS, Mooser V, Ripatti S, Surakka I, Nie-
minen MS, Sinisalo J, Lokki ML, Perola M, Havulinna A, de Faire U, Gigante 
B, Ingelsson E, Zeller T, Wild P
, de Bakker PI, Klungel OH, Maitland-van 
der Zee AH, Peters BJ, de Boer A, Grobbee DE, Kamphuisen PW, Deneer 
VH, Elbers CC, Onland-Moret NC, Hofker MH, Wijmenga C, Verschuren 
WM, Boer JM, van der Schouw YT, Rasheed A, Frossard P
, Demissie S, 
Willer C, Do R, Ordovas JM, Abecasis GR, Boehnke M, Mohlke KL, Daly 
MJ, Guiducci C, Burtt NP
, Surti A, Gonzalez E, Purcell S, Gabriel S, Mar-
rugat J, Peden J, Erdmann J, Diemert P
, Willenborg C, König IR, Fischer M, 
Hengstenberg C, Ziegler A, Buysschaert I, Lambrechts D, Van de Werf F, 
Fox KA, El Mokhtari NE, Rubin D, Schrezenmeir J, Schreiber S, Schäfer A, 
Danesh J, Blankenberg S, Roberts R, McPherson R, Watkins H, Hall AS, 
Overvad K, Rimm E, Boerwinkle E, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Cupples LA, Reilly 
MP
, Melander O, Mannucci PM, Ardissino D, Siscovick D, Elosua R, Ste-
fansson K, O’Donnell CJ, Salomaa V, Rader DJ, Peltonen L, Schwartz SM, 
Altshuler D, Kathiresan S. Plasma HDL cholesterol and risk of myocardial 
infarction: a mendelian randomisation study. Lancet. 2012;380:572–580. 
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60312-2.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Sacks et al
July 18, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510
e22
 85. Zanoni P
, Khetarpal SA, Larach DB, Hancock-Cerutti WF, Millar JS, Cuchel 
M, DerOhannessian S, Kontush A, Surendran P
, Saleheen D, Trompet S, 
Jukema JW, De Craen A, Deloukas P
, Sattar N, Ford I, Packard C, Majum-
der Aa, Alam DS, Di Angelantonio E, Abecasis G, Chowdhury R, Erdmann 
J, Nordestgaard BG, Nielsen SF, Tybjærg-Hansen A, Schmidt RF, Kuulasmaa 
K, Liu DJ, Perola M, Blankenberg S, Salomaa V, Männistö S, Amouyel P
, 
Arveiler D, Ferrieres J, Müller-Nurasyid M, Ferrario M, Kee F, Willer CJ, 
Samani N, Schunkert H, Butterworth AS, Howson JM, Peloso GM, Stitziel 
NO, Danesh J, Kathiresan S, Rader DJ; CHD Exome+ Consortium; CAR-
DIoGRAM Exome Consortium; Global Lipids Genetics Consortium. Rare 
variant in scavenger receptor BI raises HDL cholesterol and increases risk 
of coronary heart disease. Science. 2016;351:1166–1171. doi: 10.1126/
science.aad3517.
 86. AIM-HIGH Investigators. Niacin in patients with low HDL cholesterol levels re-
ceiving intensive statin therapy [published correction appears in N Engl J Med. 
2012;367:189]. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:2255.
 87. Schwartz GG, Olsson AG, Abt M, Ballantyne CM, Barter PJ, Brumm J, 
Chaitman BR, Holme IM, Kallend D, Leiter LA, Leitersdorf E, McMurray 
JJ, Mundl H, Nicholls SJ, Shah PK, Tardif JC, Wright RS; dal-OUTCOMES 
Investigators. Effects of dalcetrapib in patients with a recent acute coro-
nary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2089–2099. doi: 10.1056/NEJ-
Moa1206797.
 88. Nicholls SJ, Lundman P
, Harmer JA, Cutri B, Griffiths KA, Rye KA, Barter 
PJ, Celermajer DS. Consumption of saturated fat impairs the anti-inflam-
matory properties of high-density lipoproteins and endothelial function. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:715–720. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2006.04.080.
 89. Sacks FM, Carey VJ, Anderson CA, Miller ER 3rd, Copeland T, Charleston 
J, Harshfield BJ, Laranjo N, McCarron P
, Swain J, White K, Yee K, Ap-
pel LJ. Effects of high vs low glycemic index of dietary carbohydrate on 
cardiovascular disease risk factors and insulin sensitivity: the OmniCarb 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2014;312:2531–2541. doi: 10.1001/
jama.2014.16658.
 90. TG and HDL Working Group of the Exome Sequencing Project, National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Loss-of-function mutations in APOC3, 
triglycerides, and coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:22–31.
 91. Miller M, Stone NJ, Ballantyne C, Bittner V, Criqui MH, Ginsberg HN, Goldberg 
AC, Howard WJ, Jacobson MS, Kris-Etherton PM, Lennie TA, Levi M, Maz-
zone T, Pennathur S; on behalf of the American Heart Association Clinical 
Lipidology, Thrombosis, and Prevention Committee of the Council on Nutri-
tion, Physical Activity, and Metabolism; Council on Arteriosclerosis, Throm-
bosis and Vascular Biology; Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on 
the Kidney in Cardiovascular Disease. Triglycerides and cardiovascular dis-
ease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circula-
tion. 2011;123:2292–2333. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e3182160726.
 92. Sarwar N, Danesh J, Eiriksdottir G, Sigurdsson G, Wareham N, Bingham S, 
Boekholdt SM, Khaw KT, Gudnason V. Triglycerides and the risk of coro-
nary heart disease: 10,158 incident cases among 262,525 participants 
in 29 Western prospective studies. Circulation. 2007;115:450–458. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.637793.
 93. Wyler von Ballmoos MC, Haring B, Sacks FM. The risk of cardiovascular 
events with increased apolipoprotein CIII: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Clin Lipidol. 2015;9:498–510. doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2015.05.002.
 94. Quealy K, Sanger-Katz M. Is sushi “healthy”? What about granola? 
Where Americans and nutritionists disagree.  New York Times. July 5, 
2016. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/07/05/upshot/is-sushi-
healthy-what-about-granola-where-americans-and-nutritionists-disagree.
html?_r=0 Y. Accessed July 5, 2016.
 95. Cox C, Mann J, Sutherland W, Chisholm A, Skeaff M. Effects of coconut 
oil, butter, and safflower oil on lipids and lipoproteins in persons with 
moderately elevated cholesterol levels. J Lipid Res. 1995;36:1787–1795.
 96. Voon PT, Ng TK, Lee VK, Nesaretnam K. Diets high in palmitic acid (16:0), 
lauric and myristic acids (12:0 + 14:0), or oleic acid (18:1) do not alter 
postprandial or fasting plasma homocysteine and inflammatory markers 
in healthy Malaysian adults [published correction appears in Am J Clin 
Nutr. 2012;95:780]. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;94:1451–1457. doi: 10.3945/
ajcn.111.020107.
 97. Eyres L, Eyres MF, Chisholm A, Brown RC. Coconut oil consumption and 
cardiovascular risk factors in humans. Nutr Rev. 2016;74:267–280. doi: 
10.1093/nutrit/nuw002.
 98. de Oliveira Otto M, Nettleton JA, Lemaitre RN, Steffen LM, Kromhout 
D, Rich SS, Tsai MY, Jacobs DR, Mozaffarian D. Biomarkers of dairy 
fatty acids and risk of cardiovascular disease in the Multi-Ethnic Study 
of Atherosclerosis. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013;2:3000092. doi: 10.1161/
JAHA.113.000092.
 99. Sun Q, Ma J, Campos H, Hu FB. Plasma and erythrocyte biomarkers 
of dairy fat intake and risk of ischemic heart disease. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2007;86:929–937.
 100. Thorning TK, Raziani F, Bendsen NT, Astrup A, Tholstrup T, Raben A. 
Diets with high-fat cheese, high-fat meat, or carbohydrate on cardio-
vascular risk markers in overweight postmenopausal women: a random-
ized crossover trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2015;102:573–581. doi: 10.3945/
ajcn.115.109116.
 101. Chen M, Li Y, Sun Q, Pan A, Manson JE, Rexrode KM, Willett 
WC, Rimm ER, Hu FB. Dairy fat and risk of cardiovascular dis-
ease in 3 cohorts of US adults. Am J Clin Nutr. 2016;104: 
1209–1217.
 102. Pietinen P
, Nissinen A, Vartiainen E, Tuomilehto A, Uusitalo U, Ketola A, 
Moisio S, Puska P
. Dietary changes in the North Karelia Project (1972-
1982). Prev Med. 1988;17:183–193.
 103. Pietinen P
, Vartiainen E, Seppänen R, Aro A, Puska P
. Changes in diet in 
Finland from 1972 to 1992: impact on coronary heart disease risk. Prev 
Med. 1996;25:243–250. doi: 10.1006/pmed.1996.0053.
 104. Mozaffarian D, Clarke R. Quantitative effects on cardiovascular risk fac-
tors and coronary heart disease risk of replacing partially hydrogenated 
vegetable oils with other fats and oils. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2009;63(suppl 
2):S22–S33.
 105. Aro A, Jauhiainen M, Partanen R, Salminen I, Mutanen M. Stearic 
acid, trans fatty acids, and dairy fat: effects on serum and lipo-
protein lipids, apolipoproteins, lipoprotein(a), and lipid trans-
fer proteins in healthy subjects. Am J Clin Nutr. 1997;65: 
1419–1426.
 106. Gatto LM, Sullivan DR, Samman S. Postprandial effects of dietary trans 
fatty acids on apolipoprotein(a) and cholesteryl ester transfer. Am J Clin 
Nutr. 2003;77:1119–1124.
 107. Matthan NR, Welty FK, Barrett PH, Harausz C, Dolnikowski GG, Parks JS, 
Eckel RH, Schaefer EJ, Lichtenstein AH. Dietary hydrogenated fat increases 
high-density lipoprotein apoA-I catabolism and decreases low-density lipo-
protein apoB-100 catabolism in hypercholesterolemic women. Arterioscler 
Thromb Vasc Biol. 2004;24:1092–1097. doi: 10.1161/01.ATV.0000128410. 
23161.be.
 108. Brouwer IA, Wanders AJ, Katan MB. Trans fatty acids and cardiovascu-
lar health: research completed? Eur J Clin Nutr. 2013;67:541–547. doi: 
10.1038/ejcn.2013.43.
 109. Gebauer SK, Destaillats F, Dionisi F, Krauss RM, Baer DJ. Vaccenic acid and 
trans fatty acid isomers from partially hydrogenated oil both adversely 
affect LDL cholesterol: a double-blind, randomized controlled trial. Am J 
Clin Nutr. 2015;102:1339–1346. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.115.116129.
 110. Stender S. In equal amounts, the major ruminant trans fatty acid is 
as bad for LDL cholesterol as industrially produced trans fatty ac-
ids, but the latter are easier to remove from foods. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2015;102:1301–1302. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.115.123646.
 111. de Souza RJ, Mente A, Maroleanu A, Cozma AI, Ha V, Kishibe T, Uleryk 
E, Budylowski P
, Schunemann H, Beyene J, Anand SS. Intake of satu-
rated and trans unsaturated fatty acids and risk of all cause mortality, 
cardiovascular disease, and type 2 diabetes: systematic review and meta-
analysis of observational studies. BMJ. 2015;351:h3978. doi: 10.1136/
bmj.h3978.
 112. Bendsen NT, Christensen R, Bartels EM, Astrup A. Consumption of in-
dustrial and ruminant trans fatty acids and risk of coronary heart disease: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Eur J Clin Nutr. 
2011;65:773–783. doi: 10.1038/ejcn.2011.34.
 113. Downs SM, Thow AM, Leeder SR. The effectiveness of policies for reduc-
ing dietary trans fat: a systematic review of the evidence. Bull World 
Health Organ. 2013;91:262–269H. doi: 10.2471/BLT.12.111468.
 114. Kromhout D, Giltay EJ, Geleifnse JM; Alpha Omega Trial Group. N-3 fatty 
acids and cardiovascular events after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 
2010;363:2015–2026.
 115. Borchgrevink CF, Skaga E, Berg KJ, Skjaeggestad O. Absence of pro-
phylactic effect of linolenic acid in patients with coronary heart-disease. 
Lancet. 1966;2:187–189.
 116. Natvig H, Borchgrevink CF, Dedichen J, Owren PA, Schiotz EH, Westlund 
K. A controlled trial of the effect of linolenic acid on incidence of coro-
nary heart disease: the Norwegian vegetable oil experiment of 1965-66. 
Scand J Clin Lab Invest Suppl. 1968;105:1–20.
 117. Pan A, Chen M, Chowdhury R, Wu JH, Sun Q, Campos H, Mozaffarian 
D, Hu FB. α-Linolenic acid and risk of cardiovascular disease: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;96:1262–1273. doi: 
10.3945/ajcn.112.044040.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Dietary Fats and Cardiovascular Disease
Circulation. 2017;136:e1–e23. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000510 
July 18, 2017
e23
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 118. Del Gobbo LC, Imamura F, Aslibekyan S, Marklund M, Virtanen JK, 
Wennberg M, Yakoob MY, Chiuve SE, Dela Cruz L, Frazier-Wood AC, 
Fretts AM, Guallar E, Matsumoto C, Prem K, Tanaka T, Wu JH, Zhou 
X, Helmer C, Ingelsson E, Yuan JM, Barberger-Gateau P
, Campos H, 
Chaves PH, Djoussé L, Giles GG, Gómez-Aracena J, Hodge AM, Hu FB, 
Jansson JH, Johansson I, Khaw KT, Koh WP
, Lemaitre RN, Lind L, Luben 
RN, Rimm EB, Risérus U, Samieri C, Franks PW, Siscovick DS, Stampfer M, 
Steffen LM, Steffen BT, Tsai MY, van Dam RM,Voutilainen S, Willett WC, 
Woodward M, Mozaffarian D; Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in 
Genomic Epidemiology (CHARGE) Fatty Acids and Outcomes Research 
Consortium (FORCe). ω-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acid biomarkers and cor-
onary heart disease: pooling project of 19 cohort studies. JAMA Intern 
Med. 2016;176:1155–1166. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.2925.
 119. McLennan PL, Dallimore JA. Dietary canola oil modifies myocar-
dial fatty acids and inhibits cardiac arrhythmias in rats. J Nutr. 
1995;125:1003–1009.
 120. Billman GE, Kang JX, Leaf A. Prevention of sudden cardiac death by 
dietary pure omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in dogs. Circulation. 
1999;99:2452–2457.
 121. Rastogi T, Reddy KS, Vaz M, Spiegelman D, Prabhakaran D, Willett WC, 
Stampfer MJ, Ascherio A. Diet and risk of ischemic heart disease in India. 
Am J Clin Nutr. 2004;79:582–592.
 122. Petrova S, Dimitrov P
, Willett WC, Campos H. The global availability of 
n-3 fatty acids. Public Health Nutr. 2011;14:1157–1164. doi: 10.1017/
S1368980010003678.
 123. Willett WC, Sacks FM, Trichopoulou A, Drescher G, Ferro-Luzzi A, Helsing 
E, Trichopoulos D. Mediterranean diet pyramid: a cultural model for 
healthy eating. Am J Clin Nutr. 1995;61(suppl):1402S–1406S.
 124. Trichopoulou A, Costacou T, Bamia C, Trichopoulos D. Adherence to a 
Mediterranean diet and survival in a Greek population. N Engl J Med. 
2003;348:2599–2608. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa025039.
 125. de Lorgeril M, Salen P
, Martin JL, Monjaud I, Delaye J, Mamelle N. 
Mediterranean diet, traditional risk factors, and the rate of cardiovascu-
lar complications after myocardial infarction: final report of the Lyon Diet 
Heart Study. Circulation. 1999;99:779–785.
 126. Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvadó J, Covas MI, Corella D, Arós F, Gómez-
Gracia E, Ruiz-Gutiérrez V, Fiol M, Lapetra J, Lamuela-Raventos RM, 
Serra-Majem L, Pintó X, Basora J, Muñoz MA, Sorlí JV, Martínez JA, 
Martínez-González MA; PREDIMED Study Investigators. Primary pre-
vention of cardiovascular disease with a Mediterranean diet [published 
correction appears in N Engl J Med. 2014;370:886]. N Engl J Med. 
2013;368:1279–1290. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1200303.
 127. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health and 
Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents, National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute. Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health and Risk 
Reduction in Children and Adolescents. http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-
pro/guidelines/current/cardiovascular-health-pediatric-guidelines/index.
htm. Accessed July 12, 2016.
 128. US Department of Agriculture, US Department of Health and Human 
Services, and US Department of Agriculture. Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans, 2010. 7th ed. Washington, DC: US Government Printing 
Office; 2011.
 129. Nicklas TA, Farris RP
, Smoak CG, Frank GC, Srinivasan SR, Webber LS, 
Berenson GS. Dietary factors relate to cardiovascular risk factors in early 
life: Bogalusa Heart Study. Arteriosclerosis. 1988;8:193–199.
 130. Mikkilä V, Räsänen L, Raitakari OT, Marniemi J, Pietinen P
, Rönnemaa 
T, Viikari J. Major dietary patterns and cardiovascular risk factors from 
childhood to adulthood: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study. Br 
J Nutr. 2007;98:218–225. doi: 10.1017/S0007114507691831.
 131. Raitakari OT, Juonala M, Kähönen M, Taittonen L, Laitinen T, Mäki-Torkko 
N, Järvisalo MJ, Uhari M, Jokinen E, Rönnemaa T, Akerblom HK, Viikari 
JS. Cardiovascular risk factors in childhood and carotid artery intima-
media thickness in adulthood: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns 
Study. JAMA. 2003;290:2277–2283. doi: 10.1001/jama.290.17.2277.
 132. Ritchie LD, Spector P
, Stevens MJ, Schmidt MM, Schreiber GB, Striegel-
Moore RH, Wang MC, Crawford PB. Dietary patterns in adolescence are 
related to adiposity in young adulthood in black and white females. J 
Nutr. 2007;137:399–406.
 133. Morrison JA, Sprecher DL, Barton BA, Waclawiw MA, Daniels SR. 
Overweight, fat patterning, and cardiovascular disease risk factors in 
black and white girls: the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
Growth and Health Study. J Pediatr. 1999;135:458–464.
 134. Simell O, Niinikoski H, Rönnemaa T, Lapinleimu H, Routi T, Lagström 
H, Salo P, Jokinen E, Viikari J. Special Turku Coronary Risk Factor 
Intervention Project for Babies (STRIP). Am J Clin Nutr. 2000;72(suppl): 
1316S–1331S.
 135. Niinikoski H, Lagström H, Jokinen E, Siltala M, Rönnemaa T, Viikari J, 
Raitakari OT, Jula A, Marniemi J, Näntö-Salonen K, Simell O. Impact 
of repeated dietary counseling between infancy and 14 years of age 
on dietary intakes and serum lipids and lipoproteins: the STRIP study. 
Circulation. 2007;116:1032–1040. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
107.699447.
 136. Lauer RM, Obarzanek E, Hunsberger SA, Van Horn L, Hartmuller VW, 
Barton BA, Stevens VJ, Kwiterovich PO Jr, Franklin FA Jr, Kimm SY, Lasser 
NL, Simons-Morton DG. Efficacy and safety of lowering dietary intake 
of total fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol in children with elevated LDL 
cholesterol: the Dietary Intervention Study in Children. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2000;72(suppl):1332S–1342S.
 137. Obarzanek E, Kimm SY, Barton BA, Van Horn L, Kwiterovich PO Jr, 
Simons-Morton DG, Hunsberger SA, Lasser NL, Robson AM, Franklin FA 
Jr, Lauer RM, Stevens VJ, Friedman LA, Dorgan JF, Greenlick MR; DISC 
Collaborative Research Group. Long-term safety and efficacy of a choles-
terol-lowering diet in children with elevated low-density lipoprotein cho-
lesterol: seven-year results of the Dietary Intervention Study in Children 
(DISC). Pediatrics. 2001;107:256–264.
 138. McGill HC Jr, McMahan CA, Malcom GT, Oalmann MC, Strong JP
. Effects 
of serum lipoproteins and smoking on atherosclerosis in young men and 
women. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1997;17:95–106.
 139. McGill HC Jr, McMahan CA, Zieske AW, Sloop GD, Walcott JV, Troxclair 
DA, Malcom GT, Tracy RE, Oalmann MC, Strong JP. Associations of coro-
nary heart disease risk factors with the intermediate lesion of atheroscle-
rosis in youth: the Pathobiological Determinants of Atherosclerosis in 
Youth (PDAY) Research Group. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000;20: 
1998–2004.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
