 N A N OM E D I C I N E
RNAi targeting multiple cell adhesion molecules
reduces immune cell recruitment and vascular
inflammation after myocardial infarction
Hendrik B. Sager,1*† Partha Dutta,1† James E. Dahlman,2,3,4† Maarten Hulsmans,1
Gabriel Courties,1 Yuan Sun,1 Timo Heidt,1 Claudio Vinegoni,1 Anna Borodovsky,5
Kevin Fitzgerald,5 Gregory R. Wojtkiewicz,1 Yoshiko Iwamoto,1 Benoit Tricot,1 Omar F. Khan,3
Kevin J. Kauffman,3,6 Yiping Xing,2,3 Taylor E. Shaw,2,3 Peter Libby,7 Robert Langer,2,3,4,6
Ralph Weissleder,1,8 Filip K. Swirski,1 Daniel G. Anderson,2,3,4,6† Matthias Nahrendorf1,9*†
Myocardial infarction (MI) leads to a systemic surge of vascular inflammation in mice and humans, resulting in
secondary ischemic complications and high mortality. We show that, in ApoE−/− mice with coronary ligation, increased
sympathetic tone up-regulates not only hematopoietic leukocyte production but also plaque endothelial expression
of adhesion molecules. To counteract the resulting arterial leukocyte recruitment, we developed nanoparticle-
based RNA interference (RNAi) that effectively silences five key adhesion molecules. Simultaneously encapsulating
small interfering RNA (siRNA)–targeting intercellular cell adhesion molecules 1 and 2 (Icam1 and Icam2), vascular
cell adhesion molecule 1 (Vcam1), and E- and P-selectins (Sele and Selp) into polymeric endothelial-avid nanopar-
ticles reduced post-MI neutrophil and monocyte recruitment into atherosclerotic lesions and decreased matrix-
degrading plaque protease activity. Five-gene combination RNAi also curtailed leukocyte recruitment to ischemic
myocardium. Therefore, targeted multigene silencing may prevent complications after acute MI.
INTRODUCTION
Leukocytes promote inflammation in atherosclerotic plaques (1–3).
Systemically increased myeloid cell levels support disease progression
and complication by delivering inflammatory mediators and tissue-
destabilizing proteases to plaques. The current standard of care mostly
modifies atherosclerosis risk factors and does not target myeloid cells.
Although we will soon be able to identify inflamed plaques with im-
aging and other diagnostics, we currently lack the clinical means to
rapidly and efficiently intervene therapeutically.
Macrophages turn over rapidly in growing arterial lesions (4). Plaque-
dwelling macrophages arise from blood monocytes, and abrogating
leukocyte recruitment drastically reduces atherosclerotic plaque devel-
opment and complication in mice (5–12). After myocardial infarction
(MI), the hematopoietic system produces excess inflammatory cells
(13, 14) that accelerate plaque growth in mice (15) and enhance sys-
temic plaque inflammation in humans (16, 17). Owing to this increase
in inflammation, previously asymptomatic lesions may become un-
stable and trigger subsequent MI. Recurrent ischemic events have
accentuated case fatality (18). If leukocyte recruitment could be
interrupted, then plaque inflammation may wane, rendering ar-
teries less prone to rupture. Patients with acute MI and a high in-
flammatory burden could specifically benefit from such a treatment,
which potentially prevents further ischemic events.
Neutrophils and monocytes rely on endothelial cell adhesion mole-
cules (CAMs) and interaction between chemokines and their receptors
for recruitment into the arterial wall. Cell recruitment is a multistep
process that involves rolling (mediated by E- and P-selectins), firm
arrest and adhesion [mediated by vascular cell adhesion molecule 1
(VCAM-1) and intercellular cell adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1)], and
endothelial transmigration (mediated by ICAM-2) (19–22). Endothelial
cells that line atherosclerotic plaques express high levels of collaborating
leukocyte adhesion molecules (2, 19, 20, 22–24). Loss-of-function studies
investigating single CAMs demonstrate their importance for the devel-
opment of atherosclerosis (7, 25). Data obtained in mice with genetic
deficiency for more than one CAM suggest that inhibiting adhesion
molecule function in parallel has synergistic effects on leukocyte re-
cruitment (8, 24). We thus reasoned that simultaneously inhibiting
five disease-associated adhesion molecules would inhibit leukocyte re-
cruitment effectively and reduce arterial inflammation, especially during
post-MI disease acceleration.
Because small interfering RNA (siRNA) inhibits gene expression
by mediating mRNA cleavage in a sequence-specific manner, concur-
rently delivering five distinct siRNAs offers an appealing approach to
reduce the translation of multiple targets with high specificity. How-
ever, combination therapies require highly efficient delivery vehicles,
which have historically been limited to hepatocyte targeting (26). We
recently developed a nontoxic nanoformulation that delivers siRNA to
endothelial cells at very low doses (27). Here, we use these endothelial-
avid nanoparticles to reduce simultaneously the expression of five en-
dothelial CAM in ApoE−/− mice with accelerated atherosclerosis after
MI. This quintuple-target drug candidate, termed siCAM5, decreased
leukocyte recruitment and plaque inflammation. Similarly, siCAM5
treatment lowered immune cell infiltration into acutely ischemic
1Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA. 2Harvard–Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Division of
Health Sciences and Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 3David H. Koch Institute for In-
tegrative Cancer Research, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 4Institute for Medical Engineering
and Science, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 5Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA. 6Department of Chemical Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
7Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston,
MA 02115, USA. 8Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA. 9Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: mnahrendorf@mgh.harvard.edu (M.N.); hendrik.sager@
tum.de (H.B.S.)
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra80
1
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 myocardium and improved post-MI recovery in mice. Our study sug-
gests the viability of targeting multiple genes in parallel as a therapeu-
tic avenue for inhibiting inflammatory aspects of atherosclerotic
disease progression after a myocardial ischemic insult.
RESULTS
Arterial sympathetic activity increases plaque leukocytes
after MI
Accelerated leukocyte production in the spleen and bone marrow after
MI increases plaque leukocyte numbers. After coronary ligation in
mice, sympathetic nervous system signaling in the bone marrow
contributes to this phenomenon (15). Because previous studies indi-
cated that sympathetic tone also regulates circadian fluctuation of ad-
hesion molecule expression in endothelial cells (28), we explored
whether increased vascular wall sympathetic nervous tone may also
contribute to post-MI arterial inflammation. First, we differentiated
circulating from noncirculating factors by joining ApoE−/− mice in
parabiosis. After 2 weeks, during which shared circulation developed,
we induced MI in one parabiont only (Fig. 1A). Comparing the
vasculature of the infarcted and the noninfarcted parabiont, so we rea-
soned, would allow us to study effects that are not related to blood-
borne signals or circulating cells. Three weeks after coronary artery
ligation, the infarcted and noninfarcted mice sharing circulation in
parabiosis had similarly elevated blood leukocytosis when compared
to steady-state parabionts without MI (Fig. 1B). However, the infarcted
parabionts recruited more neutrophils and Ly6Chigh monocytes into
their aortae, consequently yielding higher plaque macrophage numbers
than both their noninfarcted partners and steady-state parabionts (Fig.
1C). Plaque size was larger in the infarcted than in noninfarcted para-
bionts (Fig. 1D). These data indicate that circulation-independent
processes contribute to acceleration of atherosclerosis after MI, as
infarcted parabionts recruited more cells despite similar blood leu-
kocyte supply.
We next investigated atherosclerotic plaque endothelial expression
of CAM and chemokines after MI in single ApoE−/− mice by using
flow cytometry of aortic endothelial cells (fig. S1). ICAM-1, ICAM-2,
VCAM-1, E-selectin, and P-selectin levels are known to rise on
inflamed, plaque-lining endothelial cells in mice (2, 19, 20, 22–24).
Fig. 1. Noncirculating factors contribute to expansion of inflammatory
plaque leukocytes and acceleration of atherosclerosis. (A) Experimental
setup. ApoE−/− mice were joined in parabiosis, and one parabiont was in-
farcted 2 weeks thereafter. Three weeks later, leukocytes were evaluated by
flow cytometry. (B and C) Flow cytometric gating and quantification of blood
(B)andaortic(C)leukocytes.Dataaremeans±SEM(n=5to11pergroup from
two independent experiments). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, two-tailed
paired Wilcoxon test for comparison between connected parabionts; two-
tailed unpaired Mann-Whitney U for comparison to steady-state parabiosis.
(D) Masson staining of aortic roots. Data are means ± SEM quantifying total
plaque size and necrotic core area per section (n = 5 to 9 per group from two
independent experiments). Scale bars, 250 mm (top) and 100 mm (bottom).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra80
2
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Three days after MI, aortic endothelial ICAM-2, VCAM-1, and E-
selectin protein amounts increased (Fig. 2, A and B). Endothelial
expression of the CCR2 ligand Mcp1 rose on day 3 after coronary
ligation, likely also supporting increased monocyte recruitment
into plaques after MI (Fig. 2C). Parabiosis experiments, similar to
those examining cellular recruitment described in Fig. 1, revealed
higher protein levels of ICAM-2, VCAM-1, and E-selectin in the aor-
tae of infarcted versus noninfarcted parabionts (Fig. 2, D and E), in-
dicating that circulation-independent processes contributed to the rise
in CAM levels after MI.
To explore the role of the sympathetic nervous system in modulat-
ing CAM expression after MI, we stained whole-mount aortic roots
for tyrosine hydroxylase. This rate-limiting enzyme, located in adven-
titial sympathetic nervous fibers, regulates noradrenaline synthesis by
catalyzing the tyrosine conversion to L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine
(L-dopa). Aortic tyrosine hydroxylase staining increased after MI
(Fig. 3A), as did tyrosine hydroxylase mRNA in aortic roots (Fig. 3B).
In ApoE−/− mice, aortic arch noradrenaline, a sympathetic neuro-
transmitter, increased after permanent coronary ligation (Fig. 3C).
Noradrenaline levels after ischemia/reperfusion injury in wild-type
mice were slightly but not significantly lower than after MI (Fig.
3D). As expected, ablating the sympathetic nervous system with 6-
hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) dampened the increase in nor-
adrenaline (Fig. 3C). It attenuated the increase of ICAM-2, VCAM-1,
and E-selectin on plaque endothelial cells after MI (Fig. 3E).
Next, we addressed whether aortic endothelial cells can directly sense
locally released noradrenaline. Aortic endothelial cells expressed both a-
and b-adrenergic receptors (Fig. 3F), suggesting that sympathetic ner-
vous system activity enhances arterial leukocyte recruitment via
increased CAM expression, possibly by local action on endothelial cells.
Plaque endothelial cells take up nanoparticle siRNA carriers
Limiting CAM expression may provide a therapeutic option to coun-
teract leukocyte recruitment after MI. Viable siRNA sequences target-
ing CAM were identified by in vitro screening of in silico–predicted
candidates (fig. S2A and table S1). The best duplexes were selected for
scale-up and nanoparticle formulation and modified to minimize im-
munostimulation and off-target silencing (29). We delivered all siRNAs
with a nanoparticle recently optimized for in vivo delivery to endothelial
cells (27). These nanoparticles were formulated with either control
siRNA targeting luciferase (termed siCtrl) or a combination of five
siRNAs targeting Icam1, Icam2, Vcam1, Sele, and Selp (termed siCAM5).
Fig. 2. Noncirculating signals contribute to expansion of plaque leuko-
cyte recruitment after MI. (A) Gating strategy and histograms of leukocyte
adhesion molecules on aortic endothelial cells from ApoE−/− mice 3 days
after MI or no MI controls. (B) Mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of adhesion
molecules expressed by aortic endothelial cells from animals in (A). Data
are means ± SEM (n = 11 to 13 per group from two independent experiments).
P values versus no MI are determined by Mann-Whitney U test. (C) Chemokine
mRNA in aortic roots from animals in (A). Data are means ± SEM (n = 7 to 8 per
group from two independent experiments). P values are determined by Mann-
Whitney U test. (D) Experimental setup. ApoE−/− mice were joined in parabiosis,
andoneparabiontwasinfarcted2weeksthereafter.Threedayslater,CAMlevels
on aortic endothelial cells were evaluated by flow cytometry. (E) MFI on aortic
endothelial cells fromanimalsin(D) wasevaluatedbyflowcytometry.Dataare
means normalized to steady-state parabiosis ± SEM (n = 7 per group from two
independent experiments). P values compare respective infarcted to nonin-
farcted parabionts and are determined by two-tailed paired Wilcoxon test.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra80
3
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Reflecting their individual in vitro siRNA potency (fig. S2B), the five
siRNAs were admixed in a molar ratio of 1:0.35:1:1:1, with siRNA tar-
geting Icam2 being represented at 0.35 (fig. S3A). After formulation
with siCtrl or siCAM5, transmission electron microscopy revealed siRNA
and lipid multilamellar structures with a particle diameter 45 ± 16 nm
(SD) measured by dynamic light scattering (fig. S3, B and C).
To examine how effectively these particles delivered siRNA to ar-
terial endothelial cells in ApoE−/− mice with atherosclerosis, we formu-
lated fluorochrome-conjugated siRNA in nanoparticles and injected
them intravenously (1.0 mg/kg siRNA). Two hours later, fluorescent
signal was detected histologically in CD31high endothelial cells lining
atherosclerotic plaques in the aortic root and arch (fig. S3D). Cy3-
labeled siRNA was undetectable in deeper plaque layers (fig. S3, E
and F). To quantify in vivo siRNA delivery, we measured uptake in
aortic endothelial cells, blood leukocytes, and plaque macrophages by
flow cytometry. The fluorescence intensity increased more than 54-
fold in CD45low CD31high CD107ahigh endothelial cells isolated from
aortae (fig. S3G), indicating effective siRNA delivery to endothelial
cells. In line with the histologic findings, plaque macrophages lacked
siRNA (fig. S4A). In contrast, blood neutrophils and monocytes
incorporated siRNA, but to a far lesser extent than endothelial cells
(28- and 11-fold lower, respectively; fig. S4B).
Next, we measured five target genes’ mRNA and protein levels in
aortic endothelial cells in vivo. Over the course of 1 week, mice were
injected twice with siCtrl (3 mg/kg) or siCAM5 before CD45low
CD31high CD107ahigh cells were flow-sorted from ApoE−/− aortae.
Compared to siCtrl-treated mice, those that received siCAM5 treat-
ment had significantly decreased target gene mRNA and protein levels
(Fig. 4). With RNA interference (RNAi), there was no significant reduc-
tion in circulating cells (fig. S5A), and the overall profile of circulating
myeloid cells was comparable between the siCtrl and siCAM5, with
the exception of Il1b, Tnfa, and Mpo (fig. S5B). Total blood cholesterol
levels were unchanged after treatment with siCAM5 (fig. S6).
siCAM5 treatment suppresses leukocyte recruitment to
atherosclerotic plaques
To determine whether siCAM5 treatment curtails leukocyte recruit-
ment to atherosclerotic plaques in vivo, we treated ApoE−/− mice with
siCAM5 over a period of 2 weeks (three intravenous injections of 3 mg/kg
cumulative siRNA dose) before adoptive intravenous transfer of 2 mil-
lion green fluorescent protein–positive (GFP+) neutrophils admixed
with 2 million GFP+ Ly6Chigh monocytes. These myeloid cells, which
rely on adhesion molecules for recruitment into plaques, promote
plaque growth and inflammation (1, 2). Two days after cell transfer,
Fig. 3. Aortic sympathetic tone regulates leukocyte adhesion molecule
expression after MI. These experiments examine the vascular innervation
after coronary ligation. (A) Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) staining of aortic roots
in steady-state and infarcted atherosclerotic mice. L, lumen; M, media; A, ad-
ventitia; P, atherosclerotic plaque. Scale bar, 70 mm. TH+ area per high-power
field was quantified from fluorescent images as means ± SEM (n = 5 ApoE−/−
mice per group). P value is determined by Mann-Whitney U test.(B) Th mRNA
levels in aortic roots. Data are means ± SEM (n = 7 ApoE−/− mice per group
from two independent experiments, normalized to controls without MI). P
value is determined by Mann-Whitney U test. (C) Aortic arch noradrenaline
content. Data are means ± SEM (n = 4 to 5 ApoE−/− mice per group). P
values are determined by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). (D) Aortic
arch noradrenaline content in permanent ligation versus 45 min of ischemia
followed by reperfusion. Data are means ± SEM (n = 8 to 10 wild-type mice
per group from two independent experiments). P value is determined by
Mann-Whitney U test. (E) CAM expression by aortic endothelial cells in
post-MI atherosclerosis (3 days after MI; red) and after MI + 6-OHDA (blue).
The bar graph shows MFI on aortic endothelial cells by flow cytometry (n = 7
to 8 ApoE−/− mice per group from two independent experiments), normal-
ized to no MI controls. P values are determined by one-way ANOVA. (F) Adre-
noceptor a1–2 and b1–3 mRNA levels (Adra and Adrb) in sorted murine aortic
endothelial cells. Data are means ± SEM (n = 8 ApoE−/− mice and 5 B6 mice
as steady-state myocardium). P values are determined by Mann-Whitney
U test.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra80
4
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 the number of GFP+ CD11bhigh myeloid cells recruited into the aortae
of siCAM5-treated mice was 50% lower than in mice treated with
siCtrl, whereas their numbers in blood were similar (Fig. 5A).
With respect to plaque character in ApoE−/− mice, although circu-
lating neutrophils and Ly6Chigh monocytes did not change, their
numbers decreased in the aortae by at least one-third (Fig. 5, B and
C). The number of plaque macrophages also decreased (Fig. 5B). Im-
munohistochemical and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reac-
tion (RT-qPCR) studies further supported reduced leukocyte
recruitment by siCAM5 treatment. Specifically, we observed at least
40% reduction in myeloid cells and neutrophils in aortic root sections
stained for myeloid markers CD11b and Ly6G (Fig. 5D).
To explore whether parallel silencing of multiple CAMs is syner-
gistic, we compared aortic leukocyte numbers in mice treated with
siCAM5 with mice treated with a single siRNA at a similar cumulative
dose. We chose silencing Vcam1 because its involvement in athero-
sclerosis is well documented (19). Treatment with siVcam1 reduced
aortic neutrophil, monocyte, and macrophage numbers compared
with siCtrl but was significantly less effective than siCAM5 (Fig. 5E).
To compare blockade of distinct steps in the recruitment cascade, we
injected ApoE−/− mice with siRNA combinations targeting either leu-
kocyte rolling (Sele and Selp) or adhesion and transmigration (Icam1,
Icam2, and Vcam1) at a similar cumulative dose. Blocking mediators
of rolling reduced monocyte uptake more efficiently than targeting ad-
hesion and transmigration (fig. S7).
Expression of myeloperoxidase (Mpo), a product of neutrophils
and the inflammatory monocyte subset, and F4/80, a marker for
macrophages, decreased in aortic plaques of siCAM5-treated mice by
at least 75% (Fig. 6A). Atherosclerotic
plaques also expressed less of the proin-
flammatory cytokines Tnfa, Il6, Il1b, and
Il12 (Fig. 6A). Matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) released by inflammatory cells
promote extracellular matrix degradation
in fibrous caps, support vessel remodel-
ing, and may destabilize atherosclerotic
plaques (30). Mmp2, Mmp3, and
Mmp9 mRNA levels decreased in mice
treated with siCAM5 by up to 85%
(Fig. 6A). Protease activity also signifi-
cantly decreased in mice treated with
siCAM5 (Fig. 6B) and, accordingly,
plaque collagen increased (Fig. 6C). As
a result, we observed smaller necrotic
cores and thicker fibrous caps in mice
treated with siCAM5, whereas plaque
size remained unaffected by this 2-week
treatment (Fig. 6D).
siCAM5 reduces inflammation
after myocardial ischemia
Because we developed siCAM5 for a
clinical scenario that necessitates rapid
inflammation reduction, we tested the
approach in ApoE−/− mice that under-
went coronary ligation, which acceler-
ates inflammation within atheromata
(15). Mice received siCAM5 for 3 weeks
(weekly injection of 3 mg/kg siRNA) after MI. MI increased the num-
ber of inflammatory leukocytes in aortic plaques (Fig. 7A and fig. S8)
and augmented both lesion and necrotic core size (Fig. 7B) compared
to ApoE−/− mice that had no MI, as described previously (15). Treat-
ment with siCAM5 limited these post-MI changes by blocking inflam-
matory cell recruitment (Fig. 7A) and reducing plaque size to those of
control animals without MI (Fig. 7B).
Last, we investigated whether siCAM5 affects leukocyte recruit-
ment in acutely ischemic myocardium, an injury that relies on leuko-
cytes for infarct healing but that may be enhanced by an overzealous
immune response (1). A single dose of siCAM5, administered 2 hours
after coronary ligation, reduced Ly6Chigh monocyte numbers by more
than 50% on day 3 after MI, whereas circulating cell numbers did not
change (Fig. 7C). To assess the consequences of reduced monocyte
recruitment to the ischemic heart 3 weeks after MI, we performed car-
diac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on ApoE−/− mice that re-
ceived either siCtrl or siCAM5. Treatment with siCAM5 preserved
left ventricular ejection fraction in mice after MI (siCAM5, 33 ± 4%;
siCtrl, 23 ± 4%; Fig. 7D). In summary, RNAi efficiently attenuated
myeloid recruitment to the ischemic heart and consequently improved
recovery after MI.
DISCUSSION
Ischemic organ injury leading to stroke and MI remains the most
prevalent cause of death worldwide (31). Previous work identified sol-
uble and nervous signals that increase innate immune cell production
Fig. 4. siCAM5 results in endothelial CAM knockdown. ApoE−/− mice were injected with either siCAM5 or
siCtrl for 1 week. (A) Histograms showing target proteins in murine aortic endothelial cells after RNAi.
(B) siCAM5 knockdown on protein level measured by flow cytometric MFI in aortic endothelial cells. Data
are normalized to siCtrl. (C) mRNA levels after 1 week of treatment with either siCAM5 or siCtrl. RT-qPCR data
are normalized to siCtrl. Data in (B) and (C) are means ± SEM (n = 6 to 7 ApoE−/− mice per group). P values are
determined by Mann-Whitney U test.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra80
5
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 during acute MI (14, 15). Here, we provide evidence that acute ische-
mia increases systemic expression of proteins that recruit leukocytes
into plaques. The stimuli that enhance endothelial CAM expression
include noncirculating factors, specifically sympathetic nervous
signaling. Although recruited leukocytes dominate arterial plaque
events that lead to downstream tissue hypoxia, current clinical therapy
does not target these cells. Rather, beyond reperfusion therapy, stan-
dard care targets platelets, and risk factors such as hyperlipidemia and
hypertension. Further inroads into preventing recurrent events and
complications of acute coronary syndromes require therapeutic op-
tions that allow rapid and decisive interventions beyond standard
measures. Multiple plaques in an individual can provoke such recur-
rence and complications, hence the desirability of a systemic rather
than local intervention. Therapeutically targeting leukocyte supply
offers one promising approach, because macrophages turn over ra-
pidly in atherosclerotic plaques (4)—a process that depends on bone
marrow–derived monocytes and neutrophils. Blood leukocytosis has
been correlated with adverse outcome in cardiovascular patients (32, 33),
and abundant preclinical data show benefits of inhibiting pathways
that recruit leukocytes (6, 8, 25, 34–36).
Leukocyte accumulation is associated with increased plaque vul-
nerability, thrombus formation, vascular occlusion, MI, and stroke.
Macrophages have particular importance because they accumulate
progressively in growing lesions, become foam cells after lipid inges-
tion, and promote disease by producing a myriad of proinflammatory
mediators. Plaque macrophages originate from monocytes recruited
from the blood pool (4). Although neutrophils have a less well under-
stood role in atherosclerosis, these cells are increasingly recognized as
inflammatory mediators that accumulate in the vessel wall during ath-
erogenesis (37). On the basis of these data, blocking chemokine/
chemokine receptor interaction and adhesion molecule function
emerged as a promising strategy that has relied primarily on
small-molecule inhibitors or antibodies (34, 38, 39). However, redun-
dancies in the leukocyte recruitment cascade may affect the efficiency of
single-target strategies. Here, we simultaneously silenced the expression
of all known endothelial CAM. Enabled by a high-efficiency delivery
Fig. 5. siCAM5 reduces leukocyte recruitment into plaque. ApoE−/− mice
were injected with either siCAM5 or siCtrl for 2 weeks. (A) Gating and quan-
tification of GFPhigh myeloid cells in plaques and quantification of GFPhigh
myeloid cells in blood after adoptive transfer of 2 × 106 GFPhigh Ly6Chigh
monocytes and 2 × 106 GFPhigh neutrophils. Data are means ± SEM (n = 6
to 7 ApoE−/− mice per group from two independent experiments. (B and C)
Gating and quantification of neutrophils, Ly6Chigh monocytes, and macro-
phages in atherosclerotic aortae (B) and in the blood (C). Data are means ±
SEM (n = 6 to 10 ApoE−/− mice per group from three independent
experiments). (D) Immunohistochemical staining of aortic roots for myeloid
cells (CD11b) and neutrophils (Ly6G). Bar graphs show percentage of positive
area per region of interest (ROI) or number of cells per high-power field
(hpf). Scale bar, 250 mm. Data are means ± SEM (n = 5 to 6 ApoE−/− mice
per group). P values in (A), (B), and (D) are determined by Mann-Whitney
U test. (E) Quantification of neutrophils and Ly6Chigh monocytes in athero-
sclerotic aortae after treatment with siCtrl, siVcam1, or siCAM5. Data are
means ± SEM (n = 7 to 8 ApoE−/− mice per group from two independent
experiments). *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001, one-way ANOVA.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra80
6
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 nanoparticle with avidity for endothelial cells, the required siRNA
doses were low enough to allow combining five duplexes into one de-
livery nanoparticle. This poly-target therapy had profound synergistic
effects and systemically neutralized the increase of leukocyte recruit-
ment into cardiovascular organs triggered by acute ischemia.
Our study has several limitations. The exact relative contribution of
each CAM to leukocyte recruitment remains uncertain, and therefore
also the relative importance of each individual siRNA contained in
siCAM5. Our studies revealed that one siRNA was less powerful in
dampening leukocyte recruitment as a combination of all five siRNAs.
Additional studies should clarify whether all five siRNAs are essential,
or whether the nanoparticle composition could be better tailored and
simplified, a desirable goal from a drug development perspective. Ge-
netically modified mice that develop atheromata, including ApoE−/−
mice, display many features of atherosclerosis that are also observed
in humans, like accumulation of leukocytes, necrotic core formation,
smooth muscle cell migration to the fibrous cap, and fibrotic tissue
accumulation (30). Our treatment lowered plaque leukocyte numbers
and reduced necrotic core expansion and fibrous cap thinning, all hall-
marks of human vulnerable plaque. Other features of human athero-
sclerosis, such as plaque rupture and subsequent thrombus formation, are
rarely observed in mice. Thus, the translatability of the data to human
Fig. 6. siCAM5 reduces inflammation and progression of athero-
sclerotic plaque phenotype.ApoE−/−mice wereinjected witheithersiCAM5
or siCtrl for 2 weeks. (A) mRNA levels in aortic arches; values normalized to
Gapdh with the siCtrl group set to 1. (B) Aortic root protease activity by fluores-
cence molecular tomography (FMT)/computed tomography (CT). (C) Immuno-
histochemical evaluation of aortic roots for collagen-1 after 3 weeks of siCtrl
(3 mg/kg) or siCAM5 (3 mg/kg). Bar graphs show percentage of positivestaining
per ROI. Scale bar, 100 mm. (D) Masson staining of aortic roots. Bar graphs show
fibrous cap thickness, necrotic core area, and total plaque size per section. Scale
bars, 250 mm (low magnification) and 100 mm (high magnification). The arrows
point at a fibrous cap. In (A) to (D), data are means ± SEM (n = 5 to 6 ApoE−/−
mice per group). P values are determined by Mann-Whitney U test.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra80
7
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 patients requires scrutiny. Larger animals that develop plaques, includ-
ing rabbits, pigs, or monkeys, should be tested next. Our previous
work demonstrated minimal toxicity of the endothelial-avid delivery
nanoparticles in mice (27). The safety of these nanoparticles needs to
be established in humans.
Advances in siRNA delivery, together with siRNA modification to
reduce off-target effects, have led to a resurgence in efforts to clinically
translate systemic RNAi (40). We hypothesize that a short-term intra-
venous RNAi treatment course, similar to the one tested in ApoE−/−
mice with MI, could benefit a very high risk population of patients
identified by either risk scores or molecular imaging. Such interven-
tion may also benefit patients with acute ischemic events, who may
have rates of recurrent events exceeding 10% within the first year de-
spite full standard of care (16). Initiating RNAi therapy shortly after an
ischemic event may have a twofold benefit. First, the treatment could
decrease recruitment of neutrophils and monocytes into the ischemic
Fig. 7. siCAM5 reduces inflammation of infarcted myocardium and im-
proves functional recovery after ischemia. The baseline cohort of ApoE−/−
mice (No MI athero) received no MI and no therapy. Cohorts of ApoE−/− mice
after coronary ligation received either siCtrl (MI athero & siCtrl) or siCAM5 (MI
athero & siCAM5) for 3 weeks. Treatment started 2 hours after MI. All cohorts
are age-matched and received a similar atherogenic diet. (A) Gating and
quantification of neutrophils, Ly6Chigh monocytes, and macrophages in ath-
erosclerotic aortae. Data are means ± SEM (n = 8 ApoE−/− mice per group from
two independent experiments). P values are determined by one-way ANOVA.
(B) Masson staining of aortic roots. Bar graphs show plaque size, fibrous
cap thickness, and necrotic core area. Data are means ± SEM (n = 5 ApoE−/−
mice per group). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001, one-way
ANOVA. (C) Wild-type mice received one injection of either siCAM5 or siCtrl 2
hours after coronary ligation. Flow cytometric gating and quantification of
inflammatory monocytes in infarct and blood 3 days after MI. Data are means ±
SEM (n = 6 mice per group). P values are determined by Mann-Whitney U test.
(D) ApoE−/− mice received either siCAM5 or siCtrl for 3 weeks after coronary
ligation, starting 2 hours after MI. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LV-EF)
was assessed by cardiac MRI 21 days later. Data are means ± SEM (n = 5 to
6 ApoE−/− mice per group). P values are determined by Mann-Whitney U test.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra80
8
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 brain or myocardium, thus reducing injury (41, 42). Second, silencing
endothelial CAM could attenuate the acceleration of atherosclerosis
observed after MI in mice (15) and patients (43). Our data support
the further pursuit of these therapeutic avenues and demonstrate
the utility of multigene targeting therapies to study and treat diseases
that involve endothelial dysfunction. Thus, such RNAi-based multi-
gene silencing may be a safe and viable treatment paradigm for endo-
thelial dysfunction promoted by complex genetic networks.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
To study RNAi in ischemic heart disease, we performed experiments
in ApoE−/− mice that were fed a high-cholesterol diet (HCD). A
power analysis justified the sample size based on the variance (for
instance, for plaque leukocyte numbers) that we obtained from pre-
vious experiments in ApoE−/− mice (15). We excluded outliers that
were identified by a ROUT Identify Outliers test. Leukocyte
numbers, plaque size, plaque protease activity, and protein/mRNA
levels were investigated as predefined end points in this study.
Age- and sex-matched mice were assigned randomly to the experi-
mental groups. Studies were not performed in a blinded fashion.
Sample size and number of experimental replicates are displayed
in the figure captions.
Sequence identification
The set of siRNAs targeting each gene were designed using custom R
and Python scripts. The rationale and method for the set of siRNA
designs are as follows: the predicted efficacy for every potential
19-mer siRNA from the start of the coding region to the end of the
3′ untranslated region (UTR) was determined with a linear model
derived from the direct measure of mRNA knockdown from more
than 20,000 distinct siRNA designs targeting a large number of verte-
brate genes. Subsets were subsequently identified with perfect or near-
perfect matches between human, rodent, and cynomolgus monkey
orthologs. For each strand of the siRNA, a custom Python script
was used in a brute force search to measure the number and positions
of mismatches between the siRNA and all potential alignments in the
target species transcriptome (defined as National Center for Bio-
technology Information’s RefSeq collection for each species). Extra
weight was given to mismatches in the seed region, defined here as
positions 2 to 9 of the antisense oligonucleotide, as well as the cleavage
site of the siRNA, defined here as positions 10 and 11 of the antisense
oligonucleotide. The relative weight of the mismatches was 2.8 (1.2:1
for seed mismatches, cleavage site, and other positions up to antisense
position 19). Mismatches in the first position were ignored. A speci-
ficity score was calculated for each strand by summing the value of
each weighted mismatch. Preference was given to siRNAs whose
antisense score in human and cynomolgus monkey was ≥3.0 and
predicted efficacy was ≥70% knockdown.
Synthesis and in vitro screening of siRNAs
All RNAs were modified to reduce immune stimulation and improve
specificity as described previously (29, 44). To select an siRNA for a
given gene, sequences targeting the 3′UTR of the gene were synthe-
sized and tested. The siRNAs targeting Sele, Selp, Icam1, and Icam2
were transfected in bEnd.3 murine endothelial cells [American Type
Culture Collection (ATCC)] using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen);
the siRNAs targeting Vcam1 were tested in C2C12 cells (ATCC). In
all cases, the siRNAs were dosed at 1 nM. Lead candidates were
selected from this panel and tested at various doses in bEnd.3 cells
to measure in vitro potency. In all cases, target gene mRNA was nor-
malized to murine Gapdh; this ratio was compared to cells that were
not transfected with siRNA. In all cases, mRNA analysis was per-
formed 48 hours after transfection, and cells were passaged in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum.
To generate consistent inflammatory gene expression in these cell
lines, the bEnd.3 cells were exposed to lipopolysaccharide (LPS;
0.01 ng/ml) (LPS-EB; InvivoGen) 1 hour before transfection, and the
C2C12 cells to tumor necrosis factor–a (TNFa) (InvivoGen). The best
duplexes were selected for scale-up, formulation, and subsequent na-
noparticle encapsulation.
siRNA formulation into 7C1 nanoparticles
7C1 was synthesized by reacting low–molecular weight poly(ethylene-
imine) (600 daltons; Sigma-Aldrich) with an epoxide-terminated C15
alkyl tail in 100% ethanol at 90°C for 48 hours. After synthesizing 7C1,
it was purified on a silica column with increasing amounts of dichlor-
omethane, as described previously (27). 7C1 nanoparticles were for-
mulated by mixing the chemical compound 7C1 with C14PEG2000
(Alnylam Pharmaceuticals) in a poly(dimethylsiloxane)-based micro-
fluidic device (45). More specifically, the 7C1 compound and
C14PEG2000 were solubilized in 100% ethanol and loaded into a glass
syringe (Hamilton). siRNAs were solubilized in 10 mM citrate buffer
(pH 4.0) and loaded into another syringe. The two 7C1/C14PEG2000
ethanol phases were mixed with the RNA citrate buffer phase at a flow
ratio of 1:3 using a syringe pump (Harvard Apparatus). The fluid
speeds were 600 and 1800 ml/min, respectively. Particles were then
dialyzed against 1× phosphate-buffered saline at 4°C for at least 3
hours and sterilized using a 0.22-mm filter.
Nanoparticle and siRNA dosing
Nanoparticle size and structure were characterized as described in
Supplementary Materials and Methods. Nanoparticles were injected
intravenously via a tail vein in a volume of 10 ml/g body weight. For a
1-week study, we injected particles on days 1 and 3, and for longer studies
once a week thereafter. Particles contained either siRNA (3.0 mg/kg)
targeting luciferase (termed siCtrl) or a combination of five siRNAs
(3.0 mg/kg) encapsulated in the same particle targeting the leukocyte
adhesion molecules Icam1, Icam2, Vcam1, Sele, and Selp (siCAM5).
Nontargeting siRNAs are frequently used as controls in siRNA studies
(27, 46–50). We selected an siRNA targeting luciferase because the pro-
tein is not expressed in any mice used in this study and, as a result,
could be used in any experiment. Notably, the control sequence we
selected was modified at the 2′ position to avoid off-target effects and
has been used previously as a control in many experiments (27, 46–50).
Mice
Female C57BL/6J mice (wild type), female ubiquitous GFP mice
[C57BL/6-Tg (UBC-GFP) 30Scha/J], and female apolipoprotein E–
deficient mice (ApoE−/−; B6.129P2-Apoetm1Unc/J) were purchased
from The Jackson Laboratory. At 12 weeks of age, ApoE−/− mice
were fed an HCD (21.2% fat by weight and 0.2% cholesterol;
TD.88137, Harlan Teklad) for 3 to 6 weeks. All procedures were
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra80
9
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (IACUC) Subcommittee on Research Animal Care, Massachusetts
General Hospital (MGH), Charlestown, MA.
MI and parabiosis
MI was induced by permanent ligation of the left anterior descending
coronary artery as described previously (14). ApoE−/− mice were an-
esthetized with isoflurane, intubated, and ventilated. All mice received
buprenorphine (0.1 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) twice daily for 3 days,
starting on the day of the surgery, as stipulated by the local IACUC.
Sham MI surgery was carried out as described for the MI surgery, but
instead of tying a knot that permanently ligated the coronary artery,
the suture was not closed. Ischemia-reperfusion injury was induced as
described previously (14). In brief, we ligated the left anterior descend-
ing coronary artery and released the suture after 45 min of ischemia.
Mice were joined in parabiosis as described previously (14). To in-
duce MI, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane. All mice received
buprenorphine (0.1 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) twice daily for 3 days,
starting on the day of the surgery. Experiments began 14 days after
induction of parabiosis so that a shared circulation was established
before one parabiont was subjected to coronary artery ligation.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software
(GraphPad Software Inc.). Results are depicted as means ± SEM.
For two-group comparisons, an unpaired two-tailed t test was applied
to normally distributed variables (D’Agostino-Pearson omnibus nor-
mality test) and a two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test to non-normally
distributed variables. For comparing more than two groups, an
ANOVA test, followed by a Sidak’s test for multiple comparisons,
was applied. Because mice joined in parabiosis are considered
dependent, these data were analyzed using a stepwise t test strategy.
First, we used a two-tailed paired Wilcoxon test to compare infarcted
(red; Fig. 1) with noninfarcted (blue) parabionts. A paired test was
chosen for this comparison because these animals have a common
blood circulation. We next performed two separate unpaired two-
tailed t tests to compare infarcted or noninfarcted parabionts with
the average of steady-state parabiosis (gray). P < 0.05 indicated statis-
tical significance.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/8/342/342ra80/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Identification of aortic endothelial cells by flow cytometry.
Fig. S2. siRNA candidate screening and relative potency.
Fig. S3. siRNA delivery.
Fig. S4. siRNA is taken up by blood neutrophils and monocytes, but not plaque macrophages.
Fig. S5. The effect of RNAi on blood myeloid cells.
Fig. S6. Blood cholesterol levels.
Fig. S7. RNAi targeting either siSele/Selp or siIcam1/2 + Vcam1.
Fig. S8. Inflammation in atherosclerotic plaques 3 weeks after MI or sham surgery.
Table S1. siRNA sequences screened for siCAM5.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. F. K. Swirski, M. Nahrendorf, Leukocyte behavior in atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction,
and heart failure. Science 339, 161–166 (2013).
2. K. Ley, Y. I. Miller, C. C. Hedrick, Monocyte and macrophage dynamics during atherogenesis.
Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 31, 1506–1516 (2011).
3. E. Galkina, K. Ley, Vascular adhesion molecules in atherosclerosis. Arterioscler. Thromb.
Vasc. Biol. 27, 2292–2301 (2007).
4. C. S. Robbins, I. Hilgendorf, G. F. Weber, I. Theurl, Y. Iwamoto, J.-L. Figueiredo, R. Gorbatov,
G. K. Sukhova,L. M.S. Gerhardt, D. Smyth, C. C. J.Zavitz,E. A. Shikatani, M.Parsons, N. van Rooijen,
H. Y. Lin, M. Husain, P. Libby, M. Nahrendorf, R. Weissleder, F. K. Swirski, Local proliferation
dominates lesional macrophage accumulation in atherosclerosis. Nat. Med. 19, 1166–1172
(2013).
5. M.-C. Bourdillon, R. N. Poston, C. Covacho, E. Chignier, G. Bricca, J. L. McGregor, ICAM-1 de-
ficiency reduces atherosclerotic lesions in double-knockout mice (ApoE−/−/ICAM-1−/−) fed
a fat or a chow diet. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 20, 2630–2635 (2000).
6. R. G. Collins, R. Velji, N. V. Guevara, M. J. Hicks, L. Chan, A. L. Beaudet, P-selectin or inter-
cellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 deficiency substantially protects against athero-
sclerosis in apolipoprotein E–deficient mice. J. Exp. Med. 191, 189–194 (2000).
7. M. I. Cybulsky, K. Iiyama, H. Li, S. Zhu, M. Chen, M. Iiyama, V. Davis, J.-C. Gutierrez-Ramos,
P. W. Connelly, D. S. Milstone, A major role for VCAM-1, but not ICAM-1, in early athero-
sclerosis. J. Clin. Invest. 107, 1255–1262 (2001).
8. Z. M. Dong, S. M. Chapman, A. A. Brown, P. S. Frenette, R. O. Hynes, D. D. Wagner, The
combined role of P- and E-selectins in atherosclerosis. J. Clin. Invest. 102, 145–152 (1998).
9. Z. M. Dong, A. A. Brown, D. D. Wagner, Prominent role of P-selectin in the development of
advanced atherosclerosis in ApoE-deficient mice. Circulation 101, 2290–2295 (2000).
10. K. Iiyama, L. Hajra, M. Iiyama, H. Li, M. DiChiara, B. D. Medoff, M. I. Cybulsky, Patterns of
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 expression in
rabbit and mouse atherosclerotic lesions and at sites predisposed to lesion formation. Circ.
Res. 85, 199–207 (1999).
11. R. C. Johnson, S. M. Chapman, Z. M. Dong, J. M. Ordovas, T. N. Mayadas, J. Herz, R. O. Hynes,
E. J. Schaefer, D. D. Wagner, Absence of P-selectin delays fatty streak formation in mice.
J. Clin. Invest. 99, 1037–1043 (1997).
12. Y. Nakashima, E. W. Raines, A. S. Plump, J. L. Breslow, R. Ross, Upregulation of VCAM-1 and
ICAM-1 at atherosclerosis-prone sites on the endothelium in the ApoE-deficient mouse.
Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 18, 842–851 (1998).
13. P. Dutta, H. B. Sager, K. R. Stengel, K. Naxerova, G. Courties, B. Saez, L. Silberstein, T. Heidt,
M. Sebas, Y. Sun, G. Wojtkiewicz, P. F. Feruglio, K. King, J. N. Baker, A. M. van der Laan,
A. Borodovsky, K. Fitzgerald, M. Hulsmans, F. Hoyer, Y. Iwamoto, C. Vinegoni, D. Brown,
M. Di Carli, P. Libby, S. W. Hiebert, D. T. Scadden, F. K. Swirski, R. Weissleder, M. Nahrendorf,
Myocardial infarction activates CCR2+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Cell Stem Cell
16, 477–487 (2015).
14. H. B. Sager, T. Heidt, M. Hulsmans, P. Dutta, G. Courties, M. Sebas, G. R. Wojtkiewicz, B. Tricot,
Y. Iwamoto, Y. Sun, R. Weissleder, P. Libby, F. K. Swirski, M. Nahrendorf, Targeting interleukin-
1b reduces leukocyte production after acute myocardial infarction. Circulation 132, 1880–1890
(2015).
15. P. Dutta, G. Courties, Y. Wei, F. Leuschner, R. Gorbatov, C. S. Robbins, Y. Iwamoto, B. Thompson,
A. L. Carlson, T. Heidt, M. D. Majmudar, F. Lasitschka, M. Etzrodt, P. Waterman, M. T. Waring,
A. T. Chicoine, A. M. van der Laan, H. W. M. Niessen, J. J. Piek, B. B. Rubin, J. Butany, J. R. Stone,
H. A. Katus, S. A. Murphy, D. A. Morrow, M. S. Sabatine, C. Vinegoni, M. A. Moskowitz,
M. J. Pittet, P. Libby, C. P. Lin, F. K. Swirski, R. Weissleder, M. Nahrendorf, Myocardial infarction
accelerates atherosclerosis. Nature 487, 325–329 (2012).
16. J. A. Goldstein, D. Demetriou, C. L. Grines, M. Pica, M. Shoukfeh, W. W. O’Neill, Multiple
complex coronary plaques in patients with acute myocardial infarction. N. Engl. J. Med.
343, 915–922 (2000).
17. D. S. Wald, J. K. Morris, N. J. Wald, A. J. Chase, R. J. Edwards, L. O. Hughes, C. Berry,
K. G. Oldroyd; for the PRAMI Investigators, Randomized trial of preventive angioplasty in my-
ocardial infarction. N. Engl. J. Med. 369, 1115–1123 (2013).
18. J. L. Mega, E. Braunwald, S. D. Wiviott, J.-P. Bassand, D. L. Bhatt, C. Bode, P. Burton, M. Cohen,
N. Cook-Bruns, K. A. A. Fox, S. Goto, S. A. Murphy, A. N. Plotnikov, D. Schneider, X. Sun,
F. W. Verheugt, C. M. Gibson; for the ATLAS ACS 2–TIMI 51 Investigators, Rivaroxaban in
patients with a recent acute coronary syndrome. N. Engl. J. Med. 366, 9–19 (2012).
19. K. Ley, C. Laudanna, M. I. Cybulsky, S. Nourshargh, Getting to the site of inflammation: The
leukocyte adhesion cascade updated. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7, 678–689 (2007).
20. K. J. Moore, F. J. Sheedy, E. A. Fisher, Macrophages in atherosclerosis: A dynamic balance.
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13, 709–721 (2013).
21. R. M. Rao, L. Yang, G. Garcia-Cardena, F. W. Luscinskas, Endothelial-dependent mechanisms of
leukocyte recruitment to the vascular wall. Circ. Res. 101, 234–247 (2007).
22. C. Shi, E. G. Pamer, Monocyte recruitment during infection and inflammation. Nat. Rev.
Immunol. 11, 762–774 (2011).
23. J. Mestas, K. Ley, Monocyte-endothelial cell interactions in the development of atherosclerosis.
Trends Cardiovasc. Med. 18, 228–232 (2008).
24. K. Ley, The role of selectins in inflammation and disease. Trends Mol. Med. 9, 263–268
(2003).
25. M. F. Nageh, E. T. Sandberg, K. R. Marotti, A. H. Lin, E. P. Melchior, D. C. Bullard, A. L. Beaudet,
Deficiency of inflammatory cell adhesion molecules protects against atherosclerosis in mice.
Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 17, 1517–1520 (1997).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra80
10
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 26. D. Haussecker, M. A. Kay, RNA interference. Drugging RNAi. Science 347, 1069–1070 (2015).
27. J. E. Dahlman, C. Barnes, O. Khan, A. Thiriot, S. Jhunjunwala, T. E. Shaw, Y. Xing, H. B. Sager,
G. Sahay, L. Speciner, A. Bader, R. L. Bogorad, H. Yin, T. Racie, Y. Dong, S. Jiang, D. Seedorf,
A. Dave, K. S. Sandu, M. J. Webber, T. Novobrantseva, V. M. Ruda, A. K. R. Lytton-Jean, C. G. Levins,
B. Kalish, D. K. Mudge, M. Perez, L. Abezgauz, P. Dutta, L. Smith, K. Charisse, M. W. Kieran,
K. Fitzgerald, M. Nahrendorf, D. Danino, R. M. Tuder, U. H. von Andrian, A. Akinc, D. Panigrahy,
A. Schroeder, V. Kotelianski, R. Langer, D. G. Anderson, In vivo endothelial siRNA delivery using
polymeric nanoparticles with low molecular weight. Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 648–655 (2014).
28. C. Scheiermann, Y. Kunisaki, D. Lucas, A. Chow, J.-E. Jang, D. Zhang, D. Hashimoto, M. Merad,
P. S. Frenette, Adrenergic nerves govern circadian leukocyte recruitment to tissues. Immunity
37, 290–301 (2012).
29. K. A. Whitehead, J. E. Dahlman, R. S. Langer, D. G. Anderson, Silencing or stimulation?
siRNA delivery and the immune system. Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng. 2, 77–96 (2011).
30. C. Silvestre-Roig, M. P. de Winther, C. Weber, M. J. Daemen, E. Lutgens, O. Soehnlein, Ather-
osclerotic plaque destabilization: Mechanisms, models, and therapeutic strategies. Circ. Res.
114, 214–226 (2014).
31. World Health Organization Report, July 2013; www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs310/en/.
32. M. Madjid, I. Awan, J. T. Willerson, S. W. Casscells, Leukocyte count and coronary heart
disease: Implications for risk assessment. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 44, 1945–1956 (2004).
33. B. S. Coller, Leukocytosis and ischemic vascular disease morbidity and mortality: Is it time
to intervene? Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 25, 658–670 (2005).
34. Y. Huo, A. Hafezi-Moghadam, K. Ley, Role of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 and fibro-
nectin connecting segment-1 in monocyte rolling and adhesion on early atherosclerotic
lesions. Circ. Res. 87, 153–159 (2000).
35. M.-T. Huang, K. Y. Larbi, C. Scheiermann, A. Woodfin, N. Gerwin, D. O. Haskard, S. Nourshargh,
ICAM-2 mediates neutrophil transmigration in vivo: Evidence for stimulus specificity and a role
in PECAM-1–independent transmigration. Blood 107, 4721–4727 (2006).
36. M. J. Elices, L. Osborn, Y. Takada, C. Crouse, S. Luhowskyj, M. E. Hemler, R. R. Lobb, VCAM-1 on
activated endothelium interacts with the leukocyte integrin VLA-4 At a site distinct from the
VLA-4/fibronectin binding site. Cell 60, 577–584 (1990).
37. O. Soehnlein, Multiple roles for neutrophils in atherosclerosis. Circ. Res. 110, 875–888
(2012).
38. N. C. Kaneider, A. J. Leger, A. Kuliopulos, Therapeutic targeting of molecules involved in
leukocyte–endothelial cell interactions. FEBS J. 273, 4416–4424 (2006).
39. H. Ulbrich, E. E. Eriksson, L. Lindbom, Leukocyte and endothelial cell adhesion molecules as
targets for therapeutic interventions in inflammatory disease. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 24,
640–647 (2003).
40. S. Crunkhorn, Trial watch: Pioneering RNAi therapy shows antitumour activity in humans.
Nat. Rev. Drug. Discov. 12, 178 (2013).
41. F. Leuschner, P. Dutta, R. Gorbatov, T. I. Novobrantseva, J. S. Donahoe, G. Courties, K. M. Lee,
J. I. Kim, J. F. Markmann, B. Marinelli, P. Panizzi, W. W. Lee, Y. Iwamoto, S. Milstein, H. Epstein-Barash,
W. Cantley, J. Wong, V. Cortez-Retamozo, A. Newton, K. Love, P. Libby, M. J. Pittet, F. K. Swirski,
V. Koteliansky, R. Langer, R. Weissleder, D. G. Anderson, M. Nahrendorf, Therapeutic siRNA
silencing in inflammatory monocytes in mice. Nat. Biotechnol. 29, 1005–1010 (2011).
42. M. Ishikawa, J. H. Zhang, A. Nanda, D. N. Granger, Inflammatory responses to ischemia and
reperfusion in the cerebral microcirculation. Front. Biosci. 9, 1339–1347 (2004).
43. J.-i. Kotani, G. S. Mintz, M. T. Castagna, E. Pinnow, C. O. Berzingi, A. B. Bui, A. D. Pichard, L. F. Satler,
W. O. Suddath, R. Waksman, J. R. Laird Jr., K. M. Kent, N. J. Weissman, Intravascular ultrasound
analysis of infarct-related and non–infarct-related arteries in patients who presented with an
acute myocardial infarction. Circulation 107, 2889–2893 (2003).
44. G. F. Deleavey, M. J. Damha. Designing chemically modified oligonucleotides for targeted
gene silencing. Chem. Biol. 19, 937–954 (2012).
45. D. Chen, K. T. Love, Y.Chen, A. A. Eltoukhy, C. Kastrup, G. Sahay,A. Jeon, Y. Dong, K. A. Whitehead,
D. G. Anderson, Rapid discovery of potent siRNA-containing lipid nanoparticles enabled by
controlled microfluidic formulation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 6948–6951 (2012).
46. K. T. Love, K. P. Mahon, C. G. Levins, K. A. Whitehead, W. Querbes, J. R. Dorkin, J. Qin, W. Cantley,
L. L. Qin, T. Racie, M. Frank-Kamenetsky, K. N. Yip, R. Alvarez, D. W. Y. Sah, A. de Fougerolles,
K. Fitzgerald, V. Koteliansky, A. Akinc, R. Langer, D. G. Anderson, Lipid-like materials for low-dose,
in vivo gene silencing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 1864–1869 (2010).
47. S. C. Semple, A. Akinc, J. Chen, A. P. Sandhu, B. L. Mui, C. K. Cho, D. W. Y. Sah, D. Stebbing,
E. J. Crosley, E. Yaworski, I. M. Hafez, J. R. Dorkin, J. Qin, K. Lam, K. G. Rajeev, K. F. Wong,
L. B. Jeffs, L. Nechev, M. L. Eisenhardt, M. Jayaraman, M. Kazem, M. A. Maier, M. Srinivasulu,
M. J. Weinstein, Q. Chen, R. Alvarez, S. A. Barros, S. De, S. K. Klimuk, T. Borland, V. Kosovrasti,
W. L. Cantley, Y. K. Tam, M. Manoharan, M. A. Ciufolini, M. A. Tracy, A. de Fougerolles, I. MacLachlan,
P. R. Cullis, T. D. Madden, M. J. Hope, Rational design of cationic lipids for siRNA delivery. Nat.
Biotechnol. 28, 172–176 (2010).
48. V. Fehring, U. Schaeper, K. Ahrens, A. Santel, O. Keil, M. Eisermann, K. Giese, J. Kaufmann,
Delivery of therapeutic siRNA to the lung endothelium via novel lipoplex formulation
DACC. Mol. Ther. 22, 811–820 (2014).
49. Y. Dong, K. T. Love, J. R. Dorkin, S. Sirirungruang, Y. Zhang, D. Chen, R. L. Bogorad, H. Yin,
Y. Chen, A. J. Vegas, C. A. Alabi, G. Sahay, K. T. Olejnik, W. Wang, A. Schroeder, A. K. R. Lytton-Jean,
D. J. Siegwart, A. Akinc, C. Barnes, S. A. Barros, M. Carioto, K. Fitzgerald, J. Hettinger, V. Kumar,
T. I. Novobrantseva, J. Qin, W. Querbes, V. Koteliansky, R. Langer, D. G. Anderson, Lipopeptide
nanoparticles for potent and selective siRNA delivery in rodents and nonhuman primates.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 3955–3960 (2014).
50. M. Aleku, P. Schulz, O. Keil, A. Santel, U. Schaeper, B. Dieckhoff, O. Janke, J. Endruschat,
B. Durieux, N. Röder, K. Löffler, C. Lange, M. Fechtner, K. Möpert, G. Fisch, S. Dames, W. Arnold,
K. Jochims, K. Giese, B. Wiedenmann, A. Scholz, J. Kaufmann, Atu027, a liposomal small
interfering RNA formulation targeting protein kinase N3, inhibits cancer progression. Cancer
Res. 68, 9788–9798 (2008).
Acknowledgments: We thank M. Weglarz, K. Folz-Donahue, and L. Prickett-Rice from the Flow
Cytometry Core Facility, MGH, Center for Regenerative Medicine and Harvard Stem Cell Insti-
tute, and M. Waring and A. Chicoine from Ragon Institute (MGH, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, and Harvard) for assistance with cell sorting; M. Sebas (MGH) for help with mouse
surgery; and L. Altstein (biostatistician; MGH Biostatistics Center) for help with statistics.
Funding: This work was funded by grants from the NIH (HL114477, HL117829, HL096576, and
K99-HL121076), the MGH Research Scholar Award, and Harvard Catalyst/The Harvard Clinical and
Translational Science Center (National Center for Research Resources and the National Center for
Advancing Translational Sciences, NIH Award UL1 TR001102). H.B.S. and T.H. were funded by
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SA1668/2-1 and HE-6382/1-1). Author contributions: H.B.S.,
P.D., and J.E.D. designed and performed mouse experiments, flow cytometry, histology, qPCR,
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and particle and siRNA synthesis; collected and analyzed
the data; and contributed to writing the article. M.H., G.C., Y.S., T.H., C.V., Y.I., O.F.K., K.J.K., Y.X.,
and T.E.S. performed mouse surgery, histology, and particle and siRNA synthesis. B.T. performed
and analyzed cardiac MRI. G.R.W. performed and reconstructed FMT/CT and collected, analyzed,
and discussed data. A.B., K.F., P.L., R.L., R.W., F.K.S., and D.G.A. conceived experiments and discussed
strategy and results. M.N. designed and supervised the study and contributed to writing the ar-
ticle, which was edited and approved by all coauthors. Competing interests: J.E.D., D.G.A., and R.L.
have filed intellectual property protection related to 7C1 nanoparticles. The authors declare that
they have no further competing interests. Data and materials availability: Material transfer
agreements may be required for nanoparticles.
Submitted 22 December 2015
Accepted 17 May 2016
Published 8 June 2016
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf1435
Citation: H. B. Sager, P. Dutta, J. E. Dahlman, M. Hulsmans, G. Courties, Y. Sun, T. Heidt,
C. Vinegoni, A. Borodovsky, K. Fitzgerald, G. R. Wojtkiewicz, Y. Iwamoto, B. Tricot, O. F. Khan,
K. J. Kauffman, Y. Xing, T. E. Shaw, P. Libby, R. Langer, R. Weissleder, F. K. Swirski,
D. G. Anderson, M. Nahrendorf, RNAi targeting multiple cell adhesion molecules reduces
immune cell recruitment and vascular inflammation after myocardial infarction. Sci. Transl.
Med. 8, 342ra80 (2016).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
8 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 342 342ra80
11
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 vascular inflammation after myocardial infarction
RNAi targeting multiple cell adhesion molecules reduces immune cell recruitment and
Daniel G. Anderson and Matthias Nahrendorf
Khan, Kevin J. Kauffman, Yiping Xing, Taylor E. Shaw, Peter Libby, Robert Langer, Ralph Weissleder, Filip K. Swirski, 
F.
Claudio Vinegoni, Anna Borodovsky, Kevin Fitzgerald, Gregory R. Wojtkiewicz, Yoshiko Iwamoto, Benoit Tricot, Omar 
Hendrik B. Sager, Partha Dutta, James E. Dahlman, Maarten Hulsmans, Gabriel Courties, Yuan Sun, Timo Heidt,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf1435
, 342ra80342ra80.
8
Sci Transl Med 
existing options to prevent heart disease from worsening.
not target inflammatory cells, and this multipronged siRNA-based nanomedicine approach could complement 
the equivalent of a heart attack. Current therapies for atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease do
−−
infarction
 
features of human atherosclerosis. In the same mice, the siRNAs also attenuated inflammation after myocardial
 
siRNAs reduced leukocyte recruitment to atherosclerotic plaques in mice that were engineered to develop certain
 
(siRNA) targeting the CAMs inside nanoparticles that had been optimized to reach endothelial cells. The five
 
by transiently knocking down five different CAMs simultaneously. The authors delivered small interfering RNA
 
developed a nanomedicine approach to preventing such inflammatory cell adhesion and exacerbation of plaques,
 
.
et al
transmigration process is mediated by surface receptors called cell adhesion molecules (CAMs). Sager 
at an ideal site, and lastly pass through the cells lining the blood vessel: the endothelial cells. This recruitment and
''feeling out'' the vessel surface. Neutrophils and monocytes first ''roll'' along the wall, then firmly plant themselves 
Cells that are central to inflammation lodge in damaged or fatty regions of the vessels (called plaques) by
Knocking down adhesion, knocking out inflammation
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/342/342ra80
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/06/06/8.342.342ra80.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/424/eaan6205.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/10/464/eaah4214.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/411/eaam6084.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/357/6354/855.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/389/eaal3920.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/342/342ra80#BIBL
This article cites 49 articles, 21 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
