 974          An Official Publication of the Society of Hospital Medicine 
Journal of Hospital Medicine    Vol 12  |  No 12  |  December 2017
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
How Exemplary Teaching Physicians Interact with Hospitalized Patients
Sanjay Saint, MD, MPH1,2,3*, Molly Harrod, PhD2, Karen E. Fowler, MPH2, Nathan Houchens, MD1,3
1Medicine Service, Veterans Affairs Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, Michigan; 2Center for Clinical Management Research, Veterans Affairs 
Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, Michigan; 3Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
BACKGROUND: Effectively interacting with patients defines 
the consummate clinician.
OBJECTIVE: As part of a broader study, we examined how 
12 carefully selected attending physicians interacted with 
patients during inpatient teaching rounds.
DESIGN: A multisite study using an exploratory, qualitative 
approach. 
PARTICIPANTS: Exemplary teaching physicians were iden-
tified using modified snowball sampling. Of 59 potential par-
ticipants, 16 were contacted, and 12 agreed to participate. 
Current and former learners of the participants were also in-
terviewed. Participants were from hospitals located through-
out the United States.
INTERVENTION: Two researchers—a physician and a med-
ical anthropologist—conducted 1-day site visits, during 
which they observed teaching rounds and patient-physician 
interactions and interviewed learners and attendings. 
MEASUREMENTS: Field notes were taken during teaching 
rounds. Interviews were recorded and transcribed, and code 
reports were generated. 
RESULTS: The attendings generally exhibited the following 3 
thematic behaviors when interacting with patients: (1) care for 
the patient’s well-being by being a patient advocate and form-
ing a bond with the patient; (2) consideration of the “big pic-
ture” of the patient’s medical and social situation by anticipat-
ing what the patient may need upon discharge and inquiring 
about the patient’s social situation; and (3) respect for the pa-
tient through behaviors such as shaking hands with the patient 
and speaking with the patient at eye level by sitting or kneeling.
CONCLUSIONS: The key findings of our study (care for the pa-
tient’s well-being, consideration of the “big picture,” and respect 
for the patient) can be adopted and honed by physicians to im-
prove their own interactions with hospitalized patients. Journal 
of Hospital Medicine 2017;12:974-978. Published online first 
September 20, 2017. © 2017 Society of Hospital Medicine
Approximately a century ago, Francis Peabody taught that 
“the secret of the care of the patient is in caring for the pa-
tient.”1 His advice remains true today. Despite the advent of 
novel diagnostic tests, technologically sophisticated inter-
ventional procedures, and life-saving medications, perhaps 
the most important skill a bedside clinician can use is the 
ability to connect with patients. 
The literature on patient-physician interaction is vast2-11 
and generally indicates that exemplary bedside clinicians are 
able to interact well with patients by being competent, trust-
worthy, personable, empathetic, and effective communica-
tors. “Etiquette-based medicine,” first proposed by Kahn,12 
emphasizes the importance of certain behaviors from physi-
cians, such as introducing yourself and explaining your role, 
shaking hands, sitting down when speaking to patients, and 
asking open-ended questions. 
Yet, improving patient-physician interactions remains nec-
essary. A recent systematic review reported that almost half 
of the reviewed studies on the patient-physician relationship 
published between 2000 and 2014 conveyed the idea that the 
patient-physician relationship is deteriorating.13 
As part of a broader study to understand the behaviors and 
approaches of exemplary inpatient attending physicians,14-16 
we examined how 12 carefully selected physicians interacted 
with their patients during inpatient teaching rounds. 
METHODS
Overview
We conducted a multisite study using an exploratory, qual-
itative approach to inquiry, which has been described pre-
viously.14-16 Our primary purpose was to study the attributes 
and behaviors of outstanding general medicine attendings in 
the setting of inpatient rounds. The focus of this article is on 
the attendings’ interactions with patients. 
We used a modified snowball sampling approach17 to iden-
tify 12 exemplary physicians. First, we contacted individuals 
throughout the United States who were known to the prin-
cipal investigator (S.S.) and asked for suggestions of excel-
lent clinician educators (also referred to as attendings) for 
potential inclusion in the study. In addition to these person-
al contacts, other individuals unknown to the investigative 
team were contacted and asked to provide suggestions for 
attendings to include in the study. Specifically, the US News 
& World Report 2015 Top Medical Schools: Research Rank-
ings,18 which are widely used to represent the best U.S. hos-
pitals, were reviewed in an effort to identify attendings from 
*Address for correspondence and reprint requests: Sanjay Saint, MD, MPH, 
George Dock Professor of Internal Medicine, 2800 Plymouth Road, Building 16, 
Room 430W, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2800; Telephone: 734-615-8341; Fax: 
734-936-8944; E-mail: saint@med.umich.edu
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this 
article.
Received: February 10, 2017; Revised: May 4, 2017; Accepted: May 19, 
2017
2017 Society of Hospital Medicine DOI 10.12788/jhm.2844
 Physician Interactions with Patients   |   Saint et al
An Official Publication of the Society of Hospital Medicine 
Journal of Hospital Medicine    Vol 12  |  No 12  |  December 2017          975
a broad range of medical schools. Using this list, we identi-
fied other medical schools that were in the top 25 and were 
not already represented. We contacted the division chiefs 
of general internal (or hospital) medicine, chairs and chiefs 
of departments of internal medicine, and internal medicine 
residency program directors from these medical schools and 
asked for recommendations of attendings from both within 
and outside their institutions whom they considered to be 
great inpatient teachers. 
This sampling method resulted in 59 potential participants. 
An internet search was conducted on each potential par-
ticipant to obtain further information about the individuals 
and their institutions. Both personal characteristics (medical 
education, training, and educational awards) and organiza-
tional characteristics (geographic location, hospital size and 
affiliation, and patient population) were considered so that 
a variety of organizations and backgrounds were represented. 
Through this process, the list was narrowed to 16 attendings 
who were contacted to participate in the study, of which 12 
agreed. The number of attendings examined was appropriate 
because saturation of metathemes can occur in as little as 6 
interviews, and data saturation occurs at 12 interviews.19 The 
participants were asked to provide a list of their current learn-
ers (ie, residents and medical students) and 6 to 10 former 
learners to contact for interviews and focus groups. 
Data Collection
Observations
Two researchers conducted the one-day site visits. One was 
a physician (S.S.) and the other a medical anthropologist 
(M.H.), and both have extensive experience in qualitative 
methods. The only exception was the site visit at the prin-
cipal investigator’s own institution, which was conducted by 
the medical anthropologist and a nonpracticing physician 
who was unknown to the participants. The team structure 
varied slightly among different institutions but in general 
was composed of 1 attending, 1 senior medical resident, 1 to 
2 interns, and approximately 2 medical students. Each site 
visit began with observing the attendings (n = 12) and cur-
rent learners (n = 57) on morning rounds, which included 
their interactions with patients. These observations lasted 
approximately 2 to 3 hours. The observers took handwritten 
field notes, paying particular attention to group interactions, 
teaching approaches, and patient interactions. The observ-
ers stood outside the medical team circle and remained si-
lent during rounds so as to be unobtrusive to the teams’ dis-
cussions. The observers discussed and compared their notes 
after each site visit.
Interviews and Focus Groups
The research team also conducted individual, semistructured 
interviews with the attendings (n = 12), focus groups with 
their current teams (n = 46), and interviews or focus groups 
with their former learners (n = 26). Current learners were 
asked open-ended questions about their roles on the teams, 
their opinions of the attendings, and the care the attendings 
provide to their patients. Because they were observed during 
rounds, the researchers asked for clarification about specific 
interactions observed during the teaching rounds. Depend-
ing on availability and location, former learners either par-
ticipated in in-person focus groups or interviews on the day 
of the site visit, or in a later telephone interview. All inter-
views and focus groups were audio recorded and transcribed.
This study was deemed to be exempt from regulation by 
the University of Michigan Institutional Review Board. All 
participants were informed that their participation was com-
pletely voluntary and that they could refuse to answer any 
question.
Data Analysis
Data were analyzed using a thematic analysis approach,20 
which involves reading through the data to identify patterns 
(and create codes) that relate to behaviors, experiences, 
meanings, and activities. The patterns are then grouped into 
themes to help further explain the findings.21 The research 
team members (S.S. and M.H.) met after the first site vis-
it and developed initial ideas about meanings and possible 
patterns. One team member (M.H.) read all the transcripts 
from the site visit and, based on the data, developed a code-
TABLE 1. Characteristics of Selected Attendings
Characteristic
N
Gender
   Male
   Female
9
3
Region
   Northeast
   South
   Midwest
   West
1
2
6
3
Top 25 on the 2015 US News & World Report Top Medical Schools: Research 
Rankings
9
Institutions represented
   Baylor College of Medicine
   Cleveland Clinic
   Massachusetts General Hospital
   Northwestern University; Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center
   Rush University; Cook County Hospital Chicago
   Tulane University
    
University of California, San Francisco; San Francisco Veterans Affairs  
Medical Center
   University of Chicago, Pritzker School of Medicine
   University of Michigan
   University of Washington; Seattle Veterans Affairs Medical Center
   University of Wisconsin-Madison
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
Academic position
   Staff physician
   Assistant professor
   Associate professor
   Professor
1
1
7
3
Mean years in practice (range)
26 (11-44)
 Saint et al   |   Physician Interactions with Patients
976          An Official Publication of the Society of Hospital Medicine 
Journal of Hospital Medicine    Vol 12  |  No 12  |  December 2017
book to be used for this study. This process was repeated after 
every site visit, and the coding definitions were refined as 
necessary. All transcripts were reviewed to apply any new 
codes when they developed. NVivo® 10 software (QSR In-
ternational, Melbourne, Australia) was used to assist with 
the qualitative data analysis.
To ensure consistency and identify relationships between 
codes, code reports listing all the data linked to a specific 
code were generated after all the field notes and transcripts 
were coded. Once verified, codes were grouped based on sim-
ilarities and relationships into prominent themes related to 
physician-patient interactions by 2 team members (S.S. and 
M.H.), though all members reviewed them and concurred.
RESULTS
A total of 12 attending physicians participated (Table 1). 
The participants were from hospitals located throughout the 
U.S. and included both university-affiliated hospitals and 
Veterans Affairs medical centers. We observed the attend-
ing physicians interact with more than 100 patients, with 
3 major patient interaction themes emerging. Table 2 lists 
key approaches for effective patient-physician interactions 
based on the study findings. 
Care for the Patient’s Well-Being
The attendings we observed appeared to openly care for 
their patients’ well-being and were focused on the patients’ 
wants and needs. We noted that attendings were general-
ly very attentive to the patients’ comfort. For example, we 
observed one attending sending the senior resident to find 
the patient’s nurse in order to obtain additional pain medi-
cations. The attending said to the patient several times, “I’m 
sorry you’re in so much pain.” When the team was leaving, 
she asked the intern to stay with the patient until the medi-
cations had been administered. 
Learners noticed when an attending physician was espe-
cially skilled at demonstrating empathy and patient-cen-
tered care. While education on rounds was emphasized, pa-
tient connection was the priority. One learner described the 
following: “… he really is just so passionate about patient 
care and has so much empathy, really. And I will tell you, of 
all my favorite things about him, that is one of them...” 
The attendings we observed could also be considered pa-
tient advocates, ensuring that patients received superb care. 
As one learner said about an attending who was attempting 
to have his patient listed for a liver transplant, “He is the 
biggest advocate for the patient that I have ever seen.” Re-
garding the balance between learning biomedical concepts 
and advocacy, another learner noted the following: “… 
there is always a teaching aspect, but he always makes sure 
that everything is taken care of for the patient…”
Building rapport creates and sustains bonds between peo-
ple. Even though most of the attendings we observed primar-
ily cared for hospitalized patients and had little long-term 
continuity with them, the attendings tended to take spe-
cial care to talk with their patients about topics other than 
medicine to form a bond. This bonding between attending 
and patient was appreciated by learners. “Probably the most 
important thing I learned about patient care would be tak-
ing the time and really developing that relationship with 
patients,” said one of the former learners we interviewed. 
“There’s a question that he asks to a lot of our patients,” 
one learner told us, “especially our elderly patients, that [is], 
‘What’s the most memorable moment in your life?’ So, he 
asks that question, and patient[s] open up and will share.” 
The attendings often used touch to further solidify their 
relationships with their patients. We observed one attending 
who would touch her patients’ arms or knees when she was 
talking with them. Another attending would always shake the 
patient’s hand when leaving. Another attending would often 
lay his hand on the patient’s shoulder and help the patient sit 
up during the physical examination. Such humanistic behavior 
was noticed by learners. “She does a lot of comforting touch, 
particularly at the end of an exam,” said a current learner. 
Consideration of the “Big Picture”
Our exemplary attendings kept the “big picture” (that is, 
the patient’s overall medical and social needs) in clear fo-
cus. They behaved in a way to ensure that the patients un-
derstood the key points of their care and explained so the 
patients and families could understand. A current learner 
said, “[The attending] really makes sure that the patient un-
derstands what’s going on. And she always asks them, ‘What 
do you understand, what do you know, how can we fill in any 
blanks?’ And that makes the patient really involved in their 
own care, which I think is important.” This reflection was 
supported by direct observations. Attendings posed the fol-
TABLE 2. Key Approaches for Effective Patient-
Physician Interactions 
Care for the Patient’s Well-Being
•  
Be a patient advocate and attend to each patient’s comfort.
•  
Talk with the patient about topics other than medicine to form a bond.
•  
Use touch to comfort the patient. 
Consideration of the “Big Picture”
•  
Explain so the patient and family can understand.
•  
Use teach-back techniques to ensure the patient and family understand 
the plan.
•  
Consider what the patient needs in the outpatient setting upon discharge.
•  
Inquire about the patient’s social situation and support system to anticipate 
problems the patient may face in the outpatient setting. 
Respect for the Patient 
•  
Shake hands with the patient when entering and exiting the room.
•  
Introduce the team members who are present or have them introduce 
themselves to the patient.
•  
Leave the room and the patient the way they were found.
•  
Consider using appropriate humor to make the patient or family members 
feel more comfortable.
•  
Speak with the patient at eye level by either sitting or kneeling when the 
patient is lying in bed. 
 Physician Interactions with Patients   |   Saint et al
An Official Publication of the Society of Hospital Medicine 
Journal of Hospital Medicine    Vol 12  |  No 12  |  December 2017          977
lowing questions at the conclusion of patient interactions: 
“Tell me what you know.” “Tell me what our plan is.” “What 
did the lung doctors tell you yesterday?” These questions, 
which have been termed “teach-back” and are crucial for 
health literacy, were not meant to quiz the patient but rather 
to ensure the patient and family understood the plan. 
We noticed that the attendings effectively explained clin-
ical details and the plan of care to the patient while avoiding 
medical jargon. The following is an example of one interac-
tion with a patient: “You threw up and created a tear in the 
food tube. Air got from that into the middle of the chest, not 
into the lungs. Air isn’t normally there. If it is just air, the 
body will reabsorb [it]... But we worry about bacteria getting 
in with the air. We need to figure out if it is an infection. 
We’re still trying to figure it out. Hang in there with us.” 
One learner commented, “… since we do bedside presenta-
tions, he has a great way of translating our gibberish, basical-
ly, to real language the patient understands.” 
Finally, the attendings anticipated what patients would 
need in the outpatient setting. We observed that attendings 
stressed what the next steps would be during transitions of 
care. As one learner put it, “But he also thinks ahead; what 
do they need as an outpatient?” Another current learner 
commented on how another attending always asked about 
the social situations of his patients stating, “And then there 
is the social part of it. So, he is very much interested [in] 
where do they live? What is their support system? So, I think 
it has been a very holistic approach to patient care.” 
Respect for the Patient
The attendings we observed were steadfastly respectful to-
ward patients. As one attending told us, “The patient’s room 
is sacred space, and it’s a privilege for us to be there. And if 
we don’t earn that privilege, then we don’t get to go there.” 
We observed that the attendings generally referred to the 
patient as Mr. or Ms. (last name) rather than the patient’s 
first name unless the patient insisted. We also noticed that 
many of the attendings would introduce the team members 
to the patients or ask each member to introduce himself or 
herself. They also tended to leave the room and patient the 
way they were found, for example, by pushing the patient’s 
bedside table so that it was back within his or her reach or 
placing socks back onto the patient’s feet. 
We noted that many of our attendings used appropriate 
humor with patients and families. As one learner explained, 
“I think Dr. [attending] makes most of our patients laugh 
during rounds. I don’t know if you noticed, but he really puts 
a smile on their face[s] whenever he walks in. … Maybe it 
would catch them off guard the first day, but after that, they 
are so happy to see him.” 
Finally, we noticed that several of our attendings made 
sure to meet the patient at eye level during discussions by ei-
ther kneeling or sitting on a chair. One of the attendings put 
it this way: “That’s a horrible power dynamic when you’re an 
inpatient and you’re sick and someone’s standing over you 
telling you things, and I like to be able to make eye contact 
with people, and often times that requires me to kneel down 
or to sit on a stool or to sit on the bed. … I feel like you’re 
able to connect with the people in a much better way…” 
Learners viewed this behavior favorably. As one told us, 
“[The attending] gets down to their level and makes sure 
that all of their questions are answered. So that is one thing 
that other attendings don’t necessarily do.” 
DISCUSSION
In our national, qualitative study of 12 exemplary attending 
physicians, we found that these clinicians generally exhib-
ited the following behaviors with patients. First, they were 
personable and caring and made significant attempts to con-
nect with their patients. This occasionally took the form 
of using touch to comfort patients. Second, they tended to 
seek the “big picture” and tried to understand what patients 
would need upon hospital discharge. They communicated 
plans clearly to patients and families and inquired if those 
plans were understood. Finally, they showed respect toward 
their patients without fail. Such respect took many forms 
but included leaving the patient and room exactly as they 
were found and speaking with patients at eye level. 
Our findings are largely consistent with other key studies 
in this field. Not surprisingly, the attendings we observed ad-
hered to the major suggestions that Branch and colleagues2 
put forth more than 15 years ago to improve the teaching of 
the humanistic dimension of the patient-physician relation-
ship. Examples include greeting the patient, introducing team 
members and explaining each person’s role, asking open-end-
ed questions, providing patient education, placing oneself at 
the same level as the patient, using appropriate touch, and be-
ing respectful. Weissmann et al.22 also found similar themes in 
their study of teaching physicians at 4 universities from 2003 
to 2004. In that study, role-modeling was the primary method 
used by physician educators to teach the humanistic aspects of 
medical care, including nonverbal communication (eg, touch 
and eye contact), demonstration of respect, and building a 
personal connection with the patients.22
In a focus group-based study performed at a teaching hos-
pital in Boston, Ramani and Orlander23 concluded that both 
participating teachers and learners considered the patient’s 
bedside as a valuable venue to learn humanistic skills. Un-
fortunately, they also noted that there has been a decline in 
bedside teaching related to various factors, including doc-
umentation requirements and electronic medical records.23 
Our attendings all demonstrated the value of teaching at a 
patient’s bedside. Not only could physical examination skills 
be demonstrated but role-modeling of interpersonal skills 
could be observed by learners.
Block and colleagues24 observed 29 interns in 732 patient 
encounters in 2 Baltimore training programs using Kahn’s “et-
iquette-based medicine” behaviors as a guide.12 They found 
that interns introduced themselves 40% of the time, ex-
plained their role 37% of the time, touched patients on 65% 
of visits (including as part of the physical examination), asked 
open-ended questions 75% of the time, and sat down with 
 Saint et al   |   Physician Interactions with Patients
978          An Official Publication of the Society of Hospital Medicine 
Journal of Hospital Medicine    Vol 12  |  No 12  |  December 2017
patients during only 9% of visits.24 Tackett et al.7 observed 24 
hospitalists who collectively cared for 226 unique patients in 
3 Baltimore-area hospitals. They found that each of the fol-
lowing behaviors was performed less than 30% of the time: ex-
plains role in care, shakes hand, and sits down.7 However, our 
attendings appeared to adhere to these behaviors to a much 
higher extent, though we did not quantify the interactions. 
This lends support to the notion that effective patient-physi-
cian interactions are the foundation of great teaching.
The attendings we observed (most of whom are inpatient 
based) tended to the contextual issues of the patients, such 
as their home environments and social support. Our exem-
plary physicians did what they could to ensure that patients 
received the appropriate follow-up care upon discharge.
Our study has important limitations. First, it was conducted 
in a limited number of US hospitals. The institutions repre-
sented were generally large, research-intensive, academic med-
ical centers. Therefore, our findings may not apply to settings 
that are different from the hospitals studied. Second, our study 
included only 12 attendings and their learners, which may also 
limit the study’s generalizability. Third, we focused exclusively 
on teaching within general medicine rounds. Thus, our find-
ings may not be generalizable to other subspecialties. Fourth, 
attendings were selected through a nonexhaustive method, in-
creasing the potential for selection bias. However, the multisite 
design, the modified snowball sampling, and the inclusion of 
several types of institutions in the final participant pool intro-
duced diversity to the final list. Former-learner responses were 
subject to recall bias. Finally, the study design is susceptible to 
observer bias. Attempts to reduce this included the diversity of 
the observers (ie, both a clinician and a nonclinician, the latter 
of whom was unfamiliar with medical education) and review 
of the data and coding by multiple research team members to 
ensure validity. Although we cannot discount the potential 
role of a Hawthorne effect on our data collection, the research 
team attempted to mitigate this by standing apart from the care 
teams and remaining unobtrusive during observations.
Limitations notwithstanding, we believe that our multisite 
study is important given the longstanding imperative to im-
prove patient-physician interactions. We found empirical 
support for behaviors proposed by Branch and colleagues2 and 
Kahn12 in order to enhance these relationships. While others 
have studied attendings and their current learners,22 we add to 
the literature by also examining former learners’ perspectives 
on how the attendings’ teaching and role-modeling have cre-
ated and sustained a lasting impact. The key findings of our 
national, qualitative study (care for the patient’s well-being, 
consideration of the “big picture,” and respect for the patient) 
can be readily adopted and honed by physicians to improve 
their interactions with hospitalized patients. 
Acknowledgments 
The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not neces-
sarily represent the official position of the US Department of Veterans Affairs.
Funding: Dr. Saint provided funding for this study using a University of Michigan 
endowment. 
Disclosure: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
References
1. Peabody FW. The care of the patient. JAMA. 1927;88(12):877-882.
2. Branch WT, Jr., Kern D, Haidet P, et al. The patient-physician relationship. Teach-
ing the human dimensions of care in clinical settings. JAMA. 2001;286(9):1067-
1074.
3. Frankel RM. Relationship-centered care and the patient-physician relationship. J 
Gen Intern Med. 2004;19(11):1163-1165.
4. Stewart MA. Effective physician-patient communication and health outcomes: a 
review. CMAJ. 1995;152(9):1423-1433.
5. Osmun WE, Brown JB, Stewart M, Graham S. Patients’ attitudes to comforting 
touch in family practice. Can Fam Physician. 2000;46:2411-2416.
6. Strasser F, Palmer JL, Willey J, et al. Impact of physician sitting versus standing 
during inpatient oncology consultations: patients’ preference and perception of 
compassion and duration. A randomized controlled trial. J Pain Symptom Manage. 
2005;29(5):489-497.
7. Tackett S, Tad-y D, Rios R, Kisuule F, Wright S. Appraising the practice of eti-
quette-based medicine in the inpatient setting. J Gen Intern Med. 2013;28(7):908-913.
8. Gallagher TH, Levinson W. A prescription for protecting the doctor-patient rela-
tionship. Am J Manag Care. 2004;10(2, pt 1):61-68.
9. Braddock CH, 3rd, Snyder L. The doctor will see you shortly. The ethical sig-
nificance of time for the patient-physician relationship. J Gen Intern Med. 
2005;20(11):1057-1062.
10. Ong LM, de Haes JC, Hoos AM, Lammes FB. Doctor-patient communication: a 
review of the literature. Soc Sci Med. 1995;40(7):903-918.
11. Lee SJ, Back AL, Block SD, Stewart SK. Enhancing physician-patient communi-
cation. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2002:464-483.
12. Kahn MW. Etiquette-based medicine. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(19):1988-1989.
13. Hoff T, Collinson GE. How Do We Talk About the Physician-Patient Relation-
ship? What the Nonempirical Literature Tells Us. Med Care Res Rev. 2016.
14. Houchens N, Harrod M, Moody S, Fowler KE, Saint S. Techniques and behaviors 
associated with exemplary inpatient general medicine teaching: an exploratory 
qualitative study. J Hosp Med. 2017;12(7):503-509.
15. Houchens N, Harrod M, Fowler KE, Moody S., Saint S. Teaching “how” to think 
instead of “what” to think: how great inpatient physicians foster clinical reason-
ing. Am J Med. In Press.
16. Harrod M, Saint S, Stock RW. Teaching Inpatient Medicine: What Every Physician 
Needs to Know. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2017.
17. Richards L, Morse J. README FIRST for a User’s Guide to Qualitative Methods. 
3rd ed. Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications Inc; 2013.
18. US News and World Report. Best Medical Schools: Research. 2014; http://
grad-schools.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-graduate-schools/top-medi-
cal-schools/research-rankings. Accessed on September 16, 2016.
19. Guest G, Bunce A, Johnson L. How many interviews are enough? An experiment 
with data saturation and variability. Field Methods. 2006;18(1):59-82.
20. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol. 
2006;3(2):77-101.
21. Aronson J. A pragmatic view of thematic analysis. Qual Rep. 1995;2(1):1-3.
22. Weissmann PF, Branch WT, Gracey CF, Haidet P, Frankel RM. Role modeling 
humanistic behavior: learning bedside manner from the experts. Acad Med. 
2006;81(7):661-667.
23. Ramani S, Orlander JD. Human dimensions in bedside teaching: focus group dis-
cussions of teachers and learners. Teach Learn Med. 2013;25(4):312-318.
24. Block L, Hutzler L, Habicht R, et al. Do internal medicine interns practice eti-
quette-based communication? A critical look at the inpatient encounter. J Hosp 
Med. 2013;8(11):631-634.
