 Correction
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES, ENGINEERING
Correction for “Investigation of hindwing folding in ladybird
beetles by artificial elytron transplantation and microcomputed
tomography,” by Kazuya Saito, Shuhei Nomura, Shuhei Yamamoto,
Ryuma Niyama, and Yoji Okabe, which appeared in issue 22, May
30, 2017, of Proc Natl Acad Sci USA (114:5624–5628; first published
May 15, 2017; 10.1073/pnas.1620612114).
The authors note that the author name Ryuma Niyama should
instead appear as Ryuma Niiyama. The corrected author line
appears below. The online version has been corrected.
Kazuya Saito, Shuhei Nomura, Shuhei Yamamoto,
Ryuma Niiyama, and Yoji Okabe
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1709196114
E5482
|
PNAS
|
July 3, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 27
www.pnas.org
 Investigation of hindwing folding in ladybird beetles by
artificial elytron transplantation and
microcomputed tomography
Kazuya Saitoa,1, Shuhei Nomurab, Shuhei Yamamotoc, Ryuma Niiyamad, and Yoji Okabea
aInstitute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Tokyo, 153-8505 Japan; bNational Museum of Nature and Science, 4-1-1 Amakubo,
Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki 305-0005 Japan; cGraduate School of Bioresource and Bioenvironmental Sciences, Kyushu University, 6-10-1 Hakozaki, Fukuoka,
812-8581 Japan; and dGraduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Tokyo, 113-8654 Japan
Edited by David A. Weitz, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, and approved April 17, 2017 (received for review December 20, 2016)
Ladybird beetles are high-mobility insects and explore broad areas by
switching between walking and flying. Their excellent wing trans-
formation systems enabling this lifestyle are expected to provide
large potential for engineering applications. However, the mecha-
nism behind the folding of their hindwings remains unclear. The
reason is that ladybird beetles close the elytra ahead of wing folding,
preventing the observation of detailed processes occurring under the
elytra. In the present study, artificial transparent elytra were trans-
planted on living ladybird beetles, thereby enabling us to observe the
detailed wing-folding processes. The result revealed that in addition
to the abdominal movements mentioned in previous studies, the
edge and ventral surface of the elytra, as well as characteristic shaped
veins, play important roles in wing folding. The structures of the wing
frames enabling this folding process and detailed 3D shape of the
hindwing were investigated using microcomputed tomography. The
results showed that the tape spring-like elastic frame plays an
important role in the wing transformation mechanism. Compared
with other beetles, hindwings in ladybird beetles are characterized by
two seemingly incompatible properties: (i) the wing rigidity with
relatively thick veins and (ii) the compactness in stored shapes with
complex crease patterns. The detailed wing-folding process revealed
in this study is expected to facilitate understanding of the naturally
optimized system in this excellent deployable structure.
aerospace engineering | biomimetics | Coccinella | Coleoptera | deployable
structure
L
adybird beetles are high-mobility insects and explore broad
areas by switching between walking and flying. This lifestyle is
achieved by an excellent wing transformation system that enables
smooth switching between the walking and flight forms. The
hindwing deployment in the takeoff motion is very fast and
completed within 0.1 s from the fully folded state (Movie S1).
Researchers have found that the intrinsic elasticity acting in wing
veins allows this high-speed wing deployment (1–6). Investigation
in other species of beetles indicated the existence of a hydraulic
mechanism that straightens the wing veins (7). In contrast, the
other fundamental problem, namely, the mechanism behind the
folding of these wings, remains unclear. It can be assumed that
wing folding is more difficult than unfolding in ladybird beetles
because the wing elasticity, which assists in rapid deployment,
would interfere in the folding process of the wings. Nevertheless,
ladybird beetles can achieve highly compact wing storage with
complex crease patterns. The up-and-down movements in the
abdomen are estimated to play an important role in the folding
process (2–4); however, how these simple movements can ac-
complish a complex folded shape remains unclear. Complicating
matters further is the fact that ladybird beetles close the elytra
ahead of wing folding, preventing the observation of detailed
folding processes. In addition, the elytra are required elements
for wing folding, and therefore cannot be removed for observa-
tions. Wing transformations were described using crease patterns
(ground plans) in previous studies (1, 8); however, the actual 3D
structures in folded and unfolded wings remain unclear.
To clarify these unknown mechanisms and structures, we first
transplanted artificial transparent elytra on living ladybird beetles
and observed their wing-folding movements using high-speed
cameras. This method revealed the detailed wing-folding mecha-
nism occurring under the elytra. Next, we investigated the bending
points in the anterior margin of the hindwing using microcomputed
tomography (micro-CT). This part is the most rigid area of the
hindwings and is considered to confer the rigidity and strength re-
quired for flight. Therefore, a detailed investigation of this area is
important for understanding the wing transformation mechanism
facilitating compatibility between the deformability required for wing
folding and strength property required for flying. The folded hindw-
ings were also investigated by micro-CT, and the actual 3D shape and
positional relationship between fold lines and frames were revealed.
Results
The specimens used were Coccinella septempunctata (L.), from
which two-thirds of the apical right elytron was removed. To
reestablish the function of wing folding and to reveal in detail the
folding processes, including the midfolded shapes of the hindw-
ings, we transplanted the acrylic transparent elytron. The artificial
elytra used were composed of UV light-cured resin constructed
using a silicon impression of the undersurface of the removed
elytron and transplanted into the original living ladybird beetle.
Fig. S1 shows the schematic representation of the transplant
Significance
Hindwings in ladybird beetles successfully achieve compatibil-
ity between the deformability (instability) required for wing
folding and strength property (stability) required for flying.
This study demonstrates how ladybird beetles address these
two conflicting requirements by an unprecedented technique
using artificial wings. Our results, which clarify the detailed
wing-folding process and reveal the supporting structures,
provide indispensable initial knowledge for revealing this
naturally evolved optimization system. Investigating the char-
acteristics in the venations and crease patterns revealed in this
study could provide an innovative designing method, enabling
the integration of structural stability and deformability, and
thus could have a considerable impact on engineering science.
Author contributions: K.S. and Y.O. designed research; K.S. performed research; K.S., S.N.,
and R.N. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; K.S., S.N., S.Y., R.N., and Y.O. analyzed
data; and K.S. and S.Y. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: saito-k@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1620612114/-/DCSupplemental.
5624–5628
|
PNAS
|
May 30, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 22
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620612114
 operation. The detailed method is explained in Materials and
Methods. Fig. 1A shows the hindwing of C. septempunctata. The
wing basal component is supported by two thick veins: the medi-
ocubital loop (MCL) and radiomedial loop (RML) (8, 9). The
positions of the folding lines in the rest position are shown in Fig.
1B. The crease lines can be classified into three types on the basis
of their functions. Red lines are the principal transverse fold
(PTF) and apical transverse fold (ATF), which fold a wing along
the longitudinal direction. Blue lines emerge between the MCL
and RML, and fold a wing along the transverse direction. These
two types of lines are connected by diamond-shaped crease
patterns (green lines). The detailed wing-folding processes are
explained with reference to Fig. 1 C–G. After landing, the elytra
are first closed before the hindwing folding commences (Fig. 1C).
The hindwings are simultaneously aligned backward and protrude
out from the closed elytra. Held by the elytron, the wing is slightly
folded in the transverse direction (Fig. 1D). Then, the ladybird
beetle lifts its abdomen, and the hindwings are pressed into the
undersurface of the elytron. During this process, the characteristic
shape of the MCL fits the curve of the ventral surface of the el-
ytron and ark-like mountain folding lines appear beneath the
MCL (Fig. 1E). The abdominal lifting movements are observed
multiple times. These movements result in the rubbing of the
underside of the hindwings and pulling them into the dorsal
1 / 1
PTF
ATF
PTF
ATF
M
V
M
V
M
M
V
M
V
M
V
PTF'
PTF'
ATF'
ATF'
PTF'
PTF'
ATF'
ATF'
M: mountain folding lines. V: valley folding lines.
ATF
B
C
G
D
F
E
A
PTF
RML
SV1
SV2
Anterior margin area
MP3+4
Fig. 1.
Wing-folding process in a ladybird beetle. (A) Hindwing of C. septempunctata. The basal part of the wing is supported by thick two veins: the MCL
and RML. (B) Main crease lines of hindwing folding. The crease lines can be classified into three types based on their functions. Red lines are the PTF and ATF,
which fold the wing along the longitudinal direction. Blue lines emerge between the MCL and RML and fold the wing along the transverse direction. The
movements of these two types of lines are connected by diamond-shaped crease patterns (green lines). Fine lines represent mountain folding lines, and
dashed lines represent valley folding lines. The dashed-line square corresponds to the paper model of Fig. 3. (C–G) Schematic representations of the wing-
folding process. (C) Elytra are closed ahead of the hindwings, and they are simultaneously aligned backward. (D) Held by the elytron, the wing is slightly
folded in the transverse direction and a triangular crease pattern emerges between the MCL and RML. (E) PTF and ATF are first introduced by the inner curve
of the elytron and the edge of the elytron with the abdomen (PTF′ and ATF′). (F) According to the wing retraction by abdominal movement, the ATF′ drifts
toward the apex of the wing by abdominal push and the wing is gradually retracted. The position of the PTF′ is held by the edge of the elytron. Finally, two
transverse folding lines are stabilized into the positions of the PTF and ATF as shown in B. (G) Explanation of the stored shape. The hindwings are folded into a
Z-shape on the folding lines of the PTF and ATF, and the diamond-shaped crease pattern emerges in the center of the hindwing.
Saito et al.
PNAS
|
May 30, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 22
|
5625
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
ENGINEERING
 storage space. For maximum effectiveness of these movements,
the tergal plates contain microspicule patches (Assisting Structures
for Wing Folding and Fig. S2), which are considered to hold the
surface of the hindwings and assist smooth wing folding (2–4). The
PTF is introduced by the inner curve of the elytron (PTF′ in Fig.
1G) and appears at almost the same position as in Fig. 1B. The
ATF is initially introduced by the edge of the elytron at the position
shown as ATF′ in Fig. 1E and gradually drifts toward the apex of
the wing guided by the abdominal movements (Fig. 1F). Finally, two
transverse folding lines (red lines) are stabilized into the positions of
the PTF and ATF in Fig. 1B, and the diamond-shaped crease
pattern (green lines) emerges in the center of the wing. In the stored
shape, the hindwings are folded into a Z-shape on the folding lines
of the PTF and ATF as shown in in Fig. 1G (Center). The wing
folding is completed within 2.0 s. For better understanding, a high-
speed movie of these folding processes is available in Movie S2.
The majority of the hindwing comprises relatively soft membrane.
During flights, the hindwing shape is maintained by thick veins.
Among them, the anterior margin area (Fig. 1A) including the
supporting vein 1 (SV1) and SV2 veins and the RML, is hard and
considered to confer stiffness and strength to the hindwings. We
investigated the deformation of this part in both folded and unfolded
states using micro-CT. Fig. 2A shows the 3D shape of the unfolded
wing reconstructed by the result of the CT scan. The thicknesses of
these main veins have no difference from other areas; however, their
cross-sections have a characteristic curved shape similar to the shape
of a tape spring (10–13). No special structures, including articula-
tions, thinner parts, or an inner cavity, are observed on the cross-
point of the crease lines and veins. Fig. 2B shows the 3D model of
the folded hindwing. It is observed that the anterior margin is bent
into a cylinder shape with a constant curvature instead of being bent
at a sharp angle (white circles in Fig. 2). The bent shapes of these
veins are similar to the shapes of the localized folds (10) observed in
a tape spring. For better understanding of the shape of the folded
wing, a translucent 3D image is available in Movie S3.
Discussion
With respect to the wing venation, two loop-shaped veins (MCL
and RML) are a common feature found in many beetle spe-
cies; however, the MCLs in ladybird beetles have characteristic
arc-like shapes. As mentioned above, this shape functions to
introduce the crease lines by fitting the ventral curve of the el-
ytron. These steady venations not only confer sufficient strength
and stiffness in hindwings but also play an important role for
interlocking the action of crease lines. The deploying actions are
caused by the skeletomuscular apparatus of the metathorax
(8, 14) and are propagated to the wing apex direction by these
thick veins. Therefore, ladybird beetles can interlock the move-
ment of two transverse folding lines and achieve compact wing
folding and quick deployment. C. septempunctata has a crease
pattern similar to the crease pattern of the other ladybird
Aiolocaria sp. reported by Fedorenko (8). According to Forbes
(1), Epilachna borealis (Fabricius) and Anatis 15-punctata (Olivier)
also possess similar crease patterns with the minor difference of
additional small fold lines in the posterior margin. A diamond-
shaped crease pattern similar to the green lines in Fig. 1B was also
found in these ladybird beetles and can be regarded as an im-
portant feature of their hindwings. Fig. 3A shows the schematic
of the folding movement of this pattern. Note that this figure
shows the ventral side of the hindwing; therefore, the mountain
and valley assignments of folding lines are exchanged from the
case of Fig. 1B. These diamond-shaped crease lines have little
involvement in the global deformation of the wings but cause the
additional fold on the ridge of the central folding line, as in-
dicated by the red circle in Fig. 3A. One possible function of this
additional fold is the lock mechanism that helps avoid accidental
unfolding caused by wing elasticity. Fig. 3B shows the semi-
transparent image of the folded hindwing. As shown in the red
circle in this figure, the additional fold of the diamond-shaped
crease is fixed by tucking between the MCL and RML (also
Movie S3). It can be considered that this tucking functions to
maintain the folded shape in the PTF. An additional possible
function may be to introduce bistability into the structure. The
bistable behavior of the hindwings, which is considered to assist
wing transformation and shape locking, has been reported in
many previous studies (1–3, 6, 8); however, its detailed mecha-
nisms remain unclear. Considering the structural stability, the
crease pattern evident in Fig. 3A has a negative degree of free-
dom; hence, it is not rigidly foldable in general (15, 16) (Rigid
Foldability in Origami Crease Patterns). Therefore, the act of
folding and unfolding should be accompanied by elastic defor-
mations. These deformations in nonrigid origami usually emerge
as stretching and shrinkage of fold lines, fold line drifts, and out-
of-plane deformation of facets. In the case of these diamond-
shaped crease lines, out-of-plane deformations are considered
Fig. 2.
Three-dimensional models of the hindwings in C. septempunctata
reconstructed from the results of micro-CT. (A, Upper Left) Unfolded hindwing
(from the underside). (A, Lower Right) Slice view on the white line is shown.
Compared with other parts, the cross-sections of the main supporting veins
(SV1, SV2) have no difference in thickness but have a characteristic curved
shape. (B) Folded hindwing. The main supporting veins are bent into a cylin-
drical shape (white circles) similar to the shape of a tape spring.
Fig. 3.
Schematic of the folding movement in the wing central part (from
the ventral side of the right hindwing). (A) Diamond-shaped crease lines,
which are characteristic of hindwings in ladybird beetles, have little in-
volvement in the global deformation of wings but cause the additional fold
on the ridge of the central folding line, as indicated by the black dotted lines
and red circles. (B) Translucent image of a folded hindwing in C. septem-
punctata. The additional fold part (white dotted lines) is positioned between
the RML (yellow dotted line) and MCL (green dotted line) (also Movie S3).
5626
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620612114
Saito et al.
 the dominant factor. Observing the wing structure, the facets as
presented in Fig. 3A are not wholly hard plates but are partially
supported by veins; therefore, these facets can readily cause out-
of-plane deformation involving some diagonal lines. In fact, it
can be confirmed that certain facets in the paper model of Fig.
3A result in out-of-plane deformations during the folding pro-
cess. This elastic deformation in the folding/unfolding process is
considered to impart the bistable behavior to hindwings.
From an engineering standpoint, the most interesting aspect of
hindwings in beetles is how they can achieve the compatibility be-
tween the deformability (or instability) required for the wing storage
and the strength properties (or stability) required for flying. These
two properties generally demonstrate a trade-off relationship, and
thus are difficult to combine (Crease Patterns and Supporting
Structures in Beetle Hindwings). Ladybird beetles have successfully
resolved these two conflicting requirements, resulting in the evolu-
tion of relatively thick veins with decent strength properties while
achieving sufficiently compact wing folding with two folding lines in
the longitudinal direction of the wing. It is noteworthy that
Fedorenko (17) concluded that ladybird beetles are categorized as
one of the most advanced groups within the context of wing folding.
The biggest challenge for ladybird beetles is that they are re-
quired to embed the two transverse folding lines (PTF and ATF)
on the anterior margin, which acts as the main support structure
of the hindwing during flight. Simple articulations or positionally
fixed compliant hinges in this area may cause a considerable
decrease in the stiffness and strength of the wing. Our results
show that ladybird beetles solve this problem by using tape
spring-like veins as the main wing-supporting structures. A tape
spring is a thin elastic strip with a curved cross-section that is
commonly known as a carpenter tape. This structure becomes
elastically stable when it is extended and can be stored into a
compact form only by elastic folding (10); therefore, it is widely
used in the extension booms and hinges of space-deployable
structures (11–13). Fig. 4 presents a schematic of the functions
of tape spring-like veins in wing folding/unfolding. These veins
are stabilized in the unfolded shape and can confer sufficient
stiffness for flight (Fig. 4A). Based on finite element analysis that
was conducted on a simple shell model of the SV2 vein obtained
from the results of micro-CT scanning, this curved cross-section
has about 11-fold greater bending stiffness than flat-shaped veins
of the same weight (Finite Element Analysis of the Tape Spring-
Like Vein and Fig. S3). If the specific stiffness is the only issue,
more effective forms were found in insect wings. For example,
wing veins in the dragonfly have a tubular sandwich micro-
structure (18). It is also reported that the elytra of beetles are
constructed with honeycomb-like sandwich structures (19). Be-
sides the structural reinforcement property, tape spring veins
have three unique properties enabling wing folding/unfolding in
ladybird beetles. First, the veins can be bent at an arbitrary po-
sition by forming localized folds during wing storage, and
therefore can serve as compliant hinges where appropriate. As
shown in Fig. 1 D and E, the edge of the elytron is used to ini-
tialize this folding (Fig. 4B). A second characteristic of this
structure is its ease of moving the bending point (position of the
localized fold) along the beam length (Fig. 4C). The revealed
folding processes include the drift of the ATF in the basal-to-
apex direction as shown in Fig. 1F. This drifting fold is consid-
ered to enable gradual wing retractions. The third function of the
tape spring vein is to store elastic energy for wing deployment
(Fig. 4 D and E). The elastic force caused by the resilience in the
localized folds is considered to enable rapid wing deployments in
ladybird beetles (Movie S1). With respect to wing-deploying
forces, it is reported that some beetles use hydraulic mecha-
nisms that may straighten the hindwings by blood pressure (7).
Our micro-CT investigation shows no concrete evidence re-
garding whether ladybird beetles exhibit similar mechanisms
(e.g., cavities in hindwings, inflation of unfolded veins). Further
investigations, particularly of the cross-sections of wing veins, by
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and microtome are war-
ranted to clarify this issue.
The detailed wing-folding mechanism revealed in the present
study is expected to facilitate understanding of the optimization
process that has developed during the course of evolution, which can
elucidate the innovative design method enabling the integration of
both structural stability and deformability. Immediate applications
may be deployable structures, including space-deployable structures
represented by solar array paddles and antenna reflectors of satel-
lites, wings of carrier-based aircrafts, and many articles of daily use
with a deforming function (e.g., umbrellas, fans). The relationship
between the wing-actuating mechanisms and latest mechanics is
similarly interesting. The deformations include elastic behavior in the
supports, and therefore can be determined as the compliant mech-
anism (20, 21). This mechanism is an active research target within
the mechanics and microelectromechanical system fields. In regard
to the geometry of the crease pattern, Brackenbury (3) and Haas and
Wootton (22) proposed a simplified geometrical model based on the
characteristic patterns found in most beetles. These studies have
recently been considered to gain importance because of the ad-
vancement in applied origami (23–27). Combined with these
emerging technologies, the wings of beetles will have a great impact
on multiscaled production in various engineering fields.
Materials and Methods
Transplant Operation. Specimens used were of the ladybird beetle species
C. septempunctata (L.) (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) and were captured in the
grass fields of Tokyo, Japan. Each specimen was anesthetized using carbon
dioxide gas, and two-thirds of its right apical elytron was excised using
scissors. Silicone (Sildefit wash-XS; SHOFU Co., Ltd.) was used to construct the
impression of the undersurface of the excised elytron. The curing time was
5 min at 25 °C. The UV-cured resin (Craft arrange clear; CHEMITECH, Inc.) was
applied in a thin layer on the impressions using a brush. After curing by UV
light, the transparent acrylic elytron was fabricated. These artificial wings
were adhered on the apices of the excised wings of the original ladybird
beetles using a UV-cured resin. Each transplant operation was completed
in ≤1 h to minimize the damage to the hindwings and living beetles.
Observations by High-Speed Cameras. The specimens were placed on an
acrylic board and were kept in focus by simultaneously moving the board on
the table to maintain their position in the frame. High-speed cameras
(Phantom V1611, Nobby Tech. Ltd.; VW9000, KEYENCE CORPORATION; and
HAS-L2, DITECT Co., Ltd.) were used to acquire slow-motion movies. The
Introducing 
localized fold
Elytron edge
Abdominal push
Pumping 
movement
Drifting 
localized fold 
Elastic energy stored  
Elastic deployment
SV2
Stabilized in 
unfolded shape
A
B
C
D
E
SV1
Fig. 4.
Schematic of the functions of tape spring-like veins. (A) Veins are
stabilized in the unfolded position and able to confer sufficient stiffness for
flight. (B) Veins can be bent at an arbitrary position by forming localized folds
during wing storage. The edge of the elytron is used to initialize this folding.
(C) It is easy to move the bending point (position of the localized fold) along
the beam length in tape spring veins. (D and E) Storing elastic energy for
wing deployment. The elastic force caused by the resilience of the localized
folds is considered to enable rapid wing deployments in ladybird beetles.
Saito et al.
PNAS
|
May 30, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 22
|
5627
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
ENGINEERING
 wing-deploying scenes (Movie S1) were filmed using 3,000 and 4,000 frames
per second (fps), whereas the folding scenes (Movie S2) used 60 fps.
Micro-CT. This study used the microfocus X-ray CT system, inspeXio SMX-
100CT (SHIMADZU CORPORATION), which comprises a nonenclosure tube-
type X-ray generator operating at a voltage of 100 kV. Specimens used
were the folded and unfolded hindwings of C. septempunctata vertically
mounted on the stage along the wing-length direction. CT images were
acquired for each 10-μm length at a resolution of 1,024 × 1,024 pixels and
reconstructed into 3D images using the visualization software VGStudio
MAX (Volume Graphics GmbH).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank M. Maruyama for meaningful discussions
during the early days of the study, F. Tomoike for giving useful advice about
manufacturing of the artificial wings, A. Igarashi for supporting the capture
and upkeep of the ladybird beetles, and Nobby Tech. Ltd. and KEYENCE
CORPORATION for providing high-speed cameras. This work was supported by
the Special Fund of the Institute of Industrial Science, the University of
Tokyo; Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Grants-in-Aid for
Scientific Research (KAKENHI) Grants 24860024 and 17H04911; Asahi Glass
Foundation Research Encouragement grants (2016); and Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Exploratory Research for Advanced Technology (ERATO)
Grant JPMJER1501. The work of S.N. is supported, in part, by KAKENHI
Grant 24120002.
1. Forbes WTM (1926) The wing folding pattern of the Coleoptera. J NY Entomol Soc 24:
91–139.
2. Hammond PM (1979) Wing-folding mechanisms of beetles, with special reference to
investigations
of
adephagan
phylogeny
(Coleoptera).
Carabid
Beetles,
Their
Evolution, Natural History, and Classification, eds Erwin TL, Ball GE, Whitehead DR
(Dr W. Junk, The Hague), pp 113–180.
3. Brackenbury JH (1944) Wing folding and free-flight kinematics in Coleoptera (In-
secta): A comparative study. J Zool 232:253–283.
4. Schneider VP (1978) Flight types and hinding folding in Coleoptera. Zool Jahrb Abt
Anat Ontogenie Tiere 99:174–210.
5. Saito K, Yamamoto S, Maruyama M, Okabe Y (2014) Asymmetric hindwing foldings in
rove beetles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111:16349–16352.
6. Haas F, Gorb S, Blickhan R (2000) The function of resilin in beetle wings. Proc Biol Sci
267:1375–1381.
7. Sun J, Ling M, Wu W, Bhushan B, Tong J (2014) The hydraulic mechanism of the
unfolding of hind wings in Dorcus titanus platymelus (order: Coleoptera). Int J Mol Sci
15:6009–6018.
8. Fedorenko DN (2009) Evolution of the Beetle Hind Wing, with Special Reference to
Folding (Insects, Coleoptera) (Pensoft Publishers, Sofia, Bulgaria).
9. Kukalová-Peck J, Lawrence JF (1993) Evolution of the hind wing in Coleoptera. Can
Entomol 125:181–258.
10. Seffen KA, Pellegrino S (1999) Deployment dynamics of tape springs. Proc R Soc A 455:
1003–1048.
11. Mobrem M, Adams D (2009) Deployment analysis of lenticular jointed antennas on-
board the Mars express spacecraft. J Spacecr Rockets 46:394–402.
12. Mallikarachchi HMYC, Pellegrino S (2009) Deployment dynamics of ultrathin com-
posite booms with tape-spring hinges. J Spacecr Rockets 51:604–613.
13. Kwok K, Pellegrino S (2013) Folding, stowage, and deployment of viscoelastic tape
springs. AIAA Stud J 51:1908–1918.
14. Haas F, Beutel RG (2001) Wing folding and the functional morphology of the wing
base in Coleoptera. Zoology (Jena) 104:123–141.
15. Watanabe N, Kawaguchi K (2009) The method for judging rigid foldability. Origami4,
ed Lang JR (A K Peters, Natick, MA), pp 165–174.
16. Tachi T (2010) Geometric considerations for the design of rigid origami structures.
Proceedings of the International Association for Shell and Spatial Structures Sympo-
sium, eds Zhang Q, Yang L, Hu Y, (China Architecture & Building Press, Beijing), pp
771–782.
17. Fedorenko DN (2015) Transverse folding and evolution of the hind wings in beetles
(Insecta, Coleoptera). Biol Bull Rev 5:71–84.
18. Ren H, Wang X, Li X, Chen Y (2013) Effects of Dragonfly wing structure on the dy-
namic performances. J Bionic Eng 10:28–38.
19. Chen J, Xie J, Wu Z, Elbashiry EMA, Lu Y (2015) Review of beetle forewing structures
and their biomimetic applications in China: (I) On the structural colors and the vertical
and horizontal cross-sectional structures. Mater Sci Eng C 55:605–619.
20. Howell LL (2001) Compliant Mechanisms (Wiley–Interscience, New York).
21. Smith ST (2000) Flexures: Elements of Elastic Mechanisms (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL).
22. Haas F, Wootton RJ (1996) Two basic mechanisms in insect wing folding. Proc R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 263:1651–1658.
23. Saito K, Tsukahara A, Okabe Y (2016) Designing of self-deploying origami structures
using geometrically misaligned crease patterns. Proc R Soc A 472:20150235.
24. Saito K, Tsukahara A, Okabe Y (2015) New deployable structures based on an elastic
origami model. J Mech Des N Y 137:021402.
25. Felton S, Tolley M, Demaine E, Rus D, Wood R (2014) Applied origami. A method for
building self-folding machines. Science 345:644–646.
26. Filipov ET, Tachi T, Paulino GH (2015) Origami tubes assembled into stiff, yet re-
configurable structures and metamaterials. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:12321–12326.
27. Chen Y, Peng R, You Z (2015) Applied origami. Origami of thick panels. Science 349:
396–400.
28. Shi NN, et al. (2015) Thermal physiology. Keeping cool: Enhanced optical reflection
and radiative heat dissipation in Saharan silver ants. Science 349:298–301.
29. Burrows M, Sutton G (2013) Interacting gears synchronize propulsive leg movements
in a jumping insect. Science 341:1254–1256.
30. Gao X, Jiang L (2004) Biophysics: Water-repellent legs of water striders. Nature 432:
36.
31. Gorb SN (1998) Frictional surfaces of the elytra-to-body arresting mechanism in te-
nebrionid Beetles (Coleoptera tenebrionidae): Design of co-opted fields of micro-
trichia and cuticle ultrastructure. Int J Insect Morphol Embryol 27:205–225.
32. Belcasro SM, Hull TC (2002) Modelling the folding of paper into three dimensions
using affine transformations. Linear Algebra Appl 348:273–282.
33. Tachi T (2009) Simulation of rigid origami. Origami4, ed Lang JR (A K Peters, Natick,
MA), pp 175–187.
34. Thompson DW (1917) On Growth and Form (Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, UK).
35. Vincent JFV, Wegst UGK (2004) Design and mechanical properties of insect cuticle.
Arthropod Struct Dev 33:187–199.
36. Takaku Y, et al. (2013) A thin polymer membrane, nano-suit, enhancing survival
across the continuum between air and high vacuum. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110:
7631–7635.
5628
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620612114
Saito et al.
