 Electroacupuncture Promotes Central Nervous
System-Dependent Release of Mesenchymal
Stem Cells
TATIANA E. SALAZAR,a,b,c MATTHEW R. RICHARDSON,d ELENI BELI,b MATTHEW S. RIPSCH,e,f
JOHN GEORGE,c YOUNGSOOK KIM,e YAQIAN DUAN,b LENI MOLDOVAN,b YUANQING YAN,a
ASHAY BHATWADEKAR,b VAISHNAVI JADHAV,e JARED A. SMITH,e SUSAN MCGORRAY,g
ALICIA L. BERTONE,h DMITRI O. TRAKTUEV,i,j KEITH L. MARCH,i,j LUIS M. COLON-PEREZ,k
KEITH G. AVIN,l EMILY SIMS,m JULIE A. MUND,d,m JAMIE CASE,m,n XIAOLIN DENG,o MIN SU KIM,p
BRUCE MCDAVITT,q MICHAEL E. BOULTON,b JEFFREY THINSCHMIDT,r SERGIO LI CALZI,b
STEPHANIE D. FITZ,s ROBYN K. FUCHS,l STUART J. WARDEN,l TODD MCKINLEY,t ANANTHA SHEKHAR,s
MARCELO FEBO,k PHILLIP L. JOHNSON,u LUNG-JI CHANG,v,w ZHANGUO GAO,x MIKHAIL G. KOLONIN,x
SONG LAI,y JINGFENG MA,y XINZHONG DONG,z FLETCHER A. WHITE,e,f HUISHENG XIE,aa
MERVIN C. YODER,d,m MARIA B. GRANT
b
Key Words. Mesenchymal stem cells • Adult stem cells • Nervous system • Neurones
ABSTRACT
Electroacupuncture (EA) performed in rats and humans using limb acupuncture sites, LI-4 and
LI-11, and GV-14 and GV-20 (humans) and Bai-hui (rats) increased functional connectivity
between the anterior hypothalamus and the amygdala and mobilized mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) into the systemic circulation. In human subjects, the source of the MSC was found to be
primarily adipose tissue, whereas in rodents the tissue sources were considered more heteroge-
neous. Pharmacological disinhibition of rat hypothalamus enhanced sympathetic nervous system
(SNS) activation and similarly resulted in a release of MSC into the circulation. EA-mediated SNS
activation was further supported by browning of white adipose tissue in rats. EA treatment of
rats undergoing partial rupture of the Achilles tendon resulted in reduced mechanical hyperalge-
sia,
increased
serum
interleukin-10
levels
and
tendon
remodeling,
effects
blocked
in
propranolol-treated rodents. To distinguish the afferent role of the peripheral nervous system,
phosphoinositide-interacting regulator of transient receptor potential channels (Pirt)-GCaMP3
(genetically encoded calcium sensor) mice were treated with EA acupuncture points, ST-36 and
LIV-3, and GV-14 and Bai-hui and resulted in a rapid activation of primary sensory neurons. EA
activated sensory ganglia and SNS centers to mediate the release of MSC that can enhance tis-
sue repair, increase anti-inflammatory cytokine production and provide pronounced analgesic
relief. STEM CELLS 2017;35:1303–1315
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
In this study, we show how the use of electroacupuncture (EA) at specific points stimulates
mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) release into peripheral blood through the activation of the ner-
vous system. EA could be used to aid tissue repair through increasing the levels of circulating
MSC. Moreover, MSC can be harvested directly from the blood of EA-treated humans and ani-
mals and expanded ex vivo. Thus, EA may be a low cost, low risk method for MSC harvest for
autologous stem cell therapy.
INTRODUCTION
Acupuncture, one of the oldest medical thera-
pies, mediates its therapeutic effect through the
insertion of needles into specific points in the
body called acupoints [1]. Electroacupuncture
(EA) combines traditional acupuncture with
modern electrotherapy as a means to enhance
the stimulation at the acupoints. Acupoints are
located in areas of decreased electrical resis-
tance and increased electrical conductivity in
the body attributed to both neural and vascular
elements in the dermis or hypodermis [2]. His-
tological studies reveal that acupoints are locat-
ed in areas with high densities of free nerve
endings, arterioles, lymphatics, and mast cells
aGenetics Institute, cCollege of Medicine,
gDepartment of Biostatistics,
kDepartment of Psychiatry, McKnight
Brain Institute, rDepartment of
Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
wDepartment of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology, yDepartment of Radiation
Oncology, College of Medicine, aaCollege
of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA,
bDepartment of Ophthalmology, dWells
Center for Pediatric Research,
eDepartment of Anesthesia,
sDepartment of Psychiatry, tDepartment
of Orthopedic Surgery, uDepartment of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, Indiana
University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA, fRichard L.
Roudebush VA Medical Center; iKrannert
Institute of Cardiology, jIndiana Center
for Vascular Biology and Medicine,
lDepartment of Physical Therapy, School
of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences,
mMelvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center,
Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana,
USA; hDepartment of Veterinary Clinical
Sciences, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, USA; nScripps Clinic
Medical Group, Scripps Center for Organ
and Cell Transplantation, La Jolla,
California, USA; oMainland Acupuncture
Center, Gainesville, Florida, USA; pCollege
of Veterinary Medicine, Chon Buk
National University, Jeonju, South Korea;
qMcDavitt Veterinary Clinic, Zionsville,
Indiana, USA; vSchool of Medicine,
University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China, Sichuan, China;
xThe Brown Foundation, Institute of
Molecular Medicine, University of Texas
Health Science Center, Houston, Texas,
USA; zDepartment of Neuroscience,
Center of Sensory Biology, the Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Correspondence: Maria B. Grant,
M.D., Department of
Ophthalmology, Indiana University
School of Medicine, 980 W. Walnut
Street, R3-C426D, Indianapolis, Indi-
ana 46202, USA. Telephone: 11-
317-274-2628; Fax: 317-274-8046;
e-mail: mabgrant@iupui.edu; or
Mervin C. Yoder, M.D., Wells Center
for Pediatric Research, Indiana Uni-
versity School of Medicine, 1044
West Walnut Street, R4-W125, Indi-
anapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. Tele-
phone: 11-317-274-4738; Fax: 317-
274-8679; e-mail: myoder@iupui.edu
Received November 3, 2016;
accepted for publication February
11, 2017; first published online in
STEM CELLS EXPRESS March 16, 2017.
V
C AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2017/$30.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/stem.2613
REGENERATIVE MEDICINE
www.StemCells.com
The copyright line for this
article was changed on
6 October 2017 after original
online publication.
V
C AlphaMed Press 2017
 [3]. Certain acupoints have been identified to correspond to
specific neural structures, such as superficial nerves and nerve
plexuses [3].
The primary mechanism implicated in the anti-nociceptive
effect of acupuncture involves release of opioid peptides in
the central nervous system (CNS) in response to the long-
lasting activation of ascending sensory tracks during the stim-
ulation [1]. Adenosine has also been implicated, and interfer-
ing with adenosine metabolism prolonged the clinical benefit
of acupuncture [4].
While both anatomical characteristics and local mediators
of signaling are associated with specific acupoints, the mecha-
nism responsible for the beneficial systemic effects and heal-
ing associated with acupuncture still lacks understanding. In
this study, we sought to understand the central and peripher-
al nervous system response to EA using two sets of points (1:
LI-4, LI-11, GV-14, Bai-hui; 2:ST-36, LIV-3, GV-14 and Bai-hui;
Supporting Information Fig. S1) associated with successful
treatment of arthritis and asthma and with modulation of
immunity [5].
RESULTS
EA Induces Activation of Hypothalamic Regions of the
Brain in Both Rats and Humans
The systemic beneficial effects of EA may be centrally driven;
therefore, we sought to determine the relationship between
the hypothalamus and other brain structures, which is termed
“connectivity.” The hypothalamus plays a critical role as a pri-
mary homeostatic center in the brain and contains neurons
with important projections to other limbic sites and sympa-
thetic nuclei directly communicating with the periphery. To
determine whether the hypothalamus was involved in the EA
response, blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was performed in anes-
thetized male Sprague-Dawley rats (n 5 6) during a single EA
session. Connectivity was derived from four time points: base-
line, 0–8 minutes during EA, 9–22 minutes, and immediately
post-EA. Seed regions included the anterior, posterior, and lat-
eral hypothalamus. EA-stimulation produced changes in rats in
the strength of functional connectivity within the hypothala-
mus and between the hypothalamus and adjacent brain
regions, such as the amygdala (Fig. 1A), compared with base-
line and the post-EA period. A representative example of the
increase in signal (over time) in the PVN of a rat receiving
acupuncture is shown in Figure 1B.
Arterial spin labeling fMRI was performed in healthy
human subjects (n 5 6) during a single EA session. Connectivi-
ty was derived from four time points: baseline, 0–8 minutes
during EA, 8–16 minutes during EA, and immediately post-EA.
EA stimulation produced changes in humans in the strength
of
functional
connectivity
within
the
hypothalamus
and
between the hypothalamus and adjacent brain regions (Fig. 2)
compared with baseline and the post-EA period. Thus, rats
and humans exhibited a similar response in terms of the con-
nectivity observed.
As these regions have been associated with hematopoietic
stem cell mobilization [6], peripheral blood was examined in
the rat before and following EA for evidence of mesenchymal
stem
cell
(MSC)
mobilization.
A
313%
increase
in
the
circulating
MSC
population,
Lin-CD901CD44HI
cells,
was
detected in the blood of EA-treated rats 2 hours post-EA com-
pared with baseline (Fig. 3A, 3B).
Characterization of Human EA Mobilized MSC as
Adipocyte-Derived MSC
The availability of human antibodies to fully characterize the
populations of cells mobilized by EA lead us to next examine
the populations of cells mobilized by EA in the human sub-
jects that underwent fMRI. Due to limitations regarding the
fMRI equipment used, only points GV-14, LI-11, and LI-14
were able to be used in this experiment. We observed an
increase in MSC in the peripheral blood 2 hours following EA
in all subjects (Fig. 3C), while total lymphocyte numbers did
not change. To further characterize the MSC population and
potentially determine whether they were released from adi-
pose stores, the levels of CD341CD45-CD31- cells were
examined. Two hours following completion of EA, CD341
CD45-CD31- cells were increased in four of six individuals (Fig.
3D) and the response was proportional to the body mass
index of the subjects as previously noted [7]. Two individuals
with body mass index less than 18.5 did not demonstrate an
increase in this population. Human EA mobilized MSC were
expanded in vitro and underwent adipogenic differentiation.
Adipogenesis potential was confirmed by the cells’ ability to
form lipid droplets as established through oil red O staining
(Fig. 3E–3H).
Because hypothalamic activation (Fig. 1B) preceded the
mobilization of circulating MSC, it was proposed that the EA-
induced connectivity changes contributed to the subsequent
release of these cells into the peripheral blood. Exogenous
administration of epinephrine or dopamine in rats resulted in
a similar increase of Lin-CD90HICD441 cell population into the
circulation (Supporting Information Fig. S2A–S2C), supporting
the role of CNS in mobilization of MSC and in EA activating
these key CNS centers.
EA-Induced Uncoupling Protein 1 Expression Promotes
the Browning of White Adipose Tissue in Rats
To confirm that EA can activate the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem (SNS), we asked whether EA was associated with brow-
ning
of
white
adipose
tissue
(WAT).
The
“inducible/
recruitable” brown-like (beige a.k.a bright) adipocytes arise in
WAT and are functionally indistinguishable from adipocytes in
the canonical (constitutive) brown adipose tissue [8, 9]. The
function
of
brown
and
beige
adipocytes
is
muscle-
independent thermogenic energy dissipation, which relies on
the function of uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) [10]. Following
14 days of EA (every other day) in rats, UCP1 immunofluores-
cence of inguinal subcutaneous WAT was increased (Fig. 4A),
indicating a greater number of brown adipocytes, compared
with control (sham EA) (Fig. 4B). Consistent with the notion
that SNS signaling mainly activates subcutaneous WAT, no
changes were detected in intraperitoneal WAT.
Pharmacological Disinhibition of the Dorsomedial
Regions of the Tuberal Hypothalamus Mobilizes
Lin-CD90HICD441 Cells into the Circulation
To confirm that activation of the SNS can mediate release of
MSC, we performed stereotaxic injections with the GABAA
receptor antagonist
bicuculline
methiodide
(BMI)
in
the
1304
EA Promotes CNS-Dependent Release of MSC
STEM CELLS
V
C AlphaMed Press 2017
 dorsomedial regions of the tuberal hypothalamus to disinhibit
these regions. Histological verification of injection sites is indi-
cated in the illustration (Fig. 4C). The exact location of all
injection sites are shown on coronal sections from a Standard
Stereotaxic Atlas of the Rat Brain [11] (Fig. 4C) and a photo-
micrograph that shows the representative injection site (Fig.
4D). In rats, BMI at the dose of 50 pmol increased the per-
centage of circulating Lin-CD90HICD441 cells (F (2, 14) 5 6.7,
p 5 .027) at 4 hours post injection of BMI (Fig. 4E) in the
absence of EA. These results demonstrate that circulating
Lin-CD90HICD441 cells are mobilized during hypothalamic
disinhibition and EA. However, the delay in release (4 hours)
compared with EA (2 hours) may suggest an alternative mech-
anism of release.
EA-Treated Rodents Exhibit Reduced Mechanical
Hyperalgesia, Increased Serum Interleukin-10 Levels
and Enhanced Tissue Remodeling following Partial
Achilles Tendon Rupture
To address the possible anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects
of EA-mobilization of circulating MSC [7], we analyzed the con-
tribution of an EA treatment paradigm on injury-induced
Figure 1.
Electroacupuncture (EA) stimulation increases hypothalamic functional connectivity in rats. (A): Rat brains were monitored
through functional magnetic resonance imaging during administration of EA. Functional connectivity increased within the hypothalamus and
between the hypothalamus and adjacent brain region with progression of treatment (n 5 6). (B): A representative example of the increase in
signal (over time) in the PVN of a rat receiving acupuncture (n 5 1). Abbreviations: EA, electroacupuncture; PVN, paraventricular nucleus.
Salazar, Richardson, Beli et al.
1305
www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2017
 hyperalgesia in rats in the presence and absence of a b-
blocker, propranolol. Treatments included EA (i.e., applied to
the forelimb LI-4, LI-11, GV-14, and Bai-hui, and hindlimb
ST36, LIV-3, GV-14 and Bai-hui immune points in horses), sham
EA (i.e., applied to skin not associated with an acupoint) or EA
plus propranolol (i.e., potential inhibitor for sympathetic
effects of EA). EA or sham EA was administered every other
day for 2 weeks following injury. Using sham EA applied to
nonimmune acupoints or EA plus propranolol, nociceptive
behavior elicited by von Frey mechanical stimulation did not
change over the time course in the hind paw ipsilateral to the
injury (Supporting Information Fig. S3). In contrast, mechanical
hyperalgesia (assessed at both day 7 and 14) was considerably
decreased (i.e., able to tolerate more pressure) in injured
rodents subjected to EA application at LI-4, LI-11, GV-14, and
Bai-hui (Fig. 5A). At early stages of tendon repair, the
Figure 2.
Electroacupuncture (EA) stimulation increases hypothalamic functional connectivity in humans. Brains from normal subjects
were monitored using functional magnetic resonance imaging before, during, and after EA. Functional connectivity increased within the
hypothalamus and between the hypothalamus and adjacent brain regions with progression of treatment (n 5 6).
1306
EA Promotes CNS-Dependent Release of MSC
STEM CELLS
V
C AlphaMed Press 2017
 Figure 3.
Electroacupuncture (EA) stimulation induced mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) mobilization. (A): Rat peripheral blood MSC were
increased (p 5 .0063) after EA. Circulating MSC were defined as Lin-(CD45-CD31-erythroid-CD11b-) cells that were positive for CD44 and
CD90. Gated cells increased post treatment (n 5 11 for baseline and 4 hours, n 5 9 for 2 hours). (B): Representative flow charts for rat Lin-
cells are shown at baseline and 2 hours samples. (C): The percentage of human peripheral blood MSC increased in post EA-treatment
(p 5 .006, n 5 6). (D): The percentage of circulating MSCs from adipose tissue (AD-MSC) is significantly elevated 2 hours post EA-treatment
(p 5 .033, n 5 4). (E, F): EA-mobilized MSCs were expanded in vitro. After undergoing adipogenesis differentiation, EA-mobilized MSCs devel-
oped fat deposits as seen by Oil Red staining, which were not seen in the undifferentiated control cells (G, H). Magnification bars 5 (E, G):
100 mm; (F, H): 50 mm. Abbreviations: ASC, adipose stem cells; EA, electroacupuncture; MNC, mononuclear cell.
Salazar, Richardson, Beli et al.
1307
www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2017
 granulation tissues mainly synthesize type III collagen, while at
later stages of healing, intrinsic fibroblasts produce type I colla-
gen, whose fibers are orientated longitudinally to replace type
III collagen. At 14 days post-injury, EA sham-treated or EA plus
propranolol did not change type I collagen content, while type
I collagen was significantly enhanced by EA (Fig. 5B); there was
no change in type III collagen across treatments (Fig. 5C). Tak-
en together, these data suggest that EA may enhance the
replacement of thinner and immature type III collagen fibers
with mature type I collagen fibers in the injured tendon [12],
thereby supporting a better quality of regeneration and tissue
reorganization. Given that EA can attenuate mechanical hyper-
algesia and enhance tissue reorganization, we examined possi-
ble alterations of the anti-inflammatory cytokine, interleukin
(IL)-10, in blood plasma. Previous evidence suggested that EA
following surgical trauma contributed to increased levels of IL-
10 by T-cells [13] and focal microinjections of IL-10 diminish
mechanical hyperalgesia [14]. The results herein demonstrate
that tendon injury in rodents subjected to sham EA or EA com-
bined with propranolol fail to produce detectable changes in
plasma IL-10. However, injured rodents treated with EA signifi-
cantly increased IL-10 in plasma. These results indicate that EA
Figure 4.
Electroacupuncture (EA) increases sympathetic activation leading to browning of white adipose tissue and the effects of EA
can be duplicated by pharmacological disinhibition of hypothalamus (sympathetic activation). (A, B): UCP1 immunofluorescence (red)
detectable in inguinal subcutaneous adipose tissue (blue: adipocytes nuclei) from animals that underwent EA treatment (A) but not in
control (B). EA resulted in an increase in beige adipocytes (n 5 4). Magnification bars 5 50 mm. (C): The effects of EA can be duplicated
by pharmacological disinhibition of hypothalamus. Rats underwent injection of either vehicle, 30 pmol or 50 pmol/100 nL of the GABAA
receptor antagonist bicuculline methiodide. Sites of injections are represented on a coronal section from the tuberal hypothalamus from
a Standard Steroetaxic Atlas of the Rat brain [11]. Colored circles indicate injection sites (black, orange, and red represent vehicle, 30
pmol and 50 pmol, respectively). (D): Representative photomicrograph showing an injection site from one rat. Magnification
bar 5 1 mm. (E): There was a significant increase (p 5 .027) in Lin-CD90HICD441 cells in the plasma 4 hours post injection (n 5 6). Data
presented as means 6 SEM. Abbreviations: BMI, bicuculline methiodide; DMN, dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus; f, fornix; MNC, mono-
nuclear cells; mt, mammillothalamic tract; PeF, perifornical hypothalamus; PH, posterior hypothalamic nucleus; VMN, ventromedial hypo-
thalamic nucleus; 3V, third ventricle.
1308
EA Promotes CNS-Dependent Release of MSC
STEM CELLS
V
C AlphaMed Press 2017
 increases production of the endogenous anti-inflammatory
cytokine IL-10 (Fig. 5D).
EA Performed over Immune Points in Pirt-GCaMP3
Mice Rapidly Activates Primary Sensory Neurons
We next examined mice to confirm that EA stimulation of acupoints
(LI-4, LI-11, and GV-14 and Bai-hui) resulted in mobilization of MSC.
At 4 hours post EA, murine MSC as defined by Lin-PDGFRa1Sca-11
cells were significantly increased (p5 .01) in peripheral blood, a
response that was markedly reduced when mice were pretreated
with propranolol (Supporting Information Fig. S4). Immune
acupoints are present on both the front and hind limbs of mice and
are differentially used based on their ease of access in the particular
species undergoing EA. Thus, we used acupoints in both front limbs
(LI-4, LI-11) and hind limbs (ST-36 and LIV-3). To distinguish the
afferent stimulation of the hypothalamus by peripheral acupoints,
we treated Pirt-GCaMP3 mice with either a noxious hind paw pinch
(100g force) or EA directed at the hind limb acupoints (Fig. 6A–6F)
[15]. Hind paw stimulation evoked robust and transient Ca1
2
increases in 10–20 neurons per DRG in na
€
ıve mice, on average
12.763.0 per DRG (Fig. 6A, 6B) of which nearly all were small
diameter neurons (<20 mm; Supporting Information Fig. S5;
Figure 5.
Electroacupuncture (EA)-treated rodents exhibit reduced mechanical hyperalgesia, enhanced tissue remodeling, and increased
serum IL-10 levels following partial Achilles tendon rupture. (A): Effects of EA application on mechanical allodynia in rats at 7 and 14
days after partial tendon rupture in the right hind leg. Mechanical hypersensitivity was determined by measuring the change in weight-
bearing forces on the affected limb. Behavioral changes in the hind paw tactile threshold (in millinewtons, mN) were observed in the
hindpaw ipsilateral to the tendon injury 18 hours after EA treatment, EA sham treatment or EA treatment with propranolol. (*, p < .01
versus baseline. EA: n 5 9; EA: sham n 5 7; EA 1 propranolol: n 5 10). (B): EA increased type I collagen content in injured tendons in
rats at 14 days after unilateral Achilles tendon partial tenotomy. In EA-treated animals (n 5 6), type-I collagen content was 24% greater
in injured tendons than EA sham treated tendons (n 5 7; p < .05) and 28% greater in injured tendons than EA 1 propranolol treated ten-
dons (n 5 8; p < .02). (C): In contrast, there was no difference in type-III collagen content between injured EA and EA sham or EA 1 pro-
pranolol treated tendons (p 5 .67). (D): IL-10 serum levels were also elevated in EA-treated rats compared with EA sham and
EA 1 propanolol animals (p 5 .0041). Data presented as means 6 SEM. Abbreviations: EA, electroacupuncture; IL-10, interleukin-10.
Salazar, Richardson, Beli et al.
1309
www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2017
 Figure 6.
Small diameter primary afferent sensory neurons show sensitivity to pinch stimulus and medium-large diameter neurons
show sensitivity to electroacupuncture (EA) in Pirt-GCaMP3 mice with intact dorsal root ganglia (DRG). Representative fluorescent
GCaMP3 neuronal imaging response by lumbar DRG in vivo before (A) and after a mechanical press of the hindpaw using a 100g force
(B). The mechanical force evokes a robust fluorescent GCaMP3 Ca21 response in numerous small sensory neurons (B; white arrows).
Acupuncture needles alone failed to elicit neuronal changes in the same lumbar DRG of the Pirt-GCamp3 mouse (C, D). EA-stimulation
of the ST-36 and LIV-3 accupoints produced rapid activation of medium–larger diameter of the lumbar DRG (E, F; white arrows) (n 5 4,
p < .0001). Abbreviation: EA, electroacupuncture.
1310
EA Promotes CNS-Dependent Release of MSC
STEM CELLS
V
C AlphaMed Press 2017
 Supporting Information Video 1) suggestive of pain fibers. Place-
ment of acupuncture needles alone did not elicit activity in sensory
neurons (Fig. 6C, 6D; Supporting Information Video 2). We noticed
a striking pattern of neuronal activation in the DRG following EA
stimulation; many activated neurons were medium to large diame-
ter neurons (medium [20–25 mm]; large [>25 mm] with an average
of 6.164.0 neurons per ganglia; (Fig. 6E, 6F; Supporting Informa-
tion Video 3) suggesting activation of touch fibers.
EA at Immune Points in the Forelimbs Preferentially
Mobilizes MSC Whereas EA of Immune Points in the
Hind Limb Mobilizes Macrophages into the Circulation
Acupuncture of horses and humans is pursued with the same
rigor and is not as technically difficult as acupuncture in
rodents. We examined the forelimb (LI-4, LI-11, and GV-14
and Bai-hui) and hind limb immune points (ST36, LIV-3, and
GV-14 and Bai-hui) in horses. Peripheral blood of horses
(n 5 30) undergoing EA at LI-4, LI-11, and GV-14 and Bai-hui
was examined first. However, due to the limited availability of
equine MSC antibodies compared with humans and mice,
stem cell mobilization into peripheral blood was confirmed by
measuring circulating cell colony-forming ability in vitro. While
colony-forming cells were rarely seen at baseline, colony-
forming ability was easily detected in blood samples obtained
2 and 4 hours after EA (Fig. 7A), the identical time points
examined in humans and rats. Blood collected at 2 and 4
hours post-EA using mock acupoints approximately 1 cm from
the immune points in the same horses did not give rise to
colonies in vitro. Importantly, and representing a more critical
control than simply sham acupoints, the use of metabolic
points similarly did not give rise to significantly more colonies
in vitro (Fig. 7A). To further verify the stem/progenitor charac-
teristics of the equine cells, clonogenic potential was deter-
mined using single cell assays. EA-mobilized cells showed
robust clonogenic potential, with over 75% proliferating into
two or more cells, and over 50% of them resulting in large
colonies of 10,000 cells or more; levels of proliferation that
are generally reflective of stem/progenitor cells (Fig. 7B). The
MSC origin of the mobilized colony forming cells was con-
firmed by their in vitro differentiation into osteocytes as dem-
onstrated by positive staining for calcium deposits, (Fig. 7C,
panels a, b [controls: panels e, f]), as well as their adipogenic
differentiation (Fig. 7C, panels c, d [controls: panels g, h]) and
chondrogenic differentiation (Fig. 7C, panels i, j) supporting
that equine EA-mobilized cells display MSC lineage character-
istics. When the EA-mobilized equine cells were examined in
the in vivo angiogenesis assay, the cells did not directly form
blood vessels (Fig. 7D, panel a) or lumenize; thus supporting a
nonendothelial origin. However co-implantation of the EA-
mobilized equine cells with human cord blood derived endo-
thelial colony forming cells (ECFCs) significantly enhanced
ECFC vasculogenesis (Fig. 7D, panels b, c) and the number of
human vessels with an arterial morphology (Fig. 7E). Further-
more, when the EA-mobilized MSC were co-cultured with
human ECFC (hECFC) in vitro, a significant increase in HEY2
expression was observed in the endothelial cells, which indi-
cated that the addition of the equine cells promoted arterio-
genesis, as the Notch signaling pathway is known to be active
in arterial vascular endothelial cells (Fig. 7F). Overall, these
data support that EA-mobilized cells display MSC characteris-
tics and enhance hECFC vasculogenesis and arteriogenesis.
To compare the EA-mobilized MSC (EA-MSC) with other MSC
populations derived from either depots of adipose stem cells
(ASC) or the bone marrow (BM-MSC), we performed gene array
studies. Of the �30,000 genes present on the EquGene-1_0-st
GeneChip, 678 showed significant differences between EA-MSC
and BM-MSC, 1,164 between the EA-MSC and ASC and 1,193
between ASC and BM-MSC (all p < .05 and absolute fold change
>2) (Supporting Information Tables S1–S3). Principal component
analysis mapping (Supporting Information Fig. S6A), hierarchical
clustering (Supporting Information Fig. S6B), and partitioning
clustering (Supporting Information Fig. S6C) showed that the EA-
MSC, BM-MSC, and the ASC segregated into distinct groups. This
suggests either that the EA-mobilized MSC population may be
derived from a source distinct from either adipose tissue or
bone marrow, or that their mobilization into the systemic circu-
lation modified their gene expression from that of the BM-MSC
or ASC obtained directly from their tissue source. Genes that
were specifically upregulated in the EA-MSC cells compared with
BM-MSC and ASC (Supporting Information Fig. S6C, Cluster 1)
encoded numerous proteins with roles in cell cycle control and
progression, DNA replication and repair, endothelial cell physiol-
ogy, and adhesion and migration (BGN, CTH, DHFR, ENG, EDN1,
MYOF, PROCR, VEGF, several integrins, and SERPINB2). In addi-
tion, this group contained genes coding for enzymes implicated
in extracellular matrix synthesis, such as proteoglycans (e.g.,
HAS2, also possibly involved in vasculogenesis, CHSY1, GCNT4,
etc.) and collagens (COL1A1, COL1A2, COL3A1, COL5A1, COL5A2,
and COL12A1). Furthermore, EA-MSC cells expressed several
growth hormones, hormone receptors, and members of their
signaling pathways (FGF5, BDNF, HTR2A, ADORA2B, and RLN)
(Supporting Information Tables S1 and S3).
Genes showing the greatest decreases in EA-MSC cells
(Supporting Information Fig. S6C, Cluster 2) were acute-phase
response genes and protease inhibitors (HP, SAA1, JAM2, C1S,
C1R, and SLPI), concordant with the fact that stimulation of
EA points reduces acute and chronic inflammation (Supporting
Information Tables S2, S4).
The pathways in which were involved the genes differentially
expressed between EA-MSC and BM-MSC were analyzed using
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA), and included cellular
growth and proliferation, hepatic pathways and embryonic stem
cell pluripotency, DNA damage response, axonal guidance signal-
ing, cardiovascular system development, mitotic roles of polo-like
kinase, as well as cell cycle: G2/M DNA damage checkpoint regu-
lation, cell cycle control of chromosomal replication, GADD45 sig-
naling, and ATM signaling (Supporting Information Table S5).
In contrast, BM-MSC demonstrated increased expression
of genes involved in inflammatory responses (acute phase,
cytokine signaling), cell motility, and response to hormones
and growth factors (Supporting Information Fig. S6C, Cluster
3), while ASC displayed highly increased expression of genes
related to cholesterol, fatty acids, and lipid metabolism,
inflammatory response, and redox homeostasis (Supporting
Information Fig. S6C, Cluster 4).
Changes in representative genes (ADAM23, COL1A1, ENG,
FGF5, GCNT4, HP, IGFBP3, RLN, SAA1 and SERPINB2) were fur-
ther validated by real-time polymerase chain reaction (Sup-
porting Information Fig. S7).
Contemporary interpretation of EA must consider contri-
butions from the dry needle as well as the electrical stimula-
tion itself, as performed in clinical applications such as
Salazar, Richardson, Beli et al.
1311
www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2017
 Figure 7.
1312
EA Promotes CNS-Dependent Release of MSC
STEM CELLS
V
C AlphaMed Press 2017
 transcutaneous electrical stimulation (TENS). Therefore, we
next asked whether TENS performed with adhesive electrodes
versus EA placed at immune acupoints LI-4, LI-11, and GV-14
and Bai-hui would result in similar MSC mobilization. All hors-
es (n 5 6) stimulated with TENS at LI-4, LI-11, and GV-14 and
Bai-hui resulted in mobilization of MSC as confirmed by
growth of MSC cultures (Supporting Information Fig. S8) from
the 2 hours peripheral blood sample obtained following TENS.
As shown in Figure 6, EA at ST-36 and Liv-3 results in the
activation of medium to large diameter neurons suggesting
activation of touch fibers. EA at ST-36 and Liv-3 and GV-14
and GV-20 resulted in the release of cells exhibiting the
appearance of macrophages, which was confirmed by their
ability to phagocytose fluorescently-labeled Escherichia coli
particles (Supporting Information Fig. S9).
DISCUSSION
In this study, we make the highly novel observation that EA at
immune points releases key populations in the peripheral blood
(MSC and
macrophages)
that can
modulate
physiological
responses to injury. While the effect of EA on analgesia is well-
accepted, until now the effect of EA on release of reparative cell
populations is largely unknown. Of equal importance is that the
effect of EA we observed is uniform across four species. The fMRI
studies in both humans and rats support that EA activates the
hypothalamus leading to mobilization of MSC. These cells can be
ex vivo expanded and they demonstrate the phenotypic and
functional characteristics of MSC. Depending on the set of
immune points used the reparative population released varies.
When the EA at GV-14 and Bai-hui is performed with the fore-
limb points (LI-4 and LI-11), MSC are released into the blood,
whereas when EA at GV-14 and Bai-hui is performed with the
hind limb (ST-36 and LIV-3) points macrophage-like cells are
released instead (Supporting Information Fig. S1). Similar
responses to those observed with forelimb immune points were
observed with injections of either epinephrine or dopamine and
with pharmacological disinhibition of the tuberal hypothalamus
with the GABAA receptor antagonist bicuculline methiodide in
rats. Pharmacological disinhibition of the tuberal hypothalamus
increases plasma concentration of norepinephrine by 100% and
epinephrine by 400% [16]. Deep brain stimulation of the tuberal
hypothalamus of humans also enhances sympatho-excitation
[17]. Furthermore, these electrical activities could be replaced by
TENS stimulation at the precise EA points. Thus, the mobilization
of MSCs is likely centrally mediated through hypothalamic activa-
tion and subsequent SNS activity. There has been increasing
interest and evidence supporting the role of the SNS as a regula-
tor of immune cell release, as appropriate activation and signal-
ing is necessary to mobilize these cells into the blood stream [6].
TENS is a widely accepted method of pain relief [18]. The use
of TENS over acupoints is a relatively new application, with some
using the term transcutaneous EA [19]. Methods to mobilize cir-
culating MSC (i.e., epinephrine, dopamine, substance P, and GM-
CSF) or hematopoietic stem cells (i.e., chemotherapy, growth fac-
tors, or AMD3100 [20–23]) into the bloodstream are plagued by
adverse side effects; however, use of EA or TENS represents an
easy and inexpensive approach to increasing MSC numbers in the
peripheral blood to allow MSC harvest and ex vivo expansion.
EA has been reported to have long-lasting and powerful
analgesic effects in models of both acute and chronic pain [24,
25]. Adrenergic receptors or GABAergic modulation through
peripheral, spinal, and supraspinal mechanisms, as well as
adenosine A1 receptors have been implicated as part of the
underlying mechanisms of this effect [4, 26–28]. EA-induced
mobilization of circulating MSC may have served to directly or
indirectly modulate anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory
properties in vivo [29, 30], as we show by the increase in serum
IL-10 levels and the observed reduced mechanical hyperalgesia.
This would suggest that EA limits the production of nociceptive
proinflammatory cytokines and serves to enhance tissue
remodeling following tendon injury [31–33]. In contrast, chronic
treatment with the non-selective b-adrenergic receptor antago-
nist, propranolol, effectively blocks EA’s anti-inflammatory activ-
ity [34, 35]. Monocyte mobilization into peripheral blood can
also be mediated by sympathetic signaling [36]. In our studies,
the use of hind-limb points mobilized a cell type that acquired a
macrophage-like phenotype in culture and that presented
strong phagocytic activity in vitro. These activated cells could be
playing a role in modulation of the cytokine milieu leading to
Figure 7.
Electroacupuncture (EA)-mediated sympathetic stimulation induces mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) release into the circulation. (A):
EA mobilized cells are highly proliferative and potentiate vasculogenesis. Equine peripheral blood mononuclear cells (MNC) showed an increased
colony-forming ability 2 hours (p < .05) post administration of EA at immune points (n 5 7), while cells obtained from the same horses when
they underwent mock treatment or treatment at metabolic points did not. (B): The EA-mobilized cells demonstrated high proliferative capacity,
when plated in a single-cell assay, with over 50% proliferating into large colonies (p < .001 vs. all groups). (C): Equine peripheral blood MNCs
were cultured to the third passage and then differentiated into key mesenchymal lineages. (a): Following culture with osteogenic induction
media, the mobilized equine cells showed strong osteogenic potency, demonstrated by Alizarin red staining of calcium deposits (red: Alizarin
red). (b): Human mesenchymal cells responded in a similar fashion when cultured under identical conditions. Equine cells when cultured under
control media (1:1 Ham’s F12 and low glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium, 15% fetal bovine serum) (e) and human cells under control
conditions (f) did not show Alizarin red staining. (c): The EA-mobilized equine cells showed a weak adipogenic response, demonstrated by oil red
O staining of lipid deposits (red: oil red O) when cultured under adipogenic conditions; (d) human MSC showed a much stronger response than
the equine cells when cultured under identical adipogenic conditions. Under control conditions, neither equine MSCs (g) or human MSCs (h)
showed oil red O staining. (i, j) When cells were cultured under chondrogenesis differentiation media they were able to differentiate into chon-
drogenic lineages, demonstrated by Alcian Blue staining of proteoglycans in the cell masses. Magnification bars 5 50 mm. (D): In vivo angiogene-
sis assay. (a): When equine cells were incorporated into a three-dimensional type I pig skin collagen plug and placed under the skin of NOD/
SCID mice no capillaries were formed. (b): Human endothelial colony forming cells (hECFC) were inserted into the porcine collagen plugs togeth-
er with equine MSC, and implanted into the flank of NOD/SCID mice. (c): A higher magnification of the boxed area in (b), showing a bona fide
blood vessel. Magnification bars 5 (a, b): 50 mm; (c): 10 mm. (E): When quantified, the hECFC-MSC had a significant increase of arteriogenesis
compared with hECFC alone (p 5 .02, n 5 5 for ECFCs alone, n 5 7 for combined hECFC-MSC group). (F): After 48 hours in vitro, cells were isolat-
ed, total mRNA was extracted and HEY2 expression levels were quantified by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. HEY2 was elevat-
ed in the mixed cell treatment when compared with ECFC alone (p 5 .006, n 5 4). All data presented as means 6 SEM. Abbreviations: EA,
electroacupuncture; ECFC, endothelial colony forming cell; MNC, mononuclear cell; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell.
Salazar, Richardson, Beli et al.
1313
www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2017
 EA-mediated repair and analgesia (Supporting Information Fig.
S10). The specificity of cell mobilization according to the points
warrants further study.
The activation of the SNS with EA is further supported by
our results demonstrating that EA at the specific points LI-11,
LI-4, GV-14, and Bai-hui promoted browning of WAT in rats.
Brown adipose tissue counter-acts WAT function [37, 38]. This
effect was accomplished using an every other day EA protocol
for 14 days. Shen et al. [39] used points typically associated
with treatment of obesity (acupoints ST-36 and ST-44) six
times per week for 5 weeks in DIO mice to accomplish this
same effect. They did not observe weight loss or a decrease
in appetite in the EA-treated mice; however, they did observe
a reduction in the ratio of WAT weight/body weight sugges-
ting
that
EA
increased
lipolysis
in
obese
mice.
WAT
“browning” is driven by SNS stimuli, such as cold tempera-
ture, and signal transduction cascades triggered by catechol-
amines activating b3 adrenergic receptors [37, 40, 41]. UCP11
thermogenic brown-like (beige/bright) adipocytes within WAT
[42, 43] activate energy expenditure and can counteract meta-
bolic consequences of obesity [44, 45]. Even a mild reduction
in lipid content in WAT associated with its browning activates
energy expenditure and has positive metabolic benefits [46,
47]. Fat browning has been considered as a promising avenue
in diabetes treatment [48].
CONCLUSION
Acupuncture is among the oldest healing practices in the world
and is currently one of the most rapidly growing complementary
therapies. Our studies provide strong support for the use of EA at
specific immune points to stimulate MSC and macrophage release
into peripheral blood through hypothalamic and SNS activation.
EA may serve as a way to facilitate tissue repair following injury by
supplying high levels of circulating MSC into the circulation and
could be used to treat acute or chronic conditions associated with
inflammation [49, 50]. Furthermore, fMRI and direct neurostimu-
lation studies have confirmed SNS activation and the metabolically
beneficial response of browning of WAT. The importance of adi-
posity is demonstrated in individuals with body mass index of
>18.5. We observed an increase in the specific subset of MSC,
the ASC population only in these individuals. Importantly, EA stim-
ulated “browning” of WAT can enhance metabolism and influence
glucose sensitivity. Furthermore, harvesting of MSC from the
blood of EA-treated human subjects and ex vivo expansion is feasi-
ble and may serve as a practical method to harvest cells for autol-
ogous cell therapy, free of the risks and discomfort associated
with current more invasive and toxic collection methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the Angio BioCore at Indiana University School of Med-
icine for their work in the human studies, the Flow Cytometry
Resource Facility at Indiana University Simon Cancer Center (par-
tially funded by National Cancer Institute Grant P30. CA082709),
the OSUCCC Microarray Shared Resource, where the equine Gen-
eChips were processed, and Christopher Brown for his original
illustration, the graphical abstract. This work was supported by
NIH Grants R01EY012601-15, R01HL11070-03, R01DK090730-04,
and R01EY007739-23 (to M.B.G.), U54 DK106846-01 and R01
HL109602 (to M.C.Y.), PR151924 (to M.E.B.), and DK100905,
R01DK100905 and 101BX002209 (to F.A.W.), by the St. Vincent
Foundation (to F.A.W.) and by the Cryptic Masons’ Medical
Research Foundation (to K.L.M. and D.T.).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
T.E.S. and M.R.R.: study design, acquisition of data, data analysis
and interpretation, manuscript writing, final approval of manu-
script; E.B. and J.C.: study design, acquisition of data, data analysis
and interpretation, manuscript writing; M.S.R., Y.D., A.B., V.J., J.A.S.,
A.L.B., D.O.T., S.D. B.M.D., S.L.C., S.D.F., R.K.F., S.J.W., and T.M.K:
acquisition of data; J.G.: study design, acquisition of data; Y.K., Y.Y.,
L.M.C.-P
., E.S., J.A.M., and P.L.J.: acquisition of data, data analysis
and interpretation; L.M. and K.A.: acquisition of data, data analysis
and interpretation, manuscript writing; S.M.G.: data analysis and
interpretation; K.L.M.: study design; M.S.K.: study design, acquisi-
tion of data, data analysis and interpretation; M.E.B.: manuscript
writing; J.T.: data acquisition, data analysis and interpretation,
manuscript writing; A.S.: data analysis and interpretation; M.F.,
M.G.K., and F.A.W.: study design, data acquisition, data analysis
and interpretation, manuscript writing; L.J.C., S.L., and X.D.: study
design, data acquisition, data analysis and interpretation; Z.G.:
data acquisition; J.M.: data acquisition and analysis; H.X.: study
design, data acquisition, manuscript writing; M.C.Y.: study design,
data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing, final approval
of manuscript; M.B.G.: conception of ideas, study design, data
acquisition, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing,
final approval of manuscript. T.E.S and M.R.R are first authors who
contributed equally to this article. F.A.W., H.X, M.C.Y. and M.B.G
are senior authors who contributed equally to this article.
ACCESSION NUMBERS
Microarray data have been deposited in GEO and given the
accession number GSE53723.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors indicate no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Zhao ZQ. Neural mechanism underlying
acupuncture analgesia. Prog Neurobiol 2008;
85:355–375.
2
Urano K, Ogasawara S. A fundamental
study on acupuncture points phenomena of dog
body. Kitasato Arch Exp Med 1978;51:95–109.
3
Gunn CC, Ditchburn FG, King MH et al.
Acupuncture loci: A proposal for their classifi-
cation
according
to
their
relationship
to
known neural structures. Am J Chin Med
(Gard City NY) 1976;4:183–195.
4
Goldman N, Chen M, Fujita T et al.
Adenosine A1 receptors mediate local anti-
nociceptive effects of acupuncture. Nat Neu-
rosci 2010;13:883–888.
5
Kim SK, Bae H. Acupuncture and immune
modulation. Auton Neurosci 2010;157:38–41.
6
Katayama Y, Battista M, Kao WM et al.
Signals from the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem
regulate
hematopoietic
stem
cell
egress from bone marrow. Cell 2006;124:
407–421.
7
Gil-Ortega
M,
Garidou
L,
Barreau
C
et al. Native adipose stromal cells egress
from adipose tissue in vivo: Evidence during
lymph node activation. STEM CELLS 2013;31:
1309–1320.
8
Shinoda K, Luijten IH, Hasegawa Y et al.
Genetic and functional characterization of
clonally derived adult human brown adipo-
cytes. Nat Med 2015;21:389–394.
1314
EA Promotes CNS-Dependent Release of MSC
STEM CELLS
V
C AlphaMed Press 2017
 9
Cypess AM, Haft CR, Laughlin MR et al.
Brown fat in humans: Consensus points and exper-
imental guidelines. Cell Metab 2014;20:408–415.
10
Bartness TJ, Shrestha YB, Vaughan CH
et al. Sensory and sympathetic nervous sys-
tem control of white adipose tissue lipolysis.
Mol Cell Endocrinol 2010;318:34–43.
11
Paxinos G,Watson C.The Rat Brain in Stereotax-
ic Coordinates. Academic Press, Amsterdam, 2007.
12
Liu X, Wu H, Byrne M et al. Type III col-
lagen is crucial for collagen I fibrillogenesis
and for normal cardiovascular development.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:1852–1856.
13
Wang K, Wu H, Wang G et al. The effects of
electroacupuncture on TH1/TH2 cytokine mRNA
expression and mitogen-activated protein kinase
signaling pathways in the splenic T cells of trau-
matized rats. Anesth Analg 2009;109:1666–1673.
14
Shimizu K, Guo W, Wang H et al. Differ-
ential involvement of trigeminal transition
zone and laminated subnucleus caudalis in
orofacial deep and cutaneous hyperalgesia:
The effects of interleukin-10 and glial inhibi-
tors. Mol Pain 2009;5:75.
15
Kim YS, Anderson M, Park K et al. Coupled
Activation of Primary Sensory Neurons Contributes
to Chronic Pain. Neuron. 2016;91:1085–1096.
16
Wible JH, Jr, DiMicco JA, Luft FC. Hypo-
thalamic GABA and sympathetic regulation in
spontaneously hypertensive rats. Hyperten-
sion 1989;14:623–628.
17
Wilent WB, Oh MY, Buetefisch CM et al.
Induction of panic attack by stimulation of
the ventromedial hypothalamus. J Neurosurg
2010;112:1295–1298.
18
Wall PD, Sweet WH. Temporary abolition
of pain in man. Science 1967;155:108–109.
19
Song J, Yin J, Chen J. Needleless transcu-
taneous electroacupuncture improves rectal
distension-induced impairment in intestinal
motility and slow waves via vagal mechanisms
in dogs. Int J Clin Exp Med 2015;8:4635–4646.
20
Kumar S, Ponnazhagan S. Mobilization of
bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells in vivo
augments bone healing in a mouse model of seg-
mental bone defect. Bone 2012;50:1012–1018.
21
Kassis I, Zangi L, Rivkin R et al. Isolation of
mesenchymal stem cells from G-CSF-mobilized
human peripheral blood using fibrin microbeads.
Bone Marrow Transplantation 2006;37:967–976.
22
Broxmeyer HE, Orschell CM, Clapp DW
et al. Rapid mobilization of murine and
human hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cells with AMD3100, a CXCR4 antagonist.
J Exp Med 2005;201:1307–1318.
23
Kawada H, Fujita J, Kinjo K et al. Nonhemato-
poietic mesenchymal stem cells can be mobilized
and differentiate into cardiomyocytes after myocar-
dial infarction. Blood 2004;104:3581–3587.
24
Zhang RX, Lao L, Wang X et al. Electroacu-
puncture attenuates inflammation in a rat mod-
el. J Altern Complement Med 2005;11:135–142.
25
Huang C, Hu ZP, Long H et al. Attenuation
of mechanical but not thermal hyperalgesia by
electroacupuncture with the involvement of
opioids in rat model of chronic inflammatory
pain. Brain Res Bull 2004;63:99–103.
26
Zhang Y, Zhang RX, Zhang M et al. Electroa-
cupuncture inhibition of hyperalgesia in an
inflammatory pain rat model: Involvement of dis-
tinct spinal serotonin and norepinephrine recep-
tor subtypes. Br J Anaesth 2012;109:245–252.
27
Koo ST, Lim KS, Chung K et al. Electroa-
cupuncture-induced analgesia in a rat model
of ankle sprain pain is mediated by spinal
alpha-adrenoceptors. Pain 2008;135:11–19.
28
Silva JR, Silva ML, Prado WA. Analgesia
induced by 2- or 100-Hz electroacupuncture
in the rat tail-flick test depends on the acti-
vation of different descending pain inhibitory
mechanisms. J Pain 2011;12:51–60.
29
Newman RE, Yoo D, LeRoux MA et al.
Treatment
of
inflammatory
diseases
with
mesenchymal
stem cells.
Inflamm Allergy
Drug Targets 2009;8:110–123.
30
Chamberlain G, Fox J, Ashton B et al.
Concise review: Mesenchymal stem cells:
Their
phenotype,
differentiation
capacity,
immunological features, and potential for
homing. Stem Cells. 2007;25:2739–2749.
31
Torres-Rosas R, Yehia G, Pena G et al.
Dopamine mediates vagal modulation of the
immune system by electroacupuncture. Nat
Med 2014;20:291–295.
32
Chen XM, Xu J, Song JG et al. Electroacu-
puncture inhibits excessive interferon-gamma
evoked up-regulation of P2X4 receptor in spi-
nal microglia in a CCI rat model for neuropath-
ic pain. Br J Anaesth 2015;114:150–157.
33
Inoue M, Nakajima M, Oi Y et al. The
effect
of
electroacupuncture
on
tendon
repair in a rat Achilles tendon rupture model.
Acupunct Med 2015;33:58–64.
34
Choi JW, Kang SY, Choi JG et al. Analge-
sic effect of electroacupuncture on paclitaxel-
induced neuropathic pain via spinal opioider-
gic and adrenergic mechanisms in mice. Am J
Chin Med 2015;43:57–70.
35
Kim HW, Kang SY, Yoon SY et al. Low-fre-
quency
electroacupuncture
suppresses
zymosan-induced peripheral inflammation via
activation
of
sympathetic
post-ganglionic
neurons. Brain Res 2007;1148:69–75.
36
McKim DB, Patterson JM, Wohleb ES et al.
Sympathetic release of splenic monocytes pro-
motes recurring anxiety following repeated
social defeat. Biol Psychiatry 2016;79:803–813.
37
Rosen ED, Spiegelman BM. What we
talk about when we talk about fat. Cell 2014;
156:20–44.
38
Nedergaard J, Cannon B. The browning
of white adipose tissue: Some burning issues.
Cell Metab 2014;20:396–407.
39
Shen W, Wang Y, Lu SF et al. Acupunc-
ture promotes white adipose tissue browning
by inducing UCP1 expression on DIO mice.
BMC Complement Altern Med 2014;14:501.
40
Enerback S. The origins of brown adipose
tissue. N Engl J Med 2009;360:2021–2023.
41
Cinti S. Transdifferentiation properties of
adipocytes in the adipose organ. Am J Phys-
iol Endocrinol Metab 2009;297:977–986.
42
Wu J, Bostrom P, Sparks LM et al. Beige adi-
pocytes are a distinct type of thermogenic fat cell
in mouse and human. Cell 2012;150:366–376.
43
van
Marken
Lichtenbelt
WD,
Vanhommerig JW, Smulders NM et al. Cold-
activated brown adipose tissue in healthy
men. N Engl J Med 2009;360:1500–1508.
44
Tseng YH, Cypess AM, Kahn CR. Cellular
bioenergetics as a target for obesity therapy.
Nat Rev Drug Discov 2010;9:465–482.
45
Lowell BB, S-Susulic V, Hamann A et al.
Development of obesity in transgenic mice
after genetic ablation of brown adipose tis-
sue. Nature 1993;366:740–742.
46
Reilly SM, Chiang SH, Decker SJ et al. An
inhibitor of the protein kinases TBK1 and IKK-
varepsilon improves obesity-related metabolic
dysfunctions in mice. Nat Med 2013;19:313–321.
47
Orci L, Cook WS, Ravazzola M et al. Rap-
id transformation of white adipocytes into
fat-oxidizing machines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 2004;101:2058–2063.
48
Yoneshiro T, Aita S, Matsushita M et al.
Recruited brown adipose tissue as an anti-
obesity agent in humans. J Clin Invest 2013;
123:3404–3408.
49
Ringden
O,
Uzunel
M,
Rasmusson
I
et al. Mesenchymal stem cells for treatment
of therapy-resistant graft-versus-host disease.
Transplantation 2006;81:1390–1397.
50
Le Blanc K, Rasmusson I, Sundberg B
et al. Treatment of severe acute graft-versus-
host disease with third party haploidentical
mesenchymal stem cells. Lancet 2004;363:
1439–1441.
See www.StemCells.com for supporting information available online.
Salazar, Richardson, Beli et al.
1315
www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2017
