  
 
James F. Sallis, Fiona Bull, Ricky Burdett, Lawrence D. Frank, 
Peter Griffiths, Billie Giles-Corti, Mark Stevenson 
Use of science to guide city planning policy 
and practice: how to achieve healthy and 
sustainable future cities 
Article (Accepted version) 
(Refereed) 
 
Original citation: 
Sallis, James F, Bull, Fiona, Burdett, Ricky, Frank, Lawrence D., Griffiths, Peter, Giles-Corti, 
Billie and Stevenson, Mark (2016) Use of science to guide city planning policy and practice: how 
to achieve healthy and sustainable future cities. The Lancet, 388 (10062). pp. 2936-2947. ISSN 
0140-6736 
 
DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30068-X  
 
© 2016 Elsevier B.V. 
 
This version available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/68652/  
 
Available in LSE Research Online: December 2016 
 
LSE has developed LSE Research Online so that users may access research output of the 
School. Copyright © and Moral Rights for the papers on this site are retained by the individual 
authors and/or other copyright owners. Users may download and/or print one copy of any 
article(s) in LSE Research Online to facilitate their private study or for non-commercial research. 
You may not engage in further distribution of the material or use it for any profit-making activities 
or any commercial gain. You may freely distribute the URL (http://eprints.lse.ac.uk) of the LSE 
Research Online website.  
 
This document is the author’s final accepted version of the journal article. There may be 
differences between this version and the published version.  You are advised to consult the 
publisher’s version if you wish to cite from it. 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
1
Using science to guide city planning policy and practice: achieving 
healthy and sustainable future cities 
 
 
Prof James F Sallis (University of California, San Diego, USA) 
Prof Fiona Bull (University of Western Australia, Australia) 
Prof Ricky Burdett (London School of Economics, UK) 
Prof Lawrence D Frank (University of British Columbia, Canada) 
Mr Peter Griffiths (London School of Economics, UK) 
Prof Billie Giles‐Corti (University of Melbourne, Australia) 
Prof Mark Stevenson (University of Melbourne, Australia) 
 
Word Count: 4536 
 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
2
Abstract 
Land‐use and transport policies contribute to worldwide epidemics of injuries and non‐
communicable diseases through traffic exposure, noise, air pollution, social isolation, low 
physical activity, and sedentary behaviours. Motorised transport is a major cause of the 
greenhouse gas emissions that are threatening human health. Urban and transport planning 
and urban design policies in many cities do not reflect the accumulating evidence that, if 
implemented, these policies could benefit a wide range of common health problems. Enhanced 
research translation to ensure that health research has a stronger influence on urban and 
transport planning decisions could address many global health problems. This paper illustrates 
the potential for such change by presenting conceptual models and case studies of research 
translation applied to urban and transport planning and urban design. The primary 
recommendation of this paper is for cities to actively pursue compact and mixed‐use urban 
designs that encourage a transport modal shift away from private motor vehicles towards 
walking, cycling, and public transport. This series of papers concludes by urging a systematic 
approach to designing cities to enhance health and sustainability through active transport and a 
move towards new urban mobility. Such an approach promises to be a powerful strategy for 
improving population health on a permanent basis.  
 
 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
3
Introduction 
Current land‐use and transport policies in cities around the world are having negative effects on 
health, primarily through road traffic injuries, air pollution, and physical inactivity.1‐3 Road 
traffic collisions kill and maim millions of people each year. Urban air pollution, mostly motor 
vehicle related, kills hundreds of thousands of people annually and contributes to climate 
change. Epidemic levels of physical inactivity contribute to the deaths of millions through 
effects on multiple non‐communicable diseases (NCDs). Urban and transport planning and 
urban design are some of the most fundamental causes of many serious global problems.3,4 
It is vital that evidence of the health effects of land‐use and transport policies is used more 
effectively to guide the design of cities so that they enhance health and environmental 
sustainability. The first paper in this series5 demonstrated that land‐use and transport policies 
and practices can affect a wide range of health outcomes, especially NCDs and motor vehicle 
injuries. Eight health‐promoting urban design and transport principles were identified, and 
evidence‐informed indicators were proposed that can be used to monitor progress in creating 
health‐promoting cities. In many countries, land‐use and transport policies are the antithesis of 
healthy urban design.5 The second paper in this series6 modelled land‐use and transport 
policies with an emphasis on compact cities that support a modal shift from private motor 
vehicle use to walking, cycling, and public transport as a strategy for improving population 
health and estimated the gains in population health that cities could likely achieve.  
In this, the final paper of this series, we consider the use of evidence as a tool for improving 
urban design and transport decision‐making and we make recommendations for improving the 
application of evidence. This paper draws on a conceptual model of research translation, 
summarises evidence from the knowledge transfer field, and uses a diverse set of case studies 
to illustrate the potential for effective research translation to facilitate more health‐oriented 
land‐use and transport practices and policies. For present purposes, we use the terms research 
translation, knowledge transfer, and knowledge exchange interchangeably to refer to the 
process of actively working to have research‐based information used in policy‐making. We 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
4
conclude with recommendations based on the entire series of papers, identifying research and 
policy actions that are needed to advance the creation of healthy and sustainable cities.  
Models and evidence to guide research translation 
Research translation is a novel concept to many health researchers. Some investigators may not 
consider it their role to communicate research findings to decision makers, and those who 
would like to see research used in decision‐making may lack the necessary skills. To be more 
effective in promoting the application of health research findings, researchers need to 
understand policy processes.  
Three streams of the policy process 
While recognising that policy‐making varies dramatically between and within countries, it is still 
useful to consider a simple model of the policy process and consider where health research can 
be applied. Kingdon and Thurber’s7 model describes three streams or conditions that must 
converge before movement on a policy is likely. The problem stream means that the issue must 
be recognised as a problem by decision makers. While epidemiological research documenting 
health problems is plentiful, there is a dearth of evidence identifying solutions. The proposal 
stream requires a variety of feasible solutions to be identified. This is a demanding criterion for 
research because evaluations of city planning interventions are costly and time consuming. The 
policy stream refers to politicians being willing to make a decision. For this stream, different 
types of research may be required, such as public opinion polls documenting support for 
alternative policies or evidence about the costs or cost‐effectiveness of policy options. For 
example, consumer preferences for neighbourhoods that support walking and cycling are 
producing greater demand for housing in walkable neighbourhoods in the United States.8 When 
all three streams converge, there is a policy window that facilitates, but does not guarantee, 
action.8  
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
5
Policy maker views of research 
It has been argued that researchers and policy makers do not understand each other or value 
each other’s methods.9 It is valuable for researchers to understand how policy makers view 
research. Petticrew and colleagues10 conducted interviews with decision makers in a variety of 
fields about their views on research. Although none were from city planning or transport, they 
said that researchers did not understand the policy‐making process, especially the time 
constraints and how political pressure often outweighs evidence. Stories and case studies were 
seen as more compelling than rigorous studies or literature syntheses, although decision 
makers valued evaluations of real‐world interventions. Cost and cost‐effectiveness analyses 
were considered more important than experimental controls and sophisticated statistics. 
Decision makers called for more research that is specifically designed to assist them in making 
decisions.  
Because research is just one of several inputs into any policy‐making process, it is important to 
maximise the value of research to policy makers. Recommendations for effective knowledge 
exchange based on models and evidence11,12 include ensuring that the evidence is applicable to 
the context, facilitating ongoing partnerships between knowledge producers and users, 
communication tailored to research users, engagement of knowledge brokers who are familiar 
with both research and policy, and institutional support for the participation of both producers 
and users in knowledge exchange.  
Four‐phase model of research translation 
A model by Giles‐Corti and colleagues13 identified four phases of the research translation 
process and suggested strategies for enhancing the utility of research in land‐use and transport 
decision‐making. A critical first step is to conduct policy‐relevant research. Researchers should 
consult with policy stakeholders to develop policy‐relevant research questions, rather than 
basing research questions only on theory or the scientific literature. This step can be aided by 
assembling research teams that incorporate health and built environment experts, including 
policy makers. The second step is to use research methods that are most compelling to policy 
makers. These methods include evaluations of real‐world natural experiments and examining 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
6
multiple outcomes, such as health, social, environmental, and economic benefits. The third step 
is to actively disseminate findings to policy makers using appropriate communication methods. 
The fourth step is to engage in advocacy as part of the policy change process. Researchers can 
do this either by communicating directly with decision makers or by working through 
knowledge brokers, which could include health non‐profit organisations.  
There is a growing body of experience in knowledge translation outside the health sector – in 
urban planning, transport, and city governance. An initial challenge is engaging researchers in 
knowledge translation. This may require changing reward systems in academia, funding 
agencies, and professional societies. The following case study describes the actions of a 
research funding programme to increase the use of research in policy and practice decision‐
making.  
Case study: implementing research translation in a research funding programme 
– Active Living Research (ALR), United States 
ALR (www.activelivingresearch.org) illustrates all four phases of the Giles‐Corti et al.13 research 
translation model. ALR was supported by The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation with the goals 
of building evidence about the role of environments and policies in physical activity, nurturing 
investigative teams with members from diverse disciplines and personal backgrounds, and 
using research to inform policy and practice in multiple sectors.14 ALR’s methods of research 
translation are described here for each phase of the Giles‐Corti13 model, with more details 
available elsewhere.14,15 
Ensure policy‐relevant research questions  
ALR required a policy rationale in grant proposals and encouraged interdisciplinary teams that 
included a policy maker or practitioner. Conference presentations from policy makers and 
practitioners that focused on improving the policy relevance of research were summarised in 
commentaries.16,17 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
7
Apply policy‐relevant research methods  
Interdisciplinary teams were expected to broaden the range of study designs and methods used 
to enhance scientific value and policy relevance. Input from policy makers indicated that they 
placed a high value on case studies and economic data, so calls for proposals requested studies 
to provide this information.  
Undertake dissemination strategies with end users of research  
ALR placed the most emphasis on enhancing communication of research findings to policy 
makers, advocates, and practitioners who could use evidence in their decision‐making. Calls for 
proposals required a dissemination strategy that addressed both researcher and non‐
researcher audiences. ALR built capacity and supported research dissemination through 
training in communication strategies, individual technical assistance from communication 
experts, and Translating Research into Policy awards.  
ALR translated research by disseminating non‐technical briefs and infographics that highlighted 
findings in illustrated formats that were appropriate for community members. Social media 
engagement, YouTube videos, and a blog were also used for communicating findings to non‐
researchers.  
To overcome barriers to research translation, such as lack of training and few rewards within 
academia, ALR developed Research Translation Grants that provided an incentive for research 
translation activities. Proposals had to identify actionable messages based on previously funded 
studies, key audiences, and dissemination activities.  
Engage in advocacy for policy and practice change  
Interdisciplinary teams are likely to be better prepared to identify policy and practice solutions 
than individual investigators, and team members from urban planning, transport, education, 
and parks disciplines can serve as a bridge between researchers and research users. It was 
often more feasible for investigators to work with knowledge brokers (such as advocacy groups) 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
8
who routinely attempt to affect policy decisions than for investigators to directly contact policy 
makers.  
Key lessons  
ALR integrated actions into its research funding programme to support a culture of 
investigators translating research into policy. Research translation methods illustrated how all 
four phases of the Giles‐Corti et al. model13 can be integrated into a comprehensive approach. 
An evaluation of ALR provided indicators of success: 40% of grantees reported communication 
to policy or practice audiences in a given year, 50% of grantees had input into decision‐making 
processes that contributed to a policy or practice change, and 80% of relevant policy and 
advocacy organisation leaders were familiar with ALR research briefs.15  
Research is being used to guide land‐use and transport policies and practices 
There is reason to be sceptical that health research could affect land‐use and transport policy. 
In the next sections, we highlight case studies that illustrate how health research can influence 
policy in non‐health sectors.  
Case study: evaluation of a state government’s Liveable Neighbourhoods policy 
– Residential Environment Study (RESIDE), Perth, Western Australia 
The RESIDE study was a longitudinal natural experiment that evaluated health impacts of the 
state government’s Liveable Neighbourhoods design code in new suburban neighbourhoods.18 
Although initiated by public health researchers, there was active engagement of the 
Department of Planning before and during the study. The Chief Investigator and Department of 
Planning staff had collaborated on a prior study that had resulted in multiple presentations and 
a good working relationship. RESIDE operated at each phase of the research translation 
model.13 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
9
Ensure policy‐relevant research questions  
RESIDE aimed to contribute to evidence on the causal relationship between changes in urban 
design and physical activity (especially walking) and to undertake an independent assessment 
of the state government’s Liveable Neighbourhoods policy. Department of Planning officials 
wanted evidence of the health benefits of their ambitious policy. Having goals relevant to both 
researchers and policy makers justified a ten‐year research collaboration that included co‐
funding by the department.  
Apply policy‐relevant research methods  
RESIDE applied a pre–post experimental design with intervention and matched comparison 
neighbourhoods. The study assessed the level of policy implementation and the impact of the 
Liveable Neighbourhoods design code on health outcomes. Results showed that policy 
recommendations were, on average, only around half implemented (average 47%; range 27% 
to 54%). However, for every 10% increase in implementation, the odds of walking increased 
about 50%.19 
Undertake dissemination strategies with end‐users of research  
Throughout RESIDE, frequent communication with government officials established trust 
between the researchers and decision makers. This resulted in the Department of Planning 
inviting direct input from the researchers into the review and update of the Liveable 
Neighbourhoods policy. A highlight of this research partnership was that Department of 
Planning guidance on performance indicators of the Liveable Neighbourhoods policy was 
directly based on RESIDE findings.  
Engage in advocacy for policy and practice change  
RESIDE investigators communicated the health evidence to diverse stakeholder groups, 
including government departments, conferences outside the health field, and news media. 
Working with the Planning Institute of Australia provided reach into the planning community. A 
partnership with the Australian Heart Foundation capitalised on its experience in advocacy. The 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
10
knowledge translation and advocacy work by the research team contributed to improving 
knowledge of health impacts within the planning sector and inclusion of health‐related design 
principles into planning policies.  
Key lessons  
RESIDE researchers initiated the research relationship with policy makers after a sustained 
period of engagement on other projects. Because the evidence was directly related to specific 
policies and because the relationship was built over time, interest in the study findings grew to 
the point where evidence was explicitly used in the Liveable Neighbourhoods policy review. 
Details of the research methods were less important and often not wanted by policy makers 
who trusted the researchers, especially when the research findings corresponded with the 
policy makers’ preferences.  
Case study: Strategies for Metropolitan Atlanta’s Regional Transport and Air 
Quality (SMARTRAQ), Atlanta, Georgia, United States  
Another example of research undertaken as a successful partnership between researchers and 
government that resulted in strong knowledge translation to policy was SMARTRAQ.20 In 1997, 
the Atlanta, Georgia region fell out of compliance with the United States’ Federal Clean Air 
Act21 due to its low density sprawling urban form, creating long distances between destinations 
and few competitive options to the car.22 
Ensure policy‐relevant research questions  
The Atlanta Regional Commission (a transport planning agency), Georgia Department of 
Transportation, Georgia Regional Transportation Authority, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Environmental Protection Agency, and the Turner Foundation supported the 
interdisciplinary SMARTRAQ research programme,20 which was innovative in its integrated 
health and transport data collection. Motivated by the ability to regain federal transport 
funding tied to air quality, diverse partners became sympathetic to funding health‐related 
research and to a smarter growth approach to transport investment.  
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
11
Apply policy‐relevant research methods  
SMARTRAQ integrated air pollution, travel patterns, and walkability data to evaluate the air 
quality benefits of plans for three communities. Using scenario planning software, the study 
compared the community‐based plans with current motor vehicle‐oriented trends and showed 
significant air quality improvements could be achieved through increased walking in existing 
population and activity centres.23 
Undertake dissemination strategies with end users of research  
Policy partners were briefed throughout the project. Final results were communicated in 
meetings with stakeholders, technical reports, press releases, and journal articles. 
Interpretation of findings was facilitated by accessible graphics, policy briefs, and by responding 
to the key policy questions.  
Engage in advocacy for policy and practice change  
SMARTRAQ findings helped justify an initial US$350 million from the federal government for 
non‐motorised and transit improvements that otherwise would have gone to highway 
expansion, thereby promoting further urban sprawl. Since then, an additional US$150 million 
has been approved for activities that are consistent with study recommendations 
(http://www.atlantaregional.com/land‐use/livable‐centers‐initiative). 
Key lessons  
Transport officials initiated the research in an effort to qualify for federal funding. Nevertheless, 
it was necessary to design the research so that it directly addressed the policy questions and 
communicated the findings so the recommendations were clear. This case study illustrates how 
federal policy related to health forced changes in regional transport policy and how 
interdisciplinary research was a critical mechanism for the change.  
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
12
Case study: creating systems to communicate evidence from individual studies 
to knowledge platforms 
RESIDE and SMARTRAQ are examples of collaborations between researchers and policy makers 
opening channels for policy influence. However, there is a need to develop a more systematic 
knowledge translation process for city planning and transport sectors to integrate health goals 
and evidence. Several countries have shown progress in this area. An early example from the 
United States was an evidence‐based report on active transport that was jointly produced by 
the Transportation Research Board and the Institute of Medicine.24 Also in the United States, 
the Guide to Community Preventive Services, which was published by the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, produced recommendations on urban design interventions at the 
community and street scales.25 
The Australian Heart Foundation reviewed the literature on built environments and physical 
activity, using the review to derive recommendations to support its advocacy work.26 In the 
United Kingdom, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence commissioned reviews of 
built environment interventions to promote physical activity, resulting in public health 
guidance27 (which was updated in 201428) that provided authority for public health efforts to be 
directed to sectors outside of health. The five‐year review cycle is a good illustration of a 
systems approach to translating evidence into policy.  
Evidence‐based design guidelines  
An effective research translation approach is the development of guidelines based on health 
evidence that built environment practitioners can use in daily practice. Examples of these 
resources are shown in panels 1 and 2. Both examples (Active Design Guidelines29 and Healthy 
Active by Design29) focus on communicating the key features of urban design that facilitate or 
hinder physical activity, with a particular focus on walking and cycling. Both documents were 
developed in partnership with industry, provide direct links to relevant policy, were developed 
with a strong integration of evidence, and specify a level of evidence support (eg, strong, 
emerging, and best practice).  
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
13
 
[PANEL 1 HERE] 
[PANEL 2 HERE] 
 
How cities use evidence in transport planning  
These examples describe how three major cities used research and evaluation in making plans 
to increase walking and cycling for transport. While these examples are not connected with 
specific research projects, each city used research differently and used different types of 
research. One lesson from these case studies is that there are opportunities to improve the 
practice of research translation, even when the use of research is not required. A surprising 
finding was that the news media emerged as a stimulus for the use of research in transport 
planning.  
 
[PANEL 3 HERE] 
 
Key lessons  
These examples, which highlight the use of health research to inform land‐use and transport 
policy, show that research can be an influential instrument for achieving environmental 
changes that produce health and other benefits. The continuing challenge is to develop a more 
systematic approach to research translation that involves ongoing collaboration among 
researchers, practitioners, and policy makers in the health, urban planning, urban design, and 
transport sectors. Strategies for research translation derived from case studies, the Giles‐Corti 
model,13 and knowledge exchange literature11,12 can be recommended to improve the practice 
of research translation (see panel 4).  
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
14
 
[PANEL 4 HERE] 
 
Conclusions about research translation 
Motor vehicle‐oriented land‐use and transport policies in cities are contributing to global 
epidemics of NCDs and injuries.5,6 The health impacts create an imperative to make use of 
research evidence to move city planning and transport policies in directions that are health 
promoting. The diverse case studies presented here demonstrate that health research can play 
an influential role in land‐use and transport decision‐making. The challenge is to ensure that 
health research is used in a more routine and effective way. Because the policy process varies 
so much by country, to be relevant to local land‐use and transport policy, research is required 
in all countries so that policy makers have local data to guide local decisions. Generalising 
evidence and best practices between countries should be done with caution, particularly when 
attempting to extrapolate methods of research translation that are effective in high‐income 
countries to low‐ and middle‐income countries. Because funding tends to be discipline‐ and 
sector‐specific, it is not clear how research will be funded on research translation that is, by 
definition, multi‐sector. Philanthropies with an international focus may be the most promising 
source of funds to support research leading to context‐specific research translation.  
There is growing evidence that healthy urban design and transport policies can have benefits 
beyond health for environmental sustainability and economic vitality.30 Evidence of diverse 
benefits provide additional opportunities to ensure that the full range of societal consequences 
of land‐use and transport decisions is adequately considered in decision‐making. This is likely to 
require a systems approach to reform in governmental decision‐making and routine 
collaborations between researchers, practitioners, and policy makers to consider the full range 
of health and environmental impacts of urban planning, urban design, and transport decision‐
making. Because of the societal significance of using research to enhance land‐use and 
transport decisions, we recommend that an international working group be established to 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
15
propose changes within academia, government, and non‐governmental organisations that 
would lead to a more systematic approach to research translation. 
Series conclusions and recommendations 
Land‐use and transport policies are contributing to worldwide epidemics of NCDs and injuries 
through traffic exposure, noise, air pollution, social isolation, low physical activity, and 
sedentary behaviours. Motorised transport is a major cause of greenhouse gas emissions that 
threaten human health, especially in low‐income countries31. Traditional single‐problem and 
single‐discipline approaches to research, practice, and policy are insufficient to solve the 
serious inter‐related problems described in this series of papers. Better systems are required in 
government and academia to facilitate policy‐relevant interdisciplinary research and its timely 
translation into city planning policy and practice.  
The health, environmental, and economic consequences of motor vehicle‐driven development 
have become so obvious that many cities are taking serious steps towards reform. Cities in The 
Netherlands, Denmark, and Germany, for example, have been working for decades to 
encourage walking and cycling for transport and create barriers to motor vehicle use.32 Many 
other cities from all income categories are pursuing similar policies for a variety of reasons.33 
The findings outlined in this series6 indicate that the approach to city planning likely to produce 
the greatest health benefit is one where walking, cycling, and public transport are supported by 
a safe infrastructure and are prioritised over private motorised transport. Although this may 
seem a significant challenge in motor vehicle‐dependent cities across North America, 
Australasia, and rapidly motorising Asian cities, it is important to remember that cities were car 
free for thousands of years.  
This series highlights that moving from motor vehicle to active transport modes in cities, 
ensuring mixed land‐use, and providing safe facilities for walking and cycling represents an 
integrated solution that is likely to increase physical activity and reduce NCDs, injuries, air 
pollution, and greenhouse gas emissions. In this series of papers, we propose implementing 
eight integrated regional and local land‐use and transport planning and urban design 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
16
interventions to support active travel modes, rather than prioritising mobility of private motor 
vehicles.  
Recommendations for research 
The consequences of motor vehicle‐oriented land‐use and transport policies on physical activity, 
NCDs, injuries, pollution, climate change, stress of driving, congestion, and overall quality of life 
should be quantified in as many countries as possible to maximise the value of data in local 
decision‐making. As cities become more compact and residential density increases, there is a 
need for research that monitors unintended health consequences that may arise. Paper 2 in 
this series highlights the challenge associated with road trauma in moving to greater levels of 
active transport and enhanced public transport use (new urban mobility). The modelling in 
paper 2 highlighted how road trauma risk could be mitigated by the provision of enhanced 
urban design and safe infrastructure for walking and cycling. Another concern is that high 
residential density is a well‐documented risk factor for the increased incidence of infectious 
diseases,34,35 so future land‐use policies also need to consider approaches for reducing this risk. 
Health researchers must work in interdisciplinary teams and become more focused on studying 
and influencing decisions made in non‐health sectors (such as urban design, transport, and 
energy) that affect health. 
Research priorities in applied areas such as public health and city planning must not only 
advance science but should be driven by relevance to the policy process. Research teams need 
to include multi‐sector policy makers and incorporate policy‐relevant methods including case 
studies, evaluations of natural experiments and cost‐effectiveness studies. Topics such as the 
economics of land‐use and transport policies, evaluations of policy implementation, and public 
opinion about policy change are likely to be of more interest to policy makers than studies of 
health outcomes.  
 Improving research translation related to healthy urban design and transport policies is a topic 
of research itself. A small evidence base has identified barriers to research translation such as a 
lack of access to relevant evidence among decision makers,36 insufficient skills in applying 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
17
evidence into local contexts,37 and lack of timeliness in communication of research.38 Research 
to develop and evaluate possible solutions to these barriers is warranted.  
Most health‐oriented land‐use and transport research comes from mostly high‐income 
countries. Thus, research funding for low‐ and middle‐income countries should be prioritised to 
identify relevant local solutions.  
Recommendations for policy 
Policies that prioritise the needs and safety of pedestrians, cyclists, and public transport users 
must be encouraged. The findings of Stevenson et al.6 highlight that achieving a modal shift 
away from private motor vehicles would deliver substantial population health benefit. This 
recommendation is globally relevant, given that NCDs are the leading causes of death on all 
continents and that the NCD burden is increasing in the most populous regions.39 The urban 
design and transport policies and practices highlighted in Giles‐Corti et al.5 provide a set of 
integrated interventions for cities to work towards. Implementation of these interventions may 
vary between cities depending upon the context, but achieving a multi‐modal transport system 
that prioritises walking, cycling, and public transport is a necessity for population health. Young, 
low‐density, and highly motorised cities, such as those in North America, Australia, and New 
Zealand, have unhealthy patterns of land‐use. These cities will need to change density and 
zoning policies to retrofit established areas and revise regional, transport, and employment 
planning and urban design policies to create more accessible pedestrian‐ and cycling‐friendly 
greenfield developments. In contrast, older cities in Europe are well designed for walking and 
have good public transport, but many cities in Europe are yet to develop high‐quality cycle 
facilities, and new growth is often motor vehicle‐oriented. High‐density cities in Asia and Latin 
America typically have a good mix of land‐use to support walking. However, in some of these 
cities, pedestrian and cycling facilities are absent, unsafe, or not functional. The priorities in 
these cities are to improve infrastructure for walking and cycling and to invest in affordable 
public transport to provide attractive alternatives to private vehicles.  
Accountability is critical. Building on the World Health Organization’s Health Equity Indicators, 
Giles‐Corti et al.5 proposed indicators that could be used to monitor progress towards achieving 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
18
healthier cities. We recommend that a healthy liveable cities scorecard be created for cities 
worldwide. 
Despite land‐use and transport having interconnected effects, city planning and transport 
agencies are seldom integrated. The largely independent functioning of these agencies has 
resulted in communities with destinations within walking distance of residences but road 
designs that create barriers to walking and cycling. A lack of co‐ordination of regional transport 
infrastructure planning and urban design can result in incomplete networks of facilities that 
support walking, cycling, and public transport. Thus, there is a need for integrated urban 
planning, urban design, and transport policies and practices, at both local and regional levels.  
Funders need to support training in, and implementation of, research translation activities by 
investigators, with the Canadian Institute of Health Research programme being a good 
example.12 
Most countries are concerned by costs associated with the mounting burden of NCDs and injury. 
Although strategies have been recommended to mitigate the growing burden,39‐41 few address 
the topic of this series, namely to actively pursue compact and mixed‐use urban designs that 
encourage a transport modal shift away from private motor vehicles towards walking, cycling 
and public transport. Systematically designing cities to enhance health through active transport 
promises to be a powerful strategy for improving population health on a permanent basis.  
 
[PANEL 5 HERE] 
 
 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
19
Panel 1: Case study in research translation – Active Design Guidelines, New York, 
United States 
 
In the 2000s, the New York City government prioritised the reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions and identified built environment supports for physical activity as an important part of 
the strategy. A built environment and physical activity office was established within the 
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, and the mayor instructed all city departments to 
contribute to this work. The multi‐sector initiative included working groups, research and 
evaluation efforts, and annual Fit City conferences that featured many city agency heads.  
 
[PANEL 1 FIGURE HERE] 
 
A centrepiece of the effort was the development of the Active Design Guidelines, a resource 
that was based on academic research and best practice in the field and provided architects and 
urban designers with strategies for creating healthier buildings, streets, and urban spaces. 
The Active Design Guidelines were developed in conjunction with the New York City Chapter of 
the American Institute of Architects and included illustrations and technical drawings, a format 
tailored to the intended audience of architects and designers. A critical feature of the Active 
Design Guidelines was a code for the level of evidence supporting each guideline, ranging from 
evidence based to expert consensus.  
The Active Design Guidelines were adopted as official city policy to guide project design, and 
this is an example of an explicitly evidence‐based policy. Subsequent design guideline 
documents were developed for affordable housing, sidewalks, and universal design.  
For more information, visit www.nyc.gov/html/ddc/html/design/active_design.shtml and 
http://centerforactivedesign.org/guidelines/ 
 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
20
Panel 2: Case study in research translation – Healthy Active by Design 
www.healthyactivebydesign.com.au  
Australia is an urbanised nation with over 70% of the population living in major cities. Many 
Australian cities rank among the world’s worst for environmental sustainability. Curtailing 
urban sprawl and improving environmental sustainability while maintaining high standards of 
liveability are critical issues for federal, state, and local governments.  
 
[PANEL 2 FIGURE HERE] 
 
Healthy Active by Design was developed in Western Australia and is a free web‐based resource 
aimed at urban planners and interested stakeholders, including health advocates. Healthy 
Active by Design provides information and evidence on how places, spaces, and buildings can 
be designed to promote active healthy lifestyle choices and provide pedestrian‐friendly 
environments.  
Healthy Active by Design is structured around nine design elements: movement network, mixed 
use, town centre and main street, housing diversity, sense of place, shared facilities, schools, 
and buildings. Each design element has evidence summaries, practical guidance, policies, 
annotated examples of good design (with local, national, and international case studies), and a 
planners’ checklist.  
Launched in March 2014, Healthy Active by Design dissemination activities have included a 
series of metropolitan and regional presentations, tailored local government workshops, 
professional development seminars (including hands‐on design projects), and general 
promotional activities. In 2015, Healthy Active by Design won two awards from the Planning 
Institute of Australia. Future developments include a partnership with a national research 
consortium (NHMRC Centre for Research Excellence on Healthy Liveable Communities42), 
expansion of the professional development training programme (online and in‐person) and 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
21
upscaling Healthy Active by Design to a national platform. Healthy Active by Design was 
developed by a partnership of a non‐government health agency (Australian Heart Foundation), 
academics from the Centre for Built Environment and Health, government departments, and 
planning professionals.  
For more information, visit www.healthyactivebydesign.com.au 
 
Panel 3: Use of research by transport planners in London, Stockholm, and 
Bogotá 
City transport officials in London, Stockholm, and Bogotá were willing to answer several 
questions regarding the relationship between research and investment in walking and cycling. 
Each city has made substantial progress towards increasing walking and cycling, and each city 
has applied the evidence differently to guide their decision‐making.  
 
London: The Mayor’s Vision for Cycling in London  
As a city with worldwide visibility, London’s actions are likely to have a significant impact on 
future active travel policies globally. Through the Mayor’s Vision for Cycling in London, the city 
aims to double the number of cyclists within a decade. Funding will be tripled to £913 million43 
over the next decade to support investment in not only central London, but also in outer 
London boroughs where land‐use policies are often heavily skewed in favour of single‐use 
residential neighbourhoods and car‐dominated infrastructure. In this context, cycling 
infrastructure will signal new priorities by redistributing scarce road space away from cars to 
cycling and the broader public realm. As cyclists have been found to be more likely to visit 
neighbourhood shops, increasing cycling may help recover main shopping streets that have 
gone into decline.43  
Transport for London surveyed 14 other cities to inform best practice in active transport 
infrastructure and governance.44 Locally, research was conducted to determine the physical and 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
22
social potential for cycling by postcode. Areas of high cycling density potential were mapped 
against the propensity to cycle by postcode.45 This research has been used to inform where to 
build cycle infrastructure.  
Although it is now safer to cycle in London than it was a decade ago,46 the perceived risk of 
injury is the number one reason for not cycling in the capital.43,47 The response has been to 
lower speed limits to 32 km/h or build segregated routes along busy roads.43 Cycling coaching 
sessions and awareness training for heavy goods vehicles drivers – identified through research 
as the greatest risk to cyclists – have also been implemented. 
Segregated routes will be complemented with routes along quiet residential streets for more 
cautious cyclists. Regular research into attitudes relating to cycling has been conducted by 
Transport for London to understand market segmentation. For example, the modal shift away 
from inactive car travel is far higher for non‐cyclists planning to start cycling than for cyclists 
planning to cycle more.  
Transport for London commissioned research by Cambridge University’s Centre for Diet and 
Activity Research to model the health impacts of policy options. Models estimated the health 
benefits of being more active in a less polluted city against the increased risk of injury to be 
worth £250 million if the increased cycling expected by 2031 in the Mayor’s Transport Strategy 
is attained.47 Research undertaken by academics to assess their policies and guide new policies 
resulted in indicators to measure success, including physical activity, on‐street air quality 
monitoring, road traffic collisions, transport noise, perception of the urban realm, and access to 
services.48 
Despite a growing population, motor vehicle traffic volumes across London decreased by 7% 
between 2004 and 2014, while cycling has increased.49 
Stockholm: Urban Mobility Strategy and Vision 2030 
Stockholm shares many characteristics with the cycling capital of Copenhagen, including 
weather and city size. Both cities share a history of integrated regional planning and land‐use 
that support cycling given the proximity between places of work and homes. However, cycling 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
23
mode‐shares are far lower in Stockholm. Like London, Stockholm plans to double the 
percentage of cyclists and has implemented a congestion charge to discourage car trips into the 
city centre. Stockholm has seen a 20% reduction in car trips since implementation of the 
congestion charge in 2007.50 
 
Stockholm has responded to cold snowy winters by conducting research on winter cycling 
habits and infrastructure maintenance requirements.50 Questions on winter cycling are 
included in regular travel behaviour surveys and before‐and‐after studies of infrastructure 
interventions to inform future projects. At a city‐wide level, indicators are used to inform what 
transport infrastructure should be prioritised. Indicators include mode share, collisions, cycle 
speeds, number of safe cycle and pedestrian crossings, and number of cycle parking spaces.  
Stockholm collects local neighbourhood data while also drawing on national and international 
studies. In developing specific solutions in specific locations – especially in the area of cycling 
infrastructure – the city adopts best practice from other cities. Stockholm is also invested in 
meeting the European Union’s Air Quality Standards for nitrogen dioxide and PM10 levels, which 
require significantly reducing transport emissions.  
Bogotá: Cicloruta cycle network 
Bogotá has pursued an ambitious agenda of creating separate cycle paths, most of which have 
required repurposing road space from cars. Over 300 kilometres of separate cycle paths have 
been installed at a cost of US$46 million.51 Unlike London and Stockholm, which generally 
followed an incremental approach to building cycling infrastructure, Bogotá pursued a rapid 
roll‐out of cycle and public transport infrastructure. This partly reflected Bogotá’s relative lack 
of cycle infrastructure two decades ago and partly reflected the city’s different political and 
demographic make‐up. There was political alignment for providing access to the city through 
cycling that not only promoted sustainability but also enhanced equity for poorer residents who 
are unable to afford public transport fares. Frequent mayoral changes may also have shortened 
the time frame available for completing politically driven projects.  
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
24
The administration that implemented the cycle network in Bogotá did not focus on research in 
the same way as London and Stockholm. Bogotá had an in‐house special advisor with a 
research team that was informed by best and worst practices around the world to establish 
how to implement cycling infrastructure. This included finding published studies and inviting 
experts to train city officials and make presentations to the general public in support of the 
project. As with London, it was important to be able to respond to journalists, but the focus was 
also about informing the public, whom the local government assumed had limited experience 
with cycling infrastructure.  
However, measuring the impact of the cycle network was not a priority. For the administration, 
the new policy, which resulted in visible changes to travel modes in the city, was sufficient. 
Similarly, the impact of the Ciclovía activation, which closes 121 kilometres of city streets on 
Sundays and public holidays52 to allow safe passage for cyclists and pedestrians, on the uptake 
of cycling was not used to gauge success. However, it was documented that those taking part in 
Ciclovía at least once a month scored higher on health‐related quality of life compared with 
those who did not.53 A study measuring particulate pollution along closed roads showed that 
PM10 was 13 times higher on a regular week day (65 μg/m3) than on a Sunday (5 μg/m3),54 
pointing to potential health benefits from reduced vehicle use in the city centre. Bogotá does, 
however, measure mode share, which showed an increase in cycle share from 2∙2% in 2005 to 
3∙8% in 2011.  
Comment 
London, Stockholm, and Bogotá highlight a trend of using shared learning, where international 
evidence about the strengths and weaknesses of cycle infrastructure is used in local decision‐
making. London and Stockholm both test how local markets respond to the adoption of new 
strategies. This research has enabled these cities to use policy to more specifically target 
different market segments, an approach that could make transport policy more effective.55 
Bogotá did not focus on this type of research because the goal was to provide infrastructure in 
an environment where previously safe passage by cycle was not possible. In each city, research 
was partly motivated to provide evidence in support of cycling projects to either the general 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
25
public or the media. Some form of democratic oversight provides an important incentive for 
these cities to provide evidence to support plans. Desire for recognition as a city that is able to 
share best practices in active transport also acts as a powerful incentive to provide indicators of 
success. Although London and Stockholm conducted evaluations of their cycle infrastructure, 
the evidence would contribute to knowledge translation more effectively if the results were 
published in more accessible formats than internal reports. Evaluations of natural experiments 
are valued by both researchers and policy makers, so compiling the lessons from large 
infrastructure investments and policy changes worldwide would be a worthwhile project. The 
Bogotá case study is an example of a major intervention that was not fully evaluated, which is a 
type of missed opportunity that is likely to become more common. 
Panel 4: Summary of recommendations for improving translation of research to 
policy and practice 
The recommendations below are organised by the four steps of the Giles‐Corti et al.13 research 
translation model and are drawn from that model, the knowledge exchange literature,12 a 
qualitative study of decision makers,10 and ALR.14 
Policy‐relevant research questions 
 Collaborations among researchers, practitioners, and policy makers 
 Interdisciplinary teams 
 Research questions designed to address timely policy questions 
 Research questions about economics and public opinion 
 Funders or professional organisations offer training in researcher and policy‐maker 
collaboration 
Policy‐relevant research methods 
 Design and measures selected for relevance to policy makers 
 Natural experiments and case studies 
 Emphasis on local evidence 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
26
 Multiple outcomes and measures to enhance relevance to multiple sectors 
 Training in policy‐relevant research methods at conferences 
 Institutional support from universities and governments can facilitate collaboration of 
knowledge producers and users in the research process 
Dissemination strategy to decision makers 
 Target journals and professional conferences that reach practitioners 
 Target communication modes to decision makers, including in‐person, print, video, 
websites, and social media 
 Research briefs and infographics with clear policy implications to be accessible to non‐
technical audiences 
 Evidence should be relevant to context of decision‐making, with local data being 
preferred 
 Evidence should be supplemented with stories to illustrate how findings relate to 
specific people 
 Practitioners and policy makers collaborate to help plan dissemination strategy and 
materials 
 Communications with policy makers should be at the time the information can be most 
useful 
 Funders provide grants to support research translation 
 Training for research translation at conferences 
Engagement in advocacy 
 Develop relationships with knowledge brokers who can take research findings to 
decision makers 
 Become known by decision makers as a source of useful and credible information  
 Schedule one‐on‐one meetings, group briefings, and testimony to policy makers 
 Press releases and stories in mass media 
 Training in advocacy offered by funders or professional organisations 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
27
 
 
Panel 5: Key messages 
Land‐use and transport policies that were adopted for good reasons at the time are now having 
widespread negative effects on health through reduced physical activity, prolonged sitting, 
injuries, air pollution, social isolation, noise, stress, compromised personal safety, unhealthy 
diets, urban heat island effects, and greenhouse gas emissions driving climate change. Most of 
these negative consequences are related to the high priority given to motor vehicles in land‐use 
and transport planning.  
Integrated regional and local land‐use and transport interventions that support health include: 
density, design, diversity, destination accessibility, distance to public transport, demand 
management, distribution of employment, and desirability. A diverse set of indicators to 
monitor progress towards achieving healthier cities is proposed.  
Substantial reductions in the burden of NCDs were predicted by models that increased 
residential densities, increased diversity of the built environment, decreased travel distances to 
common destinations, and promoted walking, cycling, and the use of public transport over 
motor vehicle use. The last scenario produced the greatest population health impact, but 
changes in transport mode can only be achieved through integrated land‐use and transport 
interventions.  
Given the trends of growing populations and rapid urbanisation, there is an urgent need to 
improve knowledge translation so the evidence about health‐enhancing urban planning, urban 
design, and transport policies is more quickly and effectively disseminated to, and adopted by, 
decision makers.  
 Researchers are encouraged to conduct more innovative policy‐relevant studies, develop 
better ways of communicating research to decision makers, and become involved in informing 
the policy process.  
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
28
Case studies of the effective use of research to inform land‐use and transport policy were 
identified in several countries. These cases illustrate that research can influence policy, so 
efforts to improve research translation are justified.  
The unintended consequences of land‐use and transport policies that favour motor vehicle 
mobility are likely to worsen the global epidemics of NCDs and injuries, along with increasing 
the effects of air pollution and climate change. The solution with the likelihood of greatest 
health impact is to enact and implement integrated land‐use and transport policies that 
prioritise investments that achieve safe and sustainable walking, cycling and public transport 
while reducing private motor vehicle dependence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paper 3 
 
 
Panel F
Panel 1 
Panel 2 
Draft Only – 
Figures 
Figure 
Figure 
Not for distr
ribution 
 
 
29
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
30
References 
1. 
Woodcock J, Edwards P, Tonne C, et al. Public health benefits of strategies to reduce 
greenhouse‐gas emissions: urban land transport. The Lancet 2009; 374(9705): 1930‐43. 
2. 
Roberts I, Edwards P. The energy glut: the politics of fatness in an overheating world: 
Zed Books Limited; 2010. 
3. 
Woodcock J, Banister D, Edwards P, Prentice AM, Roberts I. Energy and Health 3 Energy 
and transport. The Lancet 2007; 370(9592): 1078‐88. 
4. 
Ewing R, Cervero R. Travel and the built environment: a meta‐analysis. Journal of the 
American planning association 2010; 76(3): 265‐94. 
5. 
Giles‐Corti B, Vernez Moudon A, Reis R, et al. City planning and population health: a 
global challenge. The Lancet 2016; xx(xx) 
6. 
Stevenson M, Thompson J, de Sa TH, et al. Land‐use, transport and population health: 
estimating the health benefits of compact cities. Lancet 2016; xx(xx) 
7. 
Kingdon J. Agendas, alternatives, and public policies. Second ed. New York, USA: 
Longman; 1995. 
8. 
Nelson AC. The mass market for suburban low‐density development is over. The Urban 
Lawyer 2012: 811‐26. 
9. 
Brownson RC, Royer C, Ewing R, McBride TD. Researchers and policymakers: travelers in 
parallel universes. American journal of preventive medicine 2006; 30(2): 164‐72. 
10. 
Petticrew M, Whitehead M, Macintyre SJ, Graham H, Egan M. Evidence for public health 
policy on inequalities: 1: the reality according to policymakers. Journal of epidemiology 
and community health 2004; 58(10): 811‐6. 
11. 
Gagnon ML. Moving knowledge to action through dissemination and exchange. Journal 
of clinical epidemiology 2011; 64(1): 25‐31. 
12. 
Shea BJ. A decade of knowledge translation research‐‐what has changed? Journal of 
clinical epidemiology 2011; 64(1): 3. 
13. 
Giles‐Corti B, Sallis JF, Sugiyama T, Frank LD, Lowe M, Owen N. Translating active living 
research into policy and practice: one important pathway to chronic disease prevention. 
Journal of public health policy 2015; 36(2): 231‐43. 
14. 
Sallis JF, Cutter CL, Lou D, et al. Active Living Research: creating and using evidence to 
support childhood obesity prevention. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 2014; 
46(2): 195‐207. 
15. 
Barker DC, Gutman MA. Evaluation of Active Living Research: ten years of progress in 
building a new field. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 2014; 46(2): 208‐15. 
16. 
Moodie R. Commentary: Where Different Worlds Collide: Expanding the Influence of 
Research and Researchers on Policy. Journal of Public Health Policy 2009; 30: S33‐S7. 
17. 
Goldstein H. Commentary: translating research into public policy. Journal of Public 
Health Policy 2009; 30: S16‐S20. 
18. 
Giles‐Corti B, Knuiman M, Timperio A, et al. Evaluation of the implementation of a state 
government community design policy aimed at increasing local walking: design issues 
and baseline results from RESIDE, Perth Western Australia. Preventive Medicine 2008; 
46(1): 46‐54. 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
31
19. 
Hooper P, Giles‐Corti B, Knuiman M. Evaluating the implementation and active living 
impacts of a state government planning policy designed to create walkable 
neighborhoods in Perth, Western Australia. American Journal of Health Promotion 2014; 
28(sp3): S5‐S18. 
20. 
Frank LD, Andresen MA, Schmid TL. Obesity relationships with community design, 
physical activity, and time spent in cars. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 2004; 
27(2): 87‐96. 
21. 
US Clean Air Act. 2015. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clean_Air_Act_(United_States) 
(accessed September 9th, 2015). 
22. 
Frank L, Engelke P, Schmid T. Health and community design: The impact of the built 
environment on physical activity: Island Press; 2003. 
23. 
Frank LD, Schmid TL, Sallis JF, Chapman J, Saelens BE. Linking objectively measured 
physical activity with objectively measured urban form: findings from SMARTRAQ. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine 2005; 28(2): 117‐25. 
24. 
Transport Research Board and Institute of Medicine. Does the built environment 
influence physical activity? Examining the evidence. Washington DC: TRB, 2005. 
25. 
Heath GW, Brownson RC, Kruger J, et al. The effectiveness of urban design and land use 
and transport policies and practices to increase physical activity: a systematic review. 
Journal of Physical Activity & Health 2006; 3: S55. 
26. 
National Neart Foundation of Australia. Blueprint for an active Australia. Melbourne: 
NHFoA, 2014. 
27. 
NICE 
Guidelines. 
Physical 
activity 
and 
the 
environment. 
2008. 
http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/PH8 (accessed September 9th, 2015). 
28. 
NICE 
Evidence 
Update 
57. 
Physical 
activity 
and 
the 
environment. 
2014. 
https://arms.evidence.nhs.uk/resources/hub/1034503/attachment 
(accessed 
September 9th, 2015). 
29. 
www.nyc.gov/html/ddc/html/design/active_design.shtml (accessed September 9th, 
2015). 
30. 
Sallis JF, Spoon C, Cavill N, et al. Co‐benefits of designing communities for active living: 
an exploration of literature. International Journal Behav Nutr Phys Act 2015; 12. 
31. 
Watts N, Adger WN, Agnolucci P, et al. Health and climate change: policy responses to 
protect public health. The Lancet 2015; 386(10006): 1861‐914. 
32. 
Pucher J, Buehler R. Making cycling irresistible: lessons from the Netherlands, Denmark 
and Germany. Transport Reviews 2008; 28(4): 495‐528. 
33. 
Designed 
to 
Move: 
Active 
Cities. 
https://www.designedtomove.org/resources. 
(accessed September 9 2015). 
34. 
Tellier R. Review of aerosol transmission of influenza A virus. Emergency Infectious 
Diseases 2006; 12(11): 1657‐62. 
35. 
Colosia AD, Masaquel A, Hall CB, Barrett AM, Mahadevia PJ, Yogev R. Residential 
crowding and severe respiratory syncytial virus disease among infants and young 
children: a systematic literature review. BMC infectious diseases 2012; 12(1): 1. 
36. 
Brownson RC, Fielding JE, Maylahn CM. Evidence‐based public health: a fundamental 
concept for public health practice. Annual review of public health 2009; 30: 175‐201. 
 Paper 3 Draft Only – Not for distribution 
 
 
32
37. 
Gudes O, Kendall E, Yigitcanlar T, Pathak V, Baum S. Rethinking health planning: a 
framework for organising information to underpin collaborative health planning. Health 
Information Management Journal 2010; 39(2): 18. 
38. 
Lavis JN, Permanand G, Oxman AD, Lewin S, Fretheim A. SUPPORT Tools for evidence‐
informed health Policymaking (STP) 13: Preparing and using policy briefs to support 
evidence‐informed policymaking. Health Research Policy and Systems 2009; 7(Suppl 1): 
S13. 
39. 
Nations U. Sixty seventh session Political Declaration of the High Level meeting of the 
General Assembly on the Prevention and control of non‐communicable diseases, 2011. 
40. 
Organisation WH. Can urban development, housing and transport policy act as health 
policy? Economics of Social Determinants of Health and Health Inequalities: A Resource 
Book; 2013. 
41. 
OECD. Pedestrian Survey, Urban Space and Health: summary document.  International 
Transport Forum 2011; 2011. 
42. 
Melbourne TUo. NHMRC Centre of Research Excellence. 
43. 
Transport for London. The Mayor’s vision for cycling in London, 2013. 
44. 
Transport for London. International cycling infrastructure best practice study, 2014. 
45. 
Transport for London. Analysis of cycling potential: travel in London, 2010. 
46. 
Transport for London. Casualties in Greater London during 2014, 2015. 
47. 
Greater London Authority. Transport and health in London: the main impacts of London 
road transport on health, 2014. 
48. 
Transport for London. Improving the health of Londoners: transport action plan, 2014. 
49. 
Department for Transport. Traffic flows, Borough, 2015. 
50. 
Floater G, Rode P, Zenghelis D. Stockholm: Green Economy Leader Report. 2013. 
51. 
Montezuma R. Promoting active lifestyles and healthy urban spaces: the cultural and 
spatial transformation of Bogotá, Colombia. SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL PUBLICATION‐
PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION 2005; 612: 161. 
52. 
Cervero R, Sarmiento OL, Jacoby E, Gomez LF, Neiman A. Influences of built 
environments on walking and cycling: lessons from Bogotá. International Journal of 
Sustainable Transportation 2009; 3(4): 203‐26. 
53. 
Sarmiento O, Torres A, Jacoby E, Pratt M, Schmid TL, Stierling G. The Ciclovía‐Recreativa: 
a mass‐recreational program with public health potential. Journal of Physical Activity & 
Health 2010; 7(2): S163. 
54. 
Sarmiento O, Parra D, Gómez L, Schmid T, Diaz‐del‐Castillo A, Pratt M. Quality of Life of 
the citizens of Bogota‐Colombia: The importance of physical activity and built 
environment characteristics.  The 19th IUHPE World Conference on Health Promotion & 
Health Education; 2007. 
55. 
Rode P, Floater G, Thomopoulos N, et al. Accessibility in cities: transport and urban 
form. 2014. 
 
 
