 1018 
VOLUME 23 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2017   NATURE MEDICINE
Once virtually ignored, microglia, the resident immune cells of the CNS, 
have recently taken center stage in research for their roles in CNS health 
and disease. In the healthy brain and spinal cord, microglia, which repre-
sent approximately 10% of CNS cells, form a near-regular three-dimen-
sional lattice in which each microglial cell occupies unique territory. 
Microglia are highly ramified cells that have a multitude of fine, excep-
tionally motile processes that continuously survey the parenchymal 
environment. Through this surveillance, microglia detect diverse extra-
cellular signals, and consequently, transduce, integrate, and respond to 
them to maintain brain homeostasis. Researchers are increasingly com-
ing to appreciate the variety of microglial responses, recognizing that 
many of the response states are distinctly different from CNS inflam-
mation. Thus, in contrast to the roles they have had attributed to them 
in the past, microglia are now known to be active participants in brain 
function and dysfunction.
The majority of recent information gained about the roles for microg-
lia come from applying powerful new technologies in the mouse and 
in mouse models of disease. Investigations of microglia in humans are 
becoming more frequent, but more selective and specific biomarkers 
of microglia states are required to determine whether biological find-
ings in the mouse are applicable to humans, and whether therapeutic 
approaches targeted to microglia in mouse models of disease predict 
treatment response in human diseases.
Scientific interest in the role of microglia in disease is growing at an 
ever-accelerating rate. In this article, we first describe the current under-
standing of the ontogeny of microglia and the cells’ physiological roles 
in the CNS, which is based largely on research using animal models. We 
then discuss the emerging roles for microglia in CNS diseases (Table 1). 
Finally, we speculate on the potential therapeutic opportunities that may 
come from targeting the aberrant functions of microglia in disease, and 
describe some of the hurdles that must be overcome.
Ontogeny, development, and maintenance of microglia
Elegant lineage-tracing studies in mice have established that microglia 
are derived from yolk-sac progenitors that express the transcription 
factor RUNX1 and the receptor tyrosine kinase c-Kit, also known as 
CD117, but that do not express CD45, a pan-leukocyte marker protein1. 
These progenitors migrate through the bloodstream to the developing 
CNS, starting at embryonic day 8.5 and continuing until the blood–
brain barrier is formed2,3. Microglia may be considered to be similar to 
tissue-resident macrophages in non-CNS tissues, but it has recently been 
determined that microglia are the only myeloid cells that are derived 
solely from yolk-sac precursors under normal conditions4,5. Lineage-
specific genes, such as Pu.1 and Irf8, define the microglial transcriptional 
network and distinguish it from that of tissue-resident macrophages1,6–8. 
Microglia, which are parenchymal cells in the CNS, are also distinct from 
perivascular, meningeal, and choroid plexus macrophages, although 
transcriptome analysis has revealed a striking overlap in the transcrip-
tional profiles between microglia and perivascular macrophages, much 
more so than between microglia and circulating monocytes9.
As the CNS develops and matures, microglia must progressively 
adapt to take on distinct sets of physiological functions. Examination 
using RNA sequencing and epigenomic analyses of the dynamics of 
the transcriptional repertoire from the yolk sac to the adult in mice has 
revealed three major developmental states: early (less than E14), pre-
microglia (E14 to a few weeks postnatal), and adult microglia (more than 
a few weeks)10. Single-cell analysis identified a stepwise developmental 
 
1Neurosciences & Mental Health Program, Hospital for Sick Children, 
Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada. 2F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children’s Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, Stanley Center for 
Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, United 
States. Correspondence should be addressed to M.W.S. (michael.salter@
sickkids.ca).  
 
Received 31 October 2016; accepted 26 July 2017; published online 28 
September 2017; doi:10.1038/nm.4397
Microglia emerge as central players in 
brain disease
Michael W Salter1 & Beth Stevens2
There has been an explosion of new findings recently giving us insights into the involvement of microglia in central 
nervous system (CNS) disorders. A host of new molecular tools and mouse models of disease are increasingly 
implicating this enigmatic type of nervous system cell as a key player in conditions ranging from neurodevelopmental 
disorders such as autism to neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease and chronic pain. 
Contemporaneously, diverse roles are emerging for microglia in the healthy brain, from sculpting developing neuronal 
circuits to guiding learning-associated plasticity. Understanding the physiological functions of these cells is crucial 
to determining their roles in disease. Here we focus on recent developments in our rapidly expanding understanding 
of the function, as well as the dysfunction, of microglia in disorders of the CNS.
REVIEW
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 NATURE MEDICINE   VOLUME 23 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2017 
1019
The physiological roles of microglia in development and 
synaptic plasticity
Microglia not only respond when things go wrong, but they also instruct 
the form and function of the healthy CNS (Fig. 1). Numerous stud-
ies have demonstrated that microglia have a number of physiological, 
noninflammatory functions that are crucial for CNS development and 
for regulating neuroplasticity in the adult20–22. Given that microglia are 
present in the CNS from the mid-embryonic stage onward, they are 
positioned to carry out roles in many aspects of the subsequent devel-
opment of the CNS.
Microglia surveillance and monitoring
Two-photon imaging studies in vivo in mice expressing green fluorescent 
protein specifically in microglia have revealed that these cells have highly 
dynamic processes and continually survey their local environment23,24. 
It is estimated that resident microglia scan the entire volume of the brain 
over the course of a few hours24, suggesting that they have homeostatic 
functions in the healthy brain. The fine processes of microglia continu-
ously contact neurons, axons, and dendritic spines. Moreover, process 
motility can change dramatically in response to extracellular stimuli, 
including neuronal activity25,26 and neurotransmitters26. ATP is a major 
stimulus of microglia, and microglial processes are rapidly attracted to 
the source of ATP release23, which is a feature that can be manipulated 
by glutamate-receptor agonists in rodent models in vitro and in situ6–8. 
program in which individual microglial cells shift their regulatory net-
works in a coordinated manner, such that, as a group, microglia are 
synchronized with neuronal development. It is hypothesized that the dif-
ferent stages of microglia development utilize distinct pathways for pro-
cessing homeostatic neurodevelopmental signals from the environment, 
balanced by the need to maintain the capacity for appropriate immune 
responses. Although there is some commonality among microglia in 
ontogeny and developmental programs, hierarchical clustering analy-
sis11 indicates that there may be microglial subpopulations with distinct 
transcriptomes. This concept builds on findings of functional, morpho-
logical subpopulations of microglia in different CNS regions12,13.
The original pool of yolk-sac-derived cells is the source of myeloid 
cells in the healthy CNS, and the maintenance of microglia does not 
dependent on circulating monocytes4,14,15. Thus, when new microglia 
are required, these must be generated by self-renewal from local pools 
that persist over long periods. In the healthy adult, individual microg-
lia are long-lived, turning over at a rate of 0.05% of cells per hour16. 
Maintenance of the microglia population depends on the continuing 
activation of the receptor for colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1R), 
which is also essential for microglia and macrophage development2,17. 
The endogenous ligands produced in the CNS for CSF-1R–CSF-1 and 
interleukin (IL)-34 (ref. 18)—must be released continuously, because 
pharmacological blockade of CSF-1R leads to rapid depletion of 
microglia19.
Programmed
cell death
Phagocytosis
Pu.1+/IRF8+
pre-microglia
Microglia
surveillance
RUNX1+/CD45–/
c-Kit+ progenitors
Neuronal plasticity
Synaptic pruning
Yolk sac
Placenta
c-Kit
Figure 1  Ontogeny of microglia and physiological roles in CNS development, homeostasis, and plasticity. Microglia develop from myeloid progenitors in the 
yolk sac that express the transcription factor RUNX1 and the receptor tyrosine kinase c-Kit, also known as CD117, but not CD45, and enter the CNS during 
early embryonic development (embryonic day 8.5 in mice). Microglia have normal roles in brain development and CNS homeostasis, including programmed 
cell death and clearance of apoptotic newborn neurons, as well as pruning developing axons and synapses. Later in development and into adulthood, 
microglia processes are highly motile and continually survey their local environment, contacting neurons, axons, and dendritic spines. Microglia have diverse 
physiological roles, including regulating neuronal and synaptic plasticity.
Debbie Maizels/Springer Nature
R E V I E W
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 1020 
VOLUME 23 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2017   NATURE MEDICINE
is to engulf and clear neurons that die as a result of programmed cell 
death, a process that eliminates excess neurons generated as part of nor-
mal development and ongoing neurogenesis in the adult37,38. Crucial 
for the removal of the cellular corpses in adult neurogenesis are the 
TAM-receptor kinases AXL and Mer39. But, microglia are not simply 
waste scavengers; they are also active neuronal exterminators, driving 
programmed cell death by inducing apoptosis of neurons without pro-
voking inflammation. Microglia may drive neuronal apoptosis through 
the release of superoxide ions40, nerve growth factor41, or tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF)42. Microglia-induced neuronal apoptosis is dependent on 
the cell-surface receptor CR3, the activation of which initiates intracel-
lular downstream signaling through DNAX activation protein of 12 kDa 
(DAP12) (also known as TYROBP), ultimately triggering the release of 
the neurotoxic factors43. In addition to microglia having a role in the 
initiation of programmed neuronal death, they may also be involved in 
expediting the processes leading to death in neurons that are induced 
by other mechanisms to be vulnerable44. In physiological conditions, 
microglial phagocytosis is coupled to apoptosis through ‘find-me’ sig-
nals, such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which are released by apop-
totic cells, and so appropriate coupling of phagocytosis to apoptosis is 
physiologically important25. Moreover, it has been found that in the 
healthy CNS, only a small proportion of microglia are in the process of 
phagocytosing at a given time, which suggests that there may be large 
potential for increasing the number of microglia performing phagocy-
tosis, a mechanism that could be targeted in the impaired CNS25.
Microglia in synaptic plasticity in the adult
Unstimulated microglia in the healthy CNS have no demonstrable 
role in ongoing, basal synaptic transmission or in short-term plastic-
ity, although the stimulation of microglia, for example, by activating 
TLR4, may affect synaptic function45. Rather, microglia come into play 
during the processes of activity-dependent, long-term synaptic plastic-
ity. Such persistent synaptic plasticity is commonly understood to be a 
fundamental cellular underpinning of learning and memory46, and one 
that may manifest as either an increase or a decrease in synaptic efficacy, 
commonly referred to, respectively, as long-term potentiation and long-
term depression. Learning and memory are also highly dependent on the 
proliferation and development of new neurons—a process called neuro-
genesis47—which occurs in the healthy brain as well as during develop-
ment48. The cumulative body of evidence from numerous laboratories 
using a range of approaches suggests that microglia are crucial regulators 
of activity-triggered synaptic plasticity49–53, adult neurogenesis54–56, and 
learning and memory49,57,58. Changes in microglial number or function 
during development, for example, through the deletion of transforming 
growth factor (TGF)-b in the CNS51,59 or by knocking out CX3CR1 (ref. 
49), results in aberrations in neuroplasticity in adulthood. But more 
importantly, eliminating microglia in the adult or blocking the cells’ 
 
Glutamate-receptor agonists can stimulate ATP-mediated microglial-
process outgrowth in rodent models in vitro and in situ27–29. Although 
the functional significance of microglial process motility and local sur-
veillance remains elusive, ATP is likely one of many signals that mediates 
microglia–neuron communication and so could influence neuronal and 
synaptic function in health and disease.
Developmental synaptic pruning
During development, microglia sculpt immature neuronal circuits by 
engulfing and eliminating synaptic structures (axons and dendritic 
spines) in a process known as synaptic pruning30–32. Electron micros-
copy and high-resolution in vivo engulfment assays have revealed pre- 
and postsynaptic structures inside microglial lysosomes in the mouse 
visual system, hippocampus, and other brain regions during critical peri-
ods of synaptic refinement. The disruption of microglia pruning leads to 
sustained defects in synaptic development and wiring abnormalities31. 
Intriguingly, in the mouse visual system, this pruning is dependent on 
neuronal activity and sensory experience30,31, wherein microglia pref-
erentially engulf less active presynaptic inputs. This raises questions 
about how specific synapses are recognized and molecularly targeted 
by microglia for pruning.
One group of molecules involved in pruning is the classical-com-
plement cascade22,31,33,34. In the innate immune system, complement 
proteins are ‘eat me’ signals that mark apoptotic cells and pathogens 
for removal by circulating macrophages that express C3 receptors 
(CR3/CD11b)35. In the healthy developing murine brain, C3 and C1q 
are widely expressed and localize to subsets of immature synapses33. 
Microglia, the only CNS cell type that expresses a C3 receptor (CR3), 
phagocytose these synaptic inputs through the same C3–CR3 signaling 
pathway as is used by the innate immune system31. Mice deficient in 
C1q, C4 (ref. 36), C3, or CR3 have sustained defects in synaptic con-
nectivity, suggesting that the healthy brain requires the activation of 
the classical-complement cascade. Fractalkine, the neuronal CX3CR1 
ligand CX3CL1, has also been implicated in microglial synaptic pruning; 
mice that lack this receptor have markedly fewer microglia during early 
postnatal development than those that express the receptor, and also 
show defects in synaptic maturation and hippocampus refinement32.
There are likely other molecules that work in concert with comple-
ment and fractalkine to prune specific synapses and to ensure that 
pruning occurs at the right time and place. It is possible that different 
mechanisms regulate pruning in different contexts, including across 
brain regions and stages of development. Aberrant pruning during 
critical developmental periods could contribute to neurodevelopmental 
disorders, such as autism and schizophrenia, as discussed later.
Driving neuronal programmed cell death
Given that microglia are phagocytic cells, one role in CNS development 
Table 1  Microglial genes and pathways implicated in health and disease
Health and disease
Genes and/or pathways of interest
References
Synaptic pruning
C3R, C1A, CR3, and CX3CR1
30,33
Neuronal programmed cell death
CR3, TAM-receptor kinases (AXL, Mer), DAP12, NGF, and TNF
38,40–42
Synaptic plasticity
Tlr4, TGF-b, CX3CR1, BDNF, and TNF
44,48,50,57,58,162
Nasu–Hakola disease
TREM2
84
Rett syndrome
MECP2
71–73
Alzheimer’s disease
TREM2, DAP12, APOE, APOJ, CD33, CR1, C1q, C3, and  
classical-complement cascade
97–114, 117,118,163–165,
Frontal temporal dementia
Progranulin and C1qA
33
Neuropathic pain
P2RX4, P2RX7, P2RY12, BDNF, DAP12, IRF5, and IRF8
129–140
R E V I E W
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 NATURE MEDICINE   VOLUME 23 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2017 
1021
numbers or state in some individuals with autism, it will be important 
to determine whether the microglia are simply responding to aberrant 
changes in brain environment, or whether they have a contributing role.
Although human genetic studies do not implicate genes specifically 
expressed by microglia as having a causative role for ASD, microglia 
could aberrantly respond to insults that originate in neurons or other 
cells (i.e., astrocytes), thereby contributing to neuronal and circuit dys-
function in autism. This was recently demonstrated in a mouse model 
of Rett syndrome72, a neurodevelopmental disorder usually caused 
by mutations in methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MECP2)73,74. When 
microglia–synapse interactions were examined before, during, and after 
the onset of phenotypic and synaptic regression in the visual system of 
mice lacking Mecp2, microglia were shown to excessively engulf syn-
apses at end stages of disease. However, this effect was independent of 
microglia-specific loss of MECP2 expression, suggesting that microg-
lia aberrantly respond to the loss of MECP2 in neurons or other cell 
types. These results also suggest that synaptic pruning could become 
dysregulated or overactive and so could contribute to aberrant synapse 
loss and dysfunction in ASD and neurodevelopmental disorders, includ-
ing schizophrenia36.
Environmental factors could also alter microglia function, thus influ-
encing brain development and synaptic connectivity. Because microglia 
respond to inflammatory signals, environmental conditions that cause 
systemic or local inflammation during the developmental critical period 
may have consequences throughout life. This could explain how prenatal 
infection and maternal immune challenge seem to increase the risk of 
autism and schizophrenia in offspring. Indeed, maternal immune activa-
tion in pregnant rodents induces robust behavioral deficits in offspring. A 
single maternal challenge with viral or bacterial components (i.e., PolyIC) 
during embryonic development (E9–12) results in behavioral changes 
in the offspring, including decreased social behavior, increased repeti-
tive behaviors, increased anxiety, and altered ultrasonic vocalization75. 
ability to make brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) leads to 
impaired synaptic plasticity and learning and memory58.
Roles in CNS pathology and disorders
Our growing understanding of the pleiotropic physiological roles of 
microglia in the developing and mature CNS suggests that aberrations 
in these normal functions of microglia may contribute to disease pro-
cesses in the CNS (Fig. 2).
Microglia ‘activation’ and plasticity
Microglia are dynamic cells that respond subtly, and sometimes grossly, 
to a near endless variety of environmental cues. A hallmark of microg-
lial responsivity is the cells’ ability to alter their own morphology, with 
or without proliferation. Indeed, differences in microglial morphology 
were described by Pio del Rio Hortego, who discovered microglia more 
than 100 years ago and correlated their morphology with pathological 
transformation60. But, in fact, the morphological changes indicate only 
that the microglia have detected a change in homeostasis; they do not 
specify a particular response state or type of activity in any given CNS 
disease.
Previously, the responsivity of microglia was conceptually shoehorned 
into a monolithic state—activation—that consisted of linear progression 
through a small number of states defined morphologically from ramified 
to ameboid. Attempts have even been made to fit microglia responsiv-
ity into a bimodal scheme: the M1 and M2 states, borrowed from the 
now-defunct classification of macrophages61. Similarly to macrophages, 
modern transcriptome profiling of microglia in mice has shown that 
the response phenotypes fail to conform to M1/M2 patterns62–64. New 
approaches that examine the transcriptomic, proteomic, and epigenomic 
characteristics of microglia in specific contexts are beginning to reveal 
consistent, discrete responsivity patterns in health and disease.
Microglia in autism and developmental disorders
A role for microglia in autism and developmental disorders has been 
speculated about for some time65, but direct evidence has been lacking. 
New insights into the functions of microglia in the healthy developing 
brain in the mouse are providing a new perspective on this potential 
link. As microglia colonize the brain during early embryonic develop-
ment, environmental and/or genetic perturbations could alter microglial 
development, synaptic pruning and surveillance, or other functions that 
could directly or indirectly contribute to the pathobiology of neurode-
velopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders.
Several lines of evidence from human studies suggest that microg-
lia are dysfunctional in autism-spectrum disorders (ASD), a complex 
group of neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by impairments 
in social and verbal communication and other characteristic behaviors. 
Postmortem studies have revealed altered microglial counts, morphol-
ogy, and neuronal interaction in brains from individuals with autism, 
notably, in regions such as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex that control 
executive functions66–68. Moreover, genome-wide transcriptional analy-
ses of postmortem brain tissue have found that brains from some indi-
viduals with autism have altered expression of microglia-specific genes, 
including markers related to the inflammatory state69–71. Intriguingly, a 
human brain-imaging study using positron-emission tomography (PET) 
with the radiotracer [11C](R)-PK11195, a ligand for the translocator pro-
tein (TSPO), which is expressed in microglia and astrocytes, has revealed 
increased [11C](R)-PK11195 binding in the brains of young adults with 
autism70, a finding consistent with postmortem studies. However, [11C]
(R)-PK11195, although informative, is not specific for microglia and 
may also be a more general indicator of gliosis and neuroinflamma-
tion. Although these studies indicate that there are changes in microglial 
–
–
–
+
+
Healthy neuron
Homeostatic
microglia
• Surveillance, monitoring
• Synaptic pruning, refinement
• Synaptic plasticity
Inflammation
Excessive
synaptic pruning
Aβ clearance
Debris clearance
Amyloid 
plaque
Protective/‘good’
Aberrant/‘bad’
Figure 2  Microglia states in health and disease. Microglia have complex 
roles that are both beneficial and detrimental to disease pathogenesis, 
including engulfing or degrading toxic proteins (i.e., amyloid plaques) 
and promoting neurotoxicity through excessive inflammatory cytokine 
release. Aberrations in microglia’s normal homeostatic functions such 
as surveillance, synaptic pruning, and plasticity may also contribute to 
excessive synapse loss and cognitive dysfunction in AD and other diseases.
Debbie Maizels/Springer Nature
R E V I E W
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 1022 
VOLUME 23 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2017   NATURE MEDICINE
(GWAS) have identified more than 20 loci that are linked to AD, many 
of which are expressed or exclusively expressed in microglia or myeloid 
cells95,96.
Among these risk genes for AD is TREM2. Individuals heterozygous 
for the rare TREM2 variant R47H are at a significantly increased risk for 
AD, and several other TREM2 variants have been associated with AD, 
frontal temporal dementia, and possibly, Parkinson’s disease, indicat-
ing that the dysfunction of microglia (or infiltrating myeloid cells) is 
important in neurodegenerative disorders97. Additionally, the level of 
soluble TREM2 in cerebrospinal fluid is increased in very early stages of 
AD, i.e., in those diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment98. However, 
the underlying biology and relevant ligands remain poorly understood. 
In the immune system, TREM2 mediates inflammatory and phagocytic 
signaling in immune cells through engagement of its co-receptor DAP12 
(ref. 99). Mutations that impair TREM2 signaling could thus contribute 
to AD pathogenesis by affecting several crucial functions of microglial 
phagocytosis, microglial survival, neuroinflammation, and other pro-
cesses97,100.
Microglia surround amyloid plaques in human AD brains and in 
animal models of AD. They have complex roles that are both beneficial 
and detrimental to AD pathogenesis, including engulfing or degrading 
amyloid plaques and promoting neurotoxicity through excessive inflam-
matory cytokine release90 (Fig. 2). Failure to clear apoptotic cells, cellular 
debris, and toxic proteins, such as beta-amyloid (Ab) can contribute 
to inflammation and neurodegeneration. Recent studies have reported 
fewer microglia or monocytes surrounding Ab plaques in the absence of 
TREM2, with varying—and sometimes contradictory—effects on plaque 
burden in AD models101–103. Some studies report the amelioration of 
plaques, inflammation, and AD pathology in the absence of TREM2, 
whereas others suggest that TREM2 has a beneficial role in AD. These 
differences are likely due to the specific animal model and also the time 
points studied, because TREM2 deficiency in the same model has been 
shown to have distinct roles in early as opposed to late stages of amyloid 
pathology104. More research is needed to elucidate the relevant mecha-
nisms. New data suggest that apolipoprotein E (APOE) binds TREM2 to 
regulate efficient clearance of apoptotic cells and debris105. Interestingly, 
a recent unbiased screen identified apolipoproteins, including APOE 
and APOJ, as putative ligands of TREM2, and suggests that they can 
facilitate the uptake of Ab and Ab–APOE complexes by microglia in 
vitro106. Because the APOE genotype has the strongest association of 
the apolipoproteins with AD risk, it will be crucial to understand the 
underlying mechanisms that govern interactions between TREM2, 
APOE, and other microglia-specific pathways to increase risk and AD 
pathogenesis. Interestingly, cell-surface TREM2 can be cleaved by a 
protease, and soluble TREM2 levels are decreased in the cerebrospinal 
fluid of individuals with early AD or frontal temporal dementia98,107,108, 
identifying it as a potential biomarker. Although much of the field has 
focused on plaque clearance and inflammation during the later stages 
of AD, TREM2 could also have earlier, homeostatic functions related to 
cognition97, because mutations in TREM2 or DAP12 cause progressive 
cognitive impairment109,110. Whether TREM2 deficiency impairs syn-
aptic or cognitive functions in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases 
is an important question for investigation.
Several other genes specifically expressed or enriched in microglia 
have emerged as genes conferring susceptibility to AD, including CD33, 
a transmembrane receptor on myeloid cells, which has been shown to 
have a role in Ab clearance and neuroinflammation111,112. Members 
of the classical-complement cascade, APOJ (clusterin), and comple-
ment receptor 1 (CR1)113,114 have also been linked to late-onset AD. 
The complement cascade is substantially upregulated and activated in 
the AD-affected brain; however, the link between AD and complement 
A second challenge (i.e., stress) later in development was shown to 
increase the severity in mice of some maternal-immune-activation-
related behavioral defects that are related to anxiety, memory, and cog-
nition function76.
Furthermore, a recent study using genome-wide chromatin and 
expression profiling throughout development identified several tempo-
ral stages of microglial development that are sensitive to both genetic and 
environmental perturbations, including alterations in the microbiome or 
prenatal immune activation10. The developmental and behavioral defi-
cits observed in maternal-immune-challenged offspring are mediated 
by interleukin (IL)-6, a proinflammatory cytokine released from mac-
rophages and T cells to elicit an immune response, and are accompanied 
by long-term cytokine dysregulation77,78. Microglia could modulate the 
maturation or function of neurons and synaptic function through the 
release of inflammatory cytokines and molecules, such as interleukins 
or TNF, which also regulates synaptic maturation and plasticity.
Thus, genetic or environmental disruption of microglial development 
or function could have functional and behavioral consequences and 
may be relevant to ASD and other disorders. In rodents, perturbations 
in microglia79, including genetic deletion of microglia-specific recep-
tors (Cx3cr1 or Dap12), result in defects in the outgrowth of dopami-
nergic axons in the forebrain and the laminar positioning of subsets 
of neocortical interneurons. Moreover, defects in synaptic function 
and connectivity, including altered pruning of cortical synapses, are 
thought to underlie autism and schizophrenia80,81. In support of this 
idea, Cx3cr1-knockout mice, which have impaired synaptic pruning, 
also have sustained defects in social behavior and functional long-range 
connectivity82. In addition, genetic disruptions in myeloid cells con-
tribute to behavioral abnormalities in mice. Compulsive overgrooming 
behavior in mice with mutations in Hoxb8, a homeobox transcription 
factor, is mediated by bone-marrow-derived microglia, the only cell in 
the brain that expresses HOXB8 (ref. 83). The HOXB8 cell lineage spe-
cifically gives rise to brain microglia. Transplantation of bone marrow 
from wild-type mice into irradiated HOXB8 mice rescued the exces-
sive-grooming and hair-loss phenotypes, which suggests that microg-
lia contribute to core symptoms of the disorder83. Finally, in humans, 
homozygous mutations in triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 
2 (TREM2)—which encodes an innate immune receptor expressed on 
microglia and myeloid cells—is associated with Nasu–Hakola disease, 
a rare disease characterized by multiple bone cysts, leukoencephalopa-
thy, and early mid-life dementia and neurodegeneration84, findings that 
provide evidence that microglia are important for cognitive function85.
Understanding when and where microglia become dysfunctional in 
autism and other neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders 
will be crucial for understanding how microglia influence circuits and 
brain regions relevant to these disorders. Brain development shows 
distinct sexual dimorphism86, in which sex differences in microglia 
function may have a key role87,88 (see Box 1). Such sex differences in 
microglial function could underlie, at least in part, differences observed 
in susceptibilities to and outcomes of neurodevelopmental and neuro-
psychiatric disorders in males and females89.
Microglia in neurodegenerative disorders
Reactive gliosis and neuroinflammation are hallmarks of Alzheimer’s 
disease (AD), a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that is the most 
common cause of dementia, and other neurodegenerative diseases, 
including Parkinson’s disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and 
frontal temporal dementia90. Long considered to be secondary events 
to neurodegeneration, microglia-related pathways have been identified 
by emerging genetic and transcriptomic studies as central to AD risk 
and pathogenesis91–94. Large-scale genome-wide association studies 
R E V I E W
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 NATURE MEDICINE   VOLUME 23 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2017 
1023
FTD. The phenotypes can be rescued by deleting C1q A chain (C1qA)34. 
Moreover, in glaucoma, a neurodegenerative disease that involves the 
selective loss of retinal ganglion neurons33, the complement cascade 
is upregulated and targets vulnerable synapses very early in disease. 
The genetic deletion of C1qa in the DBA2J glaucoma mouse model 
protects retinal ganglion cell (RGC) neurons and prevents disease pro-
gression119 and synapse loss120. Complement and microglia were also 
recently shown to mediate synapse loss in a model of virus (West Nile 
virus)-induced memory impairment121. Thus, understanding the sig-
nals that trigger microglia and complement to prune vulnerable circuits 
could provide important insights into potential new therapeutic targets.
Another subset of glia, astrocytes, has been shown in recent years 
to activate into at least two different states that depend on the mode 
of the initiating injury122. Inflammatory insult induces a so-called A1 
astrocyte, whereas ischemia induces a different phenotype, called A2. 
New research has also revealed that aberrant microglia signaling can 
induce astrocytes, CNS glia, and key regulators of synapse function and 
plasticity and brain homeostasis123–125 to transform into A1 astrocytes 
that were shown to be powerfully neurotoxic126. C1q was one of several 
factors (in addition to TNF and IL-1a) released by activated microglia 
that trigger the conversion of homeostatic astrocytes into neurotoxic 
reactive astrocytes that could contribute to neurodegeneration as well as 
to the impairment of several synaptic and neuronal functions, including 
synaptic pruning. Indeed, A1 astrocytes are abundant in various human 
neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s, Huntington’s, and 
Parkinson’s diseases, ALS, and multiple sclerosis126,127. What remains 
to be seen and will be interesting going forward is to investigate to what 
degree neurodegeneration can be augmented by targeting both astrocyte 
and microglial activation states.
Recently, it has been found in a mouse model of AD (the 5XFAD 
model) that driving γ-frequency oscillations reduces amyloid-plaque 
load128. Transcriptome changes in microglia suggested that microglial 
phagocytosis of Ab is enhanced by γ-entrainment. Whether synaptic 
loss and cognition are improved by this potentially exciting approach to 
indirectly affect microglia function remains to be determined. Given that 
the A2 state of reactive astrocytes may promote survival and repair126, 
it may be that synaptic and cognitive function are improved through 
the coordinated actions of entrained microglia together with astrocytes 
in the A2 state.
Microglia in neuropathic pain
Increasingly, studies in rodents129 and humans130 are implicating 
microglia in peripheral neuropathic pain, a debilitating and prevalent 
condition arising from damage to peripheral sensory nerves. Peripheral-
nerve injury has been found to elicit a series of changes that drives a 
stereotypic microglial response in the sensory-processing region of the 
spinal cord129. Central to the pain hypersensitivity is transcriptional 
upregulation of the purinergic receptor, P2X4, in the microglia (Fig. 3). 
The activation of P2X4Rs by ATP released from spinal interneurons131 
initiates signaling within the microglia, leading to a release of BDNF that 
subsequently acts on pain-transmitting neurons to suppress inhibition. 
This lack of inhibition—disinhibition—ultimately results in pain hyper-
sensitivity. The pain hypersensitivity process can be conceptualized as 
an exaggeration of the physiological action of microglia-derived BDNF 
in learning and plasticity58, but in the context of a different neuronal 
network: one in which potentiating the output leads not to learning, 
but to enhanced pain.
Additional purinergic receptors, expressed by spinal microglia and P2X7 
and P2Y12 receptors, have been implicated in pain hypersensitivity caused 
by peripheral-nerve injury130,132–134. Whether these receptors also act 
through BDNF signaling and disinhibition is currently an open question.
was largely thought to be related to plaque clearance and neuroinflam-
mation associated with neurodegeneration90. However, recent studies 
implicate microglia, complement, and other immune-related pathways 
as early mediators of synaptic dysfunction in the absence of plaques and 
overt inflammation.
Synapse loss is an early hallmark of AD and other neurodegenerative 
disorders and is considered a strong correlate of cognitive decline115,116. 
Complement proteins (C1q, C3) are upregulated in several AD mouse 
models in the hippocampus and vulnerable brain regions, and they asso-
ciate with synapses before overt plaque deposition, causing enhanced 
engulfment of synaptic elements117. Moreover, genetic and antibody-
mediated inhibition of C1q, C3, and/or CR3 rescues synapse loss and 
Ab-mediated synaptic dysfunction, suggesting that microglia contribute 
to early synapse loss and dysfunction in a pre-plaque model of AD117. 
Taken together, these findings suggest that the same pathway that prunes 
excess synapses in development are inappropriately activated and medi-
ate synapse loss in AD117,118.
Could this microglial pruning pathway be a common mechanism 
underlying synapse loss and dysfunction in CNS neurodegenerative dis-
ease? In support of this idea, deletion of the frontal temporal dementia 
gene, progranulin, in mice results in neurodegeneration and behavioral 
phenotypes, as well as complement activation and enhanced synaptic 
pruning, preferentially for inhibitory synapses in a mouse model of 
Box 1  Sex differences in microglia
Heterogeneity in human brain structure and function has been 
widely acknowledged for some time. However, the question 
of whether such differences can be directly linked to sex 
chromosomes and/or influenced by sex hormone is still being 
debated, despite growing evidence showing that sex can indeed be 
a determinant of structural and functional differences that exist 
in the brain (see review in ref. 86). Observations from the late 
1980s had implicated sex hormones as modulators for neuronal 
and astrocytic developmental programming153,154. It was not 
until later that sex differences were investigated in microglia and 
for their possible involvement in disease155. So far, the influence 
of sex differences on microglia function has been linked not 
only to development156, but also to many CNS perturbations, 
including traumatic injury, ischemia, and stress157–160, although 
exactly what mechanisms are involved is still unclear. Some 
insight into the impact that sex has on microglial functional 
divergence has recently been revealed in pain signaling and in 
the development of male copulatory behavior. Previously, it was 
shown that pain hypersensitivity after a peripheral-nerve injury in 
male mice involves signaling from spinal-dorsal-horn microglia151. 
Strikingly, recent findings have revealed that female mice with 
the same injury do not require microglia; rather, in females, 
the pain signal is maintained by adaptive immunity, and this 
profound cell-type difference in how males and females maintain 
pain hypersensitivity is largely hormonal139. In embryonic 
development, androgen levels are crucial for the masculinization 
of the preoptic area (POA) and, ultimately, adult male copulatory 
behavior. Lenz et al.161 have shown that microglia inhibition in 
males prevented POA masculinization and affected adult behavior, 
whereas activating microglia with estradiol in females induced the 
masculinization of the POA. These recent studies demonstrate 
that sex can be a strong contributor to both normal and 
pathological functions of microglia in mammals, a finding that 
has far-reaching implications on how we interpret physiological 
responses, and ultimately, develop therapeutic strategies.
R E V I E W
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 1024 
VOLUME 23 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2017   NATURE MEDICINE
physiological functions of microglia—such as pruning, regulating plas-
ticity, and neurogenesis—are dysregulated in CNS disorders are open-
ing up possibilities for new opportunities for therapeutic interventions 
and disease diagnosis. Targeting the mechanisms that are dysregulated 
may arrest or reverse neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative dis-
orders in which microglia have a role. Moreover, microglia-based diag-
nostic approaches, such as biomarkers—for example, soluble TREM2 
or complement components in cerebrospinal fluid—or neuroimaging 
approaches with probes toward microglia signaling pathways, may allow 
for the detection of at-risk individuals much earlier than is possible 
with biomarkers directed at neuronal dysfunction. Such microglia-based 
biomarkers may also permit the monitoring of disease progression and 
recovery. Given the sexual dimorphism in microglial function and dys-
function and the sex bias in CNS disorders with microglial pathology 
(including ASD and AD), the development of microglia-directed bio-
markers and therapeutics will need to address pathways and targets that 
may differ in men and women.
To develop new therapeutics based on targeting microglia, a deeper 
dive into the mechanisms underlying microglia function and dysfunction 
is needed. Given the complexity and diverse functions of microglia in 
health and disease, there is a crucial need for new biomarkers that relate 
to specific microglial functional states (for example, abnormal phago-
cytosis of synapses as opposed to plaques; the inflammatory compared 
to the homeostatic states). Newly developed approaches for single-cell 
 
Peripheral-nerve injury elicits a proliferative response with profound 
morphological changes of spinal microglia, as well as pain hypersensitivity. 
 
If pain hypersensitivity is dependent upon morphological changes and 
proliferation, these should follow mechanistically step by step. The pain 
hypersensitivity is dependent upon DAP12 (ref. 135), the transcription 
factors IRF8 and IRF5 (refs. 136,137), P2X4Rs138, and microglial-
derived BDNF139,140. But the proliferative response and morphological 
changes are independent of all of these, which demonstrates that mor-
phological changes can be separate from, and not causal for, changes in 
microglia function.
Surprisingly, the involvement of microglia in neuropathic pain hyper-
sensitivity is sexually dimorphic: pain depends on microglial signaling 
only in males139. Despite this profound difference in cellular depen-
dency, the degree of pain hypersensitivity in female mice is as great as 
that in male mice. Even more strikingly, the microglial proliferation and 
morphological changes induced by nerve injury are indistinguishable 
in females and males. But in females, the transcriptional upregulation 
of P2X4Rs is blocked by a mechanism dependent on adaptive immune 
signaling to microglia139. Although the details of this signaling remain 
to be worked out, this is a clear demonstration of sex differences in a 
disease process for which microglia are crucial (see also Box 1).
Therapeutic opportunities by targeting microglia
The recent advances in our understanding of where, when, and how the 
–
+
DRG
Microglia
To brain
Damage
Dorsal horn
P2X4R++ microglia
P2X4 receptor
BDNF
Ca2+
Ca2+
Na+
Mg2+
K+
Cl–
GABA
p38
P
TrkB
KCC2
Fyn
NMDA
GABA
Lamina I projection neurons
ATP
P
Figure 3  Microglia–neuron interactions in the spinal cord are crucial to pain hypersensitivity induced by peripheral-nerve injury in males. Damage to 
peripheral sensory nerves, which in humans may lead to peripheral neuropathic pain, causes microglia in the sensory part of the spinal cord to respond 
by upregulating expression of the purinergic P2X4 receptor129. Activating microglial P2X4Rs initiates a signaling cascade, including calcium influx, that 
ultimately leads to hyperexcitability of neurons in spinal lamina I through the downregulation of KCC2 (disinhibition151) and the upregulation of N-methyl 
d-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) (enhanced excitation152). The involvement of microglia in nerve-injury-induced pain hypersensitivity is sexually dimorphic, 
occurring only in males. In females, the upregulation of P2X4-receptor expression is blocked, and adaptive immune cells drive hyperexcitability of neurons in 
ascending pain pathways. DRG, dorsal root ganglion.
Debbie Maizels/Springer Nature
R E V I E W
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 NATURE MEDICINE   VOLUME 23 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2017 
1025
7.  Gosselin, D. et al. Environment drives selection and function of enhancers controlling 
tissue-specific macrophage identities. Cell 159, 1327–1340 (2014). 
8.  Minten, C., Terry, R., Deffrasnes, C., King, N.J. & Campbell, I.L. IFN regulatory factor 
8 is a key constitutive determinant of the morphological and molecular properties of 
microglia in the CNS. PLoS One 7, e49851 (2012). 
9.  Goldmann, T. et al. Origin, fate and dynamics of macrophages at central nervous 
system interfaces. Nat. Immunol. 17, 797–805 (2016). 
10.  Matcovitch-Natan, O. et al. Microglia development follows a stepwise program to 
regulate brain homeostasis. Science 353, aad8670 (2016). 
11.  Grabert, K. et al. Microglial brain region-dependent diversity and selective regional 
sensitivities to aging. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 504–516 (2016). 
12.  Pannell, M. et al. The subpopulation of microglia expressing functional muscarinic 
acetylcholine receptors expands in stroke and Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Struct. 
Funct. 221, 1157–1172 (2016). 
13.  Wlodarczyk, A. et al. Pathologic and protective roles for microglial subsets and bone 
marrow- and blood-derived myeloid cells in central nervous system inflammation. 
Front. Immunol. 6, 463 (2015). 
14.  Hashimoto, D. et al. Tissue-resident macrophages self-maintain locally through-
out adult life with minimal contribution from circulating monocytes. Immunity 38, 
792–804 (2013). 
15.  Bruttger, J. et al. Genetic cell ablation reveals clusters of local self-renewing microglia 
in the mammalian central nervous system. Immunity 43, 92–106 (2015). 
16.  Lawson, L.J., Perry, V.H. & Gordon, S. Turnover of resident microglia in the normal 
adult mouse brain. Neuroscience 48, 405–415 (1992). 
17.  Erblich, B., Zhu, L., Etgen, A.M., Dobrenis, K. & Pollard, J.W. Absence of colony 
stimulating factor-1 receptor results in loss of microglia, disrupted brain development 
and olfactory deficits. PLoS One 6, e26317 (2011). 
18.  Greter, M. et al. GM-CSF controls nonlymphoid tissue dendritic cell homeostasis but 
is dispensable for the differentiation of inflammatory dendritic cells. Immunity 36, 
1031–1046 (2012). 
19.  Elmore, M.R. et al. Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor signaling is necessary for 
microglia viability, unmasking a microglia progenitor cell in the adult brain. Neuron 
82, 380–397 (2014). 
20.  Salter, M.W. & Beggs, S. Sublime microglia: expanding roles for the guardians of the 
CNS. Cell 158, 15–24 (2014). 
21.  Tay, T.L., Savage, J., Hui, C.W., Bisht, K. & Tremblay, M.E. Microglia across the 
lifespan: from origin to function in brain development, plasticity and cognition. J. 
Physiol. (Lond.) 595, 1929–1945 (2016).
22.  Hong, S., Dissing-Olesen, L. & Stevens, B. New insights on the role of microglia in 
synaptic pruning in health and disease. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 36, 128–134 (2016). 
23.  Davalos, D. et al. ATP mediates rapid microglial response to local brain injury in vivo. 
Nat. Neurosci. 8, 752–758 (2005). 
24.  Nimmerjahn, A., Kirchhoff, F. & Helmchen, F. Resting microglial cells are highly 
dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo. Science 308, 1314–1318 (2005). 
25.  Abiega, O. et al. Neuronal hyperactivity disturbs ATP microgradients, impairs microg-
lial motility, and reduces phagocytic receptor expression triggering apoptosis/microg-
lial phagocytosis uncoupling. PLoS Biol. 14, e1002466 (2016). 
26.  Li, Y., Du, X.F., Liu, C.S., Wen, Z.L. & Du, J.L. Reciprocal regulation between resting 
microglial dynamics and neuronal activity in vivo. Dev. Cell 23, 1189–1202 (2012). 
27.  Fontainhas, A.M. et al. Microglial morphology and dynamic behavior is regulated by 
ionotropic glutamatergic and GABAergic neurotransmission. PLoS One 6, e15973 
(2011). 
28.  Eyo, U.B. et al. Neuronal hyperactivity recruits microglial processes via neuronal 
NMDA receptors and microglial P2Y12 receptors after status epilepticus. J. Neurosci. 
34, 10528–10540 (2014). 
29.  Dissing-Olesen, L. et al. Activation of neuronal NMDA receptors triggers transient 
ATP-mediated microglial process outgrowth. J. Neurosci. 34, 10511–10527 (2014). 
30.  Tremblay, M.E., Lowery, R.L. & Majewska, A.K. Microglial interactions with synapses 
are modulated by visual experience. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000527 (2010). 
31.  Schafer, D.P. et al. Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and 
complement-dependent manner. Neuron 74, 691–705 (2012). 
32.  Paolicelli, R.C. et al. Synaptic pruning by microglia is necessary for normal brain 
development. Science 333, 1456–1458 (2011). 
33.  Stevens, B. et al. The classical complement cascade mediates CNS synapse elimina-
tion. Cell 131, 1164–1178 (2007). 
34.  Lui, H. et al. Progranulin deficiency promotes circuit-specific synaptic pruning by 
microglia via complement activation. Cell 165, 921–935 (2016). 
35.  van Lookeren Campagne, M., Wiesmann, C. & Brown, E.J. Macrophage complement 
receptors and pathogen clearance. Cell. Microbiol. 9, 2095–2102 (2007). 
36.  Sekar, A. et al. Schizophrenia risk from complex variation of complement component 
4. Nature 530, 177–183 (2016). 
37.  Marín-Teva, J.L., Cuadros, M.A., Martín-Oliva, D. & Navascués, J. Microglia and 
neuronal cell death. Neuron Glia Biol. 7, 25–40 (2011). 
38.  Brown, G.C. & Neher, J.J. Microglial phagocytosis of live neurons. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
15, 209–216 (2014). 
39.  Fourgeaud, L. et al. TAM receptors regulate multiple features of microglial physiology. 
Nature 532, 240–244 (2016). 
40.  Marín-Teva, J.L. et al. Microglia promote the death of developing Purkinje cells. 
Neuron 41, 535–547 (2004). 
41.  Frade, J.M. & Barde, Y.A. Microglia-derived nerve growth factor causes cell death in 
the developing retina. Neuron 20, 35–41 (1998). 
42.  Sedel, F., Béchade, C., Vyas, S. & Triller, A. Macrophage-derived tumor necrosis 
factor alpha, an early developmental signal for motoneuron death. J. Neurosci. 24, 
2236–2246 (2004). 
RNA sequencing and the profiling of rodent and human microglia, such 
as DropSeq141, are likely to provide important new insights and help to 
identify region- and species-specific alterations in microglia both in ani-
mal models and human disease142. New approaches to modeling disease 
with human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) microglia also present 
an exciting and promising area for future development143–145, with the 
potential to model microglia disease and develop the biomarkers and 
therapeutics. Studying microglia in vitro has been challenging, because 
removing microglia from their CNS environment results in rapid and 
extensive downregulation of microglia-specific genes146,147; however, 
defined serum-free conditions have recently been developed that enable 
the investigation of signals required for microglia survival, development, 
and function146.
Such approaches will need to be advanced while keeping in mind the 
multiple functional states of microglia and the high degree of plastic-
ity of these cells. Given these variables, these functional states must be 
understood in vitro and tightly controlled, so that as biomarkers and 
therapeutics are being developed, they can be matched to specific func-
tional states. Independent validation will be crucial so as to increase the 
likelihood of translating biomarkers and new therapeutics across species, 
or even from human iPSC-derived microglia, to the clinic.
Conclusions
We are just beginning to understand how microglia function in health and 
are altered in disease. Even so, our growing knowledge of the diverse roles 
of these cells in the healthy nervous system suggests that microglia-depen-
dent CNS disorders may be reconceptualized as the result of aberrations 
in the physiological and homeostatic functions of microglia. Targeting 
these aberrant microglial functions, thereby returning homeostasis, may 
yield novel paradigms for therapies and biomarkers of microglia func-
tion and dysfunction for CNS disorders that were inconceivable under 
a neuron-centric view of the brain. Because recent information gained 
about the varying roles for microglia has come primarily from studies in 
the the mouse and in mouse models of disease, it is essential that we invest 
in developing new models of disease, including human iPSCs and organ-
oids144,146–150, to fully understand which findings translate from mouse 
to humans, and whether microglia-targeted therapeutic approaches being 
developed in mice can be used to treat human CNS diseases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank A. Sengar (Hospital for Sick Children) for important discussions about 
the review and assistance with the manuscript and figures. Work of the authors 
is supported by CIHR, Brain Canada, Krembil Foundation (M.W.S.) and NIH, 
NIH RO1NS071008 (B.S.), Simons Foundation SFARi (B.S.). M.W.S. holds the 
Northbridge Chair in Paediatric Research at the Hospital for Sick Children.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://www.nature.com/
reprints/index.html. Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
1.  Kierdorf, K. et al. Microglia emerge from erythromyeloid precursors via Pu.1- and 
Irf8-dependent pathways. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 273–280 (2013). 
2.  Ginhoux, F. et al. Fate mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia derive from 
primitive macrophages. Science 330, 841–845 (2010). 
3.  Gomez Perdiguero, E. et al. Tissue-resident macrophages originate from yolk-sac-
derived erythro-myeloid progenitors. Nature 518, 547–551 (2015). 
4.  Sheng, J., Ruedl, C. & Karjalainen, K. Most tissue-resident macrophages except 
microglia are derived from fetal hematopoietic stem cells. Immunity 43, 382–393 
(2015). 
5.  Hoeffel, G. et al. C-Myb+ erythro-myeloid progenitor-derived fetal monocytes give rise 
to adult tissue-resident macrophages. Immunity 42, 665–678 (2015). 
6.  Hagemeyer, N. et al. Transcriptome-based profiling of yolk sac-derived macrophages 
reveals a role for Irf8 in macrophage maturation. EMBO J. 35, 1730–1744 (2016). 
R E V I E W
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 1026 
VOLUME 23 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2017   NATURE MEDICINE
81.  Feinberg, I. Schizophrenia: caused by a fault in programmed synaptic elimination 
during adolescence? J. Psychiatr. Res. 17, 319–334 (1982–83). 
82.  Zhan, Y. et al. Deficient neuron-microglia signaling results in impaired functional 
brain connectivity and social behavior. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 400–406 (2014). 
83.  Chen, S.K. et al. Hematopoietic origin of pathological grooming in Hoxb8 mutant 
mice. Cell 141, 775–785 (2010). 
84.  Paloneva, J. et al. CNS manifestations of Nasu-Hakola disease: a frontal dementia 
with bone cysts. Neurology 56, 1552–1558 (2001). 
85.  Bianchin, M.M. et al. Nasu-Hakola disease (polycystic lipomembranous osteodyspla-
sia with sclerosing leukoencephalopathy–PLOSL): a dementia associated with bone 
cystic lesions. From clinical to genetic and molecular aspects. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 
24, 1–24 (2004). 
86.  McCarthy, M.M. Multifaceted origins of sex differences in the brain. Phil. Trans. R. 
Soc. Lond. B 371, 20150106 (2016). 
87.  Bolton, J.L. et al. Gestational exposure to air pollution alters cortical volume, microg-
lial morphology, and microglia–Neuron interactions in a sex-specific manner. Front. 
Synaptic Neurosci. 9, 10 (2017). 
88.  Hanamsagar, R. et al. Generation of a microglial developmental index in mice and 
in humans reveals a sex difference in maturation and immune reactivity. Glia 65, 
1504–1520 (2017). 
89.  Hanamsagar, R. & Bilbo, S.D. Sex differences in neurodevelopmental and neuro-
degenerative disorders: Focus on microglial function and neuroinflammation during 
development. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 160, 127–133 (2016). 
90.  Wyss-Coray, T. & Rogers, J. Inflammation in Alzheimer disease-a brief review of the 
basic science and clinical literature. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 2, a006346 
(2012). 
91.  Lambert, J.C. et al. Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new suscep-
tibility loci for Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet. 45, 1452–1458 (2013). 
92.  Zhang, B. et al. Integrated systems approach identifies genetic nodes and networks 
in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 153, 707–720 (2013). 
93.  Guerreiro, R. et al. TREM2 variants in Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 
117–127 (2013). 
94.  Jonsson, T. et al. Variant of TREM2 associated with the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 107–116 (2013). 
95.  Efthymiou, A.G. & Goate, A.M. Late onset Alzheimer’s disease genetics implicates 
microglial pathways in disease risk. Mol. Neurodegener. 12, 43 (2017). 
96.  Villegas-Llerena, C., Phillips, A., Garcia-Reitboeck, P., Hardy, J. & Pocock, J.M. 
Microglial genes regulating neuroinflammation in the progression of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 36, 74–81 (2016). 
97.  Colonna, M. & Wang, Y. TREM2 variants: new keys to decipher Alzheimer disease 
pathogenesis. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 201–207 (2016). 
98.  Suárez-Calvet, M. et al. sTREM2 cerebrospinal fluid levels are a potential biomarker 
for microglia activity in early-stage Alzheimer’s disease and associate with neuronal 
injury markers. EMBO Mol. Med. 8, 466–476 (2016). 
99.  Colonna, M. TREMs in the immune system and beyond. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3, 
445–453 (2003). 
100. Kleinberger, G. et al. The FTD-like syndrome causing TREM2 T66M mutation impairs 
microglia function, brain perfusion, and glucose metabolism. EMBO J. 36, 1837–
1853 (2017). 
101. Ulrich, J.D. et al. Altered microglial response to Ab plaques in APPPS1-21 mice 
heterozygous for TREM2. Mol. Neurodegener. 9, 20 (2014). 
102. Jay, T.R. et al. TREM2 deficiency eliminates TREM2+ inflammatory macrophages 
and ameliorates pathology in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. J. Exp. Med. 212, 
287–295 (2015). 
103. Wang, Y. et al. TREM2 lipid sensing sustains the microglial response in an Alzheimer’s 
disease model. Cell 160, 1061–1071 (2015). 
104. Jay, T.R. et al. Disease progression-dependent effects of TREM2 deficiency in a 
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 37, 637–647 (2017). 
105. Atagi, Y. et al. Apolipoprotein E is a ligand for triggering receptor expressed on myeloid 
cells 2 (TREM2). J. Biol. Chem. 290, 26043–26050 (2015). 
106. Yeh, F.L., Wang, Y., Tom, I., Gonzalez, L.C. & Sheng, M. TREM2 binds to apolipopro-
teins, including APOE and CLU/APOJ, and thereby facilitates uptake of amyloid-beta 
by microglia. Neuron 91, 328–340 (2016). 
107. Kleinberger, G. et al. TREM2 mutations implicated in neurodegeneration impair cell 
surface transport and phagocytosis. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 243ra86 (2014). 
108. Suárez-Calvet, M. et al. Early changes in CSF sTREM2 in dominantly inherited 
Alzheimer’s disease occur after amyloid deposition and neuronal injury. Sci. Transl. 
Med. 8, 369ra178 (2016). 
109. Paloneva, J. et al. Loss-of-function mutations in TYROBP (DAP12) result in a pre-
senile dementia with bone cysts. Nat. Genet. 25, 357–361 (2000). 
110. Paloneva, J. et al. Mutations in two genes encoding different subunits of a receptor 
signaling complex result in an identical disease phenotype. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71, 
656–662 (2002). 
111. Griciuc, A. et al. Alzheimer’s disease risk gene CD33 inhibits microglial uptake of 
amyloid beta. Neuron 78, 631–643 (2013). 
112. Bertram, L. et al. Genome-wide association analysis reveals putative Alzheimer’s 
disease susceptibility loci in addition to APOE. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 83, 623–632 
(2008). 
113. Jun, G. et al. Meta-analysis confirms CR1, CLU, and PICALM as alzheimer disease 
risk loci and reveals interactions with APOE genotypes. Arch. Neurol. 67, 1473–1484 
(2010). 
114. Fonseca, M.I. et al. Analysis of the putative role of CR1 in Alzheimer’s disease: 
genetic association, expression and function. PLoS One 11, e0149792 (2016). 
115. Terry, R.D. et al. Physical basis of cognitive alterations in Alzheimer’s disease: syn-
43.  Wakselman, S. et al. Developmental neuronal death in hippocampus requires the microg-
lial CD11b integrin and DAP12 immunoreceptor. J. Neurosci. 28, 8138–8143 (2008). 
44.  Schafer, D.P. & Stevens, B. Microglia function in central nervous system development 
and plasticity. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 7, a020545 (2015). 
45.  Pascual, O., Ben Achour, S., Rostaing, P., Triller, A. & Bessis, A. Microglia activation 
triggers astrocyte-mediated modulation of excitatory neurotransmission. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 109, E197–E205 (2012). 
46.  Bliss, T.V., Collingridge, G.L. & Morris, R.G. Synaptic plasticity in health and disease: 
introduction and overview. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 369, 20130129 (2013). 
47.  Zhao, C., Deng, W. & Gage, F.H. Mechanisms and functional implications of adult 
neurogenesis. Cell 132, 645–660 (2008). 
48.  Akers, K.G. et al. Hippocampal neurogenesis regulates forgetting during adulthood 
and infancy. Science 344, 598–602 (2014). 
49.  Rogers, J.T. et al. CX3CR1 deficiency leads to impairment of hippocampal cognitive 
function and synaptic plasticity. J. Neurosci. 31, 16241–16250 (2011). 
50.  Schafer, D.P., Lehrman, E.K. & Stevens, B. The “quad-partite” synapse: microglia-
synapse interactions in the developing and mature CNS. Glia 61, 24–36 (2013). 
51.  Koeglsperger, T. et al. Impaired glutamate recycling and GluN2B-mediated neuronal 
calcium overload in mice lacking TGF-b1 in the CNS. Glia 61, 985–1002 (2013). 
52.  George, J., Cunha, R.A., Mulle, C. & Amédée, T. Microglia-derived purines modulate 
mossy fibre synaptic transmission and plasticity through P2X4 and A1 receptors. 
Eur. J. Neurosci. 43, 1366–1378 (2016). 
53.  Sipe, G.O. et al. Microglial P2Y12 is necessary for synaptic plasticity in mouse visual 
cortex. Nat. Commun. 7, 10905 (2016). 
54.  Sierra, A. et al. Microglia shape adult hippocampal neurogenesis through apoptosis-
coupled phagocytosis. Cell Stem Cell 7, 483–495 (2010). 
55.  Bachstetter, A.D. et al. Fractalkine and CX 3 CR1 regulate hippocampal neurogenesis 
in adult and aged rats. Neurobiol. Aging 32, 2030–2044 (2011). 
56.  Gemma, C. & Bachstetter, A.D. The role of microglia in adult hippocampal neuro-
genesis. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 7, 229 (2013). 
57.  Tremblay, M.E. et al. The role of microglia in the healthy brain. J. Neurosci. 31, 
16064–16069 (2011). 
58.  Parkhurst, C.N. et al. Microglia promote learning-dependent synapse formation 
through brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Cell 155, 1596–1609 (2013). 
59.  Butovsky, O. et al. Identification of a unique TGF-b-dependent molecular and func-
tional signature in microglia. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 131–143 (2014). 
60.  Sierra, A. et al. The “Big-Bang” for modern glial biology: Translation and comments 
on Pío del Río-Hortega 1919 series of papers on microglia. Glia 64, 1801–1840 
(2016). 
61.  Murray, P.J. et al. Macrophage activation and polarization: nomenclature and experi-
mental guidelines. Immunity 41, 14–20 (2014). 
62.  Ransohoff, R.M. A polarizing question: do M1 and M2 microglia exist? Nat. Neurosci. 
19, 987–991 (2016). 
63.  Chiu, I.M. et al. A neurodegeneration-specific gene-expression signature of acutely 
isolated microglia from an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mouse model. Cell Reports 
4, 385–401 (2013). 
64.  Holtman, I.R. et al. Induction of a common microglia gene expression signature 
by aging and neurodegenerative conditions: a co-expression meta-analysis. Acta 
Neuropathol. Commun. 3, 31 (2015). 
65.  Pardo, C.A., Vargas, D.L. & Zimmerman, A.W. Immunity, neuroglia and neuroinflam-
mation in autism. Int. Rev. Psychiatry 17, 485–495 (2005). 
66.  Morgan, J.T. et al. Microglial activation and increased microglial density observed in 
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in autism. Biol. Psychiatry 68, 368–376 (2010). 
67.  Vargas, D.L., Nascimbene, C., Krishnan, C., Zimmerman, A.W. & Pardo, C.A. 
Neuroglial activation and neuroinflammation in the brain of patients with autism. 
Ann. Neurol. 57, 67–81 (2005). 
68.  Tetreault, N.A. et al. Microglia in the cerebral cortex in autism. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 
42, 2569–2584 (2012). 
69.  Gupta, S. et al. Transcriptome analysis reveals dysregulation of innate immune 
response genes and neuronal activity-dependent genes in autism. Nat. Commun. 5, 
5748 (2014). 
70.  Suzuki, K. et al. Microglial activation in young adults with autism spectrum disorder. 
JAMA Psychiatry 70, 49–58 (2013). 
71.  Voineagu, I. et al. Transcriptomic analysis of autistic brain reveals convergent molecu-
lar pathology. Nature 474, 380–384 (2011). 
72.  Schafer, D.P. et al. Microglia contribute to circuit defects in Mecp2 null mice inde-
pendent of microglia-specific loss of Mecp2 expression. eLife 5, e15224 (2016). 
73.  Derecki, N.C. et al. Wild-type microglia arrest pathology in a mouse model of Rett 
syndrome. Nature 484, 105–109 (2012). 
74.  Maezawa, I. & Jin, L.W. Rett syndrome microglia damage dendrites and synapses by 
the elevated release of glutamate. J. Neurosci. 30, 5346–5356 (2010). 
75.  Estes, M.L. & McAllister, A.K. Maternal immune activation: Implications for neuro-
psychiatric disorders. Science 353, 772–777 (2016). 
76.  Giovanoli, S. et al. Stress in puberty unmasks latent neuropathological consequences 
of prenatal immune activation in mice. Science 339, 1095–1099 (2013). 
77.  Patterson, P.H. Maternal infection and immune involvement in autism. Trends Mol. 
Med. 17, 389–394 (2011). 
78.  Garay, P.A., Hsiao, E.Y., Patterson, P.H. & McAllister, A.K. Maternal immune activa-
tion causes age- and region-specific changes in brain cytokines in offspring through-
out development. Brain Behav. Immun. 31, 54–68 (2013). 
79.  Squarzoni, P. et al. Microglia modulate wiring of the embryonic forebrain. Cell Reports 
8, 1271–1279 (2014). 
80.  Penzes, P., Cahill, M.E., Jones, K.A., VanLeeuwen, J.E. & Woolfrey, K.M. Dendritic 
spine pathology in neuropsychiatric disorders. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 285–293 (2011). 
R E V I E W
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 NATURE MEDICINE   VOLUME 23 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2017 
1027
142. Keren-Shaul, H. et al. A unique microglia type associated with restricting develop-
ment of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 169, 1276–1290.e17 (2017). 
143. Pandya, H. et al. Differentiation of human and murine induced pluripotent stem cells 
to microglia-like cells. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 753–759 (2017). 
144. Muffat, J. et al. Efficient derivation of microglia-like cells from human pluripotent 
stem cells. Nat. Med. 22, 1358–1367 (2016). 
145. Hammond, T.R. & Stevens, B. Increasing the neurological-disease toolbox using 
iPSC-derived microglia. Nat. Med. 22, 1206–1207 (2016). 
146. Bohlen, C.J. et al. Diverse requirements for microglial survival, specification, and 
function revealed by defined-medium cultures. Neuron 94, 759–773.e8 (2017). 
147. Gosselin, D. et al. An environment-dependent transcriptional network specifies 
human microglia identity. Science 356, eaal3222 (2017). 
148. Choi, S.H. et al. A three-dimensional human neural cell culture model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Nature 515, 274–278 (2014). 
149. Abud, E.M. et al. iPSC-derived human microglia-like cells to study neurological 
diseases. Neuron 94, 278–293.e9 (2017). 
150. Bennett, M.L. et al. New tools for studying microglia in the mouse and human CNS. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, E1738–E1746 (2016). 
151. Coull, J.A. et al. BDNF from microglia causes the shift in neuronal anion gradient 
underlying neuropathic pain. Nature 438, 1017–1021 (2005). 
152. Hildebrand, M.E. et al. Potentiation of synaptic GluN2B NMDAR currents by Fyn 
kinase is gated through BDNF-mediated disinhibition in spinal pain processing. Cell 
Reports 17, 2753–2765 (2016). 
153. Hodgkin, J. Sex determination and the generation of sexually dimorphic nervous 
systems. Neuron 6, 177–185 (1991). 
154. Chowen, J.A., Azcoitia, I., Cardona-Gomez, G.P. & Garcia-Segura, L.M. Sex ste-
roids and the brain: lessons from animal studies. J. Pediatr. Endocrinol. Metab. 13, 
1045–1066 (2000). 
155. Gill, S.K., Bhattacharya, M., Ferguson, S.S. & Rylett, R.J. Identification of a novel 
nuclear localization signal common to 69- and 82-kDa human choline acetyltrans-
ferase. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 20217–20224 (2003). 
156. Schwarz, J.M., Sholar, P.W. & Bilbo, S.D. Sex differences in microglial colonization 
of the developing rat brain. J. Neurochem. 120, 948–963 (2012).
157. Acaz-Fonseca, E., Duran, J.C., Carrero, P., Garcia-Segura, L.M. & Arevalo, M.A. 
Sex differences in glia reactivity after cortical brain injury. Glia 63, 1966–1981 
(2015). 
158. McCullough, L.D. et al. Stroke sensitivity in the aged: sex chromosome complement 
vs. gonadal hormones. Aging (Albany. NY) 8, 1432–1441 (2016).
159. Bollinger, J.L., Bergeon Burns, C.M. & Wellman, C.L. Differential effects of stress on 
microglial cell activation in male and female medial prefrontal cortex. Brain Behav. 
Immun. 52, 88–97 (2016). 
160. Arevalo, M.A., Santos-Galindo, M., Acaz-Fonseca, E., Azcoitia, I. & Garcia-Segura, 
L.M. Gonadal hormones and the control of reactive gliosis. Horm. Behav. 63, 216–
221 (2013). 
161. Lenz, K.M., Nugent, B.M., Haliyur, R. & McCarthy, M.M. Microglia are essential to 
masculinization of brain and behavior. J. Neurosci. 33, 2761–2772 (2013). 
162. Stellwagen, D. & Malenka, R.C. Synaptic scaling mediated by glial TNF-a. Nature 
440, 1054–1059 (2006). 
163. Shi, Q. et al. Complement C3 deficiency protects against neurodegeneration in aged 
plaque-rich APP/PS1 mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf6295 (2017).
164. Fonseca, M.I. et al. Contribution of complement activation pathways to neuropathol-
ogy differs among mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroinflammation 8, 4 
(2011). 
165. Fonseca, M.I., Zhou, J., Botto, M. & Tenner, A.J. Absence of C1q leads to less 
neuropathology in transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 24, 
6457–6465 (2004). 
apse loss is the major correlate of cognitive impairment. Ann. Neurol. 30, 572–580 
(1991). 
116. DeKosky, S.T., Scheff, S.W. & Styren, S.D. Structural correlates of cognition in 
dementia: quantification and assessment of synapse change. Neurodegeneration 5, 
417–421 (1996). 
117. Hong, S. et al. Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in Alzheimer 
mouse models. Science 352, 712–716 (2016). 
118. Stephan, A.H., Barres, B.A. & Stevens, B. The complement system: an unexpected 
role in synaptic pruning during development and disease. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 35, 
369–389 (2012). 
119. Howell, G.R. et al. Molecular clustering identifies complement and endothelin induc-
tion as early events in a mouse model of glaucoma. J. Clin. Invest. 121, 1429–1444 
(2011). 
120. Williams, P.A. et al. Inhibition of the classical pathway of the complement cascade 
prevents early dendritic and synaptic degeneration in glaucoma. Mol. Neurodegener. 
11, 26 (2016). 
121. Vasek, M.J. et al. A complement-microglial axis drives synapse loss during virus-
induced memory impairment. Nature 534, 538–543 (2016). 
122. Zamanian, J.L. et al. Genomic analysis of reactive astrogliosis. J. Neurosci. 32, 
6391–6410 (2012). 
123. Sofroniew, M.V. & Vinters, H.V. Astrocytes: biology and pathology. Acta Neuropathol. 
119, 7–35 (2010). 
124. Clarke, L.E. & Barres, B.A. Emerging roles of astrocytes in neural circuit development. 
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14, 311–321 (2013). 
125. Chung, W.S., Allen, N.J. & Eroglu, C. Astrocytes control synapse formation, function, 
and elimination. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 7, a020370 (2015). 
126. Liddelow, S.A. et al. Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated microg-
lia. Nature 541, 481–487 (2017). 
127. Chung, W.S., Welsh, C.A., Barres, B.A. & Stevens, B. Do glia drive synaptic and 
cognitive impairment in disease? Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1539–1545 (2015). 
128. Iaccarino, H.F. et al. Gamma frequency entrainment attenuates amyloid load and 
modifies microglia. Nature 540, 230–235 (2016). 
129. Beggs, S., Trang, T. & Salter, M.W. P2X4R+ microglia drive neuropathic pain. Nat. 
Neurosci. 15, 1068–1073 (2012). 
130. Sorge, R.E. et al. Genetically determined P2X7 receptor pore formation regulates 
variability in chronic pain sensitivity. Nat. Med. 18, 595–599 (2012). 
131. Masuda, T. et al. Dorsal horn neurons release extracellular ATP in a VNUT-dependent 
manner that underlies neuropathic pain. Nat. Commun. 7, 12529 (2016). 
132. North, R.A. P2X receptors. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 371, 20150427 (2016). 
133. Tozaki-Saitoh, H. et al. P2Y12 receptors in spinal microglia are required for neuro-
pathic pain after peripheral nerve injury. J. Neurosci. 28, 4949–4956 (2008). 
134. Burnstock, G. Purinergic mechanisms and pain. Adv. Pharmacol. 75, 91–137 (2016). 
135. Guan, Z. et al. Injured sensory neuron-derived CSF1 induces microglial proliferation 
and DAP12-dependent pain. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 94–101 (2016). 
136. Masuda, T. et al. Transcription factor IRF5 drives P2X4R+-reactive microglia gating 
neuropathic pain. Nat. Commun. 5, 3771 (2014). 
137. Masuda, T. et al. IRF8 is a critical transcription factor for transforming microglia into 
a reactive phenotype. Cell Reports 1, 334–340 (2012). 
138. Tsuda, M. et al. P2X4 receptors induced in spinal microglia gate tactile allodynia 
after nerve injury. Nature 424, 778–783 (2003). 
139. Sorge, R.E. et al. Different immune cells mediate mechanical pain hypersensitivity 
in male and female mice. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1081–1083 (2015). 
140. Ferrini, F. et al. Morphine hyperalgesia gated through microglia-mediated disruption 
of neuronal Cl- homeostasis. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 183–192 (2013). 
141. Macosko, E.Z. et al. Highly parallel genome-wide expression profiling of individual 
cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214 (2015). 
R E V I E W
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
