 Gut Microbiota Regulate Motor Deficits and Neuroinflammation 
in a Model of Parkinson's Disease
Timothy R. Sampson1,*, Justine W. Debelius2, Taren Thron1, Stefan Janssen2, Gauri G. 
Shastri1, Zehra Esra Ilhan3, Collin Challis1, Catherine E. Schretter1, Sandra Rocha4, 
Viviana Gradinaru1, Marie-Francoise Chesselet5, Ali Keshavarzian6, Kathleen M. Shannon7, 
Rosa Krajmalnik-Brown3, Pernilla Wittung-Stafshede4, Rob Knight8, and Sarkis K. 
Mazmanian1,*,†
1Division of Biology & Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, 
California, 91125, USA
2Deparment of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, California, 92110, USA
3Swette Center for Environmental Biotechnology, Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, 
Tempe, Arizona, 85287, USA
4Biology and Biological Engineering Department, Chalmers University of Technology, 
Gothenburg, 41296, Sweden
5Department of Neurology, The David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California, 90095, USA
6Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Rush University Medical Center, 
Chicago, Illinois, 60612, USA
7Department of Neurological Sciences, Section of Movement Disorders, Rush University Medical 
Center, Chicago, Illinois, 60612, USA. Current address: Department of Neurology, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 53705, USA
8Deparment of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, California, 92110; Department of 
Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego, California, 92093
Summary
The intestinal microbiota influence neurodevelopment, modulate behavior, and contribute to 
neurological disorders. However, a functional link between gut bacteria and neurodegenerative 
diseases remains unexplored. Synucleinopathies are characterized by aggregation of the protein α-
*Correspondence: trsamps@caltech.edu and sarkis@caltech.edu.
†Lead contact
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T.R.S., C.E.S., M.F.C., and S.K.M; Formal analysis, J.W.D., S.J., and C.C.; Investigation, 
T.R.S., T.T., G.G.S., Z.E.I., and S.R.; Resources, A.K. and K.M.S; Writing-Original Draft, T.R.S. and S.K.M; Writing-Review and 
Editing, all authors; Supervision, V.G., R.K.B., P.W.S., R.K., and S.K.M; Funding Acquisition, T.R.S., V.G., M.F.C., A.K., P.W.S., 
R.K., and S.K.M
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 December 01; 167(6): 1469–1480.e12. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.018.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 synuclein (αSyn), often resulting in motor dysfunction as exemplified by Parkinson's disease 
(PD). Using mice that overexpress αSyn, we report herein that gut microbiota are required for 
motor deficits, microglia activation, and αSyn pathology. Antibiotic treatment ameliorates, while 
microbial re-colonization promotes, pathophysiology in adult animals, suggesting postnatal 
signaling between the gut and the brain modulates disease. Indeed, oral administration of specific 
microbial metabolites to germ-free mice promotes neuroinflammation and motor symptoms. 
Remarkably, colonization of αSyn-overexpressing mice with microbiota from PD patients 
enhances physical impairments compared to microbiota transplants from healthy human donors. 
These findings reveal that gut bacteria regulate movement disorders in mice, and suggest that 
alterations in the human microbiome represent a risk factor for PD.
Graphical abstract
Signals from gut microbes are required for the neuroinflammatory responses as well as hallmark 
gastrointestinal and α-synuclein-dependent motor deficits in a model of Parkinson's disease.
Introduction
Neurological dysfunction is the basis of numerous human diseases. Behavioral, psychiatric 
and neurodegenerative disorders often display hallmark neuropathologies within the central 
nervous system (CNS). One neuropathology, amyloidosis, results from aberrant aggregation 
of specific neuronal proteins that disrupt many cellular functions. Affected tissues often 
contain insoluble aggregates of proteins that display altered conformations, a feature 
believed to contribute to an estimated 50 distinct human diseases (Sacchettini and Kelly, 
2002). Neurodegenerative amyloid disorders, including Alzheimer's, Huntington's, and 
Parkinson's diseases (PD), are each associated with a distinct amyloid protein 
(Brettschneider et al., 2015). PD is the second most common neurodegenerative disease in 
the United States, affecting an estimated 1 million people and 1% of the US population over 
60 years of age (Nalls et al., 2014). Worldwide, about 3 million patients and caregivers 
Sampson et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 suffer from the often-debilitating symptoms of PD, which involve motor deficits including 
tremors, muscle rigidity, bradykinesia, and impaired gait. It is a multifactorial disorder that 
has a strong environmental component, as less than 10% of cases are hereditary (Nalls et al., 
2014). Aggregation of α-synuclein (αSyn) is thought to be pathogenic in a family of 
diseases termed synucleinopathies, which includes PD, multiple system atrophy and Lewy 
body disease (Brettschneider et al., 2015; Luk et al., 2012; Prusiner et al., 2015). αSyn 
aggregation is a stepwise process, leading to oligomeric species and intransient fibrils that 
accumulate within neurons. Dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta 
(SNpc) appear particularly vulnerable to effects of αSyn aggregates. Dopamine modulators 
are a first line therapeutic in PD; however treatments can carry serious side effects and often 
lose effectiveness (Jenner, 2008). Discovery of safe and effective therapeutics are needed to 
address the increasing burden of PD in an ever-aging population, a paradoxical consequence 
of mankind's achievements in increased lifespan.
Although neurological diseases have been historically studied within the CNS, peripheral 
influences have been implicated in the onset and/or progression of diseases that impact the 
brain (Dinan and Cryan, 2015). Indeed, emerging data suggest bidirectional communication 
between the gut and the brain in anxiety, depression, nociception and autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD), among others (Mayer et al., 2014; Schroeder and Backhed, 2016; Sharon et 
al., 2016) Gastrointestinal (GI) physiology and motility are influenced by signals arising 
both locally within the gut and from the CNS. Neurotransmitters, immune signaling, 
hormones and neuropeptides produced within the gut may, in turn, impact the brain (Selkrig 
et al., 2014; Wall et al., 2014). Research into how the gut-brain axis influences neurological 
conditions may reveal insights into disease etiology.
The human body is permanently colonized by microbes on virtually all environmentally 
exposed surfaces, the majority of which reside within the GI tract (Ley et al., 2006). 
Increasingly, research is beginning to uncover the profound impacts that the microbiota can 
have on neurodevelopment and the CNS (Sharon et al., 2016). Germ-free (GF) mice, and 
antibiotic treated specific pathogen free (SPF) mice, are altered in hippocampal 
neurogenesis, resulting in impaired spatial and object recognition (Mohle et al., 2016). The 
microbiota regulate expression of the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor (5-HT1A), brain-derived 
neurotropic factor (BDNF), and NMDA receptor subunit 2 (NR2A) (Bercik et al., 2011; 
Diaz Heijtz et al., 2011; Sudo et al., 2004). GF mice have altered cortical myelination and 
impaired blood-brain barrier function (Braniste et al., 2014; Hoban et al., 2016). 
Additionally, the microbiota promotes enteric and circulating serotonin production in mice 
(Yano et al., 2015), and affects anxiety, hyperactivity and cognition (Clarke et al., 2013; 
Diaz Heijtz et al., 2011; Neufeld et al., 2011; Selkrig et al., 2014). To augment mouse 
models, dysbiosis (alterations to the microbial composition) of the human microbiome has 
been reported in subjects diagnosed with several neurological diseases (Schroeder and 
Backhed, 2016). For example, fecal and mucosa-associated gut microbes are different 
between individuals with PD and healthy controls (Hasegawa et al., 2015; Keshavarzian et 
al., 2015; Scheperjans et al., 2015; Unger et al., 2016). Yet, how dysbiosis arises and 
whether this feature contributes to PD pathogenesis remains unknown.
Sampson et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gut bacteria control the differentiation and function of immune cells in the intestine, 
periphery and brain (Erny et al., 2015; Matcovitch-Natan et al., 2016; Rooks and Garrett, 
2016). Intriguingly, subjects with PD exhibit intestinal inflammation (Devos et al., 2013), 
and GI abnormalities such as constipation often precede motor defects by many years (Braak 
et al., 2003; Verbaan et al., 2007). Braak's hypothesis posits that aberrant αSyn 
accumulation initiates in the gut and propagates via the vagus nerve to the brain in a prion-
like fashion (Del Tredici and Braak, 2008). This notion is supported by pathophysiologic 
evidence: αSyn inclusions appear early in the enteric nervous system (ENS) and the 
glossopharyngeal and vagal nerves (Braak et al., 2003; Shannon et al., 2012), while 
vagotomized individuals are at reduced risk for PD (Svensson et al., 2015). Further, injection 
of αSyn fibrils into the gut tissue of healthy rodents is sufficient to induce pathology within 
the vagus nerve and brainstem (Holmqvist et al., 2014). However, the notion that αSyn 
aggregation initiates in the ENS and spreads to the CNS via retrograde transmission remains 
controversial (Burke et al., 2008), and experimental support for a gut microbial connection 
to PD is lacking.
Based on the common occurrence of GI symptoms in PD, dysbiosis among PD patients, and 
evidence that the microbiota impacts CNS function, we tested the hypothesis that gut 
bacteria regulate the hallmark motor deficits and pathophysiology of synucleinopathies. 
Herein, we report that the microbiota is necessary to promote αSyn pathology, 
neuroinflammation, and characteristic motor features in a validated mouse model. We 
identify specific microbial metabolites that are sufficient to promote disease symptoms. 
Remarkably, fecal microbes from PD patients impair motor function significantly more than 
microbiota from healthy controls when transplanted into mice. Together, these results 
suggest that gut microbes may play a critical and functional role in the pathogenesis of 
synucleinopathies such as PD.
Results
Gut Microbes Promote Motor and GI Dysfunction
The Thy1-αSyn (ASO; alpha-synuclein overexpressing) mouse displays progressive deficits 
in fine and gross motor function, as well as gut motility defects (Chesselet et al., 2012; 
Rockenstein et al., 2002). Recent evidence has linked unregulated αSyn expression in 
humans to a higher risk of PD (Soldner et al., 2016), providing an epidemiological 
foundation for the Thy1-αSyn mouse model. Defects in coordinated motor tasks become 
evident at 12 weeks of age (Fleming et al., 2004). Motor function was measured via four 
tests: beam traversal, pole descent, nasal adhesive removal, and hindlimb clasping reflexes, 
as previously validated in this model (Fleming et al., 2004). 12-13 week old ASO animals 
harboring a complex microbiota (SPF-ASO) require significantly more time to cross a 
challenging beam compared to wild-type littermates (SPF-WT), and also exhibit increased 
time to descend a pole, two measures of gross motor function (Figures 1A, B). Removal of 
an adhesive from the nasal bridge, a test of fine motor control, is impaired in SPF-ASO mice 
compared to SPF-WT mice (Figure 1C). Finally, the hindlimb clasping reflex, a measure of 
striatal dysfunction (Zhang et al., 2014), is defective in SPF-ASO mice (Figure 1D). To 
assess the contribution of gut bacteria, we re-derived ASO mice (GF-ASO) and wild-type 
Sampson et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mice (GF-WT) under germ-free conditions. Remarkably, 12-13 week old GF-ASO animals 
exhibit reduced deficits in beam traversal, pole descent, adhesive removal, and hindlimb 
clasping (Figures 1A-D). In fact, the execution of motor function tasks by GF-ASO mice 
resembles performance levels of WT animals in many cases. GF-ASO mice do not exhibit 
differences in weight compared to SPF-ASO animals (Figure S1A), while both SPF-ASO 
and GF-ASO animals display defects in the inverted grid assay, a measure of limb strength 
(Figure S1B)—thus, outcomes in motor tests are not due to weight or physical strength. At a 
later age (24-25 weeks old), SPF-ASO animals exhibit a progressive decline in motor 
function (Figures S1C-G), which is significantly delayed in GF-ASO animals (Figures S1C-
G). We do not observe consistent differences in motor tasks between GF-WT and SPF-WT 
animals, providing evidence for gene-microbiome interactions.
As in PD, motor dysfunction in this mouse model co-occurs with decreased GI function and 
constipation (Verbaan et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2012). In SPF-ASO animals, we observe a 
marked decrease in the total output of fecal pellets, at both 12-13 weeks and 24-25 weeks of 
age, while fecal output is unaltered in GF-ASO animals (Figures 1E, F and Figures S1H, I). 
Further, fecal pellets produced by SPF-ASO mice contain reduced water content compared 
to GF-ASO mice (Figure S1J), together revealing reduced GI defects in GF animals. Indeed, 
compilation of all motor phenotypes into a principle component analysis (PCoA) displays a 
striking segregation by the SPF-ASO group, while GF-ASO animals cluster more similarly 
to WT mice (Figure S1K). Together, these data demonstrate that the presence of gut 
microbes promote the hallmark motor and intestinal dysfunction in a preclinical model of 
PD.
The Gut Microbiota is Required for αSyn Pathology
Motor deficits in PD coincide with the aggregation of αSyn. Utilizing an antibody that 
recognizes only conformation-specific αSyn aggregates and fibrils, we performed 
immunofluorescence microscopy to visualize αSyn inclusions in the brains of mice. Under 
SPF conditions, we observe notable aggregation of αSyn in the caudoputamen (CP) and 
substantia nigra (SN) of ASO animals (Figures 2A and B), brain regions of the nigrostriatal 
pathway affected in both mouse models and human PD (Brettschneider et al., 2015). 
Surprisingly, GF-ASO mice display appreciably less αSyn aggregates (Figures 2A and B). 
To quantify αSyn aggregation, we performed Western blots of brain extracts (Figure 2C). 
We reveal significantly less insoluble αSyn in brains of GF-ASO animals (Figures 2C-E). To 
further confirm these findings, we performed dot blot analysis for aggregated αSyn in the 
CP and inferior midbrain, where the SN is located, and observe similarly decreased αSyn 
aggregation in GF-ASO animals (Figures S2 A-C). Interestingly, we observe regional 
specificity of αSyn aggregation: in the frontal cortex (FC), GF-ASO animals harbor fewer 
αSyn aggregation than SPF animals, while in the cerebellum (CB), we observe nearly equal 
quantities of αSyn in SPF and GF mice (Figures S2D-H). To ensure that these findings do 
not reflect differences in transgene expression, we report similar levels of αSyn transcript 
and protein in the inferior midbrain and the CP between SPF and GF ASO animals (Figure 
2F and G). These data suggest that the microbiota regulates pathways that promote αSyn 
aggregation and/or prevent the clearance of insoluble protein aggregates.
Sampson et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 αSyn-Dependent Microglia Activation by the Microbiota
The microbiota modulates immune development in the CNS (Erny et al., 2015; Matcovitch-
Natan et al., 2016), and αSyn aggregates activate immune cells, including brain-resident 
microglia (Kim et al., 2013; Sanchez-Guajardo et al., 2013). Microglia undergo significant 
morphological changes upon activation, transitioning from thin cell bodies with numerous 
branched extensions to round, amoeboid cells with fewer branches (Erny et al., 2015). In situ 
3D reconstructions of individual microglia cells from confocal fluorescence microscopy 
reveals that wild-type GF animals harbor microglia that are distinct from SPF animals. 
Within the CP and SN, microglia in GF-WT mice display increased numbers and total 
lengths of microglia branches compared to SPF-WT animals (Figures 3A-C). These 
morphological features are indicative of an arrest in microglia maturation and/or a reduced 
activation state in GF animals, corroborating a recent report that gut bacteria affect immune 
cells in the brain (Erny et al., 2015).
Extending these observations to a disease model, microglia from SPF-ASO mice display 
significant increases in cell body diameter, along with fewer processes of shorter length 
compared to GF-ASO mice (Figures 3A-C). Tissue homogenates from the CP and inferior 
midbrain of SPF-ASO mice contain a marked increase in the pro-inflammatory cytokines 
tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) compared to GF-ASO mice 
(Figures 3D and E). Both cytokines are elevated in the brains of PD patients (Mogi et al., 
1994a; Mogi et al., 1994b). Gene expression analysis of RNA from enriched CD11b+ cells 
(primarily microglia) reveals increased tnfa and il6 expression in SPF-ASO animals, which 
is nearly absent in GF animals (Figure 3F). Neuroprotective bdnf and the cell cycle marker 
ddit4 levels are upregulated in GF animals (Figure S2I), as observed in previous studies 
(Erny et al., 2015; Matcovitch-Natan et al., 2016). Neuroinflammatory responses are region 
specific with increased in microglia diameter and TNFα production in the FC, but not the 
CB (Figures 3G and H). Overall, these findings support the hypothesis that gut microbes 
promote αSyn-dependent activation of microglia within specific brain regions involved in 
disease.
Postnatal Microbial Signals Modulate αSyn-Dependent Pathophysiology
The microbiota influence neurological outcomes during gestation, as well as via active gut-
to-brain signaling in adulthood. In order to differentiate between these mechanisms, we 
treated SPF animals with an antibiotic cocktail to postnatally deplete the microbiota (Figure 
4A). Conversely, we colonized groups of 5-6 week old GF mice with a complex microbiota 
from SPF-WT animals (Figure 4A). Remarkably, antibiotic-treated (Abx) animals display 
little αSyn-dependent motor dysfunction, closely resembling mice born under GF conditions 
(Figures 4B-E). Postnatal colonization of previously GF animals (Ex-GF) recapitulates the 
genotype effect observed in SPF mice, with mice that overexpress αSyn displaying 
significant motor dysfunction (Figures 4B-E). GI function, as measured by fecal output, is 
also significantly improved in Abx-treated animals, while Ex-GF mice exhibit an αSyn-
dependent decrease in total fecal output (Figures 4F, G). Furthermore, in the transgenic ASO 
line, microglia from Ex-GF animals have increased cell body diameters comparable to those 
in SPF mice (Figures 4H and I). Abx-ASO animals, however, harbor microglia with 
diameters similar to GF animals (Figures 4H and I). While not excluding a role for the 
Sampson et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 microbiota during prenatal neurodevelopment, modulation of microglia activation during 
adulthood contributes to αSyn-mediated motor dysfunction and neuroinflammation, 
suggesting active gut-brain signaling by the microbiota.
SCFAs are Sufficient to Promote αSyn-Mediated Neuroinflammation
Recently, it was revealed that gut bacteria modulate microglia activation during viral 
infection through production of microbial metabolites, namely short-chain fatty acids 
(SCFA) (Erny et al., 2015). Indeed, we observe lower fecal SCFA concentrations in GF and 
Abx-treated animals, compared to SPF mice (Figure S3A) (Smith et al., 2013). To address 
whether SCFAs impact neuroimmune responses in a mouse model of PD, we treated GF-
ASO and GF-WT animals with a mixture of the SCFAs acetate, propionate, and butyrate 
(while the animals remained microbiologically sterile), and significantly restored fecal 
SCFA concentrations (Figure S3A). Within affected brain regions (i.e., CP and SN), 
microglia in SCFA-administered animals display morphology indicative of increased 
activation compared to untreated mice, and similar to cells from Ex-GF and SPF mice 
(Figures 5A and B, Figures S3B and C, see Figures 3 and 4). Microglia from GF-ASO mice 
fed SCFAs (SCFA-ASO) are significantly larger in diameter than those of GF-WT animals 
treated with SCFAs (SCFA-WT), with a concomitant decrease in the length and total number 
of branches. Abx-treated animals, however, display microglia morphology similar to GF 
animals (Figure 5B, Figures S3B and C, see Figures 3 and 4). Changes in microglia diameter 
are also observed in the FC, but not the CB, demonstrating region-specific responses 
(Figures S3D and E).
Corresponding to microglia morphology, we reveal αSyn aggregates in mice administered 
SCFAs compared to untreated and Abx-treated mice, and similar to Ex-GF animals (Figures 
S3F-I). Strikingly, we observe that postnatal signaling by microbes induces increased αSyn 
aggregation in the CP, SN (Figures S3F and G), with no observable difference in the FC and 
CB (Figures S3H and I), confirmed by quantification and Western blot (Figures S3J-O). 
SCFAs either singly or in a mixture, over a range of concentrations, do not expedite the 
aggregation of human αSyn in vitro (Figures S4A-G); nor do they alter the overall structure 
of αSyn amyloid fibrils (Figures S4H and I). Though additional studies are needed, it 
appears SCFAs accelerate in vivo αSyn aggregation, albeit independently of direct 
molecular interactions.
SCFAs are Sufficient to Promote Motor Deficits
To explore a link between microbial metabolites and motor symptoms in the Thy1-αSyn 
model, GF animals were treated with the SCFA mixture beginning at 5-6 weeks of age, and 
motor function assessed at 12-13 weeks of age. SCFA-ASO mice display significantly 
impaired performance in several motor tasks compared to untreated GF-ASO animals 
(Figures 5C-F), including impairment in beam traversal, pole descent, and hindlimb reflex 
(compare GF-ASO to SCFA-ASO). All effects by SCFAs are genotype-specific to the Thy1-
αSyn mice. GI deficits are also observed in the SCFA-treated transgenic animals (Figures 
5G and H). Oral treatment of GF animals with heat-killed bacteria does not induce motor 
deficits (Figures S4J-M), suggesting bacteria need to be metabolically active. Additionally, 
oral treatment of SCFA-fed animals with the anti-inflammatory compound minocycline is 
Sampson et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sufficient to reduce TNFα production, reduce αSyn aggregation, and improve motor 
function, without altering transgene expression (Figures S5A-H). We propose that the 
microbiota actively produce metabolites, such as SCFAs, which are required for microglia 
activation and αSyn aggregation, contributing to motor dysfunction in a preclinical model of 
PD.
Dysbiosis of the PD Microbiome
Given recent evidence that PD patients display altered microbiomes (Hasegawa et al., 2015; 
Keshavarzian et al., 2015; Scheperjans et al., 2015), we sought to determine whether human 
gut microbes affect disease outcomes when transferred into GF mice. We collected fecal 
samples from 6 human subjects diagnosed with PD, as well as 6 matched healthy controls 
(Table S1). To limit confounding effects, only new onset, treatment naïve PD patients with 
healthy intestinal histology were chosen, among other relevant inclusion and exclusion 
criteria (see Methods and Resources and Table S1).
Fecal microbiota from PD patients or controls were transplanted into individual groups of 
GF recipient animals via oral gavage. Fecal pellets were collected from “humanized” mice, 
bacterial DNA extracted, and 16S rRNA sequencing performed. Sequences were annotated 
into Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs), using closed reference picking against the 
Greengenes database and metagenome function was predicted by PICRUSt. Recipient 
animal groups were most similar to their respective human donor's profile in unweighted 
UniFrac (Lozupone and Knight, 2005), based on PCoA (Figures 6A, B). Strikingly, the 
disease status of the donor had a strong effect on the microbial communities within recipient 
mice. Humanized mouse groups from PD donors are significantly more similar to each other 
than to communities transplanted from healthy donors, with this trend persisting when 
stratified by genetic background (Figures 6C, D). Furthermore, there are significant 
differences between the healthy and PD donors in the ASO background compared to WT 
recipients, suggesting genotype effects on microbial community configuration (Figures 6C, 
D).
We identified a number of genera that are altered in animals colonized with microbiota 
derived from PD donors, compared to healthy controls (Figure 6E), as well as altered KEGG 
pathways between these groups as indicated by Bray-Curtis distances (Figures S6 A-C). 
OTUs increased in abundance in mice with PD microbiomes include Proteus sp., Bilophila 
sp., and Roseburia sp., with a concomitant loss of members of families Lachnospiraceae, 
Rikenellaceae, and Peptostreptococcaceae, as well as Butyricicoccus sp. (Figure 6E). 
Interestingly, some taxa are altered only in ASO animals (e.g. Proteus sp., Bilophila sp., and 
Lachnospiraceae), while others display significant changes independent of mouse genotype 
(e.g. Rosburia sp., Rikenellaceae, and Enterococcus sp.) (Figure 6E). Intriguingly, the 
abundance of three SCFA-producing KEGG families (K00929, butyrate kinase; K01034 and 
K01035, acetate CoA/acetoacetate CoA transferase alpha and beta) are increased in mice 
that received fecal microbes derived from PD donors (Figure S6D). Further, we observe that 
animals receiving PD donor-derived microbiota display a significantly altered SCFA profile, 
with a lower concentration of acetate, and higher relative abundances of propionate and 
butyrate, compared to animals colonized with microbes from healthy controls (Figure S6E). 
Sampson et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Together, these data indicate that differences in fecal microbial communities between PD 
patients and controls can be maintained following transfer into mice. Further, αSyn 
overexpression engenders distinct alterations to the gut microbiome profile following 
transplantation.
PD-Derived Gut Microbiota Promotes Motor Dysfunction
To assess microbiota function, groups of humanized animals from each of the donor pairs 
were tested for motor function. Consistent among four of the six pairs (Pairs #1, 3, 4, and 5), 
microbiota derived from individuals with PD promote increased αSyn-mediated motor 
dysfunction (Figures 7A-F). Beam traversal, pole descent and nasal adhesive removal are 
significantly impaired in ASO animals colonized with PD microbiota compared to genotype-
matched recipient mice harboring gut bacteria from healthy controls. Hindlimb reflex scores, 
on the other hand, are generally not different between individual donors. Interestingly, 
microbiota from one pair of samples did not induce significant genotype effects in the beam 
traversal and pole descent tasks (Pair #2, Figure 7B), reflecting potential heterogeneity in the 
population that needs to be addressed through well-powered cohort studies. We observed no 
notable effects in motor function by WT recipient animals colonized with microbiota from 
either donor group (Figures 7A-F). This finding in a preclinical mouse model supports the 
notion the PD microbiota contributes to disease symptoms in genetically susceptible hosts. 
Notably, recipient animals display little alteration to weight and GI function as measured by 
fecal output (Figures S7A-F). Compilation of performance data from all groups reveals that 
microbiota from PD patients induce increased motor impairment in ASO animals compared 
to microbes from healthy controls in 3 of 4 tests used in this study (Figure 7G). In fact, 
depicting all motor function by PCoA displays striking global differences between animals 
colonized with microbiota from PD donors, compared to those colonized with gut bacteria 
derived from healthy individuals (Figure S7G). The observation that gut bacteria from PD 
patients compared to healthy controls enhance motor deficits in a mouse model provides 
evidence for a functional contribution by the microbiota to synuclienopathies.
Discussion
Parkinson's disease represents a growing health concern for an ever-aging population. While 
genetic risks have been identified, environmental factors and gene-environment interactions 
likely account for most PD cases (Nalls et al., 2014; Ritz et al., 2016). We provide evidence 
that the gut microbiota are required for postnatal events that promote hallmark motor deficits 
in an animal model. Under GF conditions, or when bacteria are depleted with antibiotics, 
transgenic animals overexpressing human αSyn display reduced microglia activation, αSyn 
inclusions, and motor deficits compared to animals with a complex microbiota. Treatment 
with microbially-produced SCFAs restores all major features of disease in GF mice, 
identifying potential molecular mediators involved in gut-brain signaling. Exacerbated motor 
symptoms in humanized mice transplanted with a PD microbiota compared to healthy 
controls suggest that αSyn overexpression (genetics) and dysbiosis (environment) combine 
to influence disease outcomes in mice. Extrapolation of these preclinical findings to humans 
may embolden the concept that gene-microbiome interactions represent a previously 
unrecognized etiology for PD.
Sampson et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mechanisms by which gut bacteria promote αSyn-mediated pathophysiology are likely 
complex; herein, we have identified one potential pathway requiring microbiota-dependent 
effects on microglia. Recent studies have demonstrated an active role for the gut microbiota 
in promoting full maturation and inflammatory capabilities of microglia through the 
production of SCFAs (Erny et al., 2015). Despite a requirement for the SCFA receptor 
FFAR2 for microglia maturation, these cells are not known to express FFAR2, but do 
express other SCFA responsive genes such as the histone deactylases that modulate gene 
expression (Erny et al., 2015). SCFAs may cross the BBB and impact the physiology of cells 
in the CNS (Mitchell et al., 2011), or they may have peripheral effects, which indirectly 
activate and mature microglia by currently unknown mechanisms (Erny et al., 2015). 
Further, insoluble aggregates and oligomeric forms of αSyn activate microglia (Kim et al., 
2013; Sanchez-Guajardo et al., 2013). Increases in the activation state of microglia and the 
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines alter neuronal function and increase cell death in 
models of PD and other neurodegenerative diseases (Kannarkat et al., 2013; Sanchez-
Guajardo et al., 2013). Intriguingly, an inflammatory environment is known to enhance 
αSyn aggregation, which may further activate microglia upon contact and promote a feed-
forward cascade that leads to additional αSyn aggregation and propagation, and progression 
of disease (Gao et al., 2011). If true, possible future treatment options may include targeting 
immune activation by the microbiota, a notion consistent with research into anti-
inflammatory therapeutic modalities for PD (Valera and Masliah, 2016).
While the microbiota promote microglia maturation, there are likely other disease-modifying 
processes that remain undiscovered. These include effects by the microbiota on autophagy 
(Lin et al., 2014), a cellular recycling process that is genetically linked to PD risk, and when 
impaired may lead to reduced clearance of αSyn aggregates (Beilina and Cookson, 2015; 
Nalls et al., 2014). Additionally, intestinal bacteria have been shown to modulate proteasome 
function (Cleynen et al., 2014), which may also aid in the clearance of αSyn inclusions. The 
protective effects of autophagy and the proteasome are not specific to synuclienopathies, and 
the ability of the microbiota to modulate these critical cellular functions suggests that other 
amyloid disorders, such as Alzheimer's and Huntington's diseases, may be impacted by gut 
bacteria. In fact, recent studies have implicated the gut microbiota in promoting amyloid 
beta pathology in a model of Alzheimer's disease (Minter et al., 2016). Though we have 
explored postnatal effects of the microbiota in a model of neurodegenerative disease, our 
findings do not address the likely important role of microbial signals during prenatal 
neurodevelopment. Whether gut microbes alter the development of the dopaminergic 
system, perhaps by modulating neurogenesis or neural differentiation in utero or early life, 
remains unexplored. Furthermore, gut microbes can produce dopamine and its precursors 
from dietary substrates, with almost half of the body's dopamine generated in the GI tract 
(Eisenhofer et al., 1997; Wall et al., 2014). Deciphering microbiota effects on microglia 
activation, cellular protein clearance pathways, neurotransmitter production and/or other 
mechanisms may offer an integrated approach to understand the pathogenesis of a complex 
and enigmatic disorder such as PD.
We reveal that gut bacteria from PD patients promote enhanced motor impairment compared 
to microbiota from healthy controls when transplanted into genetically susceptible ASO 
mice. This surprising finding suggests that distinct microbes associated with PD, rather than 
Sampson et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 general microbial stimulation, manifest disease symptoms. Several bacterial taxa are altered 
in mice receiving fecal transplants from PD patients compared to healthy controls. 
Additionally, a number of bacterial genera are changed specifically in ASO animals, but not 
WT mice, receiving microbes from the same donor. These include depletions in members of 
family Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococceae in recipient mice, a notable finding as these 
same genera are significantly reduced in fecal samples directly from PD patients 
(Keshavarzian et al., 2015). Conversely, the gut microbiomes in human subjects with PD 
contain an increased abundance of Proteobacteria (Hasegawa et al., 2015; Keshavarzian et 
al., 2015; Scheperjans et al., 2015; Unger et al., 2016), remarkably similar to our results in 
mice. Whether these specific microbes play a role in disease processes remains unknown. 
Intriguingly, a recent study demonstrated alterations in fecal SCFA ratios between patients 
and healthy controls, including an elevated relative concentration of butyrate, possibly 
implicating a role for SCFAs in PD (Unger et al., 2016). Accordingly, we observe altered 
SCFA abundances in animals colonized with PD donor-derived microbiota, and the 
discovery that SCFAs are sufficient to generate αSyn-reactive microglia in the brain is 
consistent with expansive literature showing altered microbial communities impact immune 
responses in the gut and periphery (Hooper et al., 2012).
What causes dysbiosis in PD? Physiological functions in affected individuals, such as altered 
intestinal absorption, reduced gastric motility, or dietary habits, represent factors that may 
change the microbiome. Epidemiological evidence has linked specific pesticide exposure to 
the incidence of PD (Ritz et al., 2016), with some pesticides known to impact microbiome 
configuration (Gao et al., 2016). Given the structure of αSyn and its ability to associate with 
membranes (Jo et al., 2000), it is tempting to speculate that extracellular αSyn may act as an 
antimicrobial, similar to recent observations with amyloid beta (Kumar et al., 2016), and 
shape the PD microbiome. Whether microbial community alterations are caused by extrinsic 
or intrinsic factors, the PD microbiota may be missing or reduced in protective microbes, 
harbor increased pathogenic resident microbes, or both. In turn, dysbiosis will result in 
differential production of microbial molecules in the gut. Metabolites produced by a 
deranged microbiota may enter the circulation (or even the brain) and impact neurological 
function. Identification of bacterial taxa or microbial metabolites that are altered in PD may 
serve as disease biomarkers or even drug targets, and interventions that correct dysbiosis 
may provide safe and effective treatments to slow or halt the progression of often 
debilitating motor symptoms.
Our findings establish that the microbiota are required for the hallmark motor and GI 
dysfunction in a mouse model of PD, via postnatal gut-brain signaling by microbial 
molecules that impact neuroinflammation and αSyn aggregation. Coupled with emerging 
research that has linked gut bacteria to disorders such as anxiety, depression and autism, we 
propose the provocative hypothesis that certain neurologic conditions which have classically 
been studied as disorders of the brain may also have etiologies in the gut.
Contact For Reagent and Resource Sharing
Sarkis K. Mazmanian, California Institute of Technology, sarkis@caltech.edu
Sampson et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Experimental Model and Subject Details
Mice
Female BDF1 background, Thy1-αSyn animals heterozygous for the Thy1-α-synuclein 
transgene on the X-chromosome were bred with wild-type male BDF1 mice to generate the 
male ASO and WT littermates used in the study (Chesselet et al., 2012; Rockenstein et al., 
2002). Male BDF1 were bred by crossing female C57BL/6 with DBA/2 males (Charles 
River, Hollister, CA). Breeding pairs were replenished every 6 months with transgenic 
females and newly generated BDF1 males. Germ-free (GF) Thy1-αSyn breeding pairs were 
generated via caesarian section and males newly generated every 6 months. Following 
surgical removal of the uterus and delivery of pups, microbiologically-sterile animals were 
fostered by GF Swiss-Webster dams. SPF, antibiotic-treated, and ex-GF animals were 
housed in autoclaved, ventilated, microisolator caging. GF and SCFA-treated animals were 
housed in open-top caging within flexible film isolators and maintained microbiologically 
sterile. Microbial sterility was confirmed on a biweekly basis through 16s rRNA PCR from 
fecal-derived DNA and plating of fecal pellets on Brucella blood agar media under 
anaerobic conditions and tryptic soy blood agar under aerobic conditions. All animals, 
irrespective of colonization status, received autoclaved food (LabDiet Laboratory 
Autoclavable Diet 5010, St Louis, MO) and water ad libitum, were maintained on the same 
12-hour light-dark cycle, and housed in the same facility. Antibiotic-treated animals were 
provided ampicillin (1g/L; Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), vancomycin (0.5g/L; Sagent 
Pharmaceuticals, Schaumburg, IL), neomycin (0.5g/L; Fisher Scientific), gentamycin 
(100mg/L; Sigma Aldrich), and erythromycin (10mg/L; Sigma Aldrich) in drinking water 
beginning at 5-6 weeks of age through 12-13 weeks of age. Ex-GF animals were generated 
by colonizing 5-6 week old GF animals with cecal contents from 3 wild-type BDF1 males 
resuspended in sodium biocarbonate buffer prior to oral gavage. SCFA treated animals were 
provided with drinking containing sodium acetate (67.5mM; Sigma Aldrich), sodium 
propionate (25mM; Sigma Aldrich), and sodium butyrate (40mM; Sigma Aldrich) beginning 
at 5-6 weeks of age until 12-13 weeks of age (Smith et al., 2013). Minocycline (Arcos 
Organics) treatment was provided in drinking water ad libitum at 2g/L, concurrently with 
SCFAs from 5-6 weeks of age until 12-13 weeks (Kohman et al., 2013). GF animals treated 
with heat-killed bacteria were provided ∼5×108 cfu/mL of lysogeny broth (LB)-grown 
Escherichia coli MC4100 (a kind gift from Matthew Chapman, U. of Michigan), washed 
twice in phosphate buffered saline and boiled for 45min, in drinking water ad libitum. All 
animal husbandry and experiments were approved by the California Institute of 
Technology's Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).
Human Donor and Criteria
Human donors were selected from patients seen at the Movement Disorder Clinic at Rush 
University. PD was diagnosed according to the UK Brain Bank Criteria. Exclusion criteria 
for PD subjects: atypical or secondary Parkinsonism; the use of probiotics or antibiotics 
within three months prior to sample collection; use of NSAIDs; primary gastrointestinal 
pathology; history of chronic GI illness (including IBD and celiac disease); unstable 
medical, neurological, or psychiatric illness; low platelet count (<80k); uncorrectable 
prolonged PT 9>15sec); or history of bleeding that precludes biopsies. All patients had 
Sampson et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 normal mucosa in their rectum and sigmoid by sigmoidoscopy and by H&E histology. 
Healthy controls were matched as closely as possible to PD patients. Inclusion criteria for 
healthy subjects: normal physical exam and blood work; no digestive complaints, symptoms, 
or history of disease; no neurodegenerative disease; no probiotic, antibiotic, NSAIDs, or 
prescription medication use at least three months prior to sample collection. All human 
studies were approved under both Rush University and California Institute of Technology 
Institutional Review Board (IRB).
Method Details
Motor Function and Gastrointestinal Testing
Excluding humanized animals, all motor function assessment was performed in identical, 
gnotobiotic animal facility. Humanized animals were tested within a laminar-flow biosafety 
cabinet in the same facility. Motor function for all animals was tested between hours 7 and 9 
of the light-phase. All tests were performed similarly to previous studies (Fleming et al., 
2004). Beam traversal was performed first, before allowing animals to rest for ∼1hr and 
testing on pole descent. The following day, adhesive removal and hindlimb scoring was 
performed. Fecal output was performed within 3 days and immediately prior to tissue 
collection. Beam traversal- A 1 meter plexiglass beam (Stark's Plastics, Forest Park, OH) 
was constructed of four segments of 0.25m in length. Each segment was of thinner widths 
3.5cm, 2.5cm, 1.5cm, and 0.5cm, with 1cm overhangs placed 1cm below the surface of the 
beam. The widest segment acted as a loading platform for the animals and the narrowest end 
placed into home cage. Animals had two days of training to traverse the length of the beam 
before testing. On the first day of training, animals received 1 trial with the home cage 
positioned close to the loading platform and guided the animals forward along the narrowing 
beam. Animals received two more trials with limited or no assistance to encourage forward 
movement and stability on the beam. On the second day of training, animals had three trials 
to traverse the beam and generally did not require assistance in forward movement. On the 
third day, animals were timed over three trials to traverse from the loading platform and to 
the home cage. Timing began when the animals placed their forelimbs onto the 2.5cm 
segment and ended when one forelimb reached the home cage. Pole descent- A 0.5m long 
pole, 1cm in diameter, wrapped with non-adhesive shelf liner to facilitate the animals grip, 
was placed into the home cage. Animals received two days of training to descend from the 
top of the pole and into the home cage. On day one of training, animals received 3 trials. The 
first trial, animals were placed head-down 1/3 the distance above the floor, the second trial 
from 2/3 the distance, and the third trial animals were placed at the top. The second day of 
training, animals were given 3 trials to descend, head-down, from the top of the pole. On the 
test day, animals were placed head-down on the top of the pole and timed to descend back 
into the home cage. Timing began when the experimenter released the animal and ended 
when one hind-limb reached the home cage base. Adhesive removal- ¼” round adhesive 
labels (Avery, Glendale, CA) were placed on the nasal bridge between the nostrils and 
forehead. Animals were placed into their home cage (with cage mates removed) and timed 
to completely remove the sticker. Animals were recorded over three trials. Hindlimb 
clasping reflex scoring- Animals were gently lifted upwards by the mid-section of the tail 
and observed over ∼5-10 seconds (Zhang et al., 2014). Animals were assigned a score of 0, 
Sampson et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 1, 2, 3 based on the extent to which the hindlimbs clasped inward. 0, indicating no clasping, 
was given to animals that freely moved both their limbs and extended them outwards. A 
score of 1 was assigned to animals which clasped one hindlimb inward for the duration of 
the restraint or if both legs exhibited partial inward clasping. A score of 2 was given if both 
legs clasped inward for the majority of the observation, but still exhibited some flexibility. A 
score of 3 was assigned if animals displayed complete paralysis of hindlimbs that 
immediately clasped inward and exhibited no signs of flexibility. Inverted grid- Animals 
were placed in the center of a 30cm by 30cm screen with 1cm wide mesh. The screen was 
inverted head-over-tail and placed on supports ∼40cm above an open cage with deep 
bedding. Animals were timed until they released their grip or remained for 60s. Fecal 
Output- Animals were removed from their home cages and placed into a 12cm × 25cm 
translucent cylinder. Fecal pellets were counted every 5 minutes, cumulative over 15 
minutes. Principal component analysis of all motor function was performed using MATLAB 
software (MathWorks) using behavioral data collected from subjects that performed at least 
3 tasks. Data was centered and standardized (σ = 1) prior to running the pca function. Only 
PC1 and PC2, which accounted for 70.5% of the variance, were plotted using the 
corresponding factor loadings for each individual subject.
Immunostaining and Microglia Reconstructions
Animals were sedated with pentobarbital and well-perfused with phosphate-buffered saline, 
brains were dissected and hemispheres fixed in 4%(w/v) paraformaldehyde. 50 μm saggital 
sections were generated via vibratome. Free-floating sections were stained with anti-
aggregated/fibril αSyn MJFR1 (1:1000; rabbit; AbCam, Cambridge UK), anti-
phosphoSer129 αSyn (1:1000; mouse; Biolegend, San Diego, CA), and Neurotrace (Life 
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA), or with anti-Iba1 (1:1000; rabbit; Wako, Richmond, VA) and 
subsequently stained with anti-mouse IgG-AF488 and anti-rabbit IgG-AF546 (1:1000; Life 
Technologies). Sections were mounted with ProFade Diamond (Life Technologies), and 
imaged with a 10× objective on a Zeiss LSM800 confocal microscope. 2-3 fields per region 
per animal were imaged and compiled in ImageJ software for analysis. For microglia 
reconstructions, z-stacks were imaged at 1μm steps and subsequently analyzed using Imaris 
software, as previously described (Erny et al., 2015). Semi-automated reconstruction of 
microglia cell bodies and processes were performed, whereby the experimenter designates 
individual cell bodies and the software quantifies diameter, dendrite length, and branch 
points from each given cell body. 20-60 cells per region per animal were analyzed.
CD11b enrichment and qPCR analysis
Perfused whole brains were homogenized in PBS via passage through a 100μm mesh filter, 
myelin debris were removed using magnetic separation with Myelin Removal Beads 
(Miltenyi Biotec, San Diego CA), according to manufacturer's instructions. CD11b 
enrichment was performed similarly, with magnetic enrichment by Microglia Microbeads 
(Miltenyi Biotec), according to manufacturer's instructions. Generally, greater than 90% of 
cells enriched stained positive for CD11b by immunofluorescence microscopy. For RNA 
analysis, dissected tissue (frontal cortex, caudoputamen, inferior midbrain, and cerebellum) 
or CD11b-enriched cell pellets, were lysed in Trizol for DirectZol RNA extraction (Zymo 
Research, Irvine, CA). cDNA was generated via iScript cDNAsynthesis kit (BioRad, 
Sampson et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hercules, CA). qRT-PCR was performed with SybrGreen master mix (Applied Biosystems, 
Foster City, CA) on an AB 7900ht instrument using primers derived from PrimerBank for 
the indicated target genes and quantified as ΔΔCT, relative to gapdh (Primers listed in 
associated Resource Table).
Cytokine and αSyn ELISAs and Western blots
Tissue homogenates were prepared in RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail 
(ThermoFisher, Pittsburgh, PA) and diluted into PBS. TNF-α and IL-6 ELISAs 
(eBioscience, San Diego, CA) and αSyn ELISAs (ThermoFisher) were performed according 
to manufacturer's instructions. For dot blot quantification of αSyn fibrils, 1μg of tissue 
homogenate from the specified region was spotted in 1μL volume aloquats onto 0.45 μm 
nitrocellulose membranes. For Triton X- soluble vs insoluble fraction western blots, brain 
hemispheres were homogenized in RIPA buffer containing 1% Triton X-100, centrifuged at 
15k × g for 60 min at 4°C to precipitate insoluble proteins from the Triton soluble 
supernatant. The insoluble fraction was solubilized in 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate, as 
previously described (Klucken et al., 2006). 5μg of each fraction was separated by 4-20% 
SDS-PAGE (ThermoFisher), blotted onto PVDF membranes. All membranes were blocked 
with 5% dry skim milk in Tris-buffered saline with 0.1% Tween-20. Anti-aggregated αSyn 
antibody (1:2000; rabbit; Abcam) or anti-αSyn (1:1000; mouse; BD) was diluted in skim 
milk and incubated overnight at 4°C. Membranes were probed with anti-rabbit or anti-mouse 
IgG HRP (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology). All blots were detected with the Clarity 
chemiluminescence substrate (BioRad) on a BioRad GelDoc XR. Densitometry was 
performed using ImageJ software.
αSyn aggregation assays
For in vitro aggregation kinetics, 70μM αSyn was purified as described previously (Chorell 
et al., 2015), and incubated in phosphate-buffered saline solution (0.01 M phosphate buffer, 
0.0027 M potassium chloride, 0.137M sodium chloride, pH 7.4) in the presence of 12μM of 
Thioflavin T (ThT; Sigma Aldrich) and increasing concentrations of SCFA. A nonbinding 
96-well plate with half area (Corning #3881) was used for each experiment and a 2 mm 
diameter glass bead was added to each well to accelerate the aggregation. The ThT 
fluorescence signal was recorded using a microplate reader (Fluostar OPTIMA Microplate 
reader, BMG Labtech) with the excitation filter of 440 ± 10nm and an emission filter of 490 
± 10nm under intermittent shaking conditions at 37°C. The kinetic curves were normalized 
to the fluorescence maxima and the time to reach half-maximum intensity quantified. For 
atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging, samples were diluted with ultrapure water to 
∼3μM total protein concentration, and 50μls were pipetted onto freshly cleaved mica and left 
to dry. The samples were imaged with a Modular scanning probe microscope NTEGRA 
Prima (NT-MDT) in intermittent contact mode in air using a gold-coated single crystal 
silicon cantilever (spring constant of ∼5.1 N/m) with a resonance frequency of ∼150 kHz. 
AFM images were processed with Gwyddion open source software.
SCFA extraction and analysis
Fecal samples were collected from animals at 12 weeks of age. Each fecal pellet was mixed 
with 1mL sterile 18 Ω de-ionized water. The pellet-water mixtures were homogenized by 
Sampson et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mixing at 3200 rpm for five minutes and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 13,000 rpm at 4 °C. 
Supernatants were filtered using Acrodisc LC 13 mm sterile syringe filters with 0.2 μm 
PVDF membranes (Pall Life Sciences). The filtrates were used for high performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) analysis. Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) were analyzed using 
HPLC (LC-20AT, Shimadzu) equipped with a carbohydrate column (Aminex HPX-87H 
column, Biorad) and photodiode array detector (PDA, Shimadzu). The eluent was 5 mM 
H2SO4, fed at a flowrate of 0.6 mL/min, and the column temperature was 50 °C. The run 
time was 60 minutes. Standard curves were generated by diluting 10 mM volatile fatty acid 
standard solution (acetic acid, butyric acid, formic acid, valeric acid, isovaleric acid, caproic 
acid, isocaproic acid, and heptanoic acid) to 50 nM to 5000 nM. Concentrations of SCFAs 
were normalized to soluble chemical oxygen demand. sCOD values of the fecal supernatants 
were measured with high range (20-1500 mg/L) Hach COD digestion tubes (Hach 
Company, Loveland) as recommended by the manufacturer. The wavelength used to measure 
COD with Hach spectrophotometer was 620 nm.
Microbiome Profiling
Fecal pellets were collected at day 7, 14, 21, and 49 post fecal transplant, from animals 
housed in groups of 1-3 by genotype and donor. Samples were sequenced according to the 
Earth Microbiome Project protocols (Gilbert et al., 2014). Briefly, DNA was extracted using 
a MoBio Power soil kit (Carlsbad, CA), and the V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was 
amplified using barcoded primers (Walters et al., 2016). Sequencing was performed using an 
Illumina MiSeq. Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) were picked closed reference using 
SortMeRNA 2.0 (Kopylova et al., 2012) against the August 2013 release of Greengenes 
(McDonald et al., 2012) in QIIME 1.9 (Caporaso et al., 2010). The table was rarefied to 
7500 sequences per sample for alpha and beta diversity calculations. Differential abundance 
was performed on a table filtered to exclude samples with less than 7500 sequences. 
Weighted and unweighted UniFrac (Lozupone and Knight, 2005) distances were calculated 
in QIIME 1.9. Principle Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) projections were visualized using 
Emperor 0.9.4 (Vazquez-Baeza et al., 2013). Function was inferred using PICRUSt 1.0 
(Langille et al., 2013); predicted functional repertoires were compared using Bray Curtis 
distance. Significance tests were performed using permanova in scikit-bio 0.4.2 and 
permutative t tests in QIIME 1.9, both with 999 permutations per test. Differential 
abundance calculations were performed using genus-level taxa and KEGG-based relative 
abundance of all counts offset by one. Tests were performed using ANCOM (Mandal et al., 
2015) in scikit-bio 0.4.2 with a one-way ANOVA test with a Bonferroni-corrected alpha of 
0.1 as the rejection threshold. Mice colonized with samples from healthy donors or donors 
with PD were compared in the BDF1 or Thy1-αSyn genetic backgrounds. Significantly 
different taxa were compared between the groups, and classified as significant in both, 
significant in the Thy1-αSyn background only, or significant in the BDF1 background. Plots 
were generated using Seaborn 0.7.0.
Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Microbiome population statistics are described in detail above. Excluding these, data sets 
were analyzed within GraphPad Prism 6 software. Pair-wise comparisons were generated 
Sampson et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with two-tailed t tests. Comparisons of groups were generated with one-way ANOVA. P –
values, n values, definition of center and dispersion measurements are indicated in the 
associated figure legends for each figure.
Data and Software Availability
16s sequencing data and metadata are available online through the QIITA website (https://
qiita.ucsd.edu/), with the study accession #10483 and the EMBL ENA database (http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/ena) with the study accession # ERP019564.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank E. Hsiao, M. Sampson, and the Mazmanian laboratory for helpful critiques. We are grateful to K. Ly, A. 
Maskell, M. Quintos for animal husbandry, Y. Garcia-Flores G. Ackermann, G. Humphrey, and H. Derderian for 
technical support. Imaging and analysis was performed in the Caltech Biological Imaging Facility, with the support 
of the Caltech Beckman Institute and the Arnold and Mabel Beckman Foundation. T.R.S. is a Larry L. Hillblom 
Foundation postdoctoral fellow. This project was supported by funds from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg 
Foundation and Swedish Research Council to P.W.S.; a gift from Mrs. and Mr. Larry Field to A. K.; the Heritage 
Medical Research Institute to V.G. and S.K.M.; and a National Institutes of Health grant NS085910 to S.K.M.
References
Beilina A, Cookson MR. Genes associated with Parkinson's disease: regulation of autophagy and 
beyond. J Neurochem. 2015
Bercik P, Denou E, Collins J, Jackson W, Lu J, Jury J, Deng Y, Blennerhassett P, Macri J, McCoy KD, 
et al. The intestinal microbiota affect central levels of brain-derived neurotropic factor and behavior 
in mice. Gastroenterology. 2011; 141:599–609. 609 e591–593. [PubMed: 21683077] 
Braak H, Rub U, Gai WP, Del Tredici K. Idiopathic Parkinson's disease: possible routes by which 
vulnerable neuronal types may be subject to neuroinvasion by an unknown pathogen. Journal of 
neural transmission. 2003; 110:517–536. [PubMed: 12721813] 
Braniste V, Al-Asmakh M, Kowal C, Anuar F, Abbaspour A, Toth M, Korecka A, Bakocevic N, Ng 
LG, Kundu P, et al. The gut microbiota influences blood-brain barrier permeability in mice. Sci 
Transl Med. 2014; 6:263ra158.
Brettschneider J, Del Tredici K, Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ. Spreading of pathology in 
neurodegenerative diseases: a focus on human studies. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015; 16:109–120. 
[PubMed: 25588378] 
Burke RE, Dauer WT, Vonsattel JP. A critical evaluation of the Braak staging scheme for Parkinson's 
disease. Annals of neurology. 2008; 64:485–491. [PubMed: 19067353] 
Caporaso JG, Kuczynski J, Stombaugh J, Bittinger K, Bushman FD, Costello EK, Fierer N, Pena AG, 
Goodrich JK, Gordon JI, et al. QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing 
data. Nat Methods. 2010; 7:335–336. [PubMed: 20383131] 
Chesselet MF, Richter F, Zhu C, Magen I, Watson MB, Subramaniam SR. A progressive mouse model 
of Parkinson's disease: the Thy1-aSyn (“Line 61”) mice. Neurotherapeutics. 2012; 9:297–314. 
[PubMed: 22350713] 
Chorell E, Andersson E, Evans ML, Jain N, Gotheson A, Aden J, Chapman MR, Almqvist F, Wittung-
Stafshede P. Bacterial Chaperones CsgE and CsgC Differentially Modulate Human alpha-Synuclein 
Amyloid Formation via Transient Contacts. PLoS One. 2015; 10:e0140194. [PubMed: 26465894] 
Sampson et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Clarke G, Grenham S, Scully P, Fitzgerald P, Moloney RD, Shanahan F, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. The 
microbiome-gut-brain axis during early life regulates the hippocampal serotonergic system in a 
sex-dependent manner. Mol Psychiatry. 2013; 18:666–673. [PubMed: 22688187] 
Cleynen I, Vazeille E, Artieda M, Verspaget HW, Szczypiorska M, Bringer MA, Lakatos PL, Seibold 
F, Parnell K, Weersma RK, et al. Genetic and microbial factors modulating the ubiquitin 
proteasome system in inflammatory bowel disease. Gut. 2014; 63:1265–1274. [PubMed: 
24092863] 
Del Tredici K, Braak H. A not entirely benign procedure: progression of Parkinson's disease. Acta 
neuropathologica. 2008; 115:379–384. [PubMed: 18320198] 
Devos D, Lebouvier T, Lardeux B, Biraud M, Rouaud T, Pouclet H, Coron E, Bruley des Varannes S, 
Naveilhan P, Nguyen JM, et al. Colonic inflammation in Parkinson's disease. Neurobiol Dis. 2013; 
50:42–48. [PubMed: 23017648] 
Diaz Heijtz R, Wang S, Anuar F, Qian Y, Bjorkholm B, Samuelsson A, Hibberd ML, Forssberg H, 
Pettersson S. Normal gut microbiota modulates brain development and behavior. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2011; 108:3047–3052. [PubMed: 21282636] 
Dinan TG, Cryan JF. The impact of gut microbiota on brain and behaviour: implications for psychiatry. 
Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2015; 18:552–558. [PubMed: 26372511] 
Eisenhofer G, Aneman A, Friberg P, Hooper D, Fandriks L, Lonroth H, Hunyady B, Mezey E. 
Substantial production of dopamine in the human gastrointestinal tract. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
1997; 82:3864–3871. [PubMed: 9360553] 
Erny D, Hrabe de Angelis AL, Jaitin D, Wieghofer P, Staszewski O, David E, Keren-Shaul H, 
Mahlakoiv T, Jakobshagen K, Buch T, et al. Host microbiota constantly control maturation and 
function of microglia in the CNS. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:965–977. [PubMed: 26030851] 
Fleming SM, Salcedo J, Fernagut PO, Rockenstein E, Masliah E, Levine MS, Chesselet MF. Early and 
progressive sensorimotor anomalies in mice overexpressing wild-type human alpha-synuclein. J 
Neurosci. 2004; 24:9434–9440. [PubMed: 15496679] 
Gao B, Bian X, Mahbub R, Lu K. Gender-Specific Effects of Organophosphate Diazinon on the Gut 
Microbiome and Its Metabolic Functions. Environ Health Perspect. 2016
Gao HM, Zhang F, Zhou H, Kam W, Wilson B, Hong JS. Neuroinflammation and alpha-synuclein 
dysfunction potentiate each other, driving chronic progression of neurodegeneration in a mouse 
model of Parkinson's disease. Environ Health Perspect. 2011; 119:807–814. [PubMed: 21245015] 
Gilbert JA, Jansson JK, Knight R. The Earth Microbiome project: successes and aspirations. BMC 
Biol. 2014; 12:69. [PubMed: 25184604] 
Hasegawa S, Goto S, Tsuji H, Okuno T, Asahara T, Nomoto K, Shibata A, Fujisawa Y, Minato T, 
Okamoto A, et al. Intestinal Dysbiosis and Lowered Serum Lipopolysaccharide-Binding Protein in 
Parkinson's Disease. PLoS One. 2015; 10:e0142164. [PubMed: 26539989] 
Hoban AE, Stilling RM, Ryan FJ, Shanahan F, Dinan TG, Claesson MJ, Clarke G, Cryan JF. 
Regulation of prefrontal cortex myelination by the microbiota. Transl Psychiatry. 2016; 6:e774. 
[PubMed: 27045844] 
Holmqvist S, Chutna O, Bousset L, Aldrin-Kirk P, Li W, Bjorklund T, Wang ZY, Roybon L, Melki R, 
Li JY. Direct evidence of Parkinson pathology spread from the gastrointestinal tract to the brain in 
rats. Acta neuropathologica. 2014; 128:805–820. [PubMed: 25296989] 
Hooper LV, Littman DR, Macpherson AJ. Interactions between the microbiota and the immune system. 
Science. 2012; 336:1268–1273. [PubMed: 22674334] 
Jenner P. Molecular mechanisms of L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008; 9:665–677. 
[PubMed: 18714325] 
Jo E, McLaurin J, Yip CM, St George-Hyslop P, Fraser PE. alpha-Synuclein membrane interactions 
and lipid specificity. J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:34328–34334. [PubMed: 10915790] 
Kannarkat GT, Boss JM, Tansey MG. The role of innate and adaptive immunity in Parkinson's disease. 
J Parkinsons Dis. 2013; 3:493–514. [PubMed: 24275605] 
Keshavarzian A, Green SJ, Engen PA, Voigt RM, Naqib A, Forsyth CB, Mutlu E, Shannon KM. 
Colonic bacterial composition in Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord. 2015; 30:1351–1360. 
[PubMed: 26179554] 
Sampson et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Kim C, Ho DH, Suk JE, You S, Michael S, Kang J, Joong Lee S, Masliah E, Hwang D, Lee HJ, et al. 
Neuron-released oligomeric alpha-synuclein is an endogenous agonist of TLR2 for paracrine 
activation of microglia. Nat Commun. 2013; 4:1562. [PubMed: 23463005] 
Klucken J, Ingelsson M, Shin Y, Irizarry MC, Hedley-Whyte ET, Frosch M, Growdon J, McLean P, 
Hyman BT. Clinical and biochemical correlates of insoluble alpha-synuclein in dementia with 
Lewy bodies. Acta neuropathologica. 2006; 111:101–108. [PubMed: 16482476] 
Kohman RA, Bhattacharya TK, Kilby C, Bucko P, Rhodes JS. Effects of minocycline on spatial 
learning, hippocampal neurogenesis and microglia in aged and adult mice. Behav Brain Res. 2013; 
242:17–24. [PubMed: 23274840] 
Kopylova E, Noe L, Touzet H. SortMeRNA: fast and accurate filtering of ribosomal RNAs in 
metatranscriptomic data. Bioinformatics. 2012; 28:3211–3217. [PubMed: 23071270] 
Kumar DK, Choi SH, Washicosky KJ, Eimer WA, Tucker S, Ghofrani J, Lefkowitz A, McColl G, 
Goldstein LE, Tanzi RE, et al. Amyloid-beta peptide protects against microbial infection in mouse 
and worm models of Alzheimer's disease. Sci Transl Med. 2016; 8:340ra372.
Langille MG, Zaneveld J, Caporaso JG, McDonald D, Knights D, Reyes JA, Clemente JC, Burkepile 
DE, Vega Thurber RL, Knight R, et al. Predictive functional profiling of microbial communities 
using 16S rRNA marker gene sequences. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:814–821. [PubMed: 23975157] 
Ley RE, Peterson DA, Gordon JI. Ecological and evolutionary forces shaping microbial diversity in the 
human intestine. Cell. 2006; 124:837–848. [PubMed: 16497592] 
Lin R, Jiang Y, Zhao XY, Guan Y, Qian W, Fu XC, Ren HY, Hou XH. Four types of Bifidobacteria 
trigger autophagy response in intestinal epithelial cells. J Dig Dis. 2014; 15:597–605. [PubMed: 
25123057] 
Lozupone C, Knight R. UniFrac: a new phylogenetic method for comparing microbial communities. 
Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005; 71:8228–8235. [PubMed: 16332807] 
Luk KC, Kehm V, Carroll J, Zhang B, O'Brien P, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM. Pathological alpha-
synuclein transmission initiates Parkinson-like neurodegeneration in nontransgenic mice. Science. 
2012; 338:949–953. [PubMed: 23161999] 
Mandal S, Van Treuren W, White RA, Eggesbo M, Knight R, Peddada SD. Analysis of composition of 
microbiomes: a novel method for studying microbial composition. Microb Ecol Health Dis. 2015; 
26:27663. [PubMed: 26028277] 
Matcovitch-Natan O, Winter DR, Giladi A, Vargas Aguilar S, Spinrad A, Sarrazin S, Ben-Yehuda H, 
David E, Zelada Gonzalez F, Perrin P, et al. Microglia development follows a stepwise program to 
regulate brain homeostasis. Science. 2016; 353:aad8670. [PubMed: 27338705] 
Mayer EA, Padua D, Tillisch K. Altered brain-gut axis in autism: comorbidity or causative 
mechanisms? Bioessays. 2014; 36:933–939. [PubMed: 25145752] 
McDonald D, Price MN, Goodrich J, Nawrocki EP, DeSantis TZ, Probst A, Andersen GL, Knight R, 
Hugenholtz P. An improved Greengenes taxonomy with explicit ranks for ecological and 
evolutionary analyses of bacteria and archaea. ISME J. 2012; 6:610–618. [PubMed: 22134646] 
Minter MR, Zhang C, Leone V, Ringus DL, Zhang X, Oyler-Castrillo P, Musch MW, Liao F, Ward JF, 
Holtzman DM, et al. Antibiotic-induced perturbations in gut microbial diversity influences neuro-
inflammation and amyloidosis in a murine model of Alzheimer's disease. Sci Rep. 2016; 6:30028. 
[PubMed: 27443609] 
Mitchell RW, On NH, Del Bigio MR, Miller DW, Hatch GM. Fatty acid transport protein expression in 
human brain and potential role in fatty acid transport across human brain microvessel endothelial 
cells. J Neurochem. 2011; 117:735–746. [PubMed: 21395585] 
Mogi M, Harada M, Kondo T, Riederer P, Inagaki H, Minami M, Nagatsu T. Interleukin-1 beta, 
interleukin-6, epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor-alpha are elevated in the 
brain from parkinsonian patients. Neurosci Lett. 1994a; 180:147–150. [PubMed: 7700568] 
Mogi M, Harada M, Riederer P, Narabayashi H, Fujita K, Nagatsu T. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNF-alpha) increases both in the brain and in the cerebrospinal fluid from parkinsonian patients. 
Neurosci Lett. 1994b; 165:208–210. [PubMed: 8015728] 
Mohle L, Mattei D, Heimesaat MM, Bereswill S, Fischer A, Alutis M, French T, Hambardzumyan D, 
Matzinger P, Dunay IR, et al. Ly6Chi Monocytes Provide a Link between Antibiotic-Induced 
Change in Gut Microbiota and Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis. Cell Reports. 2016
Sampson et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Nalls MA, Pankratz N, Lill CM, Do CB, Hernandez DG, Saad M, DeStefano AL, Kara E, Bras J, 
Sharma M, et al. Large-scale meta-analysis of genome-wide association data identifies six new 
risk loci for Parkinson's disease. Nat Genet. 2014; 46:989–993. [PubMed: 25064009] 
Neufeld KM, Kang N, Bienenstock J, Foster JA. Reduced anxiety-like behavior and central 
neurochemical change in germ-free mice. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2011; 23:255–264. e119. 
[PubMed: 21054680] 
Prusiner SB, Woerman AL, Mordes DA, Watts JC, Rampersaud R, Berry DB, Patel S, Oehler A, Lowe 
JK, Kravitz SN, et al. Evidence for alpha-synuclein prions causing multiple system atrophy in 
humans with parkinsonism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112:E5308–5317. [PubMed: 
26324905] 
Ritz BR, Paul KC, Bronstein JM. Of Pesticides and Men: a California Story of Genes and Environment 
in Parkinson's Disease. Curr Environ Health Rep. 2016; 3:40–52. [PubMed: 26857251] 
Rockenstein E, Mallory M, Hashimoto M, Song D, Shults CW, Lang I, Masliah E. Differential 
neuropathological alterations in transgenic mice expressing alpha-synuclein from the platelet-
derived growth factor and Thy-1 promoters. J Neurosci Res. 2002; 68:568–578. [PubMed: 
12111846] 
Rooks MG, Garrett WS. Gut microbiota, metabolites and host immunity. Nat Rev Immunol. 2016; 
16:341–352. [PubMed: 27231050] 
Sacchettini JC, Kelly JW. Therapeutic strategies for human amyloid diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 
2002; 1:267–275. [PubMed: 12120278] 
Sanchez-Guajardo V, Barnum CJ, Tansey MG, Romero-Ramos M. Neuroimmunological processes in 
Parkinson's disease and their relation to alpha-synuclein: microglia as the referee between neuronal 
processes and peripheral immunity. ASN Neuro. 2013; 5:113–139. [PubMed: 23506036] 
Scheperjans F, Aho V, Pereira PA, Koskinen K, Paulin L, Pekkonen E, Haapaniemi E, Kaakkola S, 
Eerola-Rautio J, Pohja M, et al. Gut microbiota are related to Parkinson's disease and clinical 
phenotype. Mov Disord. 2015; 30:350–358. [PubMed: 25476529] 
Schroeder BO, Backhed F. Signals from the gut microbiota to distant organs in physiology and disease. 
Nat Med. 2016; 22:1079–1089. [PubMed: 27711063] 
Selkrig J, Wong P, Zhang X, Pettersson S. Metabolic tinkering by the gut microbiome: Implications for 
brain development and function. Gut Microbes. 2014; 5:369–380. [PubMed: 24685620] 
Shannon KM, Keshavarzian A, Dodiya HB, Jakate S, Kordower JH. Is alpha-synuclein in the colon a 
biomarker for premotor Parkinson's disease? Evidence from 3 cases. Mov Disord. 2012; 27:716–
719. [PubMed: 22550057] 
Sharon G, Sampson TR, Geschwind DH, Mazmanian SK. The Central Nervous System and the Gut 
Microbiome. Cell. 2016; 167:915–932. [PubMed: 27814521] 
Smith PM, Howitt MR, Panikov N, Michaud M, Gallini CA, Bohlooly YM, Glickman JN, Garrett WS. 
The microbial metabolites, short-chain fatty acids, regulate colonic Treg cell homeostasis. Science. 
2013; 341:569–573. [PubMed: 23828891] 
Soldner F, Stelzer Y, Shivalila CS, Abraham BJ, Latourelle JC, Barrasa MI, Goldmann J, Myers RH, 
Young RA, Jaenisch R. Parkinson-associated risk variant in distal enhancer of alpha-synuclein 
modulates target gene expression. Nature. 2016; 533:95–99. [PubMed: 27096366] 
Sudo N, Chida Y, Aiba Y, Sonoda J, Oyama N, Yu XN, Kubo C, Koga Y. Postnatal microbial 
colonization programs the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system for stress response in mice. The 
Journal of physiology. 2004; 558:263–275. [PubMed: 15133062] 
Svensson E, Horvath-Puho E, Thomsen RW, Djurhuus JC, Pedersen L, Borghammer P, Sorensen HT. 
Vagotomy and subsequent risk of Parkinson's disease. Annals of neurology. 2015; 78:522–529. 
[PubMed: 26031848] 
Unger MM, Spiegel J, Dillmann KU, Grundmann D, Philippeit H, Burmann J, Fassbender K, 
Schwiertz A, Schafer KH. Short chain fatty acids and gut microbiota differ between patients with 
Parkinson's disease and age-matched controls. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2016
Valera E, Masliah E. Combination therapies: The next logical Step for the treatment of 
synucleinopathies? Mov Disord. 2016; 31:225–234. [PubMed: 26388203] 
Vazquez-Baeza Y, Pirrung M, Gonzalez A, Knight R. EMPeror: a tool for visualizing high-throughput 
microbial community data. Gigascience. 2013; 2:16. [PubMed: 24280061] 
Sampson et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Verbaan D, Marinus J, Visser M, van Rooden SM, Stiggelbout AM, van Hilten JJ. Patient-reported 
autonomic symptoms in Parkinson disease. Neurology. 2007; 69:333–341. [PubMed: 17646625] 
Wall R, Cryan JF, Ross RP, Fitzgerald GF, Dinan TG, Stanton C. Bacterial neuroactive compounds 
produced by psychobiotics. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014; 817:221–239. [PubMed: 24997036] 
Walters W, Hyde ER, Berg-Lyons D, Ackermann G, Humphrey G, Parada A, Gilbert JA, Jansson JK, 
Caporaso JG, Fuhrman JA, et al. Improved Bacterial 16S rRNA Gene (V4 and V4-5) and Fungal 
Internal Transcribed Spacer Marker Gene Primers for Microbial Community Surveys. mSystems. 
2016; 1
Wang L, Magen I, Yuan PQ, Subramaniam SR, Richter F, Chesselet MF, Tache Y. Mice overexpressing 
wild-type human alpha-synuclein display alterations in colonic myenteric ganglia and defecation. 
Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2012; 24:e425–436. [PubMed: 22779732] 
Yano JM, Yu K, Donaldson GP, Shastri GG, Ann P, Ma L, Nagler CR, Ismagilov RF, Mazmanian SK, 
Hsiao EY. Indigenous bacteria from the gut microbiota regulate host serotonin biosynthesis. Cell. 
2015; 161:264–276. [PubMed: 25860609] 
Zhang J, Saur T, Duke AN, Grant SG, Platt DM, Rowlett JK, Isacson O, Yao WD. Motor impairments, 
striatal degeneration, and altered dopamine-glutamate interplay in mice lacking PSD-95. J 
Neurogenet. 2014; 28:98–111. [PubMed: 24702501] 
Sampson et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
Gut microbes promote α-synuclein-mediated motor deficits and brain 
pathology
•
Depletion of gut bacteria reduces microglia activation
•
SCFAs modulate microglia and enhance PD pathophysiology
•
Human gut microbiota from PD patients induce enhanced motor dysfunction 
in mice
Sampson et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Gut microbes promote motor and gastrointestinal dysfunction
(A) Time to traverse beam apparatus
(B) Time to descend pole
(C) Time to remove adhesive from nasal bridge
(D) Hind-limb clasping reflex score
(E) Time course of fecal output in a novel environment over 15 minutes
(F) Total fecal pellets produced in 15 minutes
Animals were tested at 12-13 weeks of age. N=4-6, error bars represent the mean and 
standard error from 3 trials per animal. Data are representative of 2 experiments. *p ≤ 0.05; 
**p≤ 0.01; ***p≤ 0.001; ****p≤ 0.0001. SPF=specific pathogen free, GF=germ-free, 
WT=wild-type, ASO=Thy1-α-synuclein genotype. See also Figure S1.
Sampson et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. αSyn pathology is increased in mice harbouring a gut microbiota
(A) Representative images of the caudoputamen (CP) from SPF-ASO or GF-ASO animals 
stained with aggregation-specific αSyn antibody (red), Phospho-Ser129-αSyn antibody 
(green), and Neurotrace/Nissl (blue)
(B) Representative images of the substantia nigra (SN) from SPF-ASO or GF-ASO animals, 
stained as above
(C) Representative western blot of triton soluble and insoluble brain homogenates, 
immunostained with anti-αSyn antibody
(D, E) Densitometry quantification of anti-αSyn western blots for (D) all αSyn and (E) ratio 
of insoluble to soluble αSyn staining
(F) qRT-PCR analysis of human αSyn in the CP or inferior midbrain (Mid)
(G) ELISA analysis of total αSyn present in homogenates from the the CP or inferior 
midbrain (Mid)
Tissues collected from mice at 12-13 weeks of age. N=3-4, error bars represent the mean 
and standard error. *p ≤ 0.05; **p≤ 0.01; ***p≤ 0.001. SPF=specific pathogen free, 
GF=germ-free, WT=wild-type, ASO=Thy1-α-synuclein genotype. See also Figure S2.
Sampson et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. αSyn-dependent microglia activation by the microbiota
(A) Representative 3D reconstructions of Iba1-stained microglia residing in the 
caudoputamen (CP) of SPF-WT, SPF-ASO, GF-WT, and GF-ASO animals
(B) CP-resident microglia parameters diameter, number of branch points, and total branch 
length
(C) Substantia nigra (SN)-resident microglia parameters diameter, number of branch points, 
and total branch length
(D) ELISA analysis for TNF-α and IL-6 present in homogenates from the CP
(E) ELISA analysis for TNF-α and IL-6 present in homogenates from the inferior midbrain 
(Mid)
(F) qPCR analysis of CD11b+ cells derived from brain homogenate for tnfa and il6
(G) Diameter of microglia residing in the frontal cortex (FC) or cerebellum (CB)
(H) ELISA analysis for TNF-α present in homogenates from the FC or CB
Tissues collected from mice at 12-13 weeks of age. N=3-4, (with 20-60 cells per region per 
animal analyzed) error bars represent the mean and standard error. *p ≤ 0.05; **p≤ 0.01; 
***p≤ 0.001; ****p≤ 0.0001. SPF=specific pathogen free, GF=germ-free, WT=wild-type, 
ASO=Thy1-α-synuclein genotype. See also Figure S2.
Sampson et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Postnatal microbial signals promote motor and gastrointestinal dysfunction
(A) Time course schema for animal treatment and testing
(B) Time to traverse beam apparatus
(C) Time to descend pole
(D) Time to remove nasal adhesive
(E) Hindlimb clasping reflex score
(F) Time course of fecal output in a novel environment over 15 minutes
(G) Total fecal pellets produced in 15 minutes
(H) Representative 3D reconstructions of Iba1-stained microglia residing in the 
caudoputamen (CP) of Abx-ASO or Ex-GF-ASO animals
(I) Diameter of microglia residing in the CP or substantia nigra (SN)
Animals were tested at 12-13 weeks of age. N=6-12, error bars represent the mean and 
standard error from 3 trials per animal, and compiled from 2 independent cohorts or 20-60 
microglia per region analyzed. #0.05<p<0.1; *p ≤ 0.05; **p≤ 0.01; ***p≤ 0.001; ****p≤ 
0.0001. SPF=specific pathogen free, GF=germ-free, Abx=antibiotic-treated, Ex-
GF=recolonized germ-free animals, WT=wild-type, ASO=Thy1-α-synuclein genotype. See 
also Figure S3.
Sampson et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. SCFAs promote αSyn-stimulated microglia activation and motor dysfunction
(A) Representative 3D reconstructions of Iba1-stained microglia residing in the 
caudoputamen (CP) of wild-type or ASO SCFA-treated animals
(B) Diameter of microglia residing in the CP or substantia nigra (SN)
(C) Time to traverse beam apparatus
(D) Time to descend pole
(E) Time to remove nasal adhesive
(F) Hindlimb clasping reflex score
(G) Time course of fecal output in a novel environment over 15 minutes
(H) Total fecal pellets produced in 15 minutes
Animals were tested at 12-13 weeks of age. N=6-12, error bars represent the mean and 
standard error from 3 trials per animal, and compiled from 2 independent cohorts or 20-60 
microglia per region analyzed. Data are plotted with controls from Figure 4 for clarity. *p ≤ 
0.05; **p≤ 0.01; ***p≤ 0.001; ****p≤ 0.0001. SPF=specific-pathogen free, GF=germ-free, 
SCFA=short-chain fatty acid-treated, WT=wild-type, ASO=Thy1-α-synuclein genotype. See 
also Figures S3-5.
Sampson et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Microbiome dysbiosis of PD patient samples after transplant into germ-free mice
(A) Unweighted UniFrac Principle Coordinate Analysis of microbial communities of human 
donors (large circles) and recipient mice (small circles). Each donor and recipient sample are 
matched by color.
(B) Unweighted and weighted UniFrac analysis of microbial communities in recipient 
animals based on donor identity
(C) Unweighted and weighted UniFrac analysis of microbial communities in recipient 
animals based on mouse genotype
(D) Comparison of unweighted and weighted UniFrac analysis of microbial communities in 
recipient animals
(E) Taxa-level analysis of individual genera altered between PD and healthy donors as a 
function of recipient mouse genotype. Left column indicates percentage with significant 
differences observed; right column indicates fold change between PD and healthy donors. 
Light colors indicate non-statistically significant differences
N=3-6, over 3 time points post-colonization. ***p≤ 0.001, 999 permutations. HC=germ-free 
mice colonized with fecal microbes from healthy controls, PD=germ-free mice colonized 
with fecal microbes from Parkinson's disease patients, WT=wild-type, ASO=Thy1-α-
synuclein genotype. See also Figure S6.
Sampson et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Microbiota from PD patients induce increased αSyn-mediated motor deficits
(A-F) Time to cross a beam, time to descend the pole, time to remove nasal adhesive, and 
hindlimb clasping reflex scores of mice humanized with microbiota from either PD patients 
or matched healthy controls
(G) Compilation of all independent cohorts in each motor task: beam traversal, pole descent, 
adhesive removal, and hindlimb clasping reflex score, grouped by health status of fecal 
donor
Animals were tested at 12-13 weeks of age. N=3-6, error bars represent the mean and 
standard error from 3 trials per animal. #0.05<p<0.1; *p ≤ 0.05; **p≤ 0.01; ***p≤ 0.001; 
****p≤ 0.0001. HC=germ-free mice colonized with fecal microbes from healthy controls, 
PD=germ-free mice colonized with fecal microbes from Parkinson's disease patients, 
WT=wild-type, ASO=Thy1-α-synuclein genotype. See also Figure S7 and Table S1.
Sampson et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
