 C A N C E R
Copyright © 2018
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
Intravenous delivery of oncolytic reovirus to brain
tumor patients immunologically primes for
subsequent checkpoint blockade
Adel Samson,1* Karen J. Scott,1† David Taggart,1† Emma J. West,1 Erica Wilson,1 Gerard J. Nuovo,2
Simon Thomson,3 Robert Corns,3 Ryan K. Mathew,1 Martin J. Fuller,1 Timothy J. Kottke,4
Jill M. Thompson,4 Elizabeth J. Ilett,1 Julia V. Cockle,1 Philip van Hille,3 Gnanamurthy Sivakumar,3
Euan S. Polson,1 Samantha J. Turnbull,1 Elizabeth S. Appleton,1 Gemma Migneco,1 Ailsa S. Rose,1
Matthew C. Coffey,5 Deborah A. Beirne,3 Fiona J. Collinson,6 Christy Ralph,1 D. Alan Anthoney,1
Christopher J. Twelves,1 Andrew J. Furness,7 Sergio A. Quezada,7 Heiko Wurdak,1
Fiona Errington-Mais,1 Hardev Pandha,8 Kevin J. Harrington,9 Peter J. Selby,1 Richard G. Vile,4
Stephen D. Griffin,1 Lucy F. Stead,1 Susan C. Short,1*‡ Alan A. Melcher9*‡
Immune checkpoint inhibitors, including those targeting programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1), are reshaping
cancer therapeutic strategies. Evidence suggests, however, that tumor response and patient survival are determined
by tumor programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression. We hypothesized that preconditioning of the tumor
immune microenvironment using targeted, virus-mediated interferon (IFN) stimulation would up-regulate tumor
PD-L1 protein expression and increase cytotoxic T cell infiltration, improving the efficacy of subsequent
checkpoint blockade. Oncolytic viruses (OVs) represent a promising form of cancer immunotherapy. For brain
tumors, almost all studies to date have used direct intralesional injection of OV, because of the largely untested
belief that intravenous administration will not deliver virus to this site. We show, in a window-of-opportunity
clinical study, that intravenous infusion of oncolytic human Orthoreovirus (referred to herein as reovirus) leads
to infection of tumor cells subsequently resected as part of standard clinical care, both in high-grade glioma
and in brain metastases, and increases cytotoxic T cell tumor infiltration relative to patients not treated with virus.
We further show that reovirus up-regulates IFN-regulated gene expression, as well as the PD-1/PD-L1 axis in tumors,
via an IFN-mediated mechanism. Finally, we show that addition of PD-1 blockade to reovirus enhances systemic
therapy in a preclinical glioma model. These results support the development of combined systemic immuno-
virotherapy strategies for the treatment of both primary and secondary tumors in the brain.
INTRODUCTION
Therapies targeting T cell inhibitory checkpoint signaling pathways,
including programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) monoclonal anti-
bodies, have produced unprecedented results in recent years in solid
malignancies (1–4). Unfortunately, only a minority of patients bene-
fit, with mounting evidence that tumor response and patient survival
are associated with tumor programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) ex-
pression (5) and preexisting tumor-infiltrating cytotoxic T cells (CD8+)
(6). Oncolytic virus (OV) immunotherapy uses wild-type or genet-
ically modified viruses selectively to kill tumor cells and promote
tumor-directed innate and adaptive immune responses (7, 8). The
first OV to receive U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval was
talimogene laherparepvec (T-VEC), after a phase 3 trial demonstrat-
ing superior outcomes in patients with advanced melanoma treated
with intratumoral T-VEC compared to subcutaneous granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) (9). Major challenges
remain, including the optimization of combination therapies and
routes of virus delivery. In particular, the combination of OV with
immune checkpoint blockade deserves attention, because a number
of OVs stimulate the secretion of interferons (IFNs) (10, 11), inter-
mediary cytokines in PD-1/PD-L1 expression. Furthermore, OV de-
livery to tumors can enhance T cell infiltration (11), hence priming
the tumor immune microenvironment for immune-mediated therapy
when combined with PD-1/PD-L1 axis blockade.
For patients with brain tumors, concerns that the blood-brain bar-
rier (BBB) may inhibit OV delivery have, thus far, limited studies using
intravenous administration, notwithstanding the infiltrative and/or
multifocal nature of such tumors. A number of OVs, including herpes
simplex virus (HSV)–1716 (12–14), HSV-G207 (15), adenovirus-dl1520
(ONYX-015)(16), and reovirus (17, 18), have been trialed in glioma
patients by surgical intratumoral or intracavity injection. These tech-
niques require careful patient selection and technically challenging
neurosurgery, limiting repeat administration. Yet, the need for effec-
tive therapies in this group of patients cannot be overemphasized; me-
dian survival for grade IV gliomas [glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)]
after tumor-directed surgery and chemoradiotherapy is 14.6 months (19),
and those with a single brain metastasis and controlled extracranial
1Leeds Institute of Cancer and Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Univer-
sity of Leeds, St James’s University Hospital, Beckett Street, Leeds, West Yorkshire
LS9 7TF, UK. 2Ohio State University, Comprehensive Cancer Centre, Columbus, OH
43210, USA. 3Leeds Teaching Hospitals National Health Service Trust, St James’s
University Hospital, Beckett Street, Leeds, West Yorkshire LS9 7TF, UK. 4Department
of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. 5Oncolytics Biotech, Calgary,
Alberta T2N 1X7, Canada. 6Leeds Institute of Clinical Trials Research, Faculty of Med-
icine and Health, University of Leeds, Leeds, West Yorkshire LS2 9JT, UK. 7University
College London, London WC1 6BT, UK. 8University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH, UK.
9Institute of Cancer Research, 123 Old Brompton Road, London SW7 3RP, UK.
*Corresponding author. Email: a.samson@leeds.ac.uk (A.S.); alan.melcher@icr.ac.uk
(A.A.M.); s.c.short@leeds.ac.uk (S.C.S.)
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡These authors contributed equally to this work.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Samson et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaam7577 (2018)
3 January 2018
1 of 12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 disease survive only 9 to 10 months, despite optimal treatment (20).
The clinical trial described herein tested whether intravenous reovirus
could infect recurrent high-grade gliomas (HGGs) and metastatic
brain tumors in patients and examined the ensuing immunological
sequelae, with particular focus upon the tumor microenvironment.
RESULTS
Intravenous-injected reovirus accesses brain tumors in mice
Preclinical experiments confirmed that intravenous reovirus selec-
tively accesses intracranially implanted malignant melanoma in im-
munocompetent mice, albeit to varying degrees (fig. S1). Reovirus
s3 capsid protein and reovirus RNA were strongly detected after in-
travenous infusion in mice 1 and 2, suggesting viral genome replication
and translation, but were only detectable in extremely low amounts in
mouse 3. Lower magnification pictures revealed high reovirus protein
expression clustered in small areas of the tumor, with lower expression
in a larger number of tumor cells (fig. S1, middle row). Reovirus was
not detected in normal peritumor murine brain tissue or phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) control.
Intravenous reovirus associates with multiple peripheral
white blood cell subsets in patients
On the basis of the murine experiment results, we recruited nine pa-
tients to a phase 1b window of opportunity trial (table S1), where each
patient was treated with a single, 1-hour intravenous infusion of 1 ×
1010 TCID50 (50% tissue culture infectious dose) reovirus ahead of
planned surgical resection of his or her brain tumor. Treatment was
well tolerated in all cases, and surgery was undertaken 3 to 17 days
after reovirus infusion. The most commonly observed adverse events
were lymphopenia (grades 1 to 2 in all nine patients, grades 3 to 4 in
six patients) and flu-like symptoms. Median overall survival from the
day of reovirus infusion to death was 469 days (range, 118 to 1079 days),
which is consistent with the expected survival for this group of patients
that have variable cancer diagnoses.
Extending upon findings from our previous study (21), where we
demonstrated intravenous reovirus carriage and protection from neu-
tralizing antibody by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs),
granulocytes, and platelets, we examined white blood cell (WBC) sub-
sets taken mid–reovirus infusion for reovirus RNA by reverse tran-
scription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) (fig. S2A). In addition
to granulocytes, we confirmed the association of reovirus RNA with
CD14+ [monocytes, which are pivotal for reovirus cell carriage in mice
(22)], CD19+ (B cells), and CD56+ [natural killer (NK)/NK T cells] frac-
tions, but viral RNA could not be detected on CD3+ (T cells) in this
subset of trial patients, for whom samples were available. Time course
analysis of IFN-a concentrations in patient sera taken before and after
reovirus revealed significantly increased IFN-a (P = 0.0153) 2 days after
infusion, in comparison to baseline (fig. S2B). This indicates reovirus
engagement of pathogen recognition receptors, potentially during car-
riage by peripheral WBCs, resulting in systemic IFN release. Plasma con-
centrations of other inflammatory cytokines were also increased 2 days
after reovirus infusion, relative to preinfusion concentrations (table S2).
Reovirus is detected in resected brain tumors from
trial patients
Examination of resected brain tumors by immunohistochemistry
(IHC) revealed the presence of reovirus s3 capsid protein in low
amounts in six of nine tumors (Fig. 1A, top, and table S3) and nine
of nine tumors by immunogold transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) (Fig. 1B). Resected brain tumor specimens from patients out-
side the trial served as controls. Secondary antibody–only controls for
background immunogold staining in trial patient tumors are shown
in fig. S3. The vast majority of reovirus protein was localized to tumor
cells, with only 0 to 6% localizing to endothelial cells (table S3 and
fig. S4). Examination of the specimens by in situ hybridization (ISH)
revealed eight of nine tumors to be positive for reovirus RNA (Fig. 1A,
bottom), with reovirus RNA being detected in a higher percentage of
cells than reovirus s3 protein in all cases (table S3), consistent with
the findings in mice (fig. S1). In comparison, control brain tumors
showed no reovirus RNA staining (Fig. 1A, bottom). The presence of
reovirus RNA in tumors was further examined by quantitative RT-
PCR (qRT-PCR) amplification of the S4 genome segment (encoding
s3), confirming four of the seven available tumor samples to be pos-
itive (Fig. 1C). Despite some variation in detection limits for different
techniques, together, these data convincingly support delivery of sys-
temically administered reovirus to patient brain tumors.
The distribution of reovirus RNA and protein within tumors was
further examined using immunofluorescence (IF) (Fig. 1D for trial
tumors and fig. S5A for control). Reovirus RNA was detected in a
large proportion of cells, whereas reovirus protein and protein-RNA
colocalization were only detected in discrete areas of tumor, suggest-
ing that reovirus protein translation and/or productive infection oc-
curred only in small areas of tumor, at least by the snapshot time point
of surgical resection.
The presence of reovirus RNA and protein in tumors
correlates with Ki67
The overall proportion of reovirus s3 protein- and RNA-positive cells
within individual tumors varied widely between the nine trial patients
(table S3). Because actively dividing cells preferentially support reo-
virus replication in comparison to quiescent cells (23), (24), we ana-
lyzed resected trial patient and control tumors for expression of the
proliferation marker Ki67 relative to reovirus protein/RNA (Fig. 2, A
and B, and table S4). The amounts of both reovirus s3 protein and
RNA correlated with tumors containing a high proportion of Ki67-
positive cells (P = 0.014 for s3 protein and P = 0.016 for reovirus RNA).
However, IF analysis of tumors revealed little coexpression of reovirus
RNA and Ki67 (Fig. 2C for trial tumors and fig. S5B for control), poten-
tially because Ki67 staining is restricted to particular phases of the cell
cycle (25). Further, IF examination of tumors confirmed the presence
of low amounts of reovirus s3 protein, as was detected by IHC and
TEM, and showed reovirus protein to frequently colocalize with tu-
bulin, a key component of reovirus replication factories (Fig. 2D for
trial tumors and fig. S5C for control) (26). Together, these results indi-
cate that tumors with a higher proliferation index are more susceptible
to reovirus infection but that reovirus protein translation and/or pro-
ductive infection overall occur at relatively low rates only. In keeping
with these observations and in contrast to our previous trial in resected
colorectal liver metastases (21), replication-competent reovirus could
not be retrieved from any of the nine trial tumors. Analysis of the num-
ber of days between reovirus administration and surgery revealed no
significant change in reovirus RNA and protein over time from reo-
virus infusion (fig. S6).
Reovirus treatment increases tumor leukocyte infiltration
We used RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to compare expression of cod-
ing and noncoding transcripts in whole tumor RNA from three GBM
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Samson et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaam7577 (2018)
3 January 2018
2 of 12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 trial patient samples (cases 1, 6, and 7) to that of three control GBM
tumors. Given that sample numbers were small, criteria for statisti-
cally significant differential gene expression between treatment and
control tumors were stringently set as described in Materials and
Methods (q < 0.1). Of the 2366 sequenced transcripts, 102 genes were
differentially expressed between reovirus-treated and untreated GBM
Fig. 1. Intravenous delivery of
reovirus to primary and second-
ary brain tumors. (A) Represen-
tative immunohistochemistry
(IHC) and in situ hybridization
(ISH) trial and control patient tu-
mor sections stained for reovirus
s3 protein (brown, top) and reo-
virus RNA (blue, bottom). The
“control breast met” is a metas-
tasis to the brain from a breast
cancer primary. Arrows point
to examples of positive cells/
positive areas of tissue. Scale
bars, 20 mm. HGG, high-grade
glioma. (B) Trial and control pa-
tient tumor immunogold-TEM
images for reovirus s3 protein
(arrows). CRC, colorectal cancer.
Scale bars, 200 nm. (C) Quanti-
tative reverse transcription poly-
merase chain reaction for reovirus
s3 gene, using whole tumor RNA.
Data indicate femtograms (fg)
reovirus RNA per microgram of
whole tumor RNA. Histogram
shows the mean of triplicate
samples, and error bars indicate
SD. (D) Representative immuno-
fluorescence (IF) of trial patient
tumor sections showing staining
for reovirus RNA (blue), reovirus
s3 protein (red), and their co-
expression (yellow). Scale bars,
80 mm.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Samson et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaam7577 (2018)
3 January 2018
3 of 12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 groups (table S5). Two of these transcripts were CCL3 (mean control
group expression = 4.2, mean treatment group expression = 34.3, q =
0.0188) and CCL4 (mean control group expression = 2.5, mean treat-
ment group expression = 19.2, q = 0.0188), which both function to
recruit CD8+ T cells and other leukocytes to sites of immunization
(27). CCL4 protein and a number of other chemokines were higher in
trial patient plasma 2 days after reovirus infusion, relative to preinfu-
sion concentrations (table S2). Furthermore, peripheral blood assess-
ment of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell populations revealed increased cell
surface expression of intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM) 2 days
after intravenous reovirus infusion, in comparison to baseline expres-
sion (Fig. 3A). ICAM expression is up-regulated by inflammatory cyto-
kines, enhancing leukocyte interaction with vascular endothelial cells
to enable migration to sites of inflammation (28). In keeping with these
observations, IHC analysis of trial patient and control tumors revealed
CD3+ T cells in and around blood vessel walls, in virus-treated but not
untreated controls, consistent with reovirus-induced chemotaxis of T
cells into infected brain tumors (Fig. 3B). Further IHC assessment for
tumor-infiltrating cytotoxic T cells (CD8+), which are critical for PD-1/
PD-L1–directed immunotherapy (29), revealed their presence in eight
of the nine trial patient tumors, four of which showed more stain-
ing (2+ or 3+), in comparison to the control cases, where CD8+ T cell
Fig. 2. Correlation of reovirus RNA/protein with proliferating tumor cells. (A) Trial patient IHC tumor sections stained for Ki67 (brown) with indicated percentages of
cells positive for Ki67 and reovirus s3 protein (from table S3), showing examples of tumors with high reovirus s3 staining (top) and no reovirus s3 protein staining (bottom).
Scale bars, 40 mm. GBM, glioblastoma multiforme. (B) Scatter plot and line of best fit, correlating the percentages of tumor cells positive by IHC for reovirus RNA or s3
protein and for Ki67. (C) Representative tumor sections derived from trial patient 9 (high Ki67; top), trial patient 1 (intermediate Ki67; middle), and trial patient 4 (low Ki67;
bottom), showing IF staining for reovirus RNA (blue), Ki67 (red), or their coexpression (yellow, arrows). Scale bars, 40 mm. (D) Representative trial patient tumor IF staining
for tubulin (fluorescent red), reovirus s3 protein (fluorescent green), and their coexpression (yellow). Nuclear counterstaining is blue. Scale bars, 40 mm (top and bottom)
and 80 mm (middle).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Samson et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaam7577 (2018)
3 January 2018
4 of 12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 infiltration was detected only in three of the six tumors, all in low
amounts (Fig. 3C and table S4).
We also examined tumors for the presence of CD68+ microglia/
infiltrating macrophages and found these to be present in higher
numbers in tumors from reovirus-treated patients in comparison to
controls (fig. S7 and table S4). Very few tumor-infiltrating CD56+
NK cells and CD19+ B cells were found in any tumor. The daily dose
of dexamethasone taken by patients within and outside the trial did
not appear to correlate with tumor immune cell infiltration in the
examined surgical specimens (table S4).
Genes associated with programmed cell death are more
highly expressed in GBM tumors from reovirus-treated
patients than in matched controls
Functional analysis of the differentially expressed genes found by RNA-
seq indicated significant enrichment in members of several biological
processes, including those governing programmed cell death (P =
0.0003), regulation of viral transcription (P = 0.0000502), and cytokine
activity (P = 0.0129) (table S6). Consistent with these RNA expression
data and preclinical models (30), IHC analysis of trial HGG samples
revealed a higher proportion of tumor cells to be positive for cleaved
caspase 3, albeit in a small number of patients, than in controls, suggest-
ing the specific induction of apoptosis within tumors after intravenous
reovirus infusion (Fig. 4A and table S4). A similar pattern was observed
for the three trial brain metastases in comparison to controls (fig. S8A
and table S4).
PD-L1 expression is higher in tumors resected from reovirus-
treated patients than in controls
We next sought to determine whether reovirus treatment results in
the up-regulation of IFN-regulated genes (IRGs). Of the 23,366 genes
expressed in our samples, 5031 are IRGs (31), in contrast to 48 of the
102 genes that were differentially expressed between trial and control
samples (c2 test, P = 1.28 × 10−8).
IFN transcripts and PD-1 messenger RNA (mRNA) were not de-
tected in our analysis, perhaps due to a transient rise and fall in ex-
pression before the time point of surgical resection. The expression
of PD-L1 was, on average, about twice as high in reovirus-treated pa-
tient GBM samples than in controls, but the difference was not statis-
tically significant (1.310 in trial samples versus 0.668 in controls).
However, protein analysis by IHC revealed consistent PD-L1 expres-
sion in trial HGGs but not in controls (Fig. 4B and table S4), and a
similar pattern was observed for brain metastases (fig. S8B and table S4).
Of the two melanoma metastases in the trial, case 9 (which stained
most intensely for Ki67 and reovirus RNA) also displayed the strongest
PD-L1 expression. Case 5, in contrast, displayed relatively low expression
Fig. 3. Tumor immune cell infiltration. (A) Fold change in cell-surface intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM) expression on CD4 and CD8 T cells from trial patients’
peripheral blood. (B) Trial and control patient IHC tumor sections stained for CD3 (brown). Scale bars, 20 mm. “V” indicates blood vessel. (C) Trial and control patient IHC
tumor sections stained for CD8 (brown). Scale bars, 20 mm.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Samson et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaam7577 (2018)
3 January 2018
5 of 12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 of Ki67, reovirus RNA, and PD-L1 (fig. S8C). We sought to confirm
these clinical findings in vitro; direct reovirus treatment of the estab-
lished glioma cell line U87, primary human GBM cells [GBM1 and
GBM4 (32)], and cell lines derived from metastatic breast cancer, co-
lon cancer, and melanoma (MCF-7, SW620, and Mel624) significantly
increased PD-L1 expression in U87 (P = 0.0021), GBM4 (P = 0.0275),
MCF-7 (P = 0.0002), and SW620 cells (P = 0.0062), with no signifi-
cant differences in GBM1 and Mel624 cells (fig. S9A).
We reasoned that reovirus treatment would also promote check-
point protein expression within tumor-infiltrating immune cell pop-
ulations. In vitro reovirus treatment of patient-derived mixed HGG
cell cultures from control patients outside the trial induced PD-L1
Fig. 4. Expression of cleaved caspase 3, PD-L1, and PD-1 in HGGs after reovirus treatment. (A) Representative trial and control patient HGG sections stained for
cleaved caspase 3 (brown) by IHC. Scale bars, 60 mm. (B) Representative trial and control patient HGG sections stained by IHC for programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1)
(brown). Scale bars, 30 mm. (C) Representative (one of three samples tested) flow cytometry for PD-L1 on GBM tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) (bottom) or peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) (top) derived from the same patient, after stimulation for 48 hours using 1 plaque-forming unit per cell reovirus. PBS, phosphate-buffered
saline; Ab, antibody. (D) Representative trial and control patient HGG sections stained by IHC for programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) (brown). Scale bars, 30 mm. (E) Rep-
resentative flow cytometry for PD-L1 on GBM1 cells after stimulation with combinations of purified interferon (IFN)–a/IFN-b/IFN-g for 24 hours, each at 100 pg/ml. (F) Repre-
sentative flow cytometry for PD-L1 on GBM1 cells after stimulation with ex vivo HGG-derived conditioned medium (CM) or reovirus-conditioned medium (RCM) for 24 hours
(at a concentration of 1:4 of CM to native medium). (G) Representative flow cytometry for PD-L1 on GBM1 cells after stimulation using PBMC-derived CM or RCM for 24 hours
(at a concentration of 1:4 of CM to native medium) with blockade of IFN-a+b/g/a+b+g or equivalent isotype controls.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Samson et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaam7577 (2018)
3 January 2018
6 of 12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 up-regulation within tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), includ-
ing helper/cytotoxic T cells, B cells, and NK cells (Fig. 4C, bottom). This
was also observed within PBMCs derived from the same patients
(Fig. 4C, top) and in healthy donor PBMCs (fig. S9B). With regards
to PD-1, higher protein expression was seen in both reovirus-treated
HGGs and metastatic tumors in comparison to controls (Fig. 4D
and table S4), as well as in healthy donor PBMC subsets after in vitro
reovirus treatment (fig. S9C).
Reovirus induces PD-L1 expression via an
IFN-based mechanism
We used GBM1 cells as an in vitro model of HGG tumor cells to con-
firm an IFN-dependent mechanism for reovirus-induced stimulation
of PD-L1 expression. GBM1 cells were treated using type I IFNs (IFN-a
and IFN-b) and type II IFN (IFN-g) in isolation or in combination.
Whereas type I or type II IFN treatments each induced 50 to 70%
up-regulation of PD-L1, the combination of type I and type II IFNs
induced a 250% increase in cell surface PD-L1 expression. By con-
trast, combining IFN-a and IFN-b, which bind the same type I IFN
receptor, induced no further increase in PD-L1 expression over IFN-a
alone (Fig. 4E and fig. S10A). Reovirus treatment of fresh patient-derived
HGG single-cell suspensions (including all cell types contributing to
the tumor immune microenvironment) generated reovirus-conditioned
medium (RCM), which contained high concentrations of type I and
II IFNs (fig. S10B). RCM was filtered to remove reovirus, and condi-
tioned medium (CM) controls were also filtered to maintain exper-
imental consistency. Soluble factors within HGG-RCM significantly
up-regulated GBM1 PD-L1 expression in comparison to CM (P =
0.0481) (Fig. 4F and fig. S10C). To establish the relative contributions
of type I and type II reovirus-induced IFNs in the up-regulation of
PD-L1, we used PBMC-RCM (containing IFN-a, IFN-b, and IFN-g)
to treat GBM1 cells with concurrent blockade of IFN receptors and
soluble IFNs. Blockade of type I or II IFNs partially reduced PBMC-
RCM–induced PD-L1 expression on GBM1 cells, whereas blockade
of both type I and II IFNs greatly diminished PD-L1 expression, con-
firming that type I and II IFNs cooperate to induce PD-L1 in patient-
derived glioma cells (Fig. 4G and fig. S10D).
Sequential treatment using intravenous reovirus followed
by PD-1/PD-L1 axis blockade improves survival in mice
with brain tumors
On the basis of the above data showing immune cell infiltration and
up-regulation of the PD-1/PD-L1 axis by systemic reovirus in brain
tumor patients, we sought to test survival using sequential OV check-
point inhibitor blockade in an immunocompetent orthotopic animal
model of glioma. Consistent with our trial data, C57/BL6 mice im-
planted intracranially with GL261 glioma cells exhibited improved
survival using intravenous GM-CSF/reovirus [our optimal systemic
reovirus regime (22)] over a 2-week period, followed by a 1-week period
of PD-1 antibody treatment, compared to treatment with either virother-
apy or checkpoint blockade alone (Fig. 5A). Comparison of hematoxylin
and eosin–stained sections from brain tumors taken postmortem from
GM-CSF/reovirus-treated mice revealed prominent perivascular and in-
tratumoral inflammatory infiltrate, containing lymphocytes (Fig. 5B).
Further, flow cytometry analysis of brain tumor single-cell suspensions
revealed significantly higher active (IFN-g+) helper (CD3+CD4+) and cy-
totoxic (CD3+CD8+) T cells within GM-CSF/reovirus-treated tumors in
comparison to PBS-treated tumors (P = 0.0089 and P = 0.0125, respec-
tively, for helper and cytotoxic T cells; Fig. 5C).
DISCUSSION
Our data provide evidence of an OV, reovirus, gaining access to brain
tumors after intravenous administration to patients. Reovirus RNA
was widely detected in tumor cells of differing histological types. The
intravenous route, therefore, holds promise as an efficient means of
delivering OV to brain tumors, enabling regular scheduled treatments
to be administered, while avoiding the need for neurosurgical methods
of access.
The tight window of opportunity between clinical presentation
and planned brain surgery limited the number of patients able to par-
ticipate in this study. Nonetheless, tumors from all nine treated pa-
tients, across a range of histological tumor types, showed evidence of
reovirus infection. An ongoing clinical trial is assessing the safety and
efficacy of intravenous reovirus in combination with postoperative chemo-
radiotherapy for patients with GBM (ReoGlio, ISRCTN70044565).
Other OVs, including parvovirus H-1, are also being tested by intra-
venous infusion in patients with brain tumors (33).
Previous studies have shown that apoptosis in malignant cells is
induced after reovirus receptor binding and disassembly to form in-
termediate subviral particles but that viral genome transcription and
translation are not required (34). Hence, the lack of evidence for ma-
jor reovirus productive infection in our study does not necessarily mean
the absence of direct viral cytotoxicity. Our RNA-seq analysis and IHC
for cleaved caspase 3 do indicate the induction of apoptosis. Moreover,
from an immunotherapy perspective, intracellular reovirus RNA is suf-
ficient to engage pathogen recognition receptors, inducing IFN expres-
sion. IFNs are critical mediators of immune-mediated anticancer effects,
for example, by activating NK cell, T cell, and dendritic cell populations
and enhancing antigen presentation (35). Future studies should, there-
fore, look to optimize reovirus treatment schedules to further increase
the delivery of reovirus to tumor cells, given the absence of major reo-
virus productive infection.
The BBB is known to be disrupted in brain tumors, as indicated by
the presence of vasogenic edema (36). Nonetheless, many systemic anti-
cancer agents, including monoclonal antibodies, are thought to be ex-
cluded by the BBB due to their higher molecular mass (37, 38). The
mechanisms by which reovirus enters brain tumors in comparison to
tumors outside of the brain and its relation to the integrity of the BBB
remain unclear, although the association of reovirus with multiple
peripheral WBC subsets supports the idea that these immune cells
may play a role in the delivery of virus to tumor. This is additionally
supported by our observations of enhanced immune cell tumor infil-
tration after reovirus and also by the clinically observed lymphopenia
in all nine treated patients, a phenomenon that could be attributed at
least in part to the accumulation of lymphocytes at the site of infection
in tumor, consistent with previous reports of lymphopenia in acute vi-
ral infections (39). We found up-regulation of CCL3 and CCL4 mRNA
in brain tumors from reovirus-treated patients. These chemokines are
up-regulated in other acute viral encephalitis infections, including
Semliki Forest virus and West Nile virus (40), whereas blockade of
CCR5, whose ligands include CCL3 and CCL4 (41), decreases leuko-
cyte migration into murine brains after viral infection (40). Preexisting
CD3+ and CD8+ TILs have a positive effect on survival in solid tumors,
and infiltrating cytotoxic T cells are critical for PD-1/PD-L1–directed
immunotherapy (29, 42). In our trial, a proportion of brain tumors
contained high numbers of cytotoxic T cells after reovirus treatment,
a finding consistent with our murine data showing increased T cell
infiltration into tumors after systemic reovirus treatment. Our data
indicate lower baseline CD68 staining than in previous reports (43),
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Samson et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaam7577 (2018)
3 January 2018
7 of 12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 potentially due to differences in staining
methods. The functional relevance of in-
creased CD68 cells in brain tumors after
intravenous reovirus infusion and their
origin remain unclear, warranting further
investigation.
Tumors from reovirus-treated patients
exhibited more intense staining for both
PD-1 and PD-L1, immune checkpoint
proteins that are induced by IFNs. We fur-
ther found evidence for both peripheral and tumor induction of IFNs,
key cytokines in reovirus-mediated activation of immune cell popula-
tions (44). It has previously been shown that effector T cells up-regulate
PD-1 during the acute phase of viral infections while maintaining ac-
tivity and that this protective response does not correspond to adverse
outcomes (45, 46). One of the determinants of efficacy in PD-1 check-
point blockade is tumor expression of PD-L1 (47). In GBM, PD-L1
expression is relatively weak in most of the tumors (48). We found
PD-L1 to be strongly up-regulated by type I IFNs in combination with
IFN-g, cytokines that were secreted after ex vivo reovirus treatment of
HGG cells. Hence, reovirus therapy may be used to improve clinical
outcomes in patients with brain tumors by activating WBCs, enhanc-
ing T cell infiltration into tumors, and up-regulating PD-L1 there, in
preparation for subsequent anti–PD-1 therapy. In support of our find-
ings, Ribas et al. has reported findings from the phase 1b portion of the
MASTERKEY-265 study in extracranial advanced melanoma, where
patients were treated using intratumoral injections of T-VEC (HSV
type I encoding GM-CSF), with concomitant anti–PD-1 therapy be-
ginning 6 weeks after the start of OV therapy (49). Patients who re-
sponded to treatment in this study had increased CD8+ T cells and
elevated PD-L1 protein expression on several cell subsets in tumors
after OV therapy.
The combination of intravenous OV with anti–PD-1 therapy for the
treatment of brain tumors is the focus of investigations in our laboratory.
In support of our findings, preclinical research using Maraba virus in
murine models of triple-negative breast cancer has also shown OV-
induced tumor inflammation, immune infiltration, and up-regulation
of PD-L1, leading to enhanced survival when Maraba virus is com-
bined with PD-1 checkpoint blockade (50). Rational drug combinations
that include anti–PD-1 therapy for the treatment of brain tumors are
all the more pertinent in light of the failure of single-agent nivolumab
to deliver a survival advantage in patients with GBM (NCT02017717)
(51). The challenges of local delivery of OVs into brain tumors are
substantial, and direct intratumoral injection is inevitably suboptimal
for multifocal/infiltrative disease. Systemic virus-based immuno-
therapy provides a pragmatic alternative and appears capable of altering
the immune microenvironment within brain tumors, which in turn,
could potentially improve cancer therapy when combined with im-
mune checkpoint blockade.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
European Union Drug Regulating Authorities Clinical Trials (EudraCT)
number 2011-005635-10. This was an open-label, nonrandomized,
single-center study, which recruited nine adult patients between July 2013
and November 2014 at The Leeds Teaching Hospitals National Health
Service Trust (LTHT), Leeds, United Kingdom. Patients were planned
Fig. 5. Combination intravenous reovirus and
checkpoint inhibition in an orthotopic syn-
geneic brain tumor model. C57/BL6 reovirus-
vaccinated mice (22) were injected with GL261
cells intracranially on day 1 and treated using com-
binations of granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) plus intravenous
reovirus and/or anti–PD-1 antibody. (A) Kaplan-
Meier survival plot, with Mantel-Cox compari-
son of survival curves: control versus anti–PD-1
(P = 0.4617), control versus GM-CSF/reovirus (P =
0.0012), control versus GM-CSF/reovirus + anti–
PD-1 (P < 0.0001), GM-CSF/reovirus versus GM-CSF/
reovirus + anti–PD-1 (P < 0.0001), and anti–PD-1
versus GM-CSF/reovirus + anti–PD-1 (P < 0.0001).
(B) Representative brain tumor hematoxylin and
eosin–stained sections from PBS-treated and GM-
CSF/reovirus-treated mice. Black arrows mark
vascular endothelial cells; white arrows mark lym-
phocytes. Scale bars, 30 mm. (C) Flow cytometry
quantification of CD3+ CD4+ IFN-g+ or CD3+ CD8+
IFN-g+ TILs from PBS-treated or GM-CSF/reovirus-
treated mice. Graph shows the mean ± SD of four
samples.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Samson et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaam7577 (2018)
3 January 2018
8 of 12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 for debulking neurosurgery either for recurrent HGG or for metastatic
tumor to the brain, as part of routine clinical care. A single 1-hour
intravenous infusion of 1 × 1010 TCID50 reovirus was administered
to patients ahead of surgery. The primary end point of the study
was the presence of reovirus in the resected tumor sample. Tumors
were initially analyzed for the presence of reovirus in batches of three.
The trial achieved its primary end point and was closed after the re-
cruitment of six patients with recurrent HGG and three with meta-
static tumors to the brain, because reovirus was detected in all nine
tumors. Inclusion criteria included adequate hematological and or-
gan function and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance
status of ≤1. All patients gave written informed consent according to
good clinical practice guidelines. Protocol, patient information sheet,
and consent forms were approved by the United Kingdom Medicines
and Healthcare products Regulatory Authority, regional ethics review
committee, and institutional review board at St James’s University Hos-
pital. The trial management committee met on a monthly basis to
discuss study progress, including patient safety and adverse events.
Clinical patient safety assessments were performed within 1 week of
start of treatment, on the day of reovirus infusion (day one), day three,
the day of surgery, and 1 month after surgery. Imaging was performed
as for standard clinical care only. Control brain tumors were obtained
from patients undergoing routine planned surgery at LTHT. Written
informed consent was obtained in accordance with local institution-
al ethics review and approval. After surgery, all brain tumors were
transported in L-glutamine–containing RPMI 1640 medium (Sigma) sup-
plemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) (Biosera) and 1% (v/v)
antibiotic antimycotic solution (Sigma).
Reovirus
Clinical grade reovirus Dearing type 3 (REOLYSIN) was provided by
Oncolytics Biotech Inc.
Animal experiments
In vivo animal models were approved by the University of Leeds Lo-
cal Ethics Review Committee or the Mayo Foundation Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee. For fig. S1, 6- to 10-week-old C57/
BL6 mice (the Jackson Laboratories) were injected intracranially with
1 × 105 B16 melanoma cells and 8 days later treated with a single in-
jection of 1 × 108 plaque-forming units (PFU) intravenous reovirus
or PBS. Mice were sacrificed 3 days after treatment. For Fig. 5, eight
mice in each group were used; 6- to 8-week-old C57/BL6 reovirus-
vaccinated mice (22) were injected intracranially with GL261 cells
on day one. On day five, mice were treated using daily intravenous
injections of 300-ng GM-CSF (PeproTech) and intravenous reovirus
at 5 × 107 PFU or PBS as a control for 5 days. Treatments were re-
peated for a further five consecutive days starting on day 12. On days
19, 21, and 23, mice were treated with anti–PD-1 antibody (clone
RMP1-14; Bio X Cell) or immunoglobulin G (IgG) isotype control
(clone MPC11; Bio X Cell) by intraperitoneal injections. Mice were
regularly monitored for any signs of deterioration or weight loss,
upon which animals were sacrificed, and the duration of survival was
recorded.
IHC, ISH, and IF
These techniques were performed on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tissue sampled randomly from one to two areas of resected patient or
animal tumor. Tissue for IHC was processed using an automated Bond
Max system (Leica Biosystems) as described (52). Reovirus s3 and
cleaved caspase 3 antibodies were diluted 1:1000. IHC detection of
PD-1, PD-L1, CD3, CD8, CD68, and Ki67 used an automated Bond
Max system (Leica Biosystems) according to the manufacturer’s pro-
tocol. Primary antibodies (all Abcam) were diluted either 1:500 (PD1
and PD-L1) or 1:200 (CD3, CD31, CD8, CD68, and Ki67). The per-
centage of positive cells was determined using the InForm System
(PerkinElmer). ISH for reovirus RNA and IF for reovirus s3 protein,
reovirus RNA, and tubulin were performed as previously described
(21, 52). IF nuclear counterstaining was with 4′,6-diamidino-2-
phenylindole diluted 1:10,000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). One to
two slides per tumor were examined for quantification of reovirus s3
protein and reovirus RNA, whereas two to three slides per tumor were
examined for quantification of Ki67, PD-1, PD-L1, and CD markers.
Peripheral reovirus carriage RT-PCR
Peripheral blood samples taken from study patients mid–reovirus
infusion were collected, fractionated for PBMCs and granulocytes,
and then RNA-extracted as previously described (21). PBMC sub-
sets were isolated by MACS Microbead selection (Miltenyi Biotec)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. PCR conditions and
primers were also previously described (53). Samples were run on
2% agarose gels alongside a 100-bp (base pair) DNA ladder (New
England BioLabs).
Tumor reovirus qRT-PCR
Tumor tissue was disaggregated using the Cell Dissociation Sieve
and Tissue Grinder Kit (Sigma). One microgram of TRIzol (Sigma)–
extracted RNA was reverse-transcribed (Bioline SensiFAST cDNA
Synthesis Kit) according to the manufacturer’s instructions in 20-ml
reactions. Two microliter of resultant reaction containing cDNA was
subjected to standard quantitative polymerase chain reaction using
SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Life Technologies) and primers spe-
cific to the reovirus s3 gene to amplify a 61-bp product (forward,
5′-GATGCGCCAATGTCTAATCA-3′ and reverse, 5′-CTCCTCG-
CAATACAACTCGT-3′; both Sigma). QuantiTect primers (Qiagen)
specific to 18S rRNA served as cellular RNA controls.
RNA sequencing
Three control GBM tumors were compared to three GBM tumors
from reovirus-treated trial patients. RNA-seq libraries were prepared
using the TruSeq Stranded Total RNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina),
and 150-bp paired end reads were sequenced on a lane of the Illumina
HiSeq3000. Reads were quality-processed and aligned as described pre-
viously (54). Expression analysis was performed using the Cuffdiff
suite of programs (55). Briefly, expression was quantified using cuffquant
with multiread correction and abundant noninformative transcripts
(ribosomal and mitochondrial RNAs) masked. Differential expression
analysis between the control (patients without reovirus) and treated
(patients receiving reovirus) groups was then performed using Cuffdiff
with a false discovery rate of 0.1. Gene set analysis of the resulting sig-
nificantly differentially expressed genes was performed using hyper-
geometric testing via WebGestalt (56), with the set of genes expressed
in any sample as the reference set.
Processing of HGG single-cell suspensions and PBMCs
Written informed consent was obtained in accordance with local in-
stitutional ethics review and approval. HGG tumor samples were
processed using the Brain Tumor Dissociation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec),
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, tumor tissue
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Samson et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaam7577 (2018)
3 January 2018
9 of 12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 was homogenized and digested in gentleMACS C tubes using a dis-
sociator and buffers and enzymes supplied by the manufacturer and
then incubated at 37°C. Single-cell suspensions were passed through
a 70-mm filter. Where appropriate, samples were demyelinated using
Myelin Removal Beads II (Miltenyi Biotec). Paired PBMC samples
were derived from the same patients by step density centrifugation
over Lymphoprep (Axis-Shield).
Culture of GBM1, GBM4, MCF-7, U87, SW620, and Mel624
cell lines
All cells were cultured at 37°C with 5% CO2. The human breast adeno-
carcinoma cell line (MCF-7), human colorectal cancer cell line (SW620),
human glioblastoma cell line (U87), and the human melanoma cell line
(Mel624) were maintained in L-glutamine–containing Dulbecco’s mod-
ified Eagle’s medium (Sigma) supplemented with 10% (v/v) FCS. GBM1
and GBM4 cells were adherently propagated on plasticware coated with
poly-L-ornithine (5 mg/ml; Sigma) and laminin (5 mg/ml; Invitrogen)
and cultured in Neurobasal medium supplemented with 0.5× B27,
0.5× N2 (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific), recombinant human basic
fibroblast growth factor (40 ng/ml; Gibco), and epidermal growth
factor (40 ng/ml; R&D Systems).
Generation of CM and RCM from fresh patient HGG samples
and PBMCs
HGG single-cell suspensions or PBMCs were cultured for 24 hours
at 2 × 106/ml alone (CM), with 50 PFU per cell reovirus (HGG-RCM)
or with 1 PFU per cell reovirus (PBMC-RCM) in L-glutamine–containing
RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% (v/v) FCS. Cell-free supernatants
were collected, and reovirus was removed by filtration through Millipore
OptiScale 25 filters. CM and RCM were stored at −80°C until required.
Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry was performed on an LSRII flow cytometer, and data
were analyzed using FACSDiva (both Becton Dickinson) or FlowJo
(TreeStar). Relative fluorescence shift (RFS) was calculated using
the formula RFS ¼ ðMFI of treatment sample � isotypeÞ
ðMFI of control sample � isotypeÞ where MFI is median
fluorescence intensity. To create overlay plots in FlowJo, we normal-
ized the y axis to mode.
Direct reovirus stimulation of patient HGG and PBMC
HGG single-cell suspensions and PBMCs were plated separately at a
density of 2 × 106/ml and cultured with or without reovirus at 1 PFU
per cell for 48 hours in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FCS.
Samples were harvested and washed with isotonic buffer (PBS/0.05%
bovine serum albumin) before staining with the following antibodies:
CD45-FITC (fluorescein isothiocyanate) (H130), CD8-BV421 (RPA-T8),
CD20-BUV395 (2H7), NKp46-APC (9E2/Nkp46), and PD1-PE (MIH4)
from BD Biosciences; CD3PerCP (BW264/56) and CD4-PEvio770
(M-T466) from Miltenyi Biotec; CD69-BV421 FN50 and PDL1-PE
(29E.2A3) from BioLegend; mouse CD3-FITC, CD4-Percp, and CD8-
PE from eBioscience; and mouse intracellular IFN-g-PE-Cy7 from
BioLegend.
Direct reovirus stimulation of primary human cells and
cell lines
GBM1, GBM4, MCF-7, U87, SW620, and Mel624 cells were cultured
overnight at 1 × 105 cells per well. Reovirus (0, 1, or 10 PFU per cell)
was then added for 24 hours before cells were harvested and stained
with anti-human PD-L1–PE (clone MIH1; eBioscience) as above.
Treatment of GBM1 using exogenous, purified IFNs
GBM1 cells were cultured overnight at 1 × 105 cells per well. Cells were
then treated with 100 pg of recombinant human IFN-a (R&D Systems),
IFN-b (Pestka Biomedical Laboratories (PBL) InterferonSource), or
IFN-g (PeproTech) alone or in combination. After 24 hours, cells were
harvested and stained with anti–PD-L1–PE as above.
Treatment of GBM1 using HGG-derived CM/RCM
GBM1 cells were cultured as above and then treated with 500 ml of a
1:16 dilution of CM or RCM for 24 hours before being stained for
PD-L1 expression as above.
Treatment of GBM1 cells using PBMC-derived CM/RCM and
IFN blockade
GBM1 cells were cultured at 5 × 104 cells per well. After 24 hours,
thawed CM and RCM were incubated for 1 hour at 4°C with 0.75%
anti-human IFN-a, IFN-b, or IFN-g blocking antibody (alone or in
combination; all from PBL) or isotype control [rabbit serum (IFN-g)
or sheep serum (IFN-a and IFN-b) alone or in combination; both
Sigma]. Simultaneously, when GBM1 cells were to be treated with
anti-human IFN-a/b blocking antibodies, 1.25% anti-human IFN-
a/b receptor chain 2 antibody (PBL) or IgG2a isotype control (R&D
Systems) was added to cells for 1 hour at 37°C. Prepared CM/RCM
(including block/isotype) was then added for 4 hours at 37°C before
medium was removed and replaced with full growth medium. After
24 hours, cells were harvested and stained for PD-L1 expression as
described above.
Determination of cytokine and chemokine concentrations
BioRad Bio-Plex Pro Cytokine and Chemokine Assays (21-plex, human
group I and 27-plex, human group II) were used to determine con-
centrations of soluble mediators in plasma, as per the manufacturer’s
instructions.
IFN-a (Mabtech) and IFN-g (BD Biosciences) were detected by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using matched antibody
pairs, whereas IFN-b was detected using the VeriKine Human IFN-b
ELISA Kit (PBL) as previously described (30).
IFN-a was detected using a VeriKine Human IFN-a Multi Sub-
type Serum ELISA Kit, as per the manufacturer’s instructions.
Transmission electron microscopy
This method was performed as previously described (21).
Statistical analysis
All statistical analysis was conducted using GraphPad Prism software.
Asterisks in Fig. 5C and figs. S2B, S8, and S9 represent P < 0.05 using a
t test. The statistical correlation of reovirus RNA/protein with Ki67
(Fig. 2B) and with time between infusion and surgery (fig. S6) was
determined by linear regression.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/10/422/eaam7577/DC1
Fig. S1. Selective intravenous delivery of reovirus to intracranial melanoma in
immunocompetent mice.
Fig. S2. Reovirus carriage by WBC subsets and changes in serum IFN-a.
Fig. S3. Secondary antibody–only control immunogold-TEM images from trial patient brain
tumors.
Fig. S4. Reovirus protein expression in endothelial cells.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Samson et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaam7577 (2018)
3 January 2018
10 of 12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. S5. Negative controls for reovirus coexpression.
Fig. S6. Correlation of reovirus RNA/protein with time between infusion and surgery.
Fig. S7. CD68 tumor-infiltrating cells.
Fig. S8. Expression of cleaved caspase 3 and PD-L1 in brain tumor metastases after reovirus
stimulation.
Fig. S9. In vitro expression of PD-L1 and PD-1 in human-derived cell lines and healthy donor
PBMCs after reovirus stimulation.
Fig. S10. In vitro expression of PD-L1 on GBM1 cells after purified IFN or CM stimulation.
Table S1. Participant baseline clinical characteristics, grade 3 or 4 adverse events, and survival
after reovirus infusion.
Table S2. Change in plasma inflammatory cytokines and chemokines after intravenous
reovirus infusion.
Table S3. Presence of reovirus protein and RNA in resected brain tumors.
Table S4. Ki67, cleaved caspase 3, immune cell infiltration, and PD-1/PD-L1 expression in
resected trial and control brain tumors.
Table S5. RNA-seq expression data (provided as an Excel file).
Table S6. Enriched biological processes within genes differentially expressed between control
and trial GBM tumors.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. C. Robert, G. V. Long, B. Brady, C. Dutriaux, M. Maio, L. Mortier, J. C. Hassel, P. Rutkowski,
C. McNeil, E. Kalinka-Warzocha, K. J. Savage, M. M. Hernberg, C. Lebbé, J. Charles,
C. Mihalcioiu, V. Chiarion-Sileni, C. Mauch, F. Cognetti, A. Arance, H. Schmidt,
D. Schadendorf, H. Gogas, L. Lundgren-Eriksson, C. Horak, B. Sharkey, I. M. Waxman,
V. Atkinson, P. A. Ascierto, Nivolumab in previously untreated melanoma without BRAF
mutation. N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 320–330 (2014).
2. F. S. Hodi, S. J. O’Day, D. F. McDermott, R. W. Weber, J. A. Sosman, J. B. Haanen,
R. Gonzalez, C. Robert, D. Schadendorf, J. C. Hassel, W. Akerley, A. J. M. van den Eertwegh,
J. Lutzky, P. Lorigan, J. M. Vaubel, G. P. Linette, D. Hogg, C. H. Ottensmeier, C. Lebbé,
C. Peschel, I. Quirt, J. I. Clark, J. D. Wolchok, J. S. Weber, J. Tian, M. J. Yellin, G. M. Nichol,
A. Hoos, W. J. Urba, Improved survival with ipilimumab in patients with metastatic
melanoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 363, 711–723 (2010).
3. J. Brahmer, K. L. Reckamp, P. Baas, L. Crinò, W. E. E. Eberhardt, E. Poddubskaya, S. Antonia,
A. Pluzanski, E. E. Vokes, E. Holgado, D. Waterhouse, N. Ready, J. Gainor, O. Arén Frontera,
L. Havel, M. Steins, M. C. Garassino, J. G. Aerts, M. Domine, L. Paz-Ares, M. Reck,
C. Baudelet, C. T. Harbison, B. Lestini, D. R. Spigel, Nivolumab versus docetaxel in
advanced squamous-cell non–small-cell lung cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 373, 123–135
(2015).
4. R. J. Motzer, B. Escudier, D. F. McDermott, S. George, H. J. Hammers, S. Srinivas,
S. S. Tykodi, J. A. Sosman, G. Procopio, E. R. Plimack, D. Castellano, T. K. Choueiri,
H. Gurney, F. Donskov, P. Bono, J. Wagstaff, T. C. Gauler, T. Ueda, Y. Tomita, F. A. Schutz,
C. Kollmannsberger, J. Larkin, A. Ravaud, J. S. Simon, L.-A. Xu, I. M. Waxman,
P. Sharma; CheckMate 025 Investigators, Nivolumab versus everolimus in advanced
renal-cell carcinoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 373, 1803–1813 (2015).
5. H. Borghaei, L. Paz-Ares, L. Horn, D. R. Spigel, M. Steins, N. E. Ready, L. Q. Chow,
E. E. Vokes, E. Felip, E. Holgado, F. Barlesi, M. Kohlhäufl, O. Arrieta, M. A. Burgio, J. Fayette,
H. Lena, E. Poddubskaya, D. E. Gerber, S. N. Gettinger, C. M. Rudin, N. Rizvi, L. Crinò,
G. R. Blumenschein Jr., S. J. Antonia, C. Dorange, C. T. Harbison, F. Graf Finckenstein,
J. R. Brahmer, Nivolumab versus docetaxel in advanced nonsquamous non–small-cell
lung cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 373, 1627–1639 (2015).
6. P. C. Tumeh, C. L. Harview, J. H. Yearley, I. P. Shintaku, E. J. M. Taylor, L. Robert,
B. Chmielowski, M. Spasic, G. Henry, V. Ciobanu, A. N. West, M. Carmona, C. Kivork, E. Seja,
G. Cherry, A. J. Gutierrez, T. R. Grogan, C. Mateus, G. Tomasic, J. A. Glaspy, R. O. Emerson,
H. Robins, R. H. Pierce, D. A. Elashoff, C. Robert, A. Ribas, PD-1 blockade induces responses
by inhibiting adaptive immune resistance. Nature 515, 568–571 (2014).
7. A. Melcher, K. Parato, C. M. Rooney, J. C. Bell, Thunder and lightning: Immunotherapy and
oncolytic viruses collide. Mol. Ther. 19, 1008–5 (2011).
8. H. L. Kaufman, F. J. Kohlhapp, A. Zloza, Oncolytic viruses: A new class of immunotherapy
drugs. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 14, 642–662 (2015).
9. R. H. I. Andtbacka, H. L. Kaufman, F. Collichio, T. Amatruda, N. Senzer, J. Chesney,
K. A. Delman, L. E. Spitler, I. Puzanov, S. S. Agarwala, M. Milhem, L. Cranmer, B. Curti,
K. Lewis, M. Ross, T. Guthrie, G. P. Linette, G. A. Daniels, K. Harrington, M. R. Middleton,
W. H. Miller, J. S. Zager, Y. Ye, B. Yao, A. Li, S. Doleman, A. VanderWalde, J. Gansert,
R. Coffin, Talimogene laherparepvec improves durable response rate in patients with
advanced melanoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 2780–2788 (2015).
10. L. Steele, F. Errington, R. Prestwich, E. Ilett, K. Harrington, H. Pandha, M. Coffey, P. Selby,
R. Vile, A. Melcher, Pro-inflammatory cytokine/chemokine production by reovirus treated
melanoma cells is PKR/NF-kB mediated and supports innate and adaptive anti-tumour
immune priming. Mol. Cancer 10, 20 (2011).
11. F. Benencia, M. C. Courrèges, J. R. Conejo-García, A. Mohamed-Hadley, L. Zhang,
R. J. Buckanovich, R. Carroll, N. Fraser, G. Coukos, HSV oncolytic therapy upregulates
interferon-inducible chemokines and recruits immune effector cells in ovarian cancer.
Mol. Ther. 12, 789–802 (2005).
12. R. Rampling, G. Cruickshank, V. Papanastassiou, J. Nicoll, D. Hadley, D. Brennan, R. Petty,
A. MacLean, J. Harland, E. McKie, R. Mabbs, M. Brown, Toxicity evaluation of replication-
competent herpes simplex virus (ICP 34.5 null mutant 1716) in patients with recurrent
malignant glioma. Gene Ther. 7, 859–866 (2000).
13. V. Papanastassiou, R. Rampling, M. Fraser, R. Petty, D. Hadley, J. Nicoll, J. Harland,
R. Mabbs, M. Brown, The potential for efficacy of the modified (ICP 34.5−) herpes simplex
virus HSV1716 following intratumoural injection into human malignant glioma: A proof
of principle study. Gene Ther. 9, 398–406 (2002).
14. S. Harrow, V. Papanastassiou, J. Harland, R. Mabbs, R. Petty, M. Fraser, D. Hadley,
J. Patterson, S. M. Brown, R. Rampling, HSV1716 injection into the brain adjacent to
tumour following surgical resection of high-grade glioma: Safety data and long-term
survival. Gene Ther. 11, 1648–1658 (2004).
15. J. M. Markert, M. D. Medlock, S. D. Rabkin, G. Y. Gillespie, T. Todo, W. D. Hunter,
C. A. Palmer, F. Feigenbaum, C. Tornatore, F. Tufaro, R. L. Martuza, Conditionally
replicating herpes simplex virus mutant, G207 for the treatment of malignant glioma:
Results of a phase I trial. Gene Ther. 7, 867–874 (2000).
16. E. A. Chiocca, K. M. Abbed, S. Tatter, D. N. Louis, F. H. Hochberg, F. Barker, J. Kracher,
S. A. Grossman, J. D. Fisher, K. Carson, M. Rosenblum, T. Mikkelsen, J. Olson, J. Markert,
S. Rosenfeld, L. B. Nabors, S. Brem, S. Phuphanich, S. Freeman, R. Kaplan, J. Zwiebel,
A phase I open-label, dose-escalation, multi-institutional trial of injection with an
E1B-Attenuated adenovirus, ONYX-015, into the peritumoral region of recurrent
malignant gliomas, in the adjuvant setting. Mol. Ther. 10, 958–966 (2004).
17. P. Forsyth, G. Roldán, D. George, C. Wallace, C. A. Palmer, D. Morris, G. Cairncross,
M. V. Matthews, J. Markert, Y. Gillespie, M. Coffey, B. Thompson, M. Hamilton, A phase I
trial of intratumoral administration of reovirus in patients with histologically confirmed
recurrent malignant gliomas. Mol. Ther. 16, 627–632 (2008).
18. K. P. Kicielinski, E. A. Chiocca, J. S. Yu, G. M. Gill, M. Coffey, J. M. Markert, Phase 1 clinical
trial of intratumoral reovirus infusion for the treatment of recurrent malignant gliomas in
adults. Mol. Ther. 22, 1056–1062 (2014).
19. R. Stupp, M. E. Hegi, W. P. Mason, M. J. van den Bent, M. J. B. Taphoorn, R. C. Janzer,
S. K. Ludwin, A. Allgeier, B. Fisher, K. Belanger, P. Hau, A. A. Brandes, J. Gijtenbeek,
C. Marosi, C. J. Vecht, K. Mokhtari, P. Wesseling, S. Villa, E. Eisenhauer, T. Gorlia, M. Weller,
D. Lacombe, J. G. Cairncross, R.-O. Mirimanoff; the European Organisation for Research
and Treatment of Cancer Brain Tumour and Radiation Oncology Groups; the National
Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group, Effects of radiotherapy with concomitant
and adjuvant temozolomide versus radiotherapy alone on survival in glioblastoma in a
randomised phase III study: 5-year analysis of the EORTC-NCIC trial. Lancet Oncol.
10, 459–466 (2009).
20. A. Mintz, J. Perry, K. Spithoff, A. Chambers, N. Laperriere, Management of single brain
metastasis: A practice guideline. Curr. Oncol. 14, 131–143 (2007).
21. R. A. Adair, V. Roulstone, K. J. Scott, R. Morgan, G. J. Nuovo, M. Fuller, D. Beirne, E. J. West,
V. A. Jennings, A. Rose, J. Kyula, S. Fraser, R. Dave, D. A. Anthoney, A. Merrick, R. Prestwich,
A. Aldouri, O. Donnelly, H. Pandha, M. Coffey, P. Selby, R. Vile, G. Toogood, K. Harrington,
A. A. Melcher, Cell carriage, delivery, and selective replication of an oncolytic virus in
tumor in patients. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 138ra77 (2012).
22. E. Ilett, T. Kottke, O. Donnelly, J. Thompson, C. Willmon, R. Diaz, S. Zaidi, M. Coffey,
P. Selby, K. Harrington, H. Pandha, A. Melcher, R. Vile, Cytokine conditioning enhances
systemic delivery and therapy of an oncolytic virus. Mol. Ther. 22, 1851–1863
(2014).
23. J. Taterka, M. Sutcliffe, D. H. Rubin, Selective reovirus infection of murine
hepatocarcinoma cells during cell division. A model of viral liver infection. J. Clin. Invest.
94, 353–360 (1994).
24. K. A. Parato, C. J. Breitbach, F. Le Boeuf, J. Wang, C. Storbeck, C. Ilkow, J.-S. Diallo, T. Falls,
J. Burns, V. Garcia, F. Kanji, L. Evgin, K. Hu, F. Paradis, S. Knowles, T.-H. Hwang,
B. C. Vanderhyden, R. Auer, D. H. Kirn, J. C. Bell, The oncolytic poxvirus JX-594 selectively
replicates in and destroys cancer cells driven by genetic pathways commonly activated
in cancers. Mol. Ther. 20, 749–758 (2012).
25. N. Braun, T. Papadopoulos, H. K. Müller-Hermelink, Cell cycle dependent distribution of
the proliferation-associated Ki-67 antigen in human embryonic lung cells. Virchows Arch.
B Cell Pathol. Incl. Mol. Pathol. 56, 25–33 (1988).
26. J. S. L. Parker, T. J. Broering, J. Kim, D. E. Higgins, M. L. Nibert, Reovirus core protein m2
determines the filamentous morphology of viral inclusion bodies by interacting with and
stabilizing microtubules. J. Virol. 76, 4483–4496 (2002).
27. F. Castellino, A. Y. Huang, G. Altan-Bonnet, S. Stoll, C. Scheinecker, R. N. Germain,
Chemokines enhance immunity by guiding naive CD8+ T cells to sites of CD4+
T cell–dendritic cell interaction. Nature 440, 890–895 (2006).
28. E. O. Long, ICAM-1: Getting a grip on leukocyte adhesion. J. Immunol. 186, 5021–5023
(2011).
29. K. Rajani, C. Parrish, T. Kottke, J. Thompson, S. Zaidi, L. Ilett, K. G. Shim, R.-M. Diaz,
H. Pandha, K. Harrington, M. Coffey, A. Melcher, R. Vile, Combination therapy with
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Samson et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaam7577 (2018)
3 January 2018
11 of 12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 reovirus and anti-PD-1 blockade controls tumor growth through innate and adaptive
immune responses. Mol. Ther. 24, 166–174 (2016).
30. F. Errington, C. L. White, K. R. Twigger, A. Rose, K. Scott, L. Steele, L. J. Ilett, R. Prestwich,
H. S. Pandha, M. Coffey, P. Selby, R. Vile, K. J. Harrington, A. A. Melcher, Inflammatory
tumour cell killing by oncolytic reovirus for the treatment of melanoma. Gene Ther.
15, 1257–1270 (2008).
31. I. Rusinova, S. Forster, S. Yu, A. Kannan, M. Masse, H. Cumming, R. Chapman, P. Hertzog,
INTERFEROME v2. 0: An updated database of annotated interferon-regulated genes.
Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D1040–D1046
32. H. Wurdak, S. Zhu, A. Romero, M. Lorger, J. Watson, C.-y. Chiang, J. Zhang, V. S. Natu,
L. L. Lairson, J. R. Walker, C. M. Trussell, G. R. Harsh, H. Vogel, B. Felding-Habermann,
A. P. Orth, L. J. Miraglia, D. R. Rines, S. L. Skirboll, P. G. Schultz, An RNAi screen identifies
TRRAP as a regulator of brain tumor-initiating cell differentiation. Cell Stem Cell 6, 37–47
(2010).
33. K. Geletneky, J. Huesing, J. Rommelaere, J. R. Schlehofer, B. Leuchs, M. Dahm, O. Krebs,
M. von Knebel Doeberitz, B. Huber, J. Hajda, Phase I/IIa study of intratumoral/
intracerebral or intravenous/intracerebral administration of parvovirus H-1 (ParvOryx) in
patients with progressive primary or recurrent glioblastoma multiforme: ParvOryx01
protocol. BMC Cancer 12, 99 (2012).
34. J. L. Connolly, T. S. Dermody, Virion disassembly is required for apoptosis induced by
reovirus. J. Virol. 76, 1632–1641 (2002).
35. B. S. Parker, J. Rautela, P. J. Hertzog, Antitumour actions of interferons: Implications for
cancer therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer 16, 131–144 (2016).
36. M. C. Papadopoulos, S. Saadoun, D. K. Binder, G. T. Manley, S. Krishna, A. S. Verkman,
Molecular mechanisms of brain tumor edema. Neuroscience 129, 1009–1018 (2004).
37. T. Yau, C. Swanton, S. Chua, A. Sue, G. Walsh, A. Rostom, S. R. Johnston, M. E. R. O’Brien,
I. E. Smith, Incidence, pattern and timing of brain metastases among patients
with advanced breast cancer treated with trastuzumab. Acta Oncol. 45, 196–201
(2006).
38. L. A. Lampson, Monoclonal antibodies in neuro-oncology: Getting past the blood-brain
barrier. mAbs 3, 153–160 (2011).
39. R. Dolin, R. C. Reichman, A. S. Fauci, Lymphocyte populations in acute viral gastroenteritis.
Infect. Immun. 14, 422–428 (1976).
40. D. Michlmayr, C. S. McKimmie, M. Pingen, B. Haxton, K. Mansfield, N. Johnson, A. R. Fooks,
G. J. Graham, Defining the chemokine basis for leukocyte recruitment during viral
encephalitis. J. Virol. 88, 9553–9567 (2014).
41. L. Wu, G. LaRosa, N. Kassam, C. J. Gordon, H. Heath, N. Ruffing, H. Chen, J. Humblias,
M. Samson, M. Parmentier, J. P. Moore, C. R. Mackay, Interaction of chemokine receptor
CCR5 with its ligands: Multiple domains for HIV-1 gp120 binding and a single domain for
chemokine binding. J. Exp. Med. 186, 1373–1381 (1997).
42. M. J. M. Gooden, G. H. de Bock, N. Leffers, T. Daemen, H. W. Nijman, The prognostic
influence of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes in cancer: A systematic review with meta-
analysis. Br. J. Cancer 105, 93–103 (2011).
43. C. Lapa, T. Linsenmann, K. Lückerath, S. Samnick, K. Herrmann, C. Stoffer, R.-I. Ernestus,
A. K. Buck, M. Löhr, C.-M. Monoranu, Tumor-associated macrophages in glioblastoma
multiforme—A suitable target for somatostatin receptor-based imaging and therapy?.
PLOS ONE 10, e0122269 (2015).
44. R. A. Adair, K. J. Scott, S. Fraser, F. Errington-Mais, H. Pandha, M. Coffey, P. Selby,
G. P. Cook, R. Vile, K. J. Harrington, G. Toogood, A. A. Melcher, Cytotoxic and immune-
mediated killing of human colorectal cancer by reovirus-loaded blood and liver
mononuclear cells. Int. J. Cancer 132, 2327–2338 (2013).
45. V. Kasprowicz, J. Schulze Zur Wiesch, T. Kuntzen, B. E. Nolan, S. Longworth, A. Berical,
J. Blum, C. McMahon, L. L. Reyor, N. Elias, W. W. Kwok, B. G. McGovern, G. Freeman,
R. T. Chung, P. Klenerman, L. Lewis-Ximenez, B. D. Walker, T. M. Allen, A. Y. Kim,
G. M. Lauer, High level of PD-1 expression on hepatitis C virus (HCV)-specific CD8+ and
CD4+ T cells during acute HCV infection, irrespective of clinical outcome. J. Virol. 82,
3154–3160 (2008).
46. K. E. Brown, G. J. Freeman, E. J. Wherry, A. H. Sharpe, Role of PD-1 in regulating acute
infections. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 22, 397–401 (2010).
47. L. P. Diggs, E. C. Hsueh, Utility of PD-L1 immunohistochemistry assays for predicting PD-
1/PD-L1 inhibitor response. Biomark. Res. 5, 12 (2017).
48. E. K. Nduom, J. Wei, N. K. Yaghi, N. Huang, L.-Y. Kong, K. Gabrusiewicz, X. Ling, S. Zhou,
C. Ivan, J. Q. Chen, J. K. Burks, G. N. Fuller, G. A. Calin, C. A. Conrad, C. Creasy, K. Ritthipichai,
L. Radvanyi, A. B. Heimberger, PD-L1 expression and prognostic impact in glioblastoma.
Neuro Oncol. 18, 195–205 (2016).
49. A. Ribas, R. Dummer, I. Puzanov, A. VanderWalde, R. H. I. Andtbacka, O. Michielin,
A. J. Olszanski, J. Malvehy, J. Cebon, E. Fernandez, J. M. Kirkwood, T. F. Gajewski, L. Chen,
K. S. Gorski, A. A. Anderson, S. J. Diede, M. E. Lassman, J. Gansert, F. Stephen Hodi,
G. V. Long, Oncolytic virotherapy promotes intratumoral T cell infiltration and improves
anti-PD-1 Immunotherapy. Cell 170, 1109–1119.e10 (2017).
50. M.-C. Bourgeois-Daigneault, D. G. Roy, A. S. Aitken, N. El Sayes, N. T. Martin, O. Varrette,
T. Falls, L. E. St-Germain, A. Pelin, B. D. Lichty, D. F. Stojdl, G. Ungerechts, J.-S. Diallo,
J. C. Bell, Neoadjuvant oncolytic virotherapy before surgery sensitizes triple-negative
breast cancer to immune checkpoint therapy. Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaao1641 (2018).
51. Bristol Myers Squibb, Bristol-Myers Squibb announces results from CheckMate −143, a
phase 3 study of Opdivo (nivolumab) in patients with glioblastoma multiforme (2017);
https://news.bms.com/press-release/bmy/bristol-myers-squibb-announces-results-
checkmate-143-phase-3-study-opdivo-nivoluma.
52. G. J. Nuovo, M. Garofalo, N. Valeri, V. Roulstone, S. Volinia, D. E. Cohn, M. Phelps,
K. J. Harrington, R. Vile, A. Melcher, E. Galanis, S. Sehl, R. Adair, K. Scott, A. Rose,
G. Toogood, M. C. Coffey, Reovirus-associated reduction of microRNA-let-7d is related to
the increased apoptotic death of cancer cells in clinical samples. Mod. Pathol. 25,
1333–1344 (2012).
53. L. Vidal, H. S. Pandha, T. A. Yap, C. L. White, K. Twigger, R. G. Vile, A. Melcher, M. Coffey,
K. J. Harrington, J. S. DeBono, A phase I study of intravenous oncolytic reovirus type 3
Dearing in patients with advanced cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 14, 7127–7137 (2008).
54. C. Conway, J. L. Graham, P. Chengot, C. Daly, R. Chalkley, L. Ross, A. Droop, P. Rabbitts,
L. F. Stead, Elucidating drivers of oral epithelial dysplasia formation and malignant
transformation to cancer using RNAseq. Oncotarget 6, 40186–40201 (2015).
55. C. Trapnell, A. Roberts, L. Goff, G. Pertea, D. Kim, D. R. Kelley, H. Pimentel, S. L. Salzberg,
J. L. Rinn, L. Pachter, Differential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA-seq
experiments with TopHat and Cufflinks. Nat. Protoc. 7, 562–578 (2012).
56. J. Wang, B. Zhang, WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit (2016); www.webgestalt.org/
option.php.
Acknowledgments: We are grateful to all the patients that participated in this trial.
Funding: A.S. was the recipient of a Cancer Research UK Clinical Research Fellowship. Clinical
and translational costs were donated by Brain Tumour Research and Support Across Yorkshire.
We are also grateful for support from The Brain Tumour Charity, Yorkshire Cancer Research, the
Cancer Research UK Leeds Centre, the Leeds Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre, and the
National Institute for Health Research Leeds Clinical Research Facility. K.J.H. acknowledges
support from the Institute of Cancer Research/Royal Marsden NIHR Biomedical Research
Facility. Author contributions: Study design: A.S., A.A.M., S.C.S., and M.C.C. Enrollment and
management of patients: A.S., S.T., R.C., R.K.M., J.V.C., P.v.H., G.S., D.A.B., F.J.C., C.R., D.A.A., and C.J.T.
Laboratory work: A.S., K.J.S., D.T., E.W., E.J.W., G.J.N., M.J.F., T.J.K., J.M.T., E.J.I., E.S.P., S.J.T., E.S.A.,
G.M., A.S.R., M.C.C., A.J.F., S.A.Q., H.W., F.E.-M., and L.F.S. Data analysis and study write up: A.S.,
A.A.M., K.J.S., D.T., L.F.S., E.W., G.J.N., K.J.H., H.P., P.J.S., S.D.G., S.C.S., and R.G.V. Competing interests:
M.C.C. is an employee of Oncolytics Biotech Inc., Calgary, Canada, from which S.D.G., S.C.S.,
A.A.M., K.J.H., and H.P. have received research grants. M.C.C. and colleagues are inventors on
several patents (including patents 6110461, 6136307, 6261555, 6344195, and 6455038) held by
Oncolytics Biotech Inc. that cover reovirus treatment of neoplasia. All other authors declare
that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: Correspondence and
requests for materials should be addressed to A.S., A.A.M., or S.C.S. Oncolytic reovirus (REOLYSIN)
was supplied by Oncolytics Biotech Inc. under a material transfer agreement with the University
of Leeds, United Kingdom.
Submitted 17 January 2017
Resubmitted 8 September 2017
Accepted 27 November 2017
Published 3 January 2018
10.1126/scitranslmed.aam7577
Citation: A. Samson, K. J. Scott, D. Taggart, E. J. West, E. Wilson, G. J. Nuovo, S. Thomson,
R. Corns, R. K. Mathew, M. J. Fuller, T. J. Kottke, J. M. Thompson, E. J. Ilett, J. V. Cockle,
P. van Hille, G. Sivakumar, E. S. Polson, S. J. Turnbull, E. S. Appleton, G. Migneco, A. S. Rose,
M. C. Coffey, D. A. Beirne, F. J. Collinson, C. Ralph, D. Alan Anthoney, C. J. Twelves, A. J. Furness,
S. A. Quezada, H. Wurdak, F. Errington-Mais, H. Pandha, K. J. Harrington, P. J. Selby, R. G. Vile,
S. D. Griffin, L. F. Stead, S. C. Short, A. A. Melcher, Intravenous delivery of oncolytic reovirus to
brain tumor patients immunologically primes for subsequent checkpoint blockade. Sci. Transl.
Med. 10, eaam7577 (2018).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Samson et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaam7577 (2018)
3 January 2018
12 of 12
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 primes for subsequent checkpoint blockade
Intravenous delivery of oncolytic reovirus to brain tumor patients immunologically
Harrington, Peter J. Selby, Richard G. Vile, Stephen D. Griffin, Lucy F. Stead, Susan C. Short and Alan A. Melcher
J. Twelves, Andrew J. Furness, Sergio A. Quezada, Heiko Wurdak, Fiona Errington-Mais, Hardev Pandha, Kevin J.
Ailsa S. Rose, Matthew C. Coffey, Deborah A. Beirne, Fiona J. Collinson, Christy Ralph, D. Alan Anthoney, Christopher 
van Hille, Gnanamurthy Sivakumar, Euan S. Polson, Samantha J. Turnbull, Elizabeth S. Appleton, Gemma Migneco,
Corns, Ryan K. Mathew, Martin J. Fuller, Timothy J. Kottke, Jill M. Thompson, Elizabeth J. Ilett, Julia V. Cockle, Philip 
Adel Samson, Karen J. Scott, David Taggart, Emma J. West, Erica Wilson, Gerard J. Nuovo, Simon Thomson, Robert
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aam7577
, eaam7577.
10
Sci Transl Med 
potential of checkpoint therapy and expanding it to new types of cancer.
immune effects induced by the oncolytic viruses, they indicate the potential of such viruses for enhancing the
treatment with immune checkpoint inhibitors. Although these studies differ in the details of their methods and the 
before surgical resection, alters the antitumor immune response and potentiates the effects of subsequent
way to address this for brain tumors. In both cases, the authors found that oncolytic virus treatment given early, 
. discovered a
et al
. discovered a way to address this for breast cancer, and Samson 
et al
Bourgeois-Daigneault 
cancers, and neither breast nor brain tumors are usually treatable with these drugs. However, 
Immune checkpoint inhibitors have shown great promise for cancer therapy, but they do not treat all
Viruses team up with cancer immunotherapy
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/10/422/eaam7577
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/12/27/10.422.eaam7577.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/11/476/eaat9321.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/454/eaar2718.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/360/6389/660.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/360/6386/331.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/359/6377/801.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/359/6377/770.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/359/6377/745.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/359/6375/582.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/359/6375/516.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/425/eaao1613.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/422/eaao1641.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/226/226ra32.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/404/eaam7996.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/408/eaan4220.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/10/422/eaam7577#BIBL
This article cites 53 articles, 11 of which you can access for free
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
