 Continuing Education Examination available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/cme/conted.html. 
Recommendations and Reports / Vol. 65 / No. 6 
November 11, 2016 
Core Elements of  
Outpatient Antibiotic Stewardship
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
 Recommendations and Reports
Disclosure of Relationship
CDC, our planners, presenters (or content experts), and their 
spouses/partners wish to disclose they have no financial interests 
or other relationships with the manufacturers of commercial 
products, suppliers of commercial services, or commercial 
supporters. Planners have reviewed content to ensure there 
is no bias. Content will not include any discussion of the 
unlabeled use of a product or a product under investigational 
use, with the exception that some of the recommendations in 
this document might be inconsistent with package labeling. 
CDC did not accept commercial support for this continuing 
education activity.
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Title]. MMWR Recomm Rep 2016;65(No. RR-#):[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Thomas R. Frieden, MD, MPH, Director 
Harold W. Jaffe, MD, MA, Associate Director for Science 
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Serials)
Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, MS, Editor-in-Chief
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Executive Editor 
Christine G. Casey, MD, Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor
David C. Johnson, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Catherine B. Lansdowne, MS, Project Editor
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Moua Yang, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, Terraye M. Starr,
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William L. Roper, MD, MPH 
William Schaffner, MD
CONTENTS
Introduction ............................................................................................................1
Background .............................................................................................................1
Methods 
....................................................................................................................4
Core Elements of Outpatient Antibiotic Stewardship 
..............................4
Future Directions ................................................................................................ 10
Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 10
References 
............................................................................................................. 10
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6 
1
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Core Elements of Outpatient Antibiotic Stewardship
Guillermo V. Sanchez, MPH, MSHS1
Katherine E. Fleming-Dutra, MD1
Rebecca M. Roberts, MS1
Lauri A. Hicks, DO1
1Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, CDC
Summary
The Core Elements of Outpatient Antibiotic Stewardship provides a framework for antibiotic stewardship for outpatient 
clinicians and facilities that routinely provide antibiotic treatment. This report augments existing guidance for other clinical 
settings. In 2014 and 2015, respectively, CDC released the Core Elements of Hospital Antibiotic Stewardship Programs and 
the Core Elements of Antibiotic Stewardship for Nursing Homes. Antibiotic stewardship is the effort to measure and improve 
how antibiotics are prescribed by clinicians and used by patients. Improving antibiotic prescribing involves implementing effective 
strategies to modify prescribing practices to align them with evidence-based recommendations for diagnosis and management. The 
four core elements of outpatient antibiotic stewardship are commitment, action for policy and practice, tracking and reporting, 
and education and expertise. Outpatient clinicians and facility leaders can commit to improving antibiotic prescribing and take 
action by implementing at least one policy or practice aimed at improving antibiotic prescribing practices. Clinicians and leaders 
of outpatient clinics and health care systems can track antibiotic prescribing practices and regularly report these data back to 
clinicians. Clinicians can provide educational resources to patients and families on appropriate antibiotic use. Finally, leaders of 
outpatient clinics and health systems can provide clinicians with education aimed at improving antibiotic prescribing and with 
access to persons with expertise in antibiotic stewardship. Establishing effective antibiotic stewardship interventions can protect 
patients and improve clinical outcomes in outpatient health care settings.
Corresponding author: Katherine E. Fleming-Dutra, Division of 
Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Emerging and 
Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC. Telephone: 404-639-4243. 
E-mail: getsmart@cdc.gov. 
Introduction
Antibiotic resistance is among the greatest public health 
threats today, leading to an estimated 2 million infections 
and 23,000 deaths per year in the United States (1). Although 
antibiotics are life-saving drugs that are critical to modern 
medicine, infections with pathogens resistant to first-line 
antibiotics can require treatment with alternative antibiotics 
that can be expensive and toxic. Antibiotic-resistant infections 
can lead to increased health care costs and, most importantly, 
to increased morbidity and mortality (1). The most important 
modifiable risk factor for antibiotic resistance is inappropriate 
prescribing of antibiotics. Approximately half of outpatient 
antibiotic prescribing in humans might be inappropriate, 
including antibiotic selection, dosing, or duration, in addition 
to unnecessary antibiotic prescribing (2–4). At least 30% of 
outpatient antibiotic prescriptions in the United States are 
unnecessary (5). 
Antibiotic stewardship is the effort to measure antibiotic 
prescribing; to improve antibiotic prescribing by clinicians and 
use by patients so that antibiotics are only prescribed and used 
when needed; to minimize misdiagnoses or delayed diagnoses 
leading to underuse of antibiotics; and to ensure that the right 
drug, dose, and duration are selected when an antibiotic is 
needed (1,6). Antibiotic stewardship can be used in all health 
care settings in which antibiotics are prescribed and remains 
a cornerstone of efforts aimed at improving antibiotic-related 
patient safety and slowing the spread of antibiotic resistance. 
The goal of antibiotic stewardship is to maximize the benefit of 
antibiotic treatment while minimizing harm both to individual 
persons and to communities.
Background
Improving antibiotic prescribing in all health care settings 
is critical to combating antibiotic-resistant bacteria (7). 
Approximately 60% of U.S. antibiotic expenditures for 
humans are related to care received in outpatient settings (8). 
In other developed countries, approximately 80%–90% of 
antibiotic use occurs among outpatients (9,10). During 2013 
in the United States, approximately 269 million antibiotic 
prescriptions were dispensed from outpatient pharmacies 
(11). Approximately 20% of pediatric visits (12) and 10% 
of adult visits (3) in outpatient settings result in an antibiotic 
prescription. Complications from antibiotics range from 
common side effects such as rashes and diarrhea to less common 
adverse events such as severe allergic reactions (13). These 
adverse drug events lead to an estimated 143,000 emergency 
 Recommendations and Reports
2 
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
department visits annually and contribute to excess use of 
health care resources (13). Antibiotic treatment is the most 
important risk factor for Clostridium difficile infection (14). 
In 2011, an estimated 453,000 cases of C. difficile infection 
occurred in the United States, approximately one third of 
which were community-associated infections (i.e., occurred 
in patients with no recent overnight stay in a health care 
facility) (15). As much as 35% of adult and 70% of pediatric 
C. difficile infections are community associated (15,16). One 
study estimated that a 10% reduction in overall outpatient 
antibiotic prescribing could reduce community-associated 
C. difficile infections by 17% (17). By reducing unnecessary 
antibiotic prescribing (18–20), antibiotic stewardship can 
prevent avoidable adverse events resulting from antibiotics.
In 2014 and 2015, respectively, CDC released the Core 
Elements of Hospital Antibiotic Stewardship Programs (21,22) 
and the Core Elements of Antibiotic Stewardship for Nursing 
Homes (23). This 2016 report, Core Elements of Outpatient 
Antibiotic Stewardship, provides guidance for antibiotic 
stewardship in outpatient settings and is applicable to any 
entity interested in improving outpatient antibiotic prescribing 
and use. The intended audiences for this guidance include 
clinicians (e.g., physicians, dentists, nurse practitioners, and 
physician assistants) and clinic leaders in primary care, medical 
and surgical specialties, emergency departments, retail health 
and urgent care settings, and dentistry, as well as community 
pharmacists, other health care professionals, hospital clinics, 
outpatient facilities, and health care systems involved in 
outpatient care (Box 1).
Leaders of organizations of any size and within any medical 
specialty, from single-provider clinics to large health care 
systems, are encouraged to commit to optimizing antibiotic 
prescribing and patient safety; implement at least one action 
in the form of a policy or practice to improve antibiotic 
prescribing; track and regularly report antibiotic prescribing 
practices to clinicians or enable clinician self-assessment on 
antibiotic prescribing; educate clinicians and patients on 
appropriate antibiotic prescribing; and ensure access to expertise 
on antibiotic prescribing. Before implementing antibiotic 
stewardship interventions, clinicians and outpatient clinic and 
BOX 1. Entities that are intended audiences for Core Elements of Outpatient Antibiotic Stewardship
Entities that are intended audiences for this report are outpatient health care professionals and leaders of their respective clinics, 
departments, facilities, and health care systems.
• Primary care clinics and clinicians: These clinics and clinicians prescribe approximately half of all outpatient antibiotics 
in the United States.* This includes clinicians specializing in family practice, pediatrics, and internal medicine, all of whom 
treat a wide variety of patients and conditions that might benefit from antibiotic treatment.
• Outpatient specialty and subspecialty clinics and clinicians: These clinics and clinicians focus on treatment and 
management of patients with specialized medical conditions that sometimes benefit from antibiotic therapy. These 
specialties clinics include gastroenterology, dermatology, urology, obstetrics, otolaryngology, and others.
• Emergency departments (EDs) and emergency medicine clinicians: EDs and emergency medicine clinicians are 
positioned between acute care hospitals and the community and encounter unique challenges, including lack of continuity 
of care and higher concentration of high-acuity patients, as well as unique opportunities for stewardship interventions, 
such as greater clinician access to diagnostic resources and the expertise of pharmacists and consultants.
• Retail health clinics and clinicians: These clinics and clinicians provide treatment for routine conditions in retail stores 
or pharmacies and represent a growing category of health care delivery in the United States.
• Urgent care clinics and clinicians: These clinics and clinicians specialize in treating patients who might need immediate 
attention or need to be seen after hours but might not need to be seen in EDs.
• Dental clinics and dentists: Dental clinics and dentists use antibiotics as prophylaxis before some dental procedures and 
for treatment of dental infections.
• Nurse practitioners and physician assistants: These clinicians work in every medical specialty and subspecialty involved 
in antibiotic prescribing and should be included in antibiotic stewardship efforts.
• Health care systems: Health care systems plan, deliver, and promote health care services and often involve a network of 
primary and specialty outpatient clinics, urgent care centers, EDs, acute care hospitals, and other facilities that provide 
health care services. Health care systems can use existing antibiotic stewardship programs or develop new ones to promote 
appropriate antibiotic prescribing practices in their outpatient facilities as well as across the system.
* 
Source: CDC. Outpatient antibiotic prescriptions—United States, 2013. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2013. http://
www.cdc.gov/getsmart/community/pdfs/annual-reportsummary_2013.pdf
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6 
3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
health system leaders can identify opportunities to improve 
antibiotic prescribing. These opportunities include identifying 
high-priority conditions for intervention, identifying barriers 
that lead to deviation from best practices, and establishing 
standards for antibiotic prescribing based on evidence-
based diagnostic criteria and treatment recommendations 
(Box 2). High-priority conditions are conditions for which 
clinicians commonly deviate from best practices for antibiotic 
prescribing and include conditions for which antibiotics 
are overprescribed, underprescribed, or misprescribed with 
the wrong antibiotic agent, dose, or duration. Barriers to 
prescribing antibiotics appropriately might include clinician 
knowledge gaps about best practices and clinical practice 
guidelines, clinician perception of patient expectations for 
antibiotics, perceived pressure to see patients quickly, or 
clinician concerns about decreased patient satisfaction with 
clinical visits when antibiotics are not prescribed. Standards for 
antibiotic prescribing can be based on national clinical practice 
BOX 2. Initial steps for antibiotic stewardship: recognize opportunities to improve antibiotic prescribing practices by identifying high-priority 
conditions, identifying barriers to improving antibiotic prescribing, and establishing standards for antibiotic prescribing
Identify one or more high-priority conditions for intervention. 
High-priority conditions are conditions for which clinicians commonly deviate from best practices for antibiotic prescribing 
and include conditions for which antibiotics are overprescribed, underprescribed, or misprescribed with the wrong antibiotic 
agent, dose, or duration. 
Examples of types of high-priority conditions for improving antibiotic prescribing include:
• conditions for which antibiotics are overprescribed, such as conditions for which antibiotics are not indicated (e.g., acute 
bronchitis, nonspecific upper respiratory infection, or viral pharyngitis).* 
• conditions for which antibiotics might be appropriate but are overdiagnosed, such as a condition that is diagnosed without 
fulfilling the diagnostic criteria (e.g., diagnosing streptococcal pharyngitis and prescribing antibiotics without testing for 
group A Streptococcus).†
• conditions for which antibiotics might be indicated but for which the wrong agent, dose, or duration often is selected, 
such as selecting an antibiotic that is not recommended (e.g., selecting azithromycin rather than amoxicillin or amoxicillin/
clavulanate for acute uncomplicated bacterial sinusitis).§ 
• conditions for which watchful waiting or delayed prescribing is appropriate but underused (e.g., acute otitis media or 
acute uncomplicated sinusitis).¶
• conditions for which antibiotics are underused or the need for timely antibiotics is not recognized (e.g., missed diagnoses 
of sexually transmitted diseases or severe bacterial infections such as sepsis).
Identify barriers that lead to deviation from best practices.
These might include clinician knowledge gaps about best practices and clinical practice guidelines, clinician perception of 
patient expectations for antibiotics, perceived pressure to see patients quickly, or clinician concerns about decreased patient 
satisfaction with clinical visits when antibiotics are not prescribed.
Establish standards for antibiotic prescribing.
This might include implementation of national clinical practice guidelines and, if applicable, developing facility- or system-
specific clinical practice guidelines to establish clear expectations for appropriate antibiotic prescribing. 
* Sources: Shulman ST, Bisno AL, Clegg HW, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis and management of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: 2012 
update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2012;55:1279–82; Harris AM, Hicks LA, Qaseem A; High Value Care Task Force of the 
American College of Physicians; CDC. Appropriate antibiotic use for acute respiratory tract infection in adults: advice for high-value care from the American 
College of Physicians and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Ann Intern Med 2016;164:425–34; and Hersh AL, Jackson MA, Hicks LA; American 
Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases. Principles of judicious antibiotic prescribing for upper respiratory tract infections in pediatrics. 
Pediatrics 2013;132:1146–54.
† Source: Shulman ST, Bisno AL, Clegg HW, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis and management of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: 2012 
update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2012;55:1279–82.
§ Sources: Chow AW, Benninger MS, Brook I, et al; Infectious Diseases Society of America. IDSA clinical practice guideline for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis in 
children and adults. Clin Infect Dis 2012;54:e72–112; Wald ER, Applegate KE, Bordley C, et al; American Academy of Pediatrics. Clinical practice guideline 
for the diagnosis and management of acute bacterial sinusitis in children aged 1 to 18 years. Pediatrics 2013;132:e262–80; and Rosenfeld RM, Piccirillo JF, 
Chandrasekhar SS, et al. Clinical practice guideline (update): adult sinusitis executive summary. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2015;152:598–609.
¶ Sources: Lieberthal AS, Carroll AE, Chonmaitree T, et al. The diagnosis and management of acute otitis media. Pediatrics 2013;131:e964–99; Wald ER, 
Applegate KE, Bordley C, et al; American Academy of Pediatrics. Clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis and management of acute bacterial sinusitis in 
children aged 1 to 18 years. Pediatrics 2013;132:e262–80; and Rosenfeld RM, Piccirillo JF, Chandrasekhar SS, et al. Clinical practice guideline (update): adult 
sinusitis executive summary. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2015;152:598–609.
 Recommendations and Reports
4 
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
guidelines by national health care professional societies such 
as the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American College 
of Physicians, or the Infectious Diseases Society of America 
or, if applicable, can be based on facility- or system-specific 
clinical practice guidelines. A summary of current national 
clinical practice guidelines for common outpatient infections 
in children and adults is available at http://www.cdc.gov/
getsmart/community/for-hcp/outpatient-hcp/index.html. 
Clinicians and clinic leaders can collaborate with relevant 
partners in the broader health care community to facilitate 
outpatient antibiotic stewardship (Box 3). To improve 
antibiotic prescribing, clinic leaders can implement effective 
strategies to modify prescribing behaviors and align them 
with evidence-based recommendations for diagnosis and 
management (1). Clinicians can expect outpatient antibiotic 
stewardship to improve the quality of patient care, slow the 
development of community antibiotic resistance, and reduce 
avoidable adverse drug events caused by unnecessary use of 
antibiotics (24,25).
Methods
CDC’s Core Elements of Outpatient Antibiotic Stewardship 
were developed through a combination of consolidating 
evidence-based antibiotic stewardship practices and building 
on or adapting known best practices for antibiotic stewardship 
across other clinical settings, such as the core elements outlined 
for hospitals (21,22) and nursing homes (23). A narrative 
review of evidence on outpatient antibiotic stewardship 
interventions, policies, and practices through May 2016 was 
conducted. A systematic review was not conducted because 
at least five systematic reviews on outpatient stewardship 
interventions have been performed since 2005 (24–28), of 
which the two most recent were published in 2015 and 2016 
(24,25). The narrative review included the five systematic 
reviews (24–28), articles found through in-text citations, and 
new articles from a supplemental search of articles published 
during October 2015–May 2016. Information from selected 
citations included in the systematic reviews also was considered 
if it had not been specified previously in the systematic review. 
The supplemental search of PubMed identified English-
language articles only published during October 2015–May 
2016 with the following search terms: “antibiotic stewardship” 
or “antibiotic prescribing” or “antibiotic prescriptions” or 
“antimicrobial stewardship” or (“antibiotic” and “stewardship”) 
or (“antimicrobial” and “stewardship”). Articles identified 
through these methods were prioritized and included on the 
basis of relevance to outpatient antibiotic stewardship, defined 
as having 1) clearly stated study objectives to identify factors 
affecting outpatient antibiotic prescribing or to assess one 
or more outpatient antibiotic stewardship interventions, 
2) been performed in outpatient settings similar to those 
common in the United States (e.g., study settings in 
which patients access antibiotics through prescriptions 
written by a clinician), 3) effectively reported outcomes 
related to antibiotic stewardship, 4) enrolled subjects with 
outpatient infections common in the United States, or 
5) been previously cited as archetypal studies for stewardship 
interventions (http://www.cdc.gov/getsmart/community/
improving-prescribing/interventions/index.html); included 
studies are available online at https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/
cdc/41536). When no peer-reviewed evidence was available, 
expert opinion was substituted. 
CDC identified subject-matter experts in outpatient 
antibiotic stewardship research, implementation, policy, 
and practice on the basis of peer-reviewed publications with 
representation from important outpatient specialties. Subject-
matter experts were identified with expertise in pediatrics, 
internal medicine, family medicine, emergency medicine, 
infectious diseases, and pharmacy. CDC provided eight 
subject-matter experts with a draft of the core elements in April 
2016. Subject-matter experts were asked for specific feedback 
on the feasibility, acceptability, recommended supplementary 
materials, and potential for the core elements to promote 
effective and meaningful improvements in outpatient antibiotic 
prescribing. In addition to written feedback via electronic 
correspondence, a 1-hour group teleconference was offered 
to all subject-matter experts, during which verbal feedback 
from each person was collected. CDC revised and refined the 
core elements using individual feedback received from the 
subject-matter experts.
Core Elements of Outpatient 
Antibiotic Stewardship
The Core Elements of Outpatient Antibiotic Stewardship follow 
and are summarized in a clinician checklist (Figure 1) and a 
facility checklist (Figure 2):
• Commitment: Demonstrate dedication to and 
accountability for optimizing antibiotic prescribing and 
patient safety.
• Action for policy and practice: Implement at least one 
policy or practice to improve antibiotic prescribing, assess 
whether it is working, and modify as needed.
• Tracking and reporting: Monitor antibiotic prescribing 
practices and offer regular feedback to clinicians, or 
have clinicians assess their own antibiotic prescribing 
practices themselves.
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6 
5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
• Education and expertise: Provide educational resources 
to clinicians and patients on antibiotic prescribing, and 
ensure access to needed expertise on optimizing 
antibiotic prescribing.
Commitment
A commitment from all health care team members to 
prescribe antibiotics appropriately and engage in antibiotic 
stewardship is critical to improving antibiotic prescribing. 
Every person involved in patient care, whether directly or 
indirectly, can act as an antibiotic steward. Each clinician can 
make the choice to be an effective antibiotic steward during 
each patient encounter.
Clinicians can demonstrate commitment to appropriate 
antibiotic prescribing by doing the following:
• Write and display public commitments in support of 
antibiotic stewardship. For example, inappropriate 
antibiotic prescriptions for acute respiratory infections 
were reduced after clinicians displayed, in their examination 
rooms, a poster showing a letter from the clinician to their 
patients committing to prescribing antibiotics appropriately 
(18). This approach also might facilitate patient 
communication about appropriate antibiotic use.
BOX 3. Potential partners for outpatient antibiotic stewardship activities
• Acute care hospitals: Acute care hospitals are a critical component of the continuum of care and often share patients with 
outpatient clinics. Information sharing between outpatient facilities and acute care hospitals is necessary to monitor local patterns 
of antibiotic resistance, minimize duplicative testing, facilitate proper patient transition across different care settings, and 
collaborate on quality improvement initiatives. In addition, hospital-based antibiotic stewardship programs might be a resource 
for expertise in outpatient antibiotic stewardship initiatives.
• Long-term care facilities: Long-term care facilities provide various services, such as medical and personal care, to patients who 
are unable to manage independently in the community. Long-term care facilities include rehabilitation facilities, nursing homes, 
and long-term acute care facilities. Residents of long-term care facilities also are often treated by outpatient clinicians, including 
medical specialists. Thus, communication between outpatient clinicians and long-term care facilities is critical to antibiotic 
stewardship efforts.
• State and local health departments: State and local health departments play a crucial role in promoting outpatient antibiotic 
stewardship by sharing educational resources, connecting local stakeholders and coalitions, designating staff members to improve 
coordination within and across health care facilities, tracking and reporting local antibiotic resistance threats, and promoting 
infection prevention and vaccinations.
• Health plans and payers (health insurance companies): Health plans and payers can be a crucial source of data for 
clinician performance on quality measures for appropriate prescribing, including the Healthcare Effectiveness Data and 
Information Set (HEDIS) measures. In addition, health plans can provide incentives for antibiotic stewardship through 
quality-based payments.
• Health care professional societies: Health care professional societies provide an important network of health care 
professionals and health care leaders to create and share clinical practice guidelines for diagnosis and management of 
common conditions, provide continuing medical education opportunities for members, and bolster national, local, and 
regional initiatives promoting appropriate antibiotic use.
• Community pharmacies and pharmacists: Community pharmacies and pharmacists are a trusted source of health care 
information and provide patient recommendations for nonprescription medications to alleviate symptoms, facilitate 
medication therapy management, screen patients for drug interactions and allergies, and educate patients regarding 
appropriate antibiotic use and anticipated side effects. Pharmacies frequently are located near clinics in which patients 
are seen for management of common infections.
• Local microbiologic laboratories: Local microbiologic laboratories can produce regional or local antibiograms (i.e., 
tables displaying selected antibiotic sensitivities of bacterial species identified from clinical specimens) relevant to the 
setting of care, streamline testing and reporting of clinical samples, support rapid diagnostic testing, and provide expertise 
for interpretation of microbiologic tests.
Other important partners in outpatient stewardship include academic institutions, health professional training programs, 
information technology and electronic medical record software personnel, consumer advocacy groups, pharmaceutical companies, 
and health sciences education programs.
 Recommendations and Reports
6 
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
FIGURE 1. Clinician checklist for core elements of outpatient antibiotic stewardship
CDC recommends that outpatient clinicians take steps to implement antibiotic stewardship activities. Use this checklist as a baseline assessment of policies and 
practices that are in place. Then use the checklist to review progress in expanding stewardship activities on a regular basis (e.g., annually).
Commitment
1. Can you demonstrate dedication to and accountability for optimizing antibiotic prescribing and patient safety related to antibiotics?
 Yes   No
If yes, indicate which of the following are in place.
 Write and display public commitments in support of antibiotic stewardship.
Action
2. Have you implemented at least one practice to improve antibiotic prescribing?
 Yes   No
If yes, indicate which practices which you use. (Select all that apply.)
 Use evidence-based diagnostic criteria and treatment recommendations. 
 Use delayed prescribing practices or watchful waiting, when appropriate.
Tracking and Reporting
3. Do you monitor at least one aspect of antibiotic prescribing?
 Yes   No
If yes, indicate which of the following are being tracked. (Select all that apply.)
 Self-evaluate antibiotic prescribing practices.
 Participate in continuing medical education and quality improvement activities to track and improve antibiotic prescribing.
Education and Expertise
4. Do you provide education to patients and seek out continuing education on antibiotic prescribing?
 Yes   No
If yes, indicate how you provide antibiotic stewardship education. (Select all that apply.)
 Use efective communications strategies to educate patients about when antibiotics are and are not needed.
 Educate about the potential harms of antibiotic treatment.
 Provide patient education materials.
FIGURE 2. Facility checklist for core elements of outpatient antibiotic stewardship
CDC recommends that outpatient care facilities take steps to implement antibiotic stewardship activities. Use this checklist as a baseline assessment of policies 
and practices that are in place. Then use the checklist to review progress in expanding stewardship activities on a regular basis (e.g., annually).
Commitment 
1. Can your facility demonstrate dedication to and accountability for optimizing antibiotic prescribing and patient safety related to antibiotics?
 Yes   No
If yes, indicate which of the following are in place. (Select all that apply.)
 Identify a single leader to direct antibiotic stewardship activities within a facility.
 Include antibiotic stewardship-related duties in position descriptions or job evaluation criteria.
 Communicate with all clinic staf members to set patient expectations.
Action
2. Has your facility implemented at least one policy or practice to improve antibiotic prescribing?
 Yes   No
If yes, indicate which interventions are in place. (Select all that apply.)
 Provide communications skills training for clinicians.
 Require explicit written justifcation in the medical record for nonrecommended antibiotic prescribing. 
 Provide support for clinical decisions. 
 Use call centers, nurse hotlines, or pharmacist consultations as triage systems to prevent unnecessary visits.
Tracking and Reporting
3. Does your facility monitor at least one aspect of antibiotic prescribing?
 Yes   No
If yes, indicate which of the following are being tracked. (Select all that apply.)
 Track and report antibiotic prescribing for one or more high-priority conditions.
 Track and report the percentage of all visits leading to antibiotic prescriptions.
 (If already tracking and reporting one of the above) Track and report, at the level of a health care system, complications of antibiotic use and 
antibiotic resistance trends among common outpatient bacterial pathogens.
 Assess and share performance on quality measures and established reduction goals addressing appropriate antibiotic prescribing from health care 
plans and payers.
Education and Expertise
4. Does your facility provide resources to clinicians and patients on evidence-based antibiotic prescribing?
 Yes   No
If yes, indicate how your facility provides antibiotic stewardship education. (Select all that apply.)
 Provide face-to-face educational training (academic detailing).
 Provide continuing education activities for clinicians.
 Ensure timely access to persons with expertise.
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6 
7
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Outpatient clinic and health care system leaders can commit 
to promoting appropriate antibiotic prescribing by doing any 
of the following:
• Identify a single leader to direct antibiotic stewardship 
activities within a facility. Appointing a single leader who 
is accountable to senior facility leaders is recommended 
for hospital stewardship programs (21,22), and this 
approach also might be beneficial in outpatient settings.
• Include antibiotic stewardship-related duties in 
position descriptions or job evaluation criteria. These 
duties can be listed for medical directors, nursing 
leadership positions, and practice management personnel 
and will help ensure staff members have sufficient time 
and resources to devote to stewardship. Although evidence 
in the outpatient settings is lacking, this type of leadership 
support has been shown to be important for hospital 
antibiotic stewardship programs (29).
• Communicate with all clinic staff members to set 
patient expectations. Patient visits for acute illnesses 
might or might not result in an antibiotic prescription. 
All staff members in outpatient facilities, including 
administrative staff members, medical assistants, nurses, 
allied health professionals, and medical directors, can 
improve antibiotic prescribing by using consistent 
messages when communicating with patients about the 
indications for antibiotics. 
Action for Policy and Practice
Outpatient clinicians and clinic leaders can implement 
policies and interventions to promote appropriate antibiotic 
prescribing practices. A stepwise approach with achievable goals 
can facilitate policy and practice changes and help clinicians 
and staff members from feeling overwhelmed. As with all 
quality improvement efforts, assessment and modification 
of implemented policies and interventions are critical to 
improving antibiotic prescribing practices. Prioritizing 
interventions according to feasibility, acceptability, resource 
commitment, and anticipated barriers to change is important. 
Action is necessary to transform policy and practice into 
measurable outcomes.
Clinicians can implement at least one of the following actions 
to improve antibiotic prescribing:
• Use evidence-based diagnostic criteria and treatment 
recommendations. When possible, these criteria and 
recommendations should be based on national or local 
clinical practice guidelines informed by local pathogen 
susceptibilities. This can be accomplished by adhering to 
recommendations from clinical practice guidelines for 
common infections published by national professional 
societies such as the American Academy of Pediatrics and 
the Infectious Diseases Society of America (30–35).
• Use delayed prescribing practices or watchful waiting, 
when appropriate. Delayed prescribing can be used for 
patients with conditions that usually resolve without 
treatment but who can benefit from antibiotics if the 
conditions do not improve (e.g., acute uncomplicated 
sinusitis or mild acute otitis media). Clinicians can apply 
delayed prescribing practices by giving the patient or 
parent a postdated prescription and providing instructions 
to fill the prescription after a predetermined period or by 
instructing the patient to call or return to collect a 
prescription if symptoms worsen or do not improve 
(36–40). Watchful waiting means providing symptomatic 
relief with a clear plan for follow-up if infection symptoms 
worsen or do not improve. Watchful waiting and delayed 
antibiotic prescriptions are evidence-based approaches that 
can safely decrease antibiotic use when used in accordance 
with clinical practice guidelines (41–44).
Outpatient clinic and health care system leaders can take 
at least one of the following actions to improve antibiotic 
prescribing based on established standards or national clinical 
practice guidelines:
• Provide communications skills training for clinicians. 
Communications skills training can be used to promote 
strategies to address patient concerns regarding prognosis, 
benefits, and harms of antibiotic treatment; management 
of self-limiting conditions; and clinician concerns 
regarding managing patient expectations for antibiotics 
during a clinical visit (45,46).
• Require explicit written justification in the medical 
record for nonrecommended antibiotic prescribing. 
This technique has reduced inappropriate prescribing by 
holding clinicians accountable in the medical record for 
their decisions (19).
• Provide support for clinical decisions. Clinical decision 
support, which provides specific information in electronic 
or print form during the typical workflow, can facilitate 
accurate diagnoses and effective management of common 
conditions (e.g., discouraging antibiotic prescribing for 
acute bronchitis in healthy adults) (47–52).
• Use call centers, nurse hotlines, or pharmacist 
consultations as triage systems to prevent unnecessary 
visits. These resources can be used to reduce unnecessary 
visits for conditions that do not require a clinic visit (53), 
such as a common cold.
 Recommendations and Reports
8 
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Tracking and Reporting
Tracking and reporting clinician antibiotic prescribing, also 
called audit and feedback, can guide changes in practice and be 
used to assess progress in improving antibiotic prescribing. When 
setting up tracking and reporting systems, decisions need to be 
made about the level at which to track and report (i.e., at the 
individual clinician level or at the facility level), which outcomes 
to track and report, and how to obtain the data for tracking and 
reporting. Sources of data might include automatic electronic 
medical record extraction, manual periodic chart reviews, 
or performance data on existing quality measures related to 
outpatient antibiotic prescribing (e.g., Healthcare Effectiveness 
Data and Information Set [HEDIS] measures). Analysis can 
occur at the individual clinician level or at the facility level (i.e., 
aggregate of all clinician antibiotic prescriptions). The preferred 
approach, when possible, is to track antibiotic prescribing at the 
individual clinician level. Individualized feedback provided to 
clinicians on antibiotic prescribing is an effective way to promote 
adherence to evidence-based guidelines (20,54–56). Effective 
feedback interventions have included comparison of clinicians’ 
performance with that of their peers (20), particularly with peers 
who perform in the top 10% on quality measures or in adherence 
to evidence-based guidelines (i.e., top-performing peers) (19). In 
turn, feedback from clinicians about stewardship interventions 
can help guide modifications to maximize the impact and 
improve the acceptability of stewardship interventions (57). 
In addition, a study that informed certain clinicians that they 
prescribed more antibiotics than 80% of their peers also resulted 
in reductions in overall antibiotic prescribing (58). 
Tracking and reporting for identified high-priority conditions 
can be used to assess whether an antibiotic was appropriate for 
the assigned diagnosis, whether the diagnostic criteria were met 
before assigning an antibiotic-appropriate diagnosis, whether 
the selected antibiotic was the recommended agent, and whether 
the dose and duration were correct. Outpatient clinicians and 
clinic or health care system leaders can select outcomes to 
track and report on the basis of identified opportunities for 
improvement in their practice or clinics. Systems can track 
high-priority conditions identified as opportunities to improve 
clinician adherence to best practices and clinical practice 
guidelines for antibiotic prescribing (Box 2). For example, 
acute bronchitis is a common condition for which antibiotics 
are not recommended in national clinical practice guidelines, 
yet antibiotics are commonly prescribed (59,60). Therefore, 
leaders might choose to provide feedback on the percentage 
of acute bronchitis visits in which a clinician prescribed an 
antibiotic and include comparisons with their peers’ prescribing 
percentages for acute bronchitis. This paired tracking and 
reporting approach for selected high-priority conditions has 
reduced inappropriate antibiotic prescribing and improved 
antibiotic selection (19,20).
Systems also can track the percentage of visits for which an 
individual clinician prescribes antibiotics (e.g., number of all 
antibiotics prescribed for all diagnoses by a clinician divided by 
the total number of visits for all diagnoses for that clinician). 
Providing clinicians with these individualized percentages in 
comparison with their peers has reduced antibiotic prescribing 
(58) and can help minimize the influence of differences in 
clinicians’ diagnostic coding practices. A practice known 
as diagnosis shifting occurs when a clinician manipulates a 
diagnostic code to justify prescribing an antibiotic; for example, 
a clinician might record the code for pneumonia (which 
requires an antibiotic) when a patient has acute bronchitis 
(which does not require an antibiotic). Diagnosis shifting can 
be missed when tracking and reporting only one high-priority 
condition (e.g., only acute bronchitis), whereas tracking the 
percentage of all visits leading to antibiotic prescriptions is 
not affected by diagnosis shifting. However, when comparing 
metrics for antibiotic stewardship, the comparability of the 
clinicians’ patient populations should be considered because 
clinicians might treat patients with different underlying 
needs for antibiotics (e.g., a clinician who cares for a higher 
percentage of patients with immunosuppression than other 
clinicians in their clinic).
Certain health care systems also might be able to track and 
report the complications of antibiotic use (e.g., C. difficile 
infections, drug interactions, and adverse drug events) and 
antibiotic resistance trends among common outpatient 
bacterial pathogens (24). At the individual or clinic level, 
smaller sample sizes might make these measures less reliable 
or useful. In these cases, investigating C. difficile infections to 
assess for possible links to previous ambulatory care visits and 
antibiotic prescriptions might be used as a marker for possible 
adverse drug events.
Both clinicians and clinic leaders can be involved in 
antibiotic stewardship. Clinicians can track and report their 
own antibiotic prescribing practices by doing at least one of 
the following:
• Self-evaluate antibiotic prescribing practices. Clinicians 
can use self-evaluations to align their antibiotic prescribing 
practices with updated evidence-based recommendations 
and clinical practice guidelines.
• Participate in continuing medical education and 
quality improvement activities to track and improve 
antibiotic prescribing. Activities can be tailored by 
clinical specialty if conducted through health professional 
organizations and also might be used to meet licensure 
and other education and quality improvement requirements.
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6 
9
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Outpatient clinic or health care system leaders can do at 
least one of the following:
• Implement at least one antibiotic prescribing tracking 
and reporting system. Outcomes to be tracked can 
include high-priority conditions that have been identified 
as opportunities for improvement in that clinic, the 
percentage of all visits leading to antibiotic prescriptions, 
and, for health systems, complications of antibiotic use 
and antibiotic resistance trends (if antibiotic prescribing 
outcomes are already being tracked). Outcomes can be 
tracked and reported by individual clinicians (which is 
preferred) and by facilities.
• Assess and share performance on quality measures and 
established reduction goals addressing appropriate 
antibiotic prescribing from health care plans and payers. 
The National Strategy for Combating Antibiotic-Resistant 
Bacteria aims to reduce inappropriate antibiotic use by 50% 
for monitored conditions in outpatient settings by 2020 
(61). Current HEDIS measures include quality measures 
for appropriate testing for children with pharyngitis, 
appropriate treatment for children with upper respiratory 
infections (i.e., avoidance of antibiotics), and avoidance of 
antibiotic treatment in adults with acute bronchitis (62).
Education and Expertise
Education on appropriate antibiotic use can involve patients 
and clinicians. Education for patients and family members 
can improve health literacy and augment efforts to improve 
antibiotic use. Education for clinicians and clinic staff 
members can reinforce appropriate antibiotic prescribing and 
improve the quality of care (56,63,64). Deficits in clinician 
knowledge are seldom the only barrier to prescribing antibiotics 
appropriately in the outpatient setting. Effective clinician 
education often includes reviewing guidelines for appropriate 
antibiotic prescribing while also addressing the psychosocial 
pressures that influence antibiotic prescribing practices of 
clinicians (e.g., clinicians’ concerns about patient satisfaction). 
Access to colleagues and consultants with expertise (e.g., 
pharmacists and specialists) also is a valuable resource for 
improving antibiotic prescribing.
Clinicians can educate patients and families about 
appropriate antibiotic use by doing at least one of the following:
• Use effective communications strategies to educate 
patients about when antibiotics are and are not needed. 
For example, patients should be informed that antibiotic 
treatment for viral infections provides no benefit and thus 
should not be used for viral infections. Patients also should 
be informed that certain bacterial infections (e.g., mild 
ear and sinus infections) might improve without 
antibiotics. Explanations of when antibiotics are not 
needed can be combined with recommendations for 
symptom management; this combination of messages has 
been associated with visit satisfaction (65). In addition, 
providing recommendations for when to seek medical care 
if patients worsen or do not improve (i.e., a contingency 
plan) has been associated with higher visit satisfaction 
scores among patients who expected but were not 
prescribed antibiotics (66).
• Educate patients about the potential harms of antibiotic 
treatment. Potential harms might include common and 
sometimes serious side effects of antibiotics, including 
nausea, abdominal pain, diarrhea, C. difficile infection, 
allergic reactions, and other serious reactions. Parents of 
young children, in particular, want to be informed about 
possible adverse events associated with antibiotics (67). In 
addition, increasing evidence suggests antibiotic use in 
infancy and childhood is linked with allergic, infectious, 
and autoimmune diseases, likely through disturbing the 
microbiota (i.e., microorganisms within and on the human 
body) (68).
• Provide patient education materials. These materials 
might include information on appropriate antibiotic use, 
potential adverse drug events from antibiotics, and 
available resources regarding symptomatic relief for 
common infections. Educational materials on management 
of common infections are available online from CDC 
(http://www.cdc.gov/getsmart).
Outpatient clinic and health care system leaders can provide 
education to clinicians and ensure access to expertise by doing 
at least one of the following:
• Provide face-to-face educational training (academic 
detailing). This training can be provided by peers, 
colleagues, or opinion leaders, including other clinicians 
and pharmacists, and uses reinforcement techniques and 
peer-to-peer comparisons to facilitate changes in antibiotic 
prescribing practices (69–71).
• Provide continuing education activities for clinicians. 
Relevant continuing education activities include those 
that address appropriate antibiotic prescribing, adverse 
drug events, and communication strategies about 
appropriate antibiotic prescribing that can improve 
patient satisfaction. In particular, communications 
training in which clinicians were taught to assess patient 
expectations, discuss the risks and benefits of antibiotic 
treatment, provide recommendations for when to seek 
medical care if worsening or not improving (a contingency 
plan), and assess the patient’s understanding of the 
communicated information led to sustained decreases in 
inappropriate antibiotic prescribing (46,72).
 Recommendations and Reports
10 
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
• Ensure timely access to persons with expertise. Persons 
with expertise might include pharmacists or medical and 
surgical consultants who can assist clinicians in improving 
antibiotic prescribing for patients with conditions 
requiring specialty care. For example, in hospitals, 
pharmacists with infectious disease training have been 
effective and important members of antibiotic stewardship 
programs, and in hospital stewardship programs these 
types of pharmacists have been associated with improved 
patient outcomes and overall cost savings for the hospital 
(73). The expertise needed might differ among outpatient 
facilities and can be determined by each facility.
Future Directions
The Core Elements of Outpatient Antibiotic Stewardship provides 
a framework for improving antibiotic prescribing. Expanding 
horizons for outpatient health care delivery, such as outpatient 
parenteral antibiotic therapy, telemedicine and telehealth, and 
urgent care and retail clinics, might require unique stewardship 
approaches. Several studies have been published that show the 
benefit of antibiotic stewardship interventions in traditional 
primary care clinics (18,38,42). Additional implementation 
research is needed to determine which outpatient stewardship 
interventions work best in different outpatient settings, 
effective strategies to implement interventions, and sustainable 
approaches to outpatient stewardship.
Acute respiratory tract infections have been a focus of outpatient 
stewardship because these are the most common conditions 
leading to antibiotic treatment. However, additional efforts are 
needed to optimize stewardship efforts for other situations and 
syndromes that commonly lead to antibiotic use in the outpatient 
setting, including ambulatory procedures, dental prophylaxis, 
genitourinary infections, acne and other skin and soft tissue 
conditions, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Conclusion
Although the core elements provide a framework for 
outpatient antibiotic stewardship, implementing the 
elements requires a thoughtful and consistent effort to 
achieve desired outcomes. This includes developing strategies 
and preparing individuals, facilities, or organizations for 
change; developing and testing stewardship interventions; 
identifying and addressing barriers to change; and evaluating 
progress toward stated goals. Outpatient settings remain 
a crucial component of antibiotic stewardship in the 
United States. Establishing effective antibiotic stewardship 
interventions can protect patients and optimize clinical 
outcomes in outpatient health care settings.
Acknowledgments
Jonathan A. Finkelstein, MD, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Jeffrey S. Gerber, MD, 
PhD, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Adam 
L. Hersh, MD, PhD, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Salt Lake 
City, Utah; David Y. Hyun, MD, The Pew Charitable Trusts, 
Washington, DC; Jeffrey A. Linder, MD, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Larissa S. 
May, MD, University of California—Davis, Sacramento, California; 
Daniel Merenstein, MD, Georgetown University Medical Center, 
Washington, DC; Katie J. Suda, PharmD, Department of Veterans 
Affairs, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; Kelly 
O’Neill, Austyn Dukes, and Rachel Robb, National Center for 
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia; 
Rachel Zetts, The Pew Charitable Trusts, Washington, DC.
References
 1. CDC. Antibiotic resistance threats in the United States, 2013 [Internet]. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 
2013. http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/threat-report-2013/index.html
 2. CDC. Office-related antibiotic prescribing for persons aged ≤14 years—
United States, 1993–1994 to 2007–2008. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2011;60:1153–6.
 3. Shapiro DJ, Hicks LA, Pavia AT, Hersh AL. Antibiotic prescribing for 
adults in ambulatory care in the USA, 2007–09. J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2014;69:234–40. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jac/dkt301
 4. Gonzales R, Malone DC, Maselli JH, Sande MA. Excessive antibiotic 
use for acute respiratory infections in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;33:757–62. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/322627
 5. Fleming-Dutra KE, Hersh AL, Shapiro DJ, et al. Prevalence of 
inappropriate antibiotic prescriptions among U.S. ambulatory care visits, 
2010–2011. JAMA 2016;315:1864–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jama.2016.4151
 6. Barlam TF, Cosgrove SE, Abbo LM, et al. Implementing an Antibiotic 
Stewardship Program: Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America and the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America. Clin 
Infect Dis 2016;62:e51–77 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciw217
 7. Seppälä H, Klaukka T, Vuopio-Varkila J, et al; Finnish Study Group for 
Antimicrobial Resistance. The effect of changes in the consumption of 
macrolide antibiotics on erythromycin resistance in group A streptococci 
in Finland. N Engl J Med 1997;337:441–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/
NEJM199708143370701
 8. Suda KJ, Hicks LA, Roberts RM, Hunkler RJ, Danziger LH. A national 
evaluation of antibiotic expenditures by healthcare setting in the United 
States, 2009. J Antimicrob Chemother 2013;68:715–8. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/jac/dks445
 9. Public Health England. English Surveillance Programme for 
Antimicrobial Utilisation and Resistance (ESPAUR): report 2014 
[Internet]. London, England: Public Health England; 2014. https://
www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/362374/ESPAUR_Report_2014__3_.pdf
 
10. Public Health Agency of Sweden, National Veterinary Institute. 
Consumption of antibiotics and occurrence of antibiotic resistance in 
Sweden [Internet]. Swedres-Svarm 2014. Solna and Uppsala, Sweden: 
Public Health Agency of Sweden, National Veterinary Institute; 2015. 
Report No. ISSN 1650–6332. https://www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/
pagefiles/20281/Swedres-Svarm-2014-14027.pdf
 
11. CDC. Outpatient antibiotic prescriptions—United States, 2013. Atlanta, 
GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2013. http://
www.cdc.gov/getsmart/community/pdfs/annual-reportsummary_2013.pdf 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6 
11
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
12. Hersh AL, Shapiro DJ, Pavia AT, Shah SS. Antibiotic prescribing in 
ambulatory pediatrics in the United States. Pediatrics 2011;128:1053–
61. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2011-1337
 
13. Shehab N, Patel PR, Srinivasan A, Budnitz DS. Emergency department 
visits for antibiotic-associated adverse events. Clin Infect Dis 
2008;47:735–43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/591126
 
14. Kutty PK, Woods CW, Sena AC, et al. Risk factors for and estimated 
incidence of community-associated Clostridium difficile infection, North 
Carolina, USA. Emerg Infect Dis 2010;16:197–204. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3201/eid1602.090953
 
15. Lessa FC, Mu Y, Bamberg WM, et al. Burden of Clostridium difficile 
infection in the United States. N Engl J Med 2015;372:825–34. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1408913
 
16. Wendt JM, Cohen JA, Mu Y, et al. Clostridium difficile infection among 
children across diverse U.S. geographic locations. Pediatrics 
2014;133:651–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2013-3049
 
17. Dantes R, Mu Y, Hicks LA, et al. Association between outpatient 
antibiotic prescribing practices and community-associated Clostridium 
difficile infection. Open Forum Infect Dis 2015;2:ofv113.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/ofid/ofv113 
 
18. Meeker D, Knight TK, Friedberg MW, et al. Nudging guideline-
concordant antibiotic prescribing: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
Intern Med 2014;174:425–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jamainternmed.2013.14191
 
19. Meeker D, Linder JA, Fox CR, et al. Effect of behavioral interventions 
on inappropriate antibiotic prescribing among primary care practices: a 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016;315:562–70. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/jama.2016.0275
 
20. Gerber JS, Prasad PA, Fiks AG, et al. Effect of an outpatient antimicrobial 
stewardship intervention on broad-spectrum antibiotic prescribing by 
primary care pediatricians: a randomized trial. JAMA 2013;309:2345–
52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2013.6287
 
21. CDC. Core elements of hospital antibiotic stewardship programs 
[Internet]. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC; 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/getsmart/healthcare/implementation/
core-elements.html
 
22. Pollack LA, Srinivasan A. Core elements of hospital antibiotic 
stewardship programs from the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Clin Infect Dis 2014;59(Suppl 3):S97–100. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/cid/ciu542
 
23. CDC. Core elements of antibiotic stewardship for nursing homes 
[Internet]. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC; 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/longtermcare/prevention/antibiotic-
stewardship.html
 
24. Drekonja DM, Filice GA, Greer N, et al. Antimicrobial stewardship in 
outpatient settings: a systematic review. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
2015;36:142–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/ice.2014.41
 
25. McDonagh M, Peterson K, Winthrop K, Cantor A, Holzhammer B, 
Buckley DI. Improving antibiotic prescribing for uncomplicated 
acute respiratory tract infections. AHRQ Comparative Effectiveness 
Reviews 2016.
 
26. Ranji SR, Steinman MA, Shojania KG, Gonzales R. Interventions to 
reduce unnecessary antibiotic prescribing: a systematic review and 
quantitative analysis. Med Care 2008;46:847–62. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/MLR.0b013e318178eabd
 
27. Arnold SR, Straus SE. Interventions to improve antibiotic prescribing 
practices in ambulatory care. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2005;4:CD003539.
 
28. van der Velden AW, Pijpers EJ, Kuyvenhoven MM, Tonkin-Crine SK, 
Little P
, Verheij TJ. Effectiveness of physician-targeted interventions to 
improve antibiotic use for respiratory tract infections. Br J Gen Pract 
2012;62:801–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.3399/bjgp12X659268
 
29. Pollack LA, van Santen KL, Weiner LM, Dudeck MA, Edwards JR, 
Srinivasan A. Antibiotic stewardship programs in U.S. acute care 
hospitals: findings from the 2014 National Healthcare Safety Network 
Annual Hospital Survey. Clin Infect Dis 2016;63:443–9 http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/cid/ciw323
 
30. Chow AW, Benninger MS, Brook I, et al; Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. IDSA clinical practice guideline for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis 
in children and adults. Clin Infect Dis 2012;54:e72–112. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/cid/cis370
 
31. Gupta K, Hooton TM, Naber KG, et al; Infectious Diseases Society of 
America; European Society for Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. 
International clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of acute 
uncomplicated cystitis and pyelonephritis in women: a 2010 update by 
the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the European Society for 
Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. Clin Infect Dis 2011;52:e103–20. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciq257
 
32. Lieberthal AS, Carroll AE, Chonmaitree T, et al. The diagnosis and 
management of acute otitis media. Pediatrics 2013;131:e964–99. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2012-3488
 
33. Mandell LA, Wunderink RG, Anzueto A, et al; Infectious Diseases 
Society of America; American Thoracic Society. Infectious Diseases 
Society of America/American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on 
the management of community-acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin 
Infect Dis 2007;44(Suppl 2):S27–72. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/511159
 
34. Shulman ST, Bisno AL, Clegg HW, et al. Clinical practice guideline for 
the diagnosis and management of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: 
2012 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect 
Dis 2012;55:1279–82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/cis847
 
35. Wald ER, Applegate KE, Bordley C, et al; American Academy of 
Pediatrics. Clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis and management 
of acute bacterial sinusitis in children aged 1 to 18 years. Pediatrics 
2013;132:e262–80. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2013-1071
 
36. Little P
, Moore M, Kelly J, et al; PIPS Investigators. Delayed antibiotic 
prescribing strategies for respiratory tract infections in primary care: 
pragmatic, factorial, randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2014;348:g1606. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.g1606
 
37. Little P
, Rumsby K, Kelly J, et al. Information leaflet and antibiotic 
prescribing strategies for acute lower respiratory tract infection: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2005;293:3029–35. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/jama.293.24.3029
 
38. de la Poza Abad M, Mas Dalmau G, Moreno Bakedano M, et al; 
Delayed Antibiotic Prescription (DAP) Group. Prescription strategies 
in acute uncomplicated respiratory infections: a randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA Intern Med 2016;176:21–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jamainternmed.2015.7088
 
39. Chao JH, Kunkov S, Reyes LB, Lichten S, Crain EF. Comparison of 
two approaches to observation therapy for acute otitis media in the 
emergency department. Pediatrics 2008;121:e1352–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1542/peds.2007-2278
 
40. Francis NA, Gillespie D, Nuttall J, et al. Delayed antibiotic prescribing 
and associated antibiotic consumption in adults with acute cough. Br J 
Gen Pract 2012;62:e639–46. http://dx.doi.org/10.3399/bjgp12X654614
 
41. McCormick DP
, Chonmaitree T, Pittman C, et al. Nonsevere acute otitis 
media: a clinical trial comparing outcomes of watchful waiting versus 
immediate antibiotic treatment. Pediatrics 2005;115:1455–65. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2004-1665
 
42. Siegel RM, Kiely M, Bien JP
, et al. Treatment of otitis media with 
observation and a safety-net antibiotic prescription. Pediatrics 
2003;112:527–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.112.3.527
 
43. Spiro DM, Tay KY, Arnold DH, Dziura JD, Baker MD, Shapiro ED. 
Wait-and-see prescription for the treatment of acute otitis media: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2006;296:1235–41. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/jama.296.10.1235
 Recommendations and Reports
12 
MMWR / November 11, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
44. Rosenfeld RM, Piccirillo JF, Chandrasekhar SS, et al. Clinical 
practice guideline (update): Adult Sinusitis Executive Summary. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2015;152:598–609. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/0194599815574247
 
45. Little P
, Stuart B, Francis N, et al; GRACE consortium. Effects 
of internet-based training on antibiotic prescribing rates for acute 
respiratory-tract infections: a multinational, cluster, randomised, 
factorial, controlled trial. Lancet 2013;382:1175–82. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60994-0
 
46. Cals JW, de Bock L, Beckers PJ, et al. Enhanced communication 
skills and C-reactive protein point-of-care testing for respiratory tract 
infection: 3.5-year follow-up of a cluster randomized trial. Ann Fam 
Med 2013;11:157–64. http://dx.doi.org/10.1370/afm.1477
 
47. McGinn TG, McCullagh L, Kannry J, et al. Efficacy of an evidence-based 
clinical decision support in primary care practices: a randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA Intern Med 2013;173:1584–91. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jamainternmed.2013.8980
 
48. Jenkins TC, Irwin A, Coombs L, et al. Effects of clinical pathways 
for common outpatient infections on antibiotic prescribing. 
Am J Med 2013;126:327–335.e12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
amjmed.2012.10.027
 
49. Gonzales R, Anderer T, McCulloch CE, et al. A cluster randomized 
trial of decision support strategies for reducing antibiotic use in acute 
bronchitis. JAMA Intern Med 2013;173:267–73. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.1589
 
50. Rattinger GB, Mullins CD, Zuckerman IH, et al. A sustainable strategy 
to prevent misuse of antibiotics for acute respiratory infections. PLoS 
One 2012;7:e51147. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0051147
 
51. Linder JA, Schnipper JL, Tsurikova R, et al. Documentation-based 
clinical decision support to improve antibiotic prescribing for acute 
respiratory infections in primary care: a cluster randomised controlled 
trial. Inform Prim Care 2009;17:231–40.
 
52. Forrest CB, Fiks AG, Bailey LC, et al. Improving adherence to 
otitis media guidelines with clinical decision support and physician 
feedback. Pediatrics 2013;131:e1071–81. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/
peds.2012-1988
 
53. Harper R, Temkin T, Bhargava R. Optimizing the use of telephone 
nursing advice for upper respiratory infection symptoms. Am J Manag 
Care 2015;21:264–70.
 
54. Metlay JP
, Camargo CA Jr, MacKenzie T, et al; IMPAACT Investigators. 
Cluster-randomized trial to improve antibiotic use for adults with 
acute respiratory infections treated in emergency departments. 
Ann Emerg Med 2007;50:221–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
annemergmed.2007.03.022
 
55. Finkelstein JA, Huang SS, Kleinman K, et al. Impact of a 16-community 
trial to promote judicious antibiotic use in Massachusetts. Pediatrics 
2008;121:e15–23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2007-0819
 
56. Butler CC, Simpson SA, Dunstan F, et al. Effectiveness of multifaceted 
educational programme to reduce antibiotic dispensing in primary care: 
practice based randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2012;344:d8173. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.d8173
 
57. Dempsey PP
, Businger AC, Whaley LE, Gagne JJ, Linder JA. Primary 
care clinicians’ perceptions about antibiotic prescribing for acute 
bronchitis: a qualitative study. BMC Fam Pract 2014;15:194. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12875-014-0194-5
 
58. Hallsworth M, Chadborn T, Sallis A, et al. Provision of social norm 
feedback to high prescribers of antibiotics in general practice: a pragmatic 
national randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2016;387:1743–52. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00215-4
 
59. Harris AM, Hicks LA, Qaseem A; High Value Care Task Force of the 
American College of Physicians and for the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention. Appropriate antibiotic use for acute respiratory tract 
infection in adults: advice for high-value care from the American College 
of Physicians and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Ann 
Intern Med 2016;164:425–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/M15-1840
 
60. Hersh AL, Jackson MA, Hicks LA; American Academy of Pediatrics 
Committee on Infectious Diseases. Principles of judicious antibiotic 
prescribing for upper respiratory tract infections in pediatrics. Pediatrics 
2013;132:1146–54. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2013-3260
 
61. The White House. National action plan for combating antibiotic-
resistant bacteria [Internet]. Washington, DC: The White House; 2015. 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/national_action_
plan_for_combating_antibotic-resistant_bacteria.pdf
 
62. National Committee for Quality Assurance. HEDIS & 
performance measurement [Internet]. Washington, DC: National 
Committee for Quality Assurance; 2016. http://www.ncqa.org/
hedis-quality-measurement
 
63. Harris RH, MacKenzie TD, Leeman-Castillo B, et al. Optimizing 
antibiotic prescribing for acute respiratory tract infections in an urban 
urgent care clinic. J Gen Intern Med 2003;18:326–34. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1046/j.1525-1497.2003.20410.x
 
64. Juzych NS, Banerjee M, Essenmacher L, Lerner SA. Improvements 
in antimicrobial prescribing for treatment of upper respiratory tract 
infections through provider education. J Gen Intern Med 2005;20:901–
5.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1525-1497.2005.0198.x 
 
65. Mangione-Smith R, Zhou C, Robinson JD, Taylor JA, Elliott MN, 
Heritage J. Communication practices and antibiotic use for acute 
respiratory tract infections in children. Ann Fam Med 2015;13:221–7. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1370/afm.1785
 
66. Mangione-Smith R, McGlynn EA, Elliott MN, McDonald L, Franz 
CE, Kravitz RL. Parent expectations for antibiotics, physician-
parent communication, and satisfaction. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 
2001;155:800–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archpedi.155.7.800
 
67. Roberts RM, Albert AP
, Johnson DD, Hicks LA. Can improving 
knowledge of antibiotic-associated adverse drug events reduce parent 
and patient demand for antibiotics? Health Serv Res Manag Epidemiol 
2015;2. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/2333392814568345
 
68. Vangay P
, Ward T, Gerber JS, Knights D. Antibiotics, pediatric dysbiosis, 
and disease. Cell Host Microbe 2015;17:553–64. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.chom.2015.04.006
 
69. Gjelstad S, Høye S, Straand J, Brekke M, Dalen I, Lindbæk M. 
Improving antibiotic prescribing in acute respiratory tract infections: 
cluster randomised trial from Norwegian general practice (prescription 
peer academic detailing (Rx-PAD) study). BMJ 2013;347:f4403. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.f4403
 
70. Solomon DH, Van Houten L, Glynn RJ, et al. Academic detailing to 
improve use of broad-spectrum antibiotics at an academic medical center. 
Arch Intern Med 2001;161:1897–902. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archinte.161.15.1897
 
71. Soumerai SB, Avorn J. Principles of educational outreach (‘academic 
detailing’) to improve clinical decision making. JAMA 1990;263:549–
56. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.1990.03440040088034
 
72. Cals JWL, Scheppers NAM, Hopstaken RM, et al. Evidence based 
management of acute bronchitis; sustained competence of enhanced 
communication skills acquisition in general practice. Patient Educ Couns 
2007;68:270–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2007.06.014
 
73. Yu K, Rho J, Morcos M, et al. Evaluation of dedicated infectious diseases 
pharmacists on antimicrobial stewardship teams. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2014;71:1019–28. http://dx.doi.org/10.2146/ajhp130612
  ISSN: 1057-5987 (Print)
The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free of 
charge in electronic format. To receive an electronic copy each week, visit MMWR’s free subscription page at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/mmwrsubscribe.html. 
Paper copy subscriptions are available through the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402; telephone 
202-512-1800.
Readers who have difficulty accessing this PDF file may access the HTML file at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/rr/rr6506a1.htm?s_cid=rr6506a1_w. 
Address all inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for publication, to Executive Editor, MMWR Series, Mailstop E-90, 
CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30329-4027 or to mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations 
or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses 
listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication.
