 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Recommendations for Conduct, Methodological Practices,
and Reporting of Cost-effectiveness Analyses
Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine
Gillian D. Sanders, PhD; Peter J. Neumann, ScD; Anirban Basu, PhD; Dan W. Brock, PhD; David Feeny, PhD;
Murray Krahn, MD, MSc; Karen M. Kuntz, ScD; David O. Meltzer, MD, PhD; Douglas K. Owens, MD, MS;
Lisa A. Prosser, PhD; Joshua A. Salomon, PhD; Mark J. Sculpher, PhD; Thomas A. Trikalinos, MD;
Louise B. Russell, PhD; Joanna E. Siegel, ScD; Theodore G. Ganiats, MD
IMPORTANCE Since publication of the report by the Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and
Medicine in 1996, researchers have advanced the methods of cost-effectiveness analysis,
and policy makers have experimented with its application. The need to deliver health care
efficiently and the importance of using analytic techniques to understand the clinical and
economic consequences of strategies to improve health have increased in recent years.
OBJECTIVE To review the state of the field and provide recommendations to improve the
quality of cost-effectiveness analyses. The intended audiences include researchers,
government policy makers, public health officials, health care administrators, payers,
businesses, clinicians, patients, and consumers.
DESIGN In 2012, the Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine was formed
and included 2 co-chairs, 13 members, and 3 additional members of a leadership group. These
members were selected on the basis of their experience in the field to provide broad
expertise in the design, conduct, and use of cost-effectiveness analyses. Over the next 3.5
years, the panel developed recommendations by consensus. These recommendations were
then reviewed by invited external reviewers and through a public posting process.
FINDINGS The concept of a “reference case”and a set of standard methodological practices
that all cost-effectiveness analyses should follow to improve quality and comparability
are recommended. All cost-effectiveness analyses should report 2 reference case analyses:
one based on a health care sector perspective and another based on a societal perspective.
The use of an “impact inventory,”which is a structured table that contains consequences
(both inside and outside the formal health care sector), intended to clarify the scope and
boundaries of the 2 reference case analyses is also recommended. This special
communication reviews these recommendations and others concerning the estimation of the
consequences of interventions, the valuation of health outcomes, and the reporting of
cost-effectiveness analyses.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE The Second Panel reviewed the current status of the field of
cost-effectiveness analysis and developed a new set of recommendations. Major changes
include the recommendation to perform analyses from 2 reference case perspectives and to
provide an impact inventory to clarify included consequences.
JAMA. 2016;316(10):1093-1103. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.12195
Corrected on November 8, 2016.
Editorial page 1049
Supplemental content
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Gillian D.
Sanders, PhD, Duke Clinical Research
Institute, 2400 Pratt St, Durham, NC
27705 (gillian.sanders@duke.edu).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | Special Communication
(Reprinted)
1093
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Kaohsiung Med Univ User  on 10/06/2018
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
I
n 1993, the US Public Health Service convened a panel of 13
nongovernment scientists and scholars with expertise in eco-
nomics, clinical medicine, ethics, and statistics to review the
state of cost-effectiveness analysis and to develop recommenda-
tions for its conduct and use in health and medicine (a glossary of
terms appears in the Box).1 The primary goals were to improve the
quality of cost-effectiveness analyses and promote comparability
across studies.
In 1996, the original Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and
MedicinepublisheditsfindingsinaseriesofarticlesinJAMA,2-4and
in a book.1 The panel emphasized that the growing field of cost-
effectivenessanalysisprovidedanopportunitytorationalizehealth
policyifthetechniqueanditsapplicationwerewellunderstoodand
implemented.
During the 20 years since the release of the panel’
s report, the
number of published cost-effectiveness analyses has increased
substantially. Moreover, the field has advanced in many ways such
as by strengthening its theoretical foundations; improving meth-
ods for evidence synthesis, modeling, and uncertainty analysis;
considering more closely the ethical issues surrounding the use of
cost-effectiveness analysis; and standardizing requirements for
the reporting of results. During the same period, health care also
has experienced substantial changes in terms of its use of techno-
logical advances and the organization, financing, cost, and delivery
of care. New uses of cost-effectiveness analysis have also emerged
in the United States and abroad. Examples from the United States
include the use of cost-effectiveness analysis by the Advisory
Committee for Immunization Practices, which establishes national
immunization policy recommendations on behalf of the US Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention.5 A prominent example in
the United Kingdom is the use of cost-effectiveness analysis by
the National Institute of Health and Care Excellence, which is a
nondepartmental public body created in 1999 that serves England
and Wales.6
The need to deliver health care efficiently and the importance
of using analytic techniques to understand the clinical and eco-
nomic consequences of strategies to improve health have only
increased. Health care spending in the United States comprised
13% of gross domestic product in 1995; in 2014, it approached
18%.7 For these reasons, an update of the original panel’
s efforts
is important.
Methods
In 2011, members of the original panel began planning for an
update to the 1996 recommendations. Over the next year, a leader-
ship group was formed that included the eventual co-chairs (G.D.S.
and P.J.N.) of the Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and
Medicine and coauthors of this article (L.B.R., J.E.S., and T.G.G.).
This leadership group convened a new panel during the fall 2012
and developed a process for updating the original report.
The 13 individuals invited to join the Second Panel were in-
vited by the leadership group (after consultation with members
of the first panel and other advisors) and selected on the basis of
their experience in the field to provide broad expertise in the
design, conduct, and use of cost-effectiveness analyses. Three
international members (D.F., M.K, and M.J.S.) reflected the per-
spectives and experiences of other countries that have used cost-
effectiveness analysis. The group met as a full panel through regu-
lar teleconferences beginning in early 2013 and held 5 in-person
meetings over the next few years to update the recommendations.
The Second Panel has updated and expanded the recommen-
dations of the original panel in numerous ways. The panel consid-
ered each of the original recommendations and the need to modify
Box. Glossarya
Cost-benefit analysis: An analytic tool for estimating the net social
benefit of a program or intervention as the incremental benefit
of the program minus the incremental cost, with all benefits and
costs measured in US dollars.
Cost-effectiveness analysis: An analytic tool in which the costs
and effects of a program and at least 1 alternative are calculated
and presented in a ratio of incremental cost to incremental effect.
Effects are health outcomes, such as cases of a disease prevented,
years of life gained, or quality-adjusted life-years, rather than
monetary measures as in cost-benefit analysis.
Disaggregated measures: Attribution of total costs or
quality-adjusted life-years to intermediate categories associated
with specific cost categories (eg, intervention-specific vs relating
to the care of the condition, health care sector vs other sector)
or intermediate health outcomes. A typical breakdown of costs
into disaggregated measures would report intervention-specific
and condition-related costs, along with more detailed categories
as relevant (eg, hospitalization, outpatient visits). Other categories
may be relevant depending on the decision context.
Discounting: The process of converting future dollars and future
health outcomes to their present values.
Health care sector perspective: A viewpoint for conducting
a cost-effectiveness analysis that includes formal health care
sector (medical) costs borne by third-party payers and paid
out-of-pocket by patients. These third-party and out-of-pocket
medical costs include current and future costs, related and
unrelated to the condition under consideration.
Incremental cost-effectiveness ratio: The ratio of the difference
in costs between 2 alternatives to the difference in effectiveness
between the same 2 alternatives.
Net health benefit: Linear combination of costs and effects,
expressed in effectiveness units.
Net monetary benefit: Linear combination of costs and effects,
expressed in US dollars.
Perspective: The viewpoint from which a cost-effectiveness
analysis is conducted.
Quality-adjusted life-year: A measure of health outcome
that assigns a weight to each period (ranging from 0 to 1),
corresponding to the health-related quality of life during that
period, in which a weight of 1 corresponds to optimal health,
and a weight of 0 corresponds to a health state judged equivalent
to death; these are then aggregated across periods.
Reference case: A set of standard methodological practices
that all cost-effectiveness analyses should follow to improve
comparability and quality.
Societal perspective: A viewpoint for conducting
a cost-effectiveness analysis that incorporates all costs and
health effects regardless of who incurs the costs and who obtains
the effects.
aAdapted from glossary in Gold et al.1
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Recommendations From the Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine
1094
JAMA
September 13, 2016
Volume 316, Number 10
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Kaohsiung Med Univ User  on 10/06/2018
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
or expand them based on changes in the field. For new topic areas
(decision modeling, evidence synthesis, ethics), panel members
drafted recommendations de novo. Throughout the process, draft
recommendations were circulated first among chapter authors and
then more broadly among the panel as a whole for email, telecon-
ference, and in-person discussion and consensus. If consensus was
not possible, the plan was for the panel to vote, with an 80%
majority required to pass and with the option for a minority report.
Consensus was reached relatively easily on most recommenda-
tions. Two exceptions were recommendations about perspectives
for the reference case (whether to recommend 1, 2, or more per-
spectives and how to define them) and on productivity (whether to
include it in the numerator or denominator of the incremental cost-
effectiveness ratio). After further discussion, consensus was
reached on these and all other issues without the need for a formal
vote and without any minority reports.
The Second Panel benefited from the active participation of
somemembersoftheoriginalpanel,andfromreviewofitsworkby
experts in the field through both an external review process and a
publiccommentperiod(participantsofthisprocessarelistedinthe
additional contributions section at the end of the article).
The objectives were to review the state of the field and pro-
viderecommendationstoimprovethequalityandpromotethecom-
parabilityofcost-effectivenessanalyses.Theintendedaudiencesare,
in addition to students and researchers, government policy mak-
ers, public health officials, health care administrators, payers, busi-
nesses, clinicians, patients, and consumers.
The landscape and the set of challenges to cost-effectiveness
analysis have changed since 1996. Cost-effectiveness analysis is
no longer a nascent approach, and variation in published studies
cannot be ascribed to the newness of its concepts or methods.
Compared with the original panel, the Second Panel had the
advantage of drawing on 2 decades of methodological and policy
advances. However, the Second Panel also had the challenge of
sifting through and trying to make sense of the diverse and some-
times contrasting opinions about and experiences with cost-
effectiveness analysis.
Key Recommendations
Overview
Cost-effectiveness analysis can help inform decisions about how to
applyneworexistingtests,therapies,andpreventiveandpublichealth
interventions so that they represent a judicious use of resources. It
also can help to fill gaps in the evidence about the estimated popu-
lation-level public health effect of such interventions, and can sup-
port decisions to disinvest in older interventions for which there are
more cost-effective alternatives. Cost-effectiveness analysis pro-
videsaframeworkforcomparingtherelativevalueofdifferentinter-
ventions, along with information that can help decision makers sort
throughalternativesanddecidewhichonesbestservetheirprogram-
matic and financial needs.
The full set of recommendations are included in the eAppen-
dixintheSupplement.Thecompletereportwillbepublishedinbook
forminOctober2016.8ThisSpecialCommunicationsummarizeskey
recommendationsregardingthereferencecaseandstudyperspec-
tives, as well as other important aspects of the report.
Reference Cases
The original panel recommended a reference case, which is a set of
standard methodological practices that all cost-effectiveness analy-
ses should follow to improve comparability and quality.1 It further
recommended that reference case analyses take a societal per-
spective to reflect the perspective of a decision maker whose
intention is to make decisions about the broad allocation of
resources across the entire population. In a cost-effectiveness
analysis conducted from a societal perspective, the analyst consid-
ers all parties affected by the intervention and counts all significant
outcomes and costs that flow from it, regardless of who experi-
ences the outcomes or bears the costs. The original panel also
noted that, to address specific decision contexts, analysts might
also include narrower perspectives, such as that of the health care
sector, to reflect the view of a decision maker whose responsibility
rests only within that sector. The Second Panel endorses the refer-
ence case concept for the purposes originally intended, namely to
improve the quality of cost-effectiveness analyses and promote
comparability across studies.
Societal Perspective: Experience Since the Original Panel
Since publication of the original panel’
s recommendations in 1996,
there has been a substantial increase in the number of published
cost-effectiveness analyses, and many have not used a societal per-
spective as defined by the original panel.9-12 One study found, for
example, that only 341 (29%) of 1163 cost per quality-adjusted life-
year (QALY) analyses published through 2005 adopted a societal
perspective.11 Even when analysts have stated that they have used
a societal perspective, they have often omitted potentially impor-
tant elements, such as costs related to patient and caregiver time,
or to transportation or non–health care sectors (eg, education), so
that the perspective of the analysis is essentially a narrower
one.11,13-15 Moreover, since 1996, decision-making bodies primarily
in Europe, Australia, and Canada have formally incorporated cost-
effectiveness analysis into health technology assessment pro-
cesses to inform coverage and reimbursement decisions, but gen-
erally have not adopted a societal perspective, preferring instead a
more focused health system perspective. Others have highlighted
the theoretical challenges associated with aggregating the costs
and effects that fall on different sectors and individuals in a way
that reflects a consensus position on social welfare.16,17
Panel’
s Reference Case Recommendations
The following recommendations are important to promote qual-
ity and comparability, while also recognizing (1) the different pref-
erences, types of interventions, needs, and authorities of decision
makers, (2) the importance of preserving flexibility for analysts
in accommodating those factors, and (3) the value that stems
from illustrating the consequences of decisions from different
viewpoints.
Recommendation 1: Reference Cases and Perspectives
All studies should report a reference case analysis based on a
health care sector perspective and another reference case analy-
sis based on a societal perspective. The reference cases are
defined by recommendations for components to consider for
evaluation, methods to use, and elements for reporting. It is rec-
ommended that reference case analyses measure health effects
Recommendations From the Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
September 13, 2016
Volume 316, Number 10
1095
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Kaohsiung Med Univ User  on 10/06/2018
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
in terms of QALYs. Standardizing methods and components
within a perspective is intended to enhance consistency and com-
parability across studies.
Recommendation 2: Health Care Sector Reference Case
Results of the health care sector reference case analysis should be
summarized in the conventional form as an incremental cost-
effectivenessratio.Netmonetarybenefitornethealthbenefitmay
alsobereported,andarangeofcost-effectivenessthresholdsshould
be considered. In addition, the health care sector perspective
should include formal health care sector (medical) costs reim-
bursedbythird-partypayersorpaidout-of-pocketbypatients.Both
types of medical costs include current and future costs both re-
lated and unrelated to the condition under consideration.
Recommendation 3: Societal Reference Case
Recommendation 3A: Inclusion of an Impact Inventory | Evaluation
of the broader effects of interventions designed to improve health
is strongly recommended. The societal reference case analysis
should include medical costs (current and future, related and unre-
lated) borne by third-party payers and paid out-of-pocket by pa-
tients,timecostsofpatientsinseekingandreceivingcare,timecosts
of informal (unpaid) caregivers, transportation costs, effects on fu-
tureproductivityandconsumption,andothercostsandeffectsout-
sidethehealthcaresector.Tomakethisevaluationmoreexplicitand
transparent, inclusion of an “impact inventory”that lists the health
and nonhealth effects of an intervention should be considered in a
societalreferencecaseanalysis(describedinmoredetailbelowand
in the Figure 1). The main purpose of the impact inventory is to en-
surethatallconsequences,includingthoseoutsidetheformalhealth
care sector, are considered regularly and comprehensively, which
has generally not been the case to date.
Recommendation 3B: Quantifying and Valuing Nonhealth Compo-
nents in the Impact Inventory | Analysts should attempt to quantify
and value nonhealth consequences in the impact inventory unless
those consequences are likely to have a negligible effect on the re-
sult of the analysis.
Figure 1. Impact Inventory Template
Sector
Type of Impact
(list category within each sector with unit of
measure if relevant)a
Formal Health Care Sector
Health
Health outcomes (effects)
Informal Health Care Sector
Included in This
Reference Case Analysis
From…Perspective?
Notes on
Sources of
Evidence
Health Care
Sector
Societal
Longevity effects
Health-related quality-of-life effects
Other health effects (eg, adverse events
and secondary transmissions of infections)
Medical costs
Paid for by third-party payers
Health
Patient-time costs
NA
Non−Health Care Sectors (with examples of possible items)
Productivity
Labor market earnings lost
NA
Consumption
Future consumption unrelated to health
NA
Social Services
Cost of social services as part of intervention
NA
Education
Impact of intervention on educational
achievement of population
NA
Housing
Cost of intervention on home improvements
(eg, removing lead paint)
NA
Environment
Production of toxic waste pollution by
intervention
NA
Other (specify)
Other impacts
NA
Legal or
Criminal Justice
Number of crimes related to intervention
NA
Unpaid caregiver-time costs
NA
Cost of crimes related to intervention
NA
Cost of unpaid lost productivity due to illness
NA
Cost of uncompensated household productionb
NA
Transportation costs
NA
Paid for by patients out-of-pocket
Future related medical costs (payers
and patients)
Future unrelated medical costs (payers
and patients)
a Categories listed are intended
as examples for analysts.
bExamples include activities such
as food preparation, cooking,
and clean up in the household;
household management; shopping;
obtaining services; and travel
related to household activity.18
NA indicates not applicable.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Recommendations From the Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine
1096
JAMA
September 13, 2016
Volume 316, Number 10
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Kaohsiung Med Univ User  on 10/06/2018
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Recommendation3C:SummaryandDisaggregatedMeasures|Itwould
behelpfultoinformdecisionmakersthroughthequantificationand
valuation of all health and nonhealth effects of interventions, and
to summarize those effects in a single quantitative measure, such
asanincrementalcost-effectivenessratio,netmonetarybenefit,or
net health benefit. However, there are no widely agreed on meth-
odsforquantifyingandvaluingsomeofthesebroadereffectsincost-
effectiveness analyses. Analysts should present the items listed in
the impact inventory in the form of disaggregated consequences
across different sectors. It is also recommended that analysts use 1
or more summary measures, such as an incremental cost-
effectivenessratio,netmonetarybenefit,ornethealthbenefit,that
include some or all of the items listed in the impact inventory. Ana-
lysts should clearly identify which items are included and how they
aremeasuredandvalued,andprovidearationalefortheirmethod-
ological decisions.
Recommendation 4: Reporting the Reference Cases
and Other Perspectives
Recommendation4A:StatingthePerspective|Analystsshouldclearly
state the perspective of every analysis reported.
Recommendation 4B: Presenting Other Perspectives | When spe-
cificdecisionmakershavebeenidentified,suchasaparticularpub-
lic or private payer, analysts may want to present results from that
decisionmaker’
sperspectiveinadditiontothe2referencecaseper-
spectives. In these cases, analysts should indicate who the primary
decision makers were whose deliberations are intended to be in-
formed by the analysis.
Recommendation 4C: Importance of Transparency and Sensitivity
Analysis | The items included in a cost-effectiveness analysis and
the manner in which they are valued involve numerous choices.
Analysts should be transparent about how they have conducted
the analyses, and convey how the results change with alternative
assumptions. Sensitivity analysis should describe the assump-
tions to which the results for different perspectives are sensitive.
Other Recommendations Regarding the Design
and Conduct of Cost-effectiveness Analyses
Itisimportanttofocusonrelevantresearchquestions,maintainthe
focus as the study progresses, and avoid analytic pitfalls. A written
protocol at the outset of an analysis that details key aspects of the
design and conduct of the cost-effectiveness analysis is recom-
mended(eg,thestudyobjective;theintervention,comparators,and
populationsunderconsideration;thetimehorizon;sourcesofdata;
a list of key assumptions).
Intermsofvaluinghealthoutcomes,theSecondPanel(inagree-
mentwiththeoriginalpanel)recommendsthat(1)thereferencecase
cost-effectivenessanalysesshouldmeasurehealtheffectsinterms
of QALYs (including QALYs accruing to patients and to any other af-
fectedpartiessuchascaregivers);(2)qualityweightsshouldbepref-
erence based and interval scaled; and (3) community preferences
forhealthstatesarethemostappropriatesourceofpreferencesfor
referencecaseanalyses.Theuseofgenericpreference-basedmea-
suresisrecommendedtoenhancecomparabilityacrossstudies,but
it is emphasized that the instrument used should be fit for purpose
in the sense that its measurement properties are adequate to mea-
surethedifferencesandchangesinhealthacrosstheinterventions
under consideration. Although generic preference-based mea-
sures should be used for the reference case analyses, analysts may
also want to present estimates based on scores obtained from pa-
tients or from other sources.
In a departure from the original panel, the Second Panel ob-
serves that, in general, effects on productivity are unlikely to have
been captured by most preference-based measures, and that evi-
dence is not definitive that the effects of morbidity on leisure are
necessarilyreflectedintheutilityscoresorquality-of-lifeweights.19-25
Therefore, it is recommended that the productivity consequences
related to changes in health status be reflected in the numerator of
cost-effectivenessratiosforreferencecaseanalysesconductedun-
der the societal perspective, while recognizing the possibility that
the uncertainty about how productivity and the effects of morbid-
ity on leisure activities are captured in preference-based measures
couldleadtodoublecounting.Researchrecommendationsaremade
to develop improved quality-of-life weights that would avoid such
double counting.
In terms of estimating costs for cost-effectiveness analyses, a
keydeparturefromtheoriginalpanelistheconsiderationofcostcat-
egories from the 2 reference case perspectives. It is now recom-
mendedthatsomecomponents(eg,currentandfuturemedicalcosts
and patients’out-of-pocket costs) should be included in both per-
spectives, while others (eg, time costs for patients and caregivers,
transportation costs, productivity benefits, consumption costs,
and other non–health-care sector costs) should be included only in
the societal reference case perspective (Table 1). The new recom-
mendations also suggest inclusion of future costs (ie, that cost-
effectiveness analyses account for related or unrelated health care
Table 1. Cost Components Included in the 2 Recommended Reference
Case Perspectives
Cost Component
Reference Case Perspective
Health Care
Societal
Formal Health Care Sectora
Costs paid by third-party payers
Yes
Yes
Costs paid out-of-pocket by patients
Yes
Yes
Informal Health Care Sector
Patient-time costs
No
Yes
Unpaid caregiver-time costs
No
Yes
Transportation costs
No
Yes
Non–Health Care Sectors
Productivity
No
Yes
Consumption
No
Yes
Social services
No
Yes
Legal or criminal justice
No
Yes
Education
No
Yes
Housing
No
Yes
Environment
No
Yes
Other (eg, friction costs)
No
Yes
a Includes current and future costs related and unrelated to the condition under
consideration.
Recommendations From the Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
September 13, 2016
Volume 316, Number 10
1097
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Kaohsiung Med Univ User  on 10/06/2018
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
costs that occur during the additional life-years produced by an in-
tervention).Theoriginalpaneldiscussedthisissuebutdidnotreach
consensus (noting that analysts could use their discretion) due to
the lack of a developed theoretical basis for including future costs
at the time of its report.26-34
It is important to interpret, adjust, and synthesize evidence in
a cost-effectiveness analysis, drawing on recent guidance regard-
ing systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Among the recommen-
dations,analystsshould(1)provideaqualitativedescriptionandcri-
tique of the evidence base, (2) be explicit about whether and how
bias in each study and across studies in the evidence was handled,
(3) produce bias-corrected estimates, and (4) be explicit about
whether and how estimates were adjusted for transferability.
Costsandhealtheffectsshouldbediscountedatthesamerate
incost-effectivenessanalyses.Furthermore,givenavailabledataon
realeconomicgrowthandcorrespondingestimatesoftherealcon-
sumption rate of interest and to promote comparability across
studies, 3% is the most appropriate real discount rate for cost-
effectiveness analyses. However, the panel recommends conduct-
ing sensitivity analyses that allow for a reasonable range of rates,
along with more research on the topic of using different discount
rates for costs and health effects in cost-effectiveness analyses.
Recommendations Regarding Reporting
and Interpreting Cost-effectiveness Analyses
Organization and clarity in reporting cost-effectiveness analyses35
are important and there are expanded recommendations to im-
prove and standardize reporting (Figure 2). Analysts should docu-
ment cost-effectiveness analyses in both a journal article and in a
technical appendix.
All of the elements included in the reporting checklist should be
briefly covered in the journal article, with additional detail provided
within the technical appendix. There are no specific recommenda-
tions on which elements are of the highest priority because this may
depend to some extent on the specifics of the analysis. Typical ele-
ments often covered primarily in the technical appendix include
detailed reporting of intermediate outcomes and disaggregated re-
sults,uncertaintyandsecondaryanalyses,modelingassumptions,evi-
dencesynthesis,modelvalidation,andinformationonsourcesofdata
regarding effectiveness, cost, and preferences.
Inclusion of a structured abstract for journal articles, incorpo-
ration of an impact inventory to aid analysts in providing a com-
plete and transparent account of the reference cases, reporting of
intermediate end points and disaggregated results, and disclosure
of potential conflicts of interest are recommended.
Structured Abstract
Although each journal may have its own requirements, it is recom-
mended that a structured abstract specifically designed for cost-
effectivenessanalysesshouldbeincludedinthejournalarticlewhen-
ever possible (Table 2).
Impact Inventory
As noted, the new reference case recommendations mean report-
ingofresultsfromboththehealthcaresectorperspectiveandtheso-
cietal perspective. Analysts should clearly delineate the results from
the 2 reference case perspectives and identify differences using the
impactinventory(Figure1).Analystsshouldconsiderthedecisioncon-
textwhendeterminingifonereferencecaseperspectiveistobepre-
sented in greater detail than the other. The discussion section of the
journal article should address qualitative and quantitative differ-
ences between the 2 reference case perspectives. It is important to
highlight the components of the impact inventory most affected by
the condition or those that differ between the 2 perspectives.
For interventions that have substantial effects beyond the for-
mal health care sector, such as those that address public health pro-
gramsorchildren’
shealth,itisimportanttohighlightdifferencesbe-
tween the health care sector and societal perspectives. If a sector or
consequence within a sector is identified but excluded from a cost-
effectivenessanalysis,analystsshouldprovideabriefrationaleinthe
accompanying text or in the “Notes on Sources of Evidence”section
of the impact inventory. The impact inventory should be completed
andreportedforallanalyses,eventhoserestrictedtothehealthcare
sector to highlight any effects or costs not fully addressed.
For all analyses, the impact inventory should identify the sec-
tors affected and list the specific types of impacts within each sec-
tor. If the results in the societal reference case differ substantially
fromthoseinthehealthcaresectorreferencecase,allidentifiedef-
fects should ideally be quantified, valued if possible, and reported
in the results section. Items in categories not estimated quantita-
tivelyshouldbenamedintheimpactinventoryandaddressedinthe
discussionsection,thetechnicalappendix,orboth.Analystsshould
initiallyconsidertheelementsoftheimpactinventoryaspartofthe
design exercise for an analysis and then include the completed im-
pact inventory in the journal article (or in the technical appendix if
space limitations preclude inclusion in the journal report).
Reporting of Intermediate End Points
and Disaggregated Results
Incrementalcost-effectivenessratiosprovideaconcisesummaryof
the results. The panel recommends that information on intermedi-
ate outcomes and disaggregated results should also be included in
thejournalarticlewithmoredetailprovidedinthetechnicalappen-
dix.Intermediateoutcomessuchasdiagnoses,testoutcomes,health
events, or hospitalizations provide readers with an opportunity to
assesstheeffectivenessoftheinterventionsinmorefamiliarterms,
and to compare the results with other analyses that may have used
similaroutcomes.Thereportingofdisaggregatedresults,whichre-
fers to the attribution of total costs or QALYs to specific categories,
can help audiences understand the different magnitudes of eco-
nomic and health consequences.
Interpreting Results for Decision Makers
Because few decision makers in the United States or elsewhere use
strict cost-effectiveness thresholds for decision making, conclu-
sionsaboutthecost-effectivenessofaninterventionshouldbeframed
with respect to the decision context and how the specific set of re-
sults can aid and inform decision making.36 Comparison with 1 spe-
cific threshold should be avoided (unless appropriate for the deci-
sioncontext);analystsshouldinsteadhighlighthowclinicalorpolicy
recommendations might change with consideration of a range of
thresholds.37Comparingcost-effectivenessresultswiththoseofsimi-
larinterventionsisalsorecommended.Thediscussionsectionofthe
journal article is the appropriate place to consider these issues.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Recommendations From the Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine
1098
JAMA
September 13, 2016
Volume 316, Number 10
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Kaohsiung Med Univ User  on 10/06/2018
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
Disclosure policy for authors of cost-effectiveness analyses should
followthestandardsformulatedbytheInternationalCommitteeof
Medical Journal Editors.
Worked Examples
Within the full report of the Second Panel,8 2 new worked
examples (one focusing on alcohol use disorders and another on
end-of-life care) are included. These worked examples demon-
Figure 2. Reporting Checklist for Cost-effectiveness Analyses
Introduction
Element
Journal Article Technical Appendix
Background of the problem
Study Design and Scope
Methods and Data
Objectives
Audience
Type of analysis
Target populations
Description of interventions and comparators (including no intervention, if applicable)
Time horizon
Other intervention descriptors (eg, care setting, model of delivery, intensity and timing of intervention)
Analytic perspectives (eg, reference case perspectives [health care sector, societal]; other perspectives such as employer or payer)
Trial-based analysis or model-based analysis. If model-based:
Identification of key outcomes
Impact Inventory
Full accounting of consequences within and outside the health care sector
Results
Results of model validation
Disclosures
Statement of any potential conflicts of interest due to funding source, collaborations, or outside interests
Discussion
Summary of reference case results
Summary of sensitivity of results to assumptions and uncertainties in the analysis
Discussion of the study results in the context of results of related cost-effective analyses
Limitations of the study
Relevance of study results to specific policy questions or decisions
Discussion of ethical implications (eg, distributive implications relating to age, disability, or other characteristics of the population)
Reference case results (discounted and undiscounted): total costs and effectiveness, incremental costs and effectiveness, incremental
cost-effectiveness ratios, measures of uncertainty 
Disaggregated results for important categories of costs, outcomes, or both
Results of sensitivity analysis
Other estimates of uncertainty
Graphical representation of cost-effectiveness results
Graphical representation of uncertainty analyses
Aggregate cost and effectiveness information
Secondary analyses
Description of event pathway or model (describe condition or disease and the health states included)
Diagram of event pathway or model (depicting the sequencing and possible transitions among the
health states included)
Description of model used (eg, decision tree, state transition, microsimulation)
Modeling assumptions
Software used
Complete information on sources of effectiveness data, cost data, and preference weights
Methods for obtaining estimates of effectiveness (including approaches used for evidence synthesis)
Methods for obtaining estimates of costs and preference weights
Critique of data quality
Statement of costing year (ie, the year to which all costs have been adjusted for the analysis; eg, 2016)
Statement of method used to adjust costs for inflation
Statement of type of currency
Source and methods for obtaining expert judgment if applicable
Statement of discount rates
Whether this analysis meets the requirements of the reference case
Analysis plan
Boundaries of the analysis; defining the scope or comprehensiveness of the study (eg, for a screening program, whether only a subset
of many possible strategies are included; for a transmissible condition, the extent to which disease transmission is captured;
for interventions with many possible delivery settings, whether only one or more settings are modeled)
Recommendations From the Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
September 13, 2016
Volume 316, Number 10
1099
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Kaohsiung Med Univ User  on 10/06/2018
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
strate how to report results for both reference case perspectives,
use of the impact inventory, sample methods for displaying cost-
effectiveness analysis results, uncertainty analyses, sensitivity
analyses, and examples of intermediate outcomes and disaggre-
gated results.
Discussion
The goal of the Second Panel was to promote the continued evolu-
tion of cost-effectiveness analysis and its use to support judicious,
efficient, and fair decisions regarding the use of health care re-
sources. Comparability across cost-effectiveness analyses is highly
desirable if the technique is to help decision makers evaluate
tradeoffs. Inclusion of standardized components, and standardiza-
tion of methods within a perspective, is intended to enhance con-
sistency and comparability across studies.
Differentiatingbetweenthehealthcaresectorperspectiveand
the societal perspective will provide more clarity to consumers of
cost-effectiveness analyses than has been the case in recent years.
Thecommonpracticeofpresentingananalysisfromthehealthcare
sector perspective and labeling it a societal perspective has cre-
ated the impression that these 2 perspectives are the same when
theyarenot.Clarityaboutperspectiveisfurtheremphasizedbythe
recommendations that analysts should identify any specific deci-
sion maker whose decisions are intended to be influenced by the
analysis, and conduct additional analyses from perspectives spe-
cific to that decision maker if those analyses will provide useful in-
formation.Manychallengesremain,suchasvaluationofeffectsout-
side the health care sector and coordination with other methods
already used to evaluate those effects, such as cost-benefit analy-
sis. Addressing these challenges will continue to provide opportu-
nities to advance the field of cost-effectiveness analysis.
Thesereportingrecommendationshighlightthereferencecase
perspectives and delineation of the impact inventory. A review of
existing reporting recommendations was conducted and included
adiscussionofthepossibleadoptionoftheConsolidatedHealthEco-
nomic Evaluation Reporting Standards (CHEERS)38 for endorse-
ment (one of the panel members and one of the leadership group
were involved with the Delphi process for the CHEERS guidelines).
However,specificreportingrequirementsforthereferencecasepre-
cluded the direct adoption of CHEERS or other available reporting
guidelines.TherecommendationsfromtheSecondPanelsharemany
elements with the CHEERS recommendations, which, in turn, re-
flect elements of the original panel’
s recommendations.
Substantialattentionhasbeenfocusedonethicalissuesincost-
effectiveness analyses, reflecting the importance of the topic and
developmentsinthefield.Considerationoftheopportunitycostof
aninterventionisethicallyjustified.Withoutsuchconsideration,de-
cision makers would not know if there were better uses of the re-
sources at hand. These recommendations also reaffirm the prin-
ciples that cost-effectiveness analysis is not by itself a sufficient
decision-making standard and that it does not capture all relevant
concerns.Maximizingthetotalquantityofhealthbenefitswillrarely
betheonlyconcernfordecisionmakers.Whoreceivesthebenefits—
the distributive concern—also matters. Such decisions involve
tradeoffs between effects and costs for some patients vs different
effects and costs for other patients.
The use of QALYs in cost-effectiveness analysis raises possible
ethical and other concerns. A key advantage of QALYs is that they
reflect effects on both morbidity and mortality and provide a basis
for broad comparisons of the health effects of various interven-
tions and policies. But there are a number of disadvantages associ-
ated with the QALY framework. For instance, QALYs may not accu-
ratelyreflecttheburdenofshort-livedbutintenseexperiences.Thus
the benefits of interventions that reduce the incidence of such
Table 2. Elements Recommended for Inclusion in a Structured Abstract for Cost-effectiveness Analyses
Element
Suggested Content
Objective
Succinctly state the research question specific to the analysis.
Interventions
List all interventions included in the analysis, including the comparators. Identify the time frame of the interventions.
Target population
Identify the age ranges, clinical characteristics, and other characteristics for all subgroups evaluated in the analysis.
Perspectives
Identify whether the analysis uses the reference case perspective and any alternative perspective presented.
Time horizon
Specify the time horizon for the analysis. This may differ from the time frames of the interventions and the comparators.
Discount rate
Specify the discount rate used in the analysis.
Costing year
Specify the costing year used in the analysis.
Study design
Describe whether this is a trial-based or model-based analysis. If it is a model-based analysis, briefly describe the model type
(eg, decision tree, state transition, microsimulation, discrete event) and the size and characteristics of the simulated population.
Indicate whether the analysis meets the reference case requirements.
Data sources
Describe the types of data used to derive inputs for the analysis (eg, primary data, secondary data from the published literature,
administrative data, unpublished trial data).
Outcome measures
List primary and secondary outcome measures (eg, incremental cost-effectiveness ratio in dollars per quality-adjusted life-year,
dollars per life-year, or dollars per clinical end point; total costs; total quality-adjusted life-years for a specified cohort;
or population-level outcomes).
Results of analysis
Base case
Briefly describe the results for the primary outcome measures, as well as the notable results for intermediate outcomes
and disaggregated results (eg, deaths averted, hospitalizations averted, specific subcategories of costs).
Identify any substantial changes in non–health-care–sector consequences.
Uncertainty
Briefly describe whether the results are robust to changes explored in the uncertainty analyses.
Limitations
Describe important limitations of the analysis such as controversial assumptions.
Conclusions
Summarize the key clinical or policy conclusions.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Recommendations From the Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine
1100
JAMA
September 13, 2016
Volume 316, Number 10
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Kaohsiung Med Univ User  on 10/06/2018
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
experiencesmaybeundervalued.Furthermore,inthestandardap-
proach to estimating QALYs, the QALYs gained due to an interven-
tionthatgeneratesmarginalgainsformanypeoplemaybeapproxi-
matelyequaltotheQALYsgainedbyaninterventionthatgenerates
substantial gains for a small number of people, yet society may fa-
vor the latter. Similarly, some have argued that treating those who
initiallyexperiencehighlyimpairedhealthismorevaluablethantreat-
ing those with good baseline health. These and other issues are ex-
plored further in the forthcoming book.
Numerouspolicyquestionsrelatedtotheuseofcost-effectiveness
analysis were considered. Even though cost-effectiveness analy-
ses have been published widely in the United States, and have
been used to inform policy in selected areas, the application
of cost-effectiveness analysis has also encountered resistance. For
example, the Medicare program is barred from considering cost-
effectiveness analysis in its decisions about whether to pay
for new therapies and diagnostics. Notably, the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act39 prohibited the Patient-Centered Out-
comes Research Institute from developing or using a dollars-per-
QALY metric as a threshold to establish what type of health care
is cost-effective or recommended, and stated that the “Secretary
shall not utilize such an adjusted life year (or such a similar mea-
sure) as a threshold to determine coverage, reimbursement, or in-
centive programs….”
Reasonsfortheresistancetocost-effectivenessanalysisarelikely
multifacetedandcomplexbutsuggestaninclinationonthepartofmany
individualsintheUnitedStatestominimizetheunderlyingproblemof
resourcescarcityandtheconsequentneedtoexplicitlyrationcare.Ex-
perience shows that when policy makers have incorporated cost-
effectivenessanalysisintodecision-makingprocesses,theyhavenot
applieditasthesoledecisioncriterion.40,41Inpractice,multiplefactors
arebroughttobearonresourceallocationdecisions.Cost-effectiveness
isonly1elementamongmany,includingpatient’
sexpectations;legal,
ethical,equity,cultural,andpoliticalconcerns;andpragmaticissuesof
logisticsandfeasibility.Mosthealthorganizationsinvolvedinresource
allocationdecisionsgivethegreatestweightanddeepestconsideration
totheclinicalevidence.Cost-effectivenessanalysiscanplayanimpor-
tantrole,however,particularlywhenitisrecognizedthatcostsareef-
fectivelyopportunitiesforhealthimprovementthatotherpatientsforgo.
Updating the original panel’
s work provided an opportunity to
reflect on the evolution of cost-effectiveness analysis and to de-
velop guidance for the next generation of practitioners and con-
sumers.Similartoanyconsensuspanel,theserecommendationsre-
flectaneffortbyaselectedgroupofindividualstoachieveasensible
and workable arrangement. Other groups may have developed dif-
ferent recommendations.
Somekeyareasforfutureresearchinclude(1)theuseofmulticri-
teria decision analysis and group decision making; (2) the use
ofcost-effectivenessanalysisinvalue-basedpricing;(3)estimationof
cost-effectivenessthresholds;(4)thelinkbetweencost-effectiveness
analysisandincentivesforinnovation;(5)theroleofcost-effectiveness
analysiswithinhealthplansorguidelinedevelopment;and(6)theef-
fectofthe2recommendedreferencecaseperspectivesonthecost-
effectiveanalysisanditsfindings.Thefieldwouldalsobenefitfromfur-
therresearchonQALYs,includingtopicssuchaswhetherandtowhat
extentrespondentsconsiderproductivityeffectsintheirevaluations
ofhealthstates,therelationshipofcommunitypreferencestopatient
preferences for different health states, the elicitation of preference
scoresforpathstates,thesequenceofstatesthatpatientsexperience,
and the methods for measuring health-related quality-of-life effects
on family members of ill individuals (family spillover effects).
Conclusions
The Second Panel reviewed the current status of the field of cost-
effectiveness analysis and developed a new set of recommenda-
tions.Majorchangesincludetherecommendationtoperformanaly-
ses from 2 reference case perspectives and to provide an impact
inventory to clarify included consequences.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Correction: This article was corrected online
November 8, 2016, to add 2 names to the
Additional Contributions section and fix an
affiliation in this section.
Author Affiliations: Duke Clinical Research
Institute, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
(Sanders); Center for the Evaluation of Value and
Risk in Health, Institute for Clinical Research and
Health Policy Studies, Tufts Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts (Neumann); Pharmaceutical
Outcomes Research and Policy Program,
Department of Pharmacy, and Departments of
Health Services and Economics, University of
Washington, Seattle (Basu); Division of Medical
Ethics, Social Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts (Brock); Department of
Economics, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada (Feeny); Leslie Dan Faculty of
Pharmacy, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada (Krahn); Toronto Health Economics and
Technology Assessment Collaborative, Toronto
General Research Institute, University Health
Network, Toronto General Hospital, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada (Krahn); Institute of Health Policy,
Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada (Krahn); Division of
Health Policy and Management, School of Public
Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
(Kuntz); Departments of Medicine and Economics,
Harris School of Public Policy Studies, and Center
for Health and the Social Sciences, University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois (Meltzer); VA Palo Alto
Health Care System, Palo Alto, California (Owens);
Center for Health Policy/Center for Primary Care
and Outcomes Research, Stanford University,
Stanford, California (Owens); Child Health
Evaluation and Research Unit, Department of
Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University
of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor (Prosser);
Department of Health Management and Policy,
University of Michigan School of Public Health,
Ann Arbor (Prosser); Department of Global Health
and Population, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts (Salomon); Centre
for Health Economics, University of York, York,
England (Sculpher); Department of Health Services,
Policy and Practice, School of Public Health, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island (Trikalinos);
Department of Economics and Institute for Health,
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey
(Russell); Patient-Centered Outcomes Research
Institute, Washington, DC (Siegel); Department of
Family Medicine and Community Health, Miller
School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami,
Florida (Ganiats).
Author Contributions: Drs Sanders and Neumann
had full access to all of the data in the study and
take responsibility for the integrity of the data and
the accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Sanders, Neumann,
Basu, Feeny, Krahn, Kuntz, Meltzer, Owens, Prosser,
Salomon, Sculpher, Trikilanos, Russell, Siegel,
Ganiats.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Sanders, Neumann, Brock, Krahn, Meltzer, Owens,
Ganiats.
Drafting of the manuscript: Sanders, Neumann,
Basu, Meltzer, Prosser, Sculpher.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Neumann, Basu, Brock, Feeny,
Krahn, Kuntz, Meltzer, Owens, Prosser, Salomon,
Trikilanos, Russell, Siegel, Ganiats.
Statistical analysis: Basu, Kuntz, Owens.
Obtaining funding: Sanders, Neumann, Ganiats.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Neumann, Krahn, Ganiats.
Study supervision: Sanders, Neumann, Krahn,
Russell, Siegel, Ganiats.
Recommendations From the Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
September 13, 2016
Volume 316, Number 10
1101
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Kaohsiung Med Univ User  on 10/06/2018
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: The authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest.
Dr Neumann reported serving on advisory boards
for Merck, Bayer, Pacira, Novo Nordisk, Shire,
Amgen, and the Congressional Budget Office;
serving as a consultant to Boston Health
Economics, Purdue, Vertex, and Precision Health
Economics; and receiving funding from the CEA
Registry sponsors. Dr Feeny reported having a
proprietary interest in Health Utilities Incorporated,
which owns the copyright to the Health Utilities
Index. Dr Meltzer reported serving on a formulary
committee for CVS. Dr Sculpher reported serving as
a consultant on the methods of cost-effectiveness
for various pharmaceutical and medical device
companies. The Second Panel will not be receiving
royalities from the book. No other disclosures
were reported.
Funding/Support: Funding was provided by the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation to support in-person
meetings, the services of a medical editor (Rebecca
Gray, DPhil), and research for 2 new worked
examples (one focusing on alcohol use disorders
and another on end-of-life care), which will appear
in Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine.8 In
addition, the panel received a conference grant
from the Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality, which funded a 3-day in-person meeting in
spring 2014 and parts of 2 subsequent meetings;
support from the University of California,
San Diego, Health Services Research Center, which
funded part of the first in-person panel meeting;
and in-kind support from the Society for Medical
Decision Making.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funders played
no role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; and preparation, review,
or approval of the manuscript or decision to submit
the manuscript for publication. Some material from
this article and the complete report from the
Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and
Medicine will appear in Cost-Effectiveness in Health
and Medicine.8
Disclaimer: The individual contributions to this
article are expressed in a personal capacity and are
not presented on behalf of or as the views of the
individual parties’employers.
Additional Contributions: We acknowledge the
support and guidance of members of the original
panel throughout the process of producing this
update: Norman Daniels, PhD, Dennis G. Fryback,
PhD, Alan M. Garber, MD, PhD, Marthe R. Gold, MD,
David C. Hadorn, MD, PhD, MA, Mark S. Kamlet,
PhD, Joseph Lipscomb, PhD, Bryan R. Luce, PhD,
MBA, Jeanne S. Mandelblatt, MD, PhD, Willard G.
Manning Jr, PhD, Kristine L. McCoy, MPH, Donald L.
Patrick, PhD, Louise B. Russell, PhD (co-chair),
Joanna E. Siegel, ScD, George W. Torrance, MBA,
PhD, and Milton C. Weinstein, PhD (co-chair).
We also thank Rebecca Gray, DPhil (Duke Clinical
Research Institute, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina), for editorial assistance; Julie
Lannon, BS (Center for the Evaluation of Value and
Risk in Health, Institute for Clinical Research and
Health Policy Studies, Tufts Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts) for logisitical support; and David
Kim, PhD (University of Washington, Seattle),
and Ba’Pham, MSc, PhD (University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada), for their efforts on
the worked examples. The efforts of Dr Gray,
Ms Lannon, Dr Kim, and Dr Pham were supported
through the grant funding listed in the Funding/
Support section. No other participants (including
the panel members or leadership group) received
compensation for their work on this project. We
also acknowledge the following individuals who
reviewed 1 or more chapters of the book, which
provided the template for this summary report:
Paul Barnett, PhD (VA Palo Alto Health Care
System), Andrew Briggs, DPhil (University of
Glasgow), Karl Claxton, PhD (University of York),
Joshua T. Cohen, PhD (Tufts Medical Center),
Phaedra Corso, PhD (University of Georgia),
Michael Drummond, PhD (University of York),
Nir Eyal, DPhil (Harvard University), Dennis
Fryback, PhD (University of Wisconsin), William
Furlong, MSc (McMaster University), Afschin
Gandjour, MD, PhD (Frankfurt School of Finance
and Management), Louis Garrison, PhD (University
of Washington), Marthe Gold, MD (City University
of New York), Dan Greenberg, PhD (Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev), Scott Grosse, PhD (US
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), James
Hammitt, PhD (Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public
Health), Neil Hawkins, PhD, MBA (University of
Glasgow), Mark Helfand, MD (Oregon Health &
Science University), Don Husereau, BScPharm
(Institute of Health Economics), Emmett Keeler,
PhD (RAND), Paul Krabbe, PhD (University of
Groningen), William Lawrence, MD, MS (Patient-
Centered Outcomes Research Institute), Joseph
Lipscomb, PhD (Emory University), Daniel Mullins,
PhD (University of Maryland), Erik Nord, PhD
(University of Oslo), James O’
Mahony, PhD (Trinity
College Dublin), Donald Patrick, PhD (University of
Washington), Mike Paulden, MSc (University of
Alberta), A. Simon Pickard, PhD (University of
Illinois at Chicago), Michael Pignone, MD, MPH
(University of Texas at Austin), Daniel Polsky, PhD
(University of Pennsylvania), K. V. Ramanath, MBA
(SAC College of Pharmacy), Dennis Revicki, PhD
(Evidera), Mark Roberts, MD, MPP (University of
Pittsburgh), Lisa Robinson, MPP (Harvard T. H.
Chan School of Public Health), Steven Teutsch, MD,
MPH (University of California, Los Angeles), George
Torrance, PhD, MBA (McMaster University), Joel
Tsevat, MD, MPH (University of Cincinnati), Todd
Wagner, PhD (Stanford University), Evelyn
Whitlock, MD, PhD (Patient-Centered Outcomes
Research Institute), Milton Weinstein, PhD (Harvard
T. H. Chan School of Public Health), John Wong, MD
(Tufts Medical Center), Beth Woods, MSc
(University of York), Jeremy Goldhaber-Fiebert,
PhD (Stanford University), and John Nyman, PhD
(University of Minnesota). We are grateful to
several dozen individuals who commented on the
publicly posted draft chapters during fall 2015.
REFERENCES
1. Gold MR, Siegel JE, Russell LB, Weinstein MC,
eds. Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1996.
2. Russell LB, Gold MR, Siegel JE, Daniels N,
Weinstein MC; Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in
Health and Medicine. The role of cost-effectiveness
analysis in health and medicine. JAMA. 1996;276
(14):1172-1177.
3. Siegel JE, Weinstein MC, Russell LB, Gold MR;
Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine.
Recommendations for reporting cost-effectiveness
analyses. JAMA. 1996;276(16):1339-1341.
4. Weinstein MC, Siegel JE, Gold MR, Kamlet MS,
Russell LB. Recommendations of the Panel on
Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine. JAMA.
1996;276(15):1253-1258.
5. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP). ACIP: guidance for health economics
studies. http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip
/committee/guidance/economic-studies.html.
Accessed May 22, 2015.
6. National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence. Guide to the methods of technology
appraisal, 2013: PMG9. https://www.nice.org.uk
/process/pmg9/chapter/1-foreword. Accessed
August 16, 2016.
7. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
National health expenditures; aggregate
and per capita amounts, annual percent change
and percent distribution: calendar years
1960-2014. http://www.cms.gov/research
-statistics-data-and-systems/statistics-trends
-and-reports/nationalhealthexpenddata
/nationalhealthaccountshistorical.html. Accessed
July 22, 2016.
8. Neumann PJ, Sanders GD, Russell LB, Siegel JE,
Ganiats TG, eds. Cost-Effectiveness in Health and
Medicine. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press; 2016.
9. Daigle ME, Weinstein AM, Katz JN, Losina E.
The cost-effectiveness of total joint arthroplasty:
a systematic review of published literature. Best
Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2012;26(5):649-658.
10. Diaby V, Tawk R, Sanogo V, Xiao H, Montero AJ.
A review of systematic reviews of the
cost-effectiveness of hormone therapy,
chemotherapy, and targeted therapy for breast
cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015;151(1):27-40.
11. Neumann PJ. Costing and perspective in
published cost-effectiveness analysis. Med Care.
2009;47(7)(suppl 1):S28-S32.
12. Garrison LP Jr, Mansley EC, Abbott TA III,
Bresnahan BW, Hay JW, Smeeding J. Good research
practices for measuring drug costs in
cost-effectiveness analyses: a societal perspective:
the ISPOR Drug Cost Task Force report—part II.
Value Health. 2010;13(1):8-13.
13. Brettschneider C, Djadran H, Härter M, Löwe B,
Riedel-Heller S, König HH. Cost-utility analyses of
cognitive-behavioural therapy of depression:
a systematic review. Psychother Psychosom. 2015;
84(1):6-21.
14. Kokorowski PJ, Routh JC, Nelson CP. Quality
assessment of economic analyses in pediatric
urology. Urology. 2013;81(2):263-267.
15. Stone PW, Chapman RH, Sandberg EA, Liljas B,
Neumann PJ. Measuring costs in cost-utility
analyses: variations in the literature. Int J Technol
Assess Health Care. 2000;16(1):111-124.
16. Brouwer WB, Culyer AJ, van Exel NJ, Rutten FF.
Welfarism vs extra-welfarism. J Health Econ.
2008;27(2):325-338.
17. Drummond MF, Sculpher MJ, Claxton K,
Torrance GW, Stoddart GL. Methods for the
Economic Evaluation of Health Care Programmes.
4th ed. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press;
2015.
18. Grosse SD, Krueger KV, Mvundura M. Economic
productivity by age and sex: 2007 estimates
for the United States. Med Care. 2009;47(7)(suppl
1):S94-S103.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Recommendations From the Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine
1102
JAMA
September 13, 2016
Volume 316, Number 10
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Kaohsiung Med Univ User  on 10/06/2018
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
19. Krol M, Brouwer W, Sendi P. Productivity costs
in health-state valuations: does explicit instruction
matter? Pharmacoeconomics. 2006;24(4):401-414.
20. Meltzer D, Johannesson M. Inconsistencies in
the “
societal perspective”on costs of the Panel on
Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine. Med
Decis Making. 1999;19(4):371-377.
21. Meltzer DO, Weckerle CE, Chang LM. Do people
consider financial effects in answering quality of life
questions? Med Decis Making. 1999;19(3):517.
22. Sculpher MJ, O’
Brien BJ. Income effects of
reduced health and health effects of reduced
income: implications for health-state valuation.
Med Decis Making. 2000;20(2):207-215.
23. Sendi P, Brouwer WB. Is silence golden? a test
of the incorporation of the effects of ill-health on
income and leisure in health state valuations.
Health Econ. 2005;14(6):643-647.
24. Shiroiwa T, Fukuda T, Ikeda S, Shimozuma K.
QALY and productivity loss: empirical evidence for
“
double counting.”Value Health. 2013;16(4):581-587.
25. Tilling C, Krol M, Tsuchiya A, Brazier J,
Brouwer W. In or out? income losses in health state
valuations: a review. Value Health. 2010;13(2):
298-305.
26. Bleichrodt H, Quiggin J. Life-cycle preferences
over consumption and health: when is
cost-effectiveness analysis equivalent to
cost-benefit analysis? J Health Econ. 1999;18(6):
681-708.
27. Feenstra TL, van Baal PH, Gandjour A,
Brouwer WB. Future costs in economic evaluation:
a comment on Lee. J Health Econ. 2008;27(6):
1645-1649.
28. Garber AM, Phelps CE. Economic foundations
of cost-effectiveness analysis. J Health Econ.
1997;16(1):1-31.
29. Lee RH. Future costs in cost effectiveness
analysis. J Health Econ. 2008;27(4):809-818.
30. Meltzer D. Accounting for future costs in
medical cost-effectiveness analysis. J Health Econ.
1997;16(1):33-64.
31. Meltzer D. Future costs in medical
cost-effectiveness analysis. In: Jones AM, ed.
The Elgar Companion to Health Economics.
Cheltenham, England: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd;
2006:447-454.
32. Meltzer D. Response to “future costs and the
future of cost-effectiveness analysis”. J Health Econ.
2008;27(4):822-825.
33. Nyman JA. Should the consumption of
survivors be included as a cost in cost-utility
analysis? Health Econ. 2004;13(5):417-427.
34. Weinstein MC, Manning WG Jr. Theoretical
issues in cost-effectiveness analysis. J Health Econ.
1997;16(1):121-128.
35. Husereau D, Drummond M, Petrou S, et al;
CHEERS Task Force. Consolidated Health Economic
Evaluation Reporting Standards (CHEERS)
statement. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2013;11(1):6.
36. Russell LB. The Science of Making Better
Decisions About Health: Cost-Effectiveness and
Cost-Benefit Analysis, September 2015. Rockville, MD:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2015.
37. Neumann PJ, Cohen JT, Weinstein MC.
Updating cost-effectiveness—the curious resilience
of the $50,000-per-QALY threshold. N Engl J Med.
2014;371(9):796-797.
38. Husereau D, Drummond M, Petrou S, et al;
ISPOR Health Economic Evaluation Publication
Guidelines-CHEERS Good Reporting Practices Task
Force. Consolidated Health Economic Evaluation
Reporting Standards (CHEERS)—explanation and
elaboration: a report of the ISPOR Health Economic
Evaluation Publication Guidelines Good Reporting
Practices Task Force. Value Health. 2013;16(2):231-
250.
39. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 42
USC §18001 et seq (2010).
40. PausJenssen AM, Singer PA, Detsky AS.
Ontario’
s formulary committee: how
recommendations are made. Pharmacoeconomics.
2003;21(4):285-294.
41. Neumann PJ. Using Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
to Improve Health Care: Opportunities and Barriers.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2005.
Recommendations From the Second Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
September 13, 2016
Volume 316, Number 10
1103
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a Kaohsiung Med Univ User  on 10/06/2018
