 CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e273
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: This scientific statement provides an 
interprofessional, comprehensive review of evidence and recommendations 
for indications, duration, and implementation of continuous electro­
cardiographic monitoring of hospitalized patients. Since the original 
practice standards were published in 2004, new issues have emerged 
that need to be addressed: overuse of arrhythmia monitoring among 
a variety of patient populations, appropriate use of ischemia and QT­
interval monitoring among select populations, alarm management, and 
documentation in electronic health records.
METHODS: Authors were commissioned by the American Heart Association 
and included experts from general cardiology, electrophysiology (adult and 
pediatric), and interventional cardiology, as well as a hospitalist and experts 
in alarm management. Strict adherence to the American Heart Association 
conflict of interest policy was maintained throughout the consensus process. 
Authors were assigned topics relevant to their areas of expertise, reviewed 
the literature with an emphasis on publications since the prior practice 
standards, and drafted recommendations on indications and duration for 
electrocardiographic monitoring in accordance with the American Heart 
Association Level of Evidence grading algorithm that was in place at the time 
of commissioning.
RESULTS: The comprehensive document is grouped into 5 sections: 
(1) Overview of Arrhythmia, Ischemia, and QTc Monitoring; (2) 
Recommendations for Indication and Duration of Electrocardiographic 
Monitoring presented by patient population; (3) Organizational Aspects: 
Alarm Management, Education of Staff, and Documentation; (4) 
Implementation of Practice Standards; and (5) Call for Research.
CONCLUSIONS: Many of the recommendations are based on limited 
data, so authors conclude with specific questions for further research.
Kristin E. Sandau, PhD, 
RN, FAHA, Chair
Marjorie Funk, PhD, RN, 
FAHA, Co-Chair
Andrew Auerbach, MD, 
MPH
Gregory W. Barsness, MD, 
FAHA
Kay Blum, PhD, CRNP†
Maria Cvach, DNP
, RN
Rachel Lampert, MD
Jeanine L. May, MPH, 
MSN, APRN
George M. McDaniel, MD, 
MS, FAHA
Marco V. Perez, MD, FAHA
Sue Sendelbach, PhD, RN, 
CCNS, FAHA
Claire E. Sommargren, 
PhD, RN, FAHA
Paul J. Wang, MD, FAHA
On behalf of the Ameri-
can Heart Association 
Council on Cardiovascu-
lar and Stroke Nursing; 
Council on Clinical Car-
diology; and Council on 
Cardiovascular Disease 
in the Young
Update to Practice Standards for 
Electrocardiographic Monitoring in 
Hospital Settings
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
Endorsed by the American College of Cardiology, American Association of Critical-Care Nurses, and Pediatric and 
Congenital Electrophysiology Society
© 2017 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Key Words: AHA Scientific 
Statements ◼ arrhythmias, 
cardiac ◼ clinical alarms ◼ 
documentation ◼ ECG ◼ education 
◼ electrocardiographic monitoring 
◼ electrocardiography ◼ guidelines 
◼ ischemia ◼ long QT syndrome  
◼ myocardial infarction ◼ pediatrics 
◼ telemetry
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
†Deceased.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e274
T
he goals of electrocardiographic monitoring 
have expanded from simple heart rate and basic 
rhythm determination to the diagnosis of com­
plex arrhythmias, the detection of acute and often 
silent myocardial ischemia, and the identification of 
drug­induced prolonged QT interval. The first American 
Heart Association (AHA) scientific statement on prac­
tice standards for electrocardiographic monitoring in 
hospital settings was published in 20041 and provided 
an interprofessional, comprehensive review of evidence 
and recommendations for continuous electrocardio­
graphic monitoring of hospitalized patients.
Since then, however, further data and new issues have 
emerged that need to be more fully addressed: overuse 
of arrhythmia monitoring among a variety of patient 
populations, underuse of QT­interval and ST­segment 
monitoring among select populations, alarm fatigue, 
and documentation in electronic health records. For this 
document, the writing group reviewed research pub­
lished since 2004 to provide updated recommendations 
for indications, duration, and implementation indications 
for continuous electrocardiographic monitoring in hospi­
talized patients. This document does not contain recom­
mendations for other forms of electrocardiographic mon­
itoring, including the static 12­lead ECG, exercise testing, 
or ambulatory electrocardiographic (Holter) monitoring.
ORGANIZATION OF THE WRITING 
GROUP
The 2004 practice standards1 were commissioned by the 
AHA Manuscript Oversight Committee on the basis of a 
proposal from the AHA’s Council on Cardiovascular Nurs­
ing, along with support from the Council on Cardiovas­
cular Disease in the Young and the Council on Clinical 
Cardiology. The aim was to encompass all areas of hos­
pital electrocardiographic monitoring, including arrhyth­
mia, ST­segment ischemia, and QT­interval monitoring in 
both children and adults. The current update to practice 
standards was similarly approved, with appointments 
of interprofessional experts from the AHA’s Council on 
Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on Cardio­
vascular Disease in the Young, and Council on Clinical 
Cardiology. A member of the American College of Car­
diology (ACC) was formally appointed for the update 
to practice standards. The current writing group is com­
posed of experts from general cardiology, electrophysiol­
ogy (adult and pediatric), and interventional cardiology 
and included experts in alarm management. The writing 
group included nurses, cardiologists, and a hospitalist.
METHOD AND EVIDENCE REVIEW
Experts from the writing group were asked to per­
form a literature review of select topics and inpatient 
populations, to evaluate the strength of evidence for 
electrocardiographic monitoring, and to provide rec­
ommendations on indications for electrocardiographic 
monitoring. Data on costs for electrocardiographic 
monitoring are limited at this time; therefore, the main 
outcomes of the current practice standards will contin­
ue to be the degree to which evidence exists to support 
the usefulness and effectiveness of continuous elec­
trocardiographic monitoring. As more studies are pub­
lished that include financial analyses, these data can be 
reviewed in future practice standards.
Searches were extended to studies, reviews, and pre­
vious related scientific statements or guidelines from the 
AHA, ACC, American Association of Critical­Care Nurses, 
or Heart Rhythm Society that were published in English and 
accessible through PubMed Medline, CINAHL, Cochrane, 
and other selected relevant databases. Key search words 
included arrhythmia, dysrhythmia, ST-segment monitor-
ing, QTc monitoring, and torsade de pointes, among other 
terms. ECG monitoring was searched in the context of pa­
tient populations such as acute coronary syndrome (myo-
cardial infarction, STEMI, NSTEMI, therapeutic hypother-
mia, targeted temperature management, angina, unstable 
angina, chest pain, vasospastic angina, percutaneous cor-
onary intervention, open heart surgery). Arrhythmia was 
searched with other key words (ventricular arrhythmias, 
atrial arrhythmias, sinus bradycardia, atrioventricular block). 
Further searches included ECG monitoring and diagnoses 
such as syncope, heart failure, endocarditis, stroke, drug 
overdose, electrolyte abnormalities, hemodialysis, and 
pediatric. Procedures searched in regard to electrocardio­
graphic monitoring and arrhythmias included ventricular 
assist device, ablation, transcatheter valve replacement, 
pacemakers (transcutaneous, transvenous, permanent), 
and implantable cardioverter-defibrillator.
For the organizational aspects of monitoring, lit­
erature search terms included electrocardiography, 
arrhythmias, cardiac, monitoring (physiologic), nurs-
ing assessment, nursing staff, hospital, nursing care, 
nurse’s role, and clinical competence. Key words/
phrases included in-service, competency, or education. 
In addition, the subheadings education, nursing, stan-
dards, diagnosis, cardiac or physiologic monitoring and 
equipment alarms, and alarm fatigue were used. Finally, 
additional articles were garnered from reference lists of 
literature identified from the initial review.
The recommendations and levels of evidence used in 
writing the current practice standards were developed 
by the ACC Foundation/AHA Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines for Applying Classification of Recommen­
dation and Level of Evidence2 and were in effect at 
the time of the commissioning of this statement (Ta­
ble 1). Class of Recommendation (COR) according to 
size of treatment effect is described as COR I (should 
be performed), IIa (is reasonable to perform), IIb (may 
be considered), III (no benefit; is not recommended), 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e275
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
or III (harm; is potentially harmful and should not be 
performed). Level of Evidence (LOE) for estimates of 
certainty (precision) of treatment effect are classified as 
Level A, B, or C (Table 1). It must be noted that a rec­
ommendation with LOE C does not imply a weak rec­
ommendation.2 Some interventions may prove difficult 
or unethical to test in a randomized design, but there 
may be a very clear clinical consensus that a particular 
therapy is useful.
Some interventions have become firmly established 
as standard of practice without a randomized con­
trolled trial (RCT) and thus seldom receive investigation. 
This is particularly notable in the case of electrocardio­
graphic monitoring. Electrocardiographic monitoring 
quickly became the accepted standard of practice in 
all intensive care units (ICUs) and for many patients on 
a step­down/progressive care unit. Thus, the standard 
of care for electrocardiographic monitoring was firmly 
established before RCTs for almost all electrocardio­
graphic monitoring. For example, patients immediately 
after myocardial infarction (MI) received electrocardio­
graphic monitoring without patients being randomized 
to electrocardiographic monitoring versus no monitor­
ing. Thus, the vast majority of studies of patients after 
MI are not directly evaluating the intervention of elec­
trocardiographic monitoring but clearly demonstrate 
Table 1. Applying Classification of Recommendations and Level of Evidence
A recommendation with Level of Evidence B or C does not imply that the recommendation is weak. Many important clinical questions addressed in the 
guidelines do not lend themselves to clinical trials. Although randomized trials are unavailable, there may be a very clear clinical consensus that a particular test or 
therapy is useful or effective.
*Data available from clinical trials or registries about the usefulness/efficacy in different subpopulations such as sex, age, history of diabetes mellitus, history of 
prior myocardial infarction, history of heart failure, and prior aspirin use.
†For comparative effectiveness recommendations (Class I and IIa; Level of Evidence A and B only), studies that support the use of comparator verbs
should involve direct comparisons of the treatments or strategies being evaluated.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e276
that select groups of patients are at risk for significant 
arrhythmias, ischemia, or QT prolongation. Because 
data on monitoring as a specific intervention are few 
(with several exceptions), the writing group considered 
the vast majority of recommendations for continuous 
electrocardiographic monitoring to be LOE C (stan­
dard of care, consensus opinion of experts). Following 
the precedent set with the 2004 electrocardiographic 
monitoring practice standards, the writing group in­
cluded studies that describe mortality, morbidity, and 
cost (when available) and the incidence or prevalence 
of arrhythmias, ST­segment events, or QT prolongation 
among patient populations, as well as data from ex­
perimental studies when available. Certain hospitalized 
patient populations have not been included in stud­
ies of electrocardiographic monitoring. In these popu­
lations, the writing group attempted to be clear that 
recommendations were based primarily on expert con­
sensus. In some cases, the writing group simply stated 
its inability to provide recommendations because of 
insufficient data.
Although the original AHA scientific statement1 
presented practice standards within CORs, the current 
practice standards present recommendations by patient 
population. The goal is ease of inclusion in routine hos­
pital order sets and quicker access to recommendations 
for practicing clinicians for day­to­day decision making. 
This pragmatic organization also allows attention to be 
directed to inpatient populations for whom electrocar­
diographic monitoring needs further study.
DOCUMENT REVIEW AND APPROVAL
The completed document was sent for external peer 
review by experts in the field, including representatives 
from the AHA and ACC. After passing peer review, it 
was reviewed for final approval to publish by the AHA’s 
Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee, the 
highest science body within the association.
PRESENTATION OF CONTENT
This comprehensive document is grouped into 5 sec­
tions, the first being Overview of Arrhythmia, Isch­
emia, and QTc Monitoring. Because continuous elec­
trocardiographic monitoring has 3 main purposes, the 
writing group provides an overview of each. Because 
clinicians may be less familiar with continuous ST­
segment and QTc monitoring, the overview sections 
for these topics contain more detail than the overview 
section for arrhythmia monitoring. The next section 
is Recommendations for Indication and Duration of 
Electrocardiographic Monitoring, which we present 
by patient population to allow practicing clinicians 
access to recommendations for day­to­day decision 
making and to facilitate inclusion in hospital order 
sets. Pediatric considerations are included when evi­
dence is sufficient to make recommendations or when 
practice standards are notably different for pediatric 
patients. Following the recommendations for electro­
cardiographic monitoring is Section 3, Organizational 
Aspects: Alarm Management, Education of Staff, and 
Documentation related to electrocardiographic moni­
toring, which includes recommendations for these up­
dated and pragmatic areas. The next section, Imple­
mentation of Practice Standards, summarizes results 
of hospitals that have evaluated implementation of 
the 2004 practice standards, allowing us to learn from 
their experience. The final section, Call for Research, 
targets specific areas of highest priority for future re­
search to address current gaps in evidence for electro­
cardiographic monitoring.
SECTION 1: OVERVIEW OF 
ARRHYTHMIA, ISCHEMIA, AND QTC 
MONITORING
Overview of Arrhythmia Monitoring
Background
There are 4 broad rationales for arrhythmia monitor­
ing. The first is immediate recognition of sudden car­
diac arrest to improve time to defibrillation. Delayed 
defibrillation is associated with significantly decreased 
survival after in­hospital cardiac arrest,3 and occur­
rence of arrest in an unmonitored patient doubles the 
likelihood of delayed defibrillation.3 Nurse­to­patient 
ratios have been identified as the greatest predictor 
of survival after in­hospital arrest.4 It is likely that ad­
equate staffing improves nurses’ ability to respond 
rapidly to monitor­identified alarms. Identification of 
hospitalized patient populations at sufficient risk of 
arrest to warrant inpatient monitoring is critical to im­
prove survival.
The second rationale is recognizing deteriorating 
conditions (ie, development of early afterdepolariza­
tions or nonsustained arrhythmias) that may lead to 
a life­threatening, sustained arrhythmia and thereby 
prompting treatment that may prevent or mitigate the 
effects of a cardiac arrest. Hospitals with the lowest 
arrest incidence also have the greatest arrest survival.4 
Although many hospital factors may underlie this as­
sociation, it is likely that early recognition of patients 
at risk for arrest improves overall survival. Third, ar­
rhythmia monitoring will, in many situations, facilitate 
management of arrhythmias even if not immediately 
life­threatening. Finally, arrhythmia monitoring can fa­
cilitate diagnosis of arrhythmias or cause of symptoms 
(eg, syncope and palpitations) and subsequently guide 
appropriate management.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e277
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Implementation of Arrhythmia Monitoring
Two key points when implementing continuous ar­
rhythmia monitoring are accurate electrode placement 
and selection of the appropriate leads to monitor.
Accurate Electrode Placement 
Unlike the standard 12­lead ECG in which limb elec­
trodes are placed on the arms and legs, limb electrodes 
for hospitalized patients receiving continuous electro­
cardiographic monitoring are placed on the torso to al­
low patient movement while reducing artifact.1
Accurate electrode placement is key to correct 
identification of monitored arrhythmias. Incorrect 
diagnosis of ventricular tachycardia (VT; which was 
caused by artifact possibly related to a misplaced elec­
trode) among hospitalized inpatients and emergency 
department (ED) patients has resulted in unnecessary 
interventions ranging from intravenous antiarrythmic 
agent to diagnostic catheterizations and even implan­
tation of a pacemaker and implantable cardioverter­
defibrillator (ICD).5 Correct placement of electrocar­
diographic electrodes for both arrhythmia monitoring 
and continuous ST­segment monitoring cannot be 
overemphasized. Frequent inaccurate placement of 
electrodes, particularly the precordial lead, has been 
reported in a multisite study.6
Appropriate Lead Selection
For arrhythmia monitoring, V1 is commonly selected be­
cause of its helpfulness in distinguishing between VT 
and aberrancy.1,7
Pediatric Considerations
Although V1 is commonly used for arrhythmia monitor­
ing in adults, lead II is commonly selected as a primary 
lead for continuous monitoring in the pediatric popu­
lation because supraventricular arrhythmias are more 
common than ventricular arrhythmias, and P waves are 
often best visible in the inferior leads.7,8 Age­related 
variations are found in pediatric ECGs and include heart 
rate, axis, intervals, and voltage criteria.9
Among children, respiratory causes of arrest are more 
common than cardiac causes; however, hypoxia may 
lead to bradycardia and subsequent asystole. Cardiac 
arrest data from 36 
902 adults and 880 children (neona­
tal intensive care and delivery unit excluded) from 253 
US and Canadian hospitals revealed that the first docu­
mented pulseless arrest rhythm was most commonly 
asystole or pulseless electrical activity in both children 
and adults.10
Overview of Continuous ST-Segment 
Ischemia Monitoring
Background
The ST segment is the portion of the surface ECG that 
is coincident with ventricular repolarization. Although 
electrocardiographic abnormalities associated with 
myocardial ischemia or MI may be seen in the PR seg­
ment or the QRS complex, the earliest manifestations of 
myocardial ischemia are usually T­wave and ST­segment 
changes.11
Because the static 12­lead provides only ≈10 sec­
onds of electrocardiographic waveforms, an exten­
sion of this technology has been continuous ST­seg­
ment monitoring available for patients most at risk 
for ischemia. Given the benefits of early management 
of MI, continuous ST­segment monitoring may facili­
tate early recognition of ischemic events, potentiat­
ing rapid medical treatment and revascularization to 
avoid permanent myocardial damage in patients pre­
senting with signs and symptoms suggestive of acute 
coronary syndrome (ACS). Continuous ST­segment 
monitoring has the potential to identify ischemia be­
fore the onset of symptoms. This may be particularly 
important for patients who are unable to perceive 
angina symptoms12,13 (eg, patients with diabetes mel­
litus who did not experience angina with a prior MI) 
or patients who cannot communicate that they are 
having angina symptoms14–17 (eg, patients who are 
intubated and sedated or with impaired mental sta­
tus). Alternatively, the absence of dynamic changes 
on continuous ST­segment monitoring after revascu­
larization can help provide reassurance that chest dis­
comfort does not represent coronary reocclusion.1,15 
Descriptive studies consistently highlight the preva­
lence of transient ischemia among patients in ICUs 
and step­down units.18,19
Verification of Perfusion and Prognostic  
and Clinical Significance
Despite lack of an RCT evaluating the clinical benefit 
of continuous ST­segment monitoring in hospitalized 
patients, many prospective and comparative studies 
report the clinical and prognostic impact associated 
with continuous ST­segment monitoring (Table 2). 
Continuous ST­segment monitoring has been used as 
a marker of ischemia and infarction in a variety of 
settings. As early as 1999, investigators prospectively 
evaluated 100 patients with chest pain and an ECG 
nondiagnostic of acute MI, finding that transient ST­
segment elevation or depression ≥1 mm occurred in 
15.9% of the patients, was an independent risk fac­
tor for cardiac death or MI, and should be considered 
an early risk stratification tool.28 A later study of 237 
patients admitted for ACS and on a telemetry moni­
tor revealed that 17% had ischemia per continuous 
ST­segment monitoring. These patients with ischemia 
were 8.5 times more likely to have in­hospital com­
plications.30
Akkerhuis et al34 conducted a meta­analysis of 3 
multisite trials of patients with non–ST­segment–eleva­
tion MI (NSTEMI; the Netherlands and United States). 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e278
The 3 clinical trials had evaluated glycoprotein IIb/IIIa 
inhibitors; a subgroup of patients (n=995) in these sites 
received additional continuous 12­lead ST­segment 
monitoring. In a retrospective, blinded analysis, recur­
rent ischemia episodes were identified in 27% of pa­
tients. The number of ischemic episodes in 24 hours 
was directly proportionate to the probability of cardiac 
events at 5 and 30 days. At 30 days, the composite end 
points of MI or death were met by 19.7% of patients 
with ST­segment episodes compared with only 5.7% of 
those without ST­segment episodes. After known base­
line predictors for worse outcomes were controlled for, 
each ischemic event predicted a 25% increase in death/
MI at 5 and 30 days.
Implementation of Continuous ST-Segment 
Ischemia Monitoring
It is important to clarify that diagnosis of an MI is not 
made by continuous ST­segment monitoring. Rather, 
continuous ST­segment monitoring is used as part of 
a comprehensive assessment for MI. A 12­lead ECG 
is done to verify findings of continuous monitoring.35 
The 2004 practice standards1 recommended 1­mm ST­
segment deviation as clinically significant for patients 
in critical care units at high risk of ACS. However, 1­ to 
2­mm ST­segment elevation or depression that lasts 
at least 1 minute (with or without symptoms) may 
be clinically significant, and further clinical assess­
ment is warranted.14,18,19,36 Further study is needed to 
guide optimal alarm thresholds on the basis of several 
considerations: the patient’s potential for developing 
ischemia, a pragmatic plan for whether this ischemia 
would be addressed with a feasible and appropriate 
intervention, the type of nursing unit, and tolerance 
for potential false alarms, which case reports and 
studies have revealed to be attributable to patient 
movement.37,38
Methods Used to Measure ST-Segment Changes
The technology for real­time monitoring for ischemia 
has been available since the mid­1980s, and practi­
cal clinical guidelines were published as a consensus 
statement in 199914 and again within the practice 
standards in 2004.1 The 2004 practice standards1 rec­
ommended that aging monitors at end of life be re­
placed with monitors with automated ischemia moni­
toring capability.
Unlike arrhythmia monitoring, the software for 
ischemia monitoring is not automatically enabled by 
the monitor manufacturers. A thoughtful decision by 
nurses, physicians, and biomedical engineers at each 
hospital is critical to identifying an interprofessional 
protocol for ischemia monitoring, including identifi­
cation of which hospital units commonly admit the 
patient populations who may benefit from continu­
ous ischemia monitoring.39 Some hospitals have cho­
sen to have ST­segment monitoring as a default for all 
patients in ICUs and telemetry units; unfortunately, 
this is likely to result in overuse of ST­segment moni­
toring because busy nurses may neglect to turn off 
the function when a patient does not meet criteria. To 
reduce unnecessary monitoring and alarms, the writ­
ing group recommends setting the ST­segment moni­
toring default to “off” because only a select group 
of patients will potentially benefit from this moni­
toring. Each institution should have clear guidelines 
and a protocol for nurses to efficiently enable con­
tinuous ST­segment ischemia monitoring in patients 
for whom it is indicated and turn it off when it is no 
longer indicated for the patient. A physician or ad­
vanced practice clinician may indicate when a patient 
Table 2. Selected Studies of Continuous ST-Segment 
Monitoring for Verification of Perfusion and Clinical 
and Prognostic Significance
Verification of myocardial perfusion
 By thrombolytics (Krucoff et al,20 Langer et al,21 Maas et al,22 Cruden et al23)
 By percutaneous intervention (Krucoff et al,20 Terkelson et al24)
 By anticoagulants (Jernberg et al25)
 By platelet inhibitors (Klootwijk et al26)
 By intensive insulin therapy (Stefanidis et al27)
Clinical significance
  
Among patients with chest pain and an ECG nondiagnostic of acute MI, 
transient ST­segment elevation or depression ≥1mm occurred in 15.9% 
of the patients and was an independent risk factor for cardiac death or 
MI (Jernberg et al28).
  
A 6­h rule­out protocol using cardiac markers and continuous ST­
segment monitoring for MI among patients in a chest pain unit 
demonstrated ST­segment changes on continuous monitoring for 6 
patients, leading to early identification of an evolving MI for 2 of these 
who subsequently received thrombolytics (Herren et al29).
  
17% of telemetry patients admitted for ACS had ischemia per 
continuous monitoring; these patients were 8.5 times more likely to 
have in­hospital complications (Pelter et al30).
  
ICU patients with ST­segment depression demonstrated a 4.7­fold higher 
risk for troponin elevation (Landesberg et al31).
  
After adjustment for risk scores, presence of ST­segment shifts on 
continuous electrocardiographic monitoring was a stronger independent 
predictor of mortality than the admission 12­lead ECG (Yan et al32).
  
The variability of ST­segment shifts during continuous monitoring in the first 
4–24 h of an MI predicted mortality within 5 y, suggesting that continuous 
ST­segment monitoring during the first 24 h of an MI is a valuable tool 
for differentiating high­ and low­risk patients (Ottander et al33).
Prognostic significance
  
Variables of continuous ST­segment recovery were predictive for both 
mortality and the composite risk of mortality, reinfarction, and heart 
failure (Maas et al22).
  
Retrospective, blinded meta­analysis of 3 multisite trials of patients 
with NSTEMI identified recurrent ischemia episodes in 27% of patients; 
number of ischemic episodes in 24 h was directly proportionate to the 
probability of cardiac events at 5 and 30 d. After controlling for known 
baseline predictors for worse outcomes, each ischemic event predicted a 
25% increase for death/MI at 5 and 30 d (Akkerhuis et al34).
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; ICU, intensive care unit; MI, 
myocardial infarction; and NSTEMI, non–ST­segment–elevation myocardial 
infarction.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e279
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
has transitioned from a clinical condition warranting 
ischemia monitoring (eg, potential ACS) to no lon­
ger needing ischemia monitoring (eg, ACS ruled out). 
However, because nurses are the caregivers manag­
ing the continuous electrocardiographic monitoring 
24 hours a day, it is most often the nurse who most 
quickly identifies when a patient transitions into and 
out of a paced rhythm or right bundle­branch block 
(BBB) and can turn off ST­segment monitoring imme­
diately to avoid false alarms. Thus, interprofessional 
management and communication are essential.
Accurate Electrode Placement and Interpretation
As previously discussed (in Overview of Arrhythmia 
Monitoring), accurately placed electrocardiographic 
electrodes are essential to avoid inaccurate diagnoses 
and potentially inappropriate treatment. The neces­
sity for correct electrocardiographic electrode place­
ment also applies to continuous ST­segment monitor­
ing. Continuous ST­segment monitoring may differ in 
measurement method compared with exercise stress 
testing and core laboratories in that a measurement 
at 60 milliseconds beyond the J point is commonly re­
ported for studies or protocols specific to continuous 
ST­segment monitoring,19,31,39 in an attempt to reduce 
the potential for false alarms that may occur if the 
measurement is taken at 80 milliseconds beyond the 
J point where the upslope of the T wave begins.40 Fur­
ther study is needed.
Appropriate Lead Selection
Ideally, ST­segment monitoring software should have 
the capability of monitoring all 12 leads simultane­
ously. In practice, monitoring system capabilities vary, 
with some monitoring systems able to monitor only 
1 precordial lead at a time. Thus, the decision about 
which precordial lead is selected should be based on 
the coronary artery or surface known or suspected 
to be affected by the ischemic process. The principle 
of using the “ST­segment fingerprint” supports lead 
selection for noninvasive monitoring. This principle is 
based on validation of noninvasive ST­segment chang­
es occurring during invasive angiography as being able 
to accurately signal occlusion via balloon inflation and 
spontaneous ischemia during early MI.20 Thus, if an 
artery is identified on angiography to be occluded and 
leading to ischemia, this ST­segment fingerprint should 
guide lead selection for postangiographic monitoring. 
Similarly, if an initial 12­lead ECG demonstrates that 
a particular lead suggests ischemia, that same lead 
should be prioritized for continuous ischemia monitor­
ing. Recommendations have differed over the years as 
to which lead is of most benefit in identifying ischemia 
in the circumflex artery: I, aVL, V5 or V6
41; III or aVF15; 
or V6 for ST­segment elevation and V1 and V3 for ST­
segment depression42 in the circumflex. The disagree­
ment may be attributable to heterogeneity of study 
samples, with ischemia in distal versus proximal areas 
of the circumflex artery and either elevation or depres­
sion of the ST segment. Further studies with larger 
sample sizes may be helpful.
For patients at risk for both arrhythmia and ischemia, 
selection of the ideal precordial lead can be challenging 
because at least 1 precordial lead (V1 or V6) is needed 
to assess for ventricular arrhythmias. Thus, it is impera­
tive that if a patient is to receive continuous electrocar­
diographic monitoring, it is individualized by a clinician 
competent in ST­segment monitoring.
Nonischemic Causes of ST-Segment Changes
Continuous ST­segment monitoring may not be ap­
propriate for particular patient populations for 2 main 
reasons: Their clinical condition does not warrant it, 
or their baseline ECG is abnormal and does not allow 
valid measurement of the ST segment. A number of 
conditions other than myocardial ischemia can cause 
ST­segment changes and trigger ST­segment alarms. 
For example, changes on the ECG may occur among 
patients who are admitted with hyperkalemia; their ad­
mission “baseline” waveform may include ST­segment 
elevation with peaked T waves and widening of the 
QRS complex, often (but not always) throughout the 
limb and precordial leads.43 As hyperkalemia resolves 
and the patient’s ST segment returns to baseline, the 
ST­segment alarm may be triggered because the base­
line ST segment stored in the memory of the monitor 
demonstrated ST­segment elevation, rather than the 
patient’s outpatient baseline before hyperkalemia.
Similarly, patients who are hypothermic as a result 
of accidental hypothermia or targeted temperature 
management may exhibit Osborn waves, which may 
manifest as prominent J­point elevation mimicking ST­
segment–elevation MI (STEMI).44,45 Although ST­segment 
monitoring is recommended for a patient who sustained 
an ACS­associated arrest and is undergoing therapeutic 
hypothermia, the ST segment returning to baseline on 
rewarming may trigger the ST­segment alarm, although 
this ST resolution to baseline represents a normal physio­
logical response to rewarming. Finally, up to a quarter of 
patients after defibrillation may exhibit ST­segment ele­
vation, but this usually decreases within 5 minutes.43 The 
clinician can adjust alarm settings for the patient’s new 
baseline during resolution of hyperkalemia or hypother­
mia or after resuscitation to avoid unnecessary alarms.
Primary repolarization abnormalities occur indepen­
dently, without changes in QRS depolarization,40,42 and 
include the following:
• Drugs and toxins (eg, prolonged use of digitalis 
may result in what has been described by clini­
cians as a “scoop” or “soup ladle” ST­segment 
depression)
• Electrolyte abnormalities (eg, serum calcium and 
potassium)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e280
• Pericarditis or myopericarditis, often with diffuse 
changes on the ECG, including ST­segment eleva­
tion (or, more frequently, PR depression) in mul­
tiple leads, representing inflammation rather than 
true ischemia43
Secondary repolarization abnormalities may also 
manifest as ST­segment and T­wave abnormalities. They 
occur with changes in sequence or duration of ventricu­
lar depolarization40,42 and include the following:
• Right or left BBB
• Paced rhythms
• Ventricular hypertrophy
• Ventricular pre­excitation
Several other patient populations that present with 
electrocardiographic waveforms displaying abnormal re­
polarization are particularly challenging for the clinician 
on initial admission to the hospital if the patient’s history 
is not well known and no baseline ECG is available. Expert 
consultation may be indicated. These conditions follow:
• Early repolarization pattern, described as wide­
spread and consistent ST­segment elevation at 
the J point, with characteristic QRS slurring or 
notching (a positive deflection on terminal QRS 
complex); preservation of the initial concave 
upsloping; and prominent T waves in at least 2 
contiguous leads43
• Chronic or evolutionary ST­segment elevation 
caused by ventricular aneurysmal dilatation from a 
previous infarction43
• Brugada syndrome, manifested by right BBB and 
ST­segment elevation in leads V1 through V3 among 
patients who, despite absence of chest pain, are at 
high risk for syncope or death resulting from VT or 
ventricular fibrillation (VF)43,46
Because there are so many patient populations for 
whom either continuous ST­segment monitoring is not 
valid or the ST segment is difficult to measure accu­
rately, this monitoring should be considered an add­on 
rather than a default for in­hospital cardiac monitor­
ing. In contrast, there are discrete patient populations 
for whom ST­segment monitoring may provide valuable 
prognostic and clinical data.
Changes to Previous Recommendations for 
ST-Segment Monitoring
The authors of the 2004 practice standards1 gave a COR 
I recommendation for continuous ST­segment monitor­
ing to 4 patient populations (early phase of ACS; chest 
pain or angina­equivalent symptoms in patients present­
ing to the ED; after nonurgent percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI) with suboptimal angiographic results; 
and possible variant angina caused by coronary vaso­
spasm), all of whom were at significant risk of myocardi­
al ischemia, which, if sustained, could result in acute MI.
After considerable discussion resulting in consensus, 
the current writing group has given these patients a 
COR IIa recommendation, not because we doubt the 
potential for this technology but because recent liter­
ature demonstrates a very serious problem with false 
and nonactionable alarm signals.47–53 False and non­
actionable alarm signals have led to alarm fatigue and 
resulted in sentinel events.49,54 False alarm signals occur 
when there is no valid triggering event, whereas nonac­
tionable alarm signals correctly sound but for an event 
that has no clinical relevance.
False ST­segment alarms37,38 were described in early 
reports and continue to be an area needing priority 
attention. Investigators evaluated standardization of 
monitor software and nurse tailoring of patient alarms 
using a 12­lead hardwire monitoring system in a 15­bed 
medical progressive care (telemetry) unit over an 18­day 
period, reporting that after intervention, the number of 
ST­segment alarms (9647) remained high and needed 
further follow­up interventions.47 In 5 ICUs in a single 
hospital during a period of 31 days, Drew et al50 re­
ported that 91% of the 6196 alarms for ST­segment 
changes were considered nonactionable. Unfortunate­
ly, until this unacceptable rate of false and nonaction­
able alarms can be addressed, we can no longer give a 
COR I recommendation because false and nonaction­
able alarm signals distract the nurse, bother the patient, 
and desensitize clinicians to respond to alarms.47,49,50,55 
ST­segment monitoring software in its current state 
contributes far too many false and nonactionable alarm 
signals that constrain its usefulness.
Exacerbating the problem of false and nonaction­
able alarm signals is the lack of studies on the process 
and outcomes of continuous ST­segment monitoring by 
staff nurses in telemetry settings. The majority of studies 
evaluating benefits of continuous ischemia monitoring 
were done by researchers who used a 12­lead monitor­
ing system. 18,19,28,30,34 These important studies provided 
a foundation for others; unfortunately, very few studies 
were forthcoming to evaluate real­time workflow pro­
cess and real­time outcomes for the patients as a result 
of caregivers using their standard continuous monitor­
ing equipment. Ischemia monitoring in non­ICU settings 
(eg, telemetry units) has not been adequately studied. 
Literature on appropriate workflow and protocols is 
rarely published; reports of the impact of protocols 
for real­time continuous electrocardiographic monitor­
ing are sorely needed. Earlier writing groups provided 
recommendations during a time when some hospitals 
still did not have equipment to perform continuous ST­
segment monitoring; at that time, hospital leaders were 
advised that when their cardiac monitors needed to be 
replaced, they should be replaced with monitors ca­
pable of ischemia monitoring.1,14 Since that time, most 
hospitals have had monitoring capability for ischemia; 
however, the recent practice of unnecessary arrhythmia 
monitoring combined with suboptimal technology and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e281
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
suboptimal management of alarms has resulted in an 
unacceptable rate of false and nonactionable alarms.
Although the number of studies addressing imple­
mentation of practice standards for electrocardiograph­
ic monitoring has increased in the past few years, the 
focus has been on arrhythmia monitoring, not continu­
ous ST­segment monitoring.56–59 Unfortunately, this has 
resulted in a continued lack of studies evaluating con­
tinuous ST­segment monitoring by telemetry, which of­
ten includes only 5 electrodes (7 leads) rather than 10 
electrodes (12 leads). Research is ongoing on the practi­
cal use of reduced lead sets with capability for 12­lead 
monitoring directly by staff nurses.60
The highest current recommendation for ischemia 
monitoring is COR IIa, LOE C for intermediate­ to 
high­risk patients in the early phase of ACS, including 
   Paced rhythms
General principles and alarm management
 General principles
  Assess if ST­segment monitoring is indicated for patient
   
Monitor via 12­lead ECGs; select display leads on the basis of priority 
purpose of monitoring
   
Assess alarm parameters on the basis of patient’s baseline and 
purpose of monitoring; adjust as appropriate
  Continue monitoring until indication no longer relevant
   Reassess daily
    
If unable to resolve continuous false alarms, discontinue continuous 
ST­segment monitoring to avoid alarm fatigue; collaborate with 
the care team to decide whether other assessments are needed 
(eg, agitated patient with delirium: consider daily ECGs rather than 
continuous ST­segment monitoring)
   
Document the continuous ST­segment monitoring in patient’s medical 
record at baseline and then at least every 8–12 h
   
Document waveform strip on ECG with any signs or symptoms of 
angina or angina equivalent
   
In ACS, continue ST­segment monitoring until MI has been ruled out 
or other diagnosis is made (eg, myopericarditis)
   
If ACS confirmed, continue continuous ST­segment monitoring using 
guidelines provided in these practice standards
Alarm management
  
Have interprofessional policy in place at institution for use of continuous 
ST­segment monitoring
 In responding to alarms, first assesses:
   
Is patient appropriate for continuous ST­segment monitoring (eg, verify 
rhythm is not paced)?
  Are electrodes placed correctly?
  Did ST­segment alarm continue despite change to supine position?
  
After the above are confirmed, obtain 12­lead ECG; qualified clinician 
should evaluate 12­lead ECG to confirm presence of ST­segment 
changes in contiguous leads
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; ADHF, acute decompensated 
heart failure; LBBB, left bundle­branch block; MI, myocardial infarction; NSTE­
ACS, non­ST­segment elevation acute coronary syndrome; PCI, percutaneous 
coronary intervention; RBBB, right bundle­branch block; and STEMI, ST­
segment elevation myocardial infarction.
Table 3. Continued
Table 3. Recommendations for Continuous ST-
Segment Monitoring of Hospitalized Adult Patients
Class of Recommendation I
 None
Class of Recommendation IIa
 Continuous ST­segment monitoring is reasonable for:
   
Early­phase ACS (<24 h) for intermediate to high risk NSTE­ACS or 
STEMI, while receiving definitive diagnosis, initiating immediately and 
 
continuing uninterrupted ≥24–48 h (or until ruled out; negative 
biomarkers) (Level of Evidence B)
   
After MI without revascularization or with residual ischemic lesions 
(initiating immediately; continuing ≥24–48 h until no evidence of 
ongoing modifiable ischemia or hemodynamic or electric instability) 
(Level of Evidence C)
   
Newly diagnosed left main coronary artery lesion (until revascularized) 
(Level of Evidence C)
   
Vasospastic angina (can be useful to document transient ST­segment 
changes until diagnosed and stabilized) (Level of Evidence C)
   
After nonurgent PCI with complications or suboptimal results (for ≥24 
h or until complication resolved; expert judgment is needed for type 
of complication) (Level of Evidence C)
   
Open heart surgery (intraoperatively) (Level of Evidence B)
Class of Recommendation IIb
 Continuous ST­segment monitoring may be considered for:
   
After MI with revascularization of all ischemic lesions (initiating 
immediately; continuing ≥12–24 h after revascularization; duration 
of monitoring may be shorter or longer, depending on how quickly 
patient was revascularized, cardiac biomarker levels, and clinical 
condition) (Level of Evidence B)
   
Apical ballooning (stress cardiomyopathy): until symptoms resolved 
(Level of Evidence C)
   
During targeted temperature management (therapeutic hypothermia) 
procedure based on presumed cause of arrest (Level of Evidence C)
   
Open heart surgery: immediately postoperatively in intubated and 
sedated patients until able to recognize and report new or ongoing 
ischemia (Level of Evidence B)
   
ADHF: only if possible ischemic origin and evaluable ST segment (until 
precipitating event is successfully treated) (Level of Evidence C)
   
Stroke: only in patients with acute stroke at increased risk for cardiac 
events with evaluable ST segments (24–48 h) (Level of Evidence C)
Class of Recommendation III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C
 Continuous ST­segment monitoring is not beneficial for:
   
Fully awake and alert patients able to recognize and verbalize angina 
symptoms
   After nonurgent PCI without complications
    
After routine coronary angiography (no further monitoring beyond 
femoral sheath removed and immediate postprocedure area)
   
Low­risk and noncardiac chest pain (risk score derived from 
established scoring tool)
Class of Recommendation III: Harm; Level of Evidence C
  
Continuous ST­segment monitoring is potentially harmful because it will 
likely trigger false or nonactionable alarms that may disturb patients, 
distract nurses, or lead to unnecessary treatment for:
  Condition­specific changes in repolarization
   Myopericarditis
   Chronic “scooped” ST segment caused by prolonged digitalis use
   LBBB, RBBB (unless advanced interpretation skills are present)
(Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e282
those being evaluated for vasospastic angina; post­
MI patients without revascularization or with residual 
ischemic lesions; and newly diagnosed patients with 
a high­risk lesion such as left main blockage in the 
setting of a nursing unit with technology for con­
tinuous 12­lead ST monitoring and related education 
and protocols that facilitate reduction of false and 
nonactionable alarm signals (Table 3). A COR IIb, LOE 
B recommendation is given for ischemia monitoring 
immediately postoperatively after open heart sur­
gery, which is congruent with guidelines published 
in 2011.61
Technology and protocols for continuous ST­seg­
ment monitoring must be improved. The full potential 
of continuous ST­segment monitoring has not been re­
alized. Monitor manufacturers have a responsibility to 
work with clinicians to optimize this potentially benefi­
cial technology. Specific recommendations to improve 
ST­segment technology have been suggested,50 and 
further remedies for addressing alarm fatigue are given 
in Section 3 of this article; specific recommendations 
for further studies on ST­segment monitoring are listed 
in Section 5.
Pediatric Considerations
In neonates and infants, the TP segment is the preferred 
reference for the isoelectric line.62 Changes of ≥1 mm 
above the isoelectric line may be considered clinically 
significant; however, this is uncommon in the newborn. 
During the first week of life, variability in T waves is nor­
mal. After ≈1 week, the T wave is generally negative in 
V1 and positive in V5 and V6.62
ST­segment monitoring for primary ischemia is less 
common among children than adults, although chil­
dren with congenital heart defects such as Fontan 
circulation may benefit.63,64 In 30 children with Ka­
wasaki disease (a leading acquired heart disease in 
children in developed nations65,66), ST­segment moni­
toring via Holter successfully demonstrated ischemic 
ST­segment depression in all patients with angio­
graphically identified left main coronary artery occlu­
sion.67 In children, secondary ischemia resulting from 
myocardial demand exceeding supply may include 
those receiving high­dose epinephrine or isoproter­
enol, infants with prenatal exposure to cocaine,68 or 
infants with cardiotoxicity during treatment of severe 
asthma.69 Thus, further study of ST­segment moni­
toring among these pediatric populations has been 
proposed, with clinical recommendations similar to 
those for adults in terms of degree of elevation/de­
pression, duration of at least 1 minute, and confir­
mation by a 12­lead ECG.67 Further study is needed 
to support specific recommendations for use among 
select patient populations, method of monitoring, 
normal versus abnormal measurements, and effec­
tiveness of interventions.
Overview of QTc Monitoring
Background
Acute QT prolongation is associated with increased risk for 
torsade de pointes (TdP), a rare but potentially fatal VT. QT
­
interval prolongation is attributable to abnormal structure 
or function of ion channels and related proteins respon­
sible for cardiac cellular repolarization. In the congenital 
form of long­QT syndrome (LQTS), these abnormalities 
result from genetic mutation, whereas in acquired LQTS, 
ion channel function is altered by acute medical condi­
tions or the action of drugs. Emerging evidence indicates 
that some instances of drug­induced acquired LQTS and 
TdP may be related to previously undetected genetic fac­
tors.70–72 Prevalence of QTc prolongation is difficult to 
determine because of inconsistent definitions and dif­
fering research methods. Investigations have reported 
prevalence of QTc prolongation >500 milliseconds in 
monitored patients ranging from 2.6% to 24%.73–75
A major risk factor for acquired LQTS and TdP in 
hospitalized patients is the initiation, increased dose, 
or overdose of QT­prolonging drugs. Drugs from a 
wide range of classes have been implicated (Table 4). 
AZCERT, Inc, an independent nonprofit organization, 
maintains a continually updated lists of drugs with 
known, possible, and conditional risk for causing TdP 
on its website.76 This resource provides a conservative 
approach to management and is used by clinicians in 
evaluating the risks and benefits of listed drugs. Ongo­
ing studies of these drugs, as well as new agents, will 
provide evidence for future recommendations.
Examples of drug classes known to present poten­
tial risk for prolonged ventricular repolarization and 
TdP are listed (Table 4). The degree of risk is variable, 
and data on the incidence of TdP are best documented 
for the antiarrhythmic agents. Among the antiarrhyth­
mics, older drugs such as disopyramide, procainamide, 
and quinidine, as well as dofetilide, ibutilide, and so­
talol, have been found to have a TdP incidence of 1% 
to 10%.77 Although amiodarone frequently causes 
Table 4. Examples of Drugs Available on US Market 
With Known Risk for TdP
Drug Class
Examples
Antiarrhythmic
Amiodarone, disopyramide, dofetilide, ibutolide, sotalol
Antibiotic
Azithromycin, ciprofloxacin, erythromycin, levofloxacin, 
moxifloxacin
Antidepressant
Citalopram, escitalopram
Antiemetic
Droperidol, ondansetron
Antifungal
Fluconazole
Antipsychotic
Haloperidol, chlorpromazine
Opiate
Methadone
TdP indicates torsade de pointes. 
Adapted from http://www.crediblemeds.org.76 Used with permission from 
AZCERT Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e283
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
marked QTc interval prolongation, it is thought to less 
frequently result in TdP
.78
Administration by intravenous route and rapid infusion 
of culprit drugs has been demonstrated in animal studies 
to be more likely to cause arrhythmia.79 Other reported 
risk factors (Table 5) include female sex, family history of 
congenital LQTS, and underlying conditions such as elec­
trolyte abnormalities, renal or hepatic dysfunction, hypo­
thyroidism, heart disease, and bradycardic episodes.80 QT 
prolongation has also been observed in patients under­
going therapeutic hypothermia after cardiac arrest.81,82
Although assessing the QT interval has become a 
standard part of the in­hospital monitoring routine, 
consensus is lacking about specific processes such as 
measurement methods (manual, semiautomated, fully 
automated continuous), heart rate correction methods, 
frequency of QT measurement, and patient selection. 
Because of the dearth of definitive research findings, 
many of the recommendations made here are based on 
expert opinion.
Implementation of QTc Monitoring
Implementation of QTc monitoring involves several con­
siderations: selection of the method to measure the QTc, 
selection of the appropriate lead to monitor, measurement 
of the length of the QT interval in seconds or milliseconds, 
and correction of the QT interval for heart rate (QTc).
Methods Used to Measure the QTc Interval
In monitored hospitalized patients, QT and QTc inter­
val duration can be determined by 3 methods: manual 
measurement with handheld calipers, a semiautomated 
approach with digital calipers built into the electrocar­
diographic monitoring system, and fully automated 
continuous QTc monitoring. A specific recommenda­
tion for 1 of the previously mentioned 3 methods can­
not be made at the present time because hospitals have 
different monitoring systems, some more sophisticated 
than others, and no studies to date have determined 
the best method for in­hospital monitoring of QT/QTc. 
Most institutions currently do not have automatic con­
tinuous QT correction in their monitoring systems. Thus, 
knowing how to measure QT intervals and calculate the 
corrected QT manually is important and provides hu­
man oversight to automatically calculated readings.
Calculating the QTc in patients with atrial fibrillation 
(AF) is particularly challenging with manual measure­
ment because of the constantly changing RR interval. 
Although there is no consensus on the best method, >1 
approach has been suggested. One method takes the 
longest and shortest QTc interval in an electrocardio­
graphic recording and calculates an average. Another 
method takes the average of multiple QTc measure­
ments (up to 10) in a recording.83 Methods that rely on 
only a single QT measurement are less likely to accu­
rately represent the actual repolarization duration.
Newer­generation hospital electrocardiographic moni­
toring systems include electronic calipers. Electronic cali­
pers are positioned to measure both the QT and previ­
ous RR interval and the values entered. The system then 
uses an automated QT correction to calculate the QTc. 
The most recent development is fully automated QTc 
monitoring, in which QT/QTc intervals are measured ev­
ery 5 minutes for display, alarms, and trending.84,85 The 
fully automated method has the advantage of measur­
ing every QT interval from all monitoring leads and uses 
a representative heart rate for correction.
Caution should be used in comparing serial QTc mea­
surements on recordings from bedside monitors with 
those from standard 12­lead ECGs. Monitor measure­
ments, especially from fully automated continuous QTc 
monitoring, should not be considered equivalent to, 
or used interchangeably with, standard 12­lead ECGs 
for serial comparison.86 However, nurses monitoring 
QTc for at­risk patients every 8 hours via telemetry are 
able to report increasing measurements, having identi­
fied an increase in QTc for which the prescriber would 
Table 5. General Risk Factors and Indicators for 
Impending TdP
Examples
General risk factors
 Older age
 Female sex
 Heart disease
Left ventricular hypertrophy
Low left ventricular ejection fraction
Myocardial ischemia
 Bradyarrhythmia
Pause after conversion from AF or flutter 
to sinus rhythm
Compensatory pauses after PVCs
Sinus pauses
Mobitz II or complete heart block with 
ventricular rate <40 bpm
  
Electrolyte abnormalities
Hypokalemia (moderate to severe)
Hypomagnesemia (moderate to severe)
Malnutrition electrolyte disorders
  
Metabolic impairment 
(acquired or genetic)
Renal failure
Hepatic failure
  
Genetic predisposition to 
QT prolongation
Unexplained QT prolongation in patient or 
family member
Family history of syncope, sudden death, LQTS
  
Concomitant use of 
drugs that prolong QT or 
impair their metabolism
Electrocardiographic indicators of impending TdP
  
Sudden bradycardia or long pauses (eg, compensatory pauses after 
ventricular ectopy)
 Enhanced U waves
 T wave alternans
 Nonsustained polymorphic VT
AF indicates atrial fibrillation; LQTS, long­QT syndrome; PVC, premature 
ventricular contraction; TdP
, torsade de pointes; and VT, ventricular tachycardia.
Adapted from Drew et al.80 Copyright © 2010, American Heart Association, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e284
want to be notified (eg, reaching 500 milliseconds), at 
which point the prescriber may decide whether a 12­
lead ECG is needed to confirm the measurement and 
adjust treatment accordingly. Patients can be moni­
tored for response to Class III antiarrhythmic drugs (eg, 
call prescriber if QTc increases ≥25% from baseline). 
Guidelines for the frequency of QTc measurement and 
notification of prescriber may vary according to patient 
characteristics and drug.
Appropriate Lead Selection
The AHA/ACC Foundation/Heart Rhythm Society rec­
ommendations for the standardization and interpreta­
tion of the ECG (2009) recommend selecting the elec­
trocardiographic lead with the longest T wave when 
monitoring the QT interval and avoiding a lead with U 
waves.40 The same electrocardiographic lead should be 
used over time for the same patient because QT length 
varies across the 12 leads. If a lead change after QT 
monitoring has started is unavoidable, then that lead 
change should be clearly documented along with the 
QT measurement.
Measurement of the QT Interval
The QT interval is measured from the onset of the 
QRS complex to the end of the T wave. If the QRS 
should become prolonged, for example, with a new 
BBB, the resultant increase in QT interval should not 
be interpreted as acquired LQTS.87 This situation can 
be handled by subtracting the increased QRS length 
from the QT interval.40,80 An alternative method is to 
substitute measurement of the JT interval (from the 
end of the QRS to the end of the T wave), thereby 
eliminating the confounding widened QRS.40,80 Either 
method must be documented and used consistently 
to detect valid ventricular repolarization changes over 
time. With notched or biphasic T waves or superim­
posed U wave, the end of the entire T­wave complex 
should be considered the end of the QT interval. If a 
U wave is discrete, that is, occurring after the T wave 
returns to the baseline, then it should not be included 
in the QT measurement.
Correction of the QT for Heart Rate
Because the QT interval lengthens with slow heart rates 
and shortens with fast heart rates, it is necessary to cor­
rect the QT interval for heart rate to accurately detect 
repolarization changes over time. The Bazett formula, 
by which the measured QT interval is divided by the 
square root of the R­R interval (in seconds), is the most 
commonly used QT correction method. However, mul­
tiple studies have demonstrated that the Bazett method 
overestimates QTc values at faster heart rates. Numer­
ous alternatives, including the Hodges, Framingham, 
Fridericia, and subject­specific formulas, have been 
shown to be more accurate.88–91 Although there is cur­
rently a lack of consensus on a single optimal formula, 
some of these alternatives may be used more frequent­
ly in the future.
The QTc interval is considered prolonged when it 
is >450 milliseconds for male patients and >460 mil­
liseconds for female patients; the difference for sex de­
creases at ≈40 years of age.40 Review of studies and 
expert opinion highlights the clinical significance for 
QTc duration of >500 milliseconds as being associated 
with higher risk for TdP
.80,92–96 Although QTc prolonga­
tion criteria have been recommended, there is no firmly 
established threshold below which QTc prolongation is 
considered free of proarrhythmic risk.83
General Recommendations for QTc Monitoring
Regardless of the method used, it is essential that all cli­
nicians responsible for electrocardiographic monitoring 
share a consistent method and procedure within their 
hospital. Such a QTc protocol should include measure­
ment equipment, electrocardiographic lead selection 
criteria, use of a consistent lead in the same patient 
over time, method to identify QRS onset and T­wave 
offset, QT correction formula, frequency of measure­
ment, and documentation procedure.
It is important to remember that a goal of QTc moni­
toring is to assess the safety of QT­prolonging medica­
tions (eg, Class III antiarrhythmic agents) and to avoid 
TdP
. Thus, astute arrhythmia monitoring must be done 
concurrently with QTc monitoring. Evidence suggests 
that a combination of clinical risk factors and QT­pro­
longing medications may present increased risk for 
TdP
.97 Among inpatients with observed prolonged QTc 
interval, monitoring is a high priority if they exhibit any 
of the risk factors or specific electrocardiographic indi­
cators of impending TdP (Table 5).
Among patients for whom the provider has selected 
inpatient initiation, for those with risk factors for TdP 
(Table 5), including baseline QTc prolongation, who 
are being started on nonantiarrhythmic drugs with 
known, possible, or conditional risk for TdP, QT moni­
toring is recommended. Nonantiarrhythmic drugs with 
known, possible, or conditional risk for TdP, including 
many antipsychotic agents, are generally initiated in 
the outpatient setting without electrocardiographic 
monitoring. Because studies of nonantiarrhythmic 
drugs with known risk for TdP consist largely of case 
reports and small series, data on incidence of TdP are 
limited.
Although these populations are discussed further in 
the Monitoring Recommendations by Patient Popula­
tions section, patients most likely to benefit (COR I rec­
ommendation) from QTc monitoring while hospitalized 
are highlighted in Table 6.
Pediatric Considerations
The above recommendations may also be applied to 
pediatric populations, with several caveats noted. The 
normal upper limit for QTc among children 11 days to 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e285
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
16 years of age was identified as <450 milliseconds.9 
A patient with LQTS and a resting QTc of ≥500 mil­
liseconds is generally considered at increased clinical 
risk for a significant arrhythmia. A shortened QTc in­
terval (ie, <300 milliseconds) may be associated with 
malignant arrhythmias.99 An estimated 10% of sud­
Targeted temperature management (therapeutic hypothermia)
  
Patients undergoing targeted 
temperature management
QTc monitoring is recommended 
until:
 Temperature normalized
 QTc interval is in normal range
  
No evidence of QT­related 
arrhythmias
(Class I; Level of Evidence C§)
Congenital LQTS
  
Patients with inherited long QT 
who:
QTc monitoring is recommended 
until:
   
Present with unstable 
ventricular arrhythmias and/or
  
Stabilization of ventricular 
arrhythmias
   
Have medically or metabolically 
induced prolongation of QTc 
interval
  
Exacerbating medical or 
metabolic condition is reversed
 QTc interval returns to baseline
(Class I; Level of Evidence C§)
Electrolyte disorders
  
Patients with moderate to severe 
hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia, 
in combination with other general 
risk factors for TdP†
QTc monitoring is recommended 
until:
 Electrolytes normalized
  
No evidence of QT­related 
arrhythmias
(Class I; Level of Evidence C§)
Drug overdose
  
Patients with overdose of drug 
with known TdP risk or with 
overdose of unknown drug(s)
QTc monitoring is recommended 
until:
  
QT­prolonging drug levels have 
decreased
  
Unknown drug has been 
identified as non–QT­prolonging
 QTc interval is in normal range
  
No evidence of QT­related 
arrhythmias
(Class I; Level of Evidence C§)
Acute neurological event
  
Patients with acute neurological 
events and no baseline QTc 
prolongation
QTc monitoring is not recommended
(Class III: No Benefit; Level of 
Evidence C)
LQTS indicates long­QT syndrome; and TdP
, torsade de pointes.
*These recommendations apply to patients who are hospitalized. Different 
recommendations may apply to patients in an outpatient setting. Classification of 
known, possible, or conditional risk is per http://www.crediblemeds.org.76
†Risk factors are listed in Table 5.
‡US Food and Drug Administration guidelines apply.
§Document the QTc, including rhythm strip, in the patient’s medical record 
at baseline and then at least every 8 to 12 hours.
Data derived from Zipes et al,77 Malik and Camm,78 Drew et al,80 Storm et al,81  
Riaz et al,82 Beach et al,93 and Machado et al.98
Table 6. Continued
Patient Population/Indication
Recommendations
Table 6. Recommended QTc Monitoring of 
Hospitalized Adult Patients by Population*
Patient Population/Indication
Recommendations
Drug initiation*
  
Patients with or without risk 
factors for TdP† who are started 
on antiarrhythmic drugs with 
known risk for TdP
  
Medications include dofetilide,‡ 
ibutilide,‡ sotalol, disopyramide, 
procainamide, quinidine
QTc monitoring is recommended: 
  
For dofetilide (Class I; Level of 
Evidence B)§
  
For others (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C)§
Factors determining duration of 
QTc monitoring:
 QTc return to baseline
 Drug half­life
  
Time to drug elimination 
dependent on hepatic or renal 
function
  
Presence of QT­related 
arrhythmias
Continue QTc monitoring for 
48–72 h for patients initiating or 
increasing dose of disopyramide, 
procainamide, quinidine, and 
sotalol
  
Patients with or without risk 
factors for TdP† who are started 
on antiarrhythmic drugs with 
possible risk for TdP
  
Medications include amiodarone, 
dronedarone, flecainide
QTc monitoring may be reasonable 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C)§
  
Patients with history of prolonged 
QTc or with general risk factors 
for TdP† who are started on 
nonantiarrhythmic drugs with risk 
for TdP
  Drugs with known risk
   
Drugs with possible or 
conditional risk
QTc monitoring is recommended 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C)§
QTc monitoring is reasonable 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence C)§
  
Patients without history of 
prolonged QTc or without general 
risk factors for TdP† who are 
started on nonantiarrhythmic 
drugs with risk for TdP
QTc monitoring is not 
recommended
  Drugs with known risk
  
Class III: No Benefit; Level of 
Evidence C
   
Drugs with possible or 
conditional risk
  
Class III: No Benefit; Level of 
Evidence C
General principles
  
For patients with Class I indication for QT monitoring, document the 
QTc, including rhythm strip, in patient’s medical record at baseline and 
then at least every 8–12 h
  
If QTc prolongation occurs during administration of drug, more frequent 
measurement may be needed
 Document QTc before and after increases in dose of QT­prolonging drug
  
In patients who develop QTc >500 ms, discontinue causative drug and 
continue QTc monitoring until drug washes out and QTc is documented 
to be decreasing
  
Decision to hold drug will vary on the basis of drug (eg, may not need 
to hold amiodarone or dronedarone); consult an expert on whether to 
continue drug when QT prolongation is observed
(Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e286
den infant death syndrome is thought to be a result 
of hereditary QT prolongation. Therefore, in attempt 
to reduce further QT prolongation by QT­prolonging 
medications in the setting of existing congenital QT 
prolongation, clinicians have implemented automat­
ed, continuous QT­interval surveillance in the neona­
tal ICU.100
SECTION 2: RECOMMENDATIONS 
FOR INDICATION AND DURATION 
OF ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHIC 
MONITORING
Monitoring Recommendations by Patient 
Populations
The following sections provide a review of evidence 
for electrocardiographic monitoring in discrete patient 
populations, with recommendations for electrocardio­
graphic monitoring when sufficient evidence to provide 
recommendations exists, including a summary of each 
patient population for which recommendations are 
provided in the text in Table 7.
Chest Pain and Coronary Artery Disease
Cardiac arrest is the leading cause of death in US adults 
and the most common cause of death after MI.101,102 
Although the rate of sudden cardiac death (SCD) has 
decreased with advanced reperfusion and medical 
and secondary prevention therapies, it still accounts 
for 24% to 40% of total mortality after MI,101,103 with 
an overall incidence of 2% to 4% per year.104 The 
highest absolute rates of SCD occur within the early 
hours after MI and during the initial hospitalization, 
a relatively brief period that accounts for 17% of the 
sudden deaths likely to occur within the first 30 days 
after infarction.104 The substantial risk of death in the 
early hours and days after MI is a primary motivation 
for the early recognition, evaluation, and electrocar­
diographic monitoring of patients with acute ischemic 
cardiac events.
All patients presenting for urgent assessment of 
chest pain or symptoms of acute ischemic cardiac dis­
ease should be rapidly assessed and treated within the 
construct of a predetermined chest pain protocol, in­
cluding prompt initiation of electrocardiographic moni­
toring and acquisition of a static 12­lead ECG, with ear­
ly triage of patients with evidence of STEMI to urgent 
reperfusion therapy.105 For all patients, appropriate use 
of electrocardiographic monitoring is essential because 
the large number of patients admitted for chest pain 
has an important impact on the availability of moni­
tored beds in some institutions. Indeed, heavy use of te­
lemetry monitoring and ICU admissions is an important 
driver of increased costs without clear substantiation of 
improved outcomes in many subsets of patients.106–108 
Electrocardiographic monitoring should be purpose­
ful.109–111 Thus, researchers are working to differentiate 
patients whose chest pain is unlikely to be cardiac in 
origin in an attempt to reduce unnecessary inpatient 
admissions.
In the absence of STEMI, assessment tools include 
elements of the history, physical examination, static 
12­lead ECG, and cardiac biomarkers to stratify the 
likelihood of ischemia as high, intermediate, or low. 
Several authors105,112–114 have described the likelihood 
of signs and symptoms that represent ACS secondary 
to coronary artery disease. A variety of scoring tools 
have been developed to assist in identifying patients at 
presentation to the ED who are at increased likelihood 
for the presence of ischemia and therefore at higher 
risk for adverse outcome,115–120 although the superiority 
of these scores beyond clinical judgment is not estab­
lished. Among patients whose presenting symptoms are 
found to be the result of a noncardiac cause or deemed 
to be low likelihood for an ischemic cardiac condition, 
further evaluation and treatment can be directed in a 
more appropriate manner without continued electro­
cardiographic monitoring.
In contrast, when the initial assessment is consistent 
with an intermediate or high likelihood of ischemic 
chest pain, further evaluation and management for 
potential cardiac ischemic conditions are warranted. 
Risk assessment tools such as the TIMI121 (Thromboly­
sis in Myocardial Infarction) risk score, the PURSUIT122 
(Platelet Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa in Unstable Angina: Re­
ceptor Suppression Using Integrilin Therapy) score, the 
GRACE123 (Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events) 
score, or the NCDR­ACTION (National Cardiovascular 
Data Registry­Acute Coronary Treatment and Interven­
tion Outcomes Network) registry score124 incorporate 
historical, risk factor, biochemical, and electrocardio­
graphic data and have demonstrated ability to predict 
short­, intermediate­, and/or long­term risk for adverse 
outcome. Therefore, when applied to patients with 
ischemic cardiac symptoms, these scores are useful in 
guiding the intensity of therapeutic management, in­
cluding level of nursing and monitoring intensity, an­
ticoagulation therapy, and accelerated invasive assess­
ment and revascularization for high­risk patients.114 The 
following section contains evidence for electrocardio­
graphic monitoring of patients when they are at mod­
erate to high risk for ACS.
Early Phase of ACS (<24 Hours)
Although the incidence of malignant ventricular ar­
rhythmias occurring in the setting of ACS historically 
has varied considerably from 2% to 20%,125–129 limited 
recent research indicates that the incidence of malig­
nant ventricular arrhythmias in the setting of ACS is 
less than that reported decades ago.130 Nonetheless, 
because ventricular arrhythmias are known to occur 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e287
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Table 7. Recommended Electrocardiographic Monitoring of Hospitalized Adult Patients by Population
Patient Population/Indication
Arrhythmia Monitoring Recommendations
Continuous ST-Segment Ischemia 
Monitoring Recommendations
QTc*
Chest pain/coronary artery disease
  
Early­phase ACS (<24 h) for 
intermediate­ or high­risk NSTE­ACS 
or STEMI
Should be initiated immediately, continuing 
uninterrupted ≥24–48 h (or until ruled 
out; negative biomarkers) (Class I; Level of 
Evidence B)
Is reasonable to initiate immediately, 
continuing uninterrupted ≥24–48 h (or until 
MI ruled out; negative biomarkers or successful 
reperfusion/revascularization) (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence B)
 
  
After MI, with revascularization of all 
ischemic lesions
Should be initiated immediately, continuing 
uninterrupted ≥12–24 h after revascularization 
(duration of monitoring after PCI may be 
shorter or longer, depending on how quickly 
patient was revascularized, cardiac biomarker 
levels, and clinical condition) (Class I; Level of 
Evidence B)
May be considered for immediate initiation, 
continuing uninterrupted ≥12–24 h after 
revascularization (duration of monitoring after 
PCI may be shorter or longer, depending on 
how quickly patient was revascularized, cardiac 
biomarker levels, and clinical condition) (Class 
IIb; Level of Evidence B)
  
After MI, without revascularization or 
with residual ischemic lesions
Should be initiated immediately, continuing 
uninterrupted ≥24–48 h until no evidence 
of ongoing modifiable ischemia or 
hemodynamic or electric instability (Class I; 
Level of Evidence C)
Is reasonable to initiate immediately, 
continuing uninterrupted ≥24–48 h until no 
evidence of ongoing modifiable ischemia or 
hemodynamic or electric instability (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence C)
 
  
Targeted temperature management
Class I; Level of Evidence C
Decision must be based on presumed cause of 
arrest (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C)
*
  
Vasospastic angina (ie, Prinzmetal)
Until symptoms resolved (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C)
Can be useful in patients to document 
transient ST­segment changes until clinical 
syndrome diagnosed and stabilized (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence C)
 
  
Apical ballooning syndrome (stress 
cardiomyopathy)
Until symptoms resolved (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C)
May be useful to document until symptoms 
resolved (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C)
  
Newly diagnosed left main coronary 
artery lesion
Until revascularized (Class I; Level of Evidence C)
Until revascularized (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C)
  
After nonurgent PCI, with complications
For ≥24 h or until complication resolved (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C)
For ≥24 h or until complication resolved (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C)
  
After nonurgent PCI, without 
complications
No further monitoring beyond femoral sheath 
removal and immediate postprocedure area 
(Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C)
No further monitoring beyond femoral  
sheath removal and immediate  
postprocedure area (Class III: No Benefit; 
Level of Evidence C)
  
After routine diagnostic coronary 
angiography
No further monitoring beyond immediate 
postprocedure area (Class III: No Benefit; Level 
of Evidence C)
No further monitoring beyond immediate 
postprocedure area (Class III: No Benefit; Level 
of Evidence C)
  
Low­risk and noncardiac chest pain  
(risk score derived from established 
scoring tool)
If normal ECG and negative biomarkers (Class 
III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence B)
If normal ECG and negative biomarkers (Class 
III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence B)
Major cardiac interventions
 Open heart surgery
  Uncomplicated: 48–72 h
Class I; Level of Evidence B
Intraoperatively (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B) 
and postoperatively in intubated and sedated 
patients until able to recognize and report 
new or ongoing ischemia (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence B)
   
High risk for AF: monitor until 
discharge from acute care unit
Class I; Level of Evidence B
  
Mechanical circulatory support
 
Only if patient meets respective criteria  
(ie, signs and symptoms of angina)
   
Clinically significant cardiovascular or 
hemodynamic deterioration
Class I; Level of Evidence C
   
Immediately after implantation
Class I; Level of Evidence C
  Admitted with noncardiac problems
Class IIa; Level of Evidence C
   
Admitted to a rehabilitation facility
Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C
(Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e288
Major cardiac interventions Continued
  
Transcatheter structural interventions
 
Not indicated unless ischemic origin is 
suspected; then follow indications and duration 
per ischemia criteria
   
After TAVR, particularly with 
periprocedural conduction abnormalities
≥3 d after procedure (Class I; Level of Evidence 
C) and after day 3 (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C)
   
Other transcatheter interventions (eg, 
VSD, ASD, valvuloplasty)
Duration of monitoring varies with procedure, 
device, and patient factors (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C)
Arrhythmias
  
VTs; postresuscitation from VT/VF cardiac 
arrest or hemodynamically unstable VT
Until ICD implanted or underlying problem 
resolved (Class I; Level of Evidence C)
For all arrhythmias, add ST­segment monitoring 
only if ischemic origin is suspected; then follow 
indications and duration per ischemia criteria
 Nonsustained VT
Class IIb; Level of Evidence C
 Atrial tachyarrhythmias
   
New or recurrent AF: monitor until 
treatment strategy determined
Class I; Level of Evidence C
   
Hemodynamically unstable or 
symptomatic AF
Class I; Level of Evidence C
   
Ongoing rate control management
Class I; Level of Evidence C
   
Initiation of new antiarrhythmic 
agent†
See text; QTc monitoring may be indicated for 
hospitalized patients
*
 Chronic AF
   
If admitted for reason other than 
arrhythmia or rate and patient are 
hemodynamically stable
Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C
   
If medical condition affects ventricular 
rate or patient is unstable
Class IIa; Level of Evidence C
 Sinus bradycardias
 
  Symptomatic
Class I; Level of Evidence C
   
Asymptomatic, significant bradycardia 
with negative chronotropic 
medications initiated
Class IIa; Level of Evidence C
   
Asymptomatic, hemodynamically 
stable, admitted for other indication
Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C
  
Atrioventricular block
 
   
Symptomatic second­ or third­degree 
atrioventricular block of any anatomic 
origin
Class I; Level of Evidence C
   
Asymptomatic second­ or third­
degree block caused by distal 
conduction system disease
Class I; Level of Evidence C
   
Third­degree atrioventricular block 
caused by intranodal disease
Class I; Level of Evidence C
   
Asymptomatic Wenckebach or transient 
atrioventricular block of vagal origin
Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C
  
Congenital or genetic arrhythmic 
syndromes (eg, WPW, Brugada, LQTS)
 
   
Hemodynamically unstable, recurrent 
syncope, increased arrhythmia 
susceptibility
Until appropriate therapy is delivered (Class I; 
Level of Evidence C)
   
WPW with rapid conduction via 
accessory pathway during atrial 
arrhythmia
Until therapy such as antiarrhythmic 
medication or ablation is delivered (Class I; 
Level of Evidence C)
   
Congenital long QT with unstable 
ventricular arrhythmias or further QT 
prolongation induced medically or 
metabolically
Until stable, exacerbating cause reversed, QTc 
returned to baseline (Class I; Level of Evidence C)
*
(Continued 
)
Table 7. Continued
Patient Population/Indication
Arrhythmia Monitoring Recommendations
Continuous ST-Segment Ischemia 
Monitoring Recommendations
QTc*
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e289
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Syncope of suspected cardiac origin
  
Meeting admission criteria for syncope, 
cause of syncope suspected to be 
cardiac
Monitor ≥24 h; until cause and treatment 
identified; then follow indications and 
durations per criteria in these practice 
standards (Class I; Level of Evidence B)
Not indicated unless ischemic cause is 
suspected; then follow indications and duration 
per ischemia criteria
 
After electrophysiology procedures/ablations
  
Uncomplicated SVT ablation
Can be discontinued after immediate 
postprocedure area (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C)
For signs and symptoms of ischemia, follow 
indications and duration per ischemia criteria
 
  
Complex ablation (pulmonary vein 
isolation) or serious comorbidities (eg, 
heart failure)
Monitor for 12–24 h (duration of monitoring 
varies with procedure, vascular access, and 
patient factors) (Class I; Level of Evidence C)
 
  
Atrioventricular nodal ablation after 
incessant tachycardia and after chronic AF 
with concomitant pacemaker implantation
Monitor for 12–24 h (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C)
 
After pacemaker or ICD implantation procedures
 Transcutaneous pacing pads
Monitor until pacing is no longer necessary 
and the device is removed or replaced with a 
permanent device (Class I; Level of Evidence C)
Class III: Harm; Level of Evidence C
 
  
Standard temporary transvenous pacing 
wires
Monitor until pacing is no longer necessary 
and the device is removed or replaced 
with a permanent device (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C)
 
 Semipermanent transvenous pacing
 
 
  Day 1
Class IIa; Level of Evidence C
 
  After day 1
Class IIb; Level of Evidence C
 
 Permanent pacemaker or ICD
 
 
  Pacemaker dependent
For 12–24 h (Class I; Level of Evidence C)
 
  Not pacemaker dependent
For 12–24 h (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C)
 
 Generator change
In immediate postprocedure period (Class IIb; 
Level of Evidence C)
 
Preexisting rhythm devices
 ICD shocks, requiring hospital admission
For duration of related hospitalization until 
precipitating event treated (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C)
Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C
 
  
ICD or pacemaker, admission for 
unrelated indication
Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C
 
  
Stable with wearable defibrillator, 
admission for unrelated indication
Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C
 
Other cardiac conditions
 Acute decompensated heart failure
Until precipitating event (eg, volume overload; 
ischemia; anemia; progressive ventricular, 
respiratory, or renal failure; hypertension; 
exacerbation of comorbidities; new­onset AF; 
or infection) is successfully treated (Class I; 
Level of Evidence B)
Only if possible ischemic origin and in the 
setting of evaluable ST segments (Class IIb; 
Level of Evidence C)
 
 Infective endocarditis
Until clinically stable (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C)
Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C
 
Noncardiac conditions
 Postconscious sedation
May be of benefit until patients are breathing 
per baseline and hemodynamically stable; 
consider that monitoring other than ECG may 
be more appropriate (eg, oximetry, end­tidal 
CO2) (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C)
Decision based on preoperative cardiac risk 
assessment
 
(Continued 
)
Table 7. Continued
Patient Population/Indication
Arrhythmia Monitoring Recommendations
Continuous ST-Segment Ischemia 
Monitoring Recommendations
QTc*
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e290
in the setting of ACS, most commonly after STEMI or 
NSTEMI, and have been associated with increased risk 
of in­hospital mortality, patients in the early phase of 
ACS should receive arrhythmia monitoring.
Although cardiac risk is highest within the first hours 
to days of ACS, diagnostic findings, including ST­segment 
deviation on ECG and biomarker elevation, may not 
manifest until after the initial presentation with symp­
Noncardiac conditions Continued
 Noncardiac surgery
Not indicated among asymptomatic 
postoperative patients; postoperative patients 
with angina equivalent symptoms or rhythm 
changes should be treated according to chest 
pain/coronary artery disease standards above 
(Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C)
Only if specific practice standard met (Class 
III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C)
 
 Noncardiac major thoracic surgery
After noncardiac major thoracic surgery such 
as pulmonary resection to identify AF through 
postoperative day 2–3 and may be helpful until 
discharge from acute care (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B)
Medical conditions
 Stroke
Monitor 24–48 h (Class I; Level of Evidence B)
Monitor longer if cryptogenic stroke (to 
assess for intermittent AF and asymptomatic 
rapid ventricular response) (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B)
ST­segment monitoring should be considered 
only in patients with acute stroke at 
increased risk for cardiac events with 
evaluable ST­segments (24–48 h) (Class IIb; 
Level of Evidence C)
 
  
Moderate to severe imbalance of 
potassium or magnesium
Until normalization of electrolytes (Class I; 
Level of Evidence B)
In less severe electrolyte abnormalities, if 12­
lead ECG at time of abnormal laboratory result 
demonstrates electric abnormalities, consider 
continuous electrocardiographic monitoring
Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C
*
 Drug overdose
Monitor until free of the influence of the 
drug(s) and clinically stable (Class I; Level of 
Evidence B) (see specific recommendations for 
QTc monitoring in Table 6)
Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C
*
 Hemodialysis
Efficacy is not well established for most 
patients receiving chronic hemodialysis 
unless they have another indication (eg, 
hyperkalemia, arrhythmia) (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence B) (see specific recommendations for 
QTc monitoring in Table 6)
Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C
*
DNR/DNI
  
When data gained from monitoring 
would trigger interventions consistent 
with patient wishes (eg, rate control if 
symptomatic)
Follow practice standards for related conditions
Follow practice standards for related conditions
 
  
When data will not be acted on and 
comfort­focused care is the goal
Class III: Harm; Level of Evidence C
Class III: Harm; Level of Evidence C
 
Need for continuous electrocardiographic monitoring should be reevaluated at least every 24 to 48 hours.
Patients in an intensive care unit and immediate postprocedure area (eg, catheterization laboratory) will have continuous electrocardiographic monitoring.
Patients with Class I indications for arrhythmia monitoring who need to be transported off the unit should have continuous electrocardiographic monitoring via 
a portable monitor–defibrillator/pacemaker with a healthcare provider skilled in use of the equipment and in electrocardiographic interpretation.
For chest pain/coronary artery disease, complications such as cardiogenic shock or recurrent angina or angina­equivalent syndromes require continued 
arrhythmia monitoring beyond 24 to 48 hours.
For chest pain/coronary artery disease, reapplication of ischemia monitoring should be considered in previously stable patients who experience recurrent signs/
symptoms of ischemia.
For continuous ST­segment monitoring, monitor all 12 leads in the setting of a nursing unit with technology, education, and protocols that facilitate reduction 
of false and nonactionable alarm signals; not appropriate for patients with uninterpretable ECG (ST segments).
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; AF, atrial fibrillation; ASD, atrial septal defect; DNR/DNI, do not resuscitate/do not intubate; ICD, implantable 
cardioverter­defibrillator; LQTS, long­QT syndrome; MI, myocardial infarction; NSTE­ACS, non–ST­segment–elevation acute coronary syndrome; PCI, percutaneous 
coronary intervention; STEMI, ST­segment–elevation myocardial infarction; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia; TAVR, transcatheter aortic valve replacement; VF, 
ventricular fibrillation; VSD, ventricular septal defect; VT, ventricular tachycardia; and WPW, Wolff­Parkinson­White. 
*QTc monitoring indicated; see comprehensive QTc monitoring recommendations in Table 6.
†For patients who are hospitalized.
Table 7. Continued
Patient Population/Indication
Arrhythmia Monitoring Recommendations
Continuous ST-Segment Ischemia 
Monitoring Recommendations
QTc*
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e291
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
toms suggestive of unstable angina or non–ST­segment 
elevation ACS. Therefore, a high index of suspicion 
must be maintained in patients at increased risk until 
a diagnosis of NSTEMI can be verified or excluded.105 
All patients at intermediate or high likelihood of ACS 
should be evaluated rapidly and receive electrocardio­
graphic monitoring without delay.131–133 Electrocardio­
graphic monitoring for arrhythmia and ischemia should 
continue uninterrupted for a minimum of 24 to 48 
hours, including during transportation within the hos­
pital, until a definitive noncardiac diagnosis has been 
established or until appropriate reperfusion or therapy 
has been provided. This includes patients evaluated 
in chest pain units for probable or likely ACS who re­
main at intermediate risk for adverse events after initial 
evaluation. Arrhythmia and ischemia monitoring are 
integral components of these short­stay units, which 
can provide a cost­effective means for the manage­
ment of patients in the early stages of evaluation for 
ACS.112–114,134,135 Regardless of the patient population, 
the need for monitoring should be reassessed every 24 
hours on the basis of clinical and diagnostic findings 
and response to therapy, including the absence of ma­
jor complications such as sustained VT or VF, high­de­
gree atrioventricular block or other evidence of electric 
instability, or evidence of recurrent or persistent isch­
emia or hemodynamic instability, including mechanical 
complication.
Static 12­lead ECGs record only several seconds 
of an often dynamic physiological process. Because 
changes on the ECG are associated with increased risk 
of adverse outcome but may be transient or manifest 
after presentation, acquisition of a serial 12­lead ECG 
may improve both diagnostic sensitivity and specificity 
when performed at 15­ to 30­minute intervals in pa­
tients with an initial nondiagnostic ECG during evalu­
ation for ongoing symptoms.136–138 Alternatively, in 
patients at increased risk for ACS, continuous ST­seg­
ment monitoring may provide additional prognostic 
information by detection of this transient or evolving 
electrocardiographic finding. Refractory or recurrent 
ischemia identified in this way has been shown to of­
fer incremental prognostic information and can serve 
as a trigger to optimize therapeutic direction.138 In a 
study of 234 intermediate­ to high­risk patients with 
ACS, 23.1% demonstrated ischemic changes identi­
fied on continuous ST­segment monitoring. These 
documented ischemic episodes were associated with 
an increase in adverse outcome and provided addi­
tional prognostic information to the TIMI and PUR­
SUIT risk scores.139 Herren et al29 evaluated a 6­hour 
rule­out protocol using cardiac markers and continu­
ous ST­segment monitoring among patients in a chest 
pain unit. Among 383 consecutive patients with chest 
pain, 6 demonstrated ST­segment changes on contin­
uous monitoring, leading to early identification of an 
evolving MI for 2 of these who subsequently received 
thrombolytics.29
Among 968 patients with ACS (the majority of whom 
had NSTEMI or unstable angina), the conventional 12­
lead ECG lacked sensitivity, failing to detect T­wave or 
ST­segment changes in 80% of these patients.140 By im­
plementation of a 12­lead ECG from 5 electrodes and 
continuous ST­segment monitoring transmitted via tele­
phone to the local EDs in northern California, patients 
(n=4219) with symptoms of ACS had a faster time to 
first intravenous drug; among patients with STEMI, 
there was a trend toward faster door­to­balloon time 
and lower mortality risk.141 In another prospective study 
of 678 patients with chest pain with suspected ACS, 26 
patients had their therapy changed as a consequence 
of new injury or ischemia identified early through con­
tinuous ST­segment monitoring.142 It is reasonable to 
implement continuous ischemia monitoring with 12 
leads to augment troponins in units with staff who are 
equipped with the appropriate education, protocol, 
and resources such as the ED and coronary care unit to 
improve early risk stratification for select patients with 
intermediate to high risk of ACS.34
Recommendations
1. Arrhythmia monitoring should be initiated 
immediately in the early phase of evalua-
tion and management of patients at inter-
mediate or high risk of ACS and those with 
documented STEMI and continue unin-
terrupted ≥24 to 48 hours (or until ruled 
out; negative biomarkers) (Class I; Level of 
Evidence B).
2. Continuous ischemia monitoring is reason-
able using 12-leads immediately in the early 
phase of evaluation and management of 
patients at intermediate or high risk of ACS 
and those with documented STEMI, con-
tinuing uninterrupted ≥24 to 48 hours (or 
until ruled out; negative biomarkers or suc-
cessful revascularization) (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
After MI, With Revascularization
Continuous arrhythmia and ST­segment ischemia moni­
toring is an essential component of post­MI care. Iden­
tification of ischemic changes or rhythm abnormalities 
provides important prognostic information and often 
results in targeted therapeutic modifications during the 
early period of increased risk.143–147 Ischemia monitoring 
allows recognition of ongoing or recurrent ischemia in a 
broad segment of patients with ACS while providing im­
portant ancillary information in patients during and af­
ter reperfusion and revascularization therapy, including 
culprit artery patency after thrombolytic therapy22,148–151 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e292
and primary PCI.20 Because early, persistent resolution 
of ischemia is associated with optimal long­term results, 
identification of recurrent ischemia during early postin­
farction monitoring is a critical component of care. Even 
after angiographically successful primary PCI, failure of 
ST­segment resolution as a result of poor myocardial 
perfusion or evidence of recurrent ST­segment elevation 
caused by reocclusion or infarction extension is associ­
ated with worse outcome and should prompt additional 
evaluation.152
Lack of signs of ischemia on continuous monitoring 
has been suggested as a criterion for low risk and early 
hospital discharge after MI.153 Although the safety of 
early discharge in select patients after MI has been 
documented after thrombolytic therapy (GUSTO [Glob­
al Utilization of Streptokinase and Tissue Plasminogen 
Activator for Occluded Coronary Arteries]) and primary 
PCI,154,155 early discharge is offered to only a fraction of 
patients meeting low­risk criteria.154 Continuous am­
bulatory ischemia monitoring has been suggested as 
a readily available prognostic device in the identifica­
tion of low­risk patients suitable for early hospital dis­
missal. Bogaty and colleagues153 randomized 120 low­
risk patients after infarction in a 2:1 fashion to a short 
hospital course or usual care. Patients assigned to a 
short hospital course were evaluated with continuous 
ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring during 
hospitalization hours 48 to 72, including a supervised 
walk up 2 flights of stairs. If ischemic symptoms or 
ST­segment shifts were identified during this 24­hour 
monitoring period (21% of randomized patients), ear­
ly discharge plans were canceled, and these patients 
were evaluated accordingly. With this strategy, mean 
hospital length of stay was shortened from 6.9 to 3.5 
days without any increase in adverse events or adverse 
psychosocial effects.
In patients who have undergone successful reper­
fusion and amelioration of any ischemic substrate, 
real­time studies in which nurses continuously moni­
tor for ST­segment changes are lacking, and the du­
ration for ischemia monitoring is unclear. Although 
ischemia monitoring should not be discontinued in 
patients with recurrent ischemic signs or symptoms 
or other evidence of continued ischemia, continued 
ST­segment monitoring in an unselected cohort of 
patients after infarct may result in a significant bur­
den of nonactionable or false alarms and a potentially 
hazardous increase in diagnostic and therapeutic ac­
tions. Particularly in alert patients in the active recov­
ery phase of MI, asymptomatic ST­segment shifts may 
occur as a result of position, activity, or even evolu­
tionary changes associated with large infarctions or 
axis shifts, leading to unnecessary testing and associ­
ated cost. Therefore, it is reasonable to consider ST­
segment monitoring ≥12 to 24 hours after reperfu­
sion, but the duration of monitoring may be shorter 
or longer, depending on how quickly the patient was 
revascularized, cardiac biomarker levels, and clinical 
condition (COR IIb, LOE B). Reapplication of ischemia 
monitoring can be considered in previously stable 
patients after MI who experience recurrent signs or 
symptoms of ischemia.
Life­threatening tachyarrhythmias and bradyarrhyth­
mias are known complications in patients with STEMI 
or NSTEMI. Several prospective and retrospective stud­
ies have sought to describe the incidence, timing, and 
predictors of ventricular arrhythmias. Among 3065 
patients with STEMI, Mehta et al127 found that 133 
(4.3%) undergoing primary PCI had VT/VF during the 
procedure. Also among patients with STEMI, Piccini et 
al129 reported a very low rate of ventricular arrhythmias 
(1.5%) during hospitalization that were as likely to oc­
cur after 48 hours as within 48 hours. However, most 
studies have reported that ventricular arrhythmias oc­
cur early during hospitalization, often before and dur­
ing revascularization.127,156,157
Piccini et al157 reported a 5.2% incidence of sus­
tained VT and VF before revascularization in a 3­year 
retrospective study of patients with acute MI; in­hos­
pital mortality risk was significantly increased in pa­
tients with sustained VT or VF (16.3% versus 3.7% in 
those without VT/VF). Although successful PCI was as­
sociated with a reduction in mortality (41% to 14%), 
patients with VT/VF still had a significantly higher in­
hospital mortality that those with no VT/VF. Analysis 
of data from the Canadian GRACE (Global Registry 
of Acute Coronary Events) and CANRACE (Canadian 
Registry of Acute Coronary Events) registries revealed 
that the rate of sustained VT in patients with STEMI 
who underwent primary PCI did not differ significantly 
(P=0.54) from the rate in those who received fibrinoly­
sis alone or in combination with rescue PCI or urgent/
elective PCI.158
In patients with STEMI undergoing primary PCI, 
the incidence of malignant ventricular arrhythmias is 
≈5% (4.7%–5.7%), with 60% to 64% of ventricular 
arrhythmias occurring within the first 24 hours of ad­
mission and 90% to 92% occurring within 48 hours 
of PCI.128,159 Rahimi et al160 reported a lower incidence 
of malignant ventricular arrhythmias in a sample of pa­
tients with NSTEMI undergoing PCI (2.6%), with 80% 
occurring during the first 12 hours and none after 48 
hours. The overall incidence of ventricular arrhythmias 
in patients with acute MI undergoing PCI has been re­
ported as 2.6% to 5.7 %.127,128,159,160 Because the major­
ity occur within 12 to 48 hours after presentation with 
STEMI or NSTEMI­ACS, arrhythmia monitoring should 
be initiated immediately on presentation and contin­
ue uninterrupted for 12 to 24 hours after reperfusion 
therapy (PCI or thrombolytic therapy), including during 
transportation within the hospital. The appropriateness 
of early discharge versus continued monitoring needs 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e293
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
to be considered in the context of how quickly the pa­
tient was revascularized, cardiac biomarker levels, and 
clinical condition. The need for monitoring should be 
reassessed every 24 hours, with a goal of continued 
monitoring until the patient has been event free for 12 
to 24 hours. Duration of monitoring after PCI may be 
shorter or longer, depending on how quickly the pa­
tient was revascularized, cardiac biomarker levels, and 
clinical condition.
Recommendations
1. Arrhythmia monitoring should be initiated 
immediately on presentation with MI, con-
tinuing uninterrupted for ≥12 to 24 hours 
after reperfusion (PCI or thrombolytic ther-
apy) (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
2. Ischemia monitoring may be considered 
immediately on presentation with MI, con-
tinuing uninterrupted for ≥12 to 24 hours 
after reperfusion (PCI or thrombolytic ther-
apy) (Class IIb; Level of Evidence B).
After MI, Without Reperfusion or Revascularization
Reperfusion and revascularization is the preferred 
therapeutic course for the vast majority of patients 
with MI. Despite the recommendation of the ACC/
AHA guidelines for revascularization in these patients, 
nearly 20% of patients with non–ST­segment elevation 
ACS and either 3­vessel disease or left main disease 
identified with coronary angiography during hospital­
ization, who are known to benefit from revasculariza­
tion, were managed medically.161 During the first 24 
hours of admission for patients with ACS, of whom 
73% did not undergo PCI, Winkler et al130 found that 
potentially life­threatening arrhythmias occurred rare­
ly: <1% developed asystole, TdP, or VF, and only 1% 
had sustained VT. In this sample, 8.63% were diag­
nosed with STEMI, 26.62% with NSTEMI, and 64.75% 
with unstable angina. The majority (94%) did not re­
quire treatment with antiarrhythmic medication, sug­
gesting that even when early reperfusion is not used, 
life­threatening arrhythmias do not occur with great 
frequency.
Using data from the MERLIN­TIMI 36 trial (Metabolic 
Efficiency With Ranolazine for Less Ischemia in Non­
ST­Elevation Acute Coronary Syndrome–Thrombolysis 
in Myocardial Infarction 36), Scirica et al162 found that 
nonsustained VT occurred commonly after non–ST­
segment elevation ACS: 56.4% had at least 1 episode 
of at least 3 consecutive beats. Continuous event re­
corders captured episodes of nonsustained VT for the 
first 7 days after randomization, and subjects were fol­
lowed up for 1 year. Although there was no difference 
in the risk of SCD between patients with ventricular 
triplets and no VT, 4 to 7 and ≥8 consecutive beats 
of nonsustained VT were independently associated 
with an increased risk of SCD, particularly when it oc­
curred after 48 hours. It is noteworthy that having ≥8 
beats in the first 24 to 48 hours was not associated 
with a significant risk of SCD. The prognostic impact 
of nonsustained VT for mortality is well known if left 
ventricular ejection fraction is <40%, and electrophysi­
ology studies may be considered, or revascularization 
may be considered for an NSTEMI. However, there is 
no guideline­based recommendation for continuous 
electrocardiographic monitoring in the setting of non­
sustained VT.
Mehta et al128 similarly found that late VT was asso­
ciated with poorer outcomes and noted that postpro­
cedural TIMI flow <3, lack of β­blocker use on admis­
sion, and ST­segment resolution <70% were correlated 
with late VT/VF. Factors including prior MI/Q waves 
on admission, previous heart failure, brain natriuretic 
peptide >80 pg/mL, use of diuretics/hypokalemia, 
heart rate >100 bpm, left ventricular ejection fraction 
<40%, lower systolic blood pressure, chronic kidney 
disease/elevated creatinine, chronic obstructive pulmo­
nary disease (COPD), elevated white blood cell count, 
older age, and higher Killip class were associated with 
mortality.157,159,160,163
There is disagreement about the need to continue 
electrocardiographic monitoring of patients with ACS 
beyond 24 to 48 hours. Although several studies have 
found that ventricular arrhythmias occur infrequently 
beyond 48 hours after MI,159,160 data in this setting are 
conflicting. It is recommended that these patients be 
monitored for at least 24 hours and until there is no 
evidence of modifiable ongoing ischemia or hemody­
namic or electric instability. Because factors associated 
with greater mortality have been identified, it is reason­
able to consider continuous electrocardiographic moni­
toring 24 to 48 hours for patients who manifest an on­
going remediable problem that is amenable to further 
therapeutic intervention. As important as it is to identify 
patients who require increased (longer) monitoring, it is 
equally important to identify low­risk patients who may 
be candidates for early discharge.
Recommendations
1. Arrhythmia monitoring should be initiated 
immediately after MI when there is no reper-
fusion or revascularization, continuing unin-
terrupted for ≥24 to 48 hours and until there 
is no evidence of ongoing modifiable isch-
emia or hemodynamic or electric instability 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. Continuous ischemia monitoring is reason-
able for patients with ongoing or untreated 
myocardial ischemia or infarction for ≥24 
to 48 hours, continuing uninterrupted until 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e294
there is no evidence of ongoing modifiable 
ischemia or hemodynamic or electric instabil-
ity (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Targeted Temperature Management
Ischemia monitoring may be useful for patients treated 
with therapeutic hypothermia who are at high risk for 
the development of recurrent ischemia after cardiac ar­
rest. However, careful assessment is needed to differ­
entiate between new ischemic or injury patterns and 
the effects of hypothermia on ST­segment morphology 
to avoid unnecessary and potentially harmful diagnostic 
and therapeutic responses.
Mild therapeutic hypothermia is recommended to 
improve outcome after resuscitated cardiac arrest.164–166 
Although mild hypothermia has been defined as a tar­
get body temperature of 32°C to 33°C and has been 
associated with improved neurological outcome and 
survival in this population, this degree of cooling slows 
impulse conduction through all cardiac tissue, result­
ing in prolongation of all electrocardiographic intervals 
and elevation of the J point, resulting in characteris­
tic Osborn waves, with the height of the Osborn wave 
proportional to the degree of hypothermia.167–169 Addi­
tional changes on the ECG have also been recorded in 
response to both accidental and therapeutic hypother­
mia, including AF in up to 50% of patients,170 ST­seg­
ment depression,171 ST­segment elevation,170 Brugada 
syndrome morphology,172 and QT prolongation.81,82 All 
these findings may confuse interpretation of the ECG in 
patients treated with therapeutic hypothermia with core 
body temperatures <35°C. Because mechanical ven­
tilation and sedation are essential components of the 
care process in patients being treated with therapeutic 
hypothermia, arrhythmia and ischemia monitoring can 
herald the otherwise silent occurrence or recurrence of 
arrhythmia, myocardial ischemia, and myocardial injury. 
However, because of the frequent changes on the ECG 
attributable to the hypothermic state, including poten­
tially confounding Osborn waves and other ST­segment 
deviations in >30% of patients undergoing therapeutic 
hypothermia,173 the relative benefit of ischemia moni­
toring in this patient population needs to be weighed 
against the potential for misidentifying Osborn waves 
for ST­segment deviations caused by ischemia.
Recommendations
1. Arrhythmia monitoring, including QTc moni-
toring, is indicated in patients being treated 
with targeted temperature management 
(Class, I; Level of Evidence C).
2. The decision for ischemia monitoring must 
be based on the presumed cause of the arrest 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Vasospastic Angina
Coronary spasms occur as transient contractions in coro­
nary arteries with highly variable amounts of sclerosis, in­
cluding arteries in which sclerotic lesions are visible only 
with intravascular ultrasound.174 Variant angina is a type 
of vasospastic angina and has been characterized by ST
­
segment elevation during angina attacks.174­177 Variant an­
gina is more common among women and is not associat­
ed with typical coronary artery disease risk factors except 
smoking. Cocaine has been identified as a trigger.43 Rare 
case studies have reported variant angina among adoles­
cents.178,179 Recent attention has been directed to the con­
tribution of an allergic (hypersensitivity) response.180
Electrocardiographic manifestations and sever­
ity of angina vary for vasospastic angina (also called 
coronary spastic angina). Partial or complete occlu­
sion may result in anginal pain with ischemia in the 
region perfused by the artery (ST­segment elevation), 
but if collateral flow is available, ST­segment depres­
sion may be visible instead.174 In the CASPAR study 
(Coronary Artery Spasm in Patients With Acute Coro­
nary Syndrome) of 488 consecutive patients with sus­
pected ACS, 25% of patients had no culprit lesion, 
and epicardial coronary spasms were established for 
50% of these patients.181 Investigators suggest that 
coronary spasm should routinely be considered as a 
differential diagnosis in ACS.
Patients with variant angina have electrocardio­
graphic changes that are difficult to capture on a static 
12­lead ECG because the ischemia is transient. They 
may have asymptomatic ischemia episodes, or they 
may be symptomatic with syncope that occurs as a re­
sult of severe arrhythmias, including VT, VF, and high­
degree atrioventricular block.176,182 Untreated variant 
angina can result in MI, fatal arrhythmias, and sudden 
death,176 so early treatment is imperative. Guidelines 
for the diagnosis and treatment of patients with vaso­
spastic angina, including calcium channel blockers and 
nitrates, are available.174 Continuous ambulatory elec­
trocardiographic monitoring has been recommended 
for identifying frequency and duration of vasospasm 
leading to MI.183 However, no studies were identified 
that used in­hospital ST­segment monitoring. Thus, 
for patients admitted with chest pain for whom va­
sospastic angina is a differential diagnosis, continuous 
ST­segment monitoring is reasonable and may be help­
ful in early detection of ischemia caused by spasms not 
documented on 12­lead ECG to facilitate diagnosis 
and to initiate treatment.
Recommendations
1. Arrhythmia monitoring for patients with 
vasospastic angina should be performed 
until symptoms resolve (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e295
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
2. Ischemia monitoring can be useful for 
patients with vasospastic angina until diag-
nosis is made and symptoms resolve (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Apical Ballooning Syndrome (Stress Cardiomyopathy) 
Apical ballooning (also called stress cardiomyopathy 
or takotsubo cardiomyopathy) is an acute cardiac syn­
drome manifested by transient wall­motion abnormali­
ties (typically apical) that are most often exhibited in 
postmenopausal women with significant ST­segment 
elevation or T­wave abnormalities despite no significant 
obstructive coronary disease on angiography and only 
mild troponin elevation.184 Current understanding of 
the pathogenesis is evolving on the basis of an exagger­
ated sympathetic stimulation often associated with a 
significant emotional crisis; coronary spasms have been 
implicated.184 Case studies and case series reports185 
describe dynamic ST­segment and T­wave changes that 
increase and decrease rapidly. The clinical utility of con­
tinuous ST­segment ischemia monitoring has not been 
studied in this population. If continuous ST­segment 
ischemia monitoring is used, caution must be exercised 
because excessive alarms could occur if ST­segment 
alarm parameters are not adjusted on the basis of the 
unique characteristics of this dynamic condition.
Recommendations
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is recommended for 
patients with left ventricular apical balloon-
ing until related symptoms resolve (Class I; 
Level of Evidence C).
2. Ischemia monitoring may be considered 
until symptoms resolved (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C).
Newly Diagnosed Left Main Coronary Artery Lesion
In a retrospective study186 of >1700 patients undergoing 
coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery, 97 had an­
giographically documented clinically significant (≥50%) 
left main coronary artery stenosis. Among those pa­
tients with angiographically significant left main disease, 
4 had acute MI or unstable angina before undergoing 
angiography and experienced cardiac events (3 had 
life­threatening ventricular arrhythmias, 1 had NSTEMI) 
while awaiting surgery. All events occurred within the 
first 3 days, but none occurred in the first 24 hours.186 
Although serious cardiac events occur infrequently in 
patients with left main stenosis awaiting CABG, ven­
tricular arrhythmias are the most frequently occurring 
event, and patients with ACS may be at highest risk.
Recommendations
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is indicated in patients 
who have newly recognized critical left main 
coronary artery stenosis or its equivalent 
while awaiting revascularization (Class I; Level 
of Evidence C).
2. Ischemia 
monitoring 
is 
reasonable 
for 
patients who have newly recognized criti-
cal left main coronary artery stenosis or its 
equivalent while awaiting revascularization 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
After Nonurgent PCI, With Complications or 
Suboptimal Results
In high­volume centers, complications after PCI are 
relatively infrequent. However, several complications 
of coronary intervention have been identified that war­
rant careful observation and a higher level of manage­
ment after PCI: persistent chest pain with changes on 
the ECG, hypotension, severe arrhythmia, and angio­
graphic evidence of significant dissection or remaining 
thrombus.187 For suboptimal PCI results, including coro­
nary artery complications such as vessel dissection or 
thrombus or procedural complications such as under­
expansion or incomplete stent apposition, it is reason­
able to continue monitoring for at least 24 hours given 
the risk of abrupt closure and other ischemic complica­
tions of dissection, including chest pain, changes on the 
ECG, MI, and death.188 Although acute closure is most 
likely to occur within minutes of balloon inflation, sub­
acute closure can occur later, with a median of 24 hours 
reported by Cheneau et al.189 Continuous electrocardio­
graphic monitoring can be useful for patients who ex­
perience complications during angiography or coronary 
intervention, including vessel dissection or no reflow, or 
who have suboptimal interventional outcomes.
Recommendations
1. After nonurgent PCI with complications or 
suboptimal results, it is reasonable to monitor 
for arrhythmia, beginning immediately and 
continuing for ≥24 hours or until complication 
is resolved (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. After nonurgent PCI with complications or 
suboptimal results, it is reasonable to monitor 
for ischemia, beginning immediately and con-
tinuing for ≥24 hours or until complication is 
resolved (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
After Nonurgent PCI, Without Complications
In 1994, Li et al187 established that the majority of se­
vere complications after angioplasty occur during the 
procedure itself or are immediately evident from the 
angiographic result (poor or no flow). Thus, continu­
ous electrocardiographic monitoring would be unlike­
ly to improve outcomes when there is no chest pain, 
change on the ECG, or symptomatic arrhythmia. In a 
review of nearly 20 
000 PCIs in patients without cardio­
genic shock, Addala et al156 observed VF during PCI in 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e296
164 (0.84%). All were immediately defibrillated, and all 
were discharged without neurological sequelae. More 
recently, Spoon et al190 noted that in­hospital mortal­
ity has decreased for patients undergoing PCI for sta­
ble angina. Improved treatment (stenting and optimal 
anticoagulation) and reduced vascular complications 
(closure devices and transradial approach) have led to 
a reduction in major complications and safe same­day 
discharge in low­risk patients after PCI. The risk of major 
complications is highest immediately after PCI; most ma­
jor complications occur during the first 6 hours after PCI 
and decline thereafter.191–193 Despite the low likelihood 
of a serious event, vasovagal responses with symptom­
atic bradycardia can occur at the time of femoral sheath 
removal, so it is reasonable to consider continuous elec­
trocardiographic monitoring immediately after interven­
tion until femoral sheaths are removed. Ischemia moni­
toring may provide assurance that postprocedural chest 
discomfort is from stent manipulation, not angina.
Recommendation
1. In the absence of complications, continu-
ous monitoring for ischemia and arrhythmia 
beyond femoral sheath pull in the immedi-
ate postprocedural area is unlikely to ben-
efit after nonurgent PCI and therefore not 
recommended (Class III: No Benefit; Level of 
Evidence C).
After Routine Diagnostic Coronary Angiography
The risk of complication after routine coronary angiog­
raphy is <2% overall.194,195 Ventricular arrhythmias sel­
dom occur during coronary angiography, and if they do 
occur, it is frequently when the catheter is manipulated 
or in response to high osmolar ionic contrast dye, used 
infrequently today.195,196 Major complications, including 
death, MI, or embolization during or after diagnostic 
cardiac angiography, are extremely rare (<1%), and pro­
cedural mortality has been reported to be 0.1%.195,197 
It is increasingly common to perform diagnostic cath­
eterizations in the ambulatory setting, and patients are 
often discharged several hours after uncomplicated 
coronary angiography.
Recommendation
1. In the absence of complications, continuous 
electrocardiographic 
monitoring 
(beyond 
that which is provided in immediate post-
procedure area) after routine angiography 
is not indicated in low-risk patients (Class III: 
No Benefit; Level of Evidence C).
Low-Risk and Noncardiac Chest Pain
Various strategies for assessment of patients presenting 
with chest pain share a common goal of early identifica­
tion of those at moderate to high risk of suffering ACS 
caused by obstructive coronary disease. Patients with a 
low likelihood of an active ischemic coronary syndrome 
are at low risk of adverse outcomes and thus may be 
safely discharged to outpatient follow­up without the 
need for ongoing inpatient evaluation and monitor­
ing.112 In a number of studies, investigators have ques­
tioned the value of continuous monitoring of patients 
presenting with chest pain and a low risk of ACS while 
in the ED, during transport, and after admission for 
workup and observation.106,107,198–201 The goal in each of 
these investigations was to ensure the safe allocation 
of monitoring resources so that these resources were 
available for patients with a clear, evidence­based need 
without unnecessary risk to the population of patients 
with chest pain in general.
Among patients determined to be at low risk for ACS 
on the basis of well­defined risk stratification schemes, 
significant monitor alarms are very uncommon. In the 
ALARMED (Adverse Events in Low Risk Patients With 
Chest Pain Receiving Continuous Electrocardiograph­
ic Monitoring in the Emergency Department)200 pi­
lot study, 72 patients admitted to the ED with chest 
pain potentially of ischemic origin were monitored for 
371 hours, and 1762 alarms were recorded. Of those 
alarms, 99.4% were false alarms. Eleven were signifi­
cant alarms, 3 of which required a change in manage­
ment. None of the 3 that required a change in manage­
ment was in the low­ or very­low­risk group.
Similarly, Hollander and colleagues106 conducted a pro­
spective cohort study of patients admitted from the ED to 
a non­ICU monitored bed with a diagnosis of chest pain. 
These patients had a Goldman Risk Score115 of <8%, a 
negative troponin I level (<0.3 ng/mL), and a normal initial 
creatine kinase­MB level (<5 ng/mL). Of the 1750 patients 
admitted to a non­ICU monitored bed for chest pain, 
1029 met the criteria for low risk. The primary outcomes 
were cardiovascular death and life­threatening ventricular 
arrhythmia during telemetry. No patients had sustained 
VT/VF requiring treatment. There were 2 deaths, nei­
ther of which was cardiovascular or potentially prevent­
able by electrocardiographic monitoring.
Both the ALARMED200 and Hollander et al106 studies 
failed to show benefit in detecting or predicting any le­
thal arrhythmias, sudden death, MI, or hemodynamic 
instability related to heart rhythm among patients in 
whom ACS was ruled out and risks were low on the 
basis of established criteria. The low­risk designation 
makes continuous electrocardiographic monitoring un­
likely to be helpful and potentially harmful in diverting 
scarce resources in an unproductive manner. In a study 
of patients determined to be primarily at low to interme­
diate risk of ACS by the HEART (history, ECG, age, risk 
factors, and troponin)118,202 score, Bovino et al203 found 
that continuous ST­segment monitoring in the ED de­
tected only 3 episodes of ST­segment deviation, none of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e297
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
which was associated with a diagnosis of ACS, and only 
9% of patients were ruled in for ACS. Thus, their find­
ings did not support the use of continuous ST­segment 
monitoring in the ED in this lower­risk population.
Recommendation
1. Continuous arrhythmia and ST-segment 
monitoring provides no benefit and is not 
indicated for patients with symptoms sug-
gestive of ACS determined to be low risk 
or noncardiac in origin (Class III: No Benefit; 
Level of Evidence B).
Major Cardiac Interventions
Open Heart Surgery
Arrhythmias are common after open heart surgery. AF 
is a common arrhythmia after any type of cardiac sur­
gery, including CABG surgery or surgical valve replace­
ment/repair.204–209 New­onset AF in CABG may occur 
at any point from the time of the procedure, usually 
2 to 4 days postoperatively with peak occurrence at 2 
days.206 AF occurs in 28% to 33% of patients undergo­
ing CABG.207
Approximately 33% to 49% of patients undergoing 
surgical valve replacement/repair develop AF, and if the 
surgery is a combination of valve and CABG, the inci­
dence rises to 60%.210 AF is present at surgery in 30% 
to 40% of patients, and ≈8.5% convert to sinus rhythm 
after surgery. It is unclear how many remain in sinus 
rhythm. The onset of AF is associated with hemody­
namic instability and increased risk of stroke, although 
up to 69% of episodes of AF are not associated with 
symptoms.205 Identification of new­onset AF when it 
occurs early in the postoperative period increases the 
likelihood that it will be treated before any hemody­
namic or thromboembolic complications. Risk factors 
for developing AF after open heart surgery include 
older age, left atrial enlargement, mitral valve disease, 
heart failure, hypertension, and history of AF.208
Ventricular arrhythmias are common in the immedi­
ate postoperative period and are related to hypother­
mia, ischemia, and electrolyte abnormalities.211 Risk de­
creases over time but is never eliminated. These rhythms 
have the potential to affect hemodynamic stability and 
to cause sudden death.
Permanent pacemaker implantation is required in 
1.5% of cases for postoperative atrioventricular block 
after cardiac surgery.212 In a study by Huynh and col­
leagues,213 among the 207 patients who underwent 
surgical valve replacement/repair, 7.2% required per­
manent pacing postoperatively. Predictors included pre­
operative first­degree atrioventricular block with and 
without left anterior fascicular block and/or intraven­
tricular conduction delay, postoperative cardiac arrest, 
and combined mitral and aortic valve replacements.
The greatest risk of ventricular arrhythmia and sud­
den death occurs in the immediate postoperative peri­
od in the ICU where monitoring is the standard of care, 
and although risk does not completely disappear, it de­
creases rapidly once the patient is ready for discharge 
from the ICU. Similarly, the risk of heart block requiring 
temporary or permanent pacing is higher in the imme­
diate postoperative period. Bradycardia with or with­
out third­degree atrioventricular block has significant 
hemodynamic consequences; therefore, the patient 
benefits from early recognition of the rhythm. AF may 
occur at any time in the postoperative period and has 
both potential hemodynamic consequences (diastolic 
heart failure, rapid ventricular response) and embolic 
consequences (transient ischemic attack, stroke).
In addition to arrhythmia monitoring, ischemia mon­
itoring has shown utility in identifying myocardial isch­
emia in the intraoperative period214,215 and was given 
a COR IIa, LOE B recommendation in published guide­
lines.61 Ischemia monitoring can also be helpful in the 
early postoperative period,216–219 with potential to guide 
targeted therapeutic efforts, including surgical revision 
or early angiography and percutaneous revasculariza­
tion,220,221 and was given a COR IIb, LOE B recommen­
dation in published guidelines.61
Recommendations
1. For patients whose open heart surgery was 
uncomplicated, arrhythmia monitoring is rec-
ommended for a minimum of 48 to 72 hours 
postoperatively (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
2. For patients at high risk for AF, postopera-
tive arrhythmia monitoring is recommended 
for the duration of their hospitalization in an 
acute care unit (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
3. Ischemia monitoring is reasonable intraop-
eratively (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
4. Ischemia monitoring may be considered in 
the immediate postoperative setting for the 
detection of ongoing or new ischemia in 
intubated and sedated patients and those 
in the early recuperative phase who may 
have difficulty recognizing and reporting 
new or ongoing ischemia (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence B).
Pediatric Considerations
Arrhythmias are common in children after surgical re­
pair of congenital heart disease. Virtually all of these 
patients will have an electrocardiographic monitor in 
place as part of the admission to an ICU. Because of 
developmental characteristics of the patient and al­
terations in the conduction system secondary to the 
underlying structural disease, the mechanism can be 
challenging to diagnose.222,223 The arrhythmias are com­
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e298
monly atrial or junctional in origin,224,225 with the focus 
difficult to distinguish.
Tachycardia that is atrial in origin is commonly at­
tributable to an atrial macroreentrant circuit or is a fo­
cal tachycardia caused by a gain of automaticity. The P 
wave can be difficult to see because at higher rates it 
may be buried in the preceding T wave. In addition, in 
patients who have a history of a total cavopulmonary 
anastomosis (all of the systemic venous return bypasses 
the heart and drains directly into the pulmonary arteries) 
and have undergone an atrial reduction, there may not 
be much atrial tissue to generate voltage that is easily 
seen on surface leads.226,227 Junctional ectopic tachycar­
dia is thought to originate from a gain of automaticity 
of the bundle of His. In this arrhythmia, the P wave is 
not seen via surface leads because it is masked by the 
QRS complex. Recording of the atrial depolarization by 
either an epicardial or a transesophageal lead may be 
necessary to distinguish the mechanism. VT is also seen 
after congenital heart surgery.222,228 These arrhythmias 
may be the result of surgical incisions, coronary manip­
ulation, electrolyte imbalance, or infusion of vasoactive 
medication. Whether the mechanism of a tachycardia is 
ventricular or supraventricular, it can have a substantial 
negative impact on the patient’s hemodynamic status. 
It is critical for these rhythm disturbances to be detected 
and treated appropriately in the postoperative period. 
The duration of monitoring is determined by the clinical 
stability of the patient.
After pediatric cardiac surgery, high­grade atrioven­
tricular nodal block can be seen and may be transient 
or permanent. If the expectation is that atrioventricular 
nodal function will return, some recommend allowing 
7 days for assessment of atrioventricular nodal function 
before placement of a permanent pacing system.229 
During the period before return of atrioventricular nodal 
function or placement of a permanent pacemaker, the 
patient is typically supported with temporary epicardial 
pacing wires connected to an external pulse generator. 
Pacing capture thresholds can change rapidly, neces­
sitating continuous electrocardiographic monitoring. 
Although continuous arrhythmia monitoring until dis­
charge from an acute care unit is common practice in 
pediatrics, current data are lacking to provide specific 
recommendations for practice.
Mechanical Circulatory Support
Mechanical circulatory support devices include the total 
artificial heart, extracorporeal life support, ventricular 
assist device (VAD), and intra­aortic balloon pump.
Clinically Significant Cardiovascular or Hemodynamic 
 
Deterioration. These patients are hemodynamically 
unstable; therefore, it is standard of care that they will 
be in an ICU, where they will receive electrocardio­
graphic monitoring to allow the recognition and treat­
ment of arrhythmias. Further monitoring for ischemia 
is necessary only if the patient meets criteria (eg, signs 
and symptoms of angina). Further monitoring for QTc 
is indicated only if the patient meets the respective QTc 
monitoring criteria (eg, initiating dofetilide).
Recommendation
1. For hemodynamically unstable patients with 
immediate need for mechanical circulatory 
support, continuous arrhythmia is indicated 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
Immediately After Implantation. VADs are increas­
ingly being used long term for patients with advanced 
heart failure. It is standard of care that in the imme­
diate postoperative period, these patients will be an 
ICU with continuous electrocardiographic monitoring. 
After the immediate postoperative period, patients 
with VADs can be successfully cared for outside of an 
ICU. Patients have been considered stable for telem­
etry units if they are extubated, are weaned from vaso­
pressors, have stable vital signs and heart rhythm, and 
can be cared for by staff competent in care of patients 
with VADs.230,231
After the immediate period, ≈20% of patients with 
left VADs have atrial arrhythmias, which are most com­
mon within the first 60 days of implantation. Patients 
with left VADs who had atrial arrhythmias had a worse 
unadjusted quality of life and a decreased rate of im­
provement in a 6­minute walk test over 6 to 24 months 
after implantation.232 Although ventricular arrhythmias 
are common in patients with continuous­flow left 
VADs, occurring in about one third of patients, these 
arrhythmias may not be life­threatening.233,234
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is indicated for 
patients in the postoperative period after VAD 
implantation (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
Admitted With Noncardiac Problems. Hemodynami 
cally stable patients with VADs admitted for noncar­
diac problems (eg, gastrointestinal bleed) will usually 
be on telemetry units. Continuous electrocardiographic 
monitoring for hospitalized patients with VADs is con­
sidered standard of care because many patients have a 
pulse that is difficult or impossible to palpate. In addi­
tion, arrhythmias may provide insight into the hemo­
dynamics of the VAD, indicating a need to increase or 
decrease pump speed to optimize hemodynamic func­
tion. It is important that patients with a VAD are cared 
for by personnel trained in VAD care,235 and this level of 
expertise is most often found in telemetry units in the 
hospital. However, if staff members have competency 
in the basic management of VADs elsewhere, telem­
etry may not be required for stable patients. Thus, it is 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e299
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
reasonable to admit patients with acute care needs to 
telemetry units; however, patients with nonacute, non­
cardiac problems may be admitted to nonmonitored 
units (eg, a mental health unit) if appropriate VAD man­
agement can be provided.
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring can be beneficial for 
patients with VADs admitted with noncar-
diac problems but may not be needed in all 
circumstances if appropriate VAD care can be 
provided (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Admitted to a Rehabilitation Facility. Rehabilitation 
facilities where staff is educated on the basic care of 
patients with VADs may be safe environments for these 
patients, even without providing continuous electrocar­
diographic monitoring.
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is not recommended 
for patients with VADs admitted to a rehabili-
tation facility where basic VAD care is avail-
able (Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C).
Pediatric Considerations. At this point in the devel­
opment of the clinical practice of caring for left VADs in 
children, most are housed in ICUs or step­down units. 
As a result of their location, they are typically monitored.
Transcatheter Structural Interventions
Transcatheter structural interventions represent a het­
erogeneous group of interventions with a heteroge­
neous group of devices. Some, such as closure of sep­
tal defects and transcatheter aortic valve replacement 
(TAVR), have specifically described procedure­related 
risk of arrhythmias. For others, such as repair of peri­
valvular leak or pseudoaneurysm repair, arrhythmia risk 
will depend more on patient comorbidities than on the 
specific surgical procedure. All patients undergoing 
transcatheter interventions require arrhythmia monitor­
ing after the procedure.
After TAVR. TAVR has emerged as an alternative to 
open heart surgery for patients with severe aortic steno­
sis who are at high risk for surgical replacement,236 and 
indications may expand to those at moderate risk as 
experience with this procedure grows. Atrioventricular 
block requiring pacemaker implantation is reported in 
1% to 8% of patients with the Edwards SAPIEN valve 
and 19% to 42% with the Medtronic CoreValve using 
currently available devices.236 The need for pacemaker 
implantation did not influence subsequent survival 
after TAVR in some studies,237 although others have 
shown increased mortality in those receiving a new 
pacemaker.238 Clinical predictors of complete heart 
block239 include characteristics of patient status (valve 
calcification and preexisting right BBB)240 and comor­
bidities, as well as characteristics of the procedure 
(depth of implantation, device profile)241 and balloon 
sizing.242 However, sensitivity and specificity are not 
high except possibly for right BBB. AF is also common 
after TAVR.243,244 Current consensus documents recom­
mend continuous monitoring early after the procedure 
(at least 3 days).236 In a recent analysis245 of 32 studies 
of TAVR, including >5000 patients without pacemaker 
before the procedure, the need for a pacemaker was 
reported in 25% of Medtronic CoreValve and in 6% 
of the Edwards SAPIEN valve recipients. In the 5 trials 
reporting timing of the development of atrioventricu­
lar block, 63% occurred during or within 24 hours of 
TAVR, and another 32% occurred within 1 week, lead­
ing these authors to recommend 1 week of in­hospi­
tal monitoring after TAVR.245 Among patients who do 
not require a permanent pacemaker by 48 hours after 
TAVR, 5% of patients with persistent left BBB (versus 
2% without left BBB) are likely to require a permanent 
pacemaker.246 Longer monitoring could be considered 
for patients with evidence of periprocedural conduction 
abnormalities.
Electrocardiographic monitoring may also reveal AF 
after TAVR. Amat­Santos and colleagues209 studied the 
incidence and implications of AF in the TAVR popula­
tion. AF had not been considered a significant risk for 
TAVR patients in the past.247 However, findings from the 
study reported by Amat­Santos et al209 suggest that the 
incidence of new­onset AF may be high in the first 30 
days after TAVR. They studied 138 consecutive patients 
with no history of AF who had TAVR and were moni­
tored until hospital discharge. New­onset AF occurred 
in 44 patients (31.9%) at a median time of 48 hours 
after TAVR and was associated with a higher incidence 
of stroke at 30 days and 1 year.
The following recommendations are given. Duration 
of monitoring varies with procedure, device, and pa­
tient factors.
Recommendations
1. After TAVR, at least 3 days of postprocedural 
arrhythmia monitoring is recommended 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. Longer monitoring periods may be beneficial 
for patients undergoing TAVR, particularly 
those with periprocedural conduction abnor-
malities (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Other Transcatheter Interventions: Ventricular 
Septal Defect Closure. Percutaneous device closure 
of perimembranous ventricular septal defect is increas­
ingly used as a successful alternative to surgical clo­
sure.248 Arrhythmic complications, including BBB and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e300
atrioventricular block, occur in 11% during the proce­
dure248 and in 15% after the procedure,249 with a 1% 
to 5.7% incidence of high­grade atrioventricular block. 
Time to the development of atrioventricular block 
ranged from intraprocedural to up to 7 days after the 
procedure, with most occurring by 3 days. Although 
atrioventricular block resolution often occurs with ste­
roids, certain characteristics of the ventricular septal 
defect and placement of the occluder249 have been 
identified as risk factors for atrioventricular block. Thus, 
all patients should be monitored after percutaneous 
ventricular septal defect closure.
Other Transcatheter Interventions: Atrial Septal 
Defect Closure. Atrial septal defect transcatheter occlu­
sion techniques have emerged as an alternative to sur­
gery. Both atrial arrhythmias and heart blocks have been 
reported.250 In a meta­analysis of 172 series comprising 
>13 
000 patients, the incidence of atrioventricular block 
was 0.4%.251 The overall risk of major periprocedural 
complications was 0% to 9.4% in the studies, with a 
pooled risk of 1.6%. In a recent series of 706 patients 
undergoing atrial septal defect closure with an Amplatzer 
device, the risk of atrioventricular block was 0.85%. Age, 
size of the atrial septal defect, and characteristics of the 
occluder were predictive of atrioventricular block.252
Recommendation
1. All patients undergoing transcatheter inter-
ventions require arrhythmia monitoring 
after the procedure (Class I; Level of Evidence 
C). Duration of monitoring varies with proce-
dure, device, and patient factors.
Arrhythmias
As a general rule, patients with arrhythmias that are 
life­threatening or potentially life­threatening and 
those who require ongoing management should be 
monitored. Monitoring is not required for patients with 
asymptomatic, non–life­threatening arrhythmias that 
do not require ongoing management.
Ventricular Tachycardias
Patients resuscitated from cardiac arrest or unstable VT 
have a high risk of recurrent arrest.229 Most of these pa­
tients will require an ICD. While hospitalized for evalua­
tion and before implantation of an ICD or other devices 
(eg, wearable cardiac defibrillator, VAD), these patients 
should have arrhythmia monitoring.
Recommendations
1. These patients should receive arrhythmia 
monitoring until ICD implantation. Patients 
after cardiac arrest believed to be attributable 
to a transient and reversible cause should be 
monitored until the underlying problem is 
resolved (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. After implantation, if further therapy is 
ongoing (ie, medications, ablation), monitor-
ing should be continued until adequate sup-
pression of arrhythmia as determined by the 
treating team is achieved (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C).
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias resulting in ICD shock 
are discussed in Section 2, Preexisting Rhythm Devices.
Nonsustained VT
Premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) and non­
sustained VT may be associated with occult structural 
heart disease and with long­term reduced survival in 
unselected populations.253 Even in otherwise normal 
hearts, PVCs and nonsustained VT may over time lead 
to tachycardia­induced cardiomyopathy.254 Further eval­
uation and treatment may be warranted in some situa­
tions254 such as determining the origin of the VT, which 
may help guide further therapy such as ablation.
Recommendation
1. PVCs and nonsustained VT are not immedi-
ately life-threatening, and in the absence of 
other indications for monitoring in hospital-
ized patients, continued arrhythmia moni-
toring may be considered but is not required 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Atrial Tachyarrhythmias
Atrial arrhythmias include new­onset or recurrent par­
oxysmal or intermittent­persistent AF or other atrial 
tachyarrhythmias.255 For unidentified supraventricular 
arrhythmias, arrhythmia monitoring will aid in diagno­
sis. For AF, monitoring will aid in determining the bur­
den of AF and the adequacy of rate control. Although 
rapid AF is rarely life­threatening, it can cause symp­
toms and, in some cases, hemodynamic deterioration.
Recommendations
1. Patients admitted for new-onset or recur-
rent atrial tachyarrhythmias, including AF, 
should receive arrhythmia monitoring while 
planned evaluation is underway and the 
treatment strategy is determined (Class I; 
Level of Evidence C).
2. Patients with hemodynamically unstable 
or symptomatic atrial arrhythmias should 
receive arrhythmia monitoring until hemody-
namically stable (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
3. If rate control in the hospital is deemed nec-
essary, arrhythmia monitoring is beneficial in 
management and may accelerate appropri-
ate treatment (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e301
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Although strategies of attempting to maintain si­
nus rhythm through the use of antiarrhythmic drugs 
have not been shown to improve mortality, antiar­
rhythmic drug therapy may be used to decrease the 
frequency of symptoms and to improve quality of life 
in selected patients.256 In a 2006 meta­analysis of 44 
trials including >11 000 patients,257 Class IC (flecainide 
and propafenone) and Class III drugs (amiodarone, 
sotalol, dofetilide; dronedarone is not approved) re­
duced recurrences of atrial tachyarrhythmias after car­
dioversion of AF.
Except for amiodarone and propafenone, all anti­
arrhythmics have increased proarrhythmias (number 
needed to harm, 17–119), with risk most commonly 
occurring during initiation.256 Previous guidelines have 
not addressed inpatient versus outpatient electrocar­
diographic monitoring for the initiation of antiarrhyth­
mic agents.256 Dofetilide carries a risk of TdP, and in­
patient electrocardiographic monitoring is required by 
the US Food and Drug Administration for 3 days during 
initiation because of the risk of QT prolongation and 
ventricular arrhythmias.256 Sotalol also prolongs the QT 
interval.257 Some experts have suggested that outpa­
tient initiation is safe if the patient is in sinus rhythm 
and the QT interval and electrolytes are normal,258 
although others suggest inpatient monitoring.256 Ini­
tiation and dose escalation during hospitalization with 
electrocardiographic monitoring should be consid­
ered; the package insert for sotalol has a correspond­
ing black box warning.256 One small study suggested 
that outpatient, unmonitored initiation of flecainide 
and propafenone is safe,259 but data are insufficient 
for a definitive recommendation. Data supporting the 
safety of the initiation of antiarrhythmic drug therapy 
without monitoring are best established for amioda­
rone and dronedarone,256 although both can lead to 
bradycardia,257 so monitoring may be considered for 
initiation, particularly in patients currently in AF whose 
sinus node function may put them at risk for postcon­
version pauses.
Recommendations
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is recommended 
for initiation of dofetilide (Class I; Level of 
Evidence B).
2. Among patients for whom the provider has 
selected inpatient initiation, arrhythmia 
monitoring is recommended for the initia-
tion of sotalol, flecainide, and propafenone 
(Class I; Level of Evidence B).
3. Among patients for whom the provider has 
selected inpatient initiation, arrhythmia 
monitoring may be considered for the initia-
tion of amiodarone and dronedarone (Class 
IIb; Level of Evidence B).
Patients receiving QTc monitoring, as described ear­
lier in these practice standards, should be monitored for 
arrhythmias.
Chronic AF
Patients with long­standing or permanent AF who are 
admitted with other medical indications do not rou­
tinely need arrhythmia monitoring. For patients with 
chronic AF who are admitted for a medical condition 
that affects ventricular rate, arrhythmia monitoring is 
reasonable.
Recommendations
1. Patients with known permanent AF do not 
need ongoing monitoring once rate control 
is determined to be adequate (Class III: No 
Benefit; Level of Evidence C).
2. Arrhythmia monitoring is reasonable in 
patients with chronic AF if a medical condi-
tion may affect their ventricular rate (eg, 
results in changes in autonomic state or 
inability to take medications) or if their heart 
rate may affect their clinical stability (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Sinus Bradycardias
The clinical manifestations of sinus node dysfunction, 
implying slow impulse generation from the sinus node 
or pauses in sinus node firing, are many, ranging from 
syncope to chronotropic incompetence to the inciden­
tal finding of bradycardia in the asymptomatic patient. 
Untreated, sinus node dysfunction does not influence 
survival,260 and asymptomatic sinus bradycardia is not 
an indication for pacing.229 Thus, asymptomatic sinus 
bradycardia does not require in­hospital monitoring. 
Patients with symptomatic sinus bradycardia awaiting 
pacemaker implantation should be monitored. Many 
drugs can slow the heart rate, and in patients with sig­
nificant sinus bradycardia in whom negative chrono­
tropic medications are being initiated, monitoring may 
be considered on an individual basis.
Recommendations
1. Arrhythmia monitoring should be used for 
patients with symptomatic bradycardia such 
as syncope (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. Arrhythmia monitoring may be beneficial for 
patients undergoing initiation of negatively 
chronotropic medications, in whom worsen-
ing of a baseline sinus bradycardia may be a 
concern (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
3. Finally, arrhythmia monitoring is not recom-
mended for asymptomatic, hemodynami-
cally stable patients with bradycardia (Class 
III; Level of Evidence B).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e302
Atrioventricular Block
Atrioventricular block is classified by the pattern of con­
duction from the atria to the ventricles. In first­degree 
atrioventricular bock, the PR interval is prolonged but 
1:1 conduction remains; in second­degree block, some 
P waves are conducted and some are not; in third­
degree block, the atrioventricular block is complete. 
Advanced atrioventricular block refers to blocking of 
>1 consecutive P wave. Second­degree atrioventricular 
block is further classified on the basis of the pattern 
of the PR interval, which generally correlates with the 
anatomic site of block. Mobitz type I, or Wenckebach, 
is characterized by a progressive lengthening of the PR 
interval before the block and generally reflects disease 
within the atrioventricular node, whereas Mobitz type 
II is characterized by unchanging PR intervals before 
the block and is generally associated with infranodal 
(distal) conduction system disease. Complete heart 
block is not defined on the basis of type but can of­
ten, although not always, be diagnosed as intranodal 
(proximal) versus infranodal (distal) on the basis of the 
characteristics of the escape focus, as well as the pre­
ceding rhythms.
Early studies showed that atrioventricular block re­
sulting from distal disease could progress rapidly and 
unpredictably and has been associated with sudden 
death.229,261 Thus, these patients require arrhythmia 
monitoring until a pacemaker is implanted. In contrast, 
patients with type I second­degree atrioventricular 
block (Wenckebach) generally have a benign progno­
sis.262 Wenckebach is common and benign in athletes 
and during sleep.263 Monitoring may be considered 
in patients with Wenckebach but is generally not re­
quired. Complete heart block caused by atrioventricu­
lar nodal disease will have a stable, junctional escape 
and is not immediately life­threatening. Monitoring of 
patients with atrioventricular nodal third­degree block 
should be considered on an individual basis.
Recommendations
1. Patients with symptomatic second- or third-
degree atrioventricular block of any anatomic 
origin should have arrhythmia monitoring 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. Patients with asymptomatic second- or 
third-degree atrioventricular block caused 
by distal conduction system disease should 
have arrhythmia monitoring (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C).
3. Patients with third-degree atrioventricular 
block should have arrhythmia monitoring 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
4. Asymptomatic patients with Wenckebach 
and those with transient atrioventricular 
block of any degree determined to be of 
vagal origin do not benefit from arrhythmia 
monitoring (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
Pediatric Considerations. Third­degree atrioventricu­
lar nodal block can be seen in infants and children in the 
absence of cardiac surgery. The decision for permanent 
pacing is based on escape loci and heart rate, as well 
as symptoms associated with the bradycardia.229 For 
newborns, the ability to feed without signs of hemo­
dynamic compromise is often used in determining the 
need for pacing. During that assessment period, they 
are often in a neonatal ICU where electrocardiographic 
monitoring is standard of care.
Congenital or Genetic Arrhythmic Syndromes
Among the numerous conditions that can predispose 
patients to life­threatening arrhythmias are many in­
herited disorders such as LQTS and Brugada syndrome 
and those characterized by abnormal conduction such 
as Wolff­Parkinson­White syndrome.264 Determining 
which of these patients are at higher risk of sudden 
death and require therapeutic intervention can be chal­
lenging.
Hemodynamically Unstable. Patients with these 
syndromes who present with signs of unstable ventric­
ular arrhythmias (eg, recurrent syncope or worsening 
ventricular ectopy) or clear worsening of the underly­
ing arrhythmic susceptibility (eg, during uncontrolled 
fevers with Brugada syndrome or with metabolically 
induced prolongation of the QT interval in LQTS) should 
have arrhythmia monitoring until appropriate therapy 
is delivered. Worrisome findings on the ECG such as 
a significant augmentation of QT prolongation or the 
development of a type I Brugada pattern on the ECG 
during a febrile illness should also be considered in the 
decision to provide electrocardiographic monitoring.
Recommendation
1. Hemodynamically unstable patients with 
congenital or genetic arrhythmic syndromes 
should have arrhythmia monitoring until 
appropriate therapy is delivered (Class I; 
Level of Evidence C).
Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome With Rapid 
Conduction via an Accessory Pathway. Patients 
with Wolff­Parkinson­White syndrome who dem­
onstrate rapid conduction via an accessory pathway 
during an atrial arrhythmia, typically with shortest pre­
excited RR intervals <250 milliseconds, are at greater 
risk of developing VF.265
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is indicated in patients 
with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome with 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e303
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
rapid conduction via an accessory pathway 
until therapy such as antiarrhythmic medica-
tion or ablation is delivered (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C).
Congenital Long QT. Patients with inherited long QT 
who present with unstable ventricular arrhythmias or 
have medically or metabolically induced prolongation 
of the QTc interval should have electrocardiographic 
monitoring.
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia and QTc monitoring is indicated 
in unstable patients with congenital long QT 
until stabilization of ventricular arrhythmias, 
reversal of exacerbating medical or meta-
bolic condition, and return of the QTc inter-
val to baseline (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
Syncope of Suspected Cardiac Origin
Syncope, defined as a transient, self­limited loss of con­
sciousness, is among the most common reasons for visit­
ing an ED.266 There are 2 reasons to evaluate syncope. 
The first is to determine the pathogenic mechanism to 
prevent future episodes, which are most often not life­
threatening but may have an impact on quality of life. 
The second is to identify the less common patient whose 
syncopal episode represents a risk for death. Several 
predictive algorithms such as the San Francisco266 and 
Rose267 rules have been developed to determine progno­
sis on the basis of clinical factors at presentation and thus 
guide necessity for inpatient admission; other studies are 
ongoing.268 These and other algorithms have identified 
age, structural heart disease, abnormal ECG, absence of 
prodromal symptoms, and other factors as predictive of 
higher risk in patients presenting with syncope.266 Recent 
studies suggest electrocardiographic findings predictive 
of serious cardiac outcomes, which include Mobitz 2 or 
complete atrioventricular block, severe conduction sys­
tem disease, new ischemic changes, nonsinus rhythm, 
left axis deviation, or other abnormalities noted from 
electrocardiographic monitoring in the ED.269
The ACC/AHA/Heart Rhythm Society 2017 guideline 
for the evaluation and management of patients with syn­
cope270 provides recommendations for hospital admission 
for syncope. This guideline also states that patients with 
a suspected cardiac cause of their syncope are vulnerable 
to arrhythmias and thus should undergo electrocardio­
graphic monitoring.
For those patients admitted for treatment of synco­
pe with an identified cause, such pathogenesis should 
guide the use of arrhythmia monitoring. Occurrence of 
symptoms correlating with a documented arrhythmia 
on monitoring is considered a gold standard for the di­
agnosis of arrhythmia, but asymptomatic findings on 
monitoring, including asystole >3 seconds, Mobitz 2 
atrioventricular block, ventricular arrhythmia, or rapid 
supraventricular arrhythmias, when associated with 
syncope at other times, have also been considered di­
agnostic.271 In contrast to a 5% diagnostic yield of in­
patient telemetry monitoring in unselected populations 
admitted for syncope of undetermined origin,272 prede­
termined algorithms based on predictive characteristics 
documented a 16% to 18% diagnostic yield with inpa­
tient monitoring.273,274 In a study of telemetry use, syn­
cope was one of the major diagnoses for which telem­
etry monitoring influenced management decisions.58
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring for at least 24 hours 
is recommended for those patients who, on 
the basis of presentation characteristics, are 
admitted for syncope with a suspected car-
diac origin (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
Pediatric Considerations. Syncope is a common pre­
senting complaint for pediatric patients in the ED and 
often associated with high patient and parental anxiety. 
Although syncope in pediatric patients is often attribut­
able to a benign cause,275 in some patients, syncope 
may herald a serious medical condition such as obstruc­
tion to blood flow, myocardial dysfunction, or syncope 
that originated from a primary arrhythmic source. 
Algorithms using a detailed medical history, family his­
tory, physical examination, and 12­lead ECG have been 
developed to help distinguish between benign syncope 
and malignant cardiac conditions requiring further eval­
uation.270,276,277 If a patient is believed to have a cardiac 
condition that requires admission, consideration should 
be given to arrhythmia monitoring.
Postelectrophysiology Procedures/Ablations
The practice of ablation is rapidly evolving with a paucity 
of published research related to postprocedural arrhyth­
mia monitoring. Although the incidence of major com­
plications has been reported, the timing of occurrence is 
often not described in detail.278 Clearly, a major compli­
cation such as hemodynamic instability from pericardial 
effusion or a thromboembolic event such as stroke is an 
indication for arrhythmia monitoring. Therefore, the fol­
lowing recommendations are based primarily on expert 
opinion. Investigators are encouraged to assess and re­
port the timing of both minor and major complications 
that require arrhythmia monitoring so that recommen­
dations can have a stronger evidence base.
Uncomplicated Supraventricular Tachycardia Ablation
The technologies and techniques for catheter­based ab­
lations of cardiac arrhythmias are advancing at a great 
pace. Modern tools allow the practitioner to deliver tar­
geted lesion sets and to perform more controlled trans­
septal punctures. Rates of postoperative complications 
after ablation for simple supraventricular tachycardias 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e304
(SVTs; atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia, atrio­
ventricular reentry tachycardia, atrial flutter, and atrial 
tachycardia) have improved over the past several years. 
The rate of atrioventricular block, for example, after 
slow pathway ablation for atrioventricular nodal reentry 
tachycardia is now <1%.279 The duration of observation 
of patients with uncomplicated SVT ablation without ev­
idence of transient atrioventricular block is not well de­
fined in the medical literature; some clinicians discharge 
patients after ≈4 hours of arrhythmia monitoring.
Recommendation
1. Patients with uncomplicated SVT ablation 
(eg, no transient atrioventricular block) may 
be discharged from arrhythmia monitoring 
after a short observation period in a post-
procedure area. Additional arrhythmia moni-
toring after the postprocedure area may be 
considered (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Complex Ablations or Serious Comorbidities
Investigators278 prospectively evaluated 1676 consecu­
tive ablations (non­AF SVT, AF, and VT) for major adverse 
postprocedural events such as life­threatening cardiac 
perforation, stroke, or death, with the following find­
ings by ablation type: for SVT, 0.8%; for idiopathic VT, 
3.4%; for VT ablation in the setting of structural heart 
disease, 6%; and for AF, 5.2%. Others have reported 
major complication rates after AF ablation between 
4.5%280 and 5.8%.281 Patients who undergo complex 
ablation such as pulmonary vein isolation for AF or ab­
lation for VT are at higher risk of major complications 
in the postoperative period. These patients often have 
additional comorbidities and usually require general 
anesthesia during ablation. Investigators278 identified 
no thromboembolic events after SVT ablation; the vast 
majority occurred after AF ablation (1%). Of all throm­
boembolic events, only 27.3% occurred before the pa­
tient left the procedure room.278 For all ablation types, 
most major complications occurred on the procedure 
day (54.7%), a third (31.1%) during the procedure. 
However, postprocedural complications occurred at a 
mean of 4.4±5.6 days and included 2 pericardial effu­
sions on days 5 and 6.278
The following recommendations are provided. How­
ever, the duration of monitoring varies with procedure, 
vascular access, and patient factors. Expert clinical judg­
ment is needed.
Recommendation
1. Patients with more serious comorbidities (eg, 
advanced heart failure) or who undergo com-
plex ablations (eg, pulmonary vein isolation 
for AF) should receive arrhythmia monitoring 
for 12 to 24 hours after the procedure (Class 
I; Level of Evidence C).
Atrioventricular Nodal Ablation
Patients who have experienced prolonged rapid heart 
rates from incessant tachycardia may be at greater risk 
for TdP
, as demonstrated in case reports,282,283 as are 
patients with chronic AF who undergo atrioventricular 
nodal ablation and concomitant pacemaker implanta­
tion.284
Recommendation
1. Patients who undergo atrioventricular nodal 
ablation who have experienced prolonged 
rapid heart rates from incessant tachycardia 
and patients with chronic AF who undergo 
atrioventricular nodal ablation with concom-
itant pacemaker implantation should receive 
arrhythmia monitoring for 12 to 24 hours 
after ablation (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
After Pacemaker or ICD Implantation Procedures
Temporary pacing is indicated in situations of acute life­
threatening bradyarrhythmias, as well as situations in 
which permanent pacing is indicated for bradyarrhyth­
mias but temporarily contraindicated by infection or other 
acute comorbidities. Temporary pacing may be achieved 
via transcutaneous pacing pads, transvenous pacing 
wires, or semipermanent transvenous pacing wires.
Transcutaneous Pacing Pads
Transcutaneous pacing can be deployed rapidly, but it is 
moderately or very uncomfortable for most patients,285 
and capture is variable.285,286 Thus, transcutaneous pac­
ing is used for urgent situations pending insertion of a 
transvenous lead or for situations with lower likelihood 
of pacing necessity. Transcutaneous pacing is subject 
to the same concerns as other temporary pacemakers. 
In addition, because the pacing artifact is large, it may 
obscure or mimic the QRS complex, making it difficult 
to determine the presence of ventricular capture. In 
such instances, different electrocardiographic monitor­
ing leads should be tested to identify a lead that mini­
mizes the pacemaker artifact and maximizes the QRS 
complex. If no such lead can be identified, then con­
comitant monitoring with a nonelectrocardiographic 
method is recommended (eg, arterial pressure, pulse 
oximetry monitoring, or both).
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is recommended 
until transcutaneous pacing is no longer nec-
essary and the device is removed or replaced 
with a permanent device (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e305
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Standard Temporary Transvenous Pacing Wires
Standard temporary transvenous pacing wires are stiff 
wires that have no fixation mechanisms, thus increas­
ing the likelihood of dislodgment. In addition, loss of 
pacemaker output may occur if lead wires become sep­
arated from the external pacemaker generator, batter­
ies become depleted, or oversensing occurs because of 
large P or T waves or because of extraneous electric po­
tentials such as muscle artifact or nearby faulty electric 
equipment. In a prospective observational study con­
ducted in patients with temporary transvenous pacing 
wires, dislodgement rates were 16%, with 50% of dis­
lodgements occurring within the first 24 hours and the 
other half occurring later during the hospital course.287
Recommendation
1. All patients with standard temporary trans-
venous pacing wires should receive arrhyth-
mia monitoring until either pacing is no 
longer necessary and the device is removed 
or it is replaced with a permanent device 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
Semipermanent Transvenous Temporary Pacing
The use of transvenous active fixation leads is in­
creasing, such as those designed for permanent pac­
ing that are inserted transvenously, externalized, and 
connected to an epicutaneous pulse generator.288–291 
These temporary systems have been used in place of 
standard temporary wires in several settings: device 
explantation because of infection to allow a period of 
antibiotic treatment, when the need for pacing may 
be temporary such as Lyme disease, or when perma­
nent pacing is indicated but temporarily precluded by 
comorbidities such as systemic infection.292 Several 
single­center studies of 17 to 60 patients have shown 
no loss of function or dislodgements over mean or 
median uses of 2 to 19 days. Although 1 of the earlier 
centers288 described maintaining patients in telemetry 
units during this period, 2 centers did not maintain 
patients on telemetry wards,290,291 and 1 center289 al­
lowed patients to go home or to a nursing facility with 
these systems in place. Telemetry may be considered 
in these patients.
Recommendations
1. It is reasonable for all patients with semi-
permanent transvenous pacing to receive 
arrhythmia monitoring for 24 hours (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. After the first 24 hours in low-risk patients, 
arrhythmia monitoring may be considered 
if the patient is not discharged to home or 
a skilled nursing facility (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C).
Permanent Pacemaker or ICD 
The number of pacemaker, ICD, and cardiac resynchro­
nization device implantations continues to increase dra­
matically as the population ages and indications broad­
en. The risks of major complications, including cardiac 
perforation, hemothorax, pneumothorax, stroke, MI, 
and death, increase with age and complexity of device 
implantation.77,293
Although many of the major adverse complications 
occur during the procedure, acute lead failure often 
manifests in the immediate postprocedural period.294 
Acute failure to capture or sense appropriately can be 
caused by lead fractures, loose set screws, cardiac per­
foration, sudden increase in pacing threshold, and most 
commonly, lead dislodgement. Rates of lead dislodge­
ment have been reported in 1% to 2% of cases after 
pacemaker or ICD insertion and up to 5.7% after car­
diac resynchronization device insertion.294–296
The main purpose of electrocardiographic monitoring 
after device implantation is to detect acute lead failure 
as evidenced by oversensing, undersensing, or failure to 
capture. Early confirmation of lead failure with device in­
terrogation or chest x­ray can result in rapid procedural 
correction. Although less common, electrocardiographic 
monitoring may also detect arrhythmias related the ma­
jor adverse complications such as sinus tachycardia in 
the setting of cardiac tamponade. Monitor manufactur­
ers have specific electrode configurations to achieve the 
most reliable recognition of paced rhythms. In addition, 
the clinician may need to enable pacemaker recogni­
tion by the monitor to avoid a potential monitor alarm 
for VT resulting from the width of the QRS with paced 
rhythm. Improvement in visibility of pacemaker spikes is 
still needed by some monitor manufacturers. Because 
technologies for pacemaker recognition vary, no recom­
mendation for their use can be made at this time.
Recommendations
1. Patients who do not have a consistent, intrin-
sic, hemodynamically stable heart rhythm 
are considered pacemaker dependent, and 
arrhythmia monitoring is recommended for 
12 to 24 hours after device implantation 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. For patients who are not pacemaker depen-
dent, arrhythmia monitoring 12 to 24 hours 
after implantation may be reasonable 
because detection of complications could 
lead to early intervention such as adjustment 
of settings or lead revision (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C).
Generator Change
Although the risks of major perioperative complica­
tions after nonendovascular procedures such as gen­
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e306
erator changes are low, the risk of system malfunc­
tion requiring reoperation caused by loose set screws 
and inadvertent lead problems is ≈1.5%.297 Patients 
with uncomplicated generator replacement do not 
need further monitoring after a short observation 
period.
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring may be reasonable 
for the immediate postprocedure period 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Preexisting Rhythm Devices
ICD Shocks Requiring Hospital Admission
The evaluation of patients who present after an ICD 
shock includes determination of the cause, whether the 
ICD shock was appropriate, and whether hospitaliza­
tion is required.
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is recommended for 
patients requiring hospitalization after an 
ICD shock for the duration of the related 
hospitalization until the precipitating event 
is treated (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
ICD or Pacemaker: Admission for Unrelated Indication 
Given the significant rise in pacemaker and ICD use 
in the United States,298 many patients with these 
implanted devices are admitted to the hospital for 
noncardiac reasons. In addition, as the cost and avail­
ability of external monitors and implantable recorders 
improve, a growing number of patients with these 
monitors will present to a hospital setting for noncar­
diac concerns.
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is not recommended 
for patients with preexisting rhythm devices 
who do not otherwise meet indications for 
active inpatient monitoring (Class III: No 
Benefit; Level of Evidence C).
Stable With Wearable Defibrillator: Admission for 
Unrelated Indication
Patients deemed at risk for sudden death who are not 
candidates for ICD implantation, because of contraindi­
cations or because their higher risk is deemed transient, 
may receive a wearable cardiac defibrillator. These devices 
have monitoring capabilities and are able to deliver elec­
tric energy that is as effective as that of ICDs.299 With help 
and education from nursing staff and company represen­
tatives, patients who demonstrate self­management of 
the wearable cardiac defibrillator and ability to wear the 
device reliably can be discharged to a nonmonitored set­
ting such as home or skilled nursing facility.
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is not recommended 
for patients with a wearable cardiac defibril-
lator who are admitted for noncardiac reasons 
(Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence C).
Other Cardiac Conditions
Acute Decompensated Heart Failure
Acute decompensation of chronic heart failure (ADHF) 
occurs as the result of a number of precipitating events 
such as volume overload; ischemia; anemia; progres­
sive ventricular, respiratory, or renal failure; hyperten­
sion; exacerbation of comorbidities; new­onset AF; 
and infection. These same pathogenic entities also in­
crease the risk of lethal and hemodynamically unstable 
arrhythmias during treatment. During the aforemen­
tioned clinical situations, the increases in demand for 
cardiac output exceed the ability of the heart to supply 
oxygenated blood to meet the metabolic demands of 
tissues. This is true of heart failure with reduced or pre­
served left ventricular function.
In new acute heart failure, the problem is usually 
ischemia from a new MI, inflammation from myocar­
ditis or endocarditis, or mechanical related to ruptured 
chordae or papillary muscles leading to acutely insuf­
ficient valves. The addition of arrhythmic instability re­
sulting from the hemodynamic effects of structural or 
ischemic failure is rapidly lethal if not identified quickly 
and treated.
Patients who have a new MI and those who present 
as hemodynamically unstable are readily admitted to an 
ICU where continuous electrocardiographic monitoring 
is the standard of care. However, the majority of pa­
tients with ADHF are admitted to non­ICU beds, most 
often for diuresis to achieve optimal volume status and 
to relieve congestion. No objective, prospective evalua­
tion of telemetry monitoring in patients with ADHF ad­
mitted to non­ICU beds has been reported.
Many, especially those with dilated cardiomyopathy 
of both ischemic and nonischemic origin, have ICDs. 
The incidence of arrhythmias such as AF and nonsus­
tained VT is high in patients with ADHF. Fibrosis, di­
lation, changes in ion currents, and other structural 
changes in the myocardium are proposed mechanisms 
of arrhythmias.300 In patients with nonischemic cardio­
myopathy, female sex, lack of statin therapy, and el­
evated creatinine were independent risk factors for ma­
lignant ventricular arrhythmias.301
Benza et al302 reviewed the OPTIME­CHF (Outcomes 
of a Prospective Trial of Intravenous Milrinone for Ex­
acerbations of Chronic Heart Failure) registry and con­
cluded that new arrhythmias during an exacerbation of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e307
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
heart failure were associated with both higher inpatient 
and 60­day morbidity and mortality. Opasich et al303 sur­
veyed physicians about their perception of the useful­
ness of telemetry monitoring among 711 patients with 
heart failure (199 of whom were monitored) admitted 
to a heart failure unit. Electrocardiographic monitoring 
was used primarily in unstable patients, and telemetry 
was deemed useful in 70% of cases.
Although many patients with heart failure now have 
ICDs, the increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias with 
ADHF and the extremely unpleasant experience of de­
fibrillation make reliance on the defibrillator unreason­
able if the arrhythmia can be identified and suppressed, 
thus avoiding defibrillation. Most patients with ICDs 
have the antitachycardia pacing feature programmed 
“on” in an effort to minimize ICD shocks, which are 
not only uncomfortable but may be associated with an 
increased risk of mortality. In addition, antiarrhythmic 
drugs carry the risk of proarrhythmia and do not obvi­
ate the need for an ICD.
Recommendations
1. Because of the risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
and the frequency of new-onset AF, arrhyth-
mia monitoring is recommended for patients 
with ADHF until the precipitating event (eg, 
volume overload; ischemia; anemia; progres-
sive ventricular, respiratory, or renal failure; 
hypertension; exacerbation of comorbidities; 
new-onset AF; or infection) is successfully 
treated (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
2. Because of the potential for new ischemia, 
ischemia monitoring may be reasonable, 
but only if there is a possible ischemic origin 
and in the setting of evaluable ST segments 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Endocarditis
Guidelines published in 2005 do not mention electro­
cardiographic monitoring for patients with endocardi­
tis,304 although conduction abnormalities occur with 
moderate frequency in the setting of infective endo­
carditis. Limited data exist on the role of electrocar­
diographic monitoring of patients with this condition. 
Meine et al305 reported a series of 137 cases of endocar­
ditis classified as definite or possible by the Duke criteria 
with an interpretable ECG. Conduction abnormalities 
of new or unknown duration occurred in 36 of these 
patients (27%). Among these 36 patients, conduction 
abnormalities included the following: 18 with intraven­
tricular conduction abnormalities alone, 14 with atrio­
ventricular block alone, and 4 with both intraventricu­
lar conduction abnormalities and atrioventricular block. 
The extent of the infection was significantly associated 
with the occurrence of conduction change on the ECG: 
53% of those with invasive infection, defined as ab­
scess or paravalvular regurgitation, exhibited a conduc­
tion change on the ECG compared with 26% of those 
with isolated valve infections (P=0.046). Conduction 
change on the ECG was associated with a 2­fold higher 
mortality compared with those without a conduction 
change on the ECG (31% versus 15%; P=0.039). Simi­
larly, 41% of patients with intraventricular blocks that 
were new or of unknown duration died compared with 
only 15% of patients without intraventricular blocks 
(P=0.003).305 The occurrence of conduction abnormali­
ties in the setting of infective endocarditis may be a 
marker of more advanced disease rather than serving 
simply as an arrhythmic cause of death. Telemetry is ap­
propriate for patients with endocarditis who have signs 
or symptoms of heart block, heart failure, or high­risk 
features noted on central nervous system examination 
or echocardiogram (eg, ring abscess).
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring for patients with 
infective endocarditis can be beneficial until 
the patient is clinically stable (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence C).
Noncardiac Conditions
Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring of patients 
with noncardiac conditions occurs both in the ICU and 
outside the ICU. No randomized trials or observational 
studies could be found that describe how and whether 
differing forms of monitoring influence patient out­
comes or care processes in the ICU. Although not ex­
plicitly required by The Joint Commission, electrocardio­
graphic monitoring is standard in ICUs in the United 
States. If a patient is unstable enough to require an 
ICU, adequate rationale would need to be documented 
for why electrocardiographic monitoring would not 
be warranted. In general, it is reasonable that electro­
cardiographic monitoring should be continued until 
patients are weaned from mechanical ventilation and 
are hemodynamically stable. Continuous electrocardio­
graphic monitoring in patients receiving intensive care 
for noncardiac indications is recommended.
Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring should 
not be used outside the ICU setting unless a clear clini­
cal indication exists and for only as long as that indi­
cation is present. The decision to place a patient on 
electrocardiographic monitoring should not be based 
only on an assumption that the patient will be observed 
more frequently or that more intensive nursing care will 
be provided. This section examines the current available 
evidence for the use of continuous electrocardiographic 
monitoring of patients with noncardiac conditions in 
the non­ICU setting such as those undergoing proce­
dures with conscious sedation, noncardiac surgical pa­
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e308
tients, and medical patients. The final section provides 
a brief discussion of electrocardiographic monitoring of 
patients with an order not to resuscitate or intubate.
After Conscious Sedation
Major cardiac events resulting from common proce­
dures with conscious sedation (such as colonoscopy) 
are exceedingly rare, particularly in the ambulatory set­
ting.306,307 The primary cause of these cardiac events is 
probably respiratory in nature, leading to nearly ubiqui­
tous use of continuous pulse oximetry as a key monitor­
ing modality. However, prospective studies are needed 
to determine causality.308 As others have pointed out,307 
although intraprocedural ST­segment or QT changes ap­
pear to be associated with poorer postprocedural out­
comes,309 few studies have provided empirical data on 
which patients benefit from electrocardiographic moni­
toring during conscious sedation, and such trials are un­
likely to be carried out. Although few studies exist in 
which electrocardiographic monitoring is compared with 
other types of monitoring such as pulse oximetry and 
capnography, these may provide additional information 
or even alternatives to electrocardiographic monitoring 
for the patient undergoing minor procedures.
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring may be reasonable 
in patients undergoing conscious sedation 
and should be continued until the patient is 
awake, alert, and hemodynamically stable 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Noncardiac Surgery
ACC/AHA guidelines for perioperative management of 
patients after major surgery310 do not make recommen­
dations for the use of continuous electrocardiographic 
monitoring as an approach to detecting major cardiac 
events (eg, MI, arrhythmias). However, the guidelines 
do make a specific recommendation against routine 
postoperative use of the static 12­lead ECG for screen­
ing of asymptomatic patients because of a lack of clini­
cal trial data defining an optimal approach to acting on 
electrocardiographic findings in asymptomatic patients. 
In contrast, obtaining a postoperative 12­lead ECG 
would be appropriate if a patient becomes symptom­
atic after a noncardiac surgical procedure. In this sce­
nario, if a patient becomes symptomatic (eg, has chest 
pain, symptoms of heart failure, or palpitations) and the 
ECG and clinical risk profile suggest a cardiac cause, 
other areas of these practice standards would be appli­
cable as the basis for continuous electrocardiographic 
monitoring in a patient after noncardiac surgery.
Few studies exist to guide the use of perioperative 
electrocardiographic monitoring to manage patients 
who have preexisting arrhythmias (eg, AF) or who 
are at high risk for arrhythmias. The absolute risk of 
new or worsening AF after noncardiac surgery is rela­
tively low, between 1% and 2% in large studies, but 
is associated with higher costs and worse clinical out­
comes.311,312 However, data are limited for defining a 
high­risk subgroup and a clinically effective approach to 
monitoring these patients. Postoperative patients with 
angina­equivalent symptoms or rhythm changes should 
be treated according to the chest pain/coronary artery 
disease standards above.
Recommendation
1. Routine use of arrhythmia monitoring after 
noncardiac surgery is not indicated for 
asymptomatic patients (Class III; Level of 
Evidence C).
Two particular types of noncardiac surgery deserve 
special consideration related to the use of continuous 
electrocardiographic monitoring outside the ICU: major 
thoracic surgery and major vascular surgery.
Noncardiac: Major Thoracic Surgery. AF is by far 
the most common arrhythmia after thoracotomy and 
lung surgery.313 For patients who undergo thoracic 
surgery even without direct cardiac involvement, the 
incidence of postoperative AF is dramatically higher 
(4%–37%) than for those who undergo nonthoracic 
surgery.313–316 Heterogeneity of samples and methods 
contributes to a lack of understanding of the true inci­
dence. A review spanning 2002 to 2012 noted a 3.2% 
to 30% incidence of SVT after pulmonary surgery, with 
return to normal sinus rhythm before discharge for 
most patients.313 However, challenges for these patients 
included hemodynamic consequences, potential for 
systemic embolization, increased length of stay, and 
potential need for long­term prophylactic medication. 
In a consecutive sample of patients undergoing pulmo­
nary resection, the overall incidence of postoperative 
AF was 11.8%, with a quarter of patients experiencing 
AF in the first 24 hours; the incidence peaked at 2.5 
days postoperatively.316 Other investigators noted that 
AF develops most frequently 2 days after noncardiac 
thoracic surgery.315,317 Thus, it is reasonable to recom­
mend electrocardiographic monitoring through postop­
erative day 2 to 3 for pulmonary resection, with longer 
periods determined by the clinician for those with mul­
tiple risk factors.
In 2 retrospective studies, the incidence of new 
postoperative AF was 16% to 17% with open thora­
cotomy and 10% to 12% with a video­assisted tho­
racic approach to pulmonary lobectomy.314,318 Ivanovic 
et al316 reported a similar incidence (11.8%) of a new 
documented postoperative AF that required pharmaco­
logical therapy among patients undergoing pulmonary 
resection (n=363). Patients with postoperative AF had a 
significantly longer mean length of stay (10.5 versus 6.9 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e309
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
days). Ivanovic et al316 described the AF as mainly tran­
sient and uncomplicated; however, one third of cases 
either were not transient or led to a major intervention. 
Sohn et al315 reported that patients who developed AF 
had a longer hospitalization and increased in­hospital 
mortality (although the cause of death was noncardio­
vascular such as pneumonia or hemorrhage).
Risk factors for postoperative AF after thoracotomy 
have included older age, coronary artery disease, more 
extensive surgery or more serious stage of cancer, emer­
gency surgery, male sex, and low body mass index.315,316 
Although certain risk factors cannot be modified, fur­
ther attention to pathogenesis may highlight directions 
for the prevention of postthoracotomy arrhythmias. 
The factors triggering new AF after cardiac or thoracic 
surgery may include direct intrathoracic stimulation or 
atrial irritation; thus, some have examined strategies for 
prophylaxis (eg, β­blockers or calcium channel blockers, 
amiodarone) with varying risks and benefits.313,319 Auto­
nomic denervation and stress­mediated neurohumoral 
mechanisms have been recognized as contributing to 
frequent AF after thoracotomy.318 A key intervention to 
preventing SVT in patients undergoing thoracotomy is 
aggressive pain management, including thoracic epi­
dural analgesia.313,320
Recommendations
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is reasonable for 
patients after noncardiac major thoracic sur-
gery such as pulmonary resection to identify 
AF through postoperative day 2 to 3 (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence B).
2. Arrhythmia monitoring for a longer period 
of time can be useful for patients with mul-
tiple risk factors for AF after noncardiac 
major thoracic surgery (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
Noncardiac: Major Vascular Surgery. Continuous 
arrhythmia monitoring in patients undergoing major 
vascular surgery such as invasive aneurysm repair 
deserves further study to determine benefit/nonbenefit 
in the postoperative period, given the very high rate of 
ischemia reported.321 The risk factors for major vascular 
problems (eg, smoking, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, 
diabetes mellitus) are analogous to those of cardiac 
disease. These patients may have undiagnosed coro­
nary lesions, which may be identified on postoperative 
ST­segment monitoring, triggering a need for evalua­
tion and potential intervention. Because current data 
are limited, specific recommendations cannot be made 
for monitoring. For patients who develop new signs or 
symptoms suggestive of cardiac ischemia, heart fail­
ure, or arrhythmias, relevant practice standards apply. 
Further study is indicated for this at­risk population.
Medical Conditions
Among general medical patients, the limited data avail­
able suggest that the incidence of clinically important 
arrhythmias is quite low (<2%), even in a telemetry 
setting.322–326 Moreover, in noncardiac patients, serious 
and fatal arrhythmias tend to be a secondary manifesta­
tion of serious underlying comorbidities, and signs and 
symptoms of worsening clinical status do not require 
telemetry to detect.327–329 In fact, the few studies sug­
gest that the rationale for monitoring may to be more 
to detect and manage a broad range of complications, 
not just arrhythmias or myocardial ischemia.326 This 
section includes a discussion of the evidence current­
ly available to guide the use or nonuse of continuous 
electrocardiographic monitoring among patients with 
the following medical conditions: stroke; pneumonia; 
COPD; severe electrolyte abnormalities; drug overdose, 
including specific types of drugs; and hemodialysis.
Stroke
Guidelines for the early management of patients with 
acute ischemic stroke (2013) recommended that ar­
rhythmia monitoring should begin in the prehospital 
setting and continue throughout the initial assessment 
and management of acute stroke. The guidelines list a 
COR I, LOE B recommendation for arrhythmia monitor­
ing for at least 24 hours after stroke to identify possible 
AF and other potentially serious cardiac arrhythmias 
that would necessitate emergency cardiac interven­
tions.330 The 2009 AHA/American Stroke Association 
scientific statement on transient ischemic attack lists 
a COR IIa, LOE B recommendation for prolonged in­
patient or Holter monitor use among patients with an 
unclear pathogenesis.331
Kallmünzer and colleagues332 evaluated the Stroke­
Arrhythmia­Monitoring­Database to assess the risk and 
timing of serious arrhythmias in patients admitted with 
a stroke. Their analysis revealed that 25% of patients 
had significant arrhythmias (mostly ventricular or SVT) 
with ventricular rates in excess of 130 bpm. These ar­
rhythmias were associated with older age and more 
severe neurological deficits measured on the National 
Institutes of Health Stroke Scale. The incidence of these 
arrhythmias was highest in the first 24 hours and de­
clined over 3 days.332
Ritter and colleagues333 conducted a prospective 
study of 256 patients with ischemic strokes who were 
continuously monitored for at least 24 hours. In this 
study, 15% had episodes of a heart rate >120 bpm; this 
was associated with larger lesion size, higher National 
Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score, and AF. The au­
thors concluded that continuous electrocardiographic 
monitoring allowed the detection of arrhythmias to 
support treatment decisions.
Electrocardiographic monitoring is useful for iden­
tifying significant arrhythmias in patients with strokes 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e310
that result in a change in therapy, including identifica­
tion of AF and initiation of anticoagulation. Although 
arrhythmia monitoring is recommended in the setting 
of stroke up to 24 to 48 hours, the likelihood of doc­
umenting AF is low, and longer­term monitoring has 
been shown to have an increased yield in identifying 
patients with AF.334
QTc prolongation has been documented in patients 
who have experienced acute neurological events such 
as stroke or neurological trauma. It is most frequently 
documented among patients with subarachnoid hem­
orrhage, who are especially prone to QT prolongation. 
However, they rarely develop TdP
,98 and thus, QTc moni­
toring is not recommended.
The following recommendations are provided, 
with considerations for shorter monitoring in pa­
tients in whom the source of ischemic stroke is iden­
tified (eg, AF) and for longer monitoring in older and 
sicker patients.
Recommendations
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is recommended for 
patients with strokes for up to 24 to 48 hours 
after admission (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
2. Arrhythmia monitoring can be useful for a 
longer duration in the setting of cryptogenic 
stroke to assess for intermittent AF and 
asymptomatic rapid ventricular response 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Patients with cardiac disease encompass a high­risk 
population for occurrence of stroke, whereas patients 
with acute stroke are similarly at increased risk for 
cardiovascular complications. Electrocardiographic ab­
normalities are frequent in the setting of acute stroke, 
described in 50% to 92% of patients studied,335–338 
including ST­segment shifts suggestive of myocardial 
ischemia or injury in up to two thirds of patients with 
ischemic stroke.339–341 When evaluations for both isch­
emia and arrhythmia are combined, telemetry monitor­
ing has been demonstrated to provide a high yield of 
abnormalities with important diagnostic and prognos­
tic relevance. In an acute stroke unit study of 692 pa­
tients with acute cerebral infarction, 155 patients with 
intracerebral hemorrhage, and 223 patients with tran­
sient ischemic attack, 12 to 24 hours of electrocardio­
graphic monitoring documented electrocardiographic 
abnormalities in the majority (60%, 50%, and 44%, 
respectively), including potential ischemic findings such 
as ST­segment elevation (5%, 5%, and 2%), ST­seg­
ment depression (16%, 7%, and 9%), and/or T­wave 
inversion (18%, 8%, and 11%).342 The occurrence of 
electrocardiographic abnormalities was associated with 
impaired 3­month outcome in patients with cerebral 
infarction or hemorrhage but not those with transient 
ischemic attack in this study.342
Although it has been suggested that aggressive 
monitoring, including electrocardiographic monitoring, 
of patients in a stroke care unit may lead to improved 
outcomes,343 evidence for ST­segment monitoring is 
lacking. Indeed, the prognostic benefit of ST­segment 
monitoring in the setting of acute stroke, despite the 
clear shared association of risk factors and concomitant 
cerebrovascular and cardiovascular events, is further 
confounded by the frequency of ST­segment shifts iden­
tified in this population344 and the lack of clarity about 
cause and effect. Concurrent stroke and evidence of 
MI are not infrequent, with angina, MI, or evidence of 
cardiac ischemia present in up to 6% of patients with 
acute stroke, although associations with elevation of 
biomarkers of myocardial injury and left ventricular wall 
motion abnormalities vary by stroke type and location, 
noted particularly in association with subarachnoid 
hemorrhage.335,345,346 It has been postulated that these 
changes occur via a centrally mediated release of cat­
echolamines resulting in subendocardial ischemia with 
elevation of cardiac biomarkers, although even this el­
evation is inconsistent and not clearly associated with 
remediable ischemia.347–349 Given the clear association 
between risk of stroke and incident cardiac disease, a 
high index of suspicion for inducible myocardial isch­
emia must be maintained in patients with acute stroke. 
However, given the frequent occurrence of evolution­
ary ST­segment and T­wave changes of unclear origin 
and significance, limited therapeutic options for he­
modynamically stable MI in the setting of acute stroke, 
and a lack of prospective data to support a prognostic 
benefit for ischemia monitoring in patients with stroke, 
ST­segment monitoring should be considered only in 
patients with acute stroke at increased risk for cardiac 
events with evaluable ST segments and may require ex­
pert consultation.
Recommendation
1. ST-segment ischemia monitoring may be 
considered only in patients with acute stroke 
at increased risk for cardiac events who have 
evaluable ST segments (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C).
Pneumonia
Recent studies and literature reviews have proposed an 
association between community­acquired pneumonia 
and cardiovascular­related events during hospitaliza­
tion.350,351 Among patients hospitalized with pneumo­
nia, cardiac arrest occurring without preceding shock 
or respiratory failure may be related to myocardial 
ischemia, a maladaptive response to hypoxia, or sepsis­
related cardiomyopathy.352 The possibility of proarrhyth­
mic effects of antibiotics should be considered and may 
be mitigated by appropriate QTc monitoring.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e311
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Recent attention has been given to the frequency of 
arrhythmias among patients with pneumonia. Of 3068 
hospitalized patients with pneumonia, 12% developed 
a cardiovascular event (defined as pulmonary edema, 
cardiac arrhythmia, or MI). Hyperlipidemia and severity 
of pneumonia were associated with increased risk.353 
Similar findings were reported from another study of 
32 
689 patients with pneumonia and no prior diagnosis 
of a cardiac arrhythmia: 12% had a new diagnosis of 
cardiac arrhythmia (AF, VT/VF, cardiac arrest, and symp­
tomatic bradycardia) within 90 days of admission.354 
Older age, history of heart failure, and need for me­
chanical ventilation or vasopressors were associated 
with more events. Perry et al355 studied 50 
119 inpa­
tients admitted with pneumonia and identified con­
gestive heart failure (10.2%), arrhythmia (9.5%), MI 
(1.5%), and stroke (0.2%) occurring primarily within 
the hospitalization period but also up to 90 days after 
the initial hospitalization.
Among 3921 patients with community­acquired 
pneumonia, Viasus et al356 identified 8 risk factors for 
acute cardiac events and mortality: age >65 years, 
chronic heart disease, chronic kidney disease, tachycar­
dia, septic shock, multilobar pneumonia, hypoalbumin­
emia, and pneumococcal pneumonia. Patients with at 
least 6 of these factors were deemed high risk and had a 
21.2% occurrence of cardiac complications (P<0.001). 
Overall, mortality was higher in patients who had acute 
cardiac events. Thus, Viasus et al356 recommended elec­
trocardiographic monitoring in patients with pneumo­
nia who also had at least 6 of the identified risk factors. 
This may be a reasonable recommendation given that 
many patients with 6 of these risk factors, in addition to 
acute pneumonia, may already be in the ICU.
The standard practice for electrocardiographic 
monitoring for patients with pneumonia in the ICU is 
not being questioned, despite a lack of prospective, 
interventional studies evaluating outcomes of electro­
cardiographic monitoring in the ICU. However, the ex­
istence of a subset of high­risk patients on telemetry 
units who directly benefit from electrocardiographic 
monitoring is unknown. Further prospective study is 
needed to determine whether telemetry monitoring 
results in better outcomes in high­risk patients with the 
use of a valid risk stratification tool or whether these 
high­risk patients would meet criteria to be in the ICU 
where electrocardiographic monitoring is already the 
standard of care. At this time, evidence is lacking to 
provide recommendations for continuous electrocar­
diographic monitoring among non­ICU patients with 
pneumonia.
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
Two major hypotheses for arrhythmogenesis in COPD 
are hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and acid­base disturbanc­
es and COPD­associated autonomic neuropathy that 
decreases heart rate variability.357 The latter has gained 
attention as investigations of heart rate variability have 
increased.358
About one third of patients with stable COPD also 
have heart failure.359 Ischemic heart disease is likely a 
missed diagnosis among patients hospitalized with 
COPD exacerbation.360 Data from a large retrospective 
review demonstrated that COPD is an independent risk 
factor for cardiovascular disease.361 However, prospec­
tive studies of patients with COPD receiving electrocar­
diographic monitoring are rare. Holter monitoring of a 
consecutive series of patients (n=7441) demonstrated 
that the severity of COPD was independently associated 
with the occurrence of AF.362
Patients with concurrent COPD and AF may have 
increased breathlessness and should be treated ac­
cording to usual AF guidelines; if β­blockers are used, 
β1­selective drugs are preferred.363 Because these pa­
tients are often excluded from clinical trials, more data 
on COPD medication in patients with AF are needed 
and could inform future electrocardiographic monitor­
ing studies.
Patients with COPD often have electrocardiographic 
abnormalities; the degree of abnormality increases with 
disease severity. Abnormalities include the verticality of 
the P­wave axis (>60°) and narrowness of the QRS com­
plex (<75 milliseconds),364 as well as right atrial enlarge­
ment, right ventricular hypertrophy, and right BBB.365,366 
Ischemic electrocardiographic changes are common 
among patients with COPD.367
The unanswered question is not whether cardiovas­
cular disease and arrhythmias occur in patients with 
COPD but rather whether any new changes on the ECG 
will be clinically important, thus justifying electrocardio­
graphic monitoring. Reports of research evaluating the 
use of telemetry for hospitalized patients with COPD 
are lacking. For example, patients with COPD demon­
strating shortness of breath attributed to COPD exacer­
bation accompanied by T­wave inversion in V1 through 
V3 on ECG366 are not typically considered candidates 
for immediate revascularization. Thus, if a patient with 
COPD demonstrated ischemic abnormalities on telem­
etry, the clinical response is unclear in the acute setting. 
At this time, there is insufficient evidence to provide 
recommendations for electrocardiographic monitoring 
for patients with COPD.
Electrolyte Abnormalities
Abnormalities in potassium and magnesium levels can 
cause changes on the ECG.
Potassium. Hypokalemia, the most common electro­
lyte abnormality, is often the result of diuresis, but it may 
also result from the administration of potassium­free 
intravenous fluids, potassium loss from vomiting and 
diarrhea, and other endocrine and renal mechanisms.368 
Hypokalemia has been defined as K<3.5 mEq/L.369,370 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e312
Various sources have classified hypokalemia with 
slight differences but typically as mild (3.0–3.5 mEq/L), 
moderate (2.5–2.9 mEq/L), or severe (<2.5 mEq/L).369 
Although many noncardiac patients are asymptomatic 
until potassium levels are <3 mEq/L,369 those with rapid 
losses may be symptomatic sooner. It has been sug­
gested recently that patients with heart failure main­
tain a level of at least 4 mEq/L.370,371 Changes on the 
ECG associated with hypokalemia are broadening of 
the T waves, ST­segment depression, and prominent U 
waves.368 A variety of arrhythmias have been associated 
with hypokalemia, including first­ or second­degree 
atrioventricular block or AF. Ventricular arrhythmias 
include PVCs, VT, TdP
, VF, and cardiac arrest.370
Hyperkalemia occurs less commonly but is a well­
known challenge, primarily among patients with renal 
dysfunction. Upper limits range from 5 to 5.5 mmol/L, 
depending on the laboratory and institution.370 
Changes on the ECG do not usually manifest until 
serum potassium levels are >6.5 mmol/L.372 One of 
the most common findings on ECG for patients with 
hyperkalemia are nonspecific ST­segment abnormali­
ties.373 Various sources have classified hyperkalemia 
with slight differences but typically as mild (5.5–6.4 
mmol/L), moderate (6.5–8.0 mmol/L), or severe (>8.0 
mmol/L).374 This classification helps illustrate the pro­
gressive effect on the ECG. As hyperkalemia progress­
es, the T wave often (but not always) becomes peaked 
(5.5–6.5 mmol/L), the PR interval lengthens (6.5–7.5 
mmol/L), and the QRS widens (7.0–8.0 mmol/L).375 
Bradycardia may occur in severe hyperkalemia as a re­
sult of the extremely prolonged PR and QRS.373,375,376 
Finally, a sine wave pattern, VF, and asystole or pulse­
less electrical activity may be seen at potassium lev­
els exceeding 10 mmol/L.372,374 It is important to note, 
however, that electrocardiographic manifestations for 
hyperkalemia vary among individuals and may not be 
predictable.345,373,377
Magnesium. Magnesium deficiency is common, and 
magnesium has been associated with benefit in treat­
ing TdP. Differing normal values are reported, but <1.3 
mEq/L is undisputedly low.372 Keren and Tzivoni378 
described a number of incidences in which adminis­
tration of magnesium bolus or infusion resolved TdP in 
situations when it was preceded by both normal lev­
els and hypomagnesemia. In an RCT among hospital­
ized patients with heart failure, hypomagnesemia was 
associated with more frequent ventricular arrhyth­
mias, likely caused by diuresis; patients randomized to 
receiving magnesium supplements intravenously dem­
onstrated significantly fewer PVCs.379 A second RCT 
reported significantly fewer PVCs after magnesium 
supplements.380
Magnesium toxicity is less common but seen in 
patients with renal dysfunction and as an iatrogenic 
overdose possible in pregnant women receiving mag­
nesium for preterm labor.381 Magnesium levels of 2.5 
to 5 mmol/L may manifest as prolonged PR, QRS, and 
QT intervals; severely elevated levels of 6 to 10 mmol/L 
may result in atrioventricular nodal conduction block, 
bradycardia, hypotension, and cardiac arrest.372
In summary, use of electrocardiographic monitoring 
among hospitalized patients with moderate and severe 
imbalances of potassium or magnesium facilitates the 
use of published algorithms to prevent or intervene for 
lethal cardiac rhythms. In less severe electrolyte abnor­
malities, if a 12­lead ECG demonstrates electric abnor­
malities, continuous arrhythmia monitoring should be 
considered.
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is recommended for 
moderate and severe imbalance of potassium 
or magnesium (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
Pediatric Considerations. Because the substrate of 
scarred, hypertrophic myocardium is much less com­
mon among children compared with adults, many 
pediatric clinicians believe that electrolyte abnormali­
ties are less likely to be associated with electrocardio­
graphic abnormalities. However, insufficient published 
data make specific recommendations for electrocardio­
graphic monitoring for abnormal electrolytes in chil­
dren difficult.
Drug Overdose
Overdose of drugs can occur purposely as an attempt 
at suicide or through error, accident, or inexperience. 
The drugs involved may be prescribed (for pain, anxio­
lytics, antidepressants), industrial (inhalants), or illegal/
recreational (street drugs/club drugs). In addition, chil­
dren can access and ingest medications of adults in the 
household. Regardless of the particular drug or the cir­
cumstances of the ingestion, all of these drugs have ar­
rhythmogenic properties when consumed in toxic dos­
es. The minimum toxic dose may be individually defined.
Psychotropic Drugs. Buckley et al382 compared 39 
patients with serious arrhythmias (VT, SVT, or cardiac 
arrest) with 117 patients without arrhythmias, all of 
whom were admitted with overdose of tricyclic anti­
depressants or thioridazines. Initial evaluation of QRS 
duration and QTc interval to predict serious arrhythmias 
was not helpful because they were prolonged in the 
majority of both groups. Monitoring of prolonged QTc 
is discussed in Section 1, Overview of QTc Monitoring, 
and Section 2, Arrhythmias.
Opiates. Heroin, methadone, and oxycodone (in 
either rapid­release or sustained­release formulations) 
are used by individuals who may overdose by error or 
design. Large doses of opiates cause central nervous 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e313
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
system depression that often manifests in respiratory 
depression.383 Methadone, in particular, may cause QT 
prolongation384 that worsens with overdose because 
of concomitant drug use, including methamphet­
amine,384–386 benzodiazepines, or cannabis.386 In addi­
tion, street heroin may be “cut” with cardioactive drugs 
such as quinidine, diltiazem, cocaine, procaine, lido­
caine, phenacetin, methorphan, or caffeine.387
Inhalants. The inhalation (“huffing,” “sniffing,” or 
“bagging”) of substances such as toluene, butane, 
propane, fluorocarbons, chlorinated hydrocarbons, or 
acetone to experience an associated euphoria is com­
monly done by children and adolescents. However, it 
is an inexpensive high that is not limited to children. 
When combined with alcohol or drugs such as ben­
zodiazepines, barbiturates, or sympathetic stimulation, 
inhalants can result in “sudden sniffing death syn­
drome.”388 This syndrome is thought to be the cause 
of at least 50% of the deaths resulting from inhalant 
abuse and likely is attributable to a combination of 
anoxia, vagal inhibition, and catecholamine surge.389 
Prolonged use of toluene leads to renal dysfunction 
and a potential acute presentation of metabolic aci­
dosis and potentially Goodpasture syndrome, which 
causes lung damage and renal failure.389
Cocaine. Ventricular arrhythmias that occur early 
after cocaine ingestion may be attributable to effects 
on sodium channels, whereas ventricular arrhythmias 
occurring later may be related to ischemia.390 Thus, it 
is possible that electrocardiographic monitoring may 
facilitate interventions for ischemia. Cocaine prolongs 
the QT interval for several days after ingestion,391 requir­
ing the avoidance of other QT­prolonging medications 
during this time. In 84 of 107 deaths (81%) associated 
with cocaine, no definitive cause was noted, leading 
investigators to hypothesize that MI with VF was the 
cause of unknown deaths among cocaine users.392
The most common symptom reported by cocaine 
users is chest pain390 described as heavy in nature.393 
Unfortunately, correlation of MI with ECGs has been 
reported to be low in this population, so troponin mea­
surement is essential.390 Risk stratification for observa­
tion status versus inpatient admission using estab­
lished criteria (eg, changes on the ECG and troponin) 
is critical because although only 0.7% to 6%394,395 of 
patients initially presenting with cocaine­induced chest 
pain had a subsequent MI, among high­risk patients 
admitted for evaluation, 24% had an MI and another 
24% were diagnosed with unstable angina.395 AHA 
guidelines recommend 9 to 12 hours of observation in 
a chest pain unit for those patients with nondiagnos­
tic electrocardiographic findings and negative cardiac 
markers, whereas they recommend hospital admission 
with continuous electrocardiographic monitoring for 
high­risk patients.390
Other Recreational Drugs. Overdose of stimulant 
drugs such as 3,4 methylenedioxymethamphetamie 
(ecstasy), methamphetamine, or substituted cathinones 
(bath salts) commonly found at dance clubs and par­
ties present challenges in the ED and in follow­up care. 
Risks include tachyarrhythmias, bradyarrhythmias, MI, 
hypothermia, hyperthermia, hypertension, acute neu­
rological and psychological symptoms, and violent 
behavior.396–399 Ingestion of γ­hydroxybutyrate, origi­
nally developed as an anesthetic, may lead to excessive 
depressant side effects. Patients admitted after taking 
γ­hydroxybutyrate may have knowingly or unknowingly 
also ingested other drugs and thus may have additional 
side effects.400 Death is uncommon when appropriate 
management is instituted.
Summary of Drug Overdose. All of the psychotropic 
drugs, methadone, and the inhalants prolong the QT 
interval and predispose patients to ventricular arrhyth­
mias. Stimulants predispose to arrhythmias by activat­
ing the sympathetic nervous system.396 The temperature 
regulation effect of several of the drugs is an added 
source of arrhythmogenesis.397–399 A majority of peo­
ple who overdose have >1 drug in their system either 
because they purposely took multiple drugs or because 
the drug they knowingly took was mixed with other 
drugs without their knowledge. Patients with drug 
overdoses of these substances should undergo elec­
trocardiographic monitoring until they are free of the 
influence of the drug and are ready for discharge from 
acute care. Specific recommendations for QTc monitor­
ing are described in the QT section of these practice 
standards and corresponding table (Table 6).
Recommendation
1. Arrhythmia monitoring is indicated until 
the patient is free of the influence of the 
drug(s) and clinically stable (Class I; Level of 
Evidence B).
Hemodialysis
Although experts from the National Kidney Founda­
tion: Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative Work­
group401 called for automatic external defibrillators in 
all outpatient hemodialysis clinics because the com­
mon occurrence of fatal arrhythmias among patients, 
electrocardiographic monitoring is generally not pro­
vided in outpatient centers. In contrast, most hospitals 
provide continuous electrocardiographic monitoring 
for inpatients undergoing hemodialysis. The benefit 
of monitoring of inpatients undergoing hemodialysis 
is not known. Some inpatients receiving hemodialysis 
demonstrate criteria for electrocardiographic monitor­
ing as listed elsewhere in these practice standards. For 
example, for inpatients with new acute renal failure 
with severe electrolyte abnormalities (eg, hyperkalemia) 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e314
or acidosis, continuous electrocardiographic monitor­
ing is recommended. Patients undergoing dialysis while 
in the ICU receive electrocardiographic monitoring. Pa­
tients being dialyzed for drug intoxication with proar­
rhythmic drugs should have QT monitoring in addition 
to arrhythmia monitoring. However, for stable patients 
who are hospitalized for a procedure such as repair of a 
clotted dialysis access or an orthopedic procedure, evi­
dence is lacking on which to base recommendations for 
electrocardiographic monitoring.
Reports addressing both atrial and ventricular ar­
rhythmias among patients on hemodialysis have been 
published. However, studies evaluating the use of elec­
trocardiographic monitoring for patients on hemodi­
alysis are limited. A high prevalence and incidence of 
AF in patients on maintenance hemodialysis have been 
identified through routine ECGs.402 Using the ICD re­
mote monitoring function, investigators demonstrated 
that AF was more frequent on hemodialysis days and 
increased during the hemodialysis procedure.403 Abnor­
mal ECGs, including QTc prolongation, are common 
among patients on hemodialysis,404 and QT prolonga­
tion has been identified as an independent predictor of 
mortality for patients on hemodialysis.405 As described 
in a review of 5 studies, SCD has been noted in patients 
on hemodialysis, most commonly occurring during the 
72­hour time frame between dialysis treatments and 
within the first 12 hours after receiving a treatment.406 
The Kidney Disease Workgroup401 provided guidelines 
for evaluation of heart disease on initiation of dialy­
sis, including baseline and annual ECGs; however, no 
specific recommendations were provided for continu­
ous electrocardiographic monitoring during inpatient 
hemodialysis. Studies demonstrating the occurrence of 
rhythm changes during dialysis that provided real­time 
data to clinicians to confirm or modify care during he­
modialysis were not identified. Further study is needed 
to determine whether continuous electrocardiographic 
monitoring is associated with improved outcomes for 
patients receiving hemodialysis in non­ICU settings.
Patients with severe hyperkalemia or metabolic imbal­
ance (such as in new, acute renal failure) or who are hos­
pitalized for another condition for which a COR I indica­
tion exists should have arrhythmia monitoring, including 
possible QTc monitoring for QT­prolonging medication.
Recommendation
1. Efficacy of arrhythmia monitoring for all hos-
pitalized patients receiving chronic hemodi-
alysis is not well established (Class IIb; Level 
of Evidence B).
Do Not Resuscitate/Do Not Intubate
There are no RCTs examining the uses or outcomes of 
continuous electrocardiographic monitoring in patients 
who have requested do not resuscitate (DNR) or do not 
intubate (DNI) status. It is important to note that a re­
quest for DNR or DNI (or both) care limitations provides 
only a very limited narrowing of care, even for severely 
ill patients, and should be clearly delineated from pa­
tients transitioned to comfort­focused end­of­life care 
for whom monitoring would not be indicated. Monitor­
ing in patients with DNR or DNI status would therefore 
be indicated if it would guide therapy congruent with 
the patient’s overall care wishes.
DNR or DNI status does not limit the use of other 
treatments (eg, vasopressors, oxygen support, or elec­
trolyte replacement) and can be suspended when sur­
gery or invasive procedures are planned.407 As a result, 
in patients with DNR or DNI status, clinical judgment 
and evidence from other aspects of these practice 
standards should be used to guide whether specific 
electrocardiographic monitoring is used. Arrhythmia 
monitoring may be considered if findings would trig­
ger interventions consistent with patient wishes (eg, 
rate control if symptomatic); practice standards for 
related conditions could then be applied. Arrhythmia 
monitoring is not recommended for patients when 
data will not be acted on and comfort­focused care 
is the goal. Ischemia monitoring can be useful if the 
patient is a candidate for angiography with temporary 
reversal of DNR status, as well as when electrocardio­
graphic monitoring facilitates medication adjustment 
to promote comfort.
Summary: Other General Medical Patients
There are a variety of patient populations for whom 
clinician judgment is needed to decide whether they 
are appropriate for an ICU, telemetry, or nonmonitored 
unit. The clinician judges whether a patient is stable 
using parameters such as blood pressure, heart rate, 
oxygenation, mental status, and signs and symptoms 
of angina. Certain patient conditions may be appropri­
ate on medical­surgical and telemetry/progressive care/
step­down units versus the ICU, depending on hemo­
dynamic stability. For example, Patient A with a gastro­
intestinal bleed may be very appropriate for a medical 
unit while receiving a transfusion and awaiting endos­
copy. However, Patient B presents with a gastrointes­
tinal bleed and associated SVT to the extent that she 
has lightheadedness and chest pain. She may benefit 
from being in a telemetry/progressive care unit with ar­
rhythmia monitoring, as well as potential continuous 
ST­segment monitoring for demand ischemia if there 
is interprofessional agreement for this. Finally, Patient 
C presents with a gastrointestinal bleed and hemo­
dynamic instability to the extent that she needs vaso­
pressors and thus belongs in an ICU until stabilized. A 
similar approach can be taken by the clinician caring for 
the patient with sepsis, for example, to decide whether 
electrocardiographic monitoring is appropriate.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e315
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Prescribers, nurses, and hospital administrators must 
work cooperatively to identify the appropriate and safe 
level of care for each patient without using electrocar­
diographic monitoring as a surrogate for better staffing 
ratios. It is reasonable to use telemetry monitoring for 
general medical patients who have clinical symptoms 
or electrocardiographic or laboratory abnormalities that 
provide an indication for telemetry as outlined else­
where in these practice standards. However, the utility 
of continuous electrocardiographic monitoring in de­
tecting life­threatening arrhythmias or ischemia in gen­
eral medical patients is uncertain, and a cost­effective 
approach remains to be determined.
SECTION 3: ORGANIZATIONAL 
ASPECTS: ALARM MANAGEMENT, 
EDUCATION OF STAFF, AND 
DOCUMENTATION
In addition to knowing when electrocardiographic 
monitoring is indicated (and when it is not), other con­
siderations are relevant to ensure the effectiveness and 
safety of monitoring. This section covers the following 
as they relate to electrocardiographic monitoring: alarm 
management, education of staff, and documentation.
Alarm Management
Alarm Hazards
The myriad alarm­enabled medical devices in use today, 
coupled with the large number of false or nonaction­
able alarm signals, have created a noisy environment 
prone to patient safety risks. The sources of a large 
proportion of alarm signals in hospitals are electrocar­
diographic monitors. In an observational study, Drew 
et al50 reported a total of >2.5 million unique monitor 
alarms in 5 ICUs over 31 days.
Since 2007, the ECRI Institute has published a 
top 10 health technology hazards list that identifies 
sources of danger involving medical devices and steps 
to minimize the likelihood of adverse patient events. 
Alarm hazards has been at or near the top of this list 
since its inception.48,52,408 The Joint Commission made 
alarm management the focus of a National Patient 
Safety Goal that was phased in between 2014 and 
2016. This should result in major efforts to improve 
alarm management.409
Alarm signals are triggered by either patient or tech­
nical issues. Patient alarms are specific to the clinical 
status of the patient such as arrhythmias or low heart 
rate. Technical alarms are triggered by equipment­re­
lated problems such as impending telemetry battery 
depletion.47 The priority of alarm signals is classified 
according to the seriousness of the problem causing 
the alarm­triggered event. High­priority alarm signals 
require an immediate response; medium priority indi­
cates that a prompt response is necessary; and low­
priority alarm signals indicate that clinician awareness 
is required.
Alarm hazards include an array of problems that may 
occur with alarm­equipped medical devices such as 
electrocardiographic monitors. These interrelated haz­
ards include alarm fatigue, inadequate alarm response, 
and lack of a reliable alarm notification system.
Alarm Fatigue
Alarm fatigue occurs when clinicians are barraged by so 
many false or nonactionable alarm signals that they be­
come desensitized. False alarms occur when there is no 
valid triggering event, whereas nonactionable alarms 
correctly sound but for an event that has no clinical rel­
evance.
Research indicates that 68% to 99% of alarm signals 
are false or nonactionable.50, 200,410–412 The Joint Com­
mission’s Sentinel Event database includes reports of 98 
alarm­related events between January 2009 and June 
2012. Of the 98 reported events, 80 resulted in death, 
13 in permanent loss of function, and 5 in unexpected 
additional care or extended hospital stay.49 From 2005 
to 2008, the US Food and Drug Administration report­
ed 566 deaths linked specifically to monitor alarms.54,413
Medical devices generate enough false and nonac­
tionable alarm signals to cause a reduction in response 
known as the “cry wolf” effect. Alarm signals are de­
signed to interrupt and call attention to problems, but 
if not clinically significant, they are distracting and in­
terfere with the performance of critical tasks. Exces­
sive false and nonactionable alarm signals have led to 
desensitization, such that nurses develop mistrust with 
the alarm system, may take unsafe actions like disabling 
alarm systems,414–416 and are less likely to act on real 
events.414–418
Inadequate Alarm Response
National surveys of healthcare providers indicate that 
false and nonactionable alarms occur frequently, disrupt 
patient care, and reduce trust, thereby causing staff to 
take inappropriate actions such as disabling or ignoring 
alarm signals.417,418 A delayed response to alarm signals 
or no response at all compromises patient safety.419
Alarm response is affected by the rate of exposure 
to nonactionable alarms, perceived alarm urgency, and 
workload conditions. In an observational study using 
video, the response time of nurses to alarm signals in­
creased incrementally as the number of nonactionable 
alarms in the preceding 120 minutes increased.420 Oth­
er research indicated that the probability of respond­
ing to an alarm signal is related to the perceived true 
alarm rate. If an alarm signal is perceived to be reliable 
90% of the time, the response rate will be ≈90%. Con­
versely, if the alarm signal is perceived to be 10% reli­
able, the response rate will be only ≈10%.55 Response 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e316
to alarms improves in low­workload conditions and 
when staff has not developed mistrust for the alarm 
system.416 Nurses adjust the order of their activities by 
evaluating the urgency of the alarm in relation to the 
condition of the patient and do not rely solely on the 
alarm sounding.415
Minimizing nonsignificant alarm signals47,421–425 and 
tailoring acoustic properties of audible alarm signals to 
the urgency of the triggering situation are critical to im­
proving alarm response.426,427
Alarm Notification: Monitor Watcher Versus Medical 
Device Data Systems
Various ancillary alarm communication methods have 
been proposed to ensure that those providing care to 
patients are notified of true and actionable alarms. 
These methods include the use of monitor watchers 
and medical device data systems (MDDSs) that route 
alarms to the care provider’s wireless device using 
alarm algorithms.428–430 The need for human oversight 
in the interpretation of electrocardiographic monitor­
ing data remains as important today as it was with the 
advent of continuous electrocardiographic monitoring 
>50 years ago.1
Funk et al431 demonstrated little to no difference 
in patient outcomes when dedicated monitor watch­
ers were used, although it is important to note that 
this study was conducted 20 years ago. It is unknown 
whether the structural changes in hospital­based 
healthcare delivery involving consolidation into larger 
health systems, trends of higher­acuity patients in the 
non­ICU setting, and an increasing focus on alarm man­
agement in the past 5 to 10 years may alter strategies in 
favor of centralized monitoring with monitor watchers. 
Despite the lack of studies to support the benefit of 
human monitor surveillance, national surveys revealed 
that this alarm notification strategy is used in 47% to 
61% of hospitals.432 Monitor watchers may be based 
on the unit, in a nearby ICU, or in a central remote loca­
tion where monitors are watched from multiple patient 
care units. Methods to communicate from a centralized 
telemetry monitoring area to a bedside caregiver have 
been studied. Use of a voice badge significantly short­
ened the time to first contact, time to completion, and 
rate of closed­loop communication, resulting in more 
timely bedside care.433
The number of waveforms a monitor watcher can 
effectively and safely observe is not known, although 
a recent study used simulation to compare response 
time of monitor watchers to VF over 5 different pa­
tient loads (16, 24, 32, 40, and 48 patients). As patient 
loads increased, response times increased significantly. 
Frequency of failure to meet a response time goal of 
<20 seconds was significantly higher in the 48­patient 
condition than in all other conditions.434 The number 
of waveforms observed is also dependent on the lay­
out and location of the screens, the type of monitor­
ing and alarm notification system in use, alarm burden, 
and whether the staff is expected to watch more than 
electrocardiographic waveforms (eg, oxygen satura­
tion measured by pulse oximetry [Spo2], end­tidal CO2, 
blood pressure).
Potential monitor watchers have included nurses, 
monitor technicians, nursing assistants, and unit secre­
taries. The minimum educational preparation of moni­
tor watchers, the content and length of orientation, 
and the frequency of ongoing education and compe­
tency evaluations vary widely.432
An MDDS, also known as middleware, can integrate 
multiple alarms from various medical devices such as 
monitors, patient call systems, ventilators, and infusion 
pumps. An MDDS uses alarm escalation rules that al­
low closed­loop communication. This alarm notification 
system sends alarms from a primary to an ancillary no­
tification device such as a telephone, pager, or voice 
badge. It uses algorithms with slight delays to allow 
alarm autocorrection before routing the alarm to the 
designated caregiver. Many false alarms are caused by 
patient movement or staff manipulation of the patient 
when positioning or bathing. The slight alarm delay al­
lows caregivers in the room to silence the alarm before 
it is sent through the ancillary notification device, thus 
reducing the number of false and nonactionable alarms 
sent. However, before any ancillary notification system 
is implemented, alarms must be properly managed to 
reduce the alarm burden.430
Methods to Reduce Alarm Hazards
Research on methods to reduce alarm hazards is in its in­
fancy. In its 2014 National Patient Safety Goals, The Joint 
Commission emphasized that hospitals must identify the 
most important alarms to manage on the basis of their 
own internal situations.409 In response, hospitals are un­
dertaking quality improvement (QI) projects to determine 
the best ways to reduce alarm hazards in their specific 
environments. The results of some of these QI projects 
have been published.47,430,435–437 Often in QI projects, 
hospitals have bundled their alarm interventions, thus 
making it impossible to identify which intervention influ­
enced the outcome.47,430,435,437 The following approaches 
to reducing alarm hazards should be considered.
Interdisciplinary Committee
Interdisciplinary teams have been identified both in QI 
projects47,435,436,438–440 and by experts441 as essential for 
addressing alarm management. Typically, teams are 
composed of nurses, physicians, clinical engineers, 
quality and safety experts, information technology pro­
fessionals, and senior hospital leadership.47,440 Some 
teams also include a representative from the monitoring 
equipment manufacturer438 and families of patients.436 
In an integrative review, an interdisciplinary alarm man­
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e317
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
agement committee was identified as key to selecting 
alarm management strategies.442
Recommendation
1. An interdisciplinary committee should be 
instituted to address alarm management 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
Alarm Data Assessment
A monitor alarm assessment includes a collection of 
alarm signal data to identify the types of alarm conditions 
that occur within the monitoring system.47,440 This can 
be done through an MDDS with annotation,50 by direct 
observation,423 or via video recording.410,443 The MDDS 
can produce electronic reports of alarm data in multiple 
formats such as in tables or graphs. It can handle an 
unlimited number of alarms, which can be sorted by 
frequency and duration and by unit, bed, or time. The 
benefit of direct observation and video recording is the 
ability to see actions taken by the caregiver in response 
to alarm signals and to determine whether an alarm 
signal is false or nonactionable. Assessment of alarm 
data is essential in the evaluation of the effect of alarm 
reduction interventions.
Recommendation
1. Data should be used to guide decisions 
about alarm management (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C).
Default Alarm Presets
Default settings for monitor alarms are activated by 
the alarm system without operator action any time the 
monitor is turned on or a new patient is admitted. De­
fault monitor alarm settings are preset by the manufac­
turer but with most systems can be changed. Reviewing 
alarm data is essential to standardizing monitor alarm 
default settings. Alarm default settings need to be ex­
amined carefully to eliminate nonactionable alarms such 
as some PVC alarms and duplicative alarms, for exam­
ple, AF and irregular heart rate. Studies have indicated 
that adding a short delay before the alarm activates can 
eliminate a significant number of nonactionable alarms, 
especially related to Spo2 and ST­segment alarms.50,423,440 
Standardizing monitor alarm default settings across sim­
ilar populations (eg, intensive care, telemetry, pediatrics, 
neonatal) is a reasonable strategy in alarm management 
and has been successfully used in QI projects.440
Recommendation
1. Manufacturer alarm default settings should 
be evaluated and adjusted as needed accord-
ing to the population being monitored (Class I; 
Level of Evidence C).
Alarm Customization
Monitor alarm customization, based on individual pa­
tient need, has been shown to decrease the number 
of nonactionable alarm signals.47,422,440 In a QI project, 
revising default alarm settings, customizing alarms on 
the basis of patient need, and providing nursing educa­
tion resulted in a 43% reduction in high­priority alarm 
signals. This QI project focused on the most frequent, 
duplicative, and staff­perceived “nuisance” alarms.47
Recommendation
1. Protocols should be developed that encour-
age nurses to adjust alarms for individual 
patients 
within 
established 
parameters 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
Skin Preparation
Electric signals are transmitted via the epidermis to 
reach the electrodes that sense their signal. As the 
epidermal cells mature, they begin to degenerate. 
The stratum corneum sheds millions of skin cells daily 
and may be the source of some problems with the 
quality of electrocardiographic tracings. Removing 
this outer layer is important because the dead skin 
cells contain dirt and oil that may increase skin imped­
ance and compromise the cardiac signal.444 Conduc­
tivity of the signal can be enhanced by proper skin 
preparation before electrocardiographic electrodes 
are placed.444,445
The purpose of skin preparation is to cleanse the area 
to optimize signal transfer. Research,446 QI projects,435,437 
and expert opinion445,447 have identified proper skin 
preparation before electrocardiographic electrode ap­
plication to optimize conductivity. The skin is prepared 
by cleansing the area and wiping it with a dry wash­
cloth.435,447 Alcohol should not be used because it dries 
the skin and may diminish electric flow.447 Melendez 
and Pino446 showed that interference was reduced with 
proper skin preparation as one of their interventions. 
However, they did not specifically identify their mode 
of skin preparation. In addition, clipping excessive hair 
before electrode application contributed to optimizing 
signal acquisition.435,447
Recommendation
1. The skin should be prepared before electrode 
placement (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
Electrocardiographic Electrodes and Lead Wires
Experts agree that old or dried electrodes, motion ar­
tifact, and poor skin­electrode contact trigger moni­
tor alarms and result in disruption in patient monitor­
ing. One published QI project demonstrated that daily 
electrocardiographic electrode changes decreased the 
number of alarms per monitored bed by 46% in both 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e318
a cardiology care unit and a progressive care unit.435 In 
another study that included an alarm annotation proto­
col, only 9% of the false arrhythmia alarms were rated 
as having poor signal quality.50 The integrity of monitor­
ing can be maintained by using fresh electrodes that 
are opened immediately before use. Results of a recent 
single­center comparative­effectiveness study revealed 
that disposable electrocardiographic lead wires were 
associated with fewer technical alarms than reusable 
lead wires.448
Recommendation
1. Evaluation of the integrity of electrodes and 
lead wires and change of electrodes should 
be done at a minimum of every 48 hours 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
Avoiding Unnecessary Electrocardiographic Monitoring
Despite the clearly defined electrocardiographic moni­
toring criteria in the previous AHA practice standards,1 
telemetry monitoring is overused. Studies that exam­
ined appropriate electrocardiographic monitoring, on 
the basis of the 2004 AHA practice standards criteria, 
found that 35%449,450 to 43%56 of patients being moni­
tored in non­ICU areas had no clinical indications for 
doing so. In addition, baseline data from the PULSE trial 
(Practical Use of the Latest Standards of Electrocardiog­
raphy) revealed that 85% of patients in cardiac units 
with no indication for monitoring were on a monitor.451 
Telemetry discontinuation protocols following specific 
criteria for monitor discontinuation have been used 
to minimize false and nonactionable alarms.452 Others 
have integrated the AHA practice standards1 into their 
electronic ordering system on the basis of the right indi­
cation for the right duration and found no apparent in­
crease in mortality, cardiac arrest, activation of the rapid 
response team, or life­threatening arrhythmias.59,453 Af­
ter an intervention consisting of education and strat­
egies to implement and sustain change in practice in 
the PULSE trial, the proportion of appropriate telemetry 
monitoring increased significantly.6
Policies and Procedures
Policies and procedures to guide practice for alarm 
management are key to reducing alarm hazards and 
are mandated as part of The Joint Commission’s Na­
tional Patient Safety Goal.409 Policies and procedures 
should include patient issues (eg, alarm limit de­
faults, criteria for customizing alarm limits according 
to patient condition) and system issues (eg, timing 
of telemetry battery replacement, who replaces the 
batteries).
The 2014 National Patient Safety Goal409 requires 
policies and procedures on the following:
• Clinically appropriate settings for alarm signals
• When alarm signals can be disabled
• When alarm parameters can be changed
• Who in the organization has the authority to set 
alarm parameters
• Who in the organization has the authority to 
change alarm parameters
• Who in the organization has the authority to set 
alarm parameters to “off”
• Monitoring and responding to alarm signals
• Checking individual alarm signals for accurate set­
tings, proper operation, and detectability
Education
Education about the purpose and proper operation 
of alarm systems is part of the National Patient Safety 
Goal.409 Education has also been identified in QI proj­
ects47,439,440,454 and by experts as a critical part of the 
process of alarm management. Education about alarm 
management is beneficial on both an initial and ongo­
ing basis for nurses and physicians.417,440,441 Ongoing 
education should be budgeted when monitoring sys­
tems are purchased.
Device Improvements
Although clinicians bear significant responsibility for 
reducing alarm hazards, monitor manufacturers are 
responsible for making monitors more intuitive, using 
principles of human factors engineering. In discussing 
the results of their large observational study, Drew et 
al50 suggested the use of all available electrocardio­
graphic leads to identify leads without artifact and 
those with adequate QRS amplitude, prompts to help 
in customizing alarm settings, and delays for certain 
parameters before alarms are triggered. Some newer 
monitors consider other parameters before alarming 
such as considering blood pressure before alarming for 
asystole.421 By incorporating information from other 
parameters, a multiparameter alarm system can deter­
mine a more reasonable hypothesis of the cause of an 
alarm and suppress false alarms.
The ability to perform continuous ST­segment mon­
itoring is limited by current electrocardiographic mon­
itoring equipment. False and nonactionable alarms 
from ST­segment monitoring could be reduced by 
monitor enhancements such as adding customizable 
delays for ST­segment alarms to allow autocorrection 
of momentary threshold breaches caused by move­
ment or position changes. Other potential improve­
ments include redesigning ST­segment alarms so that 
the monitor alarms only when ST­segment changes 
occur in 2 contiguous leads and adding an option for 
ST­segment alarms to be visual (low priority, flashing) 
but not audible.
Although upgrading to the latest monitoring sys­
tems with enhanced features has significant financial 
implications, it may need to be a priority if it can re­
duce alarm fatigue and enhance patient safety. How­
ever, to avoid further alarm fatigue, caution needs 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e319
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
to be taken before alarm notifications are added to 
electrocardiographic monitors (eg, specific respiratory 
alarms that duplicate those on ventilators) without the 
consensus of clinicians. It is wise to pilot test upgraded 
monitors before fully incorporating them into the entire 
hospital system.
Pediatric Considerations
As is the case in units serving adult patients, alarm sig­
nals from electrocardiographic monitors are also ubiqui­
tous in pediatric units, and most are false or nonaction­
able.455 A number of issues unique to the monitoring of 
pediatric patients may lead to excessive false or nonac­
tionable alarms. Pediatric units care for patients whose 
ages range from birth to young adulthood, resulting 
in a heterogeneous population physically, intellectually, 
and emotionally. Further confounding the situation, pa­
tients may have an underlying condition in which their 
developmental age is disparate from their chronologi­
cal age. An infant or young child may have a develop­
mentally appropriate substantial elevation in heart rate 
when approached by an unfamiliar person or confront­
ed by an unfamiliar situation. In addition, as the child 
attempts to avoid an uncomfortable situation, monitor 
electrode dislodgement or movement artifact may oc­
cur. These developmentally appropriate responses may 
trigger a false alarm that then has to be evaluated.
Alarm systems have preset default settings that are 
broadly based on age.455,456 These default settings have 
to be customized to the patient and evaluated fre­
quently to minimize false alarms and to maximize the 
detection of clinically relevant arrhythmias.436 Dandoy 
et al436 described a QI project to test a team­based in­
tervention to reduce alarms on a pediatric unit. They 
reported that their intervention reduced the median 
number of alarms per patient­day from 180 to 40. In 
addition to customizing alarm settings, they recom­
mend that electrodes be replaced daily with a pain­free 
approach and monitors be discontinued when no lon­
ger clinically indicated.
Recommendations for Further Research
More research focusing on signal quality, networking 
of medical devices at the bedside, diagnostic alarms 
and predictive warnings, usability of alarm systems, 
creation of annotated clinical databases for testing, 
standardization efforts, patient monitoring in non­ICU 
and non–step­down unit settings, ancillary alarm noti­
fication, and education of healthcare providers is rec­
ommended.454 Research also needs to focus on which 
interventions will reduce false or nonactionable alarm 
conditions and the best approach to increasing the 
specificity of an alarm condition without an unaccept­
able loss of sensitivity.454
Arrhythmia algorithms are considered proprietary 
by monitor manufacturers. However, biomedical engi­
neers and clinicians need to have input into the condi­
tions that will elicit alarm signals. Manufacturers should 
make available the sensitivity and specificity of their ar­
rhythmia algorithms. Future research and development 
by manufacturers should include multiparameter alarms 
(eg, consider blood pressure or Spo2 before alarming 
for asystole), use of short delays to allow alarm signal 
autocorrection, and autocustomization of alarm limits 
according to patient status.
Consideration of the design of future research is 
critical. RCTs are needed. Comparative­effectiveness tri­
als would be the next step after RCTs. Studies must be 
interdisciplinary, emphasizing collaboration across in­
dustry, engineers, and clinicians. The focus needs to be 
on meaningful patient outcomes rather than just on the 
reduction of the number of alarms. Statistical power 
may be lacking to detect the effect of interventions on 
mortality and sentinel events. Large multicenter studies 
and appropriate surrogates for outcomes are necessary.
Education of Staff
Education is a critical aspect of the process in electro­
cardiographic monitoring.1,39,447,457,458 Adequate educa­
tion is crucial for correct interpretation of electrocar­
diographic waveforms and data and proper care of 
patients undergoing continuous electrocardiographic 
monitoring. Incorrect interpretation can result in un­
necessary diagnostic or surgical interventions.5,38
Published reports note that both physicians and 
nurses have performed poorly in the assessment of 
rhythms from 12­lead ECGs or from continuous electro­
cardiographic monitoring.458–461 Sobering findings were 
reported by Viskin et al,462 who asked 902 physicians 
from 12 countries to measure QT and to calculate QTc 
in 4 sample ECGs. For the 2 electrocardiographic sam­
ples with prolonged QTc, >80% of arrhythmia experts 
were able to calculate the QTc correctly compared with 
<50% of general cardiologists and <40% of noncardi­
ologists. Fewer than 25% of general cardiologists and 
noncardiologists were able to classify all QT intervals 
correctly as either long or normal. In an examination 
of cardiology versus noncardiology fellows in interpret­
ing 12­lead ECGs, Novotny et al463 found that although 
the rate of correct diagnosis was more frequent by car­
diology fellows (70.1%) than noncardiology fellows 
(55.0%), it was still inadequate.
Among nurses in a quasi­experimental study to im­
prove QT­interval monitoring, Pickham et al458 found 
that at baseline 94% of nurses were unable to calculate 
the QTc interval. After education, this skill improved, 
but still only half were able to calculate QTc correctly. 
In a later multisite, quasi­experimental study to improve 
QT­interval monitoring, Sandau et al464 augmented on­
line education with computerized enhancements to 
electronic health records to notify nurses of patients on 
QT­prolonging medications and computerized calcula­
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e320
tion of QTc on the nurse entering QT and heart rate, 
resulting in significantly improved QTc documentation. 
In the PULSE trial, accuracy of documented arrhythmia 
interpretation by nurses improved from 82% correct to 
97% after an interactive online electrocardiographic 
monitoring education program in the experimental 
group.6 Both nurses465,466 and physicians467,468 report a 
significant increase in knowledge with an educational 
intervention for electrocardiographic monitoring.
Variable results are seen with pediatricians inter­
preting 12­lead ECGs. Wathen et al469 found an 87% 
concordance rate between emergency room pediatri­
cians and pediatric cardiologists. However, in exam­
ining accuracy rates with pediatric residents, Snyder 
et al470 demonstrated no difference between senior 
pediatric residents and interns, with complex arrhyth­
mias being correctly interpreted only 28% (interns) 
to 45% (pediatric residents) of the time. Crocetti and 
Thompson471 found that pediatric residents who com­
pleted a pediatric cardiology rotation were better able 
to correctly interpret ECGs than those who had not 
(P=0.001).
The ACC established standards for training fellows 
in clinical cardiology for ECG and ambulatory ECG.472 
The standards are based on the 6 general competencies 
endorsed by the Accreditation Council for Graduate 
Medical Education and the American Board of Medi­
cal Specialties and endorsed by the American Board 
of Internal Medicine with recommended time points 
within the fellowship training for the competency to 
be achieved, including 3000 to 3500 ECGs read within 
36 months.472
Although such competencies do not currently ex­
ist for nurses, patient care needs on each unit should 
guide the clinical leadership team to identify the elec­
trocardiographic monitoring priorities and to establish 
content and processes for baseline and ongoing educa­
tion.447 For example, a unit in which patients include 
those undergoing ICD placement should have required 
initial education and ongoing updates as technology 
changes to support knowledge to assess both patient 
and device appropriately (ie, including recognition of 
antitachycardia pacing, overpacing, or underpacing).
Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring is per­
formed in a wide variety of inpatient clinical areas and 
managed by nurses, with the assistance of monitor 
watchers in some facilities. Although it is recommended 
that minimal electrocardiographic monitoring competen­
cies be established for healthcare providers who monitor 
patients, published competencies or educational stan­
dards for nurses or monitor watchers are lacking.447,459
Elements to include in education related to electro­
cardiographic monitoring include the following:
1. Goals of monitoring, that is, arrhythmia, ischemia, 
and prolonged QTc. For example, for patients in 
the early phase of ACS who are on continuous 
ST­segment ischemia monitoring, the goal is to 
enable the clinician to identify myocardial ischemia 
as soon as possible to promote rapid implemen­
tation of reperfusion strategies and to optimize 
patient outcomes. If the detection of ischemia is 
the primary goal of monitoring, then nurses should 
know to select the monitor lead(s) most likely to 
reveal ischemic changes, in addition to, or instead 
of, leads likely to be diagnostic of arrhythmias.
2. Electrode 
placement 
and 
skin 
preparation. 
Although placement of electrodes is a critical 
aspect of education because misplaced electrodes 
can result in misdiagnosis and inappropriate treat­
ment,39,447,473–478 it is commonly done incorrectly. 
Studies have demonstrated that misplaced elec­
trode placement of hospitalized patients ranged 
between 20% and 80%.6,479 Among patients in 
the PULSE trial,6 correct placement of the pre­
cordial electrode (defined as being in any of the 
correct V1–V6 sites) was only 20% at baseline but 
improved to 59% immediately after the interactive 
online educational intervention and to 65% 15 
months later. Proper preparation of the skin before 
placement of electrodes and regular replacement 
of electrodes should also be part of education to 
improve electrocardiographic monitoring and to 
minimize false alarms resulting from artifact.
3. Interpreting electrocardiographic waveforms and 
data. 
Interpreting 
waveforms 
and 
data 
includes 
under­
standing normal and abnormal rhythms (Table 8), 
general electrophysiological concepts (Table 9), and 
specific monitoring skills (Table 10).1,447,460,480 The 
content of electrocardiographic monitoring educa­
tion needs to match the nature and complexity of 
the patient population served. Unit nursing leaders 
and educators are responsible for annually assessing 
the content of ongoing education on the basis 
of the electrocardiographic monitoring needs of 
patients in their care.
4. Appropriate response to an electrocardiographic 
abnormality.39,447,457,481 The appropriate response 
to an observed electrocardiographic abnormal­
ity will differ depending the team members, that 
is, physician, advanced practice nurse, physician 
assistant, staff nurse, or a monitor watcher, and 
their scope of practice.447,457 For example, for a 
patient with new AF, a monitor watcher would 
inform the staff nurse, who would assess the 
patient’s hemodynamic status and laboratory val­
ues. The nurse would then notify the physician, 
advanced practice nurse, or physician assistant, 
who would take appropriate action. Education 
also should include when to call a rapid response 
team or a “code blue.” Case studies appropri­
ate for the type of clinician may be helpful in 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e321
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
teaching the appropriate response to an observed 
abnormality.39,481
Education about electrocardiographic monitoring 
should be included in orientation and on an ongoing 
basis, with both didactic content and clinically based 
hands­on practice. Education should be matched to the 
complexity of the monitoring needs of the patient pop­
ulation served.39,447 However, no established standards 
related to content breadth or depth or duration of a 
course exist. Formal tests to determine knowledge and 
skill readiness are usually institution specific; they are 
rarely published with reports of validity or reliability. Go­
odridge et al459 described their pilot study that resulted 
in cessation of medical­surgical nurses providing elec­
trocardiographic monitoring because of the low level of 
accuracy of interpretation of cardiac rhythms. Although 
some hospitals use unlicensed technicians to watch 
monitors, evidence related to the appropriate education 
and evaluation of their knowledge and skill is lacking.
Because education has an impact on cost and time, 
e­learning has been investigated in addition to face­
to­face learning. Ongoing education was evaluated in 
the PULSE trial in which experienced nurses working on 
cardiac units completed an interactive online electrocar­
diographic monitoring education program that covered 
the essentials of electrocardiographic monitoring and 
arrhythmia, ischemia, and QT­interval monitoring. Mean 
scores on a 20­item validated online test were low at 
baseline (49.2% correct) but improved significantly to 
70.2% correct after the intervention.6 Alternatively, in­
vestigators studying the best method to teach second­
year medical students in their introductory class on 
electrocardiographic material randomized “near­peer” 
teaching (physicians in their second postgraduate year 
using a 1­hour PowerPoint presentation) and e­learning 
(including short multiple­choice assessments).482 Al­
though both groups increased knowledge, the near­
peer group scored significantly higher (84%) than the e­
learning group (74.5%). A face­to­face component may 
be important for students without prior knowledge of 
ECG, whereas e­learning may be appropriate for build­
Table 8. Education* Related to Specific Abnormalities 
on ECG
Normal rhythms
 Sinus rhythm
 Sinus bradycardia
 Sinus arrhythmia
 Sinus tachycardia
Intraventricular conduction defects
 Right and left BBB
 Aberrant ventricular conduction
Bradyarrhythmias
 Inappropriate sinus bradycardia
 Sinus node pause or arrest
 Nonconducted atrial premature beats
 Junctional rhythm
 Atrioventricular blocks
  First degree
  Second degree
    Mobitz I (Wenckebach)
    Mobitz II
    Advanced (≥2:1)
  Third degree (complete heart block)
 Asystole, pulseless electric activity
 Sino­ventricular rhythm (eg, in severe hyperkalemia)
Tachyarrhythmias
 Supraventricular
   
Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia, atrioventricular reentrant 
tachycardia
  AF
  Atrial flutter
  Multifocal atrial tachycardia
  Atrial tachycardia 
  Accelerated junctional rhythm
 Ventricular
  Accelerated ventricular rhythm
  Nonsustained/sustained monomorphic VT
  Nonsustained/sustained polymorphic VT
  Prolonged QT interval–associated ventricular ectopy, TdP
  VF
Premature complexes
 Supraventricular (atrial, junctional)
 Ventricular
Pacemaker electrocardiography
 Failure to capture
 Failure to pace (no pacemaker output)
 Failure to sense
 Failure to capture both ventricles in biventricular pacing
(Continued 
)
Electrocardiographic abnormalities of acute myocardial ischemia
 ST­segment elevation/depression
 T­wave inversion
Muscle or other artifacts simulating arrhythmias
AF indicates atrial fibrillation; BBB, bundle­branch block; TdP
, torsade de 
pointes; VF, ventricular fibrillation; and VT, ventricular tachycardia. 
*The content of electrocardiographic monitoring education needs to match 
the nature and complexity of the patient population served. Unit nursing 
leaders and educators are responsible for annually assessing the content of 
ongoing education on the basis of the electrocardiographic monitoring needs 
of patients in their care.
Updated from Table 4 in Drew et al.1 Copyright © 2004, American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Table 8. Continued
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e322
ing on existing knowledge; however, further study is 
needed. Knowledge can be enhanced by collaborative 
activities such as preceptorships, skill validations, and 
case studies,16,481–486 and studies have demonstrated no 
differences in knowledge or confidence with face­to­
face classes versus a hybrid approach (ie, online course 
combined with face­to­face classes).482,487,488
Hospital, service line, or unit­based nurse educa­
tors or clinical nurse specialists can provide this edu­
cation.485,487,488 In addition, the manufacturer of the 
monitors used should provide education related to 
the equipment. With the purchase of new monitoring 
equipment, the contract with the manufacturer should 
include both initial and ongoing education.
Recommendation
1. Initial and ongoing education for correct 
interpretation of electrocardiographic wave-
forms and data, congruent with type of 
patients being cared for, is recommended 
(Class I; Level of Evidence A).
Documentation
Very little research has been published on documenta­
tion related to electrocardiographic monitoring, so the 
following section is based primarily on expert opinion 
and contemporary practice. Documentation of the ECG 
is critical for diagnosis and to guide subsequent treat­
ment. All rhythms that require immediate attention 
should be preserved as actual tracings; written diagnos­
tic statements alone are not adequate.1 Documentation 
of actual electrocardiographic tracings so that they are 
immediately available is particularly important as hospi­
tals have transitioned to electronic health records.
Appropriate and timely documentation of electro­
cardiographic waveforms is needed as a record of the 
rhythm and the clinical context. For example, as dis­
cussed in the syncope section, occurrence of symptoms 
with a documented arrhythmia on monitoring is con­
sidered a gold standard for the diagnosis of arrhythmia. 
 NSTEMI
  
Transient myocardial ischemia (including coronary spasm and effects of 
body position changes mimicking ischemia)
Syncope
Effects of common antiarrhythmic drugs, rate control vs rhythm control
NSTEMI indicates non–ST­segment–elevation myocardial infarction. 
*The content of electrocardiographic monitoring education needs to match 
the nature and complexity of the patient population served. Unit nursing 
leaders and educators are responsible for annually assessing the content of 
ongoing education on the basis of the electrocardiographic monitoring needs 
of patients in their care.
Updated from Table 5 in Drew et al.1 Copyright © 2004, American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Table 9. Continued
Table 9. Education* Related to General 
Electrophysiological Concepts
Automaticity
 Physiological pacemakers
 Overdrive suppression
Excitation
 Refractory periods
Conduction
 Conduction velocity
 Concealed conduction
 Anterograde and retrograde conduction
Sinus node physiology
 Normal ranges of sinus rate with age
 Effects of autonomic tone
   Vasovagal reactions
   Resting/sleep
   Activity/exercise
 Effects of drugs
Atrioventricular node physiology
 Effects of atrial rate
 Effects of autonomic tone
  Resting/sleep
  Activity/exercise
 Effects of drugs
Wide vs narrow QRS complexes
QT/U intervals
 Relation to rate
 Sex differences
 Drug effects
 Pause dependency
Observations with arrhythmias
 Sustained vs nonsustained
 Monomorphic vs polymorphic
 Hemodynamically stable vs unstable
 Symptomatic vs asymptomatic
 Association with heart disease vs no heart disease
Hemodynamic effects of arrhythmias
 Influence of rate
 Influence of heart disease
 Influence of atrioventricular synchrony
 Influence of left ventricular synchrony
Implantable devices
 Function of electronic pacemakers, including biventricular pacemakers
 Function of automatic defibrillators
Acute myocardial ischemia
  
ST­segment elevation (anterior, septal, inferior, lateral, right ventricular; 
ST recovery indicative of successful reperfusion; reperfusion arrhythmias; 
intermittent reperfusion; leads on the ECG related to occlusion of 3 
main coronary arteries)
(Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e323
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
However, asymptomatic findings on monitoring, includ­
ing asystole >3 seconds, Mobitz type 2 atrioventricular 
block, ventricular arrhythmias, or rapid supraventricular 
arrhythmias, when associated with syncope at other 
times, have also been considered diagnostic.271 For some 
patients, an arrhythmia may occur only within the first 
few minutes of presenting to the ED. Furthermore, this 
information may provide vital documentation for insur­
ance reimbursement if an implantable device is indicat­
ed. The patient’s activity, symptoms, and blood pressure 
should be documented with the waveform strip, which 
will provide valuable information about a patient’s toler­
ance of the arrhythmia and activity or will be used to 
guide medication adjustment or other intervention. If 
the documentation of electrocardiographic waveforms 
is done by a monitoring technician, it should be con­
firmed by a qualified nurse. Care must also be taken 
to verify that the lead identified on the waveform strip 
accurately reflects the true electrode configuration on 
the patient’s chest. This may facilitate differentiation of 
aberrant conduction from PVCs.7 If electrocardiographic 
monitoring is performed remotely, a system should be 
in place for routine verification of electrode placement.
Some monitors are equipped to monitor only 1 pre­
cordial lead at a time but allow the nurse to manually 
change the position of the precordial electrode on the 
chest to any of the 6 precordial leads. If this change is 
made, the nurse must document the new lead selected 
on the waveforms printed. Otherwise, it may appear 
that the patient had a sudden change from a nega­
tive (ie, V1) to a positive (ie, V6) QRS deflection. Correct 
documentation of the lead used in monitoring is vital to 
correct interpretation.
Typical expectations at hospitals include the follow­
ing to be documented: rhythm, rate, PR interval, QRS 
duration, and QT, as well as whether they are within 
established parameters. Some hospital protocols expect 
QTc documentation for all patients. The writing group 
recommends that select patients receive QTc monitor­
ing (Table 6). Documentation of a patient’s waveform 
strip is typically expected on admission, on transfer to 
a monitored unit, and every 8 hours. Additional docu­
mentation of a waveform strip is typically expected for 
any significant change in the patient’s rhythm or hemo­
dynamic status, including before and after cardiover­
sion.1 The waveform strip should be accessible to all 
healthcare providers.
Thorough documentation for a significant arrhyth­
mia includes events before and during the arrhyth­
mia (eg, defibrillation, insertion of subclavian central 
line), signs and symptoms that may be related to the 
arrhythmia, vital signs, and interventions with patient 
response. This documentation must be available to all 
healthcare providers in a timely fashion so that a con­
sulting cardiologist, for example, is able to access the 
electrocardiographic waveform as a piece of compre­
hensive assessment to guide the patient’s care.
Additional documentation is important for patients 
with pacemakers and ICDs, including documentation of 
any improper sensing or failure to capture, as well as an 
estimated percentage of patient’s reliance on atrial or 
ventricular pacing. It is important to have easy access to 
the patient’s brand and type of device (pacemaker, ICD) 
and settings to be able to discern whether the device is 
functioning appropriately (eg, according to lower rate 
limits, antitachycardia pacing capability). Temporary 
pacemakers require more detailed documentation be­
cause adjustments to settings may be made from shift 
to shift. Documentation should include patient’s skin at 
site of transcutaneous patches or wire exit sites.
As electronic health record systems evolve, methods 
to save waveforms will vary. Some will seamlessly inte­
grate with electrocardiographic monitors. For these, the 
nurse will select an electronic waveform to be electroni­
cally transferred into the electronic health record. As 
Table 10. Education* Related to Specific Monitoring 
Skills
Operation of monitoring system used in hospital unit (arrhythmia, ST­
segment, and QTc monitoring)
Recognition of limitations of computer algorithms
Proper skin preparation before applying electrodes
Landmarks for and importance of accurate electrode placement
Setting heart rate, ST­segment alarm parameters appropriately
Importance and procedure for customizing alarm parameters to unit and 
patient needs
Measurement of heart rate
Measurement of intervals (use of manual and electronic 
electrocardiographic calipers)
Diagnosis of specific rhythms, recognition of atrial activity, evaluation of 
pauses
Recording of standard 12­lead ECG from monitor, including moving limb 
lead wires from electrodes on torso to electrodes on limbs
Recording of atrial electrograms from postoperative epicardial wires 
(including electrical safety)
Ability to intervene (unit protocols for responding to, reporting, and 
documenting) for:
 Defibrillation/cardioversion
 Patient with bradycardia
 Patient with tachycardia
 Patient with syncope
 Patient with cardiac arrest
 Patient with implanted device (new or chronic)
 Patient with temporary transvenous pacemaker
 Patient with transcutaneous pacemaker
*The content of electrocardiographic monitoring education needs to match 
the nature and complexity of the patient population served. Unit nursing 
leaders and educators are responsible for annually assessing the content of 
ongoing education on the basis of the electrocardiographic monitoring needs 
of patients in their care.
Updated from Table 6 in Drew et al.1 Copyright © 2004, American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e324
with any computer­generated diagnostic interpretation 
of an ECG, computer­generated labels of arrhythmias 
must be verified by the nurse. However, with many cur­
rent electronic health record systems, personnel must 
print out waveform strips from the monitors and tape 
a paper copy into a paper chart in a format that can 
then be electronically scanned into patient medical re­
cords on a shift­to­shift basis. Similarly, portable moni­
tor/defibrillator machines used in electric cardioversion 
or emergency situations print out paper electrocardio­
graphic strips; it is critical that these strips be quickly 
and efficiently transferred onto a paper chart and 
scanned per protocol into an electronic health record. 
When a waveform strip is obtained for documentation, 
care should be taken to verify that voltage standardiza­
tion and paper speed are visible on the strip.
Other considerations for documentation are depen­
dent on the type of electrocardiographic monitor used. 
Many monitor systems have waveforms stored as full 
disclosure, meaning the clinician can view waveforms 
from several leads over the past several hours, allow­
ing identification of when conversion from AF to sinus 
rhythm occurred, for example. The documentation of 
this event from full disclosure is helpful for evaluat­
ing the effects of an antiarrhythmic medication over 
time. Alternatively, documentation from full disclosure 
memory may be helpful for evaluating for ST­segment 
changes during a specific time period at night when a 
patient experienced chest pain but did not tell the nurse 
until morning. Finally, a 12­lead ECG obtained through 
a continuous electrocardiographic monitoring system 
should be clearly documented as such to avoid being 
mistaken for a standard 12­lead ECG obtained from a 
free­standing electrocardiographic machine.
Specific guidelines for frequency of ST­segment and 
QTc documentation have already been provided in this 
update to practice standards (Tables 3 and 6).
SECTION 4: IMPLEMENTATION OF 
PRACTICE STANDARDS
The discussion of implementation of practice standards 
into routine clinical care has 2 major aspects: the find­
ings from past studies evaluating implementation of 
electrocardiographic monitoring practice standards and 
practical considerations for clinicians as they work to 
implement practice standards. Designs of future re­
search studies that implement practice standards re­
quire thoughtful interprofessional collaboration to facil­
itate rapid translation of research into clinical practice.
Findings From Past Studies of 
Electrocardiographic Monitoring
The number of published evaluations of the original 
1991 ACC/Emergency Cardiac Care Committee489 and 
AHA1 electrocardiographic monitoring standards has 
increased and has included QI projects,490 intervention­
al research of electrocardiographic monitoring guide­
lines,56–59,449,491 and more recently, an RCT.6 These stud­
ies have addressed electrocardiographic monitoring for 
chest pain, association of practice standards with pa­
tient outcomes, practice standard use, and outcomes 
evaluated in studies of electrocardiographic monitor­
ing.
Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Chest Pain
Early reports included overuse of electrocardiographic 
monitoring in the setting of chest pain in low­risk pa­
tients, resulting in a shortage of monitored beds and 
financial resources.492 Several investigators reported 
that the use of validated risk stratification tools could 
identify which patients admitted for possible ACS could 
be considered low or very low risk; they advised that 
electrocardiographic monitoring was not necessary for 
these patients.106,492,493
Association of Practice Standards With Patient 
Outcomes
Fålun et al58 evaluated the appropriateness and out­
comes of telemetry use according to the 2004 practice 
standards1 by evaluating the frequency and type of ar­
rhythmias in patients in each of the 3 CORs for moni­
toring. They found an overall arrhythmia rate of 33% 
(COR I, 43%; COR II, 28%; COR III, 47%). Change in 
management occurred in 25% of COR I patients, 14% 
of COR II patients, and 29% of COR III patients. These 
rates of change in care management were higher than 
the 7% to 8% reported in other studies.491,494 Fålun 
et al58 recommended revision of the 2004 practice 
standards1 on the basis of their finding that nearly half 
of COR III patients experienced arrhythmia events and 
one third of these events resulted in changes in care 
management. This may be related in part to the clas­
sification of patients with syncope in COR III per 2004 
standards. The current writing group gives a COR I rec­
ommendation for arrhythmia monitoring for at least 24 
hours for patients who, on the basis of presentation 
characteristics, are admitted for syncope with suspect­
ed cardiac origin. For those patients admitted for treat­
ment of syncope with an identified cause, such patho­
genesis should guide the use of arrhythmia monitoring.
Studies of the Use of Practice Standards for 
Electrocardiographic Monitoring
Among published reports (Table 11) of studies evaluat­
ing the use of practice standards for electrocardiographic 
monitoring,1 the largest was the multisite PULSE trial.6 
The PULSE trial was the only RCT and the only trial that 
evaluated continuous ST­segment and QTc monitoring. 
The PULSE trial revealed that appropriate use of elec­
trocardiographic monitoring improved after the inter­
vention of an interactive online education program and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e325
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Table 11. Published Reports of Use of Electrocardiographic Practice Standards
Source
Design/Findings
Outcomes Measured
Kanwar et al56 (2008, 
United States)
Retrospective study to evaluate educational interventions to improve compliance 
with AHA monitoring standards. Charts of patients admitted to telemetry units 
were reviewed for 3 mo: before (n=972) and after (n=856) intervention. Education 
included lectures to ED and internal medicine residents and faculty, NPs, PAs, and unit 
clerks; included reminders via email, laminated cards, and posting. Unit clerks were 
encouraged to call to confirm telemetry indication.
Evaluated for indications for QTc or ST­
segment monitoring: No.
Appropriate monitoring percentage: A significant increase was noted for percent of 
patients with COR I/II indications for monitoring from before (57%) to after (71%) 
intervention, with a trend for shorter LOS (4.3±4 to 3.8±3 d).
Safety: Not reported.
Dhillon et al57 (2009, 
United States)
Retrospective study of patients (n=562) admitted to the telemetry unit. Guidelines 
(based on the 1991 ACC/ECCC guidelines) were developed and implemented for 
telemetry admissions. Orders for telemetry expired after 48 h unless renewed. Nurses 
were encouraged to review need for telemetry daily and to confer with treating team. 
Significantly higher arrhythmia events were noted in the “telemetry indicated” group 
compared with the “telemetry not indicated” group.
Evaluated for indications for QTc or ST­
segment monitoring: No.
Appropriate monitoring percentage: Not reported.
Safety: No patients in the telemetry not 
indicated group had a clinically significant 
arrhythmia requiring a change in 
management or further study.
Fålun et al58 (2013, 
Norway)
Prospective observational study of a 3­mo consecutive sample of all telemetry patient 
admissions with follow­up measurements at discharge from the hospital (n=1194). 
Arrhythmias that might result in a change in management were recorded; monitor 
watchers at a central monitoring station abstracted 64 variables that were reviewed 
along with medical records. The overall arrhythmia rate was 33%; of all events, 54% 
resulted in changes in care management.
Evaluated for indications for QTc or ST­
segment monitoring: No.
Patients were identified as COR I (18%), COR II (71%), and COR III (11%). These 
patients experienced arrhythmias at the following rates: COR I, 43%; COR II, 
28%; and COR III, 47%. Changes in care management occurred as follows: 
COR I, 25%; COR II, 14%; and COR III, 29%. Nearly half of COR III patients 
experienced arrhythmia events, and one third of them resulted in changes to care 
management.
Appropriate monitoring percentage: 89%.
Safety: A large proportion of patients 
with chest pain were confirmed as having 
ACS at discharge, so although they were 
originally assigned as COR II, they would 
be upgraded to COR I.
Leighton et al490 (2013, 
United States)
Prospective QI project of patients admitted to telemetry on non­ICU or cardiac ward 
units. Telemetry bed use was followed up 4 wk before and 4 wk after implementation 
of electronic order sets on the basis of AHA 2004 practice standards.
Evaluated for indications for QTc or ST­
segment monitoring: No.
Appropriate monitoring percentage (on admission to telemetry):
Before (n=196): 65% of patients met guidelines.
After (n=156): 81% of patients met guidelines; however, at 48 h after admission: 
13% of patients met guidelines.
Safety: No clinically significant arrhythmia 
events occurred among those without 
indications for monitoring.
Benjamin et al449 (2013,
United States)
Retrospective, descriptive, multisite study of 4 hospitals with non­ICU patients 
receiving electrocardiographic monitoring in which telemetry bed use was examined 
for 1 wk. In 35% of telemetry days, electrocardiographic monitoring was not 
supported by clinical indication for monitoring.
Evaluated for indications for QTc or ST­
segment monitoring: No.
Appropriate monitoring percentage: 65% of telemetry­indicated days.
Safety: 3.1 arrhythmias per 100 d.
Cost: Estimated $53–$88.4 per patient 
per day or $250 
000/y savings for 400­
bed hospital (based on estimated 15–30 
min of nursing time per patient per 
shift=45–90 min/d).
Dressler et al59
(2014, United States)
Prospective study of revised telemetry order sets based on AHA practice standards 
(2004) in which prescribers were required to select from a list of clinical indications, 
each with a predetermined duration of monitoring. Order sets included nurse 
assessment guidelines; nurses could request reorder of telemetry if patient was 
believed to be unsafe (eg, unstable blood pressure). Mean daily number of patients 
with telemetry ordered decreased by 70%.
Evaluated for indications for QTc or ST­
segment monitoring: None reported.
(Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e326
strategies to implement and sustain change in practice, 
and this improvement was sustained over time.6
Outcomes Evaluated in Studies of 
Electrocardiographic Monitoring
Researchers evaluating preimplementation to postim­
plementation of practice standards have some variabil­
ity in their selection of outcome measures. Investigators 
have used the number of rapid response calls as an out­
come variable, but the number of calls alone is difficult 
to interpret without contextual data. Reasons for the 
call may be unrelated to electrocardiographic monitor­
ing (eg, dyspnea, decreased cognition). Alternatively, a 
rapid response call may be made because of a synco­
pal episode that could potentially have been averted 
if a patient had been monitored. A patient undergo­
ing ischemia monitoring may have a nurse who calls 
rapid response more quickly as a result of identification 
of ST­segment changes with silent ischemia. Thus, the 
number of rapid response calls could be unrelated to 
electrocardiographic monitoring or could increase or 
decrease as a result of appropriate monitoring.
Financial outcomes require thoughtful consider­
ation. Dressler et al59 reported a 70% decrease in inap­
propriate monitoring, with a resultant estimated cost 
savings of $4.8 million annually. Although a cost reduc­
tion of this magnitude was impressive for this site, it 
may not be appropriate to generalize to other hospitals. 
The amount of caregiver time for the management of 
patients receiving electrocardiographic monitoring has 
never been rigorously quantified, so it is challenging to 
provide accurate financial data. Leighton et al490 asked 
nurse managers to estimate the amount of time and 
supplies for monitoring, resulting in an estimated 15 to 
30 minutes per patient per 8­hour shift. It may be help­
ful to avoid reporting only aggregate data for the cal­
culation of financial outcomes to permit more accurate 
comparison across institutions. Although cost savings 
have been reported, one must consider that a reduction 
in monitored beds could potentially reduce revenue for 
monitored beds while simultaneously increasing admis­
sion to nonmonitored beds.
Finally, associations of the implementation of elec­
trocardiographic monitoring practice standards with 
patient outcomes such as mortality, in­hospital MI, and 
outcomes of cardiac arrest have been reported (Ta­
ble 11). Thoughtful examination of published studies 
reporting implementation of electrocardiographic mon­
itoring standards allows investigators to design robust 
experimental studies. These studies must be adequately 
powered to enable detection of rare patient outcomes 
such as mortality and TdP
.
Practical Considerations to Implementing 
Practice Standards
When implementing electrocardiographic monitor­
ing practice standards, the clinician needs to consider 
a number of issues related to arrhythmia, ST­segment, 
Dressler et al59
(2014, United States) 
(Continued)
Appropriate monitoring percentage: not reported.
Safety: Code blue, mortality, and rapid 
response team activation rates remained 
stable.
Cost: Estimated mean daily cost to deliver 
telemetry was $53.44 per patient; mean 
daily cost for non­ICU cardiac telemetry 
decreased from $18 
971 to $5772 on the 
basis of estimated 19.75 min per patient 
on telemetry­related tasks daily.
Funk et al6 (2017, 
United States)
Prospective, multisite RCT in 17 hospitals with all patients in cardiac ICUs and 
telemetry units (n=4587 patients; n=3013 nurses). Medical records of current patients 
were reviewed to determine whether they had a COR I or II indication for arrhythmia, 
ST­segment ischemia, and QTc interval monitoring and noted if the patient was being 
monitored. Patient outcomes were assessed in 95 
884 admissions.
Evaluated for indications for QTc or ST­
segment monitoring: Yes.
An online interactive education intervention for nurses was supplemented by 
strategies to change practice led by nurse champions, including initiation by some 
hospitals of protocols for QTc and ST­segment monitoring according to the 2004 
practice standards.
Appropriate monitoring percentage: Appropriate monitoring increased significantly 
immediately after the intervention and was sustained for 15 mo (66% at baseline 
to 70% immediately after the intervention and 70% 15 mo later). Appropriate 
ST­segment monitoring went from 56% at baseline to 67% immediately after the 
intervention to 75% 15 mo later. Appropriate QTc monitoring was 13% at baseline 
and 51% immediately after the intervention but dropped to 45% 15 mo later.
Safety: In­hospital MI declined 
significantly immediately after the 
intervention and was sustained 15 mo 
later (2.4% to 1.9% to 1.5%). Mortality 
ranged from 1.9%–3.1% and was not 
associated with the intervention.
ACC/ECCC indicates American College of Cardiology/Emergency Cardiac Care Committee; ACS, acute coronary syndrome; AHA, American Heart Association; 
COR, Class of Recommendation; ED, emergency department; ICU, intensive care unit; LOS, length of stay; NP
, nurse practitioner; PA, physician’s assistant; QI, 
quality improvement; and RCT, randomized clinical trial.
Table 11. Continued
Source
Design/Findings
Outcomes Measured
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e327
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
and QTc monitoring when developing new protocols as 
electronic health records become more common.
Arrhythmia: Practice Standards Embedded Into 
Electronic Health Record Order Sets 
Dressler et al59 reported that education on practice stan­
dards alone was not enough to bring about increased 
adherence. Instead, interprofessional education need­
ed to be augmented with new electronic order sets for 
prescribers and institution­wide guidelines for electro­
cardiographic monitoring59 based on the practice stan­
dards.1 This practice is increasingly common.490
ST-Segment Monitoring: In-Hospital Protocols 
to Promote Awareness, Education, and Use of 
Standards
Through a national survey of cardiologists published in 
2010, Sandau et al495 found that only 45% of practicing 
cardiologists (n=200) were aware of ST­segment moni­
toring practice standards, despite publications in 199914 
and 2004.1 The cardiologists surveyed selected top bar­
riers to use of this technology as concerns about false­
positive alarms, lack of understanding by nurses, con­
cern for extra telephone calls resulting from inaccurate 
monitoring, lack of understanding by other physicians, 
and concern for extra cost or treatment caused by false­
positive alarms. In a single­site study, Sangkachand et 
al481 identified top barriers for nurses’ use of continuous 
ST­segment monitoring as similar to those of cardiolo­
gists, with an additional barrier that prescribers did not 
order it. Clinicians should share experience with imple­
mentation of protocols39; identifying effective strategies 
can enhance successful implementation at other sites.
QTc Monitoring: Electronic Alerts, Education, 
Protocol, and Computerized Calculation 
Investigators have recently used both alerts by pharma­
cists and computerized alerts to identify hospitalized 
patients receiving QT­prolonging medications. Ng et 
al496 evaluated a pharmacist­led intervention (n=149 pa­
tients), resulting in patients randomized to the interven­
tion of pharmacist involvement and a specific QTc algo­
rithm having less frequent QTc prolongation. Haugaa et 
al497 evaluated an institution­wide (n=1145) QT alert sys­
tem that identified ECGs with QTc ≥0.50 seconds, with 
a “semi­urgent” e­mail alert to the prescriber. Tisdale 
et al498 evaluated a computerized clinical decision sup­
port system incorporating a validated risk score for QTc 
prolongation to alert pharmacists when a QT­prolong­
ing cardiac medication was prescribed for cardiac unit 
inpatients (n=2400) and found a significantly reduced 
risk of QTc prolongation and decreased prescribing of 
noncardiac medications known to cause TdP
, including 
fluoroquinolones and intravenous haloperidol.498
In a quasi­experimental study of 4011 patients re­
ceiving electrocardiographic monitoring in 10 hospitals, 
Sandau and colleagues464 tested a 3­part intervention 
of online education for nurses, electronic notifications 
to alert nurses when a patient received QT­prolonging 
medication, and computerized calculation of QTc in the 
electronic health record. They found that appropriate 
QTc documentation increased significantly from baseline 
(17.3%) to 3 months after intervention (58.2%), with a 
further increase by 6 months after intervention (62.1%), 
demonstrating that improvements persisted over time.
Conclusions
Electrocardiographic monitoring offers a number of 
clinical benefits that are rarely evaluated in implemen­
tation studies. First, electrocardiographic monitoring 
is used to assess the response to medications for ar­
rhythmias. Titration of the dose of medications such as 
diltiazem, β­blockers, and dofetilide based on electro­
cardiographic monitoring provides data for communi­
cation among care provers (eg, prescriber, nurse, phar­
macist, exercise rehabilitation professional), allowing 
evaluation of heart rate changes with exercise or sleep. 
Individualized dosing of QT­prolonging medications re­
lies on monitoring QTc, which is usually not captured in 
implementation studies.
The absence of abnormal findings on telemetry has 
clinical relevance. For example, telemetry may be help­
ful for the patient admitted with syncope with a sus­
pected cardiac cause. It is typical that if no electrocar­
diographic abnormalities are found, the patient may be 
transferred to a neurological unit without electrocardio­
graphic monitoring. Electrocardiographic monitoring 
in the immediate post–pacemaker/ICD implantation 
period is used to confirm the absence of undersensing 
or oversensing of a device. Finally, the absence of ST­
segment changes may be helpful to verify reperfusion 
after PCI and can be used to help distinguish between 
a chest ache that is sometimes reported after stent ma­
nipulation and signs of reocclusion.1 Although clinicians 
must be mindful of the appropriate duration of moni­
toring, the purpose and benefit of a brief prescribed 
period of monitoring to confirm the absence of abnor­
mal findings should not be overlooked. It is important 
that careful consideration be given to the type of data 
that may be useful to assess for relevant changes58 and 
for interprofessional collaboration in the design of any 
implementation protocols for ECG.56
SECTION 5: CALL FOR RESEARCH
The majority of recent studies reporting adherence to 
practice standards have 2 main limitations: lack of evalu­
ation for appropriate QTc monitoring and lack of evalua­
tion for appropriate continuous ST­segment monitoring. 
Researchers who evaluate only the indication for arrhyth­
mia monitoring miss the opportunity to examine whether 
patients are also receiving QTc monitoring while on QT­
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e328
prolonging medications. Researchers wanting to assess 
for appropriate ST­segment monitoring face a particular 
challenge in study design for 2 main reasons. First, some 
hospitals have not universally incorporated this practice 
and related interprofessional education. Second, retro­
spective designs are generally unable to capture whether 
continuous ST­segment monitoring was used because 
use of continuous ST­segment monitoring is not typically 
documented on either paper waveform strips or any 
drop­down menus in an electronic health record.
Throughout this statement, an attempt has been 
made to highlight areas where there is limited evidence 
on which to base clinical practice guidelines. Table 12 is 
provided to highlight areas in particular need of targeted 
studies. The considerable time, education, and cost asso­
ciated with continuous electrocardiographic monitoring 
is a call to action for the research needed to ensure that 
we are providing the best­quality monitoring for those 
who truly benefit from this diagnostic intervention.
Table 12. Future Research Directions for 
Electrocardiographic Monitoring
Patient Population
Future Research Directions
Chest pain and ACS
What type of monitoring system and alarm 
management approaches result in accurate 
identification of ischemia with the fewest false and 
nonactionable alarms?
Does continuous ST­segment monitoring result 
in earlier identification of ischemia for patients 
deemed at high risk in the ACS continuum?
Does continuous ST­segment monitoring result in 
earlier identification of ischemia for patients with 
impaired ability to sense or communicate ischemia 
(eg, those with diabetes mellitus or communication 
or cognitive barriers)?
What is the effect of targeted temperature 
management after cardiac arrest on the ST­
segment and QTc?
Major cardiac 
interventions
What are the expected ST­segment changes after 
open heart surgery (eg, restoration of normal ST 
segment postoperatively)?
What is the optimal duration of monitoring for 
adult and pediatric patients after cardiac surgery?
Does continuous ST­segment monitoring result in 
earlier identification of ischemia for patients after 
heart transplantation because of impaired sensory 
discrimination?
Arrhythmias
Does prospective QTc monitoring for patients at 
risk result in decreased TdP or mortality?
Syncope of 
unknown origin
What risk stratification strategies are helpful in 
identifying which patients with syncope benefit 
from continuous electrocardiographic monitoring?
After 
electrophysiology 
procedures and 
pacemaker/ICD 
implantation
What is the timing of minor and major 
complications after an electrophysiology procedure 
and pacemaker/ICD implantation that require 
arrhythmia monitoring?
How can monitor manufacturers enhance the 
visibility of pacemaker spikes on telemetry?
ADHF
What risk stratification strategies are helpful in 
identifying which patients with ADHF benefit from 
continuous electrocardiographic monitoring?
Stroke
Does the risk of serious arrhythmia vary by type of 
stroke (ie, embolic, hemorrhagic)?
Is the risk window for rapid intervention (ie, 24 h) 
the same for patients who receive thrombolytics 
and patients who do not?
Noncardiac medical 
conditions (eg, 
hemodialysis, sepsis, 
gastrointestinal 
bleed; postconscious 
sedation)
In what subgroup of noncardiac patients is 
electrocardiographic monitoring associated with 
improved outcomes?
What alternative surveillance monitoring methods 
(oximetry, capnography) provide clinical benefit for 
noncardiac patients outside the ICU?
Electrolyte 
abnormalities
What electrolyte abnormalities are serious enough 
to warrant electrocardiographic monitoring for 
adults and children?
Pediatric
What changes in alarm criteria can be used to 
safely limit false­positive alarms?
How should automated algorithms be validated 
across age groups?
Can wireless leads provide cost­effective, quality 
monitoring (eg, patches as transmitters) for 
pediatric and adult patients?
(Continued 
)
Alarm management
What is the best way to increase the specificity of 
alarms without a significant loss of sensitivity?
What is the best geographic setup for a unit with 
no dedicated monitor watchers?
What is the effect of the use of dedicated monitor 
watchers on quality of care, patient outcomes, 
and cost?
What are the best systems to notify direct 
caregivers of alarms?
Should patients in noncardiac units (eg, 
orthopedic) be monitored from a centralized 
station? If so, is there a minimum knowledge base 
for electrocardiographic monitoring for staff nurses 
on noncardiac units who are providing direct care?
What is the effect of altering alarm parameters on 
adverse patient outcomes?
What are the most effective alarm sounds to 
improve alarm response?
What is the best method to ensure alarm audibility/
secondary alarm notification?
Is the use of multiparameter alarm algorithms 
effective in reducing false alarms?
Education of 
physicians, NPs, 
PAs, and staff 
nurses
What education is necessary for initial competency 
and subsequent maintenance of skills for 
electrocardiographic monitor interpretation?
Implementation of 
practice standards
What are the most collaborative, efficient,  
and cost­effective methods for incorporating 
practice standards for electrocardiographic 
monitoring into electronic order sets? Who should 
review for discontinuation of telemetry? How 
often should orders be reviewed, and what criteria 
should be used?
What is the impact of implementation of these 
practice standards for electrocardiographic monitoring 
on patient outcomes, alarms, cost, and bed use?
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; ADHF, acute decompensated heart 
failure; ICD, implantable cardioverter­defibrillator; ICU, intensive care unit; NP
, 
nurse practitioner; PA, physician’s assistant; and TdP
, torsade de pointes.
Table 12. Continued
Patient Population
Future Research Directions
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e329
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The Writing Group would like to recognize Dr. Kay Blum, who 
died shortly before publication. Dr. Blum was appointed to 
represent the American College of Cardiology for this scien­
tific statement, and we sincerely appreciated her expert con­
tribution to our phone discussions and manuscript.
FOOTNOTES
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any 
actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result 
of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or business 
interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, all mem­
bers of the writing group are required to complete and submit 
a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that 
might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart Asso­
ciation Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on Jan­
uary 20, 2017, and the American Heart Association Executive 
Committee on February 28, 2017. A copy of the document is 
available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using 
either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse 
by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843­216­
2533 or e­mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this docu­
ment be cited as follows: Sandau KE, Funk M, Auerbach A, 
Barsness GW, Blum K, Cvach M, Lampert R, May JL, McDaniel 
GM, Perez MV, Sendelbach S, Sommargren CE, Wang PJ; on 
behalf of the American Heart Association Council on Cardio­
vascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Clinical Cardiology; 
and Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young. Update 
to practice standards for electrocardiographic monitoring in 
hospital settings: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conduct­
ed by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA 
statements and guidelines development, visit http://professional.
heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” 
drop­down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, en­
hancement, and/or distribution of this document are not per­
mitted without the express permission of the American Heart 
Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located 
at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright­Per­
mission­Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the 
“Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears on the right 
side of the page.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
DISCLOSURES
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing 
Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Kristin E. 
Sandau
Bethel University 
United Hospital
Co­investigator, 
Abbott 
Northwestern 
Hospital 
Foundation 
(nonprofit)†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Marjorie 
Funk
Yale University 
School of Nursing
Co­investigator, 
Abbott 
Northwestern 
Hospital 
Foundation 
(nonprofit)†
None
None
None
None
Philips 
Healthcare*
None
Andrew 
Auerbach
University of 
California San 
Francisco
None
None
None
Community 
Hospital, FL*
None
None
None
Gregory W. 
Barsness
Mayo Clinic
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Kay Blum
Retired
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Maria Cvach
Johns Hopkins 
Health System
None
None
None
Scruggs vs 
Gulfport 
Memorial 
Hospital*
None
None
None
Rachel 
Lampert
Yale University 
School of 
Medicine
GE Medical†; 
Medtronic†
None
None
None
None
Medtronic*
None
Jeanine L. 
May
Yale University, 
Yale Center 
for Clinical 
Investigation
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
(Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e330
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Daniel Brotman
Johns Hopkins 
Hospital
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Daniel Cantillon
Cleveland Clinic
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Carol Chen­Scarabelli
VA Ann Arbor 
Healthcare System
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Jennifer Cook
Banner University 
Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Robert Helm
Boston University
None
None
None
None
None
None
Boston 
Scientific* 
(dinner); St. 
Jude Medical*
(dinner)
Ankur Karnik
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Gaurav A. Upadhyay
University of 
Chicago
Medtronic†;
Biotronic†
None
None
None
None
None
None
George Van Hare
Washington 
University in St. 
Louis
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Richard Vander Heide
LSU Medical School/
LSU Health Sciences 
Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or 
more during any 12­month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, 
or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding 
definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
George M. 
McDaniel
University of 
Virginia
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Marco V. 
Perez
Stanford 
University
None
None
None
None
Patent to use 
electrocardiographic 
markers to predict 
atrial fibrillation*
None
None
Sue 
Sendelbach
Retired
Primary 
investigator, 
Abbott 
Northwestern 
Hospital 
Foundation 
(nonprofit)†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Claire E. 
Sommargren
UCSF
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Paul J. Wang
Stanford 
University School 
of Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on 
the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if 
(a) the person receives $10 
000 or more during any 12­month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the 
voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 
000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than 
“significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Writing Group Disclosures Continued
Writing 
Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e331
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
REFERENCES
 1. Drew BJ, Califf RM, Funk M, Kaufman ES, Krucoff MW, Laks MM, Macfar­
lane PW, Sommargren C, Swiryn S, Van Hare GF, American Heart Associa­
tion, Councils on Cardiovascular Nursing, Clinical Cardiology, and Cardio­
vascular Disease in the Young. Practice standards for electrocardiographic 
monitoring in hospital settings: an American Heart Association scientific 
statement from the Councils on Cardiovascular Nursing, Clinical Cardiol­
ogy, and Cardiovascular Disease in the Young [published correction ap­
pears in Circulation. 2005;111:378]. Circulation. 2004;110:2721–2746.
 2. ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Methodologies and 
policies from the ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. https://
my.americanheart.org/idc/groups/ahamah­public/@wcm/@sop/documents/
downloadable/ucm_319826.pdf. Accessed September 3, 2015.
 3. Chan PS, Krumholz HM, Nichol G, Nallamothu BK; American Heart Asso­
ciation National Registry of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Investigators. 
Delayed time to defibrillation after in­hospital cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med. 
2008;358:9–17. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0706467.
 4. Chen LM, Nallamothu BK, Spertus JA, Li Y, Chan PS; American Heart Associa­
tion’s Get With the Guidelines­Resuscitation (formerly the National Registry 
of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation) Investigators. Association between a hos­
pital’s rate of cardiac arrest incidence and cardiac arrest survival. JAMA Intern 
Med. 2013;173:1186–1195. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.1026.
 5. Knight BP
, Pelosi F, Michaud GF, Strickberger SA, Morady F. Clinical 
consequences of electrocardiographic artifact mimicking ventricu­
lar tachycardia. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:1270–1274. doi: 10.1056/
NEJM199910213411704.
 6. Funk M, Fennie KP
, Stephens KE, May JL, Winkler CG, Drew BJ, The PULSE 
Site Investigators. Association of implementation of practice standards 
for electrocardiographic monitoring with nurses’ knowledge, quality of 
care, and patient outcomes: findings from the Practical Use of the Latest 
Standards of Electrocardiography (PULSE) Trial. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Out-
comes. 2017;10:e003132.
 7. Alzand BS, Crijns HJ. Diagnostic criteria of broad QRS complex tachycar­
dia: decades of evolution. Europace. 2011;13:465–472. doi: 10.1093/
europace/euq430.
 8. Geggel RL. Conditions leading to pediatric cardiology consultation in a 
tertiary academic hospital. Pediatrics. 2004;114:e409–e417.
 9. Rijnbeek PR, Witsenburg M, Schrama E, Hess J, Kors JA. New normal limits 
for the paediatric electrocardiogram. Eur Heart J. 2001;22:702–711. doi: 
10.1053/euhj.2000.2399.
 10. Nadkarni VM, Larkin GL, Peberdy MA, Carey SM, Kaye W, Mancini ME, 
Nichol G, Lane­Truitt T, Potts J, Ornato JP
, Berg RA; National Registry of 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Investigators. First documented rhythm 
and clinical outcome from in­hospital cardiac arrest among children and 
adults. JAMA. 2006;295:50–57. doi: 10.1001/jama.295.1.50.
 11. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, White HD; on behalf of the Joint ESC/ACCF/
AHA/WHF Task Force for the Redefinition of Myocardial Infarction, Jaffe 
AS, Apple FS, Galvani M, Katus HA, Newby LK, Ravkilde J, Chaitman B, 
Clemmensen PM, Dellborg M, Hod H, Porela P, Underwood R, Bax JJ, 
Beller GA, Bonow R, Van der Wall EE, Bassand JP, Wijns W, Ferguson 
TB, Steg PG, Uretsky BF, Williams DO, Armstrong PW, Antman EM, Fox 
KA, Hamm CW, Ohman EM, Simoons ML, Poole­Wilson PA, Gurfinkel 
EP, Lopez­Sendon JL, Pais P, Mendis S, Zhu JR, Wallentin LC, Fernández­
Avilés F, Fox KM, Parkhomenko AN, Priori SG, Tendera M, Voipio­Pulkki 
LM, Vahanian A, Camm AJ, De Caterina R, Dean V, Dickstein K, Filippatos 
G, Funck­Brentano C, Hellemans I, Kristensen SD, McGregor K, Sechtem 
U, Silber S, Tendera M, Widimsky P, Zamorano JL, Morais J, Brener S, Har­
rington R, Morrow D, Lim M, Martinez­Rios MA, Steinhubl S, Levine GN, 
Gibler WB, Goff D, Tubaro M, Dudek D, Al­Attar N. Universal definition of 
myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2007;116:2634–2653. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.107.187397.
 12. Cohn PF, Fox KM, Daly C. Silent myocardial ischemia. Circulation. 
2003;108:1263–1277. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000088001.59265.EE.
 13. Conti CR, Bavry AA, Petersen JW. Silent ischemia: clinical relevance. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:435–441. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.07.050.
 14. Drew BJ, Krucoff MW. Multilead ST­segment monitoring in patients with 
acute coronary syndromes: a consensus statement for healthcare profes­
sionals: ST­ Segment Monitoring Practice Guideline International Working 
Group. Am J Crit Care. 1999;8:372–386.
 15. Drew BJ, Tisdale LA. ST segment monitoring for coronary artery re­
occlusion following thrombolytic therapy and coronary angioplasty: 
identification of optimal bedside monitoring leads. Am J Crit Care. 
1993;2:280–292.
 16. Sandau KE, Smith M. Continuous ST­segment monitoring: 3 case studies 
in progressive care. Crit Care Nurse. 2009;29:18–27; quiz 1 p following 
27. doi: 10.4037/ccn2009953.
 17. Sangkachand P
, Cluff M, Funk M. Detecting myocardial ischemia with 
continuous ST­segment monitoring: two case studies. Heart Lung. 
2012;41:284–289. doi: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2011.10.007.
 18. Drew BJ, Pelter MM, Adams MG. Frequency, characteristics, and clini­
cal significance of transient ST segment elevation in patients with acute 
coronary syndromes. Eur Heart J. 2002;23:941–947. doi: 10.1053/
euhj.2001.2987.
 19. Booker KJ, Holm K, Drew BJ, Lanuza DM, Hicks FD, Carrigan T, Wright 
M, Moran J. Frequency and outcomes of transient myocardial ischemia 
in critically ill adults admitted for noncardiac conditions. Am J Crit Care. 
2003;12:508–516.
 20. Krucoff MW, Parente AR, Bottner RK, Renzi RH, Stark KS, Shugoll RA, 
Ahmed SW, DeMichele J, Stroming SL, Green CE, Rackley CE, Kent KM. 
Stability of multilead ST­segment “fingerprints” over time after percuta­
neous transluminal coronary angioplasty and its usefulness in detecting 
reocclusion. Am J Cardiol. 1988;61:1232–1237.
 21. Langer A, Krucoff MW, Klootwijk P
, Simoons ML, Granger CB, Barr A, 
Califf RM, Armstrong PW. Prognostic significance of ST segment shift 
early after resolution of ST elevation in patients with myocardial infarction 
treated with thrombolytic therapy: the GUSTO­I ST Segment Monitoring 
Substudy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;31:783–789.
 22. Maas AC, Wyatt CM, Green CL, Wagner GS, Trollinger KM, Pope JE, 
Langer A, Armstrong PW, Califf RM, Simoons ML, Krucoff MW. Combin­
ing baseline clinical descriptors and real­time response to therapy: the in­
cremental prognostic value of continuous ST­segment monitoring in acute 
myocardial infarction. Am Heart J. 2004;147:698–704. doi: 10.1016/j.
ahj.2003.08.014.
 23. Cruden NL, Graham C, Harding SA, Ludlam CA, Fox KA, Newby DE. Plas­
ma TAFI and soluble CD40 ligand do not predict reperfusion following 
thrombolysis for acute myocardial infarction. Thromb Res. 2006;118:189–
197. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2005.06.014.
 24. Terkelsen CJ, Nørgaard BL, Lassen JF, Poulsen SH, Gerdes JC, Sloth E, 
Gøtzsche LB, Rømer FK, Thuesen L, Nielsen TT, Andersen HR. Potential sig­
nificance of spontaneous and interventional ST­changes in patients trans­
ferred for primary percutaneous coronary intervention: observations from 
the ST­MONitoring in Acute Myocardial Infarction study (the MONAMI 
study). Eur Heart J. 2006;27:267–275. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehi606.
 25. Jernberg T, Abrahamsson P
, Lindahl B, Johanson P
, Wallentin L, Dellborg 
M. Continuous multilead ST­monitoring identifies patients with unstable 
coronary artery disease who benefit from extended antithrombotic treat­
ment. Eur Heart J. 2002;23:1093–1101.
 26. Klootwijk P
, Meij S, Melkert R, Lenderink T, Simoons ML. Reduction of 
recurrent ischemia with abciximab during continuous ECG­ischemia moni­
toring in patients with unstable angina refractory to standard treatment 
(CAPTURE). Circulation. 1998;98:1358–1364.
 27. Stefanidis A, Melidonis A, Tournis S, Zairis M, Handanis S, Olympios C, 
Asimacopoulos P
, Foussas S. Intensive insulin treatment reduces transient 
ischaemic episodes during acute coronary events in diabetic patients. Acta 
Cardiol. 2002;57:357–364. doi: 10.2143/AC.57.5.2005453.
 28. Jernberg T, Lindahl B, Wallentin L. ST­segment monitoring with continu­
ous 12­lead ECG improves early risk stratification in patients with chest 
pain and ECG nondiagnostic of acute myocardial infarction. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1999;34:1413–1419.
 29. Herren KR, Mackway­Jones K, Richards CR, Seneviratne CJ, France MW, 
Cotter L. Is it possible to exclude a diagnosis of myocardial damage within 
six hours of admission to an emergency department? Diagnostic cohort 
study. BMJ. 2001;323:372.
 30. Pelter MM, Adams MG, Drew BJ. Transient myocardial ischemia is an 
independent predictor of adverse in­hospital outcomes in patients with 
acute coronary syndromes treated in the telemetry unit. Heart Lung. 
2003;32:71–78. doi: 10.1067/mhl.2003.11.
 31. Landesberg G, Vesselov Y, Einav S, Goodman S, Sprung CL, Weissman 
C. Myocardial ischemia, cardiac troponin, and long­term survival of 
high­cardiac risk critically ill intensive care unit patients. Crit Care Med. 
2005;33:1281–1287.
 32. Yan AT, Yan RT, Tan M, Senaratne M, Fitchett DH, Langer A, Goodman 
SG; INTERACT Investigators. Long­term prognostic value and therapeutic 
implications of continuous ST­segment monitoring in acute coronary syn­
drome. Am Heart J. 2007;153:500–506. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2007.02.003.
 33. Ottander P
, Nilsson JB, Jensen SM, Näslund U. Ischemic ST­segment epi­
sodes during the initial 24 hours of ST elevation myocardial infarction pre­
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e332
dict prognosis at 1 and 5 years. J Electrocardiol. 2010;43:224–229. doi: 
10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2009.12.010.
 34. Akkerhuis KM, Klootwijk PA, Lindeboom W, Umans VA, Meij S, Kint 
PP, Simoons ML. Recurrent ischaemia during continuous multilead ST­
segment monitoring identifies patients with acute coronary syndromes 
at high risk of adverse cardiac events; meta­analysis of three studies 
involving 995 patients. Eur Heart J. 2001;22:1997–2006. doi: 10.1053/
euhj.2001.2750.
 35. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, Simoons ML, Chaitman BR, White HD; 
 
on behalf of the Joint ESC/ACCF/AHA/WHF Task Force for the Univer­
sal Definition of Myocardial Infarction. Third universal definition of 
myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2012;126:2020–2035. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0b013e31826e1058.
 36. Jernberg T, Cronblad J, Lindahl B, Wallentin L. Observer variability and op­
timal criteria of transient ischemia during ST monitoring with continuous 
12­lead ECG. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 2002;7:181–190.
 37. Adams MG, Drew BJ. Body position effects on the ECG: implication for 
ischemia monitoring. J Electrocardiol. 1997;30:285–291.
 38. Drew BJ, Adams MG. Clinical consequences of ST­segment changes 
caused by body position mimicking transient myocardial ischemia: hazards 
of ST­segment monitoring? J Electrocardiol. 2001;34:261–264.
 39. Sandau KE, Smith M. Continuous ST­segment monitoring: protocol 
for practice. Crit Care Nurse. 2009;29:39–49; quiz following 50. doi: 
10.4037/ccn2009703.
 40. Rautaharju PM, Surawicz B, Gettes LS, Bailey JJ, Childers R, Deal BJ, 
Gorgels A, Hancock EW, Josephson M, Kligfield P
, Kors JA, Macfarlane 
P
, Mason JW, Mirvis DM, Okin P
, Pahlm O, van Herpen G, Wagner GS, 
Wellens H. AHA/ACCF/HRS recommendations for the standardization 
and interpretation of the electrocardiogram, part IV: the ST segment, T 
and U waves, and the QT interval: a scientific statement from the Ameri­
can Heart Association Electrocardiography and Arrhythmias Committee, 
Council on Clinical Cardiology; the American College of Cardiology Foun­
dation; and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2009;119:e241–e250. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.191096.
 41. Goldberger AL, ed. Clinical Electrocardiography: A Simplified Approach. 
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Mosby Elsevier; 2006.
 42. Haeberlin A, Studer E, Niederhauser T, Stoller M, Marisa T, Goette J, Ja­
comet M, Traupe T, Seiler C, Vogel R. Electrocardiographic ST­segment 
monitoring during controlled occlusion of coronary arteries. J Electrocar-
diol. 2014;47:29–37. doi: 10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2013.10.003.
 43. Pollak P
, Brady W. Electrocardiographic patterns mimicking ST segment 
elevation myocardial infarction. Cardiol Clin. 2012;30:601–615. doi: 
10.1016/j.ccl.2012.07.012.
 44. Antzelevitch C, Yan GX. J wave syndromes. Heart Rhythm. 2010;7:549–
558. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2009.12.006.
 45. Noda T, Shimizu W, Tanaka K, Chayama K. Prominent J wave and ST seg­
ment elevation: serial electrocardiographic changes in accidental hypo­
thermia. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2003;14:223.
 46. Brugada P
, Brugada J. Right bundle branch block, persistent ST segment 
elevation and sudden cardiac death: a distinct clinical and electrocardio­
graphic syndrome: a multicenter report. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1992;20:1391–
1396.
 47. Graham KC, Cvach M. Monitor alarm fatigue: standardizing use of 
physiological monitors and decreasing nuisance alarms. Am J Crit Care. 
2010;19:28–34; quiz 35. doi: 10.4037/ajcc2010651.
 48. Physiologic monitoring systems. Health Devices. 2013;42:310–340.
 49. The Joint Commission. The Joint Commission Sentinel Event Alert Issue 
50: Medical device alarm safety in hospitals. http://www.jointcommission.
org/sea_issue_50/. Accessed July 18, 2016.
 50. Drew BJ, Harris P
, Zègre­Hemsey JK, Mammone T, Schindler D, Salas­Boni 
R, Bai Y, Tinoco A, Ding Q, Hu X. Insights into the problem of alarm fatigue 
with physiologic monitor devices: a comprehensive observational study of 
consecutive intensive care unit patients. PLoS One. 2014;9:e110274. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0110274.
 51. Top 10 health technology hazards for 2015. OR Manager. 2015;31:15–
17.
 52. ECRI Institute. 2016 Top 10 health technology hazards: What technology 
hazards are lurking in your hospital? http://www.ecri.org/2016hazards. 
Accessed December 10, 2015.
 53. Honan L, Funk M, Maynard M, Fahs D, Clark JT, David Y. Nurses’ perspec­
tives on clinical alarms. Am J Crit Care. 2015;24:387–395. doi: 10.4037/
ajcc2015552.
 54. Weil KM. Alarming monitor problems. Nursing. 2009;39:58. doi: 
10.1097/01.NURSE.0000360252.10823.b8.
 55. Bliss JP
, Gilson RD, Deaton JE. Human probability matching behaviour 
in response to alarms of varying reliability. Ergonomics. 1995;38:2300–
2312. doi: 10.1080/00140139508925269.
 56. Kanwar M, Fares R, Minnick S, Rosman HS, Saravolatz L. Inpatient cardiac 
telemetry monitoring: are we overdoing it? JCOM. 2008;15:16–20.
 57. Dhillon SK, Rachko M, Hanon S, Schweitzer P
, Bergmann SR. Telem­
etry monitoring guidelines for efficient and safe delivery of cardiac 
rhythm monitoring to noncritical hospital inpatients. Crit Pathw Cardiol. 
2009;8:125–126. doi: 10.1097/HPC.0b013e3181b6ef41.
 58. Fålun N, Nordrehaug JE, Hoff PI, Langørgen J, Moons P
, Norekvål TM. Evalua­
tion of the appropriateness and outcome of in­hospital telemetry monitoring. 
Am J Cardiol. 2013;112:1219–1223. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2013.05.069.
 59. Dressler R, Dryer MM, Coletti C, Mahoney D, Doorey AJ. Altering over­
use of cardiac telemetry in non­intensive care unit settings by hardwir­
ing the use of American Heart Association guidelines. JAMA Intern Med. 
2014;174:1852–1854. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.4491.
 60. Loreto L, Andrea T, Lucia D, Carla L, Cristina P
, Silvio R. Accuracy of 
EASI 12­lead ECGs in monitoring ST­segment and J­point by nurses in 
the coronary care units. J Clin Nurs. 2016;25:1282–1291. doi: 10.1111/
jocn.13168.
 61. Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, Bittl JA, Bridges CR, Byrne JG, Cigarroa JE, 
Disesa VJ, Hiratzka LF, Hutter AM Jr, Jessen ME, Keeley EC, Lahey SJ, Lange 
RA, London MJ, Mack MJ, Patel MR, Puskas JD, Sabik JF, Selnes O, Shahian 
DM, Trost JC, Winniford MD. 2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for coronary ar­
tery bypass graft surgery: a report of the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines 
[published correction appears in Circulation. 2011;124:e957]. Circulation. 
2011;124:e652–e735. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e31823c074e.
 62. Schwartz PJ, Garson A Jr, Paul T, Stramba­Badiale M, Vetter VL, Wren C; 
European Society of Cardiology. Guidelines for the interpretation of the 
neonatal electrocardiogram: a task force of the European Society of Car­
diology. Eur Heart J. 2002;23:1329–1344.
 63. McCulley ME, Bennett RL. ST segment monitoring in the pediatric ICU: de­
tecting myocardial ischemia in children. Crit Care Nurse. 1997;17:81–86, 
88–92.
 64. Rydberg A, Rask P
, Teien DE, Hörnsten R. Electrocardiographic ST segment 
depression and clinical function in children with Fontan circulation. Pediatr 
Cardiol. 2003;24:468–472. doi: 10.1007/s00246­002­0374­2.
 65. Newburger JW, Takahashi M, Gerber MA, Gewitz MH, Tani LY, Burns JC, 
Shulman ST, Bolger AF, Ferrieri P
, Baltimore RS, Wilson WR, Baddour LM, 
Levison ME, Pallasch TJ, Falace DA, Taubert KA. Diagnosis, treatment, 
and long­term management of Kawasaki disease: a statement for health 
professionals from the Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis 
and Kawasaki Disease, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2004;110:2747–2771. doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000145143.19711.78.
 66. Uehara R, Belay ED. Epidemiology of Kawasaki disease in Asia, Europe, 
and the United States. J Epidemiol. 2012;22:79–85.
 67. Tatara K, Kusakawa S, Itoh K, Kazuma N, Lee K, Hashimoto K, Shinohara 
T, Kondoh C, Hiroe M. Long­term prognosis of Kawasaki disease patients 
with coronary artery obstruction. Heart Vessels. 1989;5:47–51.
 68. Mehta SK, Finkelhor RS, Anderson RL, Harcar­Sevcik RA, Wasser TE, Bahler 
RC. Transient myocardial ischemia in infants prenatally exposed to co­
caine. J Pediatr. 1993;122:945–949.
 69. Maguire JF, O’Rourke PP
, Colan SD, Geha RS, Crone R. Cardiotoxicity during 
treatment of severe childhood asthma. Pediatrics. 1991;88:1180–1186.
 70. Yang P
, Kanki H, Drolet B, Yang T, Wei J, Viswanathan PC, Hohnloser SH, 
Shimizu W, Schwartz PJ, Stanton M, Murray KT, Norris K, George AL Jr, 
Roden DM. Allelic variants in long­QT disease genes in patients with drug­
associated torsades de pointes. Circulation. 2002;105:1943–1948.
 71. Lehtonen A, Fodstad H, Laitinen­Forsblom P
, Toivonen L, Kontula K, Swan 
H. Further evidence of inherited long QT syndrome gene mutations in 
antiarrhythmic drug­associated torsades de pointes. Heart Rhythm. 
2007;4:603–607. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2007.01.019.
 72. Paulussen AD, Gilissen RA, Armstrong M, Doevendans PA, Verhasselt 
P
, Smeets HJ, Schulze­Bahr E, Haverkamp W, Breithardt G, Cohen N, 
Aerssens J. Genetic variations of KCNQ1, KCNH2, SCN5A, KCNE1, and 
KCNE2 in drug­induced long QT syndrome patients. J Mol Med (Berl). 
2004;82:182–188. doi: 10.1007/s00109­003­0522­z.
 73. Pickham D, Helfenbein E, Shinn JA, Chan G, Funk M, Weinacker A, Liu 
JN, Drew BJ. High prevalence of corrected QT interval prolongation in 
acutely ill patients is associated with mortality: results of the QT in 
Practice (QTIP) Study. Crit Care Med. 2012;40:394–399. doi: 10.1097/
CCM.0b013e318232db4a.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e333
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 74. Pasquier M, Pantet O, Hugli O, Pruvot E, Buclin T, Waeber G, Aujesky 
D. Prevalence and determinants of QT interval prolongation in medi­
cal inpatients. Intern Med J. 2012;42:933–940. doi: 10.1111/j.1445­
5994.2011.02447.x.
 75. Tisdale JE, Wroblewski HA, Overholser BR, Kingery JR, Trujillo TN, Kovacs 
RJ. Prevalence of QT interval prolongation in patients admitted to cardiac 
care units and frequency of subsequent administration of QT interval­
prolonging drugs: a prospective, observational study in a large urban 
academic medical center in the US. Drug Saf. 2012;35:459–470. doi: 
10.2165/11598160­000000000­00000.
 76. CredibleMeds website. http://www.crediblemeds.org. Accessed April 25, 
2017.
 77. Zipes DP
, Camm AJ, Borggrefe M, Buxton AE, Chaitman B, Fromer M, 
Gregoratos G, Klein G, Moss AJ, Myerburg RJ, Priori SG, Quinones MA, 
Roden DM, Silka MJ, Tracy C. ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for man­
agement of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of 
sudden cardiac death: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force and the European Society of Cardi­
ology Committee for Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop 
Guidelines for Management of Patients With Ventricular Arrhythmias and 
the Prevention of Sudden Cardiac Death). Circulation. 2006;114:e385–
e484. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.178233.
 78. Malik M, Camm AJ. Evaluation of drug­induced QT interval prolongation: 
implications for drug approval and labelling. Drug Saf. 2001;24:323–351.
 79. Carlsson L, Abrahamsson C, Andersson B, Duker G, Schiller­Linhardt G. 
Proarrhythmic effects of the class III agent almokalant: importance of in­
fusion rate, QT dispersion, and early afterdepolarisations. Cardiovasc Res. 
1993;27:2186–2193.
 80. Drew BJ, Ackerman MJ, Funk M, Gibler WB, Kligfield P, Menon V, 
Philippides GJ, Roden DM, Zareba W; on behalf of the American Heart 
Association Acute Cardiac Care Committee of the Council on Clini­
cal Cardiology; Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; American College 
of Cardiology Foundation. Prevention of torsade de pointes in hospi­
tal settings: a scientific statement from the American Heart Associa­
tion and the American College of Cardiology Foundation. Circulation. 
2010;121:1047–1060.
 81. Storm C, Hasper D, Nee J, Joerres A, Schefold JC, Kaufmann J, Roser M. 
Severe QTc prolongation under mild hypothermia treatment and incidence 
of arrhythmias after cardiac arrest–a prospective study in 34 survivors with 
continuous Holter ECG. Resuscitation. 2011;82:859–862. doi: 10.1016/j.
resuscitation.2011.02.043.
 82. Riaz A, Hieb H, Foley B, Mulvihill N, Crean P
, Murphy RT, Daly C, Boyle N. 
Safety of therapeutic hypothermia in post VF/VT cardiac arrest patients. Ir 
Med J. 2013;106:55–56.
 83. Al­Khatib SM, LaPointe NM, Kramer JM, Califf RM. What clinicians 
should know about the QT interval [published correction appears in 
JAMA. 2003;290:1318]. JAMA. 2003;289:2120–2127. doi: 10.1001/
jama.289.16.2120.
 84. Helfenbein ED, Zhou SH, Lindauer JM, Feild DQ, Gregg RE, Wang JJ, 
Kresge SS, Michaud FP
. An algorithm for continuous real­time QT interval 
monitoring. J Electrocardiol. 2006;39(suppl):S123–S127.
 85. Zhou SH, Helfenbein ED, Lindauer JM, Gregg RE, Feild DQ. Philips QT 
interval measurement algorithms for diagnostic, ambulatory, and pa­
tient monitoring ECG applications. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 
2009;14(suppl):S3–S8.
 86. Kligfield P
, Badilini F, Rowlandson I, Xue J, Clark E, Devine B, Macfarlane 
P
, de Bie J, Mortara D, Babaeizadeh S, Gregg R, Helfenbein ED, Green CL. 
Comparison of automated measurements of electrocardiographic inter­
vals and durations by computer­based algorithms of digital electrocardio­
graphs. Am Heart J. 2014;167:150–159.e1.
 87. Sommargren CE, Drew BJ. Preventing torsades de pointes by careful car­
diac monitoring in hospital settings. AACN Adv Crit Care. 2007;18:285–
293.
 88. Hasanien AA, Drew BJ, Howie­Esquivel J, Fung G, Harris P
. Prevalence and 
prognostic significance of long QT interval among patients with chest 
pain: selecting an optimum QT rate correction formula. J Electrocardiol. 
2013;46:336–342. doi: 10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2013.03.007.
 89. Chiladakis J, Kalogeropoulos A, Zagkli F, Koutsogiannis N, Chouchoulis 
K, Alexopoulos D. Predicting torsade de pointes in acquired long QT syn­
drome: optimal identification of critical QT interval prolongation. Cardiol-
ogy. 2012;122:3–11. doi: 10.1159/000338345.
 90. Indik JH, Pearson EC, Fried K, Woosley RL. Bazett and Fridericia QT correction 
formulas interfere with measurement of drug­induced changes in QT interval. 
Heart Rhythm. 2006;3:1003–1007. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2006.05.023.
 91. Luo S, Michler K, Johnston P
, Macfarlane PW. A comparison of commonly 
used QT correction formulae: the effect of heart rate on the QTc of nor­
mal ECGs. J Electrocardiol. 2004;37(suppl):81–90.
 92. Bednar MM, Harrigan EP
, Anziano RJ, Camm AJ, Ruskin JN. The QT inter­
val. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2001;43(suppl):1–45.
 93. Beach SR, Celano CM, Noseworthy PA, Januzzi JL, Huffman JC. QTc 
prolongation, torsades de pointes, and psychotropic medications. 
Psychosomatics. 2013;54:1–13. doi: 10.1016/j.psym.2012.11.001.
 94. Moss AJ, Zareba W, Benhorin J, Couderc J, Kennedy H, Locati­Heilbron 
E, Maison­Blanche P
. ISHNE guidelines for electrocardiographic evalua­
tion of drug­related QT prolongation and other alterations in ventricu­
lar repolarization: task force summary. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 
2001;6:333–341.
 95. Anderson ME, Al­Khatib SM, Roden DM, Califf RM; Duke Clinical Research 
Institute/American Heart Journal Expert Meeting on Repolarization 
Changes. Cardiac repolarization: current knowledge, critical gaps, and 
new approaches to drug development and patient management. Am 
Heart J. 2002;144:769–781.
 96. Michels G, Kochanek M, Pfister R. Life­threatening cardiac arrhythmias 
due to drug­induced QT prolongation: a retrospective study over 6 years 
from a medical intensive care unit. Med Klin Intensivmed Notfmed. 
2016;111:302–309. doi: 10.1007/s00063­015­0071­6.
 97. Digby GC, Pérez Riera AR, Barbosa Barros R, Simpson CS, Redfearn DP
, 
Methot M, Femenía F, Baranchuk A. Acquired long QT interval: a case 
series of multifactorial QT prolongation. Clin Cardiol. 2011;34:577–582. 
doi: 10.1002/clc.20945.
 98. Machado C, Baga JJ, Kawasaki R, Reinoehl J, Steinman RT, Lehmann MH. 
Torsade de pointes as a complication of subarachnoid hemorrhage: a 
critical reappraisal. J Electrocardiol. 1997;30:31–37.
 99. Zipes DP
, Ackerman MJ, Estes NA 3rd, Grant AO, Myerburg RJ, Van Hare 
G. Task Force 7: arrhythmias. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:1354–1363. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.02.014.
 100. Helfenbein ED, Ackerman MJ, Rautaharju PM, Zhou SH, Gregg RE, 
Lindauer JM, Miller D, Wang JJ, Kresge SS, Babaeizadeh S, Feild DQ, 
Michaud FP
. An algorithm for QT interval monitoring in neonatal inten­
sive care units. J Electrocardiol. 2007;40(suppl):S103–S110.
 101. Zaman S, Kovoor P
. Sudden cardiac death early after myocardial infarc­
tion: pathogenesis, risk stratification, and primary prevention. Circulation. 
2014;129:2426–2435. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.007497.
 102. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, Arnett DK, Blaha MJ, Cushman M, 
de Ferranti S, Després JP
, Fullerton HJ, Howard VJ, Huffman MD, Judd SE, 
Kissela BM, Lackland DT, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Liu S, Mackey RH, 
Matchar DB, McGuire DK, Mohler ER 3rd, Moy CS, Muntner P
, Mussolino 
ME, Nasir K, Neumar RW, Nichol G, Palaniappan L, Pandey DK, Reeves MJ, 
Rodriguez CJ, Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi A, Turan TN, Virani SS, Willey JZ, 
Woo D, Yeh RW, Turner MB; on behalf of the American Heart Association 
Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart disease 
and stroke statistics–2015 update: a report from the American Heart 
Association [published corrections appear in Circulation. 2015;131:e535 
and Circulation. 2016;133:e417]. Circulation. 2015;131:e29–e322. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0000000000000152.
 103. Adabag AS, Therneau TM, Gersh BJ, Weston SA, Roger VL. Sudden 
death after myocardial infarction. JAMA. 2008;300:2022–2029. doi: 
10.1001/jama.2008.553.
 104. Solomon SD, Zelenkofske S, McMurray JJ, Finn PV, Velazquez E, Ertl G, 
Harsanyi A, Rouleau JL, Maggioni A, Kober L, White H, Van de Werf F, 
Pieper K, Califf RM, Pfeffer MA; Valsartan in Acute Myocardial Infarction 
Trial (VALIANT) Investigators. Sudden death in patients with myocardial 
infarction and left ventricular dysfunction, heart failure, or both [pub­
lished correction appears in N Engl J Med. 2005;353:744]. N Engl J Med. 
2005;352:2581–2588. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa043938.
 105. Anderson JL, Adams CD, Antman EM, Bridges CR, Califf RM, Casey DE 
Jr, Chavey WE 2nd, Fesmire FM, Hochman JS, Levin TN, Lincoff AM, 
Peterson ED, Theroux P
, Wenger NK, Wright RS. ACCF/AHA focused 
update incorporated into the ACCF/AHA 2007 guidelines for the man­
agement of patients with unstable angina/non–ST­elevation myocardial 
infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines [published 
correction appears in Circulation. 2013;127:e863–864]. Circulation. 
2013;127:e663–e828. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e31828478ac. 
 106. Hollander JE, Sites FD, Pollack CV Jr, Shofer FS. Lack of utility of telem­
etry monitoring for identification of cardiac death and life­threatening 
ventricular dysrhythmias in low­risk patients with chest pain. Ann Emerg 
Med. 2004;43:71–76. doi: 10.1016/S0196064403007194.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e334
 107. Chen EH, Mills AM. Is it necessary to admit low­risk patients with sus­
pected acute coronary syndrome to inpatient telemetry beds? Ann 
Emerg Med. 2005;46:440–444.
 108. Morrison LJ, Neumar RW, Zimmerman JL, Link MS, Newby LK, 
McMullan PW Jr, Hoek TV, Halverson CC, Doering L, Peberdy MA, 
Edelson DP; on behalf of the American Heart Association Emergency 
Cardiovascular Care Committee, Council on Cardiopulmonary, Critical 
Care, Perioperative and Resuscitation, Council on Cardiovascular and 
Stroke Nursing, Council on Clinical Cardiology, and Council on Peripheral 
Vascular Disease. Strategies for improving survival after in­hospital car­
diac arrest in the United States: 2013 consensus recommendations: a 
consensus statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2013;127:1538–1563. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e31828b2770.
 109. Larson TS, Brady WJ. Electrocardiographic monitoring in the hospital­
ized patient: a diagnostic intervention of uncertain clinical impact. Am J 
Emerg Med. 2008;26:1047–1055. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2007.12.003.
 110. Brady WJ, Gurka KK, Mehring B, Peberdy MA, O’Connor RE; American 
Heart 
Association’s 
Get 
With 
the 
Guidelines 
(formerly, 
NRCPR) 
Investigators. 
In­hospital cardiac arrest: impact of monitoring and witnessed event on 
patient survival and neurologic status at hospital discharge. Resuscitation. 
2011;82:845–852. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2011.02.028.
 111. Chopra V, McMahon LF Jr. Redesigning hospital alarms for patient safety: 
alarmed and potentially dangerous. JAMA. 2014;311:1199–1200. doi: 
10.1001/jama.2014.710.
 112. Farkouh ME, Smars PA, Reeder GS, Zinsmeister AR, Evans RW, Meloy TD, 
Kopecky SL, Allen M, Allison TG, Gibbons RJ, Gabriel SE. A clinical trial 
of a chest­pain observation unit for patients with unstable angina: Chest 
Pain Evaluation in the Emergency Room (CHEER) Investigators. N Engl J 
Med. 1998;339:1882–1888. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199812243392603.
 113. Farkouh ME, Aneja A, Reeder GS, Smars PA, Bansilal S, Lennon RJ, Wiste 
HJ, Razzouk L, Traverse K, Holmes DR Jr, Mathew V. Clinical risk strati­
fication in the emergency department predicts long­term cardiovascu­
lar outcomes in a population­based cohort presenting with acute chest 
pain: primary results of the Olmsted County Chest Pain Study. Medicine 
(Baltimore). 2009;88:307–313. doi: 10.1097/MD.0b013e3181b98782.
 114. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, Casey DE Jr, Ganiats TG, Holmes 
DR Jr, Jaffe AS, Jneid H, Kelly RF, Kontos MC, Levine GN, Liebson PR, 
Mukherjee D, Peterson ED, Sabatine MS, Smalling RW, Zieman SJ. 2014 
ACC/AHA guideline for the management of patients with non­ST­ele­
vation acute coronary syndromes: executive summary: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines [published correction appears in Circulation. 
2014;130:e431–e432]. Circulation. 2014;130:2354–2394. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000133.
 115. Goldman L, Cook EF, Johnson PA, Brand DA, Rouan GW, Lee TH. 
Prediction of the need for intensive care in patients who come to emer­
gency departments with acute chest pain. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:1498–
1504. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199606063342303.
 116. Sanchis J, Bodí V, Núñez J, Bertomeu­González V, Gómez C, Bosch MJ, 
Consuegra L, Bosch X, Chorro FJ, Llàcer A. New risk score for patients 
with acute chest pain, non­ST­segment deviation, and normal troponin 
concentrations: a comparison with the TIMI risk score. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2005;46:443–449. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.04.037.
 117. Christenson J, Innes G, McKnight D, Thompson CR, Wong H, Yu E, 
Boychuk B, Grafstein E, Rosenberg F, Gin K, Anis A, Singer J. A clinical 
prediction rule for early discharge of patients with chest pain. Ann Emerg 
Med. 2006;47:1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2005.08.007.
 118. Backus BE, Six AJ, Kelder JC, Bosschaert MA, Mast EG, Mosterd A, 
Veldkamp RF, Wardeh AJ, Tio R, Braam R, Monnink SH, van Tooren R, Mast 
TP
, van den Akker F, Cramer MJ, Poldervaart JM, Hoes AW, Doevendans 
PA. A prospective validation of the HEART score for chest pain patients 
at the emergency department. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:2153–2158. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.01.255.
 119. Fesmire FM, Martin EJ, Cao Y, Heath GW. Improving risk stratification in 
patients with chest pain: the Erlanger HEARTS3 score. Am J Emerg Med. 
2012;30:1829–1837. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2012.03.017.
 120. Hess EP
, Brison RJ, Perry JJ, Calder LA, Thiruganasambandamoorthy V, 
Agarwal D, Sadosty AT, Silvilotti ML, Jaffe AS, Montori VM, Wells GA, 
Stiell IG. Development of a clinical prediction rule for 30­day cardiac 
events in emergency department patients with chest pain and possible 
acute coronary syndrome. Ann Emerg Med. 2012;59:115–125.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.annemergmed.2011.07.026.
 121. Antman EM, Cohen M, Bernink PJ, McCabe CH, Horacek T, Papuchis G, 
Mautner B, Corbalan R, Radley D, Braunwald E. The TIMI risk score for 
unstable angina/non­ST elevation MI: a method for prognostication and 
therapeutic decision making. JAMA. 2000;284:835–842.
 122. Boersma E, Pieper KS, Steyerberg EW, Wilcox RG, Chang WC, Lee KL, 
Akkerhuis KM, Harrington RA, Deckers JW, Armstrong PW, Lincoff AM, 
Califf RM, Topol EJ, Simoons ML. Predictors of outcome in patients 
with acute coronary syndromes without persistent ST­segment eleva­
tion. Results from an international trial of 9461 patients: the PURSUIT 
Investigators. Circulation. 2000;101:2557–2567.
 123. Eagle KA, Lim MJ, Dabbous OH, Pieper KS, Goldberg RJ, Van de Werf 
F, Goodman SG, Granger CB, Steg PG, Gore JM, Budaj A, Avezum A, 
Flather MD, Fox KA; GRACE Investigators. A validated prediction model 
for all forms of acute coronary syndrome: estimating the risk of 6­month 
postdischarge death in an international registry. JAMA. 2004;291:2727–
2733. doi: 10.1001/jama.291.22.2727.
 124. NCDR: National Cardiovascular Data Registry. Registries. https://www.
ncdr.com/webncdr/action/. Accessed August 14, 2017.
 125. Newby KH, Thompson T, Stebbins A, Topol EJ, Califf RM, Natale A. 
Sustained ventricular arrhythmias in patients receiving thrombolytic 
therapy: incidence and outcomes: the GUSTO Investigators. Circulation. 
1998;98:2567–2573.
 126. Chiriboga D, Yarzebski J, Goldberg RJ, Gore JM, Alpert JS. Temporal 
trends (1975 through 1990) in the incidence and case­fatality rates of 
primary ventricular fibrillation complicating acute myocardial infarction: 
a communitywide perspective. Circulation. 1994;89:998–1003.
 127. Mehta RH, Harjai KJ, Grines L, Stone GW, Boura J, Cox D, O’Neill 
W, Grines CL; Primary Angioplasty in Myocardial Infarction (PAMI) 
Investigators. Sustained ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation in the 
cardiac catheterization laboratory among patients receiving pri­
mary percutaneous coronary intervention: incidence, predictors, and 
outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43:1765–1772. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2003.09.072.
 128. Mehta RH, Starr AZ, Lopes RD, Hochman JS, Widimsky P
, Pieper KS, 
Armstrong PW, Granger CB; APEX AMI Investigators. Incidence of and 
outcomes associated with ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation in pa­
tients undergoing primary percutaneous coronary intervention. JAMA. 
2009;301:1779–1789. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.600.
 129. Piccini JP
, White JA, Mehta RH, Lokhnygina Y, Al­Khatib SM, Tricoci P
, 
Pollack CV Jr, Montalescot G, Van de Werf F, Gibson CM, Giugliano RP
, 
Califf RM, Harrington RA, Newby LK. Sustained ventricular tachycar­
dia and ventricular fibrillation complicating non­ST­segment­elevation 
acute coronary syndromes. Circulation. 2012;126:41–49. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.111.071860.
 130. Winkler C, Funk M, Schindler DM, Hemsey JZ, Lampert R, Drew BJ. 
Arrhythmias in patients with acute coronary syndrome in the first 24 
hours of hospitalization. Heart Lung. 2013;42:422–427. doi: 10.1016/j.
hrtlng.2013.07.010.
 131. Patel DJ, Holdright DR, Knight CJ, Mulcahy D, Thakrar B, Wright C, 
Sparrow J, Wicks M, Hubbard W, Thomas R, Sutton GC, Hendry G, 
Purcell H, Fox K. Early continuous ST segment monitoring in unstable 
angina: prognostic value additional to the clinical characteristics and the 
admission electrocardiogram. Heart. 1996;75:222–228.
 132. Patel D, Knight C, Holdright D, Mulcahy D, Clarke D, Wright C, 
Purcell H, Fox K. Long­term prognosis in unstable angina. Eur Heart J. 
1998;19:240–249.
 133. Fesmire FM, Hughes AD, Fody EP
, Jackson AP
, Fesmire CE, Gilbert MA, 
Stout PK, Wojcik JF, Wharton DR, Creel JH. The Erlanger chest pain evalu­
ation protocol: a one­year experience with serial 12­lead ECG monitor­
ing, two­hour delta serum marker measurements, and selective nuclear 
stress testing to identify and exclude acute coronary syndromes. Ann 
Emerg Med. 2002;40:584–594.
 134. Gomez MA, Anderson JL, Karagounis LA, Muhlestein JB, Mooers FB. An 
emergency department­based protocol for rapidly ruling out myocardial 
ischemia reduces hospital time and expense: results of a randomized 
study (ROMIO). J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;28:25–33.
 135. Amsterdam EA, Lewis WR, Kirk JD, Diercks DB, Turnipseed S. 
Acute ischemic syndromes: chest pain center concept. Cardiol Clin. 
2002;20:117–136.
 136. Fesmire FM, Wharton DR, Calhoun FB. Instability of ST segments in the 
early stages of acute myocardial infarction in patients undergoing con­
tinuous 12­lead ECG monitoring. Am J Emerg Med. 1995;13:158–163. 
doi: 10.1016/0735­6757(95)90084­5.
 137. Selker HP
, Zalenski RJ, Antman EM, Aufderheide TP
, Bernard SA, Bonow 
RO, Gibler WB, Hagen MD, Johnson P
, Lau J. Continuous 12­lead ECG. 
Ann Emerg Med. 1997;29:25–28.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e335
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 138. Fesmire FM, Percy RF, Bardoner JB, Wharton DR, Calhoun FB. Usefulness 
of automated serial 12­lead ECG monitoring during the initial emergen­
cy department evaluation of patients with chest pain. Ann Emerg Med. 
1998;31:3–11.
 139. Carmo P
, Ferreira J, Aguiar C, Ferreira A, Raposo L, Gonçalves 
P
, Brito J, Silva A. Does continuous ST­segment monitoring add 
prognostic information to the TIMI, PURSUIT, and GRACE risk 
scores? Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 2011;16:239–249. doi: 
10.1111/j.1542­474X.2011.00438.x.
 140. Drew BJ, Pelter MM, Lee E, Zegre J, Schindler D, Fleischmann KE. 
Designing prehospital ECG systems for acute coronary syndromes: les­
sons learned from clinical trials involving 12­lead ST­segment moni­
toring. J Electrocardiol. 2005;38(suppl):180–185. doi: 10.1016/j.
jelectrocard.2005.06.031.
 141. Drew BJ, Sommargren CE, Schindler DM, Benedict K, Zegre­Hemsey 
J, Glancy JP
. A simple strategy improves prehospital electrocardiogram 
utilization and hospital treatment for patients with acute coronary syn­
drome (from the ST SMART Study). Am J Cardiol. 2011;107:347–352. 
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2010.09.027.
 142. Fesmire FM. Which chest pain patients potentially benefit from continu­
ous 12­lead ST­segment monitoring with automated serial ECG? Am J 
Emerg Med. 2000;18:773–778. doi: 10.1053/ajem.2000.18036.
 143. Gottlieb SO, Weisfeldt ML, Ouyang P
, Mellits ED, Gerstenblith G. Silent 
ischemia as a marker for early unfavorable outcomes in patients with 
unstable angina. N Engl J Med. 1986;314:1214–1219.
 144. Gottlieb SO, Weisfeldt ML, Ouyang P
, Mellits ED, Gerstenblith G. Silent 
ischemia predicts infarction and death during 2 year follow­up of un­
stable angina. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1987;10:756–760.
 145. Nademanee K, Intarachot V, Josephson MA, Rieders D, Vaghaiwalla 
Mody F, Singh BN. Prognostic significance of silent myocardial ischemia 
in patients with unstable angina. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1987;10:1–9.
 146. Langer A, Freeman MR, Armstrong PW. ST segment shift in unstable 
angina: pathophysiology and association with coronary anatomy and 
hospital outcome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1989;13:1495–1502.
 147. Larsson H, Jonasson T, Ringqvist I, Fellenius C, Wallentin L. Diagnostic and 
prognostic importance of ST recording after an episode of unstable angi­
na or non­Q­wave myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J. 1992;13:207–212.
 148. Krucoff MW, Croll MA, Pope JE, Pieper KS, Kanani PM, Granger CB, 
Veldkamp RF, Wagner BL, Sawchak ST, Califf RM. Continuously updated 
12­lead ST­segment recovery analysis for myocardial infarct artery pa­
tency assessment and its correlation with multiple simultaneous early 
angiographic observations. Am J Cardiol. 1993;71:145–151.
 149. Veldkamp RF, Green CL, Wilkins ML, Pope JE, Sawchak ST, Ryan JA, 
Califf RM, Wagner GS, Krucoff MW. Comparison of continuous ST­
segment recovery analysis with methods using static electrocardiograms 
for noninvasive patency assessment during acute myocardial infarction. 
Thrombolysis and Angioplasty in Myocardial Infarction (TAMI) 7 Study 
Group. Am J Cardiol. 1994;73:1069–1074.
 150. Langer A, Krucoff MW, Klootwijk P
, Veldkamp R, Simoons ML, Granger 
C, Califf RM, Armstrong PW. Noninvasive assessment of speed and sta­
bility of infarct­related artery reperfusion: results of the GUSTO ST seg­
ment monitoring study: Global Utilization of Streptokinase and Tissue 
Plasminogen Activator for Occluded Coronary Arteries. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1995;25:1552–1557.
 151. Santoro GM, Buonamici P
. Reperfusion therapy in cardiogenic shock 
complicating acute myocardial infarction. Am Heart J. 1999;138(pt 
2):S126–S131.
 152. Albertal M, Cura F, Thierer J, Trivi M, Escudero AG, Padilla LT, Belardi 
JA. Time to stable ST­segment recovery following primary angioplasty is 
predictive of regional wall motion score and clinical outcome. Angiology. 
2010;61:638–642. doi: 10.1177/0003319710369099.
 153. Bogaty P
, Dumont S, O’Hara GE, Boyer L, Auclair L, Jobin J, Boudreault 
JR. Randomized trial of a noninvasive strategy to reduce hospital stay 
for patients with low­risk myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2001;37:1289–1296.
 154. Kandzari DE, Tcheng JE, Cohen DJ, Bakhai A, Grines CL, Cox DA, 
Effron M, Stuckey T, Griffin JJ, Turco M, Carroll JD, Fahy M, Mehran 
R, Stone GW; CADILLAC Investigators. Feasibility and implications of 
an early discharge strategy after percutaneous intervention with abcix­
imab in acute myocardial infarction (the CADILLAC Trial). Am J Cardiol. 
2003;92:779–784.
 155. De Luca G, van ‘t Hof AW, de Boer MJ, Ottervanger JP
, Hoorntje JC, 
Gosselink AT, Dambrink JH, Zijlstra F, Suryapranata H. Time­to­treatment 
significantly affects the extent of ST­segment resolution and myo­
cardial blush in patients with acute myocardial infarction treated by 
primary angioplasty. Eur Heart J. 2004;25:1009–1013. doi: 10.1016/j.
ehj.2004.03.021.
 156. Addala S, Kahn JK, Moccia TF, Harjai K, Pellizon G, Ochoa A, O’Neill 
WW. Outcome of ventricular fibrillation developing during percutaneous 
coronary interventions in 19,497 patients without cardiogenic shock. Am 
J Cardiol. 2005;96:764–765. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2005.04.057.
 157. Piccini JP
, Berger JS, Brown DL. Early sustained ventricular arrhythmias 
complicating acute myocardial infarction. Am J Med. 2008;121:797–
804. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2008.04.024.
 158. Czarnecki A, Welsh RC, Yan RT, DeYoung JP
, Gallo R, Rose B, Grondin FR, 
Kornder JM, Wong GC, Fox KA, Gore JM, Goodman SG, Yan AT; Global 
Registry of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE/GRACE2); Canadian Registry 
of Coronary Events (CANRACE) Investigators. Reperfusion strategies 
and outcomes of ST­segment elevation myocardial infarction patients in 
Canada: observations from the Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events 
(GRACE) and the Canadian Registry of Acute Coronary Events (CANRACE). 
Can J Cardiol. 2012;28:40–47. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2011.09.011.
 159. Ohlow MA, Geller JC, Richter S, Farah A, Müller S, Fuhrmann JT, Lauer B. 
Incidence and predictors of ventricular arrhythmias after ST­segment el­
evation myocardial infarction. Am J Emerg Med. 2012;30:580–586. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajem.2011.02.029.
 160. Rahimi K, Watzlawek S, Thiele H, Secknus MA, Hayerizadeh BF, Niebauer 
J, Schuler G. Incidence, time course, and predictors of early malignant 
ventricular arrhythmias after non­ST­segment elevation myocardial infarc­
tion in patients with early invasive treatment. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:1706–
1711. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehl100.
 161. Harskamp RE, Wang TY, Bhatt DL, Wiviott SD, Amsterdam EA, Li S, 
Thomas L, de Winter RJ, Roe MT. Hospital patterns of medical manage­
ment strategy use for patients with non–ST­elevation myocardial in­
farction and 3­vessel or left main coronary artery disease. Am Heart J. 
2014;167:355–362. e3.
 162. Scirica BM, Braunwald E, Belardinelli L, Hedgepeth CM, Spinar J, Wang 
W, Qin J, Karwatowska­Prokopczuk E, Verheugt FW, Morrow DA. 
Relationship between nonsustained ventricular tachycardia after non­ST­
elevation acute coronary syndrome and sudden cardiac death: observa­
tions from the Metabolic Efficiency With Ranolazine for Less Ischemia in 
Non­ST­Elevation Acute Coronary Syndrome­Thrombolysis in Myocardial 
Infarction 36 (MERLIN­TIMI 36) randomized controlled trial. Circulation. 
2010;122:455–462. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.937136.
 163. Harkness JR, Morrow DA, Braunwald E, Ren F, Lopez­Sendon J, Bode 
C, Budaj A, Scirica BM. Myocardial ischemia and ventricular tachycardia 
on continuous electrocardiographic monitoring and risk of cardiovascu­
lar outcomes after non­ST­segment elevation acute coronary syndrome 
(from the MERLIN­TIMI 36 Trial). Am J Cardiol. 2011;108:1373–1381. 
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2011.06.058.
 164. Bernard SA, Gray TW, Buist MD, Jones BM, Silvester W, Gutteridge G, 
Smith K. Treatment of comatose survivors of out­of­hospital cardiac ar­
rest with induced hypothermia. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:557–563. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa003289.
 165. Hypothermia After Cardiac Arrest Group. Mild therapeutic hypother­
mia to improve the neurologic outcome after cardiac arrest [published 
correction appears in N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1756]. N Engl J Med. 
2002;346:549–556.
 166. Peberdy MA, Callaway CW, Neumar RW, Geocadin RG, Zimmerman JL, 
Donnino M, Gabrielli A, Silvers SM, Zaritsky AL, Merchant R, Vanden 
Hoek TL, Kronick SL. Part 9: post­cardiac arrest care: 2010 American 
Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and 
emergency cardiovascular care [published correction appears in 
Circulation. 2011;123:e237]. Circulation. 2010;122(suppl 3):S768–S786. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.971002.
 167. Vassallo SU, Delaney KA, Hoffman RS, Slater W, Goldfrank LR. A prospec­
tive evaluation of the electrocardiographic manifestations of hypother­
mia. Acad Emerg Med. 1999;6:1121–1126.
 168. Mattu A, Brady WJ, Perron AD. Electrocardiographic manifestations of 
hypothermia. Am J Emerg Med. 2002;20:314–326.
 169. Aslam AF, Aslam AK, Vasavada BC, Khan IA. Hypothermia: evaluation, 
electrocardiographic manifestations, and management. Am J Med. 
2006;119:297–301. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2005.09.062.
 170. Salinski EP
, Worrilow CC. ST­segment elevation myocardial infarction vs. 
hypothermia­induced electrocardiographic changes: a case report and 
brief review of the literature. J Emerg Med. 2014;46:e107–e111. doi: 
10.1016/j.jemermed.2013.08.122.
 171. Wang H, Hollingsworth J, Mahler S, Arnold T. Diffuse ST segment de­
pression from hypothermia. Int J Emerg Med. 2010;3:451–454. doi: 
10.1007/s12245­010­0211­y.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e336
 172. Bonnemeier H, Mäuser W, Schunkert H. Images in cardiovascular medi­
cine: Brugada­like ECG pattern in severe hypothermia. Circulation. 
2008;118:977–978. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.771329.
 173. Rolfast CL, Lust EJ, de Cock CC. Electrocardiographic changes in thera­
peutic hypothermia. Crit Care. 2012;16:R100. doi: 10.1186/cc11369.
 174. JCS Joint Working Group. Guidelines for diagnosis and treatment of pa­
tients with vasospastic angina (Coronary Spastic Angina) (JCS 2008). Circ 
J. 2010;74:1745–1762.
 175. Prinzmetal M, Kennamer R, Merliss R. A variant form of angina pectoris. 
Am J Med. 1959;27:376–388.
 176. Kusama Y, Kodani E, Nakagomi A, Otsuka T, Atarashi H, Kishida 
H, Mizuno K. Variant angina and coronary artery spasm: the clini­
cal spectrum, pathophysiology, and management. J Nippon Med Sch. 
2011;78:4–12.
 177. Figueras J, Domingo E, Ferreira I, Lidón RS, Garcia­Dorado D. Persistent 
angina pectoris, cardiac mortality and myocardial infarction during a 12 
year follow­up in 273 variant angina patients without significant fixed 
coronary stenosis. Am J Cardiol. 2012;110:1249–1255.
 178. Holt DB, Singh GK, Rhee EK, Billadello J, Ludomirsky A. Images in cardio­
vascular medicine: Prinzmetal angina in an adolescent: adjunctive role of 
tissue synchronization imaging. Circulation. 2005;112:e91–e92.
 179. Jefferies JL, Treistman B. Prinzmetal angina in a teenage girl. Pediatr 
Cardiol. 2005;26:486–487. doi: 10.1007/s00246­004­0811­5.
 180. Kounis NG. Coronary hypersensitivity disorder: the Kounis syndrome. 
Clin Ther. 2013;35:563–571. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2013.02.022.
 181. Ong P
, Athanasiadis A, Hill S, Vogelsberg H, Voehringer M, Sechtem U. 
Coronary artery spasm as a frequent cause of acute coronary syndrome: 
the CASPAR (Coronary Artery Spasm in Patients With Acute Coronary 
Syndrome) Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:523–527. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2008.04.050.
 182. Wittstein IS, Thiemann DR, Lima JA, Baughman KL, Schulman SP
, 
Gerstenblith G, Wu KC, Rade JJ, Bivalacqua TJ, Champion HC. 
Neurohumoral features of myocardial stunning due to sudden emotional 
stress. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:539–548. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa043046.
 183. Williams DS. Prinzmetal angina. J Insur Med. 2009;41:77–79.
 184. Pilgrim TM, Wyss TR. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy or transient left ven­
tricular apical ballooning syndrome: a systematic review. Int J Cardiol. 
2008;124:283–292. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2007.07.002.
 185. Kurisu S, Inoue I, Kawagoe T, Ishihara M, Shimatani Y, Hata T, Nakama 
Y, Kijima Y, Kagawa E. Documentation of dynamic electrocardiograph­
ic changes shortly after the onset of tako­tsubo cardiomyopathy. Int J 
Cardiol. 2007;119:258–260. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2006.07.141.
 186. Virani SS, Mendoza CE, Ferreira AC, de Marchena E. Left main coro­
nary artery stenosis: factors predicting cardiac events in patients awaiting 
coronary surgery. Tex Heart Inst J. 2006;33:23–26.
 187. Li JM, Camenzind E, Meier B, Urban P
, Giroud D, Rutishauser W. 
In­hospital monitoring after coronary angioplasty. J Interv Cardiol. 
1994;7:229–235.
 188. Black AJ, Namay DL, Niederman AL, Lembo NJ, Roubin GS, Douglas JS Jr, 
King SB 3rd. Tear or dissection after coronary angioplasty: morphologic 
correlates of an ischemic complication. Circulation. 1989;79:1035–1042.
 189. Cheneau E, Leborgne L, Mintz GS, Kotani J, Pichard AD, Satler 
LF, Canos D, Castagna M, Weissman NJ, Waksman R. Predictors 
of subacute stent thrombosis: results of a systematic intravascu­
lar ultrasound study. Circulation. 2003;108:43–47. doi: 10.1161/01.
CIR.0000078636.71728.40.
 190. Spoon DB, Psaltis PJ, Singh M, Holmes DR Jr, Gersh BJ, Rihal CS, Lennon 
RJ, Moussa ID, Simari RD, Gulati R. Trends in cause of death after percu­
taneous coronary intervention. Circulation. 2014;129:1286–1294. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.006518.
 191. Thel MC, Califf RM, Tardiff BE, Gardner LH, Sigmon KN, Lincoff AM, 
Topol EJ, Kitt MM, Blankenship JC, Tcheng JE. Timing of and risk factors 
for myocardial ischemic events after percutaneous coronary intervention 
(IMPACT­II): Integrilin to Minimize Platelet Aggregation and Coronary 
Thrombosis. Am J Cardiol. 2000;85:427–434.
 192. Jozic J, Orford J, Steinhubl S, Berger P
, Hsu A, Topol E. Timing and cor­
relates of very early major adverse clinical events following percutaneous 
coronary intervention. J Invasive Cardiol. 2008;20:113–118.
 193. Brayton KM, Patel VG, Stave C, de Lemos JA, Kumbhani DJ. Same­day 
discharge after percutaneous coronary intervention: a meta­analysis. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:275–285. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.03.051.
 194. Scanlon PJ, Faxon DP
, Audet AM, Carabello B, Dehmer GJ, Eagle KA, 
Legako RD, Leon DF, Murray JA, Nissen SE, Pepine CJ, Watson RM. 
ACC/AHA guidelines for coronary angiography: executive summary 
and recommendations: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee 
on Coronary Angiography). Circulation. 1999;99:2345–2357.
 195. Tavakol M, Ashraf S, Brener SJ. Risks and complications of coronary angi­
ography: a comprehensive review. Glob J Health Sci. 2012;4:65–93. doi: 
10.5539/gjhs.v4n1p65.
 196. Chen J, Gao L, Yao M, Chen J. Ventricular arrhythmia onset during diag­
nostic coronary angiography with a 5F or 4F universal catheter. Rev Esp 
Cardiol. 2008;61:1092–1095.
 197. Johnson LW, Lozner EC, Johnson S, Krone R, Pichard AD, Vetrovec GW, 
Noto TJ. Coronary arteriography 1984­1987: a report of the Registry of 
the Society for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions, I: results and 
complications. Cathet Cardiovasc Diagn. 1989;17:5–10.
 198. Saleem MA, McClung JA, Aronow WS, Kannam H. Inpatient telemetry 
does not need to be used in the management of older patients hospi­
talized with chest pain at low risk for in­hospital coronary events and 
mortality. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2005;60:605–606.
 199. Singer AJ, Visram F, Shembekar A, Khwaja M, Viccellio A. Telemetry mon­
itoring during transport of low­risk chest pain patients from the emer­
gency department: is it necessary? Acad Emerg Med. 2005;12:965–969. 
doi: 10.1197/j.aem.2005.06.007.
 200. Atzema C, Schull MJ, Borgundvaag B, Slaughter GR, Lee CK. ALARMED: 
adverse events in low­risk patients with chest pain receiving con­
tinuous electrocardiographic monitoring in the emergency depart­
ment: a pilot study. Am J Emerg Med. 2006;24:62–67. doi: 10.1016/j.
ajem.2005.05.015.
 201. Chen EH, Hollander JE. When do patients need admission to a te­
lemetry bed? J Emerg Med. 2007;33:53–60. doi: 10.1016/j.
jemermed.2007.01.017.
 202. Six AJ, Backus BE, Kelder JC. Chest pain in the emergency room: value of 
the HEART score. Neth Heart J. 2008;16:191–196.
 203. Bovino LR, Funk M, Pelter MM, Desai MM, Jefferson V, Andrews LK, 
Forte K. The value of continuous ST­segment monitoring in the emer­
gency department. Adv Emerg Nurs J. 2015;37:290–300. doi: 10.1097/
TME.0000000000000080.
 204. Siebert J, Rogowski J, Jagielak D, Anisimowicz L, Lango R, Narkiewicz M. 
Atrial fibrillation after coronary artery bypass grafting without cardiopul­
monary bypass. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2000;17:520–523.
 205. Funk M, Richards SB, Desjardins J, Bebon C, Wilcox H. Incidence, timing, 
symptoms, and risk factors for atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery. Am 
J Crit Care. 2003;12:424–433; quiz 434–435.
 206. Nisanoglu V, Erdil N, Aldemir M, Ozgur B, Berat Cihan H, Yologlu S, 
Battaloglu B. Atrial fibrillation after coronary artery bypass grafting in el­
derly patients: incidence and risk factor analysis. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2007;55:32–38. doi: 10.1055/s­2006­924711.
 207. Koletsis EN, Prokakis C, Crockett JR, Dedeilias P
, Panagiotou M, 
Panagopoulos N, Anastasiou N, Dougenis D, Apostolakis E. Prognostic 
factors of atrial fibrillation following elective coronary artery bypass 
grafting: the impact of quantified intraoperative myocardial ischemia. J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2011;6:127. doi: 10.1186/1749­8090­6­127.
 208. Maesen B, Nijs J, Maessen J, Allessie M, Schotten U. Post­operative atrial 
fibrillation: a maze of mechanisms. Europace. 2012;14:159–174. doi: 
10.1093/europace/eur208.
 209. Amat­Santos IJ, Rodés­Cabau J, Urena M, DeLarochellière R, Doyle D, 
Bagur R, Villeneuve J, Côté M, Nombela­Franco L, Philippon F, Pibarot 
P, Dumont E. Incidence, predictive factors, and prognostic value of 
new­onset atrial fibrillation following transcatheter aortic valve im­
plantation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:178–188. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2011.09.061.
 210. Maisel WH, Rawn JD, Stevenson WG. Atrial fibrillation after cardiac sur­
gery. Ann Intern Med. 2001;135:1061–1073.
 211. Brembilla­Perrot B, Villemot J, Carteaux J, Haouzi A, Amrein D, Schöth B, 
Houriez P
, Beurrier D, Djaballah K, Vancon AC,Nippert M. Postoperative 
ventricular arrhythmias after cardiac surgery: immediate­ and long­term 
significance. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2003;26(pt 1):619–625.
 212. Merin O, Ilan M, Oren A, Fink D, Deeb M, Bitran D, Silberman S. 
Permanent pacemaker implantation following cardiac surgery: indica­
tions and long­term follow­up. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2009;32:7–12. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1540­8159.2009.02170.x.
 213. Huynh H, Dalloul G, Ghanbari H, Burke P
, David M, Daccarett M, 
Machado C, David S. Permanent pacemaker implantation follow­
ing aortic valve replacement: current prevalence and clinical pre­
dictors. 
Pacing 
Clin 
Electrophysiol. 
2009;32:1520–1525. 
doi: 
10.1111/j.1540­8159.2009.02552.x.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e337
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 214. Gordon MA, Urban MK, O’Connor T, Barash PG. Is the pressure rate 
quotient a predictor or indicator of myocardial ischemia as measured 
by ST­segment changes in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass 
surgery? Anesthesiology. 1991;74:848–853.
 215. Jain U, Laflamme CJ, Aggarwal A, Ramsay JG, Comunale ME, Ghoshal 
S, Ngo L, Ziola K, Hollenberg M, Mangano DT. Electrocardiographic and 
hemodynamic changes and their association with myocardial infarction 
during coronary artery bypass surgery: a multicenter study: Multicenter 
Study of Perioperative Ischemia (McSPI) Research Group. Anesthesiology. 
1997;86:576–591.
 216. Knight AA, Hollenberg M, London MJ, Tubau J, Verrier E, Browner W, 
Mangano DT. Perioperative myocardial ischemia: importance of the pre­
operative ischemic pattern. Anesthesiology. 1988;68:681–688.
 217. Berry PD, Thomas SD, Mahon SP
, Jackson M, Fox MA, Fabri B, Weir 
WI, Russell GN. Myocardial ischaemia after coronary artery bypass 
grafting: early vs late extubation [published corrections appear in Br J 
Anaesth. 1998;80:572 and Br J Anaesth. 1998;81: 111]. Br J Anaesth. 
1998;80:20–25.
 218. Mangano DT, Siliciano D, Hollenberg M, Leung JM, Browner WS, Goehner 
P
, Merrick S, Verrier E. Postoperative myocardial ischemia: therapeutic tri­
als using intensive analgesia following surgery: the Study of Perioperative 
Ischemia (SPI) Research Group. Anesthesiology. 1992;76:342–353.
 219. Cheng DC, Karski J, Peniston C, Asokumar B, Raveendran G, Carroll J, 
Nierenberg H, Roger S, Mickle D, Tong J, Zelovitsky J, David T, Sandler 
A. Morbidity outcome in early versus conventional tracheal extubation 
after coronary artery bypass grafting: a prospective randomized con­
trolled trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;112:755–764. doi: 10.1016/
S0022­5223(96)70062­4.
 220. Thielmann M, Massoudy P
, Jaeger BR, Neuhäuser M, Marggraf G, Sack S, 
Erbel R, Jakob H. Emergency re­revascularization with percutaneous coro­
nary intervention, reoperation, or conservative treatment in patients with 
acute perioperative graft failure following coronary artery bypass surgery. Eur 
J Cardiothorac Surg. 2006;30:117–125. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2006.03.062.
 221. Cockburn J, Blows L, Cohen A, Holmberg S, Hyde J, Lewis M, Trivedi U, 
Hildick­Smith D, de Belder A. Acute ischemic complications of PCI and 
CABG: who should cover whom for coronary revascularization? J Interv 
Cardiol. 2013;26:372–377. doi: 10.1111/joic.12045.
 222. Payne L, Zeigler VL, Gillette PC. Acute cardiac arrhythmias following 
surgery for congenital heart disease: mechanisms, diagnostic tools, and 
management. Crit Care Nurs Clin North Am. 2011;23:255–272. doi: 
10.1016/j.ccell.2011.04.001.
 223. Skippen PW, Sanatani S, Gow RM, Froese N. Diagnosis of postoperative 
arrhythmias following paediatric cardiac surgery. Anaesth Intensive Care. 
2009;37:705–719.
 224. Makhoul M, Oster M, Fischbach P
, Das S, Deshpande S. Junctional ecto­
pic tachycardia after congenital heart surgery in the current surgical era. 
Pediatr Cardiol. 2013;34:370–374. doi: 10.1007/s00246­012­0465­7.
 225. Batra AS, Chun DS, Johnson TR, Maldonado EM, Kashyap BA, Maiers J, 
Lindblade CL, Rodefeld M, Brown JW, Hubbard JE. A prospective analysis 
of the incidence and risk factors associated with junctional ectopic tachy­
cardia following surgery for congenital heart disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 
2006;27:51–55. doi: 10.1007/s00246­005­0992­6.
 226. Backer CL, Tsao S, Deal BJ, Mavroudis C. Maze procedure in single ven­
tricle patients. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 
2008;11:44–48.
 227. Deal 
BJ. 
Late 
arrhythmias 
following 
Fontan 
surgery. 
World 
J 
Pediatr 
Congenit 
Heart Surg. 2012;3:194–200. doi: 10.1177/2150135111436314.
 228. Smith AH, Owen J, Borgman KY, Fish FA, Kannankeril PJ. Relation of 
milrinone after surgery for congenital heart disease to significant post­
operative tachyarrhythmias. Am J Cardiol. 2011;108:1620–1624. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjcard.2011.07.023.
 229. Epstein A, DiMarco J, Ellenbogen K, Estes N 3rd, Freedman R, Gettes 
L, Gillinov A, Gregoratos G, Hammill S, Hayes D, Hlatky MA, Newby 
LK, Page RL, Schoenfeld MH, Silka MJ, Stevenson LW, Sweeney MO. 
ACC/AHA/HRS 2008 Guidelines for Device­Based Therapy of Cardiac 
Rhythm Abnormalities: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing 
Committee to Revise the ACC/AHA/NASPE 2002 Guideline Update for 
Implantation of Cardiac Pacemakers and Antiarrhythmia Devices) [pub­
lished correction appears in Circulation. 2009:120:e34–e35]. Circulation. 
2008;117:e350–e408. doi: 10.1161/CIRCUALTIONAHA.108.189742.
 230. McCafferty M, Sorbellini D, Cianci P
. Telemetry to home: successful 
discharge of patients with ventricular assist devices. Crit Care Nurse. 
2002;22:43–51.
 231. Shinn JA, Abou­Awdi N, Ley SJ, Reedy JE, Rountree WD. Nursing care 
of the patient on mechanical circulatory support. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1993;55:288–294.
 232. Brisco MA, Sundareswaran KS, Milano CA, Feldman D, Testani JM, 
Ewald GA, Slaughter MS, Farrar DJ, Goldberg LR; HeartMate II Clinical 
Investigators. Incidence, risk, and consequences of atrial arrhythmias in 
patients with continuous­flow left ventricular assist devices. J Card Surg. 
2014;29:572–580. doi: 10.1111/jocs.12336.
 233. Enriquez AD, Calenda B, Miller MA, Anyanwu AC, Pinney SP
. The role 
of implantable cardioverter­defibrillators in patients with continuous 
flow left ventricular assist devices [published correction appears in Circ 
Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2014;7:185]. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 
2013;6:668–674. doi: 10.1161/CIRCEP
.113.000457.
 234. Garan AR, Yuzefpolskaya M, Colombo PC, Morrow JP
, Te­Frey R, Dano D, 
Takayama H, Naka Y, Garan H, Jorde UP
, Uriel N. Ventricular arrhythmias 
and implantable cardioverter­defibrillator therapy in patients with contin­
uous­flow left ventricular assist devices: need for primary prevention? J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:2542–2550. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.04.020.
 235. Feldman D, Pamboukian SV, Teuteberg JJ, Birks E, Lietz K, Moore SA, 
Morgan JA, Arabia F, Bauman ME, Buchholz HW, Deng M, Dickstein ML, 
El­Banayosy A, Elliot T, Goldstein DJ, Grady KL, Jones K, Hryniewicz K, 
John R, Kaan A, Kusne S, Loebe M, Massicotte MP
, Moazami N, Mohacsi 
P
, Mooney M, Nelson T, Pagani F, Perry W, Potapov EV, Eduardo Rame 
J, Russell SD, Sorensen EN, Sun B, Strueber M, Mangi AA, Petty MG, 
Rogers J; International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. The 
2013 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation guidelines 
for mechanical circulatory support: executive summary. J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2013;32:157–187. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2012.09.013.
 236. Holmes DR Jr, Mack MJ, Kaul S, Agnihotri A, Alexander KP
, Bailey SR, 
Calhoon JH, Carabello BA, Desai MY, Edwards FH, Francis GS, Gardner 
TJ, Kappetein AP
, Linderbaum JA, Mukherjee C, Mukherjee D, Otto CM, 
Ruiz CE, Sacco RL, Smith D, Thomas JD. 2012 ACCF/AATS/SCAI/STS ex­
pert consensus document on transcatheter aortic valve replacement. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:1200–1254. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.01.001.
 237. Urena M, Webb JG, Tamburino C, Muñoz­García AJ, Cheema A, 
Dager AE, Serra V, Amat­Santos I, Barbanti M, Immè S, Briales JH, 
Benitez LM, Al Lawati H, Cucalon AM, García Del Blanco B, López J, 
Dumont E, Delarochellière R, Ribeiro HB, Nombela­Franco L, Philippon 
F, Rodés­Cabau J. Permanent pacemaker implantation after transcath­
eter aortic valve implantation: impact on late clinical outcomes and left 
ventricular function. Circulation. 2014;129:1233–1243. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.113.005479.
 238. Nazif TM, Dizon JM, Hahn RT, Xu K, Babaliaros V, Douglas PS, El­Chami 
MF, Herrmann HC, Mack M, Makkar RR, Miller DC, Pichard A, Tuzcu 
EM, Szeto WY, Webb JG, Moses JW, Smith CR, Williams MR, Leon MB, 
Kodali SK; PARTNER Publications Office. Predictors and clinical outcomes 
of permanent pacemaker implantation after transcatheter aortic valve re­
placement: the PARTNER (Placement of AoRtic TraNscathetER Valves) trial 
and registry. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2015;8(pt A):60–69. doi: 10.1016/j.
jcin.2014.07.022.
 239. Siontis GC, Jüni P
, Pilgrim T, Stortecky S, Büllesfeld L, Meier B, Wenaweser 
P
, Windecker S. Predictors of permanent pacemaker implantation in pa­
tients with severe aortic stenosis undergoing TAVR: a meta­analysis. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:129–140. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.04.033.
 240. Piazza N, Onuma Y, Jesserun E, Kint PP
, Maugenest AM, Anderson RH, de 
Jaegere PP
, Serruys PW. Early and persistent intraventricular conduction 
abnormalities and requirements for pacemaking after percutaneous re­
placement of the aortic valve. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2008;1:310–316. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2008.04.007.
 241. Bleiziffer S, Ruge H, Hörer J, Hutter A, Geisbüsch S, Brockmann G, 
Mazzitelli D, Bauernschmitt R, Lange R. Predictors for new­onset com­
plete heart block after transcatheter aortic valve implantation. JACC 
Cardiovasc Interv. 2010;3:524–530. doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2010.01.017.
 242. Nuis RJ, Van Mieghem NM, Schultz CJ, Tzikas A, Van der Boon RM, 
Maugenest AM, Cheng J, Piazza N, van Domburg RT, Serruys PW, de 
Jaegere PP
. Timing and potential mechanisms of new conduction ab­
normalities during the implantation of the Medtronic CoreValve System 
in patients with aortic stenosis. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:2067–2074. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartj/ehr110.
 243. Maan A, Heist EK, Passeri J, Inglessis I, Baker J, Ptaszek L, Vlahakes 
G, Ruskin JN, Palacios I, Sundt T, Mansour M. Impact of atrial fibrilla­
tion on outcomes in patients who underwent transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement. Am J Cardiol. 2015;115:220–226. doi: 10.1016/j.
amjcard.2014.10.027.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e338
 244. Urena M, Hayek S, Cheema AN, Serra V, Amat­Santos IJ, Nombela­Franco 
L, Ribeiro HB, Allende R, Paradis JM, Dumont E, Thourani VH, Babaliaros 
V, Francisco Pascual J, Cortés C, Del Blanco BG, Philippon F, Lerakis S, 
Rodés­Cabau J. Arrhythmia burden in elderly patients with severe aortic 
stenosis as determined by continuous electrocardiographic recording: 
toward a better understanding of arrhythmic events after transcatheter 
aortic valve replacement. Circulation. 2015;131:469–477. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.114.011929.
 245. Erkapic D, De Rosa S, Kelava A, Lehmann R, Fichtlscherer S, Hohnloser SH. 
Risk for permanent pacemaker after transcatheter aortic valve implanta­
tion: a comprehensive analysis of the literature. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 
2012;23:391–397. doi: 10.1111/j.1540­8167.2011.02211.x.
 246. Testa L, Latib A, De Marco F, De Carlo M, Agnifili M, Latini RA, Petronio 
AS, Ettori F, Poli A, De Servi S, Ramondo A, Napodano M, Klugmann 
S, Ussia GP
, Tamburino C, Brambilla N, Colombo A, Bedogni F. Clinical 
impact of persistent left bundle branch block after transcatheter aor­
tic valve implantation with CoreValve Revalving System. Circulation. 
2013;127:1300–1307. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.001099.
 247. Iung B, Himbert D, Vahanian A. Atrial fibrillation following transcath­
eter aortic valve implantation: do we underestimate its frequency 
and impact? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:189–190. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2011.11.005.
 248. Butera G, Carminati M, Chessa M, Piazza L, Micheletti A, Negura DG, 
Abella R, Giamberti A, Frigiola A. Transcatheter closure of perimembra­
nous ventricular septal defects: early and long­term results. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2007;50:1189–1195. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2007.03.068.
 249. Yang R, Kong XQ, Sheng YH, Zhou L, Xu D, Yong YH, Sun W, Zhang 
H, Cao KJ. Risk factors and outcomes of post­procedure heart blocks 
after transcatheter device closure of perimembranous ventricular sep­
tal defect. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2012;5:422–427. doi: 10.1016/j.
jcin.2012.01.015.
 250. Chessa M, Carminati M, Butera G, Bini RM, Drago M, Rosti L, Giamberti 
A, Pomè G, Bossone E, Frigiola A. Early and late complications associated 
with transcatheter occlusion of secundum atrial septal defect. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2002;39:1061–1065.
 251. Abaci A, Unlu S, Alsancak Y, Kaya U, Sezenoz B. Short and long term 
complications of device closure of atrial septal defect and patent fora­
men ovale: meta­analysis of 28,142 patients from 203 studies. Catheter 
Cardiovasc Interv. 2013;82:1123–1138. doi: 10.1002/ccd.24875.
 252. Wang Y, Hua Y, Li L, Wang X, Qiao L, Shi X, Hua J, Qu Y, Mu D. Risk 
factors and prognosis of atrioventricular block after atrial septum defect 
closure using the Amplatzer device. Pediatr Cardiol. 2014;35:550–555. 
doi: 10.1007/s00246­013­0822­1.
 253. Lee V, Hemingway H, Harb R, Crake T, Lambiase P
. The prognostic sig­
nificance of premature ventricular complexes in adults without clinically 
apparent heart disease: a meta­analysis and systematic review. Heart. 
2012;98:1290–1298. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl­2012­302005.
 254. Cantillon DJ. Evaluation and management of premature ventricu­
lar complexes. Cleve Clin J Med. 2013;80:377–387. doi: 10.3949/
ccjm.80a.12168.
 255. Page RL, Joglar JA, Caldwell MA, Calkins H, Conti JB, Deal BJ, Estes NA3, 
Field ME, Goldberger ZD, Hammill SC, Indik JH, Lindsay BD, Olshansky 
B, Russo AM, Shen WK, Tracy CM, Al­Khatib SM. 2015 ACC/AHA/HRS 
guideline for the management of adult patients with supraventricular 
tachycardia: executive summary: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society [published correction appears 
in Circulation. 2016;134:e232–e233]. Circulation. 2016;133:e471–
e505. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000310.
 256. January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, Calkins H, Cigarroa JE, Cleveland JC 
Jr, Conti JB, Ellinor PT, Ezekowitz MD, Field ME, Murray KT, Sacco RL, 
Stevenson WG, Tchou PJ, Tracy CM, Yancy CW. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS 
guideline for the management of patients with atrial fibrillation: a report 
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on practice guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society [published 
correction appears in Circulation. 2014;130:e272–e274]. Circulation. 
2014;130:e199–e267. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000041.
 257. Lafuente­Lafuente C, Mouly S, Longás­Tejero MA, Mahé I, Bergmann JF. 
Antiarrhythmic drugs for maintaining sinus rhythm after cardioversion 
of atrial fibrillation: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. 
Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:719–728. doi: 10.1001/archinte.166.7.719.
 258. You JJ, Singer DE, Howard PA, Lane DA, Eckman MH, Fang MC, 
Hylek EM, Schulman S, Go AS, Hughes M, Spencer FA, Manning WJ, 
Halperin JL, Lip GYH. Antithrombotic therapy for atrial fibrillation: 
antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis: American College 
of Chest Physicians Evidence­Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest. 
2012;141(suppl):e531S–e575S.
 259. Hauser TH, Pinto DS, Josephson ME, Zimetbaum P
. Safety and feasibility 
of a clinical pathway for the outpatient initiation of antiarrhythmic medi­
cations in patients with atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter. Am J Cardiol. 
2003;91:1437–1441.
 260. Menozzi C, Brignole M, Alboni P
, Boni L, Paparella N, Gaggioli G, Lolli 
G. The natural course of untreated sick sinus syndrome and identifica­
tion of the variables predictive of unfavorable outcome. Am J Cardiol. 
1998;82:1205–1209.
 261. Dhingra RC, Denes P
, Wu D, Chuquimia R, Rosen KM. The significance of 
second degree atrioventricular block and bundle branch block: observa­
tions regarding site and type of block. Circulation. 1974;49:638–646.
 262. Strasberg B, Amat­Y­Leon F, Dhingra RC, Palileo E, Swiryn S, Bauernfeind 
R, Wyndham C, Rosen KM. Natural history of chronic second­degree 
atrioventricular nodal block. Circulation. 1981;63:1043–1049.
 263. Connelly DT, Steinhaus DM. Mobitz type I atrioventricular block: 
an indication for permanent pacing? Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 
1996;19:261–264.
 264. Priori SG, Wilde AA, Horie M, Cho Y, Behr ER, Berul C, Blom N, Brugada 
J, Chiang CE, Huikuri H, Kannankeril P
, Krahn A, Leenhardt A, Moss A, 
Schwartz PJ, Shimizu W, Tomaselli G, Tracy C. HRS/EHRA/APHRS expert 
consensus statement on the diagnosis and management of patients with 
inherited primary arrhythmia syndromes. Heart Rhythm. 2013;10:1932–
1963. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2013.05.014.
 265. Timmermans C, Smeets JL, Rodriguez LM, Vrouchos G, van den Dool A, 
Wellens HJ. Aborted sudden death in the Wolff­Parkinson­White syn­
drome. Am J Cardiol. 1995;76:492–494.
 266. Benditt DG. Syncope risk assessment in the emergency department 
and clinic. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2013;55:376–381. doi: 10.1016/j.
pcad.2012.10.010.
 267. Reed MJ, Newby DE, Coull AJ, Prescott RJ, Jacques KG, Gray AJ. The 
ROSE (Risk Stratification of Syncope in the Emergency Department) 
study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:713–721. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2009.09.049.
 268. Thiruganasambandamoorthy V, Stiell IG, Sivilotti ML, Murray H, Rowe 
BH, Lang E, McRae A, Sheldon R, Wells GA. Risk stratification of adult 
emergency department syncope patients to predict short­term serious 
outcomes after discharge (RiSEDS) study. BMC Emerg Med. 2014;14:8. 
doi: 10.1186/1471­227X­14­8.
 269. Thiruganasambandamoorthy V, Hess EP
, Turko E, Tran ML, Wells GA, 
Stiell IG. Defining abnormal electrocardiography in adult emergency 
department syncope patients: the Ottawa Electrocardiographic Criteria. 
CJEM. 2012;14:248–258.
 270. Shen W, Sheldon RS, Benditt DG, Cohen MI, Forman DE, Goldberger 
ZD, Grubb BP, Hamdan MH, Krahn AD, Link MS, Olshansky B, Raj 
SR, Sandhu RK, Sorajja D, Sun BC, Yancy CW. 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS 
guideline for the evaluation and management of patients with syn­
cope: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines, and the Heart 
Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000499.
 271. Task Force for the Diagnosis and Management of Syncope; European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC); European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA); 
Heart Failure Association (HFA); Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), Moya A, 
Sutton R, Ammirati F, Blanc J, Brignole M, Dahm JB, Deharo J, Gajek 
J, Gjesdal K, Krahn A, Massin M, Pepi M, Pezawas T, Ruiz Granell R, 
Sarasin F, Ungar A, van Dijk JG, Walma EP
, Wieling W. Guidelines for 
the diagnosis and management of syncope (version 2009). Eur Heart J. 
2009;30:2631–2671.
 272. Mendu ML, McAvay G, Lampert R, Stoehr J, Tinetti ME. Yield of diag­
nostic tests in evaluating syncopal episodes in older patients. Arch Intern 
Med. 2009;169:1299–1305. doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2009.204.
 273. Benezet­Mazuecos J, Ibanez B, Rubio JM, Navarro F
, Martín E, Romero J, Farre 
J. Utility of in­hospital cardiac remote telemetry in patients with unexplained 
syncope. Europace. 2007;9:1196–1201. doi: 10.1093/europace/eum239.
 274. Croci F, Brignole M, Alboni P
, Menozzi C, Raviele A, Del Rosso A, Dinelli 
M, Solano A, Bottoni N, Donateo P
. The application of a standardized 
strategy of evaluation in patients with syncope referred to three syncope 
units. Europace. 2002;4:351–355.
 275. Anderson JB, Czosek RJ, Knilans TK, Marino BS. The effect of paediatric 
syncope on health­related quality of life. Cardiol Young. 2012;22:583–
588. doi: 10.1017/S1047951112000133.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e339
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 276. Friedman KG, Alexander ME. Chest pain and syncope in children: 
a practical approach to the diagnosis of cardiac disease. J Pediatr. 
2013;163:896–901.e1– e3. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2013.05.001.
 277. Tretter JT, Kavey RE. Distinguishing cardiac syncope from vasovagal syn­
cope in a referral population. J Pediatr. 2013;163:1618–1623.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2013.07.023.
 278. Bohnen M, Stevenson WG, Tedrow UB, Michaud GF, John RM, Epstein 
LM, Albert CM, Koplan BA. Incidence and predictors of major complica­
tions from contemporary catheter ablation to treat cardiac arrhythmias. 
Heart Rhythm. 2011;8:1661–1666. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2011.05.017.
 279. Pelargonio G, Fogel RI, Knilans TK, Prystowsky EN. Late occurrence 
of heart block after radiofrequency catheter ablation of the septal re­
gion: clinical follow­up and outcome. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 
2001;12:56–60.
 280. Cappato R, Calkins H, Chen SA, Davies W, Iesaka Y, Kalman J, Kim 
YH, Klein G, Natale A, Packer D, Skanes A, Ambrogi F, Biganzoli E. 
Updated worldwide survey on the methods, efficacy, and safety of cath­
eter ablation for human atrial fibrillation. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 
2010;3:32–38. doi: 10.1161/CIRCEP
.109.859116.
 281. Metzner I, Wissner E, Tilz RR, Rillig A, Mathew S, Schmidt B, Chun J, 
Wohlmuth P
, Deiss S, Lemes C, Maurer T, Fink T, Heeger C, Ouyang F, 
Kuck KH, Metzner A. Ablation of atrial fibrillation in patients ≥75 years: 
long­term clinical outcome and safety. Europace. 2016;18:543–549. doi: 
10.1093/europace/euv229.
 282. Grimm W, Hoffmann J, Menz V, Maisch B. Transient QT prolonga­
tion with torsades de pointes tachycardia after ablation of perma­
nent junctional reciprocating tachycardia. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 
1999;10:1631–1635.
 283. Reithmann C, Fiek M, Beckmann BM, Kääb S. Recurrent torsades de 
pointes after catheter ablation of incessant ventricular bigeminy in 
combination with QT prolongation. Europace. 2012;14:299–300. doi: 
10.1093/europace/eur278.
 284. Peters RH, Wever EF, Hauer RN, Wittkampf FH, Robles de Medina EO. 
Bradycardia dependent QT prolongation and ventricular fibrillation fol­
lowing catheter ablation of the atrioventricular junction with radiofre­
quency energy. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1994;17:108–112.
 285. Falk RH, Battinelli NJ. External cardiac pacing using low impedance elec­
trodes suitable for defibrillation: a comparative blinded study. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1993;22:1354–1358.
 286. Zoll PM, Zoll RH, Falk RH, Clinton JE, Eitel DR, Antman EM. External 
noninvasive temporary cardiac pacing: clinical trials. Circulation. 
1985;71:937–944.
 287. Betts TR. Regional survey of temporary transvenous pacing procedures 
and complications. Postgrad Med J. 2003;79:463–465.
 288. Chihrin SM, Mohammed U, Yee R, Gula LJ, Klein GJ, Skanes AC, Krahn 
AD. Utility and cost effectiveness of temporary pacing using active fixa­
tion leads and an externally placed reusable permanent pacemaker. Am 
J Cardiol. 2006;98:1613–1615. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2006.07.041.
 289. Kawata H, Pretorius V, Phan H, Mulpuru S, Gadiyaram V, Patel J, Steltzner 
D, Krummen D, Feld G, Birgersdotter­Green U. Utility and safety of tem­
porary pacing using active fixation leads and externalized re­usable 
permanent pacemakers after lead extraction. Europace. 2013;15:1287–
1291. doi: 10.1093/europace/eut045.
 290. Kornberger A, Schmid E, Kalender G, Stock UA, Doernberger V, Khalil 
M, Lisy M. Bridge to recovery or permanent system implantation: an 
eight­year single­center experience in transvenous semipermanent 
pacing. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2013;36:1096–1103. doi: 10.1111/
pace.12175.
 291. Pecha S, Aydin MA, Yildirim Y, Sill B, Reiter B, Wilke I, Reichenspurner H, 
Treede H. Transcutaneous lead implantation connected to an externalized 
pacemaker in patients with implantable cardiac defibrillator/pacemaker 
infection and pacemaker dependency. Europace. 2013;15:1205–1209. 
doi: 10.1093/europace/eut031.
 292. Rosenfeld 
LE. 
Temporary 
permanent 
or 
permanent 
tempo­
rary pacing? Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2011;34:670–671. doi: 
10.1111/j.1540­8159.2011.03086.x.
 293. Tsai V, Goldstein MK, Hsia HH, Wang Y, Curtis J, Heidenreich PA; on 
behalf of the National Cardiovascular Data’s ICD Registry. Influence of 
age on perioperative complications among patients undergoing im­
plantable cardioverter­defibrillators for primary prevention in the United 
States. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2011;4:549–556. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCOUTCOMES.110.959205.
 294. van Rees JB, de Bie MK, Thijssen J, Borleffs CJ, Schalij MJ, van 
Erven 
L. 
Implantation­related 
complications 
of 
implantable 
cardioverter­defibrillators and cardiac resynchronization therapy devic­
es: a systematic review of randomized clinical trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2011;58:995–1000. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.06.007.
 295. Chauhan A, Grace AA, Newell SA, Stone DL, Shapiro LM, Schofield PM, 
Petch MC. Early complications after dual chamber versus single cham­
ber pacemaker implantation. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1994;17(pt 
2):2012–2015.
 296. Cheng A, Wang Y, Curtis JP
, Varosy PD. Acute lead dislodgements and in­
hospital mortality in patients enrolled in the national cardiovascular data 
registry implantable cardioverter defibrillator registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2010;56:1651–1656. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.06.037.
 297. Gould PA, Krahn AD; Canadian Heart Rhythm Society Working Group 
on Device Advisories. Complications associated with implantable cardio­
verter­defibrillator replacement in response to device advisories. JAMA. 
2006;295:1907–1911. doi: 10.1001/jama.295.16.1907.
 298. Kurtz SM, Ochoa JA, Lau E, Shkolnikov Y, Pavri BB, Frisch D, 
Greenspon AJ. Implantation trends and patient profiles for pacemak­
ers and implantable cardioverter defibrillators in the United States: 
1993­2006. 
Pacing 
Clin 
Electrophysiol. 
2010;33:705–711. 
doi: 
10.1111/j.1540­8159.2009.02670.x.
 299. Chung MK, Szymkiewicz SJ, Shao M, Zishiri E, Niebauer MJ, Lindsay BD, 
Tchou PJ. Aggregate national experience with the wearable cardioverter­
defibrillator: event rates, compliance, and survival. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2010;56:194–203. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.04.016.
 300. Coronel R, Wilders R, Verkerk AO, Wiegerinck RF, Benoist D, Bernus O. 
Electrophysiological changes in heart failure and their implications for 
arrhythmogenesis. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013;1832:2432–2441. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.04.002.
 301. Kreuz J, Horlbeck F, Hoyer F, Mellert F, Fimmers R, Lickfett L, Nickenig 
G, Schwab JO. An impaired renal function: a predictor of ventricular ar­
rhythmias and mortality in patients with nonischemic cardiomyopathy 
and heart failure. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2011;34:894–899. doi: 
10.1111/j.1540­8159.2011.03059.x.
 302. Benza RL, Tallaj JA, Felker GM, Zabel KM, Kao W, Bourge RC, Pearce D, 
Leimberger JD, Borzak S, O’connor CM, Gheorghiade M; OPTIME­CHF 
Investigators. The impact of arrhythmias in acute heart failure. J Card Fail. 
2004;10:279–284.
 303. Opasich C, Capomolla S, Riccardi PG, Febo O, Forni G, Cobelli F, Tavazzi 
L. Does in­patient ECG monitoring have an impact on medical care in 
chronic heart failure patients? Eur J Heart Fail. 2000;2:281–285.
 304. Baddour LM, Wilson WR, Bayer AS, Fowler VG Jr, Bolger AF, Levison ME, 
Ferrieri P
, Gerber MA, Tani LY, Gewitz MH, Tong DC, Steckelberg JM, 
Baltimore RS, Shulman ST, Burns JC, Falace DA, Newburger JW, Pallasch 
TJ, Takahashi M, Taubert KA. Infective endocarditis: diagnosis, antimicro­
bial therapy, and management of complications: a statement for health­
care professionals from the Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, 
and Kawasaki Disease, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, 
and the Councils on Clinical Cardiology, Stroke, and Cardiovascular 
Surgery and Anesthesia, American Heart Association [published correc­
tions appear in Circulation. 2005;112:2373, Circulation. 2007;115:e408, 
Circulation. 2007;116:e547, Circulation. 2008;118:e497]. Circulation. 
2005;111:e394–e434. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.165564.
 305. Meine TJ, Nettles RE, Anderson DJ, Cabell CH, Corey GR, Sexton DJ, 
Wang A. Cardiac conduction abnormalities in endocarditis defined 
by the Duke criteria. Am Heart J. 2001;142:280–285. doi: 10.1067/
mhj.2001.116964.
 306. Khalid­de Bakker C, Jonkers D, Hameeteman W, de Ridder R, Masclee 
A, Stockbrügger R. Cardiopulmonary events during primary colonoscopy 
screening in an average risk population. Neth J Med. 2011;69:186–191.
 307. Castro G, Azrak MF, Seeff LC, Royalty J. Outpatient colonoscopy com­
plications in the CDC’s Colorectal Cancer Screening Demonstration 
Program: a prospective analysis. Cancer. 2013;119(suppl):2849–2854. 
doi: 10.1002/cncr.28159.
 308. ASGE Technology Committee, Gottlieb KT, Banerjee S, Barth BA, Bhat 
YM, Desilets DJ, Maple JT, Pfau PR, Pleskow DK, Siddiqui UD, Tokar JL, 
Wang A, Song LM, Rodriguez SA. Monitoring equipment for endoscopy. 
Gastrointest Endosc. 2013;77:175–180.
 309. Roberts­Thomson IC, Teo E, Roberts­Thomson KC. Myocardial ischemia, 
pancreatitis and ERCP
. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;25:1469–1470.
 310. Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, Barnason SA, Beckman 
JA, Bozkurt B, Davila­Roman VG, Gerhard­Herman MD, Holly TA, 
Kane GC, Marine JE, Nelson MT, Spencer CC, Thompson A, Ting HH, 
Uretsky BF, Wijeysundera DN. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on periopera­
tive cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e340
noncardiac surgery: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2014;130:e278–e333. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000106.
 311. Bhave PD, Goldman LE, Vittinghoff E, Maselli J, Auerbach A. Incidence, 
predictors, and outcomes associated with postoperative atrial fibrillation 
after major noncardiac surgery. Am Heart J. 2012;164:918–924. doi: 
10.1016/j.ahj.2012.09.004.
 312. Gialdini G, Nearing K, Bhave PD, Bonuccelli U, Iadecola C, Healey JS, 
Kamel H. Perioperative atrial fibrillation and the long­term risk of isch­
emic stroke. JAMA. 2014;312:616–622. doi: 10.1001/jama.2014.9143.
 313. Vretzakis G, Simeoforidou M, Stamoulis K, Bareka M. Supraventricular 
arrhythmias after thoracotomy: is there a role for autonomic imbalance? 
Anesthesiol Res Pract. 2013;2013:413985. doi: 10.1155/2013/413985.
 314. Neustein SM, Kahn P
, Krellenstein DJ, Cohen E. Incidence of arrhythmias 
after thoracic surgery: thoracotomy versus video­assisted thoracoscopy. J 
Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 1998;12:659–661.
 315. Sohn GH, Shin DH, Byun KM, Han HJ, Cho SJ, Song YB, Kim JH, On YK, 
Kim JS. The incidence and predictors of postoperative atrial fibrillation 
after noncardiothoracic surgery. Korean Circ J. 2009;39:100–104. doi: 
10.4070/kcj.2009.39.3.100.
 316. Ivanovic J, Maziak DE, Ramzan S, McGuire AL, Villeneuve PJ, Gilbert 
S, Sundaresan RS, Shamji FM, Seely AJ. Incidence, severity and periop­
erative risk factors for atrial fibrillation following pulmonary resection. 
Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2014;18:340–346. doi: 10.1093/icvts/
ivt520.
 317. Roselli EE, Murthy SC, Rice TW, Houghtaling PL, Pierce CD, Karchmer 
DP
, Blackstone EH. Atrial fibrillation complicating lung cancer resec­
tion. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005;130:438–444. doi: 10.1016/j.
jtcvs.2005.02.010.
 318. Park BJ, Zhang H, Rusch VW, Amar D. Video­assisted thoracic surgery 
does not reduce the incidence of postoperative atrial fibrillation after 
pulmonary lobectomy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;133:775–779. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2006.09.022.
 319. Ryu JK. Postoperative atrial fibrillation after noncardiothoracic surgery: is 
it different from after cardiothoracic surgery? Korean Circ J. 2009;39:93–
94. doi: 10.4070/kcj.2009.39.3.93.
 320. Oka T, Ozawa Y, Ohkubo Y. Thoracic epidural bupivacaine attenuates 
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias after pulmonary resection. Anesth 
Analg. 2001;93:253–259.
 321. Landesberg G, Einav S, Christopherson R, Beattie C, Berlatzky Y, 
Rosenfeld B, Eidelman LA, Norris E, Anner H, Mosseri M, Cotev S, Luria 
MH. Perioperative ischemia and cardiac complications in major vascular 
surgery: importance of the preoperative twelve­lead electrocardiogram. J 
Vasc Surg. 1997;26:570–578.
 322. Estrada CA, Prasad NK, Rosman HS, Young MJ. Outcomes of patients 
hospitalized to a telemetry unit. Am J Cardiol. 1994;74:357–362.
 323. Estrada CA, Rosman HS, Prasad NK, Battilana G, Alexander M, Held AC, 
Young MJ. Role of telemetry monitoring in the non­intensive care unit. 
Am J Cardiol. 1995;76:960–965.
 324. Schull MJ, Redelmeier DA. Continuous electrocardiographic monitor­
ing and cardiac arrest outcomes in 8,932 telemetry ward patients. Acad 
Emerg Med. 2000;7:647–652.
 325. Peterson MC, Whetten DK, Renlund DG, Coletti A. Sensitivity of rhythm 
disturbance detection by community hospital telemetry. Ann Noninvasive 
Electrocardiol. 2002;7:219–221.
 326. Najafi N, Auerbach A. Use and outcomes of telemetry monitoring on a 
medicine service. Arch Intern Med. 2012;172:1349–1350. doi: 10.1001/
archinternmed.2012.3163.
 327. Hillman KM, Bristow PJ, Chey T, Daffurn K, Jacques T, Norman SL, 
Bishop GF, Simmons G. Antecedents to hospital deaths. Intern Med J. 
2001;31:343–348.
 328. Vetro J, Natarajan DK, Mercer I, Buckmaster JN, Heland M, Hart GK, 
Bellomo R, Jones DA. Antecedents to cardiac arrests in a hospital equipped 
with a medical emergency team. Crit Care Resusc. 2011;13:162–166.
 329. Stevenson JE, Israelsson J, Nilsson GC, Petersson GI, Bath PA. Recording 
signs of deterioration in acute patients: the documentation of vi­
tal signs within electronic health records in patients who suffered in­
hospital cardiac arrest. Health Informatics J. 2016;22:21–33. doi: 
10.1177/1460458214530136.
 330. Jauch EC, Saver JL, Adams HP Jr, Bruno A, Connors JJ, Demaerschalk BM, 
Khatri P
, McMullan PW Jr, Qureshi AI, Rosenfield K, Scott PA, Summers 
DR, Wang DZ, Wintermark M, Yonas H; on behalf of the American 
Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; 
Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease; Council on Clinical Cardiology. 
Guidelines for the early management of patients with acute ischemic 
stroke: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2013;44:870–947. doi: 
10.1161/STR.0b013e318284056a.
 331. Easton JD, Saver JL, Albers GW, Alberts MJ, Chaturvedi S, Feldmann E, 
Hatsukami TS, Higashida RT, Johnston SC, Kidwell CS, Lutsep HL, Miller 
E, Sacco RL. Definition and evaluation of transient ischemic attack: a 
scientific statement for healthcare professionals from the American 
Heart Association/American Stroke Association Stroke Council; Council 
on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia; Council on Cardiovascular 
Radiology and Intervention; Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; and 
the Interdisciplinary Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. Stroke. 
2009;40:2276–2293. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.192218.
 332. Kallmünzer B, Breuer L, Kahl N, Bobinger T, Raaz­Schrauder D, Huttner 
HB, Schwab S, Köhrmann M. Serious cardiac arrhythmias after stroke: 
incidence, time course, and predictors–a systematic, prospective analysis. 
Stroke. 2012;43:2892–2897. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.664318.
 333. Ritter MA, Rohde A, Heuschmann PU, Dziewas R, Stypmann J, Nabavi 
DG, Ringelstein BE. Heart rate monitoring on the stroke unit: what does 
heart beat tell about prognosis? An observational study. BMC Neurol. 
2011;11:47. doi: 10.1186/1471­2377­11­47.
 334. Miller DJ, Khan MA, Schultz LR, Simpson JR, Katramados AM, Russman 
AN, Mitsias PD. Outpatient cardiac telemetry detects a high rate of atrial 
fibrillation in cryptogenic stroke. J Neurol Sci. 2013;324:57–61. doi: 
10.1016/j.jns.2012.10.001.
 335. Dimant J, Grob D. Electrocardiographic changes and myocardial 
damage in patients with acute cerebrovascular accidents. Stroke. 
1977;8:448–455.
 336. Norris JW, Froggatt GM, Hachinski VC. Cardiac arrhythmias in acute 
stroke. Stroke. 1978;9:392–396.
 337. Goldstein DS. The electrocardiogram in stroke: relationship to patho­
physiological type and comparison with prior tracings. Stroke. 
1979;10:253–259.
 338. Myers MG, Norris JW, Hachinski VC, Weingert ME, Sole MJ. Cardiac se­
quelae of acute stroke. Stroke. 1982;13:838–842.
 339. Hachinski VC. The clinical problem of brain and heart. Stroke. 
1993;24(suppl):I1–I2.
 340. Khechinashvili G, Asplund K. Electrocardiographic changes in pa­
tients with acute stroke: a systematic review. Cerebrovasc Dis. 
2002;14:67–76.
 341. Jensen JK, Bak S, Flemming Høilund­Carlsen P
, Mickley H. Prevalence of 
electrocardiographic ST­T changes during acute ischemic stroke in patients 
without known ischemic heart disease. Int J Cardiol. 2008;128:137–138. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2007.05.055.
 342. Christensen H, Fogh Christensen A, Boysen G. Abnormalities on 
ECG and telemetry predict stroke outcome at 3 months. J Neurol Sci. 
2005;234:99–103. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2005.03.039.
 343. Sulter G, Elting JW, Langedijk M, Maurits NM, De Keyser J. Admitting 
acute ischemic stroke patients to a stroke care monitoring unit ver­
sus a conventional stroke unit: a randomized pilot study. Stroke. 
2003;34:101–104.
 344. McDermott MM, Lefevre F, Arron M, Martin GJ, Biller J. ST seg­
ment depression detected by continuous electrocardiography in pa­
tients with acute ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack. Stroke. 
1994;25:1820–1824.
 345. Yamour BJ, Sridharan MR, Rice JF, Flowers NC. Electrocardiographic 
changes in cerebrovascular hemorrhage. Am Heart J. 1980;99:294–300.
 346. Ramani A, Shetty U, Kundaje GN. Electrocardiographic abnormalities 
in cerebrovascular accidents. Angiology. 1990;41(pt 1):681–686. doi: 
10.1177/000331979004100902.
 347. Chua HC, Sen S, Cosgriff RF, Gerstenblith G, Beauchamp NJ Jr, 
Oppenheimer SM. Neurogenic ST depression in stroke. Clin Neurol 
Neurosurg. 1999;101:44–48.
 348. Ay H, Arsava EM, Saribaş O. Creatine kinase­MB elevation after stroke 
is not cardiac in origin: comparison with troponin T levels. Stroke. 
2002;33:286–289.
 349. Chalela JA, Ezzeddine MA, Davis L, Warach S. Myocardial injury in 
acute stroke: a troponin I study. Neurocrit Care. 2004;1:343–346. doi: 
10.1385/NCC:1:3:343.
 350. Corrales­Medina VF, Suh KN, Rose G, Chirinos JA, Doucette S, Cameron 
DW, Fergusson DA. Cardiac complications in patients with community­
acquired pneumonia: a systematic review and meta­analysis of obser­
vational studies. PLoS Med. 2011;8:e1001048. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pmed.1001048.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e341
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 351. Aliberti S, Ramirez JA. Cardiac diseases complicating community­
acquired pneumonia. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2014;27:295–301. doi: 
10.1097/QCO.0000000000000055.
 352. Carr GE, Yuen TC, McConville JF, Kress JP
, VandenHoek TL, Hall JB, 
Edelson DP; American Heart Association’s Get With the Guidelines­
Resuscitation (National Registry of CPR) Investigators. Early cardiac arrest 
in patients hospitalized with pneumonia: a report from the American 
Heart Association’s Get With The Guidelines­Resuscitation Program. 
Chest. 2012;141:1528–1536. doi: 10.1378/chest.11­1547.
 353. Griffin AT, Wiemken TL, Arnold FW. Risk factors for cardiovascular events 
in hospitalized patients with community­acquired pneumonia. Int J Infect 
Dis. 2013;17:e1125–e1129. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2013.07.005.
 354. Soto­Gomez N, Anzueto A, Waterer GW, Restrepo MI, Mortensen EM. 
Pneumonia: an arrhythmogenic disease? Am J Med. 2013;126:43–48. 
doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.08.005.
 355. Perry TW, Pugh MJ, Waterer GW, Nakashima B, Orihuela CJ, Copeland 
LA, Restrepo MI, Anzueto A, Mortensen EM. Incidence of cardio­
vascular events after hospital admission for pneumonia. Am J Med. 
2011;124:244–251. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2010.11.014.
 356. Viasus D, Garcia­Vidal C, Manresa F, Dorca J, Gudiol F, Carratalà J. Risk 
stratification and prognosis of acute cardiac events in hospitalized adults 
with community­acquired pneumonia. J Infect. 2013;66:27–33. doi: 
10.1016/j.jinf.2012.09.003.
 357. Theofilogiannakos EK, Anogeianaki A, Tsekoura P
, Glouftsios P
, Ilonidis G, 
Hatzitolios A, Anogianakis G. Arrhythmogenesis in patients with stable 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 
2008;9:89–93. doi: 10.2459/JCM.0b013e328028fe73.
 358. Lacasse M, Maltais F, Poirier P
, Lacasse Y, Marquis K, Jobin J, LeBlanc P
. Post­
exercise heart rate recovery and mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. Respir Med. 2005;99:877–886. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2004.11.012.
 359. Rutten FH, Cramer MJ, Grobbee DE, Sachs AP
, Kirkels JH, Lammers JW, 
Hoes AW. Unrecognized heart failure in elderly patients with stable 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Heart J. 2005;26:1887–1894. 
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehi291.
 360. Brekke PH, Omland T, Smith P
, Søyseth V. Underdiagnosis of myocardial 
infarction in COPD ­ Cardiac Infarction Injury Score (CIIS) in patients hos­
pitalised for COPD exacerbation. Respir Med. 2008;102:1243–1247. doi: 
10.1016/j.rmed.2008.04.010.
 361. Finkelstein J, Cha E, Scharf SM. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
as an independent risk factor for cardiovascular morbidity. Int J Chron 
Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2009;4:337–349.
 362. Konecny T, Park JY, Somers KR, Konecny D, Orban M, Soucek F, Parker 
KO, Scanlon PD, Asirvatham SJ, Brady PA, Rihal CS. Relation of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease to atrial and ventricular arrhythmias. Am J 
Cardiol. 2014;114:272–277. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.04.030.
 363. Vestbo J, Hurd SS, Agustí AG, Jones PW, Vogelmeier C, Anzueto A, 
Barnes PJ, Fabbri LM, Martinez FJ, Nishimura M, Stockley RA, Sin DD, 
Rodriguez­Roisin R. Global strategy for the diagnosis, management, and 
prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: GOLD executive 
summary. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013;187:347–365. doi: 10.1164/
rccm.201204­0596PP
.
 364. Thomas AJ, Apiyasawat S, Spodick DH. Electrocardiographic detection 
of emphysema. Am J Cardiol. 2011;107:1090–1092. doi: 10.1016/j.
amjcard.2010.11.039.
 365. Holtzman D, Aronow WS, Mellana WM, Sharma M, Mehta N, Lim J, 
Chandy D. Electrocardiographic abnormalities in patients with severe ver­
sus mild or moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease followed in 
an academic outpatient pulmonary clinic. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 
2011;16:30–32. doi: 10.1111/j.1542­474X.2010.00404.x.
 366. Lazović B, Svenda MZ, Mazić S, Stajić Z, Delić M. Analysis of electrocar­
diogram in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients. Med Pregl. 
2013;66:126–129.
 367. Vanfleteren LE, Franssen FM, Uszko­Lencer NH, Spruit MA, Celis M, 
Gorgels AP
, Wouters EF. Frequency and relevance of ischemic electro­
cardiographic findings in patients with chronic obstructive pulmo­
nary disease. Am J Cardiol. 2011;108:1669–1674. doi: 10.1016/j.
amjcard.2011.07.027.
 368. El­Sherif N, Turitto G. Electrolyte disorders and arrhythmogenesis. Cardiol 
J. 2011;18:233–245.
 369. Pepin J, Shields C. Advances in diagnosis and management of hypoka­
lemic and hyperkalemic emergencies. Emerg Med Pract. 2012;14:1–17; 
quiz 17–18.
 370. Medford­Davis L, Rafique Z. Derangements of potassium. Emerg Med 
Clin North Am. 2014;32:329–347. doi: 10.1016/j.emc.2013.12.005.
 371. Alfonzo AV, Isles C, Geddes C, Deighan C. Potassium disorders: clinical 
spectrum and emergency management. Resuscitation. 2006;70:10–25. 
doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2005.11.002.
 372. Vanden Hoek TL, Morrison LJ, Shuster M, Donnino M, Sinz E, Lavonas 
EJ, Jeejeebhoy FM, Gabrielli A. Part 12: cardiac arrest in special situa­
tions: 2010 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care [published corrections 
 
appear in Circulation. 2011;124:e405 and Circulation. 2011;123:e239]. 
Circulation. 
2010;122(suppl 
3):S829–S861. 
doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
110.971069.
 373. Freeman K, Feldman JA, Mitchell P
, Donovan J, Dyer KS, Eliseo L, White 
LF, Temin ES. Effects of presentation and electrocardiogram on time to 
treatment of hyperkalemia. Acad Emerg Med. 2008;15:239–249. doi: 
10.1111/j.1553­2712.2008.00058.x.
 374. Webster A, Brady W, Morris F. Recognising signs of danger: ECG changes 
resulting from an abnormal serum potassium concentration. Emerg Med 
J. 2002;19:74–77.
 375. Chon SB, Kwak YH, Hwang SS, Oh WS, Bae JH. Severe hyperkalemia can be 
detected immediately by quantitative electrocardiography and clinical history 
in patients with symptomatic or extreme bradycardia: a retrospective cross­
sectional study [published correction appears in J Crit Card. 2014;29:310]. J 
Crit Care. 2013;28:1112.e7–1112.e13. doi: 10.1016/j.jcrc.2013.08.013.
 376. Mohanlal V, Haririan A, Weinman EJ. Bradycardia without “classical” 
EKG changes in hyperkalemic hemodialysis patients. Clin Nephrol. 
2013;80:464–468. doi: 10.5414/CN107529.
 377. Martinez­Vea A, Bardají A, Garcia C, Oliver JA. Severe hyperkalemia with 
minimal electrocardiographic manifestations: a report of seven cases. 
 
J Electrocardiol. 1999;32:45–49.
 378. Keren A, Tzivoni D. Torsades de pointes: prevention and therapy. 
Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 1991;5:509–513.
 379. Ceremuzyński L, Gebalska J, Wolk R, Makowska E. Hypomagnesemia in 
heart failure with ventricular arrhythmias: beneficial effects of magne­
sium supplementation. J Intern Med. 2000;247:78–86.
 380. Falco CN, Grupi C, Sosa E, Scanavacca M, Hachul D, Lara S, Sacilotto L, 
Pisani CF, Ramires JA, Darrieux F. Successful improvement of frequency 
and symptoms of premature complexes after oral magnesium adminis­
tration [published correction appears in Arq Bras Cardiol. 2013;100:488]. 
Arq Bras Cardiol. 2012;98:480–487.
 381. Smith JM, Lowe RF, Fullerton J, Currie SM, Harris L, Felker­Kantor E. An 
integrative review of the side effects related to the use of magnesium 
sulfate for pre­eclampsia and eclampsia management. BMC Pregnancy 
Childbirth. 2013;13:34. 
 382. Buckley NA, Chevalier S, Leditschke IA, O’Connell DL, Leitch J, Pond SM. 
The limited utility of electrocardiography variables used to predict ar­
rhythmia in psychotropic drug overdose. Crit Care. 2003;7:R101–R107. 
doi: 10.1186/cc2345.
 383. Berling I, Whyte IM, Isbister GK. Oxycodone overdose causes naloxone 
responsive coma and QT prolongation. QJM. 2013;106:35–41. doi: 
10.1093/qjmed/hcs176.
 384. Butler B, Rubin G, Lawrance A, Batey R, Bell J. Estimating the risk 
of fatal arrhythmia in patients in methadone maintenance treat­
ment for heroin addiction. Drug Alcohol Rev. 2011;30:173–180. doi: 
10.1111/j.1465­3362.2010.00213.x.
 385. Haning W, Goebert D. Electrocardiographic abnormalities in meth­
amphetamine 
abusers. 
Addiction. 
2007;102(suppl):70–75. 
doi: 
10.1111/j.1360­0443.2006.01776.x.
 386. Wallner C, Stöllberger C, Hlavin A, Finsterer J, Hager I, Hermann 
P
. Electrocardiographic abnormalities in opiate addicts. Addiction. 
2008;103:1987–1993. doi: 10.1111/j.1360­0443.2008.02333.x.
 387. Phillips KA, Hirsch GA, Epstein DH, Preston KL. Cardiac complications of unwit­
ting co­injection of quinine/quinidine with heroin in an intravenous drug user. 
J Gen Intern Med. 2012;27:1722–1725. doi: 10.1007/s11606­012­2089­2.
 388. Bass M. Sudden sniffing death. JAMA. 1970;212:2075–2079.
 389. Anderson CE, Loomis GA. Recognition and prevention of inhalant abuse. 
Am Fam Physician. 2003;68:869–874.
 390. McCord J, Jneid H, Hollander JE, de Lemos JA, Cercek B, Hsue P
, Gibler WB, 
Ohman EM, Drew B, Philippides G, Newby LK. Management of cocaine­
associated chest pain and myocardial infarction: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association Acute Cardiac Care Committee of 
the Council on Clinical Cardiology. Circulation. 2008;117:1897–1907. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.188950.
 391. Levin KH, Copersino ML, Epstein D, Boyd SJ, Gorelick DA. Longitudinal 
ECG changes in cocaine users during extended abstinence. Drug Alcohol 
Depend. 2008;95:160–163. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2007.12.001.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e342
 392. Bauman JL, Grawe JJ, Winecoff AP
, Hariman RJ. Cocaine­related sudden 
cardiac death: a hypothesis correlating basic science and clinical observa­
tions. J Clin Pharmacol. 1994;34:902–911.
 393. Hollander JE, Hoffman RS, Gennis P
, Fairweather P
, DiSano MJ, Schumb 
DA, Feldman JA, Fish SS, Dyer S, Wax P
, Whelan C, Schwarzwald E. 
Prospective multicenter evaluation of cocaine­associated chest pain: 
Cocaine Associated Chest Pain (COCHPA) Study Group. Acad Emerg 
Med. 1994;1:330–339.
 394. Feldman JA, Fish SS, Beshansky JR, Griffith JL, Woolard RH, Selker HP
. 
Acute cardiac ischemia in patients with cocaine­associated complaints: 
results of a multicenter trial. Ann Emerg Med. 2000;36:469–476. doi: 
10.1067/mem.2000.110994.
 395. Weber JE, Shofer FS, Larkin GL, Kalaria AS, Hollander JE. Validation of a 
brief observation period for patients with cocaine­associated chest pain. 
N Engl J Med. 2003;348:510–517. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa022206.
 396. Greene SL, Dargan PI, O’connor N, Jones AL, Kerins M. Multiple toxic­
ity from 3,4­methylenedioxymethamphetamine (“ecstasy”). Am J Emerg 
Med. 2003;21:121–124. doi: 10.1053/ajem.2003.50028.
 397. Maraj S, Figueredo VM, Lynn Morris D. Cocaine and the heart. Clin 
Cardiol. 2010;33:264–269. doi: 10.1002/clc.20746.
 398. Lenz J, Brown J, Flagg S, Oh R, Batts K, Ditzler T, Johnson J. Cristalius: 
a case in designer drugs. Mil Med. 2013;178:e893–e895. doi: 10.7205/
MILMED­D­12­00393.
 399. Paillet­Loilier M, Cesbron A, Le Boisselier R, Bourgine J, Debruyne 
D. Emerging drugs of abuse: current perspectives on substituted 
cathinones. Subst Abuse Rehabil. 2014;5:37–52. doi: 10.2147/SAR.
S37257.
 400. Munir VL, Hutton JE, Harney JP, Buykx P, Weiland TJ, Dent AW. 
Gamma­hydroxybutyrate: a 30 month emergency department 
 
review. Emerg Med Australas. 2008;20:521–530. doi: 10.1111/j.1742­ 
6723.2008.01140.x.
 401. K/DOQI Workgroup. K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines for cardiovascular 
disease in dialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 2005;45(suppl 3):S7–S153.
 402. Nishi 
K, 
Fujimoto 
S, 
Hisanaga 
S, 
Ogawa 
O, 
Kitamura 
K. 
Electrocardiographic 
assessment of incident atrial fibrillation in hemodialysis patients. Ther 
Apher Dial. 2013;17:16–23. doi: 10.1111/j.1744­9987.2012.01137.x.
 403. Buiten MS, de Bie MK, Rotmans JI, Gabreëls BA, van Dorp W, Wolterbeek 
R, Trines SA, Schalij MJ, Jukema JW, Rabelink TJ, van Erven L. The dialysis 
procedure as a trigger for atrial fibrillation: new insights in the develop­
ment of atrial fibrillation in dialysis patients. Heart. 2014;100:685–690. 
doi: 10.1136/heartjnl­2013­305417.
 404. Bignotto LH, Kallás ME, Djouki RJ, Sassaki MM, Voss GO, Soto CL, Frattini 
F, Medeiros FS. Electrocardiographic findings in chronic hemodialysis pa­
tients. J Bras Nefrol. 2012;34:235–242.
 405. Hage FG, de Mattos AM, Khamash H, Mehta S, Warnock D, Iskandrian 
AE. QT prolongation is an independent predictor of mortality in end­
stage renal disease. Clin Cardiol. 2010;33:361–366. doi: 10.1002/
clc.20768.
 406. Flythe JE, Lacson E Jr. Outcomes after the long interdialytic break: im­
plications for the dialytic prescription. Semin Dial. 2012;25:1–8. doi: 
10.1111/j.1525­139X.2011.01015.x.
 407. Midwest Bioethics Center, Kansas City Area Ethics Committee 
Consortium. Honoring do­not­resuscitate (DNR) orders during invasive 
procedures. Bioethics Forum. 1998;14:23–26.
 408. ECRI Institute. 2015 Top 10 health technology hazards for 2015. https://
www.ecri.org/Pages/2015­Hazards.aspx. Accessed August 11, 2017.
 409. Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations. 
The Joint Commission Announces 2014 national patient safety goal. 
 
Jt Comm Perspect. 2013;33:1, 3–4.
 410. Siebig S, Kuhls S, Imhoff M, Gather U, Schölmerich J, Wrede CE. Intensive 
care unit alarms: how many do we need? Crit Care Med. 2010;38:451–
456. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181cb0888.
 411. Schmid F, Goepfert MS, Kuhnt D, Eichhorn V, Diedrichs S, Reichenspurner 
H, Goetz AE, Reuter DA. The wolf is crying in the operating room: 
patient monitor and anesthesia workstation alarming patterns dur­
ing cardiac surgery. Anesth Analg. 2011;112:78–83. doi: 10.1213/
ANE.0b013e3181fcc504.
 412. Inokuchi R, Sato H, Nanjo Y, Echigo M, Tanaka A, Ishii T, Matsubara 
T, Doi K, Gunshin M, Hiruma T, Nakamura K, Shinohara K, Kitsuta Y, 
Nakajima S, Umezu M, Yahagi N. The proportion of clinically relevant 
alarms decreases as patient clinical severity decreases in intensive 
care units: a pilot study. BMJ Open. 2013;3:e003354. doi: 10.1136/
bmjopen­2013­003354.
 413. Deleted in proof.
 414. Bliss JP
, Dunn MC. Behavioural implications of alarm mistrust as a 
function of task workload. Ergonomics. 2000;43:1283–1300. doi: 
10.1080/001401300421743.
 415. Bitan Y, Meyer J, Shinar D, Zmora E. Nurses’ reaction to alarms in a neo­
natal intensive care unit. Cogn Tech Work. 2004;6:239–246.
 416. Bustamante EA, Bliss JP
, Anderson BL. Effects of varying the threshold 
of alarm systems and workload on human performance. Ergonomics. 
2007;50:1127–1147. doi: 10.1080/00140130701237345.
 417. Korniewicz DM, Clark T, David Y. A national online survey on the effec­
tiveness of clinical alarms. Am J Crit Care. 2008;17:36–41.
 418. Funk M, Clark JT, Bauld TJ, Ott JC, Coss P
. Attitudes and practices 
 
related to clinical alarms. Am J Crit Care. 2014;23:e9–e18. doi: 10.4037/
ajcc2014315.
 419. Bridi AC, da Silva RC, de Farias CC, Franco AS, dos Santos Vde L. Reaction 
time of a health care team to monitoring alarms in the intensive care 
unit: implications for the safety of seriously ill patients [in Portuguese]. 
Rev Bras Ter Intensiva. 2014;26:28–35.
 420. Bonafide CP
, Lin R, Zander M, Graham CS, Paine CW, Rock W, Rich A, 
Roberts KE, Fortino M, Nadkarni VM, Localio AR, Keren R. Association 
between exposure to nonactionable physiologic monitor alarms and re­
sponse time in a children’s hospital. J Hosp Med. 2015;10:345–351. doi: 
10.1002/jhm.2331.
 421. Aboukhalil A, Nielsen L, Saeed M, Mark RG, Clifford GD. Reducing 
false alarm rates for critical arrhythmias using the arterial blood pres­
sure waveform. J Biomed Inform. 2008;41:442–451. doi: 10.1016/j.
jbi.2008.03.003.
 422. Gross B, Dahl D, Nielsen L. Physiologic monitoring alarm load on medi­
cal/surgical floors of a community hospital. Biomed Instrum Technol. 
2011(suppl):29–36. doi: 10.2345/0899­8205­45.s1.29.
 423. Görges M, Markewitz BA, Westenskow DR. Improving alarm performance 
in the medical intensive care unit using delays and clinical context. Anesth 
Analg. 2009;108:1546–1552. doi: 10.1213/ane.0b013e31819bdfbb.
 424. Imhoff M, Kuhls S. Alarm algorithms in critical care monitoring. Anesth 
Analg. 2006;102:1525–1537. doi: 10.1213/01.ane.0000204385.01983.61.
 425. Nouira K, Trabelsi A. Intelligent monitoring system for intensive care units. 
J Med Syst. 2012;36:2309–2318. doi: 10.1007/s10916­011­9698­x.
 426. Wee AN, Sanderson PM. Are melodic medical equipment alarms eas­
ily learned? Anesth Analg. 2008;106:501–508, table of contents. doi: 
10.1213/01.ane.0000286148.58823.6c.
 427. Edworthy J, Page R, Hibbard A, Kyle S, Ratnage P
, Claydon S. Learning 
three sets of alarms for the same medical functions: a perspective on the 
difficulty of learning alarms specified in an international standard. Appl 
Ergon. 2014;45:1291–1296. doi: 10.1016/j.apergo.2013.10.003.
 428. Hoglund D, Elms J. The use of mobile devices to improve alarm sys­
tems. Biomed Instrum Technol. 2011;45:381–384. doi: 10.2345/ 
0899­8205­45.5.381.
 429. Moorman BA, Gee T. Functional basics of third­party alarm notifi­
cation systems. Biomed Instrum Technol. 2011(suppl):76–82. doi: 
10.2345/0899­8205­45.s1.76.
 430. Cvach MM, Frank RJ, Doyle P
, Stevens ZK. Use of pagers with an alarm 
escalation system to reduce cardiac monitor alarm signals. J Nurs Care 
Qual. 2014;29:9–18. doi: 10.1097/NCQ.0b013e3182a61887.
 431. Funk M, Parkosewich JA, Johnson CR, Stukshis I. Effect of dedicated mon­
itor watchers on patients’ outcomes. Am J Crit Care. 1997;6:318–323.
 432. Funk M, Ruppel H, Blake N, Phillips J. Research: use of monitor watch­
ers in hospitals: characteristics, training, and practices. Biomed Instrum 
Technol. 2016;50:428–438. doi: 10.2345/0899­8205­50.6.428.
 433. Bonzheim KA, Gebara RI, O’Hare BM, Ellis RD, Brand MA, Balar SD, 
Stockman R, Sciberras AM, Haines DE. Communication strategies and 
timeliness of response to life critical telemetry alarms. Telemed J E Health. 
2011;17:241–246. doi: 10.1089/tmj.2010.0139.
 434. Segall N, Hobbs G, Granger CB, Anderson AE, Bonifacio AS, Taekman JM, 
Wright MC. Patient load effects on response time to critical arrhythmias 
in cardiac telemetry: a randomized trial. Crit Care Med. 2015;43:1036–
1042. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000000923.
 435. Cvach MM, Biggs M, Rothwell KJ, Charles­Hudson C. Daily electrode 
change and effect on cardiac monitor alarms: an evidence­based prac­
tice approach. J Nurs Care Qual. 2013;28:265–271. doi: 10.1097/
NCQ.0b013e31827993bc.
 436. Dandoy CE, Davies SM, Flesch L, Hayward M, Koons C, Coleman K, 
Jacobs J, McKenna LA, Olomajeye A, Olson C, Powers J, Shoemaker 
K, Jodele S, Alessandrini E, Weiss B. A team­based approach to reduc­
ing cardiac monitor alarms. Pediatrics. 2014;134:e1686–e1694. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2014­1162.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Electrocardiographic Monitoring for Hospitalized Patients
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527 
November 7, 2017
e343
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 437. Sendelbach S, Wahl S, Anthony A, Shotts P
. Stop the noise: a quality 
improvement project to decrease electrocardiographic nuisance alarms. 
Crit Care Nurse. 2015;35:15–22; quiz 1p following 22. doi: 10.4037/
ccn2015858.
 438. AAMI Foundation HTSI. Safety innovations: using data to drive alarm 
system improvement. http://s3.amazonaws.com/rdcms­aami/files/pro­
duction/public/FileDownloads/HTSI/Johns_Hopkins_White_Paper.pdf. 
Accessed June 10, 2014.
 439. Deleted in proof.
 440. Whalen DA, Covelle PM, Piepenbrink JC, Villanova KL, Cuneo CL, 
Awtry EH. Novel approach to cardiac alarm management on te­
lemetry units. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2014;29:E13–E22. doi: 10.1097/
JCN.0000000000000114.
 441. Phillips J. Clinical alarms: complexity and common sense. Crit Care Nurs 
Clin North Am. 2006;18:145–156, ix. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2006.01.002.
 442. Edworthy J. Medical audible alarms: a review. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 
2013;20:584–589. doi: 10.1136/amiajnl­2012­001061.
 443. Bonafide CP
, Localio AR, Holmes JH, Nadkarni VM, Stemler S, 
MacMurchy M, Zander M, Roberts KE, Lin R, Keren R. Video analysis of 
factors associated with response time to physiologic monitor alarms in 
a children’s hospital. JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171:524–531. doi: 10.1001/
jamapediatrics.2016.5123.
 444. Adams­Hamoda MG, Caldwell MA, Stotts NA, Drew BJ. Factors to con­
sider when analyzing 12­lead electrocardiograms for evidence of acute 
myocardial ischemia. Am J Crit Care. 2003;12:9–16; quiz 17–18.
 445. Patel SI, Souter MJ. Equipment­related electrocardiographic artifacts: 
causes, characteristics, consequences, and correction. Anesthesiology. 
2008;108:138–148. doi: 10.1097/01.anes.0000296537.62905.25.
 446. Melendez LA, Pino RM. Electrocardiogram interference: a thing of 
the past? Biomed Instrum Technol. 2012;46:470–477. doi: 10.2345/ 
0899­8205­46.6.470.
 447. Drew BJ, Funk M. Practice standards for ECG monitoring in hospital set­
tings: executive summary and guide for implementation. Crit Care Nurs 
Clin North Am. 2006;18:157–168, ix. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2006.01.007.
 448. Albert NM, Murray T, Bena JF, Slifcak E, Roach JD, Spence J, Burkle A. 
Differences in alarm events between disposable and reusable electro­
cardiography lead wires. Am J Crit Care. 2015;24:67–73; quiz 74. doi: 
10.4037/ajcc2015663.
 449. Benjamin EM, Klugman RA, Luckmann R, Fairchild DG, Abookire SA. 
Impact of cardiac telemetry on patient safety and cost. Am J Manag Care. 
2013;19:e225–e232.
 450. Feder S, Funk M. Over­monitoring and alarm fatigue: for whom do the bells 
toll? Heart Lung. 2013;42:395–396. doi: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2013.09.001.
 451. Funk M, Winkler CG, May JL, Stephens K, Fennie KP
, Rose LL, Turkman YE, 
Drew BJ. Unnecessary arrhythmia monitoring and underutilization of isch­
emia and QT interval monitoring in current clinical practice: baseline results 
of the Practical Use of the Latest Standards for Electrocardiography trial. 
 
J Electrocardiol. 2010;43:542–547. doi: 10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2010.07.018.
 452. Bubb C. A timely practice; a nurse­driven telemetry discontinuation pro­
tocol. Pa Nurse. 2011;66:6–10; quiz 10.
 453. Kansara P
, Jackson K, Dressler R, Weiner H, Kerzner R, Weintraub WS, 
Doorey A. Potential of missing life­threatening arrhythmias after limiting 
the use of cardiac telemetry. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175:1416–1418. 
doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.2387.
 454. Cvach M. Monitor alarm fatigue: an integrative review. Biomed Instrum 
Technol. 2012;46:268–277. doi: 10.2345/0899­8205­46.4.268.
 455. Rosman EC, Blaufox AD, Menco A, Trope R, Seiden HS. What are we 
missing? Arrhythmia detection in the pediatric intensive care unit. J 
Pediatr. 2013;163:511–514. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2013.01.053.
 456. Ahlborn V, Bohnhorst B, Peter CS, Poets CF. False alarms in very low 
birthweight infants: comparison between three intensive care monitor­
ing systems. Acta Paediatr. 2000;89:571–576.
 457. Pelter MM. Electrocardiographic monitoring in the medical­surgical set­
ting: clinical implications, basis, lead configurations, and nursing implica­
tions. Medsurg Nurs. 2008;17:421–428.
 458. Pickham D, Shinn JA, Chan GK, Funk M, Drew BJ. Quasi­experimental 
study to improve nurses’ QT­interval monitoring: results of QTIP study. 
Am J Crit Care. 2012;21:195–200; quiz 201. doi: 10.4037/ajcc2012245.
 459. Goodridge E, Furst C, Herrick J, Song J, Tipton PH. Accuracy of cardiac 
rhythm interpretation by medical­surgical nurses: a pilot study. J Nurses 
Prof Dev. 2013;29:35–40. doi: 10.1097/NND.0b013e31827d0c4f.
 460. Salerno SM, Alguire PC, Waxman HS. Competency in interpretation of 
12­lead electrocardiograms: a summary and appraisal of published evi­
dence. Ann Intern Med. 2003;138:751–760.
 461. Sur DK, Kaye L, Mikus M, Goad J, Morena A. Accuracy of elec­
trocardiogram reading by family practice residents. Fam Med. 
2000;32:315–319.
 462. Viskin S, Rosovski U, Sands AJ, Chen E, Kistler PM, Kalman JM, Rodriguez 
Chavez L, Iturralde Torres P
, Cruz FFE, Centurión OA, Fujiki A, Maury 
P
, Chen X, Krahn AD, Roithinger F, Zhang L, Vincent GM, Zeltser D. 
Inaccurate electrocardiographic interpretation of long QT: the major­
ity of physicians cannot recognize a long QT when they see one. Heart 
Rhythm. 2005;2:569–574. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.02.011.
 463. Novotny T, Bond RR, Andrsova I, Koc L, Sisakova M, Finlay DD, Guldenring 
D, Spinar J, Malik M. Data analysis of diagnostic accuracies in 12­lead elec­
trocardiogram interpretation by junior medical fellows. J Electrocardiol. 
2015;48:988–994. doi: 10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2015.08.023.
 464. Sandau KE, Sendelbach S, Fletcher L, Frederickson J, Drew BJ, Funk M. 
Computer­assisted interventions to improve QTc documentation in pa­
tients receiving QT­prolonging drugs. Am J Crit Care. 2015;24:e6–e15. 
doi: 10.4037/ajcc2015240.
 465. Chronister C. Improving nurses’ knowledge of continuous ST­segment 
monitoring. AACN Adv Crit Care. 2014;25:104–113. doi: 10.1097/
NCI.0000000000000029.
 466. Blakeman JR, Sarsfield K, Booker KJ. Nurses’ practices and lead selec­
tion in monitoring for myocardial ischemia: an evidence­based quality 
improvement project. Dimens Crit Care Nurs. 2015;34:189–195. doi: 
10.1097/DCC.0000000000000118.
 467. Rolskov Bojsen S, Räder SB, Holst AG, Kayser L, Ringsted C, Hastrup 
Svendsen J, Konge L. The acquisition and retention of ECG interpretation 
skills after a standardized web­based ECG tutorial­a randomised study. 
BMC Med Educ. 2015;15:36. doi: 10.1186/s12909­015­0319­0.
 468. Jheeta JS, Narayan O, Krasemann T. Accuracy in interpreting the paediat­
ric ECG: a UK­wide study and the need for improvement. Postgrad Med 
J. 2015;91:436–438. doi: 10.1136/postgradmedj­2013­305788rep.
 469. Wathen JE, Rewers AB, Yetman AT, Schaffer MS. Accuracy of ECG in­
terpretation in the pediatric emergency department. Ann Emerg Med. 
2005;46:507–511. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2005.03.013.
 470. Snyder CS, Bricker JT, Fenrich AL, Friedman RA, Rosenthal GL, 
Johnsrude CL, Kertesz C, Kertesz NJ. Can pediatric residents interpret 
electrocardiograms? Pediatr Cardiol. 2005;26:396–399. doi: 10.1007/
s00246­004­0759­5.
 471. Crocetti M, Thompson R. Electrocardiogram interpretation skills in pe­
diatric residents. Ann Pediatr Cardiol. 2010;3:3–7. doi: 10.4103/0974­ 
2069.64356.
 472. Balady GJ, Bufalino VJ, Gulati M, Kuvin JT, Mendes LA, Schuller JL. 
COCATS 4 Task Force 3: training in electrocardiography, ambulatory elec­
trocardiography, and exercise testing. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:1763–
1777. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.03.021.
 473. Badri M, Goldstein MA, Burke JF, Kowey PR. Reversal of fortunes: recog­
nizing misplacement of ECG electrodes. Am J Med. 2013;126:868–870. 
doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2013.06.017.
 474. Drew B. Standardization of electrode placement for continuous patient 
monitoring: introduction of an assessment tool to compare proposed 
electrocardiogram lead configurations. J Electrocardiol. 2011;44:115–
118. doi: 10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2010.10.031.
 475. García­Niebla J, Llontop­García P
, Valle­Racero JI, Serra­Autonell G, 
Batchvarov VN, de Luna AB. Technical mistakes during the acquisition 
of the electrocardiogram. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 2009;14:389–
403. doi: 10.1111/j.1542­474X.2009.00328.x.
 476. Greenfield JC Jr, Rembert JC. ECG acquisition errors due to arm leads 
placed on the chest. J Electrocardiol. 2009;42:235–237. doi: 10.1016/j.
jelectrocard.2008.10.009.
 477. Harrigan RA, Chan TC, Brady WJ. Electrocardiographic electrode mis­
placement, misconnection, and artifact. J Emerg Med. 2012;43:1038–
1044. doi: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2012.02.024.
 478. Toosi MS, Sochanski MT. False ST elevation in a modified 12­lead surface 
electrocardiogram. J Electrocardiol. 2008;41:197–201. doi: 10.1016/j.
jelectrocard.2007.11.004.
 479. Pettersen TR, Fålun N, Norekvål TM. Improvement of in­hospital teleme­
try monitoring in coronary care units: an intervention study for achieving 
optimal electrode placement and attachment, hygiene and delivery of 
critical information to patients. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2014;13:515–523. 
doi: 10.1177/1474515113515585.
 480. Kadish AH, Buxton AE, Kennedy HL, Knight BP
, Mason JW, Schuger CD, 
Tracy CM. ACC/AHA clinical competence statement on electrocardiog­
raphy and ambulatory electrocardiography: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association/American College of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Sandau et al
November 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:e273–e344. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527
e344
Physicians­American Society of Internal Medicine Task Force on Clinical 
Competence (ACC/AHA Committee to Develop a Clinical Competence 
Statement on Electrocardiography and Ambulatory Electrocardiography). 
 
Circulation. 2001;104:3169–3178.
 481. Sangkachand P
, Sarosario B, Funk M. Continuous ST­segment monitor­
ing: nurses’ attitudes, practices, and quality of patient care. Am J Crit 
Care. 2011;20:226–237; quiz 238. doi: 10.4037/ajcc2011129.
 482. Davies A, Macleod R, Bennett­Britton I, McElnay P
, Bakhbakhi D, Sansom 
J. E­learning and near­peer teaching in electrocardiogram education: a 
randomized trial. Clin Teach. 2015;12:1–4. doi: 10.1111/tct.12421.
 483. Jeffries PR. Development and testing of a Hyperlearning Model for 
 
design of an online critical care course. J Nurs Educ. 2005;44:366–372.
 484. Morris LL, Pfeifer PB, Catalano R, Fortney R, Hilton EL, McLaughlin J, 
Nelson G, Palamone J, Rabito R, Wetzel R, Goldstein L. Designing a 
comprehensive model for critical care orientation. Crit Care Nurse. 
2007;27:37–40, 42, 46–48 passim; quiz 61.
 485. Drew BJ. Pulling it all together: case studies on ECG monitoring. AACN 
Adv Crit Care. 2007;18:305–317.
 486. Hatala R, Norman GR, Brooks LR. Impact of a clinical scenario on accu­
racy of electrocardiogram interpretation. J Gen Intern Med. 1999;14: 
126–129.
 487. Ray K, Berger B. Challenges in healthcare education: a correlational 
study of outcomes using two learning techniques. J Nurses Staff Dev. 
2010;26:49–53; quiz 54–55. doi: 10.1097/NND.0b013e3181d4782c.
 488. Spiva L, Johnson K, Robertson B, Barrett DT, Jarrell NM, Hunter D, 
Mendoza I. The effectiveness of nurses’ ability to interpret basic electro­
cardiogram strips accurately using different learning modalities. J Contin 
Educ Nurs. 2012;43:81–89. doi: 10.3928/00220124­20111011­02.
 489. Recommended guidelines for in­hospital cardiac monitoring of adults for 
detection of arrhythmia: Emergency Cardiac Care Committee Members. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 1991;18:1431–1433.
 490. Leighton H, Kianfar H, Serynek S, Kerwin T. Effect of an electronic or­
dering system on adherence to the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association guidelines for cardiac monitoring. Crit Pathw 
Cardiol. 2013;12:6–8. doi: 10.1097/HPC.0b013e318270787c.
 491. Tiongson J, Robin J, Chana A, Shin DD, Gheorghiade M. Are the 
American College of Cardiology/Emergency Cardiac Care (ACC/ECC) 
guidelines useful in triaging patients to telemetry units? Acute Card Care. 
2006;8:155–160. doi: 10.1080/17482940600934192.
 492. Durairaj L, Reilly B, Das K, Smith C, Acob C, Husain S, Saquib M, 
Ganschow P
, Evans A, McNutt R. Emergency department admissions to 
inpatient cardiac telemetry beds: a prospective cohort study of risk strati­
fication and outcomes. Am J Med. 2001;110:7–11.
 493. Sultana RV, Kerr D, Kelly AM, Cameron P
. Validation of a tool to safely tri­
age selected patients with chest pain to unmonitored beds. Emerg Med 
(Fremantle). 2002;14:393–399.
 494. Estrada CA, Rosman HS, Prasad NK, Battilana G, Alexander M, Held AC, 
Young MJ. Evaluation of guidelines for the use of telemetry in the non­
intensive­care setting. J Gen Intern Med. 2000;15:51–55.
 495. Sandau KE, Sendelbach S, Frederickson J, Doran K. National survey of 
cardiologists’ standard of practice for continuous ST­segment monitor­
ing. Am J Crit Care. 2010;19:112–123. doi: 10.4037/ajcc2010264.
 496. Ng TM, Bell AM, Hong C, Hara JM, Touchette DR, Danskey KN, Lindsay 
TT, Puumala SE. Pharmacist monitoring of QTc interval­prolonging medi­
cations in critically ill medical patients: a pilot study. Ann Pharmacother. 
2008;42:475–482. doi: 10.1345/aph.1K458.
 497. Haugaa KH, Bos JM, Tarrell RF, Morlan BW, Caraballo PJ, Ackerman 
MJ. Institution­wide QT alert system identifies patients with a high 
risk of mortality. Mayo Clin Proc. 2013;88:315–325. doi: 10.1016/j.
mayocp.2013.01.013.
 498. Tisdale JE, Jaynes HA, Kingery JR, Overholser BR, Mourad NA, Trujillo TN, 
Kovacs RJ. Effectiveness of a clinical decision support system for reducing 
the risk of QT interval prolongation in hospitalized patients [published 
correction appears in Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2014;7:981]. 
Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2014;7:381–390. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCOUTCOMES.113.000651.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
