 Place-based perceptions of the impacts of fracking along the Marcellus
Shale
Thurka Sangaramoorthy a, *, Amelia M. Jamison b, Meleah D. Boyle c,
Devon C. Payne-Sturges c, Amir Sapkota c, Donald K. Milton c, Sacoby M. Wilson c
a Department of Anthropology, University of Maryland, 1111 Woods Hall, 4302 Chapel Lane, College Park, MD, 20742, USA
b Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Maryland, 255 Valley Drive, College Park, MD, 20742, USA
c Maryland Institute for Applied Environmental Health, University of Maryland, 255 Valley Drive, College Park, MD, 20742, USA
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 18 July 2015
Received in revised form
22 September 2015
Accepted 3 January 2016
Available online 6 January 2016
Keywords:
US
Fracking
Energy development
Sense of place
Social and psychological stress
Health impacts
Qualitative research
a b s t r a c t
We examined community perspectives and experiences with fracking in Doddridge County, West Vir-
ginia, USA as part of a larger assessment to investigate the potential health impacts associated with
fracking in neighboring Maryland, USA. In November 2013, we held two focus groups with community
residents who had been impacted by fracking operations and conducted field observations in the
impacted areas. Employing grounded theory, we conducted qualitative analysis to explore emergent
themes related to direct and indirect health impacts of fracking. Three components of experience were
identified, including (a) meanings of place and identity, (b) transforming relationships, and (c) percep-
tions of environmental and health impacts. Our findings indicate that fracking contributes to a disruption
in residents' sense of place and social identity, generating widespread social stress. Although community
residents acknowledged the potential for economic growth brought about by fracking, rapid trans-
formations in meanings of place and social identity influenced residents' perceptions of environmental
and health impacts. Our findings suggest that in order to have a more complete understanding of the
health impacts of fracking, future work must consider the complex linkages between social disruption,
environmental impacts, and health outcomes through critical engagements with communities under-
going energy development.
© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Discovering new sources of energy along with independence
from foreign oil has become increasingly important as the demand
for fossil fuels continues to rapidly increase. Recent innovations in
extractive technologies have made it possible to develop previously
inaccessible natural gas and oil reserves. Unconventional natural
gas development and production, or fracking, the horizontal dril-
ling of a rock layer and the injection of a pressurized mixture of
water, sand, and other chemicals to release gas and oil, is one such
new technique employed to extract natural gas or oil reserves
dispersed within shale formations. These methods have allowed for
the rapid expansion of oil and natural gas development throughout
the United States, Europe, Asia, and Australia, and are predicted to
make the United States a key exporter of natural gas in the near
future (Boersma et al., 2015).
One of the largest shale formations in the United States, Mar-
cellus Shale, is abundant in gas resources and is found deep beneath
the surface of the Northern Appalachian regions of Pennsylvania,
Ohio, West Virginia, New York, and Western Maryland (Fig. 1).
Although fracking has been established in the Western United
States, in states like Colorado and Texas, it has only recently been
implemented in states like West Virginia and Pennsylvania. How-
ever, despite shale production beginning in 2005, Marcellus Shale is
currently the largest producing shale gas basin in the United States,
accounting for almost 40% of US shale gas production. Production in
the Marcellus Shale has increased dramatically, from 2 billion cubic
feet per day in 2010 to its current level of 16.5 billion cubic feet per
day (U.S. Energy Information Administration, 2015).
The process of extracting gas from shale formations is complex
and involves several phases. Negotiating mineral rights with
landowners, clearing land for well pads, construction of road and
infrastructure
including
pipelines
and
compressor
stations,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: tsangara@umd.edu (T. Sangaramoorthy).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Social Science & Medicine
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/socscimed
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.01.002
0277-9536/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Social Science & Medicine 151 (2016) 27e37
 transporting and processing extracted gas as well as water and
wastewater, and the influx of transient workers and populations
into established communities are also important aspects of frack-
ing. These stages of development may have significant environ-
mental, health, and social effects for communities undergoing
fracking (Ferrar et al., 2013; Jacquet, 2014).
Because fracking is relatively new and has expanded rapidly,
there is a lack of substantive population-based studies of the public
health effects of fracking operations. However, current research
indicates that there is significant potential for adverse direct and
indirect health outcomes as a result of fracking. A growing body of
work has identified several key environmental, physical, and social
stressors associated with fracking as well as the exposure pathways
by which the health of communities may be impacted (Adgate
et al., 2014; Shonkoff et al., 2014; Ziemkiewicz et al., 2014). Air
pollutants, reported in various phases of fracking, have been a cause
of concern since they are known respiratory, skin, and neurological
toxicants; can cause drowsiness and headaches; and can lead to
blood disorders, reproductive and fetal conditions, and cancer
(McKenzie et al., 2012). Contamination of surface and groundwater
has also been noted as a serious concern because of the large
amounts of water used and generated through the fracking process
(Environmental Protection Agency, 2015; Rahm and Riha, 2014).
Although few studies have attempted to link chemicals used in
fracking to direct health effects, these fluids are known to cause
cancer and other mutations, disrupt endocrine functioning and
normal immune responses, and damage neurological, cardiovas-
cular, and kidney functioning (Colborn et al., 2011). Stressors
emanating from the physical environment as a result of the fracking
process such as noise and light pollution and accidents and injuries
also have raised alarm among communities and researchers (Ferrar
et al., 2013). Noise and light pollution can increase stress among
residents living near fracking sites and may have serious impacts on
workers; occupational hazards and traffic and industrial accidents
can increase mortality related to fracking operations (Boudet et al.,
2014).
Finally, social stressors related to rapid community change as a
result of frackingdindustrialization, uneven economic benefits,
diminishing social cohesion, and increases in crime and substance
abusedhave been noted as potentially contributing to health ef-
fects attributable to psychosocial stress (Brasier et al., 2011;
Shandro et al., 2011; Stedman et al., 2012). Some of this literature
has examined nonspecific health symptoms reported by residents
living near fracking sites including upper respiratory tract issues,
nosebleeds, eye irritation, headaches, vomiting, diarrhea, and skin
rashes (Saberi et al., 2014; Werner et al., 2015). Others have focused
on residential risk perceptions where fear of uncertainty around
fracking and lack of trust surrounding government and industry
regulations has led to increased levels of stress and anxiety
(Willow, 2014). This scholarship indicates that fracking represents a
significant dilemma for communities, who often welcome the po-
tential economic growth but are also concerned about socio-
environmental risks (Ladd, 2014).
In 2011, former Maryland governor Martin O'Malley issued an
executive order establishing the Marcellus Shale Safe Drilling
Initiative, the purpose of which was to assist state policymakers
and regulators in determining whether and how gas production
from the Marcellus Shale formations in Maryland can be accom-
plished without unacceptable risks to public health, safety, the
environment, and natural resources (O'Malley and McDonough,
2011). As part of this initiative, the State of Maryland contracted
us to conduct an assessment of the potential public health impacts
associated with drilling in the Marcellus Shale in Western Mary-
land, especially those that would be concentrated in and unique to
communities living and working near fracking sites. We employed
a health impact assessment (HIA) methodology to conduct a study
of potential public health impacts of fracking. A HIA is a process that
utilizes a variety of data and analytic methods to determine a broad
range of potential health impacts, including those that may result
from social, economic, and environmental changes, of a proposed
Fig. 1. Extent of the Marcellus shale in Western Maryland.
T. Sangaramoorthy et al. / Social Science & Medicine 151 (2016) 27e37
28
 project, plan, or policy before it is implemented (Witter et al., 2013).
Our HIA included a comprehensive description of risks and po-
tential public health responses to fracking using a baseline
assessment of current regional population health, an assessment of
potential public health impacts, and possible adaptive and public
health mitigation strategies. The final HIA report and supporting
documents are available on the project website (Maryland Institute
for Applied Environmental Health, 2014).
In this paper, we report on qualitative data collected at the
beginning of the HIA using focus groups and observational data. A
necessary initial step in any HIA is the scoping process where the
plan for the HIA is outlined and potential health risks and benefits
are identified in consultation with a wide range of stakeholders.
Through input from multiple stakeholders in Western Maryland,
we conducted focus groups with residents from nearby West Vir-
ginia, where
drilling operations were already underway, to
examine how community residents perceive and experience
fracking to better understand the potential health impacts for
Western Maryland residents.
1.1. Western Maryland and West Virginia in context
Potential fracking operations in Maryland are predicted to occur
in Allegany and Garrett counties, the westernmost counties in the
state, nestled in the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains.
Although West Virginia figures prominently in the social science
and health literature on Appalachia, Western Maryland often has
been overlooked. The limited scholarship on Western Maryland has
noted that Allegany and Garrett counties are more similar to
neighboring West Virginia and other states that encompass the
Northern Sub region of Appalachia than to the rest of the state of
Maryland due to closely-aligned economic and cultural histories
(Hanna, 1995). Coal mining and oil and gas development greatly
influenced regional settlement patterns and still have considerable
environmental and economic impacts on the area (Bell and York,
2010). Much of the region is in economic and population decline
after being major coal, oil, and gas production centers in the past
century (Thorne et al., 2004). Tables 1 and 2 show current
geographical, sociodemographic, and health outcome data for
Allegany, Garrett, and Doddridge counties and for the states of
Maryland and West Virginia. All three counties are rural and have
populations that are older and racially homogenous and experience
high rates of poverty. The health profile of Allegany and Garrett
County residents is also comparable to that of Doddridge County
residents.
Scholarship on Appalachia indicates that place-based identity is
complex and diverse, resulting from a shared sense of regional
geography, history, political economy, and culture. The Appalachian
mountain range defines the region geographically, extending from
Southern Alabama into Canada, encompassing nearly 400 counties
in 13 different states (Mencken, 1997). Although rooted in place-
based meanings related to physical and metaphorical homeplace
of mountains, Appalachia also extends to a shared social identity
rooted in regional politics, economic history, and social struggles
(Cooper et al., 2011). Recent work has focused on how modern
Appalachian identity rejects “hillbilly” and “culture of poverty”
stereotypes as those in the region redefine themselves in the face of
global
capitalism
(Fisher
and
Smith,
2012).
Communities
throughout the region are forming broader alliances and social
movements to advocate for social and health justice in response to
years of political, economic, and cultural marginalization (Taylor,
2009).
1.2. Place-based approaches to fracking
Although fracking is a global phenomenon, experiences with
fracking are localized and often tied to individual and collective
sense of place (Jacquet and Stedman, 2014). Scholars have long
documented the deep and substantial connections between people
and environments, and in particular psychosocial conceptions and
meanings of place, individual and collective attachment to partic-
ular places, and the formation of identities strongly linked with
place (Low and Altman, 1992; Proshansky et al., 1983). Although
public health literature, for the most part, has focused on dis-
tinguishing between contextual or compositional effects of place,
evidence indicates that people and places are mutually-reinforcing
reciprocal systems and that personal and collective identities are
situated and shaped by both social relations and place (Cummins
et al., 2007). Proshansky and colleagues argue that the “subjective
sense of self is defined and expressed not simply by one's rela-
tionship to other people, but also by one's relationships to the
various physical settings that define and structure day-to-day life”
(1983,
58).
These
routine
experiences
and
understandings
contribute to how people come to construct complex meanings to
their social and physical environments, especially in attributing
social, cultural, and environmental values to place (Manzo, 2005).
Table 1
Demographic profile.
State of Maryland
Garrett County, MD
Allegany County, MD
State of West
Virginia
Doddridge County, WV
Total population (Est. 2014)a
5,976,407
29,679
72,952
1,850,326
8391
Total land area (mi2)a
9707.24
647.10
424.16
24,038.21
319.72
Pop. density (per mi2)a
594.8
46.5
177.0
77.1
25.7
Pop. growth rate (% change. April 2010eJuly
2014)a
3.5%
�1.4%
�2.8%
�0.1%
1.7%
Demographics
Pop. Id as non-hispanic whitea
52.6%
96.6%
87.4%
92.5%
95.8%
Median ageb
38
43.4
41.2
41.5
43.2
Economics
Median household incomea
$73,538
$45.206
$39,293
$41,043
$34,043
Poverty (% pop.)a
10.1%
15.9%
18.6%
18.3%
18.1%
Employment
Civilian labor force (% pop. >16 yrs)a
68.8%
61.2%
52.9%
54.5%
46.7%
Leading employment by sector (% of
pop. > 16yrs employed)a
Healthcare, Government,
Professional
Healthcare,
Construction, Retail
Administrative, Sales,
Production
Healthcare, Retail,
Education
Healthcare, Retail, Oil &
Gas Industry
a United States Census Bureau (2015a).
b United States Census Bureau (2015b).
Sources:
T. Sangaramoorthy et al. / Social Science & Medicine 151 (2016) 27e37
29
 They also influence emotional ties and attachment to place
(Korpela, 1989). Social and environmental changes to place,
therefore, can have critical consequences for people's sense of self
and their meanings and attachment to place (Fried, 2000; Siegrist,
2000).
Recently, literature on place meaning, place attachment, and
place-based identity has found that disruptions to cultural attri-
butes and social identities as a result of environmental degradation
result in considerable psychosocial stress (Albrecht et al., 2007;
Crighton et al., 2003; Kondo et al., 2014; Van Haaften and Van de
Vijver, 1996). An emerging literature on the psychological and so-
cial impacts of fracking suggests that similar levels of stress may be
occurring along the Marcellus Shale. For instance, Perry (2012),
through long-term ethnographic work in Bradford County, Penn-
sylvania, uses “collective trauma” to describe community experi-
ences of acute social disruption and stress ranging from altered
connections with place and ruptures in sense of belonging and
identity. In Eastern Ohio, researchers found that local residents who
oppose fracking used narratives of disempowerment and vulnera-
bility to document drastic alterations to their sense of place and
identity which compounded their sense of health and environ-
mental risk (Willow et al., 2014). Given the complex nature and
relative novelty of fracking, we contribute to the literature by
examining how changing relationships of place and social identity
can result in multiple stressors that have a significant effect on
people's perceptions of health and environmental impacts.
2. Methods
2.1. Data collection
We used methods traditionally employed in HIAs, utilizing the
scoping process to understand community concerns related to
natural gas exploration and development (Korfmacher et al., 2013;
Witter et al., 2013). As part of the scoping phase, we conducted
focus groups in November 2013 among Doddridge County, West
Virginia residents to gain insight into how individuals living in
communities where fracking is underway are being impacted.
Focus groups allow individuals to use others' ideas as prompts to
stimulate their own perspectives allowing for a deeper exploration
of challenges, issues, and concerns about fracking (Kreuger, 1988;
Lobdell et al., 2005). We determined that because of participants'
shared history as landowners impacted by fracking, the focus group
method was appropriate for a deeper exploration of community
perspectives. The study was approved by the University of Mary-
land Institutional Review Board.
Table 2
Regional health profiles.
Maryland State
Garrett County, MD
Allegany County, MD
West
Virginia
State
Doddridge County, WV
Life expectancy (years at birth)d
78.8
78.0
77.2
75.4
76.1
Mortality (Age-adjusted per 100,000 population)a
All cause mortality rate
797.5
808.0
885.3
938.7
915.2
Malignant neoplasms
189.6
172.8
191.7
212.0
199.5
Diseases of the heart
273.7
351.5
314.2
325.9
317.4
Chronic lower respiratory diseases
36.6
50.4
53.8
61.2
63.5
Accidents
25.8
39.6
31.8
57.7
57.0
Intentional self-harm
8.8
10.7
11.7
14.6
13.3*
Morbidity
Diabetes prevalence (Age-adjusted rate per 100 adults)c
9.2
12.3
12.1
11.2
12.2
Disability
(% pop. <65 yrs)e
7.0%
9.4%
13.5%
14.2%
11.5%
Quality of life (Avg. in past 30 days)b
Poor physical health days
3.0
3.6
4.5
4.9
3.7
Poor mental health days
3.2
3.7
3.8
4.4
3.8
Health behaviors (% pop > 18 yrs)b
Adult obesity
28%
31%
28%
33%
33%
Adult smoking
15%
20%
23%
26%
14%
Excessive drinking
15%
17%
16%
10%
10%
Health access
Without Health Insurance (% pop. <65yrs)f
8.9%
12.8%
11.0%
10.4%
18.4%
a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2015a).
b Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (2015).
c Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2015b).
d Social Science Research Council (2015).
e United States Census Bureau (2015b).
f United States Census Bureau (2015a).
Sources:
T. Sangaramoorthy et al. / Social Science & Medicine 151 (2016) 27e37
30
 Flyers, email blasts, and an announcement on the project web-
site were used to recruit study participants. Our aim was to un-
derstand the perspectives of residents who were engaged and
impacted by fracking, rather than to seek a representative sample of
the public (Marshall, 1996). Thirteen individuals, composed of ten
women and three men, participated in two focus groups lasting
90 minutes each. Both focus groups were conducted in West Union,
West Virginia in two private rooms in a local cafe, with staggered
start times to accommodate all participants. All participants were
18 years or older, residents impacted by fracking, and signed con-
sent forms agreeing to participate in the focus group. All focus
group participants were non-Hispanic whites, reflecting the racially
homogenous demographics of the county. Table 3 summarizes two
key characteristics of participants, related to residency and land
ownership rights, that featured prominently in the study.
A limitation of this study is that we were not able to recruit
representative numbers of residents impacted by fracking at the
county or state level. We also recognize that the individuals who
chose to participate may have been likely to be the most concerned
members of the community. Finally, although the vast majority of
our sample consisted of women, who have been documented to be
more involved and vocal about environmental injustices (Xiao and
McCright, 2013), we did not observe gender differences in per-
spectives related to fracking or suppression of pro-fracking senti-
ments that might have been voiced from either male or female
participants.
The first and last author, both experienced moderators, led each
focus group. Each session was audio-recorded and transcribed
verbatim. Focus group questions explored participants' perspec-
tives and experiences with fracking; the factors which structured
these perspectives and experiences; narratives, metaphors, and
judgments employed by participants to justify and support
particular perspectives; and participant priorities for public health
research related to fracking. Four of the authors also participated in
a multi-day trip in November 2013 to local fracking sites and resi-
dences and recorded observations through photos and notes. These
observations were discussed extensively among all authors in
subsequent team meetings and were crucial in shaping analysis.
2.2. Data analysis
Focus group transcripts were compared with the original voice
recordings for completeness and accuracy. The first and second
authors coded the transcripts using a thematic approach to data
analysis in Atlas ti 7.0, and initial broad coding were guided by
major themes from the interview guides, but new codes and
themes were developed on the basis of the data (Huberman and
Miles, 2002). Following the constant comparative method, data
coding and analysis occurred simultaneously in an iterative process
of inductive reasoning (Glaser and Strauss, 1967). Excerpts and
analytical memos were reviewed to identify common themes and
differing views. Data was analyzed a second time to further detail
the initial broad codes into sub-themes using grounded theory to
develop fine codes (Strauss and Corbin, 1990). The definitions of
these emerging fine codes were discussed and refined among the
first two authors. After finalizing the coding scheme, printed re-
ports of each fine code were discussed among all team members
and used to write a detailed analytical report.
3. Results
3.1. Meanings of place and identity
Narratives about land, geography, and the history of place
figured prominently in how participants framed their experiences
and perspectives of fracking. Many participants described them-
selves as “newcomers” or non-natives to the area who were
attracted to the quiet of the West Virginia hills as a place to
peacefully raise a family or retire. They came for the peace, quiet,
and pristine environmentdthe very qualities that they felt were
critically compromised when fracking commenced.
For instance, a woman who had moved to the area from Balti-
more told us, “When my husband and I moved here, our intent was
to retire and disappear into the hollows so to speak.” Similarly, an
older woman, another newcomer explained her family's move, “We
retired here because it was clean and beautiful. Most people who've
grown up here love it because it is clean and beautiful but now it's
being turned into an industrial wasteland.” A man, also a
newcomer, who had bought property in the area with his wife so
that she could find relief for her health conditions stated, “I've been
here about three years. I came to get away. My wife has a chronic
illness, liver disease, and a whole lot of other things. Found the
place, the furthest away from pollution. That's what brought us
here but now we're trying like hell to get out.”
“Natives” or long-term residents, those who have lived in the
area their entire lives and are able to trace their lineage back
multiple generations, also described the same sense of loss and
distress over the transformation of their land and their sense of
place. One long-time resident, who was struggling to maintain her
property as fracking operations commenced, explained, “I love
where I live. I just love the area and I'm distressed. I'm grieving,
grieving the loss of [my] environment. Grieving home when [I'm]
still at home. It has been overwhelming. Lost the road. Living with
the dust. Pipe yard within a 100 yards of my home that has since
been converted to have a heavy equipment yard. Wood pallets.
Trucks all hours. Gas well. Industrialized bottom line …”
Many individuals expressed that they couldn't afford to leave or
lacked the desire to leave, which also compounded their distress. A
Table 3
Sample characteristics and representative quotes references.
Dimension
Context
Quote
Long term
residents
Residents who could trace their lineage back for multiple generations with
connections to the land.
“My family has lived in West Virginia for a long time, my ancestors came here
from Maryland like several of the rest of you - but a little bit earlier - 1799 they
arrived at Falls Creek”.
Newcomers Residents who moved to Doddridge were seen as “newcomers” regardless of
how many decades they had been in the county.
“I'm a newcomer, like some of the people here in the sense that I bought the land in
1975, and moved in 1977, which means in another 30 or 40 years I might be
considered local.”
Mineral
owners
Residents who retained control of their subsurface property and were
perceived to have more control over interactions with the gas industry.
“I'm 64 years old and my grandfather purchased the property that we called a
home place. He owned 100% of the mineral rights and the surface.”
Surface
owners
Residents who did not own rights to subsurface property and had to allow
companies “reasonable access” to the underground gas and minerals. Some
had sold their rights, others had purchased land without mineral rights, and
still others inherited property from ancestors who had ceded mineral rights.
“I don't own my rights. No one around me owns our rights.”
“I'm a surface owner, you're taking away my right to exist on my land. “
T. Sangaramoorthy et al. / Social Science & Medicine 151 (2016) 27e37
31
 newcomer who debated leaving said, “I wish we and a lot of other
people could afford to get out.” Another newcomer told us, “It's like
I moved out here because I wanted to have some place for my
grandkids to be able to go. It's like, where do you go from here?
We're fighting back the best we can, and we've had our hands tied,
and we're spent. I mean, we're not rich people. This was supposed
to be my house fund, but we've had to pay the lawyer.”
3.2. Transforming relationships
Discussions of the impact of fracking also significantly centered
on the topic of split estates and mineral rights. Split estates, the
separation of surface (above ground portion of land) and mineral
(sub-surface) rights, is fairly common in the Appalachian region
and throughout the Western United States as a result of several land
grant and homesteading acts which were designed to encourage
Western migration in the early twentieth century, while allowing
the federal government to retain access to any future mineral dis-
coveries (Collins and Nkansah, 2013). Under common law, mineral
rights trump surface rights, and surface owners have to allow the
necessary use of surface property for mineral access (Ryder and
Hall, 2014). In West Virginia, legislation allows surface owners to
be compensated for surface damages caused by horizontal drilling
and property taxes on surface lands altered by fracking operations
(Collins and Nkansah, 2013). Split estates have emerged as para-
mount issues in West Virginia because of rapid increases in natural
gas drilling and fracturing technology.
Many participants discussed experiences in which gas devel-
opment operations occurred on their property without their con-
sent because oil and gas rights took precedence over the their rights
as surface owners. However, participants also pointed to the sub-
stantial differences between the drilling of the past and fracking. To
them, the older methods were less invasive and less dangerous. As
a newer technology used only by a few large and powerful energy
companies, the fracking process increased concern because of the
uncertainty related to the use of more chemicals, deeper faults, and
heavy machinery. As a long-term resident and surface-owner
explained, his relationship with gas companies evolved over time:
These leases originally were beautiful symbiotic relationships.
They would come in to punch some vertical wells and people
got a little bit of money. They got free gas. They didn't destroy
your property. It was a little pad. I've got two of them on my
property. The guy comes once a week on a little four wheel and
checks it, doesn't bother a thing. A beautiful symbiotic rela-
tionship. Now these leases are no longer symbiotic. Now these
leases are being used to devastate and destroy our property
while the gas companies get all the benefits.
Another
long-term
resident
and
surface-owner
further
explained how fracking changed the nature of social relationships:
A conventional well goes down 2000 feet vertically. What
happens on your property, if it gets contaminated, it's you.
When you drill a Marcellus, and you're going out a mile or more,
you are impacting others and that's the difference. It takes a
quarter million to drill a well; your little mom-and-pop drilling
companies can't afford it. Their kids went to school with our
kids. They had a vested interest in the community. When Mar-
cellus came into the county, they saw the writing on the wall.
They couldn't compete with the Exons, the AEPs, the multi-
billion dollar, and multi-national companies that wanted to
come.
Additionally, participants perceived that fracking increased
tensions between surface and mineral owners. Individuals who
maintained their mineral rights claimed that they (or their ances-
tors) were “smart enough” to hold on to their rights. Mineral
owners today recognize that they have the power to choose
whether to get involved with fracking operations on their property.
A mineral rights owner defended his support of the industry,
acknowledging that sometimes the industry takes advantage of
individuals but that “there are people who are benefitting.” He
explained his advantageous position was due to generations of his
family retaining their mineral rights, “Whether it's just luck or not,
my grandfather a hundred years ago decided he wasn't going to let
go of the mineral rights. It wasn't any choice that I made. I could
have sold and I can sell right now, but I'm not going to sell.”
However, most participants were surface owners who had far
fewer options. As one surface owner explained, under current
regulations, whoever purchases the mineral rights has the right to
“reasonable access” to underground minerals on her land. She
continued, “A hundred years ago ‘reasonable access’ was bringing a
horse-drawn rig and drilling while today, it means that surface
owners can have a well pad set up in their yard without warning.”
Another woman who had purchased land in the 1970's knew she
didn't own the mineral rights, but pointed out that this was decades
before fracking technology made large-scale drilling a possibility.
She discussed her fears, “They could come to me tomorrow and say
they're going to start a Marcellus crop and I would have no say
because I don't own the minerals.” This scenario was reported by an
older man whose family had given up their mineral rights gener-
ations ago. He described how blindsided he and his wife felt when
drilling operations commenced on their property, “That's how we
found outdsurvey flags in our field. We contacted the company …
they came into our house and said, ‘We'll have our pit made at the
end of the week. We're putting a well there. If you don't like it, sue
us.’” Fig. 2 shows a road and storage pond that was constructed on a
surface owner's property.
Meanwhile, residents living near fracking operations are left
with rising insurance costs and plummeting property values. A
surface owner complained, “I have catastrophic homeowners now;
I dropped it because it went up a thousand dollars year after year.
I'm a single individual with a kid in college. I can't pay $2000 a year
for homeowner's insurance!” Other surface owners were more
concerned with property values. Another surface owner said, “They
need to compensate people for the value of the property. These are
people's life savings. I invested everything we had, and I was happy
to live here, but now I'm just trying to get my money out of it. It's
Fig. 2. Road and storage pond constructed on surface owner's property.
T. Sangaramoorthy et al. / Social Science & Medicine 151 (2016) 27e37
32
 been on the market for over two years now. No one will touch it!” A
prevailing sentiment among surface owners was summed up by a
frustrated participant, “We've got no rights. No rights at all.”
Many surface owners felt that there was little they could do to
fight back. Those who did seek legal recourse recounted facing
well-funded corporate lawyers and evasive courtroom techniques.
Without legal protection, these landowners felt powerless and
resigned to their fate. While acknowledging that she and her hus-
band were wealthy enough to move if they needed to, a long-term
resident described how there were larger issues at play and how
her community was powerless, “The major problem in West Vir-
ginia is we don't have a say so. Landowners who have owned their
property for hundreds of years never had to fight about being
poisoned on their own property, but now somebody can come in
and say, ‘We're on your land, this is what we're doing, sorry but
we've got the right.’”
Participants described the role that poverty plays in structuring
interactions between companies and Doddridge residents. One
participant, a tax preparer and mineral rights owner, told us, “The
amount of money that a lot of people here in the county live on
would appall some of you. As for the economic part of it, our county
until this started to happen five or six years ago was doomed for
failure. I mean we had no activity, we had no businesses …” Such
dire economic circumstances made fracking appealing for many, as
a long-term resident explained, “I get up every morning and I smile,
because I prayed for something like this to happen for our county
and for this region.”
Others spoke of both benefits and disadvantages of fracking. One
participant said that she felt that all the benefits went to non-local,
transient workers, while locals, like her son, are forced to take on
lower paying jobs. She explained that the majority of the workers
weren't local, “They travel, they follow the industry, they're out of
state, and those paychecks are going home.” However, she
expressed her deep conflict with fracking by saying that without
the industry, her son would need to leave West Virginia to find
work, but by working for the oil and gas companies, he'd be
working in dangerous conditions, “I'm not so against the industry
all together. He knows the dangers. You know what? Just like
everyone else in West Virginia, he needs a job.”
A few participants, however, saw the appeals of an economic
boom as “propaganda.” Participants described fracking companies
as “predatory” because they were aware of how poorer residents
could be swayed with the promise of extra income. One concerned
surface owner described an encounter with an executive at an in-
dustry presentation in the neighboring township, “One of the
things he said that couldn't be more condescending was that he
wanted people going to the mailbox to get a ‘little check’ instead of
just their bills.” Others opposed what they saw as predatory
employment practices. An elderly man, retired from years in the oil
industry, explained that the dangerous working conditions within
fracking operations was not worth any amount of compensation,
“Some laborers appear to be relatively well off, but they're not
really that well off considering how they're treated. They work
exceedingly long hours, and often under very dangerous circum-
stances, they're exempt from safety rules almost completely.” He
concluded that “from a very high level, it's all controlled by finan-
cial interests.”
Participants described the “corrupt” relationship between state
and local governments and big energy companies as further
contributing to their distress. Many participants expressed concern
that the money being offered by rich companies was potentially
corrupting government officials, who continued to pass “pro-wells
legislation.” A surface owner described an instance where well-pad
construction started before proper permits could be procured,
saying “That tells me that they spend millions of dollars in labor and
construction and they have not even been given the permit, and
that implies to me that there is an understanding that this is a done
deal.” As a newer resident, she described herself as someone who
was not a “radical activist” but “pretty conservative and very pro-
business” but started turning to local activist groups for answers
because of the failures of the local government.
Participants also saw evidence of this “pro-wells” bias in the lack
of government regulation and enforcement. A long-term resident
had witnessed workers cleaning up fracking fluid without adequate
safety equipment at a spill near her property. She tried to contact
the proper authorities but could not reach them, “The West Virginia
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)dtheir oil and gas
division had tremendous influence from the industry, and they only
have 14 to 16 inspectors and that is intentional.” Participants felt
this lack of oversight made enforcement nearly impossible. Another
woman told us that she observed a truck accident where waste-
water was leaking into a local creek, but when she followed up
with authorities, there was a lack of response, “They never tested it
… they asked for all of my pictures and I sent them the e-mail from
DEP that said it wasn't necessary to test the creek water. This is
every day. This happens every day.” These experiences led her to
turn to grassroots activism that focused on calls for better industry
regulation, “We know what is supposed to be, but in West Virginia
they think that is perfectly okay to have a station next door and not
have the oversight.”
3.3. Perceptions of environmental and health impacts
During the focus groups and observational activities to fracking
sites and residences, residents expressed concern about environ-
mental changes brought about by fracking operations such as
increased traffic, land erosion and mudslides, wastewater, chemical
runoff, and changes in air and water quality (Fig. 3). They told us
that these concerns contributed to increasing levels of stress and
growing sense of uncertainty about the future. Many participants
repeatedly made connections between contaminated environ-
ments and poor health, reflecting what researchers have described
as the interconnectedness of Appalachian health, identity, and
place (Behringer and Friedell, 2006).
Few participants experienced health concerns themselves but
spoke of neighbors, co-workers, and others who had symptoms
such as nosebleeds, sore throats, skin rashes, chemically induced
asthma, and headaches. Participants who directly experienced
symptoms or expressed concern about symptoms were those living
in close proximity to fracking operationsdcompressor stations,
Fig. 3. Increased truck traffic related to fracking.
T. Sangaramoorthy et al. / Social Science & Medicine 151 (2016) 27e37
33
 well pads, and increased truck traffic. A participant who lived so
close to a well pad that she had been “breathing condensate”
described, “I'm very sensitive to anything right now. Itching all over.
I had burning skin. I have headaches. I have pains that is in all
different parts of my body.” An older woman who lived meters from
an active drill site told us she worried about contamination of her
well water as well as poor air quality, “I've been breathing this crap
for two years. The condensation tank was a nightmare, but I've just
gotten really ill, really bad sore throats, really bad rashes.” In
addition to her own health problems, she reported that her
grandson, who periodically stays at her house, had come back from
the pediatrician with an unconfirmed diagnosis of asthma:
I took him to the doctor who said he had a bad sore throat but no
traces of bacterial infection. So the doctor asked, “How long has
he had asthma?” I tell her, “He doesn't have asthma.” She goes,
“Are you sure?” and I say again, “Yeah, he's never been diag-
nosed with asthma!” When they checked, he almost had
pneumonia in his right lung and that was when we started
turning the gas on in the house so that could have had some-
thing to do with that too. So now we're taking him to an ENT
doctor and they had to treat him with two doses of antibiotics,
just for the lung. So I ask, “Does he have asthma or not?” They
say, “We're not going to say he doesn't!” The doctors won't get
involved in this. They're not even allowed to discuss it with
people.
The most mentioned health effect was psychosocial stress.
Participants frequently expressed that stress was a result of
increased uncertainty, anxiety, anger, and fear related to living with
fracking. The uncertainty of the future, when combined with the
powerlessness residents feel against big companies, created stress
across the entire community. An older man who was native to the
area told us:
I have sensitivity to a lot of things because I have cancer. My
body is a little bit traumatized, so I have to be careful about what
I do. You don't smoke. You don't drink. You don't put stuff into
your body because you want to take care of your body, you want
to live, and you want to be the healthiest you can. But when you
lie in your house and you can't go outside and breathe fresh air
because somebody else has the right to come on your property
and poison it and you've got nowhere to go, it is a feeling of
helplessness. Sometimes it is overwhelming, you just want to
give up.
Likewise, the surface owner who had relocated to the region for
his wife's health described how the stress of protracted legal battles
impacted his ailing wife:
My wife with her autoimmune disease, the worst thing for her is
stress. When she gets stressed, she gets sick. She starts hurting
all over because the fibromyalgia kicks in, the arthritis kicks in
… So I try to downplay it all for her. The stress level on her, and
every time this happens, she gets sick. This has happened
multiple times. When this guy showed up, she was off the wall
for a week or two … She was crying. She was absolutely
distraught that they were going to put this industrial park in our
yard. She said she'd chain herself to the tree and have news
media out here and they'd have to cut down the tree over her
dead body. She was dead serious.
4. Discussion
The current study examined community perspectives and ex-
periences with fracking in Doddridge County, West Virginia using
qualitative data. Participants were not selected randomly and their
viewpoints may not reflect the perspectives of community resi-
dents. Our study focused specifically on one county in West Virginia
and local experiences of fracking. While these findings cannot be
generalized to other communities, including those in Western
Maryland, they can be helpful in understanding the role of place
and psychosocial stress in understanding the potential health im-
pacts of fracking in other communities facing similar issues.
Participants reported deep distress over the transformation of
the physical and natural environment, which led to conflicted
meanings of place and compromised social identities as land-
owners and West Virginians. Although residents did not experience
a complete loss of property or forcible removal from their land, they
conveyed feelings of extreme anxiety, fear, and stress due to
occupying an “outsider” position while living and experiencing the
rapid transformation and destruction of their home and overall
physical environment. These rapid changes, as a result of fracking,
negatively impacted participants' sense of belonging and attach-
ment to place. Many also expressed an unwillingness or inability to
leave their homes and the region despite these social and envi-
ronmental disruptions as a result of fracking, which only deepened
their stress.
These findings corroborate a handful of studies of impacted
communities along the Marcellus Shale which suggest that par-
ticipants' lived experiences of fracking contribute to a heightened
sense of fragmented individual and collective identities and
increasing loss of control over lives and personal property (Perry,
2012; Poole and Hudgins, 2013; Willow, 2014). However, our
findings indicate that Doddridge residents, despite their extensive
experience with localized gas drilling, view fracking as significantly
different. They described longing for a past where they felt that
relations with neighbors and gas companies were not as detri-
mental and where meanings of place were still held intact. Un-
certainty about potential environmental and social impacts, along
with the accelerated pace of industrial land development and influx
of a large “non-local” labor force may be impacting the ways in
which fracking is perceived and experienced as far more disruptive
to participants' sense of place.
The issue over mineral rights was also a key factor influencing
participants' perceptions and experiences of fracking. The tension
between mineral rights and surface owners was perceived to be
intensified by fracking. Mineral rights owners generally supported
fracking operations because they benefitted from it, whereas sur-
face owners expressed feeling powerless because of what they
perceived to be the failures of government and other entities
(including health professionals) to protect their lives, livelihood,
and environment from the “greed” of gas companies. This lack of
power or agency was discussed as being part of the history of en-
ergy extraction in West Virginia, where government agencies and
elected officials were seen as complicit in the destruction of land
and personal property. However, surface owners again felt that
there was a significant difference in the scale of fracking operations
which exacerbated their mistrust in institutions designed to protect
their welfare. Although all participants understood how fracking
could bring about substantial economic growth, most did not
perceive these benefits to be worth the cost of environmental
degradation, safe working conditions, and social fragmentation.
They felt strongly that government and elected leaders did not
share these same values as evidenced by what they reported to be a
“pro-wells” bias. Our findings contribute to research that docu-
ments increasing mistrust and community stress that results from
T. Sangaramoorthy et al. / Social Science & Medicine 151 (2016) 27e37
34
 perceived or actual lack of governmental regulation and enforce-
ment related to fracking (Smith and Ferguson, 2013; Willow et al.,
2014). Findings also support growing evidence of residents turning
to informal networks and grassroots activism for more information
and to advocate for their own rights in the face of fracking
(Simonelli, 2014).
Furthermore, the nascent literature on split estate policy in
energy development has documented the impact of ownership on
environmental, social, and economic inequalities (Anderson, 2013;
Fitzgerald, 2013; Rahm, 2011). Collins and Nkansah (2013), for
instance, found that over 40% of fracking gas wells were located on
split estates in West Virginia and that surface owners reported
more problems with the fracking processdland damage, polluted
water, and storage of fracking fluidsdthan those with mineral
rights. Our study indicates that surface owners may be at dispro-
portionate risk for environmental, physical, and social stressors
because they often are unable to stop the development of their
property or sell their property should they wish to move away. Split
estate issues are serious concerns for residents of Western Mary-
land as well as those living in West Virginia (Maryland Institute for
Applied Environmental Health, 2014). Our work also suggests that
issues of equity brought about by split estates may intensify dis-
ruptions to sense of place and identity.
Government, planning, and regulatory bodies can make better
efforts to mitigate these stressors stemming from split estate con-
ditions that can lead to long term community-level problems.
Others have shown that perceptions of fairness and equity in the
planning and siting process strongly influence perceived environ-
mental and social risks in energy development (McComas et al.,
2011; Sj€
oberg and Drottz-Sj€
oberg, 2001; Wolsink, 2007). Devel-
opment of fracking should include institutional capacity building, a
process in which knowledge resources, relational resources, and
mobilization capacity are increased through collaboration with
communities and various other stakeholders, ultimately leading to
more sustainable policy and planning recommendations (Breukers
and Wolsink, 2007). Once fracking operations have commenced,
existing surface owner legislation and enforcement to protect
surface owners against damages caused by fracking activities
should be strengthened. In New Mexico, for instance, the drilling
operator has to give a 30 day notice before commencing operations,
enter into a written agreement that lays out rights and obligations
regarding proposed surface activities with the surface owner, and
compensate the surface owner for damages (N.M. Stat. Ann. xx 70-
12-1 to 70-12-10). In addition, collaborative strategies at the local
level between communities, government experts, and conservation
groups aimed at monitoring and ensuring that setback regulations
(i.e. distance between fracking operations and occupied dwellings)
are properly implemented may also alleviate stressors and bring
about a sense of spatial equality for surface owners (Maryland
Institute for Applied Environmental Health, 2014; Ryder and Hall,
2014).
Finally, this study found that participants perceived individual
and social stress as contributing to the health impacts of fracking.
Participants who lived near fracking sites reported nonspecific
health symptoms, and others attributed community members'
physical ailments such as nosebleeds and skin rashes as directly
related to fracking operations. Almost all participants expressed
that they suffered from health impacts such as fear, anxiety, and
stress brought about by the uncertainty related to fracking. These
psychosocial health impacts are heavily influenced by disruptions
in people's sense of place, similar to those observed elsewhere
(Wester-Herber, 2004; Willow, 2014). Our findings indicate that
rapid environmental change brought about by fracking is impacting
the physical, mental, and emotional health of individuals in this
area. More thorough investigations of the multidimensional nature
of individual and social stress related to fracking are needed,
especially those which attend to the centrality of place in people's
perceptions of health and environmental impacts.
5. Conclusion
On April 2015, the Maryland Congress passed legislation that
included a moratorium on fracking until October 2017 and plans for
further research of health and economic impacts. The emergent
themes described in this study provide several important insights
for future planning and research agendas related to fracking in
Maryland.
Baseline
monitoring
and
longitudinal
studies
are
essential for understanding and responding to short-term and
long-term environmental health impacts of fracking. Community
health research investigating the complex relations between
environmental and social stress should be also prioritized, espe-
cially those that identify and measure the impact of place and
community disruption on psychosocial risks. Research examining
the full spectrum of stress can aid health providers, community
leaders, and policymakers in the design and implementation of
locally-appropriate services and programs for those impacted or
potentially impacted by fracking. Social and psychological context,
especially in relation to disruptions to place meaning, attachment,
and identity, also has great potential to inform current and future
work in environmental risk analysis and health impact assess-
ments. Additionally, a greater focus on the impact of split estates on
environmental and health outcomes is critically needed to better
understand issues that may be disproportionately affecting surface
owners.
Finally,
inclusive
partnerships
with
communities
throughout the process of fracking development should be strongly
considered as they can bring about not only increased institutional
capacity, but also potentially alleviate psychosocial stress and
disruption to place-relationships.
Acknowledgment
We would like to express our deepest gratitude and apprecia-
tion for the communities in West Virginia and Western Maryland
and to the individuals who participated in this research and shared
their stories, experiences, and expectations with our team. We
thank Laura Delmarre, Rianna Murray, and Diane Pitcock for
assistance with research and data collection. We also thank three
anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback, which led to
considerable improvements in this paper.
The work presented in this manuscript was supported by the
Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH:
M00B4400326). The findings and conclusions of this manuscript do
not necessarily represent the official views or policies of DHMH.
References
Adgate, J.L., Goldstein, B.D., McKenzie, L.M., 2014. Potential public health hazards,
exposures and health effects from unconventional natural gas development.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 48 (15), 8307e8320. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es404621d.
Albrecht, G., Sartore, G.M., Connor, L., Higginbotham, N., Freeman, S., Kelly, B.,
Pollard, G., 2007. Solastalgia: the distress caused by environmental change.
Australas.
Psychiatry
15
(Suppl.
1),
S95eS98.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
10398560701701288.
Anderson, P., 2013. Reasonable accommodation: split estates, conservation ease-
ments, and drilling in the Marcellus Shale. Va. Environ. Law J. 31, 136.
Behringer, B., Friedell, G.H., 2006. Appalachia: where place matters in health. Prev.
Chronic Dis. 3 (4) http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cncr.23132.
Bell, S.E., York, R., 2010. Community economic identity: the coal industry and ide-
ology construction in west virginia. Rural. Sociol. 75, 111e143. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1111/j.1549-0831.2009.00004.
Boersma, T., Ebinger, C.K., Greenley, H.L., 2015. An Assessment of U.S. Natural Gas
Exports. The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Boudet, H., Clarke, C., Bugden, D., Maibach, E., Roser-Renouf, C., Leiserowitz, A.,
2014. “Fracking” controversy and communication: using national survey data to
T. Sangaramoorthy et al. / Social Science & Medicine 151 (2016) 27e37
35
 understand public perceptions of hydraulic fracturing. Energy Policy 65, 57e67.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.10.017.
Brasier, K.J., Filteau, M.R., McLaughlin, D.K., Jacquet, J., Stedman, R.C., Kelsey, T.W.,
Goetz, S.J., 2011. Residents' perceptions of community and environmental im-
pacts from development of natural gas in the Marcellus Shale: a comparison of
Pennsylvania and New York cases. J. Rural Soc. Sci. 26 (1), 52e61.
Breukers, S., Wolsink, M., 2007. Wind power implementation in changing institu-
tional
landscapes:
an
international
comparison.
Energy
Policy
35
(5),
2737e2750. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2006.12.004.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015a. CDC Wonder Online Databases.
Retrieved September 10, 2015 from. http://wonder.cdc.gov/.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015b. Diabetes Home. Retrieved
September 10, 2015 from. http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/data/county.html.
Colborn, T., Kwiatkowski, C., Schultz, K., Bachran, M., 2011. Natural gas operations
from a public health perspective. Hum. Ecol. Risk Assess. 18, 1039e1056. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/10807039.2011.605662.
Collins, A., Nkansah, K., 2013. Divided rights, expanded conflict: the impact of split
estates in natural gas production. In: Paper Presented at the Agricultural and
Applied Economics Association Annual Meeting, Washington, DC, August 5,
2013.
Cooper, C.A., Knotts, H.G., Elders, K.L., 2011. A geography of appalachian identity.
Southeast. Geogr. 51 (3), 457e572. http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/sgo.2011.0025.
Crighton, E.J., Elliott, S.J., Van der Meer, J., Small, I., Upshur, R., 2003. Impacts of an
environmental disaster on psychosocial health and well-being in Karakalpak-
stan. Soc. Sci. Med. 56, 551e567. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0277-9536(02)
00054.
Cummins, S., Curtis, S., Diez-Roux, A.V., Macintyre, S., 2007. Understanding and
representing ‘place’ in health research: a relational approach. Soc. Sci. Med. 65
(9), 1825e1838. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2007.05.036.
Environmental Protection Agency, 2015. Assessment of the Potential Impacts of
Hydraulic Fracturing for Oil and Gas on Drinking Water Resources (External
Review Draft). U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC.
Ferrar, K.J., Kriesky, J., Christen, C.L., Marshall, S.L., Sharma, R.K., Michanowicz, D.R.,
Goldstein, B.D., 2013. Assessment and longitudinal analysis of health impacts
and stressors perceived to result from unconventional shale gas developments
in the Marcellus Shale Region. Int. J. Occup. Environ. Health 19 (2), 104e112.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/2049396713Y.0000000024.
Fisher, S.L., Smith, B.E., 2012. Transforming Places: Lessons from Appalachia. Uni-
versity of Illinois Press, Urbana, IL.
Fitzgerald, T., 2013. The role of ownership in environmental performance: evidence
from coalbed methane development. Environ. Manag. 52 (6), 1503e1517,
10.1007s00267-013-0178-6.
Fried, M., 2000. Continuities and discontinuities of place. J. Environ. Psychol. 20 (3),
193e205. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jevp.1999.0154.
Glaser, B.G., Strauss, A.L., 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for
Qualitative Research. Aldine De Gruyter, New York.
Hanna, S.P., 1995. Finding a place in the world-economy: core-periphery relations,
the nation-state and the underdevelopment of Garrett County, Maryland. Polit.
Geogr. 14 (5), 451e472. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0962-6298(95)93406-9.
Huberman, M.A., Miles, M.N., 2002. The Qualitative Researcher's Companion. Sage,
London.
Jacquet, J.B., 2014. Review of risks to communities from shale energy development.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 48 (15), 8321e8333. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es404647x.
Jacquet, J.B., Stedman, R.C., 2014. The risk of social-psychological disruption as an
impact of energy development and environmental change. J. Plan. Manag. 57
(9), 1285e1304. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2013.820174.
Kondo, M.C., Gross-Davis, C.A., May, K., Davis, L.O., Johnson, T., Mallard, M.,
Branas, C.C., 2014. Place-based stressors associated with industry and air
pollution.
Health
&
Place
28,
31e37.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.healthplace.2014.03.004.
Korfmacher, K.S., Jones, W.A., Malone, S.L., Vinci, L.F., 2013. Public health and high
volume hydraulic fracturing. New Solut. 23 (1), 13e31. http://dx.doi.org/
10.2190/NS.23.1.c.
Korpela, K.M., 1989. Place-identity as a product of environmental self-regulation.
J. Environ. Psychol. 9 (3), 241e256. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0272-4944(89)
80038-6.
Kreuger, R.A., 1988. Focus Groups: A Practical Guide for Applied Research. Sage,
London.
Ladd, A.E., 2014. Environmental disputes and opportunity-threat impacts sur-
rounding natural gas fracking in Louisiana. Sociol. Curr. 1 (3), 293e311. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/2329496514540132.
Lobdell, D.T., Gilboa, S., Mendola, P., Hesse, B.W., 2005. .Use of focus groups for the
environmental health researcher. J. Environ. Health 67 (9), 36e42.
Low, S.M., Altman, I., 1992. Place attachment. In: Altman, I., Low, S.M. (Eds.), Place
Attachment. Springer, New York, pp. 1e12.
Manzo, L.C., 2005. For better or worse: exploring multiple dimensions of place
meaning.
J.
Environ.
Psychol.
25
(1),
67e86.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jenvp.2005.01.002.
Marshall, M.N., 1996. Sampling for qualitative research. Fam. Pract. 13 (6), 522e526.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/fampra/13.6.522.
Maryland Institute for Applied Environmental Health, 2014. Potential Public Health
Impacts of Natural Gas Development and Production in the Marcellus Shale in
Western Maryland. University of Maryland, College Park, MD.
McComas, K.A., Stedman, R., Hart, P.S., 2011. Community support for campus ap-
proaches to sustainable energy use: the role of “townegown” relationships.
Energy Policy 39 (5), 2310e2318. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.01.045.
McKenzie, L.M., Witter, R.Z., Newman, L.S., Adgate, J.L., 2012. Human health risk
assessment of air emissions from development of unconventional natural gas
resources.
Sci.
Total
Environ.
424,
79e87.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.scitotenv.2012.02.018.
Mencken, F.C., 1997. Regional differences in socioeconomic well-being in Appa-
lachia.
Sociol.
Focus
30
(1),
79e97.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
00380237.1997.1057068.
O'Malley, M., McDonough, J.P., 2011. Executive Order 01.01.2011.11: The Marcellus
Shale Safe Drilling Initiative. Maryland Department of the Environment.
Accessed June 1, 2015 from. http://www.mde.state.md.us/programs/Land/
mining/marcellus/Pages/index.aspx.
Perry, S.L., 2012. Development, land use, and collective trauma: the Marcellus Shale
gas boom in rural Pennsylvania. Cult. Agric. Food, & Environ. 34 (1), 81e92.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.2153-9561.2012.01066.x.
Poole, A., Hudgins, A., 2013. “I care more about this place, because I fought for it”:
exploring the political ecology of fracking in an ethnographic field school.
J. Environ. Stud. Sci. 4 (1), 37e46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13412-013-0148-6.
Proshansky, H.M., Fabian, A.K., Kaminoff, R., 1983. Place-identity: physical world
socialization of the self. J. Environ. Psychol. 3 (1), 57e83. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S0272-4944(83)80021-8.
Rahm, D., 2011. Regulating hydraulic fracturing in shale gas plays: the case of Texas.
Energy Policy 39 (5), 2974e2981. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.03.009.
Rahm, B.G., Riha, S.J., 2014. Evolving shale gas management: water resource risks,
impacts, and lessons learned. Environ. Sci. Process. Impacts 16 (6), 1400e1412.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C4EM00018H.
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 2015. County Health Rankings. Accessed
September 10, 2015 from. http://www.countyhealthrankings.org/.
Ryder, S.S., Hall, P.M., 2014. Space, place and spatial inequality: fracking and split
estates in Colorado. In: Paper Presented at American Sociological Association,
San Francisco, August 17, 2014.
Saberi, P., Propert, K.B., Powers, M., Emmett, E., Green-McKenzie, J., 2014. Field
survey of health perception and complaints of Pennsylvania residents in the
Marcellus Shale Region. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 11, 6517e6527. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijerph11060651.
Shandro, J.A., Viega, M.M., Shoveller, J., Scoble, M., Koehoorn, M., 2011. Perspectives
on community health issues and the mining boom-bust cycle. Resour. Policy 36
(2), 178e186. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2011.01.004.
Shonkoff, S.B., Hays, J., Finkel, M.L., 2014. Environmental public health dimensions
of shale and tight gas development. Environ. Health Perspect. 122 (8), 787.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1307866.
Siegrist, J., 2000. Place, social exchange and health: proposed sociological frame-
work. Soc. Sci. Med. 51 (9), 1283e1293. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0277-
9536(00)00092-7.
Simonelli, J., 2014. Home rule and natural gas development in New York: civil
fracking rights. J. Polit. Ecol. 21 (1), 258e278.
Sj€
oberg, L., Drottz-Sj€
oberg, B.M., 2001. Fairness, risk and risk tolerance in the siting
of a nuclear waste repository. J. Risk Res. 4 (1), 75e101. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/136698701456040.
Smith, M.F., Ferguson, D.P., 2013. “Fracking democracy”: issue management and
locus of policy decision-making in the Marcellus Shale gas drilling debate.
Public
Relat.
Rev.
39
(4),
377e386.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.pubrev.2013.08.003.
Social Science Research Council, 2015. Measure of America: Health. Accessed
September 10, 2015 from. http://www.measureofamerica.org/maps/.
Stedman, R.C., Jacquet, J.B., Filteau, M.R., Willits, F.K., Brasier, K.J., McLaughlin, D.K.,
2012. Marcellus Shale gas development and new boomtown research: views of
new york and pennsylvania residents. Environ. Rev. 14 (4), 382e393. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1466046612000403.
Strauss, A., Corbin, J.M., 1990. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory
Procedures and Techniques. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Taylor, B., 2009. “Place” as prepolitical grounds of democracy an appalachian case
study in class conflict, forest politics, and civic networks. Am. Behav. Sci. 52 (6),
826e845. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0002764208327661.
Thorne, D., Tickamyer, A., Thorne, M., 2004. Poverty and income in appalachia.
J. Appalach. Stud. 10 (3), 341e357.
United States Census Bureau, 2015a. Census Quick Facts Beta. Retrieved July 15,
2015 from. http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/54/54017.html.
United States Census Bureau, 2015b. American Community Survey. Retrieved
September 10, 2015. https://www.census.gov/acs/www/data/data-tables-and-
tools/index.php.
U.S. Energy Information Administration, 2015. Drilling Report. Accessed July 1, 2015
from. http://www.eia.gov/petroleum/drilling/#tabs-summary-2.
Van Haaften, E.H., Van de Vijver, F.J.R., 1996. Psychological consequences of envi-
ronmental degradation. J. Health Psychol. 1 (4), 411e429. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/135910539600100401.
Werner, A.K., Vink, S., Watt, K., Jagals, P., 2015. Environmental health impacts of
unconventional natural gas development: a review of the current strength of
evidence.
Sci.
Total
Environ.
505,
1127e1141.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/
es404621d.
Wester-Herber, M., 2004. Underlying concerns in land-use conflictsdthe role of
place-identity in risk perception. Environ. Sci. Policy 7, 109e116. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2003.12.001.
Willow, A.J., 2014. The new politics of environmental degradation: un/expected
landscapes of disempowerment and vulnerability. J. Polit. Ecol. 21 (1), 237e257.
T. Sangaramoorthy et al. / Social Science & Medicine 151 (2016) 27e37
36
 Willow, A.J., Zak, R., Vilaplana, D., Sheeley, D., 2014. The contested landscape of
unconventional energy development: a report from Ohio's shale gas country.
J. Environ. Stud. Sci. 4 (1), 56e64. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13412-013-0159-3.
Witter, R.Z., McKenzie, L., Stinson, K.E., Scott, K., Newman, L.S., Adgate, J., 2013. The
use of health impact assessment for a community undergoing natural gas
development. Am. J. Public Health 103 (6), 1002e1010. http://dx.doi.org/
10.2105/AJPH.2012.30101.
Wolsink, M., 2007. Wind power implementation: the nature of public attitudes:
equity and fairness instead of ‘backyard motives. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 11
(6), 1188e1207. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2005.10.005.
Xiao, C., McCright, A.M., 2013. Gender differences in environmental concern:
revisiting the institutional trust hypothesis in the USA. Environ. Behav. 47 (1),
17e37. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0013916513491571.
Ziemkiewicz, P.F., Quaranta, J.D., Darnell, A., Wise, R., 2014. Exposure pathways
related to shale gas development and procedures for reducing environmental
and public risk. J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng. 16, 77e84. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jngse.2013.11.003.
T. Sangaramoorthy et al. / Social Science & Medicine 151 (2016) 27e37
37
