 Technical Advances
The Rockefeller University Press 
J. Exp. Med. 2017 Vol. 214 No. 8 2471–2490
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20170633
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
2471
IntroductIon
B lymphocytes (B cells) play a critical role in adaptive im-
munity, providing protection from pathogens through the 
production of specific antibodies. B cells recognize and re-
spond to pathogen-derived antigens through surface B cell 
receptors (BCRs). The BCR has two interrelated functions 
in B cell activation. The first is to initiate signal cascades that 
result in the transcription of a variety of genes associated 
with B cell activation (Pierce and Liu, 2010). The second is 
to mediate antigen uptake and processing, leading to antigen 
presentation to T cells within the MHC class II context and 
full activation of the B cells (Lanzavecchia, 1985). Similarly, 
BCR-mediated antigen internalization has been shown to 
facilitate the presentation of lipid antigens in the context of 
CD1d, which can result in the recruitment of iNKT cell help 
(Barral et al., 2008; Leadbetter et al., 2008) or the transport 
of TLR agonists, resulting in TLR7 or TLR9 signaling (Mar-
shak-Rothstein, 2006; Hou et al., 2011).
TLRs recognize structurally conserved sequences in 
pathogen-associated ligands, provide costimulation to im-
mune cells, and are involved in promoting B cell responses 
and also in autoimmunity (Leadbetter et al., 2002; Pasare 
and Medzhitov, 2005; Christensen et al., 2006; DeFranco et 
al., 2012; Shlomchik and Weisel, 2012). In mice, it has long 
been known that, even in the absence of BCR signaling or T 
cell help, naive B cells can undergo proliferation and differ-
entiation in response to TLR ligands such as LPS and CpG 
(Coutinho et al., 1974; Krieg, 2002; Eckl-Dorna and Batista, 
2009). In human B cells, TLR signaling has been suggested 
to represent a third signal required for the polyclonal acti-
vation of naive B cells (Ruprecht and Lanzavecchia, 2006). 
Furthermore, TLR signaling has also been implicated in 
antibody responses in vivo, long-term B cell memory, and 
plasma cell differentiation (Bernasconi et al., 2002). Similarly, 
stimulation of B cells via TLR ligands has been associated 
with promotion of plasma cell differentiation (Rawlings et 
al., 2012). However, the precise signaling requirements that 
Vaccines remain the most effective tool to prevent infectious diseases. Here, we introduce an in vitro booster vaccination 
approach that relies on antigen-dependent activation of human memory B cells in culture. this stimulation induces anti-
gen-specific B cell proliferation, differentiation of B cells into plasma cells, and robust antibody secretion after a few days of 
culture. We validated this strategy using cells from healthy donors to retrieve human antibodies against tetanus toxoid and 
influenza hemagglutinin (HA) from H1n1 and newly emergent subtypes such as H5n1 and H7n9. Anti-HA antibodies were 
cross-reactive against multiple subtypes, and some showed neutralizing activity. Although these antibodies may have arisen as 
a result of previous influenza infection, we also obtained gp120-reactive antibodies from non–HIV-infected donors, indicating 
that we can generate antibodies without prior antigenic exposure. overall, our novel approach can be used to rapidly produce 
therapeutic antibodies and has the potential to assess the immunogenicity of candidate antigens, which could be exploited in 
future vaccine development.
Novel in vitro booster vaccination to rapidly generate 
antigen-specific human monoclonal antibodies
Irene Sanjuan Nandin,1* Carol Fong,1* Cecilia Deantonio,1 Juan A. T
orreno-Pina,3 Simone Pecetta,3 
Paula Maldonado,1 Francesca Gasparrini,1 Jose Ordovas-Montanes,3,4,5 Samuel W
. Kazer,3,4,5,6 
Svend Kjaer,2 Daryl W
. Borley,7 Usha Nair,3 Julia A. Coleman,1 Daniel Lingwood,3 Alex K. Shalek,3,4,5,6,8 
Eric Meffre,9 Pascal Poignard,10,11 Dennis R. Burton,3,10,11 and Facundo D. Batista1,3
1Lymphocyte Interaction Laboratory and 2Protein Purification and Structural Biology, Francis Crick Institute, London, England, UK
3Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, MA
4Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA
5Institute for Medical Engineering and Science and 6Department of Chemistry, MIT, Cambridge, MA
7Diagnostic and Molecular Development, hLAB Division, hVIVO PLC, Queen Mary BioEnterprises Innovation Centre, London, England, UK
8Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
9Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
10International AIDS Vaccine Initiative Neutralizing Antibody Center and the Collaboration for AIDS Vaccine Discovery and 11Department of Immunology and 
Microbial Science, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA
© 2017 Sanjuan Nandin et al. This article is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution 4.0 
International, as described at https 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
/4 
.0 
/).
*I. Sanjuan Nandin and C. Fong contributed equally to this paper.
Correspondence to Facundo D. Batista: fbatista1@mgh.harvard.edu
Abbreviations used: BCR, B cell receptor; BLI, biolayer interferometry; CDR, 
 
complementarity-determining region; EC50, half-maximal effective concentration; 
FWR, framework region; HA, hemagglutinin; TT, tetanus toxoid.
on June 2, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20170633
Published Online: 24 July, 2017 | Supp Info: 
 In vitro boost strategy to produce human antibodies | Sanjuan Nandin et al.
2472
promote terminal B cell differentiation are a topic of intense 
investigation (Nutt et al., 2015).
In recent years, the potent immunostimulatory proper-
ties of CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG-ODNs) have been 
exploited in the study of human antibody responses. It has 
been reported that CpG DNA can enhance the efficiency of 
EBV-immortalization of B cells (Traggiai et al., 2004; Yu et 
al., 2008b). Furthermore, the use of such EBV-transformed 
human B cells in fusions can increase hybridoma formation 
as much as 25-fold compared with untransformed PBMCs 
(Yu et al., 2008b). These strategies have not only led to the 
generation of neutralizing antibodies against the influenza 
strain responsible for the 1918 pandemic (Yu et al., 2008b), 
but have also been exploited to study antibody responses to 
many pathogens, including CMV (Macagno et al., 2010), in-
fluenza virus (Yu et al., 2008a; Corti et al., 2010), HIV (Bu-
chacher et al., 1994), and dengue virus (Dejnirattisai et al., 
2010; Smith et al., 2014).
Soluble oligonucleotides containing unmethylated CpG 
have, therefore, been used to expand human B cell populations 
in vitro from infected or vaccinated individuals. However, 
this strategy is laborious and time consuming, as extensive 
screening is needed to retrieve the comparatively rare anti-
gen-specific B cells contained within this expanded B cell 
population. During the last decade, the direct cloning of Ig 
variable genes from single cells (Babcook et al., 1996; War-
demann et al., 2003) and, more recently, the next-generation 
sequencing of IgH variable genes have facilitated the isolation 
of antigen-specific B cells from the plasmablast or memory 
cell population in the peripheral blood approximately a week 
after infection or vaccination (Wrammert et al., 2008; Scheid 
et al., 2009; Smith et al., 2009; Zhu et al., 2013). One limita-
tion in using some of these antigen-specific B cell isolation 
methods is imposed by the time frame of the humoral re-
sponse to infection or immunization, which typically peaks 
7 d postvaccination and returns to barely detectable levels of 
specific antibody by day 14 (Wrammert et al., 2008). The re-
sults of these in vivo studies underscore the need for fast and 
inexpensive in vitro systems that can recapitulate at least some 
features of the human immune response.
Antigen-specific B cell activation is a key step in the ini-
tiation of immune responses. The in vitro activation of B cells 
in an antigen-dependent manner is difficult to achieve, because 
the wide haplotype variation of MHC 
IIs necessitates the use 
of unique T cells specific to a particular MHC 
II to activate 
B cells in vitro (Fauci et al., 1976; Borrebaeck et al., 1988). 
To overcome these limitations, we developed a novel, in vitro 
strategy to stimulate human B cells with streptavidin nanopar-
ticles conjugated to both GpG and antigen (Eckl-Dorna and 
Batista, 2009). B cells producing antigen-specific antibodies 
were identified, quantified, and characterized to determine 
the antibody repertoire. We validated the utility of this ap-
proach using human B cells from healthy individuals against 
a wide range of infectious targets including tetanus toxoid 
(TT), hemagglutinin (HA) from several subtypes of influenza 
A, and the HIV envelope protein gp120. We also determined 
the physiological effectiveness of the antibodies by measuring 
their antigen-binding affinities and neutralizing abilities. Ad-
ditionally, we demonstrated that this method allows selective, 
in vitro recall of human B cells, overcoming the difficulties 
of either isolating the infrequent antigen-specific memory 
B cells present in the peripheral blood of healthy subjects 
under normal circumstances or the requirement for vacci-
nation or infection and the use of plasmablasts as a source of 
antigen-specific cells. This is a novel and valuable approach 
not only to rapidly generate therapeutic antibodies, but also 
to accelerate immunogen design, testing, and early character-
ization of human vaccines, obviating the need for laborious, 
time-consuming, and expensive clinical trials.
results
In vitro stimulation of memory B cells by particulate cpG 
in a Bcr-dependent manner
Previous studies have demonstrated that the in vitro stimula-
tion of human B cells by 
TLRs is an efficient way of inducing 
the activation and proliferation of these cells, irrespective of 
BCR specificity (Bernasconi et al., 2003; Pinna et al., 2009). 
These findings have been exploited as an efficient way of re-
trieving human monoclonal antibodies in vitro (Traggiai et 
al., 2004). We hypothesized that the delivery of a TLR ligand 
via BCR-mediated internalization might represent a way of 
exclusively activating B cells with a particular BCR specific-
ity. T
o determine the best stimulatory conditions for such ac-
tivation, we first took advantage of an anti–κ-chain antibody 
to target CpG to the BCR, because 60% of circulating human 
B cells bear this BCR chain; the rest bear a λ chain. 
We coated 
streptavidin polystyrene nanoparticles with a mixture of bioti-
nylated anti-κ antibody and the TLR ligand CpG, as we have 
previously described in mice (Eckl-Dorna and Batista, 2009).
T
o determine whether we could use these nanoparti-
cles in vitro to selectively activate only those memory B cells 
expressing a κ-chain BCR, CellTrace Violet–labeled human 
memory B cells obtained from healthy donors were cultured 
in the presence of a cytokine cocktail with nanoparticles 
coated with either anti-κ and CpG (anti–κ-CpG) or CpG 
alone; soluble CpG; or no stimulant as a control. 6 d after 
stimulation, flow cytometry was used to measure B cell pro-
liferation by the dilution of the CellTrace 
Violet. As expected, 
soluble CpG induced a robust proliferation of B cells irre-
spective of whether they expressed κ- or λ-BCR (57.9% vs. 
39.9%, respectively; Fig. 1 a). In contrast, CpG that had been 
rendered particulate did not trigger any proliferation unless 
anti-κ was also present. Particulate anti–κ-CpG could stim-
ulate only B cells with a κ-BCR, leading to 47.6% prolifera-
tion (Fig. 1 a). These results show that when internalized via 
the BCR, particulate CpG can be used to selectively activate 
memory B cells bearing a particular BCR in vitro.
T
o investigate whether this type of stimulation could 
also lead to antibody secretion, we measured the total IgG 
production in the culture supernatants by ELI 
SA 6 d post-
 2473
JEM Vol. 214, No. 8
stimulation. Stimulation with particulate CpG did not induce 
any detectable antibody in the culture supernatant. In con-
trast, we detected an increase in IgG secretion when the B 
cells were stimulated with either soluble CpG or anti–κ-CpG 
(Fig. 1 b, left). As expected, this increase in IgG levels cor-
responded with a similar increase in IgG antibodies bear-
ing the κ-light chain (κ-Ig; Fig. 1 b, middle). Importantly, 
no λ antibodies (λ-Ig) could be detected in the supernatant 
of B cells stimulated with anti–κ-CpG, indicating that the 
κ-Igs we detected were the result of specific κ-BCR target-
ing (Fig. 1 b, right). Therefore our results indicate that the in 
vitro targeting of particulate CpG via BCR triggers selec-
tive antibody production.
Interestingly, we noted that although soluble CpG stimu-
lation induced B cell proliferation, the amount of κ-Igs secreted 
in these cultures was lower than that produced in response to 
anti–κ-CpG. We wondered whether this could be caused by 
B cells reaching different stages of plasma cell differentiation 
in each of these conditions. To investigate this, we used flow 
cytometry to monitor the differentiation of proliferating cells 
by the expression of the surface molecules CD27 and CD38, 
which are up-regulated during plasma cell differentiation. 
When stimulated with soluble CpG, 38% of the cells were 
CD27hi/CD38int, a characteristic phenotype that has been de-
scribed for plasmablasts (Fig. 2 a; Fink, 2012). Stimulation with 
particulate anti–κ-CpG or anti–λ-CpG (but not with particu-
late anti-κ or anti-λ) led to the production of CD27hi/CD38hi 
cells (44% for anti–κ-CpG and 30% for anti–λ-CpG), charac-
teristic of a plasma cell phenotype (Fig. 2 a). In line with the 
plasma cell differentiation stage, we observed an increase in IgG 
secretion after stimulation with soluble CpG and particulate 
anti–κ-CpG or anti–λ-CpG and higher levels of IgG antibod-
ies bearing κ-light or λ chain when the cells were stimulated 
with particulate anti–κ-CpG or anti–λ-CpG, respectively 
(Fig. 2 b). Comparable results were obtained using memory B 
cells isolated from fresh and cryopreserved PBMCs (Fig. S1). 
Figure 1. In vitro stimulation with particulate anti–Bcr-cpG enhances specific B cell proliferation and antibody secretion. (a) CellTrace Vio-
let–labeled cells were either not stimulated or stimulated for 6 d with soluble CpG, particulate CpG, or particulate anti–κ-CpG. Flow cytometry was used 
to measure proliferation, by CellTrace Violet dilution, of memory B cells bearing BCRs containing either the κ or λ chain. Numbers in the boxes indicate the 
percentage of proliferating cells. One representative result of three independent experiments is shown. (b) Memory B cells were cultured in the presence 
of different stimulatory conditions or no stimulation. The concentration of IgG antibodies secreted in the culture supernatant and the presence of κ- or 
λ-chain–bearing antibodies was determined by ELI 
SA. Left, mean ± SD IgG concentrations from eight different donors. Middle and right, ELI 
SA measure-
ments of κ- and λ-chain Igs, respectively. Results represent the mean OD405 values ± SD of two replicates; one representative result of eight indepen-
dent experiments is shown.
 In vitro boost strategy to produce human antibodies | Sanjuan Nandin et al.
2474
The generation of plasmablasts and plasma cells in the different 
cultures was further confirmed and quantified by transmission 
electron microscopy (TEM). Unlike plasmablasts, plasma cells 
exhibit an expanded ER, a feature typically associated with 
large-scale antibody production. We found that the majority 
(88%) of the CD27hi/CD38int cells showed typical plasmablast 
morphology, with no changes in the ER. In contrast, 75% of the 
CD27hi/CD38hi cells possessed expanded ER, indicating that 
the CD27hi/CD38hi cells were indeed plasma cells (Fig. 2 c).
T
o further characterize the CD27hi/CD38int population 
generated after soluble CpG stimulation and the CD27hi/
CD38hi population obtained after anti–κ-CpG stimulation, 
we analyzed the expression of specific cell surface markers 
in these populations by flow cytometry. The CD27hi/CD38hi 
population displays a plasma cell phenotype characterized 
by higher levels of CD138 and CD43 compared with the 
CD27hi/CD38int population (Fig. 2 d). Consistent with 
plasma cell differentiation, we also observed a lower expres-
sion of CD19, CD20, IgD, HLA-DR, CD80, and CD86 (Fig. 
S2 a). 
With regard to the cell surface expression of homing re-
ceptors, CD27hi/CD38hi cells are characterized by an increase 
in the mucosal or epidermal chemokine receptor, CCR10, 
and the L-selectin, CD62L (Fig. 2 d), and a reduction in the 
chemokine receptors CXCR4 and CXCR5 compared with 
the CD27hi/CD38int population (Fig. S2 a).
We examined the gene expression profiles of the 
CD27hi/CD38hi versus CD27hi/CD38int cell populations by 
quantitative real-time PCR. As expected, the two cell popu-
lations substantially down-regulate key transcription factors 
such as PAX5 and BCL6, which are required for naive B cell 
maintenance. Similarly, when compared with the CD27hi/
CD38int population, CD27hi/CD38hi cells expressed higher 
levels of transcription factor (TF) genes such as XBP1, IRF4, 
and PRMD1, which are required for plasma cell differentia-
tion (Fig. S2 b). We also analyzed the early molecular signal-
ing pathways triggered after the activation of memory B cells 
with the different stimuli, particulate anti–κ-CpG, particulate 
anti-κ, and soluble CpG, by evaluating the activation status 
of a range of intracellular mediators such as pAKT, pERK, 
pSTAT3, and p-p38 in response to these stimuli. We ob-
served that in agreement with a previously published study 
(Eckl-Dorna and Batista, 2009), compared with memory B 
cell stimulation with soluble CpG or particulate anti-κ, par-
ticulate anti–κ-CpG stimulation resulted in more sustained 
phosphorylation of p38 (Fig. S2 c). However, stimulation with 
particulate anti–κ-CpG did not induce a synergistic effect in 
the phosphorylation of AKT, ERK, or STAT3 (Fig. S2 c).
T
o support our findings from flow cytometry, TEM, 
and molecular signaling characterization that anti–κ-CpG 
stimulation preferentially leads to the generation of κ-IgG–
secreting plasma cells, we performed RNA-seq analysis on 
memory B cells (day 0) and FACS-sorted B cells stimulated 
with CpG and anti–κ-CpG (day 6) from five donors. An anal-
ysis of the transcriptional activity of all Ig-κ and Ig-λ variable 
and constant region genes revealed that anti–κ-CpG stimula-
tion resulted in the specific enhanced expression of κ-chain 
genes in CD27hi/CD38hi cells, with minimal bystander ac-
tivation of λ-chain B cells (Fig. 2 e). Furthermore differen-
tial expression across the entire transcriptome confirms the 
up-regulation of genes involved in antibody production and 
plasma cell markers in B cells stimulated with anti–κ-CpG in 
comparison to memory B cells and CpG-stimulated B cells 
(plasmablasts), respectively (Fig. 2 f). Collectively, our exper-
imental results suggest that the targeting of particulate CpG 
via the BCR can work as a selective method for stimulating 
human memory B cells to proliferate and differentiate into 
CD27hi/CD38hi plasma cells, leading to antibody production.
enrichment of tt-specific antibodies in cultures 
of human memory B cells
Having demonstrated the potential of particulate anti–κ-CpG 
in triggering plasma cell differentiation and antibody secre-
tion, we hypothesized that we could extend these findings and 
use this protocol to specifically activate B cells with infectious 
antigens in vitro. Accordingly, we first chose 
TT as an antigen. 
The percentage of TT
-specific memory cells in circulating 
blood of immunized individuals has been estimated to be 
∼0.04% (Giesecke et al., 2014), which is three orders of mag-
nitude lower than the 60% of B cells bearing a κ-chain BCR. 
For this experiment, memory B cells were either unstimulated 
or stimulated with soluble CpG or particulate TT
-CpG. It is 
important to note that memory B cells were purified from 
healthy donors who had not been recently vaccinated against 
tetanus or otherwise restimulated. Plasma cell differentiation 
was assessed by flow cytometry as described earlier. Interest-
ingly, a distinct population of CD27hi/CD38hi plasma cells 
was observed after stimulation with TT
-CpG (Fig. 3 a, top 
row, orange quadrants). This plasma cell population is likely 
to be the result of BCR-specific recognition of particulate 
TT
-CpG, as it was completely absent in the nonstimulated 
control or when B cells from the same donor were stimulated 
with soluble CpG alone (Fig. 3 a, top row, orange quadrants).
T
o establish that this CD27hi/CD38hi population does 
indeed contain TT
-specific antibody-secreting cells, and to 
get an estimate of their frequency, we sorted this population 
by FACS and performed TT
-specific enzyme-linked immu-
nospot (ELI 
SPOT) assays. As shown in Fig. 3 a (lower row), 
217 of the 2,500 plasma cells sorted after memory B cell stim-
ulation with particulate TT
-CpG were TT specific. In con-
trast, there was a 10-fold decrease in the number of plasma 
cells (n = 18/2,500) present after memory B cells were stim-
ulated with soluble CpG. T
o test the specificity of the anti-
bodies produced by bulk-sorted plasma cells after particulate 
TT
-CpG stimulation, we performed ELI 
SA using TT as a 
coating antigen (Fig. 3 a, right). We found that only antibod-
ies produced after particulate TT
-CpG stimulation were TT 
specific, and no signal was produced in the absence of stimu-
lus. Moreover, the ELI 
SA results showed that these antibodies 
were 
TT specific, and they did not exhibit any cross-reactivity 
to an irrelevant protein control (Fig. 3 a, right).
 2475
JEM Vol. 214, No. 8
Figure 2. uptake of particulate anti–Bcr-cpG is essential for promoting cd27hi/cd38hi plasma cell differentiation. (a) Flow cytometry profiles of 
CellTrace Violet–labeled memory B cells unstimulated or cultured for 6 d in the presence of soluble GpG, particulate CpG, particulate anti-BCR, or particulate 
anti–BCR-CpG. Numbers in the plots indicate the percentage of plasmablasts (blue) and plasma cells (orange) based on the expression of CD27/CD38 in 
 In vitro boost strategy to produce human antibodies | Sanjuan Nandin et al.
2476
T
o unambiguously establish the number of TT
-specific 
plasma cells present in these cultures, we performed single- 
cell sorting of CD27hi/CD38hi plasma cells by FACS. For 
each cell, we amplified the corresponding heavy and light 
chains by nested PCR and cloned them into expression vec-
tors. To produce recombinant monoclonal human antibodies 
of the same specificity in vitro, we transiently expressed 56 
antibodies in HEK-293 cells. The culture supernatants were 
harvested after 3 d, quantified for expressed IgG levels, and 
screened for antibody specificity by ELI 
SA (Fig. 3b, left). 
The levels of antibody production by individual transfections 
ranged from 0.5 to 3 µg/ml, with a mean concentration of 
1 µg/ml. Furthermore, half-maximal binding (EC50) of the 
TT-specific antibodies was also determined and found to be 
in the micromolar range, reinforcing the TT specificity of 
these antibodies (Fig. 3 b, right).
The ELI 
SA results and sequence analysis of the 
VH seg-
ments revealed 23 TT
-specific IgGs of the 56 expressed an-
tibodies (32%), with 13 unique sequences, as some of them 
were represented two or three times (Fig. 3 c and Table S1). 
Notably, this represents a >1,000-fold enrichment compared 
with the expected 0.04% circulating TT
-specific memory B 
cells mentioned previously after only 6 d of in vitro stim-
ulation (Giesecke et al., 2014). Moreover, the multiple en-
counter of the same antibody sequence is indicative of the in 
vitro proliferation of a single B cell after stimulation. These 
antibodies also showed an extensive diversity in V(D)J gene 
usage, with no dominant preferences for particular genes, 
and a broad distribution of heavy chain complementarity- 
determining region 3 (CDR3) lengths (Table S1). Some of 
the recovered 
VH segments also show sequence similarities to 
anti-TT VH gene sequences previously isolated from vacci-
nated individuals (de Kruif et al., 2009; DeKosky et al., 2013; 
unpublished data). Interestingly, we also found two antibodies 
with identical VH and JH gene usage and CDR3 junctions, 
but carrying single point mutations (TT
-Ab3 and TT
-Ab4; 
Table S1; and Fig. S3 a). These antibodies, although sharing 
identical heavy (VH1-69/D4-17/JH4) and light (VK-39/
JK4) chain gene usage, differed in the number of mutations 
in their sequences, indicating that they are clonally related 
(Table S1; and Fig. S3 a). This is consistent with antibodies 
produced by individual B cells that most likely originated in 
vivo via somatic hypermutation but subsequently proliferated 
in vitro. 
The identification of 13 unique B cell clones strongly 
suggests that our in vitro booster vaccination is able to sample 
a wide repertoire of TT
-specific B cells, in particular when 
taking into consideration that only single 56 activated B cells 
were used for single-cell sequence analysis.
T
o assess the possible contribution of somatic hypermu-
tation in rearranged VH gene segments, the sequences from 
this region were compared with their respective germline 
IGHV genes. This analysis suggests the presence of mutations 
within framework regions (FWRs) 1–3 and CDR1/2 (Fig. 
S3 b). VH gene segments showed a higher number of muta-
tions in TT
-specific antibodies compared with sequences of 
unknown specificity (P = 0.005). The number of mutations 
ranged between 10 and 35 in TT
-specific antibodies (21.77 ± 
2.17) and between 1 and 29 in those of unknown specificity 
(12.75 ± 1.26; Fig. 3 d). An analysis of replacement (R) and 
silent (S) mutations in the TT
-specific antibodies showed that 
there were more replacements than silent mutations in both 
the CDRs and the FR
Ws, although the CDRs displayed a 
higher overall R/S ratio (Fig. S3 b). Collectively, there was 
a higher number of mutations seen in the genes encoding 
TT
-specific antibodies compared with those encoding non–
TT-specific cloned antibodies, and a higher frequency of 
replacement mutations compared with silent mutations, es-
pecially in the CDRs, both of which suggest antigen-driven 
selection. Another possibility, however, is that particulate 
TT
-CpG may have preferentially induced the differentiation 
or proliferation of a proportion of TT
-specific memory cells 
with higher affinity or mutation.
Furthermore, we measured the affinity of the recom-
binant TT
-specific antibodies by biosensor binding analysis 
(Fig. 3, e and f; and Table S2). The equilibrium dissociation 
constant (Kd) values obtained revealed picomolar to nanomo-
lar affinities (Fig. 3 e), with a median Kd of 1.6 nM (Fig. 3 f), 
indicating high-specificity binding for the antigen. Thus, de-
spite the low numbers of TT
-specific memory B cells in cir-
culation in healthy individuals, we were able to specifically 
proliferating cells. One representative result of six independent experiments is shown. (b) The concentration of IgG antibodies secreted in the culture super-
natant and the presence of κ- or λ-chain antibodies was determined by ELI 
SA. Left, mean ± SD IgG concentrations from three different donors. Middle and 
right, results of ELI 
SA assays to detect κ- and λ-Igs, respectively. Results represent the mean OD405 values ± SD of two replicates; one representative result of 
three independent experiments is shown. (c) Representative TEM images of CD27hi/CD38int plasmablasts and CD27hi/CD38hi plasma cells of six independent 
experiments. Bars, 2 µm. Percentage of cells with expanded and nonexpanded ER is shown in the chart to the right (n = 100). (d) Comparison of the surface 
phenotype of the CD27hi/CD38int (blue) and CD27hi/CD38hi (orange) cell populations after particulate anti–κ-CpG stimulation. As a control, the phenotype of 
the memory B cells before stimulation is also shown. Flow cytometry data from one representative experiment of four independent experiments is shown. 
In each plot, gray traces represent the corresponding isotype control. Numbers in panels indicate the percentage of cells positive for the indicated markers. 
(e) Specific activation of memory B cells by anti–κ-CpG leads to the acquisition of a plasma cell phenotype revealed by RNA-seq analysis, performed on 
mRNA isolated from memory B cells that were unstimulated or stimulated with CpG or anti–κ-CpG. Transcriptional profiles of each B cell population were 
scored against Ig-κ and Ig-λ variable and constant region genes. Box and whiskers represent the upper and lower quartile of scores and 1.5 × the inner 
quartile range, respectively. (f) Significance plotted against log2 fold change for differentially expressed genes as determined by DESeq2 analysis between B 
cells stimulated with anti–κ-CpG and unstimulated B cells and between B cells stimulated with anti–κ-CpG and CpG. For this experiment, data are derived 
from PBMCs obtained from six independent donors.
 2477
JEM Vol. 214, No. 8
Figure 3. Generation of human tt-specific antibodies from sorted plasma cells. (a) Representative FACS profile and gating strategy for sorting 
plasma cells (orange box) after no stimulation or stimulation with soluble CpG or particulate TT-CpG. Enrichment of TT-specific plasma cells after sorting 
was determined by ELI 
SPOT and ELI 
SA. One representative ELI 
SPOT of three shows IgG-producing plasma cells that are reactive against TT. The numbers 
above the ELI 
SPOT panels represent the spot count for that well. Culture supernatants from sorted plasma cells were tested by ELI 
SA (right) for the presence 
 In vitro boost strategy to produce human antibodies | Sanjuan Nandin et al.
2478
induce plasma cell activation and differentiation in vitro after 
only 6 d, allowing the recovery of several antibodies with 
high affinity for this antigen.
Generation and characterization of antibodies 
to influenza A subtypes
Having established the efficacy of our in vitro stimulation 
system using a protein that is a component of the standard 
vaccine program in infancy and childhood, we wanted to de-
termine whether we could use it to generate antibodies against 
influenza A virus, a more complex natural pathogen. H1N1 is 
the most common influenza virus subtype infecting humans, 
so it is likely to have been encountered by many adults. T
o 
determine whether we could activate H1N1-specific B cells 
from individuals who had not been recently infected or vac-
cinated against influenza, we stimulated memory B cells from 
two healthy donors with particulate H1N1 HA (H1)-CpG or 
soluble CpG and BSA-CpG as controls. Similar to our obser-
vations using particulate TT
-CpG, a defined CD27hi/CD38hi 
plasma cell population was detected only when memory B 
cells were stimulated with particulate H1-CpG (Fig. 4 a, 
upper row, orange quadrants). This CD27hi/CD38hi popula-
tion contained a higher frequency (n = 37/10,000) of cells 
secreting anti-H1 antibody compared with the unstimulated 
(n = 5/10,000) or soluble CpG–stimulated (n = 1/10,000) 
memory B cells, as shown by the results of an H1-specific ELI 
SPOT assay (Fig. 4 a, lower row).
We performed single-cell sorting of CD27hi/CD38hi 
plasma cells obtained after particulate H1-CpG challenge. 
Next, we PCR amplified, cloned, and expressed 114 recom-
binant antibody genes from individual plasma cells from two 
donors in HEK293 cells. ELI 
SA assays show that 65 of these 
antibodies, more than 50%, were specific for H1 (Fig. 4 b), 
indicating a high level of enrichment after only 6 d of in 
vitro stimulation. VH sequence alignment revealed 62 anti-
bodies with unique sequences from the two donors (Figs. 4 c 
and S3). This analysis also revealed two clones that, although 
having identical gene usage in their VH and VL regions, ex-
hibited different numbers of point mutations in their 
VH re-
gions (Figs. S4 a). Interestingly our antibodies H1-Ab1 and 
H1-Ab2 show strong convergence, restriction, or selection 
to Ab 31.b.09, which has been recently isolated as a broadly 
neutralizing antibody capable of neutralizing H1, H5, H3, 
and H7 influenza subtypes. Additionally, we found that the 
same is true for H1-Ab3 antibody, isolated in this study, and 
Ab 01.k.01, which is capable of neutralizing H1, H5, and 
H3 (Joyce et al., 2016).
Analysis of somatic hypermutations in the rearranged 
VH gene segments of all the antibodies obtained showed 
that the genes encoding anti–H1-positive antibodies contain 
more mutations (17.61 ± 0.99) than the genes encoding anti–
H1-negative antibodies (14.88 ± 1.20; Fig. 4 d) These muta-
tions were mostly concentrated in the CDRs and displayed a 
higher R/S ratio compared with other regions, indicative of a 
positive antigen-driven selection (Fig. S4 b). Additionally, we 
determined the affinity of antigen-specific monoclonal anti-
bodies for H1 by measuring the Kd via surface plasmon reso-
nance. 
The resulting Kd values were in the nano- to picomolar 
range (median, 7.34 nM; Fig. 4 e and Table S4), indicating 
high-specificity binding for the antigen.
Antibody cross-reactivity among various influenza virus 
strains has been detected in several studies after infection and 
immunization with influenza vaccines (Corti et al., 2011; Ek-
iert et al., 2011). T
o check for reactivity against other influ-
enza A subtypes, we screened the anti-H1 antibodies against 
HA from representative influenza subtypes from each of the 
two phylogenetically distinct groups: H1, H2N2 hemaggluti-
nin (H2), and H5N1 hemagglutinin (H5) from group 1 and 
H3N2 hemagglutinin (H3) and H7N9 hemagglutinin (H7) 
from group 2. The majority of the antibodies reacted ex-
clusively with antigenic H1; however, 12 antibodies showed 
cross-reactivity against at least one subtype (Fig. 4 f).
Next, we wanted to address whether we could also 
generate antigen-specific antibodies using the rare influenza 
subtypes H5 and H7 that would also cross react with our 
panel of different influenza subtypes. T
o this end, we stim-
ulated memory B cells of healthy donors with the uncom-
mon H5N1 influenza HA. After 6 d of stimulation with 
particulate H5-CpG or BSA-CpG control, we sorted single 
CD27hi/CD38hi plasma cells and cloned and expressed genes 
encoding 47 recombinant antibodies, seven (15%) of which 
were specific for H5 (Fig. 5 a). Sequence alignment analysis 
of antibodies specific for TT or to an unrelated protein control. Data represent the mean OD405 values ± SD from two replicates. Data from one representa-
tive experiment of three independent repeats is shown. (b) The specificity of the recombinant antibodies generated from 56 single-sorted plasma cells was 
tested by ELI 
SA. Cognate IgH and IgL gene pairs were transiently transfected into HEK293T cells, and the culture supernatant was tested for the presence of 
antibodies specific for TT or an unrelated protein control (left); the mean IgG antibody concentration was 1 µg/ml. The cutoff value for a positive signal was 
set as more than twofold above background. The EC50 values of the transfected TT-specific antibodies were extracted from the fitting of the raw data to a 
sigmoidal multiparameter curve (right). (c) Pie chart outlines the frequency of the TT-specific clones. The percentage of TT-positive antibodies is denoted in 
the center of the pie chart. The numbers outside the pie chart indicate the number of antibody allele sequences with identical IgH and IgL chain rearrange-
ments. (d) Comparison of the absolute numbers of somatic mutations in the VH genes encoding 13 TT-specific and 24 non–TT-specific antibodies. Boxes 
represent the percentile range (25–75%), the horizontal bar indicates the median, and whiskers extend to the highest and lowest data points. Two-tailed 
P values were calculated with an unpaired t test (***, P = 0.0005). (e) Representative Octet measurements of the kinetics of TT-specific antibodies (left, Kd 
= 6.64 × 10−9; right, Kd = 1.85 × 10−11). Concentrations of the antibodies represent serial twofold dilutions. (f) Kd of TT-specific antibodies. Boxes represent 
the percentile range (25–75%), the horizontal bar indicates the median KD value (1.6 nM) of six TT-specific antibodies, and whiskers extend to the highest 
and lowest data points.
 2479
JEM Vol. 214, No. 8
Figure 4. Generation of human H1-specific antibodies from single-sorted plasma cells. (a) Representative FACS profile and gating strategy for 
sorted plasma cells (orange box) after stimulation with soluble CpG, particulate H1-CpG, or no stimulation. Enrichment of FACS-sorted H1-specific plasma 
cells detected by ELI 
SPOT. Numbers above the ELI 
SPOT panels represent the spot counts for each well. Data from one representative experiment of three is 
shown. (b) Specificity of the recombinant antibodies generated from sorted plasma cells from two donors was tested by ELI 
SA. After transient transfection 
of HEK293T cells with plasmids expressing cognate pairs of IgH and IgL genes, the culture supernatant was tested for the presence of antibodies specific for 
H1 or an irrelevant protein control; the recombinant IgG antibody concentration ranged from 1 to 3 µg/ml. (c) The frequency of the H1-specific clones is 
depicted by the pie chart. The percentage of H1-positive antibodies retrieved from each donor is indicated in the center of the pie chart. The numbers outside 
the pie chart indicate the number of antibody allele sequences with identical IgH and IgL chain rearrangements. (d) Comparison of the absolute numbers 
of somatic mutations in the VH genes encoding 56 H1-specific and 34 non–H1-specific antibodies. Boxes represent the percentile range (25–75%), the 
horizontal bar indicates the median, and whiskers extend to the highest and lowest data points. Two-tailed P values were calculated with an unpaired t test 
(P = 0.0870; NS). (e) Affinity (Kd 1/M) of the H1-specific antibodies. Boxes represent the percentile range (25–75%), the horizontal bar indicates the median 
Kd value (7.34 nM) of 14 H1-specific antibodies, and whiskers extend to the highest and lowest data points. (f) ELI 
SA test to detect cross-reactivity of anti-
bodies derived after H1 stimulation. Strong binding is coded in red (>2.0 OD405), intermediate in orange (1.0–2.0 OD405), and weak in yellow (0.3–1.0 OD405).
 In vitro boost strategy to produce human antibodies | Sanjuan Nandin et al.
2480
of the expressed alleles revealed six different H5-specific an-
tibody gene sequences (Fig. 5 b and Table S5). The analysis 
of somatic hypermutations revealed that the alleles encoding 
H5-positive antibodies contained more mutations (24.40 ± 
4.27) than those encoding H5-negative antibodies (12.88 ± 
1.01; Fig. S4 c), indicating in vivo antigen-driven selection. 
Similar to our observations with H1, H5-specific antibody 
alleles displayed a higher R/S ratio in the CDRs than in 
FR
W regions (Fig. S4 d). ELI 
SA assays of these H5-specific 
antibodies against other influenza subtypes revealed a high 
degree of cross-reactivity with other HA proteins (Fig. 5 c). 
Indeed, H5-Ab6 was panreactive across all the subtypes 
tested, H5-Ab1 was cross-reactive with H1 and H7, and the 
remaining four were cross-reactive only with the group 1 
strains, H1 and H2 (Fig. 5 c).
Similarly, using H7-HA as the antigen, we stimulated B 
cells from four different donors, single-cell sorted plasma cells, 
and sequenced their 
VH and 
VL regions. 
This analysis revealed 
206 different antibodies, 14 of which proved to be positive for 
H7 (Fig. 5, d and e; and Table S6). Analysis of somatic hyper-
mutation showed that the genes encoding H7-specific anti-
bodies had more somatic mutations than those of unknown 
specificity. The number of mutations ranged from 11 to 35 in 
H7-specific cells (20.14 ± 1.95) and from 0 to 28 mutations 
in those that were not H7 specific (14.16 ± 0.99; Fig. S4 e). 
Overall, we found that compared with the FR
Ws, the CDRs 
possessed a higher frequency of R mutations and a lower fre-
quency of S mutations, suggestive of antigen-driven selection 
(Fig. S4 f). Interestingly, when we examined the cross-reactivity 
of H7-positive antibodies against the previous panel of influ-
enza HA subtypes, we found that 12 of the H7-positive anti-
bodies bound to at least one other influenza subtype and that 
three were panreactive with all subtypes (Fig. 5 f). In conclu-
sion, by stimulating memory B cells in vitro with particulate 
H5- or H7-CPG, we were able to generate a high frequency 
of cross-reactive or even panreactive antibodies.
Given our observation that these antibodies are highly 
cross-reactive, we wanted to determine whether any of the 
antibodies generated against the different HA proteins have 
the capacity to neutralize influenza virus. T
o this end, we 
chose nine mAbs (EC50 values in the micromolar range) 
based on their cross-reactivity for different influenza strains 
and tested their ability to inhibit either A/California/7/2009 
(H1N1) or A/Perth/16/2009 (H3N2) by plaque reduction 
assay (Fig. 6 a). This assay revealed that two of these antibod-
ies showed different degrees of inhibition (Fig. 6, a and b). 
The IC50 of the antibodies H5-Ab2 and H5-Ab4 (obtained 
after H5 stimulation) against H1N1 was 6.31 µg/ml (95% 
confidence interval, 5.391–7.395) and 44.43 µg/ml (95% 
confidence interval, 21.77–90.67), respectively, whereas none 
of the other seven antibodies showed any significant neutral-
ization capacity (Fig. 6 b). These results suggest not only that 
our stimulation strategy leads to antibodies that can be highly 
cross-reactive, but more importantly, that some of them also 
have the capacity to neutralize virus.
To further characterize antibodies H5-Ab2 and 
H5-Ab4, we investigated their site of binding on HA. T
o 
this end, we performed a competitive ELI 
SA with C179, 
a cross-neutralizing anti-HA stem antibody (Okuno et al., 
1993). As shown in Fig. 6 c, the neutralizers H5-Ab2 and 
H5-Ab4 efficiently compete with C179 for binding to the 
A/California/7/2009 (H1N1) HA, indicating that these an-
tibodies are binding to the HA stem. T
o further substantiate 
these findings, we evaluated the binding of these antibodies 
to different HA mutants by ELI 
SA. We took advantage of 
wild-type HA from A/New Caledonia/20/1999 (H1 wt); a 
mutant HA containing arginine substitutions that block ac-
cess to the stem epitope (H1 delta stem I45R/T49R), and a 
mutant with an N-glycan insertion that also prevents access to 
the stem epitope (H1 delta stem 45glyc). In this assay, the HA 
stem-binding antibody CR6261 and the HA head-binding 
antibody CH65 were used as controls. Although both anti-
bodies bound to the positive control H1 wt, the binding of 
CR6261 to the I45R/T49R or 45glyc mutant proteins was 
compromised. On the other hand, the binding of Ab CH65 to 
both mutant variants was unaffected (Fig. 6 d). Both H5-Ab2 
and H5-Ab4 lost the capacity to bind the I45R/T49R mu-
tant (Fig. 6 d), confirming that these antibodies bind to the 
stem epitope. Moreover, these antibodies also showed reduced 
binding to the 45glyc mutant, further supporting the binding 
of H2-Ab2 and H5-Ab4 to the HA stem region (Fig. 6 d).
Generation of HIV anti-gp120 antibodies by plasma cells 
derived from antigen-naive individuals
So far, we have been able to use this in vitro vaccination 
booster to stimulate B cells that recognize TT, H1, H5, and 
H7. Although H5 and H7 are unlikely to have been experi-
enced before by a healthy donor, these rare B cells might have 
originated as a result of previous H1 vaccination or infection. 
Therefore it was important to test the suitability of our ap-
proach using an antigen for which we are not relying on the 
preexistence of memory B cells from previous related-virus 
exposure. T
o this end, we stimulated memory B cells from 
five HIV-uninfected individuals with particulate gp120-CpG. 
We single-cell sorted, sequenced VH and VL, and expressed 
257 antibodies. Eighteen of these antibodies were shown 
to be positive at recognizing recombinant gp120, as tested 
by ELI 
SA and by flow cytometry (Figs. 7 a and S5 a). VH 
gene sequence alignment revealed antibodies with identical 
sequences in three of the five donors, suggesting in vitro B 
cell clonal expansion (Fig. 7 b). Analysis of somatic hyper-
mutations in the rearranged VH gene segments showed 13 
mutated VH sequences, with five to 34 mutations (16.54 ± 
2.58; Table S7). This indicates that these B cells might have 
arisen from B cells that have previously been triggered by 
an unknown antigen. Additionally, we also identified five 
antibodies that contain from zero to three mutations from 
the closest germline (Table S8), which may reflect that the B 
cells that gave rise to these antibodies have not been affinity 
matured against gp120.
 2481
JEM Vol. 214, No. 8
It was important to establish whether these antibodies 
exhibit a certain degree of specificity for gp120 or whether 
they were simply polyreactive. 
T
o this end, we tested nine rep-
resentative gp120-reactive antibodies against a panel of differ-
ent proteins using ELI 
SA and flow cytometry (Figs. 7 c and 
S5 b). Although seven of the antibodies were able to bind 
to one or more proteins of the panel, antibodies gp120-Ab8 
and gp120-Ab9 proved to be negative in this assay (Fig. 7 c). 
Moreover, biolayer interferometry (BLI) showed that 
gp120-Ab8 and gp120-Ab9 exhibited a measureable affinity 
of 89.3 and 124 nM to gp120, respectively, suggesting that 
they were specific to gp120 and were unlikely to be simply 
Figure 5. Generation of human H5- and H7-specific antibodies from single sorted plasma cells. (a) The specificity of H5-specific recombinant 
antibodies generated from sorted plasma cells from one donor was tested by ELI 
SA. Cognate pairs of IgH and IgL genes were introduced into HEK293T cells 
by transient cotransfection. Culture supernatants were tested by ELI 
SA for the presence of antibodies specific for H5 or an irrelevant protein control; the 
mean IgG antibody concentration was 1 µg/ml. Cutoff value for a positive signal is taken as more than twofold above background. (b) Pie chart outlining the 
frequency of the H5-specific clones. The number in the center indicates the percentage of H5-positive antibodies. The numbers outside the pie chart indicate 
the number of antibody gene sequences with identical IgH and IgL chain rearrangements. (c) ELI 
SA test to detect cross-reactivity of antibodies derived after 
H5 stimulation. Strong binding is coded in red (>2.0 OD405), intermediate in orange (1.0–2.0 OD405), and weak in yellow (0.3–1.0 OD405). (d) Specificity of the 
H7 recombinant antibodies retrieved from four donors. Culture supernatants from transfected HEK293T cells, with a mean IgG concentration of 1 µg/ml, 
were tested by ELI 
SA for the presence of antibodies specific for H7 or to an irrelevant protein control. The cutoff considered for positive results was more 
than twofold background. (e) Frequency of H7-specific clones. The number in the center of the pie chart indicates the percentage of H7-positive antibodies. 
The numbers outside the pie chart indicate the number of antibody alleles with identical IgH and IgL chain rearrangements. (f) ELI 
SA analysis to detect 
cross-reactivity of antibodies derived after H7 stimulation. Strong binding is coded in red (>2.0 OD405), intermediate in orange (1.0–2.0 OD405), and weak in 
yellow (0.3–1.0 OD405).
 In vitro boost strategy to produce human antibodies | Sanjuan Nandin et al.
2482
polyreactive (Fig. 7 d). These results show that our booster 
vaccination does not rely exclusively on the activation of 
memory B cells that originated from a related viral infection. 
Furthermore, because our methodology is independent of T 
cell help, it may be able to overcome tolerance mechanisms 
that would normally prevent these polyreactive specificities 
Figure 6. Functional characterization of se-
lected cross-reactive antibodies. (a) Table 
showing the cross-reactivity, EC50 values, and 
plaque reduction assay IC50 values of selected 
recombinant antibodies. IC50 values are reported 
as micrograms per milliliter, with the respective 
positive control titer (in reciprocal log10 dilutions) 
in parentheses. Cross-reactivity was measured 
by ELI 
SA; strong binding is coded in red (>2.0 
OD405), intermediate in orange (1.0–2.0 OD405), 
and weak in yellow (0.3–1.0 OD405). (b) Plaque re-
duction assay showing the neutralization activity 
of IgGs H5-Ab2 and H5-Ab4, obtained from in 
vitro stimulation with particulate H5-CpG, on the 
 
A/California/7/2009 strain (H1 subtype). IC50 and 
logIC50 values were obtained by nonlinear regres-
sion fitting to a log (inhibitor) versus normalized 
response–variable slope model using Prism 6. 
Two replicate plates were used for each virus/
test article experiment. Error bars represent SEM. 
(c) Competition ELI 
SA showing the binding inhi-
bition of the tested antibodies by the mouse mAb 
C179 to the HA stem. Dots represent the mean 
± SD of two replicates. (d) ELI 
SA reactivity of 
the indicated antibodies with wild-type HA from 
 
A/New Caledonia/20/1999 (H1 wt), H1 containing 
Arg substitutions that blocks access to the stem 
epitope, H1 delta stem (I45R/T49R), and H1 with 
an N-glycan insertion that also prevents access to 
the stem epitope, H1 delta stem (45glyc). The ref-
erence antibodies used are CR6261 IgG, a human 
stem-directed bnAb, and CH65 IgG, a human re-
ceptor-binding site (RBS)-directed bnAb. Dots rep-
resent the mean ± SD of two replicates.
 2483
JEM Vol. 214, No. 8
from responding to vaccination. Overall, our findings suggest 
that this method has the potential to be exploited as an im-
portant tool to study antigen immunogenicity in vitro.
dIscussIon
Here, we introduce an in vitro booster vaccine strategy that 
allows antigen-specific human B cell activation and differ-
Figure 7. Generation of gp120-specific antibodies from single sorted plasma cells. (a) The specificity of the gp120 recombinant antibodies gen-
erated after stimulating memory B cells from five HIV-uninfected individuals was analyzed by ELI 
SA. Cognate pairs of IgH and IgL genes were introduced 
into HEK293T cells by transient cotransfection, and culture supernatants were tested for the presence of gp120-specific IgGs. The mean IgG antibody 
concentration was 1 µg/ml. Cutoff value for a positive signal is taken as more than twofold above background. (b) Pie charts outlining the frequency of the 
gp120-specific clones. The number in the center of the pie chart indicates the percentage of the gp120-positive antibodies. Numbers outside the pie chart 
indicate the number of antibody gene sequences with identical IgH and IgL chain rearrangements. (c) Reactivity of the gp120-positive antibodies against 
a panel of foreign antigens was tested by ELI 
SA. The cutoff value for positivity has been taken as more than twofold background. (d) Octet measurements 
of the kinetics of selected gp120-reactive antibodies to the recombinant wt 92BR gp-120 are shown. Arrows represent the serial dilution of the antibodies; 
Kd values are highlighted inside the charts.
 In vitro boost strategy to produce human antibodies | Sanjuan Nandin et al.
2484
entiation. This method exploits the exquisite capacity of the 
BCR to discriminate affinity. As a result, only B cells that are 
able to bind antigen with a certain avidity are able to inter-
nalize particulate-CpG. Synergistic BCR and TLR activation 
results in the induction of robust B proliferation and differ-
entiation to plasma cells, together with antibody secretion in 
just a few days of in vitro culture. By using this approach, we 
were able to induce specific in vitro B cell responses for a 
variety of antigens such as TT, influenza, and gp120, mimick-
ing an in vivo vaccine boost. This allowed the production of 
a large panel of human monoclonal antibodies within a few 
days. 
This in vitro vaccine boost strategy can be used not only 
as a way of studying antigen-specific antibody repertoires, but 
also to generate human mAbs.
Unlike that of T cells, efficient antigen-specific B cell 
activation in vitro has been difficult to achieve, because BCR 
engagement alone is insufficient to induce robust B cell ac-
tivation. Indeed, B cells require second signals such as CD40 
or TLR, and the presence of different interleukin cocktails, 
including IL-21, IL-2, IL-6, and IL-15 (Arpin et al., 1995; 
Bernasconi et al., 2002; Ettinger et al., 2005; Huggins et al., 
2007). This type of stimulation has been used extensively 
to effectively activate polyclonal B cells (Corti et al., 2010; 
Smith et al., 2014). In contrast to CD40L stimulation, soluble 
CpG stimulation requires a high concentration, which forces 
entry through nonspecific uptake by the cells (Häcker et al., 
1998), triggering a strong activation of B cells irrespective of 
BCR specificity. In contrast, an advantage of our method is 
that the binding of CpG to a nanosphere prevents nonspe-
cific entry into B cells, so particulate-CpG can gain access 
to the TLR9 compartments only via antigen-specific BCR 
internalization. As a result, only those B cells that bind anti-
gen receive the correct signals to proliferate and differentiate. 
Importantly, particulate anti-BCR stimulation alone is a poor 
inducer of proliferation and differentiation. Similarly, soluble 
CpG alone is sufficient to drive proliferation but not plasma 
cell differentiation. Stimulation of both BCR and 
TLR, how-
ever, results in robust proliferation, plasma cell differentiation, 
and antibody secretion. In the future, it will be important 
to define the precise signals involved in the induction of 
plasma cell differentiation.
TLR9 is expressed at high constitutive levels in mem-
ory B cells and can be directly triggered by CpG to induce 
B cells to proliferate and differentiate into antibody-secreting 
cells (Bernasconi et al., 2003). CpG stimulation has been sug-
gested as one of the natural mechanisms to maintain sero-
logical memory (Bernasconi et al., 2002) and has been used 
as a polyclonal activator to expand EBV-transformed anti-
gen-specific B cells (Traggiai et al., 2004). Earlier studies from 
our laboratory provided evidence for a platform with selec-
tive synergism between BCR and 
TLRs in stimulating B cells 
using particulates in mice, and the cross-linking of the two 
receptors leads to specific B cell proliferation and differentia-
tion (Eckl-Dorna and Batista, 2009). Furthermore, synergisms 
of BCR and TLR9 have also been reported in the develop-
ment of human autoimmune diseases (Leadbetter et al., 2002; 
Viglianti et al., 2003).
T
o optimize the conditions for in vitro stimulation, we 
first validated our system using the κ light chain as a model 
target antigen. 
We showed that only the integrated delivery of 
two signals, via both the BCR and the TLR, is able to drive 
the proliferation and differentiation of memory B cells into 
plasma cells, leading to an increased production of κ-bearing 
antibodies. In addition to the κ/λ proof of principle, we 
have successfully applied this approach to different antigens, 
demonstrating its robustness and reproducibility. We have 
shown that in vitro stimulation of memory B cells with par-
ticulate antigen-CpG (TT, influenza HA, gp120) selectively 
enriched the frequency of CD27hi/CD38hi antigen-specific 
plasma cells despite the very low number of precursors circu-
lating in peripheral blood and regardless of the nature of the 
pathogen-derived antigen chosen to coat the nanoparticles. 
These plasma cells were also able to secrete antibodies that 
were specific to the stimulating immunogen.
Analysis of the variable region sequences of the plasma 
cells recovered showed not only polyclonal responses, but also 
groups of identical variable regions. The repeated isolation 
of identical V(D)J sequences represents strong evidence of 
proliferation and differentiation of individual B cells in vitro; 
alternatively, it could reflect in vivo clonal size. We also found 
VDJ sequences with point mutations, which most likely rep-
resent sister cells that underwent in vivo somatic mutation 
and were individually stimulated in our in vitro system. Given 
the absence of T cell help and the short time in culture, it is 
unlikely that our system induces any somatic hypermutation. 
Future modifications to our antigen-specific in vitro B cell 
stimulation toward the induction of somatic mutation and 
affinity maturation represents a key next step in replicating a 
full immune response in culture.
In agreement with previously published data (Corti et 
al., 2011; Buricchi et al., 2013; Goff et al., 2013), we observed 
a degree of cross-reactivity between the antibodies retrieved 
from stimulation with H1N1, H5N1, H7N9, and other in-
fluenza HA subtypes, which led us to speculate that it may 
be possible to exploit this methodology to obtain antibodies 
against antigens that had not previously been encountered in 
vivo. 
This was further suggested by functional assays in which, 
of the nine antibodies tested, two demonstrated neutralizing 
activity against H1N1 HA. Indeed, we demonstrated that 
the two neutralizing antibodies identified in this study are 
specific to the stalk of HA. It has been shown that antibod-
ies against the stem domain of HA are able to neutralize a 
wide spectrum of influenza virus strains and subtypes, be-
cause this domain is comparatively conserved (Ekiert et al., 
2009; Corti et al., 2011; Dreyfus et al., 2012). Furthermore, 
three of the antibodies that were isolated from H1 stimula-
tions, HA-Ab1, HA-Ab2, and HA-Ab3, are clonally related 
to two antibodies that have been recently identified as pre-
dominantly neutralizing antibodies developed upon H5 im-
munization in humans (Joyce et al., 2016). In the future, the 
 2485
JEM Vol. 214, No. 8
combination of this methodology with high-throughput se-
quencing may prove to be an invaluable tool to study antigen 
immunogenicity in vitro.
So far, several powerful approaches have been used to 
isolate human monoclonal antibodies such as phage display, 
EBV immortalization, yeast display, and humanized animal 
models (McCafferty et al., 1990; Clackson et al., 1991; Arpin 
et al., 1995; Tiller et al., 2008; Boder et al., 2012; Shultz et al., 
2012). However, all these methodologies rely on large-scale 
screening to identify only a few truly antigen-specific anti-
bodies. Although more recently, antigen-specific B cell sort-
ing and single-cell cloning have circumvented some of these 
issues, these approaches are still restricted to high-affinity 
 
antibody–antigen interactions (Franz et al., 2011). In con-
trast, the method reported here can overcome this barrier, 
as it does not rely on single BCR–antigen interactions but 
instead on the avidity of the BCR for the antigen arranged 
on the particle. As such, our approach allows antigen-specific 
isolation of Abs with Kd values ranging from 10−9 to 10−12 M 
for TT and influenza HA, and 10−7 to 10−8 M in the case 
of HIV gp120. Furthermore, our method induces the dif-
ferentiation into antigen-specific plasma cells with the con-
comitant up-regulation of immunoglobulin genes compared 
with memory cells, thereby facilitating single-cell antibody 
cloning. Thus, our approach could be applied in future for 
the fast generation of human monoclonal antibodies, and it 
offers the possibility to interrogate antigen immunogenicity 
in vitro. This can be achieved in a matter of days, without the 
need of expensive GMP protein production or the involve-
ment of patients in time-consuming clinical trials (Joyce et al., 
2016). As such, our approach not only complements existing 
methodologies but also offers an alternative for an in vitro 
phase 0 trial. This will help in future vaccine development by 
accelerating the iterative immunogen design before entering 
into phase I clinical trial.
In summary, our study provides a framework for a novel 
and efficient in vitro platform for the selective stimulation 
of memory B cells from healthy donors, leading to prolifer-
ation and differentiation into plasma cells that produce anti-
gen-specific antibodies, even in antigen-naive donors. Our 
methodology could have important applications in the pro-
duction of therapeutic antibodies; specifically, it should allow 
their production within a shorter time frame in vitro and 
without the need for vaccination or blood/serum donation 
from recently infected or vaccinated individuals. In addition, 
our method offers the potential to evaluate and facilitate new 
vaccine development by allowing the efficient evaluation of 
any candidate target antigen.
MAterIAls And MetHods
reagents and antibodies
BSA and streptavidin were from Sigma-Aldrich. PBS was 
from Gibco. TT was supplied by the Statens Serum In-
stitut. All recombinant influenza HA subtypes were from 
Sino Biological: H1N1 HA (A/California/04/2009; H1), 
H2N2 HA (A/Japan/305/1957; H2), H5N1 HA (A/Viet-
nam/1194/2004; H5), H3N2 HA (A/Perth/16/2009; H3) 
and H7N9 HA (A/Shanghai/1/2013; H7). H1N1 HA (A/
New Caledonia/20/1999; H1 wt), the HA delta stem mu-
tants H1 I45R/T49R and H1 45glyc, and the human mono-
clonal antibodies CR6261 and CH65 were provided by D. 
Lingwood. HIV-1 92BR-gp120 was provided by D.R. Bur-
ton (Scripps Institute, San Diego, CA). Human CpG ODN 
2006 was from InvivoGen. IL-15 and IL-6 were from Pe-
proT
ech. Antibodies used were as follows: goat anti–human 
IgG (FcΥ specific; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, 
Inc.); anti–human CD27-APC, anti–human CD38-FITC, 
CD138-PE, CD19-Percp Cy5.5, CD20-APC, CD80-
PE-Cy5, HLA-DR-PE-Cy5, and anti–human κ-Ig bio-
tin (eBioscience); anti-human CD86-Bv510, CCR10-PE, 
CD62L, CXCR4-PE-Cy5, CXCR5-APC, and anti–human 
λ-Ig biotin (BioLegend); and anti–human CD43-PE and 
anti–human IgD (Miltenyi Biotec).
nanoparticle coating
Streptavidin-coated 0.11-µm nanoparticles (Bangs Labo-
ratories) were incubated with biotinylated CpG or bioti-
nylated protein (anti-κ, anti-λ, BSA, 
TT, H1, H5, H7, gp120) 
overnight at 4°C. Coated nanoparticles were blocked with 
3% PBS, IgG free, for 2 h at RT, washed twice with PBS + 
0.5% BSA, IgG free, and resuspended in culture medium 
before sonication (117 VAC, 60 Hz, 0.5 A; Cole Parmer). 
Optimal stimulatory conditions were determined by in-
creasing the amounts of CpG while keeping the amounts 
of anti-BCR/antigen constant. Coating efficiency was mea-
sured by flow cytometry.
Human B cell activation
Leukocyte cones were obtained from the South East Regional 
Blood Transfusion Centre, UK. The health status of the 
donors for the lack of prior infection is based on mandatory 
screening for blood donations as described in the information 
contained within the issuers’ guidelines: http 
://www 
.transfusionguidelines 
.org 
/red 
-book 
/chapter 
-9 
-microbiology 
-tests 
-for 
-donors 
-and 
-donations 
-general 
-specifications 
-for 
-laboratory 
-test 
-procedures 
/9 
-1 
-general 
-requirements and 
http 
://www 
.transfusionguidelines 
.org 
/dsg 
/wb.
PBMCs were flushed from the leukocyte cones using 
a syringe and isolated using density gradient centrifugation 
(Lymphoprep; Nycomed). A mean of 15 × 108 PBMCs were 
recovered per cone. Human CD27+ B cells were purified 
using Memory B Cell Isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotec) and 
stained with 10 nM CellTrace Violet (Thermo Fisher Sci-
entific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After stain-
ing, purified human CD27+ B cells and particulates coated 
with biotinylated CpG and biotinylated anti-BCR antibody 
or antigen (in a ratio of 5,000 nanoparticles/cell) were cul-
tured in a 96-well plate (200,000 purified memory B cells/
well) at 37°C in 5% CO2 in complete medium: RPMI 1640 
(Gibco) supplemented with 1 M MEM nonessential amino 
 In vitro boost strategy to produce human antibodies | Sanjuan Nandin et al.
2486
acids (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 M Hepes, 1 M GlutaMAX, 10 U/
ml penicillin-streptomycin, 50 µM β2-mercaptoethanol, 10% 
heat-inactivated FBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 10 ng/
ml IL-15 in a 96-well plate. After 3 d, 10 ng/ml IL-6 was 
added, and cells were cultured for another 3 d. After a total 
of 6 d of stimulation, B cells were harvested to assess pro-
liferation and differentiation by flow cytometry. Supernatant 
was collected at day 6 from cultures of anti-BCR stimulated 
cells for subsequent ELI 
SA.
Flow cytometry and single-cell sorting
Cells were harvested after 6 d of stimulation and blocked with 
an FcR blocking reagent (Miltenyi Biotec). After washing 
with FACS buffer (PBS, 1% FBS, 1% BSA), cells were stained 
with anti–human CD27-APC and anti–human CD38-FITC 
and washed again before being analyzed on a BD FAC 
SAria 
III. Flow cytometry data were analyzed using FlowJo version 
10.0.7 (Tree Star). Alternatively, CD27+/CD38+ plasma cells 
were sorted by FAC 
SAria III into individual wells of 96-well 
PCR plates. Plates were sealed with foil film (Bio-Rad) and 
immediately frozen on dry ice before storage at −80°C.
elI 
sA
96-well plates (Corning) were coated with 1 µg/ml anti–
human IgG or the following proteins: TT, BSA (referred as 
protein control), streptavidin, H1, H2, H3, H5, H7, H1 wt, 
H1 I45R/T49R, H1 45glyc, or gp120 and incubated over-
night at 4°C. Plates were washed with PBS with 0.01% 
T
ween 
(PBS-T; Sigma-Aldrich) and blocked with a protein-free buf-
fer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1 h at RT. After blocking 
the plates, samples were added and incubated at RT for 2 h. 
After rinsing with PBS-T, plates were incubated with anti–
human IgG-biotin or anti–human κ-biotin or λ-biotin at a 
concentration of 1 µg/ml at for 1 h followed by ExtrAvidin 
alkaline phosphatase (Sigma-Aldrich) at RT for 1 h. Plates 
were developed by adding phosphatase substrate (SigmaFas 
p-nitrophenyl phosphate substrate; Sigma-Aldrich). OD was 
determined at 405 nm with a Spectra-max 190 microplate 
reader (Molecular Devices). For the competitive ELI 
SA, a 
twofold serial dilution of the test antibodies was premixed 
with 0.5 µg/ml of the reference mouse anti–human H1 stem 
antibody (C179; Takara Bio, Inc.) on a noncoated U-bottom 
96-well plate (Costar). The premixed antibodies were then 
transferred to a H1 (A/California/04/2009)-coated plate and 
incubated for 1 h at RT. After washing and adding 0.5 µg/
ml anti-mouse secondary antibody coupled to biotin (goat 
anti–mouse IgG biotin, human adsorbed; Southern Biotech), 
the ELI 
SA was continued as previously described.
transmission electron microscopy
B cell populations were sorted into 4% (vol/vol) formalde-
hyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (final concentration 2%), 
centrifuged gently (650 g) for 5 min, and resuspended in 
2.5% (vol/vol) glutaraldehyde/4% (vol/vol) formaldehyde in 
0.1 M phosphate buffer for 30 min at RT. Cells were post-
fixed with 2% osmium tetroxide/1.5% potassium ferricyanide 
for 1 h at 4°C and stained with 1% thiocarbohydrazide for 
20 min, followed by 2% aqueous osmium for 30 min and 
1% aqueous uranyl acetate overnight at 4°C. The pellets were 
then stained with Walton’s lead aspartate for 30 min before 
being dehydrated stepwise through an ethanol series (10 min 
each at 30%, 50%, 70% 90%, 2× 100% on ice, and 10 min 
100% at RT) and embedded in Durcupan ACM (Sigma- 
Aldrich). Blocks were sectioned using a UC6 ultramicrotome 
(Leica Microsystems) and picked up on 150-mesh hexagonal 
copper grids (Gilder Grids). Sections were viewed using a 
120-kV T
ecnai G2 Spirit transmission electron microscope 
(FEI Company), and images were captured using an Orius 
CCD (Gatan). All cells within several randomly selected grid 
areas were imaged (60–100 cells per condition using four 
donors) and quantified based on the structure of their ER 
(expanded or nonexpanded).
elI 
sPot
ELI 
SPOT plates (EMD Millipore) were coated with 5 µg/
ml TT or H1. After overnight incubation at 4°C, plates were 
washed three times with sterile PBS and blocked with RPMI 
and 10% FBS at RT. Plates were washed again, and stimulated 
B cells were added to the plates in complete medium. After 
incubation at 37°C 5% CO2 for at least 16 h, plates were 
washed with PBS-T (Sigma-Aldrich), and 100 µl of 1 µg/ml 
goat anti–human IgG-biotin was added to each well. After 
1 h, plates were washed with PBS-T, incubated with ExtrAvi-
din alkaline phosphatase (Sigma-Aldrich,) and developed by 
adding SigmaFast BCIP/NBT (Sigma-Aldrich) substrate. 
The 
reaction was stopped by washing with distilled water. Plates 
were air-dried, and the spots were imaged and counted with 
the ELI 
SPOT reader (CTL-ImmunoSpot).
single-cell rt-Pcr and antibody cloning
First-strand cDNA from single cells was synthesized in the 
original 96-well plate with SuperScript III reverse transcrip-
tion (Invitrogen) using oligo-dT. Nested PCR reactions and 
expression vector cloning were performed as previously de-
scribed (Tiller et al., 2008). In brief, cDNA was synthesized 
using 150 ng random hexamer primer (pd(N)6; GE Health-
care), 0.5 µl of 10 mM of each nucleotide dNTP-Mix (Invi-
trogen), 1 µl of 0.1 M dithiothreitol (Invitrogen), 0.5% vol/
vol Igepal CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich), 4 U RNAsin (Promega), 
6 U Prime RNase Inhibitor (Eppendorf), and 50 U Super-
script III reverse transcription (Invitrogen) at the following 
temperatures: 42°C for 10 min, 25°C for 10 min, 50°C for 60 
min, and 94°C for 5 min. IgH, Igλ, and Igκ 
V gene transcripts 
were amplified independently by nested PCR starting from 
3.5 µl cDNA as template. Each round of PCR was performed 
for 40 cycles at 94°C for 30 s, 58°C (IgH/Igκ) or 60°C (Igλ) 
for 30 s, 72°C for 55 s (first PCR) or 45 s (second PCR). IgH, 
Igλ, and Igκ PCR products were purified using Qia-Quick 
96 PCR Purification kit (QIA 
GEN) and digested with the 
respective restriction enzymes AgeI, SalI, and XhoI (all from 
 2487
JEM Vol. 214, No. 8
New England Biolabs, Inc.). Digested PCR products were 
purified and ligated into human Igγ1, Igκ, and Igλ expres-
sion vectors. Competent Escherichia coli DH10B bacteria 
(Clontech) were transformed at 42°C with 3 µl of the ligation 
product. Colonies were screened by PCR using 5′ Ab sense 
as forward primer and 3′ IgG internal, 3′ Cκ494, or 3′ Cλ as 
reverse primer. Plasmid DNA was isolated from 4-ml bacteria 
cultures grown for 16 h at 37°C in 
T
errific Broth (Difco Lab-
oratories) containing 75 µg/ml ampicillin (Sigma-Aldrich) 
using QIAprep Spin columns (QIA 
GEN). All kits and re-
agents were used according to the manufacturers’ instructions.
Antibody sequence analysis
DNA sequencing was performed on an Applied Biosystems 
3730xl DNA analyzer. Sequences were compared with 
known germline genes and assigned IGHV and IGHJ 
germline sequences based on the highest percentage of 
sequence homology using IMGT (http 
://www 
.imgt 
.org) 
and IgBLA 
ST (http 
://www 
.ncbi 
.nlm 
.nih 
.gov 
/igblast 
/) 
databases. The variable heavy and light chain antibody genes 
were analyzed for gene usage, mutations within FWR1-3 
and CDR1/2, and length of CDR3. Replacement and 
silent mutations in FWR1-3 and CDR1/2 were determined 
and normalized to the respective length of each region as 
defined by IMGT and IgBLA 
ST.
recombinant antibody production and purification
Heavy and light chain plasmids were cotransfected into ex-
ponentially growing HEK293T cells (CRL-11268; ATCC) 
by electroporation with an Amaxa 4D Nucleofector (Lonza) 
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After 3 d, super-
natants were harvested and analyzed by ELI 
SA for recombi-
nant antibody production. Antibody names are codified by 
the antigen stimulus followed by the antibody number (for 
example, H5-Ab2). Recombinant antibody concentrations 
were determined by ELI 
SA as previously described (Tiller 
et al., 2008). For neutralization assays, recombinant antibod-
ies were purified from supernatants of transfected HEK293T 
cells cultured for 3 d in serum-free Opti-MEM Medium 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells debris was removed by cen-
trifugation at 1600 rpm for 10 min, and the human IgG was 
purified by AKTA Start, using a protein A column (HiTrap 
MabSelect SuRe; GE Healthcare) according to the manu-
facturer’s instructions.
Analysis of antibody affinities
The kinetic interaction of mAb with recombinant HA pro-
tein was determined by surface plasmon resonance (SPR) 
using a Biacore 2000 system or by biolayer interferometry 
using Fortebio Octet. For Biacore, purified HA protein was 
diluted to 30 µg/ml in 10 mM sodium acetate, pH 4.5, and 
covalently immobilized at 5 µl/min by amine coupling to 
the dextran matrix of a CM5 sensor chip (Biacore), with a 
target density of 1,200 response units. Unreacted active ester 
groups were blocked with 1 M ethanolamine. All five purified 
influenza-specific mAbs, at concentrations ranging from 5 to 
500 nM in HBS/T
ween-20 buffer (Biacore), were injected 
over the immobilized HA protein or reference cell surface. 
Association rate (Kon), dissociation rate (Koff), and equilibrium 
dissociation constant (Kd) were calculated by aligning the 
binding curves globally to fit a 2:1 Langmuir binding model 
using BIAevaluation v4.1. Octect was performed in black 
96-well plates (Nunc F96 MicroWell Plates; Thermo Fisher 
Scientific) in a total working volume for samples or buffer of 
200 µl per well. Before each assay, streptavidin biosensor tips 
(ForteBio Octect) were prewetted in 200 µl of 1× kinetic 
buffer for at least 10 min. Afterward, streptavidin biosensor tips 
were loaded with biotinylated antigen in 1× PBS (12.3 µM), 
followed by an additional equilibration step (120 s). Subse-
quently, association of biotinylated antigen with antibody 
over a concentration range of 60, 30, 15, 7.5, 3.75, 1.875, 
0.094, and 0 nM in 1× kinetic buffer was conducted. Associ-
ation at each concentration was performed for 300 s. Finally, 
the dissociation was monitored in 1× kinetic buffer for 600 s. 
Results were plotted showing dissociation from 300 to 600 s.
Plaque reduction assay
The influenza plaque assay was performed using an adapta-
tion of a previously described plaque assay method (Matroso-
vich et al., 2006). A series of six twofold dilutions of each 
antibody (and a polyclonal antiserum positive control specific 
for each virus) was prepared using DMEM containing 530.45 
USP/NFP Trypsin N-tosyl-l-phenylalanyl chloromethyl 
ketone (TPCK). These dilutions were then incubated at a 
1:1 (vol/vol) ratio with 250 µl of 100 PFU/ml of either A/
Perth/16/2009 or A California/7/2009 at 37°C/5% CO2 for 
1 h, with the samples regularly inverted to ensure homogene-
ity. Six-well plates of MDCK cells (seeded at 5 × 105 cells/ml 
the day before the assay) were washed twice with PBS, and 
400 µl of the virus/mAb mix was overlaid onto individual 
wells, one well per dilution. After a further 1-h incubation, 
cells were overlaid with 2.5 ml Avicel solution (2.4% Avicel 
in DMEM containing 530.45 USP/NFP Trypsin TPCK and 
0.45% sodium bicarbonate) and incubated at 35°C 5% CO2 
for 2 d (A/California/7/2009) or 3 d (A/Perth/16/2009). 
The plates were then washed twice using PBS and subse-
quently fixed and stained using formalin and crystal violet 
solution (7.14% formalin and crystal violet, 14.29% ethanol 
in H2O). Each mAb was tested in triplicate. A back titration 
plaque assay was also performed for each virus to confirm 
that the virus titers were within acceptable parameters. The 
titer determined from this back-titration was subsequently 
used to determine the IC50 calculations. Plaques were vi-
sually counted, and IC50 data were calculated using Prism 
v5 (GraphPad Software).
Quantitative Pcr
After 6 d of stimulation, CD27hi/CD38int and CD27hi/
CD38Hi cells were sorted and lysed for RNA extraction using 
the Mag-max 96 total RNA isolation kit (Thermo Fisher 
 In vitro boost strategy to produce human antibodies | Sanjuan Nandin et al.
2488
Scientific) and reverse transcribed using random hexam-
ers and the transcriptor first-strand cDNA kit from Roche. 
Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using the 
ViiA 7 
system, and cDNA levels were detected using power SYBR 
green (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and normalized to GAP 
DH for each sample. All reported values were then further 
normalized to memory B cells. The oligonucleotides used for 
Q-PCR were as follows: BCL6 forward (5′-AAG 
GGT 
CTG 
GTT 
AGT 
CCA 
CAG-3′) and reverse (5′-GGT 
CAC 
ACT 
TGT 
AGG 
GTT 
TGTC-3′); PRDM1 forward (5′-CAA 
CAA 
CTT 
TGG 
CCT 
CTT 
CC-3′); PRDM1 reverse (5′-GCA 
TT 
C 
ATG 
TGG 
CTT 
TTC 
TC-3′); PAX-5 forward (5′-GGA 
GGA 
GTG 
AAT 
CAG 
CTT 
GG-3′); PAX-5 reverse (5′-GGC 
TTG 
ATG 
CTT 
CCT 
GTC 
TC-3′); IRF-4 forward (5′-ACC 
GAA 
GCT 
GGA 
GGG 
ACT 
AC-3′) and reverse (5′-GTG 
GGG 
CAC 
AAG 
CAT 
AAA 
AG-3′); and XBP-1 forward (5′-TCA 
CCC 
CTC 
CAG 
AAC 
ATC 
TC-3′) and reverse (5′-AAA 
GGG 
AGG 
CTG 
GTA 
AGG 
AA-3′). Differences in gene expression 
between CD27hi/CD38int and CD27hi/CD38hi were calcu-
lated with a t test, and the statistical significance was deter-
mined using the Holm–Sidak method to correct for multiple 
comparisons, with α = 5.000% (P < 0.05).
cell stimulation and immunoblotting
Purified memory B cells were equilibrated in complete me-
dium at 37°C for 10 min, and prewarmed particulates coated 
with biotinylated CpG and biotinylated anti BCR or bioti-
nylated anti-BCR were added at a ratio of 5,000 particulates 
per B cell. Soluble CpG was added at a final concentration of 
1 µg/ml for the indicated time. Cells were lysed in 1% NP-40 
buffer and analyzed by SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblot-
ting with indicated antibodies. Anti–phospho-Lyn (Y507), 
anti–phospho-ERK, anti–phospho-Akt (Ser473), anti–phos-
pho-Syk, anti–phospho-PLCϒ2, anti–phospho-CD19, anti–
phospho-SHP-1, and anti-ERK were all from Cell Signaling 
Technology. The density of the bands was quantified by den-
sitometry, corrected for background, normalized to the den-
sity of the actin band in the same sample, and made relative to 
the unstimulated zero time point for each condition.
statistics
Differences in CDR3 length and V gene mutations were 
calculated by paired two-tailed Student’s t test. Differences 
were considered to be statistically significant at values of P ≤ 
0.05. EC50 values were calculated using nonlinear regression 
(curve fit), parameter: log (agonist) vs. normalized response − 
variable slope. IC50 and logIC50 values were calculated using 
nonlinear regression (curve fit), parameter: log (inhibitor) vs. 
normalized response − variable slope. All statistical analyses 
were performed with Prism v6.0a and h.
online supplemental material
Fig. S1 provides a comparison of in vitro stimulation of memory 
B cells obtained from fresh versus frozen PBMCs. Fig. S2 de-
scribes the phenotype of the CD27high/CD38int and CD27high/
CD38high cell populations and gene expression of transcription 
factors involved in plasma cell differentiation. Fig. S3 shows 
an analysis of the sequence of TT
-specific antibodies. Fig. S4 
shows a sequence analysis of HA-specific antibodies. Fig. S5 
shows an analysis of the reactivity of the gp120 binding anti-
bodies by flow cytometry. 
Table S1 lists unique antigen-specific 
antibody sequences isolated from single plasma cells obtained 
after stimulation of memory cells of healthy individuals with 
particulate 
TT
-CpG. 
Table S2 shows biolayer interferometry to 
determine Kon, Koff, and Kd of selected TT
-specific antibodies 
binding to immobilized antigen. Table S3 shows unique an-
tigen-specific antibody sequences isolated from single plasma 
cells obtained after stimulation with particulate H1-CpG. 
Table 
S4 shows SPR measurements of Kon, Koff, and Kd of selected 
H1-specific antibodies binding to immobilized antigen. Table 
S5 shows characteristics of the unique antigen-specific anti-
body sequences isolated from single plasma cells obtained after 
stimulation with particulate H5-CpG. Table S6 shows char-
acteristics of the unique antigen-specific antibody sequences 
isolated from single plasma cells obtained after stimulation 
with particulate H7-CpG. Table S7 shows characteristics of 
the unique antigen-specific antibody sequences isolated from 
single plasma cells obtained after stimulation with particulate 
gp120-CpG. Table S8, included as an Excel file, shows se-
quences of all antibodies isolated in this study.
AcknoWledGMents
We thank the flow cytometry and electron microscopy units at the Francis Crick In-
stitute for their help. We thank all members of the Lymphocyte Interaction Labora-
tory for support and critical discussion.
This work was supported by the Francis Crick Institute, which receives its core 
funding from Cancer Research UK (FC001035), the UK Medical Research Council 
(FC001035), Wellcome Trust (FC001035), the Center for HIV/AIDS Vaccine Immunol-
ogy and Immunogen Discovery of the National Institutes of Health (NIH; 
UM1AI100663), the Phillip T. and Susan M. Ragon Institute Foundation, the Bill and 
Melinda Gates Foundation Innovation Award (228966) to F.D. Batista, and BLiNK 
Therapeutics Ltd. A.K. Shalek is supported by the Searle Scholars Program, the Beck-
man Young Investigator Program, an NIH New Innovator Award DP2 OD020839, U24 
AI11862-01, P50 HG006193, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (03629000189), 
and the Ragon Institute. D. Lingwood is supported by the Gilead Research Scholars 
Program and the NIH (DP2DA042422 and 2P30AI060354-11). J.A. Torreno-Pina is 
supported by a European Molecular Biology Organization Long-Term Fellow-
ship (ALTF 345-2016).
F.D. Batista was a scientific founder of BLiNK Therapeutics and is presently a 
shareholder of BLiNK Biomedical SAS. The authors declare no further competing fi-
nancial interests.
Submitted: 5 April 2017
Revised: 1 June 2017
Accepted: 26 June 2017
reFerences
Arpin, C., J. Déchanet, C. Van Kooten, P
. Merville, G. Grouard, F
. Brière, 
J. Banchereau, and Y
.J. Liu. 1995. Generation of memory B cells and 
plasma cells in vitro. Science. 268:720–722. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/
science 
.7537388
 2489
JEM Vol. 214, No. 8
Babcook, J.S., K.B. Leslie, O.A. Olsen, R.A. Salmon, and J.W
. Schrader. 1996. 
A novel strategy for generating monoclonal antibodies from single, 
isolated lymphocytes producing antibodies of defined specificities. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 93:7843–7848. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.93 
.15 
.7843
Barral, P
., J. Eckl-Dorna, N.E. Harwood, C. De Santo, M. Salio, P
. Illarionov, 
G.S. Besra, 
V
. Cerundolo, and F
.D. Batista. 2008. B cell receptor-mediated 
uptake of CD1d-restricted antigen augments antibody responses by 
recruiting invariant NKT cell help in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 
105:8345–8350. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0802968105
Bernasconi, N.L., E. Traggiai, and A. Lanzavecchia. 2002. Maintenance of 
serological memory by polyclonal activation of human memory B cells. 
Science. 298:2199–2202. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1076071
Bernasconi, N.L., N. Onai, and A. Lanzavecchia. 2003. A role for Toll-like 
receptors in acquired immunity: Up-regulation of TLR9 by BCR 
triggering in naive B cells and constitutive expression in memory B 
cells. Blood. 101:4500–4504. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1182 
/blood 
-2002 
-11 
-3569
Boder, E.T., M. Raeeszadeh-Sarmazdeh, and J.V
. Price. 2012. Engineering 
antibodies by yeast display. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 526:99–106. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.abb 
.2012 
.03 
.009
Borrebaeck, C.A., L. Danielsson, and S.A. Möller. 1988. Human monoclonal 
antibodies produced by primary in vitro immunization of peripheral 
blood lymphocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 85:3995–3999. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.85 
.11 
.3995
Buchacher, A., R. Predl, K. Strutzenberger, W
. Steinfellner, A. Trkola, M. 
Purtscher, G. Gruber, C. Tauer, F
. Steindl, A. Jungbauer, et al. 1994. 
Generation of human monoclonal antibodies against HIV-1 proteins; 
electrofusion and Epstein-Barr virus transformation for peripheral blood 
lymphocyte immortalization. AIDS Res. Hum. Retroviruses. 10:359–369. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1089 
/aid 
.1994 
.10 
.359
Buricchi, F
., M. Bardelli, C. Malzone, B. Capecchi, U. Nicolay, E. Fragapane, 
F
. Castellino, G. Del Giudice, G. Galli, and O. Finco. 2013. Impact of 
preexisting memory to seasonal A/H1N1 influenza virus on the 
immune response following vaccination against avian A/H5N1 virus. 
Eur. J. Immunol. 43:641–648. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/eji 
.201242563
Christensen, S.R., J. Shupe, K. Nickerson, M. Kashgarian, R.A. Flavell, 
and M.J. Shlomchik. 2006. Toll-like receptor 7 and TLR9 dictate 
autoantibody specificity and have opposing inflammatory and regulatory 
roles in a murine model of lupus. Immunity. 25:417–428. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2006 
.07 
.013
Clackson, 
T., H.R. Hoogenboom, A.D. Griffiths, and G. 
Winter. 1991. Making 
antibody fragments using phage display libraries. Nature. 352:624–628. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/352624a0
Corti, D., A.L. Suguitan Jr., D. Pinna, C. Silacci, B.M. Fernandez-Rodriguez, 
F
. Vanzetta, C. Santos, C.J. Luke, F
.J. Torres-Velez, N.J. Temperton, et 
al. 2010. Heterosubtypic neutralizing antibodies are produced by 
individuals immunized with a seasonal influenza vaccine. J. Clin. Invest. 
120:1663–1673. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI41902
Corti, D., J. Voss, S.J. Gamblin, G. Codoni, A. Macagno, D. Jarrossay, S.G. 
Vachieri, D. Pinna, A. Minola, F
. Vanzetta, et al. 2011. A neutralizing 
antibody selected from plasma cells that binds to group 1 and group 2 
influenza A hemagglutinins. Science. 333:850–856. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1205669
Coutinho, A., E. Gronowicz, W
.W
. Bullock, and G. Möller. 1974. Mechanism 
of thymus-independent immunocyte triggering. Mitogenic activation of 
B cells results in specific immune responses. J. Exp. Med. 139:74–92. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.139 
.1 
.74
DeFranco, A.L., D.C. Rookhuizen, and B. Hou. 2012. Contribution of Toll-
like receptor signaling to germinal center antibody responses. Immunol. 
Rev. 247:64–72. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1600 
-065X 
.2012 
.01115 
.x
Dejnirattisai, W
., A. Jumnainsong, N. Onsirisakul, P
. Fitton, S. Vasanawathana, 
W
. Limpitikul, C. Puttikhunt, C. Edwards, T. Duangchinda, S. Supasa, 
et al. 2010. Cross-reacting antibodies enhance dengue virus infection 
in humans. Science. 328:745–748. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1185181
DeKosky, B.J., G.C. Ippolito, R.P
. Deschner, J.J. Lavinder, Y
. Wine, B.M. 
Rawlings, N. 
Varadarajan, C. Giesecke, 
T. Dörner, S.F
. Andrews, et al. 2013. 
High-throughput sequencing of the paired human immunoglobulin 
heavy and light chain repertoire. Nat. Biotechnol. 31:166–169. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nbt 
.2492
de Kruif, J., A. Kramer, T. Visser, C. Clements, R. Nijhuis, F
. Cox, V
. van der 
Zande, R. Smit, D. Pinto, M. Throsby, and T. Logtenberg. 2009. Human 
immunoglobulin repertoires against tetanus toxoid contain a large and 
diverse fraction of high-affinity promiscuous V(H) genes. J. Mol. Biol. 
387:548–558. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jmb 
.2009 
.02 
.009
Dreyfus, C., N.S. Laursen, T. Kwaks, D. Zuijdgeest, R. Khayat, D.C. Ekiert, 
J.H. Lee, Z. Metlagel, M.V
. Bujny, M. Jongeneelen, et al. 2012. Highly 
conserved protective epitopes on influenza B viruses. Science. 337:1343–
1348. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1222908
Eckl-Dorna, J., and F
.D. Batista. 2009. BCR-mediated uptake of antigen 
linked to TLR9 ligand stimulates B-cell proliferation and antigen-
specific plasma cell formation. Blood. 113:3969–3977. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1182 
/blood 
-2008 
-10 
-185421
Ekiert, D.C., G. Bhabha, M.A. Elsliger, R.H. Friesen, M. Jongeneelen, M. 
Throsby, J. Goudsmit, and I.A. Wilson. 2009. Antibody recognition of a 
highly conserved influenza virus epitope. Science. 324:246–251. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1171491
Ekiert, D.C., R.H. Friesen, G. Bhabha, T. Kwaks, M. Jongeneelen, W
. Yu, 
C. Ophorst, F
. Cox, H.J. Korse, B. Brandenburg, et al. 2011. A highly 
conserved neutralizing epitope on group 2 influenza A viruses. Science. 
333:843–850. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1204839
Ettinger, R., G.P
. Sims, A.M. Fairhurst, R. Robbins, Y
.S. da Silva, R. Spolski, 
W
.J. Leonard, and P
.E. Lipsky. 2005. IL-21 induces differentiation of 
human naive and memory B cells into antibody-secreting plasma cells. 
J. Immunol. 175:7867–7879. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.175 
.12 
.7867
Fauci, A.S., K.R. Pratt, and G. 
Whalen. 1976. Activation of human B lympho-
cytes. II. Cellular interactions in the PFC response of human tonsillar 
and peripheral blood B lymphocytes to polyclonal activation by poke-
weed mitogen. J. Immunol. 117:2100–2104.
Fink, K. 2012. Origin and function of circulating plasmablasts during acute 
viral infections. Front. Immunol. 3:78. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3389 
/fimmu 
.2012 
.00078
Franz, B., K.F
. May Jr., G. Dranoff, and K. Wucherpfennig. 2011. Ex vivo 
characterization and isolation of rare memory B cells with antigen 
tetramers. Blood. 118:348–357. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1182 
/blood 
-2011 
-03 
-341917
Giesecke, C., D. Frölich, K. Reiter, H.E. Mei, I. Wirries, R. Kuhly, M. Killig, 
T. Glatzer, K. Stölzel, C. Perka, et al. 2014. Tissue distribution and 
dependence of responsiveness of human antigen-specific memory B 
cells. J. Immunol. 192:3091–3100. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.1302783
Goff, P
.H., F
. Krammer, R. Hai, C.W
. Seibert, I. Margine, A. García-Sastre, 
and P
. Palese. 2013. Induction of cross-reactive antibodies to novel H7N9 
influenza virus by recombinant Newcastle disease virus expressing a 
North American lineage H7 subtype hemagglutinin. J. Virol. 87:8235–
8240. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.01085 
-13
Häcker, H., H. Mischak, T. Miethke, S. Liptay, R. Schmid, T. Sparwasser, K. 
Heeg, G.B. Lipford, and H. 
Wagner. 1998. CpG-DNA-specific activation 
of antigen-presenting cells requires stress kinase activity and is preceded 
by non-specific endocytosis and endosomal maturation. EMBO J. 
17:6230–6240. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/emboj 
/17 
.21 
.6230
Hou, B., P
. Saudan, G. Ott, M.L. Wheeler, M. Ji, L. Kuzmich, L.M. Lee, R.L. 
Coffman, M.F
. Bachmann, and A.L. DeFranco. 2011. Selective utilization 
of 
Toll-like receptor and MyD88 signaling in B cells for enhancement of 
 In vitro boost strategy to produce human antibodies | Sanjuan Nandin et al.
2490
the antiviral germinal center response. Immunity. 34:375–384. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2011 
.01 
.011
Huggins, J., 
T. Pellegrin, R.E. Felgar, C. 
Wei, M. Brown, B. Zheng, E.C. Milner, 
S.H. Bernstein, I. Sanz, and M.S. Zand. 2007. CpG DNA activation 
and plasma-cell differentiation of CD27− naive human B cells. Blood. 
109:1611–1619. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1182 
/blood 
-2006 
-03 
-008441
Joyce, M.G., A.K. Wheatley, P
.V
. Thomas, G.Y
. Chuang, C. Soto, R.T. 
Bailer, A. Druz, I.S. Georgiev, R.A. Gillespie, M. Kanekiyo, et al. NISC 
Comparative Sequencing Program. 2016. Vaccine-induced antibodies 
that neutralize group 1 and group 2 influenza A viruses. Cell. 166:609–
623. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2016 
.06 
.043
Krieg, A.M. 2002. CpG motifs in bacterial DNA and their immune effects. 
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 20:709–760. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1146 
/annurev 
.immunol 
.20 
.100301 
.064842
Lanzavecchia, A. 1985. Antigen-specific interaction between T and B cells. 
Nature. 314:537–539. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/314537a0
Leadbetter, E.A., I.R. Rifkin, A.M. Hohlbaum, B.C. Beaudette, M.J. 
Shlomchik, and A. Marshak-Rothstein. 2002. Chromatin-IgG complexes 
activate B cells by dual engagement of IgM and Toll-like receptors. 
Nature. 416:603–607. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/416603a
Leadbetter, E.A., M. Brigl, P
. Illarionov, N. Cohen, M.C. Luteran, S. Pillai, G.S. 
Besra, and M.B. Brenner. 2008. NK T cells provide lipid antigen-specific 
cognate help for B cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 105:8339–8344. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0801375105
Macagno, A., N.L. Bernasconi, F
. Vanzetta, E. Dander, A. Sarasini, M.G. 
Revello, G. Gerna, F
. Sallusto, and A. Lanzavecchia. 2010. Isolation 
of human monoclonal antibodies that potently neutralize human 
cytomegalovirus infection by targeting different epitopes on the gH/
gL/UL128-131A complex. J. 
Virol. 84:1005–1013. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.01809 
-09
Marshak-Rothstein, A. 2006. Toll-like receptors in systemic autoimmune 
disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:823–835. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nri1957
Matrosovich, M., T. Matrosovich, W
. Garten, and H.D. Klenk. 2006. New 
low-viscosity overlay medium for viral plaque assays. Virol. J. 3:63. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/1743 
-422X 
-3 
-63
McCafferty, J., A.D. Griffiths, G. Winter, and D.J. Chiswell. 1990. Phage 
antibodies: Filamentous phage displaying antibody variable domains. 
Nature. 348:552–554. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/348552a0
Nutt, S.L., P
.D. Hodgkin, D.M. Tarlinton, and L.M. Corcoran. 2015. The 
generation of antibody-secreting plasma cells. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 
15:160–171. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri3795
Okuno, Y
., Y
. Isegawa, F
. Sasao, and S. Ueda. 1993. A common neutralizing 
epitope conserved between the hemagglutinins of influenza A virus H1 
and H2 strains. J. Virol. 67:2552–2558.
Pasare, C., and R. Medzhitov. 2005. Control of B-cell responses by Toll-
like receptors. Nature. 438:364–368. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nature04267
Pierce, S.K., and W
. Liu. 2010. The tipping points in the initiation of B cell 
signalling: How small changes make big differences. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 
10:767–777. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri2853
Pinna, D., D. Corti, D. Jarrossay, F
. Sallusto, and A. Lanzavecchia. 2009. Clonal 
dissection of the human memory B-cell repertoire following infection 
and vaccination. Eur. J. Immunol. 39:1260–1270. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/eji 
.200839129
Rawlings, D.J., M.A. Schwartz, S.W
. Jackson, and A. Meyer-Bahlburg. 2012. 
Integration of B cell responses through T
oll-like receptors and antigen 
receptors. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12:282–294. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri3190
Ruprecht, C.R., and A. Lanzavecchia. 2006. T
oll-like receptor stimulation 
as a third signal required for activation of human naive B cells. Eur. J. 
Immunol. 36:810–816. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/eji 
.200535744
Scheid, J.F
., H. Mouquet, N. Feldhahn, M.S. Seaman, K. 
Velinzon, J. Pietzsch, 
R.G. Ott, R.M. Anthony, H. Zebroski, A. Hurley, et al. 2009. Broad 
diversity of neutralizing antibodies isolated from memory B cells in 
HIV-infected individuals. Nature. 458:636–640. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature07930
Shlomchik, M.J., and F
. Weisel. 2012. Germinal center selection and the 
development of memory B and plasma cells. Immunol. Rev. 247:52–63. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1600 
-065X 
.2012 
.01124 
.x
Shultz, L.D., M.A. Brehm, J.V
. Garcia-Martinez, and D.L. Greiner. 2012. 
Humanized mice for immune system investigation: Progress, promise 
and challenges. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12:786–798. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri3311
Smith, K., L. Garman, J. Wrammert, N.-Y
. Zheng, J.D. Capra, R. Ahmed, 
and P
.C. Wilson. 2009. Rapid generation of fully human monoclonal 
antibodies specific to a vaccinating antigen. Nat. Protoc. 4:372–384. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nprot 
.2009 
.3
Smith, S.A., A.R. de Alwis, N. Kose, R.S. Jadi, A.M. de Silva, and J.E. Crowe 
Jr. 2014. Isolation of dengue virus-specific memory B cells with live 
virus antigen from human subjects following natural infection reveals the 
presence of diverse novel functional groups of antibody clones. J. Virol. 
88:12233–12241. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.00247 
-14
Tiller, T., E. Meffre, S. Yurasov, M. Tsuiji, M.C. Nussenzweig, and H. 
Wardemann. 2008. Efficient generation of monoclonal antibodies from 
single human B cells by single cell RT-PCR and expression vector 
cloning. J. Immunol. Methods. 329:112–124. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jim 
.2007 
.09 
.017
Traggiai, E., S. Becker, K. Subbarao, L. Kolesnikova, Y
. Uematsu, M.R. 
Gismondo, B.R. Murphy, R. Rappuoli, and A. Lanzavecchia. 2004. An 
efficient method to make human monoclonal antibodies from memory 
B cells: Potent neutralization of SARS coronavirus. Nat. Med. 10:871–
875. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm1080
Viglianti, G.A., C.M. Lau, T.M. Hanley, B.A. Miko, M.J. Shlomchik, and A. 
Marshak-Rothstein. 2003. Activation of autoreactive B cells by CpG 
dsDNA. Immunity. 19:837–847. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S1074 
-7613(03)00323 
-6
Wardemann, H., S. Yurasov, A. Schaefer, J.W
. Y
oung, E. Meffre, and M.C. 
Nussenzweig. 2003. Predominant autoantibody production by early 
human B cell precursors. Science. 301:1374–1377. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1086907
Wrammert, J., K. Smith, J. Miller, W
.A. Langley, K. Kokko, C. Larsen, N.-Y
. 
Zheng, I. Mays, L. Garman, C. Helms, et al. 2008. Rapid cloning of high-
affinity human monoclonal antibodies against influenza virus. Nature. 
453:667–671. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature06890
Yu, X., P
.A. McGraw, F
.S. House, and J.E. Crowe Jr. 2008a. An optimized 
electrofusion-based protocol for generating virus-specific human 
monoclonal antibodies. J. Immunol. Methods. 336:142–151. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jim 
.2008 
.04 
.008
Yu, X., T. Tsibane, P
.A. McGraw, F
.S. House, C.J. Keefer, M.D. Hicar, T.M. 
Tumpey, C. Pappas, L.A. Perrone, O. Martinez, et al. 2008b. Neutralizing 
antibodies derived from the B cells of 1918 influenza pandemic survivors. 
Nature. 455:532–536. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature07231
Zhu, J., G. Ofek, 
Y
. 
Yang, B. Zhang, M.K. Louder, G. Lu, K. McKee, M. Pancera, 
J. Skinner, Z. Zhang, et al. NISC Comparative Sequencing Program. 
2013. Mining the antibodyome for HIV-1-neutralizing antibodies with 
next-generation sequencing and phylogenetic pairing of heavy/light 
chains. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 110:6470–6475. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1219320110
 The Journal of Experimental Medicine
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
Correction: Novel in vitro booster vaccination to rapidly generate antigen-specific human monoclonal antibodies
Irene Sanjuan Nandin, Carol Fong, Cecilia Deantonio, Juan A. Torreno-Pina, Simone Pecetta, Paula Maldonado, Francesca Gasparrini,  
Jose Ordovas-Montanes, Samuel W. Kazer, Svend Kjaer, Daryl W. Borley, Usha Nair, Julia A. Coleman, Daniel Lingwood, Alex K. Shalek,  
Eric Meffre, Pascal Poignard, Dennis R. Burton, and Facundo D. Batista
Vol. 214, No. 8, August, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20170633
JEM regrets that in the original online version of this paper, the graph in Fig. 6 c was incomplete as the result of a production error.
The corrected Fig. 6 appears below. All versions of this article have been corrected.
Correction
