  
1
Sansom A, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e019849. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849
Open Access 
Why do GPs leave direct patient care 
and what might help to retain them? A 
qualitative study of GPs in South 
West England
Anna Sansom,1 Rohini Terry,2 Emily Fletcher,1 Chris Salisbury,3 Linda Long,2 
Suzanne H Richards,4 Alex Aylward,5 Jo Welsman,6 Laura Sims,1 
John L Campbell,1 Sarah G Dean2
To cite: Sansom A, Terry R, 
Fletcher E, et al.  Why do GPs 
leave direct patient care and 
what might help to retain them? 
A qualitative study of GPs in 
South West England. BMJ Open 
2018;8:e019849. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2017-019849
 
► Prepublication history for 
this paper is available online. 
To view these files, please visit 
the journal online (http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
bmjopen- 
2017- 
019849).
Received 28 September 2017
Revised 13 November 2017
Accepted 1 December 2017
1Primary Care Research Group, 
University of Exeter Medical 
School, Exeter, UK
2University of Exeter Medical 
School, College House, Exeter, 
UK
3Centre for Academic Primary 
Care, Population Health 
Sciences, Bristol Medical 
School, University of Bristol, 
Bristol, UK
4Academic Unit of Primary 
Care, Leeds Institute of Health 
Research, University of Leeds, 
Leeds, UK
5Patient and Public Involvement 
Group, NIHR CLAHRC, Exeter, UK
6Centre for Biomedical Modelling 
and Analysis, Living Systems 
Institute, University of Exeter, 
Exeter, UK
Correspondence to
Professor John L Campbell;  
 
john. 
campbell@ 
exeter. 
ac. 
uk
Research
AbstrACt
Objective To identify factors influencing general 
practitioners' (GPs’) decisions about whether or not to 
remain in direct patient care in general practice and what 
might help to retain them in that role.
Design Qualitative, in-depth, individual interviews 
exploring factors related to GPs leaving, remaining in and 
returning to direct patient care.
setting South West England, UK.
Participants 41 GPs: 7 retired; 8 intending to take 
early retirement; 11 who were on or intending to take 
a career break; 9 aged under 50 years who had left or 
were intending to leave direct patient care and 6 who 
were not intending to leave or to take a career break. Plus 
19 stakeholders from a range of primary care-related 
professional organisations and roles.
results Reasons for leaving direct patient care were 
complex and based on a range of job-related and individual 
factors. Three key themes underpinned the interviewed 
GPs’ thinking and rationale: issues relating to their personal 
and professional identity and the perceived value of 
general practice-based care within the healthcare system; 
concerns regarding fear and risk, for example, in respect of 
medical litigation and managing administrative challenges 
within the context of increasingly complex care pathways 
and environments; and issues around choice and volition 
in respect of personal social, financial, domestic and 
professional considerations. These themes provide increased 
understanding of the lived experiences of working in today’s 
National Health Service for this group of GPs.
Conclusion Future policies and strategies aimed at 
retaining GPs in direct patient care should clarify the role 
and expectations of general practice and align with GPs’ 
perception of their own roles and identity; demonstrate 
to GPs that they are valued and listened to in planning 
delivery of the UK healthcare; target GPs’ concerns 
regarding fear and risk, seeking to reduce these to 
manageable levels and give GPs viable options to support 
them to remain in direct patient care.
IntrODuCtIOn
General practitioners (GPs) make numerous, 
complex decisions about patient care and 
service delivery on a daily basis. Whether 
or not to remain in general practice and 
whether that should involve a direct patient 
care role, are additional decisions many GPs 
are facing at a time when the GP workforce is 
said to be in ‘crisis’.1–3 Our recent survey of all 
GPs in South West England revealed that 37% 
of GPs reported a high likelihood of quitting 
direct patient care within 5 years and that, 
overall, 70% of GPs reported a career inten-
tion that, if implemented, would negatively 
impact GP workforce capacity and availability 
in the next 5 years.4 Similar figures have been 
found elsewhere in the UK5–8 and, along with 
an overall reduction in the number of GPs, 
unfilled training places and an ageing work-
force,9 represent a toxic challenge to primary 
care provision in the UK.
Our systematic review of survey-based 
studies of the UK GPs identified four job-re-
lated factors that contributed to GPs’ deci-
sion-making about leaving their jobs or 
reducing their hours: workload, job (dis)
satisfaction, work-related stress and work-
life balance.10 However, many other detailed 
factors underlie these job-related factors or 
strengths and limitations of this study
 
► A maximum variation general practitioner (GP) 
sample was achieved through use of the workforce 
census survey returns.
 
► The large number of interviews conducted provided 
rich data and the opportunity to explore opinions and 
experiences with GPs and stakeholders.
 
► The analysis process was supported through study 
input from the Patient and Public Involvement group 
and a GP representative.
 
► GPs were self-selecting and represented mainly 
those indicating the intention to leave (or who had 
already left) direct patient care.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849 on 10 January 2018. Downloaded from 
 2
Sansom A, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e019849. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849
Open Access 
may influence decisions.10 Few qualitative studies provide 
a contemporary view of decision-making or include GPs 
of more than one age group or decision outcome.11 There 
is also a lack of evidence to support the view that recent 
policies and strategies developed to address GP workforce 
retention (eg, as outlined in the General Practice Forward 
View12) will help to reverse the GP shortage. In the mean-
time, existing GPs of all ages still face the decision about 
whether or not to remain in direct patient care. The aim 
of this study was to gain insight into the lived experiences 
of GPs in today’s National Health Service  (NHS), with 
the intention of identifying factors which, if addressed, 
might facilitate retention in direct patient care. This was 
part of a larger mixed methods study seeking to inform 
the development of policies and strategies to support the 
retention of experienced GPs (ReGROUP).
MethOD
During the course of a survey of all GPs in South West 
England,4 GPs were asked about their future intentions 
(within the next 5 years) regarding remaining in, leaving 
or taking a break from direct patient care, or reducing 
their hours. A sample population was drawn from survey 
respondents who reported being willing to be interviewed 
and who met the eligibility criteria for one of five inter-
view categories (table 1). A maximum variation approach 
was used to identify a purposive sample of GPs from prac-
tices of varying size and deprivation, GP demographic 
profiles and GP role (partner, salaried or locum).
We created a second sampling frame of key stakeholders 
to obtain the views of other professionals with direct expe-
rience of GP workforce issues and who could comment 
on the impact on practice organisation and management. 
Convenience sampling was used to identify individuals 
from a range of healthcare roles and professional organi-
sations to be approached for interview within South West 
England.
An invitation letter, information sheet and consent 
form were sent to each potential participant. A maximum 
of three attempts were made to contact and schedule 
an interview before moving on to the next potential 
participant in the sampling frame. We paused halfway 
through recruitment to review the sample and to deter-
mine whether adjustments were needed in our sampling 
approach.
Semi-structured interview schedules were developed 
using themes identified from the literature and through 
discussion with the study’s patient and public involve-
ment (PPI) members and GP representative. Individual 
interviews were conducted face-to-face, by telephone or 
by Skype video call depending on the participant’s pref-
erence. Interviews were conducted by one of two experi-
enced, postdoctoral, female, qualitative researchers (AS 
and RT) from May to November 2016. Interviews were 
audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim and anonymised. 
Interviewees provided consent prior to interview and 
were offered a gift voucher in acknowledgement of their 
time.
Transcripts from GP and stakeholder interviews were 
analysed together. Transcribed interviews were entered 
into data management software QSR NVivo V.1113 and 
analysed using thematic analysis. An initial coding frame 
was independently constructed by AS and RT, based on 
five transcripts. Following discussions, a consensus about 
the coding frame was reached. The coding frame was 
then independently tested by AS and RT with two further 
interview transcripts and final modifications were made. 
All transcripts were coded using this final coding frame. 
Detailed project notes were kept regarding further refine-
ment of any existing, or the addition of new, codes. To 
aid trustworthiness and reduce any potential bias, the 
researchers wrote field notes and reflexive memos and 
discussed these during peer debriefing sessions.
Discussions to help analyse emerging themes were 
held by the research team (AS, RT and SD) along with 
the PPI group and a GP representative (who was not a 
study participant). Recruitment and analysis were concur-
rent; data collection concluded when code and meaning 
saturation had been reached.14 A written summary of the 
findings was shared with all participants at the end of the 
study.
Patient and public involvement
Patient representatives were recruited from local PPI 
networks and chaired by JW, Engaged Research Fellow. 
The group consisted of two men and five women repre-
senting individuals with experience of a range of long-
term physical and mental health conditions. Some of the 
group also had experience as carers for elderly relatives 
or for children with life-altering health conditions. One 
member had extensive experience as a lay representative 
for Clinical Commissioning Groups and Quality Outcome 
Framework as a lay assessor of GP practices.
PPI members were involved throughout this study, using 
their experiences and patient perspectives to contribute 
to several key stages including: initial study design and 
funding application; review of application for ethical 
approval and development of qualitative interview ques-
tions. They also took part in group discussions with the 
Table 1 Number of general practitioner (GP) interviewees 
in each interview category (n=41)
GP interview category
Number 
interviewed
Retired GPs (age 50+ years)
7
GPs intending to retire (50–60 
years)
8
GPs on or intending to take a career break 
(any age)
11
GPs who had quit or were intending to quit 
(35–49 
years)
9
Staying GPs (any age; ‘high’ or ‘very high’ 
morale)
6
Total
41
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849 on 10 January 2018. Downloaded from 
  
3
Sansom A, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e019849. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849
Open Access
researchers to help refine themes and interpret the data 
during the analysis process; and contributed to discussion 
about the implications of the findings. A final dissemi-
nation and debriefing workshop took place with the PPI 
members at the end of the study.
results
Thirty-one per cent (694/2248) of those who returned 
the GP workforce census survey were eligible for inter-
view. Invitations were sent to a purposive sample of 98 
GPs and to a convenience sample of 41 stakeholders; 44 
GPs and 19 stakeholders agreed to be interviewed. Inter-
views were conducted by telephone (31 GPs; 15 stake-
holders), face-to-face (8 GPs; 4 stakeholders) and Skype 
(2 GPs). Interviews lasted between 15 and 73 min. Sched-
uling difficulties resulted in three GPs who had agreed to 
interview not being interviewed.
Interviewees were recruited from urban and rural areas 
across South West England. GP interviewees included 
partner, salaried and locum GPs. Table 1 reports the 
number of GPs interviewed in each interview category. 
Table 2 illustrates participants’ demographic and prac-
tice characteristics (where known). Table 3 reports stake-
holders’ roles and the organisations they represented. 
Stakeholders provided greater perspectives of the 
broader issues; 11 of the stakeholders had also been, or 
were currently, GPs (in addition to any other role).
In-depth analysis of interview data revealed three 
themes underpinning GPs’ thinking and rationale in 
respect of continuing to provide direct patient care: 
issues relating to their personal and professional iden-
tity and the perceived value of general practice-based 
care within the healthcare system; concerns regarding 
fear and risk, for example, in respect of medical litiga-
tion and managing administrative challenges within 
the context of increasingly complex care pathways and 
environments; and issues around choice and volition 
in respect of personal social, financial, domestic and 
professional considerations. These themes are presented 
in this paper. Additional findings from the interviews, 
broader than the scope of this paper, are provided in our 
full ReGROUP study report to the funder (NIHR study 
number 14/196/02).
Identity and value
Three subthemes related to identity and value were 
identified.
Boundaries and expectations for general practice
Changes within general practice have led to diminished 
clarity around professional boundaries and unreal-
istic expectations about what general practice can (and 
should) deliver. Tensions were identified between the 
primary and secondary care interface: general practice 
tended to ‘pick up’ and manage aspects of care that were 
felt to be the remit of other services and there was a clear 
sense that the ‘buck stops’ with general practice:
GPs, being the out of hospital doctors, have had to 
pick up everything (…) And eventually the buck 
stops with the GP. (GP stakeholder)
GP identity, professionalism and morale
Identity and professionalism were important to GPs:
Table 2 Demographic distribution of GP sample (n=41)
GP role (current or most recent)
  
Partner
22
  
Salaried
5
  
Locum
14
Gender
  
Female
21
  
Male
20
Ethnicity
  
White
41
  
Other
0
Age (years)
  
<40
7
  
40–49
16
  
50+
18
Practice list size*
  
<3500–8000
8
  
>8000
21
  
Not known† 
12
Practice Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD 2015) score*
  
1–5 (more deprived)
10
  
6–10 (less deprived)
19
  
Not known*
12
*Public Health England: http://fingertips.phe.org.uk/profile/general-
practice
†GPs who were locums and attached to more than one practice.
GP
, general practitioner.
Table 3 Stakeholder roles and organisations (n=19)
Role/organisations represented
Number 
interviewed
Clinical Commissioning Group
4
Local Medical Committee
3
Care Quality Commission
2
Regional organisation
1
General practitioner with interest in workforce 
issues
4
Practice manager
1
Nurse practitioner
1
Other allied health professional
1
Pharmacist
2
Total
19
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849 on 10 January 2018. Downloaded from 
 4
Sansom A, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e019849. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849
Open Access 
…being a doctor, for me and I think for most of my 
colleagues is about professionalism (…) Don't need 
a carrot or a stick – just love the job. Just want to get 
on with it (…) they will miss us when we're gone. (GP 
partner, male, aged 50–59 years, retired)
However, many felt compromised in their ability to 
practise in their preferred ways (eg, in the length of time 
they were able to spend with patients) and this impacted 
negatively on morale, professionalism and identity. This 
was partly due to: unrealistic demands; concerns about 
complaints; targets and guidelines; complexity of cases and 
lack of time to address them; lack of continuity and loss of 
professional autonomy. GPs felt compromised in striking a 
balance between delivering high-quality care and doing this 
within the constraints and burdens they experienced:
I like to listen to people, I like to give people time, 
so I’m a very popular GP, but I’m quite a stressed 
GP in the NHS setting (GP locum, female, aged 30–
39 years, intending career break)
…to survive in today’s NHS you have to be comfortable 
taking risks and cutting corners (CCG stakeholder)
Being listened to and being valued
GPs expressed frustration over not feeling listened to. 
They felt strongly that the government had failed to 
listen to them, to general practice as a profession and 
to the British Medical Association, about the impending 
workforce crisis. This was mirrored in matters relating to 
organisational change and demands on the service.
Feeling valued on account of their work was important 
to GPs. However, they reported often feeling under-
valued by the general public, the NHS, the media and the 
government:
I think most people, if you ask them why they do jobs, 
it’s a complex mixture and a lot of it comes about 
being valued and appreciated. I mean, people always 
focus on incomes and things but, the more detailed 
the analysis is, it always comes back to things like be-
ing appreciated, feeling valued (GP partner, male, 
age 60+ years, intending retirement)
Fear and risk
Fear and anxiety were experienced regarding different 
aspects of risk that had to be managed within the GP 
role. There was a general perception that GPs are good at 
managing clinical risk. However, risks were perceived to 
have increased in recent years, practice had changed to 
accommodate them and the risks were "not proportional to 
the rewards" (GP partner, male, age 30–39 years, intending 
career break). Three subthemes were identified.
Risk to patient care and safety and fear of complaints and being 
sued
There were concerns about the safety of practice and the 
quality of care being delivered to patients:
…when repeat prescriptions came through to be 
re-authorised I would be checking through and mak-
ing sure everything was up to date and everybody else 
(…) was just re-authorising it because they'd given up 
that aspect (…) of safety… (GP locum, female, aged 
40–49 years, staying)
Risk was related to ‘unmanageable’ workloads, the 
complexity of cases, the large number of decisions that 
had to be made and the impact of cumulative deci-
sion-making throughout the day:
…you have to balance priorities and triage things 
and I think (…) the busier you get the more dan-
gerous your decision-making becomes on that front 
and the riskier it can get (GP partner, female, aged 
40–49 years, staying)
Fear of making mistakes and litigation influenced 
how medicine was being practised, with some GPs prac-
tising more defensively (eg, spending more time writing 
notes and choosing face-to-face rather than telephone 
consultations):
We don’t really practice evidence-based medicine; 
we practice a sort of legal-based medicine (GP 
stakeholder)
Patients were perceived to have easy routes to complain 
about their GP/practice, but there was felt to be little 
support or recourse for GPs in actively managing those 
concerns. Defensive practice was also seen as a response to 
patient expectations with one GP feeling that "I’d better 
give this person what they want or they will complain" 
(salaried GP, male, aged 40–49 years, intending early 
leaver).
Where GPs had experienced complaints or being 
sued, they described the process as being drawn out 
and stressful. Complaints “wound the doctor severely 
(…). When you’re kicked in the teeth like that, either 
by the government or the patient, it really hurts" (GP 
stakeholder).
Risk to professional status and identity and to own health and 
well-being
Participants described GPs who they felt ‘cut corners’ 
and other GPs who did not. Both routes could potentially 
create a risk and be a threat to the professional status of 
the GP, their well-being and morale and the profession 
overall:
GPs tend go down one of two routes: they either- to 
cope with demand - start to cut corners (…) or (…) 
you over burden yourself and you won’t cut corners 
(…) and that has its consequences at the end of the 
day (locum GP, male, aged 40–49 years, intending ca-
reer break)
The consequences of experiencing ongoing fear 
and anxiety and of having to manage a range of risks, 
impacted negatively on GPs’ own health and well-being. 
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849 on 10 January 2018. Downloaded from 
  
5
Sansom A, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e019849. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849
Open Access
Work pressures had led to GP colleagues taking sick leave; 
some participants had direct experience of their own 
work-related ill health:
I was just working at such a pace and I knew I was mak-
ing myself ill (locum GP, female, aged 50–59 years, 
intending retirement)
The fear of becoming ill compounded the fear of 
making mistakes, creating a vicious circle:
You can’t make yourself ill. If you make yourself ill, 
you’re going to make mistakes anyway and no one 
wants that (GP partner, male, aged 30–39 years, in-
tending career break)
Financial risk and uncertainty about the future of general practice
Financial investment in a practice was perceived to be 
a greater risk now than in previous times and this was 
both a burden of and a barrier to, investment. Buying 
into a practice could mean taking on the risk of personal 
debt and increased stress. GPs may have previously 
been willing to make a long-term financial investment 
in general practice, but other pressures on personal 
finances, uncertainty about the viability of long-term 
commitment and concerns about the future of general 
practice, meant that younger GPs (in particular) were 
now reluctant to invest:
…if I had been willing to take on the whole practice 
and just tough it out, there’s a chance that in 20 years 
I would have £800 000 of equity in a building, but 
there is an equal chance I would burn out, be report-
ed to the GMC, gone crazy… (GP partner, male, aged 
30–39 years, intending career break)
Older GPs who had invested were experiencing stress 
and anxiety due to concerns about changes to practice 
mortgages, the threat of having to make staff redundant 
or practice closure and responsibilities arising from joint 
civil liability for a practice.
There was a pessimistic view of the future of the NHS 
and general practice:
There seems to be a lack of belief that the NHS will 
survive, let alone GPs part of it (CQC stakeholder)
Pessimism and uncertainty directly impacted on deci-
sions about staying in or returning to direct patient care 
following a career break. One GP, on a career break at the 
time of the interview, saw the current workforce ‘crisis’ as 
a barrier to returning to practice:
…it feels like something in crisis and who wants to 
jump into that? (GP partner, male, aged 50–59 years, 
on career break)
There was frustration over a perceived lack of 
ability to determine the future of general prac-
tice and the lack of a unified model that could be 
implemented:
There is so much uncertainty and the biggest frustra-
tion of being a GP is that you’re beholden to what-
ever the NHS England decision is, or whatever the 
Department of Health’s decision is… (GP partner, 
male, aged 40–49 years, staying)
Choice and volition
This theme concerned GPs’ feelings about making their 
decisions to leave or to remain in direct patient care and 
the degree of choice they felt they actually had. Three 
subthemes were identified.
Cumulation, compounding and combination of factors; decisions 
do not happen in isolation
A range of inter-related factors contributed to GPs’ deci-
sion-making: factors relating to workload, their practice, 
their personal circumstances and the wider social context 
(eg, ‘GP bashing’ by the media). The accumulation and 
compounding of factors over a number of years could 
ultimately lead to decisions to leave or to reduce hours:
It’s really like an insidious, drip drip drip thing re-
ally that’s been happening for ten plus years, really. 
There’s more and more and more things coming our 
way. (GP locum, male, aged 50–59 years, intending 
retirement)
For some GPs there had been a key tipping point for 
their decision making:
…everything happened at once: the menopause, the 
awful complaint (…) the locum work that I wasn’t 
particularly enjoying (…) and I got to the stage of 
thinking, ‘I don’t have to do this. I’m not enjoying it. 
Why am I doing it? Let’s just stop and see if I miss it.’ 
(GP locum, female, aged 50–59 years, retired)
Individual career decisions could affect colleagues, 
peers, patients and the profession in general and this 
was taken into consideration by the GPs. For example, 
retiring early from a partner position when the practice 
was experiencing recruitment difficulties, or choosing 
to work part-time knowing that others would need to 
provide cover:
And if individual partners jumped ship, it was incred-
ibly disruptive (…) Certainly, that had a knock-on 
effect, not just within the doctors who are the part-
ners, but the wider staff, the nurses, the receptionists, 
everybody. And it was a less good place to come to 
work. (GP partner, male, aged 50–59 years, retired)
GPs were also mindful that a decision to remain could 
have a negative impact on others in the practice:
The worry is about being miserable around people 
who don’t need misery (…) Like I say, sever the gan-
grenous limb and you save the patient! (…) the best 
thing you could do is leave so that actually you’re not 
polluting in any way. (GP partner, male, aged 50–
59 years, intending retirement)
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849 on 10 January 2018. Downloaded from 
 6
Sansom A, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e019849. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849
Open Access 
GP resilience and the only route left
Interviewees felt that GPs’ resilience had been eroded 
over recent years. This erosion was linked to loss of 
control:
…not feeling in control of where the money’s coming 
from, not feeling in control of your future because if 
you’re going to have contracts imposed on you by the 
government, you’re not in control. So that’s where I 
feel the loss of resilience is coming from… (Salaried 
GP, female, aged 40–49 years, staying)
A number of participants felt strongly that the solution 
to the current workforce crisis was not simply to make 
GPs more resilient but rather that the system they work in 
needs to be addressed:
If the purpose of resilience is to enable the same 
workforce to cope with every increasing demand, 
that’s not on, we actually have to make the job do-
able. (GP stakeholder)
…these are people who are highly resilient already 
(…) the system is so cruel (…). You’ve got to make 
changes to the system. Just supporting people is 
the wrong approach. (GP locum, female, aged 40–
49 years, early leaver)
It was noted that stigma exists around GPs accessing 
help—particularly mental health support—and GPs 
expressed concerns about confidentiality. Concern was 
also highlighted over GPs exhausting all alternative 
routes and coping strategies (such as changing to part-
time or portfolio working) and feeling that the only 
option they had left was to ‘vote with their feet’ and leave 
direct patient care:
I’ve just become more and more desperate (…) in 
past years I have just felt terribly angry with the way 
things are going and now I think, ‘I can’t actually do 
anything more about it’. And if I could do anything 
but vote with my feet, but ultimately it’s the only vote 
which they’re going to listen to. (GP partner, male, 
aged 50–59 years, intending retirement)
DIsCussIOn
Recent surveys suggest that approximately one in three 
GPs intend to leave direct patient care within 5 years.4–8 
Our findings paint a complex and bleak picture of GPs’ 
experiences and illustrate underlying factors that may 
be contributing to the large number of GPs leaving or 
considering leaving direct patient care. The Government 
has identified the need for an additional 5000 GPs by 
202012 and retaining existing GPs in direct patient care 
is a critical issue because of the time lag before newly 
trained GPs start to practice. Concern has been raised 
that ‘if general practice fails, the whole NHS fails'.3 Thus, 
there is an urgent need to better understand GPs’ expe-
riences and decision-making rationales to inform any 
policies and strategies aimed at retaining them and also 
to contextualise any evaluations of the effects and impacts 
of new and existing policies and strategies.
Our previous pilot research with older GPs (aged 
50–60 years) identified four key themes that highlighted 
individual and job-related factors associated with decisions 
about remaining in general practice: early retirement 
is a viable option for many GPs; GPs have employment 
options other than undertaking direct patient care; GPs 
report feeling they are doing an (almost) undoable 
job and GPs may have other aspirations that pull them 
away from direct patient care.15 A study of younger GPs 
(aged <50 years) who had left direct patient care identified 
the changing role of general practice as key (including: 
organisational changes; clash of values; increased work-
load; negative media portrayal; workplace issues and lack 
of support).16 Our synthesis of qualitative studies identi-
fied three central dynamics key to understanding the UK 
GP quitting behaviour: factors associated with low job 
satisfaction, high job satisfaction and those linked to the 
doctor-patient relationship.17 The current study explored 
how job-related and individual factors are experienced by 
GPs—their ‘lived experience’. We sampled from a broad 
range of GPs and other primary care stakeholders and 
identified three central themes which underpin deci-
sion-making: identity and value, fear and risk and choice 
and volition.
Workplace theories and models provide insight into the 
significance of these findings. The Theory of Organisa-
tional Justice highlights the importance of feeling valued 
and treated fairly in the workplace.18 GPs in our current 
study repeatedly described a perception of unfairness 
and feeling undervalued (often using colloquialisms such 
as ‘GP bashing’). When Sutinen et al explored organisa-
tional fairness in hospital doctors they found an associa-
tion between low organisational fairness and the risk of 
psychological distress.19 Dollard and Bakker’s theoret-
ical model of Psychosocial Safety Climate highlights the 
need for policies, practices and procedures to protect 
workers’ psychological health and safety.20 Our inter-
viewees identified organisational and cultural elements 
that were causing fear and anxiety and leading them to 
feel ‘unsafe’ in their role. Where perceived psychosocial 
safety is low, workers may experience long-term, high job 
demands and increased pressure to hide emotions, espe-
cially if worker concerns are not listened to.20 Not being 
listened to and stigma related to seeking support, were 
described by interviewees in our study. GPs in the current 
study talked about different routes they had taken to try 
and balance their personal resources with the demands 
of their role and, consequently, make their role in direct 
patient care more sustainable. However, the effectiveness 
and viability of these ‘coping strategies’ were not neces-
sarily long-term. This could lead to increased risk of 
burnout, identified by Orton et al as prevalent in the UK 
GPs.21 Emotional exhaustion (a signal of the development 
of burnout) can be common among GPs and is associated 
with older age, high workload, fear of medical errors and 
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849 on 10 January 2018. Downloaded from 
  
7
Sansom A, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e019849. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849
Open Access
feelings of isolation at work22 (all factors described by GPs 
in the current study).
While the themes identified are not unique to GPs, they 
can be considered fundamental to the satisfaction and 
sustainability of the workforce and consequently need to 
be addressed. With 90% of all patient contacts taking place 
in primary care,23 a failure to adequately address the GP 
workforce crisis will have profound ramifications across 
the NHS. Creating a fairer, safer and more supportive 
work environment will be fundamental to aiding reten-
tion and policies and strategies need to account for this.
strengths and weaknesses
The number of interviews conducted provided rich data 
and the opportunity to explore opinions and experiences 
with a range of GPs and stakeholders. A maximum vari-
ation sample was possible through use of the workforce 
census survey returns. Identification of stakeholders 
enabled us to approach participants across South West 
England, with a range of roles within key organisations.
PPI and project team discussion enabled modifica-
tion of the original sample targets to ensure that we also 
captured the views and experiences of ‘staying’ GPs. 
The PPI group and GP representative, along with reflec-
tive practice incorporating interview field notes and 
researchers’ memos, supported the analysis process.
GPs were self-selecting and represented mainly those 
indicating the intention to leave (or who had already left) 
direct patient care. We acknowledge the possibility that 
those GPs who did not respond to the survey or who were 
not available for interview may have reported different 
experiences. The vast majority of GPs eligible for inter-
view were white; GPs from other ethnic groups were 
approached but none agreed to be interviewed.
Patient and public involvement group discussion of findings
The group expressed understanding of the pressures that 
GPs can experience and noted the potential negative 
impact on patients when GPs were under pressure. There 
was agreement that more involvement and inclusion of 
patient participation groups (PPGs) could benefit GPs: 
positive interactions with patient representatives could 
help to reduce GP anxiety (eg, around fear of complaints). 
The PPI members also felt that there was a role for PPGs 
to support GPs: addressing patient demands and expec-
tations and helping GPs to feel more valued. For PPGs 
to be of value to practices, it was noted that there is a 
need for practice staff and patient representatives to be 
perceived as ‘on the same side’ and for GPs and other 
non-clinical staff to trust PPG representatives as part of 
the practice team. This, in turn, could help the identifica-
tion of models and examples of good practice that could 
then be shared by PPGs with other practices.
COnClusIOn
There is a need to address GP retention in ways that take 
into account the lived experiences of GPs. The solutions 
to the present crisis in GP workforce capacity do not lie in 
short-term initiatives or attempts to boost GP resilience. 
Effective strategies will need to demonstrate under-
standing of the key role and value of general practice, to 
manage the risks inherent in providing general practice 
and to provide a range of viable ways in which GPs can 
continue to contribute their key role to the NHS patient 
care. Showing such commitment to GPs, as central 
providers of healthcare in the UK, may also prove to be 
a positive step in attracting new doctors into this clinical 
specialty.
Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to all of the GP and stakeholder 
participants who contributed interviews, to the PPI group chaired by JW who 
support the wider programme of work of which the qualitative interviews are a part, 
to AA, patient representative, to LS, GP representative and to other members of the 
study advisory group. 
Contributors AS and RT contributed to the study design, data collection, analysis 
and writing of the paper. JLC and SGD contributed to study design, analysis and 
writing of the paper. SR, CS, AA, LS, EF, LL and JW contributed to the study design 
and writing of the paper. All authors read and approved the final paper. JLC is the 
guarantor of the paper.
Funding The project was funded by the National Institute for Health Research, 
Health Service and Delivery Research programme (project 14/196/02). The views 
and opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reflect those of the Health Service and Delivery Research programme, the National 
Institute for Health Research, the National Health Service or the Department of 
Health. JW is generously supported by a Wellcome Trust Institutional Strategic 
Support Award (WT105618MA). SD’s position is partially supported by the National 
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health 
Research and Care South West Peninsula at the Royal Devon and Exeter NHS 
Foundation Trust. 
Competing interests All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure 
at www. 
icmje. 
org/ 
coi_ 
disclosure. 
pdf and declare: financial support for the 
submitted work was received from the National Institute for Health Research 
(HS&DR); JW is supported by a Wellcome Trust Institutional Strategic Support 
Award; AA has received personal fees from Northern Eastern Western Devon CCG, 
Devon Local Medical Committee, British Medical Association, University of Exeter, 
SouthWest CLAHRC and NHS England Medical Directorate (South), outside of this 
work. 
ethics approval University of Exeter Medical School Research Ethics Committee 
(UEMS REC reference 15/11/085, 3 December 2015). 
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data sharing statement No additional data are available.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits 
others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for commercial use, 
provided the original work is properly cited. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
reFerenCes
 1. Baird B, Charles A, Honeyman M, et al. Understanding pressures in 
general practice. London: King's Fund, 2016.
 2. Dayan M, Arora S, Rosen R, et al. Is general practice in crisis?. 
London: Nuffield Trust, 2014.
 3. Roland M, Everington S. Tackling the crisis in general practice. BMJ 
2016;352:i942.
 4. Fletcher E, Abel GA, Anderson R, et al. Quitting patient care and 
career break intentions among general practitioners in South West 
England: findings of a census survey of general practitioners. BMJ 
Open 2017;7:e015853.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849 on 10 January 2018. Downloaded from 
 8
Sansom A, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e019849. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849
Open Access 
 5. Campbell J, Calitri R, Sansom A. Retaining the experienced GP 
workforce in direct patient care (ReGROUP) - final report. Exeter: 
University of Exeter, 2015.
 6. Dale J, Potter R, Owen K, et al. Retaining the general practitioner 
workforce in England: what matters to GPs? A cross-sectional study. 
BMC Fam Pract 2015;16:140.
 7. Gibson J, Checkland K, Coleman A, et al. Eighth national GP worklife 
survey UK. Manchester, 2015.
 8. Martin S, Davies E, Gershlick B. Under pressure: what the 
Commonwealth Fund’s 2015 international survey of general 
practitioners means for the UK. London: The Health Foundation, 
2016.
 9. Health Education England (HEE) Commission on GP workforce. 
Securing the future GP workforce - delivering the mandate on GP 
expansion. London: Health Education England, 2014.
 
10. Anderson R, Long L, Robinson S, et al. Why do UK GPs leave their 
jobs or reduce their work hours? A systematic review. In Press.
 
11. Long L, Sansom A, Aylward A, et al. Understanding why UK GPs are 
leaving general practice – a systematic review of qualitative research. 
J Epidemiol Community Health 2017;71(Suppl 1):A84.
 
12. NHS England. General practice forward view. 2016 https://www. 
england. 
nhs. 
uk/ 
wp- 
content/ 
uploads/ 
2016/ 
04/ 
gpfv. 
pdf (accessed 
Sep 2017).
 
13. NVivo qualitative data analysis software. Version 11. QSR 
International Pty Ltd. 2015.
 
14. Hennink MM, Kaiser BN, Marconi VC. Code saturation versus 
meaning saturation: how many interviews are enough? Qual Health 
Res 2017;27:591–608.
 
15. Sansom A, Calitri R, Carter M, et al. Understanding quit decisions 
in primary care: a qualitative study of older GPs. BMJ Open 
2016;6:e010592.
 
16. Doran N, Fox F
, Rodham K, et al. Lost to the NHS: a mixed methods 
study of why GPs leave practice early in England. Br J Gen Pract 
2016;66:e128–35.
 
17. Long L, Sansom A, Terry R, et al. Understanding complex issues of 
GP retention using a visual model to interface qualitative evidence 
synthesis, patient involvement and primary research. 1074. Cape 
Town, South Africa: Global Evidence Summit, 2017.
 
18. Greenberg J. A taxonomy of organizational justice theories. Acad 
Manage Rev 1987;12:9–22.
 
19. Sutinen R, Kivimäki M, Elovainio M, et al. Organizational fairness and 
psychological distress in hospital physicians. Scand J Public Health 
2002;30:209–15.
 
20. Dollard MF
, Bakker AB. Psychosocial safety climate as a 
precursor to conducive work environments, psychological health 
problems, and employee engagement. J Occup Organ Psychol 
2010;83:579–99.
 
21. Orton P
, Orton C, Pereira Gray D, et al. Depersonalised doctors: a 
cross-sectional study of 564 doctors, 760 consultations and 1876 
patient reports in UK general practice. BMJ Open 2012;2:e000274.
 
22. Torppa MA, Kuikka L, Nevalainen M, et al. Emotionally exhausting 
factors in general practitioners' work. Scand J Prim Health Care 
2015;33:178–83.
 
23. NHS England (London Region)/Primary Care Transformation 
Programme. Transforming primary care in London: general practice a 
call to action. London: NHS England, 2013
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019849 on 10 January 2018. Downloaded from 
