 Chromosome mis-segregation generates cell cycle-arrested 
cells with complex karyotypes that are eliminated by the immune 
system
Stefano Santaguida1, Amelia Richardson2, Divya Ramalingam Iyer3, Ons M’Saad1, Lauren 
Zasadil1, Kristin A. Knouse1,4, Yao Liang Wong2,5, Nicholas Rhind3, Arshad Desai2, and 
Angelika Amon1,6
1Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT, Department of Biology, Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 76-543, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
2Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, University 
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
3Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical 
School, 364 Plantation St., Worcester, MA 01605, USA
4Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115
SUMMARY
Aneuploidy, a state of karyotype imbalance, is a hallmark of cancer. Changes in chromosome copy 
number have been proposed to drive disease by modulating the dosage of cancer driver genes and 
by promoting cancer genome evolution. Given the potential of cells with abnormal karyotypes to 
become cancerous, do pathways exist that limit the prevalence of such cells? By investigating the 
immediate consequences of aneuploidy on cell physiology, we identified mechanisms that 
eliminate aneuploid cells. We find that chromosome mis-segregation leads to further genomic 
instability that ultimately causes cell cycle arrest. We further show that cells with complex 
karyotypes exhibit features of senescence and produce pro-inflammatory signals that promote their 
clearance by the immune system. We propose that cells with abnormal karyotypes generate a 
signal for their own elimination that may serve as a means for cancer cell immunosurveillance.
Keywords
aneuploidy; cancer; immune system; genome instability; senescence
Correspondence should be sent to: Angelika Amon (angelika@mit.edu), Stefano Santaguida (ste@mit.edu).
5Present address: Calico Life Sciences LLC, South San Francisco, CA 94080.
6Lead contact
Author Contributions
Conceptualization, S.S. and A.A.; Investigation, S.S, A.R., D.R.I., O.M.S., L.Z., K.A.K., Y.L.W.; Writing, S.S. and A.A.; Funding 
Acquisition and Supervision, N.R., A.D., A.A. All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Published in final edited form as:
Dev Cell. 2017 June 19; 41(6): 638–651.e5. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2017.05.022.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 INTRODUCTION
In all organisms analyzed to date, aneuploidy, an unbalanced karyotype in which one or 
more chromosomes are present in excess or reduced copy number, is highly detrimental 
(Santaguida and Amon, 2015a). Aneuploid budding and fission yeast show proliferation 
defects under standard growth conditions (Niwa et al., 2006; Torres et al., 2007). In 
multicellular organisms, chromosomal gain or loss is largely lethal (Hodgkin, 2005; 
Lindsley et al., 1972; Lorke, 1994). In humans, for example, all monosomies and most 
trisomies cause embryonic lethality (reviewed in (Hassold and Hunt, 2001)). Only trisomy 
of the gene poorest chromosome, chromosome 21, is compatible with survival into 
adulthood. However, even this trisomy leads to high levels of embryonic lethality. Only 12.5 
percent of trisomy 21 fetuses survive to birth (reviewed in (Roper and Reeves, 2006)).
The adverse effects of an incorrect karyotype are also observed at the cellular level. 
Aneuploid mammalian and yeast cells exhibit metabolic alterations (Williams et al., 2008), 
proliferation defects (Santaguida et al., 2015; Stingele et al., 2012; Tang et al., 2011; 
Thompson and Compton, 2010; Torres et al., 2007; Williams et al., 2008), genome 
instability (Blank et al., 2015; Meena et al., 2015; Ohashi et al., 2015; Passerini et al., 2016; 
Sheltzer et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2012), proteotoxic stress (Oromendia et al., 2012; 
Santaguida et al., 2015; Santaguida and Amon, 2015b; Stingele et al., 2012; Tang and 
Amon, 2013), and aneuploid mammalian cells have been reported to activate p53 
(Hinchcliffe et al., 2016; Li et al., 2010; López-García et al., 2017; Sansregret et al., 2017; 
Thompson and Compton, 2010). In addition to traits observed in a broad range of 
aneuploidies, aneuploid cells exhibit gene-specific phenotypes where changes in dosage of a 
particular gene cause a specific phenotype (i.e. (Dodgson et al., 2016)).
The observation that an aneuploid karyotype has detrimental consequences on cellular 
fitness is consistent with the low prevalence of aneuploid cells in somatic tissues (~2 
percent) (Knouse et al., 2014). Aneuploid cells are a rare occurrence even in tissues of mice 
harboring mutations that cause high levels of chromosome mis-segregation. Mice carrying a 
hypomorphic mutation in the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) component BUB1B 
(BUB1bH/H allele), exhibit high levels of chromosome mis-segregation in all tissues where 
this has been analyzed (Baker et al., 2004). Yet, single cell sequencing revealed aneuploid 
cells to be exceedingly rare in regenerating tissues such as the intestine, skin and blood from 
these animals (Pfau et al., 2016). Whether aneuploid cells are outcompeted by euploid cells 
or whether mechanisms exist that eliminate aneuploid cells from tissues is not known.
Paradoxically, despite the adverse effects of an aneuploid karyotype on normal cell 
physiology, the condition is also a hallmark of cancer, a disease characterized by excessive 
cell proliferation. 90% of solid tumors harbor whole chromosome gains and/or losses 
(Gordon et al., 2012; Holland and Cleveland, 2009). Multiple, not mutually exclusive 
hypotheses have been put forth to explain the prevalence of abnormal karyotypes in cancer. 
Chromosome copy number alterations have been proposed to drive disease by modulating 
the dosage of cancer driver genes (Davoli et al., 2013). Aneuploidy also endows cells with 
phenotypic variability (Beach et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2015; Rutledge et al., 2016), which 
could help facilitate metastasis or resistance to therapeutic interventions. Indeed aneuploidy 
Santaguida et al.
Page 2
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 has been shown to be associated with metastatic behavior, resistance to chemotherapy and 
poor patient outcome (Bakhoum et al., 2011; Heilig et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2011; Walther et 
al., 2008). Finally, the process of chromosome mis-segregation and aneuploidy of many 
chromosomes have been shown to cause genomic instability (Blank et al., 2015; Crasta et 
al., 2012; Janssen et al., 2011; Ohashi et al., 2015; Passerini et al., 2016; Sheltzer et al., 
2011; Zhu et al., 2012), which could fuel cancer genome evolution.
Given the potential link between aneuploidy and tumorigenesis, it is critical to understand 
how abnormal karyotypes affect cellular physiology. Here, we examine the immediate 
consequences of chromosome mis-segregation. We find that following chromosome mis-
segregation cells experience replication stress and genomic instability that cause the 
evolution of cells with highly aberrant karyotypes characterized by complex patterns of 
whole chromosome and segmental aneuploidies. Such cells cease to divide, undergo 
senescence and produce pro-inflammatory signals that leads to their elimination by natural 
killer cells in vitro. Our results indicate that mechanisms exist that eliminate cells with 
aberrant karyotypes and thus protect organisms from cells with the potential to become 
cancerous.
RESULTS
Chromosome mis-segregation rarely leads to p53 activation
Previous studies reported that chromosome mis-segregation causes p53 activation and a p53-
dependent cell cycle arrest (Li et al., 2010; Thompson and Compton, 2010). The aneuploid 
state per se or events accompanying chromosome mis-segregation could be responsible for 
this p53 activation. To distinguish between these possibilities we examined the immediate 
consequences of chromosome mis-segregation using live cell microscopy.
Several methods have been developed to induce chromosome mis-segregation. For example, 
compounds that interfere with microtubule dynamics or microtubule – kinetochore 
attachment cause a SAC dependent delay in mitosis and induce chromosome mis-
segregation. Inducing chromosome mis-segregation in this manner was shown to be 
associated with p53 activation in the subsequent G1 phase (Thompson and Compton, 2010). 
However, mitotic arrest exceeding ~100 minutes induces a p53-dependent G1 arrest 
irrespective of whether or not chromosomes are mis-segregated (Uetake and Sluder, 2010). 
We too observed this phenomenon. We analyzed cells that experienced an extended mitosis 
induced by the kinesin Eg5 inhibitor monastrol by live cell imaging (Mayer et al., 1999). 
This analysis showed that the frequency of chromosome mis-segregation and subsequent G1 
arrest increased with time spent in mitosis (Figure S1), highlighting that without live 
imaging it is difficult to compare fates of cells with and without mis-segregation due to the 
missing information about arrest duration.
To avoid G1 arrest caused by a prolonged mitosis, we generated aneuploid cells by 
interfering with SAC function rather than by activating the checkpoint. SAC inactivation 
does not delay cells in mitosis but instead accelerates progression through this cell cycle 
stage even when chromosomes are not attached to the spindle correctly (Figure S2A) and 
results in aneuploid progeny.
Santaguida et al.
Page 3
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We examined hTERT immortalized RPE-1 cells stably expressing PCNA-GFP (to determine 
S phase initiation) and RFP-H2B (to monitor chromosome segregation) grown in the 
presence of NMS-P715 or reversine. Both compounds inhibit the SAC kinase Mps1 
(Colombo et al., 2010; Santaguida et al., 2010). Treatment with NMS-P715 or reversine led 
to severe chromosome segregation defects. Each chromosome mis-segregated in 6 – 8% of 
mitoses (Figure S2D–F and (Santaguida et al., 2015)) and virtually all cells harbored lagging 
chromosomes during anaphase and micronuclei in the following G1 (Figure 1A and Figure 
S2B, C). Despite severe chromosome mis-segregation, however, mitotic arrest did not occur 
but cells in fact progressed through mitosis faster than vehicle-control treated cells (Figure 
S2A). Notably, chromosome mis-segregation did not lead to arrest in the following G1 in the 
vast majority of aneuploid daughter cells (~80%; Figure 1B). This finding indicates that 
aneuploidy per se does not cause cell cycle arrest in G1.
Although 80 percent of cells that mis-segregated chromosomes continued to divide, 9% of 
cells arrested in G1. To determine why these 9% of cells arrested in G1, we developed a 
method to separate G1-arrested cells from cycling cells following chromosome mis-
segregation (Figure 1C). Briefly, we induced chromosome mis-segregation, and then 
transiently exposed cells to the microtubule poison nocodazole during the cell cycle 
following chromosome mis-segregation (Figure 1C). Dividing cells arrest in mitosis and can 
be removed from the plate by shake-off (Figure 1C). We repeated this procedure multiple 
times to also eliminate cells that progress through the cell cycle more slowly. The only cells 
that remained adhered to the plate following this procedure were cells that arrested in the 
interphase immediately following the mitosis during which chromosome mis-segregation 
was induced. Single cell sequencing revealed highly abnormal karyotypes characterized by 
multiple chromosome gains and losses in cells that arrested immediately following 
chromosome mis-segregation (Figure 1D, E). Whereas aneuploid cells that still divided 
harbored genomic imbalances, which involved less than 5% of their genomes, aneuploid 
arrested cells exhibited genomic imbalances involving more than 20% of their genomes 
(Figure 1E). In addition to whole chromosome gains and losses, 42% of cells that had 
arrested in G1 (5 out of 12 cells) also harbored segmental aneuploidies compared to about 
18% of aneuploid cells that were still able to divide (2 out of 11 cells; note that the 
segmental gain on chromosome 10 was not included in this analysis as it is a characteristic 
of RPE-1 cells (Zhang et al., 2015)). Aneuploid arrested cells also exhibited signs of cellular 
senescence. Levels of p53, and the CDK inhibitors p21 and p16 were elevated (Figure 1F).
Inactivation of the DNA damage checkpoint suppresses the G1 arrest following 
chromosome mis-segregation
Segmental aneuploidies in G1 arrested aneuploid cells could be the result of DNA damage 
incurring during cytokinesis (Janssen et al., 2011), during accelerated anaphase entry (Figure 
S2A), or in micronuclei (Crasta et al., 2012). Their presence in G1 arrested aneuploid cells 
thus raised the possibility that cell cycle arrest was due to DNA damage associated with 
chromosome mis-segregation. To test this we analyzed γ-H2AX levels following 
chromosome mis-segregation. Although not detectable by Western blot analysis (Figure 
S3A), we observed a transient, modest increase in the average number of γ-H2AX foci 3 – 6 
hours after chromosome mis-segregation (Figure 2A, S3B, C and (Janssen et al., 2011)). 
Santaguida et al.
Page 4
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 More importantly, preventing activation of the DNA damage response by inhibiting the DNA 
damage-response kinases ATR, p38 or CHK2 or inactivation of p53 partially suppressed the 
infrequent G1 delay following chromosome mis-segregation (Figure 2B, C; S3D). These 
findings suggest that DNA damage occurring during chromosome mis-segregation might be 
responsible for the G1 arrest following chromosome mis-segregation in a small number of 
cells. Support for this conclusion comes from the finding that constitutive aneuploidies do 
not elicit a p53 response. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) trisomic for various different 
chromosomes do not activate p53 (Tang et al., 2011) nor does p53 depletion suppress their 
proliferation defects (Sheltzer et al., 2017). It is also possible that stresses associated with 
aneuploidy, such as oxidative and proteotoxic stress, which scale with the degree of 
aneuploidy, cause p53 activation. Indeed, we note, that cells that arrest in G1 and activate 
p53 following chromosome mis-segregation harbor highly aberrant karyotypes (Figure 1D).
Aneuploidy causes DNA replication defects
While aneuploidy per se did not impair G1 progression, it was possible that other cell cycle 
stages were affected by an unbalanced karyotype. Previous studies in budding yeast and 
human cells showed that many but not all aneuploidies cause DNA replication defects and 
genomic instability because of changes in gene copy number of factors critical for DNA 
replication and segregation (Blank et al., 2015; Meena et al., 2015; Ohashi et al., 2015; 
Passerini et al., 2016; Sheltzer et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2012). To assess the immediate effects 
of chromosome mis-segregation on the subsequent S phase, we induced chromosome mis-
segregation using reversine (aneuploid) or did not interfere with mitosis (euploid), then 
synchronized cells in G1 and measured DNA replication fork rate by DNA combing after 
release from the G1 arrest. Fork rates were significantly slower in cells that had mis-
segregated their chromosomes compared to their euploid counterparts (0.59 ± 0.02 kb min−1 
versus 0.88 ± 0.03 kb min−; Figure 3A, B). Furthermore, replication fork stalling was 
increased in aneuploid cells (Figure 3B). Live cell imaging of reversine-treated cells 
confirmed this result (Figure 3C, D; Movie S1). PCNA foci, a sign of ongoing DNA 
replication, persisted for longer times in cells that had mis-segregated their chromosomes in 
the preceding mitosis (Figure 3D). The prolonged presence of PCNA foci in cells was not a 
consequence of reversine treatment. Cells that were in G1 at the time of reversine treatment 
(cells that had completed mitosis but did not harbor PCNA foci at the time of reversine 
addition) were slightly delayed in S phase by reversine treatment (Figure 3D, Table S1; 
compare G1 population +/− reversine) but this delay was not nearly as dramatic as that of 
cells that had mis-segregated chromosomes because reversine was added prior to mitosis 
(Figure 3D; compare G2 population +/− reversine). Not surprisingly, DNA replication 
defects were accompanied by DNA damage as judged by an increase in 53BP1 foci (Figure 
3E, F). Our results indicate that chromosome mis-segregation leads to DNA replication 
stress in the following S phase which results in DNA damage. We propose that genomic 
imbalances caused by the aneuploid state as well as replication problems in micronuclei are 
causes of this replication defect (Passerini et al., 2016).
Chromosome mis-segregation triggers the evolution of complex abnormal karyotypes
What are the consequences of aneuploidy-induced DNA damage? Do such cells 
permanently arrest in G2 or do some of them proceed into mitosis? Our 
Santaguida et al.
Page 5
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 immunofluorescence studies indicate that the latter occurs. We observed DNA damage to 
persist into pro-metaphase. Aneuploid pro-metaphase cells harbored increased levels of γ-
H2AX foci compared to euploid cells but lower than those seen in cells treated with 
aphidocolin which interferes with replication of late replicating regions of the genome and 
results in DNA damage persisting into prometaphase (Figure 4A, B; (Minocherhomji et al., 
2015)).
To further characterize how chromosome mis-segregation affect genome integrity, we 
analyzed the cell division following the mitosis during which cells were treated with 
reversine by live cell microscopy (henceforth second mitosis; Figure 4C). Aneuploid cells 
exhibited a high degree of mitotic aberrations during the second mitosis - lagging 
chromosomes during anaphase and micronuclei in the following G1 (Figure 4D, E, Figure 
S4 and Movie S2). Importantly, these abnormalities were not due to incomplete drug wash 
out and hence lack of a SAC function. Duration of the abnormal second mitoses was 
significantly longer than that of unperturbed mitoses, indicating that the spindle assembly 
checkpoint was active (Figure 4F). Furthermore, we observed ultrafine anaphase DNA 
bridges – DNA threads that connect under-replicated genomic regions – as revealed by 
staining with antibodies against the Bloom’s syndrome helicase (BLM) protein and Plk1-
interacting checkpoint helicase (PICH) protein (Figure 4G).
Signs of DNA damage, identified as 53BP1 foci, were apparent even in G1 following this 
second mitosis (Figure 5A, B). Comparison of the karyotypes of cells immediately after 
chromosome mis-segregation (“First cell cycle” in Figure 5C, D; S5A) and of cells that had 
undergone an additional mitosis thereafter confirmed that complex karyotypes evolve in 
aneuploid cells (“Second cell cycle” in Figure 5C, D; S5B). Only 20% of cells displayed 
greater than two chromosome aberrations immediately after chromosome mi-segregation 
(Fig 5C, D, in agreement with Figure S2C–F and (Colombo et al., 2010; Hewitt et al., 2010; 
Santaguida et al., 2015; 2010)), but in the second mitosis, 80% of cells harbored more than 2 
chromosome gains or losses (Figure 5C, D). Together our results indicate that chromosome 
mis-segregation has consequences beyond the production of cells with whole chromosome 
gains or losses. It sets in motion a process where replication stress and DNA damage drive 
chromosome segregation errors and mitotic aberrations in the next mitosis.
Cells with complex karyotypes senesce
Our results indicate that chromosome mis-segregation leads to the generation of cells with 
highly aberrant karyotypes. Their ability to undergo mitosis decreased as karyotypes became 
more aberrant (Figure 6A) indicating that they arrest in interphase. To characterize the cells 
that had stopped proliferating within three days after they had been induced to mis-segregate 
their chromosomes, we induced chromosome mis-segregation, let cells divide for three days 
and then repeatedly used the previously described nocodazole-shake off protocol to remove 
cells that were still proliferating, which we determined to be approximately 60 percent 
(Figure 6B). Of the 40 percent of cells that had arrested within three days following 
chromosome mis-segregation, approximately half had never undergone a cell division and 
the other half had undergone at least one cell cycle as judged by EdU incorporation (Figure 
6C).
Santaguida et al.
Page 6
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The cell population obtained in this manner exhibited the same characteristics as cells that 
arrested in G1 immediately following chromosome mis-segregation. They harbored highly 
abnormal karyotypes with multiple whole chromosome and segmental aneuploidies (Figure 
6D, E) and displayed the hallmarks of senescence, including elevated levels of the 
senescence markers p53, p21 and p16 (Figure 6F), higher numbers of γ-H2AX foci (Figure 
6G), and increased senescence-associated β-galactosidase activity (Figure 6H and (Baker et 
al., 2004)).
Like cells that arrest in G1 immediately following chromosome mis-segregation, inactivation 
of p53 partially suppressed their cell cycle arrest. We induced chromosome mis-segregation, 
removed proliferating cells by nocodazole shake off and then determined the number of cells 
that detached from the plate as a measure of the percentage of the population that continued 
to proliferate following chromosome mis-segregation. This analysis revealed that fewer 
aneuploid cells arrested in interphase when p53 was deleted compared to aneuploid cells 
with intact p53 (Figure 6I). Our results indicate that approximately 50% of cells arrest in G1 
due to p53 activation but other pathways prevent cell proliferation in the other half of G1 
cells.
The aneuploid state causes a senescence-associated gene expression signature
Gene expression analysis of the G1 arrested aneuploid cells was consistent with cells being 
senescent. We observed down-regulation of genes involved in cell cycle progression (Figure 
S6A–C) and a senescence-associated gene expression profile known as senescence-
associated secretory phenotype (SASP; (Freund et al., 2010)) (Figure S6D and Table S2; the 
leading edge of the enrichment includes the genes listed in Table S3). DNA damage and cell 
cycle arrest are likely a major cause of the SASP gene expression signature observed in cells 
with complex karyotypes but other aspects of the aneuploid state likely also contribute. 
MEFs harboring specific trisomies also show a SASP gene expression pattern (Figure S6E 
and (Sheltzer et al., 2012)) yet these cells do not experience significant DNA damage nor 
activate p53 nor undergo cell cycle arrest (Figure S6F; (Tang et al., 2011; Williams et al., 
2008)).
Cells with complex karyotypes produce pro-inflammatory signals
Our gene expression analysis not only revealed the existence of a SASP-like gene expression 
signature in aneuploid cells but also the upregulation of genes that mediate inflammation 
and an immune response (Figure 7A). The top 7 upregulated gene set categories in arrested 
cells with complex karyotypes represented gene expression profiles associated with an 
immune response. Interestingly, with the exception of the “Interferon alpha/beta signaling” 
gene-set, immune response gene sets observed in aneuploid arrested cells did not match gene 
sets previously identified in cells in which senescence was induced by DNA damage (Figure 
7A; (Krizhanovsky et al., 2008)). Furthermore, we found the cGAS/STING pathway, an 
innate immune system pathway that is activated in response to cytosolic DNA, to be 
upregulated in cells with complex karyotypes ((Schneider et al., 2014); Figure S7G, Table 
S2). Whether these findings indicate that aneuploid arrested cells exhibit a different immune 
response than cells that senesce due to DNA damage remains to be determined. We conclude 
that cells that arrest in G1 with highly abnormal karyotypes induce multiple immune 
Santaguida et al.
Page 7
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 response pathways. In agreement with the idea that the aneuploid state produces a pro-
inflammatory signal is the recent finding that fibroblasts derived from Down Syndrome 
individuals activate an interferon response (Sullivan et al., 2016).
Consistent with the inflammatory gene expression profile observed in cells with complex 
karyotypes we found the secretion of cytokines (IL-6, IL-8 and CCL2) to be elevated (Figure 
7B). Interestingly, we also observed a subtle elevation in secretion of CCL2 but not other 
cytokines in early passage mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from BUB1bH/H 
(Figure 7C), which do not exhibit signs of senescence. This finding raises the interesting 
possibility that increased immunogenicity is not just a characteristic of cells with complex 
karyotypes that ceased to divide but also of cells with aberrant karyotypes that are 
proliferating.
To further characterize the immunogenic potential of arrested aneuploid cells we examined 
various cell surface proteins known to trigger recognition by the innate immune system, 
specifically natural killer (NK) cells. First, we examined expression of MICA and MICB. 
MICA and MICB are cell surface proteins that belong to the natural killer group 2, member 
D (NKG2D) ligand family, and activate NK cells in response to proteotoxic stress (Raulet 
and Guerra, 2009). Although euploid cells expressed MICA and MICB at their cell surface, 
MICA/B levels were elevated two fold in arrested aneuploid cells (Figure 7D, G; (Chien et 
al., 2011; Krizhanovsky et al., 2008)). This increase was not due to differences in cell size 
between aneuploid and euploid cells, as we compared MICA/B mean fluorescence intensity 
between cell populations of the same size (Figure S7A). We also examined the expression of 
the NKG2D ligands ULBP1 and ULBP2 at the cell surface. ULBP1 and ULBP2 are induced 
by cellular stresses and DNA damage (Raulet and Guerra, 2009). Their levels were also 
elevated in aneuploid arrested cells compared to euploid cells but did not reach levels seen in 
euploid cells treated with the DNA damaging agent doxorubicin (Figure 7E, G and S7B–D).
DNAM1 is an adhesion molecule at the surface of NK cells which mediates interactions 
between NK cells and target cells (Raulet and Guerra, 2009). This protein binds to CD112 
(also known as Nectin-2) and CD155 (also known as PVR) two surface molecules expressed 
in response to DNA damage (Raulet and Guerra, 2009). Aneuploid cells expressed CD112 
and CD155 at elevated levels (Figure 7F, G and S7E–G). CD155 levels, in particular, were 
as high in aneuploid arrested cells with complex karyotypes as in euploid cells treated with 
doxorubicin (Figure 7F, G). Finally, we found phosphorylation of STAT3 (Y705) and 
SAPK/JNK (T183/Y185) (Figure 7H) to be higher in aneuploid arrested cells which 
suggests that the inflammatory response caused by arrested cells with complex karyotypes 
triggers a feed-forward loop in which secreted cytokines propagate the inflammation 
response by activating other inflammatory pathways such as those dependent on STAT3 and 
SAPK/JNK (Kyriakis and Avruch, 2001). Together, these findings indicate that aneuploid 
arrested cells elicit an immune response.
To test whether aneuploid arrested cells were indeed targeted by immune cells we co-
cultured euploid cells or aneuploid arrested cells with NK92 cells and followed cell viability 
by live cell imaging (see STAR methods). NK92 cells did not interact with euploid cells, but 
effectively killed cells with complex karyotypes (Figure 7I, J and movie S3). NK92-
Santaguida et al.
Page 8
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mediated killing of aneuploid cells was not immediate but started 6–12 hours after mixing of 
cells (Figure 7J and movie S3). Despite the fact that NK92 mediated killing occurred only 
after a lag, the response was nevertheless NK92 cell-specific. Aneuploid arrested cells did 
not die when cultured in the absence of NK92 cells (Figure S7H). Further evidence 
supporting the conclusion that selective killing occurred stems from the observation that the 
interaction between NK cells and aneuploid arrested cells was at least partially dependent on 
the NK cell receptor NKG2D. Pre-incubation of NK cells with blocking antibodies against 
NKG2D decreased their ability to kill aneuploid arrested cells (Figure 7K). We conclude that 
cells with complex karyotypes elicit an innate immune response aimed at their removal.
DISCUSSION
By investigating the immediate consequences of aneuploidy on cells, we identified 
mechanisms that eliminate aneuploid cells. Chromosome mis-segregation leads to genomic 
instability and increased karyotype complexity ((Blank et al., 2015; Meena et al., 2015; 
Ohashi et al., 2015; Passerini et al., 2016; Sheltzer et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2012), this study). 
Cells with complex aberrant karyotypes ultimately cease to divide, exhibit features of 
senescence and produce pro-inflammatory signals that promote their clearance by the 
immune system. Together, these findings indicate that multiple mechanisms prevent the 
accumulation of aneuploid cells in tissues. A senescence program limits their proliferation 
and the innate immune system facilitates their clearance. The latter mechanism could very 
well represent a means whereby cancer cells, which are frequently highly aneuploid, are 
recognized and eliminated by the immune system.
Cells cannot count their chromosomes
It was previously reported that chromosome mis-segregation induced by interference with 
spindle function causes p53 activation (Thompson and Compton, 2010). This observation 
led to the interesting proposal that the cells somehow “know” how many chromosomes they 
have and that a chromosome number that deviates from the euploid karyotype triggers a p53 
response. However chromosome mis-segregation brought about by interfering with spindle 
function results in a mitotic delay, which when it exceeds 100 minutes causes p53 activation 
in the subsequent G1 phase irrespective of whether or not chromosome mis-segregation 
occurred (Uetake and Sluder, 2010) and requires the DNA damage binding protein 53BP1 
and the deubiquitinating enzyme USP28 (Lambrus and Holland, 2017). To examine the 
effects of chromosome mis-segregation on cell cycle progression without this complication, 
we used methods to interfere with chromosome segregation that accelerated rather than 
delayed mitosis. Live cell imaging of cells induced to mis-segregate chromosomes in this 
manner showed that the vast majority of cells that mis-segregate chromosomes do not delay 
or arrest in G1 following chromosome mis-segregation. p53 activation and a p53-dependent 
cell cycle arrest do not occur in cells harboring constitutive aneuploidies either (Sheltzer et 
al., 2017; Tang et al., 2011) further supporting the idea that aneuploidy per se does not 
trigger a p53-dependent G1 arrest.
While the vast majority of cells that mis-segregated chromosomes continued to proliferate, 
some cells (10–15%, depending on the experimental set up) do arrest in G1. Such cells 
Santaguida et al.
Page 9
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 harbor highly complex karyotypes and show signs of DNA damage. We propose that DNA 
damage accrued during chromosome mis-segregation is largely responsible for p53 
activation and G1 arrest in these cells. In agreement with this hypothesis is the observation 
that inactivation of DNA damage-responsive kinases or p53 greatly reduces the number of 
cells that arrest in G1 following chromosome mis-segregation. We further note that a 
previous study utilizing cells harboring a mutant allele of the SAC target Cdc20 
(CDC20AAA) that is resistant to SAC inhibition found that p53 is activated by the DNA 
damage checkpoint kinase ATM in aneuploid cells (Li et al., 2010). Several sources of DNA 
damage likely contribute to p53 activation. Lagging chromosomes might become trapped in 
the cytokinetic furrow (Janssen et al., 2011), which could lead to DNA damage but perhaps 
not breakage of chromosomes (Houchmandzadeh et al., 1997; Maciejowski et al., 2015). 
Premature anaphase entry induced by SAC inactivation could lead to anaphase onset in the 
presence of incompletely replicated or decatenated DNA. DNA damage could also occur 
when chromosomes contained in micronuclei are exposed to cytoplasmic nucleases, due to 
ruptured nuclear envelopes (Crasta et al., 2012; Hatch et al., 2013; Janssen et al., 2011). 
Aneuploidy-associated stresses that include oxidative, metabolic and proteotoxic stress also 
likely contribute to p53 activation (Kruiswijk et al., 2015), especially in cells with high 
levels of genomic imbalances such as is seen in aneuploid cells that arrest in G1. We 
conclude that the aneuploid state per se does not lead to p53 activation and G1 arrest, but 
that events associated with chromosome mis-segregation such as DNA damage and 
aneuploidy associated stresses do. Thus, p53 activation is a potential but not an obligatory 
outcome of chromosome mis-segregation.
Aneuploidy causes chromosome instability
Previous analyses showed that human and yeast cells harboring many different constitutive 
aneuploidies exhibit DNA replication and repair defects (Blank et al., 2015; Ohashi et al., 
2015; Passerini et al., 2016; Sheltzer et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2012). Here, we show that this 
effect on DNA replication is immediate. Our studies in yeast and those of others in 
mammalian cells further point to changes in the levels of DNA replication factors as being 
responsible for these DNA replication defects. In yeast, specific chromosome gains, cause 
specific DNA replication and repair defects, indicating that altered expression of specific 
genes located on the aneuploid chromosome is responsible for the observed defects (Sheltzer 
et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2012). In mammalian cells, multiple DNA replication factors such as 
the ssDNA binding protein RPA and the lagging strand DNA polymerase δ have been shown 
to be haploinsufficient (Murga et al., 2016; O’Driscoll, 2008). Furthermore, aneuploid cells 
downregulate the expression of DNA replication proteins, such as the MCM helicases 
(Passerini et al., 2016).
The aneuploidy-induced aberrant S phase precipitates further chromosome instability. DNA 
damage incurred during the abnormal S phase persists into mitosis leading to chromosome 
mis-segregation and other mitotic abnormalities. We note that this finding could provide an 
explanation for the puzzling observation that cancers harbor highly abnormal karyotypes yet 
mutations in genes encoding chromosome segregation factors are rare in the disease (Kops et 
al., 2005). Our data show that a single chromosome mis-segregation event can set in motion 
the evolution of complex karyotypes that are characteristic of solid tumors.
Santaguida et al.
Page 10
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Aneuploidy causes an innate immune response
Previous studies showed that aneuploidy is a rare occurrence in tissues even when 
chromosome segregation is compromised (Pfau et al., 2016) raising the possibility that 
mechanisms exist to eliminate cells with highly aberrant karyotypes in vivo. Our findings 
indicate that this is indeed the case. Cells with complex karyotypes express higher levels of 
NKG2D ligands, such as MICA/B and ULBPs, and of the DNAM1 ligands CD112 and 
CD155. These cell surface molecules mediate NK cells activation, trigger NK-mediated 
clearance in vitro (Iannello et al., 2013; Krizhanovsky et al., 2008) and have been shown to 
mediate tumor cell recognition (Raulet and Guerra, 2009).
Several characteristics of aneuploid cells likely contribute to their recognition by NK cells. 
For example, aneuploid arrested cells experience DNA damage and produce a SASP gene 
expression signature, which were previously shown to elicit NK cell recognition and to play 
a crucial role in the removal of cancer cells in vivo (Raulet and Guerra, 2009). Up-regulation 
of genes regulated by the cGAS/STING pathway could hint to the presence of DNA in the 
cytoplasm in aneuploid arrested cells (Lan et al., 2014). The aneuploid state per se might 
also trigger immune recognition. MEFs harboring specific trisomies exhibit a gene 
expression pattern very similar to that of aneuploid arrested cells yet these cells do not 
experience significant DNA damage nor undergo cell cycle arrest. Aneuploidy causes a 
number of stresses such as proteotoxic stress and oxidative stress (Santaguida and Amon, 
2015a), which have previously been shown to induce MICA/B and DNAM1-ligand 
expression, respectively (Raulet and Guerra, 2009). Moreover, it is important to note that the 
proteome of aneuploid cells is fundamentally altered because changes in gene copy number 
generally lead to changes in protein levels (Santaguida and Amon, 2015a). Aneuploidy-
induced changes in the cell surface proteome could also elicit an immune response.
It has not escaped our attention that our study could shed light on how the immune system 
recognizes cancer cells. Neoantigens have been proposed to be a major source of cancer 
immunosurveillance (Schumacher and Schreiber, 2015). Our data raise the possibility that 
immune recognition of cancer cells is also mediated by their aneuploid state and the 
physiological changes associated with complex aberrant karyotypes. At some point during 
disease evolution however, aneuploid cancer cells escape immune detection and once this 
point has been reached, aneuploidy appears to correlate with immune evasion (Davoli et al., 
2017). Understanding which aspect of tumorigenesis transforms aneuploidy from an 
immunogenic trait into an immune evasive property will be key to understanding cancer 
immune evasion.
STAR Methods
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
RPE-1 hTERT cell lines and MEFs were cultured in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 
10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine and 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were grown at 
37°C with 5% CO2 in a humidified environment.
To generate an RPE-1 hTERT cell line co-expressing GFP-PCNA and H2B-RFP, cells were 
transduced with pBABE-Puro, a vector encoding human histone H2B C-terminally fused to 
Santaguida et al.
Page 11
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mRFP1.3 (gift from Don Cleveland), and with an MGC collection human PCNA cDNA 
engineered to harbor an N-terminal eGFP fusion and cloned into pBABE-Hygro. A 
population of cells expressing both transgenes at moderate levels was selected by 
fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS). This cell population was then cultured in 
DMEM/F12 (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and 100U/ml penicillin/streptomycin 
and grown at 37°C with 5% CO2 in a humidified environment. NK92-MI cells were 
obtained from ATCC and cultured in Alpha Minimum Essential medium without 
ribonucleosides and deoxyribonucleosides but with 2 mM L-glutamine and 1.5 g/L sodium 
bicarbonate, 0.2 mM inositol, 0.1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 0.02 mM folic acid, horse serum 
to a final concentration of 12.5%, fetal bovine serum to a final concentration of 12.5%.
METHOD DETAILS
Drug treatments—Reversine was obtained from Cayman Chemical or Sigma-Aldrich and 
used at a working concentration of 0.5 μM or 2μM; Monastrol (working concentration 100 
μM) from Tocris; SB203580 (working concentration 10 μM) from CellSignalingTechnology; 
Thymidine (working concentration 5 mM), Aphidicolin (working concentration 400 nM), 
RO-3306 (working concentration 7.5 μM), Chk2 inhibitor II hydrate (working concentration 
10 μM), VE821 (working concentration 1 μM) and Nocodazole (working concentration 330 
nM) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. NMS-P715 (working concentration 1 μM) was 
obtained from EMD/Millipore.
Isolation of cells that stopped dividing following chromosome mis-
segregation—To enrich for cells that ceased to divide following chromosome mis-
segregation, RPE-1 cells were synchronized at the G1/S phase transition by thymidine 
treatment. Six hours after release from the G1/S phase block, cells were treated with vehicle 
or 0.5 μM reversine for 12 hours. After wash-out of the drug, cells were placed into fresh 
medium and either harvested 66 hours later (euploid and aneuploid cycling cells) or exposed 
to nocodazole. 12 hours later, mitotic cells were removed by shake-off and the remaining 
cells were placed again into fresh medium containing nocodazole. Because the percentage of 
dividing cells was very low after the fourth shake-off (see Figure 6B), we performed four 
nocodazole treatment/shake-offs in all experiments shown.
Cell imaging methods—For fluorescence imaging RPE-1 cells were plated at about 30% 
of confluence onto coverslips coated with 10 μg/ml Fibronectin (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were 
fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (in PBS) for 15 minutes at room temperature, then treated 
with 4% BSA-PBS and incubated with the appropriate antibodies diluted in BSA-PBS. The 
following antibodies were used for immunofluorescence: anti γH2AX (Cell Signaling 
Technology #9718), anti 53BP1 (Novus #NB100–305), anti PICH (Millipore #04–1540), 
anti BLM (Santa Cruz #sc-7790), anti-centromeric antibody (Antibodies Inc. 
#15-234-0001). Alexa 488- and Alexa 546-labeled secondary antibodies were from 
Invitrogen. DyLight649-conjugated secondary antibody was purchased from Jackson 
ImmunoResearch Laboratories. DNA was stained with Hoechst. The coverslips were 
mounted using ProLong Gold Antifade reagent (Life Technologies).
Santaguida et al.
Page 12
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 EdU incorporation into DNA was visualized using the Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 647 or 
Alexa Fluor 488 Imaging Kit (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s instructions. EdU-
positive nuclei were scored by: (i) applying a global intensity threshold (manually adjusted 
to detect nuclei by DAPI staining and EdU-positive cells at an intensity value of about 
1000); (2) applying the Separate Touching Objects tool in Volocity; (3) excluding touching 
nuclei with a separation guide of 7 μm; and (4) rejecting nuclei with an area of less than 30 
μm2. The method was validated manually and found to give accurate cell counts.
Cells were imaged at 25°C on a Zeiss Axio Observer. Z1 inverted microscope (Zeiss. 
Thornwood, NY) with an ORCA-ER C4742-80 CCD camera (Hamamatsu Corporation. 
Middlesex, NJ) and an X-Cite Series 120 arc lamp (Life Sciences & Industrial Division. 
Ontario, Canada) or on a DeltaVision Elite imaging system (Applied Precision) and 
microscope (model IX-71; Olympus) controlled by SoftWoRx software (Applied Precision) 
and a 60× objective lens with a CoolSNAP HQ2 camera (Photometrics). Images were 
acquired as z-sections at 0.3 μm (DeltaVision) and converted into maximal intensity 
projections using SoftWoRx (Applied Precision) software. Deconvolution was performed 
using a constrained-iterative algorithm in SoftWoRx.
Quantification of fluorescence intensity as well as quantification of 53BP1 and γH2AX foci 
was conducted using Volocity (Perkin Elmer) and Python 2.7. γH2AX -positive foci within 
a cell were determined by analyzing the number of objects within each cell containing 
fluorescent accumulations of DAPI and γH2AX greater than 0.2 μm2 as measured by 
Volocity. Foci were scored by: (1) applying the Volocity “find spots” option; (2) filtering the 
population by applying a pixel intensity threshold of 1500; (3) using the compartmentalize 
tool in Volocity to analyze only previously identified nuclei; and (4) applying a 0.2 μm2 size 
filter to remove speckles and noise. This protocol was validated manually and found to 
reliably detect foci. Images were imported into Photoshop CS5.1 (Adobe Systems, Inc.), and 
levels were adjusted.
For FISH analyses, RPE-1 cells were plated on 24×60mm coverslips, treated with DMSO or 
1μM NMS-P715 for 24 hrs and then fixed and stained with Hoechst and FISH probes 
(Cytocell Aquarius Satellite Enumeration probe LPE-011G, Cytocell Aquarius Satellite 
Enumeration probe LPE-006R). Nuclei were imaged on a Deltavision microscope with a 
40x objective and number of foci/nucleus were counted.
Video microscopy—Live cell imaging was performed either using an inverted 
microscope (IX70; Nikon) with a magnification objective of 10x or using a Yokagawa CQ1 
spinning disk confocal (40x objective, reversine-treated cells) or Yokogawa CV1000 (20x 
objective, monastrol-treated cells). All microscopes were equipped with an incubation 
chamber maintained at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. For experiments with NK92 
cells, euploid and aneuploid arrested cells were co-cultured in the presence of NK92 cells at 
a target:effector ratio of 1:10 right before the beginning of filming.
For experiments described in Figure S1, unsynchronized RPE-1 hTERT GFP-PCNA H2B-
RFP cells were plated on Greiner SCREENSTAR 96-well plates (#655866), incubated 
overnight, and then treated with DMSO or 100 μM monastrol and immediately filmed for 6 
Santaguida et al.
Page 13
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hrs using a Yokagawa CV1000 microscope with a 20x objective. After 6 hours plates were 
removed, cells were washed twice with complete medium, and returned to the microscope 
for an additional 50 hrs of filming. Because cells were unsynchronized, mother cells entered 
mitosis throughout monastrol treatment and thereby experienced variable mitotic delays. 
After drug washout, the mother cells exited mitosis and the cell cycle progression of their 
daughter cells was tracked. Images were acquired every 10 min for the first 8 hrs to capture 
mother cell mitotic timing and mis-segregation events, and then every 20 min to capture 
daughter cell cycle progression.
To quantify daughter cell S phase timing after chromosome mis-segregation in the mother 
cell, unsynchronized RPE1 hTERT GFP-PCNA H2B-RFP cells were plated on Greiner 
SCREENSTAR 96-well plates (#655866), incubated overnight, and then treated with 
DMSO, 0.5 μM, or 2 μM reversine. Cells were immediately filmed on a Yokagawa CQ1 
with a 40x objective. Images were acquired every 5 minutes for 5 hrs and then every 20 min 
for a total of 48 hrs. Reversine was not washed out for the duration of the experiment. 
Because cells were unsynchronized, we determined the time from PCNA focus appearance 
to disappearance for two types of cells. The first type (G1) were cells that progressed 
through mitosis before drug treatment and hence were exposed to reversine only during G1 
and S phase. The second type (G2) were the daughters of mother cells that progressed 
through mitosis in the presence of reversine and had mis-segregated their chromosomes.
To track daughter cell cycle fate after mother cells had mis-segregated chromosomes, RPE-1 
hTERT GFP-PCNA H2B-RFP cells were plated on 96-well cycloolifin plates overnight, 
treated with DMSO or 1 μM NMS-P715 and immediately filmed on a Yokagawa CV1000 
microscope using a 20x objective. Images were acquired every 10 min for 8 hrs to capture 
mother cell mitosis and then every 15 min for 2 days to track daughter cell fate.
Protein detection by Western blots—For protein analyses cells were lysed in lysis 
buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 
1% NP-40, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) 
and resolved on 15% SDS PAGE gels. The following primary antibodies were used: anti-
actin (Sigma-Aldrich #A2228, 1:10,000), anti-p53 (Santa Cruz #sc-126, 1:200), anti-p21 
(Santa Cruz #sc-6246, 1:200), anti-p16 (BD #554079, 1:200), anti γH2AX (Cell Signaling 
Technology #9718, 1:500), anti-GAPDH (Santa Cruz #sc-365062).
RNAseq data processing and analysis—RNAseq analyses were conducted on 
euploid, and aneuploid cells that proliferate or that had ceased to divide. Total RNA was 
isolated using the RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN). Quality control of single end reads was 
performed by aligning reads to the human genome (hg19) with tophat 2.0.9. Alignment rates 
to various genomic features were counted and summarized using bedtools 2.17.0 and a 
series of custom scripts. The QC results are all within acceptable ranges.
To quantify gene expression, RNAseq data were aligned and summarized using bowtie 
version 1.0.1, rsem version 1.2.15, samtools/0.1.19 and a UCSC known genes annotation file 
from the hg19 assembly. Differential expression analysis was performed with R version 
3.2.2 and DESeq_1.20.0. Raw data for the trisomic MEF experiment (GSE12501) and 
Santaguida et al.
Page 14
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 senescence experiment (GSE11954) were downloaded from GEO and reprocessed using R 
version 3.2.2 with bioconductor packages affy_1.48.0, affyPLM_1.46.0 and gcRMA_2.42.0. 
For the senescence experiment, markers of growth and senescence were identified by 
differential expression analysis using limma_3.26.3 with statistical cut-offs of log2 fold 
change > 1 and adjusted p-value < 0.05.
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis was run with Java application version 2.2.2 obtained from the 
Broad Institute and custom gene sets (sting_sasp.gmx, grVsen_degs.gmx) or canonical 
pathway gene sets (c2cp) available at MsigDB (http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/
msigdb/index.jsp). Genes with low average expression and variance across all samples 
(expression < 0.5, variance < 0.02) were excluded from the GCT file.
A group of histone genes shows some degree of differential expression in our experiment 
and these genes are found in many different c2cp gene sets such as 
REACTOME_RNA_POL_I_TRANSCRIPTION and 
REACTOME_MEIOTIC_RECOMBINATION. These gene sets show enrichment in our 
arrested cells with complex karyotypes. Because our experiment depends on polyA tail 
purification of mRNAs for sequencing and given the controversy surrounding the polyA 
status of histone mRNAs, we have excluded the gene sets dominated by histone genes from 
our GSEA summary in order to highlight other biological processes.
DNA Combing—RPE-1 cells were treated with 2 μM AZ3146 or vehicle control for 24 
hours. The cells were then washed and arrested in late G1 by treatment with Mimosine for 
24 hours. Mimosine was removed and, cells were placed into fresh medium. Three hours 
later cells were pulsed at 37°C with 25 μM IdU for 60minu tes and chased with 200 μM 
CldU for 60 minutes. After labeling, cells were harvested and washed twice with PBS. Cells 
were re-suspended in 50 μl of PBS to a final concentration of 0.5×106 cells/ml. Cells were 
incubated at 42°C for 2–3 minutes and mixed with equal volume of 1.5 % low melting 
agarose (made in PBS and pre-warmed to 42°C) and cast into plug molds and allowed to set 
at 4°C for half an hour. The plugs w ere digested with Proteinase K for a total of 60 hours at 
50°C with solution changes eve ry 12 hours. The plugs were washed with TE and the 
combed fibers were stained as previously described (Iyer et al., 2016). Fibers were 
visualized using a Zeiss Axioskop 2 Plus epifluorescence microscope with a 100x Plan-
NEOFLUAR oil objective and imaged using a SPOT monochrome cooled-CCD camera. 
Fibers were measured using ImageJ. Pixels were converted to kb using λ DNA as a 
standard. Analysis of the data was automated using custom-made MATLAB scripts.
For fork stall rate estimation, two unidirectional forks moving in the same direction on a 
fiber (green-red-unlabeled-green-red or red-green-unlabeled-red-green) were inferred to 
contain a stalled fork in between them. Specifically, stalled forks were recognized by red-
unlabeled-green (RUG) or green-unlabeled-red (GUR) patterns. The frequency of such 
patterns in the dataset was used to identify the apparent stall rate. In addition, two forks 
moving away from each other on a fiber (a RGUGR pattern) can be interpreted as forks 
elongating from a single origin in the middle or two origins whose forks on the inner side 
have both stalled. To estimate the stall rate across the entire dataset, the probability of forks 
Santaguida et al.
Page 15
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 stalling was estimated from the unambiguous stall events and extrapolated to ambiguous 
events to determine the net stall rate (Iyer and Rhind, 2017).
Karyotype analysis—Karyotype determination by single cell sequencing was performed 
as previously described (Knouse et al., 2014). Briefly, single cells were isolated by 
microaspiration, and genomic DNA was amplified using the GenomePlex Single Cell Whole 
Genome Amplification Kit (Sigma). Amplified DNA was purified, barcoded, pooled, and 
sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq2000. Sequencing reads were aligned using BWA (0.6.1). 
HMMcopy (0.1.1) was used to estimate gene copy number in 500-kb bins. Cells with high 
variability in copy number across bins were excluded from the analysis.
Karyotype analysis by G-banding was performed by Cell Line Genetics (Madison, WI).
Cytokine measurement—Euploid and cells with complex karyotypes were isolated and 
placed into fresh medium for 36 hours. Then, medium was harvested and cell number 
determined using a Cellometer AutoT4 (Nexcelom). Levels of secreted cytokines were 
determined using the human cytokine array kit (R&D Systems) following the manufacturer’s 
instructions and normalized to total number of cells.
ELISA measurement—Euploid and cells with complex karyotypes were isolated and the 
levels of NF-κB p65, phospho- NF-κB p65 (Ser536), phospho-SAPK/JNK (Thr183/
Tyr185), phospho-p38 MAPK (Thr180/Tyr182), phospho-Stat3 (Tyr705) and phospho-IκB-
α (Ser32) were measured by a solid phase sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(PathScan Inflammation Multi-Target Sandwich ELISA Kit, Cell Signaling Technology) 
following the manufacturer’s instructions.
FACS—Euploid and arrested cells with complex karyotypes were generated as described 
above and the levels of MICA/B, CD155/PVR, CD112, ULBP1 and ULBP2 were measured 
by flow cytometry and analyzed using FlowJo software. Forward (FSC-A) scatter was used 
to determine the cell size distribution of the cell population.
NK-mediated cell death assay—51Chromium release assays are traditionally used to 
determine the cytotoxicity of immune cells (Brunner et al., 1968). Because of concerns over 
spillage during the repeated nocodazole shake-offs necessary to generate aneuploidy arrested 
cell populations, we did not use this assay. Instead we followed cell killing by life-cell 
microscopy. In this assay, euploid and aneuploidy arrested cells were generated as described 
above and plated into a 12 well plate at 104 cells/well. 12 hours later, cells were placed in 
NK92 growth medium for 24 hours and then co-cultured in the presence of NK92 cells at a 
target:effector ratio of 1:10 for 24 hours. For antibody-blocking experiments, NK92 cells 
were pre-incubated with 20 μg/ml anti-NKG2D antibody (R&D systems) for three hours. 
Dead cells, together with NK92 cells, were gently removed. Adherent cells were counted 
using a Cellometer AutoT4 (Nexcelom) and normalized to cells grown under the same 
condition but in the absence of NK92 cells.
We note that the kinetics of NK92 cell mediated killing of aneuploidy arrested cells is slower 
than what is usually seen with the 51Chromium release assay (Brunner et al., 1968). This 
Santaguida et al.
Page 16
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 difference could be biological, that is NK92 cells take longer to become activated by 
aneuploid arrested cells than by other target cells. We favor the idea that differences in assay 
sensitivity are responsible for the slow NK92 cell response that we observe. To detect 
release of 51Chromium from cells membrane perforation has to occur. In contrast, life cell 
imaging based assessment of cell death requires the complete lysis of cells, which is likely 
to take longer than membrane perforation.
RNAi—For RNAi experiments, RPE-1 cells were plated at about 25–30% of confluence 12 
hours before transfection. Negative control siRNA (with sequence that do not target any 
gene product) or oligos targeting Mad2 were purchased from Life Technologies (catalogue 
number 4390846 and 4392420/s8391, respectively) and transfected with Lipofectamine 
RNAiMAX (Life Technologies) at final concentration of 10 nM following the 
manufacturer’s instruction.
β-galactosidase staining—Euploid and arrested cells with complex karyotypes were 
plated into a 6 well plate at 106 cells/well, allowed to attach overnight, and then stained 
using the Senescence β-Galactosidase Staining Kit (Cell Signaling Technology) following 
the manufacturer’s instructions.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism software. Details of the statistical 
tests employed are reported in figure legends. Error bars represent SEM unless otherwise 
indicated. All experiments were performed in two or more replicates and at least 50 cells/
condition/replicate were analyzed.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
The RNA-seq data sets generated for this study can be accessed at Gene Expression 
Omnibus (GEO) database with the accession number GSE83647.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank members of the Amon lab for discussions and reading of the manuscript and Charlie Whittaker of the 
Barbara K. Ostrom (1978) Bioinformatics and Computing Facility KI in the Swanson Biotechnology Center for 
help with the gene expression analysis. Work in the Amon lab is supported by grants from the NIH (CA206157 and 
GM118066) and the Kathy and Curt Marble Cancer Research Fund. A. A. is an investigator of the Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute, the Paul F. Glenn Center for Biology of Aging Research at MIT and the Ludwig Institute for 
Cancer Research. S. S. was supported by the American Italian Cancer Foundation (AICF), by a Fellowship in 
Cancer Research from Marie Curie Actions and the Italian Association for Cancer Research (AIRC) and by a KI 
Quinquennial Cancer Research Fellowship. K.A.K. is supported by National Institute of General Medical Sciences 
Training Grant T32GM007753. Work in the Rhind lab was supported by grant GM98815 from NIGMS. Work in 
the Desai group is supported by grant GM074215 from NIGMS and by the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research; 
A.K.R. acknowledges support from UC San Diego’s Cancer Cell Biology Training Grant (NIH-NCI-T32-
CA067754). We thank Andy Shiau (Head, Ludwig Small Molecule Discovery group) for providing inhibitors and 
for access to high-content imaging and tissue culture equipment.
Santaguida et al.
Page 17
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
Baker DJ, Jeganathan KB, Cameron JD, Thompson M, Juneja S, Kopecka A, Kumar R, Jenkins RB, de 
Groen PC, Roche P, van Deursen JM. BubR1 insufficiency causes early onset of aging-associated 
phenotypes and infertility in mice. Nat Genet. 2004; 36:744–749. DOI: 10.1038/ng1382 [PubMed: 
15208629] 
Bakhoum SF, Danilova OV, Kaur P, Levy NB, Compton DA. Chromosomal Instability Substantiates 
Poor Prognosis in Patients with Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:7704–
7711. DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2049 [PubMed: 22184286] 
Beach RR, Ricci-Tam C, Brennan CM, Moomau CA, Hsu PH, Hua B, Silberman RE, Springer M, 
Amon A. Aneuploidy Causes Non-genetic Individuality. Cell. 2017; 169:229–242. e21. DOI: 
10.1016/j.cell.2017.03.021 [PubMed: 28388408] 
Blank HM, Sheltzer JM, Meehl CM, Amon A. Mitotic entry in the presence of DNA damage is a 
widespread property of aneuploidy in yeast. Mol Biol Cell. 2015; 26:1440–1451. DOI: 10.1091/
mbc.E14-10-1442 [PubMed: 25694455] 
Brunner KT, Mauel J, Cerottini JC, Chapuis B. Quantitative assay of the lytic action of immune 
lymphoid cells on 51-Cr-labelled allogeneic target cells in vitro; inhibition by isoantibody and by 
drugs. Immunology. 1968; 14:181–196. [PubMed: 4966657] 
Chen G, Mulla WA, Kucharavy A, Tsai HJ, Rubinstein B, Conkright J, McCroskey S, Bradford WD, 
Weems L, Haug JS, Seidel CW, Berman J, Li R. Targeting the adaptability of heterogeneous 
aneuploids. Cell. 2015; 160:771–784. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.01.026 [PubMed: 25679766] 
Chien Y, Scuoppo C, Wang X, Fang X, Balgley B, Bolden JE, Premsrirut P, Luo W, Chicas A, Lee CS, 
Kogan SC, Lowe SW. Control of the senescence-associated secretory phenotype by NF-κB 
promotes senescence and enhances chemosensitivity. Genes & Development. 2011; 25:2125–2136. 
DOI: 10.1101/gad.17276711 [PubMed: 21979375] 
Colombo R, Caldarelli M, Mennecozzi M, Giorgini ML, Sola F, Cappella P, Perrera C, Depaolini SR, 
Rusconi L, Cucchi U, Avanzi N, Bertrand JA, Bossi RT, Pesenti E, Galvani A, Isacchi A, Colotta F, 
Donati D, Moll J. Targeting the Mitotic Checkpoint for Cancer Therapy with NMS-P715, an 
Inhibitor of MPS1 Kinase. Cancer Research. 2010; 70:10255–10264. DOI: 
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2101 [PubMed: 21159646] 
Crasta K, Ganem NJ, Dagher R, Lantermann AB, Ivanova EV, Pan Y, Nezi L, Protopopov A, 
Chowdhury D, Pellman D. DNA breaks and chromosome pulverization from errors in mitosis. 
Nature. 2012; doi: 10.1038/nature10802
Davoli T, Uno H, Wooten EC, Elledge SJ. Tumor aneuploidy correlates with markers of immune 
evasion and with reduced response to immunotherapy. Science. 2017; 355:eaaf8399.doi: 10.1126/
science.aaf8399 [PubMed: 28104840] 
Davoli T, Xu AW, Mengwasser KE, Sack LM, Yoon JC, Park PJ, Elledge SJ. Cumulative 
haploinsufficiency and triplosensitivity drive aneuploidy patterns and shape the cancer genome. 
Cell. 2013; 155:948–962. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.011 [PubMed: 24183448] 
Dodgson SE, Kim S, Costanzo M, Baryshnikova A, Morse DL, Kaiser CA, Boone C, Amon A. 
Chromosome-Specific and Global Effects of Aneuploidy in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics. 
2016; 202:1395–1409. DOI: 10.1534/genetics.115.185660 [PubMed: 26837754] 
Freund A, Orjalo AV, Desprez PY, Campisi J. Inflammatory networks during cellular senescence: 
causes and consequences. Trends in Molecular Medicine. 2010; 16:238–246. DOI: 10.1016/
j.molmed.2010.03.003 [PubMed: 20444648] 
Gordon DJ, Resio B, Pellman D. Causes and consequences of aneuploidy in cancer. Nat Rev Genet. 
2012; 13:189–203. DOI: 10.1038/nrg3123 [PubMed: 22269907] 
Hassold T, Hunt P. To err (meiotically) is human: the genesis of human aneuploidy. Nat Rev Genet. 
2001; 2:280–291. DOI: 10.1038/35066065 [PubMed: 11283700] 
Hatch EM, Fischer AH, Deerinck TJ, Hetzer MW. Catastrophic Nuclear Envelope Collapse in Cancer 
Cell Micronuclei. Cell. 2013; 154:47–60. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.06.007 [PubMed: 23827674] 
Heilig CE, Löffler H, Mahlknecht U, Janssen JWG, Ho AD, Jauch A, Krämer A. Chromosomal 
instability correlates with poor outcome in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes irrespectively 
Santaguida et al.
Page 18
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of the cytogenetic risk group. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine. 2009; 14:895–902. 
DOI: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2009.00905.x [PubMed: 19754665] 
Hewitt L, Tighe A, Santaguida S, White AM, Jones CD, Musacchio A, Green S, Taylor SS. Sustained 
Mps1 activity is required in mitosis to recruit O-Mad2 to the Mad1-C-Mad2 core complex. J Cell 
Biol. 2010; 190:25–34. DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201002133 [PubMed: 20624899] 
Hinchcliffe EH, Day CA, Karanjeet KB, Fadness S, Langfald A, Vaughan KT, Dong Z. Chromosome 
missegregation during anaphase triggers p53 cell cycle arrest through histone H3.3 Ser31 
phosphorylation. Nat Cell Biol. 2016; 18:668–675. DOI: 10.1038/ncb3348 [PubMed: 27136267] 
Hodgkin, J. WormBook, The C. elegans Research Community, editor. Karyotype, ploidy, and gene 
dosage. 2005. http://www.wormbook.org
Holland AJ, Cleveland DW. Boveri revisited: chromosomal instability, aneuploidy and tumorigenesis. 
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2009; 10:478–487. DOI: 10.1038/nrm2718 [PubMed: 19546858] 
Houchmandzadeh B, Marko JF, Chatenay D, Libchaber A. Elasticity and structure of eukaryote 
chromosomes studied by micromanipulation and micropipette aspiration. J Cell Biol. 1997; 139:1–
12. [PubMed: 9314524] 
Iannello A, Thompson TW, Ardolino M, Lowe SW, Raulet DH. p53-dependent chemokine production 
by senescent tumor cells supports NKG2D-dependent tumor elimination by natural killer cells. J 
Exp Med. 2013; 210:2057–2069. DOI: 10.1084/jem.20130783 [PubMed: 24043758] 
Iyer DR, Rhind N. Replication Fork Slowing And Stalling are Distinct, Checkpoint-Independent 
Consequences of Replicating Damaged DNA. 2017; bioRxiv. doi: 10.1101/122895
Iyer, Das, Rhind. Cold Spring Harb Protoc. 2016. Analysis of DNA Replication in Fission Yeast by 
Combing. 
Janssen A, van der Burg M, Szuhai K, Kops GJPL, Medema RH. Chromosome Segregation Errors as a 
Cause of DNA Damage and Structural Chromosome Aberrations. Science. 2011; 333:1895–1898. 
DOI: 10.1126/science.1210214 [PubMed: 21960636] 
Knouse KA, Wu J, Whittaker CA, Amon A. Single cell sequencing reveals low levels of aneuploidy 
across mammalian tissues. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2014; 111:13409–
13414. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1415287111
Kops GJPL, Weaver BAA, Cleveland DW. On the road to cancer: aneuploidy and the mitotic 
checkpoint. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005; 5:773–785. DOI: 10.1038/nrc1714 [PubMed: 16195750] 
Krizhanovsky V, Yon M, Dickins RA, Hearn S, Simon J, Miething C, Yee H, Zender L, Lowe SW. 
Senescence of Activated Stellate Cells Limits Liver Fibrosis. Cell. 2008; 134:657–667. DOI: 
10.1016/j.cell.2008.06.049 [PubMed: 18724938] 
Kruiswijk F, Labuschagne CF, Vousden KH. p53 in survival, death and metabolic health: a lifeguard 
with a licence to kill. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015; 16:393–405. DOI: 10.1038/nrm4007 
[PubMed: 26122615] 
Kyriakis JM, Avruch J. Mammalian mitogen-activated protein kinase signal transduction pathways 
activated by stress and inflammation. Physiol Rev. 2001; 81:807–869. [PubMed: 11274345] 
Lambrus BG, Holland AJ. A New Mode of Mitotic Surveillance. Trends Cell Biol. 2017; :1–8. DOI: 
10.1016/j.tcb.2017.01.004 [PubMed: 27810282] 
Lan YY, Londoño D, Bouley R, Rooney MS, Hacohen N. Dnase2a Deficiency Uncovers Lysosomal 
Clearance of Damaged Nuclear DNA via Autophagy. CellReports. 2014; 9:180–192. DOI: 
10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.074
Lee AJX, Endesfelder D, Rowan AJ, Walther A, Birkbak NJ, Futreal PA, Downward J, Szallasi Z, 
Tomlinson IPM, Howell M, Kschischo M, Swanton C. Chromosomal Instability Confers Intrinsic 
Multidrug Resistance. Cancer Research. 2011; 71:1858–1870. DOI: 
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3604 [PubMed: 21363922] 
Li M, Fang X, Baker DJ, Guo L, Gao X, Wei Z, Han S, Van Deursen JM, Zhang P. The ATM-p53 
pathway suppresses aneuploidy-induced tumorigenesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences. 2010; 107:14188–14193. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1005960107
Lindsley DL, Sandler L, Baker BS, Carpenter AT, Denell RE, Hall JC, Jacobs PA, Miklos GL, Davis 
BK, Gethmann RC, Hardy RW, Steven AH, Miller M, Nozawa H, Parry DM, Gould-Somero M. 
Segmental aneuploidy and the genetic gross structure of the Drosophila genome. Genetics. 1972; 
71:157–184. [PubMed: 4624779] 
Santaguida et al.
Page 19
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Lorke DE. Developmental characteristics of trisomy 19 mice. Acta Anat (Basel). 1994; 150(3):159–69. 
[PubMed: 7817712] 
López-García C, Sansregret L, Domingo E, McGranahan N, Hobor S, Birkbak NJ, Horswell S, 
Grönroos E, Favero F, Rowan AJ, Matthews N, Begum S, Phillimore B, Burrell R, Oukrif D, 
Spencer-Dene B, Kovac M, Stamp G, Stewart A, Danielsen H, Novelli M, Tomlinson I, Swanton 
C. BCL9L Dysfunction Impairs Caspase-2 Expression Permitting Aneuploidy Tolerance in 
Colorectal Cancer. Cancer Cell. 2017; 31:79–93. DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.11.001 [PubMed: 
28073006] 
Maciejowski J, Li Y, Bosco N, Campbell PJ, de Lange T. Chromothripsis and Kataegis Induced by 
Telomere Crisis. Cell. 2015; 163:1641–1654. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.054 [PubMed: 
26687355] 
Mayer TU, Kapoor TM, Haggarty SJ, King RW, Schreiber SL, Mitchison TJ. Small molecule inhibitor 
of mitotic spindle bipolarity identified in a phenotype-based screen. 1999; 286:971–974. DOI: 
10.1126/science.286.5441.971
Meena JK, Cerutti A, Beichler C, Morita Y, Bruhn C, Kumar M, Kraus JM, Speicher MR, Wang ZQ, 
Kestler HA, d’Adda di Fagagna F, Gunes C, Rudolph KL. Telomerase abrogates aneuploidy-
induced telomere replication stress, senescence and cell depletion. EMBO J. 2015; :1–14. DOI: 
10.15252/embj.201490070
Minocherhomji S, Ying S, Bjerregaard VA, Bursomanno S, Aleliunaite A, Wu W, Mankouri HW, Shen 
H, Liu Y, Hickson ID. Replication stress activates DNA repair synthesis in mitosis. Nature. 2015; 
528:286–290. DOI: 10.1038/nature16139 [PubMed: 26633632] 
Murga M, Lecona E, Kamileri I, Díaz M, Lugli N, Sotiriou SK, Anton ME, Méndez J, Halazonetis TD, 
Fernandez-Capetillo O. POLD3 Is Haploinsufficient for DNA Replication in Mice. Molecular 
Cell. 2016; :1–8. DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.07.007
Niwa O, Tange Y, Kurabayashi A. Growth arrest and chromosome instability in aneuploid yeast. Yeast. 
2006; 23:937–950. DOI: 10.1002/yea.1411 [PubMed: 17072887] 
O’Driscoll M. Haploinsufficiency of DNA Damage Response Genes and their Potential Influence in 
Human Genomic Disorders. Curr Genomics. 2008; 9:137–146. DOI: 
10.2174/138920208784340795 [PubMed: 19440510] 
Ohashi A, Ohori M, Iwai K, Nakayama Y, Nambu T, Morishita D, Kawamoto T, Miyamoto M, 
Hirayama T, Okaniwa M, Banno H, Ishikawa T, Kandori H, Iwata K. Aneuploidy generates 
proteotoxic stress and DNA damage concurrently with p53-mediated post-mitotic apoptosis in 
SAC-impaired cells. Nature Communications. 2015; 6:7668.doi: 10.1038/ncomms8668
Oromendia AB, Dodgson SE, Amon A. Aneuploidy causes proteotoxic stress in yeast. Genes & 
Development. 2012; 26:2696–2708. DOI: 10.1101/gad.207407.112 [PubMed: 23222101] 
Passerini V, Ozeri-Galai E, de Pagter MS, Donnelly N, Schmalbrock S, Kloosterman WP, Kerem B, 
Storchova Z. The presence of extra chromosomes leads to genomic instability. Nature 
Communications. 2016; 7:10754.doi: 10.1038/ncomms10754
Pfau SJ, Silberman RE, Knouse KA, Amon A. Aneuploidy impairs hematopoietic stem cell fitness and 
is selected against in regenerating tissues in vivo. Genes & Development. 2016; 30:1395–1408. 
DOI: 10.1101/gad.278820.116 [PubMed: 27313317] 
Raulet DH, Guerra N. Oncogenic stress sensed by the immune system: role of natural killer cell 
receptors. Nature Publishing Group. 2009; 9:568–580. DOI: 10.1038/nri2604
Roper RJ, Reeves RH. Understanding the basis for Down syndrome phenotypes. PLoS Genet. 2006; 
2:e50.doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020050 [PubMed: 16596169] 
Rutledge SD, Douglas TA, Nicholson JM, Vila-Casadesús M, Kantzler CL, Wangsa D, Barroso-Vilares 
M, Kale SD, Logarinho E, Cimini D. Selective advantage of trisomic human cells cultured in non-
standard conditions. Nature Publishing Group. 2016; 6:22828.doi: 10.1038/srep22828
Sansregret L, Patterson JO, Dewhurst S, López-García C, Koch A, McGranahan N, Chao WCH, Barry 
DJ, Rowan A, Instrell R, Horswell S, Way M, Howell M, Singleton MR, Medema RH, Nurse P, 
Petronczki M, Swanton C. APC/C Dysfunction Limits Excessive Cancer Chromosomal Instability. 
Cancer Discovery. 2017; 7:1–17. DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-16-0645
Santaguida S, Amon A. Short- and long-term effects of chromosome mis-segregation and aneuploidy. 
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015a; 16:473–485. DOI: 10.1038/nrm4025 [PubMed: 26204159] 
Santaguida et al.
Page 20
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Santaguida S, Amon A. Aneuploidy triggers a TFEB-mediated lysosomal stress response. Autophagy. 
2015b; 11:2383–2384. DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1110670 [PubMed: 26571033] 
Santaguida S, Tighe A, D’Alise AM, Taylor SS, Musacchio A. Dissecting the role of MPS1 in 
chromosome biorientation and the spindle checkpoint through the small molecule inhibitor 
reversine. J Cell Biol. 2010; 190:73–87. DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201001036 [PubMed: 20624901] 
Santaguida S, Vasile E, White E, Amon A. Aneuploidy-induced cellular stresses limit autophagic 
degradation. Genes & Development. 2015; 29:2010–2021. DOI: 10.1101/gad.269118.115 
[PubMed: 26404941] 
Schneider WM, Chevillotte MD, Rice CM. Interferon-stimulated genes: a complex web of host 
defenses. Annu Rev Immunol. 2014; 32:513–545. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-
immunol-032713-120231 [PubMed: 24555472] 
Schumacher TN, Schreiber RD. Neoantigens in cancer immunotherapy. Science. 2015; 348:69–74. 
DOI: 10.1126/science.aaa4971 [PubMed: 25838375] 
Sheltzer JM, Blank HM, Pfau SJ, Tange Y, George BM, Humpton TJ, Brito IL, Hiraoka Y, Niwa O, 
Amon A. Aneuploidy drives genomic instability in yeast. Science. 2011; 333:1026–1030. DOI: 
10.1126/science.1206412 [PubMed: 21852501] 
Sheltzer JM, Ko JH, Replogle JM, Habibe Burgos NC, Chung ES, Meehl CM, Sayles NM, Passerini V, 
Storchova Z, Amon A. Single-chromosome Gains Commonly Function as Tumor Suppressors. 
Cancer Cell. 2017; 31:240–255. DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.12.004 [PubMed: 28089890] 
Sheltzer JM, Torres EM, Dunham MJ, Amon A. Transcriptional consequences of aneuploidy. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2012; 109:12644–12649. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
1209227109
Stingele S, Stoehr G, Peplowska K, Cox JUR, Mann M, Storchova Z. Global analysis of genome, 
transcriptome and proteome reveals the response to aneuploidy in human cells. Mol Syst Biol. 
2012; 8:1–12. DOI: 10.1038/msb.2012.40
Sullivan KD, Lewis HC, Hill AA, Pandey A, Jackson LP, Cabral JM, Smith KP, Liggett LA, Gomez 
EB, Galbraith MD, DeGregori J, Espinosa JM. Trisomy 21 consistently activates the interferon 
response. eLife. 2016; 5:1709.doi: 10.7554/eLife.16220
Tang YC, Amon A. Gene Copy-Number Alterations: A Cost-Benefit Analysis. Cell. 2013; 152:394–
405. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.11.043 [PubMed: 23374337] 
Tang YC, Williams BR, Siegel JJ, Amon A. Identification of aneuploidy-selective antiproliferation 
compounds. Cell. 2011; 144:499–512. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.01.017 [PubMed: 21315436] 
Thompson SL, Compton DA. Proliferation of aneuploid human cells is limited by a p53-dependent 
mechanism. J Cell Biol. 2010; 188:369–381. DOI: 10.1083/jcb.128.1.95 [PubMed: 20123995] 
Torres EM, Sokolsky T, Tucker CM, Chan LY, Boselli M, Dunham MJ, Amon A. Effects of aneuploidy 
on cellular physiology and cell division in haploid yeast. Science. 2007; 317:916–924. DOI: 
10.1126/science.1142210 [PubMed: 17702937] 
Uetake Y, Sluder G. Prolonged prometaphase blocks daughter cell proliferation despite normal 
completion of mitosis. Curr Biol. 2010; 20:1666–1671. DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.08.018 [PubMed: 
20832310] 
Walther A, Walther A, Houlston R, Tomlinson I. Association between chromosomal instability and 
prognosis in colorectal cancer: a meta-analysis. Gut. 2008; 57:941–950. DOI: 10.1136/gut.
2007.135004 [PubMed: 18364437] 
Williams BR, Prabhu VR, Hunter KE, Glazier CM, Whittaker CA, Housman DE, Amon A. 
Aneuploidy affects proliferation and spontaneous immortalization in mammalian cells. Science. 
2008; 322:703–709. DOI: 10.1126/science.1160058 [PubMed: 18974345] 
Zhang CZ, Spektor A, Cornils H, Francis JM, Jackson EK, Liu S, Meyerson M, Pellman D. 
Chromothripsis from DNA damage in micronuclei. Nature. 2015; 522:179–184. DOI: 10.1038/
nature14493 [PubMed: 26017310] 
Zhu J, Pavelka N, Bradford WD, Rancati G, Li R. Karyotypic determinants of chromosome instability 
in aneuploid budding yeast. PLoS Genet. 2012; 8:e1002719.doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002719 
[PubMed: 22615582] 
Santaguida et al.
Page 21
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
p53 activation is a potential but not obligatory outcome of chromosome mis-
segregation
•
Chromosome segregation errors lead to replication stress and DNA damage
•
Aneuploidy drives genome instability and evolution of complex karyotypes
•
Aneuploid cells with complex karyotypes are cleared by natural killer cells
Santaguida et al.
Page 22
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. p53 activation is not an obligatory consequence of chromosome mis-segregation
(A) Representative images of hTERT RPE1 cells co-expressing PCNA::GFP and RFP::H2B. 
Unsynchronized cells were treated with DMSO or 0.5 μM reversine and then immediately 
filmed for 48h. Cells were filmed every 5 min for 6 hrs to capture mitotic mis-segregation 
events and then every 20 min for 42 hrs to capture daughter cell S phase timing. Scale bar 5 
μm.
(B) Daughter cell fate in NMS-P715-treated hTERT RPE1 cells co-expressing PCNA::GFP 
and RFP::H2B. Unsynchronized cells were treated with DMSO or 1μM NMS-P715 and 
immediately filmed as described in (A). Bars represent percentage of daughter cells with the 
indicated cell fate.
(C–E) Schematic representation of experimental method used to separate cells that arrest in 
G1 following chromosome mis-segregation from cells that continue to divide (C). RPE-1 
cells were synchronized at the G1/S transition by thymidine treatment. Six hours after 
Thymidine release, cells were treated with 0.5 μM reversine for 12 hours. Six hours later 
cells were treated with nocodazole. 12 hours later, mitotic cells were removed by shake-off 
Santaguida et al.
Page 23
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and single cells that detached from the plate were sequenced to determine the karyotype of 
cells that continue to proliferate after chromosome mis-segregation (cycling). The cells that 
were not removed by shake-off were placed into fresh medium containing nocodazole. This 
procedure was repeated three times in order to remove all dividing cells. The cells that 
remained attached to the plate represented arrested cells (arrested) and their karyotype was 
determined by single cell sequencing. Heat map in (D) shows chromosome gains and losses 
in the indicated cell populations. Partially colored boxes represent segmental aneuploidies 
and are marked as “yes” in the column SA (for segmental aneuploidies). The graph in (E) 
shows the degree of genome imbalance, defined as the total number of genes that are either 
gained or lost as a consequence of whole chromosome and segmental aneuploidies (mean ± 
SEM).
(F) RPE-1 cells were synchronized at the G1/S transition by thymidine treatment. Six hours 
after Thymidine wash-out, cells were treated with 0.5μM reversine or DMSO (vehicle 
control) for 12 hours. After drug wash-out, cells were grown for 66 hours (for a total of 72 
hours after mitosis) to generate populations of aneuploid dividing cells (aneuploid cycling). 
Arrested aneuploid cells were generated as described in Figure 1C. The levels of p53, p21 
and p16 were determined by Western blot analysis. Actin served as a loading control.
See also Figure S1, S2
Santaguida et al.
Page 24
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. DNA damage incurred during chromosome mis-segregation causes p53 activation
(A) RPE-1 cells were synchronized at the G1/S transition by thymidine treatment. After 
Thymidine wash-out, cells were treated with 0.5μM reversine or DMSO (vehicle control). 
The average number of γ-H2AX foci per cell was determined at the indicated times (mean ± 
SEM). ***: p value < 0.0001; **; NS: not significant, analysis of variance plus Bonferroni’s 
test. F test of variance: 3 hour time point: 7.54718E-05; 6 hour time point: 0.002922704
(B) RPE-1 cells were exposed to a single round of siRNA-mediated depletion of Mad2 or 
control (Ctrl) oligo followed by thymidine arrest. 14h after thymidine wash-out (which 
corresponds roughly to 2 hours after mitosis), control- and Mad2-depleted cells were 
exposed to the indicated kinase inhibitors and EdU. The percentage of EdU-positive cells 
was determined 36 hours after thymidine release (~24 hours after mitosis). The graph shows 
the percentage of EdU-positive cells normalized to control-depleted cells. The following 
small molecule inhibitors were used: VE821 (ATR inhibitor, working concentration 1 μM), 
SB203580 (p38 inhibitor, working concentration 10 μM), Chk2 inhibitor II (Chk2 inhibitor, 
working concentration 10 μM). Graph shows mean ± SEM. ***: p value < 0.0001, analysis 
of variance plus Bonferroni’s test.
Santaguida et al.
Page 25
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (C) RPE-1 cells, either wild type for p53 or lacking the tumorsuppressor (p53 CRISPR), 
were synchronized at the G1/S transition by thymidine treatment. After thymidine wash-out, 
cells were treated with 0.5 μM reversine or DMSO (vehicle control). 14 hours later, the drug 
was washed-out and cells were exposed to EdU. Percentage of EdU-positive cells was 
determined at the indicated times. Graph shows mean ± SEM.
See also Figure S3
Santaguida et al.
Page 26
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Chromosome mis-segregation causes replication stress
(A, B) RPE-1 cells were treated with reversine (0.5μM; aneuploid) or vehicle control 
(euploid) for 24 hours. The inhibitor was then washed out and cells were arrested in G1 by 
treatment with Mimosine for 24 hours. After Mimosine wash-out, cells were placed into 
fresh medium and three hours later pulse labeled with IdU (green) for 60 min and chased 
with CldU (red) for 60 min. Sample fiber images from euploid and aneuploid cells are 
shown in (A). Fork rate, fork density and fork stall rate are shown in (B).
(C, D) Unsynchronized RPE-1 cells co-expressing PCNA::GFP and RFP::H2B were treated 
with DMSO or reversine (2 μM), imaged every 5 min for 5 hrs to capture mitotic mis-
segregation events, and then imaged every 20 min for 48h to capture daughter cell S phase 
timing. Representative images of mother cell anaphase and one daughter cell S phase after 
treatment with DMSO or reversine are shown in (C). Quantification of the time interval from 
PCNA focus appearance to dissolution, a measure for S phase duration in living cells, is 
shown in (D). The analysis was performed on daughter cells whose mother cells divided 
prior to addition of reversine (reversine exposure occurred during G1) and on daughter cells 
whose mothers mis-segregated chromosomes in the presence of reversine (reversine 
exposure occurred during G2; mean ± SD). Scale bar 5 μm.
(E, F) RPE-1 cells were treated with 0.5μM reversine or vehicle control for 24 hours. The 
drug was then washed out and cells were synchronized in G1 using Mimosine for 24 hours. 
After Mimosine wash-out, cells were placed into fresh medium and 53BP1 foci were 
analyzed 4 hours later. Representative images (E) and quantification (F) are shown. Scale 
bar 5 μm.
See also Movie S1
Santaguida et al.
Page 27
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Chromosome mis-segregation results in genomic instability
(A, B) RPE-1 cells were synchronized at the G1/S transition by thymidine treatment. Six 
hours after Thymidine release, cells were treated with control vehicle (euploid) or 0.5 μM 
reversine (aneuploid) for 12 hours. 12 hours after drug wash-out, cells were treated with the 
CDK1 inhibitor RO-3306 for 12 hours to enrich for G2 cells. Cells were then released in 
fresh medium containing nocodazole and γ-H2AX foci were analyzed 2 hours later. CREST 
is used to mark centromeres. As a positive control, cells were treated with aphidicolin 18 
hours after thymidine release. Representative images are shown in (A). Quantification of γ-
H2AX foci is shown in (B). γ-H2AX is in green, CREST in red, DNA in blue (mean ± 
SEM). Scale bar 10 μm. **: p value < 0.01, analysis of variance plus Bonferroni’s test.
(C–F) RPE-1 cells stably expressing H2B-GFP were synchronized at the G1/S transition by 
thymidine treatment. Six hours after thymidine wash-out, cells were treated with control 
vehicle (euploid) or 0.5 μM reversine (aneuploid) for 12 hours. After drug wash-out, cells 
were filmed every 5′. Quantification of mitotic aberrations (lagging chromosomes and 
micronuclei) is shown in (E). Length of mitosis (nuclear envelope breakdown (NEBD) to 
DNA decondensation) is shown in (F; mean ± SEM).
(G) Cells were grown as described in Figure 4A. After RO-3306 wash-out, cells were 
released into fresh medium and fixed 90′ later to analyze DNA bridges in anaphase. 
Santaguida et al.
Page 28
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Representative images of DNA bridges are shown. PICH is in green, BLM in red, CREST in 
magenta, DNA in blue. Scale bar 10 μm.
See also Figure S4 and Movie S2
Santaguida et al.
Page 29
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Chromosome mis-segregation triggers the evolution of complex abnormal karyotypes
(A, B) Cells were grown as described in Figure 4A. After RO-3306 wash-out, cells were 
released into fresh medium and fixed 6 hours later to analyze 53BP1 foci in the following 
G1. Representative images are shown. 53BP1 is in red, γ-H2AX in green, CREST in 
magenta, DNA in blue. Quantification of 53BP1 foci in G1 is shown in (B). Scale bar 5 μm.
(C, D) Karyotype analysis after the first and second cell cycle following chromosome mis-
segregation (see Figure S5 for experimental details). The percentage of cells with more than 
2 chromosome changes (C) and the total number of chromosomal changes per cell (D) are 
Santaguida et al.
Page 30
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 shown for aneuploid cells after the first and second cell cycle following chromosome mis-
segregation. *: p value < 0.05, Student’s t test.
See also Figure S5
Santaguida et al.
Page 31
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Chromosome mis-segregation causes the generation of cells with complex karyotypes 
that undergo senescence
(A) RPE-1 cells were treated with reversine or control vehicle for 24 hours. Cells were 
exposed for 12 hours to nocodazole either after wash-out or 24 hours later, to determine the 
ability of cells to enter mitosis during the first or second cell cycle following chromosome 
mis-segregation (mean ± SEM).
(B) Schematic representation of the experimental method used to isolate arrested cells with 
complex karyotypes (see STAR methods for details). Shown below the cartoon is the 
percentage of cells that detached from the plate after each shake-off.
(C) Aneuploid arrested cells were isolated as described in STAR methods. Cells were 
exposed to EdU after reversine wash-out, plated on coverslips after the fourth nocodazole 
shake-off and fixed 12 hours later to determine the percentage of EdU-positive cells. Graph 
shows mean ± SEM.
(D, E) Aneuploid arrested cells were isolated as described in STAR methods and their 
karyotype determined by single cell sequencing. The heat map of chromosome gains and 
losses of arrested cells with complex karyotypes is shown in (D). Partially colored boxes 
represent segmental aneuploidies and are marked as “yes” in the column SA (for segmental 
aneuploidies). The graph in (E) shows the degree of genome imbalance, defined as the total 
number of genes that are either gained or lost as a consequence of whole chromosome and 
segmental aneuploidies (mean ± SEM). The “Cycling” sample is the same as presented in 
Figure 1E and is comprised of aneuploid cells able to divide.
Santaguida et al.
Page 32
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (F) RPE-1 cells were synchronized at the G1/S transition by thymidine treatment. Six hours 
after thymidine release, cells were treated with DMSO (euploid) or 0.5 μM reversine 
(aneuploid) for 12 hours. After wash-out, cells were placed into fresh medium and harvested 
18 or 66 hours later, which corresponds to 24 and 72 hours after mitosis, respectively. 
Arrested cells were obtained as described in Figure 6B. The levels of p53, p21, p16 and γ-
H2AX were determined by Western blot analysis. Actin served as a loading control. Euploid 
cells treated with doxorubicin for 6 or 12 hours were used as positive controls. Euploid and 
aneuploid samples represent cells that were initially treated with DMSO or 0.5 μM 
reversine, respectively.
(G) Euploid, aneuploid cycling and aneuploid arrested cells were generated as described in 
STAR methods. The graph shows the quantification of γ-H2AX foci per cell. Euploid cells 
treated with doxorubicin for 12 hours were used as a positive control. Graph shows mean ± 
SEM.
(H) Senescence-associated β-galactosidase (β-gal) activity was determined in euploid cells 
and arrested cells with complex karyotypes obtained as described in Figure 6B.
(I) The percentage of cycling and arrested euploid or aneuploid RPE-1 cells, either wild type 
or lacking p53, was determined following the scheme shown in Figure 6B. Graph shows the 
percentage of arrested cells or cells recovered after the indicated mitotic shake-offs.
See also Table S2, S3
Santaguida et al.
Page 33
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Aneuploidy triggers an immune response
(A) Canonical pathway gene set (c2cp of msigdb) enrichment for up-regulated genes in 
arrested cells with complex karyotypes. Normalized enrichment scores (NES) for the top 7 
up-regulated gene sets are shown. The columns on the right show the normalized enrichment 
score for these gene categories in gene expression data sets obtained from cells in which 
senescence was induced by DNA damage (Iannello et al., 2013; Krizhanovsky et al., 2008).
(B) Cytokine levels were determined in supernatants of euploid and arrested cells with 
complex karyotypes (obtained as described in Figure 6B). Graph shows the cytokine fold 
change in arrested cells with complex karyotypes normalized to euploid cells (mean ± 
SEM).
(C) Early passage wild-type and BUB1BH/H mouse embryonic fibroblasts were cultured and 
CCL2 levels were determined in culture supernatants.
(D–G) MICA/B (D), CD155/PVR (E) and ULBP2 (F) cell surface levels in euploid cells and 
aneuploid arrested cells (obtained as described in Figure 6B). Euploid cells treated with 
doxorubicin (100 ng/ml, 48 hours) were used as a positive control for CD155/PVR and 
ULBP2 expression. Graphs show fluorescence intensity of cells of similar size (gating see 
Figure S7). IgG2A isotype control was used for MICA/B, ULBP2 and ULBP1 staining in 
euploid cells (Figure S7B). IgG1 isotype control was used for CD155/PVR and Nectin-2/
CD112 in euploid cells (Figure S7A). Mean fluorescence intensities are listed in (G).
(H) Euploid and arrested cells with complex karyotypes were generated as described in 
Figure 6B and levels of the indicated protein determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (mean ± SEM).
Santaguida et al.
Page 34
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (I) Euploid and arrested cells with complex karyotypes were generated as described in 
Figure 6B. Cells were co-cultured with NK92 cells at a target:effector ratio of 1:10 and 
filmed every 10′ for 36 hours. Representative images from live imaging datasets are shown.
(J) Euploid and aneuploid arrested cells were generated as described in Figure 6B. Cells 
were seeded and allowed to attach to the plate for 12 hours, after which NK92 cells were 
introduced. At the indicated times, dead and NK92 cells were removed by gentle shake-off 
and the remaining cells were counted and are shown as a percentage of cells grown for the 
same time in the absence of NK92 cells (mean ± SD). ***: p value < 0.0001; *: p value < 
0.05; NS: not significant, analysis of variance plus Bonferroni’s test.
(K) Euploid and arrested cells with complex karyotypes and NK92 cells were cultured as in 
Figure 7J for 24 hours. For experiments with antibodies blocking NKG2D, NK92 cells were 
pre-incubated with 20 μg/ml anti-NKG2D antibody for three hours before co-culturing them 
with RPE-1 cells. Dead and NK92 cells were removed and the remaining cells were counted 
and normalized to cells grown under the same condition but without co-culture (mean ± 
SEM). ***: p value < 0.0001; NS: not significant, analysis of variance plus Bonferroni’s 
test.
See also Figure S6, S7 and Movie S3
Santaguida et al.
Page 35
Dev Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
