 ADHERENCE TO LONG-TERM THERAPIES
Evidence for action
World Health Organization 2003
 WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Adherence to long-term therapies: evidence for action.
1. Patient compliance
2. Long-term care
3. Drug therapy – utilization  
4. Chronic disease – therapy  
5. Health behavior
6. Evidence-based medicine
I.WHO Adherence to Long Term Therapies Project
II. Global Adherence Interdisciplinary Network.
ISBN 92 4 154599 2
(NLM classification:W 85)
© World Health Organization 2003
All rights reserved.
Publications of the World Health Organization can be obtained from Marketing and Dissemination,
World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel: +41 22 791 2476;
fax: +41 22 791 4857; email: bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce or translate
WHO publications – whether for sale or for noncommercial distribution – should be addressed to
Publications, at the above address (fax: +41 22 791 4806; email: permissions@who.int).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the
legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of 
its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there
may not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’products does not imply that they 
are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar
nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are
distinguished by initial capital letters.
The World Health Organization does not warrant that the information contained in this publication 
is complete and correct and shall not be liable for any damages incurred as a result of its use.
Printed in Switzerland.
All correspondence should be sent to the author. Eduardo Sabaté,World Health Organization,
avenue Appia 20, CH-1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (sabatee@who.int). Requests for free electronic
copies (pdf format only) should be sent to: adherence@who.int
 C O N T E N T S
Preface
V
Ackowledgement
VII
Scientific writers
VIII
Introduction
XI
Take-home messages
XIII
Section I – Setting the scene
1
Chapter I – Defining adherence
3
Chapter II – The magnitude of the problem of poor adherence
7
Chapter III – How does poor adherence affect policy makers and health managers?
11
Section II – Improving adherence rates: guidance for countries
17
Chapter IV – Lessons learned
19
Chapter V – Towards the solution
27
Chapter VI –How can improved adherence be translated into health 
and economics benefits?
39
Section III – Disease-specific reviews
45
Chapter VII – Asthma
47
Chapter VIII – Cancer (palliative care)
59
Chapter IX – Depression
65
Chapter X – Diabetes
71
Chapter XI – Epilepsy
87
Chapter XII – HIV/AIDS
95
Chapter XIII – Hypertension
107
Chapter XIV – Tobacco smoking cessation
115
Chapter XV – Tuberculosis
123
Annexes
133
Annex I – Behavioural mechanisms explaining adherence
135
Annex II – Statements by stakeholders
151
Annex III – Table of reported factors by condition and dimension
162
Annex IV – Table of reported interventions by condition and dimension
166
Annex V – Global adherence interdisciplinary network (GAIN)
171
Where to find a copy of this book
177
Official designated depositories libraries for WHO publications
179
Reference libraries for WHO publications
183
WHO official sales agents world wide
195
Selected WHO publications of related interest
197
A ready-to-use pamphlet for partners willing to promote this book
199
 WHO 2003
IV ❘
 Preface
Over the past few decades we have witnessed several phases in the development of approaches aimed
at ensuring that patients continue therapy for chronic conditions for long periods of time. Initially the
patient was thought to be the source of the “problem of compliance”
. Later, the role of the providers 
was also addressed. Now we acknowledge that a systems approach is required.The idea of compliance
is associated too closely with blame, be it of providers or patients and the concept of adherence is a
better way of capturing the dynamic and complex changes required of many players over long periods
to maintain optimal health in people with chronic diseases.
This report provides a critical review of what is known about adherence to long-term therapies.This is
achieved by looking beyond individual diseases. By including communicable diseases such as tuberculo-
sis and human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; mental and neurological
conditions such as depression and epilepsy; substance dependence (exemplified by smoking cessation);
as well as hypertension, asthma and palliative care for cancer, a broad range of policy options emerges.
Furthermore, this broader focus highlights certain common issues that need to be addressed with respect
to all chronic conditions regardless of their cause.These are primarily related to the way in which health
systems are structured, financed and operated.
We hope that readers of this report will recognize that simplistic approaches to improving the quality of
life of people with chronic conditions are not possible.What is required instead, is a deliberative approach
that starts with reviewing the way health professionals are trained and rewarded, and includes systemati-
cally tackling the many barriers patients and their families encounter as they strive daily to maintain opti-
mal health.
This report is intended to make a modest contribution to a much-needed debate about adherence.
It provides analysis and solutions, it recommends that more research be conducted, but critically
acknowledges the abundance of what we already know but do not apply.The potential rewards for
patients and societies of addressing adherence to long-term therapies are large.WHO urges the readers 
of this report to work with us as we make the rewards real.
Derek Yach
January 2003
❘ V
WHO 2003
 WHO 2003
VI ❘
 Acknowledgements
This report was edited by Eduardo Sabaté,WHO Medical Officer responsible for coordinating the WHO
Adherence to Long-term Therapies Project, Noncommuniclable Diseases department.
Deep appreciation is due to Rafael Bengoa, who envisioned the project and shaped the most crucial
elements of the report, Derek Yach, who provided consistent support, intellectual stimulation and leader-
ship to the project and Silvana De Castro, who provided valuable assistance with the many bibliograph-
ical reviews and with the writing of specific sections of this report.
Special appreciation goes to the scientific writers who provided their ideas and the material for the
report.Their dedication and voluntary contributions have been central to this work.Thanks are also due
to all the participants from WHO and the Global Adherence Interdisciplinary Network (GAIN) who by
their continuous involvement and input during the planning, resource collection and writing phases of
this project have given breadth and depth to the report.
Special thanks go to Steve Hotz for his intellectual support and hard work in helping to integrate the
information on behavioural knowledge and its practical implications. Several international professional
associations, in particular the International Society of Behavioural Medicine, the International Council of
Nurses, the International Union of Psychological Sciences, the International Pharmaceutical Federation,
and the World Organization of Family Doctors have played an important role in providing moral sup-
port and valuable input to the report.
Thanks are also due to Susan Kaplan, who edited the final text, and Tushita Bosonet, who was responsi-
ble for the artistic design.
The production of this report was made possible through the generous financial support of the gov-
ernements of United Kingdom, Finland, Netherlands, Norway and Switzerland.
❘ VII
WHO 2003
 Scientific writers
The scientific writers who were invited to contribute to the report are recognized scientists in adherence-
related issues.Their contributions were made voluntarily and have been incorporated following the
directions of the editor of the report. All of them signed a Declaration of Interest.They are listed below
in alphabetical order by topic. (Team leaders are indicated with an asterisk.)
WHO 2003
VIII ❘
Asthma
Bender, Bruce • Head • Pediatric Behavioral Health,
National Jewish Medical and Research Center • USA
Boulet, Louis-Philippe • Professor • Laval University,
Laval Hospital • Canada
Chaustre,Ismenia • Attending Physician and
Professor • “JM de los Ríos”Children’s Hospital •
Venezuela
Rand, Cynthia* • Associate Professor • Johns
Hopkins University • USA
Weinstein, Andrew • Researcher and Clinical
Practitioner • Christiana Medical Center • USA
With the active support of the WHO-NMH/MNC/
Chronic Respiratory Diseases unit
Behavioural mechanisms
Hotz Stephen* • University Research Fellow •
University of Ottawa • Canada
Kaptein, Ad A. • Head • Psychology unit, Leiden
University Medical Centre • The Netherlands
Pruitt, Sheri • Director of Behavioral Medicine •
Permanente Medical Group • USA
Sanchez Sosa, Juan • Professor • National
University of Mexico • Mexico
Willey, Cynthia • Professor of Pharmacoepidemio-
logy • University of Rhode Island • USA
Cancer
De Castro, Silvana* • Technical Officer • Adherence
Project, Department of Managment of
Communicable Diseases,WHO • Switzerland
Sabaté, Eduardo • Medical Officer • Adherence
Project, Department of Managment of
Communicable Diseases,WHO • Switzerland
With the active support of the WHO-NMH/MNC/
Program on Cancer Control unit
Depression
Peveler, Robert* • Head • Mental Health Group,
Community Clinical Sciences Division, School of
Medicine, University of Southampton • England
Tejada, Maria Luisa • Clinical practitioner • Hospital
of Nyon • Switzerland
With the active support of the 
WHO-NMH/MSD/Mental and behavioural disorders
unit
Diabetes
Karkashian, Christine* • Dean • School of
Psychology, Latina University • Costa Rica
Schlundt, David • Associate Professor of
Psychology • Vanderbilt University • USA
With the active support of the 
WHO-NMH/MNC/Diabetes unit
Epilepsy
Avanzini, Giuliano • President • International
League against Epilepsy • Italy 
de Boer, Hanneke M. • Global Campaign Co-Chair •
The International Bureau for Epilepsy/Stichting
Epilepsie Instellingen Nederland • the Netherlands
De Castro, Silvana* • Technical Officer • Adherence
Project, Department of Managment of
Communicable Diseases,WHO • Switzerland
Engel, Jerome Jr • Global Campaign Co-Chair •
International League against Epilepsy and
Director of the Seizure Disorder Center, University
of California at Los Angeles School of Medicine •
USA
Lee, Philip • President • International Bureau for
Epilepsy • Ireland
Sabaté, Eduardo • Medical Officer • Adherence
Project, Department of Managment of
Communicable Diseases,WHO • Switzerland
 With the active support of the 
WHO-NMH/MSD/Epilepsy unit, the International
League Against Epilepsy and the International
Bureau for Epilepsy
Human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)/acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS)
Chesney, Margaret A.* • Professor of Medicine •
University of California at San Francisco,
Prevention Sciences Group • USA
Farmer, Paul • Director • Partners in health •
Harvard University • USA
Leandre, Fernet • Director • Zanmi Lazante Health
Care • Haiti
Malow, Robert • Professor and Director • AIDS
Prevention Program, Florida International
University • USA
Starace, Fabrizio • Director • Consultation
Psychiatry and Behavioural Epidemiology Service,
Cotugno Hospital • Italy
With the active support of the WHO-HIV/AIDS
care unit
Hypertension
Mendis, Shanti* • Coordinator • Cardiovascular 
diseases • WHO-HQ
Salas, Maribel • Senior Researcher • Caro Research
Institute • USA
Smoking cessation
De Castro, Silvana • Technical Officer • Adherence
Project, Department of Managment of
Communicable Diseases,WHO • Switzerland
Lam,Tai Hing • Professor • Head Department of
Community Medicine and Behavioural Sciences,
University of Hong Kong • China
Sabaté, Eduardo* • Medical Officer • Adherence
Project, Department of Managment of
Communicable Diseases,WHO • Switzerland
Smirnoff, Margaret • Nurse Practitioner • Mount
Sinai Center • USA
With the active support of the WHO-
NMH/Tobacco Free Initiative department
Tuberculosis
Dick, Judy* • Senior Researcher • Medical Research
Center of South Africa • South Africa
Jaramillo, Ernesto • Medical Officer • Stop TB,WHO
• Switzerland
Maher, Dermot • Medical Officer • Stop TB,WHO 
• Switzerland
Volmink, Jimmy • Director of Research and
Analysis • Global Health Council • USA
Special topics
Children and adolescents
Burkhart, Patricia • Assistant Professor and Nurse
Researcher • University of Kentucky • USA
With the active support of the 
WHO-FCH/Child and adolescent health unit
Elderly patients
Di Pollina, Laura • Chief • Clinical Geriatrics,
Geneva University Hospital • Switzerland
Health Economics
Kisa, Adnan • Associate Professor • Baskent
University • Turkey 
Nuño, Roberto • Health Economist • Spain
Sabaté, Eduardo* • Medical Officer • Adherence
Project, Department of Managment of
Communicable Diseases,WHO • Switzerland
Patients’ perception of illness
Horne, Rob • Director and Professor of Psychology
in Health Care • Centre for Health Care Research,
University of Brighton • England
❘ IX
WHO 2003
 WHO 2003
X ❘
 Introduction
Objectives and target audience
This report is part of the work of the Adherence to Long-term Therapies Project, a global initiative
launched in 2001 by the Noncommunicable Diseases and Mental Health Cluster of the World Health
Organization.
The main target audience for this report are policy-makers and health managers who can have an
impact on national and local policies in ways that will benefit patients, health systems and societies
with better health outcomes and economic efficiency.This report will also be a useful reference for 
scientists and clinicians in their daily work.
The main objective of the project is to improve worldwide rates of adherence to therapies commonly
used in treating chronic conditions.
The four objectives of this report are to:
• summarize the existing knowledge on adherence, which will then serve as
the basis for further policy development;
• increase awareness among policy-makers and health managers about the
problem of poor rates of adherence that exists worldwide, and its health and
economic consequences;
• promote discussion of issues related to adherence; and
• provide the basis for policy guidance on adherence for use by individual 
• articulating consistent, ethical and evidence-based policy and advocacyposi-
tions; and
• managing information by assessing trends and comparing performance, set-
ting the agenda for, and stimulating, research and involvement.
How to read this report
As this report intends to reach a wide group of professionals, with varied disciplines and roles, the inclusion
of various topics at different levels of complexity was unavoidable. Also, during the compilation of the
report, contributions were received from eminent scientists in different fields, who used their own tech-
nical languages, classifications and definitions when discussing adherence.
For the sake of simplicity, a table has been included for each disease reviewed in section III, showing the 
factors and interventions cited in the text, classified according to the five dimensions proposed by the
project group and explained later in this report:
–social- and economic-related factors/interventions;
–health system/health care team-related factors/interventions;
–therapy-related factors/interventions;
–condition-related factors/interventions; and
–patient-related factors/interventions.
The section entitled “Take-home messages”summarizes the main findings of this report and indicates
how readers could make use of them.
❘ XI
WHO 2003
 Section I:
Setting the scene, discusses the main concepts leading to the definition of adherence and its relevance
to epidemiology and economics.
Section II:
Improving adherence rates: guidance for countries, summarizes the lessons learned from the reviews
studied for this report and puts into context the real impact of adherence on health and economics 
for those who can make a change.
Section III:
Disease-specific reviews, discusses nine chronic conditions that were reviewed in depth. Readers 
with clinical practice or disease-oriented programmes will find it useful to read the review related 
to their current work. Policy-makers and health managers may prefer to move on to the Annexes.
Annex I:
Behavioural mechanisms explaining adherence, provides an interesting summary of the existing 
models for explaining people’s behaviour (adherence or nonadherence), and explores the behavioural
interventions that have been tested for improving adherence rates.
Annex II:
Statements by stakeholders, looks at the role of the stakeholder in improving adherence as evaluated
by the stakeholders themselves.
Annexes III and IV:
Table of reported factors by condition and dimension and Table of reported interventions by condition
and dimension, provide a summary of all the factors and interventions discussed in this report.These
tables may be used to look for commonalities among different conditions.
Annexe V:
Global Adherence Interdisciplinary network (GAIN), lists the members of this network.
WHO 2003
XII ❘
 Take-home messages
Poor adherence to treatment of chronic diseases is a worldwide problem of
striking magnitude
Adherence to long-term therapy for chronic illnesses in developed countries averages 50%. In developing
countries, the rates are even lower. It is undeniable that many patients experience difficulty in following
treatment recommendations.
The impact of poor adherence grows as the burden of chronic disease grows
worldwide
Noncommunicable diseases and mental disorders, human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immuno-
deficiency syndrome and tuberculosis, together represented 54% of the burden of all diseases world-
wide in 2001 and will exceed 65% worldwide in 2020.The poor are disproportionately affected.
The consequences of poor adherence to long-term therapies are poor health
outcomes and increased health care costs
Poor adherence to long-term therapies severely compromises the effectiveness of treatment making
this a critical issue in population health both from the perspective of quality of life and of health eco-
nomics. Interventions aimed at improving adherence would provide a significant positive return on
investment through primary prevention (of risk factors) and secondary prevention of adverse health
outcomes.
Improving adherence also enhances patients’ safety
Because most of the care needed for chronic conditions is based on patient self-management (usually
requiring complex multi-therapies), use of medical technology for monitoring, and changes in the
patient’s lifestyle, patients face several potentially life-threatening risks if not appropriately supported
by the health system.
Adherence is an important modifier of health system effectiveness
Health outcomes cannot be accurately assessed if they are measured predominantly by resource utilization
indicators and efficacy of interventions.The population health outcomes predicted by treatment efficacy
data cannot be achieved unless adherence rates are used to inform planning and project evaluation.
“Increasing the effectiveness of adherence interventions may have a far
greater impact on the health of the population than any improvement in
specific medical treatments”1
Studies consistently find significant cost-savings and increases in the effectiveness of health interven-
tions that are attributable to low-cost interventions for improving adherence.Without a system that
addresses the determinants of adherence, advances in biomedical technology will fail to realize their
potential to reduce the burden of chronic illness. Access to medications is necessary but insufficient in
itself for the successful treatment of disease.
Health systems must evolve to meet new challenges
In developed countries, the epidemiological shift in disease burden from acute to chronic diseases over
the past 50 years has rendered acute care models of health service delivery inadequate to address the
health needs of the population. In developing countries, this shift is occurring at a much faster rate.
❘ XIII
WHO 2003
1Haynes RB. Interventions for helping patients to follow prescriptions for medications.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2001, Issue 1.
 Patients need to be supported, not blamed
Despite evidence to the contrary, there continues to be a tendency to focus on patient-related factors
as the causes of problems with adherence, to the relative neglect of provider and health system-related
determinants.These latter factors, which make up the health care environment in which patients
receive care, have a major effect on adherence.
Adherence is simultaneously influenced by several factors
The ability of patients to follow treatment plans in an optimal manner is frequently compromised by
more than one barrier, usually related to different aspects of the problem.These include: the social and
economic factors, the health care team/system, the characteristics of the disease, disease therapies and
patient-related factors. Solving the problems related to each of these factors is necessary if patients’
adherence to therapies is to be improved.
Patient-tailored interventions are required
There is no single intervention strategy, or package of strategies that has been shown to be effective
across all patients, conditions and settings. Consequently, interventions that target adherence must be
tailored to the particular illness-related demands experienced by the patient.To accomplish this, health
systems and providers need to develop means of accurately assessing not only adherence, but also
those factors that influence it.
Adherence is a dynamic process that needs to be followed up
Improving adherence requires a continuous and dynamic process. Recent research in the behavioural
sciences has revealed that the patient population can be segmented according to level-of-readiness to
follow health recommendations.The lack of a match between patient readiness and the practitioner’s
attempts at intervention means that treatments are frequently prescribed to patients who are not ready
to follow them. Health care providers should be able to assess the patient’s readiness to adhere, provide
advice on how to do it, and follow up the patient’s progress at every contact.
Health professionals need to be trained in adherence
Health providers can have a significant impact by assessing risk of nonadherence and delivering inter-
ventions to optimize adherence.To make this practice a reality, practitioners must have access to specif-
ic training in adherence management, and the systems in which they work must design and support
delivery systems that respect this objective. For empowering health professionals an “adherence coun-
selling toolkit”adaptable to different socioeconomic settings is urgently needed. Such training needs 
to simultaneously address three topics: knowledge (information on adherence), thinking (the clinical
decision-making process) and action (behavioural tools for health professionals).
Family, community and patients’ organizations: a key factor for success in
improving adherence
For the effective provision of care for chronic conditions, it is necessary that the patient, the family and
the community who support him or her all play an active role. Social support, i.e. informal or formal sup-
port received by patients from other members of their community, has been consistently reported as
an important factor affecting health outcomes and behaviours.There is substantial evidence that peer
support among patients can improve adherence to therapy while reducing the amount of time devoted
by the health professionals to the care of chronic conditions.
A multidisciplinary approach towards adherence is needed
A stronger commitment to a multidisciplinary approach is needed to make progress in this area.
This will require coordinated action from health professionals, researchers, health planners and policy-
makers.
WHO 2003
XIV ❘
 ❘ XV
WHO 2003
  Section I
S E C T I O N  I
Setting the scene
 Chapter I
C H A P T E R  I
Defining adherence
1. What is adherence?
3
2. The state-of-the-art measurement
4
3. References
5
1. What is adherence?
Although most research has focused on adherence to medication, adherence also encompasses numer-
ous health-related behaviours that extend beyond taking prescribed pharmaceuticals.The participants
at the WHO Adherence meeting in June 2001 (1) concluded that defining adherence as “the extent to
which the patient follows medical instructions”was a helpful starting point. However, the term “med-
ical”was felt to be insufficient in describing the range of interventions used to treat chronic diseases.
Furthermore, the term “instructions”implies that the patient is a passive, acquiescent recipient of expert
advice as opposed to an active collaborator in the treatment process.
In particular, it was recognized during the meeting that adherence to any regimen reflects behaviour 
of one type or another. Seeking medical attention, filling prescriptions, taking medication appropriately,
obtaining immunizations, attending follow-up appointments, and executing behavioural modifications
that address personal hygiene, self-management of asthma or diabetes, smoking, contraception, risky
sexual behaviours, unhealthy diet and insufficient levels of physical activity are all examples of thera-
peutic behaviours.
The participants at the meeting also noted that the relationship between the patient and the health
care provider (be it physician, nurse or other health practitioner) must be a partnership that draws on
the abilities of each.The literature has identified the quality of the treatment relationship as being an
important determinant of adherence. Effective treatment relationships are characterized by an atmos-
phere in which alternative therapeutic means are explored, the regimen is negotiated, adherence is 
discussed, and follow-up is planned.
The adherence project has adopted the following definition of adherence to long-term therapy, a
merged version of the definitions of Haynes (2) and Rand (3):
the extent to which a person’s behaviour – taking medication,following a diet,
and/or executing lifestyle changes,corresponds with agreed recommendations
from a health care provider.
 WHO 2003
4 ❘
Strong emphasis was placed on the need to differentiate adherence from compliance.The main differ-
ence is that adherence requires the patient’s agreement to the recommendations.We believe that
patients should be active partners with health professionals in their own care and that good communi-
cation between patient and health professional is a must for an effective clinical practice.
In most of the studies reviewed here, it was not clear whether or not the “patient’s previous agreement
to recommendations”was taken into consideration.Therefore, the terms used by the original authors
for describing compliance or adherence behaviours have been reported here.
A clear distinction between the concepts of acute as opposed to chronic, and communicable (infectious)
as opposed to noncommunicable, diseases must also be established in order to understand the type of
care needed. Chronic conditions, such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), acquired immunodefi-
ciency syndrome (AIDS) and tuberculosis, may be infectious in origin and will need the same kind of
care as many other chronic noncommunicable diseases such as hypertension, diabetes and depression.
The adherence project has adopted the following definition of chronic diseases:
“Diseases which have one or more of the following characteristics: they are
permanent,leave residual disability,are caused by nonreversible pathological
alteration,require special training of the patient for rehabilitation,or may be
expected to require a long period of supervision,observation or care”(4).
2. The state-of-the-art measurement
Accurate assessment of adherence behaviour is necessary for effective and efficient treatment planning,
and for ensuring that changes in health outcomes can be attributed to the recommended regimen. In
addition, decisions to change recommendations, medications, and/or communication style in order to
promote patient participation depend on valid and reliable measurement of the adherence construct.
Indisputably, there is no “gold standard”for measuring adherence behaviour (5,6) and the use of a vari-
ety of strategies has been reported in the literature.
One measurement approach is to ask providers and patients for their subjective ratings of adherence
behaviour. However, when providers rate the degree to which patients follow their recommendations
they overestimate adherence (7,8).The analysis of patients’subjective reports has been problematic as
well. Patients who reveal they have not followed treatment advice tend to describe their behaviour
accurately (9), whereas patients who deny their failure to follow recommendations report their behav-
iour inaccurately (10). Other subjective means for measuring adherence include standardized, patient-
administered questionnaires (11).Typical strategies have assessed global patient characteristics or “per-
sonality”traits, but these have proven to be poor predictors of adherence behaviour (6).There are no
stable (i.e. trait) factors that reliably predict adherence. However, questionnaires that assess specific
behaviours that relate to specific medical recommendations (e.g. food frequency questionnaires (12) for
measuring eating behaviour and improving the management of obesity) may be better predictors of
adherence behaviour (13).
Although objective strategies may initially appear to be an improvement over subjective approaches,
each has drawbacks in the assessment of adherence behaviours. Remaining dosage units (e.g. tablets)
can be counted at clinic visits; however, counting inaccuracies are common and typically result in over-
estimation of adherence behaviour (14), and important information (e.g. timing of dosage and patterns
of missed dosages) is not captured using this strategy. A recent innovation is the electronic monitoring
device (medication event monitoring system (MEMS)) which records the time and date when a medica-
tion container was opened, thus better describing the way patients take their medications (9).
 ❘ 5
WHO 2003
Unfortunately, the expense of these devices precludes their widespread use. Pharmacy databases can
be used to check when prescriptions are initially filled, refilled over time, and prematurely discontinued.
One problem with this approach is that obtaining the medicine does not ensure its use. Also, such infor-
mation can be incomplete because patients may use more than one pharmacy or data may not be rou-
tinely captured.
Independently of the measurement technique used, thresholds defining “good”and “bad”adherence
are widely used despite the lack of evidence to support them. In practice,“good”and “bad”adherence
might not really exist because the dose–response phenomenon is a continuum function.
Although dose–response curves are difficult to construct for real-life situations, where dosage, timing
and others variables might be different from those tested in clinical trials,they are needed if sound policy
decisions are to be made when defining operational adherence thresholds for different therapies.
Biochemical measurement is a third approach for assessing adherence behaviours. Non-toxic biological
markers can be added to medications and their presence in blood or urine can provide evidence that a
patient recently received a dose of the medication under examination.This assessment strategy is not
without drawbacks as findings can be misleading and are influenced by a variety of individual factors
including diet, absorption and rate of excretion (15).
In summary, measurement of adherence provides useful information that outcome-monitoring alone
cannot provide, but it remains only an estimate of a patient’s actual behaviour. Several of the measure-
ment strategies are costly (e.g. MEMS) or depend on information technology (e.g. pharmacy databases)
that is unavailable in many countries. Choosing the “best”measurement strategy to obtain an approxi-
mation of adherence behaviour must take all these considerations into account. Most importantly, the
strategies employed must meet basic psychometric standards of acceptable reliability and validity (16).
The goals of the provider or researcher, the accuracy requirements associated with the regimen, the
available resources, the response burden on the patient and how the results will be used should also be
taken into account. Finally, no single measurement strategy has been deemed optimal. A multi-method
approach that combines feasible self-reporting and reasonable objective measures is the current state-
of-the-art in measurement of adherence behaviour.
3. References
1. Sabate E.WHO Adherence Meeting Report.Geneva,World Health
Organization,2001.
2. Haynes RB.Determinants of compliance:The disease and the mechanics of
treatment.Baltimore MD,Johns Hopkins University Press,1979.
3. Rand CS.Measuring adherence with therapy for chronic diseases:implica-
tions for the treatment of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia.
American Journal of Cardiology,1993,72:68D-74D.
4. Dictionary of health services management,2nd ed.Owing Mills,MD,National
Health Publishing,1982.
5. Timmreck TC,Randolph JF.Smoking cessation:clinical steps to improve com-
pliance.Geriatrics,1993,48:63-66.
6. Farmer KC.Methods for measuring and monitoring medication regimen
adherence in clinical trials and clinical practice.Clinical Therapeutics,1999,
21:1074-1090.
7. DiMatteo MR,DiNicola DD.Achieving patient compliance.New York,
Pergamon,1982.
8. Norell SE.Accuracy of patient interviews and estimates by clinical staff in
determining medication compliance.Social Science & Medicine - Part E,
Medical Psychology,1981,15:57-61.
9. Cramer JA,Mattson RH.Monitoring compliance with antiepileptic drug ther-
apy.In:Cramer JA,Spilker B,eds.Patient compliance in medical practice and
clinical trials.New York,Raven Press,1991:123-137.
10. Spector SL et al.Compliance of patients with asthma with an experimental
aerosolized medication:implications for controlled clinical trials.Journal of
Allergy & Clinical Immunology,1986,77:65-70.
11. Morisky DE,Green LW,Levine DM.Concurrent and predictive validity of a self-
reported measure of medication adherence.Medical Care,1986,24:67-74.
12. Freudenheim JL.A review of study designs and methods of dietary assessment
in nutritional epidemiology of chronic disease.Journal of Nutrition,1993,
123:401-405.
13. Sumartojo E.When tuberculosis treatment fails.A social behavioral account
of patient adherence.American Review of Respiratory Disease,1993,
147:1311-1320.
14. Matsui D et al.Critical comparison of novel and existing methods of compli-
ance assessment during a clinical trial of an oral iron chelator.Journal of
Clinical Pharmacology,1994,34:944-949.
15. Vitolins MZ et al.Measuring adherence to behavioral and medical interven-
tions.Controlled Clinical Trials,2000,21:188S-194S.
16. Nunnally JC,Bernstein IH.Psychometric theory,3rd ed.New York,McGraw-Hill,
1994.
 WHO 2003
6 ❘
 Chapter II
C H A P T E R  I I
The magnitude of the problem 
of poor adherence
1. A worldwide problem of striking magnitude
7
2. The impact of poor adherence grows as the burden 
of chronic diseases grows worldwide
8
3. The poor are disproportionately affected
8
4. References
9
1. A worldwide problem of striking magnitude
A number of rigorous reviews have found that, in developed countries, adherence among patients suf-
fering chronic diseases averages only 50% (1,2). The magnitude and impact of poor adherence in devel-
oping countries is assumed to be even higher given the paucity of health resources and inequities in
access to health care.
For example, in China, the Gambia and the Seychelles, only 43%, 27% and 26%, respectively, of patients
with hypertension adhere to their antihypertensive medication regimen (3–6).In developed countries,
such as the United States, only 51% of the patients treated for hypertension adhere to the prescribed
treatment (7).Data on patients with depression reveal that between 40% and 70% adhere to antide-
pressant therapies (8).In Australia, only 43% of the patients with asthma take their medication as pre-
scribed all the time and only 28% use prescribed preventive medication (9).In the treatment of HIV and
AIDS, adherence to antiretroviral agents varies between 37% and 83% depending on the drug under
study (10,11) and the demographic characteristics of patient populations (12).This represents a tremen-
dous challenge to population health efforts where success is determined primarily by adherence to
long-term therapies.
Although extremely worrying, these indicators provide an incomplete picture.To ascertain the true extent
of adherence, data on developing countries and important subgroups, such as adolescents, children and
marginal populations are urgently required.A full picture of the magnitude of the problem is critical to
developing effective policy support for efforts aimed at improving adherence.
In developed countries,adherence to long-term therapies in the general 
population is around 50% and is much lower in developing countries.
 2. The impact of poor adherence grows as the burden of chronic diseases
grows worldwide
Noncommunicable diseases, mental health disorders, HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis, combined represented
54% of the burden of all illness worldwide in 2001 (13) and will exceed 65% of the global burden of dis-
ease in 2020 (Fig. 1) (14).Contrary to popular belief, noncommunicable diseases and mental health prob-
lems are also prevalent in developing countries, representing as much as 46% of the total burden of dis-
ease for the year 2001 (13), and predicted to rise to 56% by 2020 (Fig. 2) (1F4).
3. The poor are disproportionately affected
When we are sick,working is hard and learning is harder still.Illness blunts our
creativity,cuts out opportunities.Unless the consequences of illness are pre-
vented,or at least minimized,illness undermines people,and leads them into
suffering,despair and poverty.
Kofi Annan,Secretary-General of the United Nations on the occasion of the
release of the Report of the Commission on Macroeconomics and Health,in
London,20 December 2001.
There is a two-way interdependent relationship between economic poverty and chronic disease. Many
of the world’s poor, despite regional differences in geography, culture and commerce, experience the
same discouraging cycle: being healthy requires money for food, sanitation and medical care, but to
earn money, one must be healthy.The lack of adequate care for chronic conditions forces poor families
to face a particularly heavy burden of caring for their loved ones that undermines the development of
their most basic roles.Women are particularly “taxed”by the lack of a health care system that deals
WHO 2003
8 ❘
Source: reference (30)
DALY, disability-adjusted life year;
Combined,noncommunicable diseases + mental disorders +AIDS + TB.
Source: reference (30)
DALY, disability-adjusted life year;
Mental, mental disorders;
NCD, noncommunicable diseases.
Figure 1
Burden of chronic conditions – world 
(Murray and Lopez, 1996)
Figure 2
Burden of chronic conditions – developing
countries (Murray and Lopez, 1996)
0
200 000
400 000
600 000
800 000
1 000 000
Combined
All other
1990
2000
2010
2020
Year
DALY (x1000)
0
200 000
400 000
600 000
800 000
1 000 000
NCD
Mental
AIDS+TB
All other
1990
2000
2010
2020
Year
DALY (x1000)
 4. References
1. Haynes RB.Interventions for helping patients to follow prescriptions for
medications.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,2001 Issue1.
2. Sackett D et al.Patient compliance with antihypertensive regimens.Patient
Counselling & Health Education,1978,11:18-21.
3. Bovet P et al.Monitoring one-year compliance to antihypertension medication
in the Seychelles.Bulletin of the World Health Organization,2002,80:33-39.
4. Graves JW.Management of difficult-to-control hypertension Mayo Clinic
Proceedings,2000,75:278-284 [erratum published in Mayo Clinical
Proceedings,2000,75:542].
5. van der Sande MA et al.Blood pressure patterns and cardiovascular risk 
factors in rural and urban Gambian communities.Journal of Human
Hypertension,2000,14:489-496.
6. Guo H,He H,Jiang J.[Study on the compliance of antihypertensive drugs in
patients with hypertension.] [Chinese] Chung-Hua Liu Hsing Ping Hsueh Tsa
Chih [Chinese Journal of Epidemiology],2001,22:418-420.
7. Anonymous.Critical overview of antihypertensive therapies:what is prevent-
ing us from getting there? Based on a presentation by Mark A.Munger,
PharmD.American Journal of Managed Care,2000,6 (4 Suppl):S211-S221.
8. Demyttenaere K.Noncompliance with antidepressants:who’s to blame?
International Clinical Psychopharmacology,1998,13 (Suppl 2):S19-S25.
9. Reid D et al.Management and treatment perceptions among young adults
with asthma in Melbourne:the Australian experience from the European
Community Respiratory Health Survey.Respirology,2000,5:281-287.
10. Markowitz AJ,Winawer SJ.Screening and surveillance for colorectal cancer.
Seminars in Oncology,1999,26:485-498.
11. Stein MD et al.Adherence to antiretroviral therapy among HIV-infected
methadone patients:effect of ongoing illicit drug use.American Journal of
Drug & Alcohol Abuse,2000,26:195-205.
12. Laine C et al.Adherence to antiretroviral therapy by pregnant women infected
with human immunodeficiency virus:a pharmacy claims-based analysis.
Obstetrics & Gynecology,2000,95:167-173.
13. The World Health Report 2002:Reducing Risks,Promoting Healthy Life.
Geneva,World Health Organization,2002.
14. Murray CJL,Lopez A.The global burden of disease.Geneva,World Health
Organization,1996.
15. Timmreck TC,Randolph JF.Smoking cessation:clinical steps to improve 
compliance.Geriatrics,1993,48:63–66.
16. Farmer KC.Methods for measuring and monitoring medication regimen
adherence in clinical trials and clinical practice.Clinical Therapeutics,1999,
21:1074–1090.
17. Robinson KM.Family caregiving:who provides the care,and at what cost?
Nurse Economics,1997,15:243-247.
effectively with chronic diseases (15-17). Competing needs in populations suffering from chronic pover-
ty undermine efforts to address the needs of patients requring long-term care, including the problem
of adherence to medications and therapies.
Poor adherence compounds the challenges of improving health in poor populations, and results in
waste and underutilization of already limited treatment resources.
❘ 9
WHO 2003
 WHO 2003
10 ❘
 Chapter III
C H A P T E R  I I I
How does poor adherence affect
policy-makers and health managers?
1. Diabetes
11
2. Hypertension
12
3. Asthma
13
4. References
14
There is strong evidence that many patients with chronic illnesses including asthma, hypertension, dia-
betes and HIV/AIDS, have difficulty adhering to their recommended regimens.This results in less than
optimal management and control of the illness. Poor adherence is the primary reason for suboptimal
clinical benefit (1,2). It causes medical and psychosocial complications of disease, reduces patients’qual-
ity of life, and wastes health care resources.Taken together, these direct consequences impair the ability
of health care systems around the world to achieve population health goals.
The conclusions of research in this area are unequivocal – adherence problems are observed in all situa-
tions where the self-administration of treatment is required, regardless of type of disease, disease sever-
ity and accessibility to health resources.While it may seem to be a simple issue, many factors contribute
to adherence problems. Although some of these factors are patient-related, the characteristics of the
disease and its treatment, and attributes of the health care system and service delivery also have great
influence. Adherence problems have generally been overlooked by health stakeholders, and as a result
have received little direct, systematic, intervention.Three prevalent chronic diseases, diabetes, hyperten-
sion and asthma provide compelling illustrations of different facets of these issues.
1. Diabetes
Poor adherence to the treatment for diabetes results in avoidable suffering for the patients and excess
costs to the health system.The CODE-2 study (Cost of Diabetes in Europe – type 2) found that, in Europe,
only 28% of patients treated for diabetes achieved good glycaemic control (3,4).The control of diabetes
requires more than just taking medicine. Other aspects of self-management such as self-monitoring of
blood glucose, dietary restrictions, regular foot care and ophthalmic examinations have all been shown 
to markedly reduce the incidence and progression of complications of diabetes. In the United States, less
than 2% of adults with diabetes perform the full level of care that has been recommended by the
American Diabetes Association (5). Poor adherence to recognized standards of care is the principal cause
of development of complications of diabetes and their associated individual, societal and economic costs.
 WHO 2003
12 ❘
The CODE-2 study was done in countries with nearly full access to medicines.The picture in developing
countries,where many fewer patients have their diabetes well-controlled,is cause for even greater concern.
Patients with diabetes usually have co-morbidities that make their treatment regimens even more com-
plex. In particular, other commonly associated diseases such as hypertension, obesity and depression
are themselves known to be characterized by poor rates of adherence, and serve to further increase the
likelihood of poor treatment outcomes (6,7).
The combined health and economic burden of diabetes is huge and increasing.The CODE-2 study
showed that the total cost of treating more than 10 million patients with type 2 diabetes in the coun-
tries studied was approximately US 29 billion, which represents an average of 5% of the total health
care expenditure in each country.The overall cost to the health care system of treating patients with
type 2 diabetes is on average over 1.5 times higher than per capita health care expenditure, an excess
cost-burden of 66% over the general population. Furthermore, that cost increases 2- to 3.5-fold once
patients develop preventable microvascular and macrovascular complications. Hospitalization costs,
which include the treatment of long-term complications such as heart disease, account for 30–65% of
the overall costs of the disease – the largest proportion of costs.
The direct costs of complications attributable to poor control of diabetes are 3–4 times higher than those
of good control.The indirect costs (production losses due to sick leave, early retirement and premature
death) are of approximately the same magnitude as these direct costs. Similar findings have been
reported in other studies (8-10).Clearly, if health systems could be more effective in promoting adher-
ence to self-management of diabetes, the human, social and economic benefits would be substantial.
2. Hypertension
It is well known that high blood pressure increases the risk of ischaemic heart disease 3- to 4-fold (27)
and of overall cardiovascular risk by 2- to 3-fold (11).The incidence of stroke increases approximately 
3-fold in patients with borderline hypertension and approximately 8-fold in those with definite hyper-
tension (12). It has been estimated that 40% of cases of acute myocardial infarction or stroke are attrib-
utable to hypertension (13-15).
Despite the availability of effective treatments, studies have shown that in many countries less than
25% of patients treated for hypertension achieve optimum blood pressure (16). For example, in the
United Kingdom and the United States, only 7% and 30% of patients, respectively, had good control of
blood pressure (17) and in Venezuela only 4.5% of the treated patients had good blood pressure control
(18). Poor adherence has been identified as the main cause of failure to control hypertension (19–25). In
one study, patients who did not adhere to beta-blocker therapy were 4.5 times more likely to have com-
plications from coronary heart disease than those who did (26).The best available estimate is that poor
adherence to therapy contributes to lack of good blood pressure control in more than two-thirds of
people living with hypertension (20).
Considering that in many countries poorly controlled blood pressure represents an important econom-
ic burden (e.g. in the United States the cost of health care related to hypertension and its complications
was 12.6% of total expenditure on health care in 1998) (28), improving adherence could represent for
them an important potential source of health and economic improvement, from the societal (29), insti-
tutional (30) and employers’point of view (31,32).
 3. Asthma
Research worldwide has documented poor adherence to treatments for asthma although there are
large variations between countries (33).Rates of nonadherence among patients with asthma range
from 30% to 70%, whether adherence is measured as percentage of prescribed medication taken,
serum theophylline levels, days of medication adherence, or percentage of patients who failed to reach
a clinically estimated adherence minimum (34). Evidence shows that adherence rates for the regular tak-
ing of preventive therapies are as low as 28% in developed countries (35,36).
Adherence is also a serious problem in particular populations such as children and adolescents. In ado-
lescents, adherence to prescribed pulmonary medication may be as low as 30% in general practice (37).
The complexity of optimum routine management of the disease – almost one hundred per cent self-
managed – results in reduced adherence (38).
Failure to adhere to a regular self-management plan for asthma (including the regular taking of preven-
tive therapies) results in poor asthma control which has clinical consequences, such as exacerbation of
asthma, and decreased quality of life for the patients, as well as economic consequences, such as
increased hospitalization and emergency department visits, resulting in unnecessarily high costs of
health care.
There is a large variation between countries in the costs associated with asthma, but there are several
outstanding commonalities: the total cost of asthma as a single condition currently comprises up to 1
to 2% of health care expenditures; hospitalization and emergency care are consistently, disproportion-
ately high, and there is a nearly 1:1 relationship between direct and indirect costs.The available data
suggest that this distribution of excess costs is attributable to nonscheduled acute or emergency care,
indicating poor asthma management and control (39). Such data highlight the significant cost of hospi-
tal care for asthma, compared to the costs of the more frequently used and less costly outpatient and
pharmaceutical services.
Economic studies consistently show that the costs incurred by an adult with poorly controlled asthma
are higher than those for a well-controlled patient with the same severity of disease. For severe asthma,
it has been estimated that the savings produced by optimal control would be around 45% of the total
medical costs (39). Poorer adherence to medication among elderly patients with moderate-to-severe
asthma was associated with a 5% increase in annual physician visits, whereas better adherence was
associated with a 20% decrease in annual hospitalization (40).This represents a significant potential
cost saving to society in addition to the improvement in the quality of life and productive output of the
affected individuals.
To the individual with asthma, or his or her family, the costs of asthma can be immense. For example,
studies have demonstrated that the average amount spent by a family on medical treatments for chil-
dren with asthma in the United States ranged between 5.5 and 14.5% of family income (41). In India, a
study in the state of Andhra Pradesh estimated that the average expenditure for asthma treatment was
about 9% of per capita income (42).
The above discussion shows that when asthma is not well controlled, it is likely to affect the social func-
tioning of a country, impairing not only child development and education but also causing disruption
in job training or ongoing employment for millions of adults worldwide.
❘ 13
WHO 2003
 4. References
1. Rybacki JJ.Improving cardiovascular health in postmenopausal women by
addressing medication adherence issues.Journal of the American
Pharmaceutical Association,2002,42:63-71.
2. Dunbar-Jacob J et al.Adherence in chronic disease.Annual Review of Nursing
Research,2000,18:48-90.
3. Liebl A et al.[Costs of type 2 diabetes in Germany.Results of the CODE-2
study.] [German] Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift,2001,126:585-589.
4. Liebl A et al.Complications,co-morbidity,and blood glucose control in type 2
diabetes mellitus patients in Germany - results from the CODE-2 study.
Experimental & Clinical Endocrinology & Diabetes,2002,110:10-16.
5. Beckles GL et al.Population-based assessment of the level of care among
adults with diabetes in the U.S.Diabetes Care,1998,21:1432-1438.
6. Lustman PJ,Griffith LS,Clouse RE.Depression in adults with diabetes.
Seminars in Clinical Neuropsychiatry,1997,2:15-23.
7. Ciechanowski PS,Katon WJ,Russo JE.Depression and diabetes:impact of
depressive symptoms on adherence,function,and costs.Archives of Internal
Medicine,2000,27:3278-3285.
8. Kangas T et al.Direct costs of health care of drug-treated diabetic patients in
Finland in 1989.In:Kangas T.The Finndiab Report.Stakes,Research Reports
58,1995.
9. Henriksson F et al.Direct medical costs for patients with type 2 diabetes in
Sweden.Journal of Internal Medicine,2000,248:387-396.
10. Herman WH,Eastman RC.The effects of treatment on the direct costs of dia-
betes.Diabetes Care,1998,21 (Suppl 3):C19-C24.
11. Berenson GS et al.Association between multiple cardiovascular risk factors
and atherosclerosis in children and young adults.The Bogalusa Heart Study.
New England Journal of Medicine,1998,338:1650-1656.
12. Thompson DW,Furlan AJ.Clinical epidemiology of stroke.Neurologic Clinics,
1996,14:309-315.
13. al Roomi KA,Heller RF,Wlodarczyk J.Hypertension control and the risk of
myocardial infarction and stroke:a population-based study.Medical Journal
of Australia,1990,153:595-599.
14. Borghi C et al.Effects of the administration of an angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor during the acute phase of myocardial infarction in patients with arterial
hypertension.SMILE Study Investigators.Survival of Myocardial Infarction Long-
term Evaluation.American Journal of Hypertension,1999,12:665-672.
15. Marmot MG,Poulter NR.Primary prevention of stroke.Lancet,1992,339:344-347.
16. Burt VL et al.Prevalence of hypertension in the US adult population.Results
from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey,1988-
1991.Hypertension,1995,25:305-313.
17. Heller RF et al.Blood pressure measurement in the United Kingdom Heart
Disease Prevention Project.Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health,
1978,32:235-238.
18. Sulbaran T et al.Epidemiologic aspects of arterial hypertension in Maracaibo,
Venezuela.Journal of Human Hypertension,2000,14 (Suppl 1):S6-S9.
19. Waeber B,Burnier M,Brunner HR.How to improve adherence with pre-
scribed treatment in hypertensive patients? Journal of Cardiovascular
Pharmacology,2000,35 (Suppl 3):S23-S26.
20. The sixth report of the joint national committee on prevention,detection,eval-
uation,and treatment of high blood pressure.Bethesda,MD,National High
Blood Pressure Education Program,National Heart,Lung,and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health.1997.
21. Burt VL et al.Prevalence of hypertension in the US adult population:results
from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1988-
1991.Hypertension,1995,25:305-313.
22. Hershey JC et al.Patient compliance with antihypertensive medication.
American Journal of Public Health,1980,70:1081-1089.
23. Luscher TF et al.Compliance in hypertension:facts and concepts.Journal of
Hypertension,1985,3:3-9.
24. Hughes DA et al.The impact of non-compliance on the cost-effectiveness of
pharmaceuticals:a review of the literature.Health Economics,2001,10:601-615.
25. Morisky DE et al.Five-year blood pressure control and mortality following
health education for hypertensive patients. American Journal of Public
Health,1983,73:153-162.
26. Psaty BM et al.The relative risk of incident coronary heart disease associated
with recently stopping the use of beta-blockers.Journal of the American
Medical Association,1990,263:1653-1657.
27. Spector SL et al.Compliance of patients with asthma with an experimental
aerosolized medication:implications for controlled clinical trials.Journal of
Allergy and Clinical Immunology.1986;77:6-70.
28. Hodgson TA,Cai L.Medical care expenditures for hypertension,its complica-
tions,and its comorbidities.Medical Care,2001,39:599-615.
29. Piatrauskene I.[Hypertension:economic aspects.] [Russian] Sovetskoe
Zdravookhranenie,1991,4:22-25.
30. McCombs JS et al.The costs of interrupting antihypertensive drug therapy in
a Medicaid population.Medical Care,1994,32:214-226.
31. Tulenbaev MZ et al.[Economic efficacy of implementing a program to control
arterial hypertension among industrial workers.] [Russian] Terapevticheskii
Arkhiv,1987,59:50-52.
32. Rizzo JA,Abbott TA,III,Pashko S.Labour productivity effects of prescribed
medicines for chronically ill workers.Health Economics,1996,5:249-265.
33. Cerveri I et al.International variations in asthma treatment compliance:the
results of the European Community Respiratory Health Survey (ECRHS).
European Respiratory Journal,1999,14:288-294.
34. Bender B,Milgrom H,Rand C.Nonadherence in asthmatic patients:is there a
solution to the problem? Annals of Allergy,Asthma,& Immunology,1997,
79:177-185.
35. Reid D et al.Management and treatment perceptions among young adults
with asthma in Melbourne:the Australian experience from the European
Community Respiratory Health Survey.Respirology,2000,5:281–287.
36. Pearson MH,Bucknall CE.Measuring clinical outcomes in asthma.London,
Royal College of Physicians,1999.
37. Dekker FW et al.Compliance with pulmonary medication in general practice.
European Respiratory Journal,1993,6:886-890.
38. Slack MK,Brooks AJ.Medication management issues for adolescents with
asthma.American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy,1995,52:1417-1421.
39. GINA Project (Global Initiative for Asthma).2002,http://www.ginasthma.com.
40. Balkrishnan R,Christensen DB.Inhaled corticosteroid use and associated out-
comes in elderly patients with moderate to severe chronic pulmonary dis-
ease.Clinical Therapeutics,2000,22:452-469.
41. Marion RJ,Creer TL,Reynolds RV.Direct and indirect costs associated with the
management of childhood asthma.Annals of Allergy,1985,54:31-34.
42. Mahapatra P.Social,economic and cultural aspects of asthma:an explorato-
ry study in Andhra Pradesh,India.Hyderabad,India,Institute of Health
Systems,1993.
WHO 2003
14 ❘
 ❘ 15
WHO 2003
  Section II
Improving adherence rates:
guidance for countries
S E C T I O N  I I
 Chapter IV
C H A P T E R  I V
Lessons learned
1. Patients need to be supported, not blamed
19
2. The consequences of poor adherence to long-term therapies are 
poor health outcomes and increased health care costs
20
3. Improving adherence also enhances patient safety
21
4. Adherence is an important modifier of health system effectiveness
22
5. Improving adherence might be the best investment for tackling 
chronic conditions effectively
22
6. Health systems must evolve to meet new challenges
23
7. A multidisciplinary approach towards adherence is needed
24
8. References
24
Over the past 40 years, health, behavioural and social scientists have been accumulating knowledge
concerning the prevalence of poor adherence, its determinants and interventions.This report is an
attempt to integrate diverse findings across a number of diseases in order to stimulate intersectoral
awareness of the magnitude and impact of poor adherence to therapies for chronic conditions, to catal-
yse discussion, and to identify specific targets for further research and intervention.
Several key lessons have emerged or have been reinforced by evidence from the reviews discussed in
this report.These are described below.
1. Patients need to be supported, not blamed
Despite evidence to the contrary, there continues to be a tendency to focus on patient-related factors
as the causes of problems with adherence, to the relative neglect of provider and health system-related
determinants.These latter factors make up the health care environment in which patients receive care
and have a considerable effect on adherence. Interventions that target the relevant factors in the health
care environment are urgently required.
 WHO 2003
20 ❘
Patients may also become frustrated if their preferences in treatment-related decisions are not elicited
and taken into account. For example, patients who felt less empowered in relation to treatment deci-
sions had more negative attitudes towards prescribed antiretroviral therapy and reported lower rates of
adherence (1).
Adherence is related to the way in which individuals judge personal need for a medication relative to
their concerns about its potential adverse effects (2). Horne et al. proposed a simple necessity-concerns
framework to help clinicians elicit and address some of the key beliefs that influence patients’adherence
to medication. Necessity beliefs and concerns are evaluative summations of the personal salience of the
potential costs and benefits or pros and cons of the treatment (3).
2. The consequences of poor adherence to long-term therapies are poor health
outcomes and increased health care costs 
Adherence is a primary determinant of the effectiveness of treatment (4,5) because poor adherence
attenuates optimum clinical benefit (6,7). Good adherence improves the effectiveness of interventions
aimed at promoting healthy lifestyles, such as diet modification, increased physical activity, non-smoking
and safe sexual behaviour (8-10), and of the pharmacological-based risk-reduction interventions (4,11-13).
It also affects secondary prevention and disease treatment interventions.
For example, low adherence has been identified as the primary cause of unsatisfactory control of blood
pressure (14). Good adherence has been shown to improve blood pressure control (15) and reduce the
complications of hypertension (16-18). In Sudan, only 18% of nonadherent patients achieved good con-
trol of blood pressure compared to 96% of those who adhered to their prescribed treatment (19,20).
In studies on the prevention of diabetes type 2, adherence to a reduced-fat diet (21) and to regular
physical exercise (22) has been effective in reducing the onset of the disease. For those already suffering
the disease, good adherence to treatment, including suggested dietary modifications, physical activity,
foot care and ophthalmological check-ups, has been shown to be effective in reducing complications
and disability, while improving patients’quality of life and life expectancy (23).
Level of adherence has been positively correlated with treatment outcomes in depressed patients, inde-
pendently of the anti-depressive drugs used (24). In communicable chronic conditions such as infection
with HIV, good adherence to therapies has been correlated with slower clinical progression of the dis-
ease as well as lower virological markers (25-32).
In addition to their positive impact on the health status of patients with chronic illnesses, higher rates
of adherence confer economic benefits. Examples of these mechanisms include direct savings generat-
ed by reduced use of the sophisticated and expensive health services needed in cases of disease exac-
erbation, crisis or relapse. Indirect savings may be attributable to enhancement of, or preservation of,
quality of life and the social and vocational roles of the patients.
There is strong evidence to suggest that self-management programmes offered to patients with chron-
ic diseases improve health status and reduce utilization and costs.When self-management and adher-
ence programmes are combined with regular treatment and disease-specific education, significant
improvements in health-promoting behaviours, cognitive symptom management, communication and
disability management have been observed. In addition, such programmes appear to result in a reduc-
tion in the numbers of patients being hospitalized, days in hospital and outpatient visits.The data sug-
gest a cost to savings ratio of approximately 1:10 in some cases, and these results persisted over 3 years
(33). Other studies have found similarly positive results when evaluating the same or alternative inter-
ventions (28,34-47).
 It has been suggested that good adherence to treatment with antiretroviral agents might have an
important impact on public health by breaking the transmission of the virus because of the lower viral
load found in highly adherent patients (12).
The development of resistance to therapies is another serious public health issue related to poor adher-
ence, among other factors. In addition to years of life lost due to premature mortality and health care
costs attributable to preventable morbidity, the economic consequences of poor adherence include
stimulating the need for ongoing investment in research and development of new compounds to fight
new resistant variants of the causative organisms.
In patients with HIV/AIDS, the resistance of the virus to antiretroviral agents has been linked to lower
levels of adherence (29) by some researchers, while others have suggested that resistant virus is more
likely to emerge at higher levels of adherence (48,49). Although they appear to be contradictory, both
describe the same phenomenon from a different starting point. At the lower end of the spectrum of
adherence, there is insufficient antiretroviral agent to produce selective pressure, so the more adher-
ence rates increase the higher the likelihood that resistance will appear. At the higher levels of adher-
ence, there is not enough virus to become resistant, thus the less adherent the patient, the greater the
viral load and the likelihood of resistance. Some of the published research has suggested that when
adherence rates are between 50% and 85%, drug resistance is more likely to develop (50,51).
Unfortunately, a significant proportion of treated patients fall within this range (52).The “chronic”invest-
ment in research and development could be avoided if adherence rates were higher, and the resources
could be better used in the development of more effective and safer drugs, or by being directed to the
treatment of neglected conditions.
There is growing evidence to suggest that because of the alarmingly low rates of adherence, increasing
the effectiveness of adherence interventions may have a far greater impact on the health of the popula-
tion than any improvement in specific medical treatments (53).
We strongly support the recommendations of the Commission on Macroeconomics and Health on invest-
ing in operational research “at least 5% of each country proposal for evaluating health interventions in
practice, including adherence as an important factor influencing the effectiveness of interventions”(12).
3. Improving adherence also enhances patient safety 
Because most of the care needed for chronic conditions is based on patient self-management (usually
requiring complex multi-therapies (54), the use of medical technology for monitoring and changes in
the patient’s lifestyle (55), patients face several potentially life-threatening risks if health recommenda-
tions are not followed as they were prescribed. Some of the risks faced by patients who adhere poorly
to their therapies are listed below.
More intense relapses. Relapses related to poor adherence to prescribed medication can be more
severe than relapses that occur while the patient is taking the medication as recommended, so persist-
ent poor adherence can worsen the overall course of the illness and may eventually make the patients
less likely to respond to treatment (56).
Increased risk of dependence. Many medications can produce severe dependence if taken inappropri-
ately by patients. Good examples are diazepam (57) and opioid-related medications.
Increased risk of abstinence and rebound effect. Adverse effects and potential harm may occur when a
medication is abruptly discontinued or interrupted. Good adherence plays an important role in avoid-
ing problems of withdrawal (e.g. as seen in thyroid hormone replacement therapy) and rebound effect
(e.g. in patients being treated for hypertension and depression), and consequently decreases the likeli-
hood that a patient will experience adverse effects of discontinuation (58,59).
❘ 21
WHO 2003
 Increased risk of developing resistance to therapies. In patients with HIV/AIDS, the resistance to anti-
retroviral agents has been linked to lower levels of adherence (48,60). Partial or poor adherence at levels
less than 95% can lead to the resumption of rapid viral replication, reduced survival rates, and the muta-
tion to treatment-resistant strains of HIV (61).The same happens in the treatment of tuberculosis where
poor adherence is recognized as a major cause of treatment failure, relapse and drug resistance (62,63).
Increased risk of toxicity. In the case of over-use of medicines (a type of nonadherence), patients are at
an increased risk of toxicity, especially from drugs with accumulative pharmacodynamics and/or a low
toxicity threshold (e.g. lithium).This is particularly true for elderly patients (altered pharmacodynamics)
and patients with mental disorders (e.g. schizophrenia).
Increased likelihood of accidents. Many medications need to be taken in conjunction with lifestyle
changes that are a precautionary measure against the increased risk of accidents known to be a side-
effect of certain medications. Good examples are medications requiring abstinence from alcohol
(metronidazole) or special precautions while driving (sedatives and hypnotics).
4. Adherence is an important modifier of health system effectiveness
Health outcomes cannot be accurately assessed if they are measured predominantly by resource uti-
lization indicators and efficacy of interventions.
The economic evaluation of nonadherence requires the identification of the associated costs and out-
comes. It is logical that nonadherence entails a cost due to the occurrence of the undesired effects that
the recommended regimen tries to minimize. In terms of outcomes, nonadherence results in increased
clinical risk and therefore in increased morbidity and mortality.
For health professionals, policy-makers and donors, measuring the performance of their health pro-
grammes and systems using resource utilization end-points and the efficacy of interventions is easier
than measuring the desired health outcomes.While such indicators are important, over-reliance on
them can bias evaluation towards the process of health care provision,missing indicators of health care
uptake which would make accurate estimates of health outcomes possible (64).
The population-health outcomes predicted by treatment efficacy data will not be achieved unless
adherence rates are used to inform planning and project evaluation.
5. Improving adherence might be the best investment for tackling chronic
conditions effectively
Studies consistently find significant cost-savings and increases in the effectiveness of health interven-
tions that are attributable to low-cost interventions for improving adherence. In many cases invest-
ments in improving adherence are fully repaid with savings in health care utilization (33) and, in other
instances, the improvement in health outcomes fully justifies the investment.The time is ripe for large-
scale, multidisciplinary field studies aimed at testing behaviourally sound, multi-focal interventions,
across diseases and in different service-delivery environments.
Interventions for removing barriers to adherence must become a central component of efforts to
improve population health worldwide. Decision-makers need not be concerned that an undesired
increase in health budget will occur due to increasing consumption of medications, because adherence
to those medicines already prescribed will result in a significant decrease in the overall health budget
due to the reduction in the need for other more costly interventions. Rational use of medicines means
good prescribing and full adherence to the prescriptions.
WHO 2003
22 ❘
 Interventions that promote adherence can help close the gap between the clinical efficacy of interven-
tions and their effectiveness when used in the field, and thus increase the overall effectiveness and effi-
ciency of the health system.
For outcomes to be improved, changes to health policy and health systems are essential. Effective treat-
ment for chronic conditions requires a transfer of health care away from a system that is focused on
episodic care in response to acute illness towards a system that is proactive and emphasizes health
throughout a lifetime.
Without a system that addresses the determinants of adherence, advances in biomedical technology
will fail to realize their potential to reduce the burden of chronic illness. Access to medications is neces-
sary, but insufficient in itself to solve the problem (12).
Increasing the effectiveness of adherence interventions might have a far
greater impact on the health of the population than any improvement in spe-
cific medical treatments (65).
6. Health systems must evolve to meet new challenges
In developed countries, the epidemiological shift in disease burden from acute to chronic diseases over
the past 50 years has rendered acute care models of health service delivery inadequate to address the
health needs of the population. In developing countries this shift is occurring at a much faster rate.
The health care delivery system has the potential to affect patients’adherence behaviour. Health care
systems control access to care. For example, health systems control providers’schedules, length of
appointments, allocation of resources, fee structures, communication and information systems, and
organizational priorities.The following are examples of the ways in which systems influence patients’
behaviour:
• Systems direct appointment length, and providers report that their schedules do not allow time to
adequately address adherence behaviour (66).
• Systems determine fee structures, and in many systems (e.g. fee-for-service) the lack of financial reim-
bursement for patient counselling and education seriously threatens adherence-focused interventions.
• Systems allocate resources in a way that may result in high stress and increased demands upon
providers which, in turn, have been associated with decreased adherence in their patients (67).
• Systems determine continuity of care. Patients demonstrate better adherence behaviour when they
receive care from the same provider over time (68).
• Systems direct information sharing.The ability of clinics and pharmacies to share information on
patients’behaviour regarding prescription refills has the potential to improve adherence.
• Systems determine the level of communication with patients. Ongoing communication efforts (e.g.
telephone contacts) that keep the patient engaged in health care may be the simplest and most 
cost-effective strategy for improving adherence (69).
Few studies have evaluated programmes that have used such interventions, and this is a serious gap in
the applied knowledge base. For an intervention to be truly multi-level, systemic barriers must be
included. Unless variables such as these are addressed, it would be expected that the impact of the
efforts of providers and patients would be limited by the external constraints.
❘ 23
WHO 2003
 1. Webb DG,Horne R,Pinching AJ.Treatment-related empowerment:prelimi-
nary evaluation of a new measure in patients with advanced HIV disease.
International Journal of STD & AIDS,2001,12:103-107.
2. Horne R,Weinman J.Patients’beliefs about prescribed medicines and their
role in adherence to treatment in chronic physical illness.Journal of
Psychosomatic Research,1999,47:555-567.
3. Horne R.Patients’beliefs about treatment:the hidden determinant of 
treatment outcome? Journal of Psychosomatic Research,1999,47:491-495.
4. The World Health Report 2002:Reducing Risks,Promoting Healthy Life.
Geneva,World Health Organization,2002.
5. Cramer JA.Consequences of intermittent treatment for hypertension:the
case for medication compliance and persistence.American Journal of
Managed Care,1998,4:1563-1568.
6. Dunbar-Jacob J et al.Adherence in chronic disease.Annual Review of Nursing
Research,2000,18:48-90.
7. Sarquis LM et al.[Compliance in antihypertensive therapy:analyses in 
scientific articles.] [Portuguese] Revista Da Escola de Enfermagem Da USP
,
1998,32:335-353.
8. Clark DO.Issues of adherence,penetration,and measurement in physical
activity effectiveness studies.Medical Care,2001,39:409-412.
9. Green CA.What can patient health education coordinators learn from 
ten years of compliance research? Patient Education & Counseling,1987,
10:167-174.
10. Rayman RB.Health promotion:a perspective.Aviation Space &
Environmental Medicine,1988,59:379-381.
11. Scheen AJ.[Therapeutic non-compliance:a major problem in the prevention
of cardiovascular diseases.] [French] Revue Medicale de Liege,1999,54:914-
920.
12. Macroeconomics and Health:Investing in Health for Economic Development –
Report of the Commission on Macroeconomics and Health.Geneva,World
Health Organization,2001.
13. Burke LE,Dunbar-Jacob JM,Hill MN.Compliance with cardiovascular disease
prevention strategies:a review of the research.Annals of Behavioral Medicine,
1997,19:239-263.
14. Waeber B,Burnier M,Brunner HR.How to improve adherence with pre-
scribed treatment in hypertensive patients? Journal of Cardiovascular
Pharmacology,2000,35 (Suppl 3):S23-S26.
15. Luscher TF et al.Compliance in hypertension:facts and concepts.Journal of
Hypertension (Suppl),1985,3:S3-S9.
16. Psaty BM et al.The relative risk of incident coronary heart disease associated
with recently stopping the use of beta-blockers.Journal of the American
Medical Association,1990,263:1653-1657.
17. Rogers PG,Bullman W.Prescription medicine compliance:review of the base-
line of knowledge – report of the National Council on Patient Information
and Education.Journal of Pharmacoepidemiology,1995,3:3-36.
18. Beckles GL et al.Population-based assessment of the level of care among
adults with diabetes in the U.S.Diabetes Care,1998,21:1432-1438.
19. Khalil SA,Elzubier AG.Drug compliance among hypertensive patients in
Tabuk,Saudi Arabia.Journal of Hypertension,1997,15:561-565.
20. Elzubier AG et al.Drug compliance among hypertensive patients in Kassala,
eastern Sudan.Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal,2000,6:100-105.
21. Swinburn BA,Metcalf PA,Ley SJ.Long-term (5-year) effects of a reduced-fat
diet intervention in individuals with glucose intolerance.Diabetes Care,2001,
24:619-624.
22. Foreyt JP
,Poston WS.The challenge of diet,exercise and lifestyle modification
in the management of the obese diabetic patient.International Journal of
Obesity,1999,23 (Suppl 7):S5-S11.
23. Anderson BJ,Vangsness L,Connell A.Family conflict,adherence,and gly-
caemic control in youth with short duration Type 1 diabetes.Diabetic
Medicine,2002,19:635-642.
24. Thompson C et al.Compliance with antidepressant medication in the treat-
ment of major depressive disorder in primary care:a randomized comparison
of fluoxetine and a tricyclic antidepressant.American Journal of Psychiatry,
2000,157:338-343.
25. Stein MD et al.Adherence to antiretroviral therapy among HIV-infected
methadone patients:effect of ongoing illicit drug use.American Journal of
Drug & Alcohol Abuse,2000,26:195-205.
The changing nature of disease prevalence also influences activities at the system level. Continued
reliance on acute models has delayed the reforms necessary to address longer-term interventions for
chronic conditions. In developing countries this shift is occurring at a much faster rate at a time when
the battle against communicable diseases is still being fought.
In some countries, the attention of the policy-makers may remain focused on communicable diseases,
for example HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis. However, these diseases are not effectively addressed by the
acute care model. Even if it were to provide full and unrestricted access to appropriate drugs, the acute
care model would lack impact because it does not address the broad determinants of adherence.
7. A multidisciplinary approach towards adherence is needed
The problem of nonadherence has been much discussed, but has been relatively neglected in the main-
stream delivery of primary care health services. Despite an extensive knowledge base, efforts to address
the problem have been fragmented, and with few exceptions have failed to harness the potential con-
tributions of the diverse health disciplines. A stronger commitment to a multidisciplinary approach is
needed in order to make progress in this area.This will require coordinated action from health profes-
sionals, researchers, health planners and policy-makers.
8. References
WHO 2003
24 ❘
 ❘ 25
WHO 2003
26. Gifford AL et al.Predictors of self-reported adherence and plasma HIV con-
centrations in patients on multidrug antiretroviral regimens.Journal of
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes,2000,23:386-395.
27. Paterson DL et al.Adherence to protease inhibitor therapy and outcomes in
patients with HIV infection.Annals of Internal Medicine,2000,133:21-30.
28. Tuldra A et al.Prospective randomized two-arm controlled study to deter-
mine the efficacy of a specific intervention to improve long-term adherence
to highly active antiretroviral therapy.Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndromes,2000,25:221-228.
29. Bangsberg DR et al.Adherence to protease inhibitors,HIV-1 viral load,and
development of drug resistance in an indigent population.AIDS,2000,
14:357-366.
30. Chesney MA.Factors affecting adherence to antiretroviral therapy.Clinical
Infectious Disease,2000,30 (Suppl 2):S171-S176.
31. Murri R et al.Patient-reported nonadherence to HAART is related to pro-
tease inhibitor levels.Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes,
2000,24:123-128.
32. Chesney MA,Morin M,Sherr L.Adherence to HIV combination therapy.Social
Science and Medicine,2000,50:1599-1605.
33. Holman HR et al.Evidence that an education program for self-management
of chronic disease can improve health status while reducing health care
costs:a randomized trial.Abstract Book/Association for Health Services
Research,1997,14:19-20.
34. Gibson PG et al.Self-management education and regular practitioner
review for adults with asthma.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
2001.
35. Sloss EM et al.Selecting target conditions for quality of care improvement in
vulnerable older adults.Journal of the American Geriatrics Society,2000,
48:363-369.
36. Mar J,Rodriguez-Artalejo F.Which is more important for the efficiency of
hypertension treatment:hypertension stage,type of drug or therapeutic
compliance? Journal of Hypertension (Suppl),2001,19:149-155.
37. Massanari MJ.Asthma management:curtailing cost and improving patient
outcomes.Journal of Asthma,2000,37:641-651.
38. Balkrishnan R,Christensen DB.Inhaled corticosteroid use and associated
outcomes in elderly patients with moderate to severe chronic pulmonary
disease.Clinical Therapeutics,2000,22:452-469.
39. Kokubu F et al.[Hospitalization reduction by an asthma tele-medicine sys-
tem.] [Japanese] Arerugi – Japanese Journal of Allergology,2000,49:19-31.
40. On-demand use of 2 agonists led to better asthma control than did regular
use in moderate-to-severe asthma.ACP Journal Club,2001,134:17.
41. Valenti WM.Treatment adherence improves outcomes and manages costs.
AIDS Reader,2001,11:77-80
42. McPherson-Baker S et al.Enhancing adherence to combination antiretroviral
therapy in nonadherent HIV-positive men.AIDS Care,2000,12:399-404.
43. Ostrop NJ,Hallett KA,Gill MJ.Long-term patient adherence to antiretroviral
therapy.Annals of Pharmacotherapy,2000,34:703-709.
44. Desvarieux M et al.A novel approach to directly observed therapy for tuber-
culosis in an HIV-endemic area.American Journal of Public Health,2001,
91:138-141.
45. Put C et al.A study of the relationship among self-reported noncompliance,
symptomatology,and psychological variables in patients with asthma.
Journal of Asthma,2000,37:503-510.
46. Ciechanowski PS,Katon WJ,Russo JE.Depression and diabetes:impact of
depressive symptoms on adherence,function,and costs.Archives of Internal
Medicine,2000,27:3278-3285.
47. Rohland BM,Rohrer JE,Richards CC.The long-term effect of outpatient com-
mitment on service use.Administration & Policy in Mental Health,2000,
27:383-394.
48. Bangsberg DR et al.Adherence to protease inhibitors,HIV-1 viral load,and
development of drug resistance in an indigent population.AIDS,2000,
14:357-366.
49. Gallego O et al.Drug resistance in patients experiencing early virological fail-
ure under a triple combination including indinavir.AIDS,2001,15:1701-1706.
50. Chesney MA.Factors affecting adherence to antiretroviral therapy.Clinics in
Infectious Disease,2000,30:S171-S176.
51. Wahl LM,Nowak MA.Adherence and drug resistance:predictions for therapy
outcome.Proceedings of the Royal Society of London – Series B:Biological
Sciences,2000,267:835-843.
52. Markowitz M.Resistance,fitness,adherence,and potency:mapping the paths to
virologic failure.Journal of the American Medical Association,2000,283:250-251.
53. Haynes RB.Interventions for helping patients to follow prescriptions for
medications.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,2001.
54. Chesney MA,Morin M,Sherr L.Adherence to HIV combination therapy.Social
Science & Medicine,2000,50:1599-1605.
55. Johnson KH,Bazargan M,Bings EG.Alcohol consumption and compliance
among inner-city minority patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.Archives of
Family Medicine,2000,9:964-970.
56. Weiden P.Adherence to antipsychotic medication:key facts.Schizophrenia
Home Page,2002 (www.schizophrenia.com/ami/coping/noncompli2.htm).
57. Bush PJ,Spector KK,Rabin DL.Use of sedatives and hypnotics prescribed in a
family practice.Southern Medical Journal,1984,77:677-681.
58. Demyttenaere K,Haddad P.Compliance with antidepressant therapy and
antidepressant discontinuation symptoms.Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica,
2000,403:50-56.
59. Kaplan EM.Antidepressant noncompliance as a factor in the discontinuation
syndrome.Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,1997,58:31-35.
60. Wahl LM,Nowak MA.Adherence and drug resistance:predictions for therapy
outcome.Proceedings of the Royal Society of London – Series B:Biological
Sciences,2000,267:835-843.
61. Paterson DL et al.Adherence to protease inhibitor therapy and outcomes in
patients with HIV infection.Annals of Internal Medicine,2000,133:21-30.
62. Yach D.Tuberculosis in the Western Cape health region of South Africa.Social
Science & Medicine,1988,27:683-689.
63. Bell J,Yach D.Tuberculosis patient compliance in the western Cape,1984.
South African Medical Journal,1988,73:31-33.
64. Ehiri BI.Improving compliance among hypertensive patients:a reflection on
the role of patient education.International Journal of Health Promotion &
Education,2000,38:104-108.
65. Haynes RB et al.Interventions for helping patients follow prescriptions for
medications.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,2001.
66. Ammerman AS et al.Physician-based diet counseling for cholesterol reduc-
tion:current practices,determinants,and strategies for improvement.
Preventive Medicine,1993,22:96-109.
67. DiMatteo MR,DiNicola DD.Achieving patient compliance.New York,
Pergamon,1982.
68. Meichenbaum D,Turk DC.Facilitating treatment adherence:A practitioner’s
guidebook.New York,Plenum Press,1987.
69. Haynes RB,McKibbon KA,Kanani R.Systematic review of randomised trials of
interventions to assist patients to follow prescriptions for medications.
Lancet,1996,348:383-386 [erratum published in Lancet,1997,
3499059:1180].
 WHO 2003
26 ❘
 Chapter V
C H A P T E R  V
Towards the solution
1. Five interacting dimensions affect adherence
27
2 Intervening in the five dimensions
31
3. Reference
36
1. Five interacting dimensions affect adherence
Adherence is a multidimensional phenomenon determined by the interplay of five sets of factors, here
termed “dimensions”
, of which patient-related factors are just one determinant (Figure 3).The common
belief that patients are solely responsible for taking their treatment is misleading and most often
reflects a misunderstanding of how other factors affect people’s behaviour and capacity to adhere to
their treatment.
The five dimensions are briefly discussed below.The length of the discussion on each dimension
reflects the quantity of evidence available, which is biased by the traditional misconception that adher-
ence is a patient-driven problem.Therefore, the size of the section does not reflect its importance.
Figure 3
The five dimensions of adherence
Health system/
HCT–factors
Condition–related
factors
Social/economic
factors
Therapy–related
factors
Patient–related
factors
HCT,Health-care team
 A. Social and economic factors
Although socioeconomic status has not consistently been found to be an independent predictor of
adherence, in developing countries low socioeconomic status may put patients in the position of hav-
ing to choose between competing priorities. Such priorities frequently include demands to direct the
limited resources available to meet the needs of other family members, such as children or parents for
whom they care.
Some factors reported to have a significant effect on adherence are: poor socioeconomic status, pover-
ty, illiteracy, low level of education, unemployment, lack of effective social support networks, unstable
living conditions, long distance from treatment centre, high cost of transport, high cost of medication,
changing environmental situations, culture and lay beliefs about illness and treatment, and family dys-
function.Various sociodemographic and economic variables are discussed in the course of this report
(see also Annex 3).
Some studies have reported that organizational factors are more related to adherence than sociodemo-
graphic ones, but this might differ from one setting to another. An interesting study by Albaz in Saudi
Arabia concluded that organizational variables (time spent with the doctor, continuity of care by the
doctor, communication style of the doctor and interpersonal style of the doctor) are far more important
than sociodemographic variables (gender, marital status, age, educational level and health status) in
affecting patients’adherence (1).
Race has frequently been reported to be a predictor of adherence, regardless of whether the members
of a particular race are living in their country of origin or elsewhere as immigrants. Often, cultural beliefs
are the reason behind these racial differences (2), but, no less often, social inequalities confound these
findings (3). For example, in the United Kingdom, HIV-positive black Africans have been found to have a
different experience of treatment because of their fear of being experimented on, distrust of the med-
ical profession and fears of discrimination (4). In the United States, African Americans have been report-
ed to express significantly more doubt regarding their ability to use protease inhibitors and adhere to
the treatment, and about the competence of their physicians than do the white population (5).
War has also been reported to have an influence on adherence to therapies, even after the war is over.
This is mainly the result of war experiences such as economic hardship, lack of medical control, fatalism
and anarchy (6).
Age is a factor reported as affecting adherence, but inconsistently. It should be evaluated separately for
each condition, and, if possible, by the characteristics of the patient and by developmental age group
(i.e. children dependent on parent, adolescents, adults and elderly patients).
Adherence to treatment by children and adolescents ranges from 43% to 100%, with an average of 58%
in developed countries (7). Several studies have suggested that adolescents are less adherent than
younger children (8).The adherence of infants and toddlers to recommended treatment regimens is
largely determined by the ability of the parent or guardian to understand and follow through with the
recommended management. As age increases, children have the cognitive ability to carry out treat-
ment tasks, but continue to need parental supervision.
School-aged children engage in the developmental task of industry, learning to regulate their own
behaviour and control the world around them. As children enter school, they spend less time at home
with their parents and are increasingly influenced by their peers and the social environment.
At the same time, increasing numbers of single and working parents have shifted more of the responsi-
bility for disease management to the child. Assigning too much responsibility to a child for management
of his or her treatment can lead to poor adherence. For example, studies indicate that, like adults, chil-
dren exaggerate their adherence behaviours in their self-reports (9). Parents need to understand that
inaccurate diary reporting may hinder appropriate disease management by clinicians.These findings
WHO 2003
28 ❘
 underscore the value of parental supervision and guidance of children in their health behaviours. Shared
family responsibility for treatment tasks and continuous reinforcement appear to be important factors
in the enhancement of adherence to prescribed treatment for the paediatric population. In addition to
parental supervision, behavioural techniques designed to help children, such as goal-setting, cueing,
and rewards or tokens, have been found to improve adherence in the school-aged population (10).
Adolescents, though capable of greater autonomy in following treatment recommendations, struggle
with self-esteem, body image, social role definition and peer-related issues. Poor adherence in adoles-
cents may reflect rebellion against the regimen’s control over their lives. Most studies indicate that chil-
dren and adolescents who assume early sole responsibility for their treatment regimen are less adher-
ent and in poorer control of their disease management. Both sustaining parental involvement and mini-
mizing conflict between adolescents and their parents are valuable in encouraging adherence to treat-
ment regimens. Providing families with information on forming a partnership between the parent(s)
and the adolescent is of considerable importance in promoting adherence to treatment for this age
group. Educational efforts focusing on adolescents’attitudes towards their disease and its manage-
ment, instead of predominantly on knowledge acquisition, may be beneficial.
Elderly people represent 6.4 % of the world’s population and their numbers are increasing by 800 000
every month.They have become the fastest-growing segment of the population in many developing
countries (11,12).
This demographic transition has led to an increased prevalence of chronic illnesses that are particularly
common in the elderly.These include Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, depression, diabetes, con-
gestive heart failure, coronary artery disease, glaucoma, osteoarthritis, osteoporosis and others.
Many elderly patients present with multiple chronic diseases, which require complex long-term treat-
ment to prevent frailty and disability. Furthermore, the elderly are the greatest consumers of prescrip-
tion drugs. In developed countries, people over 60 years old consume approximately 50% of all pre-
scription medicines (as much as three times more per capita than the general population) and are
responsible for 60% of medication-related costs even though they represent only 12% to 18% of the
population in these countries (13).
Adherence to treatments is essential to the well-being of elderly patients, and is thus a critically impor-
tant component of care. In the elderly, failure to adhere to medical recommendations and treatment has
been found to increase the likelihood of therapeutic failure (14), and to be responsible for unnecessary
complications, leading to increased spending on health care, as well as to disability and early death (15).
Poor adherence to prescribed regimens affects all age groups. However, the prevalence of cognitive and
functional impairments in elderly patients (16) increases their risk of poor adherence. Multiple co-mor-
bidities and complex medical regimens further compromise adherence. Age-related alterations in phar-
macokinetics and pharmacodynamics make this population even more vulnerable to problems result-
ing from nonadherence.
B. Health care team and system-related factors
Relatively little research has been conducted on the effects of health care team and system-related
factors on adherence.Whereas a good patient-provider relationship may improve adherence (17),
there are many factors that have a negative effect.These include, poorly developed health services
with inadequate or non-existent reimbursement by health insurance plans, poor medication distribu-
tion systems, lack of knowledge and training for health care providers on managing chronic diseases,
overworked health care providers, lack of incentives and feedback on performance, short consulta-
tions, weak capacity of the system to educate patients and provide follow-up, inability to establish
community support and self-management capacity, lack of knowledge on adherence and of effective
interventions for improving it.
❘ 29
WHO 2003
 C. Condition-related factors
Condition-related factors represent particular illness-related demands faced by the patient. Some strong
determinants of adherence are those related to the severity of symptoms, level of disability (physical,
psychological, social and vocational), rate of progression and severity of the disease, and the availability
of effective treatments.Their impact depends on how they influence patients’risk perception, the
importance of following treatment, and the priority placed on adherence. Co-morbidities, such as
depression (18) (in diabetes or HIV/AIDS), and drug and alcohol abuse, are important modifiers of adher-
ence behaviour.
D. Therapy-related factors
There are many therapy-related factors that affect adherence. Most notable are those related to the
complexity of the medical regimen, duration of treatment, previous treatment failures, frequent
changes in treatment, the immediacy of beneficial effects, side-effects, and the availability of medical
support to deal with them.
Unique characteristics of diseases and/or therapies do not outweigh the common factors affecting
adherence, but rather modify their influence. Adherence interventions should be tailored to the needs
of the patient in order to achieve maximum impact.
E. Patient-related factors
Patient-related factors represent the resources, knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, perceptions and expectations
of the patient.
Patients’knowledge and beliefs about their illness, motivation to manage it, confidence (self-efficacy) in
their ability to engage in illness-management behaviours, and expectations regarding the outcome of
treatment and the consequences of poor adherence, interact in ways not yet fully understood to influ-
ence adherence behaviour.
Some of the patient-related factors reported to affect adherence are: forgetfulness; psychosocial stress;
anxieties about possible adverse effects; low motivation; inadequate knowledge and skill in managing
the disease symptoms and treatment; lack of self-perceived need for treatment; lack of perceived effect
of treatment; negative beliefs regarding the efficacy of the treatment; misunderstanding and non-
acceptance of the disease; disbelief in the diagnosis; lack of perception of the health risk related to the
disease; misunderstanding of treatment instructions; lack of acceptance of monitoring; low treatment
expectations; low attendance at follow-up, or at counselling, motivational, behavioural, or psychotherapy
classes; hopelessness and negative feelings; frustration with health care providers; fear of dependence;
anxiety over the complexity of the drug regimen, and feeling stigmatized by the disease.
Perceptions of personal need for medication are influenced by symptoms, expectations and experiences
and by illness cognitions (19). Concerns about medication typically arise from beliefs about side-effects
and disruption of lifestyle, and from more abstract worries about the long-term effects and dependence.
They are related to negative views about medicines as a whole and suspicions that doctors over-pre-
scribe medicines (20,21) as well as to a broader “world view”characterized by suspicions of chemicals in
food and the environment (22) and of science, medicine and technology (23).
A patient’s motivation to adhere to prescribed treatment is influenced by the value that he or she places
on following the regimen (cost-benefit ratio) and the degree of confidence in being able to follow it (24).
Building on a patient’s intrinsic motivation by increasing the perceived importance of adherence, and
strengthening confidence by building self-management skills, are behavioural treatment targets that
must be addressed concurrently with biomedical ones if overall adherence is to be improved.
WHO 2003
30 ❘
 2. Intervening in the five dimensions
The ability of patients to follow treatments in an optimal manner is frequently compromised by more
than one barrier.Interventions to promote adherence require several components to target these barriers,
and health professionals must follow a systematic process to assess all the potential barriers.
Given that interventions are available, why has the adherence problem persisted? One answer concerns
their implementation.There has been a tendency to focus on unidimensional factors (primarily patient-
related factors). All five dimensions (social and economic factors, health care team and systems-related
factors, therapy-related factors, condition-related factors and patient-related factors), should be consid-
ered in a systematic exploration of the factors affecting adherence and the interventions aimed at
improving it.
While many interventions (e.g. education in self-management (25-34); pharmacy management pro-
grammes (35,36); nurse, pharmacist and other non-medical health professional intervention protocols
(37-43); counselling (44,45); behavioural interventions (46,47); follow-up (48,49) and reminders, among
others), have been shown to be effective in significantly improving adherence rates (50-54), they have
tended to be used alone. A single-factor approach might be expected to have limited effectiveness, if the
factors determining adherence interact and potentiate each other’s influence as they are likely to do.
The most effective approaches have been shown to be multi-level – targeting more than one factor
with more than one intervention. Several programmes have demonstrated good results using multi-
level team approaches (55-57). Examples include the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial Research
Group, 1982 (58) and the Hypertension Detection and Follow-up Program Cooperative Group, 1979 (59).
In fact, adequate evidence exists to support the use of innovative, modified health care system teams
rather than traditional, independent physician practice and minimally structured systems (60,61).
Various interventions are already being implemented by many different health care actors. Although
not all of these actors are directly responsible for providing health care, they nevertheless have an
important role in improving adherence because they can influence one or more of the factors that
determine adherence.
The work that is being done to improve adherence and the persons performing the work are described
below.
A. Social and economic interventions
Policy-makers who have the major responsibility for designing and managing the health care environ-
ment need to understand the ways in which social and economic factors influence adherence.
The main economic and social concerns that should be addressed in relation to adherence are poverty
(62), access to health care and medicines, illiteracy (62), provision of effective social support networks
and mechanisms for the delivery of health services that are sensitive to cultural beliefs about illness and
treatment. (For more information see Annex 4.)
The high cost of medicines and care is consistently reported as an important cause of nonadherence in
developing countries. Universal and sustainable financing, affordable prices and reliable supply systems
are required if good rates of adherence to therapies are to be achieved. Considerable efforts are being
made by WHO’s partners to improve access to medicines and care worldwide.
Community-based organizations, education of illiterate patients, assessment of social needs (63) and fam-
ily preparedness have been reported to be effective social interventions for improving adherence (64).
Social support (i.e. informal or formal support received by patients from other members of their com-
munity), has been consistently reported as an important factor affecting health outcomes and behav-
❘ 31
WHO 2003
 iours (65,66). It has also been reported to improve adherence to prescribed recommendations for treat-
ing chronic conditions (67), such as diabetes (68-78), hypertension (79,80), epilepsy (81-86), asthma (87)
and HIV/AIDS (88-92), and to some preventive interventions such as breast cancer screening guidelines
(93) and follow-up for abnormal Pap smears (94,95). So far, social support has not been shown to affect
adherence to smoking cessation therapies (96-98).
Good examples of successfully implemented community-based programmes are the medication
groups (99) and the peer/community support groups.The objectives of these programmes are:
– to promote the exchange of experiences of dealing with a disease and its treatment;
– to provide comprehensive medical information; and 
– to promote patients’responsibility for their own care.
There is substantial evidence that peer support among patients can improve adherence to therapy
(88,100-107) while reducing the amount of time devoted by health professionals to the care of patients
with chronic conditions (107-109).Many other community interventions have also been shown to result
in economic and health benefits by improving patients’self-management capacities (110-117) and/or by
the integration of the provision of care (57,118-121).
The participation of patients’organizations, with the support of community health professionals (122),
has been shown to be effective in promoting the maintenance and motivation required for the self-
management of chronic diseases, as well as keeping the patient active in the knowledge of his or her
disease and in the acquisition of new habits (110,111,113-115,123,124).
There are three different types of patients’organization (PO):
– Patient’s organizations directly owned and managed by the health care provider (e.g. health mainte-
nance organizations (HMOs) in the United States);
– Patient’s organizations directly owned by patients, but promoted, organized and supported by public
health care providers (as in Mexico); and 
– independent Patient’s organizations with no ties with health care providers.
Unfortunately, the Patient’s organizations that have no ties with health care providers usually lack the
health care programmes required for supporting patients’self-management.Their effectiveness has not
been evaluated and such organizations usually focus mainly on patient advocacy.
Although well-established group interventions do exist, few patients are informed by health profession-
als of the benefits of joining support groups for improving self-management of chronic conditions.
Further evaluation is needed to assess the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of these organizations in
enhancing adherence.
WHO, ministries of health and development agencies have a major role in promoting and coordinating
community-based efforts to tackle social and economic factors affecting adherence to therapies.
WHO 2003
32 ❘
 B. Health care team and health system interventions 
The issue of nonadherence has caught the attention of front-line health service providers and health
researchers for a long time. However, opinion leaders among policy-makers have yet to adopt the issue
as a policy target.This report can be used to focus attention on the consequences of poor adherence
not only for population health, but for the efficiency of the health care system and to demonstrate the
key role that policy-makers have to play.
Adherence is a multidimensional issue where different 
health care actors’efforts meet.
Health leaders at many different levels contribute to shaping a health system to meet the needs 
of its constituents.The way that health systems operate, the types of services and resources that are
available and accessible to the population, and the ways in which health providers deliver treatments
are of primary concern here.
This review found five major barriers inextricably linked to health system and team factors:
– lack of awareness and knowledge about adherence;
– lack of clinical tools to assist health professionals in evaluating and intervening in adherence problems;
– lack of behavioural tools to help patients develop adaptive health behaviours or to change maladaptive
ones;
– gaps in the provision of care for chronic conditions; and
– suboptimal communication between patients and health professionals.
No single intervention or package of interventions has been shown to be effective across all patients,con-
ditions and settings. Consequently, interventions that target adherence must be tailored to the particu-
lar illness-related demands experienced by the patient.To accomplish this, health systems and
providers need to develop means of accurately assessing not only adherence, but also those factors
that contribute to it.
Because health care providers could be expected to play a significant role in promoting adherence,
designing and implementing interventions to influence what they do would seem a reasonable strat-
egy. Although there have been efforts in this area, it is possible that they have had less-than-optimal
power because they have not conveyed a sufficiently powerful skill set and/or the skills have not been
widely adopted in practice.
To make this way of practice a reality, practitioners must have access to specific training in adherence
management, and the systems in which they work must design and support delivery systems that
respect this objective. For empowering health professionals an “adherence counselling toolkit”adapt-
able to different socioeconomic settings is urgently needed that will systematically assess, suggest
interventions and follow up patients’adherence.
Such training needs to address three main topics simultaneously.
The information on adherence. A summary of the factors that have been reported to affect adherence,
the effective interventions available, the epidemiology and economics of adherence and behavioural
mechanisms driving patient-related adherence.
A clinically useful way of using this information and thinking about adherence. This should encompass
assessment tools and strategies to promote change. Any educational intervention should provide
answers to the following questions: How should patients be interviewed to assess adherence? How can
❘ 33
WHO 2003
 one learn from local factors and interventions? How should priorities be ranked and the best available
interventions chosen? How should the patients’progress be followed up and assessed?
Behavioural tools for creating or maintaining habits. This component should be taught using “role-play”
and other educational strategies to ensure that health professionals incorporate behavioural tools for
enhancing adherence into their daily practice.
Some information is available on training health professionals to perform patient-tailored interventions
effectively. Ockene et al. (125) reported the effectiveness of short patient-centred interventions in three
different randomized clinical trials: the WATCH study (diet) (126,127), the Project Health (alcohol) (128),
the Nurse-Delivery Diabetic Smoking Intervention Project (129) and the Physician-Delivered Smoking
Intervention Project (smoking cessation) (130).The latter found a statistically significant improvement in
smoking quitting rates associated with 5-9 minutes of intervention.
It is clear from these studies that good adherence requires a continuous and dynamic process.
Practitioners (and other health enablers) often assume that the patient is, or should be, motivated to
follow a best-practice protocol. However, recent research in the behavioural sciences reveals this to be
an erroneous assumption.The patient population can be segmented according to level-of-readiness to
follow health recommendations (131-133).The lack of a match between the patient’s readiness and the
practitioner’s attempts at intervention means that treatments are frequently prescribed to patients who
are not ready to follow them.
Although adherence interventions directed towards patients have typically focused on providing edu-
cation to increase knowledge, the available evidence shows that knowledge alone is not enough. Roter
et al. published a meta-analysis of adherence-enhancing interventions which concluded that “no single
strategy or programmatic focus showed any clear advantage compared with another and that compre-
hensive interventions combining cognitive, behavioural, and affective [motivational] components were
more effective than single-focus interventions”(134). Information alone is not enough for creating or
maintaining good adherence habits. First-line interventions to optimize adherence must go beyond the
provision of advice and prescriptions. If either the perceived value of adhering, or confidence, is low, the
likelihood of adherence will also be low.
Health care providers can learn to assess the potential for nonadherence, and to detect nonadherence
itself.They can then use this information to implement brief interventions to encourage and support
progress towards adherence. A conceptual framework that explains how patients progress to adherence
will help practitioners to tailor their interventions to the needs of the patient.
More research is required in this area. New, sustainable initiatives targeting providers could aim 
to impart knowledge about the broad determinants of the problem and of specific strategies for
addressing them, in ways that can be systematically implemented in practice.
The evidence reviewed for this report suggests that it would be helpful to create a shift in provider per-
spective that supports tailoring of interventions to the needs of individual patients, and to teach specif-
ic strategies to address those needs. One of the problems in this area has been the relatively low levels
of knowledge transfer.The results of effective studies have not been widely implemented in practice.
This highlights the need for educational programmes that go beyond describing the problem, and that
convey solutions to everyday problems in practice.
WHO and many ministries of health are working to improve the provision of health care, but a lot of
work still needs to be done on the development of appropriate care for chronic conditions.
WHO 2003
34 ❘
 C. Therapy-related interventions
In studies of therapy-related interventions, the main barriers to adherence were found to be the dose
frequency and the incidence of side-effects. Pharmaceutical companies in partnership with health pro-
fessionals and researchers are addressing these problems.The health system has an important role in
minimizing the impact of side-effects on patients.
D. Condition-related interventions
Disease-specific demands, symptoms and impairments are the targets of health professionals.These
actors could provide optimal care by identifying and treating these problems, as well as identifying and
treating co-morbidities that affect adherence. For example, because of the high prevalence of depres-
sion and its considerable effect on adherence, adherence counselling interventions should include sys-
tematic screening for depression.
E. Patient-related interventions
The major barriers to adherence described in the literature reviewed for this report were lack of infor-
mation and skills as they pertain to self-management, difficulty with motivation and self-efficacy, and
lack of support for behavioural changes.
These barriers were especially significant for those interventions intended to change habits and/or
lifestyles, but also affected medication use.WHO acknowledges the necessity of supporting patients’
efforts at self-management. Many researchers are working to develop or improve and disseminate self-
management guidelines.
Global changes in the delivery of health services and shrinking health care budgets have also con-
tributed to a need for patients to become more able to manage their own treatments.The develop-
ment of self-management interventions aimed at improving motivation and adherence, based on the
best available evidence, will help to fill this need.This work can support efforts by patients’organiza-
tions to engage and support their members.
Increasing the impact of interventions aimed at patient-related factors is essential.There is a wealth of
data from the behavioural sciences demonstrating the efficacy of specific strategies. Although it is well
known that education alone is a weak intervention, many interventions continue to rely on patient edu-
cation to encourage patients to adhere to their treatment. Patients need to be informed, motivated and
skilled in the use of cognitive and behavioural self-regulation strategies if they are to cope effectively
with the treatment-related demands imposed by their illness. For the effective provision of care for
chronic conditions it is necessary to activate the patient and the community who support him or her
(135).
A continuous effort is being made to improve the provision of information to patients, but motivation,
which drives sustainable good adherence, is one of the most difficult elements for the health care sys-
tem to provide in the long term. Although health professionals have an important role in promoting
optimism, providing enthusiasm, and encouraging maintenance of health behaviours among their
patients (136), the health systems and health care teams experience difficulties in constantly motivating
patients with chronic conditions.These difficulties have led to an increased interest during the past
decade, in the role of community-based educational and/or self-management programmes aimed at
the creation and maintenance of healthy habits, including adherence to health recommendations.
❘ 35
WHO 2003
 3. References
1. Albaz RS.Factors affecting patient compliance in Saudi Arabia.Journal of
Social Sciences,1997,25:5-8.
2. Morgan M.Managing hypertension:belief and responses to medication
among cultural groups.Sociology of Health & Illness,1988,10:561-578.
3. Belgrave LL.Race and compliance with hypertension treatment.Sociological
Abstracts no.45.American Sociological Association,1997.
4. Erwin J.Treatment issues for HIV+ Africans in London.Social Science &
Medicine,1999,49:1519-1528.
5. Siegel K.Racial differences in attitudes toward protease inhibitors among
older HIV-infected men.AIDS Care,2000,12,423-434.
6. Schwalm DU.Effects of war on compliance.Curare,1997,20:101-107.
7. Burkhart P
,Dunbar-Jacob J.Adherence research in the pediatric and adoles-
cent populations:A decade in review.In:Hayman L,Mahom M,Turner R,eds.
Chronic illness in children:An evidence-based approach.New York,Springer,
2002:199-229.
8. Fotheringham MSM.Adherence to recommended medical regimens in child-
hood and adolescence.Journal of Pediatrics and Child Health,1995,31:72-78.
9. Burkhart PV,Dunbar-Jacob JM,Rohay JM.Accuracy of children’s self-reported
adherence to treatment.Journal of Nursing Scholarship,2001,33:27-32.
10. Rapoff M.Adherence to pediatric medical regimens.New York,Plenum,1999.
11. Coutts JA,Gibson NA,Paton JY.Measuring compliance with inhaled medica-
tion in asthma.Archives of Disease in Childhood,1992,67:332-333.
12. Courteheuse C.[Reciprocal responsibility:the case with asthma.] [French]
Revue Medicale de la Suisse Romande,1992,112:235-238.
13. Eney RD,Goldstein EO.Compliance of chronic asthmatics with oral adminis-
tration of theophylline as measured by serum and salivary levels.Pediatrics,
1976,57:513-517.
14. Jernigan JA.Update on drugs and the elderly.American Family Physician,
1984,29:238-247.
15. Johnson MJ,Williams M,Marshall ES.Adherent and nonadherent medica-
tion-taking in elderly hypertensive patients.Clinical Nursing Research,1999,
8:318-335.
16. Pinzone HA et al.Prediction of asthma episodes in children using peak expi-
ratory flow rates,medication compliance,and exercise data.Annals of Allergy,
1991,67:481-486.
17. Rose LE et al.The contexts of adherence for African Americans with high
blood pressure.Journal of Advanced Nursing,2000,32:587-594.
18. Ciechanowski,PS,Katon,WJ,and Russo,JE Depression and diabetes:impact
of depressives symptoms on adherence,function,and costs.Archives of
Internal Medicine,2000,27:3278-3285.
19. Horne R.Patients’beliefs about treatment:the hidden determinant of treat-
ment outcome? Journal of Psychosomatic Research,1999,47:491-495.
20. Horne R,Hankins M,Jenkins R.The satisfaction with information about med-
icines scale (SIMS):A new measurement tool for audit and research.Quality
in Health Care,2001,10:135-140.
21. Horne R,Weinman J.Patients’beliefs about prescribed medicines and their
role in adherence to treatment in chronic physical illness.Journal of
Psychosomatic Research,1999,47:555-567.
22. Gupta K,Horne R.The influence of health beliefs on the presentation and
consultation outcome in patients with chemical sensitivities.Journal of
Psychosomatic Research,2001,50:131-137.
23. Petrie KJ,Wessely S.Modern worries,new technology,and medicine.
British Medical Journal,2002,324:690-691.
24. Miller W,Rollnick S.Motivational interviewing.New York,Guilford Press,1999.
25. Gut-Gobert C et al.[Current trends in asthma management.] [French] Presse
Medicale,2000,29:761-765.
26. Weinstein AG.Asthma treatment and noncompliance.Delaware Medical
Journal,2000,72:209-213.
27. Gibson PG.Self-management education and regular practitioner review for
adults with asthma.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,2001,Issue 1.
28. Tuldra A et al.Prospective randomized two-arm controlled study to deter-
mine the efficacy of a specific intervention to improve long-term adherence
to highly active antiretroviral therapy.Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndromes,2000,25:221-228.
29. Sebastian MS,Bothamley GH.Tuberculosis preventive therapy:perspective
from a multi-ethnic community.Respiratory Medicine,2000,94:648-653.
30. Walsh S,Hagan T,Gamsu D.Rescuer and rescued:applying a cognitive analyt-
ic perspective to explore the ‘mis-management’of asthma.British Journal of
Medical Psychology,2000,73:151-168.
31. Renders C,Valk G,Griffin S.Interventions to improve the management of dia-
betes mellitus in primary care,outpatient and community settings.Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews,2001,Issue 1.
32. Haisch J,Remmele W.[Effectiveness and efficiency of ambulatory diabetes
education programmes.A comparison of specialty practice and general prac-
tice.] [German] Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift,2000,125:171-176.
33. Shiffman S et al.The efficacy of computer-tailored smoking cessation materi-
al as a supplement to nicotine polacrilex gum therapy.Archives of Internal
Medicine,2000,160:1675-1681.
34. Marquez CE et al.[Treatment compliance in arterial hypertension.A 2-year
intervention trial through health education.] [Spanish] Atencion Primaria,
2000,26:5-10.
35. Lowe CJ et al.Effects of a medicine review and education programme for
older people in general practice.British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology,
2000,50:172-175.
36. Sloss EM et al.Selecting target conditions for quality of care improvement in
vulnerable older adults.Journal of the American Geriatrics Society,2000,
48:363-369.
37. Richardson R et al.Learning curve.Hypertension:catch them when they’re
older.Nursing Times,2000,96:42-43.
38. Kokubu F et al.[Hospitalization reduction by an asthma tele-medicine sys-
tem japanese].Arerugi – Japanese Journal of Allergology,2000,49:19-31.
39. Serrier P et al.[Evaluation of an educational program on asthma for pharma-
cists.] [French] Presse Medicale,2000,29:1987-1991.
40. Strobach D et al.[Patient medication counselling – patient counselling about
discharge medication].[German] Medizinische Klinik,2000,95:548-551.
41. Piette JD et al.Do automated calls with nurse follow-up improve self-care
and glycemic control among vulnerable patients with diabetes? American
Journal of Medicine,2000,108:20-27.
42. Rice VH.Nursing interventions for smoking cessation.Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews,2001,Issue 1,2001.
42. Banerjee A et al.Evaluation of a unified treatment regimen for all new cases
of tuberculosis using guardian-based supervision.International Journal of
Tuberculosis & Lung Disease,2000,4:333-339.
44. Rohland BM,Rohrer JE,Richards CC.The long-term effect of outpatient com-
mitment on service use.Administration & Policy in Mental Health,2000,
27:383-394.
45. Nisbeth O,Klausen K,Andersen LB.Effectiveness of counselling over 1 year on
changes in lifestyle and coronary heart disease risk factors.Patient Education
& Counseling,2000,40:121-31.
46. Nichols-English G,Poirier S.Optimizing adherence to pharmaceutical care
plans.Journal of the American Pharmaceutical Association,2000,40:475-485.
47. Siegel K,Karus D,Schrimshaw EW.Racial differences in attitudes toward pro-
tease inhibitors among older HIV-infected men.AIDS Care,2000,12:423-434.
WHO 2003
36 ❘
 48. James M et al.Cost effectiveness analysis of screening for sight threatening
diabetic eye disease.British Medical Journal, 2000,320:1627-1631 [erratum
published in British Medical Journal,2000,321:424].
49. McCulloch D.Managing diabetes for improved health and economic out-
comes.American Journal of Managed Care,2000,6 (Suppl):S1089-S1095.
50. Ostrop NJ,Hallett KA,Gill MJ.Long-term patient adherence to antiretroviral
therapy.Annals of Pharmacotherapy,2000,34:703-709.
51. Tutty S,Simon G,Ludman E.Telephone counseling as an adjunct to antidepres-
sant treatment in the primary care system.A pilot study.Effective Clinical
Practice,2000,3:170-178.
52. Solomon LJ et al.Free nicotine patches plus proactive telephone peer sup-
port to help low-income women stop smoking.Preventive Medicine,2000,
31:68-74.
53. Norris SL et al.Effectiveness of physician-based assessment and counseling
for exercise in a staff model HMO.Preventive Medicine,2000,30:513-523.
54. Salmon-Ceron D et al.[Adherence to antiretroviral treatments with a pro-
tease inhibitor in HIV-infected patients.] [French] Annales de Medecine
Interne,2000,151:297-302.
55. Muller C,Hagele R,Heinl KW.[Differentiation and modification of compliance
with reference to topical corticoid medication in patients with bronchial
asthma.] [German] Pneumologie,1996,50:257-259.
56. Woller W et al.Cortisone image and emotional support by key figures 
in patients with bronchial asthma.An empirical study.Psychotherapy &
Psychosomatics,1993,59:190-196.
57. Wagner EH et al.Chronic care clinics for diabetes in primary care:
A system-wide randomized trial.Diabetes Care,2001,24:695-700.
58. Risk factor changes and mortality results.Multiple Risk Factor Intervention
Trial Research Group.1982.Journal of the American Medical Association,1997,
277:582-594.
59. Five-year findings of the hypertension detection and follow-up program.I.
Reduction in mortality of persons with high blood pressure,including mild
hypertension.Hypertension Detection and Follow-up Program Cooperative
Group.1979.Journal of the American Medical Association,1997,277:157-166.
60. DeBusk RF et al.A case-management system for coronary risk factor modifi-
cation after acute myocardial infarction.Annals of Internal Medicine,1994,
120:721-729.
61. Peters AL,Davidson MB,Ossorio RC.Management of patients with diabetes
by nurses with support of subspecialists.HMO Practice,1995,9:8-13.
62. Garnett WR.Antiepileptic drug treatment:outcomes and adherence.
Pharmacotherapy,2000,20:191S-199S.
63. Ruggieron L et al.Impact of social support and stress on compliance in
women with gestational diabetes.Diabetes Care,1990,13:441-443.
64. Glasgow RE,McCaul KD,Schafer LC.Self care behaviors and glycemic control
in Type 1 diabetes.Journal of Chronic Diseases,1987,40:399-412.
65. MacLean D,Lo R.The non-insulin-dependent diabetic:success and failure 
in compliance.Australian Journal of Advanced Nursing,1998,15:33-42.
66. Kyngas H.Predictors of good compliance in adolescents with epilepsy.
Seizure,2001,10:549-553.
67. Kyngas H,Rissanen M.Support as a crucial predictor of good compliance 
of adolescents with a chronic disease.Journal of Clinical Nursing,2001,
10:767-774.
68. Pendley JS et al.Peer and family support in children and adolescents with
type 1 diabetes.Journal of Pediatric Psychology,2002,27:429-438.
69. Burroughs TE et al.Research on social support in adolescents with IDDM:
a critical review.Diabetes Educator,1997,23:438-448.
70. Fitzgerald JT et al.Differences in the impact of dietary restrictions on African
Americans and Caucasians with NIDDM.Diabetes Educator,1997,23:41-47.
71. Wang CY,Fenske MM.Self-care of adults with non-insulin-dependent dia-
betes mellitus:influence of family and friends.Diabetes Educator,1996,
22:465-470.
72. La Greca AM et al.I get by with a little help from my family and friends:
adolescents’support for diabetes care.Journal of Pediatric Psychology,1995,
20:449-476.
73. Garay-Sevilla ME et al.Adherence to treatment and social support in patients
with non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus.Journal of Diabetes & its
Complications,1995,9:81-86.
74. Belgrave FZ,Lewis DM.The role of social support in compliance and other
health behaviors for African Americans with chronic illnesses.Journal of
Health & Social Policy,1994,5:55-68.
75. Ruggiero L et al.Self-reported compliance with diabetes self-management
during pregnancy.International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine,1993,
23:195-207.
76. Sherbourne CD et al.Antecedents of adherence to medical recommendations:
results from the Medical Outcomes Study.Journal of Behavioral Medicine,
1992,15:447-468.
77. Nagasawa M et al.Meta-analysis of correlates of diabetes patients’compli-
ance with prescribed medications.Diabetes Educator,1990,16:192-200.
78. Ruggiero L et al.Impact of social support and stress on compliance in
women with gestational diabetes.Diabetes Care,1990,13:441-443.
79. Fishman T.The 90-Second Intervention:a patient compliance mediated 
technique to improve and control hypertension.Public Health Reports,1995,
110:173-178.
80. Stanton AL.Determinants of adherence to medical regimens by hypertensive
patients.Journal of Behavioral Medicine,1987,10:377-394.
81. Kyngas H.Compliance with health regimens of adolescents with epilepsy.
Seizure,2000,9:598-604.
82. Kyngas HA,Kroll T,Duffy ME.Compliance in adolescents with chronic 
diseases:a review.Journal of Adolescent Health,2000,26:379-388.
83. Cameron C.Patient compliance:recognition of factors involved and sugges-
tions for promoting compliance with therapeutic regimens.Journal of
Advanced Nursing,1996,24:244-250.
84. Schlenk EA,Hart LK.Relationship between health locus of control,health
value,and social support and compliance of persons with diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes Care,1984,7:566-574.
85. Levy RL.Social support and compliance:a selective review and critique of
treatment integrity and outcome measurement.Social Science & Medicine,
1983,17:1329-1338.
86. Doherty WJ et al.Effect of spouse support and health beliefs on medication
adherence.Journal of Family Practice,1983,17:837-841.
87. Kyngas HA.Compliance of adolescents with asthma.Nursing & Health
Sciences,1999,1:195-202.
88. Weishut DJ.[Coping with AIDS in a support group – an encounter with 
the health system.] [Hebrew] Harefuah,1996,130:521-523.
89. Demas PA et al.Maternal adherence to the zidovudine regimen for HIV-
exposed infants to prevent HIV infection:a preliminary study.Pediatrics,
2002,110:e35.
90. Spire B et al.Adherence to highly active antiretroviral therapies (HAART) in
HIV-infected patients:from a predictive to a dynamic approach.Social Science
& Medicine,2002,54:1481-1496.
91. Roberts KJ.Barriers to and facilitators of HIV-positive patients’adherence to
antiretroviral treatment regimens.AIDS Patient Care & STDs,2000,14:155-168.
92. Catz SL et al.Patterns,correlates,and barriers to medication adherence
among persons prescribed new treatments for HIV disease.Health
Psychology,2000,19:124-133.
❘ 37
WHO 2003
 93. Katapodi MC et al.The influence of social support on breast cancer screen-
ing in a multicultural community sample.Oncology Nursing Forum,2002,
29:845-852.
94. Abercrombie PD.Improving adherence to abnormal Pap smear follow-up.
Journal of Obstetric,Gynecologic,& Neonatal Nursing,2001,30:80-88.
95. Crane LA.Social support and adherence behavior among women with
abnormal Pap smears.Journal of Cancer Education,1996,11:164-173.
96. Owen N,Brown SL.Smokers unlikely to quit.Journal of Behavioral Medicine,
1991,14:627-636.
97. DiIorio C,Faherty B,Manteuffel B.Cognitive-perceptual factors associated
with antiepileptic medication compliance.Research in Nursing & Health,
1991,14:329-338.
98. Orleans CT et al.Self-help quit smoking interventions:effects of self-help
materials,social support instructions,and telephone counseling.Journal of
Consulting & Clinical Psychology,1991,59:439-448.
99. Guimon J.The use of group programs to improve medication compliance 
in patients with chronic diseases.Patient Education & Counseling,1995,
26:189-193.
100. Broadhead RS et al.Increasing drug users’adherence to HIV treatment:
results of a peer-driven intervention feasibility study.Social Science &
Medicine,2002,55:235-246.
101. Magura S et al.Adherence to medication regimens and participation in
dual-focus self-help groups.Psychiatric Services,2002,53:310-316.
102. Hoch C,Gobel U,Janssen G.[Psychosocial support of patients with homozy-
gous beta-thalassaemia.] [German] Klinische Padiatrie,2000,212:216-219.
103. Richards W et al.A self-help program for childhood asthma in a residential
treatment center.Clinical Pediatrics,1981,20:453-457.
104. Weishut DJ.[Coping with AIDS in a support group – an encounter with 
the health system.] [Hebrew] Harefuah,1996,130:521-523.
105. Getahun H,Maher D.Contribution of ‘TB clubs’to tuberculosis control in a
rural district in Ethiopia.International Journal of Tuberculosis & Lung Disease,
2000,4:174-178.
106. Garay-Sevilla ME et al.Adherence to treatment and social support in
patients with non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus.Journal of Diabetes
& its Complications,1995,9:81-86.
107. Kulcar Z.Self-help,mutual aid and chronic patients’clubs in Croatia,
Yugoslavia:discussion paper.Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine,1991,
84:288-291.
108. Boza RA et al.Patient noncompliance and overcompliance.Behavior pat-
terns underlying a patient’s failure to ‘follow doctor’s orders’.Postgraduate
Medicine,1987,81:163-170.
109. Lilja P.Recognizing the effect of social support on compliance to medical
regimen in the elderly chronically ill.Home Healthcare Nurse,1984,2:17-22.
110. Koch T,Selim P
,Kralik D.Enhancing lives through the development of a com-
munity-based participatory action research programme.Journal of Clinical
Nursing,2002,11:109-117.
111. Dias JC.[Community participation and control of endemic diseases in Brazil:
problems and possibilities.] [Portuguese] Cadernos de Saude Publica,1998,
14 (Suppl) 2:19-37.
112. Asthana S,Oostvogels R.Community participation in HIV prevention:
problems and prospects for community-based strategies among female 
sex workers in Madras.Social Science & Medicine,1996,43:133-148.
113. Loue S,Lloyd LS,Phoombour E.Organizing Asian Pacific Islanders in an urban
community to reduce HIV risk:a case study.AIDS Education & Prevention,
1996,8:381-393.
114. Freudenberg N.A new role for community organizations in the prevention
and control of tuberculosis.Journal of Community Health,1995,20:15-28.
115. Bermejo A,Bekui A.Community participation in disease control.Social
Science & Medicine,1993,36:1145-1150.
116. Kuehnert PL.Community health nursing and the AIDS pandemic:case
report of one community’s response.Journal of Community Health Nursing,
1991,8:137-146.
117. Delaney C.Reducing recidivism:medication versus psychosocial rehabilita-
tion.Journal of Psychosocial Nursing & Mental Health Services,1998,36:28-34.
118. Davies M et al.Evaluation of a hospital diabetes specialist nursing service:
a randomized controlled trial.Diabetic Medicine,2001,18:301-307.
119. Akbar DH,Al Gamdi AA.Common causes of admission in diabetics.Saudi
Medical Journal,2000,21:539-542.
120. Gray A et al.Cost effectiveness of an intensive blood glucose control policy
in patients with type 2 diabetes:economic analysis alongside randomised
controlled trial (UKPDS 41).United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study
Group.British Medical Journal,2000,320:1373-1378.
121. Steffens B.Cost-effective management of type 2 diabetes:providing quality
care in a cost-constrained environment.American Journal of Managed Care,
2000,6:S697-S703.
122. Feuerstein M et al.Compliance – a joint effort of the patient and his doctor.
Epilepsy Research,1988,(Suppl) 1:51-56.
123. Carter IR,Nash C,Ridgway A.On any Saturday – a practical model for dia-
betes education.Journal of the National Medical Association,2002,94:67-72.
124. O’Grady A et al.Effectiveness of changes in the delivery of diabetes care in a
rural community.Australian Journal of Rural Health,2001,9:74-78.
125. Ockene J.Strategies to increase adherence to treatment.In:Burke LE,
Ockene IS,eds.Compliance in health care and research.Armonk,New York ,
Futura,2001:43-55.
126. Ockene IS et al.Effect of physician-delivered nutrition counseling training
and an office-support program on saturated fat intake,weight,and serum
lipid measurements in a hyperlipidemic population:Worcester Area Trial for
Counseling in Hyperlipidemia (WATCH).Archives of Internal Medicine,1999,
159:725-731.
127. Ockene IS et al.Effect of training and a structured office practice on physi-
cian-delivered nutrition counseling:the Worcester-Area Trial for Counseling
in Hyperlipidemia (WATCH).American Journal of Preventive Medicine,1996,
12:252-258.
128. Ockene JK et al.Provider training for patient-centered alcohol counseling in
a primary care setting.Archives of Internal Medicine,1997,157:2334-2341.
129. Canga N et al.Intervention study for smoking cessation in diabetic patients:
a randomized controlled trial in both clinical and primary care settings.
Diabetes Care,2000,23:1455-1460.
130. Ockene JK et al.The Physician-Delivered Smoking Intervention Project:
factors that determine how much the physician intervenes with smokers.
Journal of General Internal Medicine,1994,9:379-384.
131. Prochaska JO,DiClemente CC.Stages of change in the modification of 
problem behaviors.Progress In Behavior Modification,1992,28:183-218.
132. Prochaska JO,DiClemente CC,Norcross JC.In search of how people change.
Applications to addictive behaviors.American Psychologist,1992,47:1102-
1114.
133. Prochaska JO,Redding C,Evers K.The Transtheoretical Model.In:Glanz K LF,
Rimer BK,eds.Health behavior and health education:theory,research,and
practice.San Francisco,Jossey-Bass,1997.
134. Roter DL et al.Effectiveness of interventions to improve patient compliance:
a meta-analysis.Medical Care,1998,36:1138-1161.
135. McCann K.AIDS in the nineties:from science to policy.Care in the community
and by the community.AIDS Care ,1990,2:421-424.
139. Lo R.Correlates of expected success at adherence to health regimen of 
people with IDDM.Journal of Advanced Nursing,1999,30:418-424.
WHO 2003
38 ❘
 Chapter VI
C H A P T E R  V I
How can improved adherence be trans-
lated into health and economic benefits?
1. Diabetes
39
2. Hypertension
40
3. Asthma
41
4. References
43
Many studies have reported institutional changes in costs following changes in adherence rates. Some
studies have shown that initial investments in interventions to enhance adherence are fully recovered
within a few years and recurrent costs are fully covered by savings.These “cost-saving interventions”are
firmly linked to the prevention of disease relapses, crises and/or complications.
From a societal point of view,most interventions aimed at enhancing adherence have been shown to result
in cost-savings, due to the improvement in patients’quality of life, indirect costs avoided and increased
productivity. Such savings are not reflected in economic studies with an institutional perspective.
1. Diabetes
Diabetes is a typical chronic disease that demonstrates the need for integrated and multifaceted
approaches to achieve good control. Almost any intervention designed to improve metabolic control in
diabetic patients, or to delay the onset of complications does so by supporting patients in developing
appropriate self-management behaviours. Interventions to enhance adherence in patients with diabetes
benefit from a comprehensive and multifactorial approach to providing better control of the disease.
For example, a systematic review by Renders and colleagues (1), of interventions to improve the man-
agement of diabetes mellitus in primary care, conducted in outpatient and community settings,
analysed 41 heterogeneous studies of multifaceted intervention strategies. Some of these studies were
targeted at health professionals, others at the organization of care, but most of them targeted both. In
15 studies, patient education was added to the professional and organizational interventions.The
reviewers concluded that multifaceted professional interventions can enhance the performance of
health professionals in managing diabetic patients. Organizational interventions that improve regular
prompted recall and review of patients can also improve diabetes management. In addition, the inclu-
sion of patient-oriented interventions can lead to improved health outcomes for the patients. Nurses
 WHO 2003
40 ❘
can play an important role in patient-oriented interventions, through patient education and facilitating
adherence to treatment.
A recent meta-analysis has shown that education about self-management improves glycaemic levels 
at immediate follow-up, and increased contact time increases this effect. However, the benefit declines
1-3 months after the intervention ceases, suggesting that learned behaviours change over time (2), and
that some additional interventions are needed for maintaining them.
In a study in Switzerland, Gozzoli et al. estimated the impact of several alternative interventions for
improving the control of complications of diabetes (3).They concluded that the implementation of 
multifactorial interventions, including improved control of cardiovascular risk factors, combined with
early diagnosis and treatment of complications of diabetes, could save both costs and lives.
Nurse case-management (4-6), disease management (7,8) and population-based management (9) have
all resulted in better adherence to recommended standards of care, sometimes with impressive clinical
and economic outcomes. Moreover, the Chronic Care Model (CCM), a systematic approach to improving
the quality of care for persons with chronic diseases, has shown promising results (10,11).
Positive results have also been reported from the United States by the Diabetes Roadmap of Group
Health Cooperative of Puget Sound (GHC), an HMO serving about 400 000 people in western
Washington state, which uses the strategy of population-based management of care to improve care
and outcomes for its 13 000 diabetic patients (9). Population-based care uses guidelines, and epidemio-
logical data and techniques to plan, organize, deliver and monitor care in specific clinical sub-popula-
tions such as patients with diabetes.This support programme is aimed at helping primary care teams to
improve their ability to deliver population-based diabetes care. Based on an integrated CCM, the pro-
gramme includes an on-line registry of diabetic patients, evidence-based guidelines for routine dia-
betes care, improved support for patient self-management and practice re-design including group vis-
its. AIso, members of a decentralized diabetes education team see patients jointly. Preliminary outcomes
show that retinal screening rates have increased from 56% to 70%, renal screening rates from 18% to
68%, foot examination rates from 18% to 82% and patients being tested for glycosylated haemoglobin
from 72% to 92%.The cost of care for the entire population of diabetic patients has decreased by 11%.
Most studies that reported cost-savings used a systematic approach to disease management (8,12).
More research is needed to assess the cost-effectiveness of interventions aimed at improving adher-
ence rates (13).
2. Hypertension
In patients with hypertension, adherence to treatment recommendations has a major impact on health
outcomes and the costs of care. Some of the better recognized determinants of adherence to antihyper-
tensive therapy are related to drug treatment such as drug tolerability and regimen complexity.Thus,
reduced side-effects, fewer daily doses of antihypertensives, monotherapies and fewer changes in anti-
hypertensive medications have all been associated with better adherence (14-16).
In a landmark study conducted by Morisky et al. (17),patients were assigned to three adherence-pro-
moting interventions: physician counselling, family support for monitoring pill taking, group sessions
with a social worker or to a control group.The 5-year analysis showed a continuing positive effect on
appointment-keeping, weight control and blood-pressure control in the intervention groups.The all-
cause life table mortality rate was 57.3% less for the intervention group than for the control group and
the hypertension-related mortality rate was 53.2% less.The results from this longitudinal study provide
evidence to support the use of adherence-enhancing interventions in patients with hypertension.
Another study used an educational programme to emphasize the importance of proper treatment. In
the intervention groups, the systolic and diastolic blood pressure of both men and women decreased
 ❘ 41
WHO 2003
despite the 5-year increase in age; moreover, hypertension was better controlled after the programme
(24.8% baseline; 39.7% at the end of the study), and substantial decreases in deaths due to cardiovascu-
lar disease were reported (18).
Another intervention that has shown promising results is home recording of blood pressure. For exam-
ple, one study showed that in patients who initially showed poor compliance, there was an increase in
compliance from 0 to 70% after self-measuring of blood pressure was introduced.The authors conclud-
ed that self-recording of blood pressure may be of value in patients with unsatisfactory blood-pressure
responses in whom poor compliance is suspected (19).
Other studies have shown that care of patients by specially trained nurses resulted in increased adher-
ence (20-22) and compelling evidence for the efficacy of brief, nurse-administered behavioural coun-
selling comes from a study of 883 patients of physicians in Great Britain (21).Another study also showed
that adherence to hypertension therapy would benefit from intervention by nurses (22).
Finally, Bogden et al. (23) tested the effect of physicians and pharmacists working together as a team on
patients with uncontrolled hypertension. In a randomized, controlled trial, 95 adult patients with hyper-
tension (more than twice as many patients in the intervention group as in the control group) attained
blood pressure control.
3. Asthma
A systematic review by the Cochrane Airways Group has shown that training patients in asthma self-
management which involves self-monitoring of either peak expiratory flow or symptoms, coupled with
regular medical review and a written action plan appeared to improve health outcomes for adults with
asthma. In addition, self-management education reduced hospitalizations, visits by the doctor, un-
scheduled visits to the doctor, days off work or school and nocturnal asthma. Finally, training pro-
grammes that enabled people to adjust their medication using a written action plan appeared to be
more effective than other forms of asthma self-management and significant improvements in lung
function were achieved (24).
The Cochrane Airways Group has also shown that non-comprehensive approaches such as the use of
limited education about asthma (information only) do not appear to improve health outcomes in adults
with asthma although perceived symptoms may improve (24).
Therefore, patient education and self-management should be integral components of any plan for
long-term control of asthma. In particular, economic appraisals of asthma self-management pro-
grammes have shown them to be cost-effective both in terms of direct costs (mainly averted hospital-
izations and reduced emergency department use) and in terms of indirect costs (e.g. productivity losses
and missed school days).The cost-benefit ratios are between 1:2.5 and 1:7. Ratios are even better in pro-
grammes directed at high-risk groups and patients with severe asthma (25-27).Some examples of stud-
ies that reported net cost-savings are described below.
The Open Airways programme of six 1-hour monthly sessions instructed low-income parents of 310
urban children with asthma in the management steps to be taken both by the children and their par-
ents.The programme found that 44% of the parents lacked confidence in their ability to manage asthma
attacks, believing they should take their children to the hospital emergency department for all episodes,
whether mild or severe. Compared to a control group, participation in the Open Airways programme
reduced emergency department visits and hospitalizations for asthma among those who had been hos-
pitalized during the previous year by half, resulting in savings of US 11.22 for every dollar spent (28).
An Italian study evaluated two structured educational programmes on asthma.The study found that
the savings per patient in terms of reduced morbidity were US 1894.70 (for the intensive programme
 WHO 2003
42 ❘
(IP)) and US 1697.80 (for the brief programme (BP)).The net benefit was US 1181.50 for IP and US
1028.00 for BP and the cost-benefit ratio per dollar spent was 1:2.6 for IP and 1:2.5 for BP (29).
In a programme at Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit, Michigan, in 1986-1987 involving three, 1-hour, edu-
cation sessions in small groups, a registered nurse taught patients about the importance of medication
adherence, methods to control and prevent asthma attacks, relaxation exercises and smoking cessation.
For just US 85 per person in annual programme costs, this intervention reduced the cost of emergency
department visits by US 623 per person during the following year.The programme also reduced the
number of days on which the activity of participants was limited because of asthma by 35% compared
to a control group (30).
In Germany a structured intervention programme produced net benefits of DM 12 850 (in 1991 DM) per
patient within 3 years.Within the health care sector, the net benefits were DM 5 900.Within 3 years, the
paying bodies saved DM 2.70, and society as a whole saved DM 5.00 on each DM spent on the pro-
gramme (cost-saving ratios 1:2.7 and 1:5).The authors concluded that the intervention produced net
monetary benefits.This result was stable even when tested with different outcome measures. Such a
programme is therefore worthwhile, not only for its demonstrated medical benefits, but also for its eco-
nomic savings (31).
In a study in the United States, adult patients with asthma learned self-management skills in seven 90-
minute, group sessions at Ohio University in Athens, Ohio. Participants were asked to keep a weekly
record of peak flow rates and of any attacks they experienced.They also kept a workbook to record the
information that was later used to calculate costs and benefits. At a programme cost of US 208 per
patient, annual asthma-related costs for each patient were reduced by an average of nearly US 500 in
the year following the programme, primarily from reductions in hospitalizations and work absences.The
researchers have also adapted an individualized intervention for use in doctors’surgeries (32).The sub-
sequent economic evaluation of this study showed that the programme was beneficial, reducing the
cost of asthma to each patient by US 475.29.The benefit came primarily from reductions in hospital
admissions (reduced from US 18 488 to US 1538) and income lost as a result of asthma (reduced from
US 11 593 to US 4 589).The asthma self-management programme cost US 208.33 per patient. A compar-
ison of the costs of the programme with the benefits produced a 1:2.28 cost-benefit ratio, demonstrat-
ing that the programme more than paid for itself (33).
The Harvard Community Health Plan, a large staff-model HMO, reduced the annual rate of paediatric
emergency-department admissions related to asthma by 79% and hospital admissions by 86% using a
single outreach nurse for 8 hours per week. In addition to instructing patients in asthma management,
medications, triggers, and the use of inhalers and peak-flow meters, the nurse maintained regular tele-
phone contact with the families to ensure compliance with individualized treatment plans. Patients par-
ticipated for between 6 months and 2 years. At a cost of just US 11 115 per year, this intervention saved
approximately US 87 000 in 1993 dollars (34).
In the Wee Wheezers programme, four small-group sessions of about 2 hours each were conducted to
instruct parents of children under the age of 7 years how to help their children manage asthma attacks,
communicate with health professionals, and promote the psychosocial well-being of the family unit.
The last two sessions included 45 minutes of direct instruction for children aged 4-6 years. On average,
the children reported 0.9 fewer sick days and 5.8 more symptom-free days, and their parents reported
4.4 more nights of uninterrupted sleep during the month preceding the follow-up questionnaire.The
programme cost approximately US 26 per child (35).
To sum up, best practices in asthma control and in enhancement of adherence must include and re-
inforce the links between education and self-management. Not surprisingly, there is high quality evi-
dence to support the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of guided self-management plans. Furthermore,
most studies have reported net cost-savings.
 ❘ 43
WHO 2003
4. References
1. Renders C,Valk G,Griffin S.Interventions to improve the management of dia-
betes mellitus in primary care,outpatient and community settings.Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews,2001.
2. Norris SLL et al.Self-management education for adults with type 2 diabetes:
a meta-analysis of the effect on glycemic control.Diabetes Care,2002,
25:1159-1171.
3. Gozzoli V et al.Economic and clinical impact of alternative disease manage-
ment strategies for secondary prevention in type 2 diabetes in the Swiss 
setting.Swiss Medical Weekly,2001,131:303-310.
4. Aubert RE et al.Nurse case management to improve glycemic control in 
diabetic patients in a health maintenance organization.A randomized,
controlled trial.Annals of Internal Medicine,1998,129:605-612.
5. Piette JD et al.Do automated calls with nurse follow-up improve self-care
and glycemic control among vulnerable patients with diabetes? American
Journal of Medicine,2000,108:20-27.
6. Weinberger M et al.A nurse-coordinated intervention for primary care
patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus:impact on glycemic
control and health-related quality of life.Journal of General Internal Medicine,
1995,10:59-66.
7. McCulloch DK et al.Improvement in diabetes care using an integrated popu-
lation-based approach in a primary care setting.Disease Management,2000,
3:75-82.
8. Sadur CN et al.Diabetes management in a health maintenance organization.
Efficacy of care management using cluster visits.Diabetes Care,1999,
22:2011-2017.
9. McCulloch DK et al.A population-based approach to diabetes management
in a primary care setting:Early results and lessons learned.Effective Clinical
Practice,1998,1:12-22.
10. Bodenheimer T,Wagner EH,Grumbach K.Improving primary care for patients
with chronic illness:the chronic care model,Part 2.Journal of the American
Medical Association,2002,288:1909-1914.
11. Bodenheimer T,Wagner EH,Grumbach K.Improving primary care for patients
with chronic illness.Journal of the American Medical Association,2002,
288:1775-1779.
12. Wagner EH et al.Effect of improved glycemic control on health care costs and
utilization.Journal of the American Medical Association,2001,285:182-189.
13. Newell SA,Bowman JA,Cockburn JD.Can compliance with nonpharmacologic
treatments for cardiovascular disease be improved?.American Journal of
Preventive Medicine,2000,18:253-261.
14. Monane M et al.The effects of initial drug choice and comorbidity on antihy-
pertensive therapy compliance.Results from a population-based study in the
elderly.American Journal of Hypertension,1997,10:697-704.
15. Bloom BS.Continuation of initial antihypertensive medication after 1 year 
of therapy.Clinical Therapeutics,1998,20:671-681.
16. Hasford JM.A population-based European cohort study of persistence in
newly diagnosed hypertensive patients.Journal of Human Hypertension,
2002,16:569-575.
17. Morisky DE et al.Five-year blood pressure control and mortality following
health education for hypertensive patients.American Journal of Public
Health,1983,73:153-162
18. Kotchen JM et al.Impact of a rural high blood pressure control program 
on hypertension control and cardiovascular disease mortality.Journal of 
the American Medical Association,1986,255:2177-2182.
19. Edmonds D et al.Does self-measurement of blood pressure improve patient
compliance in hypertension? Journal of Hypertension,1985,(Suppl) 3:S31-
S34.
20. Stason WB et al.Effectiveness and costs of veterans affairs hypertension 
clinics.Medical Care,1994,32:1197-1215.
21. Steptoe A et al.Behavioural counselling in general practice for the promo-
tion of healthy behaviour among adults at increased risk of coronary heart
disease:randomised trial.British Medical Journal,1999,319:943-947.
22. Richardson R et al.Learning curve.Hypertension:catch them when they'
re
older.Nursing Times,2000,96:42-43.
23. Bogden PE et al.Comparing standard care with a physician and pharmacist
team approach for uncontrolled hypertension.Journal of General Internal
Medicine,1998,13:740-745.
24. Gibson PG et al.Limited (information only) patient education programs 
for adults with asthma.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,2002.
25. Taggart VS et al.You can control asthma:evaluation of an asthma education
program for hospitalized inner-city children.Patient Education & Counseling,
1991,17:35-47.
26. Sommaruga M et al.The effects of a cognitive behavioural intervention in
asthmatic patients.Monaldi Archives for Chest Disease,1995,50:398-402.
27. Liljas B,Lahdensuo A.Is asthma self-management cost-effective? Patient
Education & Counseling,1997,32:S97-S104.
28. Clark NM et al.The impact of health education on frequency and cost 
of health care use by low income children with asthma.Journal of Allergy 
& Clinical Immunology,1986,78:108-115.
29. Neri M et al.Economic analysis of two structured treatment and teaching
programs on asthma.Allergy,1996,51:313-319.
30. Bolton MB et al.The cost and effectiveness of an education program 
for adults who have asthma.Journal of General Internal Medicine,1991,
6:401-407.
31. Trautner C,Richter B,Berger M.Cost-effectiveness of a structured treatment
and teaching programme on asthma.European Respiratory Journal,1993,
6:1485-1491.
32. Kotses H et al.A self-management program for adult asthma.Part I:
Development and evaluation.Journal of Allergy & Clinical Immunology,1995,
95:529-540.
33. Taitel MS et al.A self-management program for adult asthma.Part II:Cost-
benefit analysis.Journal of Allergy & Clinical Immunology,1995,95:672-676.
34. Greineder DK,Loane KC,Parks P.Reduction in resource utilization by an asth-
ma outreach program.Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine,1995,
149:415-420.
35. Wilson SR et al.Education of parents of infants and very young children
with asthma:a developmental evaluation of the Wee Wheezers program.
Journal of Asthma,1996,33:239-254 [erratum published in Journal of
Asthma,1997,34:261].
  Section III
S E C T I O N  I I I
Disease-Specific Reviews
 Chapter VII
C H A P T E R  V I I
Asthma
1. Defining nonadherence to asthma therapy
47
2. Rates of adherence to inhaled corticosteroids 
and other drugs for the prevention of asthma
48
3. Forms of nonadherence
50
4. Factors associated with adherence to asthma treatment
51
5. Adherence in special populations
52
6. Interventions to improve adherence to asthma therapy
53
7. Discussion
56
8. Conclusions
56
9. References
57
Asthma is a chronic, inflammatory disease of the airways that has dramatically increased in incidence
over the past 15 years in both developed and developing countries.The global burden of asthma is
considerable. Its effects include reduced quality of life, lost productivity, missed school days, increased
health care costs, the risk of hospitalization and even death (1).
Although effective treatments that have been shown to dramatically reduce asthma morbidity are
available, they are effective only when properly used by patients. Because human behaviour is the nec-
essary interface between good therapies and therapeutic effectiveness, both clinical researchers and
clinicians should understand the factors associated with patient adherence.This chapter discusses
adherence issues in asthma, with a particular focus on adherence to preventive therapy, such as inhaled
corticosteroids (ICSs).The prevalence of nonadherence to preventive therapy and patient factors associ-
ated with nonadherence are reviewed. Finally, we suggest some directions for future field research.
1. Defining nonadherence to asthma therapy
Assessing and understanding patient adherence in the management of asthma requires an apprecia-
tion of the diversity and complexity of adherence behaviour. Adherence to medication can be defined
as the degree to which use of medication by the patient corresponds with the prescribed regimen.
 Patients who regularly and consistently follow the prescribed regimen demonstrate adherent use.
Adherence to medication is not a dichotomy, however, and patients can demonstrate a wide variety of
patterns of medication use.The efficacy of asthma therapies can be modulated by these adherence pat-
terns in several ways.
The most obvious form of nonadherence is chronic under-use, i.e. the patient consistently uses less
medication than is prescribed. Chronic under-treatment of asthma may lead to poor control of symp-
toms and greater reliance on pro re nata (PRN) treatments for the relief of acute asthma symptoms.
Patients may also have an erratic pattern of adherence, in which medication use alternates between
fully adherent (usually when symptomatic) and under-use or total non-use (when asymptomatic).
Patients with erratic adherence may present for treatment of acute asthma although they apparently
adhere completely to their prescribed regimen. Some patients relying solely on inhaled beta-agonists
for symptom relief may be prone to over-use during acute bronchospasm.This may cause a patient to
delay seeking care, or lead to complications associated with excessive use of beta-agonists (2).
Patients may exhibit a different pattern of adherence to each of the various medications prescribed for
the management of their asthma. For example, a patient may under-use the prescribed prophylactic
anti-inflammatory (“controller”or “preventer”) medications while remaining appropriately adherent to
the regular taking of the beta-agonist. Adherence to an asthma action plan that outlines how and when
both controller and reliever medications should be taken and when to seek urgent care has been
shown to be one of the most effective forms of asthma self-management (3). Finally, in order for med-
ications delivered by metered dose inhaler (MDI) to control asthma optimally, the patient must adhere
to the instructions for correct MDI use, or use an MDI spacer. Although MDI adherence has rarely been
assessed in clinical or research settings, those studies that have examined patterns of MDI use by
patients have suggested that poor technique is widespread (resulting both from inadequate instruction
and patients’forgetfulness), and that improved MDI adherence can influence asthma management (4).
2. Rates of adherence to inhaled corticosteroids and other drugs for the
prevention of asthma
Extensive research conducted in Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, the United States and else-
where has found that nonadherence with asthma therapy is widespread, and is a significant risk factor
for asthma morbidity and mortality. Because of the limited sensitivity and specificity of self-reported
measures of adherence (5), some of the most convincing studies have used objective measures, such as
pharmacy databases, medication measurement and electronic medication monitors to assess adher-
ence behaviour.
Conservative estimates indicate that almost half of the prescription medications dispensed yearly are
not taken as prescribed (6).The real-life response to a clinician’s prescription of preventive therapy will
include a range of undesirable patient behaviours, including a failure to fill the initial prescription, errat-
ic use or under-use of therapy, and premature discontinuation of therapy. Studies indicate that primary
nonadherence (not filling initial prescriptions) ranges from 6–44% (7–12).
Even when patients fill prescriptions for asthma medications, studies of secondary nonadherence (rates
of medication use) suggest that long-term rates of adherence to preventive therapies (e.g. controller or
preventer medications) among adult patients are often poor. Spector et al. (13), one of the first inves-
tigative teams to use an electronic medication monitor to examine adherence to MDI-delivered med-
ications, followed 19 adult asthmatic patients using an anti-inflammatory drug for 12 weeks. Patients
adhered to the four-times-daily regimen for a mean of 47% of the days, with a range of 4.3% to 95%.
Patients were also asked to maintain asthma diaries as part of this study, and a comparative analysis of
electronic data and diary data found that subjects over-reported their appropriate use of medication in
WHO 2003
48 ❘
 their diaries more than 50% of the time. In a similar study, Mawhinney et al. (14) studied adherence in
adult asthmatic patients over a 3–4 week period. Adherence to the medication as prescribed was
observed, on average, for 37% of the days, and under-use on more than 38% of the days monitored.
Yeung et al. (15) used an electronic monitor to follow patients’use of inhaled corticosteroids over a peri-
od of 2–3 weeks.When patients were aware that they were being monitored, 60% of them were fully
adherent, 20% were partially adherent (taking just 70% of the prescribed dose) and 20% were totally
nonadherent. However, when patients were unaware of the monitoring, 6 out of 11 took between 30%
and 51% of the prescribed doses.
Several studies have suggested that patients from low-income, ethnic-minority groups (primarily
African American) in developed countries may have lower rates of adherence to asthma therapy. Celano
et al. (16)examined adherence to anti-inflammatory medication delivered by MDI in low-income, urban,
primarily African American children with asthma. Adherence to treatment administered by MDI was
estimated by weighing canisters and calculating the ratio of the number of puffs used over the study
period to the number of puffs prescribed. Estimated MDI adherence in this study was 44% for all partici-
pants and only12% of the children had rates above 75%. In a group of 80 asthma patients, treated
under the Medicaid scheme, who were repeat users of the emergency department or overnight hospi-
talization, only 46% had been prescribed ICSs and only 43% had a written action plan (17). Less than
half of children with asthma living in Tennessee, receiving treatment funded by Medicaid, had a pre-
scription for oral corticosteroids filled following an emergency department visit or a period of hospital-
ization for asthma (18).
Low rates have also been reported from studies that used different measurement systems. Coutts,
Gibson and Paton (19) in the United Kingdom published the first study to examine children’s adherence
to anti-inflammatory therapy using an electronic medication monitor that recorded and stored the date
and time of each use. Children (aged 9–16 years) were monitored for 2–6 months and asked to maintain
asthma diaries as well as to use the monitored inhaler. Despite symptomatic asthma, underuse of the
inhaled corticosteroids was observed on 55% of the study days. In a second study from the United
Kingdom, Gibson et al. (20) used electronic monitoring to evaluate the adherence of preschool children
to inhaled prophylactic medication. Median adherence was 100% on 50% of study days, and an overall
median of 77% of the prescribed doses were taken during the average 2-month monitoring period. It is
important to realize that the poor adherence observed occurred in the children of a group of parents
who had a clear understanding that adherence was being monitored, and who had been provided with
careful explanations of the importance of adherence to prophylactic medications.The authors noted
that this poor adherence might reflect persistent misunderstandings or concerns about the side-effects
of the medications.
Jonasson et al. (21) reported from Sweden on adherence to inhaled budesonide administered with a
breath-driven asthma inhaler in 163 children (aged 7–16 years) with mild asthma who were participat-
ing in a randomized, double-blind clinical trial. Mean daily diary-card adherence was 93% over the 12-
week study, whereas inhaler dose-counting recorded only 77% adherence. Milgrom et al. (22), in the
United States used electronic monitors to study the adherence of school-aged children to inhaled corti-
costeroids.The participants were unaware of the function of the electronic device. Diary-card data
showed that patients reported taking all doses on a median of 54% of study days and at least one dose
on 97% of study days. However, electronic records of inhaled corticosteroid use showed a median of
only 5% of study days on which all inhaled corticosteroid doses were taken and a median of 58% of
days on which at least one dose was taken.The participants skipped all inhaled corticosteroid doses on
a median of 42% of days and almost half of them missed their inhaled corticosteroids completely for
more than a week at a time.
❘ 49
WHO 2003
 3. Forms of nonadherence
Understanding patient nonadherence to ICS therapy requires the recognition that there are different
forms of nonadherent behaviour with diverse contributory factors. Careful clinical interviewing can
reveal these problems and set the stage for identifying appropriate strategies for ameliorating them.
Erratic nonadherence. Perhaps the form of nonadherence that is most common and most acknowl-
edged by patients and providers is doses missed because of forgetfulness, changing schedules or busy
lifestyles. Patients who exhibit erratic nonadherence understand their prescribed regimen and would
often like to adhere appropriately. However, they find it difficult to comply because the complexity of
their lives interferes with adherence, or because they have not prioritized asthma management.
Patients who have changing work schedules or chaotic lifestyles may have difficulty establishing the
habit of a new medication regimen. For some patients Monday–Friday adherence presents no problem,
but weekends or holidays disrupt medication routines. Strategies to improve erratic adherence centre
on simplification of the regimen (e.g. once-a-day dosing), establishing new habits through linking (e.g.
keeping the MDI next to the toothbrush) and cues and memory aids (e.g. pill organizers).
Unwitting nonadherence. Many patients may be inadvertently nonadherent to the prescribed therapy
because they have failed to understand fully either the specifics of the regimen or the necessity for
adherence. Studies have found that patients frequently forget instructions given to them by a physician
during a clinic visit (23). MDIs, unlike pill bottles, do not usually have attached labels with dosing
instructions. In asthma management it is common for patients to misunderstand the difference
between PRN medication and daily medication. Or, they may interpret the prescription for “ICS twice
every day”as meaning “ICS twice every day – when you have symptoms”
.
Patients may overuse their inhaled beta-agonist because they have never been given clear guidelines
for when and how to adjust controller medications or seek medical assistance when asthma control
worsens.The ubiquity of unwitting nonadherence is illustrated by the findings of a study by Donnelly et
al. (24).The investigators interviewed 128 Australian parents of children with asthma about their knowl-
edge about the disease, attitudes, beliefs and knowledge of asthma medications. Only 42% of parents
had a basic understanding of the mode of action of beta-agonists, 12% for methylxanthines, 12% for
cromoglycate and 0% for inhaled corticosteroids. Approximately half of the parents reported that sodi-
um cromoglycate and inhaled corticosteroids were used to prevent asthma attacks, while 40–50% were
unsure of the mode of usage. Most of the parents reported using antibiotics, antihistamines and decon-
gestants in treating their child’s asthma.The authors suggested that this poor parental understanding
of asthma medications may result from inadequate communication between doctor and patient and
this misunderstanding may contribute to the high prevalence of nonadherence to asthma treatments.
In a study in the Netherlands of adult patients with asthma and patients with chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease, Dekker et al. (25) found that 20% of the patients using pulmonary medications admit-
ted that they did not know the prescribed daily dosage.Twenty-nine per cent thought that their regular
daily medication was actually to be used “short-term”or “as needed”
. Only 51% correctly perceived that
their medications were to be taken regularly.
Intelligent nonadherence. Sometimes patients purposely alter, discontinue, or even fail to initiate ICS
therapy.This deliberate nonadherence is called intelligent nonadherence, reflecting a reasoned choice,
rather than necessarily a wise one (26). Patients who feel better may decide that they no longer need to
take prescribed medications. Fear of perceived short- or long-term side-effects of ICS may cause some
patients to reduce or discontinue dosing. Patients may abandon a therapy because bad taste, complexi-
ty or interference with daily life may convince them that the disadvantages of therapy outweigh the
ben-efits. Patients may find that some variation of the prescribed therapy works better than the pre-
scribed by the doctor. Given the well-documented underuse of ICS, the fact that ICS therapy is as suc-
cessful in the management of asthma as it is, suggests that many patients manage quite well with
WHO 2003
50 ❘
 altered or reduced doses.This deliberate nonadherence, like any other pattern of nonadherence does
not necessarily result in worsening asthma. In every clinical practice there are patients who have know-
ingly altered their prescribed therapy, yet their health professional may never discover this modifica-
tion. Regardless of the reason for nonadherence to medication, the necessary first step towards
addressing the problem is identifying it through effective, open-ended communication between
patient and provider. Only careful interviewing and active listening will equip the provider of asthma
care with the information necessary to establish and reinforce adherence to appropriate medication.
The time constraints placed on clinicians by managed care represent a serious barrier to carrying out
this recommendation.
4. Factors associated with adherence to asthma treatment 
Severity of asthma. Because of the significant burden of symptoms and the risk associated with severe
asthma it would seem logical that patients with severe disease would have a greater incentive for, and
hence a greater likelihood of adhering to prescribed therapy. Conversely, it could be argued that for
some asthmatic patients more symptomatic disease is the consequence of inadequate adherence to
treatment. For example, Milgrom et al. (22) demonstrated in a study of paediatric asthmatic patients
that prednisone bursts were more common in those patients who were found by electronic monitoring
to be the least adherent to therapy with inhaled anti-inflammatory medication.
It has also been suggested that the immediate awareness of active asthma symptoms should serve as a
cue for improved adherence to medication. Mann et al. (27) tested this hypothesis by measuring the
relationship between patient adherence to four-times-daily beclomethasone and periods of increased
severity of asthma.Ten adult patients with moderate-to-severe asthma were monitored over a 9-week
period using an electronic device attached to the MDI to measure adherence to inhaled medication,
and peak flow monitoring to measure airflow obstruction.The authors concluded that compliance with
inhaled corticosteroids was not modulated by asthma severity (as measured by peak expiratory flow),
or by patient-reported symptoms.
Patients’beliefs about inhaled corticosteroids and asthma. The relationship between beliefs about 
asthma and adherence to preventive therapy was clearly illustrated in a study by Adams et al. (28).The
investigators interviewed adult patients in Wales, United Kingdom, using qualitative interviewing strat-
egies and identified three common self-perspectives among this group: asthma deniers/distancers,
asthma accepters, and pragmatics. Each of these perspectives was associated with very different beliefs
held by the patients about the nature of asthma and the use of preventive medication.This analysis
suggested that an asthmatic patient’s self-perception of his or her disease may influence his or her
adherence to preventive asthma therapy.
Parents and patients who are concerned about using corticosteroids may under-dose or discontinue
long-term use in an effort to be “steroid-sparing”
. Boulet (29) conducted a telephone survey of over 600
adult asthmatic patients in Canada to find out about patients’perceptions about the role of ICS in the
treatment of asthma and the potential side-effects of this therapy.The investigators found that patients
frequently had misperceptions about the role of ICSs, even if they had recently used them. For example,
over 40% of patients believed that ICS opened up the airways to relieve bronchoconstriction, while less
than a quarter of the patients reported that ICS reduced airway inflammation.This fundamental mis-
understanding of the mechanism of ICS suggests that these patients may also have failed to under-
stand the underlying chronic inflammation that characterizes asthma and the need for preventive ther-
apy. Forty-six per cent of the patients interviewed indicated that they were reluctant to take ICS regular-
ly and only 25% of patients reported that they had discussed their fears and concerns about ICS with
their primary care provider. Misconceptions about the side-effects and long-term consequences of ICS
use were also common. However, when the true side-effects of inhaled corticosteroids were explained,
❘ 51
WHO 2003
 most of the patients reported being reassured. Boulet (29) concluded that information about the safety
and usefulness of ICS does not seem to have reached many patients with asthma.This study also sug-
gests that health care providers should discuss with patients any possible concerns about ICS therapy
that might interfere with adherence.
In a similar study conducted in the United States, Chambers et al. (30) surveyed 694 largely sympto-
matic asthmatic patients aged 18–49 years who had been prescribed ICS in 1995–1996.The most
notable finding in this survey was the low level of self-reported adherence with therapy. Sixty-two per
cent of patients reported less than regular twice-daily ICS use.Thirty-six per cent of the patients
endorsed the option “some days I use it at least twice, but on other days I don’t use it at all”
, and 22%
reported that they no longer used ICS. Four per cent of patients claimed that they had never used ICS.
Those who were less than fully adherent were asked to state their reasons for not using ICS, and the
reason most frequently cited was that they used therapy only when they believed they needed it.This
study suggests that many patients with asthma believe that their asthma is an episodic rather than a
chronic disease, and that therapy is necessary only when there is disease exacerbation.
Psychological models of disease management have suggested that adherence to medication may be
related to the patient’s perceived vulnerability to the negative consequences of illness, with an
increased sense of risk being associated with better adherence. In paediatric research, several studies
have suggested that parents who consider their children’s health to be fragile or vulnerable (whether
based on real events or not) will be vigilant and will adhere to health care recommendations. Spurrier et
al. (31) examined the relationship between the asthma management strategies used by 101 parents of
children with asthma and the perceptions of these parents of their child’s vulnerability to illness.The
study found that after controlling for the frequency and severity of asthma symptoms, those parents
who felt their child had greater vulnerability to illness were more likely to use regular preventive med-
ications, take the child to the doctor and keep him or her home from school.The authors suggested
that one possible explanation of this finding is that “parents who do not perceive their child to be med-
ically vulnerable may discontinue administering regular medication…”(31).
Regimen factors in asthma therapy. A number of studies across a range of chronic diseases have found
that certain characteristics of the prescribed treatment regimen are strongly associated with patient
adherence. In general, the longer the duration of therapy, the more frequent the dosing, and the more
complex the regimen (e.g. multiple devices or tasks), the poorer the adherence of the patient (32).
Actual or perceived side-effects of treatment and the cost of therapy can also reduce adherence levels.
In recent years considerable effort has been directed towards developing an effective and safe once-a-
day therapy for asthma because of its presumed advantage in promoting patient compliance. However,
although there is convincing evidence that doses that must be administered more than twice a day
lead to decreased adherence (19), the data are equivocal on the superiority of once-a-day dosing over
twice-a-day dosing (33–35). Adherence considerations apart, once-daily asthma therapy appears to be
preferable for most patients.Venables et al. (36) studied patient preferences in asthma therapy and
found that 61% of patients expressed a preference for once-a-day treatment, 12% preferred twice-a-day
treatment and 27% expressed no preference.While preference may not necessarily lead to improved
compliance, it may well reduce the burden of therapy and enhance the quality of life of the patients.
5. Adherence in special populations
Children. There can be great diversity among families in how medication is managed.The responsibility
for administration of medication generally shifts as a child grows, from total parental management for a
young child, to shared medication management for a school-aged child, to complete self-management
for an adolescent. Day-care providers, grandparents and siblings may assume the responsibility for the
regular delivery of asthma medication in some households. In chaotic, troubled families there may be
WHO 2003
52 ❘
 confusion as to who has the primary responsibility for the medication monitoring.The age at which a
child is capable of assuming responsibility for remembering to take daily medication is highly variable,
and is more a reflection of the child’s maturity and personality than his or her chronological age. In
some families children may be expected to manage their own medication early, less because the child
has demonstrated sufficient responsibility, than because the parent believes the child is old enough to
do it. For older children and adolescents, asthma management has the potential for turning into a bat-
tle in the war of independence. Research on juvenile diabetes, haemophilia and rheumatoid arthritis
has emphasized the particular vulnerability of adolescents to problems with adherence to medication
(37,38).Family conflict and a denial of disease severity in an adolescent with severe asthma should
therefore suggest a patient at a high risk for nonadherence to therapy.
Elderly patients. Some barriers to adherence to therapy are more common in older patients and warrant
particular attention in clinical management. For example, although patients of any age may forget to
take their medication, for some older patients memory difficulties may be exacerbated by other med-
ications or early dementia. In addition, older patients are often receiving treatment for several other
chronic health conditions simultaneously.The resulting polypharmacy is a well-recognized problem for
many elderly patients, presenting both pharmacological and adherence risks (39).The treatment of mul-
tiple ailments can result in complicated and burdensome medication regimens that require medica-
tions to be taken many times per day. Clinicians treating older patients for asthma should carefully
review all prescribed medications, be attentive to potential memory difficulties, and assist the patient in
integrating ICS therapy into his or her existing regimens.
Cultural differences. Culture and lay beliefs about illness and treatment can also influence the accept-
ance of asthma therapies by patients and their families. Diverse cultural beliefs can affect health care
through competing therapies, fear of the health care system or distrust of prescribed therapies.
Income. While income per se does not predict adherence, the co-variates of poverty and inner-city liv-
ing may make adherence to asthma self-management more difficult. Barriers to adherence related to
low income can include inconsistent primary health care, inability to pay for asthma medications, lack
of transport, family dysfunction and substance abuse (40–43).
In some countries, patients may not be able to afford preventive asthma therapies. Research suggests
that these cost barriers may lead some patients to treat their disease only during periods of exacerba-
tion, or to reduce their dosage to “stretch”their medication.
6. Interventions to improve adherence to asthma therapy 
Haynes et al. (44) recently reviewed the results of randomized controlled trials of interventions to pro-
mote adherence to pharmacological regimens across a range of chronic diseases, including asthma,
where both adherence and clinical outcome were measured.This rigorous analysis found that over half
(10/19) of the interventions for long-term treatments reviewed were associated with significant
improvements in adherence; however, the magnitude of the improvements in adherence or clinical out-
come was generally not large.The authors concluded that successful interventions to promote adher-
ence were complex and multi-faceted and included combinations of counselling, education, more con-
venient care, self-monitoring, reinforcement, reminders, and other forms of additional attention or
supervision. Specific intervention strategies that can be used for promoting adherence to therapy are
outlined below (see also Table 1).
Educational strategies. Asthma is a complex disease and requires education of the patient and his or her
family if it is to be managed successfully. Knowledge of the regimen is necessary, but not sufficient in
itself, to ensure patient adherence. Several studies have emphasized the central role of effective com-
munication between patients and health care providers in promoting adherence (45,46).
❘ 53
WHO 2003
 Written instructions about the asthma regimen that are culturally appropriate and adapted to suit the
patient’s level of literacy should be a core part of every interaction with the patient. For older patients,
comprehension and recall of information on how to take medication was shown to be significantly
improved when medication-taking instructions were clear, presented as lists rather than paragraphs,
used pictures or icons in combination with written medication instructions and were consistent with
patients’mental representations of medication taking (47).
Self-management programmes that include both educational and behavioural components have been
developed (48).The educational formats use basic learning principles to promote adherence to asthma
therapy. Key points in the most recent set of treatment guidelines have included the following:
• education of the patient beginning at the time of diagnosis and integrated into every step of asthma
care;
• patient education provided by all members of the team;
• teaching skills for the self-management of asthma by tailoring the information and the treatment
approach to fit the needs of each patient;
• teaching and reinforcing behavioural skills such as inhaler use, self-monitoring and environmental
control;
• joint development of treatment plans by team members and patients;
• encouragement of an active partnership by providing written self-management and individualized
asthma action plans to patients; and
• encouraging adherence to the treatment plan jointly developed by the interdisciplinary team and the
patients.
These self-management programmes have demonstrated their effectiveness in decreasing symptoms,
school absence and emergency care as well as improving asthma knowledge. However, little is known
about the direct effects of these programmes on adherence. Future educational programmes will need
to include objective monitoring of adherence in order to examine their effectiveness in promoting it.
Behavioural strategies. Behavioural strategies are those procedures that attempt to promote adherence
behaviours directly by using techniques such as reminders, contracting and reinforcement (49).The use
of reminders has been shown to be helpful in maintaining adherence both in asthmatic children fol-
lowed in an asthma clinic and asthmatic children followed as outpatients after inpatient asthma reha-
bilitation (50,51). Providing feedback to patients regarding adherence to medication is an important
behavioural clinical strategy. Informing patients that they will be objectively monitored for adherence
has been shown to be effective in improving adherence in outpatient clinics (15), at follow-up visits
after inpatient rehabilitation (52) and in clinical trials (53). Reinforcement is an essential component of
all behavioural strategies. Reinforcement refers to any consequences that increase the probability of the
behaviour being repeated. Dunbar et al. suggested that a clinician’s time and attention to the patient
may be the most powerful available reinforcer (49).The length of time a patient spends with the clini-
cian is positively related to adherence (54). Investigators have used contracts to include the families of
asthmatic children. In this setting patients receive reinforcement from those people who are most sig-
nificant to them and most readily available at the time the health behaviour occurs (55).
Tailoring of therapy. Tailoring the therapy to the patient is a strategy that is sometimes overlooked by
health care providers.Tailoring refers to fitting the prescribed regimen and intervention strategies to
specific characteristics of the patient. It is another effective behavioural method used to improve adher-
ence (55).Whenever possible, negotiating a therapy that the patient is able to follow should be a first
WHO 2003
54 ❘
 priority. Some examples of ways in which the therapy may be tailored include exploring the patient’s
schedule, beliefs, and preferences (56); simplifying the dosing regimen (57); altering the route of admin-
istration (58),and using adherence aids (59).
Maintenance interventions to achieve adherence. Achieving and maintaining adherence over long peri-
ods of time is difficult for both patients and clinicians. Investigators in the management of childhood
and adult asthma have developed self-management programmes to enable a patient and his or her
family to manage asthma efficiently and effectively over time in conjunction with their health profes-
sional. Self-management programmes for adult and childhood asthma have been shown to reduce
asthma morbidity and costs, and may be useful in promoting and sustaining long-term adherence to
therapy (60–63).
❘ 55
WHO 2003
Asthma
Factors affecting adherence
Interventions to improve adherence
(–) Vulnerability of the adolescent to not taking
medications; family conflict and denial of severi-
ty of disease in adolescents (37); memory diffi-
culties in older patients; polypharmacy in older
patients (39); cultural and lay beliefs about ill-
ness and treatment; alternative medicines; fear
of the health care system; poverty; inner-city liv-
ing; lack of transport; family dysfunction (40)
(–) Health care providers’lack of knowledge and
training in treatment management and/or an
inadequate understanding of the disease; short
consultations; lack of training in changing
behaviour of nonadherent patients
(–) Inadequate understanding of the disease (29)
(–) Complex treatment regimens; long duration
of therapy; frequent doses (32); adverse effects
of treatment
(–) Forgetfulness;misunderstanding of instructions
about medications; poor parental understanding
of children’s asthma medications; patients’lack
of perception of his or her own vulnerability to
illness (31).Patients’lack of information about the
prescribed daily dosage/ misconceptions about
the disease and treatments (29); persistent mis-
understandings about side-effects (29); drug
abuse (40)
List-organized instructions; clear instructions
about treatment for older patients (47)
Education on use of medicines; management 
of disease and treatment in conjunction with
patients (48); adherence education (58); multidis-
ciplinary care (48); training in monitoring adher-
ence; more intensive intervention by increasing
the number and duration of contacts (49)
Patient education beginning at the time of diag-
nosis and integrated into every step of asthma
care (48)
Simplification of regimens (57); education on use
of medicines (48); adaptation of prescribed med-
ications (55,56,58); continuous monitoring and
reassessment of treatment (15,52,53)
(+) Perceiving that they are vunerable to illness
(31).Self-managment programmes that include
both educational and behaviour components
(58,60); memory aids and reminders (50); incen-
tives and/or reinforcements (49); multi-faceted
interventions, including combinations of coun-
selling, education, more convenient care, self-
monitoring, reinforcement, remindres and other
forms of additional attention or supervision (44,
65–67).
Socioeconomic-
related factors
Health care 
team/health 
system-related 
factors
Condition-related 
factors
Therapy-related 
factors
Patient-related 
factors
(+) Factors having a positive effect on adherence; (–) factors having a negative effect on adherence.
Table 1
Factors affecting adherence to asthma treatment and interventions for improving it,
listed according to the five dimensions and the interventions used to improve adherence
 A group of investigators developed and tested the effectiveness of a psycho-educational self-manage-
ment programme for severely asthmatic children that was delivered in an inpatient setting (64). Patients
were admitted to the programme if they met morbidity criteria in the year prior to admission that
included a minimum of three hospitalizations, four emergency visits, four corticosteroid bursts and
agreement of the families to participate in self-management meetings.The rehabilitation intervention
included medical assessment and management, physical activity training, education about asthma for
the child and family, and a sequence of family interviews designed to facilitate home-management of the
illness and promote adherence to medication.These individuals were followed as outpatients for 4 years;
they received three to four medications concurrently and achieved a marked reduction in hospitaliza-
tion, emergency care, oral corticosteroid use and total costs of asthma by maintaining adherence, as
measured by monitoring theophylline levels at outpatient visits.
7. Discussion
Because adherence to therapy is an integral part of the effective management of asthma, all interna-
tional public health efforts to improve asthma outcomes should include educational strategies for both
patients and health care providers that target the promotion of adherence. Regular adherence to ICS
therapy is dependent on the patient’s acceptance that asthma is a chronic disease requiring preventive
treatment. Patients must also feel that the prescribed therapy is effective in achieving the desired treat-
ment goals and is safe for long-term use. Several studies have confirmed that the beliefs that patients
hold about their asthma and the therapy prescribed for it are closely associated with the likelihood of
adherence.When patients do not perceive that their asthma is chronic or that it requires preventive
treatment, adherence with therapy is generally episodic.
Effective communication between patients and providers has been identified as having an important
influence on patients’adherence. Most health professionals lack the training to change the behaviour of
nonadherent patients. Educational efforts sponsored by both public and private sources are needed to
improve the communication skills of health professionals so as to promote adherence to the treatments
recommended for asthma.
Limited evidence from studies of adherence to asthma therapy among immigrant populations in devel-
oped countries suggests that use of alternative medicine and lay beliefs may significantly reduce adher-
ence to therapy.Watson and Lewis (68) reported that inhaled corticosteroids were available in only 
15 of 24 countries surveyed in Africa and Asia, and when available the median (range) cost of a 50 µg
beclomethasone inhaler was 20% (6.8–100%) of the average local monthly income. Additional research
is needed on the rates of adherence and barriers to adherence in developing countries.
Guidelines on the management of patients with asthma may be modified in the future following the
development of accurate and affordable systems for monitoring anti-inflammatory medication. By
objectively evaluating the adherence of symptomatic patients, those who are nonadherent may be
identified, appropriately treated and counselled in an accurate, efficient and cost-effective manner (69).
8. Conclusions
Nonadherence to regimens for asthma treatment may have several causes including inadequate knowl-
edge and skill on the part of the patient, and inadequate awareness of the problem, or lack of skill to
address it, on the part of the health professional. Patients must have a basic understanding of their ill-
ness and its treatment if we are to expect even minimal adherence. Achievement of adherence requires
considerable effort from both the patient and caregiver.To perform the daily tasks necessary for suc-
cessful control of their asthma, patients must be well motivated and convinced that their own behav-
iour will result in improved health, a concept referred to as self-efficacy. Simply giving information to
WHO 2003
56 ❘
 patients is unlikely to change behaviour; health care providers must understand the psychological prin-
ciples that underlie self-management training and comprehend that motivating patients requires more
than informing them briefly about the prescription that has just been written. At the core of these prin-
ciples is the need to establish treatment goals that can be embraced both by health professionals and
patients in a partnership that requires regular and reciprocal communication. Patients will not perform
the work necessary to achieve goals they do not understand or do not view as necessary and important.
Once appropriate goals have been established, most patients require assistance in determining how to
evaluate their changing symptoms and how to use their written action plan to make effective decisions
about daily self-management behaviour.
❘ 57
WHO 2003
9. References
1. Baena-Cagnani CE.The global burden of asthma and allergic diseases:the
challenge for the new century.Current Allergy & Asthma Reports,2001,
1:297–298.
2. Spitzer WO et al.The use of beta-agonists and the risk of death and near
death from asthma.New England Journal of Medicine,1992,326:501–506.
3. Gibson PG et al.Self-management education and regular practitioner review
for adults with asthma.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
2000,CD001117.
4. Wilson SR et al.A controlled trial of two forms of self-management educa-
tion for adults with asthma.American Journal of Medicine,1993,
94:564–576.
5. Rand C.I took the medicine like you told me,Doctor.Self-Report of adher-
ence with medical regimens.In:Stone A et al.eds.The science of self-report.
New Jersey,USA,Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,1999:257–276.
6. Clepper I.Noncompliance,the invisible epidemic.Drug Topics, 1992,17:44–65.
7. Waters WH,Gould NV,Lunn JE.Undispensed prescriptions in a mining gener-
al practice.British Medical Journal,1976,1:1062–1063.
8. Rashid A.Do patients cash prescriptions?,British Medical Journal – Clinical
Research.284:24–26.
9. Saunders CE.Patient compliance in filling prescriptions after discharge from
the emergency department.American Journal of Emergency Medicine,1987,
5:283–286.
10. Krogh C,Wallner L.Prescription-filling patterns of patients in a family prac-
tice.Journal of Family Practice,1987,24:301–302.
11. Beardon PH et al.Primary non-compliance with prescribed medication in pri-
mary care.British Medical Journal,1993,307:846–848.
12. Cerveri I et al.International variations in asthma treatment compliance:the
results of the European Community Respiratory Health Survey (ECRHS).
European Respiratory Journal,1999,14:288–294.
13. Spector SL et al.Compliance of patient with asthma with an experimental
aerosolized medication:Implications for controlled clinical trials.Journal of
Allergy and Clinical Immunology,1986,77:65–70
14. Mawhinney H et al.As-needed medication use in asthma usage patterns and
patient characteristics.Journal of Asthma,1993,30:61–71.
15. Yeung M et al.Compliance with prescribed drug therapy in asthma.
Respiratory Medicine,1994,88:31–35.
16. Celano M et al.Treatment adherence among low-income children with 
asthma.Journal of Pediatric Psychology,1998,23:345–349.
17. Apter AJ et al.Adherence with twice-daily dosing of inhaled steroids.
Socioeconomic and health-belief differences.American Journal of Respiratory
& Critical Care Medicine,1998,157:1810–1817.
18. Cooper WO,Hickson GB.Corticosteroid prescription filling for children covered
by Medicaid following an emergency department visit or a hospitalization
for asthma.Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine,2001,155:1111–1115.
19. Coutts JA,Gibson NA,Paton JY.Measuring compliance with inhaled medica-
tion in asthma.Archives of Disease in Childhood,1992,67:332–333.
20. Gibson NA et al.Compliance with inhaled asthma medication in preschool
children.Thorax,1995,50:1274–1279.
21. Jonasson G,Carrlsen K,Sodaal A.Patient compliance in a clinical trial with
inhaled budesonide in children with mild asthma.European Respiratory
Journal,1999,14:150–154.
22. Milgrom H et al.Noncompliance and treatment failure in children with 
asthma.Journal of Allergy & Clinical Immunology,1996,98:1051–1057.
23. DiMatteo MR.Enhancing patient adherence to medical recommendations.
Journal of the American Medical Association,1983,271:79–83.
24. Donnelly JE,Donnelly WJ,Thong YH.Inadequate parental understanding 
of asthma medications.Annals of Allergy,1989,62:337–341.
25. Dekker FW et al.Compliance with pulmonary medication in general practice.
European Respiratory Journal,1993,6:886–890.
26. Hindi-Alexander M.Compliance or noncompliance:that is the question!
American Journal of Health Promotion,1987,1:5–11.
27. Mann MC et al.An evaluation of severity-modulated compliance with q.i.d.
dosing of inhaled beclomethasone.Chest,1992,102:1342–1346.
28. Adams S,Pill R,Jones A.Medication,chronic illness and identity:the perspec-
tive of people with asthma.Social Science & Medicine,1997,45:189–201.
29. Boulet LP.Perception of the role and potential side effects of inhaled cortico-
steroids among asthmatic patients.Chest,1998,113:587–592.
30. Chambers CV et al.Health beliefs and compliance with inhaled cortico-
steroids by asthmatic patients in primary care practices.Respiratory Medicine,
1999,93:88–94.
31. Spurrier NJ et al.Association between parental perception of children’s 
vulnerability to illness and management of children’s asthma.Pediatric
Pulmonology,2000,29:88–93.
32. Sackett DL,Haynes RB.Compliance with therapeutic regimens.Baltimore,
Johns Hopkins University Press,1976.
33. Lan AJ,Colford JM,Colford JM,Jr.The impact of dosing frequency on the 
efficacy of 10-day penicillin or amoxicillin therapy for streptococcal tonsil-
lopharyngitis:A meta-analysis.Pediatrics,2000,105:E19.
34. Mason BJ,Matsuyama JR,Jue SG.Assessment of sulfonylurea adherence 
and metabolic control.Diabetes Educator,1995,21:52–57.
35. Weiner P
,Weiner M,Azgad Y.Long term clinical comparison of single versus
twice daily administration of inhaled budesonide in moderate asthma.
Thorax,1995,50:1270–1273.
 WHO 2003
58 ❘
36. Venables T et al.A comparison of the efficacy and patient acceptability of
once daily budesonide via Turbohaler and twice daily fluticasone propionate
via disc-inhaler at an equal daily dose of 400µg in adult asthmatics.British
Journal of Clinical Research,1996,7:15–32.
37. Jay S,Litt IF,Durant RH.Compliance with therapeutic regimens.Journal of
Adolescent Health Care,1984,5:124–136.
38. Varni J,Wallander J.Adherence to health-related regimens in pediatric
chronic disorders.Clinical Psychology Review,1984,4:585–596.
39. Kazis LE,Friedman RH.Improving medication compliance in the elderly.
Strategies for the health care provider.Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society,1988,36:1161–1162.
40. Lanier B.Who is dying of asthma and why? Journal of Pediatrics,1989,
115:838–840.
41. Levenson T et al.Asthma deaths confounded by substance abuse.
An assessment of fatal asthma.Chest,1996,110:604–610.
42. Wamboldt M,Wamboldt F.Psychosocial aspects of severe asthma in children.
In:Szefler S,Leung D,eds.Severe asthma:pathogenesis and clinical manage-
ment.Lung biology in health and disease.New York,Marcel Dekker,
1996:465–496.
43. Weitzman M,Gortmaker S,Sobol A.Racial,social,and environmental risks 
for childhood asthma.American journal of diseases of Childhood,1990,
144:1189–1194.
44. Haynes RB et al.Interventions for helping patients to follow prescriptions 
for medications.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,2000.
45. Hall JA et al.Patients’health as a predictor of physician and patient behavior
in medical visits.A synthesis of four studies.Medical Care,1996,
34:1205–1218.
46. Roter DL et al.Communication patterns of primary care physicians.Journal 
of the American Medical Association,1997,277:350–356.
47. Morrow DG et al.The influence of list format and category headers on age
differences in understanding medication instructions.Experimental Aging
Research,1998,24:231–256.
48. Lewis C,Rachelefsky G,Lewis MA.ACT for kids.In:Self-management educa-
tional programs for childhood asthma.Washington,DC,National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases,1981:21–52.
49. Dunbar J,Marshall G,Hovell M.Behavioral strategies for improving compli-
ance.In:Haynes RB.ed.Compliance in health care.Baltimore,John Hopkins
University Press,1979:174–190.
50. Walker NM,Mandell KL,Tsevat J.Use of chart reminders for physicians to 
promote discussion of advance directives in patients with AIDS.AIDS Care,
1999,11:345-353.
51. Weinstein AG.Clinical management strategies to maintain drug compliance
in asthmatic children.Annals of Allergy,Asthma,& Immunology,1995,
74:304–310.
52. Weinstein AG et al.Outcome of short-term hospitalization for children with
severe asthma.Journal of Allergy & Clinical Immunology,1992,90:66–75.
53. Nides MA et al.Improving inhaler adherence in a clinical trial through the
use of the nebulizer chronolog.Chest,1993,104:501–507.
54. Korsch BM,Negrete VF.Doctor–patient communication.Scientific American,
1972,227:66–74.
55. Hukla B.Patient–clinician interaction and compliance.Baltimore,John Hopkins
University Press,1979.
56. Dunbar-Jacob J et al.Predictors of patient adherence:Patient characteristics.
In:Shumaker S et al.,eds.Handbook of health behavior change.New York,
Springer,1998.
57. Feldman R et al.Adherence to pharmacologic management of hypertension.
Canadian Journal of Public Health,1998,89:16–18.
58. Heyscue BE,Levin GM,Merrick JP.Compliance with depot antipsychotic 
medication by patients attending outpatient clinics.Psychiatric Services,
1998,49:1232–1234.
59. Cramer JA.Enhancing patient compliance in the elderly.Role of packaging
aids and monitoring.Drugs & Aging,1998,12:7–15.
60. Clark NM et al.Developing education for children with asthma through study
of self-management behavior.Health Education Quarterly,1980,7:278–297.
61. Bailey WC et al.A randomized trial to improve self-management practices of
adults with asthma.Archives of Internal Medicine,1990,150:1664–1668.
62. Windsor RA et al.Evaluation of the efficacy and cost effectiveness of health
education methods to increase medication adherence among adults with
asthma.American Journal of Public Health,1990,80:1519–1521.
63. Taitel MS et al.A self-management program for adult asthma.Part II:Cost-
benefit analysis.Journal of Allergy & Clinical Immunology,1995,95:672–676.
64. Weinstein AG et al.An economic evaluation of short-term inpatient rehabilita-
tion for children with severe asthma.Journal of Allergy & Clinical Immunology,
1996,98:264–273.
65. Ward S et al.Patient education in pain control.Supportive Care in Cancer,
2001,9:148–155.
66. de Wit R et al.Improving the quality of pain treatment by a tailored pain
education programme for cancer patients in chronic pain.European Journal
of Pain,2001,5:241–256.
67. Rimer B et al.Enhancing cancer pain control regimens through patient 
education.Patient Education & Counseling,1987,10:267–277.
68. Watson JP
,Lewis RA.Is asthma treatment affordable in developing countries?
Thorax,1997,52:605–607.
69. Weinstein AG,Feldstein J,Esterly K.Final Report of the Medication Adherence
Task Force (Medical Society of Delaware).Delaware Medical Journal,2001,
73:413–345.
 Chapter VIII
C H A P T E R  V I I I
Cancer (Palliative care)
1. Definitions and epidemiology of adherence
61
2. Factors and interventions affecting adherence
61
3. Conclusions
63
4. References
63
In most parts of the world, the majority of cancer patients suffer an advanced stage of the disease,
which unfortunately is not responsive to curative treatment. Nearly 75% of patients with advanced can-
cer experience pain, very often in conjunction with many other symptoms, such as asthenia, anorexia
and malnutrition, skin problems, dry mouth or thirst, constipation, nausea or vomiting, anxiety, low
mood, depression, confusion and sleeplessness (1,2). For such patients, the only available management
is palliative care, which focuses mainly on pain relief (3).
Palliative care is an approach that improves the quality of life of patients through the prevention and
relief of suffering.To meet the multiple and varying needs of the patients, it is believed that the care
should be holistic, multidisciplinary, and family – as well as patient – centred.The aims of palliative care
are achieved by:
• providing relief from pain and other distressing symptoms;
• affirming life and regarding dying as a normal process;
• intending neither to hasten nor to postpone death;
• integrating the psychological and spiritual aspects of patient care;
• offering a support system to help patients live as actively as possible until death;
• offering a support system to help the family to cope during the patient’s illness and during 
bereavement;
• using a team approach to address the needs of patients and their families, including bereavement
counselling, if indicated;
• enhancing quality of life, and possibly also positively influencing the course of illness; and
 • starting palliative care early in the course of illness, in conjunction with other therapies that are
intended to prolong life, such as chemotherapy or radiation therapy, and including those investiga-
tions needed to better understand and manage distressing clinical complications (4).
Palliative care is still a neglected area worldwide and several million cancer patients suffer needlessly
every day as a result (5). Most cancer patients in developing countries receive inadequate palliative
care and less than 10% of the resources committed to cancer control in these countries are available to
them (1). Palliative care remains far from satisfactory, mainly because of:
• an absence of national policies on cancer pain relief and other aspects of palliative care;
• the lack of education for health care providers, policy-makers, administrators and the general public;
• the concern that the medical use of morphine and related drugs will fuel the problem of drug abuse
in a community and result in increased restrictions on prescription and supply;
• limitations on the supply and distribution of the drugs needed for the relief of pain and other symp-
toms, particularly in developing countries;
• restrictions imposed by the adoption of regional, district or hospital formularies, which contain insuf-
ficient drugs for the control of pain and other symptoms;
• the shortage of professional health care workers empowered to prescribe analgesics and other drugs
for palliative care; and
• the lack of financial resources for research and development in palliative care (1).
Pain relief is a key component of a comprehensive palliative care programme. Relief from cancer pain
can be achieved in about 90% of patients, but unfortunately pain is often poorly managed.Pain relief
may be achieved by drug use, but may also include various other means: psychological approaches,
pathological processes (e.g. nerve degeneration) and modification of daily activities.The pharmacologi-
cal approach to the palliative care of cancer patients uses a variety of drugs for managing symptoms.
These include non-opioid analgesics (mild analgesics and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), opi-
oids for moderate to severe pain, ulcer-healing drugs, antispasmodics, corticosteroids, bronchodilators,
laxatives, antiemetics, antifungals, antidepressants and hypnotics among others.
Data from studies by Miaskowski, Du pen and Ward et al. (6–8) indicate that one of the main factors
contributing to the undertreatment of cancer pain is the patients’lack of adherence to the therapeutic
regimen.The study by Ward et al. (8) showed that a third of the patients they monitored delayed or
omitted many prescribed doses.This reflects the fact that patients often take their doses at intervals
longer than those prescribed, commonly longer by hours, but sometimes by days and occasionally by
weeks.The clinical and economic consequences of these lapses in dosing are uniquely difficult to meas-
ure due to the complexity of treatment and the severity of disease.
Because more than 90% of palliative care is provided on an outpatient basis, it is critically important for
clinicians to know how their patients adhere to their regimen for analgesics or other palliative thera-
pies, and if possible, they should also know which effective interventions are available for improving
adherence.The aim of this chapter is to summarize the available literature on adherence to palliative
care and provide answers to some of these questions.
WHO 2003
60 ❘
 1. Definitions and epidemiology of adherence
Published studies were considered for inclusion here if they reported relevant epidemiological or eco-
nomic data on adherence to one of the therapies usually used in palliative care. A search on adherence
to cancer palliative care was made using Medline (1990–2002). Some reviews and reports from interna-
tional and national organizations were also included.The search retrieved only studies that evaluated
adherence to pain relief in palliative care.
Adherence was usually not explicitly defined in the articles retrieved, but referred to generally as
“patients following medical recommendations”
. In operational terms, the variables of adherence were
defined as:“not filling a prescription”
,“not taking medication”
,“errors in dosage”
,“reducing medication”
,
“taking extra medication”and “taking additional nonprescribed medication”(6,7,9,10).
The studies reviewed here used several different methods to estimate the adherence of patients to
their medication.These methods, which can be used either separately or in combination, include review
of medical records, patient self-report, family report, residual pill counting, electronic measurement
devices, prescription refill rates, biological markers in serum or urine, assays to quantify medications or
their metabolites and therapeutic outcome (6,9).
Few studies have provided data on the level of adherence of oncology patients to their pain relief, and
the methods used to calculate adherence rates were not always described. Zeppetella et al., reported
that 40% of patients with cancer adhered to pain relief drugs (9). Miaskowski et al. reported adherence
rates for opioid analgesics. Cancer patients prescribed relief on an around-the-clock basis took an aver-
age of 88.9%, whereas those who were prescribed relief on an as-needed basis had an adherence rate of
about 24.7% (6). Du Pen et al. reported that adherence of oncology patients to their prescribed opioid
therapy was between 62% and 72% (7) and Ferrell et al. reported a mean adherence rate of 80% (10).
2. Factors and interventions affecting adherence
Nonadherence is a problem that has many determinants; the responsibility for adherence has to be
shared by health professionals, the health care system, the community and the patients. Many studies
have identified the factors affecting adherence, and these were grouped into five dimensions: socioeco-
nomic-related factors, health care team-/health system-related factors, condition-related factors, treat-
ment-related factors and patient-related factors, as shown in Table 2.
Many factors, such as lack of knowledge about pain management (5,11), misunderstanding instructions
about how to take drugs(9), complex treatment regimens (9), anxiety about adverse effects (12), inade-
quate understanding by health professionals of drug dependence (13) and long distance from the treat-
ment setting, among many others, have been shown to be significant barriers to adherence, and should
be taken into account when developing interventions.
Several interventions have been designed to improve adherence to medications for the relief of cancer
pain. Some of them target specific factors as described below:
• Patient cooperation.This is achieved by educating the patient about pain and the management of side-
effects, and encouraging the active participation of the patient in his or her own pain treatment (9).
• Therapeutic relationship.Good relationships between health professionals and patients should be
encouraged (14).
• Simplification of regimens.The use of once-daily, or at most twice-daily, preparations is desirable wher-
ever possible (9).
• Adaptations of prescribed medications.The patient should agree on a medication formulation and medication
❘ 61
WHO 2003
 WHO 2003
62 ❘
Table 2
Factors affecting adherence to palliative care for cancer and interventions for improving
it, listed by the five dimensions and the interventions used to improve adherence
should be chosen not only for the clinical indication,but also to suit the patient,taking into account his or
her lifestyle and preferences (15).
• The role of home care nurses.Home care nurses can play an important role in educating patients and
their families about pain management, in administering medications and providing support and
counselling (16–18).
Failure to address the barriers affecting pain management may lead to therapeutic failure and poor
quality of life for the patient.
Cancer
Factors affecting adherence
Interventions to improve adherence
(–) Long distance from treatment setting
(–) Lack of knowledge of health professionals
about pain management; inadequate under-
standing of drug dependence by health profes-
sionals (5); health professionals’fears of investi-
gation or sanction (19); poor delivery of care
education to the patient (20); poor delivery of
care education to family and caregivers (20);
reluctance of health professionals to prescribe
opioids for use at home (20)
(+) Good relationship between patient and
physician (14)
(–) Nature of the patient’s illness; poor under-
standing of the disease and its symptoms
(–) Complex treatment regimens; taking too
many tablets (9); frequency of dose; having no
treatment instructions (9); misunderstanding
instructions about how to take the drugs (9);
bad tasting medication; adverse effects of treat-
ment (9); inadequate treatment doses; perceived
ineffectiveness (9) unnecessary duplicate pre-
scribing (9)
(+) Monotherapy with simple dosing schedules (9)
(–) Forgetfulness (9); misconceptions about pain
(11,12); difficulty in taking the preparation as pre-
scribed (9); fear of injections (11); anxieties about
possible adverse effects (12); no self-perceived
need for treatment (9,21); feeling that it is not
important to take medications (9,21); undue anx-
iety about medication dependence (11); fear of
dependence (14); psychological stress 
Optimizing the cooperation between services;
assessment of social needs (3); family prepared-
ness (3); mobilization of community-based
organizations
Training of health professionals on adherence
(20); pain education component in training 
programmes (13); support to caregivers; multi-
disciplinary care; follow-up consultation by 
community nurses (20); supervision in home
pain management (20); identification of the
treatment goals and development of strategies
to meet them
Education on use of medicine (11)
Simplification of regimens (15); education on use
of medications (9); giving clear instructions (9);
clarifying misunderstandings about the recom-
mendation of opioids; patient-tailored prescrip-
tions (9,15); continuous monitoring and reassess-
ment of treatment; assessment and manage-
ment of side-effects; coordination of prescribing
(9)
Interventions to redress misconceptions about
pain treatment and to encourage dialogue about
pain control between patient and oncologist
(9,11); exploration of fears (e.g. about depend-
ence) (9,11); assessment of psychological needs
(3); education on use of medications (11); behav-
ioural and motivational intervention (11); good
patient–provider relationship (14); self-manage-
ment of disease and treatment (11,16–18); self-
management of side-effects (16–18)
Socioeconomic-
related factors
Health care 
team/health 
system-related 
factors
Condition-related 
factors
Therapy-related 
factors
Patient-related 
factors
(+) Factors having a positive effect on adherence; (–) factors having a negative effect on adherence.
 3. Conclusions
Definitions and measurements of adherence vary widely; this prevents comparisons being made
between studies and populations.There is little information on the adherence to palliative treatment of
patients with cancer, and it covers only treatments for relief of pain.The available information reports
adherence rates ranging from 24.7% to 88.9%. A general programme of palliative care must include the
management of adherence in order to improve the effectiveness of the interventions and ensure an
acceptable quality of life for this group of patients.
More research on adherence to palliative care is required in the following areas:
– epidemiology of adherence, especially to medicines other than those for pain relief;
– determination of the most appropriate methods and definitions for the measurement of adherence
to analgesic medications;
– determining the additional factors that contribute to a patient’s level of adherence to all required
therapies; and
– studies evaluating interventions to improve adherence to all required therapies.
❘ 63
WHO 2003
4. References
1. Cancer pain relief and palliative care.Report of a WHO Expert Committee.
Geneva,World Health Organization,1990 (WHO Technical Report Series,No.
804).
2. Addington-Hall J,McCarthy M.Dying from cancer:results of a national popu-
lation-based investigation.Pall Medicine,1995,9:295–305.
3. Jordhoy MS et al.Quality of life in palliative cancer care:results from a cluster
randomized trial.Journal of Clinical Oncology,2001,19:3884–3894.
4. National cancer control programmes:policies and managerial guidelines.
Geneva,World Health Organization,2002.
5. Cancer pain relief,2nd ed.With a guide to opioid availability.Geneva,World
Health Organization,1996.
6. Miaskowski C et al.Lack of adherence with the analgesic regimen:a signifi-
cant barrier to effective cancer pain management.Journal of Clinical
Oncology,2001,19:4275–4279.
7. Du Pen SL et al.Implementing guidelines for cancer pain management:
results of a randomized controlled clinical trial.Journal of Clinical Oncology,
1999,17:361–370.
8. Ward SE et al.Patient-related barriers to management of cancer pain.Pain,
1993,52:319–324.
9. Zeppetella G.How do terminally ill patients at home take their medication?
Palliative Medicine,1999,13:469–475.
10. Ferrell BR,Juarez G,Borneman T.Use of routine and breakthrough analgesia
in home care.Oncology Nursing Forum,1999,26:1655–1661.
11. Ward S et al.Patient education in pain control.Supportive Care in Cancer,
2001,9:148–155.
12. Horne R,Weinman J.Patients’beliefs about prescribed medicines and their
role in adherence to treatment in chronic physical illness.Journal of
Psychosomatic Research,1999,47:555–567.
13. MacDonald N et al.A Canadian survey of issues in cancer pain management.
Journal of Pain & Symptom Management,1997,14:332–342.
14. Ferrell BR,Dean GE.Ethical issues in pain management at home.Journal of
Palliative Care,1994,10:67–72.
15. Mullen PD.Compliance becomes concordance.British Medical Journal,1997,
314:691–692.
16. Chelf JH et al.Cancer-related patient education:an overview of the last
decade of evaluation and research.Oncology Nursing Forum,2001,
28:1139–1147.
17. de Wit R et al.Improving the quality of pain treatment by a tailored pain
education programme for cancer patients in chronic pain.European Journal
of Pain,2001,5:241–256.
18. Rimer B et al.Enhancing cancer pain control regimens through patient edu-
cation.Patient Education & Counseling,1987,10:267–277.
19. Jones WL et al.Cancer patients’knowledge,beliefs,and behavior regarding
pain control regimens:implications for education programs.Patient
Education & Counseling,1984,5:159–164.
20. Barriers and benefits of managing cancer pain at home. Geneva,World
Health Organization,Cancer Pain Release 10, 1997.
21. Horne R,Weinman J.Patient’s beliefs about prescribed medicines and their
role in adherence to treatment in chronic physical illness.Journal psychoso-
matic research.1999,47:555–67.
 WHO 2003
64 ❘
 Chapter IX
C H A P T E R  I X
Depression
1. Research methods: measurement of adherence and sampling
66
2. Rates of adherence
66
3. Predictors of adherence
67
4. Interventions to improve adherence
68
5. Clinical implications and need for further research
69
6. References
70
Depressive disorder is one of the most prevalent forms of mental illness, and is of major public health
importance (1).It is characterized by abnormal and persistent low mood,accompanied by other symptoms
including sleep disturbance, loss of appetite, suicidal thoughts, impaired concentration and attention, guilt
and pessimism. Symptoms vary in severity, and the pattern of illness can range from an isolated and rel-
atively mild episode, through recurrent episodes of moderate severity, to chronic and persistent severe
illness. Owing to its prevalence, and to health system factors, primary care practitioners see most of the
patients with depression and few are referred to specialist psychiatric services, even when they are
readily available.
Although psychological treatments of proven efficacy are available for the management of depression,
the most common form of treatment worldwide is antidepressant medication. For patients with a defin-
itive diagnosis of depression, pharmacotherapy guidelines advocate that treatment should continue for
at least 6 months following remission of symptoms. Furthermore, for patients who have suffered two or
more episodes of significant depression within 5 years, long-term preventive treatment is suggested (2).
The clinical effectiveness of drug therapies for depression is limited by two groups of factors; patient
adherence to the recommended protocol, and under-diagnosis and/or suboptimal treatment by pri-
mary care doctors. Both groups of factors appear to be relatively common, but the focus here is on
adherence. However, the diagnosis and treatment cannot be ignored as they are likely to interact with,
or to mediate, adherence.
This chapter discusses research methods, the overall prevalence of adherence, predictors of adherence
and the efficacy of interventions designed to improve adherence. A literature search was made using
Medline (1990–2001). A total of 287 publications were identified and evaluated.
 1. Research methods: measurement of adherence and sampling
As is the case when attempting to measure patient behaviour in many other contexts, it is difficult to
derive accurate estimates of patient adherence to medication for depression. Across studies, several
techniques have been used including clinician estimation or patient self-report, pill-counting, estima-
tion of blood levels of drug, metabolite or tracer substance, and the use of electronic monitoring sys-
tems that record pill dispensing.Two studies directly compared methods of measurement. In 1990 Kroll
et al., using a small sample of patients with mixed diagnoses, demonstrated that levels of medication in
the blood correlated with clinical outcome, and that many patients who claimed to be taking a medica-
tion regularly had low levels of it in their blood (3). In 2000, George et al. compared four methods of
assessment in depressed patients treated by primary care practitioners, and were able to show that an
event monitoring system (EMS) that electronically counted the amount of medication dispensed from
its container was the most sensitive method of measuring adherence, although the specificity of a
patient report of nonadherence was also high (4). Estimations of plasma levels of drugs and their
metabolites were less useful. Although these types of measure overcome some of the bias associated
with either physician observation or patient self-report, they still lack some of the features required of a
“gold-standard”measure (i.e. being direct, objective and unobtrusive).
The second important methodological issue is the nature of the patient samples studied. Much
research has been conducted on hospital outpatients or inpatients, or patients recruited into random-
ized trials to test the efficacy of medications.This pre-selection bias makes it very unlikely that the
patients in these studies represent the true population of depressed patients receiving treatment in pri-
mary care settings.This makes it hard to generalize from the results of these studies.
2. Rates of adherence
Many studies have attempted to estimate the prevalence of adherence using different methods in a vari-
ety of patient samples. Early studies in primary care settings in the United Kingdom indicated that up 
to two-thirds of depressed patients who started courses of tricyclic drugs stopped taking them within a
month (29).Peveler et al. assessed a large population of patients receiving tricyclic medication in primary
care settings in the United Kingdom using EMS, and found that around 40% had discontinued treatment
within 12 weeks (5). In 1990, McCombs et al. attempted to assess adherence in a large sample of
depressed Medicaid-funded patients in California, United States, but found it difficult to separate
patient’s adherence to therapies from physician’s adherence to treatment guidelines (6). Katon et al.
assessed the extent to which patients of an HMO, on receiving prescriptions for antidepressant drugs,
actually obtained supplies of medication. They reported that only 20% of patients who had been pre-
scribed tricyclic drugs filled four or more prescriptions within 6 months, while 34% of patients who had
been prescribed newer antidepressants did so (7). Lin et al. assessed a very large sample of HMO
patients 6–8 weeks after starting treatment and found that 32–42% had not filled their prescriptions (8).
In a sample of patients with psychiatric disorders receiving prophylactic lithium treatment for unipolar
and bipolar affective illness, Schumann et al. found that 43% of patients had discontinued their medica-
tion within 6 months (9). Ramana et al. interviewed patients discharged from hospital following admis-
sion for depression and found that at 18 months about 70% were “compliant”
, although this study also
noted problems with physicians under-prescribing according to guidelines (10).
Gasquet et al. conducted a large telephone survey of the general population in France (11). He reported
that 15% of the subjects admitted to early termination of their treatment, and 22% admitted to reduc-
ing their dose.
WHO 2003
66 ❘
 3. Predictors of adherence
Frequency of dosing. In an early study in a psychiatric outpatient practice in the United Kingdom, Myers
& Branthwaite randomized patients into groups that received their treatment once daily or three times
daily, or chose one of the two schedules. Adherence was assessed by pill count and interview (12).There
was no overall difference in reported adherence between patients receiving once-daily or three-times-
daily doses, but those who elected to take their medication three times daily reported better adherence
than the others.This suggests that the element of personal control over choice of dose, rather than the
frequency of dosing itself was influential. A recent study has suggested that prescribing a once-weekly
dose of enteric-coated fluoxetine may lead to better adherence than a once-daily dose (13); thus sub-
stantial gains in convenience may also improve adherence.
Education. Lin et al. reported that patients were more likely to continue to take their medication during
the first month of treatment if they had received specific educational messages, namely that they
should take their medication daily, that they might notice no benefit for the first 2–4 weeks, that they
should continue even if they felt better and that they should not stop medication without consulting
their doctor.They also received advice about how to seek answers to questions about medication (14).
The impact of such advice has not been evaluated prospectively.
Drug type. There has been considerable interest in the question of whether or not different antide-
pressant drugs are associated with better or worse adherence. A naturalistic study of claims data of
2000 patients suggested that adherence may be poorer in patients treated with tricyclic antidepres-
sants, and that the provision of family, group or individual psychotherapy may improve adherence (15).
Several meta-analyses of randomized trials have also addressed this question. Montgomery & Kasper
reviewed 67 trials and reported that the number of patients who discontinued their treatment because
of side-effects was 5% lower in patients treated with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) than
in patients treated with tricyclics (16). Anderson & Tomenson reviewed 62 trials and also found a mar-
ginally lower discontinuation rate in patients treated with SSRIs, but commented that the difference
was probably too small to be of clinical significance (17). Hotopf et al. reporting the results of another
meta-analysis suggested that even this small difference might be due to the preponderance of older
tricyclic drugs used in most of the early trials, and that it would disappear if the comparison were made
with newer tricyclic and heterocyclic medicines (18). Although the generalizability of meta-analysis may
be limited by the characteristics of the patient samples in the trials reviewed, these results suggest that
drug type may not be a particularly influential variable.
Co-medication. Furukawa et al. conducted a meta-analysis of trials comparing combinations of antide-
pressants and benzodiazepines with antidepressants prescribed alone for periods of up to 8 weeks and
reported a marginal benefit of co-prescribing benzodiazepines. Any potential benefit must be offset
against the possible clinical disadvantages such as the development of dependence on benzodi-
azepines (19).
Psychiatric co-morbidity and personality traits. Keeley et al. reported from a small study in family prac-
tice, that patients with more frequent somatoform symptoms were more likely to be nonadherent to
drug treatment (20). Ekselius et al. reported that sensation-seeking personality traits were associated
with lower blood-levels of antidepressant drug, though not with lower self-reported adherence, in
patients participating in a randomized trial (21).
❘ 67
WHO 2003
 4. Interventions to improve adherence
As mentioned above, one difficulty in the study of depression therapy is that unsatisfactory treatment
may reflect a combination of poor patient adherence and medical advice that is inconsistent with
expert guidelines.To be clinically effective, interventions should ideally deal with both aspects of quali-
ty improvement. In 1999, Peveler et al. were able to show that two brief sessions of counselling provid-
ed by a primary care nurse could greatly reduce rates of discontinuation of treatment at 12 weeks (from
61% to 37%), but clinical benefit was only seen in a post hoc analysis of the subgroup of patients receiv-
ing adequate doses of medication (5). A small feasibility study also suggested that similar benefits could
be obtained by telephone counselling (22). Information alone, provided by leaflet (5) or by repeated
mailings (23), did not appear to be effective in improving rates of adherence (see also Table 3).
Most other studies have tested complex, multi-faceted, interventions designed to improve the overall
quality of care. For example, Katon et al. (24–27) evaluated the impact of increased involvement of sec-
ondary care specialist staff and closer surveillance of patients receiving treatment in primary care.They
reported improved adherence, boosting the proportion of patients receiving an adequate dose of their
medication at 90 days to 75%, but although this group initially had better clinical outcomes, these ben-
efits were no longer evident at 19-month follow-up. Subsequent work has shown that a relapse preven-
tion programme can also improve longer-term outcome (28).
WHO 2003
68 ❘
Table 3
Factors affecting adherence to treatment for depression and interventions for improving
it, listed by the five dimensions and the interventions used to improve adherence
Depression
Factors affecting adherence
Interventions to improve adherence
No information was found
(–) Poor health education of the patient
(+) Multi-faceted intervention for primary care
(–) Psychiatric co-morbidity
(+) Clear instructions on management of disease
(14); nature of the patient’s illness; poor under-
standing of the disease and its symptoms
(–) High frequency of dose (13); co-prescribing 
of benzodiazepines (19); adequate doses of
medication (5,24–27)
(+) Low frequency of dose (13); clear instructions
on management of treatment (14)
(–) Personality traits (20,21)
No information was found
Multidisciplinary care (24–27); training of health
professionals on adherence; counselling provid-
ed by a primary care nurse (5); telephone consul-
tation/counselling (22); improved assessment
and monitoring of patients (24)
Education of patient on use of medicines (14)
Education on use of medicines (14);
patient-tailored prescriptions (13); continuous
monitoring and reassessment of treatment (28)
Counselling (24); relapse-prevention counselling;
psychotherapy (15); family psychotherapy (15);
frequent follow-up interviews (28); specific
advice targeted at the needs and concerns of
individual patients (24)
Socioeconomic-
related factors
Health care 
team/health 
system-related 
factors
Condition-related 
factors
Therapy-related 
factors
Patient-related 
factors
(+) Factors having a positive effect on adherence; (–) factors having a negative effect on adherence.
 5. Clinical implications and need for further research
Ten years ago research in this field was limited, but considerable progress has since been made.
Although by no means complete, we now have data for estimating the extent of the problem, and there
is an increasing awareness of its clinical and social impact and of the fact that high levels of patient
adherence to treatment and physician adherence to best-practice protocols are important co-determi-
nants of treatment outcome.There is broader recognition that, at least for those patients with severe
and recurrent illness, a chronic disease model should be adopted.
Furthermore, practitioners treating patients with depression can be guided by several recent findings
that are summarized below.
• If the problem of poor adherence is not addressed, 30–40% of patients will discontinue their medica-
tion early (after 12 weeks), regardless of perceived benefits or side-effects.
• Simple to follow advice and education such as that tested by Lin et al. (14) is beneficial, and such
advice should be given both in the early phase of treatment (5) and repeated at later stages (28).
• If patients admit to poor adherence, then it is highly likely that they are not taking their medication as
prescribed; if they report good adherence, but lack of clinical progress suggests that adherence may
nevertheless be a problem, the most sensitive method of detection is electronic monitoring.
• There is at best only weak evidence that treatment with the newer antidepressants leads directly to
better rates of adherence and this is therefore probably not a material factor in choice of medication.
• Improved patient outcomes in primary care are probably best achieved through complex interven-
tions such as those used by Katon et al. comprising improved assessment and monitoring of patients
and relapse prevention counselling, together with specific advice targeted at the needs and concerns
of individual patients.
A considerable research agenda still remains. More accurate estimations of the prevalence of adherence
are needed in addition to research to address and measure the different forms that poor adherence
may take, e.g. patients missing doses, taking “drug holidays”
, substituting agents, changing dosing, not
filling prescriptions or discontinuing treatment early.The ways in which primary care physicians assess
depression and deliver treatment should be further explored to identify determinants that explain
adherence (and nonadherence) behaviours. Electronic event monitoring systems offer a useful
approach to measuring some forms of adherence. An improved understanding of the relationships
between health beliefs and medication-taking behaviour should lead to more robust theoretical frame-
works, and to more effective methods of improving adherence, that can be added to existing tech-
niques. Depression management programmes of the type pioneered by Katon and others in the United
States require evaluation in other health care systems to ascertain whether their apparent benefits are
transferable to other situations.
❘ 69
WHO 2003
 6. References
1. Murray C,Lopez A.The global burden of disease:a comprehensive assessment
of mortality and disability from diseases,injuries and risk factors in 1990.
Cambridge,MA,Harvard University Press,1996.
2. Peveler R,Kendrick A.Treatment delivery and guidelines in primary care.
British Medical Bulletin,2001,57:193–206.
3. Kroll J et al.Medication compliance,antidepressant blood levels,and side
effects in Southeast Asian patients.Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology,
1990,10:279–283.
4. George CF et al.Compliance with tricyclic antidepressants:the value of four
different methods of assessment.British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology,
2000,50:166–171.
5. Peveler R et al.Effect of antidepressant drug counselling and information
leaflets on adherence to drug treatment in primary care:randomised con-
trolled trial.British Medical Journal,1999,319:612–615.
6. McCombs JS et al.The cost of antidepressant drug therapy failure:a study 
of antidepressant use patterns in a Medicaid population.Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry,1990,51 (Suppl):60–69.
7. Katon W et al.Adequacy and duration of antidepressant treatment in primary
care.Medical Care,1992,30:67–76.
8. Lin EH et al.Low-intensity treatment of depression in primary care:is it prob-
lematic? General Hospital Psychiatry,2000,22:78–83.
9. Schumann C et al.;Nonadherence with long-term prophylaxis:a 6-year 
naturalistic follow-up study of affectively ill patients.Psychiatry Research,
1999,89:247–257.
10. Ramana R et al.Medication received by patients with depression following
the acute episode:adequacy and relation to outcome.British Journal of
Psychiatry,1999,174:128–134.
11. Gasquet I et al.[Determinants of compliance with antidepressive drugs.]
[French] Encephale,2001,27:83–91.
12. Myers ED,Branthwaite A.Out-patient compliance with antidepressant med-
ication.British Journal of Psychiatry,1992,160:83–86.
13. Claxton A et al.Patient compliance to a new enteric-coated weekly formula-
tion of fluoxetine during continuation treatment of major depressive disorder.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,2000,61:928–932.
14. Lin EH et al.The role of the primary care physician in patients’adherence to
antidepressant therapy.Medical Care,1995,33:67–74.
15. Tai-Seale M,Croghan TW,Obenchain R.Determinants of antidepressant 
treatment compliance:implications for policy.Medical Care Research &
Review,2000,57:491–512.
16. Montgomery SA,Kasper S.Comparison of compliance between serotonin
reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants:a meta-analysis.
International Clinical Psychopharmacology,1995,9 (Suppl 4):33–40.
17. Anderson IM,Tomenson BM.Treatment discontinuation with selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors compared with tricyclic antidepressants:a
meta-analysis.British Medical Journal,1995,310:1433–1438.
18. Hotopf M,Hardy R,Lewis G.Discontinuation rates of SSRIs and tricyclic 
antidepressants:a meta-analysis and investigation of heterogeneity.
British Journal of Psychiatry,1997,170:120–127.
19. Furukawa TA,Streiner DL,Young LT.Is antidepressant-benzodiazepine 
combination therapy clinically more useful? A meta-analytic study.Journal 
of Affective Disorders,2001,65:173–177.
20. Keeley R,Smith M,Miller J.Somatoform symptoms and treatment nonadher-
ence in depressed family medicine outpatients.Archives of Family Medicine,
2000,9:46–54.
21. Ekselius L,Bengtsson F,von Knorring L.Non-compliance with pharmacother-
apy of depression is associated with a sensation seeking personality.
International Clinical Psychopharmacology,2000,15:273–278.
22. Tutty S,Simon G,Ludman E.Telephone counseling as an adjunct to antide-
pressant treatment in the primary care system.A pilot study.Effective Clinical
Practice,2000,3:170–178.
23. Mundt JC et al.Effectiveness of antidepressant pharmacotherapy:the impact
of medication compliance and patient education.Depression & Anxiety,2001,
13:1–10.
24. Katon W et al.Collaborative management to achieve treatment guidelines.
Impact on depression in primary care.Journal of the American Medical
Association,1995,273:1026–1031.
25. Katon W et al.A multifaceted intervention to improve treatment of depres-
sion in primary care.Archives of General Psychiatry,1996,53:924–932.
26. Lin EH et al.Can enhanced acute-phase treatment of depression improve
long-term outcomes? A report of randomized trials in primary care.American
Journal of Psychiatry,1999,156:643–645.
27. Katon W et al.Stepped collaborative care for primary care patients with 
persistent symptoms of depression:a randomized trial.Archives of General
Psychiatry,1999,56:1109–1115.
28. Katon W et al.A randomized trial of relapse prevention of depression 
in primary care.Archives of General Psychiatry,2001,58:241–247.
29. Johnson,DA.Treatment of depression in general practice.1973,British
Medical Journal.266:18–20.
WHO 2003
70 ❘
 Chapter X
C H A P T E R  X
Diabetes
1. Introduction 71
2. Treatment of diabetes
72
3. Definition of adherence
72
4. Prevalence of adherence to recommendations for diabetes treatment
73
5. Correlates of adherence
75
6. Interventions
79
7. Methodological and conceptual issues in research on adherence 
to treatment for diabetes
81
8. Conclusions
81
9. References
82
1. Introduction
Diabetes mellitus is a group of diseases characterized by high levels of blood glucose resulting from defects
in insulin secretion, insulin action or both (1). Diabetes is highly prevalent, afflicting approximately 150 mil-
lion people worldwide (2), and this number is expected to rise to 300 million in the year 2025 (3). Much
of this increase will occur in developing countries and will result from population ageing, unhealthy
diet, obesity and a sedentary lifestyle (4). In developed countries, such as the United States, diabetes has
been reported as the seventh leading cause of death (5), and the leading cause of lower extremity
amputation, end-stage renal disease and blindness among persons aged 18–65 years (6–9). It has been
estimated that diabetes costs the United States economy more than 98 billion dollars per year in direct
and indirect costs (5,10). It has also been estimated that low-income families in the United States sup-
porting an adult member with diabetes devote 10% of their income to his or her care, and that this fig-
ure rises to 25% in India (11).
There are four known subtypes of diabetes mellitus (1).
• Type 1 diabetes,previously called insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) or juvenile onset dia-
betes, accounts for 5 to 10% of all diagnosed cases of diabetes (12).Type 1 diabetes, caused by failure
of pancreatic beta-cells to produce insulin, can afflict both children and adults who will require daily
 injections of insulin. Inadequate use of insulin results in ketoacidosis and this inevitable consequence
limits the extent to which patients can ignore recommendations to take exogenous insulin and still
survive. Ketoacidosis is a significant cause of mortality in young persons with type 1 diabetes (13,14).
Patients with diabetic ketoacidosis often require hospitalization and, in most instances, poor adher-
ence to insulin therapy is the suspected cause (15,16).
• Type 2 diabetes, previously called non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) or adult-onset
diabetes, may account for about 90% of all diagnosed cases of the disease. It is typically associated
with being overweight and is caused by insulin resistance. For patients with type 2 diabetes, weight
control, by means of dietary and physical activity regimens, is the cornerstone of the treatment.
However, pancreatic beta-cell function decreases over time, so many patients will eventually require
treatment with oral medications or exogenous insulin.
• Gestational diabetes develops in 2 to 5% of all pregnancies, but disappears postpartum (17).Risk fac-
tors include race/ethnicity and a family history of diabetes and obesity.
• Other specific types of diabetes result from specific genetic syndromes, surgery, drugs, malnutrition,
infections and other illness, and account for 1 to 2% of all diagnosed cases of diabetes.
2. Treatment of diabetes
The goals of diabetes treatment are to keep blood glucose levels as near normal as possible while
avoiding acute and chronic complications (7,18). Because the normal homeostatic control mechanisms
are disrupted in patients with diabetes, food intake, emotional stress and changes in physical activity
can cause blood glucose to become too low or too high leading to the acute complications of hypogly-
caemia or hyperglycaemia. In addition, inappropriate nutrition and insufficient physical activity increase
the risk of developing the long-term complications of diabetes, especially heart disease. Keeping blood
glucose within a target range requires feedback in the form of self-monitoring of blood glucose.
Patients with type 1 diabetes must carefully balance food intake, insulin and physical activity. Patients
with type 2 diabetes are often prescribed oral medications that increase insulin production, decrease
insulin resistance, or block carbohydrate absorption and may have to take exogenous insulin to achieve
adequate metabolic control. Because improved metabolic control ends the spilling of glucose in the
urine, patients who do not reduce their food intake will gain weight thus increasing insulin resistance,
risk for heart disease and other obesity-related complications (19,20).
3. Definition of adherence
Contemporary perspectives on diabetes care accord a central role to patient self-care, or self-manage-
ment. Self-care implies that the patient actively monitors and responds to changing environmental and
biological conditions by making adaptive adjustments in the different aspects of diabetes treatment in
order to maintain adequate metabolic control and reduce the probability of complications (21).The self-
care behaviours involved in achieving adequate metabolic control and avoiding long-term complications
are: home glucose monitoring (in blood or urine); adjustment of food intake, especially of carbohydrates,
to meet daily needs and match available insulin; administration of medication (insulin or oral hypogly-
caemic agents); regular physical activity; foot care; regular medical monitoring visits, and other behaviours
(i.e. dental care, appropriate clothing, etc.) that may vary depending on the type of diabetes (18).
Against this background of illness-related demands, adherence is conceptualized as the active, volun-
tary involvement of the patient in the management of his or her disease, by following a mutually
agreed course of treatment and sharing responsibility between the patient and health care providers
(22). Hentinen (23) described adherence to self-care as an active, responsible and flexible process of self-
WHO 2003
72 ❘
 management, in which the patient strives to achieve good health by working in close collaboration
with health care staff, instead of simply following rigidly prescribed rules. Other terms have been pro-
posed such as “collaborative diabetes management”(24),“patient empowerment”(25) or “self-care
behaviour management”(23,26–28). Another important concept is “inadvertent nonadherence”which
occurs when a patient believes he or she is adhering to the recommended treatment but, through
errors in knowledge or skill, is not doing so (29).
4. Prevalence of adherence to recommendations for diabetes treatment
From the study of adherence to treatments for diabetes, it is apparently important to assess the level of
adherence to each component of the treatment regimen independently (i.e. self-monitoring of blood
glucose, administration of insulin or oral hypoglycaemic agents, diet, physical activity, foot care and
other self-care practices) instead of using a single measure to assess adherence to the overall treat-
ment.This is because there appears to be little correlation between adherence to the separate self-care
behaviours, suggesting that adherence is not a unidimensional construct (21,30).This finding has been
reported for both type 1 and type 2 diabetes (31). Furthermore, there appear to be different relation-
ships between adherence and metabolic control for persons with different types of diabetes (32).
Consequently, the following section on adherence rates has been organized to reflect these two issues.
First there is a discussion of adherence to each element of the regimen; this is followed by an analysis of
adherence by diabetes type.
A. Adherence to treatment for type 1 diabetes 
Self-monitoring of glucose. The extent of adherence to prescribed self-monitoring of glucose levels in
blood varies widely, depending on the frequency or aspect assessed in the study. For example, in a sample
of children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes (33), only 26% of study participants reported monitoring
glucose levels as recommended (3–4 times daily), compared to approximately 40% of the adults with
type 1 diabetes (34). Similar findings were reported in a Finnish study (n = 213; patients aged 17–65 years),
in which 20% of the study participants monitored their blood glucose as recommended, and 21% of
respondents made daily or almost daily adjustments to their insulin dosage according to the results of
self-monitoring of blood glucose. Only 6% reported never performing the prescribed blood glucose tests
(35). A study conducted in the United States replicated the latter result in patients with type 1 diabetes
(mean age = 30 years), of whom 7% reported never testing their glucose levels (21).
Other studies have assessed adherence based on incorrect performance (intentional or unintentional)
of the component behaviours involved in glucose monitoring in urine or blood. One study reported
that up to 80% of adolescents made significant mistakes when estimating glucose concentrations in
urine (36). Between 30% and 60% made errors in the timing procedures involved in self-monitoring of
blood glucose (37). Others inaccurately reported concentrations; up to 75% may under-report actual
mean concentrations of blood glucose, and up to 40% have been found to over-report or to invent phan-
tom values (38).Other studies have found that between 40% and 60% of patients fabricated results (39,40)
and 18% failed to record their results (40). In recent years, the development of blood glucose meters
with electronic memory has made it more difficult, though not impossible, for patients to fabricate the
results of blood-glucose monitoring.
Administration of insulin.The prevalence of adherence to insulin administration varies widely. In a
study conducted in Finland (35) most of the respondents reported adhering to insulin injections as
scheduled either daily (84%) or almost daily (15%). Other studies have framed the adherence question
differently. Rates for “never missing a shot”varied from 92% in a sample of young adults (21) to 53% in
a sample of children (41); while 25% of adolescents reported “missing insulin shots within 10 days
before a clinic visit”(42).
❘ 73
WHO 2003
 A study conducted by Wing et al. (37) assessed the quality of performance of insulin administration
(intentional or unintentional errors).The use of unhygienic injections was noted in 80% of patients and
the administration of incorrect doses of insulin in 58%. In studies assessing the intentional omission of
insulin to control weight, Polonsky et al. (43) reported that 31% of study participants (n = 341; female
patients aged 13–60 years) admitted to intentional omission of insulin, but only 9% reported frequent
omission to control weight. More recently, Bryden et al. (44) reported that 30% of female adolescents
(but none of the males in the sample) admitted under-using insulin to control weight.
Diet.The results of research on adherence to prescribed dietary recommendations have been inconsis-
tent. In studies by Carvajal et al. (45) in Cuba, and Wing et al. (37) in the United States, 70–75% of study
participants reported not adhering to dietary recommendations, but in a study in Finland by Toljamo et
al. (35), adherence to dietary recommendations was high: 70% of participants reported always or often
having a regular main meal, while only 8% reported always having irregular mealtimes. In answer to
questions regarding the foods prescribed, over half of the participants reported assessing both the con-
tent and amount of food that they ate daily (48%) while 14% of the respondents did not evaluate their
food at all. Christensen et al. reported similar findings (46): 60% of study participants (n = 97) adhered to
the number and timing of planned meals, while only 10% of patients adhered to planned exchanges,
90% of the time.
Physical activity and other self-care measures. Literature on the extent of adherence to prescribed rec-
ommendations for physical activity among patients with type 1 diabetes is scarce. One study conduct-
ed in Finland indicated that two-thirds of study participants (n = 213) took regular daily exercise (35%)
or almost daily exercise (30%), while 10% took no exercise at all (35). In the same study, only 25% of
study participants reported taking care of their feet daily or almost daily, while 16% reported never tak-
ing care of their feet as recommended (35).
B. Adherence rates for type 2 diabetes 
Glucose monitoring. In a study conducted to assess patterns of self-monitoring of blood glucose in
northern California, United States, 67% of patients with type 2 diabetes reported not performing self-
monitoring of blood glucose as frequently as recommended (i.e. once daily for type 2 diabetes treated
pharmacologically) (34). Similar findings were reported in a study conducted in India, in which only 23%
of study participants reported performing glucose monitoring at home (47).
Administration of medication. Among patients receiving their medication from community pharmacies
(n = 91), adherence to oral hypoglycaemic agents was 75%. Dose omissions represented the most
prevalent form of nonadherence; however, more than one-third of the patients took more doses than
prescribed.This over-medication was observed more frequently in those patients prescribed a once-
daily dose (48). Similar adherence rates of between 70 and 80% were reported from the United States in
a study of oral hypoglycaemic agents in a sample of patients whose health insurance paid for pre-
scribed drugs (49). Dailey et al. (50) studied 37 431 Medicaid-funded patients in the United States, and
used pharmacy records to show that patients with type 2 diabetes averaged about 130 days per year of
continuous drug therapy, and that at the end of 1 year, only 15% of the patients who had been pre-
scribed a single oral medication were still taking it regularly.
Diet. In a study conducted in India, dietary prescriptions were followed regularly by only 37% of
patients (47), while in a study in the United States about half (52%) followed a meal plan (51). Anderson
& Gustafson (52) reported good-to-excellent adherence in 70% of patients who had been prescribed a
high-carbohydrate, high-fibre diet.Wing et al. (53) showed that patients with type 2 diabetes lost less
weight than their nondiabetic spouses and that the difference was mainly due to poor adherence to
the prescribed diet by the diabetic patients. Adherence to dietary protocols may depend upon the
nature of the treatment objective (e.g. weight loss, reduction of dietary fat or increased fibre intake).
WHO 2003
74 ❘
 Physical activity. Several studies have reported on adherence to prescribed physical activity. For exam-
ple, in a study in Canada of a sample of patients with type 2 diabetes randomly selected from provincial
health records, few respondents participated in informal (37%) or organized (7.7%) physical activity pro-
grammes (54). A survey in the United States found that only 26% of respondents followed a physical
activity plan (51). A study assessing the attitudes and adherence of patients who had completed out-
patient diabetes counselling observed that only 52% exercised on three or more days per week after
the counselling programme was completed (55).
C. Adherence to treatment for gestational diabetes
One study was found that had assessed adherence to treatment for gestational diabetes. Forty-nine
pregnant women with pre-existing (overt) diabetes (68% with type 1 and 32% with type 2 diabetes)
were assessed, using self-report, on their adherence to a number of self-care tasks on three occasions
during pregnancy (mid-second, early third and late third trimester) (56). In general, the participants
reported being adherent. However, there was considerable variation across different regimen compo-
nents: 74-79% of women reported always following dietary recommendations, compared to 86-88%
who followed the recommendations for insulin administration, 85-89% who followed the recommenda-
tions for managing insulin reactions and 94-96% who followed those for glucose testing.
5. Correlates of adherence
Variables that have been considered to be correlates of various adherence behaviours in diabetes can
be organized into four clusters:
– treatment and disease characteristics;
– intra-personal factors;
– inter-personal factors; and
– environmental factors.
A. Treatment and disease characteristics
Three elements of treatment and of the disease itself have been associated with adherence: complexity
of treatment, duration of disease and delivery of care (see also Table 4).
In general, the more complex the treatment regimen, the less likely the patient will be to follow it.
Indicators of treatment complexity include frequency of the self-care behaviour – i.e. the number of
times per day a behaviour needs to be performed by the patient. Adherence to oral hypoglycaemic
agents has been associated with frequency of dosing. Higher adherence levels were reported by
patients required to take less frequent doses (a once-daily dose), compared to those prescribed more
frequent doses (three times daily) (48). Dailey et al. (50) showed that patients prescribed a single med-
ication had better short-term and long-term adherence rates than patients prescribed two or more
medications.
Duration of disease appears to have a negative relationship with adherence: the longer a patient has
had diabetes, the less likely he or she is to be adherent to treatment. Glasgow et al. (21) studied a sam-
ple of patients with type 1 diabetes (mean age = 28 years), and found that level of physical activity was
associated with duration of disease. Patients who had had diabetes for 10 years or less reported greater
energy expenditure in recreational physical activities, and exercising on more days per week, than those
with a longer history of diabetes. Patients with a longer history of diabetes also reported eating more
inappropriate foods, consuming a greater proportion of saturated fats and following their diets plans
less well. More recently, in a study conducted in both Polish and American children with type 1 diabetes
❘ 75
WHO 2003
 (41), duration of disease was also associated with adherence to insulin administration, as children with a
longer history of diabetes were more likely to forget their insulin injections than children who had been
diagnosed more recently.
Delivery of care for diabetes can vary from intensive treatment delivered by a multidisciplinary diabetes
team, to outpatient care delivered by a primary care provider.Yawn et al. (57) observed interactions
between patients and providers in a family practice setting and reported that patients with diabetes
seen specifically for their diabetes received more counselling on diet and adherence than patients with
diabetes seen for an acute illness. Kern & Mainous (58) found that although physicians preferred to fol-
low a planned, systematic strategy for treating diabetes, acute illness and failure of patients to adhere
forced them to spend less time on diabetes care.
Adherence can also be affected by the setting in which care is received. Piette (59) examined the prob-
lems experienced by patients in accessing care in two public health settings in the United States and
found that the cost of care was a major barrier to access, especially for patients in a community treat-
ment setting. Perceived barriers to access to care were also associated with poor metabolic control.
B. Intra-personal factors 
Seven important variables have been associated with adherence: age, gender, self-esteem, self-efficacy,
stress, depression and alcohol abuse.
Age of the patient has been associated with adherence to physical activity regimens in a sample of
patients with type 1 diabetes (21). Compared to younger participants, patients over 25 years of age
reported exercising on fewer days per week, and spending less time (and expending fewer calories) in
recreational physical activities.There were no associations reported between age and adherence to
other self-care measures.
Age has also been associated with adherence to insulin administration in a study of adolescents with
type 1 diabetes.The investigators found that older adolescents were more likely to mismanage their
insulin (missing injections) than their younger counterparts (42).In a study assessing adherence to self-
monitoring of blood glucose, younger adolescents reported monitoring their blood glucose concentra-
tions more frequently than did the older ones (60).Older adults may also practice better self-manage-
ment than younger adults (61).
Gender has also been associated with adherence.The men in a sample of patients with type 1 diabetes
(21) were found to be more physically active than the women, but they also consumed more calories,
ate more inappropriate foods and had lower levels of adherence as assessed using a composite meas-
ure of diet.
Self-esteem has been associated with adherence to self-management of diabetes among patients with
type 1 diabetes. High levels of self-esteem were related to high levels of adherence to physical activity
regimens, adjustment of insulin doses and dental self-care (62). Murphy-Bennett,Thompson & Morris
(63) found that lower self-esteem in adolescents with type 1 diabetes was associated with less frequent
testing of blood glucose.
Self-efficacy has been studied in relation to adherence to prescribed treatments for diabetes. In a com-
bined sample of patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes in Canada (64), a measure of diabetes-specific
self-efficacy beliefs was found to be the strongest predictor of energy expenditure suggesting a positive
relationship between self-efficacy and adherence to prescribed physical activity. Senecal, Nouwen &
White (65) reported that beliefs in self-efficacy were a strong predictor of adherence and that both self-
efficacy and autonomy predicted life satisfaction. Ott et al. (66) found that self-efficacy was a predictor of
WHO 2003
76 ❘
 adherence to diabetes care behaviours in adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Aljasem et al. (67) showed
that self-efficacy beliefs predicted adherence to a prescribed regimen in 309 adults with type 2 diabetes
after controlling for health beliefs and perceptions of barriers.
Stress and emotional problems are also correlated with adherence. Fewer minor stressors were associat-
ed with higher levels of adherence to insulin administration and diet in women with gestational dia-
betes (56,68). In a study using a diabetes-specific stress scale in a combined sample of adults with type
1 and type 2 diabetes (69), stress was found to be significantly associated with two aspects of the diet
regimen (diet amount and diet type). However, no associations were found between stress and adher-
ence to physical activity regimens or glucose testing in this sample. Peyrot et al. (70) reported that psy-
chosocial stress was associated with poor adherence to a prescribed regimen and poor metabolic con-
trol in a mixed group of patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Mollema et al. (71) reported that
patients who had an extreme fear of insulin injections or self-monitoring of blood glucose had lower
levels of adherence and higher levels of emotional distress. Schlundt, Stetson & Plant (72) grouped
patients with type 1 diabetes according to the problems they encountered in adhering to prescribed
diets and found that two of the groups of patients – emotional eaters and diet-bingers – had adher-
ence problems related to negative emotions such as stress and depression.
Depression. The incidence of depression has been observed to be twice as high among persons with
diabetes than in the general population (73). Patients with depression are more likely to experience
complications of diabetes (74), have worse glycaemic control (75), and be less adherent to self-care
behaviours than patients who are not depressed. Depression is also associated with higher costs of
medical care in patients with diabetes (76).
Alcohol abuse. Patterns of alcohol use have been related to the quality of diabetes self-management.
Johnson, Bazargan & Bing (77), studied 392 patients with type 2 diabetes from ethnic minority groups in
Los Angeles, CA, and found that alcohol consumption within the previous 30 days was associated with
poor adherence to diet, self-monitoring of blood glucose, oral medications and appointment-keeping.
Cox et al. (78) examined alcohol use in 154 older men with diabetes and found that greater alcohol use
was associated with poorer adherence to insulin injections.
C. Inter-personal factors 
Two important inter-personal factors: the quality of the relationship between patients and providers of
care, and social support, have been found to correlate with adherence. Good communication between
patient and provider has been related to improved adherence. Among patients with type 2 diabetes,
adherence to administration of oral hypoglycaemic agents and glucose monitoring were significantly
worse in patients who rated their communication with their care provider as poor (79).
Social support has been the subject of much research. Greater social support was found to be associat-
ed with better levels of adherence to dietary recommendations and insulin administration in women
with gestational diabetes (68). Parental involvement, as a measure of social support, has also been asso-
ciated with adherence to blood glucose monitoring. Adolescents and children with type 1 diabetes,
who experienced greater parental involvement with their blood glucose monitoring, reported higher
levels of daily checks of blood sugar concentrations (60). McCaul et al. (21) followed a sample of adoles-
cents and adults with type 1 diabetes. For both adults and adolescents disease-specific social support
was associated with better adherence to insulin administration and glucose testing. For the adolescent
group only, general family support was associated with adherence to insulin administration and glu-
cose testing.The study found no association between any of the social support measures and adher-
ence to diet and physical activity regimens. Other studies have shown a relationship between poor
social support and inadequate self-management of diabetes (80–84).
❘ 77
WHO 2003
 D. Environmental factors 
Two environmental factors – high-risk situations and environmental systems – have been linked to poor
adherence in patients with diabetes. Self-care behaviours occur in the context of a continually changing
series of environmental situations at home, at work, in public, etc., which are associated with different
demands and priorities. As their circumstances change, patients are challenged to adjust and maintain
their self-care behaviours. Patients are frequently called upon to choose between giving attention to
diabetes self-management or to some other life priority. Situations associated with poor adherence
have been called “high-risk”situations (85).
Schlundt, Stetson & Plant (72) created a taxonomy of high-risk situations that posed difficulties for
patients following diet prescriptions.The situations included: overeating in response to people, place
and emotions; situations associated with under-eating, and difficulty in integrating food intake accord-
ing to social context, time of day and place. Schlundt et al. (82) described10 high-risk situations for poor
dietary adherence that included social pressure to eat; being alone and feeling bored; interpersonal
conflicts, and eating at school, social events or holidays. Schlundt et al. (83) identified 12 categories of
high-risk dietary situations in adults with type 1 and type 2 diabetes: these included resisting tempta-
tion, eating out, time pressure, competing priorities and social events. Other studies have also shown
that environmental barriers are predictive of adherence to various aspects of diabetes self-care
(34,67,86).
Many environmental factors that influence behaviour operate on a larger scale than the immediate situ-
ation confronting a person (87).These environmental systems include economic, agricultural, political,
health care, geographical, ecological and cultural systems (88).The large-scale environmental changes
that occurred in the twentieth century created the current epidemics of obesity and type 2 diabetes
(89–91).These changes included increased availability of inexpensive fast foods high in fat, salt and calo-
ries (92), and the mechanization of transport systems (93,94). Changes in economic and political sys-
tems have allowed women to move into the workforce, but these same changes have altered the com-
position of families and the way in which families deal with food selection and preparation (95,96).
Large corporations spend billions of dollars each year on marketing foods high in fat and calories (97).
Increasing segments of the population spend many hours per day in sedentary activities.These activi-
ties have been linked to obesity in both children and adults (98–101) and to the risk of developing type
2 diabetes (102).
Some authors have described the current environment as “toxic”to healthy lifestyles (103,104).The inci-
dences of both obesity and diabetes are rapidly increasing in developing nations and are likely to be
associated with urbanization, mechanized transportation and widespread changes in food supply.The
same factors that encourage sedentary lifestyles and the over-consumption of food, and lead to obesity
and diabetes, probably also make it difficult for people who do develop diabetes to adhere to best-
practice protocols.
Many people in developed nations, including the poor and members of ethnic minority groups, have to
some degree been bypassed by the economic prosperity of the twentieth century. It is these groups
that have been most adversely affected by the environmental changes that lead to disparities in health
status (105,106). Even living in a poor community can contribute to poor health outcomes (107).
Given the powerful influence of these larger social factors, it is important to avoid over-attributing the
responsibility for adherence to patient-related factors or to health care providers (108). A patient’s abili-
ty to manage his or her behaviour, achieve tight metabolic control and prevent the long-term complica-
tions of diabetes is determined by a host of intra-personal, inter-personal and environmental factors
that interact in ways that are not yet understood (27,109).
WHO 2003
78 ❘
 6. Interventions
Almost any intervention that is designed to improve metabolic control in diabetes or to reduce the
probability of acute or chronic complications does so by influencing patient self-care or self-manage-
ment behaviours. Early efforts focused on patient education (110), but more recently, the importance of
psychological and behavioural interventions has been stressed as a result of the growing recognition
that knowledge alone is insufficient to produce significant changes in behaviour (111).
Elasy et al. (112) developed a taxonomy for describing educational interventions for patients with dia-
betes based on a thorough review and analysis of the literature published between 1990 and 1999
which revealed the great diversity of interventions employed to improve self-management of diabetes.
Brown conducted a meta-analysis of studies that had tested interventions to improve self-management
of diabetes, and found a recent trend towards combining patient education with behavioural interven-
tion strategies. Combining behavioural techniques with the provision of information was found to be
more effective than interventions that provided only information. In general, the literature supports the
conclusion that diabetes education results in at least short-term improvements in adherence and meta-
bolic control (113), but more research is needed to learn which interventions work best with different
types of patient and for specific behaviours (111,112).
Beyond interventions that focus on individual patients, two other approaches can be used to improve
the self-management of diabetes – interventions that target health providers and interventions at the
community or systems level. Several studies have reported that physicians and other health care
providers deliver less-than-optimal care to patients with diabetes.There have been several correspon-
ding studies of attempts to modify professional behaviours and attitudes in ways that might lead to
improved patient outcomes. Kinmonth et al. (114) trained nurses to provide patient-centred diabetes
care, and showed that patient satisfaction was improved although metabolic parameters were not.
Olivarius et al. (115) in a study of physicians in Denmark used goal-setting, feedback and continuing
education and found that the patients of the physicians who had received this intervention had
improved metabolic parameters when compared to the patients of the physicians in the control group.
In a series of studies, Pichert and colleagues showed that a training programme for nurses and dieti-
cians improved their education and problem-solving skills (116–118). Other studies of training for health
care providers have not documented any changes in patient behaviour or metabolic control (119).
Systems interventions can change the way in which environmental determinants influence the self-
management behaviour of patients with diabetes. Systems interventions can focus on economic deter-
minants, such as changing Medicare policy to pay for medical nutrition therapy (120). Health care deliv-
ery systems are also a target for intervention by means of changing programmes, policies or procedures
to improve quality of care and outcomes for patients. For example, Hardy et al. (121) used telephone
reminders to patients to improve appointment-keeping behaviour.
The chronic care model is a systems approach to improving the quality of care for patients with chronic
diseases such as diabetes (122). Feifer (123) conducted a cross-sectional analysis of nine community-
based primary care practices and showed that providing system supports to health providers resulted
in better care of patients with diabetes.Wagner et al. (124) modified the way in which care was provided
to patients with diabetes in primary care clinics and showed that these systemic changes resulted in
better achievement of treatment goals, improved metabolic control, more time spent on diabetes edu-
cation and enhanced patient satisfaction.Wagner et al. (125) intervened using a continuous quality care
approach combined with the chronic care model in 23 health care organizations and documented
improvements in diabetes care and patient outcomes in many of them.
❘ 79
WHO 2003
 Clearly, the solution to the problem of poor adherence must involve a combination of approaches that
include intensive efforts to modify the behaviour of individuals with diabetes together with intelligent
efforts to make changes in the larger environmental systems that shape and modify behaviours (126).
WHO 2003
80 ❘
Table 4
Factors affecting adherence to therapy for the control of diabetes and interventions 
for improving it, listed by the five dimensions and the interventions used to improve
adherence
Diabetes
Factors affecting adherence
Interventions to improve adherence
(–) Cost of care (59); patients aged over 25 years
(21) (adherence to physical activity); older ado-
lescents (insulin administration) (42); older ado-
lescents (SMBG) (60); male (adherence to diet)
(21); female (adherence to physical activity) (21);
environmental high-risk situations
(72,82,83,85–89,92,93,95,98,102,103,105)
(+) Patients aged less than 25 years (21) (adher-
ence to physical activity); younger adolescents
(insulin administration) (42); younger adolescents
(SMBG) (60); male (adherence to physical activi-
ty) (21); female (adherence to diet) (21); social
support (21,68); family support (21)
(–) Poor relationship between patient and 
physician (79)
(–) Depression (73); duration of disease (21,41)
(–) Complexity of treatment (48,50)
(+) Less frequent dose (48); monotherapy with
simple dosing schedules (50); frequency of the
self-care behaviour (48,50)
(–) Depression (75); stress and emotional prob-
lems (70–72); alcohol abuse (77)
(+) Positive self-esteem (62,63) /self-efficacy
(64–67,78)
Mobilization of community-based organizations;
assessment of social needs (21,68); family pre-
paredness (21)
Multidisciplinary care; training of health profes-
sionals on adherence (114,116); identification of
the treatment goals and development of strat-
egies to meet them; continuing education; contin-
uous monitoring and reassessment of treatment
(115); systems interventions: health insurance for
nutrition therapy (120), telephone reminders to
patients (121), chronic care models (122–125)
Education on use of medicines (110,113)
Patient self-management (112); simplification of
regimens (48,50); education on use of medicines
(110,112,113)
Behavioural and motivational interventions
(111,112); assessment of psychological needs (111)
Socioeconomic-
related factors
Health care 
team/health 
system-related 
factors
Condition-related 
factors
Therapy-related 
factors
Patient-related 
factors
SMBG, Self-monitoring of blood glucose; (+) factors having a positive effect on adherence; (–) factors having a negative effect on adherence.
 7. Methodological and conceptual issues in research on adherence to
treatment for diabetes 
In a review of methodological and conceptual issues relevant to measuring adherence in patients with
diabetes, Johnson (127) suggested that the prevalence of adherence may vary across the different com-
ponents of the diabetes regimen and the patient’s lifespan, during the course of the disease, as well as
between populations of patients with diabetes (i.e. type 1 and type 2). Johnson also noted the concep-
tual problems encountered in defining and measuring adherence including:
– the absence of explicit adherence standards against which a patient’s behaviour can be compared;
– inadvertent nonadherence attributable to miscommunication between patient and provider and
deficits in the knowledge or skills of the patient;
– the behavioural complexity of the diabetes regimen; and
– the confounding of compliance with diabetes control.
Furthermore, the multiplicity of measurements used to assess adherence (i.e. health status indicators;
provider ratings; behavioural observations; permanent products, and patient self-reports, including
behaviour ratings, diaries and 24-hour recall interviews) also makes comparison of studies troublesome.
Johnson concluded that a measurement method should be selected on the basis of reliability, validity,
non-reactivity, sensitivity to the complexity of the diabetes regimen behaviours and measurement-
independence from the indicators of health status. Glasgow et al. (30) also noted the methodological
shortcomings of studies on diabetes self-care correlates, the lack of clear conceptualizations and the
failure to differentiate between regimen adherence, self-care behaviour and metabolic control, as well
as the empirical–atheoretical nature of many studies that lacked a comprehensive model or theory.
The present review of studies reported from 1980 to 2001, has revealed that research on adherence to
treatment for diabetes yields some inconsistent findings.These inconsistent results may have several
causes including variability in:
– research designs (e.g. longitudinal as opposed to cross-sectional studies) and study instruments;
– sampling frames employed for study recruitment;
– the use of general measures (e.g. general stress) as opposed to more specific ones (e.g. diabetes-spe-
cific stress);
– sample sizes (in some studies the small samples used decreased the likelihood of detecting signifi-
cant associations between the variables); and
– lack of control of potentially confounding variables.
8. Conclusions 
Poor adherence to treatment is very prevalent in patients with diabetes, and varies according to the
type of nonadherence being measured, and across the range of self-care behaviours that are compo-
nents of treatment.Thus prevalence rates should be assessed by type of behaviour. In addition, preva-
lence rates may vary by diabetes subtype (i.e. type 1, type 2 or gestational), and also appear to be influ-
enced by other factors such as age, gender and level of complexity of the treatment regimen.The rate
of adherence, or the variables affecting adherence, may vary according to nationality, culture or subcul-
ture.Therefore, these factors should also be taken into account when assessing the prevalence of
adherence in populations of patients with diabetes.
❘ 81
WHO 2003
 1. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National diabetes fact sheet:
National estimates and general information on diabetes in the United States.
Revised edition.Atlanta,GA,US Department of Health and Human Services,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,1998.
2. King H.WHO and the International Diabetes Federation:Regional Partners.
Bulletin of the World Health Organization,1999,77:954.
3. King H,Aubert RE,Herman WH.Global burden of diabetes 1995–2025:
Prevalence,numerical estimates and projections.Diabetes Care,1998,
21:1414–1431.
4. Diabetes fact sheet.Geneva,World Health Organization,1999 (available on
the Internet at http://www.who.int/inf-fs/en/fact138.html).
5. Chronic disease prevention:The impact of diabetes.Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention,2000 (available on the Internet at
http://www.cdc.gov/nccdph/diabetes).
6. Okhubo Y et al.Intensive insulin therapy prevents the progression of dia-
betes microvascular complications in Japanese patients with non-insulin
dependent diabetes mellitus:A randomized prospective six year study.
Diabetes Research & Clinical Practice, 1995,28:103–117.
7. The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group.The effect of
intensive treatment of diabetes on the development and progression of
long-term complications in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. New
England Journal of Medicine,1993,329:977–986.
8. Litzelman DK,Slemenda CW,Langefel CD.Reduction of lower clinical abnor-
malities in patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Annals of
Internal Medicine,1993,119:36–41.
9. Ferris FL.How effective are treatments for diabetic retinopathy. Journal of the
American Medical Association,1993,269:1290–1291.
10. American Diabetes Association.Economic consequences of diabetes mellitus
in the U.S.– 1997.Diabetes Care,1998,21:296–309.
11. Diabetes fact sheet.Geneva,World Health Organization,1999 (available on
the Internet at http://www.who.int/inf-fs/en/fact236.html).
12. American Diabetes Association.Report of the Expert Committee on the
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus.Diabetes Care,2002,
25:5–20.
13. Laron-Kenet T et al.Mortality of patients with childhood onset (0–17 years)
Type I diabetes in Israel:a population-based study.Diabetologia,2001,
44:B81–B86.
14. Podar T et al.Mortality in patients with childhood-onset type 1 diabetes in
Finland,Estonia,and Lithuania:follow-up of nationwide cohorts.Diabetes
Care, 2000,23:290–294.
15. Flood RG,Chiang VW.Rate and prediction of infection in children with dia-
betic ketoacidosis.American Journal of Emergency Medicine,2001,
19:270–273.
16. Morris AD et al.Adherence to insulin treatment,glycaemic control,and
ketoacidosis in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.The DARTS/MEMO
Collaboration.Diabetes Audit and Research in Tayside Scotland.Medicines
Monitoring Unit.Lancet, 1997,350:1505–1510.
17. American Diabetes Association.Gestational diabetes mellitus.Diabetes Care,
2002,25:94–96.
18. American Diabetes Association.Standards of medical care for patients with
diabetes mellitus.Diabetes Care, 2002,25:213–229.
19. Zinman B.Glucose control in type 1 diabetes:from conventional to intensive
therapy. Clinical Cornerstone,1998,1:29–38.
20. Gaster B,Hirsch IB.The effects of improved glycemic control on complications
in type 2 diabetes.Archives of Internal Medicine, 1998,158:134–140.
21. Glasgow RE,McCaul KD,Schafer LC.Self care behaviors and glycemic control
in Type 1 diabetes. Journal of Chronic Diseases, 1987,40:399–412.
The lack of standard measurements prevents comparison being made between studies and across pop-
ulations. Much work needs to be done to develop standardized, reliable and valid measurement tools.
Data from developing countries concerning the prevalence and correlates of adherence in patients
with diabetes are particularly scarce.The pressing need to undertake more research in developing
countries is emphasized by the WHO estimates indicating that by 2025 the largest absolute increase in
prevalence rates of diabetes worldwide will occur in developing countries. Patients and providers of
care in developing nations face additional barriers to achieving adequate diabetes self-care because of
poverty, inadequate systems for delivering health care, and a host of other priorities that compete for
national and individual attention.
More research is needed on adherence in women with gestational diabetes, and in study populations
that include minorities and ethnic groups. Also, cross-cultural comparison studies should be encour-
aged. However, when making comparisons between different ethnic groups or countries, a number of
aspects should be taken into account and controlled for, including types of health care system, health
care coverage and socioeconomic macro- and micro-factors, as well as language and cultural differ-
ences. Adequate translation and validation of study measurements are required when using question-
naires developed in another country.
It is also important to point out not only the large number of factors that affect adherence behaviours
in patients with diabetes, but also that the complex interactions that take place between them affect
both adherence and metabolic control. Multivariate approaches to data are required to obtain more
accurate representations of the relevant predictors and correlates.
9. References
WHO 2003
82 ❘
 ❘ 83
WHO 2003
22. Barofsky I.Compliance,adherence and the therapeutic alliance:Steps in the
development of self care. Social Science and Medicine,1978,12:369–376.
23. Hentinen M.Hoitoon sitoutuminen.[Adherence to treatment.] Pro Nursing
Vuosikirja [Pro Nursing Annual Book],1987,Julkaisusarja A 1 [Publication
Series A 1]:78–82.
24. Von Korff M et al.Collaborative management of chronic illness. Annals of
Internal Medicine, 1997,127:1097–1102.
25. Anold M et al.Guidelines for facilitating a patient empowerment program.
Diabetes Education,1995,21:308–312.
26. Glasgow RE,Wilson W,McCaul KD.Regimen adherence:A problematic con-
struct in diabetes research.Diabetes Care,1985,8:300–301.
27. Glasgow RE,Anderson RA.In diabetes care,moving from compliance to
adherence is not enough.Something entirely different is needed.Diabetes
Care,1999,22:2090–2092.
28. Anderson RM,Funnell MM.Compliance and adherence are dysfunctional
concepts in diabetes care.Diabetes Educator,2000,26:597–604.
29. Johnson SB.Knowledge,attitudes and behavior:Correlates of health in 
childhood diabetes.Clinical Psychology Review,1984,4:503–524.
30. Glasgow RE et al.Diabetes-specific social learning variables and self care
behaviors among persons with type II diabetes.Health Psychology,1989,
8:285–303.
31. Orme CM,Binik YM.Consistency of adherence across regimen demands.
Health Psychology,1989,8:27–43.
32. Wilson W et al.Psychosocial predictors of self care behaviours (compliance)
and glycemic control in non insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. Diabetes
Care,1986,9:614–622.
33. Wing RR et al.Frequency and accuracy of self-monitoring of blood glucose in
children:relationship to glycemic control. Diabetes Care,1985,8:214–218.
34. Karter AJ et al.Self-monitoring of blood glucose:language and financial 
barriers in a managed care population with diabetes. Diabetes Care,2000,
23:477–483.
35. Toljamo M,Hentinen M.Adherence to self care and glycaemic control among
people with insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. Journal of Advanced
Nursing,2001,34:780–786.
36. Epstein LH et al.Measurement and modification of the accuracy of the deter-
minations of urine glucose concentration. Diabetes Care,1980,3:535–536.
37. Wing RR et al.Behavioral skills in self-monitoring of blood glucose:relation-
ship to accuracy. Diabetes Care,1986,9:330–333.
38. Mazze RS et al.Reliability of blood glucose monitoring by patients with 
diabetes mellitus. American Journal of Medicine, 1984,77:211–217.
39. Dorchy H,Roggemans M.Improvement of the compliance with blood glucose
monitoring in young insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus patients by the
Sensorlink system. Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice,1997,36:77–82.
40. Wilson DP
,Endres RK.Compliance with blood glucose monitoring in children
with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Journal of Pediatrics,1986,108:1022–1024.
41. Jarosz-Chobot P et al.Self care of young diabetics in practice. Medical Science
Monitor,2000,6:129–132.
42. Weissberg-Benchell J et al.Adolescent diabetes management and misman-
agement. Diabetes Care,1995,18:77–82.
43. Polonsky WH et al.Insulin omission in women with IDDM. Diabetes Care,
1994,17:1178–1185.
44. Bryden K et al.Eating habits,body weight and insulin misuse. Diabetes Care,
1999,22:1959–1960.
45. Carvajal F et al.[Compliance with diet of 45 children and adolescents with
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.] [Spanish] Revista de la Asociación
Latinoamericana de Diabetes,1998,6:84.
46. Christensen NK et al.Quantitative assessment of dietary adherence in
patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care,1983,
6:245–250.
47. Shobhana R et al.Patient adherence to diabetes treatment. Journal of the
Association of Physicians of India,1999,47:1173–1175.
48. Paes AH,Bakker A,Soe-Agnie CJ.Impact of dosage frequency on patient
compliance. Diabetes Care,1997,20:1512–1517.
49. Boccuzzi SJ et al.Utilization of oral hypoglycemic agents in a drug-insured
U.S.population. Diabetes Care,2001,24:1411–1415.
50. Dailey G,Kim MS,Lian JF.Patient compliance and persistence with antihyper-
glycemic drug regimens:Evaluation of a Medicaid patient population with
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Clinical Therapeutics,2001,23:1311–1320.
51. Schultz J et al.A comparison of views of individuals with type 2 diabetes
mellitus and diabetes educators about barriers to diet and exercise. Journal
of Health Communication,2001,6:99–115.
52. Anderson JW,Gustafson NJ.Adherence to high-carbohydrate,high-fiber
diets. Diabetes Educator,1998,15:429–434.
53. Wing RR et al.Type II diabetic subjects lose less weight than their overweight
nondiabetic spouses.Diabetes Care,1987,10:563–566.
54. Searle MS,Ready AE.Survey of exercise and dietary knowledge and behav-
iour in persons with type II diabetes. Canadian Journal of Public Health,1991,
82:344–348.
55. Swift CS et al.Attitudes and beliefs about exercise among persons with non-
insulin dependent diabetes. Diabetes Educator,1995,21:533–540.
56. Ruggieron L et al.Self reported compliance with diabetes self management
during pregnancy.International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine,1993,
23:195–207.
57. Yawn B et al.Is diabetes treated as an acute or chronic illness in community
family practice? Diabetes Care,2001,24:1390–1396.
58. Kern DH,Mainous AG.Disease management for diabetes among family
physicians and general internists.Opportunism or planned care? Family
Medicine,2001,33:621–625.
59. Piette JD.Perceived access problems among patients with diabetes in two
public systems of care.Journal of General Internal Medicine,2000,
15:797–804.
60. Anderson B et al.Parental involvement in diabetes management tasks:
Relationships to blood glucose monitoring adherence and metabolic control
in young adolescents with insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. Journal of
Pediatrics,1997,130:257–265.
61. Stetson B et al.Barriers to diet and exercise differ by age in adults with type
2 diabetes. Annals of Behavioral Medicine,2000,22:S197.
62. Kneckt MC et al.Self esteem adherence to diabetes and dental self care regi-
mens. Journal of Clinical Periodontology,2001,28:175–180.
63. Murphy-Bennett LM,Thompson RJ,Morris MA.Adherence behavior among
adolescents with type I insulin dependent diabetes mellitus:The role of cog-
nitive appraisal processes. Journal of Pediatric Psychology,1997,22:811–825.
64. Plotnikoff RC,Brez S,Hotz S.Exercise behavior in a community sample with
diabetes:Understanding the determinants of exercise behavioral change.
Diabetes Educator,2000,26:450–459.
65. Senecal C,Nouwen A,White D.Motivation and dietary self-care in adults
with diabetes:Are self-efficacy and autonomous self-regulation complemen-
tary or competing constructs? Health Psychology,2000,19:452–457.
66. Ott J et al.Self-efficacy as a mediator variable for adolescents’adherence to
treatment for insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. Children’s Health Care,
2000,29:47–63.
 67. Aljasem LI et al.The impact of barriers and self-efficacy on self-care behav-
iors in type 2 diabetes.Diabetes Educator,2001,27:393–404.
68. Ruggieron L et al.Impact of social support and stress on compliance in
women with gestational diabetes. Diabetes Care,1990,13:441–443.
69. Karkashian C.A model of stress,resistance factors,and disease-related health
outcomes in patients with diabetes mellitus. Dissertation Abstracts
International,2000,60:6413.
70. Peyrot M,McMurry JF,Kruger DF.A biopsychosocial model of glycemic control
in diabetes;stress,coping and regimen adherence. Journal of Health and
Social Behavior,1999,40:141–158.
71. Mollema ED et al.Insulin treated diabetes patients with fear of self-injecting
or fear of self-testing – psychological comorbidity and general well being.
Journal of Psychosomatic Research,2001,51:665–672.
72. Schlundt DG,Stetson BA,Plant DD.Situation taxonomy and behavioral diag-
nosis using prospective self-monitoring data:Application to dietary adher-
ence in patients with type 1 diabetes. Journal of Psychopathology and
Behavioral Assessment,1999,21:19–36.
73. Anderson RJ et al.The prevalence of comorbid depression in adults with dia-
betes:a meta-analysis.Diabetes Care,2001,24:1069–1078.
74. De Groot M et al.Association of depression and diabetes complications:a
meta-analysis.Psychosomatic Medicine,2001,63:619–630.
75. Lustman PJ et al.Depression and poor glycemic control:A meta-analytic
review of the literature.Diabetes Care,2000,23:934–942.
76. Ciechanowski PS,Katon WJ,Russo JE.Depression and diabetes:impact of
depressive symptoms on adherence,function,and costs. Archives of Internal
Medicine,2000,27:3278–3285.
77. Johnson KH,Bazargan M,Bing EG.Alcohol consumption and compliance
among inner-city minority patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Archives of
Family Medicine,2000,9:964–970.
78. Cox WM et al.Diabetic patients’alcohol use and quality of life:Relationships
with prescribed treatment compliance among older males. Alcoholism:
Clinical and Experimental Research,1996,20:327–331.
79. Ciechanowski PS et al.The patient provider relationship:Attachment theory
and adherence to treatment in diabetes. American Journal of Psychiatry,
2001,158:29–35.
80. Lloyd CE et al.Psychosocial correlates of glycemic control:the Pittsburgh epi-
demiology of diabetes complications (EDC) study. Diabetes Research and
Clinical Practice,1993,21:187–195.
81. Albright TL,Parchman M,Burge SK.Predictors of self-care behaviors in adults
with type 2 diabetes:An RRNest study. Family Medicine,2001,33:354–360.
82. Schlundt DG et al.Situational obstacles to adherence for adolescents with
diabetes. Diabetes Educator,1994,20:207–211.
83. Schlundt DG et al.Situational obstacles to dietary adherence for adults with
diabetes. Journal of the American Dietetic Association,1994,94:874–876.
84. Belgrave F,Moorman D.The role of social support in compliance and other
health behaviors for African Americans with chronic illness. Journal of Health
and Social Policy,1994,5:55–68.
85. Schlundt DG,Sbrocco T,Bell C.Identification of high risk situations in a
behavioral weight loss program:Application of the relapse prevention
model. International Journal of Obesity,1989,13:223–234.
86. Glasgow RE et al.Personal-model beliefs and social-environmental barriers
related to diabetes self-management. Diabetes Care,1997,20:556–561.
87. Ramlogan R.Environment and human health:A threat to all. Environmental
Management and Health,1997,8:51–56.
88. Miller S et al.Shaping environments for reductions in type 2 risk behaviors:A
look at CVD and cancer interventions. Diabetes Spectrum,2002,15:176-186.
89. French SA,Story M,Jeffery RW.Environmental influences on eating and
physical activity. Annual Review of Public Health,2001,22:309–335.
90. Sorensen TI.The changing lifestyle in the world.Body weight and what
else? Diabetes Care,2000,23:B1–B4.
91. Hill JO,Peters JC.Environmental contributions to the obesity epidemic.
Science,1998,280:1371–1374.
92. Frazao E.High costs of poor eating patterns in the United States.In Frazao E.
ed.America’s eating habits:Changes and consequences. Agriculture
Information Bulletin – US Department of Agriculture,1999,750:5–32.
93. Stahl T et al.The importance of the social environment for physically active
lifestyle – results from an international study. Social Science and Medicine,
2001,52:1–10.
94. U.S.Department of Transportation Bureau of Transportation Statistics.
Transportation Statistics Annual Report 1999.Washington,DC,2000,
No.BTS99-03.
95. Curtis LJ et al.The role of permanent income and family structure in the
determination of child health in Canada.Health Economics,2001,
10:287–302.
96. Auslander WF et al.Disparity in glycemic control and adherence between
African Americans and Caucasian youths with diabetes.Family and commu-
nity contexts. Diabetes Care,1997,20:1569–1575.
97. Galo AE.Food Advertising in the United States.In Frazao E.ed.America’s
eating habits:Changes and consequences. Agriculture Information Bulletin –
US Department of Agriculture,1999,750:173–180.
98. Dietz W,Gortmaker S.Preventing obesity in children and adolescents.
Annual Review of Public Health,2001,22:337–353.
99. Sidney S et al.Television viewing and cardiovascular risk factors in young
adults:the CARDIA study.Annals of Epidemiology,1996,6:154–159.
100. Salmon J et al.The association between television viewing and overweight
among Australian adults participating in varying levels of leisure-time
physical activity. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic
Disorders,2000,24:600–606.
101. Jeffery R,French SA.Epidemic obesity in the United States:are fast foods
and television viewing contributing? American Journal of Public Health,
1998,88:277–280.
102. Hu F et al.Physical activity and television watching in relation to risk for
type 2 diabetes mellitus in men. Archives of Internal Medicine,2001,
161:1543–1548.
103. Poston WS,Foreyt JP.Obesity is an environmental issue. Atherosclerosis,
1999,146:201–209.
104. Rogers PJ.Eating habits and appetite control:A psychobiological perspec-
tive. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society,1999,58:59–67.
105. Mueller KJ et al.Health status and access to care among rural minorities.
Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved,1999,10:230–249.
106. Mayberry RM,Mili F,Ofili E.Racial and ethnic differences in access to med-
ical care. Medical Care Research Reviews,2000,57:108–145.
107. Robert SA.Socioeconomic position and health:the independent contribu-
tion of community socioeconomic context. Annual Review of Sociology,
1999,25:489–516.
108. Glasgow RE.A practical model of diabetes management and education.
Diabetes Care,1995,18:117–126.
109. Marmot MG.Improvement of social environment to improve health. Lancet,
1998,351:57–60.
110. Fain JA et al.Diabetes patient education research:An integrative literature
review. Diabetes Educator,1999,25:7–15.
111. Peyrot M.Behavior change in diabetes education. Diabetes Educator,1999,
25:62–73.
112. Elasy TA et al.A taxonomy for diabetes educational interventions. Patient
Education and Counseling,2001,43:121–127.
113. Brown SA.Interventions to promote diabetes self-management:state of the
science. Diabetes Education,1999,25:52–61.
WHO 2003
84 ❘
 ❘ 85
WHO 2003
114. Kinmonth AL et al.Randomized controlled trial of patient centred care of
diabetes in general practice:Impact on current wellbeing and future dis-
ease risk.The Diabetes Care from Diagnosis Research Team. British Medical
Journal,1998,317:1202–1208.
115. Olivarius NF et al.Randomized controlled trial of structured personal care of
type 2 diabetes mellitus. British Medical Journal,2001,323:970–975.
116. Pichert JW et al.Adherence-related questioning by fourth-year medical stu-
dents interviewing ambulatory diabetic patients.Teaching and Learning in
Medicine,1989,1:146–150.
117. Lorenz RA et al.Teaching skills training for health professionals:Effects on
immediate recall by surrogate patients.Teaching and Learning in Medicine,
1989,1:26–30.
118. Schlundt DG et al.Evaluation of a training program for improving adher-
ence promotion skills.Patient Education and Counseling,1994,24:165–173.
119. Pill R et al.A randomized controlled trial of an intervention designed to
improve the care given in general practice to type II diabetic patients:
patient outcomes and professional ability to change behaviour. Family
Practice,1998,15:229–235.
120. Michael P.Impact and components of the Medicare MNT benefit. Journal of
the American Dietetic Association,2001,101:1140–1141.
121. Hardy KJ,O’Brien SV,Furlong NJ.Quality improvement report:Information
given to patients before appointments and its effect on non-attendance
rates. British Medical Journal,2001,323:1298–1300.
122. McCulloch DK et al.A population-based approach to diabetes management
in a primary care setting:Early results and lessons learned. Effective Clinical
Practice,1998,1:12–22.
123. Feifer C et al.System supports for chronic illness care and their relationship
to clinical outcomes.Topics in Health Information Management,2001,
22:65–72.
124. Wagner EH et al.Chronic care clinics for diabetes in primary care:A system-
wide randomized trial.Diabetes Care,2001,24:695–700.
125. Wagner EH et al.Quality improvement in chronic illness care:A collaborative
approach. Journal on Quality Improvement,2001,27:63–80.
126. Glasgow RE et al.Behavioral science in diabetes. Diabetes Care,1999,
22:832–843.
127. Johnson SB.Methodological issues in diabetes research:Measuring adher-
ence. Diabetes Care,1992,15:1658–1667.
 WHO 2003
86 ❘
 Chapter XI
C H A P T E R  X I
Epilepsy
1. Introduction
87
2. Adherence to epilepsy therapy
88
3. Epidemiology of adherence
89
4. Factors affecting adherence and interventions used to improve it
89
5. Conclusions
92
6. References
92
1. Introduction
Epilepsy is a common neurological disease affecting almost 50 million people worldwide (1,2) 5 million
of whom have seizures more than once per month (3). Approximately 85% of people afflicted with
epilepsy live in developing countries.Two million new cases occur in the world each year.The results of
studies suggest that the annual incidence in developed countries is approximately 50 per 100 000 of the
general population whereas in developing countries this figure is nearly doubled to 100 per 100 000 (1).
In developing countries few patients with epilepsy receive adequate medical treatment, and an esti-
mated 75 to 90% receive no treatment at all (4).The treatment of epilepsy in developing countries
remains far from satisfactory, mainly because of:
– the general lack of medical personnel;
– non-availability of medications; and
– lack of information and/or education on epilepsy for both patients and medical staff (1,4,5).
Epilepsy is characterized by a tendency to recurrent seizures and it is defined by two or more unpro-
voked seizures (generally within 2 years). Seizures may vary from the briefest lapses or muscle jerks to
severe and prolonged convulsions.They may also vary in frequency, from less than one a year to several
per day (1).The risks of recurrent seizures include intractable epilepsy, cognitive impairment, physical
injury, psychosocial problems and death (6). Children suffer mainly from idiopathic generalized epilepsy
and absence, myoclonus and generalized tonic–clonic seizures are the most common forms of seizure
seen in children. In adults, symptomatic partial epilepsy is the most common form, and it may cause
 simple partial, complex partial, or secondarily generalized tonic–clonic seizures (3). Convulsive or
tonic–clonic status epilepsy is of major concern as it is associated with a mortality rate of 5–15% (7).
The aim of antiepileptic drug (AED) therapy is to achieve freedom from seizures.The treatment goals for
patients with epilepsy are to prevent the occurrence of seizures, prevent or reduce drug side-effects
and drug interactions, improve the patient’s quality of life, provide cost-effective care and ensure
patient satisfaction (6,8). Much of the treatment of epilepsy is aimed at creating a balance between pre-
vention of seizures and minimization of side-effects to a level that the patient can tolerate (6,9).
Although AED therapy does not offer a permanent cure, successful therapy can eliminate or reduce
symptoms.The most commonly used AEDs are (in aphabetical order): carbamazepine, ethosuximide,
phenobarbital, phenytoin and valproic acid. New AEDs such as gabapentin, lamotrigine, leviteracetam,
felbamate, oxcarbazepine, tiagabine, topiramate, vigabatrin and zonisamide have a role in the manage-
ment of the 20–30% of patients with epilepsy who remain refractory to conventional drug therapy (9).
About 25% of patients with epilepsy have intractable seizure disorders, of those between 12 and 25%
are candidates for surgery (3).
The direct costs attributable to epilepsy include physician visits, laboratory tests, emergency depart-
ment visits, antiepileptic drugs and hospitalizations. Indirect costs include working days lost, lost
income, decreased quality of life, the cost of failed therapy and side-effects of drugs (6). Garnett et al.,
referring to the “Epilepsy Foundation of America data”
, reported that the annual direct and indirect costs
of epilepsy exceeded $12.5 billion.The direct costs of epilepsy are significantly lower for patients whose
epilepsy is controlled than for those whose disease is not controlled (6).
Recent studies in both developed and developing countries have shown that up to 70% of children and
adults newly diagnosed with epilepsy can be successfully treated (i.e. their seizures can be completely
controlled for several years) with antiepileptic drugs. After 2–5 years of successful treatment, drugs can
be withdrawn in about 70% of children and about 60% of adults without relapse occurring (1). In the
case of treatment failure it is crucial to establish whether the failure is a result of inappropriate drug
selection, inappropriate dosing, refractory disease or poor adherence to the therapeutic regimen (3,6).
Good adherence to treatment and proper health education are fundamental to the successful manage-
ment of epilepsy (10,11). Poor adherence to prescribed medication is considered to be the main cause
of unsuccessful drug treatment for epilepsy (2,3,12–18). Nonadherent patients experience an increase in
the number and severity of seizures, which leads to more ambulance rides, emergency department vis-
its and hospitalizations (12,19). Nonadherence therefore results directly in an increase in health care
costs, and reduced quality of life (19).
The aim of this chapter is to describe the prevalence of adherence (or nonadherence), to treatment for
epilepsy, to identify the factors affecting adherence to anti-epilepsy treatment, and to discuss the inter-
ventions that have proven effective for improving adherence.
A search on adherence to anti-epilepsy therapies was made using Medline (1990–2002). Reviews and
reports from international and national organizations were also included. Publications were considered
for inclusion if they reported on one of the following: prevalence data on rates of adherence (or nonad-
herence), factors affecting adherence, interventions for improving adherence, and information on how
poor adherence rates affect illness, costs and treatment effectiveness. Of the 99 studies retrieved by the
search, 36 were reviewed for this report.
2. Adherence to epilepsy therapy
Adherence was not usually defined in the published studies, but referred to generally as patients fol-
lowing medical recommendations. Authors generally considered adherence in behavioural terms,
whereby the patient had an active and informed role to play in a therapeutic situation (13,20). In this
WHO 2003
88 ❘
 sense, adherence to prescribed medication was seen as a health-promoting behaviour (21).
The types of nonadherence were described as follows: reduced or increased amount of single dose;
decreased or increased number of daily doses; extra dosing; incorrect dosing intervals; being unaware
of the need for life-long regular medication; taking duplicate medication; taking discontinued medica-
tion; discontinuing prescribed medication; regularly forgetting to take medication, and incorrect use of
medication (18,20,22).
Medication use was assessed by review of medical records; patient self-report; family report; pill counts;
prescription refill rates, and biological markers, including serum, urine and saliva assays to quantify
medications or their metabolites (2,11,12,14,23–26).The best indicator of adherence is believed to be
serum levels of anticonvulsant drugs (18,27). Other methods of monitoring adherence, such as electron-
ic measures are not discussed further here because of the lack of published studies in this area. In sever-
al studies, patients whose serum levels were outside the therapeutic range were classified as nonadher-
ent (19,23,28). However, serum levels are not a perfect measure. Although blood levels of anticonvulsant
medications can be measured, it is difficult to translate them into comparable measures of adherence
for patients on different medications and doses. Furthermore, sub-therapeutic levels of a drug in the
serum can be due either to poor compliance or the need for a higher dosage (2). Patients with impaired
absorption or rapid or ultra-rapid metabolism can have low serum levels even if their intake of AEDs is
regular and according to prescription (11,26,29).
Dowse et al. and Leppik et al. reported that indirect measures such as patient interview, tablet counts
and prescription refill records gave no indication of the true amount of the drug present in the body
and could be inaccurate or biased (18,19). However, using the measurement of drug concentration in
blood alone, except in cases of extremely low adherence and variability of drug intake, is not sufficient
to detect incorrect drug intake.Therefore, the use of clinical markers and self-reported adherence
should also be considered (11).
3. Epidemiology of adherence
Adherence can vary from an occasional missed dose to chronic defaulting on medication regimens (21).
Adherence to antiepileptic drugs in patients with epilepsy generally ranges from 20 to 80% (12,19–21).
Some studies reported different ranges of adherence for adult patients (40–60%) and children (25–75%) (3,12).
4. Factors affecting adherence and interventions used to improve it
Nonadherence is a problem that has many determinants and the responsibility for adherence must be
shared by health professionals, the health care system, the community and the patients. Many studies
have identified factors affecting adherence, and these have been grouped into the five dimensions
described in section II (see Table 5).
– socioeconomic-related factors;
– health care team/health system-related factors;
– condition-related factors;
– treatment-related factors, and 
– patient-related factors.
Many factors, such as misunderstanding instructions about how to take the drugs (6,12,20,23,26), com-
bined antiepileptic medication, complex medication regimens (3,12,26,30), forgetfulness (6), duration
and previous treatment failures (14), fear of dependence (20), feeling stigmatized by the epilepsy (20),
❘ 89
WHO 2003
 inadequate or nonexistent reimbursement by health insurance plans (19) and poverty (6), among many
others, have been shown to be significant barriers to adherence, and should be taken into account
when developing interventions.
Contrary to expectations, a study by Mitchell et al. (14) found that frequency and duration of seizures
and previous treatment failure, which are usually thought to be valid prognostic indicators of low
adherence, did not affect adherence to treatment. Also, the severity of seizures was not significantly
associated with any adherence outcome. However, families reporting less parental education, illiteracy,
lower income and high levels of stressful life events were more likely to adhere to treatment.
Some interventions have been designed to improve adherence to anti-epilepsy medications. Some of
them target specific factors, such as:
– the therapeutic relationship (increasing communication between patient and health professional)
(2,15,16,18,19,23);
– giving full instructions about the treatment and discussing the pros and cons of treatment with the
patient (19);
– reducing the number of medications and the frequency of doses (3);
– suggesting memory aids, linking doses to events in the patient’s daily schedule, and using alarmed
watches or pill cases (3,14,16,31);
– motivating patients to incorporate drug adherence into their lifestyles (6,32); and
– providing a regular, uninterrupted supply of medicines in developing countries (33).
Education in the diagnosis and management of epilepsy was found to be effective in improving recruit-
ment of patients into treatment programmes and in improving drug adherence, or markedly reducing
nonadherence (5).The use of educational materials, regular interviews, instructions from nurses and
physicians about methods of incorporating drug administration into patients’daily lives, a real partner-
ship between physician and patient, and patient self-management of epilepsy treatment, have all been
found to improve adherence to AED therapies (6,11,14,16,18). Other helpful measures were: clear infor-
mation about the treatment, including giving full instructions; discussing the pros and cons of treat-
ment; reinforcing the value of treatment; explaining and repeating the rationale for the regimen; involv-
ing the patients in planning their regimens, and explaining the results of medical tests.
Good adherence education may be based on:
– stressing the importance of adherence at the time the therapy is initiated;
– emphasizing the consequences of nonadherence;
– spending adequate time with the patient;
– enquiring about adherence at each visit;
– motivating patients to incorporate drug adherence into their lifestyles; and
– designing and implementing intervention strategies to improve adherence to self-medication.
These latter strategies include simplifying the regimen with careful explanation of the dosing schedule;
reducing the number of medications and the frequency of doses; improving the medication routine
through cognitive cueing and through structuring the task and the environment; providing the patients
with control and choices; suggesting memory aids; linking doses to events in the patient’s daily sched-
ule, or using alarm watches, calendar packs, pill cases, or specialized dose dispensers.
WHO 2003
90 ❘
 Encouraging patients to develop their own methods to improve maintenance,after educating them about the
nature of epilepsy and the need for long-term therapy,may help them to incorporate drug administration into
their daily lives.It is important to note that patients from different cultures require different educational approach-
es to improve adherence (15).In developing countries it is necessary to maintain a regular,uninterrupted sup-
ply of medicines (33),to provide drugs at subsidized costs and to organize effective distribution systems (27).
❘ 91
WHO 2003
Epilepsy
Factors affecting adherence
Interventions to improve adherence
(–) Long distance from treatment setting (27);under
60 years old (12,20);teenagers (20);poverty (6);illit-
eracy (6);unwillingness to pay the cost of medicines
(6,23,27);high cost of medication (21,34);local
beliefs or beliefs about the origin of illness (6,27).
(+) Elderly patients (over 60 years old) (20); chil-
dren from family reporting less parental educa-
tion (14); non-English speaking in an English-
speaking community (14); lower income (14);
recent immigrants (14).
(–) Inadequate or non-existent reimbursement
by health insurance plans (19); irregular or poor
drug supply (27); lack of free medicine supplies
(33); poorly developed health services (27);
lack of education about AEDs (21,26,34,35).
(+) Good relationship between patient and
physician (20)
(–) Forgetfulness (6); memory deficits (12);
duration, and previous treatment failures (14);
high frequency of seizures (14).
(–) Complex treatment regimens (3); misunder-
standing instructions about how to take the
drugs (6,12,20,23,26); adverse effects of treat-
ment (6,9,16,20–23,27).
(+) Monotherapy with simple dosing schedules (2)
(–) Disbelief of the diagnosis (16,22);refusal to take
medication (34);delusional thinking (16,31);
inconvenience of treatment (21,34);denial of diag-
nosis (21,34);lifestyle and health beliefs;parental
worry about child’s health (29);behavioural restric-
tions placed on child to protect his/her health (29);
fear of addiction (20);doubting the diagnosis (20);
uncertainty about the necessity for drugs (20);anx-
iety over the complexity of the drug regimen (20);
feeling stigmatized by the epilepsy (20);not feel-
ing that it is important to take medications (20).
(+) Parent and child satisfaction with medical
care (29); not feeling stigmatized by the epilepsy
(20); feeling that it is important to take medica-
tions(20); high levels of stressful life events (14).
Assessment of social and career needs (3)
A regular, uninterrupted supply of medicines in
developing countries (33); good patient–physi-
cian relationship (6,11,14,16,18); instruction by
nurses and physicians about methods of incor-
porating drug administration into patient’s daily
life; training health professionals on adherence;
adherence education (11,14,16,19,31)
Education on use of medicines (5,14,31);
suggesting memory aids (3,14,16,19,26,31)
Simplification of regimens; single antiepileptic
therapy (monotherapy) (3,16,19,30); education
on use of medicines; patient-tailored prescrip-
tions (36); clear instructions; use of educational
materials; monitoring and reassessment of treat-
ment (6,11,14,16,18)
Self-management of side-effects (6,11,14,16,18);
behavioural and motivational intervention; edu-
cation on adherence (6,32); providing the
patients with control and choices; assessment of
psychological needs (3); frequent follow-up
interviews (11,16)
Socioeconomic-
related factors
Health care 
team/health 
system-related 
factors
Condition-related 
factors
Therapy-related 
factors
Patient-related 
factors
AEDs, Anti-epileptic drugs; (+) factors having a positive effect on adherence; (–) factors having a negative effect on adherence.
Table 5
Factors affecting adherence to treatment for epilepsy and interventions for improving it,
listed by the five dimensions and the interventions used to improve adherence
 6. References
1. Epilepsy:epidemiology,etiology and prognosis.Geneva,World Health
Organization,2001 ( WHO Fact Sheet No 165;available on the Internet at
http://www.who.int/inf-fs/en/fact165.html).
2. Chandra RS et al.Compliance monitoring in epileptic patients. Journal of the
Association of Physicians of India,1993,41:431–432.
3. French J.The long-term therapeutic management of epilepsy. Annals of
Internal Medicine,1994,120:411–422.
4. Kaiser C et al.Antiepileptic drug treatment in rural Africa:involving the com-
munity.Tropical Doctor,1998,28:73–77.
5. Adamolekun B,Mielke JK,Ball DE.An evaluation of the impact of health
worker and patient education on the care and compliance of patients with
epilepsy in Zimbabwe. Epilepsia,1999,40:507–511.
6. Garnett WR.Antiepileptic drug treatment:outcomes and adherence.
Pharmacotherapy,2000,20:191S–199S.
7. Khurana DS.Treatment of status epilepticus. Indian Journal of Pediatrics,
2000,67:S80–S87.
8. Ogunniyi A,Oluwole OS,Osuntokun BO.Two-year remission in Nigerian
epileptics. East African Medical Journal,1998,75:392–395.
9. Lhatoo SD et al.Long-term retention rates of lamotrigine,gabapentin,and
topiramate in chronic epilepsy. Epilepsia,2000,41:1592–1596.
10. Sureka RK.Clinical profile and spectrum of epilepsy in rural Rajasthan.
Journal of the Association of Physicians of India,1999,47:608–610.
11. Gomes M,Maia FH,Noe RA.Anti-epileptic drug intake adherence.The value
of the blood drug level measurement and the clinical approach. Arquivos de
Neuro-Psiquiatria,1998,56:708–713.
12. Hargrave R,Remler MP.Noncompliance. Journal of the National Medical
Association,1996,88:7.
13. Gomes M,Maia FH.Medication-taking behavior and drug self regulation in
people with epilepsy.Arquivos de Neuro-Psiquiatria,1998,56:714–719.
14. Mitchell WG,Scheier LM,Baker SA.Adherence to treatment in children with
epilepsy:who follows “doctor’s orders”? Epilepsia,2000,41:1616–1625.
15. Snodgrass SR,Parks BR.Anticonvulsant blood levels:historical review with a
pediatric focus. Journal of Child Neurology,2000,15:734–746.
16. Yuen HK.Increasing medication compliance in a woman with anoxic brain
damage and partial epilepsy. American Journal of Occupational Therapy,
1993,47:30–33.
17. Gledhill RF.In the shadow of epilepsy.Lancet,1997,350:811.
18. Dowse R,Futter WT.Outpatient compliance with theophylline and phenytoin
therapy. South African Medical Journal,1991,80:550–553.
19. Leppik IE.How to get patients with epilepsy to take their medication.The
problem of noncompliance. Postgraduate Medicine,1990,88:253–256.
20. Buck D et al.Factors influencing compliance with antiepileptic drug regimes.
Seizure,1997,6:87–93.
21. Lannon SL.Using a health promotion model to enhance medication compli-
ance. Journal of Neuroscience Nursing,1997,29:170–178.
5. Conclusions
Poor adherence to drug therapy is one of the primary causes of treatment failure.
Forgetfulness of patients that may or may not be linked to memory difficulties, refusal to take medica-
tion and side-effects are the factors most commonly associated with decreased adherence.The impact
of epilepsy and the side-effects of its treatment on cognition and of limited or compromised cognition
on adherence deserve more attention.
The use of memory aids, linking doses to events in the patient’s daily schedule or watch alarms, calen-
dar packs, pill cases or specialized dose dispensers may be helpful tools to increase adherence to treat-
ment in patients who regularly forget to take their AEDs. However, no studies demonstrating this were
found in the literature search.
Communication with the patient about medication regimens and the value of treatment is extremely
important. It can facilitate the identification of problems and barriers to adequate adherence, and help
with treatment planning. Also a real partnership between the physician and the patient is needed to set
and achieve goals related to treatment outcomes and adherence.
More research on adherence to anti-epileptic therapies is required to:
– deepen our understanding of the epidemiology of adherence;
– provide clear and consistent definitions of adherence;
– evaluate interventions to improve adherence; and
– collect data on adherence in developing countries.
WHO 2003
92 ❘
 ❘ 93
WHO 2003
22. Cramer JA et al.How often is medication taken as prescribed? A novel assess-
ment technique.Journal of the American Medical Association,1989,
261:3273–3277 [erratum published in Journal of the American Medical
Association,1989,262:1472].
23. Alonso NB,Da Silva DF,de Campos CJ.[Compliance in epilepsy.I.Concept fac-
tors and influence factors.] [Portuguese] Arquivos de Neuro-Psiquiatria,1991,
49:147–149.
24. Anonymous.Clobazam has equivalent efficacy to carbamazepine and pheny-
toin as monotherapy for childhood epilepsy.Canadian Study Group for
Childhood Epilepsy. Epilepsia,1998,39:952–959.
25. Valodia P et al.Benefits of a clinical pharmacokinetic service in optimising
phenytoin use in the western Cape. South African Medical Journal,1998,
88:873–875.
26. Dilorio C,Henry M.Self-management in persons with epilepsy. Journal of
Neuroscience Nursing,1995,27:338–343.
27. Elechi CA.Default and non-compliance among adult epileptics in Zaria,
Nigeria.The need to restructure continued care.Tropical & Geographical
Medicine,1991,43:242–245.
28. Snodgrass SR et al.Pediatric patients with undetectable anticonvulsant
blood levels:comparison with compliant patients. Journal of Child Neurology,
2001,16:164–168.
29. Hazzard A,Hutchinson SJ,Krawiecki N.Factors related to adherence to med-
ication regimens in pediatric seizure patients. Journal of Pediatric Psychology,
1990,15:543–555.
30. Cloyd JC et al.Comparison of sprinkle versus syrup formulations of valproate
for bioavailability,tolerance,and preference. Journal of Pediatrics,1992,
120:634–638.
31. Alonso NB et al.[Compliance in epilepsy.II.Practical aspects.] [Portuguese]
Arquivos de Neuro-Psiquiatria,1991,49:150–154.
32. Cramer JA.Medication compliance in epilepsy. Archives of Internal Medicine,
1991,151:1236–1237.
33. Desai P et al.Knowledge,attitudes and practice of epilepsy:experience at 
a comprehensive rural health services project. Seizure,1998,7:133–138.
34. Buchanan N.Noncompliance with medication amongst persons attending 
a tertiary referral epilepsy clinic:implications,management and outcome.
Seizure,1993,2:79–82.
35. Abduljabbar M et al.Epilepsy classification and factors associated with 
control in Saudi adult patients. Seizure,1998,7:501–504.
36. Mullen PD.Compliance becomes concordance. British Medical Journal,1997,
314:691–692.
 WHO 2003
94 ❘
 Chapter XII
C H A P T E R  X I I
Human immunodeficiency virus and
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
1. Types of nonadherence
96
2. Challenges in assessing adherence
96
3. Predictors of adherence
96
4. A framework for interventions to increase adherence
101
5. Conclusions
104
6. References
104
Of those patients suffering from HIV/AIDS, approximately one-third take their medication as prescribed (1).
Even when patients fully comprehend the consequences of nonadherence to medications, adherence
rates are suboptimal (2,3). Good adherence is a decisive factor in treatment success.
Unlike other chronic diseases, the rapid replication and mutation rate of HIV means that very high levels
of adherence (e.g. ≥ 95%) are required to achieve durable suppression of viral load (4–6). Recent studies
of patients with HIV/AIDS have reported low adherence rates, similar to those seen for other chronic
diseases. Suboptimal adherence may rapidly lead to resistance, which can then be transmitted to other
people (7–10).The potent and effective new combinations of antiretroviral agents, known as highly
active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), have proven efficacious in reducing viral load and improving clini-
cal outcomes. However, the large number of medications involved, the complicated dosing require-
ments, and the suboptimal tolerability make adherence difficult. Because of the great importance of
adherence to antiretroviral treatment of HIV, good strategies for maximizing adherence are essential.
There is no doubt that HAART is one of the most celebrated treatment advances in recent medical his-
tory. Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (usually two) when combined with non-nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors, protease inhibitors, or both, are highly effective in reducing viral replica-
tion and improving clinical outcomes (11,12). In patients with HIV/AIDS, these multidrug regimens,
although remarkably efficacious, result in HIV treatment having the most complicated regimens that
have ever been prescribed for conditions requiring continuous open-ended treatment (13).
 Many researchers believed initially that HAART would completely eradicate the virus from the host
(14,15). However, low levels of viral replication persist in small reservoirs even when viral loads are un-
detectable. Resting memory T-cells, which harbour proviral DNA, survive for far longer than originally
thought (5,6,16–18).Therefore, adherence to HAART must be almost perfect to achieve lasting viral sup-
pression. Paterson and colleagues (6) found that adherence at levels less than 95% independently pre-
dicted viral resistance, hospital admissions and opportunistic infections. Even among patients who
reported adherence rates of ≥ 95%, 22% experienced virologic failure during the study period. In anoth-
er study, Bangsberg and colleagues (4) found that none of the individuals with adherence greater than
90% progressed to AIDS, whereas 38% and 8% of those with adherence rates ≥ 50% and 51–89%,
respectively, progressed to AIDS. Missing even a single dose in a 28-day reporting period has been
shown to predict treatment failure (5).
Nonadherence to HAART can have important public health implications. Drug resistance can be trans-
mitted to other persons during high-risk activity, which can then limit therapeutic options (7–10). Some
studies have reported that as many as 80% of isolates from newly infected people are resistant to at
least one class of currently approved antiretroviral medications, and that 26% of isolates are resistant to
several classes of medication (18). Although these estimates are at the higher end of the spectrum, they
nonetheless suggest that transmission of drug-resistant strains is increasing (10).
Because adherence of patients with HIV to antiretroviral medications is essential for both clinical effec-
tiveness and public health, research in this area has burgeoned over the past few years.
1. Types of nonadherence
Nonadherence can take many different forms (19).The patient may simply fail to fill the prescription. If
the prescription is filled, the patient may incorrectly time the medication or take the wrong dose
because he or she misunderstood, or forgot, the health professional’s instructions. Patients may also for-
get a dose completely or prematurely terminate the medication. Moreover, patients may self-adjust
their regimen because of side-effects and toxicity or personal beliefs.
2. Challenges in assessing adherence
It is easy for health professionals to miss adherence problems because patient self-reports of adherence
tend to be exaggerated (20,21) due perhaps both to a recall bias and a desire to please the provider and
avoid criticism. Some patients have been known to dispose of their medication before a scheduled
check on their adherence to it so as to appear to have adhered (22). Inadequate adherence coupled
with biased reporting is ubiquitous across medicine (23). Conversely, patients who report problems with
adherence are rarely trying to mislead their providers (24).
In addition to the misreporting of adherence by patients, estimates of adherence made by health care
providers are also usually over-optimistic (25,26). Moreover, providers of health care are not able to pre-
dict very accurately which patients will adhere. Many providers believe that factors associated with
socioeconomic status, such as lack of education and poverty are good predictors of nonadherence.
However, predictors of adherence vary greatly across populations and settings and no one factor has
been consistently associated with nonadherence across all studies (27).
3. Predictors of adherence
Four types of factor have generally been found to predict problems with adherence to medication: regi-
men characteristics, various patient factors, the relationship between provider and patient and the sys-
tem of care.The following section focuses on the first three factors; a discussion of factors associated
with the system of care is beyond the scope of this report.
WHO 2003
96 ❘
 A. Regimen-related factors 
Complexity of regimen. For many chronicdiseases, research has shown that adherence decreases as the
complexity of the medication regimen increases (i.e. the number of pills per dose and number of doses
per day;the necessity to observe strict requirements related to the intake of food,and the existence of
special requirements regarding fluid intake). Adherence to HIV medications is an extremely complicated
process that includes both the drugs themselves and the adjustments to daily life necessary to provide
the prerequisite conditions for effective drug therapy (13). Some regimens require several doses of
medication per day together with various requirements or restrictions on food intake and other activi-
ties.These complexities, in addition to the problems of toxicity and side-effects, can greatly influence an
individual’s willingness and ability to adhere to the therapy (28–31).
Many health professionals believe that pill burden strongly influences adherence. However, the effect of
pill burden on adherence is closely associated with disease stage. Symptomatic individuals perceive a
higher risk for complications of nonadherence to medication, than do asymptomatic patients (32).
Dosing schedules and food restrictions or requirements appear to have a more pervasive influence on
adherence than pill burden. In the treatment of many diseases, once-daily or twice-daily doses are pre-
ferred (33,34). For instance, Eldred and colleagues (33) found that patients on twice-daily doses or less
reported better adherence (>80%) and were more likely to take their medications when away from
home. Paterson and colleagues (6) also found that a twice-daily dose was associated with better adher-
ence than a three-times-daily dose. However, other studies have failed to confirm this association,
including the large Health Care Services Utilization Study with more than 1900 participants (35).Wenger
and colleagues demonstrated that the “fit”of the regimen to an individual’s lifestyle and schedule, and
the individual’s attitude towards treatment were better predictors of adherence than dosing schedule
(35). It is likely, however, that fewer doses do allow for easier “fitting”of medications into an individual’s
schedule.
Regimens that involve close monitoring and severe lifestyle alterations together with side-effects may
lead not only to frustration and treatment fatigue, but also ultimately to noncompliance (36). Regimens
requiring fewer alterations in lifestyle patterns (e.g. fewer pills per day and fewer dietary restrictions) are
likely to have a positive influence on adherence to medication.
To the extent possible, regimens should be simplified by reducing the number of pills and frequency of
therapy, and by minimizing drug interactions and side-effects.This is particularly important for patients
with strong biases against many pills and frequent dosing.There is evidence that simplified regimens
that require fewer pills and lower dose frequencies improve adherence (37).When choosing appropri-
ate regimens, the patient’s eating habits should be reviewed and the specific food requirements of the
regimen discussed so that the patient understands what is required before his or her agreement to
such restrictions is sought. Regimens requiring an empty stomach several times per day may be difficult
for patients suffering from wasting, just as regimens requiring a high fat intake may be difficult for
patients with lactose intolerance or fat aversion.
Side-effects. Side-effects have also been consistently associated with decreased adherence and patients
who experience more than two aversive reactions are less likely to continue their treatment (38). HAART
regimens usually have temporary side-effects including transient reactions (diarrhoea and nausea) as
well as longer-lasting effects (i.e. lipodystrophy and neuropathy).The extent to which side-effects alter a
patient’s motivation to adhere to a treatment regimen depends greatly on the specific contextual
issues surrounding the individual.The literature on side-effects clearly shows that optimal adherence
occurs with medications that remove symptoms, whereas adherence is reduced by medications that
produce side-effects (13,27). Although HAART may greatly increase quality of life in symptomatic indi-
viduals, it probably has a negative effect on quality of life in asymptomatic individuals (39).
❘ 97
WHO 2003
 Patients quickly discontinue therapy or request changes of medication if they experience side-effects
(40).Whether real or perceived, side-effects account for more regimen changes than does treatment
failure (30,40,41). One large study of more than 860 HIV-positive patients in Italy reported that more
than 25% of treatment-naive patients discontinued their treatment within the first year because of toxi-
city and other side-effects (30). Another study in France found that the patients’subjective experience
of side-effects within the first 4 months of treatment predicted nonadherence more than any other pre-
dictors, including sociodemographic variables, number of medications or doses per day (42).The symp-
toms that cause the most distress are fatigue, diarrhoea, nausea and stomach pain, most of which can
be successfully treated (30,42).
One serious side-effect that may affect adherence to HIV medications is lipodystrophy. Kasper and col-
leagues (43) found that 37% of their respondents either stopped or changed their medications because
they developed lipodystrophy. Of those who were adherent, 57% stated that they had seriously consid-
ered discontinuation of therapy, while 46% stated that they would change medications if symptoms
worsened.
Lipodystrophy affects between 30% and 60% of persons on HAART (44,45). Physical manifestations vary
greatly but can include fat accumulation on the upper back and neck (buffalo hump), under the mus-
cles of the abdomen (crix belly or protease paunch), lipomas and breast enlargement; it may also cause
peripheral wasting of fat in the face, legs, arms and buttocks (46–48). Physiologically, these physical
deformities are usually preceded by hyperglycaemia, insulin resistance, hypercholesterolaemia and
hypertriglyceridaemia.The exact relationship of these physiological changes to lipodystrophy is unclear.
Nonetheless, lipid abnormalities must be treated and this can increase the complexity and side-effects
of already complex regimens. Selecting regimens that do not contribute to dyslipidaemia or lipodystro-
phy may allay fears of disfigurement and support adherence.
In the light of these findings, simplified regimens with fewer pills and fewer doses, and that minimize
side-effects, are desirable for achieving maximum adherence (38).
B. Patient-related factors 
A patient’s behaviour is the critical link between a prescribed regimen and treatment outcome.The
most effective regimen will fail if the patient does not take the medication as prescribed or refuses to
take it. Consequently, all things being equal, the most important factors influencing adherence are
patient-related (27).
Psychosocial issues. Perhaps more than anything else, life stress can interfere with proper dosing of pro-
tease medication regimens (49,50), and such stress is experienced more often and to a greater degree
by individuals of low socioeconomic status. Although studies of most demographic characteristicsof
patients have generally failed to establish consistent links with adherence to medication, some recent
studies have describedseveralvariables that have a possible association. Adherence is apparently most
difficult for patients with lower levels of education and literacy, and a few studies have reported lower
adherence among blacks and women, although this finding has not been consistent (38).Women have
cited the stress of childcare as being related to missed doses (36).The abuse of alcohol and intravenous
drugs and the presence of depressive symptoms have also been linked with poor adherence to medication.
Although some studies have demonstrated that a history of substance abuse is unrelated to adherence
(51,52), active substance abuse is one of the stronger predictors of nonadherence (53,54). Nevertheless,
even active substance abusers can achieve good adherence if the provider takes the time to address
the patient’s concerns about the medications, including anticipation of, and management of, side-
effects. Mocroft and colleagues (52) demonstrated that intravenous drug abusers were significantly less
likely to begin antiretroviral therapy, but among those who did, the response to therapy was similar to
that of other exposed groups.
WHO 2003
98 ❘
 Psychological distress has also been shown to affect adherence. Depression, stress, and the manner in
which individuals manage stress, are among the most significant predictors of adherence, but correla-
tions with other psychiatric comorbidities are weaker (6,53–57). Hopelessness and negative feelings can
reduce motivation to care for oneself and may also influence a patient’s ability to follow complex
instructions. Adolescents with HIV who reported high levels of depression demonstrated lower adher-
ence than did their peers who were not depressed (56).These findings are similar to those of studies on
other chronic conditions that have demonstrated a relationship between adherence and depression
(58).
Just as social support acts as a buffer for many psychosocial problems, it also affects adherence behaviour.
Patients with supportive friends and families tend to adhere to HAART better than those without these
supports (6,59,60). In addition to the support that can be provided by clinic staff in the form of a good rela-
tionship between providers and patients, recommendations for improving adherence often include pro-
viding a telephone-counselling line where messages can be left for nurses, and enlisting the support of
pharmacists (61). It is important to encourage patients to involve family and friends in their care, and to fol-
low up on referrals to support groups, peer-counselling and community-based organizations.
Several psychosocial predictors of acceptable levels of adherence to HIV medications have been identi-
fied in a large-scale, multisite investigation of HAART (62).These include:
– availability of emotional and practical life support;
– the ability of patients to fit the medications into their daily routines;
– the understanding that poor adherence leads to resistance;
– the recognition that taking every dose of the medications is important; and
– feeling comfortable taking medications in front of other people.
Such psychosocial aspects of treatment may be easily overlooked yet have been documented as being
crucial to consistent adherence to HIV medication regimens.
Patient-belief system. A patient’s knowledge and beliefs about disease and medicine can influence
adherence. Understanding the relationship between adherence and viral load and between viral load
and disease progression is integral to good adherence behaviour (53).Wenger and colleagues (35)
found better adherence in patients who believed antiretroviral medication to be effective. Negative
beliefs regarding the efficacy of HAART may also affect adherence behaviour. For example, many
African Americans were found to be reluctant to take zidovudine because they believed that it was
toxic. Siegel and colleagues (63) showed that African American men were more likely than Caucasian
men to report scepticism about medications and their ability to adhere to those medications. Other
beliefs such as those regarding interference with the actions of HAART by alcohol and drugs can also
affect adherence (64).
The list below, adapted from the NIH Antiretroviral Guidelines (62), lists additional patient- and medication-
related strategies to improve adherence.
• Inform patient, anticipate, and treat side-effects.
• Simplify food requirements.
• Avoid adverse drug interactions.
• If possible, reduce dose frequency and number of pills.
❘ 99
WHO 2003
 • Negotiate a treatment plan, which the patient understands and to which he or she is committed.
• Take time, and use several encounters, to educate the patient and explain the goals of therapy and
the need for adherence.
• Establish the patient’s readiness to take medication before the first prescription is written.
• Recruit family and friends to support the treatment plan.
• Develop a concrete plan for a specific regimen including dealing with side-effects and relate it to
meals and the patient’s daily schedule.
• Provide a written schedule with pictures of medications, daily or weekly pill boxes, alarm clocks,
pagers or other mechanical aids to adherence.
• Set up adherence support groups, or add adherence issues to the regular agenda of support groups.
• Develop links with local community-based organizations to help explain the need for adherence
using educational sessions and practical strategies.
• Consider “pill trials”with jelly beans.
Confusion and forgetfulness are major obstacles in achieving adherence to HIV medication regimens.
Difficulty in understanding instructions has also been reported to affect adherence. Requirements
and/or restrictions on the intake of food and water, or the temporal sequences of dosing can be confus-
ing. Misunderstandings may arise as a result of a complex regimen, and/or from poor instructions from
the health care provider. In the AIDS Clinical Trial Group, 25% of the participants failed to understand
how their medications were to be taken (53). In another study, less adherent individuals reported signifi-
cantly greater confusion than did adherent individuals over how many pills to take and how to take
them (41).
The most commonly cited reason for nonadherence is forgetfulness (51,53,65); for example, Chesney
and colleagues (53) reported that 66% of their respondents gave this as the main reason for nonadher-
ence. Ostrop and colleagues (51) demonstrated that not only is forgetfulness the most common reason
for nonadherence, but also that the middle dose in a three-times-a-day regimen is the most commonly
forgotten. Although other studies have not confirmed this finding, doses are more commonly missed in
three-times-daily regimens than in once-daily or twice-daily regimens.
Patient–provider relationship. A meaningful and supportive relationship between the patient and
health care provider can help to overcome significant barriers to adherence (37,59,66), but few
providers routinely ask about adherence or offer counselling (67). Factors that strengthen the relation-
ship between patient and provider include perceptions of provider competence, quality and clarity of
communication, compassion, involving the patient as an active participant in treatment decisions and
convenience of the regimen (27). Conversely, patients become frustrated with health care providers
when misunderstandings occur, treatment becomes complex, the patient is blamed for being a “bad
patient”or side-effects go unmanaged.These frustrations may lead to poor adherence. Specific strate-
gies for clinicians and health teams, as suggested in the NIH Antiretroviral Guidelines (62) are listed
below:
• Establish trust.
• Serve as educator, source of information, continuous support and monitoring.
• Provide access between visits for questions or problems by giving the patient a pager number, and
arranging for coverage during vacation periods and conferences.
WHO 2003
100 ❘
 • Monitor adherence; intensify management during periods of low adherence (e.g. by means of more
frequent visits, recruitment of family and friends, deployment of other team members, referral for
mental health or chemical-dependency services).
• Utilize health team for all patients, for difficult patients and for those with special needs (e.g. peer
educators for adolescents or for intravenous drug users).
• Consider the impact of new diagnoses (e.g. depression, liver disease, wasting, recurrent chemical
dependency), on adherence and include adherence intervention in their management.
• Enlist nurses, pharmacists, peer educators, volunteers, case managers, drug counsellors, physician’s
assistants, nurse practitioners and research nurses to reinforce the message of adherence.
• Provide training on antiretroviral therapy and adherence to the support team.
• Add adherence interventions to the job descriptions of HIV support-team members; add continuity-
of-care role to improve patient access.
4. A framework for interventions to increase adherence 
Experiences with HAART suggest that adherence is arguably the most important issue in successfully
managing HIV/AIDs. A multifaceted approach to improve adherence is the most likely to be beneficial,
particularly a combination of actively involving patients in their own health care decisions, provision of
appropriate supports, multidimensional educational programmes that teach behavioural skills to the
patient to enhance his or her adherence, and tailoring of the regimen to fit the patient (13,27,68) (see
Table 6).
The provider must accurately assess both the patient’s willingness to adhere in the context of possible
side-effects, and his or her willingness to overcome potential barriers to taking the medications as pre-
scribed. Furthermore, it is essential that the patient adequately understands the importance of adher-
ence and the serious consequences of nonadherence (i.e. treatment failure, or in some cases, disease
progression, drug-resistance or death).
Especially for a condition such as HIV, where poor adherence can cause resistance, it may prove wise to
delay active treatment until the patient understands the demands of the regimen and feels truly com-
mitted to it. One way in which to gauge a person’s readiness to adhere to a regimen, identify specific
barriers to adherence, and to simultaneously strengthen the patient–provider relationship is to ask the
patient an idea of a trial run of the regimen.This may be done using vitamin pills or jelly beans, with dif-
ferent tablets or different-coloured beans representing the various medications. Such a trial can give
patients a perspective on how dosing schedules and other complexities, such as food restrictions or
requirements will fit into their daily routine. A trial lasting a few weeks is usually sufficient for assessing
a patient’s ability to stick to the regimen and overcome the barriers. However, such a trial run is unable
to mimic possible side-effects.
For children who rely on the support of caregivers to maintain their adherence, the caregivers must
believe the rationale for the regimen and assume responsibility for maintaining it. Moreover, every
attempt should be made to involve the children in the decision-making process to the extent of their
capability. Although infants may have little influence on adherence, older children can have more influ-
ence on whether or not they take their medications as prescribed.
Whether developed or acquired, resistance complicates treatment decisions. As a variant becomes pro-
gressively resistant to current medications, the therapeutic options become limited.Then the only solu-
tion is to select medications from a new treatment class or prescribe medications from existing classes
❘ 101
WHO 2003
 that have demonstrated efficacy against variants resistant to current medications. However, forced
selection limits the ability to fit a regimen to patients’lifestyles and schedules.
Ideally, the health practitioner should work together with the patient to select a regimen that will fit
with his or her lifestyle. If more than one regimen may be appropriate for a given patient, providers may
want to discuss the regimen, the number of pills, the dosing schedule, instructions and potential side-
effects with the patient.This discussion will foster a more collaborative and positive relationship
between the practitioner and the patient, which is likely to enhance adherence (68). Once the regimen
is decided upon, practitioners must make certain that patients fully understand the dosing schedules
and instructions.
Rather than associating doses of medication with times of the day, fitting the regimen to the patient’s
lifestyle calls for working with the patient to associate medication doses with routine activities per-
formed at the times that the medication should be taken (41). For example, morning doses can be asso-
ciated with morning rituals (e.g. brushing teeth or reading the newspaper), and evening doses can be
associated with evening routines (e.g. children’s homework or watching television news programmes).
In general it is likely that accomplishing this “fit”will be easier with regimens that require infrequent
dosing (i.e. once or twice a day). However, the principle of associating medications with daily activities
can also accommodate more frequent and complex regimens.
The most simple, effective and potent regimen will fail if patients experience side-effects that they per-
ceive as problematic and terminate their medications. At the time that the regimen is prescribed, health
professionals should be proactive and provide strategies to help patients manage any side-effects that
may occur (69). Given that experiencing side-effects is associated with nonadherence, providers and
their team members should remain in close contact with the patient during early treatment with a new
regimen to allow for the timely identification and management of all side-effects and toxicities. A fur-
ther advantage of this approach is that it provides an opportunity for reinforcing adherence behaviour.
A powerful reinforcer of adherence behaviour is positive feedback regarding medication efficacy (70).
Consequently, laboratory and other tests should be conducted soon after the initiation of treatment to
show the extent to which it has been effective.
Health care providers and their teams should address the patient-related factors and psychosocial
issues associated with nonadherence.While these may vary across conditions, screening for active sub-
stance abuse and depressed mood would be appropriate in many patient groups. Finally, enlisting the
support of family members and “significant others”
, or employing “treatment buddies”to administer
medications can greatly enhance adherence.
An example of a currently operational comprehensive approach to AIDS care, which includes access to
free voluntary tests and counselling, the provision of zidovudine or nevirapine for the prevention of
mother-to-child transmission, diagnosis and treatment of opportunistic infections, social assistance and
directly observed provision of HAART (DOT-HAART) by trained community health workers to the most
severely ill patients, has been implemented by Farmer et al. in a poor rural area in Haiti where HIV infec-
tion is endemic (71,72).
Preliminary reports have suggested that adherence rates are almost 100%; 86% of patients have no
detectable virus in peripheral blood. Clinical outcomes have been excellent in all patients receiving
DOT-HAART, enabling up to 90% of them to resume normal daily activities within 3 months of initiation
of treatment. Also, hospitalization rates have decreased by more than half since the start of the pro-
gramme and a sharp decline in mortality has been observed (73).
The implementation of demonstration projects of good HIV/AIDS care practice, using targeted research
or evidence-based quality improvement processes, is urgently needed for effectively fighting against
the disease. As Pablos-Mendez stated,“research need not hold back care, we should learn by doing”(74).
WHO 2003
102 ❘
 ❘ 103
WHO 2003
HIV/AIDS
Factors affecting adherence
Interventions to improve adherence
(–) Women: stress of childcare (36); low income
(49); African American men (63); lack of social
support (6) 
(+) Support of family and friends (6); Caucasian
men (63)
(–) Lack of clear instructions from health profes-
sionals; poor implementation of educational
interventions (61)
(+) Good relationship between patient and
physician; support of nurses and pharmacists
(61)
(–) Asymptomatic patients (32)
(+) Symptomatic patients (32); understanding
the relationship between adherence and viral
load (53)
(–) Complex treatment regimens (28); close mon-
itoring; severe lifestyle alterations (36); adverse
events (36); adverse effects of treatment (27);
lack of clear instructions about how to take the
medications (30,38,40–43,53)
(+) Less frequent dose (6,33); fewer pills per day;
fewer dietary restrictions (36); fitting medication
to individual’s lifestyle (35); belief that medica-
tion is effective (35)
(–) Forgetfulness (53); life stress (6,49); alcohol
use; drug use (53); depression (6); hopelessness
and negative feelings; beliefs that alcohol and
drug use interfere with medications (6,64)
(+) Positive beliefs regarding the efficacy of anti-
retroviral medications (35)
Family preparedness (6); mobilization of com-
munity-based organizations; intensive educa-
tion on use of medicines for patients with low
levels of literacy; assessment of social needs
Good patient–physician relationship (61,68);
multidisciplinary care; training of health profes-
sionals on adherence; training of health profes-
sionals on adherence education; training in
monitoring adherence; training caregivers; iden-
tification of the treatment goals and develop-
ment of strategies to meet them (68); manage-
ment of disease and treatment in conjunction
with the patients; uninterrupted ready availabili-
ty of information; regular consultations with
nurses/physicians; non-judgemental attitude and
assistance; rational selection of medications (62)
Education on use of medicines (53,62); support-
ive medical consultation; screening for comor-
bidities; attention to mental illness, as well as
abuse of alcohol and other drugs
Simplification of regimens; education on use of
medicines; assessment and management of
side-effects (37,38); patient-tailored prescriptions
(41,68); medications for symptoms (27); educa-
tion on adherence (68); continuous monitoring
and reassessment of treatment (70); manage-
ment of side-effects (69)
Monitoring drug and/or alcohol use; psychiatric
consultation; behavioural and motivational inter-
vention (68); counselling/psychotherapy; tele-
phone counselling; memory aids and reminders;
self-management of disease and treatment (68)
Socioeconomic-
related factors
Health care 
team/health 
system-related 
factors
Condition-related 
factors
Therapy-related 
factors
Patient-related 
factors
(+) Factors having a positive effect on adherence; (–) factors having a negative effect on adherence.
Table 6
Factors affecting adherence to therapy for HIV/AIDS and interventions for improving it,
listed by the five dimensions and the interventions used to improve adherence
 6. References
1. Bedell SE et al.Discrepancies in the use of medications:their extent and 
predictors in an outpatient practice. Archives of Internal Medicine,2000,
160:2129–2134.
2. Lerner BH,Gulick RM,Dubler NN.Rethinking nonadherence:historical per-
spectives on triple-drug therapy for HIV disease. Annals of Internal Medicine,
1998,129:573–578.
3. Stephenson BJ et al.Is this patient taking the treatment as prescribed?
Journal of the American Medical Association,1993,269:2779–2781.
4. Bangsberg DR et al.Adherence to protease inhibitors,HIV-1 viral load,and
development of drug resistance in an indigent population. AIDS,2000,
14:357–366.
5. Montaner JSG et al.A randomized,double-blind trial comparing combina-
tions of nevirapine,didanosine,and zidovudine for HIV-infected patients:the
INCAS Trial. Journal of the American Medical Association,1998,279:930–937.
6. Paterson DL et al.Adherence to protease inhibitor therapy and outcomes in
patients with HIV infection. Annals of Internal Medicine,2000,133:21–30.
7. Boden D et al.HIV-1 drug resistance in newly infected individuals.Journal of
the American Medical Association,1999,282:1135–1141.
8. Hecht FM et al.Sexual transmission of an HIV-1 variant resistant to multiple
reverse-transcriptase and protease inhibitors. New England Journal of
Medicine,1998,339:307-311.
9. Little SJ et al.Reduced antiretroviral drug susceptibility among patients with
primary HIV infection.Journal of the American Medical Association,1999,
282:1142–1149.
10. Little SJ et al.Antiretroviral drug susceptibility and response to initial thera-
py among recently HIV-infected subjects in North America.In: Program and
Abstracts of the 8th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.
Alexandria,VA,Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health,2001:273.
11. Hammer SM et al.A controlled trial of two nucleoside analogues plus indi-
navir in persons with human immunodeficiency virus infection and CD4 cell
counts of 200 per cubic millimeter or less. New England Journal of Medicine,
1997,337:725–733.
5. Conclusions
The problems of adherence are ubiquitous across medicine. Because adherence is a complex process,
attempts to improve it need to be multifaceted. Factors such as the complexity of the treatment regi-
men, patient-related factors and the relationship between the patient and the provider of care all affect
adherence.
Health care providers should work to establish a collaborative treatment relationship with their
patients.This can be fostered by involving the patients in selecting regimens with dosing schedules, pill
burdens and side-effects that they believe are tolerable and will “fit”into their daily lives.
Pharmaceutical companies are currently working diligently to develop once-daily and twice-daily regi-
mens with fewer side-effects and higher tolerability that will better achieve this fit. Providers should
openly discuss with patients their readiness to follow treatment, the potential barriers to adherence
and possible solutions to problems.While the provider and his or her team can be a source of support,
other possible sources (including family, friends and formal support services) should also be discussed
with patients.
Clinicians should also be aware of the prevalence of mental health disorders and disorders related to
psychoactive substance abuse in certain HIV-infected populations, as inadequate mental health treat-
ment services may jeopardize the ability of affected individuals to adhere to their medical treatment.
Appropriate attention to mental illness, as well as to abuse of alcohol and other drugs could greatly
enhance adherence to medical treatment of HIV. Social and living conditions, fit of regimen to lifestyle,
availability and nature of social support and treatment expectations can also affect adherence.
No patient should be excluded from consideration for antiretroviral therapy simply because he or she
exhibits a behaviour, characteristic or risk factor that might be judged as predictive of nonadherence
(62).The health care team should make all possible efforts to ensure that patients adhere to therapies.
Awareness of patients’risk factors for nonadherence can help to guide clinicians in tailoring regimens
to maximize adherence.
Poor adherence to a regimen is only one of several possible reasons for its failure. Others that must be
assessed include initial resistance to one or more of the therapeutic agents, altered absorption or
metabolism, and multi-drug pharmacokinetics that adversely affect levels of therapeutic drugs. It is
therefore important to assess patient adherence carefully before changing antiretroviral therapy. Case
managers, social workers and other health care providers involved in the care of the patient may assist
in this evaluation.
WHO 2003
104 ❘
 ❘ 105
WHO 2003
12. Palella FJJ et al.Declining morbidity and mortality among patients with
advanced human immunodeficiency virus infection. New England Journal 
of Medicine,1998,338:853–860.
13. Chesney MA,Morin M,Sherr L.Adherence to HIV combination therapy.
Social Science & Medicine,2000,50:1599–1605.
14. Ho DD et al.Rapid turnover of plasma virions and CD4 lymphocytes in HIV-1
infection. Nature,1995,373:123–126.
15. Perelson AS et al.HIV-1 dynamics in vivo:virion clearance rate,infected 
cell life-span,and viral generation time. Science,1996,271:1582–1586.
16. Finzi D et al.Identification of a reservoir for HIV-1 in patients on highly active
antiretroviral therapy.Science,1997,278:1295–1300.
17. Zhang L et al.Quantifying residual HIV-1 replication in patients receiving
combination antiretroviral therapy. New England Journal of Medicine,1999,
340:1605–1613.
18. Voelker R.HIV drug resistance. Journal of the American Medical Association,
2000,284:169.
19. Miller NH.Compliance with treatment regimens in chronic asymptomatic
diseases. American Journal of Medicine,1997,102:43–49.
20. Gao X,Nau DP.Congruence of three self-report measures of medication
adherence among HIV patients. Annals of Pharmacotherapy,2000,
34:1117–1122.
21. Waterhouse DM et al.Adherence to oral tamoxifen:a comparison of patient
self-report,pill counts,and microelectronic monitoring. Journal of Clinical
Oncology,1993,11:1189–1197.
22. Rand CS et al.Metered-dose inhaler adherence in a clinical trial. American
Review of Respiratory Disease,1992,146:1559–1564.
23. Haynes RB,McKibbon KA,Kanani R.Systematic review of randomised trials 
of interventions to assist patients to follow prescriptions for medications.
Lancet,1996,348:383–386.
24. Wagner GJ,Rabkin JG.Measuring medication adherence:are missed doses
reported more accurately then perfect adherence? AIDS Care, 2000,
12:405–408.
25. Du Pasquier-Fediaevsky L,Tubiana-Rufi N.Discordance between physician
and adolescent assessments of adherence to treatment:influence of HbA1c
level. Diabetes Care,2002,22:1445–1449.
26. Gilbert JR et al.Predicting compliance with a regimen of digoxin therapy 
in family practice. Canadian Medical Association,1980,123:119–122.
27. Chesney MA.Factors affecting adherence to antiretroviral therapy. Clinical
Infectious Diseases,2000,30:S171–176.
28. Bartlett J,DeMasi R,Quinn J,Moxham C,Rousseau F.Correlation between
antiretroviral pill burden and durability of virologic response:a systematic
overview.Program and abstracts of the XIII International AIDS Conference;
9–14 July,2000;Durban,South Africa.Abstract ThPeB4998.
29. Carr A.HIV protease inhibitor-related lipodystrophy syndrome. Clinical
Infectious Diseases,2000,30:S135–S142.
30. D’Arminio A et al.Insights into the reasons for discontinuation of the first
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) regimen in a cohort of anti-
retroviral naïve patients. AIDS, 2000,14:499–507.
31. Kaul DR et al.HIV protease inhibitors:advances in therapy and adverse 
reactions,including metabolic complications. Pharmacotherapy,1999,
19:281–298.
32. Gao X et al.The relationship of disease severity,health beliefs and medica-
tion adherence among HIV patients. AIDS Care,2000,12:387–398.
33. Eldred LJ et al.Adherence to antiretroviral and pneumocystis prophylaxis in
HIV disease. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes,1998,
18:117–125.
34. Greenberg RN.Overview of patient compliance with medication dosing:a lit-
erature review. Clinical Therapeutics,1984,6:592–599.
35. Wenger N et al.Patient characteristics and attitudes associated with anti-
retroviral (AR) adherence.Abstract No.98. Presented at the VI Conference on
retrovirus and opportunistic infections.Washington DC,1999.
36. Halkitis P et al.Characteristics of HIV antiretroviral treatments and adherence
in an ethnically-diverse sample of men who have sex with men.AIDS Care (in
press).
37. Stone VE et al.HIV/AIDS patients’perspectives on adhering to regimens con-
taining protease inhibitors. Journal of General Internal Medicine,1998,
13:586–593.
38. Stone V.Strategies for optimizing adherence to highly active antiretroviral
therapy:Lessons from research and clinical practice. Clinical Infectious
Diseases,2001,33:865–872.
39. Nieuwkerk PT,Gisolf EH,Wu AW.Quality of life in asymptomatic- and symp-
tomatic HIV infected patients in a trial of ritonavir/saquinavir therapy.AIDS,
2000,14:181–187.
40. Mocroft A et al.Reasons for modification and discontinuation of antiretro-
virals:results from a single treatment centre.AIDS,2001,15:185–194.
41. Catz SL et al.Patterns,correlates,and barriers to medication adherence
among persons prescribed new treatments for HIV disease. Health
Psychology,2000,19:124–133.
42. Duran S et al.Self-reported symptoms after initiation of a protease inhibitor
in HIV-infected patients and their impact on adherence to HAART. HIV
Clinical Trials,2001,2:38–45.
43. Kasper TB,Arboleda CH,Halpern M.The impact of patient perceptions of
body shape changes and metabolic abnormalities on antiretroviral therapy.
Program and abstracts of the XIII International AIDS Conference;July 9-14,
2000;Durban,South Africa.Abstract WePpB1380.
44. Graham NM.Metabolic disorders among HIV-infected patients treated with
protease inhibitors:a review. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndromes,2002,25:S4–S11.
45. Mauss S.HIV-associated lipodystrophy syndrome. AIDS,2000,14:S197–S207.
46. Carr A et al.A syndrome of peripheral lipodystrophy,hyperlipidaemia and
insulin resistance in patients receiving HIV protease inhibitors. AIDS,1998,
12:F51–F58.
47. Gervasoni C,Ridolfo AL,Trifirò G.Redistribution of body fat in HIV-infected
women undergoing combined antiretroviral therapy. AIDS,1999,
13:465–471.
48. Mynarcik DC et al.Association of severe insulin resistance with both loss of
limb fat and elevated serum tumor necrosis factor receptor levels in HIV
lipodystrophy. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes,2000,
25:312–321.
49. Chesney MA.Adherence to drug regimens:a learned skill. Improving the
Management of HIV Disease,1997,5:12.
50. Malow R et al.A Cognitive-behavioral intervention for HIV+ recovering drug
abusers:The 2000-05 NIDA-funded AIDS Prevention Center study. Psychology
& AIDS Exchange,2001,30:23–26.
51. Ostrop NJ,Hallett KA,Gill MJ.Long-term patient adherence to antiretroviral
therapy. Annals of Pharmacotherapy,2000,34:703–709.
52. Mocroft A et al.A comparison of exposure groups in the EuroSIDA study:
starting highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART),response to HAART,and
survival. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes,1999,
22:369–378.
53. Chesney MA et al.Self-reported adherence to antiretroviral medications
among participants in HIV clinical trials:the AACTG adherence instruments.
AIDS Care,2000,12:255–266.
54. Gordillo V et al.Sociodemographic and psychological variables influencing
adherence to antiretroviral therapy. AIDS,1999,13:1763–1769.
55. Holzemer WL et al.Predictors of self-reported adherence in persons living
with HIV disease. AIDS Patient Care and STDs,1999,13:185–197.
 56. Murphy DA et al.Antiretroviral medication adherence among the REACH HIV-
infected adolescent cohort in the USA. AIDS Care,2001,13:27–40.
57. Singh BN.Effects of food on clinical pharmacokinetics. Clinical
Pharmacokinetics,1999,37:213–255.
58. Dunbar-Jacob J,Burke LE,Pyczynski S.Clinical assessment and management
of adherence to medical regimens.In:Nicassio PM,Smith TW,eds. Managing
chronic illness:A biopsychosocial perspective.Washington,DC,American
Psychological Association,1995:313–349.
59. Morse EV et al.Determinants of subject compliance within an experimental
anti-HIV drug protocol.Social Science & Medicine,1991,32:1161–1167.
60. Stall R et al.Decisions to get HIV tested and to accept antiretroviral therapies
among gay/bisexual men:Implications for secondary prevention efforts.
Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes and Human Retrovirology,
1996,11:151–160.
61. Chesney M et al.Adherence:A necessity for successful HIV combination 
therapy. AIDS,1999,13:S271–S278.
62. Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV.Guidelines for the use of 
antiretroviral agents in HIV-infected adults and adolescents (NIH 2002).
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report.Atlanta,GA,Centers for Diseases
Control and Prevention,2002,Vol.51,No.RR07.
63. Siegel K,Karus D,Schrimshaw EW.Racial differences in attitudes toward 
protease inhibitors among older HIV-infected men. AIDS Care,2000,
12:423–434.
64. Ng JJ et al.Adherence to highly active antiretroviral therapy in substance
abusers with HIV/AIDS.Journal of General Internal Medicine,2000,15:165.
65. Samet JH et al.Compliance with zidovudine therapy in patients infected
with human immunodeficiency virus,type 1:a cross-sectional study in a
municipal hospital clinic. American Journal of Medicine,1992,92:495–502.
66. Sbarbaro JA.The patient–physician relationship:compliance revisited.
Annals of Allergy,1990,64:321–331.
67. Hedge B,Petrak JA.Take as prescribed:a study of adherence behaviours in
people taking anti-retroviral medications [abstract 32346].Abstract Book.
Presented at the 12th World AIDS Conference;28 June – 3 July,1998.Geneva,
1998:590–591.
68. Caldwell JR.Drug regimens for long-term therapy of hypertension.
Geriatrics,1976,31:115–119.
69. Fischl MA.Antiretroviral therapy in 1999 for antiretroviral-naive individuals
with HIV infection. AIDS,1999,13:S49–S59.
70. Reiter GS et al.Elements of success in HIV clinical care:multiple interventions
that promote adherence.Topics in HIV Medicine,2002,8:21-30.
71. Farmer P et al.Community-based treatment of advanced HIV disease:intro-
ducing DOT-HAART (directly observed therapy with highly active antiretroviral
therapy). Bulletin of the World Health Organization,2001,79:1145–1151.
72. Farmer P et al.Community-based approaches to HIV treatment in resource-
poor settings. Lancet,2001,358:404-409.
73. Singler J,Farmer P.Treating HIV in resource-poor settings. Journal of the
American Medical Association,2002,288:1652–1653.
74. Pablos-Mendez A.AIDS care is learnt by doing it.Bulletin of the World Health
Organization,2001,79:1153–1154.
WHO 2003
106 ❘
 Chapter XIII
C H A P T E R  X I I I
Hypertension
1. Prevalence of adherence to pharmacotherapy in patients with hypertension
108
2. Impact of adherence on blood pressure control and cardiovascular outcome
108
3. Adherence to non-pharmacological treatment
108
4. Factors contributing to adherence
109
5. Interventions for improving adherence
110
6. Conclusions
112
7. References
113
Clinical trials have demonstrated that the treatment of mild-to-moderate hypertension can reduce the
risk of stroke by 30 to 43% (1–4) and of myocardial infarction by 15% (5). Other costly consequences of
untreated hypertension can also be prevented or minimized by effective treatment. Examples of the
benefits of treatment include reduction in risk of cardiac failure, reduction in incidence of dementia (6),
preservation of renal function and prevention of blindness in diabetic patients with hypertension (7–9).
Traditionally, the term compliance has been employed to mean the extent to which the patient, when
taking a drug, complies with the clinician’s advice and follows the regimen (10). However, the new era of
patient-oriented care has led to the use of this term being questioned, and alternative terms such as
adherence, persistence and concordance have been suggested (11–14).
In addition to the confusing terminology in the area of adherence, there has been controversy over the
use of 80% as a cut-off point to distinguish adherence from nonadherence. In most studies, nonadher-
ence has been considered to occur when patients do not take ≥ 80% of their prescribed antihyperten-
sive drugs (15,16).
Whatever the definition, poor adherence to treatment is the most important cause of uncontrolled
blood pressure (13,14,17) and only 20 to 80% of patients receiving treatment for hypertension in real-
life situations are considered to be “good compliers”(18).
 1. Prevalence of adherence to pharmacotherapy in patients with hypertension
Despite the availability of effective treatment, over half of the patients being treated for hypertension
drop out of care entirely within a year of diagnosis (15) and of those who remain under medical super-
vision only about 50% take at least 80% of their prescribed medications (16). Consequently, because of
poor adherence to antihypertensive treatment, approximately 75% of patients with a diagnosis of
hypertension do not achieve optimum blood-pressure control (13,18).
Estimates of the extent to which patients adhere to pharmacotherapy for hypertension vary between
50 and 70%.This variation relates to differences in study groups, duration of follow-up, methods of
assessment of adherence and drug regimens used in different studies. For example, studies that defined
adherence as an 80% ratio of days on which medication was dispensed to days in the study period,
reported adherence rates ranging from 52 to 74% (19,20). Other studies that have investigated discon-
tinuation of antihypertensives have reported adherence rates of 43 to 88% (21–24). Furthermore, it has
been estimated that within the first year of treatment 16 to 50% of patients with hypertension discon-
tinue their antihypertensive medications, and among those who continue their therapy in the long
term, missed doses of medication are common (25).These figures differ for newly-diagnosed patients
and those with chronic, long-standing hypertension (26).
Another source of variation that could explain the differences in rates of adherence is the method used
to measure adherence. Examples of methods used include calculating the percentage of pills taken in a
specific time period, the percentage of patients taking 80% of their pills, the improvement in number of
pills taken, the dropouts from treatment and follow-up, and the missed appointments.There are also
indirect proxy measures such as change in blood pressure and the achievement of target blood pres-
sure (27).
2. Impact of adherence on blood pressure control and cardiovascular outcome
Good adherence has been associated with improved blood pressure control (17) and reduced complica-
tions of hypertension (28,29). For example, in one study, health education interventions for urban-poor
patients with hypertension were introduced sequentially in a randomized factorial design to a cohort of
400 ambulatory outpatients with hypertension over a 5-year period.The interventions resulted in an
improvement in adherence, which was associated with better blood pressure control and a significant
reduction (53.2% less) in hypertension-related mortality rates (28).
In another study, patients who did not adhere to beta-blocker therapy were found to be 4.5 times more
likely to have complications of coronary heart disease than those who did (23). However, whether this
increased complication rate was directly related to poor adherence to antihypertensive medication is
not certain.
3. Adherence to non-pharmacological treatment 
The efficacy of non-pharmacological therapy, including reduction in dietary salt intake, weight reduc-
tion, moderation of alcohol intake and increased physical activity, in lowering blood pressure has been
shown by several studies (30,31). In general, among small, well-supervised and motivated groups of
patients receiving counselling on moderate salt restriction, most of the patients followed the regimen
(30,32,33).There is limited information, however, on adherence to other lifestyle measures intended to
lower blood pressure. Most of the problems related to adherence to non-pharmacological treatment
are currently assumed to be similar to those related to adherence to antihypertensive drug therapy and
this is an area that warrants further investigation.
WHO 2003
108 ❘
 4. Factors contributing to adherence
Many factors have been shown to contribute to adherence and these have been extensively reviewed
(34–36).Two of the most important factors contributing to poor adherence are undoubtedly the asymp-
tomatic and lifelong nature of the disease. Other potential determinants of adherence may be related to:
– demographic factors such as age and education;
– the patient’s understanding and perception of hypertension (37);
– the health care provider’s mode of delivering treatment;
– the relationships between patients and health care professionals;
– health systems influences; and
– complex antihypertensive drug regimens (38).
Poor socioeconomic status, illiteracy and unemployment are important risk factors for poor adherence
(39,40). Other important patient-related factors may include understanding and acceptance of the dis-
ease, perception of the health risk related to the disease, awareness of the costs and benefits of treat-
ment, active participation in monitoring (41) and decision-making in relation to management of the dis-
ease (42).
The influence of factors related to the health care provider on adherence to therapy for hypertension
has not been systematically studied. Some of the more important factors probably include lack of
knowledge, inadequate time, lack of incentives and feedback on performance. Multifaceted educational
strategies to enhance knowledge, audit with feedback on performance, and financial incentives are
some of the interventions that should be tested for their effectiveness (43–45).
The responsibility for adherence must be shared between the health care provider, the patient and the
health care system. Good relationships between the patients and their health care providers are there-
fore imperative for good adherence. Empathetic and non-judgemental attitude and assistance, ready
availability, good quality of communication and interaction are some of the important attributes of
health care professionals that have been shown to be determinants of the adherence of patients (46).
Health systems-related issues also play an important role in the promotion of adherence. In most low-
income countries supplies of medications are limited and they often have to be bought out-of-pocket.
Strategies for improving access to drugs such as sustainable financing, affordable prices and reliable sup-
ply systems have an important influence on patient adherence, particularly in poorer segments of the
population (47). Focusing on improving the efficiency of key health system functions such as delivery of
care, financing and proper pharmaceutical management can make a substantial contribution to improv-
ing the adherence rates of patients with hypertension and patients with chronic illnesses in general.
Some of the better-recognized determinants of adherence to antihypertensive therapy are related to
aspects of the drug treatment itself (46,48–55) and include drug tolerability, regimen complexity, drug
costs and treatment duration.
Some investigators have speculated that poor adherence can be explained in part by properties of the
medications such as tolerability. However, a discrepancy has been noted between data on adherence in
relation to drug tolerability that are obtained from randomized controlled trials and those obtained
from observational studies. For example pooled results from head-to-head randomized controlled trials
that recorded discontinuation of medications due to adverse events have demonstrated that signifi-
cantly fewer patients discontinued treatment with thiazide diuretics than discontinued treatment with
beta-blockers and alpha-adrenergic blockers (46,48). However a recent review based on observational
❘ 109
WHO 2003
 studies has reported that initial treatment with newer classes of drug such as angiotensin II antagonists,
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and calcium channel blockers favoured adherence to treat-
ment (22).
It has been argued that information on adherence and the factors that contribute to it is better
obtained from observational studies than from randomized clinical trials (49) because the stricter selec-
tion criteria and structured protocols used in randomized clinical trials may preclude generalization to
patient behaviour in the real world.The role of drug tolerability in adherence to antihypertensive med-
ication remains a topic for debate (50–53) and warrants further investigation.
The complexity of the regimen is another treatment-related factor that has been identified as a possible
cause of poor adherence. Frequency of dosing, number of concurrent medications and changes in anti-
hypertensive medications are some of the factors that contribute to the complexity of a regimen and
these have been investigated in many observational studies (46). Fewer daily doses of antihypertensives
(56,57), monotherapies and fewer changes in antihypertensive medications (less treatment turbulence)
have all been associated with better adherence (54,55).
5. Interventions for improving adherence
Adherence to treatment recommendations has a major impact on health outcomes and the costs of care
for patients with hypertension. However, evidence to support any specific approach or intervention for
improving patient adherence to antihypertensive drugs or prescribed lifestyle changes is lacking (27).
Adherence to long-term medication regimens requires behavioural change, which involves learning,
adopting and sustaining a medication-taking behaviour. Strategies such as providing rewards, reminders
and family support to reinforce the new behaviour have been found to improve adherence in chronic ill-
nesses (58–60) (see also table 7). Such behaviour-related interventions are likely to be key to improving
adherence to antihypertensive medications and should be explored rigorously in clinical trials.
Until better insight into adherence is obtained, multifaceted measures to assist patients to follow treat-
ment with antihypertensives have to be adopted. Health care providers need to be made aware of the
low rates of adherence of patients with hypertension.They should receive training on how to counsel
patients in a constructive and non-judgemental manner with the primary goal of helping the patient to
adhere better to the treatment schedule.
Health care providers should also be trained to make a rational selection of antihypertensive drugs.The
drug selected should be available, affordable, have a simple dosing regimen, and ideally, should not
interfere with the quality of life of the patient.
Wherever feasible, patients should be taught to measure and monitor their own blood pressure and to
assess their own adherence. Patients need to understand the importance of maintaining blood pressure
control during the day and to use their drugs rationally. Furthermore, they need to learn how to deal
with missed doses, how to identify adverse events and what to do when they occur.
WHO 2003
110 ❘
 ❘ 111
WHO 2003
Hypertension
Factors affecting adherence
Interventions to improve adherence
(–) Poor socioeconomic status; illiteracy; unem-
ployment; limited drug supply; high cost of
medication (46,48–55)
(–) Lack of knowledge and training for health
care providers on managing chronic diseases;
inadequate relationship between health care
provider and patient; lack of knowledge, inad-
equate time for consultations; lack of incentives
and feedback on performance
(+) Good relationship between patient and
physician (46)
(+) Understanding and perceptions about
hypertension (37)
(–) Complex treatment regimens (38,46,48–55);
duration of treatment; low drug tolerability,
adverse effects of treatment (46,48–55)
(+) Monotherapy with simple dosing schedules;
less frequent dose (56); fewer changes in anti-
hypertensive medications (54); newer classes of
drugs: angiotensin II antagonists, angiotensin
converting enzyme inhibitors, calcium channel
blockers (22)
(–) Inadequate knowledge and skill in managing
the disease symptoms and treatment; no aware-
ness of the costs and benefits of treatment; non-
acceptance of monitoring
(+) Perception of the health risk related to the
disease (37); active participation in monitoring
(41); participation in management of disease (42)
Family preparedness (58–60); patient health
insurance; uninterrupted supply of medicines;
sustainable financing, affordable prices and reli-
able supply systems
Training in education of patients on use of medi-
cines; good patient–physician relationship; con-
tinuous monitoring and reassessment of treat-
ment; monitoring adherence; non-judgemental
attitude and assistance; uninterrupted ready
availability of information; rational selection of
medications; training in communication skills;
delivery, financing and proper management of
medicines; pharmaceuticals: developing drugs
with better safety profile; pharmaceuticals: par-
ticipation in patient education programmes and
developing instruments to measure adherence
for patients
Education on use of medicines (58)
Simplification of regimens (38,46)
Behavioural and motivational intervention
(58–60); good patient–physician relationship;
self-management of disease and treatment (58);
self-management of side-effects; memory aids
and reminders (58–60)
Socioeconomic-
related factors
Health care 
team/health 
system-related 
factors
Condition-related 
factors
Therapy-related 
factors
Patient-related 
factors
(+) Factors having a positive effect on adherence; (–) factors having a negative effect on adherence.
Table 7
Factors affecting adherence to treatment for hypertension and interventions for improving
it, listed by the five dimensions and the interventions used to improve adherence
 6. Conclusions
Patients need advice, support and information from health professionals in order to be able to under-
stand the importance of maintaining blood pressure control during the day, to use their drugs rational-
ly, to learn how to deal with missed doses and how to identify adverse events and what to do when
they occur. Sharing this responsibility with health professionals is a must – the patient does not need to
cope alone.
There is a direct need for research to fill gaps in knowledge on adherence. In general such research
should aim at gaining a better understanding of the determinants of adherence discussed above so
that effective interventions that address barriers can be developed.
In addition, research should focus on the following important areas:
– validation and standardization of various measures of adherence to prescribed drug therapy and
non-pharmacological therapy for hypertension;
– development of valid and reliable questionnaires to obtain information on determinants of adherence;
– investigation of health-related quality-of-life indicators related to patients’adherence to antihyper-
tensive therapy;
– identification of predictors of adherence to pharmacological and non-pharmacological therapy;
– determination of the factors related to behaviour that influence adherence to antihypertensive thera-
py, such as patient preferences and patient beliefs;
– identifying common risk factors for nonadherence in patients with hypertension, in both developing
and developed countries, to study strategies for improving patient adherence;
– understanding of behaviour change principles and mechanisms that promote adherence;
– development of interventions to promote adherence to antihypertensive medication;
– development of materials to involve patients more in managing and regulating their adherence and
therefore their hypertension; and
– determination of the reductions in costs and hypertension-related complications resulting from
adherence to antihypertensive therapy – issues that are relevant to the needs of patients, managed
care organizations and governments.
WHO 2003
112 ❘
 7. References
1. Hennekens CH,Braunwald E.Clinical trials in cardiovascular disease:A com-
panion to Braunwald´s heart disease.Philadelphia,W.B.Saunders,1999.
2. Singer RB.Stroke,in the elderly treated for systolic hypertension. Journal of
Insurance Medicine,1992,24:28–31.
3. Medical Research Council Working Party.Medical Research Council Trial of
treatment of hypertension in older adults.Principal results. British Medical
Journal,1992,304:405–412.
4. Collins R,MacMahon S.Blood pressure,antihypertensive drug treatment and the
risks of stroke and coronary heart disease.British Medical Bulletin,1994,50:272–298.
5. Collins R et al.Blood pressure,stroke and coronary heart diseases.Part II:
Effects of short-term reduction in blood pressure – An overview of the
uncounfounded randomised drug trials in an epidemiological context. Lancet,
1990,335:827–838.
6. Peterson JC et al.For the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study Group.
Blood pressure control,proteinuria,and the progression of renal diseases.
Annals of Internal Medicine,1995,123:754–762.
7. Bergstrom J et al.Progression of renal failure in man is retarded with more
frequent clinical follow-ups and better blood-pressure control.Clinical
Nephrology,1985,25:1–6.
8. Holman R et al.Efficacy of atenolol and captopril in reducing the risk of
macrovascular and microvascular complications in type 2 diabetes:UKPDS
39. British Medical Journal,1998,317:713–720.
9. Forette F et al.Systolic Hypertension in Europe Investigators.The prevention
of dementia with antihypertensive treatment:new evidence from the
Systolic Hypertension in Europe (Syst-Eur) study. Archives of Internal
Medicine,2002,162:2046–2052.
10. Spence JD,Hurley TC,Spence JD.Actual practice in hypertension:implications
for persistence with and effectiveness of therapy. Current Hypertension
Reports,2001,3:481–487.
11. Sackett DL et al.Patient compliance with antihypertensive regimens.Patient
Counselling & Health Education,1978,1:18–21.
12. Haynes RB et al.Improvement of medication compliance in uncontrolled
hypertension. Lancet,1976,1:1265–1268.
13. Burt VL et al.Prevalence of hypertension in the US adult population.Results
from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey,
1988–1991. Hypertension,1995,25:305–313.
14. Hershey JC et al.Patient compliance with antihypertensive medication.
American Journal of Public Health,1980,70:1081–1089.
15. Mapes RE.Physicians’drug innovation and relinquishment. Social Science &
Medicine,1977,11:619–624.
16. Sackett DL et al.Randomised clinical trial of strategies for improving medica-
tion compliance in primary hypertension. Lancet,1975,1:1205–1207.
17. Lucher TF et al.Compliance in hypertension:facts and concepts.
Hypertension,1985,3:S3–S9.
18. Costa FV.Compliance with antihypertensive treatment. Clinical &
Experimental Hypertension,1996,18:463–472.
19. Bittar N.Maintaining long-term control of blood pressure:the role of
improved compliance. Clinical Cardiology,1995,18:312–316.
20. Okano GJ et al.Patterns of antihypertensive use among patients in the US
Department of Defense database initially prescribed an angiotensin convert-
ing enzyme inhibitor or calcium channel blocker.Clinical Therapeutics,1997,
19:1433–1435.
21. Christensen DB et al.Assessing compliance to hypertensive medications
using computer-based pharmacy records. Medical Care,1997,35:1252–1262.
22. Caro JJ et al.Effect of initial drug choice on persistence with antihypertensive
therapy:the importance of actual practice data. Canadian Medical
Association Journal,1999,160:41–46.
23. Caro JJ,Payne K.Real-world effectiveness of antihypertensive drugs.
Canadian Medical Association Journal,2000,162:190–191.
24. Psaty BM et al.Temporal patterns of antihypertensive medication use among
elderly patients.The Cardiovascular Health Study. Journal of the American
Medical Association,1993,270:1837–1841.
25. Flack JM,Novikov SV,Ferrario CM.Benefits of adherence to antihypertensive
drug therapy. European Heart Journal,1996,17:16–20.
26. Caro JJ et al.Persistence with treatment for hypertension in actual practice.
Canadian Medical Association Journal,1999,160:31–37.
27. Ebrahim S.Detection,adherence and control of hypertension for the preven-
tion of stroke. Health Technology Assessment,1998,2:1–80.
28. Morisky DE,Levine DM,Green LW et al.Five year blood pressure control and
mortality following health education for hypertensive patients.American
Journal of Public Health,1963,73:153–162.
29. Psaty BM et al.The relative risk of incident coronary heart diseases associat-
ed with recently stopping the use of ß-blockers. Journal of the American
Medical Association,1990,73:1653–1657.
30. Jeffery RW et al.Low-sodium,high-potassium diet:feasibility and accept-
ability in a normotensive population. American Journal of Public Health,
1984,74:492–494.
31. Nugent CA et al.Salt restriction in hypertensive patients.Comparison of
advice,education,and group management. Archives of Internal Medicine,
1984,144:1415–1417.
32. Weinberger MH et al.Dietary sodium restriction as adjunctive treatment of
hypertension. Journal of the American Medical Association,1988,
259:2561–2565.
33. Feldman R et al.Adherence to pharmacologic management of hypertension.
Canadian Journal of Public Health,1998,89:I16–I18.
34. Rudd P.Compliance with antihypertensive therapy:raising the bar of expec-
tations. American Journal of Managed Care,1998,4:957–966.
35. Schneider M,Fallab Stubi C,Waeber B.The place of microelectronic system in
measuring compliance.In:Metry J,Meyer U,eds. Drug regimen compliance:
issues in clinical trials and patient management.Chichester,John Wiley and
Sons,1999:85–86.
36. Nessman DG,Carnahan JE,Nugent CA.Increasing compliance.Patient-operat-
ed hypertension groups. Archives of Internal Medicine,1980,140:1427–1430.
37. Conrad P.The meaning of medications:another look at compliance.Social
Science & Medicine,1985,20:29–37.
38. Kjellgren KI,Ahlner J,Saljo R.Taking antihypertensive medication – control-
ling or co-operating with patients? International Journal of Cardiology,1995,
47:257–268.
39. Saounatsou M et al.The influence of the hypertensive patient’s education in
compliance with their medication. Public Health Nursing,2001,18:436–442.
40. Bone LR et al.Community health survey in an urban African-American
neighborhood:distribution and correlates of elevated blood pressure.
Ethnicity & Disease,2000,10:87–95.
41. Johnson AL et al.Self-recording of blood pressure in the management of
hypertension. Canadian Medical Association Journal,1978,119:1034–1039.
42. Fleiss JL.The statistical basis of meta-analysis. Statistical Methods in Medical
Research,1993,2:121–145.
43. Davis DA et al.Evidence of the effectiveness of CME.A review of 50 random-
ized controlled trials. Journal of the American Medical Association,1992,
268:1111–1117.
44. Davis DA et al.Changing physician performance.A systematic review of the
effect of continuing medical education strategies. Journal of the American
Medical Association,1995,274:700–705.
45. Oxaman AD.No magic bullets:a systematic review of 102 trials of interven-
tions to improve professional practice. Canadian Medical Association Journal,
1995,153:1423–1431.
❘ 113
WHO 2003
 WHO 2003
114 ❘
46. Wright JM,Lee C,Chambers GK.Real-world effectiveness of antihypertensive
drugs. Canadian Medical Association Journal,2000,162:190–191.
47. Schafheutle EI et al.Access to medicines:cost as an influence on the views
and behaviour of patients. Health & Social Care in the Community,2002,
10:187–195.
48. Wright JM.Choosing a first line drug in the management of elevated blood
pressure.What is the evidence? I.Thiazide diuretics. Canadian Medical
Association Journal,2000,163:57–60.
49. Revicki DL,Frank L.Pharmacoeconomic evaluations in the real world.
Effectiveness versus efficacy studies. Pharmacoeconomics,1999,15:123–134.
50. Myers MG.Compliance in hypertension:why don’t patients take their pills?
Canadian Medical Association Journal,1999,160:64–65.
51. Materson BJ et al.Single drug therapy for hypertension in men.A compari-
son of six antihypertensive agents with placebo.The Department of Veterans
Affair Cooperative Study group on Antihypertensive Agents. New England
Journal of Medicine,1993,328:914–921.
52. Phillipp T et al.Randomised,double blind multicentre comparison of
hydrochlorothiazide,atenolol,nitredipine,and enalapril in antihypertensive
treatment:results of the HANE study. British Medical Journal,1997,
315:154–159.
53. McInnes GT.Integrated approaches to management of hypertension:pro-
moting treatment acceptance. American Heart Journal,1999,
138:S252–S255.
54. Monane M et al.The effects of initial drug choice and comorbidity on antihy-
pertensive therapy compliance.Results from a population-based study in the
elderly.American Journal of Hypertension,1997,10:697–704.
55. Bloom BS.Continuation of initial antihypertensive medication after 1 year of
therapy. Clinical Therapeutics,1998,20:671–681.
56. Nuesch R et al.Relation between insufficient response to antihypertensive
treatment and poor compliance with treatment:a prospective case-control
study. British Medical Journal,2001,323:142–146.
57. Eisen SA et al.The effect of prescribed daily dose frequency on patient med-
ication compliance. Archives of Internal Medicine,1990,150:1881–1884.
58. Cholesterol,diastolic blood pressure,and stroke:13,000 strokes in 450,000
people in 45 prospective cohorts.Prospective studies collaboration. Lancet,
1995,346:1647–1653.
59. White A,Nicolass G,Foster K. Health Survey for England,1991.London,Her
Majesty’s Stationery Office,1993.
60. Five-year findings of the hypertension detection and follow-up program.I.
Reduction in mortality of persons with high blood pressure,including mild
hypertension.Hypertension Detection and Follow-up Program Cooperative
Group. Journal of the American Medical Association,1979,242:2562–2571.
 Chapter XIV
C H A P T E R  X I V
Tobacco smoking
1. The burden of tobacco smoking
115
2. Clinical guidelines and therapies available for tobacco smoking cessation
116
3. Definitions
117
4. Epidemiology of adherence
118
5. Factors affecting adherence
119
6. Interventions for improving adherence
119
7. Cost, effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of adherence
120
8. Conclusions
121
9. References
121
1. The burden of tobacco smoking
The health risks of tobacco use, particularly cigarette smoking, are well-recognized.Tobacco smoke is
the single most important factor contributing to poor health, and it is widely believed that a reduction
in the prevalence of tobacco smoking would be the single most effective preventive health measure (1).
An estimated 70–90% of lung cancer, 56–80% of chronic respiratory diseases and 22% of cardiovascular
diseases are attributable to tobacco smoking (2).
Cigarette smoking remains the most important preventable cause of premature death and disability
worldwide (3). Each year, tobacco use causes some 4.9 million premature deaths (2,4).Whereas until
recently this epidemic of chronic disease affected the wealthy countries, it is now rapidly becoming a
problem in the developing world (5). About 80% of the world’s 1.1 billion smokers live in low-income
and middle-income countries. By 2030, seven out of every 10 deaths from smoking will occur in low-
income countries (6).
 The available evidence suggests that free trade in tobacco products has led to increases in tobacco smok-
ing and other types of tobacco use, but measures to reduce its supply are difficult to implement. However,
interventions to reduce the demand for tobacco are likely to succeed.These include higher tobacco taxes,
antismoking education, bans on tobacco advertising and promotion, policies designed to prevent smok-
ing in public spaces or workplaces, and pharmacological therapies to help smokers to quit (5,6).
Hundreds of controlled scientific studies have demonstrated that appropriate treatment can help
tobacco users to achieve permanent abstinence. Millions of lives could therefore be saved with effective
treatment for tobacco dependence.
2. Clinical guidelines and therapies available for tobacco smoking cessation
Effective smoking-cessation therapy can involve a variety of methods, such as a combination of behav-
ioural treatment and pharmacotherapy (4). A number of strategies have been developed to help smok-
ers to quit.These include self-help manuals, individual or group counselling, aversive conditioning, hyp-
nosis, clonidine, nicotine replacement therapy (7) and the use of antidepressant medications.
The most widely reported treatment is nicotine replacement therapy (NRT), which is available in the
form of nicotine gum, nicotine patches and, more recently, as an oral inhaler. Nicotine replacement ther-
apy is an established pharmacological aid to quitting smoking and it has consistently been shown to
almost double the rate of quitting, irrespective of additional interventions (8). Many studies have con-
firmed these findings (1,7,9–18). A brief description of each of the NRTs is given below.
Nicotine gum delivers nicotine through transbuccal absorption.The gum should be discarded, not swal-
lowed, after 30 minutes.The patient can chew another piece when there is an urge to smoke (19).The
total recommended dose is 10 to 12 pieces of gum daily for 1–3 months. After 3 months, a gradual with-
drawal from gum use is recommended, with completion of treatment within 6 months (20).
Transdermal administration of nicotine is available in three active forms (21, 14 and 7 mg), each steadily
delivering an average of 0.7 mg nicotine per cm2 per 24 h (21).The strength of the patch is reduced
gradually (by reducing the size of the patch) over the course of therapy, 8–12 weeks per 24 h treatment
or 14–20 weeks per 16 h treatment (with patches that are worn only during the day) (19).To reduce the
likelihood of local skin irritation, the manufacturers recommend that the patch site be changed daily
and that the same site is used not more than once every 7–10 days (19,22,23).
The 1996 Smoking Cessation Clinical Guideline, which compared the use of NRT patches to nicotine
gum, considered the patch easier to use and also more likely to enhance adherence (24).
Oral nicotine inhalers consist of a disposable cartridge containing 10 mg nicotine and 1 mg menthol
inserted in a plastic mouthpiece. Nicotine is delivered at a rate of 13 mg of nicotine/puff (80 puffs = 
1 mg).The recommended dose is 6–12 cartridges over 24 h (10). In one study, participants were encour-
aged to decrease use of the inhaler after 4 months, but were permitted to continue treatment for 18 of
the 24 months (10).
Behavioural therapies have been used in combination with NRTs, to enhance adherence to treatment
and to help patients stop smoking.The therapies employed have included individual counselling, group
therapy sessions and telephone hotline support, all of which provide encouragement, guidance, and
strategies to combat urges and cravings to smoke.The intensity of the behavioural sessions varied
between studies (e.g. weekly or daily, lasting between 15 minutes and 1 hour, and provided by a nurse, a
physician or an MS/PhD therapist (5,7,8,11,12,15,17–20,24–26). Pharmacists have also been proposed as
potential providers of information and guidance concerning NRTs and tobacco in general (27).
WHO 2003
116 ❘
 3. Definitions
Smoking cessation is generally defined as complete abstinence from the use of smoked tobacco.The
duration of the studies varied from 12 weeks to 24 weeks, and used patient self-report questionnaires
or interview data to assess quitting smoking. Almost all studies confirmed the self-reported data using
one or more of the following biological measurements: expired carbon monoxide £ 10 ppm from the
quitting day until the end of treatment and follow-up (1,3,10–12,15,17,21,25,26,28–32), salivary cotinine
levels ≤ 20 ng/ml (3,11,13,16,24,28,31,33,34) and urinary cotinine levels of 317 ng/ml or less (21).
Adherence to smoking cessation therapy. The most widely used definition of adherence to treatment
was “using the nicotine replacement therapy continuously at the recommended dose in the instructed
manner for the entire 16-h (17) (or 24-h) time period”(1,10,12,13,17,20,29,30,32,35,36).
Some studies assessed adherence by comparing the number of used and unused systems returned
each week with the number of days that had elapsed between visits (18,21,29). Others counted the total
number of days on which patients did not use the systems during the treatment period, more than 5
days missed, or not wearing patches at night, were considered nonadherence (7).
Others defined adherence as “perfect compliance with treatment protocol and/or not missing any
scheduled follow-up visits”(1,8,18). Bushnel et al. defined adherence as attending ≥ 75% of smoking
cessation classes (26).
Few reports provided detailed data on adherence such as number of prescribed doses taken during a
monitored period, monitored days during which the correct number of doses were taken or whether or
not the prescribed intervals between doses taken were respected.
Drop-out. Patients may drop out from treatment for several reasons.These include patient-related fac-
tors, physician decision and adverse effects of the drug. Regardless of the reason for dropping out,
patients who do so are usually found to be smoking at follow-up (25).
The way in which dropouts are handled can make it difficult to compare studies in this area. It is impor-
tant to consider the reasons for dropping out to achieve accurate estimates of adherence.Those who
drop out for reasons related to the treatment need to be distinguished from those who dropped out for
reasons related to the study itself. Some patients drop out because they experience adverse events or
withdrawal symptoms. As with studies in other therapeutic areas, these patients should be classified as
nonadherent. Another important reason for dropout is the failure to stop or reduce smoking despite
following the treatment. Many relapsed smokers stop using the prescribed NRT (37) when they fail to
quit smoking despite having been adherent to NRT (21,36).We consider that these patients should be
counted as treatment failures for the purpose of calculating smoking cessation rates, but not for adher-
ence rates. Side-effects were the main reason given for dropout in the studies reviewed (1,9,11–13,16–18,
22,35–40). Other patient-related reasons for stopping therapy were failure to recall the receipt of a pre-
scription (20), unwillingness to continue in the study (1,9,10,13–17) lack of a self-perceived need for treat-
ment and lack of a perceived effect of treatment (1,9,13,16,36–40). Physicians reported discontinuation of
therapy due to lack of efficacy or complete failure to stop or to reduce smoking after therapy had been
started (1,3,8–10,17,18,21,22,24,29,36–38,41–43) and elevated carbon monoxide (17).
❘ 117
WHO 2003
 4. Epidemiology of adherence
The prevalence of adherence to smoking cessation therapy varied widely between studies (5–96%) and
also varied between countries as shown in Table 8.
This variation can be explained by the use of different interventions, adjunctive support and popula-
tions studied.
Figure 4 includes only studies that reported time-series data. It suggests that adherence to smoking
cessation therapies is a logarithmic function of number of weeks.The suggested trend line shows a
rapid decrease in adherence rates during the first 6 weeks and a very slow decrease after 24 weeks.
(Adherence rates after week 20 are related to adherence to follow-up visits rather than therapy.)
Many studies have found a positive linear correlation between adherence and cessation rates
(3,7,12,14,15,20,24,25,31–33,36,37,39,44). Both adherence and smoking cessation rates increased signifi-
cantly when NRT was combined with antidepressant pharmacotherapy (3).
Figure 4
Adherence rates over time
WHO 2003
118 ❘
No. of values
Standard 
Country
reported Mean
deviation Minimum Maximum
Australia
8
0.57
0.25
0.19
0.83
Denmark
23
0.59
0.14
0.33
0.86
Italy
1
0.34
–
0.34
0.34
New Zealand
4
0.86
0.16
0.63
0.96
Switzerland
2
0.53
0.10
0.46
0.60
United Kingdom
11
0.62
0.17
0.40
0.91
United States
31
0.52
0.23
0.05
0.96
Table 8
Rates of adherence to smoking cessation therapy reported by country
NRT, nicotine replacement therapy.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Weeks
NRTs Adherence Rates
 5. Factors affecting adherence 
Some baseline variables apparently influence adherence to therapy. In one study, mean daily cigarette
consumption, expired carbon monoxide, plasma nicotine and cotinine, and Fagerstrom Tolerance
Questionnaire (FTQ) scores (44) were significantly higher in the dropout group than in the adherent
group (1). Alterman et al. (25) concluded that greater dependence on tobacco was associated with less
patch use, indicating that patients who smoked more cigarettes were less adherent to treatment with
patches.
Depression is an important psychological factor associated with cessation of smoking. A higher preva-
lence of depressive symptoms would theoretically increase the risk of nonadherence to treatment (45).
Differing results of studies of this association have been reported. Some studies showed that smokers
with a history of major depression who were not depressed at the time of a 4-week treatment pro-
gramme had a lower abstinence rate than did smokers without a history of depression. In another
study, smokers with a history of major depression in an 8-week multicomponent cognitive behavioural
group plus nicotine-gum programme, had a significantly higher abstinence rate than smokers with a
history of depression who were treated with nicotine plus a standard programme of information (3,45).
Ginsberg et al. suggested that cognitive–behavioural sessions emphasizing group cohesion and social
support among smokers with a history of depression maintains adherence in this population (45). A sat-
isfactory explanation of this link will require further research (3,24,31).
Other variables, such as gender, racial or ethnic background, history of psychiatric pathology (25),
weight gain (29,30), craving and withdrawal symptoms are reported as being potential predictors of
patch adherence. However, because there are no validated measures of these variables, the available
data are insufficient to assess their effects on adherence.
During an NRT programme, investigators observed some factors that had a positive effect on adher-
ence.These included motivation (25), attendance at cessation classes, access to free NRT, higher educa-
tion levels, older age, advice from physicians (26), and more frequent contact with physicians and phar-
macists (35).These factors were also reported as predictive of success in stopping smoking.The analysis
of the studies showed that these factors have proven to be statistically significant in increasing absti-
nence rates, but there is no measure proving their association with adherence.
6. Interventions for improving adherence
The most frequently employed interventions for improving adherence reviewed were NRT, antidepres-
sant therapy, pharmacist intervention, psychosocial/behavioural support and counselling, and diet
counselling (low-calorie diet) (see also Table 9). Adjunctive psychosocial treatment or behavioural
advice has been successfully used to support smoking cessation programmes (25).
Although Alterman et al. showed that patients receiving more intense adjunctive psychosocial or med-
ical treatment were more adherent to treatment with patches (25), overall, the data reviewed suggested
that minimal behavioural support also results in similar or higher adherence rates, at least for some
types of smoker. Minimal behavioural support might offer a cost-effective way to implement first-line
smoking cessation programmes at a population level. More controlled studies including cost-effective-
ness analysis are needed to clarify this issue.
The monitoring of therapeutic drug levels, NRT and/or antidepressant may also be useful.This feedback
might be used to identify poorly adherent patients for whom more intensive adherence-enhancing
interventions would be helpful (46).
Intensive anti-smoking campaigns, such as the “Truth Denormalization Ads”might be extremely useful,
especially among teenagers, as they change the social attitude towards tobacco smoking.
❘ 119
WHO 2003
 7. Cost, effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of adherence
There are few data available concerning the health economics of adherence to smoking cessation ther-
apy.Westman et al. (7) reported that 4 weeks of high-dose and 2 weeks of low-dose nicotine treatment
were cost-effective and sufficient to enhance cessation.This 6-week intervention achieved 6-month
abstinence rates comparable with those of studies offering 12 or more weeks of treatment.
There is some debate as to whether it is necessary to have health professionals available in the clinic
providing supportive counselling (7,53,54). However, the literature search suggested that providing min-
imal or moderate support resulted in higher adherence rates than providing no support. A separate dis-
cussion is required to decide which of the professionals in the health care team should be responsible
for the provision of this support.
WHO 2003
120 ❘
Tobacco smoking
Factors affecting adherence
Interventions to improve adherence
CO, Carbon monoxide; NRT, nicotine replacement therapy; (+) factors having a positive effect on adherence; (–) factors having a negative
effect on adherence.
Table 9
Factors affecting adherence to smoking cessation therapy and interventions for improving
it, listed by the five dimensions and the interventions used to improve adherence
Social assistance (25)
Pharmacist mobilization (41); access to free NRT;
frequent follow-up interviews (35)
Education on use of medications; supportive
psychiatric consultation (3,25)
NRT; antidepressant therapy; education on use
of medications; adherence education; assistance
with weight reduction (29); continuous monitor-
ing and reassessment of treatment; monitoring
adherence (46)
Adjunctive psychosocial treatment; behavioural
intervention (1,9 –13,16–19,21–23,25,29,30,
32,38,39,47–52); assistance with weight reduction
(29); good patient–physician relationship (41)
(–) High treatment cost (41)
(+) Higher education levels, older age (41)
(–) Unavailability for follow up or lost to follow
up (1,8,10,11,17,21); failure to recall the receipt 
of a prescription (20)
(+) Access to free NRT; more frequent contact
with physicians and pharmacists (35)
(–) Daily cigarette consumption; expired CO,
plasma nicotine and cotinine levels; Fagerstrom
Tolerance Questionnaire (FTQ) scores (44);
greater tobacco dependence (25); psychiatric 
comorbidities; depression (3,25); failure to 
stop or reduce smoking during treatment
(1,3,8–10,17,18,21,22,24,29,36–38,41–43)
(+) Attendance at behavioural intervention 
sessions (26); adverse events (1,9,16,37–40)
or withdrawal symptoms
(1,9,11,12,13,16–18,22,35–40)
(–) Weight gain (29)
(+) Motivation (25); good relationship between
patient and physician (41)
Socioeconomic-
related factors
Health care 
team/health 
system-related 
factors
Condition-related 
factors
Therapy-related 
factors
Patient-related 
factors
 8. Conclusions
Adherence to NRTs and to other treatments for tobacco dependence is very low in the long term 
(< 40%), but it shows a strong positive correlation with better cessation outcomes. Unfortunately, these
long-term cessation outcomes are still unsatisfactorily low (< 20%).The data presented in this chapter
are based mainly on clinical trials and three population-based studies.Therefore the data on adherence
and cessation rates presented here might be over-optimistic.
In order to improve the accuracy and comparability of measured adherence rates, further research is
needed to establish explicit definitions of “adherence to treatment”and treatment dropout. A clearer
understanding and distinction between the different factors that influence dropout is also needed.
The patterns of both adherence to therapy and cessation rates over time suggest that interventions for
improving adherence would be more cost-effective the earlier they are introduced into the programme
(i.e. during the first 3 weeks).
Surprisingly, lack of access to cheap NRTs has been reported as an important reason for smokers in
developed countries failing to quit.This is unexpected because the cost of NRTs is usually equivalent to
the cost of smoking. Substituting the demand at the same price should not be a reason not to adhere.
There are few data available for identifying effective adherence-promoting interventions, but the use of
antidepressant drugs and psychosocial behavioural supports has shown good results. Studies to evalu-
ate the cost-effectiveness of interventions for improving adherence are required.
❘ 121
WHO 2003
9. References
1. Fornai E et al.Smoking reduction in smokers compliant to a smoking cessa-
tion trial with nicotine patch. Monaldi Archives for Chest Disease,2001,
56:5–10.
2. The World Health Report 2002:Reducing risks,promoting healthy life.Geneva,
World Health Organization,2002.
3. Killen JD et al.Nicotine patch and paroxetine for smoking cessation.
Journal of Consulting & Clinical Psychology,2000,68:883–889.
4. WHO Tobacco Free Initiative Project.Geneva,World Health Organization,
2001 (available on the Internet at http://tobacco.who.int/).
5. Jha P
,Chaloupka FJ. Curbing the epidemic:Governments and the economics 
of tobacco control.Washington,DC,World Bank,1999.
6. Jha P
,Chaloupka FJ.The economics of global control. British Medical Journal,
2000,321:358–361.
7. Westman EC,Levin ED,Rose JE.The nicotine patch in smoking cessation.
A randomized trial with telephone counseling. Archives of Internal Medicine,
1993,153:1917–1923.
8. Richmond RL,Harris K,de Almeida N.The transdermal nicotine patch:results
of a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Medical Journal of Australia,1994,
161:130–135.
9. Badgett RG,Tanaka DJ.Is screening for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease justified? Preventive Medicine,1997,26:466–472.
10. Bolliger CT et al.Smoking reduction with oral nicotine inhalers:double blind,
randomised clinical trial of efficacy and safety. British Medical Journal,2000,
321:329–333.
11. Effectiveness of a nicotine patch in helping people stop smoking:results of a
randomised trial in general practice.Imperial Cancer Research Fund General
Practice Research Group. British Medical Journal,1993,306:1304–1308.
12. Gourlay SG et al.Double blind trial of repeated treatment with transdermal
nicotine for relapsed smokers. British Medical Journal,1995,311:363–366.
13. Kornitzer M et al.Combined use of nicotine patch and gum in smoking cessa-
tion:a placebo-controlled clinical trial. Preventive Medicine,1995,24:41–47.
14. Prochaska JO.The transtheoretical approach:Crossing traditional boundaries 
of therapy. Irwin,Homewood,IL,Dow Jones,1984.
15. Russell MA et al.Targeting heavy smokers in general practice:randomised
controlled trial of transdermal nicotine patches. British Medical Journal,1993,
306:1308–1312.
16. Saizow RB.Physician-delivered smoking intervention. Journal - Oklahoma
State Medical Association,1992,84:612–617.
17. Tonnesen P et al.Higher dosage nicotine patches increase one-year smoking
cessation rates:results from the European CEASE trial.Collaborative European
Anti-Smoking Evaluation.European Respiratory Society. European Respiratory
Journal,1999,13:238–246.
18. Transdermal Nicotine Study Group.Transdermal nicotine for smoking 
cessation.Six-month results from two multicenter controlled clinical trials.
Journal of the American Medical Association,1991,266:3133–3138.
19. Timmreck TC,Randolph JF.Smoking cessation:clinical steps to improve 
compliance. Geriatrics,1993,48:63–66.
20. Johnson RE et al.Nicotine chewing gum use in the outpatient care setting.
Journal of Family Practice,1992,34:61–65.
21. Razavi D et al.Maintaining abstinence from cigarette smoking:effectiveness
of group counselling and factors predicting outcome. European Journal of
Cancer,1999,35:1238–1247.
22. Martin PD,Robinson GM.The safety,tolerability and efficacy of transdermal
nicotine (Nicotinell TTS) in initially hospitalised patients. New Zealand
Medical Journal,1995,108:6–8.
 23. Rigotti NA et al.Smoking by patients in a smoke-free hospital:prevalence,
predictors,and implications. Preventive Medicine,2000,31:159–166.
24. The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research Smoking Cessation Clinical
Practice Guideline.Journal of the American Medical Association,1996,
275:1270–1280.
25. Alterman AI et al.Nicodermal patch adherence and its correlates.
Drug & Alcohol Dependence,1999,53:159–165.
26. Bushnell FK et al.Smoking cessation in military personnel.
Military Medicine,1997,162:715–719.
27. Teräsalmi E et al. Pharmacists against Smoking:Research Report 2001.
Copenhagen,World Health Organization,2001.
28. Anthonisen NR et al.Effects of smoking intervention and the use of an inhaled
anticholinergic bronchodilator on the rate of decline of FEV1.The Lung Health
Study. Journal of the American Medical Association,1994,272:1497–1505.
29. Danielsson T,Rossner S,Westin A.Open randomised trial of intermittent very
low energy diet together with nicotine gum for stopping smoking in women
who gained weight in previous attempts to quit. British Medical Journal,
1999,319:490–493.
30. Gourlay SG et al.Prospective study of factors predicting outcome of transder-
mal nicotine treatment in smoking cessation. British Medical Journal,1994,
309:842–846.
31. Killen JD et al.Do heavy smokers benefit from higher dose nicotine patch
therapy? Experimental & Clinical Psychopharmacology,1999,7:226–233.
32. Solomon LJ et al.Free nicotine patches plus proactive telephone peer sup-
port to help low-income women stop smoking. Preventive Medicine,2000,
31:68–74.
33. Dornelas EA et al.A randomized controlled trial of smoking cessation coun-
seling after myocardial infarction. Preventive Medicine,2000,30:261–268.
34. Kviz FJ,Crittenden KS,Warnecke RB.Factors associated with nonparticipation
among registrants for a self-help,community-based smoking cessation
intervention. Addictive Behaviors,1992,17:533–542.
35. Orleans CT et al.Use of transdermal nicotine in a state-level prescription plan
for the elderly.A first look at ‘real-world’patch users. Journal of the American
Medical Association,1994,271:601–607.
36. Sonderskov J et al.Nicotine patches in smoking cessation:a randomized trial
among over-the-counter customers in Denmark. American Journal of
Epidemiology,1997,145:309–318.
37. Hatch CL,Canaan T,Anderson G.Pharmacology of the pulmonary diseases.
Dental Clinics of North America,1996,40:521–541.
38. Meliska CJ et al.Immune function in cigarette smokers who quit smoking for
31 days. Journal of Allergy & Clinical Immunology,1995,95:901–910.
39. O’Hara P et al.Design and results of the initial intervention program for the
Lung Health Study.The Lung Health Study Research Group. Preventive
Medicine,1993,22:304–315.
40. Pierce JR,Jr.Stroke following application of a nicotine patch [Letter]. Annals
of Pharmacotherapy,1994,28:402.
41. Millard RW,Waranch HR,McEntee M.Compliance to nicotine gum recom-
mendations in a multicomponent group smoking cessation program:an
exploratory study. Addictive Behaviors,1992,17:201–207.
42. Persico AM.Predictors of smoking cessation in a sample of Italian smokers.
International Journal of the Addictions,1992,27:683–695.
43. Shiffman S et al.The efficacy of computer-tailored smoking cessation materi-
al as a supplement to nicotine patch therapy. Drug & Alcohol Dependence,
2001,64:35–46.
44. Fagerstrom KO.Measuring degree of physical dependence to tobacco smok-
ing with reference to individualization of treatment. Addictive Behaviors,
1978,3:235–241.
45. Ginsberg JP et al.The relationship between a history of depression and
adherence to a multicomponent smoking-cessation program. Addictive
Behaviors,1997,22:783–787.
46. Killen JD et al.Nicotine patch and paroxetine for smoking cessation. Journal
of Consulting & Clinical Psychology,2000,68:883–889.
47. Curry SJ.Self-help interventions for smoking cessation. Journal of Consulting
& Clinical Psychology,1993,61:790–803.
48. Warnecke RB et al.The second Chicago televised smoking cessation program:
a 24-month follow-up.American Journal of Public Health,1992,82:835–840.
49. Raw M.Smoking Cessation Guidelines for Health Professionals.Thorax, 1998,
53:S1–S19.
50. Torrecilla M et al.[The physician and the patient in the decision to quit
smoking.Effect of the initiative on the result of the intervention.] [Spanish]
Archivos de Bronconeumologia,2001,37:127–134.
51. Dresler CM et al.Smoking cessation and lung cancer resection. Chest,1996,
110:1199–1202.
52. Smith TM,Winters FD.Smoking cessation:a clinical study of the transdermal
nicotine patch. Journal of the American Osteopathic Association,1996,
95:655–656.
53. Hajek P
,Taylor TZ,Mills P.Brief intervention during hospital admission to help
patients to give up smoking after myocardial infarction and bypass surgery:
randomised controlled trial. British Medical journal,324:1–6.
54. West R.Helping patients in hospital to quit smoking. British Medical Journal,
2002,324:64.
WHO 2003
122 ❘
 Chapter XV
C H A P T E R  X V
Tuberculosis
1. Definition of adherence
123
2. Factors that influence adherence to treatment
124
3. Prediction of adherence
125
4. Strategies to improve adherence to treatment
125
5. Questions for future research
128
6. References
129
The World Health Organization (WHO) declared tuberculosis (TB) a global public health emergency in
1993 and since then has intensified its efforts to control the disease worldwide (1). Despite these efforts,
there were an estimated 8.7 million new cases of TB worldwide during 2000 (2).The rapidly increasing
rates of HIV infection, combined with escalating poverty and the collapse of public health services in
many settings have contributed to this serious situation (3).
The therapeutic regimens recommended by WHO have been shown to be highly effective for both prevent-
ing and treating TB (4), but poor adherence to anti-tuberculosis medication is a major barrier to its global
control (2,5,6).Tuberculosis is a communicable disease, thus poor adherence to a prescribed treatment
increases the risks of morbidity, mortality and drug resistance at both the individual and community levels.
The purpose of this chapter is to describe the current insights into patients’treatment behaviour and
the methods adopted by health providers to enhance adherence to anti-tuberculosis treatment.This
has been done with the aim of contributing to the generation of knowledge leading to the production
of guidelines for enhancing adherence to prescribed medication in patients receiving long-term care.
1. Definition of adherence
In terms of TB control, adherence to treatment may be defined as the extent to which the patient’s his-
tory of therapeutic drug-taking coincides with the prescribed treatment (7).
Adherence may be measured using either process-oriented or outcome-oriented definitions. Outcome-
oriented definitions use the end-result of treatment, e.g. cure rate, as an indicator of success. Process-
oriented indicators make use of intermediate variables such as appointment-keeping or pill counts to
measure adherence (7).The extent to which these intermediate outcomes correlate with the actual
quantities of prescribed drugs taken is unknown (8).
 The point that separates “adherence”from “nonadherence”would be defined as that in the natural his-
tory of the disease making the desired therapeutic outcome likely (adherence) or unlikely (nonadher-
ence) to be achieved.There is as yet no empirical rationale for a definition of nonadherence in the man-
agement of TB.Therefore, the definition of adherence to TB treatment needs to be translated into an
empirical method of monitoring both the quantity and timing of the medication taken by the patient
(9). At the individual level this is desirable, but at the population level a more pragmatic approach is
needed.Thus, the success of treatment, that is, the sum of the patients who are cured and those who
have completed treatment under the directly observed therapy, short course (DOTS) strategy, is a prag-
matic, albeit a proxy, indicator of treatment adherence.
2. Factors that influence adherence to treatment
Many factors have been associated with adherence to TB treatment including patient characteristics,
the relationship between health care provider and patient, the treatment regimen and the health care
setting (10). One author has defined nonadherence as “an unavoidable by-product of collisions between
the clinical world and the other competing worlds of work, play, friendships and family life”(11).Factors
that are barriers to adherence to TB drugs can be classified as shown below.
A. Economic and structural factors
TB usually affects people who are hard to reach such as the homeless, the unemployed and the poor.
Lack of effective social support networks and unstable living circumstances are additional factors that
create an unfavourable environment for ensuring adherence to treatment (12).
B. Patient-related factors
Ethnicity, gender and age have been linked to adherence in various settings (13–15). Knowledge about
TB and a belief in the efficacy of the medication will influence whether or not a patient chooses to com-
plete the treatment (16). In addition, cultural belief systems may support the use of traditional healers in
conflict with allopathic medicine (10,17). In some TB patients, altered mental states caused by substance
abuse, depression and psychological stress may also play a role in their adherence behaviour.
C. Regimen complexity
The number of tablets that need to be taken, as well as their toxicity and other side-effects associated
with their use may act as a deterrent to continuing treatment (18).The standard WHO regimen for the
treatment of TB involves using four drugs for an initial “intensive phase”(2–3 months), and two or three
drugs for a further “continuation”phase (6–8 months). Drugs may be taken daily or “intermittently”three
times a week.
D. Supportive relationships between the health provider and the patient
Patient satisfaction with the “significant”provider of health care is considered to be an important deter-
minant of adherence (19), but empathic relationships are difficult to forge in situations where health
providers are untrained, overworked, inadequately supervised or unsupported in their tasks, as com-
monly occurs in countries with a high TB burden (20).
E. Pattern of health care delivery 
The organization of clinical services, including availability of expertise, links with patient support sys-
tems and flexibility in the hours of operation, also affects adherence to treatment. Many of the ambula-
tory health care settings responsible for the control of TB are organized to provide care for patients
with acute illnesses, and staff may therefore lack the skills required to develop long-term management
plans with patients. Consequently, the patient’s role in self-management is not facilitated and follow-up
is sporadic.
WHO 2003
124 ❘
 3. Prediction of adherence
If the individuals at risk for poor adherence could be identified early in their management, health care
providers should, in theory, be able to intervene by tailoring the provision of treatment to enable such
patients to continue their therapy. Unfortunately, the available evidence indicates that health care
providers are unable to predict accurately which patients are likely to be nonadherent (21–23).
The literature describes over 200 variables associated with patients who default on treatment. Many of
the cited determinants of adherence are unalterable, and the demonstration of a consistent association
between characteristics such as gender, age group or literacy and adherence does not lead to a logical
approaching to remedy the situation. Furthermore, demographic, social and other patient characteris-
tics often relate poorly to the patient’s intention or motivation and do not explain why some TB
patients adhere to treatment despite having several unfavourable characteristics. Patients with TB
apparently fluctuate in the intensity of their motivation to complete their treatment and admit to con-
sidering defaulting many times during their long course of therapy (24).
Many epidemiological studies have explored correlates of adherence, often examining the issue from a
biomedical perspective.Within this framework the TB patient has sometimes been seen as a recipient of
a treatment regimen, who should obey the instructions of the health care worker. Nonadherent patients
who do not conform to these expectations have sometimes been regarded as “deviant”
.This approach
ignores the fact that treatment behaviour is complex and is influenced by a host of factors including
the patients’sociocultural setting, health beliefs and subjective experience of the illness.
Numerous psychosocial constructs have been proposed that have attempted to provide a conceptual
model for thinking about health behaviour (24–28).The information–motivation–behavioural (IMB)
skills model (29) which integrates information, motivation and behavioural skills in explaining behaviour
has, however, attracted some attention as a potentially useful guide to developing interventions for
enhancing adherence to TB treatment.The IMB model demonstrates that information is a prerequisite
for good adherence, but is not sufficient in itself to change behaviour. Motivation and the development
of behavioural skills are also critical determinants of behavioural change.
4. Strategies to improve adherence to treatment 
Concurrently with the efforts to improve our understanding of factors affecting adherence to TB treat-
ment, numerous measures have been introduced in different settings in an attempt to improve it (30,31).
A. Classification of interventions 
The interventions for improving adherence rates may be classified into the following categories:
• Staff motivation and supervision – includes training and management processes aimed at improving
the way in which providers care for patients with tuberculosis.
• Defaulter action – the action to be taken when a patient fails to keep a pre-arranged appointment.
• Prompts – routine reminders for patients to keep pre-arranged appointments.
• Health education – provision of information about tuberculosis and the need to attend for treatment.
• Incentives and reimbursements – money or cash in kind to reimburse the expenses of attending the
treatment centre, or to improve the attractiveness of visiting the treatment centre.
• Contracts – agreements (written or verbal) to return for an appointment or course of treatment.
❘ 125
WHO 2003
 WHO 2003
126 ❘
• Peer assistance – people from the same social group helping someone with tuberculosis to return to
the health centre by prompting or accompanying him or her.
• Directly observed therapy (DOT) – an identified, trained and supervised agent (health worker, com-
munity volunteer or family member) directly monitors patients swallowing their anti-TB drugs (see
below).
B. Directly observed treatment as a component of the WHO DOTS strategy
The concept of “entirely supervised administration of medicines”
, first developed by Wallace Fox in the
1950s (32), is now known as directly observed therapy (DOT). DOT was first adopted in TB drug trials in
Madras (India) and Hong Kong as early as the 1960s (33) and is now widely recommended for the con-
trol of TB (34–36).WHO recommends DOT as one of a range of measures to promote adherence to TB
treatment (37).
DOT has always meant much more than “supervised swallowing”
. Different projects in countries with a
high prevalence of TB have shown that removing the socioeconomic barriers to DOT faced by patients
increases adherence and cure rates (38,39). In a country where the prevalence of TB is low, such as the
United States, DOT programmes are complex and have several components including social support,
housing, food tokens and legal measures and are highly cost-effective (35,40).
Since 1991,WHO has promoted the strategy of “directly observed therapy, short course”(now known as
the DOTS strategy) (32).“DOTS”is the brand name for a comprehensive technical and management
strategy consisting of the following five elements:
– political commitment;
– case detection using sputum microscopy among persons seeking care for prolonged cough;
– standardized short courses of chemotherapy under proper case-management conditions including DOT;
– regular drug supply; and
– a standardized recording and reporting system that allows assessment of individual patients as well
as of overall programme performance (41).
C. Evidence for the effectiveness of interventions aimed at improving
adherence
Unfortunately, there is a lack of rigorous experimental research on the effects of interventions to pro-
mote adherence to TB treatment. Quantitative research asks questions about efficacy and effectiveness.
The choice of an appropriate experimental design methodology (whether individual or community ran-
domization) depends on the nature of the intervention under evaluation. Quantitative research should
be complemented by in-depth qualitative research to answer questions about why an intervention had
an effect in a particular setting.
The extent to which DOT alone and various individual social support measures contribute to adherence
is unknown. On the one hand, randomized controlled trials have shown no difference in adherence
between TB patients randomly allocated to DOT alone or to self-administered treatment.Two recently
published systematic reviews reported 16 randomized trials, of which only half were in countries with a
high disease burden (8,49).These reviews showed that DOT alone (“supervised swallowing”) did not
always promote adherence, and therefore the results do not support the use of this intervention in iso-
lation from the other factors affecting adherence (e.g. good quality of communication between patient
and health providers, transport costs and lay health beliefs about TB) (Table 10).
 On the other hand, programmatic studies of the effectiveness of the DOTS strategy have shown high
rates of treatment success (2,50–52). In practice, the trial design necessary to properly evaluate the con-
tribution of DOT alone to the effectiveness of the overall DOTS strategy requires assessment of the
social aspects of patient support that surround DOT (as “supervised swallowing”).The outcomes of pro-
grammatic evaluations of the effectiveness of implementation of the DOTS strategy better reflect the
social, behavioural and economic factors related to the patient, the health care services and characteris-
tics of treatment.
❘ 127
WHO 2003
Tuberculosis
Factors affecting adherence
Interventions to improve adherence
(–) Lack of effective social support networks and
unstable living circumstances (12); culture and
lay beliefs about illness and treatment (10,17);
ethnicity, gender and age (13); high cost of med-
ication; high cost of transport; criminal justice
involvement; involvement in drug dealing 
(–) Poorly developed health services; inadequate
relationship between health care provider and
patient; health care providers who are untrained,
overworked, inadequately supervised or unsup-
ported in their tasks (20); inability to predict
potentially nonadherent patients (21)
(+) Good relationship between patient and
physician (19); availability of expertise; links with
patient support systems; flexibility in the hours
of operation of treatment centers
(–) Asymptomatic patients; drug use; altered
mental states caused by substance abuse;
depression and psychological stress
(+) Knowledge about TB (16)
(–) Complex treatment regimen; adverse effects
of treatment; toxicity (18)
(–) Forgetfulness; drug abuse, depression;
psychological stress
(+) Belief in the efficacy of treatment (16);
motivation (24)
Assessment of social needs, social support, hous-
ing, food tokens and legal measures (35,40,41);
providing transport to treatment setting; peer
assistance; mobilization of community-based
organizations; optimizing the cooperation
between services
Uninterrupted ready availability of information;
flexibility in available treatment; training and
management processes that aim to improve the
way providers care for patients with tuberculosis;
management of disease and treatment in con-
junction with the patients; multidisciplinary care;
intensive staff supervision (42); training in adher-
ence monitoring; DOTS strategy (32)
Education on use of medications (43); provision
of information about tuberculosis and the need
to attend for treatment
Education on use ofmedications; adherence
education; tailor treatment to needs of patients
at risk of nonadherence; agreements (written 
or verbal) to return for an appointment or
course of treatment; continuous monitoring 
and reassessment of treatment
Therapeutic relationship; mutual goal-setting;
memory aids and reminders; incentives and/or
reinforcements (44,45); reminder letters (46),
telephone reminders (47) or home visits (48)
for patients who default on clinic attendance
Socioeconomic-
related factors
Health care 
team/health 
system-related 
factors
Condition-related 
factors
Therapy-related 
factors
Patient-related 
factors
DOT, Directly observed therapy;TB, tuberculosis; (+) factors having a positive effect on adherence; (–) factors having a negative effect on
adherence.
Table 10
Factors affecting adherence to treatment for tuberculosis and interventions for improving
it, listed by the five dimensions and the interventions used to improve adherence
 Many other interventions have been found to significantly improve adherence. One study found that
reminder letters sent to patients who failed to attend clinic, appeared to be of benefit even when
patients were illiterate (46). Another study reported that home visits by a health worker, though more
labour-intensive, may be more effective than reminder letters for ensuring that defaulters complete
their treatment (48).Yet another study showed that prospective telephone reminders are useful for
helping people to keep scheduled appointments (47). Such studies are often location-specific and
therefore often produce results that cannot be generalized. For example, studies demonstrating the
benefit of telephone and mail reminders are of little relevance in many of the countries with a high
prevalence of TB because most patients do not have telephones or mail boxes.
Although one trial found that assistance by a lay health worker increased adherence to a first appoint-
ment (44), a subsequent study showed no impact on completion of preventive therapy at 6 months
(53). Studies in the USA have suggested that monetary incentives are an effective method for improving
adherence. Appointment-keeping was significantly improved in homeless men (44) and in drug users
(45) by offering US $5 in payment for returning to a clinic for TB evaluation, but the results of a study of
offering monetary incentives to people recently discharged from prison were inconclusive, partly due
to its small size (54).
The evidence for an independent effect of health education on adherence of patients to treatment is
weak. One trial did suggest some benefit (55) but the design of this study was flawed because individu-
als receiving health education were contacted or seen every 3 months, whereas those in the control
group were seen only at the end of the study period.The relative contributions of health education and
increased attention in this study are therefore hard to separate. A trial to examine the impact of inten-
sive education and counselling on patients with active TB did, however, find a trend towards increased
treatment completion rates for the patients who received intensive education and counselling com-
pared with those who received routine care (43).The study by Morisky and colleagues (56), lent no sup-
port to the authors’claims for the benefit of health education as the results were confounded by the
effects of a monetary incentive used in tandem with the educational intervention. In a more recent trial
that has helped to disaggregate these effects (45) health education alone was found to be no better
than routine case management for improving appointment-keeping and the impact of education com-
bined with a monetary incentive was indistinguishable from that of the monetary incentive alone.
Finally, an intervention directed at clinic staff rather than patients was studied. Patients attending clinics
in which staff were closely supervised were more likely to complete treatment than those attending
clinics where there was only routine supervision of staff (42).
5. Questions for future research 
Useful research into human behaviour should take into account a wide range of approaches to enquiry,
including qualitative and quantitative research methods. A review of the current literature on adher-
ence to TB treatment has revealed a variety of research objectives, ranging from social and anthropo-
logical to clinical and programmatic studies. Further studies should be designed with the following
aims:
• Define the theoretical models that underlie interventions to promote adherence to TB therapy.
• Describe the extent of various patterns of adherence (patients who take their medication sporadical-
ly, regularly take less than prescribed, and those who discontinue it completely).
• Explore the “active ingredients”of effective alliances between health providers and patients in a vari-
ety of sociocultural settings.
WHO 2003
128 ❘
 • Identify time-points in the case management at which different types of adherence strategy may
have increased impact.
• Determine the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of specific interventions to improve adherence, as part
of a complex health intervention necessary to achieve a high rate of treatment success.
• Priority should be given to studies in middle- and low-income countries to ensure the relevance of
interventions to the settings in which most of the TB caseload occurs.
❘ 129
WHO 2003
6. References
1. TB – A Global Emergency. Geneva,World Health Organization,1994 
(document WHO/TB/94.177).
2. Global Tuberculosis Control:Surveillance,Planning,Financing.Geneva,World
Health Organization,2002 (WHO/CDS/TB/2002.295) .
3. Grange J.The global burden of disease.In:Porter J,Grange J,eds.Tuberculosis:
an international perspective.London,Imperial College Press,1999.
4. Fox W,Gordon A,Mitchison D.Studies on the treatment of tuberculosis
undertaken by the British Medical Research Council Tuberculosis Units,
1946–1986,with relevant publications. International Journal of Tuberculosis
and Lung Diseases,1999,3:S231–S270.
5. Fox W.The problem of self-administration of drugs:with particular reference
to pulmonary tuberculosis.Tubercle,1958,39:269–274.
6. Addington W.Patient compliance:The most serious remaining problem in
the control of tuberculosis in the United States. Chest,1979,76:741–743.
7. Urquhart J.Patient non-compliance with drug regimens:measurement,
clinical correlates,economic impact. European Heart Journal,1996,17 
(Suppl A):8–15.
8. Volmink J,Garner P.Interventions for promoting adherence to tuberculosis
management.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2000,(4):CD000010.
9. Urquhart J.Ascertaining how much compliance is enough with outpatient
anti-biotic regimens.Postgraduate Medical Journal,1992,68:49–59.
10. Sumartojo E.When tuberculosis treatment fails.A social behavioral account
of patient adherence.American Review of Respiratory Disease,1993,
147:1311–1320.
11. Trostle JA.Medical compliance as an ideology. Social Science & Medicine,
1988,27:1299–1308.
12. Liefooghe R et al.Perception and social consequences of tuberculosis:
a focus group study of tuberculosis patients in Sialkot,Pakistan. Social
Science & Medicine,1995,41:1685–1692.
13. Hudelson P.Gender differentials in tuberculosis:the role of socio-economic
and cultural factors.Tubercle & Lung Disease,1996,77:391–400.
14. Farmer P.Social inequalities and emerging infectious diseases. Emerging
Infectious Diseases,1996,2:259–269.
15. Diwan VK,Thorson A.Sex,gender,and tuberculosis. Lancet,1999,
353:1000–1001.
16. Dick J,Lombard C.Shared vision – a health education project designed to
enhance adherence to anti-tuberculosis treatment. International Journal 
of Tuberculosis & Lung Disease,1997,1:181–186.
17. Banerji D.A social science approach to strengthening India’s national 
tuberculosis programme. Indian Journal of Tuberculosis,2002,40:61–82.
18. Treatment of Tuberculosis:guidelines for National Programmes.Geneva,World
Health Organization,1997(document WHO/TB/94.177).
19. Lewin SA et al.Interventions for providers to promote a patient-centred
approach in clinical consultations. Cochrane Database Systematic Reviews,
2001,CD003267.
20. Steyn M et al.Communication with TB patients;a neglected dimension 
of effective treatment? Curationis,1997,20:53–56.
21. Mushlin AI,Appel FA.Diagnosing potential noncompliance.Physicians’
ability in a behavioral dimension of medical care. Archives of Internal
Medicine,1977,137:318–321.
22. Caron HS,Roth HP.Patients’cooperation with a medical regimen.
Difficulties in identifying the noncooperator. Journal of the American 
Medical Association,1968,203:922–926.
23. Davis MS.Predicting non-compliant behavior. Journal of Health & Social
Behavior,1967,8:265–271.
24. Dick J et al.Development of a health education booklet to enhance adher-
ence to tuberculosis treatment.Tubercle & Lung Disease,1996,77:173–177.
25. Bandura A. Social learning theory.Englewood Cliffs,NY,Prentice Hall,1977.
26. Ajzen I,Fishbein M. Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior.
Englewood Cliffs,NY,Prentice Hall,1980.
27. Green L,Krueter M. Health promotion planning:an educational and environ-
mental approach.Mountainview,CA,Mayfield Publishing,1991.
28. Health behavior and health education:theory,research,and practice.
San Francisco,CA,Jossey-Bass,1997.
29. Fisher JD,Fisher WA.Changing AIDS-risk behavior. Psychological Bulletin,
1992,111:455–474.
30. From the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.Approaches to improv-
ing adherence to antituberculosis therapy. Journal of the American Medical
Association,1998,269:1096–1098.
31. Sbarbaro JA,Sbarbaro JB.Compliance and supervision of chemotherapy 
of tuberculosis. Seminars in Respiratory Infections,1994,9:120–127.
32. Raviglione M,Pio A.Evolution of WHO policies for tuberculosis control,
1948–2001. Lancet,2002,359:775–780.
33. Bayer R,Wilkinson D.Directly observed therapy for tuberculosis:history of 
an idea. Lancet,1995,345:1545–1548 [erratum published in Lancet, 1995,
346:322].
34. Bass JB,Jr.et al.Treatment of tuberculosis and tuberculosis infection in adults
and children.American Thoracic Society and The Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention. American Journal of Respiratory & Critical Care Medicine,
1994,149:1359–1374.
35. Chaulk CP
,Kazandjian VA.Directly observed therapy for treatment comple-
tion of pulmonary tuberculosis:Consensus Statement of the Public Health
Tuberculosis Guidelines Panel.Journal of the American Medical Association,
1998,279:943–948 [erratum published in Journal of the American Medical
Association,1998,280:134].
 36. Enarson D et al. Management of tuberculosis:a guide for low income coun-
tries,5th ed.Paris,International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung
Disease,2000.
37. Maher D et al.Treatment of tuberculosis:guidelines for national programmes,
2nd ed.Geneva,World Health Organization,1997.
38. Farmer P et al.Tuberculosis,poverty,and “compliance”:lessons from rural
Haiti. Seminars In Respiratory Infections,1991,6:254–260.
39. Olle-Goig JE,Alvarez J.Treatment of tuberculosis in a rural area of Haiti:
directly observed and non-observed regimens.The experience of Hôpital
Albert Schweitzer. International Journal of Tuberculosis & Lung Disease,2001,
5:137–141.
40. Burman WJ et al.A cost-effectiveness analysis of directly observed therapy 
vs self-administered therapy for treatment of tuberculosis. Chest,1997,
112:63–70.
41. An Expanded DOTS Framework for Effective Tuberculosis Control.Geneva,World
Health Organization,2002 (document WHO/CDS/TB/2002.297).
42. Jin BW et al.The impact of intensified supervisory activities on tuberculosis
treatment.Tubercle & Lung Disease,1993,74:267–272.
43. Liefooghe R et al.A randomised trial of the impact of counselling on 
treatment adherence of tuberculosis patients in Sialkot,Pakistan.
International Journal of Tuberculosis & Lung Disease,1999,3:1073–1080.
44. Pilote L et al.Tuberculosis prophylaxis in the homeless.A trial to improve
adherence to referral.Archives of Internal Medicine,1996,156:161–165.
45. Malotte CK,Rhodes F,Mais KE.Tuberculosis screening and compliance with
return for skin test reading among active drug users. American Journal of
Public Health,1998,88:792–796.
46. Paramasivan R,Parthasarathy R,Rajasekaran S.Short course chemotherapy:
A controlled study of indirect defaulter retrieval method. Indian Journal of
Tuberculosis,1993,40:185–190.
47. Tanke ED,Martinez CM,Leirer VO.Use of automated reminders for tuberculin
skin test return.American Journal of Preventive Medicine,1997,13:189–192.
48. Krishnaswami KV et al.A randomised study of two policies for managing
default in out-patients collecting supplies of drugs for pulmonary tuberculo-
sis in a large city in South India.Tubercle,1981,62:103–112.
49. Volmink J,Garner P.Directly observed therapy for treating tuberculosis.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.2001 (4):CD003343.
50. Suarez PG et al.The dynamics of tuberculosis in response to 10 years of
intensive control effort in Peru.The Journal of Infectious Diseases,2001,
184:473–478.
51. Fujiwara PI,Larkin C,Frieden TR.Directly observed therapy in New York City.
History,implementation,results,and challenges. Clinics In Chest Medicine,
1997,18:135–148.
52. Results of directly observed short-course chemotherapy in 112,842 Chinese
patients with smear-positive tuberculosis.China Tuberculosis Control
Collaboration. Lancet,1996,347:358–362.
53. Tulsky JP et al.Adherence to isoniazid prophylaxis in the homeless:a ran-
domized controlled trial.Archives of Internal Medicine,2000,160:697–702.
54. White MC et al.A clinical trial of a financial incentive to go to the tuberculosis
clinic for isoniazid after release from jail. International Journal of Tuberculosis
& Lung Disease,1998,2:506–512.
55. Salleras SL et al.Evaluation of the efficacy of health education on the compli-
ance with antituberculosis chemoprophylaxis in school children.A randomized
clinical trial.Tubercle & Lung Disease,1993,74:28–31 [erratum published in
Tubercle & Lung Disease,1993,74:217].
56. Morisky DE et al.A patient education program to improve adherence 
rates with antituberculosis drug regimens. Health Education Quarterly,
1990,17:253–267.
WHO 2003
130 ❘
 ❘ 131
WHO 2003
  Annexes
A N N E X E S
  Annex I
A N N E X  I
Behavioural mechanisms explaining
adherence
What every health professional should know
1. Introduction
135
2. The nature of poor adherence
136
3. Determinants of adherence
137
4. Models
139
5. Interventions
143
6. Conclusions
145
7. References
147
1. Introduction
Optimal outcomes in population health require both efficacious treatments and adherence to those
treatments.Whether the treatment involves taking medication properly, making and keeping health
care appointments, or self-managing other behaviours that influence the onset, course or prognosis of
an illness; all other things being equal, success is determined by adherence behaviour. Patients, health
care providers, researchers, funders and policy-makers, all have an interest in ensuring that effective bio-
medical and behavioural therapies for chronic illnesses are “used as prescribed”
. However, empirical
studies have consistently found that levels of compliance or adherence are often far from optimal (1,2).
Because the burden of illness in the population has shifted toward chronic diseases, the problem of
poor adherence is of major concern to all stakeholders in the health care system.This is because the risk
of poor adherence increases with the duration and complexity of treatment regimens and both long
duration and complex treatment are inherent to chronic illnesses.
Across diseases,adherence is the single most important modifiable factor that compromises treatment out-
come.The best treatment can be rendered ineffective by poor adherence.Our perspective is that an under-
standing of basic behavioural principles and models of behavioural change is relevant to adherence to
treatment for all chronic medical conditions,and more helpful than a disease-specific approach to the issue.
 Behavioural science offers useful theories, models and strategies that support best-practice approaches
to delivering treatment.The effectiveness of adherence interventions based on behavioural principles
has been demonstrated in many therapeutic areas. Examples include hypertension (3), headache (4),
AIDS (5), cancer (6), heart transplantation (7,8), chronic asthma (9,10), diabetes (11), high cholesterol (12),
obesity (13) and sun-protection behaviours (14) among others. Recent research has also evaluated inter-
ventions aimed at maintaining adherence to treatments targeting substance abuse in pregnancy (15);
alcohol abuse (16); opioid addictions and methadone maintenance (17,18); substance dependence (19);
cocaine abuse (20), and tobacco smoking (21).
Decades of behavioural research and practice have yielded proven strategies for changing people’s
behaviour. Such strategies can be used to help patients with diverse medical conditions (22,23), and can
also be effective in changing the behaviour of health care providers (24) and health care systems (25).
Epidemiological research concerning the prevalence and correlates of poor adherence to treatment,
and research on adherence to treatment for specific diseases is presented in the main text of this
report. In this annex, the following are discussed from a behavioural perspective:
– the nature of poor adherence;
– a practical approach to conceptualizing and defining adherence;
– models to help explain determinants of adherence; and 
– guidelines for assessment and intervention in clinical practice.
2. The nature of poor adherence
Treatment effectiveness is determined jointly by the efficacy of the treatment agent and the extent of
adherence to the treatment. Despite the availability of efficacious interventions, nonadherence to treat-
ment remains a problem across therapeutic areas.
Adherence is a complex behavioural process determined by several interacting factors.These include
attributes of the patient, the patient’s environment (which comprises social supports, characteristics of
the health care system, functioning of the health care team, and the availability and accessibility of
health care resources) and characteristics of the disease in question and its treatment.
There are many specific aspects of treatment to which a patient may not adhere, for example:
– health-seeking behaviours (such as appointment-keeping);
– obtaining inoculations;
– medication use (use of appropriate agents, correct dosing and timing, filling
and refilling prescriptions, consistency of use, duration of use); and
– following protocols for changing behaviour (examples include modifying
diet, increasing physical activity, quitting smoking, self-monitoring of symp-
toms, safe food handling, dental hygiene, safer sex behaviours and safer
injection practices).
The most frequently cited conceptual definition of adherence is “the extent to which a person’s behav-
iour – taking medication, following a diet, executing lifestyle changes – follows medical advice”(26).
Adherence has also been defined as “the extent to which patient behaviour corresponds with recom-
mendations from a health care provider”(27,28). It has also been suggested that a more practical
approach is to define adherence as “following treatment at a level above which treatment goals are
likely to be met”
. However, these broad definitions belie the complexity of the issue.
WHO 2003
136 ❘
 In research, adherence has been operationalized in many different ways: as the degree to which a regi-
men is followed expressed as a percentage or ratio, a categorical phenomenon (e.g. good versus poor
adherence), or as an index score synthesizing multiple behaviours. However, for clinical purposes, these
definitions lack specificity, and give no clear direction for assessment and intervention.
The treatments that patients are asked to follow vary according to the nature of the demands they
impose.They range from requiring relatively simple and familiar behaviours, to more complex and
novel ones. Some treatments involve one behaviour, while others carry multiple behavioural require-
ments. Protocols also vary in terms of the length of time for which they must be followed.This means
that the nature and meaning of adherence change according to the specific treatment demands of a
particular protocol. Assessment and intervention strategies will differ according to the circumstances
and/or intensity of the recommendations. All treatments make demands of one type or another on
patients. Patients differ in their ability to meet those demands, and the resources available and the envi-
ronmental contexts outlined earlier also differ. Perhaps adherence might be better understood as
reflecting the process of efforts, occurring over the course of an illness, to meet the treatment-related
behavioural demands imposed by that illness.This behavioural conceptualization allows us to define
adherence more explicitly according to the type of behaviour, an acceptable frequency, consistency,
intensity and/or accuracy.
3. Determinants of adherence
A considerable amount of empirical, descriptive, research has identified correlates and predictors of
adherence and nonadherence.These include aspects of the complexity and duration of treatment, char-
acteristics of the illness, iatrogenic effects of treatment, costs of treatment, characteristics of health serv-
ice provision, interaction between practitioner and patient, and sociodemographic variables. Many of
these variables are static, and may not be amenable to intervention.They have been well described in
the main text of this report and will not be discussed further here.While such findings help to identify
risk factors, they tend to be discrete and atheoretical, and not very helpful in guiding a clinical approach
to this problem.
This section describes several important variables that are behavioural in nature and are also dynamic,
and therefore amenable to intervention. First we identify key behaviours of health care providers, health
system factors and attributes of patients.Then we discuss promising behavioural science theories and
models that help to explain behavioural change.These serve as helpful heuristics both for understand-
ing nonadherence and for addressing it.
A. Provider behaviours
Variables related to how health care providers interact and communicate with their patients are key
determinants of adherence and patient health outcomes (4,6,17,29,30).The health care providers pre-
scribe the medical regimen, interpret it, monitor clinical outcomes and provide feedback to patients (31).
Correlational studies have revealed positive relationships between adherence of patients to their treat-
ment and provider communication styles characterized by, providing information,“positive talk”and
asking patients specific questions about adherence (32).The clarity of diagnostic and treatment advice
has been correlated with adherence to short-term but not to long-term regimens and chronic illnesses.
Continuity of care (follow-up) is a positive correlate of adherence. Patients who view themselves as
partners in the treatment process and who are actively engaged in the care process have better adher-
ence behaviour and health outcomes (33).Warmth and empathy of the clinician emerge time and again
as being central factors (34).Their patients of providers who share information, build partnerships, and
provide emotional support have better outcomes than the patients of providers who do not interact in
this manner (35). Patients who are satisfied with their provider and medical regimen adhere more dili-
❘ 137
WHO 2003
 gently to treatment recommendations (36). Findings such as these can guide providers to create a treat-
ment relationship that reflects a partnership with their patients and supports the discussion of thera-
peutic options, the negotiation of the regimen and clear discussion of adherence.
Health care providers often try to supply information to patients and to motivate them, and recognize
the importance of behavioural skills in improving health. However, there is evidence that, in practice,
they give limited information (37), lack skills in motivational enhancement (38), and lack knowledge and
experience frustration in teaching patients behavioural skills (39). More structured, thoughtful and
sophisticated interactions between provider and patient are essential if improvements in adherence are
to be realized.
B. Health system factors
The health care delivery system has great potential to influence the adherence behaviour of patients.
The policies and procedures of the health system itself control access to, and quality of, care. System
variables include the availability and accessibility of services, support for education of patients, data col-
lection and information management, provision of feedback to patients and health care providers, com-
munity supports available to patients, and the training provided to health service providers. Systems
direct providers’schedules, dictate appointment lengths, allocate resources, set fee structures and
establish organizational priorities.The functioning of the health system influences patients’behaviour
in many ways.
– Systems direct appointment length and duration of treatment, and providers
often report that their schedules allow insufficient time to address adher-
ence behaviour adequately (40).
– Health systems determine reimbursements and/or fee structures, and many
health systems lack financial coverage for patient counselling and educa-
tion: this threatens or precludes many adherence-focused interventions.
– Systems allocate resources in ways that may result in heightened stress for,
and increased demands upon, providers and that have, in turn, been associ-
ated with decreased patient adherence (41).
– Systems determine continuity of care and patients demonstrate better adher-
ence when they receive care from the same provider over time (42).
– Systems direct information sharing – the ability of clinics and pharmacies to
share information regarding patients’behaviour towards prescription refills
has the potential to improve adherence.
– Systems determine the level of communication with patients – ongoing com-
munication efforts (e.g. telephone contacts) that keep the patient engaged
in health care may be the simplest and most cost-effective strategy for
improving adherence (43).
C. Patient attributes
Patient characteristics have been the focus of numerous investigations of adherence. However, age, sex,
education, occupation, income, marital status, race, religion, ethnic background, and urban versus rural
living have not been definitely associated with adherence (26,44). Similarly, the search for the stable
personality traits of a typical nonadherent patient has been futile – there is no one pattern of patient
characteristics predictive of nonadherence (34,42).With the exception of extreme disturbances of func-
tioning and motivation, personality variables have not emerged as significant predictors. Recent studies
of patients with mental health problems have provided evidence that depression and anxiety are pre-
WHO 2003
138 ❘
 dictive of adherence to medical recommendations (45–48). Almost everyone has difficulty adhering to
medical recommendations, especially when the advice entails self-administered care.
Illness-relevant cognitions, perceptions of disease factors, and beliefs about treatment have stronger
relationships to adherence. In particular, factors such as perceived susceptibility to illness, perceived
severity of illness, self-efficacy and perceived control over health behaviours appear to be correlates
(26,49). For adherence to occur, symptoms must be sufficiently severe to arouse the need for adherence,
be perceived as being resolvable and acute, and remedial action must effect a rapid and noticeable
reduction in symptoms (50).
Knowledge about an illness is not a correlate of nonadherence, but specific knowledge about elements
of a medication regimen is, although apparently only for short-term, acute illnesses (51). Some of the
above variables, and several others, form the basis of various theories and models of behaviour change
and we now turn our attention to these.
4. Models
Leventhal and Cameron (52) provided a very useful overview of the history of adherence research.They
outlined five general theoretical perspectives on adherence:
– biomedical perspective;
– behavioural perspective;
– communication perspective;
– cognitive perspective; and
– self-regulatory perspective.
The biomedical model of health and illness remains a dominant perspective in many health care set-
tings and organizations.The biomedical approach to adherence assumes that patients are more-or-less
passive followers of their doctor’s orders, further to a diagnosis and prescribed therapy (52,53). Non-
adherence is understood in terms of characteristics of the patient (personality traits, sociodemographic
background), and patient factors are seen as the targets of efforts to improve adherence.This approach
has helped to elucidate the relationships between disease and treatment characteristics on the one
hand, and adherence on the other.Technological innovations (e.g. assessing levels of adherence using
biochemical measures, developing new devices to administer medications) have had this as their impe-
tus. However, other important factors, such as patients’views about their symptoms or their medica-
tions have been largely ignored.
Behavioural (learning) theory emphasizes the importance of positive and negative reinforcement as a
mechanism for influencing behaviour, and this has immediate relevance for adherence.
– The most basic, but powerful, principle is that of antecedents and conse-
quences and their influence on behaviour (i.e. operant learning) (54,55).
– Antecedents, or preceding events, are internal (thoughts) or external (envi-
ronmental cues) circumstances that elicit a behaviour.
– Consequences, or expected consequences, that can be conceptualized as
rewards or punishments, also influence behaviour.
– The probability of a patient, provider, or health care system initiating or con-
tinuing a behaviour partially depends on what happens before and after the
behaviour occurs.
❘ 139
WHO 2003
 – From a theoretical standpoint it would be possible to “control”the behav-
iour of patients, providers and health care systems if one could control the
events preceding and following a specific behaviour. From a practical stand-
point, behavioural principles can be used to design interventions that have
the potential to incrementally shape behaviour at each level of influence (i.e.
patient, provider and system) to address adherence problems.
Communication perspectives that emerged in the 1970s encouraged health care providers to try to
improve their skills in communicating with their patients.This led to emphasis being placed on the
importance of developing rapport, educating patients, employing good communication skills and stress-
ing the desirability of a more equal relationship between patient and health professional. Although this
approach has been shown to influence satisfaction with medical care, convincing data about its positive
effects on compliance are scarce (56). Adopting a warm and kind style of interaction with a patient is
necessary, but is insufficient in itself to effect changes in the adherence behaviours of patients.
Various models emphasizing cognitive variables and processes have been applied to adherence behav-
iour (53). Examples of these include the health belief model (57), social–cognitive theory (58), the theory
of planned behaviour (and its precursor, the theory of reasoned action) (59), and the protection–motiva-
tion theory (60). Although these approaches have directed attention to the ways in which patients con-
ceptualize health threats and appraise factors that may be barriers to, or facilitate, adherence they do
not always address behavioural coping skills well.
Self-regulation perspectives attempt to integrate environmental variables and the cognitive responses
of individuals to health threats into the self-regulatory model (61,62).The essence of the model pertains
to the central importance of the cognitive conceptualization of a patient (or a patient-to-be (63) of a
health threat or an illness. Illness representations (the ideas patients have about the diseases they suf-
fer) and coping are seen as mediating between the health threat and the action taken. Recent empirical
studies seem to lend support to the importance of illness cognitions in predicting adherence (64–66).
Patients create personal representations of health threats and models of the illness and its treatment,
and it is these that guide their decision-making and behaviour.Thus, adherence requires an appropriate
model and the belief that one can manage one’s own environment and behaviour, specific coping skills,
and a belief that the issue requires one’s attention and the modification of one’s behaviour.
Although these theories and models provide a conceptual framework for organizing thoughts about
adherence and other health behaviours, each has its advantages and disadvantages and no single
approach may be readily translated into a comprehensive understanding of, and intervention for, adher-
ence. More recent approaches that are more specific to health behaviours and the demands of follow-
ing recommended health practices may provide more helpful frameworks.
Meichenbaum and Turk (42) suggested that four interdependent factors operate on adherence behav-
iour and that a deficit in any one contributes to risk of nonadherence.
– knowledge and skills: about the health problem and self-regulation behav-
iours required, their mechanisms of action, and the importance of adherence;
– beliefs: perceived severity and susceptibility (relevance), self-efficacy, out-
come expectations, and response costs;
– motivation: value and reinforcement, internal attribution of success (positive
outcomes are reinforcing, negative results seen not as failure, but rather as
an indication to reflect on and modify behaviour);
– action: stimulated by relevant cues, driven by information recall, evaluation
and selection of behavioural options and available resources.
WHO 2003
140 ❘
 The recently developed information–motivation–behavioural skills model (IMB model) (67,68), bor-
rowed elements from earlier work to construct a conceptually based, generalizable, and simple model
to guide thinking about complex health behaviours.The IMB constructs, and how they pertain to
patient adherence, are outlined below.
– Information is the basic knowledge about a medical condition that might
include how the disease develops, its expected course and effective strate-
gies for its management.
– Motivation encompasses personal attitudes towards the adherence behav-
iour, perceived social support for such behaviour, and the patients’subjec-
tive norm or perception of how others with this medical condition might
behave.
– Behavioural skills include ensuring that the patient has the specific behav-
ioural tools or strategies necessary to perform the adherence behaviour
such as enlisting social support and other self-regulation strategies.
Note that information, motivation and behavioural skills must directly pertain to the desired behaviour-
al outcome; they have to be specific.
Interventions based on this model have been effective in influencing behavioural change across a vari-
ety of clinical applications (67–69). In both prospective and correlational studies, the information, moti-
vation and behavioural skills constructs have accounted for an average of 33% of the variance in behav-
iour change (68).
Figure 1
Information-motivation-behavioural skills model
The IMB model demonstrates that information is a prerequisite for changing behaviour, but in itself is
insufficient to achieve this change (70). Motivation and behavioural skills are critical determinants and
are independent of behaviour change (67,68). Information and motivation work largely through behav-
ioural skills to affect behaviour; however, when the behavioural skills are familiar or uncomplicated,
information and motivation can have direct effects on behaviour (see diagram). In this case, a patient
might fill a prescription (a simple, familiar behaviour) based on information given by the provider.The
relationship between the information and motivation constructs is weak. In practical terms, a highly
motivated person may have little information, or a highly informed person may have low motivation.
However, in the IMB model, the presence of both information and motivation increase the likelihood of
adherence.
❘ 141
WHO 2003
Information
Motivation
Behavioral Skills
Behavior Change
 The stages-of-change model (SOC – also referred to as the transtheoretical model) identifies five stages
through which individuals progress as they change behaviours, and stage-matched strategies that pre-
dict progress to each subsequent stage of change (71,72).The stages of change are: precontemplation
(not considering changing behaviour in the next 6 months), contemplation (considering changing
behaviour in the next 6 months), preparation (planning to change behaviour during the next 30 days),
action (currently changing behaviour) and maintenance (successful behaviour change for at least 6
months). Stages of change describe an individual’s motivational readiness to change.
The SOC model is useful for understanding and predicting intentional behaviour change. Most patients at
one time or another make unintentional errors in taking their medication because of forgetfulness or mis-
understanding of instructions. However, intentional non-adherence is a significant problem, particularly
among patients with conditions requiring long-term therapy such as asthma, hypertension and diabetes.
Stage of change is an indicator of an individual’s motivation to change, and is a powerful predictor of
behaviour (73–75), but variables that explain behavioural change are needed to develop actionable,
effective strategies to help people change.The SOC model has proven useful in this regard because it
utilizes key psychological constructs to characterize individuals at different levels of readiness for
change. Some of these constructs are: decisional balance, temptation to relapse, and processes or
strategies for change (76).These constructs are briefly summarized below.
Decisional balance. Decisional balance consists of the pros and cons of behaviour change. Longitudinal
research has established a characteristic relationship between stage of change and the pros and cons
(77,78).The pros of healthy behaviour are low in the early stages of change and increase as stage of
change increases. Conversely, the cons of the healthy behaviour are high in the early stages of change
and decrease as stage of change increases.The positive aspects of changing behaviour begin to out-
weigh the negative aspects of change late in the contemplation stage or early in the preparation stage.
Scales measuring pros and cons are particularly useful when intervening with individuals in early stages
of change (precontemplation, contemplation and preparation) because decisional balance is an excel-
lent indicator of an individual’s readiness to move out of the precontemplation stage (74,78,79).
Temptation to relapse.The degree of temptation associated with situations that present a challenge for
maintaining behavioural change is a concept based upon the coping models of relapse and mainte-
nance. Situational temptation to engage in unhealthy behaviour is often viewed as an important com-
panion construct to measures of confidence or self-efficacy. Confidence and temptation function
inversely across stages of change (80), and temptation predicts relapse better (81). Scores on temptation
are generally highest in the precontemplation stage, decreasing linearly from the precontemplation to
maintenance stages (81).
Strategies for change. The SOC model identifies specific strategies or processes of change that are asso-
ciated with successful movement from one stage to the next.The strategies for change outlined in the
SOC theory are based upon components of several theoretical models in behavioural science. Each of
the strategies for change is categorized as either experiential or behavioural in nature (82). Experiential
strategies reflect cognitive, evaluative and affective planning for change whereas behavioural strategies
reflect observable change strategies such as using reminders or rewards (73).
Specific strategies for change are useful for intervening with individuals in particular stages of change;
individuals who are thinking about change need different strategies from those who are actively
involved in change.
Tailored interventions provide individualized information based upon a specific theoretical framework,
demographic characteristics or a combination of variables.There is evidence that tailored communica-
tions are more effective for influencing health behaviours than non-tailored materials (83), and compar-
isons of stage-tailored versus non-tailored interventions have shown that tailoring resulted in increased
efficacy in influencing health behaviours (84).
WHO 2003
142 ❘
 A recent review found that interventions to improve adherence to medication were more effective
when they included multiple components such as more convenient care, information, counselling,
reminders, self-monitoring, reinforcement or family therapy (43). SOC tailoring may be a useful strategy
for implementing complex, multi-component interventions in a cost-effective manner. Identification of
stage of change can help determine the most relevant intervention components for each person, thus
eliminating the need to deliver all intervention components to all patients.The availability of valid
measures to assess stage of change provides a foundation for the development of stage-matched inter-
ventions for the promotion of adherence to medication. Stage-tailored communication has been shown
to be an effective method for changing health behaviour, but has yet to be applied to the problem of
nonadherence with medication.
5. Interventions
The “state-of-the-art”adherence interventions target the patient, the provider, and the health care sys-
tem. Several programmes have demonstrated good results using multilevel team approaches (85–87).
Adequate evidence exists to support the utility of innovative, modified health care system teams in
addressing the problem (25,88).
However, research on interventions to promote adherence has focused largely on modifying patient
behaviour. According to several published reviews on adherence, no single intervention targeting
patient behaviour is effective, and the most promising methods of improving adherence behaviour use
a combination of the strategies listed below (89–91):
– patient education (92);
– behavioural skills (93,94);
– self-rewards (95);
– social support (96); and
– telephone follow-up (97).
Various combinations of these techniques have been shown to increase adherence and improve treat-
ment outcomes. However, even the most efficacious patient-focused interventions have no substantial
effects on adherence behaviour over the long term (43) and few randomized controlled trials targeting
patient adherence behaviour have been reported (91).
A. Patient interventions
The most effective adherence-enhancing interventions directed at patients aim to enhance self-regula-
tion or self-management capabilities. Self-management programmes offered to patients with chronic
diseases can improve health status and reduce health care utilization and costs. Some data suggest a
cost-to-savings ratio of 1:10 (98). Such approaches are grounded in basic principles of learning (99,100).
This is critical in the management of patients with chronic illness, as over the long term patients must
rely on unassisted effort and self-regulation to maintain their behaviour. Several strategies appear to be
effective, at least in the short term.These include:
– self-monitoring;
– goal-setting;
– stimulus control;
– behavioural rehearsal;
– corrective feedback;
❘ 143
WHO 2003
 – behavioural contracting;
– commitment enhancement;
– creating social support;
– reinforcement; and
– relapse prevention.
Since the early 1980s there has been sufficient evidence to support the use of these strategies.These
are most effective when used as components of multi-modal programmes and implemented in an indi-
vidualized tailored manner, including creating social support, reorganization of the service-delivery
environment, increasing accessibility of services, and a collaborative treatment relationship.
A meta-analysis of 28 studies revealed that the key intervention components were providing reinforce-
ment for patients’efforts to change, providing feedback on progress, tailoring education to patients’
needs and circumstances, teaching skills and providing access to resources, and continuity of care
(proactive) (101). An earlier review, Garrity & Garrity (102) identified four intervention themes associated
with successful outcomes: active patient theme (promote self-care), social support theme (help in meet-
ing illness-related demands), fear arousal theme (increase concern about the consequences of the dis-
ease), and patient instruction theme.The self-care (contingency contracting element) and social sup-
port themes were associated with the strongest effects on treatment outcome.
There has been little research on the most effective methods for improving adherence to recommend-
ed treatment in children. Education alone does not promote the desired patient outcomes and the for-
mat of the educational programme may be less important than the actual presentation and under-
standing of the information (103). However, when behavioural strategies were used in conjunction with
patient education, adherence to recommended treatment improved by an average of 25% (104). Multi-
component behavioural strategies that have been found to be successful in promoting adherence
include self-monitoring, contingency contracting, reinforcing, tailoring and cueing. In addition, individ-
ual rather than group educational sessions can be better adapted to the specific needs of a child and
his or her family, and are therefore anticipated to have a greater impact on outcomes (105).There is a
need for research to identify and test developmentally-appropriate interventions to remedy the prob-
lem of paediatric nonadherence and improve health care outcomes for children.
The need for research to further our understanding of the differences in adherence behaviour at differ-
ent stages of development has been only partially met.While some progress has been made in under-
standing and modifying adherence among paediatric populations there remains much to be learned.
The research to date has suffered from a lack of methodological rigour and attention to theoretically-
based investigations, particularly the utilization of developmentally-based theory to guide adherence
interventions. Children are not small adults; children and adolescents have specific needs that differ
from those of their adult counterparts. Advances in the area of adherence will be dependent upon:
– designing and testing tools for objectively measuring adherence that are
non-intrusive (e.g. electronic monitoring), and that children and adolescents
are willing and able to use;
– addressing psychosocial and family factors that modify adherence in chil-
dren and adolescents;
– designing and testing age- and disease-specific quality-of-life scales for chil-
dren and adolescents; and 
– designing and testing educational and behavioural strategies appropriate
for children and adolescents.
WHO 2003
144 ❘
 The desired outcome is for practitioners to tailor scientifically-based adherence interventions to the
developmental stage of the patient. As interdisciplinary expertise is brought to bear on developing sci-
entifically-based policy for addressing the developmental aspects of adherence and managing care, the
gaps in the understanding of nonadherence should begin to close.
B. Interventions directed to providers
Because providers have such a significant role in adherence, designing interventions to influence their
behaviour seems a reasonable strategy. However, few investigations on this subject have been reported
in the literature.Training providers in patient-centred methods of care may be effective, but the
strongest effects of such training appear to be on patient satisfaction with treatment. Some recent
studies suggest that adherence interventions based on behavioural principles can be successfully
implemented by social workers and nurses (106,107). Studies of physicians trained to use goal-setting,
feedback and ongoing education reveal better patient outcomes, though such studies have seldom
measured adherence as an outcome.
C. Health system 
Interventions in the health system are higher order interventions affecting health policy; organization
and financing of care and quality of care programmes. One example is the creation and adoption of
chronic care models of service delivery, which, at least in patients with diabetes and asthma, have been
shown to result in better patient outcomes. However the extent to which these models are related to
adherence is not yet clear.
6. Conclusions
Nonadherence to treatment is a problem of increasing concern to all stakeholders in the health system.
Since the early 1970s, the extent and consequences of poor adherence have been well documented in
terms of impact on population health and health expenditure. Poor adherence limits the potential of
efficacious treatments to improve patients’health and quality of life.This is a particular problem in the
context of the chronic conditions that currently dominate the burden of illness in our society. Across
health disciplines, providers experience considerable frustration over the high proportion of their
patients who fail to follow treatment recommendations.
Adherence is a behavioural problem observed in patients, but with causes beyond the patient. It occurs
in the context of treatment-related demands that the patient must attempt to cope with.These
demands are characterized by the requirement to learn new behaviours, alter daily routines, tolerate
discomforts and inconveniences, and persist in doing so while trying to function effectively in their vari-
ous life-roles (108–110).While there is no behavioural magic bullet, there is substantial evidence identify-
ing effective strategies for changing behaviour.
Practitioners (and other health enablers) often assume that the patient is, or should be, motivated by his
or her illness to follow a treatment protocol. However, recent research in the behavioural sciences
reveals this assumption to be erroneous. In fact, the patient population can be segmented according to
level-of-readiness to follow health recommendations.The lack of concordance between patient readi-
ness and practitioner behaviour means that treatments are frequently offered to patients who are not
ready to follow them.This reflects an understandable bias towards treating the biomedical problem
and an under-emphasis on addressing the behavioural requirements of the treatment protocol.
Prochaska (71) argued that people move through stages of increasing readiness to follow recommenda-
tions as they develop the motivation and skills required to change their behaviour.The SOC model pro-
vides a sensible and clear framework upon which to tailor treatment to patients’needs, and organize
the delivery of the range of cognitive and behavioural interventions that are supported by the evidence
❘ 145
WHO 2003
 base. Miller and Rollnick (111) noted that motivation to adhere to treatment is influenced by the value
that a person places on following the regimen (cost–benefit ratio) and their degree of confidence in
being able to follow it. If either the perceived value of adhering, or confidence, is low the likelihood of
adherence will also be low.
First-line interventions to optimize adherence can go beyond the provision of advice. Building on a
patient’s intrinsic motivation by increasing the perceived importance of adherence, and strengthening
confidence by intervening at the level of self-management skills are behavioural treatment targets that
must be addressed concurrently with biomedical ones if overall effectiveness of treatment is to be
improved.This approach offers a way of increasing the sophistication of the adherence interventions
offered to patients. Pharmacists, case managers, health educators and others involved in patient care
should be made familiar with these basic concepts. Non-physician providers have an important role to
play and an opportunity to dramatically improve health by specifically targeting issues of patient
adherence.
In every situation in which patients are required to administer their own treatment, nonadherence is
likely. Consequently, the risk for nonadherence for all patients should be assessed as part of the treat-
ment-planning process and their adherence should be monitored as part of treatment follow-up.The
traditional approach has been to wait to identify those patients who demonstrate nonadherence and
then try to “fix”the problem.The risk for nonadherence is ever present. Interventions based on non-
adherence risk-stratification should be offered from the start, as opposed to using a stepped-care
approach.
Poor adherence persists largely because it is a complex problem and is resistant to generic approaches
to dealing with it. Adherence-promoting interventions are not consistently implemented in practice;
practitioners report lack of time, lack of knowledge, lack of incentives and lack of feedback on perform-
ance as barriers. Clearly, non-adherence is not simply a “patient”problem. At the points of initial contact
and follow-up, providers can have a significant impact by assessing risk and delivering interventions to
optimize adherence.To make this way of practice a reality, practitioners must have access to specific
training in adherence management, and the systems in which they work must design and support
delivery systems that respect this objective. Health care providers can learn to assess the potential for
nonadherence, and to detect in their patients.They can then use this information to implement brief
interventions to encourage and support progress towards adherence.
Interventions aimed at particular diseases need to target the most influential and core determinants
among the various factors. Given available resources, these targets will invariably be the patient and
provider, at least in the immediate term. Disease-specific protocols for patients can be tailored to their
needs. Practitioner protocols can convey the key requirements for the creation of optimal treatment
relationships and behaviour assessment and management skills. Beyond this, the system in which
providers work must be organized in such a way as to enable a consistent and systematic focus on
adherence. A major focus for future research should be the clarification of the best mode, or modes, of
delivering adherence interventions.There are many points of contact with patients and times at which
such interventions are required, and delivering them outside the traditional health system may
enhance their overall effectiveness.
WHO 2003
146 ❘
 ❘ 147
WHO 2003
7. References
1. Bloom BS.Daily regimen and compliance with treatment. British Medical
Journal,2001,323:647.
2. Myers LB,Midence K. Adherence to treatment in medical conditions.
Amsterdam,Harwood Academic,1998.
3. Burnier M,Brunner HR.Impact on clinical outcomes.Compliance in health-
care and research.Monograph series.Armonk,NY,Blackwell,2001:299–309.
4. Scopp A.Clear communication skills with headache patients. Headache
Quarterly,2000,11:269–274.
5. Rudman LA,Gonzales MH,Borgida E.Mishandling the gift of life:
Noncompliance in renal transplant patients. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology,1999,29:834–851.
6. Wright S.Patient satisfaction in the context of cancer care. Irish Journal of
Psychology,1998,19:274–282.
7. Dew MA.Behavioral factors in heart transplantation:Quality of life and med-
ical compliance. Journal of Applied Biobehavioral Research,1994,2:28–54.
8. Harper RG et al.Self-report evaluation of health behavior,stress vulnerability,
and medical outcome of heart transplant recipients. Psychosomatic Medicine,
1998,60:563–569.
9. Godding V,Kruth M,Jamart J.Joint consultation for high-risk asthmatic chil-
dren and their families,with pediatrician and child psychiatrist as co-thera-
pists:model and evaluation. Family Process,1997,36:265–280.
10. Wamboldt FS et al.Parental criticism and treatment outcome in adolescents
hospitalized for severe,chronic asthma. Journal of Psychosomatic Research,
1995,39:995–1005.
11. Romero MI,Portilla L,Martin E.El apoyo social y su papel en la Diabetes
Mellitus:consideraciones teoricas y resultados.[Social support,its role in dia-
betes mellitus:Theoretical considerations and results.] Avances en Psicologia
Clinica Latinoamericana,1992,10:81–86.
12. Wilson MG,Edmunson J.Characteristics of adherers of a worksite cholesterol
intervention program.Health Values,1993,17:10–20.
13. Burnett KF,Taylor CB,Agras WS.Ambulatory computer-assisted behavior
therapy for obesity:An empirical model for examining behavioral correlates
of treatment outcome. Computers in Human Behavior,1992,8:2–3.
14. Cockburn J et al.Behavioural dynamics of a clinical trial of sunscreens for
reducing solar keratoses in Victoria,Australia. Journal of Epidemiology and
Community Health,1997,51:716–721.
15. Clark HW.Residential substance abuse treatment for pregnant and postpar-
tum women and their children:treatment and policy implications. Child
Welfare,2001,80:179–198.
16. Mattson ME et al.Compliance with treatment and follow-up protocols in
project MATCH:predictors and relationship to outcome. Alcoholism:Clinical
and Experimental Research,1998,22:1328–1339.
17. Abbott PJ et al.Retrospective analyses of additional services for methadone
maintenance patients.Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment,1999,
17:129–137.
18. Griffith JD et al.Implications of family and peer relations for treatment
engagement and follow-up outcomes:An integrative model. Psychology of
Addictive Behaviors,1998,12:113–126.
19. Grella CE et al.Patient histories,retention,and outcome models for younger
and older adults in DATOS. Drug and Alcohol Dependence,1999,57:151–166.
20. Hoffman JA et al.Psychosocial treatments for cocaine abuse.12-month treat-
ment outcomes.Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment,1996,13:3–11.
21. Whitlock EP et al.Does gender affect response to a brief clinic-based smok-
ing intervention? American Journal of Preventive Medicine,1997,
13:159–166.
22. Dunbar-Jacob J,Burke LE,Pyczynski S.Clinical assessment and management
of adherence to medical regiments.In:Nicassio PM,Smith TW,eds. Managing
chronic illness:A biopsychosocial perspective.Washington,DC,American
Psychological Association,1995.
23. Nessman DG,Carnahan JE,Nugent CA.Increasing compliance.Patient-operat-
ed hypertension groups.Archives of Internal Medicine,1980,140:1427–1430.
24. Oxman AD et al.No magic bullets:a systematic review of 102 trials of inter-
ventions to improve professional practice. CMAJ (Canadian Medical
Association Journal),1995,153:1423–1431.
25. DeBusk RF et al.A case-management system for coronary risk factor modifi-
cation after acute myocardial infarction. Annals of Internal Medicine,1994,
120:721–729.
26. Haynes RB. Determinants of compliance:The disease and the mechanics of
treatment.Compliance in health care.Baltimore,MD,Johns Hopkins University
Press,1979.
27. Rand CS.Measuring adherence with therapy for chronic diseases:implica-
tions for the treatment of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia.
American Journal of Cardiology,1993,72:68D–74D.
28. Vitolins MZ et al.Measuring adherence to behavioral and medical interven-
tions. Controlled Clinical Trials,2000,21:188S–194S.
29. Brown VJ.The association of concordance between physician and patient
medical concepts and patient satisfaction,compliance and medical out-
comes. Humanities and Social Sciences,1994,54:2632.
30. Horne R.Patients’beliefs about treatment:the hidden determinant of treat-
ment outcome? Journal of Psychosomatic Research,1999,47:491–495.
31. Interventions to improve adherence to medical regimens in the elderly.
Washington,DC,Center for the Advancement of Health,National Institute on
Aging,1999.
32. Hall JA,Roter DL,Katz NR.Meta-analysis of correlates of provider behavior 
in medical encounters.Medical Care,1988,26:657–675.
33. Schulman BA.Active patient orientation and outcomes in hypertensive treat-
ment:application of a socio-organizational perspective. Medical Care,1979,
17:267–280.
34. Dunbar J,Agras W.Compliance with medical instructions.In:Ferguson J,
Taylor C,eds.The comprehensive handbook of behavioural medicine.
New York,Springer,1980:115–145.
35. Stewart MA.Effective physician–patient communication and health out-
comes:A review. Canadian Medical Association Journal,1996,153:1423.
36. Whitcher-Alagna S.Receiving medical help:A psychosocial perspective on
patient reactions.In:Nadler A,Fisher JD,DePaulo BM,eds. New directions in
helping.New York,Academic Press,2002.
37. Waitzkin H,Stoeckle JD.Information control and the micropolitics of health
care. Social Science and Medicine,1976,10:263–276.
38. Botelho RJ,Skinner H.Motivating change in health behavior.Implications 
for health promotion and disease prevention. Primary Care:Clinics In Office
Practice,1995,22:565–589.
39. Alto WA.Prevention in practice. Primary Care:Clinics In Office Practice,1995,
22:543–554.
40. Ammerman AS et al.Physician-based diet counseling for cholesterol reduction:
current practices,determinants,and strategies for improvement. Preventive
Medicine,1993,22:96–109.
41. DiMatteo MR,DiNicola DD. Achieving patient compliance.New York,
Pergamon,1982.
42. Meichenbaum D,Turk DC. Facilitating treatment adherence:A practitioner’s
guidebook,New York,Plenum Press,1987.
 43. Haynes RB,McKibbon KA,Kanani R.Systematic review of randomised trials 
of interventions to assist patients to follow prescriptions for medications.
Lancet,1996,348:383–386 [erratum published in Lancet,1997,349:1180].
44. Kaplan RM,Simon HJ.Compliance in medical care:Reconsideration of self-
predictions. Annals of Behavioral Medicine,1990,12:66-71.
45. Chesney M,et al.Not what the doctor ordered:Challenges individuals face in
adhering to medical advice/treatment. Congressional Briefing.Washington,
DC,Consortium of Social Science Associations,1999.
46. DiMatteo MR,Lepper HS,Croghan TW.Depression is a risk factor for noncom-
pliance with medical treatment:meta-analysis of the effects of anxiety and
depression on patient adherence.Archives of Internal Medicine,2000,
160:2101–2107.
47. Lustman PJ et al.Effects of alprazolam on glucose regulation in diabetes.
Results of double-blind,placebo-controlled trial. Diabetes Care,1995,
18:1133–1139.
48. Ziegelstein RC et al.Patients with depression are less likely to follow recom-
mendations to reduce cardiac risk during recovery from a myocardial infarc-
tion. Archives of Internal Medicine,2000,160:1818–1823.
49. Becker M,Rosenstock I.Compliance with medical advice.In:Steptoe A,
Mathews A,eds. Health care and human behaviour.London,Academic Press,
1984:175–208.
50. Turk D,Salovey P
,Litt M.Adherence:a cognitive behavioural perspective.
In:Gerber K,Nehemkis A,eds. Compliance:the dilemma of the chronically ill.
New York,Springer,1986:44–72.
51. Kirscht J,Rosenstock I.Patient’s problems in following recommendations of
health experts.In:Stone C,eds. Health Psychology.San Francisco,Jossey-Bass,
1979:189–216.
52. Leventhal H,Cameron L.Behavioral theories and the problem of compliance.
Patient Education and Counseling,1987,10:117–138.
53. Horne R,Weinman J.Predicting treatment adherence:an overview of theo-
retical models.In Myers LB,Midence K,eds. Adherence to treatment in medical
conditions.UK,Harwood Academic,1998.
54. Skinner BF.The behavior of organisms.New York,Appleton-Century-Crofts,
1938.
55. Skinner BF. Science and human behavior.New York,Free Press-Macmillan,
1953:23–42.
56. Ley P. Communicating with patients.Croom Helm,London,1988.
57. Becker M,Maiman L.Patient perceptions and compliance;recent studies of
the Health Belief Model.In:Haynes RB,Taylor DW,Sackett DL,eds. Compliance
in health care.Baltimore,MD,Johns Hopkins University Press,1979:78–112.
58. Bandura AJ,Simon KM.The role of proximal intentions in self-regulation 
of refractory behavior.Cognitive Therapy and Research,1977,1:177–184.
59. Ajzen I,Fishbein M. Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior,
Englewood Cliffs,NY,Prentice Hall,1980.
60. Rogers R,Prentice-Dunn S.Protection Motivation Theory.In:Gochman G,eds.
Handbook of health behavior research:Vol.1.Determinants of health behavior:
Personal and social.New York,NY,Plenum,1997.
61. Leventhal H,Leventhal EA,Cameron L.Representations,procedures,and
affect in illness self-regulation:A perceptual-cognitive model.In:Baum A,
Singer JE,eds. Handbook of health psychology.Mahwah,NJ,Erlbaum,
2001:19–47.
62. Leventhal H,Leventhal EA,Contrada RJ.Self-regulation,health,and behavior:
A perceptual-cognitive approach. Psychology and Health,1998,13:717–733.
63. Petrie KJ et al.Thoroughly modern worries:the relationship of worries about
modernity to reported symptoms,health and medical care utilization.
Journal of Psychosomatic Research,2001,51:395–401.
64. Kaptein AA,Scharloo M,Weinman JA.Assessing illness perceptions.In:
Vingerhoets A,ed.Assessment in behavioral medicine and health psychology.
London,Psychology Press,2001:179–194.
65. Scharloo M et al.Illness perceptions,coping and functioning in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis,chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and psoriasis.
Journal of Psychosomatic Research,1998,44:573–585.
66. Schmaling KB,Blume AW,Afari N.A randomized controlled pilot study of moti-
vational interviewing to change attitudes about adherence to medications for
asthma. Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings,2001,8:167–172.
67. Fisher JD,Fisher WA.Changing AIDS-risk behavior. Psychological Bulletin,
1992,111:455–474.
68. Fisher JD et al.Changing AIDS risk behavior:effects of an intervention
emphasizing AIDS risk reduction information,motivation,and behavioral
skills in a college student population. Health Psychology,1996,15:114–123.
69. Carey MP et al.Enhancing motivation to reduce the risk of HIV infection for
economically disadvantaged urban women. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology,1997,65:531–541.
70. Mazzuca SA.Does patient education in chronic disease have therapeutic
value? Journal of Chronic Diseases,1982,35:521–529.
71. Prochaska JO,DiClemente CC,Norcross JC.In search of how people change.
Applications to addictive behaviors. American Psychologist,1992,
47:1102–1114.
72. Prochaska JO.Strong and weak principles for progressing from precontem-
plation to action. Health Psychology,1992,13:47–51.
73. Prochaska JO,Redding C,Evers K.The Transtheoretical Model.In:Glanz KLF,
Rimer BK,eds. Health behavior and health education:theory,research,and
practice.San Francisco,Jossey-Bass,1997.
74. Redding,CA.Et al.Health behavior models.In:Hyner GC et al.,eds. SPM
handbook of health assessment tools.Pittsburgh,PA,Society of Prospective
Medicine and Institute for Health and Productivity Management,1999.
75. Velicer WF et al.Testing 40 predictions from the transtheoretical model.
Addictive Behaviors,1999,24:455–469.
76. Willey C.Behavior-changing methods for improving adherence to medication.
Current Hypertension Reports,1999,1:477–481.
77. Rakowski W,Fulton JP
,Feldman JP.Women’s decision making about mam-
mography:a replication of the relationship between stages of adoption and
decisional balance. Health Psychology,1993,12:209–214.
78. Prochaska JO.Strong and weak principles for progressing from precontem-
plation to action on the basis of twelve problem behaviors. Health
Psychology,1994,13:47–51.
79. Prochaska JO et al.Stages of change and decisional balance for 12 problem
behaviors. Health Psychology,1994,13:39–46.
80. Velicer WF et al.Relapse situations and self efficacy:an integrative model.
Addictive Behavior,1990,15:271–283.
81. DiClemente CC et al.The process of smoking cessation:an analysis of 
precontemplation,contemplation,and preparation stages of change.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,1991,59:295–304.
82. Prochaska JO et al.Measuring processes of change:applications to the 
cessation of smoking.Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,1988,
56:520–528.
83. Skinner CS et al.How effective is tailored print communication?
Annals of Behavioral Medicine,1999,21:290–298.
84. Campbell MK et al.Improving dietary behavior:the effectiveness of tailored
messages in primary care settings. American Journal of Public Health,1994,
84:783–787.
85. Multiple risk factor intervention trial.Risk factor changes and mortality
results.Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial Research Group. Journal of 
the American Medical Association,1982,248:1465–1477.
86. Five-year findings of the hypertension detection and follow-up program.I.
Reduction in mortality of persons with high blood pressure,including mild
hypertension.Hypertension Detection and Follow-up Program Cooperative
Group. Journal of the American Medical Association,1979,242:2562–2571.
WHO 2003
148 ❘
 ❘ 149
WHO 2003
87. Anonymous.Prevention of stroke by antihypertensive drug treatment in
older persons with isolated systolic hypertension:final results of the Systolic
Hypertension in the Elderly Program (SHEP).Journal of the American Medical
Association,1991,265:3255–3264.
88. Peters AL,Davidson MB,Ossorio RC.Management of patients with diabetes
by nurses with support of subspecialists. HMO Practice,1995,9:8–13.
89. Roter DL et al.Effectiveness of interventions to improve patient compliance:
a meta-analysis.Medical Care,1998,36:1138–1161.
90. Miller NH et al.The multilevel compliance challenge:recommendations for 
a call to action.A statement for healthcare professionals. Circulation,1997,
95:1085–1090.
91. Haynes RB et al.Interventions for helping patients follow prescriptions for
medications. Cochrane Systematic Reviews,2001.
92. Morisky DE et al.Five-year blood pressure control and mortality following
health education for hypertensive patients. American Journal of Public
Health,1983,73:153–162.
93. Oldridge NB,Jones NL.Improving patient compliance in cardiac rehabiliation:
Effects of written agreement and self-monitoring. Journal of
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation,1983,3:257–262.
94. Swain MS,Steckel SB.Influencing adherence among hypertensives.
Research Nursing and Health,1981,4:213–222.
95. Mahoney MJ,Moura NG,Wade TC.Relative efficacy of self-reward,self-pun-
ishment,and self-monitoring techniques for weight loss. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology,1973,40:404–407.
96. Daltroy LH,Godin G.The influence of spousal approval and patient perception
of spousal approval on cardiac participation in exercise programs. Journal of
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation,1989,9:363–367.
97. Taylor CB et al.Smoking cessation after acute myocardial infarction:effects 
of a nurse-managed intervention. Annals of Internal Medicine,1990,
113:118–123.
98. Holman HR et al.Evidence that an education program for self-management
of chronic disease can improve health status while reducing health care
costs:a randomized trial. Abstract Book/Association for Health Services
Research,1997,14:19–20.
99. Bandura A. Social learning theory.Englewood Cliffs,NY,Prentice Hall,1977.
100. Matarazzo JD.Behavioral health and behavioral medicine:frontiers for a
new health psychology. American Psychologist, 1980,35:807–817.
101. Mullen PD,Mains DA,Velez R.A meta-analysis of controlled trials of cardiac
patient education.Patient Education and Counseling,1992,19:143–162.
102. Garrity TF,Garrity AR.The nature and efficacy of intervention studies in the
National High Blood Pressure Education Research Program. Journal of
Hypertension 1985,(Suppl)3:S91–S95.
103. Holtzheimer LMHMI.Educating young children about asthma:Comparing
the effectiveness of a developmentally appropriate education videotape
and picture book. Child Care,Health,and Development,1998,24:85–99.
104. Burkhart P
,Dunbar-Jacob J.Adherence research in the pediatric and adoles-
cent populations:A decade in review.In:Hayman L,Mahom M,Turner R,
eds. Chronic illness in children:An evidence-based approach.New York,
Springer,2002:199–229.
105. Bender BMH.Compliance with asthma therapy:A case for shared responsi-
bility. Journal of Asthma,1996,33:199–202.
106. Rock BD,Cooper M.Social work in primary care:a demonstration student
unit utilizing practice research. Social Work in Health Care,2000,31:1–17.
107. De los Rios JL,Sanchez-Sosa JJ.Well-being and medical recovery in the criti-
cal care unit:The role of the nurse-patient interaction. Salud Mental,2002,
25:21–31.
108. Malahey B.The effects of instructions and labeling in the number of med-
ication errors made by patients at home. American Journal of Hospital
Pharmacy,1966,23:283–292.
109. Marlatt GA,George WH.Relapse prevention:introduction and overview 
of the model. British Journal of Addiction,1984,79:261–273.
110. Zola IK.Structural constraints on the doctor–patient relationship:The case
of non-compliance.In:Eisenberg L,Kleinman A,eds.The relevance of social
science for medicine.New York,D.Reidel,1981.
111. Miller W,Rollnick S. Motivational interviewing.New York,Guilford Press,1999.
 WHO 2003
150 ❘
 Annex II
A N N E X  I I
Statements by stakeholders
1. Family, community and patients’ organizations
151
2. Behavioural medicine
153
3. General practitioners/family physicians
154
4. Industry
155
5. Nurses
158
6. Pharmacists
159
7. Psychologists
160
All statements expressed here are the sole responsibility of each individual or organization. None of
these statements reflects the views of the World Health Organization on the topic discussed, or those 
of any other person or organization mentioned in this report.
The stakeholders are listed in alphabetical order, with the exception of patients, who should always
come first.
1. Family, community and patients’ organizations 
Helping people with diabetes
By P. Lefebvre, President-Elect,The International Diabetes Federation (IDF)
Diabetes today represents an unprecedented epidemic.The number of people with diabetes worldwide
is estimated to be more than 180 million, a figure likely to double in the next 20–25 years. Diabetes is
currently a disease that can be treated, but unfortunately not cured.
The International Diabetes Federation (IDF) is the global advocate for people with diabetes. It comprises
182 patients’associations in more than 140 countries.The current mission of the IDF is to work with its
member associations to enhance the lives of people with diabetes through awareness, education and
improvement of health and well-being.
 Several studies have shown that a gap presently exists between the goals recommended for diabetes
care and the care that patients actually receive. Achieving the recommended targets for diabetes con-
trol requires informed patients who are motivated to work with their health care providers.The IDF
stresses the importance of:
– helping people with diabetes, their families and communities to achieve
better control of the condition; and
– helping to train health care professionals, people with diabetes and their
families to improve management of the condition.
In this respect, the IDF fully endorses the recommendations of the WHO Adherence Report.The strategy
of the IDF for helping to improve adherence includes the identification of core strategic messages and
definition of communication objectives targeted at people with diabetes, their families and health care
professionals. Specific programmes include the development of standardized and reliable measure-
ment tools. Special emphasis is put on helping patients in developing countries and minority groups.
The IDF also stresses the need for making essential drugs, such as insulin, and monitoring material, such
as home blood-glucose monitoring, available and affordable to all people with diabetes in all countries.
The Work of the South African Depression and Anxiety Support Group
By Linda Woods, General Manager, South African Depression and Anxiety Support Group (SADASG)
Seven years have given the SADASG a long time to work on the issues of depression and anxiety and to
fulfil our goals, which have been:
Getting patients to treatment. By having a voice on the line, which is often that of someone who has
been through the feelings and emotions the patient is currently experiencing, and by being independ-
ent and trustworthy listeners we are able to give the caller the confidence to take the next step which is
to visit a professional psychiatrist or psychologist. Our referral list includes not only psychiatrists and
psychologists, but also general practitioners with the special skills needed to help patients to find the
right answers to becoming well again.
Screening. Through our counselling line which is operated from 8 a.m. to 7 p.m. on six days a week, we
have been able to give callers advice on their symptoms, whether caused by depression, bipolar disor-
der, obsessive–compulsive disorder, social phobia, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder or post-
traumatic stress disorder. Our counsellors have been trained to ask pertinent questions, to help the
caller to understand that their symptoms could be those of a real illness and to tell them what it could
possibly be.
Adherence. A voice with the time to listen to patients’concerns, their side-effects, their self-doubt, and
that can reassure them – often from first-hand experience, for example, that the side-effects they are
experiencing are transient, normal and non-threatening and will usually disappear in time.That even
though they are feeling so much better after 3 months, we would encourage them to stay on their
medication for 6 to 12 months, as recommended by WHO guidelines.
Destigmatization.Through a concerted and targeted effort we currently send out a press article every sin-
gle week.These articles include statistics and quotes from local South African experts, and guidelines on
how to get the help that patients may need.They emphasize that treatment is nothing to be ashamed
of these days.They feature patients with names, jobs, business men, and women and media personali-
ties who are not ashamed and who can confirm that mental illness is an illness just like diabetes, or
WHO 2003
152 ❘
 heart disease, or asthma, and patients can be helped. Radio programmes, television shows and the
screening of 30-second public service advertisements as well as magazine and newspaper articles help
to get our message out.Through corporate education programmes that address a diversity of compa-
nies we are able to achieve a more caring and open atmosphere in which to tackle these disorders.
Our sponsors, local and national government, industry and certain foundations have helped us play a
huge role in opening up this critical field for patients with depression and anxiety disorders throughout
South Africa.We look forward to having the continued understanding and support of local govern-
ment, with whom we could combine efforts to help patients at the community level.
Through our continued efforts, we can bring more people to treatment and improve levels of adher-
ence.Thereby we can try to prevent some of the repercussions of depression becoming the number
one illness causing death and disability in the world by 2020 as predicted by the World Bank and the
World Health Organization.
2. Behavioural medicine 
Health promotion, human behaviour and adherence to therapies
By Dr Aro Arja, Director, Education and Training Committee, International Society of Behavioural
Medicine (ISBM)
Most long-term therapies combine medication with simultaneous instructions on health habits and
lifestyle changes such as diet, physical activity and smoking cessation. Adherence to such lifestyle
changes is often as important to optimal treatment outcome as adherence to medication. Furthermore,
through lifestyle change, health promotion and disease prevention interventions can have a far-reach-
ing impact in enhancing health beyond the specific condition being treated1.
In comparison to the way in which adherence to medication has historically been addressed (in which
the target behaviour is somewhat less multidimensional, but perhaps equally broadly determined),
adherence to health-promoting or disease-preventing lifestyle changes now requires a different per-
spective.This perspective is quite broad in terms of the contexts or circumstances that directly influ-
ence these target behaviours; it requires a longer time horizon in which to evaluate benefits, considera-
tion of a wider range of multi-level interventions, and a more varied theory-base.
The context extends beyond the person to the wider society, arrangement of working conditions and
social processes. In practical terms it means that many factors outside the person, and perhaps beyond
their volitional control must be considered.The time horizon means that the availability of data having a
bearing on the effectiveness of programmes or procedures, in terms of recognizable health benefits, is
often delayed by years or decades (as in the benefits of smoking cessation).This provides a challenge
for motivation to adopt and maintain changes, especially in the absence of imminent threats to health.
The interventions needed are not only those that target the individual, but also those that act at the
level of a society, community or group, and which are conveyed through a host of different channels of
influence. For example using mass media, creating environmental changes, and regulations and laws
such as smoking bans.Thus, multi-level approaches apply here too, but their range is wider than in
compliance to medication.
❘ 153
WHO 2003
1 Tuomilehto J et al. Prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus by changes in lifestyle among subjects with impaired glucose tolerance.
New England Journal of Medicine, 2001, 344:1343–1350.
 The theoretical basis for surveillance, monitoring and intervention also requires the adoption of a wider
social and cultural framework (e.g. social marketing and communication theory) outside the individual,
family and patient–clinician relationship2. Models explaining the inter-relations between different
health-relevant behaviours, the factors that influence them, and the causal pathways of change in dif-
ferent contexts and over the life-course are needed.
Studying and enhancing adherence to preventive therapy and change towards a healthy lifestyle
require building a bridge from the person-centred approaches to adherence to medical regimens with
their traditional emphasis on individual volition and behavioural control, to the tools and concepts of
health promotion which attempt to understand and intervene in a more systemic manner.This involves
targeting causes at many levels of the processes that determine human behaviour, not just the behav-
iour of the individual.
3. General practitioners/family physicians
General practice/family medicine – our role in improving adherence
By Bjorn Gjelsvik, Hon. Secretary,World Organization of Family Doctors (Wonca), Europe Region
The general practitioner (GP) meets the patient in the first line. In many countries, the GP is the first
point of contact with the health system.
One of the main goals of a GP is to follow the chronic ill ”from birth to the grave”
, through his or her ill-
nesses.This is in contrast with second-line or hospital medicine, where the patient is seen seldom and
arbitrarily.“In hospitals patients come and go; the diseases persist. In general practice, the patients per-
sist and diseases come and go.”
Wonca is working very hard to improve quality of care. Every year, there are several Regional
Conferences where thousands of GPs meet to discuss this issue. One of the items is, of course, adher-
ence to therapy and the rational use of resources.
During the past 10 years, there has been a great wave of production of guidelines and treatment regi-
mens for chronic diseases and risk conditions.These guidelines should be based on the best available
evidence, but it is also necessary to assess their socioeconomic, ethical and political implications, and
also what impact they will have on the corps of doctors working in the field.
Important principles to improve adherence are:
– maintaining and building good doctor–patient relationships;
– in consultations, emphasizing the concept of patient-centred method
through education and research;
– strengthening the collaboration with home nurses and other services in the
care of elderly patients; and
– developing better information technology and filing services for general
practices to minimize the risk of failure.
Wonca is the most important international organization for General Practice/Family Medicine.There are
member organizations in 66 countries and Wonca is divided into Regions, covering countries connected
by geography, language and culture.
WHO 2003
154 ❘
2 Nutbeam D, Harris E.Theory in a nutshell. A guide to health promotion theory. Sydney, McGraw-Hill, 1999.
 4. Industry
How better labels and package inserts could help people increase their
adherence to therapies
By Jerome Reinstein, Director-General,World Self-Medication Industry (WSMI)
The literature on adherence to therapy has concentrated on specific therapies.There is at least one area,
however, which is applicable to adherence to all therapies: improving the usability of medicine labels
and package inserts. Along with all the specific interventions to improve adherence to therapy, the use
of written information for the patient, which has been proven to result in appropriate behaviour with
the medicine, is one that needs additional research and the application of what is already known about
medicine information design.
WHO has stated on a number of occasions that about half of medicines are not used according to best
practice. One of the reasons for this is that labels and leaflets are often not as useable as they should be.
Currently, labelling regulations are content-based.That is to say, regulators in individual countries or the
European Union decide on what should be on a label and what should be in a leaflet. Sometimes, the
regulations even state that the information should be “in consumer-understandable language”
.
However, no regulations currently require testing of labels and leaflets to determine their performance
in real-life use.That is to say the labels and leaflets are not tested by members of the public to deter-
mine whether an acceptable standard of performance has been reached. One exception to this is in
Australia where Consumer Medicines Information is performance-tested and where the contents of
labels and leaflets are in the process of being regulated on a performance-test basis.
There are universal principles for producing usable medicines information, but in practice they are not
followed by regulatory authorities. Information design principles can be used to produce labels that can
be shown to be usable by people.The steps required are:
– Scoping – defining the problem to be solved.
– Bench-marking – setting performance requirements for the design.
– Prototype development – using the best writing and layout skills to develop a
prototype.
– Testing and refinement – changing the prototype to meet performance
requirements (this process may have to be repeated several times in itera-
tive testing to reach the agreed standard).
– Specification and production – implementing the design for production and
distribution.
– Monitoring – measuring the design’s performance in use.
The application of these principles is not obvious and must be taught as a discipline. However, the prin-
ciples can be learned in a short time and can then be applied and tested in any cultural environment,
even in environments in which many people are illiterate, where communication agents such as chil-
dren or village elders can be used to transmit the information on medicines.
❘ 155
WHO 2003
 How the pharmaceutical industry can help in enhancing adherence 
to long-term therapies
By H.Bale,Director-General,International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Associations (IFPMA).
Medicines won’t work if you don’t take them. Even the best treatment plan will fail if it isn’t followed.
The most obvious consequence of nonadherence is that a person’s illness may not be relieved or cured.
According to an estimate from the Office of the United States Inspector General, every year nonadher-
ence to drug treatment results in 125 000 deaths from cardiovascular diseases such as heart attack and
stroke. In addition, up to 23% of admissions to nursing homes, 10% of hospital admissions, many visits
to doctors, many diagnostic tests and many unnecessary treatments could be avoided if people took
their drugs as directed.
Unfortunately, people often don’t take their medicines as prescribed.This nonadherence has serious
and wide-reaching outcomes, ranging from the extra cost to whoever pays for the wasted medicines
and additional treatment, to the cost to patients who will suffer avoidable illness and in serious cases,
even death. For example, missed doses of a glaucoma drug can lead to damage to the optic nerve and
blindness; missed doses of a heart drug may lead to an erratic heart rhythm and cardiac arrest; missed
doses of a high blood-pressure drug can lead to stroke; and failure to take prescribed doses of an antibi-
otic can cause an infection to flare up again and can lead to the emergence of drug-resistant bacteria.
Studies of patient behaviour show that some 50% of medicines are not taken as prescribed.There are
many reasons for this, and among the many reasons that patients give for not adhering to a treatment
plan, forgetfulness is the most common. A key question is: why do people forget? The psychological
mechanism of denial is often a reason, and sometimes something about the treatment may greatly
concern the patient, resulting in a repression of the desire to follow the prescribed treatment. Illness in
itself is a concern, and having to take medication is a constant reminder that you’re ill. Other reasons for
not adhering to a treatment plan include the cost of treatment, inconvenience and possible adverse
effects.
Studies have shown that patients are more likely to be motivated to take their medicines correctly as
prescribed when they:
– understand and accept the diagnosis;
– agree with the treatment proposed; and
– have been able to address and discuss seriously their concerns about the
specific medicines.
Ways to improve adherence. Dr Joanne Shaw, director of the Medicines Partnership project (UK), points
out that being part of the decision-making process involved in buying a home, household goods or a
new car is obvious to most people, but this may not be as obvious when getting treatment for their ill-
ness. It has been shown that people normally adhere better to their prescribed treatment if they have a
good relationship with their prescribing doctor. One reason for this is that when people participate in
their health care planning, they also assume responsibility for it and are therefore more likely to stay
with the plan. Getting clear explanations in a language they understand and understanding the ration-
ale for the treatment also help to increase adherence.
A further important issue identified by the Medicines Partnership project, is that people are more likely
to adhere if they believe that their doctor, nurse, physician assistant or pharmacist cares whether or not
they stick with the plan. Studies show that people who receive explanations from a concerned doctor
are more satisfied with the help they receive and like the doctor more; the more they like the doctor,
the better they follow a treatment plan.Written instructions help people to avoid mistakes caused by
poor recall of what the doctor said.
WHO 2003
156 ❘
 Creating a two-way relationship between patient and doctor can start with an information exchange.
By asking questions, a patient can come to terms with the severity of his or her illness and intelligently
weigh the advantages and disadvantages of a treatment plan. Misunderstandings can often be clarified
simply by talking to an informed professional. Good communication also ensures that all caregivers can
understand plans prescribed by other health care practitioners.
Patients who take responsibility for helping to monitor the good and bad effects of their treatment and
discussing concerns with health care practitioners are likely have better results from a treatment plan.
They should inform the doctor, pharmacist or nurse about unwanted or unexpected effects before
adjusting or stopping the treatment on their own. A patient often has good reasons for not following a
plan, and a doctor can make an appropriate adjustment after a frank discussion of the problem.
Patients may also form support groups for people suffering from similar conditions. Often the fact that
there are other patients trying to cope with the same problems can be helpful, and the patient support
groups can provide suggestions for coping with problems, building on the experiences of other patients.
Reasons for not adhering to a treatment plan. It is also important to try to understand the reasons for
not adhering to a prescribed treatment.The patient could be misunderstanding or misinterpreting the
instructions. Forgetting to take a medication is common, and experiencing adverse effects may be per-
ceived as worse than the disease itself, especially if the disease is asymptomatic – the treatment of high
blood pressure is a classic example of this.What may be represented as “misunderstanding or misinter-
preting or forgetting”
, could be the expression of underlying beliefs and priorities about medicines in
general, and the patient’s regimen in particular. Denying the diagnosis and the illness, and not believing
that the medicine will help are other factors. Patients may also fear adverse effects or becoming
dependent on the drug (which may lead the patient to take a “medication holiday”). Sometimes
patients may believe mistakenly – that the disease has been sufficiently treated, as is often the case
when people take antibiotics for an infection, and the symptoms disappear before all the bacteria are
eradicated. Other factors may be worries about the costs, or the patient experiences problems, for
example, difficulty swallowing tablets, opening the medicine container, or following a cumbersome
treatment plan.
For older people adherence may be a particular challenge, as they are often taking several drugs con-
currently, making it harder for them to remember when to take each of them. It is also not unlikely that
they could experience an adverse drug interaction. Doctors should take care to obtain information
about all the drugs a person is taking, not only prescription medications, but also over-the-counter
preparations.
A role for industry. The main role of the pharmaceutical industry is to develop safe and efficacious treat-
ments.The development of drugs with few side-effects and easy or easier administration would pro-
mote adherence. Because medicines are for patients and their optimal use, the industry’s role should go
beyond the traditional one of bringing the medicines to the market. Industry also has a necessary role
in helping to inform patients about their products.This should be in such a way that broader and
increased knowledge and understanding can support the patient’s relation to, and dialogue with, the
prescribing doctor and the other health professionals involved, such as nurses and pharmacists, in fol-
lowing the prescribed treatment to achieve the best outcome for both the patient and the health care
system.
❘ 157
WHO 2003
 5. Nurses
The role of the nurse in improving adherence
By Tesfamicael Ghebrehiwet, Nursing and Health Policy Consultant, International Council of Nurses (ICN)
Nonadherence to treatment regimens is a persistent challenge to nurses and other health professionals.
It is estimated that the percentage of patients who fail to adhere to prescribed regimens ranges from 20
to 80%1,2. Nurses are aware of the consequences of nonadherence and its high cost to the patient, the
community and the health care system. In addition, nurses are all too familiar with the frustrations about
treatment failures, poor health outcomes and patient dissatisfaction that accompany poor adherence.
The International Council of Nurses (ICN) estimates that there are about 12 million nurses worldwide.
And with a proper understanding of the dynamics of adherence, and techniques in assessing and moni-
toring the problems of nonadherence, these millions of nurses represent a formidable force in improving
adherence and care outcomes.Their presence in all health care settings, their closeness to people and
their large numbers combine to position nurses for sustained strategies to improve adherence.
Nursing interventions to scale up adherence need to be based on innovative approaches that involve
nurse-prescribing, patient participation in self-care, and continuous assessment and monitoring of
treatment regimens. Such approaches should foster therapeutic partnerships between patients and
nurses that are respectful of the beliefs and choices of the patient in determining when and how treat-
ment regimens are to be followed. Because much of the treatment for chronic conditions takes place in
the home and community setting, nurses can provide a link and support through home visits, telephone
and other reminders that facilitate adherence.Through sustained contact, nurses can form a therapeu-
tic alliance with patients and their families and provide ongoing support for taking the recommended
medications. Some techniques of monitoring adherence include directly observed therapy (DOT), pill
counting, thoughtful and non-judgemental interviews, and reviewing medication cabinets3.
Nursing strategies to improve adherence include:
– assessing the extent of adherence using non-threatening questions;
– asking about side-effects of medication and their effect on patient’s quality of life;
– educating patients on their illness, the importance of adherence, how the
treatment will help, possible side-effects and how deal with them;
– suggesting cues and reminders such as detailed schedules,integrating medication
times with daily habits, using medication boxes and timers, alarms, beepers, etc;
– rewarding and reinforcing adherence behaviour, for example, through charts
and graphics that show the impact of medication on clinical markers of dis-
ease: e.g. lower blood pressure, lower blood sugar, lower viral load, etc;
– encouraging the patient to cultivate therapeutic relationships with health 
professionals, and to talk with peer groups and family members.
Ensuring that treatment regimens are followed and administering medications and other treatments
are some of the key roles in nursing. Nurses have diverse skills that must be tapped in improving adher-
ence and care outcome. Continuing education programmes for nurses and other health professionals
can improve their competence and awareness about the importance of adherence in health care.
WHO 2003
158 ❘
1,2 Cramer JA et al. How often is medication taken as prescribed? A novel assessment technique. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 1989, 261:3273–3277 [erratum published in Journal of the American Medical Association, 1989, 262:1472].
Wright EC. Non-compliance – or how many aunts has Matilda? Lancet, 1993, 342:909–913.
3 Williams AB. Adherence to HIV regimens: 10 vital lessons. American Journal of Nursing, 2001, 101:37–43.
 6. Pharmacists 
The role of the pharmacist in improving adherence
A.J.M. (Ton) Hoek. General Secretary. International Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP)
Medicines are an integral part of most courses of therapy, and their safe and appropriate use is an
important aspect of optimizing health care outcomes. Medicines can be used effectively to prevent dis-
ease or the negative consequences of long-term chronic illness, but more needs to be done to improve
the overall quality of their use. Pharmacists have a key role to play by providing assistance, information
and advice to the public about medicines, as well as by monitoring treatment and identifying problems
in close cooperation with other health care providers and the patients.
Pharmacists are well-positioned to play a primary role in improving adherence to long-term therapy because
they are the most accessible health care professionals and they have extensive training in pharmaceuticals.Part
of the professional responsibility of pharmacists is to provide sound,unbiased advice and a comprehensive
pharmacy service that includes activities both to secure good health and quality of life,and to avoid ill-health.
Pharmaceutical care is a relatively new philosophy of practice, the goal of which is to optimize the
patient’s health-related quality of life and to achieve positive clinical outcomes.
Pharmaceutical care includes:
– educating the patient or the person caring for the patient about their med-
ications and the conditions for which they are prescribed to ensure maxi-
mum therapeutic benefit and safety;
– reviewing the patient’s medication history;
– continuous monitoring of the patient’s therapy;
– screening for potential adverse effects; and 
– monitoring the patient’s ability to take his or her medications correctly 
and to adhere to the prescribed therapies.
Pharmacists, through the practice of pharmaceutical care, can prevent or stop interactions, monitor and
prevent or minimize adverse drug reactions and monitor the cost and effectiveness of drug therapy as well
as provide lifestyle counselling to optimize the therapeutic effects of a medication regimen.The concept of
pharmaceutical care is particularly relevant to special groups of patients such as the elderly and chronically ill.
Intervention by the pharmacist and pharmaceutical care are effective approaches to improving adher-
ence to long-term therapies. Adherence to immunosuppressive medications in renal transplant patients
ranges from 50 to 95% and nonadherence can result in organ rejection1. Intervention by pharmacists
has been demonstrated to improve average monthly compliance by more than 100% over a 12-month
period2. Advice, information and referral by community pharmacists have been demonstrated to signifi-
cantly improve adherence to antihypertensive medications and improve blood-pressure control3.
Similar results have been demonstrated in patients with asthma4,5.
❘ 159
WHO 2003
1 Greenstein S, Siegal B. Compliance and noncompliance in patients with a functioning renal transplant: a multicenter study.
Transplantation, 1998, 66:1718–1726.
2 Chisholm MA et al. Impact of clinical pharmacy services on renal transplant patients’compliance with immunosuppressive 
medications. Clinical Transplantation,2001, 15:330–336.
3 Blenkinsopp A et al. Extended adherence support by community pharmacists for patients with hypertension: A randomised 
controlled trial. International Journal of Pharmacy Practice,2000, 8:165–175.
4 Cordina M, McElnay JC, Hughes CM. Assessment of a community pharmacy-based program for patients with asthma.
Pharmacotherapy, 2001, 21:1196–1203.
5 Schulz M et al. Pharmaceutical care services for asthma patients: a controlled intervention study. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology,
2001,41:668–676.
 These are only examples of many indications where improved compliance and outcomes have been
clearly demonstrated to result from pharmacists’interventions. Many studies on this subject have been
published, especially during the last 10–15 years.
Pharmacists are an important resource for improving adherence to long-term therapy.
7. Psychologists 
The role of psychologists in improving adherence to therapies
By Pierre L.-J. Ritchie. Secretary General. International Union of Psychological Sciences (IUPsyS)
Psychologists work as applied health researchers and practitioners in primary, secondary and tertiary
care settings and as members of multidisciplinary teams of health service providers, as well as in inde-
pendent practice. In these varied roles, the involvement of psychologists increases the effectiveness of
programmes aimed at identifying and treating prevalent behaviourally-based health problems.
Nonadherence is arguably the most widely distributed and prevalent of these problems.
The success of any treatment depends on both its efficacy and the manner in which a patient uses it.
Adherence occurs in the process of adaptation to illness or to the threat of illness.While the past 50
years have witnessed considerable progress in developing powerful treatments for a wide variety of
chronic and acute illnesses, patients’use of these treatments has been far from optimal.The global chal-
lenge now facing health systems is to become more effective in creating the conditions that enable
people to derive maximum benefit from available treatments. Establishing the optimal conditions for
adherence early in the treatment process sets the stage for long-term maintenance. Psychological sci-
ence and practice concerning adherence focus on the systemic, biological, social, cognitive, behavioural
and emotional contributing factors. Psychologists bring an understanding of both adaptive and mal-
adaptive psychological, social and behavioural processes that are critical for understanding, preventing
and treating nonadherence.
In every situation in which treatment involves an aspect of a patient’s behaviour, adherence is a poten-
tial problem.This is the case for health-seeking behaviours, the self-administration of medication or
making lifestyle changes. Adherence is a behavioural issue, and psychology is a behavioural discipline. It
is therefore not surprising that psychologists have been very active in efforts to improve adherence
since at least the 1950s. Furthermore, adherence to both medical and behavioural treatments has been
a major subject of research and practice in health psychology and behavioural medicine since their
emergence as specialty areas. Since the 1980s, many psychologists have embraced a population-health
perspective, and have supported public health goals by putting psychological know-how to work at all
levels of the health care system.Their work supports the development of effective health policy, surveil-
lance of behavioural risk factors in the population, and the design, implementation and evaluation of
interventions.
Psychologists have unique and specialized training.They are behavioural specialists, often trained as sci-
entist–practitioners, who bring an evidence-based perspective to the problem of nonadherence.
Through research and practice, psychologists have developed compelling, effective approaches to help
patients to cope with the demands imposed by chronic illness that frequently contribute to nonadher-
ence. Psychologists also possess expertise in interpersonal communication, and have contributed to
knowledge concerning the importance of good communication between health providers and patients
for promoting adherence.This has led to innovations in training in interpersonal skills for health service
providers targeting this determinant. Recognition of the importance of psychological and behavioural
skills in the training curricula of health disciplines has drawn further on the skills of psychologists as
educators.
WHO 2003
160 ❘
 As a health discipline, psychology blends basic and applied scientific enquiry with clinical service deliv-
ery to increase knowledge about adherence behaviour and its determinants, and to improve people’s
health and well-being, and the quality and efficiency of health services. Psychology was founded in
response to the need to understand, predict and influence such basic phenomena as human motiva-
tion, cognition and behaviour. Over time several sub-disciplines have emerged including, clinical, health,
rehabilitation, community, experimental, organizational and social psychology. Each of these has made
substantial contributions to the knowledge base on adherence.
As scientists, psychologists produce knowledge that helps to identify the causes of the nonadherence,
develop and test theories that help to explain the mechanisms of causality and to design and evaluate
interventions to increase adherence.In this regard, psychologists have contributed to adherence research
and patient care in areas such as HIV/AIDS, diabetes, hypertension, obesity, ischaemic heart disease, stroke,
chronic pain, asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, kidney disease, headache, addictions,
seizure disorders, a range of mental illnesses and dental hygiene, as well as behavioural risk factors for ill-
ness such as poor diet, insufficient physical activity, smoking and risky sexual behaviours among others.
As health service providers and members of the health care team, psychologists bring unique skills in
psychological assessment and behavioural measurement to help identify those patients at risk of non-
adherence, and to identify the determinants of nonadherence where it has already become a problem.
They bring sophisticated treatment skills to ameliorate these risk factors and determinants.These skills
are applied to individuals, families, groups or communities in the service of illness prevention, acute and
chronic care or rehabilitation.With regard to nonadherence, these skills are commonly used to address
the cognitive, motivational, emotional and behavioural barriers to the self-management of illness, or the
modification of health risk behaviours. In clinical service settings, psychologists function in varied roles;
as providers of direct service, consultants to health care teams with respect to diagnosis and treatment
planning, and patient advocacy.
In addition to the basic science, clinical and population health research described above, psychological
practice in the area of adherence comprises:
– assessment of risk for nonadherence including the relative contributions of
patient attributes, illness- and treatment-related factors, social context of ill-
ness, and health provider and system factors;
– assessment and treatment of mental health co-morbidities that confer addi-
tional risk for nonadherence;
– specific cognitive, motivational and behavioural interventions to enhance
the ability of patients to manage their own illness or to reduce risk of illness;
– relapse prevention intervention to assist with the long-term maintenance of
treatment;
– continuing education interventions for other health service providers that
teach skills in communication, motivation enhancement, and behaviour
modification; and
– systems interventions aimed at improving the availability, accessibility and
acceptability of treatments.
Psychological service providers have an integral role in primary health care teams that aim to deliver
optimal, cost-effective care.They contribute by monitoring the psychological and behavioural risks to
patients’health, identifying and treating psychological and behavioural problems that threaten the
effectiveness of treatment and they optimize treatment planning by helping to integrate behavioural
science.
❘ 161
WHO 2003
 WHO 2003
162 ❘
(–) Vulnerability of the adolescent to not taking
medications; family conflict and a denial of
severity of disease in adolescents; memory diffi-
culties in older patients; polypharmacy in older
patients; cultural and lay beliefs about illness
and treatment; alternative medicine; fear of the
health care system; poverty; inner-city living;
lack of transport; family dysfunction 
(–) Long distance from treatment setting
No information was found
(–) Cost of care; patients over 25 years (adherence
to physical activity); older adolescents (insulin
administration); older adolescents (SMBG); males
(adherence to diet); females (adherence to phys-
ical activity); environmental high-risk situations 
(+) Patients aged less than 25 years (adherence
to physical activity); younger adolescents (insulin
administration); younger adolescents (SMBG);
males (adherence to physical activity); females
(adherence to diet); social support; family support
(–) Long distance from treatment setting; under
60 years old; teenagers; poverty; illiteracy; unwill-
ingness to pay the cost of medicines; high cost
of medications; local beliefs or beliefs about the
origin of illness
(+) Elderly patients (over 60 years old); children
from family reporting less parental education;
non-English speaking in an English-speaking
community; lower income; recent immigrants
(–) Health care providers’lack of knowledge 
and training in treatment management and/or
an inadequate understanding of the disease;
short consultations; lack of training in changing
behaviours of nonadherent patients 
(–) lack of knowledge of health professionals
about pain management; '
 inadequate under-
standing of drug dependence by health profes-
sionals; health professionals'
 fears of investiga-
tion or sanction; poor delivery of care-education
to the patient; poor delivery of care-education to
family and caregivers; reluctance of health pro-
fessionals to prescribe opioids for use at home 
(+) Good relationship between patient and physician
(–) Poor health education of the patient 
(+) Multi-faceted intervention for primary care
(–) Poor relationship between patient and 
physician
(–) Inadequate or non-existent reimbursement
by health insurance plans; irregular or poor drug
supply; lack of supplies of free medicines; poorly
developed health services; lack of education
about AEDs
(+) Good relationship between patient and
physician
Asthma 
Cancer
Depression
Diabetes 
Epilepsy
Annex III – Table of reported factors by condition and dimension
Socioeconomic-related factors
Health care team/health system-related factors
AEDs, Antiepileptic drugs; SMBG, self-monitoring of blood glucose; (+) factors having a positive effect on adherence;
(–) factors having a negative effect on adherence.
 Condition-related factors
Therapy-related factors
Patient-related factors
(–) Inadequate understanding of the disease
(–) Nature of the patient’s illness; poor under-
standing of the disease and its symptoms
(–) Psychiatric co-morbidity 
(+) Clear instructions on management of 
disease; nature of the patient’s illness; poor
understanding of the disease and its symptoms
(–) Depression; duration of disease
(–) Forgetfulness; memory deficits; duration
and previous treatment failures; high frequen-
cy of seizures 
(–) Complex treatment regimens; long dura-
tion of therapy; frequent doses; adverse
effects of treatment
(–) Complex treatment regimens; taking too
many tablets; frequency of dose; having no
treatment instructions; misunderstanding
instructions about how to take the drugs; bad
tasting medication;adverse effects of treatment;
inadequate treatment doses;perceived ineffec-
tiveness; unnecessary duplicate prescribing
(+) Monotherapy with simple dosing sched-
ules
(–) High frequency of dose; co-prescribing of
benzodiazepines; inadequate doses of med-
ication
(+) Low frequency of dose; clear instructions
on management of treatment
(–) Complexity of treatment
(+) Less frequent doses; monotherapy with
simple dosing schedules, frequency of the
self-care behaviour
(–) Complex treatment regimens; misunder-
standing instructions about how to take the
drugs; adverse effects of treatment 
(+) Monotherapy with simple dosing sched-
ules
(–) Forgetfulness; misunderstanding of
instructions about medications; poor parental
understanding of children’s asthma medica-
tions; patient’s lack of perception of his or 
her own vulnerability to illness; patients’lack
of information about the prescribed daily
dosage/misconception about the disease and
treatments; persistent misunderstandings
about side-effects; drug abuse
(+) Perceiving that they are vulnerable to illness
(–) Forgetfulness; misconceptions about pain;
difficulty in taking the preparation as pre-
scribed; fear of injections; anxieties about
possible adverse events; no self-perceived
need for treatment; not feeling it is important
to take medications; undue anxiety about
medication dependence; fear of addiction;
psychological stress
(–) Personality traits
(–) Depression; stress and emotional problems;
alcohol abuse
(+) Self-esteem/self-efficacy
(–) Disbelief of the diagnosis; refusal to take
medication, delusional thinking; inconven-
ience of treatment; denial of diagnosis;
lifestyle and health beliefs; parental worry
about a child’s health; behavioural restrictions
placed on the child to protect his/her health;
fear of addiction; doubting the diagnosis;
uncertainty about the necessity for drugs;
anxiety over the complexity of the drug regi-
men; feeling stigmatized by the epilepsy; not
feeling that it is important to take medications
(+) Parents and child satisfied with medical
care; not feeling stigmatized by epilepsy; feel-
ing that it is important to take medications;
high levels of stressful life events
 WHO 2003
164 ❘
Annex III – Table of reported factors by condition and dimension (cont)
(–) Women (stress of childcare); low income;
African American men; lack of social support
(+) Support of family and friends; Caucasian men
(–) Low socioeconomic status; illiteracy; unem-
ployment; limited drug supply; high cost of
medication
(–) High cost of treatment
(+) Higher levels of education, older age
(–) Lack of effective social support networks 
and unstable living conditions; cultural and lay
beliefs about illness and treatment; ethnicity,
gender and age; high cost of medication; high
cost of transport; criminal justice involvement;
involvement in drug dealing
(–) Long distance from treatment setting;
low socioeconomic status;
illiteracy; high cost of medication
(+) Family support
(–) Lack of clear instructions from health profes-
sionals; poor implementation of educational
interventions
(+) Good relationship between patient and
physician; support from nurses and pharmacists
(–) Lack of knowledge and training for health
care providers on managing chronic diseases;
inadequate relationship between health care
provider and patient; lack of knowledge; inad-
equate time for consultations; lack of incentives
and feedback on performance
(+) Good relationship between patient and
physician
(–) Unavailability for follow-up or lost to follow-up;
failure to recall the receipt of a prescription
(+) Access to free nicotine-replacement therapy;
more frequent contact with physicians and
pharmacists
(–) Poorly developed health services; inadequate
relationship between health care provider and
patient; health care providers who are untrained,
overworked, inadequately supervised or unsup-
ported in their tasks; inability to predict poten-
tially non-adherent patients
(+) Good relationship between patient and
physician; availability of expertise; links with
patient support systems; flexibility in the hours
of operation
(–) Lack of knowledge and training of health
professionals about treatment management
and/or an inadequate understanding of the dis-
ease; poor relationship between patient and
physician; short consultations; poor implementa-
tion of educational interventions
(+) Good relationship between patient and
health professionals
HIV/AIDS
Hypertension
Tobacco smoking
Tuberculosis
Common 
elements
Socioeconomic-related factors
Health care team/health system-related factors
CO, carbon monoxide; (+) factors having a positive effect on adherence; (–) factors having a negative effect on adherence.
 ❘ 165
WHO 2003
Condition-related factors
Therapy-related factors
Patient-related factors
(–) Asymptomatic patients
(+) Symptomatic patients; understanding the
relationship between adherence and viral load
(+) Understanding and perceptions about
hypertension
(–) Daily cigarette consumption; expired CO;
plasma nicotine and cotinine levels;
Fagerstrom tolerance questionnaire (FTQ)
scores; greater tobacco dependence; psychi-
atric co-morbidities; depression; failure to
stop or reduce smoking during treatment
(–) Asymptomatic patients; drug use; altered
mental states caused by substance abuse;
depression and psychological stress 
(+) Knowledge about tuberculosis
(–) Poor understanding of the disease and its
"side-effects"; depressive illness; psychiatric
co-morbidities; asymptomatic disease; long
duration of the disease
(+) Understanding and perception of the 
disease
(–) Complex treatment regimens; close moni-
toring; severe lifestyle alterations; adverse
effects of treatment; lack of clear instructions
about how to take the medications
(+) Less frequent dose; fewer pills per day;
fewer dietary restrictions; fitting medication
to individual'
s lifestyle; belief that medication
is effective
(–) Complex treatment regimens; duration 
of treatment; low drug tolerability, adverse
effects of treatment
(+) Monotherapy with simple dosing schedules;
less frequent dose;fewer changes in antihyper-
tensive medications; newer classes of drug:
angiotensin II antagonists,angiotensin convert-
ing enzyme inhibitors,calcium channel blockers
(–) Adverse events or withdrawal symptoms
(+) Attendance at behavioural intervention
sessions
(–) Complex treatment regimen; adverse
effects of treatment; toxicity
(–) Complex treatment regimen; adverse
effects of treatment; frequent doses; lack 
of clear instructions about how to take the
medications
(+) Monotherapy; less frequent doses; fewer
pills per day; clear instructions on manage-
ment of treatment 
(–) Forgetfulness; life stress; alcohol use; drug
use; depression; hopelessness and negative
feelings; beliefs that alcohol and drug use
interfere with medications
(+) Positive beliefs regarding the efficacy of
antiretroviral medications
(–) Inadequate knowledge and skill in manag-
ing the disease symptoms and treatment; no
awareness of the costs and benefits of treat-
ment, non-acceptance of monitoring
(+) Perception of the health risk related to the
disease; active participation in monitoring;
participation in management of disease
(–) Weight gain, no self-perceived need for
treatment; no perceived effect of treatment
(+) Motivation; good relationship between
patient and physician
(–) Forgetfulness; drug abuse, depression;
psychological stress
(+) Belief in the efficacy of treatment; moti-
vation
(–) Forgetfulness; misunderstanding instruc-
tions about how to take the medications;
inadequate knowledge and skill in managing
the disease symptoms and treatment; anxi-
eties about possible adverse effects; lack of
self-perceived need for treatment; psychoso-
cial stress; depression; low motivation
(+) Belief in the efficacy of treatment; moti-
vation; perception of the health risk related 
to the disease
 WHO 2003
166 ❘
List-organized instructions; clear instructions
about treatment for older patients
Optimizing the cooperation between services;
assessment of social needs; family preparedness;
mobilization of community-based organizations 
No information was found
Mobilization of community-based organizations;
assessment of social needs; family preparedness
Assessment of social and career needs
Family preparedness; mobilization of communi-
ty-based organizations; intensive education on
use of medicines for patients with low levels of
literacy; assessment of social needs
Education on use of medicines; management of
disease and treatment in conjunction with
patients; adherence education; multidisciplinary
care; training in monitoring adherence; more
intensive intervention by increasing number
and duration of contacts
Training of health professionals on adherence;
pain education component in training pro-
grammes; support to caregivers; multidiscipli-
nary care; follow-up consultation by community
nurses; supervision in home pain management;
identification of the treatment goals and devel-
opment of strategies to meet them
Multidisciplinary care; training of health profes-
sionals on adherence; counselling provided by a
primary care nurse; telephone consultation/coun-
selling; improved assessment and monitoring of
patients
Multidisciplinary care; training for health profes-
sionals on adherence; identification of the treat-
ment goals and development of strategies to
meet them; continuing education; continuous
monitoring and re-assessment of treatment; sys-
tems interventions: health insurance for nutri-
tion therapy, telephone reminders to patients,
chronic care models
A regular, uninterrupted supply of medicines in
developing countries; good patient–physician
relationship; instruction by nurses and physi-
cians about methods of incorporating drug
administration into patient'
s daily life; training
health professionals on adherence; adherence
education
Good patient–physician relationship; multidisci-
plinary care; training of health professionals on
adherence; training for health professionals in
adherence education; training in monitoring
adherence; training caregivers; identification of
the treatment goals and development of strat-
egies to meet them; management of disease
and treatment in conjunction with the patients;
uninterrupted ready availability of information;
regular consultations with nurses or physicians;
non-judgemental attitude and assistance; ration-
al selection of medications
Asthma 
Cancer
Depression
Diabetes 
Epilepsy
HIV/AIDS
Annex IV Table of reported interventions by condition and dimension
Health care team-/ 
Socioeconomic-related interventions
health care system-related interventions
 Condition-related interventions
Therapy-related interventions
Patient-related interventions
Patient education beginning at the time of
diagnosis and integrated into every step of
asthma care
Education of the patient on adherence
Education of patients on use of medicines
Education on use of medicines
Education on use of medicines
Education on use of medicines; supportive
medical consultation; screening for co-mor-
bidities; attention to mental illness, as well as
abuse of alcohol and other drugs
Simplification of regimens; education on use
of medicines; adaptations of prescribed med-
ications; continuous monitoring and re-
assessment of treatment
Simplification of regimens; education on use
of medications; giving clear instructions; clari-
fying misunderstandings about the recom-
mendation of opioids; patient-tailored pre-
scriptions; continuous monitoring and re-
assessment of treatment; assessment and
management of side-effects; coordination of
prescribing
Education on use of medicines; patient-tai-
lored prescriptions; continuous monitoring
and re-assessment of treatment
Patient self-management; simplification of
regimens; education on use of medicines;
weight reduction assistance; teaching pre-
scribed physical activity
Simplification of regimens; single antiepilep-
tic therapy (monotherapy); education on use
of medicines; patient-tailored prescriptions;
clear instructions; use of educational materi-
als; continuous monitoring and re-assessment
of treatment
Simplification of regimens; education of the
patient on the use of medicines; assessment
and management of side-effects; patient-tai-
lored prescriptions; medications for symp-
toms; adherence education; continuous moni-
toring and re-assessment of treatment 
Self-management programmes that include
both educational and behavioural compo-
nents; memory aids and reminders; incentives
and/or reinforcements; self-monitoring
Interventions to redress misconceptions
about pain treatment and to encourage dia-
logue about pain control between patient
and oncologist; exploration of fears (e.g.
about addiction); assessment of psychological
needs; education on use of medications;
behavioural and motivational intervention;
self-management of disease and treatment;
self-management of side-effects
Counselling; relapse-prevention counselling;
psychotherapy; family psychotherapy; fre-
quent follow-up interviews; specific advice
targeted at the needs and concerns of indi-
vidual patients
Behavioural and motivational interventions;
assessment of psychological needs; tele-
phone reminders to patients in order to
reduce missed appointments
Self-management of disease and treatment;
self-management of side-effects; behavioural
and motivational intervention; education on
adherence; providing the patients with con-
trol and choices; assessment of psychological
needs; frequent follow-up interviews; memo-
ry aids and reminders
Monitor drug and/or alcohol use; psychiatric
consultation; behavioural and motivational
intervention; counselling/psychotherapy; tele-
phone counselling; memory aids and
reminders; self-management of disease and
treatment
 WHO 2003
168 ❘
Family preparedness; patient health insurance;
uninterrupted supply of medicines; sustainable
financing, affordable prices and reliable supply
systems
Social assistance
Assessment of social needs; social support, hous-
ing, food tokens and legal measures; providing
transport to treatment setting; peer assistance;
mobilization of community-based organizations;
optimizing the cooperation between services
Assessment of social needs; social support; fami-
ly support and preparedness; mobilization of
community-based organizations; uninterrupted
supply of medicines
Training in education of patients on use of medi-
cines; good patient–physician relationship; con-
tinuous monitoring and re-assessment of treat-
ment; monitoring adherence; non-judgemental
attitude and assistance; uninterrupted ready
availability of information; rational selection of
medications; training in communication skills;
delivery, financing and proper management of
medicines; development of drugs with better
safety profile by pharmaceutical industry; partic-
ipation of pharmaceutical industry in patient
education programmes and in developing
instruments to measure adherence for patients
Pharmacist mobilization; free access to nicotine-
replacement therapy; frequent follow-up inter-
views
Uninterrupted ready availability of information;
flexibility in available treatment; training and
management processes that aim to improve the
way providers care for patients with tuberculo-
sis; management of disease and treatment in
conjunction with the patients; multidisciplinary
care; intensive staff supervision; training in mon-
itoring adherence; DOTS strategy
Multidisciplinary care; training in educating
patients about adherence; good
patient–provider relationship; management of
disease and treatment in conjunction with the
patients; more intensive intervention in terms of
number and duration of contacts; adherence
education; training in monitoring adherence;
uninterrupted ready availability of information
Hypertension
Tobacco smoking
Tuberculosis
Common 
elements
Socioeconomic-related factors
Health care team/health system-related factors
DOTS, Directly observed therapy, short course.
Annex IV Table of reported interventions by condition and dimension (cont)
 ❘ 169
WHO 2003
Condition-related factors
Therapy-related factors
Patient-related factors
Education on use of medicines
Therapeutic patient education; supportive
psychiatric consultation
Education on use of medicines; provision of
information about tuberculosis and the need
to attend for treatment
Education on use of medicines
Simplification of regimens
Nicotine replacement therapy; antidepressant
therapy; education on use of medications;
adherence education; assistance with weight
reduction; continuous monitoring and re-
assessment of treatment;monitoring adherence
Education on use of medications; adherence
education; tailor the treatment to the needs
of patients at risk of nonadherence; agree-
ments (written or verbal) to return for an
appointment or course of treatment; continu-
ous monitoring and re-assessment of treat-
ment 
Simplification of regimens; adherence educa-
tion; education on use of medicines; patient-
tailored prescriptions; continuous monitoring
and re-assessment of treatment; monitoring
adherence
Behavioural and motivational intervention;
self-management of disease and treatment;
self-management of side-effects; memory
aids and reminders
Adjunctive psychosocial treatment; behav-
ioural intervention; assistance with weight
reduction; good patient–physician relation-
ship
Mutual goal-setting; memory aids and
reminders; incentives and/or reinforcements;
reminder letters, telephone reminders or
home visits for patients who fail to attend
clinic
Mutual goal-setting; incentives and/or rein-
forcements; behavioural and motivational
intervention; counselling/psychotherapy;
assessment of psychological needs; self-man-
agement of the disease and treatment that
includes both educational and behavioural
components; memory aids and reminders
 WHO 2003
170 ❘
 Global Adherence Interdisciplinary
Network (GAIN)
1. Scientists
171
2. Professional, industry and patient’s organizations
173
3. Policy-makers
175
Alvarez-Gordillo,Guadalupe • Senior Researcher •
Colegio de la Frontera Sur (Chiapas) • Mexico
Arnsten,Julia • Assistant Professor of Medicine •
Montefiore Medical Center • USA
Aro,Arja • Assistant Professor and Senior Researcher
• National Public Health Institute • Finland
Ashida,Terunao • Senior Researcher • Institute for
Adult Diseases,Asahi Life Foundation • Japan
Ayuso-Mateos,Jose Luis • Professor of Psychiatry •
University Hospital
“La Princesa”
,Autonomous University of Madrid •
Spain
Bamberger,Josh • Medical Director • Housing and
Urban Health • USA
Basile,Jan • Associate Professor of Medicine • Ralph
H.Johnson VA Medical Center,Medical University of
South Carolina • USA
Bender,Bruce • Head,Pediatric Behavioral Health •
National Jewish Medical and Research Center • USA
Bernsten,Cecilia • Director • Medicines Unit,
National Board of Health and Welfare • Sweden
Betancourt,Joseph • Senior Scientist • Institute for
Health Policy • USA
Blake,Max • CORE Center for Prevention of
Infectious Diseases • USA
Blank,Karen • Senior Research Psychiatrist •
Hartford Hospital'
s Mental Health Network • USA
Bogart,Laura • Assistant Professor • Kent State
University • USA
Borgdorff,Martien • Epidemiologist • Royal
Netherlands Tuberculosis Association (KNCV) •
Netherlands
Bosco de Oliveira,Helenice • Professor • Campina
State University • Brazil
Botelho,Richard J.• Associate Professor of Family
Medicine • Family Medicine Center • USA
Boulet,Louis-Philippe • Professor • Laval University
Hospital • Canada
Bovet,Pascal • Epidemiologist Consultant • Unit for
Prevention and Control of Cardiovascular Disease,
Ministry of Health • Seychelles
Branco Ferreira,Manuel • Clinical Practitioner •
Immuno-allergology Unit • Santa Maria Hospital •
Portugal
Broers,Barbara • Researcher • Department of
Community Health,University Hospital of Geneva •
Switzerland
Burkhart,Patricia • Assistant Professor and Nurse
Researcher • University of Kentucky • USA
Cameron,Tebbi • Medical Director • Tampa
Children'
s Hospital • USA
Caplehorn,John • Clinical Epidemiology • University
of Sydney • Australia
Chapman,Kenneth • Director • Asthma Center and
Pulmonary Rehabilitation Program • Canada
Chaustre,Ismenia • Attending Physician and
Professor • “JM de los Ríos”Children'
s Hospital •
Venezuela
Chen,Junwen • Research Associate • School of
Human Sciences,Waseda University • Japan
Chesney,Margaret A.• Professor of Medicine •
University of California at San Francisco Prevention
Sciences Group • USA
Choo,Peter • Researcher • Brigham and Women'
s
Hospital • USA
Coker,Richard • Senior Lecturer,Public Health •
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine •
England
Conway,Alison • Respiratory Nurse Specialist •
Glenfield Hospital • England
Crystal,Stephen • Research Professor,Director AIDS
Research Group and Associate Director for Health
Services Research • Institute for Health,Health Care
Policy,and Aging Research/ Rutgers University •
USA
Dean,Linda • Director of Clinical Education • MCP
Hahnemann University • USA
de Boer,Hanneke M.• Global Campaign Co•Chair •
The International Bureau for Epilepsy/Stichting
Epilepsie Instellingen Nederland • Netherlands
De Geest,Sabina • Professor of Nursing and Director
• Institute of Nursing Science,University of Basel •
Switzerland
Di Pollina,Laura • Chief,Clinical Geriatrics •
University Hospital of Geneva • Switzerland
Dick,Judy • Senior Researcher • Medical Research
Centre of South Africa • South Africa
Annex V
A N N E X  V
Scientists
 DiIorio,Colleen • Professor • Center for Nursing
Research,Emory University • USA
DiMatteo,Robin • Professor • Department of
Psychology,University of California • USA
Erlen,Judith • Professor • University of Pittsburgh •
USA
Esparis,Belen • Clinical Practitioner • University
Hospital of Caracas • Venezuela
Farmer,Paul • Professor • Harvard Medical School •
USA
Farmer,Paul • Director • Partners in health,Harvard
University • USA
Fitzgerald,Mark • Director of Clinical Epidemiology
and Evaluation • Vancouver General Hospital •
Canada
Fodor,George • Head of Research • Heart Institute,
University of Ottawa Heart Institute • Canada
Fox,Steven • Researcher • Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality • USA
Gabriel,Rafael • Director • Clinical Epidemiological
Unit,Hospital "La Princesa • Spain
Garfield,Frances • Researcher • Caro Research
Institute • USA
Garnett,William • Professor of Pharmacy and
Neurology • Virginia Commonwealth University •
USA
George,Stephen • Deputy Director • The Regional
Laboratory for Toxicology • England
Gerc,Vjekoslav • Medical Practitioner • Klinika za
bolesti srca i reumatizam • Bosnia and Herzegovina
Glasgow,Russell • Senior Researcher • AMC Cancer
Research Center • USA
Godding,Veronique • Medical Practitioner •
University Clinic St-Luc • Belgium
Gomes,Marleide • Professor • Federal University of
Rio de Janeiro • Brazil
Gourevitch,Marc • Associate Professor • Albert
Einstein College of Medicine/Montefiore Medical
Center • USA
Green,David • General Practitioner • South Africa
Haaga,David • Professor • Department of
Psychology,American University • USA
Hanhoff,Nikola • Clinical Practitioner • Germany
Hays,Ron • Professor of Medicine • University of
California at Los Angeles • USA
Henman,Martin • Centre for the Practice of
Pharmacy,Trinity College • Ireland
Herborg,Hanne • Director,Research and
Development • Pharmakon • Denmark
Hernan,Miguel • Associate Director • Program on
Causal Inference,Harvard University • USA
Holland,Ross • Pharmacy Education Specialist •
Independent Consultant • Australia
Horne,Rob • Director and Professor of Psychology in
Health Care • Centre for Health Care Research,
University of Brighton • England
Hotz,Stephen • University Research Fellow •
University of Ottawa • Canada
Hyland,Michael • Professor • University of Plymouth
• England
Jeffe,Donna • Assistant Professor of Medicine •
Washington University School of Medicine • USA
Jordhoy,Marit • Clinical Practitioner • Norwegian
University of Science and Technology • Norway
Joshi,Prashant • Director,Clinical Epidemiology Unit
• Government Medical College • India
Kaptein,Ad A.• Head • Psychology Unit,Leiden
University Medical Center (LUMC) • Netherlands
Karkashian,Christine • Dean • School of Psychology,
Universidad latina • USA
Kennedy,Stephen • Project Manager • Helix Group •
USA
Khan,Muhammad Amir • Chairman • Association
for Social Development • Pakistan
Kidorf,Michael • Associate Professor • Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine • USA
Kihlstrom,Lucy • Institute for the Study of
Healthcare Organizations and Transactions • USA
Kim,Jim Yong • Program Director • Program on
Infectious Diseases and Social Change • Harvard
Medical School • USA
Kjellgren,Karin • Assistant Professor • Institute of
Nursing • Göteborg University • Sweden
Klesges,Robert • Executive Director • University of
Memphis for Community Health • USA
Knobel,Hernando • Professor • Universidad
Autonoma de Barcelona • Spain
Kos,Mitja • Chair,Social Pharmacy • Faculty of
Pharmacy,University of Ljubljana • Slovenia
Lam,Tai Hing • Professor,Head of Department of
Community Medicine and Behavioural Sciences •
The University of Hong Kong • China
Lannon,Susan • Epilepsy Nurse Clinician • University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill • USA
Leandre,Fernet • Director • Zanmi Lazante Health
Care • Haiti
Lebovits,Allen • Associate Professor • New York
University Pain Management Center • USA
Leickly,Frederick • Clinical Professor of Pediatrics •
James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for Children • USA
Leppik,Ilo • Director • MINCEP Epilepsy Care • USA
Leroyer,Christophe • Clinical Practitioner •
Department of Chest Medicine • Hôpital de la
Cavale Blanche • France
Linden,Michael • Professor • BfA-Rehabilitation
Centre • Germany
Lindner,Helen • Associate Professor • School of
Psychological Science,La Trobe University • Australia
Lorvick,Jennifer • University of California • USA
Malow,Robert • Professor and Director • AIDS
Prevention Program,Florida International University
• USA
Marquez Contreras,Emilio • Coordinator of the
Compliance Group • Spanish Society of
Hypertension • Spain
Mazumdar,Sati • Researcher • University of
Pittsburgh • USA
Mazur,Lynnette • Professor • University of Texas •
USA
McGann,Elizabeth • Chair • Department of Nursing,
Quinnipiac University • USA
Meinardi,Harry • Prof.Emeritus • Department of
Physiology,Leids University Medical Centre •
Netherlands
Mitchell,Wendy • Professor,Neurology and
Pediatrics • Keck School of Medicine,University of
Southern California • USA
Morisky,Donald E.• Professor and Vice-Chair •
Department of Community Health Sciences,
University of California at Los Angeles School of
Public Health • USA
Niggemann,Bodo • Professor • Pediatric Clinic,
Humboldt University Children'
s Hospital • Germany
Nimmo,Christine • Director,Educational Resources •
American Society of Health System Pharmacists •
USA
Nuño,Roberto • Health Economist • Independent
Consultant • Spain
Osman,Liesl • Senior Research Fellow • Chest Clinic
Aberdeen Royal Infirmary • Scotland
Otero,Soraya • Mental Health Program Coordinator •
Child and Adolescent Mental Health Centre • Spain
Penedo,Frank • Assistant Professor • Department of
Psychology,Miami University • USA
Peveler,Robert • Head • Mental Health Group,
Community Clinical Sciences Division,School of
Medicine,University of Southampton • England
Pfaffenbach,Grace • Researcher • Campinas (UNI-
CAMP) State University • Brazil
Polo,Friz • Professor • National University of
Cordoba • Argentina
Preston,Kenzie • Acting Chief • Department of
Health and Human Services • USA
Price,John • Professor • King'
s College Hospital •
England
Pruitt,Sheri • Director of Behavioral Medicine • The
Permanente Medical Group • USA
Rand,Cynthia • Associated Professor • Johns
Hopkins University • USA
Reddy,K.Srinath • Professor of Cardiology • All India
Institute of Medical Sciences • India
Reynolds,Nancy • Associate Professor • Ohio State
University • USA
Roca,Bernardino • Medical Practitioner • Castellon
General Hospital • Spain
Salas,Maribel • Senior Researcher • Caro Research
Institute • USA
Salvador Carulla,Luis • Professor of Psychiatry and
Psychological Medicine • University of Cadiz • Spain
Sanchez Gomez,Luis Maria • Senior Researcher •
Clinical Epidemiology Unit • University Hospital “La
Princesa”• Spain
WHO 2003
172 ❘
 Sanchez Sosa,Juan José • Professor • National
University of Mexico • Mexico
Sayer,Quentin • Senior Clinical Nurse Specialist •
Respiratory Medicine,Eastbourne Hospitals NHS
Trust • England
Sbarbaro,John • Researcher and Clinical Practitioner
• Department of Medicine,University of Colorado •
USA
Schlundt,David • Associate Professor of Psychology
• Vanderbilt University • USA
Schneiderman,Neil • Professor and Program Chair •
Department of Psychology,Miami University • USA
Schroeder,Knut • MRC Training Fellow • Division of
Primary Health Care,University of Bristol • England
Sclar,David • Director,Pharmacoeconomics and
Pharmacoepidemiology Research Unit,Washington
State University • USA
Shope,Jean • Senior Research Scientist • University
of Michigan • USA
Singh,Meenu • Professor • Institute of Medical
Education and Research • India
Skaer,Tracy • Assistant Dean and Associate Director,
Pharmacoeconomics and Pharmacoepidemiology
Research Unit,Washington State University • USA
Smirnoff,Margaret • Nurse Practitioner • Mount
Sinai Center • USA
Sommaruga,Marinella • Clinical Psychologist •
Salvatore Maugeri Foundation,Care and Research
Institute • Italy
Sorensen,Jim • Adjunct Professor • Instruction and
Research Department,San Francisco General
Hospital • USA
Starace,Fabrizio • Director • Consultation Psychiatry
and Behavioural Epidemiology Service,Cotugno
Hospital • Italy
Starr,Mike • Clinical Practitioner and Researcher •
Department of Microbiology,British Columbia
Children'
s Hospital • Canada
Stephen,Crystal • Research Professor and Director •
AIDS Research Group,Rutgers University • USA
Stewart,Simon • Ralph Reader Fellow • University
of Adelaide • Australia
Stone,Valerie • Associate Chief • General Medicine
Unit,Massachusetts General Hospital • USA
Sumartojo,Esther • Leader • Community
Intervention Research Team,Centers for Diseases
Control • USA
Svensson,Staffan • Researcher and Clinical
Practitioner • Department of Clinical Pharmacology,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital • Sweden
Tai-Seale,Ming • Professor • Department of Health
Policy and Management,Texas AandM School of
Rural Public Health • USA
Tazeen,Jafar • Assistant Professor • Aga Khan
University • Pakistan
Tomaszewski,Maciej • Researcher • Blood Pressure
Group • University of Glasgow • Scotland and in the
Department of Internal Medicine,Diabetology and
Nephrology of Zabrze • Poland
Tseng,Alice • Clinical Pharmacist •
Immunodeficiency Clinic,Toronto General Hospital •
Canada
Turner,Barbara • Professor of Medicine • University
of Pennsylvania • USA
Urquhart,John • Professor • Department of
Pharmacoepidemiology,Maastricht University •
Netherlands
Vázquez-Barquero,José Luiz • Professor of Psychiatry
and Director • Psychiatric Research Unit,University
Hospital "Marqués de Valdecillas",Cantabria
University • Spain
Volmink,Jimmy • Director of Research and Analysis
• Global Health Council • USA
Wagner,Ed • Director • MacColl Institute for
Healthcare Innovation • USA
Wagner,Glenn • Behavioral Scientist • RAND • USA
Wahl,Lindi • Professor • University of Western
Ontario • Canada
Weingarten,Micky • Professor • Tel Aviv University •
Israel
Weinstein,Andrew • Researcher and Clinical
Practitioner • Christiana Medical Center • USA
Whitehouse,William • Researcher and Clinical
Practitioner • Queen'
s Medical Centre • England
Willey,Cynthia • Professor of Pharmacoepidemiology
• University of Rhode Island • USA
Williams,Ann • Nurse Researcher and Clinical
Practitioner • Yale School of Nursing • USA
Williams,Mark • Associate Professor of Behavioral
Sciences • The University of Texas • USA
Williams,Rhys • Professor of Clinical Epidemiology •
University of Wales Swansea • Wales
Windsor,Richard • Professor and Chairman • The
George Washington University Medical Center • USA
Zeppetella,John • Deputy Medical Director • St
Joseph'
s Hospice • England
Zwarenstein,Merrick • Senior Researcher • Medical
Research Council,Health Systems Division • South
Africa
❘ 173
WHO 2003
Acanfora,Miguel Angel • Board Member • Argentine
Society of Gerontology and Geriatrics • Argentina
Alberti,George • President,International Diabetes
Federation • Belgium
Ambler,Sue • Head of Practice Research • The Royal
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain • London
Aung,May • Cardiac Society of Myanmar Medical
Association • Myanmar
Avanzini,Giuliano • President • International League
against Epilepsy • Italy
Bassand,Jean-Pierre • President • European Society
of Cardiology • France
Bernard,Owen • Executive Director • Diabetes
Association of Jamaica • Jamaica
Blennerhassett,Mitzi • Secretary • Cancer Action
Now • England
Bunde-Birouste,Anne • Scientific and Technical
Director/Director of Programmes International
Union of Health Promotion and Education • France
Burell,Gunilla • President • International Society of
Behavioural Medicine • Sweden
Callahan,James • Executive Vice-President and Chief
Executive Officer • American Society of Addiction
Medicine • USA
Camp,Rob • Executive Director • European AIDS
Treatment Group • Netherlands
Cavalheiro,Esper • Secretary-General • International
Bureau for Epilepsy • Brazil
Chan,Bill Piu • Director • Beijing Institute of
Geriatrics • China
Chan,Juliana • Society for the Study of
Endocrinology,Metabolism Diabetes Division,The
Chinese University of Hong Kong • China
Charles,Renév • Haitian Foundation for Diabetes and
Cardiovascular diseases (FHADIMAC) • Haïti
Chavez,Rafael • Mexican Society of Cardiology •
Mexico
Chung,Wai-Sau • Honorary Secretary • Hong Kong
College of Psychiatrists • China
Costa e Forti,Adriana • President • Brazilian Diabetes
Society • Brazil
Covanis,Athanasios • Vice-President • International
Bureau for Epilepsy • Greece
De Backer,Guy • Appointed Representative • Belgian
Society of Cardiology • Belgium 
de Boer,Hanneke M.• Global Campaign Co-Chair •
The International Bureau for Epilepsy • The
Netherlands
Delefosse,Santiago Marie • Vice-President • French
Psychology Society • France
Diaz Alvarez,Ernesto • President • Dominican Society
of Cardiology • Dominican Republic
Du Melle,Fran • Consultant on International Health •
American Thoracic Society • USA
El-Guebaly,Nady • President • International Society
of Addiction Medicine • Canada
Professional, industry and patients’ organizations 
 Engel,Jerome Jr • Global Campaign Co-Chair •
International League Against Epilepsy and Director
of the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA)
Seizure Disorder Centre,UCLA School of Medicine •
USA
Erkka,Susanna • President • European Federation of
Asthma and Allergy Association (EFA) • Finland
Fejerman,Natalio • Secretary-General •
International League Against Epilepsy • Argentina
Frew,Anthony • Secretary-General • European
Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology •
Belgium
Gaffney,Terri • Executive Director • American
Academy of Nursing • USA
Ghebrehiwet,Tesfamicael • Consultant on Nursing
and Health Policy • International Council of Nurses •
Switzerland
Gjelsvik,Bjorn • Honorary Secretary • World
Organization of Family Doctors (WONCA) (Europe) •
Norway
Gradisek,Anton • Member and Past President •
National Board of General Practitioners • Slovenia
Hackshaw,Joycelyn • Chief Executive Officer •
Trinidad and Tobago Registered Nurses Association •
Trinidad
Harumi,Kenichi • Vice-Chairman • Japan Heart
Foundation • Japan
Harvey,Bale,Jr.• Director-General • International
Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers
Associations (IFPMA) • Switzerland
Hayes,Angela • Chief Executive • International
Alliance of Patients'
 Organizations (IAPO) • England
Heikki,Huikuri • Professor of Cardiology • Finnish
Cardiac Society • Finland
Henne,Genie • Program Manager • Asthma Society
of Ireland • Ireland
Hirst,Jenny • Co-Chairman • Insulin Dependent
Diabetes Trust (IDDT) • England
Hoek,A.J.M.(Ton) • General Secretary •
International Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP) •
Netherlands
Horne,Rob • Director and Professor of Psychology in
Health Care • Centre for Health Care Research,
University of Brighton,and Boardman,Concordance
Committee,Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great
Britain • England
Ilves,Pille • Chair • Estonian Patients Advocacy
Association • Estonia
Kane-Williams,Edna • Vice-President,Programs and
Research • Epilepsy Foundation of America • USA
Kielgast J.Peter • President • International
Pharmaceutical Federation • The Netherlands
Kurashvili,Ramaz B.• President • Georgian Diabetes
Federation • Diabetes Centre of Georgia • Georgia
Kwok,Ching-Fai • Secretary- General • Chinese
Taipei Diabetes Association • China
Lahti,Pirkko • Executive Director • World Federation
of Mental Health • Finland
Lee,Warren • Secretary • Diabetic Society of
Singapore • Republic of Singapore
Lee,Philip • President • International Bureau for
Epilepsy • Ireland
Lefebvre,Pierre • Elected President • International
Diabetes Federation • Belgium
Maksoud,Mahmoud Abdel • President • Emro
Pharm Forum and General Secretary • Syndicate of
Pharmacists of Egypt • Egypt
Maekawa,Yutaka • Secretary • Japanese Circulation
Society • Japan
Maheshwari,M.C.• Honorary Secretary •
Neurological Society of India • India
Manickan,Sam • Founder and Honorary Director •
Centre for Applied Psychological Studies • India
Mannign,Chris • Chair • Depression Alliance •
England
McMahon,Stephen • Chairman • Irish Patients'
Association • Ireland
Mendelson,Daniel • Program Director • Depression
and Bipolar Support Alliance • USA
Migliori,Giovanni • Director • WHO Collaborating
Centre for Control of Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases
in Europe • Italy
Muggeo,Michele • Societa Italiana di Diabetologia •
(Italian Diabetology Society) • Italy
Ng,Richard • President • Singapore Cardiac Society •
Singapore
Nielson,Faamanatu • President • Samoa Nursing
Association • Samoa
Ogola,N • Professor • Kenya Cardiac Society • Kenya
O'
Sullivan,Tony • Founder • Patient Focus • Ireland
Paoletti,Rodolfo • President • Italian Heart
Foundation • Italy
Pollard,Russell • Executive Officer • Epilepsy
Australia • Australia
Poppa,Anna • Chief Editor • British HIV Association
and Medical Society for Study of Venereal Disease
Antiretroviral Adherence Guidelines 2002/3 •
England
Ramaiya,Kaushik • General Secretary • Tanzania
Diabetes Association • Tanzania
Reinstein,Jerome • Director- General • World Self-
Medication Industry • England
Rodger,Ginette • Canadian Nurses Association •
Canada
Rodolfo Paoletti • President • Italian Heart
Foundation • Italy
Salas Sanchez,Rodrigo • President • Pharmaceutical
Forum of the Americas • Costa Rica
Samad,Abdus • Secretary • Pakistan Cardiac Society
• Pakistan
Santoso,Karo Karo • President • Indonesian Heart
Association • Indonesia
Schulz,Martin • Head • Centre for Drug Information
and Pharmacy Practice,Federal Union of German
Associations of Pharmacists • Germany
Senten,Marina • Head,Department of Patient Care •
Netherlands Heart Foundation • Netherlands
Shields,Chuck • Executive Director • Canadian
Cardiovascular Society • Canada
Silvado,Carlos • President • Brazilian Academy of
Neurology • Brazil
Snoj,Joze • Chief Editor • Slovenian Diabetes
Association (SLODA) • Slovenia
Spicak,Vaclav • Director • Czech Initiative for
Asthma • Czech Republic
Stauder,Adrienne • Coordinator • Institute of
Behavioural Sciences,Semmelweis University •
Hungary
Tainio,Satu • Project Coordinator • International
Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP) • Netherlands
Temel,Yilmaz M • President • Turkish Diabetes
Foundation • Turkey
Torongo,Mabel • Secretary-General •
Pharmaceutical Society of Zimbabwe • Zimbabwe
Ulrich,Susan • Executive Director • American College
of Clinical Pharmacology • USA
Webber,D.E.• Director-General (elected) • World Self-
Medication Industry • France
Williams,Simon • Director of Policy • The Patients
Association • England
Wilson,Elinor • President • Heart and Stroke
Foundation of Canada • Canada
Woodend,Kirsten • Director of Research • The
Canadian Pharmacists Association • Canada
Woods,Lynda • General Director • South African
Depression and Anxiety Support Group • South
Africa
Yiangou • Chairman • Cyprus Diabetic Association •
Cyprus
Yilmaz M,Temel • President •Turkish Diabetes
Foundation • Turkey
Zhang,Wen Fan • Professor and President •
Gerontological Society of China • China
WHO 2003
174 ❘
 Ala Din Abdul Sahib,Alwan • WHO Country
Representative • Jordan
Asiama,Divine • Programme Manager • Ghana
National Drugs Programme,Ministry of Health •
Ghana
Beaglehole,Bonita Ruth • Director • Surveillance •
WHO-HQ
Bengoa,Rafael • Director Management of
Noncommunicable Diseases • WHO-HQ
Bertolote,Jose Manoel • Coordinator • Mental and
Behavioural Disorders • WHO-HQ
Bloem,Paul • Technical Officer • Child and
Adolescent Health and Development • WHO-HQ 
Canny,Judith • Technical Officer • Health Care for
Chronic Conditions • WHO-HQ
Casey,Kathleen • Scientist • HIV Care • WHO-HQ
Corte,Georgina • Medical Officer • Ageing and Life
Course • WHO-HQ
Da Costa E Silva,Vera • Director • Tobacco Free
Initiative • WHO-HQ
De Castro,Silvana • Technical Officer • Adherence
Project • WHO-HQ
Edejer-Tan Torres,Tessa • Coordinator • Choosing
Interventions:Effectiveness,Quality and Costs •
WHO-HQ
Epping-Jordan,JoAnne • Coordinator • Health Care for
Chronic Conditions • WHO-HQ
Fahey,Michael • Adviser • Department of Drug
Control • Ministry of Health • United Arab Emirates
Francesca,Celletti • Medical Officer • Cardiovascular
Diseases • WHO-HQ
Gatti,Anna • Medical Officer • Ageing and Life
Course • WHO-HQ
Gojka,Roglic • Technical Officer • Diabetes • WHO-
HQ
Gustafsen,Ida • Manager • EuroPharmForum •
Netherlands
Herrera,Natasha • Scientist • Tobacco Free Initiative
• Venezuela
Jaramillo,Ernesto • Medical Officer • Stop TB • WHO-
HQ
Jones,Jack • Technical Officer • Health Promotion
and Prevention • WHO-HQ
Kalache,Alexandre • Coordinator • Ageing and Life
Course • WHO-HQ
Kawar,Rania • Technical Officer • Management of
Noncommunicable Conditions • WHO-HQ
Khaltaev,Nikolai • Team Leader • Chronic
Respiratory Diseases • WHO-HQ
King,Hillary • Team Leader • Diabetes • WHO-HQ
Leonardi,Matilde • Medical Officer • Classification,
Assessment,Surveys and Terminology • WHO-HQ
Lopez Acuña,Daniel • Coordinator • Health Systems
• WHO-PAHO
McGill,Scott • Technical Officer • HIV Care • WHO-HQ
Macklai,Nejma • Scientist • Tobacco Free Initiative •
WHO-HQ
Maher,Dermot • Medical Officer • Stop TB • WHO-HQ
Maringo,Charles • Regional Adviser
Noncommunicable Diseases • WHO-AFRO
Meiners,Micheline Marie • Technical Officer •
Pharmaceutical Forum of The Americas • USA
Mendis,Shanthi • Coordinator • Cardiovascular
Diseases • WHO-HQ
Mesquita,Fabio • Director of the STD/AIDS Program
• The City of São Paulo Public Health Department •
Brazil
Monteiro,Maristela G.Coordinator • Management of
Substance Dependence • WHO-HQ
O'
Dell,Virginia • Medical Officer • HIV care • WHO-
HQ
Peruga,Armando • Regional Adviser on Tobacco,
Alcohol and Drugs • WHO-PAHO
Prilipko,Leonid L.• Coordinator • Epilepsy • WHO-HQ
Puska,Pekka • Director • Health Promotion and
Prevention • WHO-HQ
Rai,Kumara • Acting Director • Department of
Health Systems and Community Health • WHO-
SEARO
Ramaboot,Sawat • Acting Regional Adviser on
Noncommunicable Diseases • WHO-SEARO
Robles,Sylvia • Coordinator • Noncommunicable
Diseases • WHO-PAHO
Ron,A.• Director • Health Systems Development •
WHO-WPRO
Rovira,Joan • Senior Economist • World Bank,
Health,Population and Nutrition Division/
Pharmaceutical Unit • Washington,DC
Ottmani,Salah • Medical Officer • Stop TB • WHO-HQ
Sabaté,Eduardo • Medical Officer • Adherence
Project • WHO-HQ
Saraceno,Benedetto • Director • Mental Health and
Substance Dependence • WHO-HQ
Saxena,Shekhar • Coordinator • Mental Health:
Evidence and Research • WHO-HQ
Sepulveda,Cecilia • Coordinator • Cancer Control
Programme • WHO-HQ
Shatchkute,Aushra • Regional Adviser Chronic
Disease Prevention • WHO-Europe
Uplekar,Mukund • Stop TB • WHO-HQ
Vareldzis,Basil • Medical Officer HIV Care • WHO-HQ
Yach,Derek • Executive Director • Noncommunicable
Diseases and Mental Health • WHO-HQ
❘ 175
WHO 2003
Policy-makers
  Access to…
A C C E S S  T O . . .
Where to find a copy 
of this book
 Depositaries
D E P O S I T A R I E S
Officially designated depository
libraries for WHO publications
ALBANIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteka Kombetare
(Bibliotheque Nationale) • Tirana 
ALGERIA (The People’s Democratic Republic of) 
• Bibliothèque Nationale d’Algérie • Hamma,
El Annassers.Alger,BP 127 
ANGOLA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca da Faculdade de
Medicina,Universidade de Angola (the Republic of)
• Luanda
ARGENTINA • Centro de Documentacion
Internacional,Ministerio de Cultura y Educacion,
Direccion General de Cooperacion Internacional •
Aguero 2.502,3a Piso.Buenos Aires CF,1425
AUSTRIA (the Republic of) • Zentralbibliothek für
Medizin in Wien Zeitschriftenabteilung • Währinger
Gürtel 18-20.Wien A-1097
BAHAMAS (the Commonwhealth of the) • Hilda
Bowen Library,The College of the Bahamas (the
Commonwealth of the) • Grosvenor Close Campus,
P.O.BOX N4912.Nassau 
BAHRAIN (the State of) • Ahmed Al-Farsi Library 
• Ministry of Health ,PO Box 12 .Manama 
BANGLADESH • Library,Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib
Medical University • Shahbag,1000.Dhaka 
BELGIUM (the Kingdom of) • Bibliothèque Royale de
Belgique,Section Collections Officielles • Boulevard
de l’Empereur 4,B-1000.Bruxelles 
BELIZE • WHO Programme Coordination,PAHO/WHO
Documentation Center • P.O.Box 430,93 Freetown
Road.Belize City 
BENIN (the Republic of) • Bibliotheque
D’administration Generale,Direction de la Fonction
Publique • Porto-Novo 
BUTHAN (the Kingdom of) • Library Royal Institute
of Health Sciences • PO Box 298.Thimphu 
BOTSWANA (the Republic of) • Botswana (the
Republic of) National Library Service,Ministry Of
Labour And Home Affairs • Private Bag 0036 •
Gaborone 
MARIANA ISLANDS • Commonwealth Health Centre,
Department Of Public Health and Environmental
Services • Po Box 409 Ck .Saipan,96950 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Nacional,Setor de Intercambio • Avenida Rio Branco
219/39 .Rio de Janeiro RJ,20.040-008 
BRUNEI DARUSSALAM • Medical Library,Ripas
Hospital,Ministry of Health • Bandar Seri Begawan
Negara 2062.Darussalam
BURKINA FASO • Bibliothèque,Ecole Nationale de
Santé Publique (ENSP) • 03 BP 7047.Ouagadougou,03 
CANADA • Official Publications Section,The Library
of Parliament • Ottawa (Ontario),K1A 0A9 
CENTRAL AFRICAN REP • Bibliothèque Faculté 
des Sciences de la Santé • B.P.1383.Bangui
CHILE (the Republic of) • Seccion Organismos
Internacionales,Biblioteca Nacional de Chile •
Clasifirador.Santiago 1400
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • National Library
of China,Section of publications of international
organizations and foreign governments • 39
Baishiqiao Road.Beijing 100081
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Grupo de Seleccíon y
Adquisiciones,Servicio de Canje,Biblioteca Nacional
de Colombia • Calle 24 5-60,Apartado Aereo 27600.
Santafé de Bogota DC
CONGO (the Republic of) • Institut Superieur des
Sciences de la Sante • Universite Marien Ngouabi 
• B.P.2672.Brazzaville
COOK ISLANDS • Library,Department of Health 
• P.O.Box 109.Rarotonga 
COTE D’IVOIRE • Bibliothèque,Faculté de Médecine,
Université d’Abidjan • BP V-166.Abidjan 
CROATIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteka,Skola
Narodnog Zdravlja Andrija Stampar,University of
Zagreb • Rockefellerova 4,Post.Pret.770.Zagreb,
10000
CUBA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Nacional 
Jose Marti • Plaza de la Revolucion.Ave Independ.
E/ Aranguren Y,20 Mayo .Habana,10600 
CYPRUS (the Republic of) • Cyprus Library • Eleftherias
Square.Nicosia,1011
CZECH REPUBLIC • Library,Statni Zdravotni Ustav 
• Srobarova 48.Praha 10,10042 
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Library,
The Grand People’s Study House of DPRK • PO Box
200.Central Pyongyang
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO • Bibliotheque
Nationale De Kinshasa • B.P.3090,Ave Colonel Tsatsi
No 10,Kinshasa 1,Gombe.Kinshasa 
DENMARK (the Kingdom of) • Statsbiblioteket
Tidsskriftafdelingen (The State and University
Library) • Universitetsparken,DK-8000.Aarhus C 
EGYPT (the Arab Republic of) • Egyptian National
Library,UN Depository Library • Corniche el Nil.
Ramlet Boulak.Cairo 
EL SALVADOR (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Nacional
• San Salvador
ESTONIA (the Republic of) • National Library of
Estonia • Tonismagi 2.Tallinn,EE-0100
FIJI (the Republic of) • Central Medical Research
Library,Fiji (the Republic of) School of Medicine •
Suva 
FRANCE (the French Republic) • Bibliothèque
nationale de France,GCA Périodiques Magasin 
• Quai François Mauriac.Paris F-75706 Cedex 13 
FRENCH GUIANA • Bibliothèque hospitalo-uni-
versitaire,Centre hospitalier général de Cayenne •
Rue des Flamboyants,BP 6006.Cayenne,97306 
 GERMANY (the Federal Republic of) • Staatsbibliothek
zu Berlin,Preussischer Kulturbesitz,Abteilung
Amtsdruckschriften und Internationaler • Amtlicher
Schriftentausch • Potsdamer Str.33.Berlin,D-10785 
GERMANY (the Federal Republic of) • UN Depository
Library,DL-202,Max-Planck-Institut für
Auslaendisches,Offentliches Recht und Voelkerrecht
• Im Neuenheimer Feld 535.Heidelberg,D-69120 
GHANA (the Republic of) • Ghana Medical School,
University of Ghana • PO Box 4236.Accra 
GREECE (the Hellenic Republic of) • National Library
of Greece • 32 Panepistimiou St.,106 79 Athinai 
GUADELOUPE • Bibliothèque hospitalo-universitaire,
Centre hospitalier universitaire de Pointe à Pitre •
Route de Chauvel.Pointe à Pitre Cedex,97159 
GUAM • Robert F.Kennedy Memorial Library,
University of Guam • 303 University Drive,UOG
Station.Mangilao,GU 96923 
GUATEMALA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Nacional
de Guatemala.Guatemala
GUYANA • Library,University of Guyana,Turkey en
Campus • Box 10-1110.Georgetown 
HAITI (the Republic of) • Bibliothèque nationale 
• 193 Rue du Centre.Port-au-Prince 
HONDURAS (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Nacional 
• Tegucigalpa 
HONG KONG • Yu Chun Keung Medical Library,
University of Hong Kong • 21 Sassoon Road,
Pokfulam.Hong Kong 
ICELAND (the Republic of) • Landsbokasafn Islands,
Haskolabokasafn (The National and University
Library of Iceland) • Arngrimsgotu 3.Reykjavik,Is-107 
INDIA (the Republic of) • National Science Library •
Indian National Scientific Documentation Centre •
14 Satsang Vihar Marg.New Delhi,110067
INDONESIA (the Republic of) • Perpustakaan
Nasional Republik Indonesia • Jalan Salemba Raya
28 A .Jakarta,3624 
IRAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library • Medical
Sciences University of Teheran • Inghelab Ave.
Teheran 
IRELAND • National Library Of Ireland • Kildare
Street.Dublin
ISRAEL (the State of) • Jewish National and
University Library • PO Box 503.Jerusalem,91999
ITALY (The Italian Republic) • Biblioteca Nazionale
Centrale Vittorio Emanuele • Via de Castro Pretorio
105.Roma,I-00185
JAMAICA • Medical Library,University of the West
Indies • PO Box 107.Kingston 7 
JAPAN • International Documentation Center,
General Library,The University of Tokyo • Hongo 
7-3-1,Bunkyo-Ku.Tokyo,113-0033
JORDAN (the Hashemite Kingdom of) • Library,
Serials Department,The University of Jordan •
Amman
KENYA (the Republic of) • Medical Library,
University of Nairobi • PO Box 30197.Nairobi 
KIRIBATI • The National Library,Kiribati • Bairiki.
Tarawa
LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC • Bibliothèque,
Université des Sciences Médicales • Vientiane,BP 131
LIBERIA (the Republic of) • Library,A.M.Dogliotti
College of Medicine,University of Liberia • PO Box
9020.Monrovia 
LITHUANIA (the Republic of) • Lithuanian Library of
Medicine,Lietuvos Medicinos Biblioteka • Kastonu
7.Vilnius,2600 
LUXEMBOURG (the Grand Duchy of) • Bibliothèque
Nationale de Luxembourg • 37 Boulevard F.-D.
Roosevelt.Luxembourg,L-2450 
MALAYSIA • Library,Public Health Institute (Institut
Kesihatan Umum) • Jalan Bangsar.Kuala Lumpur,
50590 
MALDIVES (the Republic of) • The Library,Institute
of Health Sciences.Malé 
MALTA (the Republic of) • Bibliothèque,Institut
National de Recherche en Santé Publique • Bamako,
BP 1771
MALI (the Republic of) • The Library,School of
Medicine • Guardamangia
MARIANA ISLANDS • Commonwealth Health Centre,
Department of Public Health and Environmental
Services • Po Box 409 Ck .Saipan,96950 
MARTINIQUE • Bibliothèque hospitalo-universitaire,
Centre hospitalier de Fort de France • BP 632/La
Meynard.Fort de France Cedex,97271
MAURITANIA (the Islamic Republic of) •
Bibliothèque des Sciences de la Santé,Institut
National des Spécialités Médicales • Nouakchott,
BP 309 
MAURITIUS (the Republic of) • Library,Mauritius
Institute of Health • Powder Mill.Pamplemousses 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Hemeroteca
Nacional,Centro Cultural Ciudad Universitaria •
Delegacion Coyoacan.Mexico DF,04510
MONGOLIA • Central Medical Research Library,
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare • Enkhtaiwan
St.• Post Office 48,Box 1.Ulaanbaatar 
MOROCCO (the Kingdom of) • Centre de
Documentation en Santé (CDS),Institut national
d’Administration sanitaire (INAS),Rabat-Instituts •
Rabat,BP 6329 
MOZAMBIQUE (the Republic of) • Centro de
Documentacao,Instituto Nacional de Saude
Ministerio da Saude • Maputo,CP 264 
NAURU (the Republic of) • Nauru General Hospital •
Nauru
NETHERLANDS (the Kingdom of) • UB Randwijck,
Verwerking • Universiteit Bibliotheek,
Rijksuniversiteit Limburg • PO Box 616.Maastricht,
NL-6200 MD 
NEW CALEDONIA • Bibliothèque,Direction territoriale
des Affaires sanitaires et sociales • BP 3278.
Noumea Cedex,98846 
NEW ZEALAND • Parliamentary Librarian •
Parliament Buildings,Wellington 1 
NICARAGUA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Nacional
Ruben Dario • Apartado Postal 101.Managua 
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • National Library
of Nigeria • P.M.B.12626,4,Wesley Street .Lagos
State 
NIUE (the Republic of) • Department for
Community Affairs • Community Affairs • Alofi 
NORWAY (the Kingdom of) • Norwegian Directorate
for Health and Social Welfare (NDHS),WHO
Documentation Centre • PO Box 8054 Dep.Oslo,
N-0031 
OMAN (The Sultanate of) • The Medical Library,
Sultan Qaboos University • PO Box 35.Al-Khod,123 
PANAMA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Nacional de
Panama • Parque Recreativo y Cultural Omar,Via
Porras,San Francisco,Apartado Postal 7906.
Panama,Zona 9 
PAPUA NEW GUINEA (the Republic of) • Medical
Library,University of Papua New Guinea • PO Box
5623.Boroko 
PERU (the Republic of) • Departamento de
Publicaciones Oficiales,Biblioteca Nacional •
Apartado 2335.Lima
POLAND (the Republic of) • Bibliothèque,
Panstwowy Zaklad Higieny • Ul.Chocimska 24 • 
PL-00-791.Warszawa 
PORTUGAL (The Portuguese Tepublic) • Biblioteca
Nacional,Servico Portugues De Trocas
Internacionais • Campo Grande 83.Lisboa,P-1751
PUERTO RICO • Library Medical Sciences Campus,
University of Puerto Rico • GPO Box 365067.San
Juan,00936-5067
QATAR (the State of) • Medical Library,Hamad
General Hospital • PO Box 3050.Doha 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Medical Library,College of
Medicine,Seoul National University • 28 Yeon Keun
Dong,Chongro Ku.Seoul
ROMANIA • Computer,Sanitary Statistics and
Medical Documentation Center • Str.Pitar Mos 7-15.
Bucuresti 1,R-70151 
RWANDA (THE RWANDESE REPULIC) • Bibliothèque,
Faculté de Medecine,Université Nationale du
Rwanda (the Rwandese Repulic) • Butare,BP 30 
SAMOA (the Independate State of) • Library Health
Department • Moto’Otua.Apia
SAUDI ARABIA (the Kingdom of) • Library,Ministry
of Planning • PO Box 358.Riyad,11182 
SENEGAL (the Republic of) • Bibliothèque Centrale,
Section Médecine et Pharmacie,Université Cheikh
Anta Diop • Dakar Fann,BP 2006 
SEYCHELLES (the Republic of) • Medical Library,
Ministry of Health • Botanical Gardens,PO Box 52.
Victoria
SIERRA LEONE (the Republic of) • Fourah Bay
College Library,University of Sierra Leone •
Freetown 
SLOVAKIA (The Slovak Republic) • Slovak Medical
Library • Lazaretska 26.Bratislava,814 42 
 SLOVENIA (the Republic of) • Dokumentacijski
Center SZO,Instiut za Varovanje Zdravja RS •
Trubarjeva 2.Ljubljana,61000
SOLOMON ISLANDS • Library,Solomon Islands
Health Training and Research Centre • c/o Ministry
of Health and Medical Services.PO Box 349.Honiara
SOUTH AFRICA • National Library of South Africa,
Foreign Official Publication Section • PO Box 397.
Pretoria,0001
SRI LANKA (The Democratic Socialist Republic of) •
Medical Library,Faculty of Medicine,University of
Colombo • Kynsey Road.PO Box 271.Colombo 08 
SUDAN (the Republic of THE) • The Library,Faculty
of Medicine,University of Khartoum • PO Box 102.
Khartoum
SWAZILAND (the Kingdom of) • Swaziland National
Library Service • c/o WHO Representative.PO Box
903.Mbabane 
SWEDEN (the Kingdom of) • Library,Karolinska
Institutet University • Nobels Väg 8.Solna 
SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC • Bibliothèque Médicale,
Université Syrienne • Damascus 
TOGO (the Togolese Republic) • National Library •
Samsen Road.Bangkok 11000 • 
THAILAND (the Kingdom of) • Institut Togolais Des
Sciences,Humaines et de La Bibliotheque Nationale
• Boite Postale 1002.Lome 
Trinidad and Tobago (the Republic of) • Medical
Library,General Hospital • Port-of-Spain 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kütüphane ve
Dokumentasyon Dairesi,Ankara Üniversitesi •
Ankara Tandogan.Ankara,TR-06100 
UGANDA (the Republic of) • Albert Cook Library,
Medical School,Makerere University • PO Box 7072.
Kampala 
UKRAINE • Vernadsky National Library of Ukraine •
Prospekt 40-richja Zhovtnja,3.Kiev,03039 
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES • Dubai Public Library • 
PO Box 67.Dubai 
UNITED REP.TANZANIA (The United republic of) •
College Library,Muhimbili University College of
Health Sciences • PO Box 65012.Dar es Salaam 
UNITED STATES of AMERICA • The Library of
Congress,European and Latin American Acquisitions
Division,Northern European Acquisitions Section •
Attn:Exchange.101 Independence Ave SE.
Washington,DC 20540-4183 
UZBEKISTAN (the Republic of) • State Scientific
Medical Library,Ministry of Health • Akhunbabaeva
30.M/Box 4820.Tashkent,700015 
VENEZUELA (The Bolivarian Republic of) • Biblioteca
Nacional,Division de Canje y Donaciones • Final
Avda.Panteon,Foro Libertador,San Jose.Caracas,
1010 
VIET NAM (the Socialist republic of) • National
Library,International Exchange Service • 31,Trang
Thi.Ha Noi,10000
YUGOSLAVIA • Narodna Biblioteka • Skerliceva I.
Beograd,YU-11000 
WHO 2003
180 ❘
 Libraries
L I B R A R I E S
Reference  libraries 
for WHO publications
ALBANIA (the Republic of) • Library,University of
TIran (the Islamic Republic of)a (Univ.Shteteror),
Faculty of Medicine (Fakulteti I Mjekesise).Tirana 
ALGERIA (the People’s Democratic Republic of) •
Bibliothèque,Institut National d’Enseignement
Supérieur en Sciences Médicales,Université d’Alger •
18 Av.Pasteur ,BP 542 ALGER GARE.Alger 
ALGERIA (the People’s Democratic Republic of) •
Bibliothèque,Institut National de Santé Publique 
Al-Madania • 4,Chemin El-Bakr-El-Biar.Alger 
ALGERIA (the People’s Democratic Republic of)
Bibliothèque • Institut National d’Enseignement
Supérieur en Sciences Médicales • BP 205.Annaba,
23000
ALGERIA (the People’s Democratic Republic of) •
Bibliothèque,Unité de Recherches en Sciences
Médicales,Institut des Sciences Médicales,Faculté
de Médecine • BP 125.Constantine,25000
ALGERIA (the People’s Democratic Republic of) •
Bibliothèque,Institut National d’Enseignement
Supérieur en Biologie • Route Bel-Hacel,BP 114.
Mostaganem,27000 
ALGERIA (the People’s Democratic Republic of) •
Bibliothèque,Institut National d’Enseignement
Supérieur en Sciences Médicales • El Menaouer,
BP 1510.Oran,31000 
ALGERIA (the People’s Democratic Republic of) •
Bibliothèque,Institut Supérieur en Sciences
Médicales,Université de Setif • Setif 
ANTIGUA BARBUDA • Library,Antigua School of
Medicine,University of Health Sciences • Po Box 510
.St John’s
ARGENTINA • Biblioteca Central,Facultad de
Medicina.Universidad de Buenos Aires • Paraguay
2155,Piso 4,1121 Buenos Aires CF
ARGENTINA • Biblioteca,Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad de El Salvador • Tucuman 1845,2 Piso.
1050 Buenos Aires CF
ARGENTINA • Biblioteca,Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Parasitarias “Dr Mario Fatala Chabén”
• Paseo Colon 568,6to Piso.Buenos Aires CF,1063
ARGENTINA • Biblioteca,Facultad de Ciencias
Medicas,Universidad Nacional de Cordoba (Ciudad
Universitaria) • Agencia Postal No 4,Cordoba CBA,
5000
ARGENTINA Biblioteca,Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad Nacional del Nordeste • Moreno 1240.
Corrientes CTS,3400 
ARGENTINA • Biblioteca Islas Maluinas,Facultad de
Ciencias Medicas,Universidad Nacional de la Plata •
Calle 60 Y 120.La Plata BA,1900 
ARGENTINA • Biblioteca Nacional Felicinda
Barrionuevo,Facultad de Ciencias Médicas,
Universidad Nacional de Cuyo • Parque General San
Martin,CC 33.5500 Mendoza 
ARGENTINA -Centro de Informacion Biomedica del
Chaco (CIBCHACO),Ministerio de Salud Publica •
Marcelo T.De Alvear 20,2 Piso.Resistencia CHO,3500
ARGENTINA • Biblioteca,Universidad Nacional de 
Rio Cuarto • Enlace Rutas 8 y 36,Km 603.Rio Cuarto
CBA,5800
ARGENTINA • Biblioteca,Facultad de Ciencias
Medicas,Universidad Nacional de Rosario • Cordoba
3160.Rosario SF,2000
ARGENTINA • Centro de Informacion y Documentacion
Cientifica (CIDOC),Universidad Nacional de Rosario •
Moreno 750.Rosario SF,2000
ARGENTINA • Biblioteca,Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad Nacional de Tucuman • Lamadrid 875 •
C.C.159.4000 San Miguel De Tucuman
AUSTRALIA • United Nations Information Center •
46-48 York Street,5th Floor,GPO Box 4045.Sydney
NSW,2001
AUSTRIA (the Republic of) • Bibliothek and
Dokumentation,Osterreichisches Bundesinstitut
Fuer,Gesundheitswesen • Stubenring 6.Wien,
A-1010 
BANGLADESH • The Library,Chittagong Medical
College • K.B.Fazlul Kader Road.Chittagong 4000 
BANGLADESH • National Medical Library and
Documentation Centre,Institute of Public Health
Premises Mohakhali • Dhaka 12
BANGLADESH • The Library,Sir Salimullah Medical
College • Dhaka,Mitford Road.Dhaka,1100
BANGLADESH • Library,People’s Health Centre
(Gonoshasthaya Kendra) • Nayarhat Head Office.
Dhaka,1344 
BANGLADESH • The Library,Mymensingh Medical
College • Mymensingh,2200 
BANGLADESH • The Library,Rangpur Medical College
• Rangpur,5400 
BARBADOS • Library,Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of the West Indies,Queen Elizabeth
Hospital • Martindales Road.St Michael
BELARUS (the Republic of) • Medical Library,Minsk
Medical Institute • 83 Dzerzinksky Prospect.Minsk,
220116 
BENIN (the Republic of) • Centre de Documentation,
Faculté des Sciences de la Santé,Université
nationale du Bénin • Cotonou,BP 188 
BOLIVIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad 
de Ciencias de la Salud,Universidad Mayor de San
Andrés • Avenida Saavedra 2246,Casilla 12148.
La Paz
These libraries figure among the regular recipients of a comprehensive collection of WHO books,series and/or periodicals.They have agreed to offer unrestricted access
to their premises to all readers interested in WHO publications.
 BOLIVIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Universidad
Nur • Av.Cristo Redentor Nro.100,Casilla 3273.
Santa Cruz de la Sierra
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Central “Prof.Jose Aloiso de Campos”
,Universidade
Federal de Sergipe Cidade Universitaria • Caixa
Postal 353.Aracaju SE,49100 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
“José Bonifácio Lafayette de Andrada”
,Faculdade de
Medicina de Barbacena da Fundaçao • Praca
Antonio Carlos No.8,Caixa Postal 45.Barbacena MG,
36200-970 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Medicina,Universidade Federal de
Minas Gerais • Avenida Alfredo Balena 190.Belo
Horizonte MG,30130-100 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Ciencias Medicas,Universidade Sao
Francisco (Campus de Braganca Paulista) • Av.Sao
Francisco de Assis,218.Braganca Paulista SP
,
12.916-00 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Nucleo de
Medicina Tropical,Faculdade de Ciências da Saude,
Universidade de Brasilia • 70910 Brasilia DF
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Ciencias Medicas,Univ.Estadual de
Campinas • Hospital de Clinicas-Bloco F2-Sal.15,
Cidade Univ.,Caixa Postal 6111.Campinas SP
,13081 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Central,Universidad Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul •
Cidade Universitaria ,Caixa Postal 649.Campo
Grande MT,79070-900 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Medicina de Campos,Fundacao
Benedito Pereira Nunes • Rua Alberto Torres 217.
Campos RJ,28100 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Medicina,Universidade de Caxias do
sul Bairro Petropolis • Rua F.G.Vargas 1130,C.P.
1352.Caxias Do Sul RS,95001 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Central,Divisao de Documentacao / Intercambio,
Hospital Universitario Julio Muller,Universidade
Federal de Mato Grosso • Rua L,s/n,Bairro Jardim
Alvorada.Cuiaba MT,78048-790 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade Evangelica de Medicina do Parana •
Alameda Princesa Isabel 1580.Curitiba PR,80000 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Central,Centro de Ciencias Biologicas e da Saude
Pontificia,Universidade Catolica do Parana • Rua
Imaculada Conceicao 1155,Prado Velho,Caixa
Postal 16.210.Curitiba PR,80215-901 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Universitaria,Setor de Intercambio,Universidade
Federal de Santa Catarina • Caixa Postal 476.
Florianopolis SC,88010-970 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Setorial de Ciencias de Saude,Universidade Federal
do Ceara Porangabucu • Rua Alex.Barauna 1019,C.
P.688.Fortaleza CE,60430-160 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Medicina,Universidade Federal de
Juiz de Fora • Rua Catulo Breviglieri s/n.Juiz De Fora
MG,36035 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Medicina de Jundiai • Rua Francisco
Telles 250,C.P.1295.Jundiai SP
,13200 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Central/DFDC/Seçao de Doaçao,Universidade
Estadual de Londrina,Campus Universitario • Caixa
Postal 6001.Londrina PR,86051-990 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Escola de Ciencias Medicas de Alagoas,Fundacao
Governador Lamenha Fil’Ho • Av.Siqueira Campos
2095.Maceio AL,57000 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Setorial,Faculdade de Ciencias da Saude,Fundacao
Universidade do Amazonas • Av.W.Pedrosa s/n
Esq.Com.Apurina.Manaus AM,69025 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Medicina de Marilia • Av.Monte
Carmelo,800 • CP 2003.Marilia SP
,17519-030 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Central,Universidade de Mogidas Cruzes • C.X.de
Almeida Souza,200,APDO 411.Mogi Das Cruzes SP
,
08700 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Hermes de Paula,Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade Estadual de Montes Claros
(Unimontes) • Av.Dr Ruy Braga s/n,APDO 19 .
Montes Claros MG,39400 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Nucleo de
Documentacao,Seçao de Aquisicao de Periodicos,
Universidade Federal Fluminense • Ag.Sao
Francisco,CP 107.001.Niteroi RJ,24250 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Ciencias Medicas de Nova Iguacu,
Soc.de Ensino Sup.de Nova Iguacu • Av.Abilio
Augusto Tavora 2134.Nova Iguacu RJ,26000 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca 
de Ciencias Biomedicas,Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de Passo Fundo • Campus,Bairro Jose.
Passo Fundo RS,99050 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Centro de Ciencias da Saude e Biologicas
Universidade,Catolica de Pelotas • Rua Goncalves
Chaves 373.Pelotas RS 96100 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Charles Alfred Esberard,Faculdade de Medicina 
de Petropolis,Fundaçao Octacílo Gualberto • Rua
Machado Fagundes 326,Cascatinha.Petropolis RJ,
25716-970 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Escola de Saude Publica • Avenida Ipiranga 6311,
Partenon Porto Alegre RS.90610-001 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Setorial,Instituto de Biociencias,Universidade
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul • Sarmento Leite,s/no.
Porto Alegre RS,90049 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca da
Faculdade de Medecina,Universidad Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul • Rua Ramiro Barcelos 2400,3° andar.
Porto Alegre RS,90035-003
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Medicina Pontificia,Universidade
Catolica do Rio Grande so Sul • Avenida Ipiranga
6690.C.P.1429.Porto Alegre RS,90000 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca 
“Dr Jose Antonio Garcia Coutinho”
,Faculdade de
Ciencias Medicas.Fundacao de Ens.Sup.Vale de
Sapucai • Av.Alfredo Custodio de Paula 320.Pouso
Alegre MG,37550-000 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Bibioteca,
Faculdade de Ciencias Medicas de Pernambuco,
Hospital Oswaldo Cruz • Rua Arnobio Marques 310.
Recife PE,50000 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirao Preto,
Universidade de Sao Paulo • Avenida Bandeirantes
s/n.Ribeirao Preto SP
,14049 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Setorial,Instituto de Medicina Social,UERJ Univ.
de Estado do Rio de Janeiro • 7 Andar,Bloco E,
Maracana,Rua Sao Fco Xavier,524.Rio De Janeiro
RJ,20550 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Centro Biomedico,Faculdade de Ciencias Medicas,
Universidade Estado Rio de Janeiro • Rua Teodoro
da Silva 48-2 Piso.Rio De Janeiro RJ,20560 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca •
Escola de Medicina • Fundacao Tecnico-Educacional
Souza Marques • Rua do Catete 6,Gloria.Rio De
Janeiro RJ,22220 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Central,Centro de Ciencias da Saude,Universidade
Federal do Rio de Janeiro (Cidado Universitaria) •
Ilha do Fundao,CP 68032.Rio de Janeiro RJ,
21949-900 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Divisao de
Biblioteca e Documentaçao,Universidade Estadual
Paulista (UNESP) • Campus de Botucatu,Caixa
Postal 502.Rubiao Jr SP
,18618.000 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Faculdade de Medicina,Universidade Federal 
Da Bahia • Av.Reitor Miguel Calmon S/n.40000
Salvador BA 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Escola de Medicina e Saude Publica,Fundacao
Bahiana para o Desenvolvimento da Medicina • 
Rua Frei Henrique No.8,Nazare.Salvador BA,40050 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca 
do Hospital Universitario,Biblioteca Central,
Universidade Federal de Santa Maria • Cidade
Universitaria,Camobi.Santa Maria RS,97100 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade Ciencias Medicas de Santos.Fundacao
Lusiada Boqueirao • Rua Oswaldo Cruz 179,C.P.459.
Santos SP
,11100 
WHO 2003
182 ❘
 BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Faculdade 
de Medicina de Sao Jose do Rio Preto • Avenida
Brigadeiro Faria Lima 5416.Sao José do Rio Preto
SP
,15090-000 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Instituto Butantan • Av.Vital Brasil 1500.Sao Paulo
SP
,05503-900 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca/CIR,
Faculdade de Saúde Pública,Universidad de Sao
Paulo • Av Dr Arnaldo 715.Sao Paulo SP
,01246-904 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Servico de
Biblioteca/documentacao,Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de Sao Paulo • Av.Dr Arnaldo 445,
CP 54.199.Sao Paulo SP
,01296 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Centro de Ciencias Medicas e Biologicas de Sorocaba
• Praca Dr Jose Ermirio de Moraes 290,Caixa Postal
1570.Sorocaba SP
,18030-230 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Centro de Ciências Biológicas e da Saúde,
Universidade de Taubaté • Av.Tiradentes 500,
Centro.Taubaté SP
,12030-180 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Centro de Ciencias da Saude,Fundacao
Universidade Federal do Piaui • Avenida Frei Serafim
2280.Teresina PI 64000 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca 
Frei Eugenio Faculdade de Medicina Do • Triangulo
Mineiro,Rua Frei Paulino 80.Uberaba MG,38025 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Administracao
Central das Bibliotecas,Fundacao Educacion “Dom
A.Arcoverde”
,Faculdade de Medicina de Valenca
Bairro de Fatima • Rua Sargento Vitor Hugo 161.
Valenca RJ,27600 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca
Central,Faculdade de Medicina de Vassouras,
Universidade Severino Sombra • Av.Expedicionario
o.de Almeida,280.Vassouras RJ,27700.000 
BRAZIL (the Federative Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Escola de Medicina da Santa Casa de Misericordia
de Vitoria • Av.Nossa Senhora da Penha • CP 36.
Vitoria ES,29000 
BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS • Health Department
Library,BVI Health Department,Ministry of Health,
Education and Welfare,Govt of the British Virgin
Islands • Road Town.Tortola 
BULGARIA • Bibliothèque,Institut Supérieur de
Médecine • 63 Rue K.Zlatarev.Pleven,5800 
BULGARIA • Library and Information Center,
Exchange Department,Medical University • 
Plovdiv,15A V.Aprilov Street.Plovdiv,4002 
BULGARIA • Bibliotheque,Centre National de
Maladies Infectieuses et Parasitaires • Boulevard
Yanko Sakuzov 26.Sofia,1504 
BULGARIA • Library,Medical University • 
Ul.armeiska 11.Stara Zagora,6000 
BULGARIA • Bibliothèque,Institut Supérieur de
Médecine • Ul.Marin Drinov 55.Varna,9002 
BURKINA FASO • Centre de Documentation,
Organisation Ouest Africaine de la Santé,
WAHO/OOAS • 01 BP 153.Bobodioulasso 01
CAMEROON (the Republic of) • Institut panafricain
pour le Développement,Afrique Centrale
Francophone • BP 4078.Douala 
CANADA • Ministère de la Santé et des Services
Sociaux,Service Documentation Périodiques • 
1075 Chemin Ste-Foy,5ème étage.Québec
(Québec),G1S 2M1 
CHILE (the Republic of) • Biblioteca (SERBYMAV),
Canje y Donacion,Universidad de Antofagasta •
Casilla 170.Antofagasta
CHILE (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Medica,
Facultade de Medicina,Universidad de Concepcion •
Casilla 160-C.Concepcion 
CHILE (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Biomédica,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile,Campus
Casa Cebtral • Av.Libertador Bernardo O’Higgins
340,Casilla 114-D.Santiago
CHILE (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Central,Facultad
de Medicina,Universidad de Chile • Avenida
Independencia 1027,Casilla 7000,Correo 7.Santiago
CHILE (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Central •
Universidad de la Frontera de Temuco • Av.F.Salazar,
#01145,Casilla 54-D.Temuco
CHILE (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad de
Medicina,Universidad Austral de Chile • Casilla 
39-A.Valdivia
CHILE (the Republic of) • Servicio de Bibliotecas,
Facultad de Medicina,Universidad de Valparaiso •
Hontaneda 2653,Casilla 92-V.Valparaiso
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • The Library,
Capital Institute of Medicine,Beijing Capital College
• You an Men.Beijing,100054 
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Institute
of Epidemiol.and Microbiology Chinese,Academy 
of Preventive Medicine • Building 5,9-301,Zhi Chun
Dong Li,Haidian District.Beijing,100086
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Binzhou
Medical College • 522 Yellow River Third Road.
Binzhou Shandong,256603
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • The Library,
Norman Bethune University of Medical Sciences •
30 Qinghua Rd.Changchun Jilin,130021
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Chengde
School of Medicine • Cui Qiao South Road,PO Box 6.
Chengde Hebei,067000
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Chengdu
College of Traditional Chinese Medicine • 317 Twelve
Bridge Street.Chengdu Sichuan,610072 
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,West
China Medical University • Chengdu.Sichuan
Province,610041
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,
Chongqing Medical College,Chongqing University
of Medical Sciences • Xie Taizi,Yixieyuan Lu.
Chongqing Sichuan,630046
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Datong
Medical College • 4 Yi Wei Street,South Xin Jian Rd.
Datong Shanxi,037008
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,The Enshi
College of Medicine • Enshi Hubei,445000
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Fujian
College of Traditional Chinese Medicine • No.53 Wu
Si North Road.Fuzhou Fujian,350003
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,
Guangzhou Medical College • 195 Dongfengxilu.
Guangzhou Guangdong,510182 
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,
Sun Yat-Sen University of Medical Sciences • 
74 Zhongshan Road,2.Guangzhou,510089
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,
Guangdong College of Medicine and Pharmacy • 
40 Bao Gang Guang Han Zhi.Guangzhou
Guangdong,510224
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Medical
College Jinan University • Shi Pai.Guangzhou
Guangdong,510632
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Guilin
Medical College • Le Qun Road 56,Mailbox 63rd.
Guilin Guangxi,541001
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • The Library,
Hainan School of Medicine • Haikou Hainan Island,
570005
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,College 
of Traditional Chinese Medicine • Qing Chun Street.
Hangzhou Zhejiang,310009
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Zhejiang
Medical University • 157 Yan An Road.Hangzhou
City,Zhejiang,310006
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Harbin
Medical University • Xiefulu.Harbin Heilongjiang,
150086
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,
Department of Chinese Traditional Medicine,Anhui
Chinese Medicine College • Hefei Anhui,230038
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,
Hengyang Medical College,West College Village •
Hengyang Hunan,421001
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Heze
Medical College • Kang Fu Road.Heze Shandong,
274030
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Department 
of Foreign Languages,Jiamusi Medical College •
Jiamusi Heilongjiang,154002
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Jining
Medical College • 38 Jian She Road.Jining
Shandong,272113
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Kaifeng
School of Medicine • 65 Qian Ying Men Street.
Kaifeng Henan,475001
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Institute
of Traditional Chinese Medicine and Materia Medica
• Kunming Yunnan,650223
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Kunming
Medical College • Renmin Western Road.Kunming
Yunnan,650031
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Medical
Department,Northwest Nationalities University • 
1 Xibeixincun.Lanzhou Gansu,730030
❘ 183
WHO 2003
 WHO 2003
184 ❘
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Luoyang
School of Medicine • 6 Anhui Road.Luoyang Jian Xi,
Dist.Henan,471003
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Luzhou
School of Medicine • Zhong Shan.Luzhou Sichuan,
646000
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Jiangxi
College of Traditional Chinese Medicine • 20
Yangmin Road.Nanchang Jiangxi,330006
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library and
Information Division,Guangxi Institute of Parasitic
Diseases • Nanning Guangxi
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Guangxi
Medical University • 6 Bin Hu Rd.Nanning Guangxi,
530021
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Qingdao
Medical College • 10 Huangtailu.Qingdao
Shandong,266012
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Medical
Center of Fudan University • 138 Yi Xue Yuan Road.
Shanghai,200032
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Shanghai
College of Traditional Chinese Medicine • 530
Lingling Road.Shanghai,200032
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Shanghai
Medical Information Centre • 602 Juan Guo Road
(west).Shanghai,200031
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Health Sciences
Library and Information Center,Shanghai Second
Medical University • 280 Chong Qing Southern
Road.Shanghai,200025
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Changzhi
Medical College • 46 South Yanan Road.Shangzhi
Shanxi,046000
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,College 
of Traditional Chinese Medicine • 79 Congshun Bei
Ling Street.Shenyang Liaoning,110032
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,China
Medical University • No.92,Bei 2 Rd.,Heping
District.Shenyang Liaoning,110001
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Shihezi
Medical College • North Second Road.Shihezi
Xinjiang,832002 
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Hebei
College of Traditional Chinese Medicine • South Xin
Shi Road.Shijiazhuang Hebei,050091
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Tianjin
Medical College • 22 Qixiangtai Rd.Tianjin,300070
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Tianjin
Second Medical College • 1 Guangdong Rd,Hexi
District .Tianjin,300203
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Tianjin
College of Traditional Chinese Medicine • 20 Yu
Quan Road,West Lake Village.Tianjin Nankai
District,300193
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,The Inner
Mongolia Traditional Mongolian Medical College •
16 Huo Lin He Street.Tongliao Inner Mongolia,
028041
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Weifang
Medical College • 68 Shenghi Street.Weifang
Shandong,261042
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Wenzhou
Medical College • Wenzhou Zhejiang,325003
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Tongji
Medical University • Wuhan Hubei,430030
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Wannan
Medical College • 2 Nang-Wu Road.Wuhu Anhui,
241001
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Shaanxi
College of Traditional Chinese Medicine • Weiyang
Road.Xianyang Shaanxi,712083
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Xuzhou
Medical College • 84 West Huai Hai Road.Xuzhou
Jiangsu,221002
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Yanan
Medical College • Du Pu Chuan.Yanan Shaanxi,
716000
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Yangzhou
Medical College • 6 Huaihai Lu.Yangzhou Jiangsu
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,
Zhangjiakou School of Medicine • Zhangjiakou
Hebei,075000
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,
Guangdong Medical College • Wenming Road,
Xiashan District.Zhanjiang Guangdong,524023
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Henan
Medical University • 40 Daxue Road.Zhengzhou
Henan,450052
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Henan
College of Traditional Chinese Medicine • East Jin
Shui Road.Zhengzhou Henan,450003
CHINA (the People’s Republic of) • Library,Zunyi
Medical College • Wai Huan Road.Zunyi Guizhou,
563003
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad
de Medicina,Universidad del Quindio • Avda Bolivar
Calle 12-N,APDO 460.Armenia Quindio
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad
de Medicina,Universidad Seccional Barranquilla •
Km.7 Antigua Via Puerto Colon,Apartado Aereo
1752.Barranquilla Atlantico
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Central,
Universidad del Norte • Km 5 Carretera a Puerto
Colombia,Apartado Aereo 1569.Barranquilla
Atlantico
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad
de Ciencias de la Salud,Universidad Industrial de
Santander • Apartado Aereo 678.Bucaramanga
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Departamento de
Bibliotecas,Universidad del Valle,Ciudad
Universitaria Melendez • Apartado Aereo 25360.
Cali Valle Del Cauca 
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad
de Medicina • Universidad Libre • Diagonal 37a 
No.3-29,Apdo 1040.Cali
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad
de Medicina,Universidad de Cartagena • 
Cra.6 No.36-100,APDO 3210.Cartagena,195
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Medica •
Facultad de Medicina • Universidad de Antioquia •
Apartado Aereo 1226.Medellin Antioquia 
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Medica •
Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana • Apartado Aereo
56006.Medellin Antioquia
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca • Facultad
de Medicina • Instituto de Ciencias de la Salud •
Calle 10A No.2204,Apdo aereo 054591.Medellin
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca • Facultad
de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud • Universidad Sur
Colombiana • Av.P.Borrero,Cra 1a,AA 385.Neiva
Huila
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Ciencias 
de la Salud • Universidad Del Cauca • Carrera 6a
Calle 13 Norte.Popayan Cauca
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Grupo de
Documentacion Cientifica • Direccion de Planeacion
Corporativa • Instituto de Seguro Social • Barrio
Chapinero,Carrera 10a.64-60,Piso 2,Apartado
5053.Santafé de Bogota DC
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca • Jorge
Bejarano • Ministerio de Salud • Carrera 13 
No.32-76.Santafé de Bogota
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca • Facultad
de Medicina • Pontificia Universidad Javeriana •
Carrera 7a,No 41-00.Santafé de Bogota DE
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca • Escuela
de Medicina Juan N.Corpas • Avenida Corpas 
Km.3-Suba.Santafé de Bogota DC 
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca • Escuela
Colombiana de Medicina • Universidad El Bosque •
Transversal 9A bis No.133-25,APDO 100998.
Santafé de Bogota DE
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca • Facultad
de Medicina • Colegio Mayor de Nuestra Senora del
Rosario • Calle 10 No.18-75,1 Piso,AP 24743.
Santafé de Bogota
COLOMBIA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca • Escuela
Militar de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud •
Universidad Militar Nueva Granada • Transv.5a.
No.49-00.Santafé de Bogota DE
COSTA RICA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca • Escuela
Autonoma de Ciencias Medicas de Centro • America
• Centro Colon,APDO 638-1007.San José 
CUBA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca • Instituto
Superior de Ciencias Medicas • Cra.Central Oeste,
Apartado 144.C amaguey,70700
CUBA (the Republic of) • Centro Nacional de
Informacion en Ciencias Medicas • Viceministerio 
de Ciencia y Tecnica • Ministerio de Salud Publica
MINSAP • Calle E No.454 c/ 19 y 21 Vedado.Habana
Ciudad de la Habana,10400
CUBA (the Republic of) • Facultad de Ciencias
Medicas • Centro Provincial de Informacion de
Ciencias Medicas • Av.Lenin 4,Esq.Aguilera.
Holguin,80700
CUBA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Instituto
Superior Ciencias Medicas • Ave.de las Americas 
y Calle E.Santiago de Cuba 
 CZECH REPUBLIC • Library,Department of Social
Medicine,Medical Faculty,Masaryk University •
Jostova 10.Brno,662 43
CZECH REPUBLIC • Library,Lekarska Fakulta,
Universita Karlova • Simkova 870.Hradec
Kralove,500 38
CZECH REPUBLIC • Information Centre,Medical
Faculty • Palacky University,Hnevotinska 3.
Olomouc,775 03 
CZECH REPUBLIC • Narodni Lekarska Knihovna,
National Medical Library • Sokolska 54.Praha 2,
121 32 
CZECH REPUBLIC • United Nations Information
Centre • Nam.Kinskych 6.Praha 5,150 00 
CZECH REPUBLIC • Library,Univerzita Karlova v
Praze,3.lékarská fakulta (3rd Medical Faculty) •
Srobarova 48.Praha 10,100 42 
CZECH REPUBLIC • Library,2.Lekarska Fakulta,
Universita Karlova • V.Uvalu 84.Praha 5 Motol,150 18 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO (the Republic
of) • Bibliothèque,Faculté de Médecine,Université
Kongo • Campus de Kisantu,BP 166.Inkisi (Bas Congo)
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO (the Republic
of) • Bibliothèque,Faculté de Médecine,Université
de Kinshasa • BP 834.Kinshasa XI
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO (the Republic
of) • Bibliothèque,Faculté de Médecine,Université
de Kisangani • BP 2012.Kisangani Haut-Zaire
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO (the Republic
of) • Bibliothèque,Faculté de Médecine,Université
de Lubumbashi • BP 1825.Lubumbashi Shaba
DENMARK (the Kingdom of) • United Nations
Information Centre • Midtermolen 3.Kobenhavn,
DK-2100 
DOMINICA • Health Resource Library,Primary Health
Care Center • Upper Lane,Roseau Commonwealth
DOMINICA (the Commonwhealth of) • Library,
School of Medicine,Ross University • PO Box 266.
Roseau
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC • Biblioteca,Universidad
Tecnologica del Cibao • Calle Autopista Duarte
Km.1,Avenida Universitaria,AP 401.La Vega
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC • Biblioteca,Escuela de
Medicina,Facultad de Ciencias Medicas,Universidad
Central del Este (UCE) • Avenida de Circunvalacion.
San Pedro de Macoris
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC • Biblioteca Central,Pontificia
Universidad Catolica Madre y Maestra • Autopista
Duarte Km 1 1/2,Apartado Postal 822.Santiago de
los Caballeros 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC • Biblioteca,Escuela de
Medicina,Universidad Nacional Pedro Henriquez
Urena • Av.J.F.Kennedy,Km 5 1/2,AA 1423.Santo
Domingo
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC • Centro de Documentacion
en Salud ”Rogelio Lamarche Soto”
,Facultad de
Ciencias de la Salud,Universidad Autonoma de
Santo Domingo • Zona Universitaria,Apdo 4355.
Santo Domingo
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC • Biblioteca,Escuela de
Medicina Universidad Henriquez y Carvajal • 
Isabel Aguiar 100,Herrera.Santo Domingo
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC • Biblioteca,Escuela de
Medicina,Universidad Tecnologica de Santiago
(UTESA) • M.Gomez Esq.Jose Contreras,AA 21423.
Santo Domingo
ECUADOR (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad 
de Ciencias Medicas,Universidad de Cuenca • 
Av.12 de Abril s/n,Casilla 01-01-1891.Cuenca
ECUADOR (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad de
Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud,Universidad
Catolica de Cuenca • Pio Bravo 2-56,Apartado 19 A.
Cuenca Azuay
ECUADOR (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Dr Alfredo J.
Valenzuela,Facultad de Ciencias Medicas,
Universidad de Guayaquil • Ciudadela Salvador
Allende.Av.J.F.Kennedy,Apartado 471.Guayaquil
ECUADOR (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad de
Ciencias Medicas,Universidad Nacional de Loja •
Miguel Angel y Av.Iberamericana,Casilla 349.Loja 
Senor Jefe • Instituto Nacional de Higiene Leopoldo
Izquieta • Perez ,quique 2045 y Yaguachi .Quito 
ECUADOR (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad de
Ciencias Medicas,Universidad Central del Ecuador
(the Republic of) • Iquique y Sodiro s/n,APDO 6120.
Quito 
EGYPT (the Arab Republic of) • The Library,Faculty
of Medicine • Alexandria El-Messalah,21521
EGYPT (the Arab Republic of) • The Library,Faculty
of Medicine,Assiut University • Assiut
EGYPT (the Arab Republic of) • Library,Behna
Faculty of Medicine • Benha El-Kalubia
EGYPT (the Arab Republic of) • Exchange and Gifts
Division,National Information and Documentation
Centre (NIDOC) • Al-Tahrir St.,Dokki.Cairo 
EGYPT (the Arab Republic of) • The Library,Faculty
of Medicine • Al-Azhar University • Madinet Nasr.
Cairo
EGYPT (the Arab Republic of) • Medical
Documentation Administration (Library of the
Ministry of Health and Population),Medical
Education Technology Centre • 21 Abdelazizi 
Alsioud St.Roda.Cairo
EGYPT (the Arab Republic of) • Bibliotheca
Alexandrina • El-Shatby.Alexandria,21526
EGYPT (the Arab Republic of) • Library,Faculty 
of Medicine,Mansura University • Mansura
EL SALVADOR (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Facultad de Medicina,Universidad Evangelica • 
63 Av.Sur Pasaje 1 No.138,Apartado 1789.
San Salvador,01186
EL SALVADOR (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad
de Medicina,Universidad Autonoma de Santa Ana •
5a Calle Pte entre 6a y 8a Av.Sur #28.Santa Ana
ERITREA • Library,College of Health Sciences,
University of Asmara • PO Box 1220.Asmara
ETHIOPIA (the Federal Democratic Republic of) •
Library,Ministry of Health • PO Box 1234.Addis
Ababa
ETHIOPIA (the Federal Democratic Republic of) •
Library,Gondar College of Medical Sciences • 
PO Box 196.Gondar
ETHIOPIA (the Federal Democratic Republic of) •
Library,Department of Community Health • Jimma
Health Sciences Institute.PO Box 378.Jimma Keffa
Region
FINLAND (the Republic of) • National Library of Health
Sciences • Haartmaninkatu 4.Helsinki,FIN-00290 
FRANCE (the Republic of) • Bibliothèque Centrale,
Institut Pasteur • 25-28 Rue du Dr Roux.Paris Cedex
15,F-75724 
GERMANY (the Federal Republic of) • Senats-
bibliothek Berlin • Strasse des 17 Juni 112.Berlin,
D-10623 
GHANA (the Republic of) • Medical and Dental
Council • PO Box 10586.Accra North
GHANA (the Republic of) • Library,Ghana Institute
of Management and Public Administration • 
PO Box 50.Achimota
GHANA (the Republic of) • The Library,University 
of Science and Technology • PMB 3201.Kumasi
GHANA (the Republic of) • Library,School of Public
Health,University of Ghana • PO Box LG 13.Legon
Accra
GRENADA • The Library,School of Medicine,
St.George’s University • St George’s
GUATEMALA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Facultad de Ciencias Medicas,Universidade de 
San Carlos de Guatemala • Ciudad Universitaria,
Edificio M-4.Guatemala 12
GUATEMALA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad
de Medicina,Universidad Francisco Marroquin • 
6a Avenida 7-55.Guatemala 10
GUYANA • Library,Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Guyana • Turkey Campus.PO Box 
10-1110.Georgetown
HAITI (the Republic of) • Bibliothèque,Ecole de
Médecine et de Pharmacie,Université d’Etat d’Haiti
• Rue Oswald Durand.Port-Au-Prince
HONDURAS (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Medica
Nacional,Facultad de Ciencias Medicas atras del
Hospital,Escuela Universidad Nacional Autonoma
de Honduras • Tegucigalpa DC
HUNGARY (the Republic of) • Orszagos
Orvostudomanyi Informacios Intezet • PO Box 278.
Budapest ,H-1444 
HUNGARY (the Republic of) • Library,Debreceni
Orvostudomanyi Egyetem • Nagyerdei Krt.98.
Debrecen 12,H-4012
HUNGARY (the Republic of) • Library,Pecs
University Medical School • Szigeti ut.12.Pecs,
H-7643 
HUNGARY (the Republic of) • Central Library,
Albert Szent-Gyorgyi Medical University • 
PO Box 109.Szeged,H-6701
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department 
of Preventive and Social Medicine,S.N.Medical
College • Agra-282001.Uttar Pradesh
❘ 185
WHO 2003
 INDIA (the Republic of) • Departmental Library,
Department of Preventive and Social Medicine,SMT.
N.H.L.Municipal Medical College • Ellis Bridge,
Ahmedabad-380006.Gujarat
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,J.L.N.Medical
College • Ajmer-305001.Rajasthan
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Community Medicine,Jawaharlal Nehru Medical
College,Aligarh Muslim University • Aligarh-
202002.Uttar Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • Central Library,Motilal
Nehru Medical College • Allahabad-211001.Uttar
Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • The Library,Swami
Ramanand Teerth Rural Medical College • Dist.Beed,
Ambajogai-431517.Maharashtra
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library Section,
Department of Preventive and Social Medicine,
Medical College • Amritsar-143001.Punjab
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Medical College 
• Aurangabad-431001.Maharashtra
INDIA (the Republic of) • Central Library,Goa
University • Taleigaum Plateau.Bambolim-403202.
Goa,Daman and Diu
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,B.S.Medical College
• Calcutta University • Bankura-722101.West
Bengal
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Community Medicine,Medical College • Baroda-
390001.Gujarat
INDIA (the Republic of) • Department of
Community Medicine,Jawaharlal Nehru Medical
College • Poona-Bangalore Road.Belgaum-590010.
Karnataka
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Government
Medical College • South Central Railway,Bellary-
583104.Karnataka
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Sardar Patel
Medical College • Shiv Bari Road,Bikaner-334001.
Rajasthan
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Community Medicine,Burdwan Medical College •
Burdwan-713104.West Bengal
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Medical College •
Calicut-673008.Kerala
INDIA (the Republic of) • The Library,University 
of Madras,University Building • Chennai-600005.
Tamil Nadu
INDIA (the Republic of) • Community Medicine
Department Library,PSG Institute of Medical
Sciences and Research • Peelamedu,Coimbatore-
641004.Tamil Nadu
INDIA (the Republic of) • The Library,Patliputra
Medical College • PO BCCL Township,Dhanbad-
826005.Bihar
INDIA (the Republic of) • Departmental Library,
Department of Social and Preventive Medicine,
Assam Medical College • Dibrugarh-786002.Assam
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Social and Preventive Medicine • B.R.D.Medical
College • Medical College Campus • Gorakhpur-
273013.Uttar Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • Department of Preventive
and Social Medicine,Guntur Medical College •
Guntur-522004.Andhra Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Guwahati Medical
College • Guwahati-781032.Assam
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Gajra Raja Medical
College • Gwalior-474009.Madhya Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Karnatak Medical
College (Karnatak University) • K.M.C.Campus,
Hubli-580022.Karnataka
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,N.E.Regional
Medical College • Lamphel,Imphal-795004.
Manipur
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,M.G.M.Medical
College • Bombay Agra Road,Indore-452001.
Madhya Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • Dr Robert Heilig Library,
S.M.S.Medical College • Jaipur-302004.Rajasthan
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Community Medicine,Government Medical College
• Jammu-180001.Jammu and Kashmir
INDIA (the Republic of) • Central Library,M.L.B.
Medical College Jhansi • Jhansi-284128.Uttar
Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Dr S.N.Medical
College,Rajasthan University • Jodhpur-342001.
Rajasthan
INDIA (the Republic of) • Department of Preventive
and Social Medicine,Rangaraya Medical College,
Andhra University • East Godavari St.Kakinada-
533001.Andhra Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Social and Preventive Medicine,G.S.V.M.Medical
College • Kanpur-208002.Uttar Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Community Medicine,Medical College • 88 College
Street,Kolkata-700012.West Bengal
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,R.G.Kar Medical
College,Calcutta University • Kolkata-700004.
West Bengal
INDIA (the Republic of) • Nilratan Sircar Medical
College,Calcutta University • Academic Bldg
(Central Library).138 Acharya Jagidish Chandra
Bose Rd,Kolkata-700014.West Bengal
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department 
of Community Medicine,Kottayam Medical College 
• Gandhinagar,Kottayam-686008.Kerala
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Kurnool Medical
College • Budhavar Pet.,Kurnool-518002.Andhra
Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Christian Medical
College,Punjab University • Ludhiana-141008.
Punjab
INDIA (the Republic of) • Department of Preventive
and Social Medicine,Dayanand Medical College and
Hospital,Punjab University • Civil Lines,PO Box 265,
Ludhiana-141001.Punjab
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library Committee,
Madurai Medical College • Madurai-625020.
Tamil Nadu
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Kasturba Medical
College,Mangalore University • PO Box No.8,
Manipal-576119.Karnataka
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department 
of Preventive and Social Medicine,Government
Medical College,Shivahi University • Miraj-416410.
Maharashtra
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Topiwala National
Medical College,Municipal Corporation of Greater
Bombay • Dr A.L.Nair Road,Mumbai-400008.
Maharashtra
INDIA (the Republic of) • The Library,Department 
of Preventive and Social Medicine,Grant Medical
College,Bombay University • Byculla,Mumbai-
400008.Maharashtra
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Govt.Medical
College,Mysore University • Mysore-570001.
Karnataka
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Centre for
Community Medicine,All-India Institute of Medical
Sciences • Ansari Nagar,New Delhi-110029 
INDIA (the Republic of) • National Medical Library,
Directorate General of Health Services • Ansari
Nagar,Ring Road.New Delhi,110029 
INDIA (the Republic of) • Central Library,Lady
Hardinge Medical College and associated KSC and
SK Hospitals • Bhagat Singh Marg.New
Delhi,110001
INDIA (the Republic of) • Central Library,Maulana
Azad Medical College,Delhi University • Bahadur
Shah Zafar Marg.New Delhi,110002
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,B.J.Medical College
Poona University • Pune-411001.Maharashtra
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,PT.J.N.M.Medical
College,Ganj.,Jail Road • Raipur-492001.Madhya
Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Medical College •
Rohtak-124001.Haryana
INDIA (the Republic of) • The Library,Department 
of Preventive and Social Medicine,Indira Gandhi
Medical College • Simla-171001.Himachal Pradesh
WHO 2003
186 ❘
 INDIA (the Republic of) • The Library Department 
of Social and Preventive Medicine,Government
Medical College • PO Box 673.Srinagar 190001.
Jammu and Kashmir
INDIA (the Republic of) • The Library,Department 
of Preventive and Social Medicine,Government
Medical College • Majura Gate,Surat-395001.
Gujarat
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,S.V.Medical College
• Tirupati-517502.Andhra Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • Central Library,Trichur
Medical College • Velappaya,Trichur-680581.Kerala
INDIA (the Republic of) • Dodd Memorial Library,
Christian Medical College and Hospital,Madras
University • Vellore-632004.Tamil Nadu 
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Andhra Medical
College • Maharanipata,Visakhapatnam-530002.
Andhra Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Kakatiya Medical
College,Osmania University • Warangal-506007.
Andhra Pradesh
INDIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Community Medicine,Mahatma Gandhi Institute 
of Medical Sciences,Sevagram • Wardha-442102.
Maharashtra
INDONESIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department
of Public Health,Medical Faculty,Universitas
Udayana • Jl.Pb.Sudirman-Sanglah.Denpasar Bali
INDONESIA (the Republic of) • Perpustakaan Kanwil
Depkes,Kantwil Depkes Propinsi Timor Timur • 
Jl.Kaikoli,PO Box 117.Dili Propinsi Timor Timur
INDONESIA (the Republic of) • Library,Faculty 
of Medicine,Tarumanagara University • Jl.Jend.
S.Parman I .Jakarta Barat,11440
INDONESIA (the Republic of) • Division of Scientific
Documentation and Data Processing,National
Institute of Health Research and Development • 
Jl Percetakan Negara 29,POB 226.Jakarta
INDONESIA (the Republic of) • Ministry of Health
Provincial Office • Abepura,PO Box 288.Jayapura,
99225
INDONESIA (the Republic of) • Library,Fakultas
Kedokteran,Universitas Brawijaya • Jalan Mayor
Jenderal Haryono 171.Malang East Java
INDONESIA (the Republic of) • Department of Public
Health (Laborat.Ilmu Kesehatan Masyarakat),
Fakultas Kedokteran,Universitas Sam Ratulangi •
Kampus Unsrat,PO Box 1333.Manado 9115
INDONESIA (the Republic of) • Library,Department
of Public Health,University of North Sumatra School
of Medicine USU • Jl.Dr Mansur No.5 .Medan North
Sumatra
INDONESIA (the Republic of) • The Library,
Perpustakaan Fakultas Kedokteran,Sriwijaya
University Faculty of Medicine.Komplek
RSU/FK.UNSRI • Jl.Mayor Mahidin Km 3 1/2.
Sumatra Selatan,30126
INDONESIA (the Republic of) • Library,Health
Services and Technology Research and
Development Centre,Ministry of Health • 17 Jalan
Indrapura.Surabaya,60176
INDONESIA (the Republic of) • Library,Faculty of
Medicine,Hasanuddin University • Kampus
Tamalanrea Km.10,Jl.Perintis Kemerdekaan.
Ujungpandang,90245 
INDONESIA (the Republic of) • Library and Health
Informatics Unit,Fakultas Kedokteran,Universitas
Gadjah Mada • Jl.Farmako,k Sekip.Yogyakarta Java,
55281
IRAN (the Islamic Republic of) (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC) •
Morteza Motahari Central Library,Razi University
(Bakhtaran University) • Azadi Sq.Bakhtaran
IRAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,Shiraz
Medical Sciences University • Fassa,74615-168
IRAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,The
University of Medical Sciences of Ghazvin • PO Box
34185-745.Ghazvine
IRAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Central Library and
Medical Documentation,Hamadan University of
Medical Sciences • Ayetollah Kashani Blvd.,PO Box
518.Hamadan
IRAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,Medical
School,Kerman University of Medical Sciences • 
BP 444.Kerman
IRAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,Meshed
Medical Sciences University • Daneshgah Ave.
Meshed
IRAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,School of
Medicine Rafsanjan,University of Medical Sciences •
Rafsanjan
IRAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Central Library,
Tabriz Medical Sciences University • 29 Bahman
Blvd.Tabriz
IRAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,Shahid
Beheshti Medical Sciences University • Even.
Teheran,19395-4139
IRAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,School 
of Public Health and Institute of Public Health
Research • PO Box 6446.Teheran,14155
IRAQ (the Republic of) • Medical Library,College of
Medicine-Basrah University-BASRAH • c/o The WHO
Representative,Alwiyah Post Office.PO Box 2048.
Baghdad
IRAQ (the Republic of) • Library-Department of
Community Medicine,College of Medicine-Mosul
University-MOSUL • c/o The WHO Representative,
Alwiyah Post Office.PO Box 2048.Baghdad
IRAQ (the Republic of) • Library • Salahadin Medical
School • University of Salahadin (ERBIL) • c/o The
WHO Representative,Alwiyah Post Office.PO Box
2048.Baghdad
IRAQ (the Republic of) • Library,College of
Medicine,Kufa University (PO Box 18),NAJEF KUFA •
c/o The WHO Representative,Alwiyah Post Office.
PO Box 2048.Baghdad
IRELAND • Official Publications Librarian,Trinity
College Library • College Street.Dublin 2
ISRAEL (the State of) • Library,College of Medical
Professions,Al-Quds University • PO Box 3523.Al-
Bireh West Bank Via 
ISRAEL (the State of) • Resource Center,Institute of
Community and Public Health,Birzeit University •
PO Box 14.Birzeit Via
ISRAEL (the State of) • Central Library,Islamic
University of Gaza • PO Box 108.Gaza El-Rimal via
ISRAEL (the State of) • Central Administration,
Hadassah Medical Organization • Ein-Kerem.PO BOX
12-000.Jerusalem,91 120
ISRAEL (the State of) • Library of Life Sciences and
Medicine,Tel-Aviv University • Ramat-Aviv,PO Box
39345.Tel Aviv-Yafo,61392 
ITALY (the italian Republic of) • Library (Serials),
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations • Via delle Terme di Caracalla.Roma,I-
00100 
ITALY (the italian Republic of) • Societa Italiana per
l’Organizzazione Internazionale • Palazzetto di
Venezia,Piazza di San Marco 51.Roma,I-00186 
JAMAICA • Library,Cornwall County Health
Administration • PO Box 472.Montego Bay
JORDAN (the Hashemite Kingdom of) • Library,
Faculty of Medicine,Jordan (the Hashemite
Kingdom of) University of Science and Technology 
• PO Box 3030.Irbid 
KENYA (the Republic of) • Mahler Library,African
Medical and Research Foundation International •
Wilson Airport.PO Box 30125.Nairobi 
KENYA (the Republic of) • Library,Department of
Community Health,University of Nairobi • PO Box
19676.Nairobi
KENYA (the Republic of) • Library and
Documentation Centre,United Nations Environment
Programme,Headquarters Gigiri • PO Box 30552.
Nairobi
KENYA (the Republic of) National Scientific and
Technology Information and Documentation Centre,
National Council for Science and Technology • 
PO Box 30623.Nairobi
KUWAIT (the State of) • Health Science Centre
Library,Faculty of Medicine,Kuwait University • 
PO Box 24923.Safat 13110
LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC • Library,
Ministry for Science and Technology Environmental
Service • Ban Sisavat.Vientiane Lao PDR
LEBANON (the Lebanese Republic of) • Saab
Medical Library,Faculty of Medicine,American
University of Beirut • PO Box 11-0236/36.Beyrouth
LEBANON (the Lebanese Republic of) •
Bibliothèque,Faculté de Médecine,Université 
Saint-Joseph • Campus des Sciences médicales.
Rue de Damas,BP 11-5076.Beyrouth
LEBANON (the Lebanese Republic of) • Library,
Faculty of Health Sciences University of Balamand •
Youssef Sorsok St.Facing St.Georges Hospital •
Ashrafieh,PO Box 166378-6417.Beyrouth
LEBANON (the Lebanese Republic of) • 
La Bibliothèque,Université Antonine • BP 40016.
Hadath-Baabda
❘ 187
WHO 2003
 LITHUANIA (the Republic of) • Vilnius University
Library • Universiteto 3.Vilnius,232633 
MACAO • Medical and Health Department of Macau,
Servicos de Saude de Macau,Biblioteca-Nucleo
Centro Hospitalar • CP 3002.Macau
MADAGASCAR (the Republic of) • Bibliothèque,
Faculté de Medecine,Etablissement
d’Enseignement Supérieur des Sciences de la Santé,
Université de Madagascar (the Republic of) • 
BP 652.Mahajanga,401 
MADAGASCAR (the Republic of) • Bibliothèque,
Direction interrégionale du Développement sanitaire
de Toliara • BP 239.Toliara,601 
MALAWI (the Republic of) • Library,College of
Medicine,University of Malawi • Chichiri,Private
Bag 360.Blantyre 3
MALAWI (the Republic of) • Library and
Documentation Centre,Ministry of Health and
Population • Capital City,PO Box 30377.Lilongwe 3
MALAYSIA • Medical Library,Universiti Sains
Malaysia • Kubang Kerian,16150 Kota Bharu.
Kelantan
MALAYSIA • Division of Library Information and
Publications,Institute for Medical Research • Jalan
Pahang.Kuala Lumpur,50588
MALAYSIA • The Medical Library,Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia • Jalan Raja Muda Abd.Aziz.
Kuala Lumpur,50778 
MALI (the Republic of) • Bibliothèque,Ecole
nationale de Médecine et de Pharmacie du Mali •
BP 1805.Bamako
MAURITIUS (the Republic of) • Library,The
University of Mauritius • Reduit
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Centro de Investigacion de Enfermedades
Tropicales,Facultad de Medicina,Universidad
Autonoma de Guerrero • APDO 25-A.Acapulco
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Centro Biomedico,Universidad Autonoma de
Aguascalientes • Avenida Universidad Km.2.
Aguascalientes AGS,20100
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Escuela Superior de Medicina,Universidad
Autonoma de Campeche • Ciudad Universitaria.
Campeche Camp.,24030
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Escuela de Medicina,Universidad de Colima,
Direccion de Desarrollo • Av.Universidad #333 •
APDO COR.134.Colima Col.,28040
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Depto de
Documentacion y Biblioteca,Instituto Nacional de
Salud Publica • Av.Universidad 655,Col.Sta.Maria
Ahuacatitlán.Cuernavaca Morelos,62508 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Facultad de Medicina,Universidad Autonoma de
Estado de Morelos • Avenida Chamilpa #1001.
Cuernavaca Mor.,62410 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Escuela de Medicina,Universidad Autonoma de
Sinaloa • Corregon/Ort.de Dominguez,APDO 1667.
Culiacan Sinaloa 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Centro de Estudios Universitarios Xochicalco • 
Ave.Lopez Mateos,APDO 1377.Ensenada Bc
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Facultad de Medecina de Gomez Palacio,
Universidad Juarez del Estado de Durango • Sixto
Ugalde y Calzada la Salle I .Gomez Palacio Durango,
35050 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca 
Dr Enrique Avalos Perez,Instituto de Ciencias
Biologicas,Universidad Autonoma de Guadalajara •
Calle Priv.Dr Banda #26,APDO 1-440.Guadalajara
Jalisco,44100 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Facultad de Medicina de Leon,Universidad de
Guanajuato • 20 de Enero 929,Apartado Postal 772.
Leon de Guanajuato Gto.,37000 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Facultad de Medicina,Universidad Veracruzana •
Av.Hidalgo Esq.F.Carrillo Puerto,Apartado Aereo 6.
Mendoza Veracruz,94730 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca 
Dr Ignacio Vado Lugo,Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad Autonoma de Yucatan • Av.Itzaes No.
498,APDO 1225-A.Merida Yucatan,97000 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Instituto
Nacional de Higiene,Ministerio de Salud y
Asistencia • Calz.Mariano Escobedo No 20.Mexico
17 DF,11400 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca 
Dr Miguel E.Bustamante,Depto de Medicina Social,
Preventiva y Salud Publica,Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico • Piso 6,
Delegacion Coyoacan.Mexico DF,04510 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Escuela Mexicana de Medicina,Universidad la Salle
• Fuentes 31,Tialpan,APDO 22271.Mexico,14000 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Escuela Nacional de Medicina y Homeopatia • Calle
Guil.Massieu Helguera No.239,Fracc.La Escalera
Col.Ticoman.Mexico DF,07320 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias de la Salud,
Instituto Politecnico Nacional • Apartado Postal 5.
Mexico 23 DF,02060 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Escuela Medico Militar • Bd Avila Camacho/Batalla
de Celaya.Mexico DF,11649 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Library,
Facultad de Medicina,Unidad de Ciencias de la
Salud,Universidad Veracruzana • Atenas y
Managua.Minatitlan Ver.,96760 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Escuela de Medicina,Universidad de Montemorelos
• APARTADO 16-37.Montemorelos Nuevo Leon,
67500 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca 
del Area Ciencias Salud,Escuela de Medicina Dr Ign.
Chavez,Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolas de
Hidalgo • Ventura Puente Y R.Carrillo.Morelia Mich.
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Escuela de Medicina,Universidad Autonoma de
Hidalgo • Dr Eliseo Ramirez Ulloa 400.Pachuca
Hidalgo 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Facultad de Medicina,Universidad Autonoma de
Queretaro • Clavel No.200,Fracc.La Capilla.
Queretaro Qto.,76170 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Escuela de Medicina,Universidad Valle del Bravo •
Apartado Postal 331.Reynosa Tamaulipas 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Escuela de Medicina,Universidad Mexico-
Americana del Norte • Col.del Prado,Apdo Postal
1118.Reynosa Tamaulipas,88500 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Facultad de Medicina,Unidad Saltillo • Francisco
Murguia Sur No.205.Saltillo Coah.25000 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Division de Ciencias de la Salud,Universidad de
Monterrey • Avenida I.Morones Prieto 4500
Poniente,Apdo 321,San Pedro Garza Garcia.
Nuevo Leon,66238 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Escuela de Medicina,Universidad del Noreste •
Prolong.Av.Hidalgo S/n,A.P.469.Tampico Tam,
89339 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Facultad de Medicina,Universidad Autonoma de
Baja California • Mesa de Otay,Apartado Postal 113-
A.Tijuana BC
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Escuela Nacional de Estudios Profesionales Iztacala,
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico • Ave.
de los Barrios S/n,Apdo 314.Tlalnepantla,54090
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Facultad de Medicina,Universidad de Coahuila •
Morelos 900 Oriente.Torreon Coahuila,2700 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Facultad de Medicina Humana,Universidad
Autonoma de Chiapas • Calle Central y 10 sur s/n.
Tuxtla Gutierrez Chiapas,29000 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Hemeroteca
Ciencias Biologicas,Universidad Veracruzana •
Carmen Serdan e Iturbide S/n.Veracruz Ver.,97700 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Division Acad.Ciencias de la Salud,Universidad
Juarez Autonoma de Tabasco • Av.Gregorio Mendez
#2838-a Col.Tamulte.Villahermosa Tabasco,86150 
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Biblioteca,
Facultad de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud,
Universidad Autonoma de Zacatecas • Carretera a 
La Bufa S/n.Zacatecas Zac.,98000 
MONGOLIA • National Public Library • Ulaanbaatar
MOROCCO (the Kingdom of) • Province Médicale
d’Agadir • Rue du 29 Février Talborjt .Agadir
MOROCCO (the Kingdom of) • Bibliothèque,Faculté
de Médecine et de Pharmacie,Université Hassan II •
19,rue Tarik Bnou Ziad.Casablanca 
WHO 2003
188 ❘
 MOROCCO (the Kingdom of) • Bibliothèque
Centrale,Ministère de la Santé • 335,avenue
Mohammed V.Rabat 
MOZAMBIQUE (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Direccion Provincial de Saude de Sofala • Caixa
Postal 583.Beira
MOZAMBIQUE (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Medicina,Universidade Catolica de
Mozambique (UCM) • Rua Marques de Soveral 960,
Caixa Postal 821.Beira
MOZAMBIQUE (the Republic of) • Biblioteca
Faculdade de Medicina,Universidade Eduardo
Mondlane • CAIXA POSTAL 257.Maputo
MYANMAR • Institute of Medicine (II) • Mingaladon,
13th Mile Prome Road.Yangon
MYANMAR • The Library,Institute of Medicine (I) •
245 Myoma Kyaung Road,PO 11131.Yangon
NAMIBIA • Documentation Resource Centre,
Directorate Policy,Planning and HRD • Private Bag
13198.Windhoek
NEPAL (the Kingdom of) • Library,Nepal Medical
College • Jorpati,PO Box 13344.Kathmandu
NICARAGUA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca del
Complejo Docente de la Salud,Facultad de Medicina
• Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Nicaragua •
Apdo 68.Leon
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • The Library,
College of Medical Sciences,University of Calabar •
Calabar Cross River State 
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • Medical Library,
College of Medicine,University of Nigeria • Enugu
Campus.Enugu,Enugu State
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • Library,National
Postgraduate Medical College of Nigeria • Km 26,
Badagry Expressway,PMB 2003.Ijanikin Lagos State 
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • The Library,
Faculty of Health Sciences,Obafemi Awolowo
University • Ile Ife Osun State 
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • The Medical
Library,University of Ilorin • PMB 1515.Ilorin Kwara
State 
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • Branch Medical
Library,University of Jos • PMB 2084.Jos Plateau
State 
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • The Library,
College of Medicine,University of Lagos • PMB
12003.Lagos,Lagos State 
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • The Library,
National Institute for Medical Research • Edmond
Crescent (off City Way) Yaba.PMB 2013.Lagos,
Lagos State 
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • Harold
Scarborough Medical Library,College of Medical
Sciences,University of Maiduguri • PMB 1069.
Maiduguri Borno State 
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • The Medical
Library,University of Port Harcourt • PMB 5323.
Port Harcourt Rivers State 
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • Medical/
Veterinary Sciences Library,Usmanu Danfodiyo
University • Sultan Abubakar Road,PMB 2346.
Sokoto,Sokoto State 
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • Medical Library,
Ahmadu Bello University Hospital • Zaria Kaduna
State
PAKISTAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,Ayub
Medical College • Abbottabad 
PAKISTAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Quaid-e-Azam
Medical College,Islamia University • Bahawalpur 
PAKISTAN (the Islamic Republic of) • The Library,
Sind Medical College • Rafiqui H.J.Shaheed Road.
Karachi,75510 
PAKISTAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Health
Sciences Library,The Aga Khan University Medical
College,Faculty of Health Sciences • Stadium Road
PO Box 3500.Karachi,74800 
PAKISTAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,Dow
Medical College • Baba-e-Urdu Road.Karachi,74200 
PAKISTAN (the Islamic Republic of) • The Library,
Fatima Jinnah Medical College for Women,
University of Punjab • Queen’s Road.Lahore
PAKISTAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,College
of Community Medicine • 6 Abdul Rehman Road
(Birdwood Road).Lahore 54000 
PAKISTAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,
Chandka Medical College • Larkana Sindh,PO Box 8.
Larkana,77170 
PAKISTAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,Nishtar
Medical College,Bahuddin Zakaria University •
Multan
PAKISTAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Directorate of
Health Services,Azad Government of the State of
Jammu and Kashmir • Muzaffarabad Azad Jammu
and Kashmir 
PAKISTAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,
University of Balochistan • Sariab Road.Quetta
PAKISTAN (the Islamic Republic of) • The Library,
Rawalpindi Medical College • Tipu Road.Rawalpindi 
PAKISTAN (the Islamic Republic of) • Library,Armed
Forces Medical College • Rawalpindi,46000 
PANAMA (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad de
Medicina,Universidad de Panama • APDO 3368.
Panama 9
PERU (the Republic of) • Biblioteca de Biomedicas,
Universidad Nacional de San Agustin • Apartado
2726.Arequipa 
PERU (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Central,
Universidad Nacional de Cajamarca • Jr.Amazonas
No.304,Apartado 16.Cajamarca 
PERU (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Programa
Academico de Medicina Humana,Universidad
Nacional San Antonio Abad • Ave.de la Cultura S/n,
Apartado 367.Cuzco 
PERU (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad de
Medicina Humana D.A.C.,Univ.Nacional san Luis
Gonzaga • Av.D.Alcides Carrion S/n,APDO 106.Ica 
PERU (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad de
Medicina,Universidad Nacional Mayor de San
Marcos • Av.Grau 755,APARTADO 529.Lima 100 
PERU (the Republic of) • Biblioteca Central,
Universidad Peru (the Republic of)ana Cayetano
Heredia • Av.Honorio Delgado 430,Apartado 2563.
Lima 100 
PERU (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad de
Medicina Humana,Universidad de San Martin de
Porres • Av.Alameda del Corregidor Cdra.15,Las
Vinas de la Molina.Lima 
PERU (the Republic of) • Biblioteca,Facultad de
Medicina Humana,Universidad Nacional de Piura •
Campus Universitario,Urb.Miraflores,APDO 295.
Piura 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Health Sciences
Library,Our Lady of Lourdes Hall,Angeles University
Foundation • Angeles City,2009 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Medical and Health
Science Library,Perpetual Help College of Laguna •
Sto.Nino.Binan Laguna,4024 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Library,Dr Jose 
P.Rizal College of Medicine,Xavier University •
Corrales Avenue.Cagayan de Oro City,9000 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Library,College of
Medicine,Manila Central University (FDT),Medical
Foundation • Samson Road.Caloocan City Metro
Manila,3108 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Medical Library,
Cebu Doctors’College of Medicine • Osmena Blvd.
Cebu City,6000 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Library,Lyceum
Northwestern,Dr Francisco Q.Duque Medical
Foundation,College of Medicine • Dagupan City
Pangasinan,0701 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Library,De la Salle
University,College of Medicine • Dasmarinas Cavite,
4114 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Library,Davao
Medical School Foundation • Circumferential Road,
PO BOX 251.Davao City Bajada,8000 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Library,Iloilo
Doctors’College of Medicine • Molo,West Avenue.
5901 Iloilo City
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Library,College of
Medicine,University of the City of Manila • Muralla
and General Luna Streets.Intramuros Manila,2801 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Library,Ago Medical
and Educational Center,Bicol Christian College of
Medicine • J.Rizal Street.Legaspi City,4901 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Library and
Information Services Division,Nutrition Center of
the Philippines (the Republic of) • MC P.O.BOX 1858.
Makati Metro Manila,1299 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Medical Library,
Faculty of Medicine and Surgery,University of Santo
Tomas • Metro Manila Espana,2801 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Library,School of
Health Sciences,University of the Philippines •
Manila,Palo Leyte,6501 
❘ 189
WHO 2003
 PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Library,Ramon
Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center,College of
Medicine,University of the East • Quezon City
Quezon City,3008 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Library,Virgen
Milagrosa University Foundation,Institute of
Medicine Foundation • San Carlos City Pangasinan,
2420 
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • Library,College of
Medicine,Fatima College • 120 Macarthur Highway.
Valenzuela City of Manila,2627 
POLAND (the Republic of) • Biblioteka,Akademii
Medycznej • Ul.Kilinskiego 1.Bialystok,PL-15-230 
POLAND (the Republic of) • Library,The L.Rydygier
University,School of Medical Science in Bydgoszcz •
Ul.M.Skeodowskiey-Curie 9.Bydgoszcz,PL-85-094 
POLAND (the Republic of) • Biblioteka Glowna,
Akademia Medyczna W Gdansku • Ul.Debinki 1,
SKR.POCZT.645.Gdansk,PL-80-952 
POLAND (the Republic of) • Biblioteka Glowna,
Akademii Medycznej • Ul.Medyczna 7.Krakow ,
PL-30-688 
POLAND (the Republic of) • Biblioteka Glowna,
Akademia Medyczna (Medical Library of Lodz,Main
Library) • Ul.Muszynskiego 2.Lodz,PL-90-151 
POLAND (the Republic of) • Dept of Health Care
Organization,Faculty of Medicine,The Lodz Medical
Academy • Piotrkowska 5.Lodz,PL-90-955 
POLAND (the Republic of) • Biblioteka Glowna,
Akademii Medycznej • ul.Szkolna 18,skr.poczt.184.
Lublin,PL-20-950 
POLAND (the Republic of) • Biblioteka Glowna,
Pomorska Akademia Medyczna • Ul.Rybacka 1.
Szczecin,PL-70-204 
POLAND (the Republic of) • Library,Medical Centre
for Postgraduate Education (Centrum Medyczne
Ksztalcenia Podyplomowego) • Ul.Schroegera 82.
Warszawa,PL-01-828 
POLAND (the Republic of) • Biblioteka Glowna,
Akademia Medyczna • Ul.Oczki 1.Warszawa,PL-02-
007 
POLAND (the Republic of) • Biblioteka,Akademii
Medycznej (Library of the Medical Academy) • 
Ul.Rosenbergow 1/3.Wroclaw 12,PL-51-616 
PORTUGAL (The Portuguese Republic) • Centre de
Documentation,Escola Nacional de Saude Publica •
Avenida Padre Cruz .Lisboa,P-1699 
PORTUGAL (The Portuguese Republic) • Biblioteca,
Instituto Bacteriologico Camara Pestana • Rua do
Instituto Bacteriologico.Lisboa,P-1169-1100 
PORTUGAL (The Portuguese Republic) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Medicina • Avenida Prof.Egas Moniz.
Lisboa,P-1600 
PORTUGAL (The Portuguese Republic) • Biblioteca,
Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical • Rua da
Junqueira 96.Lisboa,P-1300-344 
PORTUGAL (The Portuguese Republic) • Biblioteca,
Faculdade de Medicina • Rue Alameda Prof.Hernani
Monteiro.Porto,P-4200 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Medical Library,
Soonchunhyang University College of Medicine •
366-1 Ssangyong-Dong.Chunan,Choong-Nam,
330-090
REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Library,Faculty of Medicine,
Hallym University • 1 Okchon-Dong,Chunchon 200.
Kangwon-Do 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Library,College of Medicine,
Inha University • 253 Yong-Hyun Dong,Nam-Gu.
Inchon,402-751 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Medical School Library,
College of Medicine,Chonnam National University •
5 Hak 1,Dong.Kwangju,501-190
REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Library,Institute of
Population and Community Medicine,Soon Chun
Hyang University • PO Box 97,Onyang 337-880.
Chung Chung Nam Do
REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Library,College of Medicine,
Pusan National University • 1-10 Amidong Suh-Ku.
Pusan,602-739 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Library,Kosin Medical College
• 34 Amnam-Dong,Suh-Ku.Pusan,600
REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Medical Library,Korea
University • 126-1,5-Ka,Anam-Dong,Sungbuk-Ku.
Seoul,136-701 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Library,College of Medicine,
Ewha Women’s University • 11-1 Daehyon,
Sodaemun-Ku.Seoul 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Library,College of Medicine,
Hanyang University • 17 Haengdang-Dong,
Sungdong-Ku.Seoul,133-791
REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Medical Library,College of
Medicine,Yonsei University • 134 Sinchon-Dong,
Sodaemun-Ku,CPO Box 8044.Seoul,120
REPUBLIC OF KOREA • Library,Yeungnam University
Medical Center • Daemyungdong.Taegu,705-035 
ROMANIA • The Academy of Medical Sciences • 11
Boul.1er Mai.Bucuresti 1,R-79173 
ROMANIA • Library,Institute of Hygiene,Public
Health,Health Services and Management • Str.Dr
Leonte 1-3.Bucuresti,R-76256 
ROMANIA • Bibliothèque,Institutul Cantacuzino •
Spalaiul Independentei 103,CP 1-525.Bucuresti,
R-76201 
ROMANIA • United Nations Information Centre • 
16 Aurel Vlaicu Street,PO Box 1-701.Bucuresti,R-
79362 
ROMANIA • Biblioteca Centrala,U.M.F.• Str.Avram
Iancu 21.Cluj-Napoca,R-3400 
ROMANIA • Biblioteca,Facultatea de Medicina
Generala Din Craiova • Rua Petru Rares 4.Craiova
Dolj ,R-1100
ROMANIA • Library,Institutul de Sanatate Publica •
Bv.Dr V.Babes 16-18,PO Box 5.Timisoara,R-1900 
ROMANIA • Biblioteca,Universitatea de Medicina 
si Farmacie • Piata Eftimie Murgu nr.2.Timisoara,
R-1900 
ROMANIA • Biblioteca Centrala,Institutul de
Medicina si Farmacie • Str.Gheorghe Marinescu
Nr.38 Tirgu Mures,R-4300 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION • Russian Academy of Medical
Sciences • Kamennoostrovsky Avenue 69/71.St
Petersbourg,197376 
RWANDA (the Rwandese Republic) • Centre de
Documentation,Ecole de Santé publique et
Nutrition,Université nationale du Rwanda • 
Campus universitaire de Butare,B.P.56.Butare
SAINT LUCIA • Library,Spartan Health Sciences
University,School of Medicine • PO BOX 324.
Vieux-Fort 
SAMOA (The Independent State of) • The Director-
General of Health,Health Department • Apia
Sao Tome and Principe (the Democratic Republic of)
• Centre de Documentation,Ministère de la Santé •
CP 23.Sao Tomé
SAUDI ARABIA (the Kingdom of) • Central Library,
King Faisal University • PO Box 1982.Dammam,
31441
SAUDI ARABIA (the Kingdom of) • Library,College 
of Medicine and Allied Sciences,King Abdulaziz
University • PO Box 9029.Jeddah,21413
SAUDI ARABIA (the Kingdom of) • Medical Library,
College of Medicine and King Khalid University,
Hospital (44) King Saud University • PO Box 2925.
Riyad,11461 
SAUDI ARABIA (the Kingdom of) • Central Medical
Library,Ministry of Health • Airport Road,Main
Ministry.Riyad,11176 
SENEGAL (the Republic of) • Centre de
Documentation,Direction de l’Hygiène et de la
Protection Sanitaire,Ministère de la Santé et de la
Prévention • Boîte postale 4024.Dakar 
SERBIA and MONTENEGRO • Central Medical Library,
Medical Fakulty Skopje (Medicinski Fakultet) •
Vodnjanska 17.Skopje,91000 
SERBIA and MONTENEGRO • Dr Milan Jovanovic
Batut Biblioteka,Zavod Za Zastitu Zdravilja Srbije •
Dr Subotica 5.Beograd,YU-11000
SIERRA LEONE (the Republic of) • Health Library,
Endemic Diseases Control Unit,Ministry of Health •
Baima Road.Bo
SIERRA LEONE (the Republic of) • Medical Library,
Connaught Hospital • Lightfoot-Boston Street.
Freetown
SLOVAKIA (the Slovak Republic) • Library,Medical
Faculty,Comenius University • Odborarske Nam.
C.14.Bratislava,813 72 
SLOVAKIA (the Slovak Republic) • Kniznica,UK
Jeseniova Lekárska Fakulta • Novomeskeho 7.
Martin,036 45 
SOMALIA (the Republic of) • The Documentation
Center,Ministry of National Planning • PO Box 1742.
Mogadiscio
SOUTH AFRICA • Medical Library Faculty of
Medicine,University of Natal • P.Bag 7.Congella
KZN,4013
SOUTH AFRICA • Library,Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Durban Westville • Private Bag
X54001.Durban N,4000
WHO 2003
190 ❘
 SOUTH AFRICA • Department of Community Health,
Medical University of Southern Africa • PO Box 13.
Medunsa,0204
SOUTH AFRICA • Health Sciences Library,University
of the North • Private Bag X1112.Sovenga T,0727
SOUTH AFRICA • Library,University of Transkei •
Private Bag X2.Umtata K/C,5100
SRI LANKA (The Democratic Socialist Republic of) •
Library,Postgraduate Institute of Medicine,
University of Colombo • 160 Norris Canal Road.
Colombo 8 
SRI LANKA (the Democratic Socialist Republic of) •
Medical Library,University of Jaffna • Thirunelvely.
Jaffna
SRI LANKA (the Democratic Socialist Republic of) •
Medical Library,Faculty of Medicine,University of
Peradeniya • Peradeniya
SRI LANKA (the Democratic Socialist Republic of) -
Library • North Colombo Medical College,Faculty 
of Medicine,University of Kelaniya • Talagolla Road,
PO Box 6.Ragama
SUDAN (the Republic of the) • Library,Faculty of
Medicine,Shendi University • PO Box 10.Shendi
SURINAME (the Republic of the) • Medical Library,
University of Suriname • Kernkampweg 5.
Paramaribo
SWEDEN (the Kingdom of) • Library Parliament,
Riksdagsbiblioteket • Stockholm,S-10012 
SWITZERLAND (the Swiss Confederation) •
Bibliothèque Publique et Universitaire,Service des
Périodiques • Promenade des Bastions.Genève 4,
1211 
SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC • The Library,Faculty of
Medicine,University of Damascus.Damascus
THAILAND (the Kingdom of) • Library,
Phramongkutklao College of Medicine • 315
Rajavithi Road.Bangkok,10400
THAILAND (the Kingdom of) • UNICEF,East Asia and
Pacific Regional Office • 19 Phra Atit Road,PO Box
2-154.Bangkok,10200
THAILAND (the Kingdom of) • Library,Faculty of
Medicine,Chulalongkorn University • Rama VI Road.
Bangkok,10330
THAILAND (the Kingdom of) • Department of
Preventive and Social Medicine,Faculty of Medicine,
Mahidol University • Ramathibodi Hospital.Rama VI
Road.Bangkok,10400
THAILAND (the Kingdom of) • Library,Faculty of
Medicine,Chiang Mai University • 110 Intravaroros
Road.Chiang Mai,50002 
THAILAND (the Kingdom of) • Library,Faculty of
Medicine,Prince of Songkla University • PO Box 84,
Hatyai.Songkla,90110
THAILAND (the Kingdom of) • Library,Faculty of
Medicine,Khon Kaen University • 123 Mitraparp
Highway,Amphur Muang.Khon Kaen,40002
THAILAND (the Kingdom of) • Library,Sirindhorn
College of Public Health • 90/1 Anamai Road,A.
Muang.Khon Kaen,40000
THAILAND (the Kingdom of) • Director,Bureau of
Health Policy and Planning Office of the Permanent
Secretary,Ministry of Public Health,Royal Thai
Government • Tiwanond Road.Nonthaburi,11000
TOGO (the Togolese Republic) • Bibliothèque,
Faculté de Médecine,Université de Benin • BP 1515.
Lomé
Trinidad and Tobago (the Republic of) • Medical
Sciences Library,The University of the West Indies,
Eric Williams Medical Sciences Complex • Champs
Fleurs.Trinidad
TUNISIA (the Republic of) • Bibliothèque,Faculté 
de Médicine de Sfax • Sfax,3000 
TUNISIA (the Republic of) • Bibliotheque,
Deptartement de Médecine Communautaire,
Faculté de Médecine de Sousse • Sousse,4000 
TUNISIA (the Republic of) • Bibliothèque,Faculté 
de Médecine Ibn el Jazzar,Université du Centre •
Ave Mohamed Karoui.BP 126.Sousse,4002 
TUNISIA (the Republic of) • Bibliothèque,Faculté de
Médecine de Tunis • 9 Rue Professeur Zouheir Essafi.
Tunis,1006 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kitapligi,Tip Fakultesi,
Ankara Universitesi • Ankara,TR-06100 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kutuphanesi,
Department of Public Health,Tip Fakultesi,
Hacettepe Universitesi • Ankara,TR-06100 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kutuphanesi,Gulhane
Askeri Tip Akademisi Askeri,Tip Fakultesi,Dr Tevfik
Saglam Cad.• Ankara ETLIK,TR-06018 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Merkez Kutuphanesi,
Gazi Universitesi • Ankara Besevler,TR-06500 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kutuphanesi • Ege
Universitesi,Tip Fakültesi • Bornova Izmir
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kitapligi,Tip Fakultesi,
Uludag University • Bursa,TR-16059 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Halk Sagligi Anabilim
Dali Kitapligi,Dicle Universitesi,Tip Fakultesi •
Diyarbakir,TR-21280 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kitapligina,Trakya
Universitesi,Tip Fakultesi • Edirne,TR-22030 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kutuphanesi,Tip
Fakultesi,Atatürk Üniversitesi • Erzurum,TR-25050 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Medical Library,
Osmangazi University,Eskisehir Osmangazi
Kampüsü Meselik • Eskisehir ,TR-26480 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kutuphanesi,Halk
Sagligi Anabilim Dali,Cerrahpasa Tip Fakultesi,
Istanbul Universitesi • Istanbul Cerrahpasa,TR-
34303 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kitapligi (Library),Tip
Fakultesi (Faculty of Medicine),Marmara Üniversite-
si • Istanbul Haydarpasa,TR-34413 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kutuphanesi,Tip
Fakultesi,Dokuz Eylul Universitesi • Izmir ,TR-35210 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kütüphane ve
Dokümantasyon Dairesi,Erciyes Üniversitesi •
Kayseri,38039 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kutuphanesi,Tip
Fakultesi,Selcuk Universitesi • Konya,TR-42151 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kutuphanesi,
Tip Fakültesi,Celal Bayar Üniversitesi • Manisa,
TR-45020 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kutuphanesi,
Cumhuriyet University • Kampus/sivas.Sivas,
TR-58140 
TURKEY (the Republic of) • Kutuphanesi,Karadeniz
Teknik Universitesi,Tip Fakultesi • Trabzon,TR-61080 
UGANDA (the Republic of) • Library,National
Research Council • Plot 12 Johnstone Street,
PO Box 6884.Kampala 
UGANDA (the Republic of) • Library,Faculty of
Medicine,Mbarara University • PO Box 1410.
Mbarara
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES • Library • Dubai Medical
College for Girls • PO Box 19964.Dubai
UNITED KINGDOM • University Library,Cambridge
University • West Road.Cambridge,UK CB3 9DR
UNITED KINGDOM • Library,Welsh Office • Cathays
Park.Cardiff Wales,UK CF1 3NQ
UNITED KINGDOM • Official Publication Unit,
National Library of Scotland • George IV Bridge.
Edinburgh,UK EH1 1EW
UNITED KINGDOM • Radcliffe Science Library • Parks
Road.Oxford,UK OX1 3QP
UNITED REPUBLIC TANZANIA (the United Republic
of) • The Library,Centre on Integrated Rural
Development for Africa (CIRDAFRICA) • PO Box
6115.Arusha
UNITED REPUBLIC TANZANIA (the United Republic
of) • Director General,Tanzania Library Service • 
PO Box 9283.Dar Es Salaam 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA • Library,National
Institutes of Health • Building 10,Room 1-l 13,10
Center Drive,Msc1150.Bethesda,MD 20892-1150 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA • Serials Department,
University of Hawaii Library • 2550 The Mall.
Honolulu,HI 96822-2233 
URUGUAY (the Eastern Republic of) • Biblioteca,
Facultad de Medicina,Universidad de la Republica •
Avenida Gral Flores 2125,Casilla de Correo 24049.
Montevideo
VENEZUELA (the Bolivarian Republic of) •
Biblioteca,Escuela de Medicina,Universidad Centro
Occidental Lisandro Alvarado • Apdo 516.
Barquisimeto Lara
VENEZUELA (the Bolivarian Republic of) • Biblioteca
Francisco Urdaneta,Escuela de Salud Publica,El
Algodonal • Antimano,UCV APDO 62231 A.Caracas,
1060 DF
VENEZUELA (the Bolivarian Republic of) • Sistema
Nacional de Documentacion et Informacion,
Biomedica (SINADIB),Instituto de Medicina
Experimental (IME),Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad Central de Venezuela • APDO 50587.
Caracas Sabana Grande,1051
VENEZUELA (the Bolivarian Republic of) •
Biblioteca,Escuela de Medicina,Universidad de
Oriente • Avenida Jose Mendez,Apdo Postal 94.
Ciudad Bolivar,80001A
❘ 191
WHO 2003
 VENEZUELA (the Bolivarian Republic of) • Biblioteca
Dr Joaquin Esteva Parra,Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad del Zulia • Av.20 con calle 65,Apartado
Postal 526.Maracaibo,4003-A
VENEZUELA (the Bolivarian Republic of) • Biblioteca
Antonio Perez Romero,Facultad de Ciencias de la
Salud,Universidad de Carabobo (Nucleo Aragua) •
La Morita II,Apdo 4944.Maracay,Aragua
VIET NAM (the Socialist republic of) • Library,
Technical School of Medicine • No.2 ,97 Hung
Vuong.Danang City
VIET NAM (the Socialist republic of) • Ecole de la
Sante Publique (thu Vien Truong Can Bo-Quan Ly
Nganh y Te) • 138 Rue Gianj Vo.Ha Noi,10000 
VIET NAM (the Socialist republic of) • Library,
Faculty of Medicine Haiphong • 213 Bd.Tran Quoc
Toan (lach Tray).Hai Phong,35000
VIET NAM (the Socialist republic of) • Bibliotheque,
Faculte de Medicine • 217 An Duong Vuong.Ho Chi
Minh-Ville,15000
VIET NAM (the Socialist republic of) • Bibliothèque,
Faculté de Médecine,Université de Hue • 1 Ngo
Quyen.Hue,43100 
VIET NAM (the Socialist republic of) • Library,Bac
Thai Medical University • Dong Anang.Thai Nguyen,
23000
YEMEN (the Republic of) • Dhamar Hospital and
Primary Health Care Project • PO Box 87189.
Dhamar 
YEMEN (the Republic of) • The Library,Sana’a
University,Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences
• Wadi Dhahar Rd.,PO Box 13078.Sana’a 
ZAMBIA (the Republic of) • Medical Library,School
of Medicine,University of Zambia • PO Box 50110.
Lusaka,10101
ZAMBIA (the Republic of) • Library,Tropical Disease
Research Centre • PO Box 71769.Ndola
WHO 2003
192 ❘
 Sales agents
S A L E S  A G E N T S
WHO official sales agents 
world wide
ARGENTINA • World Publications S.A.• Av.Córdoba,
1877.Buenos Aires,C1120AAA • Tel:(+54-11) 4815
8156 • Fax:(+54-11) 4815 8156 • Email:ven-
taswp@wpbooks.com.ar • Web site:
http://www.worldpublications.com.ar
AUSTRALIA • Hunter Publications - Tek Imaging,P.O.
Box 404.Abbotsford,VIC 3067 • Tel:(+61-3)
94175361 • Fax:(+61-3) 94197154 • Email:
admin@tekimaging.com.au
BANGLADESH • Refer to WHO Regional Office 
(India (the Republic of)) or Global Sales.
BELGIUM (the Kingdom of) • Patrimoine sprl • 
Rue du Noyer 168.Bruxelles,1030.• Tel:(+32-2)
7366847 • Fax:(+32-2) 7366847 • Email:
Patrimoine@chello.be
BUTHAN (the Kingdom of) • Refer to WHO Regional
Office (India (the Republic of)) or Global Sales.
BOTSWANA (the Republic of) • Botsalo Books (Pty)
Ltd • P.O.Box 1532,Gaborone • Tel:(+267) 312576 •
Fax:(+267) 372608
CAMEROON (the Republic of) • FAS Foundation
International • Fon’s Street,(Former SOPECAM
Building),P.O.Box 443.Bamenda,NWP • Tel:(237)
361023 • Fax:(237) 361023 • Email:allied.engi-
neers@lom.camnet.cm
CANADA • Canadian Public Health Association • 1565
Carling Avenue,Suite 400.Ottawa,Ont.K1Z 8R1 • Tel:
(+1-613) 7253769 • Fax:(+1-613) 7259826 • Email:
hrc/cds@cpha.ca
CHILE (the Republic of) • Libros Médicos en Chile
(the Republic of) • Miguel Concha Caldera,Casilla 7
Correo 22.Providencia,Santiago • Tel:(+56-2)
6551545 • Fax:(+56-2) 2746655 • Email:
internac.ional001@chilnet.cl • Web site:
http://www.internacional.cl 
CHILE (the Republic of) • Internacional Libros Miguel
Concha S.A.• Alférez Real 14614.Providencia 
DENMARK (the Kingdom of) • GAD Import
Booksellers • c/o Gad Direct 31-33 Fiolstraede.
Kobenhavn K ,DK-1171 • Tel:(+45-33) 137233 • 
Fax:(+45-32) 542368 • Email:info@gaddirect.dk 
EGYPT (the Arab Republic of) • 2 Bahgataly street ,
EL-Masri Towers Building D,Apt.24.Cairo,Zamalek •
Tel:(+202) 7363824 • _ Fax:(+202) 7369355 • 
Web site:http://www.meric-co.com
EL SALVADOR (the Republic of) • Libreria Estudiantil
• Edificio Comercial B,No 3,Avenida Libertad,Centro
Urbano.Libertad,San Salvador
FINLAND (the Republic of) •
Stockmann/Akateeminen Kirjakauppa • 
PL 128,Keskuskatu.Helsinki,100101 • 
Tel:(+358-9) 1214403 • Fax:(+358-9) 12144 50 •
Email:sps@akateeminen.com • 
Web site:http://www.akateeminen.com
FRANCE (the Republic of) • Librarie Privat Arnette •
2,rue Casimir Delavigne.PARIS,F-75006 • 
Tel:(+33-1) 55428787 • Fax:(33-1) 55428788 •
Email:arnette@privat.fr
FRANCE (the Republic of) • Librairie Lavoisier • 
14 rue de Provigny.Cachan Cedex,94236 • 
Tel:(+33-1) 47406700 • Fax:(+33-1) 47406702 •
Email:edition@Lavoisier.fr
FRANCE (the Republic of) • Sauramps Médical • 
11,Boulevard Henri IV.Montpellier,34000 • Tel:
(+33-4) 67636880 • Fax:(+33-4) 67525905 • 
Email:sauramps.medical@livres-medicaux.com
GERMANY (the Federal Republic of) • Buchhandlung
Alexander Horn • Friedrichstrasse 34.Wiesbaden,
65185 • Tel:(+49-611) 9923540/41 • Fax:(+49-611)
9923543 • Email:alexhorn1@aol.com
GERMANY (the Federal Republic of) • Govi-Verlag
GmbH • Ginnheimerstrasse 26,POSTFACH 5360.
Eschborn,65728 • Tel:(+49-619) 6928250 • 
Fax:(+49-619) 6928259 
GERMANY (the Federal Republic of) • UNO-Verlag
GmbH • Am Hofgarten 10.Bonn,53113 • 
Tel:(+49-2) 2894902-0 • Fax:(+ 49-2) 2894902-22
• Email:bestellung@uno-verlag.de • Web site:
http://www.uno-verlag.de
GREECE (THE HELLENIC REPUBLIC OF) • G.C.
Eleftheroudakis S.A - Librairie internationale • 
17,Panepistimiou.Athens,105-634,• 
Tel:(+30-1) 3314180 • Fax:(+30-1) 3239821
GUINEA (the Republic of) • Librarie de Guinée • 
BP 542 Conakry.Guinea (the Republic of) • 
Tel:(224) 463507 • Fax:(224) 412012
Global Sales
SWITZERLAND (THE SWISS CONFEDERATION) • World Health Organization,Marketing and Dissemination,• Avenue Appia,20.CH-1211 Geneva 27 • Telephone:(+41-22)
7912476 • Fax:(+41-22) 7914857 • To place orders,please write to:bookorders@who.int;For any questions about publications,please write to:publications@who.int
Local Sales Agents
For countries not listed,please refer to global sales.For an updated list of local sales agents where this title,as well as all WHO publications,can be purchased,please
consult the Internet Catalogue of WHO publications at the following address:http://bookorders.who.int
 WHO 2003
194 ❘
HUNGARY (the Republic of) • Librotrade KFT •
Periodicall Import/K Pesti Ut 237.Budapest,H-1173
• Tel:(+36-11) 574417 • Fax:(+36-11) 574318
ICELAND (the Republic of) • Bókabúd Máls and
Menningar • Laugavegi 18,Box 392.Reykjavik,101 •
Tel:(+354-1) 5152500 • Fax:(+354-1) 5152505 •
Email:erlent@mm.is • Web site:http://www.mm.is
INDIA (the Republic of) • World Health
Organization,Regional Office for South-East Asia •
World Health House,Indraprastha Estate,Mahatma
Gandhi Road.New Delhi,110002 • Tel:(+91-11)
3370804 • Fax:(+91-11) 3370639 • Email:publica-
tions@whosea.org • Web site:
http://w3.whosea.org/rdoc/
ISRAEL (the State of) • Yozmot Ltd • P.O.Box 56055.
Tel Aviv ,61560 • Tel:(+972-3) 5284851 • Fax:
(+972-3) 5285397 • Email:books@yozmot.com
ISRAEL (the State of) • Educational Bookshop • 22
Salah Eddin Street ,PO Box 54008.Jerusalem,91513
• Tel:(+972) 26283704 • Fax:(+972) 26280814
ITALY (THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC OF) • Edizioni Minerva
Medica Corso • Bramante 83-85.Turin,10126 • 
Tel:(+39-011) 678282 • Fax:(+39-011) 674502 •
Email:minmed@tin.it 
JAPAN • Maruzen Co.,Ltd.• Information Resources
Navigation Division • 2-3-10,Nihombashi,Chuo-ku.
Tokyo 103-8245.• Tel:(+81-3) 32758595 • Fax:
(+81-3) 32750655 • Email:irneisui3@maruzen.co.jp 
JORDAN (THE HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF) • Jordan
(the Hashemite Kingdom of) Book Center Co.,Ltd.
(Al-Jubeiha) • P.O.Box 301.Amman • Tel:(+962)
6676882 • Fax:(+962) 6602016 
JORDAN (THE HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF) • Global
Development Forum • PO Box 941488.Amman,
11194 • Tel:(+962) 64656124 • Fax:(+962)
64656123 • Email:gdf@index.com.jo • Web site:
http\\www.ngoglobalforum.org
KENYA (the Republic of) • Text Book Center Ltd • 
P.O.Box 47540.Nairobi • Tel:(+254) 2330340 • 
Fax:(+254) 2338110
KUWAIT (the State of) • The Kuwait (the State of)
Bookshop Co.Ltd.• P.O.Box 2942.Safat,13030 • 
Tel:(+965) 2424266 • Fax:(+965) 2420558
MEXICO (The United Mexican States) • Librería
Internacional de C.V.• Av.Sonora 206.Mexico 
(the United Mexican States),06100 D.F.• 
Tel:(+52-5) 2651165 • Fax:(+52-5) 2651164 •
Email:libinter@compuserve.com.mx
NETHERLANDS (the Kingdom of) • Swets Blackwell
B.V.• P.O.Box 830.SZ.Lisse,2160 • 
Tel:(+31) 252435111 • Fax:(+31) 252415 888 •
Email:infoho@nl.swetsblackwell.com • 
Web site:http://www.swetsblackwell.com 
NEW-ZEALAND • Medical Books,Ltd • P.O.Box 7389.
Wellington South • Tel:(+64-9) 3733772 • 
Fax:(+64-9) 3733282
NIGERIA (the Federal Republic of) • Mr Godfrey O.
Obiaga • 28 Onitsha Road,P.O.Box 370.Nnewi,
Anambra State • Tel:(+234) 46460273 • Fax:
(+234) 46460273 • Email:obiaga@infoweb.abs.net
NORWAY (the Kingdom of) • Academic Book Center
• P.O.Box 2728,St.Hanshaugen 0131.Oslo • 
Tel:(+47) 22994840 • Fax:(+47) 22208971 • Email:
abc@fribokhandel.no
PERU (the Republic of) • Euroamerican Bussines
S.A.• Ca.Las Begonias No.183 Dpto.202,Urb.J.C.
Mariategui.Lima,35 • Tel:(+51-1) 7259152 • 
Fax:(+51-1) 2830129 • Email:
euroamerican@terra.com.pe
PHILIPPINES (the Republic of) • World Health
Organization • Regional Office for the Western
Pacific Publications Office • P.O.Box 2932.
Manila,1099 • Tel:(+63-2) 5288001 • 
Fax:(+63-2) 5211036
POLAND (the Republic of) • Foreign Trade Enterprise
- ARS Polona Joint Stock Company • Ul.Krakowskie
Przedmiescie 7.Warszawa,PL-00 068,• 
Tel:(+48-22) 8261201 • Fax:(+48-22) 8264763 •
Email:Books119@arspolona.com.pl
PORTUGAL (THE PORTUGUESE REPUBLIC) • Lusodoc
Documentacao - Tecnico-Cientifica Lda • Rua
Cruzado Osberno Lote 3,5 Dto.Lisboa,1900 • 
Tel:(+351-21) 8153312 • Fax:(+351-21) 8130641 •
Email:postmaster@lusodoc.pt
PORTUGAL (THE PORTUGUESE REPUBLIC) • 
Prata e Rodrigues Publicacoes Lda • Estraca da Luz,
nº 90-11ºH.Lisboa,1600 –160 • Tel:(+351-21)
7223528 • Fax:(+351 21) 722 3531 • 
Email:prpublicacoes@clix.pt
RWANDA (THE RWANDESE REPULIC) • Bufmar ASBL
• B.P.716.Kigali • Tel:(+250) 86176 • 
Fax:(+250) 83008
SPAIN (the Kingdom of) • Librería Díaz de Santos
Lagasca,95.Madrid,28006 • Tel:(+34-91) 7819480
• Fax:(+34-91) 5755563 • Email:librerias@diazde-
santos.es
SPAIN (the Kingdom of) • Librería Díaz de Santos •
Balmes 417 y 419.Barcelona,08022 • 
Tel:(+34-3) 2128647 • Fax:(+34-3) 2114991 •
Email:librerias@diazdesantos.es
SENEGAL (the Republic of) • Librarie Clairafrique • 
2 rue El Hadj Mbaye Gueye,BP 2005.Dakar • 
Tel:(+221) 82221 69 • Fax:(+221) 8218409
SINGAPORE (the Republic of) • Select Books • 
19 Tanglin Road,03-15,Tanglin Shopping Center.
Singapore (the Republic of),247909 • 
Tel:(+65) 7321515 • Fax:(+65) 7360855 • 
Email:info@selectbooks.com.sg • Web site:
http://www.selectbooks.com.sg
SLOVENIA (the Republic of) • Cankarjeva Zalozba
Kopitarjeva 2.Ljubljana,1512 • 
Tel:(+386-1) 2310791 • Fax:(+386-1) 2301435
• Email:nada.sever@cankarjeva-z.si • 
Web site:http://www.cankarjeva-z.si
SOUTH AFRICA • Democratic Nursing Organization
of South Africa • P.O.Box 1280.Pretoria,(T) 001 •
Tel:(+27-12) 3432315 • Fax:(+27-12) 3440750 •
Email:info@denosa.org.za
SOUTH AFRICA • South African Medical Association •
Private Bag X1.Pinelands,7430 • Tel:(+27-21)
5306527 • Fax:(+27-21) 531 4126 • Email:jstry-
dom@samedical.org
SWEDEN (the Kingdom of) • PrioInfocenter AB
Traktorvagen 11-13.Lund,S-22182 • 
Tel:+(46-46) 180420 • Fax:(+46-46) 180441 •
Email:gunnar.sjolin@prioinfo.se • 
Web site:http://www.prioinfo.se 
SWEDEN (the Kingdom of) • Akademibokhandeln •
Mäster Samuelsgatan 32,Box 7634.Stockholm,103
94 • Tel:(+46-8) 6136130 • Fax:(+46-8) 242543 •
Email:marikka.lindahl@city.akademibokhandeln.se
SWITZERLAND (THE SWISS CONFEDERATION) •
Huber and Lang - Hans Huber AG • Länggass Strasse
76.Bern 9,CH 3000 • Tel:(+41-31) 3004500 • Fax:
(+41-31) 3004590 • Email:who@hanshuber.com
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO (the Republic of) •
Systematic Studies Limited • St.Augustine
Shopping Centre Eastern Main Road.St.Augustine •
Tel:(+868) 6458466 • Fax:(+868) 6458467 • 
Email:tobe@trinidad.net
UNITED KINGDOM • The Stationery Office Ltd
(Customer Services) • 51 Nine Elms Lane London,
SW8 5DR • Tel:(+44-870) 6005522 • 
Fax:(+44-870) 6005533 • E-mail (for orders) 
customer.services@theso.co.uk
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA • WHO Publications
Center UNITED STATES OF AMERICA • 
49 Sheridan Ave.Albany.NY,12210 • 
Tel:(+1-518) 4369686 • Fax:(+1-518) 43674 33 •
Email:QCORP@compuserve.com
URUGUAY (THE EASTERN REPUBLIC OF) • Libreria
Tecnica Uruguaya Ltu • Casilla De Correo 1518.
Montevideo,11000 • Tel:(+598-2) 490072 • 
Fax:(+598-2) 413448
VENEZUELA (THE BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF) •
Librería Médica Paris • Apartado 60.681.
Caracas,1060-A • Tel:(+58-212) 7819045 • 
Fax:(+58-212) 7931753 • 
Email:libreriamp@cantv.net 
 Other books
O T H E R  B O O K S
Selected WHO publications 
of related interest
Active Ageing – a policy framework. Geneva,World Health Organization, 2002.WHO/NMH/NPH/02.8
Epilepsy. A manual for medical and clinical officers in Africa. Geneva,World Health Organization, 2002.
124 pages.WHO/MSD/MBD/02.02
Innovative Care for Chronic Conditions: Building Blocks for Action. Geneva,World Health Organization,
2002. ISBN 92 4 159017 3, 112 pages, Order no. 1150500 
Integrated management of cardiovascular risk. Report of a WHO meeting, Geneva, 9-12 July, World Health
Organization, 2002. ISBN 92 4 156224 2, 35 pages, Order no. 1151523
National cancer control programmes: policies and managerial guidelines. 2nd ed. Geneva,World Health
Organization, 2002. 92 4 154557 7, 180 pages, Order no. 1152422
Secondary prevention of noncommunicable diseases in low and middle income countries through communi-
ty based and health service interventions WHO – Wellcome Trust Meeting report.Geneva, 1-3 August 2001,
World Health Organization, 2002. ISBN 92 4 159026 2, 25 pages, Electronic access:
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2002/WHO_MPN_CVD_2002.01.pdf 
Treatment of tuberculosis: guidelines for national programmes. 3rd edition.WHO/CDS/TB/2003.313
WHO CVD-risk management package for low and medium resource settings.Geneva,World Health
Organization, 2003. ISBN 92 4 154585 2, 40 pages, Order no. 1152523 
World Health Report 2001- Mental Health: new understanding,new hope.Geneva,World Health
Organization, 2001. ISBN 92 4 156201 3, 178 pages, Order no. 1242001
 JUST PUBLISHED!
MDI.DIV.526
World Health Organization
2003, 110 pages [E]
ISBN 92 4 154599 2
Swiss francs: 30.-/US$ 27.00
In developing countries: Sw. 15.-/US$ 13.50
Order no. 1150526
World Health Organization 
Contact Information
Name:
Job Title:
Institution:
Address:
Tel/Fax:
E-mail:
Adherence to 
Long-term Therapies
Evidence for action
Payement Information
Please send a free reference copy to the library of my public institution 
(for developing countries only, full contact information is required) 
Please send me 
copies of Adherence to Long-Term Therapies 
(order no.1150526) at the price of US$27; In developing countries US$13.50.
Payment enclosed
Visa
Mastercard
Diners Club
American Express
Card N°:
Expiry date:
Date of order:
Signature:
WHO, Marketing and Dissemination, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (22) 791-2476; Fax: +41 (22) 791-4857; Email: publications@who.int
You may also order online at: http://bookorders.who.int
ORDER FORM
Adherence to therapies is a primary determinant of treatment 
success. Poor adherence attenuates optimum clinical benefits and
therefore reduces the overall effectiveness of health systems.
“Medicines will not work if you do not take them”– Medicines will
not be effective if patients do not follow prescribed treatment, yet in
developed countries only 50% of patients who suffer from chronic
diseases adhere to treatment recommendations. In developing
countries, when taken together with poor access to health care, lack
of appropriate diagnosis and limited access to medicines, poor
adherence is threatening to render futile any effort to tackle chronic
conditions, such as diabetes, depression and HIV/AIDS.
This report is based on an exhaustive review of the published litera-
ture on the definitions, measurements, epidemiology, economics
and interventions applied to nine chronic conditions and risk fac-
tors.These are asthma, cancer (palliative care), depression, diabetes,
epilepsy, HIV/AIDS, hypertension, tobacco smoking and tuberculosis.
Intended for health managers, policy-makers and clinical practition-
ers this report provides a concise summary of the consequences of
poor adherence for health and economics. It also discusses the
options available for improving adherence, and demonstrates the
potential impact on desired health outcomes and health care budg-
ets. It is hoped that this report will lead to new thinking on policy
development and action on adherence to long-term therapies.
Please send this form by fax or mail to your collegues
