 Developmental regulation of mitochondrial apoptosis by c-Myc 
governs age- and tissue-specific sensitivity to cancer 
therapeutics
Kristopher A. Sarosiek1,2, Cameron Fraser1, Nathiya Muthalagu3, Patrick D. Bhola1,2, 
Weiting Chang2,4, Samuel K. McBrayer1,2, Adam Cantlon2,4, Sudeshna Fisch2,4, Gail 
Golomb-Mello5, Jeremy M. Ryan1,2, Jing Deng1,2, Brian Jian6, Chris Corbett7, Marti 
Goldenberg7, Joseph R. Madsen2,7, Ronglih Liao2,4, Dominic Walsh2,4, John Sedivy5, 
Daniel J. Murphy3,8, Daniel Ruben Carrasco1,2, Shenandoah Robinson2,7, Javid 
Moslehi9,10,11, and Anthony Letai1,2
1Dept of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA 2Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA 3Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute, Glasgow, 
Scotland 4Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA 5Dept of Molecular Biology, 
Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, RI, 02912 USA 6Kaiser 
Permanente, Sacramento, CA 95815, USA 7Dept of Neurosurgery, Boston Children’s Hospital, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA 8Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland 
9Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Dept of Medicine, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, 
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA 10Division of Hematology-
Oncology, Dept of Medicine, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA 11Cardio-Oncology Program, Dept of Medicine, Vanderbilt-
Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA
SUMMARY
It is not understood why healthy tissues can exhibit varying levels of sensitivity to the same toxic 
stimuli. Using BH3 Profiling, we find that mitochondria of many adult somatic tissues, including 
brain, heart and kidneys, are profoundly refractory to pro-apoptotic signaling, leading to cellular 
resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapies and ionizing radiation. In contrast, mitochondria from these 
tissues in young mice and humans are primed for apoptosis, predisposing them to undergo cell 
death in response to genotoxic damage. While expression of the apoptotic protein machinery is 
nearly absent by adulthood, in young tissues its expression is driven by c-Myc, linking 
For correspondence: Anthony Letai M.D., Ph.D., Dana Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline Avenue, Mayer 430, Boston, MA 
02115, Tel: 617-582-7254, Fax: 617-582-8160, anthony_letai@dfci.harvard.edu. 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
K.A.S., C.F., N.M., P.D.B., W.C., S.K.M., A.C., S.F., G.G-M., J.M.R. and J.D. conducted the experiments. K.A.S. and A.L. 
conceptualized the study and wrote the manuscript. K.A.S., C.C., M.G., J.R.M, B.J., R.L., D.W., J.S., D.J.M., D.R.C., S.R., J.M. and 
A.L. assisted with the acquisition and analysis of the data. All authors revised the manuscript and approved its content.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2017 January 09; 31(1): 142–156. doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2016.11.011.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 developmental growth to cell death. These differences may explain why pediatric cancer patients 
have a higher risk of developing treatment-associated toxicities.
Graphical Abstract
To explain how pediatric, compared to adult, cancer patients have a higher risk for treatment-
associated toxicities, Sarosiek et al. find that many tissues in children and young mice are primed 
for apoptosis whereas adult tissues are not due to differences in the expression of apoptotic 
proteins.
INTRODUCTION
The intrinsic, or mitochondrial, pathway of apoptosis is an evolutionarily-conserved and 
highly regulated form of cell death that is critical for development and homeostasis of 
multicellular organisms. The deregulation of apoptosis is associated with many pathologies 
including cancer (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000). Apoptosis is triggered when a pro-
apoptotic effector protein (BAX or BAK) is activated by an activator BH3-only protein, of 
which BIM and BID are most potent (Tait and Green, 2013). This results in the 
oligomerization of BAX or BAK, causing mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization 
(MOMP) and consequent release of cytochrome c into the cytosol, where it complexes with 
APAF-1 to form the apoptosome. This complex activates downstream cysteine proteases, 
including caspase 3, that dismantle the cell and promote phagocytosis (Galluzzi et al., 2009; 
Taylor et al., 2008). However, anti-apoptotic proteins in this family (BCL-2, BCL-XL, 
MCL-1, etc.) can block apoptosis by binding and sequestering monomeric BAX/BAK or 
BH3-only proteins (Czabotar et al., 2013). In order for apoptosis to occur, anti-apoptotic 
proteins within the cell must be overwhelmed and BAX and/or BAK activated.
The mitochondrial apoptosis pathway can be activated by a wide variety of cellular stressors 
including growth factor or nutrient deprivation as well as genotoxic damage from cytotoxic 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 2
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 chemotherapies and radiation. In each of these cases, the basal state of the mitochondrial 
apoptotic pathway can alter the eventual fate of the cell (Sarosiek and Letai, 2016). To 
directly measure the functional state of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway in cells, we 
developed the BH3 Profiling assay, which measures apoptotic priming (proximity of cellular 
mitochondria to the apoptotic threshold) by delivering titrated doses of distinct pro-apoptotic 
signals (BH3 peptides) to mitochondria while monitoring MOMP (Ryan and Letai, 2013). In 
this assay, mitochondria bearing only a small reserve of unbound anti-apoptotic proteins 
undergo MOMP in response to even relatively low doses of pro-apoptotic peptides and are 
thus classified as “primed” for apoptosis; primed cells readily die when pro-death signals are 
generated in response to cellular damage or stress (Ni Chonghaile et al., 2011). In contrast, 
cells that contain a large reserve of unbound anti-apoptotic proteins are less sensitive to BH3 
peptides and are classified as “unprimed;” unprimed cells must experience higher levels of 
damage or stress to trigger MOMP. Finally, cells that block apoptosis by not expressing 
sufficient levels of critical components of the cell death machinery (such as BAX and BAK) 
are classified as “apoptosis refractory.” We have previously shown that patients with primed 
cancers respond more favorably to chemotherapy than patients with unprimed cancers 
(Davids et al., 2012; Ni Chonghaile et al., 2011; Vo et al., 2012).
Chemotherapy and radiation treatments have cured cancer in millions of patients (American 
Cancer Society, 2014), yet the apoptotic cell death that these agents can induce in healthy 
tissues limits their use. This is especially true in pediatric patients who experience 
considerably higher levels of treatment-associated toxicity and morbidity from genotoxic 
agents. For example, brain irradiation is a critical component of the potentially curative 
treatment for brain tumors. However, radiation can also trigger cell death in healthy neurons 
in very young patients, resulting in permanent and devastating cognitive deficits with 
severity being inversely correlated with age (Merchant et al., 2010; Silber et al., 1992). 
Similarly, children with many types of cancers are commonly treated with anthracyclines 
including doxorubicin. However, doxorubicin treatment in children can cause thinning of the 
cardiac ventricular walls, a reduction in ventricular mass and consequent heart failure, with 
the youngest children again being most at risk (Lipshultz et al., 1995; Trachtenberg et al., 
2011). Currently, parents and clinicians must balance the curative potential of these 
treatments with their potential for causing devastating toxicities. It is unclear why young 
children are more at risk of developing these toxicities than adults.
Much of the study of apoptosis has been devoted to cancer and hematopoietic tissues, with 
relatively little study of other healthy somatic tissues. It is currently unknown whether cells 
that make up distinct tissues have varying levels of apoptotic priming, which could 
potentially contribute to their different sensitivities to classical apoptosis-inducing agents.
RESULTS
Many adult tissues are apoptosis refractory
We first performed BH3 Profiling on a comprehensive set of adult mouse tissues to detect 
any potential differences in their apoptotic priming. Cells of the hematopoietic lineage from 
the periphery (peripheral blood mononuclear cells [PBMCs]), thymus, spleen and bone 
marrow are the most primed cells in the body among those we studied, as indicated by high 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 3
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mitochondrial depolarization in response to BIM or BID BH3 peptides or full length 
proteins (Figures 1A–B and S1A). Cells (excluding blood) constituting the large intestine, 
small intestine, lungs and liver were relatively unprimed, as they required higher doses of 
BIM or BID BH3 peptides and a longer time period to trigger depolarization. Strikingly, we 
found adult brain, heart and kidney tissues are far less primed, and nearly completely 
insensitive to concentrations of BIM and BID BH3 (100 μM) that are sufficient to induce 
MOMP in nearly every cancer cell line or primary cancer cell we have tested.
We previously found that apoptotic priming is a strong determinant of cancer cell fate in 
response to cytotoxic chemotherapies. We hypothesized that healthy tissue sensitivity to 
genotoxic agents would be dependent on their degree of priming. To test this hypothesis, we 
exposed live adult mice to 8 Gray of gamma radiation and found that the degree of apoptosis 
induced in the tissues corresponded to their level of apoptotic priming (Figure 1C–D, S1B–
C).
We next asked whether the profound differences in mitochondrial priming in adult tissues 
could be due to differences in expression of BCL-2 family proteins. While we might have 
expected to find reduced expression of pro-apoptotic proteins or increased expression of 
their anti-apoptotic counterparts, we instead found that both pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins 
were lacking in apoptosis refractory tissues (Figure 1E). BAX and BAK, two proteins that 
are required for mitochondrial apoptosis, were nearly undetectable in refractory tissues. 
These tissues also expressed lower levels of Caspases 3 and 8 to potentially further suppress 
cell death. We did not observe major differences in the expression of XIAP, a potent 
inhibitor of caspase activity, across adult tissues.
We next examined the levels of these proteins in human tissues by mining mass-
spectrometry-based proteome data (Kim et al., 2014) and found that adult human tissues 
exhibit a similar pattern of protein expression to that of mice (Figure 1F, Tables S1 and S2), 
suggesting that mouse and human tissues regulate apoptosis similarly, which is consistent 
with previous work (Reed et al., 2003).
To test whether the lack of BAX and BAK in apoptosis refractory tissues was preventing 
activator-induced MOMP, we tested whether addition of recombinant BAX to mitochondria 
would restore sensitivity to BH3 peptides. While recombinant BAX alone did not induce 
MOMP, we detected efficient and complete MOMP in adult brain, heart and kidney tissues 
when administering BAX concurrently with even minute amounts of BIM (Figure 1G). 
These data indicate that neither BAX nor BAK are expressed at levels sufficient for MOMP 
in adult brain, heart and kidney tissues. Moreover, in these tissues there is lower expression 
of nearly all proteins comprising the mitochondrial apoptotic machinery, both pro- and anti-
apoptotic, and pre- and post-mitochondrial. This apoptotic resistance presumably protects 
vital, long-lived cells constituting these largely post-mitotic tissues from aberrant cell death. 
Operationally, we defined cells as apoptosis refractory when MOMP is not induced by BIM 
or BID BH3 at even 100 μM, yet efficiently induced by low doses (1 μM) of BIM BH3 in 
the presence of exogenous BAX. It is important to note that although cells may be 
designated as apoptosis refractory based on the BH3 Profiling assay, this designation is 
made at a single time point and in the absence of stress. There may exist conditions under 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 4
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 which apoptosis refractory cells upregulate critical pro-apoptotic proteins to acquire 
apoptotic sensitivity.
Early in life, tissues are primed for apoptosis
Young children frequently experience neuro- and cardiotoxicity when treated with radiation 
or genotoxic chemotherapies. We therefore hypothesized that the apoptotic pathway may be 
more active in these tissues in young mammals as compared to adults. To test this, we 
measured levels of apoptotic priming in newborn mice and found that brain, heart and 
kidney mitochondria in embryonic and very young mice are extremely primed for apoptosis 
(Figure 2A). In fact, mitochondria in neonatal brain cells were almost as primed for 
apoptosis as adult splenocytes. We next sought to delineate the transition between being 
highly primed and apoptosis refractory in relevant tissues by making serial measurements 
over time. Each tissue exhibited a distinct temporal program to transition from being primed 
to being apoptosis refractory with the sharpest decreases occurring shortly after birth (P0–
P5) (Figure 2B). In contrast, the spleen maintained a high level of priming throughout 
development and into adulthood (Figure 2B).
We next sought to test the functional consequences of these developmental changes in 
apoptotic priming. We chose to again stress cells with gamma radiation, which applies an 
equal and reproducible level of genotoxic damage across tissues and models radiation 
therapy in pediatric cancer patients. Mice at various stages of postnatal development were 
treated with whole-body gamma irradiation and apoptosis was quantified. We detected 
extensive caspase 3/7 activation post radiation, at doses of 0.50 – 8 Gy, in brain, heart and 
kidney tissues in P0–P2 mice, which was measurably reduced each day of postnatal 
development and finally silenced (insensitivity to 8 Gy) by P13, P15 and P12 in brain, heart 
and kidney, respectively (Figure 2C and S2A). Splenocytes, which are primed throughout 
life, consistently activated caspases in response to damage. We utilized 
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for cleaved caspase 3 and TUNEL to confirm that the 
cells undergoing apoptosis in each tissue in response to radiation are not blood cells (Figure 
2D–F and S2B–F).
Very young patients suffer increased iatrogenic cardiotoxicity from anthracyclines compared 
with non-elderly adults. To determine whether the dynamic levels of apoptotic priming 
during postnatal development may contribute to this difference, we injected mice at various 
postnatal stages with the anthracycline doxorubicin and measured caspase activation in the 
heart, again modeling pediatric cancer treatment in humans. In neonatal heart tissue, we 
detected caspase activation, which decreases with age in a manner similar to that following 
radiation damage (Figure 2C).
Finally, we sought to determine whether the changes in apoptotic priming were dependent 
on an in vivo milieu or whether they could be driven by cell-autonomous mechanisms. To 
test this, we isolated hippocampal neurons from embryonic day 19 (E19) rat brains and 
measured apoptotic priming and chemosensitivity of these cells at regular intervals as they 
matured in vitro (Figure 3A–C). These non-proliferating (Figure 3D) neurons underwent the 
same developmentally-defined transition from high apoptotic priming to apoptotic resistance 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 5
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that was evident in vivo. Their sensitivity to the classical apoptosis inducers staurosporine 
and doxorubicin followed a similar pattern (Figure 3E).
Age-related apoptotic priming is regulated via BAX and BAK
The contrast in apoptotic priming in vital tissues between young and adult mice prompted us 
to explore the age-related expression of BCL-2 family proteins. Because we had previously 
shown that exogenous BAX supplementation is sufficient to reverse mitochondrial resistance 
to pro-apoptotic signals, we focused on the developmental regulation of BAX and BAK. In 
the spleen, we found the critical effectors BAX and BAK and potent activator BH3-only 
proteins BIM and BID to be consistently expressed during the entire lifespan of the animals 
(Figure 4A). Major anti-apoptotic proteins were also expressed in the spleen consistently 
throughout life, although a downregulation of BCL-XL and MCL-1 and upregulation of 
BCL-2 with age was noted. Expression of caspase 3 and APAF-1 was unchanged over time. 
These results were consistent with BH3 profiling data showing high levels of priming 
throughout life.
In contrast to the spleen, we found the expression of BCL-2 family members in the mouse 
brain during postnatal development to be dynamic. BAX was highly expressed in the mouse 
brain at P0–P5, but continually reduced into adulthood (Figure 4A). BAK was reduced in a 
similar manner yet expression levels were lower overall (relative to adult spleen). BCL-XL, 
as well as caspases 8 and 9 were consistently expressed while BIM, BID, MCL-1 and 
BCL-2 were also reduced during postnatal brain development. Finally, both caspase 3 and 
APAF-1 were strongly downregulated during postnatal development, further contributing to 
the suppression of apoptosis in adult brain tissue.
Similar results to the brain were also observed in heart, kidney and liver with BAX and BAK 
being rapidly downregulated following birth (Figure 4A). We confirmed this downregulation 
occurs in the non-blood cells that comprise these tissues via IHC (Figure S3). We also found 
that adult liver tissue expresses low, yet detectable, levels of BAK (Figure S3B), which is 
consistent with the higher sensitivity of adult hepatocytes to BID over BIM (Figure 1B) due 
to their activation preferences (Sarosiek et al., 2013). It is notable that anti-apoptotic proteins 
tended to be downregulated in these tissues as well, further demonstrating that adult tissues 
are not protected from apoptosis by high expression of anti-apoptotic proteins. Instead, there 
appears to be a wholesale dismantling of the apoptotic machinery to render these cells 
apoptosis refractory, preserving their survival. The expression levels of VDAC, which can 
facilitate cytochrome c release from mitochondria during MOMP, and IAP proteins (XIAP, 
CIAP1) also remained largely unchanged across all tissues.
We also found BAX and BAK, along with other key components of the apoptotic machinery, 
to be strongly downregulated in human adult brain, heart and liver tissues relative to fetal 
tissues (Figure 4B and Tables S1–S2).
Healthy tissues differ in utilizing BAX versus BAK to undergo apoptosis
BAX and BAK have non-overlapping roles in regulating apoptosis and their activity can be 
modulated selectively (Sarosiek et al., 2013; Shamas-Din et al., 2014). Our results showed 
that BAX and BAK are downregulated in tissue-specific manners as they transition from 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 6
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 being apoptotically primed to refractory. We therefore utilized mouse models to determine 
the distinct contributions of BAX and BAK to the activation of apoptosis in healthy tissues. 
Neonatal brain tissue in WT mice was efficiently depolarized by the BIM (~80%) and, to a 
lesser extent, BID (40%) peptides (Figures 5A–B and S4). In Bax−/− neonates, however, we 
found the responses to BIM and BID significantly reduced, which was not evident in 
Bak1−/− mice. We therefore hypothesized that loss of Bax would protect brain tissue from 
radiation-induced apoptosis while loss of Bak1 would not. In agreement with the BH3 
Profiling data, we found that loss of Bax prevented nearly all caspase 3 activation post 
radiation while loss of Bak1 had no effect (Figure 5C). Thus, in the early postnatal brain, 
BAX and not BAK is the dominant effector that is engaged to trigger apoptosis.
We then found that each tissue exhibits its own pattern of effector dependence. Splenocytes 
can execute apoptosis via BAX or BAK and although loss of BAX is somewhat protective, 
both must be lost in order to prevent all radiation-induced apoptosis (Figure 5C). In the 
neonatal heart, loss of either BAX or BAK reduced responses to peptides and radiation, 
indicating that both effectors are present, yet at limited levels, consistent with our 
immunoblotting results (Figure 4A). Cells within the neonatal kidney also contain both BAX 
and BAK, and loss of either reduced peptide responses. However, loss of BAX meaningfully 
reduced caspase activation after irradiation while loss of BAK did not. Finally, we found that 
neonatal hepatocytes contained both BAX and BAK and required the loss of both in order to 
significantly reduce apoptosis post radiation. In all cases, the knockout of Bax preferentially 
dulled responses to the BIM BH3 peptide while loss of Bak1 preferentially dulled responses 
to the BID BH3 peptide, which is in agreement with reported specificity of activator/effector 
interactions (Sarosiek et al., 2013). These results may enable the prevention of damage-
induced apoptosis in neonatal tissues by inhibiting BAX alone (brain) or both BAX and 
BAK (heart, kidney, liver, spleen).
Higher apoptotic priming in young mice contributes to doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity
Young hearts are considerably more sensitive to doxorubicin than non-elderly adult hearts. 
Clinically, the degree of cardiotoxicity observed correlates with age, with the youngest 
children being most at risk for developing symptoms including decreased ejection fraction 
(EF), thinning of ventricular walls, and an overall reduction in heart size (ventricular mass), 
sometimes referred to as “Grinch syndrome” (Lipshultz et al., 2014). We hypothesized that 
the differences in apoptotic priming in cardiomyocytes from young versus adult hearts may 
contribute to the heightened risk of developing cardiotoxicity in young patients.
We developed a mouse model of doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity by injecting mice with 
3 doses of doxorubicin (5 mg/kg) over the course of one week, starting at days P5/6 (primed 
for apoptosis), P11/12 (unprimed), or P60–80 (apoptosis refractory) (Figure 6A). Our dosing 
schedule is reduced in intensity (3 doses instead of 5) from one previously used to model 
chronic doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in adult mice (Zhang et al., 2012), which, when tested in 
young mice induced prohibitively high levels of cardiotoxicity as evidenced by arrhythmias 
and death (data not shown). Using echocardiograms at day 14, we found significant thinning 
of the interventricular septal (IVS;d) and posterior ventricular walls (LVPW;d) in M-mode 
echocardiogram tracings at diastole in animals that began receiving injections at P5/6, but 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 7
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 not those that began as adults (Figure 6B–D, Movies S1–S2). Moreover, animals treated at a 
young age exhibited a profound decrease in EF and left ventricular mass while adults did 
not. Masson’s Trichrome staining (MTS) of hearts after treatment showed focal areas of 
altered myocyte architecture with signs of early injury (loss of cross striations, 
disorganization of myofilaments resulting in abnormal staining, and hypochromatic nuclei) 
in mice treated starting at P5/6 but not adults (Figure S5A).
We next asked if suppression of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway could reverse these effects of 
doxorubicin. Using knockout mice to model pharmacologic inhibition, we found that loss of 
both Bax and Bak1 was required to consistently reverse doxorubicin-induced damage in 
neonatal mouse hearts (Figure 6E). In addition, knockout of Bax and Bak1 in P5/6 mice 
treated with doxorubicin showed dramatically reduced, although not completely lost, 
evidence of early injury in MTS histology (Figure S5B). Therefore, young heart tissue 
expresses both BAX and BAK at sufficient levels to activate apoptosis and thus inhibition of 
both of these effectors is needed to mitigate doxorubicin-induced thinning of ventricular 
walls and reduction in ventricular mass. In addition, there may also be a non-apoptotic 
component of doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity since the BAX/BAK double knockout 
mice still exhibited some signs of early injury based on MTS histology, although symptoms 
were greatly reduced. Taken together, our results show that hearts in young mice exhibit 
more severe clinically-relevant symptoms of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity than adults, 
potentially due to the increased BAX and BAK expression in apoptotically primed young 
hearts (Figure 2B) that renders them hypersensitive to doxorubicin (Figure 2C).
Apoptotic priming is modulated by c-Myc
The concerted loss of several genes responsible for regulating apoptosis suggested that a 
master developmental program or transcription factor may be regulating multiple members 
of this pathway. One such potential modulator is c-Myc (hereafter Myc), a transcription 
factor that drives cellular growth and proliferation in normal as well as cancerous cells 
(Dang et al., 2006). Several links between Myc and apoptosis have been reported, including 
the sensitization of Myc over-expressing cells to a variety of pro-apoptotic stimuli 
(Bissonnette et al., 1992; Egle et al., 2004; Evan et al., 1992; Murphy et al., 2008) and its 
direct regulation of BAX expression (Mitchell et al., 2000). We thus hypothesized that 
tissues early in development express Myc at levels that are sufficient to drive the expression 
of BAX and potentially other apoptosis-related genes, making them primed for apoptosis, 
and that loss of BAX expression in adulthood is related to loss of Myc.
Consistent with our hypothesis, we found that Myc is expressed at higher levels in young 
brain, heart and kidney tissues as compared to adult (Figure 4A). The human proteome 
database did not contain sufficient data for Myc expression. If Myc was driving expression 
of pro-apoptotic genes, we would expect Myc-expressing cells to be more primed. To test, 
we utilized flow cytometry-based BH3 Profiling, which allows for single-cell measurements 
of priming concurrently with evaluation of extracellular or intracellular factors. We 
measured priming and nuclear Myc expression (indicative of activation) in cells from P0 
tissues and found that Myc-positive brain, kidney and liver cells were, as expected, more 
primed than Myc negative cells (Figure 7A). We did not detect any Myc-positive cells within 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 8
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the respective adult tissues, which we again found to be dramatically less primed than 
neonatal tissues. In heart tissues, the extended processing necessary for this analysis resulted 
in prohibitively high levels of cytochrome c loss in even untreated cells, thus preventing 
analysis in that tissue.
Expression of Myc was associated with higher apoptotic priming, but this relationship may 
not be causal, prompting us to test whether Myc expression was necessary to maintain high 
priming in neonatal tissues. We therefore measured priming in the cerebral cortex of either 
WT or Myc+/− mice (Hofmann et al., 2015). As expected, the loss of one allele of Myc 
resulted in reduced sensitivity to BIM as compared to WT littermates (Figure 7B).
Next, we sought to determine whether activating Myc in adult tissues would be sufficient to 
reactivate apoptosis in refractory cells. We first utilized the well-characterized 
Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1.1(MYC/ERT2)GEV (hereafter MycER) mouse model that was developed to 
study the physiological effects of acute Myc activation in adult tissues (Murphy et al., 2008). 
These mice express a cDNA encoding human c-Myc fused at its C terminus to the hormone-
binding domain of 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT)-responsive mutant murine estrogen 
receptor, enabling us to activate Myc systemically with injections of tamoxifen. Activation 
of Myc in normally apoptosis refractory brain and kidney tissue, or unprimed liver tissue 
increased sensitivity to genotoxic damage (Figure 7C). Notably, we found that Myc-positive 
cells within these tissues were more primed for apoptosis than their Myc-negative 
counterparts as measured via flow cytometry-based BH3 Profiling (Figure 7D). Our data 
suggests that Myc activation may reenable the apoptotic pathway in apoptosis refractory 
tissues.
After acute liver damage, hepatocytes are able to re-enter the cell cycle and proliferate in 
order to replace dead cells (Tzung et al., 1997). Based on our previous data, we 
hypothesized that hepatocytes from adult liver tissue that are actively expressing Myc and 
proliferating would become more primed for apoptosis. We tested this by inducing immune-
mediated liver damage via injection of Concanavalin A (ConA), which triggers active liver 
regeneration and hepatocyte proliferation (Trautwein et al., 1998). After injection with 
ConA, we observed a profound increase in Myc-positive cells within the liver (~0% Myc-
positive in untreated animals) (Figure 7E), as hepatocytes proliferated to replace dead cells. 
We directly compared the level of priming in Myc-positive versus Myc-negative hepatocytes 
and found the former to be significantly more sensitive to BIM and BID BH3 peptides 
(Figure 7F). Thus, using both genetic and physiologic models, we found that activation of 
Myc increases mitochondrial priming.
Because modulation of Myc was sufficient to alter priming in the expected manner, we next 
sought to test whether Myc directly drives the expression of apoptosis-regulating genes in 
neonatal tissues. Myc activates the transcription of its target genes by binding specific E-box 
(Enhancer box) elements in gene promoters (Mitchell et al., 2000). We therefore used 
chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (ChIP-
qPCR) to test for Myc occupancy in the E-boxes present in the promoters of various BCL-2 
family member genes. In agreement with our hypothesis that Myc may be modulating BAX 
expression in neonatal tissues, we detected the Bax promoter being bound by Myc in 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 9
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neonatal brain, kidney, liver and spleen tissues (Figure 7G). Furthermore, Myc binding to the 
Bax promoter was lost in the adult brain and kidney but not the spleen, consistent with the 
spleen maintaining a high level of priming throughout life (note that adult heart and liver 
tissues were not tested). We also detected E-boxes in the promoters of pro-apoptotic Bcl2l11 
(Bim), which is consistent with previous reports (Campone et al., 2011; Muthalagu et al., 
2014), and Bid, and confirmed that Myc bound to these promoters. Taken together, these 
data indicate that Myc drives an apoptotically primed state by directly activating 
transcription of pro-apoptotic genes Bax, Bim, and Bid.
Human brain regulates apoptosis during development similarly to mouse
The dynamic regulation of apoptosis in murine tissues dramatically affected responses to 
genotoxic damage and prompted us to ask whether the same temporal regulation could be 
directly observed in human tissues. One source of non-malignant, viable human brain tissue 
is from pediatric and adult patients that undergo removal of seizure foci to control otherwise 
intractable seizures caused by epilepsy, trauma or other pathology. Seizure foci are mapped 
in the human brain and resected, inevitably along with some ostensibly healthy brain tissue 
(Bittigau et al., 2003). We obtained fresh, healthy brain tissue from over 20 such patients 
from 4 months to 21 years of age for BH3 Profiling analysis (Table S3). As with mice, we 
found human brain tissue from young patients to be significantly more sensitive to BIM and 
BID BH3 peptides than those from adults (Figure 7H–I). There existed a consistent 
downregulation of apoptotic priming during postnatal human brain development, 
predisposing the youngest children to radiation- and chemotherapy-induced neurotoxicity. In 
our study, there was a period of higher heterogeneity in apoptotic priming among patients 
between 2 and 6 years old, after which, the brain transitions to full apoptotic resistance. 
Finally, we mined mRNA expression data in the human brain during prenatal and postnatal 
development (Miller et al., 2014) and found that BAX expression is dramatically reduced 
during development, starting even prenatally (Figure 7I), which we confirmed at the protein 
level in our samples (Figure 7J). The highest mRNA expression of BAX was found in fetal 
brain, suggesting that the highest levels of apoptotic priming, perhaps similar to those 
observed in the youngest (P0–P2) mice, would be found in fetuses and pre-term infants.
DISCUSSION
The study of apoptosis has been traditionally dominated by the study of cancer cells and 
lymphocytes, the ubiquitous presence of functioning machinery of the mitochondrial 
apoptotic pathway in which has led to a general acceptance that this pathway is present in all 
cells. We were surprised to find that heart, kidney, and brain in adult mice lacked the 
proteins that regulate the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. It appears that the mitochondrial 
apoptotic machinery is largely absent in these adult tissues, which we designate as being 
“apoptosis refractory.” This apoptosis refractory state is achieved as part of a regulated 
postnatal developmental program in both mice and humans and is apparently reversible, as 
stress can restore apoptotic sensitivity to cells previously apoptosis refractory. A common 
feature of embryonic, immediately postnatal, and regenerating tissues is a greater degree of 
proliferation. We believe that in all of these tissues, enhanced priming is the price that cells 
pay for the capacity to proliferate. Cancer cells often share many features of embryonal 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 10
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells, including lack of differentiation, enhanced proliferation, and stem-like function 
(Daley, 2009). The relatively primed nature of cancer cells may be thought of as re-
establishment of yet another embryonic program in cancer cells.
Previous studies have shown that ectopically expressed Myc can foster pro-apoptotic 
signaling (Bissonnette et al., 1992; Evan et al., 1992; Murphy et al., 2008). We demonstrate 
here that endogenous, physiological Myc regulates apoptosis sensitivity across a range of 
tissues during mammalian development. Myc therefore provides one important mechanistic 
link between developmental proliferation, expression of pro-apoptotic genes, and apoptotic 
priming. However, we suspect that there are additional modulators of properties of this 
significance. In addition, our findings raise the question of whether other programmed cell 
death pathways including extrinsic (cell death receptor mediated) apoptosis, necroptosis 
(Zhou and Yuan, 2014), and ferroptosis (Dixon et al., 2012) are also dynamically regulated 
during postnatal development.
Very young pediatric cancer patients are subject to severe side effects of radiation and 
chemotherapy from which older children and adults are relatively spared. We show that the 
apoptotic responses of heart and brain tissues depend on the developmentally regulated 
priming of the mitochondria. It is possible that this regulation is a major contributor to the 
hypersensitivity of very young tissues to genotoxic agents. We find this correlation holds in 
the brains of very young humans. Moreover, we find we can reverse this phenotype by un-
priming mitochondria of young tissues by genetic means, potentially modeling 
pharmacologic inhibition.
Earlier work in this field reported the seemingly contrasting findings that individual BCL-2 
family members were modulated with time in select tissues(Kole et al., 2013; Polster et al., 
2003a) (Kole et al., 2013; Polster et al., 2003; Shi et al., 2012; Soane et al., 2008) and that 
BAX and BAK were highly and broadly expressed in somatic tissues including the brain 
(Brustovetsky et al., 2003; Krajewski et al., 1994). Our work aims to clarify how apoptosis is 
regulated in healthy tissues and also highlight the challenges in inferring phenotypic changes 
due to changes in levels of individual BCL-2 family proteins. The large number of proteins 
within this family and their nuanced pro- and anti-apoptotic effects, which can be further 
modulated by post-translational modifications, requires the use of a functional test of 
apoptotic priming to measure the net integration of these signals.
It is important to note that BH3 Profiling does not assess the state of post-MOMP regulators 
of apoptosis such as IAP proteins or caspases, which are also known to affect cell fate (Holly 
et al., 1999; Martin, 2002). In addition, the abilities of cells to die via the extrinsic apoptotic 
pathway (Fulda and Debatin, 2006) or inflammation-associated pathways (Martin et al., 
2012) in response to genotoxic damage are not directly probed by BH3 Profiling. Finally, we 
acknowledge that even in a primed cell, whether apoptotic machinery is actually engaged 
following genotoxic damage depends on factors such as DNA damage responses and p53 
competence (Kandioler-Eckersberger et al., 2000; Loewer et al., 2010; Rich et al., 2000). 
Combining BH3 Profiling with tests of the expression or adequacy/activity of these other 
factors/pathways, as we have attempted to do to some extent here, would provide the most 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 11
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 complete understanding of the pretreatment state of the cell or tissue and how that impacts 
cell fate in response to damage or stress.
While our results show that many healthy tissues are apoptosis refractory in the adult, we do 
not mean to rule out the possibility that various chronic injuries or disease states might 
restore apoptotic sensitivity in these tissues. In fact, increased levels of neuronal BAX and/or 
BAK have been reported in patients with Alzheimer’s disease (MacGibbon et al., 1997; 
Shimohama, 2000), which would be expected to contribute to the neuronal death that 
characterizes this pathology. BAX expression has also been observed to increase in different 
liver pathologies, including hepatitis and cirrhosis (Jr et al., 2000; Liang et al., 2007) and is 
increased following Mcl1 deletion in mouse cardiomyocytes, potentially contributing to the 
apoptosis reported in that model (Wang et al., 2013). Indeed, we found that chemical liver 
injury and the resulting regenerative proliferation increased apoptotic priming in adult mice. 
Such findings suggest that the program we observe is reversible, as we observed with the 
increased priming post activation of Myc in the regenerating liver or MycER mouse model. 
More study is needed to understand how disease states may impact apoptotic priming.
Our analysis shows that virtually all cells within neonatal brain, heart and kidney are primed 
for apoptosis while in adults virtually all cells within these tissues are apoptosis refractory. 
We did not measure priming levels or changes in priming among different types of cells 
within each tissue. It remains possible, however, that apoptotic priming of cell subsets are 
differentially regulated in development. Future work will focus on mapping how individual 
cell types within organs regulate apoptosis.
Our findings suggest that there may potentially be ways to improve the therapeutic index of 
cancer treatments through the use of agents that selectively modulate BCL-2 family member 
function. For example, because of the developing brain’s dependence on BAX and not BAK 
for apoptosis, clinicians could utilize a BAX inhibitor or RNAi-based knockdown of BAX 
while administering brain irradiation for the treatment or prophylaxis of acute lymphocytic 
leukemia (ALL) with CNS involvement. This strategy would potentially prevent apoptosis in 
neurons, which express only BAX, while still allow ALL cells, which express both BAX and 
BAK (Haferlach et al., 2010), to undergo apoptosis via BAK. It may also be possible to 
modulate developmental programs or Myc levels via recently developed strategies (Delmore 
et al., 2011) to induce transient apoptotic resistance in healthy tissues prior to administering 
radiation or chemotherapy. Beyond cancer, our data have implications for medical conditions 
such as head trauma in pediatric patients, which induces neuronal death via apoptotic and 
excitotoxic pathways, while in adults only the excitotoxic pathway is engaged (Pohl et al., 
1999). A BAX (or BAX/BAK) inhibitor could prevent the apoptotic component of this 
neuronal death, potentially rescuing some of the ill effects of these injuries in young 
children. Although no inhibitors of BAX and/or BAK have reached the clinic, efforts are 
currently underway to develop such agents (Hetz et al., 2005; Lessene, 2015).
Our findings may also impact the development of anti-cancer agents targeting cell death. 
Efforts to develop small molecule direct activators of BAX for cancer therapy have begun 
(Gavathiotis et al., 2012). The BIM BH3 peptide is itself a BAX activator. Our finding that 
the mitochondria of most adult somatic tissues are relatively insensitive to BIM BH3 makes 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 12
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the direct activation of BAX for cancer therapy more attractive. However, based on our 
findings these same tissues in pediatric patients could prove to be exquisitely sensitive, and 
thus efforts to utilize such agents in very young children should be accompanied by 
consideration of the apoptotic sensitivity of their normal tissues.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Animals: Mice were housed and bred in accordance with the policies and regulations set 
forth by the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee 
(IACUC). All animal experiments were approved by IACUC under DFCI protocols 11-008, 
12-049 and UK Home Office licenses 70-7950 and 70-8645.
Human brain specimens: All specimens were collected under IRB-approved tissue collection 
protocol #09-02-0043 at Boston Children’s Hospital and transferred to DFCI via Office for 
Human Research Studies exemption 13–545. Patients underwent surgery for removal of 
seizure foci at Boston Children’s Hospital (Table S3) and resected tissues were first 
delivered to a neuropathologist for evaluation. If available, a de-identified sample (0.2–0.5g) 
of brain tissue was provided to study investigators in PBS on ice and was immediately 
processed for BH3 Profiling. Part of the sample (0.1g) was excluded for cryopreservation 
and was subsequently prepared for immunoblotting as outlined above. The remaining brain 
tissue was dissociated by repeated pipetting until a single cell suspension was achieved and 
BH3 Profiled with JC1.
Fluorescence-based BH3 Profiling: Briefly, BH3 peptides or recombinant proteins in T-EB 
buffer were deposited into each well in a black 384-well plate, 1 treatment per well, in 
triplicate for each independent experiment. Single cells isolated from indicated tissues were 
resuspended in T-EB buffer and mixed 1:1 with a dye solution containing digitonin and JC-1 
in T-EB. Cells were kept at room temperature for 5 min to allow for cell permeabilization 
and dye equilibration. Cells were then added to each treatment well in the 384-well plate and 
fluorescence at 590 nm was measured every 5 min at 32°C for a total of 120 min. Relative 
mitochondrial depolarization was defined as the magnitude of mitochondrial potential loss 
resulting from BH3 peptide treatments as compared to negative control DMSO and positive 
control FCCP.
Flow cytometry-based BH3 Profiling: Briefly, BH3 peptides in T-EB buffer with digitonin 
were deposited into each well in a 384-well plate. Single cells were resuspended in T-EB 
buffer and added to each treatment well and incubated for 60 min at 28°C. Peptide exposure 
was terminated with formaldehyde and cells were stained overnight with an antibody to 
cytochrome c conjugated to AF647. Cytochrome c positivity was measured on a BD 
Biosciences LSR II flow cytometer.
Additional experimental procedures can be found in the Extended Experimental Procedures.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Sarosiek et al.
Page 13
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
We thank J. Sims, P. Sorger, X. Chi, L. Walensky, D. Andrews, C. Unitt, T. Bowman, O. Pozdnyakova and S. White 
for providing assistance and B. Mar, J. Montero, G. Joshi and L. Boise for critical review of our manuscript. We 
gratefully acknowledge funding from the American Cancer Society Postdoctoral Fellowship 121360-PF-11-256-01-
TBG (K.A.S.), Alex’s Lemonade Stand Foundation for Childhood Cancers Young Investigator Award (K.A.S), as 
well as NIH grants K99CA188679 (K.A.S) and RO1CA129974 (A.L). A.L. was a Leukemia and Lymphoma 
Society Scholar. The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.
References
American Cancer Society. Cancer Treatment & Survivorship Facts and Figures 2014–2015. Atlanta 
Am Cancer Soc. 2014:44.
Bissonnette RP, Echeverri F, Mahboubi A, Green DR. Apoptotic cell death induced by c-myc is 
inhibited by bcl-2. Nature. 1992; 359:552–554. [PubMed: 1406975] 
Bittigau P, Sifringer M, Ikonomidou C. Antiepileptic drugs and apoptosis in the developing brain. Ann 
N Y Acad Sci. 2003; 993:103–114. discussion 123–124. [PubMed: 12853301] 
Brustovetsky N, Dubinsky JM, Antonssont B, Jemmerson R. Two pathways for tBID-induced 
cytochrome c release from rat brain mitochondria: BAK- versus BAX-dependence. J Neurochem. 
2003; 84:196–207. [PubMed: 12485416] 
Campone M, Noël B, Couriaud C, Grau M, Guillemin Y, Gautier F, Gouraud W, Charbonnel C, 
Campion L, Jézéquel P, et al. c-Myc dependent expression of pro-apoptotic Bim renders HER2-
overexpressing breast cancer cells dependent on anti-apoptotic Mcl-1. Mol Cancer. 2011; 10:110. 
[PubMed: 21899728] 
Czabotar PE, Lessene G, Strasser A, Adams JM. Control of apoptosis by the BCL-2 protein family: 
implications for physiology and therapy. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013; 15:49–63.
Daley GQ. Common Themes of Dedifferentiation in Somatic Cell Reprogramming and Cancer 
Common Themes of Dedifferentiation in Somatic Cell Reprogramming and Cancer. Cold Spring 
Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2009; LXXIII
Dang CV, O’Donnell KA, Zeller KI, Nguyen T, Osthus RC, Li F. The c-Myc target gene network. 
Semin Cancer Biol. 2006; 16:253–264. [PubMed: 16904903] 
Davids MS, Deng J, Wiestner A, Lannutti BJ, Wang L, Wu CJ, Wilson WH, Brown JR, Letai A. 
Decreased mitochondrial apoptotic priming underlies stroma-mediated treatment resistance in 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2012
Delmore JE, Issa GC, Lemieux ME, Rahl PB, Shi J, Jacobs HM, Kastritis E, Gilpatrick T, Paranal RM, 
Qi J, et al. BET bromodomain inhibition as a therapeutic strategy to target c-Myc. Cell. 2011; 
146:904–917. [PubMed: 21889194] 
Dixon SJ, Lemberg KM, Lamprecht MR, Skouta R, Zaitsev EM, Gleason CE, Patel DN, Bauer AJ, 
Cantley AM, Yang WS, et al. Ferroptosis: An Iron-Dependent Form of Nonapoptotic Cell Death. 
Cell. 2012; 149:1060–1072. [PubMed: 22632970] 
Egle A, Harris AW, Bouillet P, Cory S. Bim is a suppressor of Myc-induced mouse B cell leukemia. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:6164–6169. [PubMed: 15079075] 
Evan GI, Wyllie AH, Gilbert S, Littlewood TD, Land H, Brooks M, Waters CM, Penn L, Hancock DC. 
Induction of Apoptosis by c-myc Protein in Fibroblasts. 1992; 69:119–128.
Fulda S, Debatin KM. Extrinsic versus intrinsic apoptosis pathways in anticancer chemotherapy. 
Oncogene. 2006; 25:4798–4811. [PubMed: 16892092] 
Galluzzi L, Aaronson Sa, Abrams J, Alnemri ES, Andrews DW, Baehrecke EH, Bazan NG, 
Blagosklonny MV, Blomgren K, Borner C, et al. Guidelines for the use and interpretation of assays 
for monitoring cell death in higher eukaryotes. Cell Death Differ. 2009; 16:1093–1107. [PubMed: 
19373242] 
Gavathiotis E, Reyna DE, Bellairs Ja, Leshchiner ES, Walensky LD. Direct and selective small-
molecule activation of proapoptotic BAX. Nat Chem Biol. 2012:1–7.
Haferlach T, Kohlmann A, Wieczorek L, Basso G, Te Kronnie G, Béné MC, De Vos J, Hernández JM, 
Hofmann WK, Mills KI, et al. Clinical utility of microarray-based gene expression profiling in the 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 14
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 diagnosis and subclassification of leukemia: Report from the international microarray innovations 
in leukemia study group. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:2529–2537. [PubMed: 20406941] 
Hanahan D, Weinberg R. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell. 2000; 100:57–70. [PubMed: 10647931] 
Hetz C, Vitte P-A, Bombrun A, Rostovtseva TK, Montessuit S, Hiver A, Schwarz MK, Church DJ, 
Korsmeyer SJ, Martinou J-C, et al. Bax channel inhibitors prevent mitochondrion-mediated 
apoptosis and protect neurons in a model of global brain ischemia. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:42960–
42970. [PubMed: 16219766] 
Hofmann JW, Zhao X, De Cecco M, Peterson AL, Pagliaroli L, Manivannan J, Hubbard GB, Ikeno Y, 
Zhang Y, Feng B, et al. Reduced expression of MYC increases longevity and enhances healthspan. 
Cell. 2015; 160:477–488. [PubMed: 25619689] 
Holly T, Drincic A, Byun Y. Caspase Inhibition Reduces Myocyte Cell Death Induced by Myocardial 
Ischemia and Reperfusion In Vivo. J Mol …. 1999; 1715:1709–1715.
E, Galuszkova D, Ehrmann J, Ek BV, Murray PG, Kolao Z. Apoptosis-related proteins, BCL-2, BAX, 
FAS, FAS-L and PCNA in liver biopsies of patients with chronic Hepatitis B virus infection. 2000; 
6
Kandioler-Eckersberger D, Ludwig C, Rudas M, Kappel S, Janschek E, Wenzel C, Schlagbauer-Wadl 
H, Mittlböck M, Gnant M, Steger G, et al. TP53 mutation and p53 overexpression for prediction of 
response to neoadjuvant treatment in breast cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res. 2000; 6:50–56. 
[PubMed: 10656431] 
Kim MS, Pinto SM, Getnet D, Nirujogi RS, Manda SS, Chaerkady R, Madugundu AK, Kelkar DS, 
Isserlin R, Jain S, et al. A draft map of the human proteome. Nature. 2014; 509:575–581. 
[PubMed: 24870542] 
Kole, aJ, Annis, RP., Deshmukh, M. Mature neurons: equipped for survival. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 
4:e689. [PubMed: 23807218] 
Krajewski S, Krajewska M, Shabaik a, Miyashita T, Wang HG, Reed JC. Immunohistochemical 
determination of in vivo distribution of Bax, a dominant inhibitor of Bcl-2. Am J Pathol. 1994; 
145:1323–1336. [PubMed: 7992838] 
Lessene G. Targeting cell death pathways with small molecules: playing with life and death at the 
cellular level to treat diseases. Future Med Chem. 2015
Liang X, Liu Y, Zhang Q, Gao L, Han L, Ma C, Zhang L, Chen YH, Sun W. Hepatitis B virus 
sensitizes hepatocytes to TRAIL-induced apoptosis through Bax. J Immunol. 2007; 178:503–510. 
[PubMed: 17182590] 
Lipshultz SE, Lipsitz SR, Mone SM, Goorin aM, Sallan SE, Sanders SP, Orav EJ, Gelber RD, Colan 
SD. Female sex and drug dose as risk factors for late cardiotoxic effects of doxorubicin therapy for 
childhood cancer. N Engl J Med. 1995; 332:1738–1743. [PubMed: 7760889] 
Lipshultz SE, Scully RE, Stevenson KE, Franco VI, Neuberg DS, Colan SD, Silverman LB, Moslehi 
JJ, Cheng S, Sallan S. Hearts too small for body size after doxorubicin for childhood ALL: Grinch 
syndrome. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32(suppl) abstr 10021. 
Loewer A, Batchelor E, Gaglia G, Lahav G. Basal dynamics of p53 reveal transcriptionally attenuated 
pulses in cycling cells. Cell. 2010; 142:89–100. [PubMed: 20598361] 
MacGibbon G, Lawlor P, Sirimanne E, Walton M, Connor B, Young D, Williams C, Gluckman P, Faull 
RL, Hughes P, et al. Bax expression in mammalian neurons undergoing apoptosis, and in 
Alzheimer’s disease hippocampus. Brain Res. 1997; 750:223–234. [PubMed: 9098548] 
Martin SJ. Destabilizing influences in apoptosis: Sowing the seeds of IAP destruction. Cell. 2002; 
109:793–796. [PubMed: 12110175] 
Martin SJ, Henry CM, Cullen SP. A Perspective on Mammalian Caspases as Positive and Negative 
Regulators of Inflammation. Mol Cell. 2012; 46:387–397. [PubMed: 22633487] 
Merchant TE, Pollack IF, Loeffler JS. Brain tumors across the age spectrum: biology, therapy, and late 
effects. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2010; 20:58–66. [PubMed: 19959032] 
Miller, Ja, Ding, SL., Sunkin, SM., Smith, Ka, Ng, L., Szafer, A., Ebbert, A., Riley, ZL., Royall, JJ., 
Aiona, K., et al. Transcriptional landscape of the prenatal human brain. Nature. 2014; 508:199–
206. [PubMed: 24695229] 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 15
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mitchell KO, Ricci MS, Miyashita T, Dicker DT, Jin Z, Reed JC, El-Deiry WS. Bax is a transcriptional 
target and mediator of c-Myc-induced apoptosis. Cancer Res. 2000; 60:6318–6325. [PubMed: 
11103792] 
Murphy DJ, Junttila MR, Pouyet L, Karnezis A, Shchors K, Bui Da, Brown-Swigart L, Johnson L, 
Evan GI. Distinct thresholds govern Myc’s biological output in vivo. Cancer Cell. 2008; 14:447–
457. [PubMed: 19061836] 
Muthalagu N, Junttila MR, Wiese KE, Wolf E, Morton J, Bauer B, Evan GI, Eilers M, Murphy DJ. 
Report BIM Is the Primary Mediator of MYC-Induced Apoptosis in Multiple Solid Tissues. 
CellReports. 2014:1–7.
Ni Chonghaile T, Sarosiek Ka, Vo TT, Ryan Ja, Tammareddi A, Moore VDG, Deng J, Anderson KC, 
Richardson P, Tai YT, et al. Pretreatment mitochondrial priming correlates with clinical response 
to cytotoxic chemotherapy. Science. 2011; 334:1129–1133. [PubMed: 22033517] 
Pohl D, Bittigau P, Ishimaru MJ, Stadthaus D, Hübner C, Olney JW, Turski L, Ikonomidou C. N-
Methyl-D-aspartate antagonists and apoptotic cell death triggered by head trauma in developing rat 
brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999; 96:2508–2513. [PubMed: 10051673] 
Polster BM, Basañez G, Young M, Suzuki M, Fiskum G. Inhibition of Bax-induced cytochrome c 
release from neural cell and brain mitochondria by dibucaine and propranolol. J Neurosci. 2003a; 
23:2735–2743. [PubMed: 12684459] 
Polster BM, Robertson CL, Bucci CJ, Suzuki M, Fiskum G. Postnatal brain development and neural 
cell differentiation modulate mitochondrial Bax and BH3 peptide-induced cytochrome c release. 
Cell Death Differ. 2003b; 10:365–370. [PubMed: 12700636] 
Reed JC, Doctor K, Rojas A, Zapata JM, Stehlik C, Fiorentino L, Damiano J, Roth W, Matsuzawa S, 
Newman R, et al. Comparative Analysis of Apoptosis and Inflammation Genes of Mice and 
Humans Comparative Analysis of Apoptosis and Inflammation Genes of Mice and Humans. 
2003:1376–1388.
Rich T, Allen RL, Wyllie aH. Defying death after DNA damage. Nature. 2000; 407:777–783. 
[PubMed: 11048728] 
Ryan J, Letai A. BH3 profiling in whole cells by fluorimeter or FACS. Methods. 2013
Sarosiek KA, Letai A. Directly targeting the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis for cancer therapy 
with BH3 mimetics: recent successes, current challenges and future promise. FEBS J. 2016 n/a – 
n/a. 
Sarosiek KA, Chi X, Bachman JA, Sims JJ, Montero J, Patel L, Flanagan A, Andrews DW, Sorger P, 
Letai A. BID preferentially activates BAK while BIM preferentially activates BAX, affecting 
chemotherapy response. Mol Cell. 2013; 51:751–765. [PubMed: 24074954] 
Shamas-Din A, Binder S, Chi X, Leber B, Andrews DW, Fradin C. Distinct lipid effects on tBid and 
Bim activation of membrane permeabilization by pro-apoptotic Bax. Submitted. 2014; 505:1–25.
Shi J, Zhang L, Zhang Y-W, Surma M, Mark Payne R, Wei L. Downregulation of doxorubicin-induced 
myocardial apoptosis accompanies postnatal heart maturation. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 
2012; 302:H1603–H1613. [PubMed: 22328080] 
Shimohama S. Apoptosis in Alzheimer’s disease — an update. 2000; 5:9–16.
Silber JH, Radcliffe J, Peckham V, Perilongo G, Kishnani P, Fridman M, Goldwein JW, Meadows aT. 
Whole-brain irradiation and decline in intelligence: the influence of dose and age on IQ score. J 
Clin Oncol. 1992; 10:1390–1396. [PubMed: 1517781] 
Soane L, Siegel ZT, Schuh Ra, Fiskum G. Postnatal developmental regulation of Bcl-2 family proteins 
in brain mitochondria. J Neurosci Res. 2008; 86:1267–1276. [PubMed: 18058945] 
Tait SWG, Green DR. Mitochondrial regulation of cell death. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013; 5
Taylor RC, Cullen SP, Martin SJ. Apoptosis: controlled demolition at the cellular level. Nat Rev Mol 
Cell Biol. 2008; 9:231–241. [PubMed: 18073771] 
Trachtenberg BH, Landy DC, Franco VI, Henkel JM, Pearson EJ, Miller TL, Lipshultz SE. 
Anthracycline-associated cardiotoxicity in survivors of childhood cancer. Pediatr Cardiol. 2011; 
32:342–353. [PubMed: 21221562] 
Trautwein C, Rakemann T, Malek NP, Plümpe J, Tiegs G, Manns MP. Concanavalin A-induced liver 
injury triggers hepatocyte proliferation. J Clin Invest. 1998; 101:1960–1969. [PubMed: 9576761] 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 16
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Tzung SP, Fausto N, Hockenbery DM. Expression of Bcl-2 family during liver regeneration and 
identification of Bcl-x as a delayed early response gene. Am J Pathol. 1997; 150:1985–1995. 
[PubMed: 9176392] 
Vo T-T, Ryan J, Carrasco R, Neuberg D, Ross DJ, Stone R, DeAngelo DJ, Frattini MG, Letai A. 
Relative Mitochondrial Priming of Malignant Myeloblasts and Normal HSCs Determines 
Chemotherapeutic Success in AML. Cell. 2012 In Press. 
Wang X, Bathina M, Lynch J, Koss B, Calabrese C, Frase S, Schuetz JD, Rehg JE, Opferman JT. 
Deletion of MCL-1 causes lethal cardiac failure and mitochondrial dysfunction. Genes Dev. 2013; 
27:1351–1364. [PubMed: 23788622] 
Zhang S, Liu X, Bawa-Khalfe T, Lu L-S, Lyu YL, Liu LF, Yeh ETH. Identification of the molecular 
basis of doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. Nat Med. 2012; 18:1639–1642. [PubMed: 23104132] 
Zhou W, Yuan J. SnapShot: Necroptosis. Cell. 2014; 158:464–464. e1. [PubMed: 25036639] 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 17
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SIGNIFICANCE
Pediatric cancer patients treated with ionizing radiation or cytotoxic chemotherapy have a 
high risk of developing devastating toxicities including cognitive decline and chronic 
heart failure, limiting the use of potentially curative therapies. These treatments, which 
rely on the preferential induction of an apoptotic cell death in cancer cells over healthy 
tissues, are comparatively well tolerated in adults, yet the molecular basis for this 
difference in sensitivity is unknown. Herein, we make the discovery that apoptosis is 
dynamically regulated during postnatal development in healthy tissues, altering cell fate 
in response to genotoxic damage induced by anti-cancer therapies. Importantly, we use 
mouse models to show that these pathways may be modulated to potentially prevent 
treatment-associated toxicities.
Sarosiek et al.
Page 18
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HIGHLIGHTS
•
Cells within healthy adult brain, heart and kidneys are apoptosis refractory.
•
Early in life, brain, heart and kidney cells are primed for apoptosis.
•
Dynamic regulation of apoptosis affects cell fate in response to genotoxic 
damage.
•
The apoptosis pathway is modulated by c-Myc, linking cellular growth with 
death.
Sarosiek et al.
Page 19
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Adult brain, heart, and kidney tissues are apoptosis refractory, protected from 
genotoxic damage
(A) Tissues were isolated from adult mice (>P60) and BH3 Profiled. Mitochondrial potential 
under each treatment condition was measured every 5 min during the experimental time 
course and plotted relative to maximum value of negative control (DMSO). Percent 
depolarization (indicative of MOMP) is calculated for each BH3 peptide treatment relative 
to DMSO (0%) and FCCP (100%). Representative traces are shown (mean ± SD, ≥ 3 
independent experiments [IEs]). (B) Summary BH3 Profiling data across healthy adult 
mouse tissues. ≥3 IEs. (C) After whole body gamma irradiation, apoptosis was measured via 
a caspase 3 activity assay. Data were compiled from 5 animals for each treatment across 3 
IEs with bars representing means. (D) After whole body irradiation, apoptosis was detected 
via immunohistochemistry for cleaved caspase 3. Data were compiled from 2 animals for 
each treatment across 2 IEs with bars representing means. (E) Tissues were collected from 
adult mice and immunoblotting was performed. Densitometry was performed across 
immunoblots from 3 IEs and averaged (blue heatmap on right). GAPDH is loading control. 
Relative molecular weight markers are shown on left. (F) Expression of indicated proteins in 
adult human tissues was assessed via the Kim et al. (2014) mass spectrometry dataset. (G) 
Tissues were isolated from adult mice and BH3 Profiled in the presence of recombinant 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 20
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BAX. Representative traces are shown (mean ± SD, ≥3 IEs). See Figure S1 and Tables S1–
S2
Sarosiek et al.
Page 21
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Embryonic and early postnatal brain, heart, kidney and liver tissues are primed for 
apoptosis and sensitive to genotoxic damage
(A) Tissues were isolated from postnatal day 0 mice (P0) and BH3 Profiled. Representative 
traces are shown (mean ± SD, ≥3 IEs). (B) Summary BH3 Profiling data across tissues 
during embryonic and postnatal development. Each point represents an average of 3 
measurements in each mouse tissue across at least 5 IEs. (C) After whole body irradiation or 
doxorubicin injection, tissues were collected and caspase activity was measured via an 
enzymatic assay. Each point represents an average of 3 measurements in each mouse tissue 
across at least 5 IEs. (D) After whole body irradiation, apoptosis was detected via IHC for 
cleaved caspase 3. Representative images, 2 IEs. Olfactory bulb (OB) and cerebral cortex 
(CC) are indicated. Scale bars are 200 μm. (E–F) Cleaved caspase 3-positive (E) or TUNEL-
positive (F) cells were counted per 40X field in sham-treated or irradiated tissues from 
young (P0–P2) or adult (P60+) mice processed via IHC. Data are compiled from 2 IEs with 
bars representing means. See Figure S2.
Sarosiek et al.
Page 22
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Apoptotic priming and chemosensitivity decrease as primary rat hippocampal neurons 
mature in vitro
(A) Primary neurons were isolated from E19 rat embryos and allowed to mature in vitro, 
with representative images shown at indicated time points (days in vitro). Note that the same 
cells (those inside box on low magnification) are shown across the 4 time points in the 
higher magnification window. Scale bars are 200 μm. (B) Primary neurons were BH3 
Profiled at indicated days in vitro. Representative traces are shown (mean ± SD, 2 IEs). (C) 
Summary of BH3 Profiling data of primary neurons at indicated time points. (D) Neuron 
nuclei were counted at indicated time points. (E) Chemosensitivity of rat hippocampal 
neurons in vitro. Each point represents an average of 3 measurements at each time point 
across 2 IEs.
Sarosiek et al.
Page 23
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Key components of the apoptotic machinery are lost during postnatal development
(A) Healthy tissues were collected from mice at indicated ages and immunoblotted. (B) 
Expression of indicated proteins in fetal and adult human tissues assessed via proteome data 
(Kim et al., 2014). See Figure S3.
Sarosiek et al.
Page 24
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. BAX and BAK dependence in early postnatal mouse tissues
(A) Tissues were collected from P0 mice of indicated genotypes and BH3 Profiled. 
Representative traces are shown (mean ± SD, ≥ 3 IEs). (B) Summary BH3 Profiling data 
from P0–P2 mouse tissues. Each point represents an average of 3 measurements in each 
tissue across 4 IEs. Bars represent means (C) Summary caspase 3 activity data from P0–P2 
mouse tissues after whole body irradiation. Each point represents an average of 3 
measurements in each tissue across 11 IEs. Bars represent means. See Figure S4.
Sarosiek et al.
Page 25
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Mouse model of pediatric doxorubicin cardiotoxicity
(A) Schematic representation of the experiment. WT mice of different ages were injected 
intraperitoneally with 3 doses of doxorubicin at 5 mg/kg on days 0, 4 and 7. 
Echocardiograms to assess heart function were performed on day 14. (B) Representative M-
mode echocardiogram tracings are shown from WT mice treated at P5 or P60+. (C) 
Representative parasternal long-axis views at the level of the papillary muscle are shown 
from WT mice treated at P5. (D) Summary echocardiogram data. Each point represents an 
average of 2 measurements in each animal across ≥ 5 IEs. Bars represent means. (E) P5–P6 
mice of indicated genotypes were treated as in (A). Bars represent means. See Figure S5 and 
Movies S1–S2.
Sarosiek et al.
Page 26
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Apoptotic priming is modulated by Myc and priming is dynamically regulated in 
human brain tissue
(A) Flow cytometry-based BH3 Profiling was performed on indicated tissues collected from 
neonatal or adult mice and loss of cytochrome c (indicative of apoptosis) was measured after 
treatment with negative control (DMSO), positive control alamethicin (AlaM), or BH3 
peptides. For neonatal tissues, each point represents a flow cytometry-based measurement of 
either Myc negative or positive cells (as determined by co-staining for nuclear Myc) from a 
single tissue sample. For adult tissues, each point represents a flow cytometry-based 
measurement of Myc negative cells. All cells analyzed by flow cytometry were CD45 
negative to exclude blood cells from analysis. Data shown are for either 3 (neonatal) or 2 
(adult) IEs. (B) Fluorescence-based BH3 Profiling was performed on brain tissue 
(neocortex) of litter-matched, neonatal Myc WT or heterozygous mice. Each point 
represents analysis of a single animal across 2 IEs. (C) MycER mice were treated with 
vehicle (oil) or tamoxifen (tam) to activate Myc for 3 days and then irradiated (8 Gy). 
TUNEL+ cells were counted per 20X field. (D) Flow cytometry-based BH3 Profiling was 
performed on tissues from (C) and each point represents the loss of cytochrome c in cells 
that are nuclear Myc-positive vs -negative from each tamoxifen-treated animal across 2 IEs. 
Sarosiek et al.
Page 27
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (E) After injection with vehicle or concanavalin A, liver tissue was collected from mice at 
indicated time points and Myc positivity was measured in hepatocytes via flow cytometry. 
Each point represents one animal across 2 IEs. (F) 96 hours after injection with concanavalin 
A, liver tissue was collected and flow cytometry-based BH3 Profiling was performed on 
hepatocytes while monitoring nuclear Myc expression. Each point represents one animal 
across 3 IEs. (G) ChIP-qPCR was performed to measure Myc occupancy on promoters for 
positive control (Mybbp1a) and negative control (Untr6) genes, along with genes of interest. 
Values shown are binding events detected per μg chromatin. In (A–G), bars represent means. 
(H) Representative BH3 Profile traces (mean ± SD) from healthy human brain tissue 
obtained during resection of seizure foci. (I) Summary of fluorescence-based BH3 Profiling 
data from human brain tissues. Each point represents an average of 3 measurements in each 
human brain specimen across at least 5 IEs. BAX mRNA expression across human brain 
regions were assessed at indicated ages. (J) Immunoblotting for BAX across healthy human 
brain specimens tested in (H–I). Numbers indicate months post conception. Heatmap 
represents expression of BAX normalized to GAPDH levels. See Table S3.
Sarosiek et al.
Page 28
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
