 Review
APP mouse models for Alzheimer’s disease
preclinical studies
Hiroki Sasaguri1,2,*
, Per Nilsson1,3
, Shoko Hashimoto1
, Kenichi Nagata1
, Takashi Saito1,4
,
Bart De Strooper5,6,7
, John Hardy8
, Robert Vassar9, Bengt Winblad3
& Takaomi C Saido1,**
Abstract
Animal models of human diseases that accurately recapitulate
clinical pathology are indispensable for understanding molecular
mechanisms and advancing preclinical studies. The Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) research community has historically used first-genera-
tion transgenic (Tg) mouse models that overexpress proteins linked
to familial AD (FAD), mutant amyloid precursor protein (APP), or
APP and presenilin (PS). These mice exhibit AD pathology, but the
overexpression paradigm may cause additional phenotypes unre-
lated to AD. Second-generation mouse models contain humanized
sequences and clinical mutations in the endogenous mouse App
gene. These mice show Ab accumulation without phenotypes
related to overexpression but are not yet a clinical recapitulation
of human AD. In this review, we evaluate different APP mouse
models of AD, and review recent studies using the second-
generation mice. We advise AD researchers to consider the
comparative strengths and limitations of each model against the
scientific and therapeutic goal of a prospective preclinical study.
Keywords Alzheimer’s disease; amyloid precursor protein; amyloid b peptide;
App knock-in; APP transgenic
DOI 10.15252/embj.201797397 | Received 19 May 2017 | Revised 9 June 2017 |
Accepted 7 July 2017 | Published online 1 August 2017
The EMBO Journal (2017) 36: 2473–2487
Modeling preclinical AD with APP mice
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative
disease. In 2015, of the ~47 million individuals with dementia
worldwide (Prince et al, 2016), AD accounted for 50–70% of these
cases (Winblad et al, 2016). In the coming decades, global AD
prevalence is projected to reach higher epidemic levels that will
place a massive economic burden on society. Given the grim
epidemiological forecast, scientifically based strategies to prevent
AD are urgently needed, as evidenced by the fact that in the previ-
ous two decades more than 400 medication candidates failed to
reach the clinic (Mangialasche et al, 2010). This large-scale failure
by the pharmaceutical industry and biomedical research community
can be attributed to many factors, including inappropriate choice of
mouse models, wrong timing for therapeutic interventions, over-
reliance on inappropriate assays for translational studies, or lack of
precise biomarkers, most of which center on efficacy and repro-
ducibility in preclinical studies of which animal models were a criti-
cal component. In this review, we focus on the important roles that
genetically engineered mouse models have contributed to AD mech-
anistic studies and preclinical drug development. Recently, new
mouse models have been introduced to the community, and we will
summarize the construction, characteristics, and merits and demer-
its of current AD mouse models to facilitate understanding of these
tools for the design of future studies. In this aim, we will be guided
by the principle that AD is a disease that should ideally be prevented
in preclinical stages where a potential interventional window of at
least 20 years exists before dementia clinically manifests (Funato
et al, 1998; Bateman et al, 2012).
Clinically, AD is characterized by early memory deficits followed
by a decline in other cognitive functions (Scheltens et al, 2016;
Winblad et al, 2016). The pathology of AD begins before overt
cognitive symptoms and includes the accumulation of amyloid b
peptide (Ab) as extracellular plaques, hyper-phosphorylated tau as
intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), and chronic neuroin-
flammation, followed by the loss of neuronal cells mainly in the
cerebral cortex and hippocampus (Braak & Braak, 1991; Hyman
et al, 2012). In parallel, a coordinated breakdown in vascular, astro-
glial, and oligodendrocytic responses demonstrates that AD is a
systems disorder and the roles and interactions of different cell types
in the decline of brain homeostasis and resultant dementia is a
1
Laboratory for Proteolytic Neuroscience, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako, Japan
2
Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan
3
Division of Neurogeriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Center for Alzheimer Research, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden
4 Department of Neuroscience and Pathobiology, Research Institute of Environmental Medicine, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan
5
Dementia Research Institute, University College London, London, UK
6
Department for Neurosciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
7
VIB Center for Brain and Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium
8
Reta Lila Research Laboratories and the Department of Molecular Neuroscience, University College London Institute of Neurology, London, UK
9
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
*Corresponding author. Tel: +81 48 4621111 (ext 7613); E-mail: hiroki.sasaguri@riken.jp
**Corresponding author. Tel: +81 48 4679715; E-mail: saido@brain.riken.jp
ª 2017 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
2473
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 major research topic (De Strooper & Karran, 2016). Ab pathology is
initiated at least two decades before cortical tau pathology and the
onset of clinical symptoms (Bateman et al, 2012; Maruyama et al,
2013). After disease onset, it is increasingly difficult to treat symp-
toms after postmitotic neurons start to degenerate (Fig 1) and finely
tuned neuronal circuits and cognitive skills are not easily recovered
at later stages. Thus, the development of accurate preclinical animal
models of AD for studies of disease mechanisms and the develop-
ment of medications for early prevention and treatment are consid-
ered vital research goals in accord with the global epidemiological
status.
Sporadic late-onset AD (LOAD) accounts for more than 99% of
all cases (Campion et al, 1999), and the ratio of LOAD patients to all
AD patients continues to increase because aging is a primary risk
factor aligned with aging of the world population. Early-onset AD
(EOAD), in contrast, is predominately familial and caused by muta-
tions in genes that encode amyloid precursor protein (App), prese-
nilin-1
(PSEN1
or
PS1)
and
presenilin-2
(PS2).
Proteolytic
processing of APP by b-secretase (b-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 or
BACE1) and c-secretase generates soluble Ab fragments. c-Secretase
is a protein complex composed of PS1 or PS2, nicastrin, Aph1 and
presenilin enhancer 2 (PEN2). Most familial AD (FAD) mutations
affect processivity of c-secretase resulting in the release of longer Ab
peptides and a shift in the relative ratios of the different peptides,
including the Ab42/Ab40 ratio (Welander et al, 2009; Cha
´vez-
Gutie
´rrez et al, 2012). Similarly, mutations in the App gene result in
the production of longer Ab peptides that aggregate more easily
(Rosenberg et al, 2016). Interestingly, an AppA673T mutation was
claimed to reduce the risk of sporadic AD (SAD) and age-related
cognitive decline by decreasing the production of Ab (Jonsson et al,
2012), although these findings require confirmation (Wang et al,
2015) and the mutation appears to affect the biophysical properties
of Ab peptides (Benilova et al, 2014; Maloney et al, 2014). The exis-
tence of familial mutations that directly affect Ab production and
influence AD risk is often cited as evidence that Ab accumulation is
central to AD pathogenesis (amyloid cascade hypothesis: Selkoe &
Hardy, 2016).
In general, Ab and tau pathology in sporadic and familial cases
are morphologically similar, rationalizing the use of mouse models
with genetically engineered FAD mutations for understanding SAD.
However, the extent to which these models actually reproduce SAD
remains unknown. A critical factor to consider in developing and
using mouse APP models is the potential mechanism of Ab accumu-
lation. In FAD, Ab deposition is primarily caused by the increased
production of Ab>40 except for intra-Ab sequence mutations that
alter its structural properties (Selkoe & Hardy, 2016) or the Swedish
mutation that increases all Ab species by increasing cleavage at the
b-site. Whether the Iceland mutation AppA673T is protective by
decreasing Ab production (Jonsson et al, 2012) remains controver-
sial. However, because Ab degradation declines with aging poten-
tially due to a decrease in the major Ab-degrading enzyme
neprilysin (Iwata et al, 2001, 2002; Hellstro
¨m-Lindahl et al, 2008)
and
because
Ab
clearance
is
decreased
in
SAD
patients
(Mawuenyega et al, 2010), Ab deposition in SAD is likely partially
caused by an aging-associated decrease in degradation/clearance of
Ab (Fig 2). In accord, increased production of Ab or its decreased
degradation/clearance might contribute to Ab accumulation in AD
(Saido & Iwata, 2006). Recent studies on the ubiquitin-proteasome
system and autophagy (Nilsson et al, 2013; Ciechanover & Kwon,
2015; Khaminets et al, 2016) point to the essential significance of
protein
degradation
in
many
diseases
including
AD.
While
decreased Ab degradation may be dominant in SAD, most APP
mouse models have increased FAD-like production. The selection of
a mouse model for preclinical studies should consider this issue.
Various AD mouse models (Onos et al, 2015; Puzzo et al, 2015;
Drummond & Wisniewski, 2017) as well as other animal models
including rats, non-human primates, Drosophila, and Caenorhabdi-
tis elegans (Drummond & Wisniewski, 2017) have been recently
reviewed. In this review, we will focus on genetically modified APP
mouse models of AD as they are the most practical approach for
in vivo screening and validation of preventive medications at this
AD
Window for AD prevention
–30
–20
Accumulation
Accumulation
Number of
patients
Years before AD onset
Preclinical AD
MCI
AD
onset
–10
0
–30
–20
–10
0
–30
–20
–10
0
AD is a disease
to prevent,
not to cure after
the onset.
Tauopathy
Neurodegeneration
Aβ amyloidosis
© EMBO
Figure 1.
Cortical pathology, neurological symptoms, and APP mouse
models of AD.
There are three neurological phases leading to the onset of AD and associated
cortical pathology. The first phase is preclinical AD, where Ab accumulates in
cortex without neurological symptoms. The second phase is mild cognitive
impairment (MCI), where tauopathy and neurodegeneration proceed with
predementia symptoms. The third phase is AD, where neurodegeneration
eliminates neurons and neuronal circuits in an irreversible manner with
progressively serious symptoms of dementia. As models of preclinical AD, APP-
overexpressing mice or App knock-in mice exhibit extensive Ab pathology
without tauopathy and neurodegeneration, for which there is a preventive
window of approximately two decades. Modified from Ihara and Arai (2007). The
pathology shown is from the cortex of a 9-month-old AppNL-G-F/NL-G-F mouse. Blue:
Ab; red: microglia (Iba-1); green: astrocyte (GFAP) (Saito et al, 2014).
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
2474
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 time (Zahs & Ashe, 2010). In the absence of gene manipulations, no
small animal models exist at present that sufficiently or consistently
mimic clinical disease pathology for experimental and preclinical
studies of AD. Furthermore, we will focus on the preclinical stage
when the time window for effective prevention and treatment is
wider. Preclinical AD patients are cognitively normal (Bateman
et al, 2012), and likewise, model mice in parallel preclinical stages
having Ab pathology without tauopathy and neurodegeneration
should not exhibit strong cognitive impairment. However, at this
early stage, pathological alterations in Ab or tau are thought to initi-
ate disease processes including synaptic dysfunction, local damage
to spines and dendrites, and vascular pathology that are observed in
AD mouse models and presumably in presymptomatic humans
(Ashe & Zahs, 2010). There are other potential points for prevention
at this stage, such as mechanism(s) by which Ab amyloidosis affects
tauopathy or by which TREM2 (Guerreiro et al, 2013; Jonsson &
Stefansson, 2013) influences pathogenesis and these may also be
studied in mouse models for Ab pathology.
First-generation mouse models
First, a note on terminology: The term “transgenic (Tg) mice” could
be confusing because in a wide sense it means “genetically modified
mice” and because it also means mice into the host genome of
which transgene is inserted in single or multicopy number. We use
the second definition for the Tg mice in this review because knock-
in and knockout mice are different from Tg mice in that they main-
tain the original murine genomic structure except for the introduced
mutations.
Several groups generated Tg mice that overexpress APP with or
without FAD mutations using various promoters (Table 1), such as
platelet-derived growth factor-b (PDGF-b), prion protein (PrP), and
Thy1. Frequently used models include PDAPP (Games et al, 1995),
Tg2576 (Hsiao et al, 1996), APP23 (Sturchler-Pierrat et al, 1997),
J20 (Mucke et al, 2000), and TgCRND8 (Chishti et al, 2001). The
APP constructs differ among the lines: They include APP695,
APP770, and minigenes. Some mice carry more than one mutation
in the transgene, and the most commonly used mutation is the
Swedish mutation (K670N/M671L; Citron et al, 1992), which causes
the overproduction of total Ab from APP. These mice exhibit extra-
cellular Ab deposits in the brain, which are reminiscent of plaques
in human patients with some differences (refer to section “Limita-
tions of first-generation mouse models”). In addition, these mice
develop cognitive dysfunction before the appearance of amyloid
plaques in many cases. However, they are unable to recapitulate
neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) formation or neuronal loss.
APP-Tg mice recapitulate only a part of AD pathology, and
efforts were made to combine them with other mutant mice to
further reconstitute the remaining pathological hallmarks. PS1 is a
constituent of the c-secretase complex that cleaves the C terminal
fragment of APP generated by b-secretase (CTF-b) to produce Ab
(De Strooper et al, 1998). PS1 mutations cause the majority of
FAD cases (Karch et al, 2014). The overexpression of mutant PS1
or a knock-in pathogenic PSEN1 gene mutation alone did not
induce Ab pathology, presumably because the absolute amount of
pathogenic longer Ab such as Ab42 and Ab43 generated from
mouse APP was insufficient (De Strooper et al, 1995). Alternately,
mouse Ab might have low amyloidogenic potential that might be
caused by the existence of three different amino acids compared
to human Ab (Chui et al, 1999; Guo et al, 1999; Schmitz et al,
2004; Xu et al, 2015). However, the combination of these mice
with human APP-overexpressing Tg mice increased pathogenic Ab
production and conferred amyloidogenicity, which resulted in
accelerated Ab deposition, behavioral deficits, and neuronal loss.
These combinations include Tg2576 and PS1M146L Tg (Holcomb
et al, 1998), APPKM670/671NL Tg and PSA246E Tg (Borchelt et al,
1996, 1997), APP751KM670/671NL-V717I Tg and PSM146L Tg (Schmitz
et al, 2004), and APP KM670/671NL-V717I and PSEN1M233T/L235P knock-
in (Casas et al, 2004). Oakley et al (2006) generated 5XFAD mice
carrying
five
FAD
mutations
in
APP
and
PS1
transgenes
(APPK670N/M671L/I716V/V717I Tg and PSEN1M146L/L286V Tg) driven by
the Thy-1 promoter. These mice exhibited cerebral Ab pathology
and gliosis as early as 2 months of age, synaptic degeneration and
neuronal loss, and developed progressive cognitive deficits as early
as 4–5 months. However, the 5XFAD mice also failed to develop
NFTs despite their aggressive phenotypes and pathological changes
(refer to section “Limitations of first-generation mouse models”).
In efforts to replicate NFT pathology, crossbreeding of mutant
Tau-Tg mice with APP-Tg mice enhanced tau pathology in the
limbic system and olfactory cortex without affecting Ab pathology
(Tg2576 and JNPL3: Lewis et al, 2001; APP23 and JNPL3: Bolmont
et al, 2007). Oddo et al (2003) generated a triple Tg model, 3xTg-
AD mice, which overexpress APPswe, and TauP301L transgenes on a
PS1M146V knock-in background. The mice exhibit neuropathology
similar to AD patients, including the formation of Ab plaques and
NFTs, together with gliosis, synaptic damage, and memory deficits.
However, the introduced mutations in the Mapt gene that encode
• Familial AD
 mutations
• APP
• Presenilin 1/2
• Sporadic AD?
Aβ
Aβ
deposits
β
Catabolites
CATABOLISM
DOWN
AGGREGATION/
DEPOSITION
ANABOLISM
UP
APP
© 
EMBO
Figure 2.
Ab proteostasis determined by the balance of production and
degradation.
The balance of anabolism and catabolism determines the steady-state quantity
of a given protein in a biological system. In FAD, increased anabolism of
pathogenic Ab (Ab42 and Ab43) in cortex results in pathological deposition. In SAD,
the causes of Ab accumulation are not fully understood, but an aging-associated
decrease in catabolism is a candidate mechanism (Saido & Iwata, 2006;
Hellström-Lindahl et al, 2008).
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
The EMBO Journal
2475
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 Table 1.
Comparison of current APP mouse models of AD.
Strain(s)
Genetic
background
Promoter
Mutation(s)
General features
Potential
disadvantages
Suitable
applications
Single transgenic
APP-Tg
PDAPP
C57B6 × DBA2
PDGF-b
APPV717F
Moderate behavioral
phenotype
Neuronal loss in
some models
Random integration of a
transgene
Overexpression-related
artifacts: multiple APP
fragments overproduced
No perfect negative
control mice
Artificial expression
pattern controlled by
exogenous promoters
No NFTs, a feature of
preclinical AD
Sudden death (unknown
reason): Tg2576, APP23
Cognitive impairment
often preceding Ab
accumulation
Mixed genetic
backgrounds in some cases
Analysis of Ab
production,
deposition, and
Ab-associated
neuroinflammation
Drug development
(targeting Ab
deposits and
secretases)
Analysis of behavior
if caused by Ab
Identification of CSF
biomarkers
Tg2576
B6; SJL mixed
background
hamster prion
protein (PrP)
APPKM670/671NL
APP23
C57BL/6
mouse Thy1
APPKM670/671NL
J20
C57BL/6
PDGF-b
APPKM670/671NL,V717F
TgCRND8
Hybrid
C3H/He-C57BL/6
hamster prion
protein (PrP)
APPKM670/671NL,V717F
Double transgenic
APP-Tg × PSEN1-Tg
or KI
APPPS1
C57BL/6J
mouse Thy1
(APP, PS1)
APPKM670/671NL
PS1I166P
Moderate behavioral
phenotype
Ab accumulation
from early stage
Neuronal loss in
some models
Random integration of a
number of transgenes in
some cases
Overexpression-related
artifacts: multiple APP
fragments overproduced
No perfect negative
control mice
Artificial expression
pattern controlled by
exogenous promoters
Multiple mutations
(APP + PS1)
Non-specific ER stress may
arise
No NFTs, a feature of
preclinical AD
Mixed backgrounds in
some cases
Complicated crossbreeding
in some cases
Analysis of Ab
production, deposition,
and Ab-associated
neuroinflammation
Drug development
(targeting Ab deposits
and secretases)
Analysis of behavior if
caused by Ab
Identification of CSF
biomarkers
Analysis of cell death,
in some cases
5XFAD
(C57BL/6 × SJL)F1
and C57BL/6J
mouse Thy1.2
(APP, PS1)
APPKM670/671NL,I716V,V717I
PS1M146L,L286V
Triple transgenic
3xTg-AD
C57BL/6J
mouse Thy1.2
(APP, Tau)
endogenous (PS1)
APPK670N,M671L
PS1M146V
MAPTP301L
Moderate to severe
behavioral phenotype
NFT formation
Neuronal loss
Random integration of
transgenes
Overexpression-related
artifacts: multiple APP
fragments overproduced
No perfect negative
control mice
Artificial expression
pattern controlled by
exogenous promoters
Multiple mutations
(APP + PS1 + FTDP-17)
where FTDP-17 mutations
are not causes of AD
Mixed genetic backgrounds
Complicated crossbreeding
Cognitive impairment
preceding Ab
accumulation
Analysis of Ab
production,
deposition, and
Ab-associated
neuroinflammation
Drug development
(targeting Ab and tau)
Analysis of behavior
if caused by Ab
and tau
Tau imaging
Identification of CSF
biomarkers
Analysis of cell
death
Single App knock-in
NL-F
C57BL/6J
endogenous APP
APPKM670/671NL,I716F
Minor behavioral
phenotype
No overexpression
of APP and
byproducts except
for CTFb
Endogenous App
promoter-driven
gene expression
Presence of relevant
control mice
(NL mice) Two lines
for differential
purposes
NL-F (wild-type Ab)
NL-G-F (Arctic Ab) :
Ab accumulation
from early stage
Multiple familial AD
mutations of APP, the
interaction between
which has not been
identified
Unknown effects of Arctic
mutation
No severe behavioral
phenotypes, a feature of
preclinical AD
No NFTs or neuronal loss,
a feature of preclinical AD
Genomic homozygosity in
order to accelerate
pathology and to remove
murine endogenous Ab
(heterozygous mice
accumulate Ab, but take
longer than homozygous
mice.)
Overproduction of CTFb
Analysis of Ab
production,
deposition, and
Ab-associated
neuroinflammation
Analysis of
molecular pathways
Analysis of neural
network
Omics analysis
Reverse genetic
analysis using the
knockout and
knock-in mice
Drug development
(preventive)
Additional gene
manipulations
(gene editing)
Analysis of
transcription and
splicing of APP
Identification of CSF
and plasma biomarkers
NL-G-F
C57BL/6J
endogenous APP
APPKM670/671NL,E693G,I716F
A side-by-side comparison of key factors to consider in selecting an APP mouse model for preclinical studies. Researchers should decide on a model depending on
the specific scientific or therapeutic goal.
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
2476
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 tau protein are not causes of AD but rather of frontotemporal
dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17).
In addition, the overexpression of multiple genes causes an
increased risk of artificial phenomena making it difficult to interpret
the results. APP-Tg mice crossbred with Mapt knockout mice exhib-
ited improvements in memory deficits and survival in APP-Tg mice,
which suggests that tau may possibly confer Ab toxicity (J20:
Roberson et al, 2007; APP23: Ittner et al, 2010). Several combina-
tions, such as APP-Tg mice crossbred with BACE1 knockout mice
(Ohno et al, 2004) or with apolipoprotein E4 (ApoE4) knock-in mice
(Fryer et al, 2005), may be more useful for specific applications.
Studies on first-generation mouse models
APP- and APP/PS-overexpressing mice exhibit key features of
amyloid pathology that have allowed them to be applied in AD
research. Although specific details of amyloid pathology such as
plaque age of onset, size and regional distribution, and Ab species
content vary depending on the line, APP-overexpressing mice reca-
pitulate aspects of cerebral Ab accumulation, including production
and deposition of Ab and associated neuroinflammation (mi-
crogliosis and astrogliosis). In some cases, downstream pathologic
consequences of Ab deposition in overexpressing mice, such as
tau hyperphosphorylation, formation of dystrophic neurites, loss of
synaptic markers, and the accumulation of BACE1 (Zhao et al,
2007), appear similar to those observed in AD. Other effects of Ab
deposition in overexpressing mice may also be relevant to AD. For
example, 5XFAD mice exhibit neuron loss and memory deficits
that are associated with amyloid pathology (Oakley et al, 2006).
Importantly, BACE1 knockout abolishes Ab deposition in 5XFAD
mice and at the same time prevents both memory deficits and
neuron loss in this and other mouse models (Ohno et al, 2007).
Thus, cerebral Ab accumulation is responsible for neuron loss and
memory deficits in these lines, rather than transgene overexpres-
sion, although effects of b-CTF overexpression cannot be ruled
out.
APP-overexpressing mice have also been useful in validating and
assessing BACE1 and c-secretase inhibition as a therapeutic strategy
for AD. BACE1 gene knockout abrogates cerebral Ab accumulation
in all APP- and APP/PS-overexpressing mice tested to date (Luo
et al, 2001, 2003; Ohno et al, 2004, 2007; Laird et al, 2005;
McConlogue et al, 2007; Rabe et al, 2011), validating BACE1 as the
major b-secretase enzyme in the brain. Subsequently, overexpress-
ing mice were used to screen small molecule inhibitors of BACE1,
some of which could reduce Ab levels in the brain and CSF by 90%
or more. Some of which have advanced to clinical trials where they
show similar Ab lowering effects in human CSF (May et al, 2015;
Neumann et al, 2015; Kennedy et al, 2016; Cebers et al, 2017).
Another application of overexpressing mice translated successfully
to humans is the preclinical testing of the anti-Ab antibody aduca-
numab. Plaque-bearing Tg2576 mice that were chronically treated
with aducanumab experienced a dose-dependent reduction of cere-
bral Ab levels by up to ~70% compared to vehicle (Sevigny et al,
2016). The mechanism of aducanumab-mediated Ab reduction
appeared to involve binding to Ab deposits in both human AD and
aged Tg2576 mouse brains stimulating microglial phagocytosis
of Ab.
Criticisms of first-generation mouse models have often focused
on the failure of c-secretase-based medications. However, mouse
work (De Strooper et al, 1999; and many follow up studies in over-
expressing models) had predicted almost all the side effects seen in
human trials, long before phase III clinical trials were halted.
Further work into the potential of tackling c-secretase in a safe
manner is based on overexpressing mice (Weggen et al, 2001) and
novel insights into more safe approaches continue (De Strooper,
2014), illustrating the utility of the overexpression paradigm for
certain types of preclinical studies specifically targeting Ab produc-
tion and Ab deposits, and possibly also for certain pathophysiolo-
gies associated with amyloid plaques such as neuroinflammation.
Limitations of first-generation mouse models
APP undergoes sequential limited proteolysis catalyzed by proteases,
collectively termed “secretases” (Fig 3A). In first-generation trans-
genic mouse models, APP overexpression therefore results in the
overproduction of various APP fragments in addition to Ab (Fig 3).
This makes it technically difficult to distinguish between the func-
tional effects of additional Ab and of other overproduced frag-
ments. It is reasonable to assume that some of the phenotypes of
the double and triple transgenic mutant mice might be of uncertain
relevance to Alzheimer’s disease. Box 1 summarizes the mutant
APP or APP/PS-overexpressing mouse models, including prospec-
tive ideas that may be experimentally validated to better consoli-
date the APP overexpression paradigm with human AD clinical
pathogenesis (Huang & Mucke, 2012; Saito et al, 2014; Palop &
Mucke, 2016).
In the absence of further validation in patient material or addi-
tional animal models in most cases, concerns remain with trans-
genic overexpression. APP overexpression for instance might induce
behavioral abnormalities prior to Ab pathology (Hsiao et al, 1996;
Mucke et al, 2000), as Ab pathology arises much earlier than overt
disease onset in humans. Apart from potential overexpression arti-
facts, it has been difficult to standardize the phenotypes of the vari-
ous models because of their construction with different promoters,
transgene constructs, and mouse strains (Webster et al, 2014; Foley
et al, 2015). In summary, further work is needed to reevaluate
published results and to be aware that some phenotypes might be
the result of APP- or APP/PS-overexpression and not part of normal
disease pathology. For instance, the extremely early lethality of
calpastatin (CAST)-deficient APP23 mice, half of which die within
10 weeks (Higuchi et al, 2012; Saito et al, 2014), clearly contradicts
the chronic progressive nature of AD. Notably, intrinsic mouse–
human differences cannot be ruled out as contributing factors as
well (Espuny-Camacho et al, 2017).
Second-generation mouse models
To overcome intrinsic drawbacks of the APP overexpression para-
digm, mouse models utilizing an App knock-in strategy were gener-
ated
to
overproduce
pathogenic
Ab
such
as
Ab42
without
overexpressing APP. Single App knock-in mouse models were
generated in which the murine Ab sequence was humanized by
changing three amino acids that differ between mice and humans
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
The EMBO Journal
2477
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 (G676R, F681Y, and H684R) and introduced two FAD mutations
(KM670/671NL: Swedish and I716F: Beyreuther/Iberian mutations)
into the endogenous mouse App gene (Saito et al, 2014). The identi-
fication of the Beyreuther/Iberian mutation using a phenylalanine
scan (Lichtenthaler et al, 1999) opened up the possibility for a
knock-in strategy because this particular mutation increased the
Ab42/Ab40 ratio by a factor of 30 in vitro. This mutation was subse-
quently identified as a cause for an aggressive form of FAD in Iberia
(Guerreiro et al, 2010).
Mice that carry NL-F mutations, denoted AppNL-F, exhibited
increased Ab42 production and a high Ab42/Ab40 ratio without alter-
ations in the expression levels of APP or other fragments. The
exception was that App knock-in mice produced more CTF-b and
thus sAPPb compared with wild-type mice because of the Swedish
mutation (Saito et al, 2014). Due to the increase in CTF-b and
concomitant decrease of CTF-a in the App knock-in mice, the total
amount of CTF in App knock-in mice remains the same as in wild-
type mice. To examine the effect of increased CTF-b and sAPPb in
β-secretase pathway
α-secretase pathway
η-secretase pathway
Overproduced proteins in
APP-overexpressing mice
 1 APP
 2 sAPPβ
 3 CTFβ
 4 Aβ
 5 AICD
 6 sAPPα
 7 CTFα
 8 P3 fragment
 9 sAPPη
 
10 CTFη
 
11 Aη-β
 
12 Aη-α
AICD
CTFα
CTFβ
APP695
APP751
CTF-APP
AppNL-F
APP23
γ-secretase
β-secretase
β
α-secretase
α
η-secretase
WT
(22C11)
APP
A
B
C
CTFα
CTFη
CTFβ
P3
AICD
AICD
sAPPα
sAPPη
sAPPβ
APP-NTF
APP-CTF
APP-NTF
APP-CTF
APP-NTF
APP-CTF
Aβ
Aη-α
Aη-β
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ-secretase
© EMBO
Figure 3.
Proteolytic processing of APP in wild-type and Tg mice.
(A) APP processing by b-secretase, a-secretase, and g-secretase pathways, respectively. (B) Western blot analysis of APP and APP-derived fragments in wild-type (WT),
AppNL-F, and APP23 mice indicated that only APP23 mice produced APP and non-Ab APP fragments in substantial abundance. AppNL-F mice overproduce CTFb; however, AppNL
mice produce the same amount without Ab deposition (Saito et al, 2014), therefore serving as relevant negative controls. (C) Proteins that are overproduced in
APP-overexpressing mice.
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
2478
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 this case, AppNL mice were generated that carried only the Swedish
mutation and we confirmed that this amount of CTF-b and sAPPb
exert no effects on the pathology or cognitive function of the mice
(Saito et al, 2014; Masuda et al, 2016). The high levels of Ab42 in
AppNL-F mice led to pathological Ab deposition in the cerebral cortex
and hippocampus, which was accompanied by enhanced neuroin-
flammation, that is, infiltration of astrocytes and microglia that
surround plaques from 6 months of age. Of particular note, the
amyloid plaques in AppNL-F mice mainly consisted of pathogenic
Ab1/3pE-42 (Saido et al, 1995) in a manner similar to the brains of
AD patients, whereas the amyloid plaques in APP-Tg mice were
predominately composed of Ab1–40 and were unphysiologically
large, compared to those observed in App knock-in mice and AD
patients. A notable exception is the 5XFAD mice, which have
amyloid deposits with an over twofold greater amount of Ab1–42 as
compared to Ab1–40 (Oakley et al, 2006). Synaptic alterations in
AppNL-F mice were also identified by the loss of presynaptic synapto-
physin and postsynaptic PSD95 (Saito et al, 2014).
AppNL-F mice developed memory dysfunction at 18 months of
age as detected by the Y-maze test. In addition, Masuda et al (2016)
analyzed the knock-in mice using IntelliCage and determined that
the AppNL-F mice exhibited various cognitive dysfunctions, including
deficits
in
spatial
memory
and
flexible
learning,
enhanced
compulsive behavior, and reduced attention performance, depend-
ing on the age and pathology of the mice (Masuda et al, 2016). App
knock-in mice that harbor a third mutation, an E693G Arctic muta-
tion (AppNL-G-F), were also generated that makes Ab more oligomer-
ization/fibrillization-prone (Cheng et al, 2007; Gessel et al, 2012),
and these mice exhibited threefold faster and greater AD pathology
and cognitive abnormalities compared with AppNL-F mice.
Reaume et al (1996) generated App knock-in mice that harbored
the Swedish mutation (K670N/M671L) with humanization of the
murine Ab sequences (AppNLh/NLh). These mice overproduced human
Ab40 and Ab42 without overexpressing APP; however, they failed to
deposit Ab in the brain at up to 22 months of age. This group subse-
quently crossbred their App knock-in mice with mutant PSEN1
knock-in mice (Flood et al, 2002; Malthankar-Phatak et al, 2012),
and the double knock-in mice successfully exhibited Ab pathology
without depending on the overexpression paradigm. The double
knock-in mice, AppNLh/NLh × PSENP264L, exhibited less aggressive
pathology compared with the double transgenic mice, likely because
of the lower expression levels of APP and PS1. These mice are
likely more difficult to use because of their double homozygous
nature but have, for reasons that are unclear, not been used exten-
sively by the community yet bear reassessment as experimental tools.
Li et al (2014) produced App knock-in mouse models using
multiple pathogenic mutations. The mice carried the Swedish
(K670N/M671L), Dutch (E693Q), and London (V717I) mutations
with the Ab sequence humanized. The Dutch mutation causes inten-
sive cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) in humans, which results
in brain hemorrhage and early mortality (Levy et al, 1990; Van
Broeckhoven et al, 1990). Thus, this mutation is not a cause of
FAD; however, its discovery inspired the first identification of an
FAD mutation in the App gene (Goate et al, 1991; Hardy, 2017).
These mice alone developed minimal Ab deposits throughout life
until the authors crossbred them with PSEN1M146V knock-in mice.
The double knock-in mice exhibited an age-dependent deposition of
Ab not only in the parenchyma of the cerebral cortex but also the
cerebral vasculature in a manner similar to human CAA pathology.
Consistently, the double knock-in mice without the Dutch mutation
exhibited virtually no vascular pathology. They likely would not
have had to introduce the PSEN knock-in mice if they had used the
Beyreuther/Iberian mutation instead of the London mutation in the
mouse App gene. Nevertheless, the Dutch mutation-harboring knock-
in mice can be considered to represent relevant models for CAA.
Studies on second-generation mouse models
New studies suggest that a re-examination of previous results
obtained using first-generation mouse models with their second-
generation counterparts is good practice. We previously reported
that the activation of calpain, a calcium-activated cysteine protease,
is associated with Ab plaque formation in the brains of AD patients
and APP23 mice (Higuchi et al, 2012). Genetic ablation of calpas-
tatin
(CAST),
a
calpain-specific
inhibitor
protein, exacerbated
amyloid deposition, neuroinflammation, tau phosphorylation, and
somato-dendritic atrophy. Notably, when APP transgenic mice were
crossed with CAST knockout mice, there was increased mortality
(Higuchi et al, 2012) where half of the mice died in 10 weeks for
unknown reason(s). In contrast, the double mutant AppNL-F mice
Box 1:
Limitations of mutant APP- and APP/PS-overexpressing
mouse models
(i)
Transgene insertion may destroy endogenous gene loci (Kuro-o
et al, 1997; Verret et al, 2012; Saito et al, 2016).
(ii)
Absence of non-coding regions of the App gene precludes the
analysis of splicing of APP mRNA and transcriptional regulation
involving these gene regions (Nicolas et al, 2016).
(iii)
Non-matched negative controls due to variable transgene copy
number and insertion site.
(iv)
Overexpressed APP interacts unphysiologically with cellular
proteins such as kinesin via JIP-1 (Gunawardena & Goldstein,
2001; Chiba et al, 2014; Cassar & Kretzschmar, 2016; Laßek et al,
2016).
(v)
Overproduced non-Ab APP fragments may interact unphysiologi-
cally with cellular proteins (Chang & Suh, 2005; Mitani et al,
2012; Nicolas & Hassan, 2014; Kerridge et al, 2015; Nhan et al,
2015; Willem et al, 2015; Xia et al, 2016). See Fig 3.
(vi)
Non-specific ER stress may arise in APP/PS-overexpressing mice
(Barbero-Camps et al, 2014; Chaudhari et al, 2014; Reinhardt
et al, 2014; Borkham-Kamphorst et al, 2016; Saito et al, 2016).
(vii)
Ab species may appear that are different from those found in
clinical AD brain (Saido et al, 1995; Saito et al, 2016).
(viii)
Atypical region specificity of Ab pathology arises. Different Tg
mice use different promoters to drive APP transgene expression
that may affect Ab in vivo propagation (Jucker & Walker, 2013).
Höfling et al (2016) showed differences in expression level and
brain regional patterning of exogenous APP among different
APP-Tg mouse lines.
(ix)
Inconsistent drug effects occurred in some cases (Duggan &
McCarthy, 2016; Ohno, 2016).
(x)
Crossbreeding with other mutant mice can generate additional
artificial phenotype(s) (Higuchi et al, 2012; Saito et al, 2014).
Refer to section “Limitations of first-generation mouse models”
for details.
(xi)
Crossbreeding with particular mouse strains increase premature
death in some lines (Tg2576 and TgCRND8; Carlson et al, 1997;
Chishti et al, 2001).
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
The EMBO Journal
2479
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 crossbred with CAST knockout mice lived as long as wild-type mice,
indicating that the early lethality demonstrated in APP-Tg crossbred
with CAST knockout mice was inconsistent with the chronic nature
of AD (Saito et al, 2014). Furthermore, Ab was suggested to induce
calpain-dependent conversion of p35 to p25, a CDK5 activator,
which may play an important role in AD pathogenesis (Seo et al,
2014). AppNL-F mice crossbred with CAST knockout mice, in which
calpain is hyper activated, did not exhibit conversion of p35 to p25
despite the finding that calpastatin deficiency increases Ab amyloi-
dosis in the crossed mice (Saito et al, 2016). Thus, the conclusion
that Ab accumulation can cause p25 generation in neurons reported
in 5XFAD mice may need to be revisited, as it might be caused by a
non-specific
increase
in
calcium
(Barbero-Camps
et al,
2014;
Reinhardt et al, 2014) that might be unique to APP/PS1 double
transgenic mice (Reinhardt et al, 2014), although further work is
required to draw firm conclusions. A third result where differences
between first and second-generation mouse models are evident
involved the reported down-regulation of Nav1.1, a sodium channel
expressed in PV-positive interneurons in the APP-Tg mouse line J20
and its resultant effect on epilepsy and AD phenotypes (Verret et al,
2012). In contrast, in AppNL-F mice, AppNL-F mice crossbred with
CAST knockout mice, or APP23, down-regulation of Nav1.1 was not
observed (Saito et al, 2016) although it is possible that CAST defi-
ciency makes calpain hyper activated (Higuchi et al, 2005; Takano
et al, 2005). Hypofunction of Nav1.1 has been also observed in
other mouse models such as Tg2576, TgCRND8, and BACE1 trans-
genic mice (Kim et al, 2007; Corbett et al, 2013; Hamm et al, 2017),
and the effect of amyloid on Nav1.1 expression and its phenotypic
consequences in AD mouse models should continue to be reviewed
and validated in future studies.
Several basic findings using the second-generation mouse models
have advanced the basic biology of AD. Hama et al (2015) devel-
oped a new sorbitol-based optical clearing method referred to as
ScaleS that preserves the cellular structure of the tissue and
proteins, including their immunochemical epitopes, enabling a 3D
analysis of plaque deposition. AppNL-F mice treated with ScaleS
allowed quantitative visualization of Ab in an entire hemisphere,
mapping of the 3D network of amyloid plaques in association with
the vascular structure, and tracking of single plaques via successive
light microscopy (LM) and electron microscopy (EM) observations.
3D images of microglial activation during amyloidosis of AppNL-F
brains demonstrated that microglia association and active inflamma-
tion occur at an early stage of plaque formation. Such clearing meth-
ods combined with AD mouse models enable analysis of the degree
of Ab burden in larger brain volumes compared with conventional
immunohistochemistry and are also applicable for the verification of
immunotherapy (Sevigny et al, 2016) by visualizing therapeutic
anti-Ab antibody binding to regional amyloid in situ.
One proposed mechanism for memory loss in AD is the destabi-
lization of mushroom-shaped postsynaptic spines, which may play
an important role in memory storage. In accord, several reports indi-
cate a reduction in mushroom spines in AD brain. In AppNL-F mice,
Zhang et al (2015) demonstrated that hippocampal mushroom
spines are lost and the STIM2 (stromal interaction molecule 2)-nSOC
(neuronal store-operated calcium entry) pathway is altered as early
as 3 months of age in a time-dependent manner. The authors
demonstrate the relationship between extracellular Ab42 and spine
loss concluding that Ab42-induced hyperactivation of mGluR5 and
the subsequent overload of ER Ca2+ signaling likely represent the
main cause for mushroom spine loss in App knock-in mice. More-
over, an sSOC-positive modulator NSN21778 recovered the reduc-
tion of mushroom spines and memory deficits via activation of
transient receptor potential canonical 6 in App knock-in mice
(Zhang et al, 2016).
The orphan G protein (heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding
protein)-coupled receptor (GPCR) GPR3 is reported to regulate c-
secretase activity and Ab generation without affecting Notch recep-
tor proteolysis (Thathiah et al, 2009). Recently, Huang et al (2015)
demonstrated that genetic deletion of GPR3 reduced amyloid pathol-
ogy in the brains of the App knock-in models, as well as the APP-Tg
and APP/PS1-Tg models. However, a reduction in the Ab42/Ab40
ratio following a genetic deficiency of GPR3 was detectable only in
AppNL-F/NL-F mice and not in the transgenic mice. In addition, they
demonstrated that both the number and volume of amyloid plaques
in AppNL-F/NL-F mice crossbred with Gpr3�/� mice were decreased
compared with single AppNL-F/NL-F (Gpr3+/+) mice using 3D analysis
with another clearing technique, CLARITY. These findings demon-
strate that second-generation mouse models can be used to evaluate
the effect of new therapeutic targets on Ab pathology.
BACE1 activity is up-regulated in AD patients, after Ab deposi-
tion, and in traumatic brain injury (Rossner et al, 2006). Kizuka et al
(2015) hypothesized that bisecting N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc)
stabilizes BACE1 protein during oxidative stress, which results in an
increase in Ab generation. In a more recent paper, they demonstrated
the up-regulation of BACE1 protein and the level of bisecting GlcNAc
in AppNL-G-F/NL-G-F mouse brains, which was accompanied by an
accumulation of oxidative damage (Kizuka et al, 2016).
Recently, the App knock-in mice were used to refute the hypothe-
sis that the new Alzheimer candidate gene PLD3 (Cruchaga et al,
2014) was involved in APP processing. Crossing of Pld3 deficient
mice with App knock-in mice demonstrated that there was no
modulation of Ab plaque or APP cleavage in these mice (Fazzari
et al, 2017)
Limitations of second-generation mouse models
Like single APP overexpression mice, the knock-in mice do not
exhibit tau pathology or neurodegeneration. This finding suggests
that Ab pathology may account, at least in part, for the cognitive
dysfunction in AD via disturbances in neuronal activities because
Zhang et al 2015 identified a reduction of mushroom spines, distin-
guishing spine structure at excitatory synapses, in the early stage in
these mice. However, the Ab-induced memory failure alone might
be insufficient to explain all symptoms of AD patients because
tauopathy-accompanying irreversible neurodegeneration has previ-
ously occurred at disease onset even in FAD-mutation carriers
(Bateman et al, 2012). Therefore, App knock-in mice should be
considered “models of preclinical AD”. A summary of features and
limitations in App knock-in mice is shown in Box 2.
The absence of tauopathy and neurodegeneration in these mice,
which live less than 3 years, may be simply a matter of AD time
course because it requires more than two decades for Ab amyloido-
sis to induce cortical tauopathy and neurodegeneration in humans
(Bateman et al, 2012). To address these questions, further genetic
manipulation to study the connection between Ab pathology and
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
2480
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 tauopathy/neurodegeneration will be required. There are only three
splice variants of tau (Mapt gene product) in adult mouse brain
whereas there are six in humans. We therefore have generated
human tau knock-in mice, in which all the exons and introns of
murine Mapt gene have been humanized (Saido et al, 2015). The
mice are available to the research community from RIKEN. Other
genes should not need to be humanized because overexpression of
frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism (FTDP) mutation-
carrying human tau is sufficient to reconstitute tauopathy composed
of Neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and neurodegeneration (Lewis
et al, 2000).
Biomarkers for the diagnosis and prognosis of preclinical AD will
not only reduce the cost but also shorten the time necessary for drug
development. AppNL-F and AppNL-G-F mice are the only single knock-
in
models
that
develop
Ab
pathology
and
memory
deficits.
However, the presence of multiple mutations in the App gene, not
observed in human patients, could in principle interact with each
other in some cases that may not accurately represent clinical AD
(Box 2). Thus, AppNL-F mice are suitable for analyzing the mecha-
nisms that affect preclinical Ab deposition compared with AppNL-G-F
that may be more useful for analyzing the mechanisms that alter
downstream cascades.
Despite these potential drawbacks, App knock-in mice may be
useful as preclinical AD models for a number of purposes including
(i) identification of biomarker(s) for preclinical AD, (ii) identifi-
cation of molecules that evoke tauopathy in an Ab pathology-
dependent manner, (iii) preclinical studies of preventive medicine(s),
(iv) a platform for the generation of improved AD model(s) by
crossbreeding with appropriate mutant mice (Table 1), and (v) to
study the cellular phase of Alzheimer’s disease (De Strooper &
Karran, 2016), including the progressive response of vascular,
astroglia, oligodendrocyte, and microglial cell populations upon
amyloid stress. A distinct advantage is that expression from an
endogenous promoter ensures that responses are not directed to
cells that artifactually overexpress APP.
Future perspectives on AD mouse modeling
Previous first-generation transgenic mouse models have made
substantial contributions to our understanding of AD pathology.
Many of these studies carried out with the best available mouse
lines at the time have advanced the understanding of AD. The new
second-generation mouse lines solve some of the previous limita-
tions and point the way to future third generation models. Until
such next generation models become available, studies that investi-
gate the interface of results from first- and second-generation
models will continue to reveal discrepancies and may in some cases
indicate that findings from previous AD models may in part be a
consequence of overexpression artifacts. Sorting out the clinically
relevant phenotypes and mechanisms will require years of work
with all the models but we urge AD researchers to remain vigilant
and not to assume textbook status for any previous findings without
extensive validation using the most appropriate mouse lines. We
further emphasize that preclinical studies, including immunother-
apy, may benefit from a re-examination with new models to identify
drug candidates for
the preclinical prevention of earlier AD
symptoms.
Species differences between rodents and humans in terms of
neuroanatomy, genetics, and behaviors are also critical to control
(Emes et al, 2003; Molna
´r & Clowry, 2012; Kaas, 2013; Nithianan-
tharajah & Grant, 2013). Key molecules in AD such as Ab, tau, and
ApoE are different between mice and humans in their sequences,
pathogenicity
or
number
of
isoforms
expressed.
In
addition,
immune systems in the brain also differ between mice and humans
in certain aspects such as the proportion of microglial phenotypes,
or the expression pattern of inflammation-related genes (reviewed
by Franco Bocanegra et al, 2017). The development of induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from AD patients can help to address
species differences (Mungenast et al, 2016; Sullivan & Young-
Pearse, 2017). Recently, a novel chimeric AD mouse model was
developed by transplanting human PSCs into AD mouse brain,
showing pathological changes in tau and neurodegeneration in
human neurons (Espuny-Camacho et al, 2017). Furthermore, to
leverage species differences for near-clinical studies, we are generat-
ing non-human primate models of AD (Okano et al, 2016) with
more similarity to humans that could reduce species barriers and
limit the time and cost of drug development.
AD research can benefit from modern views in the fields of
immunology and cancer progression. Cancer stem cells arise in
human bodies every day, but fail to develop into cancer in most
cases because of cancer immunity (Yarchoan et al, 2017; Yeo &
Box 2:
Limitations of single App knock-in mouse model and
potential solutions
(i)
All the lines carry Swedish mutations (NL), which may exhibit dif-
ferent sensitivity to b-secretase inhibitors from the wild-type lines
(KM). This is however easy to fix by converting NL to KM by gene
editing, which cannot be applied to the APP-overexpressing mice.
(ii)
The Swedish mutation causes an increase of CTF-b and concomi-
tant
reduction
of
CTF-a.
Consequently,
total
CTF
levels
(CTF-b + CTF-a) remain unchanged. If CTF-b possesses particular
biological or pathological functions, this may cause artifacts. Still,
the amount of CTF-b in single App knock-in mice is much smaller
than that in APP-overexpressing mice.
(iii)
The knock-in mice possess two or three independent FAD muta-
tions in the App gene. There is no evidence for an interaction
between the Swedish mutation and Beyreuther/Iberian muta-
tions, but the Arctic mutation increases CTFs (CTF-b + CTF-a) by
50% by unknown mechanisms (T Saito & TC Saido, unpublished;
Cheng et al, 2004) and results in an unnatural Ab conformation.
It is important to perform delipidation pretreatment for the anal-
ysis of CTFs (Sato et al, 2003; Saito et al, 2014).
(iv)
The negative control mice, AppNL, accumulate no Ab throughout
life, but appear to induce minor microgliosis specifically in
hippocampus and compulsive behavior (Masuda et al, 2016).
(v)
The knock-in mice are used in a homozygous status, in order to
achieve early pathology and to remove murine Ab. It is advised to
backcross them with the original line, B6/J, occasionally, to protect
the mice from accumulating de novo mutations that could cause
recessive defects.
(vi)
APP may behave different from human APP because the App gene
except for part of intron 15–17 is a murine sequence. For example,
KPI domain-containing APP variants are not expressed in mouse
brain unlike in human brain (Saito et al, 2014). Therefore, App
knock-in mice may not be suitable for addressing the properties
of KPI domain-containing APP variants in endothelial cells, since
these variants are expressed mostly in endothelial cells (Kitazume
et al, 2010).
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
The EMBO Journal
2481
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 Angeli, 2017; Fig 4). We can draw an analogy between cancer
immunity and AD protective mechanism(s) in the brain, which can
maintain cognition essentially unaffected for more than two decades
after the initial deposition of Ab. If we could identify the molecules
responsible for this protection, we should be able to facilitate
studies of the major AD pathologies in mice by knocking out or
modifying the corresponding genes. In the progressive systemic
dysfunction that characterizes the cellular phase of AD, many types
of cells are involved with complex feedback and feedforward
responses at different disease stages.
The emerging insight that AD is a multidimensional and multi-
cellular process will require more integrated and complex forms of
analysis (Tarasoff-Conway et al, 2015; De Strooper & Karran,
2016). Knock-in animals are most suitable to study these processes
with target genes that are expressed in the correct cell types, with
appropriate timing and amounts under the control of endogenous
promoters. In addition, a number of common variants associated
with LOAD have been identified in genes that participate in Ab
clearance or neuroinflammation in genome-wide association stud-
ies (GWAS; Rosenberg et al, 2016; Naj et al, 2017). Effects of these
variants can be precisely assessed by additional gene manipula-
tions in App knock-in mice. Both crossbreeding App knock-in mice
with other existing mutants and gene editing, which utilizes novel
techniques, such as transcription activator-like effector nuclease
(TALEN) and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeat (CRISPR)/Cas9 will reveal new mechanisms of Ab pathol-
ogy (Lee et al, 2016).
In conclusion, major steps to improve mouse models for AD
are underway. While first-generation models will remain impor-
tant and relevant for AD research, the second-generation mice
solve some of the limitations of previous models for both basic
and preclinical studies of AD. Standardization and sharing of
disease models is essential for the objective interpretation of data,
and the second-generation mice can serve as one of the important
baseline models for mechanisms of Ab pathology obtained in
different
laboratories
or
under
different
conditions.
However,
every
mouse
model
has
limitations,
and
further
side-by-side
comparisons between App knock-in
mice, APP-overexpressing
mice,
and
other
models
and
observations
from
human
AD
patients are required to move toward effective treatments. AD
researchers can and should develop an ethic of sharing and
comparing data and tools, carefully selecting the most suitable
models for their purposes, and analyzing the data with an eye
toward maximizing replication. To conquer AD as soon as possible,
such collaboration ethics on a global scale will maximize the
speed of drug development.
Acknowledgements
We thank Lennart Mucke, UCSF, for comments on the manuscript, Makoto
Higuchi for sharing valuable information, and Charles Yokoyama, RIKEN,
for editorial and editing support, respectively. This work was partially
supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B) and Scientific
Research (B) from the Japan Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science,
and Technology (MEXT) (S.H and T.S.); Special Postdoctoral Researchers
Program from RIKEN (K.N. and S.H.); the Japan Science and Technology
Agency Precursory Research for Embryonic Science and Technology (T.S.);
the Strategic Research Program for Brain Sciences, Japan Agency for Medi-
cal Research and Development (AMED) (T.S.), and the Brain Mapping by
Integrated Neurotechnologies for Disease Studies (Brain/MINDS) project
of AMED (T.C.S.); Aging Project of RIKEN (T.C.S.), the Swedish Research
Council (P.N.), Alzheimerfonden (P.N.), Hållstens forskningsstiftelse (P.N.),
and the National Institutes of Health (R01 AG022560 and R01 AG030142
to R.V.).
Conflict of interest
TCS and TS serve as the CEO and advisor, respectively, for RIKEN BIO Co. Ltd.,
which sublicenses animal models to for-profit organizations, the profits from
which are used for the identification of disease biomarkers.
References
Ashe KH, Zahs KR (2010) Probing the biology of Alzheimer’s disease in mice.
Neuron 66: 631 – 645
Barbero-Camps E, Fernández A, Baulies A, Martinez L, Fernández-Checa JC,
Colell A (2014) Endoplasmic reticulum stress mediates amyloid b
neurotoxicity via mitochondrial cholesterol trafficking. Am J Pathol 184:
2066 – 2081
Bateman RJ, Xiong C, Benzinger TL, Fagan AM, Goate A, Fox NC, Marcus DS,
Cairns NJ, Xie X, Blazey TM, Holtzman DM, Santacruz A, Buckles V, Oliver
A, Moulder K, Aisen PS, Ghetti B, Klunk WE, McDade E, Martins RN et al
(2012) Clinical and biomarker changes in dominantly inherited Alzheimer’s
disease. N Engl J Med 367: 795 – 804
Benilova I, Gallardo R, Ungureanu AA, Castillo Cano V, Snellinx A, Ramakers
M, Bartic C, Rousseau F, Schymkowitz J, De Strooper B (2014) The
Alzheimer disease protective mutation A2T modulates kinetic and
thermodynamic properties of amyloid-b (Ab) aggregation. J Biol Chem 289:
30977 – 30989
Bolmont T, Clavaguera F, Meyer-Luehmann M, Herzig MC, Radde R,
Staufenbiel M, Lewis J, Hutton M, Tolnay M, Jucker M (2007) Induction of
tau pathology by intracerebral infusion of amyloid-b-containing brain
extract and by amyloid-beta deposition in APP x Tau transgenic mice. Am
J Pathol 171: 2012 – 2020
Borchelt DR, Thinakaran G, Eckman CB, Lee MK, Davenport F, Ratovitsky T,
Prada CM, Kim G, Seekins S, Yager D, Slunt HH, Wang R, Seeger M, Levey
PROTECTIVE MECHANISMS
(IMMUNE PRIVILEGE)
Aβ 
pathology
Tauopathy
Neurodegeneration
CANCER IMMUNITY
Tumor
Cancer
stem cells
© 
EMBO
More 
than 
10 
years
More 
than 
10 
years
Figure 4.
Analogy between cancer immunity and protective mechanism
in brain.
Analogy between cancer and AD. Because of cancer immunity mechanisms, it
generally takes cancer stem cells more than a decade to develop pathological
cancer. Human brains may possess similar protective mechanisms for AD, which
can explain why it takes Ab amyloidosis decades to induce neurodegeneration,
whose identification may improve animal models and protective medications.
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
2482
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 AI, Gandy SE, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Price DL, Younkin SG, Sisodia SS
(1996) Familial Alzheimer’s disease-linked presenilin 1 variants elevate
Abeta1-42/1-40 ratio in vitro and in vivo. Neuron 17: 1005 – 1013
Borchelt DR, Ratovitski T, van Lare J, Lee MK, Gonzales V, Jenkins NA,
Copeland NG, Price DL, Sisodia SS (1997) Accelerated amyloid deposition
in the brains of transgenic mice coexpressing mutant presenilin 1 and
amyloid precursor proteins. Neuron 19: 939 – 945
Borkham-Kamphorst E, Steffen BT, Van de Leur E, Haas U, Tihaa L, Friedman
SL, Weiskirchen R (2016) CCN1/CYR61 overexpression in hepatic stellate
cells induces ER stress-related apoptosis. Cell Signal 28: 34 – 42
Braak H, Braak E (1991) Demonstration of amyloid deposits and
neurofibrillary changes in whole brain sections. Brain Pathol 1: 213 – 216
Campion D, Dumanchin C, Hannequin D, Dubois B, Belliard S, Puel M,
Thomas-Anterion C, Michon A, Martin C, Charbonnier F, Raux G, Camuzat
A, Penet C, Mesnage V, Martinez M, Clerget-Darpoux F, Brice A, Frebourg T
(1999) Early-onset autosomal dominant Alzheimer disease: prevalence,
genetic heterogeneity, and mutation spectrum. Am J Hum Genet 65:
664 – 670
Carlson GA, Borchelt DR, Dake A, Turner S, Danielson V, Coffin JD, Eckman C,
Meiners J, Nilsen SP, Younkin SG, Hsiao KK (1997) Genetic modification of
the phenotypes produced by amyloid precursor protein overexpression in
transgenic mice. Hum Mol Genet 6: 1951 – 1959
Casas C, Sergeant N, Itier JM, Blanchard V, Wirths O, van der Kolk N,
Vingtdeux V, van de Steeg E, Ret G, Canton T, Drobecq H, Clark A, Bonici
B, Delacourte A, Benavides J, Schmitz C, Tremp G, Bayer TA, Benoit P,
Pradier L (2004) Massive CA1/2 neuronal loss with intraneuronal and N-
terminal truncated Ab42 accumulation in a novel Alzheimer transgenic
model. Am J Pathol 165: 1289 – 1300
Cassar M, Kretzschmar D (2016) Analysis of amyloid precursor protein
function in Drosophila melanogaster. Front Mol Neurosci 9: 61
Cebers G, Alexander RC, Haeberlein SB, Han D, Goldwater R, Ereshefsky L,
Olsson T, Ye N, Rosen L, Russell M, Maltby J, Eketjäll S, Kugler AR (2017)
AZD3293: pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic effects in healthy
subjects and patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 55:
1039 – 1053
Chang KA, Suh YH (2005) Pathophysiological roles of amyloidogenic carboxy-
terminal fragments of the beta-amyloid precursor protein in Alzheimer’s
disease. J Pharmacol Sci 97: 461 – 471
Chaudhari N, Talwar P, Parimisetty A, Lefebvre d’Hellencourt C, Ravanan P
(2014) A molecular web: endoplasmic reticulum stress, inflammation, and
oxidative stress. Front Cell Neurosci 8: 213
Chávez-Gutiérrez L, Bammens L, Benilova I, Vandersteen A, Benurwar M,
Borgers M, Lismont S, Zhou L, Van Cleynenbreugel S, Esselmann H,
Wiltfang J, Serneels L, Karran E, Gijsen H, Schymkowitz J, Rousseau F,
Broersen K, De Strooper B (2012) The mechanism of c-Secretase
dysfunction in familial Alzheimer disease. EMBO J 31: 2261 – 2274
Cheng IH, Palop JJ, Esposito LA, Bien-Ly N, Yan F, Mucke L (2004) Aggressive
amyloidosis in mice expressing human amyloid peptides with the Arctic
mutation. Nat Med 10: 1190 – 1192
Cheng IH, Scearce-Levie K, Legleiter J, Palop JJ, Gerstein H, Bien-Ly N, Puoliväli
J, Lesné S, Ashe KH, Muchowski PJ, Mucke L (2007) Accelerating amyloid-
beta fibrillization reduces oligomer levels and functional deficits in
Alzheimer disease mouse models. J Biol Chem 282: 23818 – 23828
Chiba K, Araseki M, Nozawa K, Furukori K, Araki Y, Matsushima T, Nakaya T,
Hata S, Saito Y, Uchida S, Okada Y, Nairn AC, Davis RJ, Yamamoto T, Kinjo
M, Taru H, Suzuki T (2014) Quantitative analysis of APP axonal transport
in neurons: role of JIP1 in enhanced APP anterograde transport. Mol Biol
Cell 25: 3569 – 3580
Chishti MA, Yang DS, Janus C, Phinney AL, Horne P, Pearson J, Strome R,
Zuker N, Loukides J, French J, Turner S, Lozza G, Grilli M, Kunicki S,
Morissette C, Paquette J, Gervais F, Bergeron C, Fraser PE, Carlson GA et al
(2001) Early-onset amyloid deposition and cognitive deficits in transgenic
mice expressing a double mutant form of amyloid precursor protein 695. J
Biol Chem 276: 21562 – 21570
Chui DH, Tanahashi H, Ozawa K, Ikeda S, Checler F, Ueda O, Suzuki H, Araki W,
Inoue H, Shirotani K, Takahashi K, Gallyas F, Tabira T (1999) Transgenic mice
with Alzheimer presenilin 1 mutations show accelerated neurodegeneration
without amyloid plaque formation. Nat Med 5: 560 – 564
Ciechanover A, Kwon YT (2015) Degradation of misfolded proteins in
neurodegenerative diseases: therapeutic targets and strategies. Exp Mol
Med 47: e147
Citron M, Oltersdorf T, Haass C, McConlogue L, Hung AY, Seubert P, Vigo-
Pelfrey C, Lieberburg I, Selkoe DJ (1992) Mutation of the beta-amyloid
precursor protein in familial Alzheimer’s disease increases beta-protein
production. Nature 360: 672 – 674
Corbett BF, Leiser SC, Ling HP, Nagy R, Breysse N, Zhang X, Hazra A, Brown
JT, Randall AD, Wood A, Pangalos MN, Reinhart PH, Chin J (2013) Sodium
channel cleavage is associated with aberrant neuronal activity and
cognitive deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 33:
7020 – 7026
Cruchaga C, Karch CM, Jin SC, Benitez BA, Cai Y, Guerreiro R, Harari O,
Norton J, Budde J, Bertelsen S, Jeng AT, Cooper B, Skorupa T, Carrell D,
Levitch D, Hsu S, Choi J, Ryten M, UK Brain Expression Consortium
(UKBEC), Sassi C et al (2014) Rare coding variants in the phospholipase D3
gene confer risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 505: 550 – 554
De Strooper B, Simons M, Multhaup G, Van Leuven F, Beyreuther K, Dotti CG
(1995) Production of intracellular amyloid-containing fragments in
hippocampal neurons expressing human amyloid precursor protein and
protection against amyloidogenesis by subtle amino acid substitutions in
the rodent sequence. EMBO J 14: 4932 – 4938
De Strooper B, Saftig P, Craessaerts K, Vanderstichele H, Guhde G, Annaert W,
Von Figura K, Van Leuven F (1998) Deficiency of presenilin-1 inhibits the
normal cleavage of amyloid precursor protein. Nature 391: 387 – 390
De Strooper B, Annaert W, Cupers P, Saftig P, Craessaerts K, Mumm JS,
Schroeter EH, Schrijvers V, Wolfe MS, Ray WJ, Goate A, Kopan R (1999) A
presenilin-1-dependent c-secretase-like protease mediates release of
Notch intracellular domain. Nature 398: 518 – 522
De Strooper B (2014) Lessons from a failed c-secretase Alzheimer trial. Cell
159: 721 – 726
De Strooper B, Karran E (2016) The cellular phase of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell
164: 603 – 615
Drummond E, Wisniewski T (2017) Alzheimer’s disease: experimental models
and reality. Acta Neuropathol 133: 155 – 175
Duggan SP, McCarthy JV (2016) Beyond c-secretase activity: The multifunctional
nature of presenilins in cell signalling pathways. Cell Signal 28: 1 – 11
Emes RD, Goodstadt L, Winter EE, Ponting CP (2003) Comparison of the
genomes of human and mouse lays the foundation of genome zoology.
Hum Mol Genet 12: 701 – 709
Espuny-Camacho I, Arranz AM, Fiers M, Snellinx A, Ando K, Munck S,
Bonnefont J, Lambot L, Corthout N, Omodho L, Vanden Eynden E, Radaelli
E, Tesseur I, Wray S, Ebneth A, Hardy J, Leroy K, Brion JP, Vanderhaeghen
P, De Strooper B (2017) Hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease in stem-cell-
derived human neurons transplanted into mouse brain. Neuron 93:
1066 – 1081
Fazzari P, Horre K, Arranz AM, Frigerio CS, Saito T, Saido TC, De Strooper B
(2017) PLD3 gene and processing of APP. Nature 541: E1 – E2
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
The EMBO Journal
2483
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 Flood DG, Reaume AG, Dorfman KS, Lin YG, Lang DM, Trusko SP, Savage MJ,
Annaert WG, De Strooper B, Siman R, Scott RW (2002) FAD mutant PS-1
gene-targeted mice: increased Ab42 and Ab deposition without APP
overproduction. Neurobiol Aging 23: 335 – 348
Foley AM, Ammar ZM, Lee RH, Mitchell CS (2015) Systematic review of the
relationship between amyloid-b levels and measures of transgenic mouse
cognitive deficit in Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 44: 787 – 795
Franco Bocanegra DK, Nicoll JAR, Boche D (2017) Innate immunity in
Alzheimer’s disease: the relevance of animal models? J Neural Transm
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-017-1729-4
Fryer JD, Simmons K, Parsadanian M, Bales KR, Paul SM, Sullivan PM,
Holtzman DM (2005) Human apolipoprotein E4 alters the amyloid-beta
40:42 ratio and promotes the formation of cerebral amyloid angiopathy in
an amyloid precursor protein transgenic model. J Neurosci 25: 2803 – 2810
Funato H, Yoshimura M, Kusui K, Tamaoka A, Ishikawa K, Ohkoshi N,
Namekata K, Okeda R, Ihara Y (1998) Quantitation of amyloid beta-protein
(A beta) in the cortex during aging and in Alzheimer’s disease. Am J Pathol
152: 1633 – 1640
Games D, Adams D, Alessandrini R, Barbour R, Berthelette P, Blackwell C, Carr
T, Clemens J, Donaldson T, Gillespie F, Guido T, Hagopian S, Johnson-Wood
K, Khan K, Lee M, Leibowitz P, Lieberburg I, Little S, Masliahparallel E,
McConlogue L et al (1995) Alzheimer-type neuropathology in transgenic
mice overexpressing V717F beta-amyloid precursor protein. Nature 373:
523 – 527
Gessel MM, Bernstein S, Kemper M, Teplow DB, Bowers MT (2012) Familial
Alzheimer’s disease mutations differentially alter amyloid b-protein
oligomerization. ACS Chem Neurosci 3: 909 – 918
Goate A, Chartier-Harlin MC, Mullan M, Brown J, Crawford F, Fidani L, Giuffra
L, Haynes A, Irving N, James L, Mant R, Newton P, Rooke K, Roques P,
Talbot C, Pericak-Vance M, Roses A, Williamson R, Rossor M, Owen M et al
(1991) Segregation of a missense mutation in the amyloid precursor
protein gene with familial Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 349: 704 – 706
Guerreiro RJ, Baquero M, Blesa R, Boada M, Brás JM, Bullido MJ, Calado A,
Crook R, Ferreira C, Frank A, Gómez-Isla T, Hernández I, Lleó A, Machado
A, Martínez-Lage P, Masdeu J, Molina-Porcel L, Molinuevo JL, Pastor P,
Pérez-Tur J et al (2010) Genetic screening of Alzheimer’s disease genes in
Iberian and African samples yields novel mutations in presenilins and APP.
Neurobiol Aging 31: 725 – 731
Guerreiro R, Wojtas A, Bras J, Carrasquillo M, Rogaeva E, Majounie E,
Cruchaga C, Sassi C, Kauwe JS, Younkin S, Hazrati L, Collinge J, Pocock J,
Lashley T, Williams J, Lambert JC, Amouyel P, Goate A, Rademakers R,
Morgan K et al (2013) TREM2 variants in Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med
368: 117 – 127
Gunawardena S, Goldstein LS (2001) Disruption of axonal transport and
neuronal viability by amyloid precursor protein mutations in Drosophila.
Neuron 32: 389 – 401
Guo Q, Fu W, Sopher BL, Miller MW, Ware CB, Martin GM, Mattson MP
(1999) Increased vulnerability of hippocampal neurons to excitotoxic
necrosis in presenilin-1 mutant knock-in mice. Nat Med 5: 101 – 106
Hama H, Hioki H, Namiki K, Hoshida T, Kurokawa H, Ishidate F, Kaneko T,
Akagi T, Saito T, Saido T, Miyawaki A (2015) ScaleS: an optical clearing
palette for biological imaging. Nat Neurosci 18: 1518 – 1529
Hamm V, Héraud C, Bott J-B, Herbeaux K, Strittmatter C, Mathis C, Goutagny R
(2017) Differential contribution of APP metabolites to early cognitive deficits
in a TgCRND8 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Adv 3: e1601068
Hardy J (2017) The discovery of Alzheimer-causing mutations in the APP gene
and the formulation of the “amyloid cascade hypothesis”. FEBS J 284:
1040 – 1044
Hellström-Lindahl E, Ravid R, Nordberg A (2008) Age-dependent decline of
neprilysin in Alzheimer’s disease and normal brain: inverse correlation
with A beta levels. Neurobiol Aging 29: 210 – 221
Higuchi M, Tomioka M, Takano J, Shirotani K, Iwata N, Masumoto H, Maki M,
Itohara S, Saido TC (2005) Distinct mechanistic roles of calpain and
caspase activation in neurodegeneration as revealed in mice
overexpressing their specific inhibitors. J Biol Chem 280: 15229 – 15237
Higuchi M, Iwata N, Matsuba Y, Takano J, Suemoto T, Maeda J, Ji B, Ono M,
Staufenbiel M, Suhara T, Saido TC (2012) Mechanistic involvement of the
calpain-calpastatin system in Alzheimer neuropathology. FASEB J 26:
1204 – 1217
Höfling C, Morawski M, Zeitschel U, Zanier ER, Moschke K, Serdaroglu A,
Canneva F, von Hörsten S, De Simoni MG, Forloni G, Jäger C, Kremmer E,
Roßner S, Lichtenthaler SF, Kuhn PH (2016) Differential transgene
expression patterns in Alzheimer mouse models revealed by novel
human amyloid precursor protein-specific antibodies. Aging Cell 15:
953 – 963
Holcomb L, Gordon MN, McGowan E, Yu X, Benkovic S, Jantzen P, Wright K,
Saad I, Mueller R, Morgan D, Sanders S, Zehr C, O’Campo K, Hardy J, Prada
CM, Eckman C, Younkin S, Hsiao K, Duff K (1998) Accelerated Alzheimer-
type phenotype in transgenic mice carrying both mutant amyloid
precursor protein and presenilin 1 transgenes. Nat Med 4: 97 – 100
Hsiao K, Chapman P, Nilsen S, Eckman C, Harigaya Y, Younkin S, Yang F, Cole
G (1996) Correlative memory deficits, Abeta elevation, and amyloid
plaques in transgenic mice. Science 274: 99 – 102
Huang Y, Mucke L (2012) Alzheimer mechanisms and therapeutic strategies.
Cell 148: 1204 – 1222
Huang Y, Skwarek-Maruszewska A, Horré K, Vandewyer E, Wolfs L, Snellinx A,
Saito T, Radaelli E, Corthout N, Colombelli J, Lo AC, Van Aerschot L,
Callaerts-Vegh Z, Trabzuni D, Bossers K, Verhaagen J, Ryten M, Munck S,
D’Hooge R, Swaab DF et al (2015) Loss of GPR3 reduces the amyloid
plaque burden and improves memory in Alzheimer’s disease mouse
models. Sci Transl Med 7: 309
Hyman BT, Phelps CH, Beach TG, Bigio EH, Cairns NJ, Carrillo MC, Dickson DW,
Duyckaerts C, Frosch MP, Masliah E, Mirra SS, Nelson PT, Schneider JA, Thal
DR, Thies B, Trojanowski JQ, Vinters HV, Montine TJ (2012) National Institute
on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association guidelines for the neuropathologic
assessment of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 8: 1 – 13
Ihara Y, Arai H (2007) Arutsuhaimaa-byo ni naranai (Japanese). Tokyo, Japan:
Asahi Books
Ittner LM, Ke YD, Delerue F, Bi M, Gladbach A, van Eersel J, Wölfing H, Chieng
BC, Christie MJ, Napier IA, Eckert A, Staufenbiel M, Hardeman E, Götz J
(2010) Dendritic function of tau mediates amyloid-b toxicity in
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. Cell 142: 387 – 397
Iwata N, Tsubuki S, Takaki Y, Shirotani K, Lu B, Gerard NP, Gerard C, Hama E,
Lee HJ, Saido TC (2001) Metabolic regulation of brain Abeta by neprilysin.
Science 292: 1550 – 1552
Iwata N, Takaki Y, Fukami S, Tsubuki S, Saido TC (2002) Region-specific
reduction of A beta-degrading endopeptidase, neprilysin, in mouse
hippocampus upon aging. J Neurosci Res 70: 493 – 500
Jonsson T, Atwal JK, Steinberg S, Snaedal J, Jonsson PV, Bjornsson S,
Stefansson H, Sulem P, Gudbjartsson D, Maloney J, Hoyte K, Gustafson A,
Liu Y, Lu Y, Bhangale T, Graham RR, Huttenlocher J, Bjornsdottir G,
Andreassen OA, Jönsson EG et al (2012) A mutation in APP protects
against Alzheimer’s disease and age-related cognitive decline. Nature 488:
96 – 99
Jonsson T, Stefansson K (2013) TREM2 and neurodegenerative disease. N Engl
J Med 369: 1568 – 1569
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
2484
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 Jucker M, Walker LC (2013) Self-propagation of pathogenic protein aggregates
in neurodegenerative diseases. Nature 501: 45 – 51
Kaas JH (2013) The evolution of brains from early mammals to humans.
Wiley Interdiscip Rev Cogn Sci 4: 33 – 45
Karch CM, Cruchaga C, Goate AM (2014) Alzheimer’s disease genetics: from
the bench to the clinic. Neuron 83: 11 – 26
Kennedy ME, Stamford AW, Chen X, Cox K, Cumming JN, Dockendorf MF,
Egan M, Ereshefsky L, Hodgson RA, Hyde LA, Jhee S, Kleijn HJ, Kuvelkar R,
Li W, Mattson BA, Mei H, Palcza J, Scott JD, Tanen M, Troyer MD et al
(2016) The BACE1 inhibitor verubecestat (MK-8931) reduces CNS b-
amyloid in animal models and in Alzheimer’s disease patients. Sci Transl
Med 8: 363ra150
Kerridge C, Kozlova DI, Nalivaeva NN, Turner AJ (2015) Hypoxia affects
neprilysin expression through caspase activation and an APP intracellular
domain-dependent mechanism. Front Neurosci 9: 426
Khaminets A, Behl C, Dikic I (2016) Ubiquitin-dependent and independent
signals in selective autophagy. Trends Cell Biol 26: 6 – 16
Kim DY, Carey BW, Wang H, Ingano LA, Binshtok AM, Wertz MH, Pettingell
WH, He P, Lee VM, Woolf CJ, Kovacs DM (2007) BACE1 regulates voltage-
gated sodium channels and neuronal activity. Nat Cell Biol 9: 755 – 764
Kitazume S, Tachida Y, Kato M, Yamaguchi Y, Honda T, Hashimoto Y, Wada Y,
Saito T, Iwata N, Saido T, Taniguchi N (2010) J Biol Chem 285:
40097 – 40103
Kizuka Y, Kitazume S, Fujinawa R, Saito T, Iwata N, Saido TC, Nakano M,
Yamaguchi Y, Hashimoto Y, Staufenbiel M, Hatsuta H, Murayama S,
Manya H, Endo T, Taniguchi N (2015) An aberrant sugar modification of
BACE1 blocks its lysosomal targeting in Alzheimer’s disease. EMBO Mol
Med 7: 175 – 189
Kizuka Y, Nakano M, Kitazume S, Saito T, Saido TC, Taniguchi N (2016)
Bisecting GlcNAc modification stabilizes BACE1 protein under oxidative
stress conditions. Biochem J 473: 21 – 30
Kuro-o M, Matsumura Y, Aizawa H, Kawaguchi H, Suga T, Utsugi T, Ohyama
Y, Kurabayashi M, Kaname T, Kume E, Iwasaki H, Iida A, Shiraki-Iida T,
Nishikawa S, Nagai R, Nabeshima YI (1997) Mutation of the mouse klotho
gene leads to a syndrome resembling ageing. Nature 390: 45 – 51
Laird FM, Cai H, Savonenko AV, Farah MH, He K, Melnikova T, Wen H, Chiang
HC, Xu G, Koliatsos VE, Borchelt DR, Price DL, Lee HK, Wong PC (2005)
BACE1, a major determinant of selective vulnerability of the brain to
amyloid-beta amyloidogenesis, is essential for cognitive, emotional, and
synaptic functions. J Neurosci 25: 11693 – 11709
Laßek M, Weingarten J, Wegner M, Volknandt W (2016) The amyloid
precursor protein-A novel player within the molecular array of presynaptic
nanomachines. Front Synaptic Neurosci 7: 21
Lee HB, Sundberg BN, Sigafoos AN, Clark KJ (2016) Genome engineering with
TALE and CRISPR systems in neuroscience. Front Genet 7: 47
Levy E, Carman MD, Fernandez-Madrid IJ, Power MD, Lieberburg I, van
Duinen SG, Bots GT, Luyendijk W, Frangione B (1990) Mutation of the
Alzheimer’s disease amyloid gene in hereditary cerebral hemorrhage,
Dutch type. Science 248: 1124 – 1126
Lewis J, McGowan E, Rockwood J, Melrose H, Nacharaju P, Van Slegtenhorst
M, Gwinn-Hardy K, Paul Murphy M, Baker M, Yu X, Duff K, Hardy J, Corral
A, Lin WL, Yen SH, Dickson DW, Davies P, Hutton M (2000) Neurofibrillary
tangles, amyotrophy and progressive motor disturbance in mice
expressing mutant (P301L) tau protein. Nat Genet 25: 402 – 405
Lewis J, Dickson DW, Lin WL, Chisholm L, Corral A, Jones G, Yen SH, Sahara N,
Skipper L, Yager D, Eckman C, Hardy J, Hutton M, McGowan E (2001)
Enhanced neurofibrillary degeneration in transgenic mice expressing
mutant tau and APP. Science 293: 1487 – 1491
Li H, Guo Q, Inoue T, Polito VA, Tabuchi K, Hammer RE, Pautler RG, Taffet GE,
Zheng H (2014) Vascular and parenchymal amyloid pathology in an
Alzheimer disease knock-in mouse model: interplay with cerebral blood
flow. Mol Neurodegener 9: 28
Lichtenthaler SF, Wang R, Grimm H, Uljon SN, Masters CL, Beyreuther K
(1999) Mechanism of the cleavage specificity of Alzheimer’s disease
gamma-secretase identified by phenylalanine-scanning mutagenesis of
the transmembrane domain of the amyloid precursor protein. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 96: 3053 – 3058
Luo Y, Bolon B, Kahn S, Bennett BD, Babu-Khan S, Denis P, Fan W, Kha H,
Zhang J, Gong Y, Martin L, Louis JC, Yan Q, Richards WG, Citron M, Vassar
R (2001) Mice deficient in BACE1, the Alzheimer’s b-secretase, have
normal phenotype and abolished beta-amyloid generation. Nat Neurosci 4:
231 – 232
Luo Y, Bolon B, Damore MA, Fitzpatrick D, Liu H, Zhang J, Yan Q, Vassar R,
Citron M (2003) BACE1 (b-secretase) knockout mice do not acquire
compensatory gene expression changes or develop neural lesions over
time. Neurobiol Dis 14: 81 – 88
Maloney JA, Bainbridge T, Gustafson A, Zhang S, Kyauk R, Steiner P, van der
Brug M, Liu Y, Ernst JA, Watts RJ, Atwal JK (2014) Molecular mechanisms
of Alzheimer disease protection by the A673T allele of amyloid precursor
protein. J Biol Chem 289: 30990 – 31000
Malthankar-Phatak GH, Lin YG, Giovannone N, Siman R (2012) Amyloid
deposition and advanced age fails to induce Alzheimer’s type progression
in a double knock-in mouse model. Aging Dis 3: 141 – 155
Mangialasche F, Solomon A, Winblad B, Mecocci P, Kivipelto M (2010)
Alzheimer’s disease: clinical trials and drug development. Lancet Neurol 9:
702 – 716
Maruyama M, Shimada H, Suhara T, Shinotoh H, Ji B, Maeda J, Zhang MR,
Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM, Ono M, Masamoto K, Takano H, Sahara N, Iwata
N, Okamura N, Furumoto S, Kudo Y, Chang Q, Saido TC, Takashima A et al
(2013) Imaging of tau pathology in a tauopathy mouse model and in
Alzheimer patients compared to normal controls. Neuron 79: 1094 – 1108
Masuda A, Kobayashi Y, Kogo N, Saito T, Saido TC, Itohara S (2016) Cognitive
deficits in single App knock-in mouse models. Neurobiol Learn Mem 135:
73 – 82
Mawuenyega KG, Sigurdson W, Ovod V, Munsell L, Kasten T, Morris JC,
Yarasheski KE, Bateman RJ (2010) Decreased clearance of CNS beta-
amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease. Science 330: 1774
May PC, Willis BA, Lowe SL, Dean RA, Monk SA, Cocke PJ, Audia JE, Boggs LN,
Borders AR, Brier RA, Calligaro DO, Day TA, Ereshefsky L, Erickson JA,
Gevorkyan H, Gonzales CR, James DE, Jhee SS, Komjathy SF, Li L et al
(2015) The potent BACE1 inhibitor LY2886721 elicits robust central Ab
pharmacodynamic responses in mice, dogs, and humans. J Neurosci 35:
1199 – 1210
McConlogue L, Buttini M, Anderson JP, Brigham EF, Chen KS, Freedman SB,
Games D, Johnson-Wood K, Lee M, Zeller M, Liu W, Motter R, Sinha S
(2007) Partial reduction of BACE1 has dramatic effects on Alzheimer
plaque and synaptic pathology in APP Transgenic Mice. J Biol Chem 282:
26326 – 26334
Mitani Y, Yarimizu J, Saita K, Uchino H, Akashiba H, Shitaka Y, Ni K, Matsuoka
N (2012) Differential effects between c-secretase inhibitors and
modulators on cognitive function in amyloid precursor protein-transgenic
and nontransgenic mice. J Neurosci 32: 2037 – 2050
Molnár Z, Clowry G (2012) Cerebral cortical development in rodents and
primates. Prog Brain Res 195: 45 – 70
Mucke L, Masliah E, Yu GQ, Mallory M, Rockenstein EM, Tatsuno G, Hu K,
Kholodenko D, Johnson-Wood K, McConlogue L (2000) High-level neuronal
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
The EMBO Journal
2485
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 expression of abeta 1-42 in wild-type human amyloid protein precursor
transgenic mice: synaptotoxicity without plaque formation. J Neurosci 20:
4050 – 4058
Mungenast AE, Siegert S, Tsai LH (2016) Modeling Alzheimer’s disease with
human induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. Mol Cell Neurosci 73: 13 – 31
Naj AC, Schellenberg GD, for the Alzheimer’s Disease Genetics Consortium
(ADGC) (2017) Genomic variants, genes, and pathways of Alzheimer’s
disease: An overview. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 174: 5 – 26
Neumann U, Rueeger H, Machauer R, Veenstra SJ, Lueoend RM, Tintelnot-
Blomley M, Laue G, Beltz K, Vogg B, Schmid P, Frieauff W, Shimshek DR,
Staufenbiel M, Jacobson LH (2015) A novel BACE inhibitor NB-360 shows a
superior pharmacological profile and robust reduction of amyloid-b and
neuroinflammation in APP transgenic mice. Mol Neurodegener 10: 44
Nhan HS, Chiang K, Koo EH (2015) The multifaceted nature of amyloid
precursor protein and its proteolytic fragments: friends and foes. Acta
Neuropathol 129: 1 – 19
Nicolas M, Hassan BA (2014) Amyloid precursor protein and neural
development. Development 141: 2543 – 2548
Nicolas G, Wallon D, Goupil C, Richard AC, Pottier C, Dorval V, Sarov-Rivière
M, Riant F, Hervé D, Amouyel P, Guerchet M, Ndamba-Bandzouzi B,
Mbelesso P, Dartigues JF, Lambert JC, Preux PM, Frebourg T, Campion D,
Hannequin D, Tournier-Lasserve E et al (2016) Mutation in the
3’untranslated region of APP as a genetic determinant of cerebral amyloid
angiopathy. Eur J Hum Genet 24: 92 – 98
Nilsson P, Loganathan K, Sekiguchi M, Matsuba Y, Hui K, Tsubuki S, Tanaka
M, Iwata N, Saito T, Saido TC (2013) Ab secretion and plaque formation
depend on autophagy. Cell Rep 5: 61 – 69
Nithianantharajah J, Grant SG (2013) Cognitive components in mice and
humans: combining genetics and touchscreens for medical translation.
Neurobiol Learn Mem 105: 13 – 19
Oakley H, Cole SL, Logan S, Maus E, Shao P, Craft J, Guillozet-Bongaarts A,
Ohno M, Disterhoft J, Van Eldik L, Berry R, Vassar R (2006) Intraneuronal
b-amyloid aggregates, neurodegeneration, and neuron loss in transgenic
mice with five familial Alzheimer’s disease mutations: potential factors in
amyloid plaque formation. J Neurosci 26: 10129 – 10140
Oddo S, Caccamo A, Shepherd JD, Murphy MP, Golde TE, Kayed R, Metherate
R, Mattson MP, Akbari Y, LaFerla FM (2003) Triple-transgenic model of
Alzheimer’s disease with plaques and tangles: intracellular Ab and
synaptic dysfunction. Neuron 39: 409 – 421
Ohno M, Sametsky EA, Younkin LH, Oakley H, Younkin SG, Citron M, Vassar R,
Disterhoft JF (2004) BACE1 deficiency rescues memory deficits and
cholinergic dysfunction in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron
41: 27 – 33
Ohno M, Cole SL, Yasvoina M, Zhao J, Citron M, Berry R, Disterhoft JF, Vassar
R (2007) BACE1 gene deletion prevents neuron loss and memory deficits
in 5XFAD APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Neurobiol Dis 26: 134 – 145
Ohno M (2016) Alzheimer’s therapy targeting the b-secretase enzyme BACE1:
Benefits and potential limitations from the perspective of animal model
studies. Brain Res Bull 126: 183 – 198
Okano H, Sasaki E, Yamamori T, Iriki Shimogori T, Yamaguchi Y, Kasai K,
Miyawaki A (2016) Brain/MINDS: a Japanese national brain project for
marmoset neuroscience. Neuron 92: 582 – 590
Onos KD, Sukoff Rizzo SJ, Howell GR, Sasner M (2015) Toward more predictive
genetic mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res Bull 122: 1 – 11
Palop JJ, Mucke L (2016) Network abnormalities and interneuron dysfunction
in Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 17: 777 – 792
Prince M, Comas-Herrera A, Knapp M, Guerchet M, Karagiannidou M (2016)
World Alzheimer Report 2016. Improving healthcare for people living with
dementia. Coverage, quality and costs now and in the future. Alzheimer’s
Disease International. World Alzheimer’s Report
Puzzo D, Gulisano W, Palmeri A, Arancio O (2015) Rodent models for
Alzheimer’s disease drug discovery. Expert Opin Drug Discov 10: 703 – 711
Rabe S, Reichwald J, Ammaturo D, De Strooper B, Saftig P, Neumann U,
Staufenbiel M (2011) The Swedish APP mutation alters the effect of
genetically reduced BACE1 expression on the APP processing. J Neurochem
119: 231 – 239
Reaume AG, Howland DS, Trusko SP, Savage MJ, Lang DM, Greenberg BD,
Siman R, Scott RW (1996) Enhanced amyloidogenic processing of the b-
amyloid precursor protein in gene-targeted mice bearing the Swedish
familial Alzheimer’s disease mutations and a “humanized” Ab sequence. J
Biol Chem 271: 23380 – 23388
Reinhardt S, Schuck F, Grösgen S, Riemenschneider M, Hartmann T, Postina
R, Grimm M, Endres K (2014) Unfolded protein response signaling by
transcription factor XBP-1 regulates ADAM10 and is affected in
Alzheimer’s disease. FASEB J 28: 978 – 997
Roberson ED, Scearce-Levie K, Palop JJ, Yan F, Cheng IH, Wu T, Gerstein H, Yu
GQ, Mucke L (2007) Reducing endogenous tau ameliorates amyloid b-
induced deficits in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Science 316:
750 – 754
Rosenberg RN, Lambracht-Washington D, Yu G, Xia W (2016) Genomics of
Alzheimer disease: a review. JAMA Neurol 73: 867 – 874
Rossner S, Sastre M, Bourne K, Lichtenthaler SF (2006) Transcriptional and
translational regulation of BACE1 expression–implications for Alzheimer’s
disease. Prog Neurobiol 79: 95 – 111
Saido TC, Iwatsubo T, Mann DM, Shimada H, Ihara Y, Kawashima S (1995)
Dominant and differential deposition of distinct beta-amyloid peptide
species, A beta N3(pE), in senile plaques. Neuron 14: 457 – 466
Saido TC, Iwata N (2006) Metabolism of amyloid b peptide and pathogenesis
of Alzheimer’s disease: towards presymptomatic diagnosis, prevention and
therapy. Neurosci Res 54: 235 – 253
Saito T, Matsuba Y, Mihira N, Takano J, Nilsson P, Itohara S, Iwata N, Saido
TC (2014) Single App knock-in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat
Neurosci 17: 661 – 663
Saido T, Tsukakoshi K, Saito T (2015) ADPD5-1906 Humanization of entire
murine tau gene for a better model of AD. Neurodegener Dis 15(Suppl. 1): 22
Saito T, Matsuba Y, Yamazaki N, Saido TC (2016) Calpain activation in
Alzheimer model mice is an artifact of APP and presenilin overexpression.
J Neurosci 36: 9933 – 9936
Sato T, Dohmae N, Qi Y, Kakuda N, Misonou H, Mitsumori R, Maruyama H,
Koo EH, Haass C, Takio K, Morishima-Kawashima M, Ishiura S, Ihara Y
(2003) Potential link between amyloid b-protein 42 and C-terminal
fragment c 49–99 of b-amyloid precursor protein. J Biol Chem 278:
24294 – 20301
Scheltens P, Blennow K, Breteler MM, De Strooper B, Frisoni GB, Salloway S,
Van der Flier WM (2016) Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet 388: 505 – 517
Schmitz C, Rutten BP, Pielen A, Schäfer S, Wirths O, Tremp G, Czech C,
Blanchard V, Multhaup G, Rezaie P, Korr H, Steinbusch HW, Pradier L,
Bayer TA (2004) Hippocampal neuron loss exceeds amyloid plaque load in
a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Am J Pathol 164:
1495 – 1502
Selkoe DJ, Hardy J (2016) The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease at
25 years. EMBO Mol Med 8: 595 – 608
Seo J, Giusti-Rodríguez P, Zhou Y, Rudenko A, Cho S, Ota KT, Park C, Patzke H,
Madabhushi R, Pan L, Mungenast AE, Guan JS, Delalle I, Tsai LH (2014)
Activity-dependent p25 generation regulates synaptic plasticity and Ab-
induced cognitive impairment. Cell 157: 486 – 498
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
2486
Published online: August 1, 2017 
 Sevigny J, Chiao P, Bussière T, Weinreb PH, Williams L, Maier M, Dunstan R,
Salloway S, Chen T, Ling Y, O’Gorman J, Qian F, Arastu M, Li M, Chollate S,
Brennan MS, Quintero-Monzon O, Scannevin RH, Arnold HM, Engber T
et al (2016) The antibody aducanumab reduces Ab plaques in Alzheimer’s
disease. Nature 537: 50 – 56
Sturchler-Pierrat C, Abramowski D, Duke M, Wiederhold KH, Mistl C,
Rothacher S, Ledermann B, Bürki K, Frey P, Paganetti PA, Waridel C,
Calhoun ME, Jucker M, Probst A, Staufenbiel M, Sommer B (1997) Two
amyloid precursor protein transgenic mouse models with Alzheimer
disease-like pathology. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94: 13287 – 13292
Sullivan SE, Young-Pearse TL (2017) Induced pluripotent stem cells as a
discovery tool for Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res 1656: 98 – 106
Takano J, Tomioka M, Tsubuki S, Higuchi M, Iwata N, Itohara S, Maki M,
Saido TC (2005) Calpain mediates excitotoxic DNA fragmentation via
mitochondrial pathways in adult brains: evidence from calpastatin
mutant mice. J Biol Chem 280: 16175 – 16184
Tarasoff-Conway JM, Carare RO, Osorio RS, Glodzik L, Butler T, Fieremans E,
Axel L, Rusinek H, Nicholson C, Zlokovic BV, Frangione B, Blennow K,
Ménard J, Zetterberg H, Wisniewski T, de Leon MJ (2015) Clearance
systems in the brain-implications for Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Neurol
11: 457 – 470
Thathiah A, Spittaels K, Hoffmann M, Staes M, Cohen A, Horré K,
Vanbrabant M, Coun F, Baekelandt V, Delacourte A, Fischer DF, Pollet D,
De Strooper B, Merchiers P (2009) The orphan G protein-coupled
receptor 3 modulates amyloid-beta peptide generation in neurons.
Science 323: 946 – 951
Van Broeckhoven C, Haan J, Bakker E, Hardy JA, Van Hul W, Wehnert A,
Vegter-Van der Vlis M, Roos RA (1990) Amyloid beta protein precursor
gene and hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis (Dutch).
Science 248: 1120 – 1122
Verret L, Mann EO, Hang GB, Barth AM, Cobos I, Ho K, Devidze N, Masliah E,
Kreitzer AC, Mody I, Mucke L, Palop JJ (2012) Inhibitory interneuron deficit
links altered network activity and cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer
model. Cell 149: 708 – 721
Wang LS, Naj AC, Graham RR, Crane PK, Kunkle BW, Cruchaga C, Murcia JD,
Cannon-Albright L, Baldwin CT, Zetterberg H et al (2015) Rarity of the
Alzheimer disease-protective APP A673T variant in the United States. JAMA
Neurol 72: 209 – 216
Webster SJ, Bachstetter AD, Nelson PT, Schmitt FA, Van Eldik LJ (2014) Using
mice to model Alzheimer’s dementia: an overview of the clinical disease
and the preclinical behavioral changes in 10 mouse models. Front Genet 5:
88
Weggen S, Eriksen JL, Das P, Sagi SA, Wang R, Pietrzik CU, Findlay KA, Smith
TE, Murphy MP, Bulter T, Kang DE, Marquez-Sterling N, Golde TE, Koo EH
(2001) A subset of NSAIDs lower amyloidogenic Abeta42 independently of
cyclooxygenase activity. Nature 414: 212 – 216
Welander H, Frånberg J, Graff C, Sundström E, Winblad B, Tjernberg LO
(2009) Ab43 is more frequent than Ab40 in amyloid plaque cores from
Alzheimer disease brains. J Neurochem 110: 697 – 706
Willem M, Tahirovic S, Busche MA, Ovsepian SV, Chafai M, Kootar S,
Hornburg D, Evans LD, Moore S, Daria A, Hampel H, Müller V, Giudici C,
Nuscher B, Wenninger-Weinzierl A, Kremmer E, Heneka MT, Thal
DR, Giedraitis V, Lannfelt L et al (2015) g-Secretase processing of
APP inhibits neuronal activity in the hippocampus. Nature 526: 443 – 447
Winblad B, Amouyel P, Andrieu S, Ballard C, Brayne C, Brodaty H, Cedazo-
Minguez A, Dubois B, Edvardsson D, Feldman H, Fratiglioni L, Frisoni GB,
Gauthier S, Georges J, Graff C, Iqbal K, Jessen F, Johansson G, Jönsson L,
Kivipelto M et al (2016) Defeating Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias:
a priority for European science and society. Lancet Neurol 15: 455 – 532
Xia D, Gutmann JM, Götz J (2016) Mobility and subcellular localization of
endogenous, gene-edited Tau differs from that of over-expressed human
wild-type and P301L mutant Tau. Sci Rep 6: 29074
Xu G, Ran Y, Fromholt SE, Fu X, Yachnis A, Golde TE, Borchelt DR (2015)
Murine Ab over-production produces diffuse and compact Alzheimer-type
amyloid deposits. Acta Neuropathol Commun 3: 72
Yarchoan M, Johnson BA III, Lutz ER, Laheru DA, Jaffee EM (2017) Targeting
neoantigens to augment antitumour immunity. Nat Rev Cancer 17:
209 – 222
Yeo KP, Angeli V (2017) Bidirectional crosstalk between lymphatic endothelial
cell and T cell and its implications in tumor immunity. Front Immunol 8:
83
Zahs KR, Ashe KH (2010) ‘Too much good news’ - are Alzheimer mouse
models trying to tell us how to prevent, not cure, Alzheimer’s disease?
Trends Neurosci 33: 381 – 389
Zhang H, Wu L, Pchitskaya E, Zakharova O, Saito T, Saido T, Bezprozvanny I
(2015) Neuronal store-operated calcium entry and mushroom spine loss in
amyloid precursor protein knock-in mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J
Neurosci 35: 13275 – 13286
Zhang H, Sun S, Wu L, Pchitskaya E, Zakharova O, Fon Tacer K, Bezprozvanny
I (2016) Store-operated calcium channel complex in postsynaptic spines: A
new therapeutic target for Alzheimer’s disease treatment. J Neurosci 36:
11837 – 11850
Zhao J, Fu Y, Yasvoina M, Shao P, Hitt B, O’Connor T, Logan S, Maus E, Citron
M, Berry R, Binder L, Vassar R (2007) BACE1 levels become elevated in
neurons around amyloid plaques: implications for Alzheimer’s disease
pathogenesis. J Neurosci 27: 3639 – 3649
License: This is an open access article under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
License, which permits use, distribution and reproduc-
tion in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.
ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal
Vol 36 | No 17 | 2017
Hiroki Sasaguri et al
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models
The EMBO Journal
2487
Published online: August 1, 2017 
