 307
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
Introduction: The purpose of this guideline is to establish clinical practice recommendations for the pharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia in adults, 
when such treatment is clinically indicated. Unlike previous meta-analyses, which focused on broad classes of drugs, this guideline focuses on individual 
drugs commonly used to treat insomnia. It includes drugs that are FDA-approved for the treatment of insomnia, as well as several drugs commonly used to 
treat insomnia without an FDA indication for this condition. This guideline should be used in conjunction with other AASM guidelines on the evaluation and 
treatment of chronic insomnia in adults.
Methods: The American Academy of Sleep Medicine commissioned a task force of four experts in sleep medicine. A systematic review was conducted 
to identify randomized controlled trials, and the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) process was used to 
assess the evidence. The task force developed recommendations and assigned strengths based on the quality of evidence, the balance of benefits and 
harms, and patient values and preferences. Literature reviews are provided for those pharmacologic agents for which sufficient evidence was available to 
establish recommendations. The AASM Board of Directors approved the final recommendations.
Recommendations: The following recommendations are intended as a guideline for clinicians in choosing a specific pharmacological agent for treatment 
of chronic insomnia in adults, when such treatment is indicated. Under GRADE, a STRONG recommendation is one that clinicians should, under most 
circumstances, follow. A WEAK recommendation reflects a lower degree of certainty in the outcome and appropriateness of the patient-care strategy for 
all patients, but should not be construed as an indication of ineffectiveness. GRADE recommendation strengths do not refer to the magnitude of treatment 
effects in a particular patient, but rather, to the strength of evidence in published data. Downgrading the quality of evidence for these treatments is predictable 
in GRADE, due to the funding source for most pharmacological clinical trials and the attendant risk of publication bias; the relatively small number of eligible 
trials for each individual agent; and the observed heterogeneity in the data. The ultimate judgment regarding propriety of any specific care must be made by 
the clinician in light of the individual circumstances presented by the patient, available diagnostic tools, accessible treatment options, and resources.
1. We suggest that clinicians use suvorexant as a treatment for sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK)
2. We suggest that clinicians use eszopiclone as a treatment for sleep onset and sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK)
3. We suggest that clinicians use zaleplon as a treatment for sleep onset insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK)
4. We suggest that clinicians use zolpidem as a treatment for sleep onset and sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK)
5. We suggest that clinicians use triazolam as a treatment for sleep onset insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK)
6. We suggest that clinicians use temazepam as a treatment for sleep onset and sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK)
7. We suggest that clinicians use ramelteon as a treatment for sleep onset insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK)
8. We suggest that clinicians use doxepin as a treatment for sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK)
9. We suggest that clinicians not use trazodone as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK)
10. We suggest that clinicians not use tiagabine as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK)
11. We suggest that clinicians not use diphenhydramine as a treatment for sleep onset and sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. 
(WEAK)
12. We suggest that clinicians not use melatonin as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK)
13. We suggest that clinicians not use tryptophan as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK)
14. We suggest that clinicians not use valerian as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. (WEAK)
Keywords: insomnia, treatment, pharmacologic, guideline
Citation: Sateia MJ, Buysse DJ, Krystal AD, Neubauer DN, Heald JL. Clinical practice guideline for the pharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia in 
adults: an American Academy of Sleep Medicine clinical practice guideline. J Clin Sleep Med. 2017;13(2):307–349.
SPECIAL ARTICLES
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Pharmacologic Treatment of 
Chronic Insomnia in Adults: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine 
Clinical Practice Guideline
Michael J. Sateia, MD1; Daniel J. Buysse, MD2; Andrew D. Krystal, MD, MS3; David N. Neubauer, MD4; Jonathan L. Heald, MA5
1Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH; 2University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA; 3University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA; 
4Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD; 5American Academy of Sleep Medicine, Darien, IL
pii: jc-00382-16 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.6470
 308
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction  308
Background  309
Methodology  312
Clinical Practice Recommendations  315
Orexin receptor agonists  
Suvorexant  317
Benzodiazepine receptor agonists  
Eszopiclone  318
Zaleplon  321
Zolpidem  323
Benzodiazepines  
Triazolam  326
Temazepam  327
Melatonin agonists  
Ramelteon  329
Heterocyclics  
Doxepin  331
Trazodone  332
Anticonvulsants  
Tiagabine  333
Over-the-counter preparations  
Diphenhydramine  334
Melatonin  335
L-tryptophan  337
Valerian  338
Literature Reviews  338
Estazolam  338
Quazepam  339
Flurazepam  340
Oxazepam  341
Quetiapine  341
Gabapentin  341
Paroxetine  341
Trimipramine  342
Discussion and Future Directions  342
INTRODUCTION
Aims
This clinical practice guideline was initiated at the request 
of the Board of Directors of the American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine (AASM), who also reviewed this document and 
provided feedback. No formal clinical practice guidelines for 
the pharmacological treatment of insomnia have previously 
been issued by the AASM, despite the fact that this remains, 
by far, the most common approach to therapy, after treatment 
of comorbidities. Pharmacotherapy is one of two major ap-
proaches to treatment, the alternative being cognitive behav-
ioral therapies for insomnia (CBT-I), already identified as a 
standard of treatment. This paper does not directly address the 
relative benefits of these two approaches. Rather, the conclu-
sions and recommendations regarding pharmacotherapy must 
be considered within the context of specific treatment goals, 
comorbidities, prior treatment responses, availability, safety, 
patient preference and cost considerations. Despite the clearly 
favorable benefit to risk ratio of CBT-I, not all patients with an 
insomnia disorder can and will derive benefit from this treat-
ment alone. This failure may result from inability to access 
such treatment (due to availability, cost restraints, etc.), inabil-
ity or unwillingness to participate in the therapy, or treatment 
non-responsiveness. Thus, pharmacotherapy, alone or in com-
bination with CBT-I, must continue to be considered a part of 
the therapeutic armamentarium, as it currently is for perhaps 
25% of the population.1 Unfortunately, many individuals use 
medications or substances (e.g. over-the-counter sleep aids or 
alcohol) which are not demonstrated to be effective in manag-
ing insomnia and/or have significant potential for harm. For 
the estimated 3.5% to 7% of individuals receiving prescrip-
tion medication for sleep disturbance,2–4 significant knowledge 
gaps and anxieties about the proper usage of these agents ex-
ists among the prescribers.
This paper includes a systematic review and meta-analyses 
which provides the basis of the initial AASM clinical practice 
guideline for pharmacological management of insomnia. The 
aims of the present analysis are: (1) to determine the efficacy 
of individual prescription and non-prescription medications 
for treatment of insomnia; (2) to assess the efficacy of indi-
vidual medications for specific sleep complaints (i.e. difficulty 
initiating sleep/difficulty maintaining sleep); (3) to evaluate the 
potential for adverse effects of these drugs; (4) to consider the 
evidence concerning efficacy and adverse effects in delineat-
ing evidence-based guidelines for the use of pharmacotherapy 
in the management of chronic insomnia; and (5) to offer rec-
ommendations for optimizing quality and uniformity of future 
investigations.
This clinical practice guideline is intended to serve as one 
component in an ongoing assessment of the individual patient 
with insomnia. As discussed elsewhere,5–7 a comprehensive 
initial evaluation should include a detailed history of sleep 
complaints, medical and psychiatric history, and medication/
substance use. These factors, together with patient preferences 
and treatment availability, should be used to select specific 
treatments for specific patients. This clinical practice guide-
line is not intended to help clinicians determine which patient 
is appropriate for pharmacotherapy. Rather, it is intended to 
provide recommendations regarding specific insomnia drugs 
once the decision has been made to use pharmacotherapy. This 
guideline is also not intended to recommend one drug over an-
other. Very few comparative efficacy studies have been con-
ducted among these agents. Rather, the guideline provides a 
recommendation and evidence base for each individual drug. 
The selection of a particular drug should rest on the evidence 
summarized here, as well as additional patient-level factors, 
such as the optimal pharmacokinetic profile, assessments of 
benefits versus harms, and past treatment history.
This guideline should be used in conjunction with other 
AASM guidelines on the evaluation and treatment of chronic 
insomnia. These guidelines indicate that CBT-I is a standard 
of treatment and that such treatment carries a significantly fa-
vorable benefit:risk ratio. Therefore, based on these guidelines, 
all patients with chronic insomnia should receive CBT-I as a 
primary intervention. Medications for chronic insomnia dis-
order should be considered mainly in patients who are unable 
 309
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
to participate in CBT-I, who still have symptoms despite par-
ticipation in such treatments, or, in select cases, as a temporary 
adjunct to CBT-I.
Clinical Guidelines and Practice Parameters
The AASM has issued several guidelines, reviews, and prac-
tice parameters related to the assessment and management of 
insomnia. A 2000 review and practice parameter paper ad-
dressed the comprehensive evaluation of chronic insomnia.5,6 
Non-pharmacological management of insomnia has been 
the subject of two practice parameter papers.8–11 No formal, 
evidence-based standards of practice for pharmacological 
treatment of insomnia have been published, although clinical 
guidelines addressing this topic have been issued by various 
groups. The Standards of Practice Committee of the AASM 
addressed non-prescription treatments for insomnia in a 2006 
paper12 which concluded that there is sparse or little evidence to 
support use of these agents for insomnia. Preliminary but con-
flicting evidence was noted for valerian and first-generation 
H1 antagonists for short-term use. A 2005 National Institutes 
of Health consensus conference13 on manifestations and man-
agement of chronic insomnia found moderate-to-high-grade 
evidence to support the efficacy of both cognitive-behavioral 
therapies and benzodiazepine agonists in the short-term man-
agement of insomnia, but noted a relative paucity of data 
concerning long-term usage of such treatments, despite the 
chronicity of the condition. Little evidence supporting efficacy 
of other widely used treatments (sedating antidepressants and 
non-prescription agents) was found.
A 2008 AASM clinical guideline paper on the evaluation 
and management of chronic insomnia defined psychological 
and behavioral therapies as a standard of treatment (the high-
est level of recommendation at that time).7 No specific level 
of recommendation was offered for pharmacological therapies, 
but the consensus recommendation was that such treatment, 
when used, should be accompanied by cognitive-behavioral 
therapies whenever possible. Short/intermediate acting benzo-
diazepine receptor agonists (benzodiazepines [BZDs] or newer 
BZD receptor agonistic modulators [BzRAs]) or ramelteon 
were recommended as first-line pharmacotherapy. Other drugs, 
such as sedating antidepressants or anticonvulsant medications 
were recommended as second- or third-line agents, particu-
larly when comorbidities (e.g. mood disorder or epilepsy) are 
present. Other, non-prescription drugs such as over-the counter 
antihistamine sleeping aids and herbal/nutritional agents were 
not recommended due to lack of demonstrated efficacy as well 
as safety concerns.
A consensus statement from the British Association for 
Psychopharmacology14 assessed evidence related to chronic 
insomnia, including management issues, and came to similar 
conclusions. CBT interventions were recommended as first-
line treatment. BzRAs were found effective for short-term use, 
although degradation of improvement following discontinua-
tion of hypnotic was noted to be of concern. Limited evidence 
and toxicity concerns were cited for other prescription and 
non-prescription agents, although prolonged-release melato-
nin was recommended as a first-line treatment for insomnia in 
persons over 55 years.
In May 2016, the American College of Physicians published 
its own clinical practice guideline for the management of 
chronic insomnia.15 This guideline makes two major recom-
mendations. The first is that all patients with chronic insomnia 
receive CBT-I as the initial treatment intervention. This is a 
strong recommendation based on moderate quality evidence. 
The second is that a shared decision-making approach be em-
ployed by clinicians in determining whether pharmacotherapy 
should be employed for those patients who did not achieve 
adequate response with CBT-I (weak recommendation based 
on low quality evidence). The guideline notes that there was 
insufficient evidence to draw conclusions regarding the overall 
efficacy of pharmacotherapy in the insomnia population. More 
specifically, there was also insufficient evidence to determine 
the efficacy of benzodiazepines, trazodone and melatonin in 
the management of chronic insomnia. Studies of more recent 
generation sleep aids such as BzRAs, doxepin and suvorexant 
found improvement in a number of sleep outcome variable but, 
as is the case with our own guideline, much of the evidence 
was of low quality. Although evidence is presented for indi-
vidual drugs, there were no specific recommendations made 
for single agents. Finally, there was insufficient evidence found 
to determine the balance of benefits versus harms.
BACKGROUND
Insomnia disorder is defined in the International Classification 
of Sleep Disorders, Third Edition16 as a complaint of trouble 
initiating or maintaining sleep which is associated with day-
time consequences and is not attributable to environmental cir-
cumstances or inadequate opportunity to sleep. The disorder 
is identified as chronic when it has persisted for at least three 
months at a frequency of at least three times per week. When 
the disorder meets the symptom criteria but has persisted for 
less than three months, it is considered short-term insomnia.
Occasional, short-term insomnia affects 30% to 50% of the 
population.17 The prevalence of chronic insomnia disorder in 
industrialized nations is estimated to be at least 5% to 10%.18,19 
In medically and psychiatrically ill populations, as well as in 
older age groups, the prevalence is significantly higher. Chronic 
insomnia is associated with numerous adverse effects on func-
tion, health, and quality of life. Epidemiologic studies dem-
onstrate marked impairment in functional status among those 
with chronic insomnia.20,21 Increased rates of work absentee-
ism,22 and occupational and motor vehicle accidents have also 
been widely reported.23,24 Persistent insomnia has been identi-
fied in multiple studies as a significant risk factor for the devel-
opment of psychiatric disorders, especially mood disorder.25,26 
This condition is also associated with increased risk of relapse 
for depression and alcoholism, as well as adverse effects in 
chronic pain populations. More recent investigations suggest 
that chronic insomnia is associated with increased risk for car-
diovascular disease. In particular, insomnia with objectively 
short sleep time is a significant risk factor for the development 
of hypertension.27,28
Chronic insomnia imposes substantial economic burdens 
on society.29–31 Estimation of the direct and indirect costs 
 310
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
of chronic insomnia are complicated by many confounding 
variables, but virtually all analyses of these costs indicate 
substantially higher economic burden for an insomnia popu-
lation. Direct cost analysis demonstrates significantly higher 
utilization of emergency and office health care visits as well 
as greater cost for prescription drugs.32 Likewise, indirect 
costs in the form of work absenteeism, loss of productivity, 
and insomnia-related accidents contribute significantly to 
the economic burden of the disorder. In the United States, a 
2009 study33 found that direct and indirect costs for insom-
nia patients were in excess of $2,000/year greater than those 
of a matched non-insomnia group. Total direct and indirect 
cost estimates for insomnia in the United States differ sub-
stantially due to variability in methodologies. Nevertheless, 
estimates suggest direct costs of $2–16 billion per year and 
indirect costs of $75–100 billion. The latter are accounted 
for in large part by worker absenteeism, presenteeism (lower 
productivity due to daytime impairment), and work-related 
accidents.29
General treatment measures for insomnia include the 
treatment of comorbid medical and psychiatric conditions, 
modifying sleep-interfering medications and substances, and 
optimizing the sleep environment. Specific treatments for in-
somnia fall into two primary categories. Non-pharmacological 
therapies, largely cognitive behavioral in nature, have been 
the subject of numerous meta-analyses and practice guide-
lines.10,34–37 Pharmacological therapy, including over-the-coun-
ter sleep aids and alcohol, is the most widely used treatment for 
insomnia, yet no evidence-based clinical practice guidelines 
have been published to date by the AASM. This paper includes 
a systematic review and meta-analyses which provide the basis 
of the initial AASM clinical practice guideline for pharmaco-
logical management of insomnia.
History of Hypnotic Usage
Pharmacological agents have been used for the treatment of in-
somnia throughout much of recorded history. Prior to the 20th 
century, opioids, various herbal preparations, bromide salts, 
and alcohol were the primary hypnotic alternatives. Through 
the first half of the 20th century, barbiturate and related com-
pounds became the most commonly used agents for manage-
ment of anxiety and sleep disturbance, as well as epilepsy. By 
mid-century, however, the adverse side effects and lethal over-
dose potential of these agents became recognized, contributing 
to curtailment of use.
The first BZD, chlordiazepoxide, was introduced to the 
United States market in 1963, followed shortly by diazepam. 
Flurazepam, the first benzodiazepine approved by the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) as a hypnotic, became avail-
able in 1970 and rapidly supplanted the use of barbiturates 
and similar compounds for treatment of insomnia. Zolpidem, 
the first United States nonbenzodiazepine, benzodiazepine 
receptor agonist (non-BZD, or BzRA) hypnotic, became 
available in 1992 and remains the most widely prescribed 
hypnotic medication, accounting for 87.5% of all BzRA pre-
scriptions in a recent survey of hypnotic use.38 Since 2005, 
a melatonin agonist (ramelteon), a low dose form of the se-
dating tricyclic medication (doxepin), and, most recently, 
an orexin receptor antagonist (suvorexant) have entered the 
United States market.
Current Hypnotic Usage
Hypnotic prescribing practices have varied in recent decades 
as availability of various agents and safety concerns have 
evolved. Despite the development of numerous BZD hypnotic 
medications of varying durations of action, the overall fre-
quency of hypnotic prescriptions for insomnia declined dur-
ing the two decades from 1970–1990, from 3.5% to 2.5%.39 
Due to apparent concerns regarding the potential for toler-
ance and dependency with BZD use, physicians increasingly 
prescribed sedating antidepressants “off label,” especially 
trazodone, despite the absence of efficacy studies for this or 
any other sedating antidepressants for treatment of insomnia. 
Survey of office-based physician prescribing practices for the 
period 1987–1996 revealed an over 50% decline in BZD hyp-
notic prescriptions accompanied by a nearly 150% increase 
in trazodone prescriptions.40 Overall prescriptions for insom-
nia declined by about 25% during this period. A more recent 
study,38 utilizing the National Health and Nutrition Examina-
tion Survey (NHANES) data from 1999–2010, analyzed the 
frequency of usage of medications commonly used for insom-
nia. This includes BZDs approved for treatment of insomnia, 
BzRAs, ramelteon, trazodone, doxepin and quetiapine. The au-
thors report that just under 3% of the sample population used 
one of these agents within the past month. In contrast to the 
apparent trends of preceding decades, frequency of usage of 
any medication commonly used for insomnia increased over 
the decade, from 2.0% in the first year sampled to 3.5% in the 
final year (2009–2010). BzRAs, predominantly zolpidem, were 
most commonly prescribed (1.23% of the population), followed 
by trazodone (0.97%), BZDs (0.4%), quetiapine (0.32%) and 
doxepin. However, it should be noted in this and other studies 
that other agents—especially BZDs not approved for insomnia, 
other antidepressants, antipsychotics, and analgesics—are not 
included in these data. It seems likely that the true prevalence 
of medication use for sleep disturbance is higher than these 
figures suggest. In fact, a subsample analysis of the NHANES 
data from 2005–2008 found that approximately 19% of re-
spondents reported use of at least one pill or medication for 
sleep in the past month. The 2005 National Sleep Foundation’s 
(NSF) survey of sleep habits found that 7% of respondents re-
port using a prescription medication to improve sleep at least a 
few nights per month.41
Physicians and other health care providers have consistently 
expressed reservations about the use of medication, particu-
larly BZDs and BzRAs, to treat insomnia. They cite concerns 
regarding safety and dependency as key issues. However, they 
also note a lack of awareness and/or availability of alternative 
treatments.42 Many favor an initial approach of treating asso-
ciated comorbidities and advising good sleep hygiene.43 An 
ever-increasing amount of data makes it clear that the latter 
approach is very often unsuccessful, leaving providers feeling 
compelled to prescribe medications. Most of those surveyed 
recognize the need for additional, non-pharmacological treat-
ment for their patients, but cite a number of barriers to acquir-
ing such treatment.44
 311
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
Data concerning use of non-prescription agents for sleep 
promotion are limited. The aforementioned NSF survey re-
ported that nearly one in four respondents used some form of 
sleep aid “at least several times per month.” Eleven percent 
stated that they used alcohol to help sleep, 9% used over-the 
counter sleep aids, and 2% used melatonin.
Previous Meta-Analyses
Several meta-analyses of pharmacotherapy for insomnia have 
been conducted. Nowell and colleagues45 conducted a meta-
analysis of 22 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of BZDs and 
zolpidem for treatment of primary insomnia published from 
1966 to 1996. They found moderate effect sizes (d = 0.56 to 0.71 
for key sleep variables) for improvement with these agents, but 
noted limitations in the duration of trials and lack of follow-up 
study regarding outcome. A 2000 study commissioned by the 
Canadian Medical Association46 evaluated 45 RCTs (n = 2,672) 
of BZDs for treatment of primary insomnia. This investigation 
found reduction in sleep latency (non-significant in objective 
[polysomnography; PSG] assessment but significant in subjec-
tive reports) and a somewhat larger and significant increase in 
total sleep time by both objective and subjective reports. The 
authors also note an increase in adverse events with BZDs 
(pooled odds ratio for any adverse event = 1.8) and call into 
question the risk/benefit ratio for these agents.
A comparative evaluation of the efficacy of hypnotic drugs 
was conducted by the National Centre for Clinical Excellence 
of the UK.47 In summary, the analysis found little difference 
among the numerous BZDs and BzRAs among the 24 studies 
which directly compared more than one drug. Some small dif-
ferences were noted, such as shorter sleep latency but less total 
sleep time with zaleplon when compared to zolpidem. On the 
whole, major differences in adverse effects were not observed 
between drugs. Meta-analyses in this report were few due to 
limitations of data reporting.
Glass and colleagues48 compared benefits versus risks for 
all sedative hypnotic agents in a meta-analysis of RCTs of ac-
tive agent versus placebo or other active compound in popula-
tions > 60 years of age and free of contributing comorbidities. 
They reported a small effect size for improvement in sleep 
quality (d = 0.14). Separate analysis of BZDs alone yielded 
a somewhat more robust improvement in quality (d = 0.37). 
Significant but modest increase in total sleep time (TST) and 
reduction in number of awakenings (NOA) was also found for 
all sedative-hypnotics and for the BZD group alone, although 
effect sizes are not reported for these variables. Cognitive 
side effects were more common with sedative-hypnotics. The 
authors note that, with respect to the sleep quality measures 
reported for all sedative hypnotics, the number needed to 
treat is 13, while the number needed to harm is 6, thereby 
indicating an unfavorable risk/benefit ratio for this popula-
tion. Independent analysis of this ratio for BZDs alone was 
not conducted.
A 2007 meta-analysis49 evaluated 105 RCTs of BZDs, Bz-
RAs and antidepressant medications for treatment of chronic 
insomnia in the adult populations regardless of comorbidi-
ties. In summary, the analysis indicates moderate and sig-
nificant improvement in major sleep parameters with both 
BZDs and BzRAs in both objective (PSG) and subjective 
(sleep diary) assessments, with the exception of PSG results 
for wake after sleep onset (WASO) and TST, which yielded 
results just below the range of significance. Far fewer stud-
ies were available for antidepressants. These showed signifi-
cant reduction in sleep latency and a non-significant trend 
toward reduced WASO. Four studies utilizing PSG mea-
sures showed substantial improvement in TST (79.6 min) 
while single subjective data set suggested reduction in TST 
compared to placebo. The authors note substantial hetero-
geneity of data which was reduced in subgroup analyses by 
type of drug. Between-groups comparisons showed no sig-
nificant efficacy differences between BZDs and non-BZDs. 
All three groups demonstrated significantly higher rates of 
adverse events versus placebo. BZDs exhibited a higher rate 
of adverse events than BzRAs.
Huedo-Medina and colleagues50 conducted systematic re-
view and meta-analysis of data on BzRAs submitted to the 
United States Food and Drug Administration from 15 studies. 
They found that BzRAs produce significant reduction of sleep 
latency by both objective and subjective measures with effect 
sizes of 0.36 and 0.33, respectively. Other sleep variables did 
not show significant differences but limited data reporting on 
these variables precluded definitive conclusions.
Winkler and Doering51 analyzed data from 31 randomized 
controlled trials of sleep-promoting substances used for treat-
ment of primary insomnia. Studies included BZDs, BzRAs, 
melatonin agonists, antidepressants and other sedating com-
pounds. Only studies which included objective (PSG) data 
were considered. The meta-analysis revealed that both BZDs 
and BzRAs were significantly more effective than antide-
pressants. Both demonstrated small to moderate effect sizes 
for major sleep variables. BZDs were somewhat superior to 
BzRAs for subjective sleep latency (SL). No analysis of treat-
ment-emergent adverse events was reported.
Finally, Wilt and colleagues52 conducted a systematic re-
view and meta-analyses of 35 randomized, controlled trials of 
at least 4 weeks duration, and harms information from 11 long-
term observational trials. Their review found that eszopiclone, 
zolpidem, and suvorexant improved short-term outcomes, 
with small effect sizes and low-to-moderate strength evidence. 
They also found that evidence for BZDs, melatonin agonists, 
and antidepressants was insufficient or of too-low strength. 
Finally, they concluded that there is insufficient evidence to 
determine the comparative effectiveness or long-term efficacy 
of pharmacotherapies for insomnia.
In summary, these meta-analyses suggest small to moderate 
effect sizes for most major sleep outcome variables with both 
BZDs and BzRAs. However, some of these analyses report 
significant increases in treatment-emergent adverse events and 
raise concerns regarding their relative risk:benefit ratio. Data 
supporting the use of sedating antidepressants in the treatment 
of insomnia are scant. Overall, the studies are limited by lack 
of availability of high quality evidence and considerable vari-
ability in design and methodology across investigations. All of 
these analyses addressed efficacy only for major drug groups 
(e.g., BZDs, BzRAs), failing to address issues of safety or ef-
ficacy for individual agents.
 312
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
METHODOLOGY
Expert Task Force
In order to develop this clinical practice guideline, the AASM 
commissioned a task force composed of content experts in the 
field of insomnia, an AASM Board of Directors liaison, and 
AASM Science and Research Department staff members. Prior 
to appointment, the content experts were required to disclose 
all potential conflicts of interest according to the AASM’s 
policy. In accordance with the AASM’s conflicts of interest 
policy, task force members with a Level 1 conflict were not 
allowed to participate. Task force members with a Level 2 
conflict were required to recuse themselves from any related 
discussion or writing responsibilities. All relevant conflicts of 
interest are listed in the Disclosures section.
PICO Questions
A PICO (Patient, Population or Prob 
lem, Intervention, Com-
parison, and Outcomes) question template was developed to be 
the focus of this guideline:
“ 
In adult patients diagnosed with primary chronic insomnia, 
how does [intervention] improve [outcomes], compared to 
placebo?”
The PICO question template was approved by the AASM 
Board of Directors. The task force identified the pharmaco-
logical interventions of interest, based on FDA approval status 
and common off-label usage. Based on their expertise, the task 
force developed a list of patient-oriented clinically relevant 
outcomes that are indicative of whether a treatment should be 
recommended for clinical practice. The task force then rated 
their relative importance and selected the top six outcomes. 
The following outcomes were determined to be “critical” or 
“important” for clinical decision making across all interven-
tions: sleep latency, wake after sleep onset, total sleep time, 
quality of sleep, number of awakenings, and sleep efficiency 
(Table 1). The task force then determined which outcomes 
were “critical” for clinical decision making for each individual 
intervention (Table 2). Lastly, clinical significance thresholds, 
used to determine if a change in an outcome was clinically sig-
nificant, were defined for each outcome by task force clinical 
judgement, prior to statistical analysis (Table 3). These deci-
sions were made by nominal consensus of the task force, based 
Table 1—PICO question parameters.
Population
Intervention
Comparison
Outcomes
Adult patients diagnosed with 
primary chronic insomnia
1. Diphenhydramine †
2. Doxepin*
3. Eszopiclone*
4. Melatonin †
5. Ramelteon*
6. Suvorexant*
7. Temazepam*
8. Tiagabine**
9. Trazodone**
10. Triazolam*
11. Tryptophan †
12. Valerian + hops †
13. Zaleplon*
14. Zolpidem*
Placebo control
Sleep latency (SL)
Total sleep time (TST)
Wake after sleep onset (WASO)
Quality of sleep (QOS)
Sleep efficiency (SE)
Number of awakenings (NOA)
* = FDA-approved, indicated for the treatment of insomnia. ** = FDA-approved, off-label usage for the treatment of insomnia. † = Over-the-counter 
medication. Sleep latency is defined as the time to fall asleep following bedtime. PSG sleep latency may be reported as time to onset of first epoch of 
N1 (Stage 1) sleep, or, in more recent studies, as latency to persistent sleep (LPS), or time to onset of first 10 consecutive min of sleep. Total sleep time 
is defined as the total time spent in bed, minus sleep latency and wake after sleep onset. Wake after sleep onset is defined as the sum of wake times 
from sleep onset to the final awakening. Quality of sleep is a patient-reported measure, the definition of which varies by measurement tools and patient 
perceptions. Sleep efficiency is defined as the percentage of time spent in bed during which sleep occurs; it is calculated as (TST / time in bed) × 100. 
Number of awakenings is defined as the number of awakenings after sleep onset, excluding the final awakening.
Table 2—“Critical” outcomes by intervention.
 
TST
SL
WASO
QOS
Diphenhydramine




Doxepin




Eszopiclone




Melatonin 


Ramelteon 


Suvorexant




Temazepam 




Tiagabine



Trazodone 




Triazolam 


Tryptophan 



Valerian-hops


Zaleplon



Zolpidem




TST = total sleep time, SL = sleep latency, WASO = wake after sleep 
onset, QOS = quality of sleep.
 313
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
on their expertise and familiarity with the literature and clini-
cal practice.
Literature Searches, Evidence Review and Data 
Extraction
Multiple literature searches were performed by the AASM 
research staff using the PubMed database throughout the 
guideline development process (see Figure 1). Keywords and 
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms were:
• insomnia OR sleep initiation and maintenance disorder 
NOT transient AND
• clinical trial OR randomized controlled trial
• NOT editorial, letter, comment, case reports, biography, 
review
The full literature search string can be found in the supple-
mental material. Searches were performed on April 26, 2011 
(search 1), May 12, 2014 (search 2), October 15, 2014 (search 3), 
and January 25, 2016 (search 4). Based on their expertise and 
familiarity with the insomnia literature, task force members 
submitted additional relevant literature and screened reference 
lists to identify articles of potential interest. This served as a 
“spot check” for the literature searches to ensure that important 
articles were not missed.
Abstracts from all retrieved articles were individually as-
sessed by two task force members to deter 
mine whether the 
publication should be included or excluded from further consid-
eration in the project. Exclusion criteria can be found in Figure 1. 
A total of 129 publications were approved for inclusion.
Full texts of accepted articles were reviewed and data per-
taining to GRADE53 for the outcomes of interest were extracted 
into spreadsheets by AASM staff. All data pertaining to ad-
verse events were extracted into separate spreadsheets. Arti-
cles that met inclusion criteria but did not report outcomes of 
interest were rejected from the final evidence base. If outcome 
data were not presented in the format necessary for statistical 
analysis (i.e., mean, standard deviation, and sample size), the 
authors were contacted in an attempt to obtain the necessary 
data. Finally, clinicaltrials.gov was used as a final resource 
for attempting to obtain data necessary for completing statis-
tical analyses. If the necessary data were not available from 
the publication, the author, or clinicaltrials.gov, the paper was 
included in the evidence base as supporting evidence, but was 
not used for statistical analysis or for determining quality of 
evidence. Of the 129 accepted publications, 46 were included 
in the statistical and meta-analysis.
For some drugs, none of the accepted publications provided 
data that could be used for statistical analysis. In these cases, 
the task force did not make a recommendation, but provided a 
literature review of these accepted papers instead. These pub-
lications are not included in Figure 1.
Statistical and Meta-Analysis
For outcomes of interest, data from baseline and last-treatment 
time points were used for all statistical and meta-analyses. 
Data from crossover trials were treated as parallel groups. 
Change-from-baseline values were also used for statistical 
and meta-analyses, when the change-from-baseline standard 
deviation was provided or could be calculated from the pro-
vided statistic. Standardized mean difference (SMD) was used 
for meta-analyses of quality of sleep (QOS) when data were 
reported using variable scales. Analyses were limited to FDA-
approved doses. For adverse events, all data presented in the 
accepted papers were used for statistical and meta-analysis. All 
calculations and meta-analyses were performed using Review 
Manager 5.3 software. Whenever possible, meta-analyses were 
Figure 1—Evidence base flow diagram.
 
Table 3—Clinical significance threshold.
Measurement Tool a
Outcome
Polysomnography
Actigraphy
Subjective
Sleep latency (SL), min
10
10
20
Total sleep time (TST), min
20
20
30
Wake after sleep onset (WASO), min
20
20
30
Quality of sleep (QOS), varies b
Varies
Varies
Varies
Sleep efficiency (SE), %
5
5
10
Number of awakenings (NOA), n
2
2
0.5
a Clinical significance was judged to be present when a specific agent led to a mean change in the outcome of this magnitude, compared to placebo. 
b For standardized mean difference (SMD), an effect size of 0.5 is considered clinically significance (based on Cohen’s d).
 314
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
performed by pooling data across studies for each outcome and 
adverse event. The evidence was grouped for analysis based on 
the drug, dosage, clinical outcome of interest, and methodol-
ogy used to obtain the data (e.g., data obtained by PSG were 
analyzed separately from data obtained by sleep diary).
All meta-analyses were performed as per-treatment analyses 
using the random effects model. For most interventions, abso-
lute effects of drug treatments are represented by the mean dif-
ference (MD) ± standard deviation (SD) of post-treatment drug 
versus post-treatment placebo. Meta-analyses for adverse events 
are presented as risk difference. The result of each meta-analysis 
is displayed as a forest plot. Pooled results are expressed as the 
total number of patients, MD and 95% confidence interval (CI) 
between the experimental treatment and placebo.
Interpretation of clinical significance for outcomes of inter-
est was conducted by comparing the absolute effects of drug 
treatment to the clinical significance threshold previously de-
termined by the task force for each outcome of interest. Inter-
pretation of adverse events was based upon the risk difference 
and clinical expertise of the task force.
Strength of Recommendations
The GRADE approach (Grades of Recommendation, Assess-
ment, Development and Evaluation) was used for the assess-
ment of quality of evidence. For details on how the AASM 
uses GRADE to develop its clinical practice guidelines, refer 
to Morgenthaler et al.53 The task force assessed the following 
three components to determine the direction and strength of 
a recommendation: quality of evidence, balance of beneficial 
and harmful effects, and patient values and preferences.
For the determination of the quality of evidence for an inter-
vention, the task force used objective data whenever possible 
(e.g., PSG). When only subjective data were available (e.g., 
sleep diaries), this evidence was used to determine the over-
all quality of evidence. The decision to use objective data as 
the primary determinant of quality of evidence was based on 
the preference for an objective measure of physiologic changes 
for determining clinically significant efficacy, the standard-
ization of sleep parameter measurements and reporting, and 
the current requirements of PSG data for FDA approval of 
hypnotic medications. The results of this assessment are pre-
sented as summary of findings tables for each intervention (see 
Tables S1–S24 in the supplemental material).
The task force developed recommendation statements con-
sistent with GRADE methodology based on the balance of the 
following factors:
1. Quality of evidence. Quality of evidence was based 
exclusively on the studies that could be included 
in meta-analyses. The task force determined their 
overall confidence that the estimated effect found in 
the literature was representative of the true treatment 
effect that patients would see, based on the following 
criteria: overall risk of bias (randomization, blinding, 
allocation concealment, selective reporting, and 
author disclosures); imprecision (when 95% CI cross 
the clinical significance thresholds); inconsistency (I2 
cutoff of 75%); indirectness (study population); and 
risk of publication bias (funding sources). The task 
force also considered the consistency of the supporting 
evidence (i.e. data the met inclusion criteria, but could 
not be included in the meta-analyses). However such 
evidence did not impact judgments regarding the 
quality of evidence or final recommendations.
2. Benefits versus harms. The task force determined if the 
beneficial outcomes of the intervention outweighed any 
harmful side effects based on the following criteria: 
meta-analysis (if applicable); analysis of any harms/
side effects reported within the accepted literature; and 
the clinical expertise of the task force.
3. Patient values and preferences. The task force 
determined if patient values and preferences would 
be generally consistent, and if patients would use the 
intervention based on the body of evidence reviewed. 
These judgments were based on the clinical expertise 
of the task force members and any data published on 
the topic relevant to patient preferences.
Taking these major factors into consideration, and adhering to 
GRADE recommendations, the task force assigned a direction 
(for or against) and strength (STRONG or WEAK) for each 
recommendation statement.
Additional information is provided in the form of “Remarks” 
immediately following the recommendation statements, when 
deemed necessary by the task force. Remarks are based on the 
evidence evaluated during the systematic review, and are in-
tended to provide context for the recommendations.
Approval and Interpretation of Recommendations
A draft of the guideline was made available for public comment 
for a two-week period on the AASM website. The task force took 
into consideration all the comments received and made revisions 
when appropriate. Based on recommendations from public com-
ments, the task force decided to include data from clinicaltrials.
gov, which allowed the development of a recommendation for the 
use of suvorexant. Due to a conflict of interest, Andrew Krys-
tal did not participate in the development of the suvorexant rec-
ommendation. The final guideline was submitted to the AASM 
Board of Directors who approved these recommendations.
The recommendations in this guideline define principles of 
practice that should meet the needs of most adult patients, when 
pharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia is indicated. This 
guideline should not, however, be considered inclusive of all 
proper methods of care or exclusive of other methods of care 
reasonably used to obtain the same results. A STRONG rec-
ommendation is one that clinicians should, under most circum-
stances, always be following when pharmacological treatment 
is indicated (i.e., something that might qualify as a quality 
measure). A WEAK recommendation reflects a lower degree 
of certainty in the appropriateness of the patient-care strategy 
and requires that the clinician use his/her clinical knowledge 
and experience, and refer to the individual patient’s values and 
preferences to determine the best course of action. The ultimate 
judgment regarding propriety of any specific care must be made 
by the clinician, in light of the individual circumstances pre-
sented by the patient, available diagnostic tools, accessible treat-
ment options and resources, as well as safety considerations.
 315
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
of findings tables are presented in the supplemental material. A 
summary of the recommendations and GRADE determinations 
is presented in Table 4. A summary of the recommendations, 
“critical” outcomes, and side effects is presented in Table 5.
It is essential that the recommendations which follow be 
interpreted within the appropriate context of clinical prac-
tice. Readers will note that all specific recommendations fall 
within the “weak” (for or against) classification of the GRADE 
system. This should not be construed to mean that no sleep-
promoting medications are clearly efficacious or indicated 
in the treatment of chronic insomnia. Hypnotic medications, 
along with management of comorbidities and non-pharmaco-
logical interventions such as CBT, are an important therapeutic 
The AASM expects this guideline to have an impact on 
professional behavior, patient outcomes, and, possibly, health 
care costs. This clinical practice guideline reflects the state of 
knowledge at the time of publication and will be reviewed and 
updated as new information becomes available.
CLINICAL PRACTICE RECOMMENDATIONS
The following clinical practice recommendations are based on 
the systematic review and evaluation of evidence following the 
GRADE methodology. Remarks are intended to provide con-
text for the recommendations. All meta-analyses and summary 
Table 4—Summary of clinical practice recommendations and GRADE components of decision-making.
Treatment
Recommendation
Direction and 
Strength of 
Recommendation
Quality 
of 
Evidence
Benefits 
and Harms 
Assessment
Patients’ Values and Preferences 
Assessment
Orexin receptor agonists
Suvorexant
This recommendation is based on trials of 10, 15/20, 
and 20 mg doses of suvorexant.
We suggest that clinicians use suvorexant as a 
treatment for sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no 
treatment) in adults.
WEAK 
Low
Benefits 
outweigh 
harms
The majority of patients would use this 
treatment (over no treatment), but many 
would not.
BZD receptor agonists
Eszopiclone
This recommendation is based on trials of 2 mg and 
3 mg doses of eszopiclone.
We suggest that clinicians use eszopiclone as a 
treatment for sleep onset and sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults.
WEAK 
Very low
Benefits 
outweigh 
harms
The majority of patients would use this 
treatment (over no treatment), but many 
would not.
Zaleplon
This recommendation is based on trials of 10 mg 
doses of zaleplon.
We suggest that clinicians use zaleplon as a 
treatment for sleep onset insomnia (versus no 
treatment) in adults. 
WEAK 
Low
Benefits 
outweigh 
harms
The majority of patients would use this 
treatment (over no treatment), but many 
would not.
Zolpidem
This recommendation is based on trials of 10 mg 
doses of zolpidem.
We suggest that clinicians use zolpidem as a 
treatment for sleep onset and sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults.
WEAK 
Very low
Benefits 
outweigh 
harms
The majority of patients would use this 
treatment (over no treatment), but many 
would not.
Benzodiazepines
Triazolam
This recommendation is based on trials of 0.25 mg 
doses of triazolam.
We suggest that clinicians use triazolam as a 
treatment for sleep onset insomnia (versus no 
treatment) in adults.
WEAK 
High
Benefits 
approx equal 
to harms
The majority of patients would use this 
treatment (over no treatment), but many 
would not.
Temazepam
This recommendation is based on trials of 15 mg 
doses of temazepam.
We suggest that clinicians use temazepam as a 
treatment for sleep onset and sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults.
WEAK 
Moderate
Benefits 
outweigh 
harms
The majority of patients would use this 
treatment (over no treatment), but many 
would not.
Melatonin agonists
Ramelteon
This recommendation is based on trials of 8 mg 
doses of ramelteon.
We suggest that clinicians use ramelteon as a 
treatment for sleep onset insomnia (versus no 
treatment) in adults.
WEAK 
Very low
Benefits 
outweigh 
harms
The majority of patients would use this 
treatment (over no treatment), but many 
would not.
Heterocyclics
Doxepin
This recommendation is based on trials of 3 mg and 
6 mg doses of doxepin.
We suggest that clinicians use doxepin as a treatment 
for sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) 
in adults.
WEAK 
Low
Benefits 
outweigh 
harms
The majority of patients would use this 
treatment (over no treatment), but many 
would not.
Trazodone
This recommendation is based on trials of 50 mg 
doses of trazodone.
We suggest that clinicians not use trazodone as 
a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults.
WEAK 
Moderate
Harms 
outweigh 
benefits
The majority of patients would use this 
treatment (over no treatment), but many 
would not.
Anticonvulsants
Tiagabine
This recommendation is based on trials of 4 mg 
doses of tiagabine.
We suggest that clinicians not use tiagabine as a 
treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults.
WEAK 
Very low
Harms 
outweigh 
benefits
The majority of patients would not use 
this treatment (over no treatment), but 
many would.
Over-the-counter preparations
Diphenhydramine
This recommendation is based on trials of 50 mg 
doses of diphenhydramine.
We suggest that clinicians not use diphenhydramine 
as a treatment for sleep onset and sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults.
WEAK 
Low
Benefits 
approx equal 
to harms
The majority of patients would not use 
this treatment (over no treatment), but 
many would.
Melatonin
This recommendation is based on trials of 2 mg 
doses of melatonin.
We suggest that clinicians not use melatonin as 
a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults.
WEAK 
Very low
Benefits 
approx equal 
to harms
The majority of patients would use this 
treatment (over no treatment), but many 
would not.
L-tryptophan
This recommendation is based on trials of 250 mg 
doses of tryptophan.
We suggest that clinicians not use tryptophan as 
a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults.
WEAK 
High
Harms 
outweigh 
benefits
The majority of patients would use this 
treatment (over no treatment), but many 
would not.
Valerian
This recommendation is based on trials of variable 
dosages of valerian and valerian-hops combination.
We suggest that clinicians not use valerian as a 
treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults.
WEAK 
Low
Benefits 
approx equal 
to harms
The majority of patients would not use 
this treatment (over no treatment), but 
many would.
 approx = approximately.
 316
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
Table 5—Summary of “critical” outcomes by indication.
Recommended for Treating Sleep Onset Insomnia
Eszopiclone
Sleep latency: Mean reduction was 14 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 3 to 24 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: Moderate-to-Large a 
improvement in quality of sleep, compared to placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 2, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 2 mg and 3 mg doses of eszopiclone.
Ramelteon
Sleep latency: Mean reduction was 9 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 6 to 12 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: No improvement b in 
quality of sleep, compared to placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 7, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 8 mg doses of ramelteon.
Temazepam
Sleep latency: Mean reduction was 37 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 21 to 53 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: Small a improvement 
in quality of sleep, compared to placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 6, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 15 mg doses of temazepam.
Triazolam
Sleep latency*: Mean reduction was 9 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 4 to 22 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: Moderate c improvement 
in quality of sleep, compared to placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 5, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 0.25 mg doses of triazolam.
Zaleplon
Sleep latency: Mean reduction was 10 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 0 to 19 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: No improvement b in 
quality of sleep, compared to placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 3, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 5 mg and 10 mg doses of zaleplon.
Zolpidem
Sleep latency: Mean reduction was 5–12 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 0 to 19 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: Moderate a 
improvement in quality of sleep, compared to placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 4, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 10 mg doses of zolpidem.
Recommended for Treating Sleep Maintenance Insomnia
Doxepin
Total sleep time: Mean improvement was 26–32 min longer, compared to placebo (95% CI: 18 to 40 min improvement); Wake after sleep onset: 
Mean reduction was 22–23 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 14 to 30 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: Small-to-moderate a improvement 
in quality of sleep, compared to placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 8, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 3 mg and 6 mg doses of doxepin.
Eszopiclone
Total sleep time: Mean improvement was 28–57 min longer, compared to placebo (95% CI: 18 to 76 min improvement); Wake after sleep onset: 
Mean reduction was 10–14 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 2 to 18 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: Moderate-to-Large a improvement in 
quality of sleep, compared to placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 2, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 2 mg and 3 mg doses of eszopiclone.
Temazepam
Total sleep time: Mean improvement was 99 min longer, compared to placebo (95% CI: 63 to 135 min improvement); Wake after sleep onset: Not 
reported; Quality of sleep*: Small a improvement in quality of sleep, compared to placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 6, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 15 mg doses of temazepam.
Suvorexant
Total sleep time: Mean improvement was 10 min longer, compared to placebo (95% CI: 2 to 19 min improvement); Wake after sleep onset: 
Mean reduction was 16–28 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 7 to 43 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: Not reported; Side effects: See 
Recommendation 1, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 10, 15/20, and 20 mg doses of suvorexant.
Zolpidem
Total sleep time: Mean improvement was 29 min. longer, compared to placebo (95% CI: 11 to 47 min. improvement); Wake after sleep onset: Mean 
reduction was 25 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 18 to 33 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: Moderate a improvement in quality of sleep, 
compared to placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 4, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 10 mg doses of zolpidem.
Not Recommended for Treating either Sleep Onset or Sleep Maintenance Insomnia
Diphenhydra 
mine
Sleep latency: Mean reduction was 8 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 2 min increase to 17 min reduction); Total sleep time: Mean 
improvement was 12 min longer, compared to placebo (95% CI: 13 min reduction to 38 min improvement); Quality of sleep*: No improvement a in 
quality of sleep, compared to placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 11, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 50 mg doses of diphenhydramine.
Melatonin
Sleep latency: Mean reduction was 9 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 2 to 15 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: Small a improvement in 
quality of sleep, compared to placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 12, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 2 mg doses of melatonin.
Tiagabine
Total sleep time: Mean improvement was 1–7 min longer, compared to placebo (95% CI: 7 min reduction to 15 min improvement); Wake after sleep 
onset: Mean reduction was 1–9 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 6 min increase to 25 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: No-to-Small a 
improvement in quality of sleep, compared to placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 10, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 4 mg doses of tiagabine.
Trazodone
Sleep latency*: Mean reduction was 10 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 9 to 11 min reduction); Wake after sleep onset: Mean reduction 
was 8 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 7 to 9 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: No improvement d in quality of sleep, compared to 
placebo; Side effects: See Recommendation 9, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 50 mg doses of trazodone.
L-tryptophan
Sleep latency: Not reported; Wake after sleep onset*: Mean reduction was 10 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 4 to 15 min reduction); 
Quality of sleep*: Small e improvement in quality of sleep, compared to placebo; Side effects: see Recommendation 13, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of 250 mg doses of tryptophan.
Valerian
Sleep latency: Mean reduction was 9 min greater, compared to placebo (95% CI: 0 to 18 min reduction); Quality of sleep*: Not reported; 
Side effects: See Recommendation 14, “Harms”
This recommendation is based on trials of variable dosages of valerian and valerian-hops combination.
Drugs are listed alphabetically. All reported measures are based on polysomnographic data, unless otherwise noted. *Based on subjective reporting. a Based 
on Cohen’s d: 0.2 = small effect; 0.5 = moderate effect; 0.8 = large effect.  b Based on a 7-point Likert scale (1 = excellent, 7 = very poor).  c Based on a 4-point 
scale (1 = good, 4 = poor).  d Based on a 4-point scale (1 = excellent, 4 = poor).  e Based on a 3-point scale (sleep quality index: 1 = low, 3 = high).
 317
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
option for chronic insomnia. The strength of recommendations 
within the GRADE system are driven by the degree of confi-
dence in a variety of factors related to the intervention includ-
ing (1) the availability of specific data regarding efficacy; (2) 
the quality of that data, and (3) other considerations such as 
potential risks, impact of treatment, patient values and prefer-
ences, and perceived burden of treatment.
The existing data regarding sleep-promoting medications 
imposes limits on the degree of confidence as a result of sev-
eral factors. These include: (1) a high degree of variability in 
the statistical information presented. Many studies, especially 
older studies, do not present results that meet the criteria for 
meta-analysis within GRADE and are, by necessity, excluded 
from formal analysis; (2) a significant degree of variability in 
sleep outcomes within and across studies. Such variability 
produces a “downgrading” of the quality of evidence within 
GRADE; (3) industry sponsorship. Very few clinical trials with 
adequate sample size have been sponsored by agencies outside 
of industry. As a result, the quality of evidence for a vast ma-
jority of available data is downgraded due to potential publi-
cation bias associated with such sponsorship; (4) a paucity of 
systematic data collection and analysis of treatment-emergent 
adverse events. Absent such information, it is difficult to as-
sign a high degree of confidence to estimations of benefit:risk 
ratio; and (5) absence of outcome data (such as functional sta-
tus or prevention of complications of chronic insomnia) that 
would inform judgments regarding the impact of therapy.
The strength (or weakness) of these recommendations 
speaks as much, or more, to the limitations of the data as it 
does to the relative benefits and risks of the treatments per se. 
Clinicians must continue to exercise appropriate judgement, 
based not only on the recommendations presented herein, but 
also on individual patient characteristics, comorbidities, and 
patient preferences in the prescribing of sleep-promoting med-
ications and general management of chronic insomnia.
Finally, the literature review, meta-analyses, and recom-
mendations are based only on FDA-approved doses. This 
should not be interpreted as a recommendation for the use of 
a specific dose in clinical practice. Numerous factors, includ-
ing, but not limited to, age, sex, comorbidities, and concurrent 
use of other medications may affect dosage recommendations. 
Clinical judgment is necessary in determining appropriate 
dosage, on a patient-by-patient basis.
Orexin receptor agonists
Suvorexant for the Treatment of Chronic Insomnia
Recommendation 1: We suggest that clinicians use 
suvorexant as a treatment for sleep maintenance insomnia 
(versus no treatment) in adults. [WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on trials of 10, 
15/20, and 20 mg doses of suvorexant.
Summary
Two RCTs54,55 evaluated suvorexant for treatment of chronic 
primary insomnia. The statistical analyses and recommen-
dation are based on data available on clinicaltrials.gov. The 
overall quality of evidence was low due to imprecision and 
risk of publication bias. The overall evidence for suvorexant 
was weakly in favor of its effectiveness for the treatment of 
sleep maintenance insomnia only. Objective reports of wake 
after sleep onset (PSG) showed clinically significant reduction 
at both 10 mg and 20 mg dosages. Subjective TST data dem-
onstrated improvement, but failed to meet clinical significance. 
Objective reports (PSG) at the 10 mg and 15/20 mg dosages 
showed minimal improvements in sleep latency that failed to 
meet clinical significance. However objective reports (PSG) at 
20 mg dose did show clinically significant reduction in sleep 
latency, suggesting that suvorexant may improve sleep onset at 
higher dosages. PSG sleep efficiency (SE) results demonstrate 
improvements that are near or above the level for clinical sig-
nificance. PSG number of awakenings (NOA) was not statisti-
cally significantly reduced or increased in either study. Finally, 
sleep quality ratings showed minimal change.
Adverse events were assessed in both studies. Overall fre-
quency of adverse events was not significantly increased ver-
sus placebo. There was no evidence of daytime residual or 
withdrawal symptoms. Therefore the task force judged the 
overall benefits to outweigh the potential harms. Based on their 
clinical judgement, the task force determined that the majority 
of patients would use suvorexant over no treatment.
See Tables S1–S3 in the supplemental material.
Discussion
Two RCTs54,55 evaluated suvorexant for treatment of chronic 
primary insomnia. However, data were not presented in a way 
that could be used for statistical analyses; therefore the statisti-
cal analyses and recommendation are based on data available 
on clinicaltrials.gov. Additional outcomes data from Herring 
2012 and 2016 are discussed below as supporting evidence.
Herring 201255 evaluated adults 18–64 years of age with 
DSM-IV primary insomnia in a randomized placebo-con-
trolled crossover study which included two 4-week trial pe-
riods. Sixty-two subjects received 10 mg suvorexant and 61 
received 20 mg. Subjects underwent PSG at the end of week 
4. Sleep diary data were also obtained. The primary endpoint 
was sleep efficiency; secondary endpoints included latency to 
persistent sleep and wake after sleep onset. Inclusion criteria 
were LPS > 20 min and WASO > 60 min.
Herring 201654 conducted two randomized placebo-con-
trolled parallel trials of 3 months each (i.e. trial 1 and trial 2). 
Only data from trial 1 were available for statistical analyses. 
Adults 18- to 64-years-old and adults > 65 with primary in-
somnia were included. Two-hundred fifty four and 239 patients 
were randomized to suvorexant 15/20 mg in the two trials, re-
spectively. The dosages of interest for this analysis were 20 
mg for younger adults and 15 mg for older adults. Data for 
the two dosages were pooled for analysis. Inclusion criteria 
were LPS > 20 min and WASO > 60 min. Sleep diary data was 
collected for all patients and a subset underwent PSG. Both 
studies reported data as difference between placebo and drug 
change from baseline.
Sleep latency: Herring 201255 found a reduction of 2.3 min 
(95% CI: 13.68 min lower to 9.08 min higher) for suvorexant 
 318
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
10 mg when compared to placebo (not considered clinically 
significant). The quality of evidence was low due to impre-
cision and potential publication bias. At the 20 mg dosage, a 
clinically significant reduction versus placebo of 22.3 min was 
reported (95% CI: 33.77 to 10.83 min lower). The quality of 
evidence was MODERATE due to potential publication bias. 
LPS in the first trial of Herring 201654 showed reductions of 
8.1 min (95% CI: 13.85 to 2.35 min lower), and failed to meet 
clinical significance. The quality of evidence was low due to 
imprecision and potential publication bias. LPS in the second 
trial of Herring 2016 was not available for statistical analyses. 
However, published data show a reduction of 0.3 min, which 
also fails to meet the clinical significance threshold.
Subjective latency, reported as TSO in Herring 201654 trial 1, 
showed reductions at the pooled 15/20 mg dosages (−5.2 min; 
95% CI: 0.3 to 10.1 min lower) that failed to meet the clini-
cal significance threshold. The quality of evidence was mod-
erate due to potential publication bias. Herring 201654 trial 2 
reported reductions in TSO of 7.6 min, while TSO reported 
in the Herring 201255 study was reduced at both dosages (−3.0 
min and −4.3 min at 10 mg and 20 mg, respectively); none of 
these changes met the clinical significance threshold.
total Sleep time: Herring 2016, trial 1, reported improve-
ments in subjectively reported total sleep time of 10.6 min with 
15/20 mg dosages (95% CI: 1.79 to 19.41 min higher), which 
did not meet the clinical significance threshold. The quality 
of evidence for this outcome was moderate based on potential 
publication bias.
PSG TST was reported only in the Herring 201255 inves-
tigation. At both 10 mg and 20 mg, clinically significant im-
provement was seen versus placebo (+22.3 min and +49.9 min, 
respectively).
Neither suvorexant 10 mg (+5.5 min) nor 20 mg (−1.8 min) 
produced statistically or clinically significant improvement in 
subjective TST versus placebo at 4 weeks (Herring 2012). In 
trial 2 of the 15/20 mg dosages (Herring 201654), subjective 
TST was improved (+22.1 min), although the mean change falls 
below the clinical significance threshold.
Wake after Sleep onSet: Both studies reported PSG 
WASO. Herring 201255 found clinically significant reduction of 
WASO at both 10 mg and 20 mg (−21.4 min; 95% CI: 6.66 to 
36.34 min lower; −28.1 min; 95% CI: 13.13 to 43.07 min lower, 
respectively). The quality of evidence was low due to impre-
cision and potential publication bias. Herring 2016,54 trial 1, 
reported reductions of −16.6 min (95% CI: 8.33 to 24.87 min 
lower) with low quality of evidence due to imprecision and po-
tential publication bias. Herring 201654 trial 2 reported a 31.1 min 
reduction in WASO. Reductions of subjective WASO in the two 
trials of 15/20 mg suvorexant in the Herring 201654 study did not 
meet clinical significance thresholds (−2.4 min and −7.7 min).
Quality of Sleep: Sleep quality reductions were not statis-
tically significant in either study.
Sleep efficiency: Herring 201255 found PSG SE improve-
ment of +4.7% (95% CI: 0.97 to 8.43% higher) for 10 mg and 
+10.4% (95% CI: 13.13 to 43.07 min lower) for 20 mg, with low 
and moderate quality of evidence due to imprecision and po-
tential publication bias. These values approximate (10 mg) or 
exceed (20 mg) the clinical significance threshold of 5%.
number of aWakeningS: Number of awakenings showed 
no significant reduction in either study.
overall Quality of evidence: The overall quality of 
evidence for these studies was low due to imprecision and po-
tential publication bias.
HarmS: Neither study found a significant increase in one 
or more adverse events versus placebo for suvorexant in the 
10–20 mg range. Rates of serious adverse events were negli-
gible and not significantly different between suvorexant and 
placebo. Frequency of daytime somnolence was increased in 
the 15/20 mg doses (Herring 201255: placebo 0.4%; 20 mg 4.9%. 
Herring 201654: placebo = 3.4%; 15/20 mg = 5.1% [trial 1]; pla-
cebo = 3.1%; 15/20 mg = 8.4%). The degree of somnolence was 
reported to be typically mild to moderate and did not often 
result in discontinuation. Frequency of somnolence was noted 
to increase significantly in dose-dependent fashion at dosages 
exceeding FDA-recommended levels.
Assessments of withdrawal symptoms and daytime perfor-
mance decrements did not reveal clinically significant findings 
in either domain. There was no evidence of the emergence of 
narcolepsy symptoms.
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: The task force de-
termined that a majority of patients would likely use suvorex-
ant compared to no treatment. This assessment reflects the task 
force’s clinical judgment, based on suvorexant’s efficacy for 
reduction of WASO and improvement in TST and SE and its 
relatively benign side effect profile.
BZD receptor agonists
Eszopiclone for the Treatment of Chronic Insomnia
Recommendation 2: We suggest that clinicians use 
eszopiclone as a treatment for sleep onset and sleep 
maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. 
[WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on trials of 2 mg 
and 3 mg doses of eszopiclone.
Summary
Six RCTs evaluated eszopiclone 2 mg for the treatment of 
chronic primary insomnia.56–61 The overall quality of evidence 
was downgraded to low due to imprecision and risk of publica-
tion bias. The evidence for eszopiclone 2 mg was weakly in 
favor of its efficacy for improving sleep onset disturbance and 
total sleep time. Meta-analysis data from three studies which 
reported objective sleep latency showed a clinically significant 
mean reduction in PSG sleep latency.58,60,61 Four studies which 
evaluated subjective total sleep time demonstrated a significant 
mean increase versus placebo.57–59,61 Assessment of PSG SE in 
 319
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
two studies58,61 and subjective sleep quality in four studies57,59–61 
revealed improvements which fell just below the threshold for 
clinical significance. Measures of reduction in wake time after 
sleep onset and number of awakenings revealed trends toward 
improvement which fell below the defined level of clinical sig-
nificance. Meta-analysis of adverse effects, derived from all 
six studies, indicated no significant differences versus placebo.
Six studies assessed the effects of eszopiclone 3 mg for 
treatment of chronic primary insomnia.57,60–64 The quality of 
evidence for these studies as a whole was downgraded to very 
low due to significant heterogeneity, imprecision and poten-
tial publication bias. The collective evidence for eszopiclone 3 
mg was weakly in favor of efficacy for improving sleep onset, 
total sleep time, sleep efficiency, number of awakenings and 
sleep quality. The meta-analysis data from three studies dem-
onstrated clinically significant reduction in objective sleep la-
tency.60–62 Four studies likewise revealed clinically significant 
increase in mean subjective total sleep time.57,61,63,64 PSG sleep 
efficiency, reported in two studies61,62 also exceeded the thresh-
old for clinically significant improvement, as did subjective 
sleep quality, which was reported in all six studies included 
in meta-analysis. A trend in the direction of reduced WASO 
was observed, but did not reach clinical significance. Insuf-
ficient data were available for meta-analysis of eszopiclone 3 
mg adverse effects.
Overall, the benefits of eszopiclone 2 mg and 3 mg were 
judged to be greater than the potential harms. Based on clinical 
judgment, the task force determined that the majority of well-
informed patients would use eszopiclone over no treatment. 
This judgement is based on the evidence of improvement in 
sleep latency, total sleep time, sleep efficiency and sleep qual-
ity, coupled with its low potential for adverse events.
See Figures S1–S7, S68–S69, and Tables S4 and S5 in the 
supplemental material.
Discussion
A total of nine studies were included in the meta-analyses 
for eszopiclone 2 mg and 3 mg.56–64 Three of these studies in-
cluded only older adults (> 65 years).56,58,59 The remainder in-
cluded younger adults, typically 21–65 years of age. Inclusion 
criteria for most of these studies required persistent subjective 
sleep latency > 30 min and TST < 6.5 h.57–62 Ancoli-Israel and 
colleagues56 studied 388 older adults for 12 consecutive weeks 
of nightly eszopiclone 2 mg. Inclusion criteria for this study 
specified TST < 6 h and WASO > 45 min. Outcome data were 
patient-reported. McCall and colleagues58 also reported on 
two-week administration of 2 mg eszopiclone versus placebo 
to 254 to older adults. In addition to sleep latency and TST 
inclusion criteria, subjects were required to have WASO > 20 
min. PSG was conducted on nights 1, 2, 13, and 14. Scharf 
and colleagues59 administered 1 and 2 mg of eszopiclone or 
placebo nightly to 231 older adults for two weeks, employing 
nightly patient-reported data.
Erman and colleagues57 evaluated multiple dosages of 
eszopiclone (1, 2, 2.5, and 3 mg versus placebo and an active 
control (zolpidem 10 mg) in 65 adult subjects (age 21–65) who 
received each intervention for two nights, followed by 3–7 day 
washout, in randomized sequences. PSG was conducted for the 
two nights on each treatment. The primary endpoint was la-
tency to persistent sleep, with secondary endpoints of SE and 
WASO. Uchimura and colleagues60 employed a similar cross-
over design with eszopiclone doses of 1, 2, and 3 mg, zolpidem 
10 mg and placebo in 65 patients. PSG was conducted during 
each two-night intervention. Primary endpoints were objective 
latency to persistent sleep (LPS) and subjective SL. Zammit 
and colleagues61 examined eszopiclone 2 and 3 mg vs. placebo 
for 44 consecutive nights, with PSG on nights 1, 15, 29. Patient-
reported data were collected for nights 1, 15, 29, 43, and 44. 
Primary endpoint was PSG-defined LPS.
Krystal and colleagues63 investigated six-month nightly 
use of eszopiclone 3 mg versus placebo in 788 adults. Patient-
reported data were collected at weekly intervals. Similarly, 
Walsh and colleagues64 reported on nightly use of eszopiclone 
3 mg in 830 adults, with weekly patient-reported data. Finally, 
Boyle and colleagues,62 in a study designed primarily to as-
sess next-day driving skill, report subjective data from a single 
night of eszopiclone 3 mg versus placebo.
Sleep latency: Three studies assessed LPS as determined 
by PSG for eszopiclone 2 mg.58,60,61 The McCall investiga-
tion58 focused exclusively on older adults and demonstrated the 
greatest reduction in LPS. The mean reduction in LPS versus 
placebo for the three studies (−14.87 min; CI: −5.47 to −24.27 
min) exceeded the threshold for clinical significance. The qual-
ity of evidence was LOW due to imprecision and potential pub-
lication bias.
All six trials of eszopiclone 2 mg reported subjective sleep 
latency.56–61 As noted above, three of the six included only older 
adults. Mean difference from placebo fell slightly below the 
clinical significance threshold (−17.78 min; CI: −7.04 to −28.52 
min). The quality of this evidence was low due to imprecision 
and potential publication bias.
Three studies investigated PSG LPS with eszopiclone 3 
mg.60–62 The mean difference in LPS (−13.63 min; CI: −3.7 
to −23.56 min) fell below the clinical significance threshold. 
The quality of evidence was VERY LOW due to heterogene-
ity, imprecision and potential publication bias. Subjective SL 
with eszopiclone 3 mg was reported in four studies.57,61,63,64 The 
mean difference exceeded the clinical significance threshold 
(−25.00 min; CI: −13.94 to −36.07 min). The greatest reduc-
tions were reported in the extended 6-month trials of Krystal 
and Walsh. Quality of evidence was low due to imprecision 
and potential publication bias.
Two additional studies not included in the meta-analysis 
reported subjective SL with eszopiclone 3 mg. Soares and 
colleagues65 analyzed efficacy in perimenopausal/early meno-
pausal women with sleep onset complaints. Joffe et al.66 ex-
amined outcomes in perimenopausal/menopausal women who 
exhibited hot flashes and manifested either sleep onset or main-
tenance problems. The reductions in sleep latency versus pla-
cebo for these two studies (−15.7 and −17.8 min, respectively) 
were within the overall range found in the meta-analysis.
total Sleep time: Only one eszopiclone study reported 
adequate objective total sleep time data. Therefore meta-anal-
ysis was not possible for this outcome at either dosage.58 Four 
 320
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
studies included subjective TST for eszopiclone 2 mg.57–59,61 
The meta-analysis revealed a mean increase in TST of 27.53 
min versus placebo, just below the threshold for clinical sig-
nificance of 30 min. The quality of evidence was LOW due 
to imprecision and potential publication bias. The only study, 
noted above, which reported objective TST (in patients > 65 
years) found an increase in TST of 28.6 min greater than pla-
cebo, consistent with the subjective results.
Four studies included adequate data for subjective TST 
meta-analysis for eszopiclone 3 mg.57,61,63,64 These studies dem-
onstrate substantially greater increases in TST at this dosage 
with a mean difference versus placebo of 57.1 min, exceeding 
the clinical significance threshold. The quality of evidence was 
moderate, due to potential publication bias.
The two studies of eszopiclone 3 mg in perimenopausal/
early menopausal women revealed mean increases in subjec-
tive TST (versus placebo) of +66.5 min and +23.0 min.65,66
Wake after Sleep onSet: Two studies were included in 
the meta-analysis of objective WASO for eszopiclone 2 mg.58,61 
The mean reduction in WASO was 10.02 min greater than pla-
cebo, below the clinical significance level of 20 min for PSG 
data. The quality of evidence was rated as moderate due to 
potential publication bias. The confidence interval (−2.77 to 
−17.27 min) fell below the threshold.
Five studies reported adequate data for subjective WASO 
meta-analysis.56–59,61 The mean difference versus placebo was 
below the threshold for clinical significance (−4.74 min; CI 
−11.87 to +2.39 min). The quality of evidence was moderate 
due to potential publication bias.
The data for PSG and patient-reported WASO with eszopi-
clone 3 mg demonstrated greater reduction of WASO than with 
2 mg, but below clinical significance levels. The two studies 
including PSG WASO demonstrated a mean reduction of 14.69 
min versus placebo (CI: −11.69 to −17.68 min).61,62 Quality of 
evidence was moderate (potential publication bias). Subjective 
WASO for 3 mg was reported in four studies with mean reduc-
tion of 15.14 min (CI: −8.16 to −22.11 min). Quality of evidence 
was low due to imprecision and potential publication bias.
Krystal and colleagues63 published an independent sub-
group analysis of subjective WASO data from their 6-month 
nightly trial of 3 mg, in order to evaluate the impact of base-
line WASO severity on outcome. They identified a positive 
relationship between baseline WASO severity and degree of 
improvement in WASO (as determined by eszopiclone/placebo 
difference) at all time points. The two investigations of meno-
pausal women found eszopiclone-placebo mean differences for 
subjective WASO of 37.3 and 14.9 min, respectively.65,66
Quality of Sleep: The meta-analysis for sleep quality with 
eszopiclone 2 mg included four studies and found a moderate 
effect size of +0.47 SMD (CI: +0.32 to +0.63 SMD).57,59–61 The 
quality of evidence was moderate due to imprecision and po-
tential publication bias. Sleep quality ratings for 3 mg, based 
on six studies, showed a large effect size of +0.82 SMD (CI: 
+0.41 to +1.24 SMD), although quality of evidence was very 
low due to imprecision, heterogeneity and potential publica-
tion bias.57,60–64
In addition to the studies included in meta-analysis, Soares 
and colleagues65 reported statistically significant improvement 
in quality for eszopiclone 3 mg in their study of perimeno-
pausal and postmenopausal women.
Sleep efficiency: Two studies reported PSG SE for eszopi-
clone 2 mg.58,61 The mean improvement in SE of 4.83% fell be-
low the significance threshold of 5%. (CI: 2.21 to +7.46%). For 
the 3 mg dosage, PSG SE exceeded the clinical significance 
threshold at 5.61%.61,62 The quality of evidence for both doses 
was low due to imprecision and potential publication bias.
In studies outside the meta-analysis, Joffe66 reported a 14.6% 
improvement versus placebo in SE with 3 mg.
number of aWakeningS: The PSG NOA for 2 mg showed 
an increase of 0.12 awakenings based on two studies.58,61 Evi-
dence quality was MODERATE. Subjective NOA was based 
on four studies and likewise demonstrated no clinically signifi-
cant difference from placebo. Evidence quality was moderate 
due to potential publication bias.57–59,61
overall Quality of evidence: The overall quality of 
evidence in the meta-analytic data from these studies was 
downgraded to very low for several reasons. Substantial het-
erogeneity across studies was noted for multiple outcomes. 
The data were also downgraded for imprecision, due to the 
relatively large confidence intervals, which cross the clinical 
significance thresholds for several outcomes. All of these stud-
ies were industry sponsored, resulting in further downgrading 
of evidence due to potential publication bias. The quality of ev-
idence for individual outcomes ranged from moderate to very 
low. Therefore the overall quality of evidence was very low.
HarmS: Sufficient data for meta-analysis of side effects was 
available only for the 2 mg eszopiclone dosage. Five side effects 
(dizziness, dry mouth, headache, somnolence and unpleasant 
taste) were included. Four studies examined dizziness with 2 
mg eszopiclone and found no difference from placebo.57,58,60,61 
Two studies reported adequate data for dry mouth.58,61 A +0.06 
risk difference was reported for eszopiclone. For headache, 
four studies found essentially no difference between eszopi-
clone and placebo.56,57,59,61 The same was true for next-day som-
nolence, based on five studies.57–61 Finally, five studies found a 
+0.07 risk difference for unpleasant taste.56–59,61
Although meta-analysis was not possible for eszopiclone 3 
mg, individual studies reported results which are consistent 
with those of the 2 mg dosage. Krystal and colleagues63 re-
ported numerically higher adverse event rates for somnolence 
(eszopiclone 9.1%; placebo 2.6%), unpleasant taste (26.1% 
versus 5.6%), dry mouth (6.6% versus 1.5%), and dizziness 
(9.8% versus 3.1%). Boyle62 studied braking reaction time and 
other performance measures and found no difference between 
eszopiclone 3 mg and placebo. Walsh64 reported significantly 
greater frequencies of adverse events including somnolence 
(eszopiclone: 8.8% versus placebo: 3.2%), unpleasant taste 
(19.7% versus 1.1%) and myalgia (6.0% versus 2.9%). No dif-
ference was seen on the Benzodiazepine Withdrawal Scale 
scores following discontinuation. Zammit61 demonstrated no 
 321
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
impairment in digit symbol substitution at either 2 mg or 3 mg. 
Joffe and colleagues66 reported a 15.2% risk for metallic taste, 
but placebo rate for this side effect was not identified. Soares 
and colleagues65 found a significant increase in unpleasant 
taste with eszopiclone (17.6% versus 0.5%). Headache fre-
quency was no different and report of dry mouth was slightly 
increased for eszopiclone (4.0% to 1.4%).
In summary, the task force found that there was weak ev-
idence of efficacy in the treatment of sleep onset and main-
tenance insomnia, with limited or no consistent evidence of 
adverse events in excess of placebo, with the possible excep-
tion of unpleasant taste. Therefore, benefits were deemed to 
marginally outweigh harms.
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: The task force de-
termined that a majority of patients would likely use eszopi-
clone compared to no treatment. This assessment reflects the 
task force’s clinical judgment, based on eszopiclone’s efficacy 
for sleep onset and maintenance, and its relatively benign side 
effect profile.
Zaleplon for the Treatment of Chronic Insomnia
Recommendation 3: We suggest that clinicians use 
zaleplon as a treatment for sleep onset insomnia (versus no 
treatment) in adults. [WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on trials of 10 mg 
doses of zaleplon.
Summary
Two RCTs meeting inclusion criteria investigated the use of 
zaleplon 5 or 10 mg in the treatment of chronic primary in-
somnia.67,68 One of these reported only subjective outcomes67, 
and one reported subjective and PSG outcomes.68 No meta-
analysis was possible for these studies, due to the manner of 
reporting results. The overall quality of evidence from these 
studies was downgraded to low due to imprecision and po-
tential publication bias; both studies were industry supported. 
The overall evidence for zaleplon 10 mg support its efficacy 
for the treatment of sleep onset insomnia. At the 10 mg dose, 
one objective (PSG) study demonstrated a reduction in sleep 
latency from baseline that met the criterion for clinical signifi-
cance, with an approximately 9.5 min difference from placebo. 
Subjective sleep latency, reported in one study, showed a non-
significant change of −11.4 min. Subjective TST increased by 
approximately 21.5 min, but the difference from placebo was 
not statistically significant. WASO was not significantly dif-
ferent from placebo. Similarly, subjective sleep quality showed 
minimal differences from placebo. The overall evidence for 
zaleplon 5 mg did not support its efficacy for treatment of any 
insomnia symptoms, based on self-report studies only. No 
PSG studies at the 5 mg dose met inclusion criteria. Treatment-
emergent adverse events showed no significant difference from 
placebo for zaleplon 10 mg or 5 mg, and only one study sug-
gested a small increase in rebound using self-reported TST as 
the outcome.
Data from three additional studies of zaleplon 5–10 mg met 
our inclusion criteria but could not be included in meta-analyses 
because key outcome data were presented in insufficient de-
tail.69–71 However, the results of these three studies were con-
sistent with those of the two studies presented above, in finding 
differences from placebo in subjective SOL but no significant 
differences in subjective TST or sleep quality.
Overall, the evidence for efficacy of zaleplon 10 mg is 
marginal, and the evidence for harm appears equivalent to 
placebo; therefore potential benefits minimally outweigh po-
tential harms. The lack of evidence for efficacy of zaleplon 5 
mg makes any potential benefits equivalent to its minimal po-
tential harms.
Based on clinical judgment, the task force determined that 
the majority of well-informed patients would use zaleplon 
over no treatment. This judgement is based on the minimal 
evidence of improved sleep latency across PSG and self-report 
domains, coupled with a low potential for adverse events.
See Tables S6 and S7 in the supplemental material.
Discussion
Evidence from two RCTs which investigated the use of za-
leplon 5 or 10 mg in the treatment of chronic primary insomnia 
was included in the main analysis of outcomes, although meta-
analysis could not be performed because data were presented 
as medians, or as means with no standard deviation.67,68,70 
Subjects in each study met criteria for primary insomnia or 
insomnia associated with nonpsychotic mental disorder by ei-
ther DSM-III-R or DSM-IV criteria, together with quantitative 
criteria for self-reported sleep disturbance (SOL > 30 min, plus 
either subjective TST < 6.5 h, WASO > 30 min, or > 3 awaken-
ings) and associated daytime complaints. Walsh 200068 also re-
quired PSG LPS of > 20 min on two screening nights. Patients 
were 18–65 years of age68,70 or 65 years and older.67 Study de-
signs included randomized, double-blind, placebo run-in with 
zaleplon 5–20 mg or placebo for 14–35 nights, followed by a 
2–7 night placebo substitution. Walsh68 used PSG outcomes, 
whereas the other two studies used self-report only. Data for 
zaleplon 20 mg were not considered here because this is not an 
FDA-approved dose.
Sleep latency: One study evaluated the impact of zaleplon 
10 mg versus placebo on PSG sleep latency (SL).68 This study 
showed a clinically significant 9.5 min reduction in mean sleep 
latency versus placebo (difference in median of 8.5 min) that 
approached the 10 min value considered clinically significant, 
and was judged by the task force to be sufficient evidence 
for making a recommendation. The CI (−0.19 to −18.80 min) 
crossed the clinical significance threshold, and therefore the 
quality of evidence was downgraded for imprecision. It was 
downgraded further due to the risk of publication bias since 
the study was industry-funded. The resultant quality of evi-
dence is low.
Self-reported sleep latency was reported in one study,68 
which showed a reduction compared to placebo at the end of 
treatment (−11.40 min; CI: −26.36 to +4.56 min), which failed 
to meet the criterion for clinical significance. Hedner67 also 
reported reductions in subjective sleep latency; however, the 
results could not be subject to meta-analysis, since the mean 
values were presented only in graphic form.
 322
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
Additional studies not included in the primary analysis 
yield similar findings. Ancoli-Israel69 conducted a randomized, 
double-blind, multi-center study of the efficacy of zaleplon 5 
and 10 mg versus placebo in older adults with DSM-IV insom-
nia, using a similar study design to Hedner,67 with self-report 
outcomes. This study reported significant differences between 
zaleplon 10 mg and placebo at both treatment weeks, and be-
tween zaleplon 5 mg and placebo at week 2 only. Elie 199970 
reported significant differences on placebo at weeks 1–3 of 
treatment, with differences in the range of −8 to −15 min. Fry71 
reported a 28-day double-blind, placebo run-in and run-out 
study of adults with DSM-III-R insomnia. Median subjective 
sleep latency was signficantly different from placebo at weeks 
1, 3, and 4 for zaleplon 10 mg, and at week 1 for zaleplon 5 mg. 
Because mean and standard deviation data were not reported, 
data from these two studies could not be formally evaluated in 
our meta-analysis.
total Sleep time: The effects of zaleplon 10 mg on subjec-
tive TST were evaluated in one study.68 Over the course of a 
five-week study, TST differed significantly from placebo only 
in week one, with a difference of 21.5 min between groups (CI: 
−5.6 to +48.6 min); this difference failed to meet the criterion 
for clinical significance. Quality of the evidence was down-
graded to low due to imprecision and potential publication bias.
Objective TST was evaluated in 2 studies.67,68 However, 
meta-analysis of these studies was not possible due to the man-
ner of data reporting. These studies showed no consistent evi-
dence of a zaleplon − placebo difference at the 10 mg or 5 mg 
dose of zaleplon. Mean/median differences in subjective TST 
at the end of treatment were in the range of +7 to +22.4 min 
in favor of zaleplon. The results of studies not included in our 
formal analysis69–71 showed very similar findings for subjec-
tive TST, with inconsistent differences between placebo and 
zaleplon 10 mg.
The effects of zaleplon 5 mg versus placebo on subjective 
total sleep time were reported in one study.67 No significant 
differences in median sleep time were found between zaleplon 
5 mg and placebo across 2–4 weeks of treatment. The results of 
studies not included in our formal analysis69–71 showed similar 
findings for subjective TST, with no differences between pla-
cebo and zaleplon 5 mg.
Wake after Sleep onSet: Objective WASO was evaluated 
in one study,68 but failed to meet the criterion for clinical sig-
nificance (−2.10 min; CI: −10.23 to +6.03 min). The quality of 
evidence was moderate, due to potential publication bias. Sub-
jective WASO was not reported in any of the studies.
Quality of Sleep: Subjective sleep quality, evaluated on 
an ordinal 1–7 scale (1 = good, 7 = bad) was reported in one of 
the formally evaluated studies for both 5 mg and 10 mg.67 At 
both dosages sleep quality improved (−0.10 points; CI: −0.27 
to +0.07 points), but failed to meet the criterion for clinical 
significance. The quality of evidence for both doses was down-
graded to moderate due to potential publication bias.
In three additional studies,69–71 subjective sleep quality dif-
fered from placebo inconsistently at either dose; the majority of 
study weeks showed no difference between groups. Quality of 
evidence was downgraded for publication bias. Precision and 
heterogeneity could not be formally evaluated.
Sleep efficiency: Neither PSG nor subjective sleep effi-
ciency were formally evaluated in any of the studies reviewed 
here.
number of aWakeningS: Number of awakenings were 
evaluated in the sole PSG study.68 However, formal evaluation 
of findings was not possible. No data were presented in the 
paper, but NOA was reported not to differ between zaleplon 10 
mg and placebo at any treatment week. Subjective NOA was 
evaluated in the two studies formally included in our evalua-
tion but data were presented as median values and could not 
be included in meta-analyses. Hedner67 reported a difference 
of uncertain clinical significance only at week 1 and Walsh68 
reported a difference only at week 3. Data from three addi-
tional studies not included in our formal analysis69–71 showed 
no significant differences in NOA for either zaleplon 10 mg or 
zaleplon 5 mg at any study week.
overall Quality of evidence: As noted above, no meta-
analyses could be conducted on data from studies of zaleplon. 
Some studies reported median data only, or mean values with 
no standard deviation, for some of the key outcomes. Still other 
studies presented data for key outcomes only in graphical form. 
The quality of evidence was downgraded for imprecision, due 
to the relatively large confidence intervals which cross the clin-
ical significance thresholds for multiple outcomes. All of these 
studies were industry sponsored, resulting in further down-
grading of evidence due to potential publication bias. The qual-
ity of evidence for individual outcomes ranged from moderate 
to low, therefore the overall quality of evidence was low.
HarmS: No meta-analysis was conducted on harms. Each 
of the individual studies showed no significant difference in 
the overall rate of treatment-emergent adverse events between 
zaleplon and placebo. Several symptoms related to the cen-
tral nervous system were more frequent numerically among 
zaleplon treated patients, although these differences were not 
statistically significant due to the low overall incidence of ad-
verse events. The most common adverse events in studies of 
zaleplon versus placebo included headache, asthenia, neuras-
thenia, pain, fatigue, and somnolence. There was no clear evi-
dence of dose-dependent effects.
Several of the reviewed studies reported data from double-
blind placebo runout periods. No significant withdrawal symp-
toms were noted on the Benzodiazepine Withdrawal Symptom 
Questionnaire.70,71 The single PSG study noted no evidence 
of withdrawal upon discontinuation for the 10 mg dose. Evi-
dence of discontinuation-related increases in subjective TST 
were noted at the zaleplon 5 and 10 mg dose in older adults, 
and for subjective SOL in older adults at the zaleplon 5 mg 
dose.67,69 A small increase in NOA of the second discontinu-
ation night was also noted with zaleplon 5 mg.70 These dif-
ferences were small in absolute magnitude and of doubtful 
clinical significance. Other studies did not report evidence of 
 323
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
rebound insomnia.71 Categorically-defined rebound insomnia 
was not significantly different for zaleplon 5 mg or zaleplon 10 
mg versus placebo.69,70
The task force found that there was weak objective evidence 
of efficacy for zaleplon 10 mg in the treatment of sleep onset 
insomnia that was just below criteria for clinical significance, 
and no consistent evidence for efficacy in TST. Likewise, there 
was no statistical evidence of adverse events in excess of pla-
cebo, although some treatment-emergent adverse events were 
numerically more prevalent in zaleplon groups. Evidence for 
withdrawal effects was weak, inconsistent, and unlikely to be 
clinically important. On balance, benefits were deemed to mar-
ginally outweigh harms.
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: The task force de-
termined that a majority of patients would likely use zaleplon 
compared to no treatment. This assessment reflects the task 
force’s clinical judgment, based on zaleplon’s efficacy for sleep 
onset, and its relatively benign side effect profile.
Zolpidem for the Treatment of Chronic Insomnia
Recommendation 4: We suggest that clinicians use zolpidem 
as a treatment for sleep onset and sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. [WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on trials of 10 mg 
doses of zolpidem.
N.B. Although 10 mg. was the recommended starting dos-
age for adults at the time of initial approval, the FDA has 
subsequently lowered the recommended starting dosage of im-
mediate-release zolpidem products to 5 mg. Further, the FDA 
has recommended a reduction of starting dosage for extended-
release forms of zolpidem from 12.5 mg to 6.25 mg.
Summary
Twelve RCTs evaluated zolpidem 10 mg for the treatment of 
chronic primary insomnia.57,59,60,70,72–79 The overall quality 
of evidence was downgraded to very low due to significant 
heterogeneity, imprecision, and risk of publication bias. The 
evidence for zolpidem 10 mg was weakly in favor of its effec-
tiveness for improving sleep onset, sleep maintenance, sleep 
quality, SE and TST. In addition, one paper evaluated the ef-
fectiveness of zolpidem extended release 6.25 mg80 and one pa-
per assessed zolpidem extended release 12.5 mg.81
Five studies examined the effects of zolidem 10 mg on ob-
jective sleep latency.60,73,76,77,82 The mean reduction (vs. placebo) 
for PSG-determined latency to sleep exceeded the threshold 
for clinical significance. Ten studies presented patient-reported 
sleep latency data.57,60,70,72–76,78,82 The mean reduction in subjec-
tive latency fell approximately at the significance threshold. 
Two studies73,76 reported adequate objective TST data for meta-
analysis and found that the mean improvement in TST also 
exceeded the clinical significance threshold. The same was 
true for subjective TST, based on eight studies.57,70,73–76,78,82 Two 
studies73,76 found that PSG-determined reduction in WASO was 
clinically significant. Six studies included adequate data for 
meta-analysis of subjective WASO57,72,75,76,78,82; the mean reduc-
tion fell below the clinical significance threshold. Six studies 
evaluating sleep quality reported moderately large improve-
ment in this parameter based on SMD.57,60,76,78,79,82 Improve-
ment in PSG SE in the four studies included also exceeded the 
clinical significance threshold.73,76,77,82 Number of awakenings 
(objective) fell below the clinical significance threshold.77,82 Re-
duction in subjective number of awakenings also failed to meet 
the clinical significance threshold.
The single paper reporting on extended-release zolpidem 
6.25 mg80 found moderate reduction in PSG-determined 
WASO (based on only the first 6 h of sleep) and minimal im-
provement in LPS and SE at end-treatment in an elderly popu-
lation. Overall quality of evidence from this report was LOW 
due to imprecision and potential publication bias. Data from 
the one study81 on zolpidem extended-release 12.5 mg found 
moderate reduction in PSG LPS. Reduction in WASO was also 
moderate, while SE was not significantly different from pla-
cebo. Overall quality of evidence was LOW due to imprecision 
and potential publication bias.
Meta-analysis was conducted for amnesia, dizziness, head-
ache, nausea, somnolence and “taste perversion” (altered or 
unpleasant taste) in studies employing zolpidem 10 mg. Small, 
but potentially significant increases in amnesia, dizziness and 
somnolence were reported with zolpidem.
Overall, the benefits of zolpidem 10 mg and extended-
release zolpidem 12.5 mg were judged to be greater than the 
minimal potential harms. Benefits and harms were judged to 
be approximately equal for extended-release zolpidem 6.25 mg. 
It was determined by clinical judgement of the task force that 
the majority of well-informed patients would use zolpidem and 
extended-release over no treatment. This judgement is based 
on the evidence of improvement in sleep latency, total sleep 
time, WASO, sleep efficiency, and sleep quality, coupled with 
relatively low potential for adverse events. The data for ef-
ficacy of zolpidem extended-release 6.25 mg is minimal and 
inconclusive at best.
See Figures S18–S27, S70–S75 and Tables S8–S10 in the 
supplemental material.
Discussion
Twelve studies were included in the meta-analysis for zolpidem 
10 mg.57,60,70,72–79,82 Dorsey and colleagues72 studied 141 meno-
pausal or perimenopausal women who exhibited both insomnia 
(TST < 6 h or WASO > 1 h) and nocturnal hot flashes or sweats. 
Subjects received zolpidem 10 mg or placebo in a 4-week trial. 
Outcomes included patient-reported TST, SL, WASO, and 
NOA. Elie70 investigated three dosages of zaleplon versus zol-
pidem 10 mg or placebo. The study included 615 adults with 
SL > 30 min and either TST < 6.5 h or WASO > 30 min or > 3 
awakenings per night. Subjects received one of three zaleplon 
dosages, zolpidem 10 mg or placebo for 28 nights. Outcome 
data included subjective SL, QOS, TST and NOA. Erman57 
assessed 65 adults with reported sleep-onset insomnia and 
baseline PSG SL > 20 min and TST < 7 h or WASO > 20 min. 
Enrollees were administered eszopiclone at 4 dosages, zolpi-
dem 10 mg and placebo in a randomized treatment sequence 
of 2 nights per intervention with intervening washout. Primary 
outcome was PSG-determined LPS with secondary measures 
including SE, WASO and NOA. Hermann73 administered 
 324
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
zolpidem 10 mg or placebo for two weeks to 21 adults with 
difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep. PSG was conducted 
on the final treatment night with reported outcomes including 
SL, TST, SE and WASO.
Perlis75 evaluated 199 subjects with primary insomnia 
(SL > 45 min or TST < 6 h) with zolpidem 10 mg or placebo. 
Subjects were instructed to take the medication 3–5 times per 
week as needed over a twelve-week period. Sleep diary out-
comes included SL, TST, WASO and NOA. Jacobs74 compared 
zolpidem 10 mg, cognitive behavior therapy and placebo in 63 
adults with primary sleep-onset insomnia (SL > 1 h on > 3 
nights/week). Subjects received zolpidem for 28 days, followed 
by taper. Primary outcome was patient-reported sleep latency 
with secondary outcomes of SE and TST. Randall76 investi-
gated the efficacy of zolpidem 10 mg (5 mg for subjects 65–70 
years) over an eight-month period in 91 subjects (age 23–70 
years) with screening PSG SE < 85%. Patient-reported out-
comes and PSG data at one and eight months included SL, TST, 
WASO and SE. Scharf82 evaluated 75 adults for five weeks with 
zolpidem 10 mg, 15 mg or placebo. Inclusion criteria included 
SL > 30 min or TST < 6 h. Subjects underwent sleep studies on 
the first two nights of each treatment week. Primary outcomes 
were defined as LPS and SE.
Staner79 assessed the effects of three drugs, including zol-
pidem 10 mg, in a driving simulation study of 23 adults with 
recurrent SL > 30 min or WASO > 60 min. Sleep quality data 
was reported. Uchimura60 compared zolpidem, eszopiclone 
and placebo in a crossover design as described in the eszopi-
clone section. Walsh78 compared the efficacy of zolpidem 10 mg 
to trazodone 50 mg and placebo in 278 adults with insomnia 
characterized by frequent SL > 30 min and TST 4–6 h. Sub-
jective sleep latency and TST were reported. Ware77 assessed 
rebound insomnia in zolpidem 10 mg, triazolam 0.5 mg and 
placebo. Ninety-nine subjects with baseline PSG-determined 
LPS > 20 min and TST 4–7 h took zolpidem 10 mg, triazolam 
or placebo for 28 consecutive days. PSG LPS, SE, TST, and 
WASO were evaluated.
Two studies reported on extended-release (ER) zolpidem. 
Roth81 assessed zolpidem ER 12.5 mg in 212 adults with in-
somnia who reported > 1 h WASO at least 3 nights per week. 
Patients received zolpidem or placebo nightly for 3 weeks in a 
parallel group design. Walsh80 studied 205 elderly adults with 
insomnia with the same inclusion criteria and design, employ-
ing a 6.25 mg dose of zolpidem ER versus placebo.
Fourteen additional studies met inclusion criteria but could 
not be included in meta-analysis due to inadequate data 
sets.71,83–95 Pertinent results from these studies are noted inde-
pendently of meta-analysis results.
Sleep latency: Five studies included adequate data for PSG 
SL meta-analysis.60,73,76,77,82 The mean difference from placebo 
of −11.65 min exceeded the clinical significance threshold. The 
95% CI of −4.15 to −19.15 min crossed the clinical significance 
threshold and was therefore considered imprecise. Heterogene-
ity was high. With potential publication bias as well, the qual-
ity of evidence was rated as very low.
Ten of the twelve studies used in meta-analysis reported 
subjective SL.57,60,70,72–76,78,82 The improvement in sleep latency 
versus placebo was at the significance threshold (mean differ-
ence: 19.55 min; CI: −14.2 to −24.9 min). Evidence quality was 
very low due to imprecision, heterogeneity and potential pub-
lication bias.
Six additional studies assessed sleep latency outcomes with 
zolpidem.88–90,92,94,95 These studies varied significantly with re-
gard to drug preparation, dosage, mode of administration and 
methodology, rendering comparisons between them or to the 
meta-analytic data difficult. Four of the six evaluated sublin-
gual zolpidem, primarily for treatment of middle-of-the-night 
(MOTN) awakenings. Roth and colleagues88 reported results 
of a three-way crossover study of zolpidem sublingual 1.75 mg, 
3.5 mg and placebo. Zolpidem reduced both objective (latency 
to persistent sleep) and subjective latency to sleep (SL) follow-
ing MOTN awakenings (PSG: 1.75 mg: −11.2 min versus pla-
cebo; 3.5 mg: −18.4 min/subjective: 1.75 mg: −11.83 min versus 
placebo; 3.5 mg: −15.23 min). Roth89 also reported reduced sub-
jective latencies following MOTN awakenings with sublingual 
zolpidem 3.5 mg over a 28-day trial. Zammit95 administered 
immediate release oral zolpidem 10 mg, zaleplon 10 mg or pla-
cebo to subjects with sleep maintenance insomnia following 
induced MOTN awakenings Zolpidem reduced PSG latency to 
persistent sleep following the awakenings (−30.5 min versus 
placebo). Staner90 compared the effects of sublingual zolpidem 
10 mg to immediate release oral zolpidem on PSG initial sleep 
latency and reported shorter latency to persistent sleep with 
the sublingual preparation (−10.28 min) versus the oral prepa-
ration. Walsh94 investigated subjective SL in an 8-week trial 
of as-needed zolpidem 10 mg (3–5 times per week). For medi-
cation nights only, end treatment SL for the zolpidem 10 mg 
group was 12.6 min less than the placebo group.
Walsh80 investigated the effects zolpidem ER 6.25 mg and 
found reduction of PSG LPS of 13.0 min. Roth81 reported a 
decrease in PSG LPS of 8.2 min versus placebo at end of treat-
ment with zolpidem ER 12.5 mg.
total Sleep time: Two studies73,76 were included in the 
meta-analysis of PSG-determined TST. Mean reduction in 
TST met the clinical significance threshold at +28.91 min, how-
ever the 95% CI crossed the threshold (CI: +10.85 to +46.97 
min). The quality of evidence was downgraded to LOW due 
to imprecision and potential publication bias. Eight studies 
reported adequate data for meta-analysis of patient-reported 
TST.57,70,73–76,78,82 The mean difference for subjective TST from 
these studies exceeded the significance threshold (+30.04 min; 
CI: +15.12 to +44.96 min). Quality of evidence was low due to 
imprecision and potential publication bias.
Six additional studies presented TST data which was not 
sufficient to be included in the analysis.71,83,84,88,92,95 Allain and 
colleagues83 evaluated zolpidem 10 mg administered on an as-
needed basis over a four week period. When only drug nights 
were included in analysis, zolpidem produced a statistically 
significantly greater increase in subjective TST versus placebo 
(+19.9 min). Cluydts84 and Hajak85 found no difference in sub-
jective TST with nightly versus intermittent (5/7 nights) use of 
zolpidem 10 mg, both of which produced numerical improve-
ment (+11.3 and +16.9 min, respectively). In a study designed 
primarily to address potential rebound insomnia following 
 325
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
four weeks of treatment with zaleplon, zolpidem or placebo, 
Fry71 reported substantially greater improvement in patient-
reported TST with zolpidem 10 mg versus placebo (+28.2 min). 
In another study of rebound insomnia, Voshaar92 compared 
zolpidem 10 mg to temazepam 20 mg (without placebo con-
trol) administered nightly for four weeks. The two drugs pro-
duced improved TST without significant difference between 
the two. Finally, in two studies Roth89 and Zammit95 investi-
gated effects of zolpidem following MOTN awakenings. Roth 
and colleagues compared sublingual zolpidem 1.75 mg and 3.5 
mg to placebo. Both dosages produced greater TST following 
awakening as compared to placebo (+14.7 min and +25.9 min, 
respectively). Zammit administered zolpidem 10 mg following 
MOTN awakening and reported TST after awakening 30 min 
greater than placebo.
TST data were not reported in the extended-release studies.
Wake after Sleep onSet: Two studies reported adequate 
data for meta-analysis of PSG WASO.73,76 These studies yielded 
a mean difference from placebo of −25.46 min (CI: −17.94 to 
−32.99 min). This exceeds the threshold for clinical signifi-
cance. The quality of evidence was LOW due to imprecision 
and potential publication bias.
Zolpidem ER 12.5 mg reduced WASO by 20 min greater 
than placebo at treatment conclusion, although this was based 
on only the first 6 h of sleep.81 Comparison of changes from 
baseline in this study, however, suggested smaller differences 
between drug and placebo. Walsh,80 using the same selective 
sample of 6 h, found WASO 13.0 min less in the zolpidem ER 
6.25 mg group than in the placebo group. Given the sampling 
of only 6 h, it is difficult to clearly determine whether or not 
these agents would fulfill the criterion for clinical significance, 
which is based on an entire night of sleep.
Six studies assessed patient-reported WASO.57,72,75,76,78,82 The 
mean difference fell below the level of clinical significance at 
−13.57 min (CI: −7.30 to −19.84 min). Quality of evidence was 
low due to heterogeneity and potential publication bias.
Quality of Sleep: Six studies included sleep quality 
data.57,60,76,78,79,82 The meta-analysis produced a standardized 
mean difference of +0.64 (CI: +0.03 to +1.26 SMD), suggest-
ing moderate overall improvement in patient-reported sleep 
quality. Quality of evidence was very low due to imprecision, 
heterogeneity and potential publication bias.
Sleep efficiency: PSG sleep efficiency was reported in 
four studies.73,76,77,82 The mean difference favored zolpidem 
(+6.12%; CI: +4.39 to +7.85%), but did not exceed the clinical 
significance threshold. Quality of evidence was low.
In the Roth81 study of zolpidem ER 12.5 mg, PSG SE was 
3.9% better with zolpidem than placebo. Walsh80 found a dif-
ference of 2.4% on favor of zolpidem ER 6.25 mg. Neither 
value exceeds the clinical significance threshold.
number of aWakeningS: PSG-determined number of 
awakenings was reported by Scharf82 and Ware.77 The mean 
difference from placebo was −0.95 awakenings (CI: −0.49 to 
−1.41 awakenings), which fails to meet the clinical significance 
threshold. Quality of evidence was moderate. Subjective awak-
ening was reported in six studies.70,72,73,75,78,82 Mean reduction 
versus placebo was −0.31 awakenings (CI: −0.17 to −0.45 
awakenings), which also fails to achieve clinical significance. 
Evidence quality was low due heterogeneity and potential pub-
lication bias.
overall Quality of evidence: The overall quality of 
evidence in the meta-analytic data from these studies was 
downgraded to very low for several reasons. Substantial het-
erogeneity across studies was noted for multiple outcomes. 
The data were also downgraded for imprecision, due to the 
relatively large confidence intervals which cross the clinical 
significance thresholds for several outcomes. All of these stud-
ies were industry sponsored, resulting in further downgrading 
of evidence due to potential publication bias. The quality of ev-
idence for individual outcomes ranged from moderate to very 
low, therefore the overall quality of evidence was very low.
HarmS: Meta-analysis for adverse effects of zolpidem was 
possible for six side effects: amnesia, dizziness, sedation, 
headache, nausea, and taste perversion (altered or unpleasant 
taste). Two studies70,82 included data on amnesia and found a 
minimal difference from placebo (0.03 risk difference). A 
small increase in risk (0.06 risk difference) was identified for 
dizziness, based on analysis of four investigations.57,60,72,82 Risk 
for headache was mildly increased in the zolpidem group (0.07 
risk difference).57,72,78 Minimal difference was observed in the 
risk for nausea (0.02 risk difference),57,82 and somnolence had a 
slightly higher risk (0.04), based on six studies.57,60,70,72,78,82 Risk 
for taste perversion was low and approximately equal in both 
groups.60,70
Numerous studies have evaluated rebound insomnia after 
discontinuation of zolpidem.68,70,71,73,75,77,80,82,86,92 Some of these 
studies found no evidence of rebound after varying durations 
of nightly or intermittent use, for up to six months.68,73 Other 
investigations reported evidence of rebound, limited primarily 
to night 1 following discontinuation.70,71,80,81
Evaluation of daytime improvement and impairment was 
limited. Dorsey72 reported improvement in sleep-related dif-
ficulty with daytime function. Hajak85 described marked 
improvement in quality of life ratings with both nightly and 
intermittent use. Morning alertness and performance impair-
ment were tested in several studies. Roth81 and Walsh80 found 
no evidence of impairment on digit symbol substitution test 
(DSST) or Rey auditory-verbal learning test (RAVLT) after 
zolpidem modified-release 12.5 mg. Scharf82 reported no im-
pairment on DSST or digit symbol copying. Staner79 found 
no indication of impairment in a driving simulation study 
after seven consecutive nights of zolpidem 10 mg. Zammit95 
formally assessed sleepiness following administration of zol-
pidem 10 mg following MOTN awakening. Subjects showed 
significantly reduced PSG latencies versus placebo at 4, 5, and 
7 h following administration. This was accompanied by im-
pairment on DSST at 4 and 5 h.
In summary, the task force found that there was weak evi-
dence of efficacy in the treatment of sleep onset and mainte-
nance insomnia, with limited evidence of mild adverse events 
 326
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
in excess of placebo, with the possible exception of excessive 
sleepiness following administration of higher dosages (10 mg) 
less than 8 h prior to awakening. Therefore, benefits were 
deemed to marginally outweigh harms.
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: The task force de-
termined that a majority of patients would likely use zolpidem 
compared to no treatment. This assessment reflects the task 
force’s clinical judgment, based on zolpidem’s efficacy for 
sleep onset and maintenance, and its relatively benign side ef-
fect profile.
Benzodiazepines
Triazolam for the Treatment of Chronic Insomnia
Recommendation 5: We suggest that clinicians use 
triazolam as a treatment for sleep onset insomnia (versus 
no treatment) in adults. [WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on trials of 0.25 
mg doses of triazolam.
Summary
Because only one study96 contained data of sufficient quality, 
meta-analysis was not performed. The quality of evidence for 
this study was high. This study, consisting of patient-reported 
data, showed a modest decrease in subjective SL, which fell 
below the clinical significance threshold. Two additional stud-
ies, which did not contain data suitable for meta-analysis, re-
ported statistically significant reductions in subjective SL with 
triazolam 0.25 mg versus placebo.97,98 Roehrs96 found an in-
crease in TST, although the mean change fell below the range 
of clinical significance. WASO was not reported, while sleep 
quality showed mild to moderate reduction versus placebo. 
Number of awakenings was insignificantly decreased.
No meta-analysis of harms was possible. Given the mar-
ginal evidence for efficacy in improving sleep onset, coupled 
with limited evidence regarding harms, the task force judged 
the harms to be approximately equal to the benefits. Based on 
its clinical judgement, the task force determined that, in light 
of the evidence for efficacy for sleep onset and the absence of 
information regarding harms, the majority of patients would 
be likely to use triazolam compared to no treatment.
See Table S11 in the supplemental material.
Discussion
Roehrs96 studied 32 adults with insomnia in a complex design 
which began with 11 days in which subjects received either tri-
azolam or placebo nightly, “as needed” or every third night. This 
was followed by 14 nights in which subjects chose to self-admin-
ister treatment, with placebo (week 1) or triazolam 0.25 (week 2).
Thirteen additional studies met general inclusion and exclu-
sion criteria.97–109 These studies were highly varied in design, 
many utilizing interval scales (as opposed to specific numeric 
values) for reporting of sleep outcome variables. Some did not 
include a placebo comparison. Many included dosages which 
are higher than current recommended dosages. Therefore, only 
those studies which contained pertinent data are discussed.
Bowen100 compared triazolam 0.5 mg, flurazepam 30 mg and 
placebo in 120 insomnia outpatients. The two-night crossover 
comparison of triazolam 0.5 mg and placebo included only 18 
subjects, who completed morning sleep questionnaires. Elie97 
evaluated triazolam 0.125 mg (with upward dosage adjustment 
to 0.25 mg during the study period, as indicated) versus zopi-
clone and placebo in 48 elderly (60–90 years) subjects. Subjects 
received one of three interventions nightly for three weeks in 
a parallel group design. Outcome variables were patient-
reported. Greenblatt103 reported an RCT of 6 nights baseline 
placebo administration followed by triazolam 0.5 mg for 7–10 
nights in a total of 60 subjects with sleep onset or maintenance 
insomnia. Outcome data were derived from subjective reports. 
Hajak104 treated 1,507 subjects with sleep onset or maintenance 
insomnia with triazolam 0.25 mg, zopiclone or placebo. The 
triazolam versus placebo comparison groups totaled 605 sub-
jects, who received drug or placebo for 28 consecutive nights 
and reported sleep variables on visual analog scales.
Monti106 assessed 24 chronic insomnia subjects with tri-
azolam 0.5 mg, zolpidem and placebo in a 27-night trial, with 
PSG on nights 4/5 and 15/16 and 29/30. Reeves98 evaluated 37 
geriatric subjects (> 60 years) with triazolam 0.25 mg, fluraz-
epam or placebo in a 28 day trial. The triazolam and placebo 
groups included 28 subjects who completed daily sleep diaries. 
Rickels107 studied 50 subjects with sleep onset or maintenance 
insomnia who received either triazolam 0.5 mg or placebo for 7 
days. Outcome data were subjective ratings and interval scales. 
Scharf108 administered triazolam 0.5 mg, quazepam or placebo 
to 65 chronic insomnia subjects. After placebo run-in, partici-
pants received nightly drug or placebo for 9 nights, followed by 
14 nights of every-other-night administration. Outcomes were 
patient reported rating scales.
Sleep latency: In the only study with adequate data for 
meta-analysis, Roehrs96 found a small reduction in subjective 
SL (−9.2 min; CI: −22.3 to +3.9 min) which fell below clinical 
significance. Quality of evidence for these data was high.
Monti106 found no significant differences between triazolam 
0.5 mg and placebo for PSG SL at any time point.
Elie97 found larger reductions in subjective ratings of SL 
for triazolam 0.125–0.25 mg versus placebo. Hajak104 found 
no significant difference from placebo in SL “response rate” 
(SL reduction of > 15 min) for triazolam 0.25 mg. In contrast, 
Reeves98 found triazolam 0.25 mg statistically superior to pla-
cebo for SL in a geriatric population on subjective ratings of 
“how much [the drug] helped.” Bowen100 found triazolam 0.5 
mg to be statistically significantly better than placebo on in-
terval ratings for reduction of sleep onset time. Greenblatt103 
reported sleep diary reductions from baseline placebo levels 
of 55 min and 24 min in two separate triazolam 0.5 mg groups. 
Rickels107 reported similar subjective improvement on ratings 
of sleep induction for triazolam 0.5 mg.
total Sleep time: Roehrs96 observed a moderate increase 
in subjective TST (+25.20 min; CI: −9.12 to +59.52 min). This 
fell below the clinical significance threshold of 30 min and was 
not statistically different from placebo. Quality of evidence 
was moderate due to imprecision.
 327
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
In additional studies, Hajak104 found no significant differ-
ence between triazolam 0.25 mg and placebo in “percentage 
of responders” for TST (defined as > 20% increase in TST). 
Ratings for improvement in TST were significantly better 
for triazolam 0.25 mg than placebo in the Reeves98 geriatric 
study.
Monti106 observed a statistically significant increase in ob-
jective TST with triazolam 0.5 mg (+16 min versus placebo). 
Bowen100 found that triazolam 0.5 mg was significantly pre-
ferred to placebo for sleep duration. In two separate triazolam 
0.5 mg groups, Greenblatt103 noted increases in subjective TST 
of 1.02 and 0.76 h. Rickels107 reported that triazolam 0.5 mg 
was rated as significantly superior to placebo for sleep dura-
tion. Scharf108 noted significantly greater subjective improve-
ment in interval ratings of TST with both daily and every other 
night administration of triazolam 0.5 mg.
Wake after Sleep onSet: No studies reported data on 
WASO.
Quality of Sleep: Roehrs,96 using a 4-point scale (1 = good, 
4 = poor), found small improvements in QOS ( 
−0.37 points; CI: 
−0.66 to −0.07 points), which was not considered to be clini-
cally significant. Quality of evidence was high.
Elie97 found no significant difference between triazolam 
(0.125/0.25 mg) and placebo in an elderly population with 
respect to QOS. Likewise, Hajak104 reported no statistically 
significant difference between triazolam 0.25 and placebo. 
Reeves98 demonstrated significant improvement in QOS for 
triazolam 0.25 mg versus placebo in a geriatric population.
Sleep efficiency: Sleep efficiency was not reported by any 
study.
number of aWakeningS: Roehrs96 reported a reduction in 
NOA of 0.37 (CI: −1.7 to +0.96 awakenings), which did not 
meet the clinical significance threshold. Quality of evidence 
was LOW due to significant imprecision.
Hajak104 noted no significant difference from placebo in 
the percentage of “responders” (reduction of NOA to < 3) 
with triazolam 0.25 mg. However, Reeves98 did find a statisti-
cally significant reduction at this dosage in ratings for NOAs. 
Bowen100 observed a statistically significant reduction in sub-
jective ratings for NOA with triazolam 0.5 mg versus placebo. 
Greenblatt103 also reported reductions of 0.58 and 0.89 patient-
reported awakenings from placebo baseline in two groups ad-
ministered 0.5 mg triazolam.
overall Quality of evidence: The overall quality of 
evidence for the triazolam data, based on the single study 
meeting criteria for meta-analysis, was HIGH.
HarmS: Insufficient data were available for meta-analysis of 
adverse events associated with triazolam 0.25 mg. Very little 
systematic analysis of adverse effects is available. Hajak104 
reported that “speech disorder” was the only adverse effect, 
among many, to be significantly more frequent in the triazolam 
group than in the placebo condition.
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: The task force 
determined that a majority of patients would be likely to use 
triazolam compared to no treatment. This assessment reflects 
the task force’s clinical judgment, based on weak evidence for 
triazolam’s efficacy and the absence of information regarding 
harms.
Temazepam for the Treatment of Chronic Insomnia
Recommendation 6: We suggest that clinicians use 
temazepam as a treatment for sleep onset and sleep 
maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. 
[WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on trials of 15 mg 
doses of temazepam.
Summary
Three RCTs investigated the use of temazepam in the treat-
ment of chronic primary insomnia.110–112 These studies pro-
vide a limited assessment of temazepam in that they included 
small sample sizes of 19, 20, and 34 subjects, respectively. 
The overall quality of evidence from these studies is moder-
ate. Meta-analyses for temazepam 15 mg were conducted for 
SL, TST and sleep quality. Two studies110,112 were included in 
the meta-analysis of SL. These showed a reduction in subjec-
tive SL which exceeded the threshold for clinical significance. 
Meta-analysis of TST showed improvement in subjective TST 
which exceed the threshold for clinical significance. There 
were insufficient data for meta-analysis of WASO. One study 
of objective WASO revealed a clinically significant reduction. 
Subjective and objective SE was significantly increased, based 
on limited data from secondary studies. There was evidence 
for marginal improvement in sleep quality of 0.25 standard de-
viations. This was not a clinically significant difference from 
placebo and falls below the threshold for clinical significance. 
There were minimal data on adverse effects, and the available 
data do not suggest a high frequency of treatment-emergent 
adverse events (TEAEs).
Meta-analysis for temazepam 30 mg was not possible for 
any sleep outcomes. Data from individual studies are reported 
below.
In summary, meta-analysis data are available for temaze-
pam 15 mg only. These data, coupled with data from secondary 
studies not adequate for meta-analysis, demonstrate efficacy 
for temazepam 15 mg in improving subjective and possibly ob-
jective sleep latency, subjective and objective TST, and objec-
tive WASO (the latter based on a single study). Temazepam 30 
mg appears to have significant efficacy for improving subjec-
tive sleep latency and TST. The data also support a clinically 
significant effect for both 15 mg and 30 mg on subjective NOA, 
although data for objective NOA at 20 mg revealed no signifi-
cant effect.
Given the significant improvements in patient-reported SL 
and TST, coupled with additional data derived from secondary 
studies (see below), the task force judged that the benefits of te-
mazepam 15 mg appear to be greater than the potential harms. 
Based on its clinical judgement, the task force determined that, 
in light of the evidence for efficacy and minimal evidence for 
 328
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
harms, the majority of well-informed patients would be likely 
to use temazepam compared to no treatment.
See Figures S28–S30 and Tables S12 and S13 in the sup-
plemental material.
Discussion
Evidence from three RCTs which investigated the use of te-
mazepam in the treatment of insomnia was included in the sta-
tistical analysis.110–112
Glass110 evaluated 19 subjects 70 years of age or older who 
met DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for primary insomnia. Sub-
jects underwent a crossover study of two weeks of treatment 
with placebo, temazepam 15 mg, or diphenhydramine 50 mg 
with randomized order of administration. Sleep was assessed 
using diary-derived variables. Adverse effects were recorded 
and daytime impairment was systematically assessed using 
the digit symbol substitution task (DSST), the manual tracking 
task (MTT), and the morning-after memory impairment, using 
a free-recall procedure.
Wu112 assessed 71 patients with DSM-IV diagnosed insom-
nia who were randomized to one of four groups (CBT-I alone, 
CBT-I plus pharmacotherapy with temazepam 15 mg, pharma-
cotherapy alone, or placebo). For the purpose of this analysis, 
pharmacotherapy alone was compared to placebo (n = 34). 
Subjects received 8 weeks of treatment. End-of-treatment PSG 
and patient diary data for SL, TST and SE were compared.
Hindmarch111 studied 20 individuals with “a history of 
nighttime medication for insomnia.” No additional diagnostic 
information was provided. Subjects were randomized to re-
ceive temazepam 15 and 30 mg or placebo for a single night 
using a within-subjects crossover design. Outcome was as-
sessed using the Leeds Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire which 
consisted of Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) ratings of “Ease of 
Falling Asleep” and “Quality of Sleep.” Adverse effects were 
not reported, but daytime sedation was assessed with a Choice 
Reaction Time task, the Critical Flicker Fusion Test, and “Ease 
of Awakening” and “Integrity of Behavior Following Wakeful-
ness” items from the Leeds scale.
Six additional studies which included temazepam-placebo 
comparisons were reviewed.92,113–117 Cuanang113 studied 60 
adult “outpatients with insomnia.” Parallel group design in-
cluded three groups: temazepam 20 mg, temazepam 10 mg 
and placebo. Subjects received treatment or placebo for five 
nights. Patient-reported data including sleep quality (“better, 
same or worse”), SL, and TST were collected each morning. 
Fillingim114 evaluated 75 adult patients with difficulty initiat-
ing (SL > 30 min) and maintaining (> 1 awakening with diffi-
culty returning to sleep) sleep and TST < 6 h. Subjects received 
temazepam 30 mg, glutethimide or placebo in parallel group 
design for four nights. Outcomes included patient-reported 
estimates of SL, TST, NOA and QOS. Heffron115 reported on 
55 “insomnia outpatients” who received temazepam 30 mg or 
placebo in parallel groups for four nights. Subjects reported 
SL, TST, NOA and QOS. Tuk116 studied 21 “primary sleep-
onset insomnia” patients in a within-patient crossover study. 
Subjects received a single night of placebo and a single night 
of temazepam 20 mg with one-week intervening washout. PSG 
was conducted on each of the two nights. SL, TST, WASO and 
SE were reported. Voshaar92 assessed 85 individuals with 
DSM-III-R primary insomnia in a within-subjects crossover 
design including temazepam 20 mg, zolpidem and placebo. A 
single-blind placebo period of four days was followed by 28 
days of active treatment with zolpidem or temazepam. Data 
are presented as means for the placebo period and active treat-
ment period for each sleep outcome. Wilson117 conducted an 
actigraphic evaluation of 38 subjects with “complaints of poor 
sleep.” Subjects were randomized to one of two crossover de-
signs, each of which included two weeks of placebo and two 
weeks of temazepam 20 mg. Subjective results from patient 
diaries as well as actigraphic results were averaged over the 
respective periods.
Sleep latency: The meta-analysis for subjective SL, based 
on two studies110,112 of temazepam 15 mg revealed a mean re-
duction of 20.06 min (CI: −1.07 to −39.05 min). Quality of evi-
dence was moderate due to imprecision.
One additional study assessed subjective SL at the 15 mg 
dosage. Hindmarch111 found no effect on the VAS scale rating 
for “ease of getting to sleep.”
Three studies114,115 evaluated the effects of temazepam 30 mg 
on subjective sleep latency from patient diaries. Fillingham114 
reported a reduction of SL of 40 min versus placebo. Hef-
fron115 found a 45 min reduction versus placebo. Hindmarch111 
reported a statistically significant effect on a VAS for “ease of 
getting to sleep” with temazepam 30 mg.
Tuk116 found no difference between temazepam 20 mg and 
placebo in PSG SL. However, it is noteworthy that in this 
sample of “primary sleep onset insomnia” patients, both te-
mazepam and placebo produced a reduction from baseline 
of approximately 53 min (to SL of about 24 min). Wilson117 
demonstrated a SL derived from actigraphy which was only 
7 min less than that of placebo. However, of note, the end-of-
treatment SL for temazepam (by actigraphy) was only 15 min, 
suggesting a possible floor effect for these results.
Three studies assessed subjective SL with temazepam 20 
mg.92,113,117 Cuanang113 reported a reduction from baseline 
which was 34.2 min greater than placebo reduction. Voshaar92 
found end-of-treatment SL for temazepam 20 mg which was 29 
min less than placebo. Similarly, Wilson117 found subjective SL 
was 23 min less than placebo.
total Sleep time: Two studies110,112 were included in the 
meta-analysis for subjective TST at 15 mg. The analysis re-
vealed a mean increase in TST of 64.4 min (CI: +8.1 to +120.8 
min). Quality of evidence was moderate due to imprecision. 
No additional studies evaluated subjective TST at this dosage. 
Wu112 reported a PSG TST of 99.1 min greater than placebo for 
15 mg.
Two studies114,115 reported subjective TST at the 30 mg dos-
age. Fillingim114 demonstrated TST which was 53 min greater 
than placebo, while Heffron115 noted a 54.6 min greater TST 
versus placebo. There were no investigations of objective TST 
for this dosage.
At the 20 mg dosage, three trials92,113,117 reported subjective 
TST. Cuanang113 found a 78 min greater TST increase from 
baseline than placebo. Voshaar92 demonstrated a 46 min greater 
 329
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
TST than placebo at end-of-treatment. Wilson117 also found an 
18 min greater TST with temazepam 20 mg than with placebo. 
One study117 assessed objective TST at 20 mg. Actigraphy re-
vealed a 12 min greater TST at this dosage versus placebo.
Wake after Sleep onSet: Meta-analysis for WASO was 
not possible. One investigation116 evaluated PSG WASO at the 
20 mg dosage and reported WASO time which was 28.1 min 
less than placebo. Of note, the subjects in this study were de-
scribed as exhibiting “sleep onset insomnia.” At the same dos-
age, subjective WASO was 15 min less than placebo.92 This 
was below the threshold for clinical significance.
Quality of Sleep: Meta-analysis was conducted for sleep 
quality ratings from two studies110,111 for temazepam 15 mg. 
The SMD was 0.25, below the range for clinical significance. 
However, it should be noted that the Hindmarch111 study was 
underpowered to detect all but extremely large effects in that it 
only included 20 subjects. The quality of evidence was moder-
ate due to imprecision.
Two studies found statistically significant improvement in 
sleep quality ratings for temazepam 30 mg.114,115 Cuanang113 
reported statistically significant improvement for temazepam 
20 mg on a quality rating comparing “better quality” to “same 
or worse quality.”
Sleep efficiency: Meta-analysis was not achievable for SE 
at any dosage.
At 15 mg, Wu112 found a PSG SE which was 13.3% greater 
than placebo (CI: +3.9 to +22.6%). Subjective SE was +14.1% 
versus placebo (CI: +5.8 to +22.3%). The quality of evidence 
for both was moderate due to imprecision. At 20 mg, Tuk116 
reported a +5.9% PSG SE versus placebo.
number of aWakeningS: No meta-analysis of NOA was 
possible. One study110 reported data for subjective NOA at the 
15 mg dosage (−0.5 awakenings; CI: −1.29 to +0.29 awaken-
ings). Quality of evidence was moderate due to imprecision.
Two studies114,115 reported subjective NOA at 30 mg. They 
found −1.0 and −1.24 awakenings, respectively, compared to 
placebo.
Tuk116 found no significant reduction in PSG NOA at 20 mg. 
One study117 reported data for subjective NOA at 20 mg (−0.2 
awakenings compared to placebo).
overall Quality of evidence: The overall quality of 
evidence in the meta-analytic data from the two available stud-
ies was moderate for temazepam 15 mg due to imprecision.
HarmS: Limited data on adverse effects of temazepam 15 
and 30 mg are available. Meta-analysis could not be performed. 
Glass110 found no notable increase in adverse effects with te-
mazepam 15 mg versus placebo and no significant effects 
were found on measures of daytime impairment. Cuanang113 
reported “no marked difference in adverse events,” although 
temazepam 20 mg was associated with a modest increase in 
headache, blurred vision, depression and confusion. However, 
the frequency of these events was low overall. Heffron115 found 
no difference in overall frequency of adverse events but noted 
that drowsiness, lethargy and vertigo were more commonly 
reported with temazepam 30 mg. There is some evidence that 
temazepam 30 mg is associated with daytime impairment 
on tests such as the Choice Reaction Time Test and Critical 
Flicker Fusion Test.111
In summary, the task force found that there was weak evi-
dence of efficacy of temazepam in terms of therapeutic effects 
on sleep onset, total sleep time, awakenings, sleep efficiency, 
and possibly WASO with limited or no consistent evidence of 
adverse events in excess of placebo. However, there was also 
limited evidence for daytime impairment with temazepam 
30 mg. Over, benefits were deemed to outweigh harms for te-
mazepam 15 mg.
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: Based on its clini-
cal judgement, the task force determined that a majority of pa-
tients would be likely to use both temazepam 15 mg and 30 mg 
compared to no treatment.
Melatonin agonists
Ramelteon for the Treatment of Chronic Insomnia
Recommendation 7: We suggest that clinicians use 
ramelteon as a treatment for sleep onset insomnia (versus 
no treatment) in adults. [WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on trials of 8 mg 
doses of ramelteon.
Summary
Four RCTs investigated the use of ramelteon in the treatment 
of chronic primary insomnia.118–121 The overall quality of evi-
dence from these studies was downgraded to very low due to 
substantial heterogeneity across studies, imprecision and po-
tential publication bias. The overall evidence for ramelteon 8 
mg. was weakly in favor of its effectiveness for the treatment of 
sleep onset disturbance only. Meta-analysis of the three stud-
ies meeting inclusion criteria that reported objective (PSG) 
sleep latency demonstrated marginal reduction of sleep latency. 
The analysis revealed minimal increase in PSG-determined to-
tal sleep time which fell well below the defined threshold for 
clinical significance. Measures of sleep efficiency and sleep 
quality showed no clinically significant improvement. There 
was no evidence of significant difference from placebo for any 
adverse events, based on available side effect data. Although 
the evidence for efficacy is marginal, the benefits appear to be 
greater than the minimal potential harms. Based on clinical 
judgment, the task force determined that the majority of well-
informed patients would use ramelteon over no treatment. This 
judgement is based on the evidence of improved sleep latency, 
coupled with its apparently low potential for adverse events.
See Figures S31–S38, S76 and S77 and Table S14 in the 
supplemental material.
Discussion
Evidence from four RCTs which investigated the use of ramelt-
eon in the treatment of chronic primary insomnia was included 
 330
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
in the statistical analysis.118–121 Subjects in all studies demon-
strated chronic primary insomnia with associated daytime 
complaints. All studies required mean objective LPS of > 20 
min on two nights of PSG screening. All studies except Mayer 
and colleagues119 also required mean objective WASO > 60 
min. Kohsaka and colleagues118 studied 65 chronic insomnia 
patients for two nights each at ramelteon doses of 4, 8, 16, and 
32 mg. Roth and colleagues120 studied 100 older adults (age > 65 
years) with chronic primary insomnia. Subjects were adminis-
tered two consecutive nights each of placebo, ramelteon 4 mg, 
and ramelteon 8 mg in a three-phase crossover protocol, with 
randomization of the treatment sequence and sustained wash-
out time between each two night sequence.
Zammitt121 studied the effects of nightly ramelteon in adults 
at dosages of 8 and 16 mg. PSG was conducted at baseline, and 
weeks 1, 3, and 5. The Mayer paper119 reported on six-month 
nightly use of ramelteon in 451 adults with chronic insomnia 
from 46 multinational sites. Two nights of PSG were conducted 
in week 1 and at approximately one month intervals thereafter.
Sleep latency: The impact of 8 mg ramelteon on PSG-as-
sessed SL was evaluated in three studies.118,120,121 Objective sleep 
latency data in the study by Mayer and colleagues119 were not 
adequate for meta-analysis and therefore could not be included.
Meta-analysis of the grouped evidence demonstrated mar-
ginal improvement in this critical outcome. However, the mean 
difference between the treatment and control groups was not 
clinically significant (−9.57 min; CI: −6.38 to −12.75 min). The 
confidence interval crossed the clinical significance threshold, 
and therefore the quality of evidence was downgraded for im-
precision. It was downgraded further for the high degree of 
heterogeneity across studies (I2 = 96%), and due to the risk of 
publication bias since all these studies were funded by indus-
try. The resultant quality of evidence is very low.
Mean differences in objective sleep latency varied from −7.6 
min to −13.1 min. Of note, the Roth investigation included ex-
clusively older adults and found the smallest improvement in 
sleep latency. Subjective sleep latency from these investiga-
tions was comparable to objective latencies with mean differ-
ence (−11.44 min; CI: −3.31 to −19.56 min) falling below the 
clinical significance threshold.
Several additional papers which met inclusion criteria, but 
did not contain data suitable for this analysis, have addressed 
the efficacy and side effect profile of ramelteon.122–126 The ob-
jective and subjective sleep latency from these results were 
consistent with the meta-analysis findings. This was likewise 
the case for sub-group analysis of subjects with primary sleep 
onset complaints.124 A post-hoc analysis of the data from Zam-
mitt by Mini and colleagues123 found a significantly greater 
percentage of ramelteon 8 mg patients with > 50% reduction in 
sleep latency at week 1 (63.0% versus 39.7% for placebo), week 
3 (63.0% versus 41.2%), and week 5 (65.9% versus 48.9%).
total Sleep time: All four studies included in the meta-
analysis evaluated objective total sleep time for ramelteon 8 
mg.118–121 Although small improvements in TST were observed 
in some individual studies, ranging from 1.2 to 12.5 min lon-
ger, the meta-analysis reveals minimal increase (+6.58 min; CI: 
+1.36 to +11.80 min) which falls well below the threshold for 
clinical significance. The quality of evidence was downgraded 
to LOW due to the high degree of heterogeneity across stud-
ies, and due to the risk of publication bias since all these stud-
ies were funded by industry. Meta-analysis results of reported 
subjective TST were consistent with the objective finding (+5.7 
min; CI: −7.65 to +19.04 min). Additional studies not included 
in meta-analysis supported these results.122,125,126
Wake after Sleep onSet: Meta-analysis of objective WASO 
from the two studies reporting adequate data118,121 show a clini-
cally insignificant increase (+3.5 min; CI: +2.77 to +4.23 min) 
in WASO for the ramelteon group, well below the significance 
threshold of 20 min. The quality of evidence was downgraded 
to moderate due to potential publication bias. One study not in-
cluded in meta-analysis122 found no difference in PSG WASO.
Zammitt and Mayer reported subjective WASO data for 
meta-analysis.119,121 The ramelteon group demonstrated a clini-
cally insignificant increase in WASO of 5.2 min (CI: −6.77 to 
+17.24 min). The quality of evidence was low due to heteroge-
neity and potential publication bias. The only additional study 
which assessed subjective WASO found no difference between 
placebo and ramelteon 8 mg.126
Quality of Sleep: Sleep quality ratings showed virtually 
no difference from placebo in any of the studies assessed.119–121 
Meta-analysis suggests no difference between ramelteon and pla-
cebo, with a pooled mean difference of −0.04 points (CI: −0.13 to 
+0.05 points) on a 7-point Likert scale. The quality of evidence 
was downgraded to low due to heterogeneity and the risk of pub-
lication bias since all these studies were funded by industry. Ad-
ditional studies which assessed subjective sleep quality found no 
difference between ramelteon and placebo groups.122,125,126
Sleep efficiency: Three studies reported sleep efficiency 
data included in meta-analysis.118,120,121 Minimal improvements 
in sleep efficiency were reported (+1.93%; CI: +1.00 to +2.87%), 
falling well below the clinically significance threshold for ob-
jective sleep efficiency of 5%. The quality of evidence was low 
due to heterogeneity and potential publication bias. Additional 
studies did not report sleep efficiency data.
number of aWakeningS: No meta-analysis for PSG num-
ber of awakenings was conducted as only one study reported 
adequate data for analysis.119 This investigation found no clini-
cally significant difference between ramelteon 8 mg and pla-
cebo (+0.1 awakenings; CI: +0.08 to +0.15 awakenings). The 
quality of evidence was moderate due to potential publication 
bias. Other studies which evaluated NOA reported no signifi-
cant differences as well.120,125,126
In summary, these studies show very weak evidence for re-
duction of sleep latency at the recommended prescribed dosage 
(8 mg), with mean decrease of 9.57 min (CI: −6.38 to −12.75 
min), and no consistent evidence of improvement in other ob-
jective or subjective parameters.
overall Quality of evidence: The overall quality of 
evidence in the meta-analytic data from these studies was 
 331
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
downgraded to very low for several reasons. Substantial het-
erogeneity across studies was noted for multiple outcomes. 
The data were also downgraded for imprecision, due to the rel-
atively large confidence intervals, which cross the clinical sig-
nificance thresholds for multiple outcomes. All of these studies 
were industry sponsored, resulting in further downgrading of 
evidence due to potential publication bias. The quality of evi-
dence for individual outcomes ranged from moderate to very 
low; therefore, the overall quality of evidence was very low.
HarmS: Meta-analytic data on adverse effects showed a rela-
tively low frequency of adverse effects overall and none which 
were significantly different than placebo. This analysis included 
headache, nausea, upper respiratory infection and nasopharyn-
gitis. A single case of leukopenia, which was judged possibly 
related to medication, was noted in the Mayer study.119 Both 
Zammitt121 and Mayer119 found no evidence of rebound insom-
nia or withdrawal effects following discontinuation (notably, 
the Mayer et al. study was based on six months of nightly use).
The studies not included in the meta-analysis found no in-
dication of a significant difference in adverse events between 
ramelteon and placebo. Commonly reported adverse events 
in these studies included fatigue, headache, dizziness and 
somnolence.
Three studies assessed for next-day impairment associated 
with ramelteon. Roth and colleagues reported on next-day re-
sidual pharmacological effects of ramelteon in an older adult 
population.120 Observations of DSST, immediate and delayed 
recall, subjective alertness, and concentration showed no sig-
nificant residual as compared to placebo on any outcomes. 
Employing the same residual effect measures, Zammitt et al.121 
reported small but statistically significant impairment with 
ramelteon 8 mg. in immediate recall at week 3 only, delayed 
recall (week 1 only), level of alertness (week 5), and ability to 
concentrate (week 1). Mayer119 found no consistent evidence 
of next-day impairment in alertness, recall, DSST or visual 
analogue scales of mood, energy, or cognition. Overall, the 
available data suggest no consistent evidence of next-day im-
pairment associated with the use of ramelteon.
In summary, the task force found that there was weak evi-
dence of efficacy in the treatment of sleep onset insomnia, with 
limited or no consistent evidence of adverse events in excess 
of placebo. Therefore, benefits were deemed to marginally out-
weigh harms.
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: Based on its clini-
cal judgement, the task force determined that in light of its 
efficacy for sleep onset and its relatively benign side effect 
profile, a majority of patients would be likely to use ramelteon 
compared to no treatment.
Heterocyclics
Doxepin for the Treatment of Chronic Insomnia
Recommendation 8: We suggest that clinicians use doxepin 
as a treatment for sleep maintenance insomnia (versus no 
treatment) in adults. [WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on trials of 3 mg 
and 6 mg doses of doxepin.
Summary
Four studies addressed the efficacy of doxepin 3 mg.127–130 Four 
studies also investigated the 6 mg dosage.128–131 The overall 
quality of evidence for both dosages was low due to poten-
tial publication bias and imprecision. The evidence suggests 
minimal improvement in SL but clinically significant im-
provements in WASO, TST and SE. The overall evidence was 
graded as weakly in favor of doxepin’s efficacy in improving 
sleep maintenance.
Meta-analysis shows that PSG and patient-reported SL 
at 3 mg and PSG SL at 6 mg fell below the clinical signifi-
cance threshold. Both PSG and subjective TST at 3 mg, as 
well as PSG TST at 6 mg, were above significance thresholds, 
although subjective TST at 6 mg fell short of this criterion. 
PSG data for reduction of WASO exceeded the clinical sig-
nificance threshold at both dosages, although patient diary 
data for WASO at the 6 mg dosage fell below threshold, based 
on two studies. The SMD in sleep quality for doxepin 3 mg 
suggests moderate improvement, while the SMD for the 6 mg 
dosage suggests mild improvement. The objective SE for both 
dosages exceeded the clinical significance level, while objec-
tive NOA fell short.
Meta-analysis of side effects included headache, diarrhea, 
somnolence and upper respiratory infection at 3 mg, and head-
ache and somnolence at the 6 mg dose. Results suggest mild 
increase in somnolence at 6 mg. Given the demonstrated im-
provements in WASO, TST and SE, with limited adverse ef-
fects, the task force judged the benefits to outweigh the harms. 
The clinical judgement of the task force was that the majority 
of well-informed patients would use doxepin over no treatment. 
This judgement is based on the evidence for clinically signifi-
cant improvement in WASO, TST and SE.
See Figures S39–S53, S78–S83 and Tables S15 and S16 in 
the supplemental material.
Discussion
Five studies investigated the effects of doxepin at 3 mg and/or 
6 mg.127–131 Krystal127 conducted a 12-week RCT of nightly dox-
epin 1 and 3 mg versus placebo in 240 elderly (> 65 years) sub-
jects with predominant sleep maintenance insomnia. Subjects 
were randomized to one of three treatment groups. Outcome 
variables included both PSG and sleep diary data. Krystal128 
investigated doxepin 3 mg and 6 mg in a five week trial which 
included 221 adults with sleep onset and maintenance insom-
nia who were randomized to one of the two doxepin doses or 
placebo. PSG data and sleep diaries were included. Roth129 em-
ployed a crossover design with randomized assignment to one 
of four treatment sequences which consisted of two nights each 
of doxepin 1 mg, doxepin 3 mg, doxepin 6 mg and placebo, 
with intervening washout. PSG and sleep diary data were col-
lected. The study included 67 adults who met both baseline 
PSG-defined sleep onset and maintenance criteria. Scharf130 
employed the identical crossover design and dosages in 76 el-
derly insomnia subjects. Lankford131 reported data on a four 
week nightly trial of doxepin 6 mg or placebo in 254 elderly 
 332
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
subjects with sleep onset and sleep maintenance insomnia. 
Outcome variables were patient-reported and clinician rated.
Hajak132 also conducted a RCT of doxepin, but the dosages 
(25–50 mg) were significantly higher that FDA-approved hyp-
notic dosages. For this reason, this study was not included in 
the current analysis.
Sleep latency: Four studies127–130 reported PSG SL data 
for the 3 mg dosage. The mean difference from placebo 
(−2.30 min; CI: −6.22 to +1.62 min) was below the defined 
significance threshold. Evidence quality was moderate due to 
potential publication bias. Likewise, patient-reported SL127,130 
did not meet clinical significance (−9.35 min; CI: −21.89 to 
+3.19 min). Quality was low due to imprecision and poten-
tial publication bias. Three studies included adequate data 
for meta-analysis at the 6 mg dosage,128–130 showing a mean 
difference for objective SL of −5.29 min (CI: −1.34 to −9.25 
min) with moderate quality of evidence due to publication 
bias. No sleep diary data were available for meta-analysis of 
SL at this dosage.
total Sleep time: Four investigations127–130 reported PSG 
data for TST at 3 mg. The analysis reveals a clinically signifi-
cant increase in TST at this dosage (+26.14 min; CI: +18.49 to 
+33.79 min). Quality was low due to imprecision and potential 
publication bias. Subjective reports for 3 mg127,130 were also 
in the range of clinical significance (+43.57 min; CI: +5.16 to 
+81.98 min) with very low quality of evidence due to hetero-
geneity, imprecision and potential publication bias. At the 6 
mg dosage, PSG-determined TST,128–130 also met the clinical 
significance criterion (+32.27 min; CI: +24.24 to +40.30 min) 
with moderate quality of evidence due to potential publication 
bias. However, subjective TST at this dosage130,131 fell short 
of significance (+18.84 min; CI: −1.65 to +39.34 min) with 
LOW quality of evidence due to imprecision and potential 
publication bias.
Wake after Sleep onSet: WASO was considered a key 
outcome variable in all of the doxepin studies noted. The PSG 
data for 3 mg doxepin showed a clinically significant mean dif-
ference from placebo of −22.17 min (CI: −14.72 to −29.62 min), 
based on four trials.127–130 Quality of evidence was low due to 
imprecision and potential publication bias. Only one study 
reported subjective WASO, with a reduction of 20.0 min ver-
sus placebo. Quality of these data was low due to imprecision 
and potential publication bias. At 6 mg, PSG WASO showed 
a clinically significant reduction of 23.14 min (CI: −16.36 to 
−30.34 min)128–130 with LOW quality of evidence due to impre-
cision and potential publication bias. Patient diary results did 
not meet clinical significance (−14.39 min; CI: −3.93 to −24.86 
min)130,131 with moderate quality of evidence due to potential 
publication bias.
Quality of Sleep: Quality of sleep ratings for the 3 mg 
dosage suggest substantial improvement (SMD: +0.57; CI: 
+0.26 to 0.88 SMD) with low quality of evidence,127,130 due to 
imprecision and potential publication bias. More modest im-
provement was noted at 6 mg (SMD +0.28; CI +0.06 to 0.49 
SMD)130,131 with moderate quality of evidence due to potential 
publication bias.
Sleep efficiency: PSG SE was reported in three studies 
for the 3 mg dosage.127,129,130 Evidence quality was low due to 
imprecision and potential publication bias. The improvement 
in SE was clinically significant at +6.78% (CI: +4.50 to 9.07%). 
SE at the 6 mg dose, based on two investigations129,130 was also 
significantly improved (+7.06%; CI: +5.12 to 9.01%) with mod-
erate quality of evidence due to potential publication bias.
number of aWakeningS: PSG-determined NOA was 
mildly increased (+0.53 awakenings; CI: −0.37 to +1.42 awak-
enings) for 3 mg127,129,130 and the 6 mg dose (+0.44 awakenings; 
CI: −0.57 to +1.44 awakenings), with moderate quality for both, 
due to potential publication bias.
overall Quality of evidence: The quality of evidence 
in the meta-analytic data for the majority of variables was mod-
erate to low due to industry sponsorship and, in some cases, 
imprecision (due to relatively large confidence intervals for 
numerous variables that cross clinical significance thresholds). 
Quality was further downgraded to very low for subjective 
TST at 6 mg as a result of the above factors plus heterogene-
ity of data. As a result, the overall quality of evidence for the 
doxepin data is considered very low.
HarmS: Meta-analysis was available for both the 3 mg127–129 
and 6 mg128,129,131 dosages and revealed no increase in head-
ache frequency with doxepin. Somnolence showed no sig-
nificant increase versus placebo (+0.01 risk difference) at the 
3 mg level127–129 and a small increased risk at 6 mg (+0.04 
risk difference).128,129,131 Data were also available for meta-
analysis of risk for diarrhea and upper respiratory infection. 
Neither showed significantly greater risk than placebo. With 
respect to next-day residual effects, no difference was ob-
served between doxepin 3 mg or 6 mg and placebo on DSST, 
Symbol Copying Test, or visual analogue scales for morning 
sleepiness.127–130
In summary, the task force found weak evidence for efficacy 
in the treatment of sleep maintenance insomnia, with mini-
mal evidence of adverse events in excess of placebo. Therefore, 
benefits were deemed to be greater than harms.
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: Based on its clini-
cal judgement, the task force determined that in light of the 
data supporting efficacy for reducing WASO, and improving 
TST, SE and sleep quality, a majority of patients would be 
likely to use doxepin compared to no treatment.
Trazodone for the Treatment of Chronic Insomnia
Recommendation 9: We suggest that clinicians not 
use trazodone as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep 
maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. 
[WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on one trial of a 50 
mg dose of trazodone.
 333
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
See Table S17 in the supplemental material.
Summary
A single study78 of trazodone 50 mg met inclusion criteria; 
therefore, no meta-analysis is available. The overall qual-
ity of evidence for this study was moderate due to potential 
publication bias. The patient-reported data from this study 
demonstrated a modest reduction in SL which fell below the 
threshold for clinical significance. Likewise, the moderate in-
crease in TST and the small reduction in WASO did not reach 
the clinical threshold criteria. Quality of sleep was insignifi-
cantly improved and reduction in NOAs fell just below clinical 
significance. In summary, none of the sleep outcome variables 
improved to a clinically significant degree.
No meta-analysis of harms was possible. Given the absence of 
demonstrated efficacy on numerous critical outcome variables, 
coupled with limited evidence regarding harms, the task force 
judged the harms to potentially outweigh the benefits. Based on 
its clinical judgement, the task force determined that, despite 
the absence of significant efficacy for trazodone 50 mg and the 
paucity of information regarding harms, the majority of patients 
would be likely to use trazodone compared to no treatment.
Discussion
Walsh78 investigated the efficacy of trazodone 50 mg versus 
zolpidem 10 mg and placebo. The final sample for the trazo-
done and placebo groups included 187 adults with sleep on-
set insomnia. Subjects were administered either trazodone or 
placebo in double-blind fashion for 14 consecutive nights. All 
data were patient-reported.
Sleep latency: Subjective SL was reduced by 10.2 min (CI: 
−8.95 to −11.44 min). This falls short of the clinical significance 
threshold. The quality of evidence was moderate due to poten-
tial publication bias.
total Sleep time: Sleep diary TST was increased by a clin-
ically insignificant 21.8 min (CI: +20.10 to +23.49 min). The 
quality of evidence was moderate due to potential publication 
bias.
Wake after Sleep onSet: Sleep diary WASO was reduced 
by 7.7 min (CI: −8.89 to −6.5 min), falling below the threshold. 
The quality of evidence was moderate due to potential publica-
tion bias.
Quality of Sleep: On a 4-point scale (1 = excellent, 
4 = poor) sleep quality was not significantly improved versus 
placebo (−0.13 points; CI: −0.11 to −0.14 points). The quality of 
evidence was moderate due to potential publication bias.
number of aWakeningS: This outcome was reduced by 
0.4 (CI: −0.37 to −0.42 awakenings) compared to placebo, less 
than the 0.5 subjective awakening threshold. The quality of 
evidence was moderate due to potential publication bias.
overall Quality of evidence: The overall quality of 
evidence for this study was moderate.
HarmS: There was no meta-analysis of harms. In the Walsh78 
paper, the trazodone group experienced significantly more 
side effects than the placebo group. Chief among these were 
headache (trazodone 30%; placebo 19%) and somnolence (tra-
zodone 23%; placebo 8%). In all, 75% of trazodone subjects 
reported some adverse event(s), compared to 65.4% of subjects 
who received placebo.
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: Based on its 
clinical judgement, the task force determined that, despite 
the absence of significant efficacy for trazodone 50 mg and 
the paucity of information regarding harms, the majority of 
patients would be likely to use trazodone compared to no 
treatment. This is based on the perception of trazodone as a 
“safer” sleep-promoting agent by many physicians and the re-
sulting recommendations and prescribing practices of those 
physicians.
Anticonvulsants
Tiagabine for the Treatment of Primary Insomnia
Recommendation 10: We suggest that clinicians not use 
tiagabine as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. [WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on trials of 4 mg 
doses of tiagabine.
Summary
Three studies addressed the efficacy of tiagabine 4 mg.133–135 
The overall quality of evidence was very low due to potential 
publication bias, heterogeneity, and imprecision. Meta-analy-
ses were conducted for SL (PSG and subjective), TST (PSG 
and subjective), WASO (PSG and subjective), sleep quality, 
SE (PSG), and NOA (PSG and subjective). These analyses 
revealed that both objective and subjective measures of sleep 
latency fell below the threshold for clinical significance. Mea-
sures of TST showed minimal change (PSG) and mild to mod-
erate reduction (sleep diary). WASO data demonstrated no 
clinically significant change on either metric. Meta-analysis 
of SMD for sleep quality suggested improvement which fell 
below the clinical significance threshold. Neither objective nor 
subjective NOAs were reduced by clinically significant levels, 
while PSG SE was minimally reduced.
Meta-analysis of adverse effects showed no difference be-
tween tiagabine and placebo on headache or nausea. Given the 
absence of demonstrated efficacy on numerous critical out-
come variables (with slight trending toward mild worsening 
on some outcomes), coupled with limited evidence regarding 
harms, the task force judged the harms to potentially outweigh 
the benefits.
It was determined by clinical judgement of the task force 
that the majority of well-informed patients would not use ti-
agabine over no treatment. This judgement is based on the lack 
of evidence for efficacy and the limited systematic information 
regarding adverse effects.
See Figures S55–S64, S84 and S85 and Tables S18–S20 in 
the supplemental material.
 334
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
Discussion
Three studies were included in the meta-analyses of ti-
agabine.133–135 Roth133 studied 207 elderly primary insomnia 
patients (65–85 years) with difficulty initiating and maintain-
ing sleep who received tiagabine 2, 4, 6, or 8 mg or placebo on 
two consecutive study nights with PSG recordings in a paral-
lel group design. Walsh134 similarly evaluated 232 adults with 
chronic sleep-onset and maintenance insomnia. Tiagabine 4, 6, 
8, or 10 mg or placebo was administered on two consecutive 
nights with PSG. Walsh135 conducted a crossover study of 58 
adults (age 35–64) with chronic sleep onset and maintenance 
problems. Subjects received 4, 8, 12, and 16 mg and placebo 
for two consecutive nights of sleep recording. Medication-free 
washout periods between doses ranged from 5–12 nights.
Sleep latency: The meta-analysis for SL included three 
studies.133–135 PSG SL data showed a small increase in SL 
(+3.65 min; CI: −8.00 to +15.31 min) with very low quality of 
evidence due to heterogeneity, imprecision and potential pub-
lication bias. The subjective data133,135 showed a moderate in-
crease in SL (+13.31 min; CI: +7.54 to 19.37 min). Quality of 
evidence was moderate due to potential publication bias.
total Sleep time: Objective data for TST133–135 demon-
strated a minimal reduction in TST (−1.21 min; CI: −7.44 to 
+5.02 min) with LOW quality evidence due to heterogeneity 
and potential publication bias. Patient-reported TST133,135 was 
reduced by 19.95 min (CI: −25.35 to −14.54 min) with moder-
ate quality of evidence due to potential publication bias. Nei-
ther subjective nor objective findings met clinical significance.
Wake after Sleep onSet: The PSG WASO analysis133–135 
revealed essentially no difference from placebo (−0.56 min; CI: 
−6.77 to +5.65 min). Quality of evidence was low due to het-
erogeneity and potential publication bias. Sleep diary data133,135 
indicated a small, clinically insignificant increase (+4.29 min; 
CI: −0.22 lower to +8.79 min) with moderate quality of evi-
dence due to potential publication bias.
Quality of Sleep: The meta-analysis for QOS133,135 re-
sulted in a SMD of +0.48 (CI: −0.5 to +1.46 SMD), which falls 
below the level of clinical significance. Quality of evidence 
was very low due to heterogeneity, imprecision and potential 
publication bias.
Sleep efficiency: The objective sleep efficiency was re-
duced (−0.53%; CI: −0.02 to −1.05%). Quality of evidence was 
moderate due to potential publication bias.
number of aWakeningS: The PSG NOAs were mildly 
increased (+0.5 awakenings; CI: −1.29 to +2.29 awakenings). 
The subjective NOA was minimally reduced at −0.21 awaken-
ings (CI: −0.9 to +0.48 awakenings), falling below the thresh-
old for clinical significance. Level of evidence was low for both 
measures due to imprecision and potential publication bias
overall Quality of evidence: The overall quality 
of evidence for the meta-analytic data was very low due to 
significant heterogeneity, imprecision and potential bias (in-
dustry sponsorship) for some critical outcomes.
HarmS: Meta-analysis was possible for two adverse effects 
(headache and nausea). Neither showed any significant dif-
ference from placebo. None of the three studies found a sig-
nificant difference from placebo on morning-after DSST or 
visual analogue scales for sleepiness/alertness at the 4 mg 
dose.
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: Based on its clini-
cal judgement, the task force determined that in light of the 
absence of significant efficacy at this dose and the paucity of 
information regarding harms, the majority of patients would 
not be likely to use tiagabine compared to no treatment.
Over-the-counter preparations
Diphenhydramine for the Treatment of Primary 
Insomnia
Recommendation 11: We suggest that clinicians not use 
diphenhydramine as a treatment for sleep onset and sleep 
maintenance insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. 
[WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on trials of 50 mg 
doses of diphenhydramine.
Summary
Two RCTs evaluated diphenhydramine 50 mg for the treat-
ment of chronic primary insomnia.110,136 The overall quality of 
evidence was downgraded to low due to imprecision and risk 
of publication bias. The overall evidence for diphenhydramine 
50 mg was weakly against its effectiveness for improving 
sleep onset and TST. The mean reduction in patient-reported 
sleep latency versus placebo fell below the level of clinically 
significant improvement. The same studies found a small in-
crease in TST which also fell below the threshold for clinical 
significance. The single paper136 which included PSG-deter-
mined SL and TST showed outcomes which also fell below 
clinical significance thresholds. None of the other objective 
or patient-reported outcome variables reached clinical sig-
nificance thresholds. In addition, one paper meeting inclusion 
criteria137 but not including suitable data for meta-analysis 
evaluated diphenhydramine 50 mg in mild to moderate in-
somnia patients.
No meta-analysis was possible for side effects. Since no 
systematic data addressing harms is available, it is difficult 
to make a clear determination regarding benefits versus 
harms. However, in light of the absence of clear benefits, the 
task force judged the benefits and harms to be approximately 
equal. It was determined by clinical judgement of the task 
force that the majority of well-informed patients would not 
use diphenhydramine over no treatment. This judgement is 
based on the absence of evidence for clinically significant 
improvement.
See Figures S65 and S66 and Table S21 in the supplemen-
tal material.
 335
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
Discussion
Two studies of diphenhydramine 50 mg included adequate 
data for meta-analysis. Glass110 studied 25 elderly subjects 
(mean age = 73.9 years) with insomnia. Enrollees received 
diphenhydramine, temazepam 15 mg and placebo in a cross-
over design with two weeks of nightly use for each interven-
tion, followed by washout. Primary outcomes measures were 
sleep variables recorded in patient diaries. Morin136 compared 
diphenhydramine (14 nights, followed by 14 nights of pla-
cebo) to a valerian-hops preparation (28 nights) and placebo 
(28 nights) in a total population of 184 adults with occasional 
insomnia (2–4 nights/week with SL > 30 min or WASO > 30 
min). Patients were randomly assigned to the intervention 
groups and PSG and patient-reported data were collected. A 
third study,137 not included in meta-analysis, assessed mild to 
moderate insomnia patients in family practice settings. Par-
ticipants received diphenhydramine 50 mg and placebo for one 
week each in crossover fashion, without intervening washout. 
Outcome assessment was based on patient-completed sleep 
questionnaires.
Sleep latency: The single study employing PSG136 found 
a 7.89 min reduction in SL (CI: −17.40 to +1.62 min). This fell 
below the significance threshold. Quality of evidence was low 
due to imprecision and potential publication bias. Two stud-
ies110,136 met requirements for meta-analysis of subjective SL. 
This revealed a mean difference from placebo of −2.47 min (CI: 
−8.17 to +3.23 min). The Rickels study137 found statistically sig-
nificant improvement in SL with diphenhydramine using a 0–4 
patient-rating scale, but no specific quantitative data regarding 
actual SL times were included.
total Sleep time: Morin136 reported a PSG TST increase 
of 12.37 min (CI: −13.38 to +38.12 min). This fell below the 
significance threshold of 20 min. Quality of evidence was 
low due to imprecision and potential publication bias. Meta-
analysis of the two studies demonstrated a 17.86 min increase 
(CI: −3.79 to + 39.51 min) in subjective TST versus placebo. 
The Rickels study137 found “statistically significant improve-
ment” in patient-reported TST but, as noted above, it is un-
clear to what extent this represented clinically significant 
improvement.
Wake after Sleep onSet: No data pertaining to wake af-
ter sleep onset were available.
Quality of Sleep: Glass110 found minimal difference in 
sleep quality between diphenhydramine and placebo (mean 
difference of +0.1 SD; CI: −0.45 to +0.65 SD). Quality of 
evidence was downgraded to moderate due to potential pub-
lication bias. Rickels137 reported statistically significant im-
provement in sleep quality.
Sleep efficiency: The objective sleep efficiency data from 
the single study reporting PSG analysis136 found no clinically 
significant improvement (+2.59%; CI: −3.25 to +8.43%). In 
this same study, subjective SE also fell below the threshold 
(+4.61%; CI: +1.33 to +7.88%).
number of aWakeningS: The change in subjective number 
of awakenings (−0.3 awakenings; CI: −1.03 to +0.43 awaken-
ings) was not clinically significant.110
overall Quality of evidence: The overall quality of 
evidence in the meta-analytic data from these studies was 
downgraded to low for imprecision, due to confidence inter-
vals which crossed the clinical significance thresholds for sub-
jective TST, a critical outcome. These studies were industry 
sponsored, resulting in further downgrading of evidence due 
to potential publication bias. The quality of evidence for indi-
vidual critical outcomes ranged from moderate to low, there-
fore the overall quality of evidence was low.
HarmS: No meta-analysis of adverse effects was possible. 
Neither Morin136 nor Glass110 found significant differences 
between diphenhydramine and placebo in adverse events. 
Rickels137 reported higher numerical rates of drowsiness, diz-
ziness, and grogginess with diphenhydramine but no statistical 
analysis was conducted.
Morin136 found no substantial rebound effects following dis-
continuation of diphenhydramine. Glass110 noted minimal dif-
ferences between diphenhydramine and placebo in the number 
of subjects experiencing rebound for at least one sleep out-
come variable. Glass110 found no difference in morning-after 
DSST or Manual Tracking Task (MTT) between interventions.
In summary, the task force found that there was weak evi-
dence demonstrating an absence of efficacy in the treatment of 
sleep onset insomnia, with minimal evidence of adverse events 
in excess of placebo. Therefore, benefits were deemed approxi-
mately equal to harms.
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: Based on its clini-
cal judgement, the task force determined that, in light of the 
paucity of data supporting efficacy for sleep onset and mainte-
nance, a majority of patients would not be likely to use diphen-
hydramine compared to no treatment.
Melatonin for the Treatment of Primary Insomnia
Recommendation 12: We suggest that clinicians not use 
melatonin as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. [WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on trials of 2 mg 
doses of melatonin.
Summary
Three studies addressed the efficacy of melatonin 2 mg.138–140 
These investigations included only older adults (> 55 years). 
The overall quality of evidence was very low due to poten-
tial publication bias, heterogeneity, and imprecision. Meta-
analysis was only achievable for sleep quality. This indicated a 
SMD of +0.21 (CI: −0.36 to +0.77 SMD), which was not clini-
cally significant. The minimal overall evidence available was 
weakly against melatonin’s efficacy in improving sleep onset, 
maintenance, or quality.
No adequate data for meta-analysis of adverse effects was 
available. Given the lack of evidence for efficacy in treating 
 336
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
insomnia, and the unavailability of systematic data on side ef-
fects, the task force judged the benefits to be approximately 
equal to harms. It was determined by the task force that the 
majority of well-informed patients would use melatonin over 
no treatment. This is based on its availability and the wide-
spread perception of melatonin as a benign sleep aid.
See Figure S67 and Table S22 in the supplemental material.
Discussion
Three studies included adequate data for melatonin meta-anal-
ysis.138–140 Lemoine138 studied 170 older adults (age > 55 years) 
with primary insomnia. Subjects received either prolonged re-
lease melatonin (PRM) 2 mg or placebo nightly for 3 weeks. 
Outcome data was patient-reported. Luthringer139 similarly 
studied 40 older adults (age > 55 years) who received PRM 2 
mg or placebo for 3 weeks. Outcomes included both PSG and 
subjective data. Finally, Wade140 evaluated 354 patients of the 
same age group with PRM 2 mg or placebo nightly for 3 weeks. 
Outcome data was patient-reported.
In addition, seven trials which met inclusion criteria but 
did not include adequate data for meta-analysis were identi-
fied.141–147 These investigations employed various dosages and 
combinations with other agents, rendering meaningful com-
parisons to the 2 mg RCTs impossible. Pertinent features of 
these studies are included within each outcome section.
Haimov143 conducted a randomized crossover study of el-
derly adults with insomnia consisting of one week on each of 
three interventions (2 mg sustained-release melatonin, 2 mg 
fast-release melatonin or placebo) with intervening washout, 
followed by a 2-month extension of 1 mg slow-release melato-
nin. Data were derived from actigraphy. Zhdanova147 evaluated 
three dosages of melatonin (0.1, 0.3, and 3 mg) versus placebo in 
a randomized crossover study of 30 elderly (> 50 years) adults 
(15 normal sleepers and 15 insomnia subjects with reduced SE). 
Subjects received each dosage or placebo for one week with 
intervening washout. Wade146 administered prolonged-release 
melatonin 2 mg or placebo to adults with primary insomnia 
for 3 weeks, after which the melatonin group continued for 26 
weeks, while the placebo group was re-randomized to mela-
tonin or placebo (1:1). Sleep outcome variables (from sleep 
diary) were analyzed according by age group as well as by 
melatonin deficiency status. Baskett141 conducted a random-
ized controlled crossover study of healthy elderly with sleep 
maintenance problems. Subjects received 5 mg melatonin or 
placebo for four weeks with intervening washout.
Sleep latency: Meta-analysis was not possible for sleep 
latency. Luthringer139 reported a PSG SL reduction of 8.9 min 
(CI: −2.35 to −15.45 min), which falls below clinical signifi-
cance (prolonged release 2 mg). The quality of evidence was 
low due to imprecision and potential publication bias.
In the Haimov143 investigation, fast-release melatonin pro-
duced significantly shorter SL than placebo at one week. At 2 
months, sustained release 1 mg resulted in significantly shorter 
SL than placebo. Zhadanova147 reported no significant im-
provement in PSG SL at any dosage.
Wade146 found that the melatonin deficient group (includ-
ing all ages) showed no improvement with melatonin versus 
placebo on SL at three weeks. However, the elder group (65–80 
years) showed significant reduction of SL with melatonin, re-
gardless of melatonin deficiency status (SL: −19.1 min; pla-
cebo −1.7 min). This improvement held at 19 weeks for the 
elder group (melatonin: −25.9 min; placebo: −8.3 min). Wade145 
subsequently re-analyzed these data and reported that the sig-
nificant improvement in SL held when the age range for the 
“elderly” group was expanded to 55–80 years, but not lower. 
Baskett141 found no improvement in SL (as measured by sleep 
diary) with melatonin 5 mg.
total Sleep time: There were inadequate data for meta-
analysis of TST. Luthringer139 found an increase of 2.2 min ver-
sus placebo (CI: −19.13 to +23.53 min) in objective TST with 
melatonin 2 mg. The quality of evidence was very low due to 
significant imprecision of the data, and potential publication 
bias.
Zhdanova147 observed no increase in objective TST at any 
dosage. Wade146 reported no improvement in patient-reported 
TST in the low melatonin secretor population (regardless of 
age) at 3 weeks but observed a small improvement (estimated 
difference: +13.1 min) at 29 weeks. Analysis of the elderly 
population revealed no significant improvement in TST at any 
point. Baskett141 reported no improvement at the 5 mg dose as 
measured by sleep diary.
Wake after Sleep onSet: No meta-analysis was possible 
for WASO. Luthringer139 found a small increase in WASO 
(+8.5 min: CI: −11.75 to +28.75 min) in the prolonged release 
melatonin 2 mg group. The quality of evidence was very low 
due to significant imprecision of the data, and potential publi-
cation bias.
Quality of Sleep: The meta-analysis of QOS demonstrated 
a small improvement in quality of sleep (+0.21 SMD: CI: −0.36 
to +0.77 SMD), which fell below the threshold for clinical sig-
nificance. The quality of evidence was very low due to hetero-
geneity, imprecision and potential publication bias.
Baskett141 found no improvement in quality of sleep with 
5 mg melatonin. Wade146 reported no improvement with pro-
longed-release melatonin at 3 weeks and 29 weeks in the low 
excretor and elderly groups.
Sleep efficiency: There were not adequate data for meta-
analysis of melatonin SE.
Haimov143 reported small to moderate increases in acti-
graphic SE versus placebo (placebo: 77.4%; fast-release 2 mg/1 
week: 78.8%; sustained release 2 mg/1 week: 80.4%; sustained 
release 1 mg/2 months: 84.3%). Both of the sustained release 
dosages and durations were statistically significantly different 
from placebo. Zhdanova147 also reported significant improve-
ment in PSG SE versus placebo in the multiple dose crossover 
study (placebo: 78%; melatonin 0.1 mg: 84%; 0.3 mg 88%; 3 
mg: 84%). Baskett141 found no difference between placebo and 
melatonin 5 mg for subjective SE.
number of aWakeningS: Insufficient data precluded 
meta-analysis of NOA. Luthringer139 found an increased (+1.4 
 337
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
awakenings; CI: −4.59 to +7.39 awakenings) NOA with mela-
tonin, as measured by PSG. The quality of evidence was very 
low due to significant imprecision of the data and potential 
publication bias.
Zhdanova147 and Baskett141 reported no difference in NOA 
between melatonin and placebo by PSG or patient diary, 
respectively.
overall Quality of evidence: The overall quality of 
evidence in the single outcome meta-analytic data from these 
studies was downgraded to very low due to heterogeneity, im-
precision, and industry sponsorship, resulting in potential pub-
lication bias.
HarmS: Meta-analysis for adverse events was not possible. Of 
the included investigations, none reported clinically significant 
differences in adverse events between melatonin and placebo 
for any dosage or duration.138–140,146 With one possible excep-
tion, no rebound or withdrawal effects were reported.138,139,146 
Haimov143 found marginally significant difference in SE be-
tween the active phase for two month, 1 mg sustained-release 
melatonin and the withdrawal period.
In summary, the task force found that there was weak evi-
dence against clinically significant efficacy in the treatment of 
sleep onset insomnia, with little systematic evidence regarding 
harms. However, mixed evidence suggests possible improve-
ment in SL in an elderly population. Therefore, benefits were 
deemed to be approximately equal to harms.
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: Based on clinical 
judgement, the task force determined that despite the paucity 
of meta-analytic data, equivocal data regarding efficacy for 
sleep-onset insomnia, and absence of data regarding sleep 
maintenance, a majority of informed patients would be likely 
to use melatonin compared to no treatment. As previously 
noted, this is based on its availability and the widespread per-
ception of melatonin as a benign sleep aid.
L-tryptophan for the Treatment of Primary Insomnia
Recommendation 13: We suggest that clinicians not use 
tryptophan as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. [WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on trials of 250 mg 
doses of tryptophan.
Summary
Only one study148 contained adequate data, so meta-analysis 
was not possible. The quality of evidence for the critical out-
comes was high. This study, consisting of patient-reported 
data, showed a modest decline in TST, which was not clinically 
significant. WASO was decreased slightly, while sleep quality 
was mildly increased; neither met thresholds for clinical sig-
nificance. Sleep efficiency was insignificantly decreased.
No meta-analysis of harms was possible. Given the absence 
of demonstrated efficacy on numerous critical outcome vari-
ables, coupled with limited evidence regarding harms, the task 
force judged the harms to potentially outweigh the benefits. 
Based on its clinical judgement, the task force determined that, 
despite the absence of significant efficacy for tryptophan 250 
mg and the absence of information regarding harms, the ma-
jority of patients would be likely to use tryptophan compared 
to no treatment.
See Table S23 in the supplemental material.
Discussion
Hudson148 investigated the effects of food source tryptophan 
(250 mg), pharmacological tryptophan 250 mg, both with 
carbohydrate, versus carbohydrate alone. Subjects (n = 31) re-
ceived one of the three interventions for one week. Outcome 
data consisted of sleep diaries.
Two additional papers met inclusion criteria, but used much 
higher dosages. Hartmann149 compared tryptophan 1 g to seco-
barbital, flurazepam, and placebo in a one week trial. Tryp-
tophan and placebo groups included 52 subjects with chronic 
insomnia. Data were patient-reported. Spinweber150 studied 
20 young men with sleep onset insomnia. Following placebo 
run-in, ten subjects received tryptophan 3 g and ten received 
placebo for six nights, with PSG recordings nightly.
Sleep latency: The Hudson148 study did not report sleep 
latency data.
Spinweber150 noted improvement in PSG sleep latency only 
on nights 4–6 of administration (11.2 min lower than placebo 
for this period). Hartmann149 found no difference in subjective 
sleep latency between tryptophan and placebo during active 
treatment.
total Sleep time: Hudson148 reported a moderate reduc-
tion in subjective TST (−20 min; CI: −31.29 to −8.7 min). The 
quality of evidence was moderate due to imprecision. Other 
investigations did not report TST data.
Wake after Sleep onSet: Hudson148 noted a small reduc-
tion in subjective WASO (−9.7 min: CI −15.21 to −4.18 min), 
that did not meet clinical significance. The quality of evidence 
was high.
Quality of Sleep: On a 3-point scale (1 = low, 3 = high) 
sleep quality was increased (+0.3 points: CI +0.22 to +0.37 
points) in the Hudson study.148 The quality of evidence was 
high. Hartmann149 found no significant difference between 
tryptophan and placebo on a measure of “How well I slept.”
Sleep efficiency: Sleep efficiency was not reported by any 
study.
number of aWakeningS: NOA was not reported by any 
study.
overall Quality of evidence: The overall quality of 
evidence for this the critical outcomes was high.
HarmS: There was no meta-analysis of harms. None of the 
papers reported systematic information regarding adverse ef-
fects associated with tryptophan.
 338
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: Based on clinical 
judgement, the task force determined that, despite the absence 
of significant efficacy for tryptophan 250 mg and the absence 
of information regarding harms, the majority of patients would 
be likely to use tryptophan compared to no treatment.
Valerian for the Treatment of Primary Insomnia
Recommendation 14: We suggest that clinicians not use 
valerian as a treatment for sleep onset or sleep maintenance 
insomnia (versus no treatment) in adults. [WEAK]
Remarks: This recommendation is based on trials of vari-
able dosages of valerian and valerian-hops combination.
Summary
Morin136 evaluated a combination of valerian (374 mg native 
extract) and hops (83.8 native extract). The overall quality of 
evidence for these data was low due to imprecision and po-
tential publication bias. PSG sleep latency was reduced to a 
degree that fell below the clinical significance threshold. Other 
measures, including subjective SL, as well as PSG and patient-
reported TST and SE were improved, but did not meet clinical 
significance thresholds.
No meta-analysis of harms was possible. Given the ab-
sence of demonstrated efficacy on critical outcome variables 
(with the possible exception of marginally improved PSG SL), 
coupled with limited evidence regarding harms, the task force 
judged the harms to be roughly equal to the benefits. Based on 
its clinical judgement, the task force determined that, given 
the lack of efficacy for valerian (with the possible exception of 
small improvements in SL) and the limited information regard-
ing harms, the majority of patients would not be likely to use 
valerian compared to no treatment.
See Table S24 in the supplemental material.
Discussion
Morin136 investigated the effects of a valerian-hops combina-
tion in dosages noted above. This combination was compared 
to diphenhydramine and placebo. Subjects with mild difficulty 
initiating or maintaining sleep were randomized to one of the 
three interventions (valerian-hops n = 59; diphenhydramine 
n = 60; placebo n = 65) with nightly administration for 28 days. 
A subset (valerian n = 22; placebo n = 26) underwent PSG at 
baseline and at the end of weeks one and two.
One additional paper151 met inclusion criteria, but employed 
a higher dosage. Oxman conducted a randomized trial involv-
ing 405 adults of all ages with insomnia. Subjects were ran-
domized to two-week, nightly administration of valerian (3,600 
mg) or placebo. Outcomes were patient-reported and captured 
as ranges, therefore the data were not usable for meta-analysis.
Sleep latency: Morin136 found a reduction in PSG SL of 
9.29 min (CI: −0.27 to −18.3 min). This approached clinical 
significance. The quality of evidence was LOW due to impre-
cision and potential publication bias. Subjective SL, however, 
was increased by +3.77 min (CI: −4.47 to +12.01 min), with 
moderate quality of evidence due to potential publication bias. 
Oxman151 found no statistically significant improvement in SL.
total Sleep time: In the Morin136 study, PSG TST was in-
creased, although not to a clinically significant degree (+10.96 
min; CI: −21.67 to +43.59 min) (very low quality of evidence). 
Patient-reported TST was higher (+3.12 min; CI: - 22.08 to 
+28.32) with moderate quality of evidence. Oxman151 found no 
significant improvement in subjective TST.
Wake after Sleep onSet: WASO data were not reported 
in any study.
Quality of Sleep: Morin136 did not report quality of sleep 
data and Oxman151 found no statistically significant difference 
versus placebo in the percentage of patients meeting the de-
fined sleep quality improvement criterion (valerian 28.7%; pla-
cebo 21.2%; difference +7.5% [95% CI:15.9 to 20.9%]).
Sleep efficiency: Minimal increases in objective (+0.96%; 
CI: −5.02 to +6.94%) and subjective (1.85%; CI: −1.9 to +5.6%) 
SE were noted by Morin.136 Both outcomes were downgraded 
due to potential publication bias, while PSG data was down-
graded further due to significant imprecision.
number of aWakeningS: Oxman151 observed a statistically 
significant reduction in average change scores for NOA with 
valerian.
overall Quality of evidence: Quality of evidence 
for all outcomes ranged from very low to moderate. The only 
critical outcome for which adequate data was reported dem-
onstrated low quality evidence, therefore the overall quality of 
evidence was low.
HarmS: Morin136 observed no difference between valerian-
hops and placebo with respect to frequency of adverse events. 
No serious adverse events were noted. Likewise, Oxman151 
found no increase in adverse events at the higher valerian dose 
compared to placebo.
patientS’ valueS and preferenceS: Based on its clini-
cal judgement, the task force determined that, given the lack 
of efficacy for valerian (with the possible exception of small 
improvements in SL) and the limited information regarding 
harms, the majority of patients would not be likely to use vale-
rian compared to no treatment.
LITERATURE REVIEWS
The following section contains literature reviews of drugs for 
which clinical practice recommendations were not possible, 
due to inadequate data for statistical analyses.
Estazolam
Summary
Three studies evaluated the efficacy of estazolam152–154 us-
ing similar patient sleep questionnaires, but none of the data 
were suitable for meta-analysis. Likewise, it was not possible 
 339
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
to evaluate these data with respect to the established clinical 
significance thresholds. Therefore, no recommendations re-
garding efficacy of estazolam are possible. The data suggest 
statistically significant subjective improvement versus placebo 
at the 2 mg dosage for all parameters assessed.
Discussion
Cohn152 compared estazolam 1 mg and 2 mg to flurazepam and 
placebo in approximately 100 adults with chronic sleep onset 
and maintenance insomnia in a parallel group design. Subjects 
were randomized to receive drug or placebo for seven consecu-
tive nights. Outcomes were measured by sleep questionnaires 
(interval ratings and Likert scales). Dominguez153 evaluated a 
similar population of 45 adults with estazolam 2 mg, fluraz-
epam or placebo for 7 nights. Sleep variables were assessed by 
patient questionnaire. Scharf154 studied 243 outpatients with 
complaints of sleep onset or maintenance difficulty. Subjects 
were randomly assigned to one of three parallel groups: es-
tazolam 2 mg, flurazepam 30 mg or placebo. Medications were 
administered for 7 nights. Subjects rated sleep latency, TST, 
QOS and NOA on numerical interval questionnaires.
Three studies found statistically significant improvement 
in SL on patient ratings with estazolam 2 mg. The only study 
which included estazolam 1 mg reported no significant im-
provement on SL. All three studies reported significant im-
provement versus placebo in sleep duration at 2 mg. The 1 mg 
dosage also produced significant improvement in sleep du-
ration. Sleep quality was likewise improved at both dosages 
studied, as were NOA. No studies assessed WASO or SE.
Quazepam
Summary
Seven studies evaluated the efficacy of quazepam versus pla-
cebo in randomized, controlled trials.108,155–160 One of these 
studies160 reported PSG findings while the remainder relied ex-
clusively on subjective data derived from sleep questionnaires. 
Data analysis varies somewhat across these studies, rendering 
comparisons difficult. Only one investigation160 met require-
ments for meta-analysis. Overall, the studies suggest efficacy 
in reducing time to onset of sleep, increasing TST, and reduc-
ing NOA. The methodologies employed were not comparable 
to the standard of data reporting required by GRADE and, 
therefore, no specific recommendation was made. Quazepam 
and its metabolites have long half-lives, raising concerns re-
garding accumulation and daytime impairment. Data regard-
ing daytime sleepiness from these studies suggests a higher 
percentage of patients with somnolence in the active treatment 
group versus placebo, particularly at the 30 mg dosage.
Discussion
Alden155 evaluated 57 insomnia subjects in a 5 night, parallel 
group design with quazepam 30 mg as the active drug. This 
study and all additional quazepam studies reported here (with 
the exception of Roth160) utilized patient sleep questionnaire 
data consisting of numerical interval and other rating scales. 
Hernandez156 studied 36 insomnia outpatients with quazepam 
15 mg and placebo in a similar five night design. Martinez157 
assessed 41 older adults (> 65 years) with insomnia in a con-
trolled trial with quazepam 15 mg or placebo administered 
over 5 consecutive nights. Mendels158 assessed the same dos-
age in 60 adult insomnia outpatients for five nights. O’Hair159 
reported results of a five night trial in 60 subjects with quaz-
epam 30 mg. Scharf108 studied quazepam 15 mg and triazolam 
0.5 mg versus placebo over a five week period. During this 
time, subjects received active drug or placebo for nine con-
secutive nights, followed by 14 nights of every other night ad-
ministration. Subjects were 65 insomnia outpatients. Finally, 
Roth160 evaluated quazepam 7.5 mg and 15 mg versus placebo 
in 30 older insomnia subjects (> 60 years). PSG was conducted 
for two nights in the early phase of treatment (nights 1 and 2 
of active treatment) and during the late phase (nights 6 and 7).
Sleep latency: Utilizing a cutoff of sleep latency < 45 min 
to identify “responders,” Aden155 reported quazepam 30 mg 
to be statistically superior to placebo. O’Hair159 demonstrated 
quazepam 30 mg to be significantly better than placebo on an 
interval scale for sleep latency.
Hernandez156 found quazepam 15 mg significantly bet-
ter than placebo on sleep latency interval scales. Likewise, 
Scharf108 reported significantly shorter latencies at this dos-
age on interval scales during active treatment nights in every-
other-night administration although this was apparently not 
the case during the initial nightly administration. Using a 45 
min sleep latency cutoff as described above,155 Martinez157 
demonstrated a significantly higher percentage of responders 
to 15 mg in a geriatric population. Roth160 did not report sig-
nificant differences between quazepam 7.5 mg or 15 mg and 
placebo on PSG SL.
total Sleep time: Utilizing a cutoff of sleep duration > 6 h 
to identify “responders,” Aden155 reported quazepam 30 mg 
to be statistically superior to placebo. O’Hair159 demonstrated 
quazepam 30 mg to be significantly better than placebo on an 
interval scale for TST.
Hernandez156 found quazepam 15 mg to be significantly su-
perior to placebo on sleep duration interval scales. Likewise, 
Scharf108 reported significantly longer duration at this dosage 
on interval scales during active treatment nights in every-other-
night administration, except on the initial night of administra-
tion. Using a > 6 h sleep duration cutoff as described above,155 
Martinez157 demonstrated a significantly higher percentage of 
responders to 15 mg in a geriatric population. Roth160 reported 
improvement in PSG TST during early (treatment nights 1 and 
2) and late (nights 6 and 7) with quazepam 15 mg in a geriat-
ric insomnia population. A statistically significant effect with 
quazepam 7.5 mg was seen only during nights 6 and 7.
Wake after Sleep onSet: No studies reported placebo 
comparisons for WASO.
Quality of Sleep: The majority of studies of “sleep qual-
ity” with quazepam utilized a composite index for sleep qual-
ity (including questions on nightmares and overall evaluation 
of the medication) which is not consistent with sleep quality 
measures used in other studies; therefore these results are not 
 340
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
discussed. Scharf108 reported a single measure of sleep quality 
(“How would you describe your sleep”). Quazepam 15 mg was 
significantly better than placebo on active treatment nights in 
both the nightly and every other night administration.
Sleep efficiency: No studies reported placebo comparison 
data for SE.
number of aWakeningS: Employing a threshold for “re-
sponse” of < 2 awakenings, Aden155 reported a significantly 
higher percentage of responders to quazepam 30 mg than pla-
cebo. O’Hair159 also found significantly fewer awakenings at 
this dosage compared to placebo using interval scales. At the 
15 mg dosage, two studies156,157 found a significantly greater 
number of “responders” (i.e. < 2 awakenings) compared to pla-
cebo. No PSG data for NOA were reported.
adverSe effectS: Five studies reported specific data for 
daytime somnolence. Aden155 found an approximately four-
fold higher rate of somnolence at 30 mg (quazepam 16/24; pla-
cebo = 4/26). At the same dose, O’Hair159 reported somnolence 
in 12/30 quazepam and 5/30 placebo subjects. At 15 mg, Mar-
tinez157 noted no difference in adverse events. Hernandez156 
reported somnolence in 9/30 quazepam subjects and 6/30 pla-
cebo subjects. Mendels158 found 7/30 quazepam subjects and 
4/30 placebo subjects demonstrated daytime somnolence.
Flurazepam
Summary
Sixteen studies met general inclusion and exclusion crite-
ria.98,100,101,105,109,149,152–154,161–167 No studies contained data ad-
equate for meta-analysis. No meta-analysis of harms was 
possible. These studies were highly varied in design. Of these, 
three100,101,105 included no flurazepam/placebo comparison and 
were excluded from discussion. All of the studies included one 
or both of the standard flurazepam doses: 15 mg and 30 mg.
Studies of the efficacy of flurazepam had numerous method-
ological inconsistencies, including instruments for subjective 
assessments of sleep outcomes that were highly variable across 
these studies, which made valid comparisons across studies 
impossible. Many studies incorporated interval scales with no 
reports of specific values. In light of these inconsistencies, and 
the related unavailability of meta-analyses, no recommenda-
tions regarding efficacy of flurazepam were made. The data 
for sleep onset at both the 15 mg and 30 mg dosages are mixed. 
The majority of studies did report increases in TST with the 30 
mg dosage, but not at 15 mg. Data for WASO are limited to two 
studies, one of which (a PSG study) showed improvement at 30 
mg. Sleep quality reports uniformly indicated improvement at 
both dosages, while reports for NOA suggest reduction at the 
30 mg dosage only.
Discussion
Cohn152 compared flurazepam 30 mg and placebo in approxi-
mately 100 adults with chronic sleep onset and maintenance 
insomnia in a parallel group design. The study, with a total 
n = 223, also included two dosages of estazolam, discussed 
elsewhere. Subjects were randomized to receive drug or pla-
cebo for seven consecutive nights. Outcomes were measured 
by sleep questionnaires (interval ratings and Likert scales). 
Dominguez153 evaluated a similar population of 45 adults with 
flurazepam 30 mg or placebo for 7 nights. Sleep variables were 
assessed by patient questionnaire. Elie161 studied 60 outpatient 
insomnia patients using a cross-over study design in which 
each patient received a single dose of five different drugs (or 
drug dosages) or placebo on one night of the week over a five 
consecutive week period. Study drugs included flurazepam 
15 mg, three crossover dosages of loprazolam, and placebo. 
Outcomes included an index for sleep-onset based on patient 
questionnaires. Elie162 investigated efficacy of flurazepam 30 
mg and zopiclone versus placebo over 4 weeks. Flurazepam 
and placebo groups included 12 chronic insomnia patients per 
group. Subjects reported sleep outcome variables on post-sleep 
numerical rating questionnaires. Hartmann162 studied 96 adult 
patients (n = 45 for flurazepam and placebo groups) with vari-
ous insomnia complaints. Subjects were randomly assigned to 
receive flurazepam 30 mg, secobarbital, l-tryptophan, or pla-
cebo for one week of active treatment. Outcomes were assess 
by sleep logs which included subjective estimates of SL, NOA, 
duration of awakenings, and QOS.
Mamelak164 investigated the effects of flurazepam 30 mg 
and zopiclone versus placebo in three groups of 10 insomnia 
subjects per group, each of which received one of the three 
treatment conditions for 12 consecutive nights. Subjective es-
timates of SL, TST and NOA were reported. Mamelak165 stud-
ied 36 elderly patients with chronic insomnia. Patients were 
randomized to flurazepam 15 mg, brotizolam or placebo for 
14 nights. Outcomes included patient-reported SL, NOA, TST 
and wake time. Daytime performance measures were con-
ducted at the beginning of treatment and following conclusion. 
Melo de Paula166 evaluated flurazepam 30 mg versus placebo 
and two dosages of lormetazepam in 60 adults with sleep on-
set or maintenance problems. Subjects received one of the four 
treatment conditions for two weeks. Outcome data included 
subjective SL, NOA and TST.
Reeves98 investigated the efficacy of flurazepam 15 mg and 
triazolam versus placebo in 61 geriatric subjects (n = 27 for 
flurazepam and placebo groups) with sleep onset or mainte-
nance insomnia. Subjective sleep outcomes were assessed by 
interval rating questionnaires. Salkind167 evaluated fluraz-
epam 15 and 30 mg versus placebo in 30 general practice 
insomnia patients. Subjects received each dose of fluraz-
epam and placebo for one week in a crossover trial. Patient-
reported SL, TST and QOS were primary outcome variables. 
Daytime residual effects were also reported. Scharf154 stud-
ied 243 outpatients (n = 163 for flurazepam versus placebo) 
with complaints of sleep onset or maintenance difficulty. 
Subjects were randomly assigned to one of three parallel 
groups: flurazepam 30 mg, estazolam 2 mg or placebo. Treat-
ments were administered for 7 nights. Subjects rated sleep 
latency, TST, QOS and NOA on numerical interval question-
naires. Sunshine109 investigated the effects of 15 mg and 30 
mg flurazepam versus two dosages of triazolam and placebo 
in a five-night crossover study, with subjects receiving each 
intervention for one night. Subjects were 25 inpatients who 
 341
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
complained of sleep onset and maintenance problems. Pa-
tients completed sleep questionnaires with interval ratings 
for TST and NOA.
Kripke163 conducted the only identified PSG study of fluraz-
epam. In this study, 99 subjects with chronic insomnia were 
randomized to one of four parallel groups (flurazepam 15 mg, 
flurazepam 30 mg, midazolam or placebo). Subjects received 
treatment for 14 consecutive nights, with PSG recordings on 
nights 1, 2, 7, 13 and 14. Objective SL, WASO, TST, and SE 
were reported.
Sleep latency: The only PSG study of 30 mg163 found no 
significant reduction in SL versus placebo.
Five studies152,154,164,166,167 reported statistically significant im-
provement on subjective ratings of sleep onset for flurazepam 
30 mg versus placebo. Kripke163 found improvement in patient-
reported SL for 30 mg only in the early period (nights 1 and 
2) of administration. No significant difference from placebo 
was evident at end of 14-day treatment. Four reports109,149,153,162 
found no significant subjective improvement in sleep onset 
with flurazepam 30 mg versus placebo.
Three studies98,161,167 reported subjectively improved onset at 
the 15 mg dosage. Kripke163 found patient-reported improve-
ment at this dosage only on nights 1 and 2. Two investigations 
demonstrated no improvement in sleep onset for flurazepam 15 
mg versus placebo.
total Sleep time: Eight studies109,152–154,163,164,166,167 reported 
statistically significant improvement for flurazepam 30 mg 
versus placebo on various subjective scales for sleep duration. 
One study162 reported no significant improvement in duration 
at this dosage.
Two studies109,167 found significantly improved patient-re-
ported duration at the 15 mg dosage; Kripke163 reported sub-
jective improvement only on nights 1 and 2. Likewise, two 
studies98,165 found no significant subjective improvement in 
sleep duration for flurazepam 15 mg.
Wake after Sleep onSet: Two studies reported data for 
WASO. Kripke163 found significantly reduced PSG WASO with 
flurazepam 30 mg versus placebo. Mamelak165 reported no sig-
nificant reduction in subjective WASO with flurazepam 15 mg 
in an elderly insomnia population.
Quality of Sleep: Utilizing a variety of self-report scales, 
six studies98,152–154,161,167 reported improvement in sleep quality 
with flurazepam versus placebo. Four studies152–154,167 found im-
provement at the 30 mg dosage and three studies98,161,167 at the 
15 mg level.
Sleep efficiency: One study163 reported PSG sleep effi-
ciency. Flurazepam 30 mg significantly improved sleep effi-
ciency versus placebo.
number of aWakeningS: Six studies109,152–154,162,164 assessed 
subjective NOA with flurazepam 30 mg. All found significant 
reduction in NOA. Three studies98,109,165 found no significant 
reduction in NOA with flurazepam 15 mg.
adverSe effectS: Cohn152 reported that 68% of flurazepam 
30 mg subjects experienced an adverse event versus 43% of 
subjects receiving placebo. Approximately 50% of the fluraz-
epam group reported somnolence, about twice the rate in the 
placebo population. Dominguez153 found a significant increase 
in side effects for flurazepam 30 mg compared to placebo and 
stated that 73% of side effects described as “undetermined” 
were reports of somnolence. Elie161 indicated that there was no 
significant difference in adverse events between flurazepam 15 
mg and placebo; likewise Elie162 found no difference in rates of 
somnolence for flurazepam 30 mg versus placebo. Mamelak164 
found significant performance impairment with flurazepam 30 
mg. Mamelak165 reported significantly shorter latencies to sleep 
on MSLT at the beginning and end of treatment. The authors 
also found significant impairment on digit symbol substitution 
and serial learning as well as a significantly slower rate of im-
provement on reaction, response and movement time. Divided 
attention was also impaired at end of treatment. Reeves98 noted 
that 6 of 13 flurazepam subjects reported somnolence (versus 
4/14 in the placebo group). Salkind167 described impaired motor 
performance in the flurazepam 30 mg group (although not in 
the 15 mg group) and a significantly higher rate of “hangover 
effect” at the higher dosage. In the cross-over design, 11 of 
30 flurazepam group experienced morning drowsiness/hang-
over, which was reported by only 3 of 30 subjects during the 
flurazepam 15 mg period and 2 of 30 while taking placebo. 
Finally, Scharf154 found AEs in 73% of the flurazepam 30 mg 
group versus 43% on placebo subjects. Somnolence was the 
most common event, reported by 57% of flurazepam subjects 
and 23% of the placebo group.
Oxazepam
Götestam168 studied the efficacy of oxazepam 25 mg vs. pla-
cebo with a crossover design in 28 patients with “insomnia.” 
Subjective reports using interval ratings showed a significant 
reduction in SL and significant improvement in QOS.
Quetiapine
One study169 investigated the efficacy of quetiapine versus pla-
cebo control in primary insomnia. However, the study included 
only 13 subjects. Numerical increase in subjective TST and de-
crease in subjective SL were found, but these differences were 
not statistically significant, possibly due to small sample size.
Gabapentin
One study170 evaluated gabapentin for treatment of primary in-
somnia. This was an open-label investigation with 18 subjects, 
variable dosages, and no placebo control. Therefore, the trial 
was excluded.
Paroxetine
Two studies assessed paroxetine for treatment of primary in-
somnia. Nowell171 reported a trial of variable dosage in 15 pa-
tients, without placebo control. As a result, this investigation 
was excluded.
Reynolds172 evaluated paroxetine 10 mg/20 mg in 27 older 
adults with primary insomnia who were randomized to drug 
or placebo. The two doses were pooled for statistical analysis. 
 342
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
PSG data showed a modest but significant increase in SL, de-
crease in WASO and no difference in SE versus placebo. Sleep 
quality was improved.
Trimipramine
Hohagen173 studied the effects of trimipramine in 15 adults 
with primary insomnia. No placebo control was included and, 
as a result, the study was excluded. Riemann174 evaluated 55 
adults with primary insomnia in a placebo-controlled double 
blind study. Dosage was variable (50–200 mg; mean 109.4 mg), 
but pooled for analysis. No significant difference was observed 
between trimipramine and placebo for PSG TST or SL, but 
SE was significantly improved with trimipramine. Subjective 
sleep quality also showed significant improvement.
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Defining “Efficacy”
Assessment of the efficacy of a given agent for the treatment of 
chronic insomnia is a complex and challenging task. It remains 
unclear which are the most important variables for defining ef-
ficacy. Older studies, particularly the majority of investigations 
of benzodiazepine efficacy, utilized a variety of predominantly 
subjective scales and questionnaires. These are highly diverse 
and did not often include specific numerical patient estimates 
for sleep outcomes. Since the advent of newer benzodiazepine 
receptor agonists, more specific and uniform outcomes for both 
patient-reported and objective outcomes (e.g., self-reported 
and PSG sleep onset latency, wake time after sleep onset, and 
total sleep time) have been employed, although continued sub-
stantial variability in data reporting has not been uncommon.
In addition to the variability in outcome measures reported, 
there are a number of critical unresolved issues regarding eval-
uating the efficacy of treatments for chronic insomnia. One 
is the relative importance of subjective versus objective data. 
Another is whether metrics of sleep quality, whether they be 
subjective or objective (e.g. analysis of the microstructure of 
sleep or related physiological parameters), are perhaps more 
pertinent than measures of SL, TST or WASO. An additional 
issue of importance is whether efficacy is better reflected by 
measures of daytime alertness and cognitive, emotional, and 
psychomotor function than by measures of sleep. Recent be-
havioral treatment studies in chronic insomnia have taken 
yet another direction: measuring response or remission of the 
insomnia syndrome as the most clinically-relevant outcome. 
This approach makes sense from a patient-centered approach, 
since most patients complain of “difficulty” falling asleep or 
staying asleep, rather than tying their complaints to any spe-
cific numerical value. Indeed, several studies have identified a 
group of “non-complaining poor sleepers” whose quantitative 
sleep measures are similar to those with insomnia. Examining 
the insomnia syndrome is also useful because it addresses both 
sleep-related and wake-related symptoms.
Absent clear answers to these questions, the present analysis 
relies on conventional subjective and objective measures of 
major sleep variables (sleep onset latency, total sleep time or 
wake time after sleep onset). The meta-analyses conducted 
yield recommendations for use of a limited number of drugs 
for a limited number of specific indications (i.e. sleep onset 
and/or sleep maintenance). In all cases, the recommendations 
are “weak,” in that they are based on relatively limited and 
low quality evidence. The majority of medications included 
in these analyses are FDA-approved drugs for treating insom-
nia. This is not surprising, given that FDA approval rests on 
the demonstration of statistically significant changes in both 
subjective and objective outcomes. Furthermore, FDA ap-
proval is based on standards of significant improvement versus 
placebo for one or more indications (i.e. sleep onset or sleep 
maintenance insomnia). Many agents, including some which 
are not FDA-approved hypnotics, have been shown in one or 
more studies to be “statistically significantly superior” to pla-
cebo for a given outcome(s), but are nonetheless not recom-
mended for treatment of chronic insomnia in this guideline. It 
is important to understand the discrepancy between (1) FDA 
approval and/or demonstration of “statistically significant su-
periority” to placebo and (2) the recommendations included 
in this publication. The discrepancy results from different cri-
teria employed by the FDA and individual studies, on the one 
hand, and the GRADE approach to clinical guidelines, on the 
other. The GRADE approach establishes evidence quality rat-
ings and clinical significance thresholds that are not employed 
in individual research studies and FDA assessment for ap-
proval. The thresholds were determined by clinical judgement 
of the task force and represent best estimates of the degree of 
improvement which the “typical patient” would find signifi-
cant. Although these thresholds are consistent with numerical 
values that have been recommended as thresholds in contem-
porary publications, these standards entail a certain amount 
of subjectivity on the part of the task force, as there are no 
data which suggest absolute standards for clinical significance. 
Without question, there may be divergent opinions regarding 
what constitutes clinical significance and efficacy. Indeed, the 
task force assumed that their recommendations are not abso-
lute indications of the presence or absence of clinical utility of 
a given medication, but reflect their best judgment based on 
the available data. Each prescriber bears the responsibility for 
making treatment determinations with this in mind.
Patient selection and inclusion criteria for studies are vari-
able and may substantially impact results for a given outcome 
(e.g. see Krystal, 2012). Studies not requiring a minimum in-
clusion criterion for a specific outcome (e.g. inclusion thresh-
olds for SL or WASO) may be underpowered to identify 
significant change for that outcome. On the other hand, studies 
with stringent PSG criteria for inclusion may not represent the 
larger population of insomnia patients.
Understanding the Methodology
The recommendations of the task force were developed with 
the use of GRADE, a state-of-the-art methodology for assess-
ment of clinical data. This approach has distinct strengths, as 
well as certain limitations. GRADE is a rigorous, detailed, and 
transparent system for evaluation of the relative strengths of 
evidence for a given intervention. It incorporates several con-
siderations which may impact the quality of evidence for a 
treatment approach. These factors include the heterogeneity of 
 343
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
data (i.e. the degree of inconsistency of results across studies), 
imprecision of the data (i.e. 95% CI which cross the clinical 
significance threshold) and potential publication bias (as a re-
sult of industry sponsorship). Quality of evidence grades for 
randomized clinical trials begin at HIGH and are downgraded 
progressively for heterogeneity, imprecision, and/or potential 
publication bias. Since the vast majority of studies in this field 
are industry sponsored, the quality of evidence for nearly all 
of these studies is, therefore, reduced from HIGH to MODER-
ATE. This is to be expected for clinical trials for many drugs 
(i.e. not only hypnotics), since the vast majority are industry-
sponsored FDA registration studies. The extent to which this 
downgrading of evidence is warranted due to actual publica-
tion bias is unknown, but under the GRADE system we have 
chosen to adopt the conservative approach and assume risk of 
bias. When heterogeneity and imprecision are accounted for, 
the quality of evidence for many treatments considered is LOW 
or VERY LOW. These latter two factors are not uncommon, 
as there is substantial variability in sleep outcome variables 
across studies and confidence intervals frequently overlap the 
clinical thresholds for significance.
Meta-analysis requires specific data (numerical data for a 
given outcome, presented as mean and standard deviation). 
Many studies, particularly older investigations, do not report 
data in the required format. Some newer publications do not 
report data in this format because some sleep variables, par-
ticularly sleep onset latency, are not normally distributed. In 
this case, the preferred measure of central tendency is not the 
mean but the median, the standard deviation may not be a valid 
measure of the degree of dispersion, and the statistical analy-
ses carried out are not based on the mean and standard devia-
tion. The result of this is exclusion of substantial amounts of 
data from the formal meta-analyses. While these studies are 
discussed in the paper and (secondarily) considered in formu-
lation of recommendations, the inability to include such data in 
meta-analysis represents a distinct limitation.
As described in the methodology section, GRADE requires 
a recommendation “for” or “against” use of each treatment. 
When the evidence for efficacy is clear-cut, with (1) relatively 
high quality of evidence; (2) a high degree of confidence that 
benefits clearly outweigh harms; and (3) evidence that the 
effects of treatment are of substantial magnitude, without 
imposition of significant burden to the patient, a “strong” rec-
ommendation is delivered in the form of, “we recommend cli-
nicians use X for the treatment of chronic insomnia.” When 
evidence for benefit is less clear and the quality lower, a 
“weak” recommendation is made in the form of, “We suggest 
that clinicians use (or not use)…” However, it is important for 
clinicians to understand that a recommendation against use, 
particularly when associated with low quality evidence, is not 
equivalent to a demonstration of ineffectiveness. Rather, it 
is often an indication that the available evidence is simply in-
sufficient and fails to provide convincing support in favor of 
usage by GRADE standards. In the case of drugs (most com-
monly older drugs) for which none of the data were reported 
in a format amenable to meta-analysis, we refrain from mak-
ing any recommendation. The specific indications for use of a 
hypnotic employed in this report are limited to “sleep onset” 
and “sleep maintenance.” insomnia. We chose these since, 
from a practical clinical consideration, these are the primary 
complaints with which chronic insomnia patients present, and 
for which clinicians prescribe medication. Moreover, these are 
the subtypes of insomnia that were actually studied in many 
investigations, consistent with FDA approval strategies and the 
matching of drugs to particular types of sleep disturbance.
Hence, some medications may show substantial improve-
ment in TST or sleep quality, yet demonstrate no or insig-
nificant reduction in SL, WASO or NOA to qualify for a 
recommendation in favor of use.
As described, we established thresholds for clinically sig-
nificant improvement for each objective and subjective major 
sleep outcome. Nevertheless, some degree of judgment was in-
troduced in formulating final recommendations. For example, 
a medication may not have exceeded significance thresholds 
for both subjective and objective evidence but, when the to-
tality of evidence (including those investigations which could 
not be included in the meta-analysis) was considered, the 
task force concluded that a reasonable standard had been met. 
These considerations also include the role of adverse effects in 
the decisions made.
Beyond the quality of evidence for or against use of a given 
drug for sleep onset or maintenance insomnia, the task force 
also considered the relative benefit:harm ratio and the likeli-
hood that an informed patient would use a specific agent. To a 
great extent, these decisions are based on clinical judgement. 
With respect to the benefit:harm consideration, the data on ad-
verse events is often limited or non-existent. This may reflect 
the fact that treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) are 
typically not collected using specific assessment forms, but 
rather, rely on spontaneous reporting by research participants. 
In addition, the frequency of some TEAEs is so low that the re-
ported studies are underpowered to find a difference from pla-
cebo. This also implies that the effect size for a TEAE would 
be very small, and hence, it is unlikely that the clinical sig-
nificance of TEAEs has been underestimated. However, some 
TEAEs are very infrequent but very serious when they do oc-
cur (e.g. sleep-related behaviors with BzRA). Clinical trials are 
likely to underestimate such risks due to the limited number 
of patients treated and the limited duration of treatment. As a 
result of these considerations, assessment of potential harms is 
largely derived from clinical experience and theoretical con-
siderations, rather than well-documented evidence. This is 
clearly a limitation of the analysis and further, more systematic 
investigation of adverse effects is necessary.
Prior to formulation of the specific recommendations, the 
task force—based on its clinical judgement and experience—
indicated what medications well-informed patients would or 
would not choose to use. These judgments do not reflect the 
input of actual patients, but only the task force’s judgment. In 
most cases, these judgments were in agreement with recom-
mendations (i.e. an informed patient is likely to use a drug that 
is recommended and not likely to use one that is not). In cer-
tain cases (e.g. melatonin), the task force considered that, given 
widespread use and apparently benign side effect profiles, in-
formed patients may be likely to use a specific drug even when 
data do not clearly support a recommendation for use.
 344
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
Clinical Application
Administration of sleep-promoting medication for chronic 
insomnia is one possible component of what must be a com-
prehensive approach to evaluation and treatment of chronic 
insomnia. This approach must include adequate assessment of 
cause and characteristics of the disorder as well as evaluation 
and treatment of contributing comorbidities. The latter may in-
clude any one or more of numerous medical, neurological and 
mental disorders, as well as other primary sleep disorders.
Numerous investigations have demonstrated that hypnotic 
medications are comparably efficacious to CBT-I during acute 
treatment.11,112,175 However, these studies also make clear that 
the gains associated with CBT-I are durable following comple-
tion of treatment, whereas those associated with medication 
tend to dissipate following discontinuation of the drug. The 
vast majority of investigations which are included in the cur-
rent analysis address relatively short-term use (e.g. one day to 
five weeks). Some studies have shown that long-term treat-
ment with at least newer generation BzRA hypnotics can be 
safe and effective under properly controlled conditions. How-
ever, chronic use should be reserved for those individuals for 
whom CBT is either inaccessible or ineffective, who have been 
appropriately screened for contraindications to such treatment, 
who maintain long-term gains with medication, and who are 
followed regularly. Patient preference must also be considered 
in the determination of treatment approach.
The investigations which are included in this analysis were 
focused on “primary” chronic insomnia, with the exception of 
some older studies (e.g. zaleplon) which included some patients 
with “mild” mental disorders, The extent to which these find-
ings apply to chronic insomnia associated with major comor-
bidities is uncertain, although a limited number of comparative 
studies suggest at least some degree of efficacy in such cases. 
It should also be emphasized that the findings presented in this 
report apply only to adults. None of the agents discussed in this 
report are approved for use in children and none of the find-
ings presented apply to children or adolescents. There is very 
little information concerning pharmacotherapy for childhood 
insomnia. Although independent analyses of efficacy in older 
adults were not conducted, examination of the findings suggests 
comparable efficacy across the adult age range. Pharmacoki-
netic and pharmacodynamic properties of many medications, 
including benzodiazepine receptor agonist drugs, differ among 
older and younger adults, necessitating lower starting dosages. 
The limited information from these studies regarding adverse 
effects in older adults does not allow meaningful conclusions 
about the frequency of such events in older patients compared 
to a younger population. The American Geriatric Society Beers 
criteria recommend that benzodiazepines be avoided for treat-
ment of insomnia in older patients, due to risk of cognitive 
impairment, falls, and motor vehicle accidents. The criteria fur-
ther recommend that newer generation benzodiazepine receptor 
agonists be limited to shorter-term use (< 90 days).
The data on adverse effects derived from these clinical tri-
als, in general, do not suggest a high frequency of serious side 
effects. However, the data are scant and inconsistent, suggest-
ing that caution should be applied in the assessment of rela-
tive risks associated with use of hypnotic medications. Other 
reported adverse effects include—but are not limited to—de-
pendency/withdrawal, cognitive impairment, falls/fractures, 
parasomnias, and driving impairment and motor vehicle ac-
cidents. Epidemiological studies have also suggested a pos-
sible link between hypnotic use and infection, depression and 
overall mortality risk. These complications are observed most 
frequently in older populations, who are among the most fre-
quent users of these drugs. Risks of dependency and serious 
withdrawal complications are of greatest concern with true 
benzodiazepine agents, particularly in the setting of escalat-
ing, long-term usage and insufficient monitoring. However, 
although much concern has understandably been raised about 
potential tolerance and addiction to these drugs, there is lim-
ited information regarding the true incidence of these com-
plications. The risks associated with use of these agents are 
clearly increased not only in the elderly but also when they 
are used in dosages in excess of those recommended, or when 
combined with other psychoactive agents.38 Given the known 
sedative effects of these agents, particularly those with longer 
half-lives, clinicians must be diligent in cautioning patients re-
garding potential complications related to sedation. Such com-
plications are most likely to occur with longer-acting agents 
and during morning hours following bedtime administration. 
Use of shorter-acting agents and the lowest effective dosage 
may help to reduce sedation-related complications. Appropri-
ate patient counseling and careful monitoring will also serve 
to minimize risk. Complete avoidance of these medications 
should also be considered in those who may be particularly 
susceptible to adverse outcomes.
Future Directions
In an attempt to develop meaningful clinical practice recom-
mendations for the use of sleep-promoting medications, it be-
came increasingly clear to the task force that this endeavor is 
fraught with multiple limitations. While existing data (espe-
cially more recent data) provide a reasonable foundation for 
certain recommendations contained in this study, the overall 
quality of evidence is relatively low in the vast majority of 
cases. For numerous drugs, there is simply insufficient evi-
dence available to draw on in determining whether or not a 
compound is efficacious. Data reporting, especially that of 
older studies, is highly variable and idiosyncratic. As a re-
sult, comparing data from one study to another, or conducting 
meta-analyses of data, is not possible. Virtually all studies of 
prescription hypnotic agents are industry-funded. While the 
reasons for this are understandable, the potential for publica-
tion bias, particularly lack of publication of negative results, 
compromises the quality of evidence to a significant degree. 
Moreover, the role of industry in study design and data analysis 
may further compromise uniformity of data reporting.
With these limitations in mind, the task force recommends 
the following for future investigations:
1. Clear definitions of inclusion and exclusion criteria;
2. Adequately powering studies to detect significant 
differences for key sleep variables;
3. Development and utilization of uniform data collection 
instruments which will promote improved cross-study 
analysis and comparisons;
 345
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
4. Standardized statistical analysis and data presentation. 
The majority of newer investigations now present 
means + SD for specific PSG or sleep diary data. For 
those variables that are not normally distributed, a 
transformation can be sought which converts the 
probability distribution to the normal distribution and 
the transformed mean and SD can then be reported. An 
effort to report means and SD data should be made for 
all studies;
5. Although specific numerical data for individual sleep 
are useful in assessing the efficacy of pharmacological 
treatment for insomnia, other approaches to such 
evaluation may be more clinically meaningful. 
Specifically, determination of the efficacy of a drug 
in achieving remission of chronic insomnia disorder 
has been employed in cognitive behavioral treatments 
for insomnia and should be considered as a clinically 
relevant outcome in pharmacological trials. This may 
include not only subjective and objective outcome data 
for major sleep outcomes, but also sleep quality and 
daytime functional outcomes;
6. To the extent possible, encourage funding for 
independent, non-industry investigation of the efficacy 
and effectiveness of hypnotic medications;
7. Data for adverse events associated with hypnotic 
medications are not collected and analyzed in standard 
ways. This is a widespread problem common to studies 
of all types of medications. Continued efforts should 
be made to standardize and systematize the reporting 
of adverse effects data;
8. Daytime sedation, with concomitant risk of motor 
vehicle or occupational accidents, is a significant 
potential risk. Further efforts to include objective 
assessments of performance impairments which may 
be associated with daytime sedation is encouraged;
9. Virtually no data exists regarding the use of sleep-
promoting agents in children. Yet, such medications 
are not infrequently used in this age group. As such, 
studies of the efficacy and safety of sleep-promoting 
medications in children and adolescents should be 
required.
Summary
This analysis is, to the best of our knowledge, the most compre-
hensive assessment of efficacy of individual sleep-promoting 
agents published to date. It relies heavily on rigorous evalua-
tion of the quality of evidence for efficacy, based on GRADE, 
as well as determination of potential adverse effects, to the 
extent possible. It is intended to serve as a useful guide for cli-
nicians in prescribing medications for the treatment of chronic 
insomnia. This analysis, however, also makes it abundantly 
clear that the availability and quality of the data which serve 
as the foundation for such recommendations are sorely lim-
ited. The result is that many commonly used drugs, including 
some which carry FDA approval for treatment of insomnia, are 
not recommended. Further data are required to formulate any 
reasonable conclusion regarding their efficacy or lack thereof. 
As a result, clinicians must continue to exercise sound clinical 
judgment, based not only on these recommendations, but also 
on clinical experience, prior patient response, patient prefer-
ences, and potential adverse effects.
REFERENCES
1. 2005 Adult sleep habits and styles. National Sleep Foundation Web site. 
https://sleepfoundation.org/sites/default/files/2005_summary_of_findings.pdf. 
Published 2005. Accessed June 2016.
2. Kassam A, Patten SB. Hypnotic use in a population-based sample of over 
thirty-five thousand interviewed Canadians. Popul Health Metr. 2006;4:15.
3. Kaufmann CN, Spira AP, Alexander GC, Rutkow L, Mojtabai R. Trends 
in prescribing of sedative-hypnotic medications in the USA: 1993-2010. 
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2016;25(6):637–645.
4. Ohayon MM, Caulet M, Guilleminault C. How a general population 
perceives its sleep and how this relates to the complaint of insomnia. Sleep. 
1997;20(9):715–723.
5. Chesson A, Jr., Hartse K, Anderson WM, et al. Practice parameters for the 
evaluation of chronic insomnia. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine 
report. Standards of Practice Committee of the American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine. Sleep. 2000;23(2):237–241.
6. Sateia MJ, Doghramji K, Hauri PJ, Morin CM. Evaluation of chronic insomnia. 
An American Academy of Sleep Medicine review. Sleep. 2000;23(2):243–308.
7. Schutte-Rodin S, Broch L, Buysse D, Dorsey C, Sateia M. Clinical guideline 
for the evaluation and management of chronic insomnia in adults. J Clin Sleep 
Med. 2008;4(5):487–504.
8. Chesson AL, Jr., Anderson WM, Littner M, et al. Practice parameters for the 
nonpharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia. An American Academy of 
Sleep Medicine report. Standards of Practice Committee of the American 
Academy of Sleep Medicine. Sleep. 1999;22(8):1128–1133.
9. Morgenthaler T, Kramer M, Alessi C, et al. Practice parameters for the 
psychological and behavioral treatment of insomnia: an update. An American 
Academy of Sleep Medicine report. Sleep. 2006;29(11):1415–1419.
10. Morin CM, Bootzin RR, Buysse DJ, Edinger JD, Espie CA, Lichstein KL. 
Psychological and behavioral treatment of insomnia: update of the recent 
evidence (1998-2004). Sleep. 2006;29(11):1398–1414.
11. Morin CM, Colecchi C, Stone J, Sood R, Brink D. Behavioral and 
pharmacological therapies for late-life insomnia: a randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA. 1999;281(11):991–999.
12. Meolie AL, Rosen C, Kristo D, et al. Oral nonprescription treatment for 
insomnia: an evaluation of products with limited evidence. J Clin Sleep Med. 
2005;1(2):173–187.
13. NIH State-of-the-Science Conference Statement on manifestations 
and management of chronic insomnia in adults. NIH Consens State Sci 
Statements. 2005;22(2):1–30.
14. Wilson SJ, Nutt DJ, Alford C, et al. British Association for 
Psychopharmacology consensus statement on evidence-based treatment of 
insomnia, parasomnias and circadian rhythm disorders. J Psychopharmacol. 
2010;24(11):1577–1601.
15. Qaseem A, Kansagara D, Forciea MA, Cooke M, Denberg TD. Management 
of chronic insomnia disorder in adults: a clinical practice guideline from the 
American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2016;165(2):125–133.
16. American Academy of Sleep Medicine. International Classification of Sleep 
Disorders. 3rd ed. Darien, IL: American Academy of Sleep Medicine; 2014.
17. Ellis JG, Perlis ML, Neale LF, Espie CA, Bastien CH. The natural history of 
insomnia: focus on prevalence and incidence of acute insomnia. J Psychiatr 
Res. 2012;46(10):1278–1285.
18. Ohayon MM. Epidemiology of insomnia: what we know and what we still need 
to learn. Sleep Med Rev. 2002;6(2):97–111.
19. Ohayon MM. Observation of the natural evolution of insomnia in the american 
general population cohort. Sleep Med Clin. 2009;4(1):87–92.
20. DiBonaventura M, Richard L, Kumar M, Forsythe A, Flores NM, Moline M. 
The Association between Insomnia and Insomnia Treatment Side Effects on 
Health Status, Work Productivity, and Healthcare Resource Use. PLoS One. 
2015;10(10):e0137117.
 346
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
21. Spira AP, Kaufmann CN, Kasper JD, et al. Association between insomnia 
symptoms and functional status in U.S. older adults. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci 
Soc Sci. 2014;69 Suppl 1:S35–S41.
22. Leigh JP. Employee and job attributes as predictors of absenteeism in a 
national sample of workers: the importance of health and dangerous working 
conditions. Soc Sci Med. 1991;33(2):127–137.
23. Hagg SA, Toren K, Lindberg E. Role of sleep disturbances in occupational 
accidents among women. Scand J Work Environ Health. 2015;41(4):368–376.
24. Laugsand LE, Strand LB, Vatten LJ, Janszky I, Bjorngaard JH. Insomnia 
symptoms and risk for unintentional fatal injuries--the HUNT Study. Sleep. 
2014;37(11):1777–1786.
25. Baglioni C, Battagliese G, Feige B, et al. Insomnia as a predictor of 
depression: a meta-analytic evaluation of longitudinal epidemiological studies. 
J Affect Disord. 2011;135(1-3):10–19.
26. Breslau N, Roth T, Rosenthal L, Andreski P. Sleep disturbance and psychiatric 
disorders: a longitudinal epidemiological study of young adults. Biol Psychiatry. 
1996;39(6):411–418.
27. Fernandez-Mendoza J, Vgontzas AN, Liao D, et al. Insomnia with objective 
short sleep duration and incident hypertension: the Penn State Cohort. 
Hypertension. 2012;60(4):929–935.
28. Bathgate CJ, Edinger JD, Wyatt JK, Krystal AD. Objective but not subjective 
short sleep duration associated with increased risk for hypertension in 
individuals with insomnia. Sleep. 2016;39(5):1037–1045.
29. Daley M, Morin CM, LeBlanc M, Gregoire JP, Savard J. The economic burden 
of insomnia: direct and indirect costs for individuals with insomnia syndrome, 
insomnia symptoms, and good sleepers. Sleep. 2009;32(1):55–64.
30. Ozminkowski RJ, Wang S, Walsh JK. The direct and indirect costs of untreated 
insomnia in adults in the United States. Sleep. 2007;30(3):263–273.
31. Sivertsen B, Lallukka T, Salo P. The economic burden of insomnia 
at the workplace. An opportunity and time for intervention? Sleep. 
2011;34(9):1151–1152.
32. Leger D, Guilleminault C, Bader G, Levy E, Paillard M. Medical and socio-
professional impact of insomnia. Sleep. 2002;25(6):625–629.
33. Kleinman NL, Brook RA, Doan JF, Melkonian AK, Baran RW. Health 
benefit costs and absenteeism due to insomnia from the employer’s 
perspective: a retrospective, case-control, database study. J Clin Psychiatry. 
2009;70(8):1098–1104.
34. Montgomery P, Dennis J. Cognitive behavioural interventions for 
sleep problems in adults aged 60+. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2002;(2):CD003161.
35. Trauer JM, Qian MY, Doyle JS, Rajaratnam SM, Cunnington D. Cognitive 
Behavioral Therapy for Chronic Insomnia: A Systematic Review and Meta-
analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(3):191–204.
36. Wu JQ, Appleman ER, Salazar RD, Ong JC. Cognitive behavioral therapy for 
insomnia comorbid with psychiatric and medical conditions: a meta-analysis. 
JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175(9):1461–1472.
37. Zachariae R, Lyby MS, Ritterband LM, O’Toole MS. Efficacy of internet-
delivered cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia - a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Sleep Med Rev. 2016;30:1–10.
38. Bertisch SM, Herzig SJ, Winkelman JW, Buettner C. National use of 
prescription medications for insomnia: NHANES 1999-2010. Sleep. 
2014;37(2):343–349.
39. Balter MB, Uhlenhuth EH. The beneficial and adverse effects of hypnotics. 
J Clin Psychiatry. 1991;52 Suppl:16–23.
40. Roehrs T, Roth T. ‘Hypnotic’ prescription patterns in a large managed-care 
population. Sleep Med. 2004;5(5):463–466.
41. 2005 Adult Sleep Habits and Styles. National Sleep Foundation Web site. 
https://sleepfoundation.org/sleep-polls-data/sleep-in-america-poll/2005-adult-
sleep-habits-and-styles. Published 2005. Accessed March 2016.
42. Cheung JM, Atternas K, Melchior M, Marshall NS, Fois RA, Saini B. Primary 
health care practitioner perspectives on the management of insomnia: a pilot 
study. Aust J Prim Health. 2014;20(1):103–112.
43. Pawaskar MD, Joish VN, Camacho FT, Rasu RS, Balkrishnan R. The influence 
of co-morbidities on prescribing pharmacotherapy for insomnia: evidence from 
US national outpatient data 1995-2004. J Med Econ. 2008;11(1):41–56.
44. Siriwardena AN, Apekey T, Tilling M, Dyas JV, Middleton H, Orner R. General 
practitioners’ preferences for managing insomnia and opportunities for 
reducing hypnotic prescribing. J Eval Clin Pract. 2010;16(4):731–737.
45. Nowell PD, Mazumdar S, Buysse DJ, Dew MA, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Kupfer 
DJ. Benzodiazepines and zolpidem for chronic insomnia: a meta-analysis of 
treatment efficacy. JAMA. 1997;278(24):2170–2177.
46. Holbrook AM, Crowther R, Lotter A, Cheng C, King D. Meta-
analysis of benzodiazepine use in the treatment of insomnia. CMAJ. 
2000;162(2):225–233.
47. Dundar Y, Dodd S, Strobl J, Boland A, Dickson R, Walley T. Comparative 
efficacy of newer hypnotic drugs for the short-term management of 
insomnia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum Psychopharmacol. 
2004;19(5):305–322.
48. Glass J, Lanctot KL, Herrmann N, Sproule BA, Busto UE. Sedative hypnotics 
in older people with insomnia: meta-analysis of risks and benefits. BMJ. 
2005;331(7526):1169.
49. Buscemi N, Vandermeer B, Friesen C, et al. The efficacy and safety of drug 
treatments for chronic insomnia in adults: a meta-analysis of RCTs. J Gen 
Intern Med. 2007;22(9):1335–1350.
50. Huedo-Medina TB, Kirsch I, Middlemass J, Klonizakis M, Siriwardena AN. 
Effectiveness of non-benzodiazepine hypnotics in treatment of adult insomnia: 
meta-analysis of data submitted to the Food and Drug Administration. BMJ. 
2012;345:e8343.
51. Winkler A, Auer C, Doering BK, Rief W. Drug treatment of primary insomnia: a 
meta-analysis of polysomnographic randomized controlled trials. CNS Drugs. 
2014;28(9):799–816.
52. Wilt TJ, MacDonald R, Brasure M, et al. Pharmacologic treatment of insomnia 
disorder: an evidence report for a clinical practice guideline by the American 
College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2016;165(2):103–112.
53. Morgenthaler TI, Deriy L, Heald JL, Thomas SM. The evolution of the 
AASM clinical practice guidelines: another step forward. J Clin Sleep Med. 
2016;12(1):129–135.
54. Herring WJ, Connor KM, Ivgy-May N, et al. Suvorexant in patients with 
insomnia: results from two 3-month randomized controlled clinical trials. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2016;79(2):136–148.
55. Herring WJ, Snyder E, Budd K, et al. Orexin receptor antagonism for 
treatment of insomnia: a randomized clinical trial of suvorexant. Neurology. 
2012;79(23):2265–2274.
56. Ancoli-Israel S, Krystal AD, McCall WV, et al. A 12-week, randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled study evaluating the effect of eszopiclone 2 mg on 
sleep/wake function in older adults with primary and comorbid insomnia. Sleep. 
2010;33(2):225–234.
57. Erman MK, Zammit G, Rubens R, et al. A polysomnographic placebo-
controlled evaluation of the efficacy and safety of eszopiclone relative to 
placebo and zolpidem in the treatment of primary insomnia. J Clin Sleep Med. 
2008;4(3):229–234.
58. McCall WV, Erman M, Krystal AD, et al. A polysomnography study 
of eszopiclone in elderly patients with insomnia. Curr Med Res Opin. 
2006;22(9):1633–1642.
59. Scharf M, Erman M, Rosenberg R, et al. A 2-week efficacy and safety 
study of eszopiclone in elderly patients with primary insomnia. Sleep. 
2005;28(6):720–727.
60. Uchimura N, Kamijo A, Kuwahara H, et al. A randomized placebo-controlled 
polysomnographic study of eszopiclone in Japanese patients with primary 
insomnia. Sleep Med. 2012;13(10):1247–1253.
61. Zammit GK, McNabb LJ, Caron J, Amato DA, Roth T. Efficacy and safety of 
eszopiclone across 6-weeks of treatment for primary insomnia. Curr Med Res 
Opin. 2004;20(12):1979–1991.
62. Boyle J, Trick L, Johnsen S, Roach J, Rubens R. Next-day cognition, 
psychomotor function, and driving-related skills following nighttime 
administration of eszopiclone. Hum Psychopharmacol. 2008;23(5):385–397.
63. Krystal AD, Walsh JK, Laska E, et al. Sustained efficacy of eszopiclone over 6 
months of nightly treatment: results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study in adults with chronic insomnia. Sleep. 2003;26(7):793–799.
64. Walsh JK, Krystal AD, Amato DA, et al. Nightly treatment of primary insomnia 
with eszopiclone for six months: effect on sleep, quality of life, and work 
limitations. Sleep. 2007;30(8):959–968.
 347
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
65. Soares CN, Joffe H, Rubens R, Caron J, Roth T, Cohen L. Eszopiclone in 
patients with insomnia during perimenopause and early postmenopause: a 
randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. 2006;108(6):1402–1410.
66. Joffe H, Petrillo L, Viguera A, et al. Eszopiclone improves insomnia and 
depressive and anxious symptoms in perimenopausal and postmenopausal 
women with hot flashes: a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled 
crossover trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2010;202(2):171.e1-e171.e111.
67. Hedner J, Yaeche R, Emilien G, Farr I, Salinas E. Zaleplon shortens subjective 
sleep latency and improves subjective sleep quality in elderly patients with 
insomnia. The Zaleplon Clinical Investigator Study Group. Int J Geriatr 
Psychiatry. 2000;15(8):704–712.
68. Walsh JK, Vogel GW, Scharf M, et al. A five week, polysomnographic 
assessment of zaleplon 10 mg for the treatment of primary insomnia. Sleep 
Med. 2000;1(1):41–49.
69. Ancoli-Israel S, Walsh JK, Mangano RM, Fujimori M. Zaleplon, A Novel 
Nonbenzodiazepine Hypnotic, Effectively Treats Insomnia in Elderly Patients 
Without Causing Rebound Effects. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry. 
1999;1(4):114–120.
70. Elie R, Ruther E, Farr I, Emilien G, Salinas E. Sleep latency is shortened 
during 4 weeks of treatment with zaleplon, a novel nonbenzodiazepine 
hypnotic. Zaleplon Clinical Study Group. J Clin Psychiatry. 
1999;60(8):536–544.
71. Fry J, Scharf M, Mangano R, Fujimori M. Zaleplon improves sleep without 
producing rebound effects in outpatients with insomnia. Zaleplon Clinical 
Study Group. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2000;15(3):141–152.
72. Dorsey CM, Lee KA, Scharf MB. Effect of zolpidem on sleep in 
women with perimenopausal and postmenopausal insomnia: a 4-week, 
randomized, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Clin Ther. 
2004;26(10):1578–1586.
73. Herrmann WM, Kubicki ST, Boden S, Eich FX, Attali P, Coquelin JP. Pilot 
controlled double-blind study of the hypnotic effects of zolpidem in patients 
with chronic ‘learned’ insomnia: psychometric and polysomnographic 
evaluation. J Int Med Res. 1993;21(6):306–322.
74. Jacobs GD, Pace-Schott EF, Stickgold R, Otto MW. Cognitive behavior 
therapy and pharmacotherapy for insomnia: a randomized controlled trial and 
direct comparison. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164(17):1888–1896.
75. Perlis ML, McCall WV, Krystal AD, Walsh JK. Long-term, non-nightly 
administration of zolpidem in the treatment of patients with primary insomnia. 
J Clin Psychiatry. 2004;65(8):1128–1137.
76. Randall S, Roehrs TA, Roth T. Efficacy of eight months of nightly zolpidem: a 
prospective placebo-controlled study. Sleep. 2012;35(11):1551–1557.
77. Ware JC, Walsh JK, Scharf MB, Roehrs T, Roth T, Vogel GW. Minimal 
rebound insomnia after treatment with 10-mg zolpidem. Clin Neuropharmacol. 
1997;20(2):116–125.
78. Walsh JK, Erman M, Erwin CW, et al. Subjective hypnotic efficacy 
of trazodone and zolpidem in DSMIII-R primary insomnia. Hum 
Psychopharmacol. 1998;13(3)191–198.
79. Staner L, Ertle S, Boeijinga P, et al. Next-day residual effects of hypnotics 
in DSM-IV primary insomnia: a driving simulator study with simultaneous 
electroencephalogram monitoring. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 
2005;181(4):790–798.
80. Walsh JK, Soubrane C, Roth T. Efficacy and safety of zolpidem extended 
release in elderly primary insomnia patients. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 
2008;16(1):44–57.
81. Roth T, Soubrane C, Titeux L, Walsh JK. Efficacy and safety of zolpidem-MR: 
a double-blind, placebo-controlled study in adults with primary insomnia. 
Sleep Med. 2006;7(5):397–406.
82. Scharf MB, Roth T, Vogel GW, Walsh JK. A multicenter, placebo-controlled 
study evaluating zolpidem in the treatment of chronic insomnia. J Clin 
Psychiatry. 1994;55(5):192–199.
83. Allain H, Arbus L, Schück S, Group ZS. Efficacy and safety of zolpidem 
administered ‘as needed’ in primary insomnia: results of a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study. Clin Drug Investig. 2001;21(6):391–400.
84. Cluydts R, Peeters K, de Bouyalsky I, Lavoisy J. Comparison of continuous 
versus intermittent administration of zolpidem in chronic insomniacs: a double-
blind, randomized pilot study. J Int Med Res. 1998;26(1):13–24.
85. Hajak G, Cluydts R, Declerck A, et al. Continuous versus non-nightly use 
of zolpidem in chronic insomnia: results of a large-scale, double-blind, 
randomized, outpatient study. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2002;17(1):9–17.
86. Krystal AD, Erman M, Zammit GK, Soubrane C, Roth T. Long-term efficacy 
and safety of zolpidem extended-release 12.5 mg, administered 3 to 7 nights 
per week for 24 weeks, in patients with chronic primary insomnia: a 6-month, 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, multicenter 
study. Sleep. 2008;31(1):79–90.
87. Maroo N, Hazra A, Das T. Efficacy and safety of a polyherbal sedative-
hypnotic formulation NSF-3 in primary insomnia in comparison to zolpidem: a 
randomized controlled trial. Indian J Pharmacol. 2013;45(1):34–39.
88. Roth T, Hull SG, Lankford DA, Rosenberg R, Scharf MB. Low-dose sublingual 
zolpidem tartrate is associated with dose-related improvement in sleep 
onset and duration in insomnia characterized by middle-of-the-night (MOTN) 
awakenings. Sleep. 2008;31(9):1277–1284.
89. Roth T, Krystal A, Steinberg FJ, Singh NN, Moline M. Novel sublingual low-
dose zolpidem tablet reduces latency to sleep onset following spontaneous 
middle-of-the-night awakening in insomnia in a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, outpatient study. Sleep. 2013;36(2):189–196.
90. Staner C, Joly F, Jacquot N, et al. Sublingual zolpidem in early onset of sleep 
compared to oral zolpidem: polysomnographic study in patients with primary 
insomnia. Curr Med Res Opin. 2010;26(6):1423–1431.
91. Tu JH, Chung WC, Yang CY, Tzeng DS. A comparison between acupuncture 
versus zolpidem in the treatment of primary insomnia. Asian J Psychiatr. 
2012;5(3):231–235.
92. Voshaar RC, van Balkom AJ, Zitman FG. Zolpidem is not superior to 
temazepam with respect to rebound insomnia: a controlled study. Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2004;14(4):301–306.
93. Walsh JK. Zolpidem “as needed” for the treatment of primary insomnia: a 
double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Sleep Med Rev. 2002;6 Suppl 1:S7–
S10; discussion S10–S11, S31–S33.
94. Walsh JK, Roth T, Randazzo A, et al. Eight weeks of non-nightly use of 
zolpidem for primary insomnia. Sleep. 2000;23(8):1087–1096.
95. Zammit GK, Corser B, Doghramji K, et al. Sleep and residual sedation after 
administration of zaleplon, zolpidem, and placebo during experimental middle-
of-the-night awakening. J Clin Sleep Med. 2006;2(4):417–423.
96. Roehrs T, Bonahoom A, Pedrosi B, Rosenthal L, Roth T. Treatment 
regimen and hypnotic self-administration. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 
2001;155(1):11–17.
97. Elie R, Frenay M, Le Morvan P, Bourgouin J. Efficacy and safety of 
zopiclone and triazolam in the treatment of geriatric insomniacs. Int Clin 
Psychopharmacol. 1990;5 Suppl 2:39–46.
98. Reeves RL. Comparison of triazolam, flurazepam, and placebo as hypnotics in 
geriatric patients with insomnia. J Clin Pharmacol. 1977;17(5-6):319–323.
99. Autret E, Maillard F, Autret A. Comparison of the clinical hypnotic effects of 
zopiclone and triazolam. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 1987;31(5):621–623.
100. Bowen AJ. Comparative efficacy of triazolam, flurazepam and placebo in out-
patients insomniacs. J Int Med Res. 1978;6(4):337–342.
101. Fabre LF, Jr., Gross L, Pasigajen V, Metzler C. Multiclinic double-blind 
comparison of triazolam and flurazepam for seven nights in outpatients with 
insomnia. J Clin Pharmacol. 1977;17(7):402–409.
102. Fleming JA, McClure DJ, Mayes C, Phillips R, Bourgouin J. A comparison of 
the efficacy, safety and withdrawal effects of zopiclone and triazolam in the 
treatment of insomnia. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 1990;5 Suppl 2:29–37.
103. Greenblatt DJ, Harmatz JS, Zinny MA, Shader RI. Effect of gradual withdrawal 
on the rebound sleep disorder after discontinuation of triazolam. N Engl J Med. 
1987;317(12):722–728.
104. Hajak G, Clarenbach P, Fischer W, Haase W, Ruther E. Zopiclone improves 
sleep quality and daytime well-being in insomniac patients: comparison 
with triazolam, flunitrazepam and placebo. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 
1994;9(4):251–261.
105. Leibowitz M, Sunshine A. Long-term hypnotic efficacy and safety of triazolam 
and flurazepam. J Clin Pharmacol. 1978;18(5-6):302–309.
106. Monti JM, Attali P, Monti D, Zipfel A, de la Giclais B, Morselli PL. Zolpidem 
and rebound insomnia--a double-blind, controlled polysomnographic study in 
chronic insomniac patients. Pharmacopsychiatry. 1994;27(4):166–175.
 348
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
107. Rickels K, Gingrich RL, Jr., Morris RJ, et al. Triazolam in insomniac family 
practice patients. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1975;18(3):315–324.
108. Scharf MB. Feasibility of an every-other-night regimen in insomniac patients: 
subjective hypnotic effectiveness of quazepam, triazolam, and placebo. J Clin 
Psychiatry. 1993;54(1):33–38.
109. Sunshine A. Comparison of the hypnotic activity of triazolam, flurazepam 
hydrochloride, and placebo. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1975;17(5):573–577.
110. Glass JR, Sproule BA, Herrmann N, Busto UE. Effects of 2-week treatment 
with temazepam and diphenhydramine in elderly insomniacs: a randomized, 
placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;28(2):182–188.
111. Hindmarch I. Effects of hypnotic and sleep-inducing drugs on objective 
assessments of human psychomotor performance and subjective appraisals of 
sleep and early morning behaviour. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1979;8(1):43S–46S.
112. Wu R, Bao J, Zhang C, Deng J, Long C. Comparison of sleep condition 
and sleep-related psychological activity after cognitive-behavior and 
pharmacological therapy for chronic insomnia. Psychother Psychosom. 
2006;75(4):220–228.
113. Cuanang JR, Limos L. Treatment of insomnia with temazepam: double-blind, 
placebo-controlled evaluation. Clin Ther. 1982;4(5):402–412.
114. Fillingim JM. Double-blind evaluation of the efficacy and safety of temazepam 
in outpatients with insomnia. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1979;8(1):73S–77S.
115. Heffron WA, Roth P. Double-blind evaluation of the safety and hypnotic 
efficacy of temazepam in insomniac outpatients. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 
1979;8(1):69S–72S.
116. Tuk B, Oberye JJ, Pieters MS, et al. Pharmacodynamics of temazepam 
in primary insomnia: assessment of the value of quantitative 
electroencephalography and saccadic eye movements in predicting 
improvement of sleep. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1997;62(4):444–452.
117. Wilson SJ, Rich AS, Rich NC, Potokar J, Nutt DJ. Evaluation of actigraphy and 
automated telephoned questionnaires to assess hypnotic effects in insomnia. 
Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2004;19(2):77–84.
118. Kohsaka M, Kanemura T, Taniguchi M, et al. Efficacy and tolerability 
of ramelteon in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study in 
Japanese patients with chronic primary insomnia. Expert Rev Neurother. 
2011;11(10):1389–1397.
119. Mayer G, Wang-Weigand S, Roth-Schechter B, Lehmann R, Staner C, 
Partinen M. Efficacy and safety of 6-month nightly ramelteon administration in 
adults with chronic primary insomnia. Sleep. 2009;32(3):351–360.
120. Roth T, Seiden D, Wang-Weigand S, Zhang J. A 2-night, 3-period, crossover 
study of ramelteon’s efficacy and safety in older adults with chronic insomnia. 
Curr Med Res Opin. 2007;23(5):1005–1014.
121. Zammit G, Erman M, Wang-Weigand S, Sainati S, Zhang J, Roth T. Evaluation 
of the efficacy and safety of ramelteon in subjects with chronic insomnia. 
J Clin Sleep Med. 2007;3(5):495–504.
122. Erman M, Seiden D, Zammit G, Sainati S, Zhang J. An efficacy, safety, and 
dose-response study of Ramelteon in patients with chronic primary insomnia. 
Sleep Med. 2006;7(1):17–24.
123. Mini L, Wang-Weigand S, Zhang J. Ramelteon 8 mg/d versus placebo in 
patients with chronic insomnia: post hoc analysis of a 5-week trial using 50% 
or greater reduction in latency to persistent sleep as a measure of treatment 
effect. Clin Ther. 2008;30(7):1316–1323.
124. Mini LJ, Wang-Weigand S, Zhang J. Self-reported efficacy and tolerability of 
ramelteon 8 mg in older adults experiencing severe sleep-onset difficulty. Am 
J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2007;5(3):177–184.
125. Roth T, Seiden D, Sainati S, Wang-Weigand S, Zhang J, Zee P. Effects of 
ramelteon on patient-reported sleep latency in older adults with chronic 
insomnia. Sleep Med. 2006;7(4):312–318.
126. Wang-Weigand S, Watissee M, Roth T. Use of a post-sleep questionnaire-
interactive voice response system (PSQ-IVRS) to evaluate the subjective 
sleep effects of ramelteon in adults with chronic insomnia. Sleep Med. 
2011;12(9):920–923.
127. Krystal AD, Durrence HH, Scharf M, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Doxepin 1 
mg and 3 mg in a 12-week Sleep Laboratory and Outpatient Trial of Elderly 
Subjects with Chronic Primary Insomnia. Sleep. 2010;33(11):1553–1561.
128. Krystal AD, Lankford A, Durrence HH, et al. Efficacy and safety of doxepin 
3 and 6 mg in a 35-day sleep laboratory trial in adults with chronic primary 
insomnia. Sleep. 2011;34(10):1433–1442.
129. Roth T, Rogowski R, Hull S, et al. Efficacy and safety of doxepin 1 mg, 3 mg, 
and 6 mg in adults with primary insomnia. Sleep. 2007;30(11):1555–1561.
130. Scharf M, Rogowski R, Hull S, et al. Efficacy and safety of doxepin 1 mg, 
3 mg, and 6 mg in elderly patients with primary insomnia: a randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover study. J Clin Psychiatry. 
2008;69(10):1557–1564.
131. Lankford A, Rogowski R, Essink B, Ludington E, Heith Durrence H, Roth T. 
Efficacy and safety of doxepin 6 mg in a four-week outpatient trial of elderly 
adults with chronic primary insomnia. Sleep Med. 2012;13(2):133–138.
132. Hajak G, Rodenbeck A, Voderholzer U, et al. Doxepin in the treatment of 
primary insomnia: a placebo-controlled, double-blind, polysomnographic study. 
J Clin Psychiatry. 2001;62(6):453–463.
133. Roth T, Wright KP, Jr., Walsh J. Effect of tiagabine on sleep in elderly subjects 
with primary insomnia: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. 
Sleep. 2006;29(3):335–341.
134. Walsh JK, Perlis M, Rosenthal M, Krystal A, Jiang J, Roth T. Tiagabine 
increases slow-wave sleep in a dose-dependent fashion without affecting 
traditional efficacy measures in adults with primary insomnia. J Clin Sleep 
Med. 2006;2(1):35–41.
135. Walsh JK, Zammit G, Schweitzer PK, Ondrasik J, Roth T. Tiagabine enhances 
slow wave sleep and sleep maintenance in primary insomnia. Sleep Med. 
2006;7(2):155–161.
136. Morin CM, Koetter U, Bastien C, Ware JC, Wooten V. Valerian-hops 
combination and diphenhydramine for treating insomnia: a randomized 
placebo-controlled clinical trial. Sleep. 2005;28(11):1465–1471.
137. Rickels K, Morris RJ, Newman H, Rosenfeld H, Schiller H, Weinstock R. 
Diphenhydramine in insomniac family practice patients: a double-blind study. 
J Clin Pharmacol. 1983;23(5-6):234–242.
138. Lemoine P, Nir T, Laudon M, Zisapel N. Prolonged-release melatonin improves 
sleep quality and morning alertness in insomnia patients aged 55 years and 
older and has no withdrawal effects. J Sleep Res. 2007;16(4):372–380.
139. Luthringer R, Muzet M, Zisapel N, Staner L. The effect of prolonged-release 
melatonin on sleep measures and psychomotor performance in elderly 
patients with insomnia. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2009;24(5):239–249.
140. Wade AG, Ford I, Crawford G, et al. Efficacy of prolonged release melatonin in 
insomnia patients aged 55-80 years: quality of sleep and next-day alertness 
outcomes. Curr Med Res Opin. 2007;23(10):2597–2605.
141. Baskett JJ, Broad JB, Wood PC, et al. Does melatonin improve sleep in older 
people? A randomised crossover trial. Age Ageing. 2003;32(2):164–170.
142. Garzon C, Guerrero JM, Aramburu O, Guzman T. Effect of melatonin 
administration on sleep, behavioral disorders and hypnotic drug 
discontinuation in the elderly: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
study. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2009;21(1):38–42.
143. Haimov I, Lavie P, Laudon M, Herer P, Vigder C, Zisapel N. Melatonin 
replacement therapy of elderly insomniacs. Sleep. 1995;18(7):598–603.
144. Rondanelli M, Opizzi A, Monteferrario F, Antoniello N, Manni R, Klersy C. The 
effect of melatonin, magnesium, and zinc on primary insomnia in long-term 
care facility residents in Italy: a double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. 
J Am Geriatr Soc. 2011;59(1):82–90.
145. Wade AG, Crawford G, Ford I, et al. Prolonged release melatonin in the 
treatment of primary insomnia: evaluation of the age cut-off for short- and 
long-term response. Curr Med Res Opin. 2011;27(1):87–98.
146. Wade AG, Ford I, Crawford G, et al. Nightly treatment of primary insomnia with 
prolonged release melatonin for 6 months: a randomized placebo controlled 
trial on age and endogenous melatonin as predictors of efficacy and safety. 
BMC Med. 2010;8:51.
147. Zhdanova IV, Wurtman RJ, Regan MM, Taylor JA, Shi JP, Leclair OU. 
Melatonin treatment for age-related insomnia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2001;86(10):4727–4730.
148. Hudson C, Hudson SP, Hecht T, MacKenzie J. Protein source tryptophan 
versus pharmaceutical grade tryptophan as an efficacious treatment for 
chronic insomnia. Nutr Neurosci. 2005;8(2):121–127.
149. Hartmann E, Lindsley JG, Spinweber C. Chronic insomnia: effects of 
tryptophan, flurazepam, secobarbital, and placebo. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl). 1983;80(2):138–142.
 349
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2017
MJ Sateia, DJ Buysse, AD Krystal, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Insomnia
150. Spinweber CL. L-tryptophan administered to chronic sleep-onset insomniacs: 
late-appearing reduction of sleep latency. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 
1986;90(2):151–155.
151. Oxman AD, Flottorp S, Havelsrud K, et al. A televised, web-based randomised 
trial of an herbal remedy (valerian) for insomnia. PLoS One. 2007;2(10):e1040.
152. Cohn JB, Wilcox CS, Bremner J, Ettinger M. Hypnotic efficacy of estazolam 
compared with flurazepam in outpatients with insomnia. J Clin Pharmacol. 
1991;31(8):747–750.
153. Dominguez RA, Goldstein BJ, Jacobson AF, Steinbook RM. Comparative 
efficacy of estazolam, flurazepam, and placebo in outpatients with insomnia. 
J Clin Psychiatry. 1986;47(7):362–365.
154. Scharf MB, Roth PB, Dominguez RA, Ware JC. Estazolam and flurazepam: a 
multicenter, placebo-controlled comparative study in outpatients with insomnia. 
J Clin Pharmacol. 1990;30(5):461–467.
155. Aden GC, Thatcher C. Quazepam in the short-term treatment of insomnia in 
outpatients. J Clin Psychiatry. 1983;44(12):454–456.
156. Hernandez Lara R, Del Rosal PL, Ponce MC. Short-term study of quazepam 
15 milligrams in the treatment of insomnia. J Int Med Res. 1983;11(3):162–166.
157. Martinez HT, Serna CT. Short-term treatment with quazepam of insomnia in 
geriatric patients. Clin Ther. 1982;5(2):174–178.
158. Mendels J, Stern S. Evaluation of the short-term treatment of insomnia in out-
patients with 15 milligrams of quazepam. J Int Med Res. 1983;11(3):155–161.
159. O’Hair DE, Winsauer HJ. Evaluation of short-term treatment with 30 mg of 
quazepam in insomniac outpatients. Clin Ther. 1981;4(4):291–301.
160. Roth TG, Roehrs TA, Koshorek GL, Greenblatt DJ, Rosenthal LD. 
Hypnotic effects of low doses of quazepam in older insomniacs. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol. 1997;17(5):401–406.
161. Elie R, Caille G, Levasseur FA, Gareau J. Comparative hypnotic activity 
of single doses of loprazolam, flurazepam, and placebo. J Clin Pharmacol. 
1983;23(1):32–36.
162. Elie R, Lavoie G, Bourgouin J, Le Morvan P. Zopiclone versus flurazepam in 
insomnia: prolonged administration and withdrawal. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 
1990;5(4):279–286.
163. Kripke DF, Hauri P, Ancoli-Israel S, Roth T. Sleep evaluation in chronic 
insomniacs during 14-day use of flurazepam and midazolam. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol. 1990;10(4 Suppl):32S–43S.
164. Mamelak M, Buck L, Csima A, Price V, Smiley A. Effects of flurazepam 
and zopiclone on the performance of chronic insomniac patients: a study of 
ethanol-drug interaction. Sleep. 1987;10 Suppl 1:79–87.
165. Mamelak M, Csima A, Buck L, Price V. A comparative study on the effects 
of brotizolam and flurazepam on sleep and performance in the elderly. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol. 1989;9(4):260–267.
166. Melo de Paula AJ. Comparative study of lormetazepam and flurazepam in the 
treatment of insomnia. Clin Ther. 1984;6(4):500–508.
167. Salkind MR, Silverstone T. A clinical and psychometric evaluation of 
flurazepam. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1975;2(3):223–226.
168. Gotestam KG, Oppoyen F, Berntzen D. Treatment of insomnia with two 
benzodiazepines: a double-blind crossover study. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 
1991;41(2):137–140.
169. Tassniyom K, Paholpak S, Tassniyom S, Kiewyoo J. Quetiapine for primary 
insomnia: a double blind, randomized controlled trial. J Med Assoc Thai. 
2010;93(6):729–734.
170. Lo HS, Yang CM, Lo HG, Lee CY, Ting H, Tzang BS. Treatment effects of 
gabapentin for primary insomnia. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2010;33(2):84–90.
171. Nowell PD, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Buysse DJ, Dew MA, Kupfer DJ. 
Paroxetine in the treatment of primary insomnia: preliminary clinical and 
electroencephalogram sleep data. J Clin Psychiatry. 1999;60(2):89–95.
172. Reynolds CF, 3rd, Buysse DJ, Miller MD, Pollock BG, Hall M, Mazumdar 
S. Paroxetine treatment of primary insomnia in older adults. Am J Geriatr 
Psychiatry. 2006;14(9):803–807.
173. Hohagen F, Montero RF, Weiss E, et al. Treatment of primary insomnia with 
trimipramine: an alternative to benzodiazepine hypnotics? Eur Arch Psychiatry 
Clin Neurosci. 1994;244(2):65–72.
174. Riemann D, Voderholzer U, Cohrs S, et al. Trimipramine in primary 
insomnia: results of a polysomnographic double-blind controlled study. 
Pharmacopsychiatry. 2002;35(5):165–174.
175. Smith MT, Perlis ML, Park A, et al. Comparative meta-analysis of 
pharmacotherapy and behavior therapy for persistent insomnia. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2002;159(1):5–11.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The task force thanks and acknowledges the contributions of Karl Doghramji, MD, 
who served as a critical reviewer of this guideline.
SUBMISSION & CORRESPONDENCE INFORMATION
Submitted for publication September, 2016
Submitted in final revised form September, 2016
Accepted for publication September, 2016
Address correspondence to: Michael J. Sateia, MD, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH 03755; Tel: (603) 650-7534; Fax: (603) 650-7820; Email: 
research@aasmnet.org
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The development of this clinical practice guideline was funded by the American 
Academy of Sleep Medicine. Dr. Neubauer is a member of the Board of Directors for 
the National Sleep Foundation; and he has been a consultant for Purdue Pharama. 
Dr. Krystal serves on a scientific advisory board for Merck, and therefore did not 
participate in the development of the suvorexant recommendation; he has received 
research support from the NIH, TEVA and Sunovion; and he has been a consultant 
for Flamel, Atentiv, Ostuka, Neurocrine, Lundbeck, Pernix, Janssen, Jazz and 
Merck. Dr. Buysse has been a consultant for Cereve, Inc, Emmi Solutions, Philips 
Respironics, BeHealth; he has received research support from the NIH; and he owns 
intellectual property rights in the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI). Mr. Heald 
is employed by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. The other authors have 
indicated no financial conflicts of interest.
