 Parental Influence on Eating Behavior:
Conception to Adolescence
Jennifer S. Savage, Jennifer Orlet Fisher, and Leann L. Birch
is a research assistant in the Center for Childhood Obesity Research at the Pennsylvania State University.
Jennifer Orlet Fisher, Ph.D., is Assistant Professor of Pediatrics at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston,
Texas, and is also a research scientist at the U.S.D.A. Children's Nutrition Research Center where her research
focuses on modifiable aspects of food intake regulation in early development. Leann Birch, Ph.D., is
Distinguished Professor of Human Development and Nutritional Sciences at the Pennsylvania State University
and director of the Center for Childhood Obesity Research.
Introduction
Eating behaviors evolve during the first years of life as biological and behavioral processes
directed towards meeting requirements for health and growth. For the vast majority of human
history, food scarcity has constituted a major threat to survival, and human eating behavior and
child feeding practices have evolved in response to this threat. Because infants are born into a
wide variety of cultures and cuisines, they come equipped as young omnivores with a set of
behavioral predispositions that allow them to learn to accept the foods made available to them.
During historical conditions of scarcity, family life and resources were devoted to the
procurement and preparation of foods, which are often low in energy, nutrients, and
palatability. In sharp contrast, today in non-Third World countries children's eating habits
develop under unprecedented conditions of dietary abundance, where palatable, inexpensive,
ready-to-eat foods are readily available.
In this review, we describe factors shaping the development of children's food preferences and
eating behaviors during the first years of life, in order to provide insight into how growing up
in current conditions of dietary abundance can promote patterns of food intake which contribute
to accelerated weight gain and overweight. In particular, we focus on describing children's
predispositions and parents' child feeding practices. We will see that the feeding practices that
evolved across human history as effective parental responses to the threat of food scarcity, can,
when combined with infants' unlearned preferences and predispositions, actually promote
overeating and overweight in our current eating environments. In addition to the relatively
recent changes in our eating environments, concurrent reductions in opportunities for physical
activity undoubtedly also contribute to positive energy balance and obesity, but are outside the
scope of this article.
The first five years of life are a time of rapid physical growth and change, and are the years
when eating behaviors that can serve as a foundation for future eating patterns develop. During
these early years, children are learning what, when, and how much to eat based on the
transmission of cultural and familial beliefs, attitudes, and practices surrounding food and
eating. Throughout, we focus on the vital role parents and caregivers play in structuring
children's early experiences with food and eating, and describe how these experiences are
linked to children's eating behavior and their weight status.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
Published in final edited form as:
J Law Med Ethics. 2007 ; 35(1): 22–34. doi:10.1111/j.1748-720X.2007.00111.x.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 The Current Eating Environment
These days, food and drink are available in most venues of everyday life. As of 2002, there
were 514,085 food-service establishments in the United States and an additional 152,582 stores
where food and beverages could be purchased.1 In addition, a growing variety of inexpensive
and energy-dense foods have become available in increasingly larger portions. A typical
American supermarket carries 45,000 items2 and consumer portions served by restaurants and
fast-food establishments are often double the size of current recommended USDA serving size.
3
In most families, women still have primary responsibility for feeding children.4 Changes in
employment patterns and family structure, however, leave women with less time to devote to
this activity. From 1975 to 2004, labor force participation among mothers with children under
eighteen years of age increased from forty-seven to seventy-one percent.5 Moreover, both
parents work in sixty-one percent of two-parent families with children under eighteen years of
age.6 Among single mothers, seventy-two percent are employed. Additionally, more women
than men parent and feed their children without the assistance of a spouse: twenty-three percent
of children under eighteen years of age live with their mother only.7
One consequence of these trends is that young children are routinely fed by someone other
than a parent. In fact, thirty-one percent of preschool-age children receive out-of-home
childcare which includes mealtime care from a grandparent or other relative, and forty-one
percent participate in organized childcare.8 In addition, families spend less time eating meals
together. Only fifty-five percent of married parents and forty-seven percent of single parents
eat breakfast daily with their preschool-age child.9 Finally, an increasing proportion of food
that children eat is prepared and consumed away from home.10 About forty percent of family
food dollars are now spent on food away from the home.11 In these contexts children may be
served particularly large portions12 and consume more energy and fat than when eating at
home.13 Collectively, these trends suggest that today's young children spend less time eating
at the family table and have routine exposure to large portions of palatable, energy dense foods
than in previous generations.
Early Taste and Experience with Food Flavors in Amniotic Fluid
A growing body of evidence suggests that the food choices a mother makes during her
pregnancy may set the stage for an infant's later acceptance of solid foods. Amniotic fluid
surrounds the fetus, maintaining fetal temperature, and is a rich source of sensory exposure for
infants. Many flavors in the maternal diet appear to be present in amniotic fluid. Adult sensory
panels have detected odors and compounds of garlic,14 cumin, and curry15 in the amniotic
fluid of pregnant women ingesting oil of garlic capsules and spicy foods, respectively. Because
taste and smell are already functional during fetal life, and because the fetus regularly swallows
amniotic fluid, the first experiences with flavor occur prior to birth. Exposure to these
“transmittable” flavors influences the acceptance of these flavors by the infant postnatally.
16 Julie Mennella and colleagues examined the influence of repeated prenatal exposure to
carrot juice and found that women who consumed carrot juice for three consecutive weeks
during their third trimester of pregnancy had infants who exhibited fewer negative facial
expressions when first introduced to carrot-flavored cereal as compared to plain cereal.17
These findings reveal that experience with dietary flavors begins as the fetus is exposed to
flavors from the maternal diet in utero, and that this early experience can provide a “flavor
bridge” that can begin to familiarize the infant with flavors of the maternal diet. As we will
see, familiarity plays a key role in the acquisition of food and flavor preferences.
Savage et al.
Page 2
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 The Impact of Breast Milk Feeding
Breastfeeding is recommended as the optimal feeding method for the first six months of life,
followed by the introduction of solids and continued breastfeeding for a minimum of one year.
18 These recommendations are largely based on evidence that breast milk supports normal
growth and also has immunological properties that provide some early protection from
infection, and is associated with creating a lower risk of infant morbidity and mortality.19 A
growing body of literature also suggests that breastfeeding affords a small, yet consistent,
protective effect against obesity. Specifically, Christopher Owen and colleagues conducted a
systematic review of sixty-one studies, of which twenty-eight provided odds ratios to examine
the influence of breastfeeding on obesity from infancy to adulthood. They found that
breastfeeding was associated with a reduced risk of obesity among infants, young children,
older children, and adults with an unadjusted odds ratio of 0.50, 0.90, 0.66 and 0.80,
respectively.20 Moreover, Stephan Arenz and colleagues reviewed twenty-eight studies
investigating the association between breastfeeding and childhood obesity that met the
following inclusion criteria: relative risk had to be reported, age at last follow-up had to be
between five and eighteen years, feeding mode had to be reported, and obesity had to be defined
using BMI. Of these twenty-eight studies, nine studies comprising more than 69,000 children
were eligible for the meta-analysis. They found a significant adjusted odds ratio (AOR) for
“ever breastfed” of 0.78, 95% CI (0.71-0.85) in the fixed model.21 These odds ratios, which
are significantly lower than 1.0, indicate a significantly lower risk for subsequent obesity
among those who were breastfed, even when adjusting for other factors.
In one review of twenty-two high quality studies, fifteen found protective effects to be more
consistently noted among school-aged children and adolescents than among younger children.
22 One possible explanation is that the impact of breastfeeding on subsequent weight status
may be an example of metabolic or behavioral programming, in which the impact of
breastfeeding on weight status only emerges later in development, and in this case, may not be
clearly manifested until adolescence or adulthood. However, at this point, the mechanism(s)
by which breastfeeding exerts protective effects are not understood. Specifically, breastfeeding
is the ideal feeding method for the human infant and influences the developing anatomy and
physiology of the gastrointestinal tract in ways that differ from formula feeding, such that
breast-fed and formula-fed individuals may differ in the absorption and utilization of nutrients
later in life.23 In addition, there is some evidence for two complementary behavioral
mechanisms that may explain the protective effects of breastfeeding. The first involves the
effects of breastfeeding on food acceptance and the second involves the developing controls
of energy intake.
The sensory properties of breast milk may facilitate the transition to the modified adult diet.
Many flavors of the maternal diet appear in breast milk. For example, adult sensory panels can
detect odors of garlic,24 alcohol,25 and vanilla26 in milk samples of lactating women who
ingested those flavors prior to providing milk samples. Flavors in human milk influence infant
consumption. For example, breast milk flavored with garlic27 and vanilla28 increased infant
sucking time at the breast compared to breast milk without garlic or vanilla flavor. Mennella
and colleagues also tested the hypothesis that experience with flavor in breast milk modifies
the infants' acceptance and enjoyment of those foods in a sample of forty-five mothers and
their babies that were randomly assigned to one of three groups. The first group drank carrot
juice during pregnancy and water during lactation; group two drank water during pregnancy
and carrot juice during lactation, and the control drank water during both conditions.29 Results
revealed that repeated postnatal exposure to carrot flavors increased acceptance and enjoyment
of carrot flavor in infant cereal. These findings indicate that flavors in breast milk, which vary
with the maternal diet, provide the infant with a changing flavor environment. This early flavor
experience appears to facilitate the infant's acceptance of foods of the modified adult diet,
Savage et al.
Page 3
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 especially those foods consumed by the mother during lactation.30 In contrast to the varied
flavor experience provided by breastmilk, formula provides the infant with the same consistent
flavor experience.
There is limited evidence that these early differences in flavor experience provided by the
breast and formula feeding also influence infants' subsequent acceptance of solid foods,
especially those foods that might not otherwise be readily accepted, such as vegetables. For
example, Susan Sullivan and Leann Birch conducted a short term longitudinal study of nineteen
breastfed and seventeen exclusively formula fed four- to six-month-old infants and their
mothers to examine the influence of milk feeding regimen and repeated exposure on acceptance
of their first pureed vegetable. Participants were randomly assigned to be repeatedly fed one
vegetable, either pureed peas or green beans. Results revealed infant feeding regimen
moderated the effects of repeated exposure; the initial intake of vegetables did not differ
between breastfed and formula-fed infants, but breastfed infants increased their intake more
rapidly over days than formula fed infants, and continued to consume significantly more
vegetables after ten exposures.31 These findings are consistent with the view that breastfeeding
can more easily facilitate the acceptance of solid foods compared to formula feeding.
A second hypothesis regarding the protective effect of breastfeeding on later risk of overweight
is that breastfeeding provides the infant with greater opportunity for self-regulation of intake.
A limited body of evidence suggests that infants have some ability to self-regulate caloric intake
by adjusting the volume of milk consumed,32 although this can be influenced by maternal
feeding practices. In bottle feeding, the infant can obtain milk with less effort than from the
breast, so the formula-fed infant is more passive in the feeding process and has fewer
opportunities to control the amount consumed, making it easy to over-feed the infant. In
contrast, the breastfed infant must take an active role in order to transfer milk from the breast.
The higher levels of maternal control that are possible with bottle feeding reduce infants'
opportunities to control the amount consumed at a feeding.33 Limited evidence indicates that
bottle-fed infants consume more milk and gain weight more rapidly than breastfed infants,
increasing their risk for childhood obesity.34 Moreover, research suggests the difference in
milk intake between breastfed and formula-fed infants becomes greater with age.35 In short,
while evidence is limited, breast feeding and formula feeding provide very different
opportunities for early self-regulation of energy intake, and additional research is needed to
assess how these differing feeding methods influence the developing controls of energy intake,
weight gain, and risk for childhood obesity.
Whether and how infants exert control during feeding to regulate energy intake are not new
questions. Clara Davis conducted seminal research in the late 1920s and 1930s, providing the
first evidence of an unlearned ability to self-regulate energy intake in infancy. In Davis' studies,
infants and toddlers grew well and had few illnesses when given the opportunity to select and
consume a variety of simply prepared foods at each meal.36 As previously mentioned, Samuel
Fomon and colleagues revisited the issue of self-regulation of energy intake by systematically
varying the energy density of infant formula.37 By six weeks of age, full-term infants who
were fed a concentrated formula (100 kcal/mL) consumed smaller volumes than did those
infants who were fed a diluted formula (54 kcal/mL), such that total daily energy intake did
not differ between the two groups. In 1977, observational data from Sharon Pearcey and John
De Castro complemented these experimental findings, revealing that individual variability in
energy consumed at meals among twelve-month-old infants was close to forty-seven percent,
while variability in daily energy intake was seventeen percent.38 Similarly, Roberta Cohen
and colleagues39 found no difference in daily energy intake among infants four to six months
of age who were fed only breast milk versus those who were fed breast milk along with
complementary foods, suggesting that infants were adjusting their intake of breast milk in
response to the addition of solid foods.
Savage et al.
Page 4
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 The ability to regulate energy intake has also been described in preschool-age children.
Children responded to covert manipulations in the energy content of foods served as first
courses by adjusting their subsequent intake, such that their total energy intake for the meal
and energy consumed over a thirty-hour period40 was maintained across conditions in which
low- or high-energy foods were provided as a first course. Differences among preschool-age
children in their ability to self-regulate energy intake have been associated with differences in
weight status. For example, Susan Johnson and Leann Birch examined the influence of weight
status on regulation of energy intake in seventy-seven three- to five-year-old children. Each
child participated in two treatments, differing only in whether children received a low- or high-
calorie preload of fruit flavored drinks of equal volume before lunch. After twenty minutes,
children self-selected intake from a familiar lunch menus (i.e., turkey hot dogs, American
cheese, unsweetened applesauce, carrot sticks, fruit bars, and 2% milk) to assess their ability
to adjust food intake in response to changes in energy density of the preload drinks. They found
that children who showed little evidence of adjusting their lunch intake in response to the energy
differences in the preloads were significantly heavier.41 Leann Birch and Jennifer Fisher used
a similar protocol to investigate the association between weight status and children's caloric
compensation in a sample of 197 non-Hispanic white five-year-old girls. Data were used from
two separate lunches which differed in whether a low- or high-energy preload drink was
consumed prior to lunch. Again, after a brief delay, participants ate a self-selected lunch (i.e.,
sandwich, carrots, applesauce, cookies, and milk) ad libitum. Results indicated substantial
individual differences in the extent to which girls adjusted their energy intake at lunch in
response to the differences in preload energy content. On average the girls only compensated
for about half of the energy in the preloads. In this case, greater maternal restriction in feeding
was associated with poorer compensation and higher weight status in daughters.42 While
infants show a predisposition to respond to differences in energy density early in life, the child's
early experience, including child feeding practices, shape the development of individual
differences in self-regulation abilities.43 That infants and young children are capable of self-
regulating energy intake under laboratory conditions, in the absence of adult intervention, and
in the presence of only simply prepared healthy foods, does not speak to the extent to which
this ability can be exercised in current family environments.
The Influence of Genetic Predispositions and Repeated Exposure on Food
Acceptance during Infancy and Childhood
Infants do not have to learn preferences for the basic tastes (sweet, salty, sour, bitter, and
umami). Rather, they are predisposed to pleasing flavors. Shortly after birth infants express
preferences for sweet tastes and reject those that are sour and bitter.44 Preferences for salt are
apparent at approximately four months.45 These predispositions are thought to have evolved
to serve a protective function, by encouraging the consumption of energy-rich foods (often
signaled by the sweet taste) and discouraging ingestion of toxins (signaled by bitter and sour
tastes).46 These taste preferences are unlearned, and become very apparent to parents once
infants begin the transition from exclusive milk feeding to a modified adult diet. In general,
sweet foods such as fruits, flavored yogurts, and juices are readily accepted by infants, while
foods such as vegetables, which are not sweet, and may contain bitter components, are initially
rejected. Laboratory studies have confirmed that young children readily form preferences for
flavors associated with energy rich foods.47 Even the fruits and vegetables most preferred by
children (e.g., bananas, apples, potatoes, and peas) tend to be those that contain the most energy.
48 Innate preferences for energy dense foods may be one catalyst acting to promote energy
intake among children in abundant dietary environments.
Alternatively, children's acceptance of foods that have less intrinsic hedonic appeal to children
(such as vegetables) are shaped by their experience with those foods. Children decide their
food likes and dislikes by eating, and associating food flavors with the social contexts and the
Savage et al.
Page 5
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 physiological consequences of consumption. The tendency for children to initially reject novel
foods is often just a case of neophobia. Several studies have demonstrated that children's
preferences for and acceptance of new foods are enhanced with repeated exposure to those
foods in a non-coercive setting. New foods may need to be offered to preschool-aged children
ten to sixteen times before acceptance occurs. At the same time, simply offering new foods
will not necessarily produce liking; having children taste new foods is a necessary part of the
process.49 Awareness of this normal course of food acceptance is important because
approximately one quarter of parents with infants and toddlers prematurely drew conclusions
about their child's preference for foods after two or fewer exposures.50
Transition to the Modified Adult Diet: Food and Beverage Consumption
During the first year of life, eating patterns undergo rapid evolution. Initially, infants obtain
all nutrition from a single fluid source (i.e. milk) consumed approximately every two to four
hours. By the end of the first year, however, the infant has moved to a modified meal and snack
pattern, consuming many foods found in their culture's adult diet. The American Academy of
Pediatrics (AAP) recommends breastfeeding for the first four to six months of life, followed
by the introduction of complementary foods once the child is developmentally ready.51 At this
point, the evidence regarding the impact of early complementary feeding on the development
of obesity is inconsistent. Only four located studies examined the association between the
timing of complementary food introduction and weight gain in longitudinal studies. Two of
these studies linked the early introduction of solid foods and obesity at twelve months52 and
eighteen months53 of age, independent of breastfeeding. However, the other studies, using
similar designs, failed to note associations between the early introduction of solid foods and
childhood obesity at twenty-four months54 and seven years of age.55 Therefore, there is a need
for well designed prospective, longitudinal studies examining this association in order to better
understand the influence of the early introduction of solids on the development of childhood
obesity.
Results from a recent survey, the Feeding Infants and Toddlers Study, which provides data on
the dietary patterns of 3,022 infants and toddler four to twenty-four months of age, has also
raised concerns regarding excessive energy intake as well as the quality of young children's
diets.56 Barbara Devaney and colleagues found that mean reported energy intakes exceeded
estimated energy requirements by ten percent for infants four to six months, twenty-three
percent for infants seven to twelve months, and thirty-one percent for toddlers twelve to twenty-
four months.57 Analyses also revealed that children consumed significant amounts of energy-
dense but nutrient poor foods.58 For example, french fries were the most common vegetable
consumed among fifteen- to eighteen-month-olds, and approximately fifty percent of seven-
to eight-month-olds consumed some type of dessert, sweet, or sweetened beverage. Results
also revealed that eighteen to thirty-three percent of infants and toddlers consumed no servings
of vegetables, and twenty-three and thirty-three percent consumed no fruits. Moreover, fewer
than ten percent of infants and toddlers consumed dark green, leafy vegetables.59 Thus, it
appears that parents and caregivers need encouragement to repeatedly offer nutrient dense age-
appropriate foods (e.g., fruits, dark green and yellow vegetables, and yogurt) as opposed to
convenient energy dense foods and snacks.
The large amounts of fruit juice and sweetened beverages that begin to appear in young
children's diets have also been cause for concern. The AAP recommends no more than four to
six ounces a day of fruit juice for children one- to six-years old. By nineteen to twenty-four
months of age, however, mean intake of children who consumed 100% fruit juice was 9.5
ounces a day, with ten percent of toddlers consuming over fourteen ounces a day.60 One cross-
sectional study of two- and five-year-old children found that consumption of twelve fluid
ounces per day of fruit juice was associated with obesity and short stature.61 The findings of
Savage et al.
Page 6
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 this study have not been replicated, however, and several longitudinal studies report no
association between fruit juice consumption and over-weight.62 In fact, Melanie Smith and
Fima Lifshitz reported an association of excess juice consumption with nonorganic failure to
thrive, suggesting that large intakes of fruit juices may displace more calorie and nutrient dense
foods.63
Alternatively, Jean Welsch and colleagues used a retrospective longitudinal design to evaluate
juice intake and the persistence of overweight among two- to three-year-old children.64
Children identified as at risk for overweight who consumed sweet drinks (e.g., vitamin C
containing juices, other juices, fruit drinks, and soda) as infrequently as one to two times daily
increased their odds of becoming overweight by sixty percent. Consumption of sweetened
beverages (i.e. fruit drinks, soda) has also been associated with excessive weight and weight
gain among eleven- to twelve-year-old and nine- to fourteen-year-old children.65
Parents as Providers and Models
Parents powerfully shape children's early experiences with food and eating, providing both
genes and environments for children. Children's eating patterns develop in the early social
interactions surrounding feeding. As young omnivores, they are ready to learn to eat the foods
of their culture's adult diet, and their ability to learn to accept a wide range of foods is
remarkable, especially given the diversity of dietary patterns across cultural groups. Several
decades of research inside and outside of the laboratory have revealed that, as in other areas
of children's development, caregivers act as powerful socialization agents.66 Parents select the
foods of the family diet, serve as models of eating that children learn to emulate, and use feeding
practices to encourage the development of culturally appropriate eating patterns and behaviors
in children.
Caregivers as Providers
Studies conducted outside the laboratory support the notion that children's preference and
intake patterns are largely a reflection of the foods that become familiar to them. Research
indicates that the extent to which fruits and vegetables are present and readily available and
accessible in the home correlates positively with the level of consumption in school-age
children.67 For example, Karen Cullen and colleagues examined the relationships among
availability, accessibility, and preferences for fruit, 100% fruit juice, and vegetables in a sample
of eighty-eight fourth through sixth graders and their parents. Results revealed that availability
was the only significant predictor of intake for children reporting high preferences, whereas
for children reporting low preferences, availability and accessibility were significantly related
to consumption of fruits, vegetables, and 100% fruit juice. Thus, accessibility appears to be
particularly important for children with low preferences for fruit, 100% fruit juice, and
vegetables.68 Similarly, Polly Kratt, Kim Reynolds, and Richard Shewchuk examined the role
of availability of fruits and vegetables in the home and found that homes with greater
availability had a stronger set of motivational factors (e.g., self efficacy and behavioral
capability/knowledge of parents) for fruit and vegetable consumption compared to homes with
low fruit and vegetable availability. Furthermore, the availability of fruits and vegetables was
a moderating variable for intake by both parents and children.69 The findings are much the
same for milk drinking. In a study of beverage intake among girls during middle childhood,
milk consumption among girls almost always or always served milk at meals and snacks was
two times higher than it was for girls rarely or never served milk. Similarities in milk intake
quantities among mothers and daughters were also attributable to the extent that milk was
served at meals.70
Children's intake of particular foods is influenced not only by the types of foods present in the
home but also by the amount of those foods available to them. Recent laboratory studies provide
Savage et al.
Page 7
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 causal evidence that large food portions promote greater energy intake by children as young
as two years of age. When age-appropriate portions of an entrée were doubled in size,
preschool-age children ate approximately twenty-five to twenty-nine percent more than the
age-appropriate portions of those foods, even though they consumed only two thirds of the
smaller portions of the entrée and were not aware of increases in the portion size.71 These
effects were attributable principally to increases in the average size of children's bites. Children
did not adequately reduce their intake of other foods to compensate for their intake of larger
portions of the entrée. As a result, energy intake was nine to fifteen percent higher at meals
during which larger portions were served.
Adults, like children, eat more when served large portions.72 However, for children and adults,
the intake of large portions is not associated with weight status, suggesting that the relevance
of large portions to weight gain is not a function of exposure to large portions; rather, it is a
particular susceptibility of the overweight adult individual to overeating large portions when
available. Evidence from laboratory studies suggests that larger portions served to consumers
at restaurants, in convenience and grocery stores, and in other retail settings are driving
increases in the average size of portions consumed both at home and away from home,73 as
well as increasing the daily energy intake of children.74
Caregivers as Models
Children learn about food through the direct experience of eating and by observing the eating
behavior of others. Leann Birch found that the selection and consumption of vegetables by
preschool-age children were influenced by the choices of their peers.75 When preschool-age
children observed the eating behavior of adults, it had a similar effect. For example, Helen
Hendy and Bryan Raudenbush found that children's intake of a novel food increased at those
meals during which they observed a teacher enthusiastically consuming the food. Interestingly,
enthusiastic modeling by a teacher was not as effective when children were seated with peers
who exhibited different food preferences than did their teachers.76 While one might expect
modeling by parents to have a similar if not stronger influence on children's preference and
choices, experimental evidence is lacking.
Studies conducted outside the laboratory also provide indirect evidence for the role of social
modeling. For example, low-income adolescent girls who reported seeing their fathers consume
milk had higher calcium intakes than did those girls who did not see their fathers drink milk.
77 Parental modeling has also been associated with greater fruit juice and vegetable intake
among school-age children.78
Parenting Styles and Children's Eating Behavior
Parenting, by definition, involves the task of care and feeding one's children. Subsequently,
child feeding practices have evolved as parental responses to perceived environmental threats
to children's well being.79 For nearly all of human history, the major threats to child health
have been food scarcity and infectious disease. Feeding practices developed to address these
threats have been passed from one generation to the next, and have become traditional practices
routinely used by parents without question. However, in today's environment, we must ask,
“Are these child feeding practices, evolved to address the threats posed by food scarcity and
infectious disease, effective in dealing with the current threats to child health posed by too
much food, obesity, and its comorbidities?” The simple answer to this question is “no.”
Traditional feeding practices used with infants and young children include feeding children
frequently and quickly in response to distress, offering foods designed especially for infants
and young children, offering preferred foods if possible, and encouraging children to eat as
much as possible when food is available, often involving the use of coercion and force feeding.
Savage et al.
Page 8
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 There are, of course, differences across cultures in the specifics of these practices and in the
particular foods offered to children. There are also differences within cultures among parents'
feeding practices. These differences are caused by cultural differences among parents and by
their goals for their children. In addition, parents' feeding practices are influenced by children's
individual characteristics, including age, sex, weight status, and eating behavior.
Parenting practices and parent-child interaction during feeding vary in the degree to which
children are allowed some degree of autonomy in eating.80 These interactions can have a
powerful influence on children's developing food preferences, intake patterns, diet quality,
growth, and weight status. However, it is important to note that child feeding practices may
have unintended effects on children. For example, parents' feeding practices often include
attempts to increase children's intake of nutrient dense foods (e.g., “eat your vegetables”) or
restrict children's access to and intake of “unhealthy” or “junk” foods (e.g., “no, you can't have
any cookies now”). Parents using these practices may intend to promote healthier diets in
children, and perhaps even prevent obesity, but the results of research reveals such attempts
can have negative effects on children's food preferences and their self-regulation of energy
intake.81
In general, parental control of feeding practices, especially restrictive feeding practices, tends
to be associated with overeating and poorer self-regulation of energy intake in preschool-age
children.82 The manner in which eating behavior is affected depends on the nature of the
directive. For example, using food as reward for good behavior increased preschool-age
children's preferences for those foods,83 and because sweet, palatable foods are often used as
rewards, this practice can have the unintended consequence of promoting children's preferences
for energy dense palatable foods that are often unhealthy. Parents may also reward children
for consuming healthy foods in hopes of increasing children's intake of foods such as
vegetables; but research has demonstrated that this practice can actually result in children
learning to dislike and avoid those foods.84
Restricting children's access to “forbidden” foods also has a paradoxical effect on food
preference and energy intake. Research reveals that placing a preferred food in sight, but out
of reach, decreases children's ability to exhibit self-control over obtaining the food.85 As a
result, when restriction is lifted, and “forbidden” foods are present, children often have
difficulty controlling the amount of food eaten, resulting in overeating and eating in the absence
of hunger. For example, Fisher and Birch investigated the effects of restricting three-to five-
year-old children's physical access to foods (i.e. apple or peach bar cookies) within their
environment. Each child was observed on ten occassions over five weeks. During the restricted-
access procedure, children had free access to a control food throughout the twenty minute
procedure. In contrast, the restricted food was kept in a large transparent jar in the center of
the table. After ten minutes, chidren were granted access to the restricted food for two minutes,
followed by the removal of the restricted food from the table. Results revealed that the restricted
food elicited more positive comments, more requests, and when it was made available, children
took larger portions and ate more, compared to freely accessable control food.86 These findings
indicate that restricing access to palatable foods may be counterproductive in that it may
promote their intake. Research with animal models produced a similar pattern when access to
a preferred food source was given daily to some rats and on alternating days to others.87
Furthermore, longitudinal research reveals that at least among middle class white families with
daughters, maternal use of restrictive feeding practices predicts uninhibited overeating and
greater weight gain.88
Excessive parental control and pressure to eat may also influence dietary intake and disrupt
children's short-term behavioral control of food intake. For example, longitudinal studies have
reported that higher levels of parental control and pressure to eat were associated with lower
Savage et al.
Page 9
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 fruit and vegetable intakes89 and higher intake of dietary fat90 among young girls. Moreover,
in a study of children's feeding practices, encouraging children to eat by focusing their attention
on the amount of food on the plate promotes greater consumption and makes children less
sensitive to the caloric content of the foods consumed.91 Thus, pressuring children to eat their
vegetables in order to leave the table or as a contingency to receiving dessert may ultimately
lead to the dislike of those vegetables.
Controlling feeding practices are not likely used in isolation, but rather represent the caregiver's
broader approach to child feeding. Indeed, parents of preschoolers who reported placing greater
restrictions on their children's eating also reported using higher levels of pressure or coercion
in feeding.92 These practices are thought to typify an authoritarian style of feeding in which
eating demands placed on the child are relatively high, but responsiveness to the child's needs
or behavior is relatively low.93 Unlike specific practices, feeding styles are believed to be
stable over time and characterize parent-child interactions across a wide range of situations.
Several studies have observed that authoritarian parents have fewer fruits and vegetables
available in the home and their children consume smaller amounts of those foods.94
Specifically, Heather Patrick and colleagues examined the association between parent feeding
styles and children's food consumption patterns of Head Start preschoolers and their parents.
Results indicated that authoritative feeding was positively associated with the availability of
fruits and vegetables and attempts to get their child to eat those foods. In contrast, authoritarian
feeding was associated with lower availability of fruits and vegetables. In addition, actual
consumption of these foods varied by feeding style; authoritative feeding was positively
associated with the consumption of dairy and vegetables, in contrast, authoritarian feeding was
negatively associated with vegetable intake.95
Authoritative styles of feeding are also characterized by the high demands or expectations
placed on the child while eating. Unlike authoritarian parents, however, those with authoritative
styles tend to be highly responsive to the child's eating cues and behaviors. Authoritative
parenting has been associated with greater home availability of fruits and vegetables as well
as greater child consumption of dairy, fruits, and vegetables and lower consumption of junk
foods.96 The balance of setting limits and clear expectations with consideration of the child's
needs is thought to promote appropriate nutrition and growth. In fact, empirical data on feeding
styles and their influence on weight and weight gain are quite limited. Recent findings from
the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Study of Early Child Care and
Youth Development revealed a protective association of authoritative parenting style with risk
of overweight among five-year-old children. Among a national sample of 872 socio-
economically and ethnically diverse families with young children, authoritarian parents were
almost five times as likely to have an overweight child as authoritative parents, after statistically
adjusting for potentially confounding effects of race and income.97 These findings reveal that
the consistent use of authoritative feeding practices, which set clear expectations for children's
eating behavior and are responsive to children's needs, can reduce the risk of obesity.
Finally, feeding styles involving low demand and low responsiveness to the child are
considered neglectful whereas those with low demand and high responsiveness to the child are
indulgent. These permissive styles of feeding would logically appear to engender overnutrition
and overweight among those children exposed to the current dietary environment of abundance.
However, this assertion remains unproven. In one study, neglected children, possibly reflecting
permissive parenting styles, had a greater risk of adult obesity.98 However, feeding styles and
their effects on dietary intake were not considered. In a more recent study of low-income
African-American and Hispanic families, children of parents using indulgent feeding styles
had higher weight status scores compared to children with authoritarian parents.99
Savage et al.
Page 10
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 Differing Perceptions of Healthy Weight: Socioeconomic and Cultural
Contexts
Parents' approach to feeding their children reflects their goals for their children's eating and
health,100 and these goals are influenced by culture and socioeconomic status. For example,
among middle-income, non-Hispanic white families, mothers who employed greater
restrictions in feeding their daughters had greater concerns about their daughters becoming
overweight.101 Overweight, however, is not universally perceived as a detriment to health,
especially for infants and very young children. For example, low-income mothers have reported
that a heavy infant is viewed as a sign of a healthy child and successful parenting. Parents who
view a child large for their age as healthy are unlikely to be concerned about child overweight,
or to use restrictive feeding practices to prevent overweight. Given such values, caregivers may
interpret infant behavior in terms of potential hunger and take specific care to prevent that state.
Indeed, low-income mothers often interpret nonspecific behaviors such as frequent crying as
signs of hunger. Consequently, feeding practices that are at odds with current
recommendations, including concentrating formula or adding cereal to formula, or introducing
solid foods before four months of age may be adopted by mothers who value having bigger
babies.102
Cultural, socioeconomic and psychological factors also may shape parents' perceptions of a
healthy weight for their children. Data from the Third National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (1988-1994) indicate that nearly one third of mothers with overweight
children do not perceive their children as being over-weight.103 Among low-income
populations, seventy to eighty percent of mothers perceive their overweight child to be of
normal weight or even underweight.104 In addition, low-income mothers of young children
have reported that social stigmatization, physical limitations, and lack of a healthy diet are
more relevant indicators of problematic weight than are objective measurements.105 These
findings indicate that low-income parents desire their children to be at a healthy weight, but
differ from health care professionals in their view of just what constitutes a “healthy” weight.
Summary and Suggestion for Intervention
Experiences with food flavors begin very early; the fetus becomes familiar with the flavors of
the maternal diet during pregnancy, and the breastfed infant experiences the flavors of the
maternal diet in breast milk. This early experience provides a “flavor bridge,” which can
promote the infant's acceptance of the foods from the maternal diet. As children make the
transition to the modified adult diet of their culture, children's food preferences and their diets
reflect the foods that are available and accessible to them; parental modeling and familiarity
plays an important role in their developing food preferences.
These findings suggest a number of potential early intervention approaches that could be used
during infancy and very early childhood to promote healthier intake patterns. The implication
of the research findings is that if we want children to learn to like and eat healthy foods such
as vegetables, they need early, positive, and repeated experiences with those foods, as well as
opportunities to observe others consuming those foods. The natural tendency of children to
prefer sweet or salty, caloric rich foods over energy-poor but micronutrient-rich alternatives
highlights the need for adult intervention to provide a varied and healthful diet. As such,
caregivers play a critical role in determining which kinds of foods will become familiar to their
children – from the foods kept routinely in the cupboard to those served regularly at the family
table and even those consumed away from home. Caregivers also act as important gatekeepers
to the social influences surrounding children's eating, including access to media and modeling.
Because observing the eating behavior of others influences children's acceptance of foods,
decisions about how often families eat together, who is present during family meals, as well
Savage et al.
Page 11
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 as what is served, will dictate what is consumed and what children learn to like and eat.
Evidence regarding the poor nutritional quality of table foods infants and toddlers are
consuming as they transition to the adult diet reveals a need for parental guidance regarding
the importance of offering healthy foods, avoiding restrictive and coercive feeding practices
and serving as positive models of eating behavior for their infants and young children.
Although children possess an innate ability to self-regulate their energy intake, the extent to
which they exercise this ability is determined by environmental conditions: for example,
offering large food portions, calorically rich, sweet or salty palatable foods; the use of
controlling feeding practices that pressure or restrict eating; and the modeling of excessive
consumption can all undermine self-regulation of energy intake in children. As indicated
previously, these current manifestations of traditional child feeding practices, which involve
promoting children's intake, can be maladaptive in the current food environment where food
surfeit, obesity, and chronic disease have replaced food scarcity and infectious disease as major
threats to children's health.
A major theme of this review is that the strategies parents use to feed their children and the
effects of those strategies on children's eating and health are influenced by the broader context
in which feeding is embedded. As such, culture, tradition and context reveal what is valued
and what actions are taken to achieve feeding goals. As a part of culture, by definition, these
feeding practices are not readily subject to change. However, since the threats provided by
current eating environments have changed, changes in traditional feeding practices are needed.
A first step in initiating change in traditional feeding practices is to provide parents with
information to change parents' perceptions and concerns regarding the threat that obesity poses
to their children's growth and health.
In the current context, feeding strategies that are responsive to children's hunger and satiety
cues and which encourage children's attention to hunger and fullness are needed to support
self-regulation. However, these approaches to child feeding are a clear departure from the
traditional feeding practices, which have evolved to promote children's intake whether or not
they are hungry. Influential parenting factors reveal that in order to change parenting practices,
we need to alter parent's beliefs regarding current threats to children's health. In this instance,
parents need to learn that a large, rapidly growing child who is crossing percentiles on the
growth chart is not a sign of successful parenting, but a cause for concern, and that guidance
may be needed regarding alternative approaches to feeding. The challenge will be providing
parents with information that will alter their concerns and perceptions regarding overweight
as a threat to child health, and with guidance on alternative feeding strategies, which can be
effective in promoting healthy weight in an environment that encourages excessive
consumption.
References
1. U.S. Census Bureau. County Business Patterns for the United States. 2003
2. Food Marketing Institute. Supermarket Facts. 2004. available at
<http://www.fmi.org/facts_figs/superfact.htm> (last visited November 29, 2006)
3. Young LR, Nestle M. Expanding Portion Sizes in the U.S. Marketplace: Implications for Nutrition
Counseling. Journal of the American Dietetic Association 2003;103(2):231–234. [PubMed:
12589331]
4. Agricultural Research Service Community Nutrition Research Group. Results from USDA's 1994-96
Diet and Health Knowledge Survey: Table Set 19. U.S. Department of Agriculture; 2000.
5. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Women in the Labor Force: A Databook. U.S. Department of Labor; 2004.
6. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Employment Characteristics of Families. U.S. Department of Labor; 2005.
Savage et al.
Page 12
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 7. U.S. Census Bureau. Current Population Survey Reports, America's Families and Living
Arrangements. 2004
8. U.S. Census Bureau. Survey of Income and Program Participation, Who's Minding the Kids? Child
Care Arrangements. Spring;1999
9. Lugaila, T. Current Population Reports: U.S. Census Bureau. Washington, D.C.: 2003. A Child's Day:
2000 (Selected Indicators of Child Well-Being); p. 70-89.
10. Nielsen SJ, Siega-Riz AM, Popkin BM. Trends in Energy Intake in U.S. between 1977 and 1996:
Similar Shifts Seen across Age Groups. Obesity Research 2002;5:370–378. [PubMed: 12006636]
11. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Consumer Expenditures in 2003. U.S. Department of Labor; 2003.
at Table 6: Composition of Consumer Unit: Average Annual Expenditures and Characteristics,
Consumer Expenditure Survey, 2003
12. Nielsen SJ, Popkin BM. Patterns and Trends in Food Portion Sizes, 1977-1998. JAMA 2003;289(4):
450–453. [PubMed: 12533124]
13. Bowman SA, Gortmaker SL, Ebbeling CB, Pereira MA, Ludwig DS. Effects of Fast-Food
Consumption on Energy Intake and Diet Quality among Children in a National Household Survey.
Pediatrics 2004;113:112–118. [PubMed: 14702458]
14. Mennella JA, Johnson A, Beauchamp GK. Garlic Ingestion by Pregnant Women Alters the Odor of
Amniotic Fluid. Chemical Senses 1995;20(2):207–209. [PubMed: 7583013]
15. Hauser GJ, Chitayat D, Berns L, Braver D, Muhlbauer B. Peculiar Odours in Newborns and Maternal
Pernatal Ingestion of Spicy Foods. European Journal of Pediatrics 1985;144(4):403. [PubMed:
4076256]
16. Schaal B, Marlier L, Soussignan R. Human Foetuses Learn Odours from their Pregnant Mother's
Diet. Chemical Senses 2000;25:729–737. [PubMed: 11114151]
17. Mennella JA, Coren P, Jagnow MS, Beauchamp GK. Prenatal and Postnatal Flavor Learning by
Human Infants. Pediatrics 2001;107(6):88–94.
18. Gartner LM, Morton J, Lawrence RA, Naylor AJ, O'Hare D, Schanler RJ, Eidelman AI. Breastfeeding
and the Use of Human Milk. Pediatrics 2005;115(2):496–506. [PubMed: 15687461]American
Academy of Pediatrics. Breastfeeding and the Use of Human Milk. American Academy of Pediatrics.
Work Group on Breast-feeding. Pediatrics 1997;100(6):1035–1039. [PubMed: 9411381]
19. Kramer MS, Kakuma R. The Optimal Duration of Exclusive Breastfeeding: A Systematic Review.
Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology 2004;554:63–77. [PubMed: 15384567]
20. Dewey KG. Is Breastfeeding Protective against Child Obesity? Journal of Human Lactation 2003;19
(1):9–18. [PubMed: 12587638]Owen C, Martin R, Whincup P, Smith GD, Cook DG. Effect of Infant
Feeding on the Risk of Obesity across the Life Course: A Quantitative Review of Published Evidence.
Pediatrics 2005;115(5):1367–1377. [PubMed: 15867049]Arenz S, Ruckerl R, Koletzko B, von Kries
R. Breast-Feeding and Childhood Obesity-A Systematic Review. International Journal Obesity
Related Metabolic Disorders 2004;28(10):1247–1256.
21. See Arenz, supra note 20
22. See Dewey, supra note 20
23. Riordan J, Countryman BA. Basics of Breastfeeding. Part I: Infant Feeding Patterns Past and Present.
Journal of Obstetric, Gynecological & Neonatal Nursing 1980;9(4):207–210.see Dewey, supra note
20
24. Mennella JA, Beauchamp GK. Maternal Diet Alters the Sensory Qualities of Human Milk and
Nursling's Behavior. Pediatrics 1991;88:737–744. [PubMed: 1896276]
25. Mennella JA, Beauchamp GK. The Transfer of Alcohol to Human Milk: Effects on Flavor and the
Infant's Behavior. New England Journal of Medicine 1991;325:981–985. [PubMed: 1886634]
26. Mennella JA, Beauchamp GK. The Infant's Response to Vanilla Flavors in Mother's Milk and
Formula. Infant Behavior and Development 1996:13–19.
27. Mennella JA, Beauchamp GK. The Effects of Repeated Exposure to Garlic-flavored Milk on the
Nursling's Behavior. Pediatric Research 1993;34:805–808. [PubMed: 8108198]
28. Mennella JA, Jagnow CP, Beauchamp GK. Prenatal and Postnatal Flavor Learning by Human Infants.
Pediatrics 2001;107(6):E88. [PubMed: 11389286]
29. See Mannella, supra note 17
Savage et al.
Page 13
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 30. See Menella, supra note 28
31. Sullivan, SA.; Birch, LL. Pediatrics. 93. Infant Dietary Experience and Acceptance of Solid Foods;
1994. p. 271-277.
32. Adair LS. The Infant's Ability to Self-Regulate Caloric Intake: A Case Study. Journal of the American
Dietetic Association 1984;84(5):543–546. [PubMed: 6715750]Fomon SJ, Filer LJ, Thomas LN,
Anderson TA, Nelson SE. Influence of Formula Concentration on Caloric Intake and Growth of
Normal Infants. Acta Pediatrica Scandinavica 1975;64:172–181.Fox MK, Devaney B, Reidy K,
Razafindrakoto C, Ziegler P. Relationship between Portion Size and Energy Intake among Infants
and Toddlers: Evidence of Self Regulation. American Journal of the Dietetics Association
2006;106:S77–S83.
33. Fisher, JO.; Birch, LL.; Smiciklas-Wright, H.; Picciano, MF. American Journal of the Dietetics
Association. 100. 2000. Breast-Feeding through the First Year Predicts Maternal Control in Feeding
and Subsequent Toddler Energy Intakes; p. 641-646.
34. Dewey KG. Growth Characteristics of Breast-fed Compared to Formula-fed Infants. Biology of the
Neonate 1998;74(2):94–105. [PubMed: 9691152]
35. Dewey KG, Nommsen-Rivers L, Lonnerdal B. Plasma Insulin and Insulin-releasing Amino Acids
(IRAA) Concentrations are Higher in Formula-fed than in Breastfed Infants at 5 Months of Age.
Experimental Biology. 2004abstract #1124
36. Davis CM. Results of the Self-Selection of Diets by Young Children. The Canadian Medical
Association Journal 1939;41:257–261.Davis CM. Self-Selection of Diet by Newly Weaned Infants.
American Journal of Diseases of Children 1928;36:651–679.
37. Fomon SJ, Filer LJ, Thomas LN, Rogers RR, Proksch AM. Relationship between Formula
Concentration and Rate of Growth of Normal Infants. Journal of Nutrition 1969;98(2):241–254.
[PubMed: 5783305]Fomon SJ, Filmer LJ, Thomas LN, Anderson TA, Nelson SE. Influence of
Formula Concentration on Caloric Intake and Growth of Normal Infants. Acta Paediatric Scandinavia
1975;64(2):172–181.
38. Pearcey SM, De Castro JM. Food Intake and Meal Patterns of One Year Old Infants. Appetite 1997;29
(2):201–212. [PubMed: 9344428]
39. Cohen RJ, Brown KH, Canahuati J, Rivera LL, Dewey KG. Effects of Age of Introduction of
Complementary Foods on Infant Breast Milk Intake, Total Energy Intake, and Growth: A
Randomised Intervention Study in Honduras. Lancet 1994;344:288–293. [PubMed: 7914260]
40. Birch L, Deysher M. Conditioned and Unconditioned Caloric Compensation: Evidence for Self-
Regulation of Food Intake by Young Children. Learning and Motivation 1985;16:341–355.Birch LL,
Deysher M. Caloric Compensation and Sensory Specific Satiety: Evidence for Self Regulation of
Food Intake by Young Children. Appetite 1986;7:323–331. [PubMed: 3789709]Birch LL, Johnson
SL, Jones MB, Peters JC. Effects of a Nonenergy Fat Substitute on Children's Energy and
Macronutrient Intake. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 1993;58:326–333. [PubMed: 8237841]
41. Johnson SL, Birch LL. Parents' and Children's Adiposity and Eating Style. Pediatrics 1994;94(5):
653–661. [PubMed: 7936891]
42. Birch LL, Fisher JO. Mothers' Child-feeding Practices Influence Daughters' Eating and Weight.
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2000;71:1054–1061. [PubMed: 10799366]
43. Wright P. Learning Experiences in Feeding Behaviour during Infancy. Journal of Psychosomatic
Research 1988;32(6):613–619. [PubMed: 3065486]
44. Birch LL. Preschool Children's Preferences and Consumption Patterns. Journal of Nutrition Education
1979;11:189–192.Bartoshuk LK, Beauchamp GK. Chemical Senses. Annual Review of Psychology
1994;45:414–449.Birch LL. Children's Preference for High-fat Foods. Nutrition Reviews
1992;50:259–255.Birch LL. Development of Food Preferences. Annual Review of Nutrition
1999;19:41–62.
45. Beauchamp GK, Cowart BJ, Mennella JA, Marsh RR. Infant Salt Taste: Developmental,
Methodological, and Contextual Factors. Developmental Psychobiology 1994;27(6):353–365.
[PubMed: 8001725]
46. Cowart BJ. Development of Taste Perception in Humans: Sensitivity and Preference throughout the
Life Span. Psychological Bulletin 1981;90(1):43–73. [PubMed: 7267897]Birch LL, McPhee L,
Savage et al.
Page 14
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 Shoba BC, Pirok E, Steinberg L. What Kind of Exposure Reduces Children's Food Neophobia?
Appetite 1987;9:171–178. [PubMed: 3435134]see Sullivan, supra note 31
47. Kern DL, McPhee L, Fisher J, Johnson S, Birch LL. The Post-ingestive Consequences of Fat
Condition Preferences for Flavors Associated with High Dietary Fat. Physiology and Behavior
1993;54(1):71–76. [PubMed: 8327611]
48. Gibson EL, Wardle J. Energy Density Predicts Preferences for Fruit and Vegetables in 4-Year-Old
Children. Appetite 2003;41:97–98. [PubMed: 12880626]
49. Sullivan SA, Birch LL. Pass the Sugar, Pass the Salt: Experience Dictates Preference. Developmental
Psychology 1990;26:546–551.Birch LL, Marlin DW. I Don't Like It; I Never Tired It: Effects of
Exposure on Two-Year-Old Children's Food Preferences. Appetite 1982;3:353–360. [PubMed:
7168567]See Birch, supra note 46
50. Carruth BR, Ziegler P, Gordon A, Barr SI. Prevalence of Picky Eaters among Infants and Toddlers
and their Caregiver's Decisions about Offering a Food. Journal of the American Dietetic Association
2004;104:S57–S64. [PubMed: 14702019]
51. See Gartner, supra note 18
52. Kramer M, Barr R, Leduc D, Boisjoly C, McVey-White L, Pless I. Determinants of Weight and
Adiposity in the First Year of Life. Journal of Pediatrics 1985;106:10–14. [PubMed: 3965671]
53. Baker JL, Michaelsen KF, Rasmussen KM, Sorensen TI. Maternal Prepregnant Body Mass Index,
Duration of Breastfeeding, and Timing of Complementary Food Introduction are Associated with
Infant Weight Gain. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2004;80(6):1579–1588. [PubMed:
15585772]
54. Carruth B, Skinner J, Houck K, Moran J. Addition of Supplementary Foods and Infant Growth (2 to
24 Months). Journal of the American College Nutrition 2000;19:405–412.
55. Reilly JJ, Armstrong J, Dorosty AR, Emmett PM, Ness A, Rogers I, Steer C, Sherriff A. Early Life
Risk Factors for Obesity in Childhood: Cohort Study. British Medical Journal 2005;330(7504):1357.
[PubMed: 15908441]
56. Fox MK, Pac S, Devaney B, Jankowski L. Feeding Infants and Toddlers Study: What Foods are
Infants and Toddlers Eating? Journal of the American Dietetic Association 2004;104(Supplement
1):S22–S30. [PubMed: 14702014]
57. Devaney B, Ziegler P, Pac S, Karwe V, Barr SI. Nutrient Intakes of Infants and Toddlers. Journal of
the American Dietetic Association 2004;104(1 Supplement 1):S14–21. [PubMed: 14702013]
58. See Fox, supra note 32
59. See Fox, supra note 56
60. Skinner JD, Ziegler P, Ponza M. Transitions in Infants' and Toddlers' Beverage Patterns. Journal of
the American Dietetic Association 2004;104(1):s45–50. [PubMed: 14702017]
61. Dennison BA, Rockwell HL, Baker SL. Excess Fruit Juice Consumption by Preschool-aged Children
is Associated with Short Stature and Obesity. Pediatrics 1997;99:15–22. [PubMed: 8989331]
62. Skinner JD, Carruth BR. A Longitudinal Study of Children's Juice Intake and Growth: The Juice
Controversy Revisited. Journal of the American Dietetic Association 2001;101:432–437. [PubMed:
11320948]Alexy U, Sichert-Hellert W, Kersting M, Manz F, Schoch G. Fruit Juice Consumption
and Prevalence of Obesity and Short Stature in German Preschool Children: Results of the DONALD
Study. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterol Nutrition 1999;29:343–349.Forshee RA, Storey ML. Total
Beverage Consumption and Beverage Choices among Children and Adolescents. International
Journal of Food Science and Nutrition 2003;54(4):297–307.
63. Smith MM, Lifshitz F. Excess Fruit Juice Consumption as a Contributing Factor in Nonorganic Failure
to Thrive. Pediatrics 1194;93(3):438–443. [PubMed: 8115203]
64. Welsh JA, Cogswell ME, Rogers S, Rockett H, Mei Z, Grummer-Strawn LM. Overweight among
Low-income Pre-school Children Associated with the Consumption of Sweet Drinks: Missouri,
1999-2002. Pediatrics 2005;115(2):e223–229. [PubMed: 15687430]
65. Ludwig DS, Peterson KE, Gortmaker SL. Relation between Consumption of Sugar-sweetened Drinks
and Childhood Obesity: A Prospective, Observational Analysis. Lancet 2001;357(9255):505–508.
[PubMed: 11229668]Berkey CS, Rockett HR, Field AE, Gillman MW, Colditz GA. Sugar-Added
Beverages and Adolescent Weight Change. Obesity Research 2004;12(5):778–788. [PubMed:
15166298]
Savage et al.
Page 15
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 66. Hardy R, Wadsworth M, Kuh D. The Influence of Childhood Weight and Socioeconomic Status on
Change in Adult Body Mass Index in a British National Birth Cohort. International Journal of Obesity
2000;24:725–734. [PubMed: 10878679]M. Hendy H. Effectiveness of Trained Peer Models to
Encourage Food Acceptance in Preschool Children. Appetite 2002;39(3):217–225. [PubMed:
12495695]Lee S, Reicks M. Environmental and Behavioral Factors are Associated with the Calcium
Intake of Low-income Adolescent Girls. Journal of the American Dietetic Association 2003;103(11):
1526–1529. [PubMed: 14576721]Young EM, Fors SW, Hayes DM. Associations between Perceived
Parent Behaviors and Middle School Student Fruit and Vegetable Consumption. Journal of Nutrition
Education Behavior 2004;36(1):2–8.Cullen KW, Baranowski T, Rittenberry L, Cosart C, Hebert D,
de Moor C. Child-reported Family and Peer Influences on Fruit, Juice and Vegetable Consumption:
Reliability and Validity of Measures. Health Education Research 2001;16(2):187–200. [PubMed:
11345661]
67. Hearn M, Baranowski T, Baranowski J, Doyle C, Smith M, Lin LS, Resnicow K. Environmental
Influences on Dietary Behavior among Children: Availability and Accessibility of Fruits and
Vegetables Enable Consumption. Journal of Health Education 1998;29(1):26–32.Cullen KW,
Baranowski T, Owens E, Marsh T, Rittenberry L, de Moor C. Availability, Accessibility, and
Preferences for Fruit, 100% Fruit Juice, and Vegetables Influence Children's Dietary Behavior.
Health Education and Behavior 2003;30(5):615–626. [PubMed: 14582601]Kratt P, Reynolds K,
Shewchuk R. The Role of Availability as a Moderator of Family Fruit and Vegetable Consumption.
Health Education and Behavior 2000;27(4):471–482. [PubMed: 10929754]
68. See Cullen, supra note 67
69. See Kratt, supra note 67
70. Fisher JO, Mitchell DC, Smiciklas-Wright H, Mannino ML, Birch LL. Meeting Calcium
Recommendations during Middle Childhood Reflects Mother-Daughter Beverage Choices and
Predicts Bone Mineral Status. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2004;79(4):698–706.
[PubMed: 15051617]
71. Rolls RJ, Engell D, Birch LL. Serving Portion Size Influences 5-Year-Old but Not 3-Year-Old
Children's Food Intakes. Journal of the American Dietetic Association 2000;100(2):232–234.
[PubMed: 10670398]Fisher JO, Rolls RJ, Birch LL. Children's Bite Size and Intake of an Entree are
Greater with Large Portions than with Age-appropriate or Self-Selected Portions. American Journal
of Clinical Nutrition 2003;77(5):1164–1170. [PubMed: 12716667]
72. Nisbett RE. Determinants of Food Intake in Human Obesity. Science 1968;159:1254–1255. [PubMed:
5711760]Shaw, J. The Influence of Type of Food and Method of Presentation on Human Eating
Behavior. University of Pennsylvania; Philadelphia: 1973. Edelman B, Engell D, Bronstein P, Hirsch
E. Environmental Effects on the Intake of Overweight and Normal-weight Men. Appetite 1986;7:71–
83. [PubMed: 3963800]Engell D, Kramer M, Zaring D, Birch LL, Rolls B. Effects of Serving Size
on Food Intake in Children and Adults. Obesity Research 1995;3(Supplement 3):381S.Diliberti N,
Bordi PL, Conklin MT, Roe LS, Rolls BJ. Increased Portion Size Leads to Increased Energy Intake
in a Restaurant Meal. Obesity Research 2004;12:562–568. [PubMed: 15044675]Rolls BJ, Roe LS,
Kral TV, Meengs JS, Wall DE. Increasing the Portion Size of a Packaged Snack Increases Energy
Intake in Men and Women. Appetite 2004;42:63–69. [PubMed: 15036784]
73. See Nielsen, supra note 12
74. Huang TT-K, Howarth NC, Lin B-H, Roberts SB, McCrory MA. Energy Intake and Meal Portions:
Associations with BMI Percentiles in U.S. Children. Obesity Research 2004;12(11):1875–1885.
[PubMed: 15601985]Smicikclas-Wright H, Mitchell DC, Mickle SJ, Goldman JD, Cook A. Foods
Commonly Eaten in the United States, 1989-1991 and 1994-1996: Are Portion Sizes Changing?
Journal of the American Dietetic Association 2003;103:41–47. [PubMed: 12525792]
75. Birch LL. Effects of Peer Models' Food Choices and Eating Behaviors on Preschoolers' Food
Preference. Child Development 1980;51:489–496.
76. See Hendy, supra note 66
77. See Lee and Reicks, supra note 66
78. See Young, supra note 66Cullen, supra note 66
79. LeVine, RA. Human Parental Care: Universal Goals, Cultural Strategies, Individual Behavior. In:
Miller, PM., editor. Parental Behavior in Diverse Societies. New Directions for Child Development,
Savage et al.
Page 16
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 No. 40: The Jossey-Bass Social and Behavioral Sciences Series. Jossey-Bass; San Francisco, CA:
1998. p. 3-12.
80. Birch LL, Fisher JO. Development of Eating Behaviors among Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics
1998;101(3 part 2):539–549. [PubMed: 12224660]
81. Id
82. Faith MS, Scanlon KS, Birch LL, Francis LA, Sherry B. Parent-Child Feeding Strategies and their
Relationships to Child Eating and Weight Status. Obesity Research 2004;12(11):1711–1722.
[PubMed: 15601964]see Johnson, supra note 41
83. Birch LL, Zimmerman SI, Hind H. The Influence of Social-affective Context on Preschool Children's
Food Preferences. Child Development 1980;51:856–861.
84. Birch LL, Birch D, Marlin DW, Kramer L. Effects of Instrumental Consumption on Children's Food
Preference. Appetite 1982;3(2):125–134. [PubMed: 7137991]Birch L, Marlin D, Rotter J. Eating as
the Means Activity in a Contingency: Effects on Young Children's Food Preference. Child
Development 1984;55:432–439.
85. Mischel W, Shoda Y, Rodriguez MI. Delay of Gratification in Children. Science 1989;244(4907):
933–938. [PubMed: 2658056]
86. Fisher JO, Birch LL. Restricting Access to a Palatable Food Affects Children's Behavioral Response,
Food Selection and Intake. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 1999;69:1264–1272. [PubMed:
10357749]
87. Corwin RL, Wojnicki FH, Fisher JO, Dimitriou SG, Rice HB, Young MA. Limited Access to a Dietary
Fat Option Affects Ingestive Behavior but Not Body Composition in Male Rats. Physiology and
Behavior 1998;65(3):545–553. [PubMed: 9877422]
88. Birch LL, Fisher JO, Davison KK. Learning to Overeat: Maternal Use of Restrictive Feeding Practices
Promotes Girls' Eating in the Absence of Hunger. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2003;78
(2):215–220. [PubMed: 12885700]See Fisher, supra note 86
89. Fisher JO, Mitchell DC, Smiciklas-Wright H, Birch LL. Parental Influences on Young Girls' Fruit
and Vegetable, Micronutrient, and Fat Intakes. Journal of the American Dietetic Association
2002;102(1):58–64. [PubMed: 11794503]Galloway AT, Fiorito L, Lee Y, Birch LL. Parental
Pressure, Dietary Patterns, and Weight Status among Girls Who are ‘Picky Eaters,’. Journal of the
American Dietetic Association 2005;105(4):541–548. [PubMed: 15800554]
90. Lee Y, Birch LL. Diet Quality, Nutrient Intake, Weight Status, and Feeding Environments of Girls
Meeting or Exceeding the American Academy of Pediatrics Recommendations for Total Dietary Fat.
Pediatrics 2002;54(3):179–186.
91. Birch L, McPhee L, Shoba BC, Steinberg L, Krehbiel R. ‘Clean up Your Plate’: Effects of Child
Feeding Practices on the Conditioning of Meal Size. Learning and Motivation 1987;18:301–317.
92. Birch LL, Fisher JO, Castro CN, Grimm-Thomas K, Sawyer R, Johnson SL. Confirmatory Factor
Analysis of the Child Feeding Questionnaire: A Measure of Parental Attitudes, Beliefs and Practices
about Child Feeding and Obesity Proneness. Appetite 2001;36(3):201–210. [PubMed: 11358344]
93. Hughes SO, Power TG, Orlet Fisher J, Mueller S, Nicklas TA. Revisiting a Neglected Construct:
Parenting Styles in a Child-feeding Context. Appetite 2005;44:83–92. [PubMed: 15604035]
94. Cullen KW, Baranowski T, Rittenberry L, Olvera N. Social-Environmental Influences on Children's
Diets: Results from Focus Groups with African-, Euro- and Mexican-American Children and their
Parents. Health Education Research 2000;15(5):581–590. [PubMed: 11184217]Gable S, Lutz S.
Household, Parent and Child Contributions to Childhood Obesity. Family Relationships
2000;49:293–300.Patrick H, Nicklas TA, Hughes SO, Morales M. The Benefits of Authoritative
Feeding Style: Caregiver Feeding Styles and Children's Food Consumption Patterns. Appetite
2005;44(2):243–249. [PubMed: 15808898]
95. See Patrick, supra note 94
96. See Cullen, supra note 94Gable and Lutz, supra note 94
97. Rhee KE, Lumeng JC, Appugliese DP, Kaciroti N, Bradley RH. Parenting Styles and Overweight
Status in First Grade. Pediatrics 2006;117(6):2047–2054. [PubMed: 16740847]
98. Lissau I, Sorensen TI. Parental Neglect during Childhood and Increased Risk of Obesity in Young
Adulthood. Lancet 1994;343(8893):324–327. [PubMed: 7905145]
99. Hughes, supra note 93
Savage et al.
Page 17
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 100. See LeVine, supra note 79
101. Francis LA, Birch LL. Predictors of Maternal Child-Feeding Style: Maternal and Child
Characteristics. Appetite 2001;37(3):231–243. [PubMed: 11895324]
102. Baughcum AE, Burklow KA, Deeks CM, Powers SW, Whitaker RC. Maternal Feeding Practices
and Childhood Obesity: A Focus Group Study of Low-income Mothers. Archives of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine 1998;152(10):1010–1014. [PubMed: 9790612]Bentley M, Gavin L, Black
MM, Teti L. Infant Feeding Practices of Low-income, African-American, Adolescent Mothers: An
Ecological, Multigenerational Perspective. Social Science and Medicine 1999;49(8):1085–1100.
[PubMed: 10475672]Bronner YL, Gross SM, Caulfield L, Bentley ME, Kessler L, Jensen J,
Weathers B, Paige DM. Early Introduction of Solid Foods among Urban African-American
Participants in WIC. Journal of the American Dietic Association 1999;99(4):457–461.
103. Maynard LM, Galuska DA, Blanck HM, Serdula MK. Maternal Perceptions of Weight Status of
Children. Pediatrics 2003;111:1226–1231. [PubMed: 12728143]
104. Baughcum AE, Chamberlin LA, Deeks CM, Powers SW, Whitaker RC. Maternal Perceptions of
Overweight Preschool Children. Pediatrics 2000;106(6):1380–1386. [PubMed: 11099592]
Anderson CB, Hughes SO, Fisher JO, Nicklas TA. Cross-Sectional Equivalence of Feeding Beliefs
and Practices: The Psychometric Properties of the Child Feeding Questionnaire among Blacks and
Hispanics. Preventive Medicine 2005;41(2):521–531. [PubMed: 15917048]
105. See Bentley, supra note 102
Savage et al.
Page 18
J Law Med Ethics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 6.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
