 Resource
Identification of Zika Virus and Dengue Virus
Dependency Factors using Functional Genomics
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d RNAi and CRISPR/Cas9 screens were used to find flavivirus
dependencies
d The screens recovered host factors involved in endocytosis
and heparin sulfation
d The EMC is required by DENV and ZIKV in the early stages of
replication
d These studies give a systems-wide view of human-flavivirus
interactions
Authors
George Savidis, William M. McDougall,
Paul Meraner, ..., Sharone Green,
Timothy F. Kowalik, Abraham L. Brass
Correspondence
abraham.brass@umassmed.edu
In Brief
Savidis et al. identify DENV and ZIKV
dependencies using orthologous RNAi
and CRISPR/Cas9 approaches. Multiple
host factors involved in endocytosis and
transmembrane protein processing,
including the endoplasmic reticulum
membrane complex (EMC), are important
for flaviviral replication. Together, their
studies generate a systems-wide view of
human-flavivirus interactions.
Savidis et al., 2016, Cell Reports 16, 232–246
June 28, 2016 ª 2016 The Author(s).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.06.028
 Cell Reports
Resource
Identification of Zika Virus and Dengue Virus
Dependency Factors using Functional Genomics
George Savidis,1,5 William M. McDougall,1,5 Paul Meraner,1,5 Jill M. Perreira,1 Jocelyn M. Portmann,1 Gaia Trincucci,1
Sinu P. John,2 Aaron M. Aker,1 Nicholas Renzette,1 Douglas R. Robbins,1 Zhiru Guo,3 Sharone Green,3
Timothy F. Kowalik,1 and Abraham L. Brass1,4,*
1Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems (MaPS), University of Massachusetts Medical, School, Worcester, MA 01655, USA
2Signaling Systems Unit, Laboratory of Systems Biology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
3Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
MA 01655, USA
4Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655, USA
5Co-first author
*Correspondence: abraham.brass@umassmed.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.06.028
SUMMARY
The flaviviruses dengue virus (DENV) and Zika virus
(ZIKV) are severe health threats with rapidly expand-
ing ranges. To identify the host cell dependencies of
DENV and ZIKV, we completed orthologous func-
tional genomic screens using RNAi and CRISPR/
Cas9 approaches. The screens recovered the ZIKV
entry factor AXL as well as multiple host factors
involved in endocytosis (RAB5C and RABGEF), hep-
arin sulfation (NDST1 and EXT1), and transmem-
brane protein processing and maturation, including
the
endoplasmic
reticulum
membrane
complex
(EMC). We find that both flaviviruses require the
EMC for their early stages of infection. Together,
these studies generate a high-confidence, systems-
wide view of human-flavivirus interactions and pro-
vide insights into the role of the EMC in flavivirus
replication.
INTRODUCTION
The New Millennium has brought a rapid expansion of human fla-
vivirus infections, including dengue virus (DENV), yellow fever
virus (YFV), West Nile virus (WNV), and Zika virus (ZIKV) (Bhatt
et al., 2013). Given that global warming is predicted to enlarge
the range of the insect vectors that carry these viruses, it is crit-
ical that we understand the biology of these viruses in order to
design effective therapies against them. DENV and ZIKV are sin-
gle-stranded, positive-sense RNA viruses that are transmitted
to humans by Aedes mosquitos. Both are fast-growing health
threats that are producing an escalating number of infections
in the Americas and worldwide.
Each year, 390 million people are infected with DENV, with
500,000 individuals hospitalized with severe dengue, the major-
ity of those being young children (Bhatt et al., 2013). ZIKV, first
isolated from an infected macaque in Uganda in 1947, suddenly
emerged in Micronesia in 2007 and expanded its range to South-
east Asia. In May 2015, ZIKV was identified in Brazil coincident
with an upsurge in neurologic and fetal abnormalities. With its
rapid spread to Central and South America, ZIKV has emerged
as a severe health threat by virtue of its fast-paced global spread
and associated morbidities, including microcephaly and Guil-
lain-Barre syndrome. (D’Ortenzio et al., 2016; Driggers et al.,
2016; Haug et al., 2016; Lazear and Diamond, 2016; Musso
and Gubler, 2016; Rasmussen et al., 2016). These events have
led to ZIKV being declared a public health emergency by the
World Health Organization. Recent animal models have demon-
strated that ZIKV infects the placentas of pregnant mice, with
transmission to fetal mice resulting in death or severe growth
impairment (Cugola et al., 2016; Miner and Diamond, 2016;
Miner et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016). There are no specific therapies
for flavivirus infection, although a DENV vaccine has recently
been approved in some countries. There is no approved vaccine
or therapy for ZIKV infection.
Flavivirus replication begins with the virus binding to host cell
receptors
and
undergoing
endocytosis
(Fernandez-Garcia
et al., 2009). A number of proteins have been implicated to
facilitate DENV attachment and entry, including TIM1 and
AXL (Jemielity et al., 2013; Meertens et al., 2012; Morizono
and Chen, 2014; Perera-Lecoin et al., 2014; Richard et al.,
2015), the latter having also been identified as an important
ZIKV entry factor (Hamel et al., 2015). Subsequent to initial viral
entry, late endosomal acidification triggers the fusion of host
and viral membranes and permits the virus’ positive sense
RNA genome (viral RNA [vRNA]) to enter the host cell cytosol.
Upon cytosolic entry, the vRNA is translated into a large poly-
protein on the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). This poly-
protein is processed by both host and viral proteases into three
structural proteins (premembrane [prM], capsid [C], and the
glycoprotein envelope [E protein]), and seven non-structural
(NS) proteins (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and
NS5). DENV has been demonstrated to extensively remodel
the ER into replication centers (RCs), where progeny viruses
are created. The newly synthesized flaviviruses then traffic
from the RER to the cell surface via the Golgi, where they
232
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016 ª 2016 The Author(s).
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
 Figure 1. MORR Screens for Identifying Human Proteins that Modulate DENV Replication
(A) Schematic workflow diagram of the DENV-HF screen.
(B) MAGI HeLa cells were transfected with the indicated negative (non-targeting [NT]) and positive (ATP6V0B, IFITM3) controls for 72 hr and then infected with
DENV2-NGC (MOI 0.5) for 30 hr. Cells were then fixed, permeabilized, and immunostained with anti-E protein antibody (4G2, green) or stained for DNA (blue).
Percent infected cells ± SD are shown at 43 magnification.
(legend continued on next page)
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
233
 undergo exocytosis, thus spreading the infection to neigh-
boring cells.
The flaviviruses have a complex lifecycle that relies on the host
cell’s resources. Earlier efforts have addressed the role of
arthropod DENV-host factors (DENV-HFs) (Sessions et al.,
2009) and human factors required by YFV (Le Sommer et al.,
2012) and WNV (Krishnan et al., 2008; Ma et al., 2015). Nonethe-
less, fundamental questions regarding how human proteins
modulate flavivirus replication, including ZIKV infection, remain.
Therefore, we investigated human-flavivirus interactions with a
combined functional genomic approach employing multiple
orthologous RNAi reagent (MORR) screens for DENV replication
together with a pooled CRISPR/Cas9 cell survival enrichment
screen to find host factors that are required for ZIKV replication.
To limit false positives, we used gene-expression filtering to re-
move host cell candidates that were not expressed in the cells
used for the screens. To address some of the shortcomings of
functional genomics (false positives and false negatives), we in-
tegrated the MORR screen datasets using an existing RNAi
analysis program, RIGER (Luo et al., 2008), which quantitatively
determines what the likelihood is of a gene contributing to the
phenotype of interest. This orthologous functional genomic effort
recovered the recently discovered ZIKV entry factor AXL (Hamel
et al., 2015) as well as multiple proteins involved in endocytosis
(RAB5C and RABGEF), heparin sulfation (NDST1 and EXT1) and
transmembrane protein processing and maturation, including
the endoplasmic reticulum membrane complex (EMC). Unlike
what has been shown with WNV, we find that DENV, ZIKV, and
YFV strongly depend on the EMC for their replication and that
this requirement occurs at an early stage of infection. Using pro-
teomics, we show that the EMC associates with the translocon
and oligosaccharyl-transferase (OST) complex. Together, these
studies generate a high-confidence, systems-wide view of hu-
man-flavivirus interactions and deepen our understanding of fla-
vivirus pathogenesis.
RESULTS
MORR Screens for Identifying DENV Host Factors
We developed an RNAi screening platform for DENV-HFs (Fig-
ures 1A and 1B). After 72 hr of siRNA transfection, HeLa cells
were infected with DENV serotype 2-New Guinea C strain
(DENV2-NGC, MOI 0.5; Figure 1A). At 30 hr post infection, the
cells were stained using a monoclonal antibody, 4G2, directed
against a conserved fusion loop in the flaviviral E protein
(E) and stained for DNA. Cell number and percent infection
were determined for each well. Positive control siRNAs were
against ATP6V0B and IFITM3. This assay was used to screen
in triplicate three siRNA libraries (Dharmacon siGENOME 4;
SMARTpool, 21,121 genes targeted), Ambion Silencer Select
(21,584
genes
targeted),
and
the
Dharmacon
revision
5
(SMART-Rev, 4,506 genes targeted; Figure 1C). These libraries
were selected because of their complementary design and cu-
mulative comprehensive coverage. A comparison of >1,000
siRNA pools from the Silencer Select and SMARTpool libraries
demonstrated <5% similar siRNAs showing that the reagents
are largely orthologous. The SMART-Rev library is based on a
more recent RefSeq database annotation and thus in part sup-
plements the earlier designed SMARTpool library with which it
shares <10% siRNA sequence overlap. siRNA pools were cho-
sen as hits if the percentage of infected cells was % 50% or R
150% of the plate mean and cell number was R 50% of the
plate mean. Selected DENV-HF candidate pools were validated
by independently testing the individual oligos from each pool
(Table S1). In the validation round, pools with two or more
siRNAs that satisfied these criteria were denoted as higher con-
fidence because such results are most consistent with the
depletion of the intended target (Echeverri et al., 2006). Collec-
tively, these screens identified over 150 high-confidence candi-
date DENV-HFs that were validated with two or more individual
siRNAs (Tables S1 and S2). The validity of this approach was
supported by the enrichment of multiple pathways and macro-
molecular complexes in the high-confidence set (e.g., the vacu-
olar ATPase [vATPase], the OST complex, and endocytic
trafficking; Figures S1A–S1D; Tables S1 and S2), arguing that
the majority of these candidates are true positives. Overlap of
specific genes between our high-confidence list with either a
Drosophila-based DENV-HF screen (Sessions et al., 2009) or a
human-cell-based whole-genome screen using WNV (Krishnan
et al., 2008) was low (discussed below). Consistent with known
DENV dependencies, all of the screens independently identified
various vATPase components, and two or more screens also
detected a role in replication for SEC61B, an endoplasmic retic-
ulum protein translocase component, and SCFD1, which is
necessary for transmembrane protein processing. The low spe-
cific gene overlap between the screens may reflect different
screening strategies and reagents and is consistent with previ-
ous screen comparisons revealing that, although pathways and
complexes are more likely to be detected across screens, the
overlap of specific genes is less pronounced. Although we did
find significant overlap in pathways and gene clusters when
comparing our own Silencer Select and SMARTpool library
screens, the exact gene overlap was low (13%–14%; Table
S2). This is consistent with the differences between the various
siRNA libraries influencing the genes recovered. Therefore, our
use of multiple orthologous RNAi reagents is useful in attempt-
ing to saturate a given screen.
RIGER Analysis of the MORR DENV-HF Screens
In an attempt to address the caveats of RNAi, false negatives, and
false positives, we employed the MORR screening approach and
used an existing informatics program, RIGER (Luo et al., 2008), to
integrate the primary screen data into rankings of dependency
factors (DFs; RIGER3-DF) or competitive factors (CFs; RIGER3-
CF; Table S3). We compared the RIGER and primary screen rank-
ings for their ability to detect genes in the EMC, OST complex or
(C) The results of the DENV-HF screens with the siRNA pools ranked in order of their normalized percent infection (log2 scale). The highlighted genes are selected
hits from each respective library.
(D) Based on the RIGER3 screen dataset, a hypothetical model cell was created highlighting the DENV lifecycle as well as where 259 of the DENV-HFs might
function on the basis of the available literature (Table S3).
234
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
 the EC (Figure S2A). For this, we calculated the area under the
curve (AUC) generated by plotting the percentage of complex-
related genes from the total set that is detected moving from
the top down along the respective gene rankings (Figure S2A;
Table S3). The AUC analysis shows graphically how well an
siRNA library or RIGER analysis performed in identifying the ex-
pected components. The AUC analyses show that the Silencer
Select screen was superior, outperforming both the RIGER anal-
ysis and the SMARTpool screen for both the EMC and OST com-
plex. For the EC, the RIGER analyses were more efficient than the
independent screens, revealing its usefulness. Using the flavivi-
rus replication cycle as a starting point and with the referenced
literature as a guide, 259 (137 DFs and 122 CFs) of the top 150
of both the DF and CF RIGER3 gene lists expressed in the
HeLa cell were assembled into a speculative model of how they
might modulate viral infection (Figure 1D; Table S3).
DENV-HF Pathways and Complexes
The screens enriched for several pathways and complexes
needed by the virus (e.g., OST, conserved oligomeric complex
of Golgi, and nonsense-mediated decay pathway), whose com-
ponents scored across the primary screen datasets (Figures S1
and S2; Tables S2 and S3). For the OST complex, DENV required
seven of eight components (Figure S1D; Table S2). A similarly
strong enrichment was seen with the vATPase, with 13 subunits
needed by the virus. In addition to DENV-HFs, the screens also
identified the EC as well as others, whose loss enhanced viral
infection (CFs) in keeping with inactivation of the host’s tran-
scriptional machinery being a common viral attack mechanism
(Tables S1, S2, and S3).
Among the most enriched gene sets was the EMC, a highly
conserved, although poorly understood, oligomeric complex
comprised of nine to ten distinct proteins that predominantly
reside in the ER (Figures 2A and 2B). The EMC is needed for trans-
membrane protein folding (Jonikas et al., 2009) and has been
implicated in regulating the expression of the rhodopsin receptor
in flies (Satoh et al., 2015) as well as orchestrating the transfer of
lipids from the ER to the mitochondria in yeast (Lahiri et al., 2014).
Notably, a pooled CRISPR/Cas9 screen for WNV host factors
found three components of the EMC to be needed for WNV-
induced cell death but not for viral replication (Ma et al., 2015).
In contrast to what has been reported for WNV, we found that
DENV strongly required EMC1, EMC2, EMC4, and EMC5 for its
replication (Figures 2A–2C), suggesting that these related flavivi-
ruses utilize the EMC differently, a topic we discuss further below.
DENV-HF MORR Screens Have False Positives and False
Negatives
Comparison of candidate lists from similar siRNA screens reveals
shared pathways and complexes, but in the majority of instances,
there is low exact gene overlap (Perreira et al., 2015, 2016; Zhu
et al., 2014). The MORR DENV-HF screens behaved similarly,
with a low percentage of same-gene overlap detected in the pri-
mary screens (for DFs, with % 50% plate mean infected cells
and R 50% plate mean number of cells: Silencer Select 13.5%,
SMARTpool 14.4%, and SMART-Rev 10.6%; Table S2). A com-
parison across the screens for siRNAs targeting components of
the OST complex, the EC, or the EMC showed estimated false
negativeratesrangingfrom25%to50%(TableS2).Wegenerated
a common candidate list for genes that scored in two or more
of the screens (Table S2). To minimize the effects of false positives
and off-target effects, we performed microarray analysis (Affyme-
trix GeneChip human 2.0 ST array) to determine the genes ex-
pressed in the HeLa cells (Tables S1, S2, and S3). The microarray
probe-set values were matched to the genes present in the siRNA
libraries: 17,070 (80.8%) and 17,168 (79.5%) genes with expres-
sion data in the SMARTpool and Silencer Select screens. The me-
dian of the negative control intron probe set served as a cutoff for
gene expression, producing a list of 12,461 common genes in the
siRNA libraries that are expressed in the HeLa cells.
A CRISPR/Cas9 Screen to Identify ZIKV Host Factors
The advent of bacterially derived CRISPR/Cas9 gene modulation
has revolutionized the field of in vitro mammalian pooled genetic
screening (Hsu et al., 2014; Sanjana et al., 2014; Shalem et al.,
2014, 2015). In optimization experiments, we found that the
ZIKV MR766 strain kills >95% of H1-HeLa cells in �8 days at an
MOI of 5, with other ZIKV strains not being as cytopathic, making
this combination of virus and the host cell ideal for a pooled
CRISPR/Cas9 screen (data not shown). Therefore, to find addi-
tional flavivirus host factors, we performed a CRISPR/Cas9
screen using the H1-HeLa cell line and ZIKV MR766 (Figure 3A).
We first stably expressed a human-codon-optimized cDNA of
S. pyogenes Cas9 in a population of HeLa cells (Shalem et al.,
2014). Next, we stably transduced the H1-HeLa-Cas9 cells at an
MOI of 0.2 with a complex lentiviral pool expressing the human
GeCKO v.2 single-guide RNA (sgRNA) library (Shalem et al.,
2014), which targets 19,052 genes in the human genome with
six sgRNAs per gene across two half-libraries (libraries A and B).
Libraries A and B each possess three unique sgRNA per gene
and these two half-libraries were used in parallel to screen for
ZIKV host factors in independent triplicate screens. The Cas9-ex-
pressing H1-HeLa cells were infected with ZIKV MR766 at an MOI
of 5 and cultured for 8 days until >95% of the cells were dead, as
determined by their detachment from the plate surface as seen
with an inverted microscope. The surviving cells, appearing as
tightly clustered clonal colonies, were expanded, and genomic
DNA was prepared. Proviruses containing the sgRNA stably inte-
gratedintoeachofthe survivingcellswereamplifiedandidentified
from genomic DNA using PCR and next-gen sequencing. Similar
to RNAi screens, we used the reagent redundancy principle
(Echeverri et al., 2006) to select for candidate genes which
had >6 sequencing reads for three or more independent sgRNAs
(TableS4).Wethenrepeatedthescreenandcomparedthedatato
identifycandidatesthatarehighconfidenceinbothscreens(Table
S4). There was a high degree of sgRNA and exact-gene overlap
amongthe topcandidates foundby the independentscreens (Fig-
ure S2B; Table S4), suggesting that the screen was approaching
saturation under these conditions.
EMC Is Required for the Replication of ZIKV, DENV,
and YFV
Among the top ZIKV-DF candidates (>4 independent sgRNAs,
with >6 sequencing reads per sgRNA; Table S4) from the
CRISPR/Cas9 screens was the recently published ZIKV entry
factor, AXL (six of six sgRNAs) (Hamel et al., 2015; Jemielity
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
235
 Figure 2. The EMC Is Needed for DENV Replication
(A) MAGI HeLa cells were transfected with the indicated Silencer Select siRNAs (Table S1) for 72 hr and then infected with DENV2-NGC (MOI 0.5). At 48 hr post
infection, the cells were fixed, permeabilized, and immunostained for the viral E protein. Imaging analysis software was used to determine the percentage
infection. Values indicate the mean infected cells normalized to the NT negative control siRNA-transfected samples of n = 3 independent experiments ± SD.
(B) Schematic of the EMC with components 1–10 depicted as circles whose relative sizes are proportional to their respective molecular weights (Table S1).
Components 8 and 9 are shown as one subunit because of their similarity and variable expression. Subunits are indicated in color if they scored in one or more of
the DENV-HF MORR screens.
(C) MAGI HeLa cells were transfected with the indicated pooled Silencer Select siRNAs (three siRNAs per gene; Table S1) for 72 hr and then infected with DENV2-
NGC (MOI 0.5). At 48 hr post infection, the cells were fixed, permeabilized, and immunostained for the viral E protein. The nuclei of the cells were also stained for
DNA using Hoechst 33342 dye (blue). Imaging analysis software was used to determine the percentage infection (numbers shown ± SD). Values indicate the
mean percent infected cells of n = 3 independent experiments ± SD at 43 magnification.
Results throughout are the mean of three independent experiments ± SD.
236
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
 Figure 3. CRISPR/Cas9 Screens to Identify Human Proteins that Modulate ZIKV Replication
(A) Schematic workflow diagram of the ZIKV-HF CRISPR/Cas9 screen.
(B) Ranking of genes from the ZIKV-HF CRISPR/Cas9 screen. Relative sgRNA frequencies were detected using next-gen sequencing (pooled data from two
independent screens) were plotted against relative frequencies of sgRNAs in the unselected starting population of H1-HeLa cells containing the human GeCKO
v2.0 library. For top-ranking genes, sgRNA frequencies are highlighted.
(C) Ranking of genes from the ZIKV-HF CRISPR/Cas9 screen. Next-gen sequencing reads from two independent screens were mapped to the human GeCKO
v2.0 library using bowtie2. Only sgRNAs with six or more sequencing reads were used for analysis. Identified genes were ranked according to the number of total
reads from the two screens combined and according to the number of retrieved independent sgRNAs per gene (the human GeCKO v2.0 library contains six
independent sgRNAs per gene). Gene symbols are shown for a selection of the highest-ranking genes.
(legend continued on next page)
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
237
 et al., 2013; Meertens et al., 2012; Perera-Lecoin et al., 2014),
providing both an unbiased confirmation of AXL’s role in ZIKV
replication as well as an attestation to the validity of the
screening approach (Figures 3B and 3C; Table S4). The screen
also recovered candidate ZIKV-HFs involved in endocytosis
(RAB5C, RABGEF1, WDR7, and ZFYVE20), transmembrane pro-
tein production (the translocon-associated components SSR2
and SSR3), and post-translational modification (STT3A, EXT1,
and EXTL3) as well as two microRNAs, HSA-MIR-451A and
HSA-MIR-451B (Figures 3B and 3C; Table S4).
Consistent with the MORR DENV-HF screens, the CRISPR/
Cas9 ZIKV-HF screen effectively saturated the EMC, finding all
nine components with three or more sgRNAs, including R5
sgRNAs out of six total for EMC1–EMC6 (Figure 3D; Table S4).
Importantly, the EMC was needed for the replication of a more
recently isolated ZIKV strain provided by a pediatric patient in
Cambodia in 2010 based on the complex’s depletion leading to
a marked decrease in the levels of either viral double stranded
RNA (dsRNA) or E protein in H1-HeLa cells (Figures 3E and
S3A), with similar results seen using A549 adenocarcinoma
epithelial cells (data not shown).
The role of 12 of the top candidates found in the ZIKV-HF
screen was then assessed in a replication assay (E protein
expression) using three independent siRNAs targeting each
gene (Figure 4A). In matched studies, we determined the level
of mRNA target depletion produced by each of the siRNAs (Fig-
ure 4B). These paired assays showed a strong correlation
between the level of mRNA knockdown and the observed
phenotype. All of the ZKV-HF candidates, including EMC1–
EMC6, decreased E protein levels to %50% of control with
two or more siRNAs, and this effect was seen with multiple
strains of ZIKV (MR766 Africa 1947, ZIKV FSS3025 Cambodia
2010, and ZIKV Puerto Rico 2015) as well as DENV2-NGC.
Low-passage clinical isolates of DENV1 and DENV4 from
Thailand, as well as the YFV vaccine strain YF17D, also required
the EMC for replication (Figure 4C).
A Role for the EMC in Early DENV and ZIKV Replication
These data revealed that the EMC was needed for DENV and
ZIKV replication. In contrast, WNV has been shown to not require
the EMC for its replication, with loss of the complex resulting in
an increase in viral replication intermediates in some instances
(Ma et al., 2015). Although the role of the EMC in WNV replication
remains to be tested in our system, these data suggest that the
DENV- and ZIKV-HF screens reported here have identified a pre-
viously unappreciated role for the EMC in flavivirus replication.
To determine where in the DENV and ZIKV lifecycles the EMC
is needed, we tested how depletion of either EMC1, EMC2,
EMC4, or EMC5 impacted the early stages of DENV infection us-
ing synchronized time course infectivity experiments. To monitor
viral infection in these assays, we employed immunostaining for
E protein combined with a fluorescence-in-situ-hybridization-
based imaging assay (viewRNA) for vRNA (Feeley et al., 2011).
DENV2-NGC (MOI 50) was first incubated on ice with siRNA-
transfected H1-HeLa cells to allow viral binding but not endocy-
tosis. Warm media was then added, and, at the given times, the
cells were washed with cold PBS, incubated with or without
trypsin (T), fixed, processed, and confocally imaged using either
an antibody that binds E protein (4G2) or a probe set that recog-
nizes DENV or ZIKV RNA (ViewRNA). The trypsin step is de-
signed to remove the virus remaining at the cell surface after
warming has triggered the virus’ endocytosis. Within the time
course of this imaging assay (0 to 90 min post infection), the viral
signals arise predominantly from the incoming viruses that are
either surface bound, trafficking within the endosomal pathway,
or have recently fused and transferred their contents, including
the vRNA, into the cytosol. However, we cannot rule out the pos-
sibility that in addition to the vRNA that has recently entered the
cytosol from incoming viruses, this assay is also detecting the
products of de novo vRNA transcription that has occurred at
60 and 90 min post infection. Given our experiences using the
viewRNA assay to detect the RNA of other viruses, e.g., influenza
(Chin et al., 2015; Feeley et al., 2011), it is unlikely that this assay
would detect vRNA within intact virions due to their limited
accessibility to the probes. In support of this, our attempts to
detect vRNA fixed to the cell surface immediately prior to warm-
ing and infection (time zero) in samples that were not treated with
trypsin (-T) showed little to no vRNA signal (data not shown).
At 0 min with no trypsin treatment, the levels of surface-bound
virus were not appreciably altered by loss of the EMCs (Figures
5A–5C and S3B). In contrast, at 40 min post infection, loss of the
EMC decreased the levels of both intracellular E protein and
vRNA as compared to the control cells. A small amount of virus
was seen arrested at or very near the surface of the EMC-
depleted cells at 40 min post infection subsequent to trypsin
treatment; therefore, we attempted to rescue DENV2-NGC entry
using acidified buffer. However, this did not produce an observ-
able effect (data not shown). Similar results were obtained using
ZIKV MR766, with EMC depletion decreasing intracellular vRNA
levels but not the levels of bound virus at 0 min (Figures S4A–
S4D). The depletion of AXL also resulted in less intracellular E
and vRNA apparent at both 60 and 90 min post infection but little
to no decrease in the levels of surface bound virus at time zero
(Figures S5A–S5E). The lack of an effect on viral binding with
AXL depletion seen with this confocal imaging-based assay
was surprising given its known role as a viral entry factor; how-
ever, it is partly consistent with a published study that detected
only a modest loss, �20%, of DENV binding to host cells in the
(D) Schematic of the EMC with components 1–10 depicted as circles whose size is representative of their relative molecular weights. Components 8 and 9 are
shown as one subunit because of their similarity and variable expression. Subunits are indicated in color if they scored in two or more of ZIKV-HF CRISPR/Cas9
screens repeats with the indicated number of independent sgRNAs (right).
(E) H1-HeLa cells were transfected with the indicated pooled Silencer Select siRNAs (three siRNAs per gene; Table S1) for 72 hr. then infected with ZIKV
Cambodia (moi 0.5). At 48 hr post infection the cells were fixed, permeabilized, and immunostained for viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA; recombinant J [rJ]
antibody, green). The nuclei of the cells were also stained for DNA using Hoechst 33342 dye (blue). Imaging analysis software was used to determine the
percentage infection (numbers shown ± SD). Values indicate the mean percent infected cells of n = 3 independent experiments ± SD shown at 43 magnification.
Results throughout are the mean of three independent experiments ± SD.
238
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
 Figure 4. ZIKV-HF Are Required for the Replication of Multiple Viral Strains
(A) H1-HeLa cells were transfected with the indicated Silencer Select siRNAs (three independent siRNAs [#1, #2, and #3] per gene; Table S1) for 72 hr and
then infected with the indicated flaviviruses (MOI 0.3–1). At 48 hr post infection, the cells were fixed, permeabilized, and immunostained for the viral E
protein. Imaging analysis software was used to determine the percentage infection. Values indicate the mean percent infected cells of n = 3 independent
experiments ± SD.
(legend continued on next page)
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
239
 presence of an anti-AXL antibody using a flow-cytometry-based
assay (Meertens et al., 2012).
These studies showed that DENV and ZIKV infection was
halted early in the setting of lowered EMC components or with
the loss of AXL but did not impact viral binding under these set-
tings. Therefore, we modified the above assay by omitting the
trypsin step at 80 min post infection in order to assess what
happens to the bound virus we observed at time zero in the
EMC- and AXL-depleted cell samples. We also omitted a perme-
abilization step in the no-trypsin (-T) 80 min post infection sam-
ples so as to preferentially detect cell-surface-bound viruses.
(B) mRNA was made from cells in (A), and qPCR was performed in order to determine the relative abundance of the indicated mRNAs. Values indicate the mean
expression normalized to the NT control.
(C) Experiments performed as in (A) using the YF17D and low-passage DENV1 and DENV4 viruses.
Results throughout are the mean of three independent experiments ± SD.
Figure 5. Loss of the EMC Halts DENV Early
in Replication
(A) H1-HeLa cells were transfected with the indi-
cated pooled Silencer Select siRNAs (three siRNAs
per gene, vATP = vATPase subunit ATP6V0B) for
72 hr and then incubated with DENV2-NGC on ice
(MOI 100). The viral supernatant was removed, and
warm media was added at time zero. At the indi-
cated time points after warming, cells were washed
and treated with (+) or without (�) a 1 min incubation
with trypsin (T) to remove or leave surface-bound
virus. The cells were then fixed, permeabilized, and
immunostained with anti-E antibody (4G2, green)
and confocally imaged (633). At 40 min post
warming, vRNA was also detected in matched
samples using a viewRNA probe set (red). Cellular
DNA was stained with DAPI (blue). The scale bar
represents
20
mM.
Corresponding
differential
interference contrast (DIC) images are provided in
Figure S3B.
(B and C) Quantitation of DENV E and DENV RNA
signal intensity normalized to the NT control is
provided (normalized E or vRNA mean intensity ±
SD) for R 12 cells from each of n = 3 experiments.
These studies showed that, at 80 min
post infection, the majority of the ZIKV
MR766 remained bound to the cell surface
of the EMC and AXL siRNA-transfected
cells, whereas, in the negative control, the
vast majority of the surface-bound virus
had undergone endocytosis and entered
the cell’s interior (Figures 6A–6C).
Given
these
data,
we
determined
whether the EMC was involved with the
cell-surface levels of either AXL or heparin
sulfate, both of which are important for
the initial stages of DENV and ZIKV replica-
tion (Jemielity et al., 2013; Meertens et al.,
2012; Richard et al., 2015). Depletion of
EMC1, EMC2, EMC4, or EMC5 did not
decrease
surface expression
of
either
AXL or heparin sulfate (Figures S6A and
S6B). We also evaluated the levels of a broad range of surface
protein glycosylation moieties using flow cytometry and a panel
of conjugated lectins and found no differences between the
negative control and the EMC-depleted cells (data not shown).
Together, these data suggest that the loss of the EMC blocks
DENV and ZIKV replication after the initial virus binding to the
host cell but prior to the virus’ endocytosis; however, given the
limitations of this imaging assays noted above, we cannot rule
out the possibility that a portion of the block to infection involves
the inhibition of the early amplification of vRNA in the cytosol.
This last possibility will require further evaluation in future studies
240
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
 using additional assays such as flavivirus replicon-expressing
cells.
The EMC Associates with the OST Complex
The EMC is conserved from yeast to humans, participates in ER
protein folding response (with its loss eliciting the unfolded
protein response (UPR) [Jonikas et al., 2009]), and is needed
for ER-to-mitochondrial lipid trafficking (Lahiri et al., 2014) and
the expression of several multi-pass transmembrane proteins,
including rhodopsin, in the Drosophila eye (Satoh et al., 2015)
and the acetylcholine receptor in C. elegans (Richard et al.,
2013). EMC1–EMC6 were shown to form a complex after their
identification in a screen in yeast for ER protein folding factors
(Jonikas et al., 2009). EMC7–EMC10 were added to these initial
functionally defined EMC components based on proteomic
studies (Christianson et al., 2012). Our data now demonstrate
that, in addition to WNV-induced cell death (Ma et al., 2015),
the loss of the EMC arrests DENV and ZIKV early in their replica-
tion cycles. To further elucidate the role of the EMC in viral infec-
tion and host-cell biology, we identified proteins that associate
with EMC1, EMC2, EMC4, or EMC5, using affinity purification
Figure 6. ZIKV Remains at the Cell Surface
with Loss of the EMC or AXL
(A) H1-HeLa cells were transfected with pooled
Silencer Select siRNAs (three siRNAs per gene)
targeting the indicated EMC components or AXL for
72 hr and then incubated with ZIKV MR766 on ice
(MOI 50). The viral supernatant was removed and
warm media was added at time 0. To preferentially
detect internalized virus at the indicated time points
post warming, cells were subjected to a one minute
incubation with trypsin (+ T, top) to remove surface-
bound virus followed by fixation and permeabiliza-
tion. In order to selectively detect surface-bound
virus, matched sets of cells were processed without
the trypsin step (-T) and then fixed with no per-
meabilization (bottom). Both sets of cells were then
immunostained for E protein (green) and confocally
imaged (633). Cell plasma membranes are outlined
in white on the basis of DIC images. Cellular DNA
was stained with DAPI (blue). The scale bar repre-
sents 20 mM.
(B and C) Quantitation of ZIKV E signal intensity
normalized to the NT control is provided (normal-
ized mean E intensity ± SD) for R 12 cells for each
panel in (A) from each of n = 3 experiments. The
legend indicates the minutes post infection (post
warming).
coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS).
EMC1, EMC2, EMC5–HA, and EMC4-
FLAG fusion protein expression in H1-
HeLa cells were induced for 72 hr with
doxycycline, and affinity purification (AP)
was performed (Figures 7A–7D). Co-puri-
fied proteins were then identified with
shotgun-proteomics. Proteins associating
with EMC components (hits) have in-
creased total spectral counts from affinity
purifying EMC components compared to
vector control cells (Figure 7E; Table S5). These experiments
identified multiple components of the translocon and OST com-
plexes, including both STT3A and STT3B subunits, RPN1/RPN2,
and DDOST, as associating with the EMC (Figures 7E–7G; Table
S5). From this AP-MS dataset, common pathways emerge as
being potentially important for the EMC’s function (Figure 7F;
Table S5). Glycolysis and glucose-metabolism pathway compo-
nents are the most enriched (23 of 72 proteins). The next most
represented pathway is the citric acid cycle and electron trans-
port, where 26 of 155 proteins are present in the EMC affinity pu-
rifications. Protein metabolism (57 of 687), protein processing in
the ER (23 of 169), and protein folding (CCT/TriC) pathways (8 of
21) are also highly represented.
The higher-order assembly of the EMC proteins with one
another, and how such differing assemblages might function, is
poorly understood. Consistent with the notion that different
EMC components have distinct functions, proteins that co-purify
with EMC4 showed the least amount of overlap with those asso-
ciating with EMC1, EMC2, and EMC5. EMC4’s affinity purification
alone co-purified EMC2, whereas EMC1, EMC2, and EMC5 all
associated with multiple other EMC components, including
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
241
 EMC7, EMC8, and EMC10. These data suggest that EMC1,
EMC2, and EMC5 are core components of the EMC complex,
whereasEMC4’sassociationmaybemoreperipheralorrestricted
to a particular variant. Consistent with this idea, EMC4 alone co-
purified with multiple COP1 (COPB1, COPB2, and COPG1) and
COPII (SEC13, SEC23A, and SEC22) components, which are
coat-protein complexes responsible for anterograde and retro-
grade transport to and fromtheER to the Golgi (BrandizziandBar-
lowe, 2013), suggesting that this subunit is involved in trafficking
between these closely interacting organelles.
DISCUSSION
The rapid spread of flavivirus infections represents a severe
and escalating threat to global health (Lazear and Diamond,
2016). To obtain a systems-level understanding of DENV and
ZIKV host factor dependencies and identify potential therapeu-
tic targets, we completed orthologous functional genomic
screens using both MORR/RIGER and CRISPR/Cas9 strate-
gies coupled with validation experiments and proteomics.
We chose this combinatorial approach in order to take advan-
tage of the best that each of the these technologies has to
offer, thereby offsetting the caveats of genetic screening, false
positives, and false
negatives. This combined
functional
genomic approach generated a comprehensive overview of
flavivirus dependencies in human cells. The strong overlap of
enriched complexes and pathways between the MORR RNAi
screens and the CRISPR/Cas9 screens, as well as the
CRISPR/Cas9 screens themselves, suggest that the flavivirus
host factor screens are approaching saturation (Tables S6
and S7). These datasets will now hopefully provide a useful
resource in helping the research community find and exploit
flavivirus weaknesses.
Both screening approaches (MORR and CRISPR/Cas9) en-
riched for common complexes and pathways, including the
EMC; however, it was only in the CRISPR/Cas9 screen that the
reported ZIKV and DENV entry factor AXL was detected as
important for viral replication (Hamel et al., 2015). This is consis-
tent with pooled screens using cell survival as a readout display-
ing limited sensitivity (few candidates recovered) but excellent
specificity in finding host genes that act very early in viral replica-
tion, for instance host factors needed for viral entry (Perreira
et al., 2016). In contrast, RNAi screens generate a larger list of
host factor candidates contributing to a broader understanding
of viral requirements; however, this comes at the high cost of
increased false leads. Therefore given these complementary
strengths and weaknesses, a combined RNAi and CRISPR/
Cas9 screening effort is likely to yield the most comprehensive
insight into human-viral interactions.
Overlap with Flaviviral Screens
siRNA screens for both WNV and YFV host factors in human
cells, as well as a Drosophila cell-based siRNA screen for
DENV host factors, have been previously published (Krishnan
et al., 2008; Kwon et al., 2014; Le Sommer et al., 2012; Ma
et al., 2015; Sessions et al., 2009). We compared our MORR
screen datasets with the published candidate lists from these ef-
forts (Table S6). We found that the overlap between these efforts
was low, most likely due to false positives and false negatives
that vary significantly between siRNA libraries and platforms
(Table S6). The greatest overlap was with the fly-based screen
(Sessions et al., 2009), which, although surprising, may speak
to lower levels of artifacts being produced using that approach.
Notably, neither AXL nor the other published DENV receptor
TIM1 (Jemielity et al., 2013; Meertens et al., 2012) were recov-
ered as a viral dependency factor in any of these RNAi-based
efforts.
A comparison between the published flavivirus screens and
the ZIKV CRISPR/Cas9 screen for overlap showed that the
WNV CRISPR/Cas9 screen detected EMC2, 3 and 7 and the
translocon-associated protein, SSR2, as being needed for
WNV cytopathicity (Ma et al., 2015). The YFV siRNA screen found
EMC3, WDR7 (endocytosis), EXT1 (heparin sulfation) to be
needed for viral replication (Le Sommer et al., 2012); with the
requirement for EMC3 in YFV replication being consistent with
the results presented here. WDR7 was also needed for WNV
replication in the siRNA-based screen, along with SH3GLB2
and the vATPase subunit, ATP6V0A1, which are both involved
in endocytosis (Krishnan et al., 2008).
As discussed, the WNV CRISPR/Cas9 screen found that three
EMC subunits (EMC2, EMC3, and EMC7) were necessary for
virus-induced cell death but not for viral replication (Ma et al.,
2015), which is in contrast to what we had found with DENV,
ZIKV, and YFV. The lack of detection of any EMC subunit in
the WNV siRNA replication screen (Krishnan et al., 2008),
together with the EMC-modulating viral cytopathicity, but not
viral replication, as shown with the WNV CRISPR/Cas9 screen,
are consistent with the notion that the EMC plays an important
but differing role in the WNV lifecycle as compared to those of
DENV, ZIKV, and YFV.
Overlap with Related Screens
A role for the EMC in yeast was discovered using a genetic
screen to find genes needed for phospholipid (PL) transfer
from the ER to the mitochondria (Lahiri et al., 2014). A compar-
ison of the yeast PL and ZIKV CRISPR/Cas9 screens’ respec-
tive candidate lists showed that only the four EMC compo-
nents were shared in common, arguing against a shared
pathway in PL transfer underlying the observed phenotype
(Table S6). The flaviviruses enter host cells via clathrin-medi-
ated endocytosis (CME), and the loss of the EMC blocks flavi-
virus infection early, after viral binding but likely before viral
entry. Therefore, we checked for any overlap between the
ZIKV CRISPR/Cas9 high-confidence dataset and one from a
whole-genome siRNA screen for CME using the SMARTpool
library and human cells (Kozik et al., 2013). This comparison
revealed one common gene, LRRC29. The lack of overlap be-
tween our screens and the CME RNAi screen, together with
the EMC only registering as needed for select flaviviruses
and not any other virus we or others have investigated
(HIV-1, HRV, IAV, and HCVl; Table S6) strongly suggests that
the block in flaviviral replication found in the EMC-depleted
cells is rather unique to this subset of viruses and does not
involve a general disruption of CME. In support of this,
YF17D has recently been shown to enter via a clathrin-inde-
pendent pathway (Fernandez-Garcia et al., 2016).
242
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
 Figure 7. Identification of EMC-Interacting Proteins and Pathways using AP-MS
(A) EMC1, EMC2, and EMC5-HA expression in H1-HeLa cells after induction with 5 ug/ml doxycycline and immunostaining with anti-HA antibody.
(B) EMC4-FLAG expression in H1-HeLa cells after induction with 5 ug/ml doxycycline and immunostaining with anti-FLAG antibody.
(C) Whole-cell lysates from cells in (A) showing EMC1, EMC2, and EMC5-HA expression. Actin (ACTB) serves as a loading control.
(D) Whole-cell lysates from cells in (B) showing EMC4-FLAG expression. ACTB serves as a loading control.
(legend continued on next page)
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
243
 The Role of AXL in Flavivirus Replication
The phosphatidyl serine (PS) binding transmembrane proteins
AXL and TIM1 have been shown to be required for the entry
of a broad range of viruses, including DENV and ZIKV, via a
general interaction with the PS present on the viral membrane
(Hamel et al., 2015; Jemielity et al., 2013; Meertens et al.,
2012). Although multiple screens for flavivirus host factors
have not detected these proteins, including our own MORR
screens, the ZIKV CRISPR/Cas9 found AXL to be one of the
strongest candidates in terms of both orthologous sgRNAs as
well as total number of reads. To date, no flavivirus host-factor
screen has detected TIM1 as important for viral replication,
indeed we did not find it to be expressed in the HeLa cells
used in these studies (Table S1; data not shown). We found
the ZIKV requirement for AXL to occur early in infection, after
viral binding but prior to viral entry into the endosomal pathway
and/or the early amplification of vRNA in the cytosol. Interest-
ingly, the requirement for AXL was considerably less with the
replication of DENV and YF17D, demonstrating that, for this
subset of flaviviruses, an AXL- and TIM-1-independent means
of viral entry exists.
EMC’s Cellular Function
The EMC was first identified through a genetic interaction
screen in yeast as playing a critical role in protein folding, the
loss of which induced the UPR (Jonikas et al., 2009). More
recently, the EMC has been postulated to serve as a tethering
mechanism that facilitates PL transfer from the ER to the mito-
chondria in yeast (Lahiri et al., 2014) and to mediate the folding
of multi-pass, but not single-pass, proteins in the ER (Richard
et al., 2013; Satoh et al., 2015). We became interested in the
EMC because it was the top complex enriched for in all of our
flavivirus MORR and CRISPR/Cas9 screens. This viral depen-
dency on the EMC was unique among the multiple viruses we
and others have investigated in human-cell-based screens,
suggesting a specific role for the EMC in the flavivirus lifecycle
(Tables S6 and S7). To improve our understanding of the EMC,
we used EMC proteins as baits in AP-MS studies to find pro-
teins with which they associate. These studies showed that
the EMC interacts with both the translocon and the OST com-
plex. Given the known close interaction between the translocon
and OST (Rapoport, 2007) and the role of the EMC in ER protein
folding (Jonikas et al., 2009), our data suggest that, similar to
the OST complex, the EMC is poised near the intraluminal open-
ing of the translocon, where it would have immediate access to
the nascent transmembrane protein being extruded into the ER
lumen. Additional EMC interactions included multiple nuclear-
membrane-associated proteins as well as mitochondrial pro-
teins (Table S5). Although the EMC has been thought to reside
predominantly in the ER, these studies suggest that it may also
contribute to the functions of additional organelles, warranting
further investigation.
The Role of the EMC in Flavivirus Infection
The UPR has been implicated in modulating flavivirus replication
(Bla
´ zquez et al., 2014; Pen
˜ a and Harris, 2011, 2012), in particular
during the generation of viral RCs beginning several hours post
infection. We therefore compared our gene lists with those of
the yeast screen that first identified the EMC as being important
for protein folding because its loss induces the UPR (Jonikas
et al., 2009). Interestingly, we did not identify a strong overlap
in genes that were found to play a role in the induction of the
UPR in yeast and those that are required for flavivirus replication
(Table S6). These findings point away from a triggering of the
UPR as the mechanism underlying the EMC-dependency of fla-
viviruses. Indeed, this comparison leaves open the possibility
that the EMC’s role in transmembrane protein folding is needed
for the expression of one or more additional glycosylated multi-
pass transmembrane proteins required for DENV, ZIKV, and YFV
replication.
A CRISPR/Cas9 screen found that the EMC was needed for
WNV-induced cytopathicity but not for viral replication (Ma
et al., 2015). Although we have not tested these observations
directly in our system, they suggest that there are at least two
distinct roles for the EMC in flaviviral infection: an early one,
potentially acting at viral entry and impacting DENV, ZIKV, and
YFV, and a second later one which may result in the death of
cytopathic flavivirus-infected cells. EMC’s role in cell death ap-
pears to predominate in WNV replication, but we note that
both roles (replication and cell death) could contribute to what
we observe with ZIKV, which is also cytopathic. An early require-
ment for the EMC could potentially occur via the loss of an addi-
tional human protein or lipid that is needed for the early stages of
viral replication and/or the triggering of an anti-viral state; if the
latter is the case, then the induced phenotype would act in a
restricted manner because we and others have not found that
the loss of the EMC inhibits the replication of the diverse viruses
interrogated via genetic screening. In addition, multiple EMCs
are themselves predicted to be transmembrane proteins,
including EMC1, EMC3, EMC4, and EMC5, and so there also ex-
ists the possibility that one or more of the EMCs are interacting
directly with the flaviviruses, potentially as entry factors. WNV
is more closely related to DENV and ZIKV than YFV (Blitvich
and Firth, 2015), arguing against the differing roles of the EMC
being explained by phylogeny. DENV, ZIKV, and YFV are all
transmitted by Aedes mosquitos, whereas WNV is transmitted
by mosquitos of the genus Culex, suggesting that a vector-spe-
cific viral adaptation may have resulted in these two distinct roles
for the EMC in human cells. A prediction arising from this notion
is that Japanese encephalitis virus, which is also transmitted by
Culex mosquitos, should not require the EMC for its early replica-
tion. Additional studies are now needed in order to more fully
elucidate the differing actions of the EMC in flavivirus infection.
Collectively, these results provide an early evaluation of the
role of the EMC in the viral lifecycle (Blitvich and Firth, 2015;
(E) EMC interaction networks revealed through AP-MS of EMC1, EMC2, EMC4, and EMC5 to identify interacting proteins. The top 20 enriched proteins for each
EMC subunit (blue) were used to generate networks in Cytoscape 3.1 (Table S5). Proteins that interacted with two or more EMCs are shown in yellow.
(F) Pathway enrichment of proteins identified in (E) using ConsensusPath DB.
(G) Schematic of the OST complex, with components depicted in color if they were found to be enriched (p % 0.5) in AP-MS experiments involving EMC1, EMC2,
EMC4, or EMC5 versus the negative control samples.
244
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
 Huang et al., 2014) together with a comprehensive and system-
atic view of human-flavivirus interactions intended to serve as a
useful resource in combating these emerging viral infections.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
MORR RNAi Screens
The RNAi screens were done in triplicate using four siRNA libraries:
SMARTpool, Dharmacon (21,121 pools, three oligos per pool), Silencer Select,
Ambion (21,584 siRNA pools, three oligos per pool), and Dharmacon
RefSeq27 Reversion Pools (4,506 siRNA pools, four oligos per pool). We
created a high-throughput image-based screening platform to find host fac-
tors needed for DENV replication as follows: human cervical cancer cells
(MAGI cells, NIH AIDS Reagent Repository) were transiently transfected with
siRNA (50 nM concentration) using a reverse transfection protocol employing
0.44% Oligofectamine (siRNA delivery reagent, Invitrogen) in a 384-well plate
format. After 72 hr of siRNA-mediated gene knockdown, the cells were in-
fected with DENV2-NGC (VR-1584) at an MOI of 0.5. At 30 hr post infection,
the cells were fixed with formalin, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100,
and immunostained using the 4G2 monoclonal antibody against the E protein.
The cells were then incubated with an Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse sec-
ondary antibody and stained for DNA with Hoechst 33342. The cells were
imaged on an automated Image Express Micro microscope at 43 magnifica-
tion. Images were analyzed with MetaXpress in order to determine the total
cells per well and the percentage of infected cells in each well. Positive control
siRNA SMARTpools targeting the V-ATPase subunits ATP6V0B or IFITM3
were used for the high-throughput screen. siRNA pools were classified as
hits (decreased infection) if the average of the triplicate plates showed that
the percentage of infected cells was > 50% of the plate mean and the cell
number was not > 50% of the plate mean. Pools which increase infection
by >150% of the plate mean were also selected as hits (increased infection).
Next, in the validation round each siRNA from selected hit pools (Ambion, three
siRNAs, and Dharmacon, four siRNAs) was screened individually as above. In
the validation datasets, pools with two or more individual siRNAs that met the
above criteria were deemed higher confidence, as per the reagent redundancy
principle.
RIGER Analysis
Z score robust normalization was applied prior to using the RIGER algorithm as
previously described (RNAi Gene Enrichment Ranking, GENE-E [Luo et al.,
2008]). Three RIGER methods were employed: second best (SB) method,
weighted sum (WS) method, and the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) method, all
of which provide a p value for the phenotypic significance of each gene. To
compare the individual RIGER analyses to one another and the individual
DENV-HF screen datasets (Silencer Select, endoribonuclease prepared siRNA
[esiRNA], SMARTpool), we used several test sets of complexes or pathways.
For these comparisons, AUCs were derived by integration with Microsoft
Excel employing the following equation: = (SUMPRODUCT(Y1:YL-1,X2:XL)–
SUMPRODUCT(X1:XL-1,Y2-YL)+XLYL-X1Y1)/2, where X and Y are a plotted
X and Y value, respectively, with the subscript representing each coordinate
and L representing the last value. Thus, L-1 represents the second to last
value. If a component was not in a dataset, then it was taken out of that data-
set; in this way, alterations were made in the total number of dataset parts so
that, at the end of the dataset, the percentage of the complex was 100%.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information contains Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
six figures, and seven tables and can be found with this article online at
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.06.028.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
G.S., W.M.M., P.M., J.M.P., J.M. Portmann, G.T., S.P.J., A.M.A., N.R., D.R.R.,
Z.G., S.G., T.F.K, and A.L.B. conceived and conducted the experiments,
analyzed the results, and wrote the paper.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank R.H. Scheuermann and B. Pickett (J. Craig Venter Institute), the Uni-
versity of Maryland Medical System (UMMS; R. Fish, L. Benson, and J. Bar-
rett), ICCB-L (C. Shamu, J. Smith, S. Rudnicki, S. Johnston, K. Rudnicki,
and D. Wrobel), and T. Soellner of Heidelberg University for help and inspira-
tion. This work was supported by an Investigators in the Pathogenesis of Infec-
tious Disease award from the Burroughs Wellcome Foundation to A.L.B. and a
subcontract to A.L.B. from contract HHSN272200900041C to Northrup Grum-
man Corporation from NIAID, NIH. A.L.B. is grateful to the UMMS Center for
Clinical and Translational Science and to the Bill and Melinda Gates Founda-
tion for their support.
Received: May 12, 2016
Revised: June 2, 2016
Accepted: June 10, 2016
Published: June 21, 2016
REFERENCES
Bhatt, S., Gething, P.W., Brady, O.J., Messina, J.P., Farlow, A.W., Moyes,
C.L., Drake, J.M., Brownstein, J.S., Hoen, A.G., Sankoh, O., et al. (2013).
The global distribution and burden of dengue. Nature 496, 504–507.
Bla
´ zquez, A.B., Escribano-Romero, E., Merino-Ramos, T., Saiz, J.C., and Mar-
tı
´n-Acebes, M.A. (2014). Stress responses in flavivirus-infected cells: activa-
tion of unfolded protein response and autophagy. Front Microbiol 5, 266.
Blitvich, B.J., and Firth, A.E. (2015). Insect-specific flaviviruses: a systematic
review of their discovery, host range, mode of transmission, superinfection
exclusion potential and genomic organization. Viruses 7, 1927–1959.
Brandizzi, F., and Barlowe, C. (2013). Organization of the ER-Golgi interface for
membrane traffic control. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 14, 382–392.
Chin, C.R., Perreira, J.M., Savidis, G., Portmann, J.M., Aker, A.M., Feeley,
E.M., Smith, M.C., and Brass, A.L. (2015). Direct Visualization of HIV-1 Repli-
cation Intermediates Shows that Capsid and CPSF6 Modulate HIV-1 Intra-
nuclear Invasion and Integration. Cell Rep. 13, 1717–1731.
Christianson, J.C., Olzmann, J.A., Shaler, T.A., Sowa, M.E., Bennett, E.J.,
Richter, C.M., Tyler, R.E., Greenblatt, E.J., Harper, J.W., and Kopito, R.R.
(2012). Defining human ERAD networks through an integrative mapping strat-
egy. Nat. Cell Biol. 14, 93–105.
Cugola, F.R., Fernandes, I.R., Russo, F.B., Freitas, B.C., Dias, J.L.M., Guimar-
a
˜ es, K.P., Benazzato, C., Almeida, N., Pignatari, G.C., Romero, S., et al. (2016).
The Brazilian Zika virus strain causes birth defects in experimental models.
Nature 534, 267–271.
D’Ortenzio, E., Matheron, S., Yazdanpanah, Y., de Lamballerie, X., Hubert, B.,
Piorkowski, G., Maquart, M., Descamps, D., Damond, F., and Leparc-Goffart,
I. (2016). Evidence of Sexual Transmission of Zika Virus. N. Engl. J. Med. 374,
2195–2198.
Driggers, R.W., Ho, C.Y., Korhonen, E.M., Kuivanen, S., Ja
¨ a
¨ skela
¨ inen, A.J.,
Smura, T., Rosenberg, A., Hill, D.A., DeBiasi, R.L., Vezina, G., et al. (2016).
Zika Virus Infection with Prolonged Maternal Viremia and Fetal Brain Abnor-
malities. N. Engl. J. Med. 374, 2142–2151.
Echeverri, C.J., Beachy, P.A., Baum, B., Boutros, M., Buchholz, F., Chanda,
S.K., Downward, J., Ellenberg, J., Fraser, A.G., Hacohen, N., et al. (2006). Mini-
mizing the risk of reporting false positives in large-scale RNAi screens. Nat.
Methods 3, 777–779.
Feeley, E.M., Sims, J.S., John, S.P., Chin, C.R., Pertel, T., Chen, L.M., Gaiha,
G.D., Ryan, B.J., Donis, R.O., Elledge, S.J., and Brass, A.L. (2011). IFITM3 in-
hibits influenza A virus infection by preventing cytosolic entry. PLoS Pathog. 7,
e1002337.
Fernandez-Garcia, M.D., Mazzon, M., Jacobs, M., and Amara, A. (2009). Path-
ogenesis of flavivirus infections: using and abusing the host cell. Cell Host
Microbe 5, 318–328.
Fernandez-Garcia, M.D., Meertens, L., Chazal, M., Hafirassou, M.L., Dejarnac,
O., Zamborlini, A., Despres, P., Sauvonnet, N., Arenzana-Seisdedos, F.,
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
245
 Jouvenet, N., and Amara, A. (2016). Vaccine and Wild-Type Strains of Yellow
Fever Virus Engage Distinct Entry Mechanisms and Differentially Stimulate
Antiviral Immune Responses. MBio 7, e01956–e15.
Hamel, R., Dejarnac, O., Wichit, S., Ekchariyawat, P., Neyret, A., Luplertlop, N.,
Perera-Lecoin, M., Surasombatpattana, P., Talignani, L., Thomas, F., et al.
(2015). Biology of Zika Virus Infection in Human Skin Cells. J. Virol. 89,
8880–8896.
Haug, C.J., Kieny, M.P., and Murgue, B. (2016). The Zika Challenge. N. Engl. J.
Med. 374, 1801–1803.
Hsu, P.D., Lander, E.S., and Zhang, F. (2014). Development and applications
of CRISPR-Cas9 for genome engineering. Cell 157, 1262–1278.
Huang, Y.J., Higgs, S., Horne, K.M., and Vanlandingham, D.L. (2014). Flavivi-
rus-mosquito interactions. Viruses 6, 4703–4730.
Jemielity, S., Wang, J.J., Chan, Y.K., Ahmed, A.A., Li, W., Monahan, S., Bu, X.,
Farzan, M., Freeman, G.J., Umetsu, D.T., et al. (2013). TIM-family proteins pro-
mote infection of multiple enveloped viruses through virion-associated phos-
phatidylserine. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003232.
Jonikas, M.C., Collins, S.R., Denic, V., Oh, E., Quan, E.M., Schmid, V., Weibe-
zahn, J., Schwappach, B., Walter, P., Weissman, J.S., and Schuldiner, M.
(2009). Comprehensive characterization of genes required for protein folding
in the endoplasmic reticulum. Science 323, 1693–1697.
Kozik, P., Hodson, N.A., Sahlender, D.A., Simecek, N., Soromani, C., Wu, J.,
Collinson, L.M., and Robinson, M.S. (2013). A human genome-wide screen
for regulators of clathrin-coated vesicle formation reveals an unexpected
role for the V-ATPase. Nat. Cell Biol. 15, 50–60.
Krishnan, M.N., Ng, A., Sukumaran, B., Gilfoy, F.D., Uchil, P.D., Sultana, H.,
Brass, A.L., Adametz, R., Tsui, M., Qian, F., et al. (2008). RNA interference
screen for human genes associated with West Nile virus infection. Nature
455, 242–245.
Kwon, Y.J., Heo, J., Wong, H.E., Cruz, D.J., Velumani, S., da Silva, C.T., Mo-
simann, A.L., Duarte Dos Santos, C.N., Freitas-Junior, L.H., and Fink, K.
(2014). Kinome siRNA screen identifies novel cell-type specific dengue host
target genes. Antiviral Res. 110, 20–30.
Lahiri, S., Chao, J.T., Tavassoli, S., Wong, A.K., Choudhary, V., Young, B.P.,
Loewen, C.J., and Prinz, W.A. (2014). A conserved endoplasmic reticulum
membrane protein complex (EMC) facilitates phospholipid transfer from the
ER to mitochondria. PLoS Biol. 12, e1001969.
Lazear, H.M., and Diamond, M.S. (2016). Zika Virus: New Clinical Syndromes
and Its Emergence in the Western Hemisphere. J. Virol. 90, 4864–4875.
Le Sommer, C., Barrows, N.J., Bradrick, S.S., Pearson, J.L., and Garcia-
Blanco, M.A. (2012). G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 promotes flaviviridae
entry and replication. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 6, e1820.
Li, C., Xu, D., Ye, Q., Hong, S., Jiang, Y., Liu, X., Zhang, N., Shi, L., Qin, C.F.,
and Xu, Z. (2016). Zika virus disrupts neural progenitor development and leads
to microcephaly in mice. Cell Stem Cell 19, S1934-5909(16)30084-4. Pub-
lished online May 11, 2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2016.04.017.
Luo, B., Cheung, H.W., Subramanian, A., Sharifnia, T., Okamoto, M., Yang, X.,
Hinkle, G., Boehm, J.S., Beroukhim, R., Weir, B.A., et al. (2008). Highly parallel
identification of essential genes in cancer cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105,
20380–20385.
Ma, H., Dang, Y., Wu, Y., Jia, G., Anaya, E., Zhang, J., Abraham, S., Choi, J.G.,
Shi, G., Qi, L., et al. (2015). A CRISPR-Based Screen Identifies Genes Essential
for West-Nile-Virus-Induced Cell Death. Cell Rep. 12, 673–683.
Meertens, L., Carnec, X., Lecoin, M.P., Ramdasi, R., Guivel-Benhassine, F.,
Lew, E., Lemke, G., Schwartz, O., and Amara, A. (2012). The TIM and TAM
families of phosphatidylserine receptors mediate dengue virus entry. Cell
Host Microbe 12, 544–557.
Miner, J.J., and Diamond, M.S. (2016). Understanding How Zika Virus Enters
and Infects Neural Target Cells. Cell Stem Cell 18, 559–560.
Miner, J.J., Cao, B., Govero, J., Smith, A.M., Fernandez, E., Cabrera, O.H.,
Garber, C., Noll, M., Klein, R.S., Noguchi, K.K., et al. (2016). Zika virus infection
during pregnancy in mice causes placental damage and fetal demise. Cell 165,
1081–1091.
Morizono, K., and Chen, I.S. (2014). Role of phosphatidylserine receptors in
enveloped virus infection. J. Virol. 88, 4275–4290.
Musso, D., and Gubler, D.J. (2016). Zika Virus. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 29,
487–524.
Pen
˜ a, J., and Harris, E. (2011). Dengue virus modulates the unfolded protein
response in a time-dependent manner. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 14226–14236.
Pen
˜ a, J., and Harris, E. (2012). Early dengue virus protein synthesis induces
extensive rearrangement of the endoplasmic reticulum independent of the
UPR and SREBP-2 pathway. PLoS ONE 7, e38202.
Perera-Lecoin, M., Meertens, L., Carnec, X., and Amara, A. (2014). Flavivirus
entry receptors: an update. Viruses 6, 69–88.
Perreira, J.M., Aker, A.M., Savidis, G., Chin, C.R., McDougall, W.M., Port-
mann, J.M., Meraner, P., Smith, M.C., Rahman, M., Baker, R.E., et al.
(2015). RNASEK Is a V-ATPase-Associated Factor Required for Endocytosis
and the Replication of Rhinovirus, Influenza A Virus, and Dengue Virus. Cell
Rep. 12, 850–863.
Perreira, J.M., Meraner, P., and Brass, A.L. (2016). Functional Genomic Stra-
tegies for Elucidating Human-Virus Interactions: Will CRISPR Knockout RNAi
and Haploid Cells? Adv. Virus Res. 94, 1–51.
Rapoport, T.A. (2007). Protein translocation across the eukaryotic endo-
plasmic reticulum and bacterial plasma membranes. Nature 450, 663–669.
Rasmussen, S.A., Jamieson, D.J., Honein, M.A., and Petersen, L.R. (2016).
Zika Virus and Birth Defects–Reviewing the Evidence for Causality. N. Engl.
J. Med. 374, 1981–1987.
Richard, M., Boulin, T., Robert, V.J., Richmond, J.E., and Bessereau, J.L.
(2013). Biosynthesis of ionotropic acetylcholine receptors requires the evolu-
tionarily conserved ER membrane complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110,
E1055–E1063.
Richard, A.S., Zhang, A., Park, S.J., Farzan, M., Zong, M., and Choe, H. (2015).
Virion-associated phosphatidylethanolamine promotes TIM1-mediated infec-
tion by Ebola, dengue, and West Nile viruses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112,
14682–14687.
Sanjana, N.E., Shalem, O., and Zhang, F. (2014). Improved vectors and
genome-wide libraries for CRISPR screening. Nat. Methods 11, 783–784.
Satoh, T., Ohba, A., Liu, Z., Inagaki, T., and Satoh, A.K. (2015). dPob/EMC is
essential for biosynthesis of rhodopsin and other multi-pass membrane pro-
teins in Drosophila photoreceptors. eLife 4, 4.
Sessions, O.M., Barrows, N.J., Souza-Neto, J.A., Robinson, T.J., Hershey,
C.L., Rodgers, M.A., Ramirez, J.L., Dimopoulos, G., Yang, P.L., Pearson,
J.L., and Garcia-Blanco, M.A. (2009). Discovery of insect and human dengue
virus host factors. Nature 458, 1047–1050.
Shalem, O., Sanjana, N.E., Hartenian, E., Shi, X., Scott, D.A., Mikkelsen, T.S.,
Heckl, D., Ebert, B.L., Root, D.E., Doench, J.G., and Zhang, F. (2014).
Genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screening in human cells. Science
343, 84–87.
Shalem, O., Sanjana, N.E., and Zhang, F. (2015). High-throughput functional
genomics using CRISPR-Cas9. Nat. Rev. Genet. 16, 299–311.
Zhu, J., Davoli, T., Perriera, J.M., Chin, C.R., Gaiha, G.D., John, S.P., Sigiollot,
F.D., Gao, G., Xu, Q., Qu, H., et al. (2014). Comprehensive identification of host
modulators of HIV-1 replication using multiple orthologous RNAi reagents. Cell
Rep. 9, 752–766.
246
Cell Reports 16, 232–246, June 28, 2016
