 Accepted Manuscript
LUME-Meso: Design and Rationale of the Phase III Part of a Placebo-Controlled
Study of Nintedanib and Pemetrexed/Cisplatin Followed by Maintenance Nintedanib
in Patients with Unresectable Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma
Giorgio V. Scagliotti, Rabab Gaafar, Anna K. Nowak, Martin Reck, Anne S. Tsao,
Jan van Meerbeeck, Nicholas J. Vogelzang, Takashi Nakano, Ute von Wangenheim,
Derek Velema, Nassim Morsli, Sanjay Popat
PII:
S1525-7304(17)30087-6
DOI:
10.1016/j.cllc.2017.03.010
Reference:
CLLC 625
To appear in:
Clinical Lung Cancer
Received Date: 8 March 2017
Accepted Date: 13 March 2017
Please cite this article as: Scagliotti GV, Gaafar R, Nowak AK, Reck M, Tsao AS, van Meerbeeck J,
Vogelzang NJ, Nakano T, von Wangenheim U, Velema D, Morsli N, Popat S, LUME-Meso: Design and
Rationale of the Phase III Part of a Placebo-Controlled Study of Nintedanib and Pemetrexed/Cisplatin
Followed by Maintenance Nintedanib in Patients with Unresectable Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma,
Clinical Lung Cancer (2017), doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2017.03.010.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to
our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please
note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all
legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
LUME-Meso: Design and Rationale of the Phase III Part of a 
Placebo-Controlled Study of Nintedanib and 
Pemetrexed/Cisplatin Followed by Maintenance Nintedanib 
in Patients with Unresectable Malignant Pleural 
Mesothelioma 
 
Giorgio V. Scagliotti,a Rabab Gaafar,b Anna K. Nowak,c Martin Reck,d Anne S. Tsao, e Jan van 
Meerbeeck,f Nicholas J. Vogelzang,g Takashi Nakano,h Ute von Wangenheim,i Derek 
Velema,j Nassim Morsli,k Sanjay Popatl 
 
aUniversity of Turin, Department of Oncology, S Luigi Hospital, Torino, Italy  
Email: giorgio.scagliotti@unito.it  
bNational Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Fom El Khalig, 11796 Cairo, Egypt 
Email: rabab.gaafar@gmail.com  
cSchool of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Western 
Australia, Crawley, Western Australia, Australia, and Department of Medical Oncology, Sir 
Charles Gairdner Hospital, Nedlands, Western Australia 
Email: anna.nowak@uwa.edu.au  
dDepartment of Thoracic Oncology, Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf, Airway Research Center 
North (ARCN), Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Grosshansdorf, 
Germany 
Email: dr.martin.reck@web.de 
eDepartment of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, Division of Cancer Medicine, 
University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA 
Email: astsao@mdanderson.org 
fDepartment of Thoracic Oncology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium 
Email: jan.van.meerbeeck@uza.be 
gUS Oncology Comprehensive Cancer Centers of Nevada, Las Vegas, USA 
Email: nicholas.vogelzang@usoncology.com 
hDivision of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Hyogo College of 
Medicine, Hyogo, Japan 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
2 
Email: t-nakano@hyo-med.ac.jp 
iBoehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Biberach, Germany 
Email: ute.von_wangenheim@boehringer-ingelheim.com 
jBoehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd./Ltée, Burlington, Ontario, Canada 
Email: derek.velema@boehringer-ingelheim.com 
kBoehringer Ingelheim France S.A.S., Paris, France 
Email: nassim.morsli@boehringer-ingelheim.com 
lRoyal Marsden Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London and Surrey, UK 
Email: Sanjay.Popat@rmh.nhs.uk 
 
Corresponding author 
Name: Giorgio Scagliotti 
Address: University of Turin, Department of Oncology, S Luigi Hospital, Torino, Italy 
Phone: +39 11 9026414 
Fax: +39 11 9015184 
Email: giorgio.scagliotti@unito.it 
 
Role of the funding source 
Financial support is being provided by Boehringer Ingelheim for the conduct of the trial and 
for the preparation of this article by the provision of medical writing assistance. Boehringer 
Ingelheim was responsible for the study design, and collation and analysis of the phase II 
data, although a faculty-led steering committee were consulted throughout the process. All 
authors agreed to submit this article for publication.  
 
Word count 
Main text (excl. refs): 1646/1500  
Number of figures or tables: 2/2 
Number of references: 18/15 
 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
3 
Declaration of interest 
The authors were fully responsible for all content, were involved at all stages of manuscript 
development and have approved the final version. This work was previously presented at the 
13th International Conference of the International Mesothelioma Interest Group, Birmingham, 
UK, 2016, and at the American Society of Clinical Oncology 2016, Chicago, Illinois, USA.  
GVS is consultant for Eli Lilly and has received honoraria from Eli Lilly, Roche, Pfizer, 
Novartis, AstraZeneca, and Clovis Oncology. 
RG has nothing to disclose. 
AKN acknowledges funding from the National Health and Medical Research Council of 
Australia to the National Centre for Asbestos Related Diseases. 
MR has received non-financial support from Boehringer lngelheim during the conduct of the 
study and honoraria from Boehringer lngelheim, Hoffmann-La Roche, Lilly, Merck Sharp & 
Dohme Corp, Bristol-Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, and Novartis. 
AST has received honoraria from Eli Lilly, Roche, Novartis, AstraZeneca, Ariad, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Genentech, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Seattle Genetics, and has received 
research funding from Eli Lilly, AstraZeneca, Millennium, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Seattle 
Genetics, and Polaris. 
JvM has received institutional funding through research grants from the Belgian Foundation 
against Cancer and Flemish Kom op tegen Kanker Fund. 
NJV has received an honorarium from Boehringer lngelheim for services on the steering 
committee of this study. 
TN has nothing to disclose. 
SP acknowledges NHS funding to the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at The Royal 
Marsden and the ICR, and is consultant to and has received honoraria from Boehringer 
Ingelheim and Eli Lilly. 
DV, UvW and NM are employees of Boehringer Ingelheim.  
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
4 
Abstract 
Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a rare but aggressive disease: median survival is 
6–9 months if untreated. Standard first-line treatment for patients with unresectable MPM is 
cisplatin/pemetrexed, with a median overall survival (OS) of ~1 year. Improvements in first-
line treatment options are needed. With the benefit of adding bevacizumab to standard 
therapy demonstrated in the MAPS study, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
pathway inhibition has gained renewed interest as a treatment approach. Nintedanib is an 
oral angiokinase inhibitor targeting multiple signalling pathways implicated in the 
pathogenesis of MPM, including the VEGF receptor. The phase III part of the international, 
phase II/III LUME-Meso study is evaluating the efficacy and safety of nintedanib plus 
pemetrexed/cisplatin in patients with unresectable epithelioid MPM. Originally, this was a 
double-blind, randomised, phase II exploratory study and was amended to include a 
confirmatory phase III part following the recommendation of an internal Data Monitoring 
Committee and review of phase II data. The phase III part plans to enrol 450 chemotherapy-
naïve patients, who will be randomised to receive pemetrexed/cisplatin on Day 1 and 
nintedanib or placebo on Days 2–21, for a maximum of 6 cycles. Patients without disease 
progression who are eligible to continue study treatment will receive maintenance treatment 
with nintedanib or placebo until disease progression or undue toxicity. The primary endpoint 
is progression-free survival; OS is the key secondary endpoint. The study will use an 
adaptive design, including an interim analysis to reassess the number of OS events required 
to ensure sufficient power for OS analysis. The study is currently enrolling.  
 
Clinical trial identifier: NCT01907100. 
 
Keywords: Antiangiogenesis, VEGF, Epithelioid, Adaptive design 
 
Abbreviations 
 
bid, twice daily; CI, confidence interval; DMC, Data Monitoring Committee; ECOG PS, 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; HR, 
hazard ratio; iv, intravenous; MPM, malignant pleural mesothelioma; OS, overall survival; PD, 
progressive disease; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; PFS, progression-free survival; 
RECIST, Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth 
factor 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
5 
Introduction 
Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is rare, although its incidence is increasing 
globally, and is expected to peak in Europe between 2015 and 2020.1, 2 It is principally 
caused by occupational exposure to asbestos, but the proportion of patients with non-
occupational exposure has also increased.2 Despite being banned in Europe, asbestos 
production and use is still widespread internationally, particularly in Russia, China, 
Kazakhstan and Brazil.2, 3 Thus, the incidence of MPM in asbestos-using countries is 
expected to continue to grow.1, 2 
MPM is often diagnosed at an advanced stage,4 with an average patient survival time 
of 6–9 months when left untreated.5 Combination doublet chemotherapy with 
cisplatin/pemetrexed is considered to be the front-line standard-of-care treatment for patients 
with unresectable MPM,1, 4 yielding a median overall survival (OS) time of approximately 1 
year.6 This is currently the only approved regimen,4 although carboplatin/pemetrexed is also 
considered to be a suitable first-line treatment option.1, 4 With the poor prognosis and the 
global incidence increasing, there is a clear need for new treatment options. 
Several signalling pathways involved in regulating angiogenesis have been implicated 
in the pathogenesis and prognosis of MPM, including vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF).7, 8 The VEGF pathway is a key regulator of angiogenesis and therefore tumour 
growth, and is an important mitogen for MPM cells.7 Patients with MPM also often have very 
high serum concentrations of VEGF, which is considered to be a negative prognostic factor.7 
Clinical evidence of efficacy for the inhibition of VEGF pathway was demonstrated in 
the MAPS trial investigating the combination of bevacizumab, pemetrexed and cisplatin 
versus pemetrexed and cisplatin. OS was significantly longer in the bevacizumab arm 
(median 18.8 months [95% confidence interval (CI), 15.9–22.6] vs 16.1 months [95% CI 
14.0–17.9]; hazard ratio [HR], 0.77 [95% CI 0.62–0.95]; P = .0167) in patients with MPM.9 An 
increase in survival has not been demonstrated with any treatment in MPM since the 
approval of pemetrexed by the US Food and Drug Administration in 2004. These results 
demonstrated that targeting the VEGF pathway can be a successful approach to treating 
unresectable MPM. 
Nintedanib  is an oral, angiokinase inhibitor with multiple angiogenesis targets, 
including VEGF receptors 1–3, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptors α/β, 
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptors 1–3, as well as FLT3, RET, Abl and Src signalling.10 
Nintedanib (VARGATEF®) in combination with docetaxel is approved in the European Union 
and additional countries for the treatment of patients with locally advanced, metastatic or 
locally recurrent non-small cell lung cancer of adenocarcinoma histology after first-line 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
6 
chemotherapy.11 It can be co-administered with various anticancer drugs, demonstrating 
potential clinical benefit and a manageable safety profile in multiple tumour types.10 Targeting 
three major proangiogenic signalling pathways (VEGF, PDGF and FGF) in patients with 
unresectable MPM may result in greater benefit than other studied antiangiogenic strategies. 
Moreover, nintedanib has inhibitory activity against Src.10 Src plays a role in multiple cancer 
signalling pathways, is implicated in mesothelioma pathogenesis and inhibition of Src has 
been proposed as a treatment approach for MPM.8, 12 In preclinical studies, nintedanib 
strongly reduced the growth and migratory activity of MPM cell lines and prolonged survival 
in an orthotopic MPM xenograft model,13 and it may be viewed as a logical candidate for the 
treatment of unresectable MPM. 
LUME-Meso is a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase II/III study. The 
study compares nintedanib in combination with the standard therapy of pemetrexed/cisplatin, 
followed by maintenance nintedanib, versus placebo in combination with 
pemetrexed/cisplatin followed by placebo monotherapy for the treatment of patients with 
unresectable MPM. Originally a double-blind, randomised, phase II exploratory study, the trial 
was expanded to include a confirmatory phase III part, following recommendations from an 
internal Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) after reviewing phase II study data. Enrolment 
into the phase II study has been completed and results of the primary endpoint, PFS, have 
been presented.14 Following these results, nintedanib was granted orphan drug designation 
for the treatment of mesothelioma by the U.S. Food & Drug Administration on 12 December, 
2016. Patients are currently being enrolled into the phase III part, which will be analysed 
independently. 
 
Patients and Methods  
Study Objectives, Design and Dosing Regimen 
 
The overall objective of LUME-Meso is to evaluate the safety and efficacy of standard 
therapy plus nintedanib followed by continuing nintedanib, versus standard 
cisplatin/pemetrexed therapy plus placebo followed by continuing placebo, as first-line 
treatment for patients with unresectable MPM. LUME-Meso is a double-blind, randomised, 
multicentre, placebo-controlled, phase II/III study. The phase III part broadly follows the 
phase II design. Enrolled patients are randomised in a 1:1 ratio to receive a maximum of 6 
cycles of pemetrexed (500 mg/m2)/cisplatin (75 mg/m2) on Day 1 plus nintedanib (200 mg 
twice daily [bid]) or matched placebo (bid) on Days 2–21 (Figure 1). Patients will continue to 
receive nintedanib or placebo maintenance therapy until unequivocal disease progression 
(PD), unmanageable toxicity, withdrawal of consent or death. Patients benefiting from 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
7 
treatment beyond PD, in the opinion of the investigator, will be able to continue receiving 
treatment (nintedanib or placebo). Based on the phase II results, which included patients with 
epithelioid and biphasic histology, planned enrolment to the phase III part is for 450 patients 
of epithelioid histology only. 
 
Eligibility Criteria  
 
The study will be conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and 
necessary ethics committee approval was obtained. All patients provided written informed 
consent. The phase III part of the study is enrolling patients with histologically confirmed 
unresectable MPM of the epithelioid subtype. Although patients eligible for radical resection 
or elective surgery (e.g. pleurectomy) are ineligible, prior surgery ≥4 weeks prior to 
randomisation is permitted if there has been complete healing and residual measurable 
disease remains. The main inclusion and exclusion criteria are detailed in Table 1.  
 
Study Endpoints 
The primary endpoint is progression-free survival (PFS), with OS as the key 
secondary endpoint. Other secondary endpoints are evaluation of objective tumour response 
and disease control rate, according to modified Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid 
Tumors.15 An additional objective in the phase III part of the study is evaluation of health-
related quality of life (measured using the EQ-5D health status self-assessment 
questionnaire16 and the mesothelioma version of the Lung Cancer Symptom Scale [LCSS-
Meso]).17 An exploratory analysis will be conducted by collecting biological samples to 
investigate the value of potentially predictive or prognostic biomarkers, such as mesothelin, 
merlin (NF2) and BAP1, via immunohistochemical staining or molecular genetic assays.  
Safety will be monitored throughout the study via assessment of changes in 
laboratory parameters, and the frequency and severity of adverse events according to the 
National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI CTCAE) 
version 4.03. 
 
Statistical Design 
For analysis of the phase III OS, an adaptive design will be utilised, allowing the 
required number of events to be reassessed at a pre-planned interim analysis.18 This enables 
the uncertainty of the treatment effect to be accounted for, ensuring that the study is 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
8 
sufficiently powered to statistically assess OS. The statistical power of a trial, and thus its 
success, is dependent on the accuracy of the original clinical estimates. One advantage of 
an adaptive design is that it ensures, despite uncertainties in these parameters at 
commencement, that the trial is powered appropriately to achieve its objectives and results in 
an efficient trial with potentially reduced study duration and demand on resources.18 
For the double-blind, randomised, phase II study, sample size was selected for proof-
of-clinical-concept and all planned analyses were intended to be descriptive. Following DMC 
analysis, it was recommended that the study be expanded to include a confirmatory phase III 
part. Under recommendation from regulatory authorities, the phase II data were unblinded 
and the primary PFS analysis was undertaken to assist precise planning of the phase III part, 
including estimation of sample size. Phase II patients will not be included in the confirmatory 
phase III analyses. 
The results obtained at the time of the primary PFS analysis of the phase II part of the 
study were used to estimate the sample size and statistical assumptions for the phase III part 
of the study. At the time of the primary PFS analysis, the PFS data were considered to be 
mature (79% of events available) but the OS data were considered to still be immature with 
only 53% of events available. Based on this analysis, the phase III part of the study was 
planned with a sample size of 450 patients. This would provide a power of 90% to detect a 
statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement in the primary endpoint, PFS. In 
planning the statistical analysis of the key secondary endpoint, OS, in the phase III part, a 
two-stage adaptive design is being implemented. This will account for the greater degree of 
uncertainty around the estimated OS treatment effect resulting from the still immature OS 
dataset available at the time of the primary phase II PFS analysis. For the analysis of OS in 
the phase III part, two potential scenarios will be evaluated at the time of the primary PFS 
analysis. If at the time of the primary PFS analysis the difference in PFS between study arms 
is statistically significant, an interim OS analysis will be performed by an external DMC. If the 
difference in OS between study arms is statistically significant, then the study will be declared 
positive for the primary and key secondary endpoints and enrolment will be stopped; if the 
difference is not yet statistically significant, the final number of OS events will be reassessed. 
This provision ensures that the trial will provide 80% power to detect a statistically significant 
and clinically meaningful OS treatment effect at the time of the final OS analysis in the phase 
III part of the trial. 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
9 
Conclusion 
The LUME-Meso phase II/III trial will determine if the addition of nintedanib to the 
standard treatment regimen of pemetrexed/cisplatin offers clinical benefit in terms of PFS, 
the primary endpoint, and OS, the key secondary endpoint. The phase III part of the trial is 
active, and patients with unresectable MPM that meet the eligibility criteria are currently 
being enrolled at participating centres across North and South America, Europe, Africa, 
Australia and Asia. 
 
Acknowledgements 
Medical writing assistance, supported financially by Boehringer Ingelheim, was provided by 
Nicola Davis and Suzanne Patel of inVentiv Medical Communications, during the preparation 
of this manuscript. 
 
References 
1. Baas P, Fennell D, Kerr KM, Van Schil PE, Haas RL, Peters S. Malignant pleural 
mesothelioma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. 
Ann Oncol. 2015;26(Suppl. 5):v31–v39. 
2. Scherpereel A, Astoul P, Baas P, et al. Guidelines of the European Respiratory Society 
and the European Society of Thoracic Surgeons for the management of malignant pleural 
mesothelioma. Eur Respir J. 2010;35:479–495. 
3. US Department of the Interior, US Geological Survey. Mineral Commodity Summaries 
2016. Available at: https://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/mcs/2016/mcs2016.pdf. 
Accessed January 2017. 
4. NCCN Guidelines. Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma Version 3.2016. Available at: 
www.NCCN.org. Accessed August 2016. 
5. van Meerbeeck JP, Scherpereel A, Surmont VF, Baas P. Malignant pleural mesothelioma: 
the standard of care and challenges for future management. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 
2011;78:92–111. 
6. Vogelzang NJ, Rusthoven JJ, Symanowski J, et al. Phase III study of pemetrexed in 
combination with cisplatin versus cisplatin alone in patients with malignant pleural 
mesothelioma. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:2636–2644. 
7. Strizzi L, Catalano A, Vianale G, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor is an autocrine 
growth factor in human malignant mesothelioma. J Pathol. 2001;193:468–475. 
8. Tsao AS, He D, Saigal B, et al. Inhibition of c-Src expression and activation in malignant 
pleural mesothelioma tissues leads to apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, and decreased 
migration and invasion. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007;6:1962–1972. 
9. Zalcman G, Mazieres J, Margery J, et al. Bevacizumab for newly diagnosed pleural 
mesothelioma in the Mesothelioma Avastin Cisplatin Pemetrexed Study (MAPS): a 
randomised, controlled, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2016;387:1405–1414. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
10
10. Roth GJ, Binder R, Colbatzky F, et al. Nintedanib: from discovery to the clinic. J Med 
Chem. 2015;58:1053-1063. 
11. Reck M, Kaiser R, Mellemgaard A, et al. Docetaxel plus nintedanib versus docetaxel plus 
placebo in patients with previously treated non-small-cell lung cancer (LUME-Lung 1): a 
phase 3, double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15:143–155. 
12. Menges CW, Chen Y, Mossman BT, Chernoff J, Yeung AT, Testa JR. A phosphotyrosine 
proteomic screen identifies multiple tyrosine kinase signaling pathways aberrantly 
activated in malignant mesothelioma. Genes Cancer. 2010;1:493–505. 
13. Laszlo V, Ozsar J, Klikovits T, et al. Preclinical investigation of the therapeutic potential of 
nintedanib in malignant pleural mesothelioma. 13th International Mesothelioma Interest 
Group. 2016:Abstract PP02.61. 
14. Grosso F, Steele N, Novello S, et al. OA22.02 Nintedanib plus Pemetrexed/Cisplatin in 
Patients with MPM: Phase II Findings from the Placebo-Controlled LUME-Meso Trial. J 
Thorac Oncol. 2016;12:S329-S330. 
15. Byrne MJ, Nowak AK. Modified RECIST criteria for assessment of response in malignant 
pleural mesothelioma. Ann Oncol. 2004;15:257-260. 
16. Trippoli S, Vaiani M, Lucioni C, Messori A. Quality of life and utility in patients with non-
small cell lung cancer. Quality-of-life Study Group of the Master 2 Project in 
Pharmacoeconomics. Pharmacoeconomics. 2001;19:855–863. 
17. Hollen PJ, Gralla RJ, Liepa AM, Symanowski JT, Rusthoven JJ. Measuring quality of life 
in patients with pleural mesothelioma using a modified version of the Lung Cancer 
Symptom Scale (LCSS): psychometric properties of the LCSS-Meso. Support Care 
Cancer. 2006;14:11–21. 
18. Elman SA, Ware JH, Gottlieb AB, Merola JF. Adaptive clinical trial design: An overview 
and potential applications in dermatology. J Invest Dermatol. 2016;136:1325–1329. 
 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
11
Figure 1. Study Design for the Phase III Part of the LUME-Meso Study 
 
*Nintedanib administered on Days 2–21. 
§Pemetrexed 500 mg/m2 iv over 10 minutes on Day 1 of each 21-day cycle for a maximum of 6 cycles. 
¶Cisplatin 75 mg/m2 iv over 2 hours on Day 1 of each 21-day cycle for a maximum of 6 cycles. 
**Treatment beyond progression is allowed if clinical benefit is perceived. 
bid, twice daily; iv, intravenous; MPM, malignant pleural mesothelioma; OS, overall survival; PD, 
progressive disease; PFS, progression-free survival. 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
12
Table 1. Main Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for Enrolment in the Phase III Part of the 
LUME-Meso Study 
Key Inclusion Criteria 
Male or female ≥18 years 
Histologically confirmed MPM of epithelioid histology 
Life expectancy ≥3 months 
ECOG PS 0 or 1 
Measureable disease according to modified RECIST criteria 
Key Exclusion Criteria 
Previous systemic chemotherapy for MPM 
Prior treatment with nintedanib or any other prior first-line therapy 
Patients with sarcomatoid and biphasic subtype MPM 
Patients with symptomatic neuropathy 
Radiotherapy within 3 months prior to baseline imaging 
Patients that may be eligible for or being considered for radical resection or elective surgery 
during the course of the study 
Active brain metastases 
Creatinine clearance <60 mL/min (using standard Cockcroft–Gault formula or from 
measurement of glomerular filtration rate)  
ECOG PS, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status; MPM, malignant pleural 
mesothelioma; RECIST, Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors. 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
