  
Accepted Manuscript
Maternal and perinatal outcomes by planned place of birth among
women with low-risk pregnancies in high-income countries: A
systematic review and meta-analysis
Vanessa Scarf , Chris Rossiter , Saraswathi Vedam ,
Hannah G Dahlen , David Ellwood , Della Forster ,
Maralyn J Foureur , Helen McLachlan , Jeremy Oats ,
David Sibbritt , Charlene Thornton , Caroline S E Homer
PII:
S0266-6138(18)30097-4
DOI:
10.1016/j.midw.2018.03.024
Reference:
YMIDW 2235
To appear in:
Midwifery
Received date:
14 November 2017
Revised date:
1 March 2018
Accepted date:
26 March 2018
Please cite this article as: Vanessa Scarf , Chris Rossiter , Saraswathi Vedam , Hannah G Dahlen ,
David Ellwood ,
Della Forster ,
Maralyn J Foureur ,
Helen McLachlan ,
Jeremy Oats ,
David Sibbritt ,
Charlene Thornton ,
Caroline S E Homer , Maternal and perinatal outcomes by
planned place of birth among women with low-risk pregnancies in high-income countries: A systematic
review and meta-analysis, Midwifery (2018), doi: 10.1016/j.midw.2018.03.024
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service
to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please
note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and
all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
1 
 
Highlights 
 The review compared studies of births planned in hospital, birth centres and 
at home 
 A specific instrument appraised quality of evidence in research on birth 
setting 
 Studies varied in design, location, context and definition of key terms 
 High quality studies found no statistically significant difference in infant 
mortality by setting 
 Women have higher odds of normal vaginal birth at home or in birth centres 
 
 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
2 
 
 
Maternal and perinatal outcomes by planned place of birth among women with low-risk 
pregnancies in high-income countries: A systematic review and meta-analysis  
Vanessa Scarfa*, Chris Rossitera, Saraswathi Vedama,b, Hannah G Dahlenc, David Ellwoodd,  
Della Forstere, Maralyn J Foureura, Helen McLachlanf, Jeremy Oatsg, David Sibbritta,  
Charlene Thorntonc and Caroline S E Homera 
Submitted to Midwifery  
 
 
a Centre for Midwifery, Child and Family Health  
Faculty of Health, University of Technology Sydney 
PO Box 123, Broadway, NSW 2007, Australia 
Vanessa.scarf@uts.edu.au  
Christine.rossiter@uts.edu.au  
Maralyn.foureur@uts.edu.au 
david.sibbritt@uts.edu.au  
caroline.homer@uts.edu.au  
 
b UBC Midwifery 
Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia 
304-5950 University Boulevard 
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3,  Canada 
saraswathi.vedam@ubc.ca  
 
c School of Nursing and Midwifery 
Western Sydney University 
Locked Bag 1797, Penrith, NSW 2751, Australia 
h.dahlen@westernsydney.edu.au 
c.thornton@westernsydney.edu.au  
 
d  School of Medicine 
Griffith University 
170 Kessels Road, Nathan, Queensland 4111, Australia 
d.ellwood@griffith.edu.au 
 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
3 
 
e Judith Lumley Centre 
La Trobe University and the Royal Women’s Hospital 
215 Franklin Street, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia 
D.forster@latrobe.edu.au 
 
f Faculty of Health Sciences 
La Trobe University 
Melbourne, VIC 3086, Australia  
H.McLachlan@latrobe.edu.au  
 
g Consultative Council on Obstetric and Paediatric Mortality and Morbidity 
50 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia 
jjnoats@gmail.com  
 
*Corresponding author (VS) 
Email: vanessa.scarf@uts.edu.au  
Postal address: PO Box 123, Broadway, NSW 2007, Australia 
 
Abstract  
Background 
The comparative safety of different birth settings is widely debated. Comparing research across 
high-income countries is complex, given differences in maternity service provision, data 
discrepancies, and varying research techniques and quality. Studies of births planned at home or 
in birth centres have reported both better and poorer outcomes than planned hospital births. 
Previous systematic reviews have focused on outcomes from either birth centres or home births, 
with inconsistent attention to quality appraisal. Few have attempted to synthesise findings.  
Objective 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
4 
 
To compare maternal and perinatal outcomes from different places of birth via a systematic 
review of high-quality research, and meta-analysis of appropriate data (Prospero registration 
CRD42016042291). 
Design  
Reviewers searched CINAHL, Embase, Maternity and Infant Care, Medline and PsycINFO databases 
to identify studies comparing selected outcomes by place of birth among women with low-risk 
pregnancies in high-income countries. They critically appraised identified studies using an 
instrument specific to birth place research and then combined outcome data via meta-analysis, 
using RevMan software. 
Findings 
Twenty-eight articles met inclusion criteria, yielding comparative data on perinatal mortality, 
mode of birth, maternal morbidity and/or NICU admissions. Meta-analysis indicated that women 
planning hospital births had statistically significantly lower odds of normal vaginal birth than in 
other planned settings. Women experienced less severe perineal trauma or haemorrhage at a 
lower rate in planned home births than in obstetric units. There were no statistically significant 
differences in infant mortality by planned place of birth, although most studies had limited 
statistical power to detect differences for rare outcomes. Differences in location, context, quality 
and design of identified studies render results subject to variation.  
Conclusions and implications for practice 
High-quality evidence about low-risk pregnancies indicates that place of birth had no statistically 
significant impact on infant mortality. The lower odds of severe maternal morbidity and obstetric 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
5 
 
intervention support the expansion of birth centre and home birth options for women with low-
risk pregnancies. 
 
 
Keywords  
Home childbirth, birthing centres, obstetric delivery, pregnancy outcome, infant mortality, 
postpartum haemorrhage 
 
 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
6 
 
Introduction  
The universal importance of maternal and newborn well-being is unquestioned. However, the 
impact of place of birth on safety and well-being is widely debated globally. Debate is fuelled by 
divergent conclusions from research on planned place of birth (de Vries et al. 2013) and is further 
complicated by national and regional variation in provision of maternity care across birth places.  
Women are increasingly seeking greater choice in birth place, including options other than 
hospitals that offer fewer interventions and greater autonomy (Vedam, Stoll, et al. 2017). Yet, 
researchers vary in their conclusions about outcomes from different places of birth.   
Consequently, there is fervent keen interest in reliable research evidence comparing maternal and 
perinatal outcomes by place of birth, especially amongst clinicians, policy-makers, and 
childbearing women and their families. There is particular attention devoted to home as a safe 
place of birth. Study findings must take account not only of whether the mother and infant survive 
but also how well mother and infant thrive in different birthplaces. Diverse study designs and 
methods, and contradictory research findings create difficulty in synthesising outcomes to inform 
clinical decisions. Accordingly, government policy and professional guidelines in different countries 
vary in their support for birth centres and home births. Variation reflects differing beliefs about 
autonomy, safety, risk and childbirth, together with differing interpretations of the body of 
existing research (Roome & Welsh 2015). 
Variation in birth setting 
In many high-income countries, most women give birth in hospital. Access to alternative birth 
places varies within and between countries, although usually limited. In the Netherlands 
approximately 20% of births take place at home; elsewhere the proportion of planned home births 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
7 
 
in high-income countries ranges between 0.3% in Australia (Hilder et al. 2014) and 3.3% in New 
Zealand (Shaw et al. 2016). Similarly, the rate of births in midwife-led birth centres (a term 
encompassing various models) varies from approximately 0.5% in the United States (MacDorman 
& Declercq 2016) to over 10% in New Zealand and the Netherlands (Shaw et al. 2016) and 11% in 
England (National Audit Office 2013).  Variation in birthplace options is affected by the status, 
scope and role of the midwife in different jurisdictions, licensing and insurance issues, the extent 
of integration between maternity care options, funding issues and other sociocultural factors 
(Benoit et al. 2005; De Vries et al. 2002; Vedam et al. 2018).  
The debate on safety 
Several recent studies in high-income regions compared outcomes from births planned in 
hospitals and at home. They found no significant difference in risk of adverse perinatal outcomes 
for planned home births among women with low-risk pregnancies (de Jonge et al. 2015; de Jonge 
et al. 2009; Hutton et al. 2016; Janssen et al. 2009) and among low-risk parous women (Birthplace 
in England Collaborative 2011; Homer et al. 2014). Similarly, studies found no significant 
differences in adverse outcomes between births planned in labour wards and in birth centres 
(Birthplace in England Collaborative 2011; Gottvall et al. 2005; Homer et al. 2014; Laws, Tracy & 
Sullivan 2010). Further, many studies identified lower rates of intervention and/or maternal 
morbidity in births planned in birth centres and at home, compared with hospital births. 
However, other investigators reported higher rates of adverse perinatal outcomes in planned 
home births than in planned hospital births (Grunebaum et al. 2014; Pang et al. 2002; Snowden et 
al. 2015; Wax, Lucas, et al. 2010). Some of these findings were reported primarily in countries 
where skilled birth attendants are not universally integrated across birth settings into regional 
health systems (e.g. Chang & MacOnes 2011; Kennare et al. 2010; Snowden et al. 2015). Other 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
8 
 
results were from population-based studies that combined pregnancies with different levels of risk 
or used unreliable data sources for the reported outcome (e.g. Cheng et al. 2013; Evers et al. 2010; 
Grunebaum et al. 2013; Kennare et al. 2010; Pang et al. 2002; Wax, Pinette, et al. 2010). Others 
combined data from births with skilled and unskilled birth attendants (e.g. Chang & MacOnes 
2011; Malloy 2010).  Adverse results from a composite primary perinatal outcome were reported 
for nulliparous women planning home births in England (Birthplace in England Collaborative Group 
2011). 
Variation in the design and quality of research on place of birth inhibits the development of 
universally acceptable recommendations for provision of services across settings (Gyte et al. 2009; 
Michal et al. 2011; Nove, Berrington & Matthews 2012b; Vedam 2003; Vedam, Schummers & 
Fulton 2013). 
Methodological challenges in research about place of birth 
Researchers have delineated and discussed the unique features of studies into place of birth 
(Declercq 2013; Leslie & Romano 2007; Nove, Berrington & Matthews 2012b; Olsen & Clausen 
2012; Vedam 2003; Zielinski, Ackerson & Kane Low 2015). These features include appropriately 
identifying intended (as distinct from actual) birth place, ensuring equivalence of risk status, 
controlling for confounding and mediating factors, dealing with adverse events that would have 
occurred regardless of setting (especially related to congenital abnormalities), and accounting for 
different providers in countries with different models of maternity provision.  
When comparing outcomes across places of birth, consistent, standardised inclusion criteria 
across cohorts, reliable sampling methods, and relevant outcome measures are all imperative. For 
example, some research on place of birth is compromised by amalgamating data from unplanned 
home births (without skilled birth attendants) and from planned births at home within integrated 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
9 
 
maternity systems (Gyte et al. 2010; Kirby & Frost 2011; Michal et al. 2011). All these factors, as 
well as the limits to randomisation, complicate appraisals of research quality and risk of bias 
(Nove, Berrington & Matthews 2012b; Vedam, Rossiter, et al. 2017). 
Further, adequate sample sizes are essential to allow for comparisons between settings, especially 
when exploring rare outcomes such as mortality and severe morbidity. Relatively small numbers of 
women choose to give birth in birth centres or at home in most high-income countries. Typically, 
datasets with sufficient power can only be generated by large population-based studies conducted 
over several years, notwithstanding the limitations of using registry-based data (de Jonge et al. 
2017), or through meta-analysis, where possible. Some studies have utilised a ‘composite 
outcome’ to group data on uncommon adverse outcomes to improve statistical power (Birthplace 
in England Collaborative Group et al. 2011). Finally, the diverse context of maternity provision in 
different countries generates inconsistencies in data availability, inclusion criteria and key 
definitions, further complicating research in this field.   
Synthesising research findings 
There have been few Cochrane reviews of place of birth outcomes. Olsen and Clausen attempted a 
systematic review comparing planned home versus hospital birth (2012) and were able to identify 
only one small study (n=11) that met inclusion criteria. Noting difficulties with recruiting women 
who will consent to randomisation, their discussion highlighted the importance of well-designed 
population-based observational studies.  Another Cochrane review (Hodnett, Downe & Walsh 
2012) incorporated 10 trials comparing ‘alternative settings for birth’ with conventional hospital 
labour wards, of which five examined alongside midwifery units.  This review found no impact on 
adverse outcomes for mothers or infants across included settings, but women allocated to 
alternative settings had higher rates of spontaneous vaginal births and breastfeeding at six to 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
10 
 
eight weeks, and lower rates of obstetric intervention than women giving birth in hospital units 
(Hodnett, Downe & Walsh 2012).  
Other research syntheses about outcomes by place of birth have involved largely narrative 
analysis. Some compared data from hospital births with home births (Elder, Alio & Fisher 2016; 
Fullerton, Navarro & Young 2007; Leslie & Romano 2007; McIntyre 2012; Stotland & Declercq 
2002; Zielinski, Ackerson & Kane Low 2015); others compared births in hospitals  with birth 
centres (Alliman & Phillippi 2016; Dixon et al. 2012; McIntyre 2012; Muthu & Fischbacher 2004; 
Stewart et al. 2005; Stotland & Declercq 2002; Walsh & Downe 2004).  
The varying quality of research has been a recurring theme in reviews (Campbell & MacFarlane 
1986; Elder, Alio & Fisher 2016; McIntyre 2012; Olsen 1997; Vedam, Schummers & Fulton 2013).  
Some authors have specifically concluded that the limited quality or comparability of studies 
precludes undertaking meta-analysis (Blix et al. 2014; Stewart et al. 2005; Walsh & Downe 2004). 
Some systematic reviews indicate methods used to assess potential bias in selected studies 
(Alliman & Phillippi 2016; Blix et al. 2014; Stewart et al. 2005; Walsh & Downe 2004),  although 
other reviews do not indicate how quality was determined. One systematic review and meta-
analysis comparing planned home births and hospital births (Wax, Lucas, et al. 2010) reported that 
study quality was evaluated using a published instrument (Zaza et al. 2000) but did not report on 
the quality assessment of included studies. This meta-analysis has been widely criticised for 
methodological flaws (Gyte et al. 2010; Kirby & Frost 2011; Michal et al. 2011). 
We did not identify any systematic review or meta-analysis that examined outcomes from studies 
across three places of birth (home, birth centre, hospital), using a validated rating tool to appraise 
the quality of included studies. 
Objectives 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
11 
 
This systematic review addressed the question: are perinatal and maternal outcomes significantly 
different from births planned at home, in birth centres or hospitals, for women with low-risk 
pregnancies? We reviewed original research from high-income countries (World Bank 2016) using 
a birthplace-specific quality appraisal instrument (Vedam, Rossiter, et al. 2017), and undertook 
meta-analysis of outcome data where possible.  
Methods 
The review examined the effect of birth place as distinct from model of maternity care, although 
often closely linked. The definition of place of birth varied between studies, depending on data 
availability, regional differences in provision and study design. We registered our protocol with 
Prospero international register of systematic reviews (http://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/) in 
July 2016 (CRD42016042291). This paper follows the PRISMA guidelines for reporting systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses (Moher, Liberati, Tetzlaff, Altman, et al. 2009). 
Eligibility criteria  
The systematic review included articles:  
 published in peer-reviewed journals between 2000 and 2016; 
 comparing outcomes from two or more places of birth;  
 written in English.  
We included articles which provided evidence on one or more of nine outcomes addressing 
important dimensions of perinatal mortality and morbidity, mode of birth and maternal morbidity 
(regardless of other outcomes examined): 
1. intrapartum stillbirth  
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
12 
 
2. early neonatal mortality 0-7 days 
3. admission to neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) 
4. normal vaginal birth  
5. instrumental birth  
6. caesarean section  
7. intact perineum after vaginal birth 
8. severe perineal trauma (3rd or 4th degree tear) after vaginal birth 
9. postpartum haemorrhage (PPH) >1000mL. 
Table 1 indicates inclusion criteria following a PICOS framework comprising population, 
intervention, comparisons, outcomes and study design (PICOS) (Moher, Liberati, Tetzlaff & Altman 
2009), giving examples of excluded study types.  
INSERT TABLE 1 HERE 
Information sources 
We searched five databases during May 2016: CINAHL, Embase, Maternity and Infant Care, 
Medline and PsycINFO. We further scrutinised reference lists manually to identify other potential 
articles, and set up alerts from the databases used to receive notification of relevant articles 
published after the main data extraction. We updated the search in January 2017, to fully cover 
the period 2000-2016.  
Search strategy 
The review used a combination of search terms (Box 1) encompassing different concepts. The 
‘birth place terms’ in column A were all combined with the Boolean term OR, as were all ‘outcome 
terms’ in column B.  The resulting searches A and B were then combined with AND. 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
13 
 
Box 1: Review search terms  
A 
B 
General birth place  terms 
Outcome-related terms 
Birth place OR birthplace 
Outcomes + CV2## 
Place of birth 
Safety + CV2 
Birth setting 
Risk + CV2 
Birth site OR site of birth  
Mortality + CV2 
Out-of-hospital + CV1# 
Morbidity + CV2 
Model of care1 + CV1 
Death + CV2 
Midwife-led 
Loss + CV2 
Midwifery-led 
Stillbirth 
 
Death in childbirth 
 
Complications + CV1 
Specific birth place terms2 
Birth injuries 
Home birth OR Homebirth 
Perineal trauma 
Home childbirth OR child birth 
Perineal tear 
Childbirth at home 
Episiotomy 
Alternative birth cent* 
Postpartum h(a)emorrhage 
Birthing cent* 
Transfer + CV1 
Birth cent* OR birthcent* 
Neonatal intensive care 
Domiciliary birth 
Special care nursery 
Alongside unit 
Psycho-social outcomes + CV1  
Freestanding unit 
Trauma + CV1 
Alternative birth setting 
Stress + CV1 
 
PTSD + CV1 
 
Postpartum mood 
 
Postnatal depression 
 
Fear of childbirth 
 
Apgar 
 
Breast feeding 
 
Transfer + CV1 
 
Neonatal intensive care 
 
Special care nursery 
# CV1 = Childbirth Variable 1  
Child birth OR Childbirth OR Maternity OR Midwife OR Obstetric 
## CV2 = Childbirth Variable 2  
Perinatal OR Neonatal OR Maternal OR Newborn OR Pregnancy OR Obstetric OR F(o)etal 
OR Infant 
1. Although model of care was not the focus of this review, we used it as a search term as some studies of alternate 
models of care also report outcomes by place of birth. 
2. Because the review focuses on comparisons between different birth places, it was not necessary to use search 
terms related only to hospital-based births (delivery suite, labour ward, obstetric unit etc). Searching using terms 
related to home births and birth centres (as above) identified studies comparing these with hospital-based births, 
thus reducing the search time involved. 
 
 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
14 
 
INSERT BOX 1 HERE 
Study selection 
Two researchers searched electronic databases and screened the results for eligibility. We 
removed duplicates, screened titles to remove those clearly out of scope and then reviewed 
abstracts to assess eligibility (Figure 1). Both then read the remaining 86 articles to further 
determine eligibility, and resolved any disagreement about inclusion by discussion. In ensuring 
that selected studies contained relatively comparable risk levels, we excluded those including 
women with even one previous caesarean section (CS) (Hutton et al. 2016; Janssen et al. 2009).  
Supplementary Table S1 indicates reasons for excluding 58 articles from the systematic review 
following this close reading. Figure 1 illustrates the study selection process.    
 
 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
15 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IDENTIFICATION 
Records identified 
through electronic 
database searches 
4059 
Remaining records screened by abstract 
748 
Records 
identified via 
other sources 
8 
Records excluded on basis of title 
- not original research article 
- not high-income country 
- historical article 
- not research on humans 
2358 
Remaining records screened by title 
3106 
Total records identified  
4064 
Duplicates removed 
958 
Remaining records screened by full text 
for eligibility in Systematic Review 
101 
Records excluded via abstract 
- not comparing places of birth 
- antenatal or postnatal care 
- practice notes, case studies etc 
- not low-risk women/pregnancies 
647  
Remaining records screened by full text 
for eligibility for SR and meta-analysis 
86 
SCREENING 
Records excluded via full text 
- not comparing places of birth 
- not reporting outcomes 
- all cohorts not low-risk  
15 
ELIGIBILITY 
Papers included in systematic review  
28 
Records excluded because 
- intended birth place not indicated 
(uses actual setting) 
- intended place of birth determined 
before third trimester 
- includes high or mixed risk  
- evaluates model of care rather than 
place of birth 
58 
Papers included in meta-analysis (NB 
different definitions etc) 
25 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caption: Figure 1: Flow diagram of systematic review process 
Study appraisal (risk of bias) 
We assessed study quality using the Birth Place Research Quality (ResQu) Index (see 
Supplementary Figure S19), a newly developed critical appraisal system. This instrument was 
developed specifically to appraise studies that compare different birth settings, and takes account 
of the unique characteristics of place of birth research. Development and content validation by an 
international panel of experts are described elsewhere (Vedam, Rossiter, et al. 2017). The 
instrument provides a quantitative summary score based on 27 criteria to rate the quality of 
research evidence at study level: high (scores of 75% and above), moderate (65-74%) and low (less 
than 65%).  
 
 
Two researchers read the remaining 28 articles and rated them using the ResQu Index, discussing 
any diverging scores until reaching consensus. During meta-analysis, sensitivity analyses 
eliminated studies that scored less than 75% to explore the impact of research quality on 
identified outcomes.   
Data items 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
17 
 
Box 2 defines the data items.  
Box 2: Definition of data terms 
 
Birth Place (= Birth Setting = Place of Birth) 
Birth centre: a separate area designated to provide midwife-led primary-level care in a home-
like setting with no routine involvement of medical staff. Birth centres may be located as part 
of a hospital (Alongside Midwifery Unit – AMU) or a Freestanding Midwifery Unit (FMU).  
Access to specialist obstetric, anaesthetic or paediatric consultation requires transfer to a 
hospital obstetric unit. Birth centres may be publicly or privately funded.  
Planned home birth: where a woman intends to give birth outside a formal health facility, 
usually in her home, and plans to receive care from one or more qualified birth attendants 
(midwife or doctor recognised in their country as competent to provide care). Home birth 
may be funded publicly or privately. 
Hospital birth: births planned to take place in a hospital obstetric unit (OU) which is staffed by 
qualified midwives, nurses and doctors. Hospitals provide access to anaesthetic, surgical and 
neonatal facilities and may be public or privately-funded.  
********** 
High-income country: as defined by the World Bank for the 2016 fiscal year (World Bank 
2016).  
 
Intended place of birth: recorded as close as possible to the onset of care in labour and 
preserving integrity of cohorts by taking account of intrapartum or postpartum transfers from 
home or birth centre to hospital. We approximate intention-to-treat by including the 
outcomes of the place of birth determined at (or close to) the start of labour.  
 
Low-risk pregnancy: definitions may vary by country or by study. However, it is critical that 
studies specify the criteria utilised, the source of their definition and apply the same criteria 
to different birth place cohorts to maximise comparability. Ideally studies use recognised 
guidelines for determining low obstetric risk (e.g. NICE guidelines). In addition to specifying 
term, vertex, singleton pregnancies, studies should also indicate clearly what other maternal 
factors are eliminated from the dataset, e.g. hypertension, pre-existing medical conditions. 
For simplicity, this paper refers to ‘low-risk pregnancies’ and acknowledges variation in 
definitions in selected studies.  
 
Mode of birth: Normal vaginal birth, instrumental birth (forceps or vacuum extraction) or 
non-elective caesarean section. Elective caesarean sections are correctly excluded from 
samples of women with low-risk pregnancies.  
 
NICU admission: admission of newborn after birth to a neonatal intensive care unit  
 
Normal vaginal birth is defined variously by study authors. The meta-analysis groups results 
for births other than caesarean sections or instrumental birth. However, we also conducted 
sensitivity analyses based on a more rigorous definition i.e. births other than caesarean 
sections or instrumental birth, specifically stating there was no  induction of labour, epidural 
or spinal analgesia or episiotomy; vertex presentation.  
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
18 
 
 
Outcomes: measurable results for mother and/or infant with an emphasis on items related to 
safety as commonly defined by clinical studies. We focused on outcomes resulting from care 
in labour and birth, rather than the processes of that care, and did not include data on 
interventions such as induction, analgesia, anaesthesia, and episiotomy. Similarly we do not 
review data about Apgar scores because of the subjective nature of this measure and the 
variety of thresholds reported in the literature.  
 
Our analysis principally focuses on nine outcomes: perinatal mortality (intrapartum stillbirth 
and early neonatal mortality 0-7 days), NICU admission, mode of birth (normal vaginal birth, 
instrumental birth, caesarean section), perineal status (intact perineum and severe perineal 
trauma) and post-partum haemorrhage >1000mL.  Many studies investigated additional 
outcomes (see Table S3). 
 
Perinatal mortality: data on intrapartum death of a fetus known to be alive at the onset of 
labour (stillbirth) and early neonatal death (0-7 days). Sensitivity analyses group data from 
studies specifically excluding deaths resulting from known congenital abnormalities.  
 
Perineal status: This review reports results on either intact perineum (no lacerations and no 
episiotomy) or severe perineal trauma (third or fourth degree lacerations).   
 
Postpartum haemorrhage (PPH): blood loss of greater than 1000mL. 
 
Research quality: refers to a study’s score on the ResQu Index (Vedam et al. 2017)  
  
1. High quality evidence  –75% or above 
2. Moderate – 65-74% 
3. Low – below 65%  
 
Spontaneous vaginal birth: see Normal vaginal birth. 
 
 
 
 
 
INSERT BOX 2 HERE 
 
Data collection process 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
19 
 
Two researchers independently extracted the raw data for the nine outcomes from the 28 articles, 
ensuring consistency with our definitions (Box 2). These were recorded on using strict definitions a 
specifically-developed extraction form (Supplementary Table S2). We endeavoured to locate 
additional data for this systematic review, including seeking supplementary tables. At times, the 
extracted data differed from the published rates; for instance, for studies examining perineal 
outcomes, we ensured that the denominator included only vaginal births. We compiled the 
extracted data and resolved any discrepancies by careful discussion of the studies’ methodology 
and results. 
Summary measures 
Selected studies presented outcome data in different ways, most commonly (adjusted) odds ratios 
(OR) but also relative risk or as percentages. summarised in the Findings for the outcomes of 
interest.  Supplementary Table S3 presents further detail on the statistical techniques and findings 
from the selected studies on outcomes relevant to this review.  
Synthesis of results (meta-analysis)  
Data on the nine outcomes (where available) were entered into the RevMan software (The Nordic 
Cochrane Centre 2014) to calculate estimated ORs for each outcome, with a 95% confidence 
interval (CI). This used the random effects statistical model given the varying study designs and 
heterogeneity in findings. Few individual studies included in the meta-analyses had sample sizes of 
sufficient power to detect meaningful differences in rare outcomes such as perinatal mortality (de 
Jonge et al. 2015; van der Kooy et al. 2011). 
 
Where there were zero events reported in a study, individual odds ratios are not calculable, but 
these data are included in the pooled denominator to calculate the overall odds ratio for that 
outcome. Occasionally we have included studies which did not define mortality variables fully but 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
20 
 
where zero events in both cohorts (Gaudineau et al. 2013; Halfdansdottir et al. 2015; Homer et al. 
2000; Overgaard et al. 2011) meant that a specific definition (e.g. neonatal death) was not 
required as the result would have been zero regardless of the actual definition.  
 
Where two Some articles reported data from the same study or where two separate studies utilise 
the same (or overlapping) datasets. For instance, several studies use data from the Netherlands 
Perinatal Registry for intersecting periods (de Jonge et al. 2013; van der Kooy et al. 2011; 
Wiegerinck et al. 2015). Similarly, two New Zealand studies used data from the same dataset for 
the years 2006-2007 (Davis et al. 2011; Dixon et al. 2014). We only used one source in each meta-
analysis. Thus Two selected studies were not included in any meta-analysis either because they 
used different definitions from ours or because they used data which overlapped other studies 
(Overgaard, Fenger-Grøn & Sandall 2012; van der Kooy et al. 2011). In some studies Another study 
did not present raw data were not available from the lowest-risk cohorts (Pang et al. 2002). Other 
studies were excluded from specific meta-analyses because they used different definitions from 
ours on individual variables. For instance regarding perinatal mortality, the Birthplace in England 
study used a composite neonatal outcome rather than stillbirth or early neonatal death (Birthplace 
in England Collaborative Group 2011). Others presented data on neonatal death up to 28 days 
rather than seven (Davis et al. 2011; Laws, Tracy & Sullivan 2010) or combined data on 
intrapartum stillbirth and neonatal death (Dixon et al. 2014; van der Kooy et al. 2011). Some 
studies did not provide sufficient specificity on critical terms, such as ‘stillbirth’ (Burns et al. 2012; 
Dixon et al. 2014; Laws, Tracy & Sullivan 2010).  A number of studies were excluded from the PPH 
meta-analysis because they only presented data on blood loss over 500mL (Blix et al. 2012; 
Gaudineau et al. 2013; Miller & Skinner 2012; Prelec, Verdenik & Poat 2014) or over 300mL 
(Byrne, Crowther & Moss 2000). 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
21 
 
Additional analyses 
To address the unavoidable heterogeneity of the selected studies, we conducted sensitivity 
analyses, excluding studies that achieved less than 75% in the ResQu Index. The results of the 
sensitivity analyses are reported beside the main findings. For perinatal outcomes, we also 
eliminated data from studies that did not specifically exclude known congenital abnormalities and 
conducted further analysis by parity when data were available from studies of planned home 
births. Data on planned births in birth centre were insufficient to stratify by parity.)  In assessing 
birth centre outcomes, separate analyses compared data from FMUs and AMUs. In studies of birth 
centres in Australia (Homer et al. 2014; Laws, Tracy & Sullivan 2010), the meta-analysis assumed 
these to be AMUs. However, it is possible that data include a small number of FMU births during 
the periods studied; there are very few FMUs in Australia and some units closed during the study 
period (Monk et al. 2013).  
 
Results 
Study selection 
Initial searching identified 4059 records across five databases and another eight manually. Figure 1 
illustrates the process of screening and reviewing articles to meet inclusion criteria. In the final 
stage, two reviewers read the remaining 86 articles and excluded 58 (Supplementary Table 1).  
Study characteristics 
Twenty-eight eligible articles from 26 studies remained, published 2000-2016. Table 2 summarises 
participants, interventions, comparators, outcomes and study design (PICOS)   with further detail 
in Supplementary Table 2.  Five studies originated in Australia (Byrne, Crowther & Moss 2000; 
Homer et al. 2000; Homer et al. 2014; Laws, Tracy & Sullivan 2010; Ryan & Roberts 2005), five in 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
22 
 
the Netherlands (Bolten et al. 2016; de Jonge et al. 2015; de Jonge et al. 2013; van der Kooy et al. 
2011; Wiegerinck et al. 2015), three in the United Kingdom (Birthplace in England Collaborative 
Group 2011; Burns et al. 2012; Nove, Berrington & Matthews 2012a), six in Nordic countries 
(Bernitz et al. 2011; Blix et al. 2012; Eide, Nilsen & Rasmussen 2009; Halfdansdottir et al. 2015; 
Overgaard, Fenger-Gron & Sandall 2012; Overgaard et al. 2011), two in other European countries 
(Gaudineau et al. 2013; Prelec, Verdenik & Poat 2014), four in New Zealand (Davis et al. 2012; 
Davis et al. 2011; Dixon et al. 2014; Miller & Skinner 2012), two in the  USA (Pang et al. 2002; 
Thornton et al. 2016) and one in Japan (Hiraizumi & Suzuki 2013).  Research design included two 
randomised controlled trials (both of AMUs), 21 retrospective studies (4 with matched data), and 
five prospective studies. Eighteen were rated as providing high quality evidence.  
 TABLE 2 HERE 
Despite all meeting eligibility criteria, the articles varied considerably, in rigour and in study design 
and outcomes investigated. In addition to the nine outcomes under review (Table 2 and Box 2), 
studies examined various interventions (induction, augmentation, episiotomy, fetal monitoring, 
third stage management), pain management, duration of labour, birth positions, breastfeeding, 
transfer, maternal satisfaction and/or psychological well-being. Several investigated infants’ Apgar 
scores. Table 2 also includes a rating of research quality (risk of bias, summarised as high, 
moderate or low, Box 2). 
Results and synthesis of selected outcomes 
The results from meta-analyses of data from 25 studies across nine outcome variables are 
summarised in Tables 3 and 4, showing comparisons of planned hospital births with births planned 
at home and in birth centres. Forest plots from each meta-analysis are included in Supplementary 
Figures S1-S18, including separate results from AMUs and FMUs in birth centre analysis. 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
23 
 
Tables 3 and 4 also report sensitivity analyses for selected outcomes repeating the meta-analysis 
using only the studies rated as high quality (i.e. > 75% on the ResQu Index). The description of 
infant mortality reports sensitivity analyses limited to studies which specifically excluded infants 
with known congenital abnormalities. We also repeated the meta-analyses of perinatal data from 
studies of planned home births, stratifying by parity where possible.  
The meta-analyses include data from 25 studies. Sometimes it was not possible to extract data 
appropriate to our parameters; alternately authors used different (or no) definitions of key 
variables. The Birthplace in England study (2011) reported a composite infant outcome combining 
stillbirth, neonatal death and serious neonatal morbidities associated with birth and is not 
included in the analyses of infant mortality.  
Infant outcomes 
There was no significant difference in the odds of intrapartum stillbirth according to place of birth.  
(Figs S1 and S2) in the five studies included, This was true for meta-analyses combining data from 
studies of planned home birth (Table 3 and Fig S1) and births planned in birth centres (Table 3 and 
Fig S2). This finding did not change when low and medium quality studies were removed from the 
analysis (Table 3). Limiting the analysis to four studies where known congenital abnormalities 
were specifically excluded also yielded non-significant odds ratios (home births: OR=0.92 [95% CI: 
0.74-1.15]; birth centres OR=0.66 [95% CI: 0.29-1.50]). Further analysis by parity indicated that 
there were no significant differences in the odds of stillbirth between births planned in hospitals 
and at home for either nulliparous and multiparous women (Table 3 and Fig S1a). 
TABLE 3 HERE 
There were no significant differences in the odds for early neonatal death (0-7 days) in relation to 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
24 
 
birth place, regardless of study quality (Fig S3 and Fig S4). Two studies of planned home births that 
specifically excluded congenital abnormalities also showed a non-significant difference (OR=0.97 
[95% CI: 0.76-1.24]). Only one study of birth centres excluded infants with congenital 
abnormalities (Homer et al. 2014) with a non-significant OR of 0.62 [95% CI: 0.15-2.54]. Similarly, 
there were no significant differences in early neonatal death by parity between births planned at 
home and in hospital (Table 3 and Fig S3a). 
Meta-analysis of three four studies of planned home births identified significantly lower odds no 
significant differences in the odds of NICU admission than for planned hospital births, although the 
two as did the three high quality studies (Davis et al. 2011; de Jonge et al. 2015; Halfdansdottir et 
al. 2015). generated significantly lower odds for planned home births than for planned hospital 
births. Babies of multiparous women had significantly lower odds of NICU admission if they 
planned a home birth rather than a hospital birth, although there was no significant difference by 
birth place among nulliparous women on this outcome (Figs S5 and S5a).  Combining data from 
studies of planned birth centre births showed no significant difference in odds of NICU admission 
regardless of study quality (Table 3 and Fig S6).   
Maternal outcomes – mode of birth 
Women planning home births were nearly three times more likely to have a normal (non-
instrumental) vaginal birth than women planning a hospital birth. The odds were higher when 
analysis was restricted to high quality studies (Table 4 and Fig S7) and to studies using a more 
specific definition of non-instrumental vaginal birth without induction of labour, epidural, spinal or 
general anaesthesia (Birthplace in England Collaborative Group et al. 2011; Burns et al. 2012; 
Homer et al. 2014) (OR=5.62 [95% CI: 1.30-24.24]).  Accordingly, women planning home births had 
significantly lower odds of either caesarean section or instrumental birth, regardless of the quality 
of the study, approximately one third of those amongst women planning a hospital birth.  
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
25 
 
TABLE 4 HERE 
Women planning a birth centre birth had nearly twice the odds of having normal vaginal births 
compared with women planning hospital births – with higher odds identified amongst higher 
quality studies (Table 4) and planned FMU births (Fig S8). Sensitivity analysis using the stricter 
definition found that women planning birth centre births had significantly higher odds of normal 
vaginal births without other interventions (n=3, OR=2.12 [95% CI: 1.54-2.92]). The odds of 
instrumental birth and caesarean section were also significantly lower for women planning to give 
birth in birth centres, regardless of type of birth centre or quality of the study (Fig S10 and S12).  
Maternal outcomes - perineal status  
Only two studies investigated the likelihood of an intact perineum amongst women planning home 
births, reporting significantly higher odds (Fig S13). The six studies investigating this variable in 
planned birth centre births found no significant difference in odds compared with planned hospital 
births, regardless of study quality (Table 4 and Fig S14).  
The odds of severe perineal trauma were significantly lower amongst planned home births, 
regardless of study quality (Fig S15) and among higher-quality studies of births planned in birth 
centres (Table 4).  
Maternal outcomes - PPH 
Severe PPH (>1000mL) was significantly less likely in planned home births than in planned hospital 
births (Fig S17). However, there was no significant difference in the odds identified in studies of 
planned birth centre births, regardless of the type of birth centre (Fig S18) or the rating of study 
quality (Table 4).   
Discussion  
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
26 
 
Principal findings  
This review examined whether there were significant differences between different planned birth 
places in critical maternal and perinatal outcomes, to help women make informed decisions about 
where to give birth.  It is unique in including data from both birth centres and home births.  
Limiting data to outcomes from low-risk pregnancies, we endeavoured to compare planned birth 
place cohorts across nine relevant outcomes.  Combined maternal data from the selected studies 
indicated significantly lower odds of intervention and maternal morbidity, and significantly higher 
odds of normal vaginal births among planned home births compared to planned hospital births 
(Table 4). This is consistent with conclusions from other syntheses of research on planned home 
births (not all of which included comparative data) (Fullerton, Navarro & Young 2007; Leslie & 
Romano 2007; McIntyre 2012; Stotland & Declercq 2002; Zielinski, Ackerson & Kane Low 2015)  
and with Olsen’s early meta-analysis (1997).   Further, women planning birth centre births had 
nearly twice the odds of a normal vaginal birth compared to women planning a hospital birth, with 
correspondingly lower rates of caesarean section or instrumental births. This is consistent with 
findings from other reviews (Alliman & Phillippi 2016; Dixon et al. 2012; Hodnett, Downe & Walsh 
2012; McIntyre 2012; Muthu & Fischbacher 2004).   Our results found no significant difference in 
rates of severe perineal trauma or PPH between planned birth centre and hospital births. 
While many authors have identified favourable maternal outcomes in planned birth centre and 
home births, including outcomes not addressed in this review, results regarding infant outcomes 
from different places of birth are more controversial.  Our meta-analysis found no significant 
difference between the cohorts in the odds of stillbirth or early neonatal death (Table 3), albeit by 
combining several studies with limited statistical power to detect differences in such rare 
outcomes. This was consistent for studies of births planned in birth centres and at home, 
regardless of study quality. Moreover, the odds of perinatal mortality did not differ between births 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
27 
 
planned in hospital and at home, among both nulliparous and multiparous women. The absolute 
numbers of adverse events were still very small (Olsen & Clausen 2012). There were significantly 
lower odds of admission to NICU for babies of women planning a home birth than those of women 
planning hospital births.  
Limitations  
Given different countries of origin, the selected studies varied considerably in context: service 
provision, setting, models of care and the overall integration between maternity services. Thus, 
generalisation of findings to high-income countries with different healthcare systems requires 
caution.  There was diversity too in the quality of the included studies, although we attempted to 
reduce its impact through strict eligibility criteria and appraisal with the ResQu Index. Studies 
explored a wide range of outcomes; even common outcomes were sometimes defined differently, 
limiting the extent to which we could extract comparable data. Thus not all studies addressing a 
given outcomes contributed data to its relevant meta-analyses. 
Limiting eligibility to publication in English language peer-reviewed journals may have resulted in 
some publication bias across studies, resulting in the inclusion of studies that only reported 
significant differences between cohorts. However, given the controversial nature of this topic and 
the varying strong perspectives of different provider groups in some regions, it is likely that most 
good quality studies on perinatal and maternal outcomes would find an outlet. Further, for some 
outcomes such as mortality, a non-significant difference between places of birth is as newsworthy 
as one that is statistically significant. 
We did not analyse data We only conducted a few meta-analyses in terms of parity, focussing on 
adverse perinatal outcomes from planned home births. Although we recognise that parity is an 
important determinant of maternal and perinatal outcomes, many studies did not present data by 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
28 
 
parity.  Further, by focusing specifically on birth setting, we did not explore the impact of provider 
type or model of care. 
Most research into place of birth is observational. Our quality appraisal process, eligibility criteria 
and data extraction endeavoured to minimise bias between individual studies in design, analysis 
and reporting. However, there may have been systematic differences in confounders that could be 
overcome through randomisation. The rarity of perinatal mortality in high-income countries 
necessitates combining studies to provide sufficiently large home birth or birth centre cohorts to 
show meaningful results.  
Another proposed systematic review and meta-analysis (Hutton et al. 2014) is in progress. It will 
focus on studies of home birth outcomes that stratify by parity and those in countries where home 
birth is well integrated with other maternity services.  
Heterogeneity 
Not surprisingly, several meta-analyses showed high heterogeneity scores (I2) (Figures S1-S18), 
especially for mode of birth. These scores largely reflect the variation in sample size and in the 
outcomes of the individual studies and are consistent with the conclusions of other reviews that 
have highlighted the disparities between selected observational studies. The measures generated 
by the software may overlook other aspects of heterogeneity in studies, such as unmeasured 
differences in staffing or resources between birth settings or in underlying characteristics of the 
women in different cohorts. 
Risk status 
We closely analysed the studies’ definitions ‘low-risk’, rather than comparing them with a strict 
definition determined a priori.  Most studies gave detailed criteria, including at minimum 
gestational age, fetal presentation, and singleton pregnancy. The descriptions of exclusion criteria 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
29 
 
varied from vaguely-defined ‘pre-existing medical conditions’ or ‘obstetric complications’, through 
to comprehensive lists of factors which contribute significantly to risk status. Even where they 
demonstrated similar levels of obstetric risk, several studies identified marked disparity in the 
demographic characteristics between cohorts. Most studies adjusted reported odds ratios to take 
account of some if not all of these demographic differences; some discussed the impact of less 
measurable distinctions between their cohorts (e.g. motivation, attitudes).  
Quality appraisal 
This paper is unique in using the ResQu Index, an innovative instrument to appraise research 
specifically on place of birth (Vedam, Rossiter, et al. 2017). Although the development of the Index 
included expert validation and extensive pilot-testing, the boundaries for the different levels of 
research strength are as yet untested this is the first known application of the tool in a systematic 
review. Only ten included studies scored as moderate or low in quality. This does not demonstrate 
that the Index is undiscriminating; rather it reflects that review inclusion criteria were strict and 
addressed similar considerations as the ResQu Index itself (e.g. adherence to intention-to-treat 
analysis or exclusion of non-comparable cohorts).  
Findings from the sensitivity analyses (Tables 3 and 4) indicate that the overall odds ratios rarely 
changed substantially by ruling out weaker studies, which typically had smaller sample sizes. In 
one meta-analysis of perineal trauma among planned birth centre births, data limited to higher 
quality studies generated a statistically significant difference from planned hospital births whereas 
analysis of all studies yielded a non-significant difference.  
Conclusions 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
30 
 
By comparing and synthesising results from three distinct birth settings, this review offers valuable 
evidence to inform decisions about birth place. The results demonstrate that, amongst carefully 
selected studies of women with low-risk pregnancies in high-income countries, planned place of 
birth appears to have little significant impact on adverse perinatal outcomes. Moreover, women 
who planned to give birth in a birth centre or at home had significantly lower odds for intervention 
and severe morbidity in labour and birth.  
These findings have important implications for healthcare costs and services.  They support the 
expansion of birth centres and home birth options, and the systems to support them, including 
professional guidelines and education. The results also have ramifications for information 
provided to pregnant women and their families, as a means to enhance their choice and 
autonomy about birthplace options.  They help extend existing knowledge about the risks and 
potential outcomes from different places and birth, and the circumstances necessary to optimise 
the safety and well-being of mothers and newborns. 
Conflict of interest 
The authors declare there is no conflict of interest. 
Ethical approval 
This study is a systematic review and meta-analysis. It does not require ethical approval.  The wider 
Birthplace in Australia study has been approved by the University of Technology Sydney Human Research 
Ethics Committee (reference number UTS HREC Ref No. 2012000167) and the ethics committees of 
Australian state and territory health authorities  
Funding source 
This study is part of the Birthplace in Australia study, funded by the National Health and Medical Research 
Council (Australia), Grant ID 1022422 (2012-2017). The funders did not contribute to the study design, 
collection, interpretation or analysis of data, or to the preparation of this manuscript. 
Clinical trial registration 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
31 
 
Not applicable. 
Registration of systematic review 
The protocol for this study was submitted to Prospero, the international register of systematic reviews 
(https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/ ), Registration Number: CRD42016042291. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank facilitators and participants in the UTS Faculty of Health Twelve Weeks to Publication program, 
especially Dr Nikki Percival for advice on earlier drafts of this paper. We also thank Dr Romy Lauche and 
Associate Professor Alex Wang for their methodological advice.  
 
References 
Alliman, J. & Phillippi, J.C. 2016, 'Maternal outcomes in birth centers: an integrative review of the 
literature', vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 21-51. 
Benoit, C., Wrede, S., Bourgeault, I., Sandall, J., Vries, R.D. & Teijlingen, E.R.v. 2005, 'Understanding the 
social organisation of maternity care systems: midwifery as a touchstone', Sociology of health & 
illness, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 722-37. 
Bernitz, S., Rolland, R., Blix, E. & et al. 2011, 'Is the operative delivery rate in low-risk women dependent on 
the level of birth care? A randomised controlled trial', BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics 
and Gynaecology, pp. 1357-64. 
Birthplace in England Collaborative, G. 2011, 'Perinatal and maternal outcomes by planned place of birth 
for healthy women with low risk pregnancies: the Birthplace in England national prospective cohort 
study', BMJ. 
Birthplace in England Collaborative Group 2011, 'Perinatal and maternal outcomes by planned place of 
birth for healthy women with low risk pregnancies: the Birthplace in England national prospective 
cohort study', BMJ. 
Birthplace in England Collaborative Group, Brocklehurst, P., Hardy, P., Hollowell, J., Linsell, L., Macfarlane, 
A., McCourt, C., Marlow, N., Miller, A., Newburn, M., Petrou, S., Puddicombe, D., Redshaw, M., 
Rowe, R., Sandall, J., Silverton, L. & Stewart, M. 2011, 'Perinatal and maternal outcomes by planned 
place of birth for healthy women with low risk pregnancies: the Birthplace in England national 
prospective cohort study', BMJ, vol. 343, p. d7400. 
Blix, E., Huitfeldt, A.S., Oian, P., Straume, B. & Kumle, M. 2012, 'Outcomes of planned home births and 
planned hospital births in low-risk women in Norway between 1990 and 2007: A retrospective 
cohort study', Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 147-53. 
Blix, E., Kumle, M., Kjaergaard, H. & et al. 2014, 'Transfer to hospital in planned home births: a systematic 
review', BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth. 
Bolten, N., De Jonge, A., Zwagerman, E., Zwagerman, P., Klomp, T., Zwart, J. & Geerts, C. 2016, 'Effect of 
planned place of birth on obstetric interventions and maternal outcomes among low-risk women: a 
cohort study in the Netherlands', BMC pregnancy and childbirth, vol. 16, no. 1, p. 329. 
Burns, E.E., Boulton, M.G., Cluett, E., Cornelius, V.R. & Smith, L.A. 2012, 'Characteristics, interventions and 
outcomes of women who used a birthing pool: a prospective observational study', Birth, vol. 39, no. 
3, pp. 192-202. 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
32 
 
Byrne, J.P., Crowther, C.A. & Moss, J.R. 2000, 'A randomised controlled trial comparing birthing centre care 
with delivery suite care in Adelaide, Australia', ANZJOG, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 268-74. 
Campbell, R. & MacFarlane, A. 1986, 'Place of delivery: a review', BJOG: An International Journal of 
Obstetrics & Gynaecology, vol. 93, no. 6, pp. 675-83. 
Chang, J.J. & MacOnes, G.A. 2011, 'Birth outcomes of planned home births in Missouri: A population-based 
study', American Journal of Perinatology, vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 529-36. 
Cheng, Y.W., Snowden, J.M., King, T.L. & Caughey, A.B. 2013, 'Selected perinatal outcomes associated with 
planned home births in the United States', American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology, vol. 209, 
no. 4, pp. 325.e1-8 1p. 
Davis, D., Baddock, S., Pairman, S. & et al. 2012, 'Risk of severe postpartum hemorrhage in low-risk 
childbearing women in New Zealand: exploring the effect of place of birth and comparing third 
stage management of labor', Birth, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 98-105. 
Davis, D., Baddock, S., Pairman, S., Hunter, M., Benn, C., Wilson, D., Dixon, L. & Herbison, P. 2011, 'Planned 
Place of Birth in New Zealand: Does it Affect Mode of Birth and Intervention Rates Among Low-Risk 
Women?', Birth: Issues in Perinatal Care, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 111-9 9p. 
de Jonge, A., Geerts, C.C., van der Goes, B.Y. & et al. 2015, 'Perinatal mortality and morbidity up to 28 days 
after birth among 743 070 low-risk planned home and hospital births: a cohort study based on 
three merged national perinatal databases', BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology, vol. 122, no. 5, pp. 720-8. 
de Jonge, A., Mesman, J., Mannien, J. & et al. 2013, 'Severe adverse maternal outcomes among low risk 
women with planned home versus hospital births in the Netherlands: nationwide cohort study', 
BMJ. 
de Jonge, A., van der Goes, B.Y., Ravelli, A. & et al. 2009, 'Perinatal mortality and morbidity in a nationwide 
cohort of 529 688 low-risk planned home and hospital births', BJOG: An International Journal of 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, vol. 116, no. 9, pp. 1177-84. 
de Jonge, A., Wouters, M., Klinkert, J., Brandenbarg, J., Zwart, J., Van Dillen, J., van der Horst, H. & 
Schellevis, F. 2017, 'Pitfalls in the use of register based data for comparing adverse maternal and 
perinatal outcomes in different birth settings', BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology. 
De Vries, R., Benoit, C., Van Teijlingen, E. & Wrede, S. 2002, Birth by design: Pregnancy, maternity care and 
midwifery in North America and Europe, Routledge. 
de Vries, R.G., Paruchuri, Y., Lorenz, K. & Vedam, S. 2013, 'Moral science: ethical argument and the 
production of knowledge about place of birth', Journal of Clinical Ethics, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 225-38 
14p. 
Declercq, E. 2013, 'The absolute power of relative risk in debates on repeat cesareans and home birth in the 
United States', Journal of Clinical Ethics, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 215-24 10p. 
Dixon, L., Prileszky, G., Guilland, K. & et al. 2012, 'What evidence supports the use of free-standing 
midwifery led units (primary units) in New Zealand/Aotearoa?', New Zealand College of Midwives 
Journal, no. 46, pp. 13-20. 
Dixon, L., Prileszky, G., Guillilan, K., Miller, S. & Anderson, J. 2014, 'Place of birth and outcomes for a cohort 
of low risk women in New Zealand: A comparison with Birthplace England', New Zealand College of 
Midwives Journal, no. 50, pp. 11-8 8p. 
Eide, B.I., Nilsen, A.B. & Rasmussen, S. 2009, 'Births in two different delivery units in the same clinic--a 
prospective study of healthy primiparous women', BMC Pregnancy & Childbirth, vol. 9, p. 25. 
Elder, H.R., Alio, A.P. & Fisher, S.G. 2016, 'Investigating the debate of home birth safety: A critical review of 
cohort studies focusing on selected infant outcomes', Japan Journal of Nursing Science. 
Evers, A.C., Brouwers, H.A., Hukkelhoven, C.W., Nikkels, P.G., Boon, J., Egmond-Linden, A., Hillegersberg, J., 
Snuif, Y.S., Sterken-Hooisma, S., Bruinse, H.W. & Kwee, A. 2010, 'Perinatal mortality and severe 
morbidity in low and high risk term pregnancies in the Netherlands: prospective cohort study', BMJ, 
vol. 341. 
Fullerton, J.T., Navarro, A.M. & Young, S.H. 2007, 'Outcomes of planned home birth: an integrative review', 
Journal of Midwifery and Women's Health, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 323-33. 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
33 
 
Gaudineau, A., Sauleau, E.A., Nisand, II & et al. 2013, 'Obstetric and neonatal outcomes in a home-like birth 
centre: a case-control study', Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics, vol. 287, no. 2, pp. 211-6. 
Gottvall, K., Winbladh, B., Cnattingius, S. & et al. 2005, 'Birth centre care over a 10-year period: infant 
morbidity during the first month after birth', Acta Paediatrica, vol. 94, no. 9, pp. 1253-60. 
Grunebaum, A., McCullough, L.B., Sapra, K.J., Brent, R.L., Levene, M.I., Arabin, B. & Chervenak, F.A. 2013, 
'Apgar score of 0 at 5 minutes and neonatal seizures or serious neurologic dysfunction in relation to 
birth setting', American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology, vol. 209, no. 4, pp. 323.e1-6. 
Grunebaum, A., McCullough, L.B., Sapra, K.J., Brent, R.L., Levene, M.I., Arabin, B. & Chervenak, F.A. 2014, 
'Early and total neonatal mortality in relation to birth setting in the United States, 2006-2009', 
American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology, vol. 211, no. 4, pp. 390.e1-7. 
Gyte, G., Dodwell, M., Newburn, M. & et al. 2010, 'Findings of meta-analysis cannot be relied on', BMJ, vol. 
341, no. 7766, p. 217. 
Gyte, G., Dodwell, M., Newburn, M., Sandall, J., Macfarlane, A. & Bewley, S. 2009, 'Estimating intrapartum-
related perinatal mortality rates for booked home births: when the 'best' available data are not 
good enough', BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, vol. 116, no. 7, pp. 933-
42 10p. 
Halfdansdottir, B., Smarason, A.K., Olafsdottir, O.A. & et al. 2015, 'Outcome of Planned Home and Hospital 
Births among Low-Risk Women in Iceland in 2005-2009: A Retrospective Cohort Study', Birth, vol. 
42, no. 1, pp. 16-26. 
Hilder, L., Zhichao, Z., Parker, M., Jahan, S. & Chambers, G. 2014, 'Australia's mothers and babies 2012'. 
Hiraizumi, Y. & Suzuki, S. 2013, 'Perinatal outcomes of low-risk planned home and hospital births under 
midwife-led care in Japan', Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Research, vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 
1500-4. 
Hodnett, E.D., Downe, S. & Walsh, D. 2012, 'Alternative versus conventional institutional settings for birth', 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, no. 8, pp. N.PAG-N.PAG 1p. 
Homer, C., Davis, G., Petocz, P., Barclay, L., Matha, D. & Chapman, M. 2000, 'Birth centre or labour ward? A 
comparison of the clinical outcomes of low-risk women in a NSW hospital', Australian Journal of 
Advanced Nursing, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 8-12 5p. 
Homer, C.S., Thornton, C., Scarf, V.L., Ellwood, D.A., Oats, J.J., Foureur, M.J., Sibbritt, D., McLachlan, H.L., 
Forster, D.A. & Dahlen, H.G. 2014, 'Birthplace in New South Wales, Australia: an analysis of 
perinatal outcomes using routinely collected data', BMC Pregnancy & Childbirth, vol. 14, p. 206. 
Hutton, E.K., Cappelletti, A., Reitsma, A.H., Simioni, J., Horne, J., McGregor, C. & Ahmed, R.J. 2016, 
'Outcomes associated with planned place of birth among women with low-risk pregnancies', CMAJ: 
Canadian Medical Association Journal, vol. 188, no. 5, pp. E80-E90 11p. 
Hutton, E.K., Reitsma, A., Thorpe, J., Brunton, G. & Kaufman, K. 2014, 'Protocol: systematic review and 
meta-analyses of birth outcomes for women who intend at the onset of labour to give birth at 
home compared to women of low obstetrical risk who intend to give birth in hospital', Systematic 
Reviews, vol. 3, no. 55. 
Janssen, P.A., Saxell, L., Page, L.A. & et al. 2009, 'Outcomes of planned home birth with registered midwife 
versus planned hospital birth with midwife or physician', Canadian Medical Association Journal 
(CMAJ), vol. 181, no. 6-7, pp. 377-83. 
Kennare, R.M., Keirse, M.J., Tucker, G.R. & Chan, A.C. 2010, 'Planned home and hospital births in South 
Australia, 1991-2006: differences in outcomes', Medical Journal of Australia, vol. 192, no. 2, pp. 76-
80. 
Kirby, R.S. & Frost, J. 2011, 'Maternal and newborn outcomes in planned home birth vs planned hospital 
births: a metaanalysis...Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2010 Sep;203(3):243.e1-8', American Journal of 
Obstetrics & Gynecology, vol. 204, no. 4, pp. e16-e 1p. 
Laws, P.J., Tracy, S.K. & Sullivan, E.A. 2010, 'Perinatal outcomes of women intending to give birth in birth 
centers in Australia', Birth, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 28-36. 
Leslie, M.S. & Romano, A. 2007, 'Appendix: birth can safely take place at home and in birthing centers: the 
coalition for improving maternity services', Journal of Perinatal Education, vol. 16 Suppl 1, pp. 81S-
8S. 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
34 
 
MacDorman, M.F. & Declercq, E. 2016, 'Trends and Characteristics of United States Out-of-Hospital Births 
2004-2014: New Information on Risk Status and Access to Care', Birth: Issues in Perinatal Care, vol. 
43, no. 2, pp. 116-24 9p. 
Malloy, M.H. 2010, 'Infant outcomes of certified nurse midwife attended home births: United States 2000 
to 2004', Journal of Perinatology, vol. 30, pp. 622-7. 
McIntyre, M.J. 2012, 'Safety of non-medically led primary maternity care models: a critical review of the 
international literature', Australian Health Review, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 140-7. 
Michal, C.A., Janssen, P.A., Vedam, S., Hutton, E.K. & De Jonge, A. 2011, 'Planned home vs hospital birth: a 
meta-analysis gone wrong', Medscape OB/GYN & Women’s Health. 
Miller, S. & Skinner, J. 2012, 'Are first-time mothers who plan home birth more likely to receive evidence-
based care? A comparative study of home and hospital care provided by the same midwives', Birth, 
vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 135-44. 
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J. & Altman, D.G. 2009, 'Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews 
and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement', BMJ, vol. 339. 
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D.G. & Group, T.P. 2009, 'Preferred reporting items for 
systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA Statement', PLoS Med, vol. 6, no. 7. 
Monk, A.R., Tracy, S., Foureur, M. & Barclay, L. 2013, 'Australian primary maternity units: Past, present and 
future', Women and Birth, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 213-8. 
Muthu, V. & Fischbacher, C. 2004, 'Free-standing midwife-led maternity units: A safe and effective 
alternative to hospital delivery for low-risk women?', Evidence-Based Healthcare and Public Health, 
vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 325-31. 
National Audit Office 2013, 'Maternity Services in England', HC 794, The Stationery Office, London. 
Nove, A., Berrington, A. & Matthews, Z. 2012a, 'Comparing the odds of postpartum haemorrhage in 
planned home birth against planned hospital birth: Results of an observational study of over 
500,000 maternities in the UK', BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth, vol. 12. 
Nove, A., Berrington, A. & Matthews, Z. 2012b, 'The methodological challenges of attempting to compare 
the safety of home and hospital birth in terms of the risk of perinatal death', Midwifery, vol. 28, no. 
5, pp. 619-26. 
Olsen, O. 1997, 'Meta‐analysis of the safety of home birth', Birth, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 4-13. 
Olsen, O. & Clausen, J.A. 2012, 'Planned hospital birth versus planned home birth', Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, no. 9. 
Overgaard, C., Fenger-Gron, M. & Sandall, J. 2012, 'Freestanding midwifery units versus obstetric units: 
does the effect of place of birth differ with level of social disadvantage?', BMC Public Health. 
Overgaard, C., Fenger-Grøn, M. & Sandall, J. 2012, 'Freestanding midwifery units versus obstetric units: 
Does the effect of place of birth differ with level of social disadvantage?', BMC Public Health, vol. 
12, no. 1. 
Overgaard, C., Moller, A.M., Fenger-Gron, F. & et al. 2011, 'Freestanding midwifery unit versus obstetric 
unit: a matched cohort study of outcomes in low-risk womenSouth Australian group of newborn 
samples', BMJ Open. 
Pang, J.W., Heffelfinger, J.D., Huang, G.J., Benedetti, T.J. & Weiss, N.S. 2002, 'Outcomes of planned home 
births in Washington State: 1989-1996', Obstetrics & Gynecology, vol. 100, no. 2, pp. 253-9. 
Prelec, A., Verdenik, I. & Poat, A. 2014, 'A comparison of frequency of medical interventions and birth 
outcomes between the midwife led unit and the obstetric unit in low-risk primiparous women', 
Obzornik Zdravstvene Nege, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 166-76 11p. 
Roome, S. & Welsh, A. 2015, 'A review and thematic analysis of attitudes and positions of professional 
organisations to planned home births in the USA, Canada, the UK, Australia and New Zealand', 
BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, vol. 122, p. 231. 
Ryan, M. & Roberts, C. 2005, 'A retrospective cohort study comparing the clinical outcomes of a birth 
centre and labour ward in the same hospital', Australian Midwifery, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 17-21 5p. 
Shaw, D., Guise, J.-M., Shah, N., Gemzell-Danielsson, K., Joseph, K., Levy, B., Wong, F., Woodd, S. & Main, 
E.K. 2016, 'Drivers of maternity care in high-income countries: can health systems support woman-
centred care?', The Lancet, vol. 388, no. 10057, pp. 2282-95. 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
35 
 
Snowden, J.M., Tilden, E.L., Snyder, J. & et al. 2015, 'Planned Out-of-Hospital Birth and Birth Outcomes', The 
New England Journal of Medicine. 
Stewart, M., McCandlish, R., Henderson, J. & Brocklehurst, P. 2005, Report of a structured review of birth 
centre outcomes, NPEU, Oxford. 
Stotland, N.E. & Declercq, E.R. 2002, 'Safety of out-of-hospital birth in industrialized nations: A review', 
Current Problems in Obstetrics, Gynecology and Fertility, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 133-44. 
The Nordic Cochrane Centre 2014, 'Review Manager (RevMan)', 5.3 edn, The Cochrane Collaboration, 
Copenhagen. 
Thornton, P., McFarlin, B.L., Park, C., Rankin, K., Schorn, M., Finnegan, L. & Stapleton, S. 2016, 'Cesarean 
Outcomes in US Birth Centers and Collaborating Hospitals: A Cohort Comparison', Journal of 
Midwifery & Women’s Health. 
van der Kooy, J., Poeran, J., de Graaf, J.P., Birnie, E., Denktass, S., Steegers, E.A. & Bonsel, G.J. 2011, 
'Planned home compared with planned hospital births in the Netherlands: intrapartum and early 
neonatal death in low-risk pregnancies', Obstetrics & Gynecology, vol. 118, no. 5, pp. 1037-46 10p. 
Vedam, S. 2003, 'Home birth versus hospital birth: Questioning the quality of the evidence on safety', Birth, 
vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 57-63. 
Vedam, S., Rossiter, C., Homer, C.S., Stoll, K. & Scarf, V.L. 2017, 'The ResQu Index: A new instrument to 
appraise the quality of research on birth place', PloS one, vol. 12, no. 8, p. e0182991. 
Vedam, S., Schummers, L. & Fulton, C. 2013, 'Home birth: an annotated guide to the literature', Division of 
Midwifery, University of British Columbia, Vancouver. 
Vedam, S., Stoll, K., MacDorman, M., Declercq, E., Cheyney, M., Fisher, T., Butt, E., Yang, Y.T. & Kennedy, H. 
2018, 'Mapping integration of midwives across the United States: impact on access, equity, and 
outcomes', PLOS ONE. 
Vedam, S., Stoll, K., Rubashkin, N., Martin, K., Miller-Vedam, Z., Hayes-Klein, H. & Jolicoeur, G. 2017, 'The 
Mothers on Respect (MOR) index: measuring quality, safety, and human rights in childbirth', SSM - 
Population Health, vol. 3, pp. 201-10. 
Walsh, D. & Downe, S.M. 2004, 'Outcomes of free-standing, midwife-led birth centers: a structured review', 
Birth: Issues in Perinatal Care, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 222-9 8p. 
Wax, J.R., Lucas, F.L., Lamont, M. & et al. 2010, 'Maternal and newborn outcomes in planned home birth vs 
planned hospital births: a metaanalysis', American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, vol. 203, 
no. 3, pp. 243-5. 
Wax, J.R., Pinette, M.G., Cartin, A. & Blackstone, J. 2010, 'Maternal and newborn morbidity by birth facility 
among selected United States 2006 low-risk births', American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology, 
vol. 202, no. 2, pp. 152.e1-5 1p. 
Wiegerinck, M., Van Der Goes, B.Y., De Jonge, A., Ravelli, A.C., Klinkert, J., Brandenbarg, J., Buist, F.C., 
Wouters, M.G., Tamminga, P., Van Der Post, J.A. & Mol, B.W. 2016, 'Intrapartum and neonatal 
mortality among women without major risk factors in primary midwife-led versus secondary 
obstetrician-led care in the Amsterdam region of the Netherlands: A retrospective cohort study', 
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, vol. 1), pp. S195-S6. 
Wiegerinck, M.M., van der Goes, B.Y., Ravelli, A.C., van der Post, J.A., Klinkert, J., Brandenbarg, J., Buist, 
F.C., Wouters, M.G., Tamminga, P., de Jonge, A. & Mol, B.W. 2015, 'Intrapartum and neonatal 
mortality in primary midwife-led and secondary obstetrician-led care in the Amsterdam region of 
the Netherlands: A retrospective cohort study', Midwifery, vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 1168-76. 
World Bank 2016, Country and Lending Groups, World Bank Group, viewed 23 March 2016, 
<http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-and-lending-groups#High_income>. 
Zaza, S., Wright-De Agüero, L.K., Briss, P.A., Truman, B.I., Hopkins, D.P., Hennessy, M.H., Sosin, D.M., 
Anderson, L., Carande-Kulis, V.G. & Teutsch, S.M. 2000, 'Data collection instrument and procedure 
for systematic reviews in the Guide to Community Preventive Services', American journal of 
preventive medicine, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 44-74. 
Zielinski, R., Ackerson, K. & Kane Low, L. 2015, 'Planned home birth: benefits, risks, and opportunities', 
International Journal of Women's Health, vol. 7, pp. 361-77. 
 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
36 
 
 
 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
37 
 
 
 
 
TABLES 
Table 1. Inclusion and exclusion criteria for articles in systematic review  
Inclusion criteria 
Exclusion examples 
Participants 
Healthy women with low-risk pregnancies, assessed 
by the researchers using clear consistent criteria 
 
Non-human participants 
 
Women with known antenatal risk factors e.g. 
twins, non-vertex presentation, previous 
caesarean section, pre-term labour, elective 
caesarean section, gestational diabetes, 
hypertension  
 
Risk self-rated by study participants 
 
Risk factors not comparable in all study cohorts 
Women giving birth in a high-income country 
 
Women in low- or medium-income countries  
 
Women in two or more high-income countries, 
where outcomes may be affected by variation 
between jurisdictions rather than place of birth 
Intervention 
Intended place of birth, determined at or close to 
the onset of labour 
 
Model of care or provider type rather than 
birth place  
 
Actual place of birth, regardless of intention 
 
Intended birth place determined at booking, 
not close to onset of labour 
 
Cohorts including births without skilled 
attendants 
 
Cohorts including unplanned home births  
 
Studies where intended place of birth is a 
comparator rather than the independent 
variable 
 
Comparison of specific antenatal, intrapartum 
or postnatal interventions or management 
approaches 
Comparison 
Comparison of two or more intended birth settings 
– home birth, birth in hospital obstetric unit or 
birth centre (including, where relevant, free-
standing and alongside midwifery units) 
 
Studies of outcomes in one birth setting i.e. just 
home births or birth centres, without 
comparison cohort 
 
Studies of modified rooms within hospital 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
38 
obstetric unit 
 
(Meta-analysis excluded studies comparing 
birth centres with home births as the meta-
analysis which uses hospital births as referent.) 
Outcomes  
Maternal or neonatal outcomes related to labour 
and birth, specifically: 
 
Perinatal mortality – intraparum stillbirth and 
early neonatal mortality (0-7 days postpartum) 
 
Admission to NICU/SCN 
 
Mode of birth – spontaneous normal vaginal 
birth, instrumental birth, caesarean section 
 
Perineal status – intact perineum, 3rd/4th degree 
perineal trauma 
 
Postpartum haemorrhage >1000mL 
Many studies also investigated other outcomes not 
addressed here, as indicated in Table S1.   
 
Articles presenting study protocols rather than 
outcomes 
 
Studies with place of birth as outcome 
 
Articles which do not include data on at least 
one of these outcomes 
 
Psycho-social outcomes only 
 
Cost-related or other economic outcomes 
 
Studies which only report satisfaction or other 
qualitative results 
 
Study design 
Original research comparing outcomes from two or 
more birth place cohorts, prospectively or 
retrospectively determined  
 
Studies which don’t compare outcomes from 
two or more places of birth  
 
Opinion pieces, reports, case-studies, 
commentaries etc. 
 
Systematic reviews and/or meta-analyses 
(individual studies may be included) 
 
Studies not reported in peer-reviewed journals 
published between 2000 and 2016 
 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
39 
 
Table 2: Summary of studies included in Systematic Review (N=28) 
    
First 
author.  
Publication 
date. 
Country  
Study design 
 
 
Source of data. 
Year/s  
 
Population – 
eligibility criteria 
Intervention –  
Planned place of 
birth 
 
Comparator – 
Planned place of 
birth 
 
Outcome measures – relevant 
to current review outcomes 
 
 
Quality 
rating 
Abbreviations at foot of table 
1 
Bernitz  
2011. 
Norway   
RCT  
 
Admin data 
2004-2010 
1111 women with low-risk 
pregnancies = AMU eligibility.   
MW-led AMU 
N=412 
Normal birth unit (NU) 
N=417. 
Special birth unit (SU) 
N=282. 
Operative birth, PPH, sphincter 
injuries, NICU admission  
High 
2 
Birthplace in 
England 
Collaborative 
2011. 
England  
 
Prospective 
cohort study 
Data collection 
forms. 
2008-2010  
64,538 women with low-risk 
pregnancies as per NICE 
guidelines.  
Additional analysis of 57,127 
women without complicating 
conditions at labour onset.   
Planned HB 
N=16,840 
AMU 
N=16,710 
FMU 
N=11,282 
Obstetric Unit (OU) 
N=19,706 
 
Composite PO = perinatal mortality + 
major intrapartum morbidity 
(defined). 
SO: ‘normal birth’ (SVB without IOL; 
anaesthesia; or episiotomy) 
High  
3 
Blix 
2012.   
Norway 
Retrospective 
cohort study 
Patient files + 
registry data. 
1990-2007  
17,941 low-risk pregnancies  
 
Planned HB 
N=1631 
 
Planned hospital birth 
N=16,310 
  
PO: PPH >500mL. 
SO: perinatal and neonatal death 
rates 
High 
4 
 
Bolten 
2016. 
Netherlands 
 
Prospective 
cohort study 
Perinatal database 
+ participant 
questions 
2009-2011  
3495 women with low-risk 
pregnancies in MW care at 
onset of labour  
 
Planned HB 
N=2050. 
 
MW-led OU birth  
N=1445  
 
PO: SVB and perineal outcomes, PPH.  
 
High 
5 
Burns 
2012. 
England, 
Scotland, 
Northern 
Ireland 
Prospective 
cohort study 
Data collection 
forms.  
2000-2008  
8924 women “low risk” as per 
RCOG water immersion joint 
statement.  
 
Water immersion in a 
birth pool in AMU  
N=2100.  
Combined FMU/HB 
(=community) 
N=2694. 
Water immersion in a 
birth pool in OU 
N=4130 
Maternal: mode of birth, perineal 
trauma, PPH.  
Neonatal: NICU admission, mortality  
High 
6 
Byrne 
2000. 
Australia  
RCT 
Case notes + 
participant 
questions  
1993-1995 
201 women with normal 
uncomplicated pregnancies. 
Birth centre AMU. 
N=100 
Hospital delivery suite 
N=101 
CS, blood loss >300mL, NICU SCN 
admission 
High 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
40 
    
First 
author.  
Publication 
date. 
Country  
Study design 
 
 
Source of data. 
Year/s  
 
Population – 
eligibility criteria 
Intervention –  
Planned place of 
birth 
 
Comparator – 
Planned place of 
birth 
 
Outcome measures – relevant 
to current review outcomes 
 
 
Quality 
rating 
Abbreviations at foot of table 
7 
Davis 
2011.  
New Zealand 
 
Comparative 
descriptive 
study 
Perinatal database  
2006-2007 
16210 women with low risk 
pregnancies  
Primary Unit (PU, like 
FMU) 
N=2877 
Planned HB N=1830,  
Secondary hospital (SU) 
N=7380,  
Tertiary hospital (TU) 
N=4123 
 
Mode of birth, perineal trauma (not 
defined), PPH >1000mL, NICU 
admission 
High 
8 
Davis 
2012 
New Zealand 
Retrospective 
cohort study 
Perinatal database 
2006-2007 
16,210 women with low risk 
pregnancies  
Planned PU birth 
N=2877  
 
Planned HB N=1830 
SU N=7308 
TU N=4123 
PPH > 1000mL  
High 
9 
de Jonge, 
2013.  
Netherlands 
 
Linked cohort 
study 
Perinatal database  
+ LEMMoN study 
data 
2004-2006 
146,752 women with low risk 
pregnancies. 
 
Planned HB 
N=92,333 
 
Planned OU birth 
N=54,419. 
 
PO: Severe acute maternal morbidity 
(defined).  
SO:  PPH > 1000mL 
High 
10 
de Jonge 
2015.  
Netherlands 
 
Retrospective 
cohort study 
Linked national 
registry data.  
2000-2009 
743,070 women with low risk 
pregnancies in MW-led care  
 
Planned HB 
N=466,112 
 
Planned hospital birth 
(including AMU) 
N=276,958 
 
Intrapartum and neonatal death, 
NICU admission  
High 
11 
Dixon 
2014. 
New Zealand 
Retrospective 
cohort (aim to  
replicate BPiE in 
NZ) 
NZ College 
Midwives Research 
Data. 
2006-2010  
61,072 women defined as low-
risk using BPiE criteria) 
 
Planned HB  
N=4921 
Primary unit (PU) 
N=10,158 
Hospital birth in either  
SU (N=29,027) or 
TU (N=16,966) 
 
Perinatal mortality, NICU admission. 
Moderate 
12 
Eide 
2009.  
Norway 
Prospective 
observational  
cohort study 
Hospital data. 
2001-2002  
453 nulliparous women with 
low-risk pregnancies = MLW 
eligibility 
MLW  
N=252 
Conventional delivery 
ward (CDW) 
 N=201 
PPH, perineal trauma, mode of birth  
High 
13 
Gaudineau 
2012.  
France 
Retrospective 
case-control 
study 
Hospital data.  
2005-2008  
1206 women with low risk 
pregnancies. 
Home-like BC 
N=316 
Traditional labour ward 
(TLW) 
N=890 
Mode of delivery, perineal trauma, 
PPH (>500mL), adverse neonatal 
outcomes (including neonatal death). 
Moderate 
14 
Halfdans-
dottir  
2015.  
Iceland  
 
Retrospective 
cohort study – 
matched.  
Two methods  
  
Hospital data + 
registry data. 
2005-2009  
Method 1: 1228 all HB + 
matched hospital births  
Method 2: 1112 women with 
no contraindications  
Planned HB 
(1) N=307  
(2) N=278. 
  
Matched planned 
hospital birth (including 
AMU) 
(1) N=921  
(2) N=834. 
Operative birth, PPH, anal sphincter 
injury, NICU admission 
High 
15 
Hiraizumi 
2013. 
Japan 
Retrospective 
cohort study  
?Medical records.  
2007-2011  
508 women with low risk 
pregnancies  
Planned HB under 
MW-led care 
N=168 
Planned OU birth under 
MW (N=123) or under 
obstetrician (N=217).  
Mode of birth, perineal trauma, 
PPH > 1000mL 
Moderate 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
41 
    
First 
author.  
Publication 
date. 
Country  
Study design 
 
 
Source of data. 
Year/s  
 
Population – 
eligibility criteria 
Intervention –  
Planned place of 
birth 
 
Comparator – 
Planned place of 
birth 
 
Outcome measures – relevant 
to current review outcomes 
 
 
Quality 
rating 
Abbreviations at foot of table 
16 
Homer  
2000. 
Australia  
Retrospective 
cohort study 
Hospital data.  
1995. 
734 women with low-risk 
pregnancies  
Birth centre 
N=367  
Hospital labour ward  
N=367 
Mode of birth, perineal trauma, 
neonatal outcomes.  
Moderate 
17 
Homer  
2014.  
Australia 
 
Retrospective 
population- 
based cohort 
study (similar to 
BPiE) 
Linked registry + 
hospital data.  
2000-2008  
258,161 women with low risk 
pregnancies. 
Additional analysis for 235,611 
women without complications 
at start of labour 
Planned HB 
N=742  
BC 
N=14,483 
  
Hospital labour ward 
N=242,936 
 
PO: primary neonatal outcome (see 
BPiE Collaboration). 
SO: stillbirth + NND, mode of birth, 
perineal trauma, ‘normal labour and 
birth’ (defined) 
High 
18 
Laws 
2010.  
Australia  
Retrospective 
population-
based study 
Perinatal database.  
2001-2005  
822,955 women.   
Additional analysis of 498,023 
women with term, low-risk 
pregnancies 
Planned BC birth  
N=22,222 
 
Intended OU birth  
N=800,733 
Low-risk group: 
N=475,791 
Perinatal mortality, mode of birth, 
severe perineal trauma, SCN/NICU 
admission 
Moderate 
19 
Miller  
2012.  
New Zealand 
Retrospective 
matched case 
control study 
Questionnaires to 
MW. 
2006-2007 
225 nulliparous women with 
low-risk pregnancies.   
Planned HB 
N=109  
Planned  OU birth with 
same MW as HB group 
N=116 
Type of birth, perineal status, 
PPH >500ml 
Moderate 
 
20 
Nove  
2012. 
UK 
Observational 
study 
Secondary analysis 
of maternity data.  
1998-2000  
273,872 women. 
Exclude high risk pregnancies 
(NICE guidelines)  
Planned HB  
N=5998 
Planned hospital birth  
N=267,874 
PPH >1000ml 
High 
21 
Overgaard 
2011. 
Denmark 
 
Cohort study 
with matched 
control. 
Patient records and 
admin data. 
2004-2008. 
1678 women with low risk 
pregnancies (NICE guidelines) + 
healthy multips with 
uncomplicated obstetric history 
regardless of age and BMI.  
Planned FMU birth.  
N=839 
 
Hospital birth, women 
matched on 9 key 
factors.  
N=839 
 
PO: CS.   
SO: NICU admission, perineal status, 
type of birth, PPH >500ml, perinatal 
mortality 
High 
22 
Overgaard 
2012 
Denmark  
 
Cohort study 
with matched 
control.  
Secondary analysis 
of data from  
Overgaard et al 
2011.  
1678 women as above, 
stratified by educational 
disadvantage.   
[460 women without post-
secondary education] 
Planned FMU birth.  
N=839 
[Women without 
post-secondary 
education N=230] 
Hospital birth 
N=839 
[Women without post-
secondary education 
N=230] 
Composite optimal birth outcome 
(uncomplicated SVB with good 
maternal and fetal outcomes), SVB, 
CS, NICU admission, perineal status. 
High 
23 
Pang  
2002. 
USA 
 
 
Retrospective 
population-
based cohort 
study 
Birth registry data, 
linked with death 
records. 
1989-1996 
 
Singleton birth 34/40+ with no 
recorded complications 
(defined) N=16,726 women.  
Additional analysis used infants 
2500g+ or 37/40+ N=16,253. 
 
HB with health 
professional as 
attendant or certifier 
(not ‘planned HB’) 
N=5854 + attempted 
HB transferred to 
hospital N=279. 
Hospital birth 
N=10,593.   
Secondary analysis 
N=10,347 
Neonatal death, PPH (not defined) 
Low 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
42 
    
First 
author.  
Publication 
date. 
Country  
Study design 
 
 
Source of data. 
Year/s  
 
Population – 
eligibility criteria 
Intervention –  
Planned place of 
birth 
 
Comparator – 
Planned place of 
birth 
 
Outcome measures – relevant 
to current review outcomes 
 
 
Quality 
rating 
Abbreviations at foot of table 
Secondary analysis 
N=6052 
24 
Prelec 
2014. 
Slovenia 
Prospective 
case-control 
study 
Hospital data  
2013 
497 low-risk nulliparous 
pregnancies (NICE guidelines). 
 
MW-managed births 
in MLU 
N=154 
OU births 
N=343 
PO: CS  
SO: SVB, PPH> 500mL, perineal 
status, NICU admission 
Moderate 
25 
Ryan 
2005. 
Australia 
Retrospective 
cohort study 
Hospital records.  
1995-1996 
3683 women all with BC 
eligibility.  
Planned BC birth  
N=720 
Planned hospital labour 
ward (LW)  
N=2963 
Type of labour and birth, perineal 
status, PPH> 600mL, perinatal death, 
SCN admission 
Low 
26 
 
Thornton 
2016. 
USA 
 
Retrospective 
cohort study 
using 
prospective 
study data 
Secondary analysis 
of data from AABC.  
2006-2011  
11,303 women attending BC for 
antenatal care, who chose 
hospital or BC birth.   
FMU birth  
N=8776 
Hospital birth  
N=2527 
PO: Type of birth. 
SO: PPH, composite of severe 
newborn outcomes 
High 
27 
Van der Kooy 
2011.  
Netherlands 
 
Population-
based cohort –  
2 methods  
Perinatal Registry 
data.  
2000-2007  
 
679,952 women with low risk 
pregnancies in MW care. 
[602,331 excluding labour 
<37/40 or >41/40, or earlier 
intrauterine death ] 
Planned HB with MW  
1) N=402,912  
2) N=363,568  
Planned hospital birth  
1) N=219,105  
2) N=190,098  
OR unclear planned BP 
1) N=57,935   
2) N=48,665  
Combined intrapartum death, 
neonatal death up to 24/24, neonatal 
death from 1-7 days. 
High 
28 
Wiegerinck, 
2015. 
Netherlands 
 
Retrospective 
cohort study 
Linked admin + 
Registry data.  
2005-2008   
 
Main study 83,289 women with 
singleton term pregnancies no 
elective CS, congenital 
abnormality or fetal death, at 
all risk levels.  
Additional data on 52,629  
women with low-risk 
pregnancies  
Planned HB following 
MW-led care 
N=23,323 
Planned hospital birth 
after MW-led care 
(n=18,675) + 
obstetrician-led care of 
low-risk pregnancies 
(n=10,631) 
Total N=29,306 
PO: Perinatal mortality  
SO: mode of birth, perineal trauma, 
PPH, admission to NICU 
Moderate 
 
Abbreviations:  
AABC=American Association of Birth Centers; AMU=Alongside Midwifery Unit; BC=birth centre; BMI=Body Mass Index; BP=birth place; BPiE=Birthplace in England (Collaboration Group); CDW=conventional 
delivery ward; CLU=consultant led unit; CS=Caesarean section; FMU=Freestanding (stand-alone) Midwifery Unit; HB=home birth; HELLP = haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelet count; 
IOL=induction of labour; ITT=intention to treat; LW=labour ward; mL=millilitres; MLU=Midwifery Led Unit; MW=midwife; N=number in cohort; NICU=Neonatal Intensive Care Unit; NICE=National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence; NND=neonatal death; NS=not significant; NU=normal unit; NZ=New Zealand; OU=hospital (obstetric unit); PO=primary outcome; PPH=postpartum 
haemorrhage;PU=primary unit; RCOG=Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists; RCT=randomised controlled trial; SCN=special care nursery; signif=significant; SO=secondary outcome; 
SU=special/secondary unit; SVB=spontaneous vaginal birth; TLW=traditional labour ward; TU=tertiary unit 
 
 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
43 
Table 3: Meta-analysis of Infant Outcomes  
Infant outcomes – planned 
homebirth vs hospital 
Fig 
No. of 
studies 
Planned home 
birth 
n/N 
Planned 
hospital birth 
n/N 
Estimated 
odds ratio 
95% 
confidence 
interval 
Sensitivity analysis – High quality 
studies only 
No. of 
studies 
Est odds 
ratio 
95% CI 
Stillbirth 
S1 
5a 
200/470497 
278/526698 
0.92 
0.74 – 1.14 
5 
0.92 
0.74 – 1.14 
Stillbirth – nulliparous 
S1a 
3 
113/198948 
87/144273 
1.20 
0.32 – 4.51  
 
 
 
Stillbirth – multiparous 
S1a 
3 
87/269031 
45/149866 
1.04 
0.73 – 1.50 
 
 
 
Early neonatal death 
S3 
5b 
167/468627 
164/519202 
0.98 
0.77 – 1.25 
5 
0.98 
0.77 – 1.25 
ENND – nulliparous 
S3a 
3 
95/198845 
69/144193 
0.99 
0.73 – 1.36 
 
 
 
ENND – multiparous 
S3a 
3 
72/268949 
42/149823 
1.03 
0.69 – 1.54 
 
 
 
Admission to NICU 
S5 
4c 
1123/472914 
2694/335202 
0.71 
0.55 – 0.92 
3 
0.79 
0.63 – 0.98 
NICU admission – nulliparous 
S5a 
2 
656/198476 
499/137280 
1.11 
0.65 – 1.89 
 
 
 
NICU admission – multiparous 
S5a 
2 
337/267687 
272/140426 
0.74 
0.62 – 0.87 
 
 
 
Infant outcomes - planned 
birth in birth centre (BC) vs 
hospital 
Fig 
No of 
studies 
Planned BC 
birth 
n/N 
Planned 
hospital birth 
n/N 
Estimated 
odds ratio 
95% 
confidence 
interval 
 
 
 
Stillbirth 
S2 
6d 
6/18837 
148/237618 
0.67 
0.31 – 1.48   
3 
0.66 
0.29 – 1.50 
Early neonatal death 
S4 
6e 
4/20609 
54/230245 
0.87 
0.29 – 2.61  
3 
0.82 
0.25 – 2.63  
Admission to NICU 
S6 
6f 
387/16540 
2073/63507 
0.82 
0.62 – 1.08  
4 
0.88 
0.59 – 1.32 
Included studies: 
a. Blix et al. 2012; Davis et al. 2011; de Jonge et al. 2015; Halfdansdottir et al. 2015; Homer et al. 2014. Parity data not available for two studies: Davis et al. 
2011; Homer et al. 2014 
b. Blix et al. 2012; Burns et al. 2012; de Jonge et al. 2015; Halfdansdottir et al. 2015; Homer et al. 2014. Parity data not available for two studies: Burns et al. 
2012; Homer et al. 2014 
c. Davis et al. 2011; de Jonge et al. 2015; Dixon et al. 2014; Halfdansdottir et al. 2015. Parity data not available for Davis et al. 2011; Dixon et al. 2014 
d. Davis et al. 2011; Gaudineau et al. 2013; Homer et al. 2000; Homer et al. 2014; Overgaard et al. 2011; Ryan & Roberts 2005). Parity data only available for 
two studies with nil events for either cohort (Gaudineau et al. 2013; Overgaard et al. 2011 
e. Burns et al. 2012; Gaudineau et al. 2013; Homer et al. 2000; Homer et al. 2014; Overgaard et al. 2011; Ryan & Roberts 2005. Parity data only available for 
one study with nil events for either cohort Gaudineau et al. 2013 
f. Bernitz et al. 2011; Davis et al. 2011; Dixon et al. 2014; Overgaard et al. 2011; Prelec, Verdenik & Poat 2014. AMU data only for Burns et al. 2012 as FMU 
data merged with homebirth data. 
 
 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
44 
Table 4: Meta-analysis of Maternal Outcomes 
Maternal outcomes – 
planned homebirth vs 
hospital 
Figure  No. of 
studies 
Planned home 
birth 
n/N 
Planned 
hospital birth 
n/N 
Estimated 
odds ratio 
95% 
confidence 
interval 
Sensitivity analysis – High quality 
studies only  
No. of 
studies 
Estimated 
odds ratio 
95% 
confidence 
interval 
Normal vaginal birth 
S7 
9a 
41473/45777 
163523/300507 
2.93 
2.13 – 4.03 
6 
3.25 
1.97 – 5.38  
Caesarean section 
S9 
9b 
1006/46935 
31209/322166 
0.35 
0.27 – 0.46 
6 
0.36 
0.24 – 0.53 
Instrumental birth 
S11 
9c 
2682/46935 
46157/322166 
0.37 
0.24 – 0.58 
6 
0.33 
0.21 – 0.51 
Intact perineum 
S13 
2d 
1632/3720 
5284/12079 
1.15 
1.06 – 1.25 
2 
1.15 
1.06 – 1.25 
Severe perineal trauma 
S15 
9e 
920/44625 
9333/290389 
0.57 
0.40 – 0.81 
6 
0.49 
0.30 – 0.81 
PPH >1000mL 
S17 
6f  
2853/102663 
5231/336330 
0.73 
0.55 – 0.96 
5 
0.68 
0.52 – 0.89 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maternal outcomes – 
planned birth in birth 
centre vs hospital 
Figure No. of 
studies 
Planned BC 
birth 
n/N 
Planned 
hospital birth 
n/N 
Estimated 
odds ratio 
95% 
confidence 
interval 
No. of 
studies 
Estimated 
odds ratio 
95% 
confidence 
interval 
Normal vaginal birth 
S8 
11g 
53108/63443 
322132/521925 
1.92 
1.59 – 2.32 
7 
2.05 
1.60 – 2.63 
Caesarean section 
S10 
15h 
4061/81697 
136964/782157 
0.48 
0.39 – 0.60 
9 
0.54 
0.42 – 0.70 
Instrumental birth 
S12 
14i 
5731/72921 
97916/780066 
0.61 
0.52 – 0.71 
8 
0.58 
0.46 – 0.72 
Intact perineum 
S14 
6j 
2517/6912 
7014/19361 
1.20 
0.98 – 1.47 
3 
1.04 
0.82 – 1.30 
Severe perineal trauma 
S16 
11k 
1852/68328 
14429/621185 
1.01 
0.96 – 1.07 
7 
0.93  
0.87 – 0.99 
PPH >1000mL 
S18 
5l 
77/6378 
238/17309 
0.87 
0.67 – 1.14 
4 
0.83 
0.63 – 1.09 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Included studies: 
a. Birthplace in England Collaborative Group 2011; Blix et al. 2012; Bolten et al. 2016; Davis et al. 2011; Halfdansdottir et al. 2015; Hiraizumi & 
Suzuki 2013; Homer et al. 2014; Miller & Skinner 2012; Wiegerinck et al. 2016 
b. Birthplace in England Collaborative Group 2011; Blix et al. 2012; Bolten et al. 2016; Davis et al. 2011; Halfdansdottir et al. 2015; Hiraizumi & 
Suzuki 2013; Homer et al. 2014; Miller & Skinner 2012; Wiegerinck et al. 2016 
c. Birthplace in England Collaborative Group 2011; Blix et al. 2012; Bolten et al. 2016; Davis et al. 2011; Halfdansdottir et al. 2015; Hiraizumi & 
Suzuki 2013; Homer et al. 2014; Miller & Skinner 2012; Wiegerinck et al. 2016 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
45 
d. Bolten et al. 2016; Davis et al. 2011 
e. Birthplace in England Collaborative Group 2011; Blix et al. 2012; Bolten et al. 2016; Davis et al. 2011; Halfdansdottir et al. 2015; Hiraizumi & 
Suzuki 2013; Homer et al. 2014; Miller & Skinner 2012; Wiegerinck et al. 2016 
f. Bolten et al. 2016; Davis et al. 2012; de Jonge et al. 2013; Halfdansdottir et al. 2015; Hiraizumi & Suzuki 2013; Nove, Berrington & Matthews 
2012a 
g. Bernitz et al. 2011; Birthplace in England Collaborative Group 2011; Burns et al. 2012; Davis et al. 2011; Eide, Nilsen & Rasmussen 2009; 
Gaudineau et al. 2013; Hiraizumi & Suzuki 2013; Homer et al. 2000; Homer et al. 2014; Laws, Tracy & Sullivan 2010; Overgaard et al. 2011 
h. Bernitz et al. 2011; Birthplace in England Collaborative Group 2011; Burns et al. 2012; Byrne, Crowther & Moss 2000; Davis et al. 2011; Eide, 
Nilsen & Rasmussen 2009; Gaudineau et al. 2013; Hiraizumi & Suzuki 2013; Homer et al. 2000; Homer et al. 2014; Laws, Tracy & Sullivan 
2010; Overgaard et al. 2011; Prelec, Verdenik & Poat 2014; Ryan & Roberts 2005; Thornton et al. 2016 
i. Bernitz et al. 2011; Birthplace in England Collaborative Group 2011; Burns et al. 2012; Byrne, Crowther & Moss 2000; Davis et al. 2011; Eide, 
Nilsen & Rasmussen 2009; Gaudineau et al. 2013; Hiraizumi & Suzuki 2013; Homer et al. 2000; Homer et al. 2014; Laws, Tracy & Sullivan 
2010; Overgaard et al. 2011; Prelec, Verdenik & Poat 2014; Ryan & Roberts 2005 
j. Burns et al. 2012; Davis et al. 2011; Gaudineau et al. 2013; Homer et al. 2000; Overgaard et al. 2011; Ryan & Roberts 2005 
k. Bernitz et al. 2011; Birthplace in England Collaborative Group 2011; Burns et al. 2012; Davis et al. 2011; Eide, Nilsen & Rasmussen 2009; 
Gaudineau et al. 2013; Hiraizumi & Suzuki 2013; Homer et al. 2014; Laws, Tracy & Sullivan 2010; Overgaard et al. 2011; Prelec, Verdenik & 
Poat 2014 
l. Bernitz et al. 2011; Burns et al. 2012; Davis et al. 2012; Hiraizumi & Suzuki 2013; Overgaard et al. 2011 
 
 
