 Article
The Tumor Microenvironment Represses T Cell
Mitochondrial Biogenesis to Drive Intratumoral T
Cell Metabolic Insufficiency and Dysfunction
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d T cells infiltrating tumors show decreases in mitochondrial
function and mass
d Loss of oxidative metabolism is specific to activation in the
tumor microenvironment
d T cell mitochondrial biogenesis is repressed via Akt-mediated
inhibition of PGC1a
d Enforced expression of PGC1a results in superior antitumor
T cell function
Authors
Nicole E. Scharping, Ashley V. Menk,
Rebecca S. Moreci, ...,
Simon C. Watkins, Robert L. Ferris,
Greg M. Delgoffe
Correspondence
gdelgoffe@pitt.edu
In Brief
As the tumor microenvironment is
nutrient-poor, the inability of T cells to
attack and eliminate cancer cells might be
linked to an inability to generate sufficient
bioenergetic intermediates. Delgoffe and
colleagues show that intratumoral T cells
exhibit repressed mitochondrial
metabolism and find that metabolically
reprogramming T cells increases
antitumor activity.
Scharping et al., 2016, Immunity 45, 374–388
August 16, 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2016.07.009
 Immunity
Article
The Tumor Microenvironment Represses T Cell
Mitochondrial Biogenesis to Drive Intratumoral
T Cell Metabolic Insufficiency and Dysfunction
Nicole E. Scharping,1,2 Ashley V. Menk,1 Rebecca S. Moreci,1 Ryan D. Whetstone,1,2 Rebekah E. Dadey,1,2
Simon C. Watkins,2,3 Robert L. Ferris,1,2,4 and Greg M. Delgoffe1,2,*
1Tumor Microenvironment Center, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
2Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
3Department of Cell Biology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
4Department of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
*Correspondence: gdelgoffe@pitt.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2016.07.009
SUMMARY
Although tumor-specific T cells recognize cancer
cells, they are often rendered dysfunctional due to
an immunosuppressive microenvironment. Here we
showed that T cells demonstrated persistent loss of
mitochondrial function and mass when infiltrating
murine and human tumors, an effect specific to the
tumor microenvironment and not merely caused
by activation. Tumor-infiltrating T cells showed a
progressive loss of PPAR-gamma coactivator 1a
(PGC1a), which programs mitochondrial biogenesis,
induced by chronic Akt signaling in tumor-specific
T
cells.
Reprogramming
tumor-specific
T
cells
through enforced expression of PGC1a resulted in
superior intratumoral metabolic and effector func-
tion. Our data support a model in which signals in
the tumor microenvironment repress T cell oxidative
metabolism, resulting in effector cells with metabolic
needs that cannot be met. Our studies also suggest
that modulation or reprogramming of the altered
metabolism of tumor-infiltrating T cells might repre-
sent a potential strategy to reinvigorate dysfunc-
tional T cells for cancer treatment.
INTRODUCTION
The immune system has evolved multiple cellular mechanisms
for the detection and elimination of abnormal or stressed cells
in a wide array of environments. Early detection of cancer, via
immunosurveillance, can occur almost anywhere, facilitating
destruction of early transformed cells expressing neoantigens.
However, as cancers edit and escape this initial immune detec-
tion, they also generate an immunosuppressive microenviron-
ment which restricts T cell infiltration, activation, and effector
function both through direct repression (via cytokines, adeno-
sine, prostaglandins, glucose restriction, etc.) as well as the
recruitment of immunosuppressive populations tasked with
maintaining immune tolerance (Jiang et al., 2015). The result is
an ineffectual antitumor immune response and consequent tu-
mor progression.
Recent advances in cancer immunotherapy have revealed that
the T cell response to cancer can be reinvigorated in a variety of
ways, resulting in durable and effective benefit in a wide array of
cancer types (La-Beck et al., 2015; Mahoney et al., 2015; Ribas,
2015). These include engineering chimeric antigen receptors
redirect T cells to tumors, personalized antigen vaccines to
persistent neoepitopes, and, probably most prominently, anti-
body-mediated blockade of co-inhibitory ‘‘checkpoint’’ mole-
cules, like programmed death-1 (PD-1), cytotoxic T lymphocyte
antigen 4 (CTLA-4), lymphocyte activation gene 3 (LAG-3), T cell
immunoglobulin and mucin-containing gene 3 (Tim-3), among
others (La-Beck et al., 2015). These molecules are highly upregu-
lated on tumor-infiltrating T cells and are thought to negatively
regulate T cell activation and effector function. This elevated
and sustained expression of co-inhibitory molecules is indicative
of a hyporesponsive phenotype, originally discovered in chronic
viral infection, termed T cell exhaustion (Wherry and Kurachi,
2015). Antigen persistence results in continued TCR and cyto-
kine signals, which promote upregulation of these receptors,
resulting in a hyporesponsiveness functionally similar to anergy
but mechanistically distinct (Crespo et al., 2013; Schietinger
and Greenberg, 2014). Importantly, T cells can still have an ex-
hausted phenotype in the absence of co-inhibitory molecules
(Legat et al., 2013; Odorizzi et al., 2015), shedding light on the
fact that while these co-inhibitory molecules have been exten-
sively studied at the molecular and biochemical levels, it is still
unclear what the contribution of co-inhibitory molecule signaling
is to the initiation or maintenance of the exhausted phenotype.
Thus for improving the treatment of cancer, chronic viral infec-
tions, and other diseases, it is critical to understand the mecha-
nisms behind the dysfunction in chronically activated T cells
(Pauken and Wherry, 2015). This is especially important consid-
ering that, while checkpoint blockade has had remarkable suc-
cess in the clinic, the majority of patients still do not respond
to these therapies (La-Beck et al., 2015).
Carrying out effector function is a metabolically demanding
process (Pearce et al., 2013). T cells must efficiently divide and
replicate their genome rapidly and with fidelity, synthesize high
levels of cytokines, and deliver cytotoxic payload to target cells.
Recent discoveries of T cells’ dependence on nutrient sensing
374
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc.
 and flux through various metabolic pathways have shown that
metabolism represents a key mechanism by which the immune
system can be regulated (Delgoffe and Powell, 2015). They
also suggest that the fate and function of T cells are intrinsically
tied to their metabolism and that a T cell (like any other cell) re-
quires the machinery to generate bioenergetic intermediates to
support proliferation and effector function (Delgoffe and Powell,
2015).
T cells utilize aerobic glycolysis, diverting glucose into lactate
fermentation rather than mitochondrial acetyl-CoA oxidation to
support their expansion and proliferation during their effector
phase (Pearce et al., 2013; Roos and Loos, 1970). The precise
contributions of this pathway and its teleology remain the subject
of much study, but nevertheless the mitochondria remain an
essential component of T cell metabolism. Effector T cells signif-
icantly upregulate oxidative activity and memory T cell precur-
sors become increasingly dependent on mitochondria to
mediate fatty-acid oxidation over time (van der Windt et al.,
2012; van der Windt et al., 2013). Furthermore, the mitochondria
remain important organelles for biosynthesis, calcium buffering,
and mediating programmed cell death (Rizzuto et al., 2012; Wen-
ner, 2012). Thus, while T cells might divert glucose metabolism
away from mitochondrial pathways during activation, mitochon-
dria are still critical for maintaining the health and integrity of the
T cell in both effector and memory phases.
While the effects of glucose deprivation in tumor microenvi-
ronments on glycolytic metabolism and T cell function have
garnered much recent interest, the mitochondrial phenotype of
T cells infiltrating tumors remains unclear (Chang et al., 2015;
Ho et al., 2015; Siska and Rathmell, 2015; Zhao et al., 2015).
We have observed that tumor-infiltrating T cells display an over-
all phenotype of metabolic insufficiency, characterized most
prominently by a persistent loss of mitochondrial function and
mass. Loss of mitochondrial function in tumor-reactive T cells
occurred specifically in the tumor microenvironment, largely
independently of PD-1 blockade or regulatory T cell suppres-
sion, and due to a defect in PPAR-gamma coactivator 1a
(PGC1a)-programmed mitochondrial biogenesis. This defect
was due in part to chronic protein kinase B (Akt) signaling, in-
hibited Foxo transcription factor activity, and consequent
PGC1a repression. Metabolic reprogramming of T cells through
enforced PGC1a expression rescued mitochondrial function and
induced superior antitumor responses characterized by cytokine
production and tumor control. These findings show the chronic
activation associated with the anti-cancer response represses
oxidative metabolism, suggesting that the dysfunction of tu-
mor-infiltrating T cells might be linked to an ability to generate
sufficient metabolic intermediates for cellular function.
RESULTS
Tumor-Infiltrating T Cells Display Decreased
Mitochondrial Mass
To assay the metabolic capacity of tumor-infiltrating T cells, we
measured mitochondrial function and mass by flow cytometry
using MitoTracker Deep Red FM (a membrane permeable, car-
bocyanine-based dye for mitochondria used previously to stain
mitochondrial mass; Cottet-Rousselle et al., 2011) and compe-
tency for glucose uptake using fluorescent 2-NBD-glucose
(2NBDG) in T cells infiltrating implantable tumors. While Mito-
Tracker Deep Red has been shown to be membrane potential
sensitive in some systems, uncoupling using carbonyl cyanide
m-chlorophenyl hydrazine (CCCP) showed that, using our stain-
ing protocols, MitoTracker Deep Red was highly resistant to
collapse of membrane potential, especially compared to tetra-
methylrhodamine ester (TMRE), a well-known membrane-po-
tential sensitive dye (Figure S1A). C57/BL6 mice were inocu-
lated with B16 melanoma, and at day 12, lymph node and
tumor preparations were pulsed with 2-NBDG and stained for
flow cytometric analysis. Whereas T cells in the lymph nodes,
both non-draining (ndLN) and tumor draining (dLN), effectively
took up glucose and had relatively high MitoTracker FM stain-
ing, CD8+ tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) showed a dra-
matic reduction of mitochondrial mass as well as the ability to
take up glucose (Figures 1A and 1B). To confirm the phenotype
we were observing was due to loss of mitochondrial mass and
not only mitochondrial depolarization, we employed both Mito-
Tracker Green FM (another carbocyanine-based dye) and anti-
bodies to the mitochondrial outer membrane protein Voltage
Dependent Anion Channel (VDAC), revealing similar losses (Fig-
ure S1B). T cells of various effector and memory phenotypes
have been shown to have distinct mitochondrial masses (van
der Windt et al., 2013), which we confirmed with our dyes; how-
ever, these differences are substantially smaller than those
observed within the tumor microenvironment (Figure S1C). For
clarity, throughout this study we primarily gate solely on CD8+
T cells and without further subdivision unless explicitly stated.
This insufficiency was largely specific to CD8+ T cells, as
CD4+ T cells retained most of their mitochondrial mass in B16
tumors. This phenotype was common to three different implant-
able tumor models inoculated into B6 mice, including MC38
adenocarcinoma and Lewis Lung Carcinoma (LLC), with some
notable differences. We also observe loss of MitoTracker FM
staining in a proportion of CD4+ T cells in LLC, and no significant
differences in glucose uptake (Figure 1B and Figures S1D and
S1E). This loss of mitochondrial mass was confirmed by trans-
mission electron microscopy, which revealed that tumor-
infiltrating CD8+ T cells not only showed lower mitochondrial
mass, but also abnormal mitochondrial morphology (Figure 1C).
We also examined metabolism in T cells infiltrating human head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and found
a similar loss of mitochondrial staining when compared to pe-
ripheral blood T cells (Figure 1D).
We next examined the metabolic output of tumor-infiltrating
T cells using a Seahorse extracellular flux analyzer. Metabolic
flux analysis of effector, LN-resident, or tumor-infiltrating CD8+
T cells confirmed a defect in oxygen consumption (OCR), with
substantial loss of spare respiratory capacity (a measure of mito-
chondrial reserve, measured as the difference between basal
and uncoupled maximal oxygen consumption) compared to
naive, LN-resident cells, or previously activated effector T cells
(Figure 1E). This resulted in an increased dependence on
glycolytic metabolism, as evidenced by increased extracellular
acidification rate (Figure 1E). Thus, T cells infiltrating mouse
and human tumors showed a loss of mitochondrial mass and
dependence of glycolytic metabolism, rendering them unable
to carry out critical cellular functions in the glucose-poor tumor
microenvironment.
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
375
 Loss of Mitochondrial Function Is Specific T Cell
Responses in the Tumor Microenvironment
We next wanted to determine whether this mitochondrial
dysfunction was specific to the anti-tumor response or if it
occurred in other types of robust effector responses. To do
this, we utilized an adoptive transfer system of naive, congeni-
cally mismatched ovalbumin (OVA)-specific TCR transgenic
(OT-I) T cells into mice bearing OVA-expressing B16 (B16OVA) tu-
mors or mice infected with OVA-expressing Vaccinia virus
(VVOVA) for 6 days. This experiment was designed to compare
the chronic activation seen in cancer to a robust acute in vivo
response in which antigen is effectively cleared (Pollizzi et al.,
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 1. Tumor-Infiltrating CD8+ T Cells Display Suppressed Mitochondrial Function and Mass
(A) Representative flow cytogram of nondraining (ndLN), draining (dLN) lymph node, or tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) preparations from C57BL/6 mice
inoculated with B16 melanoma cells 12 days prior, gated on CD8 or CD4 as indicated.
(B) Tabulated flow cytometric data from CD8+ T cells isolated from mice bearing the indicated tumor types. Each circle represents an individual animal.
(C) Transmission electron microscopy of activated or tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells.
(D) MitoTracker FM staining of CD8+ T cells from peripheral blood lymphocyte (PBL) or TIL of HNSCC patients.
(E) Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) trace (left) and metabolic analysis panels (middle, right) from CD8+ T cells isolated from the indicated sites from B16-bearing
animals. T cells activated 24 hr with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 (Teff) are included as a control. Spare respiratory capacity (SRC) is calculated as the difference between
initial, basal OCR values, and the maximal OCR values achieved after FCCP uncoupling. Data represent the mean or are representative of 3–5 independent
experiments. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 by unpaired t test. Error bars indicate SEM. See also Figure S1.
376
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
 2015). Consistent with our data generated in polyclonal popula-
tions from mouse and human tumors, OT-I T cells infiltrating tu-
mors showed decreased MitoTracker FM staining relative to
their LN-resident counterparts (Figure 2A, B). In contrast, OT-I
T cells responding in the spleen to VVOVA infection had increased
mitochondrial mass compared to splenic OT-I T cells adoptively
transferred into mock infected mice, as evidenced by increased
MitoTracker FM and intracellular VDAC staining (Figure 2A, Fig-
ure S2A). T cells responding to OVA in the context of VVOVA also
increased basal oxygen consumption (OCR) and spare respira-
tory capacity (Figure 2B). VVOVA-responsive T cells also dis-
played heightened glycolytic function, even compared to OT-I
A
B
D
C
Figure 2. Loss of Mitochondrial Function and Mass Is Not Simply a Phenotype of Robust Activation In Vivo
(A) Representative flow cytogram and tabulated results of 2NBDG uptake and MitoTracker FM measurements of OT-I T cells injected into B16OVA-bearing or
VVOVA-infected, or uninfected congenically mismatched hosts for 6 days. Plots are gated on CD8+ T cells and the congenic allele marker (Thy1).
(B) Seahorse measurements (OCR, SRC, and ECAR) from cells in (A).
(C) ATP measurements from purified donor cells from (A).
(D) Flow cytogram of glucose uptake and mitochondrial mass of OT-I (Thy1.1+) T cells adoptively transferred into B16OVA bearing mice for 6 days, isolated from
either LN or tumor, then transferred into VVOVA-infected mice for 6 days. Flow cytogram depicts splenic CD8+Thy1.1+ cells. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 by
unpaired t test. Results represent four (A–C) or three (D) experiments. Circles represent individual animals. UI = uninfected VOVA = VVOVA-infected (1 3 106 PFU IP),
spl = spleen. Error bars indicate SEM. See also Figure S2.
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
377
 (legend on next page)
378
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
 T cells isolated from tumors (Figure 2B). Comparisons of ATP re-
serves from OT-I T cells responding in B16OVA tumors compared
to VVOVA-infected spleens revealed that TILs showed an inability
to maintain ATP reserves, while this pool was dramatically
increased in cells responding to viral infection (Figure 2C). Func-
tionally this led to differential patterns of cytokine production
upon peptide or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate/ionomycin re-
stimulation (Figure S2B). The phenotype of mitochondrial insuffi-
ciency observed in tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes was quite
stable; OT-I T cells isolated from B16OVA tumors retained a
phenotype of low mitochondrial mass, even when isolated and
transferred into a new, VVOVA infected mouse for 7 days (Fig-
ure 2D). Thus, T cell dysfunction associated with loss of mito-
chondria occurred specifically within the chronic activation and
microenvironment of cancer.
Mitochondria Become Dysfunctional as T Cells Are
Activated in Tumors
We next utilized this adoptive transfer model to explore the meta-
bolic consequences of activated T cells as they enter the tumor
microenvironment versus responding to acute infection. Naive,
OT-I Thy1.1+ T cells were labeled with CellTrace Violet (CTV) to
monitor proliferation and transferred into B16OVA-bearing or
VVOVA-infected C57BL/6 (Thy1.2+) mice for 72 hr. This resulted
in robust proliferation in both scenarios, with OT-I T cells under-
going as many as seven cell divisions (Figure 3A). We also
observed loss of mitochondrial mass as T cells enter the tumor
microenvironment, just as we had shown with longer incubations
(6 days, Figure 2A). Experiments employing dichlorofluorescin
diacetate (DCFDA), a reactive oxygen species (ROS) indicator,
and TMRE, a mitochondrial membrane potential-sensitive dye
(Figure S1A), indicated that T cells responding to antigen in the
tumor microenvironment showed mitochondrial depolarization
as well as a loss of ROS production (Figures 3B and 3C).
Because mitochondrial depolarization can lead to autophagy,
we then asked whether mitophagy may be mediating the loss
of mitochondria in tumor-infiltrating T cells. We did not observe
any significant increases in Light Chain 3B (LC3B) staining in per-
meabilized OT-I T cells, suggesting that autophagic processes
are likely not overtly deregulated in these cells (Figure 3D). We
also treated tumor-bearing mice 24 hr after transfer with the mi-
tophagy and mitochondrial fission inhibitor m-divi-1 (Cui et al.,
2010); this also failed to improve mitochondrial staining in tumor
infiltrating T cells (Figure 3E). We also asked whether loss of
mitochondrial function could occur in vitro in response to co-cul-
ture with tumor cells, and found that response of naive or previ-
ously activated OT-I T cells to B16OVA tumor cells in vitro did
not result in mitochondrial loss (Figures S3A and S3B). Thus,
T cells responding to cancer lost oxidative metabolism relatively
rapidly, but this required signals that are present specifically in
the tumor microenvironment.
Loss of Mitochondrial Mass Correlates with
Upregulation of Co-inhibitory Molecules
As loss of mitochondrial function was progressive and specific
to the tumor microenvironment, we next sought to determine
the relationship between the loss of mitochondria seen in tu-
mor-infiltrating T cells and the expression of molecular markers
for dysfunctional, exhausted T cells. B16 melanoma is highly en-
riched for dysfunctional T cells expressing high levels of PD-1,
LAG-3, and Tim-3 (Figure 4A). Mitochondrial loss in the poly-
clonal T cell response appeared to be progressive, as T cells
expressing more co-inhibitory molecules had decreased mito-
chondrial mass, as evidenced by MitoTracker FM staining as
well as staining for VDAC (Figures 4B, 4C, and S4A). Whereas
mitochondrial mass was inversely correlated with upregulation
of coinhibitory molecules, glucose competency was consistently
depressed in tumor-infiltrating T cells and did not specifically
correlate with these markers (Figure 4D), in agreement with pre-
vious reports (Chang et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2015). This resulted in
a failure to maintain a sufficient reserve of ATP (as measured
directly ex vivo) (Figure 4E). We observed similar results in
MC38 and LLC tumors (Figures S4B and S4C). LLC did not
induce similar sustained co-inhibitory molecule expression in
CD8+ T cells (compared to the other two models) (Figure S4C)
but still exhibited a significant mitochondrial defect (Figures 1B
and S1). CD8+ T cells infiltrating head-and-neck cancers ex-
hibited decreased MitoTracker staining compared to peripheral
blood lymphocyte T cells (Figure 1D) and high levels of coinhibi-
tory molecule expression (Figure 4F) that correlated with mito-
chondrial loss (Figure 4G). In order to determine whether,
directly, lower MitoTracker FM staining correlated with poor
cytokine production, we sorted tumor-infiltrating T cells based
on MitoTracker FM staining and stimulated them 16 hr to monitor
cytokine production. Consistent with their exhausted pheno-
type, T cells having lowest mitochondrial staining had the lowest
cytokine production (Figure S4D). Thus, T cells infiltrating solid
tumors showed a progressive loss of mitochondrial mass and
function, such that the most exhausted cells show the lowest
mitochondrial activity.
Loss of T Cell Oxidative Metabolism in Cancer Is Largely
Independent of PD-1 Signaling and Treg Cells
PD-1 blockade can reverse tumor-induced T cell dysfunction
and lead to heightened antitumor immunity and cancer regres-
sion (La-Beck et al., 2015). We thus wanted to determine
whether PD-1 blockade might rescue loss of mitochondrial func-
tion in tumor-infiltrating T cells. We employed mice bearing B16
Figure 3. T Cell Mitochondrial Dysfunction Is Induced upon Entry into the Tumor Microenvironment
(A) Representative flow cytogram and tabulated data of LN and TIL of naive, CellTrace Violet (CTV)-labeled, OT-I (Thy1.1+) CD8+ T cells transferred into B16OVA-
bearing mice (5–7 mm tumors), or the spleens of the same progenitor cells transferred into B6 mice infected with 1 3 106 PFU VVOVA for 72 hr. Cells were stained
with MitoTracker Deep Red FM.
(B) As in (A), but with the mitochondrial membrane potential dye TMRE.
(C) As in (A), but with the cellular ROS indicator DCFDA.
(D) As in (A), but cells were permeabilized and stained intracellularly for LC3B.
(E) Representative data from experiments as in (A), but some mice received mitophagy inhibitor m-divi-1. Results represent the mean of three or four independent
experiments, with n = 7–9 mice per group. **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ***p < 0.0001 by two-way ANOVA. Error bars indicate SEM. See also Figure S3.
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
379
 tumors, in which PD-1 therapy is ineffective, despite the pres-
ence of large numbers of PD-1+ T cells, as well as those bearing
MC38 tumors, which is sensitive to PD-1 monotherapy (Woo
et al., 2012). Mice were inoculated with B16 or MC38 and
received anti-PD-1 (200 mg, thrice weekly) or its isotype control
when palpable tumors were present (1 3 1 mm). Regardless of
treatment or tumor type, tumor-infiltrating T cells showed similar
decreases in mitochondrial mass (Figures 5A and 5B). Our PD-1
blockade strategy was therapeutically effective, resulting in 40%
regression in MC38 bearing mice (Figure 5C). In order to deter-
mine whether PD-1 signaling might impact the mitochondrial
sufficiency of recent entrants into the tumor, we transferred
Figure 4. Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Intratumoral T Cells Is Progressive and Correlates with Coinhibitory Molecule Expression in Mouse
and Human Tumors
(A) Representative flow cytogram of CD8+ T cells isolated from day 14 B16-bearing C57/BL6 mice.
(B) Flow cytogram showing mitochondrial mass and glucose competency of CD8+ T cell subsets.
(C and D) Tabulated data from (B).
(E) ATP measurements from CD8+ T cells sorted directly ex vivo from tumors based on the indicated expression. Results are compared to LN CD8+CD44hi cells
(Teff).
(F) Cytogram of coinhibitory molecules and (G) mitochondria/glucose status of CD8+ cells from PBL or TIL from HNSCC patients. Data represent the mean or are
representative of 3–5 independent experiments. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 by unpaired t test. Error bars indicate SEM. See also Figure S4.
380
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
 dye-labeled OT-I T cells into mice bearing established B16OVA
tumors under the cover of PD-1 blockade or its control for
72 hr. We could observe a temporary and incomplete recovery
of MitoTracker FM staining in later cell divisions (Figure 5D).
However, these changes were statistically significant only
when analyzed as broken down by cell division and could not
be sustained or detected past 72 hr (data not shown). Thus,
although PD-1 might play a role in modulation of metabolism,
blockade of PD-1 was not sufficient to reverse mitochondrial
insufficiency observed in tumor-infiltrating T cells.
Regulatory T cells (Treg) also represent a major immuno-
suppressive player in the tumor microenvironment (Liu et al.,
2016). Thus, we asked whether Treg cells mediate metabolic
insufficiency in the tumor microenvironment by examining
CD8+ TILs from Foxp3DTR.GFP mice which carry a diphtheria toxin
receptor and green fluorescent protein (GFP) knocked into the 30
UTR of Foxp3, allowing for conditional deletion of Treg cells upon
treatment with diphtheria toxin (DT) (Kim et al., 2007a). Treat-
ment of B16-bearing Foxp3DTR.GFP mice with DT resulted in
near complete depletion of tumor-infiltrating Treg cells (Fig-
ure S5A) but no significant increases in CD8+ T cell MitoTracker
FM staining (Figure S5B). In agreement with these in vivo find-
ings, CD8+ T cells suppressed in vitro by purified Treg cells
also maintained mitochondrial sufficiency (Figure S5C). Thus,
metabolic insufficiency in CD8+ TILs appeared to be driven in a
manner independent of ‘‘classic’’ immunosuppressive mecha-
nisms in the tumor microenvironment.
PGC1a-Mediated Mitochondrial Biogenesis Is
Repressed by Akt in Tumor-Infiltrating T Cells
Having found that PD-1 and Treg cells did not appear to outright
cause the mitochondrial dysfunction seen in tumor-infiltrating
T cells, we next sought to determine the molecular mechanism
for this metabolic phenotype. Our kinetic analyses showed that
Figure 5. PD-1 Blockade Does Not Rescue Metabolic Dysfunction in Intratumoral T Cells
(A) Representative flow cytogram of CD8+ T cells from LN and TIL preparations in B16-bearing mice receiving thrice-weekly injections of 200 mg anti-PD1 or its
isotype control.
(B) Tabulated results from (A) as well as MC38-bearing mice. Each dot represents a mouse in this experiment.
(C) Percentage of mice experiencing tumor regression in several experiments conducted as in (B).
(D) Flow cytogram and tabulated values of MitoTracker FM staining during cell division of OT-I T cells transferred into established B16OVA tumors under the cover
of anti-PD1 or its isotype control. Data are representative of five (A and B) or represent the mean of three (C and D) independent experiments. Error bars indicate
SEM. See also Figure S5.
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
381
 these T cells divided extremely rapidly in response to tumor an-
tigen in the LNs, so we hypothesized that T cells failed to properly
program mitochondrial biogenesis during rapid cell division upon
entry into the tumor microenvironment. Mitochondrial replication
is programmed in part by the mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM) and regulated by the transcriptional coactivator PGC1a
(encoded by Ppargc1a) (Finck and Kelly, 2006; Spiegelman,
2007). Intracellular staining and quantitative PCR analysis re-
vealed tumor infiltrating CD8+ T cells exhibit decreased PGC1a
protein and Ppargc1a expression, respectively (Figure 6A and
Figure S6A). Kinetic analysis of dye labeled, naive OT-I cells in-
jected into B16OVA-bearing mice showed PGC1a downregula-
tion occurred concomitant with cell division specifically in the
tumor microenvironment, suggesting microenvironment-derived
signals promoted downregulation of mitochondrial biogenesis
during T cell proliferation (Figure 6B). Repression of PGC1a
occurred even in the presence of PD-1 blockade, suggesting
another dominant signal present in the tumor microenviron-
ment suppresses PGC1a expression (Figure S6B). Analysis of
PGC1a-deficient T cells (Ppargc1af/fCd4Cre mice) revealed pro-
gressive losses of mitochondrial mass in vitro after activation, re-
sulting in decreased OCR (Figures S6C and S6D). Comparison of
cytokine production in LN- and TIL OT-I T cells responding to
cognate peptide revealed that the small proportion of PGC1a+
cells in tumor-infiltrating compartments marked the T cells that
were competent to produce cytokines, indicating that this
pathway is important for intratumoral T cell function (Figure 6C).
In agreement with this observation, T cells showing repressed
PGC1a staining also exhibited decreased T-bet and Ki-67 stain-
ing, consistent with a model in which PGC1a repression is
concomitant with a terminally exhausted phenotype (Figure S6E
and S6F).
PGC1a is dynamically regulated by a number of signaling
pathways relevant to T cell activation, but a prominent repressive
pathway is mediated by Akt (Fernandez-Marcos and Auwerx,
2011). Akt has been shown to upregulate glycolytic metabolism
through a variety of mechanisms, but it also can actively repres-
sive oxidative programs, particularly through the phosphoryla-
tion and consequent inactivation of Foxo family transcription fac-
tors, shown previously to promote PGC1a expression (Borniquel
et al., 2010; Olmos et al., 2009). Thus, we sought to examine the
Akt status of tumor-infiltrating T cells, hypothesizing that the
chronic activation signals mediated by persistent antigen in can-
cer might promote Akt activation and repress the oxidative
phenotype programmed by Foxo. CD8+ T cells infiltrating B16 tu-
mors show increased Akt activation (as measured by phosphor-
ylation at serine 473) and Akt-mediated inhibitory Foxo phos-
phorylation compared to LN (where the vast majority of T cells
are resting) (Figure 6D). Comparison of Akt activation to PD-1
status revealed that Akt is highest in tumor-infiltrating T cells
that are PD-1mid as well as those having high PD-1 and LAG-3
surface expression, suggesting that Akt is persistent in newly
activated T cells as well as those receiving chronic stimulation
and differentiating toward terminal exhaustion (Figure S6G).
Importantly, intratumoral cells that have high degrees of Akt acti-
vation are particularly low in PGC1a protein levels (Figures 6E).
We also examined early (3 day) and late (6 day) responses of
T cells responding to B16OVA or VVOVA, and found that while
Akt activation in acute viral infection was transient, T cells acti-
vated in the tumor microenvironment appeared to show chronic
Akt signaling, persisting 6 days after adoptive transfer (Figure 6F)
Short-term treatment (72 hr) of B16-bearing mice with a potent
Akt kinase inhibitor revealed the Akt, in part, mediated losses
in PGC1a and mitochondrial sufficiency, such that treatment
with Akt inhibitor resulted in partial rescue of the metabolically
suppressed phenotype (Figures 6G and 6H). Thus, T cells re-
sponding in tumor microenvironments repressed mitochondrial
biogenesis through repression of PGC1a, driven, in part, by
chronic Akt activation and consequent repression of Foxo
activity.
Metabolic Reprogramming of Tumor-Specific T Cells
Results in Increased Antitumor Immunity
Having demonstrated that PGC1a acted as a node of dysregu-
lation for mitochondrial sufficiency in tumor-specific T cells, we
thus wondered whether reprogramming T cells to favor mito-
chondrial biogenesis would result in increased intratumoral
T cell persistence and function. To this end, we generated retro-
viral vectors to overexpress PGC1a and transduced OT-I
T cells. PGC1a overexpression significantly increased mito-
chondrial mass early (48 and 96 hr) after transduction in
in vitro culture, although during the expansion phase, empty-
vector expressing cells initiate mitochondrial biogenesis and
eventually reach equivalency to their reprogrammed counter-
parts (Figure 7A). However, even at this later stage, PGC1a-re-
programmed T cells showed significantly increased OXPHOS
(Figure 7A). PGC1a-overexpressing T cells exhibited upregula-
tion of spare respiratory capacity (Figure 7A), indicating high
mitochondrial reserve and that mitochondrial biogenesis was
primed in these reprogrammed cells. We did not observe any
significant increases in aerobic glycolysis (ECAR), although we
did observe a trend in some experiments (Figure 7A). We then
determined whether any particular carbon source dominated
this increase in SRC. FCCP-uncoupled T cells were treated
with inhibitors of pyruvate, fatty acid, or glutamine oxidation,
revealing that the increased respiratory capacity did not prefer-
entially apply to a particular carbon source, suggesting that
mitochondrial capacity was improved generally when PGC1a
expression was enforced (Figure S7A). In vitro, these T cells
exhibited similar effector function as their control counterparts,
suggesting that in this environment where nutrients are not
limiting, T cells are operating more or less at maximal capacity
(Figure S7B). OT-I T cells overexpressing PGC1a transferred
into mice with established B16OVA tumors were resistant
to loss of mitochondrial sufficiency and highly enriched in
the tumor microenvironment (Figure 7B). Restimulation with
OVA peptide showed that these metabolically reprogrammed
T cells were superior at producing type 1 cytokines, compared
to their wild-type counterparts (Figure 7C). Notably, these re-
programmed T cells expressed (at even higher levels than EV)
co-inhibitory molecules, suggesting retention of mitochondrial
function promoted further activation and upregulation of these
checkpoint
molecules
(Figure
S7C).
Having
found
that
PGC1a-reprogrammed T cells displayed increased effector
function, we then tested whether these T cells had better
therapeutic efficacy. Mice bearing small (2–6 mm2) B16OVA
tumors received an adoptive transfer of 250,000 (if tumor
was < 4 mm2) or 500,000 (if starting tumor was > 4 mm2)
382
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
 A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Figure 6. Intratumoral T Cell Mitochondrial Biogenesis Is Repressed by Chronic Akt-Mediated Repression of PGC1a
(A) Flow cytogram (left) and tabulated data (right) of PGC1a intracellular staining in CD8+ T cells isolated from nondraining or draining LNs or TIL preparations from
B16 or MC38 bearing mice. Shaded histogram indicates isotype control.
(B) Flow cytogram of PGC1a expression in CTV-labeled, naive OT-I T cells adoptively transferred into B16OVA bearing mice for 72 hr. Tabulation for multiple
experiments is to the right.
(C) Flow cytogram of cytokine production of congenically mismitached WT OT-I T cells transferred into B16OVA-bearing or VVOVA-infected mice for 96 hr, then
restimulated with SIINFEKL peptide.
(D) Representative and tabulated phospho-Akt (S473) and phospho-Foxo1(T24)/3a(T32) staining of the indicated cell populations in mice bearing 14-day B16
tumors. MFI is reported.
(E) Representative flow cytogram and tabulated data indicating PGC1a staining in pAkt low or high cells.
(F) MFI of pAkt staining in naive OT-I T cells, or OT-I T cells transferred for 3 or 6 days into a B16OVA-bearing or VVOVA infected mouse.
(G) PGC1a levels and (H) mitochondrial mass of CD8+ T cells from LN and TIL of 14-day B16-bearing mice treated for 60 hr with Akt inhibitor VIII or its vehicle.
Results are representative of five (A, B, and D), three (C, E, G, and H), or two (F) independent experiments. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 by unpaired t test (A, F,
G, and H) or paired t test (D, E, G, and H). ***p < 0.001 by two-way ANOVA. Error bars indicate SEM. See also Figure S6.
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
383
 PGC1a
or
empty-vector
transduced
OT-I
T
cells,
and
tumor growth was measured over time. PGC1a-reprogrammed
T cells showed enhanced antitumor efficacy resulting in signifi-
cantly prolonged survival and higher incidence of complete
regressions (20%) in this aggressive tumor model (Figures 7D
and 7E). Thus, reprogramming tumor-specific T cells to favor
mitochondrial biogenesis protected them from the loss of func-
tion observed in the tumor microenvironment.
DISCUSSION
Our data place persistence and function of mitochondria as cen-
tral to sustained effector function of T cells, especially those un-
der continual stimulation as in cancer or chronic viral infections.
Observed most prominently in CD8+ T cells specifically in the tu-
mor microenvironment, we observed progressive and persistent
loss of mitochondrial function and mass. At least in the time
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 7. Bolstering Mitochondrial Biogenesis Improves Intratumoral T Cell Function
(A) Metabolic analysis of OT-I T cells retrovirally transduced with an empty mCherry vector (EV) or one encoding PGC1a. MitoTracker FM staining at various time
points post transduction is indicated. OCR, SRC, and ECAR values are from day 5–7 post transduction.
(B) Representative flow cytogram of LN- and TIL-resident OT-I T cells transduced as in (A) and transferred into B16OVA bearing C57/BL6 mice. Proportion of the
transferred cells in LN and TIL and tabulated MitoTracker FM staining is reported.
(C) Flow cytogram depicting cytokine synthesis in OT-I T cells transferred as in (B) and restimulated directly ex vivo with cognate peptide. Results are tabulated to
the right.
(D) Tumor growth plot of B16OVA bearing mice treated therapeutically upon detection of palpable tumors on day 7 with 250,000 (< 4mm2) or 500,000 (> 4mm2) of
PGC1a or control-expressing cells.
(E) Survival plot from e. n = 15–17 mice per group. Results represent six (A and B), four (C), or three (D and E) independent experiments. **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 by
unpaired t test (A–C), two-way ANOVA with repeated-measures (D), or log-rank test (E). Error bars indicate SEM. See also Figure S7.
384
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
 course of rapidly growing tumor, this effect could be observed
concomitantly with PD-1 upregulation but largely independently
of treatment with anti-PD-1, with only mild and temporary in-
creases observed in response to blockade of this particular
checkpoint. Rather, Akt signaling, associated with chronic acti-
vation, resulted in repression of oxidative metabolism, thus
driving an unsustainable metabolic program. Our data bring to
light the metabolic nature of T cell dysfunction, in cancer and
in general.
While glucose metabolism, especially aerobic glycolysis, has
been heavily studied as a key mediator of T cell effector fate
and function, our study suggests that mitochondrial function
and mass are dynamically regulated and required to maintain
optimal effector function. This is consistent with data recently
generated suggesting mitochondrial membrane potential may
predict stemness in tumor-infiltrating T cells, and that cytokine
production might be increased in T cells that display high mito-
chondrial activity (Sukumar et al., 2016).
As mentioned previously, there is some debate whether Mito-
Tracker Deep Red FM is a potentiometric dye or one that stains
for mitochondrial mass irrespective of membrane potential (Xiao
et al., 2016). Our data employing uncoupling agents such as
CCCP indicated that although Deep Red FM might show some
sensitivity for membrane potential at high doses, this paled in
comparison to results with TMRE, a true potentiometric dye.
We believe our corollary data employing MitoTracker Green
and VDAC antibodies indeed confirm that T cells infiltrating
tumors exhibit losses of mitochondrial function and total
mass, consistent with repressed PGC1a-mediated mitochon-
drial biogenesis. Whereas effector T cells have been shown to
possess fewer mitochondria than their memory counterparts
(van der Windt et al., 2012; van der Windt et al., 2013), it is un-
clear how chronic stimulation might alter this fate. Our data sug-
gest that the continued, inflammatory activation of T cells in can-
cer promotes a defect in mitochondrial biogenesis, mediated in
part by Akt-controlled inhibition of Foxo-programmed PGC1a
transcription. While Akt does repress oxidative metabolism,
more traditional roles for Akt suggest its potential as an in vivo
therapeutic target might be limited, because T cells might require
Akt and downstream signaling in situ to mediate effector func-
tions (Macintyre et al., 2011). However, recent studies have re-
vealed that this might not be the case. Akt inhibition has been
employed in preclinical and translational settings as a means
to reinvigorate TIL expansion, in part through modulating oxida-
tive metabolism (Crompton et al., 2015). In addition, T cells lack-
ing the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2, the kinase for
the hydrophobic motif (serine 473, measured in this study) of Akt,
show superior effector function and increased oxidative meta-
bolism, suggesting full Akt activation might not be acutely
required for effector function (Pollizzi et al., 2015). Thus, our
data identify PGC1a as a crucial mechanistic link between
Akt and repressed oxidative metabolism in tumor-infiltrating
T cells. In addition, Akt inhibitors, which are currently being eval-
uated in clinical trials as anti-cancer agents, might have immuno-
modulatory effects that could synergize with immunotherapies.
PD-1 has been shown to inhibit mammalian target of rapamy-
cin complex 1 signaling (which has metabolic consequences), as
well as modulating metabolism at the genetic level (Wherry and
Kurachi, 2015). However, we only observed association between
PD-1 upregulation and mitochondrial insufficiency, with mild and
short-lived effects on mitochondrial metabolism arising from
anti-PD-1 treatment. In the tumor, there might be too many other
signals to be offset by PD-1 blockade alone or other co-inhibitory
molecules like LAG-3 or TIGIT might be playing additional roles in
modulating lymphocyte metabolism. Likewise, we failed to see
any effect of regulatory T cell suppression on mitochondrial func-
tion and mass, both using a genetic model of Treg cell depletion,
Foxp3DTR.GFP mice treated with diphtheria toxin in established
tumors, as well as coculture of purified Treg cells with activated
CD8+ T cells.
Our data point to PGC1a as a key node of signal integration
tying a diverse array of cellular signals (including Akt signaling)
to mitochondrial biogenesis. Type I and type II interferons,
tumor necrosis factor, interleukin-12, energy charge, and low
NAD+/NADH or oleate/palmitate ratios have been shown to
repress PGC1a expression, localization or transcriptional activity
through a variety of signaling pathways (Alvarez-Guardia et al.,
2010; Haghikia et al., 2015; Kauppinen et al., 2013; Kim et al.,
2007b; Palomer et al., 2009; Scarpulla, 2011). PGC1a is post-
translationally modified by a number of signaling pathways
important in T cell biology (Akt, p38-MAPK, AMPK, SIRT1,
PRMT1) (Fernandez-Marcos and Auwerx, 2011). Thus, the
balance of these signals in the inflammatory milieu might deter-
mine PGC1a activity and its ability to program mitochondrial
biogenesis.
This study adds to a growing number of reports that collec-
tively suggest that the T cell exhaustion observed in chronic
activation has underpinnings in basic cellular processes like
metabolism. Unlike anergy (induced by minimal signaling, TCR
ligation alone, in a non-inflammatory environment), persistent,
inflammatory activation in cancer and chronic viral infections
promote an effector state that T cells cannot sustain (Jiang
et al., 2015; Schietinger and Greenberg, 2014; Wherry and Kur-
achi, 2015). This is especially perilous in the tumor microenviron-
ment, because chronic inflammatory signals might drive a sus-
tained reliance on glycolysis in a tissue site where glucose
levels are extremely low (Siska and Rathmell, 2015). We and
others reveal that T cells show depressed glucose uptake
compared to LN-resident cells and glycolysis compared to
matched, virus-activated cells, suggesting that, generally,
T cell exhaustion is characterized by metabolic insufficiency
(Chang et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2015). Teleolog-
ically, T cells in metabolic distress might upregulate co-inhibitory
molecules as a means to prevent terminal loss of metabolic suf-
ficiency or survival, a model consistent with results obtained in
chronic viral infection (Staron et al., 2014). These metabolic de-
fects can be persistent even when removed from that microenvi-
ronment which might provide a potential explanation for situa-
tions in which concomitant tumor immunity is lost at distal sites.
Finally, our data strongly support modulation and reprogram-
ming of the metabolic state as a strategy for the improvement
of immunotherapy for cancer. While advances in checkpoint
blockade and other types of immunotherapy have revealed
that the mechanisms blocking immune cell activation can be
altered by therapeutic intervention, tumors present a harsh
microenvironment that is immunosuppressive by its basic
nature. Further, our data suggest that the metabolic status of
individual tumor microenvironments and their respective T cell
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
385
 infiltrates, which can vary from model to model or, more impor-
tantly, patient to patient, might help predict the response to
immunotherapies like checkpoint blockade. While our study
demonstrates that the direct metabolic reprogramming of
T cells can have efficacy, it might be advantageous to adopt
other strategies to remodel the metabolism of the microenviron-
ment itself in order to create a more permissive environment for
T cell activity.
Metabolism is central to cellular function, so it is largely unsur-
prising that T cells fail in nutrient-poor conditions. Our results and
others’ have shed light on the fact that during chronic activation,
as in cancer, T cells are driven to proliferate and perform effector
function at the expense of their continued persistence and
longevity. Development of strategies to modify the bioenergetics
of T cells or the tumor microenvironment itself has the promise
to improve and synergize with other forms of immunotherapy
to increase the efficacy of the treatment of cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Mice
Animal work was done in accordance with the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee of the University of Pittsburgh. All mice were housed in specific
pathogen free conditions prior to use. C57/BL6, SJ/L (Thy1.1), Ppargc1af/f,
Cd4Cre, Foxp3GFP.Cre.ERT2, Foxp3DTR.GFP, and OT-I mice were obtained from
The Jackson Laboratory.
Cell Lines, Antibodies, and Other Reagents
B16-F10 and LLC were obtained from ATCC. MC38 was obtained from Dario
Vignali. B16OVA (MO5) was obtained from Per Basse and Lou Falo. OVA-ex-
pressing Vaccinia virus was originally generated by Yewdell and Bennink
and obtained from Jonathan Powell. Most antibodies for flow cytometry
were obtained from BioLegend. MitoTracker Green FM, MitoTracker Deep
Red FM, tetramethylrhodamine ester (TMRE), and H2-DCFDA were obtained
from ThermoFisher. VDAC antibody was obtained from Abcam. LC3B,
pAktS473, pFoxo1/3a antibodies were obtained from Cell Signaling Technol-
ogies and detected after surface staining with simultaneous fixation and per-
mabilization in 1.5% PFA made up in 1X Permeabilization buffer (eBioscience).
2-NBD-glucose, m-divi-1, and Akt inhibitor VIII were purchased from Cayman
Chemical. PGC1a antibody (H-300) was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotech-
nology, and was detected using the Foxp3 Fix/Perm kit (eBioscience) and
Alexa Fluor 647 or Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-rabbit immunoglobulin
G (IgG) (Jackson Immunoresearch). Anti-PD-1 blocking antibody (J43) and
its hamster IgG control were obtained from Bio-X-Cell. CellTrace Violet was
purchased from eBioscience, and CFSE was purchased from BioLegend.
T Cell Isolations from Lymph Node and Tumor and Adoptive Transfer
Spleen and lymph node CD8+ T cells were isolated from 6- to 8-week-old OT-I
(Thy1.2 or Thy1.1) mice. Tissue was harvested, mechanically disrupted,
and incubated with a biotinylated antibody cocktail consisting of antibodies
(BioLegend) to B220, CD11b, CD11c, CD16/32, CD19, CD25, CD105,
NK1.1, TCRgd, and CD4. After a wash step, cells were incubated with strepta-
vidin-coated magnetic nanoparticles (BioLegend). After washing, CD8+ cells
were isolated by applying a magnetic field and removing untouched cells.
These OT-I CD8+ T cells were also labeled with the proliferation dye CellTrace
Violet according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Mice bearing B16OVA tumors
or immunized with VVOVA received cells intravenously. To obtain single-cell
suspensions of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, excised, we injected whole tu-
mors repeatedly using 20G needles with 2 mg/mL collagenase type VI, 2 U/mL
hyluronidase (Dispase), and 10 U/mL DNase I (Sigma) in buffered RPMI with
10% FBS and incubated them for 30 min at 37�C. Tumors were mechanically
disrupted between frosted glass slides and filtered to remove particulates,
then vortexed for 2 min. In many experiments (especially prior to sorting), tu-
mor homogenates were debulked of tumor cells using CD105-biotin mediated
magnetic depletion.
Human Peripheral Blood Lymphocyte or Tumor Infiltrating
Lymphocyte Isolation
After approval by Institutional Review Board (University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute (UPCI) protocol 99-069], informed consent was obtained from each
patientt before blood withdrawal. Blood from patients with HNC treated with
cetuximab during or within 1 month of treatment (UPCI clinical trial #08-013
NCT 01218048). Fresh tumors from patients with HNC were minced into small
pieces manually, transferred to 70 mm cell strainers (BD), and mechanically
separated using the plunger of a 5 ml syringe. Lymphocytes were purified
by Ficoll-Paque PLUS centrifugation following standard protocol (Amersham
Biosciences), pulsed with 2NBDG, and stained for flow cytometry.
Metabolism Assays
Nondraining and draining lymph node or tumor preparations were pulsed
with 20 mM 2-NBDG (Cayman Chemical) in 5% FBS-containing media for
30 min at 37�C. Cells were surface stained and loaded with MitoTracker FM
(ThermoFisher) dyes or TMRE to measure mitochondrial mass and function.
T cells were plated on Cell-Tak coated Seahorse culture plates (50,000 or
100,000 T cells/well) in assay media consisting of minimal, unbuffered
DMEM supplemented with 1% BSA and 25 mM glucose, 1 mM pyruvate,
and 2 mM glutamine and analyzed using a Seahorse XFe96 (Agilent). Basal
extracellular acidification and oxygen consumption rates were taken for
30 min. Cells were stimulated with oligomycin (2 mM), FCCP (0.5 mM), 2-deox-
yglucose (100mM) and rotenone/antimycin A (100 mM) to obtain maximal
respiratory and control values. Spare respiratory capacity is measured as
the difference between basal OCR values and maximal OCR values obtained
after FCCP uncoupling.
Electron Microscopy
CD8+ T cells were sorted from LNs and TIL and fixed in 4% glutaraldehyde and
stained for electron microscopy as previously described. (Li et al., 2013)
Retroviral Expression
PGC1a was originally generated by B. Spiegelman, obtained from Addgene
(plasmid 1026) (Monsalve et al., 2000), and cloned into an MSCV-driven retro-
viral expression vector which also encodes an IRES-mCherry cassette, from
Dario Vignali. This vector was transiently transfected into Phoenix ecotropic
cells. OT-I splenocytes were stimulated with SIINFEKL peptide at 250 ng/mL
in the presence of 100U/mL IL-2 for 24 hr. Retroviral supernatants
were harvested, and filtered, and supplemented with 6 mg/mL polybrene.
OT-I T cell cultures were spinduced with the retroviral supernatant for
90 min at 2,500 rpm. 24 hr later spinduction this was repeated. Cells were
expanded and sorted by mCherry prior to analysis and adoptive transfer.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes seven figures and Supplemental Experi-
mental Procedures and can be found with this article online at http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.immuni.2016.07.009.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
N.E.S. performed experiments, performed data analysis, and helped write the
manuscript. A.V.M. and R.S.M. performed metabolic flux analysis experiments
and assisted with in vivo experiments. R.D.W. performed experiments relating
to Treg cell function. R.E.D. performed experiments related to Akt function.
S.C.W. performed electron microscopy. R.L.F. provided human HNSCC pa-
tient PBL and TIL. G.M.D. performed and oversaw research, designed exper-
iments, and wrote the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Dario Vignali, Larry Kane, and Jonathan Powell for critical
reading and comments on this manuscript. We also thank the UPCI Flow Cy-
tometry (especially E. Michael Meyer and Batta Janjic), Cell and Tissue Imag-
ing (Mara Sullivan and Donna Beer Stolz), and Animal Facilities (supported by
CCSG P30CA047904). This work was supported in part by the Sidney Kimmel
Foundation for Cancer Research (SKF-015-039 to G.M.D.) and the NIH
386
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
 (1S10OD016236-01 to S.C.W., P50 CA097190 Head and Neck Cancer SPORE
to R.L.F., and P50CA121973 Skin Cancer SPORE [developmental research
award] to G.M.D.).
Received: January 12, 2016
Revised: May 16, 2016
Accepted: June 8, 2016
Published: August 2, 2016
REFERENCES
Alvarez-Guardia, D., Palomer, X., Coll, T., Davidson, M.M., Chan, T.O.,
Feldman, A.M., Laguna, J.C., and Va
´ zquez-Carrera, M. (2010). The p65 sub-
unit of NF-kappaB binds to PGC-1alpha, linking inflammation and metabolic
disturbances in cardiac cells. Cardiovasc. Res. 87, 449–458.
Borniquel, S., Garcı
´a-Quinta
´ ns, N., Valle, I., Olmos, Y., Wild, B., Martı
´nez-
Granero, F., Soria, E., Lamas, S., and Monsalve, M. (2010). Inactivation of
Foxo3a and subsequent downregulation of PGC-1 alpha mediate nitric ox-
ide-induced endothelial cell migration. Mol. Cell. Biol. 30, 4035–4044.
Chang, C.H., Qiu, J., O’Sullivan, D., Buck, M.D., Noguchi, T., Curtis, J.D.,
Chen, Q., Gindin, M., Gubin, M.M., van der Windt, G.J., et al. (2015).
Metabolic Competition in the Tumor Microenvironment Is a Driver of Cancer
Progression. Cell 162, 1229–1241.
Cottet-Rousselle, C., Ronot, X., Leverve, X., and Mayol, J.-F. (2011).
Cytometric
assessment
of
mitochondria
using
fluorescent
probes.
Cytometry A 79, 405–425.
Crespo, J., Sun, H., Welling, T.H., Tian, Z., and Zou, W. (2013). T cell anergy,
exhaustion, senescence, and stemness in the tumor microenvironment.
Curr. Opin. Immunol. 25, 214–221.
Crompton, J.G., Sukumar, M., Roychoudhuri, R., Clever, D., Gros, A., Eil, R.L.,
Tran, E., Hanada, K., Yu, Z., Palmer, D.C., et al. (2015). Akt inhibition enhances
expansion of potent tumor-specific lymphocytes with memory cell character-
istics. Cancer Res. 75, 296–305.
Cui, M., Tang, X., Christian, W.V., Yoon, Y., and Tieu, K. (2010). Perturbations
in mitochondrial dynamics induced by human mutant PINK1 can be rescued
by the mitochondrial division inhibitor mdivi-1. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 11740–
11752.
Delgoffe, G.M., and Powell, J.D. (2015). Feeding an army: The metabolism of
T cells in activation, anergy, and exhaustion. Mol. Immunol. 68 (2 Pt C),
492–496.
Fernandez-Marcos, P.J., and Auwerx, J. (2011). Regulation of PGC-1a, a
nodal regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 93, 884S–90.
Finck, B.N., and Kelly, D.P. (2006). PGC-1 coactivators: inducible regulators of
energy metabolism in health and disease. J. Clin. Invest. 116, 615–622.
Haghikia, A., Faissner, S., Pappas, D., Pula, B., Akkad, D.A., Arning, L.,
Ruhrmann, S., Duscha, A., Gold, R., Baranzini, S.E., et al. (2015). Interferon-
beta affects mitochondrial activity in CD4+ lymphocytes: Implications for
mechanism of action in multiple sclerosis. Multiple sclerosis (Houndmills,
Basingstoke, England) 21, 1262–1270.
Ho,P.C., Bihuniak, J.D., Macintyre, A.N., Staron,M.,Liu,X.,Amezquita, R.,Tsui,
Y.C., Cui, G., Micevic, G., Perales, J.C., et al. (2015). Phosphoenolpyruvate Is a
Metabolic Checkpoint of Anti-tumor T Cell Responses. Cell 162, 1217–1228.
Jiang, Y., Li, Y., and Zhu, B. (2015). T-cell exhaustion in the tumor microenvi-
ronment. Cell death & disease 6, e1792.
Kauppinen, A., Suuronen, T., Ojala, J., Kaarniranta, K., and Salminen, A.
(2013). Antagonistic crosstalk between NF-kB and SIRT1 in the regulation of
inflammation and metabolic disorders. Cell. Signal. 25, 1939–1948.
Kim, J.M., Rasmussen, J.P., and Rudensky, A.Y. (2007a). Regulatory T cells
prevent catastrophic autoimmunity throughout the lifespan of mice. Nat.
Immunol. 8, 191–197.
Kim, M.S., Sweeney, T.R., Shigenaga, J.K., Chui, L.G., Moser, A., Grunfeld, C.,
and Feingold, K.R. (2007b). Tumor necrosis factor and interleukin 1 decrease
RXRalpha, PPARalpha, PPARgamma, LXRalpha, and the coactivators SRC-1,
PGC-1alpha, and PGC-1beta in liver cells. Metabolism 56, 267–279.
La-Beck, N.M., Jean, G.W., Huynh, C., Alzghari, S.K., and Lowe, D.B. (2015).
Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors: New Insights and Current Place in Cancer
Therapy. Pharmacotherapy 35, 963–976.
Legat, A., Speiser, D.E., Pircher, H., Zehn, D., and Fuertes Marraco, S.A.
(2013). Inhibitory
Receptor Expression Depends More
Dominantly
on
Differentiation and Activation than ‘‘Exhaustion’’ of Human CD8cT Cells.
Front. Immunol. 4, 455.
Li, H.H., Li, J., Wasserloos, K.J., Wallace, C., Sullivan, M.G., Bauer, P.M.,
Stolz, D.B., Lee, J.S., Watkins, S.C., St Croix, C.M., et al. (2013). Caveolae-
dependent and -independent uptake of albumin in cultured rodent pulmonary
endothelial cells. PLoS ONE 8, e81903.
Liu, C., Workman, C.J., and Vignali, D.A. (2016). Targeting Regulatory T Cells
in Tumors. FEBS J. 283, Published online March 1, 2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1111/febs.13656.
Macintyre, A.N., Finlay, D., Preston, G., Sinclair, L.V., Waugh, C.M., Tamas, P.,
Feijoo, C., Okkenhaug, K., and Cantrell, D.A. (2011). Protein kinase B controls
transcriptional programs that direct cytotoxic T cell fate but is dispensable for
T cell metabolism. Immunity 34, 224–236.
Mahoney, K.M., Rennert, P.D., and Freeman, G.J. (2015). Combination cancer
immunotherapy and new immunomodulatory targets. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.
14, 561–584.
Monsalve, M., Wu, Z., Adelmant, G., Puigserver, P., Fan, M., and Spiegelman,
B.M. (2000). Direct coupling of transcription and mRNA processing through
the thermogenic coactivator PGC-1. Mol. Cell 6, 307–316.
Odorizzi, P.M., Pauken, K.E., Paley, M.A., Sharpe, A., and Wherry, E.J. (2015).
Genetic absence of PD-1 promotes accumulation of terminally differentiated
exhausted CD8+ T cells. J. Exp. Med. 212, 1125–1137.
Olmos, Y., Valle, I., Borniquel, S., Tierrez, A., Soria, E., Lamas, S., and
Monsalve, M. (2009). Mutual dependence of Foxo3a and PGC-1alpha in the
induction of oxidative stress genes. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 14476–14484.
Palomer, X., Alvarez-Guardia, D., Rodrı
´guez-Calvo, R., Coll, T., Laguna, J.C.,
Davidson, M.M., Chan, T.O., Feldman, A.M., and Va
´ zquez-Carrera, M. (2009).
TNF-alpha reduces PGC-1alpha expression through NF-kappaB and p38
MAPK leading to increased glucose oxidation in a human cardiac cell model.
Cardiovasc. Res. 81, 703–712.
Pauken, K.E., and Wherry, E.J. (2015). Overcoming T cell exhaustion in infec-
tion and cancer. Trends Immunol. 36, 265–276.
Pearce, E.L., Poffenberger, M.C., Chang, C.H., and Jones, R.G. (2013). Fueling
immunity: insights into metabolism and lymphocyte function. Science 342,
1242454.
Pollizzi, K.N., Patel, C.H., Sun, I.H., Oh, M.H., Waickman, A.T., Wen, J.,
Delgoffe, G.M., and Powell, J.D. (2015). mTORC1 and mTORC2 selectively
regulate CD8+ T cell differentiation. J. Clin. Invest. 125, 2090–2108.
Ribas, A. (2015). Adaptive Immune Resistance: How Cancer Protects from
Immune Attack. Cancer Discov. 5, 915–919.
Rizzuto, R., De Stefani, D., Raffaello, A., and Mammucari, C. (2012).
Mitochondria as sensors and regulators of calcium signalling. Nat. Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol. 13, 566–578.
Roos, D., and Loos, J.A. (1970). Changes in the carbohydrate metabolism
of mitogenically stimulated human peripheral lymphocytes. I. Stimulation by
phytohaemagglutinin. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 222, 565–582.
Scarpulla, R.C. (2011). Metabolic
control of mitochondrial biogenesis
through the PGC-1 family regulatory network. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
(BBA) -. Molecular Cell Research 1813, 1269–1278.
Schietinger, A., and Greenberg, P.D. (2014). Tolerance and exhaustion:
defining mechanisms of T cell dysfunction. Trends Immunol. 35, 51–60.
Siska, P.J., and Rathmell, J.C. (2015). T cell metabolic fitness in antitumor im-
munity. Trends Immunol. 36, 257–264.
Spiegelman, B.M. (2007). Transcriptional control of energy homeostasis
through the PGC1 coactivators. Novartis Foundation symposium 286, 3–6,
discusssion 6-12, 162-163, 196-203.
Staron, M.M., Gray, S.M., Marshall, H.D., Parish, I.A., Chen, J.H., Perry, C.J.,
Cui, G., Li, M.O., and Kaech, S.M. (2014). The transcription factor FoxO1
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
387
 sustains expression of the inhibitory receptor PD-1 and survival of antiviral
CD8(+) T cells during chronic infection. Immunity 41, 802–814.
Sukumar, M., Liu, J., Mehta, G.U., Patel, S.J., Roychoudhuri, R., Crompton,
J.G., Klebanoff, C.A., Ji, Y., Li, P., Yu, Z., et al. (2016). Mitochondrial
Membrane Potential Identifies Cells with Enhanced Stemness for Cellular
Therapy. Cell Metab. 23, 63–76.
van der Windt, G.J., Everts, B., Chang, C.H., Curtis, J.D., Freitas, T.C., Amiel,
E., Pearce, E.J., and Pearce, E.L. (2012). Mitochondrial respiratory capacity is
a critical regulator of CD8+ T cell memory development. Immunity 36, 68–78.
van der Windt, G.J., O’Sullivan, D., Everts, B., Huang, S.C., Buck, M.D., Curtis,
J.D., Chang, C.H., Smith, A.M., Ai, T., Faubert, B., et al. (2013). CD8 memory
T cells have a bioenergetic advantage that underlies their rapid recall ability.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 14336–14341.
Wenner, C.E. (2012). Targeting mitochondria as a therapeutic target in cancer.
J. Cell. Physiol. 227, 450–456.
Wherry, E.J., and Kurachi, M. (2015). Molecular and cellular insights into T cell
exhaustion. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 486–499.
Woo, S.R., Turnis, M.E., Goldberg, M.V., Bankoti, J., Selby, M., Nirschl, C.J.,
Bettini, M.L., Gravano, D.M., Vogel, P., Liu, C.L., et al. (2012). Immune inhibi-
tory molecules LAG-3 and PD-1 synergistically regulate T-cell function to pro-
mote tumoral immune escape. Cancer Res. 72, 917–927.
Xiao, B., Deng, X., Zhou, W., and Tan, E.-K. (2016). Flow Cytometry-Based
Assessment of Mitophagy Using MitoTracker. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 10, 76.
Zhao, E., Maj, T., Kryczek, I., Li, W., Wu, K., Zhao, L., Wei, S., Crespo, J., Wan,
S., Vatan, L., et al. (2015). Cancer mediates effector T cell dysfunction by tar-
geting microRNAs and EZH2 via glycolysis restriction. Nat. Immunol. 17,
95–103.
388
Immunity 45, 374–388, August 16, 2016
