 Titin truncating variants affect heart function in disease cohorts 
and the general population
Sebastian Schafer1,2,*, Antonio de Marvao3,*, Eleonora Adami4, Lorna R Fiedler2, Benjamin 
Ng1, Ester Khin2, Owen J L Rackham2, Sebastiaan van Heesch4, Chee J Pua1, Miao Kui2, 
Roddy Walsh5, Upasana Tayal5, Sanjay K Prasad5, Timothy J W Dawes3, Nicole S J Ko2, 
David Sim1, Laura L Chan1, Calvin W L Chin1,2, Francesco Mazzarotto5, Paul J Barton5, 
Franziska Kreuchwig4, Dominique P V de Kleijn6,7, Teresa Totman6, Carlo Biffi3, Nicole 
Tee1, Daniel Rueckert8, Valentin Schneider4, Allison Faber4, Vera Regitz-Zagrosek9,15, 
Jonathan G Seidman10, Christine E Seidman10,11,12, Wolfgang A Linke13,14, Jean-Paul 
Kovalik2, Declan Patrick O’Regan3, James S Ware3,5,**, Norbert Hubner4,15,16,**, and Stuart 
A Cook2,1,5,**,¶
1National Heart Centre Singapore, Singapore 2Duke-National University of Singapore, Singapore 
3Medical Research Council Clinical Sciences Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College 
London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0HS, UK 4Cardiovascular 
and Metabolic Sciences, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz 
Association (MDC), Robert-Rossle-Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany 5National Heart and Lung 
Institute & NIHR Royal Brompton Cardiovascular BRU, Imperial College London, London, UK 
6Department of Surgery, National University of Singapore, Singapore 7Departments of Cardiology 
and Vascular Surgery, University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands 8Department of 
Computing, Imperial College London, UK 9Institute of Gender in Medicine, Charité 
Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, and German Center for Cardiovascular Research, Berlin, Germany 
10Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA 11Division of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA 12Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA 13Department of Cardiovascular 
Physiology, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany 14DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular 
Research), partner site Goettingen, Germany 15DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular 
Research), partner site Berlin, Germany 16Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany
Abstract
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
¶corresponding author Stuart A Cook: stuart.cook@duke-nus.edu.sg.
*Co-first authors
**Co-senior authors
Author Contributions
S.A.C. conceived, managed and arranged funding for the project. A.d.M., E.A., L.R.F., B.N., E.K., S.v.H., C.J.P., U.T., S.K.P., 
T.J.W.D., N.S.J.K., D.S., L.L.H.C., C.W.L.C., P.J.B., D.P.V.d.K., T.T., C.B., N.T., V.R.Z., J.G.S., C.E.S. and W.A.L. performed 
experiments and contributed clinical data. S.S., A.d.M., O.J.L.R., M.K. R.W., F.M., F.K., D.R., V.S., A.F., J.P.K., D.P.O., J.S.W., N.H. 
and S.A.C. performed data analysis and interpretation. S.S., B.N. and S.A.C. prepared the manuscript with input from co-authors.
Competing Financial Interests
S.A.C. consults for Illumina.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Genet. 2017 January ; 49(1): 46–53. doi:10.1038/ng.3719.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Titin truncating variants (TTNtv) commonly cause dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). TTNtv are 
also encountered in ~1% of the general population where they may be silent, perhaps reflecting 
allelic factors. To better understand TTNtv we integrated TTN allelic series, cardiac imaging and 
genomic data in humans and studied rat models with disparate TTNtv. In patients with DCM, 
TTNtv throughout TTN were significantly associated with DCM. Ribosomal profiling in rat 
revealed the translational footprint of premature stop codons in Ttn, TTNtv position-independent 
nonsense-mediated degradation of the mutant allele and a signature of perturbed cardiac 
metabolism. Heart physiology in rats with TTNtv was unremarkable at baseline but became 
impaired during cardiac stress. In healthy humans, machine-based analysis of high-resolution 
cardiac scans showed TTNtv to be associated with eccentric cardiac remodelling. These data show 
that TTNtv have molecular and physiological effects on the heart across species, with a continuum 
of expressivity in health and disease.
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) has a prevalence of up to 1:2501, is the commonest 
indication for heart transplantation and is often associated with titin truncating variants 
(TTNtv, 15-20% of DCM cases), which are enriched in the titin A-band2,3. A surprising 
~1% of the general population has a TTNtv in the absence of DCM, which has stimulated 
much debate as to the pathogenicity of TTNtv4–7. It has been suggested that TTNtv in the 
healthy population may be phenotypically silent and that TTNtv that segregate in familial 
DCM are perhaps modifiers of other DCM-causing variants3. However, it is also known that 
genetic variation affecting disease genes can be associated with quantitative variation in the 
physiology of healthy individuals8, which has not been assessed formally for TTNtv.
We showed previously that titin exon characteristics are important determinants of TTNtv 
pathogenicity. Variants encoded in exons that are not spliced into titin isoforms expressed in 
the heart (non-cardiac exons with ‘Percent Spliced In’ (PSI) < 15%) are not associated with 
DCM3, while variants encoded in exons that only incorporate into the N2BA and not into 
the N2B isoform have weak associations with disease. In studies of human induced 
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CMs)9 alternative exon splicing 
is a major mechanism for reduced penetrance for some I-band TTNtv. When taking only 
TTNtv that are located in cardiac exons (PSI > 15%) into account, approximately 0.5% of 
the general population have a TTNtv that might be expected to cause DCM but does not.
In addition to the complexities surrounding TTNtv penetrance, the molecular mechanisms 
underlying the pathogenesis of TTNtv are uncharacterized. Nonsense-mediated decay 
(NMD) of the mutated allele by RNA-seq or a reduction in full-length TTN by agarose gel 
analysis has not been demonstrated, which if documented would support a haploinsufficient 
disease mechanism3,9,10. Equally, accumulation of a truncated TTN protein molecule is not 
apparent in human heart samples3 and is rarely present in iPSC-CMs9 suggesting a poison-
peptide/dominant negative mechanism to be unlikely.
Here, we undertook studies of DCM patients, rat models of TTNtv and human volunteers 
from the general population to better understand TTNtv pathogenicity and molecular effect 
with a specific focus on dissecting a hypothesized position-dependent penetrance effect of 
TTNtv alleles. To do this, we performed a meta-analysis of TTNtv in DCM patients (n = 
2,495) as compared to controls (n = 61,834) and generated two rat models of TTNtv with 
Schafer et al.
Page 2
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 mutations at opposite ends of the titin molecule. We integrated RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) 
and ribosome profiling (Ribo-seq) data across models and species and performed metabolic 
and signaling studies to outline potential disease mechanisms. To define the effects of 
TTNtv on the heart in the general population we deeply phenotyped and TTN sequenced 
healthy volunteers (n = 1,409). We supplemented standard 2D cardiac magnetic resonance 
imaging (CMR) with high-resolution, high-fidelity 3D CMR, integrating and analysing the 
imaging and sequencing data using machine learning techniques.
Results
TTNtv in constitutive exons across the TTN molecule from the Z-disc to the M-band are 
associated with DCM
We and others have shown that A-band TTNtv are associated with DCM2,3,9 but the 
association of DCM with TTNtv in the I-band, Z-disc or the M-line has not been 
demonstrated and it is suggested that proximal TTNtv, in particular, may be non-penetrant. 
To address variant effect across the titin molecule we retrieved TTNtv alleles from DCM 
patients from available sources, combined these data with novel DCM cases (n = 1,105) and 
performed a meta-analysis using ExAC11 and other controls (cohort totals: DCM (n = 
2,495) controls (n = 61,834); see Methods). This showed that TTNtv in constitutive exons 
(PSI > 90%) are significantly associated with DCM irrespective of their position in TTN 
(Table 1).
While some I-band TTNtv may be rescued by differential splicing9, we observed that I-band 
TTNtv in constitutive cardiac exons were significantly associated with DCM, which was 
true for both proximal and distal I-band variants. TTNtv in Z-disc exons were also 
associated with DCM, although with a much lower odds ratio (OR: 5.3) than A-band TTNtv 
(OR: 49.8). It has been proposed that a distal internal promoter of the Cronos TTN 
isoform12, which we confirmed to be present in adult human heart using Cap Analysis of 
Gene Expression (CAGE)13 data (Fig S1), can rescue proximal TTNtv effect. However, we 
found that proximal TTNtv are also penetrant and associated with DCM. By splitting 
regions of titin into protein regions (Table 1), or consecutive uniformly-sized bins (n = 40, 
(Fig S2)) we were able to show the proportion of truncations that are penetrant (etiological 
fraction) in regions of TTN upstream of the Cronos promoter is comparable to the 
proportion in the downstream A-Band. These data show that distal I-band and all A-band 
TTNtv have larger ORs than very proximal or distal variants, which suggests position-
dependent effects for the penetrance of TTNtv in DCM.
Premature stop codons cause nonsense-mediated RNA decay and disrupt translation of 
full length, sarcomere-spanning Ttn
Our meta-analyses of DCM patients showed that TTNtv throughout the titin molecule are 
penetrant but have variable, position-related odds ratios. To study putative position-
dependent effects in greater detail while controlling for other genetic and non-genetic factors 
we modelled proximal and distal TTNtv in two independent rat strains on the same genetic 
background (TTNtvA: with variation in the A-band; TTNtvZ: with variation in the Z-disc; 
for details see Fig S3). Animals with homozygous mutations were not viable, as previously 
Schafer et al.
Page 3
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 described for TTNtv in the mouse10 while heterozygous animals were born in normal 
Mendelian ratios (data not shown).
We bred TTNtv heterozygous rats on a F344 background with Ttn wild type Brown Norway 
rats to obtain an F1 cross to specifically enable allele-specific analysis of Ttn transcription 
and translation in the heart of TTNtvA (n=3), TTNtvZ (n=3) and WT (n=4) animals using 
RNA-seq and Ribo-seq (Fig 1a and Fig S4)15,16. Ribosome protected fragments (RPFs) 
showed clear trinucleotide periodicity across the translatome, indicating actively translating 
ribosomes (Fig 1b). Ttn transcripts with a truncation in the A-band were transcribed and 
translated as far as the premature nonsense codon, which efficiently stopped translation 
thereafter (Fig 1c,d).
The premature stop codon of the TTNtvZ allele did not prevent translation downstream of 
the non-canonical stop and F344 SNPs encoded on the truncated Ttn allele were detected 
throughout Ttn (Fig. 1e). Rescue of translation from the truncated F344 allele did not 
decrease the 3-nt periodicity across Ttn when compared to F1 wild type (WT) animals that 
synthesize titin from two healthy alleles (Fig. 1f). Exon-level analyses showed that the 
TTNtvZ variant initially reduces ribosome occupancy at the N-terminus of Ttn (~50% that 
of WT) but subsequently translation is partially recovered (Fig 1g). This apparent rescue of 
translation might be explained in parts by internal ribosomal entry sites, transcription start 
sites that generate Ttn isoforms with alternative N-termini and potentially by factors that 
maintain ribosomes on the huge Ttn transcript during its translation. In support of this, 
human CAGE data13 and epigenetic marks17 revealed distal TTN promoters in the human 
heart (Fig S1), as previously suggested12. In TTNtvA animals, we only detected ribosomes 
on the healthy BN allele after the premature stop codon (Fig 1c). This led to a decrease of 
ribosome occupancy by 50% when we compared to WT animals that still translate this 
section of titin from both alleles (Fig 1g).
In both mutant rats there was a relative increase in exon translation in the I-band (Fig. 1g) 
that reflects differential Ttn mRNA processing and higher PSI ratios14 of exons in the I-
band, as observed in human iPS-derived cardiomyocytes with TTNtv9. This is indicative of 
an increase in N2BA isoform expression in TTNtv carriers. To translate this finding, we 
compared cardiac RNA-seq data3 from DCM patients either with (n = 17) or without (n = 
91) a TTNtv and observed similar patterns of alternative splicing as seen in the rat models 
(Fig 2a). Allele-specific RNA-seq data revealed a slight upregulation of the WT allele and 
profound NMD of the allele carrying the TTNtv in both the TTNtvA and the TTNtvZ 
models (Fig 2b). These data demonstrate a multi-allelic effect of TTNtv on the overall TTN 
isoform composition across species (that can cause DCM18,19), and that TTNtv confer 
position-independent NMD.
It was noticeable that both the proximal and the distal TTNtv triggered NMD with identical 
efficiencies irrespective of their location in the Ttn molecule. The fact that the proximal 
truncation triggers NMD indicates that the premature stop codon close to the N-terminus in 
the TTNtvZ is functional and that ribosomes cannot clear exon-exon junction 
complexes20,21. Assessing translation beyond the truncation in the TTNtvA model and 
within the 4-exon deletion in TTNtvZ revealed that both rat models synthesize lesser 
Schafer et al.
Page 4
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 amounts (~60% of WT rats) of full-length, sarcomere-spanning Ttn (Fig 2c). In keeping 
with our published data3, protein gel electrophoresis did not identify a truncated Ttn isoform 
or a reduction in the Ttn:Mhc ratio in mutant rat heart (Fig S5). This suggests rapid turnover 
of mutant protein that, for the first time, we document the existence of by showing its 
synthesis (Fig 1). It also shows that while there are significantly less ribosomes translating 
full length protein, titin protein changes are not apparent at the resolution of gel analysis. 
Overall changes in full length titin protein might be compensated not just by an upregulation 
of the wildtype allele (P = 0.02; Fig 2b), but also via an increase in ribosome translational 
speed or changes in protein-turnover.
Taken together these data show that proximal and distal Ttn truncations disrupt Ttn protein 
synthesis but have different translational footprints. However, their effect on NMD of the 
sarcomere-spanning Ttn isoforms is similar and leads to identical reductions in full-length 
Ttn expression.
Titin truncations cause position-independent perturbation of cardiac metabolism and 
signaling
To determine whether distinct or similar molecular phenotypes are associated with proximal 
or distal TTNtv, we performed pathway analysis22 of the genome-wide transcription (RNA-
seq) and translation (Ribo-seq) profiles of TTNtvZ and TTNtvA as compared to controls. 
The gene expression differences observed between TTNtv animals and WT controls were 
highly correlated for TTNtvA and TTNtvZ both for RNA-seq and also Ribo-seq data, 
showing both mutant strains to have similarly perturbed transcriptomes (R2 = 0.841; P < 
0.0001) and translatomes (R2 = 0.837; P < 0.0001; see also Fig S6 & Table S1). Gene set 
enrichment analyses showed significantly overlapping KEGG 22,23 terms between TTNtv 
animals when compared to WT (RNA-seq P value < 10-15; Ribo-seq P value < 10-15; 
Pearson Chi-square test; Fig 3a), which suggested altered cardiac metabolism that was 
independent of the position of the TTNtv.
To investigate further the molecular signatures of altered cardiac metabolism in mutant 
animals, we performed quantitative metabolomic profiling of WT and TTNtv hearts. Liquid 
chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) showed reduced amounts of medium and long 
chain fatty acid acyl-carnitines in TTNtv hearts as compared to controls (Fig 3b; Table S2). 
We also performed capillary electrophoresis mass spectrometry, complementary to LC-MS, 
and observed accumulation of alternative myocardial substrates (branched-chain amino acid 
metabolites and glycolytic intermediates; Fig 3c-e; Fig S7; Table S3) in mutants. These 
changes are similar to those seen in the failing heart and the pressure-loaded non-failing 
heart24,25 and are associated with a shift in cardiac metabolism away from fatty acids and 
towards glycolysis, which may be adaptive26–28. There was no change in the major energy 
substrates (e.g. ATP; Fig S8), which are only diminished in advanced cardiac failure29.
The signalling changes in the heart due to TTNtv are likely many. We found that variation in 
metabolic proteins interacting with titin, such as FHL2 (Fig S9), are small and their 
functional role cannot be established based on these data alone. It is known that mTORC1 
signalling is activated in familial DCM30 and its activity is detrimental in a mouse model of 
DCM due to LMNA mutation31. We profiled the mTORC1 pathway in the TTNtv rat hearts, 
Schafer et al.
Page 5
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 where metabolites that activate mTOR32 are elevated (Fig 3) and observed activation of this 
pathway (Fig S10). The relative importance of these signalling variations for DCM 
pathobiology remain to be established.
TTNtv impair cardiac performance during stress in rats and have adverse effects the heart 
in the general population
In young TTNtv rats (<8 months old) cardiac imaging showed features of concentric 
remodeling but normal LV mass and systolic function (Fig S11). In older rats (>1 year), 
TTNtv hearts were similar to controls although with a suggestion of slightly impaired 
systolic function (Fig 4a, Fig S12). While changes in cardiac morphology and function were 
mild in young mutant rats it was possible that this represented a compensated state as 
evidenced by the shift in cardiac metabolism (Fig 3) that is adaptive, at least in the short 
term26. We examined cardiac function ex vivo and used a volume overload model to test the 
Frank-Starling response, which may be specifically impaired by genetic variation in TTN33. 
Under basal conditions (LV end diastolic pressure, 5-10mmHg) TTNtv rat hearts tended to 
have higher strain rates and LV developed pressures, perhaps reflecting compensatory 
metabolism (Fig 3) and signalling (Fig S10) but, when subjected to sequential volume 
overload stress, mutant heart function became increasingly impaired (Fig 4b). As observed 
previously34–36, cardiac stress ex vivo activated mTORC1 signalling in control animals, 
which is an adaptive response. However, TTNtv hearts had elevated mTORC1 signalling at 
baseline and were not able to appropriately increase mTORC1 activity further when stressed 
(see Fig S10).
In the rat, TTNtv had mild effects on heart function irrespective of their position in the Ttn 
molecule but did not cause DCM. To explore the possibility that TTNtv in cardiac exons 
similarly affect the heart in human subjects, irrespective of disease status, we recruited 1,409 
healthy individuals for detailed CMR studies of the heart in combination with TTN 
sequencing. We specifically focused our studies on the cardiac parameters of LV end 
diastolic volume (LVEDV) and ejection fraction (EF) that are used to define DCM37 and 
also LV end systolic volume (LVESV) that is elevated in pre-DCM and predicts heart failure 
onset38. In this cohort we identified 15 TTNtv (see Table S4; prevalence = 1.0%) in TTN 
exons (PSI > 15%) in keeping with our previous findings3 and the data from the ExAC 
Consortium11. The individuals carrying these truncations in cardiac exons are labelled as 
TTNtv+ in Fig 4. Truncations in TTN in our cohort and in the ExAC dataset were equally 
distributed across the TTN molecule (Fig S13).
After genotype-blinded analysis of CMR data, we found that no individual from the general 
population with a TTNtv had imaging criteria for DCM, similar to our observations in the rat 
models and previous studies3. However, in univariate analyses TTNtv conferred a significant 
increase in absolute LV volumes and had more pronounced effects on volumes indexed to 
body surface area (Fig 4c). There was a non-significant trend for a lower LVEF in TTNtv+ 
individuals (LVEF (%): TTNtv+, 66 ± 5; TTNtv-, 63 ± 5; P = 0.06, Mann-Whitney). Given 
the multiple clinical and anthropometric variables that predict cardiac morphology and 
function, we built regression models for LVEDV, LVESV and LVEF (see Methods and Table 
S5) and tested whether addition of TTNtv status improved model performance, which turned 
Schafer et al.
Page 6
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 out to be the case (absolute beta values: LVEDV, +11.8mls (8.1%); LVESV +7.7 mls (15%); 
EF = -2.8% (P<0.03 for all)). Of note, the effect size of TTNtv on cardiac parameters was 
much greater than the effect sizes of cardiovascular GWAS loci (e.g. systolic blood pressure; 
combined effect of all GWAS loci ~3%)39,40.
To complement our 2D studies we collected an independent dataset of high-resolution, 
single-breath hold 3D CMR images and, blinded to genotype, performed atlas- and machine-
based analyses of LV geometry with respect to TTNtv status41,42. The 3D data show that 
TTNtv were associated with eccentric cardiac remodeling in healthy individuals. This was 
defined by outwards displacement of the endocardial border of the heart (Fig 4d,e and 
Supplementary video 1) in both systole (79% of total surface, P < 0.05) and diastole (47% of 
total surface, P < 0.05), in consensus with the 2D data that showed larger LV volumes at 
these phases of the cardiac cycle.
Discussion
Here we studied the effects of TTNtv in patients with DCM, in the rat and in healthy humans 
to better understand these variants that represent the commonest genetic cause of DCM, yet 
are prevalent in the general population. At the molecular level, we found that TTNtv cause 
altered I-band splicing and position-independent NMD, which attenuates the synthesis of 
sarcomere-spanning Ttn isoforms. The NMD of the TTNtv allele that we observed in the F1 
rat cross is the first demonstration of this effect and something we were not able to show 
previously using unphased human RNA-seq3. Distal truncations are associated with 
synthesis of carboxy-terminus truncated Ttn isoforms, whereas proximal TTNtv lead to 
translation of additional Ttn isoforms with alternative amino-termini. None of these 
additional isoforms were detected on protein gels, which suggests rapid degradation of these 
species (Fig S5). It was notable that, irrespective of their position in the Ttn molecule, both 
proximal and distal premature stop codons in the rat caused highly similar gene expression 
and translational signatures. While these molecular phenotypes are sufficient to impact heart 
function, it does not exclude additional, position-dependent effects that modify TTNtv 
penetrance in DCM where distal I-band and all A-band TTNtvs have the highest ORs.
The molecular phenotype due to TTNtv, which is reminiscent of cardiac adaptation to heart 
failure stimuli with a shift away from fatty acid metabolism26–28, was associated with 
activation of the mTORC1 pathway that is also activated in familial DCM30. We suggest 
that the metabolic (Fig 3) and signalling (Fig S10) changes in the TTNtv heart represent 
adaptive mechanisms26–28 and that the heart is maintained in a compensated state and 
therefore inflexible to further stress. This may explain why hemodynamic stress associated 
with pregnancy or possibly a second genetic factor may reveal TTNtv effects43. It will be 
interesting to see what other environmental triggers for DCM (e.g. alcohol, viral infection or 
chemotherapy) combine with TTNtv to cause disease and equally to ascertain why some 
individuals with TTNtv and an interacting stimulus such as pregnancy, do not develop 
disease.
We found that TTNtv in constitutive exons throughout the TTN molecule, from the Z-disc to 
the M-line, are significantly associated with DCM. This has implications for interpretation 
Schafer et al.
Page 7
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 of TTNtv in patients with DCM although A-band and distal I-band TTNtv have higher ORs 
than variants in other TTN domains, for reasons that remain unclear. In the general 
population, we show that TTNtv that were previously thought to be of limited 
consequence44 are associated with higher left ventricular volumes in 2D CMR analyses, 
which reflects underlying eccentric remodelling that was revealed using advanced 3D CMR 
techniques. These data demonstrate the benefits of combining high-resolution phenotyping 
and machine-based data analysis for imaging genetic studies of the heart, which we suggest 
may be applied at scale in large cohorts with cardiac imaging and genetics, such as the UK 
Biobank. It is apparent that the magnitude of effect of TTNtv on cardiac geometry in the 
general population may be large enough to adversely influence future cardiac events in some 
individuals, which requires further study.
We note that TTNtv in exons that are expressed in the heart (PSI > 15%) are present in about 
0.5% of individuals across all ethnicities3,11 and it may be that this variant class is of 
clinical relevance for up to 35 million people, particularly if they are exposed to additional 
genetic or environmental cardiac stresses. Future studies that pinpoint those at greatest risk 
from the interaction between a TTNtv and a secondary trigger, genetic or environmental, are 
needed to move the field forward.
Online Methods
Animal studies
Rat TTNtv models were generated by SAGE Laboratories using zinc-finger nuclease–
mediated gene targeting. Animals were maintained on a F344 background. For A-band (C-
terminus) truncating variant (TTNtvA), 12bp were deleted and 2bp inserted (TA) at 
228608-228619 to introduce a stop codon in exon 303 (Genomic NCBI Ref Seq: 
NC_005102.3) corresponding to exon 327 in the human sequence. For Z-disc (N-terminus) 
truncating mutation (TTNtvZ) was generated by deletion of exons 2 to 6 (5286bp deletion, 
coordinates 2323-7608) to introduce a frame-shift. For details see supplementary figure 1. 
Genotypes were detected by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and products confirmed by 
Sanger sequencing. Animal studies were conducted in accordance with the principles and 
procedures outlined in the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of 
Laboratory Animals and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee (IACUC, 2013/SHS/844) at the Duke-National University of Singapore Medical 
School.
To enable allele-specific expression analyses with RNA-seq and Ribo-seq, we crossed WT, 
TTNtvA and TTNtvZ F344 animals with healthy BN animals. These F1 animals were only 
used for sequencing experiments. The WT strain carries a non-truncated BN Ttn allele and 
one non-truncated F344 Ttn allele. The TTNtvA and TTNtvZ strains carry a truncated F344 
Ttn allele and one non-truncated BN Ttn allele.
Patient and control cohorts and rare TTNtv burden testing
Data were collated from previously published case-series2,3,45,46 alongside a novel cohort 
of 1,105 DCM patients and 571 healthy controls. Overall, TTN sequencing was performed 
Schafer et al.
Page 8
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 in a total of 2,495 cases and 61,834 reference samples. Case cohorts included 689 probands 
previously published3, 241 cases previously published2 (a UK cohort from this study, 
originally denoted DCM-B, was excluded due to overlap with the Roberts et al series), 156 
probands referred to the Partners Healthcare Laboratory of Molecular Medicine for 
molecular diagnostics45,46 and 304 probands similarly referred to the Oxford Medical 
Genetics Laboratory (OMGL), UK46. Further prospective unselected patients with a 
diagnosis of DCM, confirmed using cardiac imaging with reference to established cardiac 
MRI or echocardiographic diagnostic criteria as previously described3, were recruited via 
the NIHR Royal Brompton Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit (n=542), the German 
Center for Cardiovascular Research, Berlin (n=386) and the National Heart Centre, 
Singapore (n=177) and are reported here for the first time. These latter cohorts were 
sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq, Illumina NextSeq, or Life Technologies SOLiD 5500xl 
platform after target enrichment using in solution hybridisation (Illumina Nextera47 or 
Agilent SureSelect3), with analysis using standard pipelines as previously described3. The 
research studies were approved by a research ethics comittee and all participants gave 
written informed consent. Informatics pipelines were used to define TTNtvs as previously 
described3. TTNtvs included frameshifts, non-canonical stops and essential splice site 
variation.
Reference samples comprised the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC, n=60,706)11 
[version 0.3, Jan 2015], alongside 557 controls from our previous studies2,3 after exclusion 
of control cohorts that overlap with ExAC and 571 unpublished controls recruited at the 
National Heart Centre Singpore.
Rare variants that were predicted to truncate full-length TTN were included in analyses (rare 
= ExAC MAF < 1x10-4; predicted truncating = nonsense, frameshift insertion or deletion, or 
disrupting canonical splice donor/acceptor sequence, TTN reference = inferred complete 
meta-transcript LRG391_t1).
Variants were first grouped according to their location within the Titin structure and the 
expression of the exon in which they were found (PSI). We considered exons to be 
constitutive, if they were spliced into at least 90% of the TTN transcripts present in the heart 
(PSI >= 90%). For each region the prevalence of TTNtv in cases & controls were compared 
using the binomial test in R.
Constitutive TTN exons (plus 2bp canonical splice sequences) were divided into 40 uniform 
bins. For each bin, the total number of TTNtv alleles was compared in cases and controls, an 
odds ratio was computed, and the etiological fraction (EF: the probability that an individual 
rare variant, found in a proband, was responsible for the disease) was calculated using 
 as previously described46.
RNA- and Ribo-sequencing library preparation
To assess the translational status of wild type and Ttn mutant rats, ribosome profiling 
libraries were generated as previously described 16. Briefly, ~70mg of cardiac tissue were 
used for each animal and strain (WT: n=4, TTNtvA: n=3, TTNtvZ: n=3) and subjected to 
Schafer et al.
Page 9
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 cryolysis in 1 ml lysis buffer (1× TruSeq mammalian polysome buffer (Illumina), 1% Triton 
X100, 0.1% NP-40, 1 mM DTT, 10 U ml−1 DNase I and nuclease-free H2O) supplemented 
with 0.1mg/ml CHX (Sigma). The tissue was further homogenized using a 21-gauge syringe 
needle, incubated on ice for 10 min and centrifuged at 20,000g. 400μl lysate per sample 
were used to obtain footprints (or Ribosome protected fragments, RPFs) upon incubation 
with TruSeq Ribo Profile Nuclease (3 U per OD260 / ml of lysate). RPF purification was 
performed using MicroSpin S-400 columns (GE Healthcare) followed by phenol-chloroform 
RNA extraction. Mammalian rRNA was subsequently removed following procedures 
described for the RiboZero Magnetic Gold kit (Epicentre). Ribosome footprints are expected 
to be 28-30 nt long. To recover this exact size window, purified fragments were resolved 
under denaturing PAGE. Following adapter ligation, reverse transcription and a second 
denaturing PAGE purification, samples were circularized. The amplification of Ribo-seq 
libraries was performed by PCR (12 cycles) using the circularized products as templates. 
PCR amplified libraries were purified on native 8% polyacrylamide gels and quantified 
using the Qubit fluorometer. The quality and average fragment size of the libraries was 
instead assessed with the Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity Assay (Agilent). In order to reduce 
technical biases, samples were barcoded and pooled to perform multiplex sequencing on the 
Hiseq2000 platform (single end, 50bp sequencing chemistry).
To assess transcript abundance, stranded polyA+ RNA-sequencing was performed following 
standard manufacturer’s instructions (TruSeq stranded mRNA-seq library prep kit), using 
1μg total RNA as input. Libraries were pooled and sequenced on a HiSeq2000 instrument 
(paired end, 100bp sequencing chemistry).
Read mapping
We used the Illumina CASAVA 1.8 software to demultiplex all reads and convert bcl to fastq 
files. We then clipped adapters from the Ribo-seq cDNA inserts using the FASTX-Toolkit 
(http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/index.html). Adapters were clipped using the 
command:
fastx_clipper -a AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCT -l 20 -n -v -Q33 | 
fastx_trimmer -Q33 -f 1
We then also processed the RNA-seq reads in a similar manner and trimmed them to a 
length of 29 bp, the most abundant read length found in Ribo-seq:
fastx_trimmer -l 29 -Q33
Trimming the RNA-seq data prior to mapping ensures that we can compare both 
methodologies and draw conclusions regarding translational regulation. This step avoids 
differences in expression estimates that arise for technical differences of both methods. We 
then removed mtRNA and rRNA sequences from all libraries using bowtie48,49:
bowtie -l 20 --un clean.fastq /abundant_sequences input.fastq -S 
abundant.sam
Schafer et al.
Page 10
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Abundant sequences were stored in a bowtie index derived from fastq files of the rat 
mitochondrial genome and rRNA sequences annotated in the Ensembl database50. 
Sequences that did not align (clean.fastq) were then further mapped to the genome using 
Tophat 2.0.1351 against the rn5 genome:
tophat2 --read-realign-edit-dist 0 -p 6 -z0 -M -j HiQual.juncs -G 
Rattus_norvegicus.Rnor_5.0.79_TTN.gtf rn5 R1.fastq
To improve the mapping of these short reads, we introduced splicing junctions as described 
previously16. We also supplied the Ensembl50 rat genome annotation v79 to the mapping 
pipeline. Titin is not well annotated in the rat, so we decided to lift over the human titin to 
the rat genome. We used the Lift-Over tool of the Galaxy52,53 platform with standard 
parameters to transfer the titin transcript model3 to rn5. Split reads in RNA-seq data were 
used to confirm exon boundaries in the rat. Titin regions and domains are shown as reported 
previously in the human3. The Ensembl gene IDs representing parts of titin were removed 
from the annotation and replaced with our custom titin annotation prior the mapping step 
and then used for all analyses further downstream.
To analyze alternative splicing, we did not trim the RNA-seq reads but utilized the full-
length 2x100bp paired-end data to improve the estimation of splice site usage in the rat:
tophat2 --read-realign-edit-dist 0 -p 6 --no-coverage-search -M -j 
HiQual.juncs -G Rattus_norvegicus.Rnor_5.0.79_TTN.gtf rn5 R1.fastq 
R2.fastq
Read periodicity
To determine the quality of the Ribo-seq data, we calculated the percentage of reads starting 
at a position that is indicative for ribosomes that are located on a codon of the open reading 
frame. We first selected 29-mers and the extracted the position of the A of the start codon 
ATG. This position is indicated by the location of 5’ UTRs annotated by Ensembl50 
Biomart. Plotting the start position of 29-mers in a window around the ATG of known genes 
reveals a peak of read starts with an offset of 12 bp upstream of the start codon. This is 
indicative for ribosomes located at the translation start site. Subsequently, read starts are 
preferentially located periodically every 3 base pairs, representing actively translating 
ribosomes reading the genetic message while synthesizing new proteins. All libraries 
generated showed very high periodicity with more than 90% of reads located in frame.
To determine whether Ribosomes localized on titin after the truncation in TTNtvZ rats are 
translating canonical titin sequence, we first determined the coding frame for each exon in 
the WT animals. We then compared the percentage of reads located in this frame between 
WT and TTNtvZ animals and did not detect a difference across the locus. This indicates that 
ribosomes associated to the truncated titin isoforms are located in frame. We only 
determined the periodicity in cardiac exons that were covered by at least 10 read starts to 
avoid noise due to low coverage.
Schafer et al.
Page 11
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Gene expression analyses
To assess gene transcription and translation levels, we counted uniquely mapping reads that 
were unambiguously assigned to one gene with htseq-count:
htseq-count --stranded=no --type=CDS --quiet --idattr=gene_id - 
Rattus_norvegicus.Rnor_5.0.79_TTN.gtf
We considered only reads mapping to the coding sequence of genes annotated in the 
Ensembl database v7950 for both Ribo-seq and RNA-seq datasets. To detect differentially 
expressed genes between genotypes, we used the DESeq2 package54 with standard 
parameters (FDR <= 0.05) for comparisons between both TTNtv models to WT animals. All 
genes that were detected in any of the comparisons are reported in the supplementary data.
Gene and exon expression levels are given as “reads per kilobase per million mapped reads” 
(RPKM). Reads overlapping the feature were normalised to the length of the feature and the 
number of uniquely mapping reads (i.e. sequencing depth). Unlike read counts, these values 
can be used to compare RNA expression levels between different features within the same 
sample.
To assess allele-specific transcription and translation, we first determined all F344 SNPs on 
the BN background annotated by the rat genome database55 overlapping with the titin locus 
at http://rgd.mcw.edu/. We then counted reads overlapping these positions and assigned them 
to either the BN or the F344 depending on their sequence. The allele frequency across these 
positions indicates the ratio of titin transcripts originating from either non-truncated titin 
(BN) or truncated titin (F344) in the TTNtv models.
The sum of reads assigned to the BN or F344 allele was calculated for each animal , 
normalized by library size and then compared between WT and TTNtvA or TTNtvZ 
animals. To avoid BN or F344 specific differences in Ttn expression to disturb the signal, we 
normalised the expression levels of both alleles to the levels in WT animals.
To assess the protein synthesis levels of full-length titin, we considered all Ribo-seq reads 
that we could assign to regions that were exclusive to the non-truncated alleles in TTNtv 
animals and compared these counts to WT animals. For the TTNtvA rats, all Ribo-seq reads 
located after the premature stop codon are derived from the healthy BN allele. This is 
indicated by the complete absence of F344 SNPs in the data due to the efficient stop of 
translation after the premature stop codon. The proximal truncation in the TTNtvZ animal 
does not completely stop translation and Ribo-seq reads downstream are not necessarily 
representative of full-length titin expression. These reads partly derive from isoforms with 
alternative N-termini that are not truncated by the TTNtvZ mutation. Anticipating this, we 
chose to generate a stop by introducing a large deletion that encompasses several exons. 
These exons (3-5) are only present in the healthy BN allele and thus reads mapping to this 
location are indicative for full-length titin expression in the absence of a truncation in the 
TTNtvZ animals.
We also assessed the translation of each exonic part of titin across all animal models. We 
only considered exons with an expression level of RPKM >1 in the rat heart (n = 237). 
Schafer et al.
Page 12
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 FPKM values of all 3 replicates for each TTNtv model where compared to WT animals and 
outliers were removed (ROUT Q=1%). We then calculated the average ratio for each exon 
across all biological replicates and performed polynomial smoothing of the 2nd order using 
10 neighbors to average. Smoothing was required to visualize a trend of translation rates 
compared to healthy animals across the entire titin locus.
To assess allele frequency in the RNA-seq and Ribo-seq data, we required the location of the 
F344 SNP (n=121) to be covered by at least 2 reads on average across all animals.
Detection of alternative transcription start site expression in human heart
In order to identify transcription start sites in Titin two sources of data were used; Firstly 
capped analysis of gene expression data (CAGE) from heart tissue in the FANTOM5 
consortium dataset13 to identify the location of active transcription start sites (TSSs). 
Secondly ChipSeq data from heart tissue of two histone marks that are associated with the 
presence of an active promoter, namely H3K4me3 and H3K9ac, in the epigenome roadmap 
dataset17. Specifically, the FANTOM dataset heart samples were CNhs11758, CNhs11757, 
CNhs10621, CNhs10653, CNhs12855, CNhs12856 and CNhs12857 and were downloaded 
using CAGEr56. These were then processed using CAGEr (standard parameters) in order to 
identify TSSs by first normalising the tag counts using a power law and then clustering the 
reads in order to find CAGE peaks that correspond to active TSSs. This identified three 
TSSs within the Titin region. In order to further validate these TSSs H3K4me3 narrow peaks 
from sample E095 (adult heart left ventricle) and H3K9ac narrow peaks and H3K4me3 
narrow peaks from sample E083 (fetal heart) were downloaded from the epigenome 
roadmap data portal and overlaid onto Titin. This showed corresponding histone 
modifications for two out of the three TSSs identified using CAGEr. All of these datasets 
were then plotted using circlize57.
PSI
To assess splicing of titin in TTNtv hearts, we calculated the ‘Percent Spliced In’ (PSI) ratio 
for all exons in titin across species. The PSI is a measure of how efficiently an exon is 
spliced into the final isoform population of a gene. First we generated an exonic matrix 
based on our custom titin annotation using the prepare_annotation tool58. Then we executed 
the PSI.sh14 script to calculate PSI ratios with the following parameters:
PSI.sh StartPSIStrictFilter TTN_exonic.gtf 100 accepted_hits.bam 
junctions.bed PSI_result
We slightly altered the script and included a more stringent filter for exclusion reads to avoid 
mapping artifacts of split alignments. Every exclusion read was required to start and end at a 
known exon boundary in order to be considered in the final PSI calculation (StrictFilter). We 
also calculated PSI values for human, cardiac DCM samples with and without TTNtv for 
patients reported previously3. We then compared patterns of TTN isoform regulation 
between DCM patients carrying truncating variants in TTN versus those who do not, by 
means of the deltaPSI (dPSI): mean(PSI(DCMTTNtv)) - mean(PSI(DCMcontrols)).
Schafer et al.
Page 13
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Exons with a PSI in that heart of at least 15% are considered cardiac and at least 90% are 
considered constitutive exons throughout the manuscript.
Pathway analysis
To better understand the effects of TTNtvs on the genome-wide molecular landscape of the 
heart, we identified overrepresented pathways in differentially transcribed and translated 
genes. We used counts normalized by DESeq254 and performed a KEGG23 pathway 
enrichment analysis with GAGE22:
res <- gage(counts,gsets = kegg.gs,ref = 4:7,samp = 1:3,compare = 
“unpaired”)
where columns 4-7 represent normalized counts of WT animals and 1-3 counts from TTNtv 
rats. Ensembl IDs were converted to Entrez IDs prior to this analysis using BiomaRt50. 
GAGR does not rely on a list of significant differential genes, but rather performs a 
statistical test whether fold changes in a certain pathway are more different between groups 
than expected. This enabled use to detect affected pathways in between groups with great 
sensitivity.
Rat MRI imaging
Rats (13 to 16 month old) were anaesthetized using 1 to 3% isoflurane and maintained at 0.5 
to 1.5% isoflurane during the imaging session. Heart rate, blood oxygen saturation, 
respiratory rate, temperature and ECG were monitored (SA Instruments, NY, USA). Imaging 
was performed on a 7T ClinScan small animal MRI (Bruker Ettlingen, Germany) equipped 
with a rat cardiac array surface coil. 2D cine gradient echo sequences were acquired in long-
axis, four–chamber and short axis (SAX) views of the left ventricle59. Left ventricle 
chamber volumes were quantified using Segment v2.0 R4377 software60 (Medviso, 
Sweden), and left ventricle wall parameters were measured as previously described61.
Rat echocardiography
4 to 8 month old rats were anesthetized initially with 2% to 2.5% isoflurane and maintained 
at 1.6% to 2.0% isoflurane during image acquisition. Transthoracic echocardiographic 
measurements were performed on a Vevo 2100 system with MS250linear array transducer, 
13–24 MHz (VisualSonics, Canada). Standard two dimensional (2D) and M-mode short axis 
at mid papillary muscle level were acquired, and an average of 10 cardiac cycles were stored 
in cine loops for subsequent offline analysis using the same system62,63.
Ex vivo Langendorff studies
Rats (13-16 weeks old) were anesthetized with Ketamine (80mg/kg) and Xylazine 
(10mg/kg) via intraperitoneal injection. Heparin (1000U) was administered subcutaneously 
and the heart excised and perfused with modified Krebs-Henseleit buffer solution in a retro-
grade fashion on a Langendorff apparatus64 (ADInstruments). An incision was made on the 
left atrium and a fluid-filled latex balloon placed in the left ventricular cavity. End-diastolic 
pressure was set at between 5 to 10mmHg for all hearts for baseline measurements by 
adjustment of the volume of buffer in the latex balloon. Hearts were paced at 300 beats per 
Schafer et al.
Page 14
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 minute. To mimic volume overload, the volume of buffer in the balloon in the left ventricular 
cavity was sequentially increased by 10uL every 5 minutes up to a final 40uL incremental 
volume. Myocardial contractility (dP/dtmax) and relaxation rate (dP/dtmin) were derived 
from left ventricular developed pressure (LVDevP) using the MLT844 physiological 
pressure transducer. Data was acquired and analysed using LabchartPro software 
(ADInstruments).
Metabolomic analysis
Rat hearts were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C prior to analysis. 
Acylcarnitine profiling was performed as described65. Briefly, 50 to 100 mg of tissue was 
homogenised in 50 % Acetonitrile, 0.3 % formic acid. Tissue homogenates were extracted 
using methanol and derivatised using 3M Hydrochloric acid in methanol (Sigma Aldrich, 
USA), dried and reconstituted in methanol for analysis by Liquid chromatography-mass 
spectrometry (LC-MS) using the Agilent 6430 Triple Quadrupole LC/MS system (Agilent 
Technologies, CA, USA). 2µL sample was injected at 0.4ml/min with 80/20 methanol/water 
as mobile phase. Raw data analysis were performed on Agilent MassHunter Workstation B.
06.00 Software.
CE-TOFMS (capillary electrophoresis-time of flight mass spectrometry) was performed to 
quantify glycolytic intermediates, energy substrates and amino acids. Heart tissue were 
mixed in 50% acetonitrile in water (v/v) containing internal standards (40 μM for cation and 
10 μM for anion measurement) and homogenized (1,500rpm, 120 sec x 5 times) before 
addition of 50% acetonitrile in water (v/v). The supernatant was then filtered through 5-kDa 
cut-off filter (Human Metabolome Technologies, Yamagata, Japan) to remove 
macromolecules and the filtrate was centrifugally concentrated and resuspended in ultrapure 
water before metabolite measurement. The compounds were analysed using Agilent 
capillary electrophoresis system equipped with an Agilent 6210 TOFMS, a 1100 isocratic 
HPLC pump, a G1603A CE-MS adapter kit and a G1607A CE-electrospray ionization-mass 
spectrometry (ESI-MS) sprayer kit (Agilent Technologies, Germany). The system was 
controlled using G2201AA ChemStation software (Agilent).
Cationic metabolites were analysed using a fused silica capillary (i.d. 50 μm x 80 cm length) 
with Cation buffer solution (H3301-1001; Human Metabolome Technologies). The samples 
were injected at a pressure of 50 mbar for 10 sec and the positive applied voltage was 27 kV. 
ESI –MS was conducted in a positive ion mode with the capillary voltage set at 4,000V. 
Sample were scanned from 50 to 1,000 m/z66. Anionic metabolites were analysed using a 
fused silica capillary (i.d. 50 μm x 80 cm length) with Anion buffer solution (H3302-1021; 
Human Metabolome Technologies). The samples were injected at a pressure of 50 mbar for 
25 sec and the positive applied voltage was 30 kV. ESI –MS was conducted in a negative ion 
mode with the capillary voltage set at 3,500V. Sample were scanned from 50 to 1,000 m/
z67.
Raw data obtained by CE-TOFMS were processed using automatic integration software 
(MasterHands ver. 2.17.1.11, Keio University) to obtain peak information68. Peak area was 
converted to relative peak area and peak detection limit was determined based on signal-
noise ratio; S/N = 3. Putative metabolites were then assigned from HMT’s standard library 
Schafer et al.
Page 15
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 and known-unknown peak library on the basis of m/z and migration time. Absolute 
quantification was obtained by single-point (100 μM) calibrations and further normalized by 
sample weight.
Glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) assay
Rat hearts were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C prior to analysis. Heart 
tissue were homogenized in ice-cold PBS and samples were deproteinized following 
manufacturer’s instructions (ab204708, Abcam). Deproteinized samples were added in 
duplicate wells of a 96-well plate and G6P content determined following manufacturer’s 
instructions (ab83426, Abcam).
Titin protein quantification
SDS-PAGE (polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis) was performed on 2.5 % 
polyacrylamide/1% agarose gels and total protein visualised by Coomassie blue staining. 
Ttn protein was visualised at approximately 3 MDa and normalised to MyHC (205 KDa) as 
a loading control. For immunoblotting quantification, total protein were separated on 1.8 % 
polyacrylamide/1% agarose gels, transferred to PVDF membrane and probed with T12 
antibody against the N-terminus of Ttn and Novex3 as previously described9.
Western blotting
Rat left ventricle tissues were homogenised in primary lysis buffer [50 mM Sodium 
Phosphate pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % Triton X-100 with protease and phosphatase inhibitor 
cocktail (Sigma)] and then centrifuged. The supernatant was collected and a secondary 
extraction was performed on the pellet containing nuclear, structural and membrane proteins 
using secondary lysis buffer [1 % SDS, 5 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, 15 U/ml DnaseI and 
protease and phosphatase inhibitors]. The primary and secondary extracts were combined 
and protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay (Pierce, Thermo 
Scientific). Equal amounts of protein were separated by SDS-PAGE, transferred to PVDF 
membranes and probed with antibodies to mTOR pSer2448 (#2971), 4EBP1 pThr37/46 
(#2855), S6K pThr389 (#9205), mTOR (#2972), S6K (#2708), 4EBP1 (#9644), GAPDH 
(#2118) or β-tubulin (#2146) from Cell Signalling Technology.
Healthy Volunteer MRI imaging
Healthy volunteers without self-reported cardiovascular disease or a family history of 
disease were recruited prospectively via advertisement to the UK Digital Heart Project 
(https://digital-heart.org/) at the MRC-CSC, Imperial College, London69. The study was 
approved by a research ethics comittee and all participants gave written informed consent.
Conventional two dimensional and high-resolution three dimensional cine balanced steady-
state free precession (b-SSFP) CMR imaging was performed on a 1.5T Philips Achieva 
system (Best, Netherlands)41. Analysis of the CMR scans was carried out by 2 experienced 
cardiologists, blinded to genotyping data, using commercially available semi-automated 
software (CMRtools, Cardiovascular Imaging Solutions, London, UK). Measurements 
followed standard methodology70,71 with papillary muscles included in the LVM and valve 
Schafer et al.
Page 16
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 position tracked in the long axis images. Three dimensional CMR data were segmented and 
co-registered to provide a model of phenotypic variation in the population42.
Statistical analysis
GraphPad Prism6 software was used for statistical analysis. For two factors, trend testing 
was performed with two-way ANOVA. Comparison of two means was tested by 2-tailed t-
test. When several conditions were each compared to one reference condition, we performed 
the Dunnett’s test to correct for multiple testing. Data is reported as the mean ± standard 
error / deviation as described42, with a significance level of * = P < 0.05, ** = P < 0.01, *** 
= P < 0.001. Using RStudio Server version 0.98 (Boston, Massachusetts) standard linear 
regressions were performed to evaluate the relationship between TTNtv genotype and 
cardiovascular phenotypes, as previously described3. Multivariate models were generated 
using known clinical covariates and optimized to minimize Bayesian Information Criterion. 
The relationships between morphologic parameters and TTN genotype were assessed by 
ANOVA between nested linear models. To test for position-independent association of 
TTNtv across titin, we performed a binomial tests. Three dimensional phenotypic regression 
modelling applied threshold-free cluster enhancement and permutation testing to derive the 
P values associated with each regression coefficient following adjustment to control the false 
discovery rate72,73.
Data availability
The RNA-seq and Ribo-seq data used in the manuscript can be obtained from http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/ERP015402.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank all the patients and healthy volunteers for taking part in this research, and our team of research nurses 
across the hospital sites. We also thank M. von Frieling-Salewsky for technical support. The research was supported 
by the Medical Research Council Clinical Sciences Centre UK to J.S.W. & S.A.C. & D.P.O., NIHR Biomedical 
Research Unit in Cardiovascular Disease at Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS Foundation Trust and Imperial 
College London to J.S.W. & S.A.C., NIHR Imperial Biomedical Research Centre, British Heart Foundation UK 
(SP/10/10/28431, PG/12/27/29489 to S.A.C. & D.P.O. & C.B.), Wellcome Trust UK (107469/Z/15/Z to J.S.W., 
087183/Z/08/Z, 092854/Z/10/Z, WT095908), Wellcome Trust Fellowship (100211/Z/12/Z & P43579_WMET to 
T.J.W.D.), Fondation Leducq to J.S.W., Tanoto Foundation to S.A.C., CORDA, National Institutes of Health 
(NHLBI: 2R01HL080494 to J.G.S. & C.E.S.), National Medical Research Council (NMRC) Singapore 
(CIRG13nov024 & STaR13nov002 to D.P.V.d.K.), SingHealth Duke-NUS Institute of Precision Medicine, 
Rosetrees Trust, Health Innovation Challenge Fund (HICF-R6-373 to J.S.W.) funding from the Wellcome Trust and 
Department of Health, UK, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the European Union EURATRANS award 
(HEALTH-F4-2010-241504 to N.H.), the Helmholtz Alliance ICEMED to N.H., European Union FP7 (CardioNeT-
ITN-289600 to F.M.), Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB1002, TPA08 to W.A.L., Forschergruppe 1054 HU 
1522/1-1 to N.H. & TP1 to V.R.Z.) and an EMBO Long-Term Fellowship (ALTF 186-2015 to S.v.H.) and Marie 
Curie Actions (LTFCOFUND2013, GA-2013-609409 to S.v.H.). This publication includes independent research 
commissioned by the Health Innovation Challenge Fund (HICF), a parallel funding partnership between the 
Department of Health and Wellcome Trust. The views expressed in this work are those of the authors and not 
necessarily those of the Department of Health or Wellcome Trust. The RNA-seq and Ribo-seq data used in the 
manuscript can be obtained from http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/ERP015402.
Schafer et al.
Page 17
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 References
1. Hershberger RE, Hedges DJ, Morales A. Dilated cardiomyopathy: the complexity of a diverse 
genetic architecture. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2013; 10:531–47. [PubMed: 23900355] 
2. Herman DS, et al. Truncations of titin causing dilated cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med. 2012; 
366:619–28. [PubMed: 22335739] 
3. Roberts AM, et al. Integrated allelic, transcriptional, and phenomic dissection of the cardiac effects 
of titin truncations in health and disease. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 7:270ra6.
4. Norton N, et al. Exome sequencing and genome-wide linkage analysis in 17 families illustrate the 
complex contribution of TTN truncating variants to dilated cardiomyopathy. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 
2013; 6:144–53. [PubMed: 23418287] 
5. Chauveau C, Rowell J, Ferreiro A. A Rising Titan: TTN Review and Mutation Update. Human 
Mutation. 2014; 35:1046–1059. [PubMed: 24980681] 
6. Akinrinade O, Koskenvuo J, Alastalo T-P. Prevalence of Titin Truncating Variants in General 
Population. PLOS ONE. 2015; 10:e0145284. [PubMed: 26701604] 
7. Akinrinade, Alastalo T-P, Koskenvuo JW. Relevance of truncating titin mutations in dilated 
cardiomyopathy. Clinical Genetics. 2016; n/a–n/a. doi: 10.1111/cge.12741
8. Robinson EB, et al. Genetic risk for autism spectrum disorders and neuropsychiatric variation in the 
general population. Nat Genet. 2016; doi: 10.1038/ng.3529
9. Hinson JT, et al. HEART DISEASE. Titin mutations in iPS cells define sarcomere insufficiency as a 
cause of dilated cardiomyopathy. Science. 2015; 349:982–6. [PubMed: 26315439] 
10. Gramlich M, et al. Stress-induced dilated cardiomyopathy in a knock-in mouse model mimicking 
human titin-based disease. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009; 47:352–358. [PubMed: 19406126] 
11. Lek M, et al. Analysis of protein-coding genetic variation in 60,706 humans. bioRxiv. 2015 
030338. http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/10/30/030338.abstract. 
12. Zou J, et al. An internal promoter underlies the difference in disease severity between N- and C-
terminal truncation mutations of Titin. eLife. 2015; 4
13. Forrest A, et al. A promoter-level mammalian expression atlas. Nature. 2014; 507:462–470. 
[PubMed: 24670764] 
14. Schafer S, et al. Alternative Splicing Signatures in RNA-seq Data: Percent Spliced in (PSI). Curr 
Protoc Hum Genet. 2015; 87:11.16.1–11.16.14. [PubMed: 26439713] 
15. Ingolia N, Ghaemmaghami S, Newman J, Weissman J. Genome-Wide Analysis in Vivo of 
Translation with Nucleotide Resolution Using Ribosome Profiling. Science. 2009; 324:218–223. 
[PubMed: 19213877] 
16. Schafer S, et al. Translational regulation shapes the molecular landscape of complex disease 
phenotypes. Nature communications. 2015; 6:7200.
17. Kundaje A, et al. Integrative analysis of 111 reference human epigenomes. Nature. 2015; 518:317–
330. [PubMed: 25693563] 
18. Guo W, et al. RBM20, a gene for hereditary cardiomyopathy, regulates titin splicing. Nat Med. 
2012; 18:766–73. [PubMed: 22466703] 
19. Maatz H, et al. RNA-binding protein RBM20 represses splicing to orchestrate cardiac pre-mRNA 
processing. J Clin Invest. 2014; 124:3419–30. [PubMed: 24960161] 
20. Hir L, Izaurralde, Maquat, Moore. The spliceosome deposits multiple proteins 20-24 nucleotides 
upstream of mRNA exon-exon junctions. Embo J. 2000; 19:6860–9. [PubMed: 11118221] 
21. Hir L, Gatfield, Izaurralde, Moore. The exon-exon junction complex provides a binding platform 
for factors involved in mRNA export and nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Embo J. 2001; 
20:4987–97. [PubMed: 11532962] 
22. Luo W, Friedman MS, Shedden K, Hankenson KD, Woolf PJ. GAGE: generally applicable gene 
set enrichment for pathway analysis. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009; 10:161. [PubMed: 19473525] 
23. Kanehisa M, Goto S. KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. 2000; 28:27–30.
24. Lai L, et al. Energy metabolic reprogramming in the hypertrophied and early stage failing heart: a 
multisystems approach. Circ Heart Fail. 2014; 7:1022–31. [PubMed: 25236884] 
Schafer et al.
Page 18
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 25. Shibayama J, et al. Metabolic remodeling in moderate synchronous versus dyssynchronous pacing-
induced heart failure: integrated metabolomics and proteomics study. PLoS ONE. 2015; 
10:e0118974. [PubMed: 25790351] 
26. Doenst T, Nguyen TD, Abel ED. Cardiac metabolism in heart failure: implications beyond ATP 
production. Circ Res. 2013; 113:709–24. [PubMed: 23989714] 
27. Stanley WC, Recchia FA, Lopaschuk GD. Myocardial substrate metabolism in the normal and 
failing heart. Physiol Rev. 2005; 85:1093–129. [PubMed: 15987803] 
28. Schisler JC, et al. Cardiac energy dependence on glucose increases metabolites related to 
glutathione and activates metabolic genes controlled by mechanistic target of rapamycin. J Am 
Heart Assoc. 2015; 4
29. Neubauer S. The failing heart--an engine out of fuel. N Engl J Med. 2007; 356:1140–51. [PubMed: 
17360992] 
30. Yano T, et al. Clinical impact of myocardial mTORC1 activation in nonischemic dilated 
cardiomyopathy. Journal of molecular and cellular cardiology. 2016; 91:6–9. [PubMed: 26739211] 
31. Ramos F, et al. Rapamycin reverses elevated mTORC1 signaling in lamin A/C-deficient mice, 
rescues cardiac and skeletal muscle function, and extends survival. Science translational medicine. 
2012; 4:144ra103.
32. Neishabouri, Hutson, Davoodi. Chronic activation of mTOR complex 1 by branched chain amino 
acids and organ hypertrophy. Amino acids. 2015; 47:1167–82. [PubMed: 25721400] 
33. Ait-Mou Y, et al. Titin strain contributes to the Frank-Starling law of the heart by structural 
rearrangements of both thin- and thick-filament proteins. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America. 2016; 113:2306–11. [PubMed: 26858417] 
34. Sen S, et al. Glucose regulation of load-induced mTOR signaling and ER stress in mammalian 
heart. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013; 2:e004796. [PubMed: 23686371] 
35. Shende P, et al. Cardiac raptor ablation impairs adaptive hypertrophy, alters metabolic gene 
expression, and causes heart failure in mice. Circulation. 2011; 123:1073–82. [PubMed: 
21357822] 
36. Zhang D, et al. MTORC1 regulates cardiac function and myocyte survival through 4E-BP1 
inhibition in mice. J Clin Invest. 2010; 120:2805–16. [PubMed: 20644257] 
37. Mestroni, et al. Guidelines for the study of familial dilated cardiomyopathies. Collaborative 
Research Group of the European Human and Capital Mobility Project on Familial Dilated 
Cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J. 1999; 20:93–102. [PubMed: 10099905] 
38. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Benjamin EJ, Evans JC, Levy D. Left ventricular dilatation and the risk of 
congestive heart failure in people without myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 1997; 336:1350–5. 
[PubMed: 9134875] 
39. Levy D, et al. Genome-wide association study of blood pressure and hypertension. Nat Genet. 
2009; 41:677–87. [PubMed: 19430479] 
40. Newton-Cheh C, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies eight loci associated with blood 
pressure. Nat Genet. 2009; 41:666–76. [PubMed: 19430483] 
41. de Marvao A, et al. Population-based studies of myocardial hypertrophy: high resolution 
cardiovascular magnetic resonance atlases improve statistical power. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 
2014; 16:16. [PubMed: 24490638] 
42. Bai W, et al. A bi-ventricular cardiac atlas built from 1000+ high resolution MR images of healthy 
subjects and an analysis of shape and motion. Med Image Anal. 2015; 26:133–45. [PubMed: 
26387054] 
43. Ware J, et al. Shared Genetic Predisposition in Peripartum and Dilated Cardiomyopathies. New 
Engl J Medicine. 2016; 374:233–241.
44. Watkins H. Tackling the achilles’ heel of genetic testing. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 7:270fs1.
45. Pugh TJ, et al. The landscape of genetic variation in dilated cardiomyopathy as surveyed by 
clinical DNA sequencing. Genet Med. 2014; 16:601–8. [PubMed: 24503780] 
46. Walsh, Thomson, Ware, Funke, Woodley. Reassessment of Mendelian gene pathogenicity using 
7,855 cardiomyopathy cases and 60,706 reference samples. 2016
Schafer et al.
Page 19
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 47. Pua CJ, et al. Development of a Comprehensive Sequencing Assay for Inherited Cardiac Condition 
Genes. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2016; 9:3–11. [PubMed: 26888179] 
48. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL. Ultrafast and memory-efficient alignment of short 
DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol. 2009; 10:R25. [PubMed: 19261174] 
49. Langmead B, Salzberg S. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nature Methods. 2012; 
9:357–359. [PubMed: 22388286] 
50. Cunningham F, et al. Ensembl 2015. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:D662–9. [PubMed: 25352552] 
51. Kim D, et al. TopHat2: accurate alignment of transcriptomes in the presence of insertions, deletions 
and gene fusions. Genome Biol. 2013; 14:R36. [PubMed: 23618408] 
52. Goecks J, Nekrutenko A, Taylor J, Team T. Galaxy: a comprehensive approach for supporting 
accessible, reproducible, and transparent computational research in the life sciences. Genome 
Biology. 2010; 11:R86. [PubMed: 20738864] 
53. Giardine B, et al. Galaxy: A platform for interactive large-scale genome analysis. Genome 
Research. 2005; 15:1451–1455. [PubMed: 16169926] 
54. Love MI, Huber W, Anders S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq 
data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 2014; 15:550. [PubMed: 25516281] 
55. Shimoyama M, et al. The Rat Genome Database 2015: genomic, phenotypic and environmental 
variations and disease. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:D743–50. [PubMed: 25355511] 
56. Haberle V, Forrest A, Hayashizaki Y, Carninci P, Lenhard B. CAGEr: precise TSS data retrieval 
and high-resolution promoterome mining for integrative analyses. Nucleic Acids Research. 2015; 
43:e51–e51. [PubMed: 25653163] 
57. Gu, Gu, Eils, Schlesner, Brors. circlize implements and enhances circular visualization in R. 
Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:2811–2812. [PubMed: 24930139] 
58. Anders S, Reyes A, Huber W. Detecting differential usage of exons from RNA-seq data. Genome 
Research. 2012; 22:2008–2017. [PubMed: 22722343] 
59. Price AN, et al. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging in experimental models. Open 
Cardiovasc Med J. 2010; 4:278–92. [PubMed: 21331311] 
60. Heiberg E, et al. Design and validation of Segment--freely available software for cardiovascular 
image analysis. BMC Med Imaging. 2010; 10:1. [PubMed: 20064248] 
61. Ross AJ, et al. Serial MRI evaluation of cardiac structure and function in mice after reperfused 
myocardial infarction. Magn Reson Med. 2002; 47:1158–68. [PubMed: 12111962] 
62. Tortoledo FA, Quinones MA, Fernandez GC, Waggoner AD, Winters WL. Quantification of left 
ventricular volumes by two-dimensional echocardiography: a simplified and accurate approach. 
Circulation. 1983; 67:579–84. [PubMed: 6821900] 
63. Sahn DJ, DeMaria A, Kisslo J, Weyman A. Recommendations regarding quantitation in M-mode 
echocardiography: results of a survey of echocardiographic measurements. Circulation. 1978; 
58:1072–83. [PubMed: 709763] 
64. Sutherland FJ, Hearse DJ. The isolated blood and perfusion fluid perfused heart. Pharmacol Res. 
2000; 41:613–27. [PubMed: 10816330] 
65. Muoio DM, et al. Muscle-specific deletion of carnitine acetyltransferase compromises glucose 
tolerance and metabolic flexibility. Cell Metab. 2012; 15:764–77. [PubMed: 22560225] 
66. Soga T, Heiger DN. Amino acid analysis by capillary electrophoresis electrospray ionization mass 
spectrometry. Anal Chem. 2000; 72:1236–41. [PubMed: 10740865] 
67. Soga T, et al. Simultaneous determination of anionic intermediates for Bacillus subtilis metabolic 
pathways by capillary electrophoresis electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. Anal Chem. 
2002; 74:2233–9. [PubMed: 12038746] 
68. Sugimoto M, et al. Differential metabolomics software for capillary electrophoresis-mass 
spectrometry data analysis. Metabolomics. 2010; 6:27–41.
69. de Marvao A, et al. Precursors of Hypertensive Heart Phenotype Develop in Healthy Adults: A 
High-Resolution 3D MRI Study. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015; 8:1260–9. [PubMed: 
26476505] 
70. Bellenger NG, Grothues F, Smith GC, Pennell DJ. Quantification of right and left ventricular 
function by cardiovascular magnetic resonance. Herz. 2000; 25:392–9. [PubMed: 10948775] 
Schafer et al.
Page 20
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 71. Grothues F, et al. Comparison of interstudy reproducibility of cardiovascular magnetic resonance 
with two-dimensional echocardiography in normal subjects and in patients with heart failure or left 
ventricular hypertrophy. Am J Cardiol. 2002; 90:29–34. [PubMed: 12088775] 
72. Smith SM, Nichols TE. Threshold-free cluster enhancement: addressing problems of smoothing, 
threshold dependence and localisation in cluster inference. Neuroimage. 2009; 44:83–98. 
[PubMed: 18501637] 
73. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach 
to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B (Methodological). 1995; 
57:289–300.
Schafer et al.
Page 21
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Fig 1. Ribosome profiling reveals the translational footprint of truncating variants in Ttn.
a Ribosome occupancy across Ttn: Average reads per kilobase per million mapped reads 
(RPKM) per exon for 10 BN/F344 F1 rats. F344 SNPs on the BN background (n=121) allow 
assessment of allele-specific translation for 2 distinct models of truncations and Ttn wild 
type animals. Purple indicates Z-disc, green I-band, pink A-band and blue M-line. b Ribo-
seq reads (28-mers) show clear 3-nt periodicity across the genome for all replicates 
indicating that the datasets effectively capture actively translating ribosomes in the heart. c,d 
Ribosomes occupy the F344 allele in TTNtvA animals upstream of the premature stop 
Schafer et al.
Page 22
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 codon in the A-band of Ttn exposing the synthesis of truncated Ttn isoforms. The premature 
stop releases ribosomes from the mutant Ttn message. Titin protein synthesized after 
TTNtvA is exclusively generated from the healthy BN allele (Median ± 25-75 percentile, 
Whiskers show 10-90 percentile). Allele frequencies in RNA-seq and Ribo-seq were below 
50%, indicative for NMD. e F344 SNPs located after TTNtvZ are occupied by ribosomes, 
indicating translation after the proximal truncation in Ttn. f Ribo-seq reads located 
downstream of TTNtvZ do not lower 3-nt periodicity suggesting they actively translate 
canonical Ttn sequence at similar levels as animals with two wild type Ttn alleles. g TTNtvZ 
reduces ribosome density initially but translation of Ttn is gradually rescued. Translation of 
A-band exons, but not of I-band exons, is reduced in mutants compared to WT animals. 
TTNtvA efficiently reduces translation after the premature stop codon.
Schafer et al.
Page 23
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Fig 2. Proximal and distal truncations in titin alter isoform processing and trigger NMD.
a PSI and deltaPSI of titin exons expressed in the heart for TTNtvA, TTNtvZ and WT 
animals and human DCM. Exons with at least 10 inclusion reads are marked in solid 
colours. Truncating mutations in Ttn activate splicing in of I-band exons in the TTNtv rat 
models and also human DCM patients that carry TTN truncations. b RNA-seq reads 
assigned to either BN or F344 alleles: TTNtv selectively trigger nonsense-mediated decay of 
truncated Ttn transcripts. [Mean ± SD; Dunnett] c Ribo-seq expression of exons that are 
exclusively being synthesized in TTNtvA and TTNtvZ animals reveal that both TTNtv 
models generate 60% of full-length titin compared to WT [Mean ± SD; Student’s t test]. 
Purple indicates Z-disc, green I-band, pink A-band and blue M-line.
Schafer et al.
Page 24
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Fig 3. Hearts with proximal and distal truncations in titin undergo metabolic reprogramming.
a Pathway analyses based on RNA-seq and Ribo-seq data suggest perturbed metabolism, 
structural integrity and mechano-sensation of the TTNtv heart. This molecular signature is 
strikingly similar in rats with proximal and distal truncations (P value < 10-15; Pearson Chi-
square test). Significantly enriched pathways are indicated in red (corrected P<0.05). b 
Unsupervised clustering by k-means of cardiac acylcarnitine abundance in WT (n=5) and 
TTNtv (n=10) rats. –OH and –DC designate hydroxylated and dicarboxylic acid 
acylcarnitine species respectively. Metabolite profiles showing c branched chain amino acids 
(valine, leucine and isoleucine) [Mean ± SD; Student’s t test], d sum of measured glycolytic 
intermediates (metabolites are detailed in Table S3) [Mean ± SD; Student’s t test] and e 
Schafer et al.
Page 25
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) in cardiac tissue of WT (n=6) and TTNtv (n=12) rats [Mean ± 
SD; Student’s t test]. For individual genotypes (WT vs TTNtvA or TTNtvZ) see Fig S7.
Schafer et al.
Page 26
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Fig 4. TTNtv in rats and humans adversely affect cardiac geometry and function.
a SV (Stroke Volume), LVEF (Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction) and FWT (Fractional Wall 
Thickening) measured with CMR in 13-16 month old male WT (n=5) and TTNtv (TTNtvA, 
n=8; TTNtvZ, n=6) rats [Mean ± SD; Student’s t test]. For individual genotypes see Fig S12. 
b Measurements of ex vivo myocardial function during volume overload stress in 4 month 
old WT (n=9) and TTNtv (TTNtvA, n=8; TTNtvZ, n=8) rats. TTNtv hearts have mildly 
increased dp/dt max/min and LVDevP at baseline. Myocardial contraction rate, dp/dt max 
(mmHg/s); myocardial relaxation rate, dp/dt min (-mmHg/s); Left ventricle developed 
pressure, LVDevP (mmHg). [Mean ± SEM; Two-way ANOVA]. Human data: c Univariate 
analyses of left ventricular end diastolic volume (LVEDV), LEVEDV indexed to body 
surface area (LVEDVI), left ventricular end systolic volume (LVESV) and LVESV indexed 
Schafer et al.
Page 27
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 to body surface area (LVESVI). Healthy human individuals without a TTNtv (TTNtv-) are 
compared to healthy humans with a TTNtv (TTNtv+) [Mean ± SD; Mann-Whitney]. d 
Computational modeling of cardiac geometry in healthy humans using 3D CMR. Positive 
standardised beta coefficients indicate where TTNtv genotype status is associated with 
enlargement of the LV cavity at end-diastole and end-systole. Septal and lateral en face 
projections are shown with an outline of the LV myocardium. The area enclosed by the 
yellow contour has a corrected P <0.05 [mass univariate linear regression]. e The distribution 
of corrected P values as a proportion of the endocardial surface [mass univariate linear 
regression].
Schafer et al.
Page 28
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
  Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Schafer et al.
Page 29
Table 1
Meta-analysis shows an association of TTNtv in constitutive exons throughout the gene 
with DCM.
Exon usage are displayed base on the levels of PSI14. Constitutive exons are spliced into titin isoforms with an 
efficiency of at least 90%. OR, odds ratio. EF, etiologic fraction. P-values indicate significant enrichment for 
TTNtv in DCM [binomial test].
DCM Positive
Control Positive
DCM Prevalence (%)
Control Prevalence (%)
OR
OR (hi)
OR (lo)
EF
P-value
(n=2,495)
(n=61,834)
      Sarcomere domain affected by variant
A-band (constitutive)
268
149
10.74
0.24
49.8
61.1
40.6
0.98
2.4x10-260
I-band (Distal constitutive 
Post-Cronos)
9
7
  0.36
0.01
32.0
85.9
11.9
0.97
2.5x10-9  
I-band (Distal constitutive 
Pre-Cronos)
18
23
0.72
0.04
19.5
36.2
10.5
0.95
6.6x10-15
I-band (Non-constitutive)
6
102
0.24
0.17
  1.5
  3.3
  0.6
0.31
0.46       
I-band (Proximal constitutive)
22
29
0.88
0.05
19.0
33.0
10.9
0.95
1.1x10-17
M-band (constitutive)
6
40
0.24
0.07
  3.7
  8.8
  1.6
0.73
0.01      
Z-disc (constitutive)
7
33
0.28
0.05
  5.3
11.9
  2.3
0.81
0.001     
Z-disc (Non-constitutive)
0
11
0.00
0.02
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA  
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 21.
