 The regular 24 h environmental cycles generated by 
the planet’s rotation have led to the evolution of daily 
circadian rhythms in almost all life forms on Earth. 
Circadian rhythms are driven by cell- 
autonomous bio-
logical clocks (Box 1), which allow organisms to adapt 
to and anticipate temporal changes in the environment. 
These biological clocks probably evolved a few billion 
years ago, perhaps in response to the need for single- 
celled eukaryotes to avoid the damaging effects of ioniz-
ing radiation and oxidative stress during processes such 
as cell division in which single- 
stranded nucleic acids 
become exposed1,2. In higher organisms such as mam-
mals, virtually all aspects of physiology are regulated by 
internal circadian clocks, including sleep–wake cycles, 
behaviour and locomotor activity, body temperature 
cycles, cardiovascular and digestive processes, endocrine 
systems and metabolic and immune functions.
In the mammalian circadian system, peripheral 
clocks are normally maintained in phase coherence with 
the environment by entrainment from daily exposure 
 
to the light–dark cycle. This photic entrainment pathway 
 
operates via retinal innervation of a specialized neural 
circadian pacemaker of around 20,000 neurons located 
in a pair of hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN)3. 
The mammalian SCN pacemaker has two unique prop-
erties: first, it is the only mammalian circadian struc-
ture that is directly entrainable to light. Second, the 
SCN neurons remain coupled in ectopic culture con-
ditions, persistently generating robust rhythmic circa-
dian cycles of electrical activity and gene expression for 
many months outside the body4,5. By contrast, periph-
eral circadian oscillators lose c 
ir 
ca 
dian synchrony in 
culture because individual cells are unable to maintain 
coupled phase coherence. A 
u 
t 
o 
n 
o 
m 
ous c 
i 
r 
c 
a 
dian c 
l 
o 
cks 
h 
a 
v 
e b 
e 
e 
n d 
e 
t 
ec 
ted i 
n a 
l 
l major organs and tissues and 
within many cell types of the body. Normal circadian 
synchrony of peripheral cells and tissues is maintained 
by a complex network involving neuronal signalling6, 
secretion of hormones (such as glucocorticoids)7 and 
metabolic cues8, which are driven by rhythmic feeding 
behaviour9,10. Although light is the key entrainment 
factor for the SCN, feeding- 
regulated metabolic cues 
are now recognized as being pivotal to the regulation of 
many peripheral clocks9,10.
Phase coherence of the organism to the normally 
occurring environmental light–dark cycle is known to 
maintain organismal fitness, as animal studies show 
that its disruption by abnormal lighting or feeding 
schedules, or due to genetic mutation of key circa-
dian timing genes, induces pathological changes11. In 
support of this, human lifestyles that disrupt inherent 
timing systems (for example, exposure to abnormal 
lighting schedules in chronic shift work) are associated 
with an increased risk of cancer, metabolic disorders 
and cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease12–15. In 
addition, many human inflammatory diseases exhibit 
rhythmicity in their pathology, including myocardial 
infarction, asthma and rheumatoid arthritis, as we 
discuss in detail later9,16,17.
Diurnal host responses to lethal infection and endo-
toxins were first demonstrated almost 60 years ago18, but 
it is only recently that studies have uncovered multiple 
widespread aspects of immune functions that are under 
the control of the circadian clockwork. These include 
the trafficking of immune cells, host–pathogen interac-
tions and activation of innate and adaptive immunity, 
which have been discussed in recent reviews19–22. It is 
now apparent that circadian signals operate as a gate to 
control the magnitude of immune responses in a pow-
erful time- 
of-day manner. In this Review, we describe 
the mechanisms that place the immune system under 
clock control. We address what is known of the mole-
cular elements that couple the core circadian clockwork 
to specific output arms of the immune system and 
how these new understandings may lead to improved 
chronotherapeutic options for treatment of disease.
Circadian
A free- 
running rhythm with a 
period of approximately 24 
h 
that persists in the absence of 
external entrainment, such as 
in constant darkness.
Suprachiasmatic nuclei
(SCN). A bilateral structure in 
the anterior hypothalamus, 
home to the central pacemaker, 
which processes light input and 
conveys timing information to 
the rest of the body.
 
Clocking in to immunity
Christoph Scheiermann1,2*, Julie Gibbs3, Louise Ince  
1 and Andrew Loudon3*
Abstract | Circadian rhythms are a ubiquitous feature of virtually all living organisms, regulating a 
wide diversity of physiological systems. It has long been established that the circadian clockwork 
plays a key role in innate immune responses, and recent studies reveal that several aspects of 
adaptive immunity are also under circadian control. We discuss the latest insights into the genetic 
and biochemical mechanisms linking immunity to the core circadian clock of the cell and 
hypothesize as to why the immune system is so tightly controlled by circadian oscillations. Finally 
, 
we consider implications for human health, including vaccination strategies and the emerging 
field of chrono- 
immunotherapy.
1Walter Brendel Centre of 
Experimental Medicine, 
University Hospital, Ludwig- 
Maximilians–University 
Munich, Biomedical Centre, 
Planegg, Martinsried, 
Germany.
2DZHK (German Centre for 
Cardiovascular Research), 
partner site Munich Heart 
Alliance, Munich, Germany.
3School of Medical Sciences, 
Faculty of Biology, Medicine 
and Health, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
*e- 
mail: christoph.
scheiermann@ 
med.uni- 
muenchen.de; 
andrew.loudon@ 
manchester.ac.uk
https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41577-018-0008-4
REVIEWS
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Immunology
 Core clockwork in innate immunity
Multiple types of innate immune cells have been 
demonstrated to possess intrinsic clocks, including 
monocytes23, macrophages24,25, mast cells26,27, neutro-
phils28, eosinophils27 and natural killer (NK) cells29 
(Fig. 1a). These intrinsic timers affect the function of 
these cells, driving temporal gating of cell- 
type-specific 
processes (Fig. 1b). This temporal gating includes the 
phagocytic activity of macrophages30 and their cytokine 
release24,31, as well as histamine release and allergic reac-
tions of mast cells32,33. Evidence is emerging to suggest 
that specific clock genes mediate different elements of 
immune cell physiology. Logan and colleagues showed 
that period circadian protein homologue 1 (PER1) is 
necessary for efficient function of splenic NK cells34. 
In the absence of Per1, these cells maintain rhyth-
micity but show altered rhythmic expression of IFNγ 
and of the cytotoxic factors perforin and granzyme B. 
Furthermore, rhythmicity in these factors and asso-
ciated cytotoxicity can be suppressed by chronic jet 
lag35. In macrophages, the REV- 
ERB nuclear receptors 
are a critical nodal point between the clock and immu-
nity. For instance, REV- 
ERBα (encoded by NR1D1) 
and REV- 
ERBβ (encoded by NR1D2) suppress gene 
expression (for example, matrix metalloproteinase 9 
(Mmp9) and CX3C- 
chemokine receptor 1 (Cx3cr1)) 
in macrophages by repressing transcription from dis-
tal enhancers that are selected by macrophage- 
lineage 
determining factors36. Furthermore, REV- 
ERBα modu-
lates the inflammatory functions of macrophages 
(including adhesion, migration and integrin activation) 
via direct regulation of CC- 
chemokine ligand 2 (Ccl2) 
through a REV- 
ERB binding motif in the promoter37 
(Fig. 2a). Although not cell- 
specific, cryptochromes 
(CRYs) also directly affect inflammatory pathways 
through action on adenylyl cyclase38. In the absence of 
Cry1, basal levels of cAMP rise, leading to increased 
protein kinase A (PKA) activation. In turn, this induces 
phosphorylation of the p65 subunit of nuclear factor- 
κB 
 
(NF- 
κB) at S276, leading to NF- 
κB activation. 
 
Consequently, basal levels of several pro- 
inflammatory 
cytokines (including IL-6, tumour necrosis factor (TNF) 
and CXC- 
chemokine ligand 1 (CXCL1)) are increased 
in fibroblasts and bone- 
marrow-derived macrophages 
from Cry1−/−Cry2−/− mice38. Thus, molecular effectors 
of pro- 
inflammatory pathways are directly coupled 
 
to clock genes.
Circadian control of innate immune cell movement. 
The circadian clock is a key regulator of the temporal 
abundance of innate immune cells around the body. 
Studies by several laboratories have highlighted the 
importance of a functional clock in regulating the daily 
flux of inflammatory cells between bone marrow, blood 
and immune organs under homeostatic conditions. For 
instance, leukocyte numbers in blood show time- 
of-day- 
dependent variation in humans39, mice40 and hamsters41. 
This can be abolished by deletion of the core clock gene 
brain and muscle ARNT- 
like 1 (BMAL1; also known as 
ARNTL)40 or by inducing chronic SCN arrhythmia41. 
Box 1 | How the clock works
the mammalian circadian core clockwork consists of a conserved set of transcription 
factors operating as interlocked rhythmic transcription–translation feedback loops. 
Central to this are the key regulatory transcriptional activators circadian locomoter 
output cycles protein kaput (CLOCK), brain and muscle arNt- 
like 1 (BMaL1) and 
neuronal Pas domain- 
containing protein 2 (neuronal Pas2), which form the 
heterodimeric complexes CLOCK–BMaL1 and neuronal Pas2–BMaL1 and act on e- 
box 
elements on target genes. these target genes include the circadian transcription 
factors period circadian protein homologue 1 (PER1) and PER2, cryptochrome 1 (CRY1) 
and CRY2, rev- 
erBα (NR1D1) and rev- 
erBβ (NR1D2) and differentially expressed in 
chondrocytes protein 1 (DEC1) and DEC2 — all of which are repressors of the core 
clockwork. rhythmic negative feedback by Per and CrY proteins on e- 
box sites leads 
to the transcriptional repression of CLOCK–BMaL1 complexes on target genes, 
including PER and CRY genes. this repression is lifted late at night owing to decay of the 
Per–CrY complex and structural changes in the BMaL1 protein117. the CLOCK–BMaL1 
complex can then reactivate transcription, leading to the generation of an oscillation. 
Clock pace is strongly regulated by post- 
translational control of feedback elements. 
Genetic mutations altering the phosphorylation status, mobility or degradation of Per 
and CrY proteins can have a profound effect on clock speed118,119. two additional 
circuits cooperate with the core feedback loop to establish robust 24 h rhythms. First, 
the retinoid- 
related orphan receptor (rOr) nuclear receptors drive expression of 
BMaL1 in a feedforward loop. rOrα shares a DNa- 
binding site with rev- 
erBs, and 
rhythmic competitive repression by rev- 
erBs generates an oscillation in BMAL1 
expression. second, BMaL1–CLOCK heterodimers act on a family of Par domain basic 
leucine zipper transcription factors — namely, albumin D box- 
binding protein (DBP), 
hepatic leukaemia factor (HLF) and thyrotroph embryonic factor (teF). these act on  
D- 
box elements in target genes, including those of the core feedback loop; for example, 
DBP positively regulates PER1 expression120. Consequently, the interlocked loops of the 
core circadian clock act via rhythmic control of e- 
box, rOr or D- 
box sites to generate 
stable oscillations in target gene expression121. thus, the formation, trafficking and 
degradation of different clock protein complexes throughout this transcriptional cycle 
generate the intrinsic nature and stability of the clock.
Diurnal
A pattern that occurs over the 
course of a day in which 
external entrainment (such as 
light–dark cycles) is used; the 
onset of the light cycle is 
defined as Zeitgeber time  
0 (ZT0).
Period circadian protein 
homologue 1
(PER1). PER1, PER2 and PER3 
are PAS (PER–ARNT–SiM) 
domain- 
containing proteins 
that associate with CRY 
proteins to inhibit BMAL1–
CLoCK- 
mediated gene 
expression.
REV- 
ERB
REV- 
ERBα (encoded by 
NR1D1) and REV- 
ERBβ 
(encoded by NR1D2) are 
transcriptional repressors that 
bind to RoR response element 
(RoRE) motifs in the BMAL1 
promoter to regulate the 
rhythmic expression of 
BMAL1.
Cryptochromes
(CRYs). CRY1 and CRY2 are 
transcriptional repressors that 
associate with PER proteins to 
inhibit BMAL1–CLoCK- 
mediated gene transcription.
Fig. 1 | operation and disruption of the molecular clock 
in immune cells. a | The core molecular clockwork (centre) 
consists of interlocked transcription– translation feedback 
loops within each cell (Box 1). Rhythmic expression of 
these clock genes (and other clock- 
controlled genes) has 
been described in cells of both the innate and adaptive 
immune system, including macrophages24,25 and 
microglia129, monocytes23, mast cells26,27, dendritic cells 
(DCs)25, CD4+ T cells54,56, B cells25, natural killer (NK) cells29, 
neutrophils28 and eosinophils27 as indicated by the clock 
symbol. Other cell types such as CD8+ T cells54 and group 2 
innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s)46 exhibit rhythmic function, 
but clock gene expression has not been formally 
demonstrated. In addition, circadian oscillations in gene 
expression have also been reported in stromal cells such as 
synoviocytes116, epithelial cells43,80 and blood vessels130, 
which are known to modify immune function. b | Targeted 
disruption of the clock in specific cell types has been 
achieved largely by using the Cre- 
loxP system. Crossing 
Bmal1flox/flox mice with cell- 
specific Cre lines abolishes 
the molecular clockwork in those cells23,31,43,54,55,78,79,131. The 
effects of such a disruption are varied, encompassing both 
pro- 
inflammatory and anti- 
inflammatory responses, and 
may depend upon the timing of the immune challenge. 
BMAL1, brain and muscle ARNT- 
like 1; CLOCK 
, circadian 
locomoter output cycles protein kaput; CNS, central 
nervous system; CRY, cryptochrome; CT0, circadian time 0; 
CXCL5, CXC- 
chemokine ligand 5; EAE, experimental 
autoimmune encephalomyelitis; IEC, intestinal epithelial 
cell; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; neuronal PAS2, neuronal PAS 
domain- 
containing protein 2; PER 
, period circadian protein 
homologue; ROR 
, retinoid- 
related orphan receptor 
; TNF, 
tumour necrosis factor.
◀
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nri
Reviews
 Macrophage
Microglia
Resident
a
b
Circulatory and/or migratory
Cell group
Cell type
Driver
Effect
Refs
Innate
Macrophage
and/or
monocyte
Lyz2–Cre 
(also known 
as LysM–Cre)  
31
79
23
78
76
Microglia
Cd11b–Cre
131
Adaptive
T cell
Cd4–Cre
55
54
Lck–Cre
Loss of time-of-day variation in susceptibility to EAE and reduced pathology
54
B cell
Mb1–Cre
Differentiation and function unaffected
55
Cd19–Cre
54
Stromal
Club cell
Ccsp–iCre
43
Increased monocyte recruitment and atherosclerosis lesion size; 
polarization towards an M1-like phenotype (on ApoE–/– background) 
Loss of diurnal variation in Ly6Chi monocyte numbers in spleen, blood 
and bone marrow; reduced survival and higher inflammatory cytokine 
production in Listeria monocytogenes infection; increased weight gain, 
adiposity, insulin resistance and metabolic dysfunction on high-fat diet    
LPS stimulation 
Reduced Il6 upregulation and attenuated neuronal 
Differentiation and function unaffected, no impact on EAE severity and 
reduced percentages of IFNγ+, IL-2+ and TNF+ T cells in L. monocytogenes 
infection  
Loss of oscillations in T cell numbers in lymph nodes and lymph; loss of 
oscillations in homing capacity and Ccr7 and S1p1 expression 
Loss of oscillations in B cell numbers in lymph nodes and lymph
Increased CXCL5 production and neutrophil influx 
Mast cell
DC
CD4+ T cell
CD8+ T cell
B cell
Monocyte
NK cell
Neutrophil
Eosinophil
Fibroblast-like
synoviocyte
IEC
Club cell 
(bronchiolar 
exocrine cell) 
Blood vessel
PERs
PERs
CRYs
PERs
CRYs
BMAL1
CLOCK–
Neuronal 
PAS2
CRYs
RORs
RORs
Bmal1
REV-
ERBs
REV-ERBs
Significantly enhanced serum IL-12–p40 under basal conditions, loss of 
time-of-day susceptibility to EAE and exacerbated EAE pathology, 
including increased CNS infiltration of inflammatory monocytes with 
increased IL-1β production
ILC
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Immunology
Reviews
 Leukocyte numbers also exhibit natural temporal var-
iation in the lung42. This persists under inflammatory 
conditions but becomes less regular, with granulocytes 
rather than lymphocytes dominating as the oscillating 
cell type42. Gibbs and colleagues showed that neutro-
phil recruitment to the lung after acute inflammatory 
challenge is strongly circadian gated, driven by the 
rhythmic release of the chemokine CXCL5 from non- 
ciliated bronchiolar epithelial Club cells43 (Fig. 2b). Also, 
neutrophil recruitment to sites infected with Leishmania 
parasites has been shown to be circadian regulated44. 
Neutrophils are the most abundant leukocytes in 
human blood but appear to possess a weaker circadian 
 
oscillator — perhaps modified as the neutrophil develops 
from the myeloid progenitor28. Turnover of neutrophils 
is known to be under circadian control, with rhythmic 
clearance of aged neutrophils from the blood occurring 
in the bone marrow (where they are engulfed by bone- 
marrow-resident macrophages)45. This clearance, which 
occurs towards the end of the daily resting phase in mice, 
leads to a subsequent egress of haematopoietic precursor 
cells from the bone marrow in a liver X receptor (LXR)-
dependent manner. Ella et al. described rhythmic daily 
changes in superoxide production by human neutrophils 
Day
Healthy
Clock-disrupted
Night
Day
LPS
Night
Day
Night
Il6,
Ccl2
REV–ERB
REV–ERB
TLR9
Il6,
Ccl2
or
Overexpression
RORα
RORα
Bmal1-/- 
Club cells
↑ IL-6, IL-12–p40, 
CCL5, CXCL1 
and CCL2
a
b
↑ CXCL5
↓ CXCL5
Corticosterone
↑ β1 integrin 
↑ Adhesion to 
VCAM1
↑ Chemotaxis
↑ IL-6 and  CCL2
GR
LPS
↑↑ CXCL5
↑↑ CXCL5
Corticosterone
GR
Fig. 2 | Regulation of innate immunity in the macrophage and the lung. Clock regulation of innate immunity occurs in 
an immune cell- 
intrinsic and cell- 
extrinsic manner. a | In macrophages, for example, the intrinsic clock regulates immune 
function at multiple levels. Oscillations in the expression of the pattern- 
recognition receptor Toll- 
like receptor 9 (TLR9) 
occur, along with temporal gating of cytokine release. In this way 
, the clock regulates not only the ability to sense 
pathogens but also the extent of the cell’s response to such stimuli. Clock disruption in the macrophage yields a  
pro- 
inflammatory phenotype, as a subset of cytokines (for example, IL-6 and CC- 
chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2)) loses the  
rhythmic repression generated by REV- 
ERB signalling. Overexpression of the transcriptional activator retinoid- 
related 
orphan receptor- 
α (RORα), which binds to the same locus as REV- 
ERB, generates a similar phenotype. b | Recruitment of 
innate immune cells to tissues is also under clock control. In healthy murine lung exposed to lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 
enhanced production of the neutrophil chemoattractant CXC- 
chemokine ligand 5 (CXCL5) and increased neutrophil 
recruitment are observed during the day. At night, endogenous glucocorticoids bind the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), 
inhibiting Cxcl5 transcription and reducing neutrophil influx. Targeted ablation of Bmal1 in Club cells (Ccsp–Bmal1−/−)  
has a clear pro- 
inflammatory effect in this model. Lack of a functional oscillator in these cells greatly increased CXCL5 
production and enhanced neutrophil recruitment after LPS at both time points. Although corticosterone still binds the  
GR at night, the subsequent repression of Cxcl5 no longer occurs and neutrophilia increases. VCAM1, vascular cell 
adhesion protein 1.
Brain and muscle  
ARNT
-like 1
(BMAL1). A basic helix–loop–
helix PER–ARNT–SiM (bHLH–
PAS) domain transcription 
factor that dimerizes with 
CLoCK to bind E- 
boxes in gene 
promoters to induce circadian 
gene expression.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nri
Reviews
 and in their ability to engulf bacteria, and this was 
 
attributed to time- 
of-day variations in the composition 
of the peripheral neutrophil pool, which in turn is a 
result of circadian changes in circulating chemokine lev-
els (specifically in levels of CXCL12 and/or CXCL2)28. 
Thus, both trafficking and localization of neutro-
phils and their function are time- 
of-day- 
dependent. 
Similarly, IL-5 and IL-13 cytokine production by a sub-
set of group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) in response 
to hormonal cues induced by feeding influences the 
number of blood eosinophils and their recruitment to 
peripheral tissues46.
Under homeostatic conditions, the extravasation 
of innate immune cells from postcapillary venules to 
tissues is under clock control and is regulated by the 
rhythmic expression of pro- 
migratory factors (such 
as intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1) and 
CCL2) by endothelial cells. This is dependent on local 
delivery of sympathetic tone and signalling through 
β- 
adrenoreceptors40. Rhythmic extravasation persists 
under inflammatory challenge, and in a model of septic 
shock in mice, neutrophil recruitment to the liver exhib-
ited strong circadian oscillations. This influences mouse 
survival following administration of lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS; a component of the cellular wall of Gram- 
negative 
bacteria), with LPS delivery in the evening resulting in 
dramatically increased lethality compared with in the 
early morning40.
The examples discussed above describe how innate 
immune cell trafficking can be regulated by both 
intrinsic pathways and circadian signals from other 
cells. The trafficking of Ly6Chi inflammatory mono-
cytes from blood to bone marrow and from blood to 
tissue sites of infection is under circadian control23,47. 
CXC- 
chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) mediates the 
rhythmic fluctuations in overall numbers of circu-
lating Ly6Chi monocytes and their homing to tissue 
reservoirs47. During peritoneal infection with the 
bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes, traffick-
ing of Ly6Chi monocytes to the peritoneum is regu-
lated by the rhythmic recruitment of the polycomb 
repressor complex 2 (PRC2) to the Ccl2 promoter by 
BMAL1–CLoCK heterodimers23. These studies show that 
both cell- 
autonomous as well as cell- 
extrinsic micro-
environmental oscillations can govern the distribution 
of distinct leukocyte populations within the body.
Innate immune cell clocks in pathogen responses. At 
the level of the whole animal, circadian timers clearly 
have an impact on how the host innate immune system 
responds to pathogens. In part, this occurs through 
the regulation of inflammatory cell recruitment, where 
immune cell clocks are critical for maintaining effec-
tive host responses to disease23,43. Further control is 
exerted through the regulation of tissue- 
resident cells 
at sites of inflammation. Ingestion of the bacterial 
pathogen Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar 
Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) causes intestinal 
inflammation. Microarray analysis of the caecum of 
mice 72 h post- 
infection with this pathogen revealed 
that genes encoding antimicrobial peptides show 
strong circadian oscillations during infection that affect 
patho 
gen colonization of the colon48. This leads to ele-
vated pathogen levels following infection in the morning 
(Zeitgeber time 4 (ZT4) (Box 2)) as compared with infec-
tion in the mid- 
dark phase (ZT16)48. This response is 
dependent on the presence of a functional copy of the 
circadian- 
regulating CLOCK (circadian locomoter 
output cycles protein kaput) protein as global disrup-
tion of CLOCK alters time- 
dependent responses to 
 
S. Typhimurium. In a Leishmania infection model, 
Kiessling and colleagues were able to show that para-
site burden was circadian in nature. In addition, bone 
marrow chimaeras of Rag2–Bmal1−/− mice demonstrated 
that Bmal1 in non- 
lymphocyte immune cells (macro-
phages) was responsible for modulating the magnitude 
of Leishmania infection44. Parasites themselves can 
also exhibit circadian behaviour. For example, 10% of 
the genes of Trypanosoma brucei (parasites responsi-
ble for inducing sleeping sickness) are expressed with 
a circadian rhythm49. Furthermore, this circadian tran-
scriptome affects sensitivity to treatment. The circadian 
clockwork also regulates cellular innate immunity against 
viruses. Immortalized lung fibroblasts lacking BMAL1 
show altered susceptibility to viruses50. Respiratory syn-
cytial virus (RSV) and parainfluenza virus type 3 (PIV3) 
(which are both non- 
segmented negative- 
strand RNA 
viruses) replicate at higher frequencies in the absence of 
BMAL1 (REF.50). Bmal1−/− mice intranasally infected with 
RSV had higher viral titres and increased weight loss 
than wild- 
type controls50. Along the same lines, the time 
of day of infection affects the host response to herpes-
virus or influenza A virus, with enhanced viral titres seen 
 
when levels of Bmal1 are low or in the absence of this 
gene51. Therefore, the circadian clockwork can regulate 
cellular immunity against bacteria, parasites and viruses.
Clock control of adaptive immunity
Recently, molecular evidence has emerged to show that 
the adaptive immune system is also under circadian 
control. This evidence is perhaps surprising given that 
adaptive immune responses are mounted over weeks 
and thus were not thought to be heavily dependent 
on the initial time of day of challenge. However, this is 
in line with early reports that had initially uncovered 
T cell responses to be rhythmic52,53. In a similar manner 
to innate immune cells, circadian oscillations have been 
described in cells of the adaptive immune system, such 
as T cells54–56 and B cells25. In addition, dendritic cells 
 
(DCs), which are professional antigen- 
presenting 
 
cells (APCs) located at the interface between innate 
and adaptive immunity, show oscillations in core clock 
 
components25. Generally speaking, clock gene ampli-
tudes appear to be weaker in immune cells than in 
other cells, such as hepatocytes55. Whether this is due to 
a weaker oscillating system per se, a reduced coupling 
capacity or increased heterogeneity in immune cell 
populations is currently unknown and would need to 
be addressed using single- 
cell analyses.
Role of clock genes in lymphocyte development. 
Circadian clock genes have been associated with the 
development of lymphocytes, but the extent of their 
involvement is not yet fully established. Deficiency 
CLOCK
(Circadian locomoter output 
cycles kaput). A basic helix–
loop–helix PER–ARNT–SiM 
(bHLH–PAS) domain 
transcription factor that can 
dimerize with BMAL1 to 
regulate circadian gene 
expression.
Zeitgeber time
Zeitgeber, literally ‘time giver’, 
is a cue (such as light) that 
entrains the circadian clock. 
Zeitgeber time (ZT) is the time 
after light onset; for example, 
lights on is ZT0 and lights  
off is ZT12 in a 12 
h light-12 
h 
dark cycle.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Immunology
Reviews
 of BMAL1 negatively affects mouse B cell develop-
ment, with Bmal1−/− animals showing significantly 
reduced B cell numbers in blood and spleen57. Bmal1-
deficient B cells also showed a specific deficit in pro-
duction of IgG1 (but not in IgG2a, IgG2b, IgG3 or IgM) 
antibodies after immunization, but they exhibited no 
functional difference in response to LPS in vitro, suggest-
ing that those cells that do develop are still largely func-
tional. Adoptive transfer experiments revealed that it is 
not the B cell intrinsic clock but rather loss of Bmal1 in the 
bone marrow microenvironment that hampers B cell dif-
ferentiation57. This finding is also consistent with the data 
of Hemmers and Rudensky, who showed that mice with 
a B cell- 
specific Bmal1 deficiency do not show altered 
 
B cell differentiation or function55. These experiments 
suggest that the influence of clock genes in the genera-
tion of B cells is not cell- 
autonomous but dependent on 
the microenvironment.
With respect to the influence of the circadian clock 
on the development of T cells, the overall T cell number 
appears to be unaffected by global or cell- 
specific Bmal1 
ablation55,57. However, Yu and colleagues reported a role 
for the clock in regulating the differentiation of T helper 17 
 
(TH17) cells58. TH17 cell development has been shown to 
be suppressed by the circadian- 
regulated basic leucine 
zipper transcription factor nuclear factor IL-3-regulated 
protein (NFIL3) in a cell- 
intrinsic manner, and Nfil3−/− 
mice exhibit increased TH17 cell frequencies in spleen, 
small intestine and colon58. NFIL3 is crucial for the 
development of ILCs59 and is a major regulator of TH17 
cell frequency via rhythmic suppression of Rorc, which 
encodes RORγt, a key transcription factor necessary for 
TH17 cell differentiation58. Loss of ILC3s in the Nfil3−/− 
mice would already skew towards a higher propensity 
for TH17 cell differentiation as ILC3s are a significant 
source of IL-22, which inhibits TH17 cell differentiation. 
Depletion of ILCs thus enhances TH17 cell responses60. 
Within CD4+ T cells themselves, Nfil3 and Rorγt are 
rhythmically expressed in an anti- 
phase manner, with 
Nfil3 expression peaking during the dark phase (night) 
and Rorγt expression peaking during the light phase 
 
(day). T cells isolated during the day are therefore more 
prone to differentiate into TH17 cells upon stimulation 
than those isolated at night58. This propensity may addi-
tionally be due to the fact that during the day levels of the 
night- 
signalling hormone melatonin are low, because 
melatonin treatment of human T cells has been shown 
to inhibit TH17 cell differentiation via the NFIL3–RORγt 
pathway61. Instead, melatonin promotes the develop-
ment of IL-10-producing type 1 regulatory (TR1) cells61. 
The circadian clock protein REV- 
ERBα directly inhibits 
 
transcription of Nfil3, and Nfil3 expression is ele-
vated in both REV- 
ERBα−/− T cells and in T cells 
from ClockΔ19/Δ19 mice, which exhibit a lengthened 
circadian period and arrhythmicity in complete dark-
ness58. ClockΔ19/Δ19 mice also displayed reduced 
frequencies of TH1 cells in the intestines, implying 
additional pathways by which the circadian clock can 
affect T cell polarization. The circadian regulation of 
T cell development may be particularly important for 
maintenance of an appropriate balance of cell types 
by time of day, as chronic circadian disruption via 
simulated jet lag resulted in increased proportions 
of TH17 cells, rendering animals more susceptible to 
experimental colitis58.
In addition, the circadian- 
regulated proteins differ-
entially expressed in chondrocytes protein 1 (DEC1; 
also known as BHLHE40) and DEC2 (also known as 
BHLHE41) are driven by E- 
box mediated BMAL1–
CLOCK binding. DEC1 is involved in essential CD4+ 
T cell effector functions, including in the regulation 
of a large group of CD28-dependent genes62. Antigen- 
specific DEC1-deficient CD4+ T cells have cell- 
intrinsic 
defects in survival and proliferation62. Meanwhile, DEC2 
is critical for the development of B-1a cells, and DEC2-
deficient B-1a cells show an abnormal B cell receptor 
(BCR) repertoire63. Taken together, the proteins of 
 
the circadian clock clearly play an important role in the 
function of lymphocytes.
Lymphocyte trafficking rhythms. Similarly to innate 
immune cells, T cells and B cells exhibit strong cir-
cadian oscillations in the blood, with peak numbers 
during the respective behavioural rest phase of the 
organism (that is, during the day in mice and at night 
in humans)39,54,64–66. These rhythms have been linked to 
Circadian time
(CT). A measure of subjective 
time used when organisms are 
isolated from Zeitgebers (for 
example, constant darkness). 
CT0 represents the start of 
subjective day and CT12 
represents the start of 
subjective night.
Box 2 | Circadian terminologies
a circadian rhythm is an oscillation with a period (time from peak to peak) of 
approximately 24 h that is able to be entrained by external factors and persists in 
constant conditions (see the Figure). amplitudes (difference between peak and mean 
values) of these oscillations vary, as does acrophase (the timing of the peak value), such 
that some parameters may peak during the day (for example, leukocyte numbers in 
blood in mice) and some during the night (for example, leukocyte numbers in lymph 
node in mice). experiments assessing rhythmicity are often performed under one (or 
both) of two conditions: light–dark or constant darkness. in the light–dark condition, 
abbreviated as LD, animals or participants are exposed to controlled cycles of light and 
dark (usually 12 h light:12 h dark) to mimic a day–night cycle. in this situation, the timing 
nomenclature used is the ‘Zeitgeber time’ (Zt). a Zeitgeber (German for ‘time giver’) is a 
stimulus that provides a timing signal, such as light onset, and Zt0 is simply the timing 
of this stimulus. all other times are measured in a 24 h cycle relative to this stimulus. For 
example, in a cycle with 12 h light:12 h dark, Zt6 is the middle of the light phase, Zt12 is 
then the onset of the dark phase, Zt18 is the middle of the dark phase and Zt24/0 is the 
onset of the light phase once more. an oscillation under these conditions would be 
termed diurnal. in constant darkness, however, no such light stimulus exists. in this case, 
times are noted as ‘circadian time’ (Ct) and better reflect the animal and/or 
participant’s subjective time in the absence of external cues. thus, in dark–dark (DD) 
experiments, Ct0 is the start of the subjective day (that is, when the lights would have 
come on), Ct6 the middle of the subjective day, Ct12 the start of the subjective night 
(that is, when the lights would have gone off), Ct18 the middle of subjective night and 
Ct24/0 the start of the next subjective cycle. an oscillation under these conditions 
would be termed circadian.
Acrophase
Period
12
0
24/0
12
24/0
ZT
CT
LD
DD
Mean value
Amplitude
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nri
Reviews
 oscillations in CXCR4 and CX3CR1 expression, regulated 
by glucocorticoids and catecholamines64,65, as well as 
hypoxia- 
inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) signalling67. Recent 
 
papers found that under steady- 
state conditions, lympho-
cytes within the lymph node also exhibit circadian 
 
oscillations in mice, with the highest numbers present 
at the beginning of the active phase (that is, at night in 
mice)54,66,68 (Fig. 3). These higher numbers were not due 
to local intranodal proliferation but depended on both 
the rhythmic homing of cells from blood into lymph 
nodes and the rhythmic egress of cells from lymph nodes 
into efferent lymph. A key regulatory element is the 
 
CC- 
chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7), which exhibited diur-
nal oscillations in T cells and B cells, with its expression 
peaking in phase with CCL21 levels on high endothelial 
venules in lymph nodes54. This receptor–ligand pair is 
critical for control of T cell migration into lymph nodes, 
whereas B cells also rely on additional receptors such as 
CXCR4 and CXCR5 (REFS69,70). Peak expression levels 
of both CCR7 and CCL21 were observed around night 
onset, when the highest recruitment of CD4+ T cells, 
CD8+ T cells and B cells occurred54. Both the microen-
vironment and lymphocytes themselves contribute to 
this process, but T cell- 
specific genetic deletion of the 
circadian clock regulator BMAL1 was sufficient to ablate 
the time- 
dependent difference in lymph node homing 
and cellularity54.
Interestingly, the egress of cells into efferent lym-
phatics was also found to be rhythmic, with lymphocyte 
 
counts highest in lymph around ZT9 (REFS54,66). This 
finding was dependent on rhythmic expression of 
sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 1 (S1P1)54, which 
promotes lymphocyte egress from lymph nodes 
in response to the chemotactic lipid sphingosine 
1-phosphate71. Cells that migrated into the lymph 
node at night also stayed longer within this tissue than 
the (fewer) cells that had immigrated during the day. 
Suzuki and colleagues demonstrated that this is depend-
ent on lymphocyte expression of β2-adrenergic recep-
tors72 and rhythmic environmental sympathetic tone66. 
β2-Adrenergic- 
receptor-deficient lymphocytes transited 
through lymph nodes more quickly and failed to show a 
diurnal pattern66. This finding indicates that enhanced 
sympathetic tone and engagement of the β2-adren-
ergic receptor at night helps maintain cells in lymph 
node compartments, likely by boosting lymphocyte 
expression of the retention factors CCR7 and CXCR4 
(REF.72). This longer lymph node dwell time plays an 
important role in the generation of adaptive immune 
responses54,66. Thus, time of day both dictates expression 
Efferent
lymph
Blood
Blood
Day
Efferent
lymph
Blood
Efferent
lymph
Night
↓ Sympathetic tone
↓ Leukocyte content
↑ Sympathetic tone
↑ Leukocyte content
↓ CCR7 
(leukocytes)
↑ CCR7 
(leukocytes)
↑ NA
↑ S1p1 
(leukocytes)
↓ S1p1 
(leukocytes)
B cell
HEV
CD4+ T cell
CD8+ T cell
Fig. 3 | Regulation of adaptive immunity in the lymph node. A coordinated oscillation in pro- 
migratory factors drives 
leukocyte oscillations in blood, lymph node and lymph. During the active phase, sympathetic tone (noradrenaline (NA)) 
and concentrations of CC- 
chemokine ligand 21 (CCL21) are high in the lymph node. In addition, expression of the 
receptor for CCL21, CC- 
chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7), is at its peak on T and B cells. The combination of high receptor 
expression on the cells and high chemokine content in the lymph node provides a strong attraction signal, leading to 
increased lymph node cellularity during this phase. During the rest phase, CCL21 and CCR7 expression decrease and 
retention signals are reduced. At the same time, leukocytes begin to upregulate expression of the sphingosine 
1-phosphate receptor 1 (S1P1), a critical mediator of cell egress. Thus, the reduction in sympathetic tone and homing 
drive coupled with an increased egress potential lead to an emptying of the lymph node during the day. HEV, high 
endothelial venule.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Immunology
Reviews
 of critical pro- 
migratory molecules on lymphocytes and 
endothelial cells and governs the trafficking behaviour 
of lymphocytes from blood through lymph nodes and 
into efferent lymphatics.
Rhythmic adaptive immune responses. Initial obser-
vations by Esquifino and colleagues showed that the 
adaptive immune system exhibits functional rhythmi-
city. They demonstrated that proliferative responses of 
rat lymph node cells following treatment with LPS or 
concanavalin A were strongly rhythmic, with signifi-
cantly stronger proliferation occurring at midday than at 
midnight73. Subsequent studies by Fortier and colleagues 
confirmed these observations and further demonstrated 
that this was dependent on the circadian clock. Mice 
bearing the circadian mutation ClockΔ19/Δ19 exhib-
ited strongly blunted rhythms of proliferative responses 
of T cells after direct stimulation of the T cell receptor 
(TCR)74. Furthermore, they found that intravenous 
injections of ovalbumin (OVA)-loaded DCs into recip-
ient mice at ZT6 (daytime), as opposed to at ZT18 
(night- 
time), generated higher numbers of OVA- 
specific 
T cells within the spleen. These data provide evidence 
for the importance of circadian timing in the interaction 
between T cells and APCs.
For an adaptive immune response to be generated, 
APCs must functionally interact with lymphocytes. 
Silver and colleagues were the first to investigate a 
rhythmic link between the adaptive and innate immune 
system. They demonstrated that the expression of Toll- 
like receptor 9 (TLR9) — which recognizes bacterial 
CpG DNA — but not of other TLRs by macrophages, 
DCs and B cells, exhibited oscillations that were con-
trolled by the circadian clock gene Per2 (REF.75). In line 
with this, mice treated with OVA coupled to CpG at 
the time of enhanced TLR9 expression (ZT19 versus 
ZT7) showed elevated OVA- 
specific adaptive immune 
responses several weeks later75. Lymph node cultures 
from these mice showed higher levels of OVA- 
induced 
lymphocyte proliferation and production of IFNγ at 
ZT19. In addition, lymphocytes from mice lacking a 
functional PER2 protein showed a stronger immune 
response than wild- 
type cells75.
These data demonstrate that circadian differences 
in the expression of pattern- 
recognition receptors 
(PRRs) by APCs can drive rhythmic adaptive immune 
responses and are thus under the control of the cir-
cadian clock. However, it is currently unclear how 
the observed differences in the time of day of the 
acrophase of the response arise. Whereas Silver and 
Suzuki described stronger immune responses at night 
(ZT17 and ZT19, respectively)66,75, Fortier and Druzd 
observed peak responses during the day (ZT6 and ZT8, 
respectively)54,74. An explanation for these discrepan-
cies might lie in the type of response elicited: injec-
tion sites (subcutaneous, intraperitoneal, intravenous 
or intradermal), readout tissue (lymph node versus 
spleen), lighting conditions, responding cell type and 
antigen choice all contribute to such variations, par-
ticularly whether the antigen needs to be taken up by 
APCs to be transported to lymph nodes or can move 
there directly in a soluble form.
Recent vaccination studies also showed diur-
nal rhythmicity in adaptive immune responses. 
Responses to nitrophenyl (NP), a soluble antigen that 
is directly transported to lymph nodes, or to myelin- 
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG), which is an 
antigenic target in certain models of experimental 
autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), were higher 
at the times when more cells were present in lymph 
nodes54,66,76. Stimulation at high cellularity times 
resulted in a stronger humoral response, as demon-
strated by higher NP- 
specific antibody titres, as well as 
more NP- 
specific IgM+ germinal centre B cells 7 days 
after immunization66. In addition, in the EAE model a 
stronger cellular immune response was observed with 
more IL-17-producing TH17 cells being present, more 
IL-2 being made, higher leukocyte infiltration into the 
central nervous system and ultimately a higher dis-
ease score 14 days after inoculation54. Importantly, the 
humoral immune response to NP became arrhythmic in 
mice lacking the β2-adrenergic receptor66, and animals 
with a myeloid- 
cell-specific or T cell- 
specific deficiency 
in BMAL1 became arrhythmic in the EAE model of 
autoimmunity54,76. Rhythmicity was not restricted solely 
to sterile immunization responses but was also observed 
following infection with pathogens, such as influenza A 
virus and the bacterium Helicobacter pylori54.
Current research efforts now aim to take these find-
ings into the clinic and establish novel ways to enhance 
responses to vaccines. A randomized trial of different 
times of day of vaccination of three strains of influenza 
virus yielded promising results. When 276 patients (over 
65 years of age) were vaccinated in the morning they had 
greater antibody titres 1 month later than patients vacci-
nated in the afternoon77. These results are encouraging, 
but they will need to be validated in other preclinical 
laboratory models and clinical trials using larger patient 
cohorts. Taken together, this points to a strong role of 
the circadian clock in the polarization of the adaptive 
immune response, which is strongly dependent on the 
initial time of day of antigen challenge.
Innate versus adaptive immune clocks. Whereas 
myeloid- 
specific ablation of the circadian gene Bmal1 
leads to a general pro- 
inflammatory phenotype in mice 
that is characterized by higher levels of TNF, IL-6, IL-1β 
and CCL2 (REFS23,31,78,79), the phenotype of T cell- 
specific 
Bmal1 deficiency appears to be more time- 
of-day- 
dependent54,55. Whether this is because the currently 
employed genetic targeting strategies for lymphocytes 
(CD4–Cre for T cells54,55) are more specific than for mye-
loid cells (that is, where Lyz2–Cre is currently used, thus 
targeting most myeloid cell populations23) is unclear. To 
better compare this, future studies will need to use pro-
moters that are specific for neutrophils, monocytes or 
macrophages for Bmal1 ablation. Infection of mice with 
L. monocytogenes resulted in a lower percentage of IL-2+, 
IFNγ+ and TNF+ T cells in mice with a T cell- 
specific 
deficiency in Bmal1 than in control animals55. In addi-
tion, in models of EAE, mice with a T cell- 
specific Bmal1 
deficiency had lower disease scores than controls54 
whereas mice with myeloid cell- 
specific loss of Bmal1 
showed exacerbated pathology76. This finding indicates 
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nri
Reviews
 that the outcome of Bmal1 deletion on inflammation is 
lineage dependent.
Microbial regulation of circadian immunity
Recent evidence demonstrates that symbiosis between 
microbiota and intestinal epithelial cells is critical in 
maintaining immune homeostasis in the gut. Intriguingly, 
this interaction is orchestrated by the circadian clock 
and cues from the microbiota that activate intestinal 
TLRs. Mukherji and colleagues showed that the anti- 
phasic binding of RoRα and REV- 
ERBα to TLR genes 
acts as an activator and repressor, respectively, to medi-
ate the circadian expression of TLR1–TLR5 and TLR9 
(but not TLR6 and TLR7)80. This oscillatory promoter 
occupancy drives rhythmic activation of the key pro- 
inflammatory transcription factors activator protein 1 
 
(AP-1) and NF- 
κB to exert their functions at diurnal 
times ZT20–ZT4 (which is the active phase in mice). 
Antibiotic- 
mediated ablation of the microbiota disrupts 
this rhythmicity and induces a pre- 
diabetic syndrome in 
mice, characterized by hyperglycaemia and hypoinsuli-
naemia80. Intriguingly, rhythmicity could be restored by 
administration of LPS. Additional recent findings pro-
vide a link between rhythmic Nfil3 expression in intesti-
nal epithelial cells, microbiota and host metabolism that 
is mediated by immune cells81. The induction of TLR–
MYD88 signalling by bacteria stimulates DCs to secrete 
IL-23 and activate ILC3s. This activates signal transducer 
and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), leading to an 
inhibition of REV- 
ERBα, a negative regulator of NFIL3. 
Epithelial NFIL3 regulates lipid uptake and export in 
intestinal epithelial cells so that mice with an intestinal- 
specific deletion of Nfil3 are resistant to obesity induced 
by a high- 
fat diet81. These data indicate that the micro-
biota is a previously unrecognized and important general 
regulator of immune rhythmicity in the host (Fig. 4).
Microbial products shape circadian immunity. LPS 
also appears to be a critical factor in shaping the acti-
vation status of neutrophils that are present in blood. 
Although blood neutrophils have long been thought to 
be a relatively homogeneous population, heterogeneity 
arises owing to differences in their age and activation 
level. Neutrophils are short- 
lived and — after having 
been mobilized into the blood in the morning45 — age 
in blood over the course of the day45,82. Aged neutro-
phils exhibit higher levels of CXCR4 on their surface 
and lower levels of L- 
selectin45,83,84 and are present at 
higher concentrations during the day in mice45. This is 
associated with an enhanced activation status83, includ-
ing an increased capacity to form neutrophil extra-
cellular traps82. Microbiota- 
derived LPS drives this 
ageing process82. Mechanistically, this is modulated by 
TLR2- and TLR4-expressing haematopoietic cells, as 
well as by MYD88-expressing myeloid cells. Ablating 
the microbiota dramatically reduced the number of 
aged neutrophils and was also effective in alleviating 
the pathogenesis of sickle cell disease and endotoxin- 
induced septic shock82. Thus, rhythmically recurring 
cycles of neutrophil activation in the circulation can have 
dramatic consequences on the time- 
of-day- 
dependent 
 
worsening of inflammatory disorders.
Many bacterial genera within the gut microflora of 
mice and humans exhibit circadian oscillations them-
selves. For example, Lactobacillaceae show strong oscil-
lations in general abundance over the course of the day, 
peaking at the onset of the mouse active phase85,86. This 
rhythmicity is driven by feeding rhythms and can be 
ablated by jet- 
lag protocols (repeated shifts in timing of 
light–dark cycles) or antibiotic treatment85,86. Chronic 
jet lag in mice leads to obesity, whereas in humans jet- 
lag protocols result in a type 2 diabetic phenotype86. 
This finding indicated that aberrant circadian rhythms 
in humans can lead to metabolic disturbances. Gut 
bacteria exhibit circadian rhythmicity in terms of their 
numbers and activity, and their rhythmic function is 
also important for the systemic regulation of host tis-
sues8. This is achieved by a specific rhythmic signature 
of metabolites present in blood and is important in 
driving epigenetic changes in host tissues distant from 
the gut, such as the liver8. Thus, rhythmic release of 
metabolites and LPS from the microbiota may be key 
in directly driving important rhythmic immune- 
related 
phenotypes, such as neutrophil ageing and associated 
activation45,82. In addition, rhythms in commensal bac-
teria appear to help synchronize the body to the external 
environment and thus indirectly influence a rhythmic 
immune system.
Synchronization of the immune system. Microbial 
products and feeding rhythms can synchronize periph-
eral clocks in tissues87 but it is yet unclear how immune 
cells — most of which are migratory — are synchro-
nized in vivo to the external environment. Initial 
studies focusing on circulating hormones were able 
to demonstrate a correlative link between glucocorti-
coids and adrenaline and numbers of circulating T cells 
in blood by modulating surface CXCR4 and CX3CR1 
levels65. It has now been shown using cell- 
specific dis-
ruption of glucocorticoid signalling that rhythmic T cell 
trafficking is regulated via glucocorticoid receptor 
 
(GR)-dependent induction of the IL-7 receptor (IL-7R) 
and CXCR4 (REF.68). Dexamethasone88 and high tran-
sient serum concentrations (a so- 
called serum shock)87 
are used to synchronize cells in culture, indicating that 
both glucocorticoids and feeding rhythms are impor-
tant for the synchronization of migratory cells in vivo. 
With respect to the sympathetic nervous system, lack 
of β2-adrenergic or β3-adrenergic receptors resulted 
in an ablation of the rhythmic trafficking behaviour 
of leuko 
cytes to tissues40,66. However, it is currently 
unclear whether the clockwork in immune cells and/or 
stromal cells was also affected in this case. Furthermore, 
a recent surprising study has found that the cell- 
intrinsic 
clock is sufficient for the rhythmic migration behaviour 
of leuko 
cytes67. Zhao and colleagues showed that in 
humanized mice, human and mouse leukocyte num-
bers within the same organism exhibited inverted oscil-
lations in blood, reproducing the trafficking pattern 
previously observed in both species. This cyclic pattern 
of trafficking correlated with rhythmic CXCR4 expres-
sion, which was regulated by a HIF1α–BMAL1 hetero-
dimer. p38 mitogen- 
activated protein kinases (MAPKs) 
 
and MAPK kinase activated protein kinase 2 (MK2) 
RORα
The nuclear receptors RoRα, 
RoRβ and RoRγ are 
transcriptional activators that 
bind to RoR response element 
(RoRE) sites in target gene 
promoters.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Immunology
Reviews
 exhibited opposite effects between mice and humans in 
generating intracellular reactive oxygen species, which 
subsequently regulated HIF1α expression67. This indi-
cates that immune cells use reactive oxygen species as 
their synchronization cue. Taken together, a complex 
network of factors appears to be important for immune 
cells to be synchronized to external time.
Potential benefits of rhythmic immune responses
A key question in our field is why is the immune sys-
tem so tightly controlled by circadian oscillations? 
The most striking examples of timing in the immune 
response are mice that succumb to high doses of pro- 
inflammatory mediators or pathogen more promi-
nently in the afternoon18,89. However, at the same time, 
mice are able to fight off bacteria more effectively 
when administered at a more physiological dose that 
is more likely to be encountered in nature23. Thus, this 
heightened immune sensitivity would be an adapta-
tion to potentially recurring environmental challenges, 
with the additional effect of reducing detrimental 
immune responses (such as a high activation status of 
neutrophils) at times when they are not needed. Thus, 
a timed immune response — with a refractory phase 
in between, possibly for opposing immune processes 
 
to occur — may ultimately increase the survival of an 
organism. Evidence for this lies in the fact that both 
immune cell- 
intrinsic and cell- 
extrinsic (such as 
endothelial and stromal cell) rhythms are coordinated 
in a highly complex fashion to balance the recruitment 
and activation of immune cells. An alternative expla-
nation could be that rhythmic immune responses may 
Blood 
vessel
Day
DC
MYD88
IL-23
IL-22
CD4+ T cell
CD4+
T cell
↑ TH17 cell
in vitro
↓ TH17 cell
in vitro
Outer layers
Muscularis
mucosae
Lamina propria
Epithelium
Lumen
Neutrophil
Microbiome
Bacteria
Metabolites
Night
↑ CXCR4
↓ CXCR4
MYD88
IEC
REV–ERBα
REV–ERBα
NFIL3
RORγt
RORγt
NFIL3
ILC3
Fig. 4 | Interactions of the clock 
, microbiome and immune function. Circadian oscillations occur not only in host cells 
but also in the composition of microbiota. The relative abundance of microorganisms fluctuates across a day 
, as does the 
quantity and variety of metabolites released from the gut into the bloodstream, which can, in turn, signal to peripheral 
tissues or circulating cells (for example, via Toll- 
like receptors (TLRs)). Expression of a subset of TLRs is rhythmic in intestinal 
epithelial cells (IECs) and drives increased pro- 
inflammatory responses via activator protein 1 (AP-1) and nuclear factor- 
κB 
(NF- 
κB) at the light onset (Zeitgeber times ZT20–ZT4). Activation of the MYD88 pathway 
, a downstream cascade common 
to many TLRs, was recently shown to regulate neutrophil ageing. This process occurs more prominently during the rest 
phase, with aged neutrophils increasing CXC- 
chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) expression and preferentially homing to 
bone marrow. Homing of such senescent neutrophils triggers mobilization of haematopoietic progenitor cells, thereby 
driving rhythmic modulation of this niche. Cell differentiation may also be modulated rhythmically 
, as in the case of T 
helper 17 (TH17) cells and their key differentiation factor retinoid- 
related orphan receptor γt (RORγt). In cells isolated 
during the night, RORγt is suppressed by nuclear factor IL-3-regulated protein (NFIL3) and polarization towards TH17 cell 
differentiation is reduced. However, in cells isolated during the day 
, the clock protein REV- 
ERBα inhibits this suppression, 
allowing RORγt levels to increase along with increased TH17 cell differentiation. In this way 
, T cell populations cross this 
developmental checkpoint in a coordinated manner. Furthermore, MYD88-dependent activation of dendritic cells (DCs) 
can trigger IL-22 release by type 3 innate lymphoid cells (ILC3s), which in turn promotes signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 3 (STAT3)-dependent inhibition of REV- 
ERBα expression in the IECs. Therefore, microbiota components may 
further fine- 
tune diurnal rhythms in the gut.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nri
Reviews
 have evolved as a secondary consequence of rhythmic 
metabolic processing within the immune cell itself. 
For the latter, the key benefit of circadian rhythmicity 
would be the ability of cells to partition metabolic flux 
and detrimental redox processes in time and space9. 
Clearly, metabolic and immune processes are intricately 
linked, and both affect each other also with respect to 
circadian timing. For example, metabolic cues are crit-
ical for the entrainment of peripheral clocks, such as 
those present in immune cells. In addition, disruption 
of clock gene function results in a host of metabolic 
disorders, which are often associated with immune 
phenotypes90, such as mice with a myeloid cell- 
specific 
deletion of Bmal1 that present with a pro- 
inflammatory 
phenotype and over time become obese23. Thus, par-
titioning of immune cell function to specific times of 
the day likely demonstrates an adaptation of the organ-
ism to pathogen exposure in addition to detrimental 
endogenous processes.
Therapeutic implications
Numerous animal models show that genetic or envi-
ronmental disruption of the clock can expedite the 
development of inflammatory disease or exacerbate 
disease pathology91–94. This translates to humans, as 
employment in rotating shift work has been associated 
with an increased risk in developing inflammatory dis-
eases such as psoriasis95 and irritable bowel syndrome96. 
In keeping with this, Cuesta et al. report desynchrony in 
rhythmic immune parameters after simulated night- 
shift 
work97. Of course, rotating shift work affects not just 
biological rhythms but also other lifestyle habits (sleep 
quality and quantity, diet, mealtimes and exercise) that 
may potentially affect the development of such disor-
ders. Nevertheless, this is a major concern for society. 
Together, animal studies and clinical data corroborate 
the notion that a healthy intact clock is necessary to 
regulate immune homeostasis and to help prevent the 
development of immune disorders. In addition to this 
role under homeostatic conditions, the clock continues 
to be critical in regulating inflammation once disease 
is established. It is well recognized that human chronic 
inflammatory diseases can show time- 
of-day variation in 
not only symptoms but also disease markers. Most often 
cited is the nocturnal component to asthma, whereby 
symptoms show exacerbations in the early morning98. 
Similarly, patients suffering from rheumatoid arthritis 
often report increased joint stiffness and pain in the early 
morning99. These periods of increased symptoms corre-
late with peaks in disease markers, indicating that these 
phenomena are not simply a consequence of sleep itself 
(for example, caused by limited movement and altered 
breathing patterns). There is an early morning peak in 
the number of pulmonary eosinophils in patients with 
asthma100 and in circulating cytokine levels in patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis101. The onset of cardio-
vascular events often shows time- 
of-day variation, with 
acute myocardial infarction and ventricular arrhythmias 
more common in the morning102. This timing is likely a 
consequence of circadian variation in blood pressure, the 
 
coagulation cascade and vascular function. Furthermore, 
there is evidence that in the days following the transition 
to or from daylight savings time, there is an increase in 
the incidence of acute coronary syndrome related to the 
desynchrony between the internal clock and the external 
environment103. Given the wide range of effects of the 
circadian clock on immune function, it is not surprising 
that in a chronic setting, there are rhythmic fluctuations 
in inflammatory pathways, sufficient to cause physio-
logical effects. Our current understanding of these 
interac 
tions is very limited, but it is clearly important 
that we gain deeper knowledge as this is likely to lead to 
novel treatment options.
Seasonal diseases and underlying mechanisms. 
There is emerging evidence that the immune system 
also shows seasonal fluctuations in man and animals; 
indeed, this may explain why some inflammatory dis-
eases have an additional seasonal component. Within 
circulating immune cells, approximately 23% of the 
genome shows seasonal variation in expression104; 
furthermore, the cellular makeup of the peripheral 
immune system varies according to season104. It is not 
yet established how annual changes in the external envi-
ronment modulate seasonal changes or to what extent 
seasonal changes affect immune function over the year. 
However, this new information may explain in part why 
some immune disorders exhibit seasonal variation in 
Box 3 | Circadian clock links to cancer
the circadian clock regulates daily rhythms in cell division, metabolism, inflammation 
and DNa damage response, and disruption of the circadian clock is known to increase 
the incidence of cancer122,123. specifically, the core clock machinery is tightly coupled to 
metabolic cycles and is able to adapt to shifting metabolic rhythms, such as those 
imposed by enforced feeding schedules, leading to reprogramming of circadian 
transcriptional circuits and altered cyclic metabolism124–126. Both central and peripheral 
circadian homeostasis are known to be disrupted in a number of pathological states, 
including inflammation and cancer. Further insight into this process has been shown in 
a recent study of lung adenocarcinoma in mice, which explored the impact of tissue 
malignancy on the circadian organization of body organs127. Lung tumours driven by 
conditional activation of KrasG12D mutation and loss of p53 tumour suppressor were 
associated with widespread disruption of hepatic glucose production and altered 
insulin signalling and lipid metabolism, mediated by alterations in aKt, aMPK and 
sreBP pathways. surprisingly, these distal effects were not mediated by hepatic 
malignancy, disruption of the core circadian clockwork or indeed behavioural 
rhythmicity. rather, the authors proposed that circadian remodelling of the hepatic 
transcriptome was mediated by the release of immune signals, such as tumour- 
derived 
cytokines (for example, iL-6) from malignant lung tissue, which then acted as distal 
reorganizers of circadian hepatic metabolism.
the link between the circadian clock, inflammation and metabolism raises the 
intriguing possibility as to whether pharmacological targeting of specific elements of 
the core circadian clockwork may regulate metabolic and inflammatory pathways and 
indirectly provides effective therapeutic options for the treatment of malignancy and 
cancer. a recent study has shown that pharmacological activation of rev- 
erB using 
small- 
molecule agonists is lethal in cancer and oncogene- 
induced senescence128. these 
circadian- 
regulated rev- 
erB proteins are constitutive repressors and nuclear hormone 
receptors and act as important outputs coupling the core clock to physiology, playing a 
central role in the regulation of rhythmic hepatic metabolism125 and inflammation31. 
Sulli et al. showed that REV- 
ERB agonists evoked an apoptotic response, confined to 
malignant cells, and critically also revealed selective targeting of slowly proliferating 
tumorigenic populations. importantly, this study now links for the first time key 
hallmarks of cancer — de novo lipogenesis and apoptosis, important in meeting 
metabolic demands of cancer cells — to a specific circadian clock circuit. this suggests 
a hitherto unsuspected link between elements of the core clock, cellular metabolism 
and malignancy.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Immunology
Reviews
 the occurrence of exacerbations. Dopico and colleagues 
noted a seasonal fluctuation in Bmal1 expression, with 
lower levels of expression during the winter months104. 
Herpesviruses and influenza A viruses replicate more 
efficiently in the absence of BMAL1, perhaps in part 
explaining why viral dissemination is more common 
in winter51. Individuals diagnosed with the debilitating 
lung condition chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) are also more prone to exacerbation during the 
winter months105. This is thought to be the result of a 
combination of increased prevalence of respiratory viral 
infections, lifestyle changes during the colder months 
and reduced vitamin D levels. Conversely, disease 
activity in patients with multiple sclerosis peaks in 
early spring and troughs in autumn106. This trend may 
be attributed in part to seasonal variation in the noc-
turnal pattern of secretion of pineal melatonin, with 
longer nocturnal durations in the autumn and winter61. 
These examples demonstrate that there may be impor-
tant seasonal changes in the phasing and exposure of 
circadian- 
regulated signals, tuned to the environment, 
that can affect our physiology and health.
Chrono- 
immunotherapy. Our knowledge regard-
ing circadian variation in the expression and activ-
ity of drug targets is steadily growing. A recent study 
has shown that a high proportion of the best- 
selling 
drugs used in the treatment of inflammatory diseases 
(as well as drugs for metabolic diseases, mental health 
disorders and cancer (Box 3)) directly target the prod-
ucts of genes that are themselves under clock control107. 
Many of these drugs typically have short half- 
lives 
 
(less than 6 h); consequently, timed application in line 
with target expression may markedly improve treatment 
efficacy (Fig. 5). Surprisingly, as yet there is very little use 
of chronotherapy for the treatment of inflammatory 
disorders in a clinical setting. One success involves the 
use of glucocorticoids in the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis. A slow- 
release formula of prednisone has been 
manufactured, designed to be taken at bedtime, result-
ing in release into the bloodstream 4 h later, and phased 
to the peak in expression of inflammatory markers, 
which reduced the duration of morning stiffness of the 
joints108. We now know that the circadian clock (through 
the actions of the CRY and REV- 
ERB proteins) regu-
lates the response of the GR to its ligands109,110. Thus, 
timed application of anti- 
inflammatory glucocorticoids 
may enable maximal therapeutic benefit while at the 
same time reducing undesirable hepatic metabolic side 
effects of these heavily used drugs109.
The clock as a therapeutic target for inflammation. 
Our growing understanding of how components of the 
molecular clock interact with critical elements of inflam-
matory pathways offers the exciting potential for the use 
of pharmacological agents that target these clock pro-
teins as anti- 
inflammatory agents. The challenge now 
is to produce high- 
affinity, high- 
efficacy molecules that 
enhance the activity of clock proteins. Recently, a num-
ber of tool compounds have been developed that show, 
in principle, the benefits of pharmacological modula-
tion of clock proteins on the outcome of inflammatory 
challenge. SR9009 is a synthetic REV- 
ERB agonist111 that 
has been shown to decrease atherosclerotic plaque bur-
den after chronic administration in mice112. Conversely, 
application of a synthetic REV- 
ERB antagonist 
(SR82778)113 has detrimental effects in a mouse model of 
viral- 
induced encephalitis114. In addition, the compound 
KL001 acts to stabilize CRY proteins by preventing 
ubiquitin- 
driven degradation115. Application of KL001 
in vitro has anti- 
inflammatory effects on fibroblast- 
like 
synoviocytes116, and this presents as another potential 
anti- 
inflammatory target. Taken together, the future will 
see the development of novel tools targeting the clock in 
inflammatory disorders.
Cryptochrome-stabilizing 
drugs are anti-inflammatory 
(in vitro)116
Vaccination
Increased influenza antibody
titres in morning versus 
evening in vaccinated elderly 
population (≥65 years)77 
Atherosclerosis
Anti-inflammatory effects 
of REV–ERB agonists112 
Bone marrow transplant
mouse model40  
Asthma
Timed dosing increases
effectiveness of multiple
treatments134 
Chemotherapy
Timed treatment increases
therapeutic index133 
Neurodegeneration 
(multiple sclerosis)
Melatonin decreases 
severity and/or incidence of 
experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis132 
Targeting 
the clock
Timed 
delivery
Arthritis
Slow-release prednisolone 
allows peak drug availability 
at time of greatest need108
Fig. 5 | Chronotherapy and the clock as a therapeutic target. The knowledge of 
circadian regulation of various aspects of immunity can inform treatment in two ways: 
modifying treatment regimens to the time of greatest efficacy (green boxes) and 
targeting the clock itself (blue boxes). Timed delivery of compounds has already been 
shown to increase effectiveness of multiple drugs already in use, with the benefit of 
increasing the therapeutic index77
,108,132–134. Timing of surgical procedures such as bone 
marrow transplantation is also a key factor modulating success and survival and should 
be carefully considered in clinical applications40. On the other hand, targeting 
components of the molecular clock may yield novel treatment options in some diseases. 
Increasing the stability of the clock protein cryptochrome has shown anti- 
inflammatory 
effects in vitro116, and REV- 
ERB agonists have also proved anti- 
inflammatory in vivo112. 
However, given the broad influence of the clock upon physiology and pathology 
, care 
must be taken when developing compounds that manipulate this network.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nri
Reviews
 Conclusions
The immune system is heavily influenced by time- 
of-day 
cues, both under steady- 
state conditions and in response 
to inflammatory challenges. The regulation of immune 
responses according to the time of the day is likely opti-
mized to provide protection at specific times. In addi-
tion, time- 
partitioning of metabolic and redox processes 
in immune cells may help minimize detrimental effects 
on the organism. Shifts of a few hours in the timing of 
an inflammatory challenge targeting the innate or the 
adaptive immune system have dramatic consequences 
on subsequent immune responses and pathological 
outcomes, not only in acute immune responses but also 
in chronic responses manifested several days or even 
weeks later. Despite the rapid recent progress made in 
understanding the mechanisms involved, the role of the 
circadian- 
controlled expression signatures of specific 
organs and crosstalk to other body systems remains 
very poorly understood. An improved understand-
ing of these pathways is necessary in order to advance 
chronotherapeutic options. From this, novel drugs and 
treatments that could maximize therapeutic benefits at 
specific phases while minimizing off- 
target side effects 
may then be developed.
Published online xx xx xxxx
1. 
Edgar, R. S. et al. Peroxiredoxins are conserved 
markers of circadian rhythms. Nature 485, 459–464 
(2012).
2. 
Pittendrigh, C. S. T
emporal organization: reflections  
of a Darwinian clock- 
watcher. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 55, 
16–54 (1993).
3. 
Brown, T
. M. & Piggins, H. D. Electrophysiology of the 
suprachiasmatic circadian clock. Prog. Neurobiol. 82, 
229–255 (2007).
4. 
Brancaccio, M. et al. Network- 
mediated encoding of 
circadian time: the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) from 
genes to neurons to circuits, and back. J. Neurosci. 34, 
15192–15199 (2014).
5. 
Herzog, E. D., Hermanstyne, T
., Smyllie, N. J. & 
Hastings, M. H. Regulating the suprachiasmatic nucleus 
(SCN) circadian clockwork: interplay between  
cell- 
autonomous and circuit- 
level mechanisms.  
Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 9, a027706 (2017).
6. 
Buijs, F. N. et al. The circadian system: a regulatory 
feedback network of periphery and brain. Physiology 
31, 170–181 (2016).
7. 
Dumbell, R., Matveeva, O. & Oster, H. Circadian clocks, 
stress, and immunity. Front. Endocrinol. 7, 37 (2016).
8. 
Thaiss, C. A. et al. Microbiota diurnal rhythmicity 
programs host transcriptome oscillations. Cell 167, 
1495–1510 (2016).
9. 
Bass, J. & Lazar, M. A. Circadian time signatures of 
fitness and disease. Science 354, 994–999 (2016).
10. Panda, S. Circadian physiology of metabolism. Science 
354, 1008–1015 (2016).
11. Spoelstra, K., Wikelski, M., Daan, S., Loudon, A. S. & 
Hau, M. Natural selection against a circadian clock 
gene mutation in mice. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 
686–691 (2016).
12. McHill, A. W. & Wright, K. P
. Jr. Role of sleep and 
circadian disruption on energy expenditure and in 
metabolic predisposition to human obesity and 
metabolic disease. Obes. Rev. 18 (Suppl. 1), 15–24 
(2017).
13. Qian, J. & Scheer, F. A. Circadian system and glucose 
metabolism: implications for physiology and disease. 
T
rends Endocrinol. Metab. 27, 282–293 (2016).
14. Reitz, C. J. & Martino, T
. A. Disruption of circadian 
rhythms and sleep on critical illness and the impact  
on cardiovascular events. Curr. Pharm. Des. 21, 
3505–3511 (2015).
15. Yuan, X. et al. Night shift work increases the risks of 
multiple primary cancers in women: a systematic 
review and meta- 
analysis of 61 articles. Cancer 
Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 27, 25–40 (2018).
16. Berenbaum, F. & Meng, Q. J. The brain- 
joint axis in 
osteoarthritis: nerves, circadian clocks and beyond. 
Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 12, 508–516 (2016).
17. Cutolo, M. Rheumatoid arthritis: circadian and 
circannual rhythms in RA. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 7, 
500–502 (2011).
18. Halberg, F., Johnson, E. A., Brown, B. W. & Bittner, J. J. 
 
Susceptibility rhythm to E. coli endotoxin and 
bioassay. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 103, 142–144 
(1960).
19. Curtis, A. M., Bellet, M. M., Sassone- 
Corsi, P
. & 
O’Neill, L. A. Circadian clock proteins and immunity. 
Immunity 40, 178–186 (2014).
20. Labrecque, N. & Cermakian, N. Circadian clocks in the 
immune system. J. Biol. Rhythms 30, 277–290 (2015).
21. Man, K., Loudon, A. & Chawla, A. Immunity around 
the clock. Science 354, 999–1003 (2016).
22. Scheiermann, C., Kunisaki, Y. & Frenette, P
. S. 
Circadian control of the immune system. Nat. Rev. 
Immunol. 13, 190–198 (2013).
23. Nguyen, K. D. et al. Circadian gene Bmal1 regulates 
diurnal oscillations of Ly6C(hi) inflammatory 
monocytes. Science 341, 1483–1488 (2013).  
This paper shows that oscillations in the number of 
inflammatory monocytes in tissues are driven by 
the myeloid cell clock.
24. Keller, M. et al. A circadian clock in macrophages 
controls inflammatory immune responses. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 106, 21407–21412 (2009).
25. Silver, A. C., Arjona, A., Hughes, M. E., Nitabach, M. N.  
& Fikrig, E. Circadian expression of clock genes in 
mouse macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells.  
Brain Behav. Immun. 26, 407–413 (2012).
26. Wang, X., Reece, S. P
., Van Scott, M. R. & Brown, J. M. 
A circadian clock in murine bone marrow- 
derived mast 
cells modulates IgE- 
dependent activation in vitro. 
Brain Behav. Immun. 25, 127–134 (2011).
27. Baumann, A. et al. The circadian clock is functional  
in eosinophils and mast cells. Immunology 140,  
465–474 (2013).
28. Ella, K., Csepanyi- 
Komi, R. & Kaldi, K. Circadian 
regulation of human peripheral neutrophils. Brain 
Behav. Immun. 57, 209–221 (2016).
29. Arjona, A. & Sarkar, D. K. Circadian oscillations  
of clock genes, cytolytic factors, and cytokines  
in rat NK cells. J. Immunol. 174, 7618–7624  
(2005).
30. Oliva- 
Ramirez, J., Moreno- 
Altamirano, M. M., Pineda- 
Olvera, B., Cauich- 
Sanchez, P
. & Sanchez- 
Garcia, F. J. 
Crosstalk between circadian rhythmicity, mitochondrial 
dynamics and macrophage bactericidal activity. 
Immunology 143, 490–497 (2014).
31. Gibbs, J. E. et al. The nuclear receptor REV- 
ERBalpha 
mediates circadian regulation of innate immunity 
through selective regulation of inflammatory  
cytokines. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 582–587 
(2012).  
This article presents the first demonstration that 
synthetic ligands targeting a circadian clock protein 
modify inflammatory responses.
32. Nakamura, Y., Ishimaru, K., Shibata, S. & Nakao, A. 
Regulation of plasma histamine levels by the mast cell 
clock and its modulation by stress. Sci. Rep. 7, 39934 
(2017).
33. Nakamura, Y. et al. Circadian regulation of allergic 
reactions by the mast cell clock in mice. J. Allergy Clin. 
Immunol. 133, 568–575 (2014).
34. Logan, R. W., Wynne, O., Levitt, D., Price, D. &  
Sarkar, D. K. Altered circadian expression of cytokines 
and cytolytic factors in splenic natural killer cells of 
Per1(−/−) mutant mice. J. Interferon Cytokine Res. 33, 
108–114 (2013).
35. Logan, R. W. et al. Chronic shift- 
lag alters the circadian 
clock of NK cells and promotes lung cancer growth in 
rats. J. Immunol. 188, 2583–2591 (2012).
36. Lam, M. T
. et al. Rev- 
Erbs repress macrophage gene 
expression by inhibiting enhancer- 
directed 
transcription. Nature 498, 511–515 (2013).
37. Sato, S. et al. A circadian clock gene, Rev- 
erbα, 
modulates the inflammatory function of macrophages 
through the negative regulation of Ccl2 expression.  
J. Immunol. 192, 407–417 (2014).
38. Narasimamurthy, R. et al. Circadian clock protein 
cryptochrome regulates the expression of 
proinflammatory cytokines. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
109, 12662–12667 (2012).
39. Born, J., Lange, T
., Hansen, K., Molle, M. & Fehm, H. L. 
 
Effects of sleep and circadian rhythm on human 
circulating immune cells. J. Immunol. 158,  
4454–4464 (1997).
40. Scheiermann, C. et al. Adrenergic nerves govern 
circadian leukocyte recruitment to tissues. Immunity 
37, 290–301 (2012).
41. Prendergast, B. J. et al. Impaired leukocyte trafficking 
and skin inflammatory responses in hamsters lacking 
a functional circadian system. Brain Behav. Immun. 
32, 94–104 (2013).
42. Haspel, J. A. et al. Circadian rhythm reprogramming 
during lung inflammation. Nat. Commun. 5, 4753 
(2014).
43. Gibbs, J. et al. An epithelial circadian clock controls 
pulmonary inflammation and glucocorticoid action. 
Nat. Med. 20, 919–926 (2014).  
This paper shows circadian regulation of neutrophil 
influx via rhythmic inhibition of chemoattractant 
production by bronchial epithelial cells in the lung.
44. Kiessling, S. et al. The circadian clock in immune cells 
controls the magnitude of Leishmania parasite 
infection. Sci. Rep. 7, 10892 (2017).
45. Casanova- 
Acebes, M. et al. Rhythmic modulation of 
the hematopoietic niche through neutrophil clearance. 
Cell 153, 1025–1035 (2013).  
This study describes how rhythmic homing of aged 
neutrophils generates homeostatic cues that 
trigger release of haematopoietic stem cells from 
the bone marrow.
46. Nussbaum, J. C. et al. T
ype 2 innate lymphoid cells 
control eosinophil homeostasis. Nature 502,  
245–248 (2013).
47. Chong, S. Z. et al. CXCR4 identifies transitional bone 
marrow premonocytes that replenish the mature 
monocyte pool for peripheral responses. J. Exp. Med. 
213, 2293–2314 (2016).
48. Bellet, M. M. et al. Circadian clock regulates the host 
response to Salmonella. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
110, 9897–9902 (2013).
49. Rijo- 
Ferreira, F., Pinto- 
Neves, D., Barbosa- 
Morais, N. L., 
 
T
akahashi, J. S. & Figueiredo, L. M. T
rypanosoma 
brucei metabolism is under circadian control.  
Nat. Microbiol. 2, 17032 (2017).
50. Majumdar, T
., Dhar, J., Patel, S., Kondratov, R. & 
Barik, S. Circadian transcription factor BMAL1 
regulates innate immunity against select RNA viruses. 
Innate Immun. 23, 147–154 (2017).
51. Edgar, R. S. et al. Cell autonomous regulation of 
herpes and influenza virus infection by the circadian 
clock. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 10085–10090 
(2016).
52. Fernandes, G., Halberg, F., Yunis, E. J. & Good, R. A. 
Circadian rhythmic plaque- 
forming cell response of 
spleens from mice immunized with SRBC. J. Immunol. 
117, 962–966 (1976).
53. Kaplan, M. S. et al. Circadian rhythm of stimulated 
lymphocyte blastogenesis. A 24 
h cycle in the  
mixed leukocyte culture reaction and with SKSD 
stimulation. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 58, 180–189 
(1976).
54. Druzd, D. et al. Lymphocyte circadian clocks control 
lymph node trafficking and adaptive immune 
responses. Immunity 46, 120–132 (2017).  
This study shows dynamic regulation of lymphocyte 
numbers in blood, lymph node and lymph, driven 
by rhythmic expression of migration and egress 
factors.
55. Hemmers, S. & Rudensky, A. Y. The cell- 
intrinsic 
circadian clock is dispensable for lymphocyte 
differentiation and function. Cell Rep. 11,  
1339–1349 (2015).
56. Bollinger, T
. et al. Circadian clocks in mouse and 
human CD4 
+ 
T cells. PLoS ONE 6, e29801 (2011).
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Immunology
Reviews
 57. Sun, Y. et al. MOP3, a component of the molecular 
clock, regulates the development of B cells. 
Immunology 119, 451–460 (2006).
58. Yu, X. et al. TH17 cell differentiation is regulated by 
the circadian clock. Science 342, 727–730 (2013).
59. Yu, X. et al. The basic leucine zipper transcription 
factor NFIL3 directs the development of a common 
innate lymphoid cell precursor. eLife 3, e04406 
(2014).
60. Qiu, J. et al. Group 3 innate lymphoid cells inhibit  
T
- 
cell-mediated intestinal inflammation through aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor signaling and regulation of 
microflora. Immunity 39, 386–399 (2013).
61. Farez, M. F. et al. Melatonin contributes to the 
seasonality of multiple sclerosis relapses. Cell 162, 
1338–1352 (2015).
62. Martinez- 
Llordella, M. et al. CD28-inducible 
transcription factor DEC1 is required for efficient 
autoreactive CD4 
+ 
T cell response. J. Exp. Med. 210, 
1603–1619 (2013).
63. Kreslavsky, T
. et al. Essential role for the transcription 
factor Bhlhe41 in regulating the development,  
self- 
renewal and BCR repertoire of B-1a cells.  
Nat. Immunol. 18, 442–455 (2017).
64. Besedovsky, L., Born, J. & Lange, T
. Endogenous 
glucocorticoid receptor signaling drives rhythmic 
changes in human T
- 
cell subset numbers and the 
expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR4.  
FASEB J. 28, 67–75 (2014).
65. Dimitrov, S. et al. Cortisol and epinephrine control 
opposing circadian rhythms in T cell subsets.  
Blood 113, 5134–5143 (2009).
66. Suzuki, K., Hayano, Y., Nakai, A., Furuta, F. & Noda, M. 
 
Adrenergic control of the adaptive immune response 
by diurnal lymphocyte recirculation through lymph 
nodes. J. Exp. Med. 213, 2567–2574 (2016).  
This study shows how adrenergic tone modulates 
lymphocyte trafficking rhythms and humoral 
immune responses through β2-adrenergic 
receptors expressed by lymphocytes.
67. Zhao, Y. et al. Uncovering the mystery of opposite 
circadian rhythms between mouse and human 
leukocytes in humanized mice. Blood 130,  
1995–2005 (2017).  
This is a very interesting report of cell- 
intrinsic 
phase encoding of leukocytes, driven by opposite 
effects of p38MAPK–MK2 signalling upon HIF1α 
induction and CXCR4 expression.
68. Shimba, A. et al. Glucocorticoids drive diurnal 
oscillations in T cell distribution and responses  
by inducing interleukin-7 receptor and CXCR4. 
Immunity 48, 286–298.e6 (2018).  
This work illustrates an immune- 
enhancing role of 
glucocorticoids via upregulation of homing 
receptors, promoting rhythmic T cell accumulation 
and heightened responses to systemic infection.
69. Forster, R., Davalos- 
Misslitz, A. C. & Rot, A. CCR7  
and its ligands: balancing immunity and tolerance. 
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 8, 362–371 (2008).
70. Stein, J. V. & Nombela- 
Arrieta, C. Chemokine control 
of lymphocyte trafficking: a general overview. 
Immunology 116, 1–12 (2005).
71. Cyster, J. G. & Schwab, S. R. Sphingosine-1-phosphate 
and lymphocyte egress from lymphoid organs.  
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 30, 69–94 (2012).
72. Nakai, A., Hayano, Y., Furuta, F., Noda, M. & Suzuki, K. 
 
Control of lymphocyte egress from lymph nodes 
through β2-adrenergic receptors. J. Exp. Med. 211, 
2583–2598 (2014).
73. Esquifino, A. I., Selgas, L., Arce, A., Maggiore, V. D. & 
Cardinali, D. P
. T
wenty- 
four-hour rhythms in immune 
responses in rat submaxillary lymph nodes and 
spleen: effect of cyclosporine. Brain Behav. Immun. 10, 
92–102 (1996).
74. Fortier, E. E. et al. Circadian variation of the response 
of T cells to antigen. J. Immunol. 187, 6291–6300 
(2011).
75. Silver, A. C., Arjona, A., Walker, W. E. & Fikrig, E. The 
circadian clock controls toll- 
like receptor 9-mediated 
innate and adaptive immunity. Immunity 36,  
251–261 (2012).
76. Sutton, C. E. et al. Loss of the molecular clock in 
myeloid cells exacerbates T cell- 
mediated CNS 
autoimmune disease. Nat. Commun. 8, 1923 (2017).  
This report shows the importance of appropriate 
immune cell crosstalk in an EAE model, as 
disruption of the myeloid clock increases TH1 and 
TH17 cell responses in the central nervous system.
77. Long, J. E. et al. Morning vaccination enhances 
antibody response over afternoon vaccination: a 
cluster- 
randomised trial. Vaccine 34, 2679–2685 
(2016).
78. Curtis, A. M. et al. Circadian control of innate 
immunity in macrophages by miR-155 targeting 
Bmal1. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 7231–7236 
(2015).
79. Huo, M. et al. Myeloid Bmal1 deletion increases 
monocyte recruitment and worsens atherosclerosis. 
FASEB J. 31, 1097–1106 (2016).
80. Mukherji, A., Kobiita, A., Ye, T
. & Chambon, P
. 
Homeostasis in intestinal epithelium is orchestrated 
by the circadian clock and microbiota cues transduced 
by TLRs. Cell 153, 812–827 (2013).
81. Wang, Y. et al. The intestinal microbiota regulates 
body composition through NFIL3 and the circadian 
clock. Science 357, 912–916 (2017).  
Along with previous work from the same authors 
(reference 58), this study links the clock protein 
REV- 
ERBα with rhythmic expression of NFIL3, a 
critical regulator of both TH17 cell differentiation 
and enterocyte lipid metabolism.
82. Zhang, D. et al. Neutrophil ageing is regulated  
by the microbiome. Nature 525, 528–532  
(2015).
83. Martin, C. et al. Chemokines acting via CXCR2 and 
CXCR4 control the release of neutrophils from the 
bone marrow and their return following senescence. 
Immunity 19, 583–593 (2003).
84. T
anji- 
Matsuba, K. et al. Functional changes in aging 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Circulation 97,  
91–98 (1998).
85. Liang, X., Bushman, F. D. & FitzGerald, G. A. 
Rhythmicity of the intestinal microbiota is regulated by 
gender and the host circadian clock. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 112, 10479–10484 (2015).
86. Thaiss, C. A. et al. T
ranskingdom control of microbiota 
diurnal oscillations promotes metabolic homeostasis. 
Cell 159, 514–529 (2014).
87. Balsalobre, A., Damiola, F. & Schibler, U. A serum 
shock induces circadian gene expression in 
mammalian tissue culture cells. Cell 93, 929–937 
(1998).
88. Balsalobre, A. et al. Resetting of circadian time in 
peripheral tissues by glucocorticoid signaling. Science 
289, 2344–2347 (2000).
89. Shackelford, P
. G. & Feigin, R. D. Periodicity of 
susceptibility to pneumococcal infection: influence of 
light and adrenocortical secretions. Science 182, 
285–287 (1973).
90. Early, J. O. & Curtis, A. M. Immunometabolism: Is it 
under the eye of the clock? Semin. Immunol. 28,  
478–490 (2016).
91. Ando, N. et al. Circadian gene clock regulates 
psoriasis- 
like skin inflammation in mice. J. Invest. 
Dermatol. 135, 3001–3008 (2015).
92. Castanon- 
Cervantes, O. et al. Dysregulation of 
inflammatory responses by chronic circadian 
disruption. J. Immunol. 185, 5796–5805  
(2010).
93. Pagel, R. et al. Circadian rhythm disruption impairs 
tissue homeostasis and exacerbates chronic 
inflammation in the intestine. FASEB J. 31,  
4707–4719 (2017).
94. Summa, K. C. et al. Disruption of the circadian clock in 
mice increases intestinal permeability and promotes 
alcohol- 
induced hepatic pathology and inflammation. 
PLoS ONE 8, e67102 (2013).
95. Li, W. Q., Qureshi, A. A., Schernhammer, E. S. &  
Han, J. Rotating night- 
shift work and risk of psoriasis 
in US women. J. Invest. Dermatol. 133, 565–567 
(2013).
96. Nojkov, B., Rubenstein, J. H., Chey, W. D. & 
Hoogerwerf, W. A. The impact of rotating shift  
work on the prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome  
in nurses. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 105, 842–847 
(2010).
97. Cuesta, M., Boudreau, P
., Dubeau- 
Laramee, G., 
Cermakian, N. & Boivin, D. B. Simulated night  
shift disrupts circadian rhythms of immune  
functions in humans. J. Immunol. 196, 2466–2475 
(2016).
98. Durrington, H. J., Farrow, S. N., Loudon, A. S. &  
Ray, D. W. The circadian clock and asthma. Thorax 69, 
90–92 (2014).
99. Olsen, N. J., Brooks, R. H. & Furst, D. Variability of 
immunologic and clinical features in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis studied over 24 
h. J. Rheumatol. 
20, 940–943 (1993).
100. Panzer, S. E., Dodge, A. M., Kelly, E. A. & Jarjour, N. N. 
 
Circadian variation of sputum inflammatory cells in 
mild asthma. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 111, 308–312 
(2003).
101. Perry, M. G., Kirwan, J. R., Jessop, D. S. & Hunt, L. P
. 
Overnight variations in cortisol, interleukin 6, tumour 
necrosis factor alpha and other cytokines in people 
with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 68, 
63–68 (2009).
102. T
akeda, N. & Maemura, K. Circadian clock and the 
onset of cardiovascular events. Hypertens. Res. 39, 
383–390 (2016).
103. Culic, V. Daylight saving time transitions and acute 
myocardial infarction. Chronobiol. Int. 30, 662–668 
(2013).
104. Dopico, X. C. et al. Widespread seasonal gene 
expression reveals annual differences in human 
immunity and physiology. Nat. Commun. 6,  
7000 (2015).
105. Donaldson, G. C. & Wedzicha, J. A. The causes and 
consequences of seasonal variation in COPD 
exacerbations. Int. J. Chron. Obstruct Pulmon. Dis. 9, 
1101–1110 (2014).
106. Spelman, T
. et al. Seasonal variation of relapse rate in 
multiple sclerosis is latitude dependent. Ann. Neurol. 
76, 880–890 (2014).
107. Zhang, R., Lahens, N. F., Ballance, H. I., Hughes, M. E. 
& Hogenesch, J. B. A circadian gene expression atlas 
in mammals: implications for biology and medicine. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 16219–16224 
(2014).  
This article presents a comprehensive analysis of 
oscillating genes and non- 
coding RNAs in murine 
organs, highlighting the relationships between 
rhythmic genes, disease- 
associated genes and 
current drug targets.
108. Buttgereit, F. et al. Efficacy of modified-release 
versus standard prednisone to reduce  
duration of morning stiffness of the joints in 
rheumatoid arthritis (CAPRA-1): a double- 
blind, 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 371,  
205–214 (2008).
109. Lamia, K. A. et al. Cryptochromes mediate rhythmic 
repression of the glucocorticoid receptor. Nature 480, 
552–556 (2011).
110. Okabe, T
. et al. REV- 
ERBalpha influences the stability 
and nuclear localization of the glucocorticoid receptor. 
J. Cell Sci. 129, 4143–4154 (2016).
111. Solt, L. A. et al. Regulation of circadian behaviour  
and metabolism by synthetic REV- 
ERB agonists. 
Nature 485, 62–68 (2012).
112. Sitaula, S., Billon, C., Kamenecka, T
. M., Solt, L. A. & 
Burris, T
. P
. Suppression of atherosclerosis by 
synthetic REV- 
ERB agonist. Biochem. Biophys. Res. 
Commun. 460, 566–571 (2015).
113. Kojetin, D., Wang, Y., Kamenecka, T
. M. & Burris, T
. P
. 
Identification of SR8278, a synthetic antagonist of the 
nuclear heme receptor REV- 
ERB. ACS Chem. Biol. 6, 
131–134 (2011).
114. Gagnidze, K. et al. Nuclear receptor REV- 
ERBα 
mediates circadian sensitivity to mortality in murine 
vesicular stomatitis virus- 
induced encephalitis.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 5730–5735  
(2016).
115. Hirota, T
. et al. Identification of small molecule 
activators of cryptochrome. Science 337, 1094–1097 
(2012).
116. Hand, L. E. et al. The circadian clock regulates 
inflammatory arthritis. FASEB J. 30, 3759–3770 
(2016).
117. Partch, C. L., Green, C. B. & T
akahashi, J. S. Molecular 
architecture of the mammalian circadian clock. T
rends 
Cell Biol. 24, 90–99 (2014).
118. Guilding, C. et al. Suppressed cellular oscillations  
in after- 
hours mutant mice are associated with 
enhanced circadian phase- 
resetting. J. Physiol. 591, 
1063–1080 (2013).
119. Meng, Q. J. et al. Setting clock speed in mammals: the 
CK1 epsilon tau mutation in mice accelerates circadian 
pacemakers by selectively destabilizing PERIOD 
proteins. Neuron 58, 78–88 (2008).
120. Yamaguchi, S. et al. Role of DBP in the circadian 
oscillatory mechanism. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20,  
4773–4781 (2000).
121. Ueda, H. R. et al. System- 
level identification of 
transcriptional circuits underlying mammalian 
circadian clocks. Nat. Genet. 37, 187–192  
(2005).
122. Fu, L. & Lee, C. C. The circadian clock: pacemaker  
and tumour suppressor. Nat. Rev. Cancer 3, 350–361 
(2003).
123. Yu, E. A. & Weaver, D. R. Disrupting the circadian 
clock: gene- 
specific effects on aging, cancer, and other 
phenotypes. Aging 3, 479–493 (2011).
124. Asher, G. & Sassone- 
Corsi, P
. Time for food: the 
intimate interplay between nutrition, metabolism,  
and the circadian clock. Cell 161, 84–92  
(2015).
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nri
Reviews
 125. Cho, H. et al. Regulation of circadian behaviour and 
metabolism by REV- 
ERB-alpha and REV- 
ERB-beta. 
Nature 485, 123–127 (2012).
126. Zhang, Y. et al. Discrete functions of nuclear receptor 
Rev- 
erbα couple metabolism to the clock. Science 
348, 1488–1492 (2015).
127. Masri, S. et al. Lung adenocarcinoma distally rewires 
hepatic circadian homeostasis. Cell 165, 896–909 
(2016).
128. Sulli, G. et al. Pharmacological activation of REV- 
ERBs 
is lethal in cancer and oncogene- 
induced senescence. 
Nature 553, 351–355 (2018).  
This study shows that agonism of REV- 
ERBs is 
specifically lethal to cancer cells via inhibition of 
autophagy and lipogenesis
129. Fonken, L. K. et al. Microglia inflammatory responses 
are controlled by an intrinsic circadian clock. Brain 
Behav. Immun. 45, 171–179 (2015).
130. Rudic, R. D. et al. Bioinformatic analysis of circadian 
gene oscillation in mouse aorta. Circulation 112, 
2716–2724 (2005).
131. Nakazato, R. et al. The intrinsic microglial clock system 
regulates interleukin-6 expression. Glia 65, 198–208 
(2017).
132. Alvarez- 
Sanchez, N. et al. Melatonin controls 
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by 
altering the T effector/regulatory balance. Brain Behav. 
Immun. 50, 101–114 (2015).
133. Borniger, J. C. et al. Time- 
of-day dictates transcriptional 
inflammatory responses to cytotoxic chemotherapy.  
Sci. Rep 7, 41220 (2017).
134. Durrington, H. J., Farrow, S. N. & Ray, D. Recent 
advances in chronotherapy for the management  
of asthma. ChronoPhysiology Ther. 4, 125–135 
(2014).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank V. Lavilla for creating the video and 
 
M. F. Loudon for providing the voice- 
over to it. C.S. 
 
is funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) 
(Emmy- 
Noether grant (SCHE 1645/2-1) and SFB914 pro-
jects B09 and Z03), the European Research Council (ERC; 
starting grant 635872, CIRCODE), the DZHK (German 
Centre for Cardiovascular Research) and the BMBF 
(German Ministry of Education and Research). J.G. is an 
Arthritis Research UK Career Development Fellow (Ref. 
20629). A.L. acknowledges the support of the Wellcome 
Trust (grant 107851/Z/15/Z).
Author contributions
All authors contributed to the research, discussion of content, 
writing and review of this manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577-018-0008-4.
RelaTed links
Manchester Biological Timing: https://www.bmh.manchester.
ac.uk/research/biological- 
timing/
Loudon Laboratory: http://www.manchester.ac.uk/research/
Andrew.loudon/personaldetails
scheiermann Laboratory: http://scheiermannlab.de/
Gibbs Laboratory: https://www.research.manchester.ac.uk/
portal/Julie.Gibbs.html
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | Immunology
Reviews
