 H I V
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
Inflammatory monocytes expressing tissue factor
drive SIV and HIV coagulopathy
Melissa E. Schechter,1* Bruno B. Andrade,2,3,4,5,6*† Tianyu He,7,8* George Haret Richter,7
Kevin W. Tosh,2 Benjamin B. Policicchio,7,9 Amrit Singh,10 Kevin D. Raehtz,7,11 Virginia Sheikh,10
Dongying Ma,12 Egidio Brocca-Cofano,7,8 Cristian Apetrei,7,11 Russel Tracy,13 Ruy M. Ribeiro,14,15
Alan Sher,2 Ivo M. B. Francischetti,12 Ivona Pandrea,7,8†‡ Irini Sereti10†‡
In HIV infection, persistent inflammation despite effective antiretroviral therapy is linked to increased risk of
noninfectious chronic complications such as cardiovascular and thromboembolic disease. A better understanding of
inflammatory and coagulation pathways in HIV infection is needed to optimize clinical care. Markers of monocyte
activation and coagulation independently predict morbidity and mortality associated with non-AIDS events.
We identified a specific subset of monocytes that express tissue factor (TF), persist after virological suppression,
and trigger the coagulation cascade by activating factor X. This subset of monocytes expressing TF had a distinct
gene signature with up-regulated innate immune markers and evidence of robust production of multiple proinflam-
matory cytokines, including interleukin-1b (IL-1b), tumor necrosis factor–a (TNF-a), and IL-6, ex vivo and in vitro upon
lipopolysaccharide stimulation. We validated our findings in a nonhuman primate model, showing that TF-expressing
inflammatory monocytes were associated with simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)–related coagulopathy in the
progressive [pigtail macaques (PTMs)] but not in the nonpathogenic (African green monkeys) SIV infection model.
Last, Ixolaris, an anticoagulant that inhibits the TF pathway, was tested and potently blocked functional TF activity
in vitro in HIV and SIV infection without affecting monocyte responses to Toll-like receptor stimulation. Strikingly,
in vivo treatment of SIV-infected PTMs with Ixolaris was associated with significant decreases in D-dimer and
immune activation. These data suggest that TF-expressing monocytes are at the epicenter of inflammation and
coagulation in chronic HIV and SIV infection and may represent a potential therapeutic target.
INTRODUCTION
Monocytes are key mediators of innate immunity and have been
closely associated with pathogenesis of chronic viral infections, includ-
ing HIV (1, 2). Heightened circulating levels of monocyte activation
markers, such as soluble tissue factor (TF), soluble CD14 (sCD14),
and soluble CD163 (sCD163), have been associated with increased risk
for death (3), noninfectious complications (4, 5), subclinical athero-
sclerosis (6), and immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome
(IRIS) in HIV-infected individuals (7). Moreover, differential activation
of monocyte subsets has recently been described as a predictor of
tuberculosis (TB)–associated IRIS in patients with HIV-TB co-infection
(7). One important feature of monocytes in HIV pathogenesis is their
capacity to produce TF (8–10). TF is expressed in response to inflam-
matory stimuli, such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs) (11–13) and cytokine-
driven signals (14, 15), and initiates the extrinsic coagulation cascade by
cleavingcoagulationfactors,leadingtothe formationof factorXa,throm-
bin, and fibrin, which, when degraded, forms the coagulation biomarker
D-dimer (16, 17). For these reasons, augmented TF expression is asso-
ciated with increased levels of D-dimer (18) and thus may be associated
with an increased risk for cardiovascular complications in HIV-infected
individuals(19).Thesefindingssupportadirectroleofactivatedmonocytes
in the persistent inflammatory milieu observed in chronic HIV infection.
The need to investigate the link between coagulation and inflamma-
tion in chronic viral infections is pressing. Inflammatory and coagula-
tion markers are both independent predictors of morbidity and mortality
in treated HIV individuals (20–23) and are associated with noninfectious
complications of HIV, such as cardiovascular and thromboembolic dis-
ease (19), which are rising due to the aging of treated HIV-infected per-
sons (24). In an experimental model of nonhuman primates (NHPs)
infected with SIVsab, we previously demonstrated that increases in
D-dimer and monocyte activation markers (sCD14) predict disease
progression (25). These findings highlighted monocyte activation as a
key event driving persistent coagulation in simian immunodeficiency
virus (SIV)/HIV chronic infection, suggesting a need to delineate the role
of monocyte-derived TF in SIV/HIV-driven systemic inflammation and
coagulopathy.
1Clinical Research Directorate/Clinical Monitoring Research Program, Leidos Bio-
medical Research Inc., Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick,
MD 21701, USA. 2Immunobiology Section, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA. 3Instituto Gonçalo Moniz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Salvador 40296-710,
Brazil. 4Multinational Organization Network Sponsoring Translational and Epidemio-
logical Research (MONSTER) Initiative, Instituto Brasileiro para a Investigação da
Tuberculose, Fundação José Silveira, Salvador 40210-320, Brazil. 5Wellcome Centre
for Infectious Disease Research in Africa, Institute of Infectious Disease and Molec-
ular Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town 7925, South Africa. 6Division of
Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Med-
icine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. 7Center for Vaccine Research, School of Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. 8Department of Pathology,
School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. 9Depart-
ment of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, Graduate School of Public Health,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. 10HIV Pathogenesis Section,
Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 11Department of Microbiology
and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15261, USA. 12Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
13Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Robert Larner, M.D. College
of Medicine University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, USA. 14Theoretical Biology
and Biophysics, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87544, USA.
15Laboratório de Biomatemática, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa,
Lisboa 1649-028, Portugal.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: bruno.andrade@bahia.fiocruz.br (B.B.A.); isereti@
niaid.nih.gov (I.S.); pandrea@pitt.edu (I.P.)
‡These authors contributed equally to this work.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Schechter et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017)
30 August 2017
1 of 13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Here, we evaluated the role of TF-expressing monocytes in HIV
and SIV pathogenesis and related coagulopathy. We examined the
links between inflammation and coagulation with the aim to identify
potential targets for therapeutic interventions in HIV-infected persons.
RESULTS
A specific monocyte subset is
the major source of TF among
peripheral blood
mononuclear cells
To determine the potential of monocytes
to express TF, we stimulated peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from
healthy blood donors with lipopoly-
saccharide (LPS) in vitro, and we assessed
TF expressionbyflowcytometry (mono-
cyte gating strategy showninfig. S1).The
frequency of monocytes expressing TF
[TF-positive (TFpos)] in unstimulated
cultures was very low [median, 0.49% of
total monocytes; interquartile range
(IQR), 0.24 to 0.69]. Upon LPS stimula-
tion, the expression of TF by monocytes
was significantly increased (P < 0.0001;
Fig. 1A). We next tested whether TF ex-
pression reflects a state of cellular activa-
tion by quantifying the frequency of TFpos
monocytes after stimulation with in-
creasing doses of LPS. A robust expression
of TF by monocytes was observed only
when cells were stimulated with LPS
(≥10 ng/ml), whereas lower doses trig-
gered a minor induction of the enzyme
(Fig. 1B). The frequency of TFpos mono-
cytes did not increase further with esca-
lated doses of LPS (Fig. 1B), suggesting
that only a subset of cells is capable of
producing the coagulation factor in vitro.
We next performed a phenotypic analysis
to better delineate the subpopulation of
mononuclear cells from PBMC that pro-
duce TF upon LPS stimulation. We ob-
served that TF expression is restricted to
HLA-DR+, Dump− (CD2−CD3−CD19−
CD20−CD56−) cells, which were further
characterized as CD14+, CD16−, and
CCR2+ monocytes (fig. S2). A more
detailed analysis revealed that TFpos cells
exhibit differential expression of activa-
tion markers and costimulatory molecules,
such as CD36, CD40, CD86, CD62L,
CD163, TLR4, and interleukin-6 receptor
(IL-6R) (fig. S2). To further investigate
these populations, we sorted TFpos and
TFneg monocytes from six healthy donors
after LPS stimulation and examined the
expression profile of a customized assort-
ment of genes associated with monocyte
activation and coagulation using a multiplex quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR) assay. Hierarchical clustering analysis of the
overall gene expression profile of monocytes revealed that TFpos cells
exhibit a unique signature highlighted by increased expression of
Fig. 1. LPS drives TF expression on human monocyte subsets. (A) Left: Representative fluorescence-activated
cell sorting plots of TF expression on human monocytes from healthy controls upon LPS stimulation in vitro. Right:
Summary data (n = 5) of frequency of TFpos monocytes. Lines represent median values. Data were analyzed using
Mann-Whitney U test. SSC-H, side-scatter height. (B) Frequency of TF-expressing monocytes on PBMC from healthy
controls stimulated with increasing doses of LPS in vitro (n = 8). Data were analyzed using Kruskal-Wallis test with
Dunn’s multiple comparisons and linear trend ad hoc test. (C) Hierarchical cluster analysis of the expression profile
(z-score–normalized) of indicated genes assessed by qPCR in monocytes (n = 6 healthy donors) sorted after 6 hours
of LPS stimulation (100 ng/ml), as described in Materials and Methods. (D) PCA of the expression level of indicated
genes was performed. (E) Monocyte subsets were sorted on the basis of surface expression of CD14 and CD16 (n = 6
healthy donors). Representative plots show monocytes before and after sorting (left). TF protein expression in cell
lysates and TF functional activity measured by the formation of factor Xa in vitro were compared between the
different monocyte subsets in vitro using Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons posttest. Lines re-
present median values. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Schechter et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017)
30 August 2017
2 of 13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 TLRs, proinflammatory cytokine receptors, and signaling molecules
such as MyD88 and TRIF (Fig. 1, C and D), whereas TFneg cells exhib-
ited increased relative expression of CX3CR1 (Fig. 1, C and D). Principal
component analysis (PCA) with vector analysis of the expression
profile of all genes confirmed the observation that TFpos and TFneg
monocytes have distinct gene expression profiles associated with in-
flammation and coagulation (Fig. 1D). These findings indicate that
rather than representing a general state of cell activation, TF expression
by circulating mononuclear cells may be restricted to a specific mono-
cyte subset.
It is known that expression of surface markers on monocytes is
dynamic and can change depending on the stimulation and micro-
environment conditions (26). To address whether this dynamic expres-
sion of surface markers was confounding our interpretation of which
monocyte subset expresses TF in response to LPS, we sorted the three
major monocyte subsets based on the dichotomous surface expression
ofCD14andCD16(CD14++CD16−, CD14+CD16+, andCD14dimCD16+),
stimulated each subset with LPS, and then examined TF expression
in cell lysates and measured TF functional activity by a colorimetric as-
say, which quantifies the formation of the coagulation factor Xa (Fig.
1E) (27). Under unstimulated conditions, TF protein expression and
functional activity by each monocyte subset were uniformly low in
cultures (Fig. 1E). LPS stimulation induced an increase in TF protein
expression and activity in CD14++CD16− monocytes, a marginal in-
crease of TF functional activity (by means of factor Xa formation) in
CD14+CD16+ cells, and no effect on CD14dimCD16+ monocytes (Fig.
1E). These data demonstrate an inherent capacity for the CD14++CD16−
monocyte subset to express TF after LPS-driven activation.
TF-expressing monocytes are expanded in chronic HIV
infection independent of antiretroviral treatment
It has been previously observed that monocytes from HIV+ patients
display higher levels of TF expression compared to healthy controls
(18). Here, we extended these observations by comparing TF expression
in HIV+ individuals before and after antiretroviral therapy (ART) ini-
tiation (after virological suppression was achieved) and age- and gender-
matched healthy controls (table S2). In a cross-sectional comparison of
ex vivo TF expression, measured by flow cytometry, we observed that
the frequency of TFpos monocytes was significantly higher in both ART-
naïve and ART-treated HIV+ patients compared to healthy controls (P <
0.001 and P < 0.01, respectively; Fig. 2A), albeit with considerable varia-
bility in expression levels. The median frequency of TFpos cells was not
statistically different between treatment-naïve HIV+ patients and those
with ART-induced suppression of HIV viremia (Fig. 2A). This finding
suggests that TF protein expression in HIV+ patients may not be subs-
tantially affectedby ART. Wenext compared thepotentialof monocytes
to produce TF in response to LPS between the different study groups. We
found that the frequencies of TFpos monocytes were significantly higher in
HIV+ patients, before and after ART, compared to healthy individuals in
unstimulated cultures as well as upon LPS stimulation (Fig. 2B). There
was no observed difference in response to LPS between treatment-naïve
HIV+ patients and those on ART with virological suppression (Fig. 2B).
These results mirrored the findings obtained by quantification of TF
protein expression in PBMC lysates (Fig. 2C). We further demonstrated
that TF expressed on the cell surface of monocytes from HIV+ indivi-
duals was able to trigger factor Xa formation, demonstrating that TF was
functionally active in vitro (Fig. 2D). Again,nodifferencewasdetectedin
Fig. 2. Frequency of TF-expressing monocytes is increased in chronically HIV-infected individuals and in SIV-infected NHPs despite virological suppression
status. (A) Left: Representative plots of TFpos monocytes ex vivo in healthy controls and HIV+ patients. Right: Summary data of frequency of TFpos monocytes from a
cross-sectional analysis including healthy controls (n = 12), ART-naïve HIV+ patients (n = 10), and HIV+ individuals after ART-induced virological suppression (HIV+ post-
ART; n =1 0). PBMC were stimulated with LPS in vitro, and frequency of TFpos monocytes (B), TF protein expression in cell lysates (C), and TF functional activity (D) were
compared between the cross-sectional study groups using Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons posttest. (E) Left: Representative plots of TF expression
on monocytes ex vivo in chronically SIV-infected pigtail macaque (PTMs) (n = 6) and African green monkey (AGMs) (n = 6). Right: Summary data of frequency of TFpos
monocytes ex vivo from both naïve and chronically SIV-infected animals. PBMC were stimulated with LPS in vitro, and frequency of TFpos monocytes (F) and TF
functional activity (G) were compared between naïve or SIV-infected PTMs and AGMs. Lines represent median values. Data were analyzed using Mann-Whitney U test.
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Schechter et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017)
30 August 2017
3 of 13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 TF functional activity between the groups of HIV+ patients (Fig. 2, C
and D). The differences in TF expression on monocytes were in-
dependent of the total monocyte counts in PBMC among the HIV-
infected groups, which were not significantly different (median,
4451 cells/ml; IQR, 2383 to 6829 in ART-naïve versus 4507 cells/ml;
IQR, 3308 to 7771 in virologically suppressed individuals; P = 0.34).
These primary observations indicated an increase in the capacity of
monocytes to produce TF and promote factor Xa formation in vitro
upon cellular activation in HIV infection, which persists after ART-
induced HIV suppression. To further test this hypothesis, we prospec-
tively assessed ex vivo TF expression as well as plasma levels of D-dimer
and C-reactive protein (CRP) in an additional set of HIV+ patients
examined longitudinally with paired samples available from pre- and
post-ART (at virological suppression) time points. This longitudinal
paired analysis confirmed that the frequency of TFpos monocytes was
not significantly altered by ART (fig. S3). Of 12 HIV+ patients pro-
spectively evaluated, 6 (50%) exhibited increases and 4 (33.3%)
displayed reduction in TF expression upon ART-induced HIV sup-
pression. Mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) values for TF expression
did not differ between the time points [MFI at pre-ART, 575 ± 49.5
arbitrary units (AU) versus MFI at virologic suppression time point,
553 ± 89.6 AU; P = 0.785]. However, D-dimer levels decreased,
whereas CRP values remained unchanged after ART initiation (fig. S3).
These findings show sustained elevation of TF expression on circulating
monocytes regardless of the reduction in D-dimer levels, which strongly
argues that HIV-associated coagulopathy may persist even after ART-
induced HIV suppression, as has been previously suggested (28). In
ART-naïve patients, the ex vivo frequency of TFpos monocytes was
positively correlated with the levels of D-dimer (r = 0.69, P = 0.015; fig.
S3) and did not associate with concentrations of CRP (r = 0.04, P =
0.908; fig. S3).
To further assess the role of TF on monocytes in HIV pathogenesis
and coagulopathy, we next examined the expression and activity of
this coagulation factor in PBMCs from NHPs before and after SIVsab
infection in vivo. In this biological system, AGMs are the natural hosts
of SIVsab and undergo infection but do not progress to SIV disease and
coagulopathy despite active chronic viralreplication reflectedbylifelong
high plasma SIV viremia (29, 30). Contrastingly, SIVsab infection
causes progressive disease in PTMs (29). We have previously shown
that PTMs infected with SIVsab experience increased systemic in-
flammation and coagulopathy compared to naïve animals (25). Before
SIVsab infection, both PTMs and AGMs exhibited similarly low fre-
quencies of TFpos monocytes (Fig. 2E). The frequency of monocytes
expressing TF ex vivo was substantially increased in chronically
infected PTMs compared to naïve animals (P < 0.001), whereas there
was no marked effect of SIV infection in AGMs (Fig. 2E). Monocytes,
but not myeloid dendritic cells, were the major source of TF ex vivo
and after LPS stimulation in vitro (fig. S4). Notably, monocytes
isolated from naïve PTMs and AGMs displayed indistinguishable
TF expression in response to LPS stimulation in vitro (Fig. 2F). Dur-
ing chronic SIVsab infection, the frequency of TFpos monocytes was
higher in PTMs compared to AGMs in unstimulated cells, and this
difference was further increased upon LPS stimulation (Fig. 2F). Com-
parable results were obtained by quantification of TF functional ac-
tivity (Fig. 2G). In addition, we found in our cohort of NHPs that
concentrations of D-dimer and CRP in plasma were significantly
higher in accordance with the augmented TF monocyte expression
in chronically infected PTMs compared to naïve animals (table S1).
Neither TF expression nor levels of these plasma markers of inflam-
mation and coagulation were significantly altered upon SIVsab infec-
tion in AGMs (table S1). To further investigate the role of TF in SIV
pathogenesis, we examined TF expression before infection and at differ-
ent time points after infection in the mucosal tissues sampled from
PTMs. We observed a continuous increase of TF expression in the
gut with disease progression (fig. S5). Furthermore, few TFpos cells were
present in the lamina propria before infection, but their numbers
increased after infection, first at the tip of the villi and then more pro-
foundly in the lamina propria. The same dynamics were also observed
in Peyer’s patches (fig. S5). The significant increase in TF expression of
both mucosal tissues and peripheral monocytes of chronically SIV-
infected PTM suggests that TF expression may contribute to the patho-
genesis of SIV-driven persistent coagulation and inflammation.
Proinflammatory cytokines increase TF expression during
chronic HIV infection
A potential explanation for the activation of circulating monocytes and
subsequent persistent TF expression in HIV-infected persons could be a
soluble factor. To test this hypothesis, we column-purified CD14+
monocytes from healthy blood donors and incubated them overnight
with medium supplemented with either heat-inactivated serum from
human AB plasma (HAB serum), filtered pooled sera from healthy
controls, or sera from individuals chronically infected with HIV or hep-
atitis C virus (HCV). TF protein expression was then quantified in cell
lysates. Samples incubated with HIV+ or HCV+ sera displayed augmented
production of TF (Fig. 3A). TF expression was indistinguishable be-
tween cultures of monocytes incubated with sera from ART-naïve
HIV+ patients and at different time points upon treatment initiation
(Fig. 3B). This observation indicates that the factors driving TF expres-
sion by monocytes persist after ART implementation. Moreover, we
performed a series of blocking experiments trying to delineate the
molecules that are potentially driving monocyte activation and TF
production from the sera of HIV-infected individuals. We found that
IL-1RI blocking resulted in a slight but consistent reduction of TF
production in monocytes cultured in the presence of HIV+ serum
(Fig. 3C). Neutralizing IL-6R and interferon-g receptor (IFNgR) did
not alter TF expression in this experimental setting (Fig. 3C). Notably,
TF production exhibited a substantial drop in monocyte cultures incu-
bated with blocking antibodies against type I IFN receptor (IFNAR) or
tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1) (P = 0.003 and P = 0.005,
respectively; Fig. 3C). These experiments confirmed that inflammatory
signals present in serum from HIV-infected persons are capable of
inducing TF production in monocytes. The specific drivers of these
inflammatory signals could be coming from inflamed tissues or the
blood itself. Microbial translocation in the gut has been described as
an important trigger of persistent systemic inflammation detected in
HIV+ persons (31). To test the possibility that monocyte activation
in the blood could result from a residual leakage of microbial
products from mucosal interfaces, we incubated HIV+ serum with
polymyxin B before culturing the monocytes. Serum treated with
this bactericidal compound resulted in the lowest TF expression
among all the experimental conditions tested (Fig. 3C). These findings
demonstrate that circulating microbial products are relevant drivers of
TF expression by activated monocytes.
TF-expressing monocytes produce multiple
proinflammatory cytokines
Chronic HIV infection has been associated with persistent immune ac-
tivation and elevated markers of coagulation (22, 32). We hypothesized
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Schechter et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017)
30 August 2017
4 of 13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 that TF-expressing monocytes, aside from promoting coagulation,
could contribute to systemic inflammation. In non–HIV-infected
healthy individuals, TFpos monocytes more frequently produced
multiple proinflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-a, IL-1b, and IL-6,
simultaneously upon LPS stimulation (Fig. 4, A to C). We further
investigated the profile of intracellular cytokine expression in mono-
cytes ex vivo from our longitudinal cohort of HIV+ patients before
ART initiation and after virological suppression (table S3). HIV+ indi-
viduals, regardless of treatment status, exhibited high frequencies of
monocytes spontaneously producing proinflammatory cytokines (fig.
S6A). Furthermore, by testing the monocyte response to LPS stimulation
in our prospective cohort of HIV+ patients, we detected markedly differ-
ent intracellular cytokine expression profiles between TFneg and TFpos
monocytes in ART-naïve HIV+ patients (c2, P < 0.001). In contrast
to monocytes from healthy controls (Fig. 4C), after LPS stimulation,
the vast majority of TFneg monocytes from HIV-infected individuals
produced IL-6 alone (median, 48.7%; IQR, 33.5 to 52.8% of all the
cytokine-producing TFneg cells), whereas TFpos monocytes more fre-
quently produced TNF-a, IL-1b, and IL-6 simultaneously (53.1% of
all the cytokine-producing TFpos cells; IQR, 49.5 to 56.7%) (Fig. 4D).
The intracellular cytokine expression profile of LPS-stimulated
monocytes significantly changed after ART initiation (c2, P =
0.015 for the expression profile in TFneg cells and P < 0.001 for TFpos
monocytes from pre-ART versus post-ART initiation; Fig. 4D). In
virologically suppressed HIV+ individuals, TFneg cells exhibited a
mixed cytokine expression profile with monocytes producing one
or various combinations of two cytokines, whereas most of the TFpos
monocytes remained polyfunctional, producing a combination of
three cytokines (TNF-a, IL-1b, and IL-6) simultaneously (c2, P <
0.001 profile of TFneg versus TFpos cells; Fig. 4D). In addition, the
frequency of TF-expressing monocytes strongly correlated with that
of polyfunctional monocytes before ART initiation (r = 0.89, P < 0.001)
and in patients with virological suppression (r = 0.91, P < 0.001).
We next examined the monocyte response to LPS in our NHP
cohort by assessing the intracellular expression of TNF-a, IL-1b, and
IL-6 in vitro and found that monocytes isolated from both naïve and
chronically SIVsab-infected PTMs and AGMs were capable of
producing these cytokines upon LPS stimulation (fig. S6B). The cy-
tokine expression profile of stimulated monocytes was not different
between uninfected PTMs and AGMs, with most of the cytokine-
producing cells expressing IL-1b alone in both species (c2, P = 0.459;
Fig. 4E and fig. S6B). The overall frequency of monocytes simulta-
neously expressing multiple proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-a,
IL-1b, and IL-6) ex vivo was significantly higher in chronically
infected PTMs than in AGMs (Fig. 4F). Upon activation in vitro, the
frequency of cytokine-producing monocytes was higher in PTMs than
in AGMs (fig. S6B). SIVsab infection caused changes in the cytokine
expression profile of stimulated monocytes from both NHP species
(c2, P = 0.035 for AGM naïve versus chronically infected, P < 0.001
for PTM naïve versus chronically infected; Fig. 4E). During chronic
SIVsab infection, most of the activated monocytes from PTMs
produced TNF-a, IL-1b, and IL-6 simultaneously (median, 43.5% of
all the cytokine-producing monocytes; IQR, 35.2 to 55.8%), whereas
the activated monocytes from AGMs had a mixed expression profile
and a low frequency of triple cytokine producers (median, 12.5% of
all the cytokine-producing monocytes; IQR, 8.5 to 18.9%; P < 0.001 ver-
sus frequency of triple producers from PTMs) (Fig. 4E).
We next quantitatively compared the dynamics of monocyte
polyfunctionality in HIV-infected patients as well as in SIVab-infected
NHPs. In HIV+ patients, the polyfunctionality of TFpos monocytes
remained high after ART initiation and was significantly increased in
TFneg cells after ART compared to TFneg cells before ART initiation
(P < 0.01; Fig. 4F). The polyfunctionality of TFpos monocytes from
chronically SIVsab+ PTMs was significantly higher when compared
to TFneg monocytes from the same animals and also when compared
to TFpos monocytes isolated from chronically SIVsab+ AGMs (P <
0.001; Fig. 4G). These findings from both HIV-infected patients and
SIV-infected NHPs support the hypothesis that, in monocytes,
increased TF expression is associated with an enhanced potential to
produce multiple proinflammatory cytokines.
Thrombin triggers TF expression on CD14high monocytes
and induces production of multiple proinflammatory
cytokines via PAR-1 signaling
Our results so far demonstrated that CD14high monocytes have
increased capacity both to promote activation of coagulation factors
and to produce multiple proinflammatory cytokines linked to HIV
and SIV pathogenesis. Activation of the coagulation cascade by TF in
vivo ultimately resultsin the formation of thrombin, an essentialprotein
leading to thrombus development (33). Thrombin has been shown to
activate nuclear factor kB (NF-kB) via cleavage of the cytoplasmic tail of
Fig. 3. Inflammatory mediators and microbial products may drive TF expres-
sion by circulating monocytes in the context of HIV infection. (A) Column-
purified CD14+ monocytes from 10 healthy controls were cultured for 18 hours
in the presence of RPMI supplemented with 10% manufactured human AB serum
or serum isolated from healthy controls, ART-naïve HIV+ patients, or HCV+ indivi-
duals, as described in Materials and Methods. (B) Monocytes were also cultured in
the presence of serum from ART-naïve HIV-infected patients at different time
points after ART initiation. (C) Monocytes were cultured for 18 hours in the pres-
ence of indicated blocking antibodies (10 mg/ml) or with serum previously treated
with polymyxin B (0.5 mg/ml). Cells were washed and lysed for the assessment of
TF protein expression using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Unmatched
data were analyzed using Mann-Whitney U test, whereas matched pairs were
compared using Wilcoxon matched pairs test. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P <
0.001. ns, nonsignificant.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Schechter et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017)
30 August 2017
5 of 13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 protease-activated receptors (PARs) (34). Among the various types of
PARs, PAR-1 and PAR-3 are known to be expressed on monocytes
(35). A recent study has demonstrated that thrombin triggers TF ex-
pression on human monocytes via activation of PAR-1 (36, 37). We
postulated that activated CD14highTFpos monocytes might also be able
to sense thrombin generated from coagulation. To test this hypothesis,
we performed a series of experiments and first confirmed that thrombin
triggers TF expression on monocytes from healthy donors (fig. S7A).
Subsequently, we found that this effect was associated with reduced
expression of PAR-1 on the surface of these cells upon thrombin
stimulation (fig. S7B). We observed that TF expression triggered by
thrombin was restricted to CD14high monocytes (fig. S7C), and we
further established that CD14++CD16− and CD14+CD16+ cells exhib-
ited similarly high expression of PAR-1 (fig. S7C). Additional assays in
HIV+ patients suggested that PAR-1 is preferentially expressed in
CD14high cells and that it is shed in response to thrombin in monocytes,
a phenomenon that was associated with induction of TF expression by
these cells (fig. S7D). These results indicate that the subset of monocytes
that produces TF upon LPS-driven activation is the same that can re-
spond to thrombin stimulation in vitro, possibly via PAR-1.
These results led us to speculate that monocytes activated by throm-
bin also produce multiple proinflammatory cytokines. We tested this
idea by examining cytokine production by PBMC directly stimulated
with thrombin in vitro. We found that thrombin induced robust pro-
duction of intracellular cytokines (TNF-a, IL-1b, and IL-6) by CD14high
monocytes from healthy individuals (fig. S7E). Pharmacologic inhibi-
tion of PAR-1 signaling by SCH79797 completely neutralized the effects
of thrombin on TF expression and cytokine production (fig. S7E). These
results delineate how thrombin triggers an inflammatory response by
monocytes in a PAR-1–dependent manner.
Ixolaris blocks TF activity without suppressing monocyte
immune function in vitro
The results at this point support the hypothesis that monocytes are
highly responsive to thrombin and act as a critical link between TLR-
driven persistent inflammation and coagulation in chronic viral infec-
tions. Interventional therapies focusing on TF inhibition and/or blockade
could therefore be key to breaking this vicious cycle of coagulation and
inflammation in HIV and SIV pathogenesis. Ixolaris is a small molecule
isolated from the saliva of the tick Ixodes scapularis and acts as a potent
Fig. 4. TF-expressing mono-
cytes produce multiple pro-
inflammatory cytokines.
(A) Representative plots show
intracellular cytokine staining
for IL-1b, IL-6, and TNF-a in
monocytes from healthy do-
nors (n = 12) upon LPS stimula-
tion in vitro. SSC-A, side-scatter
area. (B) Polyfunctional analy-
sis of TFneg and TFpos mono-
cytes upon LPS stimulation.
(C to E) The cytokine expres-
sion profiles in TFneg and
TFpos monocytes were com-
pared using c2 tests. (F) Fre-
quencyofmonocytesproducing
morethanonecytokineexvivo
was compared between TFneg
and TFpos monocytes in a pro-
spective cohort of ART-naïve
HIV+patients(n=15)beforether-
apy initiation and after ART-
induced virological suppression
(HIV+ post-ART). (G) Frequency
of monocytes producing more
than one cytokine ex vivo was
compared between TFneg and
TFpos monocytes in chronically
SIV-infected PTMs (n = 6) and
AGMs (n = 6). Unmatched data
were compared using the
Mann-Whitney U test, whereas
matched comparisons were
performed using the Wilcoxon
matched pairs test. **P < 0.01,
***P < 0.001.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Schechter et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017)
30 August 2017
6 of 13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 TF pathway inhibitor, by blocking factor VIIa/TF–induced coagulation
(38, 39). Although Ixolaris has been tested in thrombosis models (40),
it has not been evaluated in the setting of HIV-driven coagulopathy.
In our in vitro model, Ixolaris inhibited TF functional activity in
monocytesfromhealthydonorsstimulatedwithLPSinadose-dependent
fashion (Fig. 5A). Even at doses 10 times higher than the maximum
inhibitory concentration (10 ng/ml), Ixolaris did not exhibit substantial
cytotoxicity (fig. S8). We next examined whether Ixolaris blocks TF
activity in pathological settings such as HIV and SIV infection. Ixolaris
completely inhibited the formation of factor Xa under unstimulated
conditions and after LPS stimulation in vitro in PBMC from both
ART-naïve and ART-treated, virologically suppressed HIV+ persons
(Fig. 5B). Ixolaris also significantly inhibited TF activity in PBMC
from chronically SIVsab-infected PTMs and AGMs (Fig. 5C). Ixolaris
did not affect TF protein expression or cytokine production triggered
by LPS stimulation in vitro (Fig. 5D). These results demonstrate that,
at low doses, Ixolaris can potently inhibit TF functional activity in cells
from HIV+ patients and from SIVsab-infected NHPs and suggest that
inhibition of TF activity could be used to suppress monocyte-driven
activation of coagulation in these settings without directly affecting the
capacity of these cells to respond to TLR stimulation.
In vivo administration of Ixolaris is safe and decreases
coagulation and immune activation in SIVsab infection
in PTMs
To assess the efficacy of Ixolaris, we first measured its anticoagulant
effect in vitro (Fig. 6). Ixolaris resulted in dose-dependent prolongation
of prothrombin time (PT)/international normalized ratio (INR) when
added to human plasma collected from healthy individuals (Fig. 6A).
Changes in PT/INR were similar when Ixolaris was added to plasma
from uninfected healthy PTMs (Fig. 6B). Activated partial thrombo-
plastin time (aPTT), an intrinsic pathway coagulation marker, was
not affected by Ixolaris in either monkey or human plasma, indicating
that Ixolaris has a specific inhibitory effect on the extrinsic pathway.
Our results thus confirmed the high efficacy and specificity of Ixolaris in
NHPs in vitro.
Chronic progressive HIV/SIV infection is characterized by high
levels of immune activation, inflammation, and hypercoagulation,
which are robust independent prognostic factors of progression to
AIDS and comorbidities (23, 41, 42). To investigate the effect of the
anticoagulant therapy on the outcome of a highly pathogenic SIVsab
infection, we administered Ixolaris to five PTMs upon SIVsab infection
(at the day of infection) and compared the natural history of SIVsab
infection in Ixolaris-treated PTMs and untreated controls. Therefore,
we first assessed the effects of the anticoagulant treatment by comparing
the levels of immune activation and inflammation markers in PTMs
receiving Ixolaris and in controls. The animals treated with Ixolaris
showed significantly reduced levels of the proinflammatory cytokine
IL-17 during early chronic infection (P = 0.03; Fig. 6C). The antico-
agulant treatment also affected T cell immune activation, as demon-
strated by a lower frequency of CD4+ T cells expressing HLA-DR+
and CD38+ (Fig. 6D), and by significantly lower frequency of CD8+
T cells expressing HLA-DR+ and CD38+ during early chronic infection
(P < 0.001; Fig. 6E).
After treatment, TF expression on circulating CD14+ monocytes
decreased compared with untreated controls (Fig. 6F). In addition,
Ixolaris treatment significantly lowered both CD80 expression in
chronically infected PTMs (P = 0.004; Fig. 6G) and CD86 expression
in both acutely and chronically infected PTMs (P = 0.03; Fig. 6H)
compared with the untreated controls. To further validate the reduction
of monocyte activation induced by Ixolaris treatment, we measured
glucose transporter-1 (Glut-1) expression on CD14+ monocytes, an im-
portant monocyte activation marker (43–45). Ixolaris-treated animals
showed a significantly reduced Glut-1 expression after SIV infection
Fig. 5. Ixolaris potently blocks TF activity but not protein expression in activated monocytes from HIV+ patients and chronically SIV-infected NHPs. (A) TF
functional activity in vitro measured by factor Xa formation in elutriated monocyte cultures from healthy donors stimulated with LPS and treated with indicated doses
of Ixolaris (n = 5). Data represent percentage of the positive control [LPS (1 mg/ml) without Ixolaris]. TF activity upon treatment with Ixolaris was compared between (B) healthy
controls (n = 12) and unmatched ART-naïve HIV+ (n = 10) patients and those who achieved ART-induced virological suppression (post-ART; n = 10) as well as between
(C) chronically SIV-infected PTMs (n = 6) and AGMs (n = 6). (D) Left: Representative plots of intracellular IL-6 and TNF-a production in monocytes from ART-naïve HIV+
individuals stimulated in the presence or absence of Ixolaris. Right: Summary data showing frequency of TFpos monocytes and percent of cytokine-producing monocytes in
stimulated cultures treated or not with Ixolaris. Data were analyzed using the Wilcoxon matched pairs test. *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Schechter et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017)
30 August 2017
7 of 13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 6. Anticoagulant treatment positively affects the immune activation and systemic inflammation of highly pathogenic SIVsab infection in PTMs. (A) Dose-
dependent dynamics of PT/INR and aPTT after Ixolaris addition to plasma isolated from uninfected human subjects. (B) Dose-dependent dynamics of PT/INR and aPTT
after Ixolaris addition to plasma isolated from uninfected PTMs. (C) Dynamics of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-17 in untreated versus Ixolaris-treated, SIVsab-infected
PTMs, as assessed by Luminex. Dynamics of activated double-positive HLA-DR+/CD38+ CD4+ (D) and CD8+ T cells (E) in untreated versus Ixolaris-treated, SIVsab-infected
PTMs, as assessed by flow cytometry. Dynamics of TF expression (F) on CD14+ monocytes in untreated versus Ixolaris-treated, SIVsab-infected PTMs, as assessed by flow
cytometry, as well as CD80 (G), CD86 (H), and Glut-1 (I) expression on CD14+ monocytes in untreated versus Ixolaris-treated, SIVsab-infected PTMs, as assessed by flow
cytometry. (J) Dynamics of D-dimer (DD) in untreated versus Ixolaris-treated, SIVsab-infected PTMs, as assessed by immunoturbidimetric assay. (K) Dynamics of plasma
SIVsab viremia in untreated versus Ixolaris-treated, SIVsab-infected PTMs, as assessed by a real-time PCR assay. vRNA, viral RNA. (L) Survival in untreated versus Ixolaris-
treated, SIVsab-infected PTMs. Statistical analyses were performed with grouping of acute versus chronic infection time points, as described in Materials and Methods,
except for TF and Glut-1 for which the statistical analyses were carried out on whole dynamics, due to limited availability of samples for flow staining. Survival analysis
was performed using the Mantel-Cox test.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Schechter et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017)
30 August 2017
8 of 13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 compared to untreated controls (P = 0.001; Fig. 6I). Furthermore, we
examined associations between expression of monocyte markers and
lymphocyte activation using generalizing estimating equations, due
to the nature of the data distribution and small sample size of the
experimental groups. Using this approach, we found that the mono-
cyte activation markers strongly associated with lymphocyte activation.
CD80 and CD86 expression on CD14+ monocytes were directly asso-
ciated with HLA-DR+ CD38+ expression on CD4+ T cells (P < 0.001
and P < 0.001, respectively), whereas Glut-1 expression on CD14+
monocytes was strongly associated with HLA-DR+ CD38+ expression
on both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (P < 0.001 and P < 0.001, respectively).
Together, these results suggest that Ixolaris treatment had a beneficial
effect in reducing immune activation and inflammation associated with
SIV infection.
The hypercoagulable status exhibited in SIVsab-infected progressive
NHPs and HIV-infected patients is marked by elevated D-dimer, which
is associated with increased incidence of cardiovascular comorbidities
and mortality (21, 25, 46). Therefore, we next compared the D-dimer
levels in Ixolaris-treated PTMs and controls. Ixolaris administration
significantly reduced plasma D-dimer levels in acute SIVsab infection of
PTMs (P = 0.033) (Fig. 6J) and resulted in lower D-dimer levels during
early chronic infection, indicating a clear effect of Ixolaris in improving
the coagulation status in the SIV-infected animals. To monitor the in-
fection in SIVsab-infected PTMs, we measured plasma SIV viremia in
all infected animals (47). The Ixolaris-treated group showed overall lower
viral loads compared to controls (Fig. 6K).
Ixolaris-treated animals did not develop disease during the first
100 days after infection (Fig. 6L). In accordance with our previous studies
in which two of five SIVsab-infected PTMs were rapid progressors
(48, 49), one of three animals progressed to AIDS in the first 100 days
after infection in the untreated group; however, no rapid progression
was registered in the Ixolaris group. Statistical significance was not
reached in the present study, possibly due to the small sample size. This
result is of potentialtranslational interest because it suggeststhat Ixolaris
treatment may abrogate rapid progression in treated animals, likely due
tothe combinedeffectof reducedimmuneactivation andinflammation,
reduced hypercoagulable status, and small reduction in plasma viremia.
DISCUSSION
Chronic HIV infection has been associated with elevated circulating
levels of biomarkers of coagulation, in particular D-dimer, and systemic
inflammation, such as IL-6, sCD14, and CRP (22, 23, 50), which have
been independently linked to a higher risk of non–AIDS-related death
and mortality (23) even in persons treated with ART (51). Although
ART-induced suppression of HIV viremia is shown to significantly re-
duce plasma levels of D-dimer, plasma levels remain higher than in
non–HIV-infected populations (32).
Monocytes have been previously described as immune cells involved
in cardiovascular disease in both HIV− and HIV+ populations (4, 51–53)
and are an important source of TF (9). Here, we performed a detailed
immune profiling of monocyte subsets and delineated molecular sig-
natures that characterize TF-expressing cells in the context of TLR
activation. Our results demonstrated that TFpos monocytes exhibit
elevated expression of several genes associated with innate immune
activation. These findings argue that the subpopulation of monocytes
that is able to up-regulate TF expression upon TLR4 activation is the
classical subset defined as CD14+CD16−. Activated monocytes that
do not express TF under the same circumstances exhibit markers of
patrolling monocytes (CD14dimCD16+) such as up-regulation of
CX3CR1 gene expression. In the setting of coagulopathy, it is possible
that patrolling monocytes, expressing high levels of CX3CR1, a vascular
homing receptor, might interact with thrombin clots. Our results indi-
cate that the patrolling monocytes express the lowest level of PAR-1 and
that PAR-1 expression is decreased by thrombin stimulation. Therefore,
in vivo, it is possible that the interaction between CX3CR1-expressing
patrolling monocytes and thrombin clots accounts for the lower expres-
sion of PAR-1. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the frequency of
monocytes expressing TF upon activation could not be further increased
with augmenting doses of TLR activation, suggesting an inherent capac-
ity of these circulating monocytes to express this coagulation factor. We
confirmed that nonmonocytic cells from peripheral blood are unable to
express TF upon LPS stimulation. Flow cytometry–based phenotypic
analysis revealed that compared to TFneg monocytes, TFpos cells
displayed increased expression of HLA-DR and costimulatory mole-
cules such as CD40 and CD86 as well as IL-6R. These results indicate
a unique monocyte phenotype capable of producing TF. Previous flow
cytometry–based studies have indicated that CD16+ monocytes are able
to produce TF (54). However, our results indicate that the molecular
signature associated with TF expression in monocytes is restricted to
the classical proinflammatory subset that lacks expression of CX3CR1.
It is possible that different experimental settings and/or gating strategies
have resulted in discrepancies between the studies, and for this reason,
we performed TF expression assessment in sorted monocyte subsets to
identify the main TF producers. In addition, molecular gene analysis
was performed in healthy individuals, and gene expression might differ
in HIV+ individuals due to the trained immunity phenomenon (55).
Our findings indicate that classical proinflammatory monocytes are
the major subset capable of robustly expressing TF protein and also
up-regulating TF functional activity upon LPS stimulation.
Previous studies have indicated that TF expression on monocytes
is increased in HIV-infected individuals compared to healthy controls
and that the frequency of TFpos cells is associated with HIV disease
progression (18). Here, we found that the frequency of TFpos mono-
cytes, as well as TF functional activity, was similar between ART-naïve
HIV+ individuals and those who achieved HIV suppression after ART
initiation. These findings strongly indicate that TF expression by mono-
cytes remains high in HIV+ individuals regardless of ART-induced
virological suppression, which could be associated with increased
potential to activate the coagulation cascade and cause cardiovascular
disease. Consistent with this concept, previous work has demonstrated
a positive correlation between frequency of TFpos monocytes and D-dimer
levels in HIV+ patients (18). We validated these findings in our analysis
of ART-naive HIV+ patients. Intriguingly, although the D-dimer plas-
ma levels were significantly reduced after ART-induced suppression
of HIV viremia, the frequency of TFpos monocytes remained elevated.
It is plausible that some degree of coagulopathy persists despite the
decreases in D-dimer and supports a more complex relationship be-
tween pro- and anticoagulant factors in untreated HIV due to poor syn-
thetic liver function (20). This also suggests that assessing TF expression
on monocytes would increase sensitivity for the detection of coagulop-
athy. Our findings further reveal TF as a potential therapeutic target in
ART-treated patients with evidence of coagulopathy.
The pathogenic role of coagulation during progressive SIVsab infec-
tion in PTMs has been established previously (25), and NHPs serve as
an important HIV model that can be controlled for key variables, such
as time of infection. Here, we observed that compared to AGMs, which
experience active viral replication but no disease progression, PTMs
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Schechter et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017)
30 August 2017
9 of 13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 have significantly increased frequency of TF-expressing monocytes and
TF functional activity upon chronic SIVsab infection. No differences
were observed in TF expression and activity in vitro between PTMs
and AGMs before SIV infection, suggesting that monocyte subsets from
these two NHP species diverge markedly in response to chronic viral
infection. These results also link the occurrence of SIV progression
and systemic coagulopathy with increased capacity of monocytes to
produce TF upon activation.
Aside from their role in coagulation, monocytes are also important
in inflammatory processes due to their production of cytokines. There is
a growing body of evidence indicating that persistent inflammation is
associated with increased mortality in HIV (23, 56). Our experiments
assessing polyfunctionality of monocytes by means of production of
IL-1b, IL-6, and TNF-a upon TLR activation in vitro demonstrate that
TFpos cells are more frequently triple cytokine producers when com-
pared to TFneg monocytes in healthy individuals and in HIV+ patients,
as well as in chronically SIV-infected PTMs. These results suggest that
the same monocyte subset that expresses TF upon activation may also
be implicated in persistent inflammation by producing multiple cyto-
kines. This idea was reinforced by our findings demonstrating an
increased frequency of polyfunctional monocytes in PTMs compared
to AGMs after SIVsab infection but not in naïve animals. Thus, it is
reasonable to propose that TFpos cells may be critically implicated in
the promotion of systemic inflammation and coagulation associated
with disease progression in chronic HIV and SIVsab infection (fig. S9).
Having identified a role of TF-expressing monocytes at the intersec-
tion of inflammation and coagulation, we hypothesized that interfering
with TF could serve as a therapeutic approach to target hypercoagula-
tion. Administration of Ixolaris in vivo decreased T cell activation as
well as plasma IL-17 and D-dimer levels. Ixolaris produced no evidence
of toxicity and was not associated with significant CD4+ or SIVsab vi-
remia changes. The results of the in vivo study are significant for two
reasons. First, they point to a causal relationship between coagulation
and immune activation and inflammation. Thus, the Ixolaris treatment
did not only reduce inflammation but also lowered monocyte and lym-
phocyte activation in the treated animals. The reduction of lympho-
cyte activation may be the direct result of reduced expression of the
costimulatory markers CD80 and CD86 (two potent T cell activa-
tors) on monocytes. Alternatively, Ixolaris treatment could have
affected the levels of immune activation by directly reducing T cell
expression of PAR-1. Such a scenario is supported by our finding that
Ixolaris treatment appears to have a stronger impact on the activation of
CD8+ T cell activation because these cells express higher levels of
PAR-1. In vitro assays showed that Ixolaris treatment did not diminish
TF expression on monocytes in response to LPS; however, these assays
did not have the capacity to generate thrombin. The in vivo data show
reduction of monocyte activation after Ixolaris treatment, highlighting
the importance of TF-generated thrombin on monocyte activation.
Our study limitations included the small sample size of our lon-
gitudinal cohort and the cross-sectional nature of many experiments. In
addition, the in vivo Ixolaris administration study included only a small
number of ART-naïve acutely infected animals, prohibiting a more
detailed evaluation of possible toxicity, drug interaction, complications,
and potential survival benefit in untreated or treated animals.
The impact of anticoagulant therapy on immune activation and in-
flammation in SIVsab-infected PTMs demonstrates that hypercoagulation
is a significant source of persistent immune activation and inflamma-
tion in this model and probably in HIV-infected patients as well.
Anticoagulant therapy by itself reduced important measurements of
immune activation and inflammation and therefore has potential to
improve the clinical management of HIV-infected patients. Second, we
show that anticoagulant treatment improved the naturalhistory of highly
pathogenic SIVsab infection even in the absence of any other interven-
tion aimed at either controlling viral replication (ART) or improving the
health of the gut. Therefore, our study suggests that targeting the coagu-
lation pathway in HIV-infected patients may be effective in reducing the
immune activation and inflammation that are linked to cardiovascular
comorbidities in HIV infection. These findings indicate that targeting
TF may be used as a host-directed therapy in chronic HIV infection as
well as other inflammatory diseases with similar immunopathology.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
Ethics statements are detailed in the Supplementary Materials and
Methods. Participants were prospectively enrolled in a clinical observa-
tional study to evaluate the impact of ART in ART-naïve HIV-infected
persons. The study objectives included the evaluation of phenotype and
function of monocytes at different stages of HIV infection. Participants
were selected retrospectively from a completed trial for evaluation of the
monocyte function based on PBMC availability, compliance with ART,
and lack of aberrant immune responses or clinical course that would
entail administration of medications that may affect coagulation such
as corticosteroids or chemotherapy or other immune therapies.
For the in vivo NHP studies, eight PTMs were infected with SIVsab.
In PTMs, Ixolaris was administered starting from the day of the infec-
tion to assess its impact on key parameters of SIV infection (survival,
viral replication, CD4+ T cell counts and activation status, systemic
inflammation, and coagulation status). The study design involved
the assessment of the impact of Ixolaris on key variables of acute
SIV infection because this stage of infection is when the differences
in these parameters can reach statistical significance even in small
animal groups. In addition, the study design permitted the compari-
sons not only between the animals in the Ixolaris-treated group and
controls but also in the same animals before and after SIVsab infection
and Ixolaris treatment. Multiple samples collected at well-defined key
time points of SIVsab infection enabled these comparisons. Primary
data are located in table S6.
Description of HIV-infected patients
Cross-sectional analysis was performed in HIV-infected individuals
enrolled in protocols at the National Institutes of Health. Cryopreserved
PBMCfrom10HIV+ART-naïve donorsand10HIV+virallysuppressed
patients(median, 128weekson ART; IQR, 112to 128 weeks) were used.
The characteristics of the participants from the cross-sectional analysis
are shown in table S2. Prospective analysis was performed in HIV-
infected ART-naïve patients over the age of 18 with CD4+ T cell counts
of <100 cells/ml before therapy initiation. Cryopreserved PBMC samples
were used from 12 patients pre- and post-ART initiation after HIV sup-
pression (median, 160 weeks on ART; IQR, 96 to 192 weeks). The char-
acteristics of the participants from the prospective analysis are shown in
table S3. Blood from age- and gender-matched healthy donors was
collected from the National Institutes of Health blood bank.
Description of the NHPs samples used for in vitro and
in vivo studies
CryopreservedPBMC from six PTMs and six AGMs were studied from
pre-SIVsab infection (SIV−, naïve) and 72 days post-SIVsab infection
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Schechter et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017)
30 August 2017
10 of 13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (SIV+). The characteristics of the animals before and after SIVsab in-
fection are shown in table S1. For the preclinical study in vivo, eight
PTMs were intravenously infected with plasma equivalent to 300 tissue
culture infectious doses (TCID50) of SIVsab strain BH66 (48). Ixolaris
therapy (20 mg/kg, subcutaneously, daily) was initiated in five PTMs at
the time of infection and was maintained for 80 days. Blood was
collected from all animals twice before infection, twice a week for the
first 2 weeks postinfection, weekly during early chronic infection (up
to 10 weeks postinfection), and then monthly. The Ixolaris-treated
group was closely monitored for signs of bleeding. Plasma viral
RNA loads were quantified using real-time qPCR specifically devel-
oped for SIVsab, as described previously (57, 58).
LPS stimulation
Cryopreserved PBMC were thawed and resuspended in RPMI 1640
supplemented with 10% human AB serum at 106 cells per well in
96-well plates. Cells were washed and resuspended in complete media
with brefeldin-A (5 mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) and stimulated with indi-
cated doses of ultrapure LPS (Sigma-Aldrich) in the presence or ab-
sence of purified Ixolaris (10 nM) for 6 hours at 37°C in 5% CO2. Cells
were then stained following the flow cytometry assay described above.
In vitro experiments with HIV+ and HCV+ serum
Column-purified CD14+ monocyteswere obtainedfromhealthy blood
donors and resuspended in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% of in-
dicated serum (commercialized human AB serum or pooled 0.22-mm
filtered sera from 12 healthy controls, 20 ART-naïve HIV+ patients
and at week 12 and 48 of ART, and 16 HCV+ persons) at 106 cells
per well in 96-well plates. Cells were left overnight (18 hours) at 37°C
in 5% CO2. Cells were then washed and lysed for measurement of TF
protein expression in cell lysates. In additional experiments, cells were
incubated with anti-IL1R1 (10 mg/ml; polyclonal, R&D Systems), anti-
IL6Ra (10 mg/ml; clone 17506, R&D Systems), anti-IFNgR (10 mg/ml;
clone 92101, R&D Systems), anti-IFNAR (10 mg/ml; polyclonal,
ab10719, Abcam), and anti-TNFR1 (10 mg/ml; clone 16803R, R&D
Systems) for 1 hour before incubation with HIV+ serum and persisted
in cultures for additional 18 hours. HIV+ serum was also treated with
polymyxin (0.5 mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour and filtered before
incubating for 18 hours.
Testing the efficacy of Ixolaris in inhibiting coagulation in
NHP in vitro
The in vitro efficacy of Ixolaris was assessed by measuring its impact
on clotting time on citrate plasma from SIV-naïve healthy PTMs.
Results were compared to the in vitro testing of Ixolaris-treated plas-
ma from healthy human subjects. Plasma samples from PTMs and
humans were incubated with Ixolaris (0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, or 2.5 mg/ml) for
2 min at 37°C. PT/INR and aPTT were then immediately measured.
Testing was performed by ITxM Diagnotics.
Statistical analysis
Median and interquartile ranges were used as measures of central ten-
dency. All statistical comparisons were prespecified and two-tailed.
Differences with P < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Data
from continuous variables comparing two groups were analyzed using
Wilcoxon matched-pairs, Mann-Whitney, and Spearman rank correla-
tion tests. Comparisonsbetween more than two groupswere performed
using the Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons ad hoc
test. Nominal variables and the expression profile of cytokine produc-
tion by monocytes were compared using the Fisher’s exact test (two
groups) or c2 test (more than two groups). Hierarchical cluster analysis
(Ward’s method with bootstrap 100×) was used to test whether TFpos
and TFneg monocytes could be clustered separately on the basis of ex-
pression profile of selected proinflammatory genes measured by qPCR
(after data was z-score–normalized). A model of PCA with an asso-
ciated vector analysis was used to visualize the distinction between
TFpos and TFneg cells and the direction in which each marker influences
mathematically the distribution of the data. These data analyses were
performed using GraphPad Prism 6.0 (GraphPad Software Inc.) and
JMP 11.0 (SAS) softwares. Additional description of statistical analyses
is available in the Supplementary Materials and Methods.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/405/eaam5441/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Gating strategy used to evaluate monocytes in PBMC.
Fig. S2. Detailed phenotyping of TF-expressing monocytes.
Fig. S3. Frequency of TF-expressing monocytes in patients prospectively undergoing ART and
its relationship with CRP and D-dimer.
Fig. S4. Circulating CD14+ monocytes, but not myeloid dendritic cells, express TF in chronically
SIV-infected PTMs.
Fig. S5. Induction of TF expression in the gut of PTMs infected with SIVab.
Fig. S6. Intracellular cytokine production and TF expression in HIV-infected patients and in
SIVab-infected NHPs.
Fig. S7. Thrombin induces TF expression on CD14high monocytes via PAR-1.
Fig. S8. Cell viability upon treatment with Ixolaris and/or LPS in vitro.
Fig. S9. Activated monocytes expressing TF represent a link between coagulation and
inflammation.
Table S1. Characteristics of the NHPs used for the in vitro studies.
Table S2. Characteristics of HIV-infected individuals included in the cross-sectional analysis.
Table S3. Characteristics of HIV-infected individuals included in the prospective analyses.
Table S4. List of antibodies used in the flow cytometry experiments in both human and NHP
samples.
Table S5. List of human primers.
Table S6. Primary data.
References (59–62)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. G. Lauvau, L. Chorro, E. Spaulding, S. M. Soudja, Inflammatory monocyte effector
mechanisms. Cell. Immunol. 291, 32–40 (2014).
2. F. Ginhoux, S. Jung, Monocytes and macrophages: Developmental pathways and tissue
homeostasis. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 392–404 (2014).
3. N. G. Sandler, H. Wand, A. Roque, M. Law, M. C. Nason, D. E. Nixon, C. Pedersen,
K. Ruxrungtham, S. R. Lewin, S. Emery, J. D. Neaton, J. M. Brenchley, S. G. Deeks, I. Sereti,
D. C. Douek; Insight Smart Study Group, Plasma levels of soluble CD14 independently
predict mortality in HIV infection. J. Infect. Dis. 203, 780–790 (2011).
4. J. V. Baker, K. H. Hullsiek, A. Singh, E. Wilson, K. Henry, K. Lichtenstein, N. Onen, E. Kojic,
P. Patel, J. T. Brooks, H. N. Hodis, M. Budoff, I. Sereti; CDC SUN Study Investigators,
Immunologic predictors of coronary artery calcium progression in a contemporary HIV
cohort. AIDS 28, 831–840 (2014).
5. E. M. P. Wilson, A. Singh, K. H. Hullsiek, D. Gibson, W. K. Henry, K. Lichtenstein, N. F. Önen,
E. Kojic, P. Patel, J. T. Brooks, I. Sereti, J. V. Baker; Natural History of HIV/AIDS in the Era
of Effective Therapy (SUN Study) Investigators, Monocyte-activation phenotypes are
associated with biomarkers of inflammation and coagulation in chronic HIV infection.
J. Infect. Dis. 210, 1396–1406 (2014).
6. R. A. McKibben, J. B. Margolick, S. Grinspoon, X. Li, F. J. Palella Jr., L. A. Kingsley, M. D. Witt,
R. T. George, L. P. Jacobson, M. Budoff, R. P. Tracy, T. T. Brown, W. S. Post, Elevated levels
of monocyte activation markers are associated with subclinical atherosclerosis in men
with and those without HIV infection. J. Infect. Dis. 211, 1219–1228 (2015).
7. B. B. Andrade, A. Singh, G. Narendran, M. E. Schechter, K. Nayak, S. Subramanian,
S. Anbalagan, S. M. R. Jensen, B. O. Porter, L. R. Antonelli, K. A. Wilkinson, R. J. Wilkinson,
G. Meintjes, H. van der Plas, D. Follmann, D. L. Barber, S. Swaminathan, A. Sher, I. Sereti,
Mycobacterial antigen driven activation of CD14++CD16– monocytes is a predictor of
tuberculosis-associated immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome. PLOS Pathog. 10,
e1004433 (2014).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Schechter et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017)
30 August 2017
11 of 13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 8. G. J. Broze Jr., Binding of human factor VII and VIIa to monocytes. J. Clin. Invest. 70,
526–535 (1982).
9. B. Osterud, E. Bjorklid, Tissue factor in blood cells and endothelial cells. Front. Biosci.
(Elite Ed.) 4, 289–299 (2012).
10. W. Ruf, Protease-activated receptor signaling in the regulation of inflammation. Crit. Care
Med. 32, S287–S292 (2004).
11. H. Kothari, L. V. M. Rao, R. Vankayalapati, U. R. Pendurthi, Mycobacterium tuberculosis
infection and tissue factor expression in macrophages. PLOS ONE 7, e45700 (2012).
12. B. P. Tsao, D. S. Fair, L. K. Curtiss, T. S. Edgington, Monocytes can be induced by
lipopolysaccharide-triggered T lymphocytes to express functional factor VII/VIIa protease
activity. J. Exp. Med. 159, 1042–1057 (1984).
13. S. M. Opal, C. T. Esmon, Bench-to-bedside review: Functional relationships between
coagulation and the innate immune response and their respective roles in the
pathogenesis of sepsis. Crit. Care 7, 23–38 (2002).
14. C. T. Esmon, Does inflammation contribute to thrombotic events? Haemostasis 30 (suppl.
2), 34–40 (2000).
15. M. Levi, T. van der Poll, H. R. Büller, Bidirectional relation between inflammation and
coagulation. Circulation 109, 2698–2704 (2004).
16. A. P. Owens III, N. Mackman, Role of tissue factor in atherothrombosis. Curr. Atheroscler.
Rep. 14, 394–401 (2012).
17. H. Pawelski, D. Lang, S. Reuter, Interactions of monocytes and platelets: Implication for
life. Front. Biosci. (Schol. Ed.) 6, 75–91 (2014).
18. N. T. Funderburg, E. Mayne, S. F. Sieg, R. Asaad, W. Jiang, M. Kalinowska, A. A. Luciano,
W. Stevens, B. Rodriguez, J. M. Brenchley, D. C. Douek, M. M. Lederman, Increased tissue
factor expression on circulating monocytes in chronic HIV infection: Relationship to in
vivo coagulation and immune activation. Blood 115, 161–167 (2010).
19. N. T. Funderburg, M. M. Lederman, Coagulation and morbidity in treated HIV infection.
Thromb. Res. 133 (suppl. 1), S21–S24 (2014).
20. J. V. Baker, K. Brummel-Ziedins, J. Neuhaus, D. Duprez, N. Cummins, D. Dalmau,
J. DeHovitz, C. Lehmann, A. Sullivan, I. Woolley, L. Kuller, J. D. Neaton, R. P. Tracy; INSIGHT
SMART Study Team, HIV replication alters the composition of extrinsic pathway
coagulation factors and increases thrombin generation. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2, e000264
(2013).
21. D. R. Boulware, K. H. Hullsiek, C. E. Puronen, A. Rupert, J. V. Baker, M. A. French,
P. R. Bohjanen, R. M. Novak, J. D. Neaton, I. Sereti; INSIGHT Study Group, Higher levels
of CRP, D-dimer, IL-6, and hyaluronic acid before initiation of antiretroviral therapy
(ART) are associated with increased risk of AIDS or death. J. Infect. Dis. 203, 1637–1646
(2011).
22. D. A. Duprez, J. Neuhaus, L. H. Kuller, R. Tracy, W. Belloso, S. De Wit, F. Drummond,
H. C. Lane, B. Ledergerber, J. Lundgren, D. Nixon, N. I. Paton, R. J. Prineas, J. D. Neaton;
INSIGHT SMART Study Group, Inflammation, coagulation and cardiovascular disease in
HIV-infected individuals. PLOS ONE 7, e44454 (2012).
23. L. H. Kuller, R. Tracy, W. Belloso, S. De Wit, F. Drummond, H. C. Lane, B. Ledergerber,
J. Lundgren, J. Neuhaus, D. Nixon, N. I. Paton, J. D. Neaton; INSIGHT SMART Study Group,
Inflammatory and coagulation biomarkers and mortality in patients with HIV infection.
PLOS Med. 5, e203 (2008).
24. K. P. High, M. Brennan-Ing, D. B. Clifford, M. H. Cohen, J. Currier, S. G. Deeks, S. Deren,
R. B. Effros, K. Gebo, J. J. Goronzy, A. C. Justice, A. Landay, J. Levin, P. G. Miotti, R. J. Munk,
H. Nass, C. R. Rinaldo Jr., M. G. Shlipak, R. Tracy, V. Valcour, D. E. Vance, J. D. Walston,
P. Volberding; OAR Working Group on HIV and Aging, HIV and aging: State of knowledge
and areas of critical need for research. A report to the NIH Office of AIDS Research by the
HIV and Aging Working Group. J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr. 60 (suppl. 1), S1–S18
(2012).
25. I. Pandrea, E. Cornell, C. Wilson, R. M. Ribeiro, D. Ma, J. Kristoff, C. Xu, G. S. Haret-Richter,
A. Trichel, C. Apetrei, A. Landay, R. Tracy, Coagulation biomarkers predict disease
progression in SIV-infected nonhuman primates. Blood 120, 1357–1366 (2012).
26. E. Grage-Griebenow, H.-D. Flad, M. Ernst, Heterogeneity of human peripheral blood
monocyte subsets. J. Leukoc. Biol. 69, 11–20 (2001).
27. I. M. Francischetti, E. Gordon, B. Bizzarro, N. Gera, B. B. Andrade, F. Oliveira, D. Ma,
T. C. F. Assumpcao, J. M. Ribeiro, M. Pena, C.-F. Qi, A. Diouf, S. E. Moretz, C. A. Long,
H. C. Ackerman, S. K. Pierce, A. Sá-Nunes, M. Waisberg, Tempol, an intracellular
antioxidant, inhibits tissue factor expression, attenuates dendritic cell function, and is
partially protective in a murine model of cerebral malaria. PLOS ONE 9, e87140 (2014).
28. N. T. Funderburg, Markers of coagulation and inflammation often remain elevated in
ART-treated HIV-infected patients. Curr. Opin. HIV AIDS 9, 80–86 (2014).
29. D. Ma, A. Jasinska, J. Kristoff, J. P. Grobler, T. Turner, Y. Jung, C. Schmitt, K. Raehtz,
F. Feyertag, N. Martinez Sosa, V. Wijewardana, D. S. Burke, D. L. Robertson, R. Tracy,
I. Pandrea, N. Freimer, C. Apetrei; International Vervet Research Consortium, SIVagm
Infection in wild African green monkeys from south Africa: Epidemiology, natural history,
and evolutionary considerations. PLOS Pathog. 9, e1003011 (2013).
30. D. Ma, A. J. Jasinska, F. Feyertag, V. Wijewardana, J. Kristoff, T. He, K. Raehtz, C. A. Schmitt,
Y. Jung, J. D. Cramer, M. Dione, M. Antonio, R. Tracy, T. Turner, D. L. Robertson, I. Pandrea,
N. Freimer, C. Apetrei, Factors associated with siman immunodeficiency virus
transmission in a natural African nonhuman primate host in the wild. J. Virol. 88,
5687–5705 (2014).
31. G. Marchetti, C. Tincati, G. Silvestri, Microbial translocation in the pathogenesis of HIV
infection and AIDS. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 26, 2–18 (2013).
32. J. Neuhaus, D. R. Jacobs Jr., J. V. Baker, A. Calmy, D. Duprez, A. La Rosa, L. H. Kuller,
S. L. Pett, M. Ristola, M. J. Ross, M. G. Shlipak, R. Tracy, J. D. Neaton, Markers of
inflammation, coagulation, and renal function are elevated in adults with HIV infection.
J. Infect. Dis. 201, 1788–1795 (2010).
33. J. Kalz, H. ten Cate, H. M. H. Spronk, Thrombin generation and atherosclerosis. J. Thromb.
Thrombolysis 37, 45–55 (2014).
34. V. Shpacovitch, M. Feld, M. D. Hollenberg, T. A. Luger, M. Steinhoff, Role of protease-
activated receptors in inflammatory responses, innate and adaptive immunity. J. Leukoc.
Biol. 83, 1309–1322 (2008).
35. R. Colognato, J. R. Slupsky, M. Jendrach, L. Burysek, T. Syrovets, T. Simmet, Differential
expression and regulation of protease-activated receptors in human peripheral
monocytes and monocyte-derived antigen-presenting cells. Blood 102, 2645–2652
(2003).
36. M. L. López, G. Bruges, G. Crespo, V. Salazar, P.-A. Deglesne, H. Schneider,
H. Cabrera-Fuentes, M. L. Schmitz, K. T. Preissner, Thrombin selectively induces
transcription of genes in human monocytes involved in inflammation and wound
healing. Thromb. Haemost. 112, 992–1001 (2014).
37. S. R. Coughlin, Protease-activated receptors in hemostasis, thrombosis and vascular
biology. J. Thromb. Haemost. 3, 1800–1814 (2005).
38. I. M. Francischetti, J. G. Valenzuela, J. F. Andersen, T. N. Mather, J. M. C. Ribeiro, Ixolaris,
a novel recombinant tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) from the salivary gland of the
tick, Ixodes scapularis: Identification of factor X and factor Xa as scaffolds for the inhibition of
factor VIIa/tissue factor complex. Blood 99, 3602–3612 (2002).
39. T. C. Carneiro-Lobo, F. Schaffner, J. Disse, H. Ostergaard, I. M. Francischetti, R. Q. Monteiro,
W. Ruf, The tick-derived inhibitor Ixolaris prevents tissue factor signaling on tumor cells.
J. Thromb. Haemost. 10, 1849–1858 (2012).
40. R. A. Nazareth, L. S. Tomaz, S. Ortiz-Costa, G. C. Atella, J. M. C. Ribeiro, I. M. B. Francischetti,
R. Q. Monteiro, Antithrombotic properties of Ixolaris, a potent inhibitor of the extrinsic
pathway of the coagulation cascade. Thromb. Haemost. 96, 7–13 (2006).
41. J. L. Fahey, Cytokines, plasma immune activation markers, and clinically relevant
surrogate markers in human immunodeficiency virus infection. Clin. Diagn. Lab. Immunol.
5, 597–603 (1998).
42. P. W. Hunt, HIV and inflammation: Mechanisms and consequences. Curr. HIV/AIDS Rep. 9,
139–147 (2012).
43. T. R. Butterfield, D. B. Hanna, R. C. Kaplan, J. R. Kizer, H. G. Durkin, M. A. Young,
M. J. Nowicki, P. C. Tien, E. T. Golub, M. A. Floris-Moore, K. Titanji, M. A. Fischl, S. L. Heath,
J. Martinson, S. M. Crowe, C. S. Palmer, A. L. Landay, J. J. Anzinger, Increased glucose
transporter-1 expression on intermediate monocytes from HIV-infected women with
subclinical cardiovascular disease. AIDS 31, 199–205 (2017).
44. A. J. Freemerman, A. R. Johnson, G. N. Sacks, J. J. Milner, E. L. Kirk, M. A. Troester,
A. N. Macintyre, P. Goraksha-Hicks, J. C. Rathmell, L. Makowski, Metabolic reprogramming
of macrophages: Glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1)-mediated glucose metabolism drives a
proinflammatory phenotype. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 7884–7896 (2014).
45. C. S. Palmer, J. J. Anzinger, J. Zhou, M. Gouillou, A. Landay, A. Jaworowski, J. M. McCune,
S. M. Crowe, Glucose transporter 1–expressing proinflammatory monocytes are elevated
in combination antiretroviral therapy-treated and untreated HIV+ subjects. J. Immunol.
193, 5595–5603 (2014).
46. I. Pandrea, A. Landay, C. Wilson, J. Stock, R. Tracy, C. Apetrei, Using the pathogenic and
nonpathogenic nonhuman primate model for studying non-AIDS comorbidities. Curr.
HIV/AIDS Rep. 12, 54–67 (2015).
47. I. Pandrea, C. Apetrei, Where the wild things are: Pathogenesis of SIV infection in African
nonhuman primate hosts. Curr. HIV/AIDS Rep. 7, 28–36 (2010).
48. D. T. Mandell, J. Kristoff, T. Gaufin, R. Gautam, D. Ma, N. Sandler, G. Haret-Richter, C. Xu,
H. Aamer, J. Dufour, A. Trichel, D. C. Douek, B. F. Keele, C. Apetrei, I. Pandrea, Pathogenic
features associated with increased virulence upon simian immunodeficiency virus
cross-species transmission from natural hosts. J. Virol. 88, 6778–6792 (2014).
49. I. Pandrea, C. Xu, J. L. Stock, D. N. Frank, D. Ma, B. B. Policicchio, T. He, J. Kristoff, E. Cornell,
G. S. Haret-Richter, A. Trichel, R. M. Ribeiro, R. Tracy, C. Wilson, A. L. Landay, C. Apetrei,
Antibiotic and antiinflammatory therapy transiently reduces inflammation and
hypercoagulation in acutely SIV-infected pigtailed macaques. PLOS Pathog. 12, e1005384
(2016).
50. Á. H. Borges, M. J. Silverberg, D. Wentworth, A. E. Grulich, G. Fätkenheuer, R. Mitsuyasu,
G. Tambussi, C. A. Sabin, J. D. Neaton, J. D. Lundgren; INSIGHT SMART; ESPRIT; SILCAAT
Study Groups, Predicting risk of cancer during HIV infection: The role of inflammatory
and coagulation biomarkers. AIDS 27, 1433–1441 (2013).
51. J. V. Baker, J. Neuhaus, D. Duprez, L. H. Kuller, R. Tracy, W. H. Belloso, S. De Wit,
F. Drummond, H. C. Lane, B. Ledergerber, J. Lundgren, D. E. Nixon, N. I. Paton, J. D. Neaton;
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Schechter et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017)
30 August 2017
12 of 13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 INSIGHT SMART Study Group, Changes in inflammatory and coagulation
biomarkers: A randomized comparison of immediate versus deferred antiretroviral
therapy in patients with HIV infection. J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr. 56, 36–43
(2011).
52. A. Ghattas, H. R. Griffiths, A. Devitt, G. Y. H. Lip, E. Shantsila, Monocytes in coronary artery
disease and atherosclerosis: Where are we now? J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 62, 1541–1551
(2013).
53. K. S. Rogacev, B. Cremers, A. M. Zawada, S. Seiler, N. Binder, P. Ege, G. Große-Dunker,
I. Heisel, F. Hornof, J. Jeken, N. M. Rebling, C. Ulrich, B. Scheller, M. Böhm, D. Fliser,
G. H. Heine, CD14++CD16+ monocytes independently predict cardiovascular events: A
cohort study of 951 patients referred for elective coronary angiography. J. Am. Coll.
Cardiol. 60, 1512–1520 (2012).
54. N. T. Funderburg, D. A. Zidar, C. Shive, A. Lioi, J. Mudd, L. W. Musselwhite, D. I. Simon,
M. A. Costa, B. Rodriguez, S. F. Sieg, M. M. Lederman, Shared monocyte subset
phenotypes in HIV-1 infection and in uninfected subjects with acute coronary syndrome.
Blood 120, 4599–4608 (2012).
55. M. G. Netea, L. A. B. Joosten, E. Latz, K. H. Mills, G. Natoli, H. G. Stunnenberg, L. A. J. O’Neill,
R. J. Xavier, Trained immunity: A program of innate immune memory in health and
disease. Science 352, aaf1098 (2016).
56. A. R. Tenorio, Y. Zheng, R. J. Bosch, S. Krishnan, B. Rodriguez, P. W. Hunt, J. Plants,
A. Seth, C. C. Wilson, S. G. Deeks, M. M. Lederman, A. L. Landay, Soluble markers of
inflammation and coagulation but not T-cell activation predict non–AIDS-defining
morbid events during suppressive antiretroviral treatment. J. Infect. Dis. 210,
1248–1259 (2014).
57. I. Pandrea, C. Apetrei, J. Dufour, N. Dillon, J. Barbercheck, M. Metzger, B. Jacquelin,
R. Bohm, P. A. Marx, F. Barre-Sinoussi, V. M. Hirsch, M. C. Müller-Trutwin, A. A. Lackner,
R. S. Veazey, Simian immunodeficiency virus SIVagm.sab infection of Caribbean African
green monkeys: A new model for the study of SIV pathogenesis in natural hosts. J. Virol.
80, 4858–4867 (2006).
58. I. Pandrea, T. Gaufin, R. Gautam, J. Kristoff, D. Mandell, D. Montefiori, B. F. Keele,
R. M. Ribeiro, R. S. Veazey, C. Apetrei, Functional cure of SIVagm infection in rhesus
macaques results in complete recovery of CD4+ T cells and is reverted by CD8+ cell
depletion. PLOS Pathog. 7, e1002170 (2011).
59. X. Shi, B. Gangadharan, L. F. Brass, W. Ruf, B. M. Mueller, Protease-activated receptors
(PAR1 and PAR2) contribute to tumor cell motility and metastasis. Mol. Cancer Res. 2,
395–402 (2004).
60. J. Kristoff, G. Haret-Richter, D. Ma, R. M. Ribeiro, C. Xu, E. Cornell, J. L. Stock, T. He,
A. D. Mobley, S. Ross, A. Trichel, C. Wilson, R. Tracy, A. Landay, C. Apetrei, I. Pandrea, Early
microbial translocation blockade reduces SIV-mediated inflammation and viral
replication. J. Clin. Invest. 124, 2802–2806 (2014).
61. I. M. B. Francischetti, C. J. Oliveira, G. R. Ostera, S. B. Yager, F. Debierre-Grockiego,
V. Carregaro, G. Jaramillo-Gutierrez, J. C. Hume, L. Jiang, S. E. Moretz, C. K. Lin,
J. M. C. Ribeiro, C. A. Long, B. K. Vickers, R. T. Schwarz, K. B. Seydel, M. Iacobelli,
H. C. Ackerman, P. Srinivasan, R. B. Gomes, X. Wang, R. Q. Monteiro, M. Kotsyfakis,
A. Sá-Nunes, M. Waisberg, Defibrotide interferes with several steps of the coagulation-
inflammation cycle and exhibits therapeutic potential to treat severe malaria. Arterioscler.
Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 32, 786–798 (2012).
62. J. Pinheiro, D. Bated, Mixed-Effects Models in S and S-Plus (Springer, 2002).
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank the study participants. Funding: This study was
supported by the NIH Intramural Research Program, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, and Bench-to-Bedside award R01HL117715-10S1 (to I.S. and I.P.). Part of this project
has been also funded with federal funds from the National Cancer Institute, NIH, under
contract no. HHSN261200800001E. The NHP study has also been funded in part with federal
funds from the NIH (R01 HL123096 and RO1 HL117715 to I.P., R01 AI119346 to C.A., and
R01AI104373 to R.M.R.). The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views
or policies of the Department of Health and Human Services, nor does mention of trade
names, commercial products, or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. government.
Author contributions: M.E.S., B.B.A., I.M.B.F., I.P., and I.S. conceived and designed the
research. M.E.S., B.B.A., T.H., G.H.R., K.W.T., B.B.P., A. Singh, K.D.R., V.S., D.M., E.B.-C., C.A.,
R.T., and I.M.B.F. performed the experiments. M.E.S., B.B.A., T.H., C.A., R.M.R., and I.M.B.F.
analyzed the data. B.B.A., A. Sher, I.M.B.F., I.P., and I.S. contributed reagents/materials/analysis
tools. M.E.S., B.B.A., I.P., and I.S. wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors
have read and approved the final version of the manuscript. B.B.A. takes major responsibility
for the integrity of the work and analyses. Competing interests: I.M.B.F. is the inventor
on patent application (no. 7,078,508) held by the NIH that covers Ixolaris. All other authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: All the
data supporting the findings of the study are presented in the manuscript. See table S6
for the primary data. Ixolaris is available from I.M.B.F. under a material transfer agreement with
the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH.
Submitted 6 December 2016
Accepted 11 July 2017
Published 30 August 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aam5441
Citation: M. E. Schechter, B. B. Andrade, T. He, G. H. Richter, K. W. Tosh, B. B. Policicchio,
A. Singh, K. D. Raehtz, V. Sheikh, D. Ma, E. Brocca-Cofano, C. Apetrei, R. Tracy, R. M. Ribeiro,
A. Sher, I. M. B. Francischetti, I. Pandrea, I. Sereti, Inflammatory monocytes expressing tissue
factor drive SIV and HIV coagulopathy. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Schechter et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam5441 (2017)
30 August 2017
13 of 13
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Inflammatory monocytes expressing tissue factor drive SIV and HIV coagulopathy
M. Ribeiro, Alan Sher, Ivo M. B. Francischetti, Ivona Pandrea and Irini Sereti
Ruy
Amrit Singh, Kevin D. Raehtz, Virginia Sheikh, Dongying Ma, Egidio Brocca-Cofano, Cristian Apetrei, Russel Tracy, 
Melissa E. Schechter, Bruno B. Andrade, Tianyu He, George Haret Richter, Kevin W. Tosh, Benjamin B. Policicchio,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aam5441
, eaam5441.
9
Sci Transl Med 
chronic infection.
It is possible in the future that HIV patients would be treated with Ixolaris to stem some of the side effects of
coagulopathy. Treatment with a compound isolated from tick saliva, Ixolaris, can interrupt this damaging pathway. 
factor in samples from patients or macaques infected with SIV. These monocytes appear to be crucial to
inflammation and coagulation intersect in chronic HIV. To do so, they examined monocytes that express tissue 
 explored how
et al.
comorbidities such as neurological or cardiovascular complications, so Schechter 
HIV-infected patients who have viral suppression due to treatment are still at enhanced risk of
Curbing complications in chronic HIV
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/405/eaam5441
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/08/28/9.405.eaam5441.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/11/486/eaav0537.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/459/eaat4162.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/358/6360/218.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/358/6359/85.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/358/6359/46.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/375/eaah4923.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/353/353ra112.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/377/eaag1809.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/358/358ra125.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/402/eaaf1483.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/405/eaam5441#BIBL
This article cites 61 articles, 19 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
