 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / April 20, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 15 
455
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices for 
Use of a Hepatitis B Vaccine with a Novel Adjuvant
Sarah Schillie, MD1; Aaron Harris, MD1; Ruth Link-Gelles, PhD1; José Romero, MD2; John Ward, MD1; Noele Nelson, MD1
Hepatitis B (HepB) vaccination is the primary means of 
preventing infections and complications caused by hepatitis B 
virus (HBV). On February 21, 2018, the Advisory Committee 
on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommended Heplisav-B 
(HepB-CpG), a yeast-derived vaccine prepared with a novel 
adjuvant, administered as a 2-dose series (0, 1 month) for use 
in persons aged ≥18 years. The ACIP Hepatitis Vaccines Work 
Group conducted a systematic review of the evidence, including 
data from four randomized controlled trials assessing preven-
tion of HBV infection and six randomized controlled trials 
assessing adverse events in adults. Seroprotective antibody to 
hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs) levels were achieved in 
90.0%–100.0% of subjects receiving HepB-CpG (Dynavax 
Technologies Corporation), compared with 70.5%–90.2% of 
subjects receiving Engerix-B (GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals). The 
benefits of protection with 2 doses administered over 1 month 
make HepB-CpG an important option for prevention of HBV.
Introduction
Vaccination is the primary means for preventing hepatitis B 
virus (HBV) infection and its complications. Existing hepatitis B 
(HepB) vaccines use an aluminum adjuvant. On November 9, 
2017, Heplisav-B (HepB-CpG), a single-antigen HepB vac-
cine with a novel immunostimulatory sequence adjuvant, was 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the preven-
tion of HBV in persons aged ≥18 years. The vaccine is admin-
istered as 2 doses, 1 month apart (1). On February 21, 2018, 
the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)* 
recommended HepB-CpG for use in persons aged ≥18 years.
HepB-CpG contains yeast-derived recombinant HepB 
surface antigen (HBsAg) and is prepared by combining 
purified HBsAg with small synthetic immunostimulatory 
cytidine-phosphate-guanosine oligodeoxynucleotide (CpG-
ODN) motifs (1018 adjuvant). The 1018 adjuvant binds to 
Toll-like receptor 9 to stimulate a directed immune response 
to HBsAg (1).
* ACIP is chartered as a federal advisory committee that provides expert external 
advice and guidance to the Director of CDC on use of vaccines and related 
agents for the control of vaccine-preventable diseases in the U.S. civilian 
population. ACIP recommendations adopted by the CDC Director become 
agency guidelines on the date published in MMWR.
HepB-CpG is available in single-dose 0.5 mL vials. Each 
dose contains 20 µg of HBsAg and 3,000 µg of 1018 adjuvant. 
HepB-CpG is formulated without preservatives and is admin-
istered as an intramuscular injection in the deltoid region of 
the upper arm (1).
HepB-CpG is the fifth inactivated HepB vaccine currently 
recommended for use in the United States. This report contains 
ACIP guidance specific to HepB-CpG and augments the 2018 
ACIP recommendations for the prevention of HBV infection 
(2). This report does not include new guidance for populations 
recommended to receive HepB vaccination or immunization 
management issues other than those that pertain specifically 
to HepB-CpG. The intended audience for this report includes 
clinical and public health personnel who provide HepB vac-
cination services to adults. These recommendations are meant 
to serve as a source of guidance for health care providers; health 
care providers should always consider the individual clinical 
circumstances of each patient.
Methods
From February 2016 to January 2018, the ACIP Hepatitis 
Vaccines Work Group† participated in three teleconference 
meetings to review the quality of evidence for immunogenic-
ity and safety of HepB-CpG and implementation issues. The 
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and 
Evaluation (GRADE) approach for evaluating evidence was 
adopted by ACIP in 2010 (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/
acip/recs/grade/). The Work Group identified critical and 
important outcomes for inclusion in the GRADE tables, con-
ducted a systematic review of the evidence, and subsequently 
reviewed and discussed findings and evidence quality (3). Key 
outcomes were designated as critical (hepatitis B infection, 
severe adverse events, and cardiovascular safety) or important 
(mild adverse events). Factors considered in determining the 
recommendation included benefits and harms and evidence 
type. Values and preferences and economic factors were not 
systematically considered.
† The ACIP Hepatitis Vaccines Work Group comprises professionals from 
academic medicine (family medicine, internal medicine, pediatrics, obstetrics, 
infectious disease, occupational health, and preventive medicine specialists), 
federal and state public health entities, and medical societies.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
456 
MMWR / April 20, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 15
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The scientific literature was searched through a systematic 
review of Medline (Ovid), CAB Abstracts, Embase, Global 
Health (Ovid), Scopus, and Cochrane databases. Search terms 
included “Heplisav,” “HBV-ISS,” “HBsAg-1018,” “1018 
immunostimulatory sequence,” and “hepatitis B surface 
antigen-1018 ISS.” To qualify as a candidate for inclusion 
in the review, a study had to present immunogenicity or 
disease endpoints or safety data on HepB-CpG. Studies were 
excluded if they were basic science, a secondary data analysis, 
immunogenicity outcomes for a nonlicensed formulation or 
use of HepB-CpG, a general review or opinion perspective, 
conducted on nonhuman primates, or if data could not be 
abstracted. Supporting evidence for the Work Group’s find-
ings is available online (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/
recs/grade/hepb.html).
A summary of Work Group discussions was presented to 
ACIP on October 25, 2017, and February 21, 2018. At the 
February 2018 meeting, a proposed recommendation was 
presented to the committee, and, after a public comment 
period, was approved by the voting ACIP members as follows: 
HepB-CpG is recommended as an option for HepB vaccina-
tion for persons aged ≥18 years (14 voted in favor, with none 
opposed, none abstained, and none recused). This report 
summarizes the data considered, the quality of evidence, and 
the rationale for the recommendation.
Summary of Key Findings
The body of evidence consisted of four randomized con-
trolled trials assessing prevention of HBV infection and six 
randomized controlled trials assessing adverse events (mild 
adverse events, serious adverse events, and cardiovascular 
adverse events) in adult subjects. Outcomes compared HepB-
CpG with Engerix-B. Data from these studies informed HepB-
CpG licensure. Studies assessing prevention of HBV infection 
used antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs) 
≥10 mIU/mL as a serologic correlate of protection. Protection 
among 7,056 subjects receiving 2 doses of HepB-CpG was 
compared with protection among 3,214 subjects receiving 
3 doses of Engerix-B. Seroprotective anti-HBs levels were 
achieved in 90.0%–100.0% of subjects receiving HepB-CpG, 
compared with 70.5%–90.2% of subjects receiving Engerix-B 
(4–7). The body of evidence for the benefits of protection 
against HBV infection was deemed to be GRADE evidence 
type 2 (i.e., evidence from randomized controlled trials with 
important limitations, or exceptionally strong evidence from 
observational studies). The evidence type was downgraded for 
indirectness because immunogenicity was used as a surrogate 
for protection.
Safety profiles among 9,871 subjects receiving 2 or 3 doses of 
HepB-CpG were compared with those among 4,385 subjects 
receiving 3 or 4 doses of Engerix-B. Among subjects receiving 
HepB-CpG, 45.6%, 5.4%, and 0.27% experienced a mild 
adverse event, serious adverse event, or cardiovascular event, 
respectively. Among subjects receiving Engerix-B, 45.7%, 6.3%, 
and 0.14% experienced a mild adverse event, serious adverse 
event, or cardiovascular event, respectively (1,4–9). The body 
of evidence assessing adverse events was deemed to be GRADE 
evidence type 1 (evidence from randomized controlled trials, or 
overwhelming evidence from observational studies).
Rationale
Based on the available immunogenicity evidence, a 2-dose 
schedule (0, 1 month) of HepB-CpG will be efficacious for 
the prevention of HBV infection. The risk for adverse events, 
including cardiovascular adverse events, was reviewed and 
will be monitored. The benefits of protection with 2 doses 
administered over 1 month make this an important option 
for prevention of HBV.
ACIP Recommendations
HepB-CpG may be used as a HepB vaccine in persons aged 
≥18 years recommended for vaccination against HBV (Box) (2).
CDC Guidance for Use
Interchangeability and dosing schedule. Data are limited 
on the safety and immunogenicity effects when HepB-CpG is 
interchanged with HepB vaccines from other manufacturers. 
When feasible, the same manufacturer’s vaccines should be used 
to complete the series (10). However, vaccination should not 
be deferred when the manufacturer of the previously adminis-
tered vaccine is unknown or when the vaccine from the same 
manufacturer is unavailable (10).
The 2-dose HepB vaccine series only applies when both 
doses in the series consist of HepB-CpG. Series consisting of 
a combination of 1 dose of HepB-CpG and a vaccine from a 
different manufacturer should consist of 3 total vaccine doses 
and should adhere to the 3-dose schedule minimum intervals of 
4 weeks between dose 1 and 2, 8 weeks between dose 2 and 3, 
and 16 weeks between dose 1 and 3. Doses administered at 
less than the minimum interval should be repeated. However, 
a series containing 2 doses of HepB-CpG administered at least 
4 weeks apart is valid, even if the patient received a single earlier 
dose from another manufacturer.
Special populations. There are no clinical studies of 
HepB-CpG in pregnant women. Available human data on 
HepB-CpG administered to pregnant women are insufficient 
to inform assessment of vaccine-associated risks in pregnancy. 
Until safety data are available for HepB-CpG, providers should 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / April 20, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 15 
457
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
BOX. Adults who are recommended to receive hepatitis B vaccine
• Persons at risk for infection through sexual exposure
 
– Sex partners of hepatitis B surface antigen 
(HBsAg)–positive persons
 
– Sexually active persons not in a long-term, 
mutually monogamous relationship
 
– Persons seeking evaluation or treatment for a 
sexually transmitted infection
 
– Men who have sex with men
• Persons with a history of current or recent injection 
drug use
• Persons at risk for infection by percutaneous or mucosal 
exposure to blood
 
– Household contacts of HBsAg-positive persons
 
– Residents and staff of facilities for developmentally 
disabled persons
 
– Health care and public safety personnel with 
reasonably anticipated risk for exposure to blood 
or blood-contaminated body fluids
 
– Hemodialysis patients and predialysis, peritoneal 
dialysis, and home dialysis patients
 
– Persons with diabetes mellitus aged <60 years and 
persons with diabetes mellitus aged ≥60 years at 
the discretion of the treating clinician
• International travelers to countries with high or 
intermediate levels of endemic HBV infection (HBsAg 
prevalence ≥2%)
• Persons with hepatitis C virus infection, persons with 
chronic liver disease (including, but not limited to, 
those with cirrhosis, fatty liver disease, alcoholic liver 
disease, autoimmune hepatitis, and an alanine 
aminotransferase [ALT] or aspartate aminotransferase 
[AST] level greater than twice the upper limit of 
normal)
• Persons with human immunodeficiency virus infection
• Incarcerated persons
• Other persons seeking protection from hepatitis B virus 
infection (even without acknowledgment of a specific 
risk factor)
continue to vaccinate pregnant women needing HepB vaccina-
tion with a vaccine from a different manufacturer.
Postvaccination serologic testing. To assess response to 
vaccination and the need for revaccination, postvaccina-
tion serologic testing 1–2 months after the final dose of 
vaccine is recommended for certain persons following vac-
cination (e.g., hemodialysis patients, HIV-infected and other 
immunocompromised persons, health care personnel, and 
sex partners of HBsAg-positive persons) (2). Postvaccination 
serologic testing should be performed using a method that 
allows determination of the protective level of anti-HBs 
(≥10 mIU/mL) (2). Persons with anti-HBs <10 mIU/mL 
following receipt of 2 doses of HepB-CpG should be revac-
cinated. Revaccination may consist of administration of a 
second complete HepB vaccine series followed by anti-HBs 
testing 1–2 months after the final dose. Alternatively, revac-
cination may consist of administration of an additional single 
HepB vaccine dose followed by anti-HBs testing 1–2 months 
later (and, if anti-HBs remains <10 mIU/mL, completion of 
the second HepB vaccine series followed again by anti-HBs 
testing 1–2 months after the final dose) (2). Administration 
of more than two complete HepB vaccine series is gener-
ally not recommended, except for hemodialysis patients (2). 
HepB-CpG may be used for revaccination following an initial 
HepB vaccine series that consisted of doses of HepB-CpG or 
doses from a different manufacturer (11). HepB-CpG may also 
be used to revaccinate new health care personnel (including 
the challenge dose) initially vaccinated with a vaccine from a 
different manufacturer in the distant past who have anti-HBs 
<10 mIU/mL upon hire or matriculation (2).
Precautions and contraindications. Before administering 
HepB-CpG, health care providers should consult the pack-
age insert for precautions, warnings, and contraindications. 
Adverse events occurring after administration of any vaccine 
should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting 
System (VAERS). Reports can be submitted to VAERS 
online, by fax, or by mail. Additional information about 
VAERS is available by telephone (1-800-822-7967) or online 
(https://vaers.hhs.gov).
Future Considerations
Postlicensure surveillance studies and additional data per-
taining to the use of HepB-CpG will be reviewed by ACIP as 
they become available, and recommendations will be updated 
as needed. Future economic analyses might inform cost-
effectiveness considerations of HepB-CpG, including its use 
among persons at an increased risk for vaccine nonresponse.
Conflict of Interest
No conflicts of interest were reported.
 1Division of Viral Hepatitis, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, 
STD, and TB Prevention, CDC; 2Pediatric Infectious Diseases Section, 
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences and Arkansas Children’s Hospital, 
Arkansas Children’s Hospital Research Institute.
Corresponding author: Sarah Schillie, sschillie@cdc.gov, 404-718-8608.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
458 
MMWR / April 20, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 15
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
References
 1. Food and Drug Administration. Product approval information: package 
insert. Heplisav-B. Silver Spring, MD: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, Food and Drug Administration; 2018. https://www.
fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/
ucm584752.htm
 2. CDC. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: 
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices. MMWR Recomm Rep 2018;67(No. RR-1).
 3. CDC. New framework (GRADE) for development of evidence-based 
recommendations by the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2012;61:327.
 4. Halperin SA, Dobson S, McNeil S, et al. Comparison of the safety and 
immunogenicity of hepatitis B virus surface antigen co-administered 
with an immunostimulatory phosphorothioate oligonucleotide and a 
licensed hepatitis B vaccine in healthy young adults. Vaccine 
2006;24:20–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2005.08.095
 5. Halperin SA, Ward B, Cooper C, et al. Comparison of safety and 
immunogenicity of two doses of investigational hepatitis B virus surface 
antigen co-administered with an immunostimulatory phosphorothioate 
oligodeoxyribonucleotide and three doses of a licensed hepatitis B vaccine 
in healthy adults 18–55 years of age. Vaccine 2012;30:2556–63. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.01.087
 6. Heyward WL, Kyle M, Blumenau J, et al. Immunogenicity and safety 
of an investigational hepatitis B vaccine with a Toll-like receptor 9 agonist 
adjuvant (HBsAg-1018) compared to a licensed hepatitis B vaccine in 
healthy adults 40–70 years of age. Vaccine 2013;31:5300–5. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.05.068
 7. Jackson S, Lentino J, Kopp J, et al.; HBV-23 Study Group. 
Immunogenicity of a two-dose investigational hepatitis B vaccine, 
HBsAg-1018, using a Toll-like receptor 9 agonist adjuvant compared 
with a licensed hepatitis B vaccine in adults. Vaccine 2018;36:668–74. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.12.038
 8. Sablan BP
, Kim DJ, Barzaga NG, et al. Demonstration of safety and 
enhanced seroprotection against hepatitis B with investigational 
HBsAg-1018 ISS vaccine compared to a licensed hepatitis B vaccine. 
Vaccine 2012;30:2689–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.02.001
 9. Janssen RS, Mangoo-Karim R, Pergola PE, et al. Immunogenicity and 
safety of an investigational hepatitis B vaccine with a Toll-like receptor 
9 agonist adjuvant (HBsAg-1018) compared with a licensed hepatitis B 
vaccine in patients with chronic kidney disease. Vaccine 2013;31:5306–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.05.067
 
10. Kroger AT, Duchin J, Vázquez M. General best practice guidelines for 
immunization: best practices guidance of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP). https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/
acip-recs/general-recs/downloads/general-recs.pdf
 
11. Halperin SA, Ward BJ, Dionne M, et al. Immunogenicity of an 
investigational hepatitis B vaccine (hepatitis B surface antigen 
co-administered with an immunostimulatory phosphorothioate 
oligodeoxyribonucleotide) in nonresponders to licensed hepatitis B 
vaccine. Hum Vaccin Immunother 2013;9:1438–44. https://doi.
org/10.4161/hv.24256
