 Linking the Human Gut Microbiome to Inflammatory Cytokine 
Production Capacity
Melanie Schirmer1,2, Sanne P. Smeekens3, Hera Vlamakis1, Martin Jaeger3, Marije 
Oosting3, Eric A. Franzosa1,2, Rob ter Horst3, Trees Jansen3, Liesbeth Jacobs3, Marc Jan 
Bonder4, Alexander Kurilshikov4,5,6, Jingyuan Fu4,7, Leo A.B. Joosten3, Alexandra 
Zhernakova4, Curtis Huttenhower1,2, Cisca Wijmenga4, Mihai G. Netea3,*, and Ramnik J. 
Xavier1,8,9,10,11,*
1The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA 2Department of 
Biostatistics, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA 3Department 
of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases (RCI), Radboudumc, 6525 GA 
Nijmegen, Netherlands 4University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Department of Genetics, 9713 EX Groningen, Netherlands 5Institute of Chemical Biology and 
Fundamental Medicine SB RAS, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia 6Novosibirsk State University, 
Novosibirsk 630090, Russia 7University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, 
Department of Pediatrics, 9713 EX Groningen, Netherlands 8Center for Computational and 
Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA 9Gastrointestinal 
Unit and Center for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA 02114, USA 10Center for Microbiome Informatics and Therapeutics, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
Summary
Gut microbial dysbioses are linked to aberrant immune responses, which are often accompanied 
by abnormal production of inflammatory cytokines. As part of the Human Functional Genomics 
*Correspondence: xavier@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu (R.J.X.), mihai.netea@radboudumc.nl (M.G.N.).
11Lead Contact
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Author Contributions
MS performed the metagenomics data analyses and correlation analyses. SPS, MJ, MO, AK, and MJB performed the immunological 
assays and processed and analyzed the data. MS, HV, EAF, CH, MGN, and RJX interpreted the results. MS, EAF, and CH led the 
computational methods and research development. SPS, MJ, and MO collected clinical samples. SPS, TJ, and LJ performed functional 
validation experiments. MS, SPS, HV, CH, MGN, and RJX assembled and wrote the paper. MS, HV, MGN, and RJX served as project 
leaders. JF, AZ, LABJ, CW, MGN, and RJX designed the cohort study. CH, CW, MGN, and RJX served as principal investigators.
Table S1. Related to Figure 3. Correlation coefficients for all significant species associations
Table S2. Related to Figure 3. FDR values for all significant species associations
Table S3. Related to Figure 3. Correlation coefficients for all significant genus associations
Table S4. Related to Figure 3. FDR values for all significant genus associations
Table S5. Related to Figure 4. Correlation coefficients for all significant pathway associations
Table S6. Related to Figure 4. FDR values for all significant pathway associations
Table S7. Related to Figure 4. Correlation coefficients for all significant GO category associations
Table S8. Related to Figure 4. FDR values for all significant GO category associations
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 November 3; 167(4): 1125–1136.e8. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.10.020.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Project (HFGP), we investigate how differences in composition and function of gut microbial 
communities may contribute to inter-individual variation in cytokine responses to microbial 
stimulations in healthy humans. We observe microbiome-cytokine interaction patterns that are 
stimulus-specific, cytokine-specific, and cytokine- and stimulus-specific. Validation of two 
predicted host-microbial interactions reveal that TNFα and IFNγ production are associated with 
specific microbial metabolic pathways: palmitoleic acid metabolism and tryptophan degradation to 
tryptophol. Besides providing a resource of predicted microbially-derived mediators that influence 
immune phenotypes in response to common microorganisms, these data can help to define 
principles for understanding disease susceptibility. The three HFGP studies presented in this issue 
lay the groundwork for further studies aimed at understanding the interplay between microbial, 
genetic, and environmental factors in the regulation of the immune response in humans.
Graphical Abstract
Keywords
Database of microbiome-cytokine associations; microbiome-host interactions; human gut 
microbiome; inflammatory cytokine response; Human Functional Genomics Project; 
metagenomics; microbial profiles; immunological profiles; interindividual variation; healthy 
human cohort
Introduction
The gut microbiome is a crucial factor for shaping and modulating immune system 
responses, with gut microbial dysbioses linked to several autoimmune and immune-mediated 
diseases (Gevers et al., 2014; Kosiewicz et al., 2011; Paun et al., 2016). In the case of 
rheumatoid arthritis, this dysbiosis can be partially resolved after treatment (Zhang et al., 
2015). While responding to pathogenic organisms is a main function of the immune system, 
recognition and tolerance of commensal bacteria are equally important for host health 
Schirmer et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Kosiewicz et al., 2011). Commensal microbes calibrate innate and adaptive immune 
responses and impact the activation threshold for pathogenic stimulations, in large part by 
producing small molecules that mediate host-microbial interactions (Donia and Fischbach, 
2015). Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) are a classic example of how bacterial-derived 
molecules contribute to gut immune homeostasis (Lee and Hase, 2014; Thorburn et al., 
2014). SCFAs serve as energy sources for gut epithelial cells, modulate cytokine production, 
and induce expansion of regulatory T cells. Consistent with these functions, SCFAs were 
implicated in anti-inflammatory properties of a mix of 17 human-derived Clostridia strains 
(Atarashi et al., 2013; Smith et al., 2013). Gut microbial communities harboring Clostridia 
are additionally beneficial in that they regulate immune function and epithelial permeability 
to food antigens to protect against allergen sensitization (Stefka et al., 2014).
Commensal microbiota also modulate systemic immune responses (Lee and Hase, 2014). 
While the epithelial barrier ensures that microorganisms are largely confined to the gut, 
microbial metabolites can penetrate the epithelial barrier, allowing them to enter and 
accumulate in the host circulatory system where they are sensed by immune cells 
(Dorrestein et al., 2014). For example, dietary tryptophan is metabolized by different gut 
bacteria resulting in distinct derivatives, including indole propionic acid, which is absorbed 
through the intestinal epithelium and enters the bloodstream. The biological activity of 
indole propionic acid, as is the case for many other small molecules, is largely unknown 
(Wikoff et al., 2009).
Given the many examples of commensal microbiota modulating immune responses, we 
investigated the relationship between inter-individual variation in gut microbial community 
composition and the inflammatory cytokine response to microbial stimulation in healthy 
individuals (Figure 1). To this end, we assessed potential functional relationships in multi-
omic data including microbial and cytokine profiles from approximately 500 healthy 
individuals of Western-European genetic background in the 500 Functional Genomics 
(500FG) cohort from the HFGP (Figure 1A; for exact sample numbers see Figures S1A and 
S1B). Several types of microbiome-cytokine interaction patterns were detected. We 
identified specific bacterial species and genera that are predicted to influence cytokine 
production capacity, and found putative interactions between microbial metabolism and 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) and interferon gamma (IFNγ), a subset of which we 
experimentally validated. This work is complemented by two accompanying studies linking 
cytokine responses to host genetics (Li et al., 2016) and to host and environmental factors 
independent of the microbiome (ter Horst et al., 2016) yielding a comprehensive picture of 
the factors influencing human cytokine responses and host defense.
Results
Study Overview
To identify associations between the gut microbiome and stimulus-induced cytokine 
responses, we collected stool samples from 500 healthy individuals to generate microbial 
taxonomic and functional profiles. Blood samples were taken concurrently from each 
individual and the cytokine response was measured ex vivo in peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells (PBMCs) and whole blood under five different microbial stimulations. Three 
Schirmer et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 stimulations were bacteria-derived (purified Escherichia coli-derived LPS and Bacteroides 
fragilis representing Gram-negative bacteria, and Staphylococcus aureus representing Gram-
positive bacteria) and two were fungal-derived (Candida albicans hyphae and conidia yeast) 
(Figure 1B and S1C). Although most stimulations were pathogens, we also included the 
common gut commensal organism Bacteroides fragilis, as this species can mediate 
development of the host immune system and was detected in 41% of all samples 
(Mazmanian et al., 2005). Three monocyte-derived cytokines (IL-1β, TNFα, IL-6) and three 
lymphocyte-derived cytokines (IFNγ, IL-17, IL-22) were measured at different times to 
capture their peak abundance (Figures 1B and 1C). We then used multivariate analyses to 
identify significant associations between microbial features and specific cytokine responses.
Between-Subject Variation Is Substantial Both in Cytokine Response to Stimulation and in 
Microbial Composition
We first analyzed the inter-individual variation in the inflammatory cytokine response and 
the gut microbiome composition, as this forms the basis for the identification of potential 
interactions between the two components (Figure 2A). The cytokine response to the 
stimulations was compared to the unstimulated state (RPMI) in whole blood and/or PBMCs 
(Figure 1B). While the unstimulated cells exhibited only a small degree of variation in 
cytokine levels, a high degree of inter-individual variation was observed in response to all 
stimulations. The difference in the degree of variation was significant for all stimulatory 
conditions compared to the unstimulated state for each cytokine and cell type, respectively 
(Fligner-Killeen test, all p < 1e-15). Generally, the intensity of the response to a particular 
stimulation was cytokine-dependent and in some cases also differed between whole blood 
and PBMCs. For most cytokines, the strongest response was induced by C. albicans; IL-6 
was the only cytokine to show a stronger response to LPS stimulation.
In addition to immunological profiles, we used metagenomic sequencing reads to identify 
the species-level composition of the communities and their functional potential in the form 
of encoded genes and pathways. As expected, inter-individual variation in taxonomic 
composition was high, with even high-level phylum composition varying greatly across 
individuals (Figure 2B) (Human Microbiome Project, 2012). At the functional level, we 
detected many MetaCyc pathways with comparable levels across samples, with a subset of 
generally less abundant pathways varying more substantially between individuals (Figure 
2C). The microbial profiles from the 500FG cohort are similar to those of LifeLines-DEEP, 
another healthy Dutch cohort within the HFGP (Fu et al., 2015; Tigchelaar et al., 2015; 
Zhernakova et al., 2016) and appear to represent a single population (Figure S1D). In 
contrast, when these data were compared with the Human Microbiome Project cohort 
(consisting of 242 healthy adults from the United States (Human Microbiome Project, 
2012)), the two Dutch cohorts had higher levels of Actinobacteria and lower levels of 
Bacteroidetes. However, a high degree of inter-individual variability was observed within all 
cohorts.
Cytokine Variation Explained by the Microbiome
For each of the cytokine measurements, we quantified how much of the overall variation 
could be attributed to the gut microbiota (Figure 2D). To avoid an overestimation of 
Schirmer et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 variability due to species-species correlations, we used the first 20 principal coordinates to 
represent the species composition, accounting for ∼50% of the variability in the microbial 
composition of the samples; thus the variation we observed is a conservative estimate. The 
largest percentage of variation in the cytokine response was explained for TNFα in 
connection with C. albicans hyphae (9.7%) and conidia (9.0%) stimulation in PBMCs. For 
other stimulations, the microbiome accounted for less than 5% of the variation in the TNFα 
response, highlighting the stimulus-specific effect of the predicted microbiome-cytokine 
interactions. In addition, we assessed variation due to functional features using MetaCyc 
metabolic pathways and gene ontology (GO) categories. A maximum of 7.7% and 8.6% of 
the cytokine variation was explained by metabolic pathways and GO categories, respectively 
(Figure S2).
Three Classes of Microbiome-Cytokine Interaction Patterns
Since we observed significant inter-individual variation in cytokine responses and gut 
microbial profiles, we next assessed whether these factors were correlated. We predicted 
three types of interaction patterns (IP), referred to as IP1 through IP3 (Figure 3A). The first 
interaction patterns (IP1) was stimulus-specific. In this case, gut microbial features were 
associated with the response of several cytokines, but only in connection with a particular 
type of stimulation. The second interaction pattern (IP2) describes cytokine-specific 
associations that are independent of the type of stimulation. In other words, a high/low 
response of a particular cytokine was connected to the abundance of a specific gut microbial 
species or function and observed in connection with several of the tested stimulations. 
Lastly, IP3 microbiome-cytokine interaction patterns were cytokine- and stimulus-specific. 
Here, a gut microbial component affected only the response of a particular cytokine and only 
in connection with a specific stimulation.
Gut Microbial Species and Genera are Significantly Associated with Inflammatory Cytokine 
Responses
We performed pairwise correlation tests between microbial taxonomic composition at the 
species and genus levels with each cytokine in connection with a specific stimulation 
(Spearman correlation with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction α ≤ 0.2, Figures 3B and 
3C). A total of 41 species and 20 genera were significantly associated with at least one 
potential interaction and associations were identified for all of the tested cytokines. All three 
interaction patterns were observed (Figure 3A) with the majority of associations being 
cytokine- and stimulus-specific (IP3). Three stimulus-specific (IP1) associations were 
observed, with C. albicans hyphae stimulation in connection with Bacteroides xylanisolvens, 
Parabacteroides distasonis, and Coprococcus comes. Furthermore, three potential cytokine-
specific interactions (IP2) were identified. Odoribacter splanchnicus (Figure 3B) and the 
genus Bilophila (Figure 3C) were negatively correlated with TNFα production for LPS and 
C. albicans stimulations. Barnesiella was negatively associated with LPS and B. fragilis-
induced IFNγ production (Figure 3C). Below, we detail the associations encountered for 
each of the stimulation types.
Schirmer et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Taxonomic Associations with Fungal-Induced Cytokine Responses
Taxonomic features associated with fungal-induced cytokine responses were often connected 
to an altered IFNγ response (Figures 3B and 3C). This included common gut commensals 
such as Dorea longicatena and Dorea formicigenerans, where higher species abundances 
were connected to higher IFNγ levels in response to C. albicans hyphae. Both Dorea species 
can metabolize sialic acids, which are commonly found at terminal ends of mucins; release 
of these acids is implicated in mucin degradation, potentially increasing gut permeability 
(Crost et al., 2013). In contrast, another unclassified Dorea species was negatively correlated 
with the IFNγ response. Thus, different species of the same genus may affect the IFNγ 
response in opposite ways. We also observed different species from the same genus affecting 
different cytokines. For example, Streptococcus parasanguinis and Streptococcus australis 
were associated with IFNγ production, but other species such as the Streptococcus mitis/
oralis/pneumoniae group were associated with IL-1β. Examples of a microbial species 
predicted to affect multiple cytokines (IP1) include Bifidobacterium, which has been 
previously associated with IFNγ production (Lopez et al., 2011; Menard et al., 2008). Here, 
we observed a positive correlation between Bifidobacterium pseudocatenulatum and IFNγ. 
In contrast, Bifidobacterium adolescentis was inversely correlated with TNFα production, 
further emphasizing the potential cytokine- and species-specificity of these associations. 
Further, P. distasonis was negatively associated with TNFα and IL-1β in response to C. 
albicans hyphae stimulation (Figure 3B). In human biopsies, P. distasonis was significantly 
more abundant in uninflamed versus inflamed tissue (Zitomersky et al., 2013). Consistent 
with this observation, oral administration of P. distasonis antigens attenuates intestinal 
inflammation during colitis in mice (Kverka et al., 2011).
These associations can also be used to form hypotheses regarding principles of host-
microbial interactions. For instance, C. comes exhibited stimulus-specific associations with 
IL-1β and IL-6 in connection with C. albicans hyphae stimulation, suggesting that C. comes 
potentially modulates acute phase responses (Figure 3D). The acute phase response is a non-
specific defense mechanism against microorganisms, characterized by a cascade involving 
stimulation of IL-1β and subsequent IL-6 production followed by fever and synthesis of 
acute-phase proteins. Both cytokines were positively correlated with C. comes, suggesting 
immunostimulatory properties of this microorganism on the acute phase pathway. In an 
accompanying manuscript examining host factors that influence cytokine response, ter Horst 
et al. found correlations between IL-1β and the acute phase protein AAT (alpha-1-
antitrypsin) (ter Horst et al., 2016). We therefore assessed the impact of C. comes on the 
circulating concentrations of AAT and found a positive correlation (r = 0.08, p = 0.08) 
(Figure S3) providing further evidence for the connection between C. comes and acute phase 
responses. Furthermore, C. comes demonstrated immunosuppressive properties in 
connection with IL-22 production induced by S. aureus (Figure 3D). The negative 
correlation of C. comes with IL-22 (in contrast to the positive correlations observed for 
IL-1β and IL-6) might at first appear contradictory, as IL-1β and IL-6 are both required for 
Th17 and IL-17/IL-22 production. However, complementary data from the 500FG and 
200FG projects show an absence of correlations between monocyte-derived cytokines (e.g., 
IL-1β and IL-6) and Th-responses (e.g., IL-22) (Li et al., 2016).
Schirmer et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Taxonomic Associations with Bacterial-Induced Cytokine Responses
Three bacterial stimulations were used: LPS, S. aureus, and B. fragilis. For TNFα, IL-17, 
and IL-22, associations were only observed in connection with a specific bacterial stimulus 
(Figures 3B and 3C). A differential IFNγ response was observed in connection with B. 
fragilis and S. aureus at the species level (Figure 3B) and LPS and B. fragilis at the genus 
level (Figure 3C). In contrast, microbial associations with TNFα were exclusively detected 
in connection with LPS stimulation, suggesting that the gut microbiome influences TNFα 
production in a stimulus-dependent manner (Figures 3B and 3C; Tables S1–S4). In total, 
three positive and nine negative associations were found at the species level for LPS-induced 
TNFα responses in whole blood and PBMCs. For example, negative associations between 
the microbiota and LPS-induced TNFα response involved multiple diet-sensitive bacteria, 
including Alistipes spp., Clostridium spp., and Bilophila spp. (in particular B. wadsworthia) 
(David et al., 2014; Devkota et al., 2012). This effect is particularly interesting given that 
anti-TNFα therapy is a common treatment for chronic inflammatory diseases such as 
inflammatory bowel disease and rheumatoid arthritis, and these associations motivate 
potential microbiome-based therapeutic approaches.
S. aureus was the only bacterial stimulus where a differential Th17 response was associated 
with the microbiota (IL-17 and IL-22; Figures 3B and 3C). While the IL-17 and IL-22 
response to S. aureus was generally lower compared to fungal-induced responses, a 
significant amount of variation was observed for all stimulations (see Figure 2A). For IL-17, 
five positive genus associations were identified, including Clostridium. This genus includes 
many species from Clostridium clades IV and XIV, which enhance T regulatory cell 
abundance and induce anti-inflammatory molecules, including IL-17 (Atarashi et al., 2013). 
Two negative genus associations with IL-17 production involved Faecalibacterium and 
Atopobium (Figure 3C). A prominent member of the Faecalibacterium genus, F. prausnitzii, 
inhibits IL-17 production in rats (Zhang et al., 2014). Our finding suggests that this may also 
be true in humans.
In contrast to these stimulus-specific examples, a differential IFNγ response was observed 
for all bacterial stimulations (Figure 3B and 3C). For LPS, for example, two negative 
associations were detected with Oscillibacter and Barnesiella. Barnesiella was additionally 
implicated in the B. fragilis-induced IFNγ response, representing a cytokine-specific 
interaction (IP2). One of the species-level associations involving B. fragilis stimulation was 
another Bacteroides species, B. nordii. However, in general the associations observed in 
connection with B. fragilis, a commensal gut bacterium, were not unique compared to the 
pathogenic stimulations. For example, the S. aureus-induced IFNγ response had three 
microbial associations, one being a positive association with Bacteroides cellulosilyticus. 
This observation suggests that while the various stimulations yield different associations, 
there does not appear to be a unique preferential association of B. fragilis with other 
Bacteroides.
Microbial Metabolites Attenuate Pathogen-Induced TNFα and IFNγ Responses
The immune system recognizes and reacts to small molecules produced by gut microbes, 
such as the previously mentioned example of SCFAs. These microbial functional pathways 
Schirmer et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 are often driven by multiple microorganisms, and hence functional associations would not 
necessarily be detected in taxonomic pairwise association analyses. Therefore we 
investigated correlations between cytokine production and MetaCyc metabolic pathways as 
well as GO categories, including biological processes and molecular functions, to identified 
functional categories implicated in differential cytokine responses (Figures 4A and 4B, 
Tables S5–S8).
Functional Associations with Fungal-Induced Cytokine Responses
Analogous to the taxonomic analysis, we first focused on functional associations in 
connection with fungal-induced cytokine responses. The majority of functional associations 
were detected for the C. albicans conidia-induced TNFα and IFNγ response (Figures 4A 
and 4B, Tables S5–S8). For TNFα, this observation was in contrast to the taxonomic 
analysis, where all associations were detected in connection with LPS stimulation (Figures 
3B and 3C). Stimulus-specific interactions patterns involving TNFα and IFNγ are not 
surprising, as both are regulated by similar transcription factors in T cells, and IFNγ can 
further induce TNFα expression in dendritic cells.
Furthermore, 11 microbial functional features were predicted to affect the C. albicans 
conidia-induced production of TNFα and IL-22 in the same manner (Figures 4A and 4B). 
Both cytokines are produced by Th22 cells and can synergistically induce an effective innate 
immune response of epithelial cells during C. albicans infection, conferring protection in 
humans (Eyerich et al., 2011). Our results indicate that there are potential microbial factors 
that correlate with the production of both cytokines. In comparison to conidia, very few 
associations were detected for C. albicans hyphae, suggesting that the developmental state of 
the fungal pathogen is an important factor in determining host-microbial interactions.
Functional Associations with Bacterial-Induced Cytokine Responses
Microbial associations with the IL-6 response were detected for all bacterial stimulations 
(Figures 4A and 4B). For example, three MetaCyc pathways (Figure 4A) associated with the 
LPS-induced IL-6 response were involved in arginine degradation: cycloserine biosynthesis 
(PWY-7274), L-arginine and L-ornithine degradation (ORNARGDEG-PWY), and L-
arginine, putrescine and 4-aminobutanoate degradation (ARGDEG-PWY) (Table S5). L-
arginine depletion mediated by myeloid cell arginase (ARG) has emerged as a fundamental 
mechanism of inflammation-associated immunosuppression (Bronte and Zanovello, 2005). 
Our data suggest that the microbiome may play an important role in arginine depletion and 
may need to be taken into consideration to address the immunomodulatory role of ARG. We 
also found a connection to the fungal-induced TNFα response, which was negatively 
correlated with two of these pathways (ORNARGDEG-PWY and ARGDEG-PWY).
Immunomodulatory Effects of Tryptophan and Tryptophol
Most functional associations in connection with bacterial stimulations were detected for 
IFNγ, involving a large number of cytokine-specific interactions (IP2) (Figure 4B). For 
example, microbial tryptophan degradation to tryptophol (MetaCyc pathway 5081) was 
negatively associated with IFNγ production in whole blood for S. aureus, LPS, and C. 
albicans conidia (Figure 5A). Tryptophan is metabolized in the gut into several molecules 
Schirmer et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that play an important role in immune regulation, such as limiting inflammation by 
interacting with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Lamas et al., 2016; Rothhammer et al., 2016) 
and both tryptophan depletion and downstream tryptophan metabolites can confer protection 
against excessive inflammation by immune inhibition (Opitz et al., 2007). To determine 
whether this observed decrease in IFNγ levels was due to a decrease in tryptophan or an 
increase in the resulting metabolite tryptophol, we experimentally validated these findings 
using a whole blood stimulation assay in healthy human donors. When tryptophan was 
added to whole blood, there was no effect on IFNγ production induced by LPS, S. aureus, or 
C. albicans conidia (Figure 5B). In contrast, tryptophol significantly decreased C. albicans- 
and LPS-induced production of IFNγ. Stimulation with S. aureus also showed a trend 
toward decreased IFNγ production when tryptophol was added (Figure 5B). These results 
show that microbially produced tryptophol has a strong effect on IFNγ production.
Palmitoleic Acid Can Inhibit the Pro-Inflammatory Cytokine Response
Two related MetaCyc pathways showed positive correlations with TNFα in response to C. 
albicans conidia stimulation: palmitoleic acid biosynthesis (MetaCyc PWY 6282) and cis-
vaccenate biosynthesis (MetaCyc PWY 5973) (Figures 5C and 5D). Cis-vaccenate 
biosynthesis was also positively associated with IFNγ production. Palmitoleic acid 
biosynthesis has a branch point from a palmitoleoyl [acp] to the cis-vaccenate pathway 
(Figure S4A). Thus, increased activity in the palmitoleic acid biosynthesis pathway could 
result in either more palmitoleic acid or more cis-vaccenate if the cis-vaccenate pathway 
were also active. In the second scenario, an increase of cis-vaccenate would utilize the 
substrate for palmitoleic acid biosynthesis, resulting in less palmitoleic acid production. 
Given that our associations with cis-vaccenate biosynthesis have a positive correlation with 
TNFα and IFNγ, it is possible that increased palmitoleic acid corresponds to decreased 
cytokine production. We tested how the presence of these molecules affects C. albicans 
conidia-induced cytokine production in human PBMCs (Figure 5E). Palmitoleic acid 
decreased TNFα production but had no effect on IFNγ. However, cis-vaccenate (cis-
vaccenic acid) did not influence cytokine production under any of the tested stimulations 
(Figure 5E). Interestingly, palmitoleic acid displayed an antiinflammatory effect in 
connection with all of the monocyte-derived cytokines (IL-1β, TNFα, IL-6), but had no 
effect on lymphocyte-derived cytokines (IFNγ, IL-17, IL-22) (Figures S4B and S4C).
Discussion
The HFGP is a comprehensive study that aims to identify the most important factors 
influencing cytokine production capacity in healthy humans. In three complementary 
studies, we report the environmental, genetic, and microbiome factors associated with 
cytokine production induced by different microbial stimulations in a cohort of 500 healthy 
volunteers. While accompanying studies demonstrate the impact of environmental and host 
factors (genetic and non-genetic) for the modulation of cytokine production (Li et al., 2016; 
ter Horst et al., 2016), in this study we provide evidence that the gut microbiome also has 
biologically relevant effects.
Schirmer et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Our analysis indicates that inter-individual variation in cytokine response is linked to 
specific microbial organisms as well as microbial functions. The majority of detected 
associations were both cytokine- and stimulus-specific (IP3), suggesting that the immune 
system recognizes and interacts with microbial organisms and products with high specificity 
and that these microbial factors are associated with a particular immunological phenotype. 
In particular, a broad range of microbial functional features was associated with cytokine 
responses. This observation suggests that modulation of host defense by the microbiota may 
be exerted mainly through the release of intermediary common mediators (such as 
metabolites) rather than direct interaction between specific microorganisms and immune 
cells. This finding constitutes the first important conclusion that can be drawn from our data.
An important role for metabolites in microbiome-cytokine interactions is supported by the 
fact that a large proportion of the metabolites in the blood originate from the gut (Sridharan 
et al., 2014; Wikoff et al., 2009), as well as our findings of the strong impact of microbial 
metabolic processes on cytokine production (Figure 4). Among these metabolic processes, 
we experimentally validated the important impact of microbial tryptophan metabolism, a 
pathway known to modulate cytokine production at the level of host metabolism (Moffett 
and Namboodiri, 2003; Nowak et al., 2012). Here, we demonstrate that microbial tryptophan 
metabolism strongly influences cytokine production. Interestingly, this effect is mainly 
mediated by the tryptophan metabolite tryptophol, which has strong inhibitory effects on the 
TNFα response. However, the inhibitory effect depends on the particular pathogenic 
stimulation. We also validated a predicted interaction involving palmitoleic acid metabolism. 
Palmitoleic acid inhibits apoptosis induced by a combination of IL-1β and IFNγ (Welters et 
al., 2004), but a specific effect on IFNγ synthesis has not been previously reported. 
Interestingly, we not only validated this relationship in human cell stimulation assays, but 
also demonstrated a specific effect of palmitoleic acid on monocyte-derived cytokines 
(TNFα, IL-1β, IL-6) but not lymphocyte-derived cytokines (IFNγ, IL-17, IL-22). The 
molecular mechanisms responsible for this specificity remain to be elucidated in future 
studies. These validations serve as proof-of-principle of how predicted associations can be 
used to provide insight into host-microbial interactions.
In addition to the observations concerning modulation of cytokine production capacity by 
microbial functions, we also predicted interactions of specific microbial species and genera, 
including the effect of C. comes on cytokines of the acute phase pathway (IL-1β and IL-6). 
The production of IL-1β and IL-6 is regulated largely at a genetic level (Li et al., 2016) and 
less influenced by microorganisms. The physiological relevance of this finding is supported 
by our subsequent analysis showing that C. comes is associated with circulating 
concentrations of the acute phase protein AAT. This connection was observed despite the 
fact that AAT was measured during health, not after microbial challenge or infection.
Insight into gut microbiota and the immune system interactions is a crucial step in 
understanding immune-mediated and infectious diseases. For example, differential 
abundance of specific gut bacteria was associated with cytokine responses and may impact 
disease susceptibility. This effect was exerted directly on the intrinsic cytokine production 
capacity of the immune cells, rather than by influencing the number of cells in circulation: 
no effect of microbiota composition on the most important immune cell populations (T/B-
Schirmer et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 lymphocytes, monocytes, neutrophils, NK-cells) was detected in the present study (data not 
shown).
Evaluating the results of the three studies presented in this issue, it appears that variation at 
many levels affects the inflammatory response. An earlier study showed that host genetic 
variants modulate pathogen sensing in dendritic cells stimulated with microbial ligands (Lee 
et al., 2014), and we now present a much broader assessment of the genetic (Li et al., 2016) 
and environmental factors (ter Horst et al., 2016) that modulate cytokine production. Non-
genetic factors such as age, gender, and season have a strong influence on cytokine 
production capacity, and genome-wide analyses have identified 17 independent loci that 
influence cytokine production at a genome-wide level. Here, we demonstrate that the 
microbiome also plays a key role in the regulation of cytokine production. This conclusion is 
supported by studies showing that perturbations such as antibiotic treatment greatly impact 
development of autoimmune diseases such as psoriasis (Zanvit et al., 2015) and are 
associated with allergic asthma susceptibility (Russell et al., 2012). In addition, the use of 
antibiotics is associated with a more pronounced dysbiosis in children with Crohn’s disease, 
implicating perturbations of the gut microbiota in disease (Gevers et al., 2014).
The HFGP provides the opportunity to evaluate the importance of these host-dependent 
factors. Although host genetic variability and microbiome composition both influence 
cytokine production, our analyses suggest a greater impact of host genetics, explaining 25–
50% of the variability of some cytokine responses, compared to the microbiome, explaining 
only up to 10% of cytokine variability.
Several limiting factors can introduce noise to the microbiome data, resulting in smaller 
correlation coefficients. First, any experimentally obtained data contains noise; for example, 
the immune cells were stimulated ex vivo, outside the environment where the cells were 
exposed to microbial factors, potentially weakening the detectable effects of host-microbial 
interactions. Second, simultaneously occurring host-microbial associations may affect each 
other adversely. Importantly, the effect size does not necessarily provide knowledge about 
biological significance, as illustrated by the experimental validation of two functional 
associations, providing conclusive evidence for the specificity of these host-microbial 
interactions.
The HFGP studies provide a comprehensive assessment of the effects of host and 
environmental factors on cytokine production capacity at a population level. Integrated 
approaches initiated in HFGP enabled us to identify important general interaction 
characteristics of different biological traits in the human hosts (Figure 6). First, general 
characteristics of the host such as age and gender have an important impact on 
inflammation. Men display a higher production of monocyte-derived proinflammatory 
cytokines, whereas women have a greater Th17 response (ter Horst et al., 2016). These 
differences may provide a partial explanation for differences in pathologies between men 
and women: men are more susceptible to metabolic and cardiovascular diseases, whereas 
women more often have autoimmune diseases (Regitz-Zagrosek, 2006; Regitz-Zagrosek et 
al., 2006). In addition, a defective IFNγ production capacity has been observed in elderly 
people (Ouyang et al., 2002), which may explain their increased susceptibility to infections. 
Schirmer et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Second, genomic approaches in HFGP demonstrate the importance of host genetics for 
determining cytokine responses. Although this concept is not new, here we have analyzed a 
large healthy population in a genome-wide fashion, and report 17 new genetic loci 
associated with specific responses (Li et al., 2016). Third, we found that the effects of both 
genetic and microbiome factors are mainly stimulus- and cytokine-specific, and interesting 
new patterns emerged: TNFα and IFNγ production capacity appear to be more strongly 
influenced by the microbiome, whereas other cytokines such as IL-1β, IL-6, and Th17-
derived IL-17 and IL-22 exhibit fewer, but more specific, associations with the gut 
microbiota. This finding is in line with genetic data showing an opposite trend for monocyte- 
and Th-derived cytokines (Li et al., 2016). These findings may have important consequences 
for approaches to immunotherapy targeting specific cytokines to alter immune responses: 
while inhibition of cytokines that are strongly influenced by the microbiome can potentially 
be modulated through diet, elimination of specific species, or fecal microbiota 
transplantation, host genomics-modulated cytokines may be more effectively targeted 
through inhibitory pharmacological approaches (e.g., neutralizing monoclonal antibodies).
Through these three complementary HFGP studies assessing the impact of the host 
microbiome (this study), environmental (ter Horst et al., 2016), and host genetic factors (Li 
et al., 2016), we are able to glimpse the complexity of the mechanisms driving the variability 
of human cytokine responses. These studies open the possibility for future similar 
investigations in patient groups to identify the variation and disturbances responsible for 
their diseases in a personalized fashion, thereby providing the basis for precision medicine.
STAR Methods
Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing
Further information and requests for reagents may be directed to and will be fulfilled by 
corresponding authors Ramnik J. Xavier (xavier@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu) and Mihai G. 
Netea (mihai.netea@radboudumc.nl).
Experimental Model and Subject Details
Human Cohort
The 500 Functional Genomics (500FG) project consists of 534 adult healthy volunteers 
sampled between July 2013 and December 2014. Inclusion criteria were >18 years of age 
and Western European descent. Exclusion criteria were pregnancy/breastfeeding, chronic or 
acute disease at the time of assessment, and use of chronic or acute medication during the 
last month before the study. After visiting the hospital to donate blood, volunteers received 
an extensive online questionnaire about lifestyle, diet, and disease history. Upon analyzing 
the questionnaire data we excluded 45 volunteers as they were under medication, non-
European descent, or had kidney disease or diabetes mellitus (Figure S1A).
Ethics Statement
The 500FG study was approved by the Ethical Committee of Radboud University Nijmegen 
(NL42561.091.12, 2012/550). Inclusion of volunteers and experiments were conducted 
Schirmer et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 according to the principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki. All volunteers gave 
written informed consent before any material was taken.
Method Details
Stimulation of Whole Blood and Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells
Whole blood experiments—100 µl heparin blood was added to a 48-well plate and 
stimulated (Figure S1C) in a total volume of 500 µl for 48 hr at 37°C and 5% CO2. 
Supernatants were collected and stored at −20°C until used for ELISA.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) experiments—PBMCs were obtained 
by density centrifugation of diluted blood (1 part blood to 1 part pyrogen-free saline) over 
Ficoll-Paque (Pharmacia Biotech, Uppsala, Sweden). Cells were washed twice in saline and 
suspended in medium (RPMI 1640) supplemented with gentamicin (10 mg/mL), L-
glutamine (10 mM), and pyruvate (10 mM). PBMCs were counted in a Coulter counter 
(Coulter Electronics, Buckinghamshire, England) and their concentrations were adjusted to 
5 × 106 cells/mL. 5 × 105 PBMCs in a total volume of 200 µL per well were stimulated in 
round-bottom 96-well plates (Greiner) with different stimulations (Figure S1C) for either 24 
hr or 7 days at 37°C and 5% CO2. Seven-day stimulations were performed in the presence of 
10% human pooled serum. Supernatants were collected and stored in −20°C until used for 
ELISA.
Cytokine Measurements
The concentrations of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-17, IL-22, IFNγ, and TNFα were measured in cell 
culture supernatants using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (IL-1β, IL-17, 
IL-22, TNFα: R&D Systems; IL-6, IFNγ: Sanquin), according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. The circulating concentration of alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT) was measured in 
EDTA plasma using an R&D Systems DuoSet ELISA kit following the manufacturer’s 
standard protocol.
Stool Samples and Sequencing
Participants collected stool samples at home the day before, or on the day of blood 
collection. Participants were asked to store their stool sample in the refrigerator before 
delivering the sample to the hospital where it was aliquoted and stored at −80°C until DNA 
extraction. DNA was isolated with the AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) with the 
addition of mechanical lysis. DNA samples were subsequently quantified by Quant-iT 
PicoGreen dsDNA Assay (Life Technologies) and normalized to a concentration of 50 
pg/µL. Whole-genome shotgun sequencing libraries were prepared according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions using the Nextera XT DNA Library Preparation kit (Illumina) 
with 100–250 pg input DNA. Libraries were pooled by transferring equal volumes of each 
library using a Labcyte Echo 550 liquid handler. The concentrations and insert size ranges 
for each pooled library were checked using an Agilent Bioanalyzer DNA 1000 kit (Agilent 
Technologies). Libraries were subsequently sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform 
in paired-end mode (2×101bp) targeting ∼2.5Gb of sequences per sample.
Schirmer et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Functional Validation Experiments
Cohort—PBMCs were isolated from buffy coats isolated from healthy volunteers 
(Netherlands).
Ethics statement—All studies with human blood samples were conducted in the 
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center and the use of healthy volunteers was 
approved by the institutional ethics review board. Peripheral venous blood samples from 
healthy volunteers were obtained after written informed consent was provided.
Reagents—The following reagents were used for cell isolation: Ficoll-Paque (GE 
Healthcare, Diegem, Belgium), RPMI 1640 Dutch modifications culture medium (Sigma, 
Zwijndrecht, the Netherlands). RPMI 1640 medium was supplemented with 1% gentamicin, 
1% L-glutamine, and 1% pyruvate (Life Technologies, Nieuwerkerk, the Netherlands). For 
cell stimulation experiments, LPS (Escherichia coli serotype 055:B5) was purchased from 
Sigma and an extra purification step was performed as described previously (Hirschfeld et 
al., 2000). Purified LPS was tested in Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4−/− mice for the presence of 
contaminants and did not have any TLR4-independent activity (Sutmuller et al., 2006). C. 
albicans ATCC MYA-3573 (UC 820) (Lehrer and Cline, 1969) was grown overnight in 
Sabouraud broth at 37°C; cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed twice, and 
resuspended in culture medium. C. albicans conidia or hyphae were heat-killed for 1 hr at 
100°C. S. aureus (ATCC 25923) and B. fragilis (NCTC 10584) were heat-killed for 30 min 
at 100°C a nd 95°C, respectively. L-tryptophan was purchased from Sigma. Palmitoleic acid, 
tryptophol, palmitic acid, and cis-vaccenic acid were purchased from Sigma (P9417, 
T90301, P0500, and V0384, respectively). Tryptophol and cis-vaccenic acid were dissolved 
in ethanol (Merck 1.00983.1000) and therefore ethanol was used as a control.
Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells—PBMCs were obtained by density 
centrifugation of diluted blood (1 part blood to 1 part pyrogen-free saline) over Ficoll-Paque 
(Pharmacia Biotech, Uppsala, Sweden). PBMCs were washed twice in saline and suspended 
in culture medium. The PBMCs were counted in a Coulter counter (Coulter Electronics, 
Buckinghamshire, England) and their concentration was adjusted to 5 × 106 cells/mL.
Stimulations—5 × 105 PBMCs in a total volume of 200 µL per well were incubated at 
37°C in round-bottomed, 96-well plates (Greiner) with different stimulations. The effects of 
various metabolites (tryptophan, tryptophol, palmitoleic acid, cis-vaccenate) were studied by 
adding them 10 min before microbial stimulation. RPMI and DMSO medium were used as 
controls. After 24 hr, 48 hr, or 7 days of incubation with or without the various metabolites, 
supernatants were collected and stored at −20°C until assayed. S even-day cultures were 
performed in the presence of 10% human pooled serum.
Cytokine measurements—The concentrations of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-17, IL-22, IFNγ, and 
TNFα were measured in cell culture supernatants using enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA) (R&D Systems & Sanquin) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Schirmer et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Metagenomic Data Analysis
Samples that were included in the analysis had at least 4 million sequencing reads. Reads 
were first processed using KneadData (http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/kneaddata). This 
included quality-trimming (trimmomatic parameters: MAXINFO:90:0.5), read-filtering 
based on a minimum read length of 60 bp, and removal of potential human contamination by 
filtering reads that aligned to the human genome (reference genome hg19). Quality-
controlled, paired-end reads were aligned against a database of unique clade-specific marker 
genes using Bowtie2 and taxonomic profiles were inferred with MetaPhlAn 2.2 (Segata et 
al., 2012). For subsequent analysis, we considered species as well as genus composition of 
the samples. Functional profiling was performed using HUMAnN2 (http://
huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/humann2). Briefly, reads are mapped against a customized 
database of functionally annotated pangenomes, only considering organisms that were 
identified during the taxonomic profiling step. Functional annotation of the protein 
sequences in the pangenomes to their respective UniRef50 family is provided with the 
software. Reads that cannot be mapped are subsequently aligned against the complete 
UniRef50 database. The community totals are computed for each protein family (RPK) and 
converted into relative abundances. For subsequent downstream analysis these tens of 
thousands of gene families were further grouped into broader functional categories: 
MetaCyc metabolic pathways and informative GO categories, focusing on molecular 
functions and biological processes as previously described (Vatanen et al., 2016). 
Specifically, the selected GO terms were each annotated to > 2,000 proteins in UniRef50, 
while all their descendant (more specific) terms were annotated to < 2,000 proteins. 
Taxonomic as well as functional features were required to occur in at least 3% of the 
samples (at least 14 samples) to be considered for association testing. Overall, this resulted 
in 219 species, 83 genera, 639 MetaCyc pathways, and 520 GO categories (213 molecular 
functions and 307 biological processes).
Cytokine Data Analysis
Inter-individual variation of cytokine responses was evaluated using Fligner-Killeen test of 
homogeneity of variances. The variance for each of the stimulation conditions was compared 
to the unstimulated state (RPMI medium). For all stimulation conditions the level of 
variation was significantly increased (all p < 1e-15).
Correlation Analysis
Associations for each cytokine measurement in connection with a particular stimulus were 
analyzed using Spearman correlation coefficient in combination with Benjamini-Hochberg 
correction to account for multiple hypothesis testing (significance threshold α ≤ 0.2). For 
whole blood samples, cytokine measurements were obtained from 456 samples. For PBMCs, 
samples from 401 and 466 individuals were available for cytokine measurements after 1 day 
and 7 days, respectively.
Schirmer et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Functional Validation Experiments
Significance testing—Experiments were performed in duplicate, and supernatants were 
pooled. When values were below or above the detection limit of the ELISA, the 
corresponding detection limit was used. For each experiment, 4–8 biological replicates were 
obtained. Differences between groups were analyzed using a paired t-test. The level of 
significance between groups was set at p < 0.05 (*), p < 0.01 (**), p < 0.001 (***) or p < 
0.0001 (****). Data are presented as percentage change compared to control ± standard 
error.
Data and Software Availability
Data Resources
The data from the Human Functional Genomics Project are available online at http://
hfgp.bbmri.nl/. The microbiome data are also available through SRA (Bioproject ID: 
PRJNA319574).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank all volunteers from the 500FG cohort for participating. The HFGP is supported by grants to 
MGN [ERC Consolidator Grant (3310372), Spinoza Prize (NOW SPI 94-212), and IN-CONTROL CVON grant] 
and CW [ERC Advanced Grant (FP/2007-2013/ERC grant 2012-322698), Spinoza Prize (NWO SPI 92-266), the 
Dutch Digestive Diseases Foundation (MLDS WO11-30), and the European Union’s Seventh Framework 
Programme (EU FP7) TANDEM project (HEALTH-F3-2012-305279)]. RJX was supported by grants from NIH 
(U54DK102557 and R01DK092405), Helmsley Charitable Trust, JDRF (17-2011-529), and CCFA (20144126). 
AZ, JF, and AK were supported by a CVON grant. SPS was financially supported by STW grant STW13546. AZ 
holds a Rosalind Franklin Fellowship (University of Groningen). JF is funded by the Netherlands Organization for 
Scientific Research (NWO-VIDI 864.13.013). We thank Tiffany Poon for help in sequence production and sample 
management and Natalia Nedelsky (Massachusetts General Hospital) for editorial help and help with figure 
generation. We also thank Edith Adriaanse, Marije van der Geest, and Marieke Bijlsma for structuring the online 
database and the MOLGENIS open source team, Dennis Hendriksen, Erwin Winder, Bart Charbon, Fleur Kelpin, 
Jonathan Jetten, Mark de Haan, Tommy de Boer, David van Enckevort, Chao Pang, Joeri van der Velde, and Morris 
Swertz for designing and implementing the database software. The creation and hosting of the online database was 
supported by BBMRI-NL, a research infrastructure financed by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific 
Research (NWO), grant number 184.021.007. We thank Maria Carmen Cenit, Astrid Maatman, Mathieu Plateel, 
and Jody Arends for technical support, and Dan Graham for helpful advice and discussions. We also thank 
thenounproject.com for providing the figure icons “Male Aging”/”Female Aging” by Marie Van den Broeck.
References
Atarashi K, Tanoue T, Oshima K, Suda W, Nagano Y, Nishikawa H, Fukuda S, Saito T, Narushima S, 
Hase K, et al. Treg induction by a rationally selected mixture of Clostridia strains from the human 
microbiota. Nature. 2013; 500:232–236. [PubMed: 23842501] 
Bronte V, Zanovello P. Regulation of immune responses by L-arginine metabolism. Nat. Rev. 
Immunol. 2005; 5:641–654. [PubMed: 16056256] 
Crost EH, Tailford LE, Le Gall G, Fons M, Henrissat B, Juge N. Utilisation of mucin glycans by the 
human gut symbiont Ruminococcus gnavus is strain-dependent. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e76341. 
[PubMed: 24204617] 
David LA, Maurice CF, Carmody RN, Gootenberg DB, Button JE, Wolfe BE, Ling AV, Devlin AS, 
Varma Y, Fischbach MA, et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. 
Nature. 2014; 505:559–563. [PubMed: 24336217] 
Schirmer et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Devkota S, Wang Y, Musch MW, Leone V, Fehlner-Peach H, Nadimpalli A, Antonopoulos DA, Jabri 
B, Chang EB. Dietary-fat-induced taurocholic acid promotes pathobiont expansion and colitis in 
Il10−/− mice. Nature. 2012; 487:104–108. [PubMed: 22722865] 
Donia MS, Fischbach MA. HUMAN MICROBIOTA. Small molecules from the human microbiota. 
Science. 2015; 349:1254766. [PubMed: 26206939] 
Dorrestein PC, Mazmanian SK, Knight R. Finding the missing links among metabolites, microbes, and 
the host. Immunity. 2014; 40:824–832. [PubMed: 24950202] 
Eyerich S, Wagener J, Wenzel V, Scarponi C, Pennino D, Albanesi C, Schaller M, Behrendt H, Ring J, 
Schmidt-Weber CB, et al. IL-22 and TNF-alpha represent a key cytokine combination for epidermal 
integrity during infection with Candida albicans. Eur. J. Immunol. 2011; 41:1894–1901. [PubMed: 
21469124] 
Fu J, Bonder MJ, Cenit MC, Tigchelaar EF, Maatman A, Dekens JA, Brandsma E, Marczynska J, 
Imhann F, Weersma RK, et al. The Gut Microbiome Contributes to a Substantial Proportion of the 
Variation in Blood Lipids. Circ. Res. 2015; 117:817–824. [PubMed: 26358192] 
Gevers D, Kugathasan S, Denson LA, Vazquez-Baeza Y, Van Treuren W, Ren B, Schwager E, Knights 
D, Song SJ, Yassour M, et al. The treatment-naive microbiome in new-onset Crohn’s disease. Cell 
Host Microbe. 2014; 15:382–392. [PubMed: 24629344] 
Hirschfeld M, Ma Y, Weis JH, Vogel SN, Weis JJ. Cutting edge: repurification of lipopolysaccharide 
eliminates signaling through both human and murine toll-like receptor 2. J. Immunol. 2000; 
165:618–622. [PubMed: 10878331] 
Human Microbiome Project, C. Structure, function and diversity of the healthy human microbiome. 
Nature. 2012; 486:207–214. [PubMed: 22699609] 
Kosiewicz MM, Zirnheld AL, Alard P. Gut microbiota, immunity, and disease: a complex relationship. 
Front Microbiol. 2011; 2:180. [PubMed: 21922015] 
Kverka M, Zakostelska Z, Klimesova K, Sokol D, Hudcovic T, Hrncir T, Rossmann P, Mrazek J, 
Kopecny J, Verdu EF, et al. Oral administration of Parabacteroides distasonis antigens attenuates 
experimental murine colitis through modulation of immunity and microbiota composition. Clin. 
Exp. Immunol. 2011; 163:250–259. [PubMed: 21087444] 
Lamas B, Richard ML, Leducq V, Pham HP, Michel ML, Da Costa G, Bridonneau C, Jegou S, 
Hoffmann TW, Natividad JM, et al. CARD9 impacts colitis by altering gut microbiota metabolism 
of tryptophan into aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligands. Nat. Med. 2016; 22:598–605. [PubMed: 
27158904] 
Lee MN, Ye C, Villani AC, Raj T, Li W, Eisenhaure TM, Imboywa SH, Chipendo PI, Ran FA, 
Slowikowski K, et al. Common genetic variants modulate pathogen-sensing responses in human 
dendritic cells. Science. 2014; 343:1246980. [PubMed: 24604203] 
Lee WJ, Hase K. Gut microbiota-generated metabolites in animal health and disease. Nat. Chem. Biol. 
2014; 10:416–424. [PubMed: 24838170] 
Lehrer RI, Cline MJ. Interaction of Candida albicans with human leukocytes and serum. J. Bacteriol. 
1969; 98:996–1004. [PubMed: 4182532] 
Li Y, Oosting M, Smeekens SP, Jaeger M, Aguirre-Gamboa R, Le KTT, Deelen P, Ricano-Ponce I, 
Schoffelen T, Jansen AFM, et al. A Functional Genomics Approach to Understand Variation in 
Cytokine Production in Humans. Cell. 2016 In Press. 
Lopez P, Gonzalez-Rodriguez I, Gueimonde M, Margolles A, Suarez A. Immune response to 
Bifidobacterium bifidum strains support Treg/Th17 plasticity. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6:e24776. 
[PubMed: 21966367] 
Mazmanian SK, Liu CH, Tzianabos AO, Kasper DL. An immunomodulatory molecule of symbiotic 
bacteria directs maturation of the host immune system. Cell. 2005; 122:107–118. [PubMed: 
16009137] 
Menard O, Butel MJ, Gaboriau-Routhiau V, Waligora-Dupriet AJ. Gnotobiotic mouse immune 
response induced by Bifidobacterium sp. strains isolated from infants. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
2008; 74:660–666. [PubMed: 18083875] 
Moffett JR, Namboodiri MA. Tryptophan and the immune response. Immunol. Cell Biol. 2003; 
81:247–265. [PubMed: 12848846] 
Schirmer et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Nowak EC, de Vries VC, Wasiuk A, Ahonen C, Bennett KA, Le Mercier I, Ha DG, Noelle RJ. 
Tryptophan hydroxylase-1 regulates immune tolerance and inflammation. J. Exp. Med. 2012; 
209:2127–2135. [PubMed: 23008335] 
Opitz CA, Wick W, Steinman L, Platten M. Tryptophan degradation in autoimmune diseases. Cell. 
Mol. Life Sci. 2007; 64:2542–2563. [PubMed: 17611712] 
Ouyang Q, Wagner WM, Wikby A, Remarque E, Pawelec G. Compromised interferon gamma (IFN-
gamma) production in the elderly to both acute and latent viral antigen stimulation: contribution to 
the immune risk phenotype? Eur. Cytokine Netw. 2002; 13:392–394. [PubMed: 12517723] 
Paun A, Yau C, Danska JS. Immune recognition and response to the intestinal microbiome in type 1 
diabetes. J. Autoimmun. 2016; 71:10–18. [PubMed: 26908163] 
Regitz-Zagrosek V. Therapeutic implications of the gender-specific aspects of cardiovascular disease. 
Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2006; 5:425–438. [PubMed: 16672926] 
Regitz-Zagrosek V, Lehmkuhl E, Weickert MO. Gender differences in the metabolic syndrome and 
their role for cardiovascular disease. Clin. Res. Cardiol. 2006; 95:136–147. [PubMed: 16598526] 
Rothhammer V, Mascanfroni ID, Bunse L, Takenaka MC, Kenison JE, Mayo L, Chao CC, Patel B, Yan 
R, Blain M, et al. Type I interferons and microbial metabolites of tryptophan modulate astrocyte 
activity and central nervous system inflammation via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Nat. Med. 
2016; 22:586–597. [PubMed: 27158906] 
Ruschen S, Stellberg W, Warnatz H. Kinetics of cytokine secretion by mononuclear cells of the blood 
from rheumatoid arthritis patients are different from those of healthy controls. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 
1992; 89:32–37. [PubMed: 1385767] 
Russell SL, Gold MJ, Hartmann M, Willing BP, Thorson L, Wlodarska M, Gill N, Blanchet MR, 
Mohn WW, McNagny KM, et al. Early life antibiotic-driven changes in microbiota enhance 
susceptibility to allergic asthma. EMBO Rep. 2012; 13:440–447. [PubMed: 22422004] 
Segata N, Waldron L, Ballarini A, Narasimhan V, Jousson O, Huttenhower C. Metagenomic microbial 
community profiling using unique clade-specific marker genes. Nat. Methods. 2012; 9:811–814. 
[PubMed: 22688413] 
Smith PM, Howitt MR, Panikov N, Michaud M, Gallini CA, Bohlooly YM, Glickman JN, Garrett WS. 
The microbial metabolites, short-chain fatty acids, regulate colonic Treg cell homeostasis. Science. 
2013; 341:569–573. [PubMed: 23828891] 
Sridharan GV, Choi K, Klemashevich C, Wu C, Prabakaran D, Pan LB, Steinmeyer S, Mueller C, 
Yousofshahi M, Alaniz RC, et al. Prediction and quantification of bioactive microbiota metabolites 
in the mouse gut. Nat. Commun. 2014; 5:5492. [PubMed: 25411059] 
Stefka AT, Feehley T, Tripathi P, Qiu J, McCoy K, Mazmanian SK, Tjota MY, Seo GY, Cao S, 
Theriault BR, et al. Commensal bacteria protect against food allergen sensitization. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2014; 111:13145–13150. [PubMed: 25157157] 
Sutmuller RP, den Brok MH, Kramer M, Bennink EJ, Toonen LW, Kullberg BJ, Joosten LA, Akira S, 
Netea MG, Adema GJ. Toll-like receptor 2 controls expansion and function of regulatory T cells. 
J. Clin. Invest. 2006; 116:485–494. [PubMed: 16424940] 
Ter Horst R, Jaeger M, Smeekens SP, Oosting M, Swertz MA, Li Y, Kumar V, Diavatopoulos DA, 
Jansen AFM, Lemmers H, et al. Host and environmental factors influencing individual human 
cytokine responses. Cell. 2016 In Press. 
Thorburn AN, Macia L, Mackay CR. Diet, metabolites, and “western-lifestyle” inflammatory diseases. 
Immunity. 2014; 40:833–842. [PubMed: 24950203] 
Tigchelaar EF, Zhernakova A, Dekens JA, Hermes G, Baranska A, Mujagic Z, Swertz MA, Munoz 
AM, Deelen P, Cenit MC, et al. Cohort profile: LifeLines DEEP, a prospective, general population 
cohort study in the northern Netherlands: study design and baseline characteristics. BMJ Open. 
2015; 5:e006772.
van de Veerdonk FL, Marijnissen RJ, Kullberg BJ, Koenen HJ, Cheng SC, Joosten I, van den Berg 
WB, Williams DL, van der Meer JW, Joosten LA, et al. The macrophage mannose receptor 
induces IL-17 in response to Candida albicans. Cell Host Microbe. 2009; 5:329–340. [PubMed: 
19380112] 
Schirmer et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Vatanen T, Kostic AD, d’Hennezel E, Siljander H, Franzosa EA, Yassour M, Kolde R, Vlamakis H, 
Arthur TD, Hamalainen AM, et al. Variation in Microbiome LPS Immunogenicity Contributes to 
Autoimmunity in Humans. Cell. 2016; 165:842–853. [PubMed: 27133167] 
Welters HJ, Tadayyon M, Scarpello JH, Smith SA, Morgan NG. Mono-unsaturated fatty acids protect 
against beta-cell apoptosis induced by saturated fatty acids, serum withdrawal or cytokine 
exposure. FEBS Lett. 2004; 560:103–108. [PubMed: 14988006] 
Wikoff WR, Anfora AT, Liu J, Schultz PG, Lesley SA, Peters EC, Siuzdak G. Metabolomics analysis 
reveals large effects of gut microflora on mammalian blood metabolites. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. 
S. A. 2009; 106:3698–3703. [PubMed: 19234110] 
Zanvit P, Konkel JE, Jiao X, Kasagi S, Zhang D, Wu R, Chia C, Ajami NJ, Smith DP, Petrosino JF, et 
al. Antibiotics in neonatal life increase murine susceptibility to experimental psoriasis. Nat. 
Commun. 2015; 6:8424. [PubMed: 26416167] 
Zhang M, Qiu X, Zhang H, Yang X, Hong N, Yang Y, Chen H, Yu C. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii 
inhibits interleukin-17 to ameliorate colorectal colitis in rats. PLoS ONE. 2014; 9:e109146. 
[PubMed: 25275569] 
Zhang X, Zhang D, Jia H, Feng Q, Wang D, Liang D, Wu X, Li J, Tang L, Li Y, et al. The oral and gut 
microbiomes are perturbed in rheumatoid arthritis and partly normalized after treatment. Nat. Med. 
2015; 21:895–905. [PubMed: 26214836] 
Zhernakova A, Kurilshikov A, Bonder MJ, Tigchelaar EF, Schirmer M, Vatanen T, Mujagic Z, Vila AV, 
Falony G, Vieira-Silva S, et al. Population-based metagenomics analysis reveals markers for gut 
microbiome composition and diversity. Science. 2016; 352:565–569. [PubMed: 27126040] 
Zitomersky NL, Atkinson BJ, Franklin SW, Mitchell PD, Snapper SB, Comstock LE, Bousvaros A. 
Characterization of adherent bacteroidales from intestinal biopsies of children and young adults 
with inflammatory bowel disease. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e63686. [PubMed: 23776434] 
Schirmer et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Linking inter-individual variation in immune response to the gut microbiome in the 
500FG cohort
(A) The 500FG cohort comprises 500 healthy adults from the Netherlands. Stool samples 
were collected and subjected to metagenomic sequencing to infer gut microbial profiles. 
Concurrent blood samples were collected to measure the inflammatory cytokine response in 
connection with various microbial stimulations.
(B) Monocyte- (blue) [IL-6, TNFα, IL-1β] and lymphocyte-derived cytokines (green) 
[IFNγ, IL-17, IL-22] were measured in connection with three bacterial (LPS, B. fragilis, and 
S. aureus) and two fungal (C. albicans conidia and hyphae) stimulations in whole blood 
and/or PBMCs.
(C) Schematic illustrating production kinetics of different cytokines in PBMCs. IL-17 and 
IL-22 increase steadily during a 7-day period, whereas IL-6 and TNFα production is 
maximal in the first 24 hr and decreases thereafter. IFNγ reaches its maximum at 4–5 days, 
and IL-1β reaches its maximum level at 24 hr, after which a plateau is attained. (Adapted 
from (Ruschen et al., 1992; van de Veerdonk et al., 2009))
See also Figure S1.
Schirmer et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Healthy individuals show significant inter-individual variability in stimulated cytokine 
responses and in gut microbiota
(A) Inter-individual variation in cytokine response. Each color represents a type of 
stimulation, also indicated on the upper x-axis: C. albicans conidia, CA(C); C. albicans 
hyphae, CA(H); E. coli-derived lipopolysaccharide 100 ng, LPS; S. aureus, SA; and B. 
fragilis, BF. Cell type is indicated below the x-axis (whole blood, WB; peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells, PBMC). The y-axis specifies the cytokine response. Each cytokine was 
measured in a non-stimulated control for each cell type (RPMI, orange). Stars indicate 
significant differences in variation for each stimulatory response compared to controls, 
respectively for each cell type (Fligner-Killeen test, all p < 1e-15). (Note that B. fragilis-
induced TNFα measurements were not considered for further analyses due to a small degree 
Schirmer et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of variation across individuals.) Whole blood measurements are based on 456 individuals. 
TNFα, IL-1β, and IL-6 measurements in PBMCs (1 d) were available for 401 individuals; 
IFNγ, IL-17, and IL-22 measurements in PBMCs (7 d) are based on 462 individuals.
(B) Taxonomic microbial profiles displaying phylum-level composition. Sample order was 
determined by the first principal component (PCA with Bray-Curtis distance).
(C) Functional microbial profiles displaying the abundance of the ten most variable 
MetaCyc pathways (based on variance). Samples are in the same order as in (B).
(D) The overall percentage of cytokine variation explained by species composition of the gut 
microbiome was 0.4–9.6%. To avoid overestimation due to species-species correlations, we 
represented the microbiota through the first 20 principal coordinates (PCoA with Bray-
Curtis distance) which explain ∼50% of the variance. The cytokine variance explained by 
these principal coordinates was estimated through permutation ANOVA by summing over 
the significant contributions (p < 0.2).
See also Figure S2.
Schirmer et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Significant correlations between gut microbial abundances and cytokine responses to 
stimulations
(A) Three microbiome-cytokine interaction patterns were observed. Each colored cell 
represents a significant interaction between a specific microbial feature (y-axis) and a 
stimulus-induced cytokine response (x-axis). Interaction pattern 1 (IP1) refers to stimulus-
specific interactions, where the same microbial feature is associated with several cytokines 
in connection with the same stimulation. IP2 describes cytokine-specific interactions, 
regardless of stimulation. IP3 refers to interactions that are cytokine- as well as stimulation-
specific.
(B and C) Summary of species (B) and genus (C) associations with cytokine responses using 
Spearman correlation with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction (α ≤ 0.2). All species/
genera were required to be detected in ≥ 3% of all samples (corresponding to ≥ 14 samples). 
Only species/genera significantly associated with at least one cytokine response are 
displayed. C. albicans conidia, CA(C); C. albicans hyphae, CA(H); lipopolysaccharide 100 
ng, LPS; B. fragilis, BF; S. aureus, SA; whole blood, WB; peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells, PBMC.
(D) A stimulus-specific association of Coprococcus comes was observed for IL-1β and IL-6 
in connection with C. albicans hyphae stimulation. C. comes was also negatively correlated 
with S. aureus-induced IL-22 production. All displayed cell types are PBMCs.
See also Tables S1–S4 and Figure S3.
Schirmer et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Significant correlations between functional potential of the gut microbiome and 
cytokine responses
Functional summary for MetaCyc pathways (A) and Gene Ontology (GO) categories (B) 
using Spearman correlation with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction (α ≤ 0.2). All 
functional categories were required to occur in ≥ 3% of the samples (≥ 14 samples). C. 
albicans conidia, CA(C); C. albicans hyphae, CA(H); lipopolysaccharide 100ng, LPS; B. 
fragilis, BF; S. aureus, SA; whole blood, WB; peripheral blood mononuclear cells, PBMC. 
For MetaCyc pathways and GO categories, respectively, higher level functional categories 
are indicated on the left side.
See also Tables S5–S8.
Schirmer et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Immunomodulatory effects of tryptophol and palmitoleic acid
(A) L-tryptophan degradation to tryptophol (MetaCyc PWY 5081) was negatively associated 
with IFNγ in connection with S. aureus, LPS, and C. albicans conidia in whole blood.
(B) Whole blood was stimulated with LPS, C. albicans conidia, or S. aureus in the presence 
or absence of tryptophan (50 µg/mL) or tryptophol (0.25 mM) and IFNγ concentrations 
were measured in supernatants for 4 donors. Group differences are expressed as percentage 
change compared to RPMI (tryptophan) or ethanol (tryptophol) and analyzed by paired t-
test. *p < 0.05. Mean values for RPMI controls in pg/mL: RPMI: 8, LPS: 370, C. albicans 
Schirmer et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 conidia: 115, S. aureus: 405. Mean values for ethanol controls in pg/mL: RPMI: 8, LPS: 
219, C. albicans conidia: 131, S. aureus: 91.
(C) Palmitoleic acid biosynthesis (MetaCyc PWY 6282) in PBMCs was positively correlated 
with C. albicans conidia-induced TNFα production.
(D) Cis-vaccenate biosynthesis (MetaCyc PWY 5973) was positively correlated with IFNγ 
(in whole blood) and TNFα (in PBMCs) in connection with C. albicans conidia stimulation.
(E) PBMCs from 5–6 healthy volunteers were stimulated with C. albicans conidia in the 
presence or absence of palmitoleic acid and cis-vaccenate (cis-vaccenic acid). Cytokine 
concentrations were measured in supernatants. Group differences are expressed as 
percentage change compared to ethanol or DMSO measurements and analyzed by paired t-
test. ***p < 0.001. Mean values in pg/mL: TNFα (DMSO: 10,000, ethanol: 10,000, 
palmitoleic acid: 1,504, cis-vaccenate: 9,957; IFNγ (DMSO: 1,370, ethanol: 1,571, 
palmitoleic acid: 976, cis-vaccenate: 2,241).
See also Figure S4.
Schirmer et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Environmental, host genetic and gut microbial factors impact human cytokine 
responses
The impact of host environmental factors (ter Horst et al., 2016), host genetics (Li et al., 
2016), and the gut microbiome (this study) on stimulus-induced cytokine responses was 
assessed in three complementary studies of the HFGP. While gender and seasonality were 
the main environmental factors affecting the response of monocyte-derived cytokines, age 
was associated with IL-22 and IFNγ production. Further, 17 independent loci were 
implicated in specific differential cytokine responses of monocyte- and Th-derived 
cytokines. Lastly, gut microbial functions were more influential on cytokine production than 
taxonomic features, where the strongest effects were observed for the stimulus-induced 
IFNγ and TNFα responses.
Schirmer et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Schirmer et al.
Page 28
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
No specific antibodies were used in this 
study
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
L-tryptophan
Sigma
H9772
Palmitoleic acid
Sigma
P9417
Palmitic acid
Sigma
P0500
Tryptophol
Sigma
T90301
Cis-vaccenic acid
Sigma
V0384
Critical Commercial Assays
Human IL-1β ELISA Kit
RD Systems
DY201
Human IL-6 ELISA Kit
PeliKine Compact
M9316
Human TNFα ELISA Kit
RD Systems
DY210
Human IL-22 ELISA Kit
RD Systems
DY782
Human IL-17 ELISA Kit
RD Systems
DY317
Human IFNγ ELISA Kit
PeliKine Compact
M9333
Human AAT ELISA Kit
RD Systems
DY1268
Deposited Data
ELISA cytokine measurements and other 
cohort data
This paper
http://hfgp.bbmri.nl/
Metagenomic shotgun sequencing data
This paper
SRA:
PRJNA319574,
http://hfgp.bbmri.nl/
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
No cell lines were used in this study
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Human PBMCs and Human Monocytes
Primary/Healthy
volunteers
N/A
Candida albicans conidia/hyphae
ATCC
UC820
Staphylococcus aureus
ATCC
ATCC 29213
Bacteroides fragilis
ATCC
ATCC 25285
Escherichia coli LPS
Sigma
E. coli serotype
055:B5
Recombinant DNA
No recombinant DNA was used in this 
study
Sequence-Based Reagents
AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit
Qiagen
80204
Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA Assay
Life Technologies
P7589
Nextera XT DNA Library Preparation kit
Illumina
FC-131-1096
Software and Algorithms
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Schirmer et al.
Page 29
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
KneadData
http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/knead data
http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/knead data
MetaPhlAn 2.2
Segata et al., 2012
http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/metaphlan
HUMAnN2
http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/humann2
http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/humann2
R
The R Project for
Statistical Computing
http://www.r-project.org/
Other
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
