 ARTICLE
Hippocampal GABA enables inhibitory control over
unwanted thoughts
Taylor W. Schmitz1,2, Marta M. Correia1,3, Catarina S. Ferreira4, Andrew P. Prescot5 & Michael C. Anderson1,6
Intrusive memories, images, and hallucinations are hallmark symptoms of psychiatric
disorders. Although often attributed to deficient inhibitory control by the prefrontal cortex,
difficulty in controlling intrusive thoughts is also associated with hippocampal hyperactivity,
arising from dysfunctional GABAergic interneurons. How hippocampal GABA contributes to
stopping unwanted thoughts is unknown. Here we show that GABAergic inhibition of
hippocampal retrieval activity forms a key link in a fronto-hippocampal inhibitory control
pathway underlying thought suppression. Subjects viewed reminders of unwanted thoughts
and tried to suppress retrieval while being scanned with functional magnetic resonance
imaging. Suppression reduced hippocampal activity and memory for suppressed content. 1H
magnetic resonance spectroscopy revealed that greater resting concentrations of hippo-
campal GABA predicted better mnemonic control. Higher hippocampal, but not prefrontal
GABA, predicted stronger fronto-hippocampal coupling during suppression, suggesting that
interneurons local to the hippocampus implement control over intrusive thoughts. Stopping
actions did not engage this pathway. These findings specify a multi-level mechanistic model
of how the content of awareness is voluntarily controlled.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z
OPEN
1 MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge CB2 7EF, UK. 2 Wolfson College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 9BB, UK. 3 Downing College,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1DQ, UK. 4 Research Center for Mind, Brain and Behavior, University of Granada, Granada 18011, Spain. 5 School of
Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA. 6 Behavioural and Clinical Neurosciences Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2
3EB, UK. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to T.W.S. (email: tws35@cam.ac.uk)
or to M.C.A. (email: Michael.Anderson@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS| 8:  1311 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890
 I
ntrusive memories, hallucinations, ruminations, and persistent
worries lie at the core of conditions such as post-traumatic stress
disorder, schizophrenia, major depression, and anxiety1–4. These
debilitating symptoms are widely believed to reflect, in part, the
diminished
engagement
of
the
lateral
prefrontal
cortex
to
stop unwanted mental processes, a process known as inhibitory
control5–12. However, these disorders share another feature of their
pathophysiology that is not usually considered theoretically relevant
to control: hippocampal hyperactivity13–20. In this article, we
examine why this recurring feature, rarely considered by researchers
interested in cognitive control, is often strongly related to
the occurrence and frequency of intrusive symptomatology. In
so doing, we provide evidence for a mechanism enabling inhibitory
control over thought: GABAergic inhibition of hippocampal
activity.
In individuals with schizophrenia, the severity of positive
symptoms, such as hallucination, increases with hippocampal
hyperactivity, as indexed from abnormally elevated resting blood
oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) activity, or increased regional
cerebral blood flow, blood volume, or blood glucose metabolic
rate14, 19. Evidence indicates that such hyperactivity arises in part
from dysfunctional GABAergic interneurons, and post-mortem
anatomical studies confirm substantial hippocampal parvalbu-
min-positive
and
somatostatin-positive
interneuron
loss
in
victims of the disease13–15. Consistent with this view, animal
models of schizophrenia show that disrupting GABAergic inhi-
bition in the hippocampus by transgenic or pharmacological
manipulations reliably reproduces hippocampal hyperactivity and
volume loss, along with behavioral phenomena paralleling
symptoms present in this disorder21, 22. Interestingly, abnormally
elevated hippocampal activity also occurs in post-traumatic stress
disorder and major depression, and this pattern predicts both
flashback intensity and depressive rumination10, 16–18, 20. In both
of these disorders, impaired GABAergic inhibition in the
hippocampus could contribute to these symptoms, possibly by a
cascade of processes initiated by stress23. Indeed, animal models
of anxiety often focus on compromised GABAergic inhibition in
the hippocampus, which produces symptoms consistent with a
dysregulation in affective control, including impaired extinction
of conditioned fear24–27. Together, these findings suggest that a
deficit of GABAergic inhibition local to the hippocampus con-
tributes to problems controlling a spectrum of intrusive memories
and thoughts, although the pathogenesis of this deficit and its
specific manifestations across disorders may vary. The basic link
between hippocampal GABA and the capacity to control
unwanted thoughts, however, remains unexplored.
Here we test a novel hypothesis about how hippocampal
GABA supports this core feature of voluntary control over the
contents of awareness. We hypothesized that GABAergic inhi-
bition in the hippocampus forms a critical link in a fronto-hip-
pocampal inhibitory control pathway that suppresses unwanted
thoughts.
Observations
from
both
human
neuroimaging
and rodent electrophysiology motivate this hypothesis. Human
imaging studies indicate that when individuals are given a
reminder to an unwanted thought and try to suppress the thought
from awareness, the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC)
acts, via polysynaptic pathways28, to downregulate hippocampal
activity, inducing forgetting of suppressed content29–35. This
provides a systems level model for how thought suppression
occurs. Rodent electrophysiology, on the other hand, demon-
strates that tonically disinhibiting GABAergic interneuron net-
works in the hippocampus desynchronizes hippocampal rhythms,
reducing overall activity and impairing memory function36, 37.
Taken together, these observations raise the possibility that sup-
pressing retrieval to stop an unwanted thought recruits a fronto-
hippocampal inhibitory control pathway that engages this
hippocampal GABAergic mechanism. Specifically, prefrontal
control signals may tonically increase activity in local hippo-
campal interneuron networks, inhibiting (and desynchronizing)
principal cell activity throughout the hippocampus, impairing
retrieval and disrupting memory. If this hypothesis is correct,
diminished GABAergic tone local to the hippocampus may mute
the inhibitory impact of control signals originating from DLPFC,
compromising the ability to suppress unwanted content. This
same deficit of GABAergic tone may also cause abnormally
elevated
hippocampal
activity
(hippocampal
hyperactivity),
explaining the recurring association between this feature and
intrusive symptomatology.
To address this hypothesis, we combined an established cognitive
manipulation for measuring the ability to suppress unwanted
thoughts, the Think/No-Think paradigm28–35, 38, with both func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and 1H magnetic reso-
nance spectroscopy (MRS). This multimodal neuroimaging strategy
provided, within the same individuals, co-localized in vivo measures
of hippocampal BOLD response and GABA concentration. To
address whether hippocampal BOLD–GABA relationships are
anatomically specific, we also measured GABA and BOLD in the
right DLPFC region thought to drive top-down control in the
putative fronto-hippocampal pathway, and in a visual cortical
control region outside of this pathway. To establish whether hip-
pocampal GABA plays a functionally specific role in inhibiting
thoughts, participants also performed a motor action inhibition
task39, 40 while fMRI was acquired, providing an index of inhibitory
control over actions rather than thoughts. We, therefore, sought to
determine whether hippocampal GABA selectively enables the
control of unwanted thoughts, and if this arises because hippo-
campal GABA alters the impact of the putative fronto-hippocampal
inhibitory
control
pathway.
We
found
that
higher
GABA
concentrations local to the hippocampus predicted superior for-
getting of the thoughts that people tried to suppress, and, critically,
the ability of the prefrontal cortex to exert long-range control over
hippocampal retrieval processes. In contrast, hippocampal GABA
predicted
neither
stopping
ability
nor
hippocampal
BOLD
responses when people exerted inhibitory control over action. Our
findings are consistent with the possibility that hippocampal GABA
may play an important role in enabling the prefrontal cortex to
suppress unwanted thoughts.
Results
Thought suppression engages a functionally specific pathway.
Twenty-four healthy young adults performed adapted versions of
the Think/No-Think (TNT)38 and stop signal (SS)39, 40 tasks, which
were interleaved in a mixed block/event-related design (see Meth-
ods section). We focus first on the TNT task used to measure
thought suppression. Prior to scanning, participants were drilled on
a large set of word pairs, each one composed of a reminder and its
associated thought. During scanning, on each trial, participants
viewed one of these reminders, by itself. For each reminder, we cued
participants either to retrieve its associated thought (Think trials),
or instead to suppress its retrieval, stopping the thought from
coming to mind at all (No-Think trials).
Previous work with the TNT paradigm establishes that
suppressing retrieval of an associated thought downregulates
hippocampal
activity
and
impairs
later
memory
for
the
suppressed content28–35, 38, 41–44. These hemodynamic and
behavioral effects occur with a broad range of stimuli, including
neutral or unpleasant words29–31, 38, 42, visual objects34, neutral
or unpleasant scenes32, 33, 41, 43, 44, autobiographical memories45,
and person-specific fears about their future35. Critically, popula-
tions that suffer from persistent intrusive thoughts such as those
with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)44, depression46, 47,
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS| 8:  1311 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 and anxiety48 show significant deficits in suppression-induced
forgetting. Individual differences in suppression-induced forget-
ting have been found to predict the frequency of naturally
occurring traumatic intrusions in healthy individuals49 and in
PTSD44, scores on clinical scales of ruminative thinking50 and
anxiety35, 48, and measures of the general ability to control
intrusive thoughts in daily life51. Together, these observations
point
to
a
general
retrieval
suppression
mechanism
that
contributes to suppressing intrusive thoughts and suggest that
these behavioral and hemodynamic effects index the efficiency of
this mechanism.
To confirm these effects with the present stimuli, we compared
BOLD responses between No-Think and Think trials in the
anatomically defined right hippocampus region of interest (ROI)52,
and found that performing No-Think trials significantly reduced
activation in this region (t23 = 3.34, p = 0.003; Fig. 1a). The same
effect was observed in the left hippocampus (t23 = 3.69, p = 0.001;
Fig. 1a), though we focus on the right hippocampus ROI co-
localized to our 1H MRS acquisition. Suppressing retrieval also
impaired participants’ later memory for the suppressed items,
demonstrating suppression-induced forgetting in this sample.
Specifically, on a post-scan recall test, participants recalled No-
think items less often (mean ± SEM: 59 ± 3%) than they recalled
either Think items (65 ± 3%; t23 = 2.2, p = 0.04) or Baseline items
that they also learned, but that did not appear during the Think/
No-Think phase (M = 65 ± 3%; t23 = 2.5, p = 0.02). As previously
shown42, the amount of suppression-induced forgetting signifi-
cantly increased with larger BOLD reductions during No-Think
trials, though only in posterior hippocampus (Robust correla-
tion53:
r = −0.56,
t = −3.14,
95%
boot-strapped
confidence
interval (CI) (−0.84 to −0.14)). Together, these neural and
behavioral markers of how well people suppressed unwanted
thoughts confirm prior evidence for the role of the hypothesized
fronto-hippocampal
inhibitory
control
pathway
in
this
function29.
Alternating with blocks of the TNT task, participants also
performed the SS task, a well-established procedure for measuring
the inhibition of motor actions39, 40 (see Methods section). We
included the action-stopping task to contrast the effects of
thought suppression with those of another widely studied
inhibitory control task that should not rely on modulating
hippocampal activity, but rather motor cortical activity. Prior to
scanning, participants learned to press one of two buttons with
their right index finger in response to differently colored circles.
During scanning, participants performed a speeded motor
response task that, on a minority of trials, required them to stop
their motor action midstream if they received a stop signal. The
right DLPFC (approximately Brodmann area 46) is thought to be
critical for inhibitory control in a variety of cognitive task
contexts54. To test whether this was indeed the case in our within-
subjects study, we used an a priori ROI of the DLPFC (defined
from a prior TNT study31) to extract BOLD response estimates
during No-Think, Think, Stop, and Go trials. Consistent with a
broad involvement in inhibitory control, DLPFC was significantly
more engaged when either thoughts or actions needed to be
inhibited (No-Think > Think, t23 = 2.38, p = 0.026; Stop > Go,
t23 = 4.32, p < 0.001). To confirm that action-stopping targeted
motor processes, we examined BOLD response in the hand lobule
of left primary motor cortex (M1; defined with an independent
localizer
task; see Supplementary Methods). As predicted,
when participants stopped a (right-handed) key press, we
observed a significant downregulation of BOLD response in left
M1 (t23 = 10.02, p < 0.001; Fig. 1b), consistent with prior
findings55. The stopping-induced reduction in BOLD response
(Stop < Go) was significantly larger in the left than in the right
hemisphere (t23 = 2.38, p = 0.026), as would be expected, based
on a right-handed key press response.
Critically, action stopping and thought suppression preferen-
tially modulated the left M1 and hippocampus, respectively
(Fig. 1c). In a Region (M1 vs. Hippocampus) by Modality
Peristimulus time (s)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Peristimulus time (s)
0
2
4
6
8
10
–0.24
–0.16
–0.08
0
0.08
Left M1
Right M1
% signal change
–0.08
–0.06
–0.04
–0.02
0
Left HIP Right HIP 
% signal change
Peristimulus time (s)
0
2
4
6
8
10
–0.08
–0.04
0
0.04
0.08
Peristimulus time (s)
0
2
4
6
8
10
–0.18
–0.09
0
0.09
0.18
*
**
**
*
**
**
% signal change
–3
–6
t
b
*
*
***
*
% signal change
–3
–9
t
c
Stop - Go
No-Think - Think
Stop - Go
No-Think - Think
**
*** *** **
Left M1
Right M1
Left HIP
Right HIP
No-Think
Think
Stop
Go
No-Think < Think
a
Stop < Go
Fig. 1 Domain-specific modulation during thought and action suppression. a and b. Group (N = 24) whole-brain contrasts for No-Think < Think (top) and
Stop < Go (bottom). Thought suppression modulated bilateral hippocampal (HIP) activity. Action-stopping-modulated activity in primary motor cortex (M1),
lateralized to the left (contralateral to hand) hemisphere. Boxes illustrate HIP and M1 activations on a coronal slice in MNI space. Activations are derived
from an uncorrected cluster-defining threshold (p < 0.001), with cluster level false discovery rate p < 0.05. Color bars demarcate T-statistics. (Middle
panels) A priori region of interest (ROI) analyses: Group hemodynamic time-courses were attenuated in HIP by thought suppression (No-Think) and in
M1 by action suppression (Stop) relative to Think and Go, respectively ***p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05. c Modality-dependent hemodynamic attenuation
in HIP (top) and M1 (bottom) was confirmed with a repeated measures ANOVA, which revealed an ROI by Modality interaction. Error bars represent SEM
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS| 8:  1311 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3
 (Thoughts vs. Actions) by Task (Inhibition vs. Non-Inhibition)
analysis of variance (ANOVA), there was a significant three
way interaction in both the left and right hemispheres (Left:
F1,23 = 78.29, p < 0.001; Right: F1,23 = 13.56, p = 0.001). Suppres-
sing retrieval (No-Think < Think) evoked larger negative BOLD
responses in the hippocampus compared to M1 (Left: t23 = 5.80,
p < 0.001; Right: t23 = 3.29, p = 0.003). By contrast, suppressing
motor
actions
(Stop < Go)
evoked
larger
negative
BOLD
responses in M1 relative to the hippocampus (Left: t23 = 5.80,
p < 0.001; Right: t23 = 3.29, p = 0.003). These differing modula-
tory profiles support the possibility that stopping thoughts
engages a distinct fronto-hippocampal pathway that is not
engaged by stopping actions. If so, GABA concentrations local
to the hippocampus may be selectively tied to stopping thoughts,
and not to stopping processes in general.
Hippocampal GABA predicts successful thought suppression.
We next tested whether our hemodynamic and behavioral
measures of thought suppression were related to hippocampal
GABA. To do so, we employed 1H MRS, a non-invasive imaging
technique that provides sensitive measures of brain metabolites,
such as GABA, by detecting the unique radio frequency signals
arising from the hydrogen nuclear spins within these metabo-
lites56 (Methods section). In a separate MRS session, we quanti-
fied resting GABA concentrations in the hippocampus, the
proposed site of inhibition, and in the right DLPFC, the proposed
source of the control signal driving inhibitory activity in the
hippocampus (see Fig. 2). As a control, we also measured GABA
in the primary visual cortex, a region outside the proposed
pathway (Supplementary Fig. 1). We used pre-defined anatomical
landmarks to position the MRS ROIs for the DLPFC31, hippo-
campus52, and primary visual cortex57, ensuring anatomical
co-localization across subjects.
After applying MRS quality control standards to the data (see
Methods), the final sample sizes for the 1H MRS data were:
Hippocampus (n = 18), DLPFC (n = 23), and visual cortex
(n = 20). Mean GABA/Cre values (±SD) for the three MRS
voxels were as follows: Hippocampus (0.185 ± 0.05), DLPFC
(0.169 ± 0.02) and visual cortex (0.192 ± 0.05). GABA concentra-
tions were not correlated across our ROIs, as determined by
robust correlation analyses53: Hippocampus and DLPFC (r =
−0.21, t < 1); Hippocampus and Visual Cortex, (r = −0.13, t < 1);
DLPFC and Visual Cortex, (r = 0.04, t < 1). The mean GABA/Cre
value of 0.18 across these ROIS matches the reported value from an
independent study using the same 2D 1H MRS protocol (0.18)57, as
well as reported values from three other studies using similar
protocols (mean GABA/Cre across ROIs and studies: 0.18)58–60.
These results suggest a level of reliability in GABA estimation
close to that achieved by more frequently used
1H MRS
acquisition protocols, such as MEGA-PRESS56. Mean gluta-
mate/Cre values (±SD) for the three ROIs were as follows:
Hippocampus (0.80 ± 0.17), DLPFC (1.19 ± 0.18), and visual
cortex (1.07 ± 0.11). Mean gray matter concentration values
(±SD) for the three ROIs were: Hippocampus (65.4 ± 5.29),
DLPFC (28.4 ± 4.02), and visual cortex (48.9 ± 5.10).
To examine relationships of 1H MRS GABA with BOLD signal,
and with behavior, we conducted a two-step procedure integrating
robust correlation with partial correlation analyses. In the first
step, we used a skipped correlation to derive a Pearson’s r-value on
data with bivariate outliers removed53. Outliers were determined
automatically via an algorithm that found the central point in the
distribution of data using the mid-covariance determinant.
Orthogonal distances were then computed to this point, and any
data outside the bound defined by the ideal estimator of the
interquartile range was removed53. In the second step, we used
partial correlation to determine if any relationships observed in
the robust estimation step were explained (or masked) by
participant sex, the amount of gray matter volume captured by
the 1H MRS voxel, or co-localized concentrations of glutamate.
We controlled for participant sex and gray matter tissue content in
each ROI because these variables can influence estimates of GABA
concentration61. Glutamate concentration was controlled because
of the relationship of glutamatergic principal cell metabolism with
BOLD62 and GABA63. In both steps, inference of statistical
significance was determined from 95% boot-strapped confidence
intervals. These relationships are reported in Tables 1 and 2, and
are described in the sections below.
Our main interest concerned whether task-induced changes in
BOLD responses in the hippocampus were related to hippocam-
pal GABA. Given the established role of the hippocampus in
memory, mnemonic processes should drive changes in its activity,
which in turn depends on the local population of GABAergic
Raw
Fit
Res
Cho
Cre CH3
NAA
Cre CH2
GABA CH2
(2.28 p.p.m.)
DLPFC: J (Hz)
–20
0
20
Chemical shift (p.p.m.)
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
–20
0
20
a
d
e
f
b
c
HIP
PFC
VIS
HIP: J (Hz)
Fig. 2 1H MRS quantification of GABA concentrations. a–c Positions of the
visual cortical, DLPFC, and hippocampus (HIP) voxels are displayed on
sagittal (top row) and coronal (bottom row) slices extracted from an
example subject’s tissue segmented structural scan. d An example of the 1H
MRS spectra displayed in one dimension. Blue line: raw metabolite spectra
for an example subject. Red line: ProFit basis functions for singlet (one-
peak) metabolites, including Creatine (Cre), Choline (Cho), and N-acetyl
aspartate (NAA). Black line: residuals after fitting. Note the GABA CH2
methylene group at 2.28 PPM is invisible on the 1D plot. e and f Plotted for
the DLPFC (N = 23) and HIP (N = 18) voxels are the fitted spectra
(averaged overall subjects) of the same four metabolites, but now spread
along two dimensions, the J-resolved axis (±20 Hz) plotted and the
chemical shift axis (1.5–4 parts per million; p.p.m.). Both plots use identical
scaling. Colors indicate minimum (blue) and maximum (red) height of
spectral contours (arbitrary units). The GABA CH2 methylene group is
visible at 2.28 p.p.m. (diagonal lines)
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS| 8:  1311 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 interneurons21. Prior work with non-human primates, combining
fMRI with cortical electrophysiology, suggests that stimulus-
induced negative BOLD responses in visual cortex arise, in part,
due to increases in neuronal inhibition64. Moreover, in humans
the magnitude of task-induced negative BOLD responses in
anterior cingulate have been linked with co-localized 1H MRS
estimates of GABA concentration58, 60. Together, these findings
raise the possibility that negative BOLD responses in the
hippocampus may also be linked with neuronal inhibition, and
thus, co-localized 1H MRS estimates of GABA concentration. If
so, our MRS measure of baseline GABA should predict reduced
memory-driven BOLD responses arising during the Think/No-
Think task. In contrast, our motor action inhibition task, despite
requiring focused attention and inhibitory control, should not
depend on hippocampal processing, and so baseline GABA may
be less related to hippocampal BOLD signal during this task. The
data confirmed these expectations (Table 1A): Robust correlation
analyses demonstrated that hippocampal GABA significantly
predicted hippocampal BOLD response magnitude during both
the Think and No-Think conditions; it did not, however, predict
BOLD during either the Go or Stop conditions. Partial correlation
analyses confirmed that these relationships were not driven (or
masked) by participant sex, hippocampal gray matter content, or
hippocampal glutamate concentrations (Table 1A).
Although the foregoing patterns suggest a functionally specific
role of hippocampal GABA in memory processes, it is important
to determine whether this relationship survives even when any
relationship between GABA and BOLD in non-memory tasks is
accounted for. This control analysis is especially necessary given
that action stopping, like thought suppression, also reduced
hippocampal BOLD signal (right HIP: t23 = 2.42, p = 0.02, left
HIP: t23 = 3.65, p = 0.001, Fig. 1c). Stopping-related reductions in
hippocampal BOLD could signify that action stopping engages
mechanisms similar to thought suppression to disrupt hippo-
campal function; alternatively, they may simply be a passive side
effect of performing a difficult task20 (e.g., reduced afferent input
to the hippocampus due to heightened task focus). In the former
case, BOLD responses induced by both No-Think and Stop trials
should share variance with hippocampal GABA, whereas in the
latter case, the variance explained by thought suppression (active
inhibition) should differ from that explained by action stopping
(task difficulty) due to their differing mechanistic origins. To
distinguish these two alternatives, we conducted a partial
correlation analysis on the relationship between hippocampal
GABA
and
BOLD
response
during
No-Think
trials
that
additionally controlled for BOLD response during Stop trials
(Table 1A). We found that the relationship between hippocampal
GABA and BOLD response during No-Think trials persisted even
when controlling for Stop-induced BOLD response. We obtained
a similar finding when we performed this analysis using Think
and Go trials. These patterns suggest that BOLD response
reductions
during motor stopping likely
have a
different
mechanistic origin, perhaps relating to task difficulty. They also
confirm the functional specificity of hippocampal GABA/BOLD
coupling to memory processes in the context of the Think/No-
Think task: only memory task-related signals to the hippocampus
drove changes in BOLD signal amplitude that scaled with resting
concentrations of hippocampal GABA, such that the higher the
hippocampal GABA, the lower the observed BOLD response
during memory retrieval and memory suppression.
We next considered the possibility that the relationships
between hippocampal GABA and BOLD measures were not
specific to hippocampal GABA. This relationship could, for
example, reflect GABAergic integrity throughout the broader
fronto-hippocampal pathway supporting the suppression of
unwanted thoughts28–35. If so, hippocampal BOLD responses
should share variance with both hippocampal and DLPFC GABA
concentrations. Alternatively, if the relationship is anatomically
specific, hippocampal GABA should share unique variance with
hippocampal BOLD responses. To distinguish these alternatives,
we conducted a partial correlation analysis on the relationship
between hippocampal GABA and BOLD responses during No-
Think
trials,
additionally
controlling
for
DLPFC
GABA
(Table 1A). Consistent with anatomical specificity, the relation-
ship between hippocampal GABA and No-Think-induced BOLD
response persisted, even when controlling for DLPFC GABA
concentration. Anatomical specificity also held for the partial
correlation between hippocampal GABA and BOLD responses
during Think trials, controlling for DLPFC GABA. Finally, we
examined whether DLPFC BOLD responses during the No-Think
and Think conditions were correlated with DLPFC GABA. No
relationships were observed, even when controlling for partici-
pant sex, DLPFC glutamate, and DLPFC gray matter concentra-
tions (Table 2A). Moreover, whereas robust correlations on the
visual cortical control ROI revealed a negative correlation
between visual cortical GABA and co-localized BOLD during
Think and No-Think trials, these relationships did not survive
after controlling for participant sex, visual cortical glutamate, and
visual cortical gray matter concentrations (Table 2D). Together,
these findings suggest that hippocampal GABA is not simply a
proxy for brain-wide GABA integrity, but rather captures region-
specific variation, and that this variation is distinctively related to
co-localized BOLD responses during memory retrieval and
memory suppression.
The foregoing findings provide evidence for a functionally and
anatomically specific relationship of GABA to memory tasks,
whereby higher hippocampal GABA predicts reduced BOLD
signal. Interestingly, we observed this relationship for both
suppression and retrieval. Although we did not anticipate that
hippocampal GABA would exhibit a negative relationship with
retrieval-induced
upregulation
of
hippocampal
BOLD,
this
observation can be understood in retrospect. A key observation
is that 1H MRS indices of bulk tissue GABA are unlikely to be tied
to BOLD signal in any single task, but rather should be related to
any psychological process that evokes high demand on local
Table 1 Intermodal relationships of hippocampal GABA
Intermodal
relationship
N
Robust
Out
Control
Functional
specificity
Anatomical
specificity
A. HIP GABA: HIP BOLD
No-Think
18
−0.49*
2
−0.58*
−0.48*
−0.53*
Think
18
−0.47*
1
−0.48*
−0.61*
−0.59*
Stop
18
−0.19
0
−0.08
–
–
Go
18
0.23
0
0.15
–
–
B. HIP GABA: Behavior
SIF
18
0.45*
1
0.57*
0.71*
0.57*
SSRT
18
0.15
1
0.23
–
–
C. HIP GABA: PPI
DLPFC
18
−0.57*
0
−0.56*
–
−0.57*
Robust = skipped correlation using Pearson’s product-moment r-value on data with bivariate
outliers removed53. Out = number of bivariate outliers automatically removed53. Degrees of
freedom on the skipped correlation = n −2 − Out. Control = partial correlation controlling for Sex,
levels of hippocampal glutamate (HIP Glu/Cre), and hippocampal gray matter concentration (HIP
GM). Degrees of freedom on the Control partial correlation = n − 5− Out. Functional specificity =
partial correlation controlling for Sex, HIP Glu/Cre, HIP GM, and the covariates from the Stop-
Signal Task. For the HIP BOLD analyses, hippocampal BOLD response on Stop trials was used as
a control for the No-Think partial correlation, and BOLD response on Go trials as a control for the
Think partial correlation. For Behavior, the stop-signal response time was used as a control for
the suppression-induced forgetting partial correlation. Degrees of freedom on the Functional
Specificity partial correlation = n − 6 − Out. Anatomical specificity = partial correlation controlling
for Sex, HIP Glu/Cre, HIP GM, and PFC GABA/Cre. Degrees of freedom on the Anatomical
Specificity partial correlation = n − 6 − Out. Bold entries and asterisks indicate significance at 95%
boot-strapped confidence intervals
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS| 8:  1311 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5
 GABAergic interneuron populations. Retrieval processes during
the Think condition likely also evoke increases in GABAergic
interneuron activity. It is widely known, for example, that
rhythmic firing of GABAergic interneurons in the hippocampus
makes an essential contribution to the theta rhythm, which is
believed to be critical for encoding and retrieval65–68. One
speculation is that the observed relationship between GABA and
retrieval-related BOLD signal reflects this key role of GABA
interneurons, a possibility consistent with the fact that theta
activity is sometimes associated with reduced BOLD signal
(though the relationship of these variables is complex)69. This
potential rhythmic engagement of hippocampal GABAergic
interneurons in our retrieval task cannot be evaluated in the
present data. Importantly, however, this speculated role of
GABAergic interneurons in retrieval is functionally distinct from
the increases in tonic inhibition36, 37 that we had hypothesized
might underlie retrieval suppression, and the associated reduction
in hippocampal BOLD signal.
Although the foregoing relationships between GABA and
BOLD cannot, by themselves, distinguish the hypothesized tonic
inhibition mechanism, our behavioral measures provide impor-
tant information relevant to a distinct role of inhibition during
thought suppression. If suppression engages GABAergic inter-
neurons in a distinct manner, as we have hypothesized, baseline
GABA measures should predict how effectively participants
forget the thoughts they try to suppress. We tested this possibility
by relating hippocampal GABA concentrations to performance
on the final surprise recall test of the Think/No-Think paradigm
(Methods
section,
Table
1B).
Consistent
with
our
initial
hypothesis, a robust correlation analysis revealed that participants
with higher hippocampal GABA exhibited better suppression of
unwanted content, as reflected in higher suppression-induced
forgetting (Baseline–No-Think). Hippocampal GABA did not, in
contrast, predict retrieval-induced facilitation (r = −0.12, 95% CI:
(−0.78 to 0.51)). We also did not observe a relationship between
hippocampal GABA and pre-scan recall performance of the
studied word pairs (r = −0.10, 95% CI: (−0.50 to 0.41)), indicating
that the positive relationship between hippocampal GABA and
suppression-induced forgetting is unlikely to be explained by a
relationship between GABA and baseline learning success. To
further interrogate the functional specificity of the relationship of
hippocampal GABA to thought suppression, we examined
whether
hippocampal
GABA
predicted
general
indices
of
inhibitory control ability, as assessed with motor action-stopping
speed on the SS Task (the stop signal reaction time). No such
relationship was detected (Table 1B). Control partial correlation
analyses confirmed that these relationships were not masked by
participant sex, hippocampal gray matter content, or hippocam-
pal glutamate concentrations. Together, these findings point to a
specific relationship of hippocampal GABA to thought suppres-
sion, and not to general inhibitory control ability. Indeed, even
when we accounted for individual variation in general inhibitory
control ability (by including stop signal reaction time as a
covariate in partial correlations), the hippocampal GABA-
forgetting relationship was, if anything, strengthened (Table 1B).
We next tested whether suppression-induced forgetting was
uniquely predicted by hippocampal GABA, or, was instead
related to brain-wide GABA concentrations indexed from our
three 1H MRS ROIs. To evaluate anatomical specificity, we
conducted a partial correlation analysis that examined the
relationship between hippocampal GABA and suppression-
induced forgetting, while controlling for shared variance with
DLPFC GABA. Critically, we found that the relationship between
hippocampal
GABA
and
suppression-induced
forgetting
persisted in this model (Table 1C). Moreover, we also directly
tested whether DLPFC GABA itself predicted suppression-
induced forgetting. We observed no such relationship, even when
controlling for participant sex, DLPFC glutamate, and DLPFC
gray matter concentration (Table 2B). GABA concentrations
outside of the fronto-hippocampal pathway, in the visual cortical
control ROI, also failed to account for significant variance in
suppression-induced forgetting (Table 2E).
The foregoing findings suggest that GABA concentrations local
to the hippocampus contribute to the persisting disruption of
intrusive thoughts in healthy participants. Although the cellular
mechanisms underlying the influence of GABA on memory
cannot be established from MRS data, increased tonic inhibition
has, in animal models, been found to attenuate synaptic plasticity,
impairing memory70, 71. Conversely, in humans, experimentally
reducing local GABA concentrations in motor cortex facilitates
motor plasticity and increases co-localized BOLD response72.
Taken together, these findings suggest that a suppression-related
increase in tonic GABAergic inhibition could, in principle,
disrupt plasticity in the hippocampus underlying episodic
retention. More broadly, however, these findings are consistent
with the hypothesis that although both retrieval and suppression
are likely to engage hippocampal GABAergic inhibition networks,
they do so in functionally distinct ways.
Reduced hippocampal GABA compromises prefrontal control.
If
intentionally
suppressing
thoughts
engages
hippocampal
GABAergic networks in a functionally distinct manner, some
mechanism must drive this activity. Prior effective connectivity
analyses indicate that suppressing retrieval involves a goal-related
signal that originates in right DLPFC and spreads downstream,
via polysynaptic pathways28, to the hippocampus, integrating
these regions in a task-dependent manner28–35, 41. If this fronto-
hippocampal
pathway
provides
afferent
input
that
drives
GABAergic processes during suppression, then how strongly
DLPFC and hippocampus functionally integrate should depend
on the availability of hippocampal GABA to implement retrieval
stopping. Specifically, higher concentrations of hippocampal
GABA should predict stronger negative DLPFC-hippocampal
Table 2 Intermodal relationships of DLPFC and visual
cortical GABA
Intermodal
relationship
N
Robust
Out
Control
A. PFC GABA: PFC BOLD
No-Think
23
−0.02
1
0.26
Think
23
−0.05
1
0.27
B. PFC GABA: behavior
SIF
23
−0.04
1
−0.23
C. PFC GABA: PPI
DLPFC
23
0.04
0
−0.20
D. VIS GABA: VIS BOLD
No-Think
20
−0.42*
1
−0.31
Think
20
−0.43*
0
−0.31
E. VIS GABA: Behavior
SIF
20
0.32
3
0.25
F. VIS GABA: PPI
DLPFC
20
0.12
0
0.27
Robust = skipped correlation using Pearson product-moment r-value on data with bivariate outliers
removed53. Out = number of bivariate outliers removed53. Degrees of freedom on the skipped
correlation (n − 2 − Out). Control = partial correlation controlling for Sex, levels of PFC or VIS
Glutamate (Glu/Cre), and PFC or VIS gray matter concentration (GM). Degrees of freedom on the
Control partial correlation (n − 5 − Out). Bold entries and asterisks indicate significance at 95%
boot-strapped confidence intervals
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS| 8:  1311 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 coupling. To test this possibility, we first used psychophysiolo-
gical interaction (PPI) analysis67 to examine brain-wide task-
dependent
connectivity
with
the
hippocampus,
isolating
all regions with which it shows suppression-related coupling
(Supplementary Methods). The PPI thus enabled a whole-brain
(data-driven) search for patterns of covariance with the hippo-
campus that differed significantly depending on whether parti-
cipants
retrieved
thoughts
(Think)
or
suppressed
them
(No-Think), after accounting for variance explained by main
effects of task (No-Think, Think, Go, and Stop) and physiological
(task-independent) correlations with the hippocampus (Fig. 3a).
We observed task-dependent connectivity between the hippo-
campus and the right DLPFC (t23 = 3.58, p = 0.034 after small
volume FWE correction with an a priori DLPFC ROI31; Fig. 3a).
Additional activations were detected in right inferior frontal
gyrus, and in early visual cortex (at a more liberal uncorrected
threshold, p < 0.005). This connectivity effect thus showed high
anatomical specificity. We next projected onto the same cortical
surface (A) the whole-brain main effect contrasts of retrieval
suppression [No-Think > Think] observed in the current study,
and (B) the study from which our a priori ROI is derived31. These
clusters overlapped at the juncture of Brodmann Area (BA) 46, 9,
and 10 in right middle frontal gyrus (Fig. 3b). Critically, these
functional connectivity effects reflect negative modulation, that is,
a task-dependent inversion of BOLD activity in hippocampus
relative to DLPFC, consistent with our hypothesis that suppres-
sion-induced recruitment of right DLPFC signals retrieval
suppression—and hence downregulation of BOLD activity—in
the hippocampus (Fig. 3c). No regions expressing task-dependent
positive modulation with the hippocampus were detected. These
initial connectivity findings confirm that suppressing unwanted
thoughts functionally integrates the right DLPFC and the
hippocampus, consistent with a possible role of DLPFC in
modulating unwanted hippocampal retrieval activity.
Of central interest, however, is whether the negative coupling
observed between the DLPFC and hippocampus during suppres-
sion was associated with hippocampal GABA concentrations, as
would be expected if local GABA contributed to inhibitory
control. To assess this, we first tested with robust correlation
analysis whether indices of DLPFC–hippocampal connectivity
varied continuously with hippocampal GABA. Consistent with
our hypothesis, individuals with higher hippocampal GABA
exhibited stronger negative coupling of the DLPFC with the
hippocampus (see Table 1C). Control partial correlation analyses
confirmed that this relationship was not driven by variation in
participant sex, hippocampal gray matter content, or hippocam-
pal glutamate concentrations. The relationship also showed
striking anatomical specificity within the fronto-hippocampal
control pathway: A partial correlation analysis, controlling for
DLPFC GABA, revealed that hippocampal GABA uniquely
predicted PPI indices of connectivity with the DLPFC (Table 2C).
We also examined whether DLPFC GABA was itself correlated
with PPI indices of DLPFC connectivity. We observed no such
relationship, even when controlling for participant’s sex, DLPFC
glutamate, and DLPFC gray matter concentration (Table 2C).
GABA concentrations in the visual cortical control ROI also
failed to account for significant variance on the PPI indices of
fronto-hippocampal coupling (Table 2F).
To further explore the anatomical specificity of hippocampal
GABA to DLPFC-hippocampal coupling, we median split our
sample into two subgroups with lower and higher hippocampal
GABA concentrations (t16 = 6.10, p = 0.00002). Crucially, these
subgroups were matched on DLPFC (t16 = 1.25, p = 0.23) and
visual cortical GABA (t < 1), as well as on age, sex and several
cognitive measures, including performance during initial word-
pair training, motor response speed, and motor action inhibition
(Supplementary Table 1). This approach enabled us to determine
whether connectivity patterns differed depending on local
0
0.5
0.75
0.9
1
Exceedance probability
DLPFC
Hip
Both
0
0.5
0.75
0.9
1
DLPFC
Hip
Both
–2
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
BA46 PPI estimate
All
High
e
Think
vs
No-Think.
*
BA10
BA9
BA46
BA45
BA44
a
b
Suppression-related prefrontal activity
?
HIP
Suppression-related hippocampal coupling
BA46
BA46
BA46
c
d
DLPFC
HIP
Low hip GABA
High hip GABA
Hip GABA
Low
Fig. 3 Hippocampal GABA predicts DLPFC-Hippocampal connectivity during thought suppression. a Schematic of psychophysiological interaction analysis
(PPI) with hippocampal (HIP) seed and conditions modulating HIP connectivity. Significant PPI effects arose in right lateral prefrontal cortex: Brodmann’s
area (BA) 46/9 (DLPFC) and BA45 (VLPFC), displayed as colored boundaries (see legend). b DLPFC activity during suppression (No-Think > Think) in the
current (left) and in a prior study31 (right) overlapped with the PPI effects. c Functional connectivity: Suppression negatively modulated fronto-hippocampal
coupling (PPI estimate, y axis), with the strength of negative coupling differing between low- and high-GABA subgroups (Independent samples t-test,
*p < 0.05). Error bars represent standard error of the mean. d The six bidirectional dynamic causal models of the DLPFC–HIP network varied according to
two parameters: Which Task modulated connectivity (horizontal lines: No-Think or Think) and source of Driving Input (Outer arrows: DLPFC, HIP, or
BOTH). e Effective connectivity: for Low GABA participants, no clear evidence for a role of DLPFC in modulating connectivity emerged in any model.
For high hippocampal GABA participants, model evidence (exceedence probabilities) favored a model with inputs to DLPFC driving the network and the
No-Think task modulating connectivity
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS| 8:  1311 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7
 hippocampal GABA, independent of GABA in other regions. We
found that task-dependent DLPFC-hippocampal connectivity
differed significantly between the high and low hippocampal
GABA subgroups (t16 = 2.39, p = 0.03): Whereas the high GABA
subgroup showed negative coupling during retrieval suppression,
the low GABA subgroup did not (Fig. 3c). Taken together, these
findings are consistent with the hypothesis that suppressing
unwanted thoughts engages GABAergic interneurons local to the
hippocampus in a functionally distinct manner to implement an
inhibitory control signal driven by DLPFC.
Although
PPI
analysis
shows
that
condition-dependent
coupling occurs between the DLPFC and the hippocampus, one
cannot infer that suppression causes this integration or that the
input driving hippocampal suppression originates in the DLPFC.
To identify the causal dynamics of the proposed network, we used
dynamic causal modeling, a Bayesian statistical framework for
inferring effective connectivity between brain regions through a
network composed of a small number of key brain regions68. We
used a model space from a prior study31 that included the DLPFC
and hippocampus as key regions. Briefly, the model space was
defined by: (i) intrinsic bidirectional connections between the
right DLPFC and the right hippocampus (modeling regional
interactions that may be mediated polysynaptically), (ii) task-
induced modulation of either the top-down connections from
DLPFC to the hippocampus, bottom–up connections from the
hippocampus
to
DLPFC,
bidirectional
connections,
or
no
connections, and (iii) task-related input sources that drive activity
in the network (e.g, No-Think and Think inputs driving activity
either via the hippocampus, the DLPFC, or both). To further
confirm the functional selectivity of the DLPFC-hippocampal
pathway to suppressing unwanted thoughts, rather than to the
broader process of inhibiting any type of response, we performed
a parallel dynamic causal modeling analysis, using an analogous
model space, but substituting the No-Think and Think conditions
(parameters ii and iii) with the Stop and Go conditions of the
stop-signal action inhibition task. We fit all of these models to the
fMRI time series in each participant (Supplementary Methods).
Using this model space, we first evaluated the Think/No-Think
task in the whole sample (N = 24). Replicating prior findings, we
found the strongest evidence for models with bidirectional
coupling between DLPFC and hippocampus31, 35 (Supplementary
Notes). By contrast, when we performed a parallel analysis
substituting the Think/No-Think task with the stop-signal action
inhibition task (Stop, Go) we found no evidence that action-
stopping modulated DLPFC-hippocampal connectivity (Supple-
mentary Notes). Thus, the effective connectivity findings for the
thought suppression and action inhibition tasks accord well with
the hypothesis that DLPFC-hippocampal network dynamics
support a function specific to thought suppression.
Next, we tested how the availability of GABA in the
hippocampus related to network architecture for the High and
Low hippocampal GABA subgroups (Fig. 3d). If hippocampal
GABA enables goal-directed input from the DLPFC to disrupt
hippocampal retrieval processes during suppression, lower GABA
concentrations should mute DLPFC influence on network
dynamics. To test this hypothesis, we conducted two parallel
Bayesian model analyses for the High and Low hippocampal
GABA subgroups
within
the winning bidirectional
family
(Fig. 3e). Consistent with our hypothesis, the Low GABA
subgroup showed little evidence that DLPFC inputs drove
network activity during any condition. By contrast, the analysis
in the High GABA subgroup isolated a single winning model, in
which inputs to the DLPFC drove network dynamics, and the
No-Think condition modulated fronto-hippocampal coupling
(EP:
93%;
Posterior
probability:
67%).
Corroborating
this
apparent difference in network dynamics, an ANOVA comparing
between-group estimates of model parameters (Supplementary
Methods) revealed a significant interaction between Group (Low
and High hippocampal GABA) and Condition (No-Think vs.
Think): (F1,16 = 6.23, p = 0.024). Driving input into the DLPFC
significantly differentiated thought suppression from retrieval
(No-Think vs. Think) in the High hippocampal GABA subgroup
(t8 = 2.9, p = 0.02); the Low hippocampal GABA subgroup did
not show inputs that differed by task (t8 < 1). These findings
indicate that GABA in the hippocampus plays a distinctive and
pivotal role in enabling goal-related signals entering the DLPFC
to affect network dynamics during suppression. More broadly,
they integrate the foregoing multimodal imaging results—in
which we linked GABA to BOLD responses in the hippocampus
and behavior—into an explanatory model of fronto-hippocampal
dynamics during the suppression of unwanted thoughts.
Discussion
The ability to disengage from unwanted thoughts is essential to
mental health. Our results suggest that GABAergic inhibition
of hippocampal retrieval processes enables such thoughts to be
suppressed. The data suggest that whereas the DLPFC contributes a
top-down control signal needed for retrieval stopping, as previously
shown28–35, 41, the efficacy of this signal depends on hippocampal
GABA to implement suppression. With lower hippocampal GABA
concentrations, the influence of prefrontal control signals on hip-
pocampal activity and on the later accessibility of the unwanted
thought is muted, as reflected in a weaker influence of suppression
on hippocampal BOLD signal, reduced forgetting of intrusive
thoughts, and decreased negative coupling between right DLPFC
and the hippocampus. Indeed, effective connectivity analyses
supported an important role of hippocampal GABA in the integrity
of this network: individuals with lower GABA showed little
evidence that DLPFC modulated hippocampal activity, unlike
individuals with higher GABA. Critically, we found an anatomically
and functionally specific role of GABA in suppressing thoughts:
unlike hippocampal GABA, GABA concentrations in the DLPFC
were not related to either reduced hippocampal activity during
suppression or to suppression-induced forgetting; and unlike
thought
suppression,
behavioral
indices
of
action
stopping
(a demanding inhibitory control task) were not related to reduced
hippocampal activity during suppression or to hippocampal GABA
concentrations. Taken together, these findings suggest that a func-
tionally specific fronto-hippocampal inhibitory control pathway
underlies the ability to suppress unwanted thoughts, and that the
functional integrity of this pathway may depend on GABAergic
interneuron networks local to the hippocampus.
We propose that the ability to suppress a broad spectrum of
mental content depends on mechanisms that stop hippocampal
retrieval processes via GABAergic inhibition. In this study, we
measured this ability by asking cognitively healthy young adults
to suppress the retrieval of simple verbal items. Given this
approach, the current findings cannot directly address whether
suppressing the more complex and aversive content that typically
intrudes in many psychiatric conditions also relies on hippo-
campal GABA. However, when considered together with litera-
ture on retrieval suppression, this possibility seems likely.
Suppression-induced forgetting occurs for a range of stimuli
including neutral or unpleasant words29–31, 38, 42, visual objects34,
neutral or unpleasant scenes32, 33, 41, 43, 44, autobiographical
memories45, and person-specific fears about their future35. In all
of these cases, retrieval suppression engages a right lateralized
fronto-hippocampal inhibitory control pathway closely matching
the one shown here. Moreover, during the suppression of aversive
images41, this fronto-hippocampal inhibitory pathway shows
especially pronounced reactive engagement when the to-be-
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS| 8:  1311 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 suppressed content intrudes into awareness, consistent with a role
in suppressing unpleasant and intrusive content. Indices of
retrieval suppression ability also predict trait anxiety48, post-
traumatic stress symptoms44, rumination50, and self-reports of
thought control ability44, 51. Together, these observations suggest
that a GABAergic hippocampal mechanism suppresses retrieval
over a broad spectrum of perseverative thoughts (whether images,
episodes,
or
worries
about
future
events).
This
proposed
mechanism linking hippocampal GABA to the volitional control
over the contents of awareness may help to interpret a growing
body of human10, 13–20 and animal21, 22, 24–27 research pointing
to hippocampal GABAergic hypofunction as a pathophysiological
driver of intrusive symptoms. Ultimately, however, determining
whether successful thought suppression relies on local hippo-
campal GABA requires a direct test of this generalization, toge-
ther with experimental manipulations of GABA rather than the
individual differences correlational approach used here.
Our findings raise questions about the cellular and local circuit
mechanisms through which hippocampal GABA enables the
suppression of unwanted thoughts. Inferences about neural
mechanisms are necessarily limited because
1H MRS only
provides one estimate of GABA for each large region of interest
(for example the hippocampus or the DLPFC), and this estimate
reflects a combination of intracellular, synaptic, and extrasynaptic
GABA from all types of GABAergic interneurons in that ROI73.
As a working hypothesis, however, we suggest that retrieval
suppression may arise in part from an increase in tonic inhibition
of principal cells in the hippocampus caused by sustained disin-
hibition of local GABAergic interneurons. Hippocampal inhibi-
tory interneurons (which are exclusively GABAergic) undergo
rhythmic inhibition from GABAergic pacemaker cells projecting
from the medial septal nucleus of the basal forebrain74,75. These
septo-hippocampal inputs, together with hippocampo-septal
back-projections, contribute to driving theta oscillatory activity
widely considered essential for encoding and retrieval75. Lesions
or inactivation of the medial septal nucleus desynchronize hip-
pocampal rhythms, reduce overall EEG amplitude, abolish hip-
pocampal theta, and impair episodic memory76. These outcomes
likely arise in part because disrupting the medial septal nucleus
eliminates inhibitory septo-hippocampal inputs to the hippo-
campus, disinhibiting hippocampal GABAergic interneurons,
increasing the tonic inhibition they exert on principal cells77. For
these reasons, it has been hypothesized that inhibiting medial
septal nucleus activity provides a means of suppressing hippo-
campal mnemonic processes so that unwanted information can
be disregarded36, 37. Supporting this proposal, the suppression of
unwanted thought was also found to downregulate activity in the
medial septal nucleus (Supplementary Methods and Supple-
mentary Fig. 2), possibly indicating disruption of its input to the
hippocampus. How these regions interact during retrieval sup-
pression remains an open question. However, this possibility
converges with prior findings showing that retrieval suppression
reduces theta-power in the medial temporal lobes78 and also
broadly disrupts memory for all recent events, the retention of
which depends on the hippocampus79. The present findings,
therefore, may indicate in humans that task-induced suppression
of the medial septal nucleus can disrupt mnemonic functions in
the hippocampus. If so, we suggest that the putative influence of
DLPFC on hippocampal GABAergic activity may include a signal
that suppresses pacemaker cells in the medial septal nucleus,
triggering tonic inhibition of principal cells. This pacemaker
suppression hypothesis should be a focus of future work.
The current study did not seek to isolate the polysynaptic
pathway through which DLPFC suppresses activity in the medial
septal nucleus or in the hippocampus. Rather, our findings
underscore the high-level function of hippocampal GABA in
integrating the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus into an
effective inhibitory control pathway. This function may provide a
unifying account of several key observations in neurobiological
research on psychiatric disorders. Reduced functional con-
nectivity between the prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus is
increasingly recognized as a core pathophysiological feature
shared by a range of psychiatric disorders, and the neural
mechanisms of such fronto-hippocampal disconnection have
been examined in animal models80–82. However, many of the
disorders exhibiting fronto-hippocampal disconnection also are
characterized by the hippocampal hyperactivity and intrusive
symptomatology of main interest in the present study10, 14, 16–20.
The present findings raise the possibility that GABAergic disin-
hibition in the hippocampus contributes to reduced fronto-hip-
pocampal connectivity, hippocampal hyperactivity, and intrusive
symptomatology.
These
differing
symptoms
may
therefore
represent a common dysfunction of the fronto-hippocampal
inhibitory control pathway specified in the present study. This
hypothesis suggests that estimates of hippocampal GABA should
be related to hippocampal hyperactivity and to reduced resting
state connectivity between the hippocampus and the prefrontal
cortex; it may also partially account for the widely established
difficulty in suppressing default mode network activity arising in
a range of psychiatric disorders characterized by intrusive
symptomatology20. The current work therefore provides a
neurobiological framework for studying psychiatric disorders that
share persistent intrusive thoughts as a common symptom. More
broadly, in bridging molecular neuroscience and higher-level
cognition, these findings lay the groundwork for a multi-level
model system of inhibitory control over thought.
Methods
Participants. Thirty right-handed native English speakers (seven males) aged
between 19 and 36 years (Mean = 24.7, SD = 4.3) were paid to participate. Prior to
experimental procedures, participants were instructed to refrain from alcohol or
psycho-active drugs in the 24 h period prior to the scan. Five participants were
excluded for not reaching the learning criterion of 40% on the Think/No-Think task.
One participant was excluded for drowsiness during fMRI acquisition. Participants
reported no history of neurological, medical, visual, or memory disorders. The project
was approved by the Cambridge Psychology Research Ethics Committee, and all
participants gave written informed consent. Participants were asked not to consume
psychostimulants, drugs, or alcohol before the experimental period.
Behavioral tasks. Participants performed adapted versions of the TNT38 and SS40
tasks, which were interleaved in a mixed block/event-related design.
SS task: We used a modified SS procedure with three phases: (1) a stimulus-
response mapping phase, during which participants learned associations between
color cues and responses; (2a) a practice phase, during which all participants
practiced the response mapping with the occurrence of stop-signals; (2b) an
extended practice phase interleaved with the TNT; (3) the critical SS task phase,
during which they were scanned.
During the stimulus-response mapping phase, participants were trained in
responding to four different colored circles (red, blue, green, and yellow), by
pressing one of two buttons. Thus, each button had two colors assigned to it.
Participants first learned to associate each color to its particular response. A
fixation cross was presented in the screen for 500 ms, followed by a colored circle at
the top of the screen and a cartoon depicting the response box below it, and the
correct response indicated by a white arrow. This was shown until the participants
pressed the correct button. After showing two colors twice, participants learned the
response mapping for the two colors, during 20 trials. Subsequently, two new colors
were introduced and participants learned the response mapping for the two new
colors for another 20 trials. Participants then practiced the response mapping for
the four colors together until they reached a total of 10 correct subsequent trials for
each color. For these latter trials, feedback was provided for errors and slow
responses, but without the white arrow indicating the correct responses.
Once the stimulus-response mapping was established, participants practiced the
SS task. Participants were instructed that they should keep trying to respond as fast
as possible to each color, but that in some of the trials a beep would sound at
varying times after the circle appeared, in which case they should prevent their
response and not press the button. Participants performed 96 trials of the stop-
signal task, before moving on to the TNT training. Thus, in Go trials participants
made their responses as fast as possible, whereas in Stop trials an auditory tone
succeeded cue onset, signaling participants to suppress their responses. A Go trial
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS| 8:  1311 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9
 started with a fixation cross, presented on the screen for 250 ms, followed by a
colored circle until response (for up to 1500 ms). After the response, there was a
jittered inter-trial interval (mean ± SD: 750 ± 158.7 ms) and a new trial
commenced. Stop trials were identical with the exception that a tone would sound
shortly after the presentation of the circle. This tone had two different possible
delays, one of 250 ms another of 300 ms. Of the total number of trials in this task,
30% were Stop-signal trials, whereas the remaining 70% were Go trials.
Performance for stop trials was maintained at around 50% correct by using a
staircase tracking algorithm that modified the forthcoming trial according to
response feedback on the current trial. Specifically, if a participant correctly
withdrew his/her response upon a stop-signal tone, 50 ms would be added to the
stop signal delay of the next stop trial. Alternatively, if an incorrect response was
made (that is, if the participant pressed a button on a stop trial), the following trial
would have a stop signal delay that was 50 ms shorter. Note that the longer the stop
signal delay is, the harder it is to withdraw from pressing the button. Again, during
this phase, feedback was provided for both incorrect trials and slow responses
(RT > 700 ms), in order to ensure participants responded as quickly as possible.
TNT task: Once participants where familiarized with the SS task, the TNT
procedure was introduced. We used a modified TNT procedure38 with four phases:
(1) a study phase, during which participants encoded cue-memory pairs; (2a) a
practice phase, during which all participants practiced retrieval suppression on
filler pairs; (2b) an extended practice phase interleaved with the SS; (3) the critical
suppression phase, during which they were scanned; and (4) the final test phase,
during which we tested their memory.
In the study phase, participants encoded 60 critical cue-memory word pairs
(e.g., BEACH-AFRICA). A third of those constituted the No-Think items, another
third the Think items, and the final third served as baseline items for the final test.
Assignment of words to the three conditions was counterbalanced across participants.
In addition, they also memorized a further 18 filler pairs that were used for practice.
The study phase had three stages. First, each pair appeared for 3.4 s with an
interstimulus interval (ISI) of 600 ms. Second, participants overtly recalled the
memories in response to the cues, which were shown for up to 6 s or until a response
was given. After cue offset (and a 600 ms ISI), the correct memory appeared for 1 s.
This procedure was repeated until participants recalled at least 40% of the critical
memories (all but 5 participants succeeded within the maximum of three iterations of
the list). Third, we presented each cue one more time for up to 3.3 s (ISI: 1.1 s), and
without feedback, to assess which memories had been correctly learned.
During practice, all participants were trained on the direct suppression variant
of the Think/No-Think task31. They were instructed to covertly recall memories for
cues presented in green font (Think condition) but to avoid thinking of memories
for cues presented in red (No-Think condition). On each trial, they were required
to first read and comprehend the cue. In the Think condition, participants retrieved
the associated memory as quickly as possible and kept it in mind while the cue
remained onscreen. By contrast, in the No-Think condition, participants blocked
out all thoughts of the associated memory without engaging in any distracting
activity. Whenever a memory intruded into awareness, they were asked to “push it
out of mind.” A trial consisted of the presentation of a cue in the center of the
screen for 3 s, followed by an ISI (mean ± SD: 2.3 s ± 1.7 s). We administered a
questionnaire in the middle of the practice session to ensure comprehension of and
compliance with the instructions.
Mixed SS/TNT training: Finally, before moving into the MRI scanner,
participants performed an extended practice phase (part 2b of each task protocol) in
order to familiarize themselves with the alternating block sequence of the two tasks.
All blocks were 30 s in duration. The trial timings for both the SS and TNT tasks
were identical to those used in part 2a of their respective practice phases. SS blocks:
Each trial commenced with a fixation onset, followed by a colored circle cue onset.
In total, there were 12 trials per SS block, with trials pseudo-randomly ordered. TNT
blocks: Each trial commenced with a fixation onset, followed by a colored word cue
onset. In total, there were 6 trials per TNT block, with trials pseudo-randomly
ordered. In this practice phase participants performed eight blocks of each task.
fMRI Tasks. Participants performed 16 blocks per session (8 SS and 8 TNT) over
8 scan sessions while fMRI was acquired. The trial durations for both the SS and
TNT tasks were identical to those used in part 2a and 2b of their respective practice
phases. SS Blocks: A tracking algorithm varied the lag between cue onset and stop-
signal tone according to each participant’s performance, thereby ensuring 50%
stopping success. TNT Blocks: In each session, participants saw each cue of the
recall and suppress condition once. Thus, they suppressed or recalled each memory
8 times in total. In each block, No-Think and Think trials were interspersed pseudo-
randomly, and the ISI was jittered (≥0.5 s; mean ± SD: 2.3 ± 1.7) to optimize the
event-related design (as determined by optseq2: http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/
optseq). The proportion of trials that were Think items was greater (58%) than the
proportion of trials that were No-Think items (42%) to better resemble the higher
frequency of Go trials than Stop trials during the stop-signal task. This was
accomplished by inserting a greater number of Think trials on “filler” word pairs,
without changing the frequency of Think trials on critical experimental items.
During the ISIs, a fixation cross appeared. To minimize carry-over effects, 4 s rest
periods were interspersed between blocks. Each block also began with several trials
on filler items that were not scored to reduce task-set switching effects between
blocks. Moreover, to limit fatigue, participants were allowed to have a break of up to
30 s in between each scan session. We administered a questionnaire after the 4th
(middle) run to ensure comprehension of and compliance with the instructions.
TNT final test phase: Participants attempted to retrieve all memories, i.e.,
irrespective of retrieval status (No-Think, Think, and Baseline). Before the actual
test took place, participants attempted to retrieve 10 items, 6 of which they had not
seen since the initial study and 4 of which they had not encountered since the
interleaved Stop-Signal/TNT practice phase. Participants were warned that the cue
words in this phase were hints they had not seen for a long time, and instructed to
think back to the first phases of the experiment. This was done in order to reinstate
the context of the study phase. In the formal test, cues were presented for a
maximum of 3.3 s or until a response was given (ISI: 1.1 s). A response was coded as
correct if participants recalled the memory while the cue was onscreen. In a same-
probe test, memory was probed with the original cues. A second, independent-probe
test was used to test whether forgetting generalized to novel cues38. Here we cued
with the semantic category of the memory and its first letter (e.g., CONTINENT-A
for AFRICA). The order of these two tests was counterbalanced across participants.
During debriefing, participants rated on a five-point scale for each suppress item the
degree to which they had focused on the cue as it appeared on the screen. For each
item, they also indicated on a five-point scale their difficulty in suppressing the
memory (1: not difficult at all; 5: very difficult). Finally, a three-item compliance
scale was administered to determine whether participants had followed the No-
Think instructions properly, or had instead engaged in strategies that violated
instructions, such as intentionally rehearsing No-Think items.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Scanning was performed on a 3
T Siemens Tim Trio MRI system using a 32-channel whole-head coil. Participants
were positioned supine and foam pads were used to fixate the subject’s head within
the RF coil housing. High-resolution (1 × 1 × 1 mm) magnetization-prepared, rapid
gradient echo (MP-RAGE) T1-weighted images were collected for anatomical
visualization and normalization (other imaging parameters were as follows: FOV
256 × 240 × 192; TR: 2250 ms; TE: 2.99 ms; flip angle 9°). Functional data were
acquired using a gradient echo, echoplanar pulse sequence (TR = 2000 ms,
TE = 30 ms, 32 axial slices, descending slice acquisition, 3 × 3 × 3 mm voxel size,
0.75 mm interslice gap). The first four volumes of each session were discarded to
allow for magnetic field stabilization.
Functional activation was determined from the BOLD signal using the software
Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM12, University College London, London, UK;
http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm12/). Following image reconstruction,
the time series data for each participant were motion corrected (translational
motion parameters were less than one voxel for all included participants) and then
corrected for slice acquisition temporal delay. All ROI-based analyses were
performed on native space images preprocessed to this point. The random effects
PPI analyses were performed in MNI space. To do so, the contrast maps for the PPI
effect in each participant were first normalized using the parameters derived from
the nonlinear normalization of individual gray matter T1 images to the T1 template
of the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI, Montreal), and spatially smoothed
using a 8-mm FWHM Gaussian kernel for univariate analyses.
Single-subject time series data were submitted to a first-level general linear
statistical model, GLM. Using the SPM design specification, the task-specific
box-car stimulus functions were convolved with the canonical hemodynamic
response function (HRF). Each model included session-specific grand mean
scaling, high-pass filtering using a cutoff frequency set at 1/128 Hz, and the AR1
method of estimating temporal autocorrelation. Regressors were created by
convolving box-car functions with a canonical HRF. To account for differences in
stimulus duration between the TNT and SS tasks, the durations of the box-car
functions varied according to task. For TNT trials, we modeled No-Think and
Think trials as separate regressors, with trial durations of 3000 ms. For the SS task,
correct Stop and correct Go trials were modeled as separate regressors, with trial
durations derived from (group) mean response latency for each trial type. Error
trials for the TNT (forgotten items) and SST (incorrect Stop, incorrect Go) were
modeled as separate regressors. The six motion parameters produced at
realignment were included in the model to account for linear residual motion
artefacts. Percent signal change was extracted from the HIP, DLPFC, and VIS ROIs
using Marsbar (http://marsbar.sourceforge.net/).
1H MRS. The medial temporal lobes pose a methodological challenge for 1H MRS
due to low signal-to-noise ratios. We therefore scanned all ROIs with an adapted
point-resolved two-dimensional J-resolved PRESS (2D J-PRESS) MRS sequence59,
which provides major advantages over conventional 1D MRS for imaging brain
areas under these circumstances58. The hardware configuration was identical to the
fMRI scan. Participants were positioned supine and foam pads and a chin strap
were used to fixate the subject’s head within the RF coil housing. High-resolution
(1 × 1 × 1 mm) MP-RAGE T1-weighted images were acquired (TR/TE/TI = 2000/
3.53/1100 ms; FOV = 256 × 256 × 224 mm) to facilitate accurate MRS voxel posi-
tioning and for post hoc within-MRS voxel tissue-type segmentation. 1H MRS and
fMRI data were acquired on separate days to minimize participant fatigue.
2D J-resolved 1H MRS data were acquired for three brain ROIs using the sequence
and methodology previously described in Prescot and Renshaw57. The imaging
parameters were identical for all ROIs: TR/TE = 2000/31-229ms, ΔTE = 2ms (100 TE
steps), 4 signal averages per TE step with online averaging, 2D spectral width =
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS| 8:  1311 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 2000 × 500 Hz, and 2D matrix size = 1024 × 100, yielding a total acquisition time of
13 min 28 s. Within-ROI B0 shimming was achieved using a manufacturer-supplied
automated phase map procedure in combination with interactive manual shimming.
Data was only collected for a given ROI if a full-width at half-maximum (FHWM) of
≤ 24 Hz was observed for the real component of the unsuppressed water signal.
Outer-volume suppression (OVS) was achieved using six saturation bands positioned
at least 1 cm away from the MRS voxel faces (Supplementary Methods).
Post-scan, we applied the ProFit algorithm83 identically to all 2D 1H MRS data
using the supplied 2D basis set generated without considering the effects of spatial
localization. Before the 2D fast Fourier transformation (FFT), we zero-filled the raw
2D matrix to 200 points along the indirectly detected (J)-dimension. The basis set
comprised of nineteen metabolites (Supplementary Methods) including creatine (Cre),
GABA, and glutamate. For both GABA and Glutamate, the basis functions provided
by ProFit model all of the multiplets produced by each metabolite. We expressed all
metabolite concentrations as a ratio to the reference Cre metabolite concentration.
Structural MP-RAGE scans, acquired in the same session as 1H MRS, were tissue
segmented to obtain measures of within-voxel gray matter (GM), white matter (WM)
and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) content for each subject (Supplementary Methods).
We undertook several post-scan steps to ensure the quality of the 2D 1H MRS data.
First, to ensure our data reflected good magnetic resonance field homogeneity (shims),
we discarded 2D spectra whose line widths deviated by more than 3 standard
deviations (±3 SD) from the mean of a given voxel84. On the basis of these criteria,
we retained 75% (18/24) of the participants for the hippocampus ROI (mean line
width = 9.2 Hz ± 1.5 SD), 100% (24/24) for the DLPFC ROI (mean line width:
7.0 Hz ± 0.68 SD), and 96% (23/24) for the visual cortex ROI (mean line width:
6.9 Hz ± 0.45 SD). Second, T.W.S. and M.M.C. conducted parallel analyses of the 1D
and 2D spectra to assess water suppression and contamination of spectra by
macromolecules. Four ROIs were jointly identified as lipid contaminated by visual
inspection of 2D spectra and post-fitting residual plots (3 in visual cortex, 1 in
DLPFC), and removed from analyses. Finally, we considered variations in data quality
explicitly in control analyses that assessed the impact of two potential limitations to our
1H MRS data: (1) lower field homogeneity of the hippocampus voxel (compared to the
other ROIs), and (2) the variable interval between fMRI and 1H MRS acquisitions
(interval range = 1–111 days across participants, interval mean ± SD = 26 ± 34 days,
though notably, longitudinal 1H MRS indices of GABA are reliable within cognitively
healthy young adults at much longer mean intervals, e.g., 229 ± 42 days85). To do so,
we re-analyzed all primary findings (summarized in Table 1) with weighed least
squares regression (WLSR), which gives each data point an amount of influence over
the parameter estimates proportionate to its ‘quality’ (Supplementary Notes). For
WLSR models assessing the field homogeneity of hippocampal data, we weighted the
quality of the data according to the line widths (Hz) for the hippocampal voxel.
Separate models also used the Cramér-Rao lower bound value for hippocampal GABA
as a weight, providing an estimate of the error associated with model fitting. For WLRS
models assessing how the interval between scans affected the data, we weighted data
quality according to the number of days between sessions (reflecting the assumption
that longer intervals may equal lower quality). In all cases the relationships identified in
the WLRS models closely approximated the original relationships reported in Table 1,
indicating that variation in field homogeneity and inter-scan interval did not
substantially impact our inferences.
Data availability. fMRI and 1H MRS data acquired for this study are available via
data request at MRC Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge
(info@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk).
Received: 19 October 2016 Accepted: 8 August 2017
References
1. Brewin, C. R., Gregory, J. D., Lipton, M. & Burgess, N. Intrusive images in
psychological disorders: characteristics, neural mechanisms, and treatment
implications. Psychol. Rev. 117, 210–232 (2010).
2. Laroi, F. et al. The characteristic features of auditory verbal hallucinations in
clinical and nonclinical groups: state-of-the-art overview and future directions.
Schizophr. Bull. 38, 724–733 (2012).
3. Newman, M. G., Llera, S. J., Erickson, T. M., Przeworski, A. & Castonguay, L. G.
Worry and generalized anxiety disorder: a review and theoretical synthesis of
evidence on nature, etiology, mechanisms, and treatment. Annu. Rev. Clin.
Psychol. 9, 275–297 (2013).
4. Watkins, E. R. Constructive and unconstructive repetitive thought. Psychol.
Bull. 134, 163–206 (2008).
5. Bishop, S. J. Trait anxiety and impoverished prefrontal control of attention.
Nat. Neurosci. 12, 92–98 (2009).
6. Eysenck, M. W., Derakshan, N., Santos, R. & Calvo, M. G. Anxiety and
cognitive performance: attentional control theory. Emotion 7, 336–353 (2007).
7. Falconer, E. et al. The neural networks of inhibitory control in posttraumatic
stress disorder. J. Psychiatry Neurosci. 33, 413–422 (2008).
8. Joormann, J. & Gotlib, I. H. Emotion regulation in depression: relation to
cognitive inhibition. Cogn. Emot. 24, 281–298 (2010).
9. Minzenberg, M. J., Laird, A. R., Thelen, S., Carter, C. S. & Glahn, D. C. Meta-
analysis of 41 functional neuroimaging studies of executive function in
schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 66, 811–822 (2009).
10. Rayner, G., Jackson, G. & Wilson, S. Cognition-related brain networks
underpin the symptoms of unipolar depression: Evidence from a systematic
review. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 61, 53–65 (2016).
11. Sadeh, N. et al. Neurobiological indicators of disinhibition in posttraumatic
stress disorder. Hum. Brain Mapp. 36, 3076–3086 (2015).
12. Waters, F. A., Badcock, J. C., Maybery, M. T. & Michie, P. T. Inhibition in
schizophrenia: association with auditory hallucinations. Schizophr. Res. 62,
275–280 (2003).
13. Benes, F. M. Building models for postmortem abnormalities in hippocampus of
schizophrenics. Schizophr. Res. 167, 73–83 (2015).
14. Heckers, S. & Konradi, C. GABAergic mechanisms of hippocampal
hyperactivity in schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res. 167, 4–11 (2015).
15. Konradi, C. et al. Hippocampal interneurons are abnormal in schizophrenia.
Schizophr. Res. 131, 165–173 (2011).
16. Osuch, E. A. et al. Regional cerebral blood flow correlated with flashback
intensity in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 50,
246–253 (2001).
17. Patel, R., Spreng, R. N., Shin, L. M. & Girard, T. A. Neurocircuitry models of
posttraumatic stress disorder and beyond: a meta-analysis of functional
neuroimaging studies. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 2130–2142 (2012).
18. Sheline, Y. I. et al. The default mode network and self-referential processes in
depression. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 1942–1947 (2009).
19. Tregellas, J. R. et al. Intrinsic hippocampal activity as a biomarker for
cognition and symptoms in schizophrenia. Am. J. Psychiatry 171, 549–556 (2014).
20. Whitfield-Gabrieli, S. & Ford, J. M. Default mode network activity and
connectivity in psychopathology. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 8, 49–76 (2012).
21. Gilani, A. I. et al. Interneuron precursor transplants in adult hippocampus
reverse psychosis-relevant features in a mouse model of hippocampal
disinhibition. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 7450–7455 (2014).
22. Schobel, S. A. et al. Imaging patients with psychosis and a mouse model
establishes a spreading pattern of hippocampal dysfunction and implicates
glutamate as a driver. Neuron 78, 81–93 (2013).
23. Czeh, B. et al. Chronic stress reduces the number of GABAergic interneurons in
the adult rat hippocampus, dorsal-ventral and region-specific differences.
Hippocampus 25, 393–405 (2015).
24. Crestani, F. et al. Trace fear conditioning involves hippocampal alpha5 GABA
(A) receptors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 8980–8985 (2002).
25. Crestani, F. et al. Decreased GABAA-receptor clustering results in enhanced
anxiety and a bias for threat cues. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 833–839 (1999).
26. Muller, I., Caliskan, G. & Stork, O. The GAD65 knock out mouse-a model for
GABAergic processes in fear- and stress-induced psychopathology. Genes Brain
Behav. 14, 37–45 (2015).
27. Yee, B. K. et al. GABA receptors containing the alpha5 subunit mediate the
trace effect in aversive and appetitive conditioning and extinction of
conditioned fear. Eur. J. Neurosci. 20, 1928–1936 (2004).
28. Anderson, M. C., Bunce, J. G. & Barbas, H. Prefrontal-hippocampal pathways
underlying inhibitory control over memory. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 134,
145–161 (2015).
29. Anderson, M. C. & Hanslmayr, S. Neural mechanisms of motivated forgetting.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 18, 279–292 (2014).
30. Anderson, M. C. et al. Neural systems underlying the suppression of unwanted
memories. Science 303, 232–235 (2004).
31. Benoit, R. G. & Anderson, M. C. Opposing mechanisms support the voluntary
forgetting of unwanted memories. Neuron 76, 450–460 (2012).
32. Benoit, R. G., Hulbert, J. C., Huddleston, E. & Anderson, M. C. Adaptive top-
down suppression of hippocampal activity and the purging of intrusive
memories from consciousness. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 27, 96–111 (2015).
33. Depue, B. E., Curran, T. & Banich, M. T. Prefrontal regions orchestrate
suppression of emotional memories via a two-phase process. Science 317,
215–219 (2007).
34. Gagnepain, P., Henson, R. N. & Anderson, M. C. Suppressing unwanted
memories reduces their unconscious influence via targeted cortical inhibition.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 1310–1319 (2014).
35. Benoit, R. G., Davies, D. J. & Anderson, M. C. Reducing future fears by
suppressing the brain mechanisms underlying episodic simulation. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 113, E8492–E8501 (2016).
36. Vertes, R. P. Serotonergic regulation of rhythmical activity of the brain,
concentrating on the hippocampus. Handbook of the Behavioral Neurobiology
of Serotonin 21, 277–292 (2010).
37. Vertes, R. P., Fortin, W. J. & Crane, A. M. Projections of the median raphe
nucleus in the rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 407, 555–582 (1999).
38. Anderson, M. C. & Green, C. Suppressing unwanted memories by executive
control. Nature 410, 366–369 (2001).
39. Aron, A. R., Robbins, T. W. & Poldrack, R. A. Inhibition and the right inferior
frontal cortex: one decade on. Trends Cogn. Sci. 18, 177–185 (2014).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS| 8:  1311 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11
 40. Logan, G. D., Schachar, R. J. & Tannock, R. Impulsivity and inhibitory control.
Psychol. Sci. 8, 60–64 (1997).
41. Gagnepain, P., Hulbert, J. & Anderson, M. C. Parallel regulation of memory
and emotion supports the suppression of intrusive memories. J. Neurosci. 37,
6423–6441 (2017).
42. Levy, B. J. & Anderson, M. C. Purging of memories from conscious awareness
tracked in the human brain. J. Neurosci. 32, 16785–16794 (2012).
43. Liu, Y. et al. Memory consolidation reconfigures neural pathways involved in
the suppression of emotional memories. Nat. Commun. 7, 13375 (2016).
44. Catarino, A., Kupper, C. S., Werner-Seidler, A., Dalgleish, T. & Anderson, M. C.
Failing to forget: inhibitory-control deficits compromise memory suppression in
posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychol. Sci. 26, 604–616 (2015).
45. Stephens, E., Braid, A. & Hertel, P. T. Suppression-induced reduction in the
specificity of autobiographical memories. Clin. Psychol. Sci. 1, 163–169 (2013).
46. Hertel, P. T. & Gerstle, M. Depressive deficits in forgetting. Psychol. Sci. 14,
573–578 (2003).
47. Zhang, D., Xie, H., Liu, Y. & Luo, Y. Neural correlates underlying impaired
memory facilitation and suppression of negative material in depression. Sci.
Rep. 6, 37556 (2016).
48. Marzi, T., Regina, A. & Righi, S. Emotions shape memory suppression in trait
anxiety. Front. Psychol. 4, 1001 (2014).
49. Streb, M., Mecklinger, A., Anderson, M. C., Johanna, L. H. & Michael, T.
Memory control ability modulates intrusive memories after analogue trauma. J.
Affect Disord. 192, 134–142 (2016).
50. Fawcett, J. M. et al. The origins of repetitive thought in rumination: separating
cognitive style from deficits in inhibitory control over memory. J. Behav. Ther.
Exp. Psychiatry 47, 1–8 (2015).
51. Kupper, C. S., Benoit, R. G., Dalgleish, T. & Anderson, M. C. Direct suppression
as a mechanism for controlling unpleasant memories in daily life. J. Exp.
Psychol. Gen. 143, 1443–1449 (2014).
52. Duvernoy, H. M. The Human Hippocampus: Functional Anatomy,
Vascularization and Serial Sections with MRI, 3rd edn (Springer, 2005).
53. Pernet, C. R., Wilcox, R. & Rousselet, G. A. Robust correlation analyses: false
positive and power validation using a new open source matlab toolbox. Front.
Psychol. 3, 606 (2012).
54. Depue, B. E., Orr, J. M., Smolker, H. R., Naaz, F. & Banich, M. T. The
organization of right prefrontal networks reveals common mechanisms of
inhibitory regulation across cognitive, emotional, and motor processes. Cereb.
Cortex 26, 1634–1646 (2016).
55. Zandbelt, B. B. & Vink, M. On the role of the striatum in response inhibition.
PLoS ONE 5, e13848 (2010).
56. Puts, N. A. & Edden, R. A. In vivo magnetic resonance spectroscopy of GABA:
a methodological review. Prog. Nucl. Magn. Reson. Spectrosc. 60, 29–41 (2012).
57. Prescot, A. P. & Renshaw, P. F. Two-dimensional J-resolved proton MR
spectroscopy and prior knowledge fitting (ProFit) in the frontal and parietal
lobes of healthy volunteers: assessment of metabolite discrimination and
general reproducibility. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 37, 642–651 (2013).
58. Northoff, G. et al. GABA concentrations in the human anterior cingulate cortex
predict negative BOLD responses in fMRI. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1515–1517 (2007).
59. Schulte, R. F., Lange, T., Beck, J., Meier, D. & Boesiger, P. Improved two-
dimensional J-resolved spectroscopy. NMR Biomed. 19, 264–270 (2006).
60. Walter, M. et al. The relationship between aberrant neuronal activation in the
pregenual anterior cingulate, altered glutamatergic metabolism, and anhedonia
in major depression. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 66, 478–486 (2009).
61. Epperson, C. N. et al. Sex, GABA, and nicotine: the impact of smoking on
cortical GABA levels across the menstrual cycle as measured with proton
magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Biol. Psychiatry 57, 44–48 (2005).
62. Raichle, M. E. & Mintun, M. A. Brain work and brain imaging. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 29, 449–476 (2006).
63. Stagg, C. J., Bachtiar, V. & Johansen-Berg, H. What are we measuring with GABA
magnetic resonance spectroscopy? Commun. Integr. Biol. 4, 573–575 (2011).
64. Shmuel, A., Augath, M., Oeltermann, A. & Logothetis, N. K. Negative
functional MRI response correlates with decreases in neuronal activity in
monkey visual area V1. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 569–577 (2006).
65. Vertes, R. P., Hoover, W. B. & Viana Di Prisco, G. Theta rhythm of the
hippocampus: subcortical control and functional significance. Behav. Cogn.
Neurosci. Rev. 3, 173–200 (2004).
66. Hasselmo, M. E., Bodelon, C. & Wyble, B. P. A proposed function for
hippocampal theta rhythm: separate phases of encoding and retrieval enhance
reversal of prior learning. Neural Comput. 14, 793–817 (2002).
67. Friston, K. J. et al. Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions in
neuroimaging. Neuroimage 6, 218–229 (1997).
68. Friston, K. J., Harrison, L. & Penny, W. Dynamic causal modelling. Neuroimage
19, 1273–1302 (2003).
69. Ekstrom, A. How and when the fMRI BOLD signal relates to underlying neural
activity: the danger in dissociation. Brain Res. Rev. 62, 233–244 (2010).
70. Wigstrom, H. & Gustafsson, B. Facilitated induction of hippocampal long-
lasting potentiation during blockade of inhibition. Nature 301, 603–604 (1983).
71. Wu, Z., Guo, Z., Gearing, M. & Chen, G. Tonic inhibition in dentate gyrus
impairs long-term potentiation and memory in an Alzheimer’s [corrected]
disease model. Nat. Commun. 5, 4159 (2014).
72. Stagg, C. J., Bachtiar, V. & Johansen-Berg, H. The role of GABA in human
motor learning. Curr. Biol. 21, 480–484 (2011).
73. Maddock, R. J. & Buonocore, M. H. MR spectroscopic studies of the brain in
psychiatric disorders. Curr. Top. Behav. Neurosci. 11, 199–251 (2012).
74. Freund, T. F. & Buzsaki, G. Interneurons of the hippocampus. Hippocampus 6,
347–470 (1996).
75. Hangya, B., Borhegyi, Z., Szilagyi, N., Freund, T. F. & Varga, V. GABAergic
neurons of the medial septum lead the hippocampal network during theta
activity. J. Neurosci. 29, 8094–8102 (2009).
76. Mizumori, S. J., Perez, G. M., Alvarado, M. C., Barnes, C. A. & McNaughton, B. L.
Reversible inactivation of the medial septum differentially affects two forms of
learning in rats. Brain Res. 528, 12–20 (1990).
77. Toth, K., Freund, T. F. & Miles, R. Disinhibition of rat hippocampal pyramidal
cells by GABAergic afferents from the septum. J. Physiol. 500.2, 463–474 (1997).
78. Waldhauser, G. T., Bauml, K. H. & Hanslmayr, S. Brain oscillations mediate
successful suppression of unwanted memories. Cereb. Cortex 25, 4180–4190 (2015).
79. Hulbert, J. C., Henson, R. N. & Anderson, M. C. Inducing amnesia through
systemic suppression. Nat. Commun. 7, 11003 (2016).
80. Esslinger, C. et al. Neural mechanisms of a genome-wide supported psychosis
variant. Science 324, 605 (2009).
81. Godsil, B. P., Kiss, J. P., Spedding, M. & Jay, T. M. The hippocampal-prefrontal
pathway: the weak link in psychiatric disorders? Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol.
23, 1165–1181 (2013).
82. Sigurdsson, T., Stark, K. L., Karayiorgou, M., Gogos, J. A. & Gordon, J. A.
Impaired hippocampal-prefrontal synchrony in a genetic mouse model of
schizophrenia. Nature 464, 763–767 (2010).
83. Schulte, R. F. & Boesiger, P. ProFit: two-dimensional prior-knowledge fitting of
J-resolved spectra. NMR Biomed. 19, 255–263 (2006).
84. Waddell, K. W., Avison, M. J., Joers, J. M. & Gore, J. C. A practical guide to
robust detection of GABA in human brain by J-difference spectroscopy at 3 T
using a standard volume coil. Magn. Reson. Imaging 25, 1032–1038 (2007).
85. Near, J., Ho, Y. C., Sandberg, K., Kumaragamage, C. & Blicher, J. U. Long-term
reproducibility of GABA magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Neuroimage 99,
191–196 (2014).
Acknowledgements
We thank Ian Charest, Pierre Gagnepain, Richard Henson, John Duncan, James Rowe,
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Helen Barbas, Susan Whitfield-Gabrieli, Pedro Bekinschtein,
Jonathan Fawcett, and Yuhua Guo for advice and assistance. This work was supported by
UK Medical Research Council grant MC-A060-5PR00 awarded to M.C.A.
Author contributions
T.W.S., C.S.F. and M.C.A. designed the experiment, with important contributions by M.
M.C. and A.P.P. T.W.S., C.S.F. and M.M.C. conducted the experiment. T.W.S. and M.M.
C. analyzed the data. All authors contributed to the analysis approach and to data
interpretation. T.W.S. and M.C.A. wrote the manuscript.
Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at doi:10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2017
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS| 8:  1311 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00956-z| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
