 ARTICLE
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1693
J. Exp. Med. 2018 Vol. 215 No. 6 1693–1708
Rockefeller University Press
In colorectal cancer, signaling pathways driving tumor progression are promising targets for systemic therapy. Besides WNT 
and MAPK signaling, activation of NOT 
CH signaling is found in most tumors. Here, we demonstrate that high NOT 
CH activity 
marks a distinct colon cancer cell subpopulation with low levels of WNT and MAPK activity and with a pronounced epithelial 
phenotype. Therapeutic targeting of MAPK signaling had limited effects on tumor growth and caused expansion of tumor 
cells with high NOT 
CH activity, whereas upon targeting NOT 
CH signaling, tumor cells with high MAPK activity prevailed. 
Lineage-tracing experiments indicated high plasticity between both tumor cell subpopulations as a mechanism for treatment 
resistance. Combined targeting of NOT 
CH and MAPK had superior therapeutic effects on colon cancer growth in vivo. These 
data demonstrate that tumor cells may evade systemic therapy through tumor cell plasticity and provide a new rationale for 
simultaneous targeting of different colon cancer cell subpopulations.
Targeting tumor cell plasticity by combined inhibition 
of NOT 
CH and MAPK signaling in colon cancer
Eva Marina Schmidt1, Sebastian Lamprecht1, Cristina Blaj1, Christian Schaaf1, Stefan Krebs2, Helmut Blum2, Heiko Hermeking1,3,4, 
Andreas Jung1,3,4, Thomas Kirchner1,3,4, and David Horst1,3,4,5
Rockefeller University Press
Introduction
Colorectal cancer is a major cause of cancer morbidity and mor-
tality, ranking third in incidence among men and women (Jemal 
et al., 2010). Although complete surgical removal of the tumor 
may be curative, treatment of advanced disease relies on systemic 
therapy including the use of biologically active agents that target 
signaling pathways related to tumor progression (Heinemann et 
al., 2014). In this context, targeting MAPK signaling by blocking 
EGFR with therapeutic antibodies is a commonly used approach 
(Miyamoto et al., 2017), while more recently MEK inhibition also 
is being clinically evaluated (Bennouna et al., 2011). However, 
targeting of MAPK signaling has limited effects and on average 
prolongs patient survival by a few months only (Van Cutsem 
et al., 2009; Douillard et al., 2014), indicating the urgent need 
for radical improvements in targeted therapy for patients with 
colorectal cancer.
Besides WNT- and MAPK-signaling pathways that often are 
activated by mutations and contribute to tumor progression 
(Cancer Genome Atlas Network, 2012), active NOT 
CH signal-
ing has been observed in colon cancer (Sonoshita et al., 2011). 
NOT 
CH is an evolutionary conserved signaling pathway involved 
in embryonic development, cell fate decisions, and tissue homeo-
stasis (Bray, 2006). Signaling is activated by binding of NOT 
CH 
ligands to their receptors with sequential proteolytic processing, 
including an intracellular cleavage by γ-secretases, that generate 
active NOT 
CH intracellular domains (NICDs). NICDs then form 
DNA-binding complexes with other protein partners, such as 
RBPJκ, and activate the expression of typical NOT 
CH effectors, 
including HES1 (Sang et al., 2010). In colon cancer, high NOT 
CH 
activity has been linked to the cancer stem cell phenotype (Bu 
et al., 2013) and to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT; 
Brabletz et al., 2011), both of which are drivers of tumor pro-
gression. Moreover, high NOT 
CH activity has been associated 
with poor survival (Yuan et al., 2015), suggesting that NOT 
CH 
contributes to tumor progression and that targeting NOT 
CH may 
be clinically effective. However, in conflict with this idea, others 
demonstrated repressive functions of NOT 
CH on WNT and MAPK 
signaling (Kim et al., 2012; Rampias et al., 2014), and treatment 
trials with γ-secretase inhibitors repressing NOT 
CH in colon can-
cer so far have been disappointing (Strosberg et al., 2012; Tolcher 
et al., 2012). The role of NOT 
CH signaling for colon cancer pro-
gression and its translational relevance for therapeutic targeting 
therefore still remain unclear.
Signaling pathways that are active in colon cancer can be 
strongly regulated within the tumor. Specifically, WNT and MAPK 
signaling typically are high in tumor cells at the infiltrative tumor 
margin or tumor edge only, where putative colon cancer stem 
cells reside and where tumor cells undergo EMT (Brabletz et al., 
2001; Horst et al., 2012; Blaj et al., 2017). On the contrary, colon 
Correspondence to David Horst: david.horst@ 
charite 
.de. 
© 2018 Schmidt et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the 
publication date (see http:/
/ 
www 
.rupress 
.org/ 
terms/ 
). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0 
International license, as described at https:/
/ 
creativecommons 
.org/ 
licenses/ 
by 
-nc 
-sa/ 
4 
.0/ 
).
1Pathologisches Institut, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany; 2Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAF 
UGA), Gene Center,  
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany; 3German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany; 4German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
Heidelberg, Germany; 5Institut für Pathologie, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
on June 2, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
Published Online: 16 May, 2018 | Supp Info: 
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1694
cancer cells that are located more centrally within the tumor have 
comparatively low activity for both pathways and assume more 
differentiated epithelial phenotypes (Vermeulen et al., 2010; 
Cernat et al., 2014; Blaj et al., 2017). However, the intratumoral 
distribution of NOT 
CH activity and associated tumor cell 
phenotypes have remained poorly characterized. Moreover, it is 
unknown to what extent intratumoral heterogeneity of signaling 
pathways contributes to resistance against targeted therapies 
of colon cancer. To shed light on these issues, we characterized 
NOT 
CH-signaling activity in colon cancer in detail, tested effects 
of targeted therapy on tumor cell subpopulations with differential 
pathway activity, and derived a more efficient treatment strategy 
by targeting different tumor cell subpopulations at the same time.
Results
High NOT 
CH activity indicates a distinct tumor cell 
subpopulation in colon cancer
To obtain insights into the role of the NOT 
CH pathway in col-
orectal cancer, we examined tissue specimens of a total of 328 
adenocarcinomas for accumulation of NICD, which indicates 
activation of NOT 
CH signaling. Immunostaining revealed wide-
spread nuclear accumulation of NICD in tumor cells of most cases 
(80.5%; Fig. 1 A). Interestingly, however, NICD was not evenly dis-
tributed within these tumors. Specifically, colon cancer cells that 
were located at the tumor edge were negative for NICD in 89.4% 
of these cases, whereas, in contrast, tumor cells located closer 
to the tumor center abruptly became NICD positive (Fig. 1 A). 
We then examined the NOT 
CH effector HES1 in a subset of 225 
cases. Similar to the pattern of NICD, we also found expression in 
the center of colorectal cancers (66.2%), whereas its expression 
was diminished or absent in tumor cells at the tumor edge (Fig. 
S1 A). Collectively, these findings showed that NOT 
CH signaling 
is activated in the center of colorectal cancers but unexpectedly 
down-regulated at the infiltrative tumor edge.
Colon cancer cells at the tumor edge are known to activate 
MAPK and WNT signaling (Blaj et al., 2017). Therefore, we 
compared the activity of both pathways with the status of the 
NOT 
CH pathway. Using FRA1 and nuclear β-catenin as indicators 
for MAPK and WNT activity, respectively, we found that tumor 
cells with strong staining for these markers showed significantly 
decreased or absent staining for NICD (Fig. 1, B–E). On the con-
trary, colon cancer cells with high levels of NICD showed much 
lower expression of FRA1 and nuclear β-catenin. Moreover, tumor 
cells that were positive for NICD on average were more numerous 
and also showed higher proliferation rates than tumor cells with 
FRA1 expression (Fig. S1, B and C). High activities of NOT 
CH and 
MAPK/WNT therefore were mutually exclusive in colon cancer 
cells and marked distinct tumor cell subpopulations. Next, we 
tested for an association of NOT 
CH signaling and EMT. Double 
immune fluorescence staining showed that colon cancer cells 
with high LAMC2 expression levels, a marker indicating EMT in 
colon cancer (Sánchez-Tilló et al., 2011), were devoid of strong 
NICD accumulation, whereas, in contrast, colon cancer cells with 
high NICD levels showed low LAMC2 expression (Fig. 1, F and G). 
Moreover, colon cancer cells with high NICD levels had signifi-
cantly higher expression of the epithelial cell adhesion molecule 
E-cadherin, when compared with colon cancer cells with low 
NICD levels (Fig. 1, H and I). These findings demonstrate that 
colon cancers are composed of distinct tumor cell subpopulations, 
including tumor cells at the tumor edge with high MAPK and WNT 
activity undergoing EMT and tumor cells with high NOT 
CH activ-
ity in the tumor center that have a more epithelial phenotype.
MAPK and NOT 
CH activity are associated with colon 
cancer progression
Next, we investigated the clinical relevance of tumor cell subpop-
ulations with high MAPK and NOT 
CH activity by scoring FRA1 
and NICD in our collection of colorectal cancer cases (Fig. 2 A). 
225 of these cases were UICC stage II colorectal cancers with 
recorded clinical follow-up data (Table S1). Kaplan-Meier sta-
tistics revealed that FRA1-negative cases were associated with 
a tendency toward better cancer-specific and disease-free sur-
vival when compared with FRA1-positive cases (Fig. 2 B). We then 
tested for associations with NICD staining and found that col-
orectal cancers with <10% NICD-positive tumor cells (NICD low) 
also showed significantly better cancer-specific and disease-free 
survival than cases with higher frequencies of NICD-positive 
tumor cells (NICD high; Fig. 2 B). Furthermore, when testing a 
combined evaluation of FRA1 and NICD, we found that patients 
whose tumors were both FRA1 negative and NICD low almost per-
fectly survived the follow-up period, with no event of cancer-spe-
cific death and only one event of tumor progression (Fig. 2 B). In 
contrast, patients whose tumors were either FRA1 positive, NICD 
high, or both showed significantly poorer cancer-specific and 
disease-free survival. Testing for associations with other clinical 
and pathological variables revealed that FRA1 positivity and high 
NICD levels were more frequent in low than in high-grade colon 
cancers, whereas the other core clinical variables T-category, 
age, and sex, as well as KRAS mutation status were not linked to 
FRA1 or NICD (Table S1). We then included these variables into 
proportional hazards regression analyses and found that com-
bined absence of FRA1 and NICD was an independent predictor 
of favorable outcome for disease-free survival (Table S2).
Furthermore, we evaluated 92 colon cancers of a case-control 
collection of matched tumor pairs, with and without synchronous 
liver metastasis (Table S3), applying the same scoring method 
as for the UICC II collection. We observed that tumors with liver 
metastases were significantly more often FRA1 positive, NICD 
high, or both, whereas on the contrary, none of the few tumors 
that were FRA1 negative and NICD low had metastasized (Fig. 2 C; 
Table S3). We then also examined another 11 colorectal cancers of 
which we obtained paired tissues of primary tumors and corre-
sponding metastases to the liver (n = 6), the peritoneum (n = 3), 
or the lung (n = 2). Interestingly, nine metastases had recapitu-
lated the patterns of FRA1- and NICD-positive tumor cells of their 
primary tumors (Fig. 2 D), whereas only two, in contrast to their 
primary tumors, showed absent or lower FRA1 or NICD staining, 
respectively. Collectively, these findings suggested that tumor 
cell subpopulations with MAPK and NOT 
CH activity are both 
important for colon cancer progression in early- and late-stage 
disease, frequently show similar presence in primary tumors and 
corresponding metastases, and that best clinical outcome may be 
expected if the activity of both pathways is low.
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1695
Colon cancers evade MAPK- or NOT 
CH-targeted therapy by 
shifting their phenotype
MAPK and NOT 
CH signaling can be repressed with the MEK 
inhibitor selumetinib (AZD) and the γ-secretase inhibitor diben-
zazepine (DBZ), respectively. To evaluate the effects of either 
treatment, we used mouse models of cell line–derived SW480 or 
patient-derived PDX1 colon cancer xenografts (Fig. 3 A). Xeno-
graft tumors were composed of tumor cell subpopulations with 
strong expression of FRA1 at the tumor edge, and accumulation 
of NICD toward the tumor center and thus adequately modeled 
the intratumoral composition and distribution of MAPK and 
NOT 
CH activity in primary colon cancers (Fig. 3 B). We then 
Figure 1. Distribution and phenotype of colorectal cancer cells with high NOT 
CH activity. (A) Representative immunostaining for NICD in primary colon 
cancer tissue. Right panel shows higher magnification of area boxed in the left panel. Arrowheads indicate tumor cells at the tumor edge, and arrows indicate 
tumor cells toward the tumor center; open arrowhead indicates an endothelial cell. (B, D, F, and H) Double immune fluorescence for indicated proteins in 
representative colon cancer tissues. Arrowheads indicate tumor cells at the tumor edge, and arrows indicate tumor cells toward the tumor center. Open arrow 
indicates endothelial cells at the tumor edge. (C, E, G, and I) Quantification of co–immune fluorescence signals. Relative fluorescence intensities (% RFI) for 
indicated proteins in tumor cells with high (upper quartile) and low (lower quartile) NICD staining intensity are shown. Data are derived from n ≥ 500 tumor 
cells in n = 10 different colorectal cancer cases. Error bars indicate mean ± SD. **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001 by t test. Bars: 200 µm (A, left); 20 µm (A, right); 50 
µm (B, D, F, and H).
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1696
Figure 2. Prognostic relevance of MAPK and NOT 
CH in colorectal cancer. (A) Assessment of FRA1 and NICD in primary human colorectal cancers. For 
FRA1, tumors were categorized as negative or positive, based on absence or presence of detectable immunostaining in tumor cells. For NICD, cases were cat-
egorized as low or high, based on less or more than 10% tumor cells with strong NICD staining, respectively. (B) Survival associations of FRA1, NICD, and their 
combination in 225 UICC stage II colorectal cancers. Kaplan-Meier plots for cancer-specific survival and disease free survival are shown. P-values are log-rank 
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1697
treated mice bearing these xenografts with AZD for 5 d and 
observed that FRA1 expression was completely lost in these 
tumors (Fig. 3, B and C). Time course analysis showed that in 
SW480 xenografts this already occurred after 2 d of treatment 
(Fig. 3 C), which indicated strong and rapid repressive effects of 
AZD on MAPK signaling, as expected. Surprisingly, however, the 
frequency of NICD-positive tumor cells significantly expanded 
under AZD treatment in SW480 and PDX1 xenografts, and these 
cells then directly reached the tumor edge, suggesting an expan-
sion of intratumoral NOT 
CH activity under MAPK repression 
(Fig. 3, B and C). In addition, AZD treatment reduced the num-
ber of cleaved caspase-3–labeled tumor cells, indicating that the 
loss of FRA1-positive tumor cells was not a result of increased 
apoptosis (Fig. S2). These findings suggest that colon cancer cell 
subpopulations switched from MAPK to NOT 
CH activity upon 
MAPK repression.
Next, to repress NOT 
CH signaling, we treated SW480 and 
PDX1 xenografts with DBZ and found complete depletion of 
NICD accumulation in these tumors that in time course analysis 
in SW480 xenografts was fully effective after 3 d of treatment 
(Fig. 3, B and D). However, under DBZ treatment, the frequency 
of FRA1-positive tumor cells significantly increased, indicating 
expanded MAPK signaling upon repression of NOT 
CH activity 
(Fig. 3, B and D). Furthermore, in contrast to MAPK inhibition, 
DBZ treatment significantly increased the number of cleaved 
caspase-3–labeled tumor cells (Fig. S2), suggesting that colon 
cancer cells with high NOT 
CH activity were at least in part lost 
from the tumor through apoptosis.
With these findings in mind, we then analyzed xenograft 
tumors of mice that had been treated with AZD or DBZ and sub-
sequently had been taken off treatment for up to 10 d before anal-
ysis. Astonishingly, in these tumors the original distributions and 
frequencies of colon cancer cells with FRA1 expression at the 
tumor edge and NICD accumulation in more centrally located 
tumor cells were readily restored (Fig. 3, B and D). Time course 
analysis in SW480 xenografts further demonstrated a quicker 
recovery of FRA1-positive tumor cells than of NICD-positive 
tumor cells from respective treatments (Fig. 3, C and D). Collec-
tively, these data indicated that colon cancers may evade targeted 
treatment against MAPK or NOT 
CH signaling by a reversible 
shift in predominating pathway activity.
MAPK and NOT 
CH have opposite effects on epithelial 
differentiation in colon cancer
To shed more light on the effects of therapeutic targeting of 
MAPK and NOT 
CH signaling in colon cancer, we analyzed gene 
expression in SW480 xenografts after AZD or DBZ treatment 
by RNA-Seq. Considering genes with at least twofold change in 
expression, we found that AZD treatment affected 12.1% (2,822 
genes) of the detected transcriptome, whereas DBZ treatment 
only deregulated 1.9% (448 genes). Differentially expressed genes 
only partially overlapped, indicating discriminative effects of 
both treatments (Fig. 4 A). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering 
of gene expression then revealed four major clusters that were 
characterized by repression (cluster A) or up-regulation (cluster 
D) upon AZD treatment or by repression (cluster C) or up-reg-
ulation (cluster B) upon DBZ treatment, respectively (Fig. 4 B). 
Searching for functional associations, we found that genes, which 
were repressed by AZD treatment (cluster A), were enriched for 
hallmark gene sets known to be related to MAPK activity, such 
as mTORC1 signaling or MYC target genes. Surprisingly how-
ever, when characterizing genes that were up-regulated by DBZ 
treatment (cluster B), we found strong enrichment for hallmark 
gene sets linked to tumor progression and, most significantly, 
to EMT (Fig. 4 B). GSEA analyses on unfiltered RNA-Seq data of 
DBZ-treated xenograft tumors confirmed a highly significantly 
enriched expression of EMT hallmark genes (Fig. 4 C). On the 
contrary, when analyzing data from AZD-treated tumors, we 
found that EMT-related genes were strongly repressed (Fig. 4 D). 
At the same time, NOT 
CH repression by DBZ caused overexpres-
sion of genes related to KRAS signaling (Fig. 4 C), whereas MAPK 
repression with AZD marginally up-regulated genes of NOT 
CH 
signaling (Fig. 4 D).
Because these data suggested opposing effects of MAPK and 
NOT 
CH repression on EMT, we next looked at individual factors 
that were linked to EMT in colon cancer. ZEB1/2, SNAI1/2, and TWI 
ST, which encode for well-known key EMT regulators, but also 
VIM, which indicates an EMT phenotype, showed significantly 
higher expression levels in DBZ than in AZD treated xenografts 
(Fig. 5 A). In addition, CDH1, which encodes for E-cadherin and 
indicates epithelial differentiation, was repressed by DBZ and 
up-regulated by AZD. By immunoblotting, we confirmed overex-
pression of E-cadherin upon AZD treatment on the protein level, 
although it was reduced in DBZ-treated tumors (Fig. 5 B). Also, 
immunostaining showed strongly increased and expanded E-cad-
herin expression in tumor cells of SW480 and PDX1 xenografts 
after AZD treatment, whereas, on the contrary, DBZ treatment 
reduced E-cadherin levels in these tumors (Fig. 5 C). Further-
more, tumor cells of SW480 xenografts became strongly positive 
for Vimentin after DBZ treatment (Fig. 5 C), whereas PDX1 tumors 
did not express detectable Vimentin levels. Collectively, these data 
demonstrated that MAPK and NOT 
CH repression had opposing 
effects on epithelial differentiation in colon cancer, with NOT 
CH 
repression causing an overall shift toward an EMT phenotype.
Plasticity of MAPK and NOT 
CH signaling in colon cancer cells
To further learn about the dynamics of tumor cell subpopulations 
with active MAPK and NOT 
CH signaling, we developed a lentiviral 
Cre recombinase–sensitive system for lineage tracing in colon 
cancer xenografts (Fig. 6 A). This system consists of three lentiviral 
vectors, two of which mediate doxycycline-inducible expression of 
an estrogen receptor-Cre fusion protein (pLenti rtTA3G and pLenti 
test results. Ratios on curves indicate the number of events over the number of patients per group. (C) Association of FRA1, NICD, and their combination with 
liver metastasis in a matched case-control collection of 92 colon cancers. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01 by χ2 test. (D) Representative staining for FRA1 and NICD in 
a primary colon cancer and corresponding liver metastasis. Arrowheads indicate tumor cells at the tumor edge, and arrows indicate tumor cells toward the 
tumor center; open arrowheads indicate endothelial cells. Bars, 50 µm.
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1698
Figure 3. Effects of MAPK and NOT 
CH repression in colon cancer xenografts. (A) Schema and experimental schedule for xenografting, inhibitor treatment, 
and tumor analysis. (B) Immunofluorescence for FRA1 and NICD in SW480 and patient-derived (PDX1) xenografts. Vehicle-treated tumors (Ctrl) and AZD- or 
DBZ-treated tumors at indicated time points were analyzed. Arrowheads indicate tumor cells at the tumor edge, and arrows indicate tumor cells toward the 
tumor center. Areas above dotted lines are tumor necrosis. Bars, 50 µm. (C and D) Quantification of FRA1- and NICD-positive tumor cells in SW480 and PDX1 
xenografts. Vehicle-treated tumors (Ctrl) and tumors at indicated time points during and after AZD (C) or DBZ (D) treatment were analyzed. Error bars are mean 
± SD. *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001 by t test; n.s., not significant; compared with Ctrl. n ≥ 3 independent biological replicates.
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1699
TetO-CreERT2), and a third vector that upon Cre recombination 
irreversibly switches from expression of RFP to YFP (pLenti Trace). 
We transduced all three vectors into SW480 colon cancer cells 
and xenografted them into immune-compromised NOD/SCID 
mice. Tumor-bearing mice then were treated with AZD or DBZ, 
causing loss of FRA1- or NICD-positive tumor cell subpopulations, 
respectively. Vehicle-treated tumors were included as controls. 
During treatment and in nontreated controls, recombination was 
then induced with doxycycline and tamoxifen (Fig. 6 B). 2 d after 
recombination, we observed that individual or small clusters of 
tumor cells had been labeled by YFP in all xenograft tumors (Fig. 6 C 
and Fig. S3). Importantly, in AZD-treated tumors, the frequency of 
NICD–/YFP–double positive tumor cells was significantly higher 
than in nontreated controls, whereas FRA1-positive tumor cells 
were completely absent (Fig. 6 D). However, DBZ-treated xenografts 
had higher frequencies of FRA1–/YFP–double positive tumor cells 
than control tumors, but contained no NICD-positive tumor cells 
(Fig. 6 D). However, at 15 d after recombination, and after mice 
had been taken off treatment, we found that clonal patches of 
YFP-positive tumor cells then had formed that in all xenografts 
included both FRA1- and NICD-positive tumor cell subpopulations 
(Fig. 6 C and Fig. S3). Importantly, the frequencies of FRA1–/YFP– 
and NICD–/YFP–double positives were then similar to those in 
nontreated control tumors (Fig. 6 E).
We also treated PDX1 xenograft tumors with AZD or DBZ and 
then labeled remaining NICD- or FRA1-positive tumor cells, respec-
tively, with BrdU (Fig. S4 A). Analyzing tumors 7 d after AZD or DBZ 
treatment revealed that the label then had expanded to reappeared 
FRA1- or NICD-positive tumor cells which at the time of labeling 
were absent from the tumor (Fig. S4 B). Furthermore, the frequen-
cies of NICD–/BrdU– and FRA1–/BrdU–double positive tumor cells 
in AZD- and DBZ-treated tumors, respectively, were higher at 6 h 
after labeling than at 7 d, where they showed similar frequencies, 
irrespective of the precedent treatment (Fig. S4 C). Collectively, 
these findings demonstrate that tumor cell subsets with high MAPK 
or NOT 
CH activity can be restored from remaining tumor cells 
during recovery from AZD or DBZ treatment and provide evidence 
for plasticity of signaling pathway activity in colon cancer cells.
Figure 4. Impact of MAPK and NOT 
CH repression on gene expression in colon cancer in vivo. (A) Venn diagram of genes with significantly (P < 0.05) 
differential expression and two or more fold change in SW480 xenografts that were treated for five consecutive days with AZD or DBZ compared with vehicle 
treatment (Ctrl). (B) Heat map and unsupervised hierarchical clustering of genes with significantly (P < 0.05) differential expression and two or more fold change 
(left). Rows represent genes and columns represent biological replicates. Four main clusters are indicated. Hallmark gene sets most enriched in each cluster as 
determined by GSEA (right). (C and D) GSEA for indicated gene sets using unfiltered gene expression data of DBZ- (C) and AZD-treated (D) tumors compared 
with controls. ES, enrichment score; NES, normalized enrichment score. (A–D) n = 3 independent biological replicates.
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1700
Treatment effects of MAPK and NOT 
CH repression 
in colon cancer
Finally, we evaluated the effects of targeting MAPK and NOT 
CH 
activity on tumor growth and survival in colon cancer xenografts. 
We applied AZD, DBZ, or a combination of both at treatment 
intervals of 3 d for several weeks. In addition to SW480 and PDX1, 
we included cell line–derived SW1222 and patient-derived PDX2 
colon cancer xenografts, both of which also had the distribution 
of FRA1- and NICD-positive tumor cell subpopulations described 
above. We then evaluated tumor growth over time and observed 
that AZD treatment significantly slowed tumor growth of PDX2 
tumors only, although it had no significant effects on growth of 
Figure 5. Effects of MAPK and NOT 
CH repression on EMT in colon cancer xenografts. (A) Relative expression levels of selected EMT-related genes in 
SW480 xenografts after 5 d of treatment with AZD or DBZ. Data are mean and error bars indicate SD. n = 3 independent biological replicates. (B) Immuno-
blotting for indicated proteins on tumor lysates of SW480 xenografts after 5 d of vehicle (Ctrl), AZD, or DBZ treatment. n ≥ 3 independent biological replicates, 
2 of which are shown. (C) Representative immunostainings (left) and quantification of relative staining intensities (% RSI, right) for E-cadherin and Vimentin 
in SW480 and/or PDX1 xenografts after 5 d of vehicle (Ctrl), AZD, or DBZ treatment. Areas above dotted lines are tumor necrosis. Bars, 25 µm. Error bars are 
mean ± SD. **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001 by t test; n.s., not significant. n ≥ 3 independent biological replicates.
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1701
Figure 6. Lineage tracing of colon cancer cells after MAPK or NOT 
CH inhibition. (A) Lentiviral vectors for expression of rtTA (pLenti rtTA3G), doxycycline 
dependent CreERT2 (pLenti TetO-CreERT2), and the Cre-responsive color transgene (pLenti Trace). Upon Cre-recombination, the RFP transgene element flanked 
by loxN will be removed, causing an irreversible switch from expression of RFP to YFP fluorescence. BlastR/PuroR, blasticid and puromycin resistance genes; 
LTR, long terminal repeat; PRE posttranscriptional regulatory element; TRE, tetracycline response element. (B) Triple transduced colon cancer cells were 
xenografted into NOD/SCID mice. Experimental schedule for Cre-recombination by doxycycline (DOX) and tamoxifen (TAM) in AZD- or DBZ-treated xenografts. 
 
(C) Representative double immune fluorescence images for YFP, FRA1, and NICD at 2 and 15 d after recombination in AZD- and DBZ-treated SW480 xenografts, 
as indicated. Narrow panels are higher magnifications of areas boxed in squared panels. Arrowheads point to FRA1- and NICD-positive tumor cells within single 
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1702
SW480, SW1222, and PDX1 xenografts (Fig. 7 A). Similarly, DBZ 
treatment slowed tumor growth in PDX2 tumors and also slightly 
in PDX1 tumors, whereas no overall effects on SW480 and SW1222 
were observed. However, combined treatment with AZD and DBZ 
significantly slowed tumor growth and prolonged tumor-specific 
survival in all xenograft models, outweighing the effects of single 
agent treatments (Fig. 7 A). We then examined treated tumors 
and found that double treatments strongly reduced proliferation 
rates, as indicated by Ki67 staining, whereas single agent 
treatments had no significant effects on proliferation (Fig. 7 B 
and Fig. S5 A). Moreover, double treatment strongly increased 
apoptosis, as indicated by cleaved caspase-3, whereas single agent 
treatments again had lower or no significant effects (Fig. 7 C and 
Fig. S5 B). All tumors formed areas of tumor necrosis which 
variably increased upon treatment (Fig. 8, A and B). Of note, 
however, when analyzing double-treated xenograft tumors for 
FRA1 and NICD, we for both markers observed some remaining 
positive tumor cells, suggesting incomplete blockage of MAPK 
and NOT 
CH signaling with our treatment protocol (Fig. 8 C). 
Collectively, these data demonstrate superior therapeutic effects 
upon combined targeting of different tumor cell subpopulations 
with high MAPK and high NOT 
CH signaling in colon cancer.
Discussion
Here, we demonstrate that in colorectal cancer high 
NOT 
CH-signaling activity marks tumor cells with low levels of 
MAPK and WNT activity, and vice versa, indicating that high 
pathway activities for NOT 
CH and MAPK/WNT in colon cancer 
cells are mutually exclusive. Additionally, these pathway activities 
were linked to distinct tumor cell phenotypes. Although tumor cells 
with high MAPK activity resided at the tumor edge and underwent 
EMT, we found that tumor cells with high NOT 
CH activity had a 
pronounced epithelial phenotype and were located in the tumor 
center. On one hand, these findings can be explained when 
considering recent data that showed a repressive role of NOT 
CH on 
MAPK and WNT signaling (Kim et al., 2012; Rampias et al., 2014), 
both of which are strong inducers of EMT in colon cancer (Sánchez-
Tilló et al., 2011; Blaj et al., 2017). On the other hand, our findings 
are unexpected in light of previous studies that suggested induction 
of EMT by NOT 
CH in various cancer types (Leong et al., 2007; 
Sahlgren et al., 2008; Yang et al., 2011; Fender et al., 2015). However, 
in contrast to these data that were mostly derived from cell culture 
experiments in vitro or from other tumor entities, such as lung or 
breast cancer, we here assessed the distribution of NOT 
CH activity 
in primary colon cancer tissues in situ. We therefore suggest that 
the emergence of colon cancer cell subpopulations with full NOT 
CH 
activation, their distribution within the tumor, and the associated 
epithelial phenotype depend on tumor entity and require the three-
dimensional architecture of growing in vivo.
Therapeutic targeting of colon cancer cells with high MAPK 
or NOT 
CH activity by MEK or γ-secretase inhibitors caused a 
loss of respective tumor cell subpopulations in colon cancer 
xenografts. However, we demonstrate that tumor cells with high 
MAPK activity were unaffected or even expanded when targeting 
NOT 
CH, whereas the NOT 
CH-active tumor cell population 
expanded when targeting MAPK signaling. These shifts in 
predominating pathway activity were accompanied by changes 
in tumor cell phenotypes that on the gene expression and protein 
level indicated strongly increased EMT when repressing NOT 
CH, 
whereas MAPK repression had opposite effects. Because MAPK 
is a strong driver of EMT in colon cancer (Lemieux et al., 2009; 
Bakiri et al., 2015; Blaj et al., 2017), the varying contribution of 
tumor cell subsets with high MAPK activity may explain these 
findings. However, when further considering that EMT is a 
hallmark of cancer progression (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011), 
we propose that solely targeting NOT 
CH may elicit limited or 
even adverse effects on the risk of tumor progression for patients 
with colon cancer. Our data therefore imply that single agent 
therapies that target specific signaling pathways require careful 
evaluation as a result of unexpected effects on overall tumor 
cell differentiation and may cause transitions into potentially 
aggressive tumor cell populations with intrinsically treatment-
resistant phenotypes.
Upon recovery from therapy, colon cancer cells with high 
MAPK or NOT 
CH activity, respectively, were quickly replenished. 
Using genetic and BrdU lineage tracing, we demonstrate clonal 
outgrowth of MAPK- and NOT 
CH-positive tumor cells from the 
remaining tumor cell population, irrespective of the pathway 
that was targeted, indicating phenotypic plasticity in signaling 
pathway activity as an underlying mechanism for treatment 
recovery. In line with these findings, a recent study demonstrated 
prompt reappearance of LGR5-positive colon cancer cells after 
their genetic ablation in tumor xenografts, indicating that tumor 
cell plasticity allowed reversion of differentiated tumor cells into 
colon cancer stem cells (Shimokawa et al., 2017). In this context, 
it remains to be determined whether colon cancer cells that 
express LGR5 or other putative cancer stem cell markers reside 
within MAPK- and/or NOT 
CH-positive tumor cell subpopulations. 
However, these data suggest that solely targeting colon cancer 
cell subpopulations with distinct phenotypes, such as EMT or 
enhanced stemness (Shibue and Weinberg, 2017), may clinically 
fail as a result of plasticity of phenotype and signaling pathway 
activity. Indeed, when we treated colon cancer xenografts for 
several weeks with MAPK or NOT 
CH inhibitors alone, effects on 
tumor growth either were nonsignificant or moderate only, which 
is in line with their limited effects in previous therapeutic trials 
(Bennouna et al., 2011; Strosberg et al., 2012). However, when 
combining both therapies, we found strong repressive effects 
on tumor cell proliferation and increased apoptosis, resulting 
in slowed tumor growth and prolonged tumor-specific survival. 
Given that these effects significantly outweighed those of single 
agent treatments, our findings denote that combined treatments 
mainly succeeded by restricting tumor cell plasticity. This lends 
YFP-positive clones at 15 d after recombination. Bars, 25 µm. (D and E) Quantification of FRA1–/YFP– and NICD–/YFP–double positive tumor cells in vehicle- 
(Ctrl), AZD-, and DBZ-treated SW480 xenografts at 2 d (D) and 15 d (E) after recombination. Error bars are mean ± SD. *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001 by t test; n.s., 
not significant. n ≥ 3 independent biological replicates.
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1703
support to a new concept for cancer therapy that advocates 
specific and simultaneous targeting of several different tumor 
cell subpopulations to strongly improve therapy response. Detailed 
analyses of targetable phenotypes and pathways found in different 
tumor cell subpopulations may thus pave the way for improved 
treatment options for patients with colorectal and other cancers.
Figure 7. Therapeutic targeting of MAPK and NOT 
CH in colon cancer xenografts. (A) Long term treatment effects of AZD, DBZ, their combination, or 
vehicle (Ctrl) on SW480-, SW1222-, and patient-derived (PDX1 and PDX2) colon cancer xenografts, shown as growth curves (upper panels) and tumor specific 
survival in Kaplan-Meier plots (lower panels). Data are mean ± SE in growth curves. P-values are log-rank test results in Kaplan-Meier plots. n ≥ 10 independent 
biological replicates for each treatment group. (B and C) Quantification of immunostaining for Ki67 proliferation index (B) and cleaved (Cl.) caspase-3 (C) in 
treated xenografts. Error bars are mean ± SD. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001 by t test. n ≥ 3 independent biological replicates. 
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1704
Figure 8. Treatment effects of MAPK and NOT 
CH repression in colon cancer xenografts. (A) Quantification of necrosis in SW480, SW1222, PDX1, and 
PDX2 colon cancer xenografts after long-term treatment with AZD and/or DBZ or vehicle (Ctrl) as indicated. Data are mean ± SD *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, 
P < 0.001 by t test; n.s., not significant. n ≥ 3 independent biological replicates. (B) Representative overview micrographs of H&E-stained sections of xenograft 
tumors after indicated long term treatments. (C) Representative immunostainings for FRA1 and NICD in SW480 xenografts after long term treatment with 
vehicle (Ctrl), or AZD and DBZ. Arrowheads indicate remaining FRA1- and NICD-positive tumor cells. Bars: 1 mm (B); 25 µm (C).
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1705
The contribution of colon cancer cell subpopulations to tumor 
progression is not yet completely understood and our data on 
clinical relevance of MAPK and NOT 
CH activity shed useful 
light. Cancer progression requires invasion and dissemination 
of tumor cells, which are strongly driven by EMT (Massagué and 
Obenauf, 2016). However, it also requires seeding at metastatic 
sites which depends on the reverse process termed mesenchy-
mal-epithelial transition (MET; Lamouille et al., 2014). Because 
we demonstrate that MAPK and NOT 
CH activity are linked to 
EMT and MET phenotypes, respectively, both pathways likely 
foster colon cancer progression in concert. This idea finds sup-
port in our observation that combined analyses of MAPK and 
NOT 
CH activity through FRA1 and NICD was most discrimi-
natory in predicting patient outcome and tumor metastasis. 
Importantly, however, because patients whose tumors showed 
low activity for both pathways survived best and showed lowest 
tumor progression and metastasis rates, this further strength-
ened the rationale for combined targeted treatment against both 
pathways. Finally, because immunostainings for FRA1 and NICD 
readily indicated presence and extent of respective tumor cell 
subpopulations in colon cancer specimens and also often were 
consistent in primary colon cancers and their metastases, these 
may well be evaluated as predictive biomarkers for response to 
MAPK- and NOT 
CH-directed therapies.
In conclusion, we here provide evidence that combined 
targeting of MAPK and NOT 
CH signaling can improve therapeutic 
response in preclinical xenograft models of colorectal cancer. 
However, this study has certain limitations. Our data are derived 
from immune-compromised animals which partially lack the 
inflammatory microenvironment and tumor directed immune 
response, so that treatment effects in human patients with 
colorectal cancer may significantly differ. Moreover, because 
several substances for MAPK and NOT 
CH inhibition are clinically 
evaluated (Takebe et al., 2015; Miyamoto et al., 2017), most 
tolerable and effective drug combinations in human patients 
still remain to be determined. Toxic side effects, especially 
of combined MAPK and NOT 
CH inhibition also need to be 
thoroughly assessed. Finally, although repression of MAPK and 
NOT 
CH signaling significantly slowed tumor growth, blockage of 
both pathways was incomplete, and also, this treatment failed to 
regress established tumors. Further preclinical and clinical trials 
may therefore reveal if combined MAPK and NOT 
CH inhibition, 
in addition to established chemotherapeutic protocols, can 
improve therapy response in patients with colorectal cancer.
Materials and methods
Clinical samples
Colorectal cancer specimens from patients that underwent surgi-
cal resection at the University of Munich between 1994 and 2007 
(LMU, Munich, Germany) were obtained from the archives of the 
Institute of Pathology. Follow-up data were recorded prospec-
tively by the Munich Cancer Registry (data provided by J. Engel, 
LMU, Munich, Germany). Specimens were anonymized, and 
the study was approved by the institutional ethics committee of 
the Medical Faculty of the LMU. For the UICC stage II collection, 
inclusion criteria were colorectal adenocarcinomas with bowel 
wall infiltration (T3 and T4), but absence of nodal (N0) or distant 
metastasis (M0) at the time of diagnosis. The final collection con-
sisted of 225 cases with 50 events of cancer-specific death and 71 
events of tumor progression, either documented as tumor recur-
rence or metastasis. For the metastasis collection, a case control 
design was chosen that included tumor specimens of 92 patients. 
Half of the patients had colon cancers with synchronous liver 
metastasis (UICC stage IV), diagnosed by clinical imaging or liver 
biopsy. Controls consisted of colon cancer patients without dis-
tant metastasis at the time of diagnosis (UICC stages I–III) and 
with disease-free survival of at least 5 yr after primary surgi-
cal resection. Cases and controls were matched by tumor grade, 
T-category, and tumor location (all tumors were right-sided colon 
cancers), resulting in 46 matched pairs. Furthermore, 11 paired 
tissue samples of primary colorectal cancers and their metasta-
ses to different sites were collected. To establish PDX1 and PDX2 
xenografts, vital tissue samples of two human primary colorectal 
adenocarcinomas were provided by the biobank under admin-
istration of the foundation Human Tissue and Cell Research 
(HTCR; Thasler et al., 2003).
For KRAS mutational testing, tumor tissue was scraped 
from deparaffinized tissue sections under microscopic control 
using sterile scalpel blades, and tumor DNA was extracted 
with QIAamp DNA Micro kits. KRAS exon 2 then was analyzed 
by pyrosequencing on a PyroMark Q24 Advanced instrument 
(Qiagen) with primers 5′-NNN 
GGC 
CTG 
CTG 
AAA 
ATG 
ACT 
GAA-3′ and 5′-Biotin-TTA 
GCT 
GTA 
TCG 
TCA 
AGG 
CAC 
TCT-3′ for 
amplification and 5′-TGT 
GGT 
AGT 
TGG 
AGCT-3′ for sequencing.
Lentiviral vectors
All template plasmids were obtained from Addgene. For the 
inducible pLenti TetO-CreERT2 expression vector, CreERT2 from 
pCAG-CreERT2 was amplified (a gift from C. Cepko, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA) by PCR and inserted between BamHI 
and XbaI restriction sites of pLenti CMV 
TRE3G eGFP Puro (a gift 
from E. Campeau, Zenith Epigenetics Ltd., Calgary, Canada), 
replacing eGFP by CreERT2. For the Cre-sensitive recombination 
vector pLenti Trace, we inserted PCR-amplified mCherry-FLAG 
and EYFP-V5 into a plasmid with synthetic paired loxN sites. This 
cassette then was inserted between AgeI and SalI sites of pLenti 
PGK-GFP (a gift from D. Trono, École Polytechnique Fédérale 
de Lausanne, Switzerland), replacing GFP. Finally, the PGK 
promoter was replaced by an EF1-α promoter, yielding pLenti 
Trace. Modified vector elements were verified by restriction 
analysis and sequencing.
Cell culture and lentiviral transductions
HEK293 and SW480 cells were obtained from ATCC and SW1222 
from the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research. Cell lines were 
authenticated using short-tandem repeat profiling, tested neg-
ative for mycoplasma contamination, and cultured in DMEM 
containing 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 0.1 mg/ml strep-
tomycin (Biochrom). For transductions, lentivirus was pro-
duced in HEK293 cells by cotransfection with lentiviral vector, 
pCMV-dR8.91, and pMD2.G as previously described (Horst et 
al., 2012). Virus containing medium was passed through 0.45 
-
µm filters (Millipore), mixed 1:1 with DMEM, and used to infect 
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1706
SW480 colon cancer cells in the presence of 8 mg/ml polybrene 
(Sigma-Aldrich). pLenti rtTA3G (gift from D. Esposito, National 
Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD), pLenti TetO-CreERT2, and 
pLenti Trace triple transduced cells then were single-cell sorted 
into 96-well plates on a FAC 
SAria III instrument (BD Biosciences) 
and expanded. Recombination was tested in vitro by addition of 
0.5 µg/ml doxycycline and 1 µM 4-hydroxytamoxifen (Sigma 
Aldrich) before xenotransplantation into mice.
Tumor xenografts and in vivo treatments
Mouse experiments were reviewed and approved by the 
Regierung von Oberbayern, and mice were housed in pathogen-
free microisolator cages. Disaggregated primary colon cancers 
(PDX1 and PDX2), as well as SW1222 or SW480 colon cancer cells 
either native or carrying the lineage tracing constructs, were 
suspended in 100 µl of a 1:1 mixture of PBS and growth factor–
depleted Matrigel (Corning) and injected subcutaneously into 
age- and gender-matched 6–8-wk-old NOD/SCID mice (NOD.
CB17-Prkdcscid, The Jackson Laboratory) for xenograft formation. 
Mice were randomly assigned to control or treatment groups 
when tumor volumes reached 100 mm3. For short-term therapy 
and tracing experiments, mice were treated daily with 1.25 mg 
selumetinib (AZD6244; Selleckchem) p.o. or 0.35 mg DBZ (Axon 
Medchem) i.p. for 5 d. For lineage tracing, 2.5 µg doxycycline 
were given p.o. for 2 d starting on day 3, and recombination 
of pLenti Trace was induced by 7.5 ng tamoxifen i.p. (Sigma-
Aldrich). For BrdU tracing, mice were injected with 1.25 mg BrdU 
(Sigma-Aldrich) 18 h after last inhibitor treatment. For long-term 
therapy, mice were treated with 1.25 mg AZD and 0.35 mg DBZ 
or vehicle as control every 3 d until tumors reached volumes of 
1,000–1,300 mm3. Mice were sacrificed, tumors removed, and 
either formalin fixed and paraffin embedded for histology and 
immunostaining, or directly used for gene expression analyses 
and immunoblotting.
Immunoblotting
For immunoblotting, freshly harvested and snap-frozen tumor 
samples were ground in a liquid nitrogen–cooled mortar (Bel-
Art) and lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (50 mM 
Tris HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxy-
cholate, and 1% NP-40), supplemented with protease and phos-
phatase inhibitors (Roche). Samples then were sonicated for 20 s 
and centrifuged, and protein concentrations were measured with 
DC Protein Assays (Biorad). Laemmli sample buffer (Biorad) then 
was added to equal amounts of protein and heated for 5 min at 
95°C. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, transferred onto 
PVDF membranes (Merck Millipore), and incubated with pri-
mary antibodies listed in Table S4. Bands were visualized using 
HRP-conjugated secondary mouse (Promega) or rabbit (Sigma) 
antibodies and chemiluminescent HRP Substrate (Millipore).
Immunohistochemistry and immune fluorescence
For immunohistochemistry, 5-µm tissue sections of colorectal 
cancer samples or xenografts were deparaffinized and stained on 
a Ventana Benchmark XT autostainer or manually by retrieving 
antigens in TRS6 (Dako Cytomation) for 20 min in a microwave 
oven. Primary antibodies used for incubation are listed in Table 
S4. Staining was visualized with ultraView or optiView DAB 
detection kits (Ventana Medical Systems) or by incubation with 
alkaline phosphatase coupled secondary antibodies and substrate 
kits (Vector). The intratumoral distribution of NICD and HES1 
staining was determined by inspection of tumor edge and tumor 
center in each case. For survival analyses, NICD 
-positive tumor 
cells were scored in 10% steps by estimation. FRA1 expression 
was scored semiquantitatively, ranging from complete absence 
(score 0), weak (score 1), moderate (score 2), or strong expres-
sion (score 3). Cases then were classified as FRA1-negative (score 
0) and FRA1-positive (scores 1–3).
For immune fluorescence, sections were deparaffinized, and 
antigens were retrieved in Target Retrieval Solution (Dako) or 
Epitope Retrieval Solution, pH 8.0 (Leica), for 20 min in a micro-
wave oven. Sections then were incubated with primary antibod-
ies listed in Table S4. NICD immunostaining was enhanced by 
tyramide signal amplification (PerkinElmer). For other epitopes, 
secondary Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated antibody (Invitrogen) 
was used for visualization, and nuclei were counterstained with 
DAPI (Vector Laboratories). Confocal fluorescence images then 
were taken on a LSM 700 laser-scanning microscope using the 
ZEN software (Zeiss). Contrast and brightness were adjusted in 
Photoshop (Adobe), and for NICD staining, a nuclear mask was 
applied. Colocalization of fluorescence signals was measured 
using Volocity 6.1.1 software (PerkinElmer) and plotted as per-
cent values of maximum fluorescence intensity.
Gene expression analyses and Gene Set Enrichment 
Analysis (GSEA)
RNA was isolated from tumor xenografts using TRIzol (Invitro-
gen). Libraries were constructed using the mRNA Sense library 
preparation kit (Lexogen) according to manufacturer’s protocol. 
In brief, 500 ng of total RNA was captured on oligo dT beads, 
hybridized to random primers and stoppers for cDNA synthesis, 
and ligated. Single-stranded cDNAs with sequencing adapters 
then were amplified and barcoded, and libraries were purified 
with AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter), quantified, pooled 
at 10-nM concentration, and sequenced in multiplex on a HiSeq 
1500 as 50-bp single reads. Data then were demultiplexed, adap-
tor sequences were removed, and the reads were mapped to the 
hg19 human reference genome. Sequence reads for annotated 
genes were counted with the HTseq count script from the DEseq2 
package, and differentially expressed genes were identified with 
the edgeR package with a <1% false discovery rate. Heat maps and 
clustering were done with GENE-E (Broad Institute). Hallmark 
gene sets most enriched in each cluster were determined using 
GSEA tools. For enrichment curves GSEA analyses were run with 
1,000 permutations. RNA-seq expression data are accessible 
through GEO (GSE98922).
Statistical analysis
Two-tailed Student’s t test was used to evaluate significant dif-
ferences between two groups, and data indicate means ± SD, 
unless indicated otherwise. For patient outcome and mouse 
survival, the Kaplan-Meier method was used, and P-values were 
calculated by the log-rank test. Cox proportional hazards model 
was used for multivariate analysis. Differences were considered 
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1707
statistically significant when P < 0.05. Individual P-values are 
given within the figures. Statistics were calculated with Prism 
(GraphPad) or SPSS (IBM).
Online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows the distribution of HES1 expression and charac-
teristics of FRA1- and NICD-positive tumor cells in colorectal 
cancer. In Fig. S2, effects of short-term AZD and DBZ treatment 
on apoptosis in colon cancer xenografts are displayed. Fig. S3 
demonstrates lineage tracing of tumor cells in vehicle-treated 
control colon cancer xenografts. Fig. S4 demonstrates BrdU 
tracing of colon cancer cells after MAPK and NOT 
CH inhibi-
tion. Fig. S5 shows the impact of long-term MAPK and NOT 
CH 
repression on proliferation and apoptosis in colon cancer xeno-
grafts. Table S1 contains information on clinical data of FRA1 
and NICD expression in UICC stage II colorectal cancer. Table S2 
shows results from multivariate analysis of disease-free survival. 
Table S3 contains information on clinical data of FRA1 and NICD 
expression in a case-control collection of colon cancers with and 
without distant metastasis. Table S4 lists primary antibodies 
used in this study.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Anja Heier, Jessica Kövi, Anne Küchler, Anne-
gret Schäfer, Andrea Sendelhofert, and Karina Windhorst for 
experimental assistance. 
This study was supported by grants from the Deutsche 
Krebshilfe (grant 11169 to D. Horst), the Rudolf Bartling 
Stiftung (to D. Horst and H. Hermeking), and the Curt-Bohne-
wand-Fonds (to C. Schaaf). 
The authors declare no competing financial interests. 
Author contributions: E.M. Schmidt and D. Horst developed 
methodology and performed experiments; E.M. Schmidt, S. Lam-
precht, C. Blaj, S. Krebs, H. Blum, C. Schaaf, H. Hermeking, A. 
Jung, T. Kirchner, and D. Horst analyzed and interpreted data and 
wrote the manuscript; D. Horst supervised the study.
Submitted: 11 August 2017
Revised: 28 February 2018
Accepted: 17 April 2018
References
Bakiri, L., S. Macho-Maschler, I. Custic, J. Niemiec, A. Guío-Carrión, S.C. 
Hasenfuss, A. Eger, M. Müller, H. Beug, and E.F. Wagner. 2015. Fra-1/
AP-1 induces EMT in mammary epithelial cells by modulating Zeb1/2 
and TGFβ expression. Cell Death Differ. 22:336–350. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
cdd 
.2014 
.157
Bennouna, J., I. Lang, M. Valladares-Ayerbes, K. Boer, A. Adenis, P. Escudero, 
T.Y. Kim, G.M. Pover, C.D. Morris, and J.Y. Douillard. 2011. A Phase II, 
open-label, randomised study to assess the efficacy and safety of the 
MEK1/2 inhibitor AZD6244 (ARRY-142886) versus capecitabine mono-
therapy in patients with colorectal cancer who have failed one or two 
prior chemotherapeutic regimens. Invest. New Drugs. 29:1021–1028. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1007/ 
s10637 
-010 
-9392 
-8
Blaj, C., E.M. Schmidt, S. Lamprecht, H. Hermeking, A. Jung, T. Kirchner, and 
D. Horst. 2017. Oncogenic Effects of High MAPK Activity in Colorectal 
Cancer Mark Progenitor Cells and Persist Irrespective of RAS Mutations. 
Cancer Res. 77:1763–1774. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1158/ 
0008 
-5472 
.CAN 
-16 
-2821
Brabletz, S., K. Bajdak, S. Meidhof, U. Burk, G. Niedermann, E. Firat, U. Well-
ner, A. Dimmler, G. Faller, J. Schubert, and T. Brabletz. 2011. The ZEB1/
miR-200 feedback loop controls Notch signalling in cancer cells. EMBO 
J. 30:770–782. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
emboj 
.2010 
.349
Brabletz, T., A. Jung, S. Reu, M. Porzner, F. Hlubek, L.A. Kunz-Schughart, R. 
Knuechel, and T. Kirchner. 2001. Variable beta-catenin expression in 
colorectal cancers indicates tumor progression driven by the tumor 
environment. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 98:10356–10361. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1073/ 
pnas 
.171610498
Bray, S.J. 2006. Notch signalling: a simple pathway becomes complex. Nat. Rev. 
Mol. Cell Biol. 7:678–689. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nrm2009
Bu, P., K.Y. Chen, J.H. Chen, L. Wang, J. Walters, Y.J. Shin, J.P. Goerger, J. Sun, M. 
Witherspoon, N. Rakhilin, et al. 2013. A microRNA miR-34a-regulated 
bimodal switch targets Notch in colon cancer stem cells. Cell Stem Cell. 
12:602–615. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.stem 
.2013 
.03 
.002
Cancer Genome Atlas Network. 2012. Comprehensive molecular characteri-
zation of human colon and rectal cancer. Nature. 487:330–337. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature11252
Cernat, L., C. Blaj, R. Jackstadt, L. Brandl, J. Engel, H. Hermeking, A. Jung, T. 
Kirchner, and D. Horst. 2014. Colorectal cancers mimic structural orga-
nization of normal colonic crypts. PLoS One. 9:e104284. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1371/ 
journal 
.pone 
.0104284
Douillard, J.Y., S. Siena, J. Cassidy, J. Tabernero, R. Burkes, M. Barugel, Y. Hum-
blet, G. Bodoky, D. Cunningham, J. Jassem, et al. 2014. Final results from 
PRI 
ME: randomized phase III study of panitumumab with FOL 
FOX4 for 
first-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer. Ann. Oncol. 25:1346–
1355. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1093/ 
annonc/ 
mdu141
Fender, A.W., J.M. Nutter, T.L. Fitzgerald, F.E. Bertrand, and G. Sigounas. 2015. 
Notch-1 promotes stemness and epithelial to mesenchymal transition 
in colorectal cancer. J. Cell. Biochem. 116:2517–2527. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1002/ 
jcb 
.25196
Hanahan, D., and R.A. Weinberg. 2011. Hallmarks of cancer: the next genera-
tion. Cell. 144:646–674. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2011 
.02 
.013
Heinemann, V., L.F. von Weikersthal, T. Decker, A. Kiani, U. Vehling-Kaiser, 
S.E. Al-Batran, T. Heintges, C. Lerchenmüller, C. Kahl, G. Seipelt, et al. 
2014. FOL 
FIRI plus cetuximab versus FOL 
FIRI plus bevacizumab as first-
line treatment for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (FIRE-3): 
a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 15:1065–1075. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
S1470 
-2045(14)70330 
-4
Horst, D., J. Chen, T. Morikawa, S. Ogino, T. Kirchner, and R.A. Shivdasani. 
2012. Differential WNT activity in colorectal cancer confers limited 
tumorigenic potential and is regulated by MAPK signaling. Cancer Res. 
72:1547–1556. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1158/ 
0008 
-5472 
.CAN 
-11 
-3222
Jemal, A., R. Siegel, J. Xu, and E. Ward. 2010. Cancer statistics, 2010. CA Cancer 
J. Clin. 60:277–300. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.3322/ 
caac 
.20073
Kim, H.A., B.K. Koo, J.H. Cho, Y.Y. Kim, J. Seong, H.J. Chang, Y.M. Oh, D.E. 
Stange, J.G. Park, D. Hwang, and Y.Y. Kong. 2012. Notch1 counteracts 
WNT/β-catenin signaling through chromatin modification in colorec-
tal cancer. J. Clin. Invest. 122:3248–3259. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1172/ 
JCI61216
Lamouille, S., J. Xu, and R. Derynck. 2014. Molecular mechanisms of epithe-
lial-mesenchymal transition. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 15:178–196. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nrm3758
Lemieux, E., S. Bergeron, V. Durand, C. Asselin, C. Saucier, and N. Rivard. 
2009. Constitutively active MEK1 is sufficient to induce epitheli-
al-to-mesenchymal transition in intestinal epithelial cells and to 
promote tumor invasion and metastasis. Int. J. Cancer. 125:1575–1586. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1002/ 
ijc 
.24485
Leong, K.G., K. Niessen, I. Kulic, A. Raouf, C. Eaves, I. Pollet, and A. Karsan. 
2007. Jagged1-mediated Notch activation induces epithelial-to-mesen-
chymal transition through Slug-induced repression of E-cadherin. J. 
Exp. Med. 204:2935–2948. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1084/ 
jem 
.20071082
Massagué, J., and A.C. Obenauf. 2016. Metastatic colonization by circulating 
tumour cells. Nature. 529:298–306. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature17038
Miyamoto, Y., K. Suyama, and H. Baba. 2017. Recent Advances in Targeting 
the EGFR Signaling Pathway for the Treatment of Metastatic Colorectal 
Cancer. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18:752. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.3390/ 
ijms18040752
Rampias, T., P. Vgenopoulou, M. Avgeris, A. Polyzos, K. Stravodimos, C. Vala-
vanis, A. Scorilas, and A. Klinakis. 2014. A new tumor suppressor role for 
the Notch pathway in bladder cancer. Nat. Med. 20:1199–1205. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nm 
.3678
Sahlgren, C., M.V. Gustafsson, S. Jin, L. Poellinger, and U. Lendahl. 2008. Notch 
signaling mediates hypoxia-induced tumor cell migration and invasion. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 105:6392–6397. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1073/ 
pnas 
.0802047105
 Schmidt et al. 
Targeting NOT 
CH and MAPK in colorectal cancer
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171455
1708
Sánchez-Tilló, E., O. de Barrios, L. Siles, M. Cuatrecasas, A. Castells, and A. Postigo. 
2011. β-catenin/TCF4 complex induces the epithelial-to-mesenchymal 
transition (EMT)-activator ZEB1 to regulate tumor invasiveness. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA. 108:19204–19209. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1073/ 
pnas 
.1108977108
Sang, L., J.M. Roberts, and H.A. Coller. 2010. Hijacking HES1: how tumors 
co-opt the anti-differentiation strategies of quiescent cells. Trends Mol. 
Med. 16:17–26. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.molmed 
.2009 
.11 
.001
Shibue, T., and R.A. Weinberg. 2017. EMT, CSCs, and drug resistance: the 
mechanistic link and clinical implications. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 14:611–
629. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nrclinonc 
.2017 
.44
Shimokawa, M., Y. Ohta, S. Nishikori, M. Matano, A. Takano, M. Fujii, S. Date, 
S. Sugimoto, T. Kanai, and T. Sato. 2017. Visualization and targeting of 
LGR5+ human colon cancer stem cells. Nature. 545:187–192. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature22081
Sonoshita, M., M. Aoki, H. Fuwa, K. Aoki, H. Hosogi, Y. Sakai, H. Hashida, 
A. Takabayashi, M. Sasaki, S. Robine, et al. 2011. Suppression of colon 
cancer metastasis by Aes through inhibition of Notch signaling. Cancer 
Cell. 19:125–137. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.ccr 
.2010 
.11 
.008
Strosberg, J.R., T. Yeatman, J. Weber, D. Coppola, M.J. Schell, G. Han, K. Alm-
hanna, R. Kim, T. Valone, H. Jump, and D. Sullivan. 2012. A phase II study 
of RO4929097 in metastatic colorectal cancer. Eur. J. Cancer. 48:997–1003. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.ejca 
.2012 
.02 
.056
Takebe, N., L. Miele, P.J. Harris, W. Jeong, H. Bando, M. Kahn, S.X. Yang, and 
S.P. Ivy. 2015. Targeting Notch, Hedgehog, and Wnt pathways in cancer 
stem cells: clinical update. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 12:445–464. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nrclinonc 
.2015 
.61
Thasler, W.E., T.S. Weiss, K. Schillhorn, P.T. Stoll, B. Irrgang, and K.W. Jauch. 
2003. Charitable State-Controlled Foundation Human Tissue and Cell 
Research: Ethic and Legal Aspects in the Supply of Surgically Removed 
Human Tissue For Research in the Academic and Commercial Sec-
tor in Germany. Cell Tissue Bank. 4:49–56. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1023/ 
A: 
1026392429112
Tolcher, A.W., W.A. Messersmith, S.M. Mikulski, K.P. Papadopoulos, E.L. 
Kwak, D.G. Gibbon, A. Patnaik, G.S. Falchook, A. Dasari, G.I. Shapiro, 
et al. 2012. Phase I study of RO4929097, a gamma secretase inhibitor 
of Notch signaling, in patients with refractory metastatic or locally 
advanced solid tumors. J. Clin. Oncol. 30:2348–2353. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1200/ 
JCO 
.2011 
.36 
.8282
Van Cutsem, E., C.H. Köhne, E. Hitre, J. Zaluski, C.R. Chang Chien, A. Makh-
son, G. D’Haens, T. Pintér, R. Lim, G. Bodoky, et al. 2009. Cetuximab and 
chemotherapy as initial treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. N. 
Engl. J. Med. 360:1408–1417. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1056/ 
NEJMoa0805019
Vermeulen, L., F. De Sousa E Melo, M. van der Heijden, K. Cameron, J.H. de 
Jong, T. Borovski, J.B. Tuynman, M. Todaro, C. Merz, H. Rodermond, et 
al. 2010. Wnt activity defines colon cancer stem cells and is regulated 
by the microenvironment. Nat. Cell Biol. 12:468–476. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
ncb2048
Yang, Y., Y.H. Ahn, D.L. Gibbons, Y. Zang, W. Lin, N. Thilaganathan, C.A. Alva-
rez, D.C. Moreira, C.J. Creighton, P.A. Gregory, et al. 2011. The Notch 
ligand Jagged2 promotes lung adenocarcinoma metastasis through 
a miR-200-dependent pathway in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 121:1373–1385. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1172/ 
JCI42579
Yuan, R., J. Ke, L. Sun, Z. He, Y. Zou, X. He, Y. Chen, X. Wu, Z. Cai, L. Wang, et al. 
2015. HES1 promotes metastasis and predicts poor survival in patients 
with colorectal cancer. Clin. Exp. Metastasis. 32:169–179. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1007/ 
s10585 
-015 
-9700 
-y
