 Accepted Manuscript
Title: Using TwitterTM to Drive Research Impact: A
Discussion of Strategies, Opportunities and Challenges
Author: Katy Schnitzler Nigel Davies Fiona Ross Ruth Harris
PII:
S0020-7489(16)00072-9
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2016.02.004
Reference:
NS 2699
To appear in:
Received date:
27-10-2015
Revised date:
3-2-2016
Accepted date:
7-2-2016
Please cite this article as: SCHNITZLER, K., DAVIES, N., ROSS, F., HARRIS,
R.,Using TwitterrmTM to Drive Research Impact: A Discussion of Strategies,
Opportunities and Challenges, International Journal of Nursing Studies (2016),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2016.02.004
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication.
As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript.
The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof
before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process
errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that
apply to the journal pertain.
 Page 1 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
2
Using Twitter™ to Drive Research Impact: A Discussion of Strategies, Opportunities and Challenges
Authors:
Katy SCHNITZLER, 
Doctoral Student, 
Kingston Business School, Kingston University, Kingston upon Thames, UK
Nigel DAVIES, 
Professor of Healthcare Leadership and Workforce Development
Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, University of Bedfordshire, Luton, Bedfordshire, UK
Fiona ROSS, 
Professor of Research
Centre for Health and Social Care Research, Kingston University and St George’s, University of 
London, UK
And
Director of Research, Leadership Foundation for Higher Education, London, UK
Ruth HARRIS, 
Professor of Health Care for Older Adults
Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery, King’s College London, London, UK
*Corresponding author:
Professor Ruth Harris
Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery,
57 Waterloo Road,
London, SE1 8WA
Mobile: +44 (0)20 7848 3708
Email:  ruth.harris@kcl.ac.uk
 Page 2 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
3
Using Twitter™ to Drive Research Impact: A Discussion of Strategies, Opportunities and Challenges
Abstract
Researchers have always recognised the importance of disseminating the findings of their work, 
however, recently the need to proactively plan and drive the impact of those findings on the wider 
society has become a necessity.  Firstly, this is because funders require evidence of return from 
investment and secondly and crucially because national research assessments are becoming 
powerful determinants of future funding.  In research studies associated with nursing, impact needs 
to be demonstrated by showing the effect on a range of stakeholders including service users, 
patients, carers, the nursing workforce and commissioners.   Engaging these groups is a well-known 
challenge influenced by lack of access to academic journals, lack of time to read long complex 
research papers and lack of opportunities to interact directly with the researchers.   This needs to be 
addressed urgently to enable nursing research to increase the impact that it has on health delivery 
and the work of clinical practitioners.  Social media is potentially a novel way of enabling research 
teams to both communicate about research as studies progress and to disseminate findings and 
research funders are increasingly using it to publicise information about research programmes and 
studies they fund.  A search of the healthcare literature reveals that advice and guidance on the use 
of social media for research studies is not well understood or exploited by the research community.  
This paper, therefore, explores how using social networking platforms, notably Twitter™ offers 
potential new ways for communicating research findings, accessing diverse and traditionally hard-to-
reach audiences, knowledge exchange at an exponential rate, and enabling new means of capturing 
and demonstrating research impact.  The paper discusses approaches to initiate the setup of social 
networking platforms in research projects and considers the practical challenges of using Twitter™ in 
nursing and healthcare research.  The discussion is illuminated with examples from our current 
research.  In summary, we suggest that the use of social media micro-blogging platforms is a 
 Page 3 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
4
contemporary, fast, easy and cost effective way to augment existing ways of disseminating research 
which helps drive impact.
Key words: Dissemination; social networking; research impact; Twitter™; social media.
What is already known about the topic?

Demonstrating impact of research is an increasing requirement of universities, funding 
bodies and governments in higher income countries, a trend which almost certainly will 
spread internationally

The use of social networking sites is expanding communication and networking in business 
and increasingly used in health and nursing communities

The use of social networking/micro-blogging platforms such as Twitter™ and Facebook™ by 
researchers as part of strategies to engage wider audiences are not well developed
What this paper adds?

Comprehensive review and discussion of how micro-blogging platforms can be used to 
support dissemination and potentially increase the spread and impact of research

A scholarly discussion of how social networking sites can contribute to proactively engaging 
with multiple audiences to facilitate research impact

A detailed practical guide for researchers to enable them to consider how social networking 
platforms can support their research and its ongoing impact
 Page 4 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
5
Introduction 
The communication and implementation of research findings to inform policy and practice has 
always been a challenge and is often described as a gap. While researchers have put effort into 
research dissemination in the academic literature, this does not go far enough, as messages and 
recommendations fail to reach policy makers, health service commissioners and practitioner 
audiences, uptake of findings is low and therefore value for public benefit compromised. The drivers 
for increasing impact are twofold. Firstly, research commissioners want evidence of return from 
investment and therefore require information from research teams about the impact of the research 
they fund (e.g. Peckham et al 2008). The second powerful driver is the national research 
assessments, for example, the Research Excellence Framework in the UK (see 
http://www.ref.ac.uk/about/), Excellence in Research for Australia (ERA), Evaluation of Research 
Quality (VRQ) in Italy and Evaluation of Research Units (FCT) in Portugal. There are differences in 
how these national exercises operate, although the quality of research publications is a core 
consideration for all (Hicks, 2012). 
The UK has one of the longest running national research assessment programmes worldwide. It 
commenced in 1986 as the Research Assessment Exercise (RAE), and was undertaken at 
approximately five year intervals until it was replaced by the Research Excellence Framework (REF 
2014) (Schotten and el Aisati 2014). The Research Excellence Framework (REF) is a process of expert 
review, which assesses and benchmarks the quality of research in UK Higher Education Institutions 
across all disciplines (McKenna, 2015). A new mechanism for impact assessment was introduced to 
the REF exercise (Grant, 2015). This has sharply focused the importance of impact for researchers, 
 Page 5 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
6
senior managers and research officers in universities, as outcomes from the REF will inform the 
selective allocation of the quality related research (QR) funding to institutions, with effect from 
2015-16.  Now that impact case studies contribute 20 per cent of the quality rating, and this is 
expected to rise to at least 25 per cent in REF 2020, the accountability for impact has shifted towards 
researchers and the universities in which they conduct their work (Witty, 2013; McKenna, 2015). 
Although research impact is not specifically included in other national assessment exercises, it is 
likely that this will be adopted in some way, and thus become a crucial aspect of all research as 
governments want to support research which is internationally excellent and ‘world leading’ 
(McKenna, 2012).  
What is research impact?
When the benefits from research are tangible, measurable and recognised outside of academia, 
research is said to have impact. This could be economic, environmental or cultural. Research impact 
can include changes to public policy, health care or quality of life (McKenna, 2012; REF, 2011). 
Although dissemination of research is important, it does not equate with impact. Morton (2015a) 
provides useful differentiation and definition of the processes of research impact, which she 
identifies as ‘research uptake’, ‘research use’ and ‘research impact’. She defined research uptake as 
where research users are aware of the research through engaging with it in some way including 
reading about the research or attending a conference presentation, or being a research partner or 
advisor. Research use is defined as where research users act in some way, for example, discussing or 
presenting it to others and using it to inform developments in practice or policy. Research impact is 
defined as involving changes in practice, knowledge and understanding, attitudes and ideas resulting 
from research (Morton, 2015a). However, in new work commissioned by the Leadership Foundation 
for Higher Education, Morrow (forthcoming 2016) expands our understanding further by 
 Page 6 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
7
conceptualising the ‘routes to impact’ within leadership, governance and management research and 
the different components to enable these. She identifies three major themes which comprise:

Contextual factors. Four main categories entitled ‘Social-political-economic factors’, 
‘research user factors’, ‘researcher factors’ and ‘research output factors’. (Morrow, 2016)

Impact processes. Eleven types of impact process including ‘stakeholder engagement’, 
‘planning impact’, ‘communication’, ‘and networking’ and ‘framing/translating outputs’. 
(Morrow, 2016)

Mechanisms for impact. Twenty different mechanisms for impact including ‘stimulating 
interest’, ‘keying into interests’ and ‘creating spaces for exchange’. (Morrow, 2016)
Therefore, processes of engagement, collaboration and partnership between researchers and 
research users are important elements to promote implementation of research in policy and 
practice. However, both Morton (2015b) and Morrow (2016) highlight the importance of the 
research user e.g. members of the public, businesses, commissioners of health/public services and 
government to determine whether they will use the findings of the research and therefore its 
subsequent impact. There are several possible strategies through which researchers can increase 
engagement and collaboration with research users, including working in partnership within research 
teams and stakeholder consultation events. Involving patients, carers, and community groups 
directly in a research study is said to improve research conduct, quality and dissemination, factors 
which are all linked to impact assessment (Morrow et al. 2010). However, engaging nurses in 
implementing research evidence in practice is a well-known challenge (McKenna, 2015). Factors 
influencing this include lack of access to academic journals where researchers tend to publish their 
work, lack of time to read long, often complex, research papers and lack of opportunities to interact 
directly with those doing research (Biswas and Kirchherr, 2015; Burke-Garcia and Scally, 2014; 
Jackson et al. 2015; Eysenbach, 2011). However, this is a challenge that needs to be addressed 
 Page 7 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
8
urgently to enable nursing research to increase the impact that it has on health delivery and the 
work of clinical practitioners (Clark and Thompson, 2015).
Social media is a potentially novel way of enabling research teams to communicate and disseminate 
research findings, both as they evolve during the process of a study and when they are published 
and can contribute to facilitating the route to access identified by Morrow (2016). Research funders 
are increasingly using social media as a communication tool to publicise information about research 
programmes and studies which they fund. As a research team embarking on a 30 month study, we 
were keen to consider how to use social media sites to support our study. We conducted a search of 
the literature using related search terms, such as ‘social media’, ‘Twitter’, ‘research impact’, 
‘research dissemination’ within relevant databases, Medline and CINAHL. We found that no papers 
directly addressed using social media platforms for research dissemination, to facilitate 
communication of study progress or to share outcomes with relevant nursing and healthcare 
professionals. 
This paper therefore explores how using social networking platforms, notably Twitter™ provide new 
potential for communicating with the users in our NIHR funded study and beyond (see box 1 for 
study details). Our proposition is that a social networking platform profile has several benefits for 
researchers, for example, accessing diverse and hard to reach audiences and knowledge exchange at 
a rate which is exponential thus supporting the research uptake and research use processes of 
research impact as defined by Morton (2015a). It also potentially enables new means of identifying 
research uptake and impact, which can be difficult to capture. We discuss the possible opportunities 
offered by social media to communicate emerging research findings rapidly, effectively and in real 
 Page 8 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
9
time. We suggest approaches to initiate the setup of social networking sites to support specific 
research projects and discuss the practical challenges. 
[Insert box 1 about here]
Aims of the discussion paper 
In this paper we critically discuss the approach we took to develop a profile within the social
networking platform Twitter™ for a health services research study, and set out suggestions and 
strategies for other researchers across different fields to consider and apply as appropriate.  We 
draw on current and relevant literature to contextualise our discussion of the opportunities and 
challenges of using Twitter™ to increase research impact.  To illustrate our argument and reflections, 
we refer to an example from our research practice, specifically a National Institute for Health 
Research (NIHR) funded study evaluating a recent nursing intervention to improve quality in 
hospitals. Hence, issues specifically related to the field of nursing and healthcare are also 
considered. It is important to point out that using Twitter™ is not our only strategy to drive research 
impact throughout the study, it is just one way. Other strategies include a strong patient and public 
involvement (PPI) voice and senior clinical management input as part of our steering group. Our 
multi-stakeholder group consists of nine healthcare professionals and nine members of the public. 
However, social media is another way for researchers to potentially drive impact, and is also a 
contemporary platform, which is becoming increasingly popular for scholarly activity. 
Social Media for Engagement, Communication and Dissemination
Internet use has become a fundamental component of daily life. Social media technologies are 
growing at a rapid rate, so much so that they are now considered to be a mainstream 
communication tool for much of the global population (Ferguson, 2013). Social media is a broad and 
 Page 9 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
10
continually evolving term, but generally refers to internet-based platforms, which enable users to 
connect, interact, and share information, ideas and other content. Social media is also referred to as 
social networking (Ventola, 2014). Social networking sites, also called social networking services or 
platforms, are web-based facilities whereby users create a public profile within a confined platform. 
They have become increasingly popular and numerous, with an estimated 1.5 billion users according 
to recent statistics (widely used examples include Facebook™, Twitter™, Myspace™ Snapchat™, 
Instagram™ and LinkedIn™) with millions of users incorporating them into their daily routines 
(Ellison, 2007). Recently, social networking sites have also been found to be utilised by government 
for agenda setting, policy making and to communicate new initiatives (Epstein et al., 2014). 
Blogging sites were the original common platforms for dissemination of information via the internet. 
However, blogs are time-consuming to compose and also to read, therefore the need existed for 
new platforms which were faster and more interactive, hence, microblogging was developed 
(Mesko, 2013). Microblogging describes the action of posting concise, succinct public messages 
through social media platforms by means of internet compatible devices to potentially large 
audiences (Mollett et al., 2011; O’Connor et al., 2013).
Twitter™ is arguably the most prominent example of a microblogging platform, and is even said to 
be the largest evolution in social media (Jendoubi et al., 2014; Java et al., 2007; Liebert, 2009; 
Grajales et al., 2014; Reinhardt et al., 2009). Twitter™ has 15 million users in the UK alone (McRory, 
2014). Table 1 summarises and provides brief definitions to help unravel the terms and ‘jargon’ used 
within the Twitter™, some of which will be referred to within this paper.
[Insert Table 1 about here]
 Page 10 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
11
Social Networking Platforms for Professional Use – why Twitter™?
Typically, social networking platforms were thought to be used for personal means, such as 
maintaining friendships, informal conversations and the sharing of daily leisure activities, 
predominantly by younger people. However, recently professional use has increased [0]across 
various fields, allowing users to create links and to exchange credible and current information 
(Jendoubi et al., 2014; Java et al., 2007; Archibald and Clark, 2014; Burke-Garcia and Scally, 2014; 
Liebert, 2009; Power, 2014; Chinn and Foord, 2014). 
Whilst Facebook™ is said to be the most widespread social networking platform, many professionals 
are opposed to using it for work-related practices, instead, various sources propose that Twitter™ is 
more appropriate (Fahlberg, 2015; Antheunis et al., 2013; Kwat et al., 2010; Ellison, 2007). 
Facebook™ is predominantly associated with facilitating the maintenance of existing, mostly 
informal offline connections and the sharing of personal activities. Facebook™ also requires users to 
accept ‘friend requests’ in order to connect, whereas on Twitter™, relationships do not have to be 
reciprocal, meaning that users may interact with professionals across different roles and institutes, 
eradicating organisational hierarchy. Twitter™ allows new ways of communication in times where 
face-to-face interactions are increasingly difficult to arrange in the contemporary workplace 
(O’Connor et al., 2013; Zhao and Rosson, 2009; Ventola, 2014; Kwat et al., 2010; Boyd and Ellison, 
2008; Mullikin, 2015).
Using Twitter™ for Healthcare Research   
Twitter™ allows for professional groups and communities to support real world social groups, 
therefore, online microblogging is said to be pertinent to the field of health (Mesko, 2013; Java et al., 
2007; Kwat et al., 2010). Recently the Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC) included information on 
 Page 11 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
12
how healthcare staff and students should professionally use social media in recognition its use is 
growing within the health fields (Moorley and Watson, 2015). In 2010, there were an estimated 
19,100 nurses using Twitter™ (Bauman, 2010), and recent statistics reveal that there are 6.6 million 
healthcare Twitter™ profiles (Symplur, 2014 as cited in Moorley and Chinn, 2014a).  The Twitter™ 
account @WeNurses has over 14,000 followers and allows nursing staff to communicate nationally 
in ‘Twitter™ chats’, creating previously unobtainable contacts and arguably revealing insight into 
health care practice from ground level (Richardson, et al 2016). The majority of nursing journals also 
have Twitter™ accounts, including the International Journal of Nursing Studies (@IJNSJournal), giving 
researchers the unique opportunity to engage with other nurses in new ways, which would not be 
possible without social media (Jackson et al. 2015). 
The health field is continuously changing due to the development of new knowledge, research and 
policies; therefore Twitter™ can be vital for healthcare professionals, patients and the general public 
to share current practice with others, and to keep up-to-date on new changes, enabling new ways of 
obtaining current, credible and reliable healthcare related information (Moorley and Chinn, 2014a; 
Mesko, 2013). There are a number of high profile people who use Twitter™, for example leading 
government ministers, politicians, leaders of healthcare policy bodies and national / international 
leaders in nursing and healthcare. Twitter™ therefore allows access to these hard to reach senior 
leaders, commissioners of services, academic elites and other policy communities (Harris et al. 
2008). However, it should be appreciated that these accounts may be mediated by support staff and 
due to the large number of followers the user may not see all tweets. One strategy to help influence 
this is to directly refer to the person’s Twitter™ handle or use the direct message facility for mutual 
followers. Twitter™ is particularly useful for the speed in which information can be shared, for 
example, when it was recently announced that NHS England were to take over the work on safe 
 Page 12 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
13
staffing levels from NICE, Twitter™ witnessed a ‘storm’ with large numbers of people responding to 
the news.
Twitter™ also allows for social support, collaboration and contribution of stakeholders. This means 
that between stakeholder events, patients, students and healthcare professionals can actively be 
involved in discussions about a study, network with those with similar interests, help to share news 
and raise the study profile (Morrow et al., 2010). It is anticipated that because the use of social 
networking platforms is growing so rapidly, they have the potential to significantly enhance health 
research (Burke-Garcia and Scally, 2014). Twitter™ in particular provides innovative means of intra-
professional communication and information sharing, helping nursing to advance and grow stronger 
(Ferguson, 2013). 
The original aim for using Twitter™ for our healthcare study specifically was to raise awareness of 
our research from the onset, in anticipation that this will be beneficial for dissemination to a wide 
range of professionals, leaders, managers and academics later in the publication process. By 
engaging in Twitter™ and the communication it facilitates, we are able to gauge ideas about who our 
key audiences are and what they are concerned with. We can follow those whose tweets indicate 
that they are interested in areas / issues in nursing that are related to our study and have access to 
their networks of followers and those they are following. Understanding what is important to 
targeted networks of tweeters enables us to adapt our tweets accordingly in order to maximise 
interest from healthcare professionals and generate conversations about the research. We are 
building the network of people who will be the key audience for, and key users of the study findings 
thus facilitating or driving the impact of the research.
 Page 13 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
14
Social Media and Research – What do we know, and what are the benefits?
The academic literature on the use of social networking platforms such as Twitter™ for research 
purposes is in its infancy, thus is unsurprisingly limited. One recent paper, however, discusses how 
social media communications can reveal insight into a university’s prestige (Shields, 2015). This is 
because social media enables connections, thus providing a means for public engagement, 
institutional branding and research outputs. It was found that universities may even seek to preserve 
their elite status via Twitter™. The ranking of an institution increases the likelihood of followers and 
mentions, and the strongest predictor of a Twitter™ connection is an existing tie or mutual 
acquaintance (Shields, 2015). 
Many papers appear to comment on the use of social networking platforms within education, or as a 
tool to recruit participants for a research study (e.g. Cain and Chretien, 2013, O’Connor et al., 2013). 
Microblogs in particular have received little scholarly attention (Zhao and Rosson, 2009). Therefore, 
academics’ ability to make firm assertions on the use of social networking platforms for research 
purposes is said to be insufficient due to a lack of empirical and longitudinal studies within the area. 
Thus, there is inadequate knowledge regarding who uses microblogs and for what purposes (Burke-
Garcia and Scally, 2014; Boyd and Ellison, 2008; Antheunis et al., 2013; Moorley and Chinn, 2014a, 
Power, 2014). 
However, the extensive use of Twitter™ by health and nursing professional bodies such as the 
Nursing Midwifery Council (@nmcnews) (UK), Royal College of Nursing (@theRCN) (UK), American 
Nurses Association (@ANANursingWorld) and Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation 
(@anmfbetterhands), show that it is certainly viewed as an important tool for professional 
communication. Researchers, practitioners and organisations have all been found to use Twitter™ 
 Page 14 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
15
for professional conversations in order to enrich their own knowledge and to share ideas, links and 
resources with others (Moorley and Chinn, 2014a,b; Liebert, 2009; Boyd and Ellison, 2008; Reinhardt 
et al., 2009; Power, 2014). Arguably, one of the best ways to influence the type of information 
shared about us is to control it ourselves through a microblog profile in a professional community 
site (Mesko, 2013). Using social media for information sharing reveals an interesting shift towards 
more informal means of knowledge exchange. Researchers in particular are said to benefit from this 
because social networking platforms allow for rapid and reactive knowledge exchange; and this can 
encourage engagement, discussion and feedback about a research topic (Murdock et al., 2013; 
Fahlberg, 2015).
Twitter™ has the unique potential to reach a range of social groups, which can help to spark interest 
from a variety of diverse people, allowing the visibility of the research profile to be raised. Our study 
profile (@Nursing_Rounds) has a range of followers including front-line nurses, academics, doctors 
and senior leaders (see table 2). Moreover, because Twitter™ is an international platform, research 
studies have the potential to reach users on a global scale at a speed which is exponential (Ferguson, 
2013; Burke-Garcia and Scally, 2014; Liebert, 2009; Power, 2014). Therefore it is timely and relevant 
to consider use of social media to convey messages quickly and in real time to encourage debate and 
new insights for policy and practice. 
Twitter™ may also allow the sharing of information with people who may not traditionally have 
access to the academic literature. Most academic journals are expensive to access for those outside 
of academia, which means that platforms such as Twitter™ allow academic knowledge to be made 
accessible and from a ‘trusted voice’ (Biswas and Kirchherr, 2015; Burke-Garcia and Scally, 2014). 
Through Twitter™, researchers can listen to people in ways which would not be possible with more 
 Page 15 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
16
traditional forms of communication (Wald et al., 2007; Ferguson, 2013). Therefore, Twitter™ could 
be said to be a ‘research mediator’ enabling individuals, groups and organisations to access quality 
research (Sebba, 2013). This is particularly pertinent for our study because our intervention is 
specifically relevant to clinical nursing staff, a group arguably less likely to access academic literature 
(Jackson et al. 2015). We have also encouraged members of our advisory and stakeholder groups to 
follow us, who again, may have limited access to academic research. There are however risks in that 
the confidentiality of our stakeholder members, and also the trusts where the nurses work could be 
jeopardised.  This is an issue to consider when using Twitter™ for research because it is a public 
forum.
Within our study in particular, we have shared information in relation to our general progress, 
relevant articles on the intentional rounding intervention, and other news about our university. We 
have also strategically initiated communication on Twitter™, for example, we ‘tweeted’ a general 
message to indirectly thank those who had taken part in our online national survey. We did this to 
encourage others to complete it as well, and whilst it is difficult to assess the influence of this on our 
response rate, it may have served as a reminder. We also participated in a Twitter™ chat hosted by a 
nursing journal, which generated additional followers.
Can Twitter™ help researchers to generate Impact?
It is predicted that social media will continue to grow from being an optional activity to becoming a 
key vehicle for research dissemination (Burke-Garcia and Scally, 2014; Ferguson, 2013; Jackson et al., 
2015). The Research Excellence Framework (REF) governs that researchers must consider how to 
engage with users, support pathways to impact and thus drive social and public benefit from 
 Page 16 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
17
research. This is a crucial agenda for all universities (McKenna, 2015; Biswas and Kirchherr, 2015; 
Murdock, et al., 2013; McKenna, 2012).
The impact factor of the journal an article is published in, as well as the number of citations are 
commonly recognised measures of scientific impact. However, these traditional forms of impact 
generation are found to be lengthy and expensive e.g. cost of open access papers and may not reach 
communities outside of academia; therefore, it is proposed that social networking platforms such as 
Twitter™ can complement these existing methods, providing researchers with new and innovative 
ways to generate impact (Eysenbach, 2011; Social Care Research Impact, 2015). Twitter™ is 
particularly useful for impact generation because it enables researchers to share information about 
their publications to widespread audiences, which in turn increases the likelihood of downloads and 
potentially citations, and this is beneficial for all research studies. The more immediate access to 
credible research is certainly challenging the more traditional structures of dissemination; social 
media can therefore provide a vehicle for fast discovery of research for larger, more diverse 
audiences (Mollett et al., 2011; Jackson et al. 2015; McKenna, 2015).   
Priem and Costello (2010) investigated scholars’ attitudes and practices in relation to using Twitter™ 
to share citations. It was found that Twitter™ citations are uniquely conversational, yet viewed as a 
legitimate conduit. Scholars stated that Twitter™ enabled them to follow other academics, and they 
would share work, trusting its credibility as they would offline. Work was often shared if it was 
similar to their own research interests. One limitation mentioned was copyright restrictions, 
however, academics’ discussed how they could overcome this by simply mentioning authors and 
briefly describing the content of a piece of research, rather than uploading the paper. The reference 
or link to the publisher’s site could also be provided. 
 Page 17 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
18
Furthermore, Eysenbach (2011) investigated how the frequency of tweets could affect the number 
of citations of journal articles. This paper looked at articles within the Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, 17-19 months following their publications. It was found that articles which were highly 
tweeted were 11 times more likely to be cited than those articles with less tweets. The interest of 
research on social media is a likely indicator of the uptake of its real word, social relevance (Jackson 
et al. 2015). However, an important issue to address is that it is difficult to quantify the impact of 
publications on the internet, and because this area is in its infancy, it is unknown just how much 
research impact Twitter™ can generate. However, figure 1 shows an example from one of our own 
papers, a scoping review on 12 hour shift patterns published in this journal (Harris et al. 2015). This 
figure shows the IJNS altmetrics; altmetrics consider the impact research has outside of traditional 
scholarly publications, such as tweets, presentations and blogs (Baynes, 2012).
This illustrates how Twitter™ activity can positively increase the number of downloads and the 
research team found that downloads increased during the time when the paper was shared via 
Twitter™.
[Figure 1:  about here]
To further demonstrate the potential of utilising a Twitter™ account for a research study, Table 2 
shows our followers after six months of setting up our Twitter™ profile. Although this appears a 
moderate number, the potential reach of these followers can be demonstrated by the combined 
following of almost 150,000 accounts.  A breakdown reflecting the categories of followers is shown 
in table 2.
[Insert Table 2 about here]
 Page 18 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
19
We decided to strategically build and shape our audience because this can enable research 
dissemination to relevant people who have influence. For example, we purposefully followed 
members of our study advisory group, which includes NHS senior managers, practitioners and 
service users. We did this in an attempt to raise our profile throughout the study in preparation for 
generating research impact upon publication. In some cases these colleagues followed us back and 
thus enabled our tweets to reach their Twitter™ followers. We believe that the Twitter™ profile 
prepares the ground for when we finish our study, and also allows for ongoing engagement as the 
study progresses. 
Having said this, there are some limitations and caveats which should be considered, for example, 
although sharing research on Twitter™ is associated with a number of downloads, traditional means 
of dissemination are still crucial, and therefore we would suggest that researchers use both 
traditional journal publications and social media (McKenna, 2015), strategically using social media to 
publicise traditional publications as well as disseminating bite size outputs.
One issue we have come across is that tweets are a ‘moment in time’ and therefore can easily be 
forgotten or even missed. Although tweets are searchable, it is unlikely that users would take the 
time to scroll through to find them. Therefore, it is important to capitalise on the use of hash tags 
and to actively participate in Twitter™ chats in order to improve memorability and so tweets are 
more easily searched by those with specific interest in the area. Furthermore, timing of tweets is 
important to increase the number of people likely to see them. Academics are more likely to retweet 
before, during and after their commute to/from work (Reed and Attlee, 2015). This is unlikely to be 
as predictable for health professionals working in clinical areas with different shift patterns and 
 Page 19 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
20
seven days per week. Therefore, while we can plan to facilitate this, we can only go so far, because 
users have to retweet and reply to our posts, and also follow us. 
Twitter™ Setup: Practical Challenges Faced
In addition to the lack of academic literature on start-up advice, we also found that it was difficult to 
locate existing research microblogs without knowing their Twitter™ handles, therefore the team 
were unable to utilise an existing research study profile as a guide, as recommended by Mesko, 
(2013). This meant that the team were presented with narrow guidance on creating the profile page 
for the research study. Thus, we share some of the potential issues and strategies for other 
researchers to consider; these are summarised in Table 3.
[Insert Table 3 approximately here]
Identifying an appropriate, easily recognised ‘Twitter™ handle’ was an issue we faced early on. The 
intervention being studied is known as ‘intentional rounding’, however, within the literature this 
same intervention is often referred to by other names, such as nursing rounds and hourly rounds. It 
was therefore difficult to decide which name to use on our Twitter™ account. Furthermore, because 
of the limit of 15 characters, it was hard to narrow down the study into such a concise profile name, 
and still enable us to be identifiable to others (Mesko, 2013; Mollett et al., 2011). However, once the 
team had finalised the Twitter™ handle, we found that our chosen name was already assigned 
elsewhere although not utilised and therefore we resorted to using a similar name with an 
underscore (@Nursing_Rounds). It is recommended that other studies consider searching for 
existing Twitter™ accounts and to establish their Twitter™ handle as early as possible. We set up our 
profile name before we were ready to tweet, solely to ensure that we did not lose it. 
 Page 20 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
21
One of our aims was for our profile to appear ‘active’ before we started following senior 
professionals and large organisations. This is supported by Power (2014) who states that a user’s 
decision to follow a profile is based largely on the information shared. Establishing a list of followers 
is central to the success of the Twitter™ profile, increasing the likelihood of our posts being 
‘retweeted’, thus raising our profile. This meant that we had to come up with a number of tweets to 
post which were relevant and interesting. A barrier identified was that we did not have much to say 
in the beginning, naturally due to being in the early stages of the research (O’Connor et al., 2013). 
Another challenge was that some members of the team were less familiar with Twitter™, a barrier 
recognised within the academic literature by Antheunis et al., (2013). This meant that time had to be 
taken to train others. As social media is a continually changing landscape, this means that team 
members involved with the twitter™ profile will have to keep up-to-date on new developments, and 
is another issue to consider, as this will take time (Mesko, 2013). Keeping the Twitter™ profile active 
was viewed as necessary, it was recommended that ‘tweets’ should occur frequently to ensure that 
new followers are attracted to the page. Replies should be quick due to social media being a fast 
paced environment with the need for current information (Mollett et al., 2011; Qualman, 2011). This 
was another issue due to this being a time consuming process. When we first set up our Twitter™ 
account we aimed to tweet 1-2 times a day for the first 2-3 weeks to become established and then 
less often i.e. 1-2 times a week depending on what was happening in the research (enough to 
maintain interest but not enough for followers to get irritated with receiving too many tweets). 
Furthermore, we aimed for our posts to contain information about a mixture of topics, instead of 
solely talking about our own study, in recognition of advice by Qualman (2011). Furthermore, some 
members of the research team have their own Twitter™ accounts and retweeted and ‘favorited’ 
tweets from the intentional rounding study Twitter™ account to increase visibility of the account and 
encourage more followers and retweets. We did originally consider whether tweeting about the 
 Page 21 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
22
study from individual team members’ accounts would suffice, however, a study specific Twitter™ 
account gives a clearer focus to the study and continuity should there be any changes to the study 
personnel.
Permission had to be sought from team members and grant co-applicants working on the study with 
regards to sharing their information on Twitter™. Some members did not wish to be included on the 
Twitter™ profile, whereas others were happy to be included and to provide followers with their 
personal Twitter™ handles. This is something to consider before anything is posted regarding team 
members. Some academics are dubious about using social media for professional means and this can 
be challenging for other members of the research team. This can often be due to a lack of 
understanding (Ferguson, 2013), for example, some may frown upon publishing through popular 
media platforms because they may be viewed as less credible (Biswas and Kirchherr, 2015). The 
reasons for having a study specific Twitter™ account and progress with using it are regularly included 
on the agenda of our advisory group to clarify its purpose and alleviate any concerns.
The concern of receiving negative feedback from the public was also considered. The unstructured 
nature and also the anonymity element to Twitter™ can be to be difficult to control. Mandavilli 
(2011) stated that research is increasingly pulled apart on social media sites such as Twitter™.  
Should this occur, we planned that the principal investigator would monitor and deal with this to 
ensure that the research team was supported. The term troll is used to describe a person who 
attempts to cause friction by posting comments in an online community which disrupt or offends 
others (Moorley and Chinn, 2014b). Should you encounter an unsavoury follower, you can ‘block’ 
this user from your followers list (Mollett et al., 2011). 
 Page 22 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
23
Using Twitter™ for an NIHR-funded study: the concerns
In the UK, widespread use of Twitter™ by health professionals is considered by some to be slow 
(Power, 2014). Nursing in particular has been hesitant to realise the potential for the use of social 
media (Ferguson, 2013; Chinn and Foord, 2014, Snell 2015). Confidentiality, privacy and professional 
conduct are some of the key concerns (Antheunis et al., 2013; Mesko, 2013; George, 2011). The 
internet remains a controversial place, and for our study, it is an ethical and governance 
requirement to keep certain aspects of the research confidential, as we do offline, such as study site 
and participant details (Mullikin, 2015). Furthermore, pre-publication outputs about the research are 
not acceptable to some funding bodies and so it was important to check the funder’s guidelines 
before setting up the Twitter™ account. In our case the funder requires notification of all outputs 28 
days in advance and they considered setting up a Twitter™ account as an output. The UK National 
Institute for Health Research have an official Twitter™ account and actively support usage of the 
platform and they have provided a link to our Twitter™ account on their website.
The nature of information to be shared, and also whether information would be misused was 
another concern (Antheunis et al., 2013). We are careful that our tweets do not contain bias, or any 
attempt to sway others towards a particular opinion. Our NIHR-funded study aims to explore what is 
and what is not working with regards to the intervention of intentional rounding, we therefore have 
to be careful that we are not seen as trying to promote, or equally, be critical of the intervention. It 
is important that our tweets reflect the balanced position of equipoise held by the team. Mollett et 
al., (2011) proposes that researchers must ensure that they do not post radical views on Twitter™. 
Another issue to consider is that messages on Twitter™ are short and therefore can be 
misunderstood. Researchers may also be more likely to promote positive findings from research, and 
less willing to discuss limitations. This may be due to the pressure of citations and the demonstration 
of research impact.
 Page 23 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
24
Conclusion
Opportunities and expectations for researchers to use social media will increase. The use of social 
media is growing rapidly and gaining popularity. It provides a time and cost-effective way to share 
information. Although academics use social media, it is relatively rare for a specific research study or 
programme to have a designated Twitter™ account. We expect that this will change. We anticipate 
that our strategic use of Twitter™ will support us to generate relationships and networks with key 
interested stakeholders and that in turn these relationships and networks will facilitate reciprocal 
engagement in the challenge of generating and implementing research evidence in practice to 
produce societal impact. In this paper we have discussed that the use of Twitter™ and other social 
media platforms is a useful process in a pathway to impact bu24 is only one element of a strategy. 
Using the case example of our research we consider some of the practical challenges for researchers. 
We do not suggest in any way that social media platforms should replace or compromise working in 
close collaboration with service users and health service providers throughout. However, Twitter™
provides rapid, widespread, international, cost-effective communication and as such offers a 
powerful tool for researchers, which is surely too promising to ignore.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the support of research team colleagues, Sarah Sims, Ros 
Levenson, Stephen Gourlay, Sally Brearley, Robert Grant, Giampiero Favato and our study advisory 
group.
Funding Acknowledgement:
This project was funded by the National Institute for Health Research Health Service & Delivery 
Research (project number 13/07/87) 
 Page 24 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
25
Department of Health Disclaimer:
The views and opinions expressed therein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect 
those of the HS&DR, NIHR, NHS or the Department of Health.
                                 
References
Antheunis, M. L., Tates, K. and Nieboer, T. E. (2013). Patients’ and health professionals’ use of social 
media in health care: Motives, barriers and expectations. Patient Education and Counselling, 92(3), 
pp. 426-431.
Archibald, M. M. and Clark, A. M. (2014). Twitter and nursing research: how diffusion of innovation 
theory can help uptake. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 70(3), pp. 3-5.
Bauman, P. (2010). Number of Doctors and Nurses on Twitter. Available at: 
http://healthissocial.com/twitter/number-of-doctors-and-nurses-on-twitter/ Accessed: 12 June 
2015)
Baynes, G. (2012). Scientometrics, bibliometrics, altmetrics: Some introductory advice for the lost 
and bemused. Insights, 25(3), pp.311–315.
Biswas, A. and Kirchherr, J. (2015). Citations are not enough: Academic promotion panels must take 
into account a scholar’s presence in popular media. LSE The Impact Blog, 9 April. Available at: 
http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2015/04/09/academic-promotion-scholars-popular-
media/ (Accessed: 12 June 2015).
 Page 25 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
26
Boyd, D. M. and Ellison, N. B. (2008). Social network sites: definition, history and scholarship. Journal 
of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13, pp. 210-230. 
Burke-Garcia, A. and Scally, G. (2014). Trending now: future directions in digital media for the public 
health sector. Journal of Public Health, 36(4), pp. 527-534.
Cain, J. and Chretien, K. (2013). Exploring Social Media’s Potential in Interprofessional Education. 
Journal of Research in Interprofessional Practice and Education, 3(2), pp. 1-7.  
Chinn, T. and Foord, D. (2014). Celebrities and Trolls… the many myths of Twitter for nurses… 
busted! NHS Employers, 30 June. Available at: http://www.nhsemployers.org/blog/2014/06/the-
many-myths-of-twitter-for-nurses (Accessed: 28 September 2015).
Chinn, T.  (2015). Blogshot reflections. 13 June. Available at: 
https://mobile.twitter.com/AgencyNurse/status/609637100904927233 Accessed: 25 July 2015. 
Clark, A. M. and Thompson, D. R. (2015). Have research assessment exercises improved the quality 
of nursing research? Journal of Advanced Nursing. doi: 10.1111/jan.12751
Department of Health, (2012a). Compassion in Practice - nursing, midwifery and care staff: our vision 
and strategy, Leeds: Department of Health/NHS Commissioning Board.  Accessed on 28.09.15 via 
http://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/compassion-in-practice.pdf
Department of Health, (2012b). PM Announces New Focus on Quality and Nursing Care. Press 
Releases - GOV.UK, 6 January. Accessed on 28.09.15 via https://www.gov.uk/government/news/pm-
announces-new-focus-on-quality-and-nursing-care
 Page 26 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
27
Department of Health, (2013). Report of the Mid Staffordshire Foundation NHS Trust Public Inquiry, 
(Chair Robert Francis QC), Volumes 1-3. HC-898-I-III. London: The Stationery Office. Accessed on 
28.09.15 via 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20150407084003/http://www.midstaffspublicinquiry.co
m/report
Ellison, N. B. (2007). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship. Journal of 
Computer‐Mediated Communication, 13(1), pp. 210-230.
Epstein, D., Farina, C. and Heidt, J. (2014). The value of words: narrative as evidence in policy 
making. Evidence & Policy, 10(2) pp. 243-258.
Eysenbach, G. (2011). Can tweets predict citations? metrics of social impact based on twitter and 
correlation with traditional metrics of scientific impact. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 13(4), 
e123
Fahlberg, B. (2015). Leveraging social media to Facilitate Recruitment and Dissemination in Doctoral 
Research. Official Journal of the International Network for Doctoral Education in Nursing, 3(1), 10-
14.
Ferguson, C. (2013). It's time for the nursing profession to leverage social media. Journal of advanced 
nursing, 69(4), pp. 745-747.
George, R. (2011). “Friending Facebook?” A minicourse on the use of social media by health 
professionals. Journal of Continuing Education in the Health Professions, 31(3), pp. 215-219.
 Page 27 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
28
Grajales, F. J., Sheps, S., Ho, K., Novak-Lauscher, H. and Eysenbach, G. (2014). Social media: A review 
and tutorial of applications in medicine and health care. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 16(2), 
e13
Grant, J. (2015). The nature, scale and beneficiaries of research impact: An initial analysis of Research 
Excellence Framework (REF) 2014 impact case studies. Available at: 
http://www.hefce.ac.uk/media/HEFCE,2014/Content/Pubs/Independentresearch/2015/Analysis,of,
REF,impact/Analysis_of_REF_impact.pdf (Accessed: 20 August 2015). 
Harris, R., Sims, S., Parr, J. and Davies, N. (2015). Impact of 12h shift patterns in nursing: a scoping 
review, International Journal of Nursing Studies, 52(2): 605-34
Harris, R., Gourlay, S., Ross, F., Sims, S. and Levenson, R. (2014) Intentional rounding in hospital 
wards: What works, for whom and in what circumstances? Research protocol [Online] National 
Institute for Health Research, HS&DR project no: 13/07/87, available at: 
http://www.nets.nihr.ac.uk/projects/hsdr/130787 (last accessed 6 May 2015)
Harris, R., Kelly, D., Hunt, J. A., Plant, H., Kelley, K., Richardson, A. and Sitzia, J. (2008). Accessing elite 
nurses for research: reflections on the theoretical and practical issues of telephone interviewing. 
Journal of Research in Nursing, 13(3), pp. 236-248. 
Hicks, D. (2012). Performance-based university research funding systems. Research Policy 41 (2012) 
251– 261
 Page 28 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
29
Jackson, D., Waine, M. L. and Hutchinson, M. (2015). Blogs as a way to elicit feedback on research 
and engage stakeholders. The International Journal of Research Methodology in Nursing and 
Healthcare, 22(3), pp. 41-47.
Java, A., Song, X., Finin, T., and Tseng, B. (2007). Why We Twitter: Understanding Microblogging 
Usage and Communities. Procedings of the Joint 9th WEBKDD and 1st SNA-KDD Workshop 2007: 
Springer  Accessed on 28.09.15 via http://ebiquity.umbc.edu/_file_directory_/papers/369.pdf
Jendoubi, S., Martin, A., Lietard, L. and Yaghlane, B. (2014). Classification of message spreading in a 
heterogeneous social network. International Conference on Information Processing and 
Management of Uncertainty in Knowledge-Based Systems (IPMU), pp. 66-75.
Kwak, H., Lee, C., Park, H. & Moon, S. (2010) What is Twitter, a social network or a news media? In 
Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World Wide Web (pp. 591-600). ACM. Accessed 
on 28.9.15 via http://www.eecs.wsu.edu/~assefaw/CptS580-06/papers/2010-www-twitter.pdf
Liebert, M. A. (2009). Twittering Healthcare: social media and medicine. Telemedicine and e-Health, 
15(6), pp. 507-510. 
Mandavilli, A. (2011). Trial by twitter. Nature, 469, pp. 286-297.
McKenna, H. (2012) RAE and ERA – Spot the difference. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 49, 
pp. 375-377.
McKenna, H. (2015). Research Excellence Framework: from a 2014 curate’s egg to a 2020 golden egg 
Keynote Presentation 22th April 2015, RCN International Nursing Research Conference, Nottingham 
 Page 29 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
30
Accessed on 28.09.15 via 
http://www.rcn.org.uk/development/research_and_innovation/rs/Annual_research_conference/res
earch2015/keynote_speakers_2015
McRory, R. (2014). UK Social Media Statistics for 2014. Rose McRory social management 
media. http://tinyurl.com/kcyh56t  accessed 23/04/15
Meade, C. M., Bursell, A. L., and Ketelsen, L. (2006). Effects of nursing rounds on patients’ call light 
use, satisfaction and safety. American Journal of Nursing, 106(9), pp. 58-70.
Merrifield, N. (2014). Researchers to investigate value of intentional ward rounds. Nursing Times (29 
Dec 2014) available at: http://www.nursingtimes.net/nursing-
practice/specialisms/management/researchers-to-investigate-value-of-intentional-ward-
rounds/5077824.article Last accessed 6 May 2015
Mesko, B. (2013). Social Media in Clinical Practice. Springer: London
Mollett, A., Moran, D. and Dunleavy, P. (2011). Using twitter in university research, teaching and 
impact activities, a guide for academics and researchers, LSE Public Policy Group, pp. 1-11.
Moorley, C. and Watson, R. (2015). NMC code advice on digital communications. Nursing Times, 111: 
14, 22-23.
Moorley, C. and Chinn, T. (2014a). Using social media for continuous professional development. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing, 71(4), pp. 713-717.
 Page 30 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
31
Moorley, C. and Chinn, T. (2014b). Nursing and twitter: creating an online community using 
hashtags. Collegian, 21(2), pp. 103-109.f
Morrow, E. M. (2016). The Impact of Higher Education Leadership, Management and Governance 
Research: Mining the 2014 Research Excellence Framework Impact Case Studies. Forthcoming 
Research report. Leadership Foundation for Higher Education: London.
Morrow, E., Ross, F., Grocott, P. and Bennet, J. (2010). A model and measure for quality service user 
involvement in health research. International Journal of Consumer Studies, 34(5), pp. 532-539.
Morton, S. (2015a). Progressing research impact assessment: A ‘contributions’ approach. Research 
Evaluation 24(4): 405-419.
Morton, S. (2015b). Creating research impact: the roles of research users in interactive research 
mobilisation. Evidence & Policy, 11(1), pp. 35-55.
Mullikin, D. (2015) Anonymity online is ‘safe’ but can hinder a discussion’s validity. Nursing Times, 
111 (12), 7 
Murdock, A., Shariff, R. and Wilding, K. (2013). Knowledge exchange between academia and third 
sector. Evidence & Policy, 9(3), pp. 419-430.
National Nursing Research Unit. (2012). Policy+  Intentional rounding. What is the evidence?
http://www.kcl.ac.uk/nursing/research/nnru/policy/By-Issue-Number/Policy--Issue-35final.pdf (Last 
accessed: 28 September 2015)
 Page 31 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
32
Nursing Management (2015) ‘Ward rounding study will find out if quality of care is improved’, 
Nursing Management, 21 (9), 7.
Nursing Standard (2014) ‘Ward rounding approach will undergo research’, Nursing Standard, 29(8), 
pp. 16-18.
O'Connor A., Jackson L., Goldsmith L. and Skirton H. (2013) Can I get a retweet please? Health 
research recruitment and the Twittersphere. Journal of Advanced Nursing 70(3), 599–609
Peckham, S. Willmott, M. Allen, P. Anderson, S. and Goodwin, N. (2008). Assessing the impact of the 
NHS Service Delivery and Organisation Research and Development Programme. Evidence & Policy 4, 
4, 313-330
Power, A. 2014, Twitter’s potential to enhance professional networking, British Journal of Midwifery, 
23, 1, 65-67
Priem, J and Costello, K, L, 2010, How and why scholars cite on twitter, ASIST/School of Information 
and Library Science, pp22-27 Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and 
Technology 11/2010; 47(1):1 - 4. DOI: 10.1002/meet.14504701201
Qualman, E, 2011, Socialnomics: How social media transforms the way we live and do business. John 
Wiley & Sons, New Jersey. Cited in  Moorley, C. and Chinn, T. (2014b). Nursing and twitter: creating 
an online community using hashtags. Collegian, 21(2), pp. 103-109.
 Page 32 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
33
Reed, M. and Attlee, A. (2015) Top Twitter tips for research impact. Available at 
http://www.mayaproject.org/blog/2015/10/4/top-twitter-tips-for-academics [last accessed 18 
January 2016]
REF (2011). Assessment Framework and Guidance on Submissions. REF 02.2011 (as of 28 July 2014) 
Available at: www.ref.ac.uk/pubs/2011-02/ [last accessed 27 September 2015]
Reinhardt, W., Ebner, M., Beham, G. and Costa, C. (2009), How people are using Twitter during 
Conferences. In V. Hornung-Praehauser, M. Luckmann, (Eds.), Creativity and Innovation 
Competencies on the Web, Proceedings of the 5th EduMedia 2009, Salzburg, pp. 145-156.
Richardson, J., Grose, J., Nelmes, P., Parra, G. & Linares, M. (2016) Tweet if you want to be 
sustainable: a thematic analysis of a Twitter chat to dis-cuss sustainability in nurse education. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing online early doi: 10.1111/jan.12900
Schotten, M. and el Aisati, M. (2014). The rise of national research assessments – and the tools and 
data that make them work. Research Evaluation & Funding, Elsevier 17.12.14 Accessed on 28.09.15 
via http://www.elsevier.com/connect/the-rise-of-national-research-assessments-and-the-tools-and-
data-that-make-them-work
Sebba, J. (2013) ‘An exploratory review of the role of research mediators in social science’, Evidence 
& Policy, 9(3), pp. 391-408.
Shields, R, 2015, Following the leader? Network models of “world-class” universities on twitter, 
Higher Educucation, Online Early DOI 10.1007/s10734-015-9900-z pp 1-16 
 Page 33 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
34
Snell, J. (2015). Preparing to fly into the Twittersphere. Nursing Standard 30, 3, 20-21
Social Care Research Impact (2015) Twitter http://socialcareresearchimpact.org.uk/impact-
tools/twitter/ accessed: 8/9/15
UK Parliament (2015) Nurses: Written question (20 March 2015 c 228618w), Available at: 
http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-
question/Commons/2015-03-20/228618 (last accessed 6 May 2015)
Ventola, C. L. (2014). Social media and health care professionals: benefits, risks, and best practices. 
P&T, 39(7), 491-499.
Wald, H. S., Dube, C. E. and Anthony, D. C. (2007). Untangling the web- the impact of internet use on 
healthcare and the physician-patient relationship, Patient Education And Counseling 68, 3, 218-24
Witty. A. (2013). Encouraging a British Invention Revolution: Sir Andrew Witty’s Review of 
Universities growth – final report and recommendations. London: Department for Business 
Innovation & Skills. Available at: 
www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/249720/bis-13-1241-
encouraging-a-britishinvention-revolution-andrew-witty-review-R1.pdf (last accessed 27 February 
2015)
Zhao, D. and Rosson, M. B. (2009). How and why people Twitter: the role that micro-blogging plays 
in informal communication at work. Proceedings of the ACM 2009 international conference on 
Supporting group work. Accessed 28.09.15 via 
 Page 34 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
35
http://www.pensivepuffin.com/dwmcphd/syllabi/info447_au10/readings/zhao.rosson.Twitter.G
ROUP09.pdf
 Page 35 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
36
Figure 1: Example of paper Altmetrics™ as an illustration of how Twitter™ contributes to 
engagement.
Based on Altmetic™ data retrieved 11.8.15 (available at http://elsevier.altmetric.com/details/2845076#score)
 Page 36 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
37
Box 1: The Context – explaining the study
Our focus on finding innovative ways to communicate and engage with research users is 
particularly relevant given the public and media interest in care issues arising from perceptions of 
“failure” in the NHS.  One policy recommendation made following the public inquiry into failings in 
mid-Staffordshire (Department of Health, 2013) was that “Regular interaction and engagement 
between nurses and patients and those close to them should be systematised though regular ward 
rounds”.   In the USA, this structured process has been labelled ‘intentional rounding’, and refers to 
nursing staff carrying out regular checks, usually hourly, with individual patients to address their 
positioning, pain, personal needs and placement of items. Some published studies in the USA have 
found benefits of intentional rounding for patient care (e.g. Meade et al., 2006), including a 
reduction in call bell use, falls and pressure sores and increased patient satisfaction. However, there 
is little research to support this in the UK, and research that does exist has been criticised for its 
design weaknesses (NNRU, 2012).  Our study (Harris et al., 2014), funded by the National Institute 
for Health Research, therefore seeks to generate an evidence base for intentional rounding and to 
provide the necessary information to successfully guide the development and implementation of 
intentional rounding across the UK. The research adopts a realistic evaluation approach and seeks to 
answer the question: ‘What is it about intentional rounding in hospital wards that works, for whom 
and in what circumstances?’
The multi method design explores how intentional rounding is being implemented through a 
national survey of all NHS acute trusts in England (n=155) and case studies in three hospital trusts.  
In the final phase, data will be synthesised to establish the potential outcomes of intentional 
rounding, the underlying mechanisms which explain how it works and the key contexts behind its 
success or failure.
Intentional rounding has gained national interest and been linked to the national 
compassion in practice campaign led by the Chief Nursing Officer (Department of Health, 2012a).   
The recommendation received strong support from the government through the endorsement of 
the Prime Minister in January 2012 (Department of Health, 2012b) and ongoing discussion including 
parliamentary questions (UK Parliament, 2015).  Interest in our study has been shown in “research 
round-up” reports in the professional nursing press (Merrifield, 2014; Nursing Standard, 2014; 
Nursing Management, 2015). (See: http://www.nets.nihr.ac.uk/projects/hsdr/130787 for more 
details about our study)
 Page 37 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
38
Table 1:  Unravelling Twitter™ jargon
Term
Explanation
Tweets
Twitter™ enables users to send messages known as ‘tweets’, which can comprise 
of a maximum of 140 characters. This encourages succinct and rapid sharing of 
information (Moorley & Chinn, 2014b; Liebert 2009; Power, 2014). The sharing of 
hyperlinks, videos, articles and ‘Blogshots’ can enhance tweets, allowing for users 
to obtain additional information (Grajales et al., 2014; Power, 2014). 
Blogshots
 ‘Blogshots’ allow for more in depth messages to be shared than regular tweets 
because more text can be included within them. They are often created in 
programs such as Microsoft PowerPoint, and provide quick bursts of information. 
They are less formal and less lengthy than a blog, but more detailed than a tweet. 
They are succinct enough to read relatively quickly, but detailed enough for 
readers to obtain more detail on a topic. They can contain pictures and colourful 
text, and therefore often receive more attention than tweets because they stand 
out within the newsfeed. Blogshots can be uploaded as a photograph; however, 
they cannot contain hyperlinks or imbedded video clips (Chinn, 2015). 
Follower
If users ‘follow’ an account, they subscribe to their tweets (Moorley & Chinn, 
2014b; Liebert 2009; Power, 2014). These tweets will therefore appear within the 
user’s ‘home feed’ (Mollett et al., 2011). The more followers an account has, the 
wider the audience the tweets can reach if they ‘retweet’.
Hashtags
Hashtags (#) are a type of information indexing; they are used in front of 
particular terms in order for messages to be grouped together on a certain topic. 
Thus, users with shared interests are able to exchange opinions, and participate in 
conversations regardless of whether they are following one another or not. For 
example, #intentionalrounding could be added to a tweet in order for users who 
may not necessarily follow our account to access our message. This can increase 
the likelihood of acquiring new followers as well. Hashtags are useful because they 
allow information to be easily organised and therefore easy to locate for the 
anticipated audience (Power, 2014; Shields, 2015). Popular hashtags may attract 
more attention, for example #nursing (Mollett et al., 2011).
Retweet
The ‘retweet’ feature on Twitter™ permits users to share information from an 
original source to their own followers; receiving a retweet is quite affirming for 
researchers. Users who retweet our posts can also encourage new users to follow 
us (Moorley & Chinn, 2014b; Reinhardt et al., 2009; Grajales et al., 2014; Fahlberg, 
2015). Retweeting other relevant research can also help to attract attention from 
other professionals, and can increase knowledge sharing (Mollett et al., 2011). It is 
also possible to ‘reply’ to a tweet directly (O’Connor et al., 2013).
‘Favorite’
If users ‘favorite’ a tweet, this will be saved onto their ‘favorites’ list. This means 
that they keep a record of articles/posts of interest. This can be quite affirming to 
users (O’Connor et al., 2013). 
 Page 38 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
39
Twitter™ 
Handle and 
‘mentions’
To ensure that a particular user receives a tweet, the message can be prefaced 
with the person’s Twitter™ handle (their unique Twitter™ username which begins 
with the @ sign, for example, ours is @Nursing_Rounds. This is known as a 
‘mention’ and can encourage others to ‘retweet’ (resulting in a message being 
exposed to a number of users), and may also encourage additional ‘followers’
(Shields, 2015; Mesko, 2013; Moorley & Chinn, 2014b; O’Connor et al., 2013).
Profile 
picture
A profile picture can be uploaded to the Twitter™ profile in order for users to 
visually represent themselves (O’Connor et al., 2013). 
Bio
Twitter™ offers users the chance to provide a short ‘bio’ at the beginning of their 
profile. This can be a maximum of 160 characters; and should provide an 
interesting snapshot of the account in order to encourage followers (Mollett et al., 
2011).
 Page 39 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
40
Table 2: @Nursing_Rounds Twitter™ followers six months after setting up the account1 by category 
and number of followers 
Follower Category
No. following
Followers’ followers 
Nurse – “front-line”
10
3,251
Doctor - “front-line”
3
7,931
Nurse manager/ director
5
2,652
National/strategic nursing leader
3
5241
Academic
7
13,783
Healthcare organisation
7
37,400
Local institution/research team
6
4,774
Other
5
73,571
Total
46
148,603
117th September 2015 
                                                          
 Page 40 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
41
Table 3:  Our Recommendations: A Guide for Researchers
Recommendation
Explanation
1.
Search and establish your Twitter™ 
handle as early as possible, and 
select a name which is easily 
recognised
Your preferred handle could already be in use, and so you will need 
to establish an alternative which is most fitting to explain your study. 
Punctuation marks can be used (e.g. underscores) if your preferred 
choice is already taken.
2.
Check whether you need to apply for 
approval from your funder
Your Twitter™ account may need to be disclosed to your funder.
3.
Appear ‘active’ prior to following 
others
This will increase the likelihood of retweets; incomplete or inactive 
accounts may be less appealing for others to follow. 
4.
Ensure tweets do not contain bias 
and maintain equipoise
Keep tweets/retweets balanced to avoid swaying towards a 
particular viewpoint. This is crucial for research projects in progress. 
5.
Follow relevant people who may 
lever impact  (i.e. leaders, patient 
advocates, managers, academics, as 
well as those whose tweets indicate 
interest in your topic)
This is likely to raise awareness of your profile and networking 
opportunities with people who have similar interests. This will help 
to build your audience and influence. 
6.
Once you find relevant people to 
follow, access their network of 
followers
This can be useful to locate people, and to find new people with 
similar interests.
7
Engage in professional conversations
This raises awareness of your research and can places it in the wider 
health and social care context. 
8.
Share interesting links, ideas and 
resources on your topic, as well as 
other topics. 
This helps to show your interests, build your followers and 
ultimately raise awareness of your research. It also encourages 
engagement, discussion and feedback. You can act as a research 
‘mediator’, enabling individuals, groups and organisations to access 
 Page 41 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
42
quality research.
9.
Strategically build and shape your 
audience
Include your Twitter™ handle in your email signature and promote it 
through word of mouth, on presentation slides, and during 
stakeholder and advisory group meetings to raise the profile of your 
study and to prepare for impact generation upon publication. This 
can enable research dissemination to relevant people who have 
influence.
10.
Ensure confidentiality 
Remember Twitter™ is a public forum; always obtain permission to 
share information about people in the research team.
11.
Strategically initiate communication
This can encourage people to get involved in your project, for 
example, tweeting in response to comments in editorials or 
publications by others related to our study topic.
12.
Participate in Twitter™ chats
This can facilitate information sharing and can also raise awareness 
of your research with new people interested in the topic. 
13.
Directly refer to a person by using 
their Twitter™ handle
It is more likely that the person will read the tweet; Twitter™ is a 
busy platform where messages can be easily missed. 
14.
Use Twitter™ to complement 
existing methods of impact 
generation
Twitter™ can be used as a vehicle for fast discovery of research for 
diverse audiences, increasing the likelihood of downloads, and 
potentially citations. Interest on social media is an indicator of 
uptake in the real world. 
15.
Capitalise on the use of hashtags
Tweets represent a ‘moment in time’, thus can be easily missed; 
using hashtags can ensure that tweets are more easily located.
16.
Strategically schedule the time you 
tweet to suit the audience you want 
to reach
Academics are more likely to tweet before and after work, often 
during their commute. However, healthcare professionals often 
work various shift patterns and so access tweets at other times. 
Tweet during the most appropriate times for your followers. 
17.
Separate study accounts from 
personal accounts
This gives a clearer focus and continuity should any changes occur 
with study personnel. 
 Page 42 of 42
Accepted Manuscript
43
18.
Researchers and others can use their 
personal accounts to retweet the 
study account 
This can increase the visibility of the study, and can encourage more 
followers. When people put a face to the account, they may be more 
likely to show interest. 
19.
Select a team member to deal with 
potential negative comments/issues 
or inappropriate followers
Negative comments/“spam” can be deleted and the user can be 
‘blocked’, but it is important to select a person to check for this. 
20.
Tweet regularly. 
Set aside time to tweet; and schedule alternative members of the 
research team to tweet over holiday and leave periods. 
