 UC San Francisco
UC San Francisco Previously Published Works
Title
Variation in quality of urgent health care provided during commercial virtual visits
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/45q1h5ch
Journal
JAMA Internal Medicine, 176(5)
ISSN
2168-6106
Authors
Schoenfeld, AJ
Davies, JM
Marafino, BJ
et al.
Publication Date
2016-05-01
DOI
10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.8248
Supplemental Material
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/45q1h5ch#supplemental
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
 Variation In Quality Of Care Provided During Commercial Virtual Visits In Urgent 
Care: A Standardized Patient Audit Study 
 
Adam J. Schoenfeld M.D.1,2, Jason M. Davies M.D., Ph.D1,2,4, Ben J. Marafino B.S.1,2,  
Mitzi Dean M.S, M.H.A.1,2, Colette DeJong B.A.1,2,8, Naomi S. Bardach M.D., M.A.S.1,2,5,
Dhruv S. Kazi M.D., M.S.2,3, W. John Boscardin Ph.D.3,7, Grace A. Lin M.D., M.A.S.1-3, 
Reena Duseja, M.D.2,7, Y John Mei A.B. 1,2,8, Ateev Mehrotra M.D., M.P.H.9, and R. 
Adams Dudley M.D., M.B.A.1-3,6
Center for Healthcare Value1, Philip R. Lee Institute for Health Policy Studies2, 
Departments of Medicine3, Neurosurgery4, Pediatrics5, Epidemiology and Biostatistics6, 
and Emergency Medicine7, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), San 
Francisco, California, USA; UC Berkeley-UCSF Joint Medical Program8, Berkeley, 
California, USA; Harvard Medical School9, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 
Running title: Variation In Quality Of Care Provided During Commercial Virtual 
Visits In Urgent Care: A Standardized Patient Audit Study 
Word count: Abstract: 317 Manuscript: 2950
Corresponding author: Adam J. Schoenfeld, MD; Philip R. Lee Institute for Health 
Policy Studies, 3333 California Street Suite 265, Box 0936, San Francisco, CA 94118 
Phone: 415-476-8617
Email: adam.schoenfeld@ucsf.edu
Conflict of Interest Notification: None 
Funding: This project was supported by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s Changes
in Health Care Financing and Organization Program, Philip R. Lee Institute for Health 
Policy Studies Innovation Fund, the National Institute of Minority Health and Health 
Disparities (NIMHD), National Institutes of Health, through grant No R25MD006832, 
and the Grove Foundation.
1
 Abstract 
Importance
Commercial virtual visits are an increasingly popular model of care for the management 
of common, acute illnesses. In commercial virtual visits, patients access a website to be 
connected synchronously—via videoconference, telephone, or webchat—to a physician 
with whom they have no prior relationship. There has been no assessment of whether the 
care delivered through those websites is similar, or whether quality varies among the 
sites.
Objective
To assess the variation in quality of care among virtual visit companies.
Design
We performed an audit study using trained standardized patients.
Setting 
The standardized patients presented to commercial virtual visit companies with six 
common, acute illnesses (ankle pain, streptococcal pharyngitis, viral pharyngitis, acute 
rhinosinusitis, low back pain, and recurrent urinary tract infection).
Participants 
The eight commercial virtual visit websites with the highest web traffic. 
2
 Main Outcome Measures
The primary outcomes were completeness of histories and physical examinations, naming
the correct diagnosis (versus an incorrect diagnosis or not naming any diagnosis), and 
adherence to guidelines of key management decisions.
Results 
Standardized patients completed 599 commercial virtual visits from May 2013 to July 
2014. Histories and physical examinations were complete in 69.6% (95% confidence 
interval [CI], 67.7%-71.6%) of virtual visits, diagnoses were correctly named in 76.5% 
(CI, 72.9%-79.9%), and key management decisions were adherent to guidelines in 54.3%
(CI, 50.2%-58.3%). Rates of guideline-adherent care ranged from 34.4% to 66.1% across 
the eight websites. Variation across websites was significantly greater for viral 
pharyngitis and acute rhinosinusitis (12.8-82.1%) than for streptococcal pharyngitis and 
low back pain (74.6-96.5%) or ankle pain and recurrent urinary tract infection (3.4-
40.4%). There was no statistically significant variation in guideline adherence by mode of
communication (video vs. telephone vs. webchat). 
Conclusions 
We found significant variation in quality among companies providing virtual visits for 
management of common acute illnesses. There was more variation in performance for 
some conditions than for others, but there was no variation by mode of communication.  
3
 Commercial virtual visits are a new form of physician-patient interaction in which 
patients use websites to request synchronous (live) consultation—via web 
videoconference, telephone, or webchat—with a physician whom they have not 
previously met. Commercial virtual visit companies have no in-person care option.1  
Instead, advertisements for commercial virtual visit companies emphasize easy access to 
care, especially acute care, over the web.2 This may be appealing, as difficulty accessing 
timely care for acute problems from local brick-and-mortar providers (primary care 
practices, retail clinics, and urgent care centers) is common. In 2013, less than half of US 
adults reported being able to get same- or next-day appointments with their physicians 
and less than 40% reported being able to get care after hours without going to the 
emergency department.3  
Commercial virtual visit companies have experienced rapid growth. One company 
reports a user base of over 6 million people.2  Acceptance by payers is also rising: one of 
the nation’s larger insurers, Anthem, has launched its own national virtual visit initiative.4 
Moreover, the percentage of large employers offering virtual visits tripled from 2010 to 
20125 and the number of virtual visits is projected to continue to grow rapidly in the near 
future.6  
In response to this trend, some state medical boards have placed limits on how virtual 
visits can be performed. Some only allow telemedicine in situations in which there is 
already an ongoing physician-patient relationship. Others require that a virtual visit occur
by videoconference (rather than telephone or webchat), despite a lack of evidence 
4
 regarding the optimal mode of virtual visit communication.7-10  Recently, the Federal 
Trade Commission has commented not only on the growth of interstate virtual visits, but 
also on the uncertainty over which government agencies should oversee them.11 In 
addition, the industry organization for commercial virtual visit companies, the American 
Telemedicine Association (ATA), is developing voluntary standards for its members to 
consider.1  
The urgency of the need to develop either a regulatory framework or industry-
promulgated standards will depend, in part, on how much quality of care varies among 
virtual visit companies. If variation is large, then characteristics of companies or their 
processes of care likely influence the quality of the care patients receive. This would 
constitute a rationale to consider standards or regulations to protect patients. 
To measure the variation in performance among commercial virtual visit companies, we
used audit methodology to evaluate the quality of care provided by the companies with
the  highest  volume  of  web traffic.  We  selected six  conditions  that  the  companies
advertised that they treat, for which there are evidence-based guidelines, and that have
been used in previous studies to measure quality.12-19 We trained standardized patients to
present as mystery shoppers with these conditions and gathered information on processes
of care and decision-making. In addition, since some states require virtual visits to occur
by  videoconference,7-10 we  compared  quality  of  care  by  mode  of  communication
(videoconference vs. telephone vs. webchat).
5
 Methods:
Identification of commercial virtual visit companies
We decided a priori to study the eight most frequently visited (as determined by Alexa 
Rankings, www.alexa.com) companies meeting the eligibility criteria (see supplementary 
appendix). These were Ameridoc, Amwell, ConsultaDr, DoctoronDemand, MDAligne, 
MDLive, MeMD, and NowClinic.
Mode of Communication
All visits were initiated by a standardized patient (description of standardized patients is 
below) visiting a company website. Most companies offered encounters only through 
videoconferencing or telephone. When given a choice as to visit modality, standardized 
patients were instructed to a use a coin flip to choose between telephone and 
videoconference.  On occasion, the virtual visit physician would override the 
standardized patient’s choice and proceed with a different mode for technical or 
convenience reasons (video, telephone, or webchat).
Selection of Cases
Six clinical case vignettes were designed in consultation with a panel of four board-
certified physicians representing pediatrics (N.S.B.), emergency medicine (R.D.), internal
medicine (G.A.L.), and pulmonary medicine (R.A.D.). Among the set of conditions the 
websites advertised that they treated, the panel chose situations in which there was a 
widely recognized and used guideline applicable to the situation. We then wrote the 
scenarios to have as many vignettes in which an action (prescribing or ordering tests) was
6
 recommended as vignettes in which guidelines recommended no action. We were limited 
to six total vignettes and the desire to have adequate power to assess care at the top 8 
websites (see supplementary appendix).  The cases involved low back pain, recurrent 
female urinary tract infection (UTI), acute rhinosinusitis, viral pharyngitis, streptococcal 
pharyngitis, and ankle pain. Vignettes were written to represent typical cases that might 
be seen in an urgent-care setting. In some vignettes, testing, imaging, or treatment is 
recommended in guidelines. In others, testing, imaging, or treatment is specifically noted 
as not necessary in guidelines (Table 1).12-19 For each vignette, a key management 
decision (getting testing or not or prescribing or not) was identified a priori by the 
physician team.
Standardized Patient Recruitment and Training
Individuals who served as standardized patients were recruited from two groups: 1) actors
with prior training as standardized patients at the University of California, San Francisco 
(UCSF) Kanbar Center for Clinical Skills and Telemedicine Education Standardized 
Patient Program, or 2) students currently enrolled in an accredited US medical school. 
Each vignette was first taught to experienced standardized patient trainers from the 
Kanbar Center. These trainers then instructed the standardized patients (while being 
observed by one or more of the study physicians) in the technical and clinical aspects of 
the study, including typical manifestations of the condition, standardized interaction 
techniques, and scoring criteria for study variables. During training, standardized patients
performed role-plays reflecting characteristic encounters, and checklists were scored for 
data collection reliability. Particular focus was put on ensuring the standardized patients 
7
 knew not to suggest any specific diagnoses, tests, or treatments. All standardized patients 
exceeded the pre-specified 90% accuracy threshold by the end of the training and also 
were audited by supervising physicians throughout the study.
Study Materials
Standardized patients carried out virtual visits from May 2013 to July 2014. Details of 
each encounter were recorded immediately following the virtual visit. Using a data 
collection form, standardized patients recorded physician and company names, whether 
specific elements of the history and physical were performed, the diagnosis (if a 
diagnosis was named), testing ordered, and prescriptions provided. The websites were 
paid their usual charges for the study virtual visits. If the websites did not respond to 
encounter requests in a timely fashion (1-2 days), the SPs were unable to complete the 
visit. Therefore, there was variation in number of cases completed by website (see 
supplementary table). 
 Study Variables
The three primary outcomes for each virtual visit in our study were: performing a 
complete history and physical examination, naming the correct diagnosis, and adherence 
to the relevant guideline in the key management decision. The completeness of the 
history and physical was a score derived using items referenced in guidelines as 
important for diagnosis and/or treatment decision. Since we anticipated that not all 
physical exam maneuvers could be performed remotely, we gave credit on the physical 
8
 exam if the physician sought the relevant information by asking the patient to perform the
maneuver. For example, in the case of streptococcal pharyngitis, we gave credit for 
assessing for tonsillar exudate if the physician asked the patient to look in the back of his 
or her own throat. 
Naming the correct diagnosis was coded as a binary variable, based on whether the 
physician told the standardized patient the correct diagnosis. For each diagnosis, the 
physician would be given credit for naming the correct diagnosis if he or she mentioned 
any one of a list of terms (see supplementary appendix).. For example, if a physician gave
the patient a more general diagnosis (UTI for recurrent UTI), they were given credit as a 
correct diagnosis. If, however, the physician diagnosed what was actually viral 
pharyngitis as a bacterial infection, this was considered incorrect. Standardized patients 
were instructed not to ask physicians for a diagnosis. If a physician gave no diagnosis at 
all, this was considered a failure to name the correct diagnosis. 
Adherence to guidelines was coded as a binary variable for each visit, based on whether 
the physician’s key management decision agreed with the relevant guideline (Table 1). 
We evaluated the variation in performance among individual companies at different 
points along the performance spectrum by grouping conditions based upon the average 
percent adherence to key management decision guidelines across all companies. We 
assessed the between-company variation within these groups. We used three groups 
(pairs) of conditions (the two conditions with the highest overall performance, the two 
9
 conditions with the lowest overall performance, and the two in the middle). We also 
assessed whether there was an association between performance on the three primary 
outcomes and communication modality (videoconference vs. telephone vs. webchat).
The secondary outcome was the frequency of referrals to a local brick-and-mortar 
provider for an in-person visit or testing. Standardized patients recorded the rationale the 
physician offered for any such referral. 
Data Analysis
We used mixed-effects models to account for clustering by condition, website, and 
physician. The condition and website effects were treated as fixed effects, while the 
physician-level effects were treated as random. For binary outcomes, we used a mixed-
effects logistic regression model. For continuous outcomes, we used a mixed-effects 
linear regression model. The rates for all binary outcomes are presented as the predicted 
marginal probabilities and the rates for continuous outcomes as the predicted marginal 
means from these models using the margins command. 
We used Stata version 12.1 (StataCorp, College Station, Texas) to perform all statistical 
analyses. This study was approved by the UCSF institutional review board.
Results: 
Standardized patients completed 599 virtual visits (Table 1) with 157 internal medicine, 
emergency medicine, or family practice physicians. The median number of visits per site 
10
 was 77 (interquartile range [IQR] 63.5-88.5). These included 372 (62.1%) 
videoconference encounters, 170 (28.4%) telephone encounters, and 57 (9.5%) webchat 
encounters. The median number of visits per doctor was 1 (IQR 1-4).
Completeness  of  Histories  and  Physical  Examinations  and  Naming  of  the  Correct
Diagnosis
Virtual visit physicians asked all recommended history questions and performed all 
recommended physical examination maneuvers in 69.6% (95% confidence interval [CI], 
67.7%-71.6%) of visits. Physicians named the correct diagnosis in 76.5% (CI, 72.9%-
79.9%) of visits. Physicians gave the wrong diagnosis in 14.8% (CI, 12.0%-17.9%) of 
visits or provided no diagnosis in 8.7% (CI, 6.6%-11.3%) of visits. 
Completeness of histories and physical examinations and naming the correct diagnosis 
varied by condition and virtual visit company (Figures 1 and 2, p<0.001 for the statistical 
significance of the variation by condition and by company in both figures).  For low back
pain, 80.0% (CI, 74.2%-85.8%) of histories and physical examinations taken were 
complete, compared with only 57.8% (CI, 52.3%-63.4%) for ankle pain. The rate of 
physicians naming the correct diagnosis also varied by condition, from 91.3% (CI, 
86.1%-96.5%) for recurrent UTI, to 70.9% (CI, 61.0%-80.2%) for rhinosinusitis. 
 
When evaluated by company, the percent of virtual visits with complete histories and 
physicals ranged from 51.7% to 82.4% and the percent of virtual visits with correct 
diagnoses named ranged from 65.4% to 93.8%. 
11
 Adherence to Guidelines for Management Decisions 
Across all conditions at all companies, key management decisions were guideline-
adherent in 54.3% of visits (CI, 50.2%-58.3%). There was substantial variation among 
conditions and among companies (Figure 3, p<0.001 for the statistical significance of the 
variation among conditions and among companies). For example, physicians ordered 
urine cultures for recurrent UTI only 34.2% of the time (CI, 24.5%–43.8%) and 
guideline-recommended x-rays for ankle pain only 15.5% of the time (CI, 7.9%–23.2%), 
whereas they (appropriately) did not order an x-ray for low back pain 93.1% of the time 
(CI, 87.7%–98.5%). Across virtual visit companies, adherence of key management 
decisions to guidelines ranged from 34.4% to 66.1%. 
The pattern of variation in virtual visit companies’ performance differs by condition 
(Figures 4a, 4b, and 4c). For the two conditions (low back pain and streptococcal 
pharyngitis) with the highest overall adherence to guidelines (ranging among companies 
from 74.6% to 96.5%), there was no statistically significant variation in virtual visit 
companies’ performance (p=0.290, Figure 4a).  Similarly, for the two conditions (ankle 
pain and recurrent UTI) with the lowest overall performance (3.4-40.4%), there was no 
statistically significant variation in virtual visit companies’ performance (p=0.330, Figure
4b).  For the two remaining conditions (viral pharyngitis and acute rhinosinusitis), 
however, there was statistically significant variation in performance (p<0.001, Figure 4c),
with a range among websites from 12.8% to 82.1%. 
12
 Referrals
In 83 patient encounters (13.9%), physicians made a referral to local brick-and-mortar 
providers. The most common stated reasons for referral were that the physician 
considered the case out of the scope of care that could be provided online, or that the case
required additional follow-up that could not be provided online. 
Mode of communication 
Both videoconference (85.8%; CI, 77.6%-93.9%) and telephone encounters (77.7%; CI, 
70.8%-84.7%) were superior to webchat (66.1%; CI, 52.2%-80.1%) in naming the correct
diagnosis (p=0.012). There was no significant difference between videoconference vs. 
telephone in rate of naming the correct diagnosis. There were no statistically significant 
differences between modes of communication in completeness of history and physical or 
adherence to guidelines. 
Comment
To our knowledge, this is the first study to evaluate variation in the quality of medical 
encounters provided by commercial virtual visit companies. We found substantial and 
statistically significant variation in guideline adherence among virtual visit companies 
and that the variation differs by condition. We found no significant difference in guideline
adherence by mode of communication (video vs. phone vs. webchat). 
In some ways, our finding that care varies online is consistent with prior literature of
traditional care settings,20-23   where there is extensive evidence of failure to follow
13
 guidelines and of variation in quality of care.
Particularly,  the antibiotic prescribing rate in commercial virtual visits we observe is
similar to the rate seen in-person nationally in traditional settings. For instance, a prior
study found that antibiotics were prescribed to approximately 60% of patients seen at
primary care practices and emergency departments with sore throat nationally,24 while
others have documented 80% prescribing to patients with upper respiratory infections.25,26 
Previous literature has also compared antibiotic prescribing patterns during virtual visits
(with providers who also offered in-person care) to visits in traditional settings. Courneya
et al.27   found lower prescription rates for acute bronchitis during an online interactive
algorithmic visit than for traditional visits, whereas Mehrotra et al.28  found that antibiotics
were prescribed for presumed acute sinusitis at higher rates during virtual visits than
traditional visits. Thus, antibiotic prescribing for viral illnesses appears to be an area
needing attention in all care settings.
Conversely, our study demonstrates that the rates of testing in situations in which testing 
is not recommended may be lower in virtual care than traditional settings, but rates of 
obtaining tests that are recommended are also lower. . For low back pain, virtual visit 
providers adhered to guidelines and did not order x-rays 93% of the time, while 
Rosenberg et al.26 found that brick-and-mortar providers ordered additional imaging 
approximately half the time. In the case of ankle injury, prior studies suggest that the 
large majority of patients who present to brick-and-mortar practices receive imaging, 
14
 whereas only 15.5% of patients were recommended imaging in our study.29 Avoiding 
additional testing is appropriate in some cases, but the uniformly low rates of testing in 
the virtual visits may actually reflect the logistical challenges of ordering or following up 
on tests to be performed near where the patient lived or concern about the out-of-pocket 
costs for additional testing. These hypotheses need to be tested in future studies. Since 
appropriate use of testing is critical to the delivery of medical care, identifying and 
reducing barriers to testing will be important.  
The evidence we found does not appear to support the limitation of virtual visits to 
videoconference. There is ongoing debate about what modes of communication constitute
a safe and appropriate telemedicine encounter.7-9 In Texas, for example, the state’s 
medical board recently ruled to restrict telemedicine encounters to videoconference due 
to safety concerns10 and the Federation of State Medical Boards has excluded audio-only 
and webchat visits from the definition of telemedicine. However, with regards to 
guideline adherence, we found no statistically significant difference by mode of 
communication.
The fact that some companies can perform considerably better than others suggests this 
variation could be addressed if performance leaders were willing to share their best 
practices with other virtual visit companies. Further research is required to evaluate 
whether better performing virtual visit companies have adopted some company-wide 
policy or protocol(s) that increase guideline adherence.
There are limitations of this study. First, we do not know if virtual visits are superior or
15
 inferior to in-person visits. Second, this is an evolving market and some companies had to
be excluded early on from the study because they ceased operations. Third, we do not
know the exact market share of each company included in our study. However, the
companies  that  remained  were  the  most  trafficked  and thus  our study  presumably
captures the major companies in this market currently.  Finally, we looked at only eight
virtual visit companies and six conditions and sample size is a potential limitation.
However, we have adjusted for company and condition in our statistical analysis and thus
clustering and co-linearity are not responsible for observed differences by company,
condition, or modality. Further, we studied the companies that receive the most traffic,
and studied their care for common conditions that they advertise they treat. 
In summary, our study provides the first evaluation of the variation in quality of care 
currently being provided during commercial virtual visits. There is significant variation 
across companies and by condition.  The patterns of variation we observed imply an 
opportunity to improve and point toward approaches to determining how to do so.
References
1. DeJong C, Santa J,Dudley R. Websites that offer care over the internet: Is there an 
access quality tradeoff? JAMA. 2014;311(13):1287-1288.
2. Uscher-Pines L, Mehrotra A. Analysis of teladoc use seems to indicate expanded 
access to care for patients without prior connection to a provider. Health Aff (Millwood). 
2014;33(2):258-264.
16
 3. Schoen C, Osborn R, Squires D, Doty MM. Access, affordability, and insurance 
complexity are often worse in the united states compared to ten other countries. Health 
Aff (Millwood). 2013;32(12):2205-2215.
4. Dolan B. Wellpoint now offering mobile video visits with physicians in 44 states. 
Mobilhealthnews. June 4, 2014. http://mobihealthnews.com/33816/wellpoint-now-
offering-mobile-video-visits-with-physicians-in-44-states/.  Accessed December 20, 
2014. 
5. Mathews AJ. Doctors move to webcams. The Wall Street Journal. December 20, 2012 
2012;B1.
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324731304578189461164849962.html. 
Accessed December 20, 2014.
6. Deloitte CIO Journal Editor. eVisits: The 21st Century House Call. The Wall Street 
Journal, March 6, 2014. http://deloitte.wsj.com/cio/2014/03/06/evisits-the-21st-century-
house-call/. Accessed January 20, 2015.
7. American Telemedicine Association. Proposed changes to the model policy for the 
appropriate use of telemedicine technologies in the practice of medicine, 2014. 
http://www.americantelemed.org/docs/default-source/policy/click-here.pdf?sfvrsn=0. 
Accessed December 20, 2014.
8. Blackwell, H. Kwolek, K. Big redial – Texas telephone medicine 
terminated? Lexology. January 27, 2015. http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?
g=9593e00a-f0be-4929-8f7a-464cbebee1a5. Accessed February 8, 2015.
17
 9. Center for Connected Health Policy. State Telehealth Policies and Reimbursement 
Schedules. September 2014. http://cchpca.org/sites/default/files/uploader/50%20STATE
%20MEDICAID%20REPORT%20SEPT%202014.pdf. Accessed February 1, 2015.
10. Goodnough, A. The New York Times. Texas Medical Panel Votes to Limit 
Telemedicine Practices in State. April 10, 2015. 
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/11/us/texas-medical-panel-votes-to-limit-telemedicine-
practices-in-state.html. Accessed April 20, 2015
11. Ohlhausen, M. Beyond Law Enforcement: The FTC’s Role in Promoting Health Care 
Competition and Innovation. Health Affairs Blog. January 26, 2015. 
http://healthaffairs.org/blog/2015/01/26/beyond-law-enforcement-the-ftcs-role-in-
promoting-health-care-competition-and-innovation/. Accessed February 1, 2015.
12. Snow V, Mottur-Pilson C, Cooper RJ, Hoffman JR. Principles of appropriate 
antibiotic use for acute pharyngitis in adults. Ann Intern Med. 2001;134(6):506-508.
13. McIsaac WJ, Kellner JD, Aufricht P, Vanjaka A, Low DE. Empirical validation of 
guidelines for the management of pharyngitis in children and adults. JAMA. 
2004;291(13):1587-1595.
14. Gupta K, Hooton TM, Naber KG, et al. International clinical practice guidelines for 
the treatment of acute uncomplicated cystitis and pyelonephritis in women: A 2010 
update by the infectious diseases society of america and the european society for 
microbiology and infectious diseases. Clin Infect Dis. 2011;52(5):e103-20.
15. Chou R, Qaseem A, Snow V, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of low back pain: A joint 
clinical practice guideline from the american college of physicians and the american pain 
society. Ann Intern Med. 2007;147(7):478-491.
18
 16. Hickner JM, Bartlett JG, Besser RE, Gonzales R, Hoffman JR, Sande MA. Principles 
of appropriate antibiotic use for acute rhinosinusitis in adults: Background. Ann Intern 
Med. 2001;134(6):498-505.
17. Bachmann LM, Kolb E, Koller MT, Steurer J, Riet Gt. Accuracy of ottawa ankle rules
to exclude fractures of the ankle and mid-foot: Systematic review. BMJ. 
2003;326(7386):417.
18. Centor RM, Witherspoon JM, Dalton HP, Brody CE, Link K. The diagnosis of strep 
throat in adults in the emergency room. Med Decis Making. 1981;1(3):239-246.
19. Dason S, Dason JT, Kapoor A. Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of 
recurrent urinary tract infection in women. Can Urol Assoc J. 2011;5(5):316-322.
20. McGlynn EA, Asch SM, Adams J, et al. The quality of health care delivered to adults 
in the united states. N Engl J Med. 2003;348(26):2635-2645.
21. Institute of Medicine (IOM). 2000. To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System.
L. T. Kohn, J. M. Corrigan, and M. S. Donaldson, eds. Washington, D.C: National 
Academy Press.
22. Dekker AR, Verheij TJ, van der Velden AW. Inappropriate antibiotic prescription for 
respiratory tract indications: Most prominent in adult patients. Fam Pract. 
2015;32(4):401-407.
23. Tsai TC, Orav EJ, Jha AK. Patient satisfaction and quality of surgical care in US 
hospitals. Ann Surg. 2015;261(1):2-8.
24. Barnett ML, Linder JA. Antibiotic prescribing to adults with sore throat in the united 
states, 1997-2010. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174(1):138-140.
25. National Committee for Quality Assurance. Quality compass. NCQA. 2013.
26. Rosenberg A, Agiro A, Gottlieb M, et al. Early Trends Among Seven 
19
 Recommendations From the Choosing Wisely Campaign. JAMA Intern Med. 2015:1-9.
27. Courneya PT, Palattao KJ, Gallagher JM. HealthPartners' online clinic for simple 
conditions delivers savings of $88 per episode and high patient approval. Health Aff 
(Millwood). 2013;32(2):385-392.
28. Mehrotra A, Paone S, Martich GD, Albert SM, Shevchik GJ. A comparison of care at 
e-visits and physician office visits for sinusitis and urinary tract infection. JAMA Intern 
Med. 2013;173(1):72-74.
29. Bachmann LM, Kolb E, Koller MT, Steurer J, ter Riet G. Accuracy of Ottawa ankle 
rules to exclude fractures of the ankle and mid-foot: systematic review. BMJ (Clinical 
research ed.). 2003;326(7386):417.
Figure Titles and Legends
Figure 1a and 1b. Completeness of History and Physical Exam by Condition and by 
Virtual Visit Company.
Legend: Abbreviations: Strep., streptococcal; UTI, recurrent female urinary tract 
20
 infection. Each point represents the adjusted mean rate of completeness by condition 
(Figure 1a) across all virtual visit companies and adjusted mean rate of completeness by 
virtual visit company (Figure 1b) across all conditions. The error bars indicate the 95% 
confidence intervals. The dotted line is the aggregate mean across conditions (Figure 1a) 
or virtual visit companies  (Figure 1b). There was statistically significant variation in 
completeness by condition (P<.001) and by virtual visit company (P<.001). 
Figure 2a and 2b. Rate of Physician Naming the Correct Diagnosis by Condition and by 
Virtual Visit Company.
Legend: Abbreviations: Strep., streptococcal; UTI, recurrent female urinary tract 
infection. Rates of naming the correct diagnosis for each visit based upon whether the 
physician stated the correct diagnosis for each encounter. Each point represents the 
adjusted mean rate of naming the correct diagnosis by condition (Figure 2a) across all 
virtual visit companies and adjusted mean rate of naming the correct diagnosis by virtual 
visit company (Figure 2b) across all conditions. The error bars indicate the 95% 
confidence intervals. The dotted line is the aggregate mean across conditions (Figure 2a) 
or virtual visit companies  (Figure 2b). There was statistically significant variation in 
naming the correct diagnosis by condition (P<.001) and by virtual visit company 
(P<.001).
Title: Figure 3a and 3b. Adherence to Guidelines for Key Management Decisions by 
Condition and by Virtual Visit Company.  
Legend: Abbreviations: Strep., streptococcal; UTI, recurrent female urinary tract 
infection. Each point represents the adjusted mean rate of adherence by condition (Figure 
3a) across all virtual visit companies and adjusted mean rate of adherence by virtual visit 
company (Figure 3b) across all conditions. The error bars indicate the 95% confidence 
intervals. The dotted line is the aggregate mean across conditions (Figure 3a) or virtual 
visit companies  (Figure 3b). There was statistically significant variation in guideline 
adherence by condition (P<.001) and by virtual visit company (P=.009).
Title: Figure 4. Variation by Pairs of Conditions Among Virtual Visit Companies in 
Adherence to Guidelines for Key Management Decisions.
Legend: Abbreviations: Strep., streptococcal; UTI, recurrent female urinary tract 
infection. Each point represents the adjusted mean rate of adherence to guidelines in key 
management decisions (for streptococcal pharyngitis and low back pain in Figure 4a, for 
ankle pain and urinary tract infection in Figure 4b, and for viral pharyngitis and acute 
rhinosinusitis in Figure 4c) for each virtual visit company and the error bars indicate the 
95% confidence intervals. The dotted line is the aggregate mean across virtual visit 
companies. Lower rates indicate lower adherence to guidelines in management decisions. 
The dotted line is the aggregate mean across virtual visit companies. There was no 
statistically significant variation between virtual visit companies in adherence to 
21
 guidelines for streptococcal pharyngitis and low back pain (P=.290) or for ankle pain and
urinary tract infection (P=.328), although the variation in adherence to guidelines was 
significant for viral pharyngitis and acute rhinosinusitis (P<.001).
Table 1. Guidelines, Key History and Physical Measures, Management Decision, and 
Number of Visits by Condition 
Condition 
Guidelines
Completeness of History and 
Physical
Recommended 
Management
Number of Visits
N=599 (%)
Ankle Pain
Ottawa Ankle Rules
• Ability to Walk
• Tenderness at Lateral 
Malleolus
Order Ankle X-ray
102 (17%)
Streptococcal
Pharyngitis
Modified Centor 
Criteria
• Fever
• Tonsilar Exudates
• Absence of Cough
• Tender Cervical Adenopathy
Order Strep Test or
Prescribe antibiotics
97 (16%)
Viral 
Pharyngitis
Modified Centor 
Criteria
• Fever
• Tonsillar Exudates
• Absence of Cough
• Tender Cervical Adenopathy
Order Strep Test or
Do Not Prescribe Antibiotics
82 (14%)
Rhinosinusiti
s
American Academy of
Family Physicians 
Diagnostic Guidelines
• Fever
• Facial Pain
• Tooth Pain
• Nasal Discharge
• Symptom Time Course
Do Not Prescribe Antibiotics
105 (18%)
Low Back 
Pain
American College of 
Physicians Diagnostic 
Guidelines
• Symptom Duration
• History of Pain/Trauma
• Location/Radiation of Pain
• Bowel or Bladder Changes
• Myelopathy/Radiculopathy
Do Not Order Imaging or 
Other Diagnostic Tests
92 (15%)
Recurrent 
Female 
Urinary Tract 
Infection
Infectious Diseases 
Society of America
• Fever
• History of UTIs
• Urinary Symptoms
• Duration of Symptoms
• Prior Testing/Treatment
• Suprapubic/Flank/Back Pain
Order Urine Culture 
121 (20%)
22
