 Older Adults’ Views and Communication Preferences
About Cancer Screening Cessation
Nancy L. Schoenborn, MD; Kimberley Lee, MD; Craig E. Pollack, MD, MHS; Karen Armacost, RN, MSA;
Sydney M. Dy, MD; John F. P. Bridges, PhD; Qian-Li Xue, PhD; Antonio C. Wolff, MD; Cynthia Boyd, MD, MPH
IMPORTANCE Older adults with limited life expectancy are frequently screened for cancer
even though it exposes them to risks of screening with minimal benefit. Patient preferences
may be an important contributor to continued screening.
OBJECTIVE To examine older adults’ views on the decision to stop cancer screening when life
expectancy is limited and to identify older adults’ preferences for how clinicians should
communicate recommendations to cease cancer screening.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS In this semistructured interview study, we interviewed
40 community-dwelling older adults (� 65 years) recruited at 4 clinical programs affiliated
with an urban academic medical center.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURE We transcribed the audio recorded discussions and analyzed
the transcripts using standard techniques of qualitative content analysis to identify major
themes and subthemes.
RESULTS The participants’ average age was 75.7 years. Twenty-three participants (57.5%)
were female; 25 (62.5%) were white. Estimated life expectancy was less than 10 years for 19
participants (47.5%). We identified 3 key themes. First, participants were amenable to
stopping cancer screening, especially in the context of a trusting relationship with their
clinician. Second, although many participants supported using age and health status to
individualize the screening decision, they did not often understand the role of life expectancy.
All except 2 participants objected to a Choosing Wisely statement about not recommending
cancer screening in those with limited life expectancy, often believing that clinicians cannot
accurately predict life expectancy. Third, participants preferred that clinicians explain a
recommendation to stop screening by incorporating individual health status but were divided
on whether life expectancy should be mentioned. Specific wording of life expectancy was
important; many felt the language of “you may not live long enough to benefit from this test”
was unnecessarily harsh compared with the more positive messaging of “this test would not
help you live longer.”
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Although research and clinical practice guidelines
recommend using life expectancy to inform cancer screening, older adults may not consider
life expectancy important in screening and may not prefer to hear about life expectancy
when discussing screening. The described communication preferences can help inform future
screening discussions. Better delineating patient-centered approaches to discuss screening
cessation is an important step toward optimizing cancer screening in older adults.
JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(8):1121-1128. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.1778
Published online June 12, 2017.
Invited Commentary
page 1128
Supplemental content
Author Affiliations: The Johns
Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
(Schoenborn, Lee, Pollack, Armacost,
Xue, Wolff, Boyd); The Johns Hopkins
University School of Public Health,
Baltimore, Maryland (Dy, Bridges).
Corresponding Author: Nancy L.
Schoenborn, MD, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, 5200
Eastern Ave, Mason F. Lord Building
Center Tower, Room 711, Baltimore,
MD 21224 (nancyli@jhmi.edu).
Research
JAMA Internal Medicine | Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
1121
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 C
ancer screening in older adults with limited life expec-
tancy may inappropriately subject them to short-term
harms when chance of benefit is minimal.1-12 Research
and clinical practice guidelines recommend incorporating life
expectancy to inform cancer screening.1-12 Specifically, sev-
eral Choosing Wisely recommendations mention that clini-
cians should not routinely screen for cancer among patients
with limited life expectancy.13-16 However, many older adults
with limited life expectancy still frequently receive cancer
screening,17-22withscreeningrateashighas55%inonestudy.17
Only a few small studies have explored older adults’views
on stopping cancer screening. The results suggest that some
older adults may be strongly enthusiastic about cancer
screening23-27 and may not always consider life expectancy im-
portant in the screening decision.25,26 In one survey study25 of
116 mostly healthy older adults, 62% did not think their physi-
cian’
s life expectancy estimate was important in cancer screen-
ing decisions. In an interview study26 of 28 older adults, most
ofwhomwere75yearsoryounger,52%didnotthinktheirhealth
would influence their screening decision even if they had lim-
ited life expectancy. Previous studies have not explored the
viewsofolderadultswithawiderangeofage,healthstatus,and
life expectancies. Studies also have not explored patient pref-
erences for how clinicians should discuss screening cessation.
Clinicians’recommendations are among the most influen-
tial factors in cancer screening decisions,18,28 and clinicians are
frequentlyuncomfortablestoppingcancerscreening.23,29,30One
study30showedthatprimarycarecliniciansoftenconsideredthat
theirpatientshadlimitedlifeexpectancybutwerehesitanttorec-
ommend against cancer screening. Clinicians were concerned
thatpatientsmayreactnegativelytoscreeningcessationandalso
struggled with discussing life expectancy.30
In this context, patient perspectives and preferences about
stoppingcancerscreeningamongthosewithlimitedlifeexpec-
tancy are critical to address clinician concerns, inform screen-
ing discussions, and help align clinical guidelines with patient
preference.Becauserelativelylittleisknownaboutthisarea,we
usequalitativemethodsinthisstudytoexploretherangeofper-
spectives from older adults to generate hypotheses. We aim to
examinecommunity-dwellingolderadults’perspectivesonthe
decision to stop cancer screening when life expectancy is lim-
ited and to identify their preferences for how clinicians should
communicate recommendations to cease cancer screening.
Methods
Design and Study Setting
This was a qualitative study in which semistructured inter-
views lasting 30 to 60 minutes were conducted with commu-
nity-dwelling older adults (≥65 years). Participants were
recruited from 4 clinical programs affiliated with an urban aca-
demic medical center, including a geriatric ambulatory clinic,
a general internal medicine ambulatory clinic, a house-call
program for homebound older adults, and a Program of All-
Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE). This project was ap-
proved by a Johns Hopkins School of Medicine institutional
review board.
Participants and Recruitment
Older adults were eligible to participate if they were 65 years
or older, English-speaking, and able to provide informed con-
sent. Because cognitive impairment affects the risk-benefit ra-
tio of cancer screening,31 we sought to include those with cog-
nitive impairment as long as the person could still participate
meaningfully in the interview and provide written informed
consent. For potential participants who had a diagnosis of cog-
nitiveimpairmentordementiaandwereinterestedinthestudy,
we consulted with the person’
s family members and/or clini-
cian to ensure that the person could provide written informed
consent and could participate in a 30- to 60-minute interview.
We used maximum variation sampling (targeting a wide
range of diverse participants) to recruit community-dwelling
older adults with a wide range of age, health and functional
status, and life expectancies.32,33 We purposefully recruited
from 4 different clinical programs to include older adults in
ambulatory clinics and those who were home-bound (house-
call) and/or had limitations in daily activities (PACE). We also
asked clinicians from all 4 clinical programs to help identify
potential participants. Recruitment stopped when theme satu-
ration in the data was reached,32 as described in subsequent
section.Eachparticipantwasprovideda$50giftcard,andpark-
ing voucher when needed.
Interview Guide
The interview guide (in the Supplement) was developed and
iteratively revised during pretesting with 10 older adults who
were not included in the study. At the beginning of the inter-
view, we provided a brief overview of the benefits and poten-
tialharmsofcancerscreening,usingbreastand/orprostateand
colorectal cancer screenings as examples. We chose these ex-
amples because they are routinely recommended in older
adults, and overscreening has been shown to occur.3-6,17-22 We
explicitly mentioned that it may take up to 10 years before a
cancer grows to the point of causing health problems, so that
someone who will not live 10 years may not benefit and may
be harmed from screening.2,6 We then asked questions about
2 domains: decision-making and communication.
In the decision-making domain, we explored the follow-
ing: (1) considerations around the decision to stop screening,
(2)reactionsiftheirclinicianweretorecommendthattheystop
Key Points
Question How do older adults think about stopping cancer
screening when life expectancy is limited, and how do they prefer
to discuss it with clinicians?
Findings In this qualitative interview study with 40
community-dwelling older adults, participants were amenable to
stopping cancer screening in the context of a trusting relationship
with their clinician. Participants did not often consider life
expectancy important in screening or prefer to hear about life
expectancy when discussing screening.
Meaning Better delineating patient-centered approaches to
discuss screening cessation when life expectancy is limited is
important for optimizing cancer screening in older adults.
Research Original Investigation
Older Adults’ Views About Cancer Screening Cessation
1122
JAMA Internal Medicine
August 2017
Volume 177, Number 8
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 screening, (3) perceived importance of health and functional
status (important predictors of life expectancy) in screening
decisions,34,35 and (4) views on hypothetical examples about
screening when age and health status were discordant.
In the communication domain, we tested 4 communica-
tion strategies for clinicians to discuss screening cessation to
a hypothetical patient (Box 1). We then explored attitudes on
discussing life expectancy in the cancer screening context. We
asked participants for their reaction to one of the Choosing
Wisely statements that address cancer screening and limited
life expectancy.13-16 We presented the statement from the So-
ciety of General Internal Medicine owing to its brevity: “Don’
t
recommend cancer screening if patient is not likely to live 10
years.”16 The interviews were semistructured and allowed for
new topics to emerge.
Questionnaire
A structured questionnaire prior to the interview collected in-
formation on demographic characteristics, health, and func-
tionalstatusaspartofamortalityriskindex,34healthliteracy,36
numeracy,37andtrustintheclinician(“Allinall,youhavecom-
plete trust in your doctor”; 1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly
agree).38Wealsoaskedaboutpastscreeningsforbreast(women
only), prostate (men only), colorectal cancers, and intention
to continue or discontinue screenings at the time of the study.
We extracted information on health conditions and duration
of relationship with clinician from the medical records. Using
the collected data, we estimated 4-year and 10-year mortality
risks using a validated index.34
Data Collection and Analysis
One investigator (N.L.S.) conducted the interviews in person
between December 2015 and March 2016. The investigator had
no direct clinical relationship with any participant. For par-
ticipants in the 2 ambulatory clinics, interviews occurred in a
private room before or after a scheduled clinic visit or (for 2
participants) at the participants’homes. For participants in the
house-call program, interviews occurred at the participants’
homes at times chosen by the participants. For participants in
the PACE program, interviews occurred in a private confer-
ence room at the PACE program site at times chosen by the par-
ticipants. All interviews were audio recorded. The audio re-
cordings were then transcribed verbatim and analyzed using
Atlas.titextualdataanalysissoftware.Thetranscriptswerecon-
tinuously reviewed and assessed for the emergence of new
ideas or themes; data collection continued until no new ideas
were emerging and theme saturation was reached.32 Stan-
dard techniques of directed qualitative content analysis were
used to code the transcripts.32,39 A preliminary coding scheme
based on the interview guide was iteratively refined and ap-
plied to analyze the data using the constant comparative
approach.32,40 Open coding procedures allowed new theme
identification in addition to the established scheme. Revi-
sionstothecodingschemewereappliedtoallpreviouslycoded
transcripts. Two investigators (N.L.S. and K.L.) indepen-
dently coded all transcripts. Differences were reconciled by
consensus until 100% agreement was reached. Content analy-
sis generated major themes and subthemes.
Results
Forty older adults participated in the study (Table 1). The
participants’average age was 75.7 years. Of the 40 partici-
pants, 23 (57.5%) were female; 25 (62.5%) were white. Esti-
mated life expectancy was less than 10 years for 19 partici-
pants (47.5%), including 8 participants with less than 4-year
life expectancies.34 All participants had regular clinicians and
reported high level of trust (average score, 4.7 out of 5.0). Du-
ration of relationship with clinician averaged 3.7 years. Among
the 29 participants who had up-to-date cancer screenings, 5
participants (all female) reported that they had decided to stop
screening and 4 participants (2 males, 2 females) reported that
they were unsure about continued screening.
Qualitative content analysis revealed 3 major themes with
subthemes (Box 2); these are presented herein and illus-
trated using representative quotes.
Theme 1: Amenable to Considering Screening Cessation
Reasons to Stop Screening
Older adults were amenable to considering cessation of can-
cer screening. In addition to the participants who already
decided to stop screening, others mentioned hypothetical sce-
narios in which they would consider screening cessation
(Table 2). Older age was the most common reason; one 84-
year-old woman said: “I just feel like at my age I don’
t need a
colonoscopy, what’
s gonna be is gonna be.”
The mentioned age threshold to stop screening varied in
age from 65 to 100 years.
Cessation of Screening and Trusting Relationship
Whentheparticipantswereaskedhowtheywouldreactiftheir
regular clinician suggested that they stop screening, many said
that they would view such a suggestion as acceptable or posi-
tive. One participant said: “I’
d feel good that I didn’
t need [an-
other screening].”
Some commented that they would think more highly of
their clinician: One participant said, “If the doctor says to me
Box 1. Tested Communication Strategies to Discuss Screening
Cessation With a Hypothetical Patient
1. Mentioning risks and benefits only: “This test would harm you
more than benefit you.”
2. Mentioning risks and benefits plus age: “Around your age, this
test is usually not recommended because it would cause more
harm than benefit.”
3. Mentioning risks and benefits plus health status: “When people
have these medical conditions like you and need help from day
to day activities like you, this test can cause more harm than
benefit.”
4. Mentioning risks and benefits plus life expectancy: “This test
would not help you live longer; it would harm you more than
benefit you.”
We then asked about a second way to phrase life expectancy:
Instead of saying: “this test would not help you live longer,” what
about saying: “you may not live long enough to benefit from this
test”?
Older Adults’ Views About Cancer Screening Cessation
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
August 2017
Volume 177, Number 8
1123
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 we don’
t have to do this no more I’
d say: ‘
thank you very much
doc’
… I probably [would] think more of him.
” Another partici-
pant said, “I would think he would be personalizing my per-
sonal health when he suggested that.”
Many of the participants attributed their responses to their
trust and confidence in their clinician: “I have all the confi-
dence in her and if she told me to stop it I would stop.”
Some participants were skeptical of a suggestion to stop
screening or said that they would still insist on screening. Even
amongthese,participantsmentionedthattheclinician’
ssugges-
tionwouldnotnecessarilymakethemthinklessoftheclinician
or trust the clinician less. One person described that she even-
tuallyacceptedherclinician’
srecommendationtoceasescreen-
ingbecauseoftrust:“Itold[mydoctor]thatIwouldwantanother
[mammogram]. He said: ‘
But at your age, 75, [we] don’
t usually
give another test.
’I said: ‘
What difference does it make [what]
myageis…I’
mstillhumanyouknow,whynotanothertest?’But
hesaid:‘
youarefine,youain’
tgotnothingtoworryabout.
’Isaid:
‘
Well, I must be fine.
’
... He’
s a good doctor and I trust him.
”
Theme 2: Misperceptions of the Role of Life Expectancy
Importance of Health Status
Older adults supported using health status to individualize
screening decision but often did not understand the role of life
expectancy. When asked about the importance of health and
functional status in cancer screening decisions, most partici-
pants believed that these were important factors to consider
along with age: “There are people much younger whose health
is very poor, and people who are 80 and 90 whose health is
very good, so age is not the only determining factor [in can-
cer screening] in my opinion.”
Health Status and Screening Decisions
Ontheonehand,whenprovidedtheexampleofahealthyolder
person who would have been recommended to stop screen-
ing based on age, many participants supported continuation
of screening. On the other hand, when provided the example
of a sick younger person who would have been recom-
mended to receive screening based on age, many agreed that
foregoing screening made sense: “Don’
t do it. [Cancer] isn’
t
Table 1. Characteristics for the 40 Patient Participants
Characteristic
No. (%)
Age, mean (SD), y
75.7 (8.0)
Female sex
23 (57.5)
Race
White
25 (62.5)
African American
14 (35.0)
Other
1 (2.5)
Self-reported health
Excellent or very good
14 (35.0)
Good
20 (50.0)
Fair or poor
6 (15.0)
History of cancer, any type
9 (22.5)
Up-to-date cancer screeninga
Breast cancer screening, 18 women eligibleb
9 (50.0)
Prostate cancer screening, 14 men eligiblec
3 (21.4)
Colorectal cancer screening, all 40 participants
eligibled
25 (62.5)
Estimated life expectancy, ye
>10
21 (52.5)
4-10
11 (27.5)
<4
8 (20.0)
Educational level
Did not complete high school
7 (17.5)
Completed high school
14 (35.0)
<4 y college
8 (20.0)
College graduate or postgraduate degrees
11 (27.5)
Health literacy score (possible range, 3-15)36
12.9 (2.9)
Numeracy score (possible range, 3-18)37
13.2 (4.6)
Trust in clinician (possible range, 1-5)f
4.7 (0.8)
Duration of relationship with clinician, mean (SD), y
3.7 (4.2)
a Twenty-nine of 40 participants were up to date for at least 1 type of screening
(breast, prostate, colorectal).
bScreening by mammography within the past 2 years. Five women were
ineligible for screening owing to history of breast cancer or mastectomy.
c Screening by prostate-specific antigen test within the past 2 years. Three men
were ineligible for screening owing to history of prostate cancer.
dScreening by colonoscopy within the past 10 years.
e A median life expectancy of more than 10 years is defined as a less than 50%
mortality risk over 10 years; a median life expectancy of 4 to 10 years is
defined as a 50% or greater mortality risk over 10 years and a 50% or lower
mortality risk over 4 years; a median life expectancy of less than 4 years is
defined as a greater than 50% mortality risk over 4 years.34
f “All in all, you have complete trust in your doctor.” 1 = strongly disagree,
5 = strongly agree.38
Box 2. Major Themes and Subthemes Summarizing Participants’
Views and Communication Preferences Around Cancer
Screening Cessation
Theme 1: Older adults were amenable to considering cessation of
cancer screening.
Subthemes:
Participants mentioned several reasons to stop screening.
Cessation of screening was acceptable within trusting relation-
ship.
Theme 2: Older adults supported using health status to individual-
ize screening decision but often did not understand the role of life
expectancy.
Subthemes:
Health status was considered important.
Some used health status in different ways to inform screening
decisions.
Many did not understand the role of life expectancy in cancer
screening.
Theme 3: Preferences varied regarding how to discuss cessation of
screening.
Subthemes:
Incorporating health status was the preferred communication
strategy.
Views were divided on whether life expectancy should be dis-
cussed.
Specific wording of life expectancy was important.
Some preferred little to no explanation.
Research Original Investigation
Older Adults’ Views About Cancer Screening Cessation
1124
JAMA Internal Medicine
August 2017
Volume 177, Number 8
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 gonna be the thing that kills the people if they’
ve got all those
[health] problems.”
For some participants, however, using health status to in-
form screening decision led to opposite conclusions. Despite
explaining that screening by definition looks for cancer in the
absence of symptoms, some participants viewed screening as
a way to evaluate poor health: “If a person is sick all the time
any test they do has got to help, it can’
t hurt … if they were
really sick they’
d probably need more tests.”
The Role of Life Expectancy in Cancer Screening
Although many participants supported using health status,
along with age, to inform the screening decision, they did not
perceive life expectancy as being directly related to health sta-
tus and age and were perplexed when shown the Choosing
Wisely statement “Don’
t recommend cancer screening if pa-
tient is not likely to live 10 years.”16 All except 2 participants
objected or questioned the statement. Reasons for objection
included skepticism about life expectancy predictions, skep-
ticism about screening’
s lag-time to benefit, and perceived
negativity of the statement (Table 3). One person described her
doubt about the life expectancy prediction even if someone
had multiple health problems: “How do you actually know the
patient is not gonna live 10 years? I mean you look at it statis-
tically I guess, you look and say…because she has this [health
problem] and this [health problem], she probably won’
t live,
but you never know. There’
s always that one person who’
s able
to get over the hump.”
Theme 3: Communication Preferences
Incorporating Health Status
Preferences varied regarding how to discuss cessation of
screening.Althoughall4testedcommunicationstrategieswere
acceptable to most participants (Box 1), the one that men-
tioned health and functional status tended to be the pre-
ferred approach. One participant commented that it sounded
better because it included details about him as an individual:
“It sounds like my doctor has done a study on me and my is-
sues, and she recommends that I not have this [test] done… I
would have to be guided by her knowledge and her decision.”
Some participants mentioned that they would want to dis-
cuss what health issues, instead of cancer screening, would be
the focus of their care. Others mentioned the importance of
giving patient the ultimate choice to make the decision.
Views on Whether Life Expectancy Should be Discussed
Participants were divided about whether clinicians should
mention life expectancy in the context of discussing cancer
screening if the clinician’
s recommendation was informed by
the patient’
s life expectancy. The most common reason for
wanting to discuss life expectancy was full disclosure of in-
formation: “I would want to know. [There are] a lot of things
in life that is upsetting but you deal with it. It’
s better, I think
it’
s better, to know than to not know.” For another partici-
pant, the phrase that “the test is not going to help you live lon-
ger” was the most compelling reason to stop screening: “That
would really make me think and probably change my mind
[about continuing screening].”
Others did not want to hear about life expectancy in the
contextofcancerscreening:“Eventhoughthedoctormayhave
the feeling that the patient is not going to live very long I don’
t
think he should express it… No, just say the test is not going
to be helpful.”
A common reason was that the participants did not be-
lieve that clinicians can predict life expectancy: “A doctor can-
not tell you how long you gonna live, he can’
t tell you if you
gonnadietomorrow,nextweek,or10yearsfromnow…theonly
one [who] knows about that is God.”
A second reason that participants did not think life expec-
tancy should be discussed in cancer screening was that the in-
formation would depress or worry the patient: “I would rather
for them to focus on the test because to tell me about life ex-
pectancy then my mind is gonna be: ‘
oh, I’
m not gonna live
long.’You could shut a person down quicker.”
Specific Wording of Life Expectancy
We provided 2 example phrases that mentioned life expec-
tancy to explain screening cessation: “This test would not help
Table 2. Older Adults’ Reasons for Stopping Cancer Screening
Reason
Example
Older age
“I just figured I’m not gonna worry about it anymore at this
age. I’ve lived a good life ….what more can I do?”
Poor health or
quality of life
“Because I felt like the quality of life I have now [is not
good]. If anything happens I’d be ready to go, so why go
through a lot of procedures if I don’t have to.”
Would not want
downstream
treatment
“If I would get cancer I would not want anything done as
far as a procedure to cure it and that’s when I made my
decision [to stop screening].”
Risks or
burdens of the
screening test
“I just think that’s too much prodding and poking of older
people and unnecessary prodding and poking … When I
had my last mammogram they had me come back… for a
second evaluation …There was a lot of unnecessary anxiety
and I have issues with anxiety anyway and it raised that
level… and there was nothing wrong.”
Physician’s
recommendation
“If a doctor of his caliber suggests let’s not be hasty, we
probably won’t have to do this [prostate-specific antigen
test], then I was very willing to say don’t worry about it
now.”
Table 3. Older Adults' Objections to a Choosing Wisely Statement
About Not Recommending Cancer Screening in Those
With Limited Life Expectancya
Objections
Example
Uncertainty of
prediction
“I don’t think they should do that…I don’t think you can
predict if a person’s gonna live 10 more years.”
Life expectancy
can change
“I wouldn’t like that because whatever’s wrong with me
they could come up with a cure within the time and my
life expectancy could go up.”
Skepticism of
lag-time to benefit
“I think they probably should get [screened] because if
[cancer] can be prevented if caught early. I think that
…obviously it’s gonna extend your life, it should extend
your life.”
Statement does
not account for
patient preference
“It’s up to the person. If they want to go through with it
they can, they should leave it up to the person.”
Negative wording
“That’s like hitting you over the head with a hammer,
I think it’s too harsh.”
Belief that cancer
screening may still
help others
“If it’s not gonna help me live I still would do it because
I might be helping somebody else.”
a “Don’t recommend cancer screening if patient is not likely to live 10 years.”16
Older Adults’ Views About Cancer Screening Cessation
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
August 2017
Volume 177, Number 8
1125
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 you live longer” and “You may not live long enough to benefit
from this test.” Most participants preferred the former phrase
and called the latter phrase “harsh.
” One person contrasted the
2 phrases: “You say you don’
t think I’
m gonna live that long.
That raises a red flag to me…It’
s more negative than the pre-
vious way you discussed it….By saying ‘
it’
s not gonna help me
live longer’
—it’
s a positive statement.”
Brief Explanation
Although many participants appreciated the discussion on the
risks and benefits of screening, some participants preferred
little to no explanation: “A short ‘
yes’or ‘
no’would be ok if [the
doctor] feels truly in his heart that is the way it should be.”
Other participants preferred omission of cancer screen-
ing discussion altogether if the doctor intended to recom-
mend no screening: “If [the doctor] wasn’
t gonna give [the
screeningtest]tothemheshouldn’
thavementionedit…Leave
it alone.”
Discussion
Building on the small body of literature that explored older
adults’attitudesaboutcancerscreeningandlifeexpectancy,25,26
we characterized perspectives from older adults with a wide
range of life expectancies regarding cancer screening cessa-
tion when life expectancy is limited. To our knowledge, this is
the first project to describe older adults’preferences for differ-
ent strategies to discuss screening cessation.
Contrary to previous studies that suggested that patients
maybereluctanttostopscreening,23-27wefoundthatmanypar-
ticipants in our study were amenable to considering screening
cessation. Recommendations from a trusted clinician made
screening cessation acceptable or positive to our study partici-
pants,whereasmostparticipantsinpriorstudiesstatedthatthey
had never discussed stopping cancer screening with their
clinicians.24,25 The results also contrast with a study that sug-
gested a recommendation to stop screening may undermine
trust in the clinician.24 The difference in results may stem from
the fact that our study participants had high levels of trust and
long relationships with their clinicians. Our results need to be
testedinlargerpopulationsbutsuggestthatitispossibleforcli-
nicians to find acceptable ways to recommend screening ces-
sation without negatively affecting their on-going relationship
with the patient.
Wefoundthatmanyparticipantsagreedthatageandhealth
status are important in screening decisions. While these fac-
tors are key predictors of life expectancy,34,35 our partici-
pants did not perceive life expectancy as being directly re-
lated to them or that life expectancy itself was important in
cancer screening. The perceived irrelevance of life expec-
tancy was also found in 2 previous studies.25,26 It is not sur-
prising then that many participants objected to the Choosing
Wisely statement16 about not recommending cancer screen-
ing in those with limited life expectancy. We realize that this
statementisintendedforcliniciansandmayhavebeenworded
differently if directly addressing patients. This result demon-
strates that complex concepts and terms used in research and
clinical guidelines, such as life expectancy, can be misinter-
preted by the public and call for careful, sensitive discussions
to avoid misperceptions. We found similar views among par-
ticipants with varying predicted life expectancies. An impor-
tantnextstepistoexaminethepotentialheterogeneityinviews
by life expectancy in a larger study.
Using health status to inform screening led to opposite de-
cisions in some participants. These participants perceived
someone with poor health status to need more screening. This
misunderstanding of the purpose of screening, even after
providing a brief explanation, confirms the importance to
both educate patients and check for understanding in clinical
practice.
How to best discuss screening cessation has not been pre-
viously studied. A systematic review of the impact of clinician-
patientcommunicationoncancerscreeningshowedthatwhether
ornotaclinicianrecommendedscreeningonlyexplainedsome
of the screening behavior; the quality and content of the com-
municationwerealsoinfluential.28Currently,cliniciansuseava-
rietyofapproachestodiscusscessationofscreeningwithoutclear
bestpractices.41Ourresultsaddtotheliteraturebyshowingthat
manyparticipantspreferredexplanationsthatincludedindividu-
alizedhealthstatusbutdislikedexplanationsthatmentionedlife
expectancy with a negative framing (“you may not live long
enough to benefit from this test”).
Our findings highlight a potential dilemma around incor-
porating life expectancy in cancer screening. Although many
participants were receptive to stopping cancer screening, most
did not feel that life expectancy was the key decision-making
factor,wereskepticalthatclinicianscouldaccuratelyassesslife
expectancy,anddidnotwantthecliniciantodiscusslifeexpec-
tancyinthescreeningcontext.Animportantimplicationofthis
finding is that clinicians may be caught between, on the one
hand, patients who do not believe or want to hear about life ex-
pectancy, and, on the other hand, research and guidelines that
emphasize the importance of using life expectancy to inform
cancer screening.3-6,13-16 The scientific literature increasingly
recognizes the importance of incorporating patient preference
into clinical guidelines, including in the language of guideline
presentation.42,43 Our results need to be tested in larger popu-
lationsbutsuggestthatmisperceptionsaroundthetermlifeex-
pectancy may be a barrier to guideline acceptance; a different
term to represent the predicted health trajectory based on age
andhealthstatusmaybemorepreferredbypatients.Evenifthe
role of life expectancy in cancer screening is appropriately un-
derstood, the participants’questions about the accuracy of life
expectancy estimates may remain, since inherent uncertainty
exists in applying population-based prediction models to any
individual. A threshold of 10-year life expectancy may not suf-
ficientlyaccountforthisuncertainty.Patientinputisimportant
to help better define how to apply life expectancy predictions
toguidecancerscreeningdecisions.Theseimplicationsarealso
relevant to a number of other clinical decisions that incorpo-
rate life expectancy.44,45
Limitations
This study has several limitations. It was conducted with par-
ticipants from clinical programs affiliated with 1 academic
Research Original Investigation
Older Adults’ Views About Cancer Screening Cessation
1126
JAMA Internal Medicine
August 2017
Volume 177, Number 8
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 center and all participants had regular clinicians in whom they
had high levels of trust. The results may not represent expe-
riencesofolderadultselsewhereoramongthosewithoutregu-
lar clinicians. This study was not designed to be representa-
tive of all older adults, but rather to gain in-depth perspectives
about a topic about which little was previously known. There
was only 1 interviewer, and both transcript coders were phy-
sicians which may have had an impact on data collection and
interpretation. The study design relied on self-report, and the
results are prone to recall and social desirability biases. A num-
beroftheinterviewquestionsusedhypotheticalscenarios,and
participants’responses may not be fully congruent with be-
havior in real life.
Conclusions
We found that older adults were generally receptive to recom-
mendations to stop cancer screening, especially in the
context of a trusting physician relationship and when the dis-
cussions framed the recommendations around age, health sta-
tus, and helping people live longer; in contrast, discussing life
expectancy in the screening context was more controversial.
Testing these communication preferences in larger popula-
tions to better delineate patient-centered approaches to
discuss screening cessation is an important step toward opti-
mizing cancer screening in older adults.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: February 22, 2017.
Published Online: June 12, 2017.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.1778
Author Contributions: Dr Schoenborn had full
access to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Schoenborn, Armacost,
Dy, Bridges, Boyd.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Schoenborn, Lee, Pollack, Armacost, Bridges, Xue,
Wolff, Boyd.
Drafting of the manuscript: Schoenborn, Armacost.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Schoenborn, Lee, Pollack, Dy,
Bridges, Xue, Wolff, Boyd.
Statistical analysis: Schoenborn, Xue.
Obtained funding: Schoenborn.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Lee,
Armacost, Bridges.
Study supervision: Schoenborn, Pollack, Dy,
Bridges, Boyd.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Funding/Support: Research reported in this
publication was supported by the National Institute
On Aging of the National Institutes of Health under
Award No. R03AG050912. This project was also
made possible in part through the support of the
Maryland Cigarette Restitution Fund Research
Grant to the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions. In
addition, Dr Schoenborn was supported by a T.
Franklin Williams Scholarship Award; Funding
provided by Atlantic Philanthropies Inc, the John A.
Hartford Foundation, the Alliance for Academic
Internal Medicine–Association of Specialty
Professors, and the American Geriatrics Society.
Disclaimer: The content is solely the responsibility
of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of the National Institutes of
Health.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding sources
had no role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
Additional Information: Ms Armacost is also a
patient and caregiver partner.
Previous Presentations: An earlier version of this
study was presented as a poster at the American
Society of Clinical Oncology National Meeting; June
3-7, 2016; Chicago, Illinois; and as a poster at the
Grants for Early Medical/Surgical Specialists'
Transition to Aging Research (GEMSSTAR) U13
Conference; September 21-23, 2016; Bethesda,
Maryland.
REFERENCES
1. Walter LC, Covinsky KE. Cancer screening in
elderly patients: a framework for individualized
decision making. JAMA. 2001;285(21):2750-2756.
2. Lee SJ, Boscardin WJ, Stijacic-Cenzer I,
Conell-Price J, O’Brien S, Walter LC. Time lag to
benefit after screening for breast and colorectal
cancer: meta-analysis of survival data from the
United States, Sweden, United Kingdom, and
Denmark. BMJ. 2013;346:e8441.
3. Lin JS, Piper MA, Perdue LA, et al. Screening for
Breast Cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement. JAMA. 2016;315(23):
2576-2594.
4. Siu AL; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for breast cancer: US Preventive Services
Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern
Med. 2016;164(4):279-296.
5. Oeffinger KC, Fontham ET, Etzioni R, et al;
American Cancer Society. Breast cancer screening
for women at average risk: 2015 guideline update
from the American Cancer Society. JAMA. 2015;314
(15):1599-1614.
6. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for prostate cancer: U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force recommendation statement.
Ann Intern Med. 2012;157(2):120-134.
7. Soung MC. Screening for cancer: when to stop? a
practical guide and review of the evidence. Med Clin
North Am. 2015;99(2):249-262.
8. Lansdorp-Vogelaar I, Gulati R, Mariotto AB, et al.
Personalizing age of cancer screening cessation
based on comorbid conditions: model estimates of
harms and benefits. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(2):
104-112.
9. Saini SD, van Hees F, Vijan S. Smarter screening
for cancer: possibilities and challenges of
personalization. JAMA. 2014;312(21):2211-2212.
10. Harris RP, Wilt TJ, Qaseem A; High Value Care
Task Force of the American College of Physicians. A
value framework for cancer screening: advice for
high-value care from the American College of
Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162(10):712-717.
11. Eckstrom E, Feeny DH, Walter LC, Perdue LA,
Whitlock EP. Individualizing cancer screening in
older adults: a narrative review and framework for
future research. J Gen Intern Med. 2013;28(2):292-
298.
12. Breslau ES, Gorin SS, Edwards HM, Schonberg
MA, Saiontz N, Walter LC. An individualized
approach to cancer screening decisions in older
adults: a multilevel framework. J Gen Intern Med.
2016;31(5):539-547.
13. Schnipper LE, Lyman GH, Blayney DW, et al.
American Society of Clinical Oncology 2013 top five
list in oncology. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(34):4362-4370.
14. Choosing Wisely Workgroup AGS; AGS
Choosing Wisely Workgroup. American Geriatrics
Society identifies another five things that
healthcare providers and patients should question.
J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014;62(5):950-960.
15. Williams AW, Dwyer AC, Eddy AA, et al;
American Society of Nephrology Quality, and
Patient Safety Task Force. Critical and honest
conversations: the evidence behind the “Choosing
Wisely” campaign recommendations by the
American Society of Nephrology. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol. 2012;7(10):1664-1672.
16. Society of General Internal Medicine. Five
things physicians and patients should question: the
choosing wisely campaign. 2013. http://www
.choosingwisely.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/02
/SGIM-Choosing-Wisely-List.pdf. Accessed
September 2016.
17. Royce TJ, Hendrix LH, Stokes WA, Allen IM,
Chen RC. Cancer screening rates in individuals with
different life expectancies. JAMA Intern Med.
2014;174(10):1558-1565.
18. Schonberg MA, Breslau ES, McCarthy EP.
Targeting of mammography screening according to
life expectancy in women aged 75 and older. J Am
Geriatr Soc. 2013;61(3):388-395.
19. Drazer MW, Prasad SM, Huo D, et al. National
trends in prostate cancer screening among older
American men with limited 9-year life expectancies:
evidence of an increased need for shared decision
making. Cancer. 2014;120(10):1491-1498.
20. So C, Kirby KA, Mehta K, et al. Medical center
characteristics associated with PSA screening in
elderly veterans with limited life expectancy. J Gen
Intern Med. 2012;27(6):653-660.
21. Schonberg MA, Breslau ES, Hamel MB, Bellizzi
KM, McCarthy EP. Colon cancer screening in U.S.
adults aged 65 and older according to life
expectancy and age. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2015;63(4):
750-756.
Older Adults’ Views About Cancer Screening Cessation
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
August 2017
Volume 177, Number 8
1127
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 22. Powell AA, Saini SD, Breitenstein MK, et al. Rates
and correlates of potentially inappropriate colorectal
cancer screening in the Veterans Health
Administration. J Gen Intern Med. 2015;30(6):732-741.
23. Schonberg MA, Ramanan RA, McCarthy EP,
Marcantonio ER. Decision making and counseling
around mammography screening for women aged
80 or older. J Gen Intern Med. 2006;21(9):979-985.
24. Torke AM, Schwartz PH, Holtz LR, Montz K,
Sachs GA. Older adults and forgoing cancer
screening: “I think it would be strange.” JAMA Intern
Med. 2013;173(7):526-531.
25. Lewis CL, Kistler CE, Amick HR, et al. Older
adults’ attitudes about continuing cancer screening
later in life: a pilot study interviewing residents of
two continuing care communities. BMC Geriatr.
2006;6:10.
26. Gross CP, Fried TR, Tinetti ME, et al.
Decision-making and cancer screening: a qualitative
study of older adults with multiple chronic
conditions. J Geriatr Oncol. 2015;6(2):93-100.
27. Lewis CL, Couper MP, Levin CA, Pignone MP,
Zikmund-Fisher BJ. Plans to stop cancer screening
tests among adults who recently considered
screening. J Gen Intern Med. 2010;25(8):859-864.
28. Peterson EB, Ostroff JS, DuHamel KN, et al.
Impact of provider-patient communication on
cancer screening adherence: a systematic review.
Prev Med. 2016;93:96-105.
29. Pollack CE, Platz EA, Bhavsar NA, et al. Primary
care providers’ perspectives on discontinuing
prostate cancer screening. Cancer. 2012;118(22):
5518-5524.
30. Schoenborn NL, Bowman TL II, Cayea D,
Pollack CE, Feeser S, Boyd C. Primary care
practitioners’ views on incorporating long-term
prognosis in the care of older adults. JAMA Intern
Med. 2016;176(5):671-678.
31. Raik BL, Miller FG, Fins JJ. Screening and
cognitive impairment: ethics of forgoing
mammography in older women. J Am Geriatr Soc.
2004;52(3):440-444.
32. Crabtree B, Miller W. Doing Qualitative Research.
2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 1999.
33. Marshall MN. Sampling for qualitative research.
Fam Pract. 1996;13(6):522-525.
34. Cruz M, Covinsky K, Widera EW, Stijacic-Cenzer
I, Lee SJ. Predicting 10-year mortality for older
adults. JAMA. 2013;309(9):874-876.
35. Schonberg MA, Davis RB, McCarthy EP,
Marcantonio ER. External validation of an index to
predict up to 9-year mortality of community
-dwelling adults aged 65 and older. J Am Geriatr Soc.
2011;59(8):1444-1451.
36. Chew LD, Bradley KA, Boyko EJ. Brief
questions to identify patients with inadequate
health literacy. Fam Med. 2004;36(8):588-594.
37. McNaughton CD, Cavanaugh KL, Kripalani S,
Rothman RL, Wallston KA. Validation of a short,
3-item version of the subjective numeracy scale.
Med Decis Making. 2015;35(8):932-936.
38. Hall MA, Zheng B, Dugan E, et al. Measuring
patients’ trust in their primary care providers. Med
Care Res Rev. 2002;59(3):293-318.
39. Hsieh HF, Shannon SE. Three approaches to
qualitative content analysis. Qual Health Res. 2005;
15(9):1277-1288.
40. Boeije H. A purposeful approach to the
constant comparative method in the analysis of
qualitative interviews. Qual Quant. 2002;36(4):
391-409. doi:10.1023/A:1020909529486
41. Schoenborn NL, Bowman TL II, Cayea D, Boyd
C, Feeser S, Pollack CE. Discussion strategies that
primary care clinicians use when stopping cancer
screening in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2016;64
(11):e221-e223.
42. Montori VM, Brito JP, Murad MH. The optimal
practice of evidence-based medicine: incorporating
patient preferences in practice guidelines. JAMA.
2013;310(23):2503-2504.
43. Andrews J, Guyatt G, Oxman AD, et al. GRADE
guidelines: 14: going from evidence to
recommendations: the significance and
presentation of recommendations. J Clin Epidemiol.
2013;66(7):719-725.
44. Sussman JB, Kerr EA, Saini SD, et al. Rates of
deintensification of blood pressure and glycemic
medication treatment based on levels of control
and life expectancy in older patients with diabetes
mellitus. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175(12):1942-1949.
45. Bibbins-Domingo K; US Preventive Services
Task Force. Aspirin use for the primary prevention
of cardiovascular disease and colorectal cancer: US
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2016;164(12):836-845.
Invited Commentary
LESS IS MORE
Talking to Patients About Cancer Screening Cessation
Alexia M. Torke, MD, MS
There has been a growing realization that many individuals
whohaveadvancedillnessormultiplemedicalconditionscon-
tinue to receive cancer screening that is unlikely to benefit
them. Such screening tests may also cause burden owing to
the cascade of interventions
that follows a positive test re-
sult and the burdens of the
tests themselves. This has led
to an important movement to stop unnecessary cancer screen-
ingbyconsideringrisksandbenefitsforindividualpatientsand
communicating effectively with the patient when the ben-
efits no longer outweigh the risks.1,2 Screening guidelines are
also beginning to consider when cancer screening should be
individualized based on factors such as age, comorbidity, or
life expectancy. Other guidelines note that evidence is insuf-
ficient to recommend a screening test for those older than a
certain age.
Public health efforts to promote screening for cancer have
been highly effective in raising awareness of its importance.
However,thepositivemessagesaboutscreeningfromclinicians
and the media may pose a major challenge to reducing rates of
unnecessary screening. Screening tests may also be prompted
byformlettersorpostcardssentdirectlytoapatient’
shomethat
may not be individualized based on factors such as advanced
illness or age. Turning the tide on nonbeneficial testing will in-
volve communicating effectively with patients and families to
explain why, after years of hearing that screening is essential
to health, the risks and benefits might have changed for the pa-
tient owing to advanced age or serious illness.
Priorresearchconfirmsthatolderadultsviewcancerscreen-
ing very favorably and may even be suspicious of messages to
stop.3,4 Unfortunately, there has been little evidence about as-
pects of communication that are effective and well received by
patients when a screening test is no longer likely to be benefi-
cial. The study by Schoenborn et al5 published in this issue of
JAMA Internal Medicine provides important new information
aboutwhatolderadultsdowanttohearandsituationsinwhich
they would consider cessation of cancer screening.5 The study
found that many patients are amenable to stopping cancer
screeninginthecontextofatrustingrelationshipandwhenthey
hear messages addressing their own concerns, such as advanc-
ing age and declining health status.
Related article page 1121
Research Original Investigation
Older Adults’ Views About Cancer Screening Cessation
1128
JAMA Internal Medicine
August 2017
Volume 177, Number 8
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
