 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / January 29, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
59
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
On January 22, this report was posted as an MMWR Early 
Release on the MMWR website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).
In early 2015, an outbreak of Zika virus, a flavivirus trans-
mitted by Aedes mosquitoes, was identified in northeast Brazil, 
an area where dengue virus was also circulating. By September, 
reports of an increase in the number of infants born with 
microcephaly in Zika virus-affected areas began to emerge, and 
Zika virus RNA was identified in the amniotic fluid of two 
women whose fetuses had been found to have microcephaly 
by prenatal ultrasound. The Brazil Ministry of Health (MoH) 
established a task force to investigate the possible association of 
microcephaly with Zika virus infection during pregnancy and 
a registry for incident microcephaly cases (head circumference 
≥2 standard deviations [SD] below the mean for sex and ges-
tational age at birth) and pregnancy outcomes among women 
suspected to have had Zika virus infection during pregnancy. 
Among a cohort of 35 infants with microcephaly born dur-
ing August–October 2015 in eight of Brazil’s 26 states and 
reported to the registry, the mothers of all 35 had lived in or 
visited Zika virus-affected areas during pregnancy, 25 (71%) 
infants had severe microcephaly (head circumference >3 SD 
below the mean for sex and gestational age), 17 (49%) had at 
least one neurologic abnormality, and among 27 infants who 
had neuroimaging studies, all had abnormalities. Tests for other 
congenital infections were negative. All infants had a lumbar 
puncture as part of the evaluation and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
samples were sent to a reference laboratory in Brazil for Zika 
virus testing; results are not yet available. Further studies are 
needed to confirm the association of microcephaly with Zika 
virus infection during pregnancy and to understand any other 
adverse pregnancy outcomes associated with Zika virus infec-
tion. Pregnant women in Zika virus-affected areas should pro-
tect themselves from mosquito bites by using air conditioning, 
screens, or nets when indoors, wearing long sleeves and pants, 
using permethrin-treated clothing and gear, and using insect 
repellents when outdoors. Pregnant and lactating women can 
use all U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered 
insect repellents according to the product label.
An outbreak of Zika virus infection was recognized in northeast 
Brazil in early 2015 (1). In September 2015, health authorities 
began to receive reports from physicians in this region of an 
increase in the number of infants born with microcephaly. In 
October, the MoH confirmed an increase in birth prevalence 
of microcephaly in northeast Brazil, compared with previously 
reported estimates (approximately 0.5/10,000 live births), which 
are based on review of birth certificates and include descriptions 
of major congenital anomalies. The MoH rapidly established a 
microcephaly registry in Brazil. On November 17, 2015, the MoH 
reported the increase in microcephaly cases, and possible associa-
tion of microcephaly with Zika virus infection during pregnancy 
on its website;* and the Pan American Health Organization 
(PAHO) published an alert regarding the increase in occurrence 
of microcephaly in Brazil (2). In December, PAHO reported 
the identification of Zika virus RNA by reverse transcription-
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in amniotic fluid samples 
from two pregnant women whose fetuses were found to have 
microcephaly by prenatal ultrasound, and the identification of 
Zika virus RNA from multiple body tissues, including the brain, of 
an infant with microcephaly who died in the immediate neonatal 
period (3). These events prompted new alerts from the MoH, the 
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (4), and 
CDC (5) concerning the possible association of microcephaly 
with the recent outbreak of Zika virus infection.
A comprehensive protocol for notification and investigation 
of all infants with microcephaly and all women with suspected 
Zika virus infection during pregnancy was developed by the 
MoH and implemented nationwide. In addition, the Brazilian 
Society of Medical Genetics established the Zika Embryopathy 
Task Force (SBGM–ZETF), which includes clinical geneticists, 
obstetricians, pediatricians, neurologists, and radiologists, to 
review all incident cases of microcephaly as well as all infants 
born to mothers with suspected Zika virus infection during 
pregnancy. Task force members collect data concerning the 
pregnancy (including exposure history, symptoms, and labora-
tory testing), physical examination of the infant, and any addi-
tional studies using a standardized spreadsheet. Microcephaly 
was defined as neonatal head circumference ≥2 SD below the 
mean for gestational age and sex of the infant at birth. Infection 
with Zika virus is difficult to confirm retrospectively because 
Possible Association Between Zika Virus Infection and Microcephaly — 
Brazil, 2015
Lavinia Schuler-Faccini, PhD1; Erlane M. Ribeiro, PhD2; Ian M.L. Feitosa, MD3; Dafne D.G. Horovitz, PhD4; Denise P
. Cavalcanti, PhD, MD5; 
André Pessoa2; Maria Juliana R. Doriqui, MD6; Joao Ivanildo Neri, MD7; Joao Monteiro de Pina Neto, PhD8; Hector Y.C. Wanderley, MD9; 
Mirlene Cernach, PhD10; Antonette S. El-Husny, PhD11; Marcos V.S. Pone, PhD4; Cassio L.C. Serao, MD12; Maria Teresa V. Sanseverino, PhD13; 
Brazilian Medical Genetics Society–Zika Embryopathy Task Force14
* http://portalsaude.saude.gov.br/index.php/cidadao/principal/
agencia-saude/20805-ministerio-da-saudedivulga-boletim-epidemiologico.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
60 
MMWR / January 29, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
serological immunological tests might cross-react with other 
flaviviruses, especially dengue virus (6). Therefore a mother’s 
report of a rash illness during pregnancy was used as a proxy 
indicator of potential Zika virus infection.
Although 37 infants with microcephaly were evaluated, only 
35 cases are included in this report. Two infants with micro-
cephaly were excluded from the original cohort of 37 babies: one 
had autosomal recessive microcephaly with sibship recurrence, 
and one had cytomegalovirus infection. Overall, 26 (74%) moth-
ers of infants with microcephaly reported a rash during the first 
(n = 21) or second (5) trimester (Table). Residence in or travel 
during pregnancy to areas where Zika virus is circulating was 
confirmed for all mothers, including women without a history 
of rash. Twenty-five (74%) infants had severe microcephaly 
(head circumference >3 SD below the mean for gestational age). 
Computed tomography scans and transfontanellar cranial 
ultrasounds showed a consistent pattern of widespread brain 
calcifications, mainly in the periventricular, parenchymal, and 
thalamic areas, and in the basal ganglia, and was associated in 
approximately one third of cases with evidence of cell migra-
tion abnormalities (e.g., lissencephaly, pachygyria). Ventricular 
enlargement secondary to cortical/subcortical atrophy was also 
frequently reported. Excessive and redundant scalp skin, reported 
in 11 (31%) cases, also suggests acute intrauterine brain injury, 
indicating and arrest in cerebral growth, but not in growth of 
scalp skin. Four (11%) infants had arthrogryposis (congenital 
contractures), indicative of central or peripheral nervous system 
involvement (7). All 35 infants in the cohort tested negative for 
syphilis, toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes 
simplex virus infections. CSF samples from all infants enrolled 
in the cohort were sent to a reference laboratory in Brazil for 
Zika virus testing; the results are not yet available.
Discussion
Microcephaly usually results from abnormal brain develop-
ment. The long-term consequences of microcephaly depend 
on underlying brain anomalies and can range from mild 
developmental delays to severe motor and intellectual defi-
cits, like cerebral palsy. In addition to congenital infections, 
microcephaly can result from chromosomal abnormalities; 
exposure to drugs, alcohol, or other environmental toxins; 
premature fusion of the bones of the skull (craniosynostosis); 
and certain metabolic disorders. The sudden increase in the 
number of infants born with microcephaly associated with 
cerebral damage characteristically seen in congenital infections 
in a region where an outbreak of a newly circulating virus 
has recently occurred is suggestive of a possible relationship. 
The association between maternal infections and congenital 
anomalies has long been recognized, especially when infection 
occurs during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy (8). Brazil’s 
vaccination program has eliminated some infections that result 
in congenital anomalies, such as rubella. Congenital infections 
can affect multiple organ systems, and many are associated with 
specific brain damage, including microcephaly, calcifications 
(predominantly periventricular, but also in the basal ganglia 
and in cerebral parenchyma), ventriculomegaly, neuronal 
migration disorders (pachygyria, polymicrogyria, lissencephaly, 
and schizenchephaly), cerebellar hypoplasia, and white matter 
anomalies (8). Ongoing surveillance and evaluation of new 
cases are important to describe the phenotypic spectrum of 
potential Zika virus-associated congenital infections. In addi-
tion, special studies, including case-control studies, are needed 
to confirm the association, determine the magnitude of the 
potential risk, and identify other possible risk factors.
CDC recently tested samples from two pregnancies that 
ended in miscarriage and from two infants with microcephaly 
who died shortly after birth. All four cases were from Brazil 
and were positive for Zika virus infection, indicating that the 
infants had become infected during pregnancy. Zika virus 
was present in the brain of the full term infants, and genetic 
sequence analyses show that the virus in all four cases was the 
same as the Zika virus strain currently circulating in Brazil. All 
four mothers reported having experienced a febrile rash illness 
during their pregnancies.†
Prevention strategies established by the MoH include aggres-
sive efforts to eliminate mosquito breeding areas by removing 
standing water containers, as well as recommendations for per-
sonal protective measures, including preventing mosquito bites 
among pregnant women by applying insect repellents, wearing 
long-sleeved shirts and long pants, and using mosquito nets, 
as well as risk communication and community mobilization 
(3). Pregnant and lactating women can use all EPA-registered 
insect repellents according to the product label.
This findings in this report are subject to at least four limita-
tions. First, historical birth prevalence of microcephaly in Brazil, 
approximately 0.5 cases per 10,000 live births, calculated from 
birth certificates, was lower than expected estimates of 1–2 cases 
per 10,000 live births (9), which might indicate general under-
ascertainment of microcephaly in Brazil. However, during the 
second half of 2015 alone, >3,000 suspected cases of microcephaly 
(approximately 20 cases per 10,000 live births) were reported to 
the MoH through the special notification protocol, suggesting a 
sharp increase in birth prevalence, although the special notifica-
tion protocol might have also increased case reporting. Second, 
before the November MoH alert, although descriptions of con-
genital anomalies were reported, infant head circumference was 
not routinely recorded. Hence, it is possible that mild cases of 
microcephaly might not have been reported. Since the MoH alert 
† http://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2016/t0116-zika-virus-travel.html.  
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / January 29, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
61
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and the attendant media coverage of the outbreak, surveillance 
for microcephaly and physician reporting of suspected cases have 
increased. Third, because Zika virus infection was not laboratory-
confirmed in infants or their mothers, the history of a nonspecific 
rash illness during pregnancy is subject to recall bias and might 
have resulted in misclassification of potential Zika virus exposure. 
Finally, this report does not comment on other features character-
istic of intrauterine infections such as hepatosplenomegaly, rash, 
and chorioretinitis, or on some features that have been reported 
in cases with presumed Zika including hearing loss, pale maculas, 
and swallowing difficulties.
As of January 2016, there has been confirmed autoch-
thonous transmission of Zika virus in 19 countries in the 
Americas outside Brazil (10). Although other countries in the 
Americas, including Uruguay and Argentina, have not reported 
autochthonous Zika virus, the presence of a competent vector, 
Ae. aegypti, in these countries poses a potential risk for further 
spread of the virus.
Acknowledgments
Patricia S. Sousa, Luciana S.S. Melo, Elza C.C.S. Barros, Brazilian 
Medical Genetics Society–Zika Embryopathy Task (SBGM–ZETF), 
Maranhão; Tirzah Lajus, SBGM–ZETF, Rio Grande do Norte; 
Bethânia F.R. Ribeiro, SBGM–ZETF, Acre; Luiz Carlos Santana da 
Silva, Gloria Colonelli, SBGM–ZETF, Pará; Larissa S.M. Bueno, 
Angelina X. Acosta, Joanna G.C. Meira, Manoel Sarno, SBGM–
ZETF, Bahia; Liane Giuliani, SBGM–ZETF, Mato Grosso do Sul; 
Cynthia A.M.S. Pacheco, Claudia N. Barbosa, Sheila M. Pone, 
Patricia S. Correia, SBGM–ZETF, Rio de Janeiro; Antonio F. Moron, 
Amelia M.N. Santos, Ana Beatriz Alvarez Perez, Rayana E. Maia, 
Victor E.F. Ferraz, SBGM–ZETF, São Paulo; Tani M.S. Ranieri, 
Andre A. Silva, Fernanda S.L. Vianna, Alberto Abeche, Julio Cesar L. 
Leite, SBGM–ZETF, Rio Grande do Sul; Mariela Larrandaburu, 
SBGM–ZETF, Uruguay.
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
An outbreak of Zika virus infection, a flavivirus transmitted by 
Aedes mosquitoes, was first recognized in northeastern Brazil in 
early 2015. In September, a sharp increase in the number of 
reported cases of microcephaly was reported in areas affected 
by the outbreak.
What is added by this report?
The Brazil Ministry of Health developed a case definition for 
Zika virus–related microcephaly (head circumference ≥2 
standard deviations [SD] below the mean for sex and gesta-
tional age at birth). A task force and registry were established to 
investigate Zika virus–related cases of microcephaly and to 
describe the clinical characteristics of cases. Among the first 
35 cases of microcephaly reported to the registry, 74% of 
mothers reported a rash illness during pregnancy, 71% of 
infants had severe microcephaly (>3 SD below the mean), 
approximately half had at least one neurologic abnormality, and 
among 27 who had neuroimaging studies, all were abnormal. 
Cerebrospinal fluid from all infants is being tested for Zika virus; 
results are not currently available.
What are the implications for public health practice?
The increased occurrence of microcephaly associated with 
cerebral damage characteristically seen in congenital infections 
in Zika virus-affected areas is suggestive of a possible relation-
ship. Additional studies are warranted to confirm the associa-
tion and to more fully characterize the phenotype. In addition 
to removing potential breeding areas for mosquitoes, pregnant 
women in Zika-affected areas should wear protective clothing, 
apply a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-approved 
insect repellent, and sleep in a screened room or under a 
mosquito net.
TABLE. Main phenotypical findings of the first 35 patients enrolled 
in the Brazilian Society of Medical Genetics–Zika Embryopathy Task 
Force Registry — Brazil, 2015  
Characteristic
n (%)
Reported maternal rash during pregnancy
First trimester
21 (57)
Second trimester
5 (14)
Not reported
9 (26)
Sex
Female
21 (60)
Male
14 (40)
Gestational age at birth (34)*
Term
31 (91)
Preterm
3 (9)
Weight
≥2,500g
26 (74)
<2,500g
9 (26)
Defect
Head circumference >3 SD
25 (71)
Head circumference >2 SD to 3 SD
10 (29)
Excessive and redundant scalp skin
11 (31)
Talipes (clubfoot)
5 (14)
Arthrogryposis (contractures)
4 (11)
Other defects (microphthalmia)
1 (3)
Abnormal funduscopic examination (11)
2 (18)
Neurologic examination
Any abnormality
17 (49)
Hypertonia/Spasticity
13 (37)
Hyperreflexia
7 (20)
Irritability
7 (20)
Tremors
4 (11)
Seizures
3 (9)
Neuroimaging (27)
Any abnormality
27 (100)
Calcifications
20 (74)
Ventricular enlargement
12 (44)
Neuronal migration disorders (lissencephaly, 
pachygyria)
9 (33)
Abbreviation: SD = standard deviations.
* Number of patients sampled was less than total (35).  
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
62 
MMWR / January 29, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 1Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil; 2Hospital Infantil Albert 
Sabin, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil; 3Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Brazil; 
4Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; 5University of Campinas, 
Sao Paulo, Brazil; 6Hospital Infantil Juvencio Mattos, Maranhao, Brazil; 
7Universidade Potiguar, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil; 8University of Sao Paulo, 
Ribeirao Preto, Brazil; 9Secretaria de Estado da Saúde do Espírito Santo, Brazil; 
10Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, Brazil; 11Centro Universitário do Estado 
do Pará, Brazil; 12Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; 13Hospital 
de Clinicas de Porto Alegre, Brazil; 14Brazilian Medical Genetics Society–Zika 
Embryopathy Task Force.
Corresponding author: Lavinia Schuler-Faccini, lavinia.faccini@ufrgs.br, 
55-51-9975-6770. 
References
 1. Campos GS, Bandeira AC, Sardi SI. Zika virus outbreak, Bahia, Brazil. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2015;21:1885–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2110.150847.
 2. Pan American Health Organization. Epidemiological alert. Increase in 
microcephaly in the northeast of Brazil—epidemiological alert. 
Washington DC: World Health Organization, Pan American Health 
Organization; 2015. http://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_
docman&task=doc_view&Itemid=270&gid=32636&lang=en.
 3. Pan American Health Organization. Neurological syndrome, congenital 
malformations, and Zika virus infection. Implications for public health 
in the Americas—epidemiological alert. Washington DC: World Health 
Organization, Pan American Health Organization; 2015. http://www.
paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_view&Itemi
d=270&gid=32405&lang=en.
 4. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Rapid risk 
assessment: microcephaly in Brazil potentially linked to the Zika virus 
epidemic. Stockholm, Sweden: European Centre for Disease Prevention 
and Control; 2015. http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications/Publications/
zika-microcephaly-Brazil-rapid-risk-assessment-Nov-2015.pdf.
 5. CDC. Recognizing, managing, and reporting Zika virus infections in 
travelers returning from Central America, South America, the Caribbean, 
and Mexico. CDC Health Advisory. Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, CDC; 2016. http://emergency.cdc.gov/
han/han00385.asp.
 6. Hall JG. Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita: etiology, genetics, classification, 
diagnostic approach, and general aspects. J Pediatr Orthop B 1997;6:159–66. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01202412-199707000-00002.
 7. Lanciotti RS, Kosoy OL, Laven JJ, et al. Genetic and serologic properties of 
Zika virus associated with an epidemic, Yap State, Micronesia, 2007. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2008;14:1232–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1408.080287.
 8. Silasi M, Cardenas I, Kwon JY, Racicot K, Aldo P
, Mor G. Viral infections 
during pregnancy. Am J Reprod Immunol 2015;73:199–213. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/aji.12355.
 9. EUROCAT European Surveillance of Congenital Anomalies. Prevalence 
tables. Ispra, Italy: EUROCAT European Surveillance of Congenital 
Anomalies; 2015. http://www.eurocat-network.eu/accessprevalencedata/
prevalencetables.
 
10. Hennessey M, Fischer M, Staples JE. Zika virus spreads to new areas—
region of the Americas, May 2015–January 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly 2016;65(3).   
