 Cross-modal object recognition and dynamic weighting
of sensory inputs in a fish
Sarah Schumachera,1, Theresa Burt de Pererab, Johanna Thenerta, and Gerhard von der Emdea
aInstitut für Zoologie, Universität Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany; and bDepartment of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PS, United Kingdom
Edited by Eric I. Knudsen, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, and approved May 20, 2016 (received for review February 24, 2016)
Most animals use multiple sensory modalities to obtain informa-
tion about objects in their environment. There is a clear adaptive
advantage to being able to recognize objects cross-modally and
spontaneously (without prior training with the sense being tested)
as this increases the flexibility of a multisensory system, allowing an
animal to perceive its world more accurately and react to environ-
mental changes more rapidly. So far, spontaneous cross-modal
object recognition has only been shown in a few mammalian species,
raising the question as to whether such a high-level function may be
associated with complex mammalian brain structures, and therefore
absent in animals lacking a cerebral cortex. Here we use an object-
discrimination paradigm based on operant conditioning to show, for
the first time to our knowledge, that a nonmammalian vertebrate,
the weakly electric fish Gnathonemus petersii, is capable of perform-
ing spontaneous cross-modal object recognition and that the sensory
inputs are weighted dynamically during this task. We found that fish
trained to discriminate between two objects with either vision or the
active electric sense, were subsequently able to accomplish the task
using only the untrained sense. Furthermore we show that cross-
modal object recognition is influenced by a dynamic weighting of
the sensory inputs. The fish weight object-related sensory inputs
according to their reliability, to minimize uncertainty and to enable
an optimal integration of the senses. Our results show that sponta-
neous cross-modal object recognition and dynamic weighting of sen-
sory inputs are present in a nonmammalian vertebrate.
multisensory integration | perception | sensory transfer |
sensory reliability | sensory conflict
T
o behave adaptively, an animal must be able to perceive and
react appropriately to environmental stimuli. Sensory in-
formation can often be obtained through multiple sensory
channels and can interact in a number of ways before a behavioral
output is produced. To increase the flexibility of a multisensory
system, information about objects in the environment can be
transferred between different senses; this enables some animals to
use spatial information acquired with one particular sensory system
to recognize objects with another one (cross-modal object recog-
nition). In contrast to simple forms of cross-modal information
transfer, which are based on the formation of direct associations
between two specific stimuli (1–4), cross-modal object recognition
requires additional and more complex conditions to be met. These
conditions are as follows: (i) The information provided by the two
senses has to match in content (i.e., both senses have to provide
information about the same characteristic object property; e.g.,
shape, surface structure). (ii) The sensory inputs have to be encoded
in a way that allows temporally disjointed information from two
senses to be identified as identical, despite these senses relying on
different physical stimuli. (iii) Characteristic object features have to
be stored in a neuronal representation that is accessible by multiple
senses. So far, spontaneous cross-modal object recognition has only
been described in humans (5), apes (6), monkeys (7), dolphins (8),
and rats (9), and little is known about the neuronal structures that
are involved in this process.
A reliable percept is fundamental for cross-modal object recog-
nition. Although the interaction of multiple sensory channels offers
many advantages, the integration of conflicting information from
different senses could also lead to a decrease of perceptual re-
liability. Therefore, to obtain a reliable percept, not all available
senses contribute equally, and the observable behavioral output
tends to be dominated by certain senses. Which sense dominates
and the degree to which each sensory input contributes to the
overall percept depends on the conditions and the task, and
might be determined by the reliability of the different sensory
inputs under the given conditions (10–13) and prior experience
(14, 15). In humans, for example, vision is dominant during
spatial tasks (16, 17), whereas the acoustic and the haptic senses
dominate over vision during tasks that require temporal assess-
ments (18, 19). Because conditions may change rapidly, this
“weighting” of sensory inputs has to be dynamically adjustable.
Dynamic weighting of sensory inputs enables animals to integrate
multisensory information optimally to obtain a reliable percept of
the environment (11), but like cross-modal object recognition has so
far only been described in mammals (11, 20, 21).
Weakly electric fish Gnathonemus petersii possess multiple
senses, which potentially could be used for fine-scale spatial in-
terrogation of their surroundings. These fish can discriminate
between nearby objects using active electrolocation (22), a process
during which object-evoked distortions in a self-generated electric
field (electrical images) (23, 24) are perceived with special elec-
troreceptor organs in the skin (25). Active electrolocation is a
near-field sense, which works only at short distances from the fish
(22). In addition to this active electric sense, G. petersii possess a
visual system with highly specialized eyes (26). The visual system is
adapted to the crepuscular and nocturnal activity of the fish and
their habitat (turbid black water streams in Central and West
Africa). In the “grouped retina,” the photoreceptors are packed
into bundles within a tapetum lucidum, which improves vision under
Significance
Being able to spontaneously recognize objects across different
senses increases the flexibility of a multisensory system, be-
cause the reliability of different sensory inputs depends on the
environment and range. However, this ability has only been
found in mammals, suggesting such a high-level function might
be associated with complex mammalian brain structures. We
show that the weakly electric fish Gnathonemus petersii, is
also capable of spontaneous cross-modal object recognition,
discriminating objects learned visually with the active electric
sense and vice versa. Furthermore, the modality-specific inputs
are weighted dynamically according to their reliability at dif-
ferent ranges. This finding suggests that these complex cog-
nitive abilities are present in fish in addition to mammals, and
therefore do not require a cerebral cortex.
Author contributions: T.B.d.P. and G.v.d.E. designed research; S.S. and J.T. performed
research; S.S., T.B.d.P., and G.v.d.E. analyzed data; and S.S., T.B.d.P., and G.v.d.E. wrote
the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: sarah51@uni-bonn.de.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1603120113/-/DCSupplemental.
7638–7643
|
PNAS
|
July 5, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 27
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603120113
 dim light and in turbid waters (26). Previous studies have shown that
the visual and electrosensory inputs can be integrated when sensing
the surroundings (27), and both senses provide spatial information
(matching content) about objects.
Here we used G. petersii to test for spontaneous cross-modal
object recognition and dynamic weighing of sensory inputs. We
applied a two-alternative forced-choice procedure, during which
the fish were trained to discriminate between two objects using
only vision or only their active electric sense and we tested them
subsequently with the untrained sense. Crucially, we varied ac-
cess to object information using the two senses by altering fea-
tures of the objects themselves without having to surgically
manipulate the fish. This was an important approach as it re-
duced the uncontrolled effects of modifying animals’ senses.
Results
To test for spontaneous cross-modal object recognition, 10 G. petersii
with no experimental experience were trained to discriminate be-
tween two objects of different shapes placed at a distance of 1 cm
from the viewing gate. By using objects made from different
materials, either the visual sense only (red colored electrically
transparent agarose objects; group 1, n = 5) or the active electric
sense only (metal objects covered by hoods; group 2, n = 5)
provided information, which could be used for object discrimi-
nation (Fig. S1). After the fish reached a preassigned learning
criterion (75% correct choices on 3 consecutive training days),
they were subjected to transfer tests, during which they could use
only the untrained sense for the discrimination task: in the
visually trained group, the active electric sense (metal objects
encased in a cube of electrically transparent agarose presented in
the dark), and the visual sense in the electrically trained group
(red-colored electrically transparent agarose objects). Control
tests were performed to ensure that the fish could not use any
other cues (e.g., electrical or lateral line input) to discriminate
between the red-colored, electrically transparent agarose objects,
and that the hoods did not influence the electrical performance
during training or the tests (Control Tests and Figs. S2–S6).
After training, all fish of both training groups were able to
discriminate between the objects with similar performances of
85–92% correct choices. However, when the objects were placed
at a distance of 1 cm from the viewing gate, the results of the two
groups during the transfer tests differed (Fig. 1). The discrimi-
nation performance of all fish in the visually trained group
remained constant during transfer tests, during which only the
electric sense was available for discrimination (Fig. 1A), in-
dicating that the fish were able to spontaneously discriminate
between the objects electrically without previously being trained
with this modality. In other words, the fish were capable of cross-
modal object recognition. In contrast, only two of five fish
trained with only the active electric sense available reached a
performance significantly different from chance level when
tested only with visual information available for object recogni-
tion. These two fish transferred information from the active
electric sense to vision (Fig. 1B).
We were unable to ascertain whether, in the three unsuccessful
fish (fish nos. 7, 8, and 10), transfer from the electric sense to
vision failed to occur at the processing stage or whether transfer
did occur, but was masked by a dominance of the electric sense.
During the tests when objects could only be perceived visually, the
electrically trained fish were presented with conflicting in-
formation from the electric sense (providing the information that
no object is present) and from vision (providing the information
that an object is present). Therefore, the inability to discriminate
between the objects in the visual transfer tests might have been
driven by a reliability-based dominance of the electric sense at short
distances. To investigate this hypothesis, four fish [fish nos. 6 and 8–10
(fish 7 died)] from the electrically trained group were subsequently
tested at different distances from the objects in three experimental
situations: first, with only the active electric sense providing in-
formation about the objects (to provide a measure of the re-
liability of the electric sense at different distances); second, with
only vision available (to test the transfer from the electric sense to
vision); and third, with both senses available for object discrimi-
nation (a control).
At longer distances, the discrimination performance of the fish
in the electrical tests decreased in line with decreasing reliability
of the electric sense (Fig. 2, red curves). However, the perfor-
mance in the transfer tests, in which vision alone was available
for object discrimination, increased with distance, eventually
reaching a similar level as in the electrical training (Fig. 2, blue
curves). At even longer distances, the performances decreased
again. These tests reveal that transfer must have occurred from
the active electric sense to vision (there was no failure of transfer
at the processing stage), but at short distances may have been
masked in all but two fish at the point of the behavioral output.
When tested with both senses (vision and the electric sense)
available for object discrimination, the information from both
modalities corresponded, leading to a high discrimination
performance at both short and long distances (Fig. 2, black
Fig. 1.
Visual (blue) and electrical (red) discrimination performance, under
training conditions and during the transfer tests of (A) visually trained fish
(fish 1–5) and (B) electrically trained fish (fish 6–10). All trials were conducted
with two objects that only differed in shape placed at a distance of 1 cm
behind the respective gates. The number of trials conducted with each
condition is indicated within the bars. Training results include all training
trials after reaching the learning criterion. The dashed line indicates the 50%
chance level. A χ2 test was conducted to test whether the performances were
significantly different from chance level (*P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; ***P ≤ 0.001).
Schumacher et al.
PNAS
|
July 5, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 27
|
7639
NEUROSCIENCE
 curves). Even at intermediate distances, where in both uni-modal
cases the performances were near threshold-level (at a distance of
about 2 cm), the fish now discriminated effectively between the
objects (Fig. 2). Control tests ensured that this effect was not due
to differences in the experimental conditions (Fig. S3).
To pursue this idea further and to test whether the inability to
discriminate between the objects visually at short distances might
be due to the visual sense not functioning, the electric organ of
each of the four electrically trained fish (fish 6 and 8–10) was
surgically silenced. To do this, the spinal cord was sectioned an-
terior to the electric organ, which is located in the caudal peduncle
(28). Following this procedure, the performances in the visual
transfer tests at short distance (1 cm) increased to a level similar
to that during electrical training (Fig. 3). This revealed that at
short distances the eyes of the animals do provide information
about object shape, and that in the absence of any electrical input
the behavioral output is driven by the visual input. Control ex-
periments after the tests at varying distances, before the fish were
electrically silenced ensured that the changes in the discrimina-
tion performance were not due to experience gathered during the
experiments with both senses (Fig. S5).
Discussion
Our results show that, similar to mammals, the weakly electric
fish G. petersii is capable of spontaneous cross-modal object
recognition. Cross-modal object recognition increases the flexi-
bility of a multisensory system as it allows animals to recognize
objects under varying conditions (e.g., day and night) and to
exploit the advantages of their long-range (vision) and short-
range (active electrolocation) sensory systems optimally. Because
the senses have to provide information with matching content for
spontaneous cross-modal object recognition, in most mammals,
this ability is restricted to vision and the haptic/tactile sense (5–7,
9). Similarly, dolphins are capable of performing cross-modal
object recognition between vision and active echolocation (8).
Here we show, for the first time to our knowledge, that cross-
modal object recognition is also possible between vision and the
active electric sense. Although the mechanosensitive lateral line
system or the passive electric sense also could have provided object
information and might influence object recognition in a natural
environment, control experiments showed no involvement of these
sensory systems in our experiments (Figs. S2 and S5).
During our study, G. petersii used their active electric sense
and vision to acquire information about the shape of the two
objects to be discriminated. Thus, the animals had to recognize
that the information provided by the two sensory systems about
the same spatial object feature were identical, even though they
were relying on different physical stimuli and the sensory infor-
mation was arriving sequentially. This means that the sensory
information had to be encoded in the brain in a way that allowed
Fig. 2.
Discrimination performance of the electrically trained fish [fish 6 (A), 8 (B), 9 (C), and 10 (D); same fish as in Fig. 1B] tested at different distances with
only the electric sense (red circles), only vision (blue squares), and both senses (black triangles) available for object discrimination. At least 30 trials were
conducted for each distance. The electrical (red line) and visual (blue line) results were fitted with a Gaussian fitting curve and a sigmoidal fit was used for the
results of the tests with both senses available (black line). The R2 value is given in the corresponding color for each curve in the figure. Results above the
dotted line are significantly different from chance level (P ≤ 0.05, χ2 test).
7640
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603120113
Schumacher et al.
 the two sensory channels to exchange information and compare and
match object related inputs. This highly cognitive ability could be
achieved in two different ways: First, information about certain
object features (in our experiment pertaining to shape) is encoded
in a generic form, regardless of the input channel (i.e., both chan-
nels use a matching format of encoding). This would enable the fish
to recognize objects cross-modally without any previous experience,
in other words cross-modal object recognition would be an innate
ability. Alternatively, information originating from multiple senses
might not match in format. Instead, the fish could have learned to
associate visual and electric inputs of basic features also common in
other environmental objects when exposed to the features in the
past. So, for example, a fish might have learned to associate a visual
and electric image of a curved edge or a corner. Subsequently, these
associations would have been generalized to new objects and new
situations. In this case, cross-modal object recognition would be
dependent on sensory experience and would not be innate. At
present, we do not know which scenario is correct for G. petersii.
Studies with humans have shown, however, that newborn infants are
cable of cross-modal recognition of object shape and texture using
touch and vision, suggesting that information is encoded generically
(29–31); however, this has remained untested in any other animal.
To recognize objects cross-modally, information about char-
acteristic object features has to be stored in some kind of neu-
ronal representation, which is subsequently accessible by the other
sense. This could be achieved either through a comparison of
modality-specific representations or through a single multi-
modal representation stored in a multisensory brain area (9, 32, 33).
In mammals, cross-modal object recognition is associated with
cortical structures such as the prefrontal cortex (6), the perirhinal,
or the posterior parietal cortex (5, 7). Because fish lack an isocortex,
the ability of cross-modal object recognition cannot depend on the
existence of these mammalian brain structures per se. However, a
recent study has shown a cryptic laminar and columnar organization
of the dorsolateral pallium (DL) of a gymnotiform weakly electric
fish which, together with other organizational structures, supports
the hypothesis that there is a homology between the teleost DL and
the mammalian cortex (34). Furthermore the pallium of G. petersii
is known to receive inputs from the auditory, the visual, the elec-
trosensory, and the lateral line systems (35), and lesion experiments
in goldfish have shown that the teleost telencephalon is involved in
spatial learning tasks (36–38), making it a prime candidate for
the location of cross-modal object recognition in G. petersii.
Other brain areas such as the tectum opticum, the torus semicirularis,
and the valvula cerebelli also receive multiple sensory inputs
in G. petersii and therefore could also be involved in cross-
modal transfers.
In G. petersii, cross-modal object recognition is influenced by
dynamic weighting of the sensory inputs. The fish weight object-
related sensory inputs according to their reliability, to minimize
uncertainty and to enable optimal multisensory integration. At
short distances, the active electric sense dominates the behav-
ioral output during object discrimination. When the object was
close by, the conflict between vision and the active electric sense
(one sense providing the information that an object is present,
the other sense providing the information that no object is pre-
sent) was resolved in favor of the active electric sense, leading to
a reduction in ability to discriminate between the objects visually
in the intact electrically trained fish (Figs. 1 and 2). However,
after being electrically silenced, the same fish were able to dis-
criminate between the objects visually at short range at the same
level as during electrical training (Fig. 3). This finding suggests
that in the absence of any electrical input, the visual information
was no longer overwritten and the behavioral output was driven
by the visual input, supporting the hypothesis that when intact,
the ability to discriminate between the objects visually was
masked by the dominance of the active electric sense. At short
range, the reliability of the electric sense exceeds that of the
visual sense, which has a relatively low spatial resolution (mini-
mal visual angle of about 3°) (26, 39, 40). In contrast, active
electrolocation provides the fish with fine-scale 3D spatial in-
formation and additionally informs the fish about the electrical
properties of an object (41, 42). The electric sense is very reliable
at short distances because environmental factors like light level,
turbidity, or small suspended particles do not interfere with ac-
tive electrolocation (in contrast to vision, which suffers, for ex-
ample, from reflection, refraction, scattering, and attenuation)
(43). In addition, the observed dominance of the electric sense at
short range might be based on the prior experience that in nature
there are no nearby objects that cannot be perceived electrically.
Because of the huge conflict between the visual and the elec-
trical inputs during our experiments, integration might have
even broken down (segregation), so that the visual information
may have been discounted leading to the fish ignoring the ob-
jects even though they could have been perceived by the visual
sense (15).
The results obtained after visual training of the fish show that
the weighting of the sensory inputs can be adjusted through
learning (Fig. 1A). The repetition and rewarding of the visual
stimulus without electrical object input during visual training may
have remapped the system so that the visual training was even-
tually successful. In experiments with humans and monkeys (44,
45) it is possible to adapt to discrepancies in sensory inputs, if
they are consistent and occur over many repetitions (15).
At longer object distances, the reliability of the electric sense
decreases rapidly due to its small working range (22, 46). Con-
sequently, the dominance of the electric sense over vision de-
creases, and the conflict between vision and the electric sense is
solved in favor of the visual information (Fig. 2). These results
correspond well with findings in humans (10), monkeys (21), and
rats (11) and suggest that dynamic weighting of sensory inputs is
a fundamental process necessary for multisensory integration,
and is conserved across vertebrates. However, it is not known yet
how the inputs of multiple senses are weighted and integrated
in the brain. Multisensory information could, for example, be
processed in a centralized or decentralized manner. In a cen-
tralized system information received through all sensory systems
would be fed into a single integration center, where the multiple
inputs would be integrated (47, 48). In contrast, in a decentral-
ized system the integration would be achieved through the in-
terconnection of many multisensory areas (49).
Fig. 3.
Discrimination performance at 1-cm object distances during the vi-
sual transfer tests of the electrically trained fish (fish 6 and 8–10; same fish as
in Figs. 1B and 2) before (blue) (same data as in Fig. 1B) and after (dark blue)
electric silencing (surgical deactivation of the electric organ). For further
description, see Fig. 1.
Schumacher et al.
PNAS
|
July 5, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 27
|
7641
NEUROSCIENCE
 Here we show, for the first time to our knowledge, that
spontaneous cross-modal object recognition as well as dynamic
weighting of sensory inputs exists not only in mammals but also
in fish. This has important implications for our understanding
of the mechanisms and the neuronal requirements underlying
these functions, by revealing that the teleost brain, which is
usually considered to be simple in relation to those of birds and
mammals, is nonetheless capable of performing these complex
cognitive tasks.
Methods
Ten naive G. petersii were individually housed in tanks, which also served as
the experimental arenas (Fig. 4). Fish were trained in a two-alternative
forced-choice procedure to swim through a gate with an object (Fig. S1) that
was positively associated with a food reward (a chironomid insect larva) and
to avoid a second gate with a negative object, which was associated with a
mild punishment (fish being chased back to start position). The position of
the positive object was changed behind the gates pseudorandomly after
Gellermann (50). During training the objects were placed 1 cm behind the
gates. To ensure that during training and testing the fish kept a certain
minimal distance during object inspection, a distance grid was placed di-
rectly behind each gate (Fig. 4). Distance grids were made from thin cotton
threads, with a mesh size of 15 mm (diagonal), which ensured unimpeded
electrolocation through this mesh. The fish could pass the grids by pushing
them aside. Although only the minimal distance of the fish to the objects
was restricted and the fish could choose its distance to the gate freely, ob-
servations of the behavior during object inspection showed that the fish
always inspected the objects from immediately behind the gates. This in-
spection behavior did not change throughout the tests.
The experiments were carried out in accordance with the guidelines of
German law, with the animal welfare regulations of the University of Bonn,
and with the “Guidelines for the treatment of animals in behavioural re-
search and teaching,” Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour (51). All
experiments, except the dark controls, were conducted at an ambient light
level of 3–6 lx (measured just above the water surface), which lies in the
optimal intensity range for visual object discrimination in G. petersii (52).
The conductivity (95–110 μS/cm) and the temperature (25–27 °C) of the
water were kept constant.
Fish were divided into two training groups, which were either able to use
vision or the active electric sense for object discrimination. Access via these
senses was controlled by manipulating the objects or the ambient sur-
roundings. Objects used in the visually trained group were constructed of
electrically transparent, red-colored agarose (Fig. S1 A and B). The con-
ductivity of those objects was adjusted to the conductivity of the tank
water (approximately 100 μS/cm); therefore they were “electrically in-
visible” to the fish (53) (Control Tests and Fig. S2). Red food color (Leb-
ensmittelpaste Rot) was added to deionized water (conductivity <10 μS)
until a conductivity of 40 μS/cm was reached. By adding agarose powder
(Agarose BP 160–100; Fisher Scientific) (2 g per 100 mL) the conductivity was
increased to approximately 100 μS/cm. This mixture was boiled and cast in
molds. After cooling down, the agarose became stiff and the objects could
be used in the discrimination experiments. Because it was not possible to
measure the conductivity of the stiffened agarose directly, the resistance of
250 mL stiff agarose within a beaker was compared with the resistance of
250 mL tank water using a multimeter (M-3650B; Voltcraft) to test whether
their electrical properties were identical. For both measurements the
measuring electrodes were positioned 5 cm apart. There was no measure-
able difference between the agarose and the tank water. Control tests
ensured that the fish could not use electrical cues to discriminate between
the objects (Control Tests and Fig. S2). Red color was used because the
cones of G. petersii are most sensitive to red light (absorption maximum:
615 nm) (26).
During training in the electrical group (group 2) aluminum objects were
covered with hoods made of opaque, black cotton fabric to prevent in-
fluence of vision and the lateral line system on the discrimination per-
formance (Fig. S1 C–E). Because the cotton fabric was soaked with the tank
water, the hoods themselves were electrically transparent. To ensure that
the hoods had no influence on the discrimination performance, control
tests were conducted (Fig. S3).
For all fish a sphere (Ø 3 cm) was used as the positive object (S+). In both
groups, three fish were trained with a cross (width, 4 cm; height, 4 cm;
depth, 1.7 cm) as the negative object and two fish with a cuboid (4 cm ×
2.2 cm × 1.7 cm) as the negative object (S−). Because the volume and the
material of S+ and all S− were the same, the fish could use only the shape
to discriminate the objects.
After the preassigned learning criterion of at least 75% correct choices on
3 consecutive days was reached, test trials (see below), which were neither
rewarded nor punished, were introduced every third trial. After 3–5 days, the
training-to-test trial ratio was increased to 2:2. With each test condition,
30 trials were conducted with each fish. The number of training trials per
fish ranged between 182 and 934.
Transfer Tests. During the transfer tests the fish could use only the previously
untrained sense for the discrimination task. The fish of the visually trained
group were tested in the dark at 1-cm distance with aluminum objects that
were encased in cubes of electrically transparent agarose so that the positive
and the negative object had the same outer shape and were only electrically
distinguishable excluding vision and the lateral line system. The electrically
trained group was tested visually with the red colored, electrically trans-
parent agarose objects placed 1 cm behind the gates.
Range Tests. Four of the electrically trained fish were tested at different
object distances (0.2 cm, 1–7 cm, and 9 cm) with only the active electric sense
available (aluminum objects covered with black cotton hood), with the visual
sense available (red-colored, electrically transparent agarose objects) and
with both senses available. For the latter, red colored conductive agarose
objects were used. These objects were produced in the same way as the
electrically transparent agarose objects but instead of using deionized water
a high conductive saline solution (>10 S/m) was used. The tests with both
Fig. 4.
Experimental set-up. G. petersii were individually housed in 75 cm × 40 cm × 40 cm tanks, which also served as the experimental arenas. (A) Schematic
side view. (B) Schematic top view. These tanks were divided into two compartments (40 cm × 40 cm and 35 cm × 40 cm) by a partition with two closable gates
behind which were positioned two objects (indicated in red) 1 cm from the gate. Distance grids, which were placed directly behind the gates and which could
be passed by pushing them aside, made sure that the fish kept the correct minimal distance to the objects. The larger compartment (experimental area) was
again divided into two compartments, one gate leading to each compartment.
7642
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603120113
Schumacher et al.
 senses available were conducted last to ensure that they would not in-
fluence the results of the visual tests. Besides that, the tested sense and
object distances were chosen pseudorandomly for each day.
Tests with “Electrically Silenced” Fish. Four fish (fish 6 and 8–10) of the
electrically trained group were electrically silenced by cutting the spinal
cord just anterior to the electric organ located in the caudal peduncle.
Before the actual operation a sham operation was conducted. The fish
were narcotized in a 100 mg/L solution of MS 222 (Acros Organics), the
operation site was locally anesthetized with Xylocain Gel (AstraZeneca; 22876),
and the skin was penetrated with a dissecting needle. Afterward, the fish
were tested electrically and visually with a 1-cm object distance as a control
(Control Tests). For the real operation, fish were treated as in the sham
operation described above but the dissecting needle was inserted dor-
sally into the vertebral canal to transect the spinal cord. After the fish
were electrically silenced, visual tests were conducted with the red-colored
electric neutral agarose objects at 1-cm distance. Because the electric input
was missing for training trials, every third trial was rewarded in-
dependently of the choice made by the fish to maintain motivation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Horst Bleckmann, Marian Dawkins, Adrian
Thomas, Vera Schlüssel, Helmut Schmitz, and Graham Taylor for discussion
and helpful comments on the manuscript. This study was supported by the
German Research Foundation (DFG Em43/17-1).
1. Yehle AL, Ward JP (1969) Cross-modal transfer of a specific discrimination in the
rabbit. Psychon Sci 16(5):269–270.
2. Seraganian P, Popova YI (1976) Cross modal transfer of a conditional flexion response
in dogs. Pavlov J Biol Sci 11(3):162–174.
3. Proops L, McComb K, Reby D (2009) Cross-modal individual recognition in domestic
horses (Equus caballus). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106(3):947–951.
4. Guo J, Guo A (2005) Crossmodal interactions between olfactory and visual learning in
Drosophila. Science 309(5732):307–310.
5. Gaydos HF (1956) Intersensory transfer in the discrimination of form. Am J Psychol
69(1):107–110.
6. Davenport RK, Rogers CM (1970) Intermodal equivalence of stimuli in apes. Science
168(3928):279–280.
7. Cowey A, Weiskrantz L (1975) Demonstration of cross-modal matching in rhesus
monkeys, Macaca mulatta. Neuropsychologia 13(1):117–120.
8. Herman LM, Pack AA, Hoffmann-Kuhnt M (1998) Seeing through sound: Dolphins
(Tursiops truncatus) perceive the spatial structure of objects through echolocation.
J Comp Psychol 112(3):292–305.
9. Winters BD, Reid JM (2010) A distributed cortical representation underlies crossmodal
object recognition in rats. J Neurosci 30(18):6253–6261.
10. Ernst MO, Banks MS (2002) Humans integrate visual and haptic information in a
statistically optimal fashion. Nature 415(6870):429–433.
11. Sheppard JP, Raposo D, Churchland AK (2013) Dynamic weighting of multisensory
stimuli shapes decision-making in rats and humans. J Vis 13(6):4.
12. Young MJ, Landy MS, Maloney LT (1993) A perturbation analysis of depth perception
from combinations of texture and motion cues. Vision Res 33(18):2685–2696.
13. Alais D, Burr D (2004) The ventriloquist effect results from near-optimal bimodal in-
tegration. Curr Biol 14(3):257–262.
14. Ernst MO, Bülthoff HH (2004) Merging the senses into a robust percept. Trends Cogn
Sci 8(4):162–169.
15. Ernst MO, Di Luca M (2011) Multisensory perception: From integration to remapping.
Sensory Cue Integration, eds Tommershauser KPKJ, Landy MS (Oxford Univ Press,
New York), pp 224–250.
16. Howard IP, Templeton WB (1966) Human Spatial Orientation (Wiley, New York).
17. Rock I, Victor J (1964) Vision and touch: An experimentally created conflict between
the two senses. Science 143(3606):594–596.
18. Shams L, Kamitani Y, Shimojo S (2000) Illusions. What you see is what you hear.
Nature 408(6814):788.
19. Shams L, Kamitani Y, Shimojo S (2002) Visual illusion induced by sound. Brain Res
Cogn Brain Res 14(1):147–152.
20. Alais D, Newell FN, Mamassian P (2010) Multisensory processing in review: From
physiology to behaviour. Seeing Perceiving 23(1):3–38.
21. Fetsch CR, Turner AH, DeAngelis GC, Angelaki DE (2009) Dynamic reweighting of visual and
vestibular cues during self-motion perception. J Neurosci 29(49):15601–15612.
22. von der Emde G, et al. (2010) 3-Dimensional scene perception during active electro-
location in a weakly electric pulse fish. Front Behav Neurosci 4:26.
23. Rasnow B (1996) The effects of simple objects on the electric field of Apteronotus.
J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural Behav Physiol 178(3):397–411.
24. Caputi AA, Budelli R, Grant K, Bell CC (1998) The electric image in weakly electric fish:
Physical images of resistive objects in Gnathonemus petersii. J Exp Biol 201(Pt 14):
2115–2128.
25. Jorgensen JM (2005) Morphology of electroreceptive sensory organs. Electroreception, eds
Bullock TH, Hopkins CD, Popper AN, Faye RR (Springer, New York), pp 47–67.
26. Kreysing M, et al. (2012) Photonic crystal light collectors in fish retina improve vision
in turbid water. Science 336(6089):1700–1703.
27. Moller P (2002) Multimodal sensory integration in weakly electric fish: A behavioral
account. J Physiol Paris 96(5-6):547–556.
28. Rojas R, Moller P (2002) Multisensory contributions to the shelter-seeking behavior of
a mormyrid fish, Gnathonemus petersii Günther (Mormyridae, Teleostei): The role of
vision, and the passive and active electrosenses. Brain Behav Evol 59(4):211–221.
29. Streri A (2003) Cross-modal recognition of shape from hand to eyes in human new-
borns. Somatosens Mot Res 20(1):13–18.
30. Streri A, Gentaz E (2004) Cross-modal recognition of shape from hand to eyes and
handedness in human newborns. Neuropsychologia 42(10):1365–1369.
31. Sann C, Streri A (2007) Perception of object shape and texture in human newborns:
Evidence from cross-modal transfer tasks. Dev Sci 10(3):399–410.
32. Ettlinger G, Wilson WA (1990) Cross-modal performance: Behavioural processes,
phylogenetic considerations and neural mechanisms. Behav Brain Res 40(3):169–192.
33. Lacey S, Campbell C, Sathian K (2007) Vision and touch: Multiple or multisensory
representations of objects? Perception 36(10):1513–1521.
34. Trinh AT, Harvey-Girard E, Teixeira F, Maler L (2016) Cryptic laminar and columnar
organization in the dorsolateral pallium of a weakly electric fish. J Comp Neurol
524(2):408–428.
35. Prechtl JC, et al. (1998) Sensory processing in the pallium of a mormyrid fish. J Neurosci
18(18):7381–7393.
36. Portavella M, Vargas JP, Torres B, Salas C (2002) The effects of telencephalic pallial
lesions on spatial, temporal, and emotional learning in goldfish. Brain Res Bull 57(3-
4):397–399.
37. Rodríguez F, et al. (2002) Spatial memory and hippocampal pallium through verte-
brate evolution: Insights from reptiles and teleost fish. Brain Res Bull 57(3-4):499–503.
38. Broglio C, et al. (2005) Hallmarks of a common forebrain vertebrate plan: Specialized
pallial areas for spatial, temporal and emotional memory in actinopterygian fish.
Brain Res Bull 66(4-6):277–281.
39. Pusch R, Wagner HJ, von der Emde G, Engelmann J (2013) Spatial resolution of an eye
containing a grouped retina: Ganglion cell morphology and tectal physiology in the
weakly electric fish Gnathonemus petersii. J Comp Neurol 521(17):4075–4093.
40. Francke M, et al. (2014) Grouped retinae and tapetal cups in some Teleostian fish:
Occurrence, structure, and function. Prog Retin Eye Res 38:43–69.
41. von der Emde G (2006) Non-visual environmental imaging and object detection
through active electrolocation in weakly electric fish. J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol
Sens Neural Behav Physiol 192(6):601–612.
42. von der Emde G, Ronacher B (1994) Perception of electric properties of objects in
electrolocating weakly electric fish: Two-dimensional similarity scaling reveals a City-
Block metric. J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural Behav Physiol 175(6):801–812.
43. Hopkins C (2009) Electrical perception and communication. Encyclopedia of Neuroscience,
ed Squire L (Academic Press, Oxford), 3, pp 813–831.
44. Adams WJ, Banks MS, van Ee R (2001) Adaptation to three-dimensional distortions in
human vision. Nat Neurosci 4(11):1063–1064.
45. Zaidel A, Turner AH, Angelaki DE (2011) Multisensory calibration is independent of
cue reliability. J Neurosci 31(39):13949–13962.
46. Pedraja F, Aguilera P, Caputi AA, Budelli R (2014) Electric imaging through evolution,
a modeling study of commonalities and differences. Plos Comput Biol 10(7):e1003722.
47. Magosso E, Cuppini C, Serino A, Di Pellegrino G, Ursino M (2008) A theoretical study
of multisensory integration in the superior colliculus by a neural network model.
Neural Netw 21(6):817–829.
48. Ursino M, Cuppini C, Magosso E, Serino A, di Pellegrino G (2009) Multisensory in-
tegration in the superior colliculus: A neural network model. J Comput Neurosci 26(1):
55–73.
49. Zhang WH, Chen A, Rasch MJ, Wu S (2016) Decentralized multisensory information
integration in neural systems. J Neurosci 36(2):532–547.
50. Gellermann LW (1933) Chance orders of alternating stimuli in visual discrimination
experiments. Pedagog Semin J Genet Psychol 42(1):206–208.
51. Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour (2006) Guidelines for the treatment of
animals in behavioural research and teaching. Anim Behav 71:245–253.
52. Schuster S, Amtsfeld S (2002) Template-matching describes visual pattern-recognition
tasks in the weakly electric fish Gnathonemus petersii. J Exp Biol 205(Pt 4):549–557.
53. Heiligenberg W (1973) Electrolocation of objects in the electric fish Eigenmannia
(Rhamphichthyidae, Gymnotoidei). J Comp Physiol 87(2):137–164.
54. Ciali S, Gordon J, Moller P (1997) Spectral sensitivity of the weakly discharging electric
fish Gnathonemus petersi using its electric organ discharges as the response measure.
J Fish Biol 50(5):1074–1087.
Schumacher et al.
PNAS
|
July 5, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 27
|
7643
NEUROSCIENCE
