 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Gait & Posture
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/gaitpost
Full length article
Deviating running kinematics and hamstring injury susceptibility in male
soccer players: Cause or consequence?
Joke Schuermans⁎, Damien Van Tiggelen, Tanneke Palmans, Lieven Danneels, Erik Witvrouw
Department of Rehabilitation Sciences and Physiotherapy Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Hamstring injury
Aetiology
Soccer
3D kinematics
Sprinting coordination
Acceleration
A B S T R A C T
Background: Although the vast majority of hamstring injuries in male soccer are sustained during high speed
running, the association between sprinting kinematics and hamstring injury vulnerability has never been in-
vestigated prospectively in a cohort at risk.
Purpose: This study aimed to objectify the importance of lower limb and trunk kinematics during full sprint in
hamstring injury susceptibility.
Study design: Cohort study; level of evidence, 2.
Methods: At the end of the 2013 soccer season, three-dimensional kinematic data of the lower limb and trunk
were collected during sprinting in a cohort consisting of 30 soccer players with a recent history of hamstring
injury and 30 matched controls. Subsequently, a 1.5 season follow up was conducted for (re)injury registry.
Ultimately, joint and segment motion patterns were submitted to retro- and prospective statistical curve analyses
for injury risk prediction.
Results: Statistical analysis revealed that index injury occurrence was associated with higher levels of anterior
pelvic tilting and thoracic side bending throughout the airborne (swing) phases of sprinting, whereas no kine-
matic differences during running were found when comparing players with a recent hamstring injury history
with their matched controls.
Conclusion: Deficient core stability, enabling excessive pelvis and trunk motion during swing, probably increases
the primary injury risk. Although sprinting encompasses a relative risk of hamstring muscle failure in every
athlete, running coordination demonstrated to be essential in hamstring injury prevention.
1. Introduction
Hamstring injuries are the single most frequent non-contact muscle
injury in male soccer [1–3]. The vast majority of those occur during
high speed running, where the muscle fails structurally or functionally
[4], due to repetitive intense eccentric loading throughout the front-
and (early) stance phases of the running cycle [5–9]. Because the me-
chanical and metabolic demands imposed upon the hamstring unit
during running acceleration are even more intense than is the case for
constant speed sprinting, this posterior thigh unit is at highest risk of
injury during explosive acceleration towards full speed sprint. Sufficient
acceleration capacity and adequate starting speed are key motor com-
ponents in soccer performance, necessitating optimal hamstring func-
tion. In trying to identify intrinsic risk factors for adequate injury pre-
vention, rehabilitation, and safe return to play, existing research tends
to be restricted to the investigation of functional and structural regional
neuromuscular characteristics in resting state conditions [2,3,8,10,11].
Among others, muscle strength and flexibility, morphologic and
-metabolic features, as well as neuro-dynamics and stretch tolerance
have been investigated in relation to hamstring injury vulnerability
[1–3,10,12]. In addition, because of the functional integrity of lower
limbs and the lumbopelvic complex, joint mobility of the spine and
lower limb as well as multiple other factors responsible for functional
lumbopelvic control (postural control, coordination, strength, etc.) are
thought to be crucial in rehabilitation and prevention [1,13–19].
Nonetheless, these potential hamstring injury correlates have only
rarely been scrutinized during explosive acceleration for full speed
sprinting, during which the hamstring is at highest risk of injury
[20,21]. High amounts of negative work and tensile strain are in-
herently present in acceleration and high speed running. Why some
players manage to keep their hamstrings in optimal shape and others
sustain (recurring) muscle injuries throughout those repeated sprint
(-acceleration)s, is a capital question that needs to be resolved in order
to adequately and sport specifically prevent these types of high speed
running injuries. Besides, although lumbopelvic control training or
‘core
stability’
training
has
proven
to
be
highly
valuable
in
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gaitpost.2017.06.268
Received 9 August 2016; Received in revised form 16 June 2017; Accepted 26 June 2017
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Rehabilitation Sciences and Physiotherapy, Ghent University, De Pintelaan 185, 3B3, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
E-mail address: Joke.schuermans@ugent.be (J. Schuermans).
Gait & Posture 57 (2017) 270–277
0966-6362/ © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
MARK
 rehabilitation outcome and secondary injury prevention [15,22–29], its
exact role in the athlete’s primary injury vulnerability and its influence
on muscle mechanics during running and kicking, remains unclear.
After the example of Kibler et al., we define ‘core stability’ as ‘the
ability to control the position and motion of the trunk and the pelvis to
allow optimum production, transfer and control of force and motion to
the terminal segment in integrated athletic activities’ [30]. This implies
a fairly broad functional interpretation, in which both the kinematic
and kinetic features that add up to a controlled and coordinated gui-
dance of the body center of mass throughout integrated activities, as
there is running, are embedded. Because (high speed) running parti-
cularly implies providing the body center of mass with acceleration and
velocity to achieve a fast horizontal displacement through horizontal
force production, the functional integrity of the core is especially im-
portant as regards the economy, sustainability and safety of running
and sprinting performances. Bearing in mind the evidence behind the
hamstring injury mechanism [8,9], it would seem merely logical that
running technique and the associated biomechanical features, as there
is sufficient functional control of proximal lumbopelvic unit (containing
the body center of mass), within the (high speed) running cycle could
be of substantial influence in the risk of sustaining a hamstring injury.
The biomechanics of running have been subject of study repeatedly.
Strikingly however, high speed running kinematics have never been
investigated in direct association with hamstring injury occurrence.
Therefore, this study intended to investigate the association between
lower limb and trunk kinematics throughout maximal acceleration to-
wards full speed sprinting and hamstring injury susceptibility in a
sample at risk (male soccer players). This association was explored both
retro- and prospectively, to allow strict differentiation between possible
kinematical causes and consequences of hamstring injury. Although
both trunk and lower limb kinematics were taken into account, our
focus was particularly directed towards trunk- and pelvis function to
explore a possible association between running related hamstring injury
risk and ‘core stability’.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Participants
Throughout the second half of the 2013 soccer season, 30 soccer
players with a recent history (last injury sustained within the past
season or the prior one (past 24 months)) and 30 matched controls, all
active in the same amateur competition series (Oost-Vlaanderen,
Belgium), were recruited. Players were excluded if they had
– a history of severe lower limb injury, which could have influenced
kinematics
– a history of lower back complaints/lower back complaints at pre-
sent, which could bias the intrinsic risk profile
– less than 5 years of competitive soccer experience, as this could
induce selection bias
To exclude age related pathologies, soccer players aged beneath 18
or above 35 years were excluded from the study as well. All participants
were completely free from injury and ready to play at the moment of
testing.
A hamstring injury was defined as a soccer related injury in the
hamstring muscle region, preventing the player from participating in
training or competition for at least one entire week. The majority of
respective hamstring injuries within the injury group was diagnosed
clinically, with or without enclosed medical imaging (depending on the
decision of the medical staff). Actual recruitment and inclusion of for-
merly injured participants was mainly based on self-report, as we were
not able to get in touch with all physicians and physiotherapists in-
volved in prior diagnosis and rehabilitation. At the time of testing, none
of the players experienced any pain or discomfort in the hamstring
region during soccer participation or during the running protocol in this
study.
2.2. Testing procedure
All participants were informed about the content and the purpose of
the testing procedure and signed the Informed Consent, after which
they were familiarized with the running protocol and the course of the
three-dimensional (3D) motion analysis. This information was con-
sistently provided by the same qualified researcher (JS), who was in
charge of the entire testing procedure (participant preparation, data
assembly and -processing) as well, which minimized the risk of inter-
tester bias. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the
Ghent University Hospital (number of approval: EC/2013/118).
In order to get a valid impression of the participant’s running co-
ordination
throughout
acceleration
towards
full speed sprinting,
without bias of fatigue or muscle soreness, subjects were instructed not
to engage in intensive training or soccer competition 48 h prior to
testing.
After testing, participants were informed about the online diary
which was put together for the purpose of injury registration during
follow up (http://www.hsi.ugent.be). This online survey contained
questions about weekly exposure (match and training) and the in-
cidence/presence of soccer related injuries and complaints. The parti-
cipants were asked to complete this survey every Monday throughout
the entire 2013–2014 season, as well as the first half of the 2014–2015
season, accounting for a follow up period of one entire and one half of a
soccer season.
Follow up was terminated at the winter break of the 2014–2015
season, during which period all participants were contacted again for
final injury inquiry.
2.3. Three-dimensional kinematic testing protocol
When indicating having understood the content and course of the
testing procedure, participants were instructed to undress, wearing only
a pair of tight shorts and indoor soccer shoes. Afterwards, 40 passive
infrared reflective markers (12 mm lightweight markers, Qualisys AB,
Sweden) were attached in accordance with the LJMU Lower limb and
Trunk Model for motion analysis (Van Renterghem J., Liverpool John
Moores University), representing respective bony landmarks and seg-
ment clusters (Fig. 1(a)). The kinematic analysis of the linear accel-
eration to full speed sprinting was conducted on a 40 m (m) running
track, which was surrounded by 8 cameras for 3D motion capturing
(Oqus, Qualisys AB, Göteborg, Sweden). These cameras were installed
between meter 15 and 25 of the running track (resulting in a kinematic
measuring volume of 10 m), as this is the average distance over which
maximal acceleration is achieved in attempting to reach maximal
running speed (Fig. 1(b)) [31]. All reflective markers were attached to
the skin firmly by using double sided carpet tape, to prevent them from
coming loose or falling off. The entire 3D data assembly of the
Fig. 1. (a) Static – and tracking marker placement; Functional joint capture protocol of
the left knee; (b) 40 m sprinting track with [10*2]m 3D measuring volume in between the
step detection bars of the Optogait system.
J. Schuermans et al.
Gait & Posture 57 (2017) 270–277
271
 acceleration phase in sprinting was carried out by the Qualisys Track
Manager hard- and software systems. A 10 m Optogait system (Micro-
gate, Bolzano-Bozen, Italy) was used for step detection, as we wanted to
perform kinematic analysis of one entire stride this would have been
impossible using a force plate. First, one static trial and 4 functional
joint trials (left and right knee and hip joints) were recorded to create a
virtual model. Subsequently, 8 markers were removed (left and right
acromion, greater Trochanters, left and right medial epicondyles of the
knee joint and left and right medial malleolus at ankle level) as these
were not necessary for motion capture (Fig. 1(a)). Hereafter, the par-
ticipant was instructed to perform a 5 min warm up by running up and
down the running track at a self-chosen pace, alternated with short
sprint-intervals, as if they would perform starting speed drills.
After warm up, each participant was instructed to sprint up the
track over a distance of (at least) 30m, trying to reach maximal
sprinting speed as soon as one could. 3D data collection and step de-
tection were conducted simultaneously throughout the 10 m measuring
volume (meter 15–meter 25), as both software systems were synchro-
nised within the QTM interface (Qualisys Track Manager). Every soccer
player had to perform 12 maximal sprints, because a minimum of six
left – and six right side strides was needed for post hoc data processing
and analysis within the Visual 3D interface (Visual 3D v5 Professional,
C-Motion Research Biomechanics, Germantown, USA). A sprinting trial
could only be taken along for data analysis when it consisted of three
full stance phases within the measuring volume.
2.4. Data analysis
For each participant, a virtual model was created according to his
specific anthropometric features, on the basis of which 3D segment
coordinates and joint angles could be calculated throughout an entire
stride. To serve this purpose, the static-, functional joint- and sprinting
trials were labelled within the QTM interface (marker identification).
Afterwards, sprinting trials were divided into swing- and stance phases
using 4 events: left toe off, right touch down, right toe off and left touch
down in the left stride trials; right toe off, left touch down, left toe off
and right touch down in the right stride trials. Labelled trials were
exported to the ‘C3D’ format, after which they could be imported in
Visual 3D (V3D, C-Motion Inc., USA) to quantify joint kinematics in the
ankle-, knee- and hip joints, as well as segment kinematics for the pelvis
and the thorax. For each phase (front-swing, stance and backswing),
kinematic data were normalized to 101 data frames, enabling in-be-
tween-subject comparison. Ultimately, kinematics were prepared for
statistical analysis by subcategorizing all processed data into excel files
in function of
– phase: “front swing”, “stance” or “backswing”
– group: “Injury History” or “Control” for the retrospective analysis;
“Injury” or “Control” for the prospective analysis
– joint (or segment), and
– plane (Sagittal, X; Coronal, Y; Transverse, Z).
2.5. Statistical analysis
For every joint- and segment angle, the entire kinematic curve
throughout each of the three phases was submitted to both retro- and
prospective in between group comparison based on the presence or
absence of injury history on one hand and injury incidence during
follow-up on the other. Curve analysis was conducted using Statistical
Parametric Mapping (SPM, version M.03) in Matlab (R2014a, The
Mathworks Inc, Natick, MA). This method retrieves results on statistical
inference, based on the Random Field Theory. Whilst commonly used
for the analysis of functional brain images it is becoming commonplace
in biomechanical data analysis as well [32,33]. Using the mean joint- or
segment angle and its corresponding standard deviation at each of the
101 data frames within one phase, it allows statistical comparison of
the entire kinematic profile instead of the commonly used peak – or
mean amplitude comparison which only takes into account one or a
couple of point estimates, irrespective of time. For more detail on the
indications and benefits related to the use of SPM in biomechanical
research, we refer the reader to previously published works of reference
[32,33].
Specifically, joint- and segment angle profiles were compared be-
tween groups, using SPM two-tailed independent t-tests. Firstly, the
SPM{t} statistic was calculated at each data point within a given time
frame (front swing, stance or backswing), then statistical inference was
examined based on the behaviour of random curves with the same
temporal smoothness. Besides taking into account the essential time-
dependency of kinematic data behaviour, another advantage of using
SPM is that it provides better control of type I and type II statistical
error [34], enabling more valid risk estimation.
For the SPM analysis within Matlab, α was set at 0.05. All statistical
analyses within the scope of this study were implemented using the
open-source SPM1D code (http://spm1d.org).
3. Results
We assessed the possible association between (deviant) sprinting
kinematics and hamstring injury vulnerability with strict differentiation
as regards kinematical cause or consequences of increased injury risk.
To do so, we performed both baseline statistics within the entire cohort
(kinematic consequences of previous hamstring injury?), and pro-
spective statistical analysis within a cohort consisting of only those that
reported never having sustained a hamstring injury at initial intake
(kinematical cause of hamstring injury?). Average age, height and
weight within the group of players with an injury history was 24.7
( ± 3.4) years, 1.80 ( ± 0.06) m and 75.2 ( ± 6.8) kg. This was 23.7
( ± 4.5) years, 1.81 ( ± 0.05) m and 74.4 ( ± 7.1) kg within the group
of matched controls.
Of the 30 healthy controls submitted to the 3D sprinting analysis,
only 1 was lost to follow up. As mentioned above, mostly to prevent a
biasing influence of injury history and to validly verify to what extent
running kinematics effectively influence hamstring loading by means of
injury vulnerability, only the data of this group (original control group)
were included for prospective analysis. Within this original control
group (n = 29), 4 players sustained an index injury, resulting in an
(index) injury incidence of 13.8% during the 1.5 season follow up.
Details on study course are illustrated in Fig. 2.
Because we wanted to compare the trunk- and lower limb kine-
matics during full acceleration based on the presence of an injury his-
tory or the incidence of a hamstring injury during our 1.5 season follow
up period, without leg dominance being a biasing covariate, we verified
the ratio of dominant/non-dominant leg involvement both retro- and
prospectively in the injury groups, and randomly elected the same ratio
in the control groups.
3.1. Retrospective analysis: hamstring injury history and running
kinematics?
Comparing the three-dimensional joint angles of the ankle-, knee-
and hip complexes (i.e. the angles between adjacent segments) as well
as the segment angles of pelvis and thorax in reference to the global
laboratory (i.e. the position of participant’s pelvis and the thorax re-
lative to the testing environment) during front swing-, stance- and
backswing phases of full acceleration between the 30 participants with
a recent hamstring injury history and the same amount of healthy
controls, no significant in between group differences could be demon-
strated. The ankle-, knee-, hip-, pelvis- and thorax kinematics in the
coronal, sagittal and transverse planes did not present significant dif-
ferences based on the presence or absence of a history of hamstring
injuries.
J. Schuermans et al.
Gait & Posture 57 (2017) 270–277
272
 3.2. Prospective analysis: running kinematics and hamstring injury
susceptibility during follow up?
Assessing the kinematic curves of the soccer players that sustained a
first time hamstring injury during follow up (n = 4) in reference to the
healthy controls (n = 25), statistical parametric mapping revealed
significant differences in pelvis – and thorax motion patterns. In par-
ticular, players that sustained a hamstring injury presented sub-
stantially more anterior pelvis tilt throughout the entire stride, with a
statistically
significant
difference
during
the
backswing
phase
(p = 0.0445), compared to the healthy controls (Figs. 3 and 4).
Moreover, the index injury group presented significantly more thoracic
side bending throughout the front-swing phase, compared to the
healthy controls (p = 0.028) (Figs. 3 and 5, ). Additionally, thoraco-
pelvic kinematics of the participants that sustained a first time ham-
string injury appeared to be less stable throughout the entire running
stride, displaying more fluctuations and discontinuity, compared to the
quite neutral thoraco-pelvic motion pattern demonstrated by the
healthy controls (Fig. 3).
4. Discussion
In this study, the association between lower limb and trunk kine-
matics during maximal acceleration to full speed sprinting, and ham-
string injuries was assessed both retro- and prospectively in male soccer
players. Comparison of the running kinematics of the participants with
a recent history of hamstring injuries and their matched controls, re-
vealed no in between group differences for any of the joints, planes or
phases
throughout
the
captured
stride.
Assessing
the
running
kinematics for hamstring injury risk detection prospectively, however,
demonstrated significant biomechanical differences in trunk- and pelvis
kinematics between the participants that sustained a (first) hamstring
injury during follow up and those who did not. Index hamstring injury
occurrence was associated with significantly more anterior pelvic tilting
and thoracic side-bending during the back- and front swing phases of
acceleration, respectively. Hip-, knee-, nor ankle kinematics, presented
a prospective association with hamstring injury occurrence.
Similar to the results of the retrospective biomechanical research of
Lee et al. [25], we found no association in between previous hamstring
injury and any of the kinematic features in the trunk nor the lower limb.
They did not include a control group and just compared the kinematic
behaviour of the previously injured limb with the contralateral side. We
did include healthy controls but found no differences in kinematic
patterns when comparing theirs with the ones of the formerly injured
participants.
Nonetheless,
original hamstring
injury
susceptibility
might just very well be influenced by running technique. Opposite to
our retrospective findings and those of Lee et al., the recent study re-
sults of Daly et al. [36] did reveal a possible association in between
previous injury and running kinematics. In their cohort of Gaelic foot-
ball players (9 with previous hamstring injury and 9 controls) presented
increased amounts of hip flexion, anterior pelvic tilt and external tibia
rotation throughout the front swing an early stance phases of the gait
cycle in running, compared to the healthy controls. We cannot compare
our study results with theirs unfortunately, as they assessed steady
treadmill running instead of over-ground sprinting acceleration (should
imply lower amounts of anterior pelvic tilting due to smaller strides and
more forward trunk lean compared to constant speed running) and used
completely different methods of statistical analysis (discrete measure
Fig. 2. Flowchart study trajectory.
J. Schuermans et al.
Gait & Posture 57 (2017) 270–277
273
 Fig. 3. (a) Sagittal plane pelvis kinematics throughout different running phases in full acceleration – Control versus Index Injury, displaying significantly more anterior tilting at the end
of backswing – p = 0.045; (b) Side bending kinematics throughout different running phases in full acceleration – Control versus Index Injury, displaying significantly more side-bending
throughout front swing – p = 0.028.
Fig. 4. (a) Controls versus (b) Index Injuries: Sagittal plane Pelvis-Lab
segment Angle in late Front swing phase (taking into account the back-
swing of the left leg in the control group, and the right left in the injury
group).
J. Schuermans et al.
Gait & Posture 57 (2017) 270–277
274
 comparison instead of looking at the overall kinematical behaviour
throughout the gait cycle in running).
As concerns our prospective findings, in particular trunk and pelvis
kinematics, presented to be associated with the risk of sustaining a
hamstring injury, contrary to lower limb motion patterns. As respective
increments in sagittal and coronal plane movement of the core-region
(trunk and pelvis) were also associated with more variability within the
kinematic trajectory over the course of the airborne phase, our findings
might suggest that players appearing to be more vulnerable for ham-
string injury, suffer from lacking proximal control and insufficient
dissociative capacity within the lumbo-pelvic-hip complex. As such,
these kinematic alterations might imply that the kinematic quality of
the core and the ability to dissociate lower limb movement (hip-ex-
tension and -flexion) from compensatory contribution of the trunk and
pelvis, is essential in primary hamstring injury prevention. Certainly
given the fact that the increments in anterior tilting were particularly
objectified during the backswing phase of running, where pelvic control
is challenged the most, as sufficient hip extension is needed for pro-
pulsion. Because these kinematical differences in pelvis- and trunk
compartments were specifically found in the index injury group, we
believe that these kinematic characteristics fundamentally contribute to
a less safe running pattern, making the running athlete more prone to
sustaining (repeated) hamstring injuries, when not recognized and
corrected.
Although
suggested
to
be
key
in
sports
injury
prevention
[1,3,15,22,23,26,27,29,37], the actual scientific background of the
functional integrity of the core (trunk and pelvis) has not been objec-
tified in a sport- and injury specific research setting. The present study
is the first giving rise to actual scientific evidence concerning the im-
portance of functional control of the proximal lumbo-pelvic unit (‘core
stability’)in injury prevention. Adequate control in the lower back,
pelvis and hip joints during the swing phase of running, warranting
proper ground contact for forceful propulsion, is of capital importance
in running performance [2,8,39]. Indeed, as functional kinetic chain
integrity throughout the swing phases is key for the safety and the
adequacy of subsequent touch down and propulsion, poor control in the
proximal core might induce both an increased injury risk and weaker
acceleration capacity/running economy. Next to exerting excessive
tensile strain on the (posterior) thigh muscles [31], reduced proximal
control could also imply higher loading of the bi-articular thigh mus-
cles, in an attempt to increase kinematic efficacy throughout both the
swing- and stance phases [13,14,35]. Interestingly, predominantly the
airborne phase was observed to be subject to a lack of proximal control.
Certainly in high speed running, where the airborne phase (flight time)
represents up to 80% of the entire stride time [2,8,39], adequate core
stability seems to be important in (primary) hamstring injury preven-
tion. Several authors have investigated the relation between core sta-
bility and hamstring injuries in soccer, however, mainly indirectly and
in association with the efficacy of rehabilitation (association between
exercise protocol allocation, time to return-to-play (RTP) and sub-
sequent injury recurrence without investigating actual core function)
[15,19,22,23,40]. Accordingly, Sherry and colleagues compared the
effectiveness of a rehabilitation protocol consisting of isolated ham-
string stretch and strengthening exercises with the one of integrated
kinetic chain training including core stability and agility exercises
[40,41]. They found the recurrence rates and the time to RTP to be
significantly lower in players allocated to the core stability training
protocol. Yet, they did not measure core function nor functional co-
ordination so the direct link with hamstring injury susceptibility could
not be deducted. In contrast, Silder and colleagues found no significant
differences in clinical presentation, functional performance or medical
imaging at time to RTP between players [19] allocated to a “Progressive
Fig. 5. (c) Controls versus (d) Index Injuries: Coronal plane Pelvis-Thorax
Angle in late Front swing phase (taking into account the front swing of the
left leg in the control group, and the right left in the injury group).
J. Schuermans et al.
Gait & Posture 57 (2017) 270–277
275
 Agility and Trunk Stability” training group and those submitted to a
“Progressive Running and eccentric Strength” training group. Un-
fortunately, similar to the before mentioned study, this study did not
include measures of core muscle strength capacity either nor did they
include a control group that did not receive a customized rehabilitation
protocol. Assuming them to have a beneficial influence, many other
interventional studies incorporated core stability exercises in their
(secondary) prevention protocols as well [1,3,15,22,23,42,43,26,38].
However, it is impossible to compare or link our study results and
possible clinical implications to this kind of retrospective interventional
studies, as both research hypothesis and statistical approaches differ
substantially. Indeed, due to differing or poor methodological design
and lack of participant compliance, the exact influence of incorporating
functional and isolated core training in (secondary) injury prevention,
remains unknown [3,15,22,23,26,42,43]. In particular, the evidence to
validly link functional core stability with running related hamstring
injury susceptibility is non-existing to date.
Interestingly, previous research also demonstrated that the magni-
tude of anterior pelvic tilting is highly correlated with the amount of
lumbar lordosis and hip-extension range of motion during backswing
[42]. Franz and colleagues suggest that the increase in anterior pelvic
tilt with increasing running velocity is predominantly due to increases
in lumbar lordosis and trunk kinematics, as they found no statistical
differences in hip extension range of motion with increasing running
speed. More so, they could demonstrate that running athletes presented
higher anterior tilting amplitudes, when hip extension range of motion
during stance and backswing was decreased. Albeit not related to soccer
or hamstring injury susceptibility in their observational study, the au-
thors pointed out the importance of lumbar spine and hip kinematics in
lower back and hamstring injury vulnerability. Because the hamstrings,
particularly the long head of the Biceps Femoris, originate on the sciatic
tuberosity and its stabilizing ligamentous structures, hamstring function
depends on pelvic posture and kinematics, just as much as lumbopelvic
function is reliant on hamstring features and function (flexibility, angle
of optimal force output etc.) [6]. Another study investigated the effects
of intentionally inducing forward trunk lean throughout sprinting
versus regular sprinting in a sample of eight healthy male sprinters
[31]. Their results indicate that both the amount of hamstring muscle
stretch and the lengthening velocity significantly increased when
adopting a forward lean in running. As intentional forward trunk lean
induces more anterior pelvic tilt as well, these could possibly explain
why the players presenting an increased pelvic tilt, were subject of
hamstring muscle failure during follow up in our study.
Although repeatedly suggested to be of potential importance for the
prevention of lower limb injuries, our findings confirm the association
between core kinematics/control and hamstring injury risk. In order to
get an even better insight in this interplay, future research should at-
tempt an integrated investigation of lower limb and trunk kinematics,
surface electromyography (sEMG) and muscle mechanics. Interestingly,
our research group recently published a study looking at the muscle
activation patterns during the exact same sprinting acceleration test
protocol. In very close coherence with the findings of this kinematic
study, it was established that lower amounts of normalized EMG ac-
tivity of the trunk muscles and the gluteus maximus during the airborne
phase of running, were associated with a greater hamstring injury oc-
currence during follow up [44]. How these valuable scientific data
might be translated into more adequate primary injury prevention
strategies, is yet to be determined.
4.1. Limitations
There were some limitations to this study. First, we must bear in
mind that the sample size for prospective statistical analysis was small.
This might have compromised the potential predictive validity of the
kinematic outcome measures. However, as the statistical procedures
(Statistical Parametric Mapping) attributed within this study, strongly
control for both type 1 and type 2 errors, associated risk is limited as
well [34]. Second, we did not have medical records of the injury history
of the participants that entered this study, nor did we have any medical
documentation on the injuries sustained during follow up (physician’s
report, records of medical imaging). Therefore, we were reliant on the
participant’s reporting and study compliance, which might have in-
duced a certain degree of recall bias. Moreover and because of the same
reason, we decided not to take along information on the exact location
of the lesion (muscle belly, distance from the ischial tuberosity and
tissue involvement (muscle-tendon ratio)). Adding those covariates to
the analysis, might have yielded towards more detailed and possibly
somewhat different insights in the running related hamstring injury
risk. The strength of this study is however that it is the first study that
investigated the association between running coordination and ham-
string injury risk in male soccer players. More so, in performing both
retro- and prospective analyses, it enabled differentiation as regards the
direction of the association between running kinematics and hamstring
injury risk, which appeared to be the cause rather than the consequence
of hamstring injury vulnerability in our cohort.
5. Conclusion
Surprisingly, this was the first study to relate lower limb and trunk
kinematics during sprinting to (primary) hamstring injury risk. Our
findings indicate that running coordination might actually be highly
associated with the risk of sustaining a hamstring injury. Lacking con-
trol of the lumbopelvic unit (core stability), presented by excessive
pelvis and trunk motion during the swing phases of running is related to
the primary injury risk. Therefore, assessing and addressing sprinting
kinematics/running technique seem to be indispensable in primary
hamstring injury prevention. Clinicians should acknowledge the im-
portance of proper running technique in muscle injury rehabilitation
and prevention in soccer, in which a bilaterally symmetrical, decently
aligned running technique should be aspired, with adequate proximal
neuromuscular control.
Conflict of interest
All authors – Joke Schuermans, Damien Van Tiggelen, Tanneke
Palmans, Lieven Danneels and Erik Witvrouw – declare to have no
conflicts of interest regarding the scientific content of the paper nor
regarding the sources of funding. All authors explicitly disclose not to
have any financial or personal relationships with other people or or-
ganizations, that could inappropriately influence the present work.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of their collea-
gues at the department of Rehabilitation Sciences and Physiotherapy in
Ghent (Belgium), as well as the staff members of Bloso, Topsporthal
Vlaanderen (Belgium). In particular Steven Heyndrickx, for his assis-
tance during the installation of the running track with surrounding
measuring systems, as well as for the assembly of the online diary for
injury registration during follow up and the post hoc data processing.
Additionally, sincere appreciation goes out to Jos Vanrenterghem
(Faculty of Kinesiology and Rehabilitation Sciences, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium), Mark van (School of Sport and Exercise Sciences,
LJMU,
Liverpool,
United
Kingdom)
and
Todd
Pataky
(Shinshu
University, Dept. Bioengineering, Matsumoto, Nagano, Japan), for their
support during the SPM analyses. Their sincere appreciation is also
oriented towards the participants of this study, without whom this
paper could not have been accomplished. For their financial support,
our gratitude goes out to the Agency for Innovation by Science and
Technology in Flanders (IWT – Brussels, Belgium). All authors declare
to have no conflicts of interest regarding the scientific content of the
paper nor regarding the sources of funding.
J. Schuermans et al.
Gait & Posture 57 (2017) 270–277
276
 References
[1] J. Mendiguchia, E. Alentorn-Geli, M. Brughelli, Hamstring strain injuries: are we
heading in the right direction? Br. J. Sports Med. 46 (2) (2012) 81–85.
[2] D.A. Opar, M.D. Williams, A.J. Shield, Hamstring strain injuries: factors that lead to
injury and re-injury, Sports Med. 42 (3) (2012) 209–226.
[3] A.M.C. van Beijsterveldt, I.G.L. van de Port, A.J. Vereijken, F.J.G. Backx, Risk
factors for hamstring injuries in male soccer players: a systematic review of pro-
spective studies, Scan. J. Med. Sci. Sports 23 (2013) 253–262.
[4] J. Ekstrand, C. Askling, H. Magnusson, et al., Return to play after thigh muscle
injury in elite football players: implementation and validation of the Munich muscle
injury classification, Br. J. Sports Med. 47 (12) (2013) 769–774.
[5] B.C. Heiderscheit, D.M. Hoerth, E.S. Chumanov, S.C. Swanson, B.J. Thelen,
D.G. Thelen, Identifying the time of occurrence of a hamstring strain injury during
treadmill running: a case study, Clin. Biomech. 20 (10) (2005) 1072–1078.
[6] A. Higashihara, Y. Nagano, O. Takashi, T. Fukubayashi, Differences in activation
properties of the hamstring muscles during overground sprinting, Gait Posture 42
(3) (2015) 360–364.
[7] A. Higashihara, T. Ono, J. Kubota, T. Okuwaki, T. Fukubayashi, Functional differ-
ences in the activity of the hamstring muscles with increasing running speed, J.
Sports Sci. 28 (10) (2010) 1085–1092.
[8] A.G. Schache, T.W. Dorn, P.D. Blanch, N.A.T. Brown, M.G. Pandy, Mechanics of the
human hamstring muscles during sprinting, Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 44 (4) (2012)
647–658.
[9] A.G. Schache, T.W. Dorn, T.V. Wrigley, N.A.T. Brown, M.G. Pandy, Stretch and
activation of the human biarticular hamstrings across a range of running speeds,
Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 113 (11) (2013) 2813–2828.
[10] G. Freckleton, T. Pizzari, Risk factors for hamstring muscle strain injury in sport: a
systematic review and meta-analysis, Br. J. Sports Med. 47 (2013) 351–358.
[11] J.J. Fyfe, D.A. Opar, M.D. Williams, A.J. Shield, The role of neuromuscular in-
hibition in hamstring strain injury recurrence, J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol. 13 (2013)
523–530.
[12] J. Schuermans, D. Van Tiggelen, L. Danneels, E. Witvrouw, Biceps femoris and
semitendinosus-teammates or competitors? New insights into hamstring injury
mechanisms in male football players: a muscle functional MRI study, Br. J. Sports
Med. 48 (22) (2014) 1599–1606.
[13] A. Ashokan, S. Milosavljevic, S. Woodley, G. Sole, Effects of external pelvic com-
pression on electromyographic activity of the hamstring muscles during unipedal
stance in sportsmen with and without hamstring injuries, Man. Ther. 20 (2015)
412–419.
[14] A. Ashokan, S. Milosavljevic, S. Woodley, G. Sole, Effects of external pelvic com-
pression on isokinetic strength of the thigh muscles in sportsmen with and without
hamstring injuries, J. Sci. Med. Sport 18 (2015) 283–288.
[15] P. Brukner, A. Nealon, C. Morgan, D. Burgess, A. Dunn, Recurrent hamstring muscle
injury: applying the limited evidence in the professional football setting with a
seven-point programme, Br. J. Sports Med. 48 (11) (2014) 929–938.
[16] L.A. Danneels, G.G. Vanderstraeten, H.J. De Cuyper, Functional spinal stability: the
role of the back muscles, in: K. Lewandrowski, M.J. Yaszemski, I.H. Kalfas, P. Park,
R.F. McLain, D.J. Trantolo (Eds.), Spina Reconstruction, Informa Healthcare USA,
New York, 2007, pp. 90–108.
[17] M. Kuszewski, R. Gnat, E. Saulicz, Stability training of the lumbo-pelvo-hip complex
influences stifness of the hamstrings: a preliminary study, Scan. J. Med. Sci. Sports
19 (2009) 260–266.
[18] A.G. Schache, K.L. Bennell, P.D. Blanch, T.V. Wrigley, The coordinated movement
of the lumbo-pelvic-hip complex during running: a literature review, Gait Posture
10 (1999) 30–47.
[19] S.E. Turl, K.P. George, Adverse neural tension: a factor in repetitive hamstring
strain? J. Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther. 27 (1) (1998) 16–21.
[20] E.S. Chumanov, B.C. Heiderscheit, D.G. Thelen, The effect of speed and influence of
individual muscles on hamstring mechanics during the swing phase of sprinting, J.
Biomech. 40 (16) (2007) 3555–3562.
[21] A. Higashira, Y. Nagano, K. Takahashi, T. Fukubayashi, Effects of forward trunk
lean on hamstring muscle kinematics during sprinting, J. Sports Sci. 33 (13) (2015)
1366–1375.
[22] N. Andrew, B.J. Gabbe, J. Cook, et al., Could targeted exercise programmes prevent
lower limb injury in community Australian football, Sports Med. 43 (2013)
751–763.
[23] A.H. Engebretsen, G. Myklebust, I. Holme, L. Engebretsen, R. Bahr, Prevention of
injuries among male soccer players, Am. J. Sports Med. 36 (6) (2008) 1052–1060.
[24] B.C. Heiderscheit, M.A. Sherry, A. Silder, E. Chumanov, D.G. Thelen, Hamstring
strain injuries: recommendations for diagnosis, rehabilitation, and injury preven-
tion, J. Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther. 40 (2) (2010) 67–81.
[25] N. Malliaropoulos, J. Mendiguchia, H. Pehlivanidis, et al., Hamstring exercises for
track and field athletes: injury and exercise biomechanics, and possible implications
for exercise selection and primary prevention, Br. J. Sports Med. 46 (12) (2012)
846–851.
[26] A. McCall, C. Carling, M. Nedelec, et al., Risk factors, testing and preventive stra-
tegies for non-contact injuries in professional football: current perceptions and
practices of 44 teams from various premier leagues, Br. J. Sports Med. 48 (18)
(2014) 1352–1357.
[27] J. Mendiguchia, M. Brughelli, A return-to-sport algorithm for acute hamstring in-
juries, Phys. Ther. Sport 12 (1) (2011) 2–14.
[28] J. Schuermans, D. Van Tiggelen, L. Danneels, E. Witvrouw, Susceptibility to ham-
string injuries in soccer: a prospective study using muscle functional magnetic re-
sonance imaging, Am. J. Sports Med. 44 (5) (2016) 1276–1285.
[29] M.A. Sherry, T.M. Best, A comparison of 2 rehabilitation programs in the treatment
of acute hamstring strains, J. Orthopaedic Sports Phys. Ther. 34 (3) (2004)
116–125.
[30] W.B. Kibler, J. Press, A. Sciascia, The role of core stability in athletic function,
Sports Med. 36 (3) (2006) 189–198.
[31] I. Jeffreys, Developing Speed, National Strength and Conditioning Association,
2017 ISBN-10: 0-7360-8328-6 (print); ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-8328-7.
[32] T.C. Pataky, Generalized n-dimensional biomechanical field analysis using statis-
tical parametric mapping, J. Biomech. 43 (2010) 1976–1982.
[33] T.C. Pataky, One-dimensional statistical parametric mapping in Pyhton, Comput.
Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng. 15 (2012) 295–301.
[34] M.A. Robinson, J. Vanrenterghem, T.C. Pataky, Statistical Parametric Mapping
(SPM) for alpha-based statistical analyses of multi-muscle EMG time-series, J.
Electromyogr. Kinesiol. 25 (1) (2015) 14–19.
[35] M.J.C. Lee, S.L. Reid, B.C. Elliot, D.G. Lloyd, Running biomechanics and lower limb
strength associated with prior hamstring injury, Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 194 (2009)
1942–1951.
[36] C. Daly, U. McCarthy Persson, R. Twycross-Lewis, R.C. Woledge, D. Morrissey, The
biomechanics of running in athletes with previous hamstring injury: a case-control
study, Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 26 (2016) 413–420.
[37] X. Valle, J.L. Tol, B. Hamilton, et al., Hamstring muscle injuries, a rehabilitation
protocol purpose, Asian J. Sports Med. 6 (4) (2015) e25411.
[38] T.L. Nicola, D.J. Jewison, The anatomy and biomechanics of running, Clin. Sports
Med. 31 (2012) 187–201.
[39] M.F. Norcross, M.D. Lewek, D.A. Padua, S.J. Shultz, P.S. Weinhold, J.T. Blackburn,
Lower extremity energy absorption and biomechanics during landing, part I: sa-
gittal plane energy absorption analyses, J. Athl. Train. 48 (4) (2013).
[40] A. Silder, M.A. Sherry, J. Sanfilippo, M.J.T. Tuite, S.J. Hetzel, B.C. Heiderscheit,
Clinical and morphological changes following 2 rehabilitation programs for acute
hamstring strain injuries: a randomized clinical trial, J. Orthopaedic Sports Phys.
Ther. 43 (5) (2013) 284–299.
[41] M.L. Cameron, R.D. Adams, C.G. Maher, D. Misson, Effect of the Hamsprint Drills
training programme on lower limb neuromuscular control in Australian football
players, J. Sci. Med. Sport 12 (2009) 24–30.
[42] J.R. Franz, K.W. Paylo, J. Dicharry, P.O. Riley, D.C. Kerrigan, Changes in the co-
ordination of the hip and pelvis kinematics with mode of locomotion, Gait Posture
29 (2009) 494–498.
[43] L. Herrington, The effect of pelvic position on popliteal angle achieved during 90:90
Hamstring-Length test, J. Sports Rehabil. 22 (4) (2013) 254–256.
[44] J. Schuermans, L. Danneels, D. Van Tiggelen, T. Palmans, E. Witvrouw, Proximal
neuormuscular control protects against hamstring injuries in male soccer players: a
prospective study with electromyography time-series analysis during maximal
sprinting, Am. J. Sports Med. 45 (6) (2017) 1315–1325.
J. Schuermans et al.
Gait & Posture 57 (2017) 270–277
277
