 Winning a competition predicts dishonest behavior
Amos Schurra,1 and Ilana Ritovb,c
aGuilford Glazer Faculty of Business & Management, Department of Business Administration, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva 8410501,
Israel; bSchool of Education, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Mount Scopus Campus, Mt. Scopus, Jerusalem 91905, Israel; and cThe Federmann Center
for the Study of Rationality, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Edmond Safra Campus, Givat Ram, Jerusalem 91904, Israel
Edited by Susan T. Fiske, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, and approved December 30, 2015 (received for review July 30, 2015)
Winning a competition engenders subsequent unrelated unethical
behavior. Five studies reveal that after a competition has taken
place winners behave more dishonestly than competition losers.
Studies 1 and 2 demonstrate that winning a competition increases
the likelihood of winners to steal money from their counterparts in a
subsequent unrelated task. Studies 3a and 3b demonstrate that the
effect holds only when winning means performing better than
others (i.e., determined in reference to others) but not when success
is determined by chance or in reference to a personal goal. Finally,
study 4 demonstrates that a possible mechanism underlying the effect
is an enhanced sense of entitlement among competition winners.
competition | behavioral ethics | behavioral economics | decision making |
corruption
L
ife, both personal and professional, is beset with challenges
and rivalries. Success is often determined by one’s ability to
outstrip the competition. Although competition motivates indi-
viduals to work harder to obtain better outcomes it may also lead
to deleterious effects, such as increasing dishonesty in pursuit of
competitive advantage and decreasing prosocial behavior. Indeed,
the literature offers important insights regarding the propensity of
contestants to behave in prosocial or asocial manners before and
during competitions (1, 2). We know only little about contestants’
behavior after the competition has ended. The current research
aims at filling this gap. In particular, we ask: Who is more likely to
subsequently engage in unrelated unethical behaviors—winners
or losers?
Competition outcomes are by definition relative. The results
are determined by the ranking of the competitor relative to other
contestants. Because performance outcome is determined relative
to others, competition evinces social comparisons (3, 4). Enhanced
social comparison can in turn result in two contrasting effects. On
one hand, because losers have access to fewer resources than
winners, they may be more motivated to use asocial behaviors to
enhance their resources. Indeed, several laboratory studies show
that losing tends to provoke subsequent dishonest behavior (5–7),
suggesting increased motivation to behave unethically when in a
position of disadvantage (8). On the other hand, one may expect
that the increased prominence of social comparison in competi-
tion will evince a sense of entitlement among winners (9, 10). The
sense of entitlement, in turn, facilitates dishonest behavior among
winners (6, 11). This reasoning points to the opposite prediction,
namely that winners are more inclined to behave dishonestly
than losers.
Psychological entitlement is the feeling that one is more de-
serving of preferential treatment than other people are (12).
Some findings suggest that entitlement is also a psychological
state; for example, people’s sense of entitlement increases when
being wronged (5, 6). Psychological theories explaining unethical
behaviors typically focus on feelings and rationalizations as moti-
vating factors of these behaviors. For example, people often behave
dishonestly, but only to the extent that they can do so without
violating their perception of themselves as honest (13, 14), or to the
extent that they can justify their actions (15–21). In this context, a
sense of entitlement may mediate the relationship between self-
concept and dishonesty because it provides the necessary justification
for moral disengagement. Individuals who feel entitled can convince
themselves that engaging in a behavior they would normally con-
sider unacceptable is in fact acceptable for them. For instance, an
entitled individual may recategorize theft as “merely claiming what
s/he justly deserves,” thus paving the way for the commission of a
dishonest act (22, 23).
Previous research in line with our conjecture shows that one’s
censured conduct increases with one’s sense of entitlement. For
example, entitlement increases dishonest behavior (6, 11, 24).
Indirect real-world evidence in line with the conjecture that
winners are more inclined to behave dishonestly than losers includes
the effect of social status on unethical behavior. Social status is an
individual’s ranking within society in terms of wealth, occupational
prestige, and education. Social status is defined in reference to
others within the society and often triggers social comparisons (3,
25). Perhaps surprisingly, research on the effect of social status on
behavior reveals that high social status decreases prosocial behav-
iors and promotes a sense of entitlement and consequent asocial
behaviors (26–29). An important factor separating members of the
upper classes from those of the lower classes is the extent to which
individuals have won the competitions they have encountered in
their lives (winning either by their own merit or due to their social
class). We propose that the experience of winning a competition, in
itself, yields a tendency toward dishonest behavior. We test this
hypothesis in four studies that explore how winning a competition
engenders unethical behavior in a subsequent unrelated task.
Results
Baseline: Measuring Dishonesty in the Dice-Under-a-Cup Task. First,
we examined the amount of self-reported winnings participants
claim in the dice-under-a-cup task. In this task, a participant
receives two dice and a cup with a small hole in the bottom that
allows peeking. The participant places the cup over the dice,
Significance
Competition is prevalent. People often resort to unethical
means to win (e.g., the recent Volkswagen scandal). Not sur-
prisingly, competition is central to the study of economics, psy-
chology, sociology, political science, and more. Although we
know much about contestants’ behavior before and during
competitions, we know little about contestants’ behavior after
the competition has ended. Connecting postcompetition behav-
iors with preceding competition experience, we find that after a
competition is over winners behave more dishonestly than losers
in an unrelated subsequent task. Furthermore, the subsequent
unethical behavior effect seems to depend on winning, rather
than on mere success. Providing insight into the issue is impor-
tant in gaining understanding of how unethical behavior may
cascade from exposure to competitive settings.
Author contributions: A.S. and I.R. designed research, performed research, analyzed data,
and wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: samos@bgu.ac.il.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1515102113/-/DCSupplemental.
1754–1759
|
PNAS
|
February 16, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 7
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1515102113
 shakes it, and receives money according to his or her reporting of
the outcome of the roll. Because only the participant can see the
outcome, the task allows the experimenter to measure dishonest
behavior at the aggregate level (i.e., compare the actual mean to
the expected mean). In the present research, we used the para-
digm in a game of pairs (a thrower and a receiver) with a fixed
total amount of 12 Israeli shekels (NIS; at the time of the studies 1
NIS was worth approximately $0.25), so that the thrower’s claims
are deducted from the fixed amount. That is, the more the thrower
claims, the less the receiver gains. Notably, in contrast to most
experiments on dishonest behavior, participants who cheated stole
money from their counterparts rather than from the experimenter.
The main advantage of this modification is that it intensifies the
moral dilemma, because stealing from a fellow participant is a
blatant asocial act. To measure dishonest behavior we com-
pared participants’ claimed payouts to the expected mean payout.
The left column in Fig. 1 summarizes the main findings. On
average participants claimed [mean (M) = 7.13, SD = 2.46].
Overall, participants’ claims did not significantly differ from the
expected 7 NIS [t (22) = 0.26, P = 0.80].
Next, we tested our main hypothesis, namely that the experience
of winning a competition promotes subsequent dishonest behav-
ior. Because we do not have a measure of individual dishonesty, to
measure aggregate dishonest behavior we compared participants’
claimed payouts to two standards. First, we compared participants’
payouts to the expected mean payout. In addition, we compared
participants’ claims to those of the baseline condition in which
participants completed the dice-under-a-cup task without any
preceding experimental activity. These baselines provided the
standard of comparison for the following studies.
Study 1: The Effect of Winning a Competition on Dishonest Behavior.
In the first study, we assessed the effect of participating in a real
competition on dishonest behavior. We invited participants to
two ostensibly unrelated experiments. In the first experiment, we
randomly assigned participants to dyads and let them compete
against each other, using the same series of estimation tasks
developed by Haran et al. (30). At the end of the competition,
winners were rewarded with a pair of earbuds. Importantly, be-
cause the estimation task was unfamiliar and completed in private,
Fig. 1.
Participants’ demands in the dice-under-a-cup task in the control condition and following a competition (study 1), following a memory recall task
(study 2), after a lottery has taken place (study 3a), and after a trivia task (study 3b). Error bars are ±1 SE; 7 NIS is the mean expected chance level payout. As
can be seen, participants in the control group refrained from stealing money from their counterparts. In contrast, recalling winning a competition or honestly
winning one yielded subsequent dishonesty in an unrelated task, whereas winning a lottery or achieving a goal did not yield such behavior. In studies 1–3 new
random matching of participants to dyads took place for this task. Throwers did not know whether their fellow receivers won or lost earlier in the exper-
imental session.
Schurr and Ritov
PNAS
|
February 16, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 7
|
1755
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 winners and losers were, in effect, determined by chance. Next, as
a purportedly unrelated task, participants carried out the same
dice-under-a-cup task we used in the baseline condition, allowing
us to examine for dishonest behavior.
Importantly, a new random matching of participants to dyads
took place for this task, and throwers did not know whether their
fellow receivers won or lost the competition that took place
earlier in the session.
Participants’ actual performance in the competition task was
unrelated to their claim in the dice-under-a-cup task (r = 0.13);
however, their status as winners and losers had a clear effect on
their claiming. The second and third columns on the left side of
Fig. 1 summarize the main findings. As shown, there was a signif-
icant difference between the claims of participants who won the
competition and participants who lost [t (41) = 2.939, P < 0.01].
Overall, winners claimed (M = 8.75, SD = 2.023) significantly more
than the expected 7 NIS [t (19) = 3.869, P < 0.01]. In contrast,
losers’ claims (M = 6.35, SD = 3.128) did not significantly differ
from the expected 7 NIS [t (22) = −1.00, P = 0.328]. Further
analysis showed that winners claimed significantly more than the
control group [t (41) = 2.34, P < 0.05], whereas losers did not
significantly differ from the control group [t (44) = 0.94, P = 0.35].*
Study 2: The Effect of Recall on Dishonest Behavior. We designed
study 2 to replicate the findings regarding the winners in study 1
and to contrast the experience of winning a competition with that
of achieving a goal. The difference between the two experiences
is that winning a competition is determined in reference to the
other contestants, whereas achieving a goal is determined in
absolute terms without direct reference to others. We asked
participants to recall either a situation in which they had won a
competition against someone or a situation in which they had
achieved a goal. After completing the recall task, respondents
engaged in the two-dice-under-a-cup task used in study 1. The
fourth and fifth left columns in Fig. 1 summarize the main
findings of study 2: The figure shows a significant difference
between the claims of participants who recalled an experience of
winning a competition and those who recalled an experience of
achieving a goal [t (36) = 2.292, P < 0.05]. Overall, winners of a
competition claimed (M = 8.89, SD = 1.99) significantly more
than the expected 7 NIS [t (18) = 4.136, P < 0.01]. In contrast,
the claims of participants who recalled an experience of achiev-
ing a goal (M = 7.16, SD = 2.63) were not significantly different
from the expected 7 NIS [t (18) = 0.262, P = 0.797]. Further
analysis (leftmost column in Fig. 1) revealed that winners claimed
significantly more than control group participants [t (40) = 2.52,
P < 0.05],† whereas achievers did not [t (40) = 0.35, P = 0.97].
The last two studies examine the extent to which mere success,
rather than winning, drives the effect.
Study 3a: The Effect of Winning a Lottery. Does winning a lottery
have an effect similar to that of winning a competition? If the
unethical behavior observed in the earlier studies is related
simply to the experience of winning, winning a lottery may have
the same effect as winning a competition. If, however, beating a
rival is at the core of the effect, lottery winners would not be
expected to cheat. To test this possibility, the setting of study 3a
was identical to that of study 1, with the exception that instead of
participating in a competition participants took part in a lottery
in which every other participant won a pair of earbuds (i.e., 50%
chance of winning). As in study 1, a new random matching of
participants into dyads took place for this task, and throwers did
not know whether their fellow receivers won the lottery. The
sixth and seventh columns of Fig. 1 summarize the main findings.
As can be seen, participants who won the lottery on average
claimed a lower amount (M = 6.00, SD = 2.52) than those who
lost the lottery claimed (M = 7.32, SD = 2.45). The difference
approached significance [t (49) = 1.87, P = 0.07]. Importantly,
comparing winners’ claims to the expected chance level revealed
that winners claimed less than the expected 7 NIS [t (28) =
−2.136, P < 0.05]. The same comparison for losers revealed that
they did not claim more than the expected 7 NIS [t (21) = 0.61,
P = 0.55]. Neither lottery winners’ nor lottery losers’ claims were
significantly different from those of the control group [for win-
ners t (50) = 1.624, P = 0.11; for losers t (43) = 0.26, P = 0.799].
Although winning a lottery does not seem to engender sub-
sequent unethical behavior, more meaningful, self-relevant success
may effect cheating, even in the absence of direct competition.
Our final study examines this possibility.
Study 3b: The Effect of Achieving a Goal. We designed this study to
control for the possibility that the experience of excelling rather
than that of defeating an opponent in a competition drove the
effect. To test this possibility, in study 3b, instead of taking part
in a competition, participants faced a trivia challenge. We first
asked participants to answer 20 trivia questions. Those who
managed to correctly answer more than 10 questions won a pair
of earbuds. To avoid selection bias we used extremely difficult
questions and randomly informed half of the participants that
they had achieved the threshold and rewarded them with a pair
of earbuds, whereas the others were informed they had not
achieved it. As in previous studies, a new random matching of
participants into dyads took place for this task, and throwers did
not know whether their fellow receivers had achieved the required
threshold of answering 10 trivia questions correctly or not.
Participants’ actual performance in the trivia task was un-
related to their claim in the dice-under-a-cup task (r = −0.003).
More importantly, their status as achievers or nonachievers did
not significantly affect their claims either. The two rightmost
columns of Fig. 1 summarize the main findings. As can be seen,
participants who met the threshold of answering 10 trivia ques-
tions correctly claimed on average M = 7.26, SD = 2.49, whereas
those who did not meet the threshold claimed on average M =
8.10, SD = 2.14. The difference between achievers and non-
achievers was not significant [t (42) = 1.19, P = 0.24]. Impor-
tantly, comparing achievers’ claims to the expected chance level
revealed that achievers did not claim more than the expected
chance level [t (22) = 0.50, P = 0.62], whereas nonachievers
claimed significantly more than the expected chance level [t (20) =
2.34, P < 0.05]. Neither achievers’ nor nonachievers’ claims were
significantly different from those of the control group. t (42) =
1.38, P = 0.17; t (44) = 0.18, P = 0.86, for nonachievers and
achievers, respectively.
Study 4: The Effect of Competition on Sense of Entitlement. Although
there are many plausible mechanisms accounting for dishonest
behavior, in the last study we investigated entitlement as one
plausible mediator for the effects we have observed. Namely, we
contrasted the experience of winning a competition with that of
achieving a goal and examined the extent to which each of these
two types of experiences promotes a sense of entitlement. In a
survey, we asked respondents to recall either a situation in which
they won a competition against someone or a situation in which
*We obtained similar pattern of results using ANOVA with all three groups. There was a
significant difference between all three experimental conditions [F(2,63) = 4.69, P < 0.05].
Planned contrasts revealed a nonsignificant difference between the control and the losers
groups [t (63) = 1.02, P = 0.31] and significant difference between the control and the
winners groups [t (63) = −2.04, P < 0.05] and between the losers and the winners groups
[t (63) = −3.00, P < 0.01].
†ANOVA across all experimental conditions yielded the same pattern of results: a signif-
icant difference between groups [F(2,58) = 3.54, P < 0.05]. Planned contrasts revealed a
significant difference between the control group and winners [t (58) = −2.25, P < 0.05]
and between the acheivers group and the winners [t (58) = 2.39, P < 0.05] and a non-
significant difference between the control group and the achievers group [t (58) = 0.037,
P = not significant].
1756
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1515102113
Schurr and Ritov
 they achieved a personal goal. All respondents then filled out a
psychological entitlement scale (PES) questionnaire (21).
Respondents who recalled a situation of winning a competition
scored 3.71 on the PES; respondents who recalled a situation
of achieving a goal scored 3.21. The difference was significant
[t (98) = 2.02, P < 0.05]. This finding lends support to the hypothesis
that winning a competition enhances one’s sense of entitlement.
Discussion
Honesty and dishonesty can affect the chances of winning a
competition, but is an opposite causal relationship also possible?
Namely, does beating a rival generate subsequent (dis)honest
behavior? The results of our studies provide a clue, shedding
light on the consequences of competing on dishonest behavior.
In studies 1 and 2, participants who won a competition or even
just recalled winning one overclaimed money from their coun-
terparts in a subsequent experiment, indicating a higher like-
lihood of cheating relative to nonwinners. This tendency
diminished when winning did not entail defeating an opponent,
as in studies 3a and 3b. When winning was determined by chance
(study 3a), lottery winners claimed less—rather than more—
money from their counterpart, relative to expectation, suggesting
an egalitarian disposition toward their counterparts. When
meeting a set goal rather than beating a counterpart determined
success (study 3b), again we found no evidence for overclaiming
by winners. Finally, in study 4, we sought evidence of an un-
derlying process. Building on previous findings showing that
entitlement drives dishonesty (6, 11, 24), we examined the effect
of winning on perceived entitlement. We found that participants
who had recalled winning a match felt more entitled than par-
ticipants who had recalled achieving a personal goal. On a more
general level, our findings indicate that success is multifaceted.
When success is measured by social comparison, as is the case
when winning a competition, dishonesty increases. When success
does not involve social comparison, as is the case of meeting a set
goal, dishonesty decreases. We further suggest that entitlement
may mediate this effect. We conclude that defeating one’s
counterpart in a competitive setting provokes dishonest behavior
in unrelated situations.
Why are competition winners in contrast to achievers and
lottery winners more prone to unethical behavior? Previous re-
search on dishonest behavior points to three mechanisms that
give rise to dishonest behavior and determine its extent. First,
when deciding to behave dishonestly people balance between the
motivation for personal gain and the desire to maintain a positive
self-concept, consequently cheating only to the extent that they
can do so without violating their perception of themselves as
honest (13). Additionally, people often experience ethical blind-
ness and fail to notice the unethical implications of a particular
decision (31). Finally, maintaining a positive self-image requires
being able to justify to oneself one’s unethical behavior. Indeed,
the extent to which people can justify their actions is an important
determinant of unethical behavior (15–21). In line with these
findings, the feeling of entitlement may facilitate self-justification
for overclaiming resources. As we have shown, winning a com-
petition enhances the sense of entitlement, presumably providing
the necessary justification to engage in a behavior one would
normally consider unacceptable.
The present research focuses on processes that occur after a
specific competition has ended. Notably, these processes are
different from the processes that occur during the competition
and, hence, are not necessarily a direct continuation of the pro-
cesses that come into play while competing. Specifically, previous
research findings show that during—as opposed to after—social
interactions people cheat more when presented with social
comparisons to those they consider to be in a better position than
themselves (5, 7, 32, 33), indicating a tendency to behave un-
ethically when in a position of disadvantage (8). These findings
suggest that the association between winning and subsequent
dishonest behavior is not simply a reflection of carryover pro-
cesses. However, what is common to both during- and after-
competition processes is the focus on social comparison. The
essence of competing is the importance of relative ranking. As
our findings indicate, the greater salience of relative ranking
induces feelings of entitlement among winners, consequently
leading to subsequent dishonest behavior. We do not claim that a
sense of entitlement is the only factor that accounts for dishonest
behavior following a competition. Given the complexity of the
situation under study and the variety of mechanisms that drive
dishonest behavior, it is likely that other mechanisms also come
into play.
Some constraints regarding the present research need to be
addressed. The interpretation of the competition outcome is a
critical factor in our theory. The interpretation must surely be
affected by perceptions of relative ranking before the competition.
For example, when an adult competes against a 6-y-old child and
wins, winning will probably not engender feelings of entitlement.
Subsequent behavior is unlikely to be affected by the competition
outcome. If anything, the loser rather than the winner may feel
entitled to “level the field” by unethically obtaining a larger gain in
the subsequent occasion. However, when two adults of similar
background and abilities compete against each other, as in our
present research, contestants have equal chances to win, and
winning is expected to enhance feelings of entitlement. In that
case, winning is expected to drive censurable conduct. It should
be noted that even in similar situations motivations may differ.
For example, it could be that a sprinter’s goal is not only to win
the race but also to set a new record or to improve his or her
personal best. In that case, the goal may affect conduct more than
beating the opponent in the competition, decreasing subsequent
misconduct.
It is difficult to overstate the importance of competition in
advancing economic growth, technological progress, wealth cre-
ation, social mobility, and greater equality. At the same time,
however, it is vital to recognize the role of competition in elic-
iting censurable conduct (34, 35). A greater tendency toward
unethicality on the part of winners, as our findings indicate, is
likely to impede social mobility and equality, exacerbating dis-
parities in society rather than alleviating them. Finding ways to
predict and overcome these tendencies may be a fruitful topic for
the future study of competition.
Methods
Ethics Statement. All studies were approved by the Institutional Review Board
at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev. All participants read and signed an
informed consent before the studies.
Control Group.
Participants. Forty-six university students provided informed consent and
completed the study (26 female; age 21–44 y, M = 28.16, SD = 5.54; two
participants did not disclose their age and gender). The analyses pertain only
to the 23 participants in the role of throwers in the dice-under-a-cup task.
The other half of participants acted as passive recipients.
Procedure. Participants entered the laboratory in large groups of ∼20 students.
We randomly assigned participants either the role of thrower or passive re-
cipient. The experimenter distributed written instructions to throwers de-
scribing the dice-under-a-cup task and handed them two dice, a cup with a
peeking hole in the bottom, and an envelope containing 12 1-shekel coins. The
experimenter read aloud the following instructions: “You have received a cup
with a small hole in the bottom, two dice, and an envelope containing 12 NIS
in coins of 1 NIS each. Please turn the cup over the dice and shake it vigorously.
The outcome of the shake (the numbers that came out) belongs to you. The
rest of the money will go to one of the participants sitting in the lab who did
not play the two-dice-under-a-cup game.” The experimenter then demon-
strated the procedure and encouraged the throwers to practice the complete
procedure once. Following the practice trial, the throwers engaged in the task.
Schurr and Ritov
PNAS
|
February 16, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 7
|
1757
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 Study 1.
Participants. Eighty-six students (52 female; age 21–31 y, M = 24.51, SD = 1.69)
provided informed consent and completed the study in exchange for course
credit and incentive-compatible payoff. The analyses pertain only to those
43 participants who acted as throwers in the dice-under-a-cup task.
Procedure. Participants entered the laboratory in large groups of ∼20 students.
We told participants that in the next 30 min they would participate in a
battery of experiments. Study 1 comprised the first two experiments. In the
first experiment, we randomly and anonymously assigned participants to
dyads and had them compete against each other. For this experiment, we used
the series of estimation tasks developed by Haran et al. (30). In each task, par-
ticipants see a number of objects of different types displayed on a computer
screen for 2,500 ms each. Participants could click a button to view the objects as
many times as they wished before choosing the object type that appeared most
frequently and estimating the total number of objects that appeared on the
screen. After completing the tasks, winners were rewarded with a pair of JVC
earbuds. Importantly, because the estimation task is done in private, winners and
losers were determined by chance to avoid selection bias. Next, in the second part
of the study (experiment 2), we used the modified dice-under-a-cup paradigm
described above. We randomly assigned participants to the role of either
throwers or passive recipients. Throwers rolled the dice and took the money
according to their (mis)reporting.
Study 2.
Participants. Seventy-six students (36 females; age 19–36 y, M = 24.46, SD =
2.47; three participants did not disclose their age and gender) provided in-
formed consent and completed the study in exchange for 10 NIS and in-
centive compatible payoff. The analyses pertain only to those 38 participants
who acted as throwers in the dice-under-a-cup task. The rest of the partic-
ipants played the role of passive recipients.
Procedure. Participants entered the laboratory in large groups of ∼20 students.
We told participants that in the next 30 min they would participate in a
battery of experiments. Study 2 comprised the first two experiments. In the
first part of the study (experiment 1) we asked participants to recall a com-
petition-winning experience or a goal-achieving experience. Next, in the sec-
ond part of the study (experiment 2), we used the modified dice-under-a-cup
paradigm described above. We randomly assigned participants to the role of
either throwers or passive recipients. Throwers rolled the dice and took the
money according to their (mis)reporting.
Study 3a.
Participants. One hundred and two students (50 female; age 21–56 y, M = 24.5,
SD = 4.25) provided informed consent and completed the study in exchange
for course credit and a chance to win a pair of JVC earbuds. The analyses
pertain only to those 51 participants who acted as throwers in the dice-
under-a-cup task.
Procedure. Participants entered the laboratory in large groups of ∼20 stu-
dents. We told participants that in the next 30 min they would participate in
a battery of experiments. Study 3a comprised the first two experiments. The
procedure was identical to study 1 with the exception that in the first part of
the study (experiment 1) participants filled out a 10-min-long questionnaire.
Upon completion, all participants engaged in a JVC earbud lottery in which
half the participants won a set of earbuds. Next, in the second part of the
study (experiment 2), participants performed the dice-under-a-cup task.
Study 3b.
Participants. Eighty-eight students (50 female; age 19–43 y, M = 24.31, SD =
3.13; 10 participants did not disclose age or gender) provided informed
consent and completed the study in exchange for 10 NIS and a chance to win
a pair of JVC earbuds. The analyses pertain only to those 44 participants who
acted as throwers in the dice-under-a-cup task.
Procedure. Participants entered the laboratory in large groups of ∼20 stu-
dents. We told participants that in the next 20 min they would participate in
two experiments. The procedure was identical to study 1 with the exception
that in the first part of the study (experiment 1) participants answered 20
trivia questions. We told participants that those who answered more than 10
questions correctly would receive a pair of earbuds. To avoid selection bias
we randomly assigned participants as achievers or nonachievers. The ques-
tions were difficult, and it was not possible for the respondents to track the
number of questions they answered correctly. In the second part of the study
(experiment 2) participants performed the dice-under-a-cup task.
Study 4.
Participants. One hundred students (55 female; aged 19–61 y, M = 26.26, SD = 5.61)
signed up in the decision-making laboratory participant pool, provided informed
consent, and completed an online survey in exchange for six 50-NIS cash prizes.
Procedure. Participants accessed the study via a link sent by email inviting them
to fill out a “short and interesting” questionnaire. As they logged on, they
were randomly assigned to one of two conditions: competition-recall or
goal-achievement-recall. We asked participants to write about a past ex-
perience in which they had won a competition or in which they had set
themselves a goal they then achieved. Specifically, participants in the com-
petition-recall condition read the following instructions: “Every now and
then, each and every one of us competes against someone and wins. For
example, competing in a sports match, in a race for a particular job, or in the
race for admission to a specific university, or winning a prestigious scholar-
ship. Please tell us about one such winning experience you have had in as
much detail as possible. Please also tell us about the thoughts and feelings
this victory stimulates right now.”
Participants in the goal-achievement condition read the following in-
structions: “Every now and then, each and every one of us sets her/himself
goals and meets those goals. For example, meeting a specific fitness goal,
obtaining a particular job, being admitted into a specific university, or re-
ceiving a special scholarship. Please tell us about such goal achievement
experience you have had in as much detail as possible. Please also tell us
about the thoughts and feelings this achievement stimulates right now.”
All participants then filled out the entitlement questionnaire (21). Mean
responses to each item are shown in Table S1. We have also examined
competence as an alternative mechanism. A description of the studies ap-
pears in Supporting Information.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The authors would like to thank the editor and two
anonymous reviewers for constructive comments and Barry Geltman for
editorial assistance. This research was supported by the I-CORE program of
the Planning and Budgeting Committee, the Israel Science Foundation
(Grant 1821/12), and by the Guilford Glazer Faculty of Business, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev.
1. Fehr E, Gächter S (2002) Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature 415(6868):
137–140.
2. Fehr E, Schmidt KM (1999) A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation. Q J
Econ 114(3):817–868.
3. Festinger L (1954) A theory of social comparison processes. Hum Relat 7(2):117–140.
4. Garcia SM, Tor A, Schiff TM (2013) The psychology of competition: A social compar-
ison perspective. Perspect Psychol Sci 8(6):634–650.
5. John LK, Loewenstein G, Rick SI (2014) Cheating more for less: Upward social com-
parisons motivate the poorly compensated to cheat. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process
123(2):101–109.
6. Zitek EM, Jordan AH, Monin B, Leach FR (2010) Victim entitlement to behave selfishly.
J Pers Soc Psychol 98(2):245–255.
7. Pittarello A, Rubaltelli E, Rumiati R (2013) You can’t be better than me: The role of the
reference point in modulating people’s pursuit of wealth. J Econ Psychol 37:65–76.
8. Rick S, et al. (2008) Commentaries and rejoinder to “the dishonesty of honest peo-
ple”. J Mark Res 45(6):645–653.
9. Major B (1994) From social inequality to personal entitlement: The role of social
comparisons, legitimacy appraisals, and group membership. Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, ed Zanna MP (Academic, San Diego), Vol 26, pp 293–355.
10. Major B, Testa M (1989) Social comparison processes and judgments of entitlement
and satisfaction. J Exp Soc Psychol 25(2):101–120.
11. Vincent L, Kouchaki M (2015) Creative, rare, entitled, and dishonest: How common-
ality of creativity in one’s group decreases an individual’s entitlement and dishonesty.
Acad Manage J, 10.5465/amj.2014.1109.
12. Campbell WK, Bonacci AM, Shelton J, Exline JJ, Bushman BJ (2004) Psychological
entitlement: Interpersonal consequences and validation of a self-report measure.
J Pers Assess 83(1):29–45.
13. Mazar N, Amir O, Ariely D (2008) The dishonesty of honest people: A theory of self-
concept maintenance. J Mark Res 45(6):633–644.
14. Schurr A, Ritov I, Kareev Y, Avrahami J (2012) Is that the answer you had in mind? The
effect of perspective on unethical behavior. Judgm Decis Mak 7(6):679–688.
15. Shalvi S (2012) Dishonestly increasing the likelihood of winning. Judgm Decis Mak
7(3):292–303.
16. Shalvi S, Dana J, Handgraaf MJ, De Dreu CK (2011) Justified ethicality: Observing
desired counterfactuals modifies ethical perceptions and behavior. Organ Behav Hum
Decis Process 115(2):181–190.
17. Shalvi S, Gino F, Barkan R, Ayal S (2015) Self-serving justifications doing wrong and
feeling moral. Curr Dir Psychol Sci 24(2):125–130.
18. Shalvi S, Handgraaf MJ, De Dreu CK (2011) Ethical manoeuvring: Why people avoid
both major and minor lies. Br J Manage 22(s1):S16–S27.
19. Shalvi S, Handgraaf MJ, De Dreu CK (2011) People avoid situations that enable them
to deceive others. J Exp Soc Psychol 47(6):1096–1106.
1758
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1515102113
Schurr and Ritov
 20. Shalvi S, Eldar O, Bereby-Meyer Y (2012) Honesty requires time (and lack of justifi-
cations). Psychol Sci 23(10):1264–1270.
21. Weisel O, Shalvi S (2015) The collaborative roots of corruption. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
112(34):10651–10656.
22. Bandura A (1999) Moral disengagement in the perpetration of inhumanities. Pers Soc
Psychol Rev 3(3):193–209.
23. Detert JR, Treviño LK, Sweitzer VL (2008) Moral disengagement in ethical decision
making: A study of antecedents and outcomes. J Appl Psychol 93(2):374–391.
24. Poon KT, Chen Z, Dewall CN (2013) Feeling entitled to more: Ostracism increases
dishonest behavior. Pers Soc Psychol Bull 39(9):1227–1239.
25. Kraus MW, Piff PK, Keltner D (2011) Social class as culture the convergence of re-
sources and rank in the social realm. Curr Dir Psychol Sci 20(4):246–250.
26. Piff PK, Kraus MW, Côté S, Cheng BH, Keltner D (2010) Having less, giving more: The
influence of social class on prosocial behavior. J Pers Soc Psychol 99(5):771–784.
27. Piff PK, Stancato DM, Martinez AG, Kraus MW, Keltner D (2012) Class, chaos, and the
construction of community. J Pers Soc Psychol 103(6):949–962.
28. Piff PK (2014) Wealth and the inflated self: Class, entitlement, and narcissism. Pers Soc
Psychol Bull 40(1):34–43.
29. Piff PK, Stancato DM, Côté S, Mendoza-Denton R, Keltner D (2012) Higher social class predicts
increased unethical behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109(11):4086–4091.
30. Haran U, Ritov I, Mellers BA (2013) The role of actively open-minded thinking in in-
formation acquisition, accuracy, and calibration. Judgm Decis Mak 8(3):188–201.
31. Bazerman MH, Tenbrunsel AE (2011) Blind Spots: Why We Fail to Do What’s Right and
What to Do About It (Princeton Univ Press, Princeton).
32. Gino F, Pierce L (2009) The abundance effect: Unethical behavior in the presence of
wealth. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 109(2):142–155.
33. Gino F, Pierce L (2009) Dishonesty in the name of equity. Psychol Sci 20(9):
1153–1160.
34. Shleifer A (2004) Does competition destroy ethical behavior? NBER Working Paper
10269 (Natl Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA).
35. Gneezy U (2005) Deception: The role of consequences. Am Econ Rev 95(1):384–394.
36. Harter S (1978) Effectance motivation reconsidered. Toward a developmental model.
Hum Dev 21(1):34–64.
37. White RW (1959) Motivation reconsidered: The concept of competence. Psychol Rev
66(5):297–333.
38. Wakeman W, Moore C, Gino F (2014) Competence by Any Means: Cheating As a
Response to Ego Threat (Academy of Management, Philadelphia, PA).
39. Heatherton TF, Polivy J (1991) Development and validation of a scale for measuring
state self-esteem. J Pers Soc Psychol 60(6):895–910.
Schurr and Ritov
PNAS
|
February 16, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 7
|
1759
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
