 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Virology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/virology
A giant virus infecting green algae encodes key fermentation genes
Christopher R. Schvarcz, Grieg F. Steward⁎
Department of Oceanography, Daniel K. Inouye Center for Microbial Oceanography: Research and Education, University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa, 1950 East-West Road,
Honolulu, HI 96822, United States
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
NCLDV
Mimiviridae
Giant virus
Algal virus
Green algae
Pyruvate formate-lyase
Auxiliary metabolic genes
A B S T R A C T
The family Mimiviridae contains uncommonly large viruses, many of which were isolated using a free-living
amoeba as a host. Although the genomes of these and other mimivirids that infect marine heterokont and
haptophyte protists have now been sequenced, there has yet to be a genomic investigation of a mimivirid that
infects a member of the Viridiplantae lineage (green algae and land plants). Here we characterize the 668-
kilobase complete genome of TetV-1, a mimivirid that infects the cosmopolitan green alga Tetraselmis
(Chlorodendrophyceae). The analysis revealed genes not previously seen in viruses, such as the mannitol me-
tabolism enzyme mannitol 1-phosphate dehydrogenase, the saccharide degradation enzyme alpha-galactosidase,
and the key fermentation genes pyruvate formate-lyase and pyruvate formate-lyase activating enzyme. The TetV
genome is the largest sequenced to date for a virus that infects a photosynthetic organism, and its genes reveal
unprecedented mechanisms by which viruses manipulate their host's metabolism.
1. Introduction
Viruses display exceptional genetic and morphological diversity
(Koonin and Dolja, 2014), and most remain undiscovered or are known
only through sequence fragments (Brum et al., 2015; Paez-Espino et al.,
2016). Analyses of novel viral genomes often uncover genes that were
once exclusively reported in cellular organisms, continually expanding
the known functional repertoire of viruses (Mann et al., 2003; Sharon
et al., 2011; Rosenwasser and Ziv, 2016). Viruses having exceptionally
large capsids and genomes, the so-called “giant” viruses, can reach a
size (> 1 μm) and gene-coding capacity (> 2.5 Mb) rivaling that of free-
living cells (Fischer, 2016). Although the difference in replication me-
chanism (assembly vs. fission) continues to clearly distinguish viruses
from cells (Steward et al., 2013), the distinction between canonical
cellular vs. viral metabolic functions is blurring with the analysis of new
giant virus genomes. For example, the 1.2 megabase genome of Acan-
thamoeba polyphaga mimivirus (APMV) revealed the first examples of
virus-encoded amino-acyl transfer RNA synthetases (Raoult et al., 2004;
Abergel et al., 2005), and more recently, a viral metacaspase was
identified in the single amplified genome of a marine giant virus
(Wilson et al., 2017).
Despite the increasing genomic data available for giant viruses, the
range of genetic potential represented among the largest viruses se-
quenced to date is likely biased by the limited number of hosts on which
they have been isolated. Nine out of the ten largest viral genomes
published in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
Viral Genomes database (all > 600 kilobase pairs in length) are from
viruses that were isolated on a single type of heterotrophic host namely,
amoebae in the genus Acanthamoeba (Raoult et al., 2004; Yoosuf et al.,
2012, 2014; Arslan et al., 2011; Philippe et al., 2013; Legendre et al.,
2014, 2015; Antwerpen et al., 2015). The other is for a virus infecting
the heterotrophic heterokont protist, Cafeteria roenbergensis (Fischer
et al., 2010). This low host diversity equates to a low diversity of cel-
lular metabolisms available for these viruses to exploit, resulting in
fewer types of proteins that a virus might co-opt for successful infection.
Investigating the genomes of giant viruses that infect a broader range of
hosts may help to reveal new viral functions and infection strategies.
In this study, we present the physical characteristics and complete
genome sequence for a novel virus in the family Mimiviridae that infects
green
algae
in
the
genus
Tetraselmis
(Chlorodendrophyceae):
Tetraselmis virus 1 (TetV-1; referred to hereafter as simply TetV). Only
one other green alga-infecting mimivirid (Pyramimonas orientalis virus
01B; PoV) has previously been characterized (Sandaa et al., 2001), but
its genome has yet to be sequenced. In the absence of a full genome
analysis of any green alga-infecting mimivirid, the functional capacity
of these viruses, and how they compare to other mimivirids, has been
unclear.
TetV was isolated from the coastal waters of Oʻahu, Hawaiʻi, and its
host was isolated from seawater collected roughly 100 kilometers north
of Oʻahu, at the Hawaiʻi Ocean Time-series site Station ALOHA (Karl
and Lukas, 1996). While this particular host strain was isolated from the
oligotrophic, open ocean, members of the genus Tetraselmis have a
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virol.2018.03.010
Received 22 November 2017; Received in revised form 8 March 2018; Accepted 11 March 2018
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: grieg@hawaii.edu (G.F. Steward).
Virology 518 (2018) 423–433
0042-6822/ © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).
T
 cosmopolitan distribution and are commonly found in nutrient-rich
marine and fresh waters. Tetraselmis spp. are widely used as a feed
source in the aquaculture industry (Hemaiswarya et al., 2010) and have
received attention from the biofuel industry as a model organism for the
production of starch (Zheng et al., 2011; Yao et al., 2012; Ji et al.,
2014). Investigations of Tetraselmis-infecting viruses might, therefore,
ultimately find some practical applications.
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Virion properties
TetV virions have average minimum and maximum dimensions of
226 ± 9 nm and 257 ± 9 nm, respectively (Fig. 1), making them among
the largest viruses characterized for algae. This is slightly larger than
the closely related PoV, which has an average capsid size of
180–220 nm (Sandaa et al., 2001), but smaller than some other pre-
viously characterized or observed algal viruses (Johannessen et al.,
2015; Dodds and Cole, 1980; Sicko-Goad and Walker, 1979).
The buoyant density of TetV particles in CsCl is approximately
1.386 g mL−1, which is within the range typically observed for marine
viruses (Lawrence and Steward, 2010).
2.2. Host range
The host range of TetV was tested using diverse phytoplankton
strains collected from both Station ALOHA (origin of host) and
Kāneʻohe Bay, Oʻahu, Hawaiʻi (origin of TetV). Included were other
chlorophytes such as Pyramimonas, Micromonas, and prasinophyte clade
VII, as well as other photosynthetic flagellates such as chlorar-
achniophytes, cryptophytes, dictyochophytes, haptophytes, and pela-
gophytes (Table S2). Permissiveness to TetV infection resulting in cell
lysis was only observed in other Tetraselmis strains (all of the eight total
Tetraselmis strains tested; 18S rDNA sequences deposited in GenBank
under accession numbers MH055444-MH055457). A phylogenetic
analysis of permissive strains showed that they included three distinct
phylotypes
in
a
clade
encompassing
Tetraselmis
cordiformis
and
Tetraselmis symbionts of open ocean radiolaria (Fig. S1).
2.3. Phylogenetic analysis
Phylogenetic analyses of multiple marker genes support TetV's
classification as a member of family Mimiviridae (Fig. 2). Based on the
phylogenies of DNA-dependent DNA polymerase family B (PolB) and
DNA mismatch repair protein MutS7, TetV appears to be most closely
related to a previously isolated virus, PoV, infecting the prasinophyte
Pyramimonas orientalis. The phylogeny for major capsid protein MCP1
shows a slightly different evolutionary history; however, these branches
have lower support. Although an A32-like virion packaging ATPase
from PoV was not available for comparison, the phylogeny for this
gene, like the other three, suggests a clustering of TetV with other alga-
infecting members of the family Mimiviridae. This is consistent with a
comparative genomic analysis of members of mimivirids, and the sug-
gestion that these alga-infecting viruses could constitute a subfamily
within the Mimiviridae (Gallot-Lavallée et al., 2017). The analysis pre-
sented here hints at further substructure within this group and the
possible emergence of a monophyletic clade of chlorophyte-infecting
mimivirids founded by TetV and PoV.
2.4. Basic genome features
The complete TetV dsDNA genome (deposited in GenBank under
accession number KY322437) was assembled as a single, circular se-
quence measuring 668,031 base pairs (bp), making it the largest
genome sequenced to date for a virus infecting a photosynthetic or-
ganism. This is nearly 200 kb larger than the next largest for an algal
virus, the recently published Chrysochromulina ericina virus (CeV)
genome, sequenced at 473,558 bp (Gallot-Lavallée et al., 2015). The
circular structure and size of TetV's genome was supported by pulsed-
field gel electrophoresis (PFGE; Fig. S2 and Table S1). Undigested
genomic DNA was retained in the well during PFGE, a phenomenon
expected for large circular molecules under the conditions used (Levene
and Zimm, 1987), and digestion with NotI, a restriction endonuclease
predicted to have a single cut site in the genome, resulted in the ex-
pected single band. The estimated sizes of the bands resulting from
digestion with NotI or SfiI agreed with the predicted sizes to within the
error of the method (Table S1).
The TetV genome has a GC content of 41.2%, which is considerably
higher than other mimivirids (23–32%; Abergel et al., 2015; Gallot-
Lavallée et al., 2017; Schulz et al., 2017). Although the complete PoV
genome is not available, the GC content of the genes for PolB (38%) and
MCP1 (53%) suggest PoV might have a GC content more similar to
TetV, consistent with the apparent phylogenetic affiliation of these two
viruses.
A total of 663 genes were predicted in the TetV genome, including
653 coding DNA sequences (CDSs) and 10 tRNAs (complete list of gene
annotations in Supplementary Dataset S1). All of the tRNAs are encoded
consecutively, on the same strand, in an 879-bp region of the genome,
an arrangement that is also seen in Cafeteria roenbergensis virus BV-
PW1 (CroV) and many chloroviruses (Fischer et al., 2010; Fitzgerald
et al., 2007b, 2007a). The average CDS length is 960 bp, and the overall
gene-coding density of the genome is 93.7%.
2.5. Protein BLAST top hit distributions
A blastp top hit analysis was performed using a combined database
that included GenBank's non-redundant (nr) dataset and eukaryotic
transcriptomes
available
through
the
Gordon
and
Betty
Moore
Foundation's Marine Microbial Eukaryote Transcriptome Sequencing
Project (MMETSP; Keeling et al., 2014). Sixty-seven percent (435) of
TetV's predicted proteins share no similarity to known proteins (Fig. 3),
a proportion considerably higher than what was found for other re-
cently sequenced algal mimivirids (43–47% no hits; Santini et al., 2013;
Fig. 1. Transmission electron micrograph of an infected Tetraselmis cell section.
The arrow points to a TetV virion. Scale bar equals 1 μm. Inset: negatively
stained TetV virion. Scale bar equals 200 nm.
C.R. Schvarcz, G.F. Steward
Virology 518 (2018) 423–433
424
 Moniruzzaman et al., 2014; Gallot-Lavallée et al., 2015), indicating the
novelty of TetV's genome relative to those currently sequenced. One
hundred ten (17%) TetV proteins are most similar to eukaryotic pro-
teins, followed by 63 (10%) top hits to viruses and 45 (7%) top hits to
bacteria. This suggests that TetV contains a large number of eukaryote-
derived proteins that are being observed for the first time in viruses.
Forty-three (39%) of the 110 eukaryote hits are from organisms in the
group Viridiplantae, which includes chlorophytes (such as Tetraselmis)
and land plants. Of the Viridiplantae hits, 34 (31%) are from chlor-
ophytes, and 19 (17%) of those are from Tetraselmis chlorophytes (2.9%
Fig. 2. Phylogenetic trees of select Nucleo-Cytoplasmic Large DNA Viruses (NCLDVs), based on protein sequence alignments of (a) DNA polymerase family B (PolB;
843 amino acid [aa] sites), (b) DNA mismatch repair protein MutS7 (674 aa sites; includes octocoral and Epsilonproteobacteria MutS7 sequences reported in Ogata
et al., 2011), (c) major capsid protein MCP1 (359 aa sites), and (d) A32-like virion packaging ATPase (230 aa sites). All trees represent Bayesian majority consensus
trees, with support values (Bayesian posterior probability/maximum-likelihood bootstrap percent, 1000 replicates) provided for branches within Mimiviridae. Bold
branches indicate complete support (Bayesian posterior probability of 1 and maximum-likelihood bootstrap percent of 100). Scale bars are in units of amino acid
substitutions per site. Abbreviations are as follows: AaV, Aureococcus anophagefferens virus; APMV, Acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus; ASFV, African swine fever
virus; ATCV-1, Acanthocystis turfacea Chlorella virus 1; BpV-1, Bathycoccus sp. RCC1105 virus BpV1; C8V, Cannes 8 virus; CeV, Chrysochromulina ericina virus;
CroV, Cafeteria roenbergensis virus BV-PW1; DpAV4, Diadromus pulchellus ascovirus 4a; EhV-86, Emiliania huxleyi virus 86; EsV-1, Ectocarpus siliculosus virus 1;
FPV, Fowlpox virus; FsV, Feldmannia species virus; HaVDNA-1, Heterosigma akashiwo virus 01; HcV-01, Heterocapsa circularisquama DNA virus 01; HvAV3,
Heliothis virescens ascovirus 3e; IIV-3, Invertebrate iridescent virus 3; IIV-30, Invertebrate iridescent virus 30; ISKNV, Infectious spleen and kidney necrosis virus;
Lausannevirus, Lausannevirus; LCDV-C, Lymphocystis disease virus - isolate China; M. chilensis, Megavirus chilensis; Mo. sib., Mollivirus sibericum; MpV-SP1,
Micromonas pusilla virus SP1; MV, Myxoma virus; OLPV-1, Organic Lake phycodnavirus 1; OLPV-2, Organic Lake phycodnavirus 2; OlV-1, Ostreococcus lucimarinus
virus OlV1; OtV-2, Ostreococcus tauri virus 2; OtV-5, Ostreococcus tauri virus OtV5; OV-SA00, Orf virus; P. dulcis, Pandoravirus dulcis; P. salinus, Pandoravirus
salinus; Pi. sibericum, Pithovirus sibericum; PBCV-1, Paramecium bursaria Chlorella virus 1; PBCV-AR158, Paramecium bursaria Chlorella virus AR158; PBCV-
FR483, Paramecium bursaria Chlorella virus FR483; PBCV-NY2A, Paramecium bursaria Chlorella virus NY2A; PgV-16 T, Phaeocystis globosa virus 16 T; PoV,
Pyramimonas orientalis virus 01B; PpV, Phaeocystis pouchetii virus; TetV, Tetraselmis virus 1; TnAV2, Trichoplusia ni ascovirus 2c; TPV-Kenya, Tanapox virus;
Tunisvirus, Tunisvirus fontaine2; WIV, Wiseana iridescent virus; YSLPV-1, Yellowstone lake phycodnavirus 1; YSLPV-2, Yellowstone lake phycodnavirus 2.
C.R. Schvarcz, G.F. Steward
Virology 518 (2018) 423–433
425
 of the total TetV proteome). For comparison, only 1.6% of AaV's pro-
teins had top hits to the genome of its host Aureococcus anophagefferens
(Moniruzzaman et al., 2014). Of the 63 top hits to other virus proteins,
the majority (47; 75%) belong to other mimivirids.
Although TetV shows a greater phylogenetic affinity to AaV than the
PgV/CeV/OLPV clade when analyzing selected genes (Fig. 2), a larger
number of TetV proteins are more similar to those from viruses in the
latter clade (n = 25 total) than AaV (n = 11). This may reflect AaV's
relatively small genome and the loss of otherwise conserved genes
through genome reduction; AaV has the smallest genome of char-
acterized mimivirids, and the genome of its ancestor is hypothesized to
have been even smaller (Moniruzzaman et al., 2014). A separate ana-
lysis of genes shared between TetV and other NCLDVs using Nucleo-
Cytoplasmic Virus Orthologous Groups (NCVOGs; Yutin et al., 2009,
2014) produced similar results, in which TetV shared the highest
number of genes with alga-infecting viruses of Mimiviridae, in particular
PgV-16T, CeV, and OLPV (Figs. S3 and S4). At present, a complete
genome sequence for TetV's presumed closest relative, PoV, is not
available, precluding genome-wide comparisons between these viruses.
Although there are numerous alga-infecting mimivirid genomes
now available, there are still a large number of TetV proteins (12; 19%
of the hits to viruses) with highest BLAST similarity to viruses in the
family Phycodnaviridae, many of which infect chlorophytes (e.g., viruses
from the genera Prasinovirus and Chlorovirus). This may be indicative of
horizontal gene transfer between phycodnavirids and TetV, facilitated
by infections of the same group of hosts. Also notable was a single top
hit to a hypothetical protein from a small (26,407-bp genome), un-
classified virus that infects Tetraselmis viridis (Tetraselmis viridis virus
S1; GenBank accession NC_020869), again suggesting horizontal gene
transfer between TetV and divergent viruses infecting the same host.
2.6. Gene function overview
Only 192 of the 653 predicted protein-coding genes in the TetV
genome could be annotated with some level of functional description.
At least four of these proteins were annotated with specific known
functions that have not previously been observed in viruses (Table 1).
One hundred thirty-three proteins had hits to the Clusters of Ortholo-
gous Groups (COG) database, and the distribution of COG functions
associated with these hits is dominated by “Replication, recombination
and repair” (23 proteins) and “Transcription” (18 proteins), as is seen in
related mimivirids (Figs. S5 and S6). The next highest-represented ca-
tegories were “Post-translational modification, protein turnover, cha-
perones” (14 proteins), owing to a large number of ubiquitination-re-
lated proteins, and “Signal transduction mechanisms” (14 proteins),
including six serine/threonine protein kinases.
Despite TetV's larger genome, its complement of transcription- and
translation-related genes is very similar to that found in other alga-in-
fecting mimivirids, such as PgV-16 T and CeV (Fig. S7). TetV does,
however, encode a eukaryotic initiation factor eIF-1A, which has not
previously been observed in alga-infecting mimivirids.
Methylation appears to be another common function encoded in the
TetV genome. TetV contains 12 putative methyltransferase proteins,
including four DNA methyltransferases, one SET domain-containing
protein methyltransferase, one FtsJ-like rRNA methyltransferase, and
six other methyltransferases (three type 24, one type 11, one type 21
[FkbM-like], and one type 23).
TetV contains seven proteins related to DNA repair. These include
two photolyases, DNA mismatch repair proteins MutS7 and MutS8, an
ERCC4-type nuclease, a putative DNA repair ATPase SbcC, and another
gene that appears to encode both the ATPase subunit (SbcC) and the
exonuclease subunit (SbcD) of the DNA repair exonuclease SbcCD
complex.
2.7. Ubiquitination-related genes
TetV contains 18 proteins with putative ubiquitination-related
functions: 14 putative RING-finger-containing E3 ubiquitin ligases, one
E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, two proteins related to de-ubiquiti-
nation, and one ubiquitin gene. Ubiquitination is the process of
Bacteria
Viruses
Eukaryotes
No Hits
Protein BLAST Top Hit Distributions
Viridiplantae (43)
Chlorophytes (34)
Tetraselmis (19)
435
45
63
110
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
M
i
m
i
v
i
r
i
d
a
e
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
P
h
y
c
o
.
Moumou (4)
PoV (3)
     M. c7 (1)
      CroV (1)
    APMV (1)
MpV (5)
 
  ATCV (2)
  PBCV (2)
       OtV-5 (1)
Poxviridae (1)
           Marseilleviridae (1)
                               TvV-S1 (1)
VIRUSES
n=63
                 FirrV (1)
 
YSLPV-3 (1)
AaV (11)
PgV (8)
CeV (13)
Caudovirales (1)
OLPV (4)
ACMV (1)
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
       
 
M
i
m
i
v
ir
u
s
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
P
r
a
s
i
n
o
. 
   
C
h
l
o
r.
  
  
  
  
 
P
g
V
/
C
e
V
/
O
L
P
V
 
c
l
a
d
e
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Fig. 3. Distribution of blastp top hits for TetV proteins searched against a
combined database of nr plus peptide sequences from the MMETSP. For the
domain-level pie chart, additional outer rings are drawn that indicate the
number of hits belonging to the nested taxonomic groups Viridiplantae,
chlorophytes, and Tetraselmis, where the arc length of the segment is propor-
tional to the number of associated hits. The distribution of viral top hits is
presented as a hierarchical pie chart, where inner rings represent higher level
groupings (e.g. family and genus) for viral taxa in the outer rings. Abbreviations
are as defined in Fig. 2, with the exceptions of: ACMV, Acanthamoeba cas-
tellanii mamavirus; ATCV, Acanthocystis turfacea Chlorella virus strains Canal-
1 and NTS-1; Chlor., Chlorovirus genus; FirV, Feldmannia irregularis virus a;
Moumou, Acanthamoeba polyphaga moumouvirus (n = 3) and Moumouvirus
goulette (n = 1); M. c7, Megavirus courdo7; MpV, Micromonas-infecting strains
MpV1 (n = 2), PL1 (n = 2), and SP1(n = 1); OLPV, Organic Lake phycodna-
virus strains OLPV-1 (n = 3) and OLPV (n = 1); PBCV, Paramecium bursaria
Chlorella virus strains KS1B and MT325; PgV, Phaeocystis globosa virus 16 T;
Phyco., Phycodnaviridae family; Prasino., Prasinovirus genus; TvV-S1, Tetra-
selmis viridis virus S1; YSLPV-3, Yellowstone lake phycodnavirus 3.
Table 1
TetV genes representing novel viral homologs, seen for the first time in viruses.
blastp Top Hit: nr + MMETSP
TetV Locus
Annotation
Organism
E-value
TetV_320
mannitol 1-phosphate
dehydrogenase*
Heterosigma akashiwo
(Euk.)
4.28E-39
TetV_428
pyruvate formate-lyasea
Chlamydomonas
chlamydogama (Euk.)
0.0
TetV_456
pyruvate formate-lyase
activating enzymeb
Tetraselmis sp. (Euk.)
3.32E-51
TetV_601
alpha-galactosidasec
Alkaliflexus imshenetskii
(Bact.)
9.42E-102
* Prasinoviruses encode a mannitol dehydrogenase belonging to a protein
family similar to Aspergillus fischeri mannitol 2-dehydrogenase, which performs
a different enzymatic reaction.
a Some phages encode a glycine radical protein that shares sequence simi-
larity with the glycine radical domain at the C-terminal end of pyruvate for-
mate-lyase, and many of these proteins have been misannotated as pyruvate
formate-lyase.
b Some phages encode an anaerobic ribonucleoside-triphosphate reductase-
activating protein that has been misannotated as a pyruvate formate-lyase ac-
tivating enzyme.
c Some phages encode hypothetical proteins with very low-scoring (> 1E-3)
partial domain hits (CDD) to alpha-galactosidase, which do not share BLAST
similarity with any known alpha-galactosidases.
C.R. Schvarcz, G.F. Steward
Virology 518 (2018) 423–433
426
 covalently attaching ubiquitin(s) to a protein substrate, thereby altering
the localization or activity of the protein or targeting it for degradation
by the proteasome (Haglund and Dikic, 2005). Genes related to ubi-
quitin signaling can be found in all families of the NCLDVs, and it has
been suggested that these genes may be used to counter host defenses
(Iyer et al., 2006). Three of TetV's ubiquitination-related proteins ap-
pear to be most closely related to homologs in its Tetraselmis host. The
genes for ubiquitin (TetV_289), an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme
(TetV_621), and a MIEL1-like E3 ubiquitin ligase (TetV_138) all had top
blastp hits to homologous proteins in the MMETSP Tetraselmis tran-
scriptomes. These relationships are supported by phylogenetic analyses
(Fig. S8), except in the case of ubiquitin, where the alignment region is
too conserved for robust phylogenetics.
2.8. Fermentation genes and energy production
Of the four TetV genes representing novel viral homologs, the most
interesting are perhaps pyruvate formate-lyase (PFL; TetV_428) and
pyruvate formate-lyase activating enzyme (PFL-AE; TetV_456). PFL and
PFL-AE are key enzymes in cellular fermentation pathways, allowing
energy production in the absence of oxygen. Phylogenetic analyses for
the TetV homologs suggest they were acquired by horizontal gene
transfer from Tetraselmis, or a more ancestral chlorophyte host (Fig. 4).
It is thought that green algae use fermentation to survive periods of low
oxygen concentration (Catalanotti et al., 2013), which can occur in
eutrophic environments with high rates of respiration, especially at
night. In the absence of oxygen (and thus, in the absence of a func-
tioning TCA cycle), fermentation provides a way to recycle oxidant that
is needed for continued energy production through glycolysis. Simi-
larly, TetV may use these genes to ensure that energy requirements are
satisfied for successful infection during low oxygen conditions. There
are numerous reports of Tetraselmis blooms in coastal eutrophic waters,
where concentrations can reach 104–105 cells mL−1, turning surface
waters green in color (Throndsen and Zingone, 1988; Jones and
Rhodes, 1994; Collantes and Prado, 2006; Daoudi et al., 2013). High
algal and bacterial respiration under such conditions could deplete
dissolved oxygen in surface waters at nighttime. Furthermore, the
spread of a virus through such a bloom and the ensuing mass lysis
would dramatically increase bacterial respiration and the likelihood of
anoxic conditions. Under such conditions, maintenance of the host's
fermentation pathway could become highly advantageous.
The ability of TetV to manipulate its host's fermentation pathway
may also hold interesting biochemical implications. In the case that
TetV forces its host to utilize fermentation regardless of ambient oxygen
concentrations, it could result in a greater release of fermentative
products (such as ethanol) compared with uninfected cells, thus al-
tering the composition of the dissolved organic carbon pool and the
associated microbial response. Determining the extent to which TetV
manipulates this pathway and the particular conditions under which
this occurs is a priority for future experimental work with this model
system.
2.9. Other notable genes
In addition to the fermentation genes, TetV also contains the first
viral homologs for the saccharide degradation protein alpha-galactosi-
dase (TetV_601) and the mannitol metabolism protein mannitol 1-
phosphate dehydrogenase (M1PHD; TetV_320). Interestingly, the rigid
cell wall of Tetraselmis was shown to contain up to 7% galactose and
21% galacturonic acid (Becker et al., 1989), and it is possible that
TetV's alpha-galactosidase assists in breaking down the cell wall upon
lysis.
The M1PHD found in TetV is homologous to the eukaryotic M1PHD
described in the brown macroalga Ectocarpus siliculosus (Rousvoal et al.,
2010), where it plays a key role in converting the photosynthate fruc-
tose 6-phosphate to the carbon storage compound mannitol. Another
mannitol cycle protein is found in prasinoviruses (Moreau et al., 2010)
and appears to be similar to a bacterial mannitol 2-dehydrogenase
(M2DH), which is used by some marine bacteria to metabolize algal-
derived mannitol into fructose (Groisillier et al., 2015). Both M1PHD
and M2DH are bidirectional enzymes and could potentially play similar
roles in the mannitol metabolism of these virus-host systems, or they
could simply be used for controlling redox balance in the host. It is also
possible that mannitol metabolism is being manipulated by the virus to
control intracellular osmolarity. Tetraselmis is known to produce man-
nitol for use as an osmolyte to acclimate to hypersaline conditions
(Kirst, 1989). Forced production of mannitol could induce hypotonic
shock, which would facilitate cell lysis.
TetV also contains the second-known viral example of a large-con-
ductance mechanosensitive channel (MscL; TetV_044) and the second-
known mimivirid example of an arabinose 5-phosphate isomerase (API;
TetV_403; this protein is also found in some phages). Both of these
proteins are also found in CroV. While the CroV API is most closely
related to bacterial homologs, the TetV API is most similar to a
Tetraselmis homolog (blastp top hit). Many chlorophytes, including
Tetraselmis, contain KDO in their cell wall theca (Becker et al., 1991),
and it is possible that TetV incorporates KDO into its virion to facilitate
virion-cell recognition. However, API is the only KDO synthesis gene
found in TetV, unlike in CroV, where the complete pathway is present.
2.10. Gene duplications and other repetitive genetic elements
Fifty-nine TetV proteins, representing 20.3% of the TetV genome
(135,897 bp total), were most similar to other proteins in the TetV
genome (blastp top hit), when searched against a combined database of
nr, MMETSP proteins, and TetV proteins. This includes 17 pairs of
proteins that were identified as reciprocal best hit (RBH) blastp
Fig. 4. Phylogenetic trees for the key fermentation genes pyruvate formate-
lyase (PFL) and pyruvate formate-lyase activating enzyme (PFL-AE). Both trees
represent Bayesian majority consensus trees inferred using alignments of 603
and 197 aa sites for PFL and PFL-AE, respectively, with support values
(Bayesian posterior probability/maximum-likelihood bootstrap percent, 1000
replicates) provided for branches that group TetV's proteins with those of
Tetraselmis. Bold branches indicate complete support (Bayesian posterior
probability of 1 and maximum-likelihood bootstrap percent of 100). Taxa
marked with filled circles are species of chlorophyte green algae, and an as-
terisk is used to mark the BLAST top hit for the respective TetV sequence. Scale
bars are in units of amino acid substitutions per site.
C.R. Schvarcz, G.F. Steward
Virology 518 (2018) 423–433
427
 matches, as well as 7 additional protein pairs linked by a nonreciprocal
best hit that were identified as being most closely related to each other
based on maximum-likelihood phylogenetic analyses. These protein
pairs likely represent recent gene duplication events. Some of the du-
plicate gene pairs share sequence similarity to larger sets of putative
paralogs in the TetV genome (Table S3 and Fig. S9; 23 total putative
paralog groups), the largest of which contains 8 gene copies. Most of
these putative paralogs are annotated as hypothetical proteins, and 12
of the protein groups did not have blastp hits to proteins in either nr or
MMETSP. Only one of the duplicated gene pairs (TetV_290 and
TetV_368, which encode putative N-6 adenine-specific DNA methy-
lases) appeared to be homologous to sequences from other NCLDV
viruses.
An overview of nucleotide exact repeats in the TetV genome re-
vealed two large clusters of repeats corresponding to fibronectin type
III-like (FN3-like) domain repeats (Fig. S10). Further analysis identified
126 FN3-like domains across 15 TetV proteins (Table S4), including
four of the six largest proteins in the TetV genome, the largest of which
is 8212 amino acids long. The sequence space occupied by FN3-like
domains represents approximately 6.4% (43,005 bp) of the TetV
genome. While the FN3-like domains are encoded on both strands, their
distribution is confined to one half of the circular genome (Fig. S11).
Highly repetitive protein domains have been found in other mimivirids.
For example, APMV and CroV contain numerous copies (> 400 copies in
CroV) of a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) similar to the FNIP/IP22 domain
(Fischer et al., 2010; O′Day et al., 2006), and approximately 11.3% of
AaV's genome is composed of the DUF285 domain (Moniruzzaman
et al., 2014), which is distantly related to LRRs. The roles of these re-
petitive viral domains are still unknown; however, studies of other LRRs
and FN3 domains suggest that the main function of both these domains
is to mediate protein-protein interactions (Kobe, 2001; Campbell and
Spitzfaden, 1994).
3. Conclusions
The 668-kb genome of TetV is the largest sequenced genome for a
virus that infects a photosynthetic organism. As such, it has revealed a
large number of viral homologs for genes previously not seen in viruses,
including the saccharide degradation enzyme alpha-galactosidase, the
mannitol metabolism enzyme mannitol 1-phosphate dehydrogenase,
and two key genes in algal fermentation pathways: pyruvate formate-
lyase (PFL) and pyruvate formate-lyase activating enzyme (PFL-AE).
The presence of PFL and PFL-AE suggests that TetV has the un-
precedented capacity to manipulate its host's fermentation pathway,
which holds intriguing implications for the ecology of the virus (and its
potential to spread in hypoxic/anoxic environments) and ocean bio-
chemistry (if TetV infections alter the production of fermentation pro-
ducts, such as ethanol). This highlights the growing importance of se-
quencing diverse reference genomes of cultivated viruses, especially in
the case of giant viruses, which, because of their large size, are trapped
on the same filters used to collect microbial samples. Such reference
data is crucial for the accurate identification of giant viral sequences in
microbial
metagenomes,
which
are
being
generated
at
an
un-
precedented high rate, particularly for the oceans (Rusch et al., 2007;
Wilkins et al., 2012; Konstantinidis et al., 2009; Bork et al., 2015).
The genomic analysis has also provided intriguing insights into
TetV's evolutionary relationship with other viruses, as well as with its
host. TetV is the second member of what appears to be an emerging
clade of chlorophyte-infecting mimivirids. The relationship between
TetV and its chlorophyte host seems to be a specific one, as indicated by
the high proportion of proteins (17% of the TetV proteome) that are
most similar to green algal and plant homologs. The long history of
chlorophyte infections may have also facilitated horizontal gene
transfer
between
TetV
and
chlorophyte-infecting
phycodnavirids.
However, additional chlorophyte-infecting mimivirid genomes will
need to be sequenced before we can better understand the connections
(if any) between the chlorophyte-infecting viruses of Mimiviridae and
Phycodnaviridae.
4. Materials and methods
4.1. Host isolation
The Tetraselmis sp. host was isolated from whole seawater collected
at Station ALOHA (22°45' N, 158°00' W) in the North Pacific Subtropical
Gyre, on May 20, 2010, during Cruise #221 of the Hawaii Ocean Time-
series program (Karl and Lukas, 1996). The seawater was collected from
the upper euphotic zone (25–75 m depth) using Niskin bottles, after
which the water was enriched with f/2 medium (Guillard, 1975) and
incubated under fluorescent lights. The Tetraselmis was isolated into
culture from the f/2-enriched seawater using three rounds of end-point
dilution (10-fold serial dilutions). After isolation, batch cultures of the
Tetraselmis were maintained in K medium (-Si; Keller et al., 2007) at
26 °C, under a 12:12 light/dark cycle with approx. 30 μmol m−2 s−1
photons of PAR.
4.2. Virus isolation
TetV was isolated from surface seawater collected from the Oʻahu-
side pier to Coconut Island (Moku o Loʻe), located in Kāneʻohe Bay,
Oʻahu, Hawaiʻi, on September 2, 2010. Approximately 175 L of surface
seawater was collected and transported to the University of Hawaiʻi at
Mānoa campus, where it was filtered through 142 mm diameter, 0.8 μm
pore size membrane filters (Isopore, Millipore P/N: ATTP14250), fol-
lowed by concentration using tangential flow filtration (TFF; Millipore
Pellicon 2 Mini system, P/N: XX42PMINI), with three stacked 30 kDa
nominal molecular weight limit (NMWL) filters (Millipore Ultracel, P/
N: PLCTK-C, 0.1 m2 ea.). The viral concentrate was then amended with
K medium and used to challenge healthy Tetraslemis culture. After
propagating the Tetraselmis lysate for multiple generations, the TetV
virus was isolated from the lysate using three rounds of dilution-to-
extinction (Nagasaki and Bratbak, 2010), performed in 96-well plates.
4.3. Host-range analysis
The host-range of TetV was investigated using in-house phyto-
plankton strains isolated from Station ALOHA (origin of the original
TetV host) and Kāneʻohe Bay (origin of TetV). Strains included the
chlorophytes Tetraselmis (n = 3, Sta. ALOHA; n = 5, Kāneʻohe Bay),
Pyramimonas (n = 3, Kāneʻohe Bay), Micromonas (n = 1, Sta. ALOHA;
n = 6, Kāneʻohe Bay) and prasinophyte clade VII (n = 1, Sta. ALOHA),
the pelagophyte Pelagomonas (n = 2, Sta. ALOHA), the dictyochophytes
Florenciella (n = 1, Sta. ALOHA) and Rhizochromulina (n = 1, Sta.
ALOHA), the haptophyte Chrysochromulina (n = 1, Sta. ALOHA; n = 1,
Kāneʻohe Bay), cryptophytes (n = 2, Kāneʻohe Bay), and chlorar-
achniophytes (n = 2, Sta. ALOHA).
TetV challenges were performed in 96-well plates. Dense, healthy
culture of each strain was amended with an equal volume of media (K
or f/2 media, depending on the strain), and 270 μL was added to each
of six wells (three challenge wells and three control wells). Challenge
wells were inoculated with 30 μL of fresh TetV lysate that had been
filtered through a 0.45 μm Millipore Sterivex filter (P/N: SVHV010RS).
Control wells were inoculated with 30 μL of the same 0.45 μm-filtered
lysate that was additionally filtered through two 0.02 μm Whatman
Anotop filters (P/N: 6809-2002). The challenges were monitored for up
to two weeks by direct microscopy and in vivo chlorophyll fluorescence
(measured using the Perkin Elmer 2030 Multilabel Reader, VICTOR
X3). Strains exhibiting lysis were investigated further to see if the lytic
effect could be propagated. This was done by performing new chal-
lenges using 30 μL of 1/100-diluted lysate from one of the lysed wells.
All of such follow-up challenges resulted in complete lysis.
C.R. Schvarcz, G.F. Steward
Virology 518 (2018) 423–433
428
 4.4. Tetraselmis host DNA extraction and 18S sequencing
All of the TetV-permissive Tetraselmis strains identified in the host-
range analysis were further characterized by small subunit rRNA gene
(18S rDNA) sequencing. Cells for DNA extraction were harvested by
centrifuging approximately 25 mL of culture at 3700 RCF for 10 min at
4 °C. DNA was extracted from the pellets using the ZymoBIOMICS DNA
Mini Kit (P/N: D4304). The 18S rDNA was PCR-amplified from ex-
tracted DNA using universal primers Euk328f/Euk329r (der Staay et al.,
2001) and the Roche Expand High Fidelity PCR System (P/N:
04738268001). PCR products were cloned using the Invitrogen TOPO
TA Cloning Kit for Sequencing (P/N: K457501), and 2–3 colonies were
picked for overnight culture in 3 mL Circlegrow media (MP Biomedi-
cals, P/N: 3000-121) and extracted using the Qiagen QIAprep Spin
Miniprep Kit (P/N: 27104). Full-length 18S rDNA was sequenced using
primers M13f, M13r, 502f, and 1174r (Worden, 2006), and was per-
formed using Sanger technology at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa's
facility for Advanced Studies in Genomics, Proteomics, and Bioinfor-
matics (ASGPB).
4.5. Electron microscopy
Measurements of virion diameter were averaged from 23 particles
imaged by electron microscopy, using negatively stained samples pre-
pared from unfixed fresh lysate. Negatively stained samples were pre-
pared using a variation of the direct application method (Doane and
Anderson, 1987).
Thin sections of infected Tetraselmis cells were prepared using cells
collected 24 h after inoculation of a healthy culture with 10% volume of
TetV lysate. The infected cells were mixed 1:1 with fixative solution
(2% glutaraldehyde, 0.2 M sodium cacodylate pH 7.2, 0.25 M sucrose,
10 mM CaCl) and stored for at least 2 h at 4 °C. Fixed cells were har-
vested by centrifugation at 1000 RCF for 10 min, washed with 0.1 M
sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4; 0.35 M sucrose), post-fixed for 1 h
with 1% osmium tetroxide in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer, dehy-
drated in a graded ethanol series, and embedded in LX 112 resin. Thin
sections of the embedded cells were cut using an ultramicrotome and
stained with 5% uranyl acetate and 0.3% lead citrate. Sections were
examined with a Hitachi HT7700 electron microscope at the Biological
Electron Microscope Facility, located at the University of Hawaiʻi at
Mānoa.
4.6. Virus purification and buoyant density measurement
Viruses were produced by challenging 40 L of dense, healthy
Tetraselmis culture with a 1.5% volume addition of previously produced
lysate. After the majority of the cells had lysed (ca. 3 days), the re-
maining cells were removed by filtration through 142 mm diameter,
0.45 μm pore size Millipore Durapore filters (P/N: HVLP14250), over-
laid with 125 mm diameter GF/C filters (Whatman P/N: 1822-125).
The filtrate was concentrated to approximately 350 mL by TFF (system
and filters described under Virus Isolation). Additional cell debris was
removed by centrifuging the concentrate at 4000 RCF for 30 min and
discarding the pellet. The sample was further concentrated by poly-
ethylene glycol (PEG) precipitation (Lawrence and Steward, 2010). The
PEG-concentrated viruses were purified on cesium chloride equilibrium
buoyant density gradients, using an initial step gradient (SW 41 Ti
rotor; 40,000 RPM for 2.5 h), followed by 3 consecutive continuous
gradients (SW 41 Ti rotor; 30,000 RPM for ≥ 40 h; Lawrence and
Steward, 2010). Gradient fractions were collected by either puncturing
the tube with a needle or sipping from the top of the tube using a piston
fractionator (Gradient Station, BioComp Instruments, Inc.). The virus-
containing
fractions
were
identified
by
a
combination
of
epi-
fluorescence microscopy (Suttle and Fuhrman, 2010) and fluorometric
DNA measurements using the Quant-iT dsDNA high sensitivity assay kit
(ThermoFisher Scientific). The buoyant density of TetV virions was
determined by measuring the density of the peak viral fraction of the
final
continuous
gradient
using
a
positive
displacement
pipette
(Lawrence and Steward, 2010).
4.7. Genome sequencing
TetV genomic DNA was extracted from the CsCl gradient-purified
viral peak. The sample was first buffer exchanged three times with 500
μL TE buffer (100 mM Tris, 10 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) using an Amicon
Ultra-0.5
30 kDa
NMWL
centrifugal
ultrafilter
(Millipore
P/N:
UFC503096), followed by DNA extraction with hot SDS and proteinase
K
and
purification
by
selective
precipitation
(Masterpure
DNA
Purification Kit, Epicentre). Illumina sequencing was performed at the
Georgia Genomics Facility, using Nextera XT library preparation and
250 bp paired-end sequencing on the MiSeq platform (2,305,807 paired
reads). PacBio sequencing (P6-C4 chemistry) was performed by the
University of Washington PacBio Sequencing Services. For the PacBio
library preparation and sequencing, TetV genomic DNA was included in
a pooled sample containing other distantly related viruses, and the TetV
reads were subsequently identified and extracted using high-similarity
BLAST searches against the TetV Illumina assembly. The TetV-specific
PacBio dataset represented 7836 total reads, with a median length of
18,374 bp.
4.8. Genome assembly
De novo assembly of the TetV genome was attempted using both a
hybrid strategy (SPAdes v3.6.2; Nurk et al., 2013) that utilized Illumina
and PacBio data, as well as a PacBio-only approach (Canu v1.0; Berlin
et al., 2015). Both assemblies produced a single scaffold representing
the TetV genome. However, a closer comparison of the scaffolds re-
vealed that the PacBio-only strategy preserved a higher number of
tandem repeats in repetitive regions of the genome, suggesting that the
shorter Illumina reads were effectively forcing these repeats to collapse
in the hybrid assembly. We assumed the PacBio-only Canu assembly
(95X mean coverage) better represented the true TetV genome se-
quence and proceeded with this.
The scaffold from the Canu assembly contained exact direct repeats
corresponding to each end, suggesting that the genome is circular. The
assembly was trimmed to represent a single, non-redundant copy, and
the circularity of the genome was verified by mapping PacBio reads to
the 100 kb partial genomic sequence that straddled both ends of the
contig (50 kb from each end; reads mapped using BLASR v1.3.1;
Chaisson and Tesler, 2012). The PacBio read coverage spanning the
endpoints of the contig was similar to that of the rest of the sequence,
thus validating the circularity of the genome sequence. The assembly
was polished using a combination of pbalign v0.2.0.141024 and Quiver
v2.0.0 (Koren et al., 2012, 2013; Berlin et al., 2015). The Quiver-po-
lished assembly shared 100% sequence identity with the consensus of
mapped Illumina reads (approx. 500X coverage), suggesting that the
Quiver-polished de novo Canu assembly was high quality.
4.9. Gene prediction
Initial gene prediction was performed using Prodigal v2.6.3
(translation table 1; Hyatt et al., 2010), followed by additional steps to
identify missed genes. Putative missed genes were identified by
querying a larger set of potential open reading frames (ORFs; i.e., all
potential genes found by Prodigal; option -s) against NCBI's Conserved
Domain Database (CDD; default settings, E-value < 0.01; Marchler-
Bauer et al., 2015). ORFs with high-scoring CDD hits that were also
distinct from the default-predicted Prodigal ORFs were further analyzed
with searches against pfam (http://pfam.xfam.org/; Finn et al., 2016),
InterPro (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/; Jones et al., 2014), and the
NCBI nr database (blastp, default settings; http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/; Camacho et al., 2009). If an ORF was supported with high
C.R. Schvarcz, G.F. Steward
Virology 518 (2018) 423–433
429
 similarity to known proteins, and if it did not overlap a default-pre-
dicted ORF having stronger evidence for protein similarity, then it was
added to the annotations. Any default-predicted ORFs sharing sig-
nificant overlap with the new ORF were removed. In this way, two new
ORFs containing high-scoring protein domain hits were identified
(TetV_107 and TetV_370), and one default-predicted ORF (TetV_630)
was extended to include additional protein domains by moving its start
position further upstream. tRNA genes were identified using the
tRNAscan-SE v1.21 webserver (http://lowelab.ucsc.edu/tRNAscan-SE/;
Schattner et al., 2005) with the default settings. Base pair numbering
was initiated at the start of the first gene encountered on the original,
linear genome assembly and, because of TetV's circular genome, does
not hold any significance. The strand orientation was also arbitrarily
chosen, based on the original genome assembly orientation.
4.10. Genome annotation
The annotation of each ORF was performed manually, after careful
evaluation of protein similarity search results from the blastp (nr), CDD,
pfam, and InterPro webservers, all using the default settings.
4.11. BLAST protein similarity analyses
Protein BLAST (blastp) searches were computed locally using a
combined database that included the April 4, 2016 issue of the NCBI
non-redundant (nr) database and peptide sequences from the Gordon
and
Betty
Moore
Foundation's
Marine
Microbial
Eukaryote
Transcriptome Sequencing Project (MMETSP; Keeling et al., 2014),
downloaded from iMicrobe (http://data.imicrobe.us/). All searches
were performed using an E-value cutoff of 10−5. Taxonomic informa-
tion associated with the top blastp hits were used to create the standard
pie chart and hierarchical pie chart in Fig. 3 (KronaTools v2.5; Ondov
et al., 2011). In cases where the top hit belonged to an uncultivated
organism, the next best hit to a cultivated organism was used instead.
Only hits to cultivated organisms were included in the analysis.
4.12. Analysis of COG functional distributions
The functional distribution of TetV proteins, as well as the proteins
of related mimivirids (AaV, PgV-16T, CeV, CroV, APMV, and Megavirus
chilensis), were analyzed using the Clusters of Orthologous Groups of
proteins (COGs) framework (Galperin et al., 2015). For consistency,
new COG predictions were performed for all viruses included in the
analysis, despite the data having been previously published for some of
the viruses. The proteins for each genome were searched against the
COG v1.0 database using the Batch Web CD-Search Tool (E-value <
0.01;
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/bwrpsb/bwrpsb.cgi;
Marchler-Bauer et al., 2015). For each protein, the highest scoring COG
hit was matched to its assigned function(s), and distributions were
created. Some COGs were associated with multiple functions, in which
case each function was counted once.
4.13. Analysis of conserved NCLDV genes
The presence, absence, and duplication of conserved NCLDV genes
in the TetV genome was investigated by assigning TetV proteins to their
corresponding
cluster
of
orthologous
genes,
using
the
Nucleo-
Cytoplasmic Orthologous Groups (NCVOG) framework established by
Yutin et al. (Yutin et al., 2009, 2014). This was done using a con-
servative approach relying on support from both the PSI-BLAST-based
COGnitor program (Kristensen et al., 2010) and blastp protein simi-
larity. For each protein, NCVOGs were predicted using COGnitor and
compared with results from a blastp search against virus-classified
proteins in the nr database (release 4/4/2016; E-value ≤ 10−5), where
the db size was set equal to the original nr database size to allow an
equivalent E-value cutoff. The highest-scoring blastp hit belonging to a
protein with known NCVOG association (based on the curated 201409
NCVOG release; Yutin et al., 2014) was identified, and its NCVOG was
compared with the COGnitor-assigned NCVOG for the same TetV pro-
tein. If the NCVOG assignment was the same for both blastp and
COGnitor, it was retained. This procedure was also performed for AaV
and CeV, since these genomes were not published at the time of the
updated NCVOG release. Additionally, proteins from TetV, AaV and
CeV that could not be assigned to any of the 201409 NCVOGs were
compared against each other using COGtriangles (Kristensen et al.,
2010) to identify new orthologous clusters among these three genomes.
4.14. Phylogenetics
All phylogenetic trees were constructed using a combination of
Bayesian and maximum-likelihood methods. First, a Bayesian majority
consensus tree was inferred using MrBayes v3.2.6 (Ronquist et al.,
2012) with two runs of 4–8 chains, until the average standard deviation
of split frequencies dropped below 0.01. Then, maximum-likelihood
bootstrap values were generated for the Bayesian tree using RAxML
v8.2.8 (Stamatakis, 2014) implemented with 1000 iterations of rapid
bootstrapping. The specific procedures for preparing the sequence
alignments varied by gene and are outlined below.
Sequence homologs used in the phylogenies were identified and
retrieved based on BLAST similarity to the corresponding TetV virus/
host sequence and/or published annotations. In the case of pyruvate
formate-lyase (PFL), pyruvate formate-lyase activating enzyme (PFL-
AE), MIEL1-like E3 ubiquitin ligase, and E2 ubiquitin conjugating en-
zyme, the blastp search database included proteins from both nr and the
MMETSP. The DNA-dependent DNA polymerase family B (PolB)
alignment was created using the MAFFT version 7 webserver (http://
mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/server/; E-INS-i strategy and inclusion of up to
200 homologs under the mafft-homologs option), and all other align-
ments were created using MAFFT v7.273 (Katoh and Standley, 2013; G-
INS-i strategy for 18S rDNA, after trimming end sites that lacked data
for any of the taxa; L-INS-i strategy for MutS7, MCP1, and A32-like
virion packaging ATPase; E-INS-i strategy for PFL, PFL-AE, MIEL1-like
E3 ubiquitin ligase, and E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme). The PolB
alignment was trimmed by removing sites with greater than 25% gaps,
and all other protein alignments were trimmed using trimAL v1.4 (strict
option; Capella-Gutierrez et al., 2009). Nucleotide and protein align-
ments were analyzed by jModelTest v2.1.10 (Darriba et al., 2012) and
ProtTest v3.4 (Abascal et al., 2005), respectively, to select the best-fit
model of nucleotide/protein substitution, prior to phylogenetic ana-
lysis.
See Supplementary Dataset S2 for a complete list of accession
numbers for the sequences used in the phylogenetic reconstructions.
4.15. Identification of repetitive genetic elements and domains
Exact direct and inverted repeats greater than 20 bp in length were
identified in the TetV genome using MUMmer v4.0 (Kurtz et al., 2004).
For identification of fibronectin type III-like (FN3-like) domains, a
search was performed using an HMM profile built from all FN3 domains
(IPR003961) identified in TetV proteins by InterProScan v5.19–58. The
InterProScan-identified domains were aligned in MAFFT v7.273 (L-INS-
i strategy), and an HMM profile was created from the alignment using
hmmbuild in HMMER v3.1b2 (http://www.hmmer.org). hmmsearch
was used to identify the TetV FN3-like HMM in all TetV proteins, using
a domain conditional E-value cutoff of 0.00001. The domain envelope
coordinates were used in calculating the total nucleotides represented
by the FN3-like domains.
4.16. Gene duplication identification
An investigation of potential gene duplications in the TetV genome
was performed using a combination of blastp protein similarity, manual
C.R. Schvarcz, G.F. Steward
Virology 518 (2018) 423–433
430
 inspections of protein alignments, and phylogenetics. First, TetV pro-
teins were searched against a combined database of nr (Dec. 4, 2017),
MMETSP transcriptomes, and all TetV proteins (blastp, e-value cutoff
0.00001). TetV queries with higher scoring hits to other TetV proteins
than to non-TetV proteins in nr and MMETSP were identified. Some
queries had high scoring hits to multiple TetV proteins, over non-TetV
proteins. These groups of blastp-linked proteins were compared to each
other, and instances of overlapping groups were merged together.
Alignments of the groups were constructed (MAFFT v7.273; strategy
automatically determined) and manually inspected. Where necessary,
sequences lacking highly conserved residues were removed from
groups, and in some cases these sequences were removed to create new
groups. In cases where pairs of blastp-linked proteins were not re-
ciprocal best hits (RBHs), a maximum-likelihood phylogenetic analysis
(RAxML v8.2.6; automatic selection of protein substitution model; 1000
iterations of rapid bootstrapping) was performed on an alignment
(MAFFT v7.273; strategy automatically determined) of the TetV pair
that included up to 5 non-TetV top hits from the non-reciprocating
protein, and pairs of non-RBHs that clustered together phylogenetically
were retained as putative paralogs. Percent identity values for un-
gapped pairwise sequence alignments were calculated for the sequences
of each group of putative paralogs, using alignments constructed with
MAFFT v7.273 (strategy automatically determined).
4.17. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis of restriction endonuclease-digested
TetV genomic DNA
Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis of restriction endonuclease (RE)-
digested TetV genomic DNA was used to provide an independent esti-
mate of genome size, as well as to confirm the circularity of the genome
(as predicted by the genome assembly). For this purpose, an additional
sample of CsCl gradient-purified TetV was prepared from 10 L of lysate,
using methods similar to those described above. Two RE enzymes were
selected for the analysis: NotI (New England BioLabs [NEB] P/N:
R0189S; one predicted digestion site) and SfiI (NEB P/N: R0123L; 10
predicted digestion sites). If the TetV genome exists in the virion as a
circular molecule, then digestion with NotI and SfiI should yield one
and ten linear segments, respectively, that correspond to in silico-pre-
dicted sizes. Alternatively, digestion of a linear molecule would result
in two and eleven linear segments, respectively, and the size of one of
the predicted segments would be inaccurately estimated.
TetV genomic DNA was extracted in agarose plugs (Steward and
Culley, 2010; Sandaa et al., 2010), and RE digestions were performed
according to protocols outlined in NEB product literature. Approxi-
mately 500 ng of genomic DNA was used for each NotI digestion and
control sample and 1 μg for each SfiI digestion and control sample.
Control plugs were prepared using the same buffer and temperature
treatments as the digested samples, but excluding the addition of RE
enzyme during the digestion step.
Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis was performed on the Bio-Rad
CHEF-DR III System, using 1% agarose gels in 0.5X TBE running buffer.
The NotI digest and control samples were run alongside the NEB Yeast
Chromosome PFG Marker (NEB P/N: N0345S) using the following
settings: 6.0 V/cm, 15 °C for 26 h; switch times of 70 s for 15 h and 120 s
for 11 h; 120° included angle. The SfiI digest and control samples were
run alongside the NEB MidRange I PFG Marker (NEB P/N: N3551S)
using the following settings: 6.0 V/cm, 15 °C for 24 h; switch times
ramped from 1 to 25 s; 120° included angle. Both gels were stained in
1X SYBR Gold in 0.5X TBE at room temperature for 40 min in the dark.
Images were taken using the KODAK Gel Logic 200 System. Standard
curves of relative distance migrated vs. DNA size were generated by
measuring distances from the well to the leading edge of the bands on
an enlargement of the gel image, correcting for uneven migration rate
across the gel. For the first gel, the standard curve was linear and used
six of the standards (three larger and three smaller than the TetV band).
For the second gel, a square root transformation of band size was used
to linearize the standard curve, and the standards spanning the visible
TetV fragments were used (15–194 kb). The sizes of TetV genome (NotI
digest) and genome fragments (SfiI digest) and the associated error (±
95% C. I.) were calculated by inverse prediction from the linear stan-
dard curves (Zar, 1996).
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Tina M. Weatherby and Marilyn F. Dunlap at
the University of Hawaiʻi (UH) at Mānoa Biological Electron Microscope
Facility for their assistance and guidance with electron microscopy
procedures, Jaclyn A. Miranda for assistance with culture maintenance,
and Katharine A. Smith for assistance with figure creation. We also
thank Chief Scientist Paul Lethaby, the Hawaii Ocean Time-Series team,
and the crew of the R/V Ka'imikai-O-Kanaloa cruise KOK-1011. For the
bioinformatics and phylogenetic analyses, the technical support and
advanced computing resources from the UH Information Technology
Services’ Cyber infrastructure group are gratefully acknowledged.
Funding sources
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (grant
numbers EF 04-24599, OCE 09-26766, PLR 09-44851, DBI 10-40548,
OCE 15-59356) and the Denise B. Evans Fellowship in Oceanographic
Research awarded to C. R. Schvarcz by the Hawaiʻi Institute of
Geophysics and Planetology at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa.
Appendix A. Supplementary information
Supplementary information associated with this article can be found
in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.virol.2018.03.010.
References
Abascal, F., Zardoya, R., Posada, D., 2005. ProtTest: selection of best-fit models of protein
evolution. Bioinformatics 21 (April (9)), 2104–2105.
Abergel, C., Chenivesse, S., Byrne, D., Suhre, K., Arondel, V., Claverie, J.-M., 2005.
Mimivirus TyrRS: preliminary structural and functional characterization of the first
amino-acyl tRNA synthetasesynthetase found in a virus. Sect. F. Struct. Biol. Cryst.
Commun. 61 (February (Pt 2)), 212–215.
Abergel, C., Legendre, M., Claverie, J.-M., 2015. The rapidly expanding universe of giant
viruses: Mimivirus, Pandoravirus, Pithovirus and Mollivirus. FEMS Microbiol. Rev.
39 (October (6)), 779–796.
Antwerpen, M.H., Georgi, E., Zoeller, L., Woelfel, R., Stoecker, K., Scheid, P., 2015.
Whole-genome sequencing of a pandoravirus isolated from keratitis-inducing acan-
thamoeba. Genome Announc 3 (January (2)) (e00136–15).
Arslan, D., Legendre, M., Seltzer, V., Abergel, C., Claverie, J.-M., 2011. Distant Mimivirus
relative with a larger genome highlights the fundamental features of Megaviridae.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108 (October (42)), 17486–17491.
Becker, B., HARD, K., Melkonian, M., Kamerling, J.P., Vliegenthart, J.F.G., 1989.
Identification of 3-deoxy-manno-2-octulosonic acid, 3-deoxy-5-O-methyl-manno-2-
octulosonic acid and 3-deoxy-lyxo-2-heptulosaric acid in the cell wall (theca) of the
green alga Tetraselmis striata Butcher (Prasinophyceae). Eur. J. Biochem. 182 (June
(1)), 153–160.
Becker, B., Becker, D., Kamerling, J.P., Melkonian, M., 1991. 2-Keto-sugar acids in green
flagellates: a chemical marker for prasinophycean scales. J. Phycol. 27 (August (4)),
498–504.
Berlin, K., Koren, S., Chin, C.-S., Drake, J.P., Landolin, J.M., Phillippy, A.M., 2015.
Assembling large genomes with single-molecule sequencing and locality-sensitive
hashing. Nat. Biotechnol. 33 (May (6)), 623–630.
Bork, P., Bowler, C., de Vargas, C., Gorsky, G., Karsenti, E., Wincker, P., 2015. Tara
Oceans studies plankton at planetary scale. Science 348 (May (6237)), 873.
Brum, J.R., Ignacio-Espinoza, J.C., Roux, S., Doulcier, G., Acinas, S.G., Alberti, A.,
Chaffron, S., Cruaud, C., de Vargas, C., Gasol, J.M., Gorsky, G., Gregory, A.C., Guidi,
L., Hingamp, P., Iudicone, D., Not, F., Ogata, H., Pesant, S., Poulos, B.T., Schwenck,
S.M., Speich, S., Dimier, C., Kandels-Lewis, S., Picheral, M., Searson, S., Tara Oceans
Coordinators, Bork, P., Bowler, C., Sunagawa, S., Wincker, P., Karsenti, E., Sullivan,
M.B., 2015. Patterns and ecological drivers of ocean viral communities. Science 348
(May (6237)), 1261498.
Camacho, C., Coulouris, G., Avagyan, V., Ma, N., Papadopoulos, J., Bealer, K., Madden,
T.L., 2009. BLAST+: architecture and applications. BMC Bioinforma 10 (1), 421.
Campbell, I.D., Spitzfaden, C., 1994. Building proteins with fibronectin type III modules.
Structure 2 (5), 333–337.
Capella-Gutierrez, S., Silla-Martinez, J.M., Gabaldon, T., 2009. trimAl: a tool for auto-
mated alignment trimming in large-scale phylogenetic analyses. Bioinformatics 25
C.R. Schvarcz, G.F. Steward
Virology 518 (2018) 423–433
431
 (July (15)), 1972–1973.
Catalanotti, C.P., Yang, W., Posewitz, M.C., Grossman, A.R., 2013. Fermentation meta-
bolism and its evolution in algae. Front. Plant Sci. 4 (May), 150.
Chaisson, M.J., Tesler, G., 2012. Mapping single molecule sequencing reads using basic
local alignment with successive refinement (BLASR): application and theory. BMC
Bioinforma. 13 (1), 238.
Collantes, G., Prado, R., 2006. Green bloom of Tetraselmis sp. in Valparaiso Bay. Harmful
Algae News 30, 7.
Daoudi, M., Serve, L., Rharbi, N., El Madani, F., Vouve, F., 2013. Phytoplankton dis-
tribution in the Nador lagoon (Morocco) and possible risks for harmful algal blooms.
Water Bull. 6 (1), 4–19.
Darriba, D., Taboada, G.L., Doallo, R., Posada, D., 2012. jModelTest 2: more models, new
heuristics and parallel computing. Nat. Methods 9 (8), 772.
der Staay, S.Y.M.-v., De Wachter, R., Vaulot, D., 2001. Oceanic 18S rDNA sequences from
picoplankton reveal unsuspected eukaryotic diversity. Nature 409 (6820), 607–610.
Doane, F.W., Anderson, N., 1987. Electron Microscopy in Diagnostic Virology: A Practical
Guide and Atlas. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Dodds, J.A., Cole, A., 1980. Microscopy and biology of Uronema gigas, a filamentous
eucaryotic green alga, and its associated tailed virus-like particle. Virology 100 (1),
156–165.
Finn, R.D., Coggill, P., Eberhardt, R.Y., Eddy, S.R., Mistry, J., Mitchell, A.L., Potter, S.C.,
Punta, M., Qureshi, M., Sangrador-Vegas, A., Salazar, G.A., Tate, J., Bateman, A.,
2016. The Pfam protein families database: towards a more sustainable future. Nucleic
Acids Res. 44 (January (D1)), D279–D285.
Fischer, M.G., Allen, M.J., Wilson, W.H., Suttle, C.A., 2010. Giant virus with a remarkable
complement of genes infects marine zooplankton. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107
(November (45)), 19508–19513.
Fischer, M.G., 2016. Giant viruses come of age. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 31 (June), 50–57.
Fitzgerald, L.A., Graves, M.V., Li, X., Feldblyum, T., Hartigan, J., Van Etten, J.L., 2007a.
Sequence and annotation of the 314-kb MT325 and the 321-kb FR483 viruses that
infect Chlorella Pbi. Virology 358 (February (2)), 459–471.
Fitzgerald, L.A., Graves, M.V., Li, X., Feldblyum, T., Nierman, W.C., Van Etten, J.L.,
2007b. Sequence and annotation of the 369-kb NY-2A and the 345-kb AR158 viruses
that infect Chlorella NC64A. Virology 358 (February (2)), 472–484.
Gallot-Lavallée, L., Pagarete, A., Legendre, M., Santini, S., Sandaa, R.-A., Himmelbauer,
H., Ogata, H., Bratbak, G., Claverie, J.-M., 2015. The 474-Kilobase-Pair Complete
Genome Sequence of CeV-01B, a Virus Infecting Haptolina (Chrysochromulina) eri-
cina (Prymnesiophyceae). Genome Announc 3 (December (6)) (e01413–15).
Gallot-Lavallée, L., Blanc, G., Claverie, J.-M., 2017. Comparative genomics of
Chrysochromulina ericina Virus and other microalga-infecting large DNA viruses
highlights their intricate evolutionary relationship with the established Mimiviridae
family. J. Virol. 91 (June (14)) (e00230–17).
Galperin, M.Y., Makarova, K.S., Wolf, Y.I., Koonin, E.V., 2015. Expanded microbial
genome coverage and improved protein family annotation in the COG database.
Nucleic Acids Res. 43 (January (D1)), D261–D269.
Groisillier, A., Labourel, A., Michel, G., Tonon, T., 2015. The mannitol utilization system
of the marine bacterium Zobellia galactanivorans. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 81
(February (5)), 1799–1812.
Guillard, R.R.L., 1975. Culture of phytoplankton for feeding marine invertebrates. In:
Culture of Marine Invertebrate Animals. Springer US, Boston, MA, pp. 29–60.
Haglund, K., Dikic, I., 2005. Ubiquitylation and cell signaling. EMBO J. 24 (19),
3353–3359.
Hemaiswarya, S., Raja, R., Kumar, R.R., Ganesan, V., Anbazhagan, C., 2010.
Microalgae: a sustainable feed source for aquaculture. World J. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 27 (8), 1737–1746.
Hyatt, D., Chen, G.-L., LoCascio, P.F., Land, M.L., Larimer, F.W., Hauser, L.J., 2010.
Prodigal: prokaryotic gene recognition and translation initiation site identification.
BMC Bioinforma 11 (March (1)), 1.
Iyer, L.M., Balaji, S., Koonin, E.V., Aravind, L., 2006. Evolutionary genomics of nucleo-
cytoplasmic large DNA viruses. Virus Res. 117 (April (1)), 156–184.
Ji, C., Cao, X., Yao, C., Xue, S., Xiu, Z., 2014. Protein-protein interaction network of the
marine microalga Tetraselmis subcordiformis: prediction and application for starch
metabolism analysis. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 41 (8), 1287–1296.
Johannessen, T.V., Bratbak, G., Larsen, A., Ogata, H., Egge, E.S., Edvardsen, B., Eikrem,
W., Sandaa, R.-A., 2015. Characterisation of three novel giant viruses reveals huge
diversity among viruses infecting Prymnesiales (Haptophyta). Virology 476
(February), 180–188.
Jones, J.B., Rhodes, L.L., 1994. Suffocation of pilchards (Sardinops sagax) by a green
microalgal bloom in Wellington Harbour, New Zealand. New Zeal. J. Mar. Fresh 28
(December (4)), 379–383.
Jones, P., Binns, D., Chang, H.Y., Fraser, M., Li, W., McAnulla, C., McWilliam, H., Maslen,
J., Mitchell, A., Nuka, G., Pesseat, S., Quinn, A.F., Sangrador-Vegas, A.,
Scheremetjew, M., Yong, S.Y., Lopez, R., Hunter, S., 2014. InterProScan 5: genome-
scale protein function classification. Bioinformatics 30 (April (9)), 1236–1240.
Karl, D.M., Lukas, R., 1996. The Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) program: background,
rationale and field implementation. Deep Sea Res. Part 2 Top. Stud. Oceanogr. 43
(2–3), 129–156.
Katoh, K., Standley, D.M., 2013. MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software version
7: improvements in performance and usability. Mol. Biol. Evol. 30 (March (4)),
772–780.
Keeling, P.J., Burki, F., Wilcox, H.M., Allam, B., Allen, E.E., Amaral-Zettler, L.A.,
Armbrust, E.V., Archibald, J.M., Bharti, A.K., Bell, C.J., Beszteri, B., Bidle, K.D.,
Cameron, C.T., Campbell, L., Caron, D.A., Cattolico, R.A., Collier, J.L., Coyne, K.,
Davy, S.K., Deschamps, P., Dyhrman, S.T., Edvardsen, B., Gates, R.D., Gobler, C.J.,
Greenwood, S.J., Guida, S.M., Jacobi, J.L., Jakobsen, K.S., James, E.R., Jenkins, B.,
John, U., Johnson, M.D., Juhl, A.R., Kamp, A., Katz, L.A., Kiene, R., Kudryavtsev, A.,
Leander, B.S., Lin, S., Lovejoy, C., Lynn, D., Marchetti, A., McManus, G., Nedelcu,
A.M., Menden-Deuer, S., Miceli, C., Mock, T., Montresor, M., Moran, M.A., Murray,
S., Nadathur, G., Nagai, S., Ngam, P.B., Palenik, B., Pawlowski, J., Petroni, G.,
Piganeau, G., Posewitz, M.C., Rengefors, K., Romano, G., Rumpho, M.E., Rynearson,
T., Schilling, K.B., Schroeder, D.C., Simpson, A.G.B., Slamovits, C.H., Smith, D.R.,
Smith, G.J., Smith, S.R., Sosik, H.M., Stief, P., Theriot, E., Twary, S.N., Umale, P.E.,
Vaulot, D., Wawrik, B., Wheeler, G.L., Wilson, W.H., Xu, Y., Zingone, A., Worden,
A.Z., 2014. The Marine Microbial Eukaryote Transcriptome Sequencing Project
(MMETSP): illuminating the functional diversity of eukaryotic life in the oceans
through transcriptome sequencing. Plos Biol. 12 (June (6)), e1001889.
Keller, M.D., Selvin, R.C., Claus, W., Guillard, R.R.L., 2007. Media for the culture of
oceanic ultraphytoplankton. J. Phycol. 23 (April (4)), 633–638.
Kirst, G.O., 1989. Salinity tolerance of eukaryotic marine algae. Annu. Rev. Plant. Phys.
40, 21–53.
Kobe, B., 2001. The leucine-rich repeat as a protein recognition motif. Curr. Opin. Struct.
Biol. 11 (6), 725–732.
Konstantinidis, K.T., Braff, J., Karl, D.M., DeLong, E.F., 2009. Comparative metagenomic
analysis of a microbial community residing at a depth of 4000 meters at Station
ALOHA in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75 (August
(16)), 5345–5355.
Koonin, E.V., Dolja, V.V., 2014. Virus world as an evolutionary network of viruses and
capsidless selfish elements. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 78 (June (2)), 278–303.
Koren, S., Schatz, M.C., Walenz, B.P., Martin, J., Howard, J.T., Ganapathy, G., Wang, Z.,
Rasko, D.A., McCombie, W.R., Jarvis, E.D., Phillippy, A.M., 2012. Hybrid error cor-
rection and de novo assembly of single-molecule sequencing reads. Nat. Biotechnol.
30 (July (7)), 693–700.
Koren, S., Harhay, G.P., Smith, T.P., Bono, J.L., Harhay, D.M., Mcvey, S.D., Radune, D.,
Bergman, N.H., Phillippy, A.M., 2013. Reducing assembly complexity of microbial
genomes with single-molecule sequencing. Genome Biol. 14 (9), R101.
Kristensen, D.M., Kannan, L., Coleman, M.K., Wolf, Y.I., Sorokin, A., Koonin, E.V.,
Mushegian, A., 2010. A low-polynomial algorithm for assembling clusters of ortho-
logous groups from intergenomic symmetric best matches. Bioinformatics 26 (June
(12)), 1481–1487.
Kurtz, S., Phillippy, A., Delcher, A.L., Smoot, M., Shumway, M., Antonescu, C., Salzberg,
S.L., 2004. Versatile and open software for comparing large genomes. Genome Biol. 5
(2), R12.
Lawrence, J.E., Steward, G.F., 2010. Purification of viruses by centrifugation. In:
Wilhelm, S.W., Weinbauer, M.G., Suttle, C.A. (Eds.), Manual of Aquatic Viral Ecology.
ASLO, May pp. 166–181.
Legendre, M., Bartoli, J., Shmakova, L., Jeudy, S., Labadie, K., Adrait, A., Lescot, M.,
Poirot, O., Bertaux, L., Bruley, C., Coute, Y., Rivkina, E., Abergel, C., Claverie, J.M.,
2014. Thirty-thousand-year-old distant relative of giant icosahedral DNA viruses with
a pandoravirus morphology. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111 (March (11)),
4274–4279.
Legendre, M., Lartigue, A., Bertaux, L., Jeudy, S., Bartoli, J., Lescot, M., Alempic, J.-M.,
Ramus, C., Bruley, C., Labadie, K., Shmakova, L., Rivkina, E., Couté, Y., Abergel, C.,
Claverie, J.-M., 2015. In-depth study of Mollivirus sibericum, a new 30,000-y-old
giant virus infecting Acanthamoeba. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112 (September (38)),
E5327–E5335.
Levene, S.D., Zimm, B.H., 1987. Separations of open-circular DNA using pulsed-field
electrophoresis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84 (12), 4054–4057.
Mann, N.H., Cook, A., Millard, A., Bailey, S., Clokie, M., 2003. Marine ecosys-
tems: bacterial photosynthesis genes in a virus. Nature 424 (6950), 741.
Marchler-Bauer, A., Derbyshire, M.K., Gonzales, N.R., Lu, S., Chitsaz, F., Geer, L.Y., Geer,
R.C., He, J., Gwadz, M., Hurwitz, D.I., Lanczycki, C.J., Lu, F., Marchler, G.H., Song,
J.S., Thanki, N., Wang, Z., Yamashita, R.A., Zhang, D., Zheng, C., Bryant, S.H., 2015.
CDD: NCBI's conserved domain database. Nucleic Acids Res 43 (January (D1)),
D222–D226.
Moniruzzaman, M., LeCleir, G.R., Brown, C.M., Gobler, C.J., Bidle, K.D., Wilson, W.H.,
Wilhelm, S.W., 2014. Genome of brown tide virus (AaV), the little giant of the
Megaviridae, elucidates NCLDV genome expansion and host-virus coevolution.
Virology 466–467 (October), 60–70.
Moreau, H., Piganeau, G., Desdevises, Y., Cooke, R., Derelle, E., Grimsley, N., 2010.
Marine prasinovirus genomes show low evolutionary divergence and acquisition of
protein metabolism genes by horizontal gene transfer. J. Virol. 84 (December (24)),
12555–12563.
Nagasaki, K., Bratbak, G., 2010. Isolation of viruses infecting photosynthetic and non-
photosynthetic protists. In: Wilhelm, S. W., Weinbauer, M. G., Suttle, C. A. (Eds.),
Manual of Aquatic Viral Ecology. ASLO, May, pp. 92–101.
Nurk, S., Bankevich, A., Antipov, D., Gurevich, A.A., Korobeynikov, A., Lapidus, A.,
Prjibelski, A.D., Pyshkin, A., Sirotkin, A., Sirotkin, Y., Stepanauskas, R., Clingenpeel,
S.R., Woyke, T., McLean, J.S., Lasken, R., Tesler, G., Alekseyev, M.A., Pevzner, P.A.,
2013. Assembling single-cell genomes and mini-metagenomes from chimeric MDA
products. J. Comp. Biol. 20 (October (10)), 714–737.
O'Day, D.H., Suhre, K., Myre, M.A., Chatterjee-Chakraborty, M., Chavez, S.E., 2006.
Isolation, characterization, and bioinformatic analysis of calmodulin-binding protein
cmbB reveals a novel tandem IP22 repeat common to many Dictyostelium and
Mimivirus proteins. Biochem. Bioph. Res. Co. 346 (August (3)), 879–888.
Ogata, H., Ray, J., Toyoda, K., Sandaa, R.-A., Nagasaki, K., Bratbak, G., Claverie, J.-M.,
2011. Two new subfamilies of DNA mismatch repair proteins (MutS) specifically
abundant in the marine environment. ISME J. 5 (January (7)), 1143–1151.
Ondov, B.D., Bergman, N.H., Phillippy, A.M., 2011. Interactive metagenomic visualiza-
tion in a web browser. BMC Bioinforma 12 (1), 385.
Paez-Espino, D., Eloe-Fadrosh, E.A., Pavlopoulos, G.A., Thomas, A.D., Huntemann, M.,
Mikhailova, N., Rubin, E., Ivanova, N.N., Kyrpides, N.C., 2016. Uncovering Earth's
virome. Nature 536 (August (7617)), 425–430.
C.R. Schvarcz, G.F. Steward
Virology 518 (2018) 423–433
432
 Philippe, N., Legendre, M., Doutre, G., Couté, Y., Poirot, O., Lescot, M., Arslan, D., Seltzer,
V., Bertaux, L., Bruley, C., Garin, J., Claverie, J.-M., Abergel, C., 2013.
Pandoraviruses: amoeba viruses with genomes up to 2.5 Mb reaching that of parasitic
eukaryotes. Science 341 (July (6143)), 281–286.
Raoult, D., Audic, S., Robert, C., Abergel, C., Renesto, P., Ogata, H., La Scola, B., Suzan,
M., Claverie, J.-M., 2004. The 1.2-megabase genome sequence of Mimivirus. Science
306 (November (5700)), 1344–1350.
Ronquist, F., Teslenko, M., van der Mark, P., Ayres, D.L., Darling, A., Hohna, S., Larget, B.,
Liu, L., Suchard, M.A., Huelsenbeck, J.P., 2012. MrBayes 3.2: efficient Bayesian
phylogenetic inference and model choice across a large model space. Syst. Biol. 61
(April (3)), 539–542.
Rosenwasser, S., Ziv, C., Creveld, S.G.v., Vardi, A., 2016. Virocell Metabolism: Metabolic
Innovations During Host–Virus Interactions in the Ocean. Trends. Microbiol. 24 (10),
Oct., 821–832.
Rousvoal, S., Groisillier, A., Dittami, S.M., Michel, G., Boyen, C., Tonon, T., 2010.
Mannitol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase activity in Ectocarpus siliculosus, a key role for
mannitol synthesis in brown algae. Planta 233 (October (2)), 261–273.
Rusch, D.B., Halpern, A.L., Sutton, G., Heidelberg, K.B., Williamson, S., Yooseph, S., Wu,
D., Eisen, J.A., Hoffman, J.M., Remington, K., Beeson, K., Tran, B., Smith, H., Baden-
Tillson, H., Stewart, C., Thorpe, J., Freeman, J., Andrews-Pfannkoch, C., Venter, J.E.,
Li, K., Kravitz, S., Heidelberg, J.F., Utterback, T., Rogers, Y.-H., Falcón, L.I., Souza, V.,
Bonilla-Rosso, G., Eguiarte, L.E., Karl, D.M., Sathyendranath, S., Platt, T.,
Bermingham, E., Gallardo, V., Tamayo-Castillo, G., Ferrari, M.R., Strausberg, R.L.,
Nealson, K., Friedman, R., Frazier, M., Venter, J.C., 2007. The Sorcerer II Global
Ocean Sampling expedition: northwest Atlantic through eastern tropical Pacific. Plos
Biol. 5 (March (3)), e77.
Sandaa, R.-A., Heldal, M., Castberg, T., Thyrhaug, R., Bratbak, G., 2001. Isolation and
characterization of two viruses with large genome size infecting Chrysochromulina
ericina (Prymnesiophyceae) and Pyramimonas orientalis (Prasinophyceae). Virology
290 (November (2)), 272–280.
Sandaa, R.-A., Short, S.M., Schroeder, D.C., 2010. Fingerprinting aquatic virus commu-
nities. In: Wilhelm, S. W., Weinbauer, M. G., Suttle, C. A. (Eds.), Manual of Aquatic
Viral Ecology. ASLO, May, pp. 9–18.
Santini, S., Jeudy, S., Bartoli, J., Poirot, O., Lescot, M., Abergel, C., Barbe, V., Wommack,
K.E., Noordeloos, A.A.M., Brussaard, C.P.D., Claverie, J.-M., 2013. Genome of
Phaeocystis globosa virus PgV-16T highlights the common ancestry of the largest
known DNA viruses infecting eukaryotes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110 (June (26)),
10800–10805.
Schattner, P., Brooks, A.N., Lowe, T.M., 2005. The tRNAscan-SE, snoscan and snoGPS web
servers for the detection of tRNAs and snoRNAs. Nucleic Acids Res. 33 (Web Server),
Jul., W686–W689.
Schulz, F., Yutin, N., Ivanova, N.N., Ortega, D.R., Lee, T.K., Vierheilig, J., Daims, H.,
Horn, M., Wagner, M., Jensen, G.J., Kyrpides, N.C., Koonin, E.V., Woyke, T., 2017.
Giant viruses with an expanded complement of translation system components.
Science 356 (April (6333)), 82–85.
Sharon, I., Battchikova, N., Aro, E.-M., Giglione, C., Meinnel, T., Glaser, F., Pinter, R.Y.,
Breitbart, M., Rohwer, F., Béjà, O., 2011. Comparative metagenomics of microbial
traits within oceanic viral communities. ISME J. 5 (February (7)), 1178–1190.
Sicko-Goad, L., Walker, G., 1979. Viroplasm and large virus-like particles in the dino-
flagellate Gymnodinium uberrimum. Protoplasma 99 (3), 203–210.
Stamatakis, A., 2014. RAxML version 8: a tool for phylogenetic analysis and post-analysis
of large phylogenies. Bioinformatics 30 (May (9)), 1312–1313.
Steward, G.F., Culley, A.I., 2010. Extraction and purification of nucleic acids from viruses.
In: Wilhelm, S.W., Weinbauer, M.G., Suttle, C.A. (Eds.), Manual of Aquatic Viral
Ecology. ASLO, pp. 154–165.
Steward, G.F., Culley, A.I., Wood-Charlson, E.M., 2013. Marine viruses. In: Levin, S.A.
(Ed.), Encyclopedia of Biodiversity. Elsevier, Waltham, MA, pp. 127–144.
Suttle, C.A., Fuhrman, J.A., 2010. Enumeration of virus particles in aquatic or sediment
samples by epifluorescence microscopy. In: Wilhelm, S.W., Weinbauer, M.G., Suttle,
C.A. (Eds.), Manual of Aquatic Viral Ecology. ASLO, pp. 145–153 May.
Throndsen, J., Zingone, A., 1988. Tetraselmis wettsteinii (Schiller) Throndsen comb. nov.
and its occurrence in golfo di Napoli. G. Bot. Ital. 122 (January (3–4)), 227–235.
Wilkins, D., Lauro, F.M., Williams, T.J., DeMaere, M.Z., Brown, M.V., Hoffman, J.M.,
Andrews-Pfannkoch, C., Mcquaid, J.B., Riddle, M.J., Rintoul, S.R., Cavicchioli, R.,
2012. Biogeographic partitioning of Southern Ocean microorganisms revealed by
metagenomics. Environ. Microbiol. 15 (November (5)), 1318–1333.
Wilson, W.H., Gilg, I.C., Moniruzzaman, M., Field, E.K., Koren, S., LeCleir, G.R., Martínez
Martínez, J., Poulton, N.J., Swan, B.K., Stepanauskas, R., Wilhelm, S.W., 2017.
Genomic exploration of individual giant ocean viruses. ISME J. 11 (May (8)),
1736–1745.
Worden, A.Z., 2006. Picoeukaryote diversity in coastal waters of the Pacific Ocean. Aquat.
Microb. Ecol. 43 (2), 165–175.
Yao, C., Ai, J., Cao, X., Xue, S., Zhang, W., 2012. Enhancing starch production of a marine
green microalga Tetraselmis subcordiformis through nutrient limitation. Bioresour.
Technol. 118, 438–444.
Yoosuf, N., Yutin, N., Colson, P., Shabalina, S.A., Pagnier, I., Robert, C., Azza, S., Klose, T.,
Wong, J., Rossmann, M.G., La Scola, B., Raoult, D., Koonin, E.V., 2012. Related giant
viruses in distant locations and different habitats: Acanthamoeba polyphaga mou-
mouvirus represents a third lineage of the Mimiviridae that is close to the megavirus
lineage. Genome Biol. Evol. 4 (12), 1324–1330.
Yoosuf, N., Pagnier, I., Fournous, G., Robert, C., Raoult, D., La Scola, B., Colson, P., 2014.
Draft genome sequences of Terra1 and Terra2 viruses, new members of the family
Mimiviridae isolated from soil. Virology 452–453 (March), 125–132.
Yutin, N., Wolf, Y.I., Raoult, D., Koonin, E.V., 2009. Eukaryotic large nucleo-cytoplasmic
DNA viruses: clusters of orthologous genes and reconstruction of viral genome evo-
lution. Virol. J. 6 (1), 223.
Yutin, N., Wolf, Y.I., Koonin, E.V., 2014. Origin of giant viruses from smaller DNA viruses
not from a fourth domain of cellular life. Virology 466–467 (October), 38–52.
Zar, J., 1996. Biostatistical Analysis, 3rd edition. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Zheng, Y., Chen, Z., Lu, H., Zhang, W., 2011. Optimization of carbon dioxide fixation and
starch accumulation by Tetraselmis subcordiformis in a rectangular airlift photo-
bioreactor. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 10 (March (10)), 1888–1901.
C.R. Schvarcz, G.F. Steward
Virology 518 (2018) 423–433
433
