 Otolaryngology–
Head and Neck Surgery
2017,  Vol. 156(1S) S1 
–S29
© American Academy of 
Otolaryngology—Head and Neck 
Surgery Foundation 2016
Reprints and permission:  
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0194599816671491
http://otojournal.org
Sponsorships or competing interests that may be relevant to content are 
disclosed at the end of this article.
Abstract
Objective. This update of the 2008 American Academy of 
 
Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery Foundation ceru-
men impaction clinical practice guideline provides evidence-
based recommendations on managing cerumen impaction. 
Cerumen impaction is defined as an accumulation of ceru-
men that causes symptoms, prevents assessment of the ear, or 
both. Changes from the prior guideline include
• a consumer added to the development group;
• new evidence (3 guidelines, 5 systematic reviews, and 6 
randomized controlled trials);
• enhanced information on patient education and 
counseling;
• a new algorithm to clarify action statement relationships;
• expanded action statement profiles to explicitly state qual-
ity improvement opportunities, confidence in the evidence, 
intentional vagueness, and differences of opinion;
• an enhanced external review process to include public 
comment and journal peer review; and
• 3 new key action statements on managing cerumen im-
paction that focus on primary prevention, contraindicated 
intervention, and referral and coordination of care.
Purpose. The primary purpose of this guideline is to help cli-
nicians identify patients with cerumen impaction who may 
benefit from intervention and to promote evidence-based 
management. Another purpose of the guideline is to highlight 
needs and management options in special populations or in 
patients who have modifying factors. The guideline is intend-
ed for all clinicians who are likely to diagnose and manage 
 
patients with cerumen impaction, and it applies to any setting 
in which cerumen impaction would be identified, monitored, 
or managed. The guideline does not apply to patients with 
cerumen impaction associated with the following conditions: 
dermatologic diseases of the ear canal; recurrent otitis ex-
terna; keratosis obturans; prior radiation therapy affecting the 
ear; previous tympanoplasty/myringoplasty, canal wall down 
mastoidectomy, or other surgery affecting the ear canal.
Key Action Statements. The panel made a strong recommenda-
tion that clinicians should treat, or refer to a clinician who 
can treat, cerumen impaction, defined as an accumulation of 
cerumen that is associated with symptoms, prevents needed 
assessment of the ear, or both.
The panel made the following recommendations: (1) Clinicians 
should explain proper ear hygiene to prevent cerumen im-
paction when patients have an accumulation of cerumen. (2) 
Clinicians should diagnose cerumen impaction when an ac-
cumulation of cerumen, as seen on otoscopy, is associated 
with symptoms, prevents needed assessment of the ear, or 
both. (3) Clinicians should assess the patient with cerumen 
impaction by history and/or physical examination for factors 
that modify management, such as ≥1 of the following: anti-
coagulant therapy, immunocompromised state, diabetes mel-
litus, prior radiation therapy to the head and neck, ear canal 
stenosis, exostoses, and nonintact tympanic membrane. (4) 
Clinicians should not routinely treat cerumen in patients who 
are asymptomatic and whose ears can be adequately exam-
ined. (5) Clinicians should identify patients with obstructing 
cerumen in the ear canal who may not be able to express 
symptoms (young children and cognitively impaired children 
and adults), and they should promptly evaluate the need for 
intervention. (6) Clinicians should perform otoscopy to de-
tect the presence of cerumen in patients with hearing aids 
during a health care encounter. (7) Clinicians should treat, 
or refer to a clinician who can treat, the patient with ceru-
men impaction with an appropriate intervention, which may 
include ≥1 of the following: cerumenolytic agents, irrigation, 
671491 OTOXXX10.1177/0194599816671491Otolaryngology–Head and Neck SurgerySchwartz et al
2016© The Author(s) 2010
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Clinical Practice Guideline (Update):  
Earwax (Cerumen Impaction)
Seth R. Schwartz, MD, MPH1, Anthony E. Magit, MD, MPH2,  
Richard M. Rosenfeld, MD, MPH3, Bopanna B. Ballachanda, PhD4,  
Jesse M. Hackell, MD5, Helene J. Krouse, PhD, RN6, Claire M. Lawlor, MD7,  
Kenneth Lin, MD, MPH8, Kourosh Parham, MD, PhD9, David R. Stutz, MD10,  
Sandy Walsh11, Erika A. Woodson, MD12, Ken 
Yanagisawa, MD13,  
and Eugene R. Cunningham Jr, MS14
Clinical Pratice Guideline
 S2  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
or manual removal requiring instrumentation. (8) Clinicians 
should recommend against ear candling for treating or pre-
venting cerumen impaction. (9) Clinicians should assess pa-
tients at the conclusion of in-office treatment of cerumen 
impaction and document the resolution of impaction. If the 
impaction is not resolved, the clinician should use additional 
treatment. If full or partial symptoms persist despite resolu-
tion of impaction, the clinician should evaluate the patient 
for alternative diagnoses. (10) Finally, if initial management 
is unsuccessful, clinicians should refer patients with persis-
tent cerumen impaction to clinicians who have specialized 
equipment and training to clean and evaluate ear canals and 
tympanic membranes.
The panel offered the following as options: (1) Clinicians may 
use cerumenolytic agents (including water or saline solution) 
in the management of cerumen impaction. (2) Clinicians may 
use irrigation in the management of cerumen impaction. (3) 
Clinicians may use manual removal requiring instrumentation 
in the management of cerumen impaction. (4) Last, clinicians 
may educate/counsel patients with cerumen impaction or ex-
cessive cerumen regarding control measures.
Keywords
cerumen, earwax, impaction, ear candling, ear coning, clinical 
practice guideline
Received June 28, 2016; revised August 24, 2016; accepted September 
7, 2016.
Differences from Prior Guideline
This clinical practice guideline is as an update and replace-
ment for an earlier guideline published in 2008 by the 
American Academy of Otolaryngology—Head and Neck 
Surgery Foundation (AAO-HNSF).1 An update was planned 
for 5 years after the initial publication date and was further 
necessitated by new primary studies and systematic reviews 
that suggest a need for modifying clinically important recom-
mendations.2 Changes in content and methodology from the 
prior guideline include the following:
 
• addition of a consumer advocate to the guideline 
update group (GUG);
 
• new evidence: 3 guidelines, 5 systematic reviews, 
and 6 randomized controlled trials (RCTs);
 
• emphasis on patient education and counseling with 
new explanatory tables;
 
• expanded action statement profiles to explicitly state 
quality improvement opportunities, confidence in the 
evidence, intentional vagueness, and differences of 
opinion;
 
• enhanced external review process to include public 
comment and journal peer review;
 
• new algorithm to clarify decision making and action 
statement relationships; and
 
• 3 new key action statements on managing cerumen 
impaction that focus on primary prevention, contra-
indicated intervention, and referral and coordination 
of care.
Introduction
Cerumen, or “earwax,” is a naturally occurring substance that 
cleans, protects, and lubricates the external auditory canal. It 
is also the primary reason why the ear canal can become 
obstructed. While often harmless, blockage of the ear canal by 
cerumen can lead to a host of symptoms: hearing loss, tinni-
tus, fullness, itching, otalgia, discharge, odor, and cough.3 In 
addition, cerumen impaction can prevent diagnostic assess-
ment by preventing complete examination of the external 
auditory canal and/or eardrum (tympanic membrane) or by 
1Department of Otolaryngology, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, Washington, USA; 2Division of Otolaryngology, Rady Children’s Hospital–San 
Diego, San Diego, California, USA; 3Department of Otolaryngology, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New 
York, USA; 4Premier Hearing Center, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA; 5Pomona Pediatrics, Pomona, New 
York, USA; 6College of Nursing, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA; 
7Department of Otolaryngology, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA; 8Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA; 9Division 
of Otolaryngology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut, USA; 10University of Michigan Health System, East Ann Arbor Health 
Care Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA; 11Consumers United for Evidence-Based Healthcare, Davis, California, USA; 12Cleveland Clinic Head and Neck 
Institute, Cleveland, Ohio, USA; 13Yale New Haven Hospital and Southern New England Ear, Nose, Throat & Facial Plastic Surgery Group, LLP
, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA; 14American Academy of Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery Foundation, Alexandria, 
Virginia, USA.
The clinical practice guideline is provided for information and educational purposes only. It is not intended as a sole source of guidance in managing 
cerumen impaction. Rather, it is designed to assist clinicians by providing an evidence-based framework for decision-making strategies. The guideline is not 
intended to replace clinical judgment or establish a protocol for all individuals with this condition and may not provide the only appropriate approach to 
diagnosing and managing this program of care. As medical knowledge expands and technology advances, clinical indicators and guidelines are promoted as 
conditional and provisional proposals of what is recommended under specific conditions, but they are not absolute. Guidelines are not mandates; these do 
not and should not purport to be a legal standard of care. The responsible physician, in light of all circumstances presented by the individual patient, must 
determine the appropriate treatment. Adherence to these guidelines will not ensure successful patient outcomes in every situation. The American Academy 
of Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery Foundation, Inc emphasizes that these clinical guidelines should not be deemed to include all proper treatment 
decisions or methods of care or to exclude other treatment decisions or methods of care reasonably directed to obtaining the same results.
Corresponding Author:
Seth R. Schwartz, MD, MPH, Department of Otolaryngology, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA 98111-0900, USA. 
Email: seth.schwartz@vmmc.org
 Schwartz et al 
S3
interfering with diagnostic assessment (ie, audiometry, tym-
panometry).4
Cerumen forms when glandular secretions from the outer 
two-thirds of the ear canal mix with exfoliated squamous epi-
thelium.5 Normally, cerumen is eliminated or expelled by a 
self-cleaning mechanism, which causes it to migrate out of the 
ear canal assisted by jaw movement.6 Figure 1 provides an 
illustration of where cerumen occurs,7 and Figure 2 is a pho-
tograph of impacted cerumen.8
Accumulation of cerumen, caused by failure of the self- 
cleaning mechanism, is one of the most common reasons why 
patients seek medical care for ear-related problems.4,9 Excessive 
or impacted cerumen is present in 1 in 10 children, 1 in 20 adults, 
and more than one-third of the geriatric and developmentally 
delayed populations. 3,10,11 About 12 million people in the United 
States annually seek medical care for problematic cerumen, 
resulting in nearly 8 million cerumen removal procedures.12,13 
Nearly $50 million was spent by Medicare in 2012 for ceru-
men-related procedures, and cerumen impaction was a diag-
nosis in up to 5% of Medicare patients.14 Moreover, excessive 
or impacted cerumen in high-risk populations, such as the 
elderly and developmentally delayed, is underdiagnosed and 
likely undertreated.11,15,16
The target patient for this guideline is >6 months of age 
with a clinical diagnosis of cerumen impaction.
 
• Cerumen is defined as a mixture of secretions 
(sebum with secretions from modified apocrine 
sweat glands) and sloughed epithelial cells, and it is 
a normal substance present in the external auditory 
canal. As cerumen migrates laterally, it may mix with 
hair and other particulate matter.
 
• Cerumen impaction, as defined for this guideline, is 
an accumulation of cerumen that causes symptoms or 
prevents a needed assessment of the ear canal, tym-
panic membrane, or audiovestibular system or both.
 
• Impaction vs obstruction. Although “impaction” 
usually implies that cerumen is lodged, wedged, or 
firmly packed in the ear canal (Figure 2), our defini-
tion of cerumen impaction does not require a com-
plete obstruction. This definition implies that the 
cerumen is associated with symptoms that may be 
attributable to it or that the cerumen prevents a nec-
essary ear examination.
We have defined this term pragmatically to designate ceru-
men that requires management.3-5 Some patients will present 
with nonimpacted cerumen that does not cause symptoms or 
prevent assessment of the ear and that is “asymptomatic.” 
Asymptomatic cerumen does not require active management. 
This guideline discusses considerations relevant to watchful 
waiting and surveillance.
Guideline Purpose
The primary purpose of this guideline is to help clinicians 
identify patients with cerumen impaction who may benefit 
from intervention and to promote evidence-based manage-
ment. Another purpose of the guideline is to highlight needs 
and management options in special populations or in patients 
who have modifying factors. A guideline is necessary, given 
evidence of practice variation in medicine and the literature. 
The secondary goal includes creating a guideline suitable for 
deriving a performance measure on cerumen impaction. This 
update is needed due to the time since the original publication 
and to the presence of new evidence.
The guideline is intended for all clinicians who are likely to 
diagnose and manage patients with cerumen impaction, and it 
applies to any setting in which cerumen impaction would be 
identified, monitored, or managed.
The guideline does not apply to patients with cerumen impac-
tion associated with the following conditions: dermatologic 
Figure 1. Cerumen is formed in the outer two-thirds 
(cartilaginous portion) of the ear canal, not the inner third (bony 
portion) that ends at the eardrum. Impacted cerumen (green-like 
collection) can completely obstruct the ear canal. Adapted and 
reproduced with permission.7
Figure 2. Otoscopic view of impacted cerumen that completely 
fills the ear canal.8
 S4  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
diseases of the ear canal; recurrent otitis externa; keratosis 
obturans; prior radiation therapy affecting the ear; exostoses or 
osteoma; neoplasms of the ear canal; previous tympanoplasty/
myringoplasty, canal wall down mastoidectomy, or other surgery 
affecting the ear canal. However, the guideline discusses the rel-
evance of these conditions in cerumen management. The follow-
ing modifying factors are not the primary focus of the guideline 
but are discussed relative to their impact on management: nonin-
tact tympanic membrane (perforation or tympanostomy tube), 
ear canal stenosis, exostoses, diabetes mellitus, immunocompro-
mised state, anticoagulant therapy, or bleeding disorder.
The goal of this document is to update the original multi-
disciplinary guideline by examining previously and newly 
identified quality improvement opportunities in the manage-
ment of impacted cerumen. The GUG sought to achieve this 
with a limited set of focused recommendations based on a 
transparent and explicit process that considers levels of evi-
dence, harm-benefit balance, consumer input, and expert con-
sensus to fill evidence gaps.
Health Care Burden
Approximately 2% to 6% of the general population in the 
United Kingdom suffers from cerumen impaction at any 
given time.3 Four percent of primary care patients will consult 
a clinician for cerumen impaction annually, and cerumen 
removal is the most common ear, nose, and throat procedure 
performed in the primary care setting in the United Kingdom.3 
Applying these rates to the US population suggests a preva-
lence of cerumen impaction of 12 million individuals, ranging 
between 6 and 18 million. One report cites 12 million office 
visits per year for cerumen removal in the United States.17
The total annual cost for managing cerumen in the United 
States is not readily available; however, an estimate of the cost 
for Medicare beneficiaries is available from reports of the 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. For 2012, $46.9 
million was spent on 1.3 million cerumen disimpactions. The 
percentage of Medicare beneficiaries receiving these services 
varied by state, ranging from 0.55% to 4.92%.14
Cerumen impaction is more common in the elderly and in 
patients with cognitive impairment. Estimates suggest that 
between 19% and 65% of patients >65 years old have ceru-
men impaction13,15 and that elderly patients in nursing homes 
are likely at the upper end of this spectrum.10,18 In the develop-
mentally delayed adult population, 28% to 36% have exces-
sive or impacted cerumen.10,11 Moreover, the presence of 
cerumen impaction has been associated with hearing loss19 
and diminished cognitive function15 in these populations.
The prevalence of cerumen impaction varies widely but is 
still high in healthy adults and children. In a study of 1507 
adults screened for hearing loss, 2.1% had occluding cerumen. 
20 Another study estimates that cerumen impaction is present 
in approximately 10% of children and 5% of healthy adults.10 
Impacted cerumen was the diagnosis for 3.6% of 8,611,282 
emergency room visits for otologic complaints in the United 
States between 2009 and 2011.21
Patients seek treatment for cerumen impaction for a host of 
symptoms. Reported symptoms include pain, itching, sensation 
of fullness, tinnitus, odor, drainage, and cough. Complete occlu-
sion can also result in significant hearing loss.3 Hearing loss can 
range from 5 to 40 dB depending on the degree of occlusion of 
the canal with cerumen. 9,10 While cerumen impaction may be 
asymptomatic in some cases, management may be necessary for 
diagnostic purposes so that the ear canal and/or tympanic mem-
brane can be visualized or diagnostic assessment can be 
performed.22
Multiple treatment options exist for cerumen impaction: 
observation, cerumenolytic agents, irrigation, and manual 
removal other than irrigation.4,22 Combinations of these treat-
ment options also exist (eg, cerumenolytic followed by irriga-
tion; irrigation followed by manual removal). Manual removal 
other than irrigation may be performed with a curette, probe, 
hook, forceps, or suction under direct visualization with head-
light, otoscope, or microscope.3,5 The training, skill, and expe-
rience of the clinician play a significant role in the treatment 
option selected.23 In addition, patient presentation, patient 
preference, and urgency of the clinical situation influence 
choice of treatment.
Though generally safe, treatment of cerumen impaction 
can result in significant complications. Tympanic membrane 
perforation, ear canal laceration, infection of the ear, bleeding, 
or hearing loss occurs at a rate of about 1 in 1000 ear irriga-
tions.9, 24,25 Applying this rate to the approximate number of 
ear irrigations performed in the United States estimates that 
8000 complications occur annually and likely require further 
medical services. Other complications that have been reported 
include otitis externa (sometimes secondary to external audi-
tory canal trauma), pain, dizziness, and syncope.4,26
The primary outcome considered in this guideline is resolu-
tion or improvement in the signs and symptoms associated with 
cerumen impaction. Secondary outcomes include complica-
tions or adverse events. Cost, adherence to therapy, quality of 
life, return to work or activity, return physician visits, and effect 
on comorbid conditions (eg, sensorineural hearing loss, con-
ductive hearing loss) were also considered. The high incidence 
and prevalence of cerumen impaction and the diversity of inter-
ventions available (T
able 1) make this an important condition 
for an up-to-date, evidence-based practice guideline.
Methods
General Methods and Literature Search
This guideline update was developed with an explicit and 
transparent a priori protocol for creating actionable statements 
based on supporting evidence and the associated balance of 
benefit and harm, as outlined in the “Clinical Practice 
Guideline Development Manual, Third Edition: A Quality-
Driven Approach for Translating Evidence into Action.”27
The original cerumen impaction guideline1 was first sent to 
a panel of expert reviewers, who were asked (1) to assess the 
key action statements and decide if they should be revised, 
kept as stands, or removed on the basis of relevancy, omis-
sions, or controversies that the guideline spurred and (2) to 
identify any new literature or treatments that might affect the 
guideline recommendations. The reviewers concluded that the 
 Schwartz et al 
S5
original guideline action statements remained valid but should 
be updated with minor modifications. A suggestion was also 
made for a new key action statement on the role of alternative 
therapies in management.
A literature search was performed by an information special-
ist to identify systematic reviews, clinical practice guidelines, 
and RCTs published since the prior guideline cutoff (September 
2007). The following databases were searched from October 
2007 to April 2015: MEDLINE (OvidSP), EMBASE (OvidSP), 
AMED (OvidSP), Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied 
Health, PubMed, National Guidelines Clearinghouse, and 
Cochrane Controlled Trials Register. The databases were 
searched for the topic of interest with use of controlled vocabu-
lary words and synonymous free text words (cerumen, earwax, 
and impaction). The search strategies were adjusted for the syn-
tax appropriate for each database/platform.
The initial English-language search identified 1 potential clin-
ical practice guideline, 6 systematic reviews, 5 RCTs, and 6 other 
studies. All searches were conducted on April 3, 2015. Systematic 
reviews were included if they met quality criteria of (1) clear 
objective and methods, (2) an explicit search strategy, and (3) 
valid data extraction. Additional evidence was identified, as 
needed, with targeted searches to support needs of the guideline 
development group in updating sections of the guideline text. 
Specifically, ear candling/coning was identified as an area of con-
cern by the reviewers. The databases were also searched through 
use of controlled vocabulary words and synonymous free text 
words for the topic of interest (ear candling and ear coning) in this 
population. The search strategies were adjusted for the syntax 
appropriate for each database/platform. The search was not lim-
ited by date range or study design, but it was limited to the English 
language. After assessing the quality and relevance of all of the 
new search results, we retained 3 guidelines, 5 systematic 
reviews, and 6 RCTs.
The AAO-HNSF assembled a GUG representing the disci-
plines of otolaryngology–head and neck surgery, otology/
neurotology, family medicine, audiology, advanced practice 
nursing, pediatrics, geriatrics, a resident physician (otolaryn-
gology), and a consumer advocate. The GUG also included a 
staff liaison from the AAO-HNSF, but this individual was not 
a voting member of the GUG and served only in an editorial 
capacity in writing the guideline. Several group members had 
significant prior experience in developing clinical practice 
guidelines.
The GUG had several conference calls and 1 in-person 
meeting, during which comments from the expert panel review 
and the literature search were reviewed for each key action 
statement. The GUG then decided to leave the statements 
unaltered, change slightly, or rewrite per the impact of the lit-
erature search, the reviewer comments, and the benefit-harm 
balance. The supporting text was then edited to explain any 
changes from the original key action statement, and the rec-
ommendation level was modified accordingly.
The evidence profile for each statement was then converted 
into an action statement profile, which was moved to immedi-
ately follow the action statement. Statements about the quality 
improvement opportunity, level of confidence in the evidence, 
differences of opinion, intentional vagueness, and any exclu-
sion to which the action statement does not apply were added 
to the action statement profiles. These additions reflect the 
current methodology for guideline development by the AAO-
HNSF and conform to the Institute of Medicine’s standards 
for developing trustworthy guidelines.2,27 The updated guide-
line then underwent GuideLine Implementability Appraisal to 
appraise adherence to methodologic standards, improve clar-
ity of recommendations, and predict potential obstacles to 
implementation.28 The GUG received summary appraisals in 
October 2015 and modified an advanced draft of the guideline 
on the basis of the appraisal.
The final draft of the updated clinical practice guideline 
was revised according to comments received during multidis-
ciplinary peer review, open public comment, and journal edi-
torial peer review. A scheduled review process will occur at 5 
years from publication or sooner if new, compelling evidence 
warrants earlier consideration.
Classification of Evidence-Based 
Statements
Guidelines are intended to reduce inappropriate variations in 
clinical care, produce optimal health outcomes for patients, 
and minimize harm. The evidence-based approach to guide-
line development requires that the evidence supporting a 
policy be identified, appraised, and summarized and that an 
explicit link between evidence and statements be defined. 
Evidence-based statements reflect both the quality of evidence 
and the balance of benefit and harm that is anticipated when 
the statement is followed. The definitions for evidence-based 
statements29 are listed in Tables 2 and 3.
Guidelines are never intended to supersede professional 
judgment; rather, they may be viewed as a relative constraint 
on individual clinician discretion in a particular clinical cir-
cumstance. Less frequent variation in practice is expected for 
Table 1. Interventions Considered in Cerumen Guideline 
Development.
Diagnosis
Targeted history
Physical examination
Otoscopy
Binocular microscopy
Audiologic evaluation
Treatment
Watchful waiting/observation
Education/information
Cerumenolytic agents
Ear canal irrigation
Manual removal other than irrigation (curette, 
probe, forceps, suction, hook)
Cotton tip swabs
Ear candling
Prevention
Cerumenolytic agents
Hygiene
Education
Environmental controls
 S6  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
a strong recommendation than what might be expected with a 
recommendation. Options offer the most opportunity for practice 
variability.30 Clinicians should always act and decide in a way 
that they believe will best serve their patients’ interests and needs, 
regardless of guideline recommendations. Guidelines represent 
the best judgment from a team of experienced clinicians and 
methodologists addressing the scientific evidence for a par-
ticular topic.29
Making recommendations about health practices involves 
value judgments on the desirability of various outcomes asso-
ciated with management options. Values applied by the GUG 
sought to minimize harm and diminish unnecessary and inap-
propriate therapy. A major goal of the GUG was to be 
transparent and explicit about how values were applied and to 
document the process.
Financial Disclosure and Conflicts of 
Interest
The cost of developing this guideline, including travel expenses 
of all panel members, was covered in full by the AAO-HNSF. 
Potential conflicts of interest for all panel members in the past 5 
years were compiled and distributed before the first conference 
call. After review and discussion of these disclosures,31 the panel 
concluded that individuals with potential conflicts could remain 
on the panel if they (1) reminded the panel of potential conflicts 
before any related discussion, (2) recused themselves from a 
Table 2. Strength of Action T
erms in Guideline Statements and Implied Levels of Obligation.
Strength
Definition
Implied Obligation
Strong recommendation
A strong recommendation means that the benefits of the 
recommended approach clearly exceed the harms (or, in the 
case of a strong negative recommendation, that the harms clearly 
exceed the benefits) and that the quality of the supporting 
evidence is high (grade A or B).a In some clearly identified 
circumstances, strong recommendations may be based on lesser 
evidence when high-quality evidence is impossible to obtain and 
the anticipated benefits strongly outweigh the harms.
Clinicians should follow a strong 
recommendation unless a clear and 
compelling rationale for an alternative 
approach is present.
Recommendation
A recommendation means that the benefits exceed the harms 
(or, in the case of a negative recommendation, that the harms 
exceed the benefits) but that the quality of evidence is not as 
high (grade B or C).a In some clearly identified circumstances, 
recommendations may be based on lesser evidence when 
high-quality evidence is impossible to obtain and the anticipated 
benefits outweigh the harms.
Clinicians should also generally follow a 
recommendation but should remain 
alert to new information and sensitive 
to patient preferences.
Option
An option means that either the quality of evidence is suspect 
(grade D)a or that well-done studies (grade A, B, or C)a show little 
clear advantage to one approach vs another.
Clinicians should be flexible in their 
decision making regarding appropriate 
practice, although they may set bounds 
on alternatives; patient preference 
should have a substantial influencing role
aSee Table 3 for definitions of evidence grades.
Table 3. Aggregate Grades of Evidence by Question Type.a
Grade
Treatment
Diagnosis
Prognosis
A
Systematic reviewb of randomized trials
Systematic reviewb of cross-sectional 
studies with consistently applied 
reference standard and blinding
Systematic reviewb of inception cohort 
studiesc
B
Randomized trials or observational 
studies with dramatic effects or highly 
consistent evidence
Cross-sectional studies with consistently 
applied reference standard and blinding
Inception cohort studiesc
C
Nonrandomized or historically  
controlled studies, including  
case-control and observational studies
Nonconsecutive studies; case-control 
studies; or studies with poor, 
nonindependent, or inconsistently 
applied reference standards
Cohort study; control arm of a 
randomized trial, case series, or case-
control study; poor quality prognostic 
cohort study
D
Case reports, mechanism-based reasoning, or reasoning from first principles
X
Exceptional situations where validating studies cannot be performed and there is a clear preponderance of benefit over harm
aAmerican Academy of Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery Foundation guideline development manual.27
bA systematic review may be downgraded to grade B because of study limitations, heterogeneity, or imprecision.
cA group of individuals identified for subsequent study at an early uniform point in the course of the specified health condition or before the condition devel-
ops.
 Schwartz et al 
S7
related discussion if asked by the panel, and (3) agreed not to 
discuss any aspect of the guideline with industry before publica-
tion. Last, panelists were reminded that conflicts of interest 
extend beyond financial relationships and may include personal 
experiences, how a participant earns a living, and the partici-
pant’s previously established “stake” in an issue.32
Guideline Action Statements
Each evidence-based statement is organized in a similar fashion: 
a key action statement in bold, followed by the strength of the 
recommendation in italics and an action statement profile that 
explicitly states the quality improvement opportunity (and cor-
responding National Quality Strategy domain based on the origi-
nal priorities),33 aggregate evidence quality, level of confidence 
in evidence (high, medium, low), benefit, harms, risks, costs, and 
benefit-harm assessment. In addition, there are statements of any 
value judgments, the role of patient (caregiver) preferences, 
clarification of any intentional vagueness by the panel, excep-
tions to the statement, any differences of opinion, and a repeat 
statement of the strength of the recommendation. Several para-
graphs subsequently discuss the evidence base supporting the 
statement. An overview of each evidence-based statement in this 
guideline can be found in T
able 4, and the relationship among 
statements is illustrated in Figure 3.
Table 4. Summary of Guideline Action Statements.
Statement
Action
Strength
1. Primary prevention
Clinicians should explain proper ear hygiene to prevent cerumen impaction when 
patients have an accumulation of cerumen.
Recommendation
2A.  
Diagnosis of cerumen 
impaction
Clinicians should diagnose cerumen impaction when an accumulation of cerumen, 
as seen on otoscopy, (1) is associated with symptoms, (2) prevents needed 
assessment of the ear, or (3) both.
Recommendation
2B. Modifying factors
Clinicians should assess the patient with cerumen impaction by history and/or 
physical examination for factors that modify management, such as ≥1 of the 
following: anticoagulant therapy, immunocompromised state, diabetes mellitus, 
prior radiation therapy to the head and neck, ear canal stenosis, exostoses, 
nonintact tympanic membrane.
Recommendation
3A.   
Need for intervention 
if impacted
Clinicians should treat, or refer to another clinician who can treat, cerumen 
impaction when identified.
Strong recommendation
3B.  
Nonintervention if 
asymptomatic
Clinicians should not routinely treat cerumen in patients who are asymptomatic 
and whose ears can be adequately examined.
Recommendation
3C.  
Need for 
intervention in 
special populations
Clinicians should identify patients with obstructing cerumen in the ear canal 
who may not be able to express symptoms (young children and cognitively 
impaired children and adults), and they should promptly evaluate the need for 
intervention.
Recommendation
4.  
Intervention in hearing 
aid users
Clinicians should perform otoscopy to detect the presence of cerumen in patients 
with hearing aids during a health care encounter.
Recommendation
5A.  
Recommended 
interventions
Clinicians should treat, or refer to a clinician who can treat, the patient with 
cerumen impaction with an appropriate intervention, which may include ≥1 
of the following: cerumenolytic agents, irrigation, or manual removal requiring 
instrumentation.
Recommendation
5B.  
Contraindicated 
intervention (ear 
candling/coning)
Clinicians should recommend against ear candling/coning for treating or preventing 
cerumen impaction.
Recommendation
6.  
Cerumenolytic agents
Clinicians may use cerumenolytic agents (including water or saline solution) in the 
management of cerumen impaction.
Option
7. Irrigation
Clinicians may use irrigation in the management of cerumen impaction.
Option
8. Manual removal
Clinicians may use manual removal requiring instrumentation in the management 
of cerumen impaction.
Option
9. Outcomes assessment
Clinicians should assess patients at the conclusion of in-office treatment of 
cerumen impaction and document the resolution of impaction. If the impaction 
is not resolved, the clinician should use additional treatment. If full or partial 
symptoms persist despite resolution of impaction, the clinician should evaluate 
the patient for alternative diagnoses.
Recommendation
10.  
Referral and 
coordination of care
If initial management is unsuccessful, clinicians should refer patients with persistent 
cerumen impaction to clinicians who have specialized equipment and training to 
clean and evaluate ear canals and tympanic membranes
Recommendation
11.  
Secondary prevention
Clinicians may educate/counsel patients with cerumen impaction or excessive 
cerumen regarding control measures.
Option
 S8  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
The role of patient preference in decision making deserves 
further clarification. For some statements, where the evi-
dence base demonstrates clear benefit, although the role of 
patient preference for a range of treatments may not be rele-
vant, clinicians should provide patients with clear and com-
prehensible information on the benefits and harms to 
facilitate understanding and shared decision making, which 
lead to better adherence and outcomes. In cases where evi-
dence is weak or benefits are unclear, the practice of shared 
decision making—again, where the management decision is 
made by a collaborative effort between the clinician and an 
informed patient—is extremely useful. Factors related to 
patient preference include, but are not limited to, absolute 
benefits (numbers needed to treat), adverse effects (number 
needed to harm), cost of drugs or procedures, and frequency 
and duration of treatment.
STATEMENT 1. PRIMARY PREVENTION: Clinicians 
should explain proper ear hygiene to prevent cerumen 
impaction when patients have an accumulation of ceru-
men. Recommendation based on observational studies and a 
preponderance of benefit over harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 1
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Communicating 
safe preventive measures to patients (National Qual-
ity Strategy domain: patient and family engagement)
Figure 3. Algorithm showing the interrelationship of guideline key action statements (KASs). The guideline does not apply to patients with 
cerumen impaction associated with the following conditions: dermatologic diseases of the ear canal; recurrent otitis externa; keratosis 
obturans; prior radiation therapy affecting the ear; previous tympanoplasty/myringoplasty, canal wall down mastoidectomy, or other surgery 
affecting the ear canal.
 Schwartz et al 
S9
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade C, based on pre-
ponderance of survey studies and 1 prospective pilot 
study
 
• Level of confidence in evidence: Medium
 
• Benefit: Promote safe and effective self-care behav-
iors in ear hygiene; prevent self-inflicted harms, such 
as abrasions, cuts, and impaction; reduction in health 
care utilization
 
• Risks, harms, costs: Induced patient anxiety regard-
ing an asymptomatic condition; time spent in coun-
seling; potential for increased use of health care 
resources if self-cleaning with cotton-tipped applica-
tors is abandoned
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Preponderance of benefit
 
• Value judgments: Perception by the group that 
patients overmanipulate the ears (ie, cotton swab 
use) and that there is benefit in educating patients 
about proper ear hygiene
 
• Intentional vagueness: The term proper ear hygiene 
is used and is discussed in detail in the text. The term 
accumulation is used but not precisely defined, as 
it is up to the clinician to determine. This statement 
applies to patients with impacted cerumen and those 
who are at risk.
 
• Role of patient preferences: Small; patient can 
decline education
 
• Exceptions: None
 
• Policy level: Recommendation
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to provide guidance to clini-
cians in educating patients on behaviors that promote safe and 
effective ear hygiene while minimizing self-inflicted harms, 
such as abrasions, cuts, and earwax impaction due to manipu-
lation.
Ear hygiene is common in the United States and world-
wide.4,34 A number of survey studies have been conducted to 
assess the prevalence of self-ear cleaning and specific prac-
tices related to ear hygiene in various populations. In 2 
studies, about 90% of respondents believed that ears should be 
cleaned; they also indicated that they clean their ears or their 
children’s ears on a regular basis.34,35 The most common rea-
sons cited for ear hygiene practices were debris removal (dirt, 
dust, and wax), relief of itching, and cosmetic reasons.34,36 The 
practice of cleaning one’s ears has a strong familial influence, 
often beginning in childhood and continuing throughout ado-
lescence into adulthood.35 This suggests that clinicians need to 
include family members as well as the patient when discuss-
ing proper ear hygiene practices.
Cerumen production is a normal physiologic process. 
Preventive measures should be focused toward those individuals 
who are at greatest risk for developing occlusion and those with a 
history of impaction. Those particularly susceptible to cerumen 
impaction are children, the elderly, and the cognitively impaired.4 
Hearing aid users also have a higher incidence of impaction.37 
Several theories have been posed to explain this phenomenon, 
including overstimulation of cerumen production and impair-
ment of normal cleaning mechanisms.3,5 Therefore, the clinician 
should discuss proper care and cleaning of hearing aids with 
patients and caregivers (see T
able 5).
Ear hygiene is commonly performed and is often incorpo-
rated into a person’s daily hygienic routine.34,38 Specific mea-
sures used to clean the ears range from washing the outer ear 
with soap and water to inserting objects into the ear canal (eg, 
bobby pins, cotton-tipped swabs, paper clips). Although 
empirical data are quite limited, consensus opinion from clini-
cians is that cerumen impaction may be exacerbated by using 
hearing aids and cotton-tipped swabs.39 A higher incidence of 
cerumen has been reported in children whose ears were 
cleaned with cotton-tipped swabs.40 One study found that 
inserting foreign objects into the ears was a common practice 
in >90% of health workers.41 Although cotton buds were most 
commonly used, individuals also inserted ballpoint pen covers 
and tips, matchsticks, chicken feathers, and bobby pins into 
their ear canals to clean them. Approximately 9% reported 
injuries to their ears as a result of cleaning, including skin 
abrasions, eardrum perforation, and cerumen impaction.41 In 
some countries, metal probes specifically designed for ear 
cleaning and wax removal at home are readily available and 
easy to purchase at markets and pharmacies.42 While objects 
Table 5. Proper Care of Hearing Aids: Tips to Clean and Keep the Ear Canal Unobstructed.
1. Hearing aid users should have regular ear canal checks every 3 or 6 months.
2. Clean the wax trap in receiver-in-canal, completely-in-the-canal, in-the-canal, and in-the-ear hearing aids.
3. Replace the wax trap once per 3 months or whenever hearing aid is not working.
4.  
Those who use behind-the-ear hearing aids: detach the earmold from the hearing aid 1 ear at a time to avoid confusion that might arise 
due to switching of hearing aids.
5. Once the earmold is detached, soak it in mild soapy solution; do not use isopropyl alcohol, solvents. or oils to clean earmolds.
6. Clean the earmold, and rinse with water.
7. Dry the earmold, and remove any excess moisture or debris with a soft cloth or cotton ball.
8.  
If earmolds cannot be detached, wipe with a damp cloth to remove any visible earwax, or use a soft toothbrush or the brush provided 
with the hearing aids.
9.  
Check the earmold tube to be sure that it is clear before reattaching to hearing aid. If the tube is clogged, have it replaced by your 
hearing care professional.
aAdapted from Adams-Wendling et al (2008).84
 S10  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
for cleaning are ubiquitous, patients should be counseled not 
to insert any foreign objects into the ear canal, as these objects 
can cause injuries or worsen cerumen impaction by pushing 
cerumen deeper into the canal.
Susceptible patients can use some measures at home to 
control accumulation of cerumen. Common self-help mea-
sures include cerumenolytic drops and ear irrigations.43 More 
information on frequently asked questions and patient educa-
tion can be found in Tables 6 and 7.
STATEMENT 2A. DIAGNOSIS OF CERUMEN IMPAC-
TION: Clinicians should diagnose cerumen impaction 
when an accumulation of cerumen, as seen with otos-
copy, (1) is associated with symptoms, (2) prevents needed 
assessment of the ear, or (3) both. Recommendation based 
on diagnostic studies with minor limitations and a preponder-
ance of benefit over harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 2A
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Allow for accu-
rate diagnosis and properly identify patients in need 
of treatment (National Quality Strategy domain: clin-
ical processes/effectiveness)
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade B for diagnostic 
studies with minor limitations regarding impact of 
cerumen on hearing and visualizations and grade C 
with respect to signs and symptoms associated with 
cerumen impaction
 
• Level of confidence in evidence: High
 
• Benefit: Identify individuals with cerumen impaction 
who require intervention, including those with otologic 
symptoms and those who require diagnostic assess-
ment (raise awareness of the consequences of ceru-
men impaction—eg, cerumen impaction may prevent 
caloric stimulation during electronystagmography)
 
• Risks, harms, costs: Overdiagnosis of cerumen 
impaction based on symptoms as a criterion resulting 
in failure to identify another cause of the symptoms; 
no additional cost
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Preponderance of benefit 
over harms
 
• Value judgments: Emphasis on clinical symptoms 
and signs for initial diagnosis; importance of avoid-
ing unnecessary diagnostic tests; consensus on using 
the term cerumen impaction to imply cerumen that 
requires treatment
 
• Intentional vagueness: Symptoms are defined in the 
supporting text; prevention of needed assessments is 
defined by the clinician.
 
• Role of patient preferences: None
 
• Exceptions: None
 
• Policy level: Recommendation
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to identify patients who may be 
symptomatic from cerumen impaction, improve the accuracy of 
otologic examinations and diagnostic testing, and differentiate 
ears with healthy nonoccluding cerumen from those that need 
intervention.
Table 6. Frequently Asked Questions: Earwax Primary Prevention.
1.  
Is it necessary to treat your ears to 
prevent accumulation of earwax?
Prevention is best for certain groups of people, yet not everyone needs it. Among these who may 
be helped are the elderly, people with hearing aids, and those with a history of excessive earwax. 
Discussion with your doctor will help determine whether anything should be done for you.
2.  
What will happen if I just leave my  
ears alone and do not clean them?
Most people do not need a regular schedule for prevention of earwax accumulation. Some 
may find it necessary to have a cleaning procedure performed occasionally. Earwax is formed 
naturally by your body and helps protect your ear canal skin and kill germs. A doctor may find 
an excess of earwax at a regularly scheduled general checkup and perform a cleaning procedure.
3.  
What symptoms could be caused by 
excessive earwax?
Common complaints include itching, hearing problems, or a sense of fullness in the ear canal. 
Other problems that might occur include discharge, odor, cough, or ear pain.
4. Does it hurt to remove earwax?
The procedures used to remove earwax should not cause any pain. If you are putting a type of 
liquid into the ear, it may feel funny but should not hurt.
5.  
If earwax is removed, will my hearing 
get better?
The type of treatment used to prevent the buildup of wax in your ear should not usually affect 
your hearing. If your ear canal is completely or almost completely blocked by excess earwax, 
then removing the wax will allow your hearing to return to preimpaction levels.
6.  
How often should I remove wax from 
my ears?
There is no standard procedure for preventing earwax buildup, and for most people, nothing 
needs to be done unless excess wax develops. Ask your health care provider if there is anything 
special that you should do to prevent or reduce accumulation of earwax. There are several 
procedures with different periods for the treatment.
7.  
Is removing earwax expensive?
Most procedures use over-the-counter materials and are not expensive. 
Your health care provider 
can help with the choices.
8.  
Do cotton-tipped swabs remove  
wax from the ear?
Cotton-tipped swabs can remove some wax, but they often simply push the wax deeper into the 
ear and may worsen an impaction or traumatize the ear canal.
9. Whom can I see to clean my ears?
Many primary care clinicians have the ability to irrigate cerumen in their clinics. Alternatively, an 
otolaryngologist can remove obstructed cerumen.
 Schwartz et al 
S11
Although impaction implies 100% occlusion to many clini-
cians, we elected to use an operational definition for this guide-
line such that only problematic cerumen, even if it only partially 
occludes the canal, is considered impacted. Clinicians should 
diagnose cerumen impaction when an accumulation of cerumen 
causes symptoms, prevents needed assessment of the ear, or both. 
By this definition, cerumen in the ear canal is not considered 
“impacted” if it is not associated with symptoms or if an unob-
structed view of the ear canal and tympanic membrane is not 
essential for patient care or diagnostic evaluation. Cerumen not 
meeting this definition of impaction requires no intervention 
(except in patients who are unable to report such symptoms; see 
below regarding at-risk patients).
Symptoms of cerumen impaction may include otalgia, tin-
nitus, fullness in the ear, pain, cough, and hearing loss.3,9,10 
Presence of any of these symptoms should prompt the clini-
cian to examine the ear canal and, if cerumen is encountered, 
consider the diagnosis of impacted cerumen.
Additionally, some at-risk patients who cannot identify or 
express symptoms of cerumen impaction should be assessed. 
Some at-risk patients include elderly adults with concerns of 
dementia15,44; developmentally delayed or nonverbal patients 
with behavioral changes; and young children with fevers, 
parental concerns, or speech delay. The presence of cerumen 
in these patients can be considered impacted and removed.
Physical examination of the external canal can be performed 
with a handheld speculum, an otoscope8 (Figure 4), or a binocu-
lar microscope. Cerumen may impair a clinician’s ability to visu-
alize the tympanic membrane and assess the status of the middle 
ear.45 In a study examining a cohort of children ranging in age 
from 2 to 60 months, cerumen was removed in 89 (29%) of 279 
children subsequently diagnosed with acute otitis media. While 
the data are limited, they suggest that cerumen can inhibit or 
prevent diagnosis of middle ear disease. Accordingly, if cerumen 
impairs examination of the ear, it is defined as impacted.
If cerumen is identified in the ear canal and may compromise 
auditory or vestibular testing, cerumen impaction is also diag-
nosed. The majority of audiologic tests cannot be performed 
accurately in the setting of complete or partial impaction; these 
tests include audiometry, immittance testing, electrocochleogra-
phy, otoacoustic emissions, auditory brainstem responses, and 
real ear measurements during hearing aid fitting. Likewise, 
caloric testing for the assessment of vestibular function—during 
which warm or cool water or air is instilled into the ear canal—
requires a clear and patent ear canal, as well as confirmation of an 
intact tympanic membrane, to be valid and safe. Of note, ceru-
men impaction does not meaningfully affect infrared tympanic 
temperature measurements.46
This operational definition is slightly different from that 
used by CPT Assistant but captures the same indications for 
intervention.47
STATEMENT 2B. MODIFYING FACTORS: Clinicians 
should assess the patient with cerumen impaction by his-
tory and/or physical examination for factors that modify 
management, such as ≥1 of the following: anticoagulant 
therapy, immunocompromised state, diabetes mellitus, 
prior radiation therapy to the head and neck, ear canal 
stenosis, exostoses, nonintact tympanic membrane. Recom-
mendation based on observational studies with a preponder-
ance of benefit over harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 2B
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Avoiding harms 
from intervention in people at increased risk based 
Table 7. Patient Education: Dos and Don’ts of Cerumen (Earwax)
Do
1.  
Understand cerumen (earwax) is normal. Earwax not causing symptoms or blocking the ear canal should be left alone.
2.  
Understand symptoms of cerumen impaction (wax blocking the ear): decreased hearing, fullness, tinnitus, and distortion/changes to 
hearing aid function.
3.   
Seek medical evaluation if you have symptoms of hearing loss, ear fullness, and ear pain if you are not certain that they are from cerumen. 
Otitis media (fluid behind the eardrum), otitis externa (ear canal infection), and sudden inner ear hearing loss can all masquerade as 
cerumen impaction.
4.  
Ask your provider about ways that you can treat your cerumen impaction at home. 
You may have certain medical or ear conditions that 
may make some options unsafe.
5.  
Seek medical attention with ear pain, drainage, or bleeding. These are not symptoms of cerumen impaction and need further evaluation.
Don’t
1.  
Overclean your ears. Excessive cleaning may irritate the ear canal, cause infection, and even increase the chances of cerumen impaction.
2.  
Put anything smaller than your elbow in your ear. 
Your mother was right! Cotton swabs, hair pins, car keys, toothpicks . . . these can all 
injure your ear and may cause a laceration (cut) in the ear canal, a perforation (hole) in the eardrum, and/or dislocation of the hearing 
bones, leading to hearing loss, dizziness, ringing, and other symptoms of ear injury.
3.  
Use ear candles. There is no evidence that they remove impacted cerumen, and candling can cause serious damage to the ear canal and 
eardrum.
4.  
Ignore your symptoms if home remedies are unsuccessful. Seek medical attention if attempts at home have not resolved the problem.
5.   
Irrigate or try cerumen-removing/softening drops if you have had ear surgery or a perforated eardrum, unless specifically cleared to do 
so by your otolaryngologist (ear, nose, and throat surgeon).
6.  
Forget to clean your hearing aids as the manufacturer and your hearing health professional recommend.
 S12  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
on patient characteristics (National Quality Strategy 
domain: Patient safety)
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade C, recommen-
dations regarding diabetes mellitus and prior radia-
tion therapy; Grade D, recommendations regarding 
immunocompromised state, anticoagulation, and 
anatomic abnormalities of the ear canal and tym-
panic membrane
 
• Level of confidence in evidence: Medium
 
• Benefits: Reduce complications
 
• Risks, harms, costs: Time of the assessment
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Preponderance of benefit 
over harm
 
• Value judgments: Consensus that identifying modi-
fying factors will improve outcomes
 
• Intentional vagueness: None
 
• Role of patient preferences: None
 
• Exceptions: None
 
• Policy level: Recommendation
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to identify patient-specific 
and anatomic factors that may alter the management of 
 
cerumen impaction to achieve safer outcomes. The initial 
approach to the patient with cerumen impaction should 
include an assessment of complicating factors by both his-
tory and physical examination. Failure to identify such fac-
tors may lead to suboptimal care, harm, or inappropriate 
interventions.
Medical factors that should influence treatment choice for 
managing cerumen impaction include coagulopathy, immuno-
compromised state, and previous head and neck radiation. 
Anatomic factors, either congenital or acquired, can compli-
cate the treatment of cerumen impaction. These factors may 
include ear canal shape and size, as well as abnormalities of 
the tympanic membrane.
Coagulopathies may include extrinsic or intrinsic abnor-
malities to clotting. History taking should include queries for 
antiplatelet therapy, anticoagulation medications, hepatic or 
renal failure, thrombocytopenia, and hemophilia. These 
patients should be counseled about increased risk of ear bleed-
ing, and special care should be taken to reduce the likelihood 
of abrading or bruising the ear canal.
Clinicians should elicit histories of conditions that may 
compromise immune functioning, such as diabetes mellitus, 
renal failure, prior organ transplant, concurrent chemotherapy, 
HIV/AIDS, and immunomodulating drugs. Such individuals 
may be at higher risk for postprocedure otitis externa, espe-
cially when irrigation is employed.
Irrigation with tap water has been implicated as an etiologic 
factor in several studies of necrotizing (malignant) external otitis 
(osteomyelitis of the ear canal).48-51 Immunocompromised AIDS 
patients have also been reported to be at risk of necrotizing otitis 
externa.52,53 Driscoll et al demonstrated that the pH of diabetic 
cerumen is significantly higher than in persons without diabetes, 
which may facilitate the growth of pathogens.54 Clinicians who 
utilize irrigation in this patient population must be especially 
careful to minimize trauma, consider using ear drops to acidify 
the ear canal postirrigation, and provide close follow-up.
Prior history of head and neck radiation should be elicited in 
the history taking of the patient with possible cerumen impaction. 
Targeted radiation to any site in the head and neck may deliver a 
radiation dose sufficient to permanently affect the external audi-
tory canals. Radiated external auditory canals undergo histologic 
changes, including epithelial thinning and atrophy of the cerumi-
nous glands.55 The resulting cerumen is drier, more tenacious 
cerumen/keratin debris that requires delicate debridement. Injury 
to the ear canals may be slow or difficult to heal and could lead to 
osteoradionecrosis (ORN) of the ear canal and temporal bone. 
Underlying ORN may present as recurrent cerumen impaction, 
and so specific care must be taken at the time of treatment to deter-
mine the health of the external auditory canal after successful dis-
impaction. The onset of ORN of the temporal bone appears to be 
correlated with the radiation dose to the temporal bone itself, not 
the target, and may range from 1 year to decades posttreatment.56 
Radiation to the parotid gland, nasopharynx, and preauricular skin 
are noted in 2 contemporary case series as the most common radi-
ation targets leading to ORN of the temporal bone.56,57
The presence of dermatologic conditions such as eczema, 
seborrheic dermatosis, and ectodermal dysplasia can compli-
cate management of cerumen. While data are limited, these 
conditions can increase the frequency of cerumen impaction 
and the risk of otitis externa if present.47
Narrowing of the ear canal limits visualization and 
increases the likelihood of trauma. A narrow ear canal makes 
both irrigation and manual instrumentation more difficult to 
perform. Narrow canals can be found in otherwise normal 
subjects, in addition to patients with craniofacial disorders, 
Down syndrome, chronic external otitis, and posttraumatic 
states (including surgical).
Stenosis may be congenital or acquired. Congenital steno-
sis may involve both the lateral portion (cartilaginous) and the 
medial bony ear canal. Stenoses vary in severity from mild 
Figure 4. Otoscopic view of impacted cerumen, mixed with hair, 
completely obstructing the ear canal.8
 Schwartz et al 
S13
constriction of the external auditory canal to complete atresia. 
Safe and effective irrigation is not always possible in patients 
with narrow or stenotic ear canals. Specialized equipment and 
procedures may be required to safely remove cerumen in these 
patients.
Diffuse exostoses and solitary osteomas of the external audi-
tory canal are acquired bony growths that may severely limit 
the patency of the ear canal and may trap cerumen and keratin 
debris in the bony canal. These lesions may also prevent ade-
quate visualization of the tympanic membrane. Exostoses are 
broad-based hyperostotic lesions that are typically multiple, 
bilateral, located in the medial ear canal near the eardrum, and 
associated with prior history of cold-water swimming.58 
Osteomas are less common. They are usually lateral in the bony 
ear canal, solitary, unilateral, and pedunculated.59
A perforated tympanic membrane or patent tympanostomy 
tube likewise limits the options available for cerumen removal. 
The suspicion of a nonintact tympanic membrane should be 
assessed by history and/or physical examination prior to selec-
tion of a disimpaction technique. Previous history of tympanic 
membrane perforation, any prior ear surgery, intratympanic 
injections, tympanostomy tubes, or barotrauma should prompt 
the clinician to suspect a nonintact eardrum and utilize disim-
paction techniques other than irrigation. In addition, use of 
irrigation in the presence of a perforated tympanic membrane 
could produce caloric effects, resulting in vertigo. Some 
agents can also be toxic to the middle or inner ear. Mechanical 
removal of cerumen is the preferred technique when eardrum 
perforation is suspected.
Current otitis externa should also be identified by history 
or examination. If the ear canal is currently infected, irrigation 
should be avoided. Pain can be a presenting symptom of ceru-
men impaction but is not common and should alert the clini-
cian to the possibility of infection or other pathology. If pain is 
present, the clinician should take care to assess the ear for 
signs of infection or other pathology prior to selecting a 
method of cleaning.
STATEMENT 3A. NEED FOR INTERVENTION IF 
IMPACTED: Clinicians should treat, or refer to another 
clinician who can treat, cerumen impaction when identi-
fied. Strong recommendation based on RCTs with heterogene-
ity and with a preponderance of benefit over harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 3A
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Prioritize patients 
for intervention (National Quality Strategy domain: 
clinical processes/effectiveness)
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade B, RCTs with 
heterogeneity
 
• Level of confidence in the evidence: High
 
• Benefits: Improved hearing and symptom relief com-
pared with no treatment
 
• Risks, harms, costs: Potential complications related 
to treatment; direct cost of managing the impaction
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Preponderance of benefit 
over harm
 
• Value judgments: None
 
• Intentional vagueness: None
 
• Role of patient preferences: Small
 
• Exceptions: None
 
• Policy level: Strong recommendation
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to specify under what circum-
stances cerumen should be removed.
Cerumen impaction has been associated with itching, ear 
pain, discharge from the ear canal, ear fullness, cough, hearing 
loss, tinnitus, and cognitive impairment in elderly patients.15 
Removing impacted cerumen can improve hearing.9,15,19,60 If 
the patient has relevant symptoms (pain, tinnitus, hearing loss, 
aural fullness, or vertigo) and the ear is impacted with ceru-
men, cerumen impaction may be a contributing factor for the 
symptoms.
Screening studies show that cerumen impaction is a fre-
quent reversible cause of hearing loss.11,61,62 A randomized 
community-based screening study in Oman determined that 
2.7% of the population had a unilateral hearing impairment. 
Of those who were identified with a unilateral hearing loss, 
54% were deemed to have a “mild” impairment (hearing 
threshold, 26-40 dB), and half of that group had resolution of 
hearing loss after simply clearing the ear canal of cerumen at 
the time of screening.61 In another study, residents at a pri-
vately owned intermediate care facility for the mentally 
retarded were examined annually over a 12-year period.11 
When examiners discovered patients with a new conductive 
hearing loss (>10-dB air-bone gap at ≥2 frequencies) and a 
complete or near-complete ear canal occlusion by cerumen, 
the conductive hearing deficit resolved after the impactions 
were removed. In an uncontrolled study of 125 consecutive 
patients who had been referred by general practitioners to an 
ear-syringing clinic in Bristol, United Kingdom, those who 
presented with difficulty hearing on the phone, ear pain, or 
“blocked ears” reported improvement or resolution of their 
symptoms 62% to 75% of the time after undergoing ear irriga-
tion.60 Forty to fifty percent of those who complained of itch-
ing or dizziness reported improvement after ear lavage.
Of note, while cerumen impaction may be the cause of 
reversible hearing loss, hearing acuity does not diminish until 
the cross-sectional area of the ear canal is reduced by at least 
80%.63 Accordingly, partial occlusion may not be the cause of 
hearing loss.
Older patients are often unaware that they have cerumen 
impaction or that removal of the impaction may improve their 
hearing.13,18,19,64 In a random sample of 226 patients aged >65 
years who were admitted to the nonintensive care units of a 
hospital in the United States, 35% had a cerumen impaction 
that blocked visualization of the tympanic membrane of 1 or 
both ears. After lavage with otoscopic confirmation of clear-
ing, repeat hearing tests showed that subjects had improved 
hearing at several frequencies. There was no change in the 
control patients who were not impacted. Regardless of whether 
the subjects had cerumen impaction or not, the majority had 
 S14  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
been unaware of their hearing deficits and had rated their 
hearing ability as either “good” or “fair.”19 Accordingly, in 
older patients, directed history and ear examination are war-
ranted to identify an impaction.
A study of cerumen removal in elderly subjects showed an 
improvement in cognitive performance when intelligence was 
assessed with the Raven’s standard progressive matrices test, 
which requires deductive reasoning.65 Symptoms of irritation, 
pressure, and fullness in the ears improved as well; however, 
there was no change in perceived hearing loss.
The presence of cerumen may also hinder or prevent visual 
assessment of the ear canal and tympanic membrane. This is 
especially important as it relates to children who present with 
ear-related symptoms and in whom clinicians need to diag-
nose and treat acute otitis media and otitis media with effu-
sion.66 Most studies of interventions to remove cerumen 
impaction do not explicitly describe improved visualization of 
the tympanic membrane as an outcome, although ears may be 
described as “completely cleared.”12,67 One exception is a 
study of emergency room patients aged 1 to 81 years who pre-
sented with suspected ear problems and in whom visualization 
of the tympanic membranes was partially or totally obscured 
by cerumen. After instillation of docusate sodium, followed 
by irrigation if necessary, there was full visualization 81% of 
the time.68
Additionally, as described in key action statement 2A, 
cerumen impaction can interfere with necessary audiometric 
and vestibular testing. Cerumen should be removed in this 
situation.
STATEMENT 3B: NONINTERVENTION IF ASYMP-
TOMATIC: Clinicians should not routinely treat cerumen 
in patients who are asymptomatic and whose ears can be 
adequately examined. Recommendation against based on 
control groups in randomized trials and observational studies 
and a preponderance of benefit over harms.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 3B
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Avoidance of 
harm, efficient use of health care resources (National 
Quality Strategy domains: patient safety and effi-
cient use of health care resources)
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade C, control groups 
in randomized trials and observational studies
 
• Level of confidence in the evidence: Medium
 
• Benefits: Avoid unnecessary treatment with potential 
adverse events and costs
 
• Risks, harms, costs: Potential progression to impac-
tion
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Preponderance of benefit 
over harms
 
• Value judgments: The presence of cerumen is not in 
itself harmful, and it may not progress to impaction; 
in fact, it may resolve spontaneously. If it progresses, 
it can be managed at that time.
 
• Intentional vagueness: The word routinely was added 
to this statement to acknowledge that there may be 
circumstances where cerumen removal may be 
offered anyway, as in a patient with hearing aids.
 
• Role of patient preferences: Substantial role for 
shared decision making. The patient may still opt for 
removal of the cerumen.
 
• Exceptions: Medical reasons for exceptions to this 
statement include, but are not limited to, history of 
recurrent cerumen impaction.
 
• Policy level: Recommendation against
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to affirm that cerumen that is 
not causing symptoms or impeding assessment can safely be 
left alone.
Cerumen is a naturally occurring product of the ear canal 
that serves as a self-cleaning agent with protective, emollient, 
and bactericidal properties.10 The normal lateral migration of 
epithelium in the external auditory canal is responsible for the 
ear’s self-cleaning mechanism. Most cerumen is asymptom-
atic and does not impair necessary physical examination.3 It is 
important that patients understand that cerumen does not 
always need to be removed.
Epithelial cells move off the tympanic membrane and then 
travel down the ear canal toward the meatus of the external 
canal. Cerumen migrates toward the entrance of the canal. 
Foreign bodies, such as dirt, dust, and other small particles, 
adhere to cerumen and are extruded with the cerumen when it 
is cast off from the canal.10 This “conveyor belt” process is an 
ongoing process in most individuals.6
Since cerumen is naturally extruded from the ear canals of 
most people and spontaneous clearing of significant impac-
tions occurs frequently, observation over time can be offered 
as reasonable management. There have only been limited 
studies investigating the outcome of observing cerumen in the 
ear canal. Keane et al performed a small randomized con-
trolled study of the use of solvents to disperse cerumen in the 
impacted ears of general practice patients in Dublin.67 After 5 
days, 5% of patients in the control group demonstrated com-
plete cleaning of the ear and 26%, moderate cleansing, when 
managed with observation alone without any intervention. In 
another study, developmentally delayed individuals in a resi-
dential facility who had 50% to 80% of their external canal 
occluded by cerumen but no related conductive hearing loss 
had no intervention and were examined after a year.11 At the 
follow-up examination, 44% had no cerumen; 53% still had 
the same amount but no conductive hearing loss; and only 3% 
progressed to impaction with associated hearing loss.
Additionally, cerumen affects some but not all diagnostic 
studies of the ear and hearing. Specifically, cerumen does not 
appear to interfere significantly with temperature measure-
ment based on infrared ear devices. In a prospective study of 
333 patients in a Swiss emergency room, cerumen impaction 
was found in 73 of 666 ears examined (11% of ears). Ear tem-
perature measurement increased only 0.2°C after the cerumen 
removal. This difference had no clinically significant effect on 
decision making.46
 Schwartz et al 
S15
While symptomatic cerumen may require intervention, 
cerumen may not affect studies involving the ear. Specifically, 
intervention for cerumen is not necessary for temperature 
measurements.
STATEMENT 3C. NEED FOR INTERVENTION IN 
SPECIAL POPULATIONS: Clinicians should identify 
patients with obstructing cerumen in the ear canal who 
may not be able to express symptoms (young children and 
cognitively impaired children and adults), and they should 
promptly evaluate the need for intervention. Recommenda-
tion based on cohort and observational studies with a prepon-
derance of benefit over harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 3C
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Efficient use 
of health care resources and coordination of care 
(National Quality Strategy domains: care coordina-
tion and efficient use of health care resources)
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade C, cohort and 
observational studies
 
• Level of confidence in the evidence: High
 
• Benefits: Improved hearing and functional health sta-
tus; improved evaluation of external auditory canal, 
tympanic membrane, and middle ear
 
• Risks, harms, costs: Potential overtreatment of ceru-
men that is asymptomatic; evaluation and treatment 
costs; substantial administrative burden in settings 
with a high prevalence of cognitively impaired indi-
viduals, such as nursing homes and institutional 
facilities
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Preponderance of benefit 
over harm
 
• Value judgments: Importance of identifying and 
treating cerumen impaction in special populations
 
• Intentional vagueness: The term young children does 
not specify age but rather indicates children who 
are unable or too immature to express symptoms 
or who fail to disclose real symptoms out of fear of 
treatment. Additionally, the term promptly does not 
specify a time frame but allows for clinical judgment 
regarding how expedient the evaluation should be.
 
• Role of patient preferences: None for the patient but 
moderate for patient advocates
 
• Exceptions: None
 
• Policy level: Recommendation
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to make providers aware of 
patient populations that may not be able to report symptoms 
of cerumen impaction but would benefit from evaluation and 
treatment.
Elderly patients, young children, and the cognitively 
impaired are at high risk for cerumen impaction and may be 
unaware of it or unable to express the symptoms associated 
with it. The hearing loss associated with cerumen impaction 
may further impair cognitive function. Furthermore, cerumen 
may obstruct the examiner’s view of the external auditory 
canal, tympanic membrane, and middle ear, limiting accurate 
diagnosis and treatment of pathology in these areas. It is 
important to educate these patients and their caregivers regard-
ing cerumen impaction and its symptoms, as well as the poten-
tial risks and benefits of cerumen removal. Caregivers may be 
more able to report symptoms to providers than the patients 
themselves.
A higher incidence of cerumen impaction in these popula-
tions is well documented.11,15,18,19,69-72 The specific reasons are 
not clear: they may be related to the size of the external audi-
tory canal in children and the developmentally delayed, or 
they may stem from changes in the skin of the external audi-
tory canal in elderly patients. A study of 107 children with 
Down syndrome who were referred to otolaryngologists 
showed that 39% had stenosis of the external auditory canal 
frequently complicated by cerumen impaction.73 A longitudi-
nal study of 117 developmentally delayed adult patients fol-
lowed over a 12-year period demonstrated a high incidence of 
recurrent cerumen impactions in this population.11 Data on 
recurrence rates are not available for children or elderly 
patients. Some elderly and developmentally delayed patients 
reside in nursing homes or institutions. Cerumen impaction 
rates appear higher for institutionalized patients.15,74 Patients 
in these settings may also suffer more baseline cognitive 
impairment than similar, ambulatory populations.
Impaired cognitive function in the elderly may prevent 
them from recognizing hearing loss or other symptoms and 
may impair their ability to bring symptoms to the attention of 
caregivers. A study screening asymptomatic elderly patients 
admitted to nursing homes15 and one screening 755 asymp-
tomatic developmentally delayed athletes70 found relatively 
high levels of cerumen impaction and significant hearing loss 
in these populations. Small children may also lack the matu-
rity to recognize hearing loss or bring ear problems to the 
attention of their caregivers. Children may also underreport or 
deny symptoms due to fear of examiners or examination. A 
cross-sectional study of nearly a thousand 4- to 5-year-old 
black and India children attending preschools in South Africa 
found that conductive hearing loss from cerumen impaction 
caused >10% of children to fail hearing screening.75
No RCTs have compared hearing in patients in these popu-
lations who have or have not been evaluated and treated for 
cerumen impaction. A case-control study of 226 hospitalized 
elderly patients, with each patient acting as his or her own 
control, demonstrated an incidence of cerumen impaction of 
35% and a statistically significant improvement in hearing 
among those patients who had an impaction removed.19 A sur-
vey study of >14,000 elderly people in England found that 
10% of people who initially failed a hearing screening passed 
after cerumen removal.76 A small cohort study of elderly 
patients admitted to nursing homes found that 65% of patients 
had cerumen impaction and that removal of the cerumen 
resulted in a statistically significant improvement in hearing 
and cognitive function, as demonstrated by a Mini-Mental 
Status Examination.15 However, a strong conclusion cannot be 
 S16  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
made due to a small sample size (N = 29). In addition, there 
are no data on the impact of cerumen-induced hearing loss on 
cognitive function in children.
Cerumen removal in this group of patients can be challeng-
ing. Care must be taken to avoid harm. Use of an assistant may 
be adequate, but in rare circumstances sedation may be needed 
(see key action statement 10).
STATEMENT 4. INTERVENTION IN HEARING AID 
USERS: Clinicians should perform otoscopy to detect the 
presence of cerumen in patients with hearing aids during 
a health care encounter. Recommendation based on cohort 
and observational studies with a preponderance of benefit 
over harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 4
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Effective use 
of health care resources and prevention of prob-
lems with hearing aid use in high-risk populations 
(National Quality Strategy domains: efficient use of 
health care resources and clinical processes/effec-
tiveness)
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade C, observational 
studies
 
• Level of confidence in the evidence: High
 
• Benefits: Prevent hearing aid dysfunction and associ-
ated repair costs
 
• Risks, harms, costs: Overtreatment of asymptomatic 
cerumen
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Preponderance of benefit 
over harm
 
• Value judgments: Cerumen can have a disproportion-
ate effect on patients with hearing aids due to their 
underlying hearing loss and the impact of the ceru-
men on the hearing aids, even if there is not an actual 
impaction.
 
• Intentional vagueness: The term health care encoun-
ter is somewhat vague but is intended to indicate any 
time that a patient with a hearing aid is assessed by a 
health care worker.
 
• Role of patient preferences: Small
 
• Exceptions: None
 
• Policy level: Recommendation
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to make clinicians aware of 
how hearing aids affect cerumen accumulation and impaction 
and how cerumen can impair the functioning of hearing aids.
The normal self-cleaning process of cerumen can be dis-
turbed by the presence of objects such as hearing aids or ear 
plugs.10,77,78 Perry suggested that the presence of foreign 
objects such as hearing aids and ear plugs can cause stimula-
tion of cerumen glands, leading to excessive cerumen produc-
tion and he termed this process “mechanical milking.”78 
Coupled with the obstruction of the lateral canal by the pres-
ence of the aid, hearing aid users are at increased risk for 
cerumen impaction. Furthermore, the combination of cerumen 
impaction and hearing aid use may alter external auditory 
canal bacterial flora to include pathogens that can increase the 
risk of otitis externa.79-81
The clinician should examine patients with hearing aids for 
impacted cerumen during a health care encounter. Examination is 
accomplished by removing the hearing aid and inspecting the ear 
canal with a handheld otoscope or binocular microscope. If the 
patient has bilateral hearing aids, the second ear is examined after 
replacing the first hearing aid to facilitate communication. Users 
of hearing aids should visit a primary care physician or audiolo-
gist any time that a change in performance is noticed.
Cerumen impaction may change hearing aid performance. 
Irrespective of the type of hearing aid being worn, cerumen 
impaction can reduce the intensity of the sound reaching the 
tympanic membrane by as much as 10 to 15 dB in the mid- to 
high frequencies.77 If hearing aid malfunction is suspected, 
then the patient should be referred to an audiologist for formal 
assessment of the hearing aid. In addition, even a partial 
impaction can change the resonance properties of the ear 
canal, reducing mid- and high-frequency perception.82
Current estimates from various hearing aid manufacturers 
indicate that 60% to 70% of all hearing aids sent for repair are 
damaged as a result of contact with cerumen.83 If an in-the-ear 
instrument is utilized, cerumen can enter the vent or receiver. 
The resulting added mass of cerumen on the receiver 
 
diaphragm causes low-output distortion and loss of high- 
frequency response. A more insidious process occurs as the 
acidic compounds within the cerumen slowly deteriorate 
 
the diaphragm suspension, resulting in receiver failure.
Cerumen in the ear canal can cause the hearing aid to fit 
poorly and not seal properly. If the hearing aid fits poorly, 
sound produced by the aid passes around it and out of the ear 
canal, where it is picked up by the microphone and reampli-
fied. A positive feedback loop is created, and audible high-
pitched feedback results. Cerumen removal eliminates 
feedback due to excess cerumen.
The percentage of hearing aid users with impaction is 
higher than the general population. Additionally, the cerumen 
migration is disrupted by the aid, causing the cerumen to be 
trapped and accumulate in the canal. A management proto-
col84 is described in Table 5.
STATEMENT 
5A. 
RECOMMENDED 
INTERVEN-
TIONS: Clinicians should treat, or refer to a clinician 
who can treat, the patient with cerumen impaction with 
an appropriate intervention, which may include ≥1 of 
the following: cerumenolytic agents, irrigation, or man-
ual removal requiring instrumentation. Recommendation 
based on RCTs and observational studies, with a preponder-
ance of benefit over harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 5A
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Engage patient 
and family; promote the use of effective therapy 
(National Quality Strategy domains: patient and fam-
ily engagement and clinical processes/effectiveness)
 Schwartz et al 
S17
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade B, RCTs with 
limitations and cohort studies
 
• Level of confidence in the evidence: High
 
• Benefits: Improved cerumen removal by using effec-
tive therapies and avoiding harm from ineffective or 
untested therapies
 
• Risks, harms, costs: Specific adverse effects related 
to treatments used; no cost associated with the deci-
sion to use appropriate therapy
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Preponderance of benefit 
over harm
 
• Value judgments: Therapy should be effective and 
minimize harm
 
• Intentional vagueness: This does not specify one 
method as superior, as studies have not compared 
them head-to-head and all may be effective.
 
• Role of patient preferences: Large
 
• Exceptions: Irrigation and cerumenolytics should not 
be used in the setting of a nonintact tympanic mem-
brane.
 
• Policy level: Recommendation
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to encourage safe and effec-
tive methods managing impacted cerumen. Details of each 
treatment are enumerated in key action statements 6, 7, and 8.
Appropriate Interventions for Cerumen Impaction. In the symp-
tomatic patient, the goal of intervention is to help alleviate or 
relieve the symptoms (pain, fullness, hearing loss, tinnitus, 
etc). In the asymptomatic patient with impacted cerumen, the 
goal is to allow visualization of the ear canal and the tympanic 
membrane or perform audiometric or vestibular evaluations. 
Several methods for achieving these goals are widely used. 
However, evidence in the literature that clearly identifies the 
superiority of one therapeutic option versus another is 
lacking.
Three effective therapeutic options are widely used: (1) 
irrigation, (2) cerumenolytic agents, and (3) manual removal 
requiring instrumentation. Combining ≥1 of these options on 
the same day or at intervals is routinely used in everyday prac-
tice.85 There are no comparative randomized clinical trials 
addressing the relative effectiveness of the 3 methods.86 Table 
8 gives an overview of these methods in the form of a shared 
decision grid for patients and caregivers.87
Irrigation (also referred to as ear syringing) involves flush-
ing the wax out by a jet of warm water (ideally at body tem-
perature). This is generally safe and effective but does carry 
the small risk of perforation of the eardrum.88 Irrigations 
should be avoided in certain at risk populations (see key action 
statement 2B).
Cerumenolytics, or wax-softening agents, are used to dis-
perse the cerumen and reduce the need for syringing or for 
manual removal of the impaction. Cerumenolytics can be used 
alone or in combination with irrigation or manual removal. A 
Cochrane review demonstrated the effectiveness of ceru-
menolytic drops but did not find any significant difference 
among agents. In fact, none were superior to water.89
Manual removal includes the use of ear curettes, probes, 
hooks, forceps, or microsuction. This method is generally 
safe and effective but can abrade the ear canal. If the suction 
device becomes partially occluded, it can generate excessive 
noise in the ear canal and potentially lead to tinnitus or hear-
ing loss.90
These methods can also be combined to increase effective-
ness. Irrigation or manual removal can be combined with soft-
ening the impacted cerumen. No direct comparison has been 
performed between (1) same-day, in-office softening followed 
by irrigation or manual removal and (2) home softening fol-
lowed by irrigation and manual removal.
Since there is no demonstrated advantage of one method 
over another, the treatment method used should depend on 
 
(1) the available resources, (2) experience of the treating clini-
cian with the available options, (3) the ease with which 
 
the canal can be cleared, and (4) shared decision making. 
Recently, Clegg et al91 performed a systematic review and 
cost-effectiveness analysis of published articles from 2008 to 
2010 on the effectiveness of softening and/or removing ear-
wax in adults and children. They identified 24 studies that met 
their criteria of earwax removal with softening, irrigation, 
mechanical removal, and other methods and combinations of 
these methods. They determined that (1) softening by any 
agent was more effective than no softening for earwax removal 
and (2) removal by a nurse practitioner/professional was bet-
ter than self-irrigation.
Interventions Not Recommended to Treat Cerumen Impaction. 
Interventions that are not appropriate for cerumen removal 
include home use of oral jet irrigators and cotton-tipped 
swabs.92 Removing cerumen with an oral jet irrigator was 
described by Larsen.93 Flared tip and OtoClear Tip are pro-
moted as safer tips to eliminate overinsertion and direct the 
water away from the tympanic membrane, theoretically avoid-
ing the risk of injury by reducing the buildup of pressure caus-
ing damage or pain. Research demonstrating the effectiveness 
of these home therapeutic options is lacking. Expert opinion 
favors the 3 clinician-administered methods discussed above 
as the most safe and effective options.
Expert opinion recommends against the use of cotton-
tipped swabs to remove cerumen from the ear canal, although 
the evidence against it is sparse. The product label of one of 
the leading manufacturers of cotton-tipped swabs specifically 
notes that the product should not be placed into the ear canal. 
The cotton buds at the end of cotton-tipped applicators may 
separate, requiring removal as a foreign body.92 One case 
report did report fatal otogenic meningitis and brain abscess 
due to retained cotton swabs.94
In a prospective study, Lee et al showed that complications 
do arise from self-cleaning of the external auditory canal.42 
Thirty-six percent of the patients cleaned their ears by intro-
ducing a foreign object into the ear. Unfortunately, the 
 S18  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
majority of the patients in that study were not willing to 
change their habits for a safer method of cleaning.
A nonrandomized comparison of earwax removal with a 
“do it yourself” ear vacuum kit versus the conventional man-
ual method of removal by a clinician with a Jobson-Horne 
probe concluded that the probe is significantly more effective 
than an ear vacuum for the removal of earwax.95
The most popular alternative practice for cerumen removal 
is ear candling, also known as “ear coning” or “thermo-auric-
ular therapy.” This is ineffective and potentially dangerous 
and should not be used.96 See key action statement 5B for 
more information.
STATEMENT 5B: CONTRAINDICATED INTERVEN-
TION (EAR CANDLING/CONING): Clinicians should 
recommend against ear candling/coning for treating or 
preventing cerumen impaction. Recommendation against 
based on RCTs and observational studies with a preponder-
ance of benefit over harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 5B
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Reducing harm 
and avoiding ineffective treatments (National Qual-
ity Strategy domain: patient safety and clinical pro-
cesses/effectiveness)
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade C
 
• Level of confidence in evidence: Medium
 
• Benefits: Avoid ineffective therapy; avoid harms; 
cost savings; prevent delay of effective therapy
 
• Risk, harm, cost: None
Table 8. Shared Decision Grid for Patients and Caregivers for Cerumen Management.87
Frequently Asked 
Questions
Observation (KAS 3b)
Cerumenolytic Agents 
(KAS 6)
Irrigation (KAS 7)
Manual Removal (KAS 8)
Are there any age 
restrictions?
No
Yes—not recommended 
for ages <3 years and in 
patients with nonintact 
ear drums
No—but small children may 
be noncooperative
No—but small children may 
be noncooperative
What does it involve?
See provider periodically  
to examine the  
ear canal
Instill several drops of 
earwax-softening 
products once or twice 
daily for 3 to 5 days
Cleaning the ear canal  
with water to flush  
out the earwax
Earwax is removed by 
the clinician inserting 
a curette, forceps, or 
suction tip into the ear, 
dislodging the wax, and 
retracting it
How long does the 
treatment take?
Time to examine the ear 
canal
<5 minutes to instill  
drops
Should not take >30 
minutes (includes 
preparation time)
The procedure takes a few 
minutes and does not 
need anesthesia
What are the benefits?
Reduce unneeded 
treatment
Noninvasive, done at  
home, avoid clinician 
visits
Immediate resolution of 
symptoms caused by the 
cerumen impaction; self-
irrigation can also  
be done at home
Immediate resolution of 
symptoms caused by the 
cerumen impaction
What are the potential 
risks and side effects?
Small amount of cerumen 
could progress to 
impaction
None reported
T
emporary dizziness,  
pain, and/or eardrum 
rupture
Trauma to the ear canal 
skin leading to bleeding 
or infection; discomfort 
from the instruments 
or noise of the suction; 
and/or rare tinnitus or 
hearing loss from the 
noise of the suction
What usually happens in 
the long term?
Nothing
Cerumen may  
reaccumulate and  
require additional 
treatment
Cerumen may  
reaccumulate and  
require additional 
treatment
Cerumen may reaccumulate 
and require additional 
treatment
Are there any special 
precautions?
None at this time
Should seek medical 
attention if excessive  
pain or discomfort  
or loss of hearing is 
noticed
Not recommended for 
patients with pressure 
equalization tubes, 
nonintact eardrum, and 
susceptibility to ear 
infection (see KAS 2B)
Cautious when treating 
patients who are taking 
blood thinners and 
susceptible to bleeding 
easily
Abbreviation: KAS, key action statement.
 Schwartz et al 
S19
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Preponderance of benefit
 
• Value judgments: Strong consensus of the group to 
avoid potentially harmful and costly therapies with 
no proven benefit
 
• Intentional vagueness: None
 
• Role of patient preferences: None
 
• Exclusions: None
 
• Policy level: Recommendation against
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to make practitioners and 
patients aware of the ineffectiveness and risks associated with 
ear candling/coning for cerumen removal.
Ear candling for cerumen removal uses a hollow candle 
that is burned with one end in the ear canal, with the intent of 
displacing cerumen. The procedure can be self-administered 
or performed by an assistant. The candles are made with bees-
wax, honey extract, essential oils, and organic linen.97 A dark 
brown waxy substance purported to be cerumen plus external 
auditory canal debris is left in the stub of the candle. Ear can-
dles have been used in children98 and adults.97,99
Two main theories support candling: (1) the “chimney 
effect”—the burning candle creates a vacuum that draws wax 
out of the ear, along with debris and bacteria; (2) at the time of 
the candling, no earwax is drawn out, but the wax heats up, 
melts, and comes out of the ear over the following few days.99 
The former hypothesis has been assessed with tympanometric 
measurements in an ear canal model.96 That study failed to 
demonstrate that ear candles produced negative pressure. In a 
limited clinical trial, 1 arm showed no removal of cerumen 
from the external auditory canal in 4 ears with cerumen impac-
tions.96 In another arm of this trial, 2 of 4 cerumen-free ears 
were noted to have new deposits after candling. Mass spec-
trography of candling residues showed that, not only are they 
composed of multiple alkanes found in candle wax, but they 
included none of the constituents of cerumen.96
The members of Northwest Academy of Otolaryngology–
Head and Neck Surgery were surveyed about their patients’ 
use of ear candling and whether they had seen any complica-
tions from its use. Of 122 respondents, 40 were aware of its 
use by their patients, and 21 had treated ear injuries associated 
with ear candling.96 Complications of candling include ear 
blockage,97 ear canal burns,96 tympanic membrane perfora-
tion,96,99 conductive hearing loss,99 otitis externa,96 and hair 
fire.96
Because of risks of serious injuries, the Food and Drug 
Administration has issued a warning to consumers to not use 
ear candles.100 The administration has advised that serious 
injuries can occur even when ear candles are used according 
to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
STATEMENT 6. CERUMENOLYTIC AGENTS: Clini-
cians may use cerumenolytic agents (including water or 
saline solution) in the management of cerumen impaction. 
Option based on limited randomized trials, with a balance of 
benefit and harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 6
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Encourage use of 
effective care; promote effective therapy (National 
Quality Strategy domain: clinical processes/effec-
tiveness)
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade C, individual 
treatment arms of randomized trials showing ben-
eficial outcomes, 1 RCT suggesting better outcomes 
over no treatment
 
• Level of confidence in the evidence: High
 
• Benefits: Safe and effective removal of impacted 
cerumen
 
• Risks, harms, costs: Potential external otitis, allergic 
reactions, and otalgia; cost of cerumenolytic agents 
other than water or saline solution, cost of procedure 
if performed in an office setting
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Balance of benefit and 
harm
 
• Value judgments: The panel values cost control and 
safety in view of limited data on absolute and com-
parative efficacy
 
• Intentional vagueness: None
 
• Role of patient preferences: Large role for shared 
decision making
 
• Exceptions: Medical reasons for exceptions to this 
statement include, but are not limited to, persons 
with a history of allergic reactions to any component, 
persons with infection of the ear canal or active der-
matitis, and persons with a nonintact tympanic mem-
brane
 
• Policy level: Option
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to describe the option of 
cerumenolytic agents, which are topical compounds that dis-
integrate earwax, and to review the evidence regarding the 
safety and efficacy of this method for the treatment of 
impacted cerumen.
Topical therapy is commonly used to manage cerumen 
impactions either as a single therapeutic intervention or in 
combination with other techniques, including irrigation of the 
ear canal and manual removal of cerumen. Topical prepara-
tions exist in 3 forms: water based, oil based and nonwater, 
nonoil based (Table 9). Water and water-based agents have a 
cerumenolytic effect by inducing hydration and subsequent 
fragmentation of corneocytes within the cerumen. Oil-based 
preparations lubricate and soften cerumen without disintegrat-
ing cerumen.101 The mechanism by which nonoil-, nonwater-
based eardrops manage cerumen has not been defined by in 
vitro studies.102
Despite the high incidence of cerumen impaction, there is a 
paucity of well-controlled and homogeneous studies of high 
quality on the efficacy of commonly used cerumenolytics, 
either alone or in conjunction with subsequent irrigation for 
this condition. One systematic review and meta-analysis 
 S20  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
evaluated 15 preparations, including saline and plain water, 
and concluded that without syringing, there was weak evi-
dence that both water- and oil-based eardrops were more 
effective than no treatment. Pooled data from this review sug-
gest that longer treatment results in greater success in clearing 
of cerumen.102 A second systematic review, including different 
agents and methods of cerumen removal, found weak evi-
dence suggesting that use of a cerumenolytic agent either 
alone or prior to irrigation was more beneficial than either no 
treatment or irrigation alone in terms of the end result of clear-
ing the cerumen impaction.103 Another review found no ben-
efit of one cerumenolytic agent over another but did suggest 
that use of a cerumenolytic followed by self-irrigation at home 
was the most cost-effective protocol, when compared with 
cerumenolytic plus professional irrigation or no treatment (the 
cost of no treatment was considered to be the hearing loss per-
sisting when untreated).104
A Cochrane review of trials using water- and oil-based 
preparations, almost all of which used irrigation as a second-
ary treatment, concluded that using drops may be preferable to 
irrigation without drops but that no specific agent was supe-
rior to another and none were superior to the much more cost-
effective use of either saline or water.89
In summary, the evidence shows that any type of ceru-
menolytic agent tends to be superior to no treatment but that 
no particular agent is superior to any other. In vitro studies 
support using a true cerumenolytic rather than an oil-based 
lubricant for disintegration of cerumen, with a longer period 
of treatment tending to be more efficacious.
Precautions
Instilling cerumenolytic agents can result in discomfort, tran-
sient hearing loss, dizziness, and skin irritation. Studies evalu-
ating cerumenolytics exclude patients with otitis externa; 
therefore, cerumenolytics should be avoided in patients with 
active infections of the ear canal. Many commercially avail-
able cerumenolytics contain possible skin irritants, and such 
agents should be applied for limited periods. The risk of a 
local skin reaction in response to a cerumenolytic appears to 
be lowest with nonorganic solutions such as saline.
STATEMENT 7. IRRIGATION: Clinicians may use irri-
gation in the management of cerumen impaction. Option 
based on RCTs with heterogeneity and with a balance of ben-
efit and harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 7
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Promote effective 
therapy (National Quality Strategy domain: clinical 
processes/effectiveness)
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade B, 1 RCT veri-
fying absolute efficacy but multiple treatment arms 
of comparative studies verifying benefit over ceru-
menolytic alone
 
• Level of confidence in the evidence: High
 
• Benefits: Resolve cerumen impaction
 
• Risks, harms, costs: External otitis, vertigo, tym-
panic membrane perforation, otalgia, temporal bone 
osteomyelitis; cost of supplies and procedure
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Balance of benefit and 
harm
 
• Value judgments: Panel enthusiasm was tempered by 
the lack of appropriate head-to-head trials comparing 
irrigation with manual removal or cerumenolytics
 
• Intentional vagueness: None
 
• Role of patient preferences: Large
 
• Exceptions: Medical reasons for exceptions to this 
statement include, but are not limited to, patients with 
nonintact tympanic membrane, active dermatitis or 
infection of the ear canal and surrounding tissue, pre-
vious intolerance or adverse reaction to this technique, 
anatomic abnormalities of the ear canal, or history of 
surgery of the ear or ear canal (including ear tubes).
 
• Policy level: Option
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Table 9. Topical Preparations.102
Preparation
Active Constituents
Water based
Acetic acid
Aqueous acetic acid
 
Cerumenex
Triethanolamine polypeptide oleate-condensate
 
Colace
Docusate sodium
 
Hydrogen peroxide
Hydrogen peroxide solution
 
Sodium bicarbonate
Sodium bicarbonate
 
Sterile saline solution
Water
Oil based
Almond oil
Almond oil
 
Arachis oil
Arachis oil
 
Earex
Arachis oil, almond oil, rectified camphor oil
 
Olive oil
Olive oil
 
Mineral oil/liquid petrolatum
Liquid petrolatum
Nonwater, nonoil based
Audax
Choline salicylate, glycerine
 
Debrox
Carbamide peroxide (urea-hydrogen peroxide)
 Schwartz et al 
S21
Supporting Text
Irrigation is another option for managing the patient with 
impacted cerumen. The purpose of this statement is to 
describe the use of aural irrigations for removal of impacted 
cerumen and to summarize the evidence regarding the effi-
cacy and potential risks of this intervention.
Aural irrigation is a widely practiced form of cerumen 
removal and can be performed with a syringe or electronic 
irrigator. While there are no randomized controlled clinical 
trials of aural irrigation versus no treatment, there is general 
consensus that aural irrigation is effective in removing ceru-
men. Manual irrigation performed with a large syringe typi-
cally made out of metal or plastic is the most commonly 
employed method in general practice. The water should be at 
close to body temperature to avoid caloric effects. Sorenson 
and Bonding assessed the pressure developed during routine 
ear syringing and found it safe for normal ears, although there 
is a risk of perforation when the tympanic membrane is 
atrophic.105
A standard oral dental jet irrigator, with or without a spe-
cially modified tip, is commonly used. Electronic irrigators 
specially designed for aural irrigation are also available. These 
irrigators claim to have controlled pressures and specially 
modified tips that make them safer than standard oral jet irri-
gators, but comparative trials are not available to verify this 
assertion. A study by Dinsdale et al suggests that standard oral 
jet irrigators are safe if used at low pressure settings and if the 
jet of water is directed at the ear canal wall and not longitudi-
nally down the ear canal toward the tympanic membrane.88 
The OtoClear safe irrigation system was found to be safe and 
effective in a small sample of children.106 A proprietary sys-
tem for automated irrigation was found to be safe, effective, 
and well tolerated in children and could be utilized by trained 
nurses. However, long-term benefits as compared with no 
treatment were not evaluated in this study.107
Self-irrigation by the patient without health care provider 
involvement may be a cost-effective alternative to profes-
sional intervention. Patients given cerumenolytic drops and 
instructions for home irrigation with a bulb syringe had com-
parable outcomes and satisfaction to those treated in similar 
fashion by a health care provider.108 Furthermore, at 2-year 
follow-up, the self-irrigation group had fewer return visits 
with complaints related to cerumen impaction than did the 
professionally irrigated group,109 suggesting a potential eco-
nomic benefit specific to self-irrigation. Additionally, 1 small 
study suggested that following clearing of cerumen impaction, 
weekly irrigation with 70% isopropyl alcohol resulted in 
fewer cases of recurrent impaction over a 2-month period.110 
This study, however, did not compare the use of alcohol with 
water, a potentially less irritating irrigation solution. The abil-
ity of all patients to do this at home, however, has not been 
demonstrated, and jet irrigators should be avoided for home 
use due to risk of damage to ear structures.111
Systematic reviews of the available evidence suggests that 
pretreatment (15 minutes before irrigation) with an otic drop, 
to soften wax, improves the efficacy of aural irrigation, 
regardless of solution type. Therefore, saline and tap water 
may be as good as specially formulated products.22,89,102
Hearing Outcomes. In uncontrolled studies following aural irriga-
tion of 28 ears with varying levels of occlusion, Mandel et al 
demonstrated that <5-dB improvement in hearing at all frequen-
cies could be expected.106 Other research suggests an average 
5-dB increase in hearing after aural irrigation.9 In contrast, a 
 
single-blind RCT found an average of 10-dB improvement in 
34% of ears that had cerumen removed by aural irrigation versus 
only 1.6% of control ears.60 Furthermore, hearing improvements 
up to 36 dB were observed among subjects in this study.
Harms. The main complications reported after aural irrigation 
are pain, injury to the skin of the ear canal with or without 
hemorrhage, and acute otitis externa. Commonly reported sig-
nificant complications are tympanic membrane perforation 
(0.2%) and vertigo (0.2%).111
Complications were reported in ≥1 patients by 38% of 274 
practitioners who performed aural irrigation for cerumen 
removal.9 Most complications were either relatively minor or 
responded promptly to initial management by the treating 
practitioner. Adverse events included pain, tinnitus, vertigo, 
otitis media, otitis externa, and tympanic membrane perfora-
tion. Several authors have estimated that only 1 in 1000 epi-
sodes of aural irrigation resulted in a complication significantly 
severe to require specialist referral.9,25 Tympanic membrane 
perforation with serious injury to the middle and inner ear is 
rare but has been reported on a number of occasions.9,24,88,112
Modifying Factors. Ear irrigation should not be performed in 
individuals who have a nonintact tympanic membrane or 
those who have had ear surgery, since the tympanic membrane 
may be thinned or atrophic and vulnerable to perforation. 
Since the eardrum is frequently not visualized due to cerumen 
impaction, a detailed history should be obtained prior to the 
decision for irrigation. If a small portion of the drum is visible 
and mobile with pneumatic otoscopy, it is safe to proceed. 
Aural irrigation should be avoided in individuals with ana-
tomic abnormalities of the canal (congenital malformations, 
osteomas, exostoses, scar tissue, etc) that might trap water in 
the external auditory canal after irrigation.
A higher incidence of malignant otitis externa was found 
among diabetic patients following aural irrigation with tap 
water, suggesting that aural irrigation may have caused the 
disease in some of these individuals.49,51 Consequently, aural 
irrigation, especially with water, should be performed with 
caution in diabetic patients. If patients with diabetes have 
cerumen removal by aural irrigation, they should be instructed 
to report the development of otorrhea and/or otalgia promptly. 
Consideration should be given to reacidifying the ear canal 
since the slightly acidic pH of the normal external auditory 
canal may be a significant factor in producing resistance to 
external otitis and/or malignant otitis externa.54 This can be 
done with vinegar or acetic acid drops after treatment. 
Solutions containing alcohol should be avoided unless one 
 S22  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
can be certain that the tympanic membrane is intact. Alcohol 
in the middle ear space is both painful and potentially 
ototoxic.
STATEMENT 8. MANUAL REMOVAL: Clinicians may 
use manual removal requiring instrumentation in the 
management of cerumen impaction. Option based on case 
series and expert opinion with a balance of benefit and harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 8
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Promote effective 
therapy (National Quality Strategy domain: clinical 
processes/effectiveness)
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade C, observational 
case series and expert opinion
 
• Level of confidence in the evidence: High
 
• Benefits: Removal of cerumen impaction under 
direct visualization
 
• Risks, harms, costs: Bleeding, laceration, tympanic 
membrane perforation, otalgia; procedural cost; 
equipment cost
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Balance of benefit and 
harm
 
• Value judgments: Recommendation acknowledges 
widespread practice of manual removal, but this is 
tempered by the relative absence of evidence.
 
• Intentional vagueness: None
 
• Role of patient preferences: Large
 
• Exceptions: None
 
• Policy level: Option
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to describe manual removal 
as an option for cerumen impaction treatment.
Advantages of manual removal are that it is often quicker, 
allows direct visualization of the external auditory canal, and 
does not expose the ear to moisture. Manual removal requires 
adequate illumination, visualization, instrumentation, and 
competence in performing the procedure. Direct visualization 
of the ear canal throughout the process allows assessment of 
when removal of the cerumen impaction is complete.113
A handheld speculum or otoscope, a headlamp or head mirror, 
or the binocular microscope are all appropriate instruments for 
visualization. The binocular microscope offers the advantage of 
stereoscopic magnification.4 Instruments used for removal 
include a metal or plastic curette loop or spoon, an alligator or 
cup forceps, a right-angled hook, a straight applicator with 
applied wisps of cotton wool, angulated suction tips (French size 
3, 5, 7), and a Jobson-Horne probe.95 Wax, which has a softer 
consistency, can sometimes be wiped out with cotton wool 
applied to an applicator or aspirated with a suction tip attached to 
a negative-pressure pump. The use of cerumenolytic agents dur-
ing the week prior to the office visit can reduce potential side 
effects of suction removal, such as pain or vertigo.114
Manual removal of cerumen is often preferred in patients 
with abnormal otologic findings (eg, obstructing exostoses), 
recent ear surgery, or systemic illness that may compromise 
immunity or make them more prone to infection (eg, diabe-
tes). Patients with perforation of the tympanic membrane or 
with a patent pressure-equalizing tube are at risk for develop-
ing suppurative otitis media should irrigation or cerumeno-
lytic agents enter the middle ear. The tympanic membrane 
may also be attenuated in patients who have had previous ear 
surgery, placing them at greater risk of a pressure-induced per-
foration from irrigation.
Adequate training, experience, and availability of appro-
priate equipment will minimize the risk of adverse events and 
maximize the likelihood of successful cerumen removal.
Harms. Trauma to the external auditory canal (including pain 
and/or bleeding), perforation of the tympanic membrane, and, 
rarely, infection have been reported. Suctioning the ear canal 
can produce noises that are quite loud and may startle the 
patient. Although no demonstrable shifts in auditory thresh-
olds have been noted in a prospective controlled series,115 
practitioners should be aware that the noise levels generated 
during suctioning of the canal can reach levels that may be 
unsafe. Suctioning may create a cooling effect and elicit a 
caloric response from the inner ear, causing nystagmus and 
vertigo.
STATEMENT 9. OUTCOMES ASSESSMENT: Clinicians 
should assess patients at the conclusion of in-office treat-
ment of cerumen impaction and document the resolution 
of impaction. If the impaction is not resolved, the clinician 
should use additional treatment. If full or partial symp-
toms persist despite resolution of impaction, the clinician 
should evaluate the patient for alternative diagnoses. Rec-
ommendation based on RCTs with limitations (supporting a 
failure of clearance of cerumen in some cases) and with a pre-
ponderance of benefit over harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 9
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Ensuring effec-
tiveness of treatment to optimize patient outcomes 
and ensuring accurate diagnosis of cause of symp-
toms (National Quality Strategy domain: clinical 
processes/effectiveness)
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade C. Observation 
in treatment arms of several randomized trials show 
that retreatment is sometimes necessary and can be 
effective; first principles support evaluation for effi-
cacy after treatment.
 
• Level of confidence in the evidence: High
 
• Benefits: Detect complications; encourage proper 
diagnosis; ensure effective therapy
 
• Risks, harms, costs: See sections on individual treat-
ments; cost of additional treatment or evaluation
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Preponderance of benefit 
over harm
 
• Value judgments: Importance of clinician assessment 
after treatment; avoid misdiagnosis
 Schwartz et al 
S23
 
• Intentional vagueness: The term additional treatment 
does not specify what type of treatment. Additional 
treatment can include repeating the same treatment 
or trying an alternative method (ie, manual removal 
if irrigation was tried first or use of softening agents 
if not used initially)
 
• Role of patient preferences: Small
 
• Exceptions: None
 
• Policy level: Recommendation
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to ensure that treatment for 
cerumen impaction is effective, that complications are recog-
nized immediately, and that alternative diagnoses are sought 
if presenting symptoms are not resolved.
Trials indicate that in-office treatment of cerumen impac-
tion is variably effective.102 Recent trials showed the effec-
tiveness of the various treatments ranging from 65% to 90% 
.110,114,116 Even in manual removal with microsuction, nearly 
10% of attempts at removal were unsuccessful.114 With irriga-
tion, the success rates were lower and lacked direct visualiza-
tion of the cerumen being removed. Direct assessment is 
required to confirm effective treatment.
Additionally, symptoms of cerumen impaction—including 
hearing loss, tinnitus, fullness, itching, otalgia, and occasionally 
cough—may overlap with many other conditions. To ascertain 
whether symptoms were in fact due to cerumen, reevaluation of 
the patient is necessary after the impaction has been resolved. 
Outcome assessment requires (1) examination of the ear and (2) 
patient assessment for symptom resolution. Both these steps 
require collection and interpretation of clinical data, and depend-
ing on state laws governing scope of practice, the posttreatment 
evaluation may be performed by a physician, an audiologist, an 
advanced practice nurse, a physician assistant, or a registered 
nurse. The laws governing scope of practice for medical assis-
tants vary by state and therefore should be referenced before del-
egating the posttreatment assessment to a medical assistant.117
Posttreatment evaluation to assess complications related to the 
removal procedure is important for patient safety and medicole-
gal purposes.118 While the techniques for cerumen removal are 
generally safe, these procedures have been associated with otitis 
externa, bleeding, pain, dizziness, syncope, tinnitus, and tym-
panic membrane perforation.9,104 For these reasons, the results of 
both the posttreatment otoscopic examination and symptom 
assessment should be documented in the medical record.
The impaction is resolved when (1) the clinician can exam-
ine the ear or perform the appropriate testing without the inter-
ference of cerumen and (2) associated symptoms have 
resolved. If cerumen has been adequately removed but symp-
toms persist, the clinician should consider alternative diagno-
ses: sensorineural hearing loss, conductive hearing loss due to 
other disorders (eg, serous otitis media, otosclerosis, choles-
teatoma), otitis media, medication side effects, head and neck 
tumors, temporomandibular joint syndrome, upper respiratory 
infections, eustachian tube dysfunction, or disorders of the 
skin of the canal.
If the cerumen cannot be adequately removed to resolve 
symptoms or perform the desired testing, additional treatment 
should be prescribed (see key action statement 5A and sup-
porting text). This may include repeating the initial treatment 
but with an alternative treatment method or strategy (eg, soft-
ening agents before repeating manual removal). If the treating 
provider cannot clear the impaction safely and without signifi-
cant discomfort, he or she should refer the patient to a pro-
vider who has the necessary skills or equipment for proper 
treatment (see key action statement 10: referral and coordina-
tion of care).
STATEMENT 10. REFERRAL AND COORDINATION 
OF CARE: If initial management is unsuccessful, clinicians 
should refer patients with persistent cerumen impaction to 
clinicians who have specialized equipment and training to 
clean and evaluate ear canals and tympanic membranes. 
Recommendation based on individual arms of randomized tri-
als and preponderance of benefit over harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 10
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Coordination of 
care and effective treatment (National Quality Strat-
egy domains: care coordination and clinical pro-
cesses/effectiveness)
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade C, individual 
arms of randomized trials
 
• Level of confidence in evidence: High
 
• Benefits: Promote successful removal of cerumen 
impaction; timely coordination of care; avoidance 
of harm from repeated unsuccessful interventions; 
avoid patient and clinician frustration; avoiding mis-
diagnosis
 
• Risk, harm, cost: Cost of additional care; limited 
access to specialty care
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Preponderance of benefit
 
• Value judgments: Skill and instruments will promote 
a better outcome. The level of care that can be ren-
dered can be limited by the available equipment and 
training.
 
• Intentional vagueness: The specialized equipment 
and training are vague but may include access to 
binocular microscopy, suction, microinstruments, or 
the operating room. Type of training is not specified, 
but this refers to someone with advanced capabilities 
of removing cerumen. Unsuccessful treatment may 
entail a repeat visit or multiple treatments by the ini-
tial clinician to allow for use of softening agents or 
spontaneous improvement of impacted cerumen.
 
• Role of patient preferences: Small
 
• Exclusions: None
 
• Policy level: Recommendation
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to encourage clinicians to 
refer patients with refractory cerumen impaction to another 
 S24  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
practitioner with higher-level skills and equipment when ini-
tial attempts to resolve cerumen impaction are unsuccessful.
Initial management of cerumen impactions through irriga-
tion, manual removal, or cerumenolytics is not always suc-
cessful. The range of success in resolving cerumen impactions 
with irrigation has been reported to be 68% to 92% . The suc-
cess rates for manual removal with a binocular microscope for 
visualization are around 90%, with no reported canal trauma 
or perforations in 1 study of 159 patients.107 However, in a 
primary care or pediatric setting, visualization for manual 
removal is often provided by a handheld otoscope. No pub-
lished studies have reported success rates of manual removal 
with a handheld otoscope for visualization, but they are likely 
to be considerably lower.104,107 The success rates for ceru-
menolytics alone are lower still.
As detailed earlier in the guideline, when initial attempts 
are unsuccessful, an alternative strategy or combination of 
multiple treatments should be attempted (eg, adding a ceru-
menolytic and then repeating irrigation or manual removal). 
Cerumenolytics used as a softening agent may even improve 
the tolerability of subsequent attempts at cerumen removal.
When repeated attempts are made, complications occur, 
and patient intolerance may prevent further attempts. In 1 
study, 38% of general practitioners reported having seen a 
complication related to irrigation, including tympanic mem-
brane perforation, otitis externa, injury to the external ear 
canal, and otitis media.9 Avoiding adverse outcomes and mini-
mizing patient discomfort after initial attempts to treat a ceru-
men impaction requires recognizing when primary attempts 
are unsuccessful. When (1) repeated attempts are still unsuc-
cessful, (2) complications are encountered, (3) the patient is 
no longer tolerating efforts to clear the cerumen, or (4) at any 
point the treating clinician no longer feels comfortable mak-
ing further (or even initial) attempts, he or she should refer the 
patient to a clinician with access to specialized equipment and 
with experience in treating refractory cerumen impactions.
Specialized equipment for cerumen removal consists of (1) 
a microscope or otoendoscope for visualization and (2) aural 
microsuction or otologic instruments for cerumen removal. 
Generally, these are available through an otolaryngologist, but 
there may be other clinicians with this equipment and the 
skills to use.
In rare instances, after multiple failed efforts to clear ceru-
men or for patients who are unable to tolerate removal, seda-
tion or general anesthesia may be needed. Mild sedation or 
anxiolytics may be adequate for some patients. Cerumen 
removal with otomicrosopy under general anesthesia should 
also be considered for pediatric patients and patients with 
developmental delay who will not tolerate cerumen removal 
in the clinic. Specific situations that would warrant the use of 
general anesthesia include concern for significant abnormali-
ties (ie, tympanic membrane perforation, cholesteatoma, and 
retained foreign body), persistent hearing loss in a speech-
delayed or developmentally delayed child, and coordination 
of cerumen removal with hearing assessment under anesthesia 
(ie, brainstem auditory evoked response).
STATEMENT 11. SECONDARY PREVENTION: Clini-
cians may educate/counsel patients with cerumen impac-
tion or excessive cerumen regarding control measures. 
Option based on survey and comparative studies with unclear 
balance of benefit vs harm.
Action Statement Profile for Statement 11
 
• Quality improvement opportunity: Patient and fam-
ily engagement (National Quality Strategy domain: 
patient and family engagement)
 
• Aggregate evidence quality: Grade C; observational 
studies, experimental pilot studies, and expert opin-
ion
 
• Level of confidence in the evidence: High
 
• Benefits: Prevent development of cerumen impac-
tion or recurrent cerumen impaction
 
• Risks, harms, costs: Time for counseling and poten-
tial risk of preventive measures if used
 
• Benefit-harm assessment: Balance benefit over harm
 
• Value judgments: Importance of prevention in man-
aging patients with cerumen impaction
 
• Intentional vagueness: The term excessive cerumen 
is used to indicate when cerumen is present but not 
actively causing symptoms, to allow the clinician 
freedom to counsel patients who appear to be at risk 
for cerumen impaction even when the ear is not actu-
ally impacted.
 
• Role of patient preferences: Large, opportunities for 
shared decision making
 
• Exceptions: None
 
• Policy level: Option
 
• Differences of opinion: None
Supporting Text
The purpose of this statement is to inform clinicians of control 
measures that patients can use to prevent recurrence of ceru-
men impaction following removal in the office and to prevent 
an accumulation of cerumen from becoming impacted.
Although empirical evidence supporting measures to 
reduce the recurrence of cerumen impaction is limited, clini-
cians have the opportunity to counsel patients on the risks and 
potential benefits of specific control measures. Measures that 
may be beneficial in reducing cerumen impaction include (1) 
instilling prophylactic topical preparations, (2) irrigating the 
ear canal, (3) cleaning hearing aids, or (4) routine cleaning of 
the ear canal by a clinician. It has been suggested that patients 
with an increased propensity for cerumen production might 
benefit from regular ear care to reduce the risk of developing 
an impaction.10 Patients can purchase wax-softening drops or 
home irrigation kits as part of an ear hygiene regimen to help 
prevent recurrence of cerumen occlusions.119 Cerumen accu-
mulation and impaction may be exacerbated by the use of 
hearing aids.37,39 Thus, it is important to provide instructions 
on proper care and routine cleaning of aids (Table 5).
Choices regarding topical preparations and devices for irri-
gating the ears should be shared with the patient, allowing for 
 Schwartz et al 
S25
substantial patient preference and discussion of cost factors in 
determining treatment options. Studies of preventive mea-
sures have shown mixed results. One study in 50 patients >50 
years of age with bilateral occluding cerumen examined the 
effect of daily olive oil spray in the external ear canal to deter-
mine if this reduced cerumen accumulation.120 Each patient 
had 1 treated ear and 1 control ear. Ear canal contents were 
weighed prior to any treatment and again at 8, 16, and 24 
weeks. Treated ears actually had heavier contents than control 
ears. This may be the result of the added oil. A randomized 
prospective study evaluated the use of a prophylactic topical 
emollient preparation in preventing or reducing the recurrence 
of cerumen impaction.121 Thirty-nine adults and children with 
completely impacted ear canals were randomly assigned to 
either an intervention group or a control group (regular care) 
after removal of the cerumen and were followed prospectively 
for 12 months. Cerumen impaction recurred in 1 or both ears 
in only 23% of intervention patients versus 61% of the control 
patients, a significant difference between groups. A high 
patient attrition rate, particularly in the intervention group, 
dampens enthusiasm for results of this study.
Self-irrigation is another option to reduce earwax accumu-
lation. A randomized trial with 237 symptomatic patients with 
cerumen occlusions found that ear irrigation with bulb 
syringes significantly reduced self-reported symptoms. Fewer 
than half (49%) of treated patients needed reirrigation by the 
nurse for cerumen removal.108 In a retrospective chart 
review109 of these same 237 patients 2 years later, 73% of 
patients in the control group (ear drops only) had been treated 
in the office for episodes of earwax occlusion, compared with 
60% of those in the intervention group (ear drops and irriga-
tions with bulb syringes). This represents a statistically sig-
nificant difference (P = .038). In addition, patients in the 
self-treatment bulb syringe irrigation group required about 
half the rate of irrigation consultations by the nurse as com-
pared with the control group.109 Based on these 2 studies, 
patients may reduce symptoms from cerumen impaction and 
need for intervention by performing self-irrigations with bulb 
syringes at home.
In a prospective crossover pilot study, 20 adults with a his-
tory of cerumen impaction received cerumenectomy in the 
office and were then randomly assigned to 1 of 2 groups to 
evaluate the safety and efficacy of once-weekly ear irrigations 
with 70% isopropyl alcohol. Group 1 performed the weekly 
irrigations on their ears for 2 months, followed by 2 months of 
no ear cleaning. Group 2 did the same protocol in reverse. At 
the end of 2 months, both groups were evaluated for cerumen 
occlusion. Those who had performed once-weekly ear irriga-
tions had significantly less accumulation of cerumen than 
patients who did not. There was also a significant difference is 
cerumen occlusion when the weekly ear irrigations were 
stopped for 2 months.110 Findings from this pilot study suggest 
that once-weekly ear irrigations with isopropyl alcohol may 
help prevent recurrence of cerumen occlusions. A larger trial 
is needed to confirm these results.
Currently, there is no standard protocol for self-irriga-
tion of ears based on the efficacy and safety of irrigation 
solutions, delivery devices, or frequency of regimen. 
Studies evaluating the benefits as well as the harms associ-
ated with specific interventions designed to prevent or 
reduce cerumen impaction are very limited. The clinician 
may discuss the various methods for self-treatment of ceru-
men accumulation at home, including self-irrigation, use of 
ear drop softeners, and proper ear hygiene regimens. 
Patients interested in these approaches should be properly 
trained to do them safely. Table 10 provides options to 
help reduce earwax.
Implementation Considerations
The complete guideline is published as a supplement to 
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery to facilitate refer-
ence and distribution. A full-text version of the guideline will 
also be accessible free of charge at the www.entnet.org, the 
AAO-HNSF website. Existing brochures and publications 
by the AAO-HNSF will be updated to reflect the guideline 
recommendations.
An anticipated barrier to diagnosis is distinguishing modi-
fying factors for cerumen impaction in a busy clinical setting. 
This will be addressed with a laminated teaching card or visual 
aid summarizing important factors that modify management. 
Laminated cards will be available for purchase through 
Guideline Central.
An anticipated barrier to the “observation option” for non-
impacted cerumen is patient and clinician reluctance to not 
intervene when cerumen is observed. This barrier can be over-
come with educational pamphlets and information sheets that 
outline the favorable natural history of nonimpacted cerumen, 
the moderate incremental benefit of removal on clinical 
 
Table 10. Options to Help Reduce Earwax.
Secondary prevention choices
Alcohol or hydrogen peroxide drops or irrigation
 
T
opical earwax-softening agents
 
Irrigation with bulb syringe or irrigation kits
 
Checking of the ear canal for cerumen by clinician in hearing aid users
 
Physically removing wax by health care provider
Not advised
Daily olive oil drops or sprays
 
Ear candling
 
Probing ears with foreign objects (eg, cotton-tipped swaps, pens/pen tops, paper clips)
 S26  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
outcomes, the potential adverse effects of treatment, and the 
benefits of cerumen for a healthy ear canal.
Prompt evaluation of special populations may be hindered 
by the high prevalence of cerumen impaction in these popula-
tions and additional treatment time that may be necessary in 
busy practice settings. Information sheets outlining the high 
prevalence and potential morbidity of cerumen impaction in 
these populations may increase awareness and willingness to 
manage this problem.
Performance of irrigation and instrument removal other 
than irrigation, when appropriate, may be hindered by access 
to equipment and by procedural cost. Last, successfully 
achieving an understanding of the lack of efficacy and poten-
tial harms of ear candling, a popular alternative therapy, will 
require patient and clinician access to education materials. 
Pamphlets may help in dispelling myths about comparative 
efficacy.
Research Needs
While there is a body of literature from which these guide-
lines were drawn, significant gaps in our knowledge about 
cerumen impaction and its management remain. The guide-
line committee identified several areas where further research 
would improve the ability of clinicians to optimally manage 
patients.
1. Establish a universal definition of cerumen impac-
tion to make comparisons of management strategies 
more meaningful.
2. Assess the natural history of cerumen impactions by 
performing observational studies in untreated popu-
lations, including the elderly, children, and develop-
mentally delayed patients.
3. Conduct studies assessing the role of preventive 
measures, such as emollients and ear hygiene, on the 
development of cerumen impactions.
4. Assess the various methods of cerumen removal, 
either as single interventions or combined interven-
tions, through well-designed large-scale RCTs.
5. Determine the efficacy of manual removal of ceru-
men through prospective studies.
6. Assess comparative impact of different cerumeno-
lytic agents through well-designed clinical trials.
7. Evaluate the efficacy of prophylactic topical antibi-
otics in preventing otitis externa when local trauma 
occurs during cerumen removal.
8. Conduct a financial analysis comparing the various 
methods of cerumen management
9. Determine the relative efficacy of cerumenolytic 
agents and irrigation for adult, elderly, and pediatric 
patients and for patients at high risk for complica-
tions related to cerumen removal due to underlying 
conditions (ie, diabetes, coagulopathies)
10. Evaluate the impact of cerumen removal on the res-
olution of symptoms, such as itching, hearing loss, 
pain, fullness, tinnitus, and vertigo, through pro-
spective clinical studies.
11. Establish that studies evaluating cerumen removal 
should document adverse events
12. Assess variation in outcomes for cerumen removal 
relative to the type of health care provider managing 
the patient (ie, nurse, physician assistant, physician, 
medical assistant)
13. Conduct financial analyses of the relative costs for 
cerumen management when performed by different 
types of health care providers
Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the support of Janene Batten, MLS, for 
her assistance with the literature searches. In addition, we acknowl-
edge the work of the original guideline development group, which 
includes Peter S. Roland, MD; Timothy L. Smith, MD, MPH; Seth 
R. Schwartz, MD, MPH; Richard M. Rosenfeld, MD, MPH; 
Bopanna Ballachanda, PhD; Jerry M. Earll, MD; Jose Fayad, MD; 
Allen D. Harlor Jr, MD; Barry E. Hirsch, MD; Stacie S. Jones, MPH; 
Helene J. Krouse, PhD, RN; Anthony Magit, MD, MPH; Carrie 
Nelson, MD, MS; David R. Stutz, MD; Stephen Wetmore, MD, 
MBA.
Author Contributions
Seth R. Schwartz, chair, writer; Anthony E. Magit, assistant chair, 
writer; Richard M. Rosenfeld, methodologist, writer; Bopanna B. 
Ballachanda, panel member, writer; Jesse M. Hackell, panel mem-
ber, writer; Helene J. Krouse, panel member, writer; Claire M. 
Lawlor, panel member, writer; Kenneth Lin, panel member, writer; 
Kourosh Parham, panel member, writer; David R. Stutz, panel 
member, writer; Sandy Walsh, panel member, writer; Erika A. 
Woodson, panel member, writer; Ken Yanagisawa, panel member, 
writer; Eugene R. Cunningham Jr, AAO-HNSF staff liaison, 
writer.
Disclosures
Competing interests: Bopanna B. Ballachanda, chief of Audiology 
and consultant for Audiology Management Group; Jesse M. Hackell, 
shareholder of Pfizer and GSK, expert witness, medical malpractice 
consultant; Helene J. Krouse, AAO-HNSF journal editor, spouse on 
AAO-HNSF Board of Directors, Sohn research funding; Erika A. 
Woodson, consultant for Oticon Medical, speaker honoraria for 
CitiGroup; Eugene R. Cunningham Jr, salaried employee of 
AAO-HNSF.
Sponsorship: AAO-HNSF.
Funding source: AAO-HNSF.
References
 1. Roland PS, Smith TL, Schwartz SR, et al. Clinical practice 
guideline: cerumen impaction. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
2008;139:S1-S21.
 2. Institute of Medicine Committee on Standards for Developing 
Trustworthy Guidelines. Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can 
Trust. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2011.
 3. Guest JF, Greener MJ, Robinson AC, et al. Impacted cerumen: 
composition, production, epidemiology and management. Q J 
Med. 2004;97:477-488.
 4. McCarter DF, Courtney AU, Pollart SM. Cerumen impaction. 
Am Fam Physician. 2007;75:1523-1530.
 Schwartz et al 
S27
 5. Burton MJ, Doree CJ. Ear drops for the removal of earwax. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(3):CD004400.
 6. Alberti PW. Epithelial migration on the tympanic membrane. 
 
J Laryngol Otol. 1964;78:808-830.
 7. Rosenfeld RM. A Parent’s Guide to Ear Tubes. Hamilton, 
 
Canada: BC Decker Inc; 2005.
 8. Yanagisawa Image Library. Otoscopic view of impacted 
 
cerumen [image]. Alexandria, VA: American Academy of 
 
Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery Foundation; 2015.
 9. Sharp JF, Wilson JA, Ross L, et al. Earwax removal: a survey of 
current practice. BMJ. 1990;301:1251-1253.
 
10. Roeser RJ, Ballachanda BB. Physiology, pathophysiology, and 
anthropology/epidemiology of human ear canal secretions. J Am 
Acad Audiol. 1997;8:391-400.
 
11. Crandell CC, Roeser RJ. Incidence of excessive/impacted ceru-
men in individuals with mental retardation: a longitudinal inves-
tigation. Am J Ment Retard. 1993;97:568-574.
 
12. Eekhof JA, de Bock GH, Le Cessie S, et al. A quasi-randomised 
controlled trial of water as a quick softening agent of persistent 
earwax in general practice. Br J Gen Pract. 2001;51:635-637.
 
13. Garahan MB, Waller JA, Houghton M, et al. Hearing loss preva-
lence and management in nursing home residents. J Am Geriatr 
Soc. 1992;40:130-134.
 
14. Yang EL, Macy TM, Wang KH, et al. Cost burden of cerumen 
extraction in Medicare beneficiaries. JAMA Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg. 2016;142:157-161.
 
15. Moore A, Voytas J, Kowalski D, et al. Cerumen, hearing and 
cognition in the elderly. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2002;3:136-139.
 
16. Society of Otorhinolaryngology and Head-Neck Nurses. Prac-
tice guidelines: cerumen/foreign body. ORL Head Neck Nurs. 
1995;13:29.
 
17. Mitka M. Cerumen removal guidelines wax practical. JAMA. 
2008;300:1506.
 
18. Mahoney DF. Cerumen impaction: prevalence and detection in 
nursing homes. J Gerontol Nurs. 1993;19:23-30.
 
19. Lewis-Cullinan C, Janken JK. Effect of cerumen removal on the 
hearing ability of geriatric patients. J Adv Nurs. 1990;15:594-600.
 
20. Karlsmose B, Lauritzen T, Engberg M, et al. A randomised con-
trolled trial of screening for adult hearing loss during preventive 
health checks. Br J Gen Pract. 2001;51:351-355.
 
21. Kozin ED, Sethi RK, Remenschneider AK, et al. Epidemiology 
of otologic diagnoses in United States emergency departments 
[published online February 20, 2015]. Laryngoscope.
 
22. Browning G, Earwax. BMJ Clin Evid. 2006;10:504.
 
23. Freeman RB. Impacted cerumen: how to safely remove earwax 
in an office visit. Geriatrics. 1995;50:52-53.
 
24. Bapat U, Nia J, Bance M. Severe audiovestibular loss following ear 
syringing for wax removal. J Laryngol Otol. 2001;115:410-411.
 
25. Bird S. The potential pitfalls of ear syringing: minimising the 
risks. Aust Fam Physician. 2003;32:150-151.
 
26. Prasad KS. Cardiac depression on syringing the ear. J Laryngol 
Otol. 1984;98:1013.
 
27. Rosenfeld RM, Shiffman RN, Robertson P, et al. Clinical prac-
tice guideline development manual, third edition: a quality-
driven approach for translating evidence into action. Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg. 2013;148(1):S1-S55.
 
28. Shiffman RN, Dixon J, Brandt C, et al. The GuideLine Imple-
mentability Appraisal (GLIA): development of an instrument 
to identify obstacles to guideline implementation. BMC Med 
Inform Decis. 2005;5:23.
 
29. American Academy of Pediatrics Steering Committee on Quality 
Improvement and Management. Classifying recommendations 
for clinical practice guidelines. Pediatrics. 2004;114:874-877.
 
30. Eddy DM. A Manual for Assessing Health Practices and Design-
ing Practice Policies: The Explicit Approach. Philadelphia, PA: 
American College of Physicians; 1992.
 
31. Choudhry NK, Stelfox HT, Detsky AS. Relationships between 
authors of clinical practice guidelines and the pharmaceutical 
industry. JAMA. 2002;287:612-617.
 
32. Detsky AS. Sources of bias for authors of clinical practice guide-
lines. CMAJ. 2006;175:1033, 35.
 
33. US Department of Health and Human Services. 2012 annual 
progress report to Congress: national strategy for quality 
improvement in health care.http://www.ahrq.gov/workingfor 
quality/nqs/nqs2012annlrpt.pdf. Published May 2014. Accessed 
August 8, 2015.
 
34. Afolabi AO, Kodiya AM, Bakari A, et al. Attitude of self ear 
cleaning in Black Africans: any benefit? East African Journal of 
Public Health. 2009;6:43-46.
 
35. Olaosun AO. Self-ear-cleaning among educated young adults in 
Nigeria. J Family Med Prim Care. 2014;3:17-21.
 
36. Adegbiji WA, Alabi BS, Olajuvin OA, et al. Earwax impaction: 
symptoms, predisposing factors and perceptions among Nigeri-
ans. J Family Med Prim Care. 2014;3:379-382.
 
37. Stone CM. Preventing cerumen impaction in nursing facility 
residents. J Gerontol Nurs. 1999;25:43-45.
 
38. Ney DF. Cerumen impaction, ear hygiene practices, and hearing 
acuity. Geriatric Nurs. 1993;14:70-73.
 
39. Williams D. Does irrigation of the ear to remove impacted wax 
improve hearing? Br J Community Nurs. 2005;10:228-232.
 
40. Baxter P. Association between use of cotton tipped swabs and 
cerumen plugs. Br Med J. 1983;287:1260.
 
41. Tonga A. What health professionals at the Jos University teach-
ing hospital insert in their ears. Niger J Med. 2013;22:109-112.
 
42. Lee IM, Govindaraju R, Hon SK. Cotton bud and ear cleaning: a 
loose tip cotton bud? Med J Malaysia. 2005;60:85-88.
 
43. Coppin R, Wicke D, Mehta R, et al. Management of earwax in 
primary care—postal survey of UK GPs and practice nurses. 
Fam Pract. 2004;21:413-414.
 
44. Sugiura S, Yasue M, Sakurai T, et al. Effect of cerumen impac-
tion on hearing and cognitive functions in Japanese older adults 
with cognitive impairment. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2014;14(suppl 
2):56-61.
 
45. Schwartz RH, Rodriguez WJ, McAveney W, et al. Cerumen 
removal: how necessary is it to diagnose acute otitis media? Am 
J Dis Child. 1983;137:1064-1065.
 
46. Twerenbold R, Zehnder A, Breidthardt T, et al. Limitations of 
infrared ear temperature measurement in clinical practice. Swiss 
Med Wkly. 2010;140:w13131.
 
47. Yildirim M, Yorgancilar E, Gun R, et al. Ectodermal dyspla-
sia: otolaryngologic evaluation of 23 cases. Ear Nose Throat J. 
2012;91:E28-E33.
 S28  
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 156(1S)
 
48. Rubin J, Yu VL. Malignant external otitis: insights into patho-
genesis, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and therapy. Am J 
Med. 1988;85:391-398.
 
49. Rubin J, Yu VL, Kamerer DB, et al. Aural irrigation with water: a 
potential pathogenic mechanism for inducing malignant external 
otitis? Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 1990;99:117-119.
 
50. Ford GR, Courteney-Harris RG. Another hazard of ear syring-
ing: malignant external otitis. J Laryngol Otol. 1990;104:709-
710.
 
51. Zikk D, Rapoport Y, Himelfarb MZ. Invasive external otitis 
after removal of impacted cerumen by irrigation. N Engl J Med. 
1991;325:969-970.
 
52. Ress BD, Luntz M, Telischi FF, et al. Necrotizing external otitis 
in patients with AIDS. Laryngoscope. 1997;107:456-460.
 
53. Weinroth SE, Schessel D, Tuazon CU. Malignant otitis externa 
in AIDS patients: case report and review of the literature. Ear 
Nose Throat J. 1994;73:772-774, 777-778.
 
54. Driscoll PV, Ramachandrula A, Drezner DA, et al. Charac-
teristics of cerumen in diabetic patients: a key to understand-
ing malignant external otitis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
1993;109:676-679.
 
55. Smouha E, Karmody C. Non-osteitic complications of therapeu-
tic radiation to the temporal bone. Am J Otol. 1995;16:83-87.
 
56. Sharon J, Khwaja S, Drescher A, et al. Osteoradionecrosis of the 
temporal bone: a case series. Otol Neurotol. 2014;35:1207-1217.
 
57. Phillips D, Njoku I, Brown K, et al. Radiation-induced necrosis 
of the temporal bone: diagnosis and management. Otol Neurotol. 
2015;36:1374-1377.
 
58. Sheehy JL. Diffuse exostoses and osteomata of the external audi-
tory canal: a report of 100 operations. Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg. 1982;90:337-342.
 
59. Kemink JL, Graham MD. Osteomas and exostoses of the exter-
nal auditory canal: medical and surgical management. J Otolar-
yngol. 1982;11:101-106.
 
60. Memel D, Langley C, Watkins C, et al. Effectiveness of ear 
syringing in general practice: a randomised controlled trial and 
patients’ experiences. Br J Gen Pract. 2002;52:906-911.
 
61. Al Khabori M, Khandekar R. Unilateral hearing impairment 
in Oman: a community-based cross-sectional study. Ear Nose 
Throat J. 2007;86(5):274, 277-280.
 
62. Serpanos YC, Jarmel F. Quantitative and qualitative follow-up 
outcomes from a preschool audiologic screening program: per-
spectives over a decade. Am J Audiol. 2007;16:4-12.
 
63. Chandler JR. Partial occlusion of the external auditory meatus: 
its effect upon air and bone conduction hearing acuity. Laryngo-
scope. 1964;74:22-54.
 
64. Laukkanen P, Era P, Leinonen R, et al. Multidimensional health 
assessment of 75- and 80-year-old men and women: a five-year 
prospective study. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2003;15:212-221.
 
65. Oron Y, Zwecker-Lazar I, Levy D, et al. Cerumen removal: com-
parison of cerumenolytic agents and effect on cognition among 
the elderly. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2011;52:228-232.
 
66. Rosenfeld RM, Culpepper L, Doyle KJ, et al. Clinical practice 
guideline: otitis media with effusion. Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg. 2004;130(5):S95-S118.
 
67. Keane EM, Wilson H, McGrane D, et al. Use of solvents to dis-
perse earwax. Br J Clin Pract. 1995;49:71-72.
 
68. Singer AJ, Sauris E, Viccellio AW. Ceruminolytic effects of 
docusate sodium: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Emerg 
Med. 2000;36:228-232.
 
69. Brister F, Fullwood HL, Ripp T, et al. Incidence of occlusion due 
to impacted cerumen among mentally retarded adolescents. Am J 
Ment Defic. 1986;91:302-304.
 
70. Neumann K, Dettmer G, Euler HA, et al. Auditory status of per-
sons with intellectual disability at the German Special Olympic 
Games. Int J Audiol. 2006;45:83-90.
 
71. Ologe FE, Segun-Busari S, Abdulraheem IS, et al. Ear diseases 
in elderly hospital patients in Nigeria. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med 
Sci. 2005;60:404-406.
 
72. Rao RS, Subramanyam MA, Nair NS, et al. Hearing impairment 
and ear diseases among children of school entry age in rural 
South India. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2002;64:105-110.
 
73. Strome M. Down’s syndrome: a modern otorhinolaryngological 
perspective. Laryngoscope. 1981;91:1581-1594.
 
74. Culbertson DS, Griggs M, Hudson S. Ear and hearing status in a 
multilevel retirement facility. Geriatr Nurs. 2004;25:93-98.
 
75. Bhoola D, Hugo R. Excess cerumen: failure rate of black and 
Indian preschool children from Durban on the Middle Ear Screen-
ing Protocol (MESP). S Afr J Commun Disord. 1997;44:43-52.
 
76. Smeeth L, Fletcher AE, Ng ES, et al. Reduced hearing, own-
ership, and use of hearing aids in elderly people in the UK—
the MRC Trial of the Assessment and Management of Older 
People in the Community: a cross-sectional survey. Lancet. 
2002;359:1466-1470.
 
77. Ballachanda BB. The Human Ear Canal. 2nd ed. San Diego, CA: 
Plural Publisher; 2013.
 
78. Perry ET. The Human Ear Canal. Springfield, IL: Charles C 
Thomas; 1957.
 
79. Ahmed N, Etheridge C, Farrington M, et al. Prospective study of 
the microbiological flora of hearing aid moulds and the efficacy of 
current cleaning techniques. J Laryngol Otol. 2007;121:110-113.
 
80. Mehdinejad M, Khosravi AD, Mahmoudabadi AZ. Study of bac-
terial flora in children’s with hearing aid earmoulds in Ahvaz, 
Iran. Pak J Biol Sci. 2010;13:245-248.
 
81. Karaca CT, Akcay SS, Toros SZ, et al. External auditory 
canal microbiology and hearing aid use. Am J Otolaryngol. 
2013;34:278-281.
 
82. Ballachanda BB. Theoretical and applied external ear acoustics. 
J Am Acad Audiol. 1997;8:411-420.
 
83. Kochkin S. MarkeTrak VII: customer satisfaction with hearing 
instruments in the digital age. Hearing J. 2005;58:30-43.
 
84. Adams-Wendling L, Pimple C, Adams S, Titler MG. Evidence-
based guideline: nursing management of hearing impairment in 
nursing facility residents. J Gerontol Nurs. 2008;34:9-16.
 
85. Somerville G. The most effective products available to facilitate 
ear syringing. Br J Community Nurs. 2002;7:94-101.
 
86. Wilson SA, Lopez R. Clinical inquiries: what is the best treat-
ment for impacted cerumen? J Fam Pract. 2002;51:2002.
 
87. Elwyn G, Lloyd A, Joseph-Williams N, et al. Option Grids: 
shared decision making made easier. Patient Educ Couns. 
2013;90:207-212.
 
88. Dinsdale RC, Roland PS, Manning SC, et al. Catastrophic oto-
logic injury from oral jet irrigation of the external auditory canal. 
Laryngoscope. 1991;101:75-78.
 Schwartz et al 
S29
  
89. Burton MJ, Doree C. Ear drops for the removal of earwax. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(1):CD004326.
 90. Baquley DM, Knight RD. Noise levels generated within the 
external auditory canal during microsuction aural toilet and the 
effect on hearing: a prospective controlled series. Clin Otolar-
yngol. 2009;34:261.
 91. Clegg AJ, Loveman E, Gospodarevskaya E, et al. The safety 
and effectiveness of different methods of earwax removal: a 
systematic review and economic evaluation. Health Technol 
Assess. 2010;14:1-192.
 92. Ryan C, Ghosh A, Wilson-Boyd B, et al. Presentation and man-
agement of aural foreign bodies in two Australian emergency 
departments. Emerg Med Australas. 2006;18:372-378.
 93. Larsen G. Removing cerumen with a Water Pik. Am J Nurs. 
1976;76:264-265.
 94. Goldman SA, Ankerstjerne JK, Welker KB, et al. Fatal men-
ingitis and brain abscess resulting from foreign body-induced 
otomastoiditis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1998;118:6-8.
 95. Leong AC, Aldren C. A non-randomized comparison of earwax 
removal with a “do-it-yourself” ear vacuum kit and a Jobson-
Horne probe. Clin Otolaryngol. 2005;30:320-323.
 96. Seely DR, Quigley SM, Langman AW. Ear candles: efficacy 
and safety. Laryngoscope. 1996;106:1226-1229.
 97. Zackaria M, Aymat A. Ear candling: a case report. Eur J Gen 
Prac. 2009;15:168-169.
 98. Hornibrook J. Where there’s smoke there’s fire—ear candling 
in a 4-year-old girl. N Z Med J. 2012;125:138-140.
  
99. Rafferty J, Tsikoudas A, Davis BC. Ear candling: should 
general practitioners recommend it? Can Fam Physician. 
2007;53:2121-2122.
 
100. Food and Drug Administration. Advice for patients: ear candles. 
http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/AlertsandNotices/ 
PatientAlerts/ucm200896.htm. Accessed August 26, 2015.
 
101. Robinson AC, Hawke M, MacKay A, et al. The mechanism of 
ceruminolysis. J Otolaryngol. 1989;18:268-273.
 
102. Hand C, Harvey I. The effectiveness of topical preparations for 
the treatment of earwax: a systematic review. Br J Gen Pract. 
2004;54:862-867.
 
103. Loveman E, Gospodarevskaya E, Clegg A, et al. Earwax 
removal interventions: a systematic review and economic eval-
uation. Br J Gen Pract. 2011;61:e680-e683.
 
104. Wright T. Ear wax [published online March 4, 2015]. BMJ Clin 
Evid.
 
105. Sorenson VZ, Bonding MD. Can ear syringing cause rupture of 
the normal membrane? An experimental study in man. J Laryn-
gol Otol. 1995;109:1036-1040.
 
106. Mandel EM, Dohar JE, Casselbrant ML. Aural irrigation using 
the OtoClear Safe Irrigation System in children. Int J Pediatr 
Otorhinolaryngol. 2004;68:1295-1299.
 
107. Propst EJ, George T, Janjua A, et al. Removal of impacted ceru-
men in children using an aural irrigation system. Int J Pediatr 
Otorhinolaryngol. 2012;76:1840-1843.
 
108. Coppin R, Wicke D, Little P. Managing earwax in primary 
care: efficacy of self-treatment using a bulb syringe. Br J Gen 
Pract. 2008;58:44-49.
 
109. Coppin R, Wicke D, Little P. Randomized trial of bulb syringes 
for earwax: impact on health service utilization. Ann Fam Med. 
2011;9:110-114.
 
110. Silverstein H, Wycherly B, Alameda YA, et al. A prospective 
study to evaluate the efficacy of isopropyl alcohol irrigations to 
prevent cerumen impaction. Ear Nose Throat J. 2012;91:E25-
E28.
 
111. Pavlidis C, Pickering JA. Water as a fast acting wax softening 
agent before ear syringing. Aust Fam Physician. 2005;34:303-
304.
 
112. Wurtele P. Traumatic rupture of the eardrum with round win-
dow fistula. J Otolaryngol. 1981;10:309-312.
 
113. Pothier DD, Hall C, Gillett S. A comparison of endoscopic and 
microscopic removal of wax: a randomised clinical trial. Clin 
Otolaryngol. 2006;31:375-380.
 
114. Prowse SJ, Mulla O. Aural microsuction for wax impaction: 
survey of efficacy and patient perception. J Laryngol Otol. 
2014;128:621-625.
 
115. Snelling JD, Smithard A, Waddell A. Noise levels generated 
within the external auditory canal during microsuction aural 
toilet and the effect on hearing: a prospective controlled series. 
Clin Otolaryngol. 2009;34:21-25.
 
116. Caballero M, Navarrete P, Prades E, et al. Randomized, 
 
placebo-controlled evaluation of chlorobutanol, potassium 
 
carbonate, and irrigation in cerumen removal. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol. 2009;118:552-555.
 
117. McCarty M. The lawful scope of a medical assistant’s practice. 
AMT Events. March 1996:8-35.
 
118. Grossan M. Safe, effective techniques for cerumen removal. 
Geriatrics. 2000;55:80-86.
 
119. Rogers N, Stevermer J. Earwax removal: help patients help 
themselves. J Fam Med. 2011;60:671a-671c.
 
120. Rodgers R. Does olive oil prevent earwax build-up? An experi-
mental study. Practice Nursing. 2013;24:191-196.
 
121. Saloranta K, Westermarck T. Prevention of cerumen impaction 
by treatment of ear canal skin: a pilot randomized controlled 
study. Clin Otolaryngol. 2005;30:112-114.
