 The Journal of Infectious Diseases
6 • JID 2019:219 (1 January) • PERSPECTIVE
The Journal of Infectious Diseases®  2019;219:6–9
The Extended Impact of Human Immunodeficiency Virus/
AIDS Research
Tara A. Schwetz, and Anthony S. Fauci
Office of the Director, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
Abstract
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is one of the most extensively studied viruses in history, and numerous extraordinary sci-
entific advances, including an in-depth understanding of viral biology, pathogenesis, and life-saving antiretroviral therapies, have 
resulted from investments in HIV/AIDS research.  While the substantial investments in HIV/AIDS research are validated solely on 
these advances, the collateral broader scientific progress resulting from the support of HIV/AIDS research over the past 30 years is 
extraordinary as well.  The positive impact has ranged from innovations in basic immunology and structural biology to treatments 
for immune-mediated diseases and cancer and has had an enormous effect on the research and public and global health communities 
well beyond the field of HIV/AIDS.  This article highlights a few select examples of the unanticipated and substantial positive spin-
offs of HIV/AIDS research on other scientific areas.
Keywords. HIV/AIDS; collateral advantages. 
The first cases of AIDS were reported in the 
United States 37 years ago. Since then, >77 
million people have been infected world-
wide, resulting in over 35 million deaths. 
Currently, there are 36.9 million people 
living with human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV), 1.8 million new infections, 
and nearly 1 million AIDS-related deaths 
annually [1]. Billions of research dollars 
have been invested toward understanding, 
treating, and preventing HIV infection. 
The largest funder of HIV/AIDS research 
is the National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
investing nearly $69 billion in AIDS 
research from fiscal years 1982–2018. 
Despite the staggering disease burden, the 
scientific advances directly resulting from 
investments in AIDS research have been 
extraordinary. HIV is one of the most 
intensively studied viruses in history, 
leading to an in-depth understanding of 
viral biology and pathogenesis. However, 
the most impressive advances in HIV/
AIDS research have come in the arena of 
antiretroviral therapy. Before the develop-
ment of these life-saving drugs, AIDS was 
an almost universally fatal disease. Since 
the demonstration in 1987 that a single 
drug, zidovudine, better known as azi-
dothymidine or AZT, could partially and 
temporarily suppress virus replication [2], 
the lives of people living with HIV have 
been transformed by the current avail-
ability of >30 antiretroviral drugs that, 
when administered in combinations of 
3 drugs, now in a single daily pill, sup-
press the virus to undetectable levels. 
Today, if a person in their 20s is infected 
and given a combination of antiretroviral 
drugs that almost invariably will durably 
suppress virus to below detectable levels, 
they can anticipate living an additional 
50 years, allowing them almost a normal 
life expectancy [3]. In addition, a person 
receiving antiretroviral therapy with an 
undetectable viral load will not transmit 
virus to their uninfected sexual partner. 
This strategy is referred to as “treatment 
as prevention” [4]. Also, administration 
of a single pill containing 2 antiretroviral 
drugs taken daily by an at-risk uninfected 
person decreases the chance of acquiring 
HIV by >95%. Finally, major strides are 
being made in the quest for a safe and 
effective HIV vaccine [5].
The enormous investment in HIV 
research is clearly justified and validated 
purely on the basis of advances specifi-
cally related to HIV/AIDS. However, the 
collateral advantages of this investment 
above and beyond HIV/AIDS have been 
profound, leading to insights and con-
crete advances in separate, diverse, and 
unrelated fields of biomedical research 
and medicine. In the current Perspective, 
we discuss a few select examples of the 
positive spin-offs of HIV/AIDS research 
on other scientific areas (Table 1).
Regulation of the Human Immune System
Congenital 
immunodeficiencies 
have 
been described as “experiments of nature,
” 
whereby a specific defect in a single com-
ponent of the complex immune system 
sheds light on the entire system. Such is 
the case with AIDS, an acquired defect in 
the immune system whereby HIV specif-
ically and selectively infects and destroys 
the CD4+ subset of T lymphocytes [6]. In 
this respect, HIV infection functions as 
a natural experiment that elucidates the 
complexity of the human immune system. 
The selectivity of this defect and its result-
ing catastrophic effect on host defense 
P E R S P E C T I V E
Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America 2018. This work is written by (a) US 
Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.
DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiy441
Received 25 June 2018; editorial decision 10 July 2018; 
accepted 17 July 2018; published online August 28, 2018
Correspondence: A. S. Fauci, MD, Office of the Director, 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bldg 31, Suite 7A03, 
Bethesda, MD 20892 (afauci@niaid.nih.gov).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-abstract/219/1/6/5063659 by guest on 04 June 2019
 PERSPECTIVE • JID 2019:219 (1 January) • 7
mechanisms, as manifested by the wide 
range of opportunistic infections and neo-
plasms, underscore the critical role this cell 
type plays in the overall regulation of the 
human immune system. This has provided 
substantial insights into the pathogenesis 
of an array of other diseases character-
ized by aberrancies of immune regulation. 
Additionally, the in-depth study of immune 
dysfunction in HIV disease has shed light 
on the role of the immune system in sur-
veillance against a variety of neoplastic 
diseases, such as non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
and Kaposi sarcoma. As a result of its asso-
ciation with HIV/AIDS, Kaposi sarcoma 
was discovered to be caused by human 
herpesvirus 8 [7].
Targeted Antiviral Drug Development
Targeted antiviral drug development did 
not begin with HIV infection. However, 
the enormous investments in biomed-
ical research supported by the NIH 
and in drug development supported by 
pharmaceutical companies led to highly 
effective antiretroviral drugs targeting 
the enzymes reverse transcriptase, pro-
tease, and integrase, among other vul-
nerable points in the HIV replication 
cycle, and have transformed the field of 
targeted drug development, bringing it to 
an unprecedented level of sophistication. 
Building on 3 decades of experience, this 
HIV model has been applied in the suc-
cessful development of antiviral drugs for 
other viral diseases, including the highly 
effective and curative direct-acting anti-
virals for hepatitis C [8].
Probing the B-Cell Repertoire
The past decade has witnessed extraor-
dinary advances in probing the human 
B-cell lineage resulting from the avail-
ability of highly sophisticated technol-
ogies in cellular cloning and genomic 
sequencing [9]. AIDS research aimed at 
developing broadly reactive neutraliz-
ing antibodies against HIV and an HIV 
vaccine that could induce broadly neu-
tralizing antibodies has greatly advanced 
the field of interrogation of human B-cell 
lineages, leading to greater insights into 
the humoral response to other infectious 
diseases, including Ebola [10], Zika [11], 
and influenza [12], as well as a range of 
autoimmune, neoplastic, and other non-
communicable diseases [13].
Structure-Based Vaccine Design
Although a safe and effective HIV vaccine 
has not yet been developed, the discipline 
of structure-based vaccine design using 
protein X-ray crystallography and cryo-
electron microscopy has matured greatly 
in the context of HIV vaccine research. 
The design of immunogens based on the 
precise conformation of epitopes in the 
viral envelope as they bind to neutraliz-
ing antibodies has been perfected within 
the arena of HIV vaccine immunogen 
design. This has had immediate positive 
spinoffs in the design of vaccines for 
other viruses, such as respiratory syncy-
tial virus, in which the prefusion glyco-
protein was identified as the important 
immunogen for a vaccine using struc-
ture-based approaches [14].
Advances in HIV/AIDS-Related Technologies
Insights into the basic immunology of 
HIV drove the development and opti-
mization of several broadly applicable 
technologies. Using inactivated HIV as 
a means of altering T lymphocytes to 
modulate the immune response, safe 
lentiviral gene therapy vectors are now 
US Food and Drug Administration–
approved to treat certain cancers (eg, 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia) [15]. 
Additionally, it was discovered early in 
the epidemic that HIV is associated with 
the loss of CD4+ T lymphocytes [16]. 
While much of the initial research on 
CD4+ T lymphocytes was possible due 
to existing flow cytometry technologies, 
probing the complexities of immune 
dysregulation in HIV infection spurred 
the development of multicolor cytofluo-
rometric technologies that have proven 
extremely useful for studying a variety of 
other diseases characterized by immune 
dysfunction [17]. The reality of utiliz-
ing these technologies in resource-poor 
areas accelerated the advancement of 
new simplified, automated, affordable, 
and portable point-of-care devices with 
broader implications for clinical medi-
cine [18].
Role of Immune Activation in Disease Pathogenesis
Studying the pathogenesis of HIV disease 
has clearly demonstrated that aberrant 
immune activation stimulated by virus 
replication is the driving force of HIV 
replication [19]. In essence, the somewhat 
paradoxical situation exists whereby the 
very immune activation triggered by the 
virus in an attempt to control virus rep-
lication creates the microenvironment 
where the virus efficiently replicates. Even 
when the virus is effectively suppressed 
by antiretroviral drugs, a low degree of 
immune activation persists [20]. In this 
regard, the flagrant immune activation 
associated with uncontrolled virus repli-
cation, as well as the subtle immune acti-
vation associated with control of virus 
replication, are important pathogenic 
triggers of the increased cardiovascular 
and other organ system diseases associ-
ated with HIV infection. This direct asso-
ciation of even subtle levels of immune 
activation seen in HIV infection with a 
variety of systemic diseases has led to con-
siderable insight into the role of immune 
activation and inflammation in human 
disease [21]. For example, recognition of 
the increased incidence of heart disease 
in the HIV population that is associated 
with chronic inflammation has stimulated 
interdisciplinary advances in understand-
ing and treating coronary heart disease 
apart from HIV infection [22].
Table 1. Positive Spin-offs of Human Immuno-
deficiency Virus/AIDS Research on Other Areas 
of Medicine
Regulation of the human immune system
Targeted antiviral drug development
Probing the B-cell repertoire
Structure-based vaccine design
Advances in HIV/AIDS-related technologies
Role of immune activation in disease 
pathogenesis
Comorbidities in HIV disease
Abbreviation: HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-abstract/219/1/6/5063659 by guest on 04 June 2019
 8 • JID 2019:219 (1 January) • PERSPECTIVE
Comorbidities in HIV Disease
Antiretroviral therapy, which has trans-
formed HIV treatment, is shifting the 
incidence of certain diseases in people 
living with HIV. Even when well-con-
trolled by antiretrovirals, HIV disease is 
associated with an increased incidence of 
diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, 
kidney and liver disease, the premature 
appearance of pathophysiologic pro-
cesses associated with aging, and several 
cancers [21–24]. This is especially true for 
non-AIDS-defining cancers, whose inci-
dence rates are increasing while AIDS-
defining cancer rates are decreasing [24]. 
In lower-income countries, tuberculo-
sis is a common coinfection with HIV, 
and HIV coinfection was shown to be a 
key risk factor for progression of latent 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection to 
active disease [25]. There are a variety 
of ongoing studies [21] investigating the 
pathogenic bases of these conditions to 
shed greater insight into their causes and 
potential interventions that might impact 
these diseases apart from HIV infection 
and immunodeficiency.
CONCLUSIONS
The collateral advantages resulting from 
the substantial resources devoted to HIV/
AIDS research over the past 30 years 
are extraordinary. From innovations in 
basic immunology and structural biol-
ogy to treatments for immune-mediated 
diseases and cancer, the conceptual and 
technological advances resulting from 
HIV/AIDS research have had an enor-
mous impact on the research and public 
and global health communities over and 
above the field of HIV/AIDS. The HIV/
AIDS research model has proven that 
cross-fertilization of ideas, innovation, 
and research progress can lead to unfore-
seen and substantial advantages for a 
variety of other diseases.
Notes
Acknowledgments. The authors thank 
Carl Dieffenbach, Daniel Rotrosen, Charles 
Hackett, and Robert Eisinger for their help-
ful input in preparation of the manuscript.
Potential conflicts of interest. Both 
authors: No reported conflicts of inter-
est. Both authors have submitted the 
ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential 
Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the 
editors consider relevant to the content of 
the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
 1. Joint United Nations Progamme on 
HIV/AIDS. Fact sheet: latest statistics 
on the status of the AIDS epidemic. 
http://www.unaids.org/en/resources/
fact-sheet. Accessed 23 July 2018. 
 2. Fischl MA, Richman DD, Grieco 
MH, et al. The efficacy of azidothy-
midine (AZT) in the treatment of 
patients with AIDS and AIDS-related 
complex. A double-blind, place-
bo-controlled trial. N Engl J Med 
1987; 317:185–91.
 3. Samji H, Cescon A, Hogg RS, et al; 
North 
American 
AIDS 
Cohort 
Collaboration 
on 
Research 
and 
Design (NA-ACCORD) of IeDEA. 
Closing the gap: increases in life 
expectancy among treated HIV-
positive individuals in the United 
States and Canada. PLoS One 2013; 
8:e81355.
 4. Lundgren JD, Babiker AG, Gordin 
F, et al; INSIGHT START Study 
Group. Initiation of antiretrovi-
ral therapy in early asymptomatic 
HIV infection. N Engl J Med 2015; 
373:795–807.
 5. Trovato M, D’Apice L, Prisco A, De 
Berardinis P. HIV vaccination: a 
roadmap among advancements and 
concerns. Int J Mol Sci 2018; 19. 
doi:10.3390/ijms19041241.
 6. Dalgleish AG, Beverley PC, Clapham 
PR, Crawford DH, Greaves MF, 
Weiss RA. The CD4 (T4) antigen is 
an essential component of the recep-
tor for the AIDS retrovirus. Nature 
1984; 312:763–7.
 7. Schulz TF, Boshoff CH, Weiss RA. 
HIV infection and neoplasia. Lancet 
1996; 348:587–91.
 8. Wyles DL. Antiviral resistance and 
the future landscape of hepatitis C 
virus infection therapy. J Infect Dis 
2013; 207(Suppl 1):S33–9.
 9. Boyd SD, Crowe JE Jr. Deep sequenc-
ing and human antibody repertoire 
analysis. Curr Opin Immunol 2016; 
40:103–9.
 
10. Flyak AI, Kuzmina N, Murin CD, 
et al. Broadly neutralizing antibod-
ies from human survivors target a 
conserved site in the Ebola virus gly-
coprotein HR2-MPER region. Nat 
Microbiol 2018; 3:670–7.
 
11. Sapparapu G, Fernandez E, Kose N, 
et al. Neutralizing human antibodies 
prevent Zika virus replication and 
fetal disease in mice. Nature 2016; 
540:443–7.
 
12. Raymond DD, Bajic G, Ferdman J, 
et al. Conserved epitope on influ-
enza-virus 
hemagglutinin 
head 
defined by a vaccine-induced anti-
body. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2018; 
115:168–73.
 
13. Röhn TA, Bachmann MF. Vaccines 
against 
non-communicable 
dis-
eases. Curr Opin Immunol 2010; 
22:391–6.
 
14. Tian D, Battles MB, Moin SM, et al. 
Structural basis of respiratory syncy-
tial virus subtype-dependent neutral-
ization by an antibody targeting the 
fusion glycoprotein. Nat Commun 
2017; 8:1877.
 
15. US Food and Drug Administration. 
FDA approval brings first gene ther-
apy to the United States. Silver Spring, 
MD: FDA, 2017.
 
16. Gottlieb MS, Schroff R, Schanker 
HM, et al. Pneumocystis carinii pneu-
monia and mucosal candidiasis in 
previously healthy homosexual men: 
evidence of a new acquired cellular 
immunodeficiency. N Engl J Med 
1981; 305:1425–31.
 
17. Chattopadhyay PK, Roederer M. 
Cytometry: today’s technology and 
tomorrow’s horizons. Methods 2012; 
57:251–8.
 
18. Kestens L, Mandy F. Thirty-five years 
of CD4 T-cell counting in HIV infec-
tion: from flow cytometry in the lab 
to point-of-care testing in the field. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-abstract/219/1/6/5063659 by guest on 04 June 2019
 PERSPECTIVE • JID 2019:219 (1 January) • 9
Cytometry B Clin Cytom 2017; 
92:437–44.
 
19. Moir S, Fauci AS. B-cell exhaustion 
in HIV infection: the role of immune 
activation. Curr Opin HIV AIDS 
2014; 9:472–7.
 
20. Paiardini M, Müller-Trutwin M. 
HIV-associated 
chronic 
immune 
activation. 
Immunol 
Rev 
2013; 
254:78–101.
 
21. Lucas S, Nelson AM. HIV and the 
spectrum of human disease. J Pathol 
2015; 235:229–41.
 
22. Boccara F, Lang S, Meuleman C, 
et al. HIV and coronary heart dis-
ease: time for a better understanding. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 2013; 61:511–23.
 
23. Torres RA, Lewis W
. Aging and HIV/
AIDS: pathogenetic role of therapeutic 
side effects. Lab Invest 2014; 94:120–8.
 
24. Thrift AP, Chiao EY. Are non-HIV 
malignancies increased in the HIV-
infected population? Curr Infect Dis 
Rep 2018; 20:22.
 
25. Getahun 
H, 
Gunneberg 
C, 
Granich R, Nunn P. HIV infec-
tion-associated tuberculosis: the 
epidemiology and the response. 
Clin Infect Dis 2010; 50(Suppl 
3):S201–7.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-abstract/219/1/6/5063659 by guest on 04 June 2019
