 Obesity Pathogenesis:
An Endocrine Society Scientific Statement
Michael W. Schwartz,1 Randy J. Seeley,2 Lori M. Zeltser,3 Adam Drewnowski,4 Eric Ravussin,5
Leanne M. Redman,5 and Rudolph L. Leibel3,6
ABSTRACT Obesity is among the most common and costly chronic disorders worldwide. Estimates suggest
that in the United States obesity affects one-third of adults, accounts for up to one-third of total mortality, is
concentrated among lower income groups, and increasingly affects children as well as adults. A lack of effective
options for long-term weight reduction magnifies the enormity of this problem; individuals who successfully
complete behavioral and dietary weight-loss programs eventually regain most of the lost weight. We included
evidence from basic science, clinical, and epidemiological literature to assess current knowledge regarding
mechanisms underlying excess body-fat accumulation, the biological defense of excess fat mass, and the
tendency for lost weight to be regained. A major area of emphasis is the science of energy homeostasis, the
biological process that maintains weight stability by actively matching energy intake to energy expenditure
over time. Growing evidence suggests that obesity is a disorder of the energy homeostasis system, rather than
simply arising from the passive accumulation of excess weight. We need to elucidate the mechanisms
underlying this “upward setting” or “resetting” of the defended level of body-fat mass, whether inherited or
acquired. The ongoing study of how genetic, developmental, and environmental forces affect the energy
homeostasis system will help us better understand these mechanisms and are therefore a major focus of this
statement. The scientific goal is to elucidate obesity pathogenesis so as to better inform treatment, public
policy, advocacy, and awareness of obesity in ways that ultimately diminish its public health and economic
consequences. (Endocrine Reviews 38: 267 – 296, 2017)
Definition
Rationale for a scientific statement on
obesity pathogenesis
ENERGY HOMEOSTASIS AND THE
PHYSIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF
BODY-FAT STORES
General principles
Background
Leptin and energy homeostasis
Fuel partitioning, insulin, and obesity
Neurobiology of energy homeostasis
Background
Hypothalamic neurons controlling
energy balance
Hindbrain circuits and the parabrachial
nucleus
Developmental considerations
Integrative physiology of energy
homeostasis
Determinants of feeding behavior
Determinants of energy expenditure
MECHANISMS OF OBESITY
PATHOGENESIS
Genetic factors: evidence for and against
Interactions between genes,
development, and environment
Role of epigenetic modifications
Developmental factors: evidence for
and against
Roles of parental body weight or diet
Undernutrition
Overnutrition/obesity
Modes of transmission
Role of EDCs
PFCs
BPA
Modes of transmission of endocrine
disrupting chemical effects
GI factors, bariatric surgery, and the
microbiome
Insights from bariatric surgery
The gut microbiome and other
GI factors
Social and economic factors
Diet composition, lifestyle, and
obesity risk
Impact of diet composition on
obesity risk
Roles of sedentary behavior, exercise,
and nonexercise activity thermogenesis
Other factors
Smoking cessation
Infectious factors
Mechanisms for biological defense of
elevated body-fat mass
CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
The two distinct components of obesity
pathogenesis
Developmental determinants of the
biologically defended level of body-fat mass
Interactions between genetics,
epigenetics, developmental influences,
and the environment
Future directions for EDC research
Lessons learned from the weight-
reduced state
The gut–brain axis
Dietary influences
ISSN Print: 0163-769X
ISSN Online: 1945-7189
Printed: in USA
Copyright © 2017
Endocrine Society
Received: 11 May 2017
Accepted: 12 May 2017
First Published Online:
26 June 2017
AFFILIATIONS
1Diabetes Institute, University
of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98109
2Department of Surgery,
University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109
3Naomi Berrie Diabetes Center
and Department of Pathology
and Cell Biology, Columbia
University, New York,
New York 10032
4Center for Public Health
Nutrition, University of
Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195
5John S. McIlhenny Skeletal
Muscle Physiology Laboratory,
Pennington Biomedical Research
Center, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana 70808
6Division of Molecular Genetics,
Department of Pediatrics,
Columbia University, New York,
New York 10032
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
267
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Stratification of obesity outcomes
Unraveling mechanisms linking the
environment to defense of elevated
body weight
Identifying and mitigating
environmental risk factors
Translating basic science into more
effective pharmacotherapy
T
he need to integrate molecular, genetic, de-
velopmental, behavioral, and environmental
factors highlights the substantial challenge inherent in
achieving a comprehensive understanding of obesity
pathogenesis. Mechanistic formulations must draw
from disciplines that include: the neuroscience of
feeding behavior; the psychology of food reward; the
metabolic impact of specific nutrients and changes of
physical activity; as well as genetics, epigenetics, and
developmental biology relevant to energy balance
control, and the influence of exposure to environ-
mental variables ranging from endocrine-disrupting
chemicals (EDCs) to socioeconomic factors. When
processing this information, one must also be mindful
that although there are many interventions that can
cause obesity in an experimental setting, the key
question is whether they do cause obesity in a natu-
ralistic environment. In this statement, we focus on
factors for which compelling evidence exists that
implicates them in the pathogenesis of either the
accumulation or maintenance of excess body fat mass.
Definition
Obesity is broadly defined as an excess of body-
fat mass. Reliable fat-mass quantitation requires
sophisticated tools that are not widely available (e.g.,
magnetic resonance imaging or dual energy X-ray
absorptiometry), and this has hampered efforts to
arrive at a more specific definition. Consequently, an
elevated body mass index (BMI), which expresses body
weight (in kilograms) as a function of body height
(in meters) as a surrogate measure of body fatness,
is the most widely accepted definition of obesity.
Population-based actuarial studies place the upper
limit of normal BMI in adults at  kg/m, define
obesity as a BMI .  kg/m, and designate a BMI
between these values to be “overweight.” The degree of
obesity can be further subcategorized into class  (BMI
of  to ,), class  (BMI of  to ,), and class 
(BMI of .) (). Assessing BMI in children requires
adjusting for both age and gender.
BMI satisfies our need to estimate body-fat mass at
a population level and thus gauge a group’s susceptibility
to complications of obesity. However, it is not a reliable
clinical tool for assessing individual body fatness, because
variations in skeletal muscle and other lean-body-mass
components create substantial variations in total body
mass. For example, a heavily muscled individual with
increased body weight relative to height will have a BMI
value that can erroneously place them into the over-
weight or even obese category. Additionally, there are
significant racial/ethnic differences in how BMI associ-
ates with adverse medical consequences. (For addi-
tional information, see the companion Endocrine Society
Scientific Statement titled “Obesity Management: Past,
Present, and Future; Science and State of the Art.”)
Rationale for a scientific statement on
obesity pathogenesis
For most endocrine disease, researchers have estab-
lished effective therapeutic treatments based on un-
derlying disease mechanisms. This is not the case with
obesity; unlike most other endocrine disorders, we
have a very limited understanding of its pathogenesis,
despite decades of research and billions of dollars
spent each year on its treatment. This gross expen-
diture of time and money is undoubtedly linked to the
extraordinarily high prevalence (affecting one-third of
the adult United States population) (), ease of de-
tection, and stigma associated with obesity. These
factors conspire to create an enormous demand for
weight-loss products and services that continue to
ESSENTIAL POINTS
· Obesity pathogenesis involves two related but distinct processes: (1) sustained positive energy balance (energy intake .
energy expenditure) and (2) resetting of the body weight “set point” at an increased value. The latter process explains
why weight lost through changes of diet and/or lifestyle tends to be regained over time, a major obstacle to effective
obesity treatment.
· How the increased body weight comes to be biologically defended remains uncertain, although ongoing research is
beginning to shed some light on underlying mechanisms. Therapeutic strategies that target these mechanisms have the
potential to reset the defended level of body weight at a lower, more normal value.
· The impact of diet on obesity risk is explained largely by its effect on calorie intake, rather than by changes of either energy
expenditure or the internal metabolic environment. Stated differently, "a calorie is a calorie.” Thus, habitual consumption
of highly palatable and energy-dense diets predispose to excess weight gain irrespective of macronutrient content.
· Beyond diet, environmental factors ranging from socioeconomic status to chemical exposures to sedentary lifestyle can
confer obesity risk. How these inputs interact with genetic, epigenetic and developmental factors that predispose to
obesity is a key question for future research.
268
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 flourish, despite being largely ineffective, sometimes
dangerous, and almost entirely unregulated ().
This situation is not unlike the medical practice of
a century ago in which “glandular extracts” were cleverly
marketed for a multitude of diseases, generating robust
sales and profits for their manufacturers despite a lack of
efficacy or safety data (, ). It was largely in response to
the rise of this practice (termed “organotherapy”) that
the Endocrine Society chose a different path. In the
third year of its existence, the Endocrine Society elected
Sir Harvey Cushing as President. In his presidential
address, he advocated strongly in favor of adopting the
scientific method and abandoning empiricism to better
inform the diagnosis and treatment of endocrine disease
(). In doing so, Cushing helped to usher in the modern
era of endocrinology and with it, the end of organo-
therapy. (In an interesting historical footnote, Cushing’s
presidential address was given in , the same year
that insulin was discovered.)
Clearly, we need a well-defined, generally accepted
set of physiological, developmental, and environ-
mental principles regarding body weight homeostasis
that will inform strong research and therapeutic
strategies regarding obesity pathogenesis. The current
lack of consensus regarding obesity pathogenesis has
resulted in competing and poorly justified claims both
from within and outside of the scientific community.
These inconsistencies erode public trust and confi-
dence in the scientific process as it pertains to obesity
and its treatment, which only further supports non-
scientific ideologies and products. To break this vi-
cious cycle, and to identify effective treatments, we
need to establish clearly defined and reliable data
regarding obesity’s underlying causes.
Energy Homeostasis and the Physiological
Control of Body-Fat Stores
General principles
Background
At its most basic level, the pathogenesis of obesity
seems simple: Calories are consumed in amounts that
exceed ongoing energy expenditure. Based largely on
this concept, most people have historically perceived
obesity as the result of negative personal traits, such as
gluttony, sloth, self-indulgence, laziness, and lack of
will power. However, growing evidence indicates that
obesity pathogenesis involves processes far more
complex than the passive accumulation of excess
calories. It is this complexity that lies at the heart of
why obesity is so difficult to treat. Fundamentally,
humans have an “evolutionary physiology” that is
predisposed to conserve body fat as a factor of survival.
This evolutionary physiology in today’s climate of easy
access to virtually unlimited calories has created a large
segment of humanity that appears to be biologically
predisposed to excessive weight gain. Hence, we see
upward trends of adiposity in developed and de-
veloping communities.
How does the energy homeostasis system bear on
this issue? We see clear evidence of a properly op-
erating energy homeostasis system in the remarkable
body-weight stability of individuals who are not
obese over long periods of time. Evidence from an
observational study of , healthy Swedish women
() indicates that participants were, on average,
..% accurate in their annual matching of energy
intake to expenditure for  consecutive years of
observation. To better understand the implications
of this observation, consider that a healthy adult
weighing  pounds can be expected to gain ..
pounds in a year if they expend  fewer calories per
day than they consumed. During  years of adulthood
[assuming a caloric intake of  kcal/day (. M kcal
total)], a weight gain of  pound (~ kcal/pound
mixed body tissue) per year (, kcal total) is
equivalent to a .% positive caloric balance. Thus, we
infer that such individuals are .% accurate in
matching energy intake to expenditure. There are caveats
to such calculations relating to the fact that increased
body mass increases energy expenditure (further re-
ducing the balance error), but from a thermodynamic
perspective, it is clear that obesity is generally the
consequence of small, cumulative imbalances of energy
intake and expenditure. Although the causes of these
imbalances can involve innumerable genetic, de-
velopmental, and/or environmental factors, once in-
dividuals who are obese and individuals who were never
obese achieve their “customary” body weights and
compositions, they tend to maintain and defend those
weights by identical mechanisms.
Studies investigating the adaptive responses of
normal-weight humans and animals to changes in
body weight support the concept of a physiologically
important energy homeostasis system. Weight loss
induced by caloric restriction, for example, results in
both an increased drive to eat and a reduction of
energy expenditure. These responses both resist fur-
ther weight loss and favor recovery of lost weight,
and they can persist for years, provided that body-
fat stores have not returned to baseline (). These
adaptive responses to weight loss are reported in both
individuals who are obese and lean individuals (),
therefore suggesting that obesity pathogenesis involves
the physiological defense of a higher level of body fat.
This perspective offers a plausible explanation for the
very frequent regain of lost weight that confounds
most forms of obesity treatment (, ).
Conversely, normal-weight subjects respond to
experimental weight gain (induced by “forced over-
feeding”) by increasing energy expenditure and
reduced hunger. Once forced overfeeding is dis-
continued, a combination of decreased drive to eat and
increased energy expenditure tends to restore body
weight to normal (). Indeed, such overfeeding studies
show that it is surprisingly difficult for normal-weight
269
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 individuals to achieve and sustain experimentally in-
duced weight gain (). Individuals who are obese also
resist excess weight gain induced by forced overfeeding
(). Therefore, their elevated levels of body-fat mass
appear to be similarly subject to biological defense.
Stated differently, individuals who are obese and in-
dividuals who are not obese appear to use the same
homeostatic mechanisms to defend different levels of
body-fat mass. This observation suggests that dysfunc-
tion of the energy homeostasis system is both necessary
and sufficient for the biological defense of elevated body
weight in individuals who are obese (). What remains
unclear is how this dysfunction is linked to factors that
enable excess weight gain, such that excess body-fat mass
comes to be biologically defended. This issue is central to
obesity pathogenesis and therefore a central focus of this
scientific statement.
Leptin and energy homeostasis
The adipocyte hormone leptin, which circulates at
concentrations proportional to body-fat mass, plays
a significant role in the relationship between obesity and
energy homeostasis. A deficiency of leptin causes severe
hyperphagia and obesity in both humans and animals
(), with physiological leptin replacement ameliorating
both the hyperphagia and obesity in leptin-deficient
individuals (). Therefore, there can be no question
that normal body-weight maintenance in humans re-
quires intact leptin-regulated neurocircuits.
However, these observations do not indicate that
genetic deficiencies of leptin or its cognate receptor
are important causes of human obesity. Although
such individuals exist, they are rare (). In contrast,
most individuals who are obese have elevated plasma
leptin levels (in proportion to the increase of body-fat
content), raising the possibility that common forms of
obesity are associated with “leptin resistance” (i.e., that
supraphysiological plasma leptin levels are required to
overcome tissue resistance to leptin and thereby enable
energy intake and energy expenditure to match one
another). Because adipocytes secrete leptin in proportion
to body-fat content, the only way to raise plasma leptin
levels in this setting is to become obese.
These considerations would seem to point to
a causal role for leptin resistance in the pathogenesis of
common forms of obesity, but the matter remains
unsettled. For one, there is no uniformly agreed-upon
definition for leptin resistance (), and the presence
of hyperleptinemia per se cannot be taken as evidence
of its presence. Indeed, recent data suggest that
the cellular response to leptin (e.g., activation of in-
tracellular STAT signaling) is preserved in obese,
hyperleptinemic rodents (). The circulating leptin
concentration needed to fully engage central nervous
system responses likely differs among individuals
based on the influence of genetics, development, and
possibly diet. Thus, some individuals who are obese
may simply require more leptin (and hence body fat)
to fully engage relevant neurocircuits ().
Given the evolutionary considerations alluded to
above, the primary role played by leptin-responsive
neurocircuits may be related more to preventing loss
of body fat (communicated to the brain by a decrease
of leptin signaling) than to defending against its in-
crease (conveyed by increased leptin levels). In this
formulation, genetics, development, and even envi-
ronmental factors can influence the level of leptin
signaling (“threshold”) below which compensatory
increases in food intake and reductions in energy
expenditure occur. Accordingly, this theory holds that
leptin circuitry is more sensitive to decreases than to
increases in the circulating leptin level, with the limited
response to leptin concentrations above the lower
threshold offering a potential explanation for what some
refer to as leptin resistance. The apparent resistance in
this formulation is simply a reflection of the circuitry’s
design (, ). More work in this area is clearly needed.
Fuel partitioning, insulin, and obesity
General perspectives on obesity pathogenesis have
swung from early conceptualizations of obesity as
a storage disease of adipose tissue (analogized pre-
sumably to some of the earliest identified inborn errors
of metabolism by Garrod) to more recent brain-centric
models, in which the brain, by virtue of its operational
control of food intake and energy expenditure, im-
poses excess calories on passive adipocytes. Sometimes
referred to as “pull” and “push” models, respectively,
each makes very different predictions regarding both
underlying molecular mechanisms and how we should
approach obesity prevention and treatment. Embed-
ded within this debate is the extent to which adipocyte-
autonomous processes can pull substrate molecules
preferentially into adipocytes, and by “partitioning”
calories in this way cause higher fractional deposition
of calories as fat. A key prediction of this model is that
some individuals who consume a diet in which caloric
intake and energy expenditure are matched (e.g., an
isocaloric diet) will preferentially deposit ingested
calories as fat at the expense of their lean tissue mass,
thereby becoming relatively fatter without entering
a state of positive energy balance per se (see the section
titled “Impact of diet composition on obesity risk”).
Although it is possible that variations in body
composition among individuals of the same body
weight reflect (to some extent) the consequences of
such processes, achieving clinical obesity in this
manner must be rare, because most individuals who
are obese have absolute increases of both lean and fat
mass. Nevertheless, when leptin-deficient ob/ob mice
are pair-fed the same amount of food consumed by
normal controls, they gain more mass (due to reduced
energy expenditure) and preferentially deposit that
mass as fat, leading to an absolute and relative de-
ficiency of lean mass in these animals (). Although
the mechanism underlying this partitioning effect
must relate to developmental and/or intercurrent ef-
fects of leptin (perhaps involving interactions with
insulin as well), the precise biology is not clear ().
The hypothesis that leptin plays a direct role in these
processes is supported by evidence of its direct effects
on lipid partitioning in skeletal muscle ().
270
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Lipoprotein lipase (LPL), an enzyme that hy-
drolyzes circulating apolipoprotein-bound acylgly-
cerides at the surface of many cell types (including
adipocytes and myocytes), also appears to affect the
partitioning of fatty acids in ways that affect both
absolute and relative fat mass. Although mice
overexpressing LPL in skeletal muscle accumulate
triglyceride in muscle and are resistant to increases
of adipose tissue mass during overfeeding (),
overexpression of LPL in adipocytes does not affect
body weight or adiposity in mice (). Restoration of
muscle LPL in mice that otherwise lacks the enzyme
creates animals functionally lacking LPL in adipose
tissue; surprisingly, these mice are characterized
by normal body-fat mass, apparently because of
a compensatory increase of fatty acid synthesis in
adipocytes (). Expression of LPL varies widely by
depot in humans, and it might account for differ-
ences in adipose tissue distribution in some in-
dividuals. As insulin increases the synthesis and
activity of LPL (while also stimulating adipocyte
uptake of fatty acids and glucose), intrinsic differ-
ences in insulin-mediated molecular processes
could (in theory) play a determinative role in body-
fat content and/or distribution. In this context,
however, it is important to note that humans lacking
LPL on a genetic basis have normal fat mass due to
the ability of adipocytes and muscle to take up
circulating free fatty acids in quantities sufficient to
allow adequate aclyglyceride formation in adipose
tissue or oxidation in muscle (). Therefore, al-
though local activity of LPL (in adipocytes and
muscle) could play a role in partitioning of fat
among tissues, it appears to be neither necessary nor
sufficient for the uptake of fatty acids into adipose
tissue.
Several investigators have proposed that the effect
of specific diet components on insulin secretion or
action contributes to obesity pathogenesis through
effects on calorie deposition in adipocytes, rather than
(or in addition to) effects on energy balance per se.
Essentially, carbohydrates in general (and refined and
possibly naturally occurring sugars in particular) are
proposed to promote hyperinsulinemia that in turn
drives glucose and fatty acids into adipose tissue ().
Accordingly, this process is proposed to cause obesity
by both direct effects on adipocytes that favor fat
deposition and by lowering circulating metabolic
substrates (and/or exerting effects on hepatic meta-
bolism) that subsequently stimulate food intake. Addi-
tional “lowering” effects on energy expenditure by
these dietary components are proposed to exacerbate
the tendency toward increased fat deposition (). As
we discuss in greater detail in a later section (“Diet
composition, lifestyle, and obesity risk”), this hy-
pothesis remains controversial and has yet to receive
the level of support needed for broad acceptance.
Among several concerns is that differences in diet
composition have yet to be convincingly shown to
cause differences in body composition when provided
in an isocaloric manner (such that total calorie
consumption is matched between diets) (). This is
not to say that diets high in refined carbohydrate and/
or fructose (soft drinks) do not predispose to obesity,
but the underlying mechanism is likely to involve
excessive intake of calories, rather than nutrient-
specific or hormonal effects on substrate partitioning.
Collectively, these data suggest that diet compo-
sition per se (relative quantities and specific types of
carbohydrates, sugars, and fatty acids, as distinct from
caloric content) contributes far less to the etiology of
obesity than do contributions made by the net im-
balance of intake and expenditure. It therefore follows
that although variations in diet composition can
powerfully affect palatability and hence hedonically
motivated feeding, whether it can also influence food
intake via secondary metabolic consequences (e.g.,
effects of insulin on circulating nutrient levels) remains
a highly controversial topic that seems unlikely to be
resolved without clinical studies that will be costly and
challenging to undertake.
Neurobiology of energy homeostasis
Background
More than  years ago, to account for evidence that
body
weight
is
biologically
defended,
Kennedy
() proposed that body-fat mass is regulated by an
“adiposity negative feedback” system. Specifically, he
suggested that circulating signals inform the brain
regarding the amount of body fuel stored in the form
of fat. In response, the brain makes compensatory
adjustments to both food intake and energy expen-
diture so as to promote weight stability. Compelling
support for this hypothesis has emerged in the decades
since, including the identification of neurocircuits and
signaling molecules that sense, integrate, and trans-
duce humoral input relevant to body-fuel stores into
adaptive changes of energy balance. Because a credible
formulation of obesity pathogenesis depends on
a comprehensive understanding of how food intake
and energy balance are controlled, we explore this
topic in detail here.
Motivational aspects of feeding behavior provide
a useful context within which to introduce the topic
of energy balance neurocircuitry. Both “metabolic
need” and “food reward” have long been considered
key drivers of feeding. The former involves a desire to
alleviate the discomfort associated with inadequate
food availability (“drive reduction”), whereas the
latter describes the anticipation of a rewarding ex-
perience and subsequent fulfillment of that experi-
ence (). Recent advances in neuroscience have
enabled the identification of neuronal substrates
implicated in these distinct but complementary
sources of motivation.
Hypothalamic neurons controlling energy balance
Perhaps the best studied subset of neurons involved
in feeding behavior are those that co-express neuro-
peptide Y (NPY), agouti-related protein (AgRP) (an
antagonist of melanocortin signaling), and the inhibitory
271
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 neurotransmitter, g-aminobutyric acid (GABA);
henceforth referred to as AgRP neurons, because they
are the only neurons that express AgRP. Located in an
area of the mediobasal hypothalamus known as the
arcuate nucleus (ARC), AgRP neurons are activated in
conditions of negative energy balance and weight loss
(e.g., fasting), in part because such conditions reduce
plasma concentrations of leptin and insulin, hormones
that tonically inhibit these neurons (). Because this
inhibitory input becomes quiescent during fasting,
AgRP neurons are activated and increase the drive to
eat.
What evidence causally links AgRP neuron acti-
vation to increased food intake? Thanks to recent
advances in optogenetics and related neuroscience
methods, researchers have been able to investigate
responses triggered by the selective activation or in-
hibition of uniquely identified neuronal subsets in
conscious, freely moving animals. This work has con-
vincingly revealed the powerful hyperphagic response
elicited by selective AgRP neuron activation ().
Combined with evidence that AgRP neurons are
activated across a variety of states of metabolic need
that drive hyperphagic feeding (e.g., fasting, un-
controlled diabetes, genetic leptin deficiency, and
hypoglycemia), researchers have suggested a causal
role for their activation in the associated hyperphagia
(). This possibility received direct support fol-
lowing the demonstration that experimental silenc-
ing of AgRP neurons prevents hyperphagia elicited
by fasting ().
Recent work has identified several unique and
unanticipated properties of AgRP neurons. Using
cell type–specific in vivo calcium imaging in con-
scious, free-moving mice, Knight et al. () docu-
mented that although AgRP neurons are activated in
fasted mice, as expected, they cease firing upon the
sight of food, prior to feeding onset. Although
originally interpreted to suggest that activation of
AgRP neurons merely prepares animals to eat,
rather than driving feeding behavior per se, the same
group showed that if food is made available only
after activation of AgRP neurons ceases, intake still
increases markedly (as long as food is made available
within  minutes) (). Thus, activation of AgRP
neurons provides a robust stimulus to feeding that
continues throughout a meal, even though activity
of these neurons ceases prior to meal onset.
Whether activation of these neurons increases
intake by enhancing the rewarding properties of
food or whether it motivates feeding through drive
reduction (a desire to alleviate the discomfort as-
sociated with not eating) is an active and somewhat
controversial area of study. Sternson et al. ()
suggested a key role for the latter mechanism, im-
plying that AgRP neuron activation is aversive when
food is not available, and that feeding ameliorates
this effect. Conversely, Knight et al. () reported
that as long as food is available, animals perceive
AgRP neuron activation as being highly rewarding.
Whether animals perceive AgRP neuron activation
as a positive or a negative experience may therefore
depend on whether food is available.
Situated adjacent to AgRP neurons in the ARC are
neurons that express pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC)
and release the anorexic neuropeptide a-melanocyte–
stimulating hormone. Food intake is reduced following
the activation of melanocortin  receptors expressed
on “downstream” target neurons in the paraventricular
hypothalamic nucleus and other brain areas, and leptin
stimulates POMC neurons (). In conditions of nega-
tive energy balance and leptin deficiency, therefore,
POMC neurons are inhibited, whereas AgRP neurons
are activated (). This combination drives feeding in
the same way that a car is propelled forward by stepping
on the accelerator pedal (AgRP neuron activation) while
also removing one’s foot from the brake pedal (POMC
neuron inactivation).
Just as leptin’s ability to reduce food intake and
body weight requires an intact melanocortin system,
mutations that impair the melanocortin system cause
hyperphagic obesity in both humans and rodent
models (). POMC neurons are also targets for the
action of certain anorexic agents, including seroto-
nergic drugs (). Because the degree of hyperphagia
and obesity induced by defective melanocortin sig-
naling is greatly enhanced by consuming a highly
palatable diet, the melanocortin system appears to play
a physiological role to limit reward-based feeding ().
Additionally, a recent study reported that adjacent to
AgRP and POMC neurons in the ARC is a distinct and
previously unrecognized subset of excitatory neurons
that, when activated, powerfully and rapidly inhibit
feeding (). How these neurons fit into the bigger
picture of energy homeostasis will undoubtedly be the
subject of intensive additional study.
A relevant consideration here is that food intake
regulation involves distinct components operating
across very different time periods. Some neurohu-
moral mechanisms exert very rapid effects of short
duration (e.g., a single meal), whereas others are more
modest but sustained over long time intervals. Yet
each is somehow integrated to enable the precise long-
term constancy of body weight mentioned above, and
each can respond in an integrated manner to per-
turbations of body weight, although not necessarily
through reciprocal effects on the same processes.
Delineating the mechanisms responsible for this
seamless integration is a critical issue for the future
study of the biology of energy homeostasis. Related
issues are how homeostatic and hedonic drivers of
energy intake interact, how this interaction is woven
into long-term control of energy balance, and whether
defects in this integration contribute to obesity
pathogenesis.
Hindbrain circuits and the parabrachial nucleus
Because experimental activation of POMC neurons is
not associated with rapid or potent feeding inhibition,
the melanocortin system does not appear to be im-
portant for meal termination under physiological
conditions. The latter process involves meal-induced
272
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 secretion of gut-derived peptides, such as glucagon-
like peptide  and cholecystokinin, that, following their
release by enteroendocrine cells in the gastrointestinal
(GI) tract, play a physiological role to promote satiety
by activating an ascending visceral sensory circuit ().
This circuit originates with vagal afferent neurons that
convey GI signals to hindbrain areas, including the
nucleus of the solitary tract. Some of these hindbrain
neurons project to the parabrachial nucleus, which is
a central node in this ascending pathway. Of particular
relevance are calcium gene-related peptide expressing
neurons in the parabrachial nucleus (CGRPPBN)
neurons located within the external lateral subnucleus
of the parabrachial nucleus. A variety of stimuli
linked to food consumption activate these neurons,
such as gastric distention, secretion of cholecystokinin,
and glucagon-like peptide . Activation of CGRPPBN
neurons is implicated not only in physiological satiety
and normal meal termination, but also in anorexia
elicited by a variety of aversive stimuli. Because hy-
pothalamic AgRP neurons inhibit CGRPPBN neurons
(), activation of hypothalamic AgRP neurons ap-
pears to stimulate feeding, in part, by inhibiting
CGRPPBN neurons.
Unlike what is seen with POMC neurons, exper-
imental activation of CGRPPBN neurons causes an-
orexia that is rapid in onset, severe, and if sustained
can lead to life-threatening weight loss (). Con-
versely, inactivation of CGRPPBN neurons increases
meal size and blocks the satiating effects of chole-
cystokinin and glucagon-like peptide , implicating
these neurons as physiological mediators of meal
termination (). However, because the increase of
meal size induced by CGRPPBN neuron inactivation is
offset by a proportionate reduction in the number of
meals, net food intake does not change. Therefore,
normal energy homeostasis does not appear to require
activation of these neurons, even though meal ter-
mination does (). Unlike what is observed in mice
with defective melanocortin signaling, CGRPPBN
neuron inactivation also does not increase intake
of a highly palatable diet, nor does it predispose to
diet-induced obesity, whereas POMC neurons play
a physiological role to limit food intake over long time
intervals. Therefore, CGRPPBN neurons provide an
immediate and powerful brake to food consumption
during individual meals.
Importantly, note that although these observations
highlight relevant recent advances in the neurobiology
of feeding, the substantial complexity inherent in food
intake regulation cannot be reduced to a small set of
interacting neurocircuits, and much remains to be
learned in this field. Adding to this complexity is
evidence that some of these neurons can affect feeding
in unexpected ways. For example, CGRPPBN neurons
are implicated not only in the perception of satiety but
also in the transmission of aversive experiences that
can lead to fear conditioning and formation of threat
memory (). It therefore seems somewhat surprising
that activation of these same neurons during a meal
plays a key role in the physiological experience of
satiety. Despite its inherent complexity, further re-
search in this area could lead to novel therapeutic
agents for obesity.
Developmental considerations
Identifying the contribution of developmental in-
fluences to obesity risk is a daunting challenge because,
as noted above, neurons regulating energy homeostasis
are distributed throughout the brain (, ), and our
understanding of the ontogeny and plasticity of these
circuits is incomplete. Nevertheless, available evidence
suggests that developmental influences can and do
contribute to obesity pathogenesis in adults.
In rodents, circuits regulating distinct aspects
of feeding behavior develop asynchronously. The
most basic types of feeding regulation are present
at birth, whereas the development of progressively
more complex systems extends into adolescence.
The capacity to regulate food intake in response to
short-term signals associated with meal termination
develops prior to the maturation of systems governing
energy homeostasis. We can detect autonomic pro-
jections at birth that link rodent hypothalamus and
brainstem to the stomach, and these projections
continue to increase during the lactation period (,
). Food intake is suppressed in response to gastric
distension as early as postnatal day , but it is not
influenced by postabsorptive nutritional signals from
the gut until postnatal day  to  (, ). Ho-
meostatic feeding circuits that sense, integrate, and
relay information about the availability of short- and
long-term energy stores develop in the periweaning
period (–). Projections from ARC neurons that
convey nutritional (e.g., glucose and fatty acids) and
hormonal (e.g., leptin and insulin) signals of energy
status to preautonomic components of the feeding
circuitry form in the third week of life (), and re-
sponsiveness to adiposity signals (such as leptin)
emerges  week after weaning (at  weeks of age) ().
Finally, processes that control motivated/rewarding
aspects of feeding behavior are not established until
postingestive consequences can be reinforced by the
actions of corticolimbic circuits, which mature in the
postweaning period (, ). Although the onset of
corresponding regulatory networks has yet to be
parsed in humans, individual patterns of food intake
are apparently established between  and  years of age
(, ). In both species, therefore, maturation of
feeding circuits continues during the transition to
independent feeding of solid foods.
Progress toward an understanding of develop-
mental events regulating the maturation of feeding
circuits is hampered by the fact that neurons with
opposing effects on food intake are often interspersed
within the same nucleus (). Furthermore, neurons
with similar peptidergic identities (e.g., NPY, AgRP,
GABA, and POMC) can respond differently to the
same hormone and nutrient signals at different de-
velopmental stages (), and they can also regulate
feeding via projections to multiple downstream targets
(). The origin of ARC feeding circuits involves
273
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 progenitor cells in the basal aspect of the third ven-
tricle that differentiate into immature postmitotic
neurons at midgestation in rodents (, ) and by the
end of the first month of gestation in primates (). In
mice, most of these immature ARC neurons initially
express the Pomc gene (), but during the course of
gestation and early part of lactation, Pomc expression is
gradually extinguished in many of these cells. As this
occurs, these neurons begin to express the combina-
tion of neuropeptides and neurotransmitters that
comprise the signaling outputs in the adult (e.g., NPY,
AgRP, and GABA). In AgRP neurons, this process
occurs progressively, with expression of NPY turning
on first, followed by GABA, and finally AgRP. Axonal
outgrowth from ARC neurons to downstream targets
begins at the end of the first postnatal week and is
largely complete by the end of lactation in the third
postnatal week (). In nonhuman primates, in
comparison, ARC projections develop during the third
trimester of gestation (), consistent with the fact that
the lactation period in rodents corresponds develop-
mentally to late gestation in humans (). Conse-
quently, many neurodevelopmental processes that
occur in utero in humans do not take place until after
birth in rodents.
Researchers have postulated a neurodevelopmental
role for the surge of plasma leptin levels that occurs in
rodents at the end of the first postnatal week ().
Although food intake is not sensitive to leptin at
this age, developmental processes (such as axonal
outgrowth) apparently are (). Furthermore, during
lactation, AgRP neurons () require leptin to pro-
ject from the ARC to other areas, such as the
paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus (, ). Fol-
lowing the transition to independent food intake at
weaning, AgRP neurons begin to express adenosine
triphosphate–sensitive potassium channels, which
enable a switch in the response to leptin from exci-
tation to inhibition (). Presynaptic modulation of
AgRP neuronal activity develops with the same
temporal pattern as the postsynaptic systems outlined
above, with excitatory inputs to AgRP becoming fully
developed by the second postnatal week, whereas the
number of inhibitory synapses increases after weaning.
The onset of homeostatic regulation of feeding co-
incides with this final maturation step. These obser-
vations raise the possibility of a “developmental
window” for the maturation of energy homeostasis
neurocircuitry. We clearly need additional work in this
area to further elucidate these developmental factors.
Signals relevant to the external nutritional envi-
ronment (usually transmitted by the mother) can
influence the maturation of ARC neurons. During
gestation, for example, the metabolic status of the
dam (e.g., the presence of obesity-associated hy-
perinsulinemia) can influence the number of ARC
neurons that adopt an anorexigenic POMC vs an
orexigenic NPY cell fate (), and during lactation,
such influences appear to be magnified. For example,
differences in the availability or composition of milk
during lactation can affect the onset and the strength
of the pup-derived leptin surge (, ). Exposure to
maternal obesity or overnutrition during lactation
can also reduce the number of neurons that express
leptin receptors, with lasting impacts on leptin re-
sponsiveness (, ). Furthermore, the extent of
axonal outgrowth from ARC neurons to their various
target sites appears to be influenced by both milk-
derived (insulin) and pup-derived (leptin) hormones
(, ). Finally, if undernutrition sufficient to limit
growth occurs during lactation, the maturation of
systems that provide presynaptic (GABA) and post-
synaptic (adenosine triphosphate–sensitive potassium
channels) inhibitory signals to AgRP neurons is
delayed (). The existence of multiple steps at which
ARC circuits can recalibrate to match the anticipated
external environment likely underlies the extraordi-
nary capacity of these circuits to compensate for early
developmental deficits ().
Although developmental influences on food in-
take regulatory circuits could certainly impact obesity
susceptibility in adults, maternal programming of
obesity susceptibility in rodents appears to arise more
from reductions of resting () and activity-dependent
energy expenditure () than from persistent effects on
food intake (). To better understand these effects,
a brief focus on the ontogeny of autonomic nervous
system neurocircuits regulating thermogenesis is
warranted. The components of energy expenditure
relevant to this discussion include heat produced ei-
ther in the service of thermoregulation or in response
to food consumption (diet-induced thermogenesis).
The ontogeny of sympathetic circuits regulating non-
shivering thermogenesis hinges on the coordinated
development of both the nervous system and its target
organ. In both neonatal rodents and humans, the
primary means of heat generation is via activation of
interscapular brown adipose tissue (iBAT) (–). In
humans, the iBAT depot appears to be maximally
active during infancy, before the development of
systems that increase or decrease core body tem-
perature by shivering or sweating, respectively. In
rodents, iBAT remains the primary source of ther-
moregulatory heat production throughout the life-
span. This distinction between species is critical to
interpreting how rodent studies relate to human
physiology.
Whereas baselines of activity in feeding circuits are
likely established by  to  weeks of age in rodents ()
and by  to  years of age in humans (), circuits
regulating resting energy expenditure (also referred to
as basal metabolic rate) appear to mature later. For
example, when a period of caloric restriction is im-
posed on obese mice between  and  weeks of age, the
result is a paradoxical (and maladaptive) increase of
resting energy expenditure (), implying incomplete
maturation of circuits controlling this response.
Consistent with this observation, weight loss in young
children who are obese is not necessarily followed by
the compensatory decrease of circulating levels of free
triiodothyronine (the active form of thyroid hormone
that helps to determine basal metabolic rate) that
274
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 occurs in adults (). Teenagers appear to be hyper-
metabolic compared with adults (), potentially
owing to higher endogenous brown/beige fat activity
(–).
Unlike what occurs in rodents and other small
animals, iBAT activity appears to decline with age in
humans (, , ). Thermogenic circuits develop in
several distinct phases (). In both species, the iBAT
depot is formed and produces key components of the
thermogenic machinery (e.g., uncoupling protein )
during gestation, but it is not active until after birth.
An immature phase of brown adipose tissue (BAT)
thermogenesis is induced both by hormones released
at parturition (e.g., glucocorticoids and prolactin) and
by factors released in response to the ketogenic diet of
lactation (e.g., FGF) (, ). Hypothalamic neu-
rocircuits that project to the brainstem and modulate
sympathetic nervous system output regulate the
mature phase of BAT thermogenesis; certain hor-
monal signals (e.g., thyroid hormone) are also re-
quired. In rodents, both sympathetic projections and
sympathetic nervous system–dependent stimulation
of BAT activity develop during the suckling period
(–).
Sensitive periods for development of circuits reg-
ulating BAT thermogenesis are distinct from those
that characterize the development of ARC feeding-
relevant circuits, in that neither maternal signals of
metabolic status (, ) nor maternal environmental
exposures () during gestation influence the forma-
tion of the iBAT depot or the expression of its as-
sociated thermogenic machinery. Nevertheless, leptin
deficiency () or severe intrauterine growth retar-
dation can cause diminished iBAT capacity in rodents
(), and leptin administration early in the postnatal
period (postnatal days  to ) can reverse these effects.
Paradoxically, the same treatment leads to impaired
BAT thermogenesis and increased susceptibility to
diet-induced obesity when applied to wild-type mice
nourished normally (, ).
Circuits regulating iBAT thermogenesis remain
plastic throughout the weaning period. For example,
weaning onto a high-fat diet (HFD) or during cold
exposure leads to increased catecholaminergic in-
nervation of iBAT (, ) with lasting impacts on
thermogenic capacity and sensitivity to diet-induced
obesity (-). Environmental programming
of the maximal capacity of iBAT thermogenesis is
correlated with lasting effects on the number of
iBAT-innervating
neurons
in
the
sympathetic
ganglia (). In addition to upstream regulation of
processes controlling sympathetic innervation, iBAT
activation itself may alter the expression of neuro-
trophic factors that promote the outgrowth or survival
of innervating sympathetic neurons. This notion is
predicated on established evidence that signals from
peripheral targets influence innervation by sensory
nerves, and an analogous system operating in ther-
mogenic circuits would provide a means of tuning
neuronal outputs to match the anticipated need for
iBAT thermogenesis.
Integrative physiology of energy homeostasis
Determinants of feeding behavior
In most mammals, food intake is organized into in-
dividual bouts (meals), the frequency and size of which
can vary greatly to accommodate the needs of the
organism. For example, predatory hunters, such as
lions and wolves, may eat only every couple of days,
provided that they can eat the entirety of their kill in
what amounts to a single meal. In contrast, most
humans eat multiple meals per day, and each meal
constitutes a modest fraction of total daily caloric
intake, with the number and size of meals per day
ranging widely across populations and cultures. Ul-
timately, however, moment-to-moment regulation of
intake serves the larger goal of maintaining adequate
fuel stores to support life, and meal size and frequency
can be adjusted so as to meet this goal ().
The identification of neuromolecular mechanisms
that integrate short-term and long-term control of
feeding behavior, such that calorie intake precisely
matches energy expenditure over long time intervals,
will almost certainly enable better preventive and
therapeutic approaches to obesity. The origins of the
flexibility in meal size and frequency that serve this
goal can be traced to differences in the biological
underpinnings of meal initiation and meal cessation.
Specifically, although researchers have proposed that
changes in the internal milieu trigger meal initiation
(e.g., a decrease in circulating levels of glucose or an
increase of plasma ghrelin levels) (–), the de-
cision to begin a meal is also strongly impacted by
a wide range of external variables, including food
availability and palatability, the cost and risk associated
with acquiring food (e.g., threats from predators), and
so forth.
In contrast to the considerable flexibility inherent
in meal onset, meal termination appears to be highly
regulated by postingestive feedback signals and
other physiological variables. Accordingly, meal size
is greatly increased when postingestive feedback is
minimized, such as draining ingested food from the
stomach (). One implication of this observation is
that meal initiation and its associated consequences
(e.g., activation of oral taste receptors) are themselves
insufficient to elicit meal termination. However,
available evidence points to a host of afferent humoral
and neural signals arising from the interaction of
food with the GI tract as primary determinants of the
size of individual meals (see the earlier section titled
“Hindbrain circuits and the parabrachial nucleus”).
Both the time since the last meal and the status of
intercurrent fat stores in the body can strongly in-
fluence the capacity of these physiologic signals to
terminate a meal. Consequently, when energy stores
(and therefore leptin levels) are low, these physiologic
“satiety signals” are less capable of terminating a meal,
thereby resulting in larger meal size (). Such in-
teractions among signals arising from the GI tract and
those generated in proportion to stored fuel adjust
ingestive behavior on a meal-to-meal basis, so as to
275
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 maintain stable body-fat stores. This process is fun-
damental to energy homeostasis, although it is in-
completely understood.
Beyond this physiological control system, varia-
tions in both the type and amount of food available
and the environment in which it is eaten can alter how
much food is consumed at a single meal. For example,
delivery of the same food in the same form repeatedly
can reduce consumption, a phenomenon known as
“sensory-specific satiety” (). A more variable pre-
sentation of the same food can reverse this effect, even
though overall diet composition is unaffected. Even
factors such as the size of one’s plate, the type of
serving utensils, and the number of people in the room
can influence the number of calories consumed in
a single meal (). What has been harder to de-
termine is the extent to which such factors contribute
to sustained alteration of overall energy balance. Al-
though meal-size variation does not by itself appear to
have much impact on body weight (because changes in
meal frequency can compensate for this to maintain
stable caloric intake), few studies have investigated
the long-term consequences of changing meal sizes.
Ongoing investigation into the effects of restricted
feeding and intermittent fasting paradigms may prove
interesting in this regard.
Determinants of energy expenditure
As noted earlier, in free-living adults, energy intake
and expenditure are tightly coupled over long time
intervals. A mismatch between intake and expenditure
of as little as % can result in involuntary changes of
body weight amounting to several pounds per annum,
which (over time) could result in profound obesity.
As weight increases, so does total energy expenditure.
Consequently, total energy intake must increase
gradually over time for a fixed caloric excess to persist.
Although energy intake adjusts well to increased en-
ergy expenditure, this compensation appears to be less
accurate at low levels of energy expenditure, favoring
weight gain in sedentary individuals (). Similarly,
energy expenditure can compensate for a change
of energy intake, although the “coupling” may be
stronger when weight is reduced vs when it is in-
creased. Therefore, whereas weight loss resulting from
reduced caloric intake is strongly resisted by decreases
of energy expenditure (both during and after weight
loss), increases of energy expenditure induced by
overfeeding tend to be more modest and short-lived
().
Although the mechanisms underlying these re-
sponses (and the metabolic/endocrine connections
linking intake and expenditure) are of major clinical
importance, they are incompletely understood. In
sedentary individuals, the following factors are the
primary determinants of energy expenditure: cardio-
respiratory activity and the maintenance of cellular ion
gradients (resting energy expenditure, %); the di-
gestion and initial distribution of food substrates (%);
and both planned or voluntary activity and low-
level unplanned physical activity, including fidgeting
(nonresting energy expenditure, %). Overfeeding
raises energy expenditure in each of these compartments
(due in part due to increases of both thyroid hormone
levels and sympathetic autonomic activity); conversely,
weight loss due to imposed caloric restriction reduces
energy expenditure in each compartment.
Net gain in stored energy cannot occur unless
energy intake exceeds expenditure. Cell-autonomous
characteristics of adipocytes and skeletal myocytes, the
chemical composition of the ingested calories, and the
hormonal responses to these factors may (in theory)
influence the chemical composition of stored energy
(fat or lean mass). Although a low rate of resting
energy expenditure predicts subsequent weight gain in
some studies (), and despite growing interest in the
contribution made by brown and beige adipose tissue
to energy expenditure in humans (), the major
cause of the energy imbalance implicated in the
current obesity epidemic is excessive food intake
(relative to energy expenditure) in the context of
sedentary lifestyles. It would be interesting to identify
the different contributions that autonomic activity, the
thyroid axis, and brown/beige adipocytes make to
resting energy expenditure in individuals who are
preobese. However, it is unlikely that such differences
(if they exist) will account for a substantial amount of
risk variance in comparison with physical activity (for
example). Furthermore, variations in energy intake
(driven by a complex mix of endogenous and exog-
enous factors described earlier) typically have a much
larger effect than variations in energy expenditure on
overall energy balance. Another consideration is that
therapeutic interventions that raise energy expenditure
sufficiently to cause weight loss eventually trigger
increased food intake as a compensatory response. For
these reasons, the ability to influence and clinically
manipulate energy intake is the more pressing goal
where obesity treatment is concerned.
Mechanisms of Obesity Pathogenesis
Genetic factors: evidence for and against
Concordance rates for obesity in studies of both twin
pairs and in adopted children suggest that % to %
of the risk for obesity is heritable (). Reasonable
arguments can be made on evolutionary grounds
that the current Homo sapiens genome is enriched
for “thrifty” alleles that conserve calories and resist
downward perturbations of weight that would—by
virtue of effects on fat mass—impair reproductive
efficiency (). Others have argued that “predation
release” (the reduced threat of predation brought on by
advances in social behavior, weapons, and the use of
fire) enabled more obese and therefore less agile
hominids to escape predation, leading to changes in
population adiposity as a result of random mutations
and genetic drift (). These are not mutually ex-
clusive formulations.
The search for the genetic basis of the apparent
“lipostat” for body fat led ultimately to the molecular
276
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 cloning of the ob and db mutations (in genes encoding
leptin and the leptin receptor, respectively). These in
turn led to the identification of a canonical molecular/
cellular signaling pathway: LEP → LEPR → POMC,
AgRP → PC → MCR.
With the exception of MCR, obesity-causing
coding mutations in these genes are rare in hu-
mans. During the past  decades, genome-wide as-
sociation
studies
(GWASs)
and
exome/genome
sequencing studies have identified a large number of
gene variants associated with more prevalent instances
of obesity. It is disappointing that these strategies have
been able to account for only a small fraction (~% to
% of interindividual variation) of the implied genetic
risk variance for obesity. Sample size has been an issue
with most candidate gene studies, but for some genes
(e.g., MCR, ADRB, BDNF, and PC) the association
studies are convincing, especially because hypomor-
phic alleles of each of these genes cause obesity in mice.
Since , GWASs of obesity have tested asso-
ciations of millions of relatively common (.%) single
nucleotide polymorphisms spaced more or less evenly
across the genome with obesity-related phenotypes
such as BMI, body-fat content, waist/hip ratio, re-
sponse to bariatric surgery, and other phenotypes.
Most of the subjects in these studies have been white
adults. However, some studies included African
Americans, East Asians, and children, and associations
present in one adult population were generally present
in others, as well as in children.
GWASs have identified many loci of small effect
size. Importantly, note that single nucleotide poly-
morphisms themselves simply implicate a genetic
interval and do not necessarily identify the relevant
gene or allele, even if the single nucleotide poly-
morphism is within the coding region of a gene. This
point aside, many of the ~ GWAS-implicated loci
for obesity () are preferentially expressed in brain,
consistent with the large amount of research sup-
porting primacy of the central nervous system in the
control of energy homeostasis. Loci associated with
body-fat distribution, in comparison, primarily mark
genes implicated in adipose tissue biology.
The weak explanatory/predictive power of the
alleles implicated by GWASs in obesity has led to the
suggestion that other (as yet undiscovered) alleles
(genetic “dark matter”) exist that are of much lower
frequency and higher phenotypic impact. Sequencing
of the entire exomes of individuals has the potential to
address this possibility. An alternative explanation is
that individual risk alleles do not act in isolation.
Rather, it is the interaction among different risk alleles
or between these alleles and environmental factors that
results in increased obesity risk. Quantifying these
interactions, however, is a far more daunting challenge
(requiring much larger sample sizes) that has yet to be
met effectively ().
Another area that has yet to be explored (mostly
due to difficulties finding suitable subjects) is whether
alleles of genes that protect against obesity exist
and can be identified. Such genes/alleles would,
presumably, be residue of earlier selection for phe-
notypes enabling predation avoidance, as we alluded to
above. To the extent that these are hypomorphic al-
leles, the genes could provide attractive targets for
inactivating drugs.
Interactions between genes, development,
and environment
Although genetic factors acting in isolation are un-
likely to explain the rapid increase of obesity preva-
lence during the past  years, it remains quite possible
that certain genetic factors enhance the risk of obesity
conferred by environmental influences in ways that
favor positive energy balance (higher calorie intake,
less physical activity, or both) and/or result in the
biological defense of increased fat mass. The long list
of potentially relevant environmental factors includes
changes of diet composition and lifestyle, environ-
mental toxins, infections, changes in the microbiome,
and many others as well. Superimposed on these
influences are the potential roles played by maternal
obesity and diabetes. As discussed in the next section,
the mechanisms responsible for transmitting such
effects range from changes in maternal substrate
provision and endocrine factors to effects conveyed by
placental secretions into fetal circulation and effects on
milk provided during lactation. Vertical “transmission”
of phenotype in this fashion could exacerbate (or
mitigate) shared genetic predispositions between
mother and offspring while also affecting the phe-
notypes of progeny in the absence of primary genetic
predisposition. Factors such as these almost certainly
confound some of the efforts to quantify genetic risk
for obesity and diabetes.
An example of interactions of genetic predis-
position and lifestyle characteristics that influence
obesity risk can be found in how levels of physical
activity and diet composition strongly influence the
impact of obesity risk alleles of the FTO gene (which
encodes “fat mass and obesity-associated protein”)
(). Additionally, single base pair sequence varia-
tions in noncoding portions of the first intron of the
FTO gene have the strongest association with obesity
in human populations yet detected (). The effect
size is not large, but the susceptibility alleles are very
frequent in the population. There are apparently
several mechanisms by which these noncoding
variants affect obesity risk, mediated by effects on
neighboring genes that influence brain development
and/or function, as well as the development of beige
adipose tissue ().
Much of the sequence variation contributing to
obesity risk will also likely be found in noncoding
portions of the genome. Unfortunately, our grasp of
the molecular genetics of noncoding DNA sequence
variation (including epigenetic influences conveyed
by these sequences) is insufficient for a clear under-
standing of how these factors might relate to human
disease susceptibility.
Related to this issue and to the future identification
of obesity therapeutics is an apparent conceptual bias
277
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 regarding the biological consequences of sequence
variants implicated in these studies. The canonical
pathway identified above relates primarily to secreted
peptides/neurotransmitters and their cognate recep-
tors. Even though interruptions of signaling can cause
acute changes of energy expenditure and intake,
these pathways also affect hypothalamic structure/
connectivity both during development and in post-
natal life (). Thus, the consequences of congenital or
acquired disruption may be long-lived. A potentially
important example of a complex structure/pathway
exemplifying a likely combination of such effects is
the primary cilium of hypothalamic and other neurons
that conveys both acute signaling and structural
guidance in the development of circuits affecting food
intake (, ).
These considerations highlight the possibility that
genes that contribute to obesity susceptibility through
direct effects on energy intake and expenditure
may also influence the response to developmental/
environmental factors, such as intrauterine and
perinatal exposures to “obesogenic” diets, toxins, and
others. By such mechanisms, genes/alleles not impli-
cated in responses to earlier evolutionary factors
might be implicated in responses to historically recent
and novel factors. Future research regarding genetic
and environmental/developmental factors that affect
obesity will need to consider these pathways and
mechanisms.
Role of epigenetic modifications
Epigenetic modification of genes typically involves
changes in how transcriptional complexes access
regulatory elements in the genome and can occur
during development and throughout life. That sub-
strates of intermediary metabolism convey some
epigenetic modifications implies a sensitivity to nu-
tritional status (). Although examples exist in
which developmental methylation changes are tied
directly to obesity pathogenesis (, ), such effects
are the exception rather than the rule. Epigenetic
changes can program phenotypes in adulthood by
affecting placental function, fetal growth rate, organ
function,
and the expression
of metastable or
imprinted genes involved in energy balance regulation.
At fertilization, there is a near-global resetting of
the epigenome that accompanies the process of cel-
lular differentiation from totipotent progenitors to
specific cell identities that is mandatory for cell type
specification (). MicroRNAs also play a role in
reinforcing cell fate decisions that progressively restrict
the potential cell fates of progenitor cells. One form of
epigenetic modification involves methylation of CpG
sites that are established during development, and
these can be inherited via semiconservative replication
in progenitor cells. Once established, they are highly
stable in differentiated cells (). Some of these early
methylation events occur on metastable alleles or
imprinted genes, which can impart a lasting impact on
numerous tissues, whereas others are restricted to
specific cell lineages.
That maternal undernutrition increases obesity
risk only during the first trimester is consistent with
a role for early epigenetic processes (). Methyl
donor supplementation during rodent gestation can
reverse adverse metabolic consequences programmed
by undernutrition (, ), and methylation status
in the periconception period is particularly sensitive
to undernutrition. This is because high levels of
homocysteine (due to folate deficiency) suppress the
expression of DNA methylase  (a key enzyme for
maintaining methylation during mitosis) (), and
supplementation with either folic acid or methyl
donors during gestation can reverse these effects (,
, ). Studies in both sheep and humans have
reported hypomethylation of imprinted genes (IGF)
and metastable alleles (POMC) when the subject is
severely undernourished early in gestation, but not
when undernourished only in late gestation (–).
Although early influences on the epigenetic modifi-
cation of metastable or imprinted alleles can persist to
adulthood, these changes do not correlate with later
obesity risk within groups of similarly exposed in-
dividuals (, , ). Genome-wide epigenomic
analysis of children of underweight mothers has
identified thousands of hypomethylated loci (), and
some EDCs can induce hypomethylation that is re-
versible with maternal methyl donor supplementation
(). Future studies that clarify whether global hypo-
methylation results from impaired placental function
or nutrient transport may help to explain why so many
different maternal exposures yield overlapping phe-
notypic outcomes.
Although studies have reported associations be-
tween adult obesity and methylation marks on can-
didate loci in either cord blood or peripheral blood
(, –), these findings are often either dis-
cordant with one another or inconsistent with dif-
ferentially methylated loci identified in a genome-wide
screen (or both). Impacts of maternal obesity may
therefore be conveyed via tissue-specific mechanisms
that cannot be assessed in the analyses of global
methylation patterns in blood samples.
In some brain regions, as well as peripheral tissues
(such as skeletal muscle and BAT), site-specific
demethylation/remethylation driven by transcrip-
tional or neuronal activity reorganizes the methylome
(–). In tissues in which this remodeling is
relatively restricted to the postnatal period, epigenetic
marks reflective of the postnatal environment can
persist to adulthood (). For example, studies
of several animal models of maternal overnutrition/
obesity reported CpG hypermethylation and increased
repressive histone marks on the Pomc locus, which
persist to adulthood (–). These observations are
consistent with the idea that epigenetic marks on the
Pomc promoter underlie alterations in hypothalamic
feeding circuits that diminish leptin responsiveness
and consequently predispose not only to weight gain
but to biological defense of elevated body weight.
However, some studies involving maternal HFD
feeding reported hypomethylation of the Pomc locus,
278
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 as well as dopamine- and opioid-related genes (,
). Even if we can potentially explain these differ-
ences via complex interactions between the effects of
maternal nutrition on early methylation patterns and
the later influences of the postnatal and postweaning
environments on the remodeling of these epigenetic
marks (, , ), they nevertheless challenge the
reliability of epigenetic marks as a biomarker of future
obesity risk.
Exposure to maternal obesity during gestation is
associated with both an increased risk of obesity in
offspring and decreased methylation of a develop-
mental gene (Znf) that promotes adipocyte dif-
ferentiation (–). As this effect is associated with
enhanced adipogenic potential of white adipose tissue
(–), it could conceivably contribute to sub-
sequent obesity risk. Although some early epigenetic
marks are retained in adipose tissue, the adipose tissue
methylome is sensitive to changes in diet, exercise, and
weight loss throughout life (–), perhaps owing
to the many different cell types represented in adipose
tissue.
Collectively, this evidence supports the possibility
of a causal link between the stable transmission of
epigenetic marks, parental nutritional status in the
periconception period, and programming of sub-
sequent obesity risk. However, this hypothesis has very
limited experimental support and hence only modest
potential to explain the complex biology observed
either in the laboratory or in human populations.
Going forward, promising avenues of research include
interdisciplinary approaches that combine epigenetic
and developmental approaches to clarify how specific
epigenetic changes influence overall fetal growth and
tissue-specific developmental processes. Such studies
are needed to delineate whether these processes
contribute to the impact of maternal undernutrition or
overnutrition on obesity risk in offspring.
Developmental factors: evidence for and against
During sensitive periods of development, ontogenic
processes in both brain and peripheral organs can be
modified so as to match anticipated environmental
conditions. Although many exposures during devel-
opment could potentially predispose to obesity in
adulthood, we focus here on two that some researchers
think contribute to the secular trends in obesity: pa-
rental obesity and exposure to EDCs.
Roles of parental body weight or diet
Undernutrition. The impact of developmental
exposure to reduced maternal food availability has
been examined both in animals and in human pop-
ulations around the globe (). Although these
studies often report sustained effects on obesity risk,
outcomes tend to be somewhat variable and sensitive
to both the timing of developmental exposure and the
relative abundance of food in the postnatal environ-
ment. Specifically, early gestational exposure to un-
dernutrition followed by an abundant food supply in
the postnatal period is reliably associated with an
increased risk of obesity (, , ), whereas
exposure late in gestation or the persistence of limited
nutrient availability after birth is often protective
against obesity. These observations are consistent with
the theory that the undernourished fetus experiences
changes in the energy homeostasis system that are
adaptive when limited nutrient availability persists, but
become maladaptive in a nutrient-rich environment
(, ). We have not yet identified the mechanism
underlying such a proposed change.
The observation that some of the adverse conse-
quences of exposure to gestational undernutrition can
be reversed by treatment with leptin () or folic acid
() during the neonatal (but not the peripubertal)
period () supports the existence of discrete sensitive
periods (referred to as “critical windows”) during
which influences on developmental processes can have
a lasting impact on metabolic disease risk. Although
the early postnatal period in rodents likely represents
one such window, whether corresponding processes
occur in humans is unclear, especially because many
developmental processes that occur postnatally in
rodents take place during late gestation in humans
(). Although epidemiological studies suggest that
maternal undernutrition predisposes to obesity in
offspring in humans (), we need additional in-
formation to determine whether such a mechanism
contributes to the increased prevalence of human
obesity in recent decades, and, if so, whether there is
a critical window during which the energy homeostasis
system is impacted in ways that predispose to obesity
in adulthood.
Overnutrition/obesity. Although
parental
obesity is associated with an increased obesity risk in
offspring, parsing contributions made by develop-
mental exposure vs genetic or environmental factors
is a difficult challenge. Studies in a genetically rela-
tively homogeneous population at high risk for obesity
(Pima Indians) point to a link between exposure to
maternal (but not paternal) diabetes during gestation
and an earlier onset of obesity (), whereas maternal
weight loss due to bariatric surgery prevents the
transmission of increased obesity risk (). Combined
with evidence that the strongest predictor of childhood
obesity is pregravid maternal BMI (, ), these
studies support the idea that an obese gestational en-
vironment programs susceptibility to obesity.
In rodents, exposure throughout gestation and
lactation to maternal consumption of an obesogenic
HFD is correlated with persistent increases of adiposity
in offspring (, ). However, this effect appears to
be explained by exposure specifically during lactation,
which leads to increased adiposity, irrespective of
whether offspring are weaned onto chow or an HFD
(, , ). Because the lactation period in rodents
corresponds developmentally to late gestation in
humans, there are very few scenarios in which obesity
in human parents would be limited to only early
or late gestation. Thus, offspring will typically be
exposed
throughout
development.
Whether
the
amount or type of food consumed by the mother has
279
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 developmental consequences that predispose to obe-
sity independently of maternal obesity per se awaits
further study.
Modes of transmission. Although initial ef-
forts to model developmental exposure were focused
on maternal transmission to progeny (F generation),
recent studies have also explored the possibility of both
paternal (F) and transgenerational (F) transmission.
Paternal obesity is reported to impair placental and
fetal growth in mice (), but consequences for
adiposity in offspring are variable (–). Although
paternal exposure to famine has been suggested to
program increased adiposity in humans (), the
contribution of paternal BMI to later obesity risk in
broad-based population studies is weaker than the
maternal contribution (, ), as might be ex-
pected. Although transgenerational transmission of
obesity in humans has been suggested—through the
paternal lineage in a largely homogeneous population
of humans () or inbred rodents ()—such effects
are difficult to quantify, owing to the influence of many
other variables that are difficult to control for.
These data collectively support the notion that
developmental exposure to either undernutrition or
obesity can increase susceptibility to obesity in off-
spring, and that the timing of exposure strongly in-
fluences such effects. However, we need more evidence
to conclude whether these developmental exposures
have contributed to the increase of obesity prevalence
in human populations in recent decades.
Role of EDCs
Numerous studies link exposure to EDCs to a variety
of outcomes of potential relevance to obesity, in-
cluding stimulation of adipogenesis and changes of
insulin secretion, insulin sensitivity, and liver meta-
bolism. A recent Endocrine Society Scientific State-
ment provides a comprehensive review on this topic
(). In many cases, however, the relevance of these
findings to obesity pathogenesis per se remains un-
certain. Our focus here is limited to evidence that
specifically links EDC exposure to the accumulation
and maintenance of excess body fat mass.
That the increase of human exposure to EDCs
parallels the rise in obesity rates in the United States
(, ) raises the possibility of a causal link between
the two. Many of these chemicals are classified as
EDCs based on their capacity to mimic or alter re-
ceptor signaling by endogenous hormones, including
estrogen, testosterone, and thyroid hormone ().
Whereas some EDCs are chemically unstable [e.g.,
bisphenol A (BPA) and pthalates], several are highly
persistent in the environment and bioaccumulate.
These include brominated flame retardants; poly-
chlorinated biphenyls; organotins, such as tributyltin;
organochlorine pesticides, such as dichlorodiphenyl-
trichloroethane; and perfluorinated chemicals (PFCs)
(, ). Although most of the latter chemicals are
currently banned from use (with the exception of
flame retardants), low-level exposure is widespread in
human populations ().
Maternal exposure to ECDs usually occurs via
ingestion of contaminated food or beverages, although
contact with personal care items, plastics, or other
products that contain these chemicals can also con-
tribute. These chemicals can also be transmitted to the
fetus across the placenta or to an infant via breast milk
(). Compared with adults, relative levels of expo-
sure as a function of body weight are higher for fetuses
and infants (), and exposure to low, environ-
mentally relevant levels can program lasting effects
(,). Given that some EDCs can act directly on
adipocytes to promote adipogenesis (–), the
possibility that low levels of these chemicals might
program increased susceptibility to obesity later in life
has been raised ().
The potential contribution to obesity risk of de-
velopmental exposure to EDCs has been extensively
reviewed, including two scientific statements pub-
lished by the Endocrine Society (the first in  and
the second in ) (, ), a workshop sponsored
by National Toxicology Program of the National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (), and
elsewhere in the scientific literature (, , ). Yet
unlike the consensus that exists regarding maternal
metabolic influences on obesity risk, links between
EDC exposure and obesity risk are a focus of ongoing
research, with many key questions remaining unan-
swered. A brief comparison of how concern about the
impact of maternal influences vs EDC exposure on
obesity risk first came to light, and how the two re-
search areas developed thereafter, offers insight into
the origins of some of this uncertainty.
Compelling support for the involvement of ma-
ternal influences in programming metabolic outcomes
first emerged from epidemiological observations in
humans. These observations led to the development of
animal models that have largely recapitulated these
observations across multiple species, thereby creating
a foundation upon which underlying cellular mech-
anisms can be investigated (for examples see earlier
sections on both epigenetics as well as developmental
factors). In comparison, evidence of a link between
EDC exposure and obesity risk began with in vitro
effects on master regulators of adipogenesis. These
observations generated justifiable concern regarding
risk to human populations and hence led to a search
for evidence of a causal link through epidemiological
studies and animal-based research, with mixed results.
To illustrate the challenges inherent in transitioning
from in vitro studies to animal models that are sur-
rogates for human exposure, we focus on two specific
EDCs—PFCs and BPAs.
PFCs
PFCs are widely used to make products more resistant to
stains, grease, and water. Because they break down in the
environment very slowly, they tend to bioaccumulate
and can therefore persist in human tissues for years
(). Some classes of PFCs can bind to and activate
the nuclear receptors peroxisome proliferator–activated
receptor a and/or peroxisome proliferator–activated
280
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 receptor g (a master regulator of adipogenesis), effects
that can promote adipocyte proliferation and differen-
tiation (, , ). These chemicals also have the
potential to alter the methylation status of peroxisome
proliferator–activated receptor g or its target genes in
ways that promote (or retard) adipocyte differentiation
(, ). Other evidence suggests that some PFCs can
alter thyroid function (), which can secondarily
impact both adipocyte biology and energy balance. Fi-
nally, some PFCs increase glucocorticoid concentrations
by inhibiting the degrading enzyme b-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase  (), which also has the potential to
increase obesity risk.
Another relevant consideration is that, as noted
earlier, obesity risk in adults appears to be increased by
any intervention that results in a period of growth
restriction in early development followed by sub-
sequent catch-up growth. Relevant to this issue is that
meta-analysis of  studies in rodents () and nine
studies in humans () supports the hypothesis that
developmental exposure to PFCs reduces fetal growth.
In some cases, therefore, the obesogenic effects of
PFCs may be secondary to nonspecific effects on fetal
growth rather than involving direct effects (e.g., on
adipogenesis) that predispose to obesity later in life.
BPA
As BPA is used in the production of polycarbonate
plastics and epoxy resins, the main exposure route in
humans is via bottles, food-can linings, and food
packaging. Maternal BPA is transported across the
placenta, with significantly higher concentrations in male
fetuses (). Young children can also be exposed through
human milk, as well as through bottle-feeding ().
There is little question that, unlike PFCs, BPA
directly promotes adipogenesis in a peroxisome
proliferator–activated receptor g-independent man-
ner (). Although such an effect cannot, in and of
itself, be assumed to cause or predispose to obesity,
other potentially obesogenic effects of BPA include
activation of estrogen receptor a (, ) or in-
creased glucocorticoid synthesis (through actions
on b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type ) ().
BPA-induced estrogen receptor signaling is also
associated with increased expression of histone-
modifying enzymes that cause global increases in
repressive epigenetic marks (HK trimethylation)
(, ) and changes of mitochondrial metabolism
resulting from altered DNA methylation (). There
is therefore little question as to whether BPA can have
biologically relevant and potentially concerning effects
in vivo as well as in vitro.
Where obesity pathogenesis is concerned, how-
ever, data from animal models of low-level BPA ex-
posure have been inconsistent. Thus, whereas several
studies reported increased postnatal growth in rodents
exposed to low-dose BPA during development
(–), others reported no differences (–)
or even reduced postnatal growth rates (,).
In , a review of the existing literature sponsored
by the National Toxicology Program identified
methodological and statistical concerns that may
contribute to these discrepancies () and raised
awareness about the potential impact of differences in
experimental design that include diets, sex, species,
strain and dose, duration, and route of exposure ().
The same organization subsequently convened a fol-
low-up workshop in  to reassess the state of the
field and highlighted both continuing inconsistencies
in animal data and the need for better metrics of
obesity (fat mass, adipose tissue cellularity, and re-
sponse to an HFD challenge), rather than relying solely
on body weight ().
This workshop also recommended the need for
comparable dose-response information across studies
to address peculiarities in the observed relationship
between BPA exposure and excessive weight gain. For
example, lower BPA-exposure levels often produce
more profound effects than are observed at higher
levels (, , ), and the dose of BPA ( mg/kg/
d) associated with increased adiposity in rats ()
elicits reduced adiposity in mice (, ). Further
complicating matters are sexually dimorphic effects
of BPA exposure, with increased body weight and liver
weight but unchanged adiposity in males, and de-
creased body weight, liver weight, and adiposity in
females (). Such effects may reflect actions of BPA
on brown adipose tissue and physical activity, as well
as on white adipose tissue adipogenesis ().
Additional concerns pertain to the nonmonotonic
dose relationship between effects of BPA on liver vs
adipose tissue. Specifically, doses that promote adi-
posity typically have no effect on the liver, whereas
doses that impact the liver can have opposite effects on
adipose tissue mass (, ). Based on these con-
siderations, the consequences of developmental ex-
posure to any particular dose of BPA on growth
trajectories, body weight, and fat mass would appear to be
influenced by the sum of its various effects on a variety of
tissues. Metabolic and physiological outcomes can be
further influenced by changes of BPA exposure during
gestation vs during lactation and/or bottle-feeding.
Efforts to extend these findings to the conse-
quences of BPA exposure for human obesity risk have
encountered similar inconsistencies. For example,
whereas evidence from cross-sectional studies shows
a link between urinary BPA concentrations and
childhood adiposity (–), prospective studies
have reported reduced growth at birth or at  years of
age (with a stronger effect in girls than boys) (, ),
increased adiposity (), or no effect (, ). In
comparison, a link between BPA exposure and be-
havioral disturbances in boys is a more consistent
finding in prospective epidemiological studies ().
Such effects seem worthy of investigation independent
of the impact of BPA exposure on obesity risk.
Modes of transmission of endocrine disrupting
chemical effects
In rodents, maternal exposure to organotins and
organochloride pesticides (dichlorodiphenyltrichloro-
ethane and methyloxychlor) is linked to increased
281
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 obesity risk in the F generation (–), despite
inconsistent effects on F offspring (). These ob-
servations raise the possibility of effects transmitted via
epigenetic changes in the germline and transgenera-
tional transmission of exposure-specific epigenetic
marks (). Should this interpretation prove correct,
a relevant consideration is that most rodent studies of
transgenerational transmission involve intercrosses be-
tween offspring with the same developmental exposure,
a condition that is less common in humans.
GI factors, bariatric surgery, and the microbiome
Insights from bariatric surgery
There is little question that bariatric surgical pro-
cedures can produce profound and long-lasting
effects on body weight. Chief among these pro-
cedures are Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and vertical
sleeve gastrectomy, each of which can produce
profound and sustained weight loss that cannot be
reliably achieved by other means (). Although
these effects have historically been attributed to
either caloric restriction (converting the stomach
into a small pouch) or malabsorption (the loss of
calories in the feces), neither explanation can ac-
count for the aggregate effects of these procedures.
Of particular relevance is that patients report being
less (rather than more) hungry following these
procedures, even in the face of pronounced weight
loss. In comparison, weight loss due to restricted
food access or to conditions causing GI malab-
sorption clearly increases hunger, suggesting that
these bariatric procedures suppress appetite even in
the face of greatly reduced energy stores—ordinarily,
a potent stimulus to food intake.
Among plausible mechanisms underlying the un-
expected effects of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and
vertical sleeve gastrectomy on appetite is the possibility
that these procedures alter communication between
the GI tract and energy homeostasis neurocircuits
(referred to as the “gut–brain axis”). Researchers have
suggested that signals that might contribute to these
effects include: gastric hormones, such as ghrelin;
intestinal hormones, such as glucagon-like peptide-
and peptide tyrosine tyrosine; and alterations in the
level and composition of bile acids and/or the in-
testinal microbiome (). These various mechanisms
are not mutually exclusive, and each may contribute to
effects on food intake control that result from surgical
alteration of the GI tract. The larger point is that we
cannot attribute the effect of bariatric surgery on
energy homeostasis to simple mechanical alterations
of the physical capacity of the GI tract to ingest food
or absorb nutrients. Rather, these bariatric surgeries
appear to lower the defended level of body-fat mass,
presumably through effects involving the gut–brain
axis.
This conclusion is consistent with rodent studies in
which animals subjected to bariatric surgery actively
defend a lower body weight, even when this involves
increasing food intake (, ). It is tempting to
speculate that this reduction of the defended level of
body-fat mass reflects a reversal of pathogenic pro-
cesses that led to obesity in the first place. However, it
is also possible that the original pathological processes
are not themselves altered by bariatric procedures, and
that, instead, a host of nonphysiological responses
collectively serve to lower the defended level of body
weight. In either case, it is evident that the response of
the gut–brain axis to these procedures can powerfully
impact not only food intake but also the homeostatic
regulation of body-fat mass. Studies that clarify how
this occurs are a high priority, as are studies to identify
cell types in the gut that convey these effects to the
brain and the role of the liver as a potential in-
termediary in these processes.
The gut microbiome and other GI factors
How might such information inform our un-
derstanding of obesity pathogenesis? The importance
of GI signals in meal termination, the potent effects of
bariatric surgery on some of these signals, and the large
sustained reductions in body weight from bariatric
surgery support the hypothesis that obesity patho-
genesis involves changes in the secretion or response
to GI signals related to the composition and quantity
of food. Yet despite the large number of experiments
measuring gut hormone responses to different types of
nutrients in individuals who are obese vs lean, a clear
role for GI factors has yet to emerge, owing to both
biological variation inherent in these responses and
issues related to study design that make it difficult
to compare results across studies. Thus, one can find
examples of differences in almost any gut hormone
response between individuals who are obese vs lean
that are contradicted by examples where there are no
meaningful differences. That obesity risk alleles have
yet to be directly linked to GI signals by GWAS also
argues against a causal relationship between GI factors
and obesity pathogenesis ().
The composition of the ~ pounds of gut bacteria
in humans has also been linked to obesity risk ().
Alterations in diet can profoundly affect the compo-
sition of gut bacteria at multiple levels of the GI tract,
and obesity itself may also affect the composition of
gut bacteria.
In mouse studies, transferring bacteria into the GI
tract of germ-free mice causes weight gain, and the
effect is modestly greater when the source is an obese
donor vs bacteria from a lean animal (). These and
similar observations raise the possibility that the
“obese” microbiome is capable of harvesting more
realizable calories from ingested food than is the lean
microbiome. The problem with this explanation is that
simply increasing the energy harvested from ingested
foods should elicit compensatory adjustments else-
where in the energy homeostasis system (e.g., reduced
energy intake or increased energy expenditure) that
limit weight gain, as detailed above. An alternative
possibility is that gut bacteria generate biological
signals (such as butyrate and other short-chain fatty
acids) that impact the energy homeostasis system, and
282
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 that the composition of gut bacteria influences the
nature of these signals (, ).
Evidence linking specific gut microbiota to obesity
falls well short of establishing a causal relationship.
Indeed, a recent analysis of available literature was
unable to identify a reliable bacterial composition
difference between humans who are lean and humans
who are obese across different studies and different
populations (). Furthermore, a recent clinical trial
found no evidence of a change of energy balance or
other metabolic alterations arising from long-term
administration of antibiotics that profoundly im-
pacted the gut microbiome (). An additional
concern is the reliance on germ-free mice as a main-
stay of basic research in this area. These animals at
baseline have a lean, hypermetabolic phenotype and
are resistant to weight gain when exposed to a HFD;
the mechanistic basis for this phenotype remains
uncertain. Although these phenotypic features tend to
normalize following fecal microbiome transfer, the
body weight of the donor does not dramatically affect
the outcome. This observation is consistent with fecal
transfer experiments designed to supplement an or-
ganism’s existing microbiome. Whether conducted in
rodents or humans, the effect on body weight tends to
be relatively small ().
One other experimental limitation that impacts the
link between obesity and the gut microbiome pertains
to differences between the microbiome of the large
intestine and that of the small intestine. Whereas the
donated microbiome usually is almost exclusively
from fecal (or sometimes cecal) samples, variations in
the microbiome that affect energy balance by influ-
encing signals from the GI tract are likely to involve
organisms in the small intestine as well as those in
the large intestine. These considerations highlight the
many questions that must be answered before the
impact of the microbiome on obesity pathogenesis and
its role in future interventions for obesity prevention
or treatment are understood.
Social and economic factors
There is little question that in the United States obesity
rates are linked inversely to socioeconomic status
(SES), especially among women (–). Deducing
cause and effect is complicated by the difficulty in-
herent in controlling for numerous potentially con-
founding variables (e.g., genetic or epigenetic factors
and environmental exposures that impact develop-
ment). The focus of this section, therefore, is not on
whether obesity is caused by economic insecurity
(which cannot be ascertained from the available evi-
dence) but rather on the extent to which highly
prevalent social, economic, and cultural conditions
influence obesity risk. Once we identify factors that
impart the greatest obesity risk, future studies can
begin to investigate whether and how they impact the
energy homeostasis system.
Unlike obesity statistics at the national or county
levels, which can obscure social disparities, new geo-
localization and mapping approaches (–) are
able to track the patterns of social, racial, and resi-
dential segregation and their impact on body weight
and health. At the census tract level, obesity prevalence
rates can vary from . to ., depending on where
people live. Analyses that accounted for variations in
residential property values, education, and incomes
have accounted for % of the variance in census tract
obesity rates in Seattle/King County (). Such
geolocalized data provide a clear link (although not
necessarily causal) between social and economic fac-
tors and obesity risk at the level of individual
neighborhoods (with the caveats noted above).
Disparities in the types and amounts of food
consumed are obvious candidates to explain this as-
sociation. Low-cost foods are typically highly pro-
cessed, composed of refined grains with added sugars
and added fats, inexpensive, and palatable. Such foods
combine low cost with high energy density and high
reward value, are readily available in underserved areas
(), and tend to be preferentially selected by lower
income groups (, ). Excess consumption of such
foods is linked to rising obesity rates (, ), and it
has been suggested that (for some individuals) con-
sumption of such foods mitigates the stress of daily life
(–), thereby adding to their high inherent re-
ward value.
Studies that link diverse aspects of the built en-
vironment with diet quality metrics, reported physical
activity, and weight and health outcomes have iden-
tified proximity to supermarkets, grocery stores, and
other services, as well as access to parks and other
opportunities for physical activity as independent
predictors of obesity risk (, –). These and
other studies (–) collectively identified an as-
sociation between lower obesity rates and locations
that have pedestrian safety; low crime; attractive
streets; well-maintained parks; and homes within close
physical proximity to supermarkets, parks, sidewalk
cafes, and landmark buildings. Conversely, locations
with physical disorder; poor sidewalk quality; close
proximity to bars, liquor stores, fast food, and con-
venience stores; and the presence of garbage, litter,
and graffiti were associated with higher BMI in some
(–) but not other studies (–).
Residential property values provide insight into
variations in the wealth of an individual or area; they
also offer a useful alternative metric with which to
assess the relationship between the built environment
and obesity risk (, ). A Seattle-based study that
examined the associations among perceived measures
of the environment, residential property values, and
BMIs () found that for each $, increase in
property value, obesity prevalence was .% lower
(). Factors related to poverty or wealth may
therefore account for at least some of the link between
the built environment and obesity risk.
Access to healthy foods is one such measure. The
concept of a “food desert,” defined as a low-income
area in which the nearest supermarket is at least  mile
away (), has become a focus of public health
policies aimed at improving both diet and health (,
283
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 , ). Studies suggest that BMI tends to be lower
in areas where the consumption of vegetables and
fruits is higher (–). Researchers tend to gauge
a specific population’s access to healthy food and food
choices largely in terms of whether their neighborhood
has a high density of (or long distance to) healthy food
sources (–). Yet the risk of obesity is not reliably
associated with distances between home and multiple
food sources (). Rather, it is the type of super-
market by price that is significantly associated with
obesity rates, even after adjusting for the distance to
the store and other sociodemographic and lifestyle
variables.
Where obesity risk is concerned, therefore, access
to healthier foods might be associated more with
economics than with distance from home. This pos-
sibility highlights the need to focus beyond neigh-
borhood geographic boundaries. One way to do this is
to use GPS tracking methods that capture actual food
shopping behaviors (). Whether improved access
of low-income populations to healthy foods will re-
duce obesity prevalence is an important unanswered
question that the food desert formulation does not
completely address.
Studies in the United States (), United Kingdom
(), France (, ), Finland (), Belgium (),
Ireland (), and Australia () have reported that
diet quality is directly linked to SES. Studies on food
pattern modeling suggest that imposing a cost con-
straint leads to food choices that are energy-dense but
nutrient-poor, similar in composition to diets con-
sumed by lower income groups (, ). Recent
economic analyses of empirical data from the United
Kingdom provide a relevant example (). In the
wake of the economic recession of , more British
consumers turned to foods with lower cost per calorie
(), and obesity rates in the United Kingdom in-
creased dramatically in recent years; today they are the
highest in Europe (). We need additional studies to
investigate the extent to which economically driven
dietary changes contributed to the observed increase of
obesity prevalence.
Overall, these observations support the testable
hypothesis that obesity risk increases among lower
income groups when their food budgets are in-
sufficient to ensure access to a healthy diet. This
hypothesis points to the larger question of how such
an effect ultimately causes not only weight gain but
also the biological defense of elevated fat mass—the
two processes that define the obese state. To reiterate
a key point, factors that predispose to positive energy
balance alone are insufficient to explain how obesity
persists, because individuals who are obese defend
their body-fat stores as effectively as do lean in-
dividuals (), and switching to a “healthy” diet and
lifestyle is insufficient to restore elevated body weight
to normal in the vast majority of individuals (). In
addition to predisposing to weight gain, therefore,
dietary, behavioral, and other factors linking SES status
to obesity risk must also affect the energy homeostasis
system in ways that raise the defended level of body
adiposity. Studies that clarify how this occurs are a key
priority for the field.
Diet composition, lifestyle, and obesity risk
Although an increase of average energy intake relative
to energy expenditure during the past  to  decades
can be inferred from the mean increase of adult body
weight (. kg) in the United States (), the relative
contributions of increased energy intake and reduced
physical activity to this increase cannot be known with
certainty, nor can the extent to which energy balance is
impacted by other variables [e.g., sleep deprivation,
decreased variation in environmental temperature
(owing to heating and air conditioning), drugs causing
weight gain, decreased smoking, and possible de-
velopmental exposures discussed earlier] (). Al-
though data from Swinburn et al. (–) suggest
that increased energy intake is sufficient to account for
recent population increases of body weight without
invoking large decreases of physical activity, epide-
miological evidence points to a concomitant increase
of sedentary behaviors. For example, Church et al.
() reported that energy expenditure related to
occupation has drastically decreased over time, and
that the associated reduction of energy expenditure
likely contributes to the increase of mean body weight
in the United States.
Impact of diet composition on obesity risk
The extent to which changes in diet composition drive
the obesity epidemic has been a matter of considerable
controversy for decades. To what extent does con-
sumption of highly processed foods (especially snack
foods) with higher levels of sugars and fats (and rel-
atively low fiber) play a role? What about excess
consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages, including
soda, juice-based drinks, and sports drinks? These are
questions of great public interest, particularly where
diets high in fat vs carbohydrate content are concerned
(, ).
Diets of different macronutrient composition can
theoretically affect energy balance by altering overall
caloric intake, energy expenditure, or both. However,
available data argue against major effects on accu-
mulation of body-fat mass, so long as energy intake is
held constant (discussed further below). For this
reason, the focus of the debate has shifted toward the
effects of diet composition on caloric intake.
Substantial debate surrounds the question of
whether the effects of dietary lipids to increase both
palatability and caloric density contribute to their
overconsumption (, ) or whether increased
dietary carbohydrate content (and the associated in-
sulin response, in particular) plays a uniquely im-
portant role in obesity pathogenesis (, –). As
noted earlier, researchers have suggested that dietary
carbohydrates—and refined sugars in particular—
increase insulin secretion. This suppresses lipolysis and
the associated release of fatty acids from the adipose
tissue while also preferentially directing dietary fat
toward storage. Some researchers propose that the
284
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 ensuing depletion of circulating fatty acids triggers
a state of “cellular starvation” for metabolically active
tissues, such as heart, muscle, and liver. Such changes
might then induce both an adaptive decrease of energy
expenditure () and an increase of food intake (,
, ) that together conspire to cause obesity.
Extending this logic, replacing dietary carbohydrate
with fat should reduce insulin secretion while in-
creasing fat mobilization and the oxidation of circu-
lating free fatty acids, effects that together protect
against obesity.
A number of observations challenge this premise.
For one, despite the known ability of insulin to inhibit
adipocyte lipolysis, and despite the fact that in un-
controlled diabetes severe insulin deficiency causes
unrestrained lipolysis, there is little direct evidence that
insulin’s antilipolytic action is an independent de-
terminant of fat mass. Furthermore, the hyper-
insulinemia of obesity is typically associated with
normal or elevated circulating glucose and fatty acid
levels (), a combination inconsistent with a state of
insulin-mediated cellular starvation.
The foregoing discussion raises the perennial
question: Is a calorie a calorie? In other words, can
consumption of different types of foods predispose to
weight gain independently of the number of calories
consumed? To address this question, one study placed
 volunteers who were obese or overweight on an
isocaloric ketogenic diet (% carbohydrate) for  weeks.
This study revealed a marginal (~ kcal/d) but
statistically significant effect of the ketogenic diet to
increase -hour energy expenditure measured in
a respiratory chamber (), but the effect waned over
time and was not associated with significant loss of fat
mass. This finding is consistent with other studies
showing that carbohydrate restriction does not increase
energy expenditure unless accompanied by an increase in
protein content (as is the case in most low carbohydrate
diets, but not the study described above) (–).
When calorie intake is held constant, therefore,
body-fat accumulation does not appear to be affected
by even very pronounced changes in the amount of fat
vs carbohydrate in the diet. With regard to obesity risk,
the clear implication is that the impact of a change of
diet composition is primarily due to the number of
calories consumed, with changes of energy expendi-
ture, fat oxidation, or other aspects of nutrient han-
dling being less important. Given that diets high in
simple sugars and processed carbohydrates tend to
be calorie-dense, low in satiety-promoting fiber and
other nutrients, affordable, widely available, and often
heavily marketed, it is perhaps not surprising that such
diets can favor an increase of overall energy intake. In
comparison, mechanisms related to increased insulin
secretion, nutrient partitioning, cellular starvation,
or other internal processes do not appear to explain
the putative benefits of low-carbohydrate or low-
glycemic index diets. Furthermore, a recent review
of weight-loss diets () reported that although low-
carbohydrate, higher fat diets led to slightly greater
weight loss than did low-fat diets (~ kg), the overall
difference was trivial and does not justify recom-
mending one diet over the other for weight-loss
purposes. Although low-carbohydrate diets have been
suggested to be helpful—by virtue of increased energy
expenditure—for maintaining reduced body weight
(), differences in protein content of the comparison
diets confound this conclusion.
Roles of sedentary behavior, exercise, and
nonexercise activity thermogenesis
As mentioned earlier, the increasing global prevalence
of obesity may involve sedentary behavior in addition
to changes of food availability and/or diet composi-
tion. Analyzing the contribution of physical activity to
total daily energy expenditure and obesity risk is
a complex challenge. Although originally described
as a single component of total daily energy expendi-
ture (in addition to basal metabolic rate and diet-
induced thermogenesis), overall physical activity can
be subdivided into three distinct components: sed-
entary behaviors, nonexercise activity thermogenesis
(NEAT), and planned/structured activity (exercise).
Researchers estimate that during the past  years
reductions in occupational physical activity have de-
creased total daily energy expenditure by . cal-
ories per day ().
Physical activity is now widely accepted to be the
most variable component of daily energy expenditure
in people. Surprisingly, however, increased physical
activity is largely ineffective as a stand-alone weight
loss intervention, even though it should promote
negative energy balance as effectively as does dietary
energy restriction (). The explanation for this
paradox is presumably that among those individuals
susceptible to obesity, the energy homeostasis system
compensates for increased energy expenditure (by
increasing energy intake and thus resisting weigh loss)
better than it compensates for increased energy intake
(by increasing energy expenditure to protect against
weight gain). Nevertheless, adherents to vigorous
physical activity programs are more likely to keep lost
weight off than are those who remain relatively in-
active. For example, according to the National Weight
Control Registry, individuals who lose a substantial
amount of weight and keep it off for an extended
period of time, on average, are those who engage in at
least  minutes per day of physical activity (). This
effect of exercise may involve a partial reversal of the
effects of weight loss to increase muscle work efficiency
(). The key point is that although increased physical
activity has not proven effective as a stand-alone
treatment of obesity, it can help to sustain weight
loss achieved by other means.
In addition to structured activity, Levine et al. ()
reported that energy expended passively in activities of
daily living is both a determinant of total daily energy
expenditure and an obesity risk factor. NEAT activities
are those that occur during normal daily life, rather
than in structured bouts of exercise () (e.g., sitting;
standing; fidgeting; walking; computer work; house-
related chores; activities associated with personal
285
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 hygiene, such as bathing; and occupation-related ac-
tivities). Evidence that reduced NEAT contributes
independently to obesity pathogenesis stems from
the observations that NEAT tends to be lower in
individuals who are obese vs lean, and it does not
appear to change in response to either weight gain
(in normal weight subjects) or weight loss (in subjects
who are obese) (). With regard to the magnitude
of this effect, a study of  individuals conducted in
the late s using a room calorimeter () found
that energy expenditure attributable to spontaneous
physical activity averaged  kcal/d but varied from
 to  kcal/d between individuals. We need ad-
ditional research to establish the extent to which
variations in NEAT play a causative role in obesity
pathogenesis.
Other factors
Smoking cessation
Another potentially causative factor in the steady
increase of obesity prevalence in the United States and
other Westernized societies is a substantial concom-
itant reduction in rates of cigarette smoking. Smoking
cessation is reliably associated with weight gain (),
presumably owing to withdrawal of the pharmaco-
logical effect of nicotine to suppress food intake and
weight gain. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are
found on hypothalamic POMC neurons, and activa-
tion of these receptors can reduce food intake and
body weight in animal models (). Although re-
duced tobacco use can therefore be expected to in-
crease the average body weight of a population, obesity
nevertheless remains a problem among both current
smokers and those who have never smoked.
Infectious factors
The emergence of obesity as a global pandemic has
spurred interest in the hypothesis that one or more
infectious agents play a causal role. Consistent with
this view, individuals who are obese have a reduced
immune response to some vaccines, raising the pos-
sibility that susceptibility to infections could play a role
in the development of obesity. For example, infection
with the AD- virus is reported to cause adipocyte
proliferation and increased body weight in a variety of
preclinical models, and individuals who are obese have
significantly higher antibody titers to this virus than do
lean individuals (). However, without better evi-
dence of a causal relationship between such infectious
agents and human obesity, this mechanism seems
unlikely to be a major factor underlying the current
obesity epidemic. Should such evidence one day
emerge, it would profoundly impact current ap-
proaches to obesity treatment and prevention.
Mechanisms for biological defense of elevated
body-fat mass
Although the many intrinsic (e.g., genetic) and
extrinsic (e.g., diet composition, lifestyle, or SES)
variables discussed herein can favor positive energy
balance and predispose to weight gain, a fundamental
unanswered question is how elevated body-fat mass
comes to be biologically defended in individuals who
are obese. Under certain circumstances (e.g., mutation
of genes encoding leptin or POMC) we can predict
that the biologically defended level of body fat will
increase due to the direct, deleterious effects on the
energy homeostasis system. In the vast majority of
individuals who are obese, however, researchers have
yet to identify a clearly definable energy homeostasis
defect (genetic or otherwise) to explain this phe-
nomenon. Part of the experimental problem is that
subtle differences in energy intake and/or expenditure
can have large effects on adiposity over time, and once
an individual is in weight equilibrium, any etiological
differences are no longer present.
A very modest but persistent energy balance
mismatch (~% to % more calories consumed than
expended per year) can explain the slow but contin-
uous accumulation of additional body fat over many
years that is characteristic of most humans who are
obese. Although an acute increase of body-fat mass is
often reversible, incremental, sustained increases of
body fat typically end up becoming part of the total
body-fat mass that is biologically defended. It is for this
reason that the weight loss induced by a change of diet
or lifestyle (e.g., changes that might be expected to
remedy an acquired defect in the energy homeostasis
system arising from a maladaptive diet, sedentary
behavior) is often ultimately regained, even in the face
of adherence to a more healthy diet and lifestyle. These
observations imply that although the mechanism
underlying the gradual increase in the defended level
of body fat may have been triggered by one or more of
the many environmental exposures discussed earlier,
simple withdrawal of the offending exposure is un-
likely to reverse the increased body fat once it becomes
established. Instead, the energy homeostasis system
has been upwardly reset, so that the higher level of
body fat is relatively resistant to lifestyle interven-
tions, similar to a genetically determined increase
of adiposity (although not necessarily by the same
mechanisms).
How might such a change in the energy homeo-
stasis system be acquired? Although we still wait for
definitive answers, recent work offers potential in-
sights. In many tissues (including liver, skeletal muscle,
adipose tissue, and the vasculature) obesity is associ-
ated with activation of inflammatory processes marked
by the invasion of macrophages or related immune
cells and an associated increase in the expression of
proinflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis
factor-a or interleukin- (). Because the onset of
this inflammation either coincides with obesity onset
or occurs after obesity is established, it is likely
a consequence rather than a cause of obesity ().
However, the hypothalamus is an exception. In
this region of the brain inflammation and tissue
injury occur in discrete areas involved in energy ho-
meostasis, and this effect is evident before obesity
develops. When rats or mice are placed on an HFD,
286
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 inflammatory markers become detectable in the hy-
pothalamic ARC within  to  hours, well before
body-fat mass has increased (). Moreover, this
inflammatory response is associated with expansion
and activation of hypothalamic glial cells, a process
referred to as “reactive gliosis” (the prototypical brain
response to neuron injury). Specifically, switching
either mice or rats from standard chow to a HFD
(which predisposes to diet-induced obesity) induces
both microgliosis and astrogliosis (activation of
microglia and astrocytes, respectively) in the ARC
within  week (, ).
Although it is tempting to draw a causal link
between the evidence of injury to a key brain area for
energy homeostasis and defense of elevated body-fat
mass, we emphasize that neither the causes nor the
consequences of this local hypothalamic reaction to
HFD feeding are known. Thus, the idea that the
defense of elevated fat mass results from this hy-
pothalamic gliosis (by impairing the capacity of key
neurons to respond to input from leptin and/or other
pertinent humoral/neural signals) is a hypothesis that
needs further testing. A working model posits that in
susceptible animals or humans, an increase in the
consumption of saturated fat () and/or other
nutrients induces injury of hypothalamic neurons
involved in energy homeostasis, which in turn trig-
gers reactive gliosis. Alternatively, the diet switch may
directly activate local microglia (a macrophage-like
cell found only in the central nervous system), a re-
sponse that sets off a vicious cycle by causing neuron
injury and triggering more gliosis. In either case, it is
not difficult to envision how this type of local reaction
might dampen the capacity of ARC neurons to re-
spond to humoral (leptin) or neural inputs relevant
to body weight control and thereby favor the defense
of elevated body-fat mass. It is noteworthy that
studies have reported radiological evidence of gliosis
in the mediobasal hypothalamus in humans who are
obese (, ), as well as in rodent models. What
distinguishes this type of mechanism from those
discussed earlier is its potential to account for the
defense of elevated body weight in acquired (envi-
ronmental) forms of obesity. The extent to which it
does so is a key priority for future work.
Concluding Remarks and Future Directions
In closing, we attempt to distill from foregoing sections
a set of key areas for possible further investigation.
The two distinct components of
obesity pathogenesis
To be viable, theories of obesity pathogenesis must
account not only for how excess body fat is acquired,
but also for how excess body fat comes to be bi-
ologically defended. To date, the preponderance of
research has focused on the former. However, we
must consider the possibility that some (perhaps
even most) mechanisms underlying weight gain are
distinct from those responsible for the biological
defense of excess fat mass. A key question, therefore,
is how the energy homeostasis system comes to
defend an elevated level of fat mass (analogous to
the defense of elevated blood pressure in patients
with hypertension). Answering this question re-
quires an improved understanding of the neuro-
molecular elements that underlie a “defended” level
of body fat. What are the molecular/neuroanatomic
predicates that help establish and defend a “set
point” for adiposity? How do these elements reg-
ulate feeding behavior and/or energy expenditure,
so as to achieve long-term energy balance? By what
mechanisms is an apparently higher set point
established and defended in individuals who are
obese?
Given that recovery of lost weight (the normal,
physiological response to weight loss irrespective of
one’s starting weight) is the largest single obstacle
to effective long-term weight loss, we cannot overstate
the importance of a coherent understanding of
obesity-associated alterations of the energy homeo-
stasis system.
Developmental determinants of the biologically
defended level of body-fat mass
By what means do intrauterine, perinatal, and later
developmental processes influence the defended
level of body fat or set point? How do these factors
interact with underlying genetic determinants? Is
overnutrition during development associated with
premature maturation of feeding circuits? Can in-
sight into key developmental influences be leveraged
into strategies to reset the defended level at a lower
value? Can these insights enable us to prevent the
homeostatic system from being reset at a higher
level in the first place? Do these developmental
exposures act directly on energy balance neuro-
circuitry, or do such effects occur indirectly as
a result of nonspecific changes in rates of placental
or fetal growth that impact adult body weight and
composition? Answers to these questions will po-
tentially help us develop maternal/prenatal in-
terventions that could protect against obesity in
adulthood.
Interactions between genetics, epigenetics,
developmental influences, and the environment
Although many studies (e.g., those based on identical
twins reared apart) identify a major role for heritable
factors as determinants of obesity susceptibility,
GWAS data indicate that only a small fraction (~%)
of obesity risk is attributable to identifiable allelic
variants. One potential explanation for this discrep-
ancy is that nongenetic factors that contribute to
heritability, such as epigenetic modification or de-
velopmental influences, make a major contribution to
obesity risk. Another possibility is that interactions
among risk alleles themselves and/or between risk
alleles, epigenetic factors, and developmental factors
play a role. Beyond these considerations, each of these
287
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 potential contributors to obesity risk can interact with
environmental factors as well. In other words, many
heritable factors may increase obesity risk, not by
causing obesity so much as by conferring susceptibility
to obesogenic environmental factors. It seems plau-
sible, for example, that certain obesity risk alleles
expressed in the brain, perhaps through an interaction
with neurodevelopmental consequences of gestational
events, enable energy homeostasis neurocircuits to
become reset around a higher level of body fat stores.
It is also possible that the likelihood of such an
outcome is maximized by consuming a diet that is
highly palatable, energy dense, and in abundant supply.
Establishing suitable experimental models with which to
test such concepts is a necessity.
Future directions for EDC research
Although available evidence suggests that EDCs can
impact the function of genes important for the control
of energy balance and adipocyte function, human
data and results from in vivo animal studies have yet
to clearly demonstrate an increased risk of obesity
conferred by developmental EDC exposure. Among
the confounding factors that may underlie this un-
certainty are differential developmental impacts of
EDC exposure on metabolically relevant organs (e.g.,
liver and adipose tissue) (, ), variation stem-
ming from sex- and dosage-specific effects, and the
potential for combinations of EDCs to cause syner-
gistic effects (, , , ). These concerns
highlight the need to focus animal research on those
exposures most closely linked to untoward impacts on
child health. Meta-analyses of prospective epidemio-
logical data may ultimately help to identify those
combinations and doses of EDC exposures that are
most often associated with increased adiposity and
that are observed consistently across species. Studies
that define conditions in mice that recapitulate the
molecular and/or epigenetic signatures of EDC ex-
posure in humans will also be important (, ).
Given difficulties inherent in obtaining human tissue,
the identification of biomarkers for these effects (e.g.,
changes of liver function) may also help to accelerate
progress in this field. Lastly, the question of whether
developmental EDC exposure increases obesity risk
through nonspecific effects on fetal growth (),
rather than or in addition to direct effects on energy
homeostasis system components, must be addressed.
Lessons learned from the weight-reduced state
The weight-reduced state is a distinct metabolic/
behavioral condition created when body weight is
reduced below its biologically defended level. Studies
during the past  years (, , –) have shown
that maintenance of a reduced body weight (e.g., %
or more) is associated with reductions in energy ex-
penditure (in part conveyed by increased contractile
efficiency of skeletal muscle) due to reduced sympa-
thetic autonomic activity and circulating thyroid
hormones. Reduced body weight increases hunger as
well, creating a “perfect metabolic storm” for weight
regain (). It also reduces circulating leptin con-
centrations in proportion to lost body fat, and (con-
sistent with the leptin threshold formulation described
earlier) providing exogenous leptin in doses just
sufficient to restore circulating leptin to preweight loss
concentrations relieves some of the autonomic, en-
docrine, energy expenditure, and behavioral pheno-
types associated with the weight-reduced state (,
). Whether such “physiological leptin replacement”
strategies can protect against recovery of lost weight is
an important unanswered question.
Rather than viewing recovery of lost weight as
a therapeutic failure or as evidence of noncompliance
with a prescribed treatment regimen, patients and
practitioners alike should view this phenomenon as an
expected physiological response to weight loss. This
perspective emphasizes the importance of identifying
strategies to subvert these responses. It is likely that the
pharmacology involved in maintaining the weight-
reduced state is different—qualitatively and quanti-
tatively—from that relevant to the induction of weight
loss. The Food and Drug Administration should allow
for such differences in the licensing of pharmacologic
agents for the treatment of obesity.
The gut–brain axis
There are a number of key questions pertaining to the
gut microbiome. Does it influence the defended level
of body-fat mass and, if so, to what extent? How do
microbial influences interact with the energy ho-
meostasis system? To what extent do host genetic or
other variables influence such effects? Is the micro-
biome a potential target for obesity treatment? How
do bariatric surgical procedures, such as Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass or vertical sleeve gastrectomy, reduce the
biologically defended level of body-fat stores? Which
specific signals emanating from the GI tract account
for this phenomenon?
Identifying the relevant signals and delineating
how they influence energy homeostasis neurocircuitry
will ultimately inform potential drug-therapy targets.
Dietary influences
Growing evidence suggests that (for practical pur-
poses) the answer to the question, “Is a calorie a cal-
orie?” is “yes.” Calories derived from different dietary
constituents (fats, carbohydrates, and proteins) do not
differ significantly in their inherent capacity to pro-
mote weight gain by affecting energy expenditure or
nutrient partitioning, so long as total calorie intake is
held constant (). From this we infer that the effects
of diet composition per se on metabolic variables
suggested to contribute to obesity pathogenesis (e.g.,
those related to plasma levels of glucose, insulin, or
free fatty acids; inherent differences in the propensity
of adipocytes to store fat; or the gut microbiome) do
not play a clinically significant causal role unless they
promote increased calorie intake (). The thera-
peutic potential of interventions primarily targeting
these metabolic processes per se, therefore, seems
limited.
288
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Stratification of obesity outcomes
Given that not all individuals who are obese are subject
to the same level of risk of comorbidities, we need
improved strategies for identifying biomarkers pre-
dictive of these comorbidities (e.g., diabetes, hyper-
tension, dyslipidemia, and cardiovascular disease).
Similarly, strategies for identifying both predictors of
future obesity comorbidity risk (to enable effective
preventive intervention) and responsiveness to a spe-
cific therapeutic intervention (to improve outcomes by
identifying what intervention is best suited for each
individual) are also a high priority.
Unraveling mechanisms linking the environment
to defense of elevated body weight
A seemingly unlimited number of environmental
variables appear to predispose to weight gain. Poverty
is a case in point. How does its influence on food
choices, behavior, and activity translate to increased
obesity risk? How can we best account for the impact
on obesity risk of differences in the racial and ethnic
mix between low and higher SES communities? Do
developmental factors also contribute?
Disarticulating differences in genetic background
from the impact of diet, lifestyle, and other environ-
mental variables is a daunting challenge. That the
impact of low SES on obesity risk is greater among
women than men () points to poorly understood
interactions between environment and biology that
influence obesity risk. Studies that delineate how in-
teractions among these factors impact the energy
homeostasis system are critical.
Identifying and mitigating environmental
risk factors
Taking poverty again as an example, does an identi-
fiable set of motivations, attitudes, and beliefs con-
tribute to obesity susceptibility? Which specific
elements related to SES predispose not only to weight
gain but to the biological defense of elevated body-fat
stores, and how might they be mitigated? Can such
mitigation efforts reduce obesity risk?
Translating basic science into more
effective pharmacotherapy
Can anatomic and functional imaging of the human
brain be used, in combination with suitable behavioral
measures, to translate cognitive, regulatory, and hedonic
aspects of human feeding behavior into effective new
pharmacologic approaches to the treatment of obesity?
An improved understanding of those aspects of ingestive
behavior that are not driven directly by homeostatic
mechanisms controlling body weight is critical to
strategies for obesity prevention. Insight gained from
animal models of these “hedonic” processes may
eventually identify relevant pathways and molecules.
However, we will need better behavioral and imaging
tools to fully understand these phenotypes in humans.
References
1.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Defining
adult overweight and obesity. Available at: www.cdc.
gov/obesity/adult/defining.html. Accessed 7 June 2017.
2.
Bray G. Battle of the Bulge: A History of Obesity Research.
Philadelphia, PA: Dorrance Publishing; 2007.
3.
Cohen PA, Maller G, DeSouza R, Neal-Kababick J.
Presence of banned drugs in dietary supplements fol-
lowing FDA recalls. JAMA. 2014;312:1691–1693.
4.
Schwartz TB. Henry Harrower and the turbulent begin-
nings of endocrinology. Ann Intern Med. 1999;131:702–706.
5.
Schwartz MW. Can the history of modern endocri-
nology shape the future of obesity? Mol Endocrinol. 2015;
29:155–157.
6.
Cushing H. Disorders of the pituitary gland: retro-
spective and prophetic. JAMA. 1921;76:1721–1726.
7.
Norberg M, Lindvall K, Jenkins PL, Emmelin M, Lonnberg G,
Nafziger AN. Self-rated health does not predict 10-year
weight change among middle-aged adults in a longitudinal
population study. BMC Public Health. 2011;11:748.
8.
Keys A. Human starvation and its consequences. J Am
Diet Assoc. 1946;22:582–587.
9.
Leibel RL, Rosenbaum M, Hirsch J. Changes in energy
expenditure resulting from altered body weight. N Engl J
Med. 1995;332:621–628.
10.
Butryn ML, Webb V, Wadden TA. Behavioral treatment
of obesity. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2011;34:841–859.
11.
Alamuddin N, Wadden TA. Behavioral treatment of the
patient with obesity. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am.
2016;45:565–580.
12.
Pasquet P, Apfelbaum M. Recovery of initial body
weight and composition after long-term massive
overfeeding in men. Am J Clin Nutr. 1994;60:861–863.
13.
Diaz EO, Prentice AM, Goldberg GR, Murgatroyd PR,
Coward WA. Metabolic response to experimental
overfeeding in lean and overweight healthy volunteers.
Am J Clin Nutr. 1992;56:641–655.
14.
Rosenbaum M, Leibel RL. Physiological adaptations fol-
lowing weight reduction. In: Brownell KD, Walsh BT, eds.
Eating Disorders and Obesity: A Comprehensive Handbook.
3rd ed. New York, NY: Guilford Press; 2017:51–56.
15.
Flier JS. Clinical review 94: What’s in a name? In search of
leptin’s physiologic role. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998;83:
1407–1413.
16.
Farooqi IS, Jebb SA, Langmack G, Lawrence E, Cheetham CH,
Prentice AM, Hughes IA, McCamish MA, O’Rahilly S. Effects
of recombinant leptin therapy in a child with congenital
leptin deficiency. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:879–884.
17.
Farooqi IS, O’Rahilly S. Monogenic human obesity
syndromes. Recent Prog Horm Res. 2004;59:409–424.
18.
Myers MG, Jr, Heymsfield SB, Haft C, Kahn BB, Laughlin
M, Leibel RL, Tschop MH, Yanovski JA. Challenges and
opportunities of defining clinical leptin resistance. Cell
Metab. 2012;15:150–156.
19.
Myers MG, Jr. Leptin keeps working, even in obesity. Cell
Metab. 2015;21:791–792.
20.
Leibel RL. The role of leptin in the control of body
weight. Nutr Rev. 2002;60(Suppl 10):S15–S19.
21.
Zhang Y, Leibel RL. Leptin and body weight. In: Brownell
KD, Walsh BT, eds. Eating Disorders and Obesity: A
Comprehensive Handbook. 3rd ed. New York, NY:
Guilford Press; 2017:15–21.
22.
Muoio DM, Dohm GL, Fiedorek FT, Jr, Tapscott EB,
Coleman RA. Leptin directly alters lipid partitioning in
skeletal muscle. Diabetes. 1997;46:1360–1363.
23.
Voshol PJ, Jong MC, Dahlmans VE, Kratky D, Levak-
Frank S, Zechner R, Romijn JA, Havekes LM. In
muscle-specific
lipoprotein
lipase-overexpressing
mice, muscle
triglyceride
content
is increased
without inhibition of insulin-stimulated whole-body
and muscle-specific glucose uptake. Diabetes. 2001;
50:2585–2590.
24.
Shimada M, Shimano H, Gotoda T, Yamamoto K,
Kawamura M, Inaba T, Yazaki Y, Yamada N. Over-
expression of human lipoprotein lipase in transgenic
mice. Resistance to diet-induced hypertriglyceridemia
and hypercholesterolemia. J Biol Chem. 1993;268:
17924–17929.
25.
Wang H, Eckel RH. Lipoprotein lipase: from gene to
obesity. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2009;297:
E271–E288.
26.
Brunzell JD. Familial lipoprotein lipase deficiency. In:
Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD, Ledbetter N, Mefford
HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, eds. GeneReviews [Internet].
Seattle, WA: University of Washington; 1993–2017. 1999
Oct 12 [updated 2011 Dec 15].
27.
Ludwig DS, Friedman MI. Increasing adiposity: conse-
quence or cause of overeating? JAMA. 2014;311:
2167–2168.
28.
Hall KD, Chen KY, Guo J, Lam YY, Leibel RL, Mayer LES,
Reitman ML, Rosenbaum M, Smith SR, Walsh TB,
Ravussin E. Energy expenditure and body composition
changes after an isocaloric ketogenic diet in overweight
and obese men. Am J Clin Nutr. 2016;104(2):324–333.
29.
Kennedy GC. The hypothalamus and obesity. Proc R Soc
Med. 1966;59:1276–1277.
289
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 30.
Seeley RJ, Berridge KC. The hunger games. Cell. 2015;160:
805–806.
31.
Boden G, Chen X, Mozzoli M, Ryan I. Effect of fasting on
serum leptin in normal human subjects. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 1996;81:3419–3423.
32.
Krashes MJ, Koda S, Ye C, Rogan SC, Adams AC, Cusher
DS, Maratos-Flier E, Roth BL, Lowell BB. Rapid, reversible
activation of AgRP neurons drives feeding behavior in
mice. J Clin Invest. 2011;121:1424–1428.
33.
Morton GJ, Meek TH, Schwartz MW. Neurobiology of
food intake in health and disease. Nat Rev Neurosci.
2014;15:367–378.
34.
Chen Y, Lin YC, Kuo TW, Knight ZA. Sensory detection
of food rapidly modulates arcuate feeding circuits. Cell.
2015;160:829–841.
35.
Chen Y, Lin YC, Zimmerman CA, Essner RA, Knight ZA.
Hunger neurons drive feeding through a sustained,
positive reinforcement signal. eLife. 2016;5:e18640.
36.
Betley JN, Xu S, Cao ZF, Gong R, Magnus CJ, Yu Y,
Sternson SM. Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit
a negative-valence teaching signal. Nature. 2015;521:
180–185.
37.
Schwartz MW, Seeley RJ, Woods SC, Weigle DS,
Campfield LA, Burn P, Baskin DG. Leptin increases
hypothalamic pro-opiomelanocortin mRNA expression
in the rostral arcuate nucleus. Diabetes. 1997;46:
2119–2123.
38.
Xu Y, Jones JE, Lauzon DA, Anderson JG, Balthasar N,
Heisler LK, Zinn AR, Lowell BB, Elmquist JK. A serotonin
and melanocortin circuit mediates D-fenfluramine an-
orexia. J Neurosci. 2010;30:14630–14634.
39.
Butler AA, Marks DL, Fan W, Kuhn CM, Bartolome M,
Cone RD. Melanocortin-4 receptor is required for acute
homeostatic responses to increased dietary fat. Nat
Neurosci. 2001;4:605–611.
40.
Fenselau H, Campbell JN, Verstegen AM, Madara JC, Xu
J, Shah BP, Resch JM, Yang Z, Mandelblat-Cerf Y, Livneh
Y, Lowell BB. A rapidly acting glutamatergic ARC→PVH
satiety circuit postsynaptically regulated by a-MSH. Nat
Neurosci. 2017;20:42–51.
41.
Grill HJ, Hayes MR. Hindbrain neurons as an essential
hub in the neuroanatomically distributed control of
energy balance. Cell Metab. 2012;16:296–309.
42.
Roman CW, Derkach VA, Palmiter RD. Genetically and
functionally defined NTS to PBN brain circuits medi-
ating anorexia. Nat Commun. 2016;7:11905.
43.
Campos CA, Bowen AJ, Schwartz MW, Palmiter RD.
Parabrachial CGRP Neurons Control Meal Termination.
Cell Metab. 2016;23:811–820.
44.
Han S, Soleiman MT, Soden ME, Zweifel LS, Palmiter RD.
Elucidating an affective pain circuit that creates a threat
memory. Cell. 2015;162:363–374.
45.
Rinaman L, Roesch MR, Card JP. Retrograde trans-
ynaptic pseudorabies virus infection of central auto-
nomic circuits in neonatal rats. Brain Res Dev Brain Res.
1999;114:207–216.
46.
Rinaman L. Ontogeny of hypothalamic-hindbrain
feeding
control
circuits. Dev Psychobiol. 2006;48:
389–396.
47.
Phifer CB, Browde JA, Jr, Hall WG. Ontogeny of glucose
inhibition of independent ingestion in preweanling rats.
Brain Res Bull. 1986;17:673–679.
48.
Swithers SE, Hall WG. A nutritive control of in-
dependent ingestion in rat pups emerges by nine days
of age. Physiol Behav. 1989;46:873–879.
49.
Ahima RS, Prabakaran D, Flier JS. Postnatal leptin surge
and regulation of circadian rhythm of leptin by feeding.
Implications for energy homeostasis and neuroendo-
crine function. J Clin Invest. 1998;101:1020–1027.
50.
Mistry AM, Swick A, Romsos DR. Leptin alters meta-
bolic rates before acquisition of its anorectic effect in
developing neonatal mice. Am J Physiol. 1999;277:
R742–R747.
51.
Ahima RS, Hileman SM. Postnatal regulation of hy-
pothalamic neuropeptide expression by leptin: impli-
cations for energy balance and body weight regulation.
Regul Pept. 2000;92:1–7.
52.
Steculorum SM, Bouret SG. Developmental effects of
ghrelin. Peptides. 2011;32:2362–2366.
53.
Grove KL, Smith MS. Ontogeny of the hypothalamic
neuropeptide Y system. Physiol Behav. 2003;79:47–63.
54.
Rozin P, Kalat JW. Specific hungers and poison avoid-
ance as adaptive specializations of learning. Psychol Rev.
1971;78:459–486.
55.
Ogawa H, Hasegawa K, Ohgushi M, Murayama N.
Changes in properties of neuronal responses in two
cortical taste areas in rats of various ages. Neurosci Res.
1994;19:407–417.
56.
Deheeger M, Akrout M, Bellisle F, Rossignol C, Rolland-
Cachera MF. Individual patterns of food intake devel-
opment in children: a 10 months to 8 years of age
follow-up study of nutrition and growth. Physiol Behav.
1996;59:403–407.
57.
Skinner JD, Ziegler P, Pac S, Devaney B. Meal and snack
patterns of infants and toddlers. J Am Diet Assoc. 2004;
104(Suppl. 1):65–70.
58.
Cone RD, Cowley MA, Butler AA, Fan W, Marks DL, Low
MJ. The arcuate nucleus as a conduit for diverse signals
relevant to energy homeostasis. Int J Obes Relat Metab
Disord. 2001;25(Suppl 5):S63–S67.
59.
Hill JW, Elias CF, Fukuda M, Williams KW, Berglund ED,
Holland WL, Cho YR, Chuang JC, Xu Y, Choi M, Lauzon
D, Lee CE, Coppari R, Richardson JA, Zigman JM, Chua S,
Scherer PE, Lowell BB, Bruning JC, Elmquist JK. Direct
insulin and leptin action on pro-opiomelanocortin
neurons is required for normal glucose homeostasis
and fertility. Cell Metab. 2010;11:286–297.
60.
Betley JN, Cao ZF, Ritola KD, Sternson SM. Parallel,
redundant circuit organization for homeostatic control
of feeding behavior. Cell. 2013;155:1337–1350.
61.
Shimada M, Nakamura T. Time of neuron origin in
mouse hypothalamic nuclei. Exp Neurol. 1973;41:
163–173.
62.
Padilla SL, Carmody JS, Zeltser LM. Pomc-expressing
progenitors give rise to antagonistic neuronal pop-
ulations in hypothalamic feeding circuits. Nat Med.
2010;16:403–405.
63.
Grove KL, Grayson BE, Glavas MM, Xiao XQ, Smith MS.
Development of metabolic systems. Physiol Behav. 2005;
86:646–660.
64.
Koutcherov Y, Mai JK, Ashwell KW, Paxinos G. Orga-
nization of human hypothalamus in fetal development.
J Comp Neurol. 2002;446:301–324.
65.
Bouret SG, Draper SJ, Simerly RB. Trophic action of
leptin on hypothalamic neurons that regulate feeding.
Science. 2004;304:108–110.
66.
Baquero AF, de Solis AJ, Lindsley SR, Kirigiti MA, Smith
MS, Cowley MA, Zeltser LM, Grove KL. Developmental
switch of leptin signaling in arcuate nucleus neurons.
J Neurosci. 2014;34:9982–9994.
67.
Bouyer K, Simerly RB. Neonatal leptin exposure specifies
innervation of presympathetic hypothalamic neurons
and improves the metabolic status of leptin-deficient
mice. J Neurosci. 2013;33:840–851.
68.
Carmody JS, Wan P, Accili D, Zeltser LM, Leibel RL.
Respective contributions of maternal insulin resistance
and diet to metabolic and hypothalamic phenotypes of
progeny. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011;19(3):492–499.
69.
Yura S, Itoh H, Sagawa N, Yamamoto H, Masuzaki H,
Nakao K, Kawamura M, Takemura M, Kakui K, Ogawa
Y, Fujii S. Role of premature leptin surge in obesity
resulting from intrauterine undernutrition. Cell Metab.
2005;1:371–378.
70.
Bautista CJ, Boeck L, Larrea F, Nathanielsz PW, Zam-
brano E. Effects of a maternal low protein isocaloric diet
on milk leptin and progeny serum leptin concentration
and appetitive behavior in the first 21 days of neonatal
life in the rat. Pediatr Res. 2008;63:358–363.
71.
Bouret SG, Gorski JN, Patterson CM, Chen S, Levin BE,
Simerly RB. Hypothalamic neural projections are per-
manently disrupted in diet-induced obese rats. Cell
Metab. 2008;7:179–185.
72.
Glavas MM, Kirigiti MA, Xiao XQ, Enriori PJ, Fisher SK,
Evans AE, Grayson BE, Cowley MA, Smith MS, Grove KL.
Early overnutrition results in early-onset arcuate leptin
resistance and increased sensitivity to high-fat diet.
Endocrinology. 2010;151:1598–1610.
73.
Cottrell EC, Mercer JG, Ozanne SE. Postnatal devel-
opment of hypothalamic leptin receptors. Vitam Horm.
2010;82:201–217.
74.
Vogt MC, Paeger L, Hess S, Steculorum SM, Awazawa M,
Hampel B, Neupert S, Nicholls HT, Mauer J, Hausen AC,
Predel R, Kloppenburg P, Horvath TL, Bruning JC.
Neonatal insulin action impairs hypothalamic neuro-
circuit formation in response to maternal high-fat
feeding. Cell. 2014;156(3):495–509.
75.
Juan De Solis A, Baquero AF, Bennett CM, Grove KL,
Zeltser LM. Postnatal undernutrition delays a key step
in the maturation of hypothalamic feeding circuits. Mol
Metab. 2016;5:198–209.
76.
Luquet S, Perez FA, Hnasko TS, Palmiter RD. NPY/AgRP
neurons are essential for feeding in adult mice but can
be ablated in neonates. Science. 2005;310:683–685.
77.
Lerea JS, Ring LE, Hassouna R, Chong AC, Szigeti-Buck K,
Horvath TL, Zeltser LM. Reducing adiposity in a critical
developmental window has lasting benefits in mice.
Endocrinology. 2016;157(2):666–678.
78.
Baker MS, Li G, Kohorst JJ, Waterland RA. Fetal growth
restriction promotes physical inactivity and obesity in
female mice. Int J Obes. 2015;39:98–104.
79.
Lagisz M, Blair H, Kenyon P, Uller T, Raubenheimer D,
Nakagawa S. Little appetite for obesity: meta-analysis of
the effects of maternal obesogenic diets on offspring
food intake and body mass in rodents. Int J Obes (Lond).
2015;39(1):1669–1678.
80.
Aherne W, Hull D. Brown adipose tissue and heat
production in the newborn infant. J Pathol Bacteriol.
1966;91:223–234.
81.
Heaton JM. The distribution of brown adipose tissue in
the human. J Anat. 1972;112:35–39.
82.
Cannon B, Nedergaard J. Brown adipose tissue: function
and physiological significance. Physiol Rev. 2004;84:
277–359.
83.
Oscai LB, McGarr JA. Evidence that the amount of food
consumed in early life fixes appetite in the rat. Am J
Physiol. 1978;235:R141–R144.
84.
Fisher JO, Cai G, Jaramillo SJ, Cole SA, Comuzzie AG,
Butte NF. Heritability of hyperphagic eating behavior
and appetite-related hormones among Hispanic chil-
dren. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2007;15:1484–1495.
85.
Wolters B, Lass N, Reinehr T. TSH and free tri-
iodothyronine concentrations are associated with
weight loss in a lifestyle intervention and weight regain
afterwards in obese children. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013;168:
323–329.
86.
Wang Z, Heymsfield SB, Ying Z, Pierson RN, Jr, Gallagher
D, Gidwani S. A cellular level approach to predicting
resting energy expenditure: evaluation of applicability in
adolescents. Am J Hum Biol. 2010;22:476–483.
87.
Gelfand MJ, O’Hara SM, Curtwright LA, Maclean JR. Pre-
medication to block [18F]FDG uptake in the brown
adipose tissue of pediatric and adolescent patients.
Pediatr Radiol. 2005;35:984–990.
88.
Drubach LA, Palmer EL III, Connolly LP, Baker A, Zur-
akowski D, Cypess AM. Pediatric brown adipose tissue:
detection, epidemiology, and differences from adults.
J Pediatr. 2011;159:939–944.
89.
Gilsanz V, Smith ML, Goodarzian F, Kim M, Wren TA,
Hu HH. Changes in brown adipose tissue in boys and
290
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 girls during childhood and puberty. J Pediatr 2012;
160(4):604–609.e1.
90.
Tanuma Y, Tamamoto M, Ito T, Yokochi C. The oc-
currence of brown adipose tissue in perirenal fat in
Japanese. Arch Histol Jpn. 1975;38:43–70.
91.
Symonds ME, Henderson K, Elvidge L, Bosman C,
Sharkey D, Perkins AC, Budge H. Thermal imaging to
assess age-related changes of skin temperature within
the supraclavicular region co-locating with brown ad-
ipose tissue in healthy children. J Pediatr. 2012;161:
892–898.
92.
Zeltser LM. Developmental influences on circuits
programming susceptibility to obesity. Front Neuro-
endocrinol. 2015;39:17–27.
93.
Villarroya F, Vidal-Puig A. Beyond the sympathetic tone:
the new brown fat activators. Cell Metab. 2013;17:
638–643.
94.
Berry DM, Daniel H. Sympathetic nerve development in
the brown adipose tissue of the rat. Can J Physiol
Pharmacol. 1970;48:160–168.
95.
Xiao XQ, Williams SM, Grayson BE, Glavas MM, Cowley
MA, Smith MS, Grove KL. Excess weight gain during the
early postnatal period is associated with permanent
reprogramming of brown adipose tissue adaptive
thermogenesis. Endocrinology. 2007;148:4150–4159.
96.
Hull D, Vinter J. The development of cold-induced
thermogenesis and the structure of brown adipocyte
mitochondria in genetically-obese (ob/ob) mice. Br J
Nutr. 1984;52:33–39.
97.
Bazin R, Eteve D, Lavau M. Evidence for decreased GDP
binding to brown-adipose-tissue mitochondria of obese
Zucker (fa/fa) rats in the very first days of life. Biochem J.
1984;221:241–245.
98.
Ashwell M, Holt S, Jennings G, Stirling DM, Trayhurn P,
York DA. Measurement by radioimmunoassay of the
mitochondrial uncoupling protein from brown adipose
tissue of obese (ob/ob) mice and Zucker (fa/fa) rats at
different ages. FEBS Lett. 1985;179:233–237.
99.
Felipe A, Villarroya F, Mampel T. Effects of maternal
hypocaloric diet feeding on neonatal rat brown adipose
tissue. Biol Neonate. 1988;53:105–112.
100. Vickers MH, Gluckman PD, Coveny AH, Hofman PL,
Cutfield WS, Gertler A, Breier BH, Harris M. Neonatal
leptin treatment reverses developmental programming.
Endocrinology. 2005;146:4211–4216.
101. Vickers MH, Gluckman PD, Coveny AH, Hofman PL,
Cutfield WS, Gertler A, Breier BH, Harris M. The effect of
neonatal leptin treatment on postnatal weight gain in
male rats is dependent on maternal nutritional status
during pregnancy. Endocrinology. 2008;149:1906–1913.
102. Ashwell M, Dunnett SB. Fluorescent histochemical
demonstration of catecholamines in brown adipose
tissue from obese (ob/ob) and lean mice acclimated at
different temperatures. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1985;14:
377–386.
103. Morrison SF, Ramamurthy S, Young JB. Reduced rearing
temperature augments responses in sympathetic out-
flow to brown adipose tissue. J Neurosci. 2000;20:
9264–9271.
104. Rothwell NJ, Stock MJ. Effects of early overnutrition and
undernutrition in rats on the metabolic responses to
overnutrition in later life. J Nutr. 1982;112:426–435.
105. Doi K, Kuroshima A. Lasting effect of infantile cold
experience on cold tolerance in adult rats. Jpn J Physiol.
1979;29:139–150.
106. Woods SC. The eating paradox: how we tolerate food.
Psychol Rev. 1991;98:488–505.
107. Campfield LA, Smith FJ. Blood glucose dynamics and
control of meal initiation: a pattern detection and
recognition theory. Physiol Rev. 2003;83:25–58.
108. Cummings DE. Ghrelin and the short- and long-term
regulation of appetite and body weight. Physiol Behav.
2006;89:71–84.
109. Rasmussen BA, Breen DM, Luo P, Cheung GW, Yang CS,
Sun B, Kokorovic A, Rong W, Lam TK. Duodenal ac-
tivation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase induces
vagal afferent firing and lowers glucose production in
rats. Gastroenterology. 2012;142(4):834–843.e3.
110. Davis JD, Smith GP, Miesner J. Postpyloric stimuli are
necessary for the normal control of meal size in real
feeding and sham feeding rats. Am J Physiol. 1993;265:
R888–R895.
111. Woods SC. Gastrointestinal satiety signals I. An over-
view of gastrointestinal signals that influence food in-
take. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004;286:
G7–G13.
112. Rolls BJ. Sensory-specific satiety. Nutr Rev. 1986;44:
93–101.
113. Wansink B. Environmental factors that increase the
food intake and consumption volume of unknowing
consumers. Annu Rev Nutr. 2004;24:455–479.
114. Mayer J, Thomas DW. Regulation of food intake and
obesity. Science. 1967;156:328–337.
115. Tataranni PA, Harper IT, Snitker S, Del Parigi A, Vozarova
B, Bunt J, Bogardus C, Ravussin E. Body weight gain in
free-living Pima Indians: effect of energy intake vs ex-
penditure. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2003;27:
1578–1583.
116. Cohen P, Spiegelman BM. Brown and beige fat: mo-
lecular parts of a thermogenic machine. Diabetes. 2015;
64:2346–2351.
117. O’Rahilly S, Farooqi IS. Human obesity as a heritable
disorder of the central control of energy balance. Int J
Obes. 2008;32(Suppl 7):S55–S61.
118. Frisch RE. Body fat, menarche, fitness and fertility. Hum
Reprod. 1987;2:521–533.
119. Speakman JR. A nonadaptive scenario explaining the
genetic predisposition to obesity: the “predation re-
lease” hypothesis. Cell Metab. 2007;6:5–12.
120. Locke AE, Kahali B, Berndt SI, Justice AE, Pers TH, Day FR,
Powell C, Vedantam S, Buchkovich ML, Yang J, Croteau-
Chonka DC, Esko T, Fall T, Ferreira T, Gustafsson S,
Kutalik Z, Luan J, Magi R, Randall JC, Winkler TW, Wood
AR, Workalemahu T, Faul JD, Smith JA, Hua Zhao J, Zhao
W, Chen J, Fehrmann R, Hedman AK, Karjalainen J,
Schmidt EM, Absher D, Amin N, Anderson D, Beekman
M, Bolton JL, Bragg-Gresham JL, Buyske S, Demirkan A,
Deng G, Ehret GB, Feenstra B, Feitosa MF, Fischer K, Goel
A, Gong J, Jackson AU, Kanoni S, Kleber ME, Kristiansson
K, Lim U, Lotay V, Mangino M, Mateo Leach I, Medina-
Gomez C, Medland SE, Nalls MA, Palmer CD, Pasko D,
Pechlivanis S, Peters MJ, Prokopenko I, Shungin D,
Stancakova A, Strawbridge RJ, Ju Sung Y, Tanaka T,
Teumer A, Trompet S, van der Laan SW, van Setten J,
Van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Wang Z, Yengo L, Zhang W,
Isaacs A, Albrecht E, Arnlov J, Arscott GM, Attwood AP,
Bandinelli S, Barrett A, Bas IN, Bellis C, Bennett AJ, Berne
C, Blagieva R, Bluher M, Bohringer S, Bonnycastle LL,
Bottcher Y, Boyd HA, Bruinenberg M, Caspersen IH, Ida
Chen YD, Clarke R, Daw EW, de Craen AJ, Delgado G,
Dimitriou M, Doney AS, Eklund N, Estrada K, Eury E,
Folkersen L, Fraser RM, Garcia ME, Geller F, Giedraitis V,
Gigante B, Go AS, Golay A, Goodall AH, Gordon SD,
Gorski M, Grabe HJ, Grallert H, Grammer TB, Grassler J,
Gronberg H, Groves CJ, Gusto G, Haessler J, Hall P, Haller
T, Hallmans G, Hartman CA, Hassinen M, Hayward C,
Heard-Costa NL, Helmer Q, Hengstenberg C, Holmen O,
Hottenga JJ, James AL, Jeff JM, Johansson A, Jolley J,
Juliusdottir T, Kinnunen L, Koenig W, Koskenvuo M,
Kratzer W, Laitinen J, Lamina C, Leander K, Lee NR,
Lichtner P, Lind L, Lindstrom J, Sin Lo K, Lobbens S,
Lorbeer R, Lu Y, Mach F, Magnusson PK, Mahajan A,
McArdle WL, McLachlan S, Menni C, Merger S, Mihailov
E, Milani L, Moayyeri A, Monda KL, Morken MA, Mulas
A, Muller G, Muller-Nurasyid M, Musk AW, Nagaraja R,
Nothen MM, Nolte IM, Pilz S, Rayner NW, Renstrom F,
Rettig R, Ried JS, Ripke S, Robertson NR, Rose LM, Sanna
S, Scharnagl H, Scholtens S, Schumacher FR, Scott WR,
Seufferlein T, Shi J, Vernon Smith A, Smolonska J,
Stanton AV, Steinthorsdottir V, Stirrups K, Stringham
HM, Sundstrom J, Swertz MA, Swift AJ, Syvanen AC, Tan
ST, Tayo BO, Thorand B, Thorleifsson G, Tyrer JP, Uh
HW, Vandenput L, Verhulst FC, Vermeulen SH, Verweij
N, Vonk JM, Waite LL, Warren HR, Waterworth D,
Weedon MN, Wilkens LR, Willenborg C, Wilsgaard T,
Wojczynski MK, Wong A, Wright AF, Zhang Q. LifeLines
Cohort S, Brennan EP, Choi M, Dastani Z, Drong AW,
Eriksson P, Franco-Cereceda A, Gadin JR, Gharavi AG,
Goddard ME, Handsaker RE, Huang J, Karpe F, Kathir-
esan S, Keildson S, Kiryluk K, Kubo M, Lee JY, Liang L,
Lifton RP, Ma B, McCarroll SA, McKnight AJ, Min JL,
Moffatt MF, Montgomery GW, Murabito JM, Nicholson
G, Nyholt DR, Okada Y, Perry JR, Dorajoo R, Reinmaa E,
Salem RM, Sandholm N, Scott RA, Stolk L, Takahashi A,
Tanaka T, Van’t Hooft FM, Vinkhuyzen AA, Westra HJ,
Zheng W, Zondervan KT, Consortium AD, Group A-
BW, Consortium CAD, Consortium CK, Glgc, Icbp,
Investigators M, Mu TC, Consortium MI, Consortium P,
ReproGen C, Consortium G, International Endogene C,
Heath AC, Arveiler D, Bakker SJ, Beilby J, Bergman RN,
Blangero J, Bovet P, Campbell H, Caulfield MJ, Cesana G,
Chakravarti A, Chasman DI, Chines PS, Collins FS,
Crawford DC, Cupples LA, Cusi D, Danesh J, de Faire U,
den Ruijter HM, Dominiczak AF, Erbel R, Erdmann J,
Eriksson JG, Farrall M, Felix SB, Ferrannini E, Ferrieres J,
Ford I, Forouhi NG, Forrester T, Franco OH, Gansevoort
RT, Gejman PV, Gieger C, Gottesman O, Gudnason V,
Gyllensten U, Hall AS, Harris TB, Hattersley AT, Hicks
AA, Hindorff LA, Hingorani AD, Hofman A, Homuth G,
Hovingh GK, Humphries SE, Hunt SC, Hypponen E, Illig
T, Jacobs KB, Jarvelin MR, Jockel KH, Johansen B, Jou-
silahti P, Jukema JW, Jula AM, Kaprio J, Kastelein JJ,
Keinanen-Kiukaanniemi SM, Kiemeney LA, Knekt P,
Kooner JS, Kooperberg C, Kovacs P, Kraja AT, Kumari M,
Kuusisto J, Lakka TA, Langenberg C, Le Marchand L,
Lehtimaki T, Lyssenko V, Mannisto S, Marette A, Matise
TC, McKenzie CA, McKnight B, Moll FL, Morris AD,
Morris AP, Murray JC, Nelis M, Ohlsson C, Oldehinkel
AJ, Ong KK, Madden PA, Pasterkamp G, Peden JF, Peters
A, Postma DS, Pramstaller PP, Price JF, Qi L, Raitakari OT,
Rankinen T, Rao DC, Rice TK, Ridker PM, Rioux JD,
Ritchie MD, Rudan I, Salomaa V, Samani NJ, Saramies J,
Sarzynski MA, Schunkert H, Schwarz PE, Sever P,
Shuldiner AR, Sinisalo J, Stolk RP, Strauch K, Tonjes A,
Tregouet DA, Tremblay A, Tremoli E, Virtamo J, Vohl
MC, Volker U, Waeber G, Willemsen G, Witteman JC,
Zillikens MC, Adair LS, Amouyel P, Asselbergs FW,
Assimes TL, Bochud M, Boehm BO, Boerwinkle E,
Bornstein SR, Bottinger EP, Bouchard C, Cauchi S,
Chambers JC, Chanock SJ, Cooper RS, de Bakker PI,
Dedoussis G, Ferrucci L, Franks PW, Froguel P, Groop LC,
Haiman CA, Hamsten A, Hui J, Hunter DJ, Hveem K,
Kaplan RC, Kivimaki M, Kuh D, Laakso M, Liu Y, Martin
NG, Marz W, Melbye M, Metspalu A, Moebus S,
Munroe PB, Njolstad I, Oostra BA, Palmer CN, Pedersen
NL, Perola M, Perusse L, Peters U, Power C, Quertermous
T, Rauramaa R, Rivadeneira F, Saaristo TE, Saleheen D,
Sattar N, Schadt EE, Schlessinger D, Slagboom PE,
Snieder H, Spector TD, Thorsteinsdottir U, Stumvoll M,
Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden AG, Uusitupa M, van der
Harst P, Walker M, Wallaschofski H, Wareham NJ,
Watkins H, Weir DR, Wichmann HE, Wilson JF, Zanen P,
Borecki IB, Deloukas P, Fox CS, Heid IM, O’Connell JR,
Strachan DP, Stefansson K, van Duijn CM, Abecasis GR,
Franke L, Frayling TM, McCarthy MI, Visscher PM,
Scherag A, Willer CJ, Boehnke M, Mohlke KL, Lindgren
CM, Beckmann JS, Barroso I, North KE, Ingelsson E,
Hirschhorn JN, Loos RJ, Speliotes EK. Genetic studies of
body mass index yield new insights for obesity biology.
Nature. 2015;518:197–206.
291
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 121. Loos RJF, Leibel RL. Genetics of obesity and related traits.
In: Brownell KD, Walsh BT, eds. Eating Disorders and
Obesity: A Comprehensive Handbook. 3rd ed. New York,
NY: Guilford Press; 2017:22–30.
122. Kim JY, DeMenna JT, Puppala S, Chittoor G, Schneider J,
Duggirala R, Mandarino LJ, Shaibi GQ, Coletta DK.
Physical activity and FTO genotype by physical activity
interactive influences on obesity. BMC Genet. 2016;17:
47.
123. Yeo GS. The role of the FTO (fat mass and obesity
related) locus in regulating body size and composition.
Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014;397:34–41.
124. Claussnitzer M, Dankel SN, Kim KH, Quon G, Meule-
man W, Haugen C, Glunk V, Sousa IS, Beaudry JL,
Puviindran V, Abdennur NA, Liu J, Svensson PA, Hsu YH,
Drucker DJ, Mellgren G, Hui CC, Hauner H, Kellis M. FTO
obesity variant circuitry and adipocyte browning in
humans. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:895–907.
125. Oh EC, Vasanth S, Katsanis N. Metabolic regulation and
energy homeostasis through the primary cilium. Cell
Metab. 2015;21:21–31.
126. Vaisse C, Reiter JF, Berbari NF. Cilia and obesity. Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2017:a028217.
127. Kaelin WG, Jr, McKnight SL. Influence of metabolism on
epigenetics and disease. Cell. 2013;153:56–69.
128. Waterland RA, Jirtle RL. Transposable elements: targets
for early nutritional effects on epigenetic gene regula-
tion. Mol Cell Biol. 2003;23:5293–5300.
129. Goldstone AP. Prader-Willi syndrome: advances in ge-
netics, pathophysiology and treatment. Trends Endo-
crinol Metab. 2004;15:12–20.
130. Reik W. Stability and flexibility of epigenetic gene
regulation in mammalian development. Nature. 2007;
447:425–432.
131. Cedar H, Bergman Y. Epigenetic silencing during early
lineage commitment. In: StemBook [Internet]. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard Stem Cell Institute; 2008–. doi:
10.3824/stembook.1.42.1.
132. Ravelli GP, Stein ZA, Susser MW. Obesity in young men
after famine exposure in utero and early infancy. N Engl J
Med. 1976;295:349–353.
133. Lillycrop KA, Phillips ES, Jackson AA, Hanson MA,
Burdge GC. Dietary protein restriction of pregnant rats
induces and folic acid supplementation prevents epi-
genetic modification of hepatic gene expression in the
offspring. J Nutr. 2005;135:1382–1386.
134. Sharp GC, Lawlor DA, Richmond RC, Fraser A, Simpkin
A, Suderman M, Shihab HA, Lyttleton O, McArdle W,
Ring SM, Gaunt TR, Davey Smith G, Relton CL. Maternal
pre-pregnancy BMI and gestational weight gain, off-
spring DNA methylation and later offspring adiposity:
findings from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents
and Children. Int J Epidemiol. 2015;44:1288–1304.
135. Lillycrop KA, Burdge GC. Epigenetic changes in early life
and future risk of obesity. Int J Obes. 2011;35:72–83.
136. Waterland RA, Travisano M, Tahiliani KG. Diet-induced
hypermethylation at agouti viable yellow is not
inherited transgenerationally through the female. FASEB
J. 2007;21:3380–3385.
137. Tobi EW, Lumey LH, Talens RP, Kremer D, Putter H,
Stein AD, Slagboom PE, Heijmans BT. DNA methylation
differences after exposure to prenatal famine are
common and timing- and sex-specific. Hum Mol Genet.
2009;18:4046–4053.
138. Heijmans BT, Tobi EW, Stein AD, Putter H, Blauw GJ,
Susser ES, Slagboom PE, Lumey LH. Persistent epigenetic
differences associated with prenatal exposure to famine
in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;105:
17046–17049.
139. Stevens A, Begum G, Cook A, Connor K, Rumball C,
Oliver M, Challis J, Bloomfield F, White A. Epigenetic
changes in the hypothalamic proopiomelanocortin and
glucocorticoid receptor genes in the ovine fetus after
periconceptional undernutrition. Endocrinology. 2010;
151:3652–3664.
140. Souren NY, Tierling S, Fryns JP, Derom C, Walter J,
Zeegers MP. DNA methylation variability at growth-
related imprints does not contribute to overweight in
monozygotic twins discordant for BMI. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2011;19:1519–1522.
141. Dolinoy DC, Huang D, Jirtle RL. Maternal nutrient
supplementation counteracts bisphenol A-induced
DNA hypomethylation in early development. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2007;104:13056–13061.
142. Gemma C, Sookoian S, Alvarinas J, Garcia SI, Quintana L,
Kanevsky D, Gonzalez CD, Pirola CJ. Maternal pre-
gestational BMI is associated with methylation of the
PPARGC1A promoter in newborns. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2009;17:1032–1039.
143. Morales E, Groom A, Lawlor DA, Relton CL. DNA
methylation signatures in cord blood associated with
maternal gestational weight gain: results from the
ALSPAC cohort. BMC Res Notes. 2014;7:278.
144. Godfrey KM, Sheppard A, Gluckman PD, Lillycrop KA,
Burdge GC, McLean C, Rodford J, Slater-Jefferies JL,
Garratt E, Crozier SR, Emerald BS, Gale CR, Inskip HM,
Cooper C, Hanson MA. Epigenetic gene promoter
methylation at birth is associated with child’s later
adiposity. Diabetes. 2011;60:1528–1534.
145. Huang RC, Garratt ES, Pan H, Wu Y, Davis EA, Barton SJ,
Burdge GC, Godfrey KM, Holbrook JD, Lillycrop KA.
Genome-wide methylation analysis identifies differen-
tially methylated CpG loci associated with severe
obesity in childhood. Epigenetics. 2015;10:995–1005.
146. Tateishi K, Okada Y, Kallin EM, Zhang Y. Role of Jhdm2a
in regulating metabolic gene expression and obesity
resistance. Nature. 2009;458:757–761.
147. Caldji C, Hellstrom IC, Zhang TY, Diorio J, Meaney MJ.
Environmental regulation of the neural epigenome.
FEBS Lett. 2011;585:2049–2058.
148. Guo JU, Ma DK, Mo H, Ball MP, Jang MH, Bonaguidi MA,
Balazer JA, Eaves HL, Xie B, Ford E, Zhang K, Ming GL,
Gao Y, Song H. Neuronal activity modifies the DNA
methylation landscape in the adult brain. Nat Neurosci.
2011;14:1345–1351.
149. Plagemann A, Harder T, Brunn M, Harder A, Roepke K,
Wittrock-Staar M, Ziska T, Schellong K, Rodekamp E,
Melchior K, Dudenhausen JW. Hypothalamic proo-
piomelanocortin promoter methylation becomes al-
tered by early overfeeding: an epigenetic model of
obesity and the metabolic syndrome. J Physiol. 2009;587:
4963–4976.
150. Cho CE. Role of methyl group vitamins in hypothalamic
development of food intake regulation in Wistar rats.
Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2014;39:844.
151. Marco A, Kisliouk T, Tabachnik T, Meiri N, Weller A.
Overweight and CpG methylation of the Pomc pro-
moter in offspring of high-fat-diet-fed dams are not
“reprogrammed” by regular chow diet in rats. FASEB J.
2014;28:4148–4157.
152. Marco A, Kisliouk T, Tabachnik T, Weller A, Meiri N.
DNA CpG methylation (5-methylcytosine) and its
derivative
(5-hydroxymethylcytosine)
alter
histone
posttranslational modifications at the Pomc promoter,
affecting the impact of perinatal diet on leanness and
obesity of the offspring. Diabetes. 2016;65(8):2258–2267.
153. Vucetic Z, Kimmel J, Totoki K, Hollenbeck E, Reyes TM.
Maternal high-fat diet alters methylation and gene
expression of dopamine and opioid-related genes. En-
docrinology. 2010;151:4756–4764.
154. Carlin J, George R, Reyes TM. Methyl donor supple-
mentation blocks the adverse effects of maternal high
fat diet on offspring physiology. PLoS One. 2013;8:
e63549.
155. Marco A, Kisliouk T, Weller A, Meiri N. High fat diet
induces hypermethylation of the hypothalamic Pomc
promoter and obesity in post-weaning rats. Psycho-
neuroendocrinology. 2013;38:2844–2853.
156. Borengasser SJ, Zhong Y, Kang P, Lindsey F, Ronis MJ,
Badger TM, Gomez-Acevedo H, Shankar K. Maternal
obesity enhances white adipose tissue differentiation
and alters genome-scale DNA methylation in male rat
offspring. Endocrinology. 2013;154:4113–4125.
157. Yang QY, Liang JF, Rogers CJ, Zhao JX, Zhu MJ, Du M.
Maternal obesity induces epigenetic modifications to
facilitate Zfp423 expression and enhance adipogenic
differentiation
in
fetal
mice.
Diabetes.
2013;62:
3727–3735.
158. Desai M, Beall M, Ross MG. Developmental origins of
obesity: programmed adipogenesis. Curr Diab Rep. 2013;
13:27–33.
159. Bouchard L, Rabasa-Lhoret R, Faraj M, Lavoie ME, Mill J,
Perusse L, Vohl MC. Differential epigenomic and
transcriptomic responses in subcutaneous adipose
tissue between low and high responders to caloric
restriction. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010;91:309–320.
160. Barr`
es R, Yan J, Egan B, Treebak JT, Rasmussen M, Fritz T,
Caidahl K, Krook A, O’Gorman DJ, Zierath JR. Acute
exercise remodels promoter methylation in human
skeletal muscle. Cell Metab. 2012;15:405–411.
161. Multhaup ML, Seldin MM, Jaffe AE, Lei X, Kirchner H,
Mondal P, Li Y, Rodriguez V, Drong A, Hussain M,
Lindgren C, McCarthy M, Naslund E, Zierath JR, Wong
GW, Feinberg AP. Mouse-human experimental epige-
netic analysis unmasks dietary targets and genetic lia-
bility for diabetic phenotypes. Cell Metab. 2015;21:
138–149.
162. Lumey LH, Stein AD, Susser E. Prenatal famine and adult
health. Annu Rev Public Health. 2011;32:237–262.
163. Ravelli ACJ, van der Meulen JHP, Michels RPJ, Osmond
C, Barker DJP, Hales CN, Bleker OP. Glucose tolerance in
adults after prenatal exposure to famine. Lancet. 1998;
351:173–177.
164. Painter RC, Roseboom TJ, Bleker OP. Prenatal exposure
to the Dutch famine and disease in later life: an
overview. Reprod Toxicol. 2005;20:345–352.
165. Hales CN, Barker DJ. The thrifty phenotype hypothesis.
Br Med Bull. 2001;60:5–20.
166. Gluckman PD, Hanson MA. Living with the past:
evolution, development, and patterns of disease. Sci-
ence. 2004;305:1733–1736.
167. Burdge GC, Lillycrop KA, Phillips ES, Slater-Jefferies JL,
Jackson AA, Hanson MA. Folic acid supplementation
during the juvenile-pubertal period in rats modifies the
phenotype and epigenotype induced by prenatal nu-
trition. J Nutr. 2009;139:1054–1060.
168. Dabelea D, Hanson RL, Lindsay RS, Pettitt DJ, Imperatore
G, Gabir MM, Roumain J, Bennett PH, Knowler WC.
Intrauterine exposure to diabetes conveys risks for type
2 diabetes and obesity: a study of discordant sibships.
Diabetes. 2000;49:2208–2211.
169. Kral JG, Biron S, Simard S, Hould FS, Lebel S, Marceau S,
Marceau P. Large maternal weight loss from obesity
surgery prevents transmission of obesity to children
who were followed for 2 to 18 years. Pediatrics. 2006;118:
e1644–e1649.
170. Catalano PM, Farrell K, Thomas A, Huston-Presley L,
Mencin P, de Mouzon SH, Amini SB. Perinatal risk
factors for childhood obesity and metabolic dysregu-
lation. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009;90:1303–1313.
171. Guo F, Jen KL. High-fat feeding during pregnancy and
lactation affects offspring metabolism in rats. Physiol
Behav. 1995;57:681–686.
172. Bayol SA, Simbi BH, Stickland NC. A maternal cafeteria
diet during gestation and lactation promotes adiposity
and impairs skeletal muscle development and meta-
bolism in rat offspring at weaning. J Physiol. 2005;567:
951–961.
173. Gorski JN, Dunn-Meynell AA, Hartman TG, Levin BE.
Postnatal environment overrides genetic and prenatal
292
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 factors influencing offspring obesity and insulin re-
sistance. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2006;
291:R768–R778.
174. McPherson NO, Bell VG, Zander-Fox DL, Fullston T, Wu
LL, Robker RL, Lane M. When two obese parents are
worse than one! Impacts on embryo and fetal devel-
opment. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2015;309:
E568–E581.
175. Ng SF, Lin RC, Laybutt DR, Barres R, Owens JA, Morris
MJ. Chronic high-fat diet in fathers programs b-cell
dysfunction in female rat offspring. Nature. 2010;467:
963–966.
176. Fullston T, Ohlsson Teague EM, Palmer NO, DeBlasio
MJ, Mitchell M, Corbett M, Print CG, Owens JA, Lane M.
Paternal obesity initiates metabolic disturbances in two
generations of mice with incomplete penetrance to the
F2 generation and alters the transcriptional profile of
testis and sperm microRNA content. FASEB J. 2013;27:
4226–4243.
177. Huypens P, Sass S, Wu M, Dyckhoff D, Tschop M, Theis
F, Marschall S, Hrabe de Angelis M, Beckers J. Epigenetic
germline inheritance of diet-induced obesity and insulin
resistance. Nat Genet. 2016;48:497–499.
178. Veenendaal MV, Painter RC, de Rooij SR, Bossuyt PM,
van der Post JA, Gluckman PD, Hanson MA, Roseboom
TJ. Transgenerational effects of prenatal exposure to the
1944–45 Dutch famine. BJOG. 2013;120:548–554.
179. Pembrey ME, Bygren LO, Kaati G, Edvinsson S,
Northstone K, Sjostrom M, Golding J, Team AS. Sex-
specific,
male-line
transgenerational
responses
in
humans. Eur J Hum Genet. 2006;14:159–166.
180. Gore AC, Chappell VA, Fenton SE, Flaws JA, Nadal A,
Prins GS, Toppari J, Zoeller RT. EDC-2: the Endocrine
Society’s Second Scientific Statement on endocrine-
disrupting chemicals. Endocr Rev. 2015;36:E1–E150.
181. Casals-Casas C, Desvergne B. Endocrine disruptors: from
endocrine to metabolic disruption. Annu Rev Physiol.
2011;73:135–162.
182. Baillie-Hamilton PF. Chemical toxins: a hypothesis to
explain the global obesity epidemic. J Altern Comple-
ment Med. 2002;8:185–192.
183. Bergman A, Heindel JJ, Kasten T, Kidd KA, Jobling S,
Neira M, Zoeller RT, Becher G, Bjerregaard P, Bornman R,
Brandt I, Kortenkamp A, Muir D, Drisse MN, Ochieng R,
Skakkebaek NE, Bylehn AS, Iguchi T, Toppari J, Woodruff
TJ. The impact of endocrine disruption: a consensus
statement on the state of the science. Environ Health
Perspect. 2013;121:A104–A106.
184. Heindel JJ, Newbold R, Schug TT. Endocrine disruptors
and obesity. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015;11:653–661.
185. World Health Organization. State of the science of
endocrine disrupting chemicals—2012. Available at:
www.who.int/ceh/publications/endocrine/en/. Accessed
15 March 2017.
186. Chapin RE, Adams J, Boekelheide K, Gray LE, Jr, Hayward
SW, Lees PS, McIntyre BS, Portier KM, Schnorr TM,
Selevan SG, Vandenbergh JG, Woskie SR. NTP-CERHR
expert panel report on the reproductive and de-
velopmental toxicity of bisphenol A. Birth Defects Res B
Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2008;83:157–395.
187. Diamanti-Kandarakis E, Bourguignon JP, Giudice LC,
Hauser R, Prins GS, Soto AM, Zoeller RT, Gore AC.
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals: an Endocrine Society
Scientific Statement. Endocr Rev. 2009;30:293–342.
188. Grun F, Blumberg B. Environmental obesogens: orga-
notins and endocrine disruption via nuclear receptor
signaling. Endocrinology. 2006;147:S50–S55.
189. Vanden Heuvel JP, Thompson JT, Frame SR, Gillies PJ.
Differential activation of nuclear receptors by per-
fluorinated fatty acid analogs and natural fatty acids:
a comparison of human, mouse, and rat peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-a, -b, and -g, liver X
receptor-b, and retinoid X receptor-a. Toxicol Sci. 2006;
92:476–489.
190. Taxvig C, Dreisig K, Boberg J, Nellemann C, Schelde AB,
Pedersen D, Boergesen M, Mandrup S, Vinggaard AM.
Differential effects of environmental chemicals and
food contaminants on adipogenesis, biomarker release
and PPARg activation. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012;361:
106–115.
191. Gr¨
un F, Blumberg B. Perturbed nuclear receptor sig-
naling by environmental obesogens as emerging factors
in the obesity crisis. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2007;8:
161–171.
192. Thayer KA, Heindel JJ, Bucher JR, Gallo MA. Role of
environmental chemicals in diabetes and obesity:
a National Toxicology Program workshop review. En-
viron Health Perspect. 2012;120:779–789.
193. de Cock M, van de Bor M. Obesogenic effects of en-
docrine disruptors, what do we know from animal and
human studies? Environ Int. 2014;70:15–24.
194. Braun JM. Early-life exposure to EDCs: role in childhood
obesity and neurodevelopment. Nat Rev Endocrinol.
2017;13:161–173.
195. Buck RC, Franklin J, Berger U, Conder JM, Cousins IT, de
Voogt P, Jensen AA, Kannan K, Mabury SA, van
Leeuwen SP. Perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl sub-
stances in the environment: terminology, classification,
and origins. Integr Environ Assess Manag. 2011;7:
513–541.
196. Bastos Sales L, Kamstra JH, Cenijn PH, van Rijt LS,
Hamers T, Legler J. Effects of endocrine disrupting
chemicals on in vitro global DNA methylation and
adipocyte differentiation. Toxicol In Vitro. 2013;27:
1634–1643.
197. Kirchner S, Kieu T, Chow C, Casey S, Blumberg B.
Prenatal exposure to the environmental obesogen
tributyltin predisposes multipotent stem cells to be-
come adipocytes. Mol Endocrinol. 2010;24:526–539.
198. Boas M, Feldt-Rasmussen U, Main KM. Thyroid effects
of endocrine disrupting chemicals. Mol Cell Endocrinol.
2012;355:240–248.
199. Ye L, Guo J, Ge RS. Environmental pollutants and
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases. Vitam Horm. 2014;94:
349–390.
200. Koustas E, Lam J, Sutton P, Johnson PI, Atchley DS, Sen S,
Robinson KA, Axelrad DA, Woodruff TJ. The Navigation
Guide—evidence-based medicine meets environmen-
tal health: systematic review of nonhuman evidence for
PFOA effects on fetal growth. Environ Health Perspect.
2014;122:1015–1027.
201. Johnson PI, Sutton P, Atchley DS, Koustas E, Lam J, Sen S,
Robinson KA, Axelrad DA, Woodruff TJ. The Navigation
Guide—evidence-based medicine meets environmen-
tal health: systematic review of human evidence for
PFOA effects on fetal growth. Environ Health Perspect.
2014;122:1028–1039.
202. Chamorro-Garcia R, Kirchner S, Li X, Janesick A, Casey
SC, Chow C, Blumberg B. Bisphenol A diglycidyl ether
induces adipogenic differentiation of multipotent
stromal stem cells through a peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor gamma-independent mechanism.
Environ Health Perspect. 2012;120:984–989.
203. Ozgyin L, Erdos E, Bojcsuk D, Balint BL. Nuclear receptors
in transgenerational epigenetic inheritance. Prog Bio-
phys Mol Biol. 2015;118:34–43.
204. Li Y, Luh CJ, Burns KA, Arao Y, Jiang Z, Teng CT, Tice RR,
Korach KS. Endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs):
in vitro mechanism of estrogenic activation and dif-
ferential effects on ER target genes. Environ Health
Perspect. 2013;121:459–466.
205. Wang J, Sun B, Hou M, Pan X, Li X. The environmental
obesogen bisphenol A promotes adipogenesis by in-
creasing
the
amount
of
11b-hydroxysteroid
de-
hydrogenase type 1 in the adipose tissue of children. Int
J Obes. 2013;37:999–1005.
206. Bhan A, Hussain I, Ansari KI, Bobzean SA, Perrotti LI,
Mandal
SS.
Histone
methyltransferase
EZH2
is
transcriptionally induced by estradiol as well as estro-
genic
endocrine
disruptors
bisphenol-A
and
di-
ethylstilbestrol. J Mol Biol. 2014;426:3426–3441.
207. Doherty LF, Bromer JG, Zhou Y, Aldad TS, Taylor HS. In
utero exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES) or bisphenol-
A (BPA) increases EZH2 expression in the mammary
gland: an epigenetic mechanism linking endocrine
disruptors to breast cancer. Horm Cancer. 2010;1:
146–155.
208. Strakovsky RS, Wang H, Engeseth NJ, Flaws JA, Helferich
WG, Pan YX, Lezmi S. Developmental bisphenol A
(BPA) exposure leads to sex-specific modification of
hepatic gene expression and epigenome at birth that
may exacerbate high-fat diet-induced hepatic steatosis.
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015;284:101–112.
209. Howdeshell KL, Hotchkiss AK, Thayer KA, Vandenbergh
JG, vom Saal FS. Exposure to bisphenol A advances
puberty. Nature. 1999;401:763–764.
210. Rubin BS, Murray MK, Damassa DA, King JC, Soto AM.
Perinatal exposure to low doses of bisphenol A affects
body weight, patterns of estrous cyclicity, and plasma
LH levels. Environ Health Perspect. 2001;109:675–680.
211. Miyakawa K, Ryo A, Murakami T, Ohba K, Yamaoka S,
Fukuda M, Guatelli J, Yamamoto N. BCA2/Rabring7
promotes tetherin-dependent HIV-1 restriction. PLoS
Pathog. 2009;5:e1000700.
212. Akingbemi BT, Sottas CM, Koulova AI, Klinefelter GR,
Hardy MP. Inhibition of testicular steroidogenesis by the
xenoestrogen bisphenol A is associated with reduced
pituitary luteinizing hormone secretion and decreased
steroidogenic enzyme gene expression in rat Leydig
cells. Endocrinology. 2004;145:592–603.
213. Moriyama K, Tagami T, Akamizu T, Usui T, Saijo M,
Kanamoto N, Hataya Y, Shimatsu A, Kuzuya H, Nakao K.
Thyroid hormone action is disrupted by bisphenol A as
an antagonist. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002;87:
5185–5190.
214. Kubo K, Arai O, Omura M, Watanabe R, Ogata R, Aou S.
Low dose effects of bisphenol A on sexual differenti-
ation of the brain and behavior in rats. Neurosci Res.
2003;45:345–356.
215. Durando M, Kass L, Piva J, Sonnenschein C, Soto AM,
Luque EH, Munoz-de-Toro M. Prenatal bisphenol A
exposure induces preneoplastic lesions in the mammary
gland in Wistar rats. Environ Health Perspect. 2007;115:
80–86.
216. Honma S, Suzuki A, Buchanan DL, Katsu Y, Watanabe H,
Iguchi T. Low dose effect of in utero exposure to
bisphenol A and diethylstilbestrol on female mouse
reproduction. Reprod Toxicol. 2002;16:117–122.
217. Stel J, Legler J. The role of epigenetics in the latent effects
of early life exposure to obesogenic endocrine dis-
rupting chemicals. Endocrinology. 2015;156:3466–3472.
218. Vandenberg LN, Colborn T, Hayes TB, Heindel JJ, Jacobs
DR, Jr, Lee DH, Shioda T, Soto AM, vom Saal FS,
Welshons WV, Zoeller RT, Myers JP. Hormones and
endocrine-disrupting chemicals: low-dose effects and
nonmonotonic dose responses. Endocr Rev. 2012;33:
378–455.
219. Zoeller RT, Brown TR, Doan LL, Gore AC, Skakkebaek
NE, Soto AM, Woodruff TJ, Vom Saal FS. Endocrine-
disrupting chemicals and public health protection:
a statement of principles from the Endocrine Society.
Endocrinology. 2012;153:4097–4110.
220. Wei J, Lin Y, Li Y, Ying C, Chen J, Song L, Zhou Z, Lv Z, Xia
W, Chen X, Xu S. Perinatal exposure to bisphenol A at
reference dose predisposes offspring to metabolic
syndrome in adult rats on a high-fat diet. Endocrinology.
2011;152:3049–3061.
221. Angle BM, Do RP, Ponzi D, Stahlhut RW, Drury BE, Nagel
SC, Welshons WV, Besch-Williford CL, Palanza P, Par-
migiani S, vom Saal FS, Taylor JA. Metabolic disruption
in male mice due to fetal exposure to low but not high
doses of bisphenol A (BPA): evidence for effects on
293
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 body weight, food intake, adipocytes, leptin, adipo-
nectin, insulin and glucose regulation. Reprod Toxicol.
2013;42:256–268.
222. Marmugi A, Ducheix S, Lasserre F, Polizzi A, Paris A,
Priymenko N, Bertrand-Michel J, Pineau T, Guillou H,
Martin PG, Mselli-Lakhal L. Low doses of bisphenol A
induce gene expression related to lipid synthesis and
trigger triglyceride accumulation in adult mouse liver.
Hepatology. 2012;55:395–407.
223. van Esterik JC, Dolle ME, Lamoree MH, van Leeuwen SP,
Hamers T, Legler J, van der Ven LT. Programming of
metabolic effects in C57BL/6J3FVB mice by exposure
to bisphenol A during gestation and lactation. Toxi-
cology. 2014;321:40–52.
224. Trasande L, Attina TM, Blustein J. Association between
urinary bisphenol A concentration and obesity preva-
lence in children and adolescents. JAMA. 2012;308:
1113–1121.
225. Harley KG, Aguilar Schall R, Chevrier J, Tyler K, Aguirre H,
Bradman A, Holland NT, Lustig RH, Calafat AM, Eskenazi
B. Prenatal and postnatal bisphenol A exposure and
body mass index in childhood in the CHAMACOS
cohort. Environ Health Perspect. 2013;121:514–520.
226. Vafeiadi M, Roumeliotaki T, Myridakis A, Chalkiadaki G,
Fthenou E, Dermitzaki E, Karachaliou M, Sarri K, Vassilaki
M, Stephanou EG, Kogevinas M, Chatzi L. Association of
early life exposure to bisphenol A with obesity and
cardiometabolic traits in childhood. Environ Res. 2016;
146:379–387.
227. Veiga-Lopez A, Kannan K, Liao C, Ye W, Domino SE,
Padmanabhan V. Gender-specific effects on gestational
length and birth weight by early pregnancy BPA ex-
posure. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100:E1394–E1403.
228. Braun JM, Lanphear BP, Calafat AM, Deria S, Khoury J,
Howe CJ, Venners SA. Early-life bisphenol a exposure
and child body mass index: a prospective cohort study.
Environ Health Perspect. 2014;122:1239–1245.
229. Hoepner LA, Whyatt RM, Widen EM, Hassoun A,
Oberfield SE, Mueller NT, Diaz D, Calafat AM, Perera FP,
Rundle AG. Bisphenol A and adiposity in an inner-city
birth
cohort.
Environ
Health
Perspect.
2016;124:
1644–1650.
230. Chamorro-Garc´
ıa R, Sahu M, Abbey RJ, Laude J, Pham N,
Blumberg B. Transgenerational inheritance of increased
fat depot size, stem cell reprogramming, and hepatic
steatosis elicited by prenatal exposure to the obesogen
tributyltin in mice. Environ Health Perspect. 2013;121:
359–366.
231. Skinner MK, Manikkam M, Tracey R, Guerrero-Bosagna
C, Haque M, Nilsson EE. Ancestral dichlorodiphenyl-
trichloroethane (DDT) exposure promotes epigenetic
transgenerational inheritance of obesity. BMC Med.
2013;11:228.
232. Manikkam M, Haque MM, Guerrero-Bosagna C, Nilsson
EE, Skinner MK. Pesticide methoxychlor promotes the
epigenetic transgenerational inheritance of adult-onset
disease through the female germline. PLoS One. 2014;9:
e102091.
233. Skinner MK. Endocrine disruptor induction of epige-
netic transgenerational inheritance of disease. Mol Cell
Endocrinol. 2014;398:4–12.
234. Scheen AJ, Letiexhe M, Rorive M, De Flines J, Luyckx FH,
Desaive C. Bariatric surgery: 10-year results of the
Swedish Obese Subjects Study [in French]. Rev Med
Liege. 2005;60:121–125.
235. Seeley RJ, Chambers AP, Sandoval DA. The role of gut
adaptation in the potent effects of multiple bariatric
surgeries on obesity and diabetes. Cell Metab. 2015;21:
369–378.
236. Hao Z, Mumphrey MB, Townsend RL, Morrison CD,
Munzberg H, Ye J, Berthoud HR. Reprogramming of
defended body weight after Roux-En-Y gastric bypass
surgery in diet-induced obese mice. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2016;24:654–660.
237. Stefater MA, Perez-Tilve D, Chambers AP, Wilson-Perez
HE, Sandoval DA, Berger J, Toure M, Tschop M, Woods
SC, Seeley RJ. Sleeve gastrectomy induces loss of weight
and fat mass in obese rats, but does not affect leptin
sensitivity. Gastroenterology 2010;138(7):2426–2436.
238. Sommer F, Backhed F. The gut microbiota—masters of
host development and physiology. Nat Rev Microbiol.
2013;11:227–238.
239. Turnbaugh PJ, Gordon JI. The core gut microbiome,
energy balance and obesity. J Physiol. 2009;587:
4153–4158.
240. Rosenbaum M, Knight R, Leibel RL. The gut microbiota
in human energy homeostasis and obesity. Trends
Endocrinol Metab. 2015;26:493–501.
241. Sze MA, Schloss PD. Looking for a signal in the noise:
revisiting obesity and the microbiome. MBio. 2016;7(4):
e01018-16.
242. Mikkelsen KH, Frost M, Bahl MI, Licht TR, Jensen US,
Rosenberg J, Pedersen O, Hansen T, Rehfeld JF, Holst JJ,
Vilsboll T, Knop FK. Effect of antibiotics on gut
microbiota, gut hormones and glucose metabolism.
PLoS One. 2015;10:e0142352.
243. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA, Magrini V, Mardis
ER, Gordon JI. An obesity-associated gut microbiome
with increased capacity for energy harvest. Nature. 2006;
444:1027–1031.
244. Sobal J, Stunkard AJ. Socioeconomic status and obesity:
a review of the literature. Psychol Bull. 1989;105:260–275.
245. McLaren L. Socioeconomic status and obesity. Epidemiol
Rev. 2007;29:29–48.
246. Drewnowski A. Obesity, diets, and social inequalities.
Nutr Rev. 2009;67(Suppl 1):S36–S39.
247. Ogden CL, Lamb MM, Carroll MD, Flegal KM. Obesity
and socioeconomic status in adults: United States,
2005–2008. NCHS Data Brief. 2010;(50):1–8.
248. Lebel A, Kestens Y, Clary C, Bisset S, Subramanian SV.
Geographic variability in the association between so-
cioeconomic status and BMI in the USA and Canada.
PLoS One. 2014;9:e99158.
249. Michimi A, Wimberly MC. Associations of supermarket
accessibility with obesity and fruit and vegetable
consumption in the conterminous United States. Int J
Health Geogr. 2010;9:49.
250. Gustafson AA, Sharkey J, Samuel-Hodge CD, Jones-
Smith J, Folds MC, Cai J, Ammerman AS. Perceived and
objective measures of the food store environment and
the association with weight and diet among low-
income women in North Carolina. Public Health Nutr.
2011;14:1032–1038.
251. Jennings A, Welch A, Jones AP, Harrison F, Bentham G,
van Sluijs EMF, Griffin SJ, Cassidy A. Availability of local
food outlets is associated with weight status and dietary
intake in 9–10 year olds. Am J Prev Med. 2011;40:
405–410.
252. Caspi CE, Sorensen G, Subramanian SV, Kawachi I. The
local food environment and diet: a systematic review.
Health Place. 2012;18:1172–1187.
253. Drewnowski A, Aggarwal A, Cook A, Stewart O,
Moudon AV. Geographic disparities in Healthy Eating
Index scores (HEI–2005 and 2010) by residential
property values: findings from Seattle Obesity Study
(SOS). Prev Med. 2016;83:46–55.
254. Drewnowski A, Rehm CD, Arterburn D. The geographic
distribution of obesity by census tract among 59 767
insured adults in King County, WA. Int J Obes. 2005;
2014(38):833–839.
255. Drewnowski A, Specter S. Poverty and obesity: the role
of energy density and energy costs. Am J Clin Nutr. 2004;
79:6–16.
256. Darmon N, Drewnowski A. Does social class predict diet
quality? Am J Clin Nutr. 2008;87:1107–1117.
257. Drewnowski A. The carbohydrate-fat problem: can we
construct a healthy diet based on dietary guidelines?
Advances in Nutrition: An International Review Journal.
2015;6:318S–325S.
258. Malik VS, Schulze MB, Hu FB. Intake of sugar-sweetened
beverages and weight gain: a systematic review. Am J
Clin Nutr. 2006;84:274–288.
259. Drewnowski A. The real contribution of added sugars
and fats to obesity. Epidemiol Rev. 2007;29:160–171.
260. Oliver G, Wardle J, Gibson EL. Stress and food choice:
a laboratory study. Psychosom Med. 2000;62:853–865.
261. Zellner DA, Loaiza S, Gonzalez Z, Pita J, Morales J, Pecora
D, Wolf A. Food selection changes under stress. Physiol
Behav. 2006;87:789–793.
262. Torres SJ, Nowson CA. Relationship between stress,
eating behavior, and obesity. Nutrition. 2007;23:887–894.
263. Yau YHC, Potenza MN. Stress and eating behaviors.
Minerva Endocrinol. 2013;38:255–267.
264. Duncan MJ, Spence JC, Mummery WK. Perceived en-
vironment and physical activity: a meta-analysis of
selected environmental characteristics. Int J Behav Nutr
Phys Act. 2005;2:1–9.
265. Ding D, Gebel K. Built environment, physical activity,
and obesity: what have we learned from reviewing the
literature? Health Place. 2012;18:100–105.
266. Rundle A, Quinn J, Lovasi G, Bader M, Yousefzadeh P,
Weiss C, Neckerman K. Associations between body
mass index and park proximity, size, cleanliness and
recreational facilities. Am J Health Promot. 2013;27:
262–269.
267. Bell JF, Wilson JS, Liu GC. Neighborhood greenness and
2-year changes in body mass index of children and
youth. Am J Prev Med. 2008;35:547–553.
268. Lovasi GS, Bader MD, Quinn J, Neckerman K, Weiss C,
Rundle A. Body mass index, safety hazards, and
neighborhood attractiveness. Am J Prev Med. 2012;43:
378–384.
269. Ellaway A, Macintyre S, Bonnefoy X. Graffiti, greenery,
and obesity in adults: secondary analysis of European
cross sectional survey. BMJ. 2005;331:611–612.
270. Boehmer TK, Hoehner CM, Deshpande AD, Brennan
Ramirez LK, Brownson RC. Perceived and observed
neighborhood indicators of obesity among urban
adults. Int J Obes. 2007;31:968–977.
271. Burdette AM, Hill TD. An examination of processes
linking perceived neighborhood disorder and obesity.
Soc Sci Med. 2008;67:38–46.
272. Duncan DT, Castro MC, Gortmaker SL, Aldstadt J, Melly
SJ,
Bennett
GG.
Racial
differences
in
the
built
environment–body mass index relationship? A geo-
spatial analysis of adolescents in urban neighborhoods.
Int J Health Geogr. 2012;11:11.
273. Fiechtner L, Block J, Duncan DT, Gillman MW, Gort-
maker SL, Melly SJ, Rifas-Shiman SL, Taveras EM.
Proximity to supermarkets associated with higher body
mass index among overweight and obese preschool-age
children. Prev Med. 2013;56:218–221.
274. Hattori A, An R, Sturm R. Neighborhood food outlets,
diet, and obesity among California adults, 2007 and
2009. Prev Chronic Dis. 2013;10:1223.
275. Fone DL, Dunstan F, Christie S, Jones A, West J, Webber
M, Lester N, Watkins J. Council tax valuation bands,
socio-economic status and health outcome: a cross-
sectional analysis from the Caerphilly Health and Social
Needs Study. BMC Public Health. 2006;6:115.
276. Connolly S, O’Reilly D, Rosato M. House value as an
indicator of cumulative wealth is strongly related to
morbidity and mortality risk in older people: a census-
based cross-sectional and longitudinal study. Int J Epi-
demiol. 2010;39:383–391.
277. Drewnowski A, Aggarwal A, Rehm CD, Cohen-Cline H,
Hurvitz PM, Moudon AV. Environments perceived as
obesogenic have lower residential property values. Am J
Prev Med. 2014;47:260–274.
278. Khan LK, Sobush K, Keener D, Goodman K, Lowry A,
Kakietek J, Zaro S. Recommended community strategies
294
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 and measurements to prevent obesity in the United
States. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2009;58:1–26.
279. Powell LM, Auld MC, Chaloupka FJ, O’Malley PM,
Johnston LD. Associations between access to food
stores and adolescent body mass index. Am J Prev Med.
2007;33:S301–S307.
280. Larson NI, Story MT, Nelson MC. Neighborhood en-
vironments: disparities in access to healthy foods in the
U.S. Am J Prev Med. 2009;36:74–81.
281. Drewnowski A, Aggarwal A, Hurvitz PM, Monsivais P,
Moudon AV. Obesity and supermarket access: prox-
imity or price? Am J Public Health. 2012;102:e74–e80.
282. Moore LV, Diez Roux AV, Nettleton JA, Jacobs DR.
Associations of the local food environment with diet
quality—a comparison of assessments based on surveys
and geographic information systems: the multi-ethnic
study of atherosclerosis. Am J Epidemiol. 2008;167:
917–924.
283. Wang MC, Cubbin C, Ahn D, Winkleby MA. Changes in
neighbourhood food store environment, food behav-
iour and body mass index, 1981–1990. Public Health
Nutr. 2008;11:963–970.
284. Jago R, Baranowski T, Baranowski JC, Cullen KW,
Thompson D. Distance to food stores & adolescent
male fruit and vegetable consumption: mediation ef-
fects. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2007;4:35.
285. Laska MN, Hearst MO, Forsyth A, Pasch KE, Lytle L.
Neighbourhood food environments: are they associated
with adolescent dietary intake, food purchases and
weight status? Public Health Nutr. 2010;13:1757–1763.
286. Aggarwal A, Monsivais P, Cook AJ, Drewnowski A.
Positive attitude toward healthy eating predicts higher
diet quality at all cost levels of supermarkets. J Acad Nutr
Diet. 2014;114:266–272.
287. Rao M, Afshin A, Singh G, Mozaffarian D. Do healthier
foods and diet patterns cost more than less healthy
options? A systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ
Open. 2013;3:e004277.
288. Northstone K, Emmett PM. Dietary patterns of men in
ALSPAC: associations with socio-demographic and
lifestyle characteristics, nutrient intake and comparison
with women’s dietary patterns. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2010;64:
978–986.
289. Estaquio C, Druesne-Pecollo N, Latino-Martel P, Dau-
chet L, Hercberg S, Bertrais S. Socioeconomic differences
in fruit and vegetable consumption among middle-
aged French adults: adherence to the 5 A Day rec-
ommendation. J Am Diet Assoc. 2008;108:2021–2030.
290. Malon A, Deschamps V, Salanave B, Vernay M, Szego E,
Estaquio C, Kesse-Guyot E, Hercberg S, Castetbon K.
Compliance with French nutrition and health program
recommendations is strongly associated with socio-
economic characteristics in the general adult pop-
ulation. J Am Diet Assoc. 2010;110:848–856.
291. Lallukka T, Laaksonen M, Rahkonen O, Roos E, Lahelma
E. Multiple socio-economic circumstances and healthy
food habits. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2007;61:701–710.
292. Mullie P, Clarys P, Hulens M, Vansant G. Dietary pat-
terns and socioeconomic position. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2010;
64:231–238.
293. Harrington J, Fitzgerald AP, Layte R, Lutomski J, Molcho
M, Perry IJ. Sociodemographic, health and lifestyle
predictors of poor diets. Public Health Nutr. 2011;14:
2166–2175.
294. McNaughton SA, Ball K, Crawford D, Mishra GD. An
index of diet and eating patterns is a valid measure of
diet quality in an Australian population. J Nutr. 2008;
138:86–93.
295. Darmon N, Ferguson EL, Briend A. A cost constraint
alone has adverse effects on food selection and nutrient
density: an analysis of human diets by linear pro-
gramming. J Nutr. 2002;132:3764–3771.
296. Darmon N, Ferguson E, Briend A. Do economic con-
straints encourage the selection of energy dense diets?
Appetite. 2003;41:315–322.
297. Butler P. Britain in nutrition recession as food prices rise
and incomes shrink. Available at: http://www.the-
guardian.com/society/2012/nov/18/breadline-britain-
nutritional-recession-austerity. Accessed 15 March
2017.
298. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group, Knowler
WC, Fowler SE, Hamman RF, Christophi CA, Hoffman
HJ, Brenneman AT, Brown-Friday JO, Goldberg R,
Venditti E, Nathan DM. 10-year follow-up of diabetes
incidence and weight loss in the Diabetes Prevention
Program Outcomes Study. Lancet. 2009;374:1677–1686.
299. Flegal KM, Kruszon-Moran D, Carroll MD, Fryar CD,
Ogden CL. Trends in obesity among adults in the
United States, 2005 to 2014. JAMA. 2016;315:2284–2291.
300. Casazza K, Fontaine KR, Astrup A, Birch LL, Brown AW,
Bohan Brown MM, Durant N, Dutton G, Foster EM,
Heymsfield SB, McIver K, Mehta T, Menachemi N,
Newby PK, Pate R, Rolls BJ, Sen B, Smith DL, Jr, Thomas
DM, Allison DB. Myths, presumptions, and facts about
obesity. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:446–454.
301. Swinburn B, Sacks G, Ravussin E. Increased food energy
supply is more than sufficient to explain the US epi-
demic of obesity. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009;90:1453–1456.
302. Swinburn BA, Sacks G, Lo SK, Westerterp KR, Rush EC,
Rosenbaum M, Luke A, Schoeller DA, DeLany JP, Butte
NF, Ravussin E. Estimating the changes in energy flux
that characterize the rise in obesity prevalence. Am J
Clin Nutr. 2009;89:1723–1728.
303. Swinburn BA, Jolley D, Kremer PJ, Salbe AD, Ravussin E.
Estimating the effects of energy imbalance on changes
in body weight in children. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;83:
859–863.
304. Church TS, Thomas DM, Tudor-Locke C, Katzmarzyk
PT, Earnest CP, Rodarte RQ, Martin CK, Blair SN,
Bouchard C. Trends over 5 decades in U.S. occupation-
related physical activity and their associations with
obesity. PLoS One. 2011;6:e19657.
305. Simpson SJ, Raubenheimer D. Obesity: the protein le-
verage hypothesis. Obes Rev. 2005;6:133–142.
306. Brooks RC, Simpson SJ, Raubenheimer D. The price of
protein: combining evolutionary and economic analysis
to understand excessive energy consumption. Obes Rev.
2010;11:887–894.
307. Cotton JR, Burley VJ, Weststrate JA, Blundell JE. Dietary
fat and appetite: similarities and differences in the sa-
tiating effect of meals supplemented with either fat or
carbohydrate. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2007;20:186–199.
308. Williams RA, Roe LS, Rolls BJ. Assessment of satiety
depends on the energy density and portion size of the
test meal. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2014;22:318–324.
309. Lustig RH. Childhood obesity: behavioral aberration or
biochemical drive? Reinterpreting the first law of
thermodynamics. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2006;
2:447–458.
310. Taubes G. The science of obesity: what do we really
know about what makes us fat? An essay by Gary
Taubes. BMJ. 2013;346:f1050.
311. Astwood EB. The heritage of corpulence. Endocrinology.
1962;71:337–341.
312. Pennington AW. A reorientation on obesity. N Engl J
Med. 1953;248:959–964.
313. Pennington AW. Obesity. Med Times. 1952;80:389–398.
314. Rouhani MH, Haghighatdoost F, Surkan PJ, Azadbakht L.
Associations between dietary energy density and
obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis of ob-
servational studies. Nutrition. 2016;32(10):1037–1047.
315. Ebbeling CB, Swain JF, Feldman HA, Wong WW, Hachey
DL, Garcia-Lago E, Ludwig DS. Effects of dietary com-
position on energy expenditure during weight-loss
maintenance. JAMA. 2012;307:2627–2634.
316. Veldhorst MA, Westerterp-Plantenga MS, Westerterp
KR. Gluconeogenesis and energy expenditure after
a high-protein, carbohydrate-free diet. Am J Clin Nutr.
2009;90:519–526.
317. Hall KD, Bemis T, Brychta R, Chen KY, Courville A,
Crayner EJ, Goodwin S, Guo J, Howard L, Knuth ND,
Miller BV III, Prado CM, Siervo M, Skarulis MC, Walter M,
Walter PJ, Yannai L. Calorie for calorie, dietary fat re-
striction results in more body fat loss than carbohydrate
restriction in people with obesity. Cell Metab. 2015;22:
427–436.
318. Tobias DK, Chen M, Manson JE, Ludwig DS, Willett W,
Hu FB. Effect of low-fat diet interventions versus other
diet interventions on long-term weight change in
adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2015;3:968–979.
319. Ross R, Janssen I. Physical activity, total and regional
obesity: dose-response considerations. Med Sci Sports
Exerc. 2001;33(6 Suppl):S521–S527.
320. Klem ML, Wing RR, McGuire MT, Seagle HM, Hill JO. A
descriptive study of individuals successful at long-term
maintenance of substantial weight loss. Am J Clin Nutr.
1997;66:239–246.
321. Rosenbaum M, Goldsmith R, Bloomfield D, Magnano A,
Weimer L, Heymsfield S, Gallagher D, Mayer L, Murphy
E, Leibel RL. Low-dose leptin reverses skeletal muscle,
autonomic,
and
neuroendocrine
adaptations
to
maintenance of reduced weight. J Clin Invest. 2005;115:
3579–3586.
322. Levine JA, Lanningham-Foster LM, McCrady SK, Krizan
AC, Olson LR, Kane PH, Jensen MD, Clark MM. In-
terindividual variation in posture allocation: possible
role in human obesity. Science. 2005;307:584–586.
323. Ravussin E, Lillioja S, Anderson TE, Christin L, Bogardus
C. Determinants of 24-hour energy expenditure in man.
Methods and results using a respiratory chamber. J Clin
Invest. 1986;78:1568–1578.
324. Bush T, Lovejoy JC, Deprey M, Carpenter KM. The effect
of tobacco cessation on weight gain, obesity, and di-
abetes risk. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2016;24:1834–1841.
325. Mineur YS, Abizaid A, Rao Y, Salas R, DiLeone RJ,
Gundisch D, Diano S, De Biasi M, Horvath TL, Gao XB,
Picciotto MR. Nicotine decreases food intake through
activation
of
POMC
neurons.
Science.
2011;332:
1330–1332.
326. Dhurandhar NV, Bailey D, Thomas D. Interaction of
obesity and infections. Obes Rev. 2015;16:1017–1029.
327. Schenk S, Saberi M, Olefsky JM. Insulin sensitivity:
modulation by nutrients and inflammation. J Clin Invest.
2008;118:2992–3002.
328. Thaler JP, Yi CX, Schur EA, Guyenet SJ, Hwang BH,
Dietrich MO, Zhao X, Sarruf DA, Izgur V, Maravilla KR,
Nguyen HT, Fischer JD, Matsen ME, Wisse BE, Morton
GJ, Horvath TL, Baskin DG, Tschop MH, Schwartz MW.
Obesity is associated with hypothalamic injury in ro-
dents and humans. J Clin Invest. 2012;122:153–162.
329. Valdearcos M, Robblee MM, Benjamin DI, Nomura DK,
Xu AW, Koliwad SK. Microglia dictate the impact of
saturated
fat consumption on hypothalamic in-
flammation and neuronal function. Cell Reports. 2014;9:
2124–2138.
330. Schur EA, Melhorn SJ, Oh SK, Lacy JM, Berkseth KE,
Guyenet SJ, Sonnen JA, Tyagi V, Rosalynn M, De Leon B,
Webb MF, Gonsalves ZT, Fligner CL, Schwartz MW,
Maravilla KR. Radiologic evidence that hypothalamic
gliosis is associated with obesity and insulin resistance in
humans. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2015;23:2142–2148.
331. DeBenedictis B, Guan H, Yang K. Prenatal exposure to
bisphenol A disrupts mouse fetal liver maturation in
a sex-specific manner. J Cell Biochem. 2016;117:344–350.
332. Faulk C, Kim JH, Anderson OS, Nahar MS, Jones TR,
Sartor MA, Dolinoy DC. Detection of differential DNA
methylation in repetitive DNA of mice and humans
295
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00111
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
 perinatally exposed to bisphenol A. Epigenetics. 2016;11:
489–500.
333. Rosenbaum M, Murphy EM, Heymsfield SB, Matthews
DE, Leibel RL. Low dose leptin administration reverses
effects of sustained weight-reduction on energy ex-
penditure and circulating concentrations of thyroid
hormones. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002;87:2391–2394.
334. Rosenbaum M, Sy M, Pavlovich K, Leibel RL, Hirsch J.
Leptin reverses weight loss-induced changes in regional
neural activity responses to visual food stimuli. J Clin
Invest. 2008;118:2583–2591.
335. Kissileff HR, Thornton JC, Torres MI, Pavlovich K, Mayer
LS, Kalari V, Leibel RL, Rosenbaum M. Leptin reverses
declines in satiation in weight-reduced obese humans.
Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;95:309–317.
336. Fothergill E, Guo J, Howard L, Kerns JC, Knuth ND,
Brychta R, Chen KY, Skarulis MC, Walter M, Walter PJ,
Hall KD. Persistent metabolic adaptation 6 years after
“The Biggest Loser” competition. Obesity (Silver Spring).
2016;24:1612–1619.
337. Sumithran P, Prendergast LA, Delbridge E, Purcell K,
Shulkes A, Kriketos A, Proietto J. Long-term persistence
of hormonal adaptations to weight loss. N Engl J Med.
2011;365:1597–1604.
338. Rosenbaum M, Leibel RL. Models of energy homeostasis
in response to maintenance of reduced body weight.
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2016;24:1620–1629.
339. Subramanian SV,PerkinsJM,OzaltinE,DaveySmithG.Weight
of nations: a socioeconomic analysis of women in low- to
middle-income countries. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;93:413–421.
340. Bellissimo N, Akhavan T. Effect of macronutrient
composition on short-term food intake and weight loss.
Adv Nutr. 2015;6:302S–308S.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge science writer Eric Vohr for his contribution
to this scientific statement, and Drs. William Heisel and
Ashkan Afshin of the Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation at the University of Washington for their helpful
comments.
Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to:
Michael W. Schwartz, MD, Department of Medicine, Uni-
versity of Washington, UW Medicine at South Lake Union,
850 Republican Street, Box 358055, Seattle, Washington
98109. E-mail: mschwart@u.washington.edu.
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health
Grants DK083042, DK090320, and DK101997 and by the
National Institute of Diabetic and Digestive and Kidney
Disease–funded Nutrition Obesity Research Center at the
University of Washington (to M.W.S.), R01 DK089038 (to
L.M.Z.), DK52431 (to R.L.L.), DK076608 (to A.D.), DK072476
(to L.M.R. and E.R.), and the Russell Berrie Foundation (to
R.L.L.).
Disclosure Summary: M.W.S. receives research funding
from and serves as a consultant to Novo Nordisk. R.J.S. re-
ceives research support from Ethicon/Johnson & Johnson,
Novo Nordisk, Janssen/Johnson & Johnson, MedImmune,
Sanofi, and Boehringer-Ingelheim, and serves as a consultant/
advisor to Ethicon/Johnson & Johnson, Novo Nordisk,
Orexigen, Daiichi Sankyo, Janssen/Johnson & Johnson,
Novartis, Paul Hastings Law Firm, Zafgen, Takeda, and
Boehringer-Ingelheim. A.D. has received grants, contracts,
honoraria, and consulting fees from numerous food and
beverage companies and other commercial and nonprofit
entities with interests in diet quality and health. E.R. serves on
the Scientific Advisory Board to the Nutrilite Health Institute
with Amway, has a consultant contract with Janssen, serves
on the Scientific Advisory Board for the Institute of Car-
diometabolism and Nutrition in Paris, France, gives lectures at
the Open Academy in Venice, and is an advisor for the
Center for Medical Weight Loss. He has received research
grants or unrestricted gifts from Amway, Nestle, the Nu-
trition Science Initiative, and Ethicon Surgery. L.M.R. serves on
the Scientific and Medical Board Advisor to AdvoCare In-
ternational, LP, and receives royalties for SmartLoss® and
SmartMoms®, which are intensive weight management in-
terventions delivered via mHealth technology. The remaining
authors have nothing to disclose.
Disclaimer Statement: The Endocrine Society develops
Scientific Statements to assist clinicians by providing guid-
ance and recommendations for particular areas of practice.
Clinicians and other users should not consider this Scientific
Statement inclusive of all proper approaches or methods or
exclusive of others. It cannot guarantee any specific outcome,
nor does it establish a standard of care. It is not intended to
dictate the treatment of a particular patient. The in-
dependent judgment of health care providers and each
patient’s individual circumstances must determine treat-
ment decisions. The Endocrine Society makes no warranty,
express or implied, regarding this Scientific Statement and
specifically excludes any warranties of merchantability and
fitness for a particular use or purpose. The Endocrine Society
shall not be liable for direct, indirect, special, incidental, or
consequential damages related to the use of the information
contained herein.
Abbreviations
AgRP, agouti-related protein; ARC, arcuate nucleus; BAT,
brown adipose tissue; BMI, body mass index; BPA, bisphenol
A; CGRPPBN, calcium gene-related peptide expressing neu-
rons in the parabrachial nucleus; EDC, endocrine-disrupting
chemical; GABA, g-aminobutyric acid; GI, gastrointestinal;
GWAS, genome-wide association study; HFD, high-fat diet;
iBAT, interscapular brown adipose tissue; LPL, lipoprotein
lipase; NEAT, nonexercise activity thermogenesis; NPY,
neuropeptide Y; PFC, perfluorinated chemical; POMC, pro-
opiomelanocortin; SES, socioeconomic status.
296
Schwartz et al
Obesity Pathogenesis
Endocrine Reviews, August 2017, 38(4):267–296
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/38/4/267/3892397 by guest on 02 June 2019
