 How much is too much? (Part 2)
International Olympic Committee consensus
statement on load in sport and risk of illness
Martin Schwellnus,1 Torbjørn Soligard,2 Juan-Manuel Alonso,3 Roald Bahr,3,4,5
Ben Clarsen,4,5 H Paul Dijkstra,3 Tim J Gabbett,6 Michael Gleeson,7
Martin Hägglund,8 Mark R Hutchinson,9 Christa Janse Van Rensburg,1
Romain Meeusen,10 John W Orchard,11 Babette M Pluim,12,13 Martin Raftery,14
Richard Budgett,2 Lars Engebretsen2,4,15
▸ Additional material is
published online only. To view
please visit the journal online
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2016-096572).
For numbered affiliations see
end of article.
Correspondence to
Professor Martin Schwellnus,
Faculty of Health Sciences,
Institute for Sport, Exercise
Medicine and Lifestyle
Research, University of
Pretoria, Hatfield, Pretoria
0028, South Africa;
martin.schwellnus@up.ac.za
Accepted 3 July 2016
To cite: Schwellnus M,
Soligard T, Alonso J-M,
et al. Br J Sports Med
2016;50:1043–1052.
ABSTRACT
The modern-day athlete participating in elite sports is
exposed to high training loads and increasingly saturated
competition calendar. Emerging evidence indicates that
inappropriate load management is a significant risk factor
for acute illness and the overtraining syndrome. The IOC
convened an expert group to review the scientific evidence
for the relationship of load—including rapid changes in
training and competition load, competition calendar
congestion, psychological load and travel—and health
outcomes in sport. This paper summarises the results linking
load to risk of illness and overtraining in athletes, and
provides athletes, coaches and support staff with practical
guidelines for appropriate load management to reduce
the risk of illness and overtraining in sport. These include
guidelines for prescription of training and competition
load, as well as for monitoring of training, competition
and psychological load, athlete well-being and illness. In
the process, urgent research priorities were identified.
INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES OF THE
CONSENSUS
The modern-day elite athlete experiences an ever-
increasing and congested sports calendar, and this is
coupled with increased training and competition
‘load’. There is a perception among health profes-
sionals taking care of athletes that ‘excessive training
load’, combined with an ‘overloaded’ or ‘congested’
competition schedule (competition load) exposes ath-
letes in different sports to an inability to adapt opti-
mally to the overall load. This can result in decreased
performance and is also associated with an increased
risk of injury (Soligard et al, 2016 IOC Injury consen-
sus statement paper) and the development of acute
illness and/or the overtraining syndrome (OTS).
High-intensity and prolonged training and competi-
tion ‘load’ is associated with an increased risk of both
subclinical immunological changes that may increase
the risk of illness, and actual symptoms of illness or
diagnosed illness.1 2 Furthermore, frequent and pro-
longed international travel, which is part of the
modern-day
congested
sports calendar,
may
be
related to increased risk of illness in athletes.3 4
Epidemiology of in competition acute illness in
elite athletes
The epidemiology of acute illness in elite-level ath-
letes during international competition has been
studied in a variety of settings including the Summer5
and Winter Olympic Games,6 7 Winter Y
outh Olympic
Games,8
Summer
Paralympic
Games,9
Winter
Paralympic Games10 and other international competi-
tions in a variety of sports including athletics,11 aquatic
sports,12 football13 14 and rugby union (table 1).15
These data indicate that in shorter duration
(<4 weeks) major international games and tourna-
ments, 6–17% of registered athletes are likely to
suffer an illness episode, with an apparently higher
incidence proportion (IP—defined as the % athletes
presenting with an illness during the games), of tour-
nament or competition illness in female athletes com-
pared with male athletes. Furthermore, the IP of
illness appears to be higher in Winter6 compared
with Summer Olympic Games5 and data from one
study indicate that athletes with disability participat-
ing in the Paralympic Games9 appear to have a higher
IP of illness than athletes competing in the Olympic
Games.5 Finally
, the data from one study indicate that
during more prolonged competition (4 months)15
there is a higher IP of illness, as might be expected
because of the longer duration of the competition.
The organ systems affected by acute illnesses in
athletes show a very consistent pattern. Most studies
indicate that about 50% of all acute illness in athletes
during competitions and tournaments affect the
respiratory tract. Other systems commonly affected
by illness are the digestive system,5–9 11–15 17 skin
and subcutaneous tissues9 15 and the genitourinary
system.9 In the majority of studies reporting acute
illness in athletes, data are either self-reported symp-
toms of acute illness or physician-diagnosed using
clinical assessment only.5–9 11–15 17 19 20 None of
these epidemiological studies used special investiga-
tions to confirm the diagnosis of an infective illness.
Despite this limitation, clinically diagnosed infec-
tions are generally reported as the most common
cause of acute illness, with infection being the cause
of respiratory tract illness in about 75% of cases.
However, it is acknowledged that athletes can
develop symptoms (eg, sore throat, sinus conges-
tion, cough) that mimic infections but are actually
due to allergy or inflammation from other causes
such as inhalation of cold, dry or polluted air.21 22
Performance loss and risks of acute illness in
elite athletes
Acute illness presents a significant health burden to
the athlete.23 Acute illness can cause reduction in
Schwellnus M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1043–1052. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572
1043
Consensus statement
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572 on 17 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 exercise performance, an interruption to training and even
result in missing an important international or domestic compe-
tition. Acute infective illness can affect a number of organ
systems causing a reduction in exercise performance through
different mechanisms including muscle wasting,24 impaired
motor coordination, a decrease in muscle strength (isotonic and
isometric),25 a decrease in maximal oxygen uptake and endur-
ance capacity,24 and alterations in muscle enzyme activity and
metabolic function.24 Furthermore, the presence of fever causes
a decrease in the body’s ability to regulate body temperature
and this results in increased fluid losses. Increased fluid loss can
decrease both stroke volume and cardiac output, resulting in
reduced maximal oxygen consumption.26 It has also been docu-
mented that a decrease in exercise performance after full clinical
recovery from an upper respiratory tract (URT) illness can last
for 2–4 days,27 and recently, data from a prospective cohort
study show that runners who start an endurance race with sys-
temic symptoms of an acute illness are 2–3 times less likely to
complete the race.28 It has also been reported in elite British
athletes from 30 different Olympic sports (24 summer, 6
winter), that illness (most commonly of the respiratory tract)
caused 33% of missed training sessions (English Institute of
Sport, 2009. Injury and Illness in Great Britain Sport. Olympiad
review August 2009 (personal communication; EIS website:
http://www.uksport.gov.uk/news/2012/07/25/
battle-against-injury-and-illness). Acute infective illness can also
increase the risk of serious medical complications and even
sudden death during strenuous exercise.24–27 29
There are many intrinsic and extrinsic risk factors that are
associated with acute illness in athletes, and it is acknowledged
that these risk factors can differ between different types of acute
illness in different organ systems. However, there is also some
evidence that increased training load, competition load and psy-
chosocial stress together with international travel, as part of a
congested sports calendar, may all be risk factors for illness in
the elite modern-day professional athlete. Therefore, the IOC
convened a consensus meeting from 24 to 27 November 2015
where experts in the field reviewed the scientific evidence for
the relationship of load—including a saturated sports calendar
—and health outcomes in sport. The expert group searched for,
and analysed, current best evidence, aimed to reach consensus,
and provided these guidelines for clinical practice and athlete
management. In the process, urgent research priorities were also
identified.
TERMINOLOGY AND DEFINITIONS
A first step for the group was to reach consensus on the defin-
ition of key terms. This is important as these terms may also
serve as a foundation for consistent use in research and clinical
practice. The consensus group recognised that the term ‘load’
can have varied definitions. In general, ‘load’ refers to ‘a weight
or source of pressure borne by someone or something’.30 Based
on this broad term, and the varied usage of the term ‘load’ in
the sports medicine and exercise physiology literature, the con-
sensus group applied a broad definition of ‘load’ to describe
‘the sport and non-sport burden (single or multiple physio-
logical, psychological or mechanical stressors) as a stimulus that
is applied to a human biological system (including subcellular
elements, a single cell, tissues, one or multiple organ systems, or
the individual)’. Load can be applied to the individual human
biological system over varying time periods (seconds, minutes,
hours to days, weeks, months and years) and with varying mag-
nitude (duration, frequency and intensity).
The term ‘external load’ is often used interchangeably with
‘load’, referring to any external stimulus applied to the athlete
that is measured independently of their internal character-
istics.31 32 Any external load will result in physiological and psy-
chological responses in each individual, following interaction
with, and variation in many other factors.33 34 This individual
response is referred to as ‘internal load’.
The term ‘illness’ has been defined in the sports medicine lit-
erature as ‘a new or recurring illness incurred during competi-
tion or training receiving medical attention, regardless of the
consequences with respect to absence from competition or
training’.5 However, it is recognised that symptomatic illness
can be preceded by subclinical immune system alterations that
precede symptomatic illness, and not all athletes seek medical
attention for early warning symptoms of illness. Therefore, in
this consensus document, a broader modified definition of
illness was applied as follows: ‘a new or recurring symptomatic
illness, or the presence of subclinical immunological precursors
of symptomatic illness, that was incurred during competition or
Table 1
Illness incidence proportion (%) among athletes at major competitive events lasting 2–16 weeks
Games/Competition
Season
Duration
(days)
Athletes
(n)
Males
(n)
Females
(n)
All athletes
(%)
Males
(%)
Females
(%)
Respiratory
(% total)
FINA 201516
Summer
18
2413
1151
1262
12.9
11.9
13.8
34
Paralympics 201410
Winter
12
547
418
129
17.4
17.0
18.6
30
Olympics 20146
Winter
18
2780
1659
1121
8.9
7.3
10.9
64
FINA 201317
Summer
18
2223
1179
1044
9.0
8.8
9.1
50
Paralympics 20129
Summer
14
3565
2347
1218
14.2
17.6
20.1
34
Olympics 20125
Summer
17
10 568
5892
4676
7.2
5.3
8.6
41
Youth Olympics 20128
Winter
10
1021
562
459
8.4
6.0
11.0
61
IAAF 201118
Summer
9
1851
971
880
6.8
7.1
7.7
39
Olympics 20107
Winter
17
2567
1522
1045
7.2
5.2
8.7
63
FIFA 201013
Winter
30
736
736
−
12.1
12.1
−
40
Super Rugby 201015
Winter
112
259
259
−
72.2
72.2
−
31
IAAF 200911
Summer
9
1979
1082
897
6.8
5.6
8.4
36
FINA 200912
Summer
18
2599
1306
1293
7.1
5.2
6.8
50
CONFED Cup 200914
Winter
14
184
184
−
14.7
14.7
−
57
CONFED Cup, Fédération Internationale de Football Association Confederations Cup; FINA, Federation Internationale de Natation; IAAF, International Athletics Federation; n, number of
registered athletes.
1044
Schwellnus M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1043–1052. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572
Consensus statement
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572 on 17 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 training, and either receiving medical attention or was self-
reported by athletes, regardless of the consequences with
respect to absence from competition or training’. An extensive
glossary of other key terms is provided in online supplementary
appendix A.
MEASURES AND MONITORING
The relationship between athlete’s health and loading can be
seen in the context of a well-being continuum,35 where load
and recovery are mutual counteragents. Sport and non-sport
loads impose stress on the athletes, shifting their physical and
psychological well-being along a continuum that progresses
from homoeostasis to acute fatigue, over-reaching, OTS, subclin-
ical immune changes, clinical symptoms, illness (or injury) and
ultimately death. Death is rare in sport, and typically coupled
with an underlying disease. For athletes, deterioration (clinically
and in performance) along the continuum usually stops at time-
loss injury or illness, at which point the athlete is forced to
cease further loading. With adequate recovery following a load,
the process is reversed, resulting in restored homoeostasis at a
higher level of fitness and an improved performance potential
(figure 1).
Regular monitoring of athletes is fundamental to defining
the relationship between load and risk of illness in the care of
athletes and in research. This includes accurate measurement
and monitoring of the sport and non-sport loads of the athletes,
and their performance, how they feel (well-being and clinical
symptoms) and any illness.
Monitoring of an athlete’s load has many potential ad-
vantages, such as explaining changes in performance, increasing
the understanding of training responses, revealing fatigue and
accompanying needs for recovery, informing the planning and
modification of training regimens and competition calendars,
and, importantly, ensuring therapeutic levels of load to minimise
the risk of maladaptations in the form of non-functional over-
reaching
(fatigue
lasting
weeks
to
months),
injury
and
illness.32 36
Monitoring of external and internal loads
There are many different measures of external and internal
loads, and a list or more common measurement tools is listed in
online supplementary appendix B. However, the evidence for
their validity as markers of adaptation and maladaptation to the
load is limited. Currently there is no single marker of an ath-
lete’s response to load that consistently predicts acute illness or
the OTS.32 37 Load monitoring involves measuring both exter-
nal and internal loads, where tools to measure the former can
be general or sports-specific, and for the latter, objective or
subjective.38
Measuring the external load typically involves quantifying the
training or competition load of an athlete, such as hours of
training, distance run, weight lifted or number of games played;
however, other external factors, such as life events, daily hassles
or travel may be equally important. The internal load is
measured by assessing the internal biological, physiological and
psychological response to the external load34 and specific exam-
ples include measures such as heart rate (physiological/objective)
or rating of perceived exertion (psychological/subjective).
Whereas measuring external load is important in understand-
ing the work completed and capabilities and capacities of the
athlete, measuring internal load is critical in determining the
appropriate stimulus for optimal biological adaptation.39 40 As
individuals will respond differently to any given stimulus, the
load required for optimal adaptation may differ significantly
from one athlete to another. For example, the ability to main-
tain a certain running speed or cycling power output for a
certain duration may be achieved with a high or low perception
of effort or heart rate, depending on numerous interindividual
and intraindividual factors, such as fitness and fatigue.32
A recent systematic review on internal load monitoring
concluded that subjective measures were more sensitive and
consistent than objective measures in determining acute and
chronic changes in an athlete’s well-being in response to load.38
The following subscales may be useful: non-sport stress, fatigue,
physical recovery, general health/well-being, being in shape,
vigour/motivation and physical symptoms/illness.35 41–44 These
variables offer the coach and other support staff essential data
on the athlete’s readiness to train or compete, and thus may
inform individual adjustments to prescribed training.38
Finally, it has been demonstrated that athletes may perform
both longer and/or more intense training,45 or perceive loads as
significantly harder31 46 47 than what was intended by the coach
or the prescribed training programme. This may pose a consid-
erable problem in the long term, as it may lead to maladaptation
to the load. This underscores the importance of monitoring
external and internal loads in the individual athlete, rather than
as a team average, as it may reveal dissociations between exter-
nal and internal loads, and helps to ensure that the applied load
matches that prescribed by the coach.32
Monitoring of illness and subclinical markers of illness,
including immune function
The general principles and guidelines to monitor acute illness
patterns in athletes during training and competition have
recently been reviewed for aquatic sports48 and athletics.49 In
general, in most epidemiological studies, illness monitoring is
restricted to athletes presenting with symptoms and clinical
signs of acute illness. However, acute infective illness is pre-
ceded by a prodromal period that is characterised by patho-
physiological changes in various organ systems resulting in the
development of non-specific symptoms such as fatigue, myalgia
or arthralgia, headache and fever. These early warning clinical
symptoms and signs may indicate acute illness, but can also be
symptomatic of over-reaching and overtraining.37 There is also
good
evidence
that
markers
of
subclinical
(asymptomatic)
illness, including changes in the immune system, can occur in
response to acute and chronic exercise50–53 and that some of
these changes may predict the onset of acute illness.54–60 To
Figure 1
Well-being continuum.35
Schwellnus M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1043–1052. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572
1045
Consensus statement
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572 on 17 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 date, recommendations for illness monitoring in epidemio-
logical studies have not included the routine measurement of
these immune system markers, and further research to deter-
mine the sensitivity, specificity and cost-effectiveness of routine
testing for these markers as risk factors for illness in athletes
is required.
Measures and monitoring of over-reaching (OR) and the OTS
Measures to monitor for over-reaching and overtraining have
recently been reviewed in a joint consensus statement published
by the European College of Sports Science (ECSS) and the
American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM).37 There are
several criteria for a reliable marker to detect the onset of the
OTS in athletes:
▸ A marker should have a high sensitivity (the proportion of
people with the condition who have a positive test result)
and specificity (the proportion of people without the condi-
tion who have a negative test result);
▸ The marker should respond to the training load and ideally
be unaffected by other factors (eg, diet and chronobiological
rhythms);
▸ Changes in the marker should occur before the establishment
of the OTS;
▸ A marker should be distinguishable from other chronic
physiological adaptations to training;
▸ The marker should be relatively easy to measure with a quick
availability of the result;
▸ The marker should not be too invasive (eg, repeated venous
blood
samplings
are
not
well
accepted)
and
not
too
expensive;
▸ The marker should be derived at rest from submaximal or
standardised exercise of relatively short duration in order to
not interfere with the training process.
However,
none of
the currently available
or suggested
markers meet all of these criteria and it is suggested that strat-
egies to monitor for the OTS should include regular recording
of training load, using questionnaires, training diaries, psycho-
logical screening and direct observational methods.37 If the
OTS is suspected in an athlete, a specific diagnostic algorithm,
as suggested by the ECSS/ACSM consensus group, can be fol-
lowed.37 Most recently, it has been suggested that a repeated
(4 hours apart) maximal exercise testing protocol can be used
to assess athletes for the OTS.61 62 However, there is a lack
of definitive monitoring and diagnostic criteria for OR and
the OTS.
LOAD AND THE RISK OF ILLNESS IN ATHLETES
All the members of the consensus group were asked to inde-
pendently search and review the literature relating load to injury
in sports and to contribute to a draft document of the results
before the 3-day consensus meeting, organised in Lausanne,
Switzerland, in November 2015. This meeting provided a
further opportunity for the consensus group to review the litera-
ture and to finalise a draft consensus statement. The consensus
group further agreed on a post hoc literature search, conducted
by the first author of this consensus document after the
meeting, to ensure the inclusion of all the relevant scientific
information from the different sporting codes. The electronic
databases of PubMed, Academic Search Complete, CINAHL
and SPORTDiscus were searched from 1 January 1980 to 16
March 2016. The following terms were included in the search,
in various combinations: illness, infection, immune, overtrain-
ing, sport, exercise, load, workload, recovery, volume, intensity,
stress, duration, congestion, distance, mileage and exposure.
Only publications in the English language, and studies involving
human participants were considered.
After duplicates were eliminated, 796 studies were identified.
Titles and abstracts were independently reviewed and assessed
for relevance by two researchers (MS and CJVR), using the fol-
lowing inclusion criteria for studies:
▸ Studies involving athletes of all levels (recreational to elite)
and sports;
▸ Studies where illness episodes were documented by either a
self-report or clinical diagnosis;
▸ Studies where illness episodes were related to training load
(internal or external);
▸ Studies where illness episodes were related to competitions,
competition calendar, travel load and psychological stressors;
▸ Studies where single (load) or multiple risk factors (load and
other risk factors) for illness were studied using univariate or
multivariable analyses;
▸ Studies using one of the following research designs: system-
atic review (with or without a meta-analysis), randomised
controlled trials, prospective cohort studies, retrospective
cohort studies, randomised controlled trials, cross-sectional
studies and case–control studies.
In some instances, unpublished data including online manu-
scripts (not yet published) were included with permission. Final
decisions to include publications were based on consensus, and
the publications (n=30) that were included in this analysis are
summarised in online supplementary appendix C.
Evidence relating absolute training load and the risk of
illness
The relationship between absolute training load and risk of
illness has been studied for more than three decades. These
observations have led to the hypothesis that the relationship
between absolute training load and risk of illness is a J-shaped
curve,63 with very low or no training being associated with a
higher risk of illness compared with moderate training load.
Very high training loads are associated with the highest risk of
illness in this model. In general, there is good evidence from a
number of studies in recreational,55 56 59 64–67 subelite68 69 or
national-level athletes,70–72 that higher absolute training loads
are associated with an increased risk of illness. Similarly, there is
some evidence that low training loads or no training is asso-
ciated with an increased risk of illness compared with a moder-
ate training load.73 74
However, recently, it has been suggested that the J-shaped rela-
tionship between absolute training load and illness is not neces-
sarily applicable to high-level elite international athletes.75 Data
from a number of recent studies show that high absolute training
loads in international-level70 76 77 and medal-winning athletes3
are associated with a lower risk of illness compared with the sub-
elite or national-level athletes. The precise reasons for this obser-
vation are not clear, but one explanation may be that it is a result
of ‘self-selection’ and that to become a high-level international
elite athlete one has to possess an incredible physique, including
an immune system able to withstand infections even during
severe physiological and psychological stress.75
In summary, there is evidence that high absolute training
loads are associated with an increased risk of illness in recre-
ational and subelite athletes ( J-shaped curve). However, there is
also evidence that this relationship does not necessarily apply to
elite athletes on the highest level, where high training loads are
not associated with an increased risk of illness (S-shaped
curve)75 (figure 2).
1046
Schwellnus M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1043–1052. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572
Consensus statement
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572 on 17 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 Evidence relating changes in training load and the risk of
illness
The relationship between risk of illness and changes (spikes or
drops in intensity, duration or frequency) in training load has
only been explored in a few studies. In one of the first studies
where the daily training load and illness episodes were moni-
tored in a group of recreational runners over 12 months, an
increase in the volume of training was associated with an
increased risk of illness.67 Similarly, in subsequent studies,
increases in training volume were associated with increased risk
of illness in elite junior tennis players,55 subelite basketball
players68 and elite swimmers.70 71 Furthermore, in a prospective
study in the elite rugby union players, periods of increased
intensity of training preceded the development of URT illness
symptoms,78 while in another study among elite swimmers, a
10% increase in training load was associated with a 10%
increase in the risk of URT illness symptoms.70 In elite cross-
country skiers, training monotony, reflecting little change in
training load, was associated with a lower risk of illness,3 but
this was not confirmed in another 29-week prospective study in
32 rugby league players, where training monotony, together
with overall increased internal load and load strain were all asso-
ciated with an increased risk for self-reported illness.79
In summary, there is some evidence that changes in external
(increased volume and intensity of training) and internal training
loads are associated with an increased risk of illness. However,
given the current data it is not yet possible to quantify which
amount of training load increase is related to increased risk of a
specific illness, or in a specific sport. Training monotony as a
risk factor for illness has only been studied recently in two
populations, with varied results, and this requires further
investigation.
Evidence relating sporting competition and risk of illness
As well as absolute and relative changes in training load, partici-
pating in single or multiple competitions (tournaments) also
increases athletes’ risk of illness. Competition load can refer to a
single event (race, game) or multiple events over a period of
time in different venues and of different durations. The earliest
studies relating competition load and risk of illness were con-
ducted among recreational runners participating in a single pro-
longed and strenuous ultramarathon event. These showed that
URT illness symptoms were more frequent in the 1–2 weeks
after the race compared with non-running controls.66
80–82
Postrace URT illness episodes were more frequent in faster
runners,66 80 81 and in runners with a history of prerace URT
illness symptoms.83 However, in shorter races (5, 10 and
21 km), postrace URT illness episodes were not related to
prerace URT illness symptoms.84 These early data indicated that
prerace URT illness symptoms, and increased race intensity and
duration were associated with an increased risk of postrace URT
illness symptoms.
Competition load and risk of illness has only been documen-
ted in a few sports other than distance running. In elite tennis
players, increased matches per week were associated with
increased risk of URT illness symptoms,55 while more frequent
training and competition periods were associated with increased
URT illness symptoms in American college football players.56
Recently, a number of prospective studies confirmed that both
the precompetition and the competition period are associated
with an increased risk of illness. In one study with a five-season
follow-up of elite track and field athletes, 50% of all illness epi-
sodes occurred in the 2 months prior to major competitions.23
In another study, elite cross-country skiers participating in an
11-day ski tour had a higher incidence of illness compared with
skiers not participating in the tournament.85 Finally, competi-
tion was an independent risk factor for illness (odds ratio for
illness=2.9) in a group of elite cross-country skiers that were
followed over a 7–8 years period.3
In summary, the current data indicate that participation in
competitions (single or multiple) is associated with an increased
risk of illness, but there are too few data to quantify that risk
and this requires further investigation. The factors responsible
for this increased risk as a result of competition are likely to be
multifactorial and also need to be explored in future studies.
Evidence relating international travel and risk of illness in
athletes
The modern-day elite athlete typically competes in an increasing
number of competitions and tournaments on the international
circuit. This necessitates more frequent international travel for
competition purposes, and for training camps. Travel medicine
is a branch of medicine studying the effects of travel and risk of
illness. Published data relating illness and international travel in
non-athletes are limited because of a number of factors includ-
ing selection bias (surveys from individuals who seek assistance
at travel clinics), information bias (self-reported data on illness),
recall bias (data obtained weeks after return from travel), poor
response rates, failure to control for confounders86 and failure
to document exposure (person days or weeks).87 Prospective
cohort studies are particularly important to determine the inci-
dence and risk factors associated with illness as a result of
travel.86 88 89
The relationship between risk of illness in athletes and inter-
national travel has been investigated in very few studies. In the
first study to determine the risk of illness in athletes during
international travel, travelling across more than four time zones
was associated with a 2–3 times increased risk of illness in elite
rugby union players competing in a 16-week tournament.4
Recently, international travel was also shown to be associated
with significantly more URT illness symptoms in professional
rugby players travelling across 11 time zones,90 while inter-
national travel was an independent risk factor for illness in
another prospective study among elite cross-country skiers.3
Although the precise mechanisms for these observations have
not been investigated, monitoring air travel (eg, frequency, dur-
ation, recovery time from travel across multiple time zones and
risk of illness associated with the travel destination) of elite
Figure 2
The relationship between load and risk of illness in
recreational and subelite athletes ( J-shaped curve) versus elite athletes
(S-shaped curve).63 75
Schwellnus M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1043–1052. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572
1047
Consensus statement
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572 on 17 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 athletes should be encouraged as an important consideration to
reduce the risk of illness.
Evidence relating psychological load and risk of illness in
athletes
There is evidence in the literature that the risk of illness is
increased when an athlete is exposed to other non-exercise stres-
sors to the immune system, including lack of sleep or severe psy-
chosocial
stress.91–94
In
one
study
in
young
elite
soccer
players,95 psychosocial stress and recovery were related to the
occurrence of illness, supporting the findings of other studies
reporting that illness is also related to a disturbed balance
between psychological stress and recovery.36 93 96
Methodological considerations
It is important to note that the quality of the data on the influ-
ence of training and competition loads and risk of illness is
compromised by clinical and methodological heterogeneity.
Some
of
the
more
specific
methodological
considerations
include the following:
▸ Most studies have been conducted in athletes participating in
individual endurance sports (cross-country skiing, swimming,
biathlon, distance running, cycling, orienteering) with only a
few studies in team sports (Australian football, tennis, foot-
ball, rugby union, rugby league, basketball) and mixed sport
types (university sports).
▸ Studies have been conducted across all sporting levels
ranging from recreational to elite sports.
▸ Studies have included athletes from all age groups and from
both sexes.
▸ In the majority of studies, illness was documented as self-
reported symptoms, through the use of questionnaires.
▸ In all studies, external training load was measured, while
internal load was only measured in some studies and changes
in load were documented in very few studies.
▸ Multiple risk factors for illness were measured in most
studies, but in only a few studies were these risk factors
included in multiple risk factor modelling to determine the
independent risk factor for illness.
PRACTICAL CLINICAL GUIDELINES FOR LOAD
MANAGEMENT TO REDUCE THE RISK OF ILLNESS IN
ATHLETES
The prevention of illness is a key component in athletes’ health
management. Illness prevention strategies are important to opti-
mise uninterrupted training, and to reduce the risk of illness
that
can
prevent
participation
in
important
competitions.
Furthermore, illness prevention may reduce the risk of medical
complications during exercise. In one observational study, an
illness
prevention
programme
in
the
Norwegian
Olympic
Winter Games (OWG) team reduced the illness rate from
17.3% of athletes competing in the T
urin OWG, to 5.1% of
athletes competing in the Vancouver OWG. The authors sug-
gested that the reduced incidence of illness contributed to the
improved performance and overall results of the team at the
Vancouver OWG.97
There is no single method that completely eliminates the risk
of illness in athletes, but there are several effective behavioural,
nutritional and training strategies that can lower exposure to
pathogens and limit the extent of exercise-induced immunode-
pression, thereby reducing the risk of illness.98 Therefore, it is
recommended that medical staff, who are responsible for indi-
vidual athletes and teams, develop, implement and monitor
illness prevention strategies to reduce the risk of illness.97 99 100
The general guidelines for illness prevention in athletes could
include adopting behavioural, lifestyle and medical strategies to
limit the transmission of infections, nutritional strategies to
maintain robust immunity in athletes, measuring, monitoring
and managing training and competition load, and measuring
and monitoring athletes to detect early signs and symptoms of
illness, over-reaching and overtraining. These general guidelines
by the group, through consensus, are summarised in box 1.
SUGGESTED AREAS FOR RESEARCH TO PREVENT ILLNESS
AS A RESULT OF EXCESSIVE TRAINING OR COMPETITION
LOAD
In general, there is a paucity of research data on the risk of
illness as a result of a congested sports calendar, or an increased
training or competition load. The consensus group identified
that there is a need to conduct large-scale prospective cohort
studies to identify the risk factors associated with illness in ath-
letes, including the role of training and competition load as well
as international travel. Once the risk factors have been identi-
fied, intervention studies, that are designed to reduce the risk of
illness, can be planned and implemented. Follow-up studies to
determine the effects of intervention strategies can then be
planned and implemented, recognising that these studies may be
difficult to conduct in elite, professional athletes. W
e suggest the
following specific areas for future research:
▸ Develop consistent systems to measure load and monitor the
athletes;
▸ Determine the impact of illness on individual and team
sports performance;
▸ Explore the dose–response relationship of training and com-
petition load on risk of illness, and quantifying the risk;
▸ Explore the dose–response relationship of recovery time on
risk of illness;
▸ Identify potential cut-off and maximum number of competi-
tions in athletes (per age groups, and in professional athletes
in different Olympic sports);
▸ Examine, and quantify the effect of illness prevention strat-
egies including preseason screening, management of training
and competition load, early detection of subclinical illness,
recovery modalities and the use of nutritional interventions;
▸ Examine, and quantify the association (including mechan-
isms) between the risk of illness and international travel
including jet lag, and sleep deprivation;
▸ Examine, and quantify the effect of illness prevention strategies
to minimise the risk of illness during international travel;
▸ Determine the mechanisms by which intensified training
and competition affect health parameters including im-
munological,
oxidative
stress-related
and
cardiovascular
parameters;
▸ Explore the individual responses of athletes to changes in
training and competition load, including genetic factors.
SUMMARY
Data on the relationship between training and competition load
and the risk of illness are limited to a few select sports and athlete
populations. High loads can have either positive or negative influ-
ences on risk of illness in athletes. High absolute training loads are
associated with an increased risk of illness in recreational and sube-
lite athletes (J-shaped curve). There is some evidence that this may
not be the case in high-level elite athletes (S-shaped curve).
Increased external (volume and intensity of training) and internal
training loads are associated with an increased risk of illness, while
training monotony as a risk factor for illness has only been studied
in
two
populations,
with
varied
results,
requiring
further
1048
Schwellnus M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1043–1052. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572
Consensus statement
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572 on 17 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 Box 1
General guidelines for illness prevention in athletes
1. Behavioural, lifestyle and medical strategies
A variety of behavioural, lifestyle and medical intervention strategies have been advocated to reduce the risk of illness in the athlete.
These include advice to athletes, measures taken by medical staff and the athlete support team.
Athletes are advised to:
i.
Minimise contact with infected people, young children, animals and contagious objects;
ii.
Avoid crowded areas and shaking hands and minimise contact with people outside the team and support staff;
iii.
Keep at distance to people who are coughing, sneezing or have a ‘runny nose’, and when appropriate wear (or ask them to
wear) a disposable mask;
iv.
Cough or sneeze on to the elbow and not on the hands—always clean the hands and nose after sneezing or coughing;
v.
Wash hands regularly and effectively with soap and water, especially before meals, and after direct contact with potentially
contagious people, animals, blood, secretions, public places and bathrooms;
vi.
Use disposable paper towels and limit hand to mouth/nose contact when suffering from upper respiratory symptoms or
gastrointestinal illness (putting hands to eyes and nose is a major route of viral self-inoculation);
vii.
Carry insect repellent, antimicrobial foam/cream or alcohol-based hand washing gel with them;
viii. Not to share drinking bottles, cups, cutlery, towels, etc, with other people;
ix.
Choose beverages from sealed bottles, avoid raw vegetables and undercooked meat, wash and peel fruit before eating, while
competing or training abroad;
x.
Wear enough covered clothing (covering the arms and legs) during training sessions when travelling in tropical areas,
particularly at dusk and dawn;
xi.
Wear open footwear when using public showers, swimming pools and locker rooms in order to avoid dermatological diseases;
xii.
Adopt strategies that facilitate good quality sleep such as strategic napping during the day and correct sleep hygiene practices
at night;
xiii. Avoid excessive drinking and binge drinking of alcohol as this impairs immune function for several hours, particularly after
strenuous training or competition;
xiv. Practice the principles of safe sex and use condoms.
Medical staff taking care of athletes is advised to consider the following:
i.
Develop, implement and monitor illness prevention guidelines for athletes and medical and administrative support staff;
ii.
Screening for airway inflammation disturbances (asthma, allergy and other inflammatory airway conditions);
iii.
Identify the high-risk athletes and take full preventative precautions during high-risk training or competition periods;
iv.
Arrange for single room accommodation during tournaments for athletes with heavy competition load or known susceptibility
to respiratory tract infections, or high performance priority athletes;
v.
Consider protecting the airways of athletes from being directly exposed to very cold (<0°C) and dry air during strenuous
exercise by using a facial mask;
vi.
Adopt measures to reduce the risk of illness associated with international travel;
vii.
Update athletes vaccines needed at home and for foreign travel and take into consideration that influenza vaccines take 5–
7 weeks to take effect, intramuscular vaccines may have a few small side effects, vaccinations are performed preferably out of
season and avoid vaccinating just before competitions or if symptoms of illness are present;
viii. Update administrative and support staff vaccines needed at home and for foreign travel;
ix.
Consider zinc lozenges (>75 mg zinc/day; high ionic zinc content) at the onset of upper respiratory symptoms, as there is some
evidence that the number of days with illness symptoms can be reduced.
The athlete support team can consider adopting nutritional measures to maintain robust immunity in athletes, including the following:
i.
Introduce personalised nutrition programmes to avoid deficiencies of essential micronutrients;
ii.
Encourage athletes to ingest carbohydrate during and after exercise and to ingest both carbohydrate and protein after exercise;
iii.
Measure and monitor the vitamin D status of athletes and supplement if required;
iv.
Consider advising athletes to ingest probiotic such as Lactobacillus probiotics on a daily basis;
v.
Consider advising athletes on the regular consumption of fruits and plants, polyphenol supplements (eg, quercetin), or
foodstuffs (eg, non-alcoholic beer and green tea) that may reduce risk of illness.
2. Training and competition load management
There is evidence that poor load management with ensuing maladaptation can be a significant risk factor for acute illness and
overtraining. However, data are limited to a few select sports and athlete populations, and this, combined with the unique nature of
different sports, make it difficult to provide sport-specific guidelines for load management. However, the following general
recommendations can be made:
i.
Very high loads can have either positive or negative influences on risk of illness in athletes, with the athlete’s level of
competition (elite), load history (chronic load) and intrinsic risk factor profile being important;
ii.
Athletes should have a detailed individualised training and competition plan, including postevent recovery measures
(encompassing nutrition and hydration, sleep, and psychological recovery);
iii.
The training load is monitored using measurements of external and internal load;
iv.
Training load is managed by adopting the following principles:
Schwellnus M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1043–1052. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572
1049
Consensus statement
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572 on 17 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 investigation. At present, there is not enough data to quantify the
risk of illness in response to absolute load or changes in load, and
this requires further investigation. Regular athlete monitoring is
fundamental to ensure appropriate external and internal training
loads to maximise performance and minimise the risk of illness.
Emerging evidence suggests that frequent and prolonged air travel
across multiple time zones is associated with risk of illness in ath-
letes but the precise mechanisms for these observations are
unknown. It is prudent for sports governing bodies, concerned
with athletes’ health to consider the overall competition load
when planning event calendars. More research is needed on the
impact of competition calendar congestion and rapid changes in
training load on risk of illness in multiple sports, as well as on the
interaction with other physiological, psychological, environmental
and genetic risk factors.
Author affiliations
1Faculty of Health Sciences, Institute for Sport, Exercise Medicine and Lifestyle
Research, Section Sports Medicine, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa
2Medical and Scientific Department, International Olympic Committee, Lausanne,
Switzerland
3Sports Medicine Department, Aspetar, Qatar Orthopedic and Sports Medicine
Hospital, Doha, Qatar
4Department of Sports Medicine, Oslo Sports Trauma Research Center, Norwegian
School of Sport Sciences, Oslo, Norway
5Olympic Training Center (Olympiatoppen), Oslo, Norway
6School of Human Movement Studies, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Australia and School of Exercise Science, Australian Catholic University, Brisbane,
Australia
7School of Sport, Exercise and Health Sciences, Loughborough University,
Loughborough, UK
8Division of Physiotherapy, Department of Medical and Health Sciences, Linköping
University, Linköping, Sweden
9Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Sports Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA
10Human Physiology Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
11School of Public Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
12Medical Department, Royal Dutch Lawn Tennis Association, Amersfoort, The
Netherlands
13Amsterdam Collaboration on Health and Safety in Sports, IOC Research Centre for
Prevention of Injury and Protection of Athlete Health, VUmc/AMC, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands
14World Rugby, Dublin, Ireland
15Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Twitter Follow Torbjørn Soligard at @TSoligard, Juan Manuel Alonso at
@DrJuanMAlonso, Benjamin Clarsen at @benclarsen and Hendrik Dijkstra at
@DrPaulDijkstra
Contributors MS and TS made substantial contributions to overall and detailed
conception, planning, drafting and critically revising the paper. J-MA, RBa, BC, HPD,
TJG, MG, MH, MRH, CJVR, RM, JWO, BMP and MR made substantial contributions
to drafting and critically revising the paper. LE and RBu made substantial
contributions to overall conception and planning of the paper.
a. Changes in training load should be individualised as there are large intraindividual and interindividual variances in the
timeframe of response and adaptation to load;
b. Changes in training load should be in small increments, with data (from the injury literature) indicating that weekly
increments should be <10%;
v.
The competition load is monitored and managed;
vi.
Variation in an athlete’s psychological stressors should guide the prescription of training and/or competition loads;
vii.
It is recommended that coaches and support staff schedule adequate recovery, particularly after intensive training periods,
competitions and travel, including nutrition and hydration, sleep and rest, active rest, relaxation strategies and emotional
support;
viii. Sports governing bodies have the responsibility to consider the competition load, and hence the health of the athletes when
planning their event calendars. This requires increased coordination between single-sport and multisport event organisers, and
the development of a comprehensive calendar of all international sports events.
3. Psychological load management
Psychological load (stressors) such as negative life event stress and daily hassles can significantly increase the risk of illness in
athletes. Clinical practical recommendations centre on reducing state-level stressors and educating athletes, coaches and support staff
in proactive stress management, and comprise the following:43
i.
Developing resilience strategies that help athletes understand the relationship between personal traits, negative life events,
thoughts, emotions and physiological states, which, in turn, may help them minimise the impact of negative life events and the
subsequent risk of illness;
ii.
Educating athletes in stress management techniques, confidence building and goal setting, optimally under supervision of a
sport psychologist, to help minimise the effects of stress and reduce the likelihood of illness;
iii. Reducing training and/or competition loads and intensities to mitigate risk of illness for athletes who appear unfocused as a
consequence of negative life events or ongoing daily hassles;
iv. Implementing periodical stress assessments (eg, hassle and uplift scale,101 LESCA102) to inform adjustment of athletes’ training
and/or competition loads. An athlete who reports high levels of daily hassle or stress could likely benefit from reducing the
training load during a specified time period to prevent potential fatigue, illness or burnout.43
4. Measuring and monitoring for early signs and symptoms of illness, over-reaching and overtraining
The use of sensitive measures to monitor an athlete’s health can lead to early detection of symptoms and signs of illness, early
diagnosis and appropriate intervention. Athletes’ innate tendency to continue to train and compete despite the existence of physical
complaints or functional limitations, particularly at the elite level, highlight the pressing need to use appropriate illness monitoring
tools. It is recommended that:
i.
Ongoing illness (and injury) surveillance systems should be implemented in all sports;
ii.
Athletes be monitored, using sensitive tools, for subclinical signs of illness such as non-specific symptoms and signs, or selected
special investigations;
iii. Athletes be monitored for overt symptoms and signs of illness;
iv. Athletes be monitored for early symptoms and signs of over-reaching or overtraining;
v.
Illness monitoring should be ongoing, and long enough to detect early indicators of illness particularly during alterations in
training load, travel and competitions.
1050
Schwellnus M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1043–1052. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572
Consensus statement
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572 on 17 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 Funding The consensus meeting was funded by the IOC.
Competing interests TS works as Scientific Manager in the Medical and Scientific
Department of the IOC. JWO is Chief Medical Officer for Cricket Australia and was
the Chief Medical Officer of the International Cricket Council Cricket World Cup
2015. BMP is Chief Medical Officer of the Royal Dutch Lawn Tennis Association and
member of the International Tennis Federation (ITF) Sport Science and Medicine
Commission. She is Editor of the British Journal of Sports Medicine. LE is Head of
Scientific Activities in the Medical and Scientific Department of the IOC, and Editor
of the British Journal of Sports Medicine and Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially,
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc/4.0/
REFERENCES
1
Walsh NP, Gleeson M, Shephard RJ, et al. Position statement. Part one: immune
function and exercise. Exerc Immunol Rev 2011;17:6–63.
2
Gleeson M, Pyne DB. Respiratory inflammation and infections in high-performance
athletes. Immunol Cell Biol 2016;94:124–31.
3
Svendsen IS, Taylor IM, Tonnesen E, et al. Training- and competition-related risk
factors for respiratory tract and gastrointestinal infections in elite cross-country
skiers. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:809–15.
4
Schwellnus MP, Derman WE, Jordaan E, et al. Elite athletes travelling to
international destinations >5 time zone differences from their home country have
a 2–3-fold increased risk of illness. Br J Sports Med 2012;46:816–21.
5
Engebretsen L, Soligard T, Steffen K, et al. Sports injuries and illnesses during the
London Summer Olympic Games 2012. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:407–14.
6
Soligard T, Steffen K, Palmer-Green D, et al. Sports injuries and illnesses in the
Sochi 2014 Olympic Winter Games. Br J Sports Med 2015;49:441–7.
7
Engebretsen L, Steffen K, Alonso JM, et al. Sports injuries and illnesses during the
Winter Olympic Games 2010. Br J Sports Med 2010;44:772–80.
8
Ruedl G, Schobersberger W, Pocecco E, et al. Sport injuries and illnesses during
the first Winter Youth Olympic Games 2012 in Innsbruck, Austria. Br J Sports Med
2012;46:1030–7.
9
Derman W, Schwellnus M, Jordaan E, et al. Illness and injury in athletes during
the competition period at the London 2012 Paralympic Games: development and
implementation of a web-based surveillance system (WEB-IISS) for team medical
staff. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:420–5.
10
Derman W, Schwellnus MP, Jordaan E, et al. The incidence and patterns of illness
at the Sochi 2014 Winter Paralympic Games: a prospective cohort study of 6564
athlete days. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1064–8.
11
Alonso JM, Tscholl PM, Engebretsen L, et al. Occurrence of injuries and illnesses
during the 2009 IAAF World Athletics Championships. Br J Sports Med
2010;44:1100–5.
12
Mountjoy M, Junge A, Alonso JM, et al. Sports injuries and illnesses in the 2009
FINA World Championships (Aquatics). Br J Sports Med 2010;44:522–7.
13
Dvorak J, Junge A, Derman W, et al. Injuries and illnesses of football players
during the 2010 FIFA World Cup. Br J Sports Med 2011;45:626–30.
14
Theron N, Schwellnus M, Derman W, et al. Illness and injuries in elite football
players—a prospective cohort study during the FIFA Confederations Cup 2009.
Clin J Sport Med 2013;23:379–83.
15
Schwellnus M, Derman W, Page T, et al. Illness during the 2010 Super 14 Rugby
Union tournament—a prospective study involving 22 676 player days. Br J Sports
Med 2012;46:499–504.
16
Prien A, Mountjoy M, Miller J, et al. Injury and illness in aquatic sport: how
high is the risk? A comparison of results from three FINA World Championships.
Br J Sports Med Published Online First: 16 June 2016. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-
096075
17
Mountjoy M, Junge A, Benjamen S, et al. Competing with injuries: injuries prior to
and during the 15th FINA World Championships 2013 (aquatics). Br J Sports Med
2015;49:37–43.
18
Alonso JM, Edouard P, Fischetto G, et al. Determination of future prevention
strategies in elite track and field: analysis of Daegu 2011 IAAF Championships
injuries and illnesses surveillance. Br J Sports Med 2012;46:505–14.
19
Clarsen B, Rønsen O, Myklebust G, et al. The Oslo Sports Trauma Research Center
questionnaire on health problems: a new approach to prospective monitoring of
illness and injury in elite athletes. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:754–60.
20
Bjørneboe J, Kristenson K, Waldén M, et al. Role of illness in male professional
football: not a major contributor to time loss. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:699–702.
21
Schwellnus MP, Lichaba M, Derman EW. Respiratory tract symptoms in endurance
athletes—a review of causes and consequences. Curr Allergy Clin Immunol
2010;23:52–7.
22
Bermon S. Airway inflammation and upper respiratory tract infection in athletes: is
there a link? Exerc Immunol Rev 2007;13:6–14.
23
Raysmith BP, Drew MK. Performance success or failure is influenced by weeks lost
to injury and illness in elite Australian Track and Field athletes: a 5-year
prospective study. J Sci Med Sport 2016. Jan 7. pii: S1440-2440(15)00764-1. doi:
10.1016/j.jsams.2015.12.515. [Epub ahead of print].
24
Friman G, Wesslén L. Special feature for the Olympics: effects of exercise on the
immune system: infections and exercise in high-performance athletes. Immunol
Cell Biol 2000;78:510–22.
25
Weidner TG, Sevier TL. Sport, exercise, and the common cold. J Athl Train
1996;31:154–9.
26
Exercise and febrile illnesses. Paediatr Child Health 2007;12:885–92.
27
Schwellnus MP, Jeans A, Motaung S, et al. Exercise and infections. In: Schwellnus
MP, ed. The Olympic textbook of medicine in sport. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell,
2008:344–64.
28
Van Tonder A, Schwellnus M, Swanevelder S, et al. A prospective cohort study of
7031 distance runners shows that 1 in 13 report systemic symptoms of an acute
illness in the 7-day period before a race, increasing their risk of not finishing the
race 1.9 times for those runners who started the race: SAFER study IV. Br J Sport
Med 2016;50:939–45.
29
Tseng GS, Hsieh CY, Hsu CT, et al. Myopericarditis and exertional rhabdomyolysis
following an influenza A (H3N2) infection. BMC Infect Dis 2013;13:283.
30
Oxford Dictionaries. ’Load‘. Oxford University Press. http://www.oxforddictionaries.
com/definition/english/load (accessed 24 May 2016)
31
Wallace LK, Slattery KM, Coutts AJ. The ecological validity and application of the
session-RPE method for quantifying training loads in swimming. J Strength Cond
Res 2009;23:33–8.
32
Halson SL. Monitoring training load to understand fatigue in athletes. Sports Med
2014;44(Suppl 2):S139–47.
33
Impellizzeri FM, Rampinini E, Marcora SM. Physiological assessment of aerobic
training in soccer. J Sports Sci 2005;23:583–92.
34
Borresen J, Lambert MI. The quantification of training load, the training response
and the effect on performance. Sports Med 2009;39:779–95.
35
Fry RW, Morton AR, Keast D. Overtraining in athletes. An update. Sports Med
1991;12:32–65.
36
Foster C. Monitoring training in athletes with reference to overtraining syndrome.
Med Sci Sports Exerc 1998;30:1164–8.
37
Meeusen R, Duclos M, Foster C, et al. Prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of the
overtraining syndrome: joint consensus statement of the European College of Sport
Science and the American College of Sports Medicine. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2013;45:186–205.
38
Saw AE, Main LC, Gastin PB. Monitoring the athlete training response: subjective
self-reported measures trump commonly used objective measures: a systematic
review. Br J Sports Med 2015;50:281–91.
39
Booth FW, Thomason DB. Molecular and cellular adaptation of muscle in
response to exercise: perspectives of various models. Physiol Rev 1991;71:
541–85.
40
Viru A, Viru M. Nature of training effects. In: Garrett WE, Kirkendall DT, eds.
Exercise and sport science. 1st edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins,
2000:67–96.
41
Hooper SL, Mackinnon LT. Monitoring overtraining in athletes. Recommendations.
Sports Med 1995;20:321–7.
42
Kentta G, Hassmen P. Overtraining and recovery. A conceptual model. Sports Med
1998;26:1–16.
43
Ivarsson A, Johnson U, Podlog L. Psychological predictors of injury occurrence:
a prospective investigation of professional Swedish soccer players. J Sport Rehabil
2013;22:19–26.
44
Kuipers H. Training and overtraining: an introduction. Med Sci Sports Exerc
1998;30:1137–9.
45
Foster C, Florhaug JA, Franklin J, et al. A new approach to monitoring exercise
training. J Strength Cond Res 2001;15:109–15.
46
Brink MS, Frencken WGP, Jordet G, et al. Coaches’ and players’ perceptions
of training dose: not a perfect match. Int J Sports Physiol Perform
2014;9:497–502.
47
Murphy AP, Duffield R, Kellett A, et al. Comparison of athlete-coach perceptions
of internal and external load markers for elite junior tennis training. Int J Sports
Physiol Perform 2014;9:751–6.
48
Mountjoy M, Junge A, Alonso JM, et al. Consensus statement on the
methodology of injury and illness surveillance in FINA (aquatic sports). Br J Sports
Med 2016;50:590–6.
49
Timpka T, Alonso JM, Jacobsson J, et al. Injury and illness definitions and data
collection procedures for use in epidemiological studies in Athletics (track and
field): consensus statement. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:483–90.
50
Simpson RJ, Kunz H, Agha N, et al. Exercise and the regulation of immune
functions. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 2015;135:355–80.
51
Walsh NP, Oliver SJ. Exercise, immune function and respiratory infection: an
update on the influence of training and environmental stress. Immunol Cell Biol
2015;94:132–9.
Schwellnus M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1043–1052. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572
1051
Consensus statement
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572 on 17 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 52
Brown WM, Davison GW, McClean CM, et al. A systematic review of the acute
effects of exercise on immune and inflammatory indices in untrained adults. Sports
Med Open 2015;1:35.
53
Gleeson M. Immunological aspects of sport nutrition. Immunol Cell Biol
2016;94:117–23.
54
Gleeson M, McDonald WA, Pyne DB, et al. Salivary IgA levels and infection risk in
elite swimmers. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1999;31:67–73.
55
Novas AM, Rowbottom DG, Jenkins DG. Tennis, incidence of URTI and salivary
IgA. Int J Sports Med 2003;24:223–9.
56
Fahlman MM, Engels HJ. Mucosal IgA and URTI in American college football
players: a year longitudinal study. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2005;37:374–80.
57
Nieman DC, Henson DA, Dumke CL, et al. Relationship between salivary IgA
secretion and upper respiratory tract infection following a 160-km race. J Sports
Med Phys Fitness 2006;46:158–62.
58
Neville V, Gleeson M, Folland JP. Salivary IgA as a risk factor for upper respiratory
infections in elite professional athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2008;40:1228–36.
59
Gleeson M, Bishop N, Oliveira M, et al. Respiratory infection risk in athletes:
association with antigen-stimulated IL-10 production and salivary IgA secretion.
Scand J Med Sci Sports 2012;22:410–17.
60
Hanstock HG, Walsh NP, Edwards JP, et al. Tear fluid SIgA as a noninvasive
biomarker of mucosal immunity and common cold risk. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2016;48:569–77.
61
Meeusen R, Piacentini MF, Busschaert B, et al. Hormonal responses in athletes:
the use of a two bout exercise protocol to detect subtle differences in (over)
training status. Eur J Appl Physiol 2004;91:140–6.
62
Meeusen R, Nederhof E, Buyse L, et al. Diagnosing overtraining in athletes using
the two-bout exercise protocol. Br J Sports Med 2010;44:642–8.
63
Shephard RJ, Shek PN. Exercise, immunity, and susceptibility to infection: a
j-shaped relationship? Phys Sportsmed 1999;27:47–71.
64
Gleeson M, Bishop N, Oliveira M, et al. Influence of training load on upper
respiratory tract infection incidence and antigen-stimulated cytokine production.
Scand J Med Sci Sports 2013;23:451–7.
65
Novas A, Rowbottom D, Jenkins D. Total daily energy expenditure and incidence
of upper respiratory tract infection symptoms in young females. Int J Sports Med
2002;23:465–70.
66
Peters EM, Goetzsche JM, Grobbelaar B, et al. Vitamin C supplementation reduces
the incidence of postrace symptoms of upper-respiratory-tract infection in
ultramarathon runners. Am J Clin Nutr 1993;57:170–4.
67
Heath GW, Ford ES, Craven TE, et al. Exercise and the incidence of upper
respiratory tract infections. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1991;23:152–7.
68
Moreira A, Arsati F, Lima-Arsati YB. Monitoring stress tolerance and occurrences of
upper respiratory illness in basketball players by means of psychometric tools and
salivary biomarkers. Stress Health 2011;27:e166–72.
69
Matthews A, Pyne D, Saunders P, et al. A self-reported questionnaire for quantifying
illness symptoms in elite athletes. Open Access J Sports Med 2010;1:15–22.
70
Hellard P, Avalos M, Guimaraes F, et al. Training-related risk of common illnesses
in elite swimmers over a 4-year period. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2015;47:698–707.
71
Rama L, Teixeira AM, Matos A, et al. Changes in natural killer cell subpopulations
over a winter training season in elite swimmers. Eur J Appl Physiol
2013;113:859–68.
72
Spence L, Brown WJ, Pyne DB, et al. Incidence, etiology, and symptomatology of
upper respiratory illness in elite athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2007;39:577–86.
73
Matthews CE, Ockene IS, Freedson PS, et al. Moderate to vigorous physical activity
and risk of upper-respiratory tract infection. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2002;34:1242–8.
74
Nieman DC, Henson DA, Austin MD, et al. Upper respiratory tract infection is
reduced in physically fit and active adults. Br J Sports Med 2011;45:987–92.
75
Malm C. Susceptibility to infections in elite athletes: the S-curve. Scand J Med Sci
Sports 2006;16:4–6.
76
Veugelers KR, Young WB, Fahrner B, et al. Different methods of training load
quantification and their relationship to injury and illness in elite Australian football.
J Sci Med Sport 2016;19:24–8.
77
Mårtensson S, Nordebo K, Malm C. High training volumes are associated with a
low number of self-reported sick days in elite endurance athletes. J Sports Sci Med
2014;13:929–33.
78
Cunniffe B, Griffiths H, Proctor W, et al. Mucosal immunity and illness incidence in
elite rugby union players across a season. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2011;43:388–97.
79
Thornton HR, Delaney JA, Duthie GM, et al. Predicting self-reported illness for
professional team-sport athletes. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 2016;11:543–50.
80
Peters EM, Bateman ED. Ultramarathon running and upper respiratory tract
infections. An epidemiological survey. S Afr Med J 1983;64:582–4.
81
Peters EM. Altitude fails to increase susceptibility of ultramarathon runners to
post-race upper respiratory tract infections. S Afr J Sports Med 1990;5:4–8.
82
Nieman DC, Johanssen LM, Lee JW, et al. Infectious episodes in runners before
and after the Los Angeles Marathon. J Sports Med Phys Fitness 1990;30:316–28.
83
Ekblom B, Ekblom O, Malm C. Infectious episodes before and after a marathon
race. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2006;16:287–93.
84
Nieman DC, Johanssen LM, Lee JW. Infectious episodes in runners before and
after a roadrace. J Sports Med Phys Fitness 1989;29:289–96.
85
Svendsen IS, Gleeson M, Haugen TA, et al. Effect of an intense period of
competition on race performance and self-reported illness in elite cross-country
skiers. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2015;25:846–53.
86
Patel D. Occupational travel. Occup Med (Lond) 2011;61:6–18.
87
Newman-Klee C, D’Acremont V, Newman CJ, et al. Incidence and types of illness
when traveling to the tropics: a prospective controlled study of children and their
parents. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2007;77:764–9.
88
Talbot EA, Chen LH, Sanford C, et al. Travel medicine research priorities:
establishing an evidence base. J Travel Med 2010;17:410–15.
89
Leder K, Wilson ME, Freedman DO, et al. A comparative analysis of
methodological approaches used for estimating risk in travel medicine. J Travel
Med 2008;15:263–72.
90
Fowler PM, Duffield R, Lu D, et al. Effects of long-haul transmeridian travel on
subjective jet-lag and self-reported sleep and upper respiratory symptoms in
professional Rugby League players. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 2016 Jan 18.
10.1123/ijspp.2015-0542 [Epub ahead of print]
91
Nieman DC, Pedersen BK. Exercise and immune function. Recent developments.
Sports Med 1999;27:73–80.
92
Nieman DC. Special feature for the Olympics: effects of exercise on the immune
system: exercise effects on systemic immunity. Immunol Cell Biol
2000;78:496–501.
93
Main LC, Landers GJ, Grove JR, et al. Training patterns and negative health
outcomes in triathlon: longitudinal observations across a full competitive season.
J Sports Med Phys Fitness 2010;50:475–85.
94
Kellmann M. Preventing overtraining in athletes in high-intensity sports and stress/
recovery monitoring. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2010;20(Suppl 2):95–102.
95
Brink MS, Visscher C, Coutts AJ, et al. Changes in perceived stress and recovery in
overreached young elite soccer players. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2012;22:285–92.
96
Putlur P, Foster C, Miskowski JA, et al. Alteration of immune function in women
collegiate soccer players and college students. J Sports Sci Med 2004;3:234–43.
97
Hanstad DV, Ronsen O, Andersen SS, et al. Fit for the fight? Illnesses in the
Norwegian team in the Vancouver Olympic Games. Br J Sports Med 2011;45:571–5.
98
Walsh NP, Gleeson M, Pyne DB, et al. Position statement. Part two: maintaining
immune health. Exerc Immunol Rev 2011;17:64–103.
99
Dijkstra HP, Pollock N, Chakraverty R, et al. Managing the health of the elite
athlete: a new integrated performance health management and coaching model.
Br J Sports Med 2014;48:523–31.
100
Palmer-Green D, Elliott N. Sports injury and illness epidemiology: Great Britain
Olympic Team (TeamGB) surveillance during the Sochi 2014 Winter Olympic
Games. Br J Sports Med 2015;49:25–9.
101
DeLongis A, Folkman S, Lazarus RS. The impact of daily stress on health and
mood: psychological and social resources as mediators. J Pers Soc Psychol
1988;54:486–95.
102
Petrie TA. Psychosocial antecedents of athletic injury: the effects of life stress and
social support on female collegiate gymnasts. Behav Med 1992;18:127–38.
1052
Schwellnus M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1043–1052. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572
Consensus statement
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096572 on 17 August 2016. Downloaded from 
