 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ONCOLOGY  51:  369-377,  2017
Abstract. Phytocannabinoids possess anticancer activity 
when used alone, and a number have also been shown to 
combine favourably with each other in vitro in leukaemia 
cells to generate improved activity. We have investigated the 
effect of pairing cannabinoids and assessed their anticancer 
activity in cell line models. Those most effective were then 
used with the common anti-leukaemia drugs cytarabine and 
vincristine, and the effects of this combination therapy on cell 
death studied in vitro. Results show a number of cannabinoids 
could be paired together to generate an effect superior to 
that achieved if the components were used individually. For 
example, in HL60 cells, the IC50 values at 48 h for cannabidiol 
(CBD) and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) when used alone were 
8 and 13 µM, respectively; however, if used together, it was 
4 µM. Median-effect analysis confirmed the benefit of using 
cannabinoids in pairs, with calculated combination indices 
being <1 in a number of cases. The most efficacious canna-
binoid-pairs subsequently synergised further when combined 
with the chemotherapy agents, and were also able to sensitise 
leukaemia cells to their cytotoxic effects. The sequence of 
administration of these drugs was important though; using 
cannabinoids after chemotherapy resulted in greater induction 
of apoptosis, whilst this was the opposite when the schedule 
of administration was reversed. Our results suggest that when 
certain cannabinoids are paired together, the resulting product 
can be combined synergistically with common anti-leukaemia 
drugs allowing the dose of the cytotoxic agents to be dramati-
cally reduced yet still remain efficacious. Nevertheless, the 
sequence of drug administration is crucial to the success of 
these triple combinations and should be considered when plan-
ning such treatments.
Introduction
The phytocannabinoids (CANN) are a group of related 
compounds extracted from the cannabis plant (1). The 
archetypal CANN that is most widely known is ∆9-tetra-
hydrocannabinol (THC). It is notorious for its psychoactive 
properties; however, it is arguably the only one to exhibit such 
an effect out of the >80 members. CANNs interact with the 
endocannabinoid system of the human body, and through 
this can consequently intrude into a number of physiological 
aspects such as appetite (2). Evidence from the 1970s (3) 
suggested CANNs possessed anticancer activity; and since 
then a large body of in vitro studies have been developed and 
performed to confirm this (4,5).
A number of cells express the cannabinoid receptor (CBR), 
of which there are a number of sub-types (e.g. CBR1, CBR2), 
and it is believed that signalling through this G-protein coupled 
receptor is required for CANN anticancer action. Most of the 
in vivo models of anticancer action of CANNs have focussed 
on cancers of the brain where there are high levels of CBR1, 
and a large proportion of these have indicated that CANN use 
is associated with decreased tumour growth and/or increased 
cell killing (6). These models have also shown the use of 
CANN can successfully support and enhance the action of 
other treatment modalities (7,8). Peripheral cells, mainly 
immune cells, can also highly express these receptors (9), in 
particular CBR2, and as a consequence the effects of CANNs 
on cancers emanating from these cells have also been studied.
Results from numerous in vitro studies have shown the 
importance of the CBR in the success of CANNs as effective 
anticancer agents. Signalling through the CBR gives CANN the 
ability to stimulate pro-apototic elements within the ceramide 
pathway (10), as well as being able to engage autophagy in 
cells (11). Additionally, CANNs can subsequently interfere/
interact with other intrinsic intracellular signalling pathways 
such as PI3-K and ERK via downstream crosstalk, which 
offers a way in which they can also fundamentally manipulate 
key processes like cell growth and survival (4,12).
The necessity for receptors to be present in order to elicit 
these cell killing mechanisms may not, however, be absolute; 
anticancer activity has been seen in leukaemia cells that is inde-
pendent of the receptors (13), and similarly, minor-occurring 
Anticancer effects of phytocannabinoids used with 
chemotherapy in leukaemia cells can be improved by 
altering the sequence of their administration
KATHERINE A. SCOTT,  ANGUS G. DALGLEISH  and  WAI M. LIU
Department of Oncology, Institute for Infection and Immunity,  
St George's, University of London, London SW17 0RE, UK
Received March 22, 2017;  Accepted May 5, 2017
DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2017.4022
Correspondence to: Dr Wai M. Liu, Department of Oncology, 
Institute for Infection and Immunity, St George's, University of London, 
London SW17 0RE, UK
E-mail: wliu@sgul.ac.uk
Key words: cannabidiol, tetrahydrocannabinol, leukaemia, combin-
ation therapy, drug sequence
 SCOTT et al:  PHYTOCANNABINOID TREATMENT IN LEUKAEMIA
370
CANNs, which have low binding affinities for these canonical 
receptors, are equally as active in these same cell types (14,15). 
Furthermore, there have been reports of CANN activity directly 
on cancer cells that do not usually express the receptors such 
as those of the breast and prostate (16). Together, this suggests 
the number of cancers that could respond to CANNs may not 
be limited to those expressing the receptors. Nevertheless, the 
evidence that a number of CANNs can be used to reduce the 
growth of leukaemia cells in vitro is exciting, and warrants 
further investigation.
As part of our ongoing research efforts investigating the 
potential benefits of CANNs in a leukaemia setting, we have 
examined further the effects of these drugs combined with 
others on cell growth and survival. We paired CANNs together 
and specifically examined the activity of these mixes in 
leukaemia cells, both alone and in combination with a number 
of common anti-leukaemia drugs. We have adopted a number 
of practical models to assess drug-drug interactions, and also 
assessed the importance of drug sequence in determining the 
overall efficacy of the differing treatments.
Materials and methods
Cell culture and drugs. The human cancer cell lines CEM 
(acute lymphocytic leukaemia) and HL60 (promyelocytic 
leukaemia) were purchased from the European Collection of 
Authenticated Cell Cultures (Salisbury, UK), and grown in 
RPMI-1640 medium (Sigma-Aldrich Co., Ltd., Dorset, UK) 
supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (FBS) and 2 mM 
L-glutamine. All cell lines were incubated in a humidified 
atmosphere with 5% CO2 in air at 37˚C, and discarded after 
~12 passages. Authentication of the cell lines was performed 
by the service provider using the AmpFISTR Identifier Plus 
PCR amplification kit looking for the presence of <10 known 
loci for each of the cell lines.
Cytarabine (CYT: Sigma) and vincristine (VIN: Sigma) were 
reconstituted in PBS at a stock concentration of 10 mM, and 
kept at -20˚C for no more than four weeks. Cannabidiol (CBD), 
cannabigerol (CBG) and THC (all provided by GW Research 
Ltd., Cambridge, UK) were dissolved in ethanol to appropriate 
concentrations that ensured a final ethanol concentration in 
cell cultures <0.1%. For experiments with treatments, the 
amount of FBS in the cell culture medium was reduced to 5%. 
One aim of the current study was to investigate the benefit of 
using two different CANNs together in a pair. The combina-
tions used here mimic a number of current and recent clinical 
trials where a proprietary product containing CBD and THC 
was used (www.clinicaltrials.gov - Identifier: NCT01812603 
and NCT01812616). Consequently, our experiments involved 
using CANNs paired concomitantly at a 1:1 ratio, where the 
stated concentration for them reflected an equal amount of each 
CANN-component; for example, 10 µM CBD+THC contained 
5 µM CBD and 5 µM THC. A similar approach was adopted 
and reported in our earlier studies (8).
Proliferation assays - CANNs alone. To study the effect of 
the CANNs on cell growth, leukaemia cells that were growing 
exponentially were seeded into 96-well plates at a density of 
1.5x104/well. CANNs were then added to the wells at various 
concentrations, ensuring an equal volume of 200 µl across the 
plate. Single-agent testing: Either CBD, CBG or THC alone 
was added to the wells at a concentration range of 1-50 µM. 
Paired-CANN testing: CBD+CBG, CBD+THC or CBG+THC 
was added to the wells at a concentration range for the paired 
CANNs of 1-50 µM. The molarity was based upon the total 
CANN in each pair. Cell number was assessed by using a 
methylthiazoletetrazolium (MTT)-based assay according to 
methods previously described (17), and by cell counting using 
trypan blue dye as a way of discriminating live and dead cells.
Combination studies - median-effect analysis. Cells 
(1.5x104/well) growing exponentially were reset in fresh 
culture medium and aliquoted into 96-well plates. A CANN-
pair (either CBD+THC or CBD+CBG) was combined with 
CYT or VIN at concentrations that were equal ratios of their 
respective IC50 according to methodologies described previ-
ously (14,17,18). Cell number was then assessed after 72 h by 
the MTT-based assay, and a combination index (CI) calculated 
by using the median-effect equation (19).
Combination studies - modulatory effect. The ability of 
CANNs to modify the efficacy CYT and VIN was studied 
by assessing and comparing the IC50 of the anti-leukaemia 
drugs in the absence and presence of the CANNs. The 
CANNs tested were CBD+CBG and CBD+THC (the modu-
lating drug in this setting), and these were used at a single 
total sub-optimal concentration of 1 µM in CEM and 5 µM 
HL60. Methodologically, cells (1.5x104/well) growing expo-
nentially were reset in fresh culture medium and aliquoted 
into 96-well plates. Drugs were added (CYT and VIN over 
a range of concentrations) and cell number determined after 
72 h. Parallel 6-well plates containing cells were also prepared 
and were cultured with the same treatment combinations 
described. These allowed for determination of cell cycle distri-
bution at 72 h by flow cytometry utilising the nucleic acid stain 
propidium iodide (17).
Combination studies - drug sequence and the impact of a 
recovery phase. CEM and HL60 cells were seeded into 6-well 
plates at a density of 1x105/well and then treated according to 
a culture schedule that lasted a total of 96 h. The treatment 
would involve two separate phases; each lasting 48 h. One set 
of drugs would be administered in the first 48 h phase and a 
second set of drugs in the following 48 h phase. The culture 
medium would be removed by centrifugation after the first 
treatment to be replaced with fresh medium in an attempt to 
remove the drugs used in the first phase of treatment. The drugs 
studied were either CBD+CBG (4 µM in CEM and 10 µM in 
HL60), CBD+THC (4 µM in CEM and 10 µM in HL60), CYT 
(10 nM), or VIN (0.1 nM). The effect of a recovery phase was 
assessed by keeping the second 48 h phase of treatment drug-
free. Flow cytometry using propidium iodide staining was 
performed at the end of the experiment to assess the extent of 
cell death/apoptosis.
Immunoblotting analysis. Western blot analyses were 
performed as previously described (8). Primary antibody 
probing was performed with anti-cyclin B1 and anti-GAPDH 
(both from New England Biolabs, Hitchin, UK) and used at a 
dilution of 1:1,000. Appropriate HRP-conjugated secondary 
 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ONCOLOGY  51:  369-377,  2017
371
antibodies were then used (New England Biolabs), and bands 
were visualised by the ECL-plus detection system (Amersham 
Biosciences Ltd., Little Chalfont, UK).
Statistical analysis. All statistical analyses were performed 
using GraphPad Prism or Microsoft Excel, and differences 
between treatments and control groups were determined by 
one-way ANOVA and subsequently by paired tests. Data 
values were presented as the means and SDs of at least three 
separate experiments.
Results
Combining CANNs can improve their overall activity. Our 
previous studies showed a small number of CANNs could be 
used together to induce a cytotoxic response that was hyper-
additive in nature. We therefore expanded this initial work by 
pairing CBD, CBG and THC in different permutations, and 
assessing their effects on cell numbers after 72 h treatment. 
IC50 values for the individual CANNs were determined, and 
these were compared with IC50 achieved when the matching 
CANN-pair was used. Results showed the virtual IC50 of the 
mixtures were generally lower than those for the CANNs when 
used individually (Fig. 1A and B). For example, the IC50 in 
CEM cells was 7.8±0.21 µM for CBD alone and 13±0.49 µM 
for THC alone, compared to 3.6±0.19 µM when CBD and THC 
were used simultaneously at a ratio of 1:1 (Fig. 1A).
In this basic paired-model, CEM cells were more respon-
sive to treatments, as the combination of two CANNs generally 
resulted in an improvement in activity. Moreover, combina-
tions including CBD as one of the partners in a pair usually 
resulted in a greater reduction in cell number (IC50 values in 
CEM for CBD/THC, CBD/CBG and CBG/THC were 3.6±0.19, 
2.8±0.24 and 11±0.55 µM, respectively) (Fig. 1A).
CANN-pairs can cooperate with anti-leukaemia agents to 
reduce cell numbers. Median-effect analyses were employed 
to assess the interactions between each CANN-pair and 
common anti-leukaemia drugs. Guided by our initial results 
showing CBD-containing pairs to be most efficacious, we 
selected the CBD/CBG and CBD/THC pairs and combined 
them with either CYT or VIN. CI-values were then calculated 
by using these results and used as a way of understanding the 
drug-interactions (14,18).
Results showed that outcome of the interactions were 
dependent upon both drug and cell line. They also hinted 
Figure 1. Dose response curves of single agent and cannabinoid combinations. CEM and HL60 cells were grown for 48 h in the presence of increasing 
concentrations of the three cannabinoids, THC, CBD and CBG, either as single agents or in dual combinations prepared at a 1:1 ratio. Thus, 10 µM of the CBD 
and THC combination would be made of 5 µM CBD + 5 µM THC. Cell number was assessed using the MTT assay and the concentration required to reduce 
the cell number by 50% (IC50) for each condition in CEM (A) and HL60 (B) was calculated using GraphPad Prism. Each data point represents the mean of at 
least three separate experiments. SDs have been omitted for clarity.
 SCOTT et al:  PHYTOCANNABINOID TREATMENT IN LEUKAEMIA
372
that combinations involving VIN would more likely result in 
enhanced activity, whilst those with CYT may cause additivity/
mild antagonism (Fig. 2A). Representative examples of the 
interactions are presented (Fig. 2B and C). Notably, in HL60 
Figure 2. Median effect analysis of chemotherapy and cannabinoid combinations. CEM and HL60 cells were grown for 72 h in the presence of increasing con-
centrations of both cytarabine or vincristine and a cannabinoid-pair, combined at fractions of their respective IC50 values. CBD/THC and CBD/CBG were the 
two cannabinoid-pairs that were investigated, and were used at equal 1:1 ratios. Cell number was assessed at 72 h using the MTT assay and defined algorithms 
were then used to generate a combination index score (CI) which indicates the nature of the combination interactions (CI=1 = additivity; CI <1 = synergy; 
CI >1 = antagonism) (A). Representative data have also been included from experiments in CEM (B) and HL60 (C). Each data point in the column graph 
represents the mean and SD of at least three separate experiments.
 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ONCOLOGY  51:  369-377,  2017
373
cells for example, the IC50 for CBD/THC was 18 µM and for 
VIN was 1.9 nM; however, when these two were used concom-
itantly, the IC50 of this combination treatment was 2.5 µM. 
The calculated CI-value was 0.29, which indicated synergy 
(Fig. 2C). This result shows that in certain circumstances 
a combination approach can result in an equivalent level of 
action even though the concentrations of the agents used are 
much lower (in this instance CBD/THC and VIN were used at 
~2.5 µM and ~0.25 nM, respectively).
CANN-pairs can sensitise cells to the effects of anti-leukaemia 
agents. A second model of drug interaction was employed in 
our studies. This experiment was designed to test the ability of 
a CANN-pair to sensitise cells to the effects of CYT or VIN. 
Specifically, the ability of a sub-effective concentration of 
CANN to alter the efficacy of CYT or VIN was determined by 
comparing the IC50 values of the chemotherapy agents in the 
absence or presence of the modulating CANN drug. Results 
showed adding CANNs to cells cultured with CYT or VIN 
only changed the cell number IC50 values for each chemo-
therapy drug to a small extent (Fig. 3A). Changes were most 
apparent in treatments where CBD/THC was the modulating 
drug. Conversely, however, there were clear changes in the 
IC50, when examining the modulatory effect of CANNs on cell 
viability (Fig. 3B). For example, the IC50 for CYT in HL60 was 
100 nM; however, this was reduced to 8 nM if CBD/THC was 
included to the cultures, but increased to 150 nM if CBD/CBG 
was used (Fig. 3B). These results generally agreed with those 
from the median-effect combination model, and suggest 
combinations of CANNs with VIN would result in hyperaddi-
tive interactions leading to reduced cell numbers.
The reduction in viability was associated with an increase 
in apoptosis, as shown by flow cytometry, which was generally 
higher in combinations involving CBD/THC (Fig. 4A). Cell 
death was not specific to any phase of the cell cycle, and the 
drug-induced arrest in the S-phase did not significantly impede 
the ability of cells to undergo death when CANNs were added 
(data not shown). The expression of cyclin B was used as a 
general marker of cell cycling, and levels increased when 
cells were cultured with CYT or VIN (Fig. 4B). However, this 
increase was negated or in the case with HL60, reduced when 
a CANN pair was included (Fig. 4B).
The sequence of drugs is important in determining overall 
activity. Having seen synergistic interactions between CANNs 
and anti-leukaemia drugs when they were used simultaneously, 
we next assessed the impact of using the drugs sequentially. 
Consequently, cells were cultured according to schedules that 
consisted of two rounds of treatment, each lasting 48 h. Each 
round of treatment was separated by a washing step to remove 
drug from the medium. The order of the drugs were swapped 
in equivalent experiments to assess the counter-order of drugs. 
In some cases, a treatment schedule could involve the use of 
a CANN-pair in the first round of treatment followed by no 
treatment in the second. This mimicked a ‘recovery’ schedule. 
The duration of each treatment phase was 48 h to ensure that 
cells were not overgrown by the end of the full treatment 
regimen, which lasted 96 h.
Results showed that, generally, the percentages of cells 
within the sub-G1 population of the cell cycle were low in 
CEM cells following any treatments (Fig. 5A); however, the 
order of administration of the drugs affected the amount of 
Figure 3. Sensitising chemotherapy action with low doses of cannabinoids. CEM and HL60 cells were grown for 72 h in the presence of increasing concentra-
tions of cytarabine (CYT) or vincristine (VIN). The effect of a low dose of CBD/THC or CBD/CBG on the activity of CYT and VIN was also assessed. 
IC50 values for cell number (A) and percentage cell viability (B) were determined by Emax models.
 SCOTT et al:  PHYTOCANNABINOID TREATMENT IN LEUKAEMIA
374
cells in sub-G1. Typically, using CYT or VIN before a CANN-
pair resulted in a greater amount of cells in sub-G1 compared 
to schedules in which the order of drugs was reversed (Fig. 5A). 
In HL60 cells for example, % sub-G1 was 37% if CBD/THC 
Figure 4. Sensitising chemotherapy action with low doses of cannabinoids. CEM and HL60 cells were grown for 72 h in the presence of increasing concen-
trations of cytarabine (CYT) or vincristine (VIN). The effect of a low dose of CBD/THC or CBD/CBG on the cell cycle distribution was assessed by flow 
cytometry, and the particular effects on the sub-G1 (apoptosis/cell death) fraction of cells (A) and on cyclin B expression (B) were studied more closely as 
read-outs for cytotoxicity and cytostasis, respectively. Each point in the column charts represent the mean and SD of three separate experiments, and SDs 
in (B) were omitted for clarity.
Figure 5. Effect of drug sequence on the cell cycle. CEM and HL60 cells were cultured according to schedules consisting of two distinct treatment stages 
lasting 48 h each. Treatments consisted of a cannabinoid - either CBD+THC (CT) or CBD+CBG (CG) in the first stage, followed by cytarabine (CYT) or 
vincristine (VIN) in the second. Parallel cultures were also performed in which the sequence of drugs was reversed. In some instances, cells were untreated 
(UN). Cell cycle distribution was then assessed by flow cytometry at 96 h (A). The specific effect on % sub-G1 cells using any regimen where a cannabinoid 
was used first was compared with those in which a cannabinoid was used second (B).
 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ONCOLOGY  51:  369-377,  2017
375
was used before CYT, but 72% if CBD/THC was used after 
CYT. Furthermore, paired t-test of all the data, irrespective of 
cell line and drug used, showed that significantly more apop-
tosis was seen if the order of treatment entailed a CANN after 
chemotherapy (Fig. 5B).
In accordance with our earlier published data, the greatest 
number of cells present in a sub-G1 population was seen 
following the schedule where HL60 cells were cultured with 
CBD/THC in the first phase of treatment followed by no treat-
ment in the last phase (92%), in imitation of a recovery phase. 
This was considerably higher than the percentage seen when 
the cells were cultured with CBD/THC in both rounds of treat-
ment (66%) (Fig. 5A).
Discussion
This work was a continuation study performed to investigate 
further the effects that CANNs may have on leukaemia cells. 
Our earlier studies showed that a number of CANNs were 
capable of eliciting death in cancer cells when used alone or 
in combination with each other; however, the benefits of using 
these with pre-existing chemotherapy drugs had not been 
investigated. In the current study, we showed that combining 
CANNs with the anti-leukaemia agents CYT and VIN resulted 
in enhanced overall activity. Furthermore, cooperation 
between CANN and chemotherapy was sequence-dependent, 
with a greater level of cell killing seen when the CANNs were 
used after the chemotherapy.
There is an increasing body of evidence showing that 
CANNs derived from the cannabis plant possess anticancer 
activity (12). A number of in vitro and murine models have 
shown that the CANNs CBD and THC can alter the way that 
tumour cells proliferate, as well as increase the capacity of 
these cells to undergo death by apoptosis and/or autophagy. 
These effects appear to be both dependent and independent of 
signalling via their cognate CBR (13,20). More recently, in the 
context of glioma, CANNs have also been shown to enhance 
the action of other treatment modalities such as chemotherapy 
and irradiation in vivo (7,8).
Although anticancer studies involving CANNs have rightly 
concentrated on cancers of the brain (21), a number have 
focused on their efficacy in leukaemias (13,22,23). Earlier 
investigations studied the action of THC alone in leukaemia, 
but limitations to the dosages that could be used in patients 
due to the psychoactivity associated with its use, made THC 
unattractive. As a result, this hindered its development as a 
putative form of therapy. Nonetheless, the concept of using 
cannabis-derived substances in leukaemia was revealed. 
Research using the non-psychoactive CANNs then rapidly 
followed, which recapitulated the results seen with THC. The 
above also revealed that combining a number of these minor 
CANNs could result in responses that were more active than if 
the individual CANNs were used separately (14,23).
These studies fully support the possibility that mixing 
CANNs could result in a product that is optimised for anti-
cancer effect. Crucially, it is important to note that not all the 
individual components of a combination need to elicit a direct 
cytotoxic effect, but instead can merely support the effect 
of its corresponding pair/partner. This cooperative phenom-
enon has been described using a number of terms such as 
an entourage-effect, a bystander-effect and a compensatory-
effect; however, the overall effect for a combination is simply 
to induce a measurable response that is greater than the sum of 
component's individual ones (24). The resulting synergy would 
be clinically attractive; not only because of an overall increase 
in general activity, but also because this improvement would 
have arisen concomitantly with a reduction in the dosages of 
the individual drugs. Associated with this reduction in dose is 
the potential easing of adverse effects that typically accom-
pany the usage of the individual drugs. A number of recent 
clinical trials involving CANNs have tested the efficacy and/or 
safety of Sativex™, which is a proprietary product composed 
of equal amounts of CBD and THC (www.clinicaltrials.gov: 
NCT01812603 and NCT01812616). The consideration being 
that both CANNs possess anticancer action, and so using 
them concomitantly would maximise the chances of a positive 
effect. These trials are expected to report soon.
In our current studies, initial experiments were performed 
to assess the activity of various CANN pairs and to iden-
tify the most active mix. Our results suggested that pairs 
comprising CBD were most active. In agreement with our 
earlier results, pairing CBD with CBG was as active as CBD 
with THC. The mechanism of this cooperative interaction 
between CANNs is unknown, but may simply be a reflec-
tion of the sum of the anticancer properties of the individual 
agents used (13,25,26). However, there may also be activation 
of other unique processes following the use of two CANNs, 
as an earlier study of ours showed a distinct number of genes 
were activated only when CBD and THC were used together, 
and not when they were used separately (27). These involved 
a number of cell cycle and apoptosis genes, suggesting distinct 
pathways that may become engaged when the two CANNs 
were used. Understanding these interactions may offer ways 
of developing new treatment strategies and regimens to best 
utilise this class of drug. Generally, HL60 appeared the more 
sensitive of the cell lines tested. The reason for this differ-
ence could be due to the higher expression of CBR-2 in HL60 
compared to CEM (13), or simply due to differences in the 
intrinsic background of intracellular signalling pathways in 
both, which we have previously shown to be different (14). 
This highlights the potential caveats of selecting the cancers 
best suited to CANN treatment.
After confirming that these CANNs could be paired 
without a loss of anticancer action, we next mimicked the 
current clinical path by assessing the effect of combining 
CBD/THC with common anti-leukaemia drugs. We first deter-
mined the value of using the CANN pair and chemotherapy at 
the same time, and results showed clear improvements in the 
cytotoxic response. This was indicated by significant improve-
ments in the IC50 of CYT and VIN if CBD/THC was included 
in the treatment. For example, in HL60 cells, the IC50 for VIN 
was 20 nM; however, this was reduced to 3.2 nM if a sub-toxic 
dose of CBD/THC was used with it. Furthermore, improve-
ments in the IC50 were associated with increases in apoptosis. 
Generally, substituting the CBD/THC pair with CBD/CBG 
had little effect on the IC50 for CYT and VIN; however, the 
IC50 values were reduced and chemotherapy efficacy improved 
in some instances.
The sequence in which certain drugs are administered 
can influence the overall activity of a treatment course for 
 SCOTT et al:  PHYTOCANNABINOID TREATMENT IN LEUKAEMIA
376
a number of cancers (28,29). This should be an important 
consideration in any treatment plan as one drug can influ-
ence the action/activity of others. These interactions can 
be both beneficial and detrimental to the outcome of the 
treatment, and as such, the order of administration should 
be optimised. When these interactions are favourable, it is 
conceivable that one drug alters the biology of tumour cells 
to render them more susceptible to another. For example, it 
has been suggested that in response to the inhibition of topoi-
somerase I by the drug camptothecin, the related enzyme 
topoisomerase II is increased. Thus the use of the drug 
etoposide after camptothecin may be fruitful as the specific 
target of its action is topoisomerase II (30). In addition to this 
compensatory phenomenon, some drugs can work to prime 
cancer cells to the cytotoxic action of others by promoting 
apoptotic pathways. BH3 mimetics serve in such a manner, by 
removing the ‘brakes’ in the form of proteins such as BCL-2 
and BCL-xL, that obstruct apoptosis (31). Therefore, a treat-
ment regimen could be designed that uses these agents first to 
lower the threshold for apoptosis, before using a second drug 
specifically chosen to elicit a death signal. Equally, drugs that 
influence the cell cycle and modulate the restriction points 
within it, may increase the sensitivity of tumour cells to other 
treatments in a sequence-dependent manner (32). Importantly, 
these drugs can take the form of dedicated cell cycle inhibi-
tors or those that, through their intrinsic mechanism of action, 
disturb the cell cycle (33).
In addition to their cytotoxic features (12), CBD and THC 
are able to directly impede the cell cycle through modula-
tion of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21waf1 and 
p27 (14,34). We therefore hypothesised that any possible 
benefit by combining them with other drugs could be influ-
enced by treatment sequence; specifically that these could 
influence any possible benefit of combining CANNs with 
other drugs, particularly those that act on the cell cycle like 
the anti-leukaemics. As such, we assessed the level of activity 
in the cell lines treated with CANNs and chemotherapy when 
used sequentially. Results showed sequence of administra-
tion was important, and that significantly greater amounts 
of apoptosis was seen when the CANN was used after the 
chemotherapy.
In summary, our data showed that a number of CANNs 
could be used together in pairs to generate anticancer 
responses that are greater than would be expected if the 
components were used separately. These CANN pairs can 
then also be combined synergistically with common anti-
leukaemia agents. Importantly, results also suggested that 
the sequence of the drugs may be crucial in determining the 
clinical activity of combination treatment regimens involving 
CANNs. Specifically, our studies recommend that if CANNs 
are to be combined with other anti-leukaemia drugs, that they 
should be used either concomitantly or after them. In conclu-
sion, evidence of CBD activity in patients with certain forms 
of cancer linked with a considerable body of evidence in vitro, 
support the overall concept that these plant-derived CANNs 
are valid therapeutic compounds. However, until clinical trials 
that test their value in an oncological setting are completed 
and reported, reticence will always remain. Ultimately, using 
information from evidence-led in vitro studies is the best way 
to predict and determine the treatment combinations and 
approaches for CANNs that have the best chance to translate 
successfully to the clinic.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by a research grant awarded to W.M.L. 
from GW Research Ltd. (Cambridge, UK).
References
 1. Mechoulam R, Hanuš LO, Pertwee R and Howlett AC: Early 
phytocannabinoid chemistry to endocannabinoids and beyond. 
Nat Rev Neurosci 15: 757-764, 2014.
 2. Pacher P, Bátkai S and Kunos G: The endocannabinoid system 
as an emerging target of pharmacotherapy. Pharmacol Rev 58: 
389-462, 2006.
 3. Munson AE, Harris LS, Friedman MA, Dewey WL and 
Carchman RA: Antineoplastic activity of cannabinoids. J Natl 
Cancer Inst 55: 597-602, 1975.
 4. Guzmán M: Cannabinoids: Potential anticancer agents. Nat Rev 
Cancer 3: 745-755, 2003.
 5. Fowler CJ: Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol as 
potential curative agents for cancer: A critical examination of 
the preclinical literature. Clin Pharmacol Ther 97: 587-596, 
2015.
 6. Ladin DA, Soliman E, Griffin L and Van Dross R: Preclinical 
and clinical assessment of cannabinoids as anti-cancer agents. 
Front Pharmacol 7: 361, 2016.
 7. Torres S, Lorente M, Rodríguez-Fornés F, Hernández-Tiedra S, 
Salazar M, García-Taboada E, Barcia J, Guzmán M and 
Velasco G: A combined preclinical therapy of cannabinoids 
and temozolomide against glioma. Mol Cancer Ther 10: 90-103, 
2011.
 8. Scott KA, Dalgleish AG and Liu WM: The combination of 
cannabidiol and ∆9-tetrahydrocannabinol enhances the anti-
cancer effects of radiation in an orthotopic murine glioma model. 
Mol Cancer Ther 13: 2955-2967, 2014.
 9. Basu S and Dittel BN: Unraveling the complexities of canna-
binoid receptor 2 (CB2) immune regulation in health and disease. 
Immunol Res 51: 26-38, 2011.
10. Galve-Roperh I, Sánchez C, Cortés ML, Gómez del Pulgar T, 
Izquierdo M and Guzmán M: Anti-tumoral action of canna-
binoids: Involvement of sustained ceramide accumulation and 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation. Nat Med 6: 
313-319, 2000.
11. Salazar M, Carracedo A, Salanueva IJ, Hernández-Tiedra S, 
Lorente M, Egia A, Vázquez P, Blázquez C, Torres S, García S, 
et al: Cannabinoid action induces autophagy-mediated cell death 
through stimulation of ER stress in human glioma cells. J Clin 
Invest 119: 1359-1372, 2009.
12. Velasco G, Sánchez C and Guzmán M: Anticancer mechanisms 
of cannabinoids. Curr Oncol 23: S23-S32, 2016.
13. Powles T, te Poele R, Shamash J, Chaplin T, Propper D, Joel S, 
Oliver T and Liu WM: Cannabis-induced cytotoxicity in 
leukemic cell lines: The role of the cannabinoid receptors and 
the MAPK pathway. Blood 105: 1214-1221, 2005.
14. Scott KA, Shah S, Dalgleish AG and Liu WM: Enhancing the 
activity of cannabidiol and other cannabinoids in vitro through 
modifications to drug combinations and treatment schedules. 
Anticancer Res 33: 4373-4380, 2013.
15. Borrelli F, Pagano E, Romano B, Panzera S, Maiello F, Coppola D, 
De Petrocellis L, Buono L, Orlando P and Izzo AA: Colon carci-
nogenesis is inhibited by the TRPM8 antagonist cannabigerol, a 
cannabis-derived non-psychotropic cannabinoid. Carcinogenesis 
35: 2787-2797, 2014.
16. Fraguas-Sánchez AI, Fernández-Carballido A and Torres-
Suárez AI: Phyto-, endo- and synthetic cannabinoids: Promising 
chemotherapeutic agents in the treatment of breast and prostate 
carcinomas. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 25: 1311-1323, 2016.
17. Liu WM, Gravett AM and Dalgleish AG: The antimalarial agent 
artesunate possesses anticancer properties that can be enhanced 
by combination strategies. Int J Cancer 128: 1471-1480, 2011.
18. Liu WM, Scott KA, Shamash J, Joel S and Powles TB: Enhancing 
the in vitro cytotoxic activity of Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol 
in leukemic cells through a combinatorial approach. Leuk 
Lymphoma 49: 1800-1809, 2008.
 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ONCOLOGY  51:  369-377,  2017
377
19. Chou TC: Drug combination studies and their synergy quantifi-
cation using the Chou-Talalay method. Cancer Res 70: 440-446, 
2010.
20. Van Dross R, Soliman E, Jha S, Johnson T and Mukhopadhyay S: 
Receptor-dependent and receptor-independent endocannabinoid 
signaling: A therapeutic target for regulation of cancer growth. 
Life Sci 92: 463-466, 2013.
21. Rocha FC, Dos Santos Júnior JG, Stefano SC and da Silveira DX: 
Systematic review of the literature on clinical and experimental 
trials on the antitumor effects of cannabinoids in gliomas. J 
Neurooncol 116: 11-24, 2014.
22. Jia W, Hegde VL, Singh NP, Sisco D, Grant S, Nagarkatti M and 
Nagarkatti PS: Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol-induced apoptosis 
in Jurkat leukemia T cells is regulated by translocation of Bad to 
mitochondria. Mol Cancer Res 4: 549-562, 2006.
23. McKallip RJ, Jia W, Schlomer J, Warren JW, Nagarkatti PS and 
Nagarkatti M: Cannabidiol-induced apoptosis in human leukemia 
cells: A novel role of cannabidiol in the regulation of p22phox 
and Nox4 expression. Mol Pharmacol 70: 897-908, 2006.
24. Liu WM: Enhancing the cytotoxic activity of novel targeted 
therapies - is there a role for a combinatorial approach? Curr Clin 
Pharmacol 3: 108-117, 2008.
25. De Petrocellis L, Ligresti A, Schiano Moriello A, Iappelli M, 
Verde R, Stott CG, Cristino L, Orlando P and Di Marzo V: 
Non-THC cannabinoids inhibit prostate carcinoma growth 
in vitro and in vivo: Pro-apoptotic effects and underlying 
mechanisms. Br J Pharmacol 168: 79-102, 2013.
26. Fisher T, Golan H, Schiby G, PriChen S, Smoum R, Moshe I, 
Peshes-Yaloz N, Castiel A, Waldman D, Gallily R, et al: In vitro 
and in vivo efficacy of non-psychoactive cannabidiol in neuro-
blastoma. Curr Oncol 23: S15-S22, 2016.
27. Scott KA, Dennis JL, Dalgleish AG and Liu WM: Inhibiting heat 
shock proteins can potentiate the cytotoxic effect of cannabidiol 
in human glioma cells. Anticancer Res 35: 5827-5837, 2015.
28. Tournigand C, André T, Achille E, Lledo G, Flesh M, Mery-
Mignard D, Quinaux E, Couteau C, Buyse M, Ganem G, et al: 
FOLFIRI followed by FOLFOX6 or the reverse sequence in 
advanced colorectal cancer: A randomized GERCOR study. J 
Clin Oncol 22: 229-237, 2004.
29. Dear RF, McGeechan K, Jenkins MC, Barratt A, Tattersall MH 
and Wilcken N: Combination versus sequential single agent 
chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 12: CD008792, 2013.
30. Bonner JA and Kozelsky TF: The significance of the sequence 
of administration of topotecan and etoposide. Cancer Chemother 
Pharmacol 39: 109-112, 1996.
31. Billard C: BH3 mimetics: Status of the field and new devel-
opments. Mol Cancer Ther 12: 1691-1700, 2013.
32. Shapiro GI and Harper JW: Anticancer drug targets: Cell cycle 
and checkpoint control. J Clin Invest 104: 1645-1653, 1999.
33. Shah MA and Schwartz GK: Cell cycle-mediated drug resistance: 
An emerging concept in cancer therapy. Clin Cancer Res 7: 
2168-2181, 2001.
34. Caffarel MM, Moreno-Bueno G, Cerutti C, Palacios J, 
Guzman M, Mechta-Grigoriou F and Sanchez C: JunD is involved 
in the antiproliferative effect of Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol on 
human breast cancer cells. Oncogene 27: 5033-5044, 2008.
