  
 
 
 
 
 
Scott, N. A. et al. (2018) Antibiotics induce sustained dysregulation of intestinal T cell 
immunity by perturbing macrophage homeostasis. Science Translational Medicine, 
10(464), eaao4755. 
 
 
 
 
There may be differences between this version and the published version. You are 
advised to consult the publisher’s version if you wish to cite from it. 
 
 
 
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/173147/  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposited on: 6 December 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enlighten – Research publications by members of the University of Glasgow 
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk 
 Antibiotics induce sustained dysregulation of intestinal T cell immunity by 
perturbing macrophage homeostasis 
 
Nicholas A. Scott1,2, Anna Andrusaite3, Peter Andersen4, Melissa Lawson5, Cristina 
Alcon-Giner5, Charlotte Leclaire5, Shabhonam Caim5, Gwenaelle Le Gall5, Tovah 
Shaw1,2, James P.R. Connolly3, Andrew J. Roe3, Hannah Wessel3, Alberto Bravo-
Blas3, Carolyn A. Thomson3, Verena Kästele3, Ping Wang1, Daniel A. Peterson4,6, 
Allison Bancroft1,7, Xuhang Li4, Richard Grencis1,7, Allan McI Mowat3, Lindsay J. 
Hall5, Mark A. Travis1,2,7, Simon W.F. Milling3* and Elizabeth R. Mann1,2,3*.  
 
1Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, M13 9PT. UK. 
 
2Manchester Collaborative Centre for Inflammation Research, Faculty of Biology, 
Medicine and Health, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PT. UK. 
 
3Centre for Immunobiology, Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, 
College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, 
G12 8TA. UK. 
 
4Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland, 21205. USA.  
 
5Quadram Institute Bioscience, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7UA. UK.  
 
6Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, 46285. USA.  
 
7Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, Manchester. 
M13 9PT. UK.  
 
* These authors contributed equally to this work.  
 
Deleted: -
Comment [Office1]: Journal style is to have this as two 
separate words. You do not need to do anything, just FYI. 
Deleted: 
,2
Comment [Office2]: Please double check author names. 
 
Please add postal codes. 
Deleted: nited Kingdom
Deleted: nited Kingdom
Deleted: . 
Deleted: K. 
Deleted: Pathology, Immunology and Microbiology, 
Deleted: Research Laboratories
 Correspondence/lead 
contact: 
Dr. 
Elizabeth 
Mann: 
Elizabeth.Mann@manchester.ac.uk 
Overline: Mucosal immunity 
Single sentence summary: Antibiotics disrupt intestinal immunity. 
 
Deleted: Short title: Antibiotics disrupt intestinal 
macrophage homeostasis
Comment [Office3]: Alternative: Mucosal immunity 
Deleted: Microbiota
Comment [Office4]: Used as a teaser on the website and needs 
to be concise. 
Formatted: Font:Not Bold
Deleted: Keywords: Intestinal macrophages; microbiota; T-
cell immunity; antibiotics, intestinal infections; intestinal 
inflammation; short-chain fatty acids
 ABSTRACT 
Macrophages in the healthy intestine are highly specialized and usually respond to 
the gut microbiota without provoking an inflammatory response. A breakdown in this 
tolerance leads to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), but the mechanisms by which 
intestinal macrophages normally become conditioned to promote microbial tolerance 
are unclear. Strong epidemiological evidence linking disruption of the gut microbiota 
by antibiotic use early in life to IBD indicates an important role for the gut microbiota 
in modulating intestinal immunity. Here, we show that antibiotic use causes intestinal 
macrophages to become hyper-responsive to bacterial stimulation, producing excess 
inflammatory cytokines. Re-exposure of antibiotic-treated mice to conventional 
microbiota induced a long term, macrophage-dependent increase in inflammatory 
Th1 responses in the colon and sustained dysbiosis. The consequences of this 
dysregulated macrophage activity for T-cell function were demonstrated by 
increased susceptibility to infections requiring Th17 and Th2 responses for clearance 
(bacterial 
Citrobacter 
rodentium 
and 
helminth 
Trichuris 
muris 
infections), 
corresponding with increased inflammation. Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) were 
depleted during antibiotic administration; supplementation of antibiotics with the 
SCFA butyrate restored the characteristic hypo-responsiveness of intestinal 
macrophages, and prevented T-cell dysfunction. Butyrate altered the metabolic 
behaviour of macrophages to increase oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and 
also promoted alternative macrophage activation. In summary, the gut microbiota is 
essential to maintain macrophage-dependent intestinal immune homeostasis, 
mediated by SCFA-dependent pathways. Oral antibiotics disrupt this process to 
promote sustained T-cell mediated dysfunction and increased susceptibility to 
infections, highlighting important implications of repeated broad-spectrum antibiotic 
use.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deleted: Thus, re
Deleted:  a
Deleted: alongside 
Deleted: Mechanistically, we showed that 
Deleted: b
Deleted: for 
Comment [Office5]: Excellent conclusion. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The intestinal immune system has evolved to co-exist with the trillions of bacteria 
comprising the microbiota. Macrophages are critical for maintaining immunological 
homeostasis in the intestine and are highly adapted to the local environment, 
recognizing and responding to the gut microbiota without provoking an inflammatory 
response (1). Under steady-state conditions, intestinal macrophages are hypo-
responsive to pattern recognition receptor (PRR) stimulation (2-4) and shape local 
CD4+ T-cell responses by maintaining immuno-suppressive regulatory T-cells 
(Tregs) (5). These homeostatic processes break down in inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD), which is driven by dysregulated CD4+ T-cell responses against the 
intestinal microbiota (6,7) and characterized by accumulation of inflammatory 
macrophages in the inflamed intestine (8-11). However, the pathogenesis of IBD 
remains poorly understood. In particular, the pathways that normally prevent 
damaging immune responses against the gut microbiota are incompletely defined.  
 
Macrophages are key regulators of immune responses in the intestine, and show 
specialization in the gut to promote tolerance against the microbiota. Thus, intestinal 
macrophages can promote tolerance via the anti-inflammatory mediators interleukin-
10 (IL-10), transforming growth factor b (TGFb), and retinoic acid (RA) (2,12,13). The 
specialization of intestinal macrophages to maintain an “anergic” state is proposed to 
involve interaction with the gut microbiota and its associated products (14-16). 
Bacteria residing in the intestine generate short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) from 
dietary fiber, with high concentrations of SCFAs found in the colon with proposed 
anti-inflammatory functions on various immune cells in the intestine (reviewed in 
Rooks et al. (17)). There is strong epidemiological evidence linking disruption of the 
gut microbiota by antibiotic use early in life with increased risk of IBD and other 
inflammatory diseases (18-21). However, the underlying mechanisms that promote 
these pro-inflammatory effects of antibiotics are poorly understood.   
 
Here, we show that antibiotic-induced bacterial disturbances lead to persistent 
changes in adaptive immunity in the intestine by interfering with microbiota-
dependent regulation of intestinal macrophage function. These immune changes in 
the intestine following antibiotics promoted susceptibility to intestinal infections and 
Formatted: Font:Italic
Deleted: 
1.
Deleted: 
2-4
Deleted: -
Deleted: 
5
Formatted: Font:Italic
Deleted: 
6,7
Deleted: 
8-11
Deleted: 
2,12,13
Deleted: 
14-16
Deleted: r
Deleted: 
17
Deleted: 
18-21
 inflammation, but could be prevented by supplementation with SCFAs, highlighting 
important mechanisms by which the microbiota drives intestinal immune tolerance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deleted: 
Deleted: Here, we show that reintroduction of the microbiota 
following oral antibiotic administration in mice induces a 
hyperactive state in intestinal macrophages. This drives long-
term T-cell dysfunction, creating a Th1-polarised inflammatory 
environment and increased susceptibility to infections and 
inflammation. Supplementation with the SCFA butyrate 
prevented this antibiotic-induced macrophage hyper-
responsiveness, inhibited inflammation and induced metabolic 
reprogramming in intestinal macrophages, highlighting 
important mechanisms by which the microbiota drives 
tolerogenic intestinal macrophage functions. Thus, antibiotic-
induced bacterial disturbances lead to persistent changes in 
adaptive immune responses by interfering with microbiota-
dependent regulation of intestinal macrophage function, 
promoting susceptibility to persistent intestinal infections and 
inflammation. 
Formatted: Left, Line spacing:  single
 RESULTS 
 
Recolonization of antibiotic-treated mice induces infiltration of innate 
inflammatory cells followed by sustained Th1 responses 
To determine the consequences of administering antibiotics and disruption of the 
microbiota on intestinal immunity, we treated mice with broad-spectrum antibiotics in 
their drinking water for 1 week. This treatment did not alter the proportions of 
monocytes, neutrophils, or eosinophils in the colonic lamina propria (LP; Figure 1a). 
However, following recolonization with the microbiota from untreated wild-type (WT) 
mice for 7 days after antibiotic treatment, there were increased infiltrates of 
monocytes, eosinophils, and neutrophils in the colon compared with non-antibiotic 
treated controls (Figure 1a and Supplementary Figure 1a). These infiltrates peaked 
between days 5-10 of recolonization, but began to normalize around day 10-13 of 
recolonization (Figure 1b).  
 
The normalization of innate cell populations in the colonic LP after 10-13 days of 
recolonization coincided with the beginning of a sustained increase in IFNg-
producing CD4+ T-cells (Figure 1b, c and Supplementary Figure 1b). The IFNg-
producing CD4+ T-cells were Ki67+ (Figure 1d), indicating recent local activation of 
the Th1 cells. Furthermore, there were markedly increased proportions of CD4+ T-
cells expressing the Th1 transcription factor T-bet, together with reduced proportions 
of FoxP3+CD4+ Tregs (Supplementary Figure 1c). The enhanced Th1 responses 
persisted until at least 60 days post-recolonization (Figure 1e and Supplementary 
Figure 1d). No changes were seen in the numbers of IL-17A-producing CD4+ T-cells 
(Supplementary figure 1b). Thus, microbial recolonization following antibiotic use 
induces infiltration of innate immune cells followed by a sustained skewing towards 
Th1 CD4+ T-cell responses. 
 
 
CCR2+ monocyte-macrophages are essential for enhanced Th1 responses 
following antibiotic treatment and recolonization 
Next, we explored the cellular mechanisms driving the increase in Th1 cells upon 
recolonization of antibiotic-treated mice. There were no alterations in the distribution, 
phenotype, or increased expression of Th1-associated cytokines amongst migratory 
Deleted: 
Comment [Office8]: A bit for my own information, but perhaps 
also for the reader: why do this instead of allowing the mice to 
recolonize naturally? To synchronize the timing/population? 
Comment [L9]: The recolonization was carried out to make sure 
that different cages within experiments were exposed to identical 
microbiota following antibiotics. Due to the specific pathogen free 
facility and with irradiated food, natural recolonization may not be 
as efficient.  
Comment [Office10]: Please write out instead of using TF 
Deleted: (TF) 
Deleted: -cells regulatory
Deleted: T-regs; 
 dendritic cell (DC) subsets within the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) of mice 
recolonized after antibiotic treatment (Supplementary figures 2a-2c). Therefore, we 
focused on monocytes and macrophages as cells that might shape CD4+ T-cell 
responses by acting as antigen-presenting cells (APCs) or by modifying the cytokine 
environment of T-cell polarization. As shown previously (4), the colon of healthy 
control mice contained Ly6Chi MHCII- monocytes, Ly6ChiMHC Class II+ 
immature/intermediate macrophages, and mature Ly6C- macrophages expressing 
MHC Class II (Figure 2a). Although there were no differences in the numbers of 
monocytes and mature macrophages in mice recolonized after antibiotic treatment 
versus control mice, there was a marked increase in the numbers of Ly6ChiMHC 
Class II+ immature/intermediate macrophages in the colon of recolonized mice 
(Figure 2a). However, all three populations of colonic monocytes/macrophages from 
recolonized mice enhanced expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, with 
monocytes showing increased tnfa expression, immature/intermediate macrophages 
showing increased il6, il1b and tnfa expression and mature macrophages showing 
increased il6 and il12p35 expression (Figure 2b). Furthermore, macrophages from 
recolonized mice expressed higher amounts of nos2 (associated with classical 
activation of pro-inflammatory macrophages) but lower amounts of cd206 
(associated with anti-inflammatory alternative activation; Figure 2b). Thus intestinal 
monocytes/macrophages can not only express MHC Class II, but also generate a 
pro-inflammatory environment that may promote the enhanced Th1 responses 
during recolonization following antibiotic treatment.  
 
Although macrophages in the adult intestine are predominantly comprised of 
monocyte-derived cells that enter the intestine as Ly6C+ precursors (22), recent 
evidence demonstrates that some colonic macrophages may be long-lived and 
maintained locally, independent of blood monocytes (23). The markers Tim4 and 
CD4 allow the fully differentiated intestinal macrophage pool to be divided into three 
subsets with distinct replenishment rates from blood monocytes. Tim4+CD4+ gut-
resident macrophages are locally maintained independent of monocytes, whereas 
Tim4-CD4+ macrophages are replenished slowly by monocytes and Tim4-CD4- 
macrophages are replenished continuously and relatively rapidly by monocytes (23). 
After confirming this heterogeneity in our control mice, we found that recolonizing 
Comment [Office11]: How? Cytokine production? 
Deleted: 
4
Deleted: levels
Comment [Office12]: “levels” is reserved for hierarchy. Please 
replace with an appropriate synonym throughout. 
Deleted: levels
Deleted: 
22
Deleted: 
23
Deleted: 
23
 after antibiotic treatment led to increased proportions of Tim4-CD4- macrophages 
(Figure 2c), suggesting they were derived recently from monocytes and consistent 
with the expanded populations of Ly6C+ cells found in the previous experiments 
(Figure 1a). Together, these results indicate that the pro-inflammatory changes 
observed in macrophages after recolonization following antibiotic treatment are 
associated with an enhanced monocyte-derived macrophage response rather than 
long- lived, tissue-resident macrophage populations.  
 
To directly examine whether monocyte-derived cells in the intestine influenced Th1 
responses after recolonization of antibiotic-treated mice, we used Ccr2-/- mice that 
are deficient in the Ly6Chi blood monocytes. These cells are the precursors of 
monocyte-derived intestinal macrophages (21) and contribute to the inflammatory 
infiltrate during recolonization (Figure 1a and Supplementary figure 1a). As reported 
previously (21), the colon of steady-state Ccr2-/- mice contained a residual population 
of mature Ly6C- MHC class II+ macrophages, but lacked Ly6Chi monocytes and 
immature macrophages (Supplementary Figure 2d). Recent evidence indicates 
these residual macrophages in the Ccr2-/- intestine are Tim4+CD4+ embryonically-
derived cells (23). We found that Ccr2-/- mice treated with antibiotics and recolonized 
with a normal microbiota failed to show the recruitment of Ly6Chi monocytes seen in 
WT mice (Supplementary Figure 2d). Their mature macrophages also did not show 
any alterations in expression of mRNA for il6, il-12p35, il-1b, tnfa or cd206 that were 
seen in recolonized WT mice (Figure 2d). Ccr2-/- mice did however display increased 
infiltrates of eosinophils 7 days after recolonization (Figure 2e) but importantly, these 
animals did not display expansion of IFNg-producing CD4+ T-cells 20 days after 
recolonization (Figure 2f), the time point where Th1 cells were expanded consistently 
in recolonized WT mice. There were no changes in any T-cell subsets in Ccr2-/- mice 
following antibiotic treatment and recolonization, compared to untreated Ccr2-/- mice 
(Figure 2f and Supplementary Figure 2e). Thus, the skewed Th1 response and 
dysregulated macrophage function observed in antibiotic-treated and recolonized 
mice require CCR2-dependent recruitment of monocytes.  
 
Given the differences in function between macrophages located within separate 
compartments of the intestine (i.e. lamina propria versus muscularis; reviewed in 
Deleted: 
21
Deleted: 
21
Deleted: C
Deleted: 
23
Deleted:  (and our own observations)
Comment [Office13]: If your own observations are shown in 
this paper, please cite the figure. 
Comment [Office14]: Meaning compared to WT, or before and 
after colonization? 
Comment [L15]: Before and after recolonization in Ccr2-/- mice 
have been compared here, have amended text to clarify this.  
Deleted: within 
 Bogunovic et al. (24)), we sought to determine whether the pro-inflammatory 
properties of macrophages from recolonized mice may be related to localization of 
these subsets. The vast majority of macrophages in the colon however resided in the 
lamina propria, with approximately 10-fold more macrophages within this 
compartment compared to the muscularis (Supplementary Figures 2f and 2g). 
Furthermore, there were no differences in numbers of macrophages in either 
compartment between control and recolonized mice (Supplementary Figure 2f). 
Therefore, it is likely that the induced pro-inflammatory cytokine profile during 
recolonization is restricted to lamina propria macrophages only.  
 
 
Antibiotic treatment induces a dysregulated cytokine response to LPS in 
intestinal monocytes and macrophages 
Intestinal macrophages are normally refractory to microbial stimulation (2-4). 
However, monocytes and mature macrophages expressed increased levels of 
inflammatory cytokines following recolonization of antibiotic-treated mice (Figure 2b). 
Thus, antibiotic treatment may have increased intestinal monocyte and macrophage 
responses to microbial stimulation, disrupting this normal control mechanism. To test 
this, we stimulated these cells from antibiotic-treated mice in vitro with LPS and 
assessed the production of pro-inflammatory TNFa and anti-inflammatory IL-10 by 
intracellular cytokine staining. Immature Ly6Chi MHC Class II+/- cells from the steady-
state colon, and from the colon of antibiotic-treated mice, displayed a robust 
induction of TNFa in response to LPS (Figure 3a). Strikingly, stimulation of colonic 
Ly6Chi cells from antibiotic-treated mice failed to induce the increased production of 
IL-10 that was seen after LPS stimulation of steady state Ly6Chi cells (Figure 3a).  
 
Treatment with antibiotics led to few differences in gene expression by mature Ly6C-
MHC Class II+ macrophages isolated from the colon compared with control 
macrophages, a finding that was replicated using macrophages from the colon of 
germ-free mice (Supplementary figure 3). However, mature colonic macrophages 
from antibiotic-treated mice showed dysregulated cytokine production when 
challenged with LPS. Unlike Ly6Chi monocytes and immature macrophages, LPS 
stimulation of mature colonic macrophages from control mice did not increase 
Deleted: 
24
Deleted: Taken with 
Comment [Office16]: This is awkward, please re-phrase 
Deleted: , 
Deleted: applies to
Comment [Office17]: “applies to” did not seem correct; please 
feel free to edit further 
Deleted: 
2-4
Deleted:  
 proportions of TNFa+ or IL-10+ cells (Figure 3b), confirming previous studies (4). In 
contrast, LPS stimulation of mature macrophages from the colon of antibiotic-treated 
mice induced an expansion in the proportion of TNFa-producing cells compared with 
both their non-stimulated counterparts and with LPS-stimulated macrophages from 
control mice (Figure 3b). Furthermore, although there were no changes in IL-10 
production, higher amounts of TNFa protein were produced from LPS-stimulated 
macrophages from antibiotic treated mice compared with control mice (Figure 3c). 
FACS-sorted intestinal macrophages from antibiotic-treated mice also secreted more 
pro-inflammatory IL-6 and MCP-1 upon LPS stimulation into surrounding 
supernatants (Figure 3d). Together, these data demonstrate that antibiotic treatment 
could cause intestinal monocytes and macrophages to respond inappropriately to 
bacterial stimulation, generating a pro-inflammatory cytokine profile.  
 
Sustained immune dysfunction in recolonized mice repolarizes immune 
responses to infection 
To understand the functional consequences of the increased numbers of Th1 cells 
observed following antibiotic treatment and recolonization, we examined models of 
infection that normally require Th17 (Citrobacter rodentium) or Th2 responses 
(Trichuris muris) for their clearance. C. rodentium infection in mice peaked around 
day 7 as indicated by colony forming units (CFU) from faecal pellets assessed during 
the course of infection (Figure 4a), with robust Th17 responses being found in the 
colon on day 10 of C. rod infection (Supplementary Figure 4a). Compared with 
infected control mice, antibiotic-treated mice that had been infected with C. 
rodentium after 20 days of microbiota recolonization had an increased bacterial 
burden in the caecum 10 days after infection (Figure 4a). In parallel, recolonized 
mice infected with C. rodentium had lower numbers of Th17 cells (RORgt+ CD4+ T-
cells producing IL-17A) than their control C. rodentium-infected counterparts (Figure 
4b). Intestinal macrophages from infected recolonized mice also expressed higher 
amounts of the co-stimulatory/activation molecule CD80 compared to macrophages 
from infected control mice (Figure 4c). Infected recolonized mice also exhibited a 
reduction in the proportion of FoxP3+CD4+ Tregs in the colon compared with infected 
controls (Supplementary Figure 4b).  
 
Deleted: 
4
Deleted:  
Deleted: higher levels of
Deleted: , with a trend for enhanced amounts of TNFα 
secretion 
Comment [Office18]: Please do not comment on trends. 
Deleted: causes 
Comment [Office19]: Toned down a bit because these 
experiments are with LPS, not bacteria 
Deleted:  
Comment [Office20]: Do you show the numbers of 
macrophages anywhere? 
Comment [L21]: The absolute numbers of macrophages from 
these experiments are difficult because the distal colon has been 
homogenized for CFU counts so it is not possible to calculate cells 
per colon. I have tried to normalize to weight but wet weight of 
tissue was very inaccurate (dry weight was not possible without 
killing cells).  
Deleted: -
 We next determined the consequences of antibiotic treatment and recolonization on 
infection with the intestinal helminth Trichuris muris, which is normally expelled via a 
Th2-mediated response and induces inflammation in the colon (25). Compared with 
control mice, antibiotic-treated mice that were infected with T. muris after 20 days of 
recolonization had higher worm burdens at the peak of infection (Fig 4d, 21 days 
after T. muris infection).  Recolonized mice also had substantial numbers of worms 
at day 35 after infection, by which time most control mice had cleared the infection 
(Figure 4d). Furthermore, recolonized mice demonstrated an impaired ability to 
generate Th2 responses in the colon upon T. muris infection, with reduced 
expansion of CD4+ T-cells producing IL-13 (Figure 4e) and expressing the Th2 
transcription factor GATA3 (Supplementary Figure 4c).  
 
Critically, the dysregulation of protective immunity in recolonized mice was 
longstanding, as these animals were still less able to clear both C. rodentium and T. 
muris when infected 60 days after recolonization (Figure 4f). Thus, these data 
indicate a long-term disruption of immune function and susceptibility to infections 
following antibiotic administration.  
 
 
Recolonization of antibiotic-treated mice causes long-term disruption of the 
intestinal microbiota and a reduction in short-chain fatty acids in the intestine. 
The intestinal microbiota and intestinal immune system exert profound effects on 
each other (26,27). Thus, we sought to determine whether the immune dysfunction 
we observed after antibiotic treatment and recolonization was associated with 
alterations in the microbiota. To do this, we used 16S rRNA sequencing to assess 
the composition of the bacterial communities in the colonic lumen. This analysis 
revealed sustained disruption of the intestinal microbiota that persisted for at least 60 
days after recolonization (Figure 5a and 5b). When sequence data were compared 
using Principal Component Analysis, PC1 consistently separated samples of 
recolonized mice from their age-matched control counterparts, at all time points 
(Figure 5a). Taxonomic profiling revealed an increased ratio of Bacteroidetes: 
Firmicutes phyla in recolonized mice (Figures 5b and 5c), as observed in human IBD 
(28). This skewing of bacterial phyla was predominantly accounted for by the striking 
and consistent reduction in bacteria of the Allobaculum genus (Firmicutes phylum) at 
Deleted: 
25
Deleted: TF
Deleted: levels 
Deleted: 
26,27
Deleted: 
28
 all time points after recolonization (Figures 5b and 5c). Although little is known about 
the interactions between Allobaculum bacteria and the immune system, these 
bacteria have regulatory properties that are beneficial during inflammatory disease 
(29) and are potent generators of SCFAs (30,31) which have a variety of immuno-
regulatory effects in the intestine (17).   
 
Other components of the microbiota showed more variability after recolonization, 
with different genera predominating at different times (Figure 5b). Interestingly, there 
was an absence of Bifidobacteria which support the growth of SCFA-generating 
bacteria (32,33) in recolonized mice, but enhanced levels of IL-12/IFNg-inducing 
Lactobacillus (34-36) Similar alterations in the bacterial composition in the caecum 
were observed after recolonization (Supplementary Figure 5). Thus, recolonization 
following antibiotic treatment causes differential microbial re-growth, with lower 
growth of bacteria associated with the generation of SCFAs. These changes 
persisted for at least 60 days, alongside the observed altered T-cell immunity.  
 
To directly determine whether antibiotic treatment (and subsequent recolonization) 
reduced amounts of SCFAs in the intestine, we used nuclear magnetic resonance 
(NMR) spectroscopy to determine the amounts of the SCFAs acetate, propionate 
and butyrate (usually found at high concentrations in the normal colon (17)). All three 
SCFAs were abolished during antibiotic administration, with amounts of butyrate 
remaining decreased during the recolonization period whilst acetate and propionate 
normalized by days 7 and 20, respectively (Figure 5d). Thus, antibiotic-induced 
changes in the microbiota caused a reduction of SCFAs in the intestine, with a 
prolonged reduction in butyrate levels during recolonization.  
 
The short-chain fatty acid butyrate causes metabolic reprogramming of 
intestinal macrophages 
SCFAs are proposed to be responsible for regulatory effects of the microbiota on 
intestinal immune cells (17), including macrophages (15, 16). Given the drastic 
depletion of SCFAs during antibiotic use, and to gain further insight into the 
mechanisms by which butyrate may act on intestinal macrophages in vivo, we 
carried out RNAseq analysis of FACS-sorted macrophages from recolonized mice 
Deleted: 
29
Deleted: 
30,31,
Deleted: 
17
Deleted: 
32,33
Comment [L22]: No, Blautia isn’t associated with induction of 
Th1s , I have removed this comment now to avoid confusion .  
Deleted: 
34-36
Deleted: (and Blautia at later time points). 
Deleted:  (Figure 1)
Deleted: 
17
Comment [Office24]: But acetate and propionate were 
normal? Please specify 
Moved down [2]: The short-chain fatty acid butyrate 
prevents antibiotic-associated immune dysfunction 
Moved (insertion) [1]
Deleted: B
Comment [L26]: Agree, I have swapped figure 6 and 7 now. 
Deleted: 
Deleted: 
17
Deleted: 
15,16
 that were administered antibiotics with or without butyrate, prior to recolonization. 
Intestinal macrophages from recolonized mice that had received butyrate with 
antibiotics displayed a distinct gene signature compared to their antibiotic-
treated/recolonized and control counterparts (Figure 6a). Pathway analysis revealed 
butyrate-induced changes in genes involved in histone and chromatin modification 
as expected. However, there was also upregulation of genes involved in alternative 
activation of macrophages (Figure 6a). To validate these results, we confirmed that 
butyrate can directly drive alternative activation of macrophages in vitro as previously 
reported (37, 38). SCFA-conditioned macrophages were assessed for expression of 
the alternative activation signature gene Arginase 1 (Arg1). Butyrate, but not 
propionate or acetate, induced a striking upregulation of Arg1 expression in 
macrophages (Figure 6b), indicating butyrate can directly drive alternative activation.  
 
We looked for pathways induced by butyrate and associated with alternative 
activation in macrophages, and found that the butyrate-specific gene signature 
included a striking upregulation of genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation 
(OXPHOS) and lipid metabolism (Figure 6c). Classically activated macrophages 
have a very different metabolic profile from that of alternatively activated 
macrophages, utilizing glycolysis for production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and 
iNOS to enable rapid response to microbial encounter (reviewed by Pearce et al. 
(39) and Galván-Peña et al. (40)). On the other hand, OXPHOS and lipid metabolism 
(rather than glycolysis) dominate in alternatively activated macrophages, which 
exhibit a more anti-inflammatory profile (41, 42). These data therefore suggest that 
the potential anti-inflammatory effects of butyrate on macrophages may extend to 
inducing metabolic reprogramming to enable alternative activation of macrophages.  
 
We next sought to determine whether butyrate can act directly on macrophages in 
vitro to drive metabolic reprogramming. Thus, to determine whether butyrate can 
directly shape OXPHOS and lipid metabolism in macrophages, cells were 
conditioned with SCFA, and oxidative mitochondrial respiration was measured via 
oxygen consumption rate (OCR) using Seahorse technology. Following addition of 
carbonyl cyanide-4 (trifluoromethoxy) phenylhydrazone (FCCP, which induces 
maximal respiratory capacity (43)) butyrate-treated macrophages displayed higher 
levels of OCR than untreated macrophages indicating enhancement of OXPHOS 
Comment [L27]: Yes – I think this autocorrected before! 
Comment [Office28]: Is that what you meant? 
 induction by butyrate (Figure 6d). Induction of OXPHOS was not observed when 
macrophages were treated with propionate or acetate, strongly suggesting the 
enhancement was specific to butyrate (Figure 6d and 6e). Furthermore, in further 
support of butyrate-mediated metabolic reprogramming, the reduction in OCR 
following administration of etomoxir, an inhibitor of fatty acid oxidation, was greatest 
in butyrate-treated macrophages (Figure 6d and 6e) indicating higher levels of lipid 
metabolism 
in 
butyrate-treated 
macrophages 
compared 
with 
controls 
or 
propionate/acetate treatment. These data demonstrate that macrophage metabolism 
is modulated by butyrate, which can act to promote alternative activation of 
macrophages (37, 38). 
 
Butyrate prevents antibiotic-associated immune dysfunction  
We next explored whether SCFA supplementation during antibiotic treatment could 
ameliorate the immune dysfunction caused during recolonization. The SCFAs 
acetate, propionate or butyrate were administered orally to mice while they were 
being treated with antibiotics, and the responses of intestinal macrophages to LPS 
were assessed ex vivo. As before, a higher frequency of mature colonic 
macrophages from antibiotic-treated mice expressed TNFa after LPS stimulation. 
Treatment of mice with butyrate, but not propionate or acetate, prevented this 
increase by intracellular flow cytometry (Figure 7a) and also at the level of secreted 
protein (Supplementary figure 6a). There was no effect of SCFA on IL-10 production 
(Figure 7a). To determine whether butyrate could act directly on macrophages to 
reduce TNFa production in response to LPS, we administered butyrate to colonic 
macrophages in vitro during stimulation with LPS. Butyrate markedly reduced the 
amounts of TNFa protein secreted by intestinal macrophages after stimulation with 
LPS as measured by intracellular flow cytometry and also by detection of TNFa in 
supernatants, secreted by FACS-sorted intestinal macrophages (Figure 7b). These 
data demonstrate that butyrate can act directly on intestinal macrophages to reduce 
inflammatory cytokine production.  
 
Importantly, oral administration of butyrate during antibiotic treatment also 
completely prevented the increase in Th1 responses in the colon 20 days after 
recolonization, with no increase in total IFNg+, IFNg+ Ki67+ and T-bet+ CD4+ T-cell 
Moved (insertion) [2]
Deleted: The short-chain fatty acid b
Comment [Office29]: What do you think about swapping Fig 6 
and Fig 7 and making this section your punchline? I think ending 
with a potential solution is impactful. 
Comment [Office30]: Agree, these have been swapped now.  
Deleted: w
Deleted: modulate 
Deleted: 6
Deleted: 6
Deleted: 6
 numbers (Supplementary figure 6b and Figure 7c). Therefore, treatment with the 
SCFA butyrate prevented both the macrophage and T-cell dysfunction following 
antibiotic use, as well as having direct effects on macrophage activation.  
 
Thus, together our results not only highlight crucial mechanisms regulating intestinal 
immune responses that are disrupted by antibiotic treatment, but also provide 
strategies in which SCFAs maintain intestinal immune homeostasis, underpinning 
the anti-inflammatory properties of butyrate in the intestine.  
 
Deleted: 6
Deleted: 
Deleted: 
Moved up [1]: Butyrate causes metabolic 
reprogramming of intestinal macrophages
Deleted: To gain further insight into the mechanisms by 
which butyrate prevents macrophage dysfunction during 
antibiotic use, we carried out RNAseq analysis of FACS-
sorted macrophages from recolonized mice that were 
administered antibiotics with or without butyrate, prior to 
recolonization. Intestinal macrophages from recolonized mice 
that had received butyrate with antibiotics displayed a unique 
distinct gene signature compared to their antibiotic-
treated/recolonized and control counterparts (Figure 7a). 
Pathway analysis revealed butyrate-induced changes in 
genes involved in histone and chromatin medication 
modification as expected. However, there was also 
upregulation of genes involved in alternative activation of 
macrophages (Figure 7a). To validate these results, we 
confirmed that butyrate can directly drive alternative activation 
of macrophages in vitro as previously reported
37,38. SCFA-
conditioned macrophages were assessed for expression of 
the alternative activation signature gene Arginase 1 (Arg1). 
Butyrate, but not propionate or acetate, induced a striking 
upregulation of Arg1 expression in macrophages (Figure 7b), 
indicating butyrate can directly drive alternative activation. 
These data demonstrate that macrophage metabolism is 
significantly modulated by butyrate, which can act to promote 
alternative activation of macrophages
37,38. 
Deleted: These data demonstrate that macrophage 
significantly modulated by butyrate, which can act to promote 
alternative activation of macrophages
37,38. 
Deleted: novel 
Comment [Office33]: Alternative: a SCFA maintains 
 DISCUSSION   
 
Here, we demonstrate that the gut microbiota is essential for the regulatory functions 
of intestinal macrophages, which is at least in part due to the immuno-regulatory 
actions of the short-chain fatty acid butyrate. These data provide a mechanistic link 
between antibiotic use and predisposition to intestinal inflammation, via sustained 
dysregulation of intestinal immunity. Oral antibiotics cause a hyperactive state in 
intestinal macrophages to promote sustained T cell mediated dysfunction and 
increased susceptibility to infections, highlighting important implications of repeated 
broad-spectrum antibiotic use.  
 
Intestinal macrophages normally prevent active immune responses against the 
commensal microbiota by acquiring a state of hypo-responsiveness to bacterial 
stimulation (22). We show here that this regulatory process is disrupted by antibiotic 
treatment, confirming that the intestinal microbiota plays a crucial role in shaping 
intestinal macrophage homeostasis to prevent inflammation. Interestingly, the 
dysregulated gene expression profile in macrophages from recolonized mice was 
restricted to monocyte-derived macrophages, with the tissue-resident embryonic-
derived Tim4+CD4+ macrophages that dominate the intestinal mucosa in Ccr2-/- mice 
(23) being unaffected by recolonization. These data suggest a marked plasticity in 
macrophage function during differentiation from monocytes that is susceptible to 
microbial disruption, and indicate that differentially targeting monocyte-derived rather 
than tissue-resident macrophages during intestinal inflammation may be beneficial 
therapeutically.  
 
It is not clear how intestinal macrophages normally become conditioned to promote 
tolerance against the microbiota, although evidence indicates an important role for 
IL-10 in shaping the regulatory properties of intestinal macrophages (2,12,13). 
However, in the absence of IL-10 (il-10-/- mice), the macrophage-dependent Th1 cell 
skewing still occurs in recolonized mice following antibiotic administration indicating 
antibiotics disrupt T-cell polarisation independent of IL-10.  
 
SCFAs also have potent immuno-regulatory effects on intestinal macrophages 
(15,16) and are usually found at high concentrations in the healthy colon (17). 
Comment [Office34]: Please make sure the limitations of your 
study are clearly discussed 
 
Discussion is a bit on the long side; please try to condense/remove 
sentences that repeat results. 
 
Instead of focusing on monocyte subsets, could this be tied back to 
the impact of antibiotics on human gut immunity? 
Comment [L35]: Limitations have now been discussed (changed 
from future studies). I have removed sections that repeated results 
and tried to shift the focus onto impact of antibiotics on gut 
immunity, however I’ve kept some of the monocyte/macrophage 
subset discussion in also due to reviewers focusing on whether 
changes were caused by monocytes and macrophages – happy to 
remove though if you like.  
Deleted:  
Deleted: and 
Deleted: Antibiotic-induced disruption of the intestinal 
microbiota induced acute intestinal inflammation and 
persistent Th1 responses by perturbing macrophage 
homeostasis in the gut. This enhanced susceptibility to 
bacterial (Citrobacter rodentium) and helminth (Trichuris 
muris) infections that require Th17 and Th2 responses for 
their clearance. Importantly, butyrate supplementation during 
antibiotic treatment prevented macrophage and T-cell 
dysfunction during recolonization, and we demonstrate that 
butyrate prevents the inflammatory properties of 
macrophages, causing metabolic reprogramming and 
directing macrophages towards an alternatively activated 
profile. Thus, our work not only highlights crucial mechanisms 
regulating intestinal immune responses that are disrupted by 
antibiotic treatment, but also provides important strategies by 
which SCFAs maintain intestinal immune homeostasis. 
factors present during differentiation are critical for 
determining macrophage turnover and function.  
Deleted: 
22
Deleted: 
23
Deleted: factors present during differentiation are critical for 
determining macrophage turnover and function.  
Deleted: 
2,12,13.
Deleted: (Supplementary Figure 7) 
Deleted: 
15,16
Deleted: 
17
 SCFAs were diminished by antibiotic administration with butyrate levels remaining 
low during recolonization, and the importance of SCFAs in our model was shown by 
the ability of butyrate to prevent the hyper-responsiveness of intestinal macrophages 
to microbial stimulation as well as preventing the aberrant Th1 response during 
recolonization. This may at least in part be due to inhibition of histone deacetylase 
activity by butyrate, which suppresses inflammatory cytokine production by intestinal 
macrophages (15) although butyrate can also act directly on these cells via its 
receptor, Gpr109a (16). SCFAs also shape the immunomodulatory functions of 
various other immune cells including epithelial cells, dendritic cells, neutrophils and 
T-cells (reviewed in Rooks et al. (17)). Thus, although we cannot rule out that the 
beneficial effects of butyrate in vivo in preventing antibiotic-associated immune 
dysfunction may be partially due to indirect effects on other cells, we have 
demonstrated that butyrate can directly reduce inflammatory cytokine production in 
intestinal macrophages. Our data also highlight an important new mechanism by 
which butyrate can regulate macrophage function, via increasing levels of OXPHOS 
and lipid metabolism. These metabolic events play an important role in alternative 
activation of macrophages (37, 38) and butyrate may shape the metabolic profile of 
intestinal macrophages by acting directly as a metabolic substrate itself (45), via G-
protein coupled receptor signalling or via inhibition of histone deacetylases.  
 
These data have direct relevance to IBD, linking the aberrant Th1 responses that 
dominate the inflamed mucosa in human Crohn’s disease (7) with the immature 
inflammatory macrophages that accumulate under these conditions, where they 
produce inflammatory cytokines (8,9). Furthermore, Escherichia coli infections 
(which C. rodentium models in mice) and other intestinal pathogenic infections 
requiring Th17 responses for their clearance (Salmonella and Campylobacter jejuni) 
are high risk factors associated with triggering the onset of IBD in genetically 
susceptible individuals (46). Thus, these data also provide a mechanistic link 
between antibiotic use and predisposition to intestinal inflammation, not only via 
dysregulated T-cell immunity but also by enhancing susceptibility to infections that 
may act as triggering factors for the onset of IBD.  
 
This work provides proof of principle that antibiotic-induced microbial disruption can 
have sustained effects on intestinal immune homeostasis, although limitations 
Deleted: after antibiotics, 
Deleted:  
Deleted: 20 days after recolonization
Deleted: 
15
Deleted: 
16
Deleted: 
17
Deleted:  (Figure 6b). 
... [1]
Deleted: Furthermore, o
Deleted: new 
Deleted: . 
Deleted: Thus, 
Deleted: RNAseq analysis of macrophages from mice that 
had received butyrate supplementation during antibiotic 
treatment showed effects of butyrate on intestinal macrophage 
cellular metabolism, increasing levels of OXPHOS and lipid 
metabolism. We confirmed that butyrate can directly induce 
expression of arginase in macrophages (the enzyme that 
characterizes alternative activation of macrophages
44) and can 
directly increase amounts of OXPHOS and lipid metabolism, 
factors that play an important role in alternative activation of 
macrophages
37,38. Important future work will determine 
mechanisms by which butyrate shapes the metabolic profile of 
macrophages, which may include 
Deleted: 
45
Deleted: 
7
Deleted: 
8,9
Deleted: 
46
Deleted: Although our 
Deleted: further studies
 include the fact that the effects of individual antibiotics used in routine clinical 
practice have not been investigated. Furthermore, it is not known exactly how long 
macrophage function is disrupted during recolonization after antibiotic use or the 
precise mechanisms by which macrophages skew adaptive immunity towards Th1 
activation. Although it seems likely that this involves production of polarizing 
cytokines such as IL-12 in mice (47) which would implicate macrophages rather than 
monocytes in driving the Th1 response (only macrophages expressed increased 
amounts of IL-12 during recolonization), this remains to be proven directly. 
Furthermore, the possibility that other functions such as direct presentation of 
antigen by MHC class II-expressing macrophages cannot be excluded. It is also 
difficult to be precise about the exact cellular targets of butyrate in vivo and in 
particular whether butyrate may induce metabolic changes or alternative activation in 
monocytes as well as macrophages. The small numbers of monocytes present in the 
murine intestine makes it difficult to perform in vitro assays or metabolic assays with 
these cells. Finally, it is possible that the T-cell alterations may not have solely been 
caused by lack of butyrate only. For example, the altered (and more dynamic) 
microbial community during recolonization may contribute to influencing T-cell 
responses independently of butyrate. Nonetheless, both the antibiotic-associated 
macrophage 
and 
T-cell 
dysfunction 
were 
totally 
prevented 
by 
butyrate 
supplementation, underlying the potent immuno-regulatory effects of this mediator.  
 
In summary, the gut microbiota is essential for maintaining macrophage-mediated 
intestinal immune homeostasis, through SCFA-dependent pathways. Oral broad-
spectrum antibiotics can disrupt these pathways and promote sustained immune 
dysfunction. This not only leads to a local inflammatory state, but can polarize local 
T-cell responses and influence responses to infection. Thus, we have highlighted the 
potential impact of interfering with microbiota-dependent regulation of intestinal 
macrophage function, with long-term detrimental implications for adaptive immunity 
and susceptibility to infections and inflammation. Targeting restoration of 
macrophage homeostasis after antibiotic treatment may be a novel and productive 
strategy for preventing sustained immune dysfunction.  
 
Deleted:  are necessary to elucidate the effects of individual 
antibiotics used in routine clinical practice. Furthermore, it will 
be important to determine exactly how long 
monocyte/macrophage function is disrupted during 
recolonization after antibiotic use, as well as to identify the 
mechanisms by which dysregulated macrophages skew 
adaptive immunity towards Th1 activation. 
Deleted: 
47
Deleted: , 
Deleted: and t
Deleted: C
Deleted:  
Deleted: 
... [2]
Deleted: , but future studies using targeted conditional 
knockout animals will determine important mechanisms by 
which butyrate acts on specific cells in vivo
 MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
Study design 
The overall objective of this study was to determine how disruption of the intestinal 
microbiota with broad-spectrum antibiotic use may impact intestinal immune 
responses. Mice were administered antibiotics to disrupt the microbiota, and in some 
cases subsequently recolonized with faeces from untreated control mice to assess 
how the intestinal immune system responds when re-introduced to the microbiota 
following antibiotic administration. Some mice were infected with intestinal 
pathogens during the recolonization period to assess ability to clear infections. 
Immune characterization, bacterial sequencing and metabolite analysis were carried 
out to assess alterations in the intestinal environment and immune responses during 
the recolonization period. End points were determined by defined periods of 
recolonization or following an appropriate number of days after pathogen infection. 
Animals were randomly assigned to treatment groups. Sampling and replicates 
differed between experiments and are stated in the figure legends. For all 
experiments, power calculations were used to determine that at least 4-6 mice per 
group will be needed to detect a 20% difference between groups with approximately 
10% standard deviation.  No blinding was carried out. Primary data are located in 
table S4. 
 
Mice 
Wild-type C57BL/6 mice (Envigo) were maintained under specific pathogen-free 
conditions at the University of Glasgow, UK, and the University of Manchester, UK. 
Cx3cr1+/gfp and Ccr2-/- mice were maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions 
at the University of Glasgow, UK. Germ free (GF) mice were maintained in the 
University of Manchester Gnotobiotic Mouse Facility (Manchester, UK), and in the 
Johns Hopkins Medicine Gnotobiotic Mouse Facility (Baltimore, US). GF mice were 
confirmed to be free of all culturable bacteria prior to and at the culmination of all 
experiments. Conventionally housed counterparts were bred and maintained at 
Johns Hopkins and the University of Manchester. Age- and gender-matched adult (8-
10 week old, male) animals were used in all experiments, approved by the University 
of Glasgow and University of Manchester Animal Welfare Ethical Review Boards, 
and performed under licenses issued by the UK Home Office. All experiments were 
Deleted: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
... [3]
Formatted: Line spacing:  single
Deleted: 
... [4]
Comment [Office42]: Recommended word count is 8000 
words; current paper is over 11000 and will become longer once 
the references are formatted to journal style. You may wish to 
consider moving some of the more routine M&M to the SM. Study 
design and Statistical analysis need to stay here. 
Comment [L43]: I have moved some of the M&M to 
supplementary materials now.  
Deleted: on 
Comment [Office44]: Please specify with what 
Deleted: their 
Moved (insertion) [3]
Comment [Office45]: Should be in Study design 
Comment [Office46]: For all experiments, please report 
primary data in tabular format. This is most easily accomplished 
with a standalone Excel file, with data from different figures 
organized on separate tabs. See Checklist. 
Deleted: ,
 carried out according to UK Home Office regulations or in agreement with Johns 
Hopkins Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee-approved protocols. 
For each experiment, littermate mice were split into control and antibiotic-treated 
groups.  
 
Antibiotic treatment 
Mice received an antibiotic cocktail containing ampicillin (1g/L), metronidazole (1g/L), 
neomycin (1g/L), gentamicin (1g/L) and vancomycin (0.5g/L) in drinking water for 7 
days, which was replaced once, after 3-4 days.  
 
SCFA treatment 
Mice were administered acetate, propionate, or butyrate in their drinking water for 7 
days at a concentration of 200mM. SCFAs were added to lamina propria cells in vitro 
at a concentration of 1mM for 4 hours. These concentrations of SCFAs were based 
on published work (15,17) and pilot experiments (no in vivo effects on macrophages 
<100mM and decreased oral intake >300mM; in vitro concentrations assessed for 
efficacy versus toxicity). The administered in vivo amount of 200mM is higher than 
the physiological concentrations in the colon (20-50mM) to take into account 
absorption in the small intestine that will reduce the amount of SCFA reaching the 
colon. For in vitro experiments, 1mM butyrate was used to take into account 
amounts of butyrate that might reach macrophages in the lamina propria from the 
colonic lumen, where it is known that a substantial amount would be taken up by 
epithelial cells.  
 
Re-colonization of mice 
Faeces from control mice (housed separately from experimental mice) were 
administered to cages of both the experimental control group and the experimental 
antibiotic-treated group. Specifically, sawdust and faeces from several cages of 
untreated (non-experimental) control mice were mixed together and distributed 
evenly between experimental control groups and experimental antibiotic-treated 
groups. Thus, mice were recolonized for variable time periods following 7-day 
antibiotic treatment. Cages and faeces were replaced every 7 days. 
 
Statistical analysis 
Deleted:  (no randomization needed). 
Moved up [3]: No blinding was carried out.
Deleted: 
Deleted: Isolation of tissue leukcocytes
... [5]
Deleted: every 3-4 days
Deleted: 
15,17
Deleted: 
Deleted: Bone-marrow derived macrophage generation
... [6]
Deleted: was 
Comment [Office51]: How? 
Deleted:  
Deleted: 
Deleted: LPS stimulation of lamina propria cells in vitro
... [7]
Formatted: Font:Italic
Formatted: Not Superscript/ Subscript
 Based on analyses of preliminary experiments, group sizes were chosen to ensure a 
20% difference with approximately a 10% error rate, with variance being similar 
between groups to be compared. Results are presented as individual data points 
with means and groups were compared using a Mann-Whitney (paired or unpaired) 
or for multiple groups, Kruskal-Wallis tests using Prism 7 software (GraphPad). 
P<0.05 was considered significant. For microbiota analysis, analysis software R was 
used. Average community profile comparison of two groups were analysed and 
compared using MEGAN. Abundance matrices are depicted using boxplots in R for 
each taxa showing comparison of two groups at each time point (control versus 
antibiotics or control versus recolonized).  
 
 
Deleted: 
 SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS 
Fig S1: Monocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils and T cells in recolonized mice.  
Fig S2. Characterization of dendritic cells, and distribution of  
monocytes and macrophages in Ccr2-/- mice. 
Fig S3. Gene expression profiles of mature colonic macrophages from antibiotic-
treated and germ free mice. 
Fig S4. Sustained immune dysfunction in recolonized mice repolarizes immune 
responses to infection.  
Fig S5. Recolonization of antibiotic-treated mice causes long-term disruption of the 
intestinal microbiota.  
Fig S6. The short-chain fatty acid butyrate prevents antibiotic-associated immune 
dysfunction.  
Fig S7. Th1 polarization in il-10-/- recolonized mice.  
Supplementary materials and methods. 
Table S1. Antibodies. 
Table S2. qPCR primer sequences for macrophage gene expression. 
Table S3. Primer sequences for 16S bacterial sequencing. 
Table S4. Primary data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comment [Office59]: Titles listed here must match SM exactly. 
Deleted: -
Deleted: s
Deleted: s
 REFERENCES AND NOTES 
 
1. C.C Bain, A.M. Mowat, Macrophages in intestinal homeostasis and inflammation. 
Immunol Rev. 260, 102-17. (2014).  
 
2. T.L. Denning, Y.C. Wang, S.R. Patel, I.R. Williams, B. Pulendran. Lamina propria 
macrophages and dendritic cells differentially induce regulatory and interleukin-17-
producing T cell responses. Nat. Immunol. 8, 1086-94. (2007).  
 
3. L. Franchi, N. Kamada, Y. Nakamura, A. Burberry, P. Kuffa, S. Suzuki, M.H. 
Shaw, Y.G. Kim, Núñez G. NLRC-4 driven production of IL-b discriminates between 
pathogenic and commensal bacteria and promotes host intestinal defense. Nat. 
Immunol. 13, 449-56. (2012). 
 
4. C.C. Bain, C.L. Scott, H Uronen-Hansson, S. Gudjonsson, O. Jansson, O. Grip, 
M. Guilliams, B. Malissen, W.W. Agace, A.M. Mowat, Resident and pro-inflammatory 
macrophages in the colon represent alternative context-dependent fates of the same 
Ly6Chi monocyte precursors. Mucosal Immunol. 6, 498-510. (2013). 
 
5. U. Hadis, B. Wahl, O. Schulz, M. Hardtke-Wolenski, A. Schippers, N. Wagner, W. 
Müller, T. Sparwasser, R. Förster, O. Pabst, Intestinal tolerance requires gut homing 
and expansion of FoxP3+ regulatory T cells in the lamina propria. Immunity. 34, 237-
46. (2011). 
 
6. G.G. Kaplan, The global burden of IBD: from 2015 to 2025. Nat. Rev. 
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 12, 720-7. (2015). 
 
7. W. Strober, I.J. Fuss, Proinflammatory cytokines in the pathogenesis of 
inflammatory bowel diseases. Gastroenterology. 140, 1756-67. (2011). 
 
8. J. Rugtveit, E.M. Nilsen, A. Bakka, H. Carlsen, P. Brandtzaeg, H. Scott, Cytokine 
profiles differ in newly recruited and resident subsets of mucosal macrophages from 
inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterology. 112, 1493-505. (1997).  
Comment [Office60]: All authors must be listed; you can 
choose “Science Signaling” style in EndNote. 
Deleted: in C.C…  and ….M. Mowat, A.M.…Macrophages in 
... [8]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (1):
Deleted: g T.L.… Y.C. Wang Y.C.… S.R. Pateltel S.R.… I.R. 
... [9]
Formatted: Font:Not Italic
Deleted: , B
Deleted:  et al
Deleted: Oct;
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (10):
Deleted:  L.… N. Kamada N.… Y. Nakamura Y.… A. ... [10]
Formatted: Font:Not Italic
Deleted:  P.… S. Suzuki S.… M.H. Shaw M.H.… Y.G. Kim 
... [11]
Deleted:  et al.
Deleted: May;
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (5)…:
... [12]
Deleted:  C.C.… C.L. Scott C.L.… H Uronen-Hansson H.… 
... [13]
Deleted:  et al
Deleted: .…Resident and pro-inflammatory macrophages in 
... [14]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (3)… :
... [15]
Deleted:  U.… B. Wahl B.… O. Schulz O.… M. Hardtke-
... [16]
Deleted:  et al
Deleted: . …ntestinal tolerance requires gut homing and 
... [17]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (2):
Deleted: , G.G.…The global burden of IBD: from 2015 to 
... [18]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (12):
Deleted:  W.…I.J. and …uss, I.J.…Proinflammatory 
... [19]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (6):
Deleted:  J.… E.M. Nilsen E.M.… A. Bakka A.… H. Carlsen 
... [20]
Deleted: ,et al.
Deleted: May;
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (5):
  
9. N. Kamada, T. Hisamatsu, S. Okamoto, H. Chinen, T. Kobayashi, T. Sato, A. 
Sakuraba, M.T. Kitazume, A. Sugita, K. Koganei, K.S. Akagawa, T. Hibi, Unique 
CD14 intestinal macrophages contribute to the pathogenesis of Crohn disease via 
IL-23/IFN-gamma axis. J Clin Invest. 118, 2269-80. (2008).  
 
10. S. Thiesen, S. Janciauskiene, H. Uronen-Hansson, W. Agace, C.M. Högerkorp, 
P. Spee, K. Håkansson, O. Grip, CD14(hi)HLA-DR(dim) macrophages, with a 
resemblance to classical blood monocytes, dominate inflamed mucosa in Crohn's 
disease. J Leukoc Biol. 95, 531-41. (2014).  
 
11. T.J. Sanders, N.E. McCarthy, E.M. Giles, K.L. Davidson, M.L. Haltalli, S. Hazell, 
J.O. Lindsay, A.J. Stagg, Increased production of retinoic acid by intestinal 
macrophages contributes to their inflammatory phenotype in patients with Crohn's 
disease. Gastroenterology. 146, 1278-88.e1-2. (2014).  
 
12. M. Murai, O. Turovskaya, G. Kim, R. Madan, C.L. Karp, H. Cheroutre, M. 
Kronenberg, Interleukin 10 acts on regulatory T cells to maintain expression of the 
transcription factor FoxP3 and suppressive function in mice with colitis. Nat. 
Immunol. 10, 1178-84. (2009). 
 
13. D.S. Shouval, A. Biswas, Y.H. Kang, A.E. Griffith, L. Konnikova, I.D. 
Mascanfroni, N.S. Redhu, S.M. Frei, M. Field, A.L. Doty, J.D. Goldsmith, A.K. Bhan, 
A. Loizides, B. Weiss, B. Yerushalmi, T. Yanagi, X. Lui, F.J. Quintana, A.M. Muise, 
C. Klein, B.H. Horwitz, S.C. Glover, A. Bousvaros, S.B. Snapper, Interleukin 1b 
Mediates Intestinal Inflammation in Mice and Patients with Interleukin 10 Receptor 
Deficiency. Gastroenterology. 151, 1100-1104. (2016).  
 
14. Y. Ueda, H. Kayama, S.G. Jeon, T. Kusu, Y. Isaka, H. Rakugi, M. Yamamoto, K. 
Takeda, Commensal microbiota induce LPS hyporesponsiveness in colonic 
macrophages via the production of IL-10. Int. Immunol. 22, 953-62. (2010).  
 
Deleted:  N.… T. Hisamatsu T.… S. Okamoto S.… H. Chinen 
... [21]
Deleted: , et al.
Deleted: Jun;
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (6):
Deleted:  S.… S. Janciauskiene S.… H. Uronen-Hanssonn 
... [22]
Deleted:  et al
Deleted: .…CD14(hi)HLA-DR(dim) macrophages, with a 
... [23]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (3):
Deleted:  T.J.… N.E. McCarthy N.E.… E.M. Giles E.M.… 
... [24]
Deleted:  et al.
Deleted:  May;
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (5)… :
... [25]
Deleted:  M.… O. Turovskaya O.… G. Kim G.… R. Madan R.
... [26]
Deleted:  et al
Deleted:  C.L.… H. Cheroutre, M. H. and… …ronenberg 
... [27]
Deleted: .
Deleted: Nov;
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (11):
Deleted:  D.S.… A. Biswas A.… Y.H. Kang Y.H.… A.E. 
... [28]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (6):
Deleted:  Y.… H. Kayama, S.G. H. …JJ…on S.G.… T. Kusu, 
... [29]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (12):
 15. P.V. Chang, L. Hao, S. Offermanns, R. Medzhitov, The microbial metabolite 
butyrate regulates intestinal macrophage function via histone deacetylase inhibition. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. Feb 111, 2247-52. (2014).  
 
16. N. Singh, A. Gurav, S. Sivaprakasam, E. Brady, R. Padia, H. Shi, M. Thangaraju, 
P.D. Prasad, S. Manicassamy, D.H. Munn, J.R. Lee, S. Offermanns, V. Ganapathy, 
Activation of Gpr109a, receptor for niacin and the commensal metabolite butyrate, 
suppresses colonic inflammation and carcinogenesis. Immunity. 40, 128-39. (2014).  
 
17. M.G. Rooks, W. Garrett,  Gut microbiota, metabolites and host immunity. Nat 
Rev Immunol. 16, 341-52. (2016).  
 
18. K. Wickens, N. Pearce, J. Crane, R. Beasley R, Antibiotic use in early childhood 
and the development of asthma. Clin. Exp. Allergy. 29, 766-71. (1999). 
 
19. M.P. Kronman, T.E. Zaoutis, K. Haynes, R. Feng, S.E. Coffin, Antibiotic 
exposure and IBD development among children: a population-based cohort study. 
Pediatrics. 130, e794-803 (2012).  
 
20. T.M. McKeever, S.A. Lewis, C. Smith, J. Collins, H. Heatlie, M. Frischer, R. 
Hubbard,  Early exposure to infections and antibiotics and the incidence of allergic 
disease: a birth cohort study with the West Midlands General Practice Research 
Database. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 109, 43-50. (2002).  
 
21. S.Y. Shaw, J.F. Blanchard, C.N. Bernstein, Association between the use of 
antibiotics in the first year of life and pediatric inflammatory bowel disease. Am. J. 
Gastroenterol. 105, 2687-92. (2010).  
 
22. C.C. Bain, A. Bravo-Blas, C.L. Scott, E. Gomez Perdiguero, F. Geissmann, S. 
Henri, B. Malissen, L.C. Osborne, D. Artis, A.M. Mowat, Constant replenishment 
from circulating monocytes maintains the macrophage pool in the intestine of adult 
mice. Nat Immunol. 15, 929-37. (2014).  
 
Deleted:  P.V.… L. Hao L.… S. Offermanns,  S…. . and 
... [30]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (6):
Deleted:  N.… A. Gurav A.… S. Sivaprakasam S.… E. 
... [31]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (1):
Deleted:  M.G. and…Garrett,  W.…Gut microbiota, 
... [32]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (6):
Deleted:  K.… N. Pearce N.… J. Crane J.… R. and …easley 
... [33]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (6):
Deleted:  M.P.… T.E. Zaoutis T.E.… K. Haynes K.… R. Feng 
... [34]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (4):
Deleted:  T.M.… S.A. Lewis S.A.… C. Smith C.… J. Collins 
... [35]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (1):
Deleted:  S.Y.… J.F. Blanchard J.F… C.N. . and …ernstein, 
... [36]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (12):
Deleted:  C.C.… A. Bravo-Blas A.… C.L. Scott C.L.… E. 
... [37]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (10):
 23. T.N. Shaw, S.A. Houston, K. Wemyss, H.M. Bridgeman, T.A. Barbera, T. 
Zangerle-Murray, P. Strangward, A.J.L. Ridley, P. Wang, S. Tamoutounour, J.E. 
Allen, J.E. Konkel, J.R. Grainger, Tissue-resident macrophages in the intestine are 
long lived and defined by Tim-4 and CD4 expression. J. Exp. Med. 215, 1507-1518. 
(2018).  
 
24. M. Bogunovic, A. Mortha, P.A. Muller, M. Merad, Mononuclear phagocyte 
diversity in the intestine. Immunol Res. 54, 37-49. (2012). 
 
25. L.J. Cliffe, R.K. Grencis, The Trichuris muris system: a paradigm of resistance 
and susceptibility to intestinal nematode infection. Adv Parasitol. 57, 255-307. 
(2004).  
 
26. K. Honda, D. Littman, The microbiota in adaptive immune homeostasis and 
disease. Nature. 535, 75-84. (2016). 
 
27. N.W. Palm, M.R. de Zoete, R.A. Flavell, Immune-microbiota interactions in health 
and disease. Clin Immunol. 159, 122-7. (2015).  
 
28. E.K. Wright, M.A. Kamm, S.M. Teo, M. Inouye, J. Wagner, C.D. Kirkwood, 
Recent advances in characterizing the gastrointestinal microbiome in Crohn's 
disease: a systematic review. Inflamm. Bowel. Dis. 21, 1219-28. (2015). 
 
29. Y. Ravussin, O. Koren, A. Spor, C. LeDuc, R. Gutman, J. Stombaugh, R. Knight, 
R.E. Ley, R.L. Leibel, Responses of gut microbiota to diet composition and weight 
loss in lean and obese mice. Obesity (Silver Spring). 20, 738-47. (2012).  
 
30. E. Herrmann, W. Young, D. Rosendale, V. Reichert-Grimm, C.U. Riedel, R. 
Conrad, M. Egert,. RNA-Based Stable Isotope Probing Suggests Allobaculum spp. 
as Particularly Active Glucose Assimilators in a Complex Murine Microbiota Cultured 
In Vitro. Biomed Res Int. 1829685. (2017).  
 
Deleted:  T.N.… S.A. Houston S.A.… K. Wemyss K.… H.M. 
... [38]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (6):
Deleted:  M.… A. Mortha A.… P.A. Muller, M.  P.A. and 
... [39]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (1-3):
Deleted: L.J. and …rencis,, R.K.
... [40]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: :
Deleted:  K.…D. and …ittman, D.…The microbiota in ... [41]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (7610):
Deleted:  N.W.… M.R. de Zoete M.R.… R.A.  and …lavell, 
... [42]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (2):
Deleted:  E.K.… M.A. Kamm M.A.… S.M. Teo S.M.… M. 
... [43]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (6):
Deleted:  Y.… O. Koren O.… A. Spor A.… C. LeDuc, R. 
... [44]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (4):
Deleted:  E.… W. Young W.… D. Rosendale D.… V. ... [45]
Formatted: Font:Bold
 31. H.L. Greetham, G.R. Gibson, C. Giffard, H. Hippe, B. Merkhoffer, U. Steiner, E. 
Falsen, M.D. Collin, Allobaculum stercoricanis gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from 
canine feces. Anaerobe. 10, 301-7. (2004).  
 
32. L. De Vuyst, F. Leroy, Cross-feeding between bifidobacteria and butyrate-
producing 
colon 
bacteria 
explains 
bifdobacterial 
competitiveness, 
butyrate 
production, and gas production. Int J Food Microbiol. 149, 73-80. (2011).  
 
33. L. De Vuyst, F. Moens, M. Selak, A. Rivière, F. Leroy, Summer Meeting 2013: 
growth and physiology of bifidobacteria. J Appl Microbiol. 116, 477-91. (2014).  
 
34. E. Pohjavuori, M. Viljanen, R. Korpela, M. Kuitunen, M. Tittanen, O. Vaarala, E. 
Savilahti, Lactobacillus GG effect in increasing IFN-gamma production in infants with 
cow's milk allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 114, 131-6. (2004).  
 
35. C. Hessle, L.A. Hanson, A.E. Wold, Lactobacilli from human gastrointestinal 
mucosa are strong stimulators of IL-12 production. Clin Exp Immunol. 116, 276-82. 
(1999).  
 
36. M. Miettinen, S. Matikainen, J. Vuopio-Varkila,  J. Pirhonen, Lactobacilli and 
streptococci induce interleukin-12 (IL-12), IL-18, and gamma interferon production in 
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Infect Immun. 66, 6058-62. (1998). 
 
37. J. Ji, D. Shu, M. Zheng, J. Wang, F. Guo, X. Zou, X. Lv, Y. Li, T. Liu, H. Qu, 
Microbial metabolite butyrate facilitates M2 macrophage polarization and function. 
Sci Rep. 6:24838. (2016). 
 
38. A. Trompette, E.S. Gollwitzer, C. Pattaroni, I.C. Lopez-Mejia, E. Riva, J. Pernot, 
N. Ubags, L. Fajas, L.P Nicod, B.J. Marsland, Dietary Fiber Confers Protection 
Against Flu by Shaping Ly6c- Patrolling Monocyte Hematopoiesis and CD8+ T Cell 
Metabolism. Immunity. 48, 992-1005. (2018).  
 
39. E.L. Pearce, E.J. Pearce. Metabolic pathways in immune cell activation and 
quiescence. Immunity. 38, 633-43. (2013).   
Deleted:  H.L.… G.R. Gibson G.R.… C. Giffard C.… H. 
... [46]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (5):
Deleted:  L. and …eroy, F.…Cross-feeding between ... [47]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (1):
Deleted:  L.… F. Moens F.… M. Selak M.… A. Rivière, F. 
... [48]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (3):
Deleted:  E.… M. Viljanen M.… R. Korpela R.… M. Kuitunen, 
... [49]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (1):
Deleted:  C.… L.A. Hanson, L.A.…A.E. and …old, 
... [50]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (2):
Deleted:  M.… S. Matikainen S.… J. Vuopio-Varkila,  J.…J. 
... [51]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (12):
Deleted:  J.… D. Shu D.… M. Zheng M.… J. Wang, F. Guo, 
... [52]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: e A.… E.S. Gollwitzer E.S.… C. Pattaroni C.… I.C. 
... [53]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (5):
Deleted:  E.L and …earce E.J… Metabolic pathways in 
... [54]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (4):
  
40. S. Galván-Peña, L.A. O’Neill. Metabolic reprogramming in macrophage 
polarization. Front Immunol. 5, 420. (2014).  
 
41. S.C. Huang, B. Everts, Y. Ivanova, D. O’Sullivan, M. Nascimento, A.M. Smith, W. 
Beatty, L. Love-Gregory, W.Y. Lam, C.M. O’Neill, C. Yan, H. Du, N.A. Abumrad, J.F. 
Jr Urban, M.N. Artyomov, E.L. Pearce, E.J. Pearce, Cell-intrinsic lysosomal lipolysis 
is essential for alternative activation of macrophages. Nat. Immunol. 15, 846-55. 
(2014).  
 
42. D. Vats, L. Mukundan, J.I. Odegaard, L. Zhang, K.L. Smith, C.R. Morel, R.A. 
Wagner, D.R. Greaves, P.J. Murray, A. Chawla, Oxidative metabolism and PGC-
1beta attenuate macrophage-mediated inflammation. Cell Metab. 4, 13-24. (2006).  
 
43. G.J. van der Windt, C.H. Chang, E.L. Pearce, Measuring Bioenergetics in T Cells 
Using a Seahorse Extracellular Flux Analyzer. Curr Protocol Immunol. 113, 3. 
(2016).  
 
44. P. Loke, M.G. Nair, J. Parkinson, D. Guiliano, M. Blaxter, J.E. Allen, IL-4 
dependent alternatively-activated macrophages have a distinctive in vivo gene 
expression phenotype. BMC Immunol. 3, 7. (2002).  
 
45. D.R. Donohoe, N. Garge, X. Zhang, W. Sun, T.M. O’Connell, M.K. Bunger, S.J. 
Bultman, The microbiome and butyrate regulate energy metabolism and autophagy 
in the mammalian colon. Cell Metab. 13, 517-26. (2011).  
 
46. K.O. Gradel, H.L. Nielsen, H.C. Schønheyder, T. Ejlertsen, B. Kristensen, H. 
Nielsen, Increased short- and long-term risk of inflammatory bowel disease after 
salmonella or campylobacter gastroenteritis. Gastroenterology. 137, 495-501. 
(2009). 
 
47. H.A. Schreiber, J. Loschko, R.A. Karssemeijer, A. Escolano, M.M. Meredith, D. 
Mucida, 
P. 
Guermonprez, 
M.C. 
Nussenzweig, 
Intestinal 
monocytes 
and 
Deleted:  S. and …’Neill L.A… Metabolic reprogramming in 
... [55]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: :
Deleted:  S.C.… B. Everts B.… Y. Ivanova Y.… D. 
... [56]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (9):
Deleted:  D.… L. Mukundan L.… J.I. Odegaard J.I.… L. 
... [57]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (1):
Deleted:  G.J.… C.H. Chang, E.L.  C.H. and …earce, ... [58]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: :
Deleted:  P.… M.G. Nair M.G.… J. Parkinsonn J.… D. ... [59]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: :
Deleted:  D.R.… N. Garge N.… X. Zhang X.… W. Sun, T.M. 
... [60]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (5):
Deleted:  K.O.… H.L. Nielsen H.L.… H.C. Schønheyder 
... [61]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (2):
Deleted:  H.A.… J. Loschko J.… R.A. Karssemeijerr R.A.… 
... [62]
 macrophages are required for T cell polarization in response to Citrobacter 
rodentium. J Exp Med. 210, 2025-39. (2013).  
 
48. C. Quast, E. Pruesse, P. Yilmaz, J. Gerken, T. Schweer, P. Yarza, J. Peplies, 
F.O. Glöckner, The SILVA ribosomal RNA gene database project: improved data 
processing and web-based tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 41(Database issue):D590-
6. (2013). 
 
49. S.F. Altschul, W. Gish, W. Miller, E.W. Myers, D.J. Lipman, Basic local alignment 
search tool. J Mol Biol. 215, 403-10. (1990).  
 
50. D.H. Huson, S. Mitra, H.J. Ruscheweyh, N. Weber, S.C. Schuster. Integrative 
analysis of environmental sequences using MEGAN4. Genome Res. 21, 1552-
60. (2011).  
 
51. A.M. Weljie, J. Newton, P. Mercier, E. Carlson, C.M. Slupsky, Targeted profiling: 
quantitative analysis of 1H NMR metabolomics data. Anal Chem. 78, 4430-42.  
 
52. J. Gratton, J. Phetcharaburanin, B.H. Mullish, H.R. Williams, M. Thursz, J.K. 
Nicholson, E. Holmes, J.R. Marchesi, J.V. Li, Optimized Sample Handling Strategy 
for Metabolic Profiling of Human Feces. Anal Chem. 88, 4661-8. (2016).  
 
53. G. Le Gall, S.O. Noor, K. Ridgeway, L. Scovell, C. Jamieson, I.T. Johnson, I.J. 
Colquhoun, E.K. Kemsley, A. Narbad, Metabolomics of fecal extracts detects altered 
metabolic activity of gut microbiota in ulcerative colitis and irritable bowel syndrome. 
J Proteome Res. 10, 4208-18. (2011).  
 
54. D. Wakelin. Acquired immunity to Trichuris muris in the albino laboratory mouse. 
Parasitology. 57, 515-24. (1967).  
 
55. M. Ghaem-Maghami, C.P. Simmons, S. Daniell, M. Pizza, D. Lewis, G. Frankel, 
G. Dougan, Intimin-specific immune responses to prevent bacterial colonization by 
the attaching-effacing pathogen Citrobacter rodentium. Infect Immun. 69, 5597-605. 
(2001).  
Deleted: Sep 23;
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (10):
Deleted:  C.… E. Pruesse E.… P. Yilmaz P.… J. Gerken, T. 
... [63]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted:  S.F.… W. Gish W.… W. Miller W.… E.W. Myers, 
... [64]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (3):
Deleted:  D.H.… S. Mitra S.… H.J. Ruscheweyh H.J.… N. 
... [65]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (9):
Deleted:  A.M.… J. Newton J.… P. Mercier P.… E. Carlson, 
... [66]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (13):
Comment [L61]: This is the end page number 
Deleted: 42
Comment [Office62]: ? 
Deleted:  J.… J. Phetcharaburanin J.… B.H. Mullish B.H.… 
... [67]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (9):
Deleted:  G.… S.O. Noor S.O.… K. Ridgeway K.… L. ... [68]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: 0(9):
Deleted: , D… Acquired immunity to Trichuris muris in the 
... [69]
Deleted: , M.… C.P. Simmons, C.P.… S. Daniell, S.… M. 
... [70]
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (9): 
  
56. A.M. Bolger, M. Lohse, B. Usadel. Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina 
sequence data. Bioinformatics. 30, 2114-20. (2014).  
 
57. A. Dobin, C.A. Davis, F. Schlesinger, J. Drenkow, C. Zaleski, S. Jha, P. Batut, M. 
Chaisson, T.R. Gingeras, Drenkow J. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq 
aligner. Bioinformatics. 29, 15-21. (2013).  
 
58. S. Anders, P.T. Pyl, W. Huber, HTSeq-a Python framework to work with high 
throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics. 31, 166-9. (2015). 
 
59. M.I. Love, W. Huber, S. Anders, Moderated estimation of fold change and 
dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550 (2014).  
 
60. B. Koscsó, K. Gowda, T.D. Schell, M. Bogunovic, Purification of dendritic cell and 
macrophage subsets from the normal mouse small intestine. J Immunol Methods. 
421, 1-13. (2015).  
 
 
Deleted: 5
Deleted:  A.M.
Deleted:  M. and 
Deleted:  B
Deleted: Aug 1;
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (15):
Deleted: 6
Deleted:  A., 
Deleted:  C.A., 
Deleted:  F.
Deleted: Jan 1;
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (1):
Deleted: 7
Deleted:  S.
Deleted:  P.T.
Deleted:  and 
Deleted:  W
Deleted: .
Deleted: Jan 15;
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (2):
Deleted: 8
Deleted:  M.I.
Deleted:  W. and 
Deleted:  S. 
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: (12):
Deleted: 59
Deleted:  B.
Deleted:  K.
Deleted: l T.D. and 
Deleted:  M.
Deleted: Jun;
Formatted: Font:Bold
Deleted: :
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
We gratefully acknowledge Dr John Grainger and Catherine Smedley (University of 
Manchester) for technical assistance with mouse experiments, Maria Krauss for 
technical assistance with Seahorse experiments, Gareth Howell and Mike Jackson in 
the FBMH flow cytometry core facility for help with flow cytometry, and members of 
the BSF at the University of Manchester for help with animal work. We also thank 
Professor Robert Nibbs (University of Glasgow), Professor Judi Allen (University of 
Manchester), Professor Clare Lloyd (Imperial College London), Dr Georgia Perona-
Wright (University of Glasgow) and Dr Matthew Hepworth (University of Manchester) 
for critical evaluation of the manuscript.  
 
FUNDING 
This research was funded by the Wellcome Trust (ERM: 206206/Z/17/Z, MAT, RG 
and AB: The Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research (Manchester: 
203128/Z/16/Z), LJH: 100974/Z/13/Z), the Medical Research Council (SM: 
MR/K021095/1 and MR/N023625/1; MAT: MR/M00242X/1) and The National 
Institutes of Health (NIH; USA) including The National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIH/NIDDK; T32-DK07632).  
 
The Manchester Gnotobiotic Facility was established with the support of the 
Wellcome Trust [097820/Z/11/B], using founder mice obtained from the Clean Mouse 
Facility (CMF), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. 
 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 
N.S., A.A., M.L., C.A.G., C.L., S.C., G.L.G., T.S., H.W., A.B., V.K., and A.B. carried 
out experiments, data acquisition and analysis. P.A. taught critical experimental 
techniques and edited manuscript. J.C. and A.R. provided critical material, edited 
manuscript. C.A.T. taught critical experimental techniques. P.W. assisted with data 
interpretation and analysis. D.A.P. provided critical material, edited manuscript. X.L. 
provided critical expertise and reagents. R.G. and M.A.T. provided critical expertise 
and reagents, edited manuscript. A.M.M. and L.J.H. provided critical expertise, 
edited manuscript. S.W.F.M. performed experimental and conceptual design, 
provided critical expertise, edited manuscript. E.R.M. performed experimental and 
Comment [Office63]: These sections need to be moved after 
the References. Please see Checklist for formatting. 
Comment [L64]: This has now been moved. 
Comment [Office65]: Please double-check that everyone is 
accounted for here. 
Comment [L66]: Everyone is accounted for 
 conceptual design, carried out experiments, data acquisition and analysis, wrote 
manuscript.  
 
Data and Materials availability: All data associated with this study are present 
in the paper or Supplementary Materials. RNA sequencing data were deposited in 
the ArrayExpress public database under accession number E-MTAB-7132.  
 
 
 FIGURE LEGENDS 
 
Figure 1. Recolonization of antibiotic-treated mice induces infiltration of innate 
inflammatory cells followed by sustained Th1 responses. 
a) Colonic monocytes (CD11b+Ly6C+Siglec F-Ly6G-), eosinophils (Siglec F+ MHC 
Class II- Ly6C-) and neutrophils (Siglec F- MHC Class II- Ly6G+ Ly6C-) were 
identified from live CD45+ cells by flow cytometry, in mice that had been recolonized 
with microbiota from wild-type mice for 7 days following 7 days of antibiotic 
treatment. Pooled data are shown, (*P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, Kruskal-Wallis 
test, n=15-17 (control), n=9 (antibiotics), n=6-8 (recolonized). b) Proportions of 
monocytes, neutrophils and eosinophils following antibiotic treatment and 
subsequent recolonization at time points up to 23 days of recolonization following 
antibiotic treatment. (*P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, Kruskal-Wallis test, n³3 for all 
time points). c) Proportions and numbers of CD3+CD4+ T-cells, and IFNg-production 
by CD3+CD4+ T-cells in control versus recolonized mice was determined by flow 
cytometry, with representative flow cytometry plots (from day 13 of recolonization) 
and pooled data at time points shown. (*P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, Kruskal-
Wallis test, n³3 for all time points). d) Ki67 expression by IFNg-producing CD3+CD4+ 
T-cells and T-bet expression by CD3+CD4+ T-cells at day 20 of recolonization 
(**P<0.01, ***P<0.001, unpaired Mann-Whitney test, n=9-12). e) Analysis of 
CD3+CD4+ T-cells producing IFNg or expressing T-bet in mice that had been 
recolonized for 20 or 60 days after the end of antibiotic treatment. Data at each time 
point were compared to age-matched controls set up in parallel (*P<0.05, ***P<0.001 
unpaired Mann-Whitney test, n=7-20 per time point). All data represent at least two 
independent experiments.  
 
Figure 2. CCR2+ monocyte-macrophages are essential for enhanced Th1 
responses following antibiotic treatment and recolonization. 
a) Live CD45+SiglecF-Ly6G-CD11b+CD64+ colonic lamina propria cells were 
analysed by flow cytometry and monocytes (Ly6C+MHC Class II-), intermediates 
(Ly6C+MHC Class II+) and macrophages (Ly6C-MHC Class II+) identified in mice that 
had been recolonized for 7 days following antibiotic treatment. Representative flow 
cytometry plots and pooled data (numbers) are depicted (**P<0.01, unpaired Mann-
Whitney test, n=8-10). b)  Ly6C+MHC class II- monocytes, Ly6C+MHC class II+ 
Deleted: shown are representative of
Comment [L68]: I meant that these experiments have been 
carried out separately at least twice.  
Deleted: immature macrophages
Deleted: mature 
Comment [Office69]: Please make the groups in the legends 
and the figures match (e.g., immature or intermediate) 
Comment [Office70]: Where did B go? 
 intermediates and Ly6C-MHC class II+ macrophages were sorted by flow cytometry 
and mRNA for il6, il12p35, TNFa, il1b, nos2 and cd206 analysed by quantitative 
real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Results are shown as mean expression normalized to 
TATA binding protein and shown relative to mean of control mice in all cases 
(unpaired Mann-Whitney tests, n=4-9).  c) Expression of Tim4 and CD4 by colonic 
Ly6C-MHC Class II+ differentiated macrophages of control or recolonized (day 7) 
mice was analysed by flow cytometry, with representative flow cytometry plots and 
pooled data depicted (*P<0.05, ***P<0.001, unpaired Mann-Whitney tests, n=9). d) 
Ly6C-MHC Class II+ macrophages from Ccr2-/- mice were sorted by flow cytometry 
and mRNA for il6, il12p35, TNFa, il1b and cd206 analysed by quantitative real-time 
PCR (qRT-PCR). Results are shown as mean expression normalized to TATA 
binding protein and shown relative to mean of Ccr2-/- control mice in all cases 
(unpaired Mann-Whitney tests, n=4). e) Eosinophils (Siglec F+ MHC Class II- Ly6C-) 
and neutrophils (Siglec F- MHC Class II- Ly6G+ Ly6C-) were identified from live 
CD45+ cells by flow cytometry in Ccr2-/- mice that had been recolonized for 7 days 
following antibiotic treatment. Pooled data are depicted (*P<0.05, unpaired Mann-
Whitney test, n=4). f) Production of IFNg and IL-17A, and expression of Ki67, T-bet 
and FoxP3 by CD3+CD4+ cells from the colonic LP of control or recolonized (day 20) 
Ccr2-/- mice was analysed by flow cytometry, with pooled data depicted (unpaired 
Mann-Whitney tests, n=5-18). WT mice (control and recolonized) are also shown as 
a reference. All data shown are representative of at least two independent 
experiments. 
 
Figure 3. Antibiotic treatment induces a dysregulated cytokine response to 
LPS in intestinal monocytes and macrophages. 
Live CD45+SiglecF-Ly6G-CD11b+CD64+ colonic LP cells from control and antibiotic 
treated mice (7 days) were further subdivided into a) Ly6Chi (monocytes and 
intermediates) and b) Ly6C-MHC Class II+ cells (mature macrophages). Response to 
in vitro LPS (1µg/ml) stimulation was assessed by measuring intracellular IL-10 and 
TNFa production by flow cytometry. Representative flow cytometry plots and pooled 
data (proportions of cytokine-producing cells) are depicted (*P<0.05, **P<0.01, 
***P<0.001, paired and unpaired Mann-Whitney tests, n=8-10. c) Pooled data 
depicting TNFa protein production by mature macrophages from control and 
Deleted: levels 
Deleted: c
Deleted: ,
Deleted: lamina propria
Comment [Office71]: Please remove “levels” from the graph 
title. How about “Magnitude”? 
Comment [L72]: Levels has been replaced with magnitude on 
graph 
Deleted: levels of 
Deleted: secreted 
Comment [Office73]: Since technically they were blocked from 
secreting it, right? 
 antibiotic treated mice, as assessed by mean fluorescence intensity (MFI; *P<0.05, 
unpaired Mann-Whitney test, n=4). d) FACS sorted colonic macrophages (live 
CD45+ Siglec F- Ly6G- CD11b+ CD64+ Ly6C- MHC Class II+ cells) were cultured for 
18 hours with 100 ng/ml LPS and secreted protein was measured in supernatants by 
cytometric bead array (*P<0.05, unpaired Mann-Whitney test, n=5). Data in c) are 
representative of one of three individual experiments with similar results. All other 
data are representative of at least two independent experiments. 
 
Figure 4. Sustained immune dysfunction in recolonized mice repolarizes 
immune responses to infection 
a) Mice were treated with antibiotics and subsequently recolonized for 20 days prior 
to infection with Citrobacter rodentium, alongside non antibiotic-treated mice 
(controls). Colony forming units (CFU) were grown overnight from faecal pellets 
harvested during infection for assessment of kinetics, and from caecal homogenates 
ten days after infection (*P<0.05, non-paired Mann-Whitney test, data shown n=5 but 
representative of two individual experiments with similar results). b) Live 
CD45+CD3+CD4+ colonic T-cells were identified by flow cytometry from control and 
recolonized mice infected with C. rodentium, and characterized for expression of 
RORgt and for production of IL-17A. Pooled data are depicted (*P<0.05, non-paired 
Mann-Whitney test, n=8). c) Mature macrophages were identified from colonic LP 
cells as live CD45+ Siglec F- Ly6G- CD11b+ CD64+ Ly6C- MHC Class II+ cells and 
surface expression of CD80 was characterized by flow cytometry. Representative 
flow cytometry plots and pooled data are depicted (*P<0.05, unpaired Mann-Whitney 
test, n=5). d) Mice were treated with antibiotics and subsequently recolonized for 20 
days prior to infection with the intestinal helminth Trichuris muris, alongside non-
antibiotic treated mice. Caeca and proximal colons were harvested at days 21 or 
days 35 after T. muris infection. Pooled data depicting worm counts from the caecum 
of T. muris-infected control (non-antibiotic treated) mice, and from infected 
recolonized mice (*P<0.05, non-paired Mann-Whitney test, n=5 at both time points). 
e) Live CD45+CD3+CD4+ T-cells from the proximal colon were identified by flow 
cytometry and characterized for production of IL-13. Representative flow cytometry 
plots and pooled data are depicted (*P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, Kruskal-Wallis 
test, n=5 at both time points). f) Mice were treated with antibiotics and subsequently 
Moved down [4]: Data in c) are representative of one of 
three individual experiments with similar results. 
Formatted: Font:Not Bold
Deleted: CBA; 
Moved (insertion) [4]
Comment [Office74]: Can panels be rearranged/resized to 
reduce white space? 
 
In the figure labels, please write groups out more fully (e.g., C. 
rodentium instead of C. rod; Recolonized instead of R) 
Comment [L75]: This has now been amended 
Deleted:  The kinetics of C. rodentium infection were 
assessed by harvesting faecal pellets to grow colony forming 
units (CFU) overnight. Ten day after infection, tissue 
homogenates from the caeca were used to grow CFU 
overnight 
Deleted: transcription factors 
Deleted: the cytokine 
Deleted:  
Deleted:  
Deleted: /recolonized
Comment [Office77]: Removed to avoid ambiguity (a reader 
could think they were recolonized without antibiotics) 
 recolonized for 60 days prior to infection with either C. rodentium or T. muris, 
alongside non-antibiotic treated control mice. For C. rodentium infections, ten day 
after infection, tissue homogenates from the caeca were used to grow CFU overnight 
(*P<0.05, unpaired Mann-Whitney test, n=5). For T. muris infections, caeca were 
harvested at days 21 or days 35 after T. muris infection and worms counted 
(*P<0.05, unpaired Mann-Whitney test, n=5). Data shown in all experiments are 
representative of at least 2 individual experiments.  
 
Figure 5. Recolonization of antibiotic-treated mice causes long-term disruption 
of the intestinal microbiota and a reduction in short-chain fatty acids in the 
intestine.  
a) Principal component analysis using Bray-Curtis metrics performed based on the 
taxonomic assignments obtained from the 16S rRNA gene sequencing libraries 
analysed from colonic stool samples of recolonized mice (red, A samples) at days 
13, 20, 30 and 60 days following antibiotic treatment and age-matched controls (dark 
blue, C samples). Results are shown as three mice per group. b) Bar charts 
represent the relative abundance of the bacterial taxa. Bar colours represent 
different genus taxa, and bar heights signify the relative abundance of each taxon in 
colonic stool samples from control and recolonized mice (day 13, day 20, day 30 and 
day 60). c) Pooled data depicting ratios of phyla Bacteroidetes: Firmicutes in colonic 
stool samples from control and recolonized mice and number of reads from 
Allobaculum genus as a proportion of total number of reads per sample, in control 
and recolonized mice (n=3). d) Metabolite analysis was carried out via nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) on colonic faecal samples from control and recolonized 
mice and normalized to faecal weight, to determine absolute levels of short-chain 
fatty acids (SCFAs) in the intestine. Pooled data depicting heat maps made from Z-
scores (relative) and summary graphs representing normalised amounts of SCFAs 
are shown (*P<0.05, ***P<0.001, Kruskal-Wallis test, n=16 (controls) and n=4 
(recolonized)).  
 
Figure 6. The short-chain fatty acid butyrate prevents antibiotic-associated 
immune dysfunction.  
a) Live CD45+SiglecF-Ly6G-CD11b+CD64+Ly6C-MHC Class II+ mature colonic 
macrophages were characterized from control mice, antibiotic treated mice, and 
Comment [Office78]: Please write “CFU” on the Y axis instead 
of “CFUs” 
Comment [Office79]: This has been amended 
Deleted: lengths 
Comment [Office80]: What are the tiny inset graphs? I cannot 
read them. 
Comment [L81]: These are a mistake and should not be 
present- they have been removed 
 mice treated with antibiotics that had been supplemented with butyrate, propionate 
or acetate for 7 days (200mM each). Following in vitro stimulation with LPS (1µg/ml), 
intracellular IL-10 and TNFa production were assessed by flow cytometry. 
Representative flow cytometry plots and pooled data (proportions of cytokine-
producing cells) are depicted (*P<0.05, **P<0.01, paired Mann-Whitney test and 
Kruskal-Wallis test, n=10 (control and antibiotics), n=7 (antibiotics+butyrate, 
antibiotics+propionate), n=4 (antibiotics+acetate). b) Total colonic LP cells were 
stimulated in vitro with LPS (1µg/ml) in the presence or 
 absence of butyrate 
(1mM) and mature colonic macrophages identified by flow cytometry and assessed 
for intracellular TNFa production. Representative flow cytometry plots demonstrating 
intracellular TNFa protein (as assessed by MFI) and pooled data are depicted 
(*P<0.05, paired Mann-Whitney test, n=6). In other experiments, colonic mature 
macrophages were FACS-sorted and cultured in vitro with 100 ng/ml LPS for 18 
hours, and TNFa secretion into surrounding supernatant was assessed by 
cytometric bead array (*P<0.05, unpaired Mann-Whitney test, n=4). c) Live 
CD45+CD3+CD4+ colonic T-cells were characterized from control mice and mice that 
had been recolonized for 20 days following antibiotic treatment. In one group, 
antibiotics were supplemented with butyrate (200mM). CD3+CD4+ T-cell production 
of IFNg and expression of Ki67 and T-bet were determined by flow cytometry. 
Representative flow cytometry plots and pooled data are depicted (*P<0.05, 
***P<0.001, Kruskal-Wallis test, n=12 (control and recolonized), n=6 (butyrate). All 
data shown are representative of at least two independent experiments. 
 
Figure 
7. 
Butyrate 
causes 
metabolic 
reprogramming 
of 
intestinal 
macrophages. 
a) RNA sequencing results were generated from FACS-sorted mature colonic 
macrophages (live CD45+SiglecF-Ly6G-CD11b+CD64+Ly6C-MHC Class II+ cells) 
from control mice or mice that had been treated with antibiotics (±200mM butyrate) 
prior to recolonization (7 days). Main heatmap is shown depicting relative gene 
expression (Z-scores) from individual samples, showing all differentially expressed 
genes. Individual heatmaps show the gene expression profiles of genes involved in 
histone/chromatin modification and alternative activation as identified by pathway 
(KEGG) analysis. b) Bone-marrow derived macrophages conditioned with SCFAs 
Comment [Office82]: After 7d? please specify 
Deleted: lamina propria
Deleted: levels of 
Deleted:  
Deleted: CBA; 
Deleted: some cases
Deleted: ,
 during development and mRNA for arg1 analysed by qRT-PCR. Results are shown 
as mean expression normalized to TATA binding protein and shown relative to mean 
of the control group in all cases (*P<0.05, Kruskal-Wallis test, n=4). c) Heatmaps 
showing gene expression profiles of genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation and 
lipid metabolism as identified by pathway (KEGG) analysis, following RNA 
sequencing of colonic macrophages from control, recolonized (no butyrate 
supplementation of antibiotics) or recolonized (butyrate (200mM) supplementation of 
antibiotics) mice. d) Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) of bone-marrow derived 
macrophages conditioned with SCFAs (1mM) during development, shown at 
baseline and following sequential treatment with oligomycin (Oligo), FCCP, etomoxir 
(Eto) and rotenone plus antimycin (R+A). Results were normalized to cellular protein 
levels e) OCR of macrophages following FCCP administration (mitochondrial stress). 
Results were normalized to protein levels (*P<0.05, **P<0.01, Kruskal-Wallis test, 
n=4). Lipid metabolism shown as the fold change (reduction) in OCR in 
macrophages following etomoxir (Eto) administration indicating measures of reliance 
on fatty acid oxidation (**P<0.01, Kruskal-Wallis test, n=4). All data shown are 
representative of at least two independent experiments. All metabolic assays were 
performed in quadruplet per data point.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deleted: levels 
Deleted: quantitative real-time PCR (
Deleted: )
Comment [Office83]: Formatting is a little confusing here. 
Comment [L84]: The butyrate group is in the middle to 
highlight all the gene changes induced by butyrate – since there are 
several genes unique to the butyrate group, the main heatmap 
looks very confusing if control and recolonized groups are located 
next to each other.  
Comment [Office85]: Total protein? 
Comment [L86]: Yes, although the exact same number of cells 
were placed in each well, the protein amount was used to make 
sure the readings can be directly compared.  
 Page 17: [1] Deleted 
Lizzie 
09/09/2018 17:21:00 
 (Figure 6b).  
 
 
Page 18: [2] Deleted 
Lizzie 
09/09/2018 17:11:00 
 
 
The dysregulated T-cell responses in this study are CCR2-dependent, but the Ccr2-/- 
model does not distinguish between deficiency in monocytes, intermediates, and 
fully differentiated macrophages that are all CCR2-dependent. The increased 
expression of IL-6 during recolonization was restricted to Ly6C+ intermediates and 
Ly6C- fully differentiated macrophages, with increased IL-12 expression restricted to 
macrophages only (Figure 2b). Thus, it seems likely that the CCR2-dependent 
skewing of T-cell responses may be restricted to the MHC Class II+ subsets of 
intermediates and macrophages rather than monocytes, but this remains to be 
proven directly. It will be informative in future studies to determine the roles of 
intermediates versus mature macrophages in the intestine in shaping T-cell 
responses, with an important discussion point being whether intermediates 
themselves can be classed as a (more immature) type of macrophage.  
 
Page 19: [3] Deleted 
Lizzie 
09/09/2018 17:24:00 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS[Office1] 
 
We gratefully acknowledge Dr John Grainger and Catherine Smedley (University of 
Manchester) for technical assistance with mouse experiments, Gareth Howell and 
Mike Jackson in the FBMH flow cytometry core facility for help with flow cytometry, 
and members of the BSF at the University of Manchester for help with animal work. 
We also thank Professor Robert Nibbs (University of Glasgow), Professor Judi Allen 
(University of Manchester), Professor Clare Lloyd (Imperial College London), Dr 
Georgia Perona-Wright (University of Glasgow) and Dr Matthew Hepworth 
(University of Manchester) for critical evaluation of the manuscript.  
 
FUNDING 
This research was funded by the Wellcome Trust (ERM: 206206/Z/17/Z, MAT, RG 
and AB: The Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research (Manchester: 
088785/Z/09/Z), LJH: 100974/Z/13/Z), the Medical Research Council (SM: 
 MR/K021095/1 and MR/N023625/1; MAT: MR/M00242X/1) and The National 
Institutes of Health (NIH; USA) including The National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIH/NIDDK; T32-DK07632).  
 
The Manchester Gnotobiotic Facility was established with the support of the 
Wellcome Trust [097820/Z/11/B], using founder mice obtained from the Clean Mouse 
Facility (CMF), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. 
 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS[Office2] 
N.S., A.A., M.L., C.A.G., C.L., S.C., G.L.G., T.S., H.W., A.B., V.K., and A.B. carried 
out experiments, data acquisition and analysis. P.A. taught critical experimental 
techniques and edited manuscript. J.C. and A.R. provided critical material, edited 
manuscript. C.A.T. taught critical experimental techniques. P.W. assisted with data 
interpretation and analysis. D.A.P. provided critical material, edited manuscript. X.L. 
provided critical expertise and reagents. R.G. and M.A.T. provided critical expertise 
and reagents, edited manuscript. A.M.M. and L.J.H. provided critical expertise, 
edited manuscript. S.W.F.M. performed experimental and conceptual design, 
provided critical expertise, edited manuscript. E.R.M. performed experimental and 
conceptual design, carried out experiments, data acquisition and analysis, wrote 
manuscript.  
Data and Materials availability: All data associated with this study are present 
in the paper or Supplementary Materials. RNA sequencing data were deposited in 
the ArrayExpress public database under accession number E-MTAB-7132.  
 
Page 19: [4] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
19/09/2018 17:51:00 
 
 
 
  
Page 20: [5] Deleted 
Lizzie 
09/09/2018 18:25:00 
Isolation of tissue leukcocytes 
For the isolation of colonic lamina propria cells, colons were removed from mice, 
cleaned in PBS, chopped into 5mm sections and incubated three times in 2mM 
EDTA in HBSS to remove the epithelial compartment, then washed and incubated in 
1.25mg/ml collagenase D (Sigma), 0.85mg/ml collagenase V (Sigma) and 1mg/ml 
dispase (Gibco, Invitrogen) in RPMI-1640 (Thermofisher Scientific) for 30-35 minutes 
in a shaking incubator at 37°C.  
 
Isolation of mesenteric lymph node leukcocytes 
For the isolation of mesenteric lymph node (MLN) cells, MLNs were removed from 
mice, chopped finely and incubated in 1mg/ml collagenase D (Sigma) for 35 minutes 
in a shaking incubator at 37°C.  
 
Flow cytometric analysis and sorting of cells 
0.5-5 x 106 cells were stained at 4°C in the dark using the antibodies listed in 
Supplementary Table 1 and analysed using an LSR Fortessa cytometer (BD 
Biosciences) and FlowJo software (TreeStar). Colonic monocytes and macrophages 
were sorted using a FACS Aria III and a FACS Aria Fusion, as live gated 
CD45+SiglecF-Ly6G-CD11b+CD64+ cells and further subdivided into subsets based 
on expression of MHC cClass II and Ly6C.[Office3] 
 
Quantitation of gene expression by real-time reverse transcription PCR 
Total RNA was extracted from monocytes and macrophages FACS-purified from the 
colons of individual mice using the RNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen). RNA were reverse 
transcribed to cDNA using the High Capacity RNA-to-cDNA Kit (ThermoFisher 
Scientific) and gene expression was assayed using quantitative reverse transcription 
PCR using PerfeCTa SYBR Green Fastmix (Quanta) on the QuantStudio 7 Flex 
Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) with the primers (Integrated DNA 
Technologies) detailed in Supplementary table 2. Gene expression levels were 
normalized to TATA binding protein (TBP). The mean relative gene expression was 
calculated using the 2-dDC(t) method.  
 
Page 20: [6] Deleted 
Lizzie 
09/09/2018 18:26:00 
 Bone-marrow derived macrophage generation 
Bone marrow progenitors were harvested from femurs and tibias of wild-type adult 
C57BL/6 mice and cultured for 6 days on petri dishes in the presence of macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF). Media and M-CSF were changed on day 3 and in 
some experiments media was supplemented with 1mM SCFA on day 5. Bone-
marrow derived macrophages were harvested on day 6 with 2mM EDTA.  
 
Cytometric bead array 
Intestinal macrophages were isolated by FACS and plated in round-bottomed 96-well 
tissue culture plates at 50,000 cells per well. The cells were cultured at 37ºC and 5% 
CO2 in 50µl complete RPMI (10% FCS) in the presence of 100ng/ml LPS (Sigma) ± 
500µM butyrate (Sigma). In other experiments, butyrate had been administered to 
mice with antibiotics in vivo as described above, prior to macrophage isolation. After 
18 hours, culture supernatants were collected and analysed for the presence of 
cytokine and chemokines using the Mouse Inflammation CBA kit (BD Biosciences). 
Data were acquired on an LSR Fortessa (BD Biosciences) and analysed using 
FCAP Array software (BD Biosciences).  
 
Page 20: [7] Deleted 
Lizzie 
09/09/2018 18:28:00 
LPS stimulation of lamina propria cells in vitro 
Colonic LP cells were incubated for 4.5 hours with monensin and Brefeldin A[Office4] in 
the presence or absence of 1µg/ml LPS (Sigma). Monocytes and macrophages were 
then identified by flow cytometry and assessed for intracellular cytokine production 
following cell permeabilisation and fixation as described below.  
 
Assessment of cytokine production by T-cells 
Colonic LP cells were incubated for 4 hours with PMA, Ionomycin, and Golgistop 
(eBioscience) before being surface stained, fixed, and permeabilised prior to 
intracellular cytokine staining (eBioscience intracellular staining kit).  
 
Faecal DNA extractions, quantification and bacterial sequencing 
DNA was extracted from faecal pellets using the FastDNATM SPIN Kit for Soil (MP 
Biomedicals) following the manufacturer’s instructions but incorporating an extension 
of the initial bead-beading time to three minutes. The concentration of bacterial DNA 
 was quantified using Qubit and normalized to 5 ng/ ml-1 for all samples. Extracted 
DNA was used as a template for PCR amplification of the V1/V2 regions of the 16S 
rRNA gene as detailed in Supplementary Table 3. Amplification conditions of the 
PCR were: 1 cycle of 94°C 3 min and 25 cycles of 94°C for 45 s, 55°C for 15 s and 
72°C for 30 s using a 96 well Thermal Cycler PCR machine. 16S RNA gene libraries 
were sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq platform with 250 bp paired end reads. 
 
Bacterial sequence processing 
All raw sequence reads were processed through quality control using FASTX-Toolkit 
(http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/) keeping a minimum quality threshold of 33 
for at least 50% of the bases. Reads that passed the threshold were aligned against 
SILVA database (version: SILVA_119_SSURef_tax_silva)48 using BLASTN49 (ncbi-
blast-2.2.30+; Max e-value 10e-3) separately for both pairs. After performing the 
BLASTN alignment, all output files were imported and annotated using the paired-
end protocol of MEGAN50.  
 
Taxonomic annotation 
Parameter settings of “Min Score = 50”, “Top Percent  = 10” were applied to process 
BLAST files by MEGAN6. Reads which did not have any match to the respective 
database were placed under a “No hit” node, and reads that were originally assigned 
to a taxon that did not meet our selected threshold criteria were returned to higher 
nodes where the threshold was met using the lowest common ancestor (LCA) 
algorithm. After importing datasets into MEGAN, we obtained MEGAN-own “rma 
files” for each data set that were mapped onto NCBI taxonomy based on our 
selected threshold and the files were compared and analysed within MEGAN. 
 
Metabolite analysis 
All samples were thawed at room temperature and prepared for 1H nuclear magnetic 
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy by mixing 50mg±1mg faeces with 200µl NMR buffer 
(0.26g NaH2PO4 and 1.41g K2HPO4) made up in 100% D2O (100ml), containing 
0.1% NaN3 (100mg) and 1mM sodium 3-(Trimethylsilyl)-propiomate-d4 (TSP) as a 
chemical shift reference and 250µl D2O. All samples were vortexed and then 
centrifuged at 14,000rpm for 5 min, and the remaining supernatant was removed and 
 used for semi-quantification of metabolites. The 1H NMR spectra were recorded at 
600MHz on aBruker Avance spectrometer (Bruker BioSpin Gmbh, Rheinstetten, 
Germany) running Topspin 2.0 software and fitted with a broadband inverse probe. 
1H NMR spectra were acquired with 512 scans, a spectral width of 12300 Hz and an 
acquisition time of 2.7s. The “noesypr1d” presaturation sequence was used to 
suppress the residual water signal with a low-power selective irradiation at the water 
frequency during the recycle delay. Spectra were transformed with a 0.3-Hz line 
broadening, manually phased, baseline corrected and referenced by setting the TSP 
methyl signal to 0 ppm. Filtered samples were transferred to NMR tubes with 100µl 
of NMR buffer and mixed well before reading using the parameters described above. 
All metabolites were quantified using the software Chenomx NMR suite 7.6TM based 
on published literature51-53 and by use of the 2D-NMR methods, COSY, HSQC and 
HMBC.  
 
Trichuris muris infections 
The maintenance, infection and recovery of Trichuris muris were as described 
previously54. Briefly, stock infections were maintained in susceptible mouse strains 
and adult worms harvested at day 42 post infection (p.i.). In all experiments, 
C57BL/6 mice (control or recolonized (20 or 60 days)) were infected [Office5]with 200 
embryonated eggs and worm burdens were assessed on day 21 or day 35 p.i. 
Proximal colons (2cm section) were harvested in all cases for FACS analysis of 
adaptive immune responses.  
 
Citrobacter rodentium infections 
The nalidixic acid-resistant Citrobacter rodentium strain ICC169 (Ghaem-Maghami, 
Infection and Immunity 2011[Office6]) was grown overnight at 37°C in Luria broth (LB). 
C57BL/6 mice (control or recolonized (20 or 60 days)) were inoculated with 
approximately 2x109 bacteria by oral gavage. CFUs were calculated in stool at days 
3,5,7 and 10 during the experiment and in caecal tissue at the conclusion of the 
experiment, by plating mechanically homogenized samples on agar (Lennox formula, 
Sigma) plates containing 50µg/ml nalidixic acid. Colonization levels were normalized 
to stool and tissue weight.  
 
 RNA sequencing and analysis 
Strand-specific RNA sequencing libraries were prepared using the Illumina workflow 
with the TruSeq stranded mRNA sample preparation kit. Paired-end reads (65 x 65 
bp) were generated from each sample and 48-192 million reads were obtained from 
each sample. The fastq files generated by a HiSeq4000 platform (Illumina) were 
analyzed with FASTQC and any low quality reads and contaminated barcodes were 
trimmed with Trimmomactic55. All libraries were aligned to GRCm38.p4 mouse 
genome assembly using STAR-2.4.256, and only uniquely mapped reads were used 
for differential gene expression analysis. The mapped reads were counted by genes 
with HTseq57 against gencode.vM11.annotation.gtf. The differentially expressed 
genes were identified using DESeq258 by pairwise comparisons between the 
experimental groups. The differentially expressed genes with a p-adjusted value 
≤[Office7]0.05 were selected for further validation and analysis. For functional analysis, 
an R package of topGO and Ingenuity Pathway analysis was used.  RNA 
sequencing data were deposited in the ArrayExpress public database under 
accession number E-MTAB-7132. [Office8] 
 
Assessment of cellular metabolism 
For real-time analysis of oxygen consumption rates (OCR), macrophages were 
analyzed using an XF-96 Extracellular Flux Analyser (Seahorse Bioscience) as 
described in detail previously41. Measurements were taken under basal conditions 
and following the sequential addition of 1µM oligomycin, 1.5µM fluoro-carbonyl 
cyanide phenylhydrazone (FCCP), 200µM etomoxir (Eto) and 100nM rotenone plus 
1µM antimycin A (R+A; all purchased from Sigma).  
 
Separation [Office9]of colonic lamina propria and muscularis 
Intestinal layers were separated as previously described59 with some modifications. 
Briefly, intestines, harvested as described above, were incubated in calcium and 
magnesium free HBSS with 2% FCS and 1mM DTT in 50mL falcon tubes for 20 
minutes at 37°0C in a shaking incubator.  Tubes containing intestinal samples 
were vortexed and intestine samples were decanted into sieves before being 
returned to 50mL tubes containing calcium and magnesium free HBSS with 2% FCS 
and 1.3mM EDTA and incubated for 45 minutes at 370C in a shaking incubator. 
 Tubes containing intestinal samples were vortexed and intestine samples were 
decanted into sieves.  After DTT and EDTA incubations, intestinal tissue was 
separated under a dissecting microscope into muscularis and lamina propria 
layers.  Digestion of these separate layers continued as described above.  
 
Immunofluorescence microscopy 
Colon sections were drop fixed in 10% sucrose 4% pfa for 2 hours followed by 
transfer into 30% sucrose PBS for 6 hours. Fixed and dehydrated tissue was 
embedded in OCT and frozen in isopentane on dry ice. Frozen tissue blocks were 
stored at -80°0C until use. Sections were cut at 8um using a cryostat (Leica 
CM3050S), mounted on to superfrost slides (Thermo Scientific), air-dried and stored 
at -80°0C until use. On the day of staining, slides were brought to room temperature 
before staining. Sections were encircled with a pap pen (Daido Sangyo) and blocked 
with TSA Blocking Reagent (PerkinElmer) for 15 min. Sections were further blocked 
using avidin and biotin blocking solutions (Biolegend), each for 15 minutes. Sections 
were washed in TNT [Office10]buffer pH7.5 with 0.03% trition-X between incubations. All 
incubations were performed in a humidified chamber at room temperature, apart 
from incubation with the primary antibody, which was performed at 4°0C. Purified rat 
anti- CD68 (clone FA-11, Invitrogen) was diluted in TNT buffer with 1% BSA and 
applied to sections overnight at 4°0C. The following day, after washing with TNT 
buffer, purified biotin-conjugated donkey anti- rat (Invitrogen) was applied for 2 hours 
at room temperature. Tyramide labelling was completed using a Molecular Probes 
TSA kit with HRP-streptavidin and AF555 tryamide according to manufacturer’s 
instructions. Briefly, endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by incubation in 
0.3% H2O2 for 10 min. Sections were then incubated with streptavidin HRP for 30 
minutes, followed by tyramide 555 labelling solution for 5 min. Sections were 
mounted in ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant with DAPI (Molecular Probes) and 
allowed to cure overnight at room temperature in the dark. 
 
Images were collected on a Zeiss Axioimager.D2 upright microscope using a 10x 
objective and captured using a Coolsnap HQ2 camera (Photometrics) through 
Micromanager software v1.4.23. Images were processed using ImageJ (NIH). 
 
 
 Page 23: [8] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 10:57:00 
in C.C 
 
Page 23: [8] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 10:57:00 
in C.C 
 
Page 23: [8] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 10:57:00 
in C.C 
 
Page 23: [8] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 10:57:00 
in C.C 
 
Page 23: [9] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:15:00 
g T.L. 
 
Page 23: [9] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:15:00 
g T.L. 
 
Page 23: [9] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:15:00 
g T.L. 
 
Page 23: [9] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:15:00 
g T.L. 
 
Page 23: [9] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:15:00 
g T.L. 
 
Page 23: [10] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:17:00 
 L. 
 
Page 23: [10] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:17:00 
 L. 
 
Page 23: [10] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:17:00 
 L. 
 
Page 23: [10] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:17:00 
 L. 
 
Page 23: [11] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:17:00 
 P. 
 
Page 23: [11] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:17:00 
 P. 
 
Page 23: [11] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:17:00 
 P. 
 
 Page 23: [11] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:17:00 
 P. 
 
Page 23: [11] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:17:00 
 P. 
 
Page 23: [12] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:18:00 
(5) 
 
Page 23: [12] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:18:00 
(5) 
 
Page 23: [13] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:19:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 23: [13] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:19:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 23: [13] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:19:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 23: [13] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:19:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 23: [13] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:19:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 23: [13] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:19:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 23: [13] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:19:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 23: [13] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:19:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 23: [13] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:19:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 23: [13] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:19:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 23: [14] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
. 
 
Page 23: [14] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
. 
 
 Page 23: [15] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
(3) 
 
Page 23: [15] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
(3) 
 
Page 23: [16] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
 U. 
 
Page 23: [16] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
 U. 
 
Page 23: [16] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
 U. 
 
Page 23: [16] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
 U. 
 
Page 23: [16] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
 U. 
 
Page 23: [16] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
 U. 
 
Page 23: [16] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
 U. 
 
Page 23: [16] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
 U. 
 
Page 23: [16] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
 U. 
 
Page 23: [16] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
 U. 
 
Page 23: [16] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
 U. 
 
Page 23: [16] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:20:00 
 U. 
 
Page 23: [17] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:21:00 
.  
 
Page 23: [17] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:21:00 
.  
 
 Page 23: [18] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:22:00 
, G.G. 
 
Page 23: [18] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:22:00 
, G.G. 
 
Page 23: [19] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:23:00 
 W. 
 
Page 23: [19] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:23:00 
 W. 
 
Page 23: [19] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:23:00 
 W. 
 
Page 23: [19] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:23:00 
 W. 
 
Page 23: [20] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:25:00 
 J. 
 
Page 23: [20] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:25:00 
 J. 
 
Page 23: [20] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:25:00 
 J. 
 
Page 23: [20] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:25:00 
 J. 
 
Page 23: [20] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:25:00 
 J. 
 
Page 23: [20] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:25:00 
 J. 
 
Page 23: [20] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:25:00 
 J. 
 
Page 24: [21] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:26:00 
 N. 
 
Page 24: [21] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:26:00 
 N. 
 
Page 24: [21] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:26:00 
 N. 
 
 Page 24: [21] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:26:00 
 N. 
 
Page 24: [21] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:26:00 
 N. 
 
Page 24: [21] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:26:00 
 N. 
 
Page 24: [21] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:26:00 
 N. 
 
Page 24: [21] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:26:00 
 N. 
 
Page 24: [21] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:26:00 
 N. 
 
Page 24: [21] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:26:00 
 N. 
 
Page 24: [21] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:26:00 
 N. 
 
Page 24: [21] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:26:00 
 N. 
 
Page 24: [22] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:30:00 
 S. 
 
Page 24: [22] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:30:00 
 S. 
 
Page 24: [22] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:30:00 
 S. 
 
Page 24: [22] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:30:00 
 S. 
 
Page 24: [22] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:30:00 
 S. 
 
Page 24: [22] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:30:00 
 S. 
 
Page 24: [22] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:30:00 
 S. 
 
 Page 24: [22] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:30:00 
 S. 
 
Page 24: [22] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:30:00 
 S. 
 
Page 24: [23] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:30:00 
. 
 
Page 24: [23] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:30:00 
. 
 
Page 24: [24] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:31:00 
 T.J. 
 
Page 24: [24] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:31:00 
 T.J. 
 
Page 24: [24] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:31:00 
 T.J. 
 
Page 24: [24] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:31:00 
 T.J. 
 
Page 24: [24] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:31:00 
 T.J. 
 
Page 24: [24] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:31:00 
 T.J. 
 
Page 24: [24] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:31:00 
 T.J. 
 
Page 24: [24] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:31:00 
 T.J. 
 
Page 24: [24] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:31:00 
 T.J. 
 
Page 24: [25] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:33:00 
(5) 
 
Page 24: [25] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:33:00 
(5) 
 
Page 24: [26] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:34:00 
 M. 
 
 Page 24: [26] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:34:00 
 M. 
 
Page 24: [26] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:34:00 
 M. 
 
Page 24: [26] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:34:00 
 M. 
 
Page 24: [27] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:34:00 
 C.L. 
 
Page 24: [27] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:34:00 
 C.L. 
 
Page 24: [27] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:34:00 
 C.L. 
 
Page 24: [27] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:34:00 
 C.L. 
 
Page 24: [27] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:34:00 
 C.L. 
 
Page 24: [28] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:36:00 
 D.S. 
 
Page 24: [28] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:36:00 
 D.S. 
 
Page 24: [28] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:36:00 
 D.S. 
 
Page 24: [28] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:36:00 
 D.S. 
 
Page 24: [28] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:36:00 
 D.S. 
 
Page 24: [28] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:36:00 
 D.S. 
 
Page 24: [29] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:42:00 
 Y. 
 
Page 24: [29] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:42:00 
 Y. 
 
 Page 24: [29] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:42:00 
 Y. 
 
Page 24: [29] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:42:00 
 Y. 
 
Page 24: [29] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:42:00 
 Y. 
 
Page 24: [29] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:42:00 
 Y. 
 
Page 25: [30] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:44:00 
 P.V. 
 
Page 25: [30] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:44:00 
 P.V. 
 
Page 25: [30] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:44:00 
 P.V. 
 
Page 25: [30] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:44:00 
 P.V. 
 
Page 25: [30] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:44:00 
 P.V. 
 
Page 25: [30] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:44:00 
 P.V. 
 
Page 25: [30] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:44:00 
 P.V. 
 
Page 25: [31] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:45:00 
 N. 
 
Page 25: [31] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:45:00 
 N. 
 
Page 25: [31] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:45:00 
 N. 
 
Page 25: [31] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:45:00 
 N. 
 
Page 25: [31] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:45:00 
 N. 
 
 Page 25: [31] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:45:00 
 N. 
 
Page 25: [32] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:48:00 
 M.G. and 
 
Page 25: [32] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:48:00 
 M.G. and 
 
Page 25: [32] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:48:00 
 M.G. and 
 
Page 25: [33] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:49:00 
 K. 
 
Page 25: [33] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:49:00 
 K. 
 
Page 25: [33] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:49:00 
 K. 
 
Page 25: [33] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:49:00 
 K. 
 
Page 25: [33] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:49:00 
 K. 
 
Page 25: [33] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:49:00 
 K. 
 
Page 25: [34] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:51:00 
 M.P. 
 
Page 25: [34] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:51:00 
 M.P. 
 
Page 25: [34] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:51:00 
 M.P. 
 
Page 25: [34] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:51:00 
 M.P. 
 
Page 25: [34] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:51:00 
 M.P. 
 
Page 25: [34] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:51:00 
 M.P. 
 
 Page 25: [34] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:51:00 
 M.P. 
 
Page 25: [35] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:52:00 
 T.M. 
 
Page 25: [35] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:52:00 
 T.M. 
 
Page 25: [35] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:52:00 
 T.M. 
 
Page 25: [35] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:52:00 
 T.M. 
 
Page 25: [35] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:52:00 
 T.M. 
 
Page 25: [35] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:52:00 
 T.M. 
 
Page 25: [36] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:54:00 
 S.Y. 
 
Page 25: [36] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:54:00 
 S.Y. 
 
Page 25: [36] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:54:00 
 S.Y. 
 
Page 25: [36] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:54:00 
 S.Y. 
 
Page 25: [36] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:54:00 
 S.Y. 
 
Page 25: [37] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:56:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 25: [37] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:56:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 25: [37] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:56:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 25: [37] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:56:00 
 C.C. 
 
 Page 25: [37] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:56:00 
 C.C. 
 
Page 26: [38] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:58:00 
 T.N. 
 
Page 26: [38] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:58:00 
 T.N. 
 
Page 26: [38] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:58:00 
 T.N. 
 
Page 26: [38] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:58:00 
 T.N. 
 
Page 26: [38] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 11:58:00 
 T.N. 
 
Page 26: [39] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:01:00 
 M. 
 
Page 26: [39] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:01:00 
 M. 
 
Page 26: [39] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:01:00 
 M. 
 
Page 26: [39] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:01:00 
 M. 
 
Page 26: [39] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:01:00 
 M. 
 
Page 26: [40] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:02:00 
L.J. and  
 
Page 26: [40] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:02:00 
L.J. and  
 
Page 26: [41] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:02:00 
 K. 
 
Page 26: [41] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:02:00 
 K. 
 
Page 26: [41] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:02:00 
 K. 
 
 Page 26: [41] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:02:00 
 K. 
 
Page 26: [42] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:03:00 
 N.W. 
 
Page 26: [42] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:03:00 
 N.W. 
 
Page 26: [42] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:03:00 
 N.W. 
 
Page 26: [42] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:03:00 
 N.W. 
 
Page 26: [42] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:03:00 
 N.W. 
 
Page 26: [43] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:04:00 
 E.K. 
 
Page 26: [43] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:04:00 
 E.K. 
 
Page 26: [43] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:04:00 
 E.K. 
 
Page 26: [43] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:04:00 
 E.K. 
 
Page 26: [43] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:04:00 
 E.K. 
 
Page 26: [44] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:07:00 
 Y. 
 
Page 26: [44] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:07:00 
 Y. 
 
Page 26: [44] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:07:00 
 Y. 
 
Page 26: [44] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:07:00 
 Y. 
 
Page 26: [44] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:07:00 
 Y. 
 
 Page 26: [45] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:19:00 
 E. 
 
Page 26: [45] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:19:00 
 E. 
 
Page 26: [45] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:19:00 
 E. 
 
Page 26: [45] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:19:00 
 E. 
 
Page 26: [45] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:19:00 
 E. 
 
Page 27: [46] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:20:00 
 H.L. 
 
Page 27: [46] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:20:00 
 H.L. 
 
Page 27: [46] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:20:00 
 H.L. 
 
Page 27: [46] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:20:00 
 H.L. 
 
Page 27: [46] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:20:00 
 H.L. 
 
Page 27: [46] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:20:00 
 H.L. 
 
Page 27: [47] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:22:00 
 L. and  
 
Page 27: [47] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:22:00 
 L. and  
 
Page 27: [47] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:22:00 
 L. and  
 
Page 27: [48] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:23:00 
 L. 
 
Page 27: [48] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:23:00 
 L. 
 
 Page 27: [48] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:23:00 
 L. 
 
Page 27: [48] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:23:00 
 L. 
 
Page 27: [48] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:23:00 
 L. 
 
Page 27: [49] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:24:00 
 E. 
 
Page 27: [49] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:24:00 
 E. 
 
Page 27: [49] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:24:00 
 E. 
 
Page 27: [49] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:24:00 
 E. 
 
Page 27: [49] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:24:00 
 E. 
 
Page 27: [50] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:25:00 
 C. 
 
Page 27: [50] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:25:00 
 C. 
 
Page 27: [50] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:25:00 
 C. 
 
Page 27: [50] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:25:00 
 C. 
 
Page 27: [50] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:25:00 
 C. 
 
Page 27: [51] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:26:00 
 M. 
 
Page 27: [51] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:26:00 
 M. 
 
Page 27: [51] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:26:00 
 M. 
 
 Page 27: [51] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:26:00 
 M. 
 
Page 27: [51] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:26:00 
 M. 
 
Page 27: [51] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:26:00 
 M. 
 
Page 27: [52] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:27:00 
 J. 
 
Page 27: [52] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:27:00 
 J. 
 
Page 27: [52] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:27:00 
 J. 
 
Page 27: [52] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:27:00 
 J. 
 
Page 27: [52] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:27:00 
 J. 
 
Page 27: [53] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:28:00 
e A. 
 
Page 27: [53] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:28:00 
e A. 
 
Page 27: [53] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:28:00 
e A. 
 
Page 27: [53] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:28:00 
e A. 
 
Page 27: [53] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:28:00 
e A. 
 
Page 27: [53] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:28:00 
e A. 
 
Page 27: [53] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:28:00 
e A. 
 
Page 27: [54] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:31:00 
 E.L and  
 
 Page 27: [54] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:31:00 
 E.L and  
 
Page 27: [54] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:31:00 
 E.L and  
 
Page 28: [55] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:31:00 
 S. and  
 
Page 28: [55] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:31:00 
 S. and  
 
Page 28: [55] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:31:00 
 S. and  
 
Page 28: [56] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:32:00 
 S.C. 
 
Page 28: [56] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:32:00 
 S.C. 
 
Page 28: [56] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:32:00 
 S.C. 
 
Page 28: [56] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:32:00 
 S.C. 
 
Page 28: [56] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:32:00 
 S.C. 
 
Page 28: [57] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:40:00 
 D. 
 
Page 28: [57] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:40:00 
 D. 
 
Page 28: [57] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:40:00 
 D. 
 
Page 28: [57] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:40:00 
 D. 
 
Page 28: [57] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:40:00 
 D. 
 
Page 28: [58] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:42:00 
 G.J. 
 
 Page 28: [58] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:42:00 
 G.J. 
 
Page 28: [58] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:42:00 
 G.J. 
 
Page 28: [58] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:42:00 
 G.J. 
 
Page 28: [59] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:43:00 
 P. 
 
Page 28: [59] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:43:00 
 P. 
 
Page 28: [59] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:43:00 
 P. 
 
Page 28: [59] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:43:00 
 P. 
 
Page 28: [59] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:43:00 
 P. 
 
Page 28: [59] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:43:00 
 P. 
 
Page 28: [60] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:44:00 
 D.R. 
 
Page 28: [60] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:44:00 
 D.R. 
 
Page 28: [60] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:44:00 
 D.R. 
 
Page 28: [60] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:44:00 
 D.R. 
 
Page 28: [60] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:44:00 
 D.R. 
 
Page 28: [61] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:46:00 
 K.O. 
 
Page 28: [61] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:46:00 
 K.O. 
 
 Page 28: [61] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:46:00 
 K.O. 
 
Page 28: [61] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:46:00 
 K.O. 
 
Page 28: [61] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:46:00 
 K.O. 
 
Page 28: [62] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:47:00 
 H.A. 
 
Page 28: [62] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:47:00 
 H.A. 
 
Page 28: [62] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:47:00 
 H.A. 
 
Page 28: [62] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:47:00 
 H.A. 
 
Page 29: [63] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:49:00 
 C. 
 
Page 29: [63] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:49:00 
 C. 
 
Page 29: [63] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:49:00 
 C. 
 
Page 29: [63] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:49:00 
 C. 
 
Page 29: [63] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:49:00 
 C. 
 
Page 29: [64] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:59:00 
 S.F. 
 
Page 29: [64] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:59:00 
 S.F. 
 
Page 29: [64] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:59:00 
 S.F. 
 
Page 29: [64] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:59:00 
 S.F. 
 
 Page 29: [64] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:59:00 
 S.F. 
 
Page 29: [64] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:59:00 
 S.F. 
 
Page 29: [64] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 12:59:00 
 S.F. 
 
Page 29: [65] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:00:00 
 D.H. 
 
Page 29: [65] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:00:00 
 D.H. 
 
Page 29: [65] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:00:00 
 D.H. 
 
Page 29: [65] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:00:00 
 D.H. 
 
Page 29: [65] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:00:00 
 D.H. 
 
Page 29: [65] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:00:00 
 D.H. 
 
Page 29: [66] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:01:00 
 A.M. 
 
Page 29: [66] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:01:00 
 A.M. 
 
Page 29: [66] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:01:00 
 A.M. 
 
Page 29: [66] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:01:00 
 A.M. 
 
Page 29: [66] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:01:00 
 A.M. 
 
Page 29: [67] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:02:00 
 J. 
 
Page 29: [67] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:02:00 
 J. 
 
 Page 29: [67] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:02:00 
 J. 
 
Page 29: [67] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:02:00 
 J. 
 
Page 29: [67] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:02:00 
 J. 
 
Page 29: [68] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:04:00 
 G. 
 
Page 29: [68] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:04:00 
 G. 
 
Page 29: [68] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:04:00 
 G. 
 
Page 29: [68] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:04:00 
 G. 
 
Page 29: [68] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:04:00 
 G. 
 
Page 29: [69] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:05:00 
, D 
 
Page 29: [69] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:05:00 
, D 
 
Page 29: [69] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:05:00 
, D 
 
Page 29: [70] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:06:00 
, M. 
 
Page 29: [70] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:06:00 
, M. 
 
Page 29: [70] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:06:00 
, M. 
 
Page 29: [70] Deleted 
Microsoft Office User 
12/09/2018 13:06:00 
, M. 
 
 
 B
C
Ki67
IFNγ
Re-colonized (d20) 
Control 
D
T-bet
CD4
E
Control 
Re-colonized (d13) 
IL-17A
IFNγ
21.5%
1.5%
12.1%
40.3%
0.8%
5.8%
30.0%
11.1%
15.9%
19.4%
41.1%
18.6%
50.8%
71.7%
CTRL
d0 (Abx)
d5
d7
d10
d13
d17
d20
d23
0
1
2
3
4
5
Monocytes during recolonization
Proportion of CD11b+Ly6C+ 
cells of live CD45 cells (%)
*
***
CTRL
d0 (Abx)
d5
d7
d10
d13
d17
d20
d23
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Proportion of Ly6G+ 
cells of live CD45 cells (%)
Neutrophils during recolonization
**
CTRL
d0 (Abx)
d5
d7
d10
d13
d17
d20
d23
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Proportion of SigF+ 
cells of live CD45 cells (%)
Eosinophils during recolonization
***
CTRL
d5
d7
d10
d13
d17
d20
d23
0
5
10
15
20
25
Proportion of CD3+CD4+
cells of live CD45 cells (%)
CD4+ T-cells during recolonization
**
**
CTRL
d5
d7
d10
d13
d17
d20
d23
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
Abs. no. CD4+ T-cells (x10^4)
Numbers of CD4+ T-cells 
**
*
CTRL
d5
d7
d10
d13
d17
d20
d23
0
10
20
30
40
50
Proportion of CD4+ 
T-cells producing IFNγ (%)
IFNγ production CD4+ T-cells
*
*
CTRL
d5
d7
d10
d13
d17
d20
d23
0
10
20
30
Abs. no. IFNγ+CD4+ 
T-cells (x10^4)
Numbers of IFNγ-producing CD4+ T-cells 
**
**
* *
d20
d60
0
20
40
60
80
Proportion of CD4+ 
T-cells producing IFNγ (%)
IFNγ production CD4+ T-cells
Control
Recolonized
***
*
Ctrl
Abx 
Recolonized (7d)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Proportion of SigF+ cells 
of live CD45+ cells (%)
Eosinophils
***
*
Ctrl
Abx 
Recolonized (7d)
0
2
4
6
Proportion of Ly6G+ cells
of live CD45+ cells (%)
Neutrophils
*
***
Ctrl
Abx 
Recolonized (7d)
0
2
4
6
Proportion of CD11b+Ly6C+
cells of live CD45+ cells (%)
Monocytes
**
***
Figure 1
A
d20
d60
40
50
60
70
80
90
Proportion of CD4+ 
T-cells expressing T-bet (%)
T-bet expression CD4+ T-cells
Control
Recolonized
***
*
Ctrl
Recolonized
(d20)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Proportion of  IFNγ+Ki67+
 CD4+ T-cells(%)
IFNγ+Ki67+ CD4+ T-cells
***
Ctrl
Recolonized
(d20)
0
10
20
30
40
Abs. nos  IFNγ+Ki67+
 CD4+ T-cells(x104)
Numbers of IFNγ+Ki67+ CD4+ T-cells
***
Ctrl
Recolonized
(d20)
50
60
70
80
Proportion of CD4+ T-cells
expressing T-bet (%)
T-bet expression by CD4+ T-cells
***
Ctrl
Recolonized
(d20)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Abs. nos CD4+ T-cells
expressing T-bet (x104)
Numbers of T-bet expressing CD4+ T-cells
**
 Macrophages
Monocytes
Intermediates
MHC Class II
Ly6C
Recolonized (7d)
MHC Class II
Ly6C
A
B
C
D
Control
v
v
v
v
2.4%
2.8%
91.3%
3.6%
6.6%
86.9%
Figure 2
Control
Recolonized (d7)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Abs. no of  Ly6C+
MHC Class II- cells (x103)
Numbers of monocytes
Control
Recolonized (d7)
0
10
20
30
Abs. no of  Ly6C+
MHC Class II+ cells (x103)
Numbers of intermediates
**
Control
Recolonized (d7)
0
200
400
600
800
Abs. no of  Ly6C-
MHC Class II+ cells (x103)
Numbers of macrophages
F
IL-6
TNFα
IL-1β
0
1
2
3
4
mRNA (relative to 
mean of controls)
Monocytes
Control
Recolonized (d7)
**
IL-6
TNFα
IL-1β
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
mRNA (relative to 
mean of controls)
Intermediates
Control
Recolonized (d7)
*
**
*
Control
Recolonized (d7)
Tim4
CD4
CD4-
Tim4-
CD4+
Tim4-
CD4+
Tim4+
10
20
30
40
50
Proportion of total 
macrophages (%)
Macrophage subsets 
during recolonization
Control
Recolonized (d7)
***
*
Eosinophils
Neutrophils
0
10
20
30
40
Proportion sof SiglecF+or 
Ly6G+ cells of live CD45+ cells
Infiltrating eosinophils 
and neutrophils CCR2-/-
CCR2-/- Control
CCR2-/- Recolonized (d7)
*
IL-6
TNFα
IL-1β
IL-12
CD206
0
1
2
3
mRNA (relative to 
mean of controls)
CCR2-/- macrophages
CCR2-/- Control
CCR2-/- Recolonized (d7)
E
WT
Ccr2-/-
0
10
20
30
40
50
Proportion of IFNγ+Ki67+
CD4+ T-cells (%)
IFNγ+Ki67+
CD4+ T-cells 
Control
Recolonized (20d)
***
WT
Ccr2-/-
0
5
10
15
20
25
Proportion of CD4+ T-cells 
producing  IL-17A (%)
IL-17A
Control
Recolonized (20d)
**
WT
Ccr2-/-
0
20
40
60
80
Proportion of CD4+ T-cells 
producing IFNγ (%)
IFNγ
Control
Recolonized (20d)
***
WT
Ccr2-/-
40
50
60
70
80
90
Proportion of CD4+ T-cells
expressing T-bet (%)
T-bet 
Control
Recolonized (20d)
***
WT
Ccr2-/-
0
10
20
30
Proportion of CD4+ T-cells
expressing FoxP3 (%)
FoxP3
Control
Recolonized (20d)
***
IL-6
TNFα
IL-1β
IL-12
NOS2
CD206
0
2
4
6
8
mRNA (relative to 
mean of controls)
Macrophages
Control
Recolonized (d7)
**
*
*
*
 MHC Class II 
Ly6C
Control -LPS
Control +LPS
Antibiotics +LPS
Intracellular IL-10
Intracellular TNFɑ
Ly6Chi
A
B
MHC Class II 
Ly6C
Mature
macrophages
Control -LPS
Control +LPS
Antibiotics +LPS
Intracellular IL-10
Intracellular TNFɑ
Control
Antibiotics
0
10
20
30
Proportion of Ly6Chi cells 
producing IL-10 (%)
Ly6Chi cells: IL-10 production
+LPS
-LPS
**
Control
Antibiotics
40
60
80
100
Proportion of macrophages 
producing TNFα (%)
Macrophages: TNFα production
-LPS
+LPS
***
*
Control
Antibiotics
40
60
80
100
Proportion of Ly6Chi cells 
producing TNFα (%)
Ly6Chi cells: TNFα production
-LPS
+LPS
***
***
8.9%
35.8%
5.3%
1.5%
57.5%
30.1%
2.7%
80.5%
9.8%
0.8%
83.9%
51.1%
17.1%
1.0%
50.9%
22.8%
1.0%
72.8%
9.8%
0.4%
Figure 3
D
Control
Antibiotics
0
200
400
600
800
TNFα secretion (pg/ml)
 
TNFα secretion
Control
Antibiotics
0
50
100
150
200
250
IL-10 secretion (pg/ml)
 
IL-10 secretion
Control
Antibiotics
0
50
100
150
IL-6 secretion (pg/ml)
 
IL-6 secretion
*
Control
Antibiotics
0
20
40
60
MCP-1 secretion (pg/ml)
 
MCP-1 secretion
*
Control
Antibiotics
0
10
20
30
40
Proportion of macrophages 
producing IL-10 (%)
Macrophages: IL-10 production
-LPS
+LPS
Control +LPS
Antibiotics +LPS
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
MFI (TNFα)
Magnitude of TNFα (Macrophages)
*
C
 B
D
DC
DC
DC
C
C
C
C
A
Figure 4
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
106
107
108
109
Citrobacter rodentium Infection Kinetics
Time (days)
CFU/g
Citrobacter rodentium
Infection Kinetics
Citrobacter burden
Caecum (d10)
C
C.rodentium
Recolonized 
C.rodentium
105
106
107
108
CFU/g
Citrobacter burden: caecum (d10)
*
IL-13
Naive
Control T. muris
CD4
Recolonized T. muris
d35
3.0%
19.5%
7.9%
T. muris
Recolonized (d60)
T. muris
0
50
100
150
Worm count
Trichuris muris 
worm burden
*
F
103
104
105
106
107
108
CFU/g
Citrobacter burden: 
caecum
C. rodentium
Recolonized (d60)
C. rodentium
*
E
C.rodentium
Recolonized
C.rodentium
CD4
IL-17A
C.rodentium
Recolonized
C.rodentium
0
20
40
60
Proportion of RORγt+CD4+ 
T-cellsproducing IL-17A (%)
IL-17A-producing 
RORγt+ CD4+ T-cells
*
Recolonized
C.rodentium
C.rodentium
CD80
CD11b
C.rodentium
Recolonized
C.rodentium
0
20
40
60
80
Proportion of macrophages 
expressing CD80 (%)
CD80 expression macrophages
*
43.5%
31.5%
39.6%
72.6%
Infection d21
Infection d35
0
5
10
15
20
25
Proportion of CD4+ T-cells
producing IL-13 (%)
IL-13 production colonic CD4+ T-cells
Naive
Control T. muris
Recolonized
   T. muris
**
*
*** **
Infection d21
Infection d35
0
50
100
150
200
250
Worm count
 Trichuris muris worm burden
Control T.muris 
Recolonized 
   T. muris
*
*
 PC1 (58.5%) vs PC2(35.1%)
Recolonized (d13)
Recolonized (d20)
Recolonized (d30)
Recolonized (d60)
C2 C1
C3
A1
A2
A3
-0.5
-0.5
0.5
1
PC1
PC2
PC1 (73.7%) vs PC2(14.7%)
-0.1
-0.5
0.5
1
PC1
PC2
-1
0.1
C3
C1
C2
A2
A1
A3
PC1 (74.3%) vs PC2(16.5%)
C2
A1
A2
A3
C1
C3
-0.1
-0.5
0.5
1
PC1
PC2
-1
0.1
-0.2
PC1 (80.3%) vs PC2(15.6%)
-1
1
2
PC1
PC2
0.2
-0.2
C2
C1
C3
A1
A2
A3
A
0
d13
d20
d30
d60
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Ratio
Ratio Bacteroidetes: Firmicutes
Control
Recolonized
*
*
d13
d20
d30
d60
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Ratio
Ratio Bacteroidetes: Firmicutes
Control
Recolonized
*
*
Ratio Bacteroidetes : Firmicutes
d13
d20
d30
d60
0
20
40
60
80
Number of reads (%)
Allobaculum 
Control
Recolonized
**
*
**
***
d13
d20
d30
d60
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Ratio
Ratio Bacteroidetes: Firmicutes
Control
Recolonized
*
*
Allobaculum
Figure 5
0
Taxonomy profile for Comparison Colon 20.megan
Samples
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
50
75
25
0
100
100
50
75
25
Taxonomy profile for Comparison Colon 13.megan
Samples
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Bacterial composition (%)
Recolonized d13
Recolonized d20
Taxonomy profile for Comparison Colon 30 .megan
Samples
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
100
50
75
25
Taxonomy profile for Comparison Caecum 60.megan
Samples
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
100
50
75
25
0
Recolonized d30
Recolonized d60
Legend (Taxa):
Allobaculum
Blautia
Alistipes
Lactobacillus
Alloprevotella
Anaerostipes
Bifidobacterium
Bacteroides
Desulfovibrio
Roseburia
Anaerotruncus
Thalassospira
Ruminococcus
Candidatus Arthromitus
Rikenella
Parabacteroides
Candidatus Saccharimonas
Faecalibacterium
Staphylococcus
Corynebacterium
Coprococcus
Dorea
Erysipelatoclostridium
Acetatifactor
Mogibacterium
Jeotgalicoccus
Ureaplasma
Subdoligranulum
Bilophila
Facklamia
Streptococcus
Oscillospira
Marvinbryantia
Papillibacter
Acetitomaculum
Sporosarcina
Peptococcus
Anaerofustis
Atopostipes
Paraprevotella
Pseudobutyrivibrio
Anaeroplasma
Robinsoniella
B
C
CTRL
d0 (Abx)
d7
d20
d60
0
5
10
15
20
25
Butyrate
Butyrate (mmol/kg)
***
*
D
CTRL
d0 (Abx)
d7
d20
d60
0
5
10
15
Propionate
Propionate (mmol/kg)
***
*
CTRL
d0 (Abx)
d7
d20
d60
0
20
40
60
Acetate
Acetate (mmol/kg)
***
Butyrate
Acetate
Propionate
-2
-1
0
1
Control
Abx
Recolonized d7
Recolonized d20
Recolonized d60
-2
-1
0
1
Control
Abx
Recolonized d7
Recolonized d20
Recolonized d60
 Figure 6
B
C
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Oxygen consumption rate
Time (minutes)
OCR (pmol/min/Norm. Unit)
Control
Butyrate
Acetate
Proprionate
Oligo
FCCP
Eto
R+A
Oxidative
phosphorylation
Lipid 
metabolism
Histone/chromatin
modification
Alternative
activation
D
E
Control
But
Prop
Ace
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Fold change in OCR following 
Eto (normalised units)
Lipid metabolism
**
Control
But
Prop
Ace
0
2
4
6
Arginase
Arg1 mRNA 
(relative to mean of controls)
*
*
*
Control
Recolonized
+ Butyrate
Recolonized
Control
But
Prop
Ace
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
OCR following 
FCCP (normalised units)
Oxidative phosphorylation
**
*
**
A
-3 -2 -1 0
Control
Abx
Recolonized d7
Recolonized d20
Recolonized d60
1 2
Brd3
Chaf1a
Dnmt1
Sin3a
Dpy30
H3f3a
-2
0
2
4
Ctrl
Recol./But
Recol. 
Relmα
Chil3
PPARγ
0
2
4
6
8
Ctrl
Recol./But
Recol.
Atp5c1
Atp5l
Cox7a21
Ndufa3
Ndufb5
0
1
2
Ctrl
Recol./But
Recol.
Phyh
Lpl
Hexb
Gpx3
Sqle
Alas2
Nubpl
Gdf3
0
2
Ctrl
Recol./But
Recol.
 Intracellular TNFɑ
CD11b
Control
+Butyrate
MFI 3658
MFI 2235
Figure 7
B
Intracellular IL-10
Intracellular TNFɑ
Control +LPS
Abx +LPS
Abx/But +LPS
Abx/Prop +LPS
C
Ki67
IFNγ
Control
Recolonized (20d)
Recolonized/But
Abx/Ace +LPS
54.5%
17.8%
1.0%
77.3%
6.9%
0.3%
62.0%
10.4%
0.7%
56.9%
22.8%
0.5%
60.5%
23.1%
0.5%
20.9%
10.9%
24.2%
24.6%
34.1%
16.9%
15.7%
6.9%
20.4%
Control
Abx
Abx + But
Abx + Prop
Abx + Ace
40
60
80
100
Proportion of macrophages 
producing TNFα (%)
Macrophages: TNFα production
-LPS
+LPS
**
*
*
**
Control
Abx
Abx + But
Abx + Prop
Abx + Ace
0
10
20
30
40
Proportion of macrophages 
producing IL-10 (%)
Macrophages: IL-10 production
-LPS
+LPS
+LPS
+LPS/BUT
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
TNFα secretion (pg/ml)
TNFα secretion
*
T-bet
CD4
Control
Recolonized (20d)
Recolonized/But
72.9%
50.3%
49.0%
A
+LPS
+LPS/BUT
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
MFI (TNFα)
Magnitude of TNFα (Macrophages)
*
Ctrl
Recolonized
(d20)
Recolonized/But
(d20)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Proportion of IFNγ+Ki67+ 
CD4+ T-cells (%)
IFNγ+Ki67+ CD4+ T-cells
*
***
Ctrl
Recolonized
(d20)
Recolonized/But
(d20)
40
50
60
70
80
Proportion of CD4+ T-cells
expressing T-bet (%)
T-bet expression CD4+ T-cells
***
***
  
 
 
Deleted: 
Formatted: Font:(Default) Arial, Bold
 Supplementary figure 1. Monocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils, and T-cells in 
recolonized mice.  
a) Representative flow cytometry plots demonstrating CD11b+Ly6C+ monocytes, 
Ly6G+ neutrophils, and SiglecF+ eosinophils identified from the colonic lamina 
propria (LP) of control, antibiotic treated and recolonized mice. b) Pooled data 
depicting proportions and number of CD3+CD4+ T-cells producing IL-17A following 
antibiotic treatment and subsequent recolonization at various time points up to 23 
days post antibiotics. Dotted line represents mean proportion/numbers of cells in 
control mice (*P<0.05, **P<0.01, Kruskal-Wallis test, n³3 for all time points). c) Mice 
were antibiotic treated and subsequently recolonized for 20 days, then CD3+CD4+ 
colonic T-cells were identified by flow cytometry and characterized for expression of 
transcription factor FoxP3. Representative flow cytometry plots and pooled data are 
depicted (***P<0.001, unpaired Mann-Whitney test, n=9). d) Analysis of CD3+CD4+ 
T-cells producing IFNg or expressing transcription factor T-bet in mice that had been 
recolonized for 20 or 60 days following antibiotic treatment. Data at each time point 
was compared to age matched controls. Pooled data of absolute numbers are 
depicted (**P<0.01, ***P<0.01, unpaired Mann-Whitney tests n=8-10).  
 
 
Comment [L1]: I’m not sure why the figures are coming 
up with gray shading – I’ve re-embedded some figures and 
its still white on my laptop and work computer so think 
perhaps it may be your computer? 
 
Where possible I have moved the legends onto the same 
page as the figures now.  
Comment [Office2]: The figures in the supp look like 
they have gray shading in the background. Could be due to 
the file transfer? Perhaps my screen? 
 
This document will be published exactly as provided. Please 
superscript anything that you want to be superscripted, 
including in the figures. 
 
Where possible I suggest cropping the size of the images to 
allow the legend to be on the same page (e.g. fig S3). 
  
 
 
Deleted: 
Formatted: Font:(Default) Arial, Bold
 Supplementary figure 2. Characterization of dendritic cells, and distribution of  
monocytes and macrophages in Ccr2-/- mice.  
a) Live CD45+B220-CD64-MHC Class IIhiCD11c+ migratory dendritic cells (DCs) were 
characterized from the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) of control mice and mice that 
had been recolonized for 7 days following antibiotic treatment, and then further 
subdivided based on expression of CD103 and CD11b, by flow cytometry. 
Representative flow cytometry plots and pooled data are depicted (unpaired Mann-
Whitney tests, n=4). b) Expression of co-stimulatory molecules CD40 and CD80 on 
DCs was assessed by flow cytometry, pooled data are depicted (unpaired Mann-
Whitney tests, n=4). c) DC subsets from the MLN of control mice, and mice that had 
been recolonized for 7 days were sorted by flow cytometry and mRNA abundance 
for il12p35, il6, and tnfa were analyzed by qRT-PCR. Results are mean expression 
normalized to TATA binding protein (tbp) and shown relative to mean of control mice 
in all cases (n=3). d) Ccr2-/- mice were antibiotic treated and subsequently 
recolonized for 7 days. Monocytes and macrophages were characterized from live 
CD45+SiglecF-Ly6G-CD11b+CD64+ LP cells based on expression of Ly6C 
(monocytes and immature macrophages) and MHC Class II (immature and mature 
macrophages). Representative flow cytometry plots are depicted and representative 
of four individual experiments with similar results. e) Analysis of CD3+CD4+ T-cells 
producing IFNg, IL-17A, or expressing Ki67, T-bet, or FoxP3 in mice that had been 
recolonized for 20 days following antibiotic treatment of Ccr2-/- mice. Pooled data of 
absolute numbers are depicted (unpaired Mann-Whitney tests, n=5-6). f) Lamina 
propria and muscularis compartments of the colon were manually separated and 
absolute numbers of mature macrophages (CD45+ live, Siglec F- Ly6G-, CD11b+, 
CD64+, Ly6C-, MHC Class II+ cells) were identified in the separate compartments by 
flow cytometry. Pooled data depicting absolute numbers (unpaired Mann-Whitney 
tests, n=4). g) Fluorescence microscopy images of demonstrating CD68 staining 
(red) of colonic intestinal sections. (DAPI nuclear staining in blue). On images m = 
muscularis and LP = lamina propria.  
 
 
Deleted: s
Comment [Office3]: “levels” is reserved for hierarchy. 
Deleted: levels 
Deleted: s
Formatted: Font:Italic
Comment [Office4]: Should this be a gene? 
Deleted: ,
Deleted: m
Deleted: L
Comment [Office5]: What is on the left and what is on 
the right? 
Comment [L6]: These are two example images showing 
the same thing 
Deleted: seen 
Comment [L7]: The figures have all been amended now 
to say d7 throughout 
Comment [Office8]: Some keys say “7d” and some say 
“d7.” Up to you if you want to go through and make it 
consistent. 
  
 
Supplementary figure 3. Gene expression profiles of mature colonic 
macrophages from antibiotic-treated and germ free mice. 
Mature colonic macrophages (Live CD45+SiglecF-Ly6G-CD11b+CD64+Ly6C-MHC 
Class II+ LP cells) from antibiotic-treated (7 days) and germ free mice were sorted by 
flow cytometry and mRNA for il6, tnfa, il23p19, il1b, il10, tgfb, aldh1a2, il10r, cd163, 
cd206, myd88, tlr4 and dectin-1 analyzed by qRT-PCR. Results are mean 
expression normalized to TATA binding protein (tbp) and shown relative to untreated 
(control) mice in all cases (dotted line). (*P<0.05, **P<0.01, Two-way ANOVA, n=4-9 
(antibiotics) and n=3-7 (germ-free)).  
 
 
 
Deleted:  
Comment [Office9]: At what time point? 
Deleted: levels 
Formatted: Highlight
Deleted: s
Deleted: TATA binding protein
Formatted: Font:Italic, Highlight
  
 
Deleted: 
Formatted: Font:(Default) Arial, Bold
 Supplementary figure 4. Sustained immune dysfunction in recolonized mice 
repolarizes immune responses to infection 
a) Mice were infected with Citrobacter rodentium and T-cell responses in the colon 
analyzed at 7 and 10 days post infection. Live CD45+CD3+CD4+ colonic T-cells were 
identified by flow cytometry and characterized for production of the cytokine IL-17A. 
Representative flow cytometry plots and pooled data are depicted (**P<0.01, non-
paired Mann-Whitney test, n=5-6). b) Mice were treated with antibiotics and 
subsequently recolonized for 20 days prior to infection with Citrobacter rodentium. 
Live CD45+CD3+CD4+ colonic T-cells were identified by flow cytometry and 
characterized for expression of the transcription factor FoxP3. Representative flow 
cytometry plots and pooled data are depicted (**P<0.01, non-paired Mann-Whitney 
test, n=6). c) Mice were treated with antibiotics and subsequently recolonized for 20 
days prior to infection with the intestinal helminth Trichuris muris, alongside non-
antibiotic treated mice. Live CD45+CD3+CD4+ colonic T-cells were identified by flow 
cytometry and characterized for expression of the transcription factor GATA3. 
Representative flow cytometry plots and pooled data are depicted (*P<0.05, Kruskal-
Wallis test, n=5).  
 
 
 
Deleted: s
  
 
Supplementary figure 5. Recolonization of antibiotic-treated mice causes long-
term disruption of the intestinal microbiota 
a) Principal coordinate analysis using Bray-Curtis metrics were performed on the 
taxonomic assignments from cecal stool samples from recolonized mice (red, A 
samples) at days 13, 20, 30 and 60 days following antibiotic treatment and age-
matched controls (dark blue, C samples). Results are shown as three individual 
experiments. b) Bar charts represent the relative abundance of the bacterial taxa. 
Bar colors represent different genus taxa, and bar heights signify the relative 
abundance of each taxon in colonic stool samples from control and recolonized mice 
(day 13, day 20, day 30 and day 60). 
 
 
 
Deleted: 
Formatted: Font:(Default) Arial, Bold
Deleted: a
Comment [Office10]: Please use American spelling in 
the figure (if possible to edit) 
Deleted: u
Deleted: lengths 
  
 
Supplementary figure 6. The short-chain fatty acid butyrate alleviates 
antibiotic-associated immune dysfunction.  
a) FACS sorted colonic macrophages (live CD45+ Siglec F- Ly6G- CD11b+ CD64+ 
Ly6C- MHC Class II+ cells) from control or recolonized mice (7 days, ±200mM 
butyrate) were cultured for 18 hours with 100 ng/ml LPS and secreted protein was 
measured in supernatants by cytometric bead array (Kruskal-Wallis test, n=5). b) 
Live CD45+CD3+CD4+ colonic T-cells were characterized from control mice and mice 
that had been recolonized for 20 days following antibiotic treatment. In some cases, 
antibiotics were supplemented with butyrate (200mM). CD3+CD4+ T-cell production 
of IFNg was determined by flow cytometry. Representative flow cytometry plots and 
pooled data are depicted (**P<0.01, ***P<0.001, Kruskal-Wallis test, n=12 (control 
and recolonized), n=6 (butyrate). All data shown are representative of at least two 
independent experiments. 
 
 
Deleted: 
Formatted: Font:(Default) Arial, Bold
Deleted: prevents 
Comment [Office11]: OK? 
Deleted: CBA; 
Deleted: unpaired Mann-Whitney
  
 
Supplementary figure 7.  Th1 polarization in recolonized il-10-/-  mice. 
Representative flow cytometry plots demonstrating IFNg and IL-17A production from 
CD3+CD4+ T-cells identified from the colonic lamina propria of control and 
recolonized mice, following stimulation with PMA and Ionomycin. Pooled data 
depicting ratio of IFNg to IL-17A producing T-cells following antibiotic treated and 
subsequent recolonization (20d) and proportions of CD4+ T-cells co-producing IFNg 
and IL-17A (*P<0.05, **P<0.01, unpaired Mann-Whitney tests, n=4-6 for all time 
points).  
 
 
Deleted: 
Deleted: 
... [1]
Formatted: Justified
Deleted: s
 Supplementary materials and methods 
 
Isolation of tissue leukocytes 
For the isolation of colonic lamina propria cells, colons were removed from mice, 
cleaned in PBS, chopped into 5mm sections and incubated three times in 2mM 
EDTA in HBSS to remove the epithelial compartment, then washed and incubated in 
1.25mg/ml collagenase D (Sigma), 0.85mg/ml collagenase V (Sigma) and 1mg/ml 
dispase (Gibco, Invitrogen) in RPMI-1640 (Thermofisher Scientific) for 30-35 minutes 
in a shaking incubator at 37°C.  
 
Isolation of mesenteric lymph node leukocytes 
For the isolation of mesenteric lymph node (MLN) cells, MLNs were removed from 
mice, chopped finely and incubated in 1mg/ml collagenase D (Sigma) for 35 minutes 
in a shaking incubator at 37°C.  
 
Separation of colonic lamina propria and muscularis 
Intestinal layers were separated as previously described (60) with some 
modifications. Briefly, intestines, harvested as described above, were incubated in 
calcium and magnesium free HBSS with 2% FCS and 1mM DTT in 50mL falcon 
tubes for 20 minutes at 37°C in a shaking incubator.  Tubes containing intestinal 
samples were vortexed and intestine samples were decanted into sieves before 
being returned to 50mL tubes containing calcium and magnesium free HBSS with 
2% FCS and 1.3mM EDTA and incubated for 45 minutes at 370C in a shaking 
incubator. Tubes containing intestinal samples were vortexed and intestine samples 
were decanted into sieves.  After DTT and EDTA incubations, intestinal tissue was 
separated under a dissecting microscope into muscularis and lamina propria 
layers.  Digestion of these separate layers continued as described above.  
 
Flow cytometric analysis and sorting of cells 
0.5-5 x 106 cells were stained at 4°C in the dark using the antibodies listed in 
Supplementary Table 1 and analysed using an LSR Fortessa cytometer (BD 
Biosciences) and FlowJo software (TreeStar). Colonic monocytes and macrophages 
were sorted using a FACS Aria III and a FACS Aria Fusion, as live gated 
Comment [Office12]: Should this and the next section 
be moved up near the mouse harvest sections? 
Comment [L13]: This has now been moved 
 CD45+SiglecF-Ly6G-CD11b+CD64+ cells to >98% purity and further subdivided into 
subsets based on expression of MHC class II and Ly6C. 
 
Quantitation of gene expression by real-time reverse transcription PCR 
Total RNA was extracted from monocytes and macrophages FACS-purified from the 
colons of individual mice using the RNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen). RNA were reverse 
transcribed to cDNA using the High Capacity RNA-to-cDNA Kit (ThermoFisher 
Scientific) and gene expression was assayed using quantitative reverse transcription 
PCR using PerfeCTa SYBR Green Fastmix (Quanta) on the QuantStudio 7 Flex 
Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) with the primers (Integrated DNA 
Technologies) detailed in Supplementary table 2. Gene expression levels were 
normalized to TATA binding protein (TBP). The mean relative gene expression was 
calculated using the 2-dDC(t) method.  
 
Bone-marrow derived macrophage generation 
Bone marrow progenitors were harvested from femurs and tibias of wild-type adult 
C57BL/6 mice and cultured for 6 days on petri dishes in the presence of macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF). Media and M-CSF were changed on day 3 and in 
some experiments media was supplemented with 1mM SCFA on day 5. Bone-
marrow derived macrophages were harvested on day 6 with 2mM EDTA.  
 
Cytometric bead array 
Intestinal macrophages were isolated by FACS and plated in round-bottomed 96-well 
tissue culture plates at 50,000 cells per well. The cells were cultured at 37ºC and 5% 
CO2 in 50µl complete RPMI (10% FCS) in the presence of 100ng/ml LPS (Sigma) ± 
500µM butyrate (Sigma). In other experiments, butyrate had been administered to 
mice with antibiotics in vivo as described above, prior to macrophage isolation. After 
18 hours, culture supernatants were collected and analysed for the presence of 
cytokine and chemokines using the Mouse Inflammation CBA kit (BD Biosciences). 
Data were acquired on an LSR Fortessa (BD Biosciences) and analysed using 
FCAP Array software (BD Biosciences).  
 
LPS stimulation of lamina propria cells in vitro 
Formatted: Highlight
Comment [Office14]: Sorted to what purity? 
 Colonic LP cells were incubated for 4.5 hours with monensin and Brefeldin A 
(Sigma) in the presence or absence of 1µg/ml LPS (Sigma). Monocytes and 
macrophages were then identified by flow cytometry and assessed for intracellular 
cytokine production following cell permeabilisation and fixation as described below.  
 
Assessment of cytokine production by T-cells 
Colonic LP cells were incubated for 4 hours with PMA, Ionomycin, and Golgistop 
(eBioscience) before being surface stained, fixed, and permeabilised prior to 
intracellular cytokine staining (eBioscience intracellular staining kit).  
 
Faecal DNA extractions, quantification and bacterial sequencing 
DNA was extracted from faecal pellets using the FastDNA SPIN Kit for Soil (MP 
Biomedicals) following the manufacturer’s instructions but incorporating an extension 
of the initial bead-beading time to three minutes. The concentration of bacterial DNA 
was quantified using Qubit and normalized to 5 ng/ml for all samples. Extracted DNA 
was used as a template for PCR amplification of the V1/V2 regions of the 16S rRNA 
gene as detailed in Supplementary Table 3. Amplification conditions of the PCR 
were: 1 cycle of 94°C 3 min and 25 cycles of 94°C for 45 s, 55°C for 15 s and 72°C 
for 30 s using a 96 well Thermal Cycler PCR machine. 16S RNA gene libraries were 
sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq platform with 250 bp paired end reads. 
 
Bacterial sequence processing 
All raw sequence reads were processed through quality control using FASTX-Toolkit 
(http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/) keeping a minimum quality threshold of 33 
for at least 50% of the bases. Reads that passed the threshold were aligned against 
SILVA database (version: SILVA_119_SSURef_tax_silva) (48) using BLASTN (49) 
(ncbi-blast-2.2.30+; Max e-value 10e-3) separately for both pairs. After performing 
the BLASTN alignment, all output files were imported and annotated using the 
paired-end protocol of MEGAN (50).  
 
Taxonomic annotation 
Parameter settings of “Min Score = 50”, “Top Percent  = 10” were applied to process 
BLAST files by MEGAN6. Reads which did not have any match to the respective 
Comment [Office15]: From Sigma? 
Formatted: Highlight
 database were placed under a “No hit” node, and reads that were originally assigned 
to a taxon that did not meet our selected threshold criteria were returned to higher 
nodes where the threshold was met using the lowest common ancestor (LCA) 
algorithm. After importing datasets into MEGAN, we obtained MEGAN-own “rma 
files” for each data set that were mapped onto NCBI taxonomy based on our 
selected threshold and the files were compared and analysed within MEGAN. 
 
Metabolite analysis 
All samples were thawed at room temperature and prepared for 1H nuclear magnetic 
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy by mixing 50mg±1mg faeces with 200µl NMR buffer 
(0.26g NaH2PO4 and 1.41g K2HPO4) made up in 100% D2O (100ml), containing 
0.1% NaN3 (100mg) and 1mM sodium 3-(Trimethylsilyl)-propiomate-d4 (TSP) as a 
chemical shift reference and 250µl D2O. All samples were vortexed and then 
centrifuged at 14,000rpm for 5 min, and the remaining supernatant was removed and 
used for semi-quantification of metabolites. The 1H NMR spectra were recorded at 
600MHz on aBruker Avance spectrometer (Bruker BioSpin Gmbh, Rheinstetten, 
Germany) running Topspin 2.0 software and fitted with a broadband inverse probe. 
1H NMR spectra were acquired with 512 scans, a spectral width of 12300 Hz and an 
acquisition time of 2.7s. The “noesypr1d” presaturation sequence was used to 
suppress the residual water signal with a low-power selective irradiation at the water 
frequency during the recycle delay. Spectra were transformed with a 0.3-Hz line 
broadening, manually phased, baseline corrected and referenced by setting the TSP 
methyl signal to 0 ppm. Filtered samples were transferred to NMR tubes with 100µl 
of NMR buffer and mixed well before reading using the parameters described above. 
All metabolites were quantified using the software Chenomx NMR suite 7.6 based on 
published literature (51-53) and by use of the 2D-NMR methods, COSY, HSQC and 
HMBC.  
 
Trichuris muris infections 
The maintenance, infection and recovery of Trichuris muris were as described 
previously (54). Briefly, stock infections were maintained in susceptible mouse 
strains and adult worms harvested at day 42 post infection (p.i.). In all experiments, 
C57BL/6 mice (control or recolonized (20 or 60 days)) were infected by oral gavage 
Comment [Office16]: Through what route? 
Formatted: Highlight
 with 200 embryonated eggs and worm burdens were assessed on day 21 or day 35 
p.i. Proximal colons (2cm section) were harvested in all cases for FACS analysis of 
adaptive immune responses.  
 
Citrobacter rodentium infections 
The nalidixic acid-resistant Citrobacter rodentium strain ICC169 (55) was grown 
overnight at 37°C in Luria broth (LB). C57BL/6 mice (control or recolonized (20 or 60 
days)) were inoculated with approximately 2x109 bacteria by oral gavage. CFUs 
were calculated in stool at days 3,5,7 and 10 during the experiment and in caecal 
tissue at the conclusion of the experiment, by plating mechanically homogenized 
samples on agar (Lennox formula, Sigma) plates containing 50µg/ml nalidixic acid. 
Colonization levels were normalized to stool and tissue weight.  
 
RNA sequencing and analysis 
Strand-specific RNA sequencing libraries were prepared using the Illumina workflow 
with the TruSeq stranded mRNA sample preparation kit. Paired-end reads (65 x 65 
bp) were generated from each sample and 48-192 million reads were obtained from 
each sample. The fastq files generated by a HiSeq4000 platform (Illumina) were 
analyzed with FASTQC and any low quality reads and contaminated barcodes were 
trimmed with Trimmomactic (56). All libraries were aligned to GRCm38.p4 mouse 
genome assembly using STAR-2.4.2 (57), and only uniquely mapped reads were 
used for differential gene expression analysis. The mapped reads were counted by 
genes with HTseq (58) against gencode.vM11.annotation.gtf. The differentially 
expressed genes were identified using DESeq2 (59) by pairwise comparisons 
between the experimental groups. The differentially expressed genes with a p-
adjusted value <0.05 were selected for further validation and analysis. For functional 
analysis, an R package of topGO and Ingenuity Pathway analysis was used.  RNA 
sequencing data were deposited in the ArrayExpress public database under 
accession number E-MTAB-7132.  
 
Assessment of cellular metabolism 
For real-time analysis of oxygen consumption rates (OCR), macrophages were 
analyzed using an XF-96 Extracellular Flux Analyser (Seahorse Bioscience) as 
Comment [Office17]: Added this to the Materials 
Availability; you can either remove here or leave it. 
 described in detail previously (41). Measurements were taken under basal conditions 
and following the sequential addition of 1µM oligomycin, 1.5µM fluoro-carbonyl 
cyanide phenylhydrazone (FCCP), 200µM etomoxir (Eto) and 100nM rotenone plus 
1µM antimycin A (R+A; all purchased from Sigma).  
 
Immunofluorescence microscopy 
Colon sections were drop fixed in 10% sucrose 4% pfa for 2 hours followed by 
transfer into 30% sucrose PBS for 6 hours. Fixed and dehydrated tissue was 
embedded in OCT and frozen in isopentane on dry ice. Frozen tissue blocks were 
stored at -80°C until use. Sections were cut at 8um using a cryostat (Leica 
CM3050S), mounted on to superfrost slides (Thermo Scientific), air-dried and stored 
at -80°C until use. On the day of staining, slides were brought to room temperature 
before staining. Sections were encircled with a pap pen (Daido Sangyo) and blocked 
with TSA Blocking Reagent (PerkinElmer) for 15 min. Sections were further blocked 
using avidin and biotin blocking solutions (Biolegend), each for 15 minutes. Sections 
were washed in Tris NaCl Tween (TNT) buffer pH7.5 with 0.03% trition-X between 
incubations. All incubations were performed in a humidified chamber at room 
temperature, apart from incubation with the primary antibody, which was performed 
at 4°C. Purified rat anti-CD68 (clone FA-11, Invitrogen) was diluted in TNT buffer 
with 1% BSA and applied to sections overnight at 4°C. The following day, after 
washing with TNT buffer, purified biotin-conjugated donkey anti-rat (Invitrogen) was 
applied for 2 hours at room temperature. Tyramide labelling was completed using a 
Molecular Probes TSA kit with HRP-streptavidin and AF555 tryamide according to 
manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by 
incubation in 0.3% H2O2 for 10 min. Sections were then incubated with streptavidin 
HRP for 30 minutes, followed by tyramide 555 labelling solution for 5 min. Sections 
were mounted in ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant with DAPI (Molecular Probes) and 
allowed to cure overnight at room temperature in the dark. 
 
Images were collected on a Zeiss Axioimager.D2 upright microscope using a 10x 
objective and captured using a Coolsnap HQ2 camera (Photometrics) through 
Micromanager software v1.4.23. Images were processed using ImageJ (NIH). 
 
 
Formatted: Highlight
Comment [Office18]: Please define at first mention. 
Formatted: Font color: Text 1, English (UK)
Deleted: 
 Supplementary table 1. Antibodies. 
Description of antibodies used in flow cytometry experiments, including clone and 
source.  
 
 
 
  
 
Supplementary table 2. qPCR primer sequences for macrophage gene 
expression. 
Description of primer sequences used to determine expression of particular genes by 
intestinal macrophages in qRT-PCR experiments.  
 
 
 
Deleted: ,
  
 
Supplementary table 3. Primer sequences for 16S bacterial sequencing. 
List of primer sequences for amplifying V1+V2 region of 16S rRNA gene using 
MiSeq Illumina in experiments to determine the composition of bacterial communities 
from colonic and cecal stool samples. 
Deleted: ,
Deleted: a
 Page 10: [1] Deleted 
Lizzie 
09/09/2018 19:29:00 
 
 
 
 
