 O P T O G E N E T I C S
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
Modulation of prefrontal cortex excitation/inhibition
balance rescues social behavior in CNTNAP2-deficient mice
Aslihan Selimbeyoglu,1 Christina K. Kim,1 Masatoshi Inoue,2 Soo Yeun Lee,2,3 Alice S. O. Hong,2
Isaac Kauvar,4 Charu Ramakrishnan,2 Lief E. Fenno,2,3 Thomas J. Davidson,2,3
Matthew Wright,3 Karl Deisseroth2,3,5*
Alterations in the balance between neuronal excitation and inhibition (E:I balance) have been implicated in the
neural circuit activity–based processes that contribute to autism phenotypes. We investigated whether acutely
reducing E:I balance in mouse brain could correct deficits in social behavior. We used mice lacking the CNTNAP2
gene, which has been implicated in autism, and achieved a temporally precise reduction in E:I balance in the
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) either by optogenetically increasing the excitability of inhibitory parvalbumin
(PV) neurons or decreasing the excitability of excitatory pyramidal neurons. Surprisingly, both of these distinct,
real-time, and reversible optogenetic modulations acutely rescued deficits in social behavior and hyperactivity
in adult mice lacking CNTNAP2. Using fiber photometry, we discovered that native mPFC PV neuronal activity
differed between CNTNAP2 knockout and wild-type mice. During social interactions with other mice, PV neuron
activity increased in wild-type mice compared to interactions with a novel object, whereas this difference was
not observed in CNTNAP2 knockout mice. Together, these results suggest that real-time modulation of E:I bal-
ance in the mouse prefrontal cortex can rescue social behavior deficits reminiscent of autism phenotypes.
INTRODUCTION
The autism spectrum disorders are characterized by highly hetero-
geneous clinical presentations and complex genetics. For this reason,
a fundamental goal of autism research is to identify a biological final
common pathway wherein the disparate genetic and pathophysiological
pathways may converge. In part, because of our ongoing failure to iden-
tify such a final common pathway, currently available pharmacological
interventions used in autism patients have not been able to address the
underlying disorder itself—instead addressing only comorbid symp-
toms with varying degrees of success (1). There remain no approved
pharmacological interventions for treating the core symptoms of autism,
namely, communication difficulties, social challenges, and restricted,
repetitive behaviors (2).
Recently developed tools for circuit-level interventions (3) may open
up new possibilities for identifying and targeting shared mechanisms
in autism. An altered balance in neuronal excitation and inhibition (E:I
balance) is commonly invoked as a possible final common pathway in
autism (4), with clues coming from anatomy (5–7), as well as from
genetics, physiology, and behavior in humans and rodents. Supporting
evidence for this concept includes observations in postmortem human
brain tissue of a decreased number of parvalbumin (PV) neurons in the
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) (8), a decreased expression of mRNAs
encoding receptors for the inhibitory neurotransmitter g-aminobutyric
acid (GABA) (9), a decreased ratio of GABA to glutamate (an excitatory
neurotransmitter) (10), increased resting-state activity in the frontal
cortex (11, 12), and behavioral or epidemiological changes that suggest
increased excitation including hypersensitivity to sensory stimuli and
comorbidity with epilepsy (1). Mouse models carrying mutations
known to cause autism in humans also point to a decreased number
of cortical inhibitory interneurons (especially PV neurons) and decreased
GABAergic transmission (1), as well as increased gamma frequency
rhythmicity under baseline (nonstimulus-evoked) conditions. The lat-
ter phenomenon may be relevant to PV neurons (13, 14) and has also
been observed in patients with autism (15–20). However, this E:I bal-
ance must be interpreted in the context of specific cells and circuits
(21). Causal demonstration of improvements in core behavioral deficits
after restoration of cellular E:I balance with real-time modulation of spe-
cific circuitry in a genetic mouse model of autism needs to be achieved.
In previous work that may help to guide attention to particular brain
circuits relevant to social behavior, it has been found that an increase
in E:I balance in the rodent mPFC leads to social behavior deficits
(22), which can be partially rescued by stimulation of PV neurons
(22). This previous work was entirely conducted in wild-type (WT)
animals and thus may have limited translational significance. Here,
we begin with a genetic mouse model lacking CNTNAP2 that exhibits
autism-like phenotypes, including social behavior deficits, together with
the common comorbidities of hyperactivity and seizures and reduced
interneuron density in cortical and striatal brain regions (23). For
real-time interrogation of neuronal circuits during social behavior, we
used engineered microbial opsin tools, specifically the stabilized step-
function opsin (SSFO) (22) or the step-function inhibitory opsin
SwiChR++ (24). We used these tools to genetically target inhibitory
PV or excitatory pyramidal (PYR) neurons, respectively, together with
fiber photometry, to record real-time neural activity signals in the pre-
frontal cortex of CNTNAP2 knockout (KO) mice.
RESULTS
Characterization of the engineered microbial opsin SSFO in
mPFC PV neurons
To specifically and stably decrease cellular E:I balance in mPFC, we first
sought to target PV neurons in mice lacking CNTNAP2, which re-
quired generation of new mouse lines. We bred PV::Cre homozygous
1Neuroscience Program, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 2Depart-
ment of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 3Depart-
ment of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305, USA. 4Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA 94305, USA. 5Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA 94305, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: deissero@stanford.edu
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Selimbeyoglu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah6733 (2017)
2 August 2017
1 of 10
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 female mice with CNTNAP2 KO male mice; after several generations,
PV::Cre homozygous/CNTNAP2 homozygous KO and WT littermates
were obtained along with PV::Cre homozygous/CNTNAP2 heterozy-
gous mice, which were bred for subsequent generations (Fig. 1A). We
then injected AAV5-EF1a::DIO-SSFO-eYFP to specifically express the
microbial opsin SSFO in mouse PV neurons (Fig. 1B).
SSFO is a double-mutant excitatory channelrhodopsin that was
engineered to have slow off-kinetics (22). Upon activation with a
A
E
F
H
I
G
J
K
B
C
D 
Fig. 1. Generation of PV::Cre/CNTNAP2 mice and characterization of SSFO properties in mPFC PV neurons. (A) Breeding strategy to generate PV::Cre/CNTNAP2
mice is shown. Only the combination of genotypes that were chosen for the next breeding step is shown. PV::Cre+/+ CNTNAP2+/− mice were bred to generate WT and CNTNAP2 KO
mice. (B) AAV5-EF1a::DIO-SSFO-YFP expression in PV neurons in WT mice. Bilateral optical fiber implantation above the mPFC in WT mice is also shown. Scale bar, 100 mm.
(C) Representative short–time scale current-clamp trace of a PV neuron [identified by yellow fluorescent protein (YFP)expression]in a brain slice from the mPFC of a PV::Cre mouse,
prepared 2 to 3 weeks after injection of a Cre-dependent adeno-associated virus (AAV) encoding the SSFO. Trace shows the minimum amount of electrical current injection
(200 pA) required for spike generation. Resting potential, −72 mV. (D) Representative trace of the same PV neuron showing the much lower minimum current injection (50 pA)
required for spike generation during SSFO activation by blue light of wavelength 475 nm (28-nm bandpass) (light blue bar). Light power density was 8 mW/mm2. SSFO was
deactivated using red light of wavelength 632/622 nm (red bar). Light power density was 5 mW/mm2. (E) Bar graph summarizing the electrical current needed to induce spiking
without or with SSFO activation (n = 8 cells) (table S1). (F) Representative extended–time scale voltage-clamp trace of an SSFO-expressing PV neuron after blue light and red light
application. Cell was held at −77 mV. (G) Representative current-clamp trace of same cell after blue and red light application. Note the lack of directly elicited spiking. (H) Voltage-
clamp studies showing SSFO-induced initial peak and final steady-state photocurrent amplitude (n = 8 cells). Resting potential of cells held in voltage clamp at −80 mV is shown (table
S2). (I) Current-clamp studies showing SSFO-induced initial peak and final steady-state depolarization (n = 8 cells) (table S3). (J) Sample traces showing stable, high-fidelity action
potential generation in a PV neuron expressing SSFO after blue light delivery, combined with increasing amounts of electrical current injection (5-ms pulses, 20-Hz frequency),
followed by deactivation with red light. Current amplitude was applied in 250-pA steps, beginning at 250 pA. In all cases, spiking persisted for 60 s until experimental termination of
the costimulation. (K) Bar graph summary of spike fidelity (spikes per 5-ms current pulse) throughout the entire SSFO activation protocol, in combination with the varying electrical
current injection steps, as shown in (J). n = 7 cells from WT mice; P = 0.101 by Kruskal-Wallis H test (table S4). Bar graphs in (E), (H), (I), and (K) are presented as mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05 by
paired t test.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Selimbeyoglu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah6733 (2017)
2 August 2017
2 of 10
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 pulse of blue light, SSFO induces stable subthreshold depolarization
of neurons without directly driving action potentials, which elevates
the excitability and strengthens the influence of targeted cells (22).
Because of a channel closure time constant of ~30 min, the higher
probability of spiking is stable after a single light flash over the pe-
riod required for complex behavioral testing, unless the channel is
switched off by yellow light (22). We found that activation of SSFO
expressed by mouse PV neurons, when compared to no-SSFO activa-
tion (Fig. 1C), resulted in the neurons requiring lower inward-current
amplitudes to generate action potentials (Fig. 1D) (with SSFO, 153.1 ±
22.4 pA; without SSFO, 221.9 ± 20.8 pA; n = 8; Fig. 1E). This indicated
the utility of SSFO for favoring excitability of the inhibitory neuronal
population.
To further validate this approach, we characterized SSFO activity
in greater detail. Blue light delivery reliably generated prolonged photo-
currents (initial peak: 93.7 ± 19.9 pA; final steady state: 94.7 ± 20.0 pA;
n = 8), which corresponded to stable subthreshold depolarization in
current-clamp recordings (peak: 8.9 ± 1.8 mV; steady state: 8.23 ±
1.9 mV), and was immediately reversible by red light (Fig. 1, F to I). Be-
cause SSFOs have been optimized for extended excitability, we sought
to ensure that mouse PV neurons would be able to sustain action
potential generation over long time scales. We provided electrical stim-
ulationbyintracellularcurrentinjectionthroughthepatch-clamppipette
during light-induced depolarization to examine prolonged time scale
spiking, spanning a range from moderate (250 pA) to large (1000 pA)
injected currents. We found that all tested cells were able to generate
stable spike trains even when large-amplitude (1000 pA) pulses were ap-
plied (no depolarization block was seen; spike probability, 91.3 ± 8.5%
with 250-pA current injection, 100% with 500 pA, 100% with 750 pA,
and 100% with 1000 pA) (Fig. 1, J and K).
Rescue of autism-like behaviors in CNTNAP2-deficient mice
Given that an increase in E:I balance in genetic mouse models of
autism has been suggested to underlie social behavior deficits
(23, 25, 26), we hypothesized that reducing cortical E:I balance in
CNTNAP2 KO mice could improve social deficits. We selectively
expressed SSFO in PV neurons and implanted bilateral optical fibers
into the mPFC of WT and CNTNAP2 KO mice. To bias excitability
of PV neurons, we applied a 2-s light pulse (473 nm); immediately
after light stimulation, we initiated a 10-min social exploration test
(Fig. 2A).
CNTNAP2 KO mice exhibited a profound deficit in social inter-
actions at baseline [one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), Dunnett’s
pairwise comparison to control; WTbaseline versus KObaseline, P < 0.05;
over the first 10 interaction bouts; Fig. 2B]. Strikingly, reducing mPFC
cellular E:I balance with SSFO rescued this social deficit (KObaseline
versus KOstimulation, P < 0.0001; Fig. 2B). Similar effects were seen over
the entire 10-min interaction period (one-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s pair-
wise comparison to control; WTbaseline versus KObaseline, P < 0.05; Fig.
2C). The significant differences in social exploration between WT
and CNTNAP2 KO mice (23) were rescued through SSFO activation
(KObaseline versus KOstimulation, P < 0.05; Fig. 2C). In addition to total
social interaction time differences, we also noted that mean social-bout
duration was significantly shorter in KO mice compared to WT mice in
the absence of SSFO stimulation (one-way ANOVA, Dunnett’spairwise
comparison to control; WTbaseline versusKObaseline, P< 0.05); afterSSFO
activation, social exploration per bout was fully restored in CNTNAP2
KO mice (one-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s pairwise comparison to control;
KObaseline versus KOstimulation, P < 0.01; Fig. 2D).
CNTNAP2 KO mice have been previously reported to show greater
locomotor activity than WT littermates in the open-field test (23);
hyperactivity symptoms can be up to 85% comorbid with autism
in clinical populations (27). We observed that CNTNAP2 KO mice
were hyperactive compared to WT littermates during social behavior
bouts (one-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s pairwise comparison; WTbaseline
versus KObaseline, P < 0.001; Fig. 2E). We found that reducing E:I balance
in the mPFC through SSFO activation in PV neurons corrected this
key behavioral phenotype (one-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s pairwise com-
parison; KObaseline versus KOstimulation, P < 0.05; Fig. 2E).
Next, to test whether manipulation of E:I balance was essential for
reversal of the social behavior deficits, we sought to reduce cortical E:I
balance by an independent, but equally temporally precise, optogenetic
method. In this case, we decreased the excitability of excitatory PYR
neurons in the mPFC of WT or CNTNAP2 KO mice. We selectively
expressed SwiChR++, a blue light–activated bistable chloride channel,
in PYR neurons by injection of AAV8-CKIIa-SwiChR++-eYFP into
the mPFC (targeted as shown in fig. S1). Taking into account the
channel closure rate of ~115 s, we delivered 1-s pulses of 473-nm
wavelength light at 1-min intervals during the 10-min social exploration
test to achieve sustained inhibition of PYR cells (Fig. 2F).
Notably, the behavioral results after PYR neuron inhibition were
concordant with the effects of PV neuron activation in the mPFC of
CNTNAP2 KO mice. Upon SwiChR++ activation, CNTNAP2 KO mice
interacted longer with littermates during the first 10 bouts of the social
exploration test (one-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s pairwise comparison;
WTstimulation versus KObaseline, P < 0.01; KObaseline versus KOstimulation,
P < 0.05; Fig. 2G). The effects of increased inhibition of PYR neurons
became more evident over the 10-min duration of the test (one-way
ANOVA, Dunnett’s pairwise comparison; WTbaseline versus KObaseline,
P < 0.05; KObaseline versus KOstimulation, P < 0.05; Fig. 2H). Mean social-bout
duration (length of individual interaction periods) was also rescued upon
SwiChR++ activation (WTbaseline versus KObaseline, P < 0.05; KObaseline ver-
sus KOstimulation, P < 0.05; Fig. 2I). Differences in locomotor activity in the
observation arena between CNTNAP2 KO and WT mice were eliminated
upon inhibition of PYR neurons by SwiChR++ activation (WTbaseline ver-
sus KObaseline, P < 0.05; KObaseline versus KOstimulation, P > 0.05; Fig. 2J).
To test for the specificity of the two optogenetic manipulations on
cellular E:I balance and social behavior, we performed object interaction
tests (fig. S2, A to D). After optogenetic manipulation, we observed
specificity for an increase in social interactions compared to interactions
with inanimate objects with no difference seen in object interaction
times. Optogenetic manipulations of E:I balance trended toward reduced
object exploration behavior in the CNTNAP2 KO animals (two-way
ANOVA treatment-genotype interaction; SSFO cohort, F1,32 = 1.348,
P = 0.2542; fig. S2B; SwiChR++ cohort, F1,27 = 0.0025, P = 0.9599; fig.
S2D). As a further test, we assessed hyperactivity independent of social
behaviors in the open-field chamber test (fig. S3). CNTNAP2 KO
animals were hyperactive in the open-field test compared to WT litter-
mates (one-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s pairwise comparison; WTbaseline
versus KObaseline, P < 0.001 for both SSFO and SwiChR++ cohorts;
fig. S3, A and B, respectively). This phenotypic difference was no longer
detectable after optogenetic modulation of cellular E:I balance (one-way
ANOVA, Dunnett’s pairwise comparison to control; WTstimulation ver-
sus KOstimulation, P > 0.05 for both SSFO and SwiChR++ cohorts).
Neurophysiological activity in freely moving mice
To explore underlying neural activity signatures, we sought to track and
quantify local neural circuit activity in freely moving mice using fiber
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Selimbeyoglu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah6733 (2017)
2 August 2017
3 of 10
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 SSFO activation in PV neurons (473 nm)
SwiChR++ activation in PYR neurons (473 nm)
Social exploration duration (s)
(first 10 bouts)
Social exploration duration (s)
(total duration)
Social exploration duration (s)
(total duration)
Social exploration duration (s)
(first 10 bouts)
Fig. 2. SSFO or SwiChR++
modulation of mPFC neu-
ronsandrescueofsocialbe-
havior deficits in CNTNAP2
KO mice. (A) Testing of so-
cial interaction behavior
for 10 min in mouse pairs
matched by genotype and
sex is shown. A single 2-s,
473-nm pulse of blue light
was administered immedi-
ately before the behavioral
test in the stimulation con-
dition. (B) The duration of
social explorations during
the first 10 interaction bouts
with or without SSFO stim-
ulation is shown (WTbaseline
versus KObaseline, P < 0.05;
KObaseline versus KOstimulation,
P < 0.0001) (table S5). In (B)
to (J), two-way ANOVA was
used, followed by Dunnett’s
pairwise comparisons; param-
eter interaction values and
n values (at least eight pairs
per condition) for each arm
are shown in the Supple-
mentary Materials. (C) Du-
ration of social explorations
during the total 10 min of
the test with and without
SSFO stimulation (WTbaseline
versus KObaseline, P < 0.05;
KObaseline versus KOstimulation,
P < 0.05) (table S6). (D) Mean
social exploration duration
per interaction bout with and
without SSFO stimulation
(WTbaseline versus KObaseline,
P < 0.05; KObaseline versus
KOstimulation, P < 0.01) (table
S7). (E) Mean social approach
velocity with and without
SSFO stimulation (WTbaseline
versus KObaseline, P < 0.001;
KObaseline versus KOstimulation,
P < 0.05) (table S8). (F) So-
cial interaction test after
a 1-s intermittent 473-nm
pulse of blue light to stim-
ulate the inhibitory chan-
nelrhodopsin SwiChR++.
(G) Social exploration du-
ration during the first 10 in-
teraction bouts with and
without inhibitory SwiChR++
stimulation (WTstimulation ver-
sus KObaseline, P < 0.01; KObaseline versus KOstimulation, P < 0.05) (table S9). (H) Social exploration duration during the total length of the test (10 min) with and without inhibitory
SwiChR++ stimulation (WTbaseline versus KObaseline, P < 0.05; KObaseline versus KOstimulation, P < 0.05) (table S10). (I) Mean social exploration duration per interaction bout with and
without inhibitory SwiChR++ stimulation (WTbaseline versus KObaseline, P < 0.05; KObaseline versus KOstimulation, P < 0.05) (table S11). (J) Mean social approach velocity with and
without inhibitory SwiChR++ stimulation (WTbaseline versus KObaseline, P < 0.05; KObaseline versus KOstimulation, P > 0.05) (table S12). Two separate cohorts were tested and
included in the analyses. Data are presented as mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Selimbeyoglu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah6733 (2017)
2 August 2017
4 of 10
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 photometry, a technique that allows recording of cell population Ca2+
signals linked to neural activity (28, 29). A genetically encoded Ca2+
indicator designed to change fluorescence properties during neuronal
firing (30–32) was expressed in PV neurons of the mPFC. Fluorescence
fluctuations were then measured using an optical fiber implanted in
freely moving mice. Altered neuronal activity within the targeted pop-
ulation of neurons was then plotted as a transient change in fluores-
cence normalized to baseline (dF/F) and could be time-locked to the
behavior of mice on fast time scales (hundreds of milliseconds) (29, 33).
We tested the method’s capability to track physiological effects of opto-
genetic E:I balance modulation by exploring whether SSFO activation in
local mPFC PV neurons would modulate projection-neuron activity in
freely moving mice. Mouse brain fiber photometry recordings of cortical
projections to striatum were chosen as the activity readout because dis-
ruptions in corticostriatal circuitry have been implicated in the CNTNAP2
KO mouse phenotype (23). We found that upon SSFO activation in
mPFC PV neurons, activity along the corticostriatal projections, defined
by origin (mPFC) and target (striatum), was reduced (fig. S4) in a tem-
porally precise and reversible fashion.
We then sought to use this method to define naturally occurring
activity in mPFC PV neurons during social interactions with mice and
novel objects. In freely moving mice (33) that expressed the genetically
encoded Ca2+ indicator GCaMP6f in mPFC PV neurons (Fig. 3A), we
continuously recorded Ca2+ signals (after acquisition of a baseline) while
behaviorally testing novel social interactions with nonlittermates, famil-
iar social interactions with littermates, and novel object interactions,
each separated by rest periods (Fig. 3B and movies S1 and S2). Record-
ings were acquired over a continuous session to counteract variability in
the baseline activity.
In freely moving WT and CNTNAP2 KO animals, activity of PV
neurons increased in response to all three types of interactions (Fig.
3, C and E). Upon introduction of a nonlittermate mouse to a freely
moving WT or CNTNAP2 KO mouse, there was a consistent increase
in PV neuron activity (Fig. 3, D and F). Parallel trends were observed
with familiar social interactions and novel object interactions in both
genotypes (fig. S5). As expected, the total novel social interaction time
in CNTNAP2 KO mice was lower than in WT mice, whereas mean
duration of the interaction time with a novel object or familiar litter-
mates did not significantly differ (novel social interaction, P = 0.0110;
WT, n = 6; KO, n = 10; familiar social interaction, P = 0.5506; WT, n =
6; KO, n= 7; novelobjectinteraction, P= 0.1965; WT, n= 10; KO,n= 11)
(Fig. 3G). The difference in social interaction times was apparent within
the first 10 interaction bouts (initial 10 bouts, P = 0.0301; final 10 bouts,
P = 0.2741; WT, n = 6; KO, n = 9) (Fig. 3H).
In WT mice, PV neuron activity was higher during novel (non-
familiar) social interactions compared to novel object interactions;
in CNTNAP2 KO mice, PV neuronal activity was similar under both
conditions (WT, n = 5; novel social interaction versus novel object in-
teraction, P = 0.0033; KO, n = 5; novel social interaction versus novel
object interaction, P = 0.2059) (Fig. 3I). Moreover, when novel social
interactions were compared to familiar social interactions, no significant
difference in PV neuron activity was observed in WT mice (WT, n = 5;
novel social interaction versus familiar social interaction, P = 0.8605)
(Fig. 3I, left). However, PV neurons in CNTNAP2 KO mice showed
increased activity upon introduction to a new mouse compared to a
familiar mouse (KO, n = 5; novel social interaction versus familiar social
interaction, P = 0.0240) (Fig. 3I, right). Neither WT nor CNTNAP2 KO
PV neurons showed changes in activity associated with altered locomo-
tion (WT, n = 5; prelocomotion versus postlocomotion, P = 0.9974; KO,
n = 5; prelocomotion versus postlocomotion, P = 0.5202) (fig. S6).
Together, these data demonstrate distinct underlying neural dynamics
of mPFC PV neurons in CNTNAP2 KO mice compared to WT mice,
concordant with a change in the E:I balance of mPFC PV neurons.
DISCUSSION
Demonstration of a causal link between targetable pathophysiological
pathways and clinically relevant symptoms is critical for testing transla-
tional ideas, but this process has been particularly challenging for neu-
ropsychiatric diseases such as autism. Several previous studies have
pointed to structural or functional abnormalities in inhibitory neurons
in genetic models of cognitive dysfunction; in some cases, behavioral
improvements were achieved through systemic pharmacological mod-
ulation of GABA transmission (19, 26, 34), but GABA modulation has
not yet been found to be clinically effective for treating the core social
interaction/communication and stereotyped behavioral symptoms of
autism (35).
Here, we report that acute and reversible reduction in cellular E:I
balance in the mPFC region of adult mouse brain, either by increasing
PV neuron excitability or reducing PYR neuron excitability, rescued
social behavior deficits in the CNTNAP2 KO autism-like mouse model.
We also observed, using fiber photometry in freely moving mice, differ-
ential mPFC PV neuron activity in CNTNAP2 KO mice compared to
WT animals. The observation that the activity of WT (but not CNTNAP2
KO) PV neurons increased more during social interactions compared
to novel-object interactions, together with previous observations that
PV neuron activity enhances the information-carrying capacity of mPFC
circuitry (14), may be consistent with a hypothesis that the complexity
of social interactions poses unique informational challenges for mPFC
circuitry. Novel social interactions may therefore normally require
robust and responsive E:I balance modulation by PV neurons, which
may fail to occur properly in autism-related conditions.
Fast-spiking PV neurons form synapses at and near the cell bodies
of PYR neurons, providing (among other circuit roles) feedforward
and feedback inhibition (36), gamma rhythm modulation (13, 14), gain
control over sensory responses (37–39), and output control over sub-
cortically projecting PYR neurons (40). Recent optogenetic elucidation
of these diverse circuit roles has led to the suggestion of PV neuron
involvement in multiple psychiatric disorders (41, 42), including not
only autism but also schizophrenia and anxiety, and broad potential
utility as a therapeutic target. Anxiety responses toward new social
stimuli in CNTNAP2 KO mice could have taken place in our study,
consistent with the ~16% comorbidity between autism and social anx-
iety disorder (43). CNTNAP2 KO mice have not been found to be more
anxious than WT littermates in a nonsocial light/dark box study (23),
but selective anxiety in response to social stimuli was not ruled out.
From a translational perspective, the ability to restore social behavior
in CNTNAP2 KO animals through PYR neuron inhibition or PV neu-
ron activation is notable because the PYR neuron intervention did not
require a transgenic (for example, Cre driver) line. The only require-
ment for expression of the transgene (the microbial opsin SwiChR++
in this case) by PYR neurons was a viral vector and promoter fragment
[calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IIa (CaMKIIa)], both
known to be effective for PYR neuron targeting in primates. Targeting
cell types in a well-defined area of the brain may thus represent a poten-
tially new strategy, contrasting in specificity with systemic pharmaco-
logical strategies (35). Pharmacological interventions that enhance GABA
receptor action directly affect inhibition at the neurotransmitter-receptor
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Selimbeyoglu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah6733 (2017)
2 August 2017
5 of 10
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 level, but GABA receptors are present on both excitatory and inhibitory
neurons. In contrast, modulation of the cellular E:I balance, which affects
the relative number of active excitatory or inhibitory neurons, may exert a
more refined influence on cortical processing. Future studies are required
to reveal the mechanistic interrelationships between these two E:I con-
cepts (excitatory/inhibitory synaptic inputs onto an individual neuron
versus excitable excitatory/inhibitory cells among a population of neu-
rons) and how various interventions may alter neural circuit dynamics
in autism and other disease states.
In-depth behavioral studies in nonhuman primates are needed to
demonstrate that interventions such as the optogenetic tools used in this
study would provide benefits for the wider range of social interactions
encountered by patients with autism and to address any potential ad-
verse effects on nonsocial behaviors. People with autism spectrum dis-
orders have difficulties in forming relationships with other people,
both with and without autism. Thus, future animal studies will be re-
quired where rodents interact with animals of diverse genotypes under
a broad range of conditions. In addition, to examine any potential ad-
verse effects of increased PV neuron activity or dampened PYR neu-
ron activity, a broad range of nonsocial behavioral assays should be
conducted in nonhuman primates.
Together, the results presented here support the notion that cortical
E:I imbalance may contribute to core behavioral disturbances in autism.
Future studies are required to explore whether E:I imbalance in other
brain regions, such as sensory associative areas, striatum, and hippocam-
pus (44), may be involved in the emergence of behavioral phenotypes
in the CNTNAP2 KO mice and whether similar pathophysiological
WT
KO
Time relative to social interaction (s)
Fig. 3. Differential mPFC PV neuron activity during exploratory behaviors in
CNTNAP2 KO and WT mice. (A) Left: Schematic showing viral targeting of mPFC PV
neurons for the purposes of fiber photometry recordings. Right: Neurons expressing the
fluorescent activity reporter GCaMP6f adjacent to the optical fiber. Scale bar, 150 mm.
(B) Behavioral test during 20 min of continuous fiber photometry recording. Animals
were presented with a sex- and age-matched new (non-cagemate) mouse (yellow), a
familiar (cagemate) mouse (blue), and a novel object (pink) for 3 or 4 min, with rest
periods in between. (C) Photometry traces from WT animals during the behavioral test.
Behavioral bouts are represented as colored lines with thickness reflecting duration of
the bout. The yellow panel below is a zoomed-in image of the corresponding trace.
(D) Representative plot showing the average photometry trace aligned to the start of
the social interaction for a WT animal. Black line represents mean dF/F (change in
fluorescence divided by baseline fluorescence) of the first 10 bouts. Gray lines corre-
spond to SE. (E) Photometry traces from CNTNAP2 KO animals during the behavioral
test. Behavioral bouts are represented as colored lines with thickness reflecting
their duration. The panel below is the zoomed-in image of the corresponding trace
above. (F) Representative plot showing the average photometry trace aligned to the
start of the interaction for a CNTNAP2 KO animal. Black line represents average mean
dF/F of the first 10 bouts. Gray lines correspond to SEM. (G) Mean total exploration time
during each condition [novel social interaction (yellow), Student’s t test, P = 0.01; WT,
n = 6; KO, n = 12; familiar social interaction (blue), P = 0.55; WT, n = 6; KO, n = 8; novel
object interaction (pink), P = 0.20; WT, n = 10; KO, n = 11] (table S13). (H) Mean novel
social exploration duration during the initial and final 10 bouts of the social interaction
behavior test (initial 10 bouts, Student’s t test, P = 0.03; final 10 bouts, P = 0.27; WT, n = 6;
KO, n = 9) (table S14). (I) Mean z-scored dF/F during the first 10 bouts. WT mice (left,
n = 5; novel social interaction versus novel object interaction, P = 0.003; novel social
interaction versus familiar social interaction, P = 0.86; familiar social interaction versus
novel object interaction, P = 0.04) and CNTNAP2 KO mice (right, n = 5; novel social
interaction versus novel object interaction, P = 0.21; novel social interaction versus
familiar social interaction, P = 0.0240; familiar social interaction versus novel object
interaction, P = 0.0012) (movies S1 and S2; note social PV recruitment in bothcases, but
to a greater extent than novel-object PV recruitment only for WT genotype as shown in
figure). Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used to compare combined bouts across all mice
for each condition. Data are presented as mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Selimbeyoglu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah6733 (2017)
2 August 2017
6 of 10
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 mechanisms occur in other genetic models of autism. These studies will
be critical to form a unified mechanistic and translational understand-
ing of the neurons and circuits that underlie autism spectrum disorders.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
A sample size of at least 16 mice (eight pairs) per group was used for
all optogenetic experiments; 5 mice per group were used for fiber
photometry studies. Animals were randomly assigned to treatment
with optogenetic stimulation. Both behavioral and photometry data
were analyzed entirely blinded to the condition, and we used consistent
blinded and readout-specific criteria to exclude animals from analysis.
First (for social or novel object), animals in which at least 10 bouts of
social interaction could not be acquired (or exhibiting seizure, escape, or
aggressive behaviors) were excluded (validated by follow-up analysis
revealing that the appearance of such behaviors led to scores at least
3 SD away from the mean). Second, for photometry recordings, exclu-
sions were made blinded to any knowledge of group or intervention,
only on the basis of looking at the entire trace before generation of aver-
aged plots aligned to behavioral epochs and eliminating those cases
where there was a clear baseline shift/motion artifact or loss of signal
(caused by patch cord twisting or loosening during the recording). To
prevent experimenter bias, behavioral data were automatically analyzed
where possible. Velocity of social approach was analyzed with TopScan
software (CleverSys Inc.); movement velocity and duration of time
spent in each zone were recorded and analyzed using a video tracking
system (Biobserve). Configuration settings for automated scoring were
kept the same for all subjects. Social and object interactions were ana-
lyzed manually; all analyses were performed by the same researcher
blinded to genotype and condition. For social and object interaction,
MATLAB scripts were written and used to reliably score, allowing the
researcher to push a key when the interaction began, hold onto the key
as the physical interaction continued, and release the key as soon as the
physical interaction ended. All graphs and numerical values in the
figures are presented as mean ± SEM. Each experiment was scored
twice, and means were used for statistical analysis.
Animals
Mice lacking the CNTNAP2 gene were obtained from D. Geschwind
(23). Mutant mice were bred with transgenic PV::Cre C57BL/6J mice.
The three obtained genotypes (Fig. 1A) were housed together, with
two to five same-sex littermates per cage. All mice were housed on a
reverse 12-hour light/dark cycle and were given food and water ad
libitum. All experimental protocols were approved by the Stanford
University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC)
following the National Institutes of Health guidelines for the care and
use of laboratory animals.
Acute slice electrophysiology
Three hundred–micrometer acute coronal slices were obtained from
virus-injected mice after intracardial perfusion with ice-cold, sucrose-
containing artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) containing 85 mM
NaCl, 75 mM sucrose, 2.5 mM KCl, 25 mM glucose, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4,
4 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM CaCl2, and 24 mM NaHCO3. Slices were kept in
sucrose-containing ACSF for 1 hour at 32° to 34°C and then transferred
to room temperature to an oxygenated standard ACSF solution con-
taining 123 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 26 mM NaHCO3, 2 mM CaCl2,
1 mM MgCl2, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, and 11 mM glucose. Electrophysio-
logical recordings were performed at 32° to 34°C with synaptic trans-
mission blockers D(−)-2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (25 mM), 2,3-
dihydroxy-6-nitro-7-sulfamoylbenzo[f]quinoxaline-2,3-dione (10 mM),
and gabazine (10 mM) added to the ACSF. Neurons were visualized
using an upright microscope (BX61WI, Olympus) with a 40× water-
immersion objective and infrared differential interference contrast
optics. Individual recordings were obtained from cells using fluorescent
protein expression to assay opsin expression. A SPECTRA X light
engine (Lumencor) was attached to the fluorescence port of the micro-
scope and used both to detect fluorescence and to deliver light pulses
for opsin activation. Light was filtered using a 475/28-nm filter for blue
light and a 633/22-nm filter for red light. Power densities of the blue and
red lights were 8 and 5 mW/mm2, respectively, measured with a power
meter (Thorlabs). Recordings were conducted in a dark room to min-
imize opsin activation from ambient light. Whole-cell recordings were
performed using patch-clamp pipettes pulled from borosilicate glass
capillaries (Sutter Instrument) with a horizontal puller (P-2000, Sutter
Instrument) and contained the following internal solution: 125 mM
K-gluconate, 10 mM KCl, 10 mM Hepes, 4 mM Mg3ATP, 0.3 mM
NaGTP, 10 mM phosphocreatine, and 1 mM EGTA. Values were cor-
rected for a liquid junction potential of +11.5 mV. Recordings were
made using a MultiClamp 700B amplifier (Molecular Devices), with
signals filtered at 4 kHz and digitized at 10 kHz with a Digidata
1440A analog-digital interface (Molecular Devices). Data were recorded
with pCLAMP 10.3 software (Molecular Devices) and analyzed with
pCLAMP 10.3 and SigmaPlot (SPSS). The electrical current needed
to induce spiking was obtained by injecting current in 25-pA steps
and recorded as the lowest amplitude that induced action potentials.
Peak photocurrent amplitude was measured within the beginning 3 s,
and the steady-state photocurrent amplitude was measured within the
last 3 s of a 1-min light pulse under voltage clamp. Electrical pulses for
examining spike generation probability during SSFO activation were
applied in 250-pA steps from 250 to 1000 pA. The electrical pulses were
applied with a 5-ms duration (with a 20-Hz frequency). Spike probabil-
ity for each cell, at each current step, was calculated as the percentage of
action potentials generated following the blue light pulses combined
with injected electrical pulses throughout the entire protocol length.
Paired t tests were used for statistics.
Stereotaxic virus injection and cannula implantation
All experimental and surgical protocols were approved by the Stanford
University’s IACUC. For all surgeries, stainless steel head plates and
ferrules were fixed to the skull using Metabond (Parkell). Mice were
anesthetized with 2.0% isoflurane and leveled using bregma and lambda
skull landmarks in a stereotaxic apparatus (Kopf Instruments). To
achieve cell type–specific opsin expression in the transgenic PV-2a-
Cre line, we cloned the opsin gene (SSFO) into a loxP/lox2722-flanked
(double-floxed), inverted open reading frame plasmid under control
of the elongation factor 1a (EF1a) promoter (pAAV-EF1a-DIO-SSFO-
eYFP). The virus was produced by the University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill Vector Core (map: https://web.stanford.edu/group/dlab/
optogenetics/sequence_info.html). For cell-specific expression in
PYR neurons, we cloned SwiChR++ under CaMKIIa promoter (pAAV-
CaMKIIa-SwiChR++-eYFP). mPFC (from bregma; 1.8 mm anterior,
0.35mmlateral,and−2.4mmventral)wastargetedusinga10-mlNanoFil
Hamilton syringe and 33-g beveled needle (World Precision Instru-
ments). One thousand nanoliters of the virus suspension was infused
at a rate of 150 nl/min into both hemispheres. After infusion, the needle
was kept at the injection site for 4 min and then slowly withdrawn. For
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Selimbeyoglu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah6733 (2017)
2 August 2017
7 of 10
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 mPFC PV neuron stimulation, mice were implanted with a 200-mm-
diameter 0.22–numerical aperture (NA) dual fiber-optic cannula
(Doric Lenses) directly above the mPFC at 1.8 mm [anterior-posterior
(AP)],0.35mm[medial-lateral(ML)],and−2.0mm[dorsal-ventral(DV)].
For fiber photometry recordings, PV neurons were targeted with AAVdj-
EF1a-DIO-GCaMP6f that was produced at the Stanford Gene Vector
and Virus Core (Stanford University). mPFC injections were performed
asdescribedabove,butunilaterally.Alow-fluorescence400-mm-diameter
0.48-NA mono fiber-optic cannula (Doric Lenses) was implanted at
1.8mm(AP),0.35mm(ML),and−2.4mm(DV).Cannulasweresecured
to the skullusingabaselayerofadhesive dentalcement (C&B-Metabond,
Parkell), followed by a second layer of cranioplastic cement (Ortho-Jet,
Lang). Behavioral experiments were conducted 2 weeks later for opto-
genetic stimulation and 3 weeks later for fiber photometry recordings to
allow for sufficient viral expression and postsurgery recovery.
Immunohistochemistry and confocal microscopy
For all cohorts, animals were anesthetized and transcardially perfused
with ice-cold 1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) followed by 4% para-
formaldehyde (PFA) in PBS. Brains were postfixed for 48 hours in 4%
PFA. Brains were sectioned into 100-mm-thick slices using a vibratome
and stored in cryoprotectant at 4°C in the dark until antibody staining.
Slices were washed three times for 10 min in PBS and mounted on mi-
croscope slides with PVA-DABCO. Images were acquired on a Leica
TCS SP5 scanning laser microscope.
Behavioral tests
All tests were performed during the dark phase, and animals were
allowed to acclimate to the behavior room for at least 2 days before
the beginning of behavioral testing. Both females and males were in-
cluded in behavioral tests. For optogenetic stimulation, a fiber-optic
patch cord (Doric Lenses) was connected to the chronically implanted
optical fiber on one side and a 473-nm solid-state laser diode on the
other side. A Master-8 pulse stimulator (A.M.P.I.) controlled the laser
output. Stimulation trials were conducted with the addition of a 2-s
pulse of 8-mW light from the tip of the fiber; the fiber was then de-
coupled before experimentation beginning with a 1-min acclimation
period (22). For fiber photometry recordings, a 3-m-long fiber-optic
patch cord was connected to the chronically implanted optical fiber
and suspended above the behavioral cage to allow animals to interact
and move freely during the experiment. To habituate and minimize
anxiety created through the environment, we placed each experimental
mouse individually in a novel cage for 10 min the day before the test.
Reciprocal social interaction
Mice were placed in a new cage simultaneously with a novel mouse
matched in age, genotype, and sex for 10 min (23). Both mice in the pair
were treated under the same experimental condition, either with stim-
ulation or without stimulation. The order of experimental condition
was counterbalanced between pairs, and conditions were separated by
24 hours. The time engaged in social interaction (nose-to-nose sniffing,
nose-to-anus sniffing, and following or crawling on/under each other)
for the pair (combining the behavior of both animals) was manually
scored by blind observation to genotype and condition. MATLAB
scripts were written and used to reliably score social interactions,
allowing the researcher to push a key when the interaction began, hold
onto the key asthe physical interaction continued, and release assoon as
the physical interaction ended. Each experiment was scored twice and
averaged to minimize human error, and the mean was used for statis-
tical analysis. Velocity of social approach was analyzed with TopScan
software (CleverSys Inc.). Mice that lost fiber-optic implants or mani-
fested seizures upon stimulation were excluded from analysis.
Novel object interaction
The novel object test was performed in a novel, clean cage using the
same general method with the social interaction assay. Instead of
presenting a stranger mouse, either a plastic ball or wooden block (of
equivalent size) was introduced to the animal’s home cage, and total
time spent investigating the object over 3 min was scored manually.
MATLAB scripts were used for more precise scoring, and the mean
resultsfromtwoindependentscoringsessionswereusedforfinalanalysis.
The type of object was switched between experiments. We counter-
balanced the condition and the object type between animals to prevent
anypotentialinherentpreferencesforagivenobjectinfluencingtheresults.
Open-field test
The open-field test was conducted on different cohorts of mice to mea-
sure the effect of optogenetic stimulation on anxiety-like responses and
general locomotor ability. The mice were placed in the chamber (50 ×
50 cm), and their movement was recorded and analyzed for 10 min
using a video tracking system (Biobserve). The center zone of the open-
field chamber was defined as the 23 × 23–cm central square area.
Fiber photometry recordings and analysis
As described previously (45, 46), we collected emitted fluorescence from
targeted brain regions using a single optical fiber while delivering exci-
tation light. We used multiple excitation wavelengths (488 and 405 nm)
modulated at distinct carrier frequencies to allow for ratiometric mea-
surements. Light collection, filtering, and demodulation were as pre-
viously described (45, 46). The ratiometric fluorescence signal was
calculated for each continuous behavioral recording with custom-
written MATLAB scripts. We fit a double exponential to a thresholded
version of the fluorescence time series and subtracted the best fit from
the unthresholded signal to account for slow bleaching artifacts (29).
We then calculated a single baseline fluorescence value as the median
of the entire trace (which robustly estimated the baseline fluorescence).
We calculated the normalized change in fluorescence (dF/F) by sub-
tracting the baseline fluorescence from the fiber fluorescence at each
time point and dividing that value by the baseline fluorescence. Within-
animal analyses were done by calculating z-scored dF/F and finding
the mean dF/F during each interaction bout (that is, mean dF/F from
the start of social interaction to the end). Next, we combined the first
10 bouts across all mice to measure mean z-scored dF/F for each geno-
type. To measure locomotion-induced activity changes, we calculated
the mean dF/F during 1 s before locomotion initiation and during first
1 s of locomotion and ran a paired t test on the average pre- and post-
locomotion values across animals.
Fiber photometry microscope setup, surgeries, and analysis
Frame-projected Independent-fiber Photometry (FIP) microscopy
was as previously described (29). Ca2+ signals were acquired through
a sCMOS (scientific complementary metal-oxide semiconductor)
camera that is connected to a series of dichroic mirrors integrated into
the microscope, which couples in various wavelengths of excitation
light sources. We unilaterally injected EF1a-DIO-SSFO-eYFP (300 nl)
and AAVdj-CKIIa-GCaMP6f (700 nl) into mPFC to specifically tar-
get PV interneurons and excitatory PYR neurons, respectively. With
this design, SSFO was expressed in local PV interneurons, whereas
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Selimbeyoglu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah6733 (2017)
2 August 2017
8 of 10
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 GCaMP6f traveled along the PYR neuron processes and was expressed
in striatal axon terminals. A 200-mm-diameter 0.22-NA mono fiber-
optic cannula was implanted above mPFC (AP, 1.8 mm; ML, 0.35 mm;
DV, −2.0 mm) for optogenetic stimulation, and a low-fluorescence
400-mm-diameter 0.48-NA mono fiber-optic cannula (Doric Lenses)
was implanted into dorsal striatum (AP, 0.7 mm; ML, 1.00 mm; DV,
−3.3mm)forFIPrecordings.WeconductedFIPrecordings6weeksafter
the surgeries to allow for sufficient expression in the axon terminals. On
thedayofrecording,onepatchcordwasattachedtotheimplantedmPFC
fiber on one side and to a 470-nm laser source on the other side. A second
patch cord connected the dorsal striatum fiber to the FIP microscope.
After a 2-min baseline recording, a 2-s, 8-mW, 470-nm pulse was
presented while the animals were freely moving. Recording continued
for 3 min after the pulse. Analysis was performed with custom MATLAB
scripts. Regions of interest were first manually drawn around the fiber on
the basis of a mean image of the movie. The average fluorescence intensity
was calculated for each fiber. dF/F was calculated as described (29). We
found individual Ca2+ events by thresholding fluorescence changes and
calculated event rate for each 20-s bin before and after the stimulation.
Statistical analysis
For each figure, a statistical test matching the structure of the experi-
ment and the structure of the data was used. Two-way ANOVA,
followed by Dunnett’s pairwise comparisons to controls, was used to
compare pairs of experimental conditions and genotypes with each other.
Nonparametric Wilcoxon rank-sum testing was used when normal var-
iance was not assumed. Variances within each group of data are shown
as SEM throughout. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P <
0.0001. Data presentation and statistical analysis were performed with
GraphPad Prism software.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/401/eaah6733/DC1
Fig. S1. Bilateral expression of SwiChR++ in mPFC.
Fig. S2. CNTNAP2 KO and WT mice interact with objects similarly both in the presence and
absence of SSFO recruitment.
Fig. S3. Both SSFO and SwiChR++ recruitments rescue CNTNAP2 KO hyperactivity in the open-
field test.
Fig. S4. Modulationof outgoingcorticostriatalactivity traffic bySSFO recruitmentinmPFCPVneurons.
Fig. S5. Temporal details of interactions with familiar mouse and novel object.
Fig. S6. Modulation of PV neuron activity with locomotion.
Table S1. Raw data of Fig. 1E.
Table S2. Raw data of Fig. 1H.
Table S3. Raw data of Fig. 1I.
Table S4. Raw data of Fig. 1K.
Table S5. Raw data of Fig. 2B.
Table S6. Raw data of Fig. 2C.
Table S7. Raw data of Fig. 2D.
Table S8. Raw data of Fig. 2E.
Table S9. Raw data of Fig. 2G.
Table S10. Raw data of Fig. 2H.
Table S11. Raw data of Fig. 2I.
Table S12. Raw data of Fig. 2J.
Table S13. Raw data of Fig. 3G.
Table S14. Raw data of Fig. 3H.
Movie S1. CNTNAP2 KO mPFC PV neuron activity during social behavior.
Movie S2. WT mPFC PV neuron activity during social behavior.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. J. A. Chen, O. Peñagarikano, T. G. Belgard, V. Swarup, D. H. Geschwind, The emerging
picture of autism spectrum disorder: Genetics and pathology. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 10,
111–144 (2015).
2. American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders:
DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association Publishing, 2013).
3. K. Deisseroth, A. Etkin, R. C. Malenka, Optogenetics and the circuit dynamics of
psychiatric disease. JAMA 313, 2019–2020 (2015).
4. J. L. R. Rubenstein, M. M. Merzenich, Model of autism: Increased ratio of excitation/
inhibition in key neural systems. Genes Brain Behav. 2, 255–267 (2003).
5. M. F. Casanova, D. P. Buxhoeveden, A. E. Switala, E. Roy, Minicolumnar pathology in
autism. Neurology 58, 428–432 (2011).
6. M. F. Casanova, D. P. Buxhoeveden, C. Brown, Clinical and macroscopic correlates of
minicolumnar pathology in autism. J. Child Neurol. 17, 692–695 (2002).
7. M. F. Casanova, A. S. El-Baz, S. S. Kamat, B. A. Dombroski, F. Khalifa, A. Elnakib, A. Soliman,
A. Allison-McNutt, A. E. Switala, Focal cortical dysplasias in autism spectrum disorders.
Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 1, 67 (2013).
8. E. Hashemi, J. Ariza, H. Rogers, S. C. Noctor, V. Martínez-Cerdeño, The number of
parvalbumin-expressing interneurons is decreased in the medial prefrontal cortex in
autism. Cereb. Cortex 27, 1931–1943 (2017).
9. S. H. Fatemi, T. J. Reutiman, T. D. Folsom, R. J. Rooney, D. H. Patel, P. D. Thuras, mRNA and
protein levels for GABAAa4, a5, b1 and GABABR1 receptors are altered in brains from
subjects with autism. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 40, 743–750 (2010).
10. M. Harada, M. M. Taki, A. Nose, H. Kubo, K. Mori, H. Nishitani, T. Matsuda, Non-invasive
evaluation of the GABAergic/glutamatergic system in autistic patients observed by
MEGA-editing proton MR spectroscopy using a clinical 3 Tesla instrument. J. Autism
Dev. Disord. 41, 447–454 (2011).
11. G. S. Dichter, J. N. Felder, J. W. Bodfish, Autism is characterized by dorsal anterior
cingulate hyperactivation during social target detection. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 4,
215–226 (2009).
12. M. K. Belmonte, M. Gomot, S. Baron-Cohen, Visual attention in autism families:
“Unaffected” sibs share atypical frontal activation. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 51, 259–276
(2010).
13. J. A. Cardin, M. Carlén, K. Meletis, U. Knoblich, F. Zhang, K. Deisseroth, L.-H. Tsai,
C. I. Moore, Driving fast-spiking cells induces gamma rhythm and controls sensory
responses. Nature 459, 663–667 (2009).
14. V. S. Sohal, F. Zhang, O. Yizhar, K. Deisseroth, Parvalbumin neurons and gamma rhythms
enhance cortical circuit performance. Nature 459, 698–702 (2009).
15. E. Milne, A. Scope, O. Pascalis, D. Buckley, S. Makeig, Independent component analysis
reveals atypical electroencephalographic activity during visual perception in individuals
with autism. Biol. Psychiatry 65, 22–30 (2009).
16. T. M. Snijders, B. Milivojevic, C. Kemner, Atypical excitation–inhibition balance in autism
captured by the gamma response to contextual modulation. NeuroImage Clin. 3, 65–72 (2013).
17. E. van Diessen, J. Senders, F. E. Jansen, M. Boersma, H. Bruining, Increased power of
resting-state gamma oscillations in autism spectrum disorder detected by routine
electroencephalography. Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 265, 537–540 (2015).
18. A. Dickinson, M. Bruyns-Haylett, M. Jones, E. Milne, Increased peak gamma frequency in
individuals with higher levels of autistic traits. Eur. J. Neurosci. 41, 1095–1101 (2015).
19. M. J. Gandal, J. Sisti, K. Klook, P. I. Ortinski, V. Leitman, Y. Liang, T. Thieu, R. Anderson,
R. C. Pierce, G. Jonak, R. E. Gur, G. Carlson, S. J. Siegel, GABAB-mediated rescue of altered
excitatory-inhibitory balance, gamma synchrony and behavioral deficits following
constitutive NMDAR-hypofunction. Transl. Psychiatry 2, e142 (2012).
20. J. C. Edgar, Y.-H. Chen, M. Lanza, B. Howell, V. Y. Chow, K. Heiken, S. Liu, C. Wootton,
M. A. Hunter, M. Huang, G. A. Miller, J. M. Cañive, Cortical thickness as a contributor to
abnormal oscillations in schizophrenia? NeuroImage Clin. 4, 122–129 (2014).
21. P. E. Rothwell, M. V. Fuccillo, S. Maxeiner, S. J. Hayton, O. Gokce, B. K. Lim, S. C. Fowler,
R. C. Malenka, T. C. Südhof, Autism-associated neuroligin-3 mutations commonly impair
striatal circuits to boost repetitive behaviors. Cell 158, 198–212 (2014).
22. O. Yizhar, L. E. Fenno, M. Prigge, F. Schneider, T. J. Davidson, D. J. O’Shea, V. S. Sohal,
I. Goshen, J. Finkelstein, J. T. Paz, K. Stehfest, R. Fudim, C. Ramakrishnan, J. R. Huguenard,
P. Hegemann, K. Deisseroth, Neocortical excitation/inhibition balance in information
processing and social dysfunction. Nature 477, 171–178 (2011).
23. O. Peñagarikano, B. S. Abrahams, E. I. Herman, K. D. Winden, A. Gdalyahu, H. Dong,
L. I. Sonnenblick, R. Gruver, J. Almajano, A. Bragin, P. Golshani, J. T. Trachtenberg, E. Peles,
D. H. Geschwind, Absence of CNTNAP2 leads to epilepsy, neuronal migration
abnormalities, and core autism-related deficits. Cell 147, 235–246 (2011).
24. A. Berndt, S. Y. Lee, J. Wietek, C. Ramakrishnan, E. E. Steinberg, A. J. Rashid, H. Kim, S. Park,
A. Santoro, P. W. Frankland, S. M. Iyer, S. Pak, S. Ährlund-Richter, S. L. Delp, R. C. Malenka,
S. A. Josselyn, M. Carlén, P. Hegemann, K. Deisseroth, Structural foundations of
optogenetics: Determinants of channelrhodopsin ion selectivity. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 113, 822–829 (2016).
25. H.-T. Chao, H. Chen, R. C. Samaco, M. Xue, M. Chahrour, J. Yoo, J. L. Neul, S. Gong, H.-C. Lu,
N. Heintz, M. Ekker, J. L. R. Rubenstein, J. L. Noebels, C. Rosenmund, H. Y. Zoghbi,
Dysfunction in GABA signalling mediates autism-like stereotypies and Rett syndrome
phenotypes. Nature 468, 263–269 (2010).
26. S. Han, C. Tai, R. E. Westenbroek, F. H. Yu, C. S. Cheah, G. B. Potter, J. L. Rubenstein,
T. Scheuer, H. O. de la Iglesia, W. A. Catterall, Autistic-like behaviour in Scn1a+/− mice and
rescue by enhanced GABA-mediated neurotransmission. Nature 489, 385–390 (2012).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Selimbeyoglu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah6733 (2017)
2 August 2017
9 of 10
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 27. D. O. Lee, O. Y. Ousley, Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder symptoms in a clinic
sample of children and adolescents with pervasive developmental disorders. J. Child
Adolesc. Psychopharmacol. 16, 737–746 (2006).
28. K. Schulz, E. Sydekum, R. Krueppel, C. J. Engelbrecht, F. Schlegel, A. Schröter, M. Rudin,
F. Helmchen, Simultaneous BOLD fMRI and fiber-optic calcium recording in rat neocortex.
Nat. Methods 9, 597–602 (2012).
29. C. K. Kim, S. J. Yang, N. Pichamoorthy, N. P. Young, I. Kauvar, J. H. Jennings, T. N. Lerner,
A. Berndt, S. Y. Lee, C. Ramakrishnan, T. J. Davidson, M. Inoue, H. Bito, K. Deisseroth,
Simultaneous fast measurement of circuit dynamics at multiple sites across the
mammalian brain. Nat. Methods 13, 325–328 (2016).
30. L. Tian, S. A. Hires, T. Mao, D. Huber, M. E. Chiappe, S. H. Chalasani, L. Petreanu,
J. Akerboom, S. A. McKinney, E. R. Schreiter, C. I. Bargmann, V. Jayaraman, K. Svoboda,
L. L. Looger, Imaging neural activity in worms, flies and mice with improved GCaMP
calcium indicators. Nat. Methods 6, 875–881 (2009).
31. J. Akerboom, T.-W. Chen, T. J. Wardill, L. Tian, J. S. Marvin, S. Mutlu, N. C. Caldéron,
F. Esposti, B. G. Borghuis, X. R. Sun, A. Gordus, M. B. Orger, R. Portugues, F. Engert,
J. J. Macklin, A. Filosa, A. Aggarwal, R. A. Kerr, R. Takagi, S. Kracun, E. Shigetomi, B. S. Khakh,
H. Baier, L. Lagnado, S. S.-H. Wang, C. I. Bargmann, B. E. Kimmel, V. Jayaraman, K. Svoboda,
D. S. Kim, E. R. Schreiter, L. L. Looger, Optimization of a GCaMP calcium indicator for neural
activity imaging. J. Neurosci. 32, 13819–13840 (2012).
32. T.-W. Chen, T. J. Wardill, Y. Sun, S. R. Pulver, S. L. Renninger, A. Baohan, E. R. Schreiter,
R. A. Kerr, M. B. Orger, V. Jayaraman, L. L. Looger, K. Svoboda, D. S. Kim, Ultrasensitive
fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity. Nature 499, 295–300 (2013).
33. L. A. Gunaydin, L. Grosenick, J. C. Finkelstein, I. V. Kauvar, L. E. Fenno, A. Adhikari,
S. Lammel, J. J. Mirzabekov, R. D. Airan, K. A. Zalocusky, K. M. Tye, P. Anikeeva,
R. C. Malenka, K. Deisseroth, Natural neural projection dynamics underlying social
behavior. Cell 157, 1535–1551 (2014).
34. R. Tyzio, R. Nardou, D. C. Ferrari, T. Tsintsadze, A. Shahrokhi, S. Eftekhari, I. Khalilov,
V. Tsintsadze, C. Brouchoud, G. Chazal, E. Lemonnier, N. Lozovaya, N. Burnashev,
Y. Ben-Ari, Oxytocin-mediated GABA inhibition during delivery attenuates autism
pathogenesis in rodent offspring. Science 343, 675–679 (2014).
35. N. Brondino, L. Fusar-Poli, C. Panisi, S. Damiani, F. Barale, P. Politi, Pharmacological
modulation of GABA function in autism spectrum disorders: A systematic review of
human studies. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 46, 825–839 (2016).
36. F. Pouille, M. Scanziani, Enforcement of temporal fidelity in pyramidal cells by somatic
feed-forward inhibition. Science 293, 1159–1163 (2001).
37. N. R. Wilson, C. A. Runyan, F. L. Wang, M. Sur, Division and subtraction by distinct cortical
inhibitory networks in vivo. Nature 488, 343–348 (2012).
38. B. V. Atallah, W. Bruns, M. Carandini, M. Scanziani, Parvalbumin-expressing interneurons
linearly transform cortical responses to visual stimuli. Neuron 73, 159–170 (2012).
39. S.-H. Lee, A. C. Kwan, S. Zhang, V. Phoumthipphavong, J. G. Flannery, S. C. Masmanidis,
H. Taniguchi, Z. J. Huang, F. Zhang, E. S. Boyden, K. Deisseroth, Y. Dan, Activation of specific
interneurons improves V1 feature selectivity and visual perception. Nature 488, 379–383 (2012).
40. M. M. Karnani, J. Jackson, I. Ayzenshtat, J. Tucciarone, K. Manoocheri, W. G. Snider,
R. Yuste, Cooperative subnetworks of molecularly similar interneurons in mouse
neocortex. Neuron 90, 86–100 (2016).
41. O. Marín, Interneuron dysfunction in psychiatric disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 107–120
(2012).
42. H. Hu, J. Gan, P. Jonas, Interneurons. Fast-spiking, parvalbumin+ GABAergic interneurons:
From cellular design to microcircuit function. Science 345, 1255263 (2014).
43. F. J. A. van Steensel, S. M. Bögels, S. Perrin, Anxiety disorders in children and adolescents
with autistic spectrum disorders: A meta-analysis. Clin. Child Fam. Psychol. Rev. 14,
302–317 (2011).
44. S. Jurgensen, P. E. Castillo, Selective dysregulation of hippocampal inhibition in the
mouse lacking autism candidate gene CNTNAP2. J. Neurosci. 35, 14681–14687 (2015).
45. T. N. Lerner, C. Shilyansky, T. J. Davidson, K. E. Evans, K. T. Beier, K. A. Zalocusky, A. K. Crow,
R. C. Malenka, L. Luo, R. Tomer, K. Deisseroth, Intact-brain analyses reveal distinct
information carried by SNc dopamine subcircuits. Cell 162, 635–647 (2015).
46. K. A. Zalocusky, C. Ramakrishnan, T. N. Lerner, T. J. Davidson, B. Knutson, K. Deisseroth,
Nucleus accumbens D2R cells signal prior outcomes and control risky decision-making.
Nature 531, 642–646 (2016).
Acknowledgments: We thank D. Geschwind for sharing CNTNAP2 KO mice, O. Penagarikano
for help with behavioral experimental design, E. Sylwestrak for helpful discussions, M. Lo
for logistical support, and the Deisseroth Lab for their support. Funding: K.D. was funded
by NIH, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Simons Foundation, the Wiegers
Foundation, and the Gatsby Foundation. A.S. was funded by a Howard Hughes Medical
Institute International Student Fellowship. C.K.K. was supported by an NIH National Research
Service Award F31 predoctoral fellowship (NIDA F31DA041795). M.I. was supported by a Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science Overseas Research Fellowship. I.K. was funded by the
NSF. Author contributions: A.S. and K.D. designed the experiments and wrote the paper. A.S.
and M.I. carried out data collection and analysis. C.K.K. set up the fiber photometry rig and
carried out data analysis. S.Y.L. conducted the electrophysiology experiments and analysis.
A.S.O.H. performed animal breeding experiments and surgeries. I.K. generated supplementary
movies. C.R. carried out opsin design and virus production. L.E.F. and M.W. participated in
study design. T.J.D. participated in fiber photometry rig setup. K.D. supervised all aspects of
the work. Competing interests: K.D. is a founder, consultant, and scientific advisory board
member of Circuit Therapeutics. The other authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Data and materials availability: The sequences of opsins can be found at http://
web.stanford.edu/group/dlab/optogenetics/sequence_info.html. All reagents and methods
are freely available for research purposes from the Deisseroth Lab at www.optogenetics.org.
Submitted 29 July 2016
Resubmitted 30 January 2017
Accepted 7 June 2017
Published 2 August 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aah6733
Citation: A. Selimbeyoglu, C. K. Kim, M. Inoue, S. Y. Lee, A. S. O. Hong, I. Kauvar, C. Ramakrishnan,
L. E. Fenno, T. J. Davidson, M. Wright, K. Deisseroth, Modulation of prefrontal cortex excitation/
inhibition balance rescues social behavior in CNTNAP2-deficient mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah6733 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Selimbeyoglu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah6733 (2017)
2 August 2017
10 of 10
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 -deficient mice
CNTNAP2
Modulation of prefrontal cortex excitation/inhibition balance rescues social behavior in 
Ramakrishnan, Lief E. Fenno, Thomas J. Davidson, Matthew Wright and Karl Deisseroth
Aslihan Selimbeyoglu, Christina K. Kim, Masatoshi Inoue, Soo Yeun Lee, Alice S. O. Hong, Isaac Kauvar, Charu
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aah6733
, eaah6733.
9
Sci Transl Med 
autism.
animals. This study highlights the potential for modulating neural circuits in the brain as a strategy for treating
real-time optogenetic modulation of the E:I balance rescued social behavior deficits and hyperactivity in these 
, a gene known to be associated with autism in humans, Selimbeyoglu and colleagues now show that
CNTNAP2
balance. An optogenetically driven increase in this E:I balance leads to social deficits in mice. Using mice lacking 
mouse models of autism have suggested that there is an increase in the neuronal excitation/inhibition (E:I) 
Neurophysiological phenomena that underlie the symptoms of autism remain unclear. Genetics-based
Social interactions light up
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/401/eaah6733
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/07/31/9.401.eaah6733.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/364/6437/eaav3932.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/461/eaam8434.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/360/6396/eaat4422.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/360/6386/327.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/439/eaam9100.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/425/eaan2742.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/401/eaah6733#BIBL
This article cites 45 articles, 6 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
