 Review
The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease at
25 years
Dennis J Selkoe1,† & John Hardy2,*,†
Abstract
Despite continuing debate about the amyloid b-protein (or Ab
hypothesis, new lines of evidence from laboratories and clinics
worldwide support the concept that an imbalance between
production and clearance of Ab42 and related Ab peptides is a very
early, often initiating factor in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Confirma-
tion that presenilin is the catalytic site of c-secretase has provided
a linchpin: all dominant mutations causing early-onset AD occur
either in the substrate (amyloid precursor protein, APP) or the
protease (presenilin) of the reaction that generates Ab. Duplication
of the wild-type APP gene in Down’s syndrome leads to Ab deposits
in the teens, followed by microgliosis, astrocytosis, and neurofibril-
lary tangles typical of AD. Apolipoprotein E4, which predisposes to
AD in > 40% of cases, has been found to impair Ab clearance from
the brain. Soluble oligomers of Ab42 isolated from AD patients’
brains can decrease synapse number, inhibit long-term potentia-
tion,
and
enhance
long-term
synaptic
depression
in
rodent
hippocampus,
and
injecting
them
into
healthy
rats
impairs
memory. The human oligomers also induce hyperphosphorylation
of tau at AD-relevant epitopes and cause neuritic dystrophy in
cultured neurons. Crossing human APP with human tau transgenic
mice enhances tau-positive neurotoxicity. In humans, new studies
show that low cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Ab42 and amyloid-PET
positivity precede other AD manifestations by many years. Most
importantly, recent trials of three different Ab antibodies (solane-
zumab, crenezumab, and aducanumab) have suggested a slowing
of cognitive decline in post hoc analyses of mild AD subjects.
Although
many
factors
contribute
to
AD
pathogenesis,
Ab
dyshomeostasis has emerged as the most extensively validated
and compelling therapeutic target.
Keywords Ab; Alzheimer; genetics; cell biology; treatment
DOI 10.15252/emmm.201606210 | Received 11 January 2016 | Revised 24
February 2016 | Accepted 10 March 2016 | Published online 29 March 2016
EMBO Mol Med (2016) 8: 595–608
See the Glossary for abbreviations used in this article.
Introduction
Few problems in modern biomedicine have garnered as much scien-
tific interest and public concern as has Alzheimer’s disease. Virtu-
ally unknown to the general public four decades ago, AD has risen
in prevalence to an estimated 40 million patients worldwide. The
true number must be much higher, given the increasing recognition
that the disease begins in the brain at least 2–3 decades before one
first forgets the name of a grandchild or where one has parked one’s
car. Since molecular studies of AD began in earnest in the early
1980s, thousands of scientists and healthcare professionals have
delved into all aspects of this complex, multifactorial syndrome,
hoping to help patients now and prevent others from developing it
in the future.
Although the progressive buildup of amyloids of diverse protein
composition in various systemic organs has been known to cause
devastating diseases for more than a century, the idea put forward
by George Glenner (Glenner & Wong, 1984) that the particular
amyloidogenic protein accumulating in AD (Ab) could be causative
has met with considerable skepticism over the ensuing years.
Precisely why this idea has been so controversial is not clear
(Selkoe, 2011), but the steady accrual of data from many preclinical
and clinical studies has increasingly supported it. The amyloid (or
Ab) hypothesis (Beyreuther & Masters, 1991; Hardy & Allsop, 1991;
Selkoe, 1991; Hardy & Higgins, 1992) has become the dominant
model of AD pathogenesis and is guiding the development of poten-
tial treatments.
We reviewed the evidence for this hypothesis (Fig 1) a dozen
years ago (Hardy & Selkoe, 2002). Space precludes a full examina-
tion here of the enormous literature on Ab since that review; a
monograph on AD pathobiology contains many details (Selkoe et al,
2012). But in the context of continuing concern about the concept
and yet the recent emergence of apparently positive clinical trial
data, a critical analysis of the latest developments in laboratory and
clinic is warranted and timely. We review here numerous new
developments since our prior review of this hypothesis, on which
ever-increasing scientific effort is being expended. We also summa-
rize the salient findings over three decades that undergird the
amyloid hypothesis (Box 1), and we discuss several alternative
concepts or concerns that have been counterposed to it (Table 1).
1
Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
2
Reta Lila Weston Institute and Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK
*Corresponding author. Tel: +44 203 108 7466; E-mail: j.hardy@ucl.ac.uk
†These authors contributed equally to this work
ª 2016 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
595
Published online: March 29, 2016 
 New insights from AD genetics and APP homeostasis
The fact that AD-causing mutations in APP and in presenilins 1 and
2 alter APP proteolytic processing in a way that elevates the relative
levels of the Ab42 or Ab43 peptides has long been known (Scheuner
et al, 1996; NB: Those mutations in APP that lie within the Ab
sequence increase the self-aggregation of the resultant peptides, not
their production). A key mechanistic explanation was the discovery
that the presenilin genes encode the active site of the intramem-
brane-cleaving c-secretase enzyme (De Strooper et al, 1998; Wolfe
et al, 1999). Subsequent studies have begun to illuminate how
presenilin mediates intramembrane proteolysis (Qi-Takahara et al,
2005; Takami et al, 2009; Chavez-Gutierrez et al, 2012; Okochi
et al, 2013; Fernandez et al, 2014): an initial endopeptidase cleav-
age of APP near the transmembrane/cytoplasmic interface of APP
(the e-cleavage) is followed by multiple carboxypeptidase cleavages
that each sequentially removes 3 or 4 C-terminal amino acids (i.e.,
approximately one turn of the intramembrane helix) (Fig 2). This
process yields two product lines that start with either the Ab48/49
or the Ab49/50 e-cleavage. Although the precise molecular effects
of different presenilin mutations differ somewhat, in all cases the
mutations appear to decrease this C- to N-terminal cleavage
“processivity” and thus increase the relative production of longer
(more hydrophobic and self-aggregating) Ab peptides. This elegant
model provides a biochemical explanation for earlier work showing
that pathogenic presenilin mutations often increase the Ab42/Ab40
ratio
in
humans.
c-Secretase
reactions
conducted
directly
in
presenilin-mutant AD brain tissue showed that all presenilin
mutations studied decreased this carboxypeptidase-like activity, and
assays in a few “sporadic” AD brains suggested that a similar
decrease in processivity might occur in some non-presenilin-mutant
cases (Szaruga et al, 2015). Ab42, Ab43, and longer Ab peptides
are highly self-aggregating, whereas Ab40 may actually be anti-
amyloidogenic (Kim et al, 2007).
One group has emphasized that the aforementioned mechanism
represents a loss of function of presenilin and have proposed that
the neural phenotype of AD patients is fundamentally due to a loss
of presenilin function, independent of effects on Ab production
(Shen & Kelleher, 2007; Xia et al, 2015). They have studied prese-
nilin-1 mutations that generally lower Ab and hardly raise relative
Ab42 levels, but this work may overlook an elevation of the Ab43
and other longer species, which are highly amyloidogenic (Saito
et al, 2011). Although AD-causing presenilin mutations can indeed
be interpreted as partial loss of function from a genetics perspective,
pinpointing the function of presenilin as an aspartyl endopeptidase
allows one instead to speak in biochemical terms of a functional
shift of the principal proteolytic cleavages to more C-terminal bonds
in the substrate (Kretner et al, 2016). Humans with pathogenic
presenilin mutations are heterozygotes and experience no loss of
function of Notch cleavage; rather, they have accelerated Ab42 and
Box 1:
Evidence supporting a key role for Ab dyshomeostasis in
initiating AD.
All AD patients undergo progressive Ab deposition followed by
surrounding neuritic and glial cytopathology in brain regions serving
memory and cognition.
Mutations within and immediately flanking the Ab region of APP
cause aggressive forms of FAD.
Humans with trisomy 21 (Down’s syndrome) harbor 3 copies of APP
and invariably develop neuropathologically typical AD. Those who die
in their early-to-mid teens (from other causes) show abundant diffuse
Ab plaques without neuritic dystrophy, microgliosis, astrocytosis, and
tangle formation, all of which accrue gradually in such subjects in the
late teens and beyond.
Inheritance of a missense mutation in APP that decreases the produc-
tion and aggregation of Ab lifelong protects against AD and age-
related cognitive decline.
Missense mutations in presenilin 1 or 2 are the most common cause
of early-onset AD, and presenilin is the catalytic subunit of c-secre-
tase. The mutations result in relative increases in the production of
Ab42/43 peptides. These hydrophobic species self-aggregate, leading
to profound Ab deposition in mid-life.
ApoE4 carriers were once included in typical late-onset AD. This allele
was found to markedly increase AD risk and decrease brain clearance
of Ab, leading to excess Ab aggregation and typical downstream AD
neuropathology.
Ab42 oligomers isolated from typical (late-onset) AD brains decrease
synapse density, inhibit LTP, and enhance long-term synaptic depres-
sion in rodent hippocampus, and their intraventricular injection
impairs memory in healthy adult rats.
Human Ab42 oligomers induce tau hyperphosphorylation at AD-rele-
vant epitopes and cause neuritic dystrophy in cultured rat neurons;
co-administering Ab antibodies fully prevents this.
Ab oligomers occur in a penumbra around many neuritic plaques.
Accordingly, synapse decreases occur in a centrifugal gradient: less
abnormality at longer distances from the plaque edge.
Based on many human biomarker studies, low CSF Ab42 and positive
amyloid-PET scans precede other AD-related changes (increased CSF
tau, decreased cerebral glucose metabolism, brain atrophy, clinical
dementia) by years.
Trials of 3 different Ab monoclonal antibodies (solanezumab, crene-
zumab, and aducanumab) have suggested slowing of cognitive decline
in post hoc analyses of mild (but not moderate) AD patients.
Other amyloidogenic proteins have been proven to cause progressive
human organ failure, and therapeutic lowering of the amyloid or its
precursor protein yields therapeutic benefits in patients.
Glossary
Microgliosis
early non-specific proliferation and
migration of microglial cells, macrophage-
like cells in the central nervous system, as
the first response to brain damage.
Astrocytosis
final response to brain damage and injury
with proliferation of astrocytes, a type of
glial cell responsible for maintaining
extracellular ion and neurotransmitter
concentrations, modulating synapse
function, and forming the blood–brain
barrier.
Neurofibrillary tangles
accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau
protein, commonly found in Alzheimer’s
disease, that aggregates inside nerve cell
bodies, also known as dystrophic neurites.
Plaque deposition
aggregates of amyloid fibrils that are
deposited outside neurons in dense
formations, also known as senile plaques or
neuritic plaques.
FAD
familial AD caused by inherited mutations in
APP and presenilin (typically early-onset) by
opposition to “sporadic” or late-onset AD
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
ª 2016 The Authors
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
Dennis Selkoe & John Hardy
596
Published online: March 29, 2016 
 Ab43 accumulation that long precedes their AD-typical memory
syndrome. Most importantly, > 99% of all AD patients (including
all other forms of familial disease) express wild-type presenilin, so
loss of presenilin function cannot be a general mechanism of AD
pathogenesis.
The original formulation of the amyloid hypothesis was based in
part on the discovery that the APP gene is on chromosome 21,
implying that individuals with Down’s syndrome develop typical
Alzheimer neuropathology because they produce too much Ab
lifelong. This supposition has been substantiated by the identifi-
cation of humans with different segmental microduplications of
sub-regions of chromosome 21. Rare individuals with translocation
Down’s syndrome involving only the distal part of chromosome 21
telomeric to the APP gene have Down’s features but do not get AD
(Prasher et al, 1998). Conversely, those rare individuals who have
the APP gene micro-duplicated but not the rest of the chromosome
do not have Down’s syndrome but get AD, typically in their mid-50s
(Rovelet-Lecrux et al, 2006). These findings show conclusively that
lifelong overexpression of wild-type APP causes AD. Even more
remarkable has been the identification of an APP missense mutation
(A673T) at the second amino acid of the Ab region that results in a
lifelong decrease in APP cleavage by b-secretase (Jonsson et al,
2012). Moreover, this benefit may be compounded, because the
DEMENTIA
Widespread neuronal/synaptic dysfunction
and selective neuronal loss with
attendant neurotransmitter deficits
Altered kinase/phosphatase activities 
lead to tangles
Altered neuronal ionic homeostasis,
oxidative injury
Microglial and astrocytic activation and
attendant inflammatory responses
Gradual deposition of Aβ42 
oligomers as diffuse plaques
Subtle effects of Aβ oligomers on 
synaptic efficacy
Increased relative
Aβ42 production throughout life 
Gradually rising
Aβ42 levels in the brain
DOMINANTLY INHERITED 
FORMS OF AD
NON-DOMINANT 
FORMS OF AD
(including ‘sporadic’ AD)
Failure of Aβ clearance 
mechanisms
Missense mutations in the APP 
or presenilin 1 or 2 genes
(e.g., ApoE4 inheritance, 
faulty Aβ degradation, etc)
Accumulation and oligomerization of Aβ42 
in limbic and association cortices
Figure 1.
The sequence of major pathogenic events leading to AD
proposed by the amyloid cascade hypothesis.
The curved blue arrow indicates that Ab oligomers may directly injure the
synapses and neurites of brain neurons, in addition to activating microglia and
astrocytes.
Table 1.
Findings that appear to undercut the amyloid hypothesis of
AD and counterarguments that could explain these discrepancies.
Findings
Counterarguments
Amyloid plaque burden
correlates much less well
with degree of cognitive
impairment than do
neurofibrillary tangle
counts
Ab deposits appear to be a very early and
widespread event that is distant to the clinical
dementia and can lead to many downstream
cellular and molecular changes (e.g.,
microgliosis, neuritic dystrophy, tangles, etc.)
that are more proximate to and causative of
neuronal dysfunction
Many humans show
sometimes abundant
Ab deposits at death
but were not noticeably
demented
Some or many of these deposits are diffuse
plaques (not rich in abnormal neurites and
glia); the patients were often not tested
rigorously before death; and Ab oligomer
levels per plaque are much lower than in
AD brains (Esparza et al, 2013), suggesting
that plaques can effectively sequester
oligomers in a non-diffusible, less neurotoxic
state, at least up to a point
Some human
neuropathological
studies suggest tangles
may precede amyloid
plaques
Such studies may not have searched
systematically for diffuse plaques or soluble
Ab oligomers in the brain. Human genetics
proves that Ab-elevating APP mutations lead
to downstream alteration and aggregation of
wild-type tau, whereas tau mutations do not
lead to Ab deposition and amyloid-related
dementia
A hypothesis that
AD is fundamentally
due to loss of presenilin
function has been put
forward
AD-causing presenilin mutations may indeed
act through partial loss of function of this
protease, but these heterozygous mutations
do not produce clinically detectable loss of
presenilin function (e.g., Notch phenotypes),
and organismal development and function
are normal until the carriers develop typical
AD symptoms in mid-life, heralded by elevated
Ab42/43 to Ab40 ratios. Moreover, 99.9% of all
AD patients have wild-type presenilins
Numerous clinical
trials of anti-amyloid
agents have not met
their pre-specified
endpoints
Several of these agents had inadequate
preclinical data, poor brain penetration,
little human biomarker change, and/or low
therapeutic indexes (e.g., tramiprosate;
R-flurbiprofen; semagacestat). Most such
failed trials enrolled many patients in the
late-mild and moderate stages of AD,
whereas other trials conducted in very mild
or mild AD produced suggestive evidence of
clinical benefit. AD trials done prior to
obligatory amyloid-PET imaging turned out
to have up to ~25% of subjects that were
amyloid-negative (i.e., did not have AD)
ª 2016 The Authors
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
Dennis Selkoe & John Hardy
Amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
EMBO Molecular Medicine
597
Published online: March 29, 2016 
 mutant Ab peptide that is generated has altered aggregation proper-
ties (Benilova et al, 2014; Maloney et al, 2014; Zheng et al, 2015).
A673T carriers have a lower risk of clinical AD and even of
age-related cognitive decline without clinical AD (Jonsson et al,
2012), and they may not show plaque deposition at age 100 (Kero
et al, 2013). The reduced amyloid deposition resulting from this
AD-protective mutation strongly supports the amyloid hypothesis.
Improved modeling of the amyloid hypothesis in rodent
and cellular systems
Concern has been expressed about the limitations of available
rodent and cellular models of b-amyloid pathogenicity (Table 2).
Early APP mouse models (e.g. Games et al, 1995; Hsiao et al,
1996) suffered from reliance on high transgene expression to
drive plaque deposition and from a lack of tangle cytopathology
and neuronal death. Crossing FAD-mutant APP mice with mutant
MAPT (tau) transgenic (tg) mice succeeded in augmenting tau
pathology and suggested that tangle-like changes occur down-
stream of Ab accumulation, but this involved transgene over-
expression
and
multiple
AD
mutations
(Lewis
et al,
2001).
Recently, mice with gradual Ab plaque accrual have been devel-
oped by the judicious use of selective knockin of human muta-
tions into endogenous mouse APP without overexpression (Saito
et al, 2014). Moreover, stem cell-derived human neurons cultured
from skin biopsies of FAD subjects have been used to show first
Ab accumulation and then tau alteration in the absence of over-
expression (Shi et al, 2012; Choi et al, 2014; Muratore et al,
2014; Moore et al, 2015) suggesting that the lack of tangle forma-
tion in early mouse models was related to the absence of human
tau. This progress means we are now able to model a substantial
part of the amyloid cascade in culture. In both cellular and
mouse models, extensive data now suggest that the neurotoxicity
of Ab is in considerable part dependent on expression of human
tau (Rapoport et al, 2002; Jin et al, 2011; Roberson et al, 2011).
Cell biology of new AD risk genes
Although the importance of ApoE4 as the major risk factor for AD
was discovered in 1993 (Corder et al, 1993), it is only since the
advent of genomewide association studies and, more recently,
exome and genome sequencing that other risk loci for late-onset
disease have been discovered. Whereas the recently described loci
are usually much weaker in effect (Lambert et al, 2013) or much
rarer (Guerreiro et al, 2013; Jonsson et al, 2013) than ApoE4, they
have helped delineate additional biological processes in AD patho-
genesis. Three types of processes have emerged as especially impor-
tant: cholesterol/sterol metabolism; inflammation and the brain’s
Table 2.
Toward a more complete modeling of the pathogenesis of AD amyloid.
Year
System
Achievement
Critique
References
1995
APP transgenic mouse
Plaque Pathology
Overexpression, no
downstream pathology
Games et al (1995)
2000
MAPT mutant transgenic mouse
Tangle Pathology
Overexpression: no
plaque pathology
Lewis et al (2000)
2001
APP X MAPT transgenic mice
Plaque and tangle pathology
Overexpression of
both transgenes:
artificiality of two
mutations
Lewis et al (2001)
2012
Down’s syndrome derived
stem cell neurons
Diffuse plaque pathology:
evidence for pre-tangles
Not full pathology
Shi et al (2012)
2014
Complex APP mutation
knockin into mouse genome
Plaque pathology without
overexpression
Artificiality of multiple
mutations: no
downstream pathology
Saito et al (2014)
2014
Overexpression of APP
mutations in human neuronal
lines in gel system
Convincing plaque pathology
and also tangle pathology
Overexpression
Choi et al (2014)
2015
APP and PSEN mutant
stem cell lines
Diffuse plaque pathology
and tau pathology
Moore et al (2015)
γ40
γ43
ζ46
ε49
γ42
Aβ42
AICD 50–
Cytosol
Membrane
Lumen/
Extracellular
AICD 49–
Aβ40
ζ45
ε48
Figure 2.
Progressive cleavages of the APP transmembrane domain by
the Presenilin/c-secretase complex.
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
ª 2016 The Authors
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
Dennis Selkoe & John Hardy
598
Published online: March 29, 2016 
 innate immune system; and endosomal vesicle recycling (Jones
et al, 2010).
Apolipoprotein E and other components of
cholesterol/sterol metabolism
A role for cholesterol in AD has long been suspected, based on the
genetic implication of ApoE in the disease as well as the contrasting
effects of cholesterol loading or depletion on amyloid pathology in
APP tg mice (Refolo et al, 2000, 2001). Work in APP mice express-
ing different human ApoE alleles has shown that a major pathogenic
influence of ApoE involves differential isoform effects on the clear-
ance of Ab (Castellano et al 2011: discussed below). The ABCA7
lipid transporter has also been identified as a genetic locus for the
disease (Hollingworth et al, 2011), and loss-of-function mutations
increase AD risk about threefold (Steinberg et al, 2015). ABCA7 is
expressed in neurons, microglia, and peripheral macrophages, and
it normally promotes the efflux of lipids from cells to apolipopro-
teins and also regulates phagocytosis. Crossing ABCA7 knockout
mice to mutant hAPP mice caused a doubling of insoluble Ab levels
and amyloid plaques without changing APP processing, suggesting
that like ApoE, ABCA7 is involved in Ab clearance (Kim et al,
2013). However, the biochemical details through which both ApoE
and ABCA7 influence the development of Ab pathology need to be
pinpointed.
The innate immune system in Alzheimer’s disease
Neuropathologists have long suggested that the brain’s innate
immune system, including the microglial response to plaque forma-
tion, was an important factor in AD pathogenesis. For example, the
early observation of multiple elements of the classical complement
cascade in and around neuritic plaques (McGeer et al, 1989) was
prescient. In the last few years, genetic variability in that system has
emerged as a compelling determinant of AD risk, implicating many
components of innate immunity and the complement cascade as risk
factors in the disease (Jones et al, 2010). Three such risk genes have
been investigated in some detail: Complement Receptor 1 (CR1;
Lambert et al, 2009), CD33 (Bertram et al, 2008), and TREM2, and
all three appear to be involved either directly or indirectly in the
response of microglia to Ab deposition. Blockade of CR1 inhibits
microglial
activation
and
potentiates
microglial
phagocytosis
(Crehan et al, 2013). Inactivation of CD33 in primary microglia also
potentiates microglial uptake of Ab (Griciuc et al, 2013), and
TREM2 is responsible for sustaining microglial phagocytosis of Ab
(Wang et al, 2015). Thus, all three genetically implicated microglial
proteins may be involved in helping to maintain the AD microglial
phenotype of phagocytosing Ab deposits. Accordingly, these 3 genes
undergo increased expression during plaque development (Griciuc
et al 2013, Wang et al, 2015; Matarin et al, 2015) and CSF TREM2
levels go up as plaque load increases, suggesting it may be a useful
biomarker (Sua
´rez-Calvet et al, 2016).
TREM2 is emerging as a key molecular determinant of the
CNS response to Ab accumulation (Forabosco et al, 2013; Zhang
et al, 2013; Matarin et al, 2015). However, the biology of TREM2,
a Type 1 single-transmembrane receptor which is principally but
not exclusively expressed in microglia and undergoes ADAM/
c-secretase processing (Wunderlich et al, 2013; Kleinberger et al,
2014), is incompletely understood [reviewed in (Lue et al, 2015)].
The most studied mutation, R47H, may increase the risk of AD to
the same extent that ApoE4 does although it is much rarer
(Guerreiro et al, 2013; Jonsson et al, 2013). The upregulation of
TREM2 in a subset of microglia in amyloid plaques of hAPP tg
mice (e.g., Guerreiro et al, 2013) suggests that the known func-
tion of TREM2 in phagocytosis is compromised during plaque
development. A current hypothesis is that R47H and other AD-
associated TREM2 mutations confer loss of function in microglia.
Deleting
one
TREM2
allele
in
hAPP
tg
mice
significantly
decreased the number of microglia associated with Ab deposits
(Ulrich et al, 2014). Conversely, TREM2 overexpression in hAPP
tg mice decreased amyloid plaque burden, neuroinflammation,
synapse loss, and spatial memory deficits (Jiang et al, 2014). And
TREM2 mutations can alter its transport to the cell surface
and
shedding,
associated
with
impaired
phagocytic
function
(Kleinberger et al, 2014). The latter work has led to evidence that
levels of the shed ectodomain in extracellular fluid and CSF are
lower in AD cases associated with TREM2 mutations.
Endosomal vesicle recycling in Alzheimer’s disease
The final set of recently identified loci for late-onset AD map to
processes regulating endosomal vesicle recycling (Jones et al,
2010). This category includes SORL1, BIN1, and PICALM (Rogaeva
et al, 2007; Lambert et al, 2013; Zhao et al, 2015). SORL1 had previ-
ously been shown to be directly involved in the processing of APP
(Andersen et al, 2005), and work in human stem cell-derived
neurons carrying the SORL1 risk haplotype confirmed this associa-
tion (Young et al, 2015). Likewise, PICALM appears to be involved
directly in endosomal APP processing (Kanatsu et al, 2014). In addi-
tion, PICALM has been implicated in the transport of brain Ab
across the blood–brain barrier: induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-
derived human endothelial cells carrying an AD-protective allele
exhibited higher PICALM levels and enhanced Ab clearance (Zhao
et al, 2015).
In summary, mechanistic studies linking several of the recently
identified risk genes for late-onset (previously “sporadic”) AD to
aspects of Ab homeostasis provide new support for the amyloid
hypothesis as a driving factor in AD pathogenesis. They also suggest
new avenues for therapeutic intervention, such as intervening in
brain cholesterol metabolism and modulating the response of the
innate immune system to amyloid deposition.
Recent findings help resolve controversies about the
role of Ab
Connecting plaques and tangles: Ab can drive tau alteration
The temporal sequence of the two canonical lesions Alois Alzheimer
noted in his 1906 index case has been debated ever since. An
elegant histopathological staging system created by Braak and Braak
(1991) is now widely used to establish the severity of AD
neuropathology. This scale principally described the progression of
AD-type cytoskeletal changes, that is, neurofibrillary tangles and
dystrophic neurites, in unrelated humans of increasing age (it could
not yet include assays for accrual of oligomeric forms of Ab). The
detection of modest amounts of neurofibrillary change in limbic
regions of young or middle-aged individuals dying of other causes
does not imply that such individuals would necessarily have
developed AD had they lived longer. Instead, human genetic and
ª 2016 The Authors
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
Dennis Selkoe & John Hardy
Amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
EMBO Molecular Medicine
599
Published online: March 29, 2016 
 biomarker studies have provided the answer to the sequence of Ab
and tau accumulation in AD. Inherited mutations in APP and prese-
nilin (i.e., in the substrate and the protease for Ab generation) cause
early-onset Ab deposition (Lemere et al, 1996a,b; Bateman et al,
2012) followed by accumulation of tangles/neurites containing
filaments of wild-type tau, so amyloid can clearly precede tangles in
humans. In contrast, mutations in the tau gene lead to a form of
frontotemporal dementia without subsequent accrual of Ab. Thus,
Ab accumulation can lead to progressive tau deposition, but the
converse has not been clearly demonstrated in humans.
Laboratory studies support this sequence. Crossing hAPP tg mice
with hTau tg mice significantly enhances tau deposition without
changing Ab deposition (Lewis et al, 2001). Crossing an APP tg
mouse to a tau knockout mouse leads to substantially less behav-
ioral deficits in the offspring than when tau is expressed (Roberson
et al, 2011). Treating normal rat neurons in culture with soluble Ab
oligomers isolated from AD cortex causes neuritic dystrophy and
AD-type tau hyperphosphorylation, but no dystrophy ensues if tau
is first knocked down (Jin et al, 2011). Several similar studies
suggest that Ab—particularly soluble oligomers of Ab42 (Shankar
et al, 2008)—can trigger AD-type tau alterations, supporting the
sequence that human genetics has indicated. The expression of
human tau seems to be “permissive”, enabling certain downstream
neuronal
consequences
of
progressive
Ab
accrual
to
occur
(Maruyama et al, 2013).
How ApoE4 promotes AD: chronically decreased Aß clearance
Humans expressing the ApoE4 protein develop more plaque and
vascular b-amyloid deposits than those expressing only ApoE3
(Rebeck et al, 1993), and this has been confirmed in genetically
engineered mice (Holtzman et al, 2000). A detailed quantitative
study
of
Ab
homeostasis
using
in
vivo
microdialysis
in
hAPP × hApoE crossed mice has shown that Ab clearance (but not
Ab production) is decreased by ApoE4 > E3 > E2, closely parallel-
ing the degree of Ab deposition in such mice (Castellano et al,
2011). The decrease in clearance of soluble Ab was observed in
young mice well before any amyloid deposition. The results strongly
suggest that ApoE contributes to AD risk at least in part by differen-
tially regulating soluble Ab clearance, emphasizing Ab clearance
pathways as a major therapeutic target. In accord, one of the numer-
ous risk genes for late-onset AD is PICALM, and AD-promoting
alleles or knockdown of this gene has been shown to decrease Ab
clearance across the brain endothelium (Zhao et al 2015). As a
potentially related effect on Ab homeostasis, the three ApoE
isoforms have also been shown to bind Ab differentially and modu-
late its fibrillogenesis (Ma et al, 1994; Wisniewski et al, 1994; Evans
et al, 1995). Other potential mechanisms have been suggested,
including an adverse effect of ApoE4 on the processing of tau in
neurons (Andrews-Zwilling et al, 2010; Huang & Mahley, 2014).
Synaptic loss, Ab, and amyloid plaques
Decreased synapse number has long been recognized as perhaps the
strongest quantitative neuropathological correlate of dementia in
AD. Numerous laboratory studies in the past decade have shown
that Ab oligomers impair both synaptic function (e.g., long-term
potentiation) and synaptic structure (e.g., dendritic spines). Of
particular, disease relevance is evidence that soluble oligomers (but
not monomers) of Ab42 isolated directly from AD cortex can
dose-dependently decrease synaptic function and number and can
impair the memory of a learned behavior in healthy adult rats
(Shankar et al, 2008). Amyloid plaque cores isolated from the same
AD brains and washed extensively in vitro do not impair LTP, but
the diffusible Ab42 oligomers that can subsequently be released
from them with harsh denaturants do so (Shankar et al, 2008). The
latter findings fit nicely with evidence in hAPP tg mice that plaques
in situ have a penumbra of soluble Ab oligomers in which synaptic
density is low; synapse number rises toward normal the farther one
measures from the edge of the plaque core (Koffie et al, 2009).
The intimate association of diffusible oligomers with fibrillar
plaques that such studies imply has been elegantly supported by
quantifying Ab oligomers with a selective ELISA in postmortem
brain tissue of subjects who were either clinically normal (Clinical
Dementia Rating of 0) or mildly demented (CDR of 1) shortly before
death. These brains were selected to have similar plaque densities,
but the oligomer-specific ELISA revealed that the non-demented
plaque-rich subjects had much lower oligomer-to-plaque ratios than
the mildly demented plaque-rich patients (Esparza et al, 2013).
Indeed, this ratio completely distinguished (without overlap) the
“high-pathology control” brains from the AD brains. This striking
result addresses an oft-cited “Achilles heel” of the amyloid hypothe-
sis: apparently normal people who have abundant plaques may
actually have low plaque-associated oligomer levels (Table 1). We
have hypothesized that plaques can sequester soluble oligomers
until they slowly reach a physical limit, after which excess oligo-
mers can diffuse onto surrounding synaptic membranes and other
hydrophobic cell surfaces (Hong et al, 2014).
A heterogeneity of Ab species in AD brain
While Ab1–42 peptides appear to be the earliest form to accumulate
in the brain and their free levels in CSF drop long before clinical
symptoms [e.g., Bateman et al (2012)], this initial species can be
modified over time into a complex array of truncated, isomerized,
and/or phosphorylated peptides. One well-studied variant that is
highly amyloidogenic (Nussbaum et al, 2012) is the “p3E” Ab
peptide that is truncated over time of Asp1 and Ala2 and then
cyclized at Glu3 (Mori et al, 1992). DeMattos et al (2012) have
shown in hAPP transgenic mice that this variant accumulates rather
late and in small amounts, but targeting it with a specific antibody
promotes a kind of “bystander clearance” by microglia of also
earlier deposited Ab species, making p3E an attractive target for Ab
immunotherapy despite its low abundance. At the opposite end of
Ab, the variant Ab43 is highly prone to aggregation (Saito et al,
2011), and it is unclear how long soluble oligomers of this peptide
can be present as such in the brain before they deposit as insoluble
amyloid plaques. Given the complexity of Ab species in humans, a
worthy goal for future clinical research is to routinely quantify all
Ab peptides in plasma or CSF of pre-symptomatic and symptomatic
AD subjects.
Recent studies have uncovered further heterogeneity of both Ab
and other proteolytic products of APP processing. One example is
the detection in certain cell lines expressing pathogenic mutant APP,
of Ab monomers and dimers as well as N-terminally extended Ab
monomers that begin some ~35–40 resides before the Asp1 of Ab
(Welzel et al, 2014). Levels of these extended monomers rise
dramatically when b-secretase inhibitors are applied to the cells,
indicating that they arise from an alternative protease(s) which
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
ª 2016 The Authors
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
Dennis Selkoe & John Hardy
600
Published online: March 29, 2016 
 cleaves APP upstream of the Met-Asp bond. The N-terminally
extended monomers inhibit LTP, presumably because they contain
the Ab region but in a misfolded form that can bind to synaptic
membranes (Welzel et al, 2014). A second and distinct set of APP
fragments arises from a novel g (“eta”)-secretase processing path-
way, involving cleavage by a matrix metalloproteinase 92 amino
acids upstream of the Met-Asp bond (Willem et al, 2015). The resul-
tant g-CTFs can then be processed by a- or b-secretase to generate
Ag-a and Ag-b peptides. Again, b-secretase inhibitors elevate these
alternative APP products. Single-cell calcium imaging shows that
neuronal activity is attenuated by Ag-a, suggesting a physiological
function of this new pathway but not yet implicating it in AD (no
g-derived fragments containing the intact Ab region were described;
Willem et al, 2015).
Is AD in humans a prion-like disease of
“pathogenic spread”?
In the last decade, the neurodegenerative field has become increas-
ingly intrigued by the hypothesis that the progression of the
cytopathological lesions in AD, Parkinson’s disease, Frontotemporal
dementia, and other age-related diseases involves a physical spread
of the specific offending proteins from neuron to neuron. Initially,
this hypothesis was based in considerable part on three observa-
tions. First, the Braak staging of tangles (in AD) and Lewy lesions
(in Parkinson’s disease) in postmortem brains from humans of
increasing age was interpreted as a physical spread of the responsi-
ble protein aggregates (tau and a-synuclein, respectively) from one
brain region to the next. Second, the development over many years
of some Lewy bodies in fetal neurons implanted into the striata of a
few advanced Parkinson patients was interpreted as a physical
spread of a pathogenic form of a-synuclein from the diseased
neurons of the host into the healthy neurons of the implant. Third,
experimental studies in rodents suggested that the extracellular
injection of fibrils of tau or a-synuclein could induce still-healthy
neurons to form the respective intracellular lesions, suggesting a
physical spread as well as a “prion-like” templating of the normal
protein by the abnormal (misfolded) protein.
These findings provide circumstantial evidence for the spread of
misfolded proteins from neuron to neuron, although the details of
the cell biological mechanisms remain unclear. The extent to which
the Braak staging in AD (as well as in Parkinson’s disease and other
neurodegenerative diseases) represents a selective temporal vulner-
ability of neurons in different brain regions rather than an actual
physical spread has not been elucidated. It remains a challenge to
distinguish cell autonomous from non-cell autonomous mechanisms
of protein aggregation in vivo, particularly in humans with patho-
genic mutations in tau or a-synuclein, where 50% of the protein in
all neurons is mutant and could aggregate without the need for
inter-neuronal spread. Clearly, these are important unresolved
issues: understanding the biological mechanisms for the spread of
cytopathology could offer new therapeutic targets and may underlie
the observed beneficial effects of administered antibodies on lesion
clearance.
A separate question from that of neuron-to-neuron spread is
whether the misfolded Ab and tau aggregates in AD brain could be
true “proteinaceous infectious particles” and thus transmissible
between humans. Attempts by Gadjusek and colleagues more than
30 years ago to transmit AD to lower primates by inoculation of AD
brain extracts were deemed unsuccessful (Brown et al, 1994).
However, Ridley et al (2006) reported that inoculation of marmosets
with AD brain extracts induced modest cerebral b-amyloidosis:
Ab-immunoreactive deposits were detected in 16 of 18 animals aged
< 10 years and 8 of 9 aged > 10 years, whereas spontaneous cere-
bral amyloid deposition was found in 0 of 11 non-injected marmo-
sets < 10 years and 5 of 29 > 10 years (Ridley et al, 2006).
Neurofibrillary tangles were not detected in any animals, so it seems
that inoculation with AD brain extracts accelerated Ab (but not tau)
deposition in these primates. This acceleration is entirely consistent
with the long-standing concept of the seeded polymerization of Ab
in kinetic models of b-amyloid formation (Jarrett & Lansbury,
1993).
Recently, four patients dying between ages 36 and 51 of iatro-
genic Creutzfeld–Jakob disease after childhood treatment for short
stature with prion-contaminated cadaveric pituitary extracts were
reported to also have substantial Ab-immunoreactive plaques and
microvessels in their brains (Jaunmuktane et al, 2015). Since pitu-
itary glands in AD subjects can have Ab deposits, these cases were
interpreted as providing evidence of human-to-human transmission
of Ab seeds. No tangles or AD-type neuritic/microglia-rich plaques
were described, so this was not transmission of AD per se, consistent
with an earlier negative study (Irwin et al, 2013). Locating some of
the original pituitary extracts used for inoculation and showing that
they had abnormal Ab forms will be necessary to prove that these
cases represent definite human transmission of Ab seeds. At present,
there are no clear clinical concerns arising from this unusual
iatrogenic event as regards AD risk in the general population.
Biomarkers: approaching the natural history of AD in
human subjects
For many years, reaching a correct understanding of the pathogenic
sequence in AD patients was hampered by the difficulty of detecting
this sequence directly in living humans. The problem has been
substantially lessened by three developments: (i) robust assays to
quantify soluble Ab monomers and tau in CSF (Vigo-Pelfrey et al,
1995); (ii) imaging fibrillar amyloid burden (but not yet soluble Ab
oligomers) by PET scanning, initially with the thioflavin T deriva-
tive, Pittsburgh compound B (Klunk et al, 2004); and (iii) the ability
to analyze APP metabolism in healthy and diseased humans by
quantifying heavy isotope-labeled Ab peptides by mass spectrome-
try in fresh CSF collected continuously through a lumbar intrathecal
catheter (Bateman et al, 2006; Mawuenyega et al, 2010).
In vivo APP labeling
The use of 13C (heavy) leucine infusions to label all newly synthe-
sized proteins, including APP, in pre-symptomatic subjects with
presenilin mutations and their non-carrier siblings confirmed the
extensive data in cultures and mouse models that these AD-causing
mutations increase relative Ab42 production (Potter et al, 2013).
Further,
during
the
period
of
amyloid
deposition,
the
Ab42
monomer declines in CSF in a manner that suggests it becomes
bound to developing plaques (Blennow et al, 2015). And the use of
the in vivo labeling approach in ApoE3 vs. E4 carriers showed that
ª 2016 The Authors
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
Dennis Selkoe & John Hardy
Amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
EMBO Molecular Medicine
601
Published online: March 29, 2016 
 E4 subjects had lower rates of Ab monomer clearance [see (Castellano
et al, 2011)]. Together, these human data support the conclusions
that presenilin mutation carriers produce relatively more Ab42 and
that E4 carriers clear it less efficiently.
Amyloid imaging and CSF biomarkers
Numerous families carrying APP, PSEN1, or PSEN2 mutations have
been studied collectively to determine the time course of fluid
biomarker, neuroimaging, and clinical changes prior to the expected
onset of AD symptoms, which is based on the age of symptom onset
in a parent with the same mutation. Initial analyses of a familial AD
cohort [the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN)]
suggest that Aß42 levels in CSF may first be somewhat elevated (vs.
normal) and then begin to decline as early as 25 years before
expected symptom onset (Bateman et al, 2012). This is followed by
the appearance of fibrillar amyloid deposits in the brain (as detected
by PiB-PET), increased levels of tau in CSF, and progressive brain
atrophy roughly 15 years before expected symptom onset (Bateman
et al,
2012).
Neuronal
hypometabolism
and
subtly
impaired
episodic memory seem to begin some 10 years or so before expected
symptoms (Bateman et al, 2012). If this time course is generally
similar to that of “sporadic” AD, and the AIBL study (Villemagne
et al, 2013) suggests that it is, then Ab deposition may begin up to
two decades or more before clinically noticeable cognitive decline.
A key lesson which emerges from such dynamic analyses of pre-
symptomatic AD is that therapeutic interventions directed only at
the mild-to-moderate clinical stage may be too late to ameliorate
progression.
Overall, brain imaging and CSF biomarker studies in humans
suggest that the sequence of AD pathogenic steps currently measur-
able in vivo broadly follows the schema proposed by Jack and collea-
gues (Jack & Holtzman, 2013; Jack et al, 2013; Fig 3). These data are
consistent with early studies of AD neuropathology in Down’s
syndrome, which documented an initial accumulation of diffuse Ab
deposits that precedes microglial and astrocytic activation, tangle
formation, and neurodegeneration (e.g., Lemere et al, 1996a,b; Mann
et al, 1992). The recent development of imaging agents for tangles
(Chien et al, 2013; Liang et al, 2014) will help define the time course
of accrual of the two major lesions, although tangles are somewhat
non-specific in that they occur increasingly with “normal” aging and
in several neurodegenerative processes besides AD.
Recent progress in AD clinical trials
None of the Ab-targeted phase 3 clinical trials in Alzheimer’s disease
has shown statistically significant benefit on its pre-specified clinical
endpoints. Several of these trials, however, were misdesigned in
terms of patient selection, choice of agent, target engagement, and/or
dose, or they had to be halted because of side effects that may not
have been target-related (De Strooper, 2014; Karran & Hardy, 2014).
Semagacestat was neither an effective nor safe c-secretase inhibitor
Inhibiting the b- or c-secretases is an attractive goal, but the recogni-
tion that they have many substrates besides APP makes selectivity
an enormous challenge. The discovery that Ab is normally secreted
by cells throughout life (Haass et al, 1992) led to widespread
compound screening on cultured cells, and most Ab-lowering “hits”
that emerged inhibited c-secretase. The only such compound to
reach Phase 3 testing was semagacestat, but the trial was terminated
after ~12 months of dosing due to adverse events (Doody et al,
2013). This may be explained by its low therapeutic index: the IC50
for Notch cleavage was only twofold to threefold higher (or less)
than that for APP cleavage. Direct proof that semagacestat was an
effective Ab-lowering agent in humans was not obtained, and this
trial should not have led to the curtailment of research to develop
safer inhibitors of c-secretase with better substrate selectivity (De
Strooper, 2014). Another agent, avagacestat, had a better therapeu-
tic index but still not good enough to avoid certain side effects and
be advanced to Phase 3 trials (Coric et al, 2012).
The
fundamental
catalytic
mechanism
of
this
first-in-class
intramembrane
aspartyl
protease
is
incompletely
understood,
although substantial progress should ensue from biochemical stud-
ies that take advantage of the atomic structure of the whole c-secre-
tase complex that has recently been solved (Bai et al, 2015). While
further research on selective inhibition of the protease is needed,
the field now favors modulators of c-secretase that shift the peptide
bond cleavage 3–4 residues N-terminal to the Ab42 site without
blocking proteolysis. Different chemical classes of such c-modula-
tors
are
being
developed;
whether
they
can
achieve
brain
HIGH RISK
LO
W R
ISK
Max.
Detection
threshold
Biomarker abnormality
Time
Min.
CSF Aβ42
Amyloid PET
CSF tau
MRI + FDG PET
Cognitive
impairment
Normal
MCI
Dementia
Dementia
Dementia
Figure 3.
A hypothetical temporal model integrating Alzheimer’s disease
biomarkers.
The threshold for the first detection of biomarkers associated with
pathophysiological changes is denoted by the black horizontal line. The gray area
denotes the zone in which abnormal pathophysiological changes lie below this
biomarker detection threshold. In this model, the occurrence of tau pathology
can precede Ab deposition in time, but only early on at a sub-threshold
biomarker detection level. Ab deposition occurs independently and rises above
the biomarker detection threshold (purple and red arrows). This induces
acceleration of tauopathy, and CSF tau then rises above the detection threshold
(light blue arrow). Later still, changes in FDG PET and MRI (dark blue arrow) rise
above the detection threshold. Finally, cognitive impairment becomes evident
(green arrow), with a wide range of cognitive responses that depend on the
individual’s risk profile (light green-filled area). Note that while CSF Ab42
alteration is plotted as a biomarker (purple), this represents a decrease in CSF
Ab42 levels and is a surrogate for an increase in parenchymal Ab42 and changes
in other Ab peptides in the brain tissue. Ab, amyloid b-protein; FDG,
fluorodeoxyglucose; MCI, mild cognitive impairment. (Adapted from Fig 6 of Jack
et al, 2013.)
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
ª 2016 The Authors
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
Dennis Selkoe & John Hardy
602
Published online: March 29, 2016 
 penetration and potency to levels needed to lower Ab chronically
remains untested.
Solanezumab: a probable signal in mild AD
Since active and passive immunotherapy to lower amyloid was first
conceptualized (Schenk et al, 1999; Bard et al, 2000), antibody trials
have taken the lead among putative disease-modifying therapeutics
for AD. The antibody most advanced time-wise in current human
testing is solanezumab, which targets the mid-region of Ab and binds
principally to soluble monomers and perhaps low-n oligomers but
not to plaques. Two large Phase 3 trials in mild and moderate AD
patients failed to achieve their clinical endpoints. Pre-specified, post
hoc analyses of the combined mild subjects of the trials showed a
statistically significant ~34% slowing of cognitive decline vs. placebo
over 18 months [see tables 3 and 4 in Doody et al, 2014]. The moder-
ate AD patients in the same trials showed no benefit, proving the
widely held assumption that anti-Ab agents should be started in mild
AD or even earlier. The results in the mild subjects suggested a small
but statistically significant cognitive benefit of this agent, leading to a
third Phase 3 study in only mild subjects that is underway. It is of
interest that another antibody, crenezumab, produced similar signs
of modest slowing of cognitive decline in mild AD patients in a Phase
2 trial (Cummings et al, 2014).
Aducanumab: a big signal in a small proof-of-concept trial
The strongest hint to date of the potential clinical and biomarker
benefits of an amyloid-targeting agent came recently in a Phase 1b
trial of a human monoclonal antibody (BIIB-037 or aducanumab) that
emerged from a large screen of B-cell clones obtained from healthy
aged people. All 165 trial subjects underwent PET amyloid imaging at
entry to confirm the clinical diagnosis; this had not been done in the
completed trials reviewed above, where up to 30% of subjects were
later found to lack amyloid. Another difference of the small aduca-
numab trail is that it was conducted in one country (United States),
so all cognitive evaluations were performed in one common
language, probably reducing inter-subject variability in scoring. Three
IV doses (1, 3 or 10 mg/kg/mo) were initially compared to placebo
after 6 and 12 months. The 3 and 10 mg dose reduced PET amyloid
levels at 6 months and more so at 12 months, with the 10 mg dose
causing a decline to near the level required for trial entry (Sevigny
et al, 2015). This dose-dependent evidence of target engagement and
biomarker movement was accompanied by significantly less decline
(vs. placebo) in two tests, the Mini-Mental State Exam and the Clini-
cal Dementia Rating—Sum of Boxes. In the 10 mg dose group, these
scores were almost stable from 6 to 12 months. The only meaningful
adverse event was transient ARIA-E (amyloid-related imaging abnor-
mality—edema) in ~20% of the subjects receiving aducanumab. As
in some prior Ab antibody trials, ARIA-E occurred mostly in ApoE4+
patients, was dose-dependent, and produced no symptoms in 65% of
these cases. Both the careful design of this small study and the nature
of the human antibody, which apparently binds plaques and oligo-
mers but not monomers, may have contributed to the positive clinical
and biomarker outcomes. Aducanumab entered the necessary Phase
3 studies in 2015.
The advent of “secondary prevention” trials
The failures of some anti-amyloid agents that appeared to engage their
targets but did not achieve clinical endpoints in mild-to-moderate AD
patients have moved the field to attempt pre-symptomatic or
“secondary prevention” trials in subjects shown by PET amyloid
imaging and/or CSF Ab42/tau assays to be at high risk for develop-
ing AD dementia. Such prevention trials are now being conducted,
respectively, in the world’s largest kindred carrying a presenilin-1
mutation (the API study in rural Colombia (Ayutyanont et al,
2014)) or in many smaller kindreds carrying presenilin-1 or prese-
nilin-2 or APP mutations (the DIAN trials). Importantly, the first
prevention trial in largely pre-symptomatic humans at risk of late-
onset AD (ages 65–85) based on abnormal PET amyloid scans is
now underway in > 60 centers in the United States, Canada and
Australia [A4study.org] (Sperling et al, 2014). All three of these
trials are initially administering Ab antibodies, but other agents
targeting Ab or other factors (tau; neuroinflammation) are planned
or underway.
Active vaccines: no longer at the forefront but not forgotten
AD immunotherapy in man began with an active vaccine trial (using
AN-1792, a synthetic Ab1–42 peptide) that was terminated after 2–3
doses due to the occurrence of a T-cell mediated meningeal
inflammation in 6% of the Phase 2 patients (Gilman et al, 2005).
But quantitative neuropathological analyses of a few brains from
subjects who had died years after a Phase 1 trial of AN1792 revealed
evidence of amyloid clearing and apparent lessening of neuritic
dystrophy and synaptic deficits, compared to what would be
expected in such advanced AD patients (Serrano-Pozo et al, 2010).
Only 1–2 trials of active Ab vaccines are underway at this writing,
but this approach clearly deserves more study, as the polyclonal
antibody response may prove beneficial, and the cost and logistics
of
distributing
passively
administered
monoclonal
antibodies
several times per year to the world’s AD population are daunting.
b–secretase 1 inhibition in Phase 3: much anticipated
Inhibitors of b-secretase arrived later than those for c-secretase,
in part because of the pharmacological challenges of targeting the
large active site of this aspartyl protease in intact neurons. But
now, several companies have Phase 2 or 3 trials of chemically
distinct inhibitors underway. No published data of efficacy and
side effects in man are yet available. Nevertheless, the discovery
of many new substrates of b-secretase, including some that are
critical for signaling events in both the immature and mature
nervous system (Willem et al, 2006; Hemming et al, 2009; Kuhn
et al, 2012), raises the possibility of significant adverse events
appearing over time in such trials. Speculation abounds about
whether lowering Ab42 monomers with b- or c-secretase inhibi-
tors/modulators or binding and clearing plaques and diffusible
Ab with antibodies will turn out to be more efficacious. The
combined testing of two anti-Ab agents is desirable and may not
lie too far ahead.
The amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
This review perforce mentions only a fraction of the many studies
on the relationship of Ab accumulation to the other features of the
AD syndrome. But the examples we highlight underscore the
compelling nature of the extensive preclinical and emerging clinical
evidence that Ab dyshomeostasis is upstream of alterations in other
ª 2016 The Authors
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
Dennis Selkoe & John Hardy
Amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
EMBO Molecular Medicine
603
Published online: March 29, 2016 
 proteins and diverse cell types that contribute to the AD cognitive
phenotype (Box 1). We emphasized more than a dozen years ago
(Hardy & Selkoe, 2002) that definitive proof of this once controver-
sial concept could only come from clinical trials that selectively
target Ab and produce slowing and ultimately arrest of cognitive
decline in typical AD patients. The recent aducanumab Phase 1b
data are consistent with such evidence, although we obviously need
large, multi-national trials that show significant amelioration of AD
progression over 18–24 months.
Success breeds success, and it appears increasingly likely that
exciting progress in the clinic, building upon a 3-decade record of
advances in the laboratory, will provide this proof. The continued
push toward a safe and efficacious amyloid therapeutic takes noth-
ing away from the need for alternative agents that target other early
features of this complex and devastating syndrome. As others have
pointed out (Small & Duff, 2008; De Strooper & Karran, 2016) and
we concur, after disease initiation, the complexity of the down-
stream pathogenic processes increases. Nonetheless, it is likely that
therapies aimed at these downstream processes will eventually have
a role in the armamentarium against this devastating disease. It is
not a question of one hypothesis against another. Rather, we must
pursue multiple approaches, leading to a range of therapeutics that
may together prevent the looming personal and societal tragedy that
Alzheimer’s disease has become.
Acknowledgements
DS receives NIH grant support from the National Institute on Aging (AG06173
and AG015379). JH receives grant support for gene expression work from the
MRC, for genetic work from ARUK and an Anonymous Foundation, and for
work on AD in Down syndrome (LonDowns) from the Wellcome Trust.
Conflict of interest
DS is a director of Prothena Biosciences and has received consulting fees from
Janssen, Roche, and Sanofi and a speaker’s fee from Biogen-Idec. JH consults
for Eisai and for Cytox and has received speaking fees from Eli Lilly, Takeda,
and Roche.
References
Andersen OM, Reiche J, Schmidt V, Gotthardt M, Spoelgen R, Behlke J, von
Arnim CA, Breiderhoff T, Jansen P, Wu X et al (2005) Neuronal sorting
protein-related receptor sorLA/LR11 regulates processing of the amyloid
precursor protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102: 13461 – 13466
Andrews-Zwilling Y, Bien-Ly N, Xu Q, Li G, Bernardo A, Yoon SY, Zwilling D,
Yan TX, Chen L, Huang Y (2010) Apolipoprotein E4 causes age- and
Tau-dependent impairment of GABAergic interneurons, leading to learning
and memory deficits in mice. J Neurosci 30: 13707 – 13717
Ayutyanont N, Langbaum JB, Hendrix SB, Chen K, Fleisher AS, Friesenhahn M,
Ward M, Aguirre C, Acosta-Baena N, Madrigal L et al (2014) The
Alzheimer’s prevention initiative composite cognitive test score: sample
size estimates for the evaluation of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease
treatments in presenilin 1 E280A mutation carriers. J Clin Psychiatry 75:
652 – 660
Bai XC, Yan C, Yang G, Lu P, Ma D, Sun LD, Zhou R, Scheres SH, Shi Y (2015)
An atomic structure of human gamma-secretase. Nature 535: 212 – 217
Bard F, Cannon C, Barbour R, Burke RL, Games D, Grajeda H, Guido T, Hu K,
Huang J, Johnson-Wood K et al (2000) Peripherally administered
antibodies against amyloid beta-peptide enter the central nervous system
and reduce pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease. Nat Med 6:
916 – 919
Bateman RJ, Munsell LY, Morris JC, Swarm R, Yarasheski KE, Holtzman DM
(2006) Human amyloid-beta synthesis and clearance rates as measured in
cerebrospinal fluid in vivo. Nat Med 12: 856 – 861
Bateman RJ, Xiong C, Benzinger TL, Fagan AM, Goate A, Fox NC, Marcus DS,
Cairns NJ, Xie X, Blazey TM et al (2012) Clinical and biomarker changes in
dominantly inherited Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med 367: 795 – 804
Benilova I, Gallardo R, Ungureanu AA, Castillo Cano V, Snellinx A, Ramakers
M, Bartic C, Rousseau F, Schymkowitz J, De Strooper B (2014) The
Alzheimer disease protective mutation A2T modulates kinetic and
thermodynamic properties of amyloid-beta (Abeta) aggregation. J Biol
Chem 289: 30977 – 30989
Bertram L, Lange C, Mullin K, Parkinson M, Hsiao M, Hogan MF, Schjeide BM,
Hooli B, Divito J, Ionita I et al (2008) Genome-wide association analysis
reveals putative Alzheimer’s disease susceptibility loci in addition to APOE.
Am J Hum Genet 83: 623 – 632
Beyreuther K, Masters CL (1991) Amyloid precursor protein (APP) and beta A4
amyloid in the etiology of Alzheimer’s disease: precursor-product
relationships in the derangement of neuronal function. Brain Pathol 1:
241 – 251
Blennow K, Mattsson N, Scholl M, Hansson O, Zetterberg H (2015) Amyloid
biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease. Trends Pharmacol Sci 36: 297 – 309
Braak H, Braak E (1991) Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related
changes. Acta Neuropathol 82: 239 – 259
Brown P, Gibbs CJ, Rodgers-Johnson P, Asher DM, Sulima MP, Bacote A,
Goldfarb LG, Gajdusek DC (1994) Human spongiform encephalopathy: the
National Institutes of Health series of 300 cases of experimentally
transmitted disease. Ann Neurol 35: 513 – 529
Castellano JM, Kim J, Stewart FR, Jiang H, Demattos RB, Patterson BW, Fagan
AM, Morris JC, Mawuenyega KG, Cruchaga C et al (2011) Human apoE
isoforms differentially regulate brain amyloid-b peptide clearance. Sci
Transl Med 3, 89ra57 .
Chavez-Gutierrez L, Bammens L, Benilova I, Vandersteen A, Benurwar M,
Borgers M, Lismont S, Zhou L, Van Cleynenbreugel S, Esselmann H et al
(2012) The mechanism of gamma-Secretase dysfunction in familial
Alzheimer disease. EMBO J 31: 2261 – 2274
Chien DT, Bahri S, Szardenings AK, Walsh JC, Mu F, Su MY, Shankle WR,
Elizarov A, Kolb HC (2013) Early clinical PET imaging results with the
novel PHF-tau radioligand [F-18]-T807. J Alzheimers Dis 34: 457 – 468
Choi SH, Kim YH, Hebisch M, Sliwinski C, Lee S, D’Avanzo C, Chen H, Hooli B,
Asselin C, Muffat J et al (2014) A three-dimensional human neural cell
culture model of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 515: 274 – 278
Corder EH, Saunders AM, Strittmatter WJ, Schmechel DE, Gaskell PC, Small
GW, Roses AD, Haines JL, Pericak-Vance MA (1993) Gene dose of
Pending issues
What are the toxic species of Ab and tau?
What is the connection between Ab and tangle pathology? Is it direct
and cell autonomous or does it involve non-neuronal cells?
What is the mechanism of pathology spread and does understanding
this spread provide therapeutic opportunities?
What is the function of APP and does Ab have a function?
GWA studies have identified cholesterol metabolism, the innate
immune system, and endosomal vesicle recycling as important patho-
genic processes in AD: how do these relate to each other?
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
ª 2016 The Authors
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
Dennis Selkoe & John Hardy
604
Published online: March 29, 2016 
 apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease in late
onset families. Science 261: 921 – 923
Coric V, van Dyck CH, Salloway S, Andreasen N, Brody M, Richter RW,
Soininen H, Thein S, Shiovitz T, Pilcher G et al (2012) Safety and
tolerability of the gamma-secretase inhibitor avagacestat in a phase 2
study of mild to moderate Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol 69: 1430 – 1440
Crehan J, Hardy J, Pocock J (2013) Blockage of CR1 prevents activation of
rodent microglia. Neurobiol Dis 54: 139 – 149
Cummings J, Cho W, Ward M, Friesenhahn M, Brunstein F, Honigberg L,
Clayton D, Mortensen D, Ho C, Paul R (2014) paper presented at the
Alzheimer’s Association International Conference (AAIC), Copenhagen,
Denmark, 16 July 2014
De Strooper B (2014) Lessons from a failed gamma-secretase Alzheimer trial.
Cell 159: 721 – 726
De Strooper B, Karran E (2016) The cellular phase of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell
164: 603 – 615
De Strooper B, Saftig P, Craessaerts K, Vanderstichele H, Gundula G, Annaert
W, Von Figura K, Van Leuven F (1998) Deficiency of presenilin-1 inhibits
the normal cleavage of amyloid precursor protein. Nature 391: 387 – 390
DeMattos RB, Lu J, Tang Y, Racke MM, Delong CA, Tzaferis JA, Hole JT, Forster
BM, McDonnell PC, Liu F et al (2012) A plaque-specific antibody clears
existing beta-amyloid plaques in Alzheimer’s disease mice. Neuron 76:
908 – 920
Doody RS, Raman R, Farlow M, Iwatsubo T, Vellas B, Joffe S, Kieburtz K, He F,
Sun X, Thomas RG et al, Siemers E, Sethuraman G, Mohs R (2013)
Semagacestat Study, a phase 3 trial of semagacestat for treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med 369, 341 – 350
Doody RS, Thomas RG, Farlow M, Iwatsubo T, Vellas B, Joffe S, Kieburtz K,
Raman R, Sun Z, Aisen PS et al, (2014). Phase 3 trials of solanezumab for
mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med 370, 311 – 321
Esparza TJ, Zhao H, Cirrito JR, Cairns NJ, Bateman RJ, Holtzman DM, Brody DL
(2013) Amyloid-beta oligomerization in Alzheimer dementia versus high-
pathology controls. Ann Neurol 73: 104 – 119
Evans KC, Berger EP, Cho CG, Weisgraber KH, Lansbury PT (1995)
Apolipoprotein E is a kinetic but not a thermodynamic inhibitor of
amyloid formation: implications for the pathogenesis and treatment of
Alzheimer disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92: 763 – 767
Fernandez MA, Klutkowski JA, Freret T, Wolfe MS (2014) Alzheimer presenilin-
1 mutations dramatically reduce trimming of long amyloid beta-peptides
(Abeta) by gamma-secretase to increase 42-to-40-residue Abeta. J Biol
Chem 289: 31043 – 31052
Forabosco P, Ramasamy A, Trabzuni D, Walker R, Smith C, Bras J, Levine AP,
Hardy J, Pocock JM, Guerreiro R et al (2013) Insights into TREM2 biology
by network analysis of human brain gene expression data. Neurobiol Aging
34: 2699 – 2714
Games D, Adams D, Alessandrini R, Barbour R, Berthelette P, Blackwell C, Carr
T, Clemens J, Donaldson T, Gillespie F et al (1995) Alzheimer-type
neuropathology in transgenic mice overexpressing V717F b-amyloid
precursor protein. Nature 373: 523 – 527
Gilman S, Koller M, Black RS, Jenkins L, Griffith SG, Fox NC, Eisner L, Kirby L,
Rovira MB, Forette F et al (2005) Clinical effects of Abeta immunization
(AN1792) in patients with AD in an interrupted trial. Neurology 64:
1553 – 1562
Glenner GG, Wong CW (1984) Alzheimer’s disease: initial report of the
purification and characterization of a novel cerebrovascular amyloid
protein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 120: 885 – 890
Griciuc A, Serrano-Pozo A, Parrado AR, Lesinski AN, Asselin CN, Mullin K,
Hooli B, Choi SH, Hyman BT, Tanzi RE (2013) Alzheimer’s disease risk
gene CD33 inhibits microglial uptake of amyloid beta. Neuron 78:
631 – 643
Guerreiro R, Wojtas A, Bras J, Carrasquillo M, Rogaeva E, Majounie E,
Cruchaga C, Sassi C, Kauwe JS, Younkin S et al (2013) TREM2 variants in
Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med 368: 117 – 127
Haass C, Schlossmacher M, Hung AY, Vigo-Pelfrey C, Mellon A, Ostaszewski B,
Lieberburg I, Koo EH, Schenk D, Teplow D et al (1992) Amyloid beta-
peptide is produced by cultured cells during normal metabolism. Nature
359: 322 – 325
Hardy J, Allsop D (1991) Amyloid deposition as the central event in the
aetiology of Alzheimer’s disease. Trends in Pharmac 12: 383 – 388
Hardy J, Selkoe DJ (2002) The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease:
progress and problems on the road to therapeutics. Science 297: 353 – 356
Hardy JA, Higgins G (1992) Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade
hypothesis. Science 256: 184 – 185
Hemming ML, Elias JE, Gygi SP, Selkoe DJ (2009) Identification of beta-
secretase (BACE1) substrates using quantitative proteomics. PLoS ONE 4:
e8477
Hollingworth P, Harold D, Sims R, Gerrish A, Lambert JC, Carrasquillo M,
Abraham R, Hamshere ML, Pahwa JS, Moskvina V et al (2011) Common
variants at ABCA7, MS4A6A/MS4A4E, EPHA1, CD33 and CD2AP are
associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 43: 429 – 435
Holtzman DM, Bales KR, Tenkova T, Fagan AM, Parsadanian M, Sartorius L,
Mackey B, Olney J, McKeel D, Wozniak D et al (2000) Apolipoprotein E
isoform-dependent amyloid deposition and neuritic degeneration in a
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:
2892 – 2897
Hong S, Ostaszewski BL, Yang T, O’Malley TT, Jin M, Yanagisawa K, Li S,
Bartels T, Selkoe DJ (2014) Soluble Abeta oligomers are rapidly sequestered
from brain ISF in vivo and bind GM1 ganglioside on cellular membranes.
Neuron 82: 308 – 319
Hsiao K, Chapman P, Nilsen S, Ekman C, Harigaya Y, Younkin S, Yang F, Cole
G (1996) Correlative memory deficits, Aß elevation, and amyloid plaques in
transgenic mice. Science 274: 99 – 102
Huang Y, Mahley RW (2014) Apolipoprotein E: structure and function in lipid
metabolism, neurobiology, and Alzheimer’s diseases. Neurobiol Dis 72 (Pt
A), 3 – 12
Irwin DJ, Abrams JY, Schonberger LB, Leschek EW, Mills JL, Lee VM,
Trojanowski JQ (2013) Evaluation of potential infectivity of Alzheimer and
Parkinson disease proteins in recipients of cadaver-derived human growth
hormone. JAMA Neurol 70: 462 – 468
Jack CR, Holtzman DM (2013) Biomarker modeling of Alzheimer’s disease.
Neuron 80: 1347 – 1358
Jack CR, Knopman DS, Jagust WJ, Petersen RC, Weiner MW, Aisen PS, Shaw
LM, Vemuri P, Wiste HJ, Weigand SD et al (2013) Tracking
pathophysiological processes in Alzheimer’s disease: an updated
hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers. Lancet Neurol 12: 207 – 216
Jarrett JT, Lansbury PT (1993) Seeding “one-dimensional crystallization” of
amyloid: a pathogenic mechanism in Alzheimer’s disease and scrapie? Cell
73: 1055 – 1058
Jaunmuktane Z, Mead S, Ellis M, Wadsworth JDF, Nicoll AJ, Kenny J,
Launchbury F, Linehan J, Richard-Loendt A, Walker AS et al (2015)
Evidence for human transmission of amyloid beta-pathology and cerebral
amyloid angiopathy. Nature 525: 247 – 250
Jiang T, Tan L, Zhu XC, Zhang QQ, Cao L, Tan MS, Gu LZ, Wang HF, Ding ZZ,
Zhang YD et al (2014) Upregulation of TREM2 ameliorates neuropathology
and rescues spatial cognitive impairment in a transgenic mouse model of
Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychopharmacology 39: 2949 – 2962
ª 2016 The Authors
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
Dennis Selkoe & John Hardy
Amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
EMBO Molecular Medicine
605
Published online: March 29, 2016 
 Jin M, Shepardson N, Yang T, Chen G, Walsh D, Selkoe DJ (2011) Soluble
amyloid beta-protein dimers isolated from Alzheimer cortex directly
induce Tau hyperphosphorylation and neuritic degeneration. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 108: 5819 – 5824
Jones L, Holmans PA, Hamshere ML, Harold D, Moskvina V, Ivanov D,
Pocklington A, Abraham R, Hollingworth P, Sims R et al (2010) Genetic
evidence implicates the immune system and cholesterol metabolism in
the aetiology of Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS ONE 5: e13950
Jonsson T, Atwal JK, Steinberg S, Snaedal J, Jonsson PV, Bjornsson S,
Stefansson H, Sulem P, Gudbjartsson D, Maloney J et al (2012) A mutation
in APP protects against Alzheimer’s disease and age-related cognitive
decline. Nature 488: 96 – 99
Jonsson T, Stefansson H, Steinberg S, Jonsdottir I, Jonsson PV, Snaedal J,
Bjornsson S, Huttenlocher J, Levey AI, Lah JJ et al (2013) Variant of TREM2
associated with the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med 368:
107 – 116
Kanatsu K, Morohashi M, Suzuki Y, Kuroda H, Watanabe T, Tomita T,
Iwatsubo T (2014) Decreased CALM expression reduces Abeta42 to total
Abeta ratio through clathrin-mediated endocytosis of gamma-secretase.
Nat Commun 5: 3386
Karran E, Hardy J (2014) A critique of the drug discovery and phase 3 clinical
programs targeting the amyloid hypothesis for Alzheimer disease. Ann
Neurol 76: 185 – 205
Kero M, Paetau A, Polvikoski T, Tanskanen M, Sulkava R, Jansson L,
Myllykangas L, Tienari PJ (2013) Amyloid precursor protein (APP) A673T
mutation in the elderly Finnish population. Neurobiol Aging 34(1518):
e1511 – e1513
Kim J, Onstead L, Randle S, Price R, Smithson L, Zwizinski C, Dickson DW,
Golde T, McGowan E (2007) Abeta40 inhibits amyloid deposition in vivo. J
Neurosci 27: 627 – 633
Kim WS, Li H, Ruberu Chan KS, Elliott DA, Low JK, Cheng D, Karl T, Garner B
(2013) Deletion of Abca7 increases cerebral amyloid-beta accumulation in
the J20 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 33: 4387 – 4394
Kleinberger G, Yamanishi Y, Suarez-Calvet M, Czirr E, Lohmann E, Cuyvers E,
Struyfs H, Pettkus N, Wenninger-Weinzier A, Mazaheri F et al (2014)
TREM2 mutations implicated in neurodegeneration impair cell surface
transport and phagocytosis. Sci Transl Med 6, 243ra286
Klunk WE, Engler H, Nordberg A, Wang Y, Blomqvist G, Holt DP, Bergstrom M,
Savitcheva I, Huang GF, Estrada S et al (2004) Imaging brain amyloid in
Alzheimer’s disease with Pittsburgh Compound-B. Ann Neurol 55: 306 – 319
Koffie RM, Meyer-Luehmann M, Hashimoto T, Adams KW, Mielke ML, Garcia-
Alloza M, Micheva KD, Smith SJ, Kim ML, Lee VM et al (2009) Oligomeric
amyloid beta associates with postsynaptic densities and correlates with
excitatory synapse loss near senile plaques. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:
4012 – 4017
Kretner B, Trambauer J, Fukumori A, Mielke J, Kuhn PH, Kremmer E, Giese A,
Lichtenthaler SF, Haass C, Arzberger T et al (2016). Generation and
deposition of Aß43 by the virtually inactive presenilin-1 L435F mutant
contradicts the presenilin loss of function hypothesis of Alzheimer’s
disease. EMBO Mol Med doi:10.15252/emmm.201505952
Kuhn PH, Koroniak K, Hogl S, Colombo A, Zeitschel U, Willem M, Volbracht C,
Schepers U, Imhof A, Hoffmeister A et al (2012) Secretome protein
enrichment identifies physiological BACE1 protease substrates in neurons.
EMBO J 31: 3157 – 3168
Lambert JC, Heath S, Even G, Campion D, Sleegers K, Hiltunen M, Combarros
O, Zelenika D, Bullido MJ, Tavernier B et al (2009) Genome-wide
association study identifies variants at CLU and CR1 associated with
Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 41: 1094 – 1099
Lambert JC, Ibrahim-Verbaas CA, Harold D, Naj AC, Sims R, Bellenguez C,
DeStefano AL, Bis JC, Beecham GW, Grenier-Boley B et al (2013)
Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci
for Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 45: 1452 – 1458
Lemere CA, Blustzjan JK, Yamaguchi H, Wisniewski T, Saido TC, Selkoe DJ
(1996a) Sequence of deposition of heterogeneous amyloid b-peptides and
Apo E in Down syndrome: implications for initial events in amyloid plaque
formation. Neurobiol Dis 3: 16 – 32
Lemere CA, Lopera F, Kosik KS, Lendon CL, Ossa J, Saido TC, Yamaguchi H,
Ruiz A, Martinez A, Madrigal L et al (1996b) The E280A presenilin 1
Alzheimer mutation produces increased Ab42 deposition and severe
cerebellar pathology. Nature Med 2: 1146 – 1150
Lewis J, McGowan E, Rockwood J, Melrose H, Nacharaju P, Van Slegtenhorst
M, Gwinn-Hardy K, Paul Murphy M, Baker M, Yu X et al (2000)
Neurofibrillary tangles, amyotrophy and progressive motor disturbance in
mice expressing mutant (P301L) tau protein. Nat Genet 25: 402 – 405
Lewis J, Dickson DW, Lin WL, Chisholm L, Corral A, Jones G, Yen SH, Sahara N,
Skipper L, Yager D et al (2001) Enhanced neurofibrillary degeneration in
transgenic mice expressing mutant tau and APP. Science 293: 1487 – 1491
Liang SH, Yokell DL, Normandin MD, Rice PA, Jackson RN, Shoup TM, Brady
TJ, El Fakhri G, Collier TL, Vasdev N (2014) First human use of a
radiopharmaceutical prepared by continuous-flow microfluidic
radiofluorination: proof of concept with the tau imaging agent [18F]T807.
Mol Imaging 13: doi:10.2310/7290.2014.00025
Lue LF, Schmitz C, Walker DG (2015) What happens to microglial TREM2 in
Alzheimer’s disease: immunoregulatory turned into immunopathogenic?
Neuroscience 302: 138 – 150
Ma J, Yee A, Brewer HB, Das S, Potter H (1994) The amyloid-associated
proteins a1-antichymotrypsin and apolipoprotein E promote the assembly
of the Alzheimer b-protein into filaments. Nature 372: 92 – 94
Maloney JA, Bainbridge T, Gustafson A, Zhang S, Kyauk R, Steiner P, van der
Brug M, Liu Y, Ernst JA, Watts RJ et al (2014) Molecular mechanisms of
Alzheimer disease protection by the A673T allele of amyloid precursor
protein. J Biol Chem 289: 30990 – 31000
Mann DMA, Yuonis N, Jones D, Stoddart DW (1992) The time course of
pathological events in Down’s Syndrome with particular reference to the
involvement of microglial cells and deposits of b/A4. Neurodegeneration 1:
201 – 215
Maruyama M, Shimada H, Suhara T, Shinotoh H, Ji B, Maeda J, Zhang MR,
Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM, Ono M et al (2013) Imaging of tau pathology in a
tauopathy mouse model and in Alzheimer patients compared to normal
controls. Neuron 79: 1094 – 1108
Matarin M, Salih DA, Yasvoina M, Cummings DM, Guelfi S, Liu W, Nahaboo
Solim MA, Moens TG, Paublete RM, Ali SS et al (2015) A genome-wide
gene-expression analysis and database in transgenic mice during
development of amyloid or tau pathology. Cell Rep 10: 633 – 644
Mawuenyega KG, Sigurdson W, Ovod V, Munsell L, Kasten T, Morris JC,
Yarasheski KE, Bateman RJ (2010) Decreased clearance of CNS beta-
amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease. Science 330: 1774 – 1777
McGeer PL, Akiyama H, Itagaki S, McGreer EG (1989) Immune system
response in Alzheimer’s disease. Can J Neurol Sci 16: 516 – 627
Moore S, Evans LD, Andersson T, Portelius E, Smith J, Dias TB, Saurat N,
McGlade A, Kirwan P, Blennow K et al (2015) APP metabolism regulates
tau proteostasis in human cerebral cortex neurons. Cell Rep 11: 689 – 696
Mori H, Takio K, Ogawara M, Selkoe DJ (1992) Mass spectrometry of purified
amyloid b protein in Alzheimer’s disease. J Biol Chem 267: 17082 – 17086
Muratore MR, Rice HC, Srikanth P, Callahan DG, Shin T, Benjamin LN, Walsh
DM, Selkoe DJ, Young-Pearse TL (2014) The familial Alzheimer’s disease
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
ª 2016 The Authors
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
Dennis Selkoe & John Hardy
606
Published online: March 29, 2016 
 APPV717I mutation alters APP processing and tau expression in iPSC-
derived neurons. Hum Mol Genet 23: 3523 – 3536
Nussbaum JM, Schilling S, Cynis H, Silva A, Swanson E, Wangsanut T, Tayler
K, Wiltgen B, Hatami A, Ronicke R et al (2012) Prion-like behaviour and
tau-dependent cytotoxicity of pyroglutamylated amyloid-beta. Nature 485:
651 – 655
Okochi M, Tagami S, Yanagida K, Takami M, Kodama TS, Mori K, Nakayama T,
Ihara Y, Takeda M (2013) Gamma-secretase modulators and presenilin 1
mutants act differently on presenilin/gamma-secretase function to cleave
Abeta42 and Abeta43. Cell Rep 3: 42 – 51
Potter R, Patterson BW, Elbert DL, Ovod V, Kasten T, Sigurdson W,
Mawuenyega K, Blazey T, Goate A, Chott R et al (2013). Increased in vivo
amyloid-beta42 production, exchange, and loss in presenilin mutation
carriers. Sci Transl Med 5, 189ra177 .
Prasher VP, Farrer MJ, Kessling AM, Fisher EM, West RJ, Barber PC, Butler AC
(1998) Molecular mapping of Alzheimer-type dementia in Down’s
syndrome. Ann Neurol 43: 380 – 383
Qi-Takahara Y, Morishima-Kawashima M, Tanimura Y, Dolios G, Hirotani N,
Horikoshi Y, Kametani F, Maeda M, Saido TC, Wang R et al (2005) Longer
forms of amyloid beta protein: implications for the mechanism of
intramembrane cleavage by gamma-secretase. J Neurosci 25: 436 – 445
Rapoport M, Dawson HN, Binder LI, Vitek MP, Ferreira A (2002) Tau is
essential to beta -amyloid-induced neurotoxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
99: 6364 – 6369
Rebeck GW, Reiter JS, Strickland DK, Hyman BT (1993) Apolipoprotein E in
sporadic Alzheimer’s disease: allelic variation and receptor interactions.
Neuron 11: 575 – 580
Refolo LM, Malester B, LaFrancois J, Bryant-Thomas T, Wang R, Tint GS,
Sambamurti K, Duff K, Pappolla MA (2000) Hypercholesterolemia
accelerates the Alzheimer’s amyloid pathology in a transgenic mouse
model. Neurobiol Dis 7: 321 – 331
Refolo LM, Pappolla MA, LaFrancois J, Malester B, Schmidt SD, Thomas-Bryant
T, Tint GS, Wang R, Mercken M, Petanceska SS et al (2001) A cholesterol-
lowering drug reduces beta-amyloid pathology in a transgenic mouse
model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Dis 8: 890 – 899
Ridley RM, Baker HF, Windle CP, Cummings RM (2006) Very long term
studies of the seeding of beta-amyloidosis in primates. J Neural Transm
113: 1243 – 1251
Roberson ED, Scearce-Levie K, Palop JJ, Yan F, Cheng IH, Wu T, Gerstein H, Yu
GQ, Mucke L (2011) Reducing endogenous tau ameliorates amyloid beta-
induced deficits in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Science 316:
750 – 754
Rogaeva E, Meng Y, Lee JH, Gu Y, Kawarai T, Zou F, Katayama T, Baldwin CT,
Cheng R, Hasegawa H et al (2007) The neuronal sortilin-related receptor
SORL1 is genetically associated with Alzheimer disease. Nat Genet 39:
168 – 177
Rovelet-Lecrux A, Hannequin D, Raux G, Le Meur N, Laquerriere A, Vital A,
Dumanchin C, Feuillette S, Brice A, Vercelletto M et al (2006) APP locus
duplication causes autosomal dominant early-onset Alzheimer disease
with cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Nat Genet 38: 24 – 26
Saito T, Matsuba Y, Mihira N, Takano J, Nilsson P, Itohara S, Iwata N, Saido
TC (2014) Single App knock-in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat
Neurosci 17: 661 – 663
Saito T, Suemoto T, Brouwers N, Sleegers K, Funamoto S, Mihira N, Matsuba
Y, Yamada K, Nilsson P, Takano J et al (2011) Potent amyloidogenicity and
pathogenicity of Abeta43. Nat Neurosci 14: 1023 – 1032
Schenk D, Barbour R, Dunn W, Gordon G, Grajeda H, Guido T, Hu K, Huang J,
Johnson-Wood K, Khan K et al (1999) Immunization with amyloid-ß
attenuates Alzheimer-disease-like pathology in the PDAPP mouse. Nature
400: 173 – 177
Scheuner D, Eckman C, Jensen M, Song X, Citron M, Suzuki N, Bird TD, Hardy
J, Hutton M, Kukull W et al (1996) Secreted amyloid b-protein similar to
that in the senile plaques of Alzheimer’s disease is increased in vivo by
the presenilin 1 and 2 and APP mutations linked to familial Alzheimer’s
disease. Nature Med 2: 864 – 870
Selkoe DJ (1991) The molecular pathology of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 6:
487 – 498
Selkoe DJ (2011) Resolving controversies on the path to Alzheimer’s
therapeutics. Nat Med 17: 1060 – 1065
Selkoe DJ, Mandelkow E, Holtzman DM (2012) The Biology of Alzheimer
Disease. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
Serrano-Pozo A, William CM, Ferrer I, Uro-Coste E, Delisle MB, Maurage CA,
Hock C, Nitsch RM, Masliah E, Growdon JH et al (2010) Beneficial effect of
human anti-amyloid-beta active immunization on neurite morphology
and tau pathology. Brain 133, 1312 – 1327
Sevigny J, Chiao P, Williams L, Miao X, O’Gorman J (2015) Randomized,
double-blind Phase 1B study of BIIB037, an anti-amyloid beta monoclonal
antibody, in patients with prodromal or mild Alzheimer’s disease.
Neurogener Dis 15(Suppl 1): 311
Shankar GM, Li S, Mehta TH, Garcia-Munoz A, Shepardson NE, Smith I, Brett
FM, Farrell MA, Rowan MJ, Lemere CA et al (2008) Amyloid-beta protein
dimers isolated directly from Alzheimer’s brains impair synaptic plasticity
and memory. Nat Med 14: 837 – 842
Shen J, Kelleher RJ (2007) The presenilin hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease:
evidence for a loss-of-function pathogenic mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 104: 403 – 409
Shi Y, Kirwan P, Smith J, MacLean G, Orkin SH, Livesey FJ (2012) A human
stem cell model of early Alzheimer’s disease pathology in Down syndrome.
Sci Transl Med 4: 124 – 129
Small SA, Duff K (2008) Linking Abeta and tau in late-onset Alzheimer’s
disease: a dual pathway hypothesis. Neuron 60: 534 – 542
Sperling RA, Rentz DM, Johnson KA, Karlawish J, Donohue M, Salmon DP,
Aisen P (2014) The A4 study: stopping AD before symptoms begin? Sci
Transl Med 6, 228fs213
Steinberg S, Stefansson H, Jonsson T, Johannsdottir H, Ingason A, Helgason H,
Sulem P, Magnusson OT, Gudjonsson SA, Unnsteinsdottir U et al (2015)
Loss-of-function variants in ABCA7 confer risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat
Genet 47: 445 – 447
Suárez-Calvet M, Kleinberger G, Araque Caballero MÁ, Brendel M, Rominger A,
Alcolea D, Fortea J, Lleó A, Blesa R, Gispert JD et al (2016) sTREM2
cerebrospinal fluid levels are a potential biomarker for microglia activity
in early-stage Alzheimer’s disease and associate with neuronal injury
markers. EMBO Mol Med 2016 doi: 10.15252/emmm.201506123
Szaruga M, Veugelen S, Benurwar M, Lismont S, Sepulveda-Falla D, Lleo A,
Ryan NS, Lashley T, Fox NC, Murayama S et al (2015) Qualitative changes
in human gamma-secretase underlie familial Alzheimer’s disease. J Exp
Med 212: 2003 – 2013
Takami M, Nagashima Y, Sano Y, Ishihara S, Morishima-Kawashima M,
Funamoto S, Ihara Y (2009) gamma-Secretase: successive tripeptide and
tetrapeptide release from the transmembrane domain of beta-carboxyl
terminal fragment. J Neurosci 29: 13042 – 13052
Ulrich JD, Finn MB, Wang Y, Shen A, Mahan TE, Jiang H, Stewart FR, Piccio L,
Colonna M, Holtzman DM (2014) Altered microglial response to Abeta
plaques in APPPS1-21 mice heterozygous for TREM2. Mol Neurodegener 9: 20
Vigo-Pelfrey C, Seubert P, Barbour R, Blomquist C, Lee M, Lee D, Coria F,
Chang L, Miller B, Lieberburg I et al (1995) Elevation of microtubule-
ª 2016 The Authors
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
Dennis Selkoe & John Hardy
Amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
EMBO Molecular Medicine
607
Published online: March 29, 2016 
 associated protein tau in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 45: 788 – 793
Villemagne VL, Burnham S, Bourgeat P, Brown B, Ellis KA, Salvado O, Szoeke
C, Macaulay SL, Martins R, Maruff P et al (2013) Amyloid beta deposition,
neurodegeneration, and cognitive decline in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease:
a prospective cohort study. Lancet Neurol 12: 357 – 367
Wang Y, Cella M, Mallinson KJ, Ulrich JD, Young KL, Robinette ML, Gilfillan S,
Krishnan GM, Sudhakar S, Zinselmeyer BH et al (2015) TREM2 lipid
sensing sustains the microglial response in an Alzheimer’s disease model.
Cell 160: 1061 – 1071
Welzel AT, Maggio JE, Shankar GM, Walker DE, Ostaszewski BL, Li S, Klyubin I,
Rowan MJ, Seubert P, Walsh DM et al (2014) Secreted amyloid beta-
proteins in a cell culture model include N-terminally extended peptides
that impair synaptic plasticity. Biochemistry 53: 3908 – 3921
Willem M, Garratt AN, Novak B, Citron M, Kaufmann S, Rittger A, De Strooper
B, Saftig P, Birchmeier C, Haass C (2006) Control of peripheral nerve
myelination by the beta-secretase BACE1. Science 314: 664 – 666
Willem M, Tahirovic S, Busche MA, Ovsepian SV, Chafai M, Kootar S,
Hornburg D, Evans LD, Moore S, Daria A et al (2015) g-Secretase
processing of APP inhibits neuronal activity in the hippocampus. Nature
526: 433 – 447
Wisniewski T, Castano AM, Golabek A, Vogel T, Frangione B (1994)
Acceleration of Alzheimer’s fibril formation by apolipoprotein E in vitro.
Am J Pathol 145: 1030 – 1035
Wolfe MS, Xia W, Ostaszewski BL, Diehl TS, Kimberly WT, Selkoe DJ (1999)
Two transmembrane aspartates in presenilin-1 required for presenilin
endoproteolysis and g-secretase activity. Nature 398: 513 – 517
Wunderlich P, Glebov K, Kemmerling N, Tien NT, Neumann H, Walter J
(2013) Sequential proteolytic processing of the triggering receptor
expressed on myeloid cells-2 (TREM2) protein by ectodomain shedding
and gamma-secretase-dependent intramembranous cleavage. J Biol Chem
288: 33027 – 33036
Xia D, Watanabe H, Wu B, Lee SH, Li Y, Tsvetkov E, Bolshakov VY, Shen J,
Kelleher RJ (2015) Presenilin-1 knockin mice reveal loss-of-function
mechanism for familial Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 85: 967 – 981
Young JE, Boulanger-Weill J, Williams DA, Woodruff G, Buen F, Revilla AC,
Herrera C, Israel MA, Yuan SH, Edland SD et al (2015) Elucidating
molecular phenotypes caused by the SORL1 Alzheimer’s disease genetic
risk factor using human induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 16:
373 – 385
Zhang B, Gaiteri C, Bodea LG, Wang Z, McElwee J, Podtelezhnikov AA, Zhang
C, Xie T, Tran L, Dobrin R et al (2013) Integrated systems approach
identifies genetic nodes and networks in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease.
Cell 153: 707 – 720
Zhao Z, Sagare AP, Ma Q, Halliday MR, Kong P, Kisler K, Winkler EA,
Ramanathan A, Kanekiyo T, Bu G et al (2015) Central role for PICALM in
amyloid-beta blood–brain barrier transcytosis and clearance. Nat Neurosci
18: 978 – 987
Zheng X, Liu D, Roychaudhuri R, Teplow DB, Bowers MT (2015) Amyloid beta-
protein assembly: differential effects of the protective A2T mutation and
recessive A2V familial Alzheimer’s disease mutation. ACS Chem Neurosci 6:
1732 – 1740
License: This is an open access article under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
License, which permits use, distribution and reproduc-
tion in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Vol 8 | No 6 | 2016
ª 2016 The Authors
EMBO Molecular Medicine
Amyloid hypothesis at 25 years
Dennis Selkoe & John Hardy
608
Published online: March 29, 2016 
