 Review Article
Cardiovascular complications after non-cardiac surgery
D. Sellers,1 C. Srinivas2 and G. Djaiani3
1 Clinical Fellow, 2 Assistant Professor, 3 Professor, Toronto General Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Summary
Cardiac complications are common after non-cardiac surgery. Peri-operative myocardial infarction occurs in 3%
of patients undergoing major surgery. Recently, however, our understanding of the epidemiology of these cardiac
events has broadened to include myocardial injury after non-cardiac surgery, diagnosed by an asymptomatic tro-
ponin rise, which also carries a poor prognosis. We review the causation of myocardial injury after non-cardiac
surgery, with potential for prevention and treatment, based on currently available international guidelines and
landmark studies. Postoperative arrhythmias are also a frequent cause of morbidity, with atrial fibrillation and
QT-prolongation having specific relevance to the peri-operative period. Postoperative systolic heart failure is rare
outside of myocardial infarction or cardiac surgery, but the impact of pre-operative diastolic dysfunction and its
ability to cause postoperative heart failure is increasingly recognised. The latest evidence regarding diastolic
dysfunction and the impact on non-cardiac surgery are examined to help guide fluid management for the non-
cardiac anaesthetist.
.................................................................................................................................................................
Correspondence to: D. Sellers
Email: daniel.sellers@doctors.org.uk
Accepted: 1 September 2017
Keywords: non-cardiac surgery; complications; myocardial injury
Introduction
Cardiac complications are common after major non-car-
diac surgery. Every year, 4% of the world’s population will
undergo a surgical procedure, with 30% of those having
major surgery in the context of at least one cardiovascular
risk factor [1]. The 30-day mortality rate for these patients
is 0.5–2% [1, 2]. The single largest cause of death is major
adverse cardiac events (MACE), mostly myocardial
infarction (MI) [3]. The spectrum of myocardial damage,
from injury through ischaemia to infarction, is broader
than ever before, with asymptomatic troponin rise now
known to be strongly associated with mortality. The term,
myocardial injury after non-cardiac surgery (MINS), is
now widely recognised, and potential therapies in the
peri-operative context continue to develop.
New postoperative arrhythmias, with paroxysmal
atrial fibrillation (AF) being the most common, occur
in 3% of patients. Many resolve spontaneously, but if
paroxysmal AF persists then the one-year absolute risk
of stroke is 1.5%, vs. 0.3% for those in sinus rhythm
[4]. Furthermore, heart failure, MI and cardiac arrest
are also more common in patients with paroxysmal
AF [4].
According
to
the
British
Heart
Foundation,
approximately 500,000 people in the UK have a diag-
nosis of heart failure, and these patients frequently
present for surgery. In addition, echocardiographic
sampling of the general population (mean age of
52 years) demonstrated a 27% incidence of diastolic
dysfunction [5], which is a significant risk factor for
34
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 34–42
doi:10.1111/anae.14138
 developing postoperative cardiac complications, partic-
ularly diastolic heart failure [6]. Regardless of aetiol-
ogy,
postoperative
cardiac
failure
has
a
30-day
mortality of 8% [7].
The purpose of this article is to review our current
understanding of cardiac complications, and highlight
the best available evidence for diagnosis and treatment.
Where
high-quality
definitive
consensus
guidelines
exist, either from the European Society of Cardiology
(ESC),
Canadian
Cardiovascular
Society
(CCS)
or
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Asso-
ciation (ACC/AHA), these are compared and referred
to as gold standard evidence. Specific meta-analyses,
systematic reviews and landmark trials are only explic-
itly discussed where they illustrate points of contro-
versy or gaps in our current knowledge.
Myocardial insult, ischaemia and
infarction
The definition of myocardial ischaemia is difficult in
the peri-operative context. The third universal defini-
tion of myocardial infarction from the Joint Task
Force formed by the ESC, ACC and World Heart Fed-
eration requires a troponin rise above the 99th per-
centile, accompanied by chest pain; new ST segment
changes or left bundle branch block; ventricular wall
motion abnormalities; or intracoronary thrombus on
angiography [8]. This methodological approach is
unsuitable for peri-operative use. Patients receiving
postoperative analgesia rarely experience chest pain;
pathognomonic ECG changes are rare; echocardiogra-
phy is not routinely performed as a screening tool;
and only a quarter of postoperative MIs demonstrate
thrombotic lesions on angiography [9].
The use of postoperative troponin screening has
evolved quickly as increasingly sensitive assays become
available, and our understanding of the underlying
pathology increases. For example, in 2005, Martinez
et al. [10] described daily normal sensitivity troponin-I
as a screening tool for postoperative MI, using a defi-
nition that required ECG changes or clinical symp-
toms, with 98% sensitivity for detection of MI.
Many studies have utilised serial high-sensitivity
troponin assays postoperatively, examining the link
between postoperative troponin rise and risk of 30-day
as well as long-term mortality and MACE [2, 11–20].
The exact methodology and assays used varies among
these studies, but certain themes occur consistently:
troponin rises are common (occurring in 10–15% of
patients over 45 with in-patient surgery); only a
minority of patients met the universal definition of
MI; and clinically silent troponin rises, which were
non-diagnostic
of
MI,
still
conferred
significant
increases in mortality risk. The magnitude of the
increase in peak troponin level is important, and can
be used to risk-stratify patients postoperatively [2].
Preservation of equipoise is required in ascribing
small rises in troponin directly to subclinical myocar-
dial ischaemic events. The newest troponin assays are
extremely sensitive, and can be moderately raised in
other conditions such as hypertension, heart failure,
chronic kidney disease, sepsis and following pul-
monary embolism [21]. They may also be transiently
raised in other conditions that cause stress to the lim-
its of physiological reserve. In addition, postoperative
troponin levels correlate closely with other biomarkers
of physiological stress such as cortisol [22]. In a sys-
tematic review of healthy marathon runners by Vilela
et al. [21], the vast majority of participants had high-
sensitivity troponin results above the 99th percentile at
the end of the race, with no evidence of myocardial
necrosis
on
cardiac
magnetic
resonance
imaging
(MRI), and zero mortality at 30 days. It is fair to say
that patients with MINS have undergone an extreme
physiological event, but whether it is always of cardiac
origin requires further substantiation. It is likely that
MINS patients represent a spectrum of pathology, with
a small proportion having overt MI, more having sub-
clinical MI, some having cardiac injury and a larger
section being asymptomatic but at increased physiolog-
ical risk (Fig. 1). Diagnostic uncertainty notwithstand-
ing, postoperative troponin is a useful biomarker for
increased mortality risk, and the evidence for prevent-
ing this rise through physiological support and cardio-
logical intervention merits review.
Prevention of myocardial injury after
non-cardiac surgery
Classical teaching on peri-operative MI was that it
resulted from oxygen supply/demand mismatch in the
coronary arteries. Coronary blood flow is principally
determined by the coronary perfusion pressure (aortic
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
35
Sellers et al. | Cardiovascular complications after non-cardiac surgery
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 34–42
 diastolic pressure – left ventricular diastolic pressure),
so peri-operative hypotension may be predicted to
increase the risk of myocardial ischaemia. In a large
database study from the Cleveland Clinic, Walsh et al.
[23] studied the correlation between lowest mean arte-
rial pressure (MAP) and incidence of MINS, defined as
fourth-generation
troponin-T > 0.04 ng.ml�1,
and
acute kidney injury. They found that even short periods
of time spent with MAP < 55 mmHg significantly
increased the relative risk of MINS by 1.5 for 1–20 min
of low MAP, and 2.0 for > 20 min, p < 0.001. The 30-
day
mortality
increased
if
MAP
was
less
than
55 mmHg for > 20 min [23]. In a prospective cohort
study of 890 patients undergoing vascular surgery, Van
Waes et al. [24] studied the association between relative
reduction in MAP and MINS, defined as third-genera-
tion troponin-I level > 99% of baseline, and found that
a MAP reduction of 40% from baseline sustained for
30 min or more was associated with myocardial injury
(p = 0.005). Finally, Selmasi et al. conducted a retro-
spective cohort analysis of 57,315 patients at the Cleve-
land Clinic, and found that the risk of MINS (defined
as fourth-generation troponin-T over the upper limit of
normal, 0.03 ng.ml�1) increased exponentially below a
MAP threshold of 65 mmHg [25]. The risk of MINS
increased
with
increasing
durations
of
MAP
< 65 mmHg from 1 to 90 min, but even brief periods
under this absolute threshold were significant. They
also demonstrated no additional benefit to using rela-
tive MAP reductions from baseline over an absolute
threshold of 65 mmHg [25].
These studies are heterogenous with respect to the
type of troponin used, cut-off for MINS diagnosis and
consequently
blood
pressure
thresholds
that
were
found to be prognostically relevant. Although it is dif-
ficult to make definitive clinical practice recommenda-
tions based on these studies, it does appear that tighter
blood pressure management may reduce the risk of
MINS in the peri-operative period.
Other physiological interventions may also be
helpful in reducing fluctuations of troponin during the
peri-operative period. A three-year quality improve-
ment project focused on maintaining physiological
homoeostasis by preventing hypoxia, avoiding hyper-
glycaemia and ensuring normovolaemia in an ortho-
paedic population demonstrated a reduction in the
incidence of troponin elevations from 8.9 to 3.9%, and
MACE from 8.1 to 1.9% [26].
Figure 1 Spectrum of myocardial injury and troponin rise after non-cardiac surgery. MI, myocardial infarction.
36
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 34–42
Sellers et al. | Cardiovascular complications after non-cardiac surgery
 Pharmacological prevention of peri-operative MI
has been controversial. The POISE trial showed that
beta-blockers reduced the incidence of MI if started
immediately before surgery, however, this was at the
expense of increased stroke and all-cause mortality [27].
The use of calcium channel blockers in the peri-opera-
tive period (principally diltiazem) was associated with a
reduction in ischaemia and supraventricular tachycardia
in a meta-analysis of 11 small-size trials [28]. A ran-
domised controlled trial (n = 1000) of dihydropyridine
calcium channel blockers showed a significant increase
in peri-operative mortality in patients undergoing aortic
surgery [29]. The current status of peri-operative use of
calcium channel blockers is reflected by the ACC/AHA
guidelines that make no recommendations [30], and the
ESC guidelines suggesting continuing its peri-operative
use, or initiating them in high-risk patients only if beta-
blockers are not tolerated [1]. Interestingly, the Cana-
dian guidelines recommend against starting calcium
channel blockers [31]. Consequently, further research is
required to delineate the safest dose, timing, and dura-
tion of administration of either beta-blockers or calcium
channel antagonists.
Platelet inhibitors are widely used in non-surgical
populations for prevention of MI and stroke. However,
evidence from the POISE-2 trial indicates that aspirin
does not reduce the rate of MI peri-operatively, either
when initiated de novo or continued for patients on
long-term therapy, and at the expense of increased rate
of major bleeding [32]. Therefore, both CCS and
ACC/AHA guidelines recommend stopping aspirin at
least three days before surgery, and restarting 8–
10 days postoperatively [31,33], except in patients with
coronary stents in situ and acceptable bleeding risk.
The ESC guidelines are more equivocal, recommending
making an individual decision based on patient and
surgical risk factors [1].
Statins have not been studied in the peri-operative
context in many randomised controlled trials, but
there are several observational trials that demonstrate
significant reductions in 30-day postoperative mortal-
ity, and as such, the recommendation is that they
should be initiated or continued throughout the peri-
operative period [33] according to the ACC/AHA
guidelines,
and
initiated
specifically
for
vascular
patients by the ESC guidelines.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are associated
with intra-operative hypotension and increased risk of
peri-operative renal impairment, and the recommenda-
tion in the ESC guidelines is that they should be with-
held when prescribed for hypertension, and continued
for heart failure. The ACC/AHA guidelines describe the
evidence as weak for discontinuing these drugs, and the
CCS
guidelines
recommended
discontinuing,
but
restarting them within 48 h. All guideline authors
describe the evidence base as weak; however, all these
guidelines predate the sub-group analysis of the VISION
study conducted by Roshanov et al. [34] which demon-
strated a reduced risk of suffering a composite outcome
of death, stroke or MINS when ACEi or ARBs are with-
held. We believe the evidence base does now support
the long-standing practice of withholding these drugs
until the postoperative period, and restarting them post-
operatively for hypertension control.
Dual antiplatelet therapy and coronary
stents
All patients with coronary stents in situ receive anti-
platelet therapy, including aspirin and a P2Y12 inhibi-
tor, most commonly clopidigrel, although prasugel,
ticagrelor and cangrelor are also available. These drugs
prevent platelet adhesion to the stent lumen, and
therefore thrombosis, while epithelial cells colonise and
cover the foreign surface. The rate at which this
epithelialisation occurs is dependent on the type of
stent used. Bare metal stents epithelialise fastest and
therefore require antiplatelet protection for the shortest
time, but are at the highest risk for early thrombosis.
Drug-eluting stents secrete antiplatelet drugs to pre-
vent thrombosis, but this also slows the rate of epithe-
lialisation. First-generation stents (secreting sirolimus
and paclitaxel) require longer protection than second-
generation stents (secreting everolimus or zotarolimus),
however, the latter are universally used in current clin-
ical practice.
The ACC/AHA guidelines on dual antiplatelet ther-
apy in the non-operative context have recently been
updated [35]. In trials of low-risk patients (without
acute coronary syndrome), 3–6 months of antiplatelet
treatment is reasonable for new drug-eluting stent
recipients, reducing major adverse bleeding events
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
37
Sellers et al. | Cardiovascular complications after non-cardiac surgery
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 34–42
 without increasing early stent thrombosis when com-
pared with 12 months. However, continuing dual anti-
platelet
therapy
for
a
further
18 months
is
still
associated with a modest reduction in MI (absolute
reduction six per 1000), with a comparable increase in
major bleeding (five per 1000). In patients with percuta-
neous coronary intervention (PCI) after acute coronary
syndrome, the absolute risk of thrombotic complication
is reduced by 1–3% with prolonged dual antiplatelet
therapy, compared with an absolute bleeding risk of
1%.
In the peri-operative context, the risk–benefit ratio
must also balance the increased risk of major bleeding.
Stopping P2Y12 inhibitors within 3–6 months of inser-
tion of any stent should be regarded as high risk, but
the exact variety of stent inserted can alter the risk pro-
file, and a multidisciplinary discussion between sur-
geon, anaesthetist and cardiologist is advised before
surgery. The length of dual antiplatelet therapy dura-
tion depends on the type of stent and the indication
(routine revascularisation or in the context of ACS).
The ESC recommend that dual antiplatelet therapy can
be terminated for bare metal stents after one month,
drug-eluting stents after six months for routine patients
and one year after treatment for ACS regardless of type
of stent. In patients whose surgical need is more urgent,
they suggest a reduction to three months of dual anti-
platelet therapy for drug-eluting stents, but recommend
that surgery is performed in a hospital with access to
PCI in case of postoperative thrombosis. Any patient
with a stent should have aspirin continued throughout
the peri-operative period. A recent study identified that
the incidence of MACE in patients undergoing non-
cardiac surgery after previous PCI is high, in spite of
adequate peri-operative antiplatelet therapy [36].
Postoperative surveillance and
treatment of myocardial injury after
non-cardiac surgery
Troponin screening regimes in MINS studies have var-
ied in timing and frequency of repetition (Table 1).
The mortality effects of troponin rise are similar across
all these studies. The ACC/AHA and ESC guidelines
were both written before many of the above studies
were published, and are therefore hesitant to recom-
mend routine troponin screening, on the grounds that
there is no established therapy. The more recent CCS
guideline is to measure troponin daily for 2–3 days
postoperatively, and refer to an internal medicine spe-
cialist for optimisation of medical therapy (particularly
aspirin and statin), as a response to the diagnosis of
MINS. As MINS covers a spectrum of myocardial
insults that includes overt MI, the occurrence of coro-
nary problems amenable to intervention by a cardiolo-
gist is not zero. Van Waes et al. reported that 41% of
patients with MINS were seen by a cardiologist, of
whom 38% had changes made to medication, 6% were
transferred to a coronary care unit for closer monitor-
ing, 5% underwent angiography and 4% were found to
have treatable coronary artery stenosis [17]. This is in
keeping with the historically established peri-operative
MI rate of 3–6%, of which 55% are caused by supply/
demand mismatch, 27% by thrombus and 18% non-
obstructive in nature [9].
Table 1 Troponin measurement schedules in myocardial injury after non-cardiac surgery (MINS) studies.
Study
Year
Troponin timing
Study type
Devereaux et al. [11]
2017
6–12 h postoperatively;
Daily for 3 days thereafter
VISION study; multinational prospective observational
trial of patients aged > 45 years having major surgery
Botto et al. [16]
2014
6–12 h postoperatively Daily for 3 days
VISION study
Biccard et al. [14]
2017
6–12 h postoperatively
Daily for 3 days thereafter
Vascular surgery sub-group of VISION study
Reed et al. [12]
2017
Any point in first 4 days postoperatively
Vascular surgery; single-centre retrospective study
Van Waes et al. [15]
2013
Daily for 3 days
Single-centre observational study, patients > 60 years
of age having major surgery
Gorgon et al. [18]
2016
Daily for 2 days
Colorectal surgery, patients aged > 45 years;
single-centre observational study
Kim et al. [19]
2016
Single measurement in first 48 h
Major surgery in patients aged > 50 years;
single-centre retrospective study
38
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 34–42
Sellers et al. | Cardiovascular complications after non-cardiac surgery
 Prognosis for myocardial injury after
non-cardiac surgery
The risk of cardiac death at one year ranges from
three to 11% in patients with MINS, depending on the
magnitude of troponin rise, compared with a baseline
risk of 3% in postoperative patients with normal tro-
ponin levels [17]. Specific treatment for MINS is still
an area of active research; however, simple optimisa-
tion of medical management of coronary artery disease
risk factors in MINS patient, according to standard
AHA/ACC guidelines, has been shown to have a sig-
nificant reduction in the one-year risk of MACE [37].
These findings open a window of opportunity for peri-
operative physicians to potentially improve long-term
outcomes in these patients.
Postoperative arrhythmia
Some form of arrhythmia is not an uncommon finding
postoperatively. Narrow and broad complex tachy-
and bradyarrhythmias may occur, but are most often
attributable to pre-existing disease. Atrial fibrillation
and prolonged QT interval are two specific conditions
that are epidemiologically different enough to merit
specific peri-operative discussion.
Outside cardiac and thoracic surgery, the incidence
of postoperative atrial fibrillation is 3–10% [38, 39],
although the transient nature of this arrhythmia makes
it difficult to capture in surveillance studies. The pre-
cipitating
factors
are
not
always
clear,
but
cate-
cholamine stress caused by tissue trauma and pain,
hypovolaemia or atrial stretch, hypoxia (causing pul-
monary vasoconstriction), and electrolyte disturbances
have all been implicated. The haemodynamic effects
are often subtle, but the loss of atrial ‘kick’ reduces
stroke volume by 25%, pulmonary artery pressure
increases,
and
tachycardia
may
cause
myocardial
ischaemia through loss of diastolic filling time and
increased myocardial work. This is often well tolerated,
and most patients with postoperative AF episodes are
asymptomatic, but patients with pre-existing hyperten-
sion or diastolic dysfunction can frequently become
haemodynamically unstable. This condition often war-
rants chemical or electrical cardioversion to restore
sinus rhythm. Patients who do not have haemody-
namic instability, or who fail cardioversion, or who
have low left ventricular ejection fraction and are unli-
kely to sustain sinus rhythm should be rate controlled
[4]. The common medications used include beta-block-
ers, calcium channel antagonists and digoxin.
The long-term implications of postoperative AF
are not benign, even if patients remain in sinus
rhythm after their initial arrhythmia. Patients who
experience postoperative AF are twice as likely to
have a stroke within one year postoperatively [40].
The guidance from the UK National Institute of
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) is that postopera-
tive AF should be treated in the same way as AF
from any other cause [41]. Stroke risk should be
assessed with a validated scoring system such as
CHADS2-VASC (Table 2) [42], and anticoagulation
started if the score is ≥ 2.
Bleeding risk should be assessed using the HAS-
BLED score (Table 3) [43], which has the highest
accuracy at predicting anticoagulant-related bleeding in
primary care, but was not designed to influence imme-
diate postoperative decision making.
Table 2 CHADS2-VASC score for calculating stroke
risk in atrial fibrillation [42].
Risk factor
Scoring
Annual stroke risk
Age 65–74 years
+1
0 points: 1.9%
1 point: 2.8%
2 points: 4.0%
3 points: 5.9%
4 points: 8.5%
5 points: 12.5%
6 points: 18.2%
Age ≥ 75 yrs
+2
Female sex
+1
Congestive heart failure
+1
Hypertension
+1
TIA/stroke
+2
Vascular disease
+1
Diabetes
+1
TIA, transient ischaemic attack.
Table 3 HAS-BLED score for bleeding risk on antico-
agulation; 3 or more points denotes increased risk of
major bleeding.
Risk factor
Scoring
Systolic blood pressure > 160 mmHg
+1
Abnormal renal function
+1
Abnormal liver function
+1
Age ≥ 65 yrs
+1
Prior stroke
+1
Bleeding history
+1
Labile INR
+1
Taking other drugs
+1
Concurrent alcohol use
+1
INR, international normalised ratio.
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
39
Sellers et al. | Cardiovascular complications after non-cardiac surgery
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 34–42
 Corrected QT interval (QTc) prolongation has
historically been associated with halothane anaesthesia
and therefore of less concern in the modern era.
However, studies from institutions with automated
telemetry reporting showed a significant peri-operative
increase in QTc, predominantly in patients with at
least one QTc-prolonging risk factor [44]. A study by
Duma et al. [45] compared three different anaesthetic
techniques with respect to QTc acquired utilising hol-
ter monitoring during the peri-operative period. The
authors
showed
that
patients
undergoing
general
anaesthesia had a mean increase in QTc of 33 ms,
patients with spinal anaesthesia of 22 ms, with no
change in patients anesthetised with local anaesthesia
[45]. In a systematic review of patients who devel-
oped torsades de pointes peri-operatively, Johnstone
et al. [46] found that an increase in QTc from
457 ms to 576 ms was required
to generate
the
arrhythmia. The increase in QTc during the peri-
operative period is multifactorial, and most patients
have predisposing risk factors, such as long QT syn-
drome or electrolyte abnormalities. Use of 5-HT3
receptor antagonist antiemetics may not be a risk fac-
tor; one database study including the use of ondanse-
tron found no difference in mean QTc [47], and a
second dose-finding study found an increase in QTc
only with ondansetron 8 mg or more [48]. Taken
together, it appears that the process of surgery and
anaesthesia increases the QTc, is multifactorial and
that most patients have predisposing non-anaesthetic
risk factors, but that this is due to anaesthetic drugs
only in a minority of cases.
Postoperative heart failure
The vast majority of patients with postoperative heart
failure also have pre-operative heart failure. The post-
operative mortality of this particular sub-group of
patients is higher than those with coronary artery dis-
ease alone [7]. However, in patients who were previ-
ously asymptomatic, heart failure is rare as a solely
postoperative complication. Some of these patients will
develop systolic heart failure as a consequence of a
myocardial ischaemic event, the prevention and treat-
ment of which we have already described. The remain-
der are victims of a disparate group of physiological
events including: inappropriate fluid type and volume;
peri-operative lung injury masquerading as pulmonary
oedema; renal impairment; and sepsis.
One condition that deserves special attention is
pre-operative diastolic dysfunction. Diastolic dysfunc-
tion is defined as inadequate active myocardial relax-
ation during diastole, leading to reduced filling of the
left ventricle, and consequently reduced end-diastolic
left ventricular volume and low stroke volume, even
with normal left ventricular ejection fraction. Diastolic
dysfunction is often present in patients with left ven-
tricular hypertrophy (long-standing hypertension, car-
diomyopathy),
occurring
in
27%
of
the
general
middle-aged population in echocardiographic epidemi-
ological studies [5]. Fayad et al. performed a system-
atic
review
of
3876
patients
with
pre-operative
diastolic dysfunction, and found that they were more
likely to develop postoperative pulmonary oedema,
myocardial infarction and MACE [6]. These patients
have decreased tolerance of hypovolaemia, which often
leads to significant hypotension; as well as to hyper-
volaemia, with exaggerated increases in left atrial pres-
sure, leading to pulmonary oedema. It has been
suggested that using some form of cardiac output
monitoring to optimise stroke volume, as well as
avoiding tachycardia and wide pulse pressure, may
lead to lower morbidity [49].
Summary
Cardiac complications remain the leading cause of
morbidity and mortality after non-cardiac surgery, and
despite a rapidly evolving literature on this topic,
many questions remain incompletely answered; for
instance, what is the pathophysiology of MINS, and
how can it be prevented, and, what is the optimal
medical pre-optimisation of the high cardiac risk
patient? Nonetheless, there is growing evidence that
improvements in outcomes can be achieved for the
high cardiac risk patient, by identifying relevant risk
factors and appropriately triaging them to a more
advanced postoperative care environment staffed by
peri-operative physicians.
References
1. Kristensen SD, Knuuti J, Saraste A, et al. 2014 ESC/ESA Guide-
lines on non-cardiac surgery: cardiovascular assessment and
management: the Joint Task Force on non-cardiac surgery:
40
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 34–42
Sellers et al. | Cardiovascular complications after non-cardiac surgery
 cardiovascular assessment and management of the European
Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European Society of
Anaesthesiology (ESA). European Heart Journal 2014; 35:
2383–431.
2. Sessler DI, Devereaux PJ. Perioperative troponin screening.
Anesthesia and Analgesia 2016; 123: 359–60.
3. Devereaux PJ, Sessler DI. Cardiac complications in patients
undergoing major noncardiac surgery. New England Journal of
Medicine 2015; 373: 2258–69.
4. Bessissow A, Khan J, Devereaux PJ, Alvarez-Garcia J, Alonso-
Coello P
. Postoperative atrial fibrillation in non-cardiac and car-
diac surgery: an overview. Journal of Thrombosis and Hae-
mostasis 2015; 13(Suppl 1): S304–12.
5. Kuznetsova T, Herbots L, Lopez B, et al. Prevalence of left
ventricular diastolic dysfunction in a general population. Circu-
lation: Heart Failure 2009; 2: 105–12.
6. Fayad A, Ansari MT, Yang H, Ruddy T, Wells GA. Perioperative
diastolic dysfunction in patients undergoing noncardiac sur-
gery is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular events: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Anesthesiology 2016;
125: 72–91.
7. van Diepen S, Bakal JA, McAlister FA, Ezekowitz JA. Mortality
and readmission of patients with heart failure, atrial fibrilla-
tion, or coronary artery disease undergoing noncardiac sur-
gery: an analysis of 38 047 patients. Circulation 2011; 124:
289–96.
8. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Third universal definition
of myocardial infarction. Circulation 2012; 126: 2020–35.
9. Lange RA. Coronary angiography is not picture perfect for
determining perioperative MI pathophysiology. Catheter and
Cardiovascular Interventions 2012; 80: 777–8.
10. Martinez EA, Nass CM, Jermyn RM, et al. Intermittent cardiac
troponin-I screening is an effective means of surveillance for
a perioperative myocardial infarction. Journal of Cardiotho-
racic and Vascular Anesthesia 2005; 19: 577–82.
11. Devereaux PJ, Biccard BM, Sigamani A, et al. Association of
postoperative high-sensitivity troponin levels with myocardial
injury and 30-day mortality among patients undergoing non-
cardiac surgery. Journal of the American Medical Assocation
2017; 317: 1642–51.
12. Reed GW, Horr S, Young L, et al. Associations between cardiac
troponin, mechanism of myocardial injury, and long-term
mortality after noncardiac vascular surgery. Journal of the
American Heart Association 2017; 6: e005672.
13. Khan J, Alonso-Coello P
, Devereaux PJ. Myocardial injury after
noncardiac surgery. Current Opinions in Cardiology 2014; 29:
307–11.
14. Biccard BM, Scott DJA, Chan MTV, et al. Myocardial Injury After
Noncardiac Surgery (MINS) in vascular surgical patients: a
Prospective Observational Cohort Study. Annals of Surgery
2017; doi: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000002290. [Epub ahead of
print].
15. van Waes JA, Nathoe HM, de Graaff JC, et al. Myocardial
injury after noncardiac surgery and its association with short-
term mortality. Circulation 2013; 127: 2264–71.
16. Botto F, Alonso-Coello P
, Chan MT, et al. Myocardial injury
after noncardiac surgery: a large, international, prospective
cohort study establishing diagnostic criteria, characteristics,
predictors, and 30-day outcomes. Anesthesiology 2014; 120:
564–78.
17. van Waes JA, Grobben RB, Nathoe HM, et al. One-year mor-
tality, causes of death, and cardiac interventions in patients
with postoperative myocardial injury. Anesthesia and Analge-
sia 2016; 123: 29–37.
18. Gorgun E, Lan BY, Aydinli HH, et al. Troponin elevation after
colorectal surgery: significance and management. Annals of
Surgery 2016; 264: 605–11.
19. Kim M, Son M, Lee DH, Park K, Park TH. Troponin-I level after
major noncardiac surgery and its association with long-term
mortality. International Heart Journal 2016; 57: 278–84.
20. Ekeloef S, Alamili M, Devereaux PJ, Gogenur I. Troponin eleva-
tions after non-cardiac, non-vascular surgery are predictive of
major adverse cardiac events and mortality: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. British Journal of Anaesthesia
2016; 117: 559–68.
21. Vilela E, Bastos J, Rodrigues R, Nunes J. High sensitivity tro-
ponin after running – a systematic review. Netherland Journal
of Medicine 2014; 72: 5–9.
22. Mahla E, Tiesenhausen K, Rehak P
, Fruhwald S, Purstner P
,
Metzler H. Perioperative myocardial cell injury: the relation-
ship between troponin T and cortisol. Journal of Clinical Anes-
thesia 2000; 12: 208–12.
23. Walsh M, Devereaux PJ, Garg AX, et al. Relationship between
intraoperative mean arterial pressure and clinical outcomes
after noncardiac surgery: toward an empirical definition of
hypotension. Anesthesiology 2013; 119: 507–15.
24. van Waes JA, van Klei WA, Wijeysundera DN, van Wolfswinkel
L, Lindsay TF, Beattie WS. Association between intraoperative
hypotension and myocardial injury after vascular surgery.
Anesthesiology 2016; 124: 35–44.
25. Salmasi V, Maheshwari K, Yang D, et al. Relationship between
intraoperative hypotension, defined by either reduction from
baseline
or
absolute
thresholds,
and
acute
kidney
and
myocardial injury after noncardiac surgery: a retrospective
cohort analysis. Anesthesiology 2017; 126: 47–65.
26. Ausset SAY, Verret C, Benhamou D, Vest P
, Cirodde A, Lenoir
B. Quality of postoperative care after major orthopedic sur-
gery is correlated with both long-term cardiovascular outcome
and troponin Ic elevation. Anesthesiology 2010; 113: 529–40.
27. Wijeysundera DN, Duncan D, Nkonde-Price C, et al. Periopera-
tive beta blockade in noncardiac surgery: a systematic review
for the 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascu-
lar evaluation and management of patients undergoing non-
cardiac
surgery:
a
report
of
the
American
College
of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines. Circulation 2014; 130: 2246–64.
28. Wijeysundera DN, Beattie WS. Calcium channel blockers for
reducing cardiac morbidity after noncardiac surgery: a meta-
analysis. Anesthesia and Analgesia 2003; 97: 634–41.
29. Kertai MD, Westerhout CM, Varga KS, Acsady G, Gal J. Dihy-
dropiridine calcium-channel blockers and perioperative mor-
tality
in
aortic
aneurysm
surgery.
British
Journal
of
Anaesthesia 2008; 101: 458–65.
30. Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al. 2014 ACC/
AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and
management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation
2014; 130: e278–333.
31. Duceppe E, Parlow J, MacDonald P
, et al. Canadian cardiovas-
cular society guidelines on perioperative cardiac risk assess-
ment and management for patients who undergo noncardiac
surgery. Canadian Journal of Cardiology 2017; 33: 17–32.
32. Devereaux PJ, Mrkobrada M, Sessler DI, et al. Aspirin in
patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. New England Journal
of Medicine 2014; 370: 1494–503.
33. Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al. 2014 ACC/
AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
41
Sellers et al. | Cardiovascular complications after non-cardiac surgery
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 34–42
 management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on practice guidelines. Journal of the
American College of Cardiology 2014; 64: e77–137.
34. Roshanov PS, Rochwerg B, Patel A, et al. Withholding versus
continuing angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angio-
tensin ii receptor blockers before noncardiac surgery: an anal-
ysis of the vascular events in noncardiac surgery patients
cohort evaluation prospective cohort. Anesthesiology 2017;
126: 16–27.
35. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA guideline
focused update on duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in
patients with coronary artery disease: a report of the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines: an update of the 2011
ACCF/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Percutaneous Coronary Interven-
tion. Circulation 2016; 134: e123–55.
36. Wasowicz M, Syed S, Wijeysundera DN, et al. Effectiveness of
platelet inhibition on major adverse cardiac events in non-car-
diac surgery after percutaneous coronary intervention: a
prospective cohort study. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2016;
116: 493–500.
37. Foucrier A, Rodseth R, Aissaoui M, et al. The long-term
impact of early cardiovascular therapy intensification for post-
operative troponin elevation after major vascular surgery.
Anesthesia and Analgesia 2014; 119: 1053–63.
38. Bhave PD, Goldman LE, Vittinghoff E, Maselli J, Auerbach A.
Incidence, predictors, and outcomes associated with postoper-
ative atrial fibrillation after major noncardiac surgery. Ameri-
can Heart Journal 2012; 164: 918–24.
39. Danelich IM, Lose JM, Wright SS, et al. Practical management of
postoperative atrial fibrillation after noncardiac surgery. Journal
of the American College of Surgeons 2014; 219: 831–41.
40. Gialdini G, Nearing K, Bhave PD, et al. Perioperative atrial
fibrillation
and
the
long-term
risk
of
ischemic
stroke.
Journal of the American Medical Association 2014; 312:
616–22.
41. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE). CG
(180) Atrial Fibrillation (update): the management of atrial
fibrillation.
2014.
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg180
(accessed 26/09/2017).
42. Chen JY, Zhang AD, Lu HY, Guo J, Wang FF. Li ZC CHADS2 versus
CHA2DS2-VASc score in assessing the stroke and thromboem-
bolism risk stratification in patients with atrial fibrillation: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Geriatric Car-
diology 2013; 10: 258–66.
43. Zhu W, He W, Guo L, Wang X, Hong K. The HAS-BLED score for
predicting major bleeding risk in anticoagulated patients with
atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clini-
cal Cardiology 2015; 38: 555–61.
44. Nagele P
, Pal S, Brown F, Blood J, Miller JP
, Johnston J. Postop-
erative QT interval prolongation in patients undergoing non-
cardiac surgery under general anesthesia. Anesthesiology
2012; 117: 321–8.
45. Duma A, Pal S, Helsten D, Stein PK, Miller JP
, Nagele P
. High-
fidelity analysis of perioperative QTc prolongation. Anesthesia
and Analgesia 2016; 122: 439–48.
46. Johnston J, Pal S, Nagele P
. Perioperative torsade de pointes:
a systematic review of published case reports. Anesthesia
and Analgesia 2013; 117: 559–64.
47. Obal D, Yang D, Sessler DI. Perioperative doses of ondansetron
or dolasetron do not lengthen the QT interval. Mayo Clinic
Proceedings 2014; 89: 69–80.
48. Kim SH, Lee SM, Kim YK, et al. Effects of prophylactic ramose-
tron and ondansetron on corrected QT interval during general
anesthesia. Journal of Clinical Anesthesia 2014; 26: 511–6.
49. Ryu T, Song SY. Perioperative management of left ventricular
diastolic dysfunction and heart failure: an anesthesiologist’s
perspective. Korean Journal of Anesthesiology 2017; 70: 3–
12.
42
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 34–42
Sellers et al. | Cardiovascular complications after non-cardiac surgery
