 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Serologic Screening for Genital Herpes Infection
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the
benefits and harms of the service and an assessment of the bal-
ance. The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a ser-
vice in this assessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendation and Evidence
The USPSTF recommends against routine serologic screening for
genital herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection in asymptomatic
adolescents and adults, including those who are pregnant (D rec-
ommendation) (Figure 1).
Rationale
Importance
Genitalherpesisaprevalentsexuallytransmittedinfection(STI)inthe
United States; the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
estimates that almost 1 in 6 persons aged 14 to 49 years have genital
herpes.1Genitalherpesinfectioniscausedby2subtypesofHSV,HSV-1
and HSV-2. Unlike other infections for which screening is recom-
mended,HSVinfectionmaynothavealongasymptomaticperioddur-
ing which screening, early identification, and treatment may alter its
course. Antiviral medications may provide symptomatic relief from
outbreaks; however, these medications do not cure HSV infection.
AlthoughverticaltransmissionofHSVcanoccurbetweenaninfected
pregnantwomanandherinfantduringvaginaldelivery,interventions
can help reduce transmission. Neonatal herpes infection, while un-
common, can result in substantial morbidity and mortality.
IMPORTANCE Genital herpes is a prevalent sexually transmitted infection in the United States,
occurring in almost 1 in 6 persons aged 14 to 49 years. Infection is caused by 2 subtypes of the
herpes simplex virus (HSV), HSV-1 and HSV-2. Antiviral medications may provide symptomatic
relief from outbreaks but do not cure HSV infection. Neonatal herpes infection, while
uncommon, can result in substantial morbidity and mortality.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2005 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
recommendation on screening for genital herpes.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the accuracy, benefits, and harms
of serologic screening for HSV-2 infection in asymptomatic persons, including those who are
pregnant, as well as the effectiveness and harms of preventive medications and behavioral
counseling interventions to reduce future symptomatic episodes and transmission to others.
FINDINGS Based on the natural history of HSV infection, its epidemiology, and the available
evidence on the accuracy of serologic screening tests, the USPSTF concluded that the harms
outweigh the benefits of serologic screening for genital HSV infection in asymptomatic
adolescents and adults, including those who are pregnant.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF recommends against routine serologic
screening for genital HSV infection in asymptomatic adolescents and adults, including those
who are pregnant. (D recommendation)
JAMA. 2016;316(23):2525-2530. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.16776
Editorial page 2493
Author Audio Interview
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com and
CME Questions page 2546
Author/Group Information: The US
Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS
(chair@uspstf.net).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
December 20, 2016
Volume 316, Number 23
2525
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/20/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Detection
In the past, most cases of genital herpes in the United States have
been caused by infection with HSV-2. Adequate evidence suggests
that the most widely used, currently available serologic screening
test for HSV-2 approved by the US Food and Drug Administration is
notsuitableforpopulation-basedscreening,basedonitslowspeci-
ficity, the lack of widely available confirmatory testing, and its high
false-positive rate. Rates of genital herpes due to HSV-1 infection in
the United States may be increasing. While HSV-1 infection can be
identified by serologic tests, the tests cannot determine if the site
ofinfectionisoralorgenital;thus,theseserologictestsarenotuse-
ful for screening for asymptomatic genital herpes resulting from
HSV-1 infection.
Benefits of Early Detection and Intervention
Based on limited evidence from a small number of trials on the
potential benefit of screening and interventions in asymptomatic
populationsandanunderstandingofthenaturalhistoryandepide-
miologyofgenitalHSVinfection,theUSPSTFconcludedthattheevi-
dence is adequate to bound the potential benefits of screening in
asymptomaticadolescentsandadults,includingthosewhoarepreg-
nant, as no greater than small.
Harms of Early Detection and Intervention
Basedonevidenceonpotentialharmsfromasmallnumberoftrials,
the high false-positive rate of the screening tests, and the potential
anxiety and disruption of personal relationships related to diagno-
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Serologic Screening for Genital Herpes Infection
2526
JAMA
December 20, 2016
Volume 316, Number 23
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/20/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
sis, the USPSTF found that the evidence is adequate to bound the
potential harms of screening in asymptomatic adolescents and
adults, including those who are pregnant, as at least moderate.
USPSTF Assessment
TheUSPSTFconcludeswithmoderatecertaintythattheharmsout-
weigh the benefits for population-based screening for genital HSV
infection in asymptomatic adolescents and adults, including those
who are pregnant.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation statement applies to asymptomatic adoles-
cents and adults, including those who are pregnant, without a his-
tory of genital HSV infection (Figure 2).
Screening Tests
TheUSPSTFdoesnotrecommendserologicscreeningforgenitalHSV
infection in asymptomatic persons.
Treatment
The CDC provides guidance for the diagnosis and management of
genital HSV infection.2
Additional Approaches to Prevention
TheUSPSTFrecommendsintensivebehavioralcounselinginterven-
tions to reduce the likelihood of acquiring an STI for all sexually ac-
tive adolescents and for adults at increased risk.3
Useful Resources
The USPSTF has issued recommendations on screening for other
STIs, including chlamydia and gonorrhea,4 hepatitis B virus,5 hu-
man immunodeficiency virus (HIV),6 and syphilis.7
Other Considerations
Research Needs and Gaps
There are many areas in need of research to better understand the
detection and management of asymptomatic genital HSV infec-
tion, including
•Improved epidemiologic data on the true prevalence and natural
historyofasymptomaticgenitalHSVinfectionintheUnitedStates
•Development of screening and diagnostic tests with higher
specificity that detect both asymptomatic genital HSV-1 and
HSV-2 infections
•BehavioralinterventionstoreducethetransmissionofgenitalHSV
infection, including interventions to reduce the risk of transmis-
sion to uninfected pregnant women
•Further interventions to prevent and treat neonatal herpes
infection
•Potentialeffectivenessofantiretroviralmedications,includingtopi-
cal gels, as preexposure or postexposure prophylaxis
•More data on the potential harms of screening in asymptomatic
persons,includingpsychologicaldistressandthedisruptionofper-
sonal relationships
•Increased understanding of the potential role of HSV infection in
increasing the risk of HIV infection and the management of coin-
fection with HSV and HIV
Figure 2. Serologic Screening for Genital Herpes Infection: Clinical Summary
Population
Recommendation 
Asymptomatic adolescents and adults, including those who are pregnant
Do not routinely screen for genital herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection. 
Grade: D
Screening Tests
Treatment and
Interventions
Balance of Benefits
and Harms
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations   
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.   
The most widely used, currently available serologic screening test for HSV-2 is not suitable for population-based screening, based
on its low specificity, the lack of widely available confirmatory testing, and its high false-positive rate. While serologic screening
tests can detect HSV-1 infection, the tests cannot determine if the site of infection is oral or genital.
There is no cure for genital HSV infection. Antiviral medications are used for the management of symptomatic outbreaks and for
prevention in patients with a history of frequent symptomatic outbreaks.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that the harms outweigh the benefits for population-based screening for genital
HSV infection in asymptomatic adolescents and adults, including those who are pregnant.
The USPSTF recommends intensive behavioral counseling interventions to reduce the likelihood of acquiring a sexually transmitted
infection for all sexually active adolescents and for adults at increased risk. The USPSTF has also issued recommendations on screening
for other sexually transmitted infections, including chlamydia and gonorrhea, hepatitis B virus, HIV, and syphilis.
These recommendations are available on the USPSTF website (https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).   
HIV indicates human immunodeficiency virus; USPSTF, US Preventive Services Task Force.
USPSTF Recommendation: Serologic Screening for Genital Herpes Infection
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
December 20, 2016
Volume 316, Number 23
2527
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/20/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Research to develop a cure for genital HSV infection and a vac-
cine to prevent genital HSV infection should continue.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
GenitalherpesisanSTIcausedby2relatedviruses,HSV-1andHSV-2.
In adolescents and adults, genital infection often results in out-
breaksofblisters(vesicles)intheareainandaroundthegenitalsand
rectum. These blisters break and leave sores (ulcers) that are often
painful.Thefirstoutbreakofgenitalherpesisusuallythemostpain-
ful and may be accompanied by flu-like symptoms, including fever,
bodyaches,andswollenglands.Amongpersonswhohaveasymp-
tomatic first outbreak, 70% to 90% will have at least 1 more symp-
tomatic outbreak within the first year, with an average of 4
outbreaks.8,9 Repeat outbreaks are usually shorter and less severe
thantheinitialoutbreak.Althoughtheriskoftransmissionishigher
during a symptomatic outbreak, persons with genital herpes can
spread the infection to sexual partners even when they are asymp-
tomatic. Studies suggest that up to 85% of persons who are found
tobeinfectedwithHSV-2andwhoreportnopriorsymptomsofgeni-
tal herpes have a symptomatic outbreak within 6 months of being
tested.Accordingtosomeexperts,personswhoreceiveeducation
about genital herpes may be more likely to recognize and report its
symptoms.Ifthisistrue,somepersonswhoareconsidered“
asymp-
tomatic”may have actually experienced symptoms but not identi-
fied them as genital herpes.
Thereiscurrentlynocureforgenitalherpes;onceinfectionhas
occurred, the virus remains in a person for life. For this reason, the
prevalence of infection increases with age. Data from the 2005-
2010NationalHealthandNutritionExaminationSurveyindicatethat
the prevalence of HSV-2 infection ranged from 1.2% in adolescents
aged 14 to 19 years to 25.6% in adults aged 40 to 49 years.10 Over-
all, 15.7% of persons aged 14 to 49 years in the United States tested
positive for HSV-2 infection between 2005 and 2010.10 These es-
timates, however, should be interpreted with caution; because of a
lackofconfirmatorytesting,thesedatamayoverestimatethepreva-
lence of HSV-2 infection. These data also may underestimate the
overallprevalenceofgenitalherpes,astheydonotaccountforher-
pes infection caused by HSV-1. In the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey, women were almost twice as likely to be in-
fected with HSV-2 as men (20.9% vs 11.5%), in part because of ana-
tomicalfactorsthatpredisposewomentoinfection.11RatesofHSV-2
infectionalsovarybyrace/ethnicityandgeographicalregionandare
higher in men who have sex with men.10
Theherpessimplexvirusmaybetransmittedfrommothertoin-
fant during vaginal delivery. Among women with a prior history of
symptomatic genital herpes, nearly 75% will have at least 1 recur-
rence during pregnancy and about 14% will have symptoms or clini-
cal recurrence at the time of delivery.12,13 Evidence shows, however,
that vertical transmission and subsequent severe neonatal HSV in-
fectionaremostlikelyinpregnantwomenwhodeveloptheinitialgeni-
tal infection during pregnancy.14,15 The overall incidence of neonatal
herpesislow.14,16Olderdatafroma2006studyusingamultistatepe-
diatric inpatient discharge database estimated the incidence of neo-
natal HSV infection as 9.6 cases per 100 000 births (95% CI,
4.3-12.0).16 The most recent estimate of neonatal herpes incidence
comes from a large study in New York City of cases reported be-
tween2006and2010.Usingaclinicallaboratorysystem,thatstudy
found 76 cases of neonatal HSV infection among approximately
571 000 infants—an estimated incidence rate of 13.3 cases per
100 000 live births.17 The study also found that of the 72% of cases
forwhichHSVtypingwasdone,infectionswerealmostequallycaused
byHSV-1andHSV-2(28vs27cases).17Incidenceratesarethoughtto
varybygeographicregionandrace/ethnicity.Inthemultistatestudy,
incidenceratesweresubstantiallyhigherininfantsborntowomencov-
eredbyMedicaid(15.1casesper100 000livebirths)vsprivateinsur-
ance (5.4 cases per 100 000 live births).16,18
Approximately 45% of infants with neonatal HSV infection de-
veloprelativelymildskin,eye,ormucousmembraneinfections;30%
develop a central nervous system infection; and 25% develop dis-
seminateddisease.19Fourpercentofinfantswithacentralnervous
systeminfectionand30%ofinfantswithdisseminateddiseasemay
die as a result.20
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned a systematic evidence review to exam-
ine the evidence on the accuracy, benefits, and harms of serologic
screening for HSV-2 infection in asymptomatic adolescents and
adults, including those who are pregnant.21,22 The evidence review
alsoconsideredtheeffectivenessandharmsofpreventivemedica-
tionsandbehavioralcounselinginterventionsinasymptomaticpopu-
lationstoreducefuturesymptomaticepisodesandtransmissionto
susceptible sexual partners and infants.
Accuracy of Screening Tests
HerpeSelect (Focus Diagnostics), the most widely available sero-
logic test for genital HSV-2 infection approved by the US Food and
Drug Administration, has a pooled estimate of sensitivity of 99%
(95% CI, 97%-100%) and a pooled estimate of specificity of 83%
(95% CI, 72%-91%).22 A second test, the biokit HSV-2 Rapid Test
(Biokit USA), has a pooled estimate of sensitivity of 84% (95% CI,
73%-91%) and specificity of 95% (95% CI, 93%-97%).22 In the
general US population, the positive predictive value may be as
low as 75% for the biokit test and as low as 50% for HerpeSelect.
Western blot is considered to be the gold standard for the sero-
logic diagnosis of herpes. Western blot test results can be
obtained by sending a blood sample to a single research labora-
tory (University of Washington Clinical Virology Laboratory);
however, this test is not widely available as a screening or confir-
matory test for persons who screen positive for HSV-2 on one of
the less-specific, commercially available serologic tests. No stud-
ies have examined the screening accuracy of serologic HSV tests
in pregnant women. Serologic HSV tests may be clinically useful
for persons with persistent undiagnosed genital symptoms and in
other diagnostic settings.
Effectiveness of Early Detection and Treatment
Currently, there is no cure for genital HSV infection. Antiviral medi-
cationsaregenerallyusedforthemanagementofsymptomaticout-
breaksandforpreventioninpatientswithahistoryoffrequentsymp-
tomatic outbreaks. In studies, many persons identified with
asymptomaticgenitalherpes(ie,theyhavebeeninfectedwithHSV-2
and have never experienced symptoms) have a symptomatic out-
break within 6 months of testing. The increasing percentage of
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Serologic Screening for Genital Herpes Infection
2528
JAMA
December 20, 2016
Volume 316, Number 23
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/20/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
genital herpes cases caused by HSV-1 also limits the potential ben-
efitofserologicscreeninginasymptomaticpersons.WhileHSV-1in-
fection can be detected through serologic tests, these tests cannot
determinethesiteofHSVinfection.SinceHSV-1cancausebothoral
andgenitalherpesinfections,andoralherpesinfectionisverycom-
mon, serologic tests for HSV-1 cannot be used to screen for asymp-
tomatic genital herpes infection. The evidence is inadequate to de-
termine if suppressive antiviral therapy reduces transmission of
genital HSV infection between serodiscordant couples with an
asymptomatic partner.
Pregnantadolescentsandwomenwithneworknownhistoryof
genital HSV infection should be carefully observed during preg-
nancy. To reduce the chance of HSV transmission to the infant dur-
ingdelivery,womenwithactivegenitalHSVlesionsatthetimeofbirth
are usually offered the option of cesarean delivery. No studies have
examined the effectiveness of antiviral therapy to decrease the risk
for HSV transmission to pregnant women by an infected partner.
Potential Harms of Screening and Treatment
Serologic screening in asymptomatic persons will likely result in a
large number of false-positive results. Given the limitations of cur-
rently available tests, 1 of 2 positive results may be false. Given the
testcharacteristicsofthemostwidelyusedserologicscreeningtest
for HSV-2 and a population infection prevalence of 15%, screening
10 000 persons would result in approximately 1485 true-positive
and 1445 false-positive results. Confirmatory testing is not cur-
rentlywidelyavailableandisonlyperformedatasingleresearchlabo-
ratory. There are social and emotional harms of receiving a false-
positive result, in addition to the potential harms of unnecessary
treatmentwithpreventiveantiviralmedications.23,24However,an-
tiviral medications are generally considered to have few harms in
nonpregnant adults.21
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
BasedonthenaturalhistoryofHSVinfection,itsepidemiology,and
the available evidence on the accuracy of serologic screening tests,
the USPSTF found adequate evidence to bound the potential ben-
efitsandharmsandconcludewithmoderatecertaintythattheharms
outweigh the benefits of serologic screening for genital HSV infec-
tion in asymptomatic adolescents and adults, including those who
are pregnant.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from August 2 to August
29, 2016. The USPSTF reviewed and considered all comments
received during this period. Several comments supported the
USPSTF’
s analysis and conclusions; some comments noted that
the recommendation is consistent with current clinical practice
and advice from other organizations, including the CDC and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG).
A few comments expressed concern that persons with asymp-
tomatic genital herpes infection can (unknowingly) transmit the
infection to sexual partners. While the USPSTF understands this
concern, given the current lack of accurate, widely available sero-
logic screening tests and the expected high rate of false-positive
results that would occur with widespread screening in asymp-
tomatic persons, the USPSTF continues to recommend against
routine serologic screening in asymptomatic adolescents and
adults. In addition, the USPSTF clarified its language about HSV-1
infection, noting that while HSV-1 infection can be identified by
serologic tests, the tests cannot determine if the site of infection
is oral or genital.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
This recommendation is consistent with and updates the 2005
USPSTFrecommendation.25Thecurrentrecommendationisbased
on substantial new evidence on the limited accuracy of serologic
screeningtestsforgenitalHSV-2infectionandasmallamountofnew
evidence on the benefits and harms of screening.
Recommendations of Others
The American Academy of Family Physicians,26 ACOG,27 and the
CDC2donotrecommendroutineserologicscreeningforgenitalHSV
infection in asymptomatic adolescents or adults. Diagnostic test-
ing, however, in persons with recurrent atypical genital symptoms
may be helpful. The CDC recommends consideration of serologic
testingforHSV-2inpersonspresentingforSTIevaluationandforper-
sons living with HIV infection.2 The CDC also recommends consid-
erationofscreeningforHSVinfectioninmenwhohavesexwithmen
and who are at high risk for HIV infection.2
The American Academy of Family Physicians,26 ACOG,28 and
the CDC2 do not recommend routine serologic screening for genital
HSV infection in pregnant adolescents and women. The CDC2 and
ACOG28 recommend asking pregnant women about history of
genital HSV infection and consideration of cesarean delivery for
women with prodromal symptoms or active genital lesions during
labor to reduce the risk of neonatal HSV infection. The CDC recom-
mends that women with recurrent genital herpes during pregnancy
be offered suppressive therapy at 36 weeks of gestation.2
ARTICLE INFORMATION
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
members: Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD,
MAS; David C. Grossman, MD, MPH; Susan J. Curry,
PhD; Karina W. Davidson, PhD, MASc; John W.
Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Francisco A. R. García, MD,
MPH; Alex R. Kemper, MD, MPH, MS; Alex H. Krist,
MD, MPH; Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN, MSN, MPH;
C. Seth Landefeld, MD; Carol M. Mangione, MD,
MSPH; William R. Phillips, MD, MPH; Maureen G.
Phipps, MD, MPH; Michael P. Pignone, MD, MPH;
Michael Silverstein, MD, MPH; Chien-Wen
Tseng, MD, MPH, MSEE.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) members: University of California,
San Francisco (Bibbins-Domingo); Group Health
Research Institute, Seattle, Washington
(Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City (Curry);
Columbia University, New York, New York
(Davidson); State University of New York Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse (Epling); Pima County
Department of Health, Tucson, Arizona (García);
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina (Kemper);
Fairfax Family Practice Residency, Fairfax, Virginia
(Krist); Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond (Krist); Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut (Kurth); University of Alabama at
Birmingham (Landefeld); University of California,
Los Angeles (Mangione); University of Washington,
Seattle (Phillips); Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island (Phipps); University of Texas at Austin
(Pignone); Boston University, Boston,
Massachusetts (Silverstein); University of Hawaii,
Manoa (Tseng).
Author Contributions: Dr Bibbins-Domingo had
full access to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
USPSTF Recommendation: Serologic Screening for Genital Herpes Infection
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
December 20, 2016
Volume 316, Number 23
2529
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/20/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors
have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form
for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest.
Authors followed the policy regarding conflicts
of interest described at https://www
.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/conflict-of-interest-disclosures. All members of the
USPSTF receive travel reimbursement and an
honorarium for participating in USPSTF meetings.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank David Meyers,
MD (AHRQ), who contributed to the writing of the
manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella, MA (AHRQ), who
assisted with coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Genital herpes: CDC fact sheet. http://www.cdc.gov
/std/herpes/stdfact-herpes.htm. 2016. Accessed
October 5, 2016.
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Genital HSV infections. http://www.cdc.gov/std
/tg2015/herpes.htm. 2015. Accessed October 5,
2016.
3. LeFevre ML; US Preventive Services Task Force.
Behavioral counseling interventions to prevent
sexually transmitted infections: US Preventive
Services Task Force recommendation statement.
Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(12):894-901.
4. LeFevre ML; US Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for chlamydia and gonorrhea: US
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(12):902-910.
5. LeFevre ML; US Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for hepatitis B virus infection in
nonpregnant adolescents and adults: US Preventive
Services Task Force recommendation statement.
Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(1):58-66.
6. Moyer VA; US Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for HIV: US Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2013;159(1):51-60.
7. Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, Curry SJ,
et al; US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF).
Screening for syphilis infection in nonpregnant
adults and adolescents: US Preventive Services
Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA.
2016;315(21):2321-2327.
8. Patel R, Rompalo A. Genital herpes infections.
In: Zenilman JM, Shahmahnesh M, eds. Sexually
Transmitted Infections: Diagnosis, Management,
and Treatment. Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett;
2012.
9. Benedetti JK, Zeh J, Corey L. Clinical reactivation
of genital herpes simplex virus infection decreases
in frequency over time. Ann Intern Med. 1999;131(1):
14-20.
10. Bradley H, Markowitz LE, Gibson T,
McQuillan GM. Seroprevalence of herpes simplex
virus types 1 and 2—United States, 1999-2010.
J Infect Dis. 2014;209(3):325-333.
11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Seroprevalence of herpes simplex virus type
2 among persons aged 14-49 years—United States,
2005-2008. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010;
59(15):456-459.
12. Watts DH, Brown ZA, Money D, et al.
A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled
trial of acyclovir in late pregnancy for the reduction
of herpes simplex virus shedding and cesarean
delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2003;188(3):836-843.
13. Sheffield JS, Hollier LM, Hill JB, Stuart GS,
Wendel GD. Acyclovir prophylaxis to prevent
herpes simplex virus recurrence at delivery:
a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol. 2003;102(6):
1396-1403.
14. Brown ZA, Wald A, Morrow RA, Selke S, Zeh J,
Corey L. Effect of serologic status and cesarean
delivery on transmission rates of herpes simplex
virus from mother to infant. JAMA. 2003;289(2):
203-209.
15. ACOG Practice Bulletin: management of herpes
in pregnancy: number 8 October 1999: clinical
management guidelines for obstetrician-
gynecologists. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2000;68(2):
165-173.
16. Flagg EW, Weinstock H. Incidence of neonatal
herpes simplex virus infections in the United States,
2006. Pediatrics. 2011;127(1):e1-e8.
17. Handel S, Klingler EJ, Washburn K, Blank S,
Schillinger JA. Population-based surveillance for
neonatal herpes in New York City, April
2006-September 2010. Sex Transm Dis. 2011;38
(8):705-711.
18. Mahnert N, Roberts SW, Laibl VR, Sheffield JS,
Wendel GD Jr. The incidence of neonatal herpes
infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2007;196(5):e55-e56.
19. Hollier LM, Wendel GD. Third trimester antiviral
prophylaxis for preventing maternal genital herpes
simplex virus (HSV) recurrences and neonatal
infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008;(1):
CD004946.
20. Kimberlin DW, Rouse DJ. Clinical practice:
genital herpes. N Engl J Med. 2004;350(19):1970-
1977.
21. Feltner C, Grodensky CA, Ebel C, et al. Serologic
Screening for Genital Herpes Infection: An Evidence
Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force:
Evidence Synthesis No. 149. Rockville, MD: Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2016. AHRQ
publication 15-05223-EF-1.
22. Feltner C, Grodensky CA, Ebel C, et al. Serologic
screening for genital herpes infection: an evidence
review for the US Preventive Services Task Force.
JAMA. 2016.
23. Melville J, Sniffen S, Crosby R, et al.
Psychosocial impact of serological diagnosis of
herpes simplex virus type 2: a qualitative
assessment. Sex Transm Infect. 2003;79(4):280-285.
24. Rosenthal SL, Zimet GD, Leichliter JS, et al.
The psychosocial impact of serological diagnosis of
asymptomatic herpes simplex virus type 2
infection. Sex Transm Infect. 2006;82(2):154-157.
25. US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening
for Genital Herpes: Recommendation Statement.
Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality; 2005.
26. American Academy of Family Physicians.
Clinical Preventive Service Recommendation:
genital herpes simplex virus infection. http://www
.aafp.org/patient-care/clinical-recommendations
/all/genital-herpes.html. 2016. Accessed October 5,
2016.
27. American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists. Guidelines for Adolescent Health Care.
2nd ed. Washington, DC: American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists; 2011.
28. ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins. ACOG
Practice Bulletin: clinical management guidelines
for obstetrician-gynecologists: No. 82 June 2007:
management of herpes in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol.
2007;109(6):1489-1498.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Serologic Screening for Genital Herpes Infection
2530
JAMA
December 20, 2016
Volume 316, Number 23
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/20/2016
