 1
Serrone RO, et al. Trauma Surg Acute Care Open 2018;3:1–4. doi:10.1136/tsaco-2017-000137
Open Access 
Grey’s Anatomy effect: television portrayal of patients 
with trauma may cultivate unrealistic patient and 
family expectations after injury
Rosemarie O Serrone, Jordan A Weinberg, Pamela W Goslar, Erin P Wilkinson, 
Terrell M Thompson, Jonathan L Dameworth, Shawna R Dempsey, Scott R Petersen
To cite: Serrone RO, 
Weinberg JA, Goslar PW, 
et al. Trauma Surg Acute Care 
Open 2018;3:1–4.
Department of Surgery, Dignity 
Health St. Joseph’s Hospital 
and Medical Center, Phoenix, 
Arizona, USA
Correspondence to
Dr Jordan A Weinberg, 
Department of Surgery, Dignity 
Health - St. Joseph’s Hospital 
and Medical Center, Phoenix, AZ 
85013, USA;  
Jordan. 
Weinberg@ 
dignityhealth. 
org
Received 26 October 2017
Revised 11 December 2017
Accepted 8 January 2018
Original article
AbsTrACT
background Expectations of the healthcare experience 
may be influenced by television dramas set in the 
hospital workplace. It is our perception that the fictional 
television portrayal of hospitalization after injury in such 
dramas is misrepresentative. The purpose of this study 
was to compare trauma outcomes on television dramas 
versus reality.
Methods We screened 269 episodes of Grey’s 
Anatomy, a popular medical drama. A television (TV) 
registry was constructed by collecting data for each 
fictional trauma portrayed in the television series. 
Comparison data for a genuine patient cohort were 
obtained from the 2012 National Trauma Databank 
(NTDB) National Program Sample.
results 290 patients composed of the TV registry 
versus 4812 patients from NTDB. Mortality was higher 
on TV (22% vs 7%, P<0.0001). Most TV patients went 
straight from emergency department (ED) to operating 
room (OR) (71% vs 25%, P<0.0001). Among TV 
survivors, a relative minority were transferred to long-
term care (6% vs 22%, P<0.0001). For severely injured 
(Injury Severity Score ≥25) survivors, hospital length of 
stay was less than 1 week for 50% of TV patients versus 
20% in NTDB (P<0.0001).
Conclusions Trauma patients as depicted on television 
dramas typically go from ED to OR, and survivors 
usually return home. Television portrayal of rapid 
functional recovery after major injury may cultivate false 
expectations among patients and their families.
Level of evidence Level III.
InTroduCTIon
Prior research has demonstrated that public percep-
tion of healthcare may be influenced by the depic-
tion of physicians, nurses, patients, and hospitals on 
television.1–3 Although many television dramas that 
portray the medical field (such as Grey’s Anatomy 
and E.R.) strive for accuracy by using consultants 
to develop plausible, yet intriguing illness-based 
storylines and realistic depiction of providers and 
patients, the constraints of the television format and 
the need to entice viewers with sensational drama 
leads to a representation of healthcare in the tele-
vision universe that may be significantly removed 
from real life. Ultimately, viewers of these television 
series may develop an unrealistic perception of the 
daily events and activities involving patients and 
staff at their local hospital. 
This is particularly relevant for trauma patients 
and their families. The public’s familiarity with the 
real-life hospital course and recovery from major 
injury is limited to personal experience, so it is 
conceivable that, for many, expectations are largely 
shaped by the portrayal of traumatic injury on tele-
vision. Given the suddenness of physical trauma, 
there is no opportunity to pursue reputable sources 
of medical information to help prepare one for a 
hospital stay and/or operative procedure (unlike 
in the setting of other illnesses, such as cancer), 
resulting in further reliance on perceptions from 
mass media.
Prior studies have demonstrated that the presen-
tation of modern medicine on television is often 
divorced from reality.4–6 Notably, the outcomes of 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation as performed on 
television has been demonstrated to be significantly 
overoptimistic.4 5 To date, however, the accuracy 
of the portrayal of major injury with respect to 
hospital course and outcome has not been assessed. 
The purpose of this study was to examine the 
course of care and outcomes after major trauma 
as depicted in contemporary television dramas to 
assess for accuracy relative to real-life experience 
after hospitalization for trauma.
MeThods
T
wo physicians and a nurse practitioner from an 
American College of Surgeons-verified Level I 
Trauma Center reviewed all 269 episodes from 
the first 12 seasons (2005–2016) of the television 
drama Grey’s Anatomy. Grey’s Anatomy was chosen 
as the representative television series given its long 
run, its immense popularity (consistently a ‘top 10’ 
television show in the USA), and its setting in a busy 
urban tertiary-care teaching hospital. The fictional 
hospital is located in Seattle, whereas the actual 
filming takes place in Los Angeles. From the 269 
episodes, hospitalized trauma patients (TV patients) 
were identified. Demographic (age, gender) and 
clinical data (identifiable injuries), Emergency 
Department disposition (admission to floor/inten-
sive care unit vs direct to operating room), length 
of stay and discharge disposition (death, discharge 
home, discharge to another inpatient facility) were 
recorded for each patient. A Certified Trauma 
Registry Specialist calculated Injury Severity Score 
(ISS) for each TV patient, based on the recorded 
description of injuries. As accurate length of stay in 
days was not possible to identify for the majority of 
copyright.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://tsaco.bmj.com/
Trauma Surg Acute Care Open: first published as 10.1136/tsaco-2017-000137 on 19 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 2
Serrone RO, et al. Trauma Surg Acute Care Open 2018;3:1–4. doi:10.1136/tsaco-2017-000137
Open Access
the TV patients from the level of detail provided in the television 
narrative, length of stay was categorized as less than or greater 
than 1 
week as gathered from the storyline for each patient. The 
reviewers analyzed this by evaluating the duration of the patient’s 
story arc relative to the temporal elements of each episode or 
subsequent episodes (days vs weeks). For example, if a patient’s 
hospital course was resolved within what appeared to be less 
than 1 
week per the episode’s temporal cues, and the patient did 
not reappear (still hospitalized) in subsequent episodes, then that 
patient’s length of stay was deemed less than 1 
week.
Patient data were obtained from the 2012 National Trauma 
Databank (NTDB) National Program Sample to establish a 
genuine patient cohort for comparison. To achieve a patient 
cohort similar to the TV cohort, inclusion criteria was admis-
sions to teaching hospital affiliated with a university with bed 
number greater than 400 in the NTDB Western Region. This 
criterion was chosen to representative of the fictional institu-
tion, ‘Seattle Grace Hospital’, the academic hospital setting of 
Grey’s Anatomy. Patients transferred from referring hospitals 
and patients with significant amounts of missing or incomplete 
data were excluded. The resulting NTDB-adapted dataset was 
merged with the dataset containing the TV patients.
Χ2 tests of significance were computed for comparison of cate-
gorical variables. The t-test of equality of means was computed 
for comparison of continuous variables. All analyses were 
completed using SPSS V
.24.
resuLTs
T
wo hundred and ninety patients with trauma were identified 
from 269 episodes of Grey’s Anatomy and identified in the 
dataset as TV patients. Four thousand eight hundred and twelve 
patients constitute the NTDB sample. Comparison of demo-
graphic and clinical characteristics between groups is presented 
in table 1. Demographically, TV patients were younger (average 
age 34 vs 41, P<0.0001) and more likely to be female (40% vs 
30%, P<0.001). With respect to injury severity, TV patients had 
relatively higher ISS (ISS 14 vs 12, P=0.013). After arrival to the 
emergency department, the majority of TV patients (71%) were 
taken directly to the operating room, compared with a relative 
minority (25%) in the NTDB sample (P<0.001).
Outcomes after hospitalization are presented in table 1 
(bottom half portion). Mortality after injury was significantly 
higher on TV compared with reality. T
wenty-two percent of the 
TV patients died, in comparison to 7% of the NTDB sample 
(P<0.0001). Concerning discharge disposition other than death, 
only a minority of TV survivors were discharged to a location 
other than home (6%), whereas 22% of the surviving NTDB 
sample was discharged to an inpatient facility (P<0.0001).
Among both TV and NTDB survivors, hospital length of stay 
appeared to be less than 1 
week for most patients, but for those 
with severe injury (ISS ≥25), hospital length of stay was more 
likely to be significantly shorter for TV patients, with 50% of 
TV survivors with severe injury having length of stays of less 
than 1 
week versus the same for only 20% of the NTDB sample 
(P<0.0001; table 1).
dIsCussIon
The value of incorporating ‘realism’ into the literary, visual, 
and dramatic arts with respect to reaching and appealing to a 
wide audience has long been recognized by authors, artists, and 
playwrights alike. Since the dawn of the television drama in the 
1950s, the portrayal of realism has been of similar concern, with 
the goal of sustaining mass market consumption of television 
programming. Recognizing the influence of this new medium, 
the American Medical Association (AMA) created the Physicians’ 
Advisory Committee for Radio, Television and Motion Pictures 
in 1955, with the goal of establishing organizational influence 
and control regarding the medical issues being portrayed on 
such early television serials set in hospitals as Ben Casey and 
Dr. Kildare.7 In exchange for consultation regarding accuracy 
in the portrayal of disease, appearance of operating rooms, use 
of medical instruments, and performance of emergency room 
procedures such as cardiopulmonary resuscitation, television 
procedures were able to display the seal of approval of the orga-
nization in the credits, effectively providing an aura of realism 
as sanctioned by an authoritative body. It was obvious to the 
AMA, at a time when media psychology was a nascent science, 
that the portrayal of the medical profession on television could 
have significant influence on the public perception of doctors, 
hospitals, and the practice of medicine in general.
Although the producers of television dramas have long aban-
doned with formal, public collaboration with organizations 
such as the AMA, they continue to employ physician consul-
tants to assist with accurate portrayals of patients, physicians, 
and hospital settings with the goal of realism in mind. Although 
realism is an integral element to the success of a television drama 
set in a contemporary workplace, be it a hospital or police depart-
ment, the requirements for dramatic effect demand a focus on 
the exceptional rather than the mundane. Hence, American tele-
vision medical dramas tend to rely on storylines that feature rare 
diseases, odd presentations of common diseases, fantastic and/
or quirky injuries, and mass casualty events, all framed within a 
‘realistic’ representation of a typical US hospital. In addition, the 
dramatic construct of a television serial lend to deviations from 
reality or accuracy in an effort to preserve the ability to commu-
nicate a story within the constraints of a 1 
hour show. As such, 
surgeons in the operating room are often presented without 
masks and protective eyewear (so the viewing audience may 
recognize the characters), and the time constraints of the show 
require that most of the plot lines be wrapped up by end of the 
hour, including storylines related to a patient’s illness or injury.
The balancing act between the presentation of the realistic and 
the dramatic can actually result in a skewed perception of reality 
among television viewers. Cultivation theory suggests that the 
portrayal of social reality on television ultimately shapes the view-
er’s perception of social reality in real life. The development of 
cultivation theory began in the 1970s, arguing that the depictions 
Table 1 Comparison of demographic, injury characteristics, and 
outcomes between NTDB and TV patients
nTdb
TV
P value
Demographic and injury characteristics
  
Number of patients
4812
290
  
Average age
41
34
<0.0001
  
Female patients
30%
40%
<0.0001
  
Average ISS
12
14
0.013
  
To operating room from ED
25%
71%
<0.0001
Outcomes
  
Mortality
7%
22%
<0.0001
  
Discharged to long-term inpatient care
22%
6%
<0.0001
  
LOS <1 week
69%
66%
=0.428
  
LOS <1 week (ISS ≥25 subset)
20%
50%
<0.0001
ED, emergency department; ISS, injury severity score; LOS, length of stay; NTDB, 
National Trauma Databank.
copyright.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://tsaco.bmj.com/
Trauma Surg Acute Care Open: first published as 10.1136/tsaco-2017-000137 on 19 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 3
Serrone RO, et al. Trauma Surg Acute Care Open 2018;3:1–4. doi:10.1136/tsaco-2017-000137
Open Access
of violence on television could shape the viewers’ perception on 
the prevalence of violence in the real world, despite it being rela-
tively inaccurate.8 More recent work has examined cultivation 
theory in the context of the modern medical television drama. 
As a result of the artistic license taken with the presentation of 
doctors, patients, and illness on television, viewers of medical 
dramas may develop a distorted perspective regarding prevalent 
health issues in the real world. In a study by Chung et al, heavy 
viewers of medical dramas were less likely to rate cardiovas-
cular disease and cancer as important societal issues and were 
more likely to agree with the statement that cancer prevention 
is uncertain and that the disease is fatal.1 In a study by Quick, 
regular viewers of Grey’s Anatomy perceived the content to be 
realistic, which led to belief that doctors are courageous and led 
to perceived satisfaction with one’s real-world doctor.9
Furthermore, television portrayal of medicine may have 
a profound effect on patient’s medical knowledge and deci-
sion-making. A survey of geriatric patients demonstrated that 
42% of older adults named television as their primary source of 
health information.10 In a study of sources of medical informa-
tion, minorities were significantly more likely to recognize tele-
vision as a valuable resource.11 Among older adults identifying 
television as a primary resource for medical information, overly 
optimistic predictions of survival rates after cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation were observed.12 When a patient develops a major 
illness with a subacute time course, the misperceptions that have 
been cultivated by television consumption may be mitigated by 
patient education provided by the physician, medical institution, 
or other reputable sources for patient education. Trauma patients 
are relatively unique in this regard, as the suddenness of injury 
and subsequent hospitalization do not allow for any educational 
opportunity to manage patient’s expectations prior to medical 
treatment, and it is likely that patients with injury and their 
families are therefore more prone to rely on perceptions gleaned 
from television to guide their expectations.
With this in mind, we were interested to see how television 
portrayal of injury differs from reality, providing some insight 
into how many of our trauma patients may anticipate their 
hospital course and outcome after injury. From our analysis of 
the depictions of trauma patients over 12 seasons of the most 
popular medical drama in its time, it is clear that there are devi-
ations from reality that follow a set pattern, regarding the nature 
of the injury. Trauma patients as depicted on television usually 
need an urgent operation to address an injured body part, and 
then alternatively die or, in most cases, have a swift recovery with 
return to home after a relatively brief hospital stay. As anyone 
involved in the care of patients at a regional trauma center 
knows, real-life patients are often managed non-operatively or 
with operations (sometimes multiple) performed at an interval 
to the time of admission, and depending on the burden of injury, 
often require prolonged hospitalization and have disabilities 
requiring transfer to long-term inpatient facilities.
The findings of this study beg the question as to what should 
specifically done with this information. In an era where patient 
satisfaction is a major component of the quality initiatives of 
healthcare institutions and a pay-for-performance measure in 
many physician compensation plans, it is important to develop 
awareness of the drivers of patient satisfaction. Divergence of 
patient expectations from reality may, in fact, contribute to lower 
levels of satisfaction.13 14 In the present study, we have demon-
strated how the representation of trauma patients on television 
dramas differs from reality, particularly with respect to recovery 
after injury. It follows that patient’s expectations after injury may 
be distorted by this unrealistic depiction of injury on television.
Although the results of the present study provide evidence 
to speculate that there is a disconnect between trauma patient 
expectations versus reality as shaped by representations from 
television shows such as Grey’s Anatomy, we and others have 
yet to specifically evaluate whether consumption of mass media 
is truly associated with such misperceptions. In fact, patient’s 
expectations after injury in general remain relatively unclear, and 
exploration of this area may offer insight that could lead to both 
improved patient satisfaction and engagement in the recovery 
process, ultimately leading to better outcomes. At our institu-
tion, this study is leading us to embark on research to measure 
the trauma patient expectations with respect to convalescence 
after injury and how mass media consumption influences these 
expectations. Specifically, we hope to establish a baseline under-
standing of public perception of the trauma patient experience 
after common injuries, as well as the influence of mass media 
consumption such as Grey’s Anatomy on these perceptions. 
Regarding performance improvement, we are assessing how 
well we are meeting the needs of our patients and families with 
respect to interpersonal communication concerning expecta-
tions of hospital course, return to home, and return to func-
tionality. We encourage others to do similar explorations of the 
trauma patient experience at their own institutions in an effort 
to improve understanding of patient’s perceptions and expecta-
tions after traumatic injury.
Contributors ROS, JAW, PWG and SRP contributed to the study concept, 
design, analysis, manuscript preparation and critical revisions. TMT contributed 
to study design and analysis. ROS, JAW, EPW, JLD and SRD contributed to data 
collection.
Funding This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the 
public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors. 
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work 
is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1 Chung JE. Medical dramas and viewer perception of health: testing cultivation effects. 
Hum Commun Res 2014;40:333–49.
 2 Muusses LD, van Weert JC, van Dulmen S, Jansen J. Chemotherapy and information-
seeking behaviour: characteristics of patients using mass-media information sources. 
Psychooncology 2012;21:993–1002.
 3 Pfau M, Mullen LJ, Garrow K. The influence of television viewing on public perceptions 
of physicians. J Broadcast Electron Media 1995;39:441–58.
 4 Diem SJ, Lantos JD, Tulsky JA. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation on television. Miracles 
and misinformation. N Engl J Med 1996;334:1578–82.
 5 Portanova J, Irvine K, Yi JY, Enguidanos S. It isn’t like this on TV: Revisiting CPR survival 
rates depicted on popular TV shows. Resuscitation 2015;96:148–50.
 6 Karp JK. Transfusion medicine on American television. Transfus Med 2014;24:27–32.
 7 Turow J. Television entertainment and the US health-care debate. Lancet 
1996;347:1240–3.
 8 Gerbner G, Gross L. Living with television: the violence profile. J Commun 
1976;26:172–99.
 9 Quick BL. The effects of viewing Grey’s Anatomy on perceptions of doctors and patient 
satisfaction. J Broadcast Electron Media 2009;53:38–55.
 
10 Adams DH, Snedden DP. How misconceptions among elderly patients regarding 
survival outcomes of inpatient cardiopulmonary resuscitation affect do-not-resuscitate 
orders. J Am Osteopath Assoc 2006;106:402–4.
 
11 Williams JE, Anstrom KJ, Friedman JY, Schulman KA. Racial/ethnic variation in 
perceptions of medical information sources in Durham County, North Carolina. N C 
Med J 2007;68:391–8.
copyright.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://tsaco.bmj.com/
Trauma Surg Acute Care Open: first published as 10.1136/tsaco-2017-000137 on 19 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 4
Serrone RO, et al. Trauma Surg Acute Care Open 2018;3:1–4. doi:10.1136/tsaco-2017-000137
Open Access
 
12 Jones GK, Brewer KL, Garrison HG. Public expectations of survival  
following cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Acad Emerg Med  
2000;7:48–53.
 
13 Neuprez A, Delcour JP, Fatemi F, Gillet P, Crielaard JM, Bruyère O, Reginster 
JY. Patients’ expectations impact their satisfaction following total hip or knee 
arthroplasty. PLoS One 2016;11:e0167911.
 
14 McKinley RK, Stevenson K, Adams S, Manku-Scott TK. Meeting patient expectations of 
care: the major determinant of satisfaction with out-of-hours primary medical care? 
Fam Pract 2002;19:333–8.
copyright.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://tsaco.bmj.com/
Trauma Surg Acute Care Open: first published as 10.1136/tsaco-2017-000137 on 19 February 2018. Downloaded from 
