 For those of us researching the development of 3,4,-methylene-
dioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) therapy for patients with
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) the drug’s historical
association with recreational ecstasy is a hindrance. Although
clinical use precedes recreational ecstasy the media focuses
primarily on the rare incidences of harm associated with misuses
of the latter. After a quarter of a century of epidemiological
evidence of MDMA’s low rates of morbidity and mortality (even
when used recreationally as ecstasy), as well as mounting data
supporting clinical MDMA as a therapeutic agent, we feel it is
time to concentrate on the objective evidence-based research.
Otherwise, we risk denying a population of needy patients a
potentially important treatment. An important step towards
recognising MDMA as a medicine is to move it from Schedule 1
to Schedule 2 of the UK’s drug classification system.
A brief history of MDMA in medicine
First synthesised in 1912 by the German pharmaceutical company
Merck as a chemical precursor, MDMA failed to make an impact
on the 1960s drug scene. In the 1970s a few psychotherapists were
using it legally as a tool in couples therapy, where it was seen to
help traumatised clients address repressed emotional memories
without being overwhelmed by the negative affect that usually
accompanies such memories. It was then banned in the mid-1980s
in the wake of growing recreational use. No placebo-controlled
studies were conducted with MDMA in the 1980s, but case–control
studies showed MDMA could be used without adverse effects to
produce qualitative improvements in psychological functioning
and resolution of relationship difficulties.1
Controlled clinical trials
A recent placebo-controlled study of participants with treatment-
resistant PTSD showed that 85% of those in the MDMA group
(compared with 15% in the placebo group) no longer had a
diagnosis of PTSD after three sessions of MDMA-assisted
psychotherapy.2 These results were sustained at 3.5 years long-
term follow-up, with no further MDMA interventions required
and many patients reducing or stopping their regular psychiatric
medications.3 A subsequent Swiss MDMA study demonstrated
substantial improvements for treatment-resistant PTSD.4
How MDMA may work as an adjunct
to psychotherapy
MDMA exerts its effects through 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)1A,
5-HT1B, 5-HT2A, dopamine and alpha-2 receptors. It also
produces oxytocin release, which improves bonding and raises levels
of empathy. Its multiple and varied effects make the drug a good
candidate for facilitating psychotherapy – especially for patients with
post-traumatic symptoms, in which helping the patient to reach a
position of empathic understanding and compassionate regard is
part of their resolution and remittance of symptoms.5
Participants given MDMA are more likely to use words
relating to friendship, support and intimacy, in comparison to
the
drug
methamphetamine,
which
by
contrast
reduced
participants’ discussions about compassion.6 MDMA appears to
enhance the quality of social interactions and thereby improve
relationships, recently tested using a simulated experimental
paradigm of social exclusion by Frye et al, showing how participants
taking MDMA exhibited reduced social exclusion phenomena.7
Similarly, MDMA enhances levels of shared empathy and prosocial
behaviour compared with placebo.8 Furthermore, Wardle et al
showed how MDMA can facilitate a faster detection of happy
faces, and reduces the detection of negative facial expressions,
which leads participants to view their social interaction partner
as more caring.9 A recent study by Kirkpatrick et al comparing
MDMA against intranasal oxytocin demonstrated the former
produced greater improvements in prosocial communication.10
And the positive effects of MDMA appear consistent across different
environments, with participants examined in San Francisco, Chicago
and Basel demonstrating broadly similar prosocial outcomes.11
Recently, several groups have used neuroimaging to explore
the actions of MDMA in the brain. For example, Carhart-Harris
et al, using magnetic resonance imaging blood oxygen level-
dependent and arterial spin labelling techniques, showed that
MDMA
reduced
amygdala
and
hippocampus
activity
and
selectively attenuated the magnitude of negative memories.12
4
Making a medicine
out of MDMA
Ben Sessa and David Nutt
Summary
From its first use 3,4,-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA) has been recognised as a drug with therapeutic
potential. Research on its clinical utility stopped when
it entered the recreational drug scene but has slowly
resurrected in the past decade. Currently there is
enough evidence for MDMA to be removed from its
Schedule 1 status of ‘no medical use’ and moved
into Schedule 2 (alongside other misused but useful
medicines such as heroin and amphetamine). Such a
regulatory move would liberate its use as a medicine
for patients experiencing severe mental illnesses
such as treatment-resistant post-traumatic stress
disorder.
Declaration of interest
None.
The British Journal of Psychiatry (2015)
206, 4–6. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.114.152751
Editorial
Ben Sessa (pictured) is a consultant psychiatrist in substance misuse
working for ‘AddAction’ in Weston-Super-Mare, North Somerset, and
a senior research fellow at Cardiff University Medical School. David Nutt
is the Edmond J. Safra Professor of Neuropsychopharmacology at Imperial
College London, and former President of the European College of
Neuropsychopharmacology.
 Current restrictions around the use
of MDMA in the UK
Given the evidence that MDMA is a useful and safe adjunct to the
treatment of PTSD and has plausible mechanisms of action, one
might well ask why MDMA is not available for clinical use. The
answer is simple – when MDMA was banned in the 1980s it
was put into Schedule 1 of the 1971 UN convention and in the
UK placed in Schedule 1 of the Misuse of Drugs Regulations
2001. Both regulatory systems define Schedule 1 drugs as those
with ‘very limited medical use’
. This is no longer defensible. So
what does being in Schedule 1 mean for researchers and doctors
who wish to prescribe it? In most countries Schedule 1 drugs
are subject to stringent controls. In the UK one needs a special
license to hold or use a Schedule 1 drug, whereas Schedule 2
drugs, such as heroin and morphine, much more addictive and
dangerous than MDMA, are available in all hospitals. Schedule 1
licenses cost about £5000, can take a year to obtain and require
special criminal record checks, extra-secure pharmacy safes and
police inspections. Only four hospitals in the country presently
have them. Furthermore, production sites and distributors need
the special license too, which massively escalates costs and limits
the number of companies able to manufacture and supply
clinical-grade material.
Safety and risks
One must distinguish the clinical use of pure MDMA from the
recreational use of ecstasy. The former involves moderate,
infrequent medically supervised doses whereas the latter often
involves high and frequent use, the risk of adulterants and the
concomitant use of other drugs – especially cannabis, amphetamine
and cocaine. There is no evidence that pure MDMA as proposed
for therapy causes any lasting physiological or psychological
harm.13 None of the controlled studies of MDMA-assisted therapy
has demonstrated any significant neurophysiological impairments
or evidence of dependence following its use clinically, validating
the observed low risk of addiction when used recreationally. The
fears about lasting neurophysiological damage, popularised in
the 1990s, have since been challenged, further validating the
epidemiological evidence of low rates of clinical problems
associated with ecstasy use, despite its widespread popularity.14
The concept of risk–benefit analysis is important when
considering any medical interventions – pharmacological or
otherwise.
With
dozens
of
individuals
with
post-combat
treatment-resistant PTSD dying by suicide every day,15 the
massive social, financial and clinical burden of untreated PTSD
is a far greater risk to society than the low risks associated with
using MDMA in the clinical setting.
The future for MDMA research
Further Phase II MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for PTSD studies
are happening, after which Phase III studies are planned across the
globe. A planned functional magnetic resonance imaging study at
Cardiff University will explore MDMA’s mechanism in individuals
with post-combat PTSD to add more physiological data to the
ongoing therapeutic studies. And an ongoing study underway in
the USA is exploring MDMA’s ability to boost empathy and for
adults with anxiety associated with autism.16 But for MDMA to
become a medicine it needs to be removed from Schedule 1 and
put alongside other therapeutic (but also misused) stimulants
such as amphetamine and methamphetamine in Schedule 2. If
the UK government advisory body on drugs, the Advisory Council
on the Misuse of Drugs, recommends this to the Home Secretary,
regulations can then be amended within weeks. It is important to
note that the UK is not legally obliged to adopt the UN structure
for scheduling drugs; and based on medical advice put heroin in
Schedule 2 against the UN recommendation. Similarly, in another
example the UN placed tetrahydrocanibinol in Schedule 1 in 1971,
but in the UK it is available (in the form of the drug sativex) and
placed in Schedule 4. Moreover there is no reason to suppose put-
ting MDMA into Schedule 2 would have any impact on illicit use
of ecstasy, just as pharmaceutical heroin in Schedule 2 is almost
never diverted into criminal hands.
We call on the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs to
recommend MDMA become a Schedule 2 drug. This will allow
medical research to explore the full potential of MDMA as a
medicine for treatment-resistant PTSD and other possible brain
disorders.
Conclusion
MDMA has been subjected to inappropriate, non-evidence-based,
legislative restrictions. These have not effectively reduced the harm
or burden of recreational ecstasy use on society but they have
effectively held back research on clinical MDMA. We urge the
regulatory authorities to consider whether a move from Schedule
1 to Schedule 2 might more accurately reflect MDMA’s relative
harms and safety, while also facilitating greater research of the
substance for possible therapeutic uses within psychiatry.
Ben Sessa, MBBS, MRCPsych, AddAction, Weston-Super-Mare, and Cardiff
University; David Nutt, DM, FRCP, FRCPsych, FMedSci, Neuropsychopharmacology
Unit, Division of Brain Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, UK
Correspondence: Ben Sessa, AddAction, 35 The Boulevard, Weston-Super-Mare,
Somerset BS23 1PE, UK. Email: bensessa@gmail.com
First received 13 Jun 2014, accepted 7 Oct 2014
Acknowledgements
Thank you to Ilsa Jerome, Rudi Law and Les King for advice on this editorial.
References
1
Greer G, Tolbert R. Subjective reports of the effects of MDMA in a clinical
setting. J Psychoactive Drugs 1986; 18: 319–27.
2
Mithoefer MC, Wagner MT, Mithoefer AT, Jerome L, Doblin R. The safety and
efficacy of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine-assisted psychotherapy in
subjects with chronic, treatment-resistant posttraumatic stress disorder:
the first randomized controlled pilot study. J Psychopharmacol 2010; 25:
439–52.
3
Mithoefer MC, Wagner MT, Mithoefer AT, Jerome L, Martin SF,
Yazar-Klosinski B, et al. Durability of improvement in PTSD symptoms
and absence of harmful effects or drug dependency after MDM-assisted
psychotherapy: a prospective long-term follow-up study. J Psychopharmacol
2013; 27: 28–39.
4
Chabrol H. MDMA assisted psychotherapy found to have a large effect
for chronic post-traumatic stress disorder. J Psychopharmacol 2013; 27:
865–6.
5
Sessa B. Could MDMA be useful in the treatment of PTSD? Prog Neurol
Psychiatry 2012; 15: 4–7.
6
Bedi G, Cecchi GA, Slezak DF, Carrillo F, Sigman M, de Wit H. A window
into the intoxicated mind? Speech as an index of psychoactive drug effects.
Neuropsychopharmacology 2014; 39: 2340–8.
7
Frye CG, Wardle MC, Norman GJ, de Wit H. MDMA decreases the effects of
simulated social rejection. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2014; 117: 1–6.
8
Hysek CM, Schmid Y, Simmler LD, Domes G, Heinrichs M, Eisenegger C, et al.
MDMA enhances emotional empathy and prosocial behavior. Soc Cogn
Affect Neurosci 2013; Oct 23 (Epub ahead of print).
5
Making a medicine out of MDMA
 9 Wardle MC, de Wit H. MDMA alters emotional processing and facilitates
positive social interaction. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2014; 231: 4219–29.
10 Kirkpatrick MG, Lee R, Wardle MC, Jacob S, de Wit H. Effects of
MDMA and intranasal oxytocin on social and emotional processing.
Neuropsychopharmacology 2014; 39: 1654–63.
11 Kirkpatrick MG, Baggott MJ, Mendelson JE, Galloway GP, Liechti ME,
Hysek CM, et al. MDMA effects consistent across laboratories.
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2014; 231: 3899–905.
12 Carhart-Harris RL, Erritzoe D, Williams LTJ, Erritzoe D, Wall MB, Ferguson B,
et al. The effects of acutely administered 3,4-methylenedioxymeth-
amphetamine on spontaneous brain function in healthy volunteers measured
with arterial spin labeling and blood oxygen level-dependent resting state
functional connectivity. Biol Psychiatry 2014; 10 Jan (Epub ahead of print).
13 Doblin R, Greer G, Holland J, Jerome L, Mithoefer MC, Sessa B.
A reconsideration and response to Parrott AC (2013) ‘‘Human
psychobiology of MDMA or ‘Ecstasy’: an overview of 25 years of
empirical research’’. Hum Psychopharmacol 2014; 29: 105–8.
14 Selvaraj S, Hoshi R, Bhagwagar Z, Murthy NV, Hinz R, Cowen P, et al.
Brain serotonin transporter binding in former users of MDMA (‘ecstasy’).
Br J Psychiatry 2009; 194: 355–9.
15 Kemp J, Bossarte R. Suicide Data Report 2012. US Department of Veterans
Affairs, 2013 (http://www.va.gov/opa/docs/Suicide-Data-Report-2012-
final.pdf).
16 Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS). Protocol
MAA-1: A Placebo-Controlled, Randomized, Blinded, Dose Finding
Phase 2 Pilot Safety Study of MDMA Assisted Therapy for Social Anxiety
in Autistic Adults. Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies
(MAPS), 2013 (http://www.maps.org/research/mdma/MAA1_FINAL_Protocol_
22Feb13_redact.pdf).
6
Sessa & Nutt
Le
´ on Bonvin
Raymond Cavanaugh Jr
Born in the outskirts of Paris in 1834, Le
´ on Bonvin was the son of a
policeman and a seamstress. There were numerous siblings from
multiple marriages, and money was scarce. Le
´ on’s strongest bond
was with his older brother Franc
¸ois. They shared a desire to draw
and a precocious aesthetic sensibility. Apprenticed to a printer in
his adolescence, Franc
¸ois would give the younger Le
´ on artistic
advice for the remainder of his life.
Most of Le
´ on’s earliest works were charcoal renditions of his
austere surroundings. He would later work in graphite, pen and
ink, and eventually in the watercolour medium, with which he
would carve his niche. Oil painting was a rare activity for him,
because he was rarely able to afford oil paints.
Though lacking in materials, Bonvin benefited from his elder
brother’s
guidance.
Franc
¸ois
suggested
that
he
study
the
Dutch masters and pay particular attention to their ‘meticulous
realism and use of outline’. In time, the younger brother
would employ sepia-toned ink outlines to produce his own
‘meticulous realism’ in the form of watercolours with startling,
quasi-photographic effects.
However, this stylistic innovation did little to enhance Bonvin’s
overall quality of life. Forced to work tirelessly at his job as
innkeeper, there was precious little time for the artistic vocation.
Early morning and sunset were usually the only times at which
he could practise his coloured magic.
The online art publication The Blue Lantern explores the psychodynamic elements of Bonvin’s Interior of a House with an Open
Door. This painting has a very claustrophobic feel, which likely reflects its painter’s ongoing sentiments of ‘frustration’ and
‘confinement’. Though the painting, through its ‘open door’, includes a ‘glimpse of a wider world’, this glimpse is ‘obscured
by blazing sunlight’.
The early 1860s saw Bonvin marry, start a family, and sink further into poverty. By January 1866 his financial situation had
become dire. Carrying as many paintings as he could, he headed to Paris and approached an art dealer. ‘Too dark’, was the
dealer’s response. Having been dismissed with these few words, the starving artist was sent on his way, not one franc the richer.
Emotionally drained, Bonvin went to a hill that overlooked the plains of Issy. This view had inspired some of his most passionately
painted watercolours.
Here, hours later, the painter was found hanging from a tree. If there was any good to come of this demise, it was that a
posthumous charity auction of his works raised enough money to spare his family from utter destitution.
The British Journal of Psychiatry (2015)
206, 6. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.113.141879
fallen
stars
Le
´ on Bonvin (French, 1834–1866) Landscape with a Bare
Tree and a Plowman, 1864. Pen and brown ink, watercolour,
and gum Arabic, 18.1616.2 cm.
The J. Paul Getty Museum, Los Angeles. Digital image
courtesy of the Getty’s Open Content Program.
