 Probiotic normalization of Candida albicans in schizophrenia: a 
randomized, placebo-controlled, longitudinal pilot study
Emily G. Severance1,*, Kristin L. Gressitt1, Cassie R. Stallings2, Emily Katsafanas2, Lucy A. 
Schweinfurth2, Christina L. G. Savage2, Maria B. Adamos2, Kevin M. Sweeney2, Andrea E. 
Origoni2, Sunil Khushalani2, Faith B. Dickerson2, and Robert H. Yolken1
1Stanley Division of Developmental Neurovirology; Department of Pediatrics; Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine; 600 North Wolfe Street; Blalock 1105; Baltimore, MD, U.S.A. 
21287
2Sheppard Pratt Health System, Stanley Research Program, Baltimore, MD, U.S.A
Abstract
The molecules and pathways of the gut-brain axis represent new targets for developing methods to 
diagnose and treat psychiatric disorders. Manipulation of the gut microbiome with probiotics may 
be a therapeutic strategy with the potential to relieve gastrointestinal (GI) comorbidities and 
improve psychiatric symptoms. Candida albicans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, commensal yeast 
species, can be imbalanced in the unhealthy human microbiome, and these fungal exposures were 
previously found elevated in schizophrenia. In a longitudinal, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
pilot investigation of 56 outpatients with schizophrenia, we examined the impact of probiotic 
treatment on yeast antibody levels, and the relationship between treatment and antibody levels on 
bowel discomfort and psychiatric symptoms. We found that probiotic treatment significantly 
reduced C. albicans antibodies over the 14-week study period in males, but not in females. 
Antibody levels of S. cerevisiae were not altered in either treatment group. The highest levels of 
bowel discomfort over time occurred in C. albicans-seropositive males receiving the placebo. We 
observed trends toward improvement in positive psychiatric symptoms in males treated with 
probiotics who were seronegative for C. albicans. Results from this pilot study hint at an 
association of C. albicans seropositivity with worse positive psychiatric symptoms, which was 
confirmed in a larger cohort of 384 males with schizophrenia. In conclusion, the administration of 
probiotics may help normalize C. albicans antibody levels and C. albicans-associated gut 
discomfort in many male individuals. Studies with larger sample sizes are warranted to address the 
role of probiotics in correcting C. albicans-associated psychiatric symptoms.
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01242371
*Corresponding author: E.G. Severance, eseverance@jhmi.edu, 410-614-3918. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
The terms of this arrangement are being managed by the Johns Hopkins University in accordance with its conflict of interest policies. 
None of the other authors report any potential conflicts of interest.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Brain Behav Immun. 2017 May ; 62: 41–45. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2016.11.019.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
Gastroenterology; fungus; infection; mental health; autism; sex differences
1. Introduction
In mental health research, understanding how the gut-brain axis might be altered could aid 
the development of novel primary and adjunctive therapies for neuropsychiatric disorders 
such as schizophrenia. Although gastrointestinal (GI) inflammation and dysbioses have been 
identified as comorbidities in schizophrenia [1–5], treatment trials of gut microbiome 
modulators such as probiotics are limited. In one of the first published randomized, placebo-
controlled trials of probiotic supplementation in outpatients diagnosed with schizophrenia, 
we previously reported the amelioration of GI functioning in many patients receiving the 
probiotic treatment [6]. Analysis of blood samples obtained from individuals in this cohort 
found significant alterations in immune proteins and associated pathways between treatment 
groups, which were suggestive of a probiotic-mediated improvement of GI epithelial and 
immune pathologies [7].
Preclinical investigations of the gut-brain axis have largely focused on characterizing how 
gut bacteria may modulate brain function via immune, neuronal and endocrine pathways [8, 
9]. However, other organisms, including fungi, are also components of the human 
microbiome and these taxa likely contribute to inter- and intra-kingdom dynamics of 
resident commensals [10, 11]. We have previously demonstrated that exposure to members 
of the human mycobiome, the yeast species, Candida albicans and Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, was elevated in individuals with schizophrenia compared to non-psychiatric 
controls [2, 12]. Furthermore, antibody levels against one of these yeast species, C. albicans, 
were associated with GI disturbances and lower scores on cognitive tests in people with 
schizophrenia [12]. In immune-competent, healthy individuals, commensal yeast 
interactions with resident bacteria are stable and balanced; however, during bacterial 
dysbioses or species depletion, such as following the intake of antibiotics, potentially 
pathogenic yeast infections can occur [13]. The administration of probiotics to restore the 
gut microbiota and improve GI conditions shows promise in combatting overgrowth of yeast 
commensals, and of Candida spp. in particular [14–16].
For the current study of the double-blind, placebo-controlled probiotic cohort [6, 7], we 
tested the hypothesis that the manipulation of the intestinal microbiome by probiotics in 
schizophrenia will ameliorate yeast imbalances, as evident by a decrease in the levels of 
antibodies to C. albicans and S. cerevisiae. We also investigated the interactive effects of 
probiotic treatment and yeast seropositivity on bowel difficulties and severity of psychiatric 
symptoms over a 14 week course of probiotic or placebo treatment.
Severance et al.
Page 2
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2. Methods
2.1 Probiotic study design
Details regarding study design and patient recruitment for this clinical trial were previously 
described [6]. In brief, inclusion criteria included an age of 18–65, written informed consent, 
DSM-IV diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder [17], outpatient status, 
scores on the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) indicative of at least 
moderately severe psychosis [18], and currently on at least 8 weeks of antipsychotic 
medication. A stable regime of antipsychotics was maintained over the course of the study. 
Exclusion criteria included mental retardation, clinically significant somatic condition, 
history of intravenous drug use, DSM-IV diagnosis of substance abuse or dependence within 
the last 3 months, recent participation in investigational new drug trial, pregnancy, use of 
antibiotic medication within the last 14 days, and celiac disease. Medical records and self-
reports were examined for evidence of GI, genitourinary (G-UR) and respiratory (RESP) 
disturbances.
A baseline PANSS score and blood sample were taken at the beginning of the study for each 
participant. Each participant received a 2-week placebo run-in and then were randomized to 
adjunctive probiotics or placebo, once per day with food, for 14 weeks. The probiotic 
formulation, “Bifiform Balance” (Ferrosan A/S, Pfizer, Søborg, Denmark) contained 
approximately 109 colony-forming units (cfus) of Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG and 
109 cfus of Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis Bb12. Participants met weekly with staff 
to monitor side effects and GI function and biweekly to score PANSS psychiatric symptoms. 
GI function was assessed as a “bowel score” on a scale of 1 to 4 regarding self-reported 
assessment of difficulty moving their bowels over the previous week, with higher numbers 
indicating more difficulty. During these weekly meetings, information regarding dietary 
intake of calories, carbohydrates, fats, fiber, protein, sodium and sugar was also obtained. A 
second blood sample was taken at the end of the 14-week study period.
All participants gave written informed consent and study approval was granted by the 
institutional review boards of Sheppard Pratt Health System and the Johns Hopkins School 
of Medicine. A Data Safety Monitoring Board oversaw the study and the study received a 
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier number: NCT01242371.
2.2 Parent study cohort
The participants in the probiotic study were drawn from an ongoing primary study of 
individuals with and without psychiatric disorders recruited by the Stanley Research 
Program at Sheppard Pratt Health System in Baltimore, MD, U.S.A. Study details of 
participants with schizophrenia and controls of this main cohort have been previously 
described [19, 20]. Limited clinical and laboratory information from 619 of these samples 
including the clinical trial cohort were available to investigate our preliminary finding 
linking C. albicans seropositivity with positive symptoms on PANSS.
Severance et al.
Page 3
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2.3 Laboratory procedures
Study start and study end blood samples were obtained by venipuncture, and plasma 
separated and assessed for antibodies. Anti-C. albicans IgG levels were measured according 
to the manufacturer’s protocol using a commercially available enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, U.S.A.). Anti-Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae IgG antibodies (ASCA) were also measured by ELISA according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol using a commercially available kit (Orgentec, Mainz, Germany). 
Each 96-well plate tested contained kit standards as well as study sample replicates for use 
as internal controls of reproducibility. C. albicans seropositivity designations were assigned 
according to standards run with the commercial ELISA kit, as previously described [12]. 
The Limit of Detection (LOD) and Limit of Quantitation (LOQ) were defined as three times 
and ten times the standard deviation of the blanks, respectively. These values were 0.17 for 
LOD and 0.55 for LOQ.
2.4 Data analyses
Power analyses were undertaken to determine if sufficient sample sizes were present for this 
retrospective analysis. Data analyses were performed at Johns Hopkins and investigators 
were blinded to treatment groups; data was unblinded by study coordinators at Sheppard 
Pratt Health System. Because we previously detected significantly different case:control 
patterns of C. albicans and S. cerevisiae IgG in males versus females with schizophrenia [2, 
12], we performed the data analyses separately for both sexes for the present study. We first 
compared starting mean antibody levels between treatment groups with analyses of variance 
(ANOVA)s. We then used repeated measures ANOVAs to determine if mean antibody levels 
differed according to treatment group and to the beginning versus end of the study. Repeated 
measures ANOVAs were also used to determine if bowel and PANSS scores differed 
between seropositive and seronegative groups over time. For more exploratory analyses of 
the PANSS data, post-hoc tests and basic comparisons of continuous data, one-tailed t-tests 
were performed to maximize detection of informative significant differences in mean levels 
of the selected variable between groups. Chi-square tests were used to examine group 
differences between categorical data. Multiple linear regressions were performed to detect 
correlations between quantitative demographic and dietary variables with C. albicans IgG 
levels.
3. Results
Of the original 65 patients who were enrolled, 58 (89%) completed the study, and C. 
albicans and S. cerevisiae data were available for 56 individuals (86%). The basic 
demographic, lifestyle and clinical data (age, gender, race, total PANSS, smoking status, 
body mass index (BMI), maternal education as a surrogate for socioeconomic status, and GI, 
G-UR, RESP disturbances) for these 56 individuals were not statistically different between 
treatment groups and are listed in Supplemental Table 1. Also in this table are corresponding 
data for individuals with schizophrenia from the main study cohort, which we will use later 
to verify a preliminary finding. In Supplemental Table 2 is a power analysis demonstrating 
that the sample size available for this pilot study was sufficient to detect a difference in mean 
antibody levels as well as to test for associations with the longitudinal data of bowel 
Severance et al.
Page 4
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 difficulty and psychiatric symptom scores. Antipsychotic regimes were not different 
between probiotic and placebo groups with 26.79% of the individuals receiving clozapine, 
21.43% olanzapine, 17.86% risperidone, 10.71% aripiprazole, 19.64% quetiapine, 16.07% 
haloperidol, and 8.93% ziprasidone. Other medications were also not significantly different 
between probiotic and placebo groups: 12.50% valproate, 44.64% antidepressants, 35.71% 
anticonvulsants.
In the clinical trial, starting C. albicans IgG levels were similar for males, but not females, 
with females receiving placebo having significantly higher antibody levels compared to 
those who received probiotics (ANOVA, F=4.02, post-hoc t=2.01, p≤0.03). A significant 
treatment effect of probiotics in females was not detectable, and the remaining analyses were 
focused on the male subset of participants (n=37). Antibody levels for S. cerevisiae were not 
significantly different between study starting and ending timepoints for either treatment 
group and either sex; thus, the remaining analyses were focused on C. albicans. The 
variables of age, race, smoking, BMI, maternal education were not significantly associated 
with C. albicans seropositivity.
In males, mean C. albicans IgG levels were significantly reduced over time in those 
receiving probiotics (n=22), but not placebo (n=15) (Figure 1A: Repeated measures 
ANOVA, F=14.6, p≤0.001). As depicted in Figure 1A, there is one individual in the 
probiotic group with quite high C. albicans IgG levels at the beginning of the study, and 
which substantially decreased by the end of the study. To verify that the significant effect of 
treatment on the group was not being driven by this one individual, the analyses were 
repeated with this sample removed. A highly statistically significant reduction of antibody 
levels by probiotics over time remained (Repeated measures ANOVA, F=20.66, p≤0.0002), 
with overall, only 18.2% of the males (4 of 22) having IgG levels that were not responsive to 
treatment (vs 44% in the placebo group).
To identify a possible source location of exposure to C. albicans, we compared IgG levels 
between those who were positive or negative for disturbances to the GI, G-UR and RESP 
systems, all of which are typical resident sites of C. albicans. We found that C. albicans IgG 
levels were consistently elevated in those patients with GI conditions compared to those 
without and this finding was significant in both males and females (T-tests, both t=1.72, 
p≤0.05). G-UR conditions were only associated with elevated C. albicans in females (t=1.79, 
p≤0.05) and RESP conditions were not significantly associated with C. albicans in either 
sex.
To determine if the reduction in C. albicans IgG levels by probiotics was associated with 
amelioration of gut dysfunction, we compared a score of bowel movement difficulty during 
the course of the study for C. albicans seropositive males versus seronegative males for each 
treatment group. Males in the placebo group who were seropositive for C. albicans IgG 
(n=5), had significantly higher bowel scores indicative of increased difficulty with bowel 
movements over time than those who were C. albicans IgG seronegative (n=10) (Figure 1B, 
repeated measures ANOVA, F=1.79, p≤0.03). Bowel scores between seropositive (n=11) and 
seronegative (n=11) individuals were not significantly different in the probiotic group, and 
these differences were not significantly different from the seronegative individuals in the 
Severance et al.
Page 5
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 placebo group. C. albicans levels were not statistically associated with dietary intake of 
calories, carbohydrates, fats, fiber, protein, sodium and sugar.
We then performed a longitudinal comparison of PANSS psychiatric symptom scores for C. 
albicans seropositive vs. seronegative males. Although PANSS scores were not statistically 
altered in the longitudinal analyses, we detected several trends for association of C. albicans 
with positive symptom scores (Figure 2A). For example, C. albicans seropositive males 
generally had elevated positive symptom scores at each week compared to those who were 
seronegative, irrespective of treatment group. For certain weeks such as study week 13, these 
differences in positive symptom scores approached significance in the probiotic group (T-
test, t=1.62, p≤0.06). Furthermore, the change in score between the study start and the 13-
week time point was significantly greater in C. albicans-seronegative males receiving 
probiotics compared to those who were seropositive, indicating a more accelerated 
improvement of positive symptoms in the C. albicans-seronegative subset (T-test, t=1.8, 
p≤0.04).
To better address whether or not actual quantitative differences in these psychiatric scores 
exist and can be attributed to C. albicans independently of a probiotic treatment response, we 
examined C. albicans data from the main schizophrenia cohort and found that males who 
were C. albicans seropositive (n=165) had significantly elevated total PANSS scores than 
males who were C. albicans seronegative (n=219) (Figure 2B, T-tests, t=2.15, p≤0.02). The 
significant differences in total PANSS scores were found to be a function of elevated 
positive (Figure 2B, t=2.2, p≤0.01) and general (t=1.7, p≤0.04) symptoms, but not negative 
psychiatric symptoms. Total and subset PANSS scores were not significantly different 
between seropositive and seronegative females in this main study cohort.
4. Discussion
In our longitudinal, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study, a probiotic formulation 
containing the bacterial species, Lactobacillus rhamnosus and Bifidobacterium animalis, was 
associated with the significant reduction over time of C. albicans IgG in males with 
schizophrenia compared to males who received the placebo. Furthermore, our data suggest 
that the improvement of bowel function by probiotics may in part be due to correction of 
yeast overgrowth, as C. albicans-seropositive males receiving placebo reported the most 
bowel difficulty. Because the highest C. albicans levels were consistently in those 
individuals with GI ailments and not genitourinary or respiratory disturbances, it is likely 
that microbial dysbioses in the gut are the predominant source of C. albicans exposures in 
these males. In spite of sample size limitations, we detected trends towards increased 
positive psychiatric symptom scores associated with C. albicans seropositivity, which were 
then verified in the larger main cohort from which the probiotic study was derived.
Results from this study highlight the physiological heterogeneity of schizophrenia and the 
difficulties inherent to identifying the most applicable participants for clinical trials. We 
were not able to include the female study arm in the data analyses due to significant, 
presumably random, differences in starting antibody levels of C. albicans for the two 
treatment groups; however, we have also previously found that analyses of C. albicans 
Severance et al.
Page 6
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 exposures in women with psychiatric disorders were hampered by the greater susceptibility 
of the female reproductive tract to yeast infections, irrespective of mental health status. 
Indeed, for the female individuals evaluated in the current study, C. albicans IgG was 
consistently elevated in those who had genitourinary and GI conditions, while in males 
corresponding elevations were only found with GI disturbances. Previously, we found that 
C. albicans-seropositivity conferred to females with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder a 
greater risk for memory deficits on cognitive tests than females with these disorders who 
were seronegative [12]. Cognitive function was not assessed in the present study, but 
analyses of the PANSS psychiatric symptom data gave a preliminary indication that 
probiotics might also improve positive symptom scores in males, and particularly in those 
who were not C. albicans positive. While the effect of probiotic treatment combined with C. 
albicans seropositivity on psychiatric symptoms was not straightforward, the hints at an 
interactive effect of these variables here and the C. albicans-associated cognitive deficits 
detected in our previous study, together suggest that these interactive effects should be 
addressed and disentangled in larger-scale, carefully designed clinical trials.
Our findings were specific to the yeast C. albicans, as we did not detect altered antibodies 
for either treatment group over time for a second species of yeast, S. cerevisiae. In a study of 
patients with the inflammatory bowel disorder, Crohn’s disease, McKenzie et al found 
elevation of S. cerevisiae antibodies but not C. albicans antibodies and concluded that 
Crohn’s disease likely was characterized not simply by generalized permeability of the gut, 
but of a specific hypersensitivity associated with dietary antigens [21]. We have previously 
found elevated antibodies to S. cerevisiae in individuals with schizophrenia compared to 
controls, and this immune response was in fact significantly associated with food antigen 
hypersensitivity [2]. Thus, the heightened exposure to C. albicans documented in 
schizophrenia likely reflects a slightly different immunogenic process, in part perhaps 
generated by lifestyle variables, but also reflective of certain gut dysbioses that are 
correctable with probiotic treatment.
The interpretation of our study results is limited by the exploratory nature of our 
investigation and small sample sizes, particularly with respect to the subgroup analyses. As 
such, there may be unmeasured demographic, lifestyle and medication factors contributing 
to the effects that we found. In spite of these limitations, this pilot study enabled detection of 
a biological improvement attributable to probiotic treatment, which was measurable with a 
blood biomarker and which was relevant to the brain. This achievement was possible 
because the study was composed of a well-characterized sample set and incorporated a 
randomized, double blind trial design, which was less subject to bias than a typical 
observational study. Furthermore, by identifying C. albicans as a potential confounder of 
probiotic studies, we can design more powerful investigations, and our power analyses 
suggest sample sizes that future studies should consider in order to rigorously understand the 
probiotic/C. albicans interface with psychiatric symptoms. These future studies would entail 
a comprehensive assessment of serum biomarkers of gut dysbioses with actual microbiome 
biospecimens.
Finally, the development of new treatment options of serious psychiatric disorders has been 
staggeringly static. The wave of genetic research and widely applied GWAS data has not yet 
Severance et al.
Page 7
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 met with the identification of a multitude of new treatment targets as originally anticipated. 
A growing acceptance of a role for environmental factors contributing to psychiatric disease 
etiology has resulted in a currently promising new array of treatment modalities residing 
within the framework of the gut-brain axis. As the mechanisms guiding gut-brain activities 
become better understood, development and refinement of the most appropriate biomarkers 
to use to design and monitor individualized treatments of psychiatric disorders will most 
certainly follow. Our study helps to identify an important determinant, C. albicans exposure 
status, for understanding specific variables that influence the microbiome and contribute to a 
microbial dysbiosis that is relevant to schizophrenia. Future studies should be directed at 
translating these findings into practical methods for the diagnosis and treatment of 
schizophrenia and related disorders.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Acknowledgements/Funding
This work was supported by a NIMH P50 Silvio O. Conte Center at Johns Hopkins (grant# MH-94268) and by the 
Stanley Medical Research Institute. RHY is a member of the Stanley Medical Research Institute Board of Directors 
and Scientific Advisory Board.
References
1. Castro-Nallar E, Bendall ML, Perez-Losada M, Sabuncyan S, Severance EG, Dickerson FB, 
Schroeder JR, Yolken RH, Crandall KA. Composition, taxonomy and functional diversity of the 
oropharynx microbiome in individuals with schizophrenia and controls. PeerJ. 2015; 3:e1140. 
[PubMed: 26336637] 
2. Severance EG, Alaedini A, Yang S, Halling M, Gressitt KL, Stallings CR, Origoni AE, Vaughan C, 
Khushalani S, Leweke FM, et al. Gastrointestinal inflammation and associated immune activation in 
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research. 2012; 138:48–53. [PubMed: 22446142] 
3. Severance EG, Gressitt KL, Stallings CR, Origoni AE, Khushalani S, Leweke FM, Dickerson FB, 
Yolken RH. Discordant patterns of bacterial translocation markers and implications for innate 
immune imbalances in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research. 2013; 148:130–137. [PubMed: 
23746484] 
4. Yolken RH, Severance EG, Sabunciyan S, Gressitt KL, Chen O, Stallings C, Origoni A, Katsafanas 
E, Schweinfurth LAB, Savage CLG, et al. Metagenomic Sequencing Indicates That the 
Oropharyngeal Phageome of Individuals With Schizophrenia Differs From That of Controls. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin. 2015; 41:1153–1161. [PubMed: 25666826] 
5. Fond G, Boukouaci W, Chevalier G, Regnault A, Eberl G, Hamdani N, Dickerson F, Macgregor A, 
Boyer L, Dargel A, et al. The "psychomicrobiotic": Targeting microbiota in major psychiatric 
disorders: A systematic review. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2015; 63:35–42. [PubMed: 25468489] 
6. Dickerson FB, Stallings C, Origoni A, Katsafanas E, Savage CL, Schweinfurth LA, Goga J, 
Khushalani S, Yolken RH. Effect of probiotic supplementation on schizophrenia symptoms and 
association with gastrointestinal functioning: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Prim Care 
Companion CNS Disord. 2014; 16
7. Tomasik J, Yolken RH, Bahn S, Dickerson FB. Immunomodulatory Effects of Probiotic 
Supplementation in Schizophrenia Patients: A Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial. Biomark 
Insights. 2015; 10:47–54. [PubMed: 26052224] 
Severance et al.
Page 8
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 8. Cryan JF, Dinan TG. Mind-altering microorganisms: the impact of the gut microbiota on brain and 
behaviour. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2012; 13:701–712. [PubMed: 22968153] 
9. Yarandi SS, Peterson DA, Treisman GJ, Moran TH, Pasricha PJ. Modulatory Effects of Gut 
Microbiota on the Central Nervous System: How Gut Could Play a Role in Neuropsychiatric Health 
and Diseases. J Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2016; 22:201–212. [PubMed: 27032544] 
10. Ghannoum MA, Jurevic RJ, Mukherjee PK, Cui F, Sikaroodi M, Naqvi A, Gillevet PM. 
Characterization of the oral fungal microbiome (mycobiome) in healthy individuals. PLoS Pathog. 
2010; 6:e1000713. [PubMed: 20072605] 
11. Suhr MJ, Hallen-Adams HE. The human gut mycobiome: pitfalls and potentials-a mycologist's 
perspective. Mycologia. 2015
12. Severance EG, Gressitt KL, Stallings CR, Katsafanas E, Schweinfurth LA, Savage CL, Adamos 
MB, Sweeney KM, Origoni AE, Khushalani S, et al. Candida albicans exposures, sex specificity 
and cognitive deficits in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. NPJ Schizophr. 2016; 2:16018. 
[PubMed: 27336058] 
13. Kim J, Sudbery P. Candida albicans, a major human fungal pathogen. J Microbiol. 2011; 49:171–
177. [PubMed: 21538235] 
14. Mailander-Sanchez D, Wagener J, Schaller M. Potential role of probiotic bacteria in the treatment 
and prevention of localised candidosis. Mycoses. 2012; 55:17–26.
15. Matsubara VH, Wang Y, Bandara HM, Mayer MP, Samaranayake LP. Probiotic lactobacilli inhibit 
early stages of Candida albicans biofilm development by reducing their growth, cell adhesion, and 
filamentation. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016; 100:6415–6426. [PubMed: 27087525] 
16. Davar R, Nokhostin F, Eftekhar M, Sekhavat L, Bashiri Zadeh M, Shamsi F. Comparing the 
Recurrence of Vulvovaginal Candidiasis in Patients Undergoing Prophylactic Treatment with 
Probiotic and Placebo During the 6 Months. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2016
17. APA. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM-IV-TR. 4th. Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Association; 2000. 
18. Kay SR, Fiszbein A, Opler LA. The positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS) for 
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia bulletin. 1987; 13:261–276. [PubMed: 3616518] 
19. Dickerson F, Stallings C, Origoni A, Katsafanas E, Schweinfurth LA, Savage CL, Khushalani S, 
Yolken R. Pentraxin 3 is reduced in bipolar disorder. Bipolar disorders. 2015; 17:409–414. 
[PubMed: 25425421] 
20. Dickerson F, Stallings C, Origoni A, Vaughan C, Khushalani S, Yang S, Yolken R. C-reactive 
protein is elevated in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research. 2013; 143:198–202. [PubMed: 
23218564] 
21. McKenzie H, Main J, Pennington CR, Parratt D. Antibody to selected strains of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae (baker's and brewer's yeast) and Candida albicans in Crohn's disease. Gut. 1990; 
31:536–538. [PubMed: 2190866] 
Severance et al.
Page 9
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
In schizophrenia, elevated Candida yeast antibody levels were lowered by 
probiotics.
•
Probiotics compared to placebo also relieved yeast-related bowel discomfort 
over time.
•
Candida albicans seropositivity was associated with worse psychiatric 
symptoms.
Severance et al.
Page 10
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Reduction of C. albicans IgG antibodies and improvement of bowel difficulty in males 
receiving probiotics
Panel A: Males with schizophrenia had significantly lower C. albicans antibody levels 
following a 14-week regimen of probiotics (n=22) compared to those receiving placebo 
(n=15). Tstart refers to study start and Tend refers to study end. Repeated measures ANOVA 
(RmANOVA) showed significantly reduced antibody levels associated with the probiotic 
treatment group over time. ap≤0.001 refers to the p-value including all 
individuals; bp≤0.0002 refers to the p-value with the elevated outlier removed. Panel B: 
Males receiving the placebo who were C. albicans seropositive reported the most bowel 
Severance et al.
Page 11
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 difficulties over the 14-week study. C.a.+ refers to C. albicans seropositive; C.a.− refers to C. 
albicans seronegative. W in the x axis refers to study week. Error bars designate standard 
errors of the mean for each group at each time point.
Severance et al.
Page 12
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. C. albicans seropositivity is associated with higher positive psychiatric symptoms on 
PANSS
Panel A: Trends toward elevated positive PANSS symptom scores over time were observed 
in C. albicans seropositive (C.a. +) individuals in the pilot probiotic study. C.a.− refers to C. 
albicans seronegative. W in the x axis refers to study week. Error bars designate standard 
errors of the mean for each group at each time point. Panel B: Significantly worse 
psychiatric symptoms in males with C. albicans seropositivity compared to seronegative 
males were confirmed in an analysis of PANSS scores in the main Sheppard Pratt 
schizophrenia cohort. Shown are differences in total PANSS scores and in positive symptom 
Severance et al.
Page 13
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 subset scores; similarly significant differences related to seropositivity in males were 
observed for general PANSS scores (not shown). No differences between groups were 
observed for negative PANSS scores or for females for any of the PANSS comparisons.
Severance et al.
Page 14
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
