   Research Paper 
 
www.aging-us.com 
315 
AGING (Albany NY) 
www.aging-us.com 
AGING 2017, Vol. 9, No. 2 
INTRODUCTION 
As a cause for the decreasing health status that 
accompanies aging, mitochondrial deterioration has 
been repeatedly suggested [1-4]. Particularly, it has 
been discussed that an accumulation of errors in 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication would lead to 
mitochondrial 
dysfunction, 
including 
increased 
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that may 
both further deteriorate the mitochondria and affect the 
function of the rest of the cell [5-9]. 
However, the significance of ROS for the aging process 
has been doubted [10, 11], particularly based on 
observations in the mtDNA mutator mice [12-14]. 
These mice accumulate errors in their mtDNA and 
demonstrate subsequent alterations in their respiratory 
chain composition [15]. They also demonstrate an early 
Improved health-span and lifespan in mtDNA mutator mice treated 
with the mitochondrially targeted antioxidant SkQ1 
Irina G. Shabalina1, Mikhail Yu. Vyssokikh2, Natalia Gibanova1, Robert I. Csikasz1, Daniel Edgar1,4, 
Anne Hallden-Waldemarson1, Zinaida Rozhdestvenskaya1, Lora E. Bakeeva2,3, Valeria B. Vays2, 
Antonina V.Pustovidko2, Maxim V. Skulachev3, Barbara Cannon1, Vladimir P. Skulachev2,3 , Jan 
Nedergaard1 
1 The Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm University, SE-106 91 
Stockholm, Sweden 
2 The Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State University, 119992, Moscow, 
Russian Federation 
3 Institute of Mitoengineering, Moscow State University, 119992, Moscow, Russian Federation 
4 Present address: Buck Institute for research on aging, Novato, CA 94945, USA 
Correspondence to: Jan Nedergaard; Vladimir P. Skulachev; email: jan@metabol.su.se; skulach@belozersky.msu.ru  
Keywords: reactive oxygen species, oxidative stress, mitochondria, cardiolipin, thermogenesis, brown adipose tissue, 
longevity 
Received: December 30, 2016 
Accepted: February 3, 2017 
Published: February 15, 2017 
ABSTRACT 
MtDNA mutator mice exhibit marked features of premature aging. We find that these mice treated from age of 
≈100 days with the mitochondria-targeted antioxidant SkQ1 showed a delayed appearance of traits of aging 
such as kyphosis, alopecia, lowering of body temperature, body weight loss, as well as ameliorated heart, 
kidney and liver pathologies. These effects of SkQ1 are suggested to be related to an alleviation of the effects of 
an enhanced reactive oxygen species (ROS) level in mtDNA mutator mice: the increased mitochondrial ROS 
released due to mitochondrial mutations probably interact with polyunsaturated fatty acids in cardiolipin, 
releasing malondialdehyde and 4-hydroxynonenal that form protein adducts and thus diminishes mitochondrial 
functions. SkQ1 counteracts this as it scavenges mitochondrial ROS. As the results, the normal mitochondrial 
ultrastructure is preserved in liver and heart; the phosphorylation capacity of skeletal muscle mitochondria as 
well as the thermogenic capacity of brown adipose tissue is also improved. The SkQ1-treated mice live 
significantly longer (335 versus 290 days). These data may be relevant in relation to treatment of mitochondrial 
diseases particularly and the process of aging in general.  
 www.aging-us.com 
316 
AGING (Albany NY) 
occurrence of characteristics normally associated with 
aging, and they die at a young age. However, there has 
been no convincing evidence that oxidative damage 
causes these problems; rather an absence of oxidative 
damage has been reported [13, 16-19], but see [20]. 
 
Experimentally, an alternative avenue to examine the 
possible involvement of ROS in the development of 
aging characteristics would be to examine the ability of 
mitochondrially targeted antioxidants to ameliorate the 
health problems associated with experimentally induced 
aging. In this paper, we find that the mitochondrially 
targeted 
antioxidant 
10-(6’-plastoquinonyl)decyltri-
phenylphosphonium cation (SkQ1) [21] substantially 
counteracts the acquisition of aging characteristics in 
the mtDNA mutator mice. We also find that parameters 
for oxidative damage not earlier examined (cardiolipin 
depletion and accumulation of hydroxynonenal protein 
adducts) are diminished by SkQ1 treatment. These data 
and other antioxidant data (mitochondrially targeted 
catalase [22] and N-acetyl-L-cysteine treatment [23]) 
clearly indicate that ROS production and oxidative 
damage are substantial factors in the development of 
aging characteristics in the mtDNA mutator mice. 
 
As the presently reluctance to associate mitochondrial 
dysfunction with aging through ROS and oxidative 
damage are largely based on the notion that these 
phenomena were apparently not involved in aging in 
mtDNA mutator mice [19, 24, 25], and as our present 
data indicate the opposite to be the case, our 
observations may also be of significance for discussions 
of the nature of aging and the possibility to ameliorate 
the aging process therapeutically. 
 
RESULTS 
 
In order to examine the significance of possible 
enhanced ROS production for the development of early 
aging characteristics in the mtDNA mutator mice, we 
have here followed such mice that were treated or not 
with SkQ1. In the following, we first describe 
phenotypic manifestations of the SkQ1 treatment and 
we then examine the effect of such a treatment on 
markers of oxidative damage. We also examine the 
effect of SkQ1 treatment on total lifespan in mtDNA 
mutator mice. 
 
SkQ1 treatment attenuated the manifestation of 
kyphosis and alopecia in mtDNA mutator mice 
 
Already at an age of less than 230-250 days, mtDNA 
mutator mice show features normally associated with 
aging, as exemplified with the ≈250 days old mtDNA 
mutator mouse in Fig. 1A which confirms observations 
originally published by [12, 13]. Strikingly, treatment of 
these mice with the SkQ1, not from birth but only from 
an age of ≈100 days, markedly diminished this 
phenotype, resulting in mice presenting a mouse much 
more similar to wild-type mice of this age (Fig. 1A). 
These dramatic improvements were quantitatively 
analyzed in the ensuing graphs. 
 
One feature of the aging process is the occurrence of 
(hyper)kyphosis, i.e. (over)curvature of the spine [12, 
13]. The severity of this malfunction has been manually 
scored in Fig. 1B every 11th day (as exemplified in 
Supp. Table S1). Whereas hyperkyphosis developed 
gradually but consistently in the non-treated mtDNA 
mutator mice, the occurrence was low and fairly stable 
in the SkQ1-treated age-matched mice, even though the 
SkQ1-treated mice lived longer (see below) and thus 
could be followed to a higher age. Hyperkyphosis can 
be quantitated through X-ray analysis. Fig. 1C 
illustrates such a measurement, performed on mice of 
equal age. The mean values of these measurements are 
compiled in Fig. 1D. As seen, there was a significant 
effect of SkQ1 in diminishing the degree of kyphosis. 
 
Measurement of bone minerality of the spinal cord from 
scapula to lumbar revealed a higher bone mineral 
content of this area in the SkQ1-treated mtDNA mutator 
mice (Fig. 1E).  
 
Non-treated mtDNA mutator mice showed severe 
alopecia (hair loss) [12, 13]. This pathology was much 
less evident in mice treated with SkQ1 (Fig. 1F). It may 
especially be noted that these cohorts of mice were 
single-caged. Thus, the alopecia and the loss of 
whiskers were mouse-autonomous effects. Earlier 
studies have kept mice in larger groups where mouse-
mouse interaction (particularly between males) may 
substantially affect the outcome, leading to exaggerated 
fur loss (barbering). – As fur protects against heat loss 
[26] and as the mice were living at 22 °C, i.e. below 
their thermoneutral zone, the implication is that the 
SkQ1-induced amelioration of the fur status is not only 
a general indication of less rapid advancement of aging 
features but also that it can diminish the heat loss and 
thus the risk for hypothermia [27]. 
 
SkQ1 treatment prevented loss of fat and improved 
the estrus state in mtDNA mutator mice 
 
The SkQ1-treated mtDNA mutator mice showed no 
decrease with age in body weight and body fat content. 
Both these parameters significantly decreased in the 
non-treated mice (Fig. 2A, B). Lean body mass was 
kept at stable levels longer than fat mass, but from an 
age of ≈270 days, it decreased in the non-treated 
mtDNA mutator mice (Fig. 2C). SkQ1 treatment 
prevented this loss of lean body mass (Fig. 2C). Acute 
 www.aging-us.com 
317 
AGING (Albany NY) 
body weight loss is an important criterion for the 
running assessment of mouse health (Supp. Table S1). 
As seen on Fig. 2D, this parameter was much improved 
in the SkQ1-treated mice.  
 
In mtDNA mutator mice of 290 days, there were nearly 
no subdermal lipid stores left whereas the stores were 
well maintained in the SkQ1-treated mice (Fig. 2E). 
During the time when the weight curves for the non-
treated and SkQ1-treated mice diverged, the food intake 
and metabolic energy consumption in the SkQ1-treated 
animals was slightly larger than that of the non-treated 
mtDNA mutator mice (Fig. 2F and G). This was 
probably secondary to the generally better status of the 
 
 
Figure 1. Effect of SkQ1 treatment on appearance, kyphosis and alopecia in mtDNA mutator mice. (A) Pictures of 
mtDNA mutator mice: a non-treated (Mut) mouse and an SkQ1-treated (Mut+SkQ1) littermate female mouse, 248 and 256 days of 
age respectively. (B) Scores of kyphosis manifestation (arbitrary units) in mtDNA mutator mice. Each bar represents the mean ± S.E. 
score from mice of both genders: 21 Mut (10 females + 11 males) and 22 Mut+SkQ1 (13 f + 11 m) in ages 213-268 days; 11 Mut (5 f 
+ 6 m) and 13 Mut+SkQ1 (6 f + 7 m) in ages 268–290 days; in ages 290–356 days, the number of mice decreased with age according 
to survival; the lowest number of mice in a group was 4 (2 f + 2 m). Day number under each bar indicates the center day of 11 days 
of mouse age. (C) X-ray picture of a non-treated mouse and an SkQ1-treated littermate female mtDNA mutator mouse (290 ± 4 days 
old). White circle arc indicates curvature angle measurements. Note that the angle is calculated from the extended line of the lower 
spine. (D) Angle of thoracic-lumbar curvature determined as in C. Each bar represents the mean ± S.E. from 10–11 mice of both 
genders in each group; Mut, 287 ± 7 days old, 5 f + 6 m; Mut + SkQ1, 284 ± 6 days old, 6 f + 5 m. (E) Bone minerality of spine cord 
area from scapula to lumbar. Each bar represents the mean ± S.E. from 6–8 female mice in each group. Mut, 290 ± 11 days; Mut + 
SkQ1, 287 ± 9 days. (F) Scores of alopecia manifestation in mtDNA mutator mice. The mice are the same as those in (B). * in B-F 
indicates a statistically significant difference between non-treated and SkQ1-treated mtDNA mutator mice (p < 0.05).  
 
 www.aging-us.com 
318 
AGING (Albany NY) 
SkQ1-treated mice. Addition of SkQ1 to the drinking 
water did not change the water intake (Fig. 2H). 
 
Through leptin signaling [28], body lipid stores may 
affect ovulation in the mice. Accordingly, non-treated 
mtDNA mutator mice exhibited a successively impaired 
estrus cycle with irregularity and loss of estrus (Fig. 3). 
The SkQ1 treatment increased the number of estruses 
and ameliorated the irregularity of the estrus cycle (Fig. 
3). 
Positive effects of SkQ1 treatment could be 
attributed to its antioxidant properties 
 
The data collected above demonstrate that treatment of 
mtDNA mutator mice with SkQ1 significantly delays 
the aging characteristics observed in the mtDNA 
mutator mice. As SkQ1 was originally developed as a 
mitochondrially targeted antioxidant [21], we examined 
whether  the  treatment  of  mtDNA  mutator  mice  with  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Effects of SkQ1 treatment on body energy stores and intake in mtDNA mutator mice. (A) Body weight, (B) body 
fat content and (C) lean body mass as a function of age (± 7 days). The points are means ± S.E. In these “paired death” experiments, 8 
female mice were in each group until age 238 days; after this, the number of mice decreased with time, depending on survival, with 4 
mice in each group at the final point. (D) Scoring of acute body weight decrease in mtDNA mutator mice. The mice are the same as in 
Fig. 1B. (E) Skin morphology. The skin samples were from the back region of non-treated and SkQ1-treated littermate female mice of 
the same age (290 ± 4 days). Bar is 100 µm. The subdermal fat region is indicated by arrow. (F) Food intake. The mice are the same as 
in Fig. 2A. (G) Dietary, fecal and metabolic energy in mtDNA mutator at age 250 ± 7 days. Metabolic energy values were obtained by 
subtraction of fecal energy from dietary energy consumed. * in A-D and F indicates a statistically significant difference between non-
treated and SkQ-treated mtDNA mutator mice (p < 0.05, n = 8 mice in each group). (H) Water intake in mtDNA mutator mice treated 
or not with SkQ1. The points were obtained by combining remaining water from all mice in each group (8 female mtDNA mutator 
mice) and subtracting this from the total amount of water supplied (values per mouse). 
 
 www.aging-us.com 
319 
AGING (Albany NY) 
 
SkQ1 would affect ROS-related parameters that may be 
linked to SkQ1’s beneficial effects. 
 
In the typical lipid peroxidation process, ROS will 
interact with omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids (mainly 
linoleic acid and arachidonic acid) in the membrane 
phospholipids, 
leading 
to 
the 
release 
of 
malondialdehyde (MDA) and 4-hydroxynonenal (4-
HNE) that may form adducts with proteins. We 
examined whether these parameters were affected by 
the SkQ1 treatment.  
 
We followed the formation of MDA in kidney lysates 
(Fig. 4A). The rate of formation was markedly lower in 
the lysates from the SkQ1-treated mtDNA mutator 
mice. We made similar observations in lysates from 
liver and brain (Fig. 4B). These experiments thus 
indicated that at least in vitro, tissues obtained from 
SkQ1-treated mice were less prone to lipid peroxidation 
than tissues from non-treated mice.  
 
To examine whether similar differences occurred in 
vivo, we estimated the endogenous level of lipid 
peroxidation by analysis of the in vivo formed 4-HNE 
adducts to cellular proteins. A lower content of 4-HNE-
adducts was observed in kidney samples from SkQ1-
treated mice as compared with the level in kidneys of 
non-treated mice (Figs. 4C - E). Also in liver and 
skeletal muscle, 4-HNE adducts were significantly 
(although less markedly) lower in SkQ1-treated mice 
(Fig. 4C - E); in brain, no difference was observed (Fig. 
4E). These findings are in line with our data that the in 
vivo administrated SkQ1 accumulates in brain in much 
smaller amount than in kidney, liver and skeletal muscle 
(A. Andreev-Andreevsky et al., in preparation). 
 
As one of the main sources of the released MDA and 4-
HNE are the polyunsaturated fatty acids of the 
mitochondrial membrane phospholipids [29], we 
examined the effect of SkQ1 on the phospholipid 
composition of mitochondria from different tissues. 
This experiment is exemplified for skeletal muscle and 
liver in Table 1. As seen in Table 1, neither the 
mutation nor the treatment with SkQ1 had any marked 
effect on the content of most phospholipid classes. 
However, one phospholipid class, cardiolipin, was 
relatively decreased in the mtDNA mutator mice as 
compared to wild-type mice. This effect was revealed in 
both skeletal muscle and liver (Table 1). Further, the 
SkQ1-treatment restored the cardiolipin amount in the 
mtDNA mutator mice to wild-type levels in the mtDNA 
mutator mice (Table 1). 
 
We further analyzed the fatty acyl composition of the 
total phospholipids of the mitochondrial membranes. 
The  content  of  polyunsaturated  n-6 fatty acids (PUFA  
 
 
Figure 3. Effects of SkQ1 treatment on estrus cycle in 
mtDNA mutator mice. (A) Examples of graphs of estrus 
cycles in non-treated and SkQ-treated mtDNA mutator 
female mice. Examination of estrus cycle was done by light 
microscopy of vaginal smears. Estrus was characterized by 
the presence of large cornified cells with degenerated nuclei 
and was indicated as estrus stage 2 on the graphic 
presentation. Diestrus was identified by presence of 
leucocytes and mucous and was indicated as 0 on graphs. 
Proestrus and metestrus were characterized by the presence 
of nucleated epithelial cells or leucocytes together with 
cornified cells and were indicated on the graphs as 
intermediate stages 0.5 – 1.5. (B) Number of estruses during 
12 days measured as a function of age (± 7 days). The points 
are means ± S.E. of 7-8 female mice for each group. * 
indicates a statistically significant difference between non-
treated and SkQ1-treated mice (p < 0.05). 
 
 www.aging-us.com 
320 
AGING (Albany NY) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. MDA formation and content of 4-HNE adducts in tissues from mtDNA mutator mice non-treated and 
treated with SkQ1. (A) MDA formation in kidney lysate exposed to normal atmospheric oxygen concentration and pressure at 37 
°C. (B) Levels of MDA formed in liver, brain and kidney lysates after 40 min of exposure of tissue to normal atmospheric oxygen 
concentration and pressure. (C) Representative immunoblot analysis of 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) adducts in kidney (left panel), 
liver (middle panel) and gastrocnemius skeletal muscle (right panel) tissue lysate from non-treated (M) and SkQ1-treated (S) mtDNA 
mutator mice (15 µg protein/lane). Numbers 1, 2, 3 indicate age-and gender-matched samples. Validation of the assay is presented 
in Fig. S1A. Loading control was performed by Ponceau Red staining (shown for kidney in Fig. S1C). (D) Profile of 4-HNE-adducts in 
kidney lysate. (E) Relative 4-HNE-adducts in kidney, liver, skeletal muscle (SKM) and brain tissue lysates. Tissue samples were 
collected in parallel from non-treated and SkQ1-treated mice (268–300 days old, both genders) in the paired death experimental 
setup. In B and E, for each pair, the mean level of 4-HNE-adducts in the non-treated mouse was set to 100 % (indicated as dashed 
line) and the amount in the paired (age- and gender-matched) SkQ1-treated mouse was expressed relative to this. The means ± S.E. 
for 4-7 mice are shown. * and ** in A, B and E indicate statistical significance between SkQ1-treated and non-treated mice (p < 0.05 
and p < 0.01, respectively).  
 www.aging-us.com 
321 
AGING (Albany NY) 
n-6) in mtDNA mutator mice was markedly decreased 
to only 2/3rd of wild-type levels both in skeletal muscle 
and liver mitochondria of mtDNA mutator mice (Table 
1). The lowering of polyunsaturated fatty acids level 
was compensated for by saturated fatty acids. The SkQ1 
treatment of the mtDNA mutator mice fully prevented 
this remodeling, such that wild-type levels were 
retained.  
Table 1. Phospholipids and fatty acyl composition in mitochondria from wild-type 
mice [SkQ1-treated (WT+SkQ1) or non-treated (WT)] and mtDNA mutator mice 
[SkQ1-treated (Mut+SkQ1) or non-treated (Mut)]. 
Mitochondria  
from tissue 
Phospholipid and their 
fatty acyls (FA) 
WT 
WT+SkQ1 
Mut 
Mut+SkQ1 
 
Skeletal muscle 
 
 
Phosphatidylcholine 
51.0±3.6 
50.0±2.8 
52.0±4.2 
52.0±3.1 
Phosphatidylethanolamine 
19±2 
18±1 
22±2 
19±2 
Cardiolipin 
17±1 
20±2 
13±1# 
18±1* 
Phosphatidylinositol 
5.0±0.7 
4.0±0.6 
5.0±0.6 
4.0±0.4 
Phosphatidylserine 
5.0±1.1 
5.0±0.9 
4.0±0.8 
4.0±0.7 
Phosphatidic acid 
3.0±0.6 
3.0±0.2 
4.0±0.4 
3.0±0.3 
Saturated FA 
20±1 
20±2 
31±2# 
23±1* 
Monounsaturated FA 
22±2 
20±1 
21±1 
22±0 
Polyunsaturated FA n-3 
22±1 
24±1 
24±1 
22±1 
Polyunsaturated FA n-6 
37±3 
37±1 
24±1# 
33±1* 
 
Liver  
Phosphatidylcholine 
45.5±4.2 
44.2±2.6 
47±3 
44.5±3.8 
Phosphatidylethanolamine 
34±2 
32±2 
35±2 
33±3 
Cardiolipin 
15±2 
20±2* 
12±1 
18±1* 
Phosphatidylinositol 
5.0±1.1 
3.0±1.0 
5.0±0.7 
4.0±0.9 
Phosphatidylserine 
0.5±0.2 
0.8±0.2 
1.0±0.5 
0.5±0.1 
Saturated FA 
19±1 
21±1 
29±2# 
22±2* 
Monounsaturated FA 
24±1 
22±1 
22±1 
23±1 
Polyunsaturated FA n-3 
21±1 
23±2 
26±2 
24±1 
Polyunsaturated FA n-6 
36±2 
35±2 
23±2# 
32±1* 
 
The values are expressed in mol % and represent the means ± S.E. of 6 independent 
mitochondrial preparations isolated in parallel from 4 groups of mice, 252–259 days old.  
* indicates statistical difference between SkQ1-treated and non-treated mice (p < 0.05).   
# indicates statistical difference between wild-type and mtDNA mutator mice (p < 0.05).   
 
 
 www.aging-us.com 
322 
AGING (Albany NY) 
As cardiolipin generally contains 4 linoleyl (18:2, n-6) 
moieties per molecule, it is likely that the decrease in 
cardiolipin amount (by ≈5 mol %) is largely responsible 
for the loss of n-6 PUFAs (by ≈10 mol %), and that the 
retention of the n-6 PUFAs by SkQ1 treatment is due to 
the preservation of cardiolipin in the SkQ1-treated 
mtDNA mutator mice. 
 
SkQ1 normalized mitochondrial ultrastructure in 
liver and heart 
 
Cardiolipin 
is 
believed 
to 
be 
important 
for 
mitochondrial structure and function [32]. We therefore 
examined whether the large changes in cardiolipin 
amount were associated with alterations in these 
parameters. 
 
Fig. 5 shows electron microscopic pictures of liver cells 
from wild-type mice, mtDNA mutator mice and SkQ1-
treated mtDNA mutator mice. The mitochondria in 
mtDNA mutator mice seemed larger than those in wild-
type mice. Moreover, some of the mitochondria in the 
mtDNA mutator mice contained elongated electron-
dense inclusions composed of series of membranes 
packed in a myelin-like manner. The SkQ1 treatment 
prevented both these changes.  
Safdar et al. [33] observed similar mitochondrial 
alterations in skeletal and heart muscles of mtDNA 
mutator mice. We confirmed this observation in heart 
muscle. 
Also 
in 
this 
tissue, 
SkQ1 
prevented 
disorganization of the mitochondrial ultrastructure (Fig. 
6). Moreover, the number of mitochondria per µm2 of 
heart muscle was increased by SkQ1 from 100 ± 5 % to 
128 ± 6 %  (P < 0.05) in the wild-type mice and from 69 
± 3 % to 125 ± 6 % (P < 0.001) in the mtDNA mutator 
mice. SkQ1 did not influence the area occupied by the 
inner mitochondrial membrane in the wild-type mice 
but prevented 42 %  (P < 0.01) decrease in this area 
observed in the mtDNA mutator mice. 
 
SkQ1 
improved 
the 
function 
of 
isolated 
mitochondria 
 
In the mtDNA mutator mice, there is a significant 
decline of ADP- and FCCP-inducible respiration of 
liver and heart mitochondria, as compared to wild-type 
mitochondria [15]. To examine whether SkQ1 treatment 
would affect the development of this mitochondrial 
deterioration, we analyzed the oxygen consumption of 
skeletal muscle mitochondria isolated from SkQ1-
treated and non-treated mtDNA mutator mice. Fig. 7A 
exemplifies the bioenergetic kinetics observed in such 
 
 
Figure 5. Liver mitochondrial structure. Electron micrographs of liver from wild-type mice (left panel), mtDNA mutator mice 
(middle panel) and mtDNA mutator mice treated with SkQ1 (right panel). Animals were 245 – 252 days old. Insertion in the middle 
panel, lower micrograph: intramitochondrial myelin-like structure at higher magnification. Similar findings were observed in 4-5 
other mice of each group.  
 
 www.aging-us.com 
323 
AGING (Albany NY) 
experiments. As summarized in Fig. 7B, ADP-
stimulated respiration was higher in mitochondria from 
SkQ1-treated 
mtDNA 
mutator 
mice 
than 
in 
mitochondria from mtDNA mutator mice. There was no 
observable effect on state 4 respiration (i.e. after 
oligomycin) but there was a tendency to a higher 
maximal respiratory capacity (i.e. after addition of the 
artificial uncoupler FCCP). Thus, both ultrastructural 
and bioenergetic features of mitochondria from mtDNA 
mutator mice were ameliorated by SkQ1 treatment. 
 
Higher mitochondrial ROS production in SkQ1-
treated mice reflects an improved respiratory chain 
capacity 
 
Hydrogen peroxide production resulting from oxidation 
of a complex I substrates (pyruvate+malate) or of mixed 
complex-I 
and 
complex-II 
substrates 
(pyruvate 
+malate+succinate) was measured in skeletal muscle 
mitochondria from non-treated and SkQ1-treated 
mtDNA mutator mice, as exemplified in Figs. 7C and 
D. Hydrogen peroxide production supported by 
complex I substrates alone was not affected by SkO1-
treatment (Fig. 7D). However, on mixed substrates 
hydrogen 
peroxide 
production 
rate 
in 
isolated 
mitochondria from SkQ1-treated mice was higher than 
in mitochondria from non-treated mice (Fig. 7D). This 
effect of SkQ1 may be the result of an improved 
respiratory electron transfer activity and/or more 
directly from a higher membrane potential in the 
mitochondria of SkQ1-treated mice. It is shown that the 
ROS production that results from reverse electron flow 
from exogenously provided succinate is augmented by a 
higher membrane potential [34, 35, 36, 37]. As to the in 
 
 
Figure 6. Heart mitochondrial structure. Electron micrographs of heart from wild-type mice (left panel), mtDNA mutator mice 
(middle panel) and mtDNA mutator mice treated with SkQ1 (right panel). Animals were 245 – 252 days old. Similar findings were 
observed in 4-5 other mice of each group.  
 
 www.aging-us.com 
324 
AGING (Albany NY) 
vivo SkQ1 treatment, it does not lead to increased 
general oxidative damage (4-HNE adduct formation 
was actually decreased following SkQ1 treatment, see 
Fig. 4E).  
 
SkQ1 treatment improves thermogenic capacity of 
brown adipose tissue 
 
Hypothermia is a characteristic feature of mtDNA 
mutator mice and develops markedly after about 220 
days, as evaluated qualitatively in Fig. 8A. SkQ1-
treated mtDNA mutator mice show almost no indication 
of hypothermia during this period. Additionally, 
whereas mtDNA mutator mice to a very high degree 
developed hypothermia towards the end of their life, the 
SkQ1-treated mtDNA mutator mice did not present with 
this problem even as they became moribund (Fig. 8A).  
 
A main source for sustained regulatory heat production 
in mammals is brown adipose tissue. There was a 
significant positive effect of SkQ1 treatment on 
interscapular brown adipose tissue mass (Fig. 8B). 
 
 
Figure 7. Effect of SkQ1 treatment on function of isolated mitochondria. (A) Example of an oxygen consumption trace in 
mitochondria isolated from skeletal muscle of mtDNA mutator mouse. Additions were 0.25 mg skeletal muscle mitochondria (SKM), 
5 mM pyruvate (Pyr), 250 µM ADP, 2 µg /ml oligomycin (Olig) and 1.4 µM FCCP. (B) Rates of oxygen consumption in mitochondria 
isolated from skeletal muscle of SkQ1-treated and non-treated mtDNA mutator mice. Analysis was performed as shown in 7A. (C) 
Amplex Red fluorescence in intact mitochondria isolated from skeletal muscle of mtDNA mutator mouse. Additions were 0.25 mg 
skeletal muscle mitochondria (SKM), 5 mM pyruvate (Pyr), 5mM succinate (Succ). Malate (3 mM) was present in the medium. The 
analyses were performed in the same mitochondrial preparations as in (A) in parallel with the oxygen consumption measurements. 
(D) Rates of hydrogen peroxide production in mitochondria isolated from skeletal muscle of wild type mice (WT), SkQ1 non-treated 
(Mut) and treated (Mut + SkQ1) mtDNA mutator mice. Analysis was performed as shown in C. P+M indicates the presence of 
complex I substrates (pyruvate + malate) and P+M+S indicates the presence of three substrates (pyruvate + malate + succinate). In 
A and D, the values represent the means ± S.E. of 6 independent mitochondrial preparations isolated in parallel from treated and 
non-treated groups of mice of an age of 252 – 259 days. * in A-D indicates statistical difference between SkQ1-treated and non-
treated mice (p < 0.05).   
 
 www.aging-us.com 
325 
AGING (Albany NY) 
Analysis of mitochondrial proteins in brown adipose 
tissue homogenate revealed a higher level of 
mitochondrial 
voltage-dependent 
anion 
channel 
(VDAC) per mg brown adipose tissue total protein 
(Figs. 8C, D) in SkQ1-treated mtDNA mutator mice, 
indicating an increase in the number of mitochondria. 
More functionally, there was also an increase in the 
amount of the rate-limiting protein for thermogenesis, 
i.e. uncoupling protein (UCP1) (Fig. 8C, D). The total
brown adipose tissue protein was also higher in SkQ1-
treated 
mtDNA 
mutator 
mice 
(Fig. 
8E). 
For
thermogenesis on whole organism level, the total
thermogenic 
capacity 
is 
more 
important 
than
concentration of proteins. Therefore we estimated the
total content of VDAC (≈ amount of mitochondria) and
UCP1(≈ total thermogenic capacity) in the interscapular
brown adipose tissue (Fig. 8F) by multiplying the
specific content of each of these proteins (Fig. 8D) with
the total amount of protein (Fig. 8E). The outcome was
that the total mitochondrial content and particularly the
total content of UCP1 was more than 50% higher in the 
SkQ1-treated mtDNA mutator mice than in the non-
treated mice (Fig. 8F). These observations indicate that 
the lack of hypothermia in the SkQ1-treated mtDNA 
mutator mice can largely be ascribed to an enhanced (or 
preserved) capacity for heat production in their brown 
adipose tissue.  
SkQ1 treatment delays development of mtDNA 
mutator mice immobility 
Oxygen consumption of mice at their living temperature 
22 °C (Fig. 9A) reflects mouse general activity inclu-
ding adaptive thermogenesis. The SkQ1-treated mtDNA 
mutator mice exhibited higher metabolism (oxygen 
consumption rates) above the resting rates (Fig. 9B and 
C), probably related to visibly higher mobility of 
animals (Fig. 9D), better retention of mitochondrial 
oxidative phosphorylation (Fig. 7B) and improved 
brown adipose tissue thermogenic capacity (Fig. 8F).  
Figure 8.Effect of SkQ1 treatment on thermogenesis and brown adipose tissue of mtDNA mutator mice. (A) Scoring of 
manifestations of hypothermia (based on body temperature, shivering and posture position) in SkQ1-treated and non-treated mtDNA 
mutator mice. Gender and number of mice in each group are as in 1B. (B) Wet weight of interscapular brown adipose tissue (BAT). (C) 
Western blots analyses of VDAC and UCP1 in BAT (tissue homogenate protein, 10 µg per lane). (D) Relative concentration of 
mitochondrial proteins. Western blots as in C were quantified. The mean level of UCP1 and VDAC in control mice was set to 100 % and 
the levels of protein in BAT from SkQ1-treated mice expressed relative to this. (E) Total protein content per BAT depot. (F) Total 
content of UCP1 and VDAC per mouse. Content of each protein per µg homogenate protein estimated from Western blot analysis (in 
E) was multiplied with the total protein content of BAT (in C) from the same mouse. The values in B and D - F represent the means ±
SE of 4-5 independent tissue preparations in each group, analyzed singly or in duplicate. * indicates statistical significance between
SkQ1-treated and non-treated mice (p < 0.05).
 www.aging-us.com 
326 
AGING (Albany NY) 
Significance of improved thermogenic capacity and 
physical activity on cause of death in SkQ1-treated 
mtDNA mutator mice 
In Table 2, we have collected descriptions of 
phenotypic features of mtDNA mutator mice treated 
and non-treated with SkQ1 at the point of euthanasia. It 
may be noted that in the non-treated mtDNA mutator 
mice, more than 50 % of the mice displayed phenotypes 
related to body temperature regulation problems: low 
body temperatures, piloerection, shivering. In the SkQ1-
treated mice, these features were not at all prominent. 
Thus, the SkQ1 treatment retained mitochondrial 
bioenergetic capacity, both in muscle and in brown 
adipose tissue, thereby eliminating a major cause of 
death. In the SkQ1-treated group, anemia and body 
weight decrease became the prominent features in the 
moribund mice. 
Postmortem examination also revealed positive effects 
of SkQ1 treatment (Table 3). Particularly, the heart 
pathology (Fig. S2A) often observed in the mtDNA 
mutator mice [12, 22] was much rarer (Table 3). Liver 
(Fig. S2B), as well as kidney (Fig. S2C), pathology was 
milder, and the hydrocephalus observed occasionally in 
the mtDNA mutator mice was not found in the SkQ1-
treated mice (Table 3). In contrast, certain other 
pathological findings occurred irrespectively of SkQ1 
treatment: cecum and colon displayed pathological 
changes in all animals in both groups, and particularly 
the spleen was also pathological in nearly all animals, 
irrespective of SkQ1 treatment or not (Table 3). The 
Figure 9. Effect of SkQ1 treatment on mouse metabolism, motility and survival. (A) Representative trace of oxygen 
consumption (metabolism) of a mouse. Running oxygen consumption rate is indicated as black bold curve, the lowest (resting at 22 °C 
environmental temperature) oxygen consumption rate indicated as a dashed straight line and the oxygen consumed above the resting 
rate is indicated as grey area. Note that the oxygen consumption rate at 22 °C does not represent the basal metabolic rate, as the 
mice are examined below their thermoneutral temperature zone.(B) Metabolic rates in non-treated and SkQ-treated mice (≈ 200 days 
of age) at 22 °C ambient temperature measured as shown in A. (C) Metabolic activity of mtDNA mutator mice. Activity was 
determined as amount of oxygen consumed above resting metabolic rate during two hours in the metabolic chamber (as shown in 
9A). In B and C, the values represent the means ± S.E. of 6 mice in each group. (D) Scoring of manifestations of immobility in SkQ1-
treated and non-treated mtDNA mutator mice. (E) Survival curves of mtDNA mutant mice non-treated (thin line) or treated with SkQ1 
(thick line), n= 38 (15 males and 23 females) in the non-treated group and n= 17 (6 males and 10 females) in SkQ1-treated group. No 
gender dependence on life-span was observed (not shown). Mice were single caged. Mean survival time for the non-treated group 
was 277 ± 6 days, for the SkQ1-treated 321 ± 10 days (+ 16%); median lifespan was 290 days for non-treated mice and 335 days (+ 
16%) for SkQ1-treated mice. Comparison of survival curves with log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test yields p < 0.0001 and with Gehan-Breslow-
Wilcoxon test yields p = 0.0012.  
 www.aging-us.com 
327 
AGING (Albany NY) 
spleen pathology is probably related to the paleness 
observed to a high extent in the SkQ1-treated mice 
during their last days (Fig. S2D). It would simply seem 
that the SkQ1-treated mtDNA mutator mice lived so 
much longer than the non-treated mice that anemia had 
time to develop sufficiently to become life-threatening.  
SkQ1 treatment increased the lifespan of mtDNA 
mutator mice 
 
It is implicitly evident from several of the above data 
series that in addition to the general positive effect that 
SkQ1 had on the general health of the mtDNA mutator 
Table 2. Incidence of symptoms in mtDNA mutator mice at the point of euthanasia during the 
survival experiment. 
mtDNA mutator mice  
mtDNA mutator mice + SkQ1 
Symptoms 
Number  
(and %)  
of mice in the 
group 
from 
total 28  
Symptoms 
Number  
(and %) of mice 
in 
the 
group 
from total 13 
Keeping 
posture 
position; 
shivering 
25 (89%) 
Severe paleness  
9 (69%) 
Body temperature below 34 °C 
23 (82%) 
Mouse hides, lies still but is startled 
when touched 
8 (62%) 
Chronic body weight loss by 15% 
during several weeks 
21 (75%) 
Chronic body weight loss by 15% 
during several weeks 
8 (62%) 
Severe piloerection  
20 (71%) 
Mouse is unable to stand up on 
back 
legs; 
dis-coordination, 
asymmetry of movement 
5 (38%) 
Severe 
anus 
prolapse 
and 
bleeding 
6 (21%) 
Keeping posture position; shivering 
5 (38%) 
Soft feces, diarrhea 
5 (18%) 
Severe dehydration 
5 (38%) 
Acute body weight loss (2-3 g 
during 1 week) 
5 (18%) 
Severe anus prolapse and bleeding 
3 (23%) 
Severe paleness  
4 (14%) 
Soft feces, diarrhea 
3 (23%) 
Mouse is unable to stand up on 
back 
legs; 
dis-coordination, 
asymmetry of movement 
3 (11%) 
Acute body weight loss (2-3 g 
during 1 week) 
3 (23%) 
Severe dehydration  
2 (7%) 
Severe piloerection  
1 (8%) 
Mouse hides, lies still but is 
startled when touched 
1 (4%) 
Body temperature below 34 °C 
1 (8%) 
 
The heavy line separates the symptoms seen in >50 % of all mice from those seen in <50 %.  
 
 www.aging-us.com 
328 
AGING (Albany NY) 
mice, SkQ1 also prolonged the life of these mice. This 
is directly shown in Fig. 9F. The first mouse from the 
non-treated group died at an age of 199 days whereas 
the first SkQ1-treated mouse lived for 70 days longer. 
The median survival time for the non-treated group was 
290 days; for the SkQ1-treated group it was 335 days, 
an increase in life expectancy of 45 days or 16 %. 
 
Thus, the SkQ1-treated mtDNA mutator mice not only 
increased their life-span; they also experienced a 
healthier life, with prolonged estrus cycles, adequate 
weight maintenance and less pathology. 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
In the present study, we have demonstrated that 
treatment 
of 
mtDNA 
mutator 
mice 
with 
the 
mitochondrial targeted antioxidant SkQ1 ameliorates 
most 
of 
the 
syndromes 
associated 
with 
the 
mitochondrial 
polymerase 
γ DNA 
proof-reading 
Table 3. Histopathological findings at necropsy of mtDNA mutator mice untreated or treated with SkQ1. 
 
Organ  
 
Histopathology 
Mut 
n = 11 
 
Mut+SkQ1 
n = 11 
 
Heart 
1) The myocardium exhibited moderate myocardial degeneration, 
characterized by irregularly shaped nuclei and rich cytoplasmic 
vacuolation in myocytes 
2) Perivascular or interstitial fibrosis and Anitschkow cells 
 
5 
2 
 
2 
0 
Brain 
Mild internal hydrocephalus 
 
3 
0 
Kidney 
The renal cortex displayed occasional dilated tubules and increased 
cytoplasmic basophillia in the epithelial lining an occasional proximal 
tubule - characteristics of nephropathy:  
mild 
moderate 
 
 
 
4 
5 
 
 
 
6 
0 
Liver 
1) Chronic degenerative changes characterized by enlarged periportal 
hepatocytes having granular cytoplasm or large and small fatty 
vacuoles. Portal areas displayed moderate fibrosis and hyperplastic oval 
cells at sites: 
1a) mild 
1b) moderate 
2) Degenerative changes with abnormal nuclear features (pseudo-
inclusions) 
 
 
 
 
1 
5 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
2 
0 
 
0 
3) The sinusoids exhibited scattered, small aggregates of  hematopoietic 
cells or/and myelopoetic cells 
 
5 
 
5 
Spleen 
1) The red pulp displayed extensive hematopoetic activity 
2) The white pulp displayed small lymphatic follicles 
10 
 
9 
11 
 
9 
Cecum and 
the 
proximal 
colon 
Severe mucosal hyperplasia with chronic catarrhal inflammation. 
Epithelium degeneration, necrosis, apoptosis. Infiltration leukocytes 
predominately macrophages. Mucosal atrophy coexisted with sites of 
the mucosa thickened by hyperplasia, forming plague-like or irregular 
papillary projections lined by crowed, tall columnar, basophilic cells 
with numerous mitotic figures.  
 
11 
 
11 
 
11 mice in each group were analyzed in the survival experimental setup.  
 
 www.aging-us.com 
329 
AGING (Albany NY) 
malfunction in these mice. Thus, the occurrence of hair 
loss, kyphosis, loss of estrus cycle, body weight loss, 
reduced lipid stores, hypothermia, immobility and 
torpor-like states were delayed and did not become so 
marked. Pathological signs of heart, liver and kidney 
malfunction were diminished. Functionally, our data 
suggest that SkQ1 counteracts free radical oxidation of 
polyunsaturated fatty acids, primarily in the cardiolipin 
class of phospholipids. This results in a slight but 
statistically significant difference in formation of MDA 
and 4-HNE between the control group and the animals 
treated with SkQ1. This in turn diminishes the levels of 
lipid peroxidation products and protein modifications. 
Preserving mitochondrial cardiolipin is likely the reason 
for protection of intact mitochondrial ultrastructure, 
required 
for 
normal 
bioenergetic 
function 
of 
mitochondria. Functional mitochondria in brown 
adipose tissue and skeletal muscle are required for the 
production of sufficient heat to protect the mice from 
hypothermia. Probably mainly due to this heat 
production, SkQ1-treated mtDNA mutator mice survive 
substantially longer than non-treated mtDNA mutator 
mice. Taken together, our observations indicate that 
mitochondrial oxidative damage is a substantial cause in 
the acquisition of aging characteristics in the mtDNA 
mutator mice. Since present reluctance to accept ROS 
as a causative agent of aging characteristics is largely 
based on the concept that increased oxidative damage 
had not been observed in the mtDNA mutator mice, and 
as our present results clearly demonstrate that 
counteraction of oxidative damage ameliorates aging in 
the mtDNA mutator mice, the above-described data are 
also important for discussions concerning the molecular 
background of the aging process. A further issue is 
whether SkQ1 or SkQ1-like substances are of 
therapeutic interest in relation to mitochondrial diseases 
in general and aging in particular. 
 
A mechanism of action for SkQ1 
 
The experiments presented here point to a series of 
events that could largely explain the ameliorating effect 
of SkQ1 on the health of mtDNA mutator mice. There 
are several issues to be discussed concerning the 
suggested mode of action. 
 
SkQ1 is an antioxidant and was developed as such to 
counteract oxidative damage in mitochondria [21]. 
However, it is a controversial issue as to whether there 
is increased oxidative stress (and damage) in mtDNA 
mutator mice, and an antioxidant should only work if 
there is increased oxidative stress. Initial studies of the 
mtDNA mutator mice indicated that there was no 
evidence (e.g. in the form of carbonylation) that the 
mitochondria of these mice displayed significantly 
increased oxidative damage [13, 16, 17]. However, this 
point has weakened over the years [20]. Particularly, 
direct measurement of hydrogen peroxide in the 
mitochondria indicated that in the mtDNA mutator mice 
an increased hydrogen peroxide level could be detected 
with age [38], and there are several indirect 
observations that are most easily explained by in 
increased ROS exposure in these mitochondria [22,23]. 
To this should evidently be added the observations that 
we report here, of decreased cardiolipin and polyun-
saturated fatty acid levels in the mtDNA mutator mice.  
 
We observed changes in cardiolipin levels in mtDNA 
mutator mice and reversal of these changes by SkQ1. 
Under oxidative stress, cardiolipin is peroxidized earlier 
than any other phospholipids [39] and its decomposition 
is prevented by SkQ1 in vitro [40]. Cardiolipin 
protection is probably the primary target for SkQ1 
operating as an antioxidant [41, 42]. In the 
mitochondria, the SkQ1 cation may combine directly 
with the cardiolipin anion [41]. 
 
It may be suggested that the mitochondria in the 
mtDNA mutator mice truly produce slightly more ROS 
than mitochondria in wild-type mice [38]). However, 
the increase is rather small so that it to a large extent is 
scavenged by the easily oxidized polyunsaturated fatty 
acids mainly found in the mitochondrial cardiolipin, 
leading to the formation of 4-HNE that then forms 
adducts with (mitochondrial) proteins. Thus, the ROS 
levels may never rise to such levels that other signs of 
oxidative stress become measurable. The problems 
caused by cardiolipin diminishment and formation of 4-
HNE protein adducts may be sufficient to explain most 
of the negative effects observed; at least, as seen here, 
when cardiolipin levels in vivo are protected, 
mitochondrial competence is markedly improved. 
 
A therapeutic role for SkQ1 and SkQ1-like 
compounds in mitochondrial diseases and aging. 
 
The mtDNA mutator mice do show mitochondrial 
damage akin to that occurring in some mitochondrial 
diseases, and the ability of SkQ1 to ameliorate the effect 
points to a possibility to ameliorate some mitochondrial 
diseases by treatment with antioxidants. Indeed, 
antioxidant 
treatments 
such 
as 
mitochondrially 
overexpressed catalase [22] and supplying large 
amounts of N-acetyl cysteine [23] have been shown to 
be beneficial against mitochondrial problems. The 
advantage of SkQ1, as well as of MitoQ [43], are that 
they are mitochondrially targeted antioxidants that can 
be directly supplied in relatively small amounts. The 
present studies could therefore promote further attempts 
to use such compounds therapeutically.  
 
A classical hypothesis for aging was that mitochondrial 
damage would result in increased ROS production that 
 www.aging-us.com 
330 
AGING (Albany NY) 
in its turn would increase mitochondrial oxidative 
damage that then in a deleterious cycle, would augment 
itself [8]. However, this idea has lost general acceptance 
in recent years. A not insignificant reason for this has 
been reports from studies of the mtDNA mutator mice 
that the mitochondria seemingly do not display 
enhanced ROS production or enhanced oxidative 
damage. However, studies such as the present one do 
imply that oxidative damage may be important for the 
aging characteristics observed, at least in the mtDNA 
mutator mice, and these studies may thus resurrect the 
ROS hypothesis for aging. We found increased 
longevity in the SkQ1-treated mtDNA mutator mice. 
Although these mice may correctly be considered an 
artificial model, the marked effects of SkQ1 treatment 
would imply that counteracting ROS damage could be 
one factor leading to prolonged life. There are indeed 
indications that treatment with targeted antioxidants 
such as SkQ1 not only are effective against specified 
diseases or in artificial models, but may also prolong 
lifespan in general, in wild-type animals [21, 44, 45]. 
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
Animal breeding, maintaining and treatment 
 
All animal experiments were performed at the Wenner-
Gren Institute, Stockholm University. MtDNA mutator 
animals were obtained by intercrossing of mice 
heterozygous for the PolgAmutallele, developed as 
described [12]. The mice were genotyped as previously 
described [12]. For the present studies, homozygous 
mutant (PolgAmut/PolgAmut) mice were used. When 
wild-type mice were studied, they were homozygotes 
for the wild-type; heterozygotes were not used in the 
present experiments. Mice were successively recruited 
to the study, as they became available. The mice had 
been backcrossed to C57Bl/6 for at least 7 generations, 
but as the PolgA gene is located on chromosome 7 at 
the 45.04 cM location close to the tyrosinase gene 
determining black/white color [46], the mice were either 
black or white. The mice were fed ad libitum (R70 
Standard Diet, Lactamin AB, Vadstena, Sweden), had 
free access to water, and were kept on a 12:12 h 
light:dark cycle at 22 °C.  
 
For treatment with SkQ1, the mice were singly housed 
from an age of ≈100 days when also the treatment 
started. The experimental mice were treated with SkQ1 
dissolved in ethanol and added to the drinking water 
provided in 30 ml volume in a small bottle; the water 
was changed every second day. The final concentration 
of ethanol was 0.1 %; this ethanol concentration was 
also present in the water of the control (non-treated) 
mice. SkQ1 doses (taking into account absorbance of 
SkQ1 on the inner surface of the bottle) were 0.7-0.8 
µmol/(day • kg body weight) for males and 0.9-1.0 
µmol/(day • kg) for females. 
 
Several experimental designs were used, as specified in 
the figure legends. In the “survival” experiments, the 
mice were followed until they were moribund (defined 
as the day when the General Condition score (see 
below) exceeded 2.5), at which time the mice were 
euthanized, according to the requirements of the ethical 
committee. Some of these mice underwent postmortem 
analysis performed at the Swedish State Veterinary 
Institute to establish the cause of death and general 
health. In the ”simultaneous” set-up, mice (6 from each 
group) were killed at a time where a clear distinction in 
health had developed between the SkQ1-treated and 
non-treated mtDNA mutator mice (i.e. at an age of ≈250 
days, after 150 days of SkQ1 treatment). In the “paired 
death” experiments, one age- and sex-matched mouse 
from the SkQ1-treated group was killed when one 
mouse in the non-treated group became moribund (8 
females and 5 males from each group). 
 
Animal protocols were in accordance with the 
guidelines for the humane treatment of animals and 
were reviewed and approved by the Animal Ethics 
Committee of the North Stockholm Region. 
 
Monitoring of physiological parameters, metabolic 
rate and DEXA 
 
From an age of about 140 days, body temperature, body 
weight, body fat content, lean body mass, food and 
water intake and estrus cycle were monitored. The body 
temperature was measured with a rectal probe for mice 
(RET-3 plugged to amplifier BAT-12, Physiterm 
Instruments Inc., NJ, USA). Measurements of body 
weight and body temperature were made every 10-14 
days, always at the same time (14.00-14.30). Magnetic 
resonance relaxometry (EchoMRITM Whole Body 
Composition Analyzer, Echo Medical Systems, LLC, 
Texas, USA) was performed every month to measure 
live body composition in terms of fat and lean tissue 
content. For food intake studies, ad libitum food intake 
of individually housed mice was measured over a period 
of 5 consecutive days every month. Known excess 
amounts of food were added on the first day, and 
leftover food was measured after 5 days for each mouse 
individually. To determine net energy intake, diet and 
fecal samples were analyzed for energy content, using 
adiabatic bomb calorimetry (Oxygen Bomb Calorimeter 
6300, Parr Instrument, USA). Water intake was 
measured over periods of 2 days.  
 
For monitoring metabolic rates, oxygen consumption 
was measured by indirect calorimetry (INCA system, 
Somedic, Hörby, Sweden). The mouse remained in its 
 www.aging-us.com 
331 
AGING (Albany NY) 
own cage with food and water, and the cage was placed 
in a constant airflow in a temperature-controlled 
chamber. Oxygen consumption measurements were 
performed for 3 hours (light period, 22 °C). Metabolic 
rate at 22 °C (“resting metabolic rate”) was defined as 
the average of the stable lowest level of oxygen 
consumption for at least 10 minutes. Facultative 
(additional) metabolism (mainly related to a physical 
activity) was estimated as the total area above the 
lowest metabolic rate during the last 2 hours (the mice 
were agitated during the first hour in the metabolic 
chamber and this period was not used for estimation of 
this parameter).  
 
Determination of the reproductive status of the female 
mice was made by microscopic examination of 
unstained vaginal secretion smears. The proportion 
between cell types was used for the determination of 
estrus cycle phases [47].  
 
The carcasses of some killed mice were placed at –20°C 
and used for densitometer dual energy X-ray 
absorptiometry (DEXA) assay to measure bone 
minerality (assessment of osteoporosis) and to make X-
ray pictures for quantitative determination of kyphosis. 
DEXA was performed using PIXImus small animal 
DEXA system (Lunar, Madison, WI, USA). 
 
Survival curve and scoring of phenotype features 
and symptoms of poor welfare 
 
Every week during the entire experiment, the mice were 
assessed and scored for features of aging phenotype 
(signs of alopecia, kyphosis) and for clinical signs of 
poor welfare [paleness, immobility, discoordination 
with 
asymmetry 
of 
movement, 
piloerection, 
withdrawnness, dehydration (squared tail and lowered 
skin turgor), shivering, anal prolapse with bleeding, soft 
feces, and skin damage]. The scoring was made by a 
veterinarian [to whom the code of treatment was not 
known (blinded experiment)] together with a researcher 
to state the general appearance for each individual 
animal. Individual records of body weight, fat content 
and body temperature were taken into consideration for 
the welfare evaluation. Mild symptoms scored between 
0 and 1, moderate symptoms between 1 and 2 and 
severe above 2. An example of a scoring table is shown 
in Supp. Table S1.  
 
Histopathological analysis 
 
In the survival experiment, the following tissues were 
collected for histopathological analysis: liver, spleen, 
kidney, pancreas, lung, heart, brain, stomach and 
different parts of the digestive tract, and skin. Tissues 
were fixed in 10 % formalin, processed using routine 
procedures, and embedded in paraffin. A 5 µm section 
was cut from each block and stained with haematoxylin 
and eosin.  
 
Protein oxidative modification biomarker 
 
Oxidative stress biomarker [4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) 
adducts] were analyzed in total tissue homogenates of 
gastrocnemius skeletal muscle, brain, liver and kidney. 
For collection of tissues, mice from the paired-death 
experimental setup [8 age- and gender-matched (268-
300 days) mice (5 females and 3 males) in each group] 
were anaesthetized for 1-2 min by a mixture of 79 % 
CO2 and 21 % O2 and decapitated. Tissues were 
dissected out and rapidly placed in liquid nitrogen; the 
tissues were powdered under liquid nitrogen, weighed, 
divided into small amounts and stored under nitrogen 
gas at –80 °C. A small amount was homogenized in 
RIPA buffer with proteinase inhibitor (Complete mini, 
Roche), and protein concentration was quantified using 
the Lowry method. 4-HNE-adducts were detected by 
immunoblot analysis with polyclonal antibodies from 
Alpha Diagnostics (HNE12-S, dilution 1:1000) as 
described [48]. 4-HNE-BSA protein conjugate (HNE12-
C, Alpha Diagnostics) was used as an internal control. 
For in vitro 4-HNE adduct formation, wild-type skeletal 
muscle tissue homogenate was incubated with 64 or 640 
µM 4-HNE for 20 min at 37 °C in the medium used for 
the mitochondrial oxygen consumption measurements.  
 
Susceptibility to lipid peroxidation 
 
Susceptibility to lipid peroxidation was estimated based 
on the kinetics of malondialdehyde (MDA) formation, 
principally as described [48]. MDA was assumed to be 
the 
main 
released 
substance 
that 
reacts 
with 
thiobarbituric acid [49]. In brief, tissue powdered as 
above was homogenized with 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer 
(pH 7.5). The MDA level was measured during 
incubation at 37 °C under vortexing every 10 - 20 min. 
After precipitation with trichloroacetic acid, an equal 
volume of 0.38% (w/w) thiobarbituric acid solution in 
0.25 M HCI was added to the samples. The mixture was 
heated at 90 °C for 10 min, and then cooled on ice. 
Light absorbance was read at 532 nm. 1,1,3,3-
tetraethoxypropane 
was 
used 
for 
calibration. 
Malondialdehyde was expressed as nmol MDA/mg 
protein.  
 
Immunoblotting of mitochondrial proteins 
 
Interscapular depots of brown adipose tissue were 
collected from mice from the paired-death experimental 
setup [5 age-matched (268-300 days) females in each 
group]. Aliquots of homogenates were stored at –80 °C 
after supplementation with protease inhibitor cocktail 
 www.aging-us.com 
332 
AGING (Albany NY) 
(Complete Mini, Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, 
Germany). The protein concentration of the samples 
was quantified using the Lowry method. Western blot 
analysis was performed on protein extracts as described 
[50]. 
Samples 
were 
loaded 
on 
15 
% 
SDS-
polyacrylamide gel (15 µg/lane) and run for 3 h in 1 x 
Tris-glycine-SDS running buffer (BioRad). Protein 
samples were transferred by electroblotting to a PVDF 
membrane 
(Amersham 
Pharmacia 
Biotech, 
Buckinghamshire, UK). UCP1 and VDAC expressions 
were examined using either a UCP1 antibody produced 
in rabbit against the C-terminal UCP1 decapeptide at a 
dilution of 1:3000 (in-house product) or a VDAC 
antibody from Cell Signaling (#4661S) diluted 1:2000.  
 
After 
incubation 
with 
primary 
antibodies, 
the 
membranes were washed with PBST buffer and 
incubated 
with 
secondary 
anti-mouse 
antibodies 
conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (Cell Signaling 
Technology, Inc. Danvers, MA, USA, dilution 1:2000). 
The membranes were washed in PBST and incubated 
with detection reagents (ECL Plus Kit, Amersham 
Biosciences); the chemiluminescence signal was 
measured with a CCD (charge-coupled device) camera. 
The blots were quantified using the Image Gauge V3.45 
program (Fuji Film, Tokyo, Japan). 
 
Isolation of mitochondria 
 
Mice from the simultaneous experimental setup [6 age-
matched (245 – 252 days) mice in each group] were 
anaesthetized for 1 min by a mixture of 79 % CO2 and 
21 % O2 and decapitated. Mitochondrial preparations 
from SkQ1-treated and non-treated mtDNA mutator 
mice were directly compared on the same experimental 
day. Skeletal muscles from the hind limbs of one mouse 
were placed into ice-cold medium containing 100 mM 
sucrose, 50 mM KCl, 20 mM K-TES, 1 mM EDTA and 
0.1 % (w/v) fatty acid-free bovine serum albumin 
(BSA) and were freed of white fat and connective 
tissue, weighed and used for mitochondrial isolation. 
Liver mitochondria were isolated as previously 
described [15]. The tissues were finely minced with 
scissors and homogenized in a Potter homogenizer with 
a Teflon pestle. During mincing and homogenizing, the 
skeletal muscles were treated with nagarse added to the 
medium at a concentration of 1 mg per g tissue. 
Throughout the isolation process, tissues were kept at 0-
2 °C. 
 
Mitochondria 
were 
isolated 
by 
differential 
centrifugation. 
The 
tissue 
homogenates 
were 
centrifuged at 8 500 g for 10 min at 2 °C using a 
Beckman J2-21M centrifuge. The resulting supernatant, 
containing floating fat and nagarse, was discarded. The 
pellet was resuspended in ice-cold medium containing 
100 mM sucrose, 50 mM KCl, 20 mM K-TES, 1 mM 
EDTA and 0.2 % BSA. The resuspended homogenate 
was centrifuged at 800 g for 10 min, and the resulting 
supernatant was centrifuged at 8 500 g for 10 min. The 
resulting mitochondrial pellet was resuspended in the 
same buffer (but albumin-free) and centrifuged again at 
8 500 g for 10 min. The final mitochondrial pellets were 
resuspended by hand homogenization in a small glass 
homogenizer in the buffer remaining in the pellet. The 
concentration of mitochondrial protein was measured 
using fluorescamine [51] with BSA as a standard. 
Mitochondrial suspensions were kept on ice for no 
longer than 4 h.  
 
Mitochondrial oxygen consumption 
 
Skeletal muscle mitochondria (0.25 mg protein/ml) 
were incubated at 37 °C under magnetic stirring in a 
buffer consisting of 100 mM sucrose, 20 mM K+-TES 
(pH 7.2), 50 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 4 
mM KPi, 3 mM malate and 0.1 % fatty-acid-free BSA. 
Oxygen consumption rates were monitored with a 
Clark-type 
oxygen 
electrode 
(Yellow 
Springs 
Instruments, Yellow Springs, OH, USA) in a sealed 
incubation chamber at 37 °C as described [52]. The 
output signal of the oxygen electrode amplifier was 
electronically time-differentiated and collected every 
0.5 s by a PowerLab application program Chart v5.1.1. 
(AD Instruments Ltd, Oxford, UK). 
 
Mitochondrial ROS production 
 
Mitochondrial 
H2O2 
production 
was 
determined 
fluorometrically using Amplex Red reagent (Molecular 
Probes, Eugene, OR, USA). Oxidation of Amplex Red 
coupled with horseradish peroxidase to reduction of 
H2O2 results in formation of resorufin, a red fluorescent 
product. Mitochondria (0.16 mg mitochondrial protein 
ml-1) were incubated at 37 °C under magnetic stirring in 
a buffer containing 100 mM sucrose, 20 mM K+ TES 
(pH 7.2), 50 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 4 
mM KPi, 3 mM malate, 0.1 % fatty-acid-free BSA, 5 
µM Amplex Red, horseradish peroxidase (12 units ml-1) 
and superoxide dismutase (45 units ml-1). The reaction 
was initiated by adding 5 mM pyruvate followed by the 
addition of 5 mM succinate. The increase in 
fluorescence emitted through a band pass filter of 600 ± 
20 nm (excitation, 545 nm) was followed in a 3 ml 
cuvette for 10-15 min in a Sigma spectrofluorometer. 
The rate of H2O2 production was calculated as a change 
in fluorescence intensity, as described earlier [36]. 
Calibration curves were obtained by adding to the assay 
medium freshly diluted H2O2 (the concentration of 
stock solution was checked at 240 nm using a molar 
extinction coefficient of 43.6).  
 www.aging-us.com 
333 
AGING (Albany NY) 
Mitochondrial phospholipid analysis 
 
Lipids were extracted from skeletal muscle or liver 
mitochondria (1-2 mg by protein content) isolated from 
mtDNA mutator mice as well as from wild-type mice 
(each strain treated or not with SkQ1) according to [53]. 
Phospholipids were separated by 2D-thin layer 
chromatography (TLC) on Silica gel 60 plates (Merck, 
Darmstadt, Germany) at 25 °C in an oxygen-depleted 
system. All solvents and chromatography tanks were 
deoxygenated by nitrogen for at least 1 h. Each sample 
was loaded on a 12x12 cm plate in the left bottom 
corner. For separation in the first direction, an eluent 
composed of chloroform/methanol/25 % NH3 (65:35:5 
per vol) was used. After front migration to the top of the 
plate, the plate was dried under a stream of nitrogen. As 
the second chromatography system, an eluent composed 
of 
chloroform/acetone/methanol/acetic 
acid/water 
(50:20:10:10:5 per vol) was used. After drying under a 
stream of nitrogen, phospholipids were visualized on 
TLC plates by staining with iodine vapour, scraped off 
and quantified according to [54]. Identification of single 
phospholipids positions was done according to 
migration of standards (Avanti Polar Lipids, USA), 
separated at the same conditions. 
 
For 
analysis 
of 
the 
fatty 
acid 
composition, 
phospholipids were converted to their methyl esters 
through methanolysis in oxygen-free 14% methanol 
solution of boron trifluoride at 100 °C. Fatty acid 
methyl esters (FAME) were separated by gas 
chromatography with a flame-ionization detector 
(GC/FID) on Hewlett-Packard 5890, using a CP Sil 88 
50 capillary column with helium as carrier gas. 
Identification and quantification of fatty acids were 
made by comparison of their retention times to FAME 
GLC-68B standards (NuCheck Inc., USA). 
 
Electron microscopy 
 
Liver and heart were collected from mice in the 
simultaneous experimental setup [6 age- and gender-
matched (≈250 days old) mice in each group]. The 
pieces of tissue were fixed with a 3% glutaraldehyde 
solution (pH 7.4) for 2 hours at 4 °C, then overfixed 
with 1% osmium tetraoxide solution for 1.5 hours and 
dehydrated in an alcohol series with increasing alcohol 
concentrations (70 % alcohol saturated with uranyl 
acetate). The tissues were embedded in an Epon-812 
epoxy resin. Ultrathin sections were made with a Leica 
Ultracut UCT microtome (Germany) followed by lead 
citrate staining according to Reynolds [55]. The 
resulting preparations were scanned and photographed 
using an H-12 electron microscope (Hitachi, Japan). 
 
Statistics 
 
All data are presented as means ± S.E. Differences 
between genotypes were examined with Student’s t-test. 
Survival curves were analyzed using the method of 
Kaplan and Meier, and comparisons of survival curves 
were made using the log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test and the 
Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon test.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
Authors wish to thank Alexandra Trifunovic for 
providing the initial breeding pair of mtDNA mutator 
mice, and Birgitta Leksell, Calvin Keyser-Allen and 
Anton A. Tonshin for technical assistance.  
 
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 
 
MVS and VPS are board members of Mitotech 
company.  
 
FUNDING 
 
This study was supported by Mitotech (phospholipid 
studies) 
and 
Russian 
Scientific 
Foundation 
(mitochondrial in vitro studies, project № 14-24-00107 
and life span studies, project № 14-50-00029). JN, BC 
are supported by the Swedish Research Council and the 
Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1.  
Cottrell DA, Turnbull DM. Mitochondria and ageing. 
Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2000; 3:473–78. doi: 
10.1097/00075197-200011000-00009 
2.  
Wallace 
DC. 
A 
mitochondrial 
paradigm 
for 
degenerative diseases and ageing. Novartis Found 
Symp. 2001; 235:247–63.  
doi: 10.1002/0470868694.ch20 
3.  
Damas J, Samuels DC, Carneiro J, Amorim A, Pereira 
F. Mitochondrial DNA rearrangements in health and 
disease--a comprehensive study. Hum Mutat. 2014; 
35:1–14. doi: 10.1002/humu.22452 
4.  
Currais A. Ageing and inflammation - A central role 
for mitochondria in brain health and disease. Ageing 
Res Rev. 2015; 21:30–42.  
doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2015.02.001 
5.  
Cadenas E, Davies KJ. Mitochondrial free radical 
generation, oxidative stress, and aging. Free Radic 
Biol Med. 2000; 29:222–30. doi: 10.1016/S0891-
5849(00)00317-8 
 www.aging-us.com 
334 
AGING (Albany NY) 
6.
Lenaz G, Bovina C, D’Aurelio M, Fato R, Formiggini G,
Genova ML, Giuliano G, Merlo Pich M, Paolucci U,
Parenti Castelli G, Ventura B. Role of mitochondria in
oxidative stress and aging. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002;
959:199–213.
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb02094.x
7.
Wei YH, Lee HC. Oxidative stress, mitochondrial DNA
mutation, and impairment of antioxidant enzymes in
aging. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2002; 227:671–82.
8.
Harman D. The free radical theory of aging. Antioxid
Redox Signal. 2003; 5:557–61.
doi: 10.1089/152308603770310202
9.
Nacarelli T, Torres C, Sell C. (2016). Mitochondrial
Reactive Oxygen Species in Cellular Senescence.
Cellular 
Ageing 
and 
Replicative 
Senescence:
Springer), pp. 169-185.
10.
Pérez VI, Bokov A, Van Remmen H, Mele J, Ran Q,
Ikeno Y, Richardson A. Is the oxidative stress theory
of aging dead? Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009;
1790:1005–14. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2009.06.003
11.
Wang Y, Hekimi S. Mitochondrial dysfunction and
longevity in animals: untangling the knot. Science.
2015; 350:1204–07. doi: 10.1126/science.aac4357
12.
Trifunovic A, Wredenberg A, Falkenberg M, Spelbrink
JN, Rovio AT, Bruder CE, Bohlooly-Y M, Gidlöf S,
Oldfors A, Wibom R, Törnell J, Jacobs HT, Larsson
NG. Premature ageing in mice expressing defective
mitochondrial DNA polymerase. Nature. 2004;
429:417–23. doi: 10.1038/nature02517
13.
Kujoth GC, Hiona A, Pugh TD, Someya S, Panzer K,
Wohlgemuth SE, Hofer T, Seo AY, Sullivan R, Jobling
WA, Morrow JD, Van Remmen H, Sedivy JM, et al.
Mitochondrial DNA mutations, oxidative stress, and
apoptosis in mammalian aging. Science. 2005;
309:481–84. doi: 10.1126/science.1112125
14.
Lagouge M, Larsson NG. The role of mitochondrial
DNA mutations and free radicals in disease and
ageing. J Intern Med. 2013; 273:529–43.
doi: 10.1111/joim.12055
15.
Edgar D, Shabalina I, Camara Y, Wredenberg A,
Calvaruso MA, Nijtmans L, Nedergaard J, Cannon B,
Larsson NG, Trifunovic A. Random point mutations
with major effects on protein-coding genes are the
driving force behind premature aging in mtDNA
mutator mice. Cell Metab. 2009; 10:131–38.
doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2009.06.010
16.
Trifunovic A, Hansson A, Wredenberg A, Rovio AT,
Dufour E, Khvorostov I, Spelbrink JN, Wibom R,
Jacobs HT, Larsson NG. Somatic mtDNA mutations
cause aging phenotypes without affecting reactive
oxygen species production. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2005; 102:17993–98. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0508886102 
17.
Hiona A, Sanz A, Kujoth GC, Pamplona R, Seo AY,
Hofer T, Someya S, Miyakawa T, Nakayama C,
Samhan-Arias AK, Servais S, Barger JL, Portero-Otín
M, et al. Mitochondrial DNA mutations induce
mitochondrial dysfunction, apoptosis and sarcopenia
in skeletal muscle of mitochondrial DNA mutator
mice. PLoS One. 2010; 5:e11468.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011468
18.
Kukat A, Edgar D, Bratic I, Maiti P, Trifunovic A.
Random mtDNA mutations modulate proliferation
capacity in mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. 2011; 409:394–99.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.145
19.
Kukat A, Dogan SA, Edgar D, Mourier A, Jacoby C,
Maiti P, Mauer J, Becker C, Senft K, Wibom R, Kudin
AP, Hultenby K, Flögel U, et al. Loss of UCP2
attenuates 
mitochondrial 
dysfunction 
without
altering ROS production and uncoupling activity.
PLoS Genet. 2014; 10:e1004385.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004385
20.
Kolesar JE, Safdar A, Abadi A, MacNeil LG, Crane JD,
Tarnopolsky 
MA, 
Kaufman 
BA. 
Defects 
in
mitochondrial DNA replication and oxidative damage
in muscle of mtDNA mutator mice. Free Radic Biol
Med. 2014; 75:241–51.
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.07.038
21.
Skulachev VP, Anisimov VN, Antonenko YN, Bakeeva
LE, Chernyak BV, Erichev VP, Filenko OF, Kalinina NI,
Kapelko VI, Kolosova NG, Kopnin BP, Korshunova GA,
Lichinitser MR, et al. An attempt to prevent
senescence: a mitochondrial approach. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2009; 1787:437–61.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2008.12.008
22.
Dai DF, Chen T, Wanagat J, Laflamme M, Marcinek
DJ, Emond MJ, Ngo CP, Prolla TA, Rabinovitch PS.
Age-dependent cardiomyopathy in mitochondrial
mutator mice is attenuated by overexpression of
catalase targeted to mitochondria. Aging Cell. 2010;
9:536–44. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2010.00581.x
23.
Ahlqvist KJ, Hämäläinen RH, Yatsuga S, Uutela M,
Terzioglu M, Götz A, Forsström S, Salven P, Angers-
Loustau A, Kopra OH, Tyynismaa H, Larsson NG,
Wartiovaara K, et al. Somatic progenitor cell
vulnerability to mitochondrial DNA mutagenesis
underlies progeroid phenotypes in Polg mutator
mice. Cell Metab. 2012; 15:100–09.
doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.11.012
24.
Thompson LV. Oxidative stress, mitochondria and
mtDNA-mutator mice. Exp Gerontol. 2006; 41:1220–
22. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2006.10.018
 www.aging-us.com 
335 
AGING (Albany NY) 
25.  Kauppila TE, Kauppila JH, Larsson NG. Mammalian 
mitochondria and aging: an update. Cell Metab. 
2017; 25:57–71. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2016.09.017 
26.  Fischer AW, Csikasz RI, von Essen G, Cannon B, 
Nedergaard J. No insulating effect of obesity. Am J 
Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2016; 311:E202–13. doi: 
10.1152/ajpendo.00093.2016 
27.  Nedergaard J, Cannon B. The browning of white 
adipose tissue: some burning issues. Cell Metab. 
2014; 20:396–407. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2014.07.005 
28.  Ahima RS, Prabakaran D, Mantzoros C, Qu D, Lowell 
B, Maratos-Flier E, Flier JS. Role of leptin in the 
neuroendocrine response to fasting. Nature. 1996; 
382:250–52. doi: 10.1038/382250a0 
29.  Ayala A, Muñoz MF, Argüelles S. Lipid peroxidation: 
production, metabolism, and signaling mechanisms 
of malondialdehyde and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal. Oxid 
Med Cell Longev. 2014; 2014:360438.  
doi: 10.1155/2014/360438 
30.  Goonesinghe A, Mundy ES, Smith M, Khosravi-Far R, 
Martinou JC, Esposti MD. Pro-apoptotic Bid induces 
membrane perturbation by inserting selected 
lysolipids into the bilayer. Biochem J. 2005; 387:109–
18. doi: 10.1042/BJ20041389 
31.  Li X, Fang P, Li Y, Kuo YM, Andrews AJ, Nanayakkara 
G, Johnson C, Fu H, Shan H, Du F, Hoffman NE, Yu D, 
Eguchi S, et al. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen 
species mediate lysophosphatidylcholine-induced 
endothelial cell activation. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc 
Biol. 2016; 36:1090–100.  
doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.306964 
32.  Paradies G, Paradies V, De Benedictis V, Ruggiero 
FM, Petrosillo G. Functional role of cardiolipin in 
mitochondrial bioenergetics. Biochim Biophys Acta. 
2014; 1837:408–17.  
doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2013.10.006 
33. Safdar A, Bourgeois JM, Ogborn DI, Little JP, Hettinga 
BP, Akhtar M, Thompson JE, Melov S, Mocellin NJ, 
Kujoth GC, Prolla TA, Tarnopolsky MA. Endurance 
exercise rescues progeroid aging and induces 
systemic mitochondrial rejuvenation in mtDNA 
mutator mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011; 
108:4135–40. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1019581108 
34.  Korshunov SS, Skulachev VP, Starkov AA. High 
protonic potential actuates a mechanism of 
production 
of 
reactive 
oxygen 
species 
in 
mitochondria. FEBS Lett. 1997; 416:15–18.  
doi: 10.1016/S0014-5793(97)01159-9 
35.  Shabalina IG, Nedergaard J. Mitochondrial (‘mild’) 
uncoupling and ROS production: physiologically 
relevant or not? Biochem Soc Trans. 2011; 39:1305–
09. doi: 10.1042/BST0391305 
36.  Shabalina IG, Vrbacký M, Pecinová A, Kalinovich AV, 
Drahota Z, Houštěk J, Mráček T, Cannon B, 
Nedergaard J. ROS production in brown adipose 
tissue 
mitochondria: 
the 
question 
of 
UCP1-
dependence. 
Biochim 
Biophys 
Acta. 
2014; 
1837:2017–30. doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2014.04.005 
37.  Scialò F, Sriram A, Fernández-Ayala D, Gubina N, 
Lõhmus M, Nelson G, Logan A, Cooper HM, Navas P, 
Enríquez JA, Murphy MP, Sanz A. Mitochondrial ROS 
produced via reverse electron transport extend 
animal lifespan. Cell Metab. 2016; 23:725–34.  
doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2016.03.009 
38.  Logan A, Shabalina IG, Prime TA, Rogatti S, Kalinovich 
AV, Hartley RC, Budd RC, Cannon B, Murphy MP. In 
vivo levels of mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide 
increase with age in mtDNA mutator mice. Aging 
Cell. 2014; 13:765–68. doi: 10.1111/acel.12212 
39.  Wiswedel I, Gardemann A, Storch A, Peter D, Schild 
L. Degradation of phospholipids by oxidative stress--
exceptional significance of cardiolipin. Free Radic 
Res. 2010; 44:135–45.  
doi: 10.3109/10715760903352841 
40.  Lokhmatikov AV, Voskoboynikova NE, Cherepanov 
DA, Sumbatyan NV, Korshunova GA, Skulachev MV, 
Steinhoff HJ, Skulachev VP, Mulkidjanian AY. 
Prevention of peroxidation of cardiolipin liposomes 
by quinol-based antioxidants. Biochemistry (Mosc). 
2014; 79:1081–100.  
doi: 10.1134/S0006297914100101 
41.  Skulachev VP, Antonenko YN, Cherepanov DA, 
Chernyak BV, Izyumov DS, Khailova LS, Klishin SS, 
Korshunova GA, Lyamzaev KG, Pletjushkina OY, 
Roginsky VA, Rokitskaya TI, Severin FF, et al. 
Prevention of cardiolipin oxidation and fatty acid 
cycling as two antioxidant mechanisms of cationic 
derivatives of plastoquinone (SkQs). Biochim Biophys 
Acta. 2010; 1797:878–89.  
doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2010.03.015 
42.  Vyssokikh MY, Antonenko YN, Lyamzaev KG, 
Rokitskaya TI, Skulachev VP. Methodology for use of 
mitochondria-targeted cations in the field of 
oxidative stress-related research. Methods Mol Biol. 
2015; 1265:149–59. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2288-
8_12 
43.  Smith RA, Murphy MP. Animal and human studies 
with the mitochondria-targeted antioxidant MitoQ. 
Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010; 1201:96–103.  
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05627.x 
 www.aging-us.com 
336 
AGING (Albany NY) 
44.
Anisimov VN, Egorov MV, Krasilshchikova MS,
Lyamzaev KG, Manskikh VN, Moshkin MP, Novikov
EA, Popovich IG, Rogovin KA, Shabalina IG,
Shekarova ON, Skulachev MV, Titova TV, et al.
Effects of the mitochondria-targeted antioxidant
SkQ1 on lifespan of rodents. Aging (Albany NY).
2011; 3:1110–19. doi: 10.18632/aging.100404
45.
Manskikh VN, Gancharova OS, Nikiforova AI,
Krasilshchikova MS, Shabalina IG, Egorov MV, Karger
EM, Milanovsky GE, Galkin II, Skulachev VP, Zinovkin
RA. Age-associated murine cardiac lesions are
attenuated 
by 
the 
mitochondria-targeted
antioxidant SkQ1. Histol Histopathol. 2015; 30:353–
60. doi: 10.14670/HH-30.353.
46.
Mizuno S, Dinh TT, Kato K, Mizuno-Iijima S, Tanimoto
Y, Daitoku Y, Hoshino Y, Ikawa M, Takahashi S,
Sugiyama F, Yagami K. Simple generation of albino
C57BL/6J mice with G291T mutation in the
tyrosinase gene by the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Mamm
Genome. 2014; 25:327–34.
doi: 10.1007/s00335-014-9524-0
47.
Kanyicska B, Sellix MT, Freeman ME. Autocrine
regulation of prolactin secretion by endothelins
throughout the estrous cycle. Endocrine. 2003;
20:53–58. doi: 10.1385/ENDO:20:1-2:53
48.
Shabalina IG, Petrovic N, Kramarova TV, Hoeks J,
Cannon B, Nedergaard J. UCP1 and defense against
oxidative stress. 4-Hydroxy-2-nonenal effects on
brown fat mitochondria are uncoupling protein 1-
independent. J Biol Chem. 2006; 281:13882–93.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M601387200
49.
Yagi K. Simple assay for the level of total lipid
peroxides in serum or plasma. Methods Mol Biol.
1998; 108:101–06.
50.
Shabalina IG, Petrovic N, de Jong JM, Kalinovich AV,
Cannon B, Nedergaard J. UCP1 in brite/beige adipose
tissue mitochondria is functionally thermogenic. Cell
Reports. 2013; 5:1196–203.
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.10.044
51.
Udenfriend S, Stein S, Böhlen P, Dairman W,
Leimgruber W, Weigele M. Fluorescamine: a reagent
for assay of amino acids, peptides, proteins, and
primary amines in the picomole range. Science.
1972; 178:871–72.
doi: 10.1126/science.178.4063.871
52.
Shabalina IG, Hoeks J, Kramarova TV, Schrauwen P,
Cannon B, Nedergaard J. Cold tolerance of UCP1-
ablated mice: a skeletal muscle mitochondria switch
toward lipid oxidation with marked UCP3 up-
regulation not associated with increased basal, fatty
acid- or ROS-induced uncoupling or enhanced GDP
effects. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010; 1797:968–80.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2010.02.033
53.
Folch J, Lees M, Sloane Stanley GH. A simple method
for the isolation and purification of total lipides from
animal tissues. J Biol Chem. 1957; 226:497–509.
54.
Bartlett 
GR. 
Phosphorus 
assay 
in 
column
chromatography. J Biol Chem. 1959; 234:466–68.
55.
Reynolds ES. The use of lead citrate at high pH as an
electron-opaque stain in electron microscopy. J Cell
Biol. 1963; 17:208–12. doi: 10.1083/jcb.17.1.208
