 ARTICLES
Pashtun Shahim, MD,
PhD
Henrik Zetterberg, MD,
PhD
Yelverton Tegner, MD,
PhD
Kaj Blennow, MD, PhD
Correspondence to
Dr. Shahim:
pashtun.shahim@neuro.gu.se
Editorial, page 1780
Supplemental data
at Neurology.org
Serum neurofilament light as a biomarker
for mild traumatic brain injury in contact
sports
ABSTRACT
Objective: To evaluate whether the axonal protein neurofilament light (NFL) in serum is a sensitive
biomarker to detect subtle brain injury or concussion in contact sports athletes.
Methods: Two prospective cohort studies involving (1) 14 Swedish amateur boxers who under-
went fluid biomarker assessments at 7–10 days after bout and after 3 months of rest from boxing
and (2) 35 Swedish professional hockey players who underwent blood biomarker assessment at
1, 12, 36, and 144 hours after concussion and when the players returned to play were per-
formed. Fourteen healthy nonathletic controls and 12 athletic controls were also enrolled. Serum
NFL was measured using ultrasensitive single molecule array technology.
Results: Serum NFL concentrations were increased in boxers 7–10 days after bout as compared
to the levels after 3 months rest as well as compared with controls (p 5 0.0007 and p , 0.0001,
respectively). NFL decreased following 3 months of rest, but was still higher than in controls (p ,
0.0001). Boxers who received many (.15) hits to the head or were groggy after bout had higher
concentrations of serum NFL as compared to those who received fewer hits to the head (p 5
0.0023). Serum NFL increased over time in hockey players, and the levels returned to normal at
return to play. Importantly, serum NFL could separate players with rapidly resolving postconcus-
sion symptoms (PCS) from those with prolonged PCS.
Conclusions: The results from these 2 independent cohort studies suggest that serum NFL is
a highly sensitive biomarker for concussion. Neurology® 2017;88:1788–1794
GLOSSARY
AUC 5 area under the receiver operating characteristic curve; DTI 5 diffusion tensor imaging; IQR 5 interquartile range;
LLOQ 5 lower limit of quantification; LOD 5 limit of detection; LP 5 lumbar puncture; mTBI 5 mild traumatic brain injury;
NFL 5 neurofilament light; PCS 5 postconcussion symptoms; RTP 5 return to play; SHL 5 Swedish Hockey League; TBI 5
traumatic brain injury.
Mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) or concussion in participants practicing contact sports, such
as American football, boxing, and hockey, is an increasing concern.1 For athletes and nonathletes
who have mTBI, postconcussion symptoms (PCS) usually resolve within days; however, in
10%–15%, PCS may persist for months to years.2
At present, there are no valid fluid or imaging biomarkers for diagnosis or prognosis of mTBI.3,4
Axonal injury with cytoskeletal damage and redistribution of neurofilament proteins have been
hypothesized to be the key type of damage and the primary determinant of outcome following
mTBI.5,6 Neurofilament light (NFL) is CNS-enriched protein, predominantly expressed in the long
myelinated subcortical axons.7 Measurement of NFL in CSF of boxers after bout have been shown
to correlate with the severity of brain injury.6,8 However, CSF biomarker analysis requires lumbar
puncture and is therefore difficult to implement in routine evaluations of athletes. In contrast, blood
samples are easily accessible. Thus, blood biomarkers for mTBI would be of great clinical value.
With the above in mind, we recently developed an immunoassay on the single molecule array
(Simoa) platform for ultrasensitive quantification of NFL in both plasma and serum.9–11 In the
From the Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology (P.S., H.Z., K.B.), Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, The Sahlgrenska Academy at
University of Gothenburg; Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory (P.S., H.Z., K.B.), Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, Sweden; Department
of Molecular Neuroscience (H.Z.), UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, UK; and the Division of Medical Sciences (Y.T.),
Department of Health Sciences, Luleå University of Technology, Sweden.
Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.
1788
© 2017 American Academy of Neurology
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 context of traumatic brain injury (TBI), we
measured serum NFL with our newly devel-
oped assay from patients with severe TBI,
where the levels correlated with diffusion ten-
sor imaging (DTI) measures of diffuse axonal
injury12 and CSF NFL, suggestive of serum
NFL reflecting axonal damage in the brain.9
We therefore hypothesized that serum NFL
may serve as a blood biomarker for mTBI.
METHODS Study population. For the first longitudinal
cohort study, we enrolled 14 amateur boxers who were sampled
7–10 days after boxing and after 3 months of rest from boxing
and sparring and 14 neurologically healthy age-matched controls
without history of brain trauma or participation in contact sports.
For comparison with athletes without head impact, we also
analyzed NFL in serum samples (n 5 12) of gymnasts.
In addition, we assessed serum NFL in a cohort of concussed
professional ice hockey players (n 5 35) competing in the Swedish
Hockey League (SHL) who underwent repeated blood sampling.
The players were diagnosed and managed according to the latest
clinical guidelines on sports-related concussion.13 Details on this
study have been presented previously.14
Standard protocol approval, registrations, and patient
consents. The regional ethics committee at the University of
Gothenburg, Sweden, approved the study. Written informed
consent was obtained from all participants.
Severity of brain injury. The boxers were interviewed at 7–10
days after bout for assessing the number and severity of hits to the
head. The severity of the brain injury was assessed by either the
number of punches each boxer received to the head or grogginess.
No boxer was knocked out.
Severity of injury in hockey players was assessed according to
the latest guidelines on the management of sports-related concus-
sion, which is based on the duration of PCS, and a graduated re-
turn to play (RTP) protocol, aiming at RTP within 6 days.13,14
Fluid sampling and biochemical procedures. Blood samples
were collected by venipuncture into EDTA tubes for serum and
centrifuged within 20–60 minutes. CSF was collected in poly-
propylene tubes by lumbar puncture (LP) through the L3-4 or
L4-5 interspace. All samples were aliquoted and stored at 2808C
pending analysis. The participants were examined physically and
neurologically prior to sampling, and all were healthy, and had no
contradictions to LP. In the cohort of boxers, sampling of serum
and CSF was performed at the same occasion both 7–10 days
after boxing and following a 3-month resting period without
sparring or boxing. The 7- to 10-day time point was considered as
the optimal time point for detecting a change in NFL levels as
a result of the bout, based on the kinetics of NFL in CSF.6 The
hockey players who sustained a concussion underwent blood
sampling at 1, 12, 36, and 144 hours after concussion, and
players with PCS lasting longer than 6 days were also sampled on
the day of RTP.
NFL concentrations in serum were measured using the Simoa
platform (Quanterix, Lexington, MA), a magnetic bead-based
digital ELISA that allows detection of proteins at subfemtomolar
concentrations,15 and an analytical protocol previously described
in detail.9 Limit of detection (LOD) for the NFL assay was 0.29
pg/mL and lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) was 2.7 pg/mL
when compensated for a 4-fold sample dilution. LOD and
LLOQ were determined by mean blank signal 13 SD and
110 SD, respectively. Average intra-assay duplicate coefficient
of variation for the samples was 6.5% (SD 8.6%).
CSF NFL concentrations were measured using a commercial
ELISA (NF-light ELISA, UmanDiagnostics, Umeå, Sweden) as
described previously.16 The CSF results have been reported in
a previous publication.6
All samples were analyzed at the same time using the same
batch of reagents by board-certified laboratory technicians who
were blind to clinical information.
Statistical analysis. The x2 test was used to examine differences
in categorical variables between the patients with mTBI vs con-
trols. The Spearman rank correlation examined the relationship
between changes in NFL levels and age as well as CSF NFL. For
the comparisons of serum NFL concentrations vs controls, the
Mann-Whitney U test was used. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test
was used for comparison between NFL levels at 7–10 days after
a bout and the levels at 3 months rest. The area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve (AUC) was calculated for assessing
the diagnostic accuracy of serum NFL for mTBI. All tests were 2-
sided and statistical significance was determined at p , 0.05. All
statistical calculations were performed using GraphPad Prism 6.0
(GraphPad Inc., San Diego, CA).
RESULTS Demographic characteristics of the boxers.
Fourteen boxers (median age 21.5 years, interquartile
range [IQR] 20–26 years) and 14 neurologically
healthy nonathletic controls (median age 23.5 years,
IQR 23–26 years) were enrolled (table e-1 at
Neurology.org). One of the boxers declined to
undergo a follow-up sampling at 3 months. For fur-
ther comparison, we also enrolled athletic controls
without direct impact: a group of gymnasts (median
age 19 years, IQR 18–22 years, all female). However,
there was no difference in the levels of serum NFL
between nonathletic controls (median 9.0 pg/mL,
IQR 7–14 pg/mL) and gymnasts (median 8.5 pg/mL,
IQR 7–12; p 5 0.90), and the latter group was
therefore excluded from further statistical analyses.
There was no significant difference in age and sex
between the boxers and controls (table e-1). There
was no correlation between serum NFL levels and age
(r 5 20.04, p 5 0.90).
Boxing is associated with axonal injury. The concentra-
tions of NFL in all serum samples from boxers were
variable and elevated (median 22.0 pg/mL, IQR
18–34 pg/mL) as compared to the controls (median
9.0 pg/mL, IQR 7–14 pg/mL; p , 0.0001) (table e-
1). Serum NFL concentrations were increased in
boxers 7–10 days after bout as compared to the levels
at 3 months rest and to levels in controls (p 5 0.0007
and p , 0.0001, respectively) (figure 1, A and B).
Serum levels of NFL decreased at 3 months rest
(median 18.0 pg/mL, IQR 16–24 pg/mL), but were
still higher than in controls (median 9.0 pg/mL, IQR
7–14 pg/mL; p , 0.0001) (figure 1B). In addition,
serum NFL concentration in boxers showed a strong,
positive correlation with correspondent CSF NFL
concentration (r 5 0.86, p 5 0.0003) (figure 1C).
Neurology 88
May 9, 2017
1789
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Serum NFL correlated with injury severity in boxers. We
dichotomized the severity of head impacts in boxers
into those who received severe head impact (more than
15 punches or feeling groggy during or after bout) or
those who received mild head impact (fewer than 15
punches to the head) (table e-2). Boxers who received
severe head impact had higher levels of serum NFL as
compared to those who received fewer hits to the head
(p 5 0.0023) (figure 2A). Also, after 3 months rest, the
concentrations of NFL were higher in boxers who had
received severe head impacts compared with boxers
who had received fewer hits, although the difference
was not significant (p 5 0.54; figure 2B). However,
both the boxers who received severe head impact and
those who received milder or fewer hits had increased
concentrations of serum NFL at 3 months as com-
pared to controls, with the highest levels observed in
the former group (p 5 0.0015 and p , 0.0001,
respectively) (figure 2B).
Diagnostic accuracy of serum NFL in boxers. We as-
sessed the diagnostic accuracy of serum NFL vs con-
trols by assessing the AUC. Serum NFL measured at
7–10 days and at 3 months rest vs controls yielded an
AUC of 0.97 and 0.96, respectively (figure 3, A and
B). Further, serum NFL measured 7–10 days after
a bout could separate boxers who received severe head
impact from those receiving milder or fewer hits with
an AUC of 0.97 (figure 3C).
Elevated serum NFL concentrations in concussed hockey
players. To validate the findings in the cohort of
boxers, we further assessed the diagnostic and prog-
nostic utility of serum NFL in concussed professional
hockey players. Of 35 players who sustained a concus-
sion during the first half of the 2012–2013 season in
the SHL, 28 consented to undergo repeated blood
sampling. Thirteen of the concussed players became
symptom-free within a few days of their injury, but in
15 players, symptoms persisted for 6 days or longer.
Players with prolonged RTP exhibited persistent
symptoms
that
included
cognitive
impairment,
headache, insomnia, irritability, and mood swings.
Two of the players also sustained loss of conscious-
ness, which lasted for less than a minute, and as long
as 17 minutes, respectively. One of the players was
forced to retire from the game due to persistent PCS
for more than 90 days. The median age of the hockey
players was 27 years (IQR 23–31 years) as compared
to the controls (median 23.5 years, IQR 23–26 years;
p 5 0.10).
Overall, serum NFL levels were higher in all post-
concussion samples (1–144 hours) from hockey play-
ers as compared with controls (p 5 0.035; figure 4A).
Serum concentrations of NFL increased rapidly and
in a prolonged fashion in concussed professional
hockey players, with the highest levels measured at
Figure 1
Boxing is associated with increased
serum neurofilament light (NFL)
(A) Longitudinal serum NFL changes in boxers. (B) Boxers
had elevated levels of serum NFL 7–10 days after a bout
compared to the levels at 3 months rest, as well as com-
pared to controls. (C) The levels of serum NFL were related
to NFL in CSF from the same individuals. Values are pre-
sented as medians; error bars indicate interquartile range.
The horizontal dotted line in (A) shows the median of the
controls.
1790
Neurology 88
May 9, 2017
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 144 hours after concussion (figure 4B). The levels of
serum NFL normalized (to the same levels as con-
trols) at RTP in all the players except for one, who
also had loss of consciousness for 17 minutes and who
returned to play after 3 months.
Serum NFL and severity of concussion in hockey players.
To assess the relationship between longitudinal meas-
ures of serum NFL and the persistence of PCS, we
compared biomarker levels between concussed play-
ers with RTP within 6 days vs players with RTP
greater than 6 days (table e-3). Serum NFL measured
between 1 and 144 hours after concussion was essen-
tially unchanged in players with rapidly resolving PCS
(#6 days) as compared to controls. In contrast, in
players with prolonged PCS (.6 days), serum NFL
levels remained elevated from 1 to 144 hours as com-
pared to controls (p 5 0.010–0.030). In addition,
Figure 2
Serum neurofilament light (NFL) correlated with injury severity in boxers
(A) Boxers who received severe head impact (more than 15 hits to the head or experienced grogginess during or after
bout) had elevated NFL at 7–10 days after a bout compared to boxers who received mild head impact (fewer than 15
head hits). (B) Also, at 3 months rest, the levels of serum NFL were elevated in boxers who received severe head impact
compared to those who received fewer, but not significant. Values are presented as medians; error bars indicate
interquartile range.
Figure 3
Diagnostic accuracy of serum neurofilament light (NFL) in boxers
(A) Serum NFL levels measured 7–10 days after bout vs controls. (B) Serum NFL measured after 3 months rest from boxing
vs controls. (C) Serum NFL measured 7–10 days after bout in those who received severe head impact (more than 15 hits to
the head or experienced grogginess during or after bout) compared with those who received mild head impact (fewer than
15 head hits). AUC 5 area under the receiver operating characteristic curve; CI 5 confidence interval.
Neurology 88
May 9, 2017
1791
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 serum NFL measured at 1 and 36 hours after con-
cussion could differentiate players with rapidly resolv-
ing PCS from those with prolonged PCS (p 5 0.006
and p 5 0.02, respectively; table e-3).
Diagnostic accuracy of serum NFL for concussion in
hockey players. To assess the diagnostic accuracy of
serum NFL, the AUC was analyzed comparing differ-
ent levels of serum NFL at different time points vs
controls. Overall, serum NFL between 36 and 144
hours after concussion vs controls yielded an AUC
of 0.67–0.71. Serum NFL showed greater diagnostic
accuracy for players with persistent PCS for more
than 6 days vs controls at 1 hour to 144 hours
(AUC 0.79–0.74; figure 5A). Also, serum NFL mea-
sured at both 1 and 36 hours after concussion could
separate players with rapidly resolving PCS from
players with prolonged PCS (AUC 0.82 and 0.83,
respectively) (figure 5B).
DISCUSSION In the present study, amateur boxers
had a marked increase in serum NFL 7–10 days after
bout. Levels were clearly higher than in controls as
well as in nonconcussed gymnasts. Importantly,
serum NFL dropped towards normalization after
a 3-month period of rest from boxing in all boxers,
and correlated with severity of head impacts during
the bout. Furthermore, as shown before in other
brain disorders, serum levels of NFL correlated
strongly with CSF levels in paired samples from the
same individuals.17 Serum NFL could separate boxers
from controls as well as boxers with severe head
impact or many hits to the head vs mild head impact
with AUC of 0.97, respectively. In the cohort of pro-
fessional hockey players, serum NFL concentrations
were increased in postconcussion samples as com-
pared to controls. Serum NFL increased rapidly after
concussion, with the highest levels measured 144
hours after concussion, and the levels normalized
when the athletes returned to play. Importantly,
NFL could separate players with rapidly resolving
PCS from those with prolonged PCS.
The finding that NFL increases in serum of boxers
after bout is in agreement with 2 previous studies on
NFL measured in CSF.6,8 Further, serum NFL mea-
sured in boxers correlated strongly with the corre-
sponding CSF values, indicating that serum NFL
may reflect injury to the large-caliber subcortical ax-
ons, which are especially vulnerable to the rotational
acceleration forces.18,19 In addition, we measured
serum NFL in elite gymnasts whose brains are
exposed to rotational acceleration, and found no dif-
ference in the levels of serum NFL between the gym-
nasts and nonathletic controls, suggesting that NFL
may mainly be released as a result of direct trauma to
the
head/axons.
Importantly,
boxers
who
had
received severe head impact during bouts had higher
levels of serum NFL compared with boxers who
received milder head impact. The levels of NFL re-
mained higher than controls after 3 months rest from
boxing in boxers who had received many hits. Taken
together, these results suggest that serum NFL may be
used to identify and monitor the course of injury in
boxers.
A previous study has shown that serum NFL mea-
sured using a standard commercial immunoassay
increased in patients with severe TBI; however, the
lower limit of detection for the commercial ELSIA
method quantifying NFL in serum has been reported
to be 3120 to 78 pg/mL,10 which precludes accurate
quantification of NFL in samples from mTBI cases as
well as healthy controls. In addition, in a recent study
Figure 4
Elevated serum neurofilament light
(NFL) in concussed professional
hockey players
(A) Serum NFL concentrations in postconcussion samples
(1–144 hours) and controls. (B) Serum NFL was higher at
12 and 144 hours after concussion as compared to controls
(p 5 0.036 and p 5 0.045, respectively). Values are pre-
sented as medians; error bars indicate interquartile range.
RTP 5 return to play.
1792
Neurology 88
May 9, 2017
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 comparing 3 different analytical techniques, we
showed that ultrasensitive analytical techniques, such
as the Simoa platform, are warranted to measure the
relatively mild increase in blood NFL in patients with
mTBI and to differentiate from control levels.10 Fur-
ther, other potential blood biomarkers, including the
established TBI biomarker S100 calcium binding
protein B, may aid in the diagnostic procedure in
severe TBI cases, but do not signal in patients with
mTBI.7
At present, there is no valid imaging or fluid bio-
marker for mTBI; diagnosis is largely based on self-
reported symptoms after blunt head injury. As such,
a blood biomarker that can reliably identify and grade
severity of brain damage, predict prognosis and guide
clinical management, monitor therapeutic interven-
tions, and, in sports-related TBI, to guide RTP deci-
sions would be highly warranted. An optimal
biomarker for mTBI should reflect the key patho-
physiology of brain injury. Given that axonal injury,
especially injury to long myelinated subcortical axons,
which are enriched in neurofilament proteins, is re-
garded as central in TBI pathophysiology,21 NFL
could serve as a marker for this type of injury. To test
this hypothesis and validate the findings from the
boxing part of this study, we measured NFL in an
independent cohort consisting of concussed profes-
sional hockey players. We found that serum NFL
was elevated in hockey players immediately after con-
cussion and the highest levels of NFL were measured
at 144 hours, and the levels normalized when the
players returned to play. Importantly, serum NFL
relates to the severity of PCS, as assessed by the latest
guidelines for sports-related concussion.13 The course
of serum NFL from 1 to 144 hours after concussion
was essentially unchanged in players with rapidly
resolving PCS as compared to controls, while players
with prolonged PCS had elevated serum NFL over
the same time course as compared to controls. Serum
NFL could also separate players with rapidly resolving
PCS from those with prolonged PCS. Furthermore,
serum NFL has accuracy of AUC 0.74–0.79 mea-
sured 1–144 hours after concussion in a subset of
cases with prolonged PCS. Taken together, these re-
sults suggest that analysis of serum NFL between 1
and 144 hours after injury may be valuable for diag-
nosis and prognosis of mTBI. In the context of
sports-related mTBI, it might aid objective or neuro-
biologically informed decision on fitness for RTP.
The dynamics of serum NFL seem to differ from
those of other axonal injury biomarkers such as tau;
while we observed a biphasic release between 1 and
36 hours for plasma tau,14 serum NFL increased
between 12 and 144 hours. Having said that, little
is known about the half-life or dynamics of NFL.
Animal model studies indicate that the half-life for
NFL in mice optical axons and retinal ganglion neu-
rons may be in the vicinity of 3 weeks,22 but there are
no human studies that have determined the half-life
of NFL in either serum or CSF.
There are limitations to this study, including the
overall modest sample size, which precludes examining
Figure 5
Diagnostic accuracy of serum neurofilament light (NFL) for concussion in hockey players
(A) Area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) for serum NFL measured at different time points postcon-
cussion in players with postconcussion symptoms (PCS) .6 days vs controls. (B) AUC for serum NFL measured at different
time points postconcussion in players with persistent PCS #6 days vs PCS .6 days. CI 5 confidence interval.
Neurology 88
May 9, 2017
1793
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 the biomarker level in relation to different form and
severity of injury, especially in the hockey cohort. Fur-
ther, in the cohort of hockey players, the lack of base-
line samples for all the players hindered direct
comparison of baseline and postconcussion biomarker
levels for each individual. In addition, we did not have
DTI performed, and therefore, could not compare
serum NFL levels to eventual changes on DTI.
The results from these 2 independent prospective
cohort studies show that serum NFL is a sensitive and
dynamic biomarker for axonal injury in concussive
traumatic brain injury. The marker should be useful
to detect and monitor CNS injury in concussion.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Drs. Shahim, Zetterberg, and Blennow had full access to all the data in
the study and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. Study concept and design: Drs. Zetterberg
and Blennow. Acquisition of data: Drs. Shahim, Zetterberg, Tegner, and
Blennow. Statistical analysis: Drs. Shahim and Zetterberg. Drafting of the
manuscript: Drs. Shahim, Zetterberg, and Blennow. Analysis and inter-
pretation of data: Drs. Shahim, Zetterberg, Tegner, and Blennow. Crit-
ical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: All
authors. Obtained funding: Drs. Zetterberg and Blennow. Study supervi-
sion: Drs. Zetterberg, Tegner, and Blennow.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the study participants.
STUDY FUNDING
The study was supported by grants from the Swedish Research Council,
the European Research Council, Centrum för Idrottsforskning, the Torsten
Söderberg Foundation, the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation, and
Frimurarestiftelsen. The funding source had no role in the design and
conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, or interpretation
of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; or decision
to submit the manuscript for publication.
DISCLOSURE
P. Shahim reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. H. Zetterberg
is a cofounder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB, a GU
Holding-based platform company at the University of Gothenburg.
Y. Tegner reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. K. Blennow
has served as a consultant or at advisory boards for Alzheon, Eli Lilly,
Fujirebio Europe, IBL International, Novartis, and Roche Diagnostics,
and is a cofounder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB,
a GU Holding-based platform company at the University of Gothenburg.
Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures.
Received September 16, 2016. Accepted in final form December 21, 2016.
REFERENCES
1.
Ellenbogen RG, Berger MS, Batjer HH. The National
Football League and concussion: leading a culture change
in contact sports. World Neurosurg 2010;74:560–565.
2.
Williams WH, Potter S, Ryland H. Mild traumatic brain
injury and postconcussion syndrome: a neuropsychological per-
spective. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2010;81:1116–1122.
3.
Corsellis JA, Bruton CJ, Freeman-Browne D. The after-
math of boxing. Psychol Med 1973;3:270–303.
4.
Baugh CM, Stamm JM, Riley DO, et al. Chronic trau-
matic encephalopathy: neurodegeneration following repet-
itive concussive and subconcussive brain trauma. Brain
Imaging Behav 2012;6:244–254.
5.
Kinnunen KM, Greenwood R, Powell JH, et al. White
matter damage and cognitive impairment after traumatic
brain injury. Brain 2011;134:449–463.
6.
Zetterberg H, Hietala MA, Jonsson M, et al. Neurochem-
ical aftermath of amateur boxing. Arch Neurol 2006;63:
1277–1280.
7.
Zetterberg H, Smith DH, Blennow K. Biomarkers of mild
traumatic brain injury in cerebrospinal fluid and blood.
Nat Rev Neurol 2013;9:201–210.
8.
Neselius S, Brisby H, Theodorsson A, Blennow K,
Zetterberg H, Marcusson J. CSF-biomarkers in Olym-
pic boxing: diagnosis and effects of repetitive head
trauma. PLoS One 2012;7:e33606.
9.
Shahim P, Gren M, Liman V, et al. Serum neurofilament
light protein predicts clinical outcome in traumatic brain
injury. Sci Rep 2016;6:36791.
10.
Kuhle J, Barro C, Andreasson U, et al. Comparison of
three analytical platforms for quantification of the neuro-
filament light chain in blood samples: ELISA, electroche-
miluminescence immunoassay and Simoa. Clin Chem Lab
Med 2016;54:1655–1661.
11.
Gisslen M, Price RW, Andreasson U, et al. Plasma con-
centration of the neurofilament light protein (NFL) is
a biomarker of CNS injury in HIV infection: a cross-
sectional study. EBioMedicine 2015;3:135–140.
12.
Ljungqvist JC, Zetterberg H, Mitsis M, Blennow K, Sko-
glund TS. Serum neurofilament light protein as a marker
for diffuse axonal injury: results from a case series study.
J Neurotrauma 2017;34:1124–1127.
13.
McCrory P, Meeuwisse WH, Aubry M, et al. Consensus
statement on concussion in sport: the 4th International
Conference on Concussion in Sport held in Zurich,
November 2012. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–258.
14.
Shahim P, Tegner Y, Wilson DH, et al. Blood biomarkers
for brain injury in concussed professional ice hockey play-
ers. JAMA Neurol 2014;71:684–692.
15.
Rissin DM, Kan CW, Campbell TG, et al. Single-mole-
cule enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay detects serum
proteins at subfemtomolar concentrations. Nat Biotechnol
2010;28:595–599.
16.
Norgren N, Rosengren L, Stigbrand T. Elevated neuro-
filament levels in neurological diseases. Brain Res 2003;
987:25–31.
17.
Lu CH, Macdonald-Wallis C, Gray E, et al. Neurofila-
ment light chain: a prognostic biomarker in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. Neurology 2015;84:2247–2257.
18.
Marmarou CR, Walker SA, Davis CL, Povlishock JT.
Quantitative analysis of the relationship between intra-
axonal neurofilament compaction and impaired axonal
transport
following
diffuse
traumatic
brain
injury.
J Neurotrauma 2005;22:1066–1080.
19.
Shitaka Y, Tran HT, Bennett RE, et al. Repetitive closed-
skull traumatic brain injury in mice causes persistent mul-
tifocal
axonal
injury
and
microglial
reactivity.
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2011;70:551–567.
20.
Al Nimer F, Thelin E, Nyström H, et al. Comparative
assessment of the prognostic value of biomarkers in trau-
matic brain injury reveals an independent role for serum
levels of neurofilament light. PLoS One 2015;10:e0132177.
21.
Johnson VE, Stewart W, Smith DH. Axonal pathology in
traumatic brain injury. Exp Neurol 2013;246:35–43.
22.
Barry DM, Millecamps S, Julien JP, Garcia ML. New
movements in neurofilament transport, turnover and dis-
ease. Exp Cell Res 2007;313:2110–2120.
1794
Neurology 88
May 9, 2017
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
