 1 
 
 
Sing Your Heart Out: community singing as part of mental health recovery  
Tom Shakespeare (Norwich Medical School) and Alice Whieldon 
 
Corresponding author 
Professor Tom Shakespeare 
Norwich Medical School, 
University of East Anglia 
Norwich Research Park 
Norwich NR4 7TJ 
Email: tom.shakespeare@uea.ac.uk  
01603 591 952 
 
Word count: 5404, including references 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper reports on a qualitative evaluation of a Norfolk-based network of community singing 
workshops aimed at people with mental health conditions and the general public.   The aims of the 
study were a) to evaluate the effectiveness of the Sing Your Heart Out (SYHO) project, and b) to 
identify the key features which made the project distinctive.   The study draws on 20 interviews with 
participants, two focus groups with organisers and workshop leaders, and participative observation 
over a six month period.  Interviewees all reported improvement in or maintenance of their mental 
health and wellbeing as a direct result of engagement in the singing workshops.   For most it was a 
key component and for some the only and sufficient component in their recovery and ongoing 
psychological stability. SYHO was regarded as different from choirs and from most other social 
groups and also different from therapy groups, music or otherwise.  The combination of singing with 
an inclusive social aspect was regarded as essential in effecting recovery.  The lack of pressure to 
discuss their condition and the absence of explicit therapy was also mentioned by most participants 
as an important and welcome element in why SYHO worked for them.   The combination of singing 
and social engagement produced an ongoing feeling of belonging and wellbeing.  Attendance 
provided them with structure, support and contact that improved functioning and mood.     We 
conclude that the SYHO model offers a low-commitment, low-cost tool for mental health recovery 
within the community.   
 
Key words 
Arts, mental health, recovery, singing, empowerment 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Recovery approaches in mental health are not about regaining symptom-free normality, but moving 
beyond the role of patient and living a satisfying and hopeful life with mental illness [1].   A 
conceptual framework comprising connectedness; hope; identity; meaning in life; and 
empowerment (CHIME) is commonly identified as the core processes of the recovery approach [2]. 
Participation in self-help groups, community organisations and arts activities can play an important 
role in this journey to recovery and wellbeing for people with mental health conditions. 
 
 3 
 
Many studies have now shown the benefits of choral singing for social and mental wellbeing [3] [4] 
[5][6] [7].    Evidence suggests that group singing can help as coping strategy for people who are 
experiencing stressful life events [8].   Liebowitz et al report that participatory choral music was 
beneficial in a residential setting for at-risk veterans, particularly because it promoted engagement 
and connection  [9].   A recent systematic review found evidence that participation in ongoing 
community singing programmes can improve quality of life and social and emotional wellbeing in 
adults living with chronic conditions [10].   An Australian study found that participation in a 
community choir promoted wellbeing, improved social connectedness, and benefitted health and 
functioning for a group of adults with mental health and physical conditions [11].  Sapouna and 
Pamer report from Cork on the benefits of the arts in mental health recovery in both in-patient and 
community mental health settings [12].  These benefits of participatory community arts for people 
with chronic health problems should be distinguished from the well-evidenced clinical practice of 
music therapy  [13] [14] [15] [16].  
 
The Sing Your Heart Out (SYHO) project in Norfolk, UK, is a community-based network of four singing 
workshops, aimed both at people who have experienced mental health conditions, but also the 
general public.  As one of the organisers put it, the project “recognises the inherently therapeutic 
effects of singing and singing with others.”   The initiative began at the local psychiatric hospital, 
Hellesdon Hospital, in 2005, but afterwards moved into the community.  The four different groups 
raise funding to employ professional musicians as leaders, and offer weekly ninety minute 
workshops free of charge to anyone who wants to participate.  Once a year, the Big Sing event brings 
together participants from the whole network for a day-long celebration: up to 200 individuals 
participate in the Big Sing.   As a user-led activity promoting connectedness, control, hope and 
empowerment, SYHO clearly adopts a recovery focus. 
 
The authors were commissioned to conduct an evaluation of the project in 2015-16, with the aims of 
(a) evaluating the effectiveness of the SYHO model in promoting well-being for all, and recovery for 
participants who have experience of secondary mental health services, and (b) characterising the 
distinctive SYHO approach, in order to understand what features of the SYHO project might 
contribute to positive outcomes for participants, to aid others who wish to replicate the approach.   
 
METHODS 
 4 
 
This was a mixed methods study, drawing on a desk review, semi-structured qualitative interviews 
with leaders and participants, participant observation of the workshops, plus a psychological 
measure (WHOQOL) for pre- and post- assessment of the impact of attending the singing group for 
one term.   The study was reviewed by the UEA Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences Research 
Ethics Committee.  This paper reports on the qualitative findings only. 
The evaluation was conducted between July and December 2015.    One focus group was conducted 
with the four founders and key organisers of SYHO.  A second was held with the two senior voice 
coaches who work with the singing workshops.  Twenty in-depth interviews were conducted with 
participants from all four SYHO groups.   Participants were self-selecting, volunteering to be 
interviewed or responding to invitations from organisers.   The sample comprised 14 women and 6 
men (roughly proportional to gender make-up of the SYHO community).  Seventeen participants 
identified themselves as current or former service users, a further 2 disclosed that they had 
significant ongoing health problems.  Six participants identified as carers or former carers; 5 
identified their caring role as a significant cause of mental health difficulties.   Both researchers 
conducted participant observation, interviews/focus groups were conducted by AW. 
An inductive approach was taken to data analysis.  The interviews and focus groups were transcribed 
and analysed thematically, with both researchers looking independently for themes and categories 
derived from data, and then comparing findings.  The project was written up by TS. 
 
FINDINGS 
 
Benefits of singing 
As SYHO does not require participants to be good at singing, or even to sing at all, this has enabled 
people to enjoy an experience that is otherwise difficult to find.  It was noted by interviewees and 
also by other participants at the workshops that SYHO actually made a very nice sound much of the 
time. 
 
Organisers and particularly coaches stressed the focus of SYHO as a place to sing; at its most basic 
they saw it as an ‘opportunity to sing together’.  Mental health or illness was not the focus of the 
workshops.  Participants all regarded singing as key to the efficacy of the model and reported a 
thorough enjoyment of singing.  For many this represented a chance to feel good and express 
happiness with others.  The focus on singing rather than therapy allowed participants to use it as a 
 5 
 
resource and interpret it however they wished.  Some saw it as a fun, low key opportunity to sing, 
others saw it as a crucial component to the maintenance of their wellbeing. 
 
There was a SYHO Songbook, with songs chosen for their uplifting or emotional content and 
harmonies.  The song were mostly musically simple and quite short.  Several participants described 
the repertoire as ‘world music’ as there were quite a number of short foreign language songs.  This 
variety of songs was welcomed by all participants.  The songbooks were kept by the coaches and 
handed out at each session.   The songbooks were regularly edited and updated.    The way of 
teaching meant that reading was not essential.  One blind participant found this particularly 
important, saying, ‘If it was just a book and told to turn to a page, then couldn’t do it. They build up a 
song line by line and they repeat it.’ 
 
All interviewees reported positive effects on their mental health from participation in singing 
together.  For some it represented one component of a wider programme of support.  For others it 
stood out as key to their recovery or the maintenance of health.  Participant 1 called it a ‘life saver’ 
and ‘the key to my recovery…the single most important thing for me’.  Participant 2 noted that, 
‘Without SYHO I wouldn’t be here, I wouldn’t have managed’.    Participant 4 said, ‘SYHO saved my 
sanity that year’.    The combination of singing and social engagement produced a feeling of 
belonging and wellbeing that often lasted for more than a day and, as a weekly engagement, gave 
ongoing structure, support and contact that kept them at a higher level of functionality and their 
moods better than they would be without.  More specifically, participants explained that singing 
was, for instance, a form of communication that was safe, that it enabled them to express emotions 
in a supported environment and communicate in a socially unthreatening way.  For many who had a 
history of social anxiety, this was highly valued and the majority of interviewees reported a 
significant improvement in social skills and confidence.  
 
A common theme was the change in mood brought about by singing in the group.  For example, one 
participant said, ‘it gives you a real feel good factor and really lifts you’.   Another said, ‘my husband 
says – you always come home smiling, and probably singing as well when you come back from 
SYHO….I feel different…it’s done me some good’.  Another participant said: ‘I always come out on a 
high…sometimes I don’t want to go, but I make the effort and am always glad I did….it definitely lifts 
the mood’.  Another said, ‘It builds self-esteem and protects against relapses.  It gives people a lift….I 
did CBT etc. but didn’t get on with it.  But this is actually doing something that’s having an effect.’    
The organisers stress there is no serious intent to the singing in SYHO, it is for fun.  This was 
 6 
 
repeated many times in different ways by most participants.  They used words like ‘joy’ and ‘happy’, 
‘funny’ and ‘silly’.  Making mistakes and laughing together about them was part of the experience.  
For many participants, it was ninety minutes in the week when they are happy.  
 
Physical benefits to singing were also mentioned by a few participants.  One participant reduced her 
asthma medication after being in SYHO first and then joining other singing groups.  Another had 
found singing helped with rehabilitation after a brain tumour in helping relearn speech.  Another 
mentioned that he had learned to breathe better at SYHO and that this had been very important to 
him.  One interviewee noted that she had learned to breathe out and that this had been significant 
in helping deal with long term anxiety attacks. 
 
The coaches particularly stressed that SYHO was not a choir.  Specifically, the workshops did not 
rehearse towards performances so there was no expectation or pressure to perform to any 
particular standard on any given day.  Singing was central to the workshops, but the quality of the 
sound produced by the group was considered only in terms of the best the group could achieve on 
that day, rather than according to standards of musical excellence.  The quality varied from week to 
week.  But as coach 2 said, “Their best is always good enough.  We wouldn’t want them to feel that 
they have to be different from that.”   
 
SYHO groups have sung in public on occasion but only with the understanding that the open 
principles would be maintained up to and on the day of performance and participants were free to 
engage or not.   For example, a public performance in Norwich Cathedral Cloisters was flagged by 
several as a significant high point of the year or even of their lives.  Many interviewees reported 
thoroughly enjoying these events but also appreciated the low-commitment of the SYHO model.   
 
Once participants had taken the step of joining in with SYHO, they were then led by the singing 
coach.  This balance between taking the initiative and being carried by the structure was 
empowering.   Organiser 2 said, “You all draw breath together.  It’s unlike a conversation where one 
person goes, and then the other.  Producing the same sound together with others and making music, 
just with the voice, there is a kind of magic in it.”  Coach 1 said, “You often see a look of amazement 
on people’s faces, like we did that.  It’s easy to do, but we did this big thing together.”  Several 
interviewees noted that working together towards a single, achievable goal was a ‘win’ and, as such, 
empowering.  One participant noted that, ‘the singing somehow unites you’.  For many, this feeling 
of being together was stronger through singing than it would be in a group that was just social. 
 7 
 
 
Holding a tune in this semi-public way can be a boost to self-confidence.  One of the coaches gave an 
example of an occasion when there was only one man present at a workshop.  He was quite shy and 
was given the option of joining in with a set of ladies, but chose to hold the bass part on his own, 
with support from the coach.  At the end of the session Coach 1 reported that he said, ‘thank you for 
that.  It was the first time I’ve felt like I really mattered.’   
 
It was reported by several organisers and coaches that singing in the group had helped participants 
‘remember’ parts of themselves that are well-functioning.  Through engaging, some people had 
rediscovered lost aspects of themselves.  One participant ‘remembered’ that she used to play the 
violin and started playing again.  Her family told the coaches that she had been considerably more 
like her old and happier self as a result.  A coach said: ‘I have witnessed an almost immediate growth 
in stature when a former singer recovers that part of him/herself which is able to do 
something well (possibly better than their carer) and own some pride and sense of identity’. 
 
Inclusivity 
Organisers saw SYHO as a space that welcomes current and ex-mental health service users as its 
main target audience, but openness to everyone was the goal.   Issues like the accessibility of the 
venue and the welcoming ethos ensured this outcome was achieved.  The aim was to provide a safe 
environment in which there was understanding of the varieties of mental ill health and the needs 
that may arise with such conditions.   There was a wide community of occasional attenders, of whom 
around 120 people each week attended the four different workshops.  Two thirds of participants had 
had contact with mental health services.  With no fee, no pressure to rehearse towards a 
performance, no questions asked about background and no audition, the workshops were low 
commitment.   
 
Openness was a key theme in participant interviews, with over half of the respondents noting 
SYHO’s inclusiveness.  One participant said:  ‘Lots of things say they are inclusive but aren’t really.  
SYHO really is.  There are no cliques, no animosity, no competition.’  Another said, ‘It all goes back to 
a feeling of being part of something; to that feeling of inclusion.  Some choirs can feel like the 
opposite.  I’ve been in choirs that make people feel they’re not up to scratch – that wasn’t the 
intention but it was the effect.’   More diverse behaviour was accepted in SYHO workshops than in 
more mainstream singing groups.   For instance, a person who made undifferentiated sounds 
throughout may be accepted by other participants if it were recognised as a ‘happy’ noise or one 
 8 
 
that was not intended to be disruptive.  It was for this reason that SYHO was described as a 
workshop, rather than a choir. 
 
For many participants the low commitment model was very appealing.  One said, ‘this was probably 
somewhere I didn’t have to come every week and no one would ask questions’ as an important 
advantage.  This participant had a fairly high commitment to SYHO and had been attending for some 
years on and off as part of their programme for managing mental health problems.  The safety of 
SYHO was key for many people.  One participant said:  ‘I felt OK from the start.  I didn’t have to 
justify taking a break. I didn’t have to say…I could just nip out.’   Another participant, who had joined 
SYHO during a breakdown when signed off from work but had since returned to work said: ‘Without 
SYHO there wouldn’t have been a recovery…I would never have got back to work… it really was that 
significant…without them I couldn’t have done it…I didn’t realise how bad I was….If the advert had 
been worded differently, about mental health problems, I wouldn’t have gone.’   For some, the 
absence of pressure to give personal information was a significant factor in first coming to the group.   
 
For people who do not have lived experience of mental distress, SYHO acted as public education.  
Most people ordinarily would not engage with others who behave a bit unusually.  But singing 
together ‘softens the edges round people’ [organiser].  Some people found it too strange and had 
not stayed for that reason.  But for others it changed their perception of who is too strange to 
engage with.  They might have been singing with someone happily, and then spoke to them in the 
break and found out they had been referred by their doctor.  According to Organiser 3, ‘it opens the 
door to being with people you might never have been together with before’.    For this reason, some 
student doctors and nurses had attended SYHO as a small part of their training.  At SYHO, no one 
was identified as a service user, and no one labeled anyone else.  This meant that friendships had 
been formed between professionals and service users that would have been almost unthinkable in 
other circumstances.  For example, the Chair of the Mental Health Trust reported sitting next to a 
service user who helped her.  Neither knew who the other was.  This kind of contact changed 
relationships and reduced stigma.      
 
Social capital 
All interviewees said the social aspect was a vital component of the SYHO model and a reason why it 
worked for them.  Many cited SYHO as an important turning point in their lives.  For instance, one 
man who had been attending for a few months said, ‘there have definitely been changes since going’ 
and went on to say that, because of gaining confidence going to SYHO he had started going to other 
 9 
 
social and creative groups.  Another noted that, ‘I’m left happier so more confident.  I know more 
people and have new friends and contacts.’  And another in a similar vein, ‘It’s given me a lot of 
confidence.  I was scared and anxious and I was only used to unfriendly people.  I got welcomed, the 
people were very nice.  The coach gave me eye-contact and wanted to know my name and was 
considerate to me.  She went out of her way, which is what she does for everybody.  I really enjoyed 
it’ 
 
People found there was a camaraderie in singing together, and particularly in singing different parts 
in smaller groups.  There was a physical closeness that people exaggerated in leaning towards each 
other, listening to the parts and helping others by singing the parts they remembered when others 
did not.  One person remarked that, ‘You lean in bodily with your own group.  This is bonding and I 
find this very valuable.’  So although each person was responsible for the sound they made and for 
joining in, this helping and being willing to receive help increased the sense of being in something 
together.  It also, and perhaps crucially, represented a model of good communication which seemed, 
in many cases, to rehabilitate the ability to develop relationships which people could then transfer to 
their lives more broadly. 
 
Organisers in particular, but also a few interviewees, noted that people had formed friendly 
relationships and sometimes friendships with people they would otherwise never have had social 
contact with.  This had, for some professionals, greatly enhanced their sympathy for service users.  
For some service users it had helped support self-esteem as they had found themselves able to 
engage socially with people, both mental health professionals but also people they thought of as 
‘ordinary’ or ‘normal’, on an equal social footing.  One participant noted: ‘You talked to everybody, it 
didn’t matter who they were….We were all in this together.’   The inclusivity of SYHO enabled several 
interviewees to feel acceptable whereas they had experienced exclusion and/or alienation in other 
social groups, ‘when I joined I felt like an outsider because of what was going on inside.  With SYHO I 
felt much more at ease with myself.’    For some it had been the beginning of greater engagement 
with others, both in SYHO and more widely.  
 
The tea break halfway through the workshop was an important part of the structure.  It allowed 
people to engage socially with low intensity on ordinary matters.  There was initially some resistance 
from the organisers to a refreshment break, due largely to logistics, but the original coach insisted 
and it was swiftly recognised as an essential aspect of the workshop.  She said that, ‘when we finally 
did it and sat down, I said to the organiser, “listen to that”, and there was this amazing sound, 
 10 
 
“that’s people talking to each other for the first time”’  Before this, there had just been a 10 minute 
loo break and no one had spoken to each other.    Now, Coach 1 said:  “they understood that it 
wasn’t about the tea, but you need the tea as a prop.  It was just ordinary talk about what tea you 
want? Do you want a biscuit?... but people also start talking about their mental health, things like, 
“when were you sectioned?”’   
 
The tea break was an element of ordinary pleasure, mentioned regularly by organizers and 
participants as vital to the model.  It allowed them to engage socially, have a break from singing, 
quench thirst or take a break from the group.  A few interviewees reported that they had found the 
tea break challenging due to social anxiety.  But the high acceptance of unsociability within SYHO 
and the lack of pressure to speak, meant that all those interviewed had come to value the break and 
some to view it as a place to gain social confidence.  Some additionally saw it as a chance to have 
nice tea and chocolate biscuits that they would not otherwise have.  A few also noted that being 
served made them feel valued.  It also gave people concrete roles within the group.  Everyone cpi;d 
wash up or put the kettle on or pass around the biscuits, and people could grow in these roles.   
 
Coach 1 talked about the role of the annual gathering of the whole network: ‘One way in which the 
Big Sing helps further is in offering an extended sense of this immediate family - including all the 
distant and lesser known “relatives”, who, despite not knowing the individual, nonetheless hold this 
same “family” ethos of acceptance and therefore expand this feeling of safety and a place where you 
can be the whole of who you are. Of course in time, it’s wonderful if people do recover a sense of 
their healthy selves and become more recognisable to their family, but in the interim phase, it is 
essential to feel this sense of another family who are not waiting for you feel better before they can 
relate to you.’  While a sense of community may often be important in any singng group, in SYHO, 
the community was especially important because for many participants contact with others was one 
of the biggest benefits they experienced.   
 
Support and self-help 
An important feature of SYHO was to provide support for people who were experiencing distress.  
Alongside the singing coaches, there were usually others present who were on the lookout for 
anyone who was distressed or disruptive or otherwise experiencing symptoms of mental ill-health.  
These were participants of any background, experienced in being with people presenting with 
mental health problems.   Those supporting other participants were knowledgeable and able to 
contact services and carers where necessary.   Participants willing to take on greater responsibility 
 11 
 
within the group were increasingly encouraged by SYHO to take Mental Health First Aid training (run 
by MIND),  so they had greater awareness of what may have been going on for other participants 
and knew the basics of how to offer assistance.    Support in SYHO was experienced as being 
welcoming and participants felt emotional behaviour was acceptable.  Most of those interviewed 
experienced this support as coming from the coach and other participants.  Those also on the 
committee were aware of a somewhat more formal arrangement, but in fact, much of the support 
was gained from the group as a whole. 
 
The aim of SYHO was that the organisational aspects of the workshops would be user-led where 
possible.  Several of the interviewees had been on the organising committee for their group, and 
others made a point of helping with particular tasks such as making tea, bringing biscuits and putting 
chairs out.   Four participants credited helping, along with the singing, as crucial in regaining their 
mental health.  SYHO offered roles to any participant who wanted to take on any degree of 
responsibility.   For some, this might be as simple as washing up, while others had taken on more 
substantial positions of responsibility on committees and a few service users had gone on to be key 
organisers and developed skills in management, public speaking and fundraising.    Getting involved 
in organising provided the benefit of self-efficacy and positive feelings about helping others.  One 
person said, ‘Gradually, as I got more and more drawn in and asked to do things, you feel you need 
to give more commitment and by giving more commitment you find you’re more satisfied’. 
 
CONCLUSION 
The findings from this study reinforce the benefits of participating in singing in a community context 
for people who have experienced mental health conditions.  Singing was cited as joyful in and of 
itself and the low pressure nature of the SYHO model was regarded by all participants as 
engendering fun and happiness.  The social and self-help aspects of the SYHO model were also cited 
as important opportunities for developing social skills in a safe environment, as well as rediscovering 
work-related skills.    SYHO clearly fitted within an overall mental health recovery ethos, because it 
was about life beyond illness. 
 
The distinctiveness of the current study derives from it being conducted with a group of people who 
predominantly had been patients in secondary mental healthcare settings; but it was not music 
therapy; and it was a self-organised community project, rather than operated within clinical settings.   
While the themes of this study echo some of the findings of Secker et al’s research on participatory 
arts in mental health, for example reduced social isolation; relaxation; enhanced self-esteem and 
 12 
 
confidence; rebuilding identities [17],   however, the current study provides richer detail on exactly 
how these benefits accrue in the context of singing.  The study echoes the findings of Dingle et al’s 
study [12].  However, whereas the Australian study followed the first year of a new choir, the SYHO 
singing groups have been operating for more than ten years, with many long-term participants. 
 
The SYHO project appeared highly effective among those who continue to attend.  There was a high 
level of commitment among attendees even though they may take long breaks.  But SYHO was not 
for everyone.  One limitation of this qualitative study is that we were unable to follow individuals 
who did not find SYHO worked for them.  More research is needed with those who do not find the 
SYHO model appealing, or who dropped out after coming once or twice.  It would be helpful to 
conduct a randomised controlled trial of the SYHO model versus conventional community mental 
health approaches.  
 
As with any voluntary organisation, sustainability of SYHO was a big issue.   For organisers who 
themselves had mental health conditions, participation and responsibility can add stress.  
Maintaining the mixture of people with lived experience, and others who are carers, members of the 
general public, or professionals, seemed valuable to maintain continuity and avoid individual crises 
having adverse effects on the project as a whole.  Funding to pay the workshop leaders and meet 
the costs of venue and refreshments remained an important issue.  In the longer term, a paid 
facilitator for the whole network would help promote efficiency and sustainability.   
 
Despite these caveats, the SYHO experience offered a very good model for community singing as 
part of mental health recovery.   Beyond the immediate benefits of choral singing, SYHO built social 
capital.  With minimal funding, this grassroots network had survived and grown over more a decade, 
and remained vigorous and highly valued by participants.  This study reinforces previous findings 
about the benefits of arts for wellbeing).[10] [11] [12] [18]  The results also demonstrate the 
subsidiary values of empowerment and social participation deriving from participation in community 
singing workshops. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Thanks to Penny Holden, Maggie Wheeler and all the SYHO organisers, workshop leaders and 
participants for their support.  Thanks to Hannah Zeilig and Guy Peryer for their advice on writing up 
the project, and to the journal referees for extremely helpful comments. 
 
 13 
 
COMPETING INTERESTS 
None. 
 
FUNDING 
The evaluation on which this paper is based was funded by the SYHO network. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
1 Repper J, Perkins R (2003) Social Inclusion and Recovery: A model for mental health practice.  
London, Bailliere Tindall. 
2 Leamy M, Bird V, Le Boutillier C, Williams J, Slade M.  (2011) Conceptual framework for personal 
recovery in mental health: systematic review and narrative synthesis.  BJPsych 199L 445-452 
3 Clift, S.,  Hancox, G.. Morrison, B. Hess, G. Kreutz and D. Stewart (2010) Choral singing and 
psychological wellbeing: Quantitative and qualitative findings from English choirs in a cross-national 
survey, Journal of Applied Arts & Health 1, 1: 19-34. 
4 Clift, S. and Morrison, I. (2011) Group singing fosters mental health and wellbeing: findings from 
the East Kent ‘Singing for Health’ Network Project, Mental Health and Social Inclusion, 15, 2: 88-97. 
5 Clift, S., Manship, S., Stephen, L. (2017) Further evidence that singing fosters mental health and 
wellbeing: the West Kent and Medway project, Mental Health and Social Inclusion, 21, 1: 53-62 
6 Livesey L, Morrison I, Clift S, Camic P (2012) Benefits of choral singing for social and mental 
wellbeing: qualitative findings from a cross-national survey of choir members, Journal of Public 
Mental Health 11, 1: 10-26 
7 Unwin, M. M., Kenny, D. T. and Davis, P. J. (2002) The effects of group singing on mood, Psychology 
of Music, 30:2, pp. 175–185. 
8 Von Lob G, Camic C, Clift S (2010) The use of singing in a group as a response to adverse life events, 
International Journal of Health Promotion 12, 3: 45-53 
9 Liebowitz M, Tucker MS, Frontz F & Mulholland S (2015) Participatory choral music as a means of 
engagement in a veterans' mental health and addiction treatment setting, Arts and Health, 7, 2: 137-
150 
 14 
 
10 Daykin, N. Julier, G., Tomlinson, A., Meads, C., Mansfield, L., Payne, A., Duffy, L.G., Lane, J., 
D’Innocenzo, G., Burnett, A., Kay, T., Dolan, P., Testoni, S., Dolan, C.V., Testoni, S. (2016)  Music, 
singing and well-being for adults living with diagnosed conditions, What Works Centre for Wellbeing, 
London. 
https://whatworkswellbeing.files.wordpress.com/2016/11/wellbeing-singing-music-diagnosed-
conditions-dec2016.pdf (Consulted, April 2, 2017) 
11Dingle GA, Brander C, Ballantyne J, Baker FA (2012) ‘To be heard’: the social and mental health 
benefits of choir singing for disadvantaged adults. Psychology of Music 41, 4: 405-421 
12 Sapouna, L & Pamer E.  The transformative potential of the arts in mental health recovery – an 
Irish research project, Arts and Health, 2014, 8, 1: 1-12 
13Ansdell G, Meehan J (2010)   “Some Light at the End of the Tunnel”: Exploring users' evidence for 
the effectiveness of music therapy in adult mental health settings, Music and Medicine, January 
2010; vol. 2, 1: pp. 29-40 
14Erkkila, Punkanen, Fachner, Ala-Ruona, Pontio, Tervaniemi, Vanhala and Gold (2011) Individual 
music therapy for depression: randomised controlled trial, The British Journal of Psychiatry 199, 132-
139 
15 Hwang F-Y, Oh S-H (2013) A comparison of the effects of music therapy interventions on 
depression, anxiety, anger, and stress on alcohol-dependent clients: a pilot study, Music and 
Medicine, July 2013; vol. 5, 3: pp. 136-144. 
16 Plener PL,  Sukale T, Ludolph AG, and Stegemann T (2010)  “Stop Cutting—Rock!”: A pilot study of 
a music therapeutic program for self-injuring adolescents, Music and Medicine, 2, 1: pp. 59-65 
17 Secker J, Hacking S, Spandler H et al (2007) Mental Health, Social Inclusion and the Arts: 
developing the evidence base, London: Department of Health. 
18. Davies C, Knuiman M, Rosenberg M (2016) The art of being mentally health: a study to quantify 
the relationship between recreational arts engagement and mental well-being in the general 
population, BMC Public Health, 16: 15 
 
 
