 Inflammation-induced IgA+ cells dismantle anti-liver cancer 
immunity
Shabnam Shalapour1, Xue-Jia Lin1,2, Ingmar N. Bastian1, John Brain3, Alastair D. Burt4, 
Alexander A. Aksenov5, Alison F. Vrbanac6, Weihua Li1, Andres Perkins1, Takaji 
Matsutani7, Zhenyu Zhong1, Debanjan Dhar1, Jose A. Navas-Molina6, Jun Xu8, Rohit 
Loomba9, Michael Downes10, Ruth T. Yu10, Ronald M. Evans10, Pieter C. Dorrestein5,11, Rob 
Knight6,11, Christopher Benner8, Quentin M. Anstee3, and Michael Karin1,11
1Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction, Department of Pharmacology, School 
of Medicine, University of California San Diego (UCSD), 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 
92093, USA
2Biomedical Translational Research Institute and The First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou 510632, China
3Liver Research Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, The Medical School, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK
4Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia
5Collaborative Mass Spectrometry Innovation Center, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California San Diego (UCSD), 9500 Gilman Drive, La 
Jolla, California 92093, USA
6Departments of Pediatrics and Computer Science & Engineering, University of California San 
Diego (UCSD), 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093, USA
7R&D Department, Repertoire Genesis Incorporation, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0085, Japan
8Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego (UCSD), 9500 Gilman Drive, La 
Jolla, California 92093, USA
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.K. (karinoffice@ucsd.edu) or S.S. (sshalapour@ucsd.edu). 
Online Content Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and Source Data, are available in the online version 
of the paper; references unique to these sections appear only in the online paper.
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.
Author Contributions M.K. and S.S. conceived and designed the project. S.S. designed and performed experiments and analysed data 
with M.K. X.L., I.N.B., W.L., A.P., Z.Z., D.D., and J.X. assisted with experiments and data analysis. T.M. analysed TCR/BCR 
repertoires. J.B., A.D.B., R.L., and Q.M.A. collected and analysed human specimens. C.B., M.D., R.T.Y., R.M.E., X.L., and S.S. 
conducted and analysed sequencing data. A.F.V., A.A.A., J.A.N., P.C.D., and R.K. performed microbiome and metabolomic analyses. 
M.K. and S.S. wrote the manuscript, with all authors contributing and providing feedback and advice.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Reviewer Information Nature thanks A. Biragyn, M. Bodogai, G. Gores and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution 
to the peer review of this work.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 November 16; 551(7680): 340–345. doi:10.1038/nature24302.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 9NAFLD Research Center, Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of 
California San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla, California 92093, USA
10Gene Expression Laboratory, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Salk Institute for Biological 
Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA
11Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of California San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla, 
California 92093, USA
Abstract
The role of adaptive immunity in early cancer development is controversial. Here we show that 
chronic inflammation and fibrosis in humans and mice with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is 
accompanied by accumulation of liver-resident immunoglobulin-A-producing (IgA+) cells. These 
cells also express programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) and interleukin-10, and directly suppress 
liver cytotoxic CD8+ T lymphocytes, which prevent emergence of hepatocellular carcinoma and 
express a limited repertoire of T-cell receptors against tumour-associated antigens. Whereas CD8+ 
T-cell ablation accelerates hepatocellular carcinoma, genetic or pharmacological interference with 
IgA+ cell generation attenuates liver carcinogenesis and induces cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-mediated 
regression of established hepatocellular carcinoma. These findings establish the importance of 
inflammation-induced suppression of cytotoxic CD8+ T-lymphocyte activation as a tumour-
promoting mechanism.
The successes of immune checkpoint inhibitors1 and adoptive T-cell transfer2 in cancer 
therapy demonstrate how activated immune cells eradicate established malignancies. 
However, the role of adaptive immunity in tumorigenesis and the existence of 
immunosurveillance remain controversial3,4. We investigated how adaptive immunity affects 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), a leading cause of cancer deaths. Other than surgical 
resection or ablation of localized tumours, no effective HCC treatments exist. HCC is 
initiated by chronic liver inflammation driven by hepatitis virus B or C infections, alcohol 
consumption, or non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)5. Liver fibrosis is another 
outcome of chronic hepatitis, but its exact pro-tumorigenic function remains obscure6. The 
contribution of adaptive immunity to HCC development has also been elusive. T cells 
activated by viral antigens or during non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) were suggested to 
promote HCC by inducing liver damage7,8, whereas alcoholic steatohepatitis (ASH) causes 
immune dysfunction9, and T-cell-produced interferon γ (IFNγ) attenuates liver fibrosis10. 
Moreover, a key mediator of liver fibrosis which usually precedes HCC development, 
transforming growth factor β (TGFβ), is a potent immunosuppressive cytokine that inhibits 
anti-cancer immunity11. TGFβ stimulates class switch recombination, which converts IgM-
expressing B cells to IgA-expressing cells with regulatory activity12. Patients with ASH or 
NASH who have liver fibrosis exhibit more circulating IgA than patients without fibrosis13, 
and IgA+ cells interfere with activation of cytotoxic CD8+ T lymphocytes (CTL)14. We now 
show that IgA+ cells, found in human and mouse NASH-afflicted livers, mediate 
immunosuppression that fosters HCC development by inhibiting a strongly protective, 
tumour-directed CTL response. Manipulations that unleash CTL activity cause regression of 
established HCC in mice and should be applicable to humans.
Shalapour et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 IgA+ cells accumulate in fibrotic liver
Serum IgA was elevated in two cohorts totalling 598 patients with NASH (Extended Data 
Fig. 1a, b), paralleling liver-intrinsic cell-bound and interstitial IgA, which correlated with 
fibrosis scores (Fig. 1a, b and Extended Data Fig. 1c). CD8+ T cells were also elevated in 
fibrotic livers (Fig. 1c and Extended Data Fig. 1d). Mouse models of NASH-driven HCC 
(Extended Data Fig. 2a), including high-fat diet (HFD)-fed MUP-uPA mice, which show 
classical NASH signs including fibrosis15, and mildly fibrogenic HFD-fed streptozotocin-
treated mice (STAM)16 (Extended Data Fig. 2b, c), exhibited elevated serum IgA before and 
after HCC development (Fig. 1d). MUP-uPA mice, which show some fibrosis on normal 
chow, exhibited elevated serum IgA before HFD feeding that was abrogated by NASH-
preventive ablation of tumour-necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1)15. However, 
diethylnitrosamine-induced HCC (dih) or HFD feeding of wild-type (WT) mice, neither of 
which are fibrogenic17, did not elevate IgA (Fig. 1d). IgA in mouse serum correlated with 
liver IgA+ lymphocyte content, which was particularly high in HFD-fed MUP-uPA mice 
(Fig. 1e, f). Mouse and human NASH-induced HCC also contained IgA+ and CD8+ T cells 
(Fig. 1g, h). IgA staining was diffuse early and became more defined and perisinusoidal at 
higher NASH grades, whereas human and mouse HCCs contained IgA+ cells with plasma 
cell morphology (Fig. 1a, g, h). Spleen IgA+ cells were also elevated (Extended Data Fig. 
2d). HFD feeding of WT and MUP-uPA mice caused weight gain and mild liver damage, but 
methionine and choline deficient diet (MCD)-fed mice exhibited severe weight loss and 
extensive liver damage, and STAM mice did not gain weight (Extended Data Fig. 2e–h).
Class switch recombination to IgA is stimulated by TGFβ 1, lipopoly-saccharide, 
interleukin-33 (IL-33), IL-21, CD40, and lymphotoxin18,19. NASH and fibrosis correlated 
with elevated liver TGFβ 1, although it was also elevated in non-fibrotic HFD-fed WT mice 
(Extended Data Fig. 2i). In MUP-uPA mice, TGFβ 1 was mainly expressed by CD11b+ 
Kupffer cells (Extended Data Fig. 2j). HFD induced IL-21 in liver CD4+ T cells with 
follicular helper (Tfh) markers only in MUP-uPA but not BL6 mice, as well as IL-33, 
chemokines, and receptors that control B- and T-cell recruitment and IgA class switch 
recombination (Extended Data Fig. 2k–o). Thus, NASH-bearing MUP-uPA livers contain 
factors and cell types needed for generation of IgA+ cells. Flow cytometry revealed that 
MUP-uPA spleens contained two main IgA+ cell populations: IgA+B220+CD138low/−, 
which are probably germinal centre or memory B cells but not antibody-secreting cells, and 
IgA+B220−CD138+, corresponding to plasmablasts or plasma cells (Extended Data Fig. 3a–
f). MHCII staining revealed two further subpopulations: MHCIIhi cells that are probably 
plasmablasts and MHCIIlow plasma cells (Extended Data Fig. 3g, h). The liver harboured 
both populations, with 5% of cells being IgA+B220+CD138low/− B cells and around 95% 
being plasmablasts/plasma cells (Extended Data Fig. 3a–f). Most IgA+ cells were CD11b 
and CD5 negative (Extended Data Fig. 3i, j) and expressed high levels of PD-L1 and IL-10 
(Fig. 2a–c). CD19+IgA− cells, however, hardly expressed PD-L1 or IL-10, and PD-L1 in 
CD138+ plasmablasts/plasma cells was higher in IgA+ cells than in IgA− cells (Fig. 2b and 
Extended Data Figs 3e and 4a–e). HFD feeding increased liver IgA+ plasmocytes as early as 
3 months of age, with a minor effect on intestinal IgA+ cells, which barely expressed PD-L1 
Shalapour et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Extended Data Fig. 4f, g). Most liver IgA+ cells in human NASH expressed PD-L1, 
whereas 10–15% of CD8+ cells were PD-1+ (Extended Data Fig. 1c, d).
To investigate how IgA+ plasmocytes affect NASH or HCC, we generated MUP-uPA/Iga−/− 
(Iga is also known as Igha) and STAM/Iga−/− mice (Extended Data Fig. 2a). IgA deficiency 
abolished IgA+PD-L1+IL-10+ cells and had no effect on other PD-L1- and/or IL-10-
expressing CD45+ cells and chemokine expression (Extended Data Figs 2n and 4b, h). IgA 
ablation barely affected weight gain, liver damage, or glucose tolerance, and did not alter 
serum and liver lipids, lipogenic and PPAR target genes (elevated in NASH), liver histology, 
fibrosis, or steatosis in either MUP-uPA or MCD-fed mice (Extended Data Fig. 5a–j). MUP-
uPA/Cd8a−/− and STAM/Cd8a−/− mice were generated and showed no alterations in weight 
gain, glucose tolerance, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) release, serum triglycerides, 
lipogenic and PPAR target genes, or hepatocyte ballooning, although steatosis, liver 
triglycerides, and serum cholesterol were reduced (Extended Data Figs 5a–e, g, j and 6i), 
probably because of early HCC development. Consistent with the anti-fibrogenic effect of 
IFNγ 10, CD8+ cell ablation enhanced liver fibrosis in MUP-uPA and MCD-fed mice but 
not in CCl4-treated animals, whose collagen deposition pattern was different (Extended Data 
Fig. 5g–i). Induction of alpha-fetoprotein and other regeneration antigens in MCD-HFD and 
CCl4-treated livers can explain the origin of HCC-independent, damage-related CD8+ T-cell 
activation (Extended Data Fig. 5k). Unlike CDD-HFD mice in which CD8+ T cells promote 
non-fibrotic liver damage7, CD8+ T cells do not contribute to NASH in MUP-uPA mice, 
which are highly fibrotic and depend on macrophage TNF production.
IgA+ cell and CTL interplay in HCC development
After 7 months of HFD, MUP-uPA mice developed HCC15, which contained numerous 
(usually 50–100 per tumour) non-recurrent coding mutations in pathways that are mutated in 
human HCC (Fig. 2d and Extended Data Fig. 6a). Mutational signatures were almost 
identical between mouse and human HCC (Extended Data Fig. 6b)20. Pathways and 
responses that were upregulated during MUP-uPA NASH to HCC progression were similar 
to those altered in human HCC (Extended Data Fig. 6c, d).
Cd8a ablation greatly accelerated HCC development: 12.5% of MUP-uPA/Cd8a−/− mice 
showed a single large tumour (> 0.4 cm) at 3 months and 27% contained such tumours at 6 
months, at which point MUP-uPA or MUP-uPA/Iga−/− mice had no large tumours (Fig. 2e–g 
and Extended Data Fig. 6e, f). Similar observations were made in STAM mice (Fig. 2h, i). 
MUP-uPA/Cd8a−/− tumours had typical HCC histology and their early appearance was 
confirmed by whole-liver RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), showing elevated expression of HCC 
markers (Extended Data Fig. 6e–g), which are also expressed by HCC progenitor cells21. 
HCC development and burden were greatly reduced in IgA-deficient mice, some of which 
contained no large tumours at 11 months (Fig. 2e–g). Complete B-cell deficiency, 
replacement of the entire immunoglobulin repertoire with hen egg lysozyme (HEL)-specific 
IgM, B-cell-specific TGFβ receptor 2 ablation, and PD-L1/2 deficiency also inhibited HCC 
development (Fig. 2f–i and Extended Data Fig. 6h–j). By contrast, ablation or depletion of 
CD8+ T cells in IgA-deficient mice restored HCC development, whereas absence of T and B 
cells (Rag1−/−) enhanced HCC development as effectively as Cd8a ablation (Fig. 2f, i, j and 
Shalapour et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Fig. 6k, l), indicating that without T cells, B or IgA+ cells do not promote 
tumorigenesis. IgA ablation enhanced immune activation and graft rejection markers 
(Extended Data Fig. 6c, m). At the time of HCC analysis, Cd8a−/− livers were more fibrotic 
than MUP-uPA or STAM livers, but steatosis did not differ between WT, Cd8a−/− and Iga−/− 
mice (Extended Data Fig. 6i, j, n). These results strongly suggest that reduced tumorigenesis 
after Iga ablation is due to CTL reactivation. Indeed, adoptive transfer of T, but not T + B, 
cells into MUP-uPA/Rag1−/− mice suppressed tumorigenesis (Fig. 2j and Extended Data Fig. 
6o–q).
Gut microbes promote HCC development
IgA dimers secreted by intestinal IgA+ plasma cells that maintain microbial homeostasis 
enter the intestinal lumen via the polyimmunoglobulin receptor (PIgR)22. Gut microbial 
components reach the liver via the portal circulation and enhance inflammation, fibrosis, and 
carcinogenesis23,24. To identify gut-specific secretory IgA functions, we examined NASH-
induced HCC in Pigr−/− mice. Unlike IgA ablation, polyimmunoglobulin receptor deficiency 
potentiated tumorigenesis and increased circulating and liver IgA (Fig. 2h and Extended 
Data Fig. 6h, r, s). Congruently, broad spectrum antibiotics, which reduced gut bacteria by 
more than 90% (Extended Data Fig. 7a), attenuated HCC development in all mouse strains 
(Fig. 2f). Antibiotics reduced weight gain, liver steatosis, and inflammation, but had a 
marginal effect on liver fibrosis and damage, barely affected liver CD8+ effector cells and 
CD19+B220+ cells, and, as expected, reduced liver and circulating IgA and Th17 cells 
(Extended Data Fig. 7b–j). HFD feeding induced microbial dysbiosis; but even in HFD-fed 
mice, immune alterations dominantly modulated microbiota composition and faecal 
metabolites (Extended Data Fig. 7k–r). Despite opposing effects on tumorigenesis, the 
microbiota of Iga−/−, Pigr−/−, and IgHEL/MD4 mice showed similar deviations from the WT 
or Cd8a−/− microbiota on the basis of unweighted UniFrac distances (Extended Data Fig. 
7r).
IgA+ plasmocytes suppress CTL activation
Liver IgA+ cells directly suppressed CTL activation. Ovalbumin (Ova)- expressing HCC-
derived dih cells presented the SIINFEKL peptide on H-2Kb and activated ovalbumin-
specific, CD8+ T cells (OT-I cells) (Extended Data Fig. 8a, b). Red fluorescent protein 
(RFP)- (controls) and Ova-expressing cells were starved overnight to induce some (5%) cell 
death and antigen release, and incubated with or without B cells from WT, Pdl1/2−/−, or SW-
HEL25 mice. TGFβ 1 and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) were added to induce IgA 
class switch recombination and, after their removal, OT-I cells were added. Whereas WT B 
cells modestly inhibited basal OT-I cell proliferation, this was strongly potentiated by TGFβ 
1 + CTGF (Extended Data Fig. 8b). By contrast, Iga−/−, Pdl1/2−/−, and SW-HEL B cells had 
compromised inhibitory activity, indicating a requirement for PD-L1 and antigen-specific B-
cell receptor (BCR) for CD8+ T-cell suppression. Iga−/− and SW-HEL B cells produced low 
PD-L1 levels, whereas dih cells incubated with IFNγ-producing OT-I cells expressed more 
PD-L1 (Extended Data Fig. 8c, d). Cancer cell killing by OT-I cells required Ova expression 
and was attenuated by WT, but not Iga−/−, Pdl1/2−/−, or SW-HEL B cells (Extended Data 
Fig. 8e, f). Incubation with dih-Ova cells, TGFβ 1, and CTGF, with or without OT-I cells, 
induced IgA production by WT B cells and, to a lesser extent, in SW-HEL B cells, but not in 
Shalapour et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Pdl1/2−/− B cells; some of the secretory IgA was directed against Ova (Extended Data Fig. 
8g). WT, but not Iga−/−, Pdl1/2−/−, or SW-HEL B cells, suppressed CD8+ T-cell expansion 
(Extended Data Fig. 8h). Similar results were obtained using Ova-expressing TRAMP-C2 
cells14, indicating that suppression of OT-I CD8+ T cells by IgA+ cells was not unique to 
HCC (Extended Data Fig. 8i, j). These results suggest that effective T-cell suppression 
required IL-10, which was also needed for maximal IgA production.
IgA+ cells also inhibited CTL activation in vivo. At 3 months, HFD-fed MUP-uPA/Iga−/− 
mice had significantly more liver CD8+ T cells than MUP-uPA mice, and this was 
maintained at later time points (Fig. 3a, b and Extended Data Fig. 8k, l). Importantly, MUP-
uPA mice on HFD had more effector and degranulating CD8+ T cells at 3 months than at 6 
months; however, such a difference was not found in MUP-uPA/Iga−/− mice, which showed 
even more activated CTL at 11 months (Fig. 3c–e and Extended Data Fig. 8m–r). 
Correspondingly, IgA ablation decreased the number of PD-1+Tim3+CD8+ exhausted T cells 
(Fig. 3f). These results suggest that, before IgA+ plasmocyte accumulation, CD8+ T cells are 
engaged in immunosurveillance, thereby explaining the absence of HCC in young MUP-
uPA mice and its appearance after IgA plasmocyte accumulation and CD8+ T-cell 
exhaustion. As reported26, HFD feeding decreased liver CD4+ T cells, but increased relative 
Th17 and regulatory T-cell amounts, as well as Tfh-like (PD1+CXCR5+CD4+) cells (Fig. 3g 
and Extended Data Fig. 8s–u). IgA ablation had a minimal effect on these changes, although 
it increased HCC-infiltrating Th1 cells (Fig. 3h), while having little effect on liver B cells 
and increasing liver IgG+ and CD138+ cells during NASH (6 months) but not HCC (11 
months) (Extended Data Fig. 8v–y).
PD-L1 blockade induces HCC regression
We placed MUP-uPA and MUP-uPA/Iga−/− mice on HFD for 7 months to establish HCC 
growth and injected them weekly with a PD-L1 blocking antibody (anti-PD-L1) or a control 
(LALAPG) that did not block PD-1 engagement (Extended Data Fig. 2a). PD-L1 blockade 
reduced tumour multiplicity and load, and most large tumours disappeared (Fig. 4a, b). The 
treatment reduced liver-to-body ratio without affecting body weight or reducing serum IgA 
levels (Extended Data Fig. 9a–c), further demonstrating HCC eradication. This beneficial 
effect was associated with tumoural lymphocyte accumulation (Fig. 4c, d) and decreased 
steatosis (Extended Data Fig. 9d). Anti-PD-L1 non-responsive tumours lacked immune cells 
and were encapsulated by fibrotic tissue (Extended Data Fig. 9e). PD-L1 blockade 
substantially decreased liver IgA+IL-10+ cell abundance, probably because of disrupted PD-
L1:PD-1 B-cell–Tfh interactions, needed for plasma cell maturation27, and increased CD8+ 
T cells, including proliferating cells expressing IFNγ and GrzB (Fig. 4e, f). PD-L1 
neutralization did not decrease tumour burden in MUP-uPA/Iga−/− or MUP-uPA/Cd8a−/− 
mice (Fig. 4a and Extended Data Fig. 9f), indicating that it acts via IgA+ cells and targets 
CD8+ T cells.
Clonal expansion of liver CD8+ T cells
We sequenced CD8+ TCR α - and β-chains from livers and spleens of HCC-bearing MUP-
uPA and MUP-uPA/Iga−/− mice and age-matched controls. In HCC-bearing mice the TCR 
repertoire was much less diverse in liver than in spleen (Fig. 4g, h, left, and Extended Data 
Shalapour et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 9g). The liver TCRα β repertoire of control BL6 mice was less diverse than that of 
HCC-bearing mice and was unaffected by HFD feeding (Fig. 4g, h, right, and Extended Data 
Fig. 9h, i). Although IgA ablation enhanced CD8+ T-cell activation, it barely effected 
liver/HCC CD8+ cell TCR diversity (Fig. 4g, h and Extended Data Fig. 9i, j). PD-L1 
neutralization clonally expanded liver/HCC CD8+ T cells, some of which were alpha-
fetoprotein directed (Fig. 4i and Extended Data Fig. 9k–m). Alpha-fetoprotein-specific 
CD8+ T cells were elevated after anti-PD-L1 treatment or IgA ablation. By contrast, HFD-
fed BL6 mice contained more alpha-fetoprotein-specific CD4+ T cells than HCC-bearing 
mice, in which CD4+ cell abundance was unaffected by anti-PD-L1 or IgA ablation 
(Extended Data Fig. 9n). BCR sequencing showed clonal expansion of a small repertoire of 
liver-infiltrating IgA- and IgM-producing cells in HCC-bearing mice (Extended Data Fig. 
10a, b). Both T- and B-cell clonal expansion could be driven by tumour antigens.
Discussion
CD8+ T cells can eradicate established tumours, but evidence that adaptive immunity 
curtails early cancer development is scant4, or has been derived from chemically induced 
mouse sarcomas that evade destructive T-cell responses by downregulating rejection 
antigens3. Our results provide one of the strongest and most direct demonstrations that 
adaptive immunity actively prevents cancer emergence. In fact, liver immunosurveillance is 
so effective that, without immunosuppressive IgA+ cells that directly inhibit HCC-directed 
CTL activity, NASH to HCC progression is severely hampered. Immunosuppressive IgA+ 
cells are by-products of chronic liver inflammation, which causes Tfh accumulation and 
elevated TGFβ, IL-21, and IL-33, and they are distinct from intestinal IgA+ B cells that 
maintain microbial homeostasis and suppress liver inflammation and tumorigenesis. PD-L1, 
first shown to prevent excessive CD8+ cell activation during viral infections28, is also needed 
for generation of immunosuppressive IgA+ cells29. Given that intestinal IgA suppresses 
inflammation and tumorigenesis, the reduction in NASH-induced tumorigenesis in Iga−/− 
mice is partly compromised by the increase in liver inflammation, and could therefore be 
greater than actually apparent.
Our ability to unravel the cancer-preventive effect of adaptive immunity is probably due to a 
mouse model that closely mimics NASH-driven human HCC and does not rely on 
engineered mutations and tumour suppressor ablation that trigger rapid malignant 
progression without additional neo-antigen-generating genetic alterations30. NASH-driven 
liver carcinogenesis depends on ongoing stress and inflammation15,23, which underlie 
human HCC, whose mutational landscape and signature are almost synonymous with MUP-
uPA HCC20. The immunopathogenesis of NASH to HCC progression in MUP-uPA and 
STAM mice is also very similar to human NASH-driven HCC, with the pre-cancerous liver 
exhibiting accumulation of PD-L1- and IL-10-expressing IgA+ cells, paralleling the 
appearance of inflammation-induced HCC progenitor cells. IgA+ cell depletion, via Iga, 
Tgfbr2, or PD-L1 ablation or blockade, enhances HCC progenitor cell eradication, and 
regression of established tumours through CTL activation, despite the potential increase in 
intestinal dysbiosis. Liverinfiltrating IgA+ cells do not affect liver injury and are not unique 
to NASH, as they are also found in ASH and other chronic hepatides. Another feature of 
human NASH and our mouse models is accumulation of CD8+ T cells, whose ablation 
Shalapour et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 resulted in a sevenfold to eightfold reduction in tumour latency, suggesting they eradicate 
HCC cells as soon as they appear. Although hepatic CD4+ T cells decline in HFD-fed MUP-
uPA mice, as found previously26,31, the frequency of Th17 and regulatory T cells that are 
cancer supportive increases. Nevertheless, the key immune-related HCC-promoting 
mechanism triggered during NASH entails IgA+ cell generation. Further evidence for the 
immunosurveillance function of CD8+ T cells is provided by their oligoclonality and 
reduced diversity in HCC, and their reinvigoration and expansion after IgA+ cell depletion. 
Our results appear applicable to human HCC, as suggested by a clinical trial that revealed 
the utility of PD-1 blockade with only one patient developing treatment-related hepatitis32, 
showing that activated CD8+ T cells rarely damage the liver.
Methods
Animal models
C57BL/6 and FVB/NJ control mice were purchased from Charles River Laboratories, and 
Cd8a−/−, Il10-GFP reporter mice33 and μMT−/− mice34 were purchased from the Jackson 
Laboratory. IgA gene-deficient (Iga−/−) mice35 were obtained from Baylor College of 
Medicine. MUP-uPA mice were previously described15 and were crossed with B-cell-
deficient (μMT−/−) mice34, CTL-deficient (Cd8a−/−) mice36, Iga−/− or Rag1−/− (ref. 37) 
mice. B-cell-deficient (JH −/−)38, IgHEL/MD4 (ref. 39) (monoclonal for BCR specific for 
HEL), Cd8a−/−;Iga−/− double knockout, Pdl1/2−/− (Genentech, San Francisco, California, 
USA), and Pigr−/− (ref. 40) mice were subjected to STAM, MCD, and CCl4-protocol. Cd19-
Cre mice were crossed to Tgfbr2F/F (ref. 41) with both BL6 and FVB/NJ background, and 
were also used as indicated. Cd8a−/−, Iga−/−, and JH −/− were crossed to FVB/NJ for at least 
ten generations and were used for experiments in both BL6 and FVB/NJ backgrounds. Iga
−/−, Pdl1/2−/−, SW-HEL (expressing HEL-specific monoclonal BCR that could switch to IgG 
and IgA)42, and OT-I mice43 (Taconic) were used for cell culture experiments. All mice were 
maintained in filter-topped cages on auto-claved food and water at the University of 
California San Diego (UCSD) animal facility and were used in accordance with UCSD and 
NIH guidelines and regulations, particularly for experimental neoplasia, which includes 
tumour size limits (not exceeding 2 cm for a single tumour) and monitoring parameters. 
Tumour volumes were calculated as (width2 × length)/2, and for multiple spontaneous liver 
tumours the volumes of single tumours were added for a total tumour volume. When 
indicated, mice were fed HFD starting at 8 weeks of age for the MUP-uPA HFD-fed 
model15 or at 4 weeks for the STAM model44, respectively (Extended Data Fig. 2a). In the 
MCD-HFD model, indicated mice were kept on an MCD diet with 60 kcal% fat, for 4 weeks 
(Extended Data Fig. 2a). In the CCl4 model, indicated mice were injected intraperitoneally 
with CCl4 twice a week for 8 weeks (Extended Data Fig. 2a).
Mouse treatment studies were ‘matched design control trials’. Accordingly, mice were 
randomly chosen and paired on the basis of gender (male), weight, and age. An 
identification code was assigned to each mouse and the investigators were blinded to 
treatment allocation at the time of analysis. Mice that did not gain weight or showed sign of 
dermatitis, a rarely observed phenotype in MUP-uPA HFD-fed mice, were excluded from 
the study. The numbers of mice used in experiments are shown in Supplementary Table 1 
Shalapour et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (MUP-uPA model) and Supplementary Table 2 (STAM, MCD, and CCl4 models). MUP-
uPA (n = 543 mice), STAM (n = 123 mice), MCD (n = 65 mice), and CCl4 (n = 82 mice) 
models were analysed in 50, 15, 3 and 6 experiments, respectively. Most of the basic 
characterization of control BL6, Iga−/−, and Cd8a−/− mice is shown in Extended Data Fig. 
10. These groups were compared to exclude the general effect of IgA and CD8 deficiencies 
on weight gain and immune status. Non-treated control mice that were used are not shown in 
Supplementary Tables 1 and 2, but are mentioned in each of the figure legends. Flow 
cytometry. Cell suspensions were prepared from livers, spleens, intestine, and visceral fat as 
described14. Lymphocytes were isolated from human blood using Ficoll-Paque PLUS (GE 
Healthcare Life Science) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. For lymphocyte 
isolation, tissues (liver, intestine, and HCC tumours) were cut into small pieces and 
incubated in dissociation solution (DMEM medium supplemented with 5% FBS, 
collagenase type I (200 U ml−1), collagenase type IV (100 U ml−1) and DNase I (100 μg ml
−1)) for 30 min at 37 °C. After incubation, cell suspensions were passed through a 40 μm 
cell strainer and washed twice. To block Fc-mediated interactions, mouse cells were pre-
incubated with 0.5–1 μg of purified anti-mouse CD16/CD32 per 100 μl, and human cells 
were incubated with FcR blocking reagent (Miltenyi Biotec). Isolated cells were stained 
with labelled antibodies in PBS with 2% FBS and 2 mM EDTA or cell staining buffer 
(Biolegend). Dead cells were excluded on the basis of staining with Live/Dead Fixable 
Viability Dye (FVD-eFluor780, eBioscience). For intracellular cytokine staining, cells were 
re-stimulated with alpha-fetoprotein (5 μg ml−1) or cell stimulation cocktail (eBioscience; 
containing PMA and ionomycin), in the presence of a protein transport inhibitor cocktail 
containing Brefeldin A and Monensin (eBioscience). For measurement of IL-10 production 
by B cells, lipopolysaccharide was added to the above-described PMA/ionomycin medium. 
For CD107a measurement, a staining antibody was added to the culture during the 
stimulation. After 4–5 h, cells were fixed and permeabilized either with BD Cytofix/
Cytoperm reagent for cytokine staining, or eBioscience Foxp3/Transcription Factor staining 
buffer for combined staining of cytokines with transcription factors. After fixation/
permeabilization, cells were stained with labelled antibodies of interest. Cells were analysed 
on a Beckman Coulter Cyan ADP flow cytometer. Data were analysed using FlowJo 10.2 
software (Treestar). Absolute numbers of particular immune cells in spleen were calculated 
by multiplying the total cell numbers from one spleen by the percentages of the particular 
cell type among total cells. Absolute numbers of particular immune cells (for example, IgA+ 
and CD8+ cells) in livers were calculated by multiplying the cell number in one liver portion 
by the percentages of the corresponding cell type in total liver cells divided by the weight of 
the analysed liver fragment (cell number per gram of liver).
Human specimens and analysis
It has previously been demonstrated that serum IgA levels correlate with hepatic fibrosis 
stage in the Newcastle NAFLD Clinic cohort13. A larger NAFLD cohort from Newcastle (n 
= 502) was analysed and is shown in Extended Data Fig. 1a. Furthermore, the study included 
18 patients with biopsy-proven NAFLD (11 in initial phase, 7 in second phase) and 5 
patients with HCC who attended the Newcastle Hospitals fatty liver clinic between 1999 and 
2016. NAFLD cases were selected for this study on the basis of high serum IgA/advanced 
fibrosis (n = 9) versus low serum IgA/mild fibrosis (n = 9). Liver biopsies were performed as 
Shalapour et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 part of the investigation of abnormal liver function tests or to stage disease severity in 
patients with ultrasound evidence of NAFLD. Clinical and laboratory data were collected 
from the time of liver biopsy. Alternative diagnoses were excluded, including increased 
alcohol intake (males and females consuming more than 21 and 14 units of alcohol per week 
(> 30/20 g d−1 ethanol), respectively, were excluded, as were any individuals with chronic 
viral hepatitis (hepatitis B and hepatitis C), autoimmune liver diseases, hereditary 
hemochromatosis, α 1-antitrypsin deficiency, Wilson disease, and drug-induced liver 
disease. In addition, patients in whom immunoglobulins were not available within 6 months 
of liver biopsy were excluded. Blood test results were taken from the time of liver biopsy or 
within 6 months. The normal ranges for serum IgA, IgG, and IgM were 0.64–2.97 g l−1, 
5.8–15.4 g l−1, and 0.71–2.3 g l−1, respectively. Percutaneous liver biopsies were performed 
using a Menghini needle or an 18-gauge BioPince liver biopsy system (Medical Devices 
Technologies, Gainesville, Florida, USA). Histological scoring was performed according to 
the NIH NAFLD Clinical Research Network criteria. Liver biopsy specimens were assessed 
by experienced hepatopathologists (A.D.B., Q.M.A., and J.B.). In the current study, 
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded liver tissue was stained for IgA, CD8, and CD20 and 
assessed by a single histopathologist (J.B.) using a semi-quantitative score. All statistical 
analyses were performed using SPSS software version 22.0 (SPSS, Chicago, Illinois, USA). 
All the Newcastle patients gave informed consent. Ethical approval to establish the 
Newcastle HPB Biobank from which these samples were used was received from the 
Newcastle & North Tyneside 1 Research Ethics Committee, REC reference 10/H0906/41.
In a second cohort from UCSD (n = 96), serum IgA, IgM, and IgG levels from 
corresponding patients were analysed and are shown in Supplementary Table 3.
Anonymized samples from consenting human participants were provided with UCSD 
Institutional Review Board Ethical Committee approval. Liver biopsy assessment was 
performed by a trained and experienced hepatopathologist (R.L.). All patients had a clinical 
indication for a liver biopsy and underwent a core biopsy of the liver using a 16-gauge 
BioPince needle. All biopsies were read using the NASH CRN Histologic Scoring System45.
Immunostaining
Tissues were embedded in Tissue-Tek OCT compound (Sakura Finetek, Torrance, 
California, USA) and snap-frozen. Tissue sections were fixed in cold acetone/methanol or 
3% PFA for 3–10 min and washed with PBS. Slides were blocked with 1× PBS/1% normal 
donkey or goat serum for surface staining or 0.2% gelatin (from cold water fish skin; Sigma-
Aldrich)/PBS/1% normal donkey or goat serum for intracellular staining for 30 min. 
Sections were incubated with primary antibodies for 1 or 12 h at room temperature or 4 °C, 
respectively. After washing with PBS, secondary antibodies were added for 1 h at room 
temperature. As negative controls, samples were incubated with isotype-matched control 
antibodies or secondary antibodies only. After staining with DAPI, sections were covered 
with Vectashield Mounting Medium (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, California, USA). 
Paraffin-embedded tissue sections were subjected to de-paraffinization and rehydration, and 
then were immersed in a pre-heated antigen retrieval water bath with a pH 6.1 citrate buffer, 
or Dako Target Retrieval Solution for 20 min at 95–96 °C. All stainings were done according 
Shalapour et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to the manufacturer’s protocols (Vector Laboratories). Nuclei were lightly counterstained 
with a freshly made haematoxylin solution then further washed in water. Sections were 
examined using an Axioplan 200 microscope with AxioVision Release 4.5 software (Zeiss, 
Jena, Germany) or a TCS SPE Leica confocal microscope (Leica, Germany).
Histology
Livers were fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin or 4% paraformal-dehyde, embedded in 
paraffin, sectioned, stained with haematoxylin and eosin, Sirius Red, and processed for 
immunohistochemistry. For frozen-block preparation, tissue was embedded in Tissue-Tek 
OCT compound, and were stained with Oil Red O and haematoxylin and eosin. Whole-slide 
images were analysed using a Hamamatsu 2.0-HT Digital slide scanner and processed using 
the NDP View Hamamatsu software (Hamamatsu Photonics, EU, Japan, and USA). For 
Sirius Red analysis, areas of at least 1 mm3 were quantitated using Image J 1.50i software 
(NIH, Maryland, USA) and normalized for vascularization and lipid accumulation using 
corresponding haematoxylin and eosin areas. For Oil Red O analysis, multiple images (two 
or three) were examined for each tissue section using an Axioplan 200 microscope with a 
20× objective with AxioVision Release 4.5 software and quantitated as averages using the 
Image J software.
Antibodies
Antibodies specific for the following antigens were used (anti-mouse antigens were 
abbreviated as ‘m’, and anti-human as ‘h’): Tim-3 (mB8.2C12- AlexaF647; hF38-2E2-
PerCP-eF710); CD138 (m281-2-PE/APC; hDL-101- APC); IgA (mA-6E1-PE/FITC; 
m11-44-2-Biotin; mRMA-1; hIS11-8E10- FITC; DAKO hA0262); CD8α (m53-6.7-PerCp-
Cy5.5/PE-Cy7; hRPA-T8-PE; hC8/144B); CD45 (m30-F11-V500; hHI30-eF450); CD20 
(mAISB12-PE); CD44 (mIM7-PE/FITC/eF450); CD4 (mRM4-5-eF450; mGk1.5-
FITC/PE/PE-Cy7; hRPA-T4-APC); B220 (mRA3-6B2-eF450/FITC); CD19 (meBio1D3-
eF660/PE-Cy7; hHIB19-PE); IgM (mII/41-PE-Cy7; hSA-DA4-eF450); IgD (m11- 26c.2a-
Pacific-Blue; m11-26c-PerCP-eF710); TNF (mMP6-XT22-FITC/PE); IFNγ (mXMG1.2-
eF660); GrzB (mNGZB-eF660); CD107a (meBio1D4B-PE); PD-1 (mJ43-eF450/FITC; 
mRMP1-30-APC; hMIH4-FITC); PD-L1 (mMIH5- PE-Cy7/PE; hMIH1-PE-Cy7); FAS-L1 
(mMFL3-FITC); Ki-67 (mSolA15-eF450); IgG2a (m2a-15F8-FITC/APC; mRMG2a-62-
PE); IgG1 (mM1-14D12-eF450; mRMG1-1-FITC); IL-10 (mJES5-16E3-PE); CD11c 
(mN418-eF450/PE); CD11b (mM1/70-eF450/eF660); MHCII (mM5/114.15.2-FITC/PE); 
Gr-1 (m1A8-Ly6G-PerCP- eF710); IL-17 (meBio17B7-PE-Cy7); Foxp3 (mFJK-16s-eF450); 
Perforin (meBioOMAK-D-FITC); CXCR5 (mSPRCL5-PE/APC/Biotin); CD62L (mMEL- 
14-PE/APC); SIINFEKL/H-2Kb (meBio25-D1.16-APC); F4/80 (mBM8-PE/FITC); anti-
Biotin (BK-1/39-PE); CD5 (m53-7.3-FITC/eF450) and NK1.1 (mPK136- APC); CD31 
(m390-eF450) (most from eBioscience and Biolegend); pAb rabbit to CD3 (DAKO, IS503); 
and alpha-SMA (m-ab5694; DAKO, h1A4). The following Alexa 594-, Alexa 647-, and 
Alexa 488-conjugated secondary antibodies were used: donkey anti-rat IgG, donkey anti-
rabbit IgG, donkey anti-goat IgG, and goat anti-rat IgG (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen).
Shalapour et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cell culture experiments for analysing the ex vivo immunosuppression and IgA class 
switch recombination
Two inducible Ova–P2A–RFP-expressing dih10 and dihXY HCC cell lines and prostate 
cancer cell line TRAMP-C2 (ATCC) were developed (dih10–Ova–RFP, dihXY–Ova–RFP, 
TRC2–Ova–RFP), and ovalbumin processing confirmed, which resulted in presentation of 
SIINFEKL peptide on MHCI (H-2Kb). This peptide can be recognized by OT-I CD8+ T 
cells, which express a high-affinity TCR specific for ovalbumin. Both dih cell lines were 
established previously in our laboratory using diethylnitrosamine-induced HCC and were 
regularly tested for mycoplasma (MycoAlert Mycoplasma Detection kit) and genomic PCR 
to confirm their characterization46.
Dih–RFP, TRC2–RFP or ova-expressing dih, TRC2 cells were starved over or treated with 
low-dose chemotherapy for 24 h (approximately 5–8% cell death). After that, the medium 
was changed and magnetic-bead-sorted B cells (7 × 105 per well) from either WT, Pdl1/2−/−, 
Il10−/−, or SW-HEL (monoclonal BCR specific for hen egg lyzosyme-HEL, however, which 
could still switch to other immunoglobulin classes upon BCR and/or cytokine signalling) 
mice were added in the presence of TGFβ 1 (5 ng ml−1) and CTGF (3 ng ml−1), for an 
additional 24 h. After TGFβ 1/CTGF removal, CFSE-labelled OT-I T cells (specific for 
ovalbumin) were added to the cultures (3 × 105 per well) that either contained or did not 
contain the B cells described. T cells were isolated from Rag1−/−/OT-I mice using CD8− 
selection beads and their proliferation was analysed on days 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. The 
proliferation and the amount of CFSE-labelled OT-I CD8+ cells were analysed by flow 
cytometry and quantitated. IgA concentrations in the culture supernatants were determined 
using ELISA. Induction of cancer cell death was analysed using LIVE/DEAD cell staining 
dyes (FVD-eF780, eBioscience). The percentage of CD19+ cells, antigen presentation 
(SIINFEKL/H-2Kb), and PD-L1 expression were also analysed using flow cytometry.
ELISA and colorimetric protein detection
Mouse IgA and IgG ELISA kits from eBioscience were used according to the 
manufacturer’s protocols. Human serum IgA and IgG were measured in the first cohort from 
Newcastle, as described previously13, or in cohort two at the UCSD Medical Center 
Laboratory. ELISA for the determination of OVA-specific IgA (anti-OVA-IgA) in the co-
culture experiment was performed by adding culture supernatant to the ovalbumin-coated 
wells, incubating at 4 °C overnight, and washing with phosphate buffered saline with Tween 
20. Rat anti-mouse IgA antibody (RMA-1, Biolegend) was added and incubated at room 
temperature for 1 h; thereafter, anti-rat HRP-conjugated antibody was added for a further 30 
min. After washing with phosphate buffered saline with Tween 20, 1× TMB was added and 
the reaction was stopped with 2 N H2SO4, followed by detection in a microplate reader at 
450 nm. Mouse serum ALT was measured using ALT (GPT) reagent (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific). Triglyceride and total cholesterol contents were measured using a Triglyceride 
Colorimetric Assay Kit (Cayman Chemical) and a Cholesterol Fluorometric Assay kit 
(Cayman Chemical) according to each manufacturer’s instructions.
Shalapour et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Glucose tolerance test
Mice were transferred to clean cages with no food or faeces in the hopper or bottom of the 
cage and fasted for approximately 6 h with access to drinking water. Small drops of blood 
were obtained from tail cuts and assessed for baseline glucose levels using a One-touch 
Ultra 2 (Lifescan, Johnson & Johnson) glucometer. A 20% glucose solution was 
intraperitoneally injected (2 g/kg mouse body mass). Blood was sampled at 30, 60, and 120 
min. Dried blood was quickly removed from the tail wounds.
Liver perfusion and isolation of hepatic stellate cells and Kupffer cells
The hepatic stellate cells and Kupffer cells were isolated as previously described47. In 
particular, the suprahepatic inferior vena cava was tightened and the inferior vena cava was 
cannulated and perfused with 50 ml Hanks’ balanced salt solutions and then the portal vein 
was cut. The perfusion was continued with 50 ml Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium F/12 
(DMEM F/12; GibcoBRL) containing 12.5 mg pronase, followed by 50 ml DMEM F/12 
containing 33.3 mg collagenase D (Roche). The liver was removed and agitated in 50 ml 
DMEM (GibcoBRL) containing 0.2 mg DNase I, 17 mg pronase, and 17 mg collagenase D 
at 42 °C for 10 min. The cell suspension was filtered through a 70 μm cell strainer (Sigma). 
The hepatic stellate cells were purified by 8.2% Nycodenz (Accurate Chemical and 
Scientific Corporation), and Kupffer cells were isolated from the non-parenchymal cell 
fraction by CD11b-conjugated magnetic beads (Miltenyi). The purity was confirmed by flow 
cytometry (Kupffer cells, ~ 83%; hepatic stellate cells, ~ 85%).
Antibody treatments
Anti-PD-L1 and LALAPG (which binds to PD-L1, but cannot inhibit the cell signalling) 
antibodies were intraperitoneally injected at 10 mg/kg (body mass) weekly. Mice were 
treated for 8 weeks in total. Anti-CD8a antibodies were intraperitoneally injected weekly 
(150 μg per mouse). Mice were treated for 6–8 weeks in total. PD-L1 and control antibodies 
were provided by I. Mellman (Genentech).
Antibiotic treatment
Ampicillin (1 g l−1; Sigma), vancomycin (500 mg l−1; MIP Pharma, Blieskastel, Germany), 
neomycin sulfate (1 g l−1; Sigma), and metronidazole (1 g l−1; OTC Pharma GmbH, Kamen, 
Germany) were applied through the drinking water as described in Extended Data Fig. 2a.
Adoptive lymphocyte transfer
For adoptive splenocyte transfer, single-cell suspensions prepared from spleens were 
transferred intraperitoneally with one total spleen injected per mouse. Labelling with 5- (and 
6-) carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE; Molecular Probes, Eugene, 
Oregon, USA) was done according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Four million CD8+ T 
cells alone or combined with 10 × 106 B cells were transferred (equivalent to one spleen). 
For adoptive lymphocyte transfer, T cells were isolated from single-cell suspensions of 
spleens using a Pan T Cell Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, Bergisch Gladbach, 
Germany), and B cells were isolated using a Pan B Cell Isolation Kit. T cells were 
Shalapour et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 transferred intraperitoneally alone or with B cells (3 × 106 to 5 × 106 each). The purity of 
sorted cells was confirmed by flow cytometry (B cells, ~ 90%; T cells, ~ 95%).
Mouse TCR and BCR repertoire analysis
Total RNA was extracted from sorted CD8+ T or B cells with an RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, 
Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Next-generation sequencing 
was performed with an unbiased TCR repertoire analysis technology developed by 
Repertoire Genesis (Osaka, Japan). An unbiased adaptor-ligation PCR was performed 
according to the previous report48. In brief, total RNA was converted to complementary 
DNA (cDNA) with Superscript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, 
USA)48. Then, double strand (ds)-cDNA was synthesized and an adaptor was ligated to the 
5′ end of the ds-cDNA and cut with SphI restriction enzyme. For TCRα, PCR was 
performed with a P20EA adaptor primer and a TCR α-chain constant region-specific primer 
(mCA1). The second PCR was performed with mCA2 and P20EA primers using the same 
PCR conditions. For TCRβ, mCB1 and mCB2 primers were used for the first PCR and the 
second PCR, respectively. For BCR, the following primers were used: mCM1: 
GTGTTGGGAAGGTTCTGATA; mCM2: TTCAGTGTTGTTCTGGTAG (IgM); mBCA1: 
TAGAGTCATGTTGC ACGGAA; mBCA2: GTTATATCCTTCCCACTCT (IgA). After Tag 
PCR amplification, index (barcode) sequences were added by amplification with a Nextera 
XT Index Kit v2 setA (Illumina, San Diego, California, USA). Sequence was done with the 
Illumina MiSeq paired-end platform (2 × 300 base pairs (bp)). Data processing, assignment, 
and data aggregation were automatically performed using repertoire analysis software 
originally developed by Repertoire Genesis. TCR and BCR (IgM and IgA) sequences were 
assigned with a data set of reference sequences from the international ImMunoGeneTics 
information system (IMGT) database (http://www.imgt.org). Nucleotide sequences of CDR3 
regions ranged from conserved cysteine at position 104 (Cys104) of IMGT nomenclature to 
conserved phenylalanine at position 118 (Phe118) and the following glycine (Gly119) was 
translated to deduced amino-acid sequences. A unique sequence read was defined as a 
sequence read having no identity in V, J, and deduced amino-acid sequence of CDR3 with 
the other sequence reads. The copy numbers of identical unique sequence reads were 
automatically counted by RG software. TCR and BCR analyses were provided by Repertoire 
Genesis.
Real-time PCR analysis
Total RNA and DNA was extracted using an AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen). RNA 
was reverse transcribed using a Superscript VILO cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen). Real-
time PCR (RT-PCR) was performed as described14. The relative expression levels of target 
genes were measured in triplicates and normalized against the level of Rpl32 expression. 
Fold-difference (as relative mRNA expression) was calculated by the comparative CT 
method (2Ct(Rpl32–gene of interest)). Primers obtained from the NIH qPrimerDepot (http://
mouseprimerdepot.nci.nih.gov) were as follows: Rpl32, forward 5′-
GGGAGCAACAAGAAAACCAA-3′, reverse 5′-TTGTGAGCAATCTC AGCACA-3′; 
Tgfb1, forward 5′-GGAGAGCCCTGGATACCAAC-3′, reverse 5′-
AAGTTGGCATGGTAGCCCTT-3′; Il21, forward 5′-CCCTTGTCTG 
TCTGGTAGTCATCTT-3′, reverse 5′-GGAGGCGATCTGGCCC-3′; Bcl6, forward 5′-
Shalapour et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 AGTTTCTAGGAAAGGCCGGA-3′, reverse 5′-ACTAGCG TGCCGGGTAAACT-3′; Icos, 
forward 5′-ACAGGGGAGGAGAAGACTGC-3′, reverse 5′-
CGAGCCATTGATTTCTCCTG-3′; Il33, forward 5′-GAGA AATCACGGCAGAATCA-3′, 
reverse 5′-CTTCTTATTTTGCAAGGCGG-3′; Cxcr4, forward 5′-
AGTGACCCTCTGAGGCGTTT-3′, reverse 5′-TCCAGACCC CACTTCTTCAG-3′; 
Cxcr3, forward 5′-AAGTGCCAAAGGCAGAGAAG-3′, reverse 5′-
CAAAGTCCGAGGCATCTAGC-3′; Cxcl12, forward 5′-TCCTC 
TTGCTGTCCAGCTCT-3′, reverse 5′-GGTAGCTCAGGCTGACTGGT-3′; Cxcl10, 
forward 5′-CGTCATTTTCTGCCTCATCC-3′, reverse 5′-CCTATGGC 
CCTCATTCTCAC-3′; Cxcl9, forward 5′-GAGGCACGATCCACTACAAA-3′, reverse 5′-
AGTCCGGATCTAGGCAGGTT-3′; Ccl19, forward 5′-CTTCAGCCT 
GCTGGTTCTCT-3′, reverse 5′-GGAAGGCTTTCACGATGTTC-3′; Cxcl13, forward 5′-
AGGTTGAACTCCACCTCCAG-3′, reverse 5′-TTGTGTAA TGGGCTTCCAGA-3′; 
Ccl25, forward 5′-GAAACTGTGGCTTTTTGCCT-3′, reverse 5′-
TTCCATTTGATCCTGTGCTG-3′; Il7, forward 5′-GCCACATTA 
AAGACAAAGAAGGT-3′, reverse 5′-TGGTTCATTATTCGGGCAAT-3′; Ctgf, forward 
5′-CCACCCGAGTTACCAATGAC-3′, reverse 5′-GCTT GGCGATTTTAGGTGTC-3′; 
Ltb, forward 5′-CTTTTCTGAGCCTG TGCTCC-3′, reverse 5′-
ATCACTGTCCTGGCTGTGC-3′; Col1a1, forward 5′-
ACATGTTCAGCTTTGTGGACC-3′, reverse 5′-TAGGCCATTGTG TATGCAGC-3′; Afp, 
forward 5′-GGCGATGGGTGTTTAGAAAG-3′, reverse 5′-
TCTTTCCACTCCACTTTGGC-3′.
RNA-seq library preparation and sequencing
Total RNA was isolated as described above from 30 livers and 11 HCC nodules as indicated. 
In particular, some of the livers from 6-month-old mice were homogenized with TRIzol 
reagent and extracted with chloroform/isopropanol, followed by purification using an 
RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). RNA purity was assessed by an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 
Sequencing libraries were prepared from 100 ng of total RNA using a TruSeq Stranded 
mRNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were 
ligated to unique adaptors and subjected to PCR amplification. Libraries were then validated 
using a 2100 BioAnalyzer (Agilent), normalized, and pooled for sequencing. RNA-seq 
libraries prepared from at least three biological replicates for each group as indicated were 
sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 using barcoded multiplexing and a 100-bp read 
length. Image analysis and base calling were done with Illumina HiSeq2500 control 
software v2.17. The RNA-seq data have been deposited in the NCBI Gene Expression 
Omnibus under accession number GSE90497.
RNA-seq processing and analysis
RNA-seq reads were aligned to the mouse genome (GRCm38/mm10) using STAR 
(v2.5.2b)49. Only reads that mapped to a single, unique location in the mouse genome were 
used for downstream analysis. Gene expression counts were counted for reads overlapping 
exons for all RefSeq transcripts using HOMER50. Differentially expressed genes were 
determined using DESeq2 (ref. 51) using thresholds of 5% false discovery rate and a fold 
change of 1.5 to determine the final lists. Gene expression profile clustering was performed 
Shalapour et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 by first using the DESeq2 rlog variance stabilization transform to normalize the gene 
expression values. Heirarchical clustering was performed using Cluster3.0 (ref. 52) and 
visualized using Java TreeView53. Pathway/functional enrichment calculations were 
performed using Metascape (http://metascape.org)54. Gene set enrichment analysis was also 
performed to identify hallmark genesets55,56. The obtained results from the mouse geneset 
were compared with previous published human data20,57.
Exome sequencing, processing, and analysis
DNA was isolated as described above from 9 spleens and 16 HCC nodules as indicated. 
Exome sequencing was performed at the University of California San Diego, IGM Genomic 
Centre using standard protocols. The exome sequencing data have been deposited in the 
NCBI Short Read Archive under accession numbers SRA556071 and SRP104724.
Exome sequencing data were processed into genetic variants using the Genome Analysis 
Tool Kit (GATK). First, exome capture reads were aligned with BWA (version 0.7.15)58 to 
the mouse genome (GRCm38/mm10). GATK (version 3.5) was used to process all exome 
sequencing data following the recommended best practices workflow59,60. Base 
recalibration was performed using the Mouse Genome Project SNP database as a reference 
for known SNPs61. Variant calls were made using the GATK HaplotypeCaller while 
considering the entire data set together to maximize sensitivity. Somatic mutations were 
called by comparing HCC samples with a pool of splenic controls. Only sites with at least 
four variant allele reads and total coverage of at least ten reads in both target or control 
samples were considered. In addition, a minimum of 10% of target sample reads had to 
contain the variant allele, and no more than 2% of control sample reads could contain the 
variant allele. Since not all samples had a matching control, each sample was compared with 
all background spleen samples to remove any variants that might have been present in any of 
the splenic control samples. Variants were annotated using snpEff (v4.3)62. Coding 
mutations were defined as variants that directly impacted amino-acid changes or splice sites. 
Variant visualization was performed using IGV63.
Comparison of gene expression profile and mutation signature between human and 
mouse
The direct overlap between genes regulated in human NASH versus control lean patients64 
and the mouse RNA-seq were found by converting the genes found on the human 
Affymetrix HuGene 1.1 ST microarray using NCBI Homologene, which maps one-to-one 
orthologues between species. Only genes that could be mapped to a unique mouse Entrez 
Gene ID were considered (retained ~ 75% of the total). Homologene was also used to 
convert human HCC gene variants found in the COSMIC database to mouse gene identifiers 
to compare with mouse mutation profiles.
Metabolomics analysis
The metabolomic analysis of samples was conducted using reverse-phase ultra-high-pressure 
liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (UHPLC MS). The samples were thawed at room 
temperature for approximately 10 min. Each Eppendorf tube with sample was weighed and 
the sample weight logged. An aliquot of 0.5 ml of HPLC-grade 80% v:v ethanol:water was 
Shalapour et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 added into each sample tube, and the material was homogenized at 25 Hz for 5 min in 
Qiagen TissueLyser II (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The samples were allowed to extract for 
4 h at room temperature. After extraction, the tubes were centrifuged for 10 min at 2,000 
r.p.m. and 400 μl of supernatant from each tube was transferred onto a 2 ml deep-well 96-
well plate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) dried down, then re-suspended in 300 
μl of 50% v-v ethanol: water. The plates were sealed, sonicated for 10 min, centrifuged at 
2,000 r.p.m. for 10 min, and a 50 μl aliquot of each sample was transferred onto Falcon 96-
well MS plate, which was then immediately sealed with sealing film. The MS plates were 
centrifuged at 2,000 r.p.m. for 10 min and stored at 2 °C until analysis. Blanks of 
resuspension solvent as well as the solvent that went through the extraction procedure steps 
(sample extraction blank) were included with each batch. Also, quality control was included 
at the beginning and end of each sample batch to control instrument performance.
The HPLC MS analysis was done on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) coupled to a Bruker impact HD 
quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Bruker, Billerica, Massachusetts, USA). The 
chromatographic separation was performed on a Kinetex C18 1.7 μm, 100Å UHPLC column 
(50 mm × 2.1 mm) (Phenomenex, Torrance, California, USA), held at 40 °C during analysis. 
Five microlitres of sample were injected. Mobile phase A was water, mobile phase B was 
acetonitrile, both with added 0.1% v:v formic acid. The solvent gradient table was set as 
follows: 2% B, increased to 10% B over 0.2 min, then to 100% B at 12 min, held at 100% B 
for 1.5 min, decreased back to 2% B in 0.5 min, followed by washout cycle and equilibration 
for a total analysis time of 15 min. The scanned m/z range was 80–2000 Th; capillary 
voltage 4,500 V; nebulizer gas pressure 2 bar, drying gas flow rate 9 l min−1 and temperature 
200 °C. The full MS scan was followed by tandem mass spectrometry fragmentation of the 
seven most abundant ions in the spectrum. For tandem mass spectrometry, the collision cell 
collision energy was set at 3 eV and the collision energy was stepped 50%, 75%, 150%, and 
200%. The scan rate was 3 Hz. A HP-921 lock mass compound was infused during the 
analysis for post-processing mass correction.
The collected LC/MS raw data files were converted to mzXML format and feature detection 
was performed with OpenMS 2.0 software65. The alignment window was set at 0.5 min, 
noise threshold at 1,000 counts, chromatographic peak FWHM at 20, and mass error at 30 
p.p.m. (https://github.com/rsilvabio-info/openms_snakemake). All of the peaks that were 
present in any of the blanks with signal:noise ratio below 3:1 were removed from the final 
feature table. The extracted feature table was parsed into tables corresponding to different 
experimental categories, which then were used as input for the MetaboAnalyst software66. 
The feature tables were filtered with interquantile ranges to remove outliers, the data 
normalized by the sum total of peak intensities, and autoscaled (mean centring and dividing 
by the standard deviation for each feature). Principal component analysis and partial least 
squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) were used to explore and visualize variance within 
data and differences among experimental categories. The HFD-fed MUP-uPA strains were 
found to be concordant between two different age groups, 6 and 11 months either in the 16S 
rRNA sequencing or in the metabolomics. For 16S sequencing, the effect of animal age on 
microbiota was minimal (P = 0.021, pseudo-F statistic = 1.66) compared with immune status 
(P = 0.001, F statistic = 5.19) by PERMANOVA (999 permutations) on the unweighted 
Shalapour et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 UniFrac distance matrix, and age was not significant by PERMANOVA on the weighted 
UniFrac distance matrix (P = 0.095, pseudo-F statistic = 1.766). Similarly, in metabolomics 
analysis the effect of age (PLS-DA tenfold cross-validation Q2 value of 0.477) was minor 
compared with the immune status (PLS-DA tenfold cross-validation Q2 value of 0.926 for 
WT versus Iga−/− and 0.934 for WT and Cd8a−/− correspondingly). Therefore, for some 
analyses, data from both time points were pooled to increase the sample numbers. All of the 
raw data are publicly available at the UCSD Center for Computational Mass Spectrometry 
(the data set ID MassIVE MSV000080918).
Bacterial genomic DNA extraction and 16S rRNA gene amplification and sequencing
For the 16S rRNA analyses, faeces were taken from the indicated mice strains. The analysed 
genotypes (Cd8a−/−, Iga−/−, μMT−/−, Rag1−/−, Pigr−/−, IgHEL/MD4) were housed separately. 
Out of 32 MUP-uPA/Cd8a−/− mice, five were co-housed with Cd8a+/−. For the MUP-uPA 
group, some MUP-uPA-negative control mice were co-housed with MUP-uPA-positive 
groups. DNA was extracted using a MagAttract PowerSoil DNA KF Kit (Qiagen, Germany) 
following protocols benchmarked through the Earth Microbiome Project (http://
www.earthmicrobiome.org/protocols-and-standards/dna-extractionprotocol/). The V4 of the 
16S rRNA gene was then amplified with PCR again following protocols benchmarked 
through the Earth Microbiome Project (http://www.earthmicrobiome.org/protocols-and-
standards/16s/)67. This approach facilitates the capture of most of the bacteria present in a 
sample because of the ubiquitous nature of the 16S rRNA gene and the ‘universal’ V4 
primer. The V4 region recapitulates the full-length 16S rRNA gene at approximately genus-
level resolution. Barcoded amplicons were then sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq using the 2 
× 150 bp protocol at the Institute for Genomic Medicine at UCSD. The data are publicly 
available at the European Bioinformatics Institute under accession number ERP022642.
16S rRNA sequencing data analysis
The data were deposited and prepared in Qiita (http://qiita.microbio.me; study id: 10856). 
Raw sequences were de-multiplexed using QIIME 1.9.1 (ref. 68) following the default 
parameters available in Qiita. De-multiplexed sequences were then trimmed to 150 bp and 
de-noised using Deblur69. Since some downstream analyses require a phylogenetic tree, we 
used SEPP70 to generate this tree (see https://github.com/smirarab/sepp/tree/master/sepp-
package) by inserting the V4 fragment sequences resulting from Deblur into the Greengenes 
tree71. Taxonomy was assigned to the sequences using the taxonomy present on the internal 
nodes of the already annotated Greengenes tree, and this taxonomy information was added 
to the biom-format observation matrix72 containing unique sequences and their abundances 
in each sample. The samples included in downstream analysis had at least 4,500 sequences 
per sample. Alpha diversity statistical analyses were performed using a non-parametric t-test 
with Monte Carlo permutations to calculate the P value73. The unweighted UniFrac beta 
diversity distances between samples were computed on a rarefied table of 4,500 sequences 
per sample74. Principal component analysis was applied to the resulting distance matrix and 
plots were generated using Emperor software75. To analyse the significance of sample 
groupings, PERMANOVA (non-parametric, 999 permutations) was performed on the 
UniFrac distance matrices using QIIME 1.9.1. Stacked bar plots of relative bacterial 
abundance were created using Matplotlib and heat maps were created with Seaborn. 
Shalapour et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Significant differences in Deblur sequences between groups were assessed using the scikit-
bio implementation of ANCOM76 with a Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons 
(http://scikit-bio.org/docs/0.4.2/generated/generated/skbio.stats.composition.ancom.html).
For the microbiome principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) plots, the samples displayed in 
each figure are indicated in the publicly available sample information file in Qiita study ID 
10856 (https://qiita.ucsd.edu/). Each PCoA plot figure has a column in the sample 
information file (labelled ‘Figure#_Extended_Data’), which indicates whether that sample 
was included in the plot with a ‘true’ or ‘false’ value and a column describing the 
subsequent grouping. This file can be downloaded and used in conjunction with the 
sequencing data to recreate the plots.
Analysis of bacteria by RT-PCR quantification of 16S rRNA-encoding DNA
For analyses of gut-bacteria content, faecal total DNAs extracts were prepared using a 
Powersoil DNA isolation kit. The abundance of total faeces bacteria was measured by RT-
PCR based on a SYBR Green Assay using universal bacterial 16S rRNA-encoding DNA 
primers (16S-V6-784F: AGGATTAGATACCCTGGTA; 16S-V6-1061R: 
CRRCACGAGCTGACGAC). The primers were first used to amplify a 16S rRNA gene 
fragment from pooled DNA extracts. The DNA fragment was purified and quantified. As 
reference for quantification, standard curves with serial dilutions of purified 16S rRNA gene 
fragment were generated for each run.
Statistical analysis and reproducibility
Data are presented either as means ± s.e.m. or medians of continuous values and were 
analysed by a two-sided Students’ t-test or Mann–Whitney test for comparison of two 
groups, respectively. Two-way ANOVA was used to compare three or more groups in mouse 
data analyses. One-way ANOVA or a Kruskal–Wallis test was used to compare three or 
more groups in human data analyses. Bonferroni’s or Dunn’s multiple comparison test was 
applied to compare all pairs of groups. A D’Agostino and Pearson test and/or Shapiro–Wilk 
test was used to test the normality of sample distribution. Fisher’s exact χ2 t-test was used to 
calculate statistical significance of categorical values between groups. Two-tailed P values of 
no more than 0.05 were considered significant. Linear regression was used to determine the 
correlation between two different variables. GraphPad PRISM software was used for 
statistical analyses. An unpaired t-test was used to determine the power with GraphPad 
StatMate software.
Representative examples of power calculations (α = 0.05, two-tailed) for important groups 
are shown as follows. 1. MUP-uPA model: MUP-uPA + HFD (24) versus MUP-uPA + 
normal chow (8) ≈ 99%; MUP-uPA + HFD (24) versus MUP-uPA + HFD + antibiotics (6) ≈ 
85%; MUP-uPA + HFD (24) versus MUP-uPA/Iga−/− + HFD (26) ≈ 95%; MUP-uPA + HFD 
(24) versus MUP-uPA/μMT −/− + HFD (9) ≈ 75%; MUP-uPA + HFD (24) versus MUP-uPA/
Cd8a−/− + HFD (31) ≈ 85%. 2. STAM model: WT-FVB (13) versus FVB/Iga−/− (15) > 99%; 
WT-FVB (13) versus FVB/JH −/− (7) > 99%; WT-FVB (13) versus FVB/Tgfbr2ΔB (4) ≈ 
95%; WT-FVB (13) versus FVB/Cd8a−/− (19) > 99%; WT-BL6 (17) versus BL6/μMT−/− (3) 
≈ 75%; WT-BL6 (17) versus BL6/Pigr−/− (9) ≈ 99%; WT-BL6 (17) versus BL6/Cd8a−/− (5) 
Shalapour et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ≈ 99%. 3. CD8 depletion: STAM-FVB: Iga−/− (15) versus Iga−/− + anti-CD8 (3) > 99%; 
MUP-uPA + HFD: Iga−/− (3) versus Iga−/− + anti-CD8 (3) ≈ 70%. 4. Adoptive lymphocyte 
transfer in MUP-uPA + HFD model: Rag1−/− (7) versus Rag1−/− (T cells) (4) ≈ 90%; 
Rag1−/− (T + B cells) (4) versus Rag1−/− (T cells) (4) ≈ 85%. 5. anti-PD-L1 treatment in 
MUP-uPA + HFD model: control (8) versus anti-PD-L1 (7) ≈ 80%; LALAPG (7) versus 
anti-PD-L1 (7) ≈ 99%.
The number of analysed and treated mice are shown in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2, with a 
total mouse number of 813 from 74 single experiments. Experiments were repeated 
independently at least two or three times with similar results.
Data and code availability
The RNA-seq (GSE90497; https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?
acc=GSE90497), exome sequencing (SRA556071, SRP104724; https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/?term=SRA556071), and 16S rRNA sequencing (ERP022642; 
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/PRJEB20486) data are available in the NCBI Gene 
Expression Omnibus, NCBI Short Read Archive, and European Bioinformatics Institute, 
respectively. Samples displayed in the microbiome PCoA plots are indicated in the publicly 
available sample information in Qiita study ID 10856 (https://qiita.ucsd.edu/). The 
metabolomics raw data are publicly available at the UCSD Center for Computational Mass 
Spectrometry (the data set ID MassIVE MSV000080918): ftp://massive.ucsd.edu/
MSV000080918.
The raw and processed feature tables used in the preparation of the ‘Metabolome’ panels in 
Extended Data Fig 7k–n, q as well as the data processing reports generated by the 
MetaboAnalyst are included along with the raw data (the data set ID MassIVE 
MSV000080558) at ftp://massive.ucsd.edu/MSV000080558.
Source data are available in the online version of the paper. All other data are available from 
the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.
The microbiome data analysis was primarily done using Qiita and QIIME, and the custom 
code used for taxonomic assignment from the phylogenetic tree generated with SEPP 
(https://github.com/smirarab/sepp/blob/master/sepp-package/README.md) is available 
online at Github (https://github.com/knightlabanalyses/shalapour-nature-iga-liver-cancer/
blob/master/assignTaxa.ipynb). Scripts used to parse, filter, and organize data and results for 
RNA-seq and DNA exome sequencing are available upon request.
Shalapour et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. NASH-induced accumulation of IgA+ plasmocytes in human liver
a, Serum IgA levels of patients with NAFLD/NASH (Newcastle cohort; n = 502) were 
analysed and compared with clinical data. b, Serum was collected from a second cohort of 
patients with NAFLD/NASH (San Diego cohort; n = 96), whose degree of liver fibrosis was 
measured by MRI and classified as grades 0 (n = 51), 1–2 (n = 33), and 3–4 (n = 12). Serum 
concentrations of IgA, IgG, and IgM were determined by ELISA and plotted against the 
fibrosis grade. c, Single-cell suspensions were prepared from liver biopsies taken from 
patients with NASH (n = 4) with fibrosis, stained with antibodies to IgA, CD19, and PD-L1, 
and analysed by flow cytometry. Blood collected from three healthy donors (used as a 
surrogate for liver biopsies that could not be obtained from such individuals; HD), stained 
with antibodies, as indicated. Shown are representative scatter plots from two patients and 
two healthy donors, and bar graphs compiling data from all samples and depicting PD-L1 
expression by IgA+ cells. d, Single-cell suspensions were prepared from liver biopsies as 
above (n = 3 per group) and stained with antibodies to CD4, CD8, Tim-3, and PD-1. Shown 
are representative data from one patient and one healthy donor with bar graphs compiling 
results obtained from three patients and depicting frequencies of PD-1+CD8+ T cells. χ2 test 
Shalapour et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (a) and two-sided t-test (means ± s.e.m.; a–d) were used to determine significance. * P < 
0.05; * * P < 0.01; * * * P < 0.001; NS, not significant.
Extended Data Figure 2. Experimental scheme and comparison of different NASH, HCC, and 
liver damage mouse models
a, In the HFD-fed MUP-uPA model, MUP-uPA, MUP-uPA/Iga−/−, MUP-uPA/μMT−/−, 
MUP-uPA/Rag1−/−, and MUP-uPA/Cd8a−/− male mice were kept on normal chow (NC) or 
placed on high-fat diet (HFD) starting at 8 weeks of age. Mice were analysed for NASH-
related immune parameters and pathology at 6 months of age and for HCC-related 
parameters at 11 months of age (n = 543 mice analysed in 50 experiments). Mice were 
treated with a cocktail of broad spectrum antibiotics (Abx) from 3 to 6 months or from 6 to 
11 months to determine microbe impact on NASH and HCC, respectively. Mice were also 
subjected to weekly anti-PD-L1 or anti-CD8 antibody injections starting at 9 months of age 
for a total of 8 or 6 weeks before being evaluated for HCC. In the STAM model, male mice 
of the indicated genotype were subcutaneously injected with 200 μg streptozotocin (STZ) 2 
days after birth and fed with HFD after 4 weeks of age. Tumour multiplicity, immune 
parameters, and pathology were determined when the mice were 25 or 20 weeks of age in 
either the BL6 or FVB backgrounds, respectively (n = 123 mice analysed in 15 
Shalapour et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experiments). STAM-Iga−/− mice were also subjected to weekly anti-CD8 antibody 
injections for a total of 5 weeks before being evaluated for HCC. In the MCD-HFD-fed 
model, mice were kept on a methionine and choline deficient (MCD) diet with 60 kcal% fat, 
for 4 weeks (n = 65 analysed in three experiments). In the CCl4 model, mice were injected 
intraperitoneally with CCl4 twice a week for 8 weeks (n = 82 analysed in six experiments). 
b, Paraffin-embedded and frozen mouse liver sections (n = 3–9 per group as indicated) were 
stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) to determine liver histology (scale bar, 100 μm), 
Sirius Red (SR) to determine collagen fibre deposition (scale bar, 100 μm), or Oil Red O 
(ORO) to determine lipid droplet accumulation (scale bar, 50 μm). c, Paraffin-embedded 
human liver sections from patients with NASH and ASH were stained with Sirius Red to 
determine collagen fibre deposition (n = 5 per group with one representative shown; scale 
bar, 250 μm). The data were validated in at least two or three experiments. d, Spleen content 
of IgA+ cells (absolute cell number per spleen) in different mouse strains and treatment 
groups (n = 11, 6, 8, 13, 11, 9). e, f, Indicated mice were placed on the different models 
described in a. At the endpoints, mouse body weights were measured (e) (n = 6, 5, 8, 10, 3, 
10, 11, 31, 15, 6, 9) and sera were analysed for ALT (f) (n = 6, 5, 6, 5, 3, 13, 3, 10, 8, 3, 6), 
an indicator of liver damage. g, h, Collagen deposition and lipid droplets were quantified 
using image analysis software, and data points for individual mice are shown (g: n = 11, 6, 3, 
9, 3, 8, 4, 6, 5; h: n = 6, 5, 3, 3, 3, 5, 4, 8, 4, 3, 6). i, Total RNA was extracted from livers of 
indicated mice and analysed by RT-PCR using primers for Tgfb1 (n = 6, 5, 3, 7, 7, 6, 6). j, 
Hepatic stellate cells (HSC), CD11b+ Kupffer cells (KC), and CD11b− non-parenchymal 
cells (NPC) from the indicated mice were isolated from livers. Total RNA was extracted 
from these cells and analysed for Tgfb1 mRNA expression (n = 3–5). k, l, CD4+ T cells 
were sorted from livers of normal chow- and HFD-fed WT or HFD-fed MUP-uPA mice 
using CD4, CD8, CD45, and CD3 antibodies. RNA was extracted and analysed by RT-PCR 
using primers for Il21, Bcl6, and Icos (n = 4–7 as indicated). m, Total RNA was extracted 
from livers of indicated mice and analysed by RT-PCR for Il33 (n = 4, 5, 3, 7, 8, 6, 6). n, o, 
Total RNA was extracted from livers of indicated mice at 6 months (n = 29 mice in total, 
with 3–8 mice per group as indicated) (n) or tumours of indicated mice at 11 months of age 
(n = 7, 9) (o), and analysed by RT-PCR for chemokine and cytokine mRNA. The heat map in 
n depicts the differential expression of immune-regulatory genes. Two-sided t-test (means ± 
s.e.m.; g–m) and Mann–Whitney test (median; d–f, o) were used to determine significance. 
* P < 0.05; * * P < 0.01; * * * P < 0.001. N values for each group are shown either in 
individual panels or in legends for each group from left to right accordingly.
Shalapour et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. IgA characterization in the indicated tissue of STAM and MUP-uPA 
mice
a–e, Single splenocyte or liver cell suspensions from tumour (HCC)-bearing mice (STAM-
B6) were stained with CD45, CD19, IgA, CD138, B220, and PD-L1, and FVD-eF780 was 
used to exclude dead cells. a, The gating strategies for splenocytes and liver lymphocytes: 
lymphocyte gate, dead cell exclusion, doublets exclusion, and CD45+ population gate. b, 
Flow cytometry analysis of IgA and CD19 expression of indicated strains, gated on the 
CD45+ population. Spleen or liver from Iga−/− mice was used to set up the gating for the 
populations. Tgfbr2ΔB and Pdl1/2−/− mice clearly showed less IgA+ cells than WT mice. c–
e, IgA subpopulations were gated as indicated and analysed for CD138, B220, and PD-L1 
expression. IgA subpopulations were gated on the basis of CD19 expression, in the indicated 
strains, and the IgA+CD19+, IgA+CD19−/low/int, and IgA−CD19+ subpopulations were 
further analysed for their B220 and CD138 expression. The decisions for CD19 and CD138 
levels were also based on their mean fluorescence intensity (MFI; red). The analyses showed 
two main populations: (1) IgA+CD19+B220+CD138low/− and (2) IgA
+CD19−/intB220−CD138+/hi. These two populations and the IgA−CD19+ populations were 
further analysed for their ability to express PD-L1 (percentage and mean fluorescence 
intensity). f–j, Single-cell suspensions were prepared from the spleen, liver, or intestine of 
Shalapour et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 MUP-uPA mice kept on normal chow or HFD, and were stained with CD45, CD19, IgA, 
B220, CD138, CD11b, MHCII, PD-L1, and CD5, and analysed by flow cytometry. f, The 
B220 and CD138 expression in total IgA+ cells (CD19+ and CD19− populations) confirmed 
that most of the IgA+ cells in spleen and liver of HFD-fed MUP-uPA mice are CD138+ cells. 
g, h, IgA subpopulations in liver (g) and spleen (h) were gated as indicated and analysed for 
CD138, B220, and MHCII expression. i, Representative dot-plots gated on IgA+ cells, 
showing that most of the IgA+ cells are not CD11b+. j, PD-L1 and CD5 expression of IgA+ 
cells in spleen, liver, and intestine.
Extended Data Figure 4. IgA+ cells in NASH livers express PD-L1
a, Single-cell suspensions were prepared from the livers of tumour-bearing mice (STAM-
B6) as indicated. Shown are the PD-L1 and IgA staining in the indicated strains. Spleen or 
liver from Iga−/− and Pdl1/2−/− mice were used as control for IgA and PD-L1 staining. b, 
Liver single-cell suspensions of MUP-uPA mice and indicated strains were stained for 
CD45, IgA, and PD-L1. Percentages of liver PD-L1+ cells in CD45+IgA− (labelled: CD45+) 
or IgA+ cell populations from the indicated strains are shown (n = 8, 6, 6, 7, 6, 6, 18, 16, 11, 
12). c, Percentages of liver PD-L1+CD45+ cells are shown in the indicated strains (n = 5, 6, 
6, 16, 10). The data were validated in at least three different experiments. d, e, CD138+ cells 
Shalapour et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were divided into IgA+ and IgA− populations and analysed for PD-L1 expression. d, Shown 
is the mean fluorescence intensity of PD-L1 expression for CD138+ cells from spleen (gated 
on either CD138+IgA− or CD138+IgA+ cells). e, Mean fluorescence intensity of PD-L1 
expression is shown for CD138+ plasmocytes from livers of 19 mice (gated on either 
CD138+IgA− or CD138+IgA+ plasma cells). f, Percentages of intestinal IgA+ cells in MUP-
uPA mice kept on normal chow or HFD (n = 6, 13; left). Percentages of PD-L1+IgA+ cells in 
intestine and liver are included for comparison (n = 7, 8; right). g, Percentages of liver IgA+ 
cells are shown in the indicated strains kept on HFD at the age of 3 months (n = 9, 7). h, 
Percentages of PD-L1+ cells are shown gated on CD45+CD19−IgA− cells in the indicated 
strains (n = 3, 4, 5). The data were validated at least in two or three experiments. Two-sided 
Mann– Whitney tests (median; b, c, e–h) were used to determine significance. * P < 0.05; * 
* P < 0.01; * * * P < 0.001. N values for each group in each panel are provided from left to 
right accordingly.
Extended Data Figure 5. CD8+ T cells and IgA+ plasmocytes are only marginal players in the 
MUP-uPA NASH model
Shalapour et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a, Comparison of weight gain by different strains of mice kept either on normal chow or 
HFD. Mice were continuously monitored from 8 to 46 weeks, and 20 data points were used 
to analyse weight gain, with at least 11–52 mice per time point (see Supplementary Source 
Data), and 5 BL6 mice on normal chow were used as controls. b–e, Sera, blood, and liver 
samples were collected from mice of the indicated strains and ages. Serum and blood 
samples were analysed for ALT (n = 13, 13, 16) (b), glucose tolerance test (n = 3–6 as 
indicated) (c), cholesterol (n = 5, 8, 9, 7) (d), or triglycerides (n = 5, 8, 9, 7) (e, left). Liver 
extracts were analysed for triglycerides (e, right) (n = 5, 9, 11, 7). f, Total RNA was 
extracted from livers of indicated mice and analysed by RT-PCR for Col1a1 mRNA (n = 4, 
4, 3, 6, 4, 8). g–i, Paraffin-embedded and frozen liver sections were stained with 
haematoxylin and eosin to determine liver histology (scale bar, 100 μm except 50 μm in the 
second panel of g), Sirius Red to determine collagen fibre deposition (scale bar, 100 μm), or 
Oil Red O to determine lipid droplet accumulation (scale bar, 50 μm) in the indicated strains 
and models (Extended Data Fig. 2a). Representative images are shown and were validated at 
least two or three times. Collagen deposition and lipid droplets were quantified using image 
analysis software and data points for individual mice are shown on the right for the MUP-
uPA (g) (Sirius Red: n = 9, 14, 10; Oil Red O: 5, 6, 3) and MCD (h) (n = 3 per group) 
models. i, Representative Sirius Red staining for the CCl4 model (n = 4 or 5 mice per group). 
j, Total RNA from livers of 6-month-old mice of the indicated genotypes was subjected to 
RNA-seq analysis. Shown is the hierarchical clustering of gene expression profiles 
comparing HFD- and normal-chow-fed mouse liver samples. The top three enriched 
pathways/functional categories from Metascape were reported for major clusters of genes. k, 
Total RNA from livers of indicated mice was analysed by RT-PCR for alpha-fetoprotein 
(Afp) mRNA (n = 5, 5, 6, 5, 6, 6, 5, 8, 6, 6). The data were validated at least in two or three 
experiments (see Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). Two-way ANOVA (means ± s.e.m.; a, c), 
two-sided t-test (means ± s.e.m.; f–h, k), and Mann–Whitney test (median; b, d, e, g, h) 
were used to determine significance. * P < 0.05; * * P < 0.01; * * * P < 0.001. N values for 
each group are shown either in individual panels or in legends for each group from left to 
right accordingly.
Shalapour et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. IgA ablation inhibits, while CD8 deficiency accelerates HCC 
development
a, b, Total DNA was extracted from HCC nodules of 11-month-old mice (n = 16) of the 
indicated genotypes with or without anti-PD-L1 treatment, and subjected to exome 
sequencing. Shown are the number of point mutations identified per sample (a) and 
mutational signatures (b). Horizontal axis shows the 96-substitution patterns with 
substitution subtypes on top, and vertical axis indicates the probability of each pattern in b. 
c, Top 20 hallmark gene sets sorted by normalized enrichment score (NES) are shown to 
depict HCC progression in MUP-uPA and MUP-uPA/Iga−/− mice by gene set enrichment 
analysis. Immune-related gene sets are coloured blue. The gene sets previously 
described20,57 for human HCC are marked with a red asterisk. d, Total RNA was extracted 
from livers of 6-month-old mice and from HCC nodules of 11-month-old mice of the 
indicated genotypes and subjected to RNA-seq analysis. Hierarchical clustering of gene 
expression profiles comparing HCC and non-HCC mouse samples according to the RNA-
seq. The top three enriched pathways/functional categories from Metascape are reported for 
major clusters of genes. e, Representative images of liver histology at different time points 
and indicated strains are shown with detailed n values. Scale bars, 100 μm (3 months), 250 
Shalapour et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 μm (6, 11 months). f, Total tumour numbers in 3-month-old MUP-uPA mice (n = 11, 7, 8). 
g, Heat map depicting differential expression of 17 liver-specific genes and 33 HCC-related 
genes in the indicated strains, illustrating the upregulation of some HCC-related genes in 
MUP-uPA/Cd8a−/− livers at 6 months of age (total mice number 29; n = 3 or 4 per group). 
h–j, BL6 mice of the indicated phenotype were subjected to the STAM protocol and their 
tumour volumes (n = 14, 6, 6, 4, 3, 9, 3) (h) and histopathology (i, j) were evaluated at 25 
weeks of age. The data were validated at least in two or three experiments. Paraffin-
embedded and frozen liver sections from these mice were stained with haematoxylin and 
eosin, Sirius Red, or Oil Red O, as indicated. Shown are typical images of tumour-
containing and tumour-free areas, the borders between which are marked by the black lines. 
Scale bars: haematoxylin and eosin, 100 μm; Sirius Red, 100, 250, or 500 μm; Oil Red O, 50 
μm. Oil Red O-positive areas were quantitated and are shown on the right. The Sirius Red-
stained areas for each mouse were calculated by image analysis of the whole-tissue scan and 
normalized to the haematoxylin and eosin stain (n = 3 or 4 per group). k, Tumour volumes 
are shown for STAM-WT (n = 10), STAM-Iga−/− (n = 13), and STAM-Iga−/− after CD8 
depletion (n = 3). l, MUP-uPA/Iga−/−-HFD mice were injected weekly with anti-CD8 for 6 
weeks and tumour multiplicity was determined (n = 3). k, l, CD8 depletion experiments 
were repeated using two different HCC models (MUP and STAM). m, Heat map depicting 
the differential expression of 59 genes involved in allograft rejection, IFNγ response, and 
inflammation (total mouse number 41; 6 months: n = 3 and 11 months: 3 or 4 per group). n, 
o, Paraffin-embedded and frozen liver sections from 11-month-old mice (n) and adoptively 
transferred mice (o) were stained with haematoxylin and eosin, Sirius Red, or Oil Red O as 
indicated and analysed (Sirius Red: n = 9, 16, 14, 6; Oil Red O: n = 8, 5, 5, 8 for n). Shown 
are typical images of tumourcontaining and tumour-free areas, the borders between which 
are marked by the black lines. p, Liver cells from MUP-uPA/Rag1−/− mice 1 week after 
being adoptively transferred with CFSE-labelled T cells with or without B cells as indicated 
(n = 3 in each group) were stained and analysed by flow cytometry. Shown are the 
percentage of CD8+ T cells among CD45+ cells (left), and histogram of proliferating CFSE-
labelled T cells with the corresponding mean fluorescence intensity (right). q, Liver sections 
for MUP-uPA/Rag1−/− and the corresponding adoptive lymphocyte transfer mice (4 weeks 
after adoptive transfer (AT)) were stained with alpha-SMA, IgA, CD3, and CD8 antibodies, 
counterstained with DAPI and examined by fluorescent microscopy (scale bars, 50 μm). For 
CD3/CD8 staining, images with higher magnification are shown (scale bars, 20 μm). Single-
cell suspensions were prepared from the corresponding liver, stained with antibodies to 
CD45, IgA, CD19, B220, CD8, and CD4, and analysed by flow cytometry. Shown are 
representative scatter plots. MUP;Rag1−/− mouse livers have been used for validation of 
CD4, CD8, IgA, and CD19, both for flow cytometry and for immunofluorescence analyses. 
The data were validated in at least two experiments. r, STAM-BL6 mice of the indicated 
phenotypes were analysed for IgA serum amounts by ELISA (n = 11, 4, 4, 4, 4). s, Absolute 
IgA+ cell number in livers of indicated STAM-BL6 mice (n = 13, 4, 4, 9, 8). Each dot 
represents a mouse. Two-sided t-test (means ± s.e.m.; f, j, l, n, r) and Mann–Whitney test 
(median; h, k, n, s) were used to determine significance. * P < 0.05; * * P < 0.01; * * * P < 
0.001. N values for each group are shown either in individual panels or in legends for each 
group from left to right accordingly.
Shalapour et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Gut microbes promote HCC development and microbial translocation 
does not account for the anti-tumorigenic effect of IgA ablation
a–j, MUP-uPA and MUP-uPA/Iga−/− mice were placed on HFD and treated with broad 
spectrum antibiotics (Abx) as described in Extended Data Fig. 2a, from 3 to 6 months (all 
panels except right part of b, and d, h, i) or 6 to 11 months (right part of b, and d, h, i) of 
age. At the end of the treatments, the stool contents of the corresponding mice were 
subjected to eubacterial 16S rRNA encoding DNA sequencing. a, Principal coordinate 
analysis plot of microbiome data using unweighted UniFrac distances; antibiotic treatment 
was significant by PERMANOVA (pseudo-F statistic = 105.5, P = 0.001) (left: n = 181, 27 
as indicated; right: n = 6, 3, 6, 3). Mouse weight (6 months: n = 5, 6, 13, 7; 11 months: n = 
8, 6, 5, 7) (b) and circulating ALT (n = 12, 5, 12, 6) (e) were measured. c, d, Paraffin-
embedded and frozen liver sections from the above mice were stained with haematoxylin 
and eosin, Sirius Red, or Oil Red O, and were analysed for collagen deposition and lipid 
droplets as indicated. Scale bars, 50 μm for Oil Red O; 100 μm for haematoxylin and eosin, 
and Sirius Red (Sirius Red: n = 9, 6, 14, 7 for c and 4, 4, 5 for d; Oil Red O: n = 5, 3, 6, 3 
mice). The data were validated at least in two or three experiments. f–h, j, Liver cell 
suspensions were stained with antibodies as indicated, and analysed by flow cytometry. Each 
dot represents one mouse. Shown are percentages of CD8+ cells in total cells (n = 11, 5, 9, 
Shalapour et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 7), CD8+CD44+ (n = 10, 4, 11, 6) or CD8+IFNγ +CD107a+TNF+ (n = 8, 6, 9, 7) cells in 
CD8+ T cells (f), CD19+B220+ cells in CD45+ cells (n = 9, 6, 11, 7) (g), IgA+ cells in 
CD45+ cells (n = 6, 6, 6, 3, 6, 6) (h), and CD4+ cells in CD45+ cells (n = 9, 6, 11, 7) or 
IL-17+ cells in CD4+ T cells (n = 9, 6, 10, 6) (j). i, MUP-uPA mice placed on HFD and 
treated with antibiotics were analysed for serum IgA by ELISA (n = 4, 8, 5, 6, 5, 5). Note 
that flow cytometry data of MUP-uPA and MUP-uPA/Iga−/− mice, which were not treated 
with antibiotics (control mice), are also shown in Fig. 3 and Extended Data Fig. 8q–y. The 
data were validated at least in two or three experiments. k–r, Effects of HFD and 
immunological background on mouse intestinal microbiomes and metabolomes (total mouse 
number n = 288). Each dot represents one mouse. k, The most pronounced differences are 
engendered by HFD compared with normal chow. Left to right: principal coordinate analysis 
(PCoA) plot of microbiome data using unweighted UniFrac distances (PERMANOVA, 
pseudo-F statistic = 46, P = 0.001 comparing diet); barchart of relative abundances of 
bacterial phyla; principal component analysis plot of metabolome. k, l, Subsequent effect of 
immune status for the MUP-uPA HFD-fed mice: WT, Iga−/−, Cd8a−/−, μMT−/−, and Rag1−/− 
groups. l, Left to right: PCoA plot of microbiome data using unweighted UniFrac distances 
(PERMANOVA, pseudo-F statistic = 4.37, P = 0.001 comparing immune status); principal 
component analysis plot of metabolome; partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-
DA) plot (the tenfold cross validation Q2 value was 0.817) of metabolome. Large differences 
between categories are evident. Subsequent juxtaposition of the (m) MUP and MUP;Iga−/−: 
PCoA of plot of microbiome using unweighted UniFrac distances (PERMANOVA, pseudo-
F statistic = 7.31, P = 0.001 comparing immune status) (left); PLS-DA (the tenfold cross 
validation Q2 value of 0.926) plot of metabolome (right) and (n) MUP and MUP;Cd8a−/−: 
PCoA plot of microbiome data using unweighted UniFrac distances (PERMANOVA, 
pseudo-F statistic = 4.61, P = 0.001 comparing immune status) (left); PLS-DA plot (the 
tenfold cross validation Q2 value of 0.934) plot of metabolome (right) illustrates the 
discordance stemming from these specific immune status differences. o, Bacterial Faith’s 
phylogenetic diversity metric (alpha diversity, box plot with minimum to maximum) 
calculated with rarefaction at 4,500 sequences per sample using Faith’s phylogenetic 
diversity metric (n = 14, 8, 14, 25, 16, 6, 44, 34). p, Heat map of abundant bacterial taxa by 
immune status, genetic background, and diet. Trends in significantly differing taxa 
(ANCOM) by immune status include increased Gammaproteobacteria in Iga−/− with HFD 
and increased Ruminococcaceae in WT versus Iga−/− with HFD. Mucispirillum schaedleri 
was elevated in Iga−/− for all groups except normal-chow-fed MUP-uPA. q, Discordance 
according to the immune status for the STAM model mice. Left to right: PCoA plot of 
microbiome data using unweighted UniFrac distances; principal component analysis plot of 
metabolome (the tenfold cross validation Q2 value of the corresponding partial least squares 
discriminant analysis is 0.814). r, Box plot (minimum to maximum) of unweighted UniFrac 
distances comparing distances within Iga−/−, Pigr−/−, and IgHEL/MD4 strains with distances 
between these strains (n = 44, 40, 56) and WT or Cd8a−/− STAM mice (n = 16, 12, 12) for 
microbiome data. Two-sided t-test (means ± s.e.m.; a, b, i, r) and Mann– Whitney test 
(median; c–h, j, o) were used to determine significance. * P < 0.05; * * P < 0.01; * * * P < 
0.001. N values for each group are shown either in individual panels or in legends for each 
group from left to right accordingly.
Shalapour et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 8. IgA+ plasmocytes regulate tumour killing by CD8+ T cells
a, Dih10 and dihXY HCC cells were transfected with an inducible ovalbumin (Ova) 
expression vector, and Ova expression and presentation were confirmed by flow cytometry, 
using an antibody that recognized the SIINFEKL peptide on the MHCI molecule H-2Kb. b–
h, Ova-expressing dih cells or controls (dih–RFP) were starved overnight (5% cell death), 
after which their medium was changed and B cells from WT, Iga−/−, Pdl1/2−/−, or SW-HEL 
mice were added in the presence of TGFβ (5 ng ml−1) and CTGF (3 ng ml−1), for an 
additional 24 h. Thereafter, the medium was replaced and CFSE-labelled OT-I T cells were 
added to the cultures that either contained or did not contain the B cells described above. 
After 4–6 days, the co-cultured cells were analysed by flow cytometry, while the secretory 
IgA was analysed by ELISA (n = 2–4 wells per group per day). a–j, Experiments were 
repeated with two different Ova-expressing HCC and one prostate cancer cell lines. Shown 
are the representative flow cytometry histograms or plots depicting (b) OT-I CD8+ T-cell 
proliferation, (c) PD-L1 and SIINFEKL/H-2Kb expression on cancer cells, (d) PD-L1 
expression on B cells, (e) cancer cell death. f, Relative dih-Ova–RFP killing by OT-I CD8+ T 
cells in the presence or absence of the indicated B cells. g, Total secretory IgA and anti-
OVA-IgA antibody amounts in culture supernatants. h, Percentages of OT-I CD8+ cells in 
each culture, as indicated. i, j, TRC2-Ova–RFP cells or its control cell line (TRC2–RFP) 
Shalapour et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were co-cultured with OT-I cells and splenic B cells (WT and Il10−/−), as described for a–h. 
i, Proliferation of OT-I cells was analysed using CFSE (n = 3, 7, 5, 4). j, The amounts of 
secretory IgA were analysed using ELISA as indicated (n = 3 per group). k–o, Liver cells 
from indicated 3-month-old mice were stained and analysed by flow cytometry. Experiments 
were repeated at least two or three times. Each dot represents one mouse. Shown are the 
percentage of CD8+ T cells among CD45+ cells (n = 6, 5, 3, 7, 4) (k), absolute CD8+ T-cell 
number per gram of liver (n = 3, 3, 7, 4) (l), the percentage of CD8+CD44+Ki-67+ T cells 
with representative scatter plots (n = 3 or 4 per group) (m, n), and the representative scatter 
plots of perforin and GrzB among CD8+CD44+Ki-67+ T cells (o). p, q, Liver cell 
suspensions from the indicated mice were stained as shown and analysed by flow cytometry 
to determine the absolute CD8+ T-cell number in both STAM-BL6 and STAM-FVB mice (n 
= 8, 4, 5, 3, 5, 5, 6, 7) (p), and the percentage of TEM cells using CD8, CD44, and CD62L (n 
= 4, 4, 6, 9) (q). r, Liver cells from indicated 3-, 6-, and 11-month-old mice kept on HFD (n 
= 4–10) were stained and analysed by flow cytometry. Shown are the percentage of 
CD8+IFNγ +CD107a+ T cells. Detailed n values are shown in Fig. 3e. s–y, Liver cell 
suspensions from the indicated mice were stained as shown and analysed by flow cytometry 
to determine the percentage of Th17 cells using CD4 and IL-17a (n = 4, 7, 9, 10, 4, 9, 11) 
(s), the percentage of regulatory T cells using CD4 and Foxp3 (n = 4, 3, 8, 11, 7, 13) (t), the 
percentage of Tfh-like cells using CXCR5, PD1 and CD4 (3, 5, 6, 5) (u), the percentage of 
B220+CD19+ B cells (n = 4, 7, 7, 4, 5, 3, 9, 3, 11) (v), absolute B220+CD19+ B-cell number 
per gram of liver (n = 5, 7, 12, 27, 15, 7) (w), the percentage of IgG+ cells (n = 4, 3, 14, 11) 
(x), and CD138+ plasma cells (n = 4, 7, 4, 7, 7, 8, 5, 8, 6, 6, 13, 27, 17) (y). Two-sided t-test 
(means ± s.e.m.; f–m) and Mann–Whitney test (median; p–y) were used to determine 
significance. * P < 0.05; * * P < 0.01; * * * P < 0.001. Mouse ages are indicated in the 
graphs. N values for each group in each panel are provided from left to right accordingly.
Shalapour et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. The response to PD-L1 blockade is dependent on CD8+ T cells and 
clonal expansion of HCC-directed CD8+ T cells
MUP-uPA and MUP-uPA/Iga−/− mice were placed on HFD and treated with anti-PD-L1, as 
described in Extended Data Fig. 2a. a, At the end of the treatments, mouse weights were 
measured (n = 3, 2, 4, 3, 3, 7, 3, 7). b, MUP-uPA mice treated with anti-PD-L1 were 
analysed for serum IgA by ELISA (n = 10, 6). c, Liver/body weight ratio of indicated strains 
kept on HFD that received the indicated treatments and were of the indicated ages (6 
months, 11 months) (n = 4, 6, 9, 19, 6, 2, 4, 15, 11, 17, 3, 14, 7, 20). d, e, Paraffin-embedded 
and frozen liver sections from HCC-bearing MUP-uPA mice were stained with Oil Red O, 
haematoxylin and eosin, or Sirius Red and analysed (n = 4 or 5). The experiments were 
repeated at least two times. Low and high magnifications are shown in e to demonstrate the 
absence of tumour-invading immune cells in a mouse that failed to respond to anti-PD-L1 
and their presence within a tumour of a treatment responsive mouse. Non-responsiveness to 
anti-PD-L1 treatment correlates with a fibrotic tumour stroma. Scale bars: haematoxylin and 
eosin, 250 μm; Sirius Red, 250 μm; Oil Red O, 50 μm. f, Response to PD-L1 blockade is 
dependent on CD8+ T cells. HCC-bearing MUP-uPA/Cd8a−/− mice (n = 3) were treated with 
anti-PD-L1 for 8 weeks and tumour multiplicity was determined. g, Two-dimensional plot 
showing the frequency of the top ten TCRα CDR3 sequences expressed by CD8+ T cells 
Shalapour et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 from spleens and livers of HCC-bearing MUP-uPA mice. h, CD8+ T cells were sorted from 
spleens and livers of normal-chow- and HFD-fed WT mice (n = 5 mice), their RNA was 
extracted, and TCR α-chain (top) and β-chain (bottom) CDR3 sequences were amplified 
and analysed by deep sequencing (ten samples). The panels show the clonality, the 
frequency of the top 50 TCR α- and β-chain sequences, and the percentage of productive 
unique TCR α - and β-chain sequences. i–k, CD8+ T cells were sorted from spleens and 
livers of HCC-bearing mice of the indicated strains and treatments (n = 13 mice, 26 samples 
as indicated) and their TCR α - and β-chain CDR3 sequence diversity was analysed. Shown 
are the clonality (i), the diversity (inverse Simpson’s index) (j), and percentage of productive 
unique TCR β-chain sequences in the indicated strains (k). Note that TCR sequencing data 
of WT, MUP-uPA, and MUP-uPA/Iga−/− mice are also shown in Fig. 4g, h and Extended 
Data Fig. 9h. l–n, Splenocytes from the indicated mice treated with or without anti- PD-L1 
were stimulated overnight with alpha-fetoprotein, stained as indicated, and analysed by flow 
cytometry. Shown are the percentage of IFNγ +CD107a+ cells (n = 3, 3, 2, 5, 3, 2, 3, 4, 4) 
(l) and IFNγ +TNF+ cells (n = 4, 3, 5, 4) (m) gated on CD8+ T cells. n, The percentage of 
IFNγ +TNF+ cells gated on CD4+ T cells (n = 3, 3, 2, 4, 3, 2, 3, 6, 4). Two-sided t-test (a–d, 
f, h–n) and Mann–Whitney test (l) were used to determine significance. * P < 0.05; * * P < 
0.01; * * * P < 0.001. N values for each group in each panel are provided from left to right 
accordingly.
Extended Data Figure 10. Liver-IgA+ cells are oligoclonal, and effects of HFD on control WT, Iga
−/−, and Cd8a−/− mice
Shalapour et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a, b, B cells and plasmocytes (CD19+, CD138+, IgA+ cells) were sorted from spleens (n = 3) 
and livers (n = 3) of HCC-bearing MUP-uPA mice and their μ (IgM) and α (IgA) locus 
genetic diversities were determined by BCR sequencing. c, Circulating ALT in HFD-fed 
WT, Iga−/−, and Cd8a−/− mice at 6 months of age (n = 5, 4, 8). d–f, Paraffin-embedded and 
frozen liver sections from the above mice were stained with haematoxylin and eosin, Oil 
Red O, or Sirius Red, as indicated. The data were validated at least twice. Scale bars: 
haematoxylin and eosin, 100 μm; Sirius Red, 100 μm; Oil Red O, 50 μm. The Sirius Red (n 
= 3, 4, 8) (d) and Oil Red O (n = 3, 3, 6) (e) stained areas were quantitated. g–i, Serum 
cholesterol (g), serum triglycerides (h), and liver triglycerides (i) were measured (n = 5, 4, 
3). Two-sided t-test (a, d–i) and Mann–Whitney test (c) were used to determine significance. 
* P < 0.05; * * P < 0.01; * * * P < 0.001. N values for each group in each panel are provided 
from left to right accordingly.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank S. Choi, B. H. Dang, K. Nguyen, I. Mellman, G. Ackermann, H. Reeves, R. Quinn, G. Di Caro, G. Karin, 
and J. Haybaeck for help and advice. The research was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences Superfund Research Program, Horizon-2020-Framework 
Program of the European Union (Q.M.A.), Newcastle NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, CMI seed grant, 
Irvington Cancer Research Institute (S.S., Z.Z.), Prostate Cancer Foundation Young Investigator Award (S.S.), 
Southern California Research Center for ALPD and Cirrhosis grant (S.S., I.N.B.), Prevent Cancer Foundation 
Board of Directors Research Award (Z.Z.), and American Liver Foundation liver scholar award (D.D.). M.K. holds 
the Ben and Wanda Hildyard Chair. NIH funding was as follows: CA127923, CA118165, AI043477, and 
U01AA022614 to M.K.; P41GM103484-07 and GMS10RR029121 to P.C.D.; P42ES010337 to M.K., R.M.E., and 
R.L.; DK106419 to R.L.; and EPoS-634413 to Q.M.A.
References
1. Sharma P, Wagner K, Wolchok JD, Allison JP. Novel cancer immunotherapy agents with survival 
benefit: recent successes and next steps. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11:805–812. [PubMed: 22020206] 
2. Rosenberg SA, Restifo NP. Adoptive cell transfer as personalized immunotherapy for human cancer. 
Science. 2015; 348:62–68. [PubMed: 25838374] 
3. Mittal D, Gubin MM, Schreiber RD, Smyth MJ. New insights into cancer immunoediting and its 
three component phases — elimination, equilibrium and escape. Curr Opin Immunol. 2014; 27:16–
25. [PubMed: 24531241] 
4. Corthay A. Does the immune system naturally protect against cancer? Front Immunol. 2014; 5:197. 
[PubMed: 24860567] 
5. Singal AG, El-Serag HB. Hepatocellular carcinoma from epidemiology to prevention: translating 
knowledge into practice. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015; 13:2140–2151. [PubMed: 26284591] 
6. Luedde T, Schwabe RF. NF-κ B in the liver—linking injury, fibrosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. 
Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011; 8:108–118. [PubMed: 21293511] 
7. Wolf MJ, et al. Metabolic activation of intrahepatic CD8+ T cells and NKT cells causes 
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and liver cancer via cross-talk with hepatocytes. Cancer Cell. 2014; 
26:549–564. [PubMed: 25314080] 
8. Nakamoto Y, Guidotti LG, Kuhlen CV, Fowler P, Chisari FV. Immune pathogenesis of 
hepatocellular carcinoma. J Exp Med. 1998; 188:341–350. [PubMed: 9670046] 
9. Dhanda AD, Collins PL. Immune dysfunction in acute alcoholic hepatitis. World J Gastroenterol. 
2015; 21:11904–11913. [PubMed: 26576079] 
Shalapour et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10. Baroni GS, et al. Interferon gamma decreases hepatic stellate cell activation and extracellular 
matrix deposition in rat liver fibrosis. Hepatology. 1996; 23:1189–1199. [PubMed: 8621153] 
11. Flavell RA, Sanjabi S, Wrzesinski SH, Licona-Limón P. The polarization of immune cells in the 
tumour environment by TGFβ. Nat Rev Immunol. 2010; 10:554–567. [PubMed: 20616810] 
12. Mauri C, Menon M. The expanding family of regulatory B cells. Int Immunol. 2015; 27:479–486. 
[PubMed: 26071023] 
13. McPherson S, Henderson E, Burt AD, Day CP, Anstee QM. Serum immunoglobulin levels predict 
fibrosis in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. J Hepatol. 2014; 60:1055–1062. 
[PubMed: 24445215] 
14. Shalapour S, et al. Immunosuppressive plasma cells impede T-cell-dependent immunogenic 
chemotherapy. Nature. 2015; 521:94–98. [PubMed: 25924065] 
15. Nakagawa H, et al. ER stress cooperates with hypernutrition to trigger TNF-dependent 
spontaneous HCC development. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:331–343. [PubMed: 25132496] 
16. Font-Burgada J, et al. Hybrid periportal hepatocytes regenerate the injured liver without giving rise 
to cancer. Cell. 2015; 162:766–779. [PubMed: 26276631] 
17. Park EJ, et al. Dietary and genetic obesity promote liver inflammation and tumorigenesis by 
enhancing IL-6 and TNF expression. Cell. 2010; 140:197–208. [PubMed: 20141834] 
18. Malik A, et al. IL-33 regulates the IgA-microbiota axis to restrain IL-1α-dependent colitis and 
tumorigenesis. J Clin Invest. 2016; 126:4469–4481. [PubMed: 27775548] 
19. Cerutti A. The regulation of IgA class switching. Nat Rev Immunol. 2008; 8:421–434. [PubMed: 
18483500] 
20. Schulze K, et al. Exome sequencing of hepatocellular carcinomas identifies new mutational 
signatures and potential therapeutic targets. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:505–511. [PubMed: 25822088] 
21. He G, et al. Identification of liver cancer progenitors whose malignant progression depends on 
autocrine IL-6 signaling. Cell. 2013; 155:384–396. [PubMed: 24120137] 
22. Brandtzaeg P. Secretory IgA: designed for anti-microbial defense. Front Immunol. 2013; 4:222. 
[PubMed: 23964273] 
23. Dapito DH, et al. Promotion of hepatocellular carcinoma by the intestinal microbiota and TLR4. 
Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:504–516. [PubMed: 22516259] 
24. Seki E, et al. TLR4 enhances TGF-β signaling and hepatic fibrosis. Nat Med. 2007; 13:1324–1332. 
[PubMed: 17952090] 
25. Phan TG, et al. B cell receptor-independent stimuli trigger immunoglobulin (Ig) class switch 
recombination and production of IgG autoantibodies by anergic self-reactive B cells. J Exp Med. 
2003; 197:845–860. [PubMed: 12668643] 
26. Ma C, et al. NAFLD causes selective CD4+ T lymphocyte loss and promotes hepatocarcinogenesis. 
Nature. 2016; 531:253–257. [PubMed: 26934227] 
27. Good-Jacobson KL, et al. PD-1 regulates germinal center B cell survival and the formation and 
affinity of long-lived plasma cells. Nat Immunol. 2010; 11:535–542. [PubMed: 20453843] 
28. Kim PS, Ahmed R. Features of responding T cells in cancer and chronic infection. Curr Opin 
Immunol. 2010; 22:223–230. [PubMed: 20207527] 
29. Shalapour S, Karin M. Immunity, inflammation, and cancer: an eternal fight between good and 
evil. J Clin Invest. 2015; 125:3347–3355. [PubMed: 26325032] 
30. Mellman I, et al. De-risking immunotherapy: report of a consensus workshop of the Cancer 
Immunotherapy Consortium of the Cancer Research Institute. Cancer Immunol Res. 2016; 4:279–
288. [PubMed: 27036972] 
31. Kang TW, et al. Senescence surveillance of pre-malignant hepatocytes limits liver cancer 
development. Nature. 2011; 479:547–551. [PubMed: 22080947] 
32. El-Khoueiry AB, et al. Nivolumab in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (CheckMate 
040): an open-label, non-comparative, phase 1/2 dose escalation and expansion trial. Lancet. 2017; 
389:2492–2502. [PubMed: 28434648] 
33. Madan R, et al. Nonredundant roles for B cell-derived IL-10 in immune counter-regulation. J 
Immunol. 2009; 183:2312–2320. [PubMed: 19620304] 
Shalapour et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 34. Kitamura D, Roes J, Kühn R, Rajewsky K. A B cell-deficient mouse by targeted disruption of the 
membrane exon of the immunoglobulin μ chain gene. Nature. 1991; 350:423–426. [PubMed: 
1901381] 
35. Harriman GR, et al. Targeted deletion of the IgA constant region in mice leads to IgA deficiency 
with alterations in expression of other Ig isotypes. J Immunol. 1999; 162:2521–2529. [PubMed: 
10072491] 
36. Koh DR, et al. Less mortality but more relapses in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis in 
CD8−/− mice. Science. 1992; 256:1210–1213. [PubMed: 1589800] 
37. Mombaerts P, et al. RAG-1-deficient mice have no mature B and T lymphocytes. Cell. 1992; 
68:869–877. [PubMed: 1547488] 
38. Chen J, et al. Immunoglobulin gene rearrangement in B cell deficient mice generated by targeted 
deletion of the JH locus. Int Immunol. 1993; 5:647–656. [PubMed: 8347558] 
39. Silveira PA, et al. The preferential ability of B lymphocytes to act as diabetogenic APC in NOD 
mice depends on expression of self-antigen-specific immunoglobulin receptors. Eur J Immunol. 
2002; 32:3657–3666. [PubMed: 12516557] 
40. Shimada S, et al. Generation of polymeric immunoglobulin receptor-deficient mouse with marked 
reduction of secretory IgA. J Immunol. 1999; 163:5367–5373. [PubMed: 10553061] 
41. Forrester E, et al. Effect of conditional knockout of the type II TGF-beta receptor gene in 
mammary epithelia on mammary gland development and polyomavirus middle T antigen induced 
tumor formation and metastasis. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:2296–2302. [PubMed: 15781643] 
42. Phan TG, Gardam S, Basten A, Brink R. Altered migration, recruitment, and somatic 
hypermutation in the early response of marginal zone B cells to T cell-dependent antigen. J 
Immunol. 2005; 174:4567–4578. [PubMed: 15814678] 
43. Hogquist KA, et al. T cell receptor antagonist peptides induce positive selection. Cell. 1994; 
76:17–27. [PubMed: 8287475] 
44. Fujii M, et al. A murine model for non-alcoholic steatohepatitis showing evidence of association 
between diabetes and hepatocellular carcinoma. Med Mol Morphol. 2013; 46:141–152. [PubMed: 
23430399] 
45. Kleiner DE, Makhlouf HR. Histology of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis in adults and children. Clin Liver Dis. 2016; 20:293–312. [PubMed: 27063270] 
46. He G, et al. Hepatocyte IKKβ/NFκ B inhibits tumor promotion and progression by preventing 
oxidative stress-driven STAT3 activation. Cancer Cell. 2010; 17:286–297. [PubMed: 20227042] 
47. Meng F, et al. Interleukin-17 signaling in inflammatory, Kupffer cells, and hepatic stellate cells 
exacerbates liver fibrosis in mice. Gastroenterology. 2012; 143:765–776. e761–763. [PubMed: 
22687286] 
48. Yoshida R, et al. A new method for quantitative analysis of the mouse T-cell receptor V region 
repertoires: comparison of repertoires among strains. Immunogenetics. 2000; 52:35–45. [PubMed: 
11132155] 
49. Dobin A, et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics. 2013; 29:15–21. 
[PubMed: 23104886] 
50. Heinz S, et al. Simple combinations of lineage-determining transcription factors prime cis-
regulatory elements required for macrophage and B cell identities. Mol Cell. 2010; 38:576–589. 
[PubMed: 20513432] 
51. Love MI, Huber W, Anders S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq 
data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 2014; 15:550. [PubMed: 25516281] 
52. de Hoon MJ, Imoto S, Nolan J, Miyano S. Open source clustering software. Bioinformatics. 2004; 
20:1453–1454. [PubMed: 14871861] 
53. Saldanha AJ. Java Treeview–extensible visualization of microarray data. Bioinformatics. 2004; 
20:3246–3248. [PubMed: 15180930] 
54. Tripathi S, et al. Meta- and orthogonal integration of influenza “OMICs” data defines a role for 
ubr4 in virus budding. Cell Host Microbe. 2015; 18:723–735. [PubMed: 26651948] 
55. Mootha VK, et al. PGC-1α-responsive genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation are 
coordinately downregulated in human diabetes. Nat Genet. 2003; 34:267–273. [PubMed: 
12808457] 
Shalapour et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 56. Subramanian A, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting 
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005; 102:15545–15550. [PubMed: 
16199517] 
57. Totoki Y, et al. Trans-ancestry mutational landscape of hepatocellular carcinoma genomes. Nat 
Genet. 2014; 46:1267–1273. [PubMed: 25362482] 
58. Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows- Wheeler transform. 
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1754–1760. [PubMed: 19451168] 
59. Van der Auwera GA, et al. From FastQ data to high confidence variant calls: the Genome Analysis 
Toolkit best practices pipeline. Curr Protoc Bioinform. 2013; 43:11.10.1–33.
60. McKenna A, et al. The Genome Analysis Toolkit: a MapReduce framework for analyzing next-
generation DNA sequencing data. Genome Res. 2010; 20:1297–1303. [PubMed: 20644199] 
61. Keane TM, et al. Mouse genomic variation and its effect on phenotypes and gene regulation. 
Nature. 2011; 477:289–294. [PubMed: 21921910] 
62. Cingolani P, et al. A program for annotating and predicting the effects of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms, SnpEff: SNPs in the genome of Drosophila melanogaster strain w1118; iso-2; 
iso-3. Fly. 2012; 6:80–92. [PubMed: 22728672] 
63. Thorvaldsdóttir H, Robinson JT, Mesirov JP. Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV): high-
performance genomics data visualization and exploration. Brief Bioinform. 2013; 14:178–192. 
[PubMed: 22517427] 
64. Teufel A, et al. Comparison of gene expression patterns between mouse models of nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disease and liver tissues from patients. Gastroenterology. 2016; 151:513–525. [PubMed: 
27318147] 
65. Röst HL, et al. OpenMS: a flexible open-source software platform for mass spectrometry data 
analysis. Nat Methods. 2016; 13:741–748. [PubMed: 27575624] 
66. Xia J, Wishart DS. Using MetaboAnalyst 3.0 for comprehensive metabolomics data analysis. Curr 
Protoc Bioinform. 2016; 55:141011–141091.
67. Caporaso JG, et al. Ultra-high-throughput microbial community analysis on the Illumina HiSeq 
and MiSeq platforms. ISME J. 2012; 6:1621–1624. [PubMed: 22402401] 
68. Caporaso JG, et al. QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing data. Nat 
Methods. 2010; 7:335–336. [PubMed: 20383131] 
69. Ammon A, et al. Deblur rapidly resolves single-nucleotide community sequence patterns. 
mSystems. 2017; 2:e00191–16. [PubMed: 28289731] 
70. Mirarab S, Nguyen N, Warnow T. SEPP: SATé-enabled phylogenetic placement. Pac Symp 
Biocomput. 2012; 17:247–258.
71. McDonald D, et al. An improved Greengenes taxonomy with explicit ranks for ecological and 
evolutionary analyses of bacteria and archaea. ISME J. 2012; 6:610–618. [PubMed: 22134646] 
72. McDonald D, et al. The Biological Observation Matrix (BIOM) format or: how I learned to stop 
worrying and love the ome-ome. Gigascience. 2012; 1:7. [PubMed: 23587224] 
73. Faith DP. Conservation evaluation and phylogenetic diversity. Biol Conserv. 1992; 61:1–10.
74. Lozupone C, Knight R. UniFrac: a new phylogenetic method for comparing microbial 
communities. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005; 71:8228–8235. [PubMed: 16332807] 
75. Vázquez-Baeza Y, Pirrung M, Gonzalez A, Knight R. EMPeror: a tool for visualizing high-
throughput microbial community data. Gigascience. 2013; 2:16. [PubMed: 24280061] 
76. Mandal S, et al. Analysis of composition of microbiomes: a novel method for studying microbial 
composition. Microb Ecol Health Dis. 2015; 26:27663. [PubMed: 26028277] 
Shalapour et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. NASH-induced IgA+ plasmocyte accumulation in human and mouse liver
a, c, Liver biopsies from patients with NASH/NAFLD (n = 18) stained for IgA and CD8. 
Staining intensity was graded from 0 to 3 and plotted against serum IgA (a) or Kleiner 
fibrosis scores (c). The data were validated in 2 different experiments. b, Serum and liver 
IgA concentrations (immunohistochemistry scores) plotted against Kleiner fibrosis scores, 
and were further validated in two different human cohorts (n = 502 and 96; Extended Data 
Fig. 1a, b). d, Mice of indicated genotypes, ages, and treatments were analysed for serum 
IgA (n = 4–20). e, f, Liver IgA+ cell (percentage and absolute cell numbers) in different 
mouse strains and treatment groups (n = 6–31). g, Representative images of paired human 
non-tumour liver and tumour sections (n = 4) stained for IgA and CD8. h, STAM-B6 liver 
sections were stained for CD3, CD8, and IgA, and counterstained with DAPI (4′,6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole; n = 3). Scale bars, 25–75 μm. Arrows indicate IgA+ and 
CD3+CD8+ cells in g, h. The data were validated at least in two or three experiments. Linear 
regression analysis was used to determine the correlation between serum IgA and IgA 
immunohistochemistry score (a). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA; means ± s.e.m.; b, 
c), two-sided t-test (means ± s.e.m.; d), and Mann– Whitney test (median; e, f) were used to 
Shalapour et al.
Page 40
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 determine significance. * P < 0.05; * * P < 0.01; * * * P < 0.001; NS, not significant. 
Specific n values are shown in d–f.
Shalapour et al.
Page 41
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. IgA ablation inhibits while CD8a ablation accelerates HCC appearance
a, Splenic and liver cells from the indicated mice (n = 3–12) were stained after ex vivo 
stimulation and analysed by flow cytometry. % of IgA+ cells expressing IL-10 and PD-L1. 
b, c, Splenic, liver, and intestinal cells from Il10-GFP/MUP-uPA mice (n = 6–12) were 
stained and analysed by flow cytometry. b, Representative flow cytometry analysis of Il10-
GFP expression in liver B cells and plasma cell subpopulations. c, Representative flow 
cytometry plots and percentage of GFP+ cells in IgA+ subpopulations. d, Mutated genes in 
human HCC on the basis of the COSMIC Database and MUP-uPA-HFD mice are compared. 
Driver genes20 are marked with red asterisks. e, Representative gross liver morphology and 
large tumour (T) incidence (> 0.4 cm) at different time points. f, g, Tumour numbers (n = 4–
31) (f) and volumes (n = 9–38) (g) in 11-month-old HFD-fed MUP-uPA mice. When 
indicated, mice were treated with broad spectrum antibiotics (Abx) from 6 to 11 months. h, 
i, Tumour multiplicity in indicated BL6 (h) or FVB (i) STAM mice was determined at 25 or 
20 weeks of age, respectively (n = 3–19). Experiments were repeated at least three times. 
STAM-Iga−/− mice were injected weekly with anti-CD8 (n = 3) for 5 weeks. j, Splenocytes 
from WT-BL6 (T+ B cells) or μMT−/− (T cells) mice were transferred into MUP-uPA/
Rag1−/− mice (n = 4 per transfer). After 1 month, tumour numbers and volumes were 
determined. Experiments were performed twice. Tumour volumes (g, j, right) are plotted 
logarithmically, and minima to maxima with all points are shown. Two-sided t-test (means ± 
s.e.m.; j, left) and Mann–Whitney test (median; a, c, f–i, j, right) were used to determine 
Shalapour et al.
Page 42
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 significance. * P < 0.05; * * P < 0.01; * * * P < 0.001. Specific n values are shown in a, c, f–
j, and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2.
Shalapour et al.
Page 43
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Liver IgA+ cells induce CD8+ T-cell exhaustion
a–f, Liver cells from indicated 3-, 6-, and 11-month (mo)-old mice (n = 3–18 per group) 
were stained and analysed by flow cytometry. The percentage of CD8+ T cells (a), absolute 
CD8+ T-cell number per gram of liver (b), and the percentage of CD44+CD8+ effector T 
cells (c). d, e, Liver CD8+ T cells from the indicated mice (n = 3–10) were stimulated with 
phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)/ionomycin medium and stained as indicated. The 
percentage of CD8+ T cells positive for CD44, IFNγ, and TNF (d), and IFNγ and CD107a 
(e). f, The percentage of CD8+Tim- 3+PD-1+ T cells at 6 and 11 months (left), and PD-1+ T 
cells at 11 months (right). g, h, Liver cell suspensions were stained for CD4 (g) and CD4 
and IFNγ (h). The gating scheme is indicated above each panel. The data were validated in 
at least three independent experiments. Two-sided t-test (means ± s.e.m.; f, left) and Mann–
Whitney test (median; a–h, f, right) were used to determine significance. * P < 0.05; * * P < 
0.01; * * * P < 0.001. Specific n values are shown in panels.
Shalapour et al.
Page 44
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. PD-L1 blockade reactivates and expands antigen-specific CD8+ T cells to induce HCC 
regression
Tumour-bearing MUP-uPA mice (n = 7–10) were given weekly injections for 8 consecutive 
weeks of blocking (anti-PD-L1) or control (LALAPG) PD-L1 antibodies or left untreated. 
a–c, Tumour number (a), representative gross liver morphology (b), and tumour histology 
(c). H&E, haematoxylin and eosin. Arrow in c shows a typical inflammatory infiltrate (scale 
bars, 100 μm). d, Liver sections were stained for CD3 and CD8 and examined by 
fluorescence microscopy (scale bars, 50 μm). Experiments were repeated at least two or 
three times. e, f, Liver CD45+ cells were stained as indicated and analysed by flow 
cytometry. g, h, CD8+ T cells were sorted from spleens and livers of indicated mice (n = 9) 
and sequenced for TCR α - (g) and β - (h) chain CDR3 region (18 samples). Panels show 
clonality and frequency of top 50 TCR α - and β-sequences. i, Similar analysis was 
performed on CD8+ T cells from spleens and livers of anti-PD-L1-treated (eight samples) or 
control (−) HCC-bearing mice. Panel shows the percentage of productive unique TCRα 
sequences. Two-sided t-test (means ± s.e.m.; g–i) and Mann–Whitney test (median; a, e, f) 
were used to determine significance. * P < 0.05; * * P < 0.01; * * * P < 0.001; Specific n 
values are shown in a, e, f.
Shalapour et al.
Page 45
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
