 Research Paper
Ebola Virus Persistence in Ocular Tissues and Fluids (EVICT) Study:
Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction and Cataract Surgery
Outcomes of Ebola Survivors in Sierra Leone☆
Jessica G. Shantha a,b, John G. Mattia c,1, Augustine Goba d, Kayla G. Barnes e,f, Faiqa K. Ebrahim g,
Colleen S. Kraft h, Brent R. Hayek a, Jessica N. Hartnett i, Jeffrey G. Shaffer j, John S. Schieffelin i, John D. Sandi d,
Mambu Momoh d, Simbirie Jalloh d, Donald S. Grant d,y, Kerry Dierberg k, Joyce Chang k, Sharmistha Mishra l,
Adrienne K. Chan l, Rob Fowler l, Tim O'Dempsey m, Erick Kaluma n, Taylor Hendricks n, Roger Reiners o,
Melanie Reiners o, Lowell A. Gess o, Kwame ONeill p, Sarian Kamara p, Alie Wurie p, Mohamed Mansaray q,
Nisha R. Acharya b, William J. Liu r, Sina Bavari s, Gustavo Palacios s, Moges Teshome o,t, Ian Crozier u,
Paul E. Farmer k, Timothy M. Uyeki v, Daniel G. Bausch w, Robert F. Garry i, Matthew J. Vandy p,1, Steven Yeh a,x,⁎,1
a Emory Eye Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States
b University of California San Francisco, Proctor Foundation, San Francisco, CA, United States
c Lunsar Baptist Eye Hospital, Port Loko, Sierra Leone
d Kenema Government Hospital Lassa Hemorrhagic Fever Laboratory, Kenema, Sierra Leone
e Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, United States
f Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States
g World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland
h Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Atlanta, GA, United States
i Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, United States
j Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Tulane School of Public Health, New Orleans, LA, United States
k Partners in Health, Boston, MA, United States
l University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
m University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom
n Comprehensive Program for Ebola Survivors, Freetown, Sierra Leone
o Lowell and Ruth Gess Eye Hospital, Freetown, Sierra Leone
p Ministry of Health and Sanitation, Sierra Leone
q Sierra Leone Association of Ebola Survivors, Freetown, Sierra Leone
r National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China
s United Stated Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Frederick, MD, United States
t Christian Blind Mission International, Washington, D.C., United States
u Integrated Research Facility, Division of Clinical Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States
v Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States
w UK Public Health Rapid Support Team Public Health England/London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom
x Emory Global Health Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States
y Department of Community Health, University of Sierra Leone, Freetown, Sierra Leone
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 15 October 2017
Received in revised form 16 March 2018
Accepted 17 March 2018
Available online 23 March 2018
Background: Ebola virus disease (EVD) survivors are at risk for uveitis during convalescence. Vision loss has been
observed following uveitis due to cataracts. Since Ebola virus (EBOV) may persist in the ocular fluid of EVD sur-
vivors for an unknown duration, there are questions about the safety and feasibility of vision restorative cataract
surgery in EVD survivors.
Methods: We conducted a cross-sectional study of EVD survivors anticipating cataract surgery and patients with
active uveitis to evaluate EBOV RNA persistence in ocular fluid, as well as vision outcomes post cataract surgery.
Patients with aqueous humor that tested negative for EBOV RNA were eligible to proceed with manual small in-
cision cataract surgery (MSICS).
Keywords:
Ebola virus disease
Ebolavirus
EBioMedicine 30 (2018) 217–224
☆ This work has been presented, in part, at the American Uveitis Society Winter Symposium (Dr. Shantha; All Co-Authors; Park City, Utah, January 14-16, 2017) and as a presentation at
Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology Annual Meeting (Dr. Yeh; All Co-Authors; Baltimore, Maryland, May 7–11, 2017).
⁎ Corresponding author at: 1365B Clifton Rd. NE, Atlanta, GA 30322, United States.
E-mail address: steven.yeh@emory.edu. (S. Yeh).
1 Principal Investigators.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.03.020
2352-3964/© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
EBioMedicine
journal homepage: www.ebiomedicine.com
 Findings: We screened 137 EVD survivors from June 2016 – August 2017 for enrolment. We enrolled 50 EVD sur-
vivors; 46 with visually significant cataract, 1 with a subluxated lens, 2 with active uveitis and 1 with a blind pain-
ful eye due to uveitis. The median age was 24.0 years (IQR 17–35) and 35 patients (70%) were female. The median
logMAR visual acuity (VA) was 3.0 (Snellen VA Hand motions; Interquartile Range, IQR: 1.2-3.0, Snellen VA 20/
320 – Hand motions). All patients tested negative for EBOV RNA by RT-PCR in aqueous humor/vitreous fluid
and conjunctiva at a median of 19 months (IQR 18-20) from EVD diagnosis in Phase 1 of ocular fluid sampling
and 34 months (IQR 32-36) from EVD diagnosis in Phase 2 of ocular fluid sampling. Thirty-four patients
underwent MSICS, with a preoperative median VA improvement from hand motions to 20/30 at three-month
postoperative follow-up (P b 0.001).
Interpretation: EBOV persistence by RT-PCR was not identified in ocular fluid or conjunctivae of fifty EVD survi-
vors with ocular disease. Cataract surgery can be performed safely with vision restorative outcomes in patients
who test negative for EBOV RNA in ocular fluid specimens. These findings impact the thousands of West
African EVD survivors at-risk for ocular complications who may also require eye surgery during EVD
convalescence.
© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Ophthalmology
Uveitis
Global Health
Cataract
1. Introduction
Uveitis syndromes due to ocular viral infection can lead to significant
visual morbidity and blindness (Connors et al., 2015). In addition to
commonly recognized pathogens (e.g. herpes simplex virus, cytomega-
lovirus), emerging viruses (e.g. chikungunya, zika) are increasingly im-
plicated as causes of uveitis (Connors et al., 2015). The West African
Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak in 2013–2016 brought attention to
a range of uveitis findings ranging from anterior uveitis to sight-
threatening panuveitis as a sequelae of Ebola virus infection diagnosed
in 13% to 34% of EVD survivors (Varkey et al., 2015; Tiffany et al.,
2016; Shantha et al., 2017; Hereth-Hebert et al., 2017). A complex dis-
ease spectrum was noted, leading to severe vision impairment or blind-
ness in nearly 40% of affected eyes (Shantha et al., 2017). Vision loss due
to uveitis impacts overall quality-of-life amidst a number of other clini-
cal sequelae of EVD, including arthralgias, myalgias, headache, and ab-
dominal pain (Epstein et al., 2015; Vetter et al., 2016).
Ebola virus (EBOV) has been noted to persist in immune privileged
sites including the aqueous humor (Varkey et al., 2015) and cerebrospi-
nal fluid (Jacobs et al., 2016), leading to severe uveitis and meningoen-
cephalitis, respectively, during EVD convalescence. Long-term EBOV
RNA detection in semen (Deen et al., 2017; Soka et al., 2016), breast
milk (Sissoko et al., 2017), and placenta (Bower et al., 2016), with
rare transmission events reported (Sissoko et al., 2017; Bower
et al., 2016; Mate et al., 2015; Diallo et al., 2016), highlight the indi-
vidual and public health consequences of EBOV persistence and em-
phasize the urgent need to investigate EBOV RNA clearance from
immune-privileged sites.
In EVD survivors, invasive ophthalmic procedures (e.g. cataract sur-
gery, open globe repair, retinal detachment surgery) currently pose an
uncertain risk of EBOV transmission via ocular fluid to health care
workers and close contacts of EVD survivors. We conducted The Ebola
Virus Persistence in Ocular Tissues and Fluids (EVICT) study to establish
an evidence base for a safe, effective approach to invasive ophthalmic
procedures in EVD survivors. Anterior chamber paracentesis was per-
formed in patients with active uveitis or in patients who require oph-
thalmic surgery to test for EBOV viral persistence before intraocular
surgery. Herein, we report the clinical ophthalmic phenotypes, preva-
lence of EBOV RT-PCR in ocular fluid of a cohort of Sierra Leonean EVD
survivors anticipating ocular surgery or with active uveitis. We also de-
scribe the vision restorative outcomes of patients meeting criteria for
cataract surgery.
2. Methods
We designed a cross-sectional study to evaluate EBOV RNA persis-
tence in ocular fluids and tissues of EVD survivors. Institutional Review
Board approval was obtained from Emory University and the Office of
Ethics and Scientific Review Committee, Sierra Leone Ministry of Health
and Sanitation (MOHS). Human research was conducted according to
the Tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki, and informed consent was ob-
tained with the assistance of Sierra Leonean interpreters in the native
dialect of enrolled patients. During the ocular fluid sampling portion
of the EVICT Study, patients underwent ocular fluid testing for EBOV
RNA by RT-PCR. Patients who tested negative for EBOV RNA were then
eligible for the surgical portion of the EVICT Study, which included man-
ual small-incision cataract surgery (MSICS) with intraocular lens (IOL)
implantation when medically indicated.
2.1. EVICT Facility, Study Site Preparation, and Personal Protective
Equipment
Patient ophthalmologic evaluations were conducted at the Lowell
and Ruth Gess Eye Hospital in Freetown, Sierra Leone. An ophthalmic
procedure room was designed adhering to World Health Organization
(WHO) guidelines (World Health Organisation, 2016), and guidance
from the Emory University Serious Communicable Disease Unit
(SCDU), with high-level safety precautions for potential EBOV exposure
(Fig. 1). Eye care providers performed the ocular fluid sampling proce-
dure in full personal protective equipment (PPE) with monitoring
from an infectious disease physician trained in the care of EVD in the
acute Ebola treatment unit (ETU) setting.
2.2. Patient Recruitment
EVD survivors anticipating ophthalmic surgery (cataract and/or ret-
inal surgery) were identified via an ophthalmic screening program con-
ducted by the MOHS National Eye Care Program from March 2015
through March 2016. In addition, EVD survivors were referred from
local eye clinics for vision loss and cataract evaluation. These centers in-
cluded Connaught Government Hospital (Freetown), Lunsar Baptist Eye
Hospital (Port Loko) and Kenema Government Hospital (Kenema), as
well as direct referral from the Sierra Leone Association of Ebola Survi-
vors (SLAES).
2.3. Patient Screening, Ophthalmic Exam, and Follow-Up
Ophthalmic exams for EVD survivors included corrected visual acu-
ity (VA), pupillary examination, confrontational visual fields, ocular mo-
tility and intraocular pressure (tonopen, Avia, Reichert Technologies).
Anterior chamber (AC) cell grade was measured per Standardization
of Uveitis Nomenclature guidelines via slit lamp examination (Jabs
et al., 2005). Cataract was classified as nuclear sclerotic, posterior sub-
capsular, anterior subcapsular, uveitic white cataract, uveitic white cat-
aract with anterior capsular fibrosis, and graded from one to four.
Funduscopic evaluation was performed with a 90- and 28-diopter
218
J.G. Shantha et al. / EBioMedicine 30 (2018) 217–224
 lens. When media opacity (e.g. dense cataract) precluded adequate
view of the retina, a B-scan ultrasound was performed. Patients who
were anticipating intraocular surgery or with active uveitis were offered
EVICT enrollment for ocular fluid sampling. Exclusion criteria included
clinical findings suggesting minimal to no benefit from intraocular
surgery (e.g. chronic tractional retinal detachment by B-scan would pre-
clude cataract surgery) and was determined by the clinical investigator.
Following their ocular fluid (aqueous humor or vitreous) sampling pro-
cedure, patients were seen at one-day, one-week, and one-month post
procedure. Patients were evaluated sooner when clinically indicated.
Patients who underwent MSICS with IOL implantation were evaluated
at postoperative day one (POD1), at week one (POW1), at month one
(POM1), and at three to four months (POM 3/4).
2.4. Laboratory Workup and Serologic Testing for Causes of Uveitis
Serologic evidence of prior EBOV infection was evaluated on sera
collected from enrolled patients using ReEBOV® IgG ELISA Test Kits
(Zalgen Labs, Germantown, MD) as described in the Supplementary Ap-
pendix by the Kenema Government Hospital Lassa Hemorrhagic Fever
Laboratory. Patients also underwent laboratory evaluation for other
causes of uveitis, including serum testing for HIV 1/2- Antigen-
Antibody (Alere Determine™, San Diego, CA), and syphilis testing by
rapid plasma reagin (RPR). Specific syphilis antibody testing with FTA-
ABS or syphilis IgG was not available. Serology for Lassa fever (LASV)
IgG using ReLASV™ Pan-Lassa IgG/IgM ELISA Test Kit (Zalgen Labs)
was also performed.
Fig. 1. Schematic blueprint of EVICT facility. Features of the EVICT room for ophthalmic procedures include a unidirectional patient flow with separate entry and exit areas, health care
worker monitoring during donning and doffing of personal protective equipment, and specimen handling protocols for harvesting and storage of specimens in a temperature-
monitored 4 °C refrigerator prior to transportation to reference laboratory.
219
J.G. Shantha et al. / EBioMedicine 30 (2018) 217–224
 2.5. Ocular Fluid Sampling Procedure
We performed ocular fluid sampling in full PPE in a facility with in-
fection prevention measures following guidelines from the WHO and
Emory SCDU (Fig. 1). Patients underwent extra- and intraocular fluid
sampling by Retina Fellowship-trained ophthalmologists. Anterior
chamber paracentesis or vitreous tap was performed as detailed in the
Supplemental Appendix. Approximately 100–200 μl were aspirated
from the aqueous humor and 500 μl were obtained from the vitreous
humor. We obtained conjunctival swabs from the inferior conjunctival
fornix pre-procedure and immediately post procedure with a Dacron
swab, and placed them in viral transport media (Hardy Diagnostics,
Springboro, OH). Ocular fluid sampling proceeded in two phases with
Phase 1 occurring in June 2016 and Phase 2 occurring in July and August
2017. The patients in Phase 1 were largely from Freetown and included
Port Loko and Western Area Districts, whereas the patients in Phase 2
included individuals from more distant locations including Bo, Kenema,
Moyamba, Tonkolili.
2.6. EBOV Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) Test-
ing of Ocular Fluid
EBOV RT-PCR was performed on conjunctival swab specimens and
ocular fluid following RNA extraction using the QIAamp Viral RNA
Mini kit (Qiagen, Germantown, MD) at the Kenema Government Hospi-
tal (KGH). Patient samples then underwent EBOV RT-qPCR analysis
using the KGH primer set (Gire et al., 2014) and Power SYBR Green
RNA-to-Ct 1-Step qRT-PCR assay (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). The
details of the EBOV RT-PCR procedure are outlined in the Supplemental
Appendix.
2.7. Manual Small-Incision Cataract Surgery Procedure
Patients with ocular fluid specimens that tested negative for EBOV
RNA by RT-PCR had the opportunity to undergo MSICS with IOL implan-
tation to achieve a postoperative refractive error between −0.50 and
−1.00 diopters. PPE was modified to sterile surgical attire (fluid imper-
vious gown, gloves, mask and shoe covers). The details of MSICS are
summarized in the Supplemental Appendix.
2.8. Statistical Analysis
Data were presented as percentage frequencies as appropriate or
medians with interquartile range (IQR) for continuous variables. VA
was converted to logarithm of the minimal angle of resolution
(logMAR) for statistical analysis. Counting fingers and hand motions
were converted to logMAR as previously described (Holladay, 2004).
Patients with only light perception or no light perception were excluded
from statistical analyses. We used a paired t-test to compare preopera-
tive to postoperative VA at follow-up. The Jeffrey's interval approach
was used to calculate a confidence interval estimating the true propor-
tion of ocular specimens with EBOV presence. Descriptive and univari-
ate analyses were carried out using Microsoft Excel (v2013, Redmond,
WA) and SAS (v9.3, Cary, NC). All statistical tests were two-sided and
a p value b 0.05 was considered statistically significant for all
comparisons.
3. Results
3.1. Characteristics of Screened and Enrolled Patients
We examined 137 EVD survivors from Sierra Leone in from June
2016 – August 2017 (Fig. 2, Consort diagram), of whom 32 (23%)
EVD-survivors showed evidence of cataract but did not fulfill EVICT eli-
gibility criteria due to non-visually significant (i.e. immature) cataract
(16 patients), retinal or optic nerve disease precluding VA improvement
(11 patients) and hypotony/phthisis bulbi (5 patients). Fifty-one pa-
tients met eligibility criteria and one patient deferred enrollment. Fifty
(35%) EVD survivors were enrolled into the EVICT study for ocular
fluid sampling.
3.2. Baseline Enrolled Patient Characteristics
The median age of the 50 EVD survivor participants was 24.0 years
(IQR 17-35). Thirty-five patients (70%) were female. The median time
spent in an ETU was 21 days (IQR 14-45). The median time from EVD di-
agnosis to AC paracentesis in Phase 1 of ocular fluid sampling was
19 months (IQR 18-20); in Phase 2 of ocular fluid sampling, the median
time from EVD diagnosis to AC paracentesis was 34 months (IQR 32-
36 months). The most commonly observed ophthalmic complaints at
the time of EVICT enrollment included vision loss (49%), eye pain
(37%), and tearing (27%) (Supplemental Table 1). Systemic complaints
at study enrollment are summarized in Supplemental Table 2, with
headache, joint pain, and weight loss being most frequently observed.
The median logMAR visual acuity of the affected eyes was 3 (IQR 1.2 –
3.0; Snellen visual acuity equivalent hand motions; IQR 20/320 – Hand
Motions). Thirty eyes (60%) involved the left eye. Indications for enrol-
ment included visually significant cataract (46 eyes, 92%), active uveitis
(2 eyes, 4%), subluxed lens (1 eyes, 2%), and blind painful eye due to
chronic uveitis (1 patient, 2%). Cataracts were identified in 46 (92%) pa-
tients. Uveitic white cataract (25, 54.3%) and posterior subcapsular cat-
aract alone (8, 17.4%) were most frequently seen. Other cataract
subtypes included uveitic white cataract with anterior capsular fibrosis
(4, 8.7%) combination nuclear sclerotic/posterior subcapsular (4, 8.7%),
combination anterior subcapsular/posterior subcapsular (3, 6.5%), and
age-related nuclear sclerotic (2, 4.3%) (Fig. 3).
Two enrollees (4%) had active uveitis, one of whom also had a
non-visually significant cataract. Forty-six survivors (92%) had a his-
tory of uveitis. Structural complications in affected eyes included
posterior synechiae (40, 80%), chorioretinal scars (7, 14%), inactive,
pigmented keratic precipitates (9, 18%), active keratic precipitates
(2, 4%) and band keratopathy (3, 6%). B-scan ultrasound was re-
quired due to inadequate view of the posterior segment in 36
(72%) patients (Fig. 4). Ocular treatments prior to study enrollment
included oral prednisone (4, 8%), sulfamethoxazole/ trimethoprim
800 mg/160 mg and oral prednisone (1, 2%), topical prednisolone ac-
etate 1% (2, 4%) and a combination of topical prednisolone acetate 1%
and oral prednisone (15, 30%).
3.3. Procedures, Safety Monitoring, and Follow-Up
Forty-nine (98%) patients underwent an AC paracentesis and 1 pa-
tient had a vitreous tap. The median volume of the AC paracentesis
was 140 (IQR: 110–170) microliters. The vitreous sample was 500 μl.
We obtained pre-procedure and immediate post procedure conjuncti-
val swabs in all patients. One adverse event was observed following oc-
ular fluid sampling. Specifically, the patient who underwent the
vitreous tap developed a 1.0 mm hyphema with a transient elevation
of intraocular pressure that resolved to a normal intraocular pressure
with topical prednisolone acetate, atropine, and ocular hypotensives.
One month after the procedure, all patients were stable with no new ad-
verse events. Visual acuities and intraocular pressures remained stable
at 2-months follow-up.
3.4. Laboratory Investigations
Sera collected from enrolled EVD survivors yielded seropositive re-
sults for EBOV IgG in 49 (98%) patients. LASV IgG, HIV, and RPR were
positive in 8 (16%), 1 (2%), and 1 (2%) patients respectively.
220
J.G. Shantha et al. / EBioMedicine 30 (2018) 217–224
 3.5. Ocular Fluid Analysis
Forty-nine aqueous humor samples and one vitreous aspirate
tested EBOV RNA-negative by RT-PCR. Pre-procedure and immediate
post procedure conjunctival swab specimens tested negative by
EBOV RT-PCR in all patients. Following negative testing results for
EBOV RNA of ocular fluid specimens, the 46 patients with visually
significant cataract were deemed eligible for MSICS. With all 50 ocu-
lar fluid specimens testing negative for EBOV RNA by RT-PCR, it is es-
timated with 95% confidence that the true EBOV presence in ocular
fluid specimens would be no greater than 5% in our cohort of patients
assessed.
3.6. Manual Small Incision Cataract Surgery Outcomes
Thirty-four of 46 (74%) patients with visually significant cataract
underwent MSICS with IOL implantation (Fig. 2). Twenty of the patients
(59%) were female. Eighteen patients (53%) had a cataract in the right
eye and thirty patients (88%) required B-scan ultrasound for evaluation
of the posterior segment. Preoperative median logMAR VA (IQR;
Median Snellen VA) improved from 3 (Snellen VA equivalent Hand
motions; IQR 1.0-3.0; IQR 20/200 – Hand motions) to 0.54 (IQR 0.18-
0.78; Median Snellen VA 20/70, IQR 20/30 – 20/120) at POM1 (p b
0.001) and 0.18 (IQR 0-0.69; Median Snellen VA 20/30, IQR 20/20–20/
100) at POM3/4 (Fig. 5).
Fig. 2. CONSORT Diagram depicting Ebola virus disease survivors screened, excluded, and enrolled for EVICT Study. Following negative Ebola virus RT-PCR testing of ocular fluid, survivors
with visually significant cataract underwent surgery.
221
J.G. Shantha et al. / EBioMedicine 30 (2018) 217–224
 Twenty-four of 34 eyes (70%) in this cohort met the International
Classification of Disease-10 (ICD-10) definition of blindness in the af-
fected eye with a preoperative VA b 20/400. Of these 24 patients with
poorer than 20/400 visual acuity, 20 patients (83%) improved by 3 or
more lines of visual acuity during follow-up. Of the 34 patients undergo-
ing MSICS, 27 patients experienced VA improvement of ≥3 Snellen eye
chart lines by their final visit with 20 patients (60%) demonstrating
VA of 20/40 or better at their last visit. Five patients remained poorer
than 2′/200E (i.e. counting fingers vision) due to vitreoretinal pathol-
ogy. Nine patients underwent yttrium aluminum garnet (YAG)
capsulotomy during follow-up. Monitoring for uveitis recurrences is
ongoing.
4. Discussion
This study is the first to systematically evaluate EBOV persistence in
the eyes of EVD survivors with cataract or active inflammation. Because
uveitis has been estimated in 13 to 34% of EVD survivors, and cataract
blindness is a disabling, but potentially treatable complication of uveitis,
the study findings provide initial evidence to directly impact clinical
care and timing of vision rehabilitation via cataract surgery. Amidst pub-
lic health uncertainty around the persistence of EBOV in immune
privileged sites (Varkey et al., 2015), interim WHO guidance includes
the avoidance of elective surgery (i.e. cataract surgery) until further
data is obtained (World Health Organization, n.d.). The step-wise ap-
proach involving ocular screening, ocular fluid sampling, and subse-
quent cataract surgery was safe, feasible, and vision restorative in this
cohort of EVD survivors.
Among the 50 EVD survivors we enrolled, the majority presented
with severe vision impairment or blindness in the affected eye. All 50
tested negative for EBOV RNA by RT-PCR in their ocular fluid and con-
junctiva at a median of 19 months after EVD diagnosis in Phase I of oc-
ular fluid sampling and at a median of 34 months after EVD in Phase 2 of
ocular fluid sampling. Survivors with a cataract could then proceed with
eye surgery with preliminary reassurance to eye care providers that
aqueous humor was free of EBOV by RT-PCR. The 34 EVD survivors
who underwent cataract surgery experienced significant VA improve-
ment over three to four months of follow-up. It is particularly notable
that the preoperative vision of over 70% of eyes was poorer than Snellen
visual acuity 20/400 or big “E” optotype. The vision loss was reversible
with treatment despite signs of previous inflammation and the need
for a complex MSICS procedure.
Fig. 3. Slit lamp photographs of cataract in Ebola virus disease (EVD) survivors. Slit lamp photograph of an EVD survivor (A) shows a mature white cataract with posterior synechiae
(yellow arrows) indicating prior uveitis. Slit lamp photograph of an EVD survivor with a 4+ brunescent, age-related nuclear sclerotic cataract (B). A slit lamp photograph of an EVD
survivor shows a distinct combination of anterior and posterior lenticular changes with anterior (light green arrow) and posterior subcapsular cataract (red arrows, C) with highly
refractile cortical deposits at higher magnification (D).
Fig. 4. B-scan ultrasound of an Ebola virus disease (EVD) survivor with a traction retinal
detachment. A B-scan ultrasound of an EVD survivor with a gain of 70 dB shows
vitreous traction with concomitant retinal detachment and subretinal fluid involving the
macula, which is confirmed by the high-frequency spike on the A-scan (yellow asterisk).
There is subtle globe distortion indicative of early phthisis bulbi (cosmetic deformity of
globe due to chronic low intraocular pressure). EVICT protocol enrolment and surgery
were deferred owing to poor visual prognosis.
222
J.G. Shantha et al. / EBioMedicine 30 (2018) 217–224
 The mechanism by which the dense cataracts leading to blindness
rapidly developed in association with uveitis in EVD survivors is un-
known. Contributing factors may include chronic, untreated inflamma-
tion, acute severe episodic inflammation, corticosteroid-related factors,
or EBOV persistence. While EBOV persistence in seminal fluid has been
evaluated in several studies (Deen et al., 2017; Mate et al., 2015; Christie
et al., 2015), the clearance dynamics of EBOV from other immune
privileged sites (i.e. eye, central nervous system) require further inves-
tigation. Recent studies in non-human primates have demonstrated
that EBOV may persist in monocytes and macrophages within the vitre-
ous humor in association with uveitis (Zeng et al., 2017). Moreover,
in vitro studies have shown that human retinal pigment epithelial
cells are permissive to EBOV infection (Smith et al., 2017).
Limitations of this cross-sectional study include the length of time
after acute EVD when ocular fluid sampling occurred. Specifically, our
study cannot determine if survivors with uveitis may have harbored
EBOV in their eye at earlier time points when ocular inflammation
was active. Although the RT-qPCR is very sensitive, the low amount of
sample extracted could affect the ability to capture EBOV RNA, espe-
cially when using conjunctival swabs, which have very little total RNA.
Moreover, only approximately 50–150 μl of aqueous humor can be
safely obtained from the anterior chamber of the eye to avoid complica-
tions, which include ocular hypotony, hyphema, damage to the lens
capsule, and vision loss. Nonetheless, it currently remains unknown
whether EBOV may persist at low levels after infection, which remain
beneath the threshold of detection of RT-PCR, or in other locations
within the eye, which were not specifically assessed in this study. An-
other limitation in the evaluation of cataract outcomes was the variable
follow-up. The majority of patients, however, returned for their 3-
month follow-up appointments and their visual acuity outcomes
showed statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement.
Future study considerations include assessment of survivors at time
points earlier than 19 months, patients with active uveitis, and a larger
sample size. While our study findings in 50 EVD survivors support that
the expected true proportion of EBOV RNA-positive patients would be
no greater than 5% in a comparable patient population, a larger sample
size could provide greater reassurance to eye care providers performing
invasive surgical procedures to restore vision. Specifically, the minimum
number of subjects testing negative for EBOV RNA by RT-PCR to achieve
a 95% confidence interval of 0.99–1.00 (i.e. expected proportion of EBOV
RNA positive samples ≤1%) is 250.
In summary, the EVICT Study provides the first systematically col-
lected evidence evaluating EBOV persistence in ocular fluid of EVD sur-
vivors. We also demonstrate that cataract surgery can be performed
safely with vision restorative outcomes. Given the magnitude of the
West African EVD outbreak and the thousands of survivors at risk of
complications of uveitis, including cataract, efforts to address the ongo-
ing ophthalmic medical and surgical needs of survivors are urgently
needed.
Funding Sources
Supported by an unrestricted grant from Research to Prevent Blind-
ness to the Emory Eye Center and National Eye Institute, National Insti-
tutes of Health Core Grant to Emory University (P30EY006360).
Supported by the Building Interdisciplinary Careers in Women's Health
of the National Institutes of Health (K12HD085850). The content is
solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily repre-
sent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. Funding
sources also include Emory University Research Committee Grant, Mar-
cus Foundation, Emory Global Health Institute Seed Grant, Santen (SY,
JGS), Alcon Research Institute (SY), Bayer Global Ophthalmology
Awards Program (JGS) and the Heed Ophthalmic Foundation (JGS).
This work was supported in part by the Center for AIDS Research (P30
AI050409).The views expressed are those of the authors and do not nec-
essarily reflect the official policy of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.
Authors' Contributions
Literature search - JGS, JM, KGB, FI, CK, SM, RF, JS, LAG, IC, TMU, DGB,
RFG, MV, SY.
Figures - JGS, JM, AG, KGB, BRH, LAG, RR, MR, MT, IC, TMU, RFG, MV,
SY.
Fig. 5. Visual acuity (VA) in eyes following cataract surgery in EVICT Study. Preoperative median logMAR VA was 3.0 (Snellen VA hand motions level) with an improvement to logMAR VA
0.54 (Snellen VA 20/70) at postoperative month 1 and continued improvement to logMAR VA 0.176 (Snellen VA 20/30) at postoperative month 3–4. Note: n = 18 for POM1; n = 28 for
POM3/4.
223
J.G. Shantha et al. / EBioMedicine 30 (2018) 217–224
 Study design - JGS (Shantha), JGM, AG, KGB, FI, CK, BRH, JH, JGS
(Shaffer), SM, AKC, RF, TOD, EK, TH, RR, MR, LAG, KO, SK, AW, MM,
NA, WL, SB, GP, MT, KD, JC, IC, PEF, TMU, DGB, RFG, MJV, SY.
Data collection - JGS, AG, KGB, FI, CK, BRH, JH, JGS, JS, MM, SJ, DG,
LAG, MM, MT, EK, TH, IC, RFG, MV, SY.
Data analysis and interpretation - All authors contributed.
Manuscript drafting - JGS (Shantha), JM, AG, KGB, JH, JGS (Shaffer),
TMU, DGB, IC, MV, SY.
Manuscript revision and approval of the final manuscript - All au-
thors contributed.
Acknowledgments
We gratefully thank the patients in the EVICT Study and their fami-
lies for accompanying them on their journey to the eye clinic and
through the ophthalmic procedures. We are grateful to the Sierra
Leone Association of Ebola Survivors organization and leadership. We
also thank the Kissy United Methodist Church Hospital, Kissy UMC Med-
ical Board, and Bishop John Yambasu; Christian Blind Mission Interna-
tional; Lowell and Ruth Gess Eye Hospital staff and eye care providers,
Lead Outreach Administrator Mr. Ibrahim Conteh; Central Global Vision
Fund; Ministry of Health and Sanitation, Sierra Leone; Chief Medical Of-
ficer Dr. Brima Kargbo for guidance in the EVICT Study; Program Imple-
mentation Unit, Comprehensive Program for Ebola Survivors, Ministry
of Health and Sanitation; Partners in Health; Emory Eye Center, Emory
Global Health Institute, Emory University School of Medicine, Dr. Allen
Beck, Dr. Timothy Olsen, Dr. Alcides Fernandes, Mr. Andy Garrard, Mrs.
Kimberly Monroe, Ms. Anita Hester; World Hope International; Kenema
Government Hospital Lassa Fever Laboratory; Alcon Foundation; and
Helen Keller International.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.03.020.
References
Bower, H., Grass, J.E., Veltus, E., et al., 2016. Delivery of an Ebola virus-positive stillborn in-
fant in a rural community health center, Sierra Leone, 2015. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 94,
417–419.
Christie, A., Davies-Wayne, G.J., Cordier-Lassalle, T., et al., 2015. Possible sexual transmis-
sion of Ebola virus - Liberia, 2015. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly Rep. 64, 479–481.
Connors, D.B., Shantha, J.G., Yeh, S., 2015. Emerging causes of viral-associated uveitis. Int.
Ophthalmol. Clin. 55, 103–113.
Deen, G.F., Broutet, N., Xu, W., et al., 2017. Ebola RNA persistence in semen of Ebola virus
disease survivors - final report. N. Engl. J. Med. 377, 1428–1437.
Diallo, B., Sissoko, D., Loman, N.J., et al., 2016. Resurgence of Ebola virus disease in guinea
linked to a survivor with virus persistence in seminal fluid for more than 500 days.
Clin. Infect. Dis. 63, 1353–1356.
Epstein, L., Wong, K.K., Kallen, A.J., Uyeki, T.M., 2015. Post-Ebola signs and symptoms in
U.S. survivors. N. Engl. J. Med. 373, 2484–2486.
Gire, S.K., Goba, A., Andersen, K.G., et al., 2014. Genomic surveillance elucidates Ebola
virus origin and transmission during the 2014 outbreak. Science 345, 1369–1372.
Hereth-Hebert, E., Bah, M.O., Etard, J.F., et al., 2017. Ocular complications in survivors of
the Ebola outbreak in Guinea. Am J. Ophthalmol. 175, 114–121.
Holladay, J.T., 2004. Visual acuity measurements. J. Cataract Refract. Surg. 30, 287–290.
Jabs, D.A., Nussenblatt, R.B., Rosenbaum, J.T., 2005. Standardization of uveitis nomencla-
ture for reporting clinical data. results of the first international workshop. Am
J. Ophthalmol. 140, 509–516.
Jacobs, M., Rodger, A., Bell, D.J., et al., 2016. Late Ebola virus relapse causing meningoen-
cephalitis: a case report. Lancet 388, 498–503.
Mate, S.E., Kugelman, J.R., Nyenswah, T.G., et al., 2015. Molecular evidence of sexual trans-
mission of Ebola virus. N. Engl. J. Med. 373, 2448–2454.
Shantha, J.G., Crozier, I., Hayek, B.R., et al., 2017. Ophthalmic manifestations and causes of
vision impairment in Ebola virus disease survivors in Monrovia, Liberia. Ophthalmol-
ogy 124, 170–177.
Sissoko, D., Duraffour, S., Kerber, R., et al., 2017. Persistence and clearance of Ebola virus
RNA from seminal fluid of Ebola virus disease survivors: a longitudinal analysis and
modelling study. Lancet Glob. Health 5 (e80-e8.
Smith, J.R., Todd, S., Ashander, L.M., et al., 2017. Retinal pigment epithelial cells are a po-
tential reservoir for Ebola virus in the human eye. Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 6, 12.
Soka, M.J., Choi, M.J., Baller, A., et al., 2016. Prevention of sexual transmission of Ebola in
Liberia through a national semen testing and counselling programme for survivors:
an analysis of Ebola virus RNA results and behavioural data. Lancet Glob. Health 4,
e736–43.
Tiffany, A., Vetter, P., Mattia, J., et al., 2016. Ebola virus disease complications as experi-
enced by survivors in Sierra Leone. Clin. Infect. Dis. 62, 1360–1366.
Varkey, J.B., Shantha, J.G., Crozier, I., et al., 2015. Persistence of Ebola virus in ocular fluid
during convalescence. N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 2423–2427.
Vetter, P., Kaiser, L., Schibler, M., Ciglenecki, I., Bausch, D.G., 2016. Sequelae of Ebola virus
disease: the emergency within the emergency. Lancet Infect. Dis. 16, e82–e91.
World Health Organization, Feb. 2016. Clinical management of patients with viral hemor-
rhagic fever: a pocket guide for front-line healtlh workers. 2nd edition.
World Health Organization. Clinical care for survivors of Ebola virus disease: Interim
Guidance. http://wwwwhoint/csr/resources/publications/ebola/guidance-survivors/
en/.
Zeng, X., Blancett, C.D., Koistinen, K.A., et al., 2017. Identification and pathological charac-
terization of persistent asymptomatic Ebola virus infection in Rhesus monkeys. Nat.
Microbiol. 2, 17113.
224
J.G. Shantha et al. / EBioMedicine 30 (2018) 217–224
