 Original Research & Contributions
 
4 Diagnostic Prevalence of Ankylosing Spondylitis 
Using Computerized Health Care Data, 1996 to 
2009: Underrecognition in a US Health Care Setting
 11 Safe and Effective Implementation of Telestroke  
in a US Community Hospital Setting
 16 Association of Unplanned Reintubation with Higher 
Mortality in Old, Frail Patients: A National Surgical 
Quality-Improvement Program Analysis
 22 Preferential Use of Total Thyroidectomy without 
Prophylactic Central Lymph Node Dissection for 
Early-Stage Papillary Thyroid Cancer: Oncologic 
Outcomes in an Integrated Health Plan
 27 Standardizing Management of Adults with Delirium 
Hospitalized on Medical-Surgical Units
 34 The Kaiser Permanente Northern California Adult 
Member Health Survey
 43 Reduced Trauma Symptoms and Perceived Stress 
in Male Prison Inmates through the Transcendental 
Meditation Program: A Randomized Controlled Trial
 49 Voices of the “99 Percent”: The Role of Online 
Narrative to Improve Health Care
 56 Trend of Decreased Length of Stay in the Intensive 
Care Unit (ICU) and in the Hospital with Palliative 
Care Integration into the ICU
 62 Development and Application of a Plant-Based 
Diet Scoring System for Japanese Patients with 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Special Reports
 74 Anal Health Care Basics
 102 Integrated Research and the Garfield Memorial 
National Research Fund—An Unobstructed View
Case Reports
 104 Refractory Depression, Fatigue, Irritable Bowel 
Syndrome, and Chronic Pain: A Functional Medicine 
Case Report
 108 Effectiveness of Cannabidiol Oil for Pediatric Anxiety 
and Insomnia as Part of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: 
A Case Report
Commentary
 116 Ethical Analysis for Physicians Considering the 
Provision of Life-Ending Medication in Compliance 
with the California End of Life Option Act
A peer-reviewed journal of medical science, 
social science in medicine, and medical humanities
See inside for 12 additional articles  
including 4 found only online at:  
www.thepermanentejournal.org
Indexed in MEDLINE, 
PubMed, and PubMed Central
National Library of Medicine
500 NE Multnomah St, Suite 100
Portland, Oregon  97232
Change Service Requested
ISSN 1552-5767
PRSRT STD
US POSTAGE
PAID
PORTLAND OR
PERMIT NO 1452
Printed on acid-free paper.
Follow @PermanenteJ
Fall 2016 
Volume 20 No. 4
The Permanente Journal
Fall 2016 
Volume 20 No. 4
Volume 20 No. 4 — Fall 2016 
          THE PERMANENTE JOURNAL 
 
 For information and/or rates for placing an  
announcement here, please contact amy.r.eakin@kp.org.
 
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY  
PERMANENTE AUTHORS:
If you are a Permanente author and would like your book cited here, 
send an e-mail to max.l.mcmillen@kp.org.
Sponsored by the National Permanente 
Medical Groups
Mission: The Permanente Journal advances 
knowledge in scientific research, clinical 
medicine, and innovative health care delivery.
Circulation: 25,000 print readers per 
quarter, 6900 eTOC readers, and in 2015, 
1.4 million page views on TPJ articles 
in PubMed from a broad international 
readership.
PermanenteJournal
The
Fall 2016/ Volume 20 No. 4
Horsetail Fall 
photograph 
by Sapna Reddy, MD
Horsetail Fall cascades down 
the surface of El Capitan, 
in Yosemite National Park 
in CA, when there is an 
adequate snow accumula-
tion combined with warmer 
temperatures. For only two 
weeks in February the angle 
of the setting sun on clear 
days illuminates the waterfall, 
transforming its color to that 
of flaming lava. The phenomenon attracts tens 
of thousands of visitors every year. Yosemite 
National Park is a national treasure and must be 
protected as such for future generations.
Dr Reddy is a Radiologist at the Walnut Creek 
Medical Center in CA and is pursuing a second 
career as a landscape/nature photographer. More 
of her work can be seen at: www.sapnareddy.com.
ORIGINAL RESEARCH  
& CONTRIBUTIONS
 4 Diagnostic Prevalence of Ankylosing 
Spondylitis Using Computerized Health 
Care Data, 1996 to 2009: Underrecog-
nition in a US Health Care Setting. 
Jeffrey R Curtis, MD; Leslie R Harrold, 
MD, MPH; Maryam M Asgari, MD, 
MPH; Atul Deodhar, MD; Craig Salman; 
Joel M Gelfand, MD, MSCE; Jashin J Wu, 
MD; Lisa J Herrinton, PhD 
In the computerized data, 5568 adults 
had diagnostic codes indicating axial 
spondyloarthritis (axSpA). Observed preva-
lence in the Kaiser Permanente Northern 
California population, compared with na-
tional estimates for axSpA and ankylosing 
spondylitis, suggests there is substantial 
underrecognition of these conditions in 
routine clinical practice. However, use of 
computerized data is able to identify true 
cases of ankylosing spondylitis, facilitating 
population-based research.
 11 Safe and Effective Implementation of 
Telestroke in a US Community Hospital 
Setting. Kori Sauser-Zachrison, MD, MSc; 
Ernest Shen, PhD; Navdeep Sangha, 
MD; Zahra Ajani, MD; William P Neil, 
MD; Michael K Gould, MD, MS; Dustin 
Ballard, MD; Adam L Sharp, MD, MS
A stepped-wedge cluster randomized trial 
of 10 community hospitals connected to 
2 tertiary care centers via telestroke was 
implemented at each hospital incrementally 
over a 1-year period. Among 2657 patients, 
utilization of tissue plasminogen activa-
tor (tPA) increased from 6.3% to 10.9%, 
without a significant change in complication 
rates. Postintervention patients were more 
likely to receive tPA than were preinterven-
tion patients. Before implementation, 8 of 
the 10 community hospitals were signifi-
cantly less likely to administer tPA than the 
highest-volume tertiary care center; how-
ever, after implementation, 9 of 10 were at 
least as likely to administer tPA.
 16 Association of Unplanned Reintubation 
with Higher Mortality in Old, Frail 
Patients: A National Surgical Quality-
Improvement Program Analysis. 
Efstathios Karamanos, MD; Nathan 
Schmoekel, DO; Dionne Blyden, MD; 
Anthony Falvo, DO; Ilan Rubinfeld, MD
Unplanned postoperative reintubation in-
creases the risk of mortality, but associated 
factors are unclear. In this retrospective 
study, patients older than age 40 years 
who underwent unplanned reintubation 
from 2005 to 2010 were identified using 
the American College of Surgeons National 
Surgical Quality Improvement Program 
database. A total of 17,051 postoperative 
reintubations in adults were analyzed. 
Overall mortality was 29.4% (n = 5009). 
As American Society of Anesthesiology 
score increased from 1 to 5, reintubation 
was associated with a mortality of 12.1% 
to 41.6%, respectively. Similarly, increasing 
age decile was associated with increasing 
incidence of mortality. Among patients who 
underwent unplanned reintubation, older 
and more frail patients had an increased 
risk of mortality.
 22 Preferential Use of Total Thyroidec-
tomy without Prophylactic Central 
Lymph Node Dissection for Early-Stage 
Papillary Thyroid Cancer: Oncologic 
Outcomes in an Integrated Health Plan. 
Meena Said, MD; Michele Fujimoto, 
MD; Cara Franken, MD; Sunee Woo, 
MD; Brooke Vuong, MD; Philip I Haigh, 
MD, MSc, FRCSC, FACS
This retrospective cohort study of patients 
with clinically node-negative papillary 
thyroid cancer who underwent total thyroid-
ectomy with or without prophylactic central 
lymph node dissection (pCLND) in Kaiser 
Permanente Southern California Region 
hospitals, between January 1996 and 
December 2008, identified 864 patients, 
34 (3.9%) of whom underwent pCLND. 
The TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) stages 
for the 2 groups were not significantly dif-
ferent (p = 0.18). There were 23 (2.8%) 
recurrences in the no-pCLND group and 
1 (2.9%) recurrence in the pCLND group 
(p = 0.95. Presently, routine pCLND is dif-
ficult to advocate in our medical system. 
 27 Standardizing Management of Adults 
with Delirium Hospitalized on Medical-
Surgical Units. Clay Angel, MD; Kristen 
Brooks, MD; Julie Fourie
Delirium, common among inpatients aged 
65 and older, is associated with multiple 
adverse consequences, including in-
creased length of stay (LOS). However, de-
lirium is frequently unrecognized and poor-
ly understood. During a pilot from 9/2010 to 
7/2012 (including 470 patients), a delirium 
management team included a redesigned 
role for consulting psychiatrists and a new 
clinical nurse specialist role. Electronic 
health record functions supported accurate 
problem list coding, referrals to the team, 
and standardized documentation. Average 
LOS decreased (8.5 to 6.5 days; p = 0.001) 
while average LOS for the Medical Center 
remained stable. The delirium team is an 
effective model that can be quickly imple-
mented with few additional resources.
 34 The Kaiser Permanente Northern 
California Adult Member Health Survey. 
Nancy Gordon, ScD; Teresa Lin, MPH
Between 1999 and 2011 the adult Health 
Plan membership became better educated 
and less non-Hispanic white. Compared 
with 1999, in 2011, the prevalence of 
self-reported diabetes and hypertension 
significantly increased in most age groups. 
There was a significant increase in the 
percentage of those age 25-64 years who 
considered their health to be very good 
or excellent, primarily among those with 
higher education. There was an increase 
in  the percentage of adults who indicated 
that physical or emotional health problems 
interfered at least moderately with their 
daily activities.
The Permanente Journal 
500 NE Multnomah St, Suite 100 
Portland, Oregon 97232 
www.thepermanentejournal.org
ISSN 1552-5767
The Permanente Journal/ Fall 2016/ Volume 20 No. 4
  
 
 
128 CME EVALUATION FORM 
Follow @PermanenteJ
From Chaos to Care: 
 
The Promise of 
 
Team-Based Medicine 
David Lawrence, MD 
ISBN-10: 0738208590 
ISBN-13: 978-0738208596 
Cambridge, MA: 
 
Da Capo Press; 2003 
 
Paperback: 208 pages 
$15.95
For the Sake of Hugh Manatee:  
Maddie and Hugh’s BIG Adventure 
Pete Hodgson; Udo Wahn, MD
ISBN-10: 0983384150 
ISBN-13: 978-0983384151
Del Mar, CA: caboandcoral.com  
Publishing; 2013 
Hardcover: 32 pages 
$17.95
 1
 
 43 Reduced Trauma Symptoms and Per-
ceived Stress in Male Prison Inmates 
through the Transcendental Meditation 
Program: A Randomized Controlled Trial. 
Sanford Nidich, EdD; Tom O’Connor, 
PhD; Thomas Rutledge, PhD; Jeff Duncan; 
Blaze Compton, MA; Angela Seng; Randi 
Nidich, EdD
Trauma events are 4 times more prevalent in 
inmates than in the general public and are as-
sociated with increased recidivism and other 
mental and physical health issues. Inmates  
(N = 181) with a moderate- to high-risk crimi-
nal profile were randomly assigned to either 
a Transcendental Meditation (TM) program or 
to a no-treatment control group. Significant re-
ductions in total trauma symptoms in the TM 
group were found compared with controls.
Narrative Medicine
 49 Voices of the “99 Percent”: The Role 
of Online Narrative to Improve Health 
Care. Beth Sundstrom, PhD, MPH; 
Stephanie J Meier; Michael Anderson; 
Kathleen E Booth; Lacey Cooper; Ellie 
Flock; Jackelyn B Payne; Priya Hirway, ScM
Researchers conducted a qualitative content 
analysis of 2003 blog posts. Bloggers dis-
cussed medical crises and the role of injury 
and illness in maintaining financial solvency. 
Difficulty of obtaining health care and lack of 
accessible quality care emerged as themes. 
In particular, under- and unemployment 
limited access to health insurance coverage. 
Results suggest opportunities to address 
health care gaps of marginalized populations 
and to develop public health policy.
 56 Trend of Decreased Length of Stay in the 
Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and in the Hos-
pital with Palliative Care Integration into 
the ICU. Eluned Mun, MS, MSN, DNP, 
APRN-Rx, AGNP-BC, CCRN; Clementina 
Ceria-Ulep, PhD, RN; Lillian Umbarger, 
MD; Craig Nakatsuka, MD
A comparison between pre- and postinterven-
tion data in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), 
incorporating palliative care into the routine 
ICU workflow, showed positive trends in mea-
sured outcomes, including increased early 
identification of advance directives, code sta-
tus, and goals of care along with a decrease 
in the ICU length of stay and hospital length 
of stay. The number of ICU family meetings 
and palliative care consultations increased.
 62 Development and Application of a Plant-
Based Diet Scoring System for Japanese 
Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease. 
Mitsuro Chiba, MD, PhD; Kunio Nakane, 
MD, PhD; Yuko Takayama, RD; Kae  
Sugawara, MD; Hideo Ohno, MD; Hajime 
Ishii, MD, PhD; Satoko Tsuda, MD; Tsuyo-
toshi Tsuji, MD, PhD; Masafumi Komatsu, 
MD, PhD; Takeshi Sugawara, MD
A semivegetarian diet (a plant-based diet 
[PBD]) has been shown to prevent a re-
lapse in Crohn disease. PBD scores were 
assigned according to the frequency of 
consumption provided on a food-frequency 
questionnaire, obtained on hospitalization 
for 159 patients with ulcerative colitis and for 
70 patients with Crohn disease. Higher PBD 
scores indicated greater adherence to a 
PBD. The PBD scores in the ulcerative coli-
tis and Crohn disease groups were 10.9 ± 
9.5 and 8.2 ± 8.2, respectively. For patients 
with Crohn disease, those with long-term 
remission and normal C-reactive protein 
concentration were significantly more likely 
to have PBD scores of 25 or greater.
 69 Accreditation Council for Graduate 
Medical Education Core Competencies at 
a Community Teaching Hospital: Is There 
a Gap in Awareness? Mohammed Al-
Temimi, MD, MPH; Michael Kidon; Samir 
Johna, MD, MACM
Physicians at the Kaiser Permanente Fon-
tana Medical Center (480) were surveyed for 
their knowledge of ACGME core competen-
cies before starting new residency programs. 
Of the 164 physicians who taught residents, 
65 (39.7%) were unsure of their knowledge 
of the core competencies. However, most 
stated that they provided direct teaching to 
residents related to the knowledge, skills, 
and attitudes stated in each of the 6 compe-
tencies. Full-time faculty (teaching 10-12 ro-
tations per year) were more likely to provide 
competency-based teaching. Discrepancy 
between knowledge of the competencies 
and acclaimed provision of competency-
based teaching emphasizes the need for 
standardized teaching methods that incorpo-
rate the values of these competencies.
Special Report
 74 Anal Health Care Basics. Jason Chang, 
MD; Elisabeth McLemore, MD, FACS, 
FASCRS; Talar Tejirian, MD, FACS
Although countless patients suffer from 
anal problems, there tends to be a lack of 
understanding of anal health care. Common 
diagnoses include pruritus ani, anal fissures, 
hemorrhoids, anal abscess or fistula, fecal 
incontinence, and anal skin tags, most of 
which can be avoided by improving bowel 
habits. Adequate fiber intake is important 
for many reasons, including improving the 
quality of stool and preventing colorectal and 
anal diseases. This Special Report provides 
an overview of commonly encountered anal 
problems, their presentation, initial treatment 
options, and recommendations for referral to 
specialists.
Special Report
 82 Implementation of the YMCA Diabetes 
Prevention Program throughout an 
Integrated Health System: A Translational 
Study. Ron Adams, MD; Christopher J 
Hebert, MD, MS; Linda McVey; Roger 
Williams, MEd
This observational study focused on engage-
ment, persistence, recruitment, and adher-
ence to the evidence-based YMCA Diabetes 
Prevention Program (DPP) of Greater 
Cleveland. Of the 2200 Medicare-eligible 
patients at risk of prediabetes, 351 (16.0%) 
responded by attending an information ses-
sion; 228 enrolled in the DPP (11.3%) and 
persisted through at least Week 9. Because 
of the motivation and reinforcement provided 
to patients through YMCA-provided signs, 
brochures, and posters; a Web site; and 
in-person conversations with primary care 
physicians, an improvement occurred over 
the 1.7% who responded to the mailing for 
the previous DPP study. 
Special Report
 87 Assessing the Value of High-Quality 
Care for Work-Associated Carpal Tunnel 
Syndrome in a Large Integrated Health 
Care System: Study Design. Craig Conlon, 
MD, PhD; Steven Asch MD, MPH; Mark 
Hanson, PhD; Andrew Avins, MD, MPH; 
Barbara Levitan; Carol Roth, BSN, MPH; 
Michael Robbins, PhD; Michael Dworsky, 
PhD; Seth Seabury, PhD; Teryl Nuckols 
MD, MSHS
Little is known about quality of care for oc-
cupational health disorders, although it may 
affect worker health and workers’ compensa-
tion costs. This is a prospective observational 
study of 477 individuals with new workers’ 
compensation claims for carpal tunnel syn-
drome (CTS) without acute trauma, treated 
at 30 occupational health clinics from 2011 
to 2013 and followed for 18 months. Two 
hundred sixty-seven subjects (56%) received 
a diagnosis of CTS and had claims filed 
around the first visit to occupational health.
Special Report
 97 Amniotic Fluid Embolism: Using the 
Medical Staff Process to Facilitate 
Streamlined Care. Peter M Hession, MD; 
Cynthia J Millward, MD; Joyce E Gottes-
feld, MD; Thomas F Rehring, MD; Kevin 
B Miller, MD; Paul M Chetham, MD; S 
Kel Muckleroy, MD; Christopher A Bates, 
MD; Harris W Hollis, Jr, MD
There are no published algorithmic ap-
proaches to the management of amniotic 
fluid embolism (AFE). Post hoc analysis of a 
complicated case of AFE resulted in devel-
opment of a care pathway that addresses 
many of its major consequences. It is a 
template for use by any institution willing to 
implement a clinical pathway to treat AFE. It 
is accompanied by the remarkable case out-
come that prompted its development.
CME credits are available  
online at www.tpjcme.org.  
The mail-in CME form can 
be found on page 128.
Contents continued on next page.
SOUL OF THE HEALER
 21 Ghosts of the Northern Plains 
Stephen Henry, MD
 33 Hallucinations 
Nadia Al Khun
 48 Sunflowers 
Bridget Bourgon, PA-C
 81 Bamberg 
Samuel H Glassner, MD
 96 Girl with a Pearl Earring 
Zhanna Vishnevskaya, MD
 2
 
EDITORIAL & PUBLISHING OFFICE
The Permanente Journal, 500 NE Multnomah St, 
Suite 100, Portland, Oregon, 97232, USA; 
phone: 503-813-3286; fax: 503-813-2348; 
E-mail: permanente.journal@kp.org.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR SUBMISSION
Instructions for Authors and Manuscript and Artwork  
Submission Instructions are available along with  
a link to our manuscript submission center at  
www.thepermanentejournal.org/authors.html.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
Send your comments to: permanente.journal@kp.org.
PERMISSIONS AND REPRINTS
Reprint Permission Form available at:  
www.thepermanentejournal.org/about-us/ 
5818-reprint-permissions.html.
ADVERTISING/ANNOUNCEMENTS
For rates and information about advertising in 
The Permanente Journal, e-mail Amy Eakin at 
amy.r.eakin@kp.org.
 
ADDRESS CHANGES
E-mail address changes to permanente.journal@kp.org. 
Please include both old and new addresses. 
The Permanente Journal (ISSN 1552-5767) is 
published quarterly by The Permanente Press. The 
Permanente Journal is available online (ISSN 1552-
5775) at www.thepermanentejournal.org. Periodicals 
postage paid at Portland and at additional mailing 
offices. POSTMASTER, send all address changes to 
The Permanente Journal, 500 NE Multnomah Street, 
Suite 100, Portland, Oregon, 97232.
The Editorial Staff have disclosed that they have no 
personal, professional, or financial involvement in 
any of the manuscripts they might judge. Should a 
conflict arise in the future, the Editorial Staff have 
agreed to recuse themselves regarding any specific 
manuscripts. The Editorial Staff also will not use the 
information gained through working with manuscripts 
for private gain.
Copyright © 2016 The Permanente Journal 
Contents continued from previous page.
More content is available at: www.thepermanentejournal.org.
ONLINE
ORIGINAL RESEARCH  
& CONTRIBUTIONS
Physicians’, Nurses’, and Medical Assistants’  
Perceptions of the Human Papillomavirus Vaccine  
in a Large Integrated Health Care System.  
Jordan Mills, DO, PhD; Patrick Van Winkle, MD; 
Macy Shen, PhD; Christina Hong, MD; Sharon 
Hudson, PhD
Trends in Type of Original Psoriasis  
Publications by Decade, 1960 to 2010.  
Eric Sako, MD; Shannon Famenini, MD;  
Jashin J Wu, MD
CASE REPORTS
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome in Sarcoidosis: A Case  
Report of a Rare Neurologic Manifestation.  
Ajinkya Sonambekar, MD, MBBS; Nikhil Gupta, MD, 
MBBS; Akanksha Swadi, MD, MBBS;  
Laxmikant Ramkumarsingh Tomar, MD, MBBS
CLINICAL MEDICINE
Image Diagnosis: Hemorrhagic Bullae in  
a Primary Varicella Zoster Virus Infection.  
Cátia Canelas, MD; João M Carvas, MD;  
Cristiana Sevivas, MD; Dina Carvalho, MD
Special Report
102 Integrated Research and the Garfield 
Memorial National Research Fund—An 
Unobstructed View. Ed Thomas, RN, MBA
Integrated care has been discussed for many 
years. Those supporting and managing the Gar-
field Memorial National Research Fund believe 
a similar idea, integrated research, must be dis-
cussed and tested, beginning with rethinking the 
proposal format. This article elaborates on the 
enhanced proposal format, presenting powerful 
patient stories to demonstrate how integrated 
research can help deliver better patient care.
CASE REPORTS
104 Refractory Depression, Fatigue, Irritable Bow-
el Syndrome, and Chronic Pain: A Functional 
Medicine Case Report. Gregory Plotnikoff, 
MD, MTS, FACP; Melissa Barber, MSc
A 72-year-old man experiencing longstanding de-
pression, fatigue, irritable bowel syndrome, and 
chronic pain in the context of additional refractory 
illnesses was assessed and treated, guided 
by a system-oriented approach to underlying 
core imbalances termed Functional Medicine. 
Blood-, urine-, or stool-based measurements of 
relevant markers for multiple systemic issues 
identified previously unrecognized root causes of 
his constellation of symptoms. These functional 
measurements guided rational recommenda-
tions for dietary choices and supplementation. 
The patient experienced steady and significant 
improvement, as well as the unexpected resolu-
tion of his chronic idiopathic pancytopenia.
108 Effectiveness of Cannabidiol Oil for Pediatric 
Anxiety and Insomnia as Part of Posttraumatic 
Stress Disorder: A Case Report. Scott Shan-
non, MD, ABIHM; Janet Opila-Lehman, ND
Anxiety and sleep disorders are often the result 
of posttraumatic stress disorder and can contrib-
ute to an impaired ability to focus and to demon-
stration of oppositional behaviors. These symp-
toms were present in our patient, a ten-year-old 
girl who was sexually abused and had minimal 
parental supervision as a young child under the 
age of five. Pharmaceutical medications provided 
partial relief; results were short-lived with major 
side effects. A trial of cannabidiol oil resulted in 
decreased anxiety and improvement in the qual-
ity and quantity of the patient’s sleep.
112 A General Pediatrics and Integrative 
Medicine Approach to Pervasive Refusal 
Syndrome: A Case Report. Tido von Schoen-
Angerer, MD, MPH; Elisabeth Helmschmidt, 
Dr Med; René Madeleyn, Dr Med; Reinhard 
Kindt, Dr Med; Christoph Möller, Prof Dr 
Med; Gunver Sophia Kienle, Dr Med; Jan 
Vagedes, Dr Med, MA
Pervasive refusal syndrome (PRS) describes 
children with social withdrawal who become 
unable to walk, eat, or care for themselves. A 
seven-year-old girl with symptoms most con-
sistent with PRS and depression was admitted 
to a pediatric ward that integrates conventional 
pediatric and psychosomatic care with anthro-
posophic medicine. She was integrated into the 
activities of the ward and received massages, 
movement therapy, and color light therapy. After 
four weeks, she talked again, showed increased 
appetite, and supported herself when moved 
passively. She made a full recovery within four 
weeks after hospital discharge.
COMMENTARY
116 Ethical Analysis for Physicians Considering 
the Provision of Life-Ending Medication in 
Compliance with the California End of Life 
Option Act. D Malcolm Shaner, MD
The End of Life Option Act in California permits 
physicians to prescribe lethal medication to pa-
tients confirmed to be terminally ill and capable 
of independently making and carrying out a de-
cision to ingest deadly medication. A physician 
choosing to expand his/her role within this nar-
rowly defined context allows the patient to as-
sume authority for a deeply personal decision.
122 An Ethics of Permission: A Response  
to the California End of Life Option Act. 
Craig Nelson, PhD, CLS
The California End of Life Option Act law does 
not define morality, and reaching a moral under-
standing demands thorough reflection. An ethics 
of permission includes the importance of exercis-
ing professional tolerance in honoring clinicians 
who participate or who refuse to participate.
EDITORIAL
125 Form Follows Function: A Functional 
Medicine Overview. Patrick Hanaway, MD
In the article on p 104, Plotnikoff presents a 
case report using an innovative systems-biology 
approach known as Functional Medicine. Treat-
ment focused on the correction of common 
physiologic imbalances, along with lifestyle 
modifications in diet and nutrition. This case 
highlights a significant opportunity to move the 
focus of care toward root cause analysis, which, 
when combined with the power of lifestyle modi-
fication, can help to bend the cost curve and 
improve the value of care.
NARRATIVE MEDICINE
127 Her Glistening Eyes. 
Ahmed Z Obeidat, MD, PhD
One day, as the end of our patient’s hospital 
stay neared, her son grasped my attention 
with these words: “Last night, she mentioned 
my name, touched my head, and pulled me 
close to her heart as if I were her baby again. 
She smiled and followed my steps around the 
room.” I was surprised to hear that she was so 
different at night. I inquired about that. Her son 
answered, “My mother became a night person 
after her stroke.”
 3
 
PermanenteJournal
The
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF: Tom Janisse, MD, MBA
ASSOCIATE EDITOR-IN-CHIEF: Lee Jacobs, MD
SENIOR EDITORS
Vincent Felitti, MD Preventive Medicine, Book Reviews
Gus M Garmel, MD, FACEP, FAAEM Clinical Medicine
Arthur Klatsky, MD Original Articles
Eric Macy, MD Research
Scott Rasgon, MD Corridor Consult
ASSOCIATE EDITORS
James J Annesi, PhD, FAAHB, FTOS, FAPA 
Health Behavior Research
Ricky Chen, MD 
Medicine in Society
Gary W Chien, MD 
Surgery
Carrie Davino-Ramaya, MD 
National Practice Guidelines
Charles Elder, MD 
Integrative Medicine
Philip I Haigh, MD, MSc, FRCSC, FACS 
Surgery
Lisa Herrinton, PhD 
Health Systems Research
Robert Hogan, MD 
Family Medicine, Health Information Technology
Ashok Krishnaswami, MD, MAS 
Cardiology
David Riley, MD 
Case Reports
Ruth Shaber, MD 
Women’s Health
John Stull, MD, MPH 
Spirit of Medicine Dialogues
Gretchen Summer, PhD, RN 
Nursing Research and Practice
KM Tan, MD 
Continuing Medical Education
Calvin Weisberger, MD 
Cognitive Clinical Medicine
Winston F Wong, MD, MS 
Community Benefit, Disparities 
Improvement and Quality Initiatives
Scott S Young, MD 
Care Management Institute and Quality
EDITORIAL & PUBLISHING OFFICE 
Merry Parker: Managing Editor & Publisher
Lynette Leisure: Creative Director 
Amy Eakin: Business & Publishing Operations Manager
Max McMillen, ELS: Senior Editor & Staff Writer
Christopher Dauterman, MBA: Web Developer & Analyst
Ian Kimmich, ELS: Copy Editor & Publishing Coordinator
EDITORIAL BOARD
Maher A Abbas, MD, FACS, FASCRS 
Chief, Digestive Disease Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, Abu Dhabi, UAE; 
Professor of Surgery, Cleveland Clinic 
Lerner College of Medicine of Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleve-
land, Ohio
Richard Abrohams, MD 
Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, 
The Southeast Permanente Medical 
Group, Atlanta, Georgia
Fábio Ferreira Amorim, MD, PhD 
Professor of Medicine, Escola 
Superior de Ciências da Saúde in 
the Department of Postgraduate and 
Extension Activities, Brasilia, Brazil
Stanley W Ashley, MD 
Chief Medical Officer, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital; Frank Sawyer 
Professor of Surgery, Harvard 
Medical School; Attending Surgeon, 
Gastrointestinal Cancer Center,  
Dana Farber Cancer Institute,  
Boston, Massachusetts
Thomas Bodenheimer, MD 
Professor, Dept of Family and  
Community Medicine, University  
of California, San Francisco
Brian Budenholzer, MD 
Associate Clinical Professor in the 
Department of Family Medicine at 
the Brody School of Medicine at 
East Carolina University, Greenville, 
North Carolina
Alexander M Carson, RN, PhD 
Associate Dean of Research and 
Enterprise at the Institute of Health, 
Medical Sciences and Society at 
Glyndwr University in Wrexham, 
Wales, United Kingdom
Rita Charon, MD, PhD 
Professor of Medicine, Founder and 
Executive Director of the Program in 
Narrative Medicine at the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, 
New York
Dan Cherkin, PhD 
Senior Scientific Investigator, Group 
Health Cooperative, and Affiliate 
Professor, Dept of Family Medicine 
and School of Public Health—Health 
Services, University of Washington, 
Seattle
Marilyn Chow, RN, PhD, DNSc, FAAN 
Vice President, Patient Care Services, 
Kaiser Foundation Health Plan; 
Associate Clinical Professor, Dept of 
Community Health Systems, School 
of Nursing, University of California, 
San Francisco
Robert R Cima, MD, FACS, FASCRS 
Associate Professor of Surgery, 
Division of Colon and Rectal Surgery; 
Vice Chairman, Department of 
Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota
Ellen Cosgrove, MD 
Vice Dean, Academic Affairs and 
Education, University of Nevada, Las 
Vegas School of Medicine, Las Vegas, 
Nevada
Quentin Eichbaum, MD, PhD, MPH, 
MFA, MMCH, FCAP 
Associate Director of Transfusion 
Medicine; Associate Professor of 
Pathology; Associate Professor of 
Medical Education and Administra-
tion; Director, Fellowship Program 
in Transfusion Medicine; Member, 
Vanderbilt Institute for Global 
Health; Vanderbilt University School 
of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee
Linda Fahey, RN, NP, MSN 
Regional Manager, Quality and 
Patient Safety, Patient Care Services, 
Kaiser Permanente, Southern 
California, Pasadena
Richard Frankel, PhD 
Professor of Medicine and Geriatrics, 
Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis
Carol Havens, MD 
Family Practice and Addiction 
Medicine, Director of Clinical 
Education, The Permanente Medical 
Group, Oakland, California
James T Hardee, MD 
Internal Medicine, Colorado 
Permanente Medical Group; 
Associate Clinical Professor of 
Medicine, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, Westminster
Arthur Hayward, MD 
Assistant Clinical Professor, Division 
of General Medicine, Dept of 
Internal Medicine, Oregon Health 
Sciences University, Portland
Catherine Hickie, MBBS 
Director of Clinical Training, 
Bloomfield Hospital, Greater Western 
Area Health Service; Conjoint Senior 
Lecturer in Psychiatry, University of 
New South Wales, Australia
Thomas E Kottke, MD 
Medical Director for Population 
Health, HealthPartners; Consulting 
Cardiologist, HealthPartners Medical 
Group; Senior Clinical Investigator, 
HealthPartners Institute for Education 
and Research; Professor of Medicine, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
Tieraona Low Dog, MD 
Director, Integrative Medicine 
Concepts, Pecos, New Mexico; 
President, My Own Health; Director, 
Scientific and Regulatory Affairs, 
Healthy Lifestyle Brands; Tempe, 
Arizona
Lewis Mehl-Madrona, MD, PhD, MPhil 
Director of Geriatric Education, Maine 
Dartmouth Family Medicine Residency; 
Director of Education and Training, 
Coyote Institute, Augusta, Maine
Michel M Murr, MD, FACS 
Director of Bariatric Surgery, Chief 
of Surgery, Tampa General Hospital, 
Florida
Sylvestre Quevedo, MD 
Department of Medicine and Global 
Health Sciences, University of 
California, San Francisco
Ilan Rubinfeld, MD, MBA, FACS, FCCP  
Director, Surgical Intensive Care; 
Associate Program Director, 
General Surgery Residency; Henry 
Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan; 
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Wayne 
State University School of Medicine, 
Detroit, Michigan
Marilyn Schlitz, PhD 
Ambassador for Creative Projects and 
Global Affairs, and Senior Scientist, 
Institute of Noetic Sciences,  
Petaluma, California
Audrey Shafer, MD  
Associate Professor, Dept of 
Anesthesia, Co-Director, Biomedical 
Ethics & Medical Humanities 
Scholarly Concentration, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Palo 
Alto, California
Mark Snyder, MD 
Specialist Leader, Electronic 
Medical Record Implementation 
and Physician Adoption; Deloitte 
Consulting, LLP, McLean, Virginia
Swee Yaw Tan, MBchB (Edin),  
MRCP (UK), ACSM, FAMS 
Senior Consultant Cardiologist, 
National Heart Centre, Adjunct 
Assistant Professor Duke National 
University of Singapore Graduate 
Medical School, Singapore
William L Toffler, MD 
Professor Emeritas of Family 
Medicine, Oregon Health and 
Sciences University, Portland
Paul Wallace, MD 
Senior Vice President and Director, 
Center for Comparative Effectiveness 
Research, The Lewin Group, Falls 
Church, Virginia
The Permanente Press
Tom Janisse, MD, MBA, Publisher 
The Permanente Journal is published 
 
by The Permanente Press 
 4
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-151
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Diagnostic Prevalence of Ankylosing Spondylitis  
Using Computerized Health Care Data, 1996 to 2009: 
Underrecognition in a US Health Care Setting
Jeffrey R Curtis, MD; Leslie R Harrold, MD, MPH; Maryam M Asgari, MD, MPH;  
Atul Deodhar, MD; Craig Salman; Joel M Gelfand, MD, MSCE; Jashin J Wu, MD; Lisa J Herrinton, PhD 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-151
E-pub: 07/29/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-151
ABSTRACT 
Introduction: Few studies have assessed the prevalence and 
features of axial spondyloarthritis (axSpA) and ankylosing spondylitis 
in diverse, population-based, community settings. 
Objectives: We used computerized diagnoses to estimate the 
prevalence of axSpA and ankylosing spondylitis in Kaiser Perman-
ente Northern California (KPNC). 
Methods: We identified persons aged 18 years or older with 1 or 
more International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9) 
diagnosis Code 720.X (ankylosing spondylitis and other inflamma-
tory spondylopathies) in clinical encounter data from 1996 through 
2009 to estimate the prevalence of axSpA and ankylosing spondylitis. 
We reviewed medical records to confirm the diagnosis in a random 
sample and estimated the positive predictive value of computerized 
data to identify confirmed cases using various case definitions. 
Results: In the computerized data, 5568 adults had diagnostic 
codes indicating axSpA. On the basis of our case-finding approach 
using a single physician diagnosis code for ICD-9 720.X, the 
point prevalence of these conditions, standardized to the 2000 
US Census, was 2.26 per 1000 persons for axSpA and 1.07 per 
1000 for ankylosing spondylitis. Less than half of suspected cases 
saw a rheumatologist. The most specific algorithm for confirmed 
ankylosing spondylitis required 2 or more computerized diag-
noses assigned by a rheumatologist, with 67% sensitivity (95% 
confidence interval, 64%-69%) and 81% positive predictive value 
(95% confidence interval, 79%-83%). 
Conclusions: Observed prevalence in the KPNC population, 
compared with national estimates for axSpA and ankylosing 
spondylitis, suggests there is substantial underrecognition of these 
conditions in routine clinical practice. However, use of computer-
ized data is able to identify true cases of ankylosing spondylitis, 
facilitating population-based research.
INTRODUCTION
Axial spondyloarthritis (axSpA) is characterized by chronic inflam-
matory back pain starting before the age of 45 years that involves 
sacroiliac joints. AxSpA is a relatively new umbrella term that includes 
ankylosing spondylitis and nonradiographic axSpA. Nonradiographic 
axSpA refers to an inflammatory spinal condition with symptoms 
that may be quite similar to ankylosing spondylitis, but where defini-
tive x-ray changes in sacroiliac joints are not present. Most patients 
with nonradiographic axSpA will have visible inflammation in the 
sacroiliac joints or spine if advanced imaging such as magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) is performed, and some but not all of these 
patients will progress to ankylosing spondylitis.1 The clinical features 
of inflammatory back pain include symptoms that are worse at night 
and with rest, improve with exercise, and entail prolonged morning 
stiffness. Physical examination findings and investigations in patients 
with axSpA include limitation in range of motion of the chest wall and 
axial joints, association with human leukocyte antigen-B27 (HLA-
B27), and inflammation and/or sclerosis/erosions in the spine and 
sacroiliac joints. Patients with axSpA carry a substantial burden of 
disease not only because of musculoskeletal features but also because 
of extra-articular manifestations that include enthesitis, inflamma-
tory bowel disease, uveitis, psoriasis, and fractures. T
reatment options 
include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, nonbiologic disease-
modifying antirheumatic drugs such as sulfasalazine (for treatment 
of peripheral arthritis), and tumor necrosis factor blockers. 
Classification criteria for spondyloarthritis have evolved over time, 
making it challenging to assess the incidence and prevalence of axSpA 
in population-based settings.2,3 Two recent studies have investigated 
the prevalence of axSpA in the US using different methods. The 
National Health and Nutritional Examination Survey (NHANES) 
of 2009-2010 concluded that the prevalence of axSpA, using either 
the Amor or the European Spondyloarthritis Study Group classifi-
cation criteria, was between 0.9% and 1.4% of the US population, 
or 9 to 14 per 1000.4 The NHANES surveys, which are nationally 
representative, are done by selecting noninstitutionalized US adults 
through a complex, multistage probability design. Strand et al5 re-
ported the axSpA prevalence as 0.7% (7 per 1000) by retrospective 
analysis of patients’ medical records from 101 randomly selected 
US rheumatology practices. Both methods have their advantages 
and shortcomings, but the axSpA prevalence estimates in these 2 
studies are similar.
Registries and other population-based resources are useful to as-
sess the prevalence, incidence, risk factors, and outcomes of diseases 
Jeffrey R Curtis, MD, is a Professor of Medicine in the Department of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology at the University of Alabama 
at Birmingham. E-mail: jcurtis@uab.edu. Leslie R Harrold, MD, MPH, is an Associate Professor at the Meyers Primary Care Institute and 
Fallon Clinic at the University of Massachusetts Medical School. E-mail: leslie.harrold@umassmed.edu. Maryam M Asgari, MD, MPH, is a 
Research Scientist for the Division of Research in Oakland, CA. E-mail: masgari@partners.org. Atul Deodhar, MD, is a Professor of Medicine 
at Oregon Health and Science University in Portland. E-mail: deodhara@ohsu.edu. Craig Salman is a Data Analyst at the American Academy 
of Ophthalmology in San Francisco, CA. Email: andyc298@yahoo.com.  Joel M Gelfand, MD, MSCE, is a Dermatologist at the University 
of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. E-mail: joel.gelfand@uphs.upenn.edu. Jashin J Wu, MD, is the Director of Dermatology Research for the 
Department of Dermatology at the Los Angeles Medical Center in CA. E-mail: jashin.j.wu@kp.org. Lisa J Herrinton, PhD, is a Research 
Scientist for the Division of Research in Oakland, CA. E-mail: lisa.herrinton@kp.org.
 5
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-151
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Diagnostic Prevalence of Ankylosing Spondylitis Using Computerized Health Care Data, 1996 to 2009: Underrecognition in a US Health Care Setting 
such as axSpA and ankylosing spondylitis. We used computerized 
clinical databases maintained by Kaiser Permanente to estimate 
the prevalence of clinically recognized axSpA in a stable, well-
characterized, and ethnically diverse population. As a secondary 
aim, we evaluated the ability of computerized data to validate cases 
of axSpA and ankylosing spondylitis.
METHODS 
The study was conducted under the approval of the Kaiser Foun-
dation Research Institute’s institutional review board. Because no 
participant contact was involved and the study involved only a review 
of existing electronic health record data and associated information 
(eg, imaging results), no participant consent was obtained or required. 
Study Population
Kaiser Permanente Northern California (KPNC) is a prepaid, 
comprehensive, integrated care organization that maintains com-
puterized clinical data of all visits, procedures, and prescriptions 
provided to more than 3 million members in Northern California. 
This study included patients with at least 12 months of enroll-
ment in KPNC between 1996 and 2009. Preliminary axSpA cases 
of patients aged 18 years and older were identified using age on 
the date of the first diagnosis recorded during the observation pe-
riod. Because there is no International Classification of Diseases, 
Ninth Revision (ICD-9) code uniquely appropriate for axSpA, the 
expectation was that US rheumatologists would use Code 720.X 
to record such cases. We identified patients with at least 1 assign-
ment of ICD-9 Code 720.X from a physician in the computer-
ized outpatient or inpatient database as preliminary cases. This 
group of diagnoses included ankylosing spondylitis (Code 720.0), 
spinal enthesopathy (720.1), sacroiliitis (720.9), and unspecified 
spondyloarthropathy (720.9). On the basis of the available project 
resources, an approximate 3% random sample of all preliminary 
cases was selected for validation using detailed review of the medical 
record. The sample was stratified on the basis of the type of clinician 
who recorded the diagnosis (rheumatologist, other clinician), the 
number of diagnostic codes (1, ≥ 2), the presence of codes for other 
inflammatory arthritides (rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, or arthritis with inflammatory bowel dis-
ease), and prescriptions for disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs.
Data Collection
Data collection occurred during 2010. Observation began on 
the later of the date of each patient’s enrollment with KPNC or 
January 1, 1996, and ended on disenrollment or December 31, 
2009. Computerized medical information was obtained during 
1996 through 2009 and included rheumatologist-recorded di-
agnosis codes recorded into outpatient data, hospital discharge 
diagnoses, and laboratory results for HLA-B27. All relevant com-
puterized medical information was obtained for possible cases. A 
manual chart review was performed on a sample of preliminary 
cases that had at least 1 computerized diagnostic code for axSpA 
or ankylosing spondylitis. The main purpose of the chart review 
was to confirm the diagnosis recorded in the computerized data. 
A secondary purpose was to obtain information on disease mani-
festations and family history.
A trained medical record abstractor reviewed the medical records 
to confirm the diagnosis. The abstractor accessed data from the 
electronic medical record that was established in 2004 and 2005; 
in addition, she sometimes referred to clinic notes recorded in the 
paper-based records created before the transition to the electronic 
medical record. The abstractor reviewed outpatient notes, hospital 
discharge summaries, laboratory results, and radiology reports to 
confirm or rule out the diagnoses using a structured case report 
form developed by the study team.
Study Case Definition
Following case validation, the criteria required to satisfy our 
study’s case definition of axSpA and ankylosing spondylitis was two 
or more clinical diagnoses recorded by a treating rheumatologist 
in the medical record and occurring on at least two unique calen-
dar days with no qualifiers such as “rule-out” or “possible.” Clinic 
notes by a primary care clinician, without a rheumatologist consult, 
and indicating joint inflammation in the spine with or without 
peripheral involvement and without a more specific diagnosis, 
were reviewed by a single, now retired rheumatologist. The rheu-
matologist assessed clinical features, including joint inflammation 
that lasted at least six weeks; associated laboratory test results; and 
radiology reports and images and reports for sacroiliitis, erosions 
of the sacroiliac joints, and other radiographic features consistent 
with axSpA or ankylosing spondylitis. 
Given the retrospective, population-based nature of the study, 
this case definition was intended to represent a reasonable refer-
ence standard to confirm a community-based diagnosis; it was not 
intended to confirm cases according to formal classification criteria, 
which would have been infeasible in this setting. The data presented 
reflected the status of the disease at the time it was assessed and the 
information available in medical records as part of routine clinical 
care. The data were not considered to reflect the cumulative preva-
lence of various manifestations of ankylosing spondylitis based on a 
systematic, standardized evaluation. During the course of the study 
and its timeframe in relation to classification criteria for axSpA and 
the data available to the project (1996-2009), it became apparent 
that there was not sufficient data available to definitively evaluate 
the validity of axSpA cases. Therefore, case confirmation was sub-
sequently restricted to ankylosing spondylitis only. 
Disease Manifestations of Ankylosing Spondylitis in Confirmed Cases
Disease manifestations were characterized descriptively and 
included HLA-B27 positivity; comorbid conditions, including 
those in the spondyloarthritis family; complications or manifesta-
tions of axSpA or ankylosing spondylitis (interstitial lung disease/
fibrosis, aortic insufficiency, enthesitis, Achilles tendinitis [heel 
pain], uveitis/iritis, iridocyclitis, kyphosis, costochondritis); ra-
diographic evidence of syndesmophytes, spondylitis, squaring of 
vertebral bodies, sacroiliitis, and erosions of the sacroiliac joint; and 
abnormal results of the Schober test. Because of the community-
based and retrospective nature of the study, not all possible clinical 
and radiologic examinations were performed on all patients; thus, 
absence of these features did not necessarily imply that the anky-
losing spondylitis-associated features of interest were not present, 
only that they were not assessed or recorded. 
 6
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-151
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Diagnostic Prevalence of Ankylosing Spondylitis Using Computerized Health Care Data, 1996 to 2009: Underrecognition in a US Health Care Setting 
Statistical Analysis 
The positive predictive value (PPV) was determined for each of 
several a priori case-finding algorithms for ankylosing spondylitis. 
For each a priori algorithm, sensitivity was defined as the number 
of confirmed cases of ankylosing spondylitis captured by the a priori 
algorithm divided by the number of confirmed cases with at least 
2 ICD-9 Codes 720.X assigned by any physician or 1 such code 
from a rheumatologist. The PPV was defined as the number of 
cases captured by the algorithm that was confirmed with the disease 
during medical record review divided by the number of confirmed 
plus unconfirmed cases that were captured by the algorithm. We did 
not compute specificity or negative predictive value because they 
generally do not fall below 99% for relatively uncommon diseases. 
Variables that were examined for inclusion in case-finding al-
gorithms included 1) inpatient and outpatient visits with relevant 
codes for axSpA or ankylosing spondylitis (720.X), 2) number of 
visits to a rheumatologist, 3) use of biologic or nonbiologic disease-
modifying antirheumatic drugs, and 4) presence of diagnoses for 
other inflammatory arthritides such as rheumatoid arthritis or 
psoriatic arthritis. We evaluated multiple possible case-finding 
algorithms, with the most inclusive (ie, sensitive) algorithm (≥ 1 
physician diagnosis of axSpA) used as the basis for comparison 
with all other algorithms.
All analyses were conducted using SAS version 9.13 software 
(SAS Institute, Cary, NC). We used the SAS SURVEYMEANS 
procedure to estimate the PPV and its 95% confidence interval 
(CI). The procedure took into account that the sampling design 
was stratified; thus, the overall PPV was weighted.
Estimation of Point Prevalence
The age- and sex-specific prevalence of axSpA and ankylosing 
spondylitis was calculated using as the denominator the number of 
men and women in each age group who were members of KPNC 
on December 31, 2009. The point prevalence was expressed as 
the number of adult cases with the disease divided by the num-
ber of adults in the Health Plan. The age- and sex-standardized 
proportion was estimated using the direct method of standardiza-
tion, with the 2000 US Census population providing weights.6 
The 95% CIs were computed assuming a Poisson distribution.7 
RESULTS 
Application of Case-Finding Algorithm 
There were 5568 KPNC members with at least 1 inpatient or 
outpatient diagnosis code of 720.X for ankylosing spondylitis or 
another inflammatory spondylopathies; of these, 48% were for 
ankylosing spondylitis specifically (720.0). However, 2965 (53% 
overall) of these had only a single code assigned by a primary care 
clinician. We validated the medical record for a random sample of 
44 of these 2965 patients, of which only 1 person (PPV, 2%) was 
confirmed. Because of the low PPV of this definition and resource 
constraints of the study, we therefore excluded these patients from 
further consideration.
Among the 2603 patients remaining who had axSpA or ankylos-
ing spondylitis, 1028 (39%) had 2 or more diagnostic codes by a 
primary care clinician, 250 (10%) had a single diagnostic code by 
a rheumatologist (with or without additional codes from a primary 
care or other type of physician), and 1325 (51%) had 2 or more 
diagnostic codes by a rheumatologist. 
We examined sensitivity and PPV of 4 case-finding algorithms 
(Table 1). The most inclusive allowed 2 or more diagnoses by a 
primary care clinician or 1 or more diagnoses by a rheumatologist. 
By definition (because we excluded possible cases that had only 
1 diagnosis code by a primary care clinician), this most inclusive 
algorithm had 100% sensitivity. 
In total, we performed 129 chart reviews to confirm possible 
ankylosing spondylitis (excluding the 44 chart reviews performed 
for patients with only a single diagnosis recorded by a primary care 
clinician). Of these, 80 (62%) were true-positives. The 3 other 
Table 1. Sensitivity and positive predictive value of computerized diagnoses for identifying ankylosing spondylitis in 2603 adults at 
first recorded diagnosis with 1 or more diagnosesa
 
Operational 
definition
 
Number in 
population
Number in 
stratified 
sampleb
Number of true-
positives in 
stratified samplec
Number of false-
positives in 
stratified samplec
 
Sensitivity,d 
% (95% CI)
Percentage of 
diagnoses for AS 
(ICD-9 code 720.0)
PPV of algorithm 
to find AS, % 
(95% CI)e
≥ 2 diagnoses in 
primary care or 
≥ 1 diagnosis in 
rheumatology
2603
129
80
49
100c
80
62 (60-64)
≥ 2 diagnoses, any 
department
2353
102
67
35
96 (95-97)
80
66 (64-68)
≥ 1 diagnosis, 
rheumatology
1575
83
61
22
72 (70-74)
94
73 (71-76)
 ≥ 2 diagnoses, 
rheumatologyf
1325
56
48
8
67 (64-69)
96
81 (79-83)
a Patients aged 18 years or older, from inpatient or outpatient data from Kaiser Permanente Autoimmune Disease Registry, Northern California, 1996 to 2009.
b Subjects were sampled for chart review on the basis of the number of visits, the department in which the diagnosis was made, use of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs, and 
presence of comorbid autoimmune conditions. The latter 2 variables did not improve the sensitivity or specificity of the algorithm.
c Classified on the basis of medical record review.
d By definition, given that our search strategy required at least 1 physician diagnosis of ICD-9 code 720.X, and recognizing the likelihood of underascertainment.
e Calculated by dividing the number of true-positives by the number in the stratified sample. For example, on the first row, 80 (true-positives)/129 (number in the stratified sample) = 62%.
f Boldface indicates most specific algorithm (maximized positive predictive value).
AS = ankylosing spondylitis; CI = confidence interval; ICD-9 = International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision; PPV = positive predictive value.
 7
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-151
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Diagnostic Prevalence of Ankylosing Spondylitis Using Computerized Health Care Data, 1996 to 2009: Underrecognition in a US Health Care Setting 
algorithms that we tested were subsets of the most inclusive and 
considered only the number of diagnostic codes and the depart-
ment in which they were recorded (Table 1). The sensitivity of 
the 2 algorithms that required 2 or more physician diagnoses, or 
1 or more diagnoses from a rheumatologist, ranged from 72% to 
96%, with PPVs ranging from 66% to 73%. The algorithm that 
maximized PPV required 2 or more diagnoses by a rheumatolo-
gist and had a sensitivity of 67% (95% CI, 64%-69%) and PPV 
of 81% (95% CI, 79%-83%). 
Half of the patients with 2 or more rheumatologist diagnoses used 
biologic or nonbiologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs, with 
the algorithm performing the same in those with and without such 
drug use. The presence or absence of concomitant diagnoses for other 
autoimmune diseases did not affect the performance of the algorithm.
Among the 49 false-positives whose charts were reviewed to 
confirm ankylosing spondylitis, 10 had other autoimmune diseases, 
including 5 with rheumatoid arthritis, 2 with inflammatory bowel 
disease, 1 with both rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel 
disease, and 2 with psoriatic arthritis. However, only 4 of these 10 
patients had 2 or more rheumatologist diagnoses. Although these 
individuals might have met diagnostic criteria for axSpA, the diag-
nostic workup and associated clinical data available were inadequate 
to systematically assess all reviewed cases for axSpA. 
Prevalence of Axial Spondyloarthritis and Ankylosing Spondylitis
Using the most sensitive definition for axSpA (any 720.X di-
agnosis code, n = 5568 cases) among patients enrolled in Kaiser 
Permanente on December 31, 2009, the point prevalence of ax-
SpA, standardized to the 2000 US Census, was 2.26 (95% CI, 
2.20-2.32) per 1000. Using a somewhat more specific definition, 
2 or more diagnoses in primary care or 1 or more diagnosis in 
rheumatology (n = 2603), 80% of which were for ankylosing 
spondylitis, the corresponding estimate was lower by approxi-
mately half (1.07 per 1000, 95% CI, 1.03-1.11). 
Characteristics of Ankylosing Spondylitis Cases
Characteristics of the 80 persons confirmed with ankylosing 
spondylitis were described on the basis of information found in 
medical records. Most of these specifically mentioned a diagnosis of 
ankylosing spondylitis. Sixty-one percent of patients were under age 
50 years, and 83% were male; 45% were white, 14% Hispanic, and 
14% Asian (Table 2). Only 44% had an HLA-B27 test, and only 34% 
were positive (among those tested). Joint involvement by signs and 
symptoms was not specifically recorded for 30% of patients. In the 
remainder, symptoms included the lumbar spine in 55% of patients; 
x-ray, MRI, or computed tomography evidence for cervical spine 
involvement in 13%, and sacroiliac and/or hip joint involvement in 
26%. About one-fourth of patients had uveitis or iritis. 
DISCUSSION
We estimated the prevalence of axSpA using computerized health 
care data during 1996-2009. A total of 5568 adults had any diag-
nostic code indicating axSpA in the computerized data. This led to 
a point prevalence of axSpA, standardized to the 2000 US census, 
of 2.26 per 1000. We also reviewed the charts of a random sample 
of 173 of the 5568 patients. The best (most specific) performing 
algorithm for ankylosing spondylitis required 2 or more computer-
ized diagnoses by a rheumatologist and had a PPV of 81% (95% 
CI, 79%-83%) compared with our study case definition. 
The incidence and prevalence of ankylosing spondylitis have been 
described in a number of studies. One report was from the Roch-
ester Epidemiology Project8 in Minnesota, which identified 158 
cases with radiographic sacroiliitis recorded on radiology reports 
from 1935 to 1989. The overall age- and sex-adjusted incidence 
rate was 7.3 per 100,000 person-years (95% CI, 6.1-8.4), although 
prevalence was not reported. Kaipiainen-Seppanen and cowork-
ers9-11 reported the annual incidence and prevalence of ankylosing 
spondylitis requiring antirheumatic medication among 87,000 
inhabitants of Kuopio, Finland. In 2000, the annual incidence was 
6.9 per 100,000 adults (95% CI, 6.0-7.8), very similar to the inci-
dence rate in Rochester, MN, and the prevalence was 1.5 per 1000 
(95% CI, 0.8-2.7), very similar to the prevalence we estimated for 
the KPNC population. In Norway, from 1960 through 1993, the 
annual incidence of ankylosing spondylitis was 8.71 per 100,000 
(95% CI, 6.38-11.04), whereas the estimated point prevalence was 
2.6 per 1000 on January 1, 1990.12 Other reports of the occurrence 
of ankylosing spondylitis have been reviewed.13 The prevalence 
of ankylosing spondylitis was much lower, 0.30 per 1000 (95% 
CI, 0.26-0.33) in Greece from 1983 through 2002,14 whereas in 
Japan it was 0.095 per 1000, based on 990 cases.15 The prevalence 
of ankylosing spondylitis has been reported to be relatively high in 
populations indigenous to circumpolar regions.15-18 
Key differences between this report and earlier reports include 
the size and diversity of the study populations, with the Rochester, 
Norway, and Sweden populations being largely white with a more 
restricted genetic background, and the Northern California popula-
tion reported here being more racially and ethnically diverse. The 
KPNC population is more diverse than the US population and 
is 50% white, 6% African American, 22% Hispanic, and 21% 
Asian.19,20 Differing calendar periods, disease duration (which af-
fects prevalence estimates), methods for case ascertainment, and 
fulfillment of diagnostic vs classification criteria are other potential 
differences that make these reports somewhat difficult to directly 
compare with one another. 
The 2009-2010 NHANES study is the largest effort to date 
to assess the prevalence of axSpA in the US.4 They calculated the 
prevalence of axSpA to be 14 per 1000 in US adults. This figure is 
6 times higher than the prevalence we estimated from the KPNC 
population. There are several possible explanations for this discrep-
ancy. First, there are major differences in the study designs. Whereas 
NHANES was designed to actively search for axSpA in a prospec-
tive manner in the general US population, the KPNC study was a 
retrospective analysis of computer records from a community-based 
patient population. To assess the prevalence of axSpA, NHANES 
investigators used a specifically designed case ascertainment tool 
that systematically searched for spondyloarthritis features found 
during spondyloarthritis-focused physical examinations, as well as 
systematically assessed for HLA-B27, applying the criteria of Amor 
and the European Spondyloarthritis Study Group.1,3 In contrast, cli-
nicians in KPNC were not actively searching for spondyloarthritis, 
and the study design is a retrospective capture of the computerized 
data for diagnoses made not just by specialists but also by primary 
 8
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-151
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Diagnostic Prevalence of Ankylosing Spondylitis Using Computerized Health Care Data, 1996 to 2009: Underrecognition in a US Health Care Setting 
care physicians, and made without applying these classification 
criteria. Strand et al5 estimated the prevalence of axSpA in the 
US to be 7 per 1000, and 3 per 1000 for ankylosing spondylitis, 
half that reported by NHANES, despite being conducted in US 
rheumatologists’ practices. Our study showed that many patients 
suspected of spondyloarthritis were not referred by primary care 
clinicians to rheumatologists, supported by our data showing that 
48% of all 720.X cases were ankylosing spondylitis (720.0) but 94% 
of 720.X cases seen by rheumatologists were ankylosing spondylitis. 
The second major reason for the low prevalence of axSpA in our 
study may suggest underascertainment of these cases in clinical 
practice. Indeed, the necessary data to support classifying patients 
according to our study case definition (much less apply the formal 
classification criteria for axSpA or ankylosing spondylitis) were 
frequently absent in the KPNC records. We also call attention to 
the distinction between population prevalence, the proportion 
of patients with a diagnosed disease of interest throughout the 
entire population, vs diagnostic prevalence (which we assessed 
in this study) Diagnostic prevalence is the proportion of people 
who have a diagnosis of the disease based on diagnostic codes, 
physician diagnoses, or other features determined when they seek 
medical attention. For most conditions, some patients will have 
the disease of interest, yet it is undiagnosed; diagnostic prevalence 
would not include these patients and therefore would be expected 
to underestimate the true disease prevalence. The study by Strand 
et al5 noted that the US rheumatologists did not diagnose one-
fourth of cases of axSpA even though they fulfilled the Assessment 
of SpondyloArthritis International Society classification criteria 
and were subsequently discovered by retrospective chart assess-
ment. It is likely that the underascertainment of these cases in 
general practice by nonspecialists is even higher, indicating a need 
for increased awareness.21-23 
Characteristic
n (%)
Sex, male
66 (83)
Age, years
18-29
9 (11)
30-39
18 (23)
40-49
22 (27)
50-59
15 (19)
60-69
11 (14)
70-89
5 (6)
Race/ethnicity
White
36 (45)
Hispanic
11 (14)
Asian
11 (14)
African American
2 (2)
Other/multiracial/unknown
20 (25)
Disease duration, years
0-4 
12 (15)
5-9 
13 (16)
10-19
14 (18)
≥ 20 
34 (42)
Not recorded
7(9)
Laboratory and imaging tests
HLA-B27 test performed
35 (44)
HLA-B27 positive (% of those tested)
12 (34)
X-rays of SI joints and/or spine
61 (76)
CT of SI joints and/or spine
6 (8)
MRI of SI joints and/or spine
16 (20)
Associated immune-mediated disease diagnoses (present at any time)
None or unmentioned
60 (75)
Psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis
2 (2)
JIA/JRA
1 (1)
Inflammatory bowel disease
2 (2)
Reactive arthritis
4 (5)
Undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy
2 (2)
Other
7 (9)
Characteristic
n (%)
Joint involvement by signs/symptoms
Lumbar spine
44 (55)
SI joint/hip
21 (26)
Cervical spine/neck
10 (13)
Shoulder
2 (3)
Thoracic spine
4 (5)
Knee
3 (4)
Ankle
3 (4)
Not recorded
24 (30)
Complications
Uveitis or iritis
19 (24)
Kyphosis
4 (5)
Achilles tendinitis
2 (3)
Enthesitis
1 (1)
None
55 (69)
Positive Schober test 
31 (39)
Family history of autoimmune diseasea
Mother/father/sibling 
19 (24)
Grandparent/distant relative
8 (10)
Medication useb 
Oral glucocorticoids
27 (34)
Etanercept
14 (18)
Adalimumab
5 (6)
Infliximab
4 (5)
a Family history of any of the following diseases: Addison disease, adult Still disease, 
alopecia areata, ankylosing spondylitis or axial spondyloarthritis, asthma, autoimmune 
hepatitis, Behçet syndrome, CREST syndrome, Crohn disease, dermatomyositis/
polymyositis, diabetes (type 1), Graves disease, Guillain-Barré syndrome, idiopathic 
thrombocytopenic purpura, inflammatory bowel disease, JIA/JRA, Meniere disease, 
mixed connective tissue disease, myasthenia gravis, pemphigus vulgaris, pernicious 
anemia, primary biliary cirrhosis, Sjögren syndrome, psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, 
Raynaud disease, Reiter syndrome (reactive arthritis), rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, 
spondyloarthropathy excluding ankylosing spondylitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, 
systemic sclerosis (scleroderma), Hashimoto thyroiditis, ulcerative colitis, uveitis/iritis, 
and vasculitis. 
b Used anytime between 1996 and 2009.
CT = computed tomography scan; HLA = human leukocyte antigen; JIA/JRA = juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis or juvenile rheumatoid arthritis; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; 
SI = sacroiliac.
Table 2. Demographic and disease manifestations among 80 confirmed cases of ankylosing spondylitis from Kaiser Permanente 
Northern California, 1996 to 2009
 9
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-151
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Diagnostic Prevalence of Ankylosing Spondylitis Using Computerized Health Care Data, 1996 to 2009: Underrecognition in a US Health Care Setting 
A third reason for the low prevalence of axSpA in our study may 
be that some patients with chronic low back pain are cared for by 
chiropractors, not physicians. Such patients will not be found in 
Health Plan data but will be captured in population-based studies 
like NHANES. 
For all these reasons, and because early identification and treat-
ment of axSpA might prevent patients from progressing to ankylos-
ing spondylitis, it is important to identify these conditions earlier. 
Early identification might be facilitated by an educational campaign 
directed at clinicians, or a screening program targeted at patients 
who have back pain with inflammatory features that began at an 
early age of onset (eg, age < 40 years).24 
We required patients to have at least one year of enrollment 
in KPNC to be included in the study. Differing amounts of data 
available in future studies could affect the estimated prevalence of 
ankylosing spondylitis and its manifestations, and should be con-
sidered when comparing across populations. 
The timeframe of the study prevented us from confirming cases 
of axSpA,25,26 and we recognize the possibility that some cases that 
could not be confirmed as ankylosing spondylitis nevertheless had 
some features that might suggest this condition (eg, concomitant 
psoriatic arthritis, 2 or more rheumatologist diagnoses). However, 
we were able to confirm potential ankylosing spondylitis cases. Only 
1610 (29%) of the 5568 patients with at least one 720.X diagnosis 
in the present study population were inferred to truly have ankylos-
ing spondylitis, suggesting that a single diagnosis code alone is not 
appropriate. The best performing algorithm (based on maximizing 
PPV) required 2 or more computerized diagnoses by a rheumatologist 
and had a sensitivity of 67% and a PPV of 81%. Other investigators 
have used computerized health care data to ascertain the prevalence 
of ankylosing spondylitis,11,27-33 but only 2 studies of which we are 
aware have validated a case-finding algorithm for ankylosing spon-
dylitis.31,34 The Veterans Affairs study reviewed medical records for 
10 patients with 1 or more rheumatologist-assigned diagnostic code 
for ankylosing spondylitis as well as for other patients with rheumatic 
diagnoses.31 The study investigators reported a single diagnosis in the 
Rheumatology Department to have a PPV of 83% (CI, 78%-89%) 
with a sensitivity of 91% (CI, 87%-95%), although they did not 
include nonrheumatologists’ diagnoses of ankylosing spondylitis in 
the denominator when computing sensitivity. As in the present study, 
requiring use of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs greatly re-
duced the sensitivity of case finding and was not helpful.31 A separate 
study conducted in The Health Improvement Network involving 85 
patients found that a single diagnostic code for ankylosing spondylitis 
had a PPV of 72%, and the best performing algorithm for ankylosing 
spondylitis had a PPV of 89% and required 2 ankylosing spondylitis 
codes more than 7 days apart.34 It is possible that rheumatologists 
assigned ankylosing spondylitis diagnoses to patients who actually 
had nonradiographic axSpA, which would have lowered the PPV. 
This circumstance may lessen with transition to use of the ICD-10 
system given that the relevant diagnostic codes are somewhat more 
dissimilar between ankylosing spondylitis (M45) and other speci-
fied inflammatory spondylopathies such as nonradiographic axSpA 
(M46.8). We also acknowledge that the sensitivity computed was 
predicated on an initial case-finding strategy that used ICD-9 codes. 
Alternate approaches (eg, presence of HLA-B27 or physician notes 
mentioning ankylosing spondylitis in the electronic health record) 
may be useful in the future to maximize sensitivity.
A positive HLA-B27 test has been strongly linked to ankylosing 
spondylitis. HLA-B27 has a very high prevalence among the native 
peoples of the circumpolar arctic and the subarctic regions of Eur-
asia and North America and in some regions of Melanesia, and it 
is present throughout Eurasia; however, the genotype is virtually 
absent among native populations of South America, Australia, and 
many equatorial and Southern African populations.12 In the sample 
of our 80 confirmed ankylosing spondylitis cases, only 45% were 
white, and only 44% were tested for HLA-B27. It is possible that 
only patients for whom the diagnosis of ankylosing spondylitis 
was uncertain were tested for the presence of HLA-B27. Restated, 
patients for whom physicians had greater certainty of ankylosing 
spondylitis on the basis of clinical and radiographic findings may 
be less likely to be tested for HLA-B27. Because these patients pre-
sumably would have a higher prevalence of HLA-B27, this might 
account for the lower-than-expected prevalence of HLA-B27 in 
our sample, and the fact that most (two-thirds) were not tested. 
Methods used for case finding in any study will depend on the 
research question, the setting, and the costs of overascertainment 
and underascertainment with respect to validity and precision. A 
case-finding strategy that is insensitive but has a high PPV, such as 
recruitment through rheumatology clinics, likely will yield fewer 
and more severe cases. The algorithms we examined provided the 
typical trade-off between specificity (and PPV) and sensitivity. A 
case-finding algorithm with high sensitivity is useful for studies 
requiring complete ascertainment but requires additional resources 
to confirm cases through a second-stage review of medical records. 
Case-finding algorithms with higher specificity and PPVs are useful 
when two-stage case ascertainment is impractical. We found that 
two or more computerized diagnoses for ankylosing spondylitis 
from a rheumatologist provided the best combination of sensitiv-
ity and PPV. 
CONCLUSION
Identification of an algorithm using computerized data enables 
efficient identification of ankylosing spondylitis and should be 
useful for advancing understanding of medical service utilization, 
long-term outcomes, and medication safety. Studying the natural 
history of the disease and the potential for early intervention to 
prevent progression from axSpA to ankylosing spondylitis is likely 
to be fruitful in future investigations. v
Disclosure Statement 
Dr Herrinton has had a research contract in the past three years with 
MedImmune, Gaithersburg, MD, that was unrelated to the present work. 
Dr Wu received research funding from AbbVie, North Chicago, IL; Amgen Inc, 
Thousand Oaks, CA; AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD; Boehringer Ingelheim 
GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany; Coherus Biosciences, Redwood City, CA; Dermira, 
Menlo Park, CA; Eli Lilly and Co, Indianapolis, IN; Janssen Pharmaceuticals, 
Titusville, NJ; Merck, Kenilworth, NJ; Novartis Corp, Basel, Switzerland; Pfizer 
Inc, New York, NY; Regeneron, Tarrytown, NY; Sandoz International, Holzkirchen, 
Germany; and Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd, Mumbai, India. He is a 
consultant for AbbVie; Amgen; and Celgene Corp, Summit, NJ. Dr Harrold is an 
epidemiologic consultant for the Consortium of Rheumatology Researchers of 
North America (CORRONA), Southborough, MA. Dr Deodhar is supported by 
research grants from AbbVie; Boehringer Ingelheim; Janssen; Novartis; Pfizer; 
 10
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-151
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Diagnostic Prevalence of Ankylosing Spondylitis Using Computerized Health Care Data, 1996 to 2009: Underrecognition in a US Health Care Setting 
and UCB, Brussels, Belgium. He serves on the advisory boards of AbbVie, 
Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Janssen, Novartis, Pfizer, and UCB. In the 
previous 12 months, Dr Gelfand received honoraria for consulting for AbbVie; 
AstraZeneca; Celgene; Coherus; Eli Lilly; Janssen Biologics (formerly Centocor), 
Barnahely, Ireland; Sanofi, Bridgewater, New Jersey; Merck; Novartis; Endo 
Pharmaceuticals Inc, Malvern, PA; and Pfizer. He receives research grants (to 
the trustees of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia) from Abbvie, Amgen, 
Eli Lilly, Janssen, Novartis, Regeneron, and Pfizer and received payment from 
these companies for continuing medical education work related to psoriasis. Dr 
Curtis receives consulting fees or honoraria and research support from Roche/
Genentech, South San Francisco, CA; UCB; Janssen; CORRONA; Amgen; 
Pfizer; Bristol-Myers Squibb Co, New York, NY; Crescendo Bioscience, South San 
Francisco, CA; and Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by grants from the National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases (1RC1AI086107-01), National Institutes of Health 
(NIH), Bethesda, MD. Dr Harrold was supported by Grant K23AR053856 
from the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases 
(NIAMS), NIH. Dr Curtis receives salary support from the NIH (AR053351) 
and the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), Rockville, MD 
(R01HS018517). Dr Wu receives salary support from AHRQ (R01HS021589). 
Dr Gelfand receives salary support from NIH/NIAMS Grant K24AR064310. 
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health Communications provided editorial 
assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Curtis JR, Harrold LR, Asgari MM, et al. Diagnostic prevalence of 
ankylosing spondylitis using computerized health care data, 1996 to 2009: 
Underrecognition in a US health care setting. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-151. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-151.
References
 1. Poddubnyy D, Rudwaleit M, Haibel H, et al. Rates and predictors of radiographic 
sacroiliitis progression over 2 years in patients with axial spondyloarthritis. Ann Rheum 
Dis 2011 Aug;70(8):1369-74. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ard.2010.145995.
 2. Dougados M, van der Linden S, Juhlin R, et al. The European Spondylarthropathy 
Study Group preliminary criteria for the classification of spondylarthropathy. Arthritis 
Rheum 1991 Oct;34(10):1218-27. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.1780341003.
 3. van der Linden SM, Valkenburg HA, de Jongh BM, Cats A. The risk of developing 
ankylosing spondylitis in HLA-B27 positive individuals. A comparison of relatives of 
spondylitis patients with the general population. Arthritis Rheum 1984 Mar;27(3):241-9. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.1780270301.
 4. Reveille JD, Witter JP, Weisman MH. Prevalence of axial spondylarthritis in the United 
States: estimates from a cross-sectional survey. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2012 
Jun;64(6):905-10. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/acr.21621.
 5. Strand V, Rao SA, Shillington AC, Cifaldi MA, McGuire M, Ruderman EM. Prevalence 
of axial spondyloarthritis in United States rheumatology practices: Assessment of 
SpondyloArthritis International Society criteria versus rheumatology expert clinical 
diagnosis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2013 Aug;65(8):1299-306. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/acr.21994. 
 6. Table 1. Population by race and Hispanic or Latino origin, for all ages and for 18 years 
and over, for the United States: 2000 [Internet]. Washington, DC: US Census Bureau; 
2001 Apr 2 [cited 2016 Feb 10]. Available from: www.census.gov/population/cen2000/
phc-t1/tab01.txt.
 7. Garwood F. Fiducial limits for the Poisson distribution. Biometrika 1936 Dec;28(3/4):437-
42. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2333958.
 8. Carbone LD, Cooper C, Michet CJ, Atkinson EJ, O’Fallon WM, Melton LJ 3rd. Ankylosing 
spondylitis in Rochester, Minnesota, 1935-1989. Is the epidemiology changing? Arthritis 
Rheum 1992 Dec;35(12):1476-82. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.1780351211.
 9. Kaipiainen-Seppänen O, Aho K. Incidence of chronic inflammatory joint diseases 
in Finland in 1995. J Rheumatol 2000 Jan;27(1):94-100. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.3109/03009749709065692.
 10. Kaipiainen-Seppanen O, Aho K, Heliovaara M. Incidence and prevalence of ankylosing 
spondylitis in Finland. J Rheumatol 1997 Mar;24(3):496-9.
 11. Savolainen E, Kaipiainen-Seppänen O, Kröger L, Luosujärvi R. Total incidence and 
distribution of inflammatory joint diseases in a defined population: results from the 
Kuopio 2000 arthritis survey. J Rheumatol 2003 Nov;30(11):2460-8.
 12. Bakland G, Nossent HC, Gran JT. Incidence and prevalence of ankylosing spondylitis 
in Northern Norway. Arthritis Rheum 2005 Dec 15;53(6):850-5. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/art.21577.
 13. Gabriel SE, Michaud K. Epidemiological studies in incidence, prevalence, mortality, and 
comorbidity of the rheumatic diseases. Arthritis Res Ther 2009;11(3):229. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1186/ar2669.
 14. Alamanos Y, Papadopoulos NG, Voulgari PV, Karakatsanis A, Siozos C, Drosos AA. 
Epidemiology of ankylosing spondylitis in Northwest Greece, 1983-2002. Rheumatology 
(Oxford) 2004 May;43(5):615-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keh133.
 15. Hukuda S, Minami M, Saito T, et al. Spondyloarthropathies in Japan: nationwide 
questionnaire survey performed by the Japan Ankylosing Spondylitis Society. J 
Rheumatol 2001 Mar;28(3):554-9.
 16. Benevolenskaya LI, Boyer GS, Erdesz S, et al. Spondylarthropathic diseases in 
indigenous circumpolar populations of Russia and Alaska. Rev Rhum Engl Ed 1996 
Dec;63(11):815-22.
 17. Boyer GS, Templin DW, Cornoni-Huntley JC, et al. Prevalence of spondyloarthropathies 
in Alaskan Eskimos. J Rheumatol 1994 Dec;21(12):2292-7.
 18. Lawrence RC, Everett DF, Benevolenskaya LI, et al. Spondyloarthropathies in 
circumpolar populations: I. Design and methods of United States and Russian studies. 
Arctic Med Res 1996 Oct;55(4):187-94.
 19. United States Census Bureau. Quick facts Table [Internet]. Washington, DC: US 
Department of Commerce; 2015 [cited 2016 Mar 28]. Available from: www.census.gov/
quickfacts/table/PST045215/00.
 20. Gordon, NP. Similarity of the Adult Kaiser Permanente Membership in Northern 
California to the Insured and General Population in Northern California: Statistics from 
the 2011 California Health Interview Survey [Intranet]. Oakland, CA: Kaiser Permanente 
Northern California Department of Research; 2015 June 19 [cited 2016 Mar 28]. 
Available from: www.dor.kaiser.org/external/WorkArea/DownloadAsset.aspx?id=12627. 
[Password protected.]
 21. Dillon CF, Hirsch R. The United States National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey and the epidemiology of ankylosing spondylitis. Am J Med Sci 2011 
Apr;341(4):281-3. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/maj.0b013e31820f8c83.
 22. Helmick CG, Felson DT, Lawrence RC, et al; National Arthritis Data Workgroup. Estimates 
of the prevalence of arthritis and other rheumatic conditions in the United States. Part I. 
Arthritis Rheum 2008 Jan;58(1):15-25. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.23177.
 23. Reveille JD. Epidemiology of spondyloarthritis in North America. Am J Med Sci 2011 
Apr;341(4):284-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/maj.0b013e31820f8c99.
 24. Poddubnyy D, Vahldiek J, Spiller I, et al. Evaluation of 2 screening strategies for early 
identification of patients with axial spondyloarthritis in primary care. J Rheumatol 2011 
Nov;38(11):2452-60. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3899/jrheum.110070.
 25. Rudwaleit M, van der Heijde D, Landewé R, et al. The development of Assessment of 
SpondyloArthritis International Society classification criteria for axial spondyloarthritis 
(part II): validation and final selection. Ann Rheum Dis 2009 Jun;68(6):777-83. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ard.2009.108233.
 26. Rudwaleit M, van der Heijde D, Landewé R, et al. The Assessment of SpondyloArthritis 
International Society classification criteria for peripheral spondyloarthritis and for 
spondyloarthritis in general. Ann Rheum Dis 2011 Jan;70(1):25-31. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1136/ard.2010.133645.
 27. Askling J, Klareskog L, Blomqvist P, Fored M, Feltelius N. Risk for malignant lymphoma 
in ankylosing spondylitis: a nationwide Swedish case-control study. Ann Rheum Dis 
2006 Sep;65(9):1184-7. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ard.2005.047514.
 28. Bremander A, Petersson IF, Bergman S, Englund M. Population-based estimates of 
common comorbidities and cardiovascular disease in ankylosing spondylitis. Arthritis 
Care Res (Hoboken) 2011 Apr;63(4):550-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/acr.20408.
 29. Chen HH, Chen TJ, Chen YM, Ying-Ming C, Chen DY. Gender differences in ankylosing 
spondylitis-associated cumulative healthcare utilization: a population-based cohort 
study. Clinics (Sao Paulo) 2011;66(2):251-4. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/s1807-
59322011000200012.
 30. Kang JH, Chen YH, Lin HC. Comorbidity profiles among patients with ankylosing 
spondylitis: a nationwide population-based study. Ann Rheum Dis 2010 Jun;69(6): 
1165-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ard.2009.116178.
 31. Singh JA, Holmgren AR, Krug H, Noorbaloochi S. Accuracy of the diagnoses of 
spondylarthritides in Veterans Affairs medical center databases. Arthritis Rheum 2007 
May 15;57(4):648-55. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.22682.
 32. Szabo SM, Levy AR, Rao SR, et al. Increased risk of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular 
diseases in individuals with ankylosing spondylitis: a population-based study. Arthritis 
Rheum 2011 Nov;63(11):3294-304. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.30581.
 33. Trontzas P, Andrianakos A, Miyakis S, et al. Seronegative spondyloarthropathies in 
Greece: a population-based study of prevalence, clinical pattern, and management. 
The ESORDIG study. Clin Rheumatol 2005 Nov;24(6):583-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s10067-005-1106-9.
 34. Dubreuil M, Peloquin C, Zhang Y, Choi HK, Inman RD, Neogi T. Validity of ankylosing 
spondylitis diagnoses in The Health Improvement Network. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug 
Saf 2016 2016 Apr;25(4):399-404. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/pds.3952.
 11
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-217
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Safe and Effective Implementation of Telestroke  
in a US Community Hospital Setting
Kori Sauser-Zachrison, MD, MSc; Ernest Shen, PhD; Navdeep Sangha, MD; Zahra Ajani, MD;  
William P Neil, MD; Michael K Gould, MD, MS; Dustin Ballard, MD; Adam L Sharp, MD, MS 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-217
E-pub: 07/25/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-217
ABSTRACT
Context: There is substantial hospital-level variation in use of tissue plasminogen 
activator (tPA) for treatment of acute ischemic stroke. Telestroke services can bring 
neurologic expertise to hospitals with fewer resources. 
Objective: To determine whether implementation of a telestroke intervention in a large 
integrated health system would lead to increased tPA utilization and would change rates 
of hemorrhagic complications. 
Design: A stepped-wedge cluster randomized trial of 11 community hospitals con-
nected to 2 tertiary care centers via telestroke, implemented at each hospital incrementally 
during a 1-year period. We examined pre- and postimplementation data from July 2013 
through January 2015. A 2-level mixed-effects logistic regression model accounted for 
the staggered rollout. 
Main Outcome Measures: Receipt of tPA. Secondary outcome was the rate of signifi-
cant hemorrhagic complications. 
Results: Of the 2657 patients, demographic and clinical characteristics were similar 
in pre- and postintervention cohorts. Utilization of tPA increased from 6.3% before the 
intervention to 10.9% after the intervention, without a significant change in complication 
rates. Postintervention patients were more likely to receive tPA than were preintervention 
patients (odds ratio = 2.0; 95% confidence interval = 1.2-3.4). Before implementation, 
8 of the 10 community hospitals were significantly less likely to administer tPA than the 
highest-volume tertiary care center; however, after implementation, 9 of the 10 were at 
least as likely to administer tPA as the highest-volume center. 
Conclusion: Telestroke implementation in a regional integrated health system was 
safe and effective. Community hospitals’ rates of tPA utilization quickly increased and 
were similar to the largest-volume tertiary care center.
INTRODUCTION
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) is 
the only treatment approved by the US 
Food and Drug Administration for acute 
ischemic stroke, but tPA continues to be 
underutilized.1-3 There are many reasons 
for this underutilization, including patient 
factors as well as physician and hospital 
factors. Among the patient factors that 
exclude patients from receiving tPA are 
that patients present outside the treatment 
window or otherwise fail to meet inclu-
sion criteria for the treatment. Physician 
and hospital-level factors contributing 
to less-than-ideal tPA utilization include 
emergency physicians’ discomfort with the 
medication and its risk profile, and vary-
ing levels of hospital resources and sup-
port. Indeed, in a previous analysis of our 
14-hospital regional integrated health care 
system, we found considerable hospital-
level variation in tPA utilization.4 
Because of this substantial variation 
between hospitals’ tPA utilization in our 
health care system, a systemwide telestroke 
project was implemented. Telestroke refers 
to the use of telecommunication technolo-
gies to provide medical information and 
services for stroke care, and it is a valuable 
tool to fill gaps in access to acute stroke 
services.5,6 In the provision of emergent 
neurologic expertise, telestroke may en-
able Medical Centers to overcome major 
barriers to tPA utilization6,7 and has a 
Class I recommendation based on Level 
A evidence supporting this application.8 
Kaiser Permanente Southern California 
(KPSC) is ideally organized for implemen-
tation of telestroke. The system includes 
2 tertiary Medical Centers with in-house 
stroke neurology and neurologic inten-
sive care units, as well as 12 community 
Medical Centers that lack such resources. 
By connecting the resources of the ter-
tiary centers with the needs at the other 
hospitals, implementation of telestroke 
could improve the care of all patients with 
ischemic stroke in the system.
METHODS
We performed a stepped-wedge cluster 
randomized trial; this design has advantage 
over a simple pre-post analysis in that it 
allows for modeling the effect of time on 
the effectiveness of the intervention. The 
telestroke intervention was implemented 
in 11 Medical Centers and incrementally 
rolled out over the study period. Each 
Medical Center’s Emergency Depart-
ment (ED) was connected to an on-call 
stroke neurologist through telemedicine 
technology. Emergency physicians were 
encouraged to consult the on-call stroke 
neurologist via telestroke on any patient 
presenting with signs and symptoms 
Kori Sauser-Zachrison, MD, MSc, is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Emergency Medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School in Boston. E-mail: ksauser@mgh.harvard.edu. Ernest Shen, PhD, is a Biostatistician in the Department of 
Research and Evaluation for Kaiser Permanente in Pasadena, CA. E-mail: ernest.shen@kp.org. Navdeep Sangha, MD, is a Neurologist 
at the Los Angeles Medical Center in CA. E-mail: navdeep.x.sangha@kp.org. Zahra Ajani, MD, is a Neurologist at the Los Angeles 
Medical Center in CA. E-mail: zahra.a.ajani@kp.org. William P Neil, MD, is a Neurologist at the San Diego Medical Center in CA. 
E-mail: william.p.neil@kp.org. Michael K Gould, MD, MS, is a Research Scientist in the Department of Research and Evaluation for 
Kaiser Permanente in Pasadena, CA. E-mail: michael.k.gould@kp.org. Dustin Ballard, MD, is an Emergency Physician at the San Rafael 
Medical Center in CA. E-mail: dustin.ballard@kp.org. Adam L Sharp, MD, MS, is a Physician in the Department of Research 
 
and Evaluation for Kaiser Permanente in Pasadena, CA. E-mail: adam.l.sharp@kp.org.
credits available for this article — see page 128.
 12
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-217
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Safe and Effective Implementation of Telestroke in a US Community Hospital Setting 
suggestive of stroke such as sudden dif-
ficulty with speech, strength, sensation, 
balance, or vision, and arriving within 
6 hours of onset. Our primary objective 
was to determine the effectiveness of the 
intervention as indicated by increased 
tPA utilization after implementation. Our 
secondary objective was to assess for safety 
of the intervention by examining whether 
there were changes in rates of tPA-related 
bleeding complications.
Data Source and Populations
Structured data from electronic health 
and administrative records identified all 
patients presenting to 1 of 11 participat-
ing EDs in our health care system between 
July 1, 2013, and January 15, 2015, with 
a primary diagnosis of ischemic stroke 
using International Classification of Dis-
eases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9) Codes 
433.xx, 434.xx, and 436. Because 2 of 
the community-based sites had previously 
implemented telestroke through outside 
vendors, and 1 hospital has 24-hour inhos-
pital neurologist availability because of a 
neurology residency, we excluded patients 
from those sites. Instead, we focused our 
analysis on the 11 community-based sites 
in which telestroke was a new interven-
tion. These Medical Centers had a stag-
gered implementation of the telestroke 
intervention. Medical Center 1 began 
implementation on August 15, 2013, and 
the other centers began on the following 
dates in 2014: Medical Center 2 on Janu-
ary 20, Medical Centers 3 and 4 on May 
19, Medical Center 5 on June 11, Medical 
Center 6 on July 2, Medical Centers 7 and 
8 on July 28, Medical Center 9 on August 
25, Medical Center 10 on September 2, 
and Medical Center 11 on December 16. 
Demographic and clinical details were 
extracted for each patient, as well as tPA 
utilization and an indicator of whether 
telestroke was used for each visit. We ex-
cluded patients younger than age 18 years, 
those with a previous stroke within 90 days, 
and those with missing or implausible brain 
imaging or tPA administration times. The 
data were combined with predefined rollout 
dates to create indicators of intervention 
status by Medical Center per rollout month. 
Each patient was categorized as preinter-
vention or postintervention on the basis of 
whether telestroke had been implemented 
at the presenting hospital by the date of 
patient presentation. Human subjects ap-
proval was obtained through the KPSC 
institutional review board.
Outcome Measures
The primary outcome was tPA receipt, 
identified by pharmacy code. Our sec-
ondary safety outcome was intracranial 
or gastrointestinal bleeding, identified 
by ICD-9 codes (432.xx, 430, 431, and 
578.xx). One of the authors (AS) reviewed 
all charts of patients with questions of the 
outcome variables. 
Statistical Analysis
Patient characteristics were described 
using medians and quartiles or means 
with standard deviations for all continuous 
variables, and frequencies and percentages 
for all categorical variables. All analyses 
were 2-tailed and were performed at a 
significance level of 0.05. For continuous 
variables with missing values, we used 
mean imputation and constructed indi-
cator variables for missingness. For cat-
egorical variables, an “unknown” category 
was created, along with the same missing 
indicators. This ensured that study group 
comparisons could be constructed for all 
observations.
The outcome of interest was defined 
as tPA receipt at a given encounter. It 
was operationalized both at the patient 
level to assess patient characteristics and 
at the medical-center level to assess vari-
ability in rates between centers and more 
appropriately account for effects of the 
study design. For the former, we used lo-
gistic regression to assess the intervention 
effects on tPA utilization at individual 
encounters. For the latter, we used nega-
tive binomial regression to assess whether 
the telestroke intervention effect varied 
Table 1. Patient demographics
 
Demographic
Preintervention  
(n = 1613)a 
Postintervention 
 
(n = 1044)a 
Total  
(N = 2657)a
 
p value
Age, years, mean (SD)
70.7 (13.6)
71.3 (13.7)
71.0 (13.6)
0.1617
Diagnosis year
2013
768 (47.6)
46 (4.4)
814 (30.6)
< 0.001
2014
845 (52.4)
915 (87.6)
1760 (66.2)
2015
0 (0.0)
83 (8.0)
83 (3.1)
Sex
Women
779 (48.3)
510 (48.9)
1289 (48.5)
0.7796
Men
834 (51.7)
534 (51.1)
1368 (51.5)
Race
White
704 (43.6)
412 (39.5)
1116 (42.0)
0.0003
Black
279 (17.3)
258 (24.7)
537 (20.2)
Hispanic
464 (28.8)
278 (26.6)
742 (27.9)
Asian/Pacific Islander
157 (9.7)
88 (8.4)
245 (9.2)
Other
4 (0.2)
5 (0.5)
9 (0.3)
Unknown
5 (0.3)
3 (0.3)
8 (0.3)
Comorbidities
Previous stroke
98 (6.1)
60 (5.7)
158 (5.9)
0.7266
Diabetes
600 (37.2)
374 (35.8)
974 (36.7)
0.4729
Hypertension
1113 (69.0)
708 (67.8)
1821 (68.5)
0.5203
Atrial fibrillation
280 (17.4)
157 (15.0)
437 (16.4)
0.1150
CHF
212 (13.1)
134 (12.8)
346 (13.0)
0.8178
COPD
100 (6.2)
68 (6.5)
168 (6.3)
0.7455
Valvular heart disease
132 (8.2)
91 (8.7)
223 (8.4)
0.6285
Other characteristics
Elixhauser index, mean (SD)
3.4 (2.4)
3.4 (2.5)
3.4 (2.4)
0.8471
Use of anticoagulant
306 (19.0)
196 (18.8)
502 (18.9)
0.8992
a Data are no. (%) unless indicated otherwise.
CHF = congestive heart failure; COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; SD = standard deviation.
 13
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-217
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Safe and Effective Implementation of Telestroke in a US Community Hospital Setting 
by Medical Center. This approach also 
allowed us to include an offset term (log 
stroke volume) to scale each Medical Cen-
ter’s monthly rate relative to its monthly 
stroke volume.
The model included indicators for 
Medical Centers to account for baseline 
variability between centers, indicators 
for exposure and length of exposure to 
the telestroke intervention, and Medical 
Center by intervention interactions to as-
sess the heterogeneity in treatment effects. 
The model adjusted for patient-level demo-
graphic and clinical characteristics. We also 
assessed time-by-intervention interactions 
but found that the intervention effect did 
not appear to vary by length of exposure 
to the telestroke intervention. We also 
tested for interactions with patient race, 
ambulance arrival, and patient sex. Where 
necessary, forest plots were used to assess 
the interactions between the telestroke 
intervention and the relevant variables. 
All analyses were conducted using SAS 9.3 
software (SAS Institute Inc, Cary, NC).
RESULTS
Of the 2657 patients included in our 
analysis, 1613 presented in the preinter-
vention period (before implementation 
of telestroke), and 1044 presented in the 
postintervention period. The pre- and 
postintervention cohorts were similar in 
demographic characteristics and medical 
history (Table 1).
As detailed in Table 2, tPA utilization 
increased from 6.3% to 10.9% from the 
pre- to postintervention period, with no 
meaningful change in rates of bleeding 
complications. Telestroke was engaged 
in 24% of patient encounters in the 
postintervention period. 
Primary Outcome
Patients treated in the postintervention 
period were more likely to receive tPA 
than those treated before the intervention 
(odds ratio = 2.0, 95% confidence interval 
= 1.17-3.4). 
Before telestroke implementation, 8 of 
the 10 community Medical Centers were 
significantly less likely to administer tPA 
to patients with ischemic stroke compared 
with the largest-volume stroke center. After 
the telestroke implementation, however, 
9 of the 10 community Medical Centers 
were at least as likely to administer tPA to 
ischemic stroke patients as that highest-
volume stroke center (Figure 1). The effect 
of the intervention did not vary signifi-
cantly by patient race, ambulance arrival, 
or arrival off-hours (5 pm-8 am Monday 
to Friday, or anytime Saturday or Sunday).
Secondary Outcomes
There were no meaningful differ-
ences in intracranial or gastrointestinal 
bleeding complications from the pre- to 
 
postintervention periods, and overall bleed-
ing complications was slightly lower after 
the intervention (5.1% vs 4.9%; Table 2). 
Table 2. Details of patient encounters
 
Patient encounter
Preintervention  
(n = 1613)a
Postintervention 
(n = 1044)a
Total  
(N = 2657)a
 
p value
Transferred from a skilled  
nursing facility
10 (0.6)
8 (0.8)
18 (0.7)
0.6534
Transported via ambulance
520 (32.2)
307 (29.4)
827 (31.1)
0.1236
Admitted during off-hoursb
424 (26.3)
283 (27.1)
707 (26.6)
0.6400
Door-to-imaging time, minutes
Mean (SD)
61.8 (42.3)
55.3 (37.7)
59.2 (40.7)
< 0.001
Median (IQR)
56 (29-89)
44 (25-79)
51 (26-85)
Door-to-imaging time categories, minutes
Preregistrationc
44 (2.7)
6 (0.6)
50 (1.9)
< 0.001
< 30
379 (23.5)
349 (33.4)
728 (27.4)
31-60
454 (28.1)
307 (29.4)
761 (28.6)
61-90
356 (22.1)
186 (17.8)
542 (20.4)
91-120
200 (12.4)
119 (11.4)
319 (12.0)
> 120
180 (11.2)
77 (7.4)
257 (9.7)
Door-to-needle time, minutes
Mean (SD)
75.4 (41.3)
62.6 (28.4)
68.6 (35.5)
0.019
Median (IQR)
66 (46-96)
55 (47-69)
58 (46-82)
Door-to-needle time categories, minutes
≤ 30
8 (7.9)
2 (1.8)
10 (0.4)
0.001
31-60
36 (35.6)
73 (64.0)
109 (4.1)
61-90
28 (27.7)
27 (23.7)
55 (2.1)
91-120
19 (18.8)
7 (6.1)
26 (1.0)
121-150
3 (3.0)
2 (1.8)
5 (0.2)
151-180
3 (3.0)
2 (1.8)
5 (0.2)
181-210
3 (3.0)
0 (0.0)
3 (0.1)
211-240
1 (1.0)
1 (0.9)
2 (0.1)
Bleeding complications
Any 
83 (5.1)
51 (4.9)
134 (5.0)
0.7643
Intracranial
17 (1.1)
15 (1.4)
32 (1.2)
0.3769
Subarachnoid
6 (0.4)
4 (0.4)
10 (0.4)
0.9634
Intracerebral
38 (2.4)
20 (1.9)
58 (2.2)
0.4483
Gastrointestinal
22 (1.4)
12 (1.1)
34 (1.3)
0.6309
Discharge disposition
Home
1186 (73.5)
775 (74.2)
1961 (73.8)
0.4834
Skilled nursing facility
150 (9.3)
106 (10.2)
256 (9.6)
Other
277 (17.2)
163 (15.6)
440 (16.6)
Other clinical factors
Use of telestroke
—
251 (24.0)
—
< 0.001
Received tPA
101 (6.3)
114 (10.9)
215 (8.1)
< 0.001
a Data are no. (%) unless indicated otherwise.
b Off-hours defined as encounters between 5 pm and 8 am weekdays and anytime Saturday or Sunday.
c Preregistration refers to patients who received brain imaging within 60 minutes before official Emergency Department 
admission time.
IQR = interquartile range; SD = standard deviation; tPA = tissue plasminogen activator.
 14
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-217
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Safe and Effective Implementation of Telestroke in a US Community Hospital Setting 
There were also improvements in median 
time from door to imaging (preinterven-
tion = 56 minutes vs postintervention = 44 
minutes) and door to needle (66 minutes 
vs 55 minutes).
We also assessed the same Medical 
Center-by-intervention interaction for the 
patient-level data. This additional analysis 
revealed a similar pattern as in Figure 1, 
suggesting that further adjusting for pa-
tient characteristics did not change our 
conclusions. Furthermore, we believe the 
Medical Center-level analysis provides the 
added benefit of scaling the monthly rates 
for each Medical Center by its monthly 
stroke volumes, and thus provides a clearer 
interpretation of the findings.
DISCUSSION
In this stepped-wedge cluster random-
ized trial, we found that implementation 
of a telestroke intervention in our inte-
grated health system improved rates of 
tPA administration for patients with isch-
emic stroke presenting to the community 
Medical Centers in the postintervention 
period. Rates of bleeding complications 
remained acceptably low and did not rise 
with the increased rate of tPA administra-
tion. Our results reinforce the utility of 
telestroke as previously reported. Many 
studies have demonstrated the utility of 
telestroke for assessing stroke severity9-12 
and for increasing the use of tPA among 
eligible patients.13-17 Our findings add 
to this body of literature supporting the 
value of telestroke for improving tPA 
administration rates among patients with 
ischemic stroke presenting to community 
hospitals. We found that telestroke can be 
implemented safely and effectively in com-
munity hospitals, and that the beneficial 
effects (increased tPA utilization) occurred 
quickly after implementation without a 
significant lag period and without any 
corresponding change in complications. 
These findings have important impli-
cations for future delivery of stroke care. 
Particularly in hospitals with limited local 
resources and/or limited access to neuro-
logic expertise, telestroke is an important 
tool to aid in the evaluation and treatment 
of potential stroke. We specifically found 
that unwarranted hospital variability in 
stroke care could be eliminated through 
a standardized telestroke program. Ad-
ditionally, telestroke may aid in triage 
and transfer decisions and in identifying 
patients potentially eligible for endovas-
cular intervention or patients who might 
otherwise benefit from transfer to a stroke 
center. Future work may help to clarify the 
role for telestroke in such decisions. 
Our study does have limitations. Our 
study design does not allow for a calcula-
tion of statistical power. We were unable 
to define the population of patients eligible 
for tPA; our finding of increased tPA utili-
zation reflects an increased rate of tPA use 
among all patients with ischemic stroke. 
However, it is unlikely that our findings 
reflect a simple increase in the propor-
tion of tPA-eligible patients because the 
study was conducted over a short period 
and without any corresponding public 
health messaging. Secondly, telestroke 
was utilized in 24% of cases after the 
intervention, and we do not know what 
distinguished these cases from those that 
did not engage telestroke. The seemingly 
low utilization rate may suggest that most 
patients with stroke arrived beyond the 
therapeutic time window. Additional pa-
tients may have been excluded if the ED 
physician noted obvious contraindications 
to thrombolytic therapy such as recent sur-
gery or anticoagulant use, or if symptoms 
completely resolved before the telestroke 
call. Furthermore, we cannot confirm that 
the 24% of cases in which telestroke was 
utilized were the same cases in which the 
improved tPA rate was realized. Yet in the 
absence of other interventions or quality-
improvement initiatives, it is reasonable to 
attribute the change in tPA utilization to 
the major systematic change that took place 
during this intervention period. Finally, we 
were unable to assess physician satisfaction 
with telestroke. Future work in our system 
should examine whether telestroke remains 
a frequently used tool, clarify the reasons 
Figure 1. Likelihood of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) treatment by Medical Center.
Adjusted odds of tPA receipt for each community Medical Center (MC) relative to odds at largest-volume stroke center. 
Bottom half of forest plot (MC 0 Pre to MC 9 Pre) illustrates relative odds of each MC in preintervention period (Pre). With 
the exception of MC 0 and MC 9, each MC has lower odds of tPA administration. Top half of forest plot (MC 0 Post to MC 
9 Post) illustrates relative odds of each MC in postintervention period (Post). With the exception of MC 8, each MC has 
similar or higher odds of tPA administration relative to highest-volume academic center.
We specifically found that 
unwarranted hospital variability 
in stroke care could be eliminated 
through a standardized 
telestroke program.
 15
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-217
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Safe and Effective Implementation of Telestroke in a US Community Hospital Setting 
for physicians’ activation or deferral of 
telestroke, and confirm physician comfort 
and satisfaction with the use of telestroke 
for patients with ischemic stroke.
CONCLUSION
In our regional integrated health sys-
tem, we found that implementation of a 
telestroke intervention eliminated unwar-
ranted hospital variation in care and led to 
increased rates of tPA utilization among 
patients with acute ischemic stroke, with 
consistently low rates of hemorrhagic com-
plications. Telestroke was implemented 
safely and effectively in this US commu-
nity hospital setting. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgment
 
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health 
Communications provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Sauser-Zachrison K, Shen E, Sangha N, et al. 
Safe and effective implementation of telestroke 
in a US community hospital setting. Perm J 2016 
Fall;20(4):15-217. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/15-217.
References
 1. Qureshi AI, Suri MF, Nasar A, et al. Thrombolysis 
for ischemic stroke in the United States: data from 
National Hospital Discharge Survey 1999-2001. 
Neurosurgery 2005 Oct;57(4):647-54. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1227/01.neu.0000175546.62088.d6.
 2. Katzan IL, Furlan AJ, Lloyd LE, et al. Use of tissue-
type plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke: 
the Cleveland area experience. JAMA 2000 Mar 
1;283(9):1151-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jama.283.9.1151.
 3. Katzan IL, Hammer MD, Hixson ED, Furlan AJ, 
Abou-Chebl A, Nadzam DM; Cleveland Clinic Health 
System Stroke Quality Improvement Team. Utilization 
of intravenous tissue plasminogen activator for acute 
ischemic stroke. Arch Neurol 2004 Mar;61(3):346-50. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archneur.61.3.346.
 4. Sauser-Zachrison K, Shen E, Ajani Z, et al. 
Emergency care of patients with acute ischemic 
stroke in the Kaiser Permanente Southern 
California Integrated Health System. Perm J 2016 
Spring;20(2):10-3. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/15-124.
 5. Schwamm LH, Holloway RG, Amarenco P, et al; 
American Heart Association Stroke Council; 
Interdisciplinary Council on Peripheral Vascular 
Disease. A review of the evidence for the use 
of telemedicine within stroke systems of care: 
a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 
2009 Jul;40(7):2616-34. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1161/strokeaha.109.192360.
 6. Schwamm LH, Audebert HJ, Amarenco P, et al; 
American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council 
on Epidemiology and Prevention; Interdisciplinary 
Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease; Council 
on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention. 
Recommendations for the implementation of 
telemedicine within stroke systems of care: a policy 
statement from the American Heart Association. 
Stroke 2009 Jul;40(7):2635-60. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.192361.
 7. Brown DL, Barsan WG, Lisabeth LD, Gallery ME, 
Morgenstern LB. Survey of emergency physicians 
about recombinant tissue plasminogen activator 
for acute ischemic stroke. Ann Emerg Med 2005 
Jul;46(1):56-60. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
annemergmed.2004.12.025.
 8. Higashida R, Alberts MJ, Alexander DN, et al; 
American Heart Association Advocacy Coordinating 
Committee. Interactions within stroke systems of 
care: a policy statement from the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 
2013 Oct;44(10):2961-84. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1161/STR.0b013e3182a6d2b2.
 9. Shafqat S, Kvedar JC, Guanci MM, Chang Y, 
Schwamm LH. Role for telemedicine in acute stroke. 
Feasibility and reliability of remote administration of 
the NIH stroke scale. Stroke 1999 Oct;30(10):2141-5. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/01.str.30.10.2141.
 10. Wang S, Lee SB, Pardue C, et al. Remote evaluation 
of acute ischemic stroke: reliability of National 
Institutes of Health Stroke Scale via telestroke. 
Stroke 2003 Oct;34(10):e188-91. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1161/01.str.0000091847.82140.9d.
 11. Demaerschalk BM, Vegunta S, Vargas BB, Wu Q, 
Channer DD, Hentz JG. Reliability of real-time video 
smartphone for assessing National Institutes of 
Health Stroke Scale scores in acute stroke patients. 
Stroke 2012 Dec;43(12):3271-7. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.669150.
 12. Anderson ER, Smith B, Ido M, Frankel M. 
Remote assessment of stroke using the 
iPhone 4. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 2013 
May;22(4):340-4. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jstrokecerebrovasdis.2011.09.013.
 13. LaMonte MP, Bahouth MN, Hu P, et al. Telemedicine 
for acute stroke: triumphs and pitfalls. Stroke 2003 
Mar;34(3):725-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/01.
str.0000056945.36583.37.
 14. Choi JY, Porche NA, Albright KC, Khaja AM, 
Ho VS, Grotta JC. Using telemedicine to facilitate 
thrombolytic therapy for patients with acute stroke. 
Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2006 Apr;32(4):199-205.
 15. Schwamm LH, Rosenthal ES, Hirshberg A, et al. 
Virtual TeleStroke support for the emergency 
department evaluation of acute stroke. Acad Emerg 
Med 2004 Nov;11(11):1193-7. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1197/j.aem.2004.08.014.
 16. Wang S, Gross H, Lee SB, et al. Remote evaluation 
of acute ischemic stroke in rural community hospitals 
in Georgia. Stroke 2004 Jul;35(7):1763-8. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1161/01.str.0000131858.63829.6e.
 17. Meyer BC, Raman R, Hemmen T, et al. Efficacy of 
site-independent telemedicine in the STRokE DOC 
trial: a randomised, blinded, prospective study. 
Lancet Neurol 2008 Sep;7(9):787-95. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(08)70171-6.
Health
The aim of the art of medicine is health, but its end is the possession of health. 
Doctors have to know by which means to bring about health, when it is absent, 
and by which means to preserve it, when it is present.
— Galen of Pergamon, 129 AD-c200 AD, Roman physician and philosopher of Greek origin
 16
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-017
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Association of Unplanned Reintubation with Higher Mortality 
in Old, Frail Patients: A National Surgical Quality-Improvement 
Program Analysis
Efstathios Karamanos, MD; Nathan Schmoekel, DO; Dionne Blyden, MD; Anthony Falvo, DO; Ilan Rubinfeld, MD 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-017
E-pub: 10/12/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-017
ABSTRACT
Background: Unplanned postoperative reintubation increases the risk of mortality, 
but associated factors are unclear.
Objective: To elucidate factors associated with increased mortality risk in patients 
with unplanned postoperative reintubation.
Design: Retrospective study. Patients older than 40 years who underwent unplanned 
reintubation from 2005 to 2010 were identified using the American College of Surgeons 
National Surgical Quality Improvement Program database. Multiple regression models 
were used to examine the impact on mortality of factors that included the modified 
frailty index (mFI) we developed, American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score, 
age decile, and days to reintubation.
Main Outcome Measure: Mortality.
Results: A total of 17,051 postoperative reintubations in adults were analyzed. Overall 
mortality was 29.4% (n = 5009). On postoperative day 1, 4434 patients were reintu-
bated and 878 (19.8%) died. On postoperative day 7 and beyond, 6329 patients were 
reintubated and 2215 (35.0%) died. Increasing mFI resulted in increasing incidence of 
mortality (mFl of 0 = 20.5% mortality vs mFl of 0.37-0.45 = 41.7% mortality). As ASA 
score increased from 1 to 5, reintubation was associated with a mortality of 12.1% to 
41.6%, respectively. Similarly, increasing age decile was associated with increasing 
incidence of mortality (40-49 years, 17.9% vs 80-89 years, 42.1%). After adjustment 
for confounding factors, mFI, ASA score, age decile, and increasing number of days to 
reintubation were independently and significantly associated with increased mortality 
in the study population.
Conclusion: Among patients who underwent unplanned reintubation, older and more 
frail patients had an increased risk of mortality.
INTRODUCTION
Unplanned reintubation is a measur-
able complication of surgical care that is 
associated with significant morbidity and 
mortality.1 Postsurgical physiologic deteri-
oration or alterations of normal hormonal 
and metabolic physiology may contribute 
to respiratory failure and lead to even-
tual unplanned reintubation.2,3 In modern 
health care, quality is not only expected but 
is also reportable. Unplanned reintubation 
is an identifiable event in a patient’s post-
operative course and serves as an outcome 
marker for quality improvement.
The population of Americans over the 
age of 65 years is projected to increase 
by 53.2% from the year 2003 to 2020.4 
An increasing number of elderly patients 
will be undergoing surgery, leading to a 
projected 31% increase in general surgery 
workload.5 In recent years, a standardized 
measure of a patient’s physiologic reserve 
has been developed in an effort to predict 
postoperative morbidity and mortal-
ity.6,7 Frailty has been utilized to analyze 
multiple postoperative complications, 
including mortality.8,9 However, there is 
insufficient literature regarding the impact 
of unplanned reintubation in the elderly 
population.
We hypothesized that the use of the 
modified frailty index (mFI) in reintubated 
patients would be predictive of increased 
mortality. We further hypothesized that 
the time to reintubation and American 
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score 
would also affect mortality.
METHODS
This study used the American College 
of Surgeons National Surgical Quality 
Improvement Program (NSQIP) database. 
The NSQIP is a dataset used by hospitals 
nationally to help track areas of surgical 
performance for quality improvement.10 
Trained nurse reviewers at each participat-
ing hospital are responsible for collecting 
the data, which encompasses approxi-
mately 136 variables per patient. These 
variables include patient demographics, 
preoperative risk factors, and postopera-
tive mortality and complications within 
30 days of surgery for patients undergo-
ing major operations, such as unplanned 
reintubation. The NSQIP database defines 
unplanned reintubation as placement of 
an endotracheal tube and mechanical or 
assisted ventilation because of the onset of 
respiratory or cardiac failure manifested 
by severe respiratory distress, hypoxia, 
hypercarbia, or respiratory acidosis within 
30 days of the operation.11
Patients age 40 years and older who 
underwent unplanned reintubation from 
2005 to 2010 were included in our study. 
The following variables were extracted 
from the NSQIP database for each patient: 
age, sex, ASA classification, race, wound 
Efstathios Karamanos, MD, is a Surgeon in the Division of Acute Care Surgery in the Department of Surgery 
at Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit, MI. E-mail: ekarama1@hfhs.org. Nathan Schmoekel, DO, is a Surgeon in 
the Division of Acute Care Surgery in the Department of Surgery at Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit, MI. E-mail: 
nschmoek1@hfhs.org. Dionne Blyden, MD, is a Surgeon in the Division of Acute Care Surgery in the Department 
of Surgery at Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit, MI. E-mail: dblyden2@hfhs.org. Anthony Falvo, DO, is a Surgeon 
in the Division of Acute Care Surgery in the Department of Surgery at Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit, MI. E-mail: 
afalvo1@hfhs.org. Ilan Rubinfeld, MD, is a Surgeon in the Division of Acute Care Surgery in the Department of 
Surgery at Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit, MI. E-mail: irubinf1@hfhs.org.
 17
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-017
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Association of Unplanned Reintubation with Higher Mortality in Old, Frail Patients: A National Surgical Quality-Improvement Program Analysis
classification at the end of the surgery, 
whether or not the surgery was emergent, 
inpatient or outpatient status, surgical sub-
specialty performing the surgery, diabetes 
mellitus status, tobacco use and number 
of packs smoked per year, history of co-
morbidities, functional status, and preop-
erative laboratory values (hematocrit and 
albumin). The total operative time for each 
patient also was extracted. Additionally, 
weight and height were used to calculate 
the body mass index for each patient.
Modified Frailty Index
Frailty has been associated with in-
creased adverse events and prolonged 
postoperative recovery in several stud-
ies.6,7,12 The Canadian Study of Health 
and Aging Frailty Index (CSHA-FI) is one 
index that has been developed to measure 
frailty. For this study, we calculated mFI 
by mapping the 70 variables from the 
CSHA-FI to the existing NSQIP preop-
erative variables, resulting in 11 matched 
Table 1. Univariate comparison of patients’ demographics and clinical characteristics of patients who required unplanned 
reintubationa
Characteristic
Overall (N = 17,051)
Alive (n = 12,042)
Dead (n = 5009)
p value
Age at reintubation (years), mean ± SD
69.4 ± 11.8
67.4 ± 11.9
71.4 ± 11.7
< 0.001
Men
9229 (54.2)
6462 (46.3)
2767 (44.6)
0.05
Emergent operation
5344 (31.3)
3583 (29.8)
1761 (35.2)
< 0.001
Inpatient
16,756 (98.3)
11,817 (98.1)
4939 (98.6)
0.032
Tobacco use
4697 (27.5)
3532 (29.3)
1165 (23.3)
< 0.001
Packs per year, mean ± SD
15.6 ± 44.8
17.6 ± 43.1
13.5 ± 46.5
< 0.001
Body mass index (kg/m2), mean ± SD
28.2 ± 25.1
29.2 ± 42.2
27.2 ± 7.9
0.002
Diabetes
Type 1
2328 (13.7)
1570 (13.0)
758 (15.1)
< 0.001
Oral medication
1749 (10.3)
1264 (10.5)
485 (9.7)
< 0.001
Comorbidities
Mechanical ventilation
1233 (7.2)
884 (7.3)
349 (7.0)
0.391
COPD
3263 (19.1)
2272 (18.9)
991 (19.8)
0.166
Pneumonia
705 (4.1)
455 (3.8)
250 (5.0)
0.001
Hypertension requiring medications
12470 (73.1)
8668 (72.0)
3802 (75.9)
< 0.001
Wound classification at end of surgery
Clean
5582 (32.7)
4034 (33.5)
1548 (30.9)
< 0.001
Clean/contaminated
6391 (37.5)
4559 (37.9)
1832 (36.6)
Contaminated
1951 (11.4)
1314 (10.9)
637 (12.7)
Infected
3127 (18.3)
2135 (17.7)
992 (19.8)
Surgical subspecialty
Cardiac surgery
324 (1.9)
261 (2.2)
63 (1.3)
< 0.001
Thoracic surgery
316 (1.9)
214 (1.3)
102 (0.6)
Vascular surgery
3797 (22.3)
2621 (21.8)
1176 (23.5)
General surgery
11756 (68.9)
8329 (69.2)
3427 (68.4)
Obstetrics and gynecology
80 (0.5)
57 (0.5)
23 (0.5)
Neurosurgery
236 (1.4)
170 (1.3)
66 (1.4)
Orthopedics
285 (1.7)
195 (1.8)
90 (1.7)
Otolaryngology
78 (0.5)
63 (0.3)
15 (0.5)
Plastic surgery
36 (0.2)
22 (0.3)
14 (0.2)
Urology
143 (0.8)
110 (0.6)
33 (0.2)
Functional status
Independent
11492 (67.4)
8513 (70.7)
2979 (59.5)
< 0.001
Partially dependent
3314 (19.4)
2079 (17.3)
1235 (24.7)
Totally dependent
2229 (13.1)
1436 (11.9)
793 (15.8)
Unknown
16 (0.1)
14 (0.1)
2 (0)
Other clinical factors
Total operative time (minutes), mean ± SD
171 ± 127
182 ± 133
159 ± 120
< 0.001
Preoperative hematocrit (%), mean ± SD
35.2 ± 6.6
35.9 ± 6.6
34.5 ± 6.5
< 0.001
Modified frailty index, mean ± SD
0.21 ± 0.14
0.20 ± 0.14
0.23 ± 0.15
< 0.001
a Data are no. (%) unless indicated otherwise.
COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; SD = standard deviation.
 18
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-017
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Association of Unplanned Reintubation with Higher Mortality in Old, Frail Patients: A National Surgical Quality-Improvement Program Analysis
variables, and then mapping these variables 
to the patients’ medical history. These 11 
variables included nonindependent func-
tional status; history of either chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease or pneumonia; 
history of diabetes mellitus; hypertension 
requiring the use of medications; history 
of congestive heart failure; history of myo-
cardial infarction; history of percutaneous 
coronary intervention, cardiac surgery, 
or angina; peripheral vascular disease or 
resting pain; transient ischemic attack or 
cerebrovascular accident without residual 
deficit; cerebrovascular accident with defi-
cit; and impaired sensorium. A patient’s 
mFI was calculated as the proportion of 
variables present (“positive”) in a patient’s 
medical history from the total 11 variables. 
The primary outcome was mortality.
The mFI has been validated in previous 
studies. Park et al13 showed that the mFI 
correlates with postesophagectomy morbid-
ity and mortality using the NSQIP database. 
Statistical Analysis
To identify if age predicts mortality in 
patients undergoing unplanned reintuba-
tion, we divided the study population into 
groups by their age decile (40-49, 50-59, 
60-69, 70-79, and 80-89 years). The inci-
dence and odds ratio (OR) for mortality 
were calculated for each age decile.
To examine the impact of time to re-
intubation after surgery, we defined 4 
different groups: Postoperative Days 0 to 
1, 2 to 3, 4 to 6, and 7 and beyond. The 
postoperative complications were cross-
tabulated with mortality and examined for 
differences using Student’s t-test or the χ2 
test as appropriate.
The study population was divided in 
2 groups: patients who died and patients 
who survived. A univariate comparison 
was performed to identify differences be-
tween the 2 groups. Categorical variables 
were compared using the Pearson χ2 or 
Fisher exact test as appropriate. Continu-
ous variables were examined for normality 
of distribution using the Shapiro-Wilk test. 
Normally distributed variables were com-
pared using the Student t-test, and nonnor-
mally distributed variables were compared 
using the Mann-Whitney U test. Variables 
that were different at p < 0.05 were entered 
in a binary logistic regression to examine 
the impact on mortality of mFI, ASA, age 
decile, and days to reintubation. Adjusted 
ORs with 95% confidence interval (CI) 
were derived from the regression. 
RESULTS
A total of 1,334,886 patients were in-
cluded in the NSQIP database from 2005 
to 2010. Of those, 17,051 (1.3%) met our 
inclusion criteria and were analyzed. Of these 
17,051 reintubated patients, 5009 had a 
documented death within 30 days of surgery. 
Therefore, the overall rate of postoperative 
mortality in patients requiring reintubation 
was 29.4%. Further analysis was performed 
to investigate the effect on mortality of pa-
tient age, ASA score, days to reintubation, 
and mFI. Patients who died were signifi-
cantly more likely to be older compared with 
patients who survived (mean 71.4 years vs 
mean 67.4 years, p < 0.001), more likely 
to have undergone an emergent operation 
(35.2% vs 29.8%, p < 0.001), more likely 
to have type 1 diabetes (15.1% vs 13.0%, p 
< 0.001), and more likely to have an infected 
wound (19.8% vs 17.7%, p < 0.001). The 
mFI was significantly higher for patients 
who died (0.23 vs 0.20, p < 0.001). Details 
of patient clinical characteristics and demo-
graphics are presented in Table 1.
Table 2 shows the incidence of mortality 
for different study groups. The mortal-
ity rate was higher among patients who 
were reintubated later after their original 
surgery, compared with those reintubated 
sooner after their initial surgery. Patients 
who required reintubation on postop-
erative days 0 to 1 had a mortality rate 
of 19.8%; days 2 to 3, 28.4%; days 4 to 
6, 32.9%; and day 7 and beyond, 35.0% 
(p < 0.001). When mortality was calcu-
lated for age, an associated increase in 
mortality with increase in age decile was 
observed. As patient age increased from 
the fourth through the eighth decile of age, 
the mortality rate increased from 17.9% 
to 42.1%. As seen in Table 1, the mean 
age of patients requiring reintubation who 
died was 71.4 years; however, Table 2 illus-
trates that mortality in patients requiring 
unplanned reintubation in the younger age 
deciles was significantly high (40-49 years, 
17.9%; 50-59 years, 21.6%; p < 0.001). 
Similarly, Table 2 also illustrates that an 
increasing ASA score was associated with 
significantly higher mortality.
The impact of mFI on mortality after 
reintubation was examined using trend 
analysis and Mantel-Haenszel testing 
(Table 3). As mFI increased from 0 to 
0.45, mortality rate increased from 20.5% 
to 41.0% (p < 0.001, linear R2 = 0.976).
After adjustment for differences between 
the 2 groups (dead vs alive), an increas-
ing mFI was significantly associated with 
Table 2. Incidence of 30-day mortality by postoperative days to reintubation, age 
decile, and American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) scorea
Variable
N
Mortality, n (%)
p value
Postoperative days to reintubation
0-1
4434
878 (19.8)
0.003
2-3
3404
967 (28.4)
4-6
2884
949 (32.9)
≥ 7 
6329
2215 (35.0)
Age decile (years)
40-49
2016
361 (17.9)
< 0.001
50-59
3125
675 (21.6)
60-69
4678
1212 (25.9)
70-79
3556
1213 (34.1)
80-89 
3676
1548 (42.1)
ASA score
1 - No disturbance
91
11 (12)
< 0.001
2 - Mild disturbance
1651
317 (19.2)
3 - Severe disturbance
9236
2503 (27.1)
4 - Life-threatening
5723
2032 (35.5)
5 - Moribund 
350
146 (41.6)
a 5009 total deaths out of 17,051 total reintubations.
 19
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-017
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Association of Unplanned Reintubation with Higher Mortality in Old, Frail Patients: A National Surgical Quality-Improvement Program Analysis
an increasing probability of dying (ad-
justed OR = 2.57, 95% CI = 1.94-3.40, 
p < 0.001; Table 4). Similarly, increased 
mortality was significantly associated with 
increasing ASA score (adjusted OR = 1.27, 
95% CI = 1.20-1.35, adjusted p < 0.001), 
age decile (adjusted OR = 1.31, 95% CI 
= 1.27-1.35, p < 0.001), and days to rein-
tubation (adjusted OR = 1.23, 95% CI = 
1.20-1.27, p < 0.001).
DISCUSSION
This retrospective study of mortality in 
reintubated patients examined well-known 
risk factors such as age, ASA score, and 
time to reintubation. However, to the best 
of our knowledge, this is the first study 
specifically examining the impact of frailty 
on mortality in this population. 
Unanticipated reintubation in the surgi-
cal patient population is a measurable event 
associated with significant morbidity. The 
present study suggests that the prognosis 
of reintubation depends on several factors 
including frailty, ASA class, age, and time to 
reintubation. In this study, the overall mor-
tality of patients who required unplanned 
reintubation was exceedingly high (28.9%), 
which reflects the physiologic derangement 
driving respiratory failure.
The incidence and risk factors associated 
with reintubation have been previously 
examined.1,14,15 Snyder et al15 identified 
several risk factors for unplanned reintuba-
tion including severe chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, previous cardiac sur-
gery, peripheral vascular disease, emergen-
cy procedure, dependent functional status, 
smoking within the past year, alcohol 
intake greater than 2 drinks per day, prior 
operation within the past 30 days, and 
transfer from an acute care hospital. Nafiu 
et al14 reported that among all patients 
requiring emergent reintubation after elec-
tive surgery, 3.3% were elderly. However, 
this classification reflected chronologic age 
only and not patients’ overall fitness and 
physiologic reserve.
For the present study, a frailty index 
modified from the CSHA-FI was de-
veloped using the 11 variables that are 
tracked in the NSQIP database. Multiple 
studies have shown that fewer variables 
may still yield an adequate assessment of 
a patient’s frailty. Rockwood et al16 studied 
the CSHA-FI and showed that using any 
10 variables of that index resulted in com-
parable predictive value in frailty.
Respiratory failure within the first 72 
hours after surgery has been related to 
hypoxemia and analgesic therapy.17,18 Ram-
achandran et al1 examined the incidence 
of early unplanned reintubation and found 
that one-half of all reintubations within a 
30-day period occurred during the first 3 
days, which was associated with a 9-fold 
increase in mortality. When adjusting for 
preoperative risk factors, these authors 
established a mortality rate of 9.7% to 
30.6% in the first 3 days.1 These data, al-
though similar to our findings, represent 
a patient population much more diverse 
than ours, because we focused on an older 
age group. 
Several protective measures can be un-
dertaken to potentially avoid the signifi-
cant morbidity and mortality associated 
with unplanned reintubation. Early tra-
cheostomy in patients who are anticipated 
to have a protracted respiratory failure has 
been advocated, but it remains controver-
sial. The advantages include reduced rates 
of ventilator-associated pneumonia and 
decreased hospital length of stay. Several 
recent studies have tried to compare the 
outcomes between performing an early 
vs late tracheostomy, but the data remain 
controversial. The present study showed an 
incremental increase in the probability of 
adverse outcomes as the day to reintuba-
tion increased. It is possible that early tra-
cheostomy in people who are anticipated 
to have a protracted ventilatory need and 
difficulty weaning off the ventilator would 
reduce the hypoxia and physiologic stress 
of an unplanned reintubation and would 
potentially result in fewer adverse events. 
It is possible that calculating a patient’s 
mFI will provide clinicians with a risk 
assessment tool regarding the probability 
of reintubation-associated mortality and 
will serve as a guide to patients and family 
counseling regarding early tracheostomy.
There are several limitations to this 
study. The first is the inability to know 
the details surrounding the indications 
for reintubation. This information may 
extend our knowledge of patients’ physi-
ologic deterioration surrounding the event 
requiring reintubation. Second, NSQIP 
tracks reintubation as an event in a 30-
day postoperative period, but it is not 
clear on which day a patient was initially 
extubated. Furthermore, NSQIP data in-
clude accidental extubations that require 
Table 3 . Incidence of 30-day mortality by modified frailty indexa 
Modified frailty index
N
Mortality, n (%)
0
1990
408 (20.5)
0.01-0.09
4252
1097 (25.8)
0.10-0.18
4486
1301 (29.0)
0.19-0.27
3479
1082 (31.1)
0.28-0.36
1204
437 (36.3)
0.37-0.45 
1640
684 (41.7)
a Linear R2 = 0.976, p < 0.001.
Table 4. Multivariate analysis for 30-day mortalitya
Variable
Adjusted odds ratio (95% CI)
Adjusted p value
Frailty index
2.57 (1.94-3.40)
< 0.001
ASA score
1.27 (1.20-1.35)
< 0.001
Age decile
1.31 (1.27-1.35)
< 0.001
Days to reintubation
1.23 (1.20-1.27)
< 0.001
a Adjustment was made for emergent surgery, diabetes, tobacco use, body mass index, history of comorbidities, wound 
classification at end of surgery, surgical subspecialty performing the operation, functional status of the patient, total 
operative time, and preoperative hematocrit value. 
ASA = American Society of Anesthesiologists; CI = confidence interval.
… the prognosis of reintubation 
depends on several factors 
including frailty, ASA class, age, 
and time to reintubation.
 20
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-017
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Association of Unplanned Reintubation with Higher Mortality in Old, Frail Patients: A National Surgical Quality-Improvement Program Analysis
reintubation, and such events would po-
tentially confound the results. The patient 
population requiring delayed extubation is 
likely more acutely ill and has an inherently 
higher mortality. This may be an area for 
future research. Another limitation to this 
study is that although NSQIP variables for 
preoperative risk assessment are collected 
prospectively, the mFI was applied retro-
spectively to these variables.
CONCLUSION
Despite the aforementioned limita-
tions, this study was conducted using 
the NSQIP database, which is a robust 
nationwide database comprising data 
from diverse participating institutions 
and surgeons. Our overall mortality rate 
of 29.4% is consistent with prior stud-
ies that found 30-day mortality among 
reintubated patients to be 29.4%.15 We 
identified several patient variables that 
were predictive of mortality in reintu-
bated patients: age, ASA score, time to 
reintubation, and frailty. Of these vari-
ables, frailty had the highest OR of 2.57. 
This large, cross-sectional study of rein-
tubated surgical patients found that despite 
the low overall incidence of postoperative 
reintubation, it is fraught with significant 
mortality, especially among older patient 
populations. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgment
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health 
Communications provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Karamanos E, Schmoekel N, Blyden D, Falvo A, 
Rubinfeld I. Association of unplanned reintubation 
with higher mortality in old, frail patients: A National 
Surgical Quality-Improvement Program analysis. 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-017. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.7812/TPP/16-017.
References
 1. Ramachandran SK, Nafiu OO, Ghaferi A, 
Tremper KK, Shanks A, Kheterpal B. Independent 
predictors and outcomes of unanticipated early 
postoperative tracheal intubation after nonemergent, 
noncardiac surgery. Anesthesiology 2011 
Jul;115(1):44-53. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
aln.0b013e31821cf6de.
 2. Blackburn GL. Metabolic considerations in the 
management of surgical patients. Surg Clin North 
Am 2011 Jun;91(3):467-80. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.suc.2011.03.001.
 3. Kause J, Smith G, Prytherch D, Parr M, Flabouris A, 
Hillman K; Intensive Care Society (UK); Australian 
and New Zealand Intensive Care Society Clinical 
Trials Group. A comparison of antecedents to 
cardiac arrests, deaths and emergency intensive 
care admissions in Australia and New Zealand, 
and the United Kingdom—the ACADEMIA study. 
Resuscitation 2004 Sep;62(3):275-82. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.resuscitation.2004.05.016.
 4. Etzioni DA, Liu JH, Maggard MA, Ko CY. The aging 
population and its impact on the surgery workforce. 
Ann Surg 2003 Aug;238(2):170-7. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/01.sla.0000081085.98792.3d.
 5. Etzioni DA, Liu JH, O’Connell JB, Maggard MA, 
Ko CY. Elderly patients in surgical workloads: 
a population-based analysis. Am Surg 2003 
Nov;69(11):961-5.
 6. Makary MA, Segev DL, Pronovost PJ, et al. Frailty 
as a predictor of surgical outcomes in older patients. 
J Am Coll Surg 2010 Jun;210(6):901-8. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2010.01.028.
 7. Dasgupta M, Rolfson DB, Stolee P, Borrie MJ, 
Speechley M. Frailty is associated with postoperative 
complications in older adults with medical problems. 
Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2009 Jan-Feb;48(1):78-83. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.archger.2007.10.007.
 8. Farhat JS, Velanovich V, Falvo AJ, et al. Are the frail 
destined to fail? Frailty index as predictor of surgical 
morbidity and mortality in the elderly. J Trauma Acute 
Care Surg 2012 Jun;72(6):1526-30. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/ta.0b013e3182542fab.
 9. Obeid NM, Azuh O, Reddy S, et al. Predictors of 
critical care-related complications in colectomy 
patients using the National Surgical Quality 
Improvement Program: exploring frailty and 
aggressive laparoscopic approaches. J Trauma 
Acute Care Surg 2012 Apr;72(4):878-83. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/ta.0b013e31824d0f70.
 10. Khuri SF, Daley J, Henderson W, et al. The National 
Veterans Administration Surgical Risk Study: risk 
adjustment for the comparative assessment of 
the quality of surgical care. J Am Coll Surg 1995 
May;180(5):519-31.
 11. ACS National Surgical Quality Improvement Program 
(ACS NSQIP) [Internet]. Chicago, IL: American 
College of Surgeons; c2016 [cited 2016 May 22]. 
Available from: www.facs.org/quality-programs/acs-
nsqip.
 12. Saxton A, Velanovich V. Preoperative 
frailty and quality of life as predictors of 
postoperative complications. Ann Surg 2011 
Jun;253(6):1223-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
sla.0b013e318214bce7.
 13. Park KU, Rubinfeld I, Hodari A, Hammoud Z. 
Prolonged length of stay after esophageal 
resection: identifying drivers of increased length 
of stay using the NSQIP database. J Am Coll Surg 
2016 Mar 31. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jamcollsurg.2016.03.029.
 14. Nafiu OO, Ramachandran SK, Ackwerh R, 
Tremper KK, Campbell DA Jr, Stanley JC. Factors 
associated with and consequences of unplanned 
post-operative intubation in elderly vascular and 
general surgery patients. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2011 
Mar;28(3):220-4. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
eja.0b013e328342659c.
 15. Snyder CW, Patel RD, Roberson EP, Hawn MT. 
Unplanned intubation after surgery: risk factors, 
prognosis, and medical emergency team effects. Am 
Surg 2009 Sep;75(9):834-8.
 16. Rockwood K, Andrew M, Mitnitski A. A comparison of 
two approaches to measuring frailty in elderly people. 
J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2007 Jul;62(7):738-43. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/gerona/62.7.738.
 17. Taylor S, Kirton OC, Staff I, Kozol RA. Postoperative 
day one: a high risk period for respiratory events. Am 
J Surg 2005 Nov;190(5):752-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.amjsurg.2005.07.015.
 18. Rosenberg J, Oturai P, Erichsen CJ, Pedersen MH, 
Kehlet H. Effect of general anesthesia and major 
versus minor surgery on late postoperative episodic 
and constant hypoxemia. J Clin Anesth 1994 May-
Jun;6(3):212-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0952-
8180(94)90061-2.
Endure
No skill or art is needed to grow old; the trick is to endure it.
— Johann Wolgang von Goethe, 1749-1832, German author and statesman
 21
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-132
SOUL OF THE HEALER
Ghosts of the Northern Plains 
photograph
Stephen Henry, MD
The farmland of the northern plains is dotted with abandoned farmsteads surrounded by large 
tracts of corn, soy, beets, or just fallow land. These lonesome structures stand, often containing 
personal possessions, as a memorial to the families who worked the land. Where are the families 
now? It’s obvious where some of them are, but what of the living? Where do the memories go?
Dr Henry has spent many days during the past few years ranging out from Fargo, ND, 
photographing these places in order to help remember them after they are gone. Dr Henry is 
retired from The Permanente Medical Group as Chief of Urology at the San Jose Medical Center. 
More of his work can be seen at: www.henryimages.net.
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-132
 22
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-251
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Preferential Use of Total Thyroidectomy without Prophylactic 
Central Lymph Node Dissection for Early-Stage Papillary Thyroid 
Cancer: Oncologic Outcomes in an Integrated Health Plan
Meena Said, MD; Michele Fujimoto, MD; Cara Franken, MD; Sunee Woo, MD;  
Brooke Vuong, MD; Philip I Haigh, MD, MSc, FRCSC, FACS 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-251
E-pub: 09/30/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-251
ABSTRACT
Context: 
The oncologic benefit of prophylactic central lymph node dissection (pCLND) 
in node-negative papillary thyroid cancer has been debated.
Objective: To determine the use of pCLND in an integrated health care system and 
to evaluate recurrence in the cohort.
Design: Retrospective cohort study of patients with clinically node-negative papillary 
thyroid cancer who underwent total thyroidectomy with or without pCLND in Kaiser 
Permanente Southern California Region hospitals between January 1996 and December 
2008. Chart review of all patients was performed to collect demographic data, tumor 
features, stage, and recurrences.
Main Outcome Measures: Proportion undergoing pCLND and recurrence rate of 
papillary thyroid cancer.
Results: There were 864 patients identified (mean age, 46.1 years). Almost all patients 
had total thyroidectomy alone, and 34 (3.9%) underwent pCLND. 
The 
TNM (tumor, node, 
metastasis) stages for the 2 groups were not significantly different (p = 0.18). Overall 
recurrence was 24 (2.8%). There were 23 (2.8%) recurrences in the no-pCLND group 
and 1 (2.9%) recurrence in the pCLND group (p = 0.95). The rate of recurrence in the 
central neck compartment in those without pCLND was 1.1% and 0% in the pCLND 
group (p = 0.54). The recurrence rate in the lateral neck compartment in the no-pCLND 
group was 2.2%, and this rate was 2.9% in the pCLND group (p = 0.76). The no-pCLND 
group had a recurrence-free survival rate of 96.4% at 10 years vs 96.8% in the pCLND 
patients (p = 0.80).
Conclusion: Presently, routine pCLND is difficult to advocate in our medical system. 
INTRODUCTION
Papillary thyroid cancer has a high pro-
pensity for metastases in the central and 
lateral cervical lymph nodes. However, 
even with regional lymph node spread, 
the overall prognosis remains good.1-3 The 
presence of nodal disease confers increased 
risk of recurrence but has traditionally 
been thought to have no impact on overall 
survival.4 More recently, some larger stud-
ies have shown differences in prognosis 
between patients with node-positive cancer 
and those with node-negative cancer, but 
these differences have been very small, on 
the order of 1% to 3% survival differences 
up to 20 years from treatment.5,6 Approxi-
mately 20% of patients present with clini-
cally palpable nodal disease, and the need 
for therapeutic lymph node dissection in 
these patients has been well established.5 
However, controversy remains over the 
benefit of a prophylactic central lymph 
node dissection (pCLND) at the time of 
thyroidectomy when the nodes are clini-
cally negative for metastases, which oc-
curs in about 20% to 40% of patients6; 
the primary reason for the controversy is 
that until recently, no randomized trial 
existed that answered the question of the 
therapeutic benefit of pCLND. Some 
studies have shown a survival benefit from 
pCLND, some have shown reduction in 
locoregional recurrence, and others have 
shown no benefit.7-11
Proponents of pCLND argue that it 
enhances accurate staging, removes mi-
croscopic disease, and reduces recurrence 
rates.10,12 Opponents counter that low 
recurrence rates exist without performing 
pCLND, the procedure causes increased 
complications, and that therapeutic cen-
tral lymph node dissection in the event 
of central compartment recurrence can 
be done with low morbidity, no higher 
than that after an initial pCLND.11,13-15 A 
recent randomized controlled trial showed 
no difference in survival in those patients 
who had pCLND, but the sample size may 
have been too small to answer the question 
without a type II error.16
The main objective of this study was to 
determine the use of pCLND in our inte-
grated medical system at the time of total 
thyroidectomy for papillary thyroid cancer, 
and secondarily to attempt to compare 
overall recurrence rates in patients who 
underwent pCLND with those who had 
nodal observation. 
METHODS
Subjects
This study was approved by the Kaiser 
Permanente Southern California (KPSC) 
institutional review board (Study Identi-
fication Number 5830). All patients with 
papillary thyroid cancer who underwent 
total thyroidectomy with and without 
pCLND in KPSC Region hospitals be-
tween January 1996 and December 2008 
Meena Said, MD, is a General and Endocrine Surgeon at Providence Saint John’s Health Center in Santa Monica, CA. 
E-mail: mnsaid8@yahoo.com. Michele Fujimoto, MD, is a General Surgeon at the Santa Rosa Medical Center in CA.  
E-mail: michele.a.fujimoto@kp.org. Cara Franken, MD, is a General Surgeon at the Modesto Medical Center in CA.  
E-mail: cara.franken@kp.org. Sunee Woo, MD, is a former General Surgery Resident at the Los Angeles Medical Center 
in CA. E-mail: sunee.s.woo@kp.org. Brooke Vuong, MD, is a former General Surgery Resident at the Los Angeles 
Medical Center in CA. E-mail: brookevuong@gmail.com. Philip I Haigh, MD, MSc, FRCSC, FACS, is an Oncologic  
and Endocrine Surgeon at the Los Angeles Medical Center in CA. E-mail: philip.i.haigh@kp.org.
 23
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-251
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Preferential 
Use 
of 
Total 
Thyroidectomy 
without 
Prophylactic 
Central 
Lymph 
Node 
Dissection 
for 
Early-Stage 
Papillary 
Thyroid 
Cancer: 
Oncologic 
Outcomes 
in 
an 
Integrated 
Health 
Plan
were identified for the study. They were 
identified using the International Clas-
sification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, 
code of 193 (malignant neoplasm of thy-
roid gland) and the Current Procedural 
Terminology Procedure Codes 60240 
(total thyroidectomy) and 60252 (total 
thyroidectomy with limited neck dissec-
tion). An individual chart review on all 
patients was then conducted. Data on 
patient demographics, tumor size, num-
ber of lymph nodes removed, number of 
positive lymph nodes, and TNM (tumor, 
node, metastasis) classification stage were 
collected. There was no specific protocol 
or algorithm used for preoperative stag-
ing. Operative reports were examined to 
determine if pCLND was performed; if 
the surgeon mentioned that lymph nodes 
were removed from the anatomic bound-
aries of level VI or anterior compartment 
in the neck as previously described, 
the patient was placed in the pCLND 
group.17 
Patients were excluded from the study 
if they had known preoperative or intra-
operative regional (either central neck 
compartment or lateral neck compart-
ment) or distant metastatic disease, if 
they were age 45 years or older and had 
T3 (Stage III) tumors, if they under-
went less than a total thyroidectomy 
(hemithyroidectomy, subtotal thyroid-
ectomy, or completion thyroidectomy), 
had previous thyroid surgery or any 
cervical lymph node dissection, if they 
were pregnant, or if they were KPSC 
members for less than 6 months. Thus, 
the study cohort included only patients 
with clinically negative (cN0) papillary 
thyroid cancer.
Main Outcome Measures
The main outcomes were the propor-
tion undergoing pCLND and recurrence 
rates. The types of recurrences included 
the following: central neck recurrence 
(including central lymph node recurrence 
and recurrence in the thyroid bed), lateral 
neck lymph node recurrence, and distant 
recurrence. Recurrence was determined by 
clinical suspicion and examination com-
bined with ultrasound and/or radioactive 
iodine scan, or elevated thyroglobulin 
level with abnormal results of imaging, 
with or without cytologic result, or with 
histopathologic evidence of cancer. There 
was no specific protocol or algorithm 
used for surveillance postoperatively. Any 
evidence of disease after a disease-free 
interval of one year was categorized as a 
recurrence.
Statistical Analysis
Chi-squared test or Fisher exact test 
was used to detect the difference in 
proportions of categorical variables, 
which were described using frequencies 
and percentages between pCLND and 
no-pCLND groups. Student t-test was 
used for comparing continuous vari-
ables between groups. We also described 
follow-up time, time to recurrence, and 
percentages of recurrence among treat-
ment groups.
Recurrence-free survival was deter-
mined using Kaplan-Meier survival func-
tion estimations. P values less than 0.05 
indicate statistical significance. All tests 
were 2-tailed. All statistical analyses were 
performed using SAS Enterprise Guide 4.3 
(SAS Institute Inc, Cary, NC).
Table 1. Demographics and tumor features in patients undergoing total thyroidectomy 
with or without prophylactic central lymph node dissection
 
 
 
Feature
No prophylactic 
central lymph 
node dissection 
(n = 830)
With prophylactic 
central lymph 
node dissection 
(n = 34)
 
Total 
patients  
(N = 864)
 
 
 
p value
Age at diagnosis, years
Mean (SD)
46.4 (14.0)
40.0 (11.4)
46.1 (14)
0.005
Median
46.0
38.0
45.0
Range
14.0-87.0
25.0-67.0
14.0-87.0
Sex, no. (%)
Female
709 (85.4)
24 (70.6)
733 (84.8)
0.018
Male
121 (14.6)
10 (29.4)
131 (15.2)
Tumor size, cm
Number of tumors
792
33
825
0.014
Mean (SD)
1.9 (1.5)
2.7 (1.9)
2.0 (1.5)
Median
1.6
2.2
1.6
Range
0.1-9.0
0.1-8.0
0.1-9.0
Number of lymph nodes removed, no. (%)
0
774 (93.3)
1 (2.9)
775 (89.7)
< 0.0001
1
5 (0.6)
0 (0)
5 (0.6)
2
1 (0.1)
0 (0)
1 (0.1)
3
23 (2.8)
7 (20.6)
30 (3.5)
4
14 (1.7)
8 (23.5)
22 (2.5)
5
5 (0.6)
4 (11.8)
9 (1)
6
4 (0.5)
7 (20.6)
11 (1.3)
7
4 (0.5)
7 (20.6)
11 (1.3)
Number of positive lymph nodes, no. (%)
0
812 (97.8)
21 (61.8)
833 (96.4)
< 0.0001
1
7 (0.8)
4 (11.8)
11 (1.3)
2
3 (0.4)
3 (8.8)
6 (0.7)
3
5 (0.6)
5 (14.7)
10 (1.2)
4
2 (0.2)
0 (0)
2 (0.2)
6
1 (0.1)
1 (2.9)
2 (0.2)
TNM stage, no. (%)
1
654 (78.8)
30 (88.2)
684 (79.2)
0.184
2
176 (21.2)
4 (11.8)
180 (20.8)
Radioactive iodine, no. (%)
52 (6.3)
4 (11.8)
56 (6.5)
0.202
SD = standard deviation; TNM = tumor, nodes, metastasis.
Preferential Use of Total Thyroidectomy without Prophylactic Central Lymph Node Dissection  
for Early-Stage Papillary Thyroid Cancer: Oncologic Outcomes in an Integrated Health Plan
 24
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-251
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Preferential 
Use 
of 
Total 
Thyroidectomy 
without 
Prophylactic 
Central 
Lymph 
Node 
Dissection 
for 
Early-Stage 
Papillary 
Thyroid 
Cancer: 
Oncologic 
Outcomes 
in 
an 
Integrated 
Health 
Plan
RESULTS
There were 864 patients who met the 
criteria for inclusion into the study. Mean 
age (± standard deviation) was 46.1 ± 14 
years, and 85% were women. Almost 
all patients had total thyroidectomy 
without pCLND, and 34 (3.9%) of the 
patients underwent pCLND (Table 1). 
The patients in the pCLND group were 
somewhat younger and men were more 
represented compared with the no-
pCLND patients. Mean tumor size was 
larger in the pCLND group than in the 
no-pCLND group (2.7 cm vs 1.93 cm, 
p = 0.014). The TNM stages for the 2 
groups were not statistically significantly 
different (p = 0.18, Table 1). 
Not surprisingly, the pCLND group 
had more lymph nodes removed. They 
had more positive lymph nodes compared 
with the no-pCLND group (p < 0.0001, 
Table 1). With increasing tumor size, there 
was a higher proportion of node-positive 
disease (p = 0.002, Table 2).
The mean follow-up period was 7.9 
years. There were no patients lost to follow-
up, and there were 36 deaths. The overall 
number of recurrences in the study period 
was 24 (2.8%), with the mean time of 4.6 
years between the index operation and re-
currence. Recurrence in the central neck 
compartment occurred in 9 patients: 4 
patients had recurrence in the central neck 
compartment only; 4 patients had recur-
rence synchronously in the central and 
lateral compartments of the neck; and 1 
patient’s cancer recurred synchronously in 
the central neck compartment, the lateral 
neck compartment, and distant sites. In 
the remaining 15 patients, 14 had recur-
rence in the lateral neck compartment as 
the sole region of disease, and 1 patient had 
recurrence at distant sites only.
When stratified by pCLND, there 
were 23 (2.8%) recurrences in the no-
pCLND group and 1 (2.9%) recurrence 
in the pCLND group. No patients in the 
pCLND group had recurrence in the cen-
tral compartment of the neck, whereas 9 
patients (1.1%) in the no-pCLND group 
had recurrence in this area (p = 0.54). One 
patient (2.9%) in the pCLND group had 
recurrence in the lateral neck compart-
ment, whereas 18 patients (2.2%) in the 
no-pCLND group had recurrence in this 
region (p = 0.76). With Kaplan-Meier 
estimations, the no-pCLND group had a 
recurrence-free rate of 96.4% at 10 years 
compared with 96.8% in the pCLND 
patients (p = 0.80).
DISCUSSION
We found in KPSC that nearly all pa-
tients with papillary thyroid cancer were 
treated with total thyroidectomy without 
pCLND. Our findings also suggest that 
performing pCLND in patients with 
initially clinically node-negative papillary 
thyroid cancer may not provide additional 
oncologic benefit. Alternatively, if there 
was a benefit that was not detectable be-
cause of a small number of patients who 
underwent pCLND, it would appear to 
be a very low absolute benefit and prob-
ably clinically insignificant, with such low 
recurrence rates found in the study.
The KPSC patient population is ethnical-
ly diverse and is representative of the larger 
community. There are 14 KPSC hospitals, 
ranging from 154 to 464 beds, all consid-
ered general surgical and medical centers. In 
addition, these operations were performed 
by more than 100 surgeons in KPSC. 
The surgeons in KPSC are predominant-
ly low-volume thyroidectomy surgeons, 
performing fewer than 10 thyroidectomies 
per year. In a later period of 2008 to 2013, 
83% of total thyroidectomies in KPSC 
were performed by low-volume KPSC 
surgeons (Christine Ferioli, personal com-
munication, November 24, 2015a). We 
believe this percentage would be similar 
in the study period. It has been shown 
previously that low-volume surgeons make 
up the majority of surgeons doing thyroid-
ectomies. Sosa et al18 reported on thyroid 
surgery in Maryland, and 79% were sur-
geons who performed fewer than 10 thy-
roidectomies per year. Similarly, Stavrakis 
et al19 found that 65% of surgeons doing 
thyroid, parathyroid, or adrenal operations 
in New York and Florida performed only 
1 to 3 such operations per year. Thus, our 
findings of low recurrence rates in our pop-
ulation of patients who are racially mixed 
and who are operated on by low-volume 
surgeons who rarely perform pCLND, as 
in the rest of the country, are probably 
generalizable to patients undergoing total 
thyroidectomy with or without pCLND 
in many other regions or communities 
in the US. 
Our finding that pCLND is rarely 
performed in KPSC is mirrored outside 
our medical system in the US. In a pop-
ulation-based study of more than 14,000 
patients with papillary thyroid cancer, only 
6.6% potentially received a pCLND or a 
therapeutic central lymph node dissection 
that retrieved 5 or more lymph nodes.20 
However, it is unclear in that study of the 
National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, 
Epidemiology, and End Results database 
how many patients actually underwent a 
formal pCLND because data on operative 
technique are missing; it is probable that 
nodes were retrieved in the total thyroid-
ectomy specimen inadvertently without 
formal pCLND. Our study scrutinized 
each operative report, and so we believe 
that 4% is accurate regarding who received 
a formal pCLND. With the limited evi-
dence supporting pCLND, it may be jus-
tified that such a low number of pCLND 
was performed in the KPSC system, and it 
also may be similar in other hospitals and 
regions in the US.
Our retrospective study has several limi-
tations. With only a very small minority 
who underwent pCLND, this group may 
well have been selected to undergo the 
procedure, and so a direct comparison with 
the no-pCLND group could be biased. 
The low number in the pCLND group and 
the low event rate also may have contrib-
uted to a type II error, with a difference in 
recurrence rates that was undetectable. Fur-
thermore, it is probable that patients were 
treated differently by the many physicians 
involved at the different Medical Centers 
in the KPSC Region, from initial staging 
to postoperative adjuvant radioactive iodine 
therapy to surveillance. Therefore, the out-
comes in patients who had pCLND may 
have been confounded by any number of 
factors. However, we are quite certain that 
Table 2. Tumor size and presence of 
positive lymph nodes in the 825 tumors
Tumor size (cm)
Positive lymph nodesa
< 1
2/248 (0.8)
1 - < 2
6/209 (2.9)
2 - < 3
15/185 (8.1)
3 - < 4
2/92 (2.2)
4 - < 5
0/40 (0)
≥ 5
6/51 (11.8)
a Data are no. (%)
Preferential Use of Total Thyroidectomy without Prophylactic Central Lymph Node Dissection 
 
for Early-Stage Papillary Thyroid Cancer: Oncologic Outcomes in an Integrated Health Plan
 25
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-251
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Preferential 
Use 
of 
Total 
Thyroidectomy 
without 
Prophylactic 
Central 
Lymph 
Node 
Dissection 
for 
Early-Stage 
Papillary 
Thyroid 
Cancer: 
Oncologic 
Outcomes 
in 
an 
Integrated 
Health 
Plan
those who did and did not have a formal 
pCLND were assigned correctly, and the 
absolute recurrence is very low in those who 
had total thyroidectomy alone, regardless of 
the ability to discern all other confounders. 
Although a randomized clinical trial is 
necessary to definitively address the onco-
logic benefit of pCLND, only recently has 
such a trial been completed, and it showed 
no benefit; in 181 patients randomly as-
signed to total thyroidectomy alone or thy-
roidectomy with pCLND, the outcomes of 
biochemical and structural recurrence were 
similar after 5 years of follow-up.16 It may 
be argued that the study was not powered 
appropriately; an impressive sample size of 
nearly 6000 patients would be required for 
80% power.21 However, the study was pow-
ered as a noninferiority trial, and so fewer 
patients were required, and this is assum-
ing that total thyroidectomy with pCLND 
would never have higher recurrence rates 
than total thyroidectomy alone.16
Most of the published literature to 
date has been retrospective studies. In 
a study of 752 patients with clinically 
node-negative papillary thyroid cancer, 
390 underwent total thyroidectomy alone 
and 362 underwent total thyroidectomy 
with pCLND, and similar incidences of 
locoregional recurrence were found in the 
2 groups of patients.11 Furthermore, those 
who had bilateral pCLND had greater 
rates of transient and permanent compli-
cations. Our findings of very low recur-
rence rates in the central compartment in 
those who did not undergo pCLND were 
similar to those of Nixon et al.14 In their 
review of 275 patients who underwent to-
tal thyroidectomy alone, the rate of struc-
tural central lymph node recurrence was 
even lower at 0.4%. On the other hand, 
Popadich et al22 reported that the rate of 
repeated operation in the central neck 
compartment was higher in those who did 
not undergo a pCLND compared with 
the group of patients who did (1.5% vs 
6.1%, p = 0.004). They also found lower 
postoperative stimulated thyroglobulin 
levels after pCLND. Other studies have 
also shown decreased thyroglobulin levels 
with pCLND or transiently decreased 
levels, but it is unclear if this translates 
to a survival advantage.23,24 Finally, sys-
tematic reviews have been done on the 
subject, with no difference in oncologic 
outcomes with pCLND, yet pCLND may 
be associated with increased complications, 
particularly with increased rates of hypo-
parathyroidism.25,26
The American Thyroid Association in 
2015 released guidelines on lymph node 
dissection for well-differentiated thyroid 
cancer.27 In Recommendation 36B, the 
association stated that “pCLND should 
be considered in patients with papillary 
thyroid carcinoma with clinically unin-
volved central neck lymph nodes (cN0) 
who have advanced primary tumors (T3 
or T4) or clinically involved lateral neck 
nodes (cN1b), or if the information will 
be used to plan further steps in therapy.”27 
The recommendation was considered 
weak because of low-quality evidence.27 
Recommendation 36C stated that “thy-
roidectomy without prophylactic central 
neck dissection is appropriate for small 
(T1 or T2), noninvasive, clinically node-
negative [papillary thyroid cancer] (cN0) 
and for most follicular cancers”; this 
was considered a strong recommenda-
tion with moderate-quality evidence.27 
These updated guidelines have slight 
wording changes compared with the 
2009 and the 2006 guidelines, but the 
general trend has changed to now accept 
total thyroidectomy alone for early-stage 
papillary thyroid cancers.28,29 It appears 
in our study that surgeons in KPSC had 
already opted overwhelmingly for total 
thyroidectomy alone in patients with 
these early-stage cancers. 
CONCLUSION
In our study of patients with early-stage 
papillary thyroid cancer treated preferen-
tially with total thyroidectomy without 
pCLND, there was a very low rate of 
recurrence. Presently, pCLND is difficult 
to advocate for these patients. If pCLND 
is ever shown to be beneficial with a large 
multicenter and appropriately powered 
randomized trial, it might be difficult to 
find surgeons at local hospitals who would 
perform the procedure. v
a Senior Consultant, Clinical Analysis, Southern California 
Permanente Medical Group, Pasadena, CA.
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Adam T 
Perzynski and John M Boltri, MD, FAAP, for their 
assistance in the preparation of this manuscript.
 
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health 
Communications provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Said M, Fujimoto M, Franken C, Woo S, Vuong B, 
Haigh PI. Preferential use of total thyroidectomy 
without prophylactic central lymph node dissection 
for early-stage papillary thyroid cancer: Oncologic 
outcomes in an integrated health plan. Perm J 2016 
Fall;20(4):15-251. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/15-251.
References
 1. Shaha AR, Shah JP, Loree TR. Patterns of nodal 
and distant metastasis based on histologic varieties 
in differentiated carcinoma of the thyroid. Am J 
Surg 1996 Dec;172(6):692-4. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/s0002-9610(96)00310-8.
 2. Coburn MC, Wanebo HJ. Prognostic factors and 
management considerations in patients with cervical 
metastases of thyroid cancer. Am J Surg 1992 
Dec;164(6):671-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
s0002-9610(05)80732-9.
 3. Eichhorn W, Tabler H, Lippold R, Lochmann M, 
Schreckenberger M, Bartenstein P. Prognostic 
factors determining long-term survival in well-
differentiated thyroid cancer: an analysis of four 
hundred eighty-four patients patients undergoing 
therapy and aftercare at the same institution. 
Thyroid 2003 Oct;13(10):949-58. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1089/105072503322511355.
 4. Hughes CJ, Shaha AR, Shah JP, Loree TR. 
Impact of lymph node metastasis in differentiated 
carcinoma of the thyroid: a matched-pair 
analysis. Head Neck 1996 Mar-Apr;18(2):127-32. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/(sici)1097-
0347(199603/04)18:2<127::aid-hed3>3.0.co;2-3.
 5. Adam MA, Pura J, Goffredo P, et al. Presence and 
number of lymph node metastases are associated 
with compromised survival for patients younger than 
age 45 years with papillary thyroid cancer. J Clin 
Oncol 2015 Jul 20;33(21):2370-5. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1200/JCO.2014.59.8391.
 6. Podnos YD, Smith D, Wagman LD, Ellenhorn JD. 
The implication of lymph node metastasis on survival 
in patients with well-differentiated thyroid cancer. Am 
Surg 2005 Sep;71(9):731-4.
 7. Bardet S, Malville E, Rame JP, et al. Macroscopic 
lymph-node involvement and neck dissection 
predict lymph-node recurrence in papillary thyroid 
carcinoma. Eur J Endocrinol 2008 Apr;158(4):551-60. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1530/eje-07-0603.
 8. Barczyński M, Konturek A, Stopa M, Nowak W. 
Prophylactic central neck dissection for papillary 
thyroid cancer. Br J Surg 2013 Feb;100(3):410-8. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bjs.8985.
 9. Hartl DM, Mamelle E, Borget I, Leboulleux S, 
Mirghani H, Schlumberger M. Influence of 
prophylactic neck dissection on rate of retreatment 
for papillary thyroid carcinoma. World J Surg 2013 
Aug;37(8):1951-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00268-013-2089-3.
 10. Scheumann GF, Gimm O, Wegener G, 
Hundeshagen J, Dralle H. Prognostic significance 
and surgical management of locoregional lymph 
node metastases in papillary thyroid cancer. World J 
Surg 1994 Jul-Aug;18(4):559-67. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/bf00353765.
Preferential Use of Total Thyroidectomy without Prophylactic Central Lymph Node Dissection  
for Early-Stage Papillary Thyroid Cancer: Oncologic Outcomes in an Integrated Health Plan
 26
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-251
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Preferential 
Use 
of 
Total 
Thyroidectomy 
without 
Prophylactic 
Central 
Lymph 
Node 
Dissection 
for 
Early-Stage 
Papillary 
Thyroid 
Cancer: 
Oncologic 
Outcomes 
in 
an 
Integrated 
Health 
Plan
 11. Conzo G, Calò PG, Sinisi AA, et al. Impact of 
prophylactic central compartment neck dissection 
on locoregional recurrence of differentiated thyroid 
cancer in clinically node-negative patients: a 
retrospective study of a large clinical series. Surgery 
2014 Jun;155(6):998-1005. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.surg.2014.02.010.
 12. Hartl DM, Leboulleux S, Al Ghuzlan A, et al. 
Optimization of staging of the neck with 
prophylactic central and lateral neck dissection 
for papillary thyroid carcinoma. Ann Surg 2012 
Apr;255(4):777-83. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
SLA.0b013e31824b7b68.
 13. Henry JF, Gramatica L, Denizot A, Kvachenyuk A, 
Puccini M, Defechereux T. Morbidity of prophylactic 
lymph node dissection in the central neck area 
in patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma. 
Langenbecks Arch Surg 1998 Apr;383(2):167-9. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s004230050111.
 14. Nixon IJ, Ganly I, Patel SG, et al. Observation 
of clinically negative central compartment lymph 
nodes in papillary thyroid carcinoma. Surgery 2013 
Dec;154(6):1166-73. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
surg.2013.04.035.
 15. Shen WT, Ogawa L, Ruan D, et al. Central neck 
lymph node dissection for papillary thyroid cancer: 
comparison of complication and recurrence rates 
in 295 initial dissections and reoperations. Arch 
Surg 2010 Mar;145(3):272-5. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/archsurg.2010.9.
 16. Viola D, Materazzi G, Valerio L, et al. Prophylactic 
central compartment lymph node dissection in 
papillary thyroid carcinoma: clinical implications 
derived from the first prospective randomized 
controlled single institution study. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2015 Apr;100(4):1316-24. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1210/jc.2014-3825.
 17. Robbins KT, Clayman G, Levine PA, et al; American 
Head and Neck Society; American Academy of 
Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery. Neck 
dissection classification update: revisions proposed 
by the American Head and Neck Society and the 
American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and 
Neck Surgery. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
2002 Jul;128(7):751-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archotol.128.7.751.
 18. Sosa JA, Bowman HM, Tielsch JM, Powe NR, 
Gordon TA, Udelsman R. The importance 
of surgeon experience for clinical and economic 
outcomes from thyroidectomy. Ann Surg 
1998 Sep;228(3):320-30. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00000658-199809000-00005.
 19. Stavrakis AI, Ituarte PH, Ko CY, Yeh MW. Surgeon 
volume as a predictor of outcomes in inpatient 
and outpatient endocrine surgery. Surgery 2007 
Dec;142(6):887-99. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
surg.2007.09.003.
 20. Enyioha C, Roman SA, Sosa JA. Central lymph node 
dissection in patients with papillary thyroid cancer: 
a population level analysis of 14,257 cases. Am J 
Surg 2013 Jun;205(6):655-61. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.amjsurg.2012.06.012.
 21. Carling T, Carty SE, Ciarleglio MM, et al; American 
Thyroid Association Surgical Affairs Committee. 
American Thyroid Association design and feasibility 
of a prospective randomized controlled trial 
of prophylactic central lymph node dissection 
for papillary thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid 2012 
Mar;22(3):237-44. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/
thy.2011-0317.
 22. Popadich A, Levin O, Lee JC, et al. A multicenter 
cohort study of total thyroidectomy and routine 
central lymph node dissection for cN0 papillary 
thyroid cancer. Surgery 2011 Dec;150(6):1048-57. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.surg.2011.09.003.
 23. Lang BH, Wong KP, Wan KY, Lo CY. Impact 
of routine unilateral central neck dissection on 
preablative and postablative stimulated thyroglobulin 
levels after total thyroidectomy in papillary thyroid 
carcinoma. Ann Surg Oncol 2012 Jan;19(1):60-7. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1245/s10434-011-1833-x.
 24. Sywak M, Cornford L, Roach P, Stalberg P, 
Sidhu S, Delbridge L. Routine ipsilateral level 
VI lymphadenectomy reduces postoperative 
thyroglobulin levels in papillary thyroid cancer. 
Surgery 2006 Dec;140(6):1000-5. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.surg.2006.08.001.
 25. Wang TS, Cheung K, Farrokhyar F, Roman SA, 
Sosa JA. A meta-analysis of the effect of prophylactic 
central compartment neck dissection on locoregional 
recurrence rates in patients with papillary thyroid 
cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 2013 Oct;20(11):3477-83. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1245/s10434-013-3125-0.
 26. Shan CX, Zhang W, Jiang DZ, Zheng XM, Liu S,  
Qiu M. Routine central neck dissection in 
differentiated thyroid carcinoma: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Laryngoscope 2012 
Apr;122(4):797-804. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
lary.22162. 
 27. Haugen BR, Alexander EK, Bible KC, et al. 2015 
American Thyroid Association management 
guidelines for adult patients with thyroid nodules 
and differentiated thyroid cancer: the American 
Thyroid Association guidelines task force on thyroid 
nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 
2016 Jan;26(1):1-133. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/
thy.2015.0020.
 28. Cooper DS, Doherty GM, Haugen BR, et al. 
Revised American Thyroid Association management 
guidelines for patients with thyroid nodules 
and differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 2009 
Nov;19(11):1167-214. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/
thy.2009.0110.
 29. Cooper DS, Doherty GM, Haugen BR, et al; 
American Thyroid Association Guidelines Taskforce. 
Management guidelines for patients with thyroid 
nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 
2006 Feb;16(2):109-42. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1089/thy.2006.16.109.
Feared
Where there are several chronic diseases more  
destructive to life than cancer, none is more feared.
— Charles Horace Mayo, MD, 1865-1939, American medical practitioner  
and cofounder of the Mayo Clinic
Preferential Use of Total Thyroidectomy without Prophylactic Central Lymph Node Dissection 
 
for Early-Stage Papillary Thyroid Cancer: Oncologic Outcomes in an Integrated Health Plan
 27
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-002
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Standardizing Management of Adults with Delirium  
Hospitalized on Medical-Surgical Units
Clay Angel, MD; Kristen Brooks, MD; Julie Fourie 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-002
E-pub: 09/09/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-002
ABSTRACT 
Context: Delirium is common among inpatients aged 65 years 
and older and is associated with multiple adverse consequences, 
including increased length of stay (LOS). However, delirium is 
frequently unrecognized and poorly understood. At one hospi-
tal, baseline management of delirium on medical-surgical units 
varied greatly, and psychiatric consultations focused exclusively 
on crisis management. 
Objective: To implement a multidisciplinary program for 
rapid identification and proactive management of patients with 
delirium on medical-surgical units.
Design: A pilot from September 2010 to July 2012 included 
920 unique patients, of whom 470 were seen by the delirium 
management team. A delirium management team included a 
redesigned role for consulting psychiatrists and a new clinical 
nurse specialist role; the team provided assistance with diagnosis 
and recommendations for nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic 
management of delirium. Multidisciplinary education focused 
on delirium identification and management and nurses’ use of 
appropriate assessment tools. Electronic health record functions 
supported accurate problem list coding, referrals to the team, and 
standardized documentation. 
Main Outcome Measure: Length of stay.
Results: During the study period, average LOS in the target 
population decreased from 8.5 days to 6.5 days (p = 0.001); 
average LOS for the Medical Center remained stable. Compared 
with patients whose delirium was diagnosed during the baseline 
period, patients who received a delirium diagnosis during the 
pilot period had a higher illness burden and were likelier to have 
a history of delirium and diagnosed dementia. 
Conclusion: Program implementation was associated with 
reduced LOS among older inpatients with delirium. The delirium 
team is an effective model that can be quickly implemented with 
few additional resources. 
INTRODUCTION
In 2010, a dementia task force at Kaiser Permanente (KP) San 
Rafael Medical Center (SRMC) recognized a need to improve the 
management of delirium among adults on medical-surgical units. 
Scarce inpatient psychiatry resources were directed at crisis inter-
vention, with little proactive management of delirium.
Delirium is an acute confusional state characterized by inatten-
tion, abnormal level of consciousness, cognitive impairment, and a 
fluctuating course.1 Delirium is frequently unrecognized. Clinicians 
may miss subtle signs, such as inattention, memory impairment, 
and difficulty following conversations and may not recognize acute 
delirium co-occurring with chronic dementia. Delirium and de-
mentia are distinct clinical entities, but delirium superimposed on 
dementia may account for 50% of cases.2 Misidentification of de-
lirium is common; it is appropriately coded in just 3% of instances.3 
Accurate diagnosis and coding are essential to providing optimal 
care, identifying the affected population, understanding incidence 
and prevalence, and developing population-level interventions.
The prevalence of delirium on hospital admission is 10% to 31%, 
and the incidence of delirium during hospitalization is 3% to 56%, 
with variations in the populations being assessed accounting for the 
broad range.4,5 In addition to advanced age, many factors influence 
the development of delirium. In a meta-analysis, 10 factors were 
consistently associated with incident delirium: dementia, comor-
bid illness, illness severity, diminished ability to perform activities 
of daily living, urinary catheterization, polypharmacy, low serum 
albumin, urea-creatinine ratio abnormalities, hyper- or hyponatre-
mia, and prolonged hospital stay.6 Other predisposing factors may 
include male sex, geriatric syndromes (eg, history of falls, pressure 
ulcers, sensory impairment, and malnutrition), social isolation, 
and immobility.7 Precipitating factors may include acute insults, 
such as dehydration, fracture, hypoxia, infection, ischemia, surgery, 
uncontrolled pain, and urinary or stool retention, and inpatient 
experiences, such as sleep deprivation and the use of restraints.7 
Medications are a common iatrogenic cause of delirium.2
Adverse outcomes of delirium include longer hospital stays, a 
need for postdischarge custodial care, and increased morbidity 
and mortality.8 In one study, length of stay (LOS) increased by 7.8 
days after incident delirium among all inpatients aged 65 years and 
older.9 Inpatients with baseline cognitive impairment and incident 
delirium stayed 3.3 days longer than cognitively impaired seniors 
without delirium.10 Total direct annual health care costs in the US 
attributable to delirium are an estimated $143 to $152 billion, 
which include the costs of longer stays.11
Limited evidence exists about multidisciplinary management 
of delirium outside intensive care units (ICUs). Comprehensive 
multidisciplinary and environmental interventions may reduce 
delirium duration and LOS,12 but reports assessing the impact of 
multidisciplinary delirium teams outside the ICU yield conflicting 
results. Psychiatric or geriatric consultation and liaison nurse follow-
up provided minimal benefits.13,14 Individualized geriatric treatment 
was associated with improved quality of life but unchanged costs 
of care.15 An intervention incorporating dedicated delirium beds 
was associated with lower mortality and fewer falls but increased 
LOS.16 A specialized geriatric unit was associated with shorter LOS, 
Clay Angel, MD, is the Chief of Service for Skilled Nursing Facilities at the San Rafael Medical Center in CA. 
E-mail: clay.angel@kp.org. Kristen Brooks, MD, is a Consultant Liaison in Psychiatry for the San Rafael Medical 
Center in CA. E-mail: kristen.b.brooks@kp.org. Julie Fourie is a Clinical Consulting Manager at the San Rafael 
Medical Center in CA. E-mail: julie.c.fourie@kp.org.
credits available for this article — see page 128.
 28
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-002
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Standardizing Management of Adults with Delirium Hospitalized on Medical-Surgical Units 
improved functional status, less restraint use, lower antipsychotic 
medication doses, and fewer adverse events.17 
The purpose of this quality-improvement project was to implement 
a multidisciplinary program for rapid identification and proactive 
management of patients with delirium on medical-surgical units.
METHODS
At SRMC, a 116-bed adult medical-surgical and intensive 
care hospital, 16 full-time equivalent (FTE) hospitalists and 600 
FTE registered nurses and ancillary staff care for an annual aver-
age of 6320 discharged patients. An integrated electronic health 
record (EHR), KP HealthConnect, is available in all settings. The 
Medical Center serves a higher proportion of adults older than 
age of 65 years (16.7%) than in KP Northern California (KPNC) 
as a whole (11.4%). The SRMC Medicare case mix index of 1.67 
is also higher than for KPNC as a whole (1.56). 
Before the project reported here, inpatient psychiatric cover-
age consisted of one FTE shared by two half-time consulting 
psychiatrists available four hours each weekday. They provided 
consultation for all inpatient psychiatric needs, including assess-
ment for mood, anxiety and thought disorders, eating disorders, 
chemical dependency, delirium, and advanced dementia. Hospi-
talists identified and managed inpatients with delirium, typically 
requesting a psychiatric consultation only when patients became 
Nonpharmacologic Delirium Management Protocol
Hospital administration
Bed and staff assignments
• Try to maintain continuity of care (nurses, 
patient care technicians, physicians)
• Avoid room changes
• Try to adhere to a routine as much as possible 
and communicate the routine frequently to the 
patient
• Patient should be in a private or semiprivate 
room. If not possible, the patient should be 
placed to either of the end beds, not the 
middle bed
Nursing assessment
• Delirium team referral: Add patient name to the 
“Delirium Rounds” patient list in the EHR.
• Social worker referral: Assess for home 
management, coping; perform long-term 
planning
• Add CAM-ICU flowsheet to shift assessment 
and perform every shift
• Assess patient for common causes of delirium
H: hypoxia or hypercapnia
E: electrolyte imbalance or ethanol 
withdrawal
M: medications (see medication list) or  
acute myocardial infarction
I: infection
• Use inpatient nursing notes to chart behavior, 
sleep, and need for and effect of as-needed 
behavior medications using SmartPhrase 
from Epic
• Use a script with patients: “Hi, Mr/Mrs (name). 
What a shame you wound up in the hospital 
because you (diagnosis). Your doctor says 
you’re better and you might be going home 
tomorrow. I am your nurse and my name is 
(name), and I’ll be taking care of you until 
(time) today.”
• Screening questions for confusion
– What brought you here?
– How long have you been here?
Patient care technician/nursing activities
Safety
• high-visibility room
• low bed
• bed alarm
• fall risk wristband
• removal of street clothing and shoes from room
Environment
• Provide soothing music or the Care Channel on the TV when appropriate (during day)
• Remove unnecessary equipment and clutter
• Hide IV lines and catheters as much as possible
Orientation
• Call patient by preferred name
• Provide orientation cue using dry-erase board in patient room
• Obtain patient’s glasses, dentures, and hearing aids from family if used and have available
• Encourage family to stay with patient during day as much as possible to improve orientation; 
encourage social interaction and family visits during visiting hours
• Allow patient to have personal items from home (photos, blankets, pillows, etc)
• Reorient the patient frequently using the script above and explain care and activities
• Have a clock visible and provide frequent verbal reminders of time and date
Maintain sleep-wake cycle
• Limit unnecessary awakenings
• If clinically stable, hold temperature and blood pressure checks from 11 pm to 7 am to maintain 
optimal sleep and rest
• Turn lights off at 10 pm and back on during the day while the patient is awake
• Turn TV off and keep room dark and quiet between 10 pm and 7 am to prevent sleep deprivation
• Pull curtains open to allow sunlight in the room during daylight hours
• Put patient in a private or semiprivate room if possible to avoid excess noise 
• Withhold caffeine after noon
Elimination
• Assist with toileting hourly during the day, then every 2 to 4 hours while awake in the evening
• If unable to void after 8 hours, perform bladder scan and notify physician
• On Day 3 of admission, notify morning rounding physician to consider discontinuation of Foley 
catheter if inserted on admission
• Monitor for constipation. Try prevention measures such as prune juice, stewed prunes, or bran cereal 
if the patient is taking food by mouth
• For patients who do not have a Foley catheter and are drinking oral liquids, allow no liquids after  
8 pm if possible
Ambulation
• Keep a walker and commode at bedside as indicated
• If patient is ambulatory, ambulate three times a day, with assistance if patient is unsteady or 
mentation is abnormal
• Assist patient out of bed to chair for all meals
 
CAM-ICU = Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit; EHR = electronic health record; IV = intravenous. 
 29
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-002
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Standardizing Management of Adults with Delirium Hospitalized on Medical-Surgical Units 
hyperactively delirious. A robust protocol for nonpharmacologic 
strategies for managing delirium was inconsistently used. On 
weekends, hospitalists managed patients with psychiatric needs, 
including delirium. Consulting psychiatrists returning on Mon-
day invested substantial effort into improving pharmacologic 
management of patients with delirium. 
Approach to Improving Delirium Management
The goal was to implement a systematic multidisciplinary 
process for proactive and timely identification and treatment of 
delirium among hospitalized adults. Objectives were to 1) raise 
awareness about delirium by educating clinicians and emphasizing 
the benefits of a team approach, 2) provide consultation to hospi-
talists for working up the cause of the delirium and appropriate 
medical management, and 3) reduce the impact of the hospital 
environment on delirium. 
Measures for Improvement
The target population, which was assessed retrospectively, in-
cluded all inpatients discharged with an International Classifica-
tion of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9) code of 293.0 (delirium 
due to conditions classified elsewhere) or 780.09 (other alteration 
of consciousness). Measured outcomes included average LOS, 
days of restraint use, and fall (assisted and found on floor) rates. 
Data also were collected on age, sex, previous history of delirium, 
diagnosed dementia, and discharge disposition. Diagnosis-related 
group (DRG) cost weights measured disease burden; they reflect 
the average level of resource use for an average Medicare patient 
in the DRG, relative to the average resource use for all Medicare 
patients.18 More complex conditions have higher DRG weights.19 
Baseline data were collected from January 2009 to August 2010. 
Baseline data validated the perceived opportunity to improve 
management of delirium in inpatients. Among 419 patients meet-
ing inclusion criteria, baseline LOS averaged 8.5 days, more than 
the reported average LOS for patients with incident delirium.9 
Restraint use occurred on 1.7% of patient days, and falls occurred 
in 0.2% of hospital admissions. Statistical process control software 
was used to monitor outcomes. This quality-improvement project 
was not subject to research oversight. 
The Delirium Team
A delirium team was created by redesigning existing staff roles. 
One of the two half-time psychiatrists began focusing primarily 
on managing delirium among inpatients. A new half-time clini-
cal nurse specialist (CNS) position was filled by a CNS already 
on staff. On weekdays, the psychiatrist/CNS team rounded on 
all referred patients, following them up until delirium resolved. 
Referrals were based on the clinical judgment of hospitalists 
and nurses; a positive screening test was not required. From the 
beginning, the team encouraged hospital staff to promptly refer 
older adults with fluctuating or sudden onset of confusion and 
not wait until they became, for example, combative or delusional. 
The delirium team recommended interventions including 
medication management and a nonpharmacologic management 
protocol (see Sidebar: Nonpharmacologic Delirium Management 
Protocol). The latter addresses the following: 1) monitoring for 
common causes (eg, medications, dehydration, constipation, 
hypoxia, electrolyte imbalance); 2) reducing environmental trig-
gers (eg, bright lights at night, loud noises, intravenous lines); 3) 
therapeutic strategies for patient care and communication (eg, 
normalizing sleep-wake cycles, frequent reorientation); and 4) 
addressing sensory deficits (eg, ensuring the use of eyeglasses, 
hearing aids, and dentures). 
Within one month, SRMC expanded psychiatric consultation 
on weekends, as part of a larger initiative to provide service seven 
days per week, as well as to better manage patients with delirium. 
In addition, hospital social workers screened all referred patients for 
psychosocial needs, and a dedicated dementia social worker role was 
created in January 2011. Because of frequent co-occurrence of de-
lirium and dementia, this role provided key support for the program.2
Multidisciplinary Education
Evidence-based best practices for identifying and managing 
delirium were presented at monthly hospitalist meetings and 
distributed to physicians.2,20 In April 2011, SRMC grand rounds 
focused on dementia and delirium. Consulting psychiatrists 
also provided real-time education for staff hospitalists while 
collaborating on patient care.
A medication dosing guide was developed and distributed to 
hospitalists and Emergency Department physicians. It included 
guidelines for scheduled and as-needed use of olanzapine, que-
tiapine, risperidone, and haloperidol, restricting lorazepam use 
to alcohol withdrawal-related delirium (Table 1). In addition, 
consulting psychiatrists recommended adding or adjusting 
bowel care and avoiding sedatives and hypnotics for sleep, 
benzodiazepines in delirium unrelated to alcohol withdrawal, 
anticholinergics, and other delirogenic medications. Individual-
ized pain management recommendations adjusted and lowered 
opioid dosages, allowing for as-needed escalation.
Mandatory training for registered nurses addressed identifi-
cation and management of delirium and use of the Confusion 
Assessment Method for the ICU (CAM-ICU) tool. Although 
the tool was developed for ICU use, it was selected for its 
high sensitivity and specificity and existing availability in the 
EHR.21,22 Nurses were expected to complete the CAM-ICU as 
part of shift assessments for medical-surgical patients referred 
to the delirium management team. The delirium CNS audited 
CAM-ICU use, providing feedback, coaching, and targeted 
education to nursing staff. 
Interventions in Delirium Care Quality-Improvement Initiative
• Delirium management team consisting of a psychiatrist and a clinical 
nurse specialist providing consultation seven days a week
• Social work support
• Pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic management protocols 
• Multidisciplinary education to improve delirium diagnosis, ongoing 
assessment, and documentation in the EHR
• “Drag and drop” referrals in the EHR to the delirium management team
• Standardized documentation templates
EHR = electronic health record.
 30
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-002
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Standardizing Management of Adults with Delirium Hospitalized on Medical-Surgical Units 
Health Information Technology Support
Before the quality-improvement project, hospitalists used 
varying diagnostic codes for patients with delirium; a key objec-
tive was increasing the appropriate coding of delirium on the 
EHR problem list. To facilitate coding, a drop-down menu ap-
peared when hospitalists matched delirium in the EHR problem 
list, listing 11 ICD-9 options that included acute delirium and 
combinations of delirium and dementias. Hospitalist education 
emphasized selecting either Code 293.0 or 780.09. 
Hospitalists and nurses could refer patients for delirium as-
sessment and management by adding their names to a shared 
EHR list. The delirium team reviewed the list and provided daily 
consultation to all referred inpatients. An electronic template 
standardized assessment, recommendations, and treatment 
plan documentation. A template for follow-up consultations 
standardized documentation of changes in clinical condition 
and recommended medication adjustments. An electronic de-
lirium order set was later created, but an existing paper-based 
order set for nonpharmacologic management was used during 
the pilot. The Sidebar: Interventions in the Delirium Care 
Quality-Improvement Initiative summarizes delirium manage-
ment strategies. 
Implementation
A pilot from September 2010 to July 2012 included 920 patients 
who were discharged with a qualifying diagnostic code, approxi-
mately half of whom were seen by the delirium management team. 
Some patients were not referred to the delirium management team, 
and a separate prevention and management protocol was used for 
delirium in the ICU. 
Program enhancements occurred during the pilot. After an 
initial lack of cross-coverage, SRMC leadership mandated that the 
Psychiatry Department provide seven-day coverage and allocated 
trained psychiatric and CNS coverage to the program. The medi-
cation dosing guide was updated. Recommendations to prevent 
pneumonia and falls were added to documentation templates. An 
EHR SmartPhrase (Epic software from Intergalactic; Verona, WI) 
was created for nurses to document the effect of medications for 
hyperactive behaviors (Figure 1).
RESULTS
During the pilot, 920 patients met inclusion criteria, of whom 
470 received care from the delirium management team. The pilot 
data from September 2010 to July 2012 were compared with the 
baseline data for 419 patients in January 2009 to August 2010. 
Those in the pilot period were more likely to have a history of 
delirium and a diagnosis of dementia. Patients in the pilot pe-
riod had a higher median DRG weight and a different mix of 
discharge dispositions compared with patients in the baseline 
period (Table 2). 
The average LOS in the target population decreased from 8.5 
to 6.5 days (p = 0.001); the average LOS for SRMC as a whole 
remained stable at 3.9 days. The rate of falls and the use of re-
straints were unchanged.
Assuming an improvement of 2.0 days in average LOS for 
480 discharges annually and a variable cost per hospital day of 
$2700, the delirium management program avoided an estimated 
annual $2.6 million in costs. The incremental staffing cost of 
a 0.5 FTE CNS position and inpatient nursing staff training 
costs offset avoided costs, generating net annual savings of 
Table 1. Neuroleptic dosing guide for delirium
 
Medication
Route of 
administration
 
Initial dosing
 
PRN dosing
 
Indications
 
Contraindications
 
Cautions
Haloperidol 
(Haldol)
Oral, IV, IM
0.5-1 mg every 
day to twice 
daily 
0.25-2.0 mg 
every hour for 
serious agitation
Delirium, agitation, 
psychosis
Parkinson disease, 
QTc > 500 ms
Avoid IV form if QT 
interval an issue; may 
cause dystonia/EPS, 
especially if given IM
Risperidone 
(Risperdal)
Oral, orally disintegrating 
tablet (M-tab); available 
in depot form but not a 
standard IM
0.5-1 mg every 
day or twice 
daily
0.5-1 mg every 4 
hours; TD not to 
exceed 6 mg/d
Delirium, psychosis/
agitation, aggression; less 
sedating than quetiapine or 
olanzapine
Parkinson disease, 
QTc > 500 ms
May cause tachycardia, 
hypotension
Quetiapine 
(Seroquel)
Oral
25 mg twice 
daily or every 
HS, can 
increase to 
50-100 mg/d
12.5-25 mg every 
4-6 hours
Preferred for delirium in 
patients with Parkinson 
disease; lower risk of NMS
QTc > 500 ms
Can cause orthostatic 
hypotension and 
sedation
Olanzapine 
(Zyprexa)
Oral, orally disintegrating 
tablet (Zydis), IM
2.5-5 mg/d
2.5-5 mg every  
4 hours; TD not 
to exceed  
20 mg/d
Second choice for delirium 
in patients with Parkinson 
disease, psychosis, 
agitation; lower risk of NMS
QTc > 500 ms
Can cause hypotension, 
sedation
Lorazepam 
(Ativan)
Oral, SL, IM, IV
0.5-2 mg
0.5-1.0 mg 
every 6 hours as 
needed for signs/ 
symptoms of 
withdrawal
Anxiety, ethanol withdrawal
May have 
paradoxical 
reaction; monitor 
for withdrawal 
syndrome
Will worsen delirium 
unless delirium 
from alcohol or 
benzodiazepine 
withdrawal
EPS = extrapyramidal symptoms; HS = hora somni (bedtime); IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous; min = minute; NMS = neuroleptic malignant syndrome;  
PRN = pro re nata (as needed); QTc = corrected QT interval; SL = sublingual; TD = total dose.
 31
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-002
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Standardizing Management of Adults with Delirium Hospitalized on Medical-Surgical Units 
$2.4 million. The cost of psychiatric coverage on weekends was 
not included because coverage was expanded to address several 
needs at SRMC. 
DISCUSSION
The delirium management program was a resource-efficient 
and effective way to improve delirium management among older 
inpatients, as measured by LOS. The rate of falls and use of re-
straints did not change. Falls occurred too infrequently to detect 
statistically significant changes. Measuring changes in the use of 
restraints was confounded by a 2011 organizational change in 
staffing and safety-sitter standards that also had an impact on 
restraint use. 
Limitations of the study include the fact that we did not include 
other measures, such as patient, family, and staff satisfaction, 
which could have provided additional evidence of benefits. In ad-
dition, we were unable to assess the effect of individual program 
components, such as education, increased emphasis on recogni-
tion and management of delirium, and seven-day availability of 
psychiatric consultations. Improved identification could have 
reduced LOS if more patients with less severe delirium were in-
cluded; we did not measure delirium severity. However, a higher 
prevalence of dementia and a history of delirium and greater 
illness complexity among patients in the pilot suggest that the 
project led to accurate identification of delirium among some 
patients in whom it might otherwise have been overlooked in 
the context of more complex illness.
Another limitation pertains to including all patients coded 
as having delirium: those in the ICU, where another delirium 
management program was in place; those receiving usual care 
in the baseline period; and those receiving usual care and the 
intervention in the pilot period. Including all patients with a 
diagnosis of delirium captured any broader intervention effects. 
For example, as hospitalists gained experience, they may have 
managed some patients without referral. However, we did not 
assess the extent to which this occurred. 
Shorter LOS could have resulted from patients with delirium 
being transferred to other care settings. Compared with the base-
line population, fewer patients in the pilot population returned 
home to routine care and more patients received home health 
or hospice care after discharge. A robust inpatient palliative care 
team was implemented during the pilot period, which may have 
affected discharge dispositions. 
A benefit of reduced average LOS among older adults is 
avoided adverse events. For example, among medical inpatients 
of all ages in all settings, each additional hospital night increases 
by 1.6% the baseline risk of infection of 17.6%.23 Adults aged 
65 years and older have a 5-fold higher risk of an inpatient Clos-
tridium difficile infection than those aged 45 to 64 years24; the 
benefit is evident of avoiding incremental increases in infection 
risk among older inpatients.
Delirium team members built collegial relationships that helped 
change the culture of delirium care at SRMC. The psychiatrist 
championed the program among physician peers. A psychiatry 
background is useful—but not essential—for this role. It could 
Table 2. Characteristics of older adults with deliriuma
Characteristic
Baseline (n = 419)b
Follow-up (n = 920)c
p value
Age, median years (mean, SD) 
81 (77, 15)
82 (79, 14)
0.163
Women
215 (51.3)
519 (56.4)
0.086
Previous history of delirium
134 (32.0)
379 ( 41.2)
0.001
Diagnosed dementia
89 (21.2)
304 ( 33.0)
0.001
DRG weight,d median (mean, SD)
1.16 (1.76, 1.99)
1.49 (1.80, 1.58)
< 0.0001
Discharge disposition
Died
35 (8.4)
91 (9.9)
< 0.0001
Against medical advice
1 (0.2)
3 (0.3)
Acute hospital
13 (3.1)
23 (2.5)
Other inpatient care
10 (2.4)
16 (1.7)
Long-term care
129 (30.8)
296 (32.1)
Routine home
187 (44.6)
295 (32.0)
Home health or hospice care
44 (10.5)
197 (21.4)
a Data are no. (%) unless otherwise indicated.
b Collected January 2009 to August 2010.
c Collected September 2010 to July 2012.
d DRG weights reflect the average level of resources for all patients at baseline and follow-up, compared with the average level of resources for all Medicare patients.
DRG = diagnosis-related group; SD = standard deviation.
Figure 1. Sample electronic health record showing documentation of effect of 
medications for hyperactive behaviors.
Geodon = ziprasidone; IM = intramuscular; PRN = as needed.
 32
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-002
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Standardizing Management of Adults with Delirium Hospitalized on Medical-Surgical Units 
be filled by a hospitalist, geriatrician, or neurologist with inpa-
tient experience who is comfortable consulting with peers and 
knowledgeable about delirium identification and management, 
particularly effective psychotropic medication use. 
The delirium team is generalizable to other settings. The low 
cost and rapid speed of implementation pose lower economic 
and logistic barriers than do approaches such as dedicated care 
settings.17 The model also can be transferred to Emergency De-
partments and skilled nursing facilities. 
The delirium program continued after the pilot period. The 
average LOS among patients with a discharge diagnosis code of 
delirium was 7.2 days between July 2012 and November 2014. 
Factors affecting sustainability include turnover of delirium team 
members and competing time demands. The CNS role is pivotal; 
without feedback and coaching, nursing practice tended to drift 
from best practices. Sustainability could be enhanced with clinical 
decision-support tools in the EHR, such as best practice alerts 
and a simpler CAM-ICU algorithm. 
Program enhancements occurred after the pilot. An electronic 
version of the nonpharmacologic management protocol replaced 
the paper-based version. The electronic delirium order set ex-
panded to include scheduled and as-needed medication manage-
ment and laboratory monitoring. These elements in the EHR can 
contribute to sustainability and enable spread to other settings. 
Efforts are under way across KPNC to use administrative data to 
automatically trigger the nonpharmacologic order set for patients 
at risk of delirium: those older than age 75 years or older than 
age 65 years and undergoing surgery; those with any history of 
dementia, cognitive impairment, or delirium; and those taking 
medications that increase delirium risk. 
CONCLUSION
A program to improve delirium management could be quickly 
implemented with few additional resources and was associated 
with reduced LOS among older inpatients with delirium. Poten-
tial benefits to patient and staff satisfaction and safety as well as 
the cost savings associated with this program support an invest-
ment in implementation. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
Acknowledgment
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health Communications provided editorial 
support.
How to Cite this Article
Angel C, Brooks K, Fourie J. Standardizing management of adults with delirium 
hospitalized on medical-surgical units. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-002.  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-002
References
 1. American Psychiatric Association, editor. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association Publishing; 2013. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425596.
 2. Douglas VC, Josephson SA. Delirium. Continuum (Minneap Minn) 2010 Apr;16(2 
Dementia):120-34. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/01.CON.0000368215.71588.22.
 3. Inouye SK, Leo-Summers L, Zhang Y, Bogardus ST Jr, Leslie DL, Agostini JV. 
A chart-based method for identification of delirium: validation compared with 
interviewer ratings using the confusion assessment method. J Am Geriatr Soc 2005 
Feb;53(2):312-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53120.x. 
 4. Siddiqi N, House AO, Holmes JD. Occurrence and outcome of delirium in medical 
in-patients: a systematic literature review. Age Ageing 2006 Jul;35(4):350-64. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ageing/afl005.
 5. Inouye SK. Delirium in older persons. N Engl J Med 2006 Mar 16;354(11):1157-65. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/nejmra052321. Erratum in: N Engl J Med 2006 Apr 
13;354(15):1655. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMx060018.
 6. Ahmed S, Leurent B, Sampson EL. Risk factors for incident delirium among older 
people in acute hospital medical units: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Age 
Ageing 2014 May;43(3):326-33. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ageing/afu022.
 7. Kalish VB, Gillham JE, Unwin BK. Delirium in older persons: evaluation and 
management. Am Fam Physician 2014 Aug;90(3):150-8. Erratum in: Am Fam 
Physician 2014 Dec 15;90(12):819.
 8. Ryan DJ, O’Regan NA, Caoimh RÓ, et al. Delirium in an adult acute hospital 
population: predictors, prevalence and detection. BMJ Open 2013 Jan 7;3(1): 
e001772. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001772.
 9. McCusker J, Cole MG, Dendukuri N, Belzile E. Does delirium increase hospital stay? 
J Am Geriatr Soc 2003 Nov;51(11):1539-46. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1532-
5415.2003.51509.x. 
 10. Boustani M, Baker MS, Campbell N, et al. Impact and recognition of cognitive 
impairment among hospitalized elders. J Hosp Med 2010 Feb;5(2):69-75. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/jhm.589.
 11. Leslie DL, Inouye SK. The importance of delirium: economic and societal costs. J 
Am Geriatr Soc 2011 Nov;59 Suppl 2:S241-3. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-
5415.2011.03671.x.
 12. Yue J, Tabloski P, Dowal SL, Puelle MR, Nandan R, Inouye SK. NICE to HELP: 
operationalizing National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guidelines to 
improve clinical practice. J Am Geriatr Soc 2014 Apr;62(4):754-61. DOI: http//dx.doi.
org/10.1111/jgs.12768.
 13. Cole MG, McCusker J, Bellavance F, et al. Systematic detection and multidisciplinary 
care of delirium in older medical inpatients: a randomized trial. CMAJ 2002 Oct 1; 
167(7):753-9.
 14. Cole MG, Primeau FJ, Bailey RF, et al. Systematic intervention for elderly inpatients 
with delirium: a randomized trial. CMAJ 1994 Oct 1;151(7):965-70. 
 15. Pitkala KH, Laurila JV, Strandberg TE, Kautiainen H, Sintonen H, Tilvis RS. 
Multicomponent geriatric intervention for elderly inpatients with delirium: effects 
on costs and health-related quality of life. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2008 
Jan;63(1):56-61. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/gerona/63.1.56.
 16. Mudge AM, Maussen C, Duncan J, Denaro CP. Improving quality of delirium care 
in a general medical service with established interdisciplinary care: a controlled 
trial. Intern Med J 2013 Mar;43(3):270-7. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1445-
5994.2012.02840.x.
 17. Chong MS, Chan M, Tay L, Ding YY. Outcomes of an innovative model of acute 
delirium care: the Geriatric Monitoring Unit (GMU). Clin Interv Aging 2014 Apr 
8;9:603-12. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2147/CIA.S60259.
 18. Office of Inspector General, Office of Evaluation and Inspections, Region IX. 
Medicare hospital prospective payment system: how DRG rates are calculated and 
updated [Internet]. Washington, DC: US Department of Health & Human Services; 
2001 Aug [cited 2016 Jan 20]. Available from: https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-09-
00-00200.pdf.
 19. Halloran EJ, Kiley M. Nursing dependency, diagnosis-related groups, and length of 
hospital stay. Health Care Financ Rev 1987 Spring;8(3):27-36. 
 20. O’Mahony R, Murthy L, Akunne A, Young J; Guideline Development Group. 
Synopsis of the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guideline for 
prevention of delirium. Ann Intern Med 2011 Jun 7;154(11):746-51. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.7326/0003-4819-154-11-201106070-00006.
 21. Inouye SK, van Dyck CH, Alessi CA, Balkin S, Siegal AP, Horwitz RI. Clarifying 
confusion: the confusion assessment method. A new method for detection of delirium. 
Ann Intern Med 1990 Dec 15;113(12):941-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-
4819-113-12-941.
 22. Ely EW, Margolin R, Francis J, et al. Evaluation of delirium in critically ill patients: 
validation of the Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-
ICU). Crit Care Med 2001 Jul;29(7):1370-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00003246-
200107000-00012.
 23. Hauck K, Zhao X. How dangerous is a day in hospital? A model of adverse events 
and length of stay for medical inpatients. Med Care 2011 Dec;49(12):1068-75. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/MLR.0b013e31822efb09.
 24. McDonald LC, Owings M, Jernigan DB. Clostridium difficile infection in patients 
discharged from US short-stay hospitals, 1996-2003. Emerg Infect Dis 2006 
Mar;12(3):409-15. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1203.051064.
 33
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-231
SOUL OF THE HEALER
Hallucinations 
acrylic paint on canvas, original size 30” x 40”
Nadia Al Khun
Our perception of our world, our reality, is comprised of colors, dots, lines, and shapes that are 
integrated in great harmony. Hallucinations represent a state of mind beyond reality. This can 
be enjoyable; however, unpleasant experiences can distort the beauty of color and sometimes 
dominate the hallucinatory experience. This painting presents a background of homogeneous colors 
(representing pleasant hallucinations) that are interrupted by a vexatious network.
Mrs Al Khun is a genetic engineer and biotechnologist who is now mostly dedicated to art.  
More of her work can be seen at: www.facebook.com/pages/NAdiAalkhun/393134820846880.
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-231
 34
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-225
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
The Kaiser Permanente Northern California  
Adult Member Health Survey
Nancy Gordon, ScD; Teresa Lin, MPH 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-225
E-pub: 08/19/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-225
ABSTRACT
Introduction: The Kaiser Permanente Northern California (KPNC) Member Health 
Survey (MHS) is used to describe sociodemographic and health-related characteristics 
of the adult membership of this large, integrated health care delivery system to monitor 
trends over time, identify health disparities, and conduct research. 
Objective: To provide an overview of the KPNC MHS and share findings that illustrate 
how survey statistics and data have been and can be used for research and program-
matic purposes. 
Methods: The MHS is a large-scale, institutional review board-approved survey of 
English-speaking KPNC adult members. The confidential survey has been conducted by 
mail triennially starting in 1993 with independent age-sex and geographically stratified 
random samples, with an option for online completion starting in 2005. The full survey 
sample and survey data are linkable at the individual level to Health Plan and geocoded 
data. Respondents are assigned weighting factors for their survey year and additional 
weighting factors for analysis of pooled survey data. 
Results: Statistics from the 1999, 2002, 2005, 2008, and 2011 surveys show trends 
in sociodemographic and health-related characteristics and access to the Internet and 
e-mail for the adult membership aged 25 to 79 years and for 6 age-sex subgroups. 
Pooled data from the 2008 and 2011 surveys show many significant differences in these 
characteristics across the 5 largest race/ethnic groups in KPNC (non-Hispanic whites, 
blacks, Latinos, Filipinos, and Chinese).
Conclusion: The KPNC MHS has yielded unique insights and provides an opportunity 
for researchers and public health organizations outside of KPNC to leverage our survey-
generated statistics and collaborate on epidemiologic and health services research studies.
INTRODUCTION
Most researchers, public health prac-
titioners, and clinicians are familiar with 
national and state health surveillance sur-
veys used to monitor trends in health and 
health-related behaviors over time, such 
as the National Health Interview Survey 
(NHIS), the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention’s Behavioral Risk Factor 
Surveillance Survey (BRFSS), the Cali-
fornia Health Interview Survey (CHIS), 
and the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being 
Index. Many fewer are aware of the Kai-
ser Permanente (KP) Northern California 
(KPNC) Adult Member Health Survey 
(MHS), which has been conducted every 
3 years since 1993 to describe the sociode-
mographic and health-related characteris-
tics of adults within a large, multicenter, 
integrated health care delivery system and 
how these characteristics may be chang-
ing over time. In 2015, the KPNC adult 
membership numbered more than 2.9 
million, 19.3% of whom were aged at 
least 65 years. Using CHIS data, we have 
previously shown that the KPNC adult 
population is very similar to the insured 
adult population in Northern California 
with respect to sociodemographic and 
health-related characteristics.1 This longi-
tudinal survey project has yielded unique 
insights and provides an opportunity for 
other researchers and public health orga-
nizations to leverage our survey-generated 
statistics and collaborate on epidemiologic 
and health services research studies.
The MHS aims to provide information 
to health service planners, program/service 
managers, and researchers in KPNC and 
organizations external to KPNC that can 
be used to 
• describe the sociodemographic charac-
teristics, the prevalence of health-related 
problems, behaviors/lifestyle factors, 
and the service needs and interests of 
young, middle-aged, and older KPNC 
adults for planning and research pur-
poses
• monitor trends over time for the over-
all adult membership and segments of 
the membership (eg, age, sex, and race/
ethnic groups) in prevalence of health 
conditions, health risks, use of comple-
mentary and alternative medicine and 
dietary supplements, and Internet ac-
cess and preferred methods of obtaining 
health information
• examine important associations between 
patient-reported predictors and clinical 
outcomes through linkage to a state-of-
the-art electronic medical record
• contribute to an evidence base for ser-
vice/program development and program 
evaluation within KPNC and for the 
community (eg, community health 
needs assessment and community health 
initiatives)
• educate health care professionals about 
factors that affect the total health of 
adults
• conduct epidemiologic and health ser-
vices research
• compare the KPNC adult membership 
to the general and insured populations 
(using BRFSS, CHIS, and NHIS data) 
and research populations to the KPNC 
population.
The KPNC Adult MHS is funded by 
KPNC’s Community Benefit program 
as part of its portfolio of support for 
health research. The survey materials 
are not proprietary, and most of the 
Nancy Gordon, ScD, is a Research Scientist II at the Division of Research in Oakland, CA. 
E-mail: nancy.gordon@kp.org. Teresa Lin, MPH, is a Data Consultant at the Division of 
Research in Oakland, CA. E-mail: teresa.y.lin@kp.org
 35
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-225
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
The Kaiser Permanente Northern California Adult Member Health Survey 
survey results are shared with the public, 
foundations, government, and research 
community via conference presentations, 
publications, and reports posted on our 
Web site (www.memberhealthsurvey.kai-
ser.org). With the approval of the Division 
of Research Director and KPNC’s insti-
tutional review board, researchers from 
within and outside the KP Medical Care 
Program can collaborate on important 
descriptive and analytic research studies 
using MHS data. 
History of the Member Health Survey
The MHS was created in 1990 to serve 
a dual purpose: KPNC researchers in the 
Division of Research required information 
about characteristics of the adult Health 
Plan membership in the region and dif-
ferent Medical Center service populations, 
and KPNC’s regional and Medical Center 
Health Education Departments required 
data to optimize health education service 
planning for their service populations. At 
the time it was first piloted with a regional 
sample in 1990, there was little informa-
tion about nonhospitalized members 
besides age, sex, geographic residence area, 
and number of outpatient visits. KPNC’s 
pre-electronic health record (EHR) infor-
mation systems and disease registries had 
not yet been implemented, so there were 
no available data to estimate numbers of 
members with chronic health conditions 
such as diabetes or hypertension; which 
patients were getting recommended can-
cer screening procedures; and numbers 
of members who smoked and had other 
behavioral health risks like obesity. Addi-
tionally, there was no systematic individ-
ual-level or descriptive information about 
sociodemographic characteristics (eg, race/
ethnicity, educational attainment, and 
household income) for the membership. 
Now 25 years later, even with the vast 
improvement in availability of race/eth-
nicity, diagnosis, and health risk (body 
mass index, smoking status, and exercise 
frequency) data from members’ EHRs, the 
MHS is still used by KPNC researchers 
and our Health Education Departments 
to describe the regional and Medical 
Center adult membership’s more detailed 
sociodemographic characteristics, overall 
health status, behavioral and psychosocial 
health risks, access to digital technology, 
and health education/health information 
modality preferences—data elements that 
may not be readily available from EHRs 
or other sources of Health Plan data. 
MHS data are used to identify racial/eth-
nic differences in self-reported health and 
functional status, health-related behaviors, 
social determinants of health, and access 
to/preferences for using digital technolo-
gies for health care-related purposes. The 
survey is also the source of membership 
statistics over time that is most comparable 
with results of other population surveys 
based on self-reported data, such as the 
BRFSS, CHIS, and NHIS. 
Survey Content
The core content categories and exam-
ples of items included in these categories 
are summarized in Table 1. Before 2012, 
when Stage 1 Meaningful Use require-
ments were implemented,2 race/ethnicity 
was not routinely collected for Health 
Plan members, and in KPNC, the MHS 
provides more detailed race/ethnicity 
Table 1. Core content of Member Health Surveys
Category
Sample items
Sociodemographic 
characteristics
Race/ethnicity; educational attainment; income; employment status; marital status; sexual orientation; for ages ≥ 65, 
transportation situation
Social determinants of health
Educational attainment, income, worry about financial security, chronic stress, satisfaction with life, experience of discrimination/
harassment in past year, worry about family safety due to neighborhood violence, intimate partner violence
Health and functional status
Rating of overall, physical, and emotional/mental health; extent to which physical and emotional/mental health problems 
interfere with daily activities; selected chronic health conditions and health-related problems (eg, back pain, sleep problems, 
hearing problems, urinary incontinence); and for ages ≥ 65, functional status (ADLs/IADLs), falls, use of hearing aid, oral health 
problems
Medications used during past 
year
Prescription medicines for diabetes, hypertension, heart problems, high cholesterol, asthma, depression, anxiety, pain; low-dose 
aspirin to prevent heart attack/stroke; OTC pain medication; NSAIDs; antacids; stop-smoking aids (eg, nicotine patches and 
nicotine gum); sleep aids
Health-related behaviors and 
beliefs
Smoking, height/weight, exercise frequency, daily servings of fruit/vegetables, high-fat food avoidance, high-salt food avoidance 
(2011), alcohol use, number of sleep hours, actions taken to improve or maintain health, health-related beliefs
CAM modalities used during 
past year (1996-present)
Modalities vary by year but always include: acupuncture, acupressure, massage, chiropractic treatment, yoga, tai chi, herbal 
supplements/remedies, homeopathic medicines, deep breathing/mindfulness meditation, guided imagery, special diet, prayer or 
spiritual practice, religious/spiritual healing by others, psychological counseling, 12-step/self-help program
Dietary supplements used 
during past year
Supplements vary by year but always include: daily multivitamin, calcium, glucosamine, melatonin, a space to list other 
supplements
Preventive care and health 
advice 
Flu shot for past flu season; health-related advice received from Health Plan; before 2011, recency of blood pressure and 
cholesterol checks and breast, cervical, and colorectal cancer screening tests
Access to digital technology
Computer; Internet; e-mail; starting in 2011, mobile phone, text messaging capability, type of device used to go online
Use of and interest in using a 
variety of modalities to obtain 
health information and health 
education
Digital and telephone-based modalities; print modalities; and in-person visits, which change as new modalities become 
available.
ADLs = activities of daily living; CAM = complementary and alternative medicine; IADLs = instrumental activities of daily living; KPNC = Kaiser Permanente Northern California;  
NSAIDs = nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; OTC = over-the-counter
 36
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-225
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
The Kaiser Permanente Northern California Adult Member Health Survey 
information than is currently captured 
in the EHR from outpatient visits, espe-
cially for Asian and multiracial members. 
Currently educational attainment, an im-
portant social determinant of health,3 is 
found in a sparsely populated text field in 
KPNC members’ EHRs, so studies requir-
ing this demographic have generally used 
census-derived data. Similarly, household 
income is only estimable from geocoded 
census block data, and employment status 
(including number of work hours), marital 
status, and sexual orientation are not avail-
able from any other data source. 
Even though information about respon-
dents’ diagnosed chronic conditions (eg, 
diabetes, hypertension, asthma) and pre-
scription medication use is now available 
from the EHR system, these items are still 
included in the survey to keep estimates 
comparable with other surveys based on 
self-reported data, for quick profiling of 
segments of the membership; and to study 
behavioral and social characteristics of 
members who self-identify with these con-
ditions. Other conditions contained in the 
health condition checklist, such as severe 
back, neck, or shoulder pain, urinary in-
continence, vision and hearing problems, 
and frequent sleep problems, are often not 
reported to physicians and so don’t get into 
EHRs. For seniors, the MHS is currently 
the best way to profile functional status 
(mobility issues, difficulties with activities 
of daily living and instrumental activities 
of daily living, ability to care for oneself). 
Although data about overweight/obesity 
(body mass index), smoking status, exer-
cise, and measures of alcohol use are now 
routinely captured in the EHR of KPNC 
members as “vital signs” at outpatient vis-
its, MHS data are still probably the most 
reliable way to estimate prevalence of these 
behavioral risks because the data are col-
lected from members who have and have 
not recently come in for a medical office 
visit (during which vital signs are mea-
sured) during a six-month period using the 
same exact question and response word-
ing. Information about other behaviors 
and psychosocial risk factors that are not 
currently routinely captured in the EHR, 
such as usual amount of sleep, number 
of daily servings of fruits and vegetables, 
salt/sodium and high-fat food avoidance, 
satisfaction with life, chronicity of stress 
and sources of distress (including worry 
about financial security and neighbor-
hood safety), nutritional supplement and 
complementary and alternative medicine 
use, and actions members are taking to 
improve or maintain their health, are cur-
rently available only through the survey. 
Additionally, since 1999, the MHS has 
been asking members to evaluate the extent 
to which they believe their lifestyle/habits 
(like diet, exercise, and weight) and stress 
and emotion troubles (like depression) can 
affect their health. 
In all MHS cycles, members have been 
asked to report whether they had a flu im-
munization for the last flu season because 
some members get this immunization 
outside of KP
. From 1999 on, the survey 
has asked about recency of last dental 
exam and whether advice or counseling 
had been received in the past year from 
a KPNC health care professional about a 
variety of health risks (eg, increasing ex-
ercise, quitting smoking, getting enough 
sleep, taking steps to reduce falls). In the 
1993-2008 surveys, members were asked 
about recency of their last blood pressure 
and cholesterol check and cancer screening 
tests, but screening items were dropped 
starting in 2011 to enable expansion of 
questions on other topics.
Finally, because the MHS serves as a 
health education planning tool, the sur-
vey captures information about members’ 
access to digital technology and preferred 
methods for obtaining health information 
and health education. In 1996, we began to 
ask about access to and use of a computer 
and the Internet. In 1999, we added ques-
tions regarding e-mail access and use, and 
in 2011 we started ascertaining access to 
mobile phone and text messaging, as well 
as whether the member could use these 
digital technologies on their own and the 
types of device(s) they used to access the 
Internet and e-mail. Health information 
modality preferences has been obtained 
since 1999 using 2 checklist questions. 
The first question asks members to indi-
cate which of a variety of print, in-person, 
and online health information sources and 
health education services they used in the 
previous 12 months. The second question 
asks members to indicate which modalities 
they would prefer to use to learn about tak-
ing care of health problems and improving 
their health, in addition to getting infor-
mation from their physician. 
Survey Methods
For most cycles, the MHS has used 
different questionnaires for women aged 
20-64, men aged 20-64, and women and 
men aged 65 and older, but all contain the 
same core set of questions for that survey 
year. Most of the MHS questionnaires can 
be downloaded from the MHS Web site. 
The MHS is a confidential, not anony-
mous survey, making it possible to link 
respondent data by medical record number 
level to other sources of KPNC clinical and 
administrative data. This makes it pos-
sible to obtain objective information on 
diagnoses, procedures, vital signs, medical 
care and pharmacy utilization and costs, 
laboratory testing, registration to use and 
use of the kp.org patient portal, Health 
Plan benefits, and other health and health 
care information. By means of mailing 
address, respondent data can be linked 
with geocoded data such as neighborhood 
sociodemographic and built environment 
characteristics. Both nonrespondents and 
respondents can be linked to available 
Health Plan data and geocoded data to 
study effects of nonresponse bias. 
To ensure that the survey sample re-
flects geographic differences that may af-
fect health conditions and health-related 
behaviors, a predetermined number of 
men and women in 5 age groups (20-44, 
45-64, 65-74, 75-79, and ≥ 80 years) are 
randomly selected from each of the Health 
Plan’s Medical Center service populations, 
resulting in oversampling of members aged 
65 and older. Members are administra-
tively assigned to a Medical Center service 
population using an algorithm that takes 
into account the facility where they receive 
or would be most likely to receive most of 
their outpatient primary care. Using this 
approach, we randomly select approxi-
mately 2100 current members from 14 
of our 19 Medical Center service popula-
tions in Northern California, sampling 
2400 from our 5 most racially/ethnically 
diverse service populations. In 1993 and 
1996, survey questionnaires were mailed to 
a stratified random sample of 34,000 adult 
Health Plan members from 17 Medical 
Center service populations in the Northern 
California Region. In 1999 and 2002, the 
 37
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-225
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
The Kaiser Permanente Northern California Adult Member Health Survey 
sample size was increased to 40,000 from 
18 Medical Center service populations, 
and starting in 2005, to approximately 
44,000 from 19 Medical Center service 
populations. In 2014, the decision was 
made to split data collection for the full 
sample over 2 years, with independent 
samples selected each year. Because samples 
are independently sampled for each survey, 
there is very little overlap of respondents 
across multiple survey years. 
Questionnaires are mailed out in the 
spring of a survey year, followed by up to 
2 additional mailings in early and late sum-
mer. Starting in 2005, members could also 
complete the survey online at the KPNC 
Division of Research’s secure Web site, 
and telephone administration has always 
been available upon request. Before the 
2014 to 2015 survey cycle, the survey was 
conducted only in English owing to cost 
considerations and our experience of very 
low response rates to a 2006 pilot mail-
ing of a Spanish-language questionnaire 
to members whose primary language was 
Spanish.4 However, as part of the 2015 
survey cycle, in Spring 2016 a separate 
sample of limited-English proficient Span-
ish speakers aged 25 to 64 years will be 
sent up to 2 mailings of a slightly modified 
bilingual (Spanish/English) version of the 
2015 MHS questionnaire. 
Each survey respondent is assigned a 
poststratification weighting factor based 
on the number of members of his/her sex 
and age group (five-year intervals) in the 
Medical Center service population from 
which s/he was sampled. Weighting fac-
tors are also created to use with data com-
bined from two or more survey years. The 
weighted respondent data are then used 
to describe the sociodemographic charac-
teristics and health-related characteristics 
of adults in the KPNC Region, individual 
Medical Center service populations, and 
population segments (eg, members with a 
specific sex, race/ethnicity, chronic condi-
tion, risk factor, etc). 
Although the overall survey response 
rate has been declining over time (58.7% 
in 1993 to 39.5% in 2011), the response 
rate among those aged 65 and older has 
consistently been approximately 70%. 
The overall response rate is comparable 
with the response rates for recent random-
digit dial (RDD) telephone surveys such 
as the CHIS and California BRFSS (ap-
proximately 35% for each in 2011) and 
significantly higher than the RDD Pew 
Internet and Society surveys and Gallup-
Healthways Well-Being Index surveys 
(each approximately 11%), all of which are 
used to support policy-making.5-8 Table 2 
shows the numbers of MHS respondents 
in each survey year.
Impact of Member Health Survey Results  
MHS results have been used by KPNC 
researchers and Health Education Depart-
ments to help identify and estimate num-
ber of members with health conditions 
(such as diabetes, hypertension, urinary in-
continence, insomnia, and heartburn) and 
behavioral/lifestyle risks (such as smoking, 
obesity, sedentary lifestyle, and stress) 
known to increase the risk of chronic ill-
ness; to examine how sociodemographic 
and health characteristics vary across 
Medical Center service populations; and 
to characterize subgroups of adults who are 
most likely to have these health problems 
and risks. Reports profiling the sociodemo-
graphic and health-related characteristics 
of young, middle-aged, and older adults 
in the KPNC Region and the different 
Medical Center service populations are 
produced for each survey cycle. Additional 
reports show trends in selected character-
istics over time or focus on specific health 
topics, such as race/ethnic differences in 
education and income, health conditions/
risks, and Internet access. Many reports 
and presentations are shared with the 
research community and general public 
Table 2. Size of Kaiser Permanente Northern California Member Health Survey final respondent samples, 1993-2011, by survey year 
and age-sex group
Respondent age-sex groupsa
Survey year
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011
All respondents
≥ 20
19,561
17,735
18,937
18,604
18,733
16,960
16,968
25-79b
18,137
16,339
17,243
16,874
16,957
15,352
15,353
≥ 80
689
564
1085
1045
1120
1046
1060
Women
≥ 20
10,529
9665
10,343
10,087
10,357
9461
9084
25-44
3902
3380
3124
3023
3022
2736
2552
45-64
3446
3130
3229
3161
3171
2940
2820
65-79
2379
2379
3045
2955
3149
2883
2863
≥ 80
375
268
510
507
553
519
513
Men
≥ 20
9032
8070
8594
8517
8376
7499
7884
25-44
2932
2400
2152
2106
1870
1580
1649
45-64
3030
2628
2669
2730
2640
2308
2661
65-79
2448
2422
3024
2899
3105
2905
2808
≥ 80
314
296
575
538
567
527
547
a Age in years.
b Trends across survey years and by race/ethnicity are generally restricted to respondents aged 25-79.
 38
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-225
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
The Kaiser Permanente Northern California Adult Member Health Survey 
via the MHS Web site as well as through 
presentations and publications. 
KPNC researchers have used the survey 
data alone or combined with supplemental 
information from KP clinical and admin-
istrative data for many purposes, resulting 
in numerous publications in peer-reviewed 
professional journals. For example, re-
searchers have used MHS data to estimate 
the prevalence of health risks; to describe 
characteristics of adults with specific health 
conditions or health risks or for population 
subgroups (eg, by race/ethnicity, age); to 
create comparison groups for epidemio-
logic studies; to study accuracy (validity) of 
member-reported health information; to 
estimate underrecording of health condi-
tions and behavioral risks in EHRs (based 
on member-reported health information), 
and under- or overestimation of these 
conditions and behaviors for a population 
based on survey data; and to identify the 
most promising Medical Center service 
populations for intervention studies. 
The survey has been used to study 
changes over time in sociodemographic 
composition of the membership and 
prevalence of health and lifestyle risks9; 
how prevalence of health conditions 
and behavioral/lifestyle risks differ by 
age group, sex, race/ethnicity, and sexual 
orientation4,9-14; trends and differences in 
complementary and alternative medicine 
and dietary supplement use15-18; senior 
health19-21; health problems, utilization, 
and cost of care for obesity,22 alcohol 
consumption,23 and smoking24; access to 
digital technology and preferred modali-
ties for receiving health information and 
advice25-27; and methodological issues.28-30 
Presentations and reports can be down-
loaded from the Special Reports section 
of the MHS Web site.
KPNC regional and medical facility 
Health Education Departments have used 
the survey data to compare and to discern 
trends in health-related behaviors (eg, 
prevalence of smoking, fruit/vegetable con-
sumption, exercise frequency) at regional 
and Medical Center service population lev-
els; to educate health professionals within 
KPNC and in the community about social 
determinants of health and health care (eg, 
stress, financial strain, educational attain-
ment, Internet access) that affect the total 
health of adults; and to examine differences 
in health-related behaviors and psychoso-
cial characteristics of women and men with 
different levels of obesity severity. 
The estimates of digital technology ac-
cess and health education modality prefer-
ences, and especially how these vary across 
different demographic segments, have 
provided valuable information for plan-
ning of patient education interventions 
by Operations and Research Departments. 
Because members don’t always need to reg-
ister for health education classes or to sign 
on to the Health Plan Web site to access 
most online health information and health 
education materials and programs, the es-
timates of modalities used in the past year 
help KPNC’s regional Health Education 
and Digital Services Departments monitor 
member use of and preferences for differ-
ent types of health information resources 
overall and by different subgroups of the 
membership. 
Selected Member Health Survey Trends  
in Membership Characteristics Over Time
Trends in selected sociodemographic, 
health, and information technology char-
acteristics 1999 to 2011 are shown for 
adults aged 25 to 79 years, and for ages 
25 to 64 years and 65 to 79 years by sex, 
in Table 3 (available at: www.theperma-
nentejournal.org/files/15-225-1.pdf). 
During that 10-year interval, the adult 
Health Plan membership became better 
educated and less non-Hispanic white, 
with the latter change associated with a 
significant increase in percentage of Asian 
members. Compared with 1999, in 2011, 
the prevalence of self-reported diabetes 
and hypertension significantly increased 
in most age-sex groups. There was a small 
but statistically significant increase in the 
percentage of those aged 25 to 64 years 
who considered their health to be very 
good or excellent, but Figure 1 suggests 
that increases were primarily among those 
with higher educational attainment. There 
was an increase in the percentage of adults 
who indicated that physical or emotional 
health problems interfered at least mod-
erately with their daily activities. Preva-
lence of current smoking, ever smoking, 
and exercise less than once a week was 
significantly lower, whereas obesity was 
significantly higher. The percentage of 
adults consuming at least 3 servings of 
fruits/vegetables daily was significantly 
higher but still less than 50%. Percent-
ages of adults who tried to eat reduced/
low fat foods, who experienced chronic 
stress, and who experienced an episode of 
depression or anxiety remained relatively 
flat across the study period. Belief that 
habits and lifestyle can greatly impact 
Figure 1. Percentages of adults who considered their health to be very good or excellent, by level of 
education, 1993-2011.
 39
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-225
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
The Kaiser Permanente Northern California Adult Member Health Survey 
health significantly increased across all age-
sex groups, and as Figures 2 and 3 show, 
the increase occurred across all levels of 
education and all race/ethnic groups. A 
comparison of access to and use of digital 
technology in 2011 versus 2002 showed 
large and significant increases across all 
age groups in percentages with access to a 
computer, the Internet, e-mail, and health 
information from Web sites. 
Use of the Member Health Survey to Identify 
Differences Across Race/Ethnic Groups
A comparison of non-Hispanic whites 
(whiteNHs) with black, Latino, Filipino, 
and Chinese Health Plan members aged 
25-79 years on selected sociodemographic 
and health characteristics is found in 
Table 4 (available at: www.theperma-
nentejournal.org/files/15-225-2.pdf). 
Prevalence estimates are derived from 
pooled 2008 and 2011 survey data that 
were weighted to the 2011 membership 
and then analyzed using SAS Proc Sur-
veyreg31,32 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) to 
standardize the age-gender composition 
of the race-ethnic groups. The results show 
significant race/ethnic differences in educa-
tion, income, and self-reported health and 
behavior/psychosocial health risks. 
Latinos are significantly less likely than 
all the other groups to have attended 
any amount of college, and blacks and 
Latinos are significantly less likely and 
Filipinos and Chinese significantly more 
likely than whiteNHs to have a college 
degree. Blacks, Latinos, and Filipinos are 
significantly more likely than whiteNHs 
to have a household income of $35,000 or 
less and to worry a great deal about their 
or their family’s financial security. Com-
pared with whiteNHs, blacks, Latinos, and 
Filipinos are significantly less likely than 
whiteNHs to report being in very good/
excellent health.
With regard to health behavior/lifestyle 
risks, blacks, Latinos, and Filipinos are 
significantly more likely than whiteNHs 
to get exercise less than once a week (age 
25-64 years) and to get less than 6 hours 
sleep per night (“short sleep”), and they 
are significantly less likely to get exercise at 
least 5 times a week and to consume at least 
3 servings of fruit/vegetables a day. Blacks 
and Latinos are significantly more likely 
and Filipinos and Chinese significantly 
less likely than whiteNHs to be obese, and 
Latinos, Filipinos, and Chinese are less 
likely than whiteNHs to have ever smoked. 
Blacks in all age-sex groups and Latinos 
aged 25-64 years are significantly more 
likely than whiteNHs to report at least 
1 episode of discrimination/harassment 
in the prior year, and blacks and Latinos 
across all age groups are significantly less 
likely to have had a dental exam in the 
past 12 months. 
Figure 3 shows that whiteNHs are sig-
nificantly more likely than all the other 
race/ethnic groups to believe that their 
health-related behaviors/lifestyle can affect 
their health quite a bit. Table 5 shows that 
Figure 2. Percentages of adults who believe that their habits/lifestyle (eg, diet, exercise, weight)  
can affect their health quite a bit, by level of education, 1999-2011.
Figure 3. Percentages of adults who believe that their habits/lifestyle (eg, diet, exercise, weight) can affect 
their health quite a bit, by race/ethnicity, 1999-2011.
WhiteNH = non-Hispanic whites.
 40
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-225
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
The Kaiser Permanente Northern California Adult Member Health Survey 
Table 5. Internet and e-mail access and preferences for selected health information modalities in 2011 among English-proficient 
Health Plan members aged 25-79 years, by race/ethnicitya
Age-sex group
Race/ethnicityb
WhiteNH
Black
Latino
Filipino
Chinese
Able to use the Internet to get information from Web sites on own or with help
All age 25-79
97.4 (0.1)
94.7 (0.5)c
94.4 (0.5)c
93.1 (0.7)c
96.6 (0.6)
Women age 25-64
98.7 (0.2)
97.1 (0.7)
96.4 (0.8)d
95.0 (1.1)d
98.2 (0.7)
Men age 25-64
> 99.9 (--)
> 99.9 (--)
> 99.9 (--)
> 99.9 (--)
> 99.9 (--)
Women age 65-79
86.5 (0.9)
71.1 (3.9)d
75.1 (3.2)c
65.2 (4.6)c
85.3 (4.3)
Men age 65-79
87.5 (0.8)
73.7 (3.7)c
72.8 (3.2)c
85.3 (4.3)
81.5 (4.8)
Able to use e-mail on own or with help
All age 25-79
95.0 (0.2)
88.4 (1.1)d
90.5 (0.7)c
90.1 (0.9)c
94.6 (0.8)
Women age 25-64
97.7 (0.3)
94.4 (1.1)c
94.8 (0.9)d
94.5 (1.2)d
96.3 (1.3)
Men age 25-64
96.3 (0.4)
90.4 (2.2)d
95.0 (1.0)
95.0 (1.4)
98.3 (0.6)d
Women age 65-79
83.1 (0.9)
64.5 (4.2)c
67.1 (3.5)c
59.3 (4.8)c
79.8 (4.7)
Men age 65-79
84.7 (0.9)
60.8 (4.3)c
65.0 (3.6)c
70.3 (4.4)d
80.0 (4.8)
Got health information from a Web site in the past 12 months
All age 25-79
49.2 (0.7)
40.7 (1.8)c
39.4 (1.4)c
39.1 (1.9)c
44.8 (2.0)e
Women age 25-64
58.0 (10)
48.8 (2.6)d
47.7 (2.2)c
47.1 (2.8)c
49.6 (3.2)e
Men age 25-64
45.3 (1.2)
35.4 (3.3)e
34.8 (2.4)d
34.2 (3.3)e
42.6 (3.4)
Women age 65-79
42.2 (1.3)
28.2 (3.6)d
27.0 (3.6)c
28.2 (4.3)d
40.3 (6.2)
Men age 65-79
39.3 (1.3)
34.3 (5.2)
27.7 (3.5)d
29.5 (5.0)
32.5 (5.6)
Interested in getting health information/advice from Web sitesf
All age 25-79
42.7 (0.7)
40.7 (1.8)c
32.0 (1.5)c
41.1 (2.1)
47.3 (2.3)
Women age 25-64
58.0 (1.0)
48.8 (2.6)d
34.2 (2.2)c
46.7 (3.0)
49.7 (3.5)
Men age 25-64
45.0 (1.3)
36.6 (3.8)e
34.3 (2.6)c
39.8 (3.8)
51.6 (3.7)
Women age 65-79
29.1 (1.3)
17.1 (3.3)c
17.4 (3.7)d
19.5 (4.3)e
33.5 (6.9)
Men age 65-79
33.4 (1.5)
25.8 (5.7)
22.0 (3.6)d
38.3 (6.0)
24.0 (6.0)
Interested in getting health information/advice from Web videosf
All age 25-79
19.7 (0.6)
21.1 (1.8)
17.3 (1.2)
21.4 (1.8)
21.7 (.9)
Women age 25-64
20.5 (0.9)
19.2 (2.2)
19.2 (1.8)
19.3 (2.4)
19.8 (2.8)
Men age 25-64
21.4 (1.1)
26.1 (3.5)
18.9 (2.1)
26.2 (3.4)
27.9 (3.4)
Women age 65-79
12.2 (1.0)
11.8 (2.7)
7.1 (2.4)e
13.3 (3.6)
16.7 (5.3)
Men age 65-79
13.8 (1.1)
14.8 (4.9)
8.0 (2.3)e
16.7 (5.3)
4.2 (2.2)c
Interested in getting health information/advice from e-mailed newslettersf
All age 25-79
36.0 (0.7)
30.4 (1.9)d
32.8 (1.5)
36.3 (2.0)
39.8 (2.2)
Women age 25-64
39.0 (1.1)
30.9 (2.6)d
34.7 (2.3)
42.2 (3.0)
39.7 (3.3)
Men age 25-64
32.8 (1.2)
31.0 (3.6)
34.3 (2.6)
32.8 (3.6)
43.6 (3.8)d
Women age 65-79
34.1 (1.8)
24.6 (3.8)e
16.7 (3.3)c
19.0 (4.1)c
29.3 (6.7)
Men age 65-79
37.2 (1.5)
29.9 (5.8)
31.4 (4.0)
39.2 (6.0)
32.0 (6.8)
Interested in telephone-based health coachingf
All age 25-79
32.3 (0.7)
37.8 (2.1)e
30.9 (1.5)
23.3 (1.8)c
21.4 (1.8)c
Women age 25-64
35.6 (1.1)
35.2 (2.8)
30.8 (2.2)e
24.1 (2.6)c
27.4 (3.1)e
Men age 25-64
29.1 (1.2)
42.6 (3.9)d
30.5 (2.6)
22.9 (3.2)
15.3 (2.5)c
Women age 65-79
33.6 (1.4)
34.2 (4.1)
28.6 (4.3)
25.4 (4.7)
22.4 (5.8)
Men age 65-79
27.7 (1.3)
31.7 (5.6)
37.1 (4.2)
17.6 (4.6)c
17.9 (5.5)
a Percentages for race/ethnic groups derived from Member Health Survey 2011 data weighted to the 2011 age × sex × service area composition in 2011 and then standardized to the 
age-sex (for age 25-79) or age distribution of the Kaiser Permanente Northern California membership for that age group in 2011. These should not be used as “official” statistics about 
the Kaiser Permanente Northern California membership.
b Data are weighted % (standard error around estimate).
c Significantly (p < 0.001) differs (higher or lower) from whiteNH in same age group.
d Significantly (p < 0.01) differs (higher or lower) from whiteNH in same age group.
e Significantly (p < 0.05) differs (higher or lower) from whiteNH in same age group.
f Statistics based on members who indicated at least 1 health education/information modality preference in a checklist.
WhiteNH = non-Hispanic white.
 41
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-225
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
The Kaiser Permanente Northern California Adult Member Health Survey 
especially among older women, blacks, 
Latinas, and Filipinas are significantly less 
likely than whiteNHs to be able to use 
the Internet and e-mail, to have obtained 
health information from a Web site in the 
past year, and to be interested in getting 
health information and advice from Web 
sites or e-mailed newsletters.
Comparisons between Filipinos and 
Chinese show that these Asian ethnic 
groups significantly differ on several de-
mographic and health-related measures, 
with Filipinos often looking more similar 
to black and Latino than Chinese adults 
despite having educational attainment 
comparable with Chinese adults. Sig-
nificantly higher percentages of Filipinos 
than Chinese have a household income 
of $35,000 or less, worry a great deal 
about their financial security, are obese, 
and among women and men aged 25-64 
years, are smokers and short sleepers 
(< 6 hours). Significantly lower percent-
ages of Filipinos than Chinese usually 
consume at least 3 servings of fruits/
vegetables per day and believe that their 
health-related behaviors/lifestyle can have 
a large impact on their health. Among 
older women, Filipinas are significantly 
less likely than Chinese to report being 
able to use e-mail and the Internet to 
obtain health information.
DISCUSSION
The information presented in this 
overview demonstrates that data from 
KPNC’s MHS can be a valuable resource 
for researchers and service planners inside 
and outside of KPNC to learn about the 
prevalence of health-related behaviors and 
psychosocial risks that are not frequently 
collected in the clinic setting, such as 
short sleep, chronic high stress, use of di-
etary supplements, and recency of dental 
care, as well as digital access and prefer-
ence factors that may influence use of 
Health Plan Web sites. Although the exact 
prevalence estimates for this Northern 
California population may not be fully 
generalizable to adults in other parts of 
the US or other countries, they represent 
patterns among a very large and diverse 
community-based population and suggest 
health risks that might be considered for 
inclusion in total health assessments in 
the clinic setting. 
The MHS enables study of trends in 
health and health-related behaviors and 
risk factors over time, which can help 
assess whether secular or Health Plan 
campaigns appear to have improved 
specific behaviors, and if so, whether 
improvements are seen across all patient 
subgroups. For example, our results sug-
gest that major strides have been made 
across all race/ethnic groups, age groups, 
and levels of education in convincing 
adults that their health-related behaviors 
and lifestyle can have a major impact on 
their health. However, this increase in 
positive health beliefs has not translated 
into major improvements in fruit and veg-
etable consumption, exercise frequency, 
or obesity. 
MHS data can also be used to study 
how health-related characteristics and 
social determinants of health and health 
care, including use of digital technology, 
differ by race-ethnicity, age cohort, edu-
cation, and income in an insured adult 
population. Such documented differences 
can provide the basis for further research, 
as well as have implications for developing 
total health assessment questionnaires for 
adults, population management activities, 
and translational patient intervention 
research. Because MHS data are linkable 
to a state-of-the-art EHR, as well as geo-
coded data, the survey can also be used 
to address important methodologic issues, 
such as sources and effects of nonresponse 
bias in surveys, how well estimates of 
health characteristics based on survey 
data match estimates based on Health 
Plan clinical data, and whether accuracy 
of self-report data differs by race/ethnic-
ity, sex, or level of education.
CONCLUSION
In this era of “big data” generated 
through rapidly expanding EHRs and 
other clinical and administrative data 
sources, surveys such as the KPNC MHS 
provide important complementary data 
that can inform on patient characteristics 
over time. The MHS is unique in that it 
can be readily linked at the individual-
patient level to facilitate novel research 
using combined clinical and self-reported 
data to address research questions that 
can have clinical and public health im-
plications. The MHS represents a great 
resource for new collaborative research, 
and KPNC encourages pursuing those 
collaborative opportunities to increase 
the benefit of this survey to the broader 
community. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgement
Mary Corrado, ELS, provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Gordon N, Lin T. The Kaiser Permanente Northern 
California adult Member Health Survey. Perm J 
2016 Fall;20(4):15-225. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.7812/TPP/15-225.
References
 1. Gordon NP. Similarity of the adult Kaiser Permanente 
membership in Northern California to the insured and 
general population in Northern California: statistics 
from the 2011 California Health Interview Survey 
[Internet]. Oakland, CA: Kaiser Permanente Division 
of Research; 2015 Jun 19 [cited 2015 Nov 11]. 
Available from: www.dor.kaiser.org/external/chis_
non_kp_2011.
 2. Blumenthal D, Tavenner M. The “meaningful use” 
regulation for electronic health records. N Engl J 
Med 2010 Aug 5;363(6):501-4. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMp1006114.
 3. Adler NE, Stead WW. Patients in context—EHR 
capture of social and behavioral determinants of 
health. N Engl J Med 2015 Feb 19;372(8):698-701. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1413945.
 4. Gordon NP, Iribarren C. Health-related characteristics 
and preferred methods of receiving health education 
according to dominant language among Latinos aged 
25 to 64 in a large Northern California health plan. 
BMC Public Health 2008 Sep 9;8:305. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-8-305.
 5. Cervantes IF, Brick JM, Edwards S. California Health 
Interview Survey. CHIS 2011-2012 methodology 
series. Report 4: response rates [Internet]. Los 
Angeles, CA: UCLA Center for Health Policy 
Research; 2014 [cited 2015 Nov 11]. Available from: 
http://healthpolicy.ucla.edu/chis/design/Documents/
chis2011-2012-method-4_2014-06-11.pdf.
 6. Behavioral risk factor surveillance system. 2014 
summary data quality report [Internet]. Atlanta, GA: 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2015 Jul 
29 [cited 2015 Nov 11]. Available from: www.cdc.gov/
brfss/annual_data/2014/pdf/2014_dqr.pdf.
 7. Hampton K, Rainie L, Lu W, Dwyer M, Shin I, 
Purcell K. Social media and the ‘spiral of silence’ 
[Internet]. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center; 
2014 Aug 26 [cited 2015 Oct 2]. Available from: www.
pewinternet.org/2014/08/26/social-media-and-the-
spiral-of-silence.
 8. Skopec L, Musco T, Sommers BD. A potential new 
data source for assessing the impacts of health 
reform: evaluating the Gallup-Healthways well-being 
index. Healthcare 2014 Jul;2(2):113-20. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.hjdsi.2014.03.001.
 9. Gordon NP, Lin TY. Kaiser Permanente Northern 
California member health survey project [Internet]. 
Poster presentation at the 19th annual HMORN 
conference; 2013 Apr 16-18; San Francisco, CA. 
Oakland, CA: Kaiser Permanente Northern California 
 42
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-225
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
The Kaiser Permanente Northern California Adult Member Health Survey 
Division of Research; 2013 [cited 2015 Nov 11]. 
Available from: www.dor.kaiser.org/external/KP_
NCAL_Member_Health_Survey_Project.
 10. Gruskin EP, Hart S, Gordon N, Ackerson L. Patterns 
of cigarette smoking and alcohol use among lesbians 
and bisexual women enrolled in a large health 
maintenance organization. Am J Public Health 2001 
Jun;91(6):976-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/
ajph.91.6.976.
 11. Gruskin EP, Gordon N. Gay/lesbian sexual orientation 
increases risk for cigarette smoking and heavy drinking 
among members of a large Northern California health 
plan. BMC Public Health 2006 Oct 3;6:241. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-6-241.
 12. Satre DD, Campbell CI, Gordon NP, Weisner C. 
Ethnic disparities in accessing treatment for 
depression and substance use disorders in an 
integrated health plan. Int J Psychiatry Med 
2010;40(1):57-76. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2190/
pm.40.1.e.
 13. Gordon NP. Demographic variations in sleep 
characteristics among adult members in Kaiser 
Permanente Northern California [Internet]. Poster 
presentation at the 18th annual HMORN conference; 
2012 Apr 29-May 2; Seattle, WA. Oakland, CA: 
Kaiser Permanente Northern California Division 
of Research; 2012 [cited 2015 Nov 11]. Available 
from: www.dor.kaiser.org/external/Demographic_
Variations_in_Sleep_Characteristics_of_KPNC_
Adults_(HMORN_2012_poster).
 14. Gordon NP. Is “Asian” a meaningful category for 
studying and reporting health and health care 
disparities? A comparison of Filipino and Chinese 
Kaiser Permanente Northern California members 
aged 25-79 on health status, selected health 
behaviors, and use of the patient portal. J Patient 
Cent Res Rev 2015;2(2):112-3. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.17294/2330-0698.1132.
 15. Gordon NP, Lin TY. Use of complementary and 
alternative medicine by the adult membership of 
a large Northern California health maintenance 
organization, 1999. J Ambul Care Manage 
2004 Jan-Mar;27(1):12-24. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00004479-200401000-00004.
 16. Schaffer DM, Gordon NP, Jensen CD, Avins AL. 
Nonvitamin, nonmineral supplement use over a 
12-month period by adult members of a large health 
maintenance organization. J Am Diet Assoc 2003 
Nov;103(11):1500-5. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jada.2003.08.026.
 17. Gordon NP, Schaffer DM. Use of dietary supplements 
by female seniors in a large Northern California 
health plan. BMC Geriatr 2005 Feb 9;5:4. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2318-5-4.
 18. Gordon NP, Caan BJ, Asgari MM. Variation in vitamin 
D supplementation among adults in a multi-race/
ethnic health plan population, 2008. Nutr J 2012  
Dec 11;11:104. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1475-
2891-11-104.
 19. Satre DD, Gordon NP, Weisner C. Alcohol 
consumption, medical conditions, and health 
behavior in older adults. Am J Health Behav 2007 
May-Jun;31(3)238-48. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5993/
ajhb.31.3.2.
 20. Gordon NP. Member health survey special report: 
sociodemographic and health-related characteristics 
of members aged 65 and over in Kaiser 
Permanente’s Northern California Region, 2011 
[Internet]. Oakland, CA: Kaiser Permanete Northern 
California Division of Research; 2012 Dec [cited 2015 
Nov 11]. Available from: www.dor.kaiser.org/external/
mhs_seniors_report__2011_regional/.
 21. Gordon NP. What are seniors doing to promote 
healthy aging? [Internet]. Poster presentation at the 
19th annual HMORN conference; 2013 Apr 16-18; 
San Francisco, CA. Oakland, CA: Kaiser Permanente 
Northern California Division of Research; 2013 [cited 
2015 Nov 11]. Available from: www.dor.kaiser.org/
external/WorkArea/DownloadAsset.aspx?id=11080.
 22. Armstrong MA, Midanik LT, Klatsky AL. Alcohol 
consumption and utilization of health services in 
a health maintenance organization. Med Care 
1998 Nov;36(11):1599-605. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00005650-199811000-00009.
 23. Quesenberry CP Jr, Caan B, Jacobson A. Obesity, 
health services use, and health care costs among 
members of a health maintenance organization. Arch 
Intern Med 1998 Mar 9;158(5):466-72. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinte.158.5.466.
 24. Sung HY, Max W, Tucker LY, Gordon N, Ray T, 
Rice D. Smoking cessation and medical care use/
costs in a large HMO [Internet]. Poster presentation 
at the APHA 134th Annual Meeting and Exposition; 
2006 Nov 4-8; Boston, MA. Washington, DC: 
American Public Health Association; 2006 Nov [cited 
2015 Nov 11]. Available from: https://apha.confex.
com/apha/134am/techprogram/paper_142540.htm.
 25. Gordon NP. Member health surveys project special 
report: adult health plan members’ access to 
information technology and preferred methods of 
obtaining health information and health education 
in 2008 [internal report] [Internet]. Oakland, CA: 
Kaiser Permanente Northern California Division of 
Research; 2010 Apr [cited 2015 Nov 11]. Available 
from: www.dor.kaiser.org/external/IT_Access_and_
Health_Ed_Preferences,_MHS2008__pubdate_
April_2010/.
 26. Gordon NP. Member health survey project special 
report: seniors’ access to information technology and 
preferred methods of obtaining health information 
and health education in 2011 [internal report] 
[Internet]. Oakland, CA: Kaiser Permanente Northern 
California Division of Research; 2012 Nov [cited 2015 
Nov 11]. Available from: www.dor.kaiser.org/external/
senior_it_access_2011.
 27. Gordon NP. Differences in use of web-based health 
care transactions by non-limited English proficient 
Latinos and nonHispanic Whites may be more related 
to predisposing sociodemographic factors than lack 
of internet access [Internet]. Poster presentation at 
the TPMG-UC Davis Latino Health Conference; 2014 
May 30-31; Santa Clara, CA. Oakland, CA: Kaiser 
Permanente Division of Research; 2014 [cited 2015 
Nov 11]. Available from: www.dor.kaiser.org/external/
Latino-White_differences_in_use_of_web_for_
health_purposes_2011/.
 28. Gruskin EP, Geiger AM, Gordon N, Ackerson L. 
Characteristics of nonrespondents to questions on 
sexual orientation and income in a HMO survey. J 
Gay Lesbian Med Assoc 2001 Mar;5(1):21-4. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1009586032661.
 29. Gordon NP, Wortley PM, Singleton JA, Lin TY, 
Bardenheier BH. Race/ethnicity and validity of 
self-reported pneumococcal vaccination. BMC 
Public Health 2008 Jul 3;8:227. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2458-8-227.
 30. Gordon N, Lin T. PS2-33: Seniors’ uptake of 
online survey completion—experience of the 2011 
KPNC Member Health Survey. Clin Med Res 2013 
Sep;11(3):161. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3121/
cmr.2013.1176.ps2-33.
 31. SAS/STAT 9.3 User’s Guide [Internet]. Cary, NC: 
SAS Institute Inc; 2011 [cited 2016 Mar 14]. Available 
from: https://support.sas.com/documentation/cdl/en/
statug/63962/HTML/default/viewer.htm#titlepage.htm.
 32. Task 1b: how to generate age-adjusted prevalence 
rates and means using SAS 9.2 survey procedures 
[Internet]. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention; [cited 2015 Nov 11]. Available 
from: www.cdc.gov/nchs/tutorials/NHANES/
NHANESAnalyses/AgeStandardization/Task1b_
SAS92.htm.
Serious Business
Good health is a serious business.  
Like life itself, it has to be worked at and  
it takes on added meaning with effort.
— Norman Cousins, 1915-1960, American political journalist, author, professor, and world peace advocate
 43
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-007
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Reduced Trauma Symptoms and Perceived Stress in Male Prison 
Inmates through the Transcendental Meditation Program:  
A Randomized Controlled Trial
Sanford Nidich, EdD; Tom O’Connor, PhD; Thomas Rutledge, PhD; Jeff Duncan;  
Blaze Compton, MA; Angela Seng; Randi Nidich, EdD 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-007
E-pub: 10/07/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-007
ABSTRACT 
Context: 
Trauma events are four times more prevalent in inmates than in the general public 
and are associated with increased recidivism and other mental and physical health issues. 
Objective: To evaluate the effects of Transcendental Meditationa (TM) on trauma 
symptoms in male inmates. 
Design: One hundred eighty-one inmates with a moderate- to high-risk criminal pro-
file were randomly assigned to either the TM program or to a usual care control group. 
Main Outcome Measures: The Trauma Symptom Checklist and the Perceived Stress 
Scale were administered at baseline and four-month posttest. 
Results: Significant reductions in total trauma symptoms, anxiety, depression, dis-
sociation, and sleep disturbance subscales, and perceived stress in the TM group were 
found compared with controls (all p values < 0.001). The high-trauma subgroup analysis 
further showed a higher magnitude of effects in the TM group compared with controls 
on all outcomes, with Cohen effect sizes ranging from 0.67 to 0.89. 
Conclusion: Results are consistent with those of prior studies of the TM program in 
other populations and its effects on trauma symptoms and perceived stress.
INTRODUCTION
Trauma events are four times more 
prevalent in inmates than in the general 
public.1 Elevated trauma symptoms are 
associated with poor lifestyle decision 
making and higher rates of recidivism.1 
Experience of trauma exposure also is as-
sociated with adverse mental and physical 
health conditions, including cardiovas-
cular disease, metabolic disease, autoim-
mune disorders, and cancer.2,3
Recent research suggests an evolving role 
for meditation therapies in populations 
with severe medical and psychiatric symp-
toms.4,5 Systematic reviews of clinical trials 
investigating meditation therapies such 
as the Transcendental Meditationa (TM) 
technique reported evidence of benefits 
on outcomes ranging from anxiety and 
depression to hypertension.4-7
Correctional facility residents represent 
one large-scale population exposed to 
heightened stress that may benefit from 
practicing meditation. Prison inmates 
report high levels of premorbid stress and 
increased exposure to trauma and violence 
before incarceration relative to the general 
population.8,9 Poor stress management 
skills may further contribute to behavioral 
problems among inmates during incarcera-
tion that could affect their ability to benefit 
from rehabilitation opportunities. 
In a review of meditation practices 
in inmate populations, the TM pro-
gram had the largest body of support, 
including research showing statistically 
significant reductions of psychological 
distress factors among inmates receiving 
TM instruction.10 On the basis of these 
initial findings, a randomized controlled 
trial of prison inmates was designed to 
evaluate the impact of this stress reduc-
tion program on trauma symptoms and 
trauma-associated factors. 
The current article describes the results 
of a randomized controlled study investi-
gating the effects of the TM program on 
total trauma symptoms: anxiety, depres-
sion, dissociation, sleep disturbance sub-
scales, and perceived stress in a population 
of inmates with a moderate- to high-risk 
criminal profile. Although research has 
been conducted on this intervention’s 
application to specific types of trauma 
in other populations,11,12 this is the first 
known published study to evaluate the 
effects of the TM program on trauma 
symptoms in prison inmates.
METHODS
Subjects
One hundred eighty-one male inmates 
in the Oregon state correctional system 
were randomly assigned to either the TM 
program (n = 90) or a no-treatment control 
group (n = 91). Two prisons took part in 
this trial: Oregon State Correctional In-
stitution and Oregon State Penitentiary. 
Both prisons are run by the Oregon De-
partment of Corrections and are located 
in Salem, OR. Oregon State Correctional 
Institution is a medium-security prison 
housing approximately 900 men. Oregon 
State Penitentiary is a maximum-security 
prison housing about 2400 men. 
To be eligible for the study, the men had 
to have at least four months of their prison 
Sanford Nidich, EdD, is a Professor and the Director of the Center for Social and Emotional Health at Maharishi 
University of Management in Fairfield, IA. E-mail: snidich@mum.edu. Tom O’Connor, PhD, is an Assistant Professor of 
Criminal Justice at Western Oregon University in Monmouth. E-mail: oconnortom@aol.com. Thomas Rutledge, PhD, is a 
Staff Psychologist at Veterans Administration San Diego Healthcare System in La Jolla, CA. E-mail: thomas.rutledge@va.gov. 
 
Jeff Duncan is a Research Analyst for the Oregon Department of Corrections in Salem. E-mail: jeff.b.duncan@doc.state.or.us. 
Blaze Compton, MA, is an Affiliated Research Associate at the Center for Social and Emotional Health at Maharishi 
University of Management in Fairfield, IA. E-mail: blazecompton@gmail.com. Angela Seng is an Affiliated Research 
Associate at the Center for Social and Emotional Health at Maharishi University of Management in Fairfield, IA. E-mail: 
seng.angelak@gmail.com. Randi Nidich, EdD, is a Senior Researcher at the Center for Social and Emotional Health at 
Maharishi University of Management in Fairfield, IA. E-mail: rnidich@mum.edu.
 44
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-007
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Reduced Trauma Symptoms and Perceived Stress in Male Prison Inmates through the Transcendental Meditation Program: A Randomized Controlled Trial 
sentence left to serve and have at least a 
moderate-risk level on the Automated 
Criminal Risk Score. This score is gener-
ated from an algorithm that uses seven risk 
factors: age, earned time, sentence length, 
revocation, number of prior incarcerations, 
prior theft convictions, and type of crime 
(person, property, or statutory). 
Procedures
Transcendental Meditation Program
The treatment group was taught the 
TM technique in a standard 7-step course 
(during 5 sessions lasting approximately 
1 hour per session). They were then en-
couraged to practice this stress reduction 
technique for 20 minutes twice a day, 
once in the morning and once in the late 
afternoon. Two certified TM teachers 
who had more than 10 years of teaching 
experience were the instructors for this 
study. The same standardized TM course 
sequence was used for all study partici-
pants; this sequence is described fully in 
the literature.13
The TM technique is a simple, natural, 
effortless technique that allows the mind 
to experience finer levels of the thinking 
process until the mind transcends and 
experiences the least excited state of hu-
man awareness.13 Overall, TM produces 
a profound state of “restful alertness.”14 
Participants in the TM group also had 
the option to attend group follow-up 
training and meditation sessions several 
times a week during the four-month 
intervention.
No-Treatment Controls 
Subjects in the control group continued 
with their daily schedule and did not par-
ticipate in the TM program. All subjects 
in both groups continued to receive their 
usual care. 
Outcome Measures
The following measures were admin-
istered at baseline and four-month post-
testing. Written informed consent was 
received from all subjects before testing.
Trauma Symptom Checklist
The Trauma Symptom Checklist (TSC) 
assesses trauma-related problems in several 
categories,15 with the source of the trauma 
being psychological and/or physical. A 
modified TSC inventory was used in this 
study, which included 30 of the original 
test items to give a total score and scores 
on the following subscales: dissociation, 
depression, anxiety, and sleep problems.15 
Each symptom item was rated according 
to its frequency of occurrence, using a 
4-point scale ranging from “0 = never” 
to “3 = often.” The TSC addresses broad 
trauma-related symptoms and has strong 
Table 1. Background and demographic characteristics by group for entire samplea
 
Variable
Transcendental 
Meditation (n = 90)
 
Control (n = 91)
 
p value
Age, years
28.56 ± 7.18
29.95 ± 8.22
NS
Race/ethnicity, no. (%)
White 
47 (52)
48 (53)
NS
Hispanic
8 (9)
4 (4)
African American
17 (19)
12 (13)
Native American
14 (16)
14 (15)
Other
4 (4)
13 (14)
ACRS
0.33 ± 0.15
0.31 ± 0.16
Perceived Stress Scale
29.84 ± 6.81
31.32 ± 6.96
Trauma Symptom Checklist 
Total trauma 
23.68 ± 13.11
30.12 ± 16.10
0.004
Anxiety subscale
2.99 ± 3.30
6.02 ± 4.27
0.001
Dissociation subscale
3.39 ± 2.34
4.31 ± 2.70
0.015
Depression subscale
6.07 ± 3.67
7.68 ± 4.04
0.005
Sleep disturbance subscale
7.72 ± 4.55
8.62 ± 4.62
NS
a Data are presented as baseline mean ± standard deviation unless indicated otherwise.
ACRS = automated criminal risk score; NS = not significant.
Table 2. Four-month adjusted posttest scores for trauma-associated symptomsa
 
Variable 
Transcendental 
Meditation (n = 73)
 
Control (n = 71)
 
p value
 
d
Perceived Stress Scale
21.37 ± 0.70
26.41 ± 0.76
< 0.001
0.75
Trauma Symptom Checklist
Total trauma 
12.50 ± 1.03
20.02 ± 1.75
< 0.001
0.57
Anxiety subscale
2.08 ± 0.23
3.61 ± 0.42
< 0.001
0.50
Dissociation subscale
1.80 ± .0.18
3.02 ± .0.29
< 0.001
0.56
Depression subscale
3.25 ± 0.52
5.21 ± .0.32
< 0.001
0.50
Sleep disturbance subscale
3.62 ± 0.39
6.22 ± .51
< 0.001
0.63
a Data are presented as adjusted posttest mean ± standard error.
d = effect size based on Cohen’s d.
Table 3. Background and demographic characteristics for the high-trauma  
symptoms subgroup (baseline total trauma score ≥ 26)a
 
Variable
Transcendental 
Meditation (n = 41)
 
Control (n = 53)
 
p value
Age, years
29.90 ± 7.06
30.21 ± 8.29
NS
ACRS
0.36 ± 0.13
0.34 ± 0.16
NS
Perceived Stress Scale
34.59 ± 5.18
34.64 ± 5.74
NS
Trauma Symptom Checklist
Total trauma
35.27 ± 9.15
41.00 ±11.70
0.011
Anxiety subscale
6.56 ± 2.97
8.47 ± 3.67
0.008
Dissociation subscale
5.00 ± 2.19
5.83 ± 2.40
NS
Depression subscale
8.90 ± 3.02
10.13 ± 3.12
NS
Sleep disturbance subscale
11.02 ± 3.52
11.42 ± 3.70
NS
a Data are presented as baseline mean ± standard deviation.
ACRS = automated criminal risk score; NS = not significant.
 45
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-007
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Reduced Trauma Symptoms and Perceived Stress in Male Prison Inmates through the Transcendental Meditation Program: A Randomized Controlled Trial 
psychometric properties.16 The TSC has 
been found to reliably index trauma se-
quelae.17 The modified TSC used in this 
study produced a Cronbach α = 0.93. 
Perceived Stress Scale
The Perceived Stress Scale is a 10-item 
inventory with a total score designed 
to assess the self-perception of stress.18 
Responses are based on the previous 4 
weeks, using a 5-item response set, ranging 
from “Never” to “Very often.” The level of 
perceived stress measured by the Perceived 
Stress Scale has been found to be sensitive 
to meditation intervention.19 Cronbach α 
for the Perceived Stress Scale is reported 
to be 0.85.18
Statistical Analysis
Analysis of covariance, adjusting for 
baseline dependent scores, was used 
for all analyses. Effect sizes, based on 
Cohen’s d, were calculated using mean 
change score group differences/posttest 
pooled standard deviation. In addition, 
subgroup analyses were conducted using 
high-trauma subjects (equal to or greater 
than the mean baseline total trauma score 
for the combined groups). Completer 
analysis was conducted for all subjects 
who were posttested, regardless of level 
of treatment compliance. Alpha was set 
at 0.05, two-tailed.
RESULTS
Table 1 shows the subjects’ demographic 
and background characteristics by group 
for the entire sample. The mean age of 
the men participating in the study was 29 
years. Approximately 52% were white, 
16% were African American, and 15% 
were Native American. 
Figure 1 shows the CONSORT flow 
diagram for all subjects. A total of 144 
subjects (TM: n = 73; Control: n = 71) 
completed both baseline and 4-month 
posttesting. Table 2 shows mean changes 
on the total trauma scale, trauma subscales, 
and Perceived Stress Scale. Significant 
reductions in total trauma (F[1, 141] = 
19.73, p < 0.001), as well as the dissocia-
tion (F[1, 141] = 18.21, p < 0.001), de-
pression (F[1, 141] = 13.32, p < 0.001), 
anxiety (F[1, 141] = 14.23, p < 0.001), 
and sleep disturbance subscales (F[1, 141] 
= 21.61, p < 0.001) on the TSC, and per-
ceived stress (F(1, 140) = 27.09, p < 0.001) 
were observed in the TM group compared 
with controls. Effect sizes were mostly in 
the moderate to large range, with depres-
sion and anxiety subscales = 0.50 and the 
Perceived Stress Scale = 0.75.
Seventy-nine of the 90 men (88%) 
randomly assigned to the TM group com-
pleted the initial TM course. During the 
course of the study, 80% of the men (72) 
were compliant with TM practice (defined 
as at least once a day), with 68% (62) prac-
ticing twice a day on average.
Table 3 shows the demographic and 
baseline data for the high-trauma symptoms 
subgroup (TM: n = 32; control: n = 41). 
Table 4 shows changes on the total 
trauma scale, trauma subscales, and 
Assessed for eligibility 
(N = 302)
Excluded (n = 121) 
♦ Not meeting inclusion criteria (n = 36) 
♦ Declined to participate (n = 85)
No-treatment control group 
Allocated to intervention (n = 91) 
♦ Received allocated treatment (n = 91) 
♦ Did not receive allocated intervention (n = 0)
Lost to follow-up (n = 20) 
♦ Declined to complete posttesting (n = 20) 
Analyzed (n = 71) 
♦ Excluded from analysis because of  
posttesting noncompliance (n = 20)
Transcendental Meditation group 
Allocated to intervention (n = 90) 
♦ Received allocated intervention (n = 90) 
♦ Did not receive allocated intervention (n = 0)
Lost to follow-up (n = 17)  
♦ Declined to complete posttesting (n = 12) 
♦ Transferred to another prison (n = 3) 
♦ Early release (n = 2)
Analyzed (n = 73) 
♦ Excluded from analysis because of  
posttesting noncompliance (n = 17)
Randomized (n = 181)
Figure 1. CONSORT flow diagram.
CONSORT = Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials.
Table 4. Four-month adjusted posttest scores for trauma-associated symptoms in the 
high-trauma subgroup (baseline total trauma score ≥ 26)
 
 
Variable
Transcendental 
Meditation (n = 32), 
mean + SE
 
Control (n = 41), 
mean + SE
 
 
p value
 
 
d
Perceived Stress Scale
21.89 ± 1.21
28.44 ± 1.02
< 0.001
0.89
Trauma Symptom Checklist
Total trauma 
15.63 ± 1.52
26.58 ± 2.47
< 0.001
0.74
Dissociation subscale
2.15 ± 0.28
4.11 ± 0.40
< 0.001
0.79
Depression subscale
3.86 ± 0.46
7.10 ± 0.69
< 0.001
0.78
Anxiety subscale
2.57 ± 0.36
4.96 ± 0.61
< 0.001
0.67
Sleep problems subscale
4.53 ± 0.67
8.00 ± 0.71
< 0.001
0.75
d = effect size based on Cohen’s d; SE = standard error.
 46
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-007
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Reduced Trauma Symptoms and Perceived Stress in Male Prison Inmates through the Transcendental Meditation Program: A Randomized Controlled Trial 
the Perceived Stress Scale for the high-
trauma symptoms subgroup. Significant 
reductions in total trauma score (F[1, 70] 
= 14.20, p < 0.001); the dissociation 
(F[1, 70] = 17.60, p < 0.001), depression 
(F[1, 70] = 14.29, p < 0.001), anxiety 
(F[1, 70] = 11.97, p = 0.003), and sleep 
disturbance subscales (F[1, 70] = 13.09, 
p = 0.001); and the Perceived Stress Scale 
(F[1, 69] = 18.60, p < 0.001) were ob-
served in the TM group compared with 
controls. Effect sizes were relatively large, 
ranging from 0.67 to 0.89.
DISCUSSION
In this clinical trial, the TM technique 
showed significant reductions in TSC total 
trauma symptoms; anxiety, depression, 
the dissociation, and sleep disturbance 
subscales of the TSC; and in the Perceived 
Stress Scale relative to a usual-care control 
group. Results for the high-trauma symp-
toms subgroup indicated that the TM 
program might be particularly efficacious 
for those with higher levels of trauma 
symptoms. 
Trauma was the focus of the current 
intervention effort for three reasons. First, 
correctional facility residents are known to 
report high rates of trauma backgrounds 
compared with noncorrectional facility 
populations. Second, although previous 
TM research in correctional settings has 
shown improvement in other psychoso-
cial stress factors, no known research to 
date has specifically focused on trauma 
as a main study outcome. Last, although 
a growing body of TM research suggests 
that this technique may be particularly 
beneficial for reducing trauma symp-
toms,11,12 there is a need for larger random-
ized controlled trials to assess the impact 
of the TM program on trauma symptoms 
and associated factors. 
To our knowledge, this is the largest 
randomized controlled trial to date of 
the effects of the TM program on trauma 
symptoms, and the first of its kind con-
ducted in a correctional setting. Prior 
studies have been conducted on veterans 
and international refugees in community-
based settings and have found similar 
results in reductions in trauma symptoms 
because of TM practice.11,12 The current 
findings therefore build on prior gaps in 
the literature, extend the range of mental 
health benefits previously documented 
on the TM program, and provide further 
evidence for the clinical value of provid-
ing TM in correctional facilities and other 
institutional settings.
Prior research indicates that regular 
TM practice decreases hyperarousal of the 
sympathetic nervous system and hypotha-
lamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,20,21 providing 
a possible mechanism for how TM practice 
may reduce trauma symptoms.22 This same 
mechanism has been proposed for the ef-
fects of the TM program on cardiovascular 
disease.23 Evidence linking trauma expo-
sure and cardiovascular disease has been 
found across different populations and 
stressor events.2
This trial offered several methodologic 
strengths, including a randomized con-
trolled design, high treatment-compliance 
rates, and a high-trauma symptoms sub-
group. 
Limitations included the use of a no-
treatment control condition in the study 
rather than a more active control condi-
tion. There is, therefore, the possibility 
that at least some of the benefits associ-
ated with the TM intervention are not 
specific to TM. Future research with a 
more active control group should be used 
to determine the degree of unique benefits 
associated with TM. The long-term stabil-
ity and further improvement in trauma 
symptoms cannot be determined because 
of the absence of a follow-up measurement 
beyond the four-month posttest assess-
ment date. Finally, research on the TM 
program should be conducted on a female 
population of inmates to determine the 
generalizability of effects across genders.
Future studies of trauma symptoms in 
prison populations should focus specifi-
cally on inmates with documented post-
traumatic stress disorder and should take 
into account other psychiatric disorders 
that may be present, as well as standard 
psychotherapy and drug treatments being 
administered. Future research also should 
assess the relationship of trauma symptoms 
to functional impairment and other quality 
of life issues. 
CONCLUSION
These findings extend prior research on 
TM and trauma symptoms. A recent review 
of posttraumatic stress disorder research indi-
cates a need for novel, evidence-based treat-
ments to supplement first-line therapies.24 
The current study findings, along with those 
of prior research on TM and posttraumatic 
stress,11,12 suggest that the TM program holds 
promise for the treatment of trauma and 
stress-related disorders. v
a Transcendental Meditation and TM are service marks 
registered in the US Patent and Trademark Office, 
licensed to Maharishi Foundation, and used under 
sublicense.
Disclosure Statement
Blaze Compton, MA, is a part-time consultant 
to Maharishi Foundation USA Inc, Fairfield, IA. 
The other authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgments
The research was supported by the David Lynch 
Foundation, New York, NY. We wish to thank Matt 
Dixon for his participation in the project. 
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health 
Communications provided editorial assistance.
Authors’ Contributions
Sanford Nidich, EdD, and Randi Nidich, EdD, 
participated in the study design, analysis of 
data, and drafting and critical review of the final 
manuscript. Tom O’Connor, PhD, participated in the 
study design, collection of data, and drafting and 
critical review of the final manuscript. Angela Seng 
participated in the statistical analysis and drafting of 
the manuscript. Blaze Compton, MA, participated in 
the delivery of Transcendental Meditation treatment. 
Thomas Rutledge, PhD, participated in drafting 
of the manuscript and critical review. Jeff Duncan 
participated in data acquisition and critical review 
of the manuscript. All authors have given final 
approval to the manuscript.
How to Cite this Article
Nidich S, O’Connor T, Rutledge T, et al. Reduced 
trauma sypmtoms and perceived stress in male 
prison inmates through the Transcendental 
Meditation program: A randomized controlled trial. 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-007. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.7812/TPP/16-007.
References
 1. Ardino V, Milani L, Di Blasio P. PTSD and re-
offending risk: the mediating role of worry and a 
negative perception of other people’s support. Eur J 
… correctional facility residents 
are known to report high 
rates of trauma backgrounds 
compared with noncorrectional 
facility populations.
 47
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-007
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Reduced Trauma Symptoms and Perceived Stress in Male Prison Inmates through the Transcendental Meditation Program: A Randomized Controlled Trial 
Psychotraumatol 2013 Dec 20;4. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.3402/ejpt.v4i0.21382.
 2. Boscarino JA. Posttraumatic stress disorder 
and physical illness: results from clinical and 
epidemiologic studies. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2004 
Dec;1032:141-53. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1196/
annals.1314.011.
 3. Hahn EE, Hays RD, Kahn KL, Litwin MS, Ganz PA. 
Post-traumatic stress symptoms in cancer survivors: 
relationship to the impact of cancer scale and other 
associated risk factors. Psychooncology 2015 
Jun;24(6):643-52. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
pon.3623.
 4. Orme-Johnson DW, Barnes VA. Effects of the 
transcendental meditation technique on trait anxiety: 
a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J 
Altern Complement Med 2014 May;20(5):330-41. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/acm.2013.0204.
 5. Sedlmeier P, Eberth J, Schwarz M, et al. The 
psychological effects of meditation: a meta-analysis. 
Psychol Bull 2012 Nov;138(6):1139-71. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0028168.
 6. Goyal M, Singh S, Sibinga EM, et al. Meditation 
programs for psychological stress and well-being: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern 
Med 2014 Mar;174(3):357-68. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.13018.
 7. Rainforth MV, Schneider RH, Nidich SI, Gaylord-
King C, Salerno JW, Anderson JW. Stress reduction 
programs in patients with elevated blood pressure: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Curr Hypertens 
Rep 2007 Dec;9(6):520-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11906-007-0094-3.
 8. Teplin LA. Psychiatric and substance abuse disorders 
among male urban jail detainees. Am J Public 
Health 1994 Feb;84(2):290-3. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/1353-1131(95)90042-x.
 9. Gibson LE, Holt JC, Fondacaro KM, Tang TS, 
Powell TA, Turbitt EL. An examination of antecedent 
traumas and psychiatric comorbidity among 
male inmates with PTSD. J Trauma Stress 1999 
Jul;12(3):473-84. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1023/a:1024767020280.
 10. Himelstein S. Meditation research: the state of the 
art in correctional settings. Int J Offender Ther Comp 
Criminol 2011 Jun;55(4):646-61. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/0306624x10364485.
 11. Rosenthal JZ, Grosswald S, Ross R, Rosenthal N. 
Effects of transcendental meditation in veterans of 
Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi 
Freedom with posttraumatic stress disorder: a pilot 
study. Mil Med 2011 Jun;176(6):626-30. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.7205/milmed-d-10-00254.
 12. Rees B, Travis F, Shapiro D, Chant R. Significant 
reductions in posttraumatic stress symptoms in 
Congolese refugees within 10 days of transcendental 
meditation practice. J Trauma Stress 2014 
Feb;27(1):112-5. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
jts.21883.
 13. Roth R. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi’s Transcendental 
Meditation. Washington, DC: Primus; 1994. p 90-102.
 14. Travis F, Shear J. Focused attention, open monitoring 
and automatic self-transcending: categories 
to organize meditations from Vedic, Buddhist 
and Chinese traditions. Conscious Cogn 2010 
Dec;19(4):1110-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
concog.2010.01.007.
 15. Briere J. Psychometric review of the Trauma 
Symptom Checklist 40. In: Stamm BH, editor. 
Measurement of stress, trauma, and adaptation. 
Lutherville, MD: Sidran Press; 1996.
 16. Zlotnick C, Shea MT, Begin A, Pearlstein T, 
Simpson E, Costello E. The validation of the Trauma 
Symptom Checklist-40 (TSC-40) in a sample of 
inpatients. Child Abuse Negl 1996 Jun;20(6):503-10. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0145-2134(96)00032-4.
 17. Neal TMS, Nagle JE. Measuring abuse sequelae: 
validating and extending the trauma symptom 
checklist-40. J Aggress Maltreat Trauma 
2013;22(3):231-47. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10
926771.2013.764953.
 18. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global 
measure of perceived stress. J Health Soc 
Behav 1983 Dec;24(4):385-96. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.2307/2136404.
 19. Nidich S, Nidich RJ, Salerno J, Hadfield B, Elder C. 
Stress reduction with the Transcendental Meditation 
program in caregivers: a pilot study. International 
Archives of Nursing and Health Care 2015;1(2):011.
 20. MacLean CR, Walton KG, Wenneberg SR, et al. 
Effects of the Transcendental Meditation program on 
adaptive mechanisms: changes in hormone levels 
and responses to stress after 4 months of practice. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 1997 May;22(4):277-95. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0306-4530(97)00003-6.
 21. Walton KG, Schneider RH, Nidich S. Review of 
controlled research on the Transcendental Meditation 
program and cardiovascular disease. Risk factors, 
morbidity, and mortality. Cardiol Rev 2004 Sep-
Oct;12(5):262-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.
crd.0000113021.96119.78.
 22. Rutledge T, Nidich S, Schneider RH, et al. Design 
and rationale of a comparative effectiveness trial 
evaluating transcendental meditation against 
established therapies for PTSD. Contemp Clin Trials 
2014 Sep;39(1):50-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
cct.2014.07.005.
 23. Schneider RH, Grim CE, Rainforth MV, et al. 
Stress reduction in the secondary prevention of 
cardiovascular disease: randomized, controlled trial 
of Transcendental Meditation and health education 
in Blacks. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2012 
Nov;5(6):750-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/
circoutcomes.112.967406.
 24. Steenkamp MM, Litz BT, Hoge CW, Marmar CR. 
Psychotherapy for military-related PTSD: a review of 
randomized clinical trials. JAMA 2015 Aug 4;314(5): 
489-500. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama. 
2015.8370.
Means
Meditation is not a means to an end. It is both the means and the end.
— Jiddhu Krishnamurti, 1895-1986, Indian theosophist, public speaker, and author
 48
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-236
SOUL OF THE HEALER
Sunflowers 
scanography
Bridget Bourgon, PA-C
This digital image of sunflowers was created on a flatbed scanner—the scanner is the camera, the light 
source, and the tabletop. The resulting image has significantly enhanced optical resolution and limited 
depth of field, which produces unique shadows, increased sharpness, and color saturation.
Ms Bourgon is a retired Physician Assistant from Urgent Care at Kaiser Permanente Orange County in 
Santa Ana, CA. More of Ms Bourgon’s images may be seen at: www.bridgetbourgon.com/unscented.
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-236
 49
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-224
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Narrative Medicine
Voices of the “99 Percent”: The Role of Online Narrative  
to Improve Health Care
Beth Sundstrom, PhD, MPH; Stephanie J Meier; Michael Anderson; Kathleen E Booth;  
Lacey Cooper; Ellie Flock; Jackelyn B Payne; Priya Hirway, ScM 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-224
E-pub: 07/15/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-224
ABSTRACT
Context: Communal blogs facilitate online narratives by 
providing opportunities for individuals to co-construct meaning 
and to engage in discussion about lived health experiences. 
Objective: To examine the role of health as a connective 
narrative among individuals organizing collectively in an online 
community. The “We are the 99 percent” Tumblr blog emerged 
as a spontaneous community platform of the Occupy Wall Street 
movement in the US. 
Design: Researchers conducted a qualitative content analysis 
of a total of 2003 blog posts. 
Main Outcome Measures: Data analysis included a process of 
data reduction, display, and conclusion drawing and verification. 
Results: Bloggers discussed medical crises and the role of injury 
and illness in maintaining financial solvency. The difficulty of ob-
taining health care and the lack of accessible quality care emerged 
as themes. In particular, unemployment and underemployment 
limited access to health insurance coverage. The bloggers ex-
pressed dissatisfaction with the health care system and the impact 
of financial status on health. These challenges were exacerbated 
for marginalized populations, such as women and veterans. 
Conclusion: Findings offer implications for the value of on-
line narrative to improve health care initiatives and to provide 
insight to integrated health care systems, including health care 
practitioners, nonprofit organizations, hospitals, and policy 
makers. Results suggest opportunities to address the health 
care gaps of marginalized populations and to develop public 
health policy.
INTRODUCTION
The Era of Health Reform
On March 23, 2010, US President Barack Obama signed the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act,1 passing health in-
surance reform into law. This legislation followed years of rising 
premiums, declining health and health care quality, and increas-
ing unemployment, which led the US health care system to the 
brink of collapse.2 According to the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD), the US spends 250% 
more on health care per capita (16% of the US gross domestic 
product in 2007)2 than the average of all other OECD countries.2,3 
Despite this spending, Americans have some of the worst health 
indicators in developed countries: the second highest prevalence 
of chronic diseases, the highest rate of obesity in all OECD coun-
tries, and higher infant mortality rates than the OECD average.3 
The US is an outlier in terms of high expenditures and low life 
expectancy at birth (in the bottom third compared with other 
OECD countries). These growing health and economic concerns 
positioned health care as a timely political issue.
Health and health care emerged as key factors in the Occupy 
Wall Street movement. The goal of the movement was to raise 
awareness about income inequality and the corporate influence of 
the wealthiest 1% of Americans on government.3 The movement 
captivated national attention in early fall 2011; however, news 
media had difficulty discerning the goal of participants, especially 
without the emergence of a clear leader.4 To address this ambigu-
ity, thousands of bloggers turned to Tumblr, a popular blogging 
Web site, to share their stories, to demand change, and to raise 
awareness about the movement. Tumblr encourages users to form 
online communities on the basis of similar interests as a means 
to communicate with others and to build support systems. The 
Tumblr blog “We are the 99 percent” amplified the voices of Oc-
cupy Wall Street protesters. The blog is a dynamic artifact, telling 
the story of the movement’s apex, while continuing to serve as 
a place for individuals to describe their lived experiences. Many 
posts expressed frustration regarding health care and the difficulty 
of attaining quality medical care in the US. 
Although scholars studied the Occupy Wall Street movement 
on other social media sites, little research explores the “We are 
the 99 percent” Tumblr.4-6 The “We are the 99 percent” Tumblr 
received more than 100 posts every day during its peak.7 Although 
the platform remains anonymous, the creators of the Tumblr 
blog, Chris and Priscilla Grim, required bloggers to handwrite 
their story on a piece of paper and to show some portion of their 
face.7 In a short period, Occupy Wall Street focused national at-
tention on the issues of health and health care through the use 
of social media.8 
Beth Sundstrom, PhD, MPH, is an Assistant Professor in the Communication Department at the College of Charleston in South 
Carolina. E-mail: sundstrombl@cofc.edu. Stephanie J Meier is a Student in the Communication Department at the College of 
Charleston in South Carolina. E-mail: meiersj@g.cofc.edu. Michael Anderson is a Student of Science, Technology, and Society 
at Stanford University in CA. E-mail: mandersc@stanford.edu. Kathleen E Booth is a Student in the Public Health Department 
at the College of Charleston in South Carolina. E-mail: boothke@g.cofc.edu. Lacey Cooper is a Student in the Public Health 
Department at the College of Charleston in South Carolina. E-mail: cooperlk@g.cofc.edu. Ellie Flock is a Student in the Public 
Health Department at the College of Charleston in South Carolina. E-mail: flockec@g.cofc.edu. Jackelyn B Payne is a Student in 
the Public Health Department at Emory University in Atlanta, GA. E-mail: jackelynpayne@gmail.com. Priya Hirway, ScM, is a 
Biostatistician at the Hasbro Children’s Hospital at Brown University in Providence, RI. E-mail: priya_hirway@brown.edu.
 50
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-224
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Voices of the “99 Percent”: The Role of Online Narrative to Improve Health Care 
LITERATURE REVIEW
Narrative Storytelling Online
Storytelling is a powerful tool capable of inspiring change 
within the health care field.9-13 Online narrative in public health 
offers a novel opportunity for individuals to communicate about 
health. The expansion of narrative-based educational and pro-
motional materials to online platforms is based on the success 
of personal stories in disseminating health information. These 
personal anecdotes serve as models of behaviors that can impact 
health.14 Online narrative provides communities with opportu-
nities to co-create health narratives and allows individuals and 
experts to bear witness to everyday lived health experiences.15-18 
Engaging with online storytelling platforms such as Twitter, Face-
book, and Tumblr allows health care practitioners to monitor and 
understand the health and health care needs of the public beyond 
the traditional health care setting, furthering the opportunity to 
address patient-physician gaps.19 
Health communication campaigns employ online narratives as 
a form of persuasive communication to motivate health behavior 
change.14,20-22 Experts suggest that readers of personal stories may 
be able to draw parallels with their lives, eliciting intellectual and 
emotional engagement.23 In practice, the use of narrative by health 
communicators is often less “true story” and more script, in which 
health care practitioners craft the “right narrative” to increase the 
chances of behavior change.14 Scholars argue that narrative-based 
online storytelling equals that of didactic education in effective-
ness of imparting information,22,24-26 offering real-world examples 
to supplement concrete data.27 
The constructed narratives of health campaigns may not be 
as effective as true personal narratives. Individuals searching 
for organic experiences may avoid messages from campaigns 
and experts, in favor of online discussion groups where mem-
bers create a community of support on the basis of common 
experiences.21 Studies show that in medical settings, individuals 
seek personal experiences from previous patients.20 As a result, 
storytelling provides patients with a means to understand their 
illness through communication with others who faced similar 
diagnoses.28 Patients search for narratives from those who have 
experienced comparable health situations. In a qualitative study 
of pregnant women, Kraschnewski et al16 found that women fre-
quently used social media sources (such as Facebook) to share their 
own experiences and learn about the experience of others—for 
example, with regard to birth methods. Their findings included 
key important themes: 1) prenatal care structure is not patient 
centered, 2) women used technology to fill gaps, and 3) technol-
ogy has limitations in supporting their pregnancy-related needs. 
The digital communication platform of the Internet expanded the 
ability for people to share these experiences and for the personal 
accounts to disseminate widely.29
The possibility of remaining relatively anonymous on the In-
ternet explains the appeal of online narratives. The anonymity 
of the digital platform creates opportunities for marginalized 
groups to participate in social activism.24 In diverse populations, 
the lack of face-to-face contact may be beneficial and encourage 
participants to directly communicate their opinions without fear 
of judgment; as a result, online narrative platforms may provide a 
safe space for marginalized populations to share and to seek out 
experiences and opinions that may differ from the mainstream, 
as the “We are the 99 percent” blog demonstrated.24,30 Advocates 
suggest that online groups serve as therapeutic outlets where in-
dividuals are freed from impediments.29 When health centers set 
up online discussion boards to build support systems within their 
patient community, the benefits include personal empowerment, 
reduced depression, better comprehension of medical procedures, 
and identifying gaps in patient knowledge.21 Further insight into 
the perspectives of individuals may shed light on practical, as well 
as ethical, implications of narrative related to issues of health.31
Communal blogs facilitate storytelling online by providing 
opportunities for individuals to co-construct meaning and to 
engage in discussion about lived health experiences. In particular, 
communal blogs aim to create spaces for discussing and sharing 
experiences and information, thus resulting in communities of 
individuals interacting online. Few studies describe the role of 
storytelling online from the perspective of individuals and how 
these individual experiences can be used to construct public 
health messages, policies, and health communication campaigns.29 
Therefore, the current study analyzed the use of the multimedia 
social media platform Tumblr and the role of health as narrative 
among individuals organizing collectively in an online commu-
nity. By exploring the perceptions and attitudes toward health and 
health care of the “We are the 99 percent” bloggers amidst the 
peak period of social movement, we examined the political views 
of marginalized community members. Our primary focus was to 
better understand the role of health and the health care system 
in the context of the Occupy Wall Street movement. Through 
qualitative research methods, this study assessed community ap-
plications of multimedia blog posts, which also offer implications 
for the application of new media intervention strategies. Findings 
offer suggestions for clinicians in understanding the attitudes of 
their patients in real time through the use of social media.
METHODS
Researchers conducted a content analysis on 15 months of “We 
are the 99 percent” blog posts beginning September 1, 2011, and 
concluding November 30, 2012. This period encompassed the 
height of the Occupy Wall Street movement, comprising 2003 
blog posts. Although the Tumblr blog is still active, there have 
been fewer than 30 posts since December 1, 2012. The “We 
are the 99 percent” posts provide detailed explanations of the 
lives of these bloggers, which frequently (approximately 55%; 
n = 1110) included their personal perceptions of and experiences 
with health and the health care system. For this reason, the blog 
represents a unique, experiential account of the role of health in 
the lives of individuals who identify with the Occupy Wall Street 
movement. A qualitative content analysis provided the most ap-
propriate approach to study how bloggers made meaning of their 
lived experience because this method of analysis reveals the per-
spectives and discourse of individuals situated in a social change 
dialogue.32 Because blog posts are publicly available, research us-
ing these data does not meet the definition of human participant 
research. Although an institutional review board application was 
not required, all researchers completed training in the appropriate 
 51
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-224
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Voices of the “99 Percent”: The Role of Online Narrative to Improve Health Care 
conduct of research and all ethical standards were followed in the 
completion of the study. Researchers included undergraduate and 
graduate students studying public health at a liberal arts and sci-
ences university mentored by a faculty member. A class assignment 
led students to discover the Occupy Wall Street movement and 
pursue this research project after the completion of the course.
Data Collection
Collection of data was performed in chronologic order to 
capture all posts written during the designated period, which 
included the height of the Occupy Wall Street movement. In a 
database, researchers logged the text from each post, a link to the 
post, the date of the post, the age of the blogger (if known), and 
a description of the photograph. In total, 2003 blog posts were 
collected. Approximately 55% of these blog posts (n = 1110) 
discussed health topics or health care. Health topics included 
discussion of disease or illness, medications, medical treatment, 
and health services, such as preventive care. Health care included 
health insurance, coverage, medical bills, and paying for services 
and treatment. Adults posted on behalf of young children and 
infants younger than age 1 year. Bloggers ranged in age from 12 
to 89 years. 
Data Analysis
To ensure credible, dependable, and replicable qualitative 
methods, data analysis included data reduction, data display, and 
conclusion drawing and verification.33 Initially, researchers coded 
each blog post line-by-line to create descriptive codes. When 
possible, researchers identified “in vivo” codes on the basis of the 
words and phrases that participants used repeatedly (eg, health 
insurance, medical bills, preexisting condition, etc). Interpretive 
codes were used to further reduce the data and provide explana-
tions for participants’ experiences (eg, the importance of health 
insurance, the role of access to care, and quality of health care). 
Finally, pattern codes allowed researchers to identify emergent 
themes (eg, patterns among marginalized populations, the cost 
of injury and illness, and the impact of facing a medical crisis). 
Researchers were trained to use a book of codes related to health 
and health care and met frequently throughout the data analysis 
process to discuss and modify codes. The codebook allowed re-
searchers to maintain consistency and reliability while compiling 
data from the original source online. Clearly defined codes ensured 
standardization and categorization of health topics. 
Researchers used Miles and Huberman’s check-coding 
formula on 7.5% of the sample. Agreement between coders 
reached approximately 90%, attaining Miles and Huberman’s 
standard for intercoder consistency, indicating that research-
ers accurately employed the coding system. Microsoft Excel 
(Microsoft Corp, Redmond, WA) on Google Drive (Google Inc, 
Mountain View, CA) provided structure and an interactive 
data display to code and analyze data. Researchers identified 
patterns emerging from the data using the codes as a guide 
through constant comparison of the blog posts.34 Researchers 
met to identify concepts, discuss data patterns, and agree upon 
themes and conclusions emerging from these data. 
RESULTS
Data analysis revealed bloggers engaged in narratives about 
health and health care. The personal narratives of the bloggers 
provided insight into their perceptions and beliefs with two 
Table 1. Themes with illustrative quotes
Topic
Theme
Quote
Health
Facing a medical 
crisis
“My husband had teeth rotting out of his mouth causing infections … no regular doctor would see him without insurance 
or medical aide card.” (2011 Oct 27; Re: Working hard and Going without)
“My best friend is pregnant … but her insurance won’t pick back up for another 45 days. She’s due in 2 weeks.”  
(2011 Sep 27; Re: I have a degree)
The cost of injury 
and illness
“I … had to leave my job and put school on hold indefinitely because my 54-year-old mother had a stroke.”  
(2011 Nov 14; Re: I am 21 years)
“I am a work-at-home mother of 4, 1 of whom was just diagnosed with autism. Insurance in my state will not cover her 
services because she is less than 6 years old.” (2011 Oct 1; Re: I am a work-at-home)
On the margins
“I worry that even after I give birth I won’t be able to work because of the cost of childcare.” (2011 Nov 12; Re: I am 
pregnant, unemployed)
“My husband has insurance through his job, but he can’t cover me because … I’m a man, and we live in Texas.”  
(2011 Oct 20; Re: My grandmother died of)
Health care 
system
The importance of 
being insured
“I currently work 2 part-time jobs at a local community college … In the last few weeks I’ve developed painful lumps  
in my neck but have no health insurance to see a doctor for it.” (2011 Oct 14; Re: I am 24 years old)
“I am Chinese American and a mother of two. I have been unemployed since 2007. I am disabled from a workplace 
injury. I don’t receive any benefits from the government. Our family relies on my husband’s income to live.”  
(2011, Oct 12; Re: I am Chinese American)
Accessing care
“It is a national security risk not to have 100% of the country having access to healthcare! … We are all protected  
when ALL people have access to vaccinations and quality health care.” (2011 Oct 27; Re: 20 years old)
“Antidepressants help me through every day … I can’t afford them, and so every day is a constant struggle.”  
(2011 Nov 11; Re: I am a junior)
Quality of health 
care
“My parents’ botched clinical trials … left my dad with cognitive damage and my mom with a heart attack.”  
(2011 Oct 29; Re: This is the sign)
“I contracted Hep C from a blood transfusion … and am uninsurable.” (2011 Nov 11; Re: I’m 49 years old)
 52
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-224
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Voices of the “99 Percent”: The Role of Online Narrative to Improve Health Care 
overarching themes emerging: 1) the personal and financial toll 
of health issues and 2) attitudes toward the US health care system. 
Narratives described facing a medical crisis, being ill or injured, 
or living on the margins, all of which negatively affected health 
and financial solvency. The health care system was discussed in 
relation to the importance of being insured, accessing health care, 
and the quality of medical services. Themes are presented with 
illustrative quotes in Table 1. Quotes are a true representation of 
bloggers’ posts. Posts are identified with a link to each individual 
entry in Table 2.
Health
Facing a Medical Crisis
The financial consequences of medical crises emerged as a criti-
cal narrative in the bloggers making meaning around health. Blog-
gers described how medical bills and debt incurred from health 
treatments wiped out personal savings and led to credit card debt. 
Swamped by medical bills and in debt, many bloggers were forced 
to make difficult decisions, such as compromising quality health 
care to pay for food or rent. One blogger was “foregoing … an-
nual physicals and any kind of dental work in order to put food 
on the table” (2011, Oct 27, Re: I live, as my). Many individuals 
discussed the decision to defer health care to afford more urgent 
necessities. Children also faced a lack of health care. According 
to one mother, “rent and food were more important” (2011, Oct 
16, Re: I’m 42, disabled after).
The Cost of Injury and Illness
Bloggers described the loss of employment or financial inde-
pendence caused by injury and illness, including chronic disease. 
A 34-year-old health care worker wrote a post about losing her 
job because of a rare medical condition. She was “denied state 
health insurance because [she made] too much money on un-
employment” and was unable to find a job that offered more 
than the unemployment compensation (2011, Dec 10, Re: I 
am a 34). The onset of disability owing to living for years with-
out access to health care emerged as a primary concern among 
bloggers. One woman wrote, “not having insurance ruined my 
husband’s body. He is 47 with the body of a 67 year old. He 
can barely walk” (2011, Sep 29, Re: All I remember is). Many 
bloggers discussed the relationship between employment status 
and health insurance coverage, emphasizing the inability to es-
cape from a cycle of illness. As one blogger stated, “health and 
Table 2. “We are the 99 percent” Tumblr blog posts with date, title, and hyperlink
Datea
Title
Link
2011, Sep 27
Re: I have a degree
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/10765163207
2011, Sep 29
Re: All I remember as far as my parents paying the bills is struggle
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/10805800341
2011, Sep 29
Re: No job=no insurance=no help=no job
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/10805778915
2011, Oct 1
Re: I am 20 years old and upwards of $275,000 in medical debt
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/10890007785
2011, Oct 1
Re: I am a work at home mother
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/10890054129
2011, Oct 9
Re: I worked hard and went to school
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/11226613846
2011, Oct 12
Re: I am Chinese American
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/11353855401
2011, Oct 14
Re: I am 24 years old
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/11422007247
2011, Oct 16
Re: I’m 42, disabled after 20 years of nursing, taking care of others
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/11512774391
2011, Oct 17
Re: I am a 38 year old married father of three
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/11592544446
2011, Oct 17
Re: My dad has his own business and works 70-80 hours a week to take  
care of me and my mom
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/11580641390
2011, Oct 18
Re: Tired and mad as hell
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/11612202432
2011, Oct 20
Re: My grandmother died of colon cancer
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/11694625078
2011, Oct 23
Re: I am 23 and I borrowed 33k to go to school to be a veterinary technician
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/11817603288
2011, Oct 26
Re: I am 31, married with a six month old son
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/11948000388
2011, Oct 27
Re: I live, as my mother does, paycheck to paycheck (when I have a job)
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/11991560794
2011, Oct 27
Re: Working hard and Going without
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/11992296233
2011, Oct 27
Re: 20 years old, college senior
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/11991548787
2011, Oct 29
Re: This is the sign I’m taking
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/12071717458
2011, Oct 30
Re: My father was fired from the job he held
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/12133071034
2011, Oct 31
Re: 33, single mother
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/12175341537
2011, Nov 11
Re: I am a junior in college
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/12639988282
2011, Nov 11
Re: I’m 49 years old
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/12640010064
2011, Nov 12
Re: I am pregnant, unemployed
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/12720299887
2011, Nov 14
Re: I am 21 years old, and had to leave my job
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/12796610414
2011, Dec 10
Re: I am a 34 year old unemployed health care worker
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/14025840885
2012, Apr 17
Re: I’m a 41 year old SAHM of 2
http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/post/21268915628
a Posts are in chronological order.
SAHM = stay-at-home mother
 53
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-224
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Voices of the “99 Percent”: The Role of Online Narrative to Improve Health Care 
the ability to work shouldn’t be something exclusive to those 
who can afford it” (2011, Sep 29, Re: No job=no insurance).
On the Margins 
Marginalized populations, including women, veterans, 
homeless, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer or 
questioning (LGBTQ) men and women, and individuals with 
mental illness, faced an additional set of obstacles. In particu-
lar, women’s health care services were perceived as a low prior-
ity for health care coverage. One woman noted, “My coverage 
denied normal, annual GYN visits because being a woman is 
a preexisting condition” (2011, Oct 30, Re: My father was 
fired). The high cost of pregnancy and childbirth led many 
bloggers to describe tremendous financial strain. According 
to one blogger, “I had a home birth because we do not have 
health insurance. My son has never seen a doctor” (2011, 
Oct 26, Re: I am 31, married). A frequent concern included 
the cost of contraception: “we don’t want children so we pay 
ridiculous $ for birth control” (2011, Oct 18, Re: Tired and 
mad as). The financial burden of being a woman was perceived 
as causing debt among these bloggers. 
Health Care System
The Importance of Being Insured
Bloggers suggested that the only way to secure affordable 
health care was through an employer. This led to limited options 
for a range of individuals, including those who had to work extra 
hours for health benefits, were unable to work owing to disabil-
ity, were self-employed, worked part-time with no benefits, or 
were unemployed. Many blog posts discussed the lack of access 
to health care because of unemployment or underemployment. 
One blogger wrote that his father “has his own business and 
works 70-80 hours a week to take care of me and my mom. He 
doesn’t have health insurance but pays for me and my mom to 
have coverage” (2011, Oct 17, Re: My dad has his).
The bloggers described a health care system that does not 
provide adequate coverage for all US citizens. Bloggers described 
the fear, worry, and frustration of living without insurance and 
sinking deeper into debt. Even those bloggers with steady em-
ployment highlighted the increasing cost of health care. One 
employee wrote, “My company just cut my pay 20% and in-
creased my health insurance costs 20%, all while doubling my 
responsibility” (2011, Oct 17, Re: I am a 38). Bloggers discussed 
an increasingly unstable health care system.
Accessing Care
Bloggers described increasing premiums and deductibles as 
the primary cause for their inability to afford health insurance 
and that “pay never kept up with inflation” (2011, Oct 9, Re: I 
worked hard and). A 41-year-old woman stated that “The insur-
ance premiums are well over 1/3 of each paycheck,” exemplifying 
common worries about the rising cost of health care (2012, Apr 
17, Re: I’m a 41 yr). Bloggers described preexisting conditions 
as a major barrier to accessing adequate health insurance and a 
cause of financial hardship. A 20-year-old blogger said that she 
was unable to get health insurance because of a “condition [she] 
was born with” (2011, Oct 1, Re: I am 20 years). This blogger, 
like many others, suggested that the health care system allowed 
those with preexisting conditions to fall through the cracks. 
Quality of Health Care
Many bloggers believed that the medical system was taking 
advantage of patients to earn increasing profits. Posts mentioned 
the debt and emotional turmoil caused by unnecessary procedures 
and medications, such as one patient undergoing “800 spinal in-
jections” to treat fractures, which were not helpful and had to be 
paid for out-of-pocket (2011, Oct 23, Re: I am 23 and). Medical 
malpractice was another concern of bloggers. One blogger stated 
that she had to receive a second surgery “to fix the first surgery, 
which was botched by an inexperienced doctor, whom I still owe 
[money to]” (2011, Oct 31, Re: 33, single mother). Bloggers 
perceived that the overuse of medical services and technologies 
by clinicians drove up the price of medical care and led to un-
necessary, costly, and potentially dangerous treatment.
DISCUSSION
The current study explored the role of narrative storytelling by 
examining how “We are the 99 percent” bloggers co-constructed 
meaning about health and health care in the context of the Oc-
cupy Wall Street social justice movement. The role of health as 
narrative emerged as bloggers described the impact of facing a 
medical crisis and the cost of injury and illness on their ability 
to remain financially solvent. These issues disproportionately 
impacted individuals living in the margins, including women 
and veterans. Bloggers discussed the importance of insurance 
coverage and the limitations of a system dominated by employer-
sponsored coverage. Bloggers also identified challenges to ac-
cessing health care, including the role of preexisting conditions 
and denial of quality medical care. 
Findings expand existing research on the potential for use of 
social media as a means to connect to peers and fellow patients. 
As in previous studies, the “We are the 99 percent” Tumblr 
demonstrated that social media outlets allow greater connectiv-
ity between individuals.29 In a study by Frost et al,35 patients 
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (“Lou Gehrig’s disease”) not 
only shared their own stories but also commented on others’ 
posts and questions, and used the forum to “foster and solidify 
relationships based on shared concerns.” A Scandinavian study 
of breast cancer patients36 who were motivated to use an online 
support group did so as a means of “breaking the social isola-
tion” that comes along with chronic pain after cancer. Narrative 
can be a powerful tool in fomenting change when readers are 
able to identify with the writer. Through this connection, the 
message offers a greater impact, suggesting that the opportunity 
exists to influence behavior.36
This study provides an understanding of how health care 
access is intertwined with other current sociopolitical realities 
faced by society. Typically, individuals turn to specific health-
based communication platforms (such as PatientsLikeMe or 
the Association of Cancer Online Resources) or groups (within 
Facebook or Twitter) to understand these issues. A wealth of 
information on how people deal with challenges faced by not 
only patients with certain conditions, but also by anyone who 
 54
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-224
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Voices of the “99 Percent”: The Role of Online Narrative to Improve Health Care 
interacts with the health care system, can be gleaned through 
this type of methodology and through defining “health issues” 
more broadly. In the current study, despite the highly varied 
backgrounds of the bloggers writing for the “We are the 99 per-
cent” Tumblr, blogging provides the same capacity to unify. The 
diversity in authorship in the posts is one of the most powerful 
tools of open source social media because it presents a unified 
struggle spanning class, geography, and ethnicity. Such varied 
backgrounds allow a wide range of readers to identify with a 
given blogger, eliciting empathy for a common struggle. The 
voices and experiences of the bloggers provided a novel oppor-
tunity for health professionals to access audiences using these 
online platforms for health communication campaigns and 
public health interventions.14,20,22,23
The use of social media activism in the Occupy Wall Street 
movement constructed a comprehensive narrative illustrating 
bloggers’ dissatisfaction regarding health care in the US and its 
impact on public health.14 This grassroots movement demon-
strated the widening disparity in health care and health status 
between low-income and high-income individuals, as evidenced 
in the “We are the 99 percent” Tumblr. The “We are the 99 per-
cent” Tumblr illustrates that social media allows for the sharing 
of stories that might ordinarily be suppressed. Localized social 
stigma surrounding health issues is powerful in silencing affected 
communities. Online narratives provide the opportunity of 
anonymity and empower the storyteller to share beyond a local 
audience.24 The relatively anonymous arena of the “We are the 
99 percent” Tumblr and other online story-sharing platforms 
provides the opportunity for health communication campaigns 
to observe and address the stated needs of marginalized individu-
als who were more difficult to reach before the advent of blogs 
and other social media tools. Additionally, this type of anony-
mous blog encourages information sharing. Concerns about 
privacy have been shown to hamper patients’ willingness to fully 
disclose aspects of their particular condition(s) within health 
specific sites, such as Association of Cancer Online Resources.37 
By utilizing an anonymous, narrative framework, patients may 
be more willing to share their experiences, and public health 
practitioners can gain a better understanding of the real-time 
health experiences of low-income and marginalized populations 
as well as use this consciousness-raising platform as a tool in 
health communication campaigns.38 
Although the Affordable Care Act1 was signed into law on 
March 23, 2010, many of the changes are still in the process of 
being implemented; and some have been challenged in court.39,40 
Beginning in July 2013, insurance coverage became available to 
those with preexisting conditions according to Title I of the law. 
Title I also requires that preventive care be covered, improving 
opportunities to manage medical conditions early, before they 
require major intervention.1 Findings suggest that upholding 
and strengthening this legislation, including wellness care and 
contraceptive coverage, may address some of the bloggers’ con-
cerns with health care and help to prevent future health crises 
by requiring a greater number of individuals to maintain health 
coverage with a greater emphasis on preventive care.40 Public 
health practitioners should consider using online narratives to 
develop and improve future public health policy. In addition, 
clinicians and community organizations can use online nar-
ratives and social media platforms to improve health care for 
individuals, as well as to garner support for future health care 
legislation through information sharing and education. 
Strengths and Limitations
Qualitative methods provided insight into the narratives of 
the “We are the 99 percent” bloggers regarding health. However, 
one limitation may be that those who made use of the Tumblr 
social media platform may differ in important characteristics 
from other social media users. According to the Pew Research 
Center,41 Tumblr is particularly appealing to young adults, aged 
18 to 29 years. Bloggers are evenly divided by gender and tend 
to represent high and low incomes (including incomes below 
$30,000).41 Another limitation is that these bloggers already 
identified strongly with the ideology of the Occupy Wall Street 
movement. Therefore, the findings may not be generalizable 
beyond this population of bloggers; however, the experiences 
described in the “We are the 99 percent” Tumblr may be sug-
gestive of the experiences with health care of other individuals 
who may not be as politically inclined as the bloggers in the 
study. Further research should be conducted to determine 
whether this population’s experiences are reflected in other so-
cial media narratives. Future areas of research include facilitat-
ing online personal narratives to disseminate health messages 
and to address health care gaps through health promotion and 
interventions that reflect the stated needs of these populations. 
Monitoring of social media by public health practitioners will 
allow health communicators to gain insight into individuals’ 
needs and attitudes toward health care reform as more aspects 
of the Affordable Care Act1 are implemented. This study pro-
vides insight into the use of online narrative as a method for 
understanding these needs and improving public policy. The 
“We are the 99 percent” Tumblr illustrates the apex of the Oc-
cupy Wall Street movement. As such, this study provided the 
opportunity to explore issues of health and health care during a 
period of social change in the US. Thus, the study can serve as 
a basis for future research using online narratives about health 
to gauge individuals’ perceptions of health care. 
CONCLUSION
This study offers practical implications for health commu-
nicators and health care practitioners related to community 
applications of multimedia social media platforms. Storytelling 
is powerful in fostering compassion and self-reflection, challeng-
ing listeners to examine their experiences and the experiences of 
others. The dissemination of a narrative through social media 
can elicit rapid empathy from a potentially worldwide audience 
empowering the movement far beyond what was capable in the 
recent past.42 This rapid exchange of stories over a broad base, 
as in the “We are the 99 percent” Tumblr, may provide a model 
for people to share their personal knowledge of health, further 
increasing the impact of health communication campaigns as 
well as providing knowledge about personal health issues and 
perceptions to health care practitioners. v
 55
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-224
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Voices of the “99 Percent”: The Role of Online Narrative to Improve Health Care 
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
Acknowledgment
Mary Corrado, ELS, provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Sundstrom B, Meier SJ, Anderson M, et al. Voices of the “99 Percent”: The role 
of online narrative to improve health care. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-224. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-224.
References
 1. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010. Public Law 111-148, 111th 
Congress, 124 Stat 119, HR 3590, enacted 2010 Mar 23.
 2. OECD. Health at a glance 2009: OECD indicators [Internet]. Paris, France: OECD 
iLibrary; 2009 [cited 2016 Mar 10]. Available from: www.oecd.org/health/health-
systems/44117530.pdf. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/health_glance-2009-en.
 3. Buckley C, Moynihan C. Occupy Wall Street protest reaches a crossroads [Internet]. 
New York, NY: The New York Times; 2011 Nov 4 [cited 2016 Mar 10]. Available 
from: www.nytimes.com/2011/11/06/nyregion/occupy-wall-street-protest-reaches-a-
crossroads.html?pagewanted=all.
 4. Caren N, Gaby S. Occupy online: Facebook and the spread of Occupy Wall Street 
[Internet]. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network; 2011 Oct 22 [revised 
2014 Jul 4; cited 2016 Mar 10]. pg 1-20. Available from: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=1943168.
 5. Gaby S, Caren N. Occupy online: how cute old men and Malcolm X recruited 400,000 
US users to OWS on Facebook. Soc Mov Stud 2012;11(3-4):367-74. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/14742837.2012.708858.
 6. Tremayne M. Anatomy of protest in the digital era: a network analysis of Twitter and 
Occupy Wall Street. Soc Mov Stud 2014;13(1):110-26. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
14742837.2013.830969.
 7. Weinstein A. “We are the 99 percent” creators revealed [Internet]. San Francisco, CA: 
Mother Jones; 2011 Oct 7 [cited 2016 Mar 10]. Available from: www.motherjones.
com/politics/2011/10/we-are-the-99-percent-creators?page=2.
 8. DeLuca KM, Lawson S, Sun Y. Occupy Wall Street on the public screens of social 
media: the many framings of the birth of a protest movement. Communication, 
Culture & Critique 2012 Dec;5(4):483-509. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1753-
9137.2012.01141.x.
 9. Maa J. Solving the emergency care crisis in America: the power of law and 
storytelling. Perm J 2012 Summer;16(3):71-4. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/ 
TPP/12-066.
 10. Charon R. The polis of a discursive narrative medicine. J Appl Commun Res 
2009;37(2):196-201. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00909880902792222.
 11. Charon R. Narrative medicine: attention, representation, affiliation. Narrative 2005 
Oct;13(3):261-70. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/nar.2005.0017.
 12. Haigh C, Hardy P. Tell me a story—a conceptual exploration of storytelling in 
healthcare education. Nurse Educ Today 2011 May;31(4):408-11. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.nedt.2010.08.001.
 13. Hunter LA. Stories as integrated patterns of knowing in nursing education. Int J Nurs 
Educ Scholarsh 2008;5:Article 38. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2202/1548-923X.1630.
 14. Petraglia J. Narrative intervention in behavior and public health. J Health Commun 
2007 Jul-Aug;12(5):493-505. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10810730701441371.
 15. Sharf BF. Observations from the outside in: narratives of illness, healing, and 
mortality in everyday life. J Appl Commun Res 2009;37(2):132-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/00909880902792297.
 16. Kraschnewski JL, Chuang CH, Poole ES, et al. Paging “Dr. Google”: does technology 
fill the gap created by the prenatal care visit structure? Qualitative focus group study 
with pregnant women. J Med Internet Res 2014 Jun 3;16(6):e147. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.2196/jmir.3385.
 17. Murphy JW. Primary health care and narrative medicine. Perm J 2015 Fall;19(4): 
90-4. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/14-206.
 18. Morris DB. Narrative medicines: challenge and resistance. Perm J 2008 
Winter;12(1):88-96. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/07-088.
 19. Eytan T, Benabio J, Golla V, Parikh R, Stein S. Social media and the health system. 
Perm J 2011 Winter;15(1):71-4. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/10-154.
 20. Iredale R, Mundy L, Hilgart J. An online resource of digital stories about cancer 
genetics: qualitative study of patient preferences and information needs. J Med 
Internet Res 2011 Sep 30;13(3):e78. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1735.
 21. Wen KY, McTavish F, Kreps G, Wise M, Gustafson D. From diagnosis to death: a 
case study of coping with breast cancer as seen through online discussion group 
messages. J Comput Mediat Commun 2011 Jan;16(2):331-61. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1083-6101.2011.01542.x.
 22. Wise M, Han JY, Shaw B, McTavish F, Gustafson DH. Effects of using online narrative 
and didactic information on healthcare participation for breast cancer patients. 
Patient Educ Couns 2008 Mar;70(3):348-56. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
pec.2007.11.009.
 23. Houston TK, Cherrington A, Coley HL, et al. The art and science of patient 
storytelling—harnessing narrative communications for behavioral interventions: the 
ACCE project. J Health Commun 2011 Aug;16(7):686-97. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.10
80/10810730.2011.551997.
 24. Vivienne S, Burgess J. The digital storyteller’s stage: queer everyday activists 
negotiating privacy and publicness. J Broadcast Electron Media 2012;56(3):362-77. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08838151.2012.705194.
 25. Abrahamson CE. Storytelling as a pedagogical tool in higher education. Education 
1998 Spring;118(3):440-51.
 26. Koenig JM, Zorn CR. Using storytelling as an approach to teaching and learning 
with diverse students. J Nurs Educ 2002 Sep;41(9):393-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.3928/0148-4834-20020901-07
 27. Davidson MR. A phenomenological evaluation: using storytelling as a primary 
teaching method. Nurse Educ Pract 2004 Sep;4(3):184-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S1471-5953(03)00043-X.
 28. Johna S, Rahman S. Humanity before science: narrative medicine, clinical practice, 
and medical education. Perm J 2011 Fall;15(4):92-4. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/11-111.
 29. Ressler PK, Bradshaw YS, Gualtieri L, Chui KK. Communicating the experience 
of chronic pain and illness through blogging. J Med Internet Res 2012 Oct 
23;14(5):e143. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2196/jmir.2002.
 30. Walther JB. Computer-mediated communication and virtual groups: applications 
to interethnic conflict. J Appl Commun Res 2009;37(3):225-38. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/00909880903025937.
 31. Thompson TL. The applicability of narrative ethics. J Appl Commun Res 
2009;37(2):188-95. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00909880902792305.
 32. Berg BL. Qualitative research methods for the social sciences. 7th ed. Boston, MA: 
Pearson Education, Inc; 2008.
 33. Miles MB, Huberman AM. Qualitative data analysis: an expanded sourcebook. 
2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc; 1994.
 34. Corbin J, Strauss A. Basics of qualitative research: techniques and procedures for 
developing grounded theory. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc; 
2008.
 35. Frost J, Vermeulen IE, Beekers N. Anonymity versus privacy: selective information 
sharing in online cancer communities. J Med Internet Res 2014 May 14;16(5):e126. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2196/jmir.2684.
 36. de Graaf A. The effectiveness of adaptation of the protagonist in narrative impact: 
similarity influences health beliefs through self-referencing. Hum Commun Res 2014 
Jan;40(1):73-90. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/hcre.12015.
 37. Høybye MT, Johansen C, Tjørnhøj-Thomsen T. Online interaction. Effects of 
storytelling in an Internet breast cancer support group. Psychooncology 2005 
Mar;14(3):211-20. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/pon.837.
 38. Leonhardt D. The idled young Americans [Internet]. New York, NY: The New 
York Times; 2013 May 3 [cited 2016 Mar 10]. Available from: www.nytimes.
com/2013/05/05/sunday-review/the-idled-young-americans.html?smid= 
tw-share&_r=1&.
 39. Galer-Unti RA. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act: opportunities for 
prevention and advocacy. Health Promot Pract 2012 May;13(3):308-12. DOI:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1524839912438750.
 40. Jost TS. Religious freedom and women’s health—the litigation on contraception. 
N Engl J Med 2013 Jan 3;368(1):4-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1214605.
 41. DeSilver D. 5 facts about Tumblr [Internet]. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center; 
2013 May 20 [cited 2016 Mar 10]. Available from: www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2013/05/20/5-facts-about-tumblr/.
 42. Peterson EE. My body lies over the keyboard: agency and efficacy in 
weblog storytelling. Atl J Commun 2008;16(3-4):149-63. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/15456870802329840.
 56
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-036
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Trend of Decreased Length of Stay in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) 
and in the Hospital with Palliative Care Integration into the ICU
Eluned Mun, MS, MSN, DNP, APRN-Rx, AGNP-BC, CCRN; Clementina Ceria-Ulep, PhD, RN;  
Lillian Umbarger, MD; Craig Nakatsuka, MD 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-036
E-pub: 08/31/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-036
ABSTRACT
Context: Is a decrease in length of stay (LOS) in the intensive care unit (ICU) and hospital 
possible with the implementation of a structured, palliative care, quality-improvement 
program in the ICU?
Objective: Incorporate palliative care into the routine ICU workflow to increase 
the numbers of palliative care consultations, improve end-of-life care in the ICU, and 
demonstrate an impact on ICU and/or hospital LOS. 
Design: A program was developed that followed recommendations from the Center 
to Advance Palliative Care’s Improving Palliative Care in the ICU project. This program 
included selecting trigger criteria and a care model, forming guidelines, and developing 
evaluation criteria. 
The early identification of multiple measures led to proactive meetings 
with ICU patients’ families and/or palliative care consultations.
Main Outcome Measures: Early identification of advance directives, code status, goals 
of care, and ICU LOS and hospital LOS.
Results: A comparison between pre- and postintervention data showed positive trends 
in measured outcomes, including increased early identification of advance directives, 
code status, and goals of care along with a decrease in ICU LOS and hospital LOS. In 
addition, the number of ICU family meetings and palliative care consultations increased.
Conclusion: It was concluded that providing palliative care in the ICU is feasible and 
may decrease both ICU LOS and overall hospital LOS. 
INTRODUCTION
Hospital-based palliative care services 
have been evolving since the late 1980s, 
and as of 2008, approximately 31% of 
all US hospitals provided some type of 
inpatient palliative care.1,2 Palliative care is 
medical care that enhances quality of life 
for patients living with serious advanced 
illness by helping to align their treatment 
choices with their values. The World 
Health Organization defines palliative care 
as an approach that improves the quality 
of life of patients and their families facing 
problems associated with life-threatening 
illness.3 This is achieved through the pre-
vention and relief of suffering by means 
of early identification, assessment, and 
treatment of pain and other physical, psy-
chosocial, and spiritual problems.3,4
Numerous reports have examined the 
effects of palliative care consultations on 
various outcome measures in the inten-
sive care unit (ICU). Outcomes include 
the length of stay (LOS) for both the 
hospital and ICU, but controversy sur-
rounding the potential impact of LOS 
on a decrease in overall hospital cost 
remains. A decrease in LOS resulting in 
an attenuation of hospital costs without 
compromising quality of care is argu-
ably beneficial because most hospital 
expenditures occur at the end of life and 
in the ICU.5 Evidence also suggests that 
early identification of goals of care and 
advanced care planning may reduce the 
intensity of unwanted care at the end of 
life, by reducing ICU LOS and numbers 
of potential ICU admissions.6
Our facility has used a palliative care 
team for the inpatient population since 
2010. Like many hospitals, however, our 
existing palliative care team was not being 
used to its full potential in our ICU, and 
there were multiple misconceptions re-
garding palliative care from both the nurs-
ing and medical staff.7 In addition, there 
were limited data with regard to the impact 
of palliative care on the ICU or hospital 
LOS at the Medical Center. The purpose of 
this project was to improve the utilization 
of the palliative care team and to enhance 
palliative care knowledge and awareness 
of both the nursing and physician staff in 
the ICU, thereby improving quality of care 
for the patients and families. In addition, 
we studied whether the implementation 
of palliative care principles and increasing 
the number of palliative care consultations 
in the ICU would affect LOS for both the 
hospital and ICU.
METHODS
Setting
A quality-improvement program was 
conducted in the 15-bed adult ICU 
at Kaiser Permanente (KP) Moanalua 
Medical Center, which is a 318-bed ter-
tiary care hospital in Honolulu, HI. This 
unit is a closed ICU, run by a team of 
board-certified intensivists following The 
Leapfrog Group recommendations.8 The 
ICU is a mixed unit that admits patients 
with medical, surgical, cardiac, and/or 
neurologic instability, who have the need 
for close monitoring. The ICU admits ap-
proximately 850 patients per year, has an 
average LOS of 4 to 5 days, and has an 
average mortality rate of 12%.9
Eluned Mun, MS, MSN, DNP, APRN-Rx, AGNP-BC, CCRN, is a retired Intensive Care Nurse and 
a current Nurse Practitioner at the Rehabilitation Hospital of the Pacific in Honolulu, HI. E-mail: 
emun@rehabhospital.org. Clementina Ceria-Ulep, PhD, RN, is a Professor and Department  
Chair in the School of Nursing and Dental Hygiene at the University of Hawaii at Manoa in 
Honolulu. E-mail: clem@hawaii.edu. Lillian Umbarger, MD, is an Intensivist and Pulmonologist  
at the Moanalua Medical Center in Honolulu, HI. E-mail: lillian.a.umbarger@kp.org.  
Craig Nakatsuka, MD, is a Palliative Care and Internal Medicine Physician at the Moanalua 
Medical Center in Honolulu, HI. E-mail: craig.nakatsuka@kp.org.
 57
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-036
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Trend of Decreased Length of Stay in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and in the Hospital with Palliative Care Integration into the ICU
Patient Sample 
The target population was all patients ad-
mitted to or transferred into the adult ICU. 
The accessible sample included patients 
who met daily screening/trigger criteria 
for a potential palliative care consultation. 
Although this was an adult ICU, there were 
times in which pediatric patients (younger 
than 18 years old) were admitted to the 
unit. These patients were not included in 
the sample because of their age. 
Most patients were admitted with a va-
riety of general medical ICU conditions, 
including cardiac and neurologic issues. The 
surgical patients were represented by all the 
surgical subspecialties, with the exception of 
open-heart surgical patients in the immedi-
ate postoperative period. Several patients 
were necessarily readmitted for treatment 
to the ICU in the same month. When this 
occurred, for the purposes of this study, they 
were counted only once, and their resultant 
ICU days were totaled together.
Procedures
To identify patients who might best 
benefit from a more timely palliative care 
consultation, a project team consisting of 
palliative care physicians, ICU nurses, and 
ICU physicians developed procedures that 
followed the suggestions from the Improving 
Palliative Care in the ICU recommendations 
by the Center to Advance Palliative Care.10 
The center’s clinical practice guidelines 
resulted from standards adopted by the 
National Quality Forum in its Framework 
and Preferred Practices for Palliative and 
Hospice Care, and the National Consensus 
Project for Quality Palliative Care.11-17 These 
recommendations included information on 
the types of inpatient palliative care models, 
screening and trigger criteria, guidelines and 
standards, and methods for the evaluation 
of a program. 
Using a literature review and ICU 
clinical expertise to identify those with a 
high risk of dying, we created final trigger 
criteria that were believed to represent the 
majority of high-risk patients admitted to 
the ICU. The trigger criteria were:
1. advanced cancer
2. chronic and severe cognitive dysfunction
3. consistency with or lack of goals of care
4. conflict with goals of care
5. multiorgan system failure
6. LOS in ICU longer than seven days.
The general model was, for the most 
part, a consultative one, using the existing 
palliative care team. This team included a 
board-certified physician, registered nurse, 
chaplain, and social worker. After patients 
met at least one of the trigger criteria, the 
nursing staff was taught to direct patients 
and families to informational videos on 
goals of care that exist on the KP Educa-
tion on Demand Webinar.18-20 The intent 
of the videos was to initiate a conversation 
regarding goals of care and designation 
of a surrogate, advance directives, and 
code status. This led to a social worker 
consultation for finalization of surrogate 
designation and advance directives, and 
then to the ICU physician for code status 
or resuscitation preferences between Days 
1 and 3. The range of days was necessary 
because of the lack of a designated social 
worker on the weekends and nights. An 
ICU family meeting was proactively initi-
ated by Day 3 for those patients meeting 
the trigger criteria, and if further need was 
identified, a palliative care family meeting 
with the multidisciplinary palliative care 
team was proactively initiated by Day 5. 
This process is demonstrated in Figure 1. 
Once the guidelines and flowcharts 
were formed, an application to the KP 
institutional review board was submitted 
for approval, to ensure completeness of 
Figure 1. Final workflow, which incorporated guidelines from Improving Palliative Care in the Intensive  
Care Unit10 recommendations.
ICU = intensive care unit; MD = physician; RN = registered nurse. 
 58
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-036
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Trend of Decreased Length of Stay in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and in the Hospital with Palliative Care Integration into the ICU
the process in implementing this project. 
Because the implementation of this pro-
gram would only provide for more timely 
intervention, without a change of routine 
practice, and because the study involved 
only collection of retrospective data with-
out compromising patient confidentiality, 
the requirement for informed consent 
was waived by the institutional review 
board. It was also necessary to notify the 
KP Quality-Improvement Committee of 
pending plans, and approval to proceed 
with implementation was received.
Preintervention patient data were ob-
tained by chart review for a 3-month pe-
riod from November 1, 2013, through 
January 30, 2014, for a total of 194 
patients. The project commenced on 
April 1, 2014, and the postintervention 
data were collected from April 1, 2014, 
through June 30, 2014. This dataset con-
sisted of 198 patients. 
Outcome Measures
The metrics and benchmarks were pre-
determined and approved by the Quality-
Improvement Committee before the 
implementation of the project. Financial 
metrics involved the LOS in the ICU and 
the hospital. Process and outcome mea-
sures looked at the early identification of 
multiple aspects of palliative care practice. 
These included 1) numbers of patients who 
met the trigger criteria; 2) goals of care, ad-
vance directives, surrogate, code status, and 
numbers of ICU family meetings by Day 
3 of meeting the trigger criteria; 3) use of 
the “Goals-of-Care” video; 4) numbers of 
palliative care brochures offered to families; 
and 5) numbers of palliative care consults. 
The pre- and postintervention samples 
of data were designed to measure the pro-
cess progression over time. This progres-
sion was reported as an aggregate dataset 
with the intent to show trends before and 
after intervention.
Data Analysis
This project was an analysis of quality-
improvement data. Therefore, experimen-
tal design and randomization were not 
used. Frequencies, means, and standard 
deviations were used to examine the distri-
bution of measures. An independent t-test 
was used to compare mean scores of the 
samples that comprised different groups. 
Terminology, as defined by Field,21 was 
used for the reporting of the t-test results. 
The following equation was used21: 
t(df) = (t value), (p value), (r value)
where df = degrees of freedom, t value = 
 
t-test result, p value = probability, and 
r value = effect size. A Pearson χ2 test was 
used for comparisons of various frequen-
cies. The χ2 results were reported as the 
value of the test statistic with its associated 
degrees of freedom and the significant 
value. The test statistic is denoted by χ2.21 
All descriptive statistics were calculated us-
ing Microsoft Excel 2013 (Microsoft Corp, 
Redmond, WA) along with the Statistical 
Package for the Social Sciences (IBM SPSS, 
Armonk, NY). The independent t-tests and 
χ2 tests were calculated using Excel 2013.
RESULTS
The patients’ demographics are present-
ed in Table 1. Results of the outcome mea-
sures are reported in Table 2. The outcome 
measures were reported as a total numeric 
value for the three months, with the ex-
ception of the LOS in both the ICU and 
hospital, which were computed as means. 
The numbers of individuals and the 
numbers of patients who met the trigger 
criteria in both samples were approximately 
the same. With use of an independent 
 
t-test, there was a slight decrease in the mean 
length of ICU days from the preinterven-
tion sample (mean = 5.76, standard error 
[SE] = 0.97) to the postintervention sample 
(mean = 4.92, SE = 0.50), both of which in-
cluded decedents. However, this difference 
was not significant: t(289) = 0.78, p > 0.05. 
There was also a decrease in the mean length 
of hospital days from the preintervention 
sample (mean = 17.43, SE = 1.99) to the 
postintervention sample (mean = 12.88, SE 
= 1.26). This difference was significant at 
t(327) = 1.93, p = 0.05, but it represented 
a small effect size (r = 0.11). 
Despite similar numbers of patients 
between the 2 populations that met the 
trigger criteria, the numbers of patients in 
Table 1. Description of patient sample in Intensive Care Unit palliative care  
integration study
Measure
Preintervention (n = 194)
Postintervention (n = 198)
Age group, years
19-30
7
2
31-40
7
7
41-50
17
22
51-60
42
34
61-70
46
57
71-80
39
50
81-90
29
19
> 91
7
7
Sex, no. (%)
Men
107 (55.2)
120 (60.6)
Women
87 (44.8)
78 (39.4)
Race/ethnicity, no. (%)
Asian
72 (37.1)
78 (39.4)
White
71 (36.6)
62 (31.3)
Pacific Islander
46 (23.7)
51 (25.8)
Other
5 (2.6)
7 (3.5)
Admitting diagnosis, no. (%)
Myocardial infarction
19 (9.8)
28 (14.1)
Cerebrovascular accident
16 (8.2)
20 (10.1)
Sepsis
19 (9.8)
20 (10.1)
Respiratory failure
17 (8.8)
14 (7.1)
Surgery
50 (25.8)
53 (26.8)
Other
73 (37.6)
63 (31.8)
Comorbidities, mean no.
4.47
4.0
 59
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-036
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Trend of Decreased Length of Stay in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and in the Hospital with Palliative Care Integration into the ICU
which the goals of care were identified by 
Day 3 increased significantly: χ2(1) = 6.62, 
p = 0.01. Patients in which advance direc-
tives were identified by Day 3 of meeting 
the trigger criteria decreased slightly from 
95% to 91%. Those in which a surrogate 
was identified by Day 3 of meeting the 
trigger also decreased from 56% to 43%. 
Neither difference was significant. The 
numbers of patients who had their code 
status identified by Day 3 of meeting the 
trigger criteria increased significantly: χ2(1) 
= 3.70, p = 0.05. The use of the video 
remained unchanged, but the use of the 
palliative care brochure increased from 
0% to 21%, reaching significance: χ2(1) 
= 8.01, p < 0.01. There was a significant 
increase in the numbers of proactive ICU 
family meetings by Day 3, from 29% in 
the preintervention sample, to 79% in 
the postintervention sample χ2(1) = 6.48, 
p = 0.01. In addition, there was an in-
creased trend in the numbers of palliative 
care meetings, which rose slightly, from 
20% in the preintervention sample to 30% 
in the postintervention sample.
DISCUSSION
Limitations
This quality-improvement project had 
several limitations. The results from this 
project encompassed a single facility, and it 
is entirely possible that the resultant trends 
were an isolated finding. In addition, the 
data sample size from both the pre- and 
postintervention periods were limited to 3 
months only. As a result, the timing of the 
data collected, along with the duration of 
the collection, may have precluded a true 
representation of the population. The KP 
Hawaii (KPHI) membership represents 
less than 20% of the state’s population,22 
with approximately 5% of the state inhab-
itants that remain uninsured.23 Therefore, 
it is also feasible that the patient popula-
tion that makes up the KPHI membership 
does not accurately represent the total 
number of inhabitants in the state. 
The measures used for this study mostly 
relied on medical record abstraction from 
an electronic medical record. Studies have 
shown that chart abstraction underesti-
mates quality of care by at most 10%, 
compared with direct observation, and 
may even overestimate quality in some 
instances. Because data are lacking on 
performance of medical record abstraction 
in palliative care, poor documentation may 
limit the utility of some of these candidate 
measures.24 In an effort to reinforce the 
charting of pertinent outcome measures, 
a template devised for easy insertion into 
the electronic progress notes was designed 
with key phrases. Despite this, it was noted 
during chart reviews that documentation 
was inconsistent. These inconsistencies 
were apparent, with not only the nursing 
staff but also the physician staff, and it was 
sometimes difficult to find specific infor-
mation. The chart reviews and data collec-
tion were performed by the team leader, 
which resulted in a large time allotment 
because every progress note was reviewed 
to search for appropriate documentation. 
This review did, however, allow for overall 
consistency in the data collection.
Most of the process and outcome mea-
sures were reported as changes in trends. 
Those measures that were reported as a 
mean score, however, had an independent 
t test applied. A χ2 test also was used for the 
outcomes reported as frequencies, but be-
cause this program was a quality-improve-
ment project without experimental design 
and randomization, the robustness of the 
inferential statistical results was uncertain.
Potential Cost Savings
The literature shows that most health 
care expenditures occur at the end of life 
and in the ICU. Among the nearly 2.5 
million annual deaths in the US, one-third 
occurs in the hospital, and a substantial 
percentage occurs in the ICU. The ICU 
can account for up to 80% of the total 
inpatient costs spent on terminal hospital-
izations.5,25 Approximately 20% of people 
who die in the US are admitted to an ICU 
within the last 6 months of life. In addi-
tion, patients with life-threatening diseases 
frequently receive medical care that con-
flicts with their end-of-life preferences.26 A 
reduction in unwanted treatments in the 
ICU can have an impact on ICU LOS, and 
interventions that clarify patient’s goals of 
care and whether ICU care is consistent 
with these goals may reduce the intensity 
of end-of-life care.27 
The results from this project saw a de-
crease in ICU LOS, but the difference 
between pre- and postintervention samples 
was not significant. This may, in part, be 
because of the sample size. There was, how-
ever, a significant difference in the hospital 
LOS between the pre- and postinterven-
tion samples, but with a small effect size. 
Consequently, a larger sample size might 
have provided greater evidence of effect. It 
is uncertain how much of an impact this 
reduction in ICU LOS or hospital LOS 
would have had on total hospital costs, 
but the potential for cost savings from the 
implementation of palliative care in the 
ICU is a tempting conclusion. In 2006, 
Table 2. Process and financial measures: Pre- and postintervention results
 
Measure
Preintervention 
(n = 194)
Postintervention 
(n = 198)
 
p value
Mean length of stay, days
ICU
5.76
4.92
0.44
Hospital
17.42
12.88
0.05
Mean APACHE III score
56.54
57.08
0.86
No. of patients who met trigger criteria
41
47
Outcome measure identified by Day 3, no. of patients of meeting trigger criteriaa 
Goals of care
10
33
0.01
Advance directives
39
43
0.90
Surrogate 
23
20
0.46
Code status 
16
37
0.05
Video viewed
2
2
0.90
Receipt of palliative care brochure
0
10
0.005
Family meeting
12
37
0.01
Total no. of palliative care consultations
8
14
0.39
a The 6 trigger criteria are defined in the text and in Figure 1.
APACHE = Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation; ICU = intensive care unit.
 60
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-036
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Trend of Decreased Length of Stay in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and in the Hospital with Palliative Care Integration into the ICU
a retrospective observational cost analysis 
by Penrod et al28 found that palliative care 
was associated with a significantly lower 
likelihood of ICU use and lower inpatient 
costs compared with those of patients who 
received the usual care. Since then, numer-
ous benefits from the provision of palliative 
care in the ICU have been demonstrated. 
Patients who receive advance care planning 
or palliative care interventions consistently 
showed trends toward decreased ICU ad-
mission and reduced ICU LOS.6,29 Starks et 
al30 suggested that savings could be achieved 
by earlier involvement of palliative care, and 
they supported screening efforts to identify 
patients who could benefit from palliative 
care services early in admission.
Any number of factors has the potential 
for affecting not only quality of care but 
also LOS. There is a general agreement that 
early identification of the various aspects of 
goals of care, including code status and the 
availability of advance directives, influence 
ultimate care decisions. All these factors 
have an effect on reducing ICU admis-
sion, LOS, and the intensity of treatment 
of patients who die in the ICU.6
This project showed an increase in the 
percentage of the early identification of 
goals of care from 24% to 70%, and code 
status from 39% to 79%, which demon-
strated that the effects of the process were 
positive and significant. The nursing staff 
also used the palliative care brochure in 
increased numbers. As demonstrated by 
Scheunemann et al,31 printed information 
can improve family comprehension and 
emotional outcomes, and there is sup-
porting evidence for the offering of this 
printed information by the ICU team 
to improve end-of-life care and family 
satisfaction. 
The use of the videos was, unfortu-
nately, neglected. These informational 
videos are evidence-based, culturally ap-
propriate communication tools that were 
designed as an instrument for physicians 
to use in their discussions of medical 
conditions and advance care planning.18-20 
These videos exist on the KP Education 
on Demand Webinar. The intent of this 
project was to use the videos to initiate 
a conversation regarding goals of care 
and designation of a surrogate, advance 
directives, and code status. Traditionally, 
it falls to the physician to inform families 
about a pending palliative consultation. 
Once the family is aware of the need for a 
consultation, the registered nurse supple-
ments the information and any questions 
with printed material. This project was 
designed so that the nurse, and not the 
physician, was to offer the video. The lack 
of results in this area could underscore 
the continued staff discomfort with the 
initiation of sensitive discussions regard-
ing advance directives, code status, and 
end-of-life issues. 
Changing a culture in the ICU affords 
multiple challenges, but this project dem-
onstrated that early identification of key 
palliative care interventions, which in-
cluded a proactive ICU and palliative care 
meeting, were possible once processes were 
in place to ensure prompt documentation 
of code status, advance directives, and goals 
of care. Celso and Meenrajan32 found that 
the relationships between days until a fam-
ily conference, do-not-resuscitate order, 
number of invasive procedures, and ICU 
LOS were significant. In addition, the 
days until the do-not-resuscitate order was 
found to be a significant predictor variable 
for total hospital LOS.
CONCLUSION
As the numbers of ICU treatments dur-
ing the last months of life increase, LOS 
in both the ICU and in the hospital will 
continue to be addressed.33 Inappropriate 
aggressive treatments in the ICU at the 
end of life have the potential to result in 
futile care and an excessive use of hospital 
resources. In addition, the potential for 
symptoms from psycho-emotional trauma 
on family members after an ICU death has 
proved to be substantial.27 In an effort to 
reduce expenditures for end-of-life care in 
the ICU, it is possible that early clarifica-
tion of advance directives, code status, and 
goals of care can ensure that palliative care 
needs are met, leading to improved quality 
of care for both patients and families, while 
reducing cost. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgment
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health 
Communications provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Mun E, Ceria-Ulep C, Umbarger L, Nakatsuka C. 
Trend of decreased length of stay in the intensive 
care unit (ICU) and in the hospital with palliative 
care integration into the ICU. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4): 
16-036. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-036.
References
 1. Campbell ML. Palliative care consultation in the 
intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 2006 Nov;34(11 
Suppl):S355-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.
ccm.0000237248.16818.e5.
 2. Casarett D, Johnson M, Smith D, Richardson D. 
The optimal delivery of palliative care: a national 
comparison of the outcomes of consultation 
teams vs inpatient units. Arch Intern Med 2011 Apr 
11;171(7):649-55. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archinternmed.2011.87.
 3. WHO definition of palliative care [Internet]. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2013 [cited 
2016 May 20]. Available from: www.who.int/cancer/
palliative/definition/en/.
 4. Mirel M, Hartjes T. Bringing palliative care to the 
surgical intensive care unit. Crit Care Nurse 2013 
Feb;33(1):71-4. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.4037/
ccn2013124.
 5. Khandelwal N, Curtis JR. Economic implications of 
end-of-life care in the ICU. Curr Opin Crit Care 2014 
Dec;20(6):656-61. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
mcc.0000000000000147.
 6. Zilberberg MD, Shorr AF. Economics at the end of 
life: hospital and ICU perspectives. Semin Respir Crit 
Care Med 2012 Aug;33(4):362-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1055/s-0032-1322399.
 7. Norton SA, Hogan LA, Holloway RG, Temkin-
Greener H, Buckley MJ, Quill TE. Proactive palliative 
care in the medical intensive care unit: effects on 
length of stay for selected high-risk patients. Crit 
Care Med 2007 Jun;35(6):1530-5. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/01.ccm.0000266533.06543.0c.
 8. Leapfrog hospital survey. Factsheet: ICU physician 
staffing [Internet]. Washington, DC: The Leapfrog 
Group; 2012 [updated 2016 Apr 1; cited 2016 May 
20]. Available from: www.leapfroggroup.org/sites/
default/files/Files/IPS%20Fact%20Sheet.pdf.
 9. Kaiser ICU. ICU utilization report and statistics. 2013, 
Kaiser Permanante Medical Center, Hawaii.
 10. Improving palliative care in the ICU [Internet]. New York, 
NY. Center to Advance Palliative Care; [cited 2016 
Aug 3]. Available from: www.capc.org/ipal/ipal-icu/.
 11. Nelson JE, Bassett R, Boss RD, et al. Models for 
structuring a clinical initiative to enhance palliative 
care in the intensive care unit: a report from the IPAL-
ICU Project (Improving Palliative Care in the ICU). 
Crit Care Med 2010 Sep;38(9):1765-72. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/ccm.0b013e3181e8ad23.
 12. Weissman DE, Meier DE. Operational features 
for hospital palliative care programs: consensus 
recommendations. J Palliat Med 2008 Nov;11(9): 
1189-94. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/jpm. 
2008.0149.
 13. Weissman DE, Morrison RS, Meier DE. Center 
to Advance Palliative Care palliative care clinical 
care and customer satisfaction metrics consensus 
recommendations. J Palliat Med 2010 Feb;13(2):179-
84. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/jpm.2009.0270.
 14. Ferrell B, Connor SR, Cordes A, et al; National 
Consensus Project for Quality Palliative Care Task 
Force Members. The national agenda for quality 
palliative care: the National Consensus Project 
and the National Quality Forum. J Pain Symptom 
Manage 2007 Jun;33(6):737-44. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2007.02.024.
 61
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-036
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Trend of Decreased Length of Stay in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and in the Hospital with Palliative Care Integration into the ICU
 15. Lanken PN, Terry PB, Delisser HM, et al; ATS End-of-
Life Care Task Force. An official American Thoracic 
Society clinical policy statement: palliative care 
for patients with respiratory diseases and critical 
illnesses. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008 Apr 
15;177(8):912-27. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1164/
rccm.200605-587st.
 16. Mularski RA. Defining and measuring quality palliative 
and end-of-life care in the intensive care unit. Crit Care 
Med 2006 Nov;34(11 Suppl):S309-16. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.ccm.0000241067.84361.46.
 17. Truog RD, Campbell ML, Curtis JR, et al. 
Recommendations for end-of-life care in the 
intensive care unit: a consensus statement by the 
American College of Critical Care Medicine. Crit 
Care Med 2008 Mar;36(3):953-63. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/ccm.0b013e3181659096. Erratum in: 
Crit Care Med 2008 May;36(5):1699. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0b013e31817c3d1e.
 18. Volandes, A, Davis, A. Goals of care, in advance 
care planning decisions patient education videos. 
Waban, MA: Nous Foundation, Inc; 2005.
 19. Volandes AE, Lehmann LS, Cook EF, Shaykevich S, 
Abbo ED, Gillick MR. Using video images of 
dementia in advance care planning. Arch Intern 
Med 2007 Apr 23;167(8):828-33. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/archinte.167.8.828. Erratum in: Arch 
Intern Med 2008 May 12;168(9):995. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinte.168.9.995.
 20. Volandes AE, Paasche-Orlow MK, Mitchell SL, et al. 
Randomized controlled trial of a video decision 
support tool for cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
decision making in advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol 
2013 Jan;31(3):380-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1200/
jco.2012.43.9570.
 21. Field A. Discovering statistics using SPSS. 3rd ed. 
London, England: SAGE Publications Ltd; 2009.
 22. Fast facts about Kaiser Permanente [Internet]. 
Oakland, CA: Kaiser Permanente; 2015 [updated 
2016 May 25; cited 2016 May 20]. Available from: 
http://share.kaiserpermanente.org/article/fast-facts-
about-kaiser-permanente/.
 23. Health insurance coverage of the total population 
[Internet]. Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser Family Foundation; 
2015 [cited 2016 Jun 2]. Available from: http://kff.org/
other/state-indicator/total-population/.
 24. Mularski RA, Curtis JR, Billings JA, et al. Proposed 
quality measures for palliative care in the critically 
ill: a consensus from the Robert Wood Johnson 
Foundation Critical Care Workgroup. Crit Care Med 
2006 Nov;34(11 Suppl):S404-11. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/01.ccm.0000242910.00801.53.
 25. Dasta JF, McLaughlin TP, Mody SH, Piech CT. Daily 
cost of an intensive care unit day: the contribution 
of mechanical ventilation. Crit Care Med 2005 
Jun;33(6):1266-71. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.
ccm.0000164543.14619.00.
 26. Akgün KM, Kapo JM, Siegel MD. Critical care 
at the end of life. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 
2015 Dec;36(6):921-33. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1055/s-0035-1565254.
 27. Khandelwal N, Kross EK, Engelberg RA, Coe NB, 
Long AC, Curtis JR. Estimating the effect of palliative 
care interventions and advance care planning on ICU 
utilization: a systematic review. Crit Care Med 2015 
May;43(5):1102-11. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
ccm.0000000000000852.
 28. Penrod JD, Deb P, Luhrs C, et al. Cost and utilization 
outcomes of patients receiving hospital-based 
palliative care consultation. J Palliat Med 2006 
Aug;9(4):855-60. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/
jpm.2006.9.855.
 29. Aslakson R, Cheng J, Vollenweider D, Galusca D, 
Smith TJ, Pronovost PJ. Evidence-based palliative 
care in the intensive care unit: a systematic review of 
interventions. J Palliat Med 2014 Feb;17(2):219-35. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/jpm.2013.0409.
 30. Starks H, Wang S, Farber S, Owens DA, Curtis JR. 
Cost savings vary by length of stay for inpatients 
receiving palliative care consultation services. J 
Palliat Med 2013 Oct;16(10):1215-20. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1089/jpm.2013.0163.
 31. Scheunemann LP, McDevitt M, Carson SS, 
Hanson LC. Randomized, controlled trials of 
interventions to improve communication in 
intensive care: a systematic review. Chest 2011 
Mar;139(3):543-54. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1378/
chest.10-0595.
 32. Celso BG, Meenrajan S. The triad that 
matters: palliative medicine, code status, and 
health care costs. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 
2010 Sep;27(6):398-401. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1049909110363806.
 33. Aslakson RA, Curtis JR, Nelson JE. The changing 
role of palliative care in the ICU. Crit Care Med 2014 
Nov;42(11):2418-28. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
ccm.0000000000000573.
The Negative Decisions
There are times when compassion should prompt us to forgo prolonged 
and costly treatment. If a man must die, he has the right to die in peace, 
as he would prefer to do if asked. … But the negative decisions that 
ease and shorten suffering have always been ours to make.
— Wilder Penfield, 1891-1976, pioneering Canadian neurosurgeon
 62
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-019
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Development and Application of a Plant-Based Diet  
Scoring System for Japanese Patients with Inflammatory  
Bowel Disease
Mitsuro Chiba, MD, PhD; Kunio Nakane, MD, PhD; Yuko Takayama, RD; Kae Sugawara, MD;  
Hideo Ohno, MD; Hajime Ishii, MD, PhD; Satoko Tsuda, MD; Tsuyotoshi Tsuji, MD, PhD;  
Masafumi Komatsu, MD, PhD; Takeshi Sugawara, MD 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-019
E-pub: 10/14/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-019
ABSTRACT
Context: Plant-based diets (PBDs) are a healthy alternative to westernized diets. A 
semivegetarian diet, a PBD, has been shown to prevent a relapse in Crohn disease. 
However, there is no way to measure adherence to PBDs. 
Objective: To develop a simple way of evaluating adherence to a PBD for Japanese 
patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). 
Design: PBD scores were assigned according to the frequency of consumption pro-
vided on a food-frequency questionnaire, obtained on hospitalization for 159 patients 
with ulcerative colitis and 70 patients with Crohn disease. Eight items considered to be 
preventive factors for IBD were scored positively, and 8 items considered to be IBD risk 
factors were scored negatively. The PBD score was calculated from the sum of plus and 
minus scores. Higher PBD scores indicated greater adherence to a PBD. The PBD scores 
were evaluated on hospitalization and 2 years after discharge for 22 patients with Crohn 
disease whose dietary pattern and prognosis were established.
Main Outcome Measure: Plant-Based Diet score.
Results: The PBD scores differed significantly, in descending order, by dietary type: 
pro-Japanese diet, mixed type, and pro-westernized diet (Wilcoxon/Kruskal-Wallis test). 
The PBD scores in the ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease groups were 10.9 ± 9.5 and 
8.2 ± 8.2, respectively. For patients with Crohn disease, those with long-term remission 
and normal C-reactive protein concentration were significantly more likely to have PBD 
scores of 25 or greater than below 25 (χ2). 
Conclusion: The PBD score is a valid assessment of PBD dietary adherence. 
INTRODUCTION
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a 
collective term for ulcerative colitis and 
Crohn disease, which are chronic inflam-
matory disorders of the gastrointestinal 
tract marked by episodes of relapse and 
remission. Originally, IBD comprised 
diseases predominantly found in Europe 
and North America. Their incidence and 
prevalence have been increasing with time 
and expanding to different regions around 
the world, indicating that IBD is a global 
disease.1 Development of IBD in geneti-
cally susceptible subjects is triggered by 
environmental factors,2 as with other com-
mon chronic diseases.
It is clear now that gut microflora play 
a role in various chronic diseases, includ-
ing obesity, diabetes, coronary artery 
disease, stroke, rheumatoid arthritis, and 
cancer.3-7 It is also clear that gut microflora 
are formed by diet.7-10 The concept that 
diet-associated gut dysbiosis (imbalance of 
gut microflora) is a critical environmental 
factor for development of chronic diseases 
has been established. Consequently, diet is 
a prime critical factor in chronic diseases. 
Dietary reviews recommend plant-based 
diets (PBDs) to treat and prevent a variety 
of common diseases.11-14 
Crohn disease is worse than ulcerative 
colitis in respect to relapse rate, surgical 
rate, and prognosis. The relapse rate per 
year is 60% to 70% in patients with mild 
to moderate severity,15 and lifelong relapse-
free status is obtained by only 10% to 15% 
of patients.16-18 Clinical remission is gained 
with total parenteral nutrition or elemen-
tal diet. Commencement of omnivorous 
meals, however, causes gradual elevation 
of C-reactive protein (CRP) concentra-
tion followed by a relapse. Therefore, 
omnivorous meals are thought to cause 
gut inflammation.19 Consequently, an 
elemental diet, either exclusive or partial, 
during the active or quiescent phases or 
both has been developed.20 
We regard IBD as a lifestyle disease 
mainly mediated by westernized diets, 
which tend to cause dysbiosis in gut micro-
flora.2,19 To provide a healthier alternative 
to a westernized diet, a semivegetarian diet 
(SVD) was developed, which is lacto-ovo-
vegetarian with fish once a week and meat 
once every two weeks.19 This SVD, one of 
the PBDs, has been shown to prevent a 
relapse in Crohn disease.19
Dietary recommendations and guide-
lines for the prevention of specific diseases 
Mitsuro Chiba, MD, PhD, is the Chief of the Inflammatory Bowel Disease Section at Akita City Hospital in 
Japan. E-mail: mchiba@m2.gyao.ne.jp. Kunio Nakane, MD, PhD, is the Chief of the Gastroenterology Division 
at Akita City Hospital in Japan. E-mail: ac060950@akita-city-hp.jp. Yuko Takayama, RD, is a Lecturer in the  
Life and Culture Department, Seirei Women’s Junior College in Japan. E-mail: takayama@seirei-wjc.ac.jp.  
Kae Sugawara, MD, is a Gastroenterologist at Akita City Hospital in Japan. E-mail: ks_st04045@yahoo.co.jp. 
Hideo Ohno, MD, is a Gastroenterologist at Akita City Hospital in Japan. E-mail: ac120502@akita-city-hp.jp. 
Hajime Ishii, MD, PhD, is a Gastroenterologist at Akita City Hospital in Japan. E-mail: acd00377@akita-city-hp.jp.  
Satoko Tsuda, MD, is a Gastroenterologist at Akita City Hospital in Japan. E-mail: satokotsuda07@gmail.com.  
Tsuyotoshi Tsuji, MD, PhD, is the Chief of the Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Section at Akita City Hospital in 
Japan. E-mail: ac070289@akita-city-hp.jp. Masafumi Komatsu, MD, PhD, is a Gastroenterologist and the 
Director of Akita City Hospital in Japan. E-mail: ac990892@akita-city-hp.jp. Takeshi Sugawara, MD, is a 
Gastroenterologist at Nakadori General Hospital in Akita, Japan. E-mail: nrp05157@nifty.com.
 63
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-019
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Development and Application of a Plant-Based Diet Scoring System for Japanese Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease  
and ways of measuring adherence to these 
guidelines include the following: the 
Healthy Eating Index,21 the Alternate 
Healthy Eating Index-2010,22 the Alternate 
Mediterranean Diet score,23 the Recom-
mended Food Score,24 and the Dietary 
Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) 
Diet score.25 These indexes or scores are 
generally the sum of the scores of the in-
dicated food groups. For example, a value 
of 0 or 1 in the Mediterranean Diet score23 
or a value of 0 to 10 in the Healthy Eating 
Index21,22 is assigned to each of the indi-
cated components. Higher scores indicate 
greater adherence to the corresponding diet. 
In these dietary guidelines, there are clear 
common food groups recommended or 
moderated; namely vegetables, fruits, and 
legumes are recommended, and meats and 
sweets are moderated. These dietary rec-
ommendations and guidelines are to some 
extent similar to a PBD. 
In IBD, detrimental and beneficial foods 
have been documented. Because common 
meals are thought to cause gut inflamma-
tion, comprehensive and stricter dietary 
control is needed. Therefore, detrimental 
foods are to be scored not as 0 but scored 
negatively. Assessment of dietary adherence 
should be simple enough for patients and 
clinicians to calculate easily. In the future, 
the term PBD,11-13 which includes diets 
of various moderating degrees of animal 
foods, is expected to be used more fre-
quently by the public than is SVD. 
The aim of this study was to develop a 
suitable PBD score for Japanese patients 
with IBD and to evaluate the validity of 
the PBD score. We assumed that the PBD 
score of a Japanese diet was higher than 
that of a westernized diet and that the 
PBD score can predict prognosis of Crohn 
disease more accurately than can dietary 
type (SVD or omnivorous diet).
METHODS
Development of Plant-Based Diet Score 
We developed a simple scoring method 
to evaluate adherence to a PBD.26 Com-
ponents of the PBD,27 which we consider 
beneficial to IBD, are scored positively: 
vegetables,28 fruits,28 pulses (beans, soy-
beans, peas, etc), and potatoes/starches 
(Table 1). Components of a westernized 
diet,29 which we consider as risk factors 
to IBD, are scored negatively: meat28,30-36 
including minced or processed meat; 
cheese, butter, and margarine31,32,35,37; 
sweets28,31,32,37,38; and soft drinks.39 Com-
ponents of the traditional Japanese diet, 
known as Washoku,40 are scored positively: 
rice, miso soup, and green tea.31,32 Green 
tea increases beneficial bacteria in the 
gut.19 Risk factors for IBD in Japanese in-
dividuals are scored negatively: fish34,38 and 
bread.37 Plain yogurt, a probiotic, is scored 
positively. Alcohol is scored negatively.33 
Scores 5, 3, and 1 are given according 
to the frequency of consumption: every 
day, 3 to 5 times/wk, and 1 or 2 times/wk, 
respectively (Table 1). An exception to 
the scores is for the consumption of fish. 
Although fish is a component of Washoku 
and the Mediterranean diet, which are 
known to be healthy diets, it is also a risk 
factor in studies in and outside Japan.34,38 
Therefore, its consumption daily, 3 to 5 
times/wk, and 1 or 2 times/wk was scored 
-2, -1, and 0, respectively. 
The PBD score is developed from the 
sum of plus and minus scores (Table 1). 
Table 1. Plant-based diet score for Japanese patients with inflammatory bowel disease
 
 
 
Food group
 
Scoring by frequency of consumption
Measured plant-based diet score for  
our patient with Crohn disease
 
 
Daily
 
3-5  
servings/wk
 
1-2  
servings/wk
 
 
Rarely
 
Baseline (before 
hospitalization)
SVD during 
hospitalization  
(7 wks)
2 years 
after 
discharge
Positive score
Vegetables
5
3
1
0
1
5
5
Fruits
5
3
1
0
0
5
5
Pulses (beans, soybeans, peas, etc)
5
3
1
0
0
5
5
Potatoes/starches
5
3
1
0
0
5
1
Rice
5
3
1
0
5
5
5
Miso soup
5
3
1
0
0
5
5
Green tea
5
3
1
0
0
 0a
5
Yogurt (plain)
5
3
1
0
0
5
5
Negative score
Meat (beef, pork, chicken)
-5
-3
-1
0
-3
0
0
Minced or processed meat
-5
-3
-1
0
0
0
0
Cheese, butter, margarine
-5
-3
-1
0
0
0
0
Sweets, ice cream, milkshake
-5
-3
-1
0
0
0
0
Soft drinks (cola, carbonated beverages, juice)
-5
-3
-1
0
0
0
0
Alcohol
-5
-3
-1
0
0
0
-5
Bread
-5
-3
-1
0
0
0
0
Fish
-2
-1
0
0
0
0
0
Plant-based diet score
3
35
31
a Green tea is recommended to drink at home but is not provided at the hospital.
SVD = semivegetarian diet.
 64
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-019
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Development and Application of a Plant-Based Diet Scoring System for Japanese Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease 
The maximum positive score is 35 for 
inpatients and 40 for outpatients because 
green tea is not provided as a drink in the 
hospital. In hospitals in Japan, inexpensive 
coarse tea usually is served with meals. The 
maximum negative score is -37. A higher 
PBD score indicates a greater adherence 
to a PBD. An example of how the PBD 
score is measured is shown for a patient 
with Crohn disease in Table 1.
Subjects 
Patients with IBD who were admitted to 
Nakadori General Hospital, Akita, Japan, 
between April 2003 and March 2013 and 
Akita City Hospital, Akita, Japan, during 
April 2013 to June 2015 were included in 
the study. This study (study identification 
no. UMIN000019061) was approved by 
the Ethical Committee of each hospital. 
Informed consent was obtained from all 
subjects. Three patients with Crohn dis-
ease whose food-frequency questionnaire 
(FFQ)41 was unavailable were not included 
in the study. The number of patients with 
ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease was 
159 and 70, respectively (Table 2). The 
male-to-female ratio was 1.1 (84/75) in 
ulcerative colitis and 2.7 (51/19) in Crohn 
disease. Patients age 18 years or younger 
consisted of 15 patients (9%) with ul-
cerative colitis and 16 patients (23%) 
with Crohn disease. The median age of 
ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease was 
36 and 23 years, respectively. Initial onset 
cases comprised 73 patients (46%) with 
ulcerative colitis and 48 patients (69%) 
with Crohn disease. 
All patients with IBD were at least ini-
tially recommended to be admitted for their 
treatment. Patients, even those with mild 
severity, were recommended to experience 
and familiarize themselves with an SVD 
through an educational hospitalization for 
about 2 weeks.26 Cases of educational hospi-
talization comprised 48 patients (30%) with 
ulcerative colitis and 19 patients (27%) with 
Crohn disease. The subjects’ characteristics 
are presented in Table 2.
Plant-Based Diet during Hospitalization 
Our PBD was a lacto-ovo-vegetarian 
diet with fish allowed once a week and 
meat allowed once every two weeks, both 
at about half the Japanese average amount, 
namely an SVD. Miso (fermented bean 
paste) soup, vegetables, fruits, legumes, 
potatoes, pickled vegetables, and plain 
yogurt were served daily. Details of the 
SVD were described in a previous article.19 
During hospitalization, foods other than 
the meal service were discouraged. Con-
sequently, the maximum PBD score dur-
ing hospitalization was 35 (Table 1). The 
period of hospitalization differed among 
patients. Some patients were hospitalized 
approximately 7 weeks for standard induc-
tion therapy with infliximab (3 infusions in 6 
weeks),19 others stayed about 2 weeks for an 
educational hospitalization,26 and the other 
patients stayed from 3 weeks to 5 weeks ac-
cording to the severity of their disease. At the 
end of hospitalization, a qualified dietitian 
gave dietary guidance to the patient and the 
patient’s meal preparer. The responsible phy-
sician (MC) advised them to continue this 
diet after discharge. They were also advised 
to preferentially drink green tea.19
Food-Frequency Questionnaire  
and Dietary Type 
Before providing information about the 
SVD, patients’ dietary habits before onset 
or relapse of the disease were obtained 
on the day of admission or immediately 
thereafter, by means of an FFQ.41 The 
questionnaire included 45 questions that 
covered almost all foods or food groups in 
Japan.19 It contained information necessary 
for calculating the PBD score. 
In the questionnaire, there was a ques-
tion about dietary type that listed 6 types: 
westernized, pro-westernized, standard 
mixed diet of Washoku and westernized 
diet, pro-Japanese, Japanese (Washoku), 
and SVD. A definition of dietary types 
was not mentioned.19 In ulcerative colitis, 
the number of patients by dietary type 
was 3, 19, 92, 25, 17, and 3, respectively 
(Figure 1A). In Crohn disease, there was 
no case of SVD. The number of patients 
by dietary type was 1, 13, 40, 11, and 5, 
respectively (Figure 1B). The standard 
mixed diet of Washoku and westernized 
diet was the most popular, making up 
more than half in both ulcerative colitis 
(92/159, 58%) and Crohn disease (40/70, 
57%) populations (Figure 1). 
Evaluation of Plant-Based Diet Score from 
Food-Frequency Questionnaire 
The PBD score was calculated from 
the patients’ dietary type obtained on 
the FFQ. The FFQ before admission was 
available for 159 patients with ulcerative 
colitis and 70 patients with Crohn disease. 
Table 2. Study subjects’ characteristics 
Characteristic
Ulcerative colitis (n = 159)
Crohn disease (n = 70)
p value
Male/female, no.
84/75
51/19
0.0039a
Age, years
Range
11-85
13-78
Mean
39.7
29.6
< 0.0001b
Median
36
23
≤18 years, no. (%)
15 (9)
16 (23)
0.0083a
Type of IBD, no. (%)
Initial attack
73 (46)
Initial case
48 (69)
Relapsing-remitting
81 (51)
Relapsed case
22 (31)
Chronic continuous
5 (3)
Enteritis
9 (13)
Proctitis
61 (38)
Enterocolitis
37 (53)
Left-sided colitis
17 (11)
Colitis
24 (34)
Entire colitis
78 (49)
Remission
19 (27)
Right-sided colitis
3 (2)
Active
51 (73)
Mild
86 (54)
Moderate
51 (32)
Severe
22 (14)
Educational 
hospitalization, no. (%)
48 (30)
19 (27)
0.6393a
a Chi-squared test.
b Wilcoxon/Kruskal-Wallis test.
IBD = inflammatory bowel disease.
 65
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-019
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Development and Application of a Plant-Based Diet Scoring System for Japanese Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease  
In a previous study, 22 patients with 
Crohn disease in remission were followed-
up as outpatients.19 They were provided 
5-aminosalicylic acid with no biologics, 
immunosuppressants, or steroid hormones. 
The FFQ was obtained at 3 months, 1 year, 
and 2 years after discharge or at the time of 
relapse. In that study, the SVD was shown 
to be preventive in the time to relapse 
compared with that in the omnivorous 
diet (p = 0.0003, log rank test).19 A PBD 
score was evaluated in the current study for 
these 22 patients with Crohn disease with a 
known outcome at 2 years. 
An abnormal CRP concentration pre-
cedes clinical relapse for various periods 
from a few months to a few years in Crohn 
disease.42 This also happened in our cases. 
Six patients in remission with abnormal 
CRP concentrations at 2 years after dis-
charge experienced a relapse, but 11 pa-
tients with normal CRP concentrations 
did not (Figure 2). Therefore, a normal 
CRP concentration with remission is a 
prerequisite for a long-lasting remission. 
We evaluated whether dietary patterns or 
PBD score is related to remission with a 
normal CRP concentration.
Statistical Analysis 
The frequency of categorical variables 
was assessed with a χ2 test. Dietary type 
and PBD score in ulcerative colitis and 
Crohn disease was analyzed through the 
Wilcoxon/Kruskal-Wallis test and analysis 
of variance (ANOVA), respectively, depend-
ing on whether scores showed standard 
normal distribution. When a significant F-
ratio was obtained, differences between the 
means were isolated with the post hoc T
ukey 
honest significant difference procedure. The 
χ2 analysis was used to test the hypothesis 
that there was no difference in dietary type 
(SVD and omnivorous diet) or PBD score 
(high and low) for the prognosis from 2 
years after discharge in Crohn disease. All 
p values are two-tailed. A p value of 0.05 or 
less was considered to indicate a statistically 
significant difference. Statistical analysis was 
performed using JMP 8 (SAS Institute Inc, 
Cary, NC) software. 
RESULTS 
Results are expressed as the mean ± 
standard deviation.
Figure 1. Dietary type and Plant-Based Diet score in patients with ulcerative colitis (n = 159) (A) and Crohn 
disease (n = 70) (B). 
* p = 0.0001, post hoc Tukey honest significant difference test.
** p < 0.0001, post hoc Tukey honest significant difference test.
Bars = mean and standard deviation; Japanese = Japanese diet (Washoku); Pro-J = pro-Japanese diet;  
Pro-W = pro-westernized diet; Standard = standard mixed with Japanese and westernized diet; SVD = semivegetarian diet; 
Westernized = westernized diet. 
Figure 2. Evaluation of Plant-Based Diet score at 2 years after discharge in 22 patients with Crohn disease, 
whose prognosis was published.19 
a Analysis of variance.
Bars = mean; CRP = C-reactive protein; SVD = semivegetarian diet. 
 66
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-019
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Development and Application of a Plant-Based Diet Scoring System for Japanese Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease 
Plant-Based Diet Score in Ulcerative  
Colitis and Crohn Disease
The positive PBD score (sum of posi-
tive scores), negative PBD score (sum of 
negative scores), and total PBD score were 
23.2 ± 8.0, 12.1 ± 6.0, and 10.9 ± 9.5, 
respectively, in the ulcerative colitis group 
(n = 159), and 20.0 ± 7.5, 10.8 ± 8.1, 
and 8.2 ± 8.2, respectively, in the Crohn 
disease group (n = 70; Table 3). The total 
PBD score and positive PBD score were 
significantly elevated in patients with ul-
cerative colitis vs those with Crohn disease 
(Wilcoxon/Kruskal-Wallis test; Table 3).
Relation between Dietary Types and  
Plant-Based Diet Score
The baseline (preadmission) PBD score 
by dietary type in the ulcerative colitis 
group was as follows in a descending order: 
23.7 ± 9.5 in SVD (n = 3), 18.0 ± 6.4 in 
pro-Japanese (n = 25), 16.8 ± 5.7 in Japa-
nese (n = 17), 10.0 ± 8.4 in standard mixed 
(n = 92), 1.9 ± 5.9 in pro-westernized (n = 
19), and -10.7 ± 5.9 in westernized (n = 3, 
p < 0.0001, Wilcoxon/Kruskal-Wallis test, 
Figure 1A). The PBD score of patients with 
a pro-westernized diet was significantly 
lower than for the standard mixed diet, 
which was significantly lower than for the 
pro-Japanese diet (see Figure 1A).
The baseline PBD score by dietary type 
in the Crohn disease group was as follows 
in a descending order: 13.9 ± 9.6 in pro-
Japanese (n = 11), 13.2 ± 11.5 in Japanese 
(n = 5), 8.5 ± 6.8 in standard mixed (n = 
40), 1.5 ± 4.4 in pro-westernized (n = 13), 
and -1 in westernized (n = 1, p = 0.0008, 
ANOVA, Figure 1B). The PBD score of 
patients with the pro-westernized diet 
was significantly lower than for the pro-
Japanese diet (see Figure 1B).
Plant-Based Diet Score and Prognosis  
in Crohn Disease
The PBD score of patients with an SVD 
(n = 16) and an omnivorous diet (n = 6) 
was 29.8 ± 7.2 and 14.5 ± 7.5, respectively 
(p = 0.0015, ANOVA, Figure 2). Main-
tenance of remission until 2 years after 
discharge was higher in patients with an 
SVD (15/16) than with an omnivorous 
diet (2/6, p = 0.0036, χ2). There was no 
difference in the frequency of maintenance 
of remission with normal CRP concentra-
tion until 2 years after discharge between 
patients with an SVD (9/16) and with an 
omnivorous diet (2/6, p = 0.3348, χ2). 
The frequency of maintenance of remis-
sion with normal CRP concentration 
until 2 postdischarge years was higher in 
patients with PBD scores of 25 or greater 
(8/11) than in those below 25 (3/11, p = 
0.0299, χ2).
DISCUSSION
In Japan, the number of patients with 
ulcerative colitis is about three times those 
of Crohn disease.43 Male predominance 
over female is an Asian (including Japa-
nese) characteristic for Crohn disease.44,45 
Our subjects in this study are consistent 
with the epidemiology found in Japan.43,44 
Among dietary types, although their 
definition was not formal, a mixed type 
of Washoku and Western diet was most 
popular for both the ulcerative colitis and 
Crohn disease groups. This means dietary 
westernization is fully embraced in Japan. 
The PBD scores by dietary type in both 
diseases were similar. Although dietary 
types were distributed across a broad range 
of PBD score, the PBD score by dietary 
type on the whole showed significant dif-
ferences. Namely, the mean PBD scores of 
patients with a Japanese dietary type and 
a pro-Japanese type were higher than for 
patients with pro-westernized and western-
ized diets, and the standard mixed type was 
the intermediate of these two groups. This 
indicates that PBD score reflects dietary 
type. Our assumption that the PBD score 
of a Japanese diet was higher than that of 
a westernized diet was confirmed. Judging 
from the PBD score, Washoku is closer to a 
PBD than standard mixed, and a western-
ized diet is far from a PBD. 
Altogether, the developed PBD scoring 
system seems to be successful in reflect-
ing adherence to PBD. The critical factor 
in our PBD score is the distribution of 
negative scores to detrimental foods for 
IBD. Otherwise, scoring would be unable 
to discriminate dietary patterns or discrim-
ination of the dietary pattern would be less 
clear than in the present scoring system.
The efficacy of SVD (PBD) in prevent-
ing relapse, namely, maintaining remis-
sion, in Crohn disease was shown in a 
previous study.19 There are two kinds of 
remission: remission with a normal CRP 
concentration and remission with an ab-
normal CRP concentration. The latter lasts 
for a few months to a few years before a 
relapse, whereas the former almost guar-
antees lasting remission.42 In this study, it 
was found that a PBD score of more than 
25 is required to maintain remission with 
normal CRP concentration. This is 3 times 
higher than the baseline PBD score of 8.2. 
The sample size in this study is very 
small (n = 22). Investigation for the 
sensitivity and specificity of PBD score 
predicting Crohn disease prognosis on 
a large scale is awaited. Needless to say, 
there are factors other than diet linked to 
relapse, namely, mucosal healing,46 stress,47 
smoking,48 acute gastroenteritis,49 and an-
tibiotics.50 We experienced a case in which 
a relapse occurred shortly after discharge 
even though the patient’s PBD score was 
the maximum of 40. Unpredictability 
of the prognosis of Crohn disease is well 
known.18 Because the concept that IBD 
is a lifestyle disease mediated mainly by 
a westernized diet is not widely appreci-
ated, an analysis of diet in the follow-up 
period in relation to a relapse of IBD has 
been ignored. Analysis of diet will provide 
information regarding prediction of relapse 
and prognosis in patients with IBD.
The variety of diets based on cultural 
background forms a diversity of gut mi-
croflora.51 In addition, susceptible genes 
for IBD differ by ethnicity.52,53 Therefore, 
some food items of PBDs will differ from 
Table 3. Plant-based diet score in ulcerative colitis and Crohn diseasea
Group
n
PBD score+
PBD score–
PBD score
Ulcerative colitis
159
23.2 ± 8.0
12.1 ± 6.0
10.9 ± 9.5
Crohn disease
70
20.0 ± 7.5
10.8 ± 8.1
8.2 ± 8.2
p value for ulcerative  
colitis vs Crohn diseaseb
0.0040 
0.2692
0.0117
a Scores are presented as mean ± standard deviation.
b Wilcoxon/Kruskal-Wallis test.
PBD = plant-based diet; PBD score+ = sum of positive scores on Plant-Based Diet; PBD score- = sum of negative 
scores; PBD score = sum of positive and negative scores.
 67
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-019
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Development and Application of a Plant-Based Diet Scoring System for Japanese Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease  
country to country. Since the PBD score 
was found to be useful in evaluating ad-
herence to a PBD, the PBD score can in 
practice be applied broadly: Education of 
PBD, monitoring of PBD, and the rela-
tionship between PBD and health.
CONCLUSION
The PBD score was significantly differ-
ent according to dietary type in a descend-
ing order: Pro-Japanese diet, mixed type, 
and Pro-westernized type. The PBD score 
of an SVD was significantly higher than 
that of an omnivorous diet. In patients 
with Crohn disease, a PBD score of 25 or 
greater was needed to maintain long-term 
remission. The PBD score is a valid assess-
ment of dietary adherence to a PBD. The 
PBD and PBD score can be modified for a 
variety of diseases and for different national 
dietary preferences. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgment
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health 
Communications provided editorial assistance.
How to cite this article
Chiba M, Nakane K, Takayama Y, et al. 
Development and application of a plant-based 
diet scoring system for Japanese patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease. Perm J 2016 
Fall;20(4):16-019. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/16-019.
References
 1. Molodecky NA, Soon IS, Rabi DM, et al. Increasing 
incidence and prevalence of inflammatory bowel 
diseases with time, based on systematic review. 
Gastroenterology 2012 Jan;142(1):46-54. DOI:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2011.10.001.
 2. Chiba M, Tsuda H, Abe T, Sugawara T, Morikawa Y. 
Missing environmental factor in inflammatory bowel 
disease: diet-associated gut microflora. Inflamm 
Bowel Dis 2011 Aug;17(8):E82-3. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/ibd.21745.
 3. Kallus SJ, Brandt LJ. The intestinal microbiota  
and obesity. J Clin Gastroenterol 2012 Jan;46(1): 
16-24. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/MCG. 
0b013e31823711fd.
 4. Tilg H, Moschen AR. Microbiota and diabetes: an 
evolving relationship. Gut 2014 Sep;63(9):1513-21. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2014-306928.
 5. Koeth RA, Wang Z, Levison BS, et al. Intestinal 
microbiota metabolism of L-carnitine, a nutrient in 
red meat, promotes atherosclerosis. Nat Med 2013 
May;19(5):576-85. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nm.3145.
 6. Scher JU, Abramson SB. The microbiome and 
rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2011 Aug 
23;7(10):569-78. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nrrheum.2011.121.
 7. Ou J, Carbonero F, Zoetendal EG, et al. Diet, 
microbiota, and microbial metabolites in colon cancer 
risk in rural Africans and African Americans. Am J 
Clin Nutr 2013 Jul;98(1):111-20. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.3945/ajcn.112.056689.
 8. De Filippo C, Cavalieri D, Di Paola M, et al. Impact 
of diet in shaping gut microbiota revealed by a 
comparative study in children from Europe and 
rural Africa. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 Aug 
17;107(33):14691-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1005963107.
 9. Wu GD, Chen J, Hoffmann C, et al. Linking long-
term dietary patterns with gut microbial enterotypes. 
Science 2011 Oct 7;334(6052):105-8. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1208344.
 10. Brown K, DeCoffe D, Molcan E, Gibson DL. Diet-
induced dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiota and 
the effects on immunity and disease. Nutrients 2012 
Aug;4(8):1095-119. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
nu4081095.
 11. World Cancer Research Fund; American Institute for 
Cancer Research. Food, nutrition, physical activity 
and the prevention of cancer: a global perspective 
[Internet]. Washington, DC: American Institute 
for Cancer Research; 2007 [cited 2016 May 20]. 
Available from: www.wcrf.org/sites/default/files/
Second-Expert-Report.pdf.
 12. McEvoy CT, Temple N, Woodside JV. Vegetarian 
diets, low-meat diets and health: a review. Public 
Health Nutr 2012 Dec;15(12):2287-94. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1368980012000936.
 13. Tuso PJ, Ismail MH, Ha BP, Bartolotto C. Nutritional 
update for physicians: plant-based diets. Perm J 
2013 Spring;17(2):61-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.7812/TPP/12-085.
 14. Orlich MJ, Singh PM, Sabaté J, et al. Vegetarian 
dietary patterns and mortality in Adventist 
Health Study 2. JAMA Intern Med 2013 Jul 
8;173(13):1230-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jamainternmed.2013.6473.
 15. Sandborn WJ, Löfberg R, Feagan BG, Hanauer SB, 
Campieri M, Greenberg GR. Budesonide for 
maintenance of remission in patients with Crohn’s 
disease in medically induced remission: a 
predetermined pooled analysis of four randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2005 Aug;100(8):1780-7. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1572-0241.2005.41992.x.
 16. Munkholm P, Langholz E, Davidsen M, Binder V. 
Disease activity courses in a regional cohort of 
Crohn’s disease patients. Scand J Gastroenterol 
1995 Jul;30(7):699-706. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.3109/00365529509096316.
 17. Loftus EV Jr, Schoenfeld P, Sandborn WJ. The 
epidemiology and natural history of Crohn’s disease 
in population-based patient cohort from North 
America: a systematic review. Aliment Pharmacol 
Ther 2002 Jan;16(1):51-60. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1046/j.1365-2036.2002.01140.x.
 18. Beaugerie L, Seksik P, Nion-Larmurier I, Gendre JP, 
Cosnes J. Predictors of Crohn’s disease. 
Gastroenterology 2006 Mar;130(3):650-6. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2005.12.019.
 19. Chiba M, Abe T, Tsuda H, et al. Lifestyle-related 
disease in Crohn’s disease: relapse prevention 
by a semi-vegetarian diet. World J Gastroenterol 
2010 May 28;16(20):2484-95. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.3748/wjg.v16.i20.2484.
 20. Alhagamhmad MH, Day AS, Lemberg DA, Leach ST. 
An update of nutritional therapy in the management 
of Crohn’s disease. J Gastroenterol 2012 
Aug;47(8):872-82. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00535-012-0617-9.
 21. Kennedy ET, Ohls J, Carlson S, Fleming K. The 
Healthy Eating Index: design and applications. J Am 
Diet Assoc 1995 Oct;95(10):1103-8. DOI:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0002-8223(95)00300-2.
 22. Chiuve SE, Fung TT, Rimm EB, et al. Alternative 
dietary indices both strongly predict risk of chronic 
disease. J Nutr 2012 Jun;142(6):1009-18. DOI:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.3945/jn.111.157222.
 23. Trichopoulou A, Costacou T, Bamia C, 
Trichopoulos D. Adherence to a Mediterranean diet 
and survival in a Greek population. N Engl J Med 
2003 Jun 26;348(26):2599-608. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMoa025039.
 24. Kant AK, Schatzkin A, Graubard BI, Schairer C. 
A prospective study of diet quality and mortality in 
women. JAMA 2000 Apr 26;283(16):2109-15. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.283.16.2109.
 25. Liese AD, Krebs-Smith SM, Subar AF, et al. The 
Dietary Patterns Methods Project: synthesis of 
findings across cohorts and relevance to dietary 
guidance. J Nutr 2015 Mar;145(3):393-402. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3945/jn.114.205336.
 26. Chiba M, Tsuda S, Komatsu M, Tozawa H, 
Takayama Y. Onset of ulcerative colitis during a 
low-carbohydrate weight-loss diet and treatment 
with a plant-based diet: a case report. Perm J 2016 
Winter;20(1):80-4. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/15-038.
 27. Haddad EH, Sabaté J, Whitten CG. Vegetarian food 
guide pyramid: a conceptual framework. Am J Clin 
Nutr 1999 Sep;70(3 Suppl):615S-619S.
 28. D’Souza S, Levy E, Mack D, et al. Dietary patterns 
and risk for Crohn’s disease in children. Inflamm 
Bowel Dis 2008 Mar;14(3):367-73. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/ibd.20333.
 29. Working Group on Arteriosclerosis of the National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Report of the 
Working Group on Arteriosclerosis of the National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Arteriosclerosis, 
vol 2. Bethesda, MD: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, Public Health Services, National 
Institutes of Health; 1981 Sep.
 30. Shoda R, Matsueda K, Yamato S, Umeda N. 
Epidemiologic analysis of Crohn disease in Japan: 
increased dietary intake of n-6 polyunsaturated fatty 
acids and animal protein relates to the increased 
incidence of Crohn disease in Japan. Am J Clin Nutr 
1996 May;63(5):741-5.
 31. Morita N, Minoda T, Munekiyo M, et al. Case-
control study of ulcerative colitis in Japan [abstract 
in English]. In: Annual epidemiology report of the 
Intractable Diseases Research Committee. Tokyo, 
Japan: Ministry of Health and Welfare of Japan; 1996 
Mar. p 153-8.
 32. Morita N, Ohnaka O, Ando S, et al. Case-control 
study of Crohn’s disease in Japan [abstract in 
English]. In: Annual epidemiology report of the 
Intractable Diseases Research Committee. Tokyo, 
Japan: Ministry of Health and Welfare of Japan; 1997 
Mar. p 58-64.
 33. Jowett SL, Seal CJ, Pearce MS, et al. Influence of 
dietary factors on the clinical course of ulcerative 
colitis: a prospective cohort study. Gut 2004 
Oct;53(10):1479-84. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
gut.2003.024828.
 34. Jantchou P, Morois S, Clavel-Chapelon F, Boutron-
Ruault MC, Carbonnel F. Animal protein intake 
and risk of inflammatory bowel disease: the E3N 
prospective study. Am J Gastroenterol 2010 
Oct;105(10):2195-201. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
ajg.2010.192.
 35. Maconi G, Ardizzone S, Cucino C, Bezzio C, 
Russo AG, Bianchi Porro G. Pre-illness changes 
in dietary habits and diet as a risk factor for 
inflammatory bowel disease: a case-control study. 
 68
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-019
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Development and Application of a Plant-Based Diet Scoring System for Japanese Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease 
World J Gastroenterol 2010 Sep 14;16(34):4297-304. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v16.i34.4297.
 36. Ge J, Han TJ, Liu J, et al. Meat intake and risk of 
inflammatory bowel disease: a meta-analysis. Turk 
J Gastroenterol 2015 Nov;26(6):492-7. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.5152/tjg.2015.0106.
 37. Dietary and other risk factors of ulcerative colitis. 
A case-control study in Japan. Epidemiology 
Group of the Research Committee of Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease in Japan. J Clin Gastroenterol 
1994 Sep;19(2):166-71. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00004836-199409000-00019.
 38. Sakamoto N, Kono S, Wakai K, et al; Epidemiology 
Group of the Research Committee on Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease in Japan. Dietary risk factors 
for inflammatory bowel disease: a multicenter 
case-control study in Japan. Inflamm Bowel 
Dis 2005 Feb;11(2):154-63. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00054725-200502000-00009.
 39. Russel MG, Engels LG, Muris JW, et al. Modern 
life in the epidemiology of inflammatory bowel 
disease: a case-control study with special 
emphasis on nutritional factors. Eur J Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 1998 Mar;10(3):243-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00042737-199803000-00010.
 40. Washoku, traditional dietary cultures of the 
Japanese, notably for the celebration of New Year 
[Internet]. Paris, France: UNESCO; 2013 [cited 2016 
May 23]. Available from: www.unesco.org/culture/
ich/en/RL/washoku-traditional-dietary-cultures-of-
the-japanese-notably-for-the-celebration-of-new-
year-00869.
 41. Hu FB, Rimm E, Smith-Warner SA, et al. 
Reproducibility and validity of dietary patterns 
assessed with a food-frequency questionnaire.  
Am J Clin Nutr 1999 Feb;69(2):243-9.
 42. Boirivant M, Leoni M, Tariciotti D, Fais S, Squarcia O, 
Pallone F. The clinical significance of serum C 
reactive protein levels in Crohn’s disease. Results of 
a prospective longitudinal study. J Clin Gastroenterol 
1988 Aug;10(4):401-5. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00004836-198808000-00011.
 43. Yao T, Matsui T, Hiwatashi N. Crohn’s disease in 
Japan: diagnostic criteria and epidemiology. Dis 
Colon Rectum 2000 Oct;43(10 suppl):S85-93. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02237231.
 44. Asakura K, Nishiwaki Y, Inoue N, Hibi T, Watanabe M, 
Takebayashi T. Prevalence of ulcerative colitis 
and Crohn’s disease in Japan. J Gastroenterol 
2009;44(7):659-65. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00535-009-0057-3.
 45. Ahuja V, Tandon RK. Inflammatory bowel disease in 
the Asia-Pacific area: a comparison with developed 
countries and regional differences. J Dig Dis 2010 
Jun;11(3):134-47. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1751-2980.2010.00429.x.
 46. Neurath MF, Travis SPL. Mucosal healing in 
inflammatory bowel diseases: a systemic review. 
Gut 2012 Nov;61(11):1619-35. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1136/gutjnl-2012-302830.
 47. Bernstein CN, Singh S, Graff LA, Walker JR, 
Miller N, Cheang M. A prospective population-based 
study of triggers of symptomatic flares in IBD. Am 
J Gastroenterol 2010 Sep;105(9):1994-2002. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ajg.2010.140.
 48. Cosnes J, Beaugerie L, Carbonnel F, Gendre JP. 
Smoking cessation and the course of Crohn’s 
disease: an intervention study. Gastroenterology 
2001 Apr;120(5):1093-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1053/gast.2001.23231.
 49. García Rodríguez LA, Ruigómez A, Panés J. Acute 
gastroenteritis is followed by an increased risk of 
inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterology 2006 
May;130(6):1588-94. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/j.
gastro.2006.02.004.
 50. Shaw SY, Blanchard JF, Bernstein CN. Association 
between the use of antibiotics and new diagnoses 
of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2011 Dec;106(12):2133-42. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1038/ajg.2011.304.
 51. Lozupone CA, Stombaugh JI, Gordon JI, Jansson JK, 
Knight R. Diversity, stability and resilience of the  
human gut microbiota. Nature 2012 Sep 13; 
489(7415):220-30. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nature11550.
 52. Inoue N, Tamura K, Kinouchi Y, et al. Lack of 
common NOD2 variants in Japanese patients 
with Crohn’s disease. Gastroenterology 2002 
Jul;123(1):86-91. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/
gast.2002.34155.
 53. Ng SC, Tsoi KK, Kamm MA, et al. Genetics of 
inflammatory bowel disease in Asia: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2012 
Jun;18(6):1164-76. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
ibd.2184.
Necessity Made Medicine
For the art of Medicine would not have been invented at first, nor would it have been 
made a subject of investigation (for there would have been no need of it), if when men 
are indisposed, the same food and other articles of regimen which they eat and drink 
when in good health were proper for them, and if no others were preferable to these. 
But now necessity itself made medicine to be sought out and discovered by men.
— Hippocrates of Kos, 460 BC-370 BC, Greek physician of the Age of Pericles
 69
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-067
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education  
Core Competencies at a Community Teaching Hospital:  
Is There a Gap in Awareness?
Mohammed Al-Temimi, MD, MPH; Michael Kidon; Samir Johna, MD, MACM 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-067
E-pub: 10/14/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-067
ABSTRACT
Context: Reports evaluating faculty knowledge of the Ac-
creditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) 
core competencies in community hospitals without a dedicated 
residency program are uncommon. 
Objective: Faculty evaluation regarding knowledge of ACGME 
core competencies before a residency program is started. 
Design: Physicians at the Kaiser Permanente Fontana Medical 
Center (N = 480) were surveyed for their knowledge of ACGME 
core competencies before starting new residency programs.
Main Outcome Measures: Knowledge of ACGME core com-
petencies.
Results: Fifty percent of physicians responded to the survey, 
and 172 (71%) of respondents were involved in teaching resi-
dents. Of physicians who taught residents and had complete 
responses (N = 164), 65 (39.7%) were unsure of their knowledge 
of the core competencies. However, most stated that they pro-
vided direct teaching to residents related to the knowledge, skills, 
and attitudes stated in each of the 6 competencies as follows: 
medical knowledge (96.3%), patient care (95.7%), professional-
ism (90.7%), interpersonal and communication skills (86.3%), 
practice-based learning (85.9%), and system-based practice 
(79.6%). Physician specialty, years in practice (1-10 vs > 10), 
and number of rotations taught per year (1-6 vs 7-12) were not 
associated with knowledge of the competencies (p > 0.05); 
however, full-time faculty (teaching 10-12 rotations per year) 
were more likely to provide competency-based teaching.
Conclusion: Objective assessment of faculty awareness of 
ACGME core competencies is essential when starting a residency 
program. Discrepancy between knowledge of the competen-
cies and acclaimed provision of competency-based teaching 
emphasizes the need for standardized teaching methods that 
incorporate the values of these competencies.
INTRODUCTION
It is estimated that the number of graduate medical education 
residency positions for medical school graduates has grown by 1.7% 
per year over the past decade.1 However, this trend is not expected 
to fulfill the actual projected need of physicians, with an anticipated 
shortfall of 41,000 to 90,000 physicians by 2025.2 As the demand 
for new training positions3 continues to exist, the Accreditation 
Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) instituted 
standard requirements for accrediting new residency programs.4 
These requirements were designed to ensure that each resident 
will develop the knowledge, skills, and attitudes required to enter 
unsupervised practice by the end of their training.4 
The ACGME mandated that all residency programs realign 
their medical education and residents’ evaluation around six core 
competencies: medical knowledge, patient care, professionalism, 
interpersonal and communication skills (ICS), practice-based 
learning and improvement (PBLI), and system-based practice.5 
In 2013, the ACGME went a step further by implementing the 
Next Accreditation System.6 In the Next Accreditation System, 
the evaluation of every residency program is shifted from a pro-
cess-oriented procedure into an outcome-based procedure that 
is based on the six ACGME core competencies.5-7 Because the 
milestones in the Next Accreditation System are considered the 
natural progression of the work on the six competencies, faculty 
awareness of those competencies is considered paramount. In fact, 
the ACGME expects program faculty to “administer and maintain 
an educational environment conducive to educating residents in 
each of the ACGME competency areas.”5 However, faculty evalua-
tion in regard to the knowledge and delivery of competency-based 
education is left to the discretion of the Program Director5,6 and, 
more recently, residents’ evaluation of faculty.6
This study focuses on the assessment of faculty knowledge of the 
six ACGME core competencies in a single community teaching 
hospital. We conducted the survey as part of needs assessment 
before establishing new residency programs in general surgery, 
internal medicine, and psychiatry. We hypothesize that at the 
time of starting a new residency program, objective evaluation of 
faculty knowledge of the ACGME core competencies is essential. 
This assessment can help to identify gaps in knowledge that po-
tentially could be addressed before a residency program is started. 
METHODS
We surveyed 480 physicians specializing in family medicine, 
internal medicine, sports medicine, geriatric medicine, psychiatry, 
pediatrics, general surgery, plastic surgery, obstetrics and gynecol-
ogy, orthopedics (listed under other specialties), and neurosurgery 
at the Kaiser Permanente (KP) Fontana Medical Center in CA. 
The purpose of this survey was to explore faculty knowledge of the 
Mohammed Al-Temimi, MD, MPH, is a Resident in the Arrowhead Regional Medical 
Center/Kaiser Permanente Fontana General Surgery Residency Program in CA. E-mail: 
muhammidh.hussein@yahoo.com. Michael Kidon is a Medical Student in the College of 
Osteopathic Medicine at Touro University in Henderson, NV. E-mail: do18.michael.kidon@
nv.touro.edu. Samir Johna, MD, MACM, is the Residency Program Director and Surgeon at 
Arrowhead Regional/Kaiser Fontana Medical Centers in CA. E-mail: samir.d.johna@kp.org.
 70
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-067
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education Core Competencies at a Community Teaching Hospital: Is There a Gap in Awareness? 
ACGME core competencies and to assess their implementation 
of competency-based teaching. At the time of this evaluation, the 
general surgery, neurosurgery, plastic surgery, and obstetrics and 
gynecology services were already involved in teaching residents ro-
tating from affiliated residencies; however, the affiliated residency 
programs were planning to withdraw their residents from our 
hospital. As such, the KP Fontana Medical Center was planning to 
start a general surgery residency program integrated with Arrowhead 
Regional Medical Center, in Colton CA. The Fontana Medical Cen-
ter also was going to be the sponsoring institution for the internal 
medicine and psychiatry residency programs. These programs were 
added to the family medicine residency program, which has been 
established since 1975.8
Pilot testing of the survey was performed among eight students 
and four faculty members from the University of Southern Cali-
fornia Master of Academic Medicine program. The survey ques-
tions were revised on the basis of feedback from the participants. 
The standardized survey was sent electronically. The survey was 
resent twice, for a total of three times, to improve the participa-
tion rate. A copy of the survey can be accessed online at www.
thepermanentejournal.org/files/16-067.pdf.
We categorized the participants by their specialty (medical vs 
surgical), years in practice (1-10 vs > 10 years), and the number 
of monthly rotations taught per year (1-3, 4-6, 7-9, and 10-12). 
Full-time faculty was defined as a faculty member who teaches 
10 to 12 rotations per year. Surgical specialties included general 
surgery, plastic surgery, obstetrics and gynecology, orthopedics 
(listed as “other”), and neurosurgery. Medical specialties included 
family medicine, internal medicine, sports medicine, psychiatry, 
pediatrics, and geriatric medicine. 
The six competencies as they appeared on the survey included 
medical knowledge, patient care, professionalism, ICS, PBLI, and 
system-based practice. We asked faculty members to define the 
degree of their own level of knowledge of the ACGME core com-
petencies as “not sure,” “know the names of the six competencies,” 
or “well versed.” The last category included response choices for 
faculty who “have worked with the subcompetencies/milestones” or 
“have developed objectives or curricula based on the competencies.” 
Additionally, we asked faculty physicians about their perception of 
whether they had incorporated each individual core competency in 
their teaching of residents. Finally, faculty members were asked 
to assess their residents’ performance across the six core compe-
tencies. The residents’ performance was evaluated as a “strength,” 
“weakness,” or “neither a strength nor a weakness.”
A χ2 test was used to test the association of physicians’ charac-
teristics with their knowledge of the competencies and whether 
they provided resident teaching that is pertinent to the objectives 
stated in each core competency. The study was approved by the 
institutional review board of KP Southern California. We used 
STATA/IC Version 11.2 for all statistical analyses (StataCorp, 
College Station, TX).
RESULTS
Among 480 hospital physicians who were surveyed, 242 
(50.4%) responded to the survey. Among the respondents, 172 
faculty physicians actively instructed residents, of whom 164 had 
complete responses. Seventy physicians who responded to the sur-
vey did not teach residents. The data of those who taught residents 
with complete survey responses were analyzed. Fifty-three (32.3%) 
faculty physicians taught 7 or more rotations per year. Only 33 
(20.1%) physicians were full-time teaching faculty (teaching 
10-12 rotations per year). One hundred thirty-three (81.1%) of 
the faculty physicians were teaching medical residents, and 31 
(18.9%) were involved in teaching surgical residents (Table 1). 
Figure 1 demonstrates a comparison of faculty knowledge of 
ACGME core competencies. Teaching (faculty) physicians were 
more likely to know the names of (33.5% vs 27.9%) or to be 
well versed in (26.8% vs 4.4%, p < 0.01) the core competencies 
compared with nonteaching (nonfaculty) physicians. 
Most of the faculty physicians surveyed indicated that they teach 
the knowledge, skills, and attitudes that make up each of the core 
competencies as follows: medical knowledge (96.3%), patient care 
(95.7%), professionalism (90.7%), ICS (86.3%), PBLI (85.9%), 
and system-based practice (79.6%; Figure 2). Faculty characteristics, 
such as specialty (medical vs surgical), years in practice (1-10 vs 
>10), and number of rotations taught per year (1-6 vs 7-12) were 
not associated with the level of knowledge of the core competencies 
Table 1. Teaching faculty physician characteristics (N = 164)
Characteristic
n (%)
Faculty specialty
Teaching surgical residentsa
31 (18.9)
Teaching medical residentsb
133 (81.1)
Years in practice
1-10
76 (46.3)
> 10
88 (53.7)
Formal rotations taught per year
1-3
81 (49.4)
4-6
30 (18.3)
7-9
20 (12.2)
10-12
33 (20.1)
a Includes general surgery, plastic surgery, obstetrics and gynecology, orthopedics  
(listed under “other”), and neurosurgery.
b Includes family medicine, internal medicine, sports medicine, and geriatric medicine.
Table 2. Factors associated with faculty level of knowledge of 
ACGME core competencies 
 
 
Factor
Not sure  
(n = 65),  
n (%)
Know the 
names,  
(n = 55), n (%)
Well versed, 
(n = 44),  
n (%)
 
 
p value
Faculty specialty
Surgical
8 (25.8)
15 (48.4)
8 (25.8)
0.11
Medical
57 (42.8)
40 (30.1)
36 (27.1)
Years in practice
1-10
24 (31.6)
30 (39.5)
22 (28.9)
0.13
> 10
41 (46.6)
25 (28.4)
22 (25.0)
Teaching rotations per year
1-6
49 (44.1)
38 (34.2)
24 (21.6)
0.07
7-12
16 (30.2)
17 (32.1)
20 (37.7)
ACGME = Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education.
 71
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-067
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education Core Competencies at a Community Teaching Hospital: Is There a Gap in Awareness?  
(p > 0.05). Regardless of the faculty characteristics, the percentage 
of faculty who were “unsure” of their knowledge of the competen-
cies was high (n = 65, 39.6%; Table 2). 
Junior (< 10 years in practice) and full-time (teaching 10-12 
rotations per year) faculty were more likely than senior faculty 
and faculty who teach less than 10 rotations per year to endorse 
competency-based education. These findings were particularly 
demonstrated for junior faculty who emphasized medical knowl-
edge in residents’ education (100% vs 93.2% for senior faculty, 
p = 0.021), and for full-time faculty endorsement of professional-
ism (p = 0.003) and ICS (p = 0.006; Table 3).
Faculty perception of residents’ performance in relation to the 6 
core competencies is demonstrated in Table 4. Most of the faculty 
thought that residents’ performance in relation to the 6 core com-
petencies was not a weakness of the program. When considering 
residents’ performance, 11.6% of faculty thought that medical 
knowledge was a program weakness. Such weakness was less com-
monly perceived for system-based practice (6.7%), PBLI (6.1%), 
patient care (2.4%), ICS (2.4%), and professionalism (2.4%). 
DISCUSSION
Competency-Based Teaching
Our study shows that at the time of starting new residency 
programs (in general surgery, psychiatry, and internal medicine) 
at a community teaching hospital, only 60% of faculty physi-
cians had some knowledge (well versed or knew the names) of 
the ACGME core competencies. However, most (80%-96%) of 
those faculty indicated their dedication and active participation 
in teaching the principles and goals outlined in the competencies. 
In addition, the competencies were not equally ingrained in the 
Table 3. Factors associated with competency-based teaching regarding each of the six core competenciesa
 
 
Factor
 
 
Nb
Medical 
knowledge,  
n (%)
 
Patient care, 
n (%)
 
Professionalism, 
n (%)
Interpersonal and 
communication 
skills, n (%)
Practice-based 
learning and 
improvement, n (%)
System-based 
practice,  
n (%)
Specialty
Surgical
31
30 (96.8)
31 (100.0)
28 (90.3)
28 (90.3)
27 (87.1)
23 (74.2)
Medical
132c
127 (96.2)
125 (94.7)
118 (90.8)
111 (85.4)
113 (85.6)
106 (80.9)
p value
0.88
0.42
0.93
0.47
0.88
0.53
Years in practice
1-10
75c
75 (100.0)
74 (98.7)
70 (93.3)
64 (87.7)
67 (89.3)
63 (84.0)
> 10
88
82 (93.2)
82 (93.2)
76 (88.4)
75 (85.2)
73 (82.9)
66 (75.9)
p valued
0.02
0.22
0.28
0.65
0.21
0.41
Teaching rotations per year
1-3
80c
76 (95.0)
76 (95.0)
72 (92.3)
69 (88.5)
68 (85.0)
64 (80.0)
4-6
30
28 (93.3)
29 (96.7)
27 (90.0)
23 (76.7)
25 (83.3)
22 (73.3)
7-9
20
20 (100.0)
18 (90.0)
14 (70.0)
14 (70.0)
17 (85.0)
15 (75.0)
10-12
33
33 (100.0)
33 (100.0)
33 (100.0)
33 (100.0)
30 (90.9)
28 (87.5)
p valued
0.37
0.15
0.003
0.006
0.45
0.18
a Percentage is the percentage of the row total; for example, 30/31 = 96.8% of surgical specialists emphasized medical knowledge in their teaching of residents.
b Total number of faculty in the cohort.
c There was one faculty member who did not answer the questions pertaining to this Table.
d Boldface p values indicate statistical significance.
Figure 1. Knowledge of ACGME core competencies by physician’s teaching status.
Know names = know names of the ACGME core competencies, well versed = have worked 
with the ACGME milestones or developed objectives or curricula based on the competencies. 
ACGME = Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education. 
Figure 2. Faculty perception of incorporating ACGME core competencies in 
resident education enough to achieve mastery of the competency.
ACGME = Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education. 
 72
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-067
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education Core Competencies at a Community Teaching Hospital: Is There a Gap in Awareness? 
faculty members’ teaching methods, with PBLI and system-based 
practice being the least commonly emphasized. The lack of aware-
ness of the core competencies came in contrast to the acclaimed 
implementation of competency-based teaching and led our pro-
gram to establish faculty development educational seminars to 
improve faculty awareness of the standards of medical education. 
If the numbers from our study were generalizable to community 
hospitals without established residency programs, they should 
alert residency program directors to the importance of conduct-
ing needs assessment before starting a residency program. Such 
assessment should objectively clarify faculty knowledge of the 6 
core competencies and competency-based teaching. Such assess-
ment would also be useful for the ACGME in assessing whether 
the faculty members of a newly proposed residency program 
have the necessary information regarding educational goals that 
are set by the ACGME.
Our findings that some physicians from community hospitals 
without dedicated teaching programs have had gaps in knowledge 
of the standards of medical education (as set by the ACGME) are 
important for hospitals that plan to start a new residency program. 
Faculty members are expected to be well versed in the six core 
competencies to be able to deliver competency-based education 
to residents as required by ACGME. A needs assessment survey 
is potentially an easy and efficient tool to identify such gaps be-
fore the start of a residency program. One approach to improve 
faculty knowledge of the ACGME standards of education is us-
ing faculty development seminars to improve competency-based 
teaching knowledge and skills.9,10 Our program adopted this 
strategy to address the gap in knowledge of the six core compe-
tencies. Gaps in physicians’ knowledge of the educational goals 
can be far more than expected, and we hypothesize that using 
educational seminars might become an effective tool to address 
such deficiency in knowledge.
Our study also shows that individual components of the 
ACGME core competencies were variably emphasized during 
residents’ education, suggesting the need for systematic and 
standardized teaching methods to emphasize all six competen-
cies with equal importance. Our data show that among the six 
competencies, PBLI and system-based practice were the least 
likely to be emphasized competencies in residents’ education. It is 
not clear whether these findings are related to lack of conceptual 
understanding of those competencies or to inadequate practical 
opportunities to apply them. In fact, these competencies were 
shown to be conceptually difficult for residents and faculty.11 
Therefore, residency programs that instituted resident and fac-
ulty teaching that specifically target those competencies seem to 
have success in improving PBLI and system-based practice for 
residents and faculty.11,12
Certain faculty characteristics seemed to affect their implemen-
tation of specific competency-based teaching. Full-time faculty 
members were more likely to emphasize each of the individual 
competencies compared with faculty who taught fewer than 6 
rotations per year. This was particularly true for teaching profes-
sionalism and ICS. Because the understanding and teaching of 
professionalism and ICS can be challenging,13 their emphasis 
by full-time faculty (compared with part-time faculty) might be 
coming from their more extensive interaction with residents and 
appreciation of the importance of those competencies. Full-time 
status might also reflect the faculty interest in resident education 
with subsequent self-commitment to understanding the educa-
tional requirements for residents’ education.
Junior faculty members (< 10 years since graduation) were 
also more likely to emphasize the core competencies. This 
finding might be explained by ACGME’s enforcement of 
competency-based education, resulting in early and extensive 
exposure of junior faculty to the values of those competencies 
during their training. These findings will help identify faculty 
characteristics that are important for new community-hospital 
residency programs in meeting the ACGME requirements for 
residents’ education. 
Study Limitations
Our study has many limitations. First, the results of this study 
may not be generalizable because of the limited subject popula-
tion from a single community hospital. Furthermore, our pool of 
physicians may not simulate a true faculty distribution at a com-
munity teaching hospital, given that only 20% of the surveyed 
physicians were full-time faculty. Second, we did not objectively 
assess the effect of the educational seminars on the faculty teach-
ing behaviors and knowledge. Third, the study evaluated faculty 
perception of implementing competency-based education to 
achieve residents’ mastery of the competencies; however, those 
answers are subjective and may be biased. Unfortunately, objec-
tive assessment of faculty teaching methods can be challenging 
and difficult to measure.14 Fourth, the response rate to our survey 
was 50%, which can affect the validity of our results; however, the 
response rate in our study is comparable to that of other studies 
in the literature.15 One potential explanation of this response rate 
is the high number of nonteaching physicians in our hospital. 
Table 4. Faculty perception of residents’ performance across 
six core competencies
 
 
Core competency
 
Strength, 
n (%)
Neither strength 
nor weakness, 
n (%)
 
Weakness, 
n (%)
Medical knowledge
66 (40.2)
79 (48.2)
19 (11.6)
Patient care
93 (56.7)
67 (40.9)
4 (2.4)
Professionalism
90 (54.9)
70 (42.7)
4 (2.4)
Interpersonal and 
communication skills
82 (50)
78 (47.6)
4 (2.4)
Practice-based learning 
and improvement
58 (35.4)
94 (57.3)
10 (6.1)
System-based 
practice
68 (41.5)
85 (51.8)
11 (6.7)
… among the six competencies, practice-based 
learning and improvement and system-based 
practice were the least likely to be emphasized 
competencies in residents’ education.
 73
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-067
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education Core Competencies at a Community Teaching Hospital: Is There a Gap in Awareness?  
Even in our survey responses, nonteaching physicians formed 
28% (n = 70) of the responding physicians. 
Fifth, we do not have information about the characteristics 
of those who did not respond to the survey, which could have 
biased our results. Sixth, our survey spanned multiple specialties, 
whereas our intended new residency programs were limited to a 
few of them. This might limit generalizing the final findings to the 
faculty from specialties with the newly proposed residency pro-
grams. However, our findings were not different between medical 
and surgical specialties overall. In addition, faculty knowledge 
of the competencies is not expected to be different by specialty. 
Seventh, although associations between faculty characteristics and 
knowledge of the competencies were noticed, these associations 
do not necessarily imply causality. 
Despite these limitations, we presented our experience of 
conducting a needs assessment before starting new residency 
programs, which might be helpful for community hospitals 
planning to begin a new residency program. We highlighted the 
important findings, lessons learned, and the methods used to 
address these findings.
CONCLUSION
Awareness of the ACGME core competencies among faculty of 
new residency programs in community teaching hospitals cannot 
be assumed without objective assessment; therefore, needs assess-
ment is essential to identify deficits in requirements for starting 
a new residency program. Although most teaching physicians 
actively enforce teaching the knowledge surrounding the core 
competencies, their knowledge of those competencies could be 
improved. The use of explicit directions during workshops is one 
of the approaches that has a tangible effect on instilling the virtues 
of the core competencies. The lack of faculty orientation to the 
core competencies could be further investigated to include their 
source of current medical educational guidelines as well as their 
graduating institutions’ degree of raising awareness of the com-
petencies. Further research also is needed to objectively evaluate 
physicians’ teaching methods as they relate to the goals stated for 
each competency. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to disclose. 
Acknowledgment
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health Communications provided editorial 
assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Al-Temimi M, Kidon M, Johna S. Accreditation council for graduate medical 
education core competencies at a community teaching hospital: Is there a gap 
in awareness? Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-067. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/16-067.
References
 1. Salsberg E. The 2014 GME residency match results: is there really a “GME 
squeeze”? Health Aff Blog [Internet] 2014 Apr 24 [cited 2016 Apr 7]:[about 3 p]. 
Available from: http://healthaffairs.org/blog/2014/04/24/the-2014-gme-residency-
match-results-is-there-really-a-gme-squeeze/.
 2. Dall T, West T, Chakrabarti R, Iacobucci W; IHS Inc. The complexities of 
physician supply and demand: projections from 2013 to 2025 [Internet]. 
Washington, DC: Association of American Medical Colleges; 2015 Mar 
[cited 2016 Apr 7]. Available from: www.aamc.org/download/426248/data/
thecomplexitiesofphysiciansupplyanddemandprojectionsfrom2013to2.
 3. Meagher AD, Beadles CA, Sheldon GF, Charles AG. Opportunities to create 
new general surgery residency programs to alleviate the shortage of general 
surgeons. Acad Med 2016 Jun;91(6):833-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
ACM.0000000000001005.
 4. ACGME common program requirements [Internet]. Chicago, IL: Accreditation 
Council for Graduate Medical Education; 2007 Feb 11 [revised 2016 Jul 1; cited 
2016 Feb 7]. Available from: www.acgme.org/acgmeweb/Portals/0/PFAssets/
ProgramRequirements/CPRs_07012016.pdf.
 5. Derstine P. Improvement through the application of the competencies. Guest editor’s 
introduction: turning the challenge into opportunities. ACGME Bulletin [Internet] 2006 
Apr [cited 2016 May 28]:[p 1, 3]. Available from: www.acgme.org/Portals/0/PFAssets/
bulletin/bulletin04_06.pdf.
 6. Nasca TJ, Philibert I, Brigham T, Flynn TC. The next GME accreditation system—
rationale and benefits. N Engl J Med 2012 Mar 15;366(11):1501-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMsr1200117.
 7. Kavic MS. Competency and the six core competencies. JSLS 2002 Apr-Jun;6(2):95-7.
 8. Welcome to the Kaiser Permanente family medicine training program at Fontana 
Medical Center [Internet]. Fontana, CA: Kaiser Permanente Southern California; 2016 
[cited 2016 May 29]. Available from: https://residency-scal-kaiserpermanente.org/
residency/familymedicine-fontana/.
 9. Lee SM, Lee MC, Reed DA, et al. Success of a faculty development program for 
teachers at the Mayo Clinic. J Grad Med Educ 2014 Dec;6(4):704-8. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.4300/JGME-D-14-00139.1.
 10. Conforti LN, Ross KM, Holmboe ES, Kogan JR. Do faculty benefit from 
participating in a standardized patient assessment as part of rater training? A 
qualitative study. Acad Med 2016 Feb;91(2):262-71. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
ACM.0000000000000838.
 11. Ziegelstein RC, Fiebach NH. “The mirror” and “the village”: a new method for 
teaching practice-based learning and improvement and systems-based practice. 
Acad Med 2004 Jan;79(1):83-8.
 12. Wilper AP, Smith CS, Weppner W. Instituting systems-based practice and practice-
based learning and improvement: a curriculum of inquiry. Med Educ Online 2013 Sep 
16;18:21612. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/meo.v18i0.21612.
 13. Gaiser RR. The teaching of professionalism during residency: why it is failing and a 
suggestion to improve its success. Anesth Analg 2009 Mar;108(3):948-54. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1213/ane.0b013e3181935ac1.
 14. Shah D, Goettler CE, Torrent DJ, et al. Milestones: the road to faculty development. 
J Surg Educ 2015 Nov-Dec;72(6):e226-35. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jsurg.2015.06.017.
 15. Pololi LH, Evans AT, Civian JT, et al. Faculty vitality—surviving the challenges facing 
academic health centers: a national survey of medical faculty. Acad Med 2015 
Jul;90(7):930-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/ACM.0000000000000674.
In the Same Class
When a simple, earnest spirit animates a college, there is no appreciable 
interval between the teacher and the taught—both are in the same class,  
the one a little more advanced than the other.
— William Osler, MD, 1849-1919, physician, pathologist, teacher, diagnostician, bibliophile, 
historian, classicist, essayist, conservationalist, organizer, manager, and author
 74
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-222
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Special Report
Anal Health Care Basics
Jason Chang, MD; Elisabeth McLemore, MD, FACS, FASCRS; Talar Tejirian, MD, FACS 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-222
E-pub: 10/10/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-222
ABSTRACT
Despite the fact that countless patients suffer from anal problems, there tends to 
be a lack of understanding of anal health care. Unfortunately, this leads to incorrect 
diagnoses and treatments. When treating a patient with an anal complaint, the primary 
goals are to first diagnose the etiology of the symptoms correctly, then to provide an 
effective and appropriate treatment strategy.
The first step in this process is to take an accurate history and physical examination. 
Specific questions include details about bowel habits, anal hygiene, and fiber supple-
mentation. Specific components of the physical examination include an external anal 
examination, a digital rectal examination, and anoscopy if appropriate.
Common diagnoses include pruritus ani, anal fissures, hemorrhoids, anal abscess 
or fistula, fecal incontinence, and anal skin tags. However, each problem presents 
differently and requires a different approach for management. It is of paramount im-
portance that the correct diagnosis is reached. Common errors include an inaccurate 
diagnosis of hemorrhoids when other pathology is present and subsequent treatment 
with a steroid product, which is harmful to the anal area. 
Most of these problems can be avoided by improving bowel habits. Adequate fiber 
intake with 30 g to 40 g daily is important for many reasons, including improving the 
quality of stool and preventing colorectal and anal diseases. 
In this Special Report, we provide an overview of commonly encountered anal 
problems, their presentation, initial treatment options, and recommendations for 
referral to specialists. 
INTRODUCTION
Despite the fact that countless patients 
suffer from anal problems, there tends to 
be a lack of understanding of anal health 
care. Unfortunately, this leads to incorrect 
diagnoses and treatments. This problem 
is compounded by the stigma associated 
with suffering from anal problems, which 
discourages patients from seeking help 
and getting the appropriate care.
The Basics 
When treating a patient with an anal 
complaint, the primary goals are to
1. diagnose the etiology of the symptoms 
correctly
2. provide an effective and appropriate 
treatment strategy
3. confirm with a follow-up appointment 
that the problem has resolved or is 
under control. If symptoms have not 
improved, additional evaluation may 
be needed.
The chief complaint and history of the 
present illness are the first pieces of the 
puzzle to put together to reach the correct 
diagnosis. Obtaining specific informa-
tion from the patient is imperative. For 
example, a chief complaint and history 
of present illness of “hemorrhoids” is 
not sufficient and frequently is counter-
productive. 
History
Discovering the patient’s main 
symptom(s) is key: pain, bleeding, itch-
ing, tissue prolapse, excessive tissue, and 
drainage are some of the most common 
symptoms of underlying anal disease. 
Investigating the details of the patient’s 
symptoms is important because “hem-
orrhoids” comprise less than half of the 
diseases causing these anal symptoms. For 
example, although there are many prob-
lems that can lead to anal pain, one of the 
most common is an anal fissure, which is 
frequently misdiagnosed as hemorrhoidal 
disease.1
Important history questions:
• How often do you have a bowel move-
ment?
• What is the quality and consistency 
of the bowel movement (ie, hard, soft, 
watery)?
• How long do you sit on the toilet?
• Do you read or play games on your 
phone while having a bowel movement?
• Do you have anal pain/bleeding/incon-
tinence to stool or gas?
• How do you clean the area? Do you use 
any wipes or ointments?
• Do you currently take a fiber supple-
ment? If yes, which type and how much?
ANAL HEALTH PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
The physical examination comprises 
three components:
1. External Visual Examination
• Thorough visual inspection is impor-
tant. This requires manual retraction of 
the surrounding buttocks with both of 
your gloved hands to expose the peri-
anal skin.
• Look for signs of acute or chronic skin 
irritation, contact dermatitis, a punc-
tate external fistula opening, erythema 
and painful raised area (abscess), or 
thrombosed external hemorrhoid with 
or without overlying skin ulceration. 
• Be knowledgeable about the difference 
between an anal skin tag, an external 
hemorrhoid, and a sentinel skin tag 
adjacent to a fissure that might not be 
evident. 
• Evaluation for anal fissure can be dif-
ficult as the patient typically has anal 
Jason Chang, MD, is a General Surgery Resident completing his training at the Los Angeles Medical Center. E-mail: 
jason.s.chang@kp.org. Elisabeth McLemore, MD, FACS, FASCRS, is a Board-Certified Colorectal Surgeon, Chief of 
Colorectal Surgery, and Director of Minimally Invasive Surgery at the Los Angeles Medical Center in CA. E-mail: 
elisabeth.c.mclemore@kp.org. Talar Tejirian, MD, FACS, is a Board-Certified General Surgeon with a special interest 
in anal health care at the Los Angeles Medical Center in CA. E-mail: talar.x.tejirian@kp.org.
credits available for this article — see page 128.
 75
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-222
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Anal Health Care Basics
Table 1. Anal itching (pruritus ani)
What is it?
Itching around the anal area, often 
iatrogenic or because of excessive 
moisture, cleaning, or harsh 
chemicals in wipes or ointments. 
This problem is unrelated to 
hemorrhoids.
Symptoms
Itching, discomfort, irritation, 
burning sensation in the perianal 
area. The itching sensation can be 
so severe that patients scratch in 
the middle of the night.
Treatment
1. Properly bulk the stool with 
adequate fiber to bind any 
bile irritants or other food or 
digestive-related irritants to the 
anal area (Table 8).
2. Clean with water only; excessive 
cleaning is discouraged.
3. Anal or intimate wipes will 
induce or exacerbate anal 
itching. The chemicals found in 
these products are irritants to 
the sensitive perianal skin.2-5
4. Dry the area without wiping or 
rubbing. Pat dry, air dry, or use 
a blow-dryer on low/medium 
heat if needed.
5. Apply skin-protecting barrier 
ointments to dry and clean 
perianal skin (zinc oxide 40%). 
6. Avoid petroleum-based topical 
ointments because patients can 
develop contact dermatitis with 
daily use.6
7. Anesthetic ointment with 
dibucaine can decrease the 
urge to scratch the skin.
8. Stop any scratching.
9. Avoid irritating clothing (avoid 
G-strings and panty liners; wear 
underwear made of undyed 
cotton).
10. Do NOT prescribe 
steroid-based hemorrhoid 
treatments. They can harm 
the patients, especially with 
extended use.7
11. There can be visible skin 
changes, but if those are not 
resolving over time, the patient 
may need a biopsy to rule out 
another pathology (ie, Paget 
disease).
Key point: Anal itching is most often a 
dermatologic problem unrelated to hemorrhoids 
or other anal diseases. Anal itching is typically 
a secondary symptom of topical remedies for 
“hemorrhoids” and/or of excessive anal hygiene 
behaviors.
Figure 1. Repeated tearing and healing of an anal fissure can lead to a sentinel tag (1a, left). An anal fissure (1b, right) 
can be seen in the posterior midline with upward retraction. Photos courtesy of Daniel Popowich, MD, FACS, FASCRS.
Table 2. Anal fissure
What is it?
A cut or tear in the anal canal typically caused by passing a hard stool. Patients often 
complain of severe anal pain and bleeding with bowel movements. On physical examination, 
you may see the fissure or just the sentinel tag. If the examination appears normal, you can 
elicit point tenderness. We recommend against continuing the digital rectal examination 
or anoscopy if the patient is having pain during the examination. You will need to use both 
gloved hands or have an assistant help to retract the buttocks and perianal skin to examine 
the anal canal. Patients frequently have anal hypertonia (spasm) as well, further making the 
anal canal more difficult to visualize.
Symptoms
Pain and bleeding, often after a hard stool or trauma. Pain can persist for days to years and 
radiate down to the legs, even when bleeding is no longer present. The patient may also 
have a burning or tearing sensation.
Treatment
The primary goals are to properly bulk the stool with adequate fiber and relax the anal muscle. 
Specific steps include the following:
1. Properly bulk the stool with adequate fiber to minimize constipation and diarrhea (Table 8); both 
frequent bowel movements and hard bowel movements can lead to an anal fissure.8
2. Temporary use of laxatives such as daily Miralax or senna. The dose of Miralax can be 
titrated up or down to achieve desired results. As the patient’s fiber supplementation 
increases, the need for Miralax will diminish. Note: AVOID docusate (Colace) and other stool 
softeners because these agents are typically ineffective.
3. Chronic use of laxatives should be avoided because it can lead to worsening colonic function 
and constipation.
4. Diltiazem 2% ointment is to be placed on the anal muscle 3 times daily—continue for a 
minimum of 8 weeks, even if symptoms improve earlier.9
5. If a patient cannot tolerate diltiazem, or is breastfeeding or pregnant, 0.2% nitroglycerin-
compounded ointment can be prescribed. However, the proper dose of nitroglycerin is 
important as too high of a dose can cause severe headaches.10
6. Do NOT prescribe hemorrhoid ointments or suppositories, especially steroid-based ones. Steroid 
ointments do not help. They do cause perianal skin thinning and dermatitis. At best, they act as 
a placebo, but they often are used chronically and cause unpleasant perianal skin changes.11
7. Use mental anal muscle relaxation: Actively thinking about relaxing sphincter tone.
8. Consider sitz baths: Soaking the anal area in warm water induces relaxation. Warmer water 
induces more relaxation. No additives are needed.12
9. Surgical intervention (such as Botox injections or sphincterotomy) is considered for patients 
whose symptoms do not improve with the above management strategies. It is imperative 
that the patient increases fiber and water intake so bowel movements are very soft before 
surgical intervention to maximize chances of postoperative healing.13
Tip: Dibucaine 1% ointment can be added for local pain control. This is for local anesthesia and skin 
protection and is not a replacement for diltiazem. 
Tip: Avoid prescribing narcotics because this will make the patient more constipated and prevent the fissure 
from healing.
Key point: When a chief complaint is anal pain and bleeding, anal fissure should be high on the differential 
even if the actual fissure is not clearly seen on an examination that is limited because of anal pain.
 76
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-222
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Anal Health Care Basics
hypertonia (anal spasm) as well. You 
may need an assistant to help you fully 
retract the peri-anal skin and efface 
the anal canal for a complete visual 
examination. If you find an anal fissure, 
do NOT proceed with digital rectal 
examination or anoscopy at this time; 
digital examination and anoscopy are 
extremely painful examinations for the 
patient with an anal fissure. You should 
perform a digital examination and 
anoscopy after the patient’s symptoms 
resolve (typically six to eight weeks later 
with appropriate treatment).
2. Digital Anal Canal and Lower  
Rectal Examination 
• Although it is uncomfortable, most pa-
tients without an active fissure, abscess, 
or thrombosed external hemorrhoid are 
able to tolerate this examination.
• If a patient reports too much pain to 
attempt or tolerate the examination 
and external pathology is not seen 
(except skin tags), then reexamine the 
external area and gently press with 
your finger or a cotton swab to place 
pressure on all soft tissue circumfer-
entially around the anal area to check 
for an area of maximum tenderness. 
If such an area is found, occasionally 
the more thorough external examina-
tion alone reveals the source, such as 
a fissure or deeper abscess.
3. Anoscopy
Do NOT perform anoscopy if any of 
the following are present:
• The patient has a midline (anterior or 
posterior) anal fissure.
• The patient is having anal pain during 
digital examination or cannot tolerate 
a digital examination.
• A tender purple marble-like “ball” that 
is firm is present—it is likely a throm-
bosed external hemorrhoid.
• A red, fluctuant, tender area is pres-
ent—it is likely an abscess.
Key point: If a mass is seen on external 
examination or anoscopy and there is any 
question of pathology such as malignancy, 
the area should be evaluated by a physi-
cian familiar with diseases of the anus and 
rectum to further determine whether biopsy 
is indicated.
COMMON ANAL PROBLEMS
Benign Anal Disease 
Many problems may be categorized 
as hemorrhoids by the general public. 
However, the etiologies and management 
can vary, so it is important to differenti-
ate between entities such as anal itching 
(Table 1), anal fissure (Figure 1, Table 2), 
hemorrhoids (Table 3), and anal abscess/
fistula (Figure 2, Table 4). Another benign 
anal problem that patients may attribute 
to hemorrhoids is anal incontinence 
(Table 5).2-26
Table 3. Hemorrhoids
What is it?
Hemorrhoidal venous cushions are normal structures of the anorectum. The term 
“hemorrhoids” is commonly used to describe the pathologic state when these blood 
vessels become engorged, become thrombosed, or protrude.
Internal hemorrhoids
What is it?
Hemorrhoids above the dentate line. These can prolapse below the dentate line and 
appear as protruding from the anal area. Internal hemorrhoids often bleed, especially 
during a bowel movement. They typically do not cause severe anal pain. However, 
internal hemorrhoid prolapse can be associated with discomfort or pressure.
Symptoms
Typically patients will complain of painless bleeding with a bowel movement either in the 
toilet, on cleaning, or both. Hemorrhoidal tissue may protrude when straining or when 
having a bowel movement. The tissue may self-reduce or need manual reduction with 
firm pressure.
External hemorrhoids
What is it?
Hemorrhoids below the dentate line. These can become thrombosed when blood clots 
form because of straining or excessive time on the toilet. External hemorrhoids are 
painful only when thrombosed. This problem tends to be self-limited in duration, with 
pain decreasing daily after the first 2 or 3 days and the thrombosis resolving over days 
to weeks.
Symptoms
Anal pain with a firm marble-like area around the anus, typically purplish in color. 
Bleeding occasionally occurs when there is pressure necrosis and the clot erodes 
through the overlying ulcerated skin. Pain is usually the worst in the first 48 hours.
Treatment for internal and external hemorrhoids
1. Properly bulk the stool with adequate fiber and water to minimize constipation and diarrhea (Table 8); 
both frequent bowel movements and hard bowel movements can lead to hemorrhoidal problems.14,15
2. Temporary use of laxatives such as daily Miralax or senna.16 The dose of Miralax can be titrated up or 
down to achieve desired results. As the patient’s fiber supplementation increases, the need for Miralax 
will diminish. Note: AVOID docusate (Colace) and other stool softeners or laxatives because these 
agents are typically ineffective. Chronic use can lead to worsening colonic function and constipation.
3. Consider prescribing dibucaine 1% ointment to act as a lubricant helpful for reduction of prolapse or for 
pain control in the case of thrombosis.
4. Restrict sitting on the toilet to no longer than 1 to 2 minutes.17
5. When on the toilet, place a stool under the feet to mimic squatting position.18-21
6. Do not recommend donut-shaped pillows, which can worsen the problem because this places more 
stretch and tension on the anal skin.
7. Do NOT prescribe hemorrhoid ointments or suppositories, especially steroid-based ones. Steroid 
ointments do not help treat hemorrhoidal problems and do not induce shrinking of hemorrhoidal tissue. 
They do cause perianal skin thinning and dermatitis. At best, they act as a placebo, but they often are 
used chronically and cause unpleasant perianal skin changes. 
Tip: Thrombosed external hemorrhoids are typically self-limited. Surgical treatment with elliptical excision 
of the clot and overlying skin has the best results when performed within the first 48 hours of 
symptom onset or if there is skin ulceration or necrosis. Clot evacuation only relieves symptoms 
but can eventually result in a skin tag disliked by some patients. Surgical excision of the clot and 
overlying skin performed after 48 hours of symptoms typically results in worsening pain and bleeding 
compared with the pain level associated with spontaneous clot absorption.8,22
Key point: Hemorrhoidal disease is a result of inadequate fiber intake that leads to constipation, diarrhea, 
straining, and spending excess time (more than 2 minutes) on the toilet. A change in lifestyle and 
bathroom habits is key for relief of symptoms and to prevent recurrence. Even in cases where surgical 
intervention is needed, implementing these changes first results in better short- and long-term results 
after surgery.23-25
 77
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-222
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Anal Health Care Basics
Common Anal Masses
Similarly, not all masses near the anus 
represent hemorrhoids, though the differ-
ence can be subtle. Anal skin tags (Figure 3, 
Table 6) are usually the result of excess 
skin after repeated scarring (such as heal-
ing from an anal fissure), and anal warts 
 
(Figure 4, Table 7) are commonly out-
growths of tissue caused by viral infection. 
DIETARY AND LIFESTYLE CHANGES
Fiber 
The Industrial Revolution has resulted 
in a diet lacking in sufficient fiber. People 
tend to lack knowledge about how much 
fiber they are consuming, or how much 
they should consume.27 In addition, fi-
ber is typically marketed as a “laxative,” 
and patients with diarrhea or loose stool 
are frequently nervous about taking a 
product that is for “constipation.” Fiber 
works by absorbing and retaining fluid, 
Table 4. Anal abscess/fistula 
(cryptoglandular disease)
What is it?
Infection of the anal gland. 
The anal abscess is the acute 
phase, and the fistula is the 
chronic phase. A fistula occurs 
when an anal abscess develops 
a connection to the perianal 
skin. This occurs approximately 
50% of the time.
Anal abcess
Symptoms
Acute pain and redness 
around the anal area. They 
spontaneously drain or need 
incision and drainage. Some 
forms, such as intersphincteric 
abscesses, can present with a 
normal external examination but 
with tenderness and fullness on 
digital rectal examination.
Treatment
Typically immediate incision 
and drainage is best; 
often antibiotics alone are 
inadequate. Outpatient surgical 
referral can lead to a delay in 
treatment.
Key point: Severe new-onset 
perianal pain without a visible 
finding could indicate a higher 
abscess that is not yet visible 
at the skin. Early surgical 
evaluation is indicated.
Anal fistula
Symptoms
Chronic drainage from the anal 
area where usually a small 
opening near the anus with 
surrounding granulation tissue 
can be seen. The drainage can 
include stool, pus, or blood.
Treatment
Referral to surgery department 
is appropriate.
Figure 2. Thrombosed external hemorrhoid.1
1. Gebbensleben O, Hilgery Y, Rohde H. Aetiology of 
thrombosed external haemorrhoids: a questionnaire 
study. BMC Res Notes 2009 Oct 23;2:216. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1756-0500-2-216. Copyright 
policy—open access: https://openi.nlm.nih.gov/faq.
php#copyright; License: http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/2.0.
Table 5. Anal incontinence  
(accidental bowel leakage)
What is it?
Inability to control stool  
and/or gas.
Symptoms
Inability to hold in stool and/or 
gas whenever desired. 
Treatment
Primarily consists of increasing 
fiber intake to bulk stools 
(Table 8). Kegel exercises and 
physical therapy referral can 
be useful.26 In patients who 
are taking metformin or other 
medications that are associated 
with diarrhea and fecal urgency, 
alternative medical treatment 
strategies and therapies 
can significantly improve the 
patient’s baseline continence 
level. If the patient has not had 
a colonoscopy, endoscopic 
evaluation may be helpful to 
diagnose inflammation of the 
colon and rectum that can 
lead to increased urgency and 
accidental bowel leakage. For 
refractory cases in otherwise 
healthy patients, surgical 
referral is an option.8 However, 
adequate fiber intake and 
bulking of stool is a necessary 
prerequisite to all surgical 
interventions. Therefore, 
ensure that you have 
provided this education and 
management strategy before 
surgical referral.
Table 6. Anal skin tag
What is it?
A piece of excess skin located 
around the anal area that often 
results from healed thrombosed 
external hemorrhoid or anal 
fissure and is exacerbated by 
excess cleaning or rubbing. 
There should be no pain or 
bleeding, but patients can be 
bothered because excess skin 
is present. 
Symptoms
Piece of extra tissue near or 
in the anal area. It typically 
starts small but with repeated 
trauma of excessive cleaning 
or recurrent thrombosed 
hemorrhoids or anal fissures, it 
slowly increases in size.
Treatment
1. Treat the underlying cause, 
such as recurrent external 
thrombosed hemorrhoids.
2. Excision can be performed if 
the patient desires, but it is 
important for the underlying 
problem to be addressed first. 
For example, if the patient 
gets recurrent anal fissures  
or thrombosed hemorrhoids, 
s/he must implement bowel 
and bathroom habits so these 
problems do not reoccur after 
skin tag excision.
Figure 3b. Anal skin tag. 
Photo courtesy of Talar Tejirian, MD, FACS.
Figure 3a. Anal skin tags.
 78
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-222
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Anal Health Care Basics
thereby softening hard stool and thicken-
ing loose stool. Adequately fiber-bulked 
stool results in more complete evacuation 
with bowel movements, less sputtering 
of bowel movements, less straining with 
bowel movements, and more regularity 
with bowel movements.
The US Department of Agriculture and 
US Department of Health and Human 
Services recommend that you eat 25 g 
to 40 g of fiber daily,28 but most people 
get less than half this recommendation. 
Table 7. Anal warts  
(condyloma acuminata)
What is it?
Growths of tissue in the area 
around and inside the anus 
that are caused by human 
papillomavirus. They may first 
appear as tiny spots or growths 
but can grow quite large and 
cover the anal area.
Symptoms
Usually, they do not cause pain 
or discomfort. Some patients 
may experience itching, 
bleeding, mucus discharge, or 
a feeling of a lump or mass in 
the area.
Treatment
If warts are small and located 
only on the skin around the 
anus, they may be treated with 
a topical medication such as 
podophyllin, trichloroacetic acid, 
and bichloroacetic acid. Topical 
agents that can be applied at 
home include imiquimod or 
5-fluorouracil. They can also 
be treated in the office with 
cryotherapy (freezing with liquid 
nitrogen). For larger lesions, 
patients can be referred to a 
surgeon for fulguration and/or 
excision.
Table 8. Fiber supplementation instructions
My daily fiber intake goal
25-40 g daily
The US Department of 
Agriculture and US Department 
of Health and Human Services 
recommend that I eat 25 g to  
40 g of fiber DAILY
1. Adequate fiber will regulate my bowel movements by 
a. softening hard stool and reducing the frequency of constipation 
b. adding bulk to loose stool and reducing the frequency of 
diarrhea.
2. Adequate fiber will improve my anal problems and bleeding by 
a. softening hard stool and making bowel movements less 
traumatic 
b. thickening loose stool and making bowel movements less 
traumatic.
3. Adequate fiber will reduce my risk of developing 
a. colon and rectal cancer 
b. diverticulosis 
c. complications of diverticulitis: Perforation, infection, emergency 
surgery.
4. Adequate fiber will reduce my cholesterol
How much fiber is in the food 
I eat?
1. The fiber content in foods that you eat can be found on the 
“Nutrition Facts” label for processed foods.
2. For fresh foods, fruits, and vegetables, there are a variety of 
Web sites that can give you the amount of fiber per serving. For 
example: www.NationalFiberCouncil.org; search for “fiber counter.”
Go slow and keep it up
Gradually work your way up to taking 20 g of fiber daily in the form 
of a fiber supplement AND increase fiber in your diet so that you are 
eating at least 10 g to 20 g of dietary fiber daily.
Fiber supplementa: 20 g daily 
Dietary fiber: + 10-20 g daily 
Total fiber intake: 25-40 g daily
Slow and steady fiber 
supplement ramp-up plan
Week 1:
1. Start counting the amount of fiber you consume in your diet on a 
daily basis.
2. Purchase a fiber product that you will be able to take every day 
for the rest of your life. Read the label to check the fiber content. 
Many fiber products, especially fiber pills, have very small amounts 
of fiber. Choose a fiber product with 5 g or more of fiber per 
serving.
3. Start drinking 8 to 10 glasses of water daily.
Week 2:
1. Supplement your diet with 5 g of additional fiber daily.
2. Drink 8 to 10 eight-oz. glasses of water daily.
Week 3:
1. Supplement your diet with 10 g of additional fiber daily.
2. Drink 8 to 10 glasses of water daily.
Week 4 and beyond:
Continue to increase the amount of additional fiber daily by 5 g per 
week until you reach your goal of 25 g to 40 g of fiber daily for life.
TIP: If you feel bloated or develop excessive gas, you are increasing 
your daily fiber too quickly. You may need to increase your daily fiber 
over a longer period of time.
a Common fiber supplements: Metamucil, Konsyl, Citrucel, Fiber One. Choose the fiber supplement that works best for 
you. Be sure to calculate the fiber amount per serving size. Choose a fiber supplement that you would be willing to 
take every day as a 20-g dose (goal at the end of the ramp-up period). If you experience diarrhea with a natural fiber 
supplement or fiber supplement that claims “easy to take/dissolves in water,” consider changing to one of the above 
brand names because some natural fiber supplements contain natural laxatives as well.
Warning: If you take Coumadin (warfarin), please be sure to speak with your primary care physician or cardiologist 
before starting a fiber supplement because fiber may interfere with your Coumadin international normalized ratio levels.
Figure 4. Anal Warts.
Reprinted from Gude D, Chennamsetty S, Jha R. 
Stalwart approach to stall wart. Indian J Palliat Care 2011 
May;17(2):168-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.4103/0973-
1075.84543 with kind permission from IJMS Publishing 
Team: Ivyspring Inquiry: www.medsci.org.
 79
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-222
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Anal Health Care Basics
Useful Online Resources
The American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgery Web site is an excellent resource 
for both patients and physicians. There are a variety of online learning tools for physi-
cians. In addition, each and every anal disease that we covered in this article is thor-
oughly presented in a patient-friendly format that can be printed for additional patient 
education. The Web addresses are as follows:
www.fascrs.org
www.fascrs.org/patients/disease-condition/pruritis-ani
www.fascrs.org/patients/disease-condition/anal-fissure
www.fascrs.org/patients/disease-condition/anal-fissure-expanded-information
www.fascrs.org/patients/disease-condition/hemorrhoids
www.fascrs.org/patients/disease-condition/hemorrhoids-expanded-version
www.fascrs.org/patients/disease-condition/abscess-and-fistula-expanded-information
www.fascrs.org/patients/disease-condition/bowel-incontinence
www.fascrs.org/patients/disease-condition/anal-warts-and-anal-dysplasia-expanded-
information
Patient friendly educational material is available from: www.bootymd.org
 
Adequate fiber intake is important for 
many reasons:
1. Fiber helps regulate bowel movements 
by softening hard stool to reduce con-
stipation and adding bulk to loose stool 
to reduce diarrhea
2. Common anal problems such as fis-
sures and hemorrhoids are caused by 
inadequate fiber and water intake
3. Adequate fiber will reduce the risk of 
developing colorectal cancer, diverticu-
losis, and complications of diverticulitis
4. Adequate fiber will reduce cholesterol.
When advising patients regarding in-
creasing fiber intake (Table 8)
• stress the fact that most people do not 
consume adequate fiber
• advise patient to keep a log of the daily 
fiber intake for one week to see exactly 
how much the intake really is
• ask them to read food labels thoroughly 
to check fiber content instead of assum-
ing labels such as “whole wheat” mean 
a high fiber content
• adding fiber supplements is helpful, 
but caution is needed when choos-
ing the fiber supplement. Commonly 
used supplements like “fiber pills” 
and orange-flavored psyllium are in-
adequate. Reading the labels of these 
products, including the serving size 
and fiber content, is important. For 
example, most fiber pills have half a 
gram of fiber. Therefore to get 20 g of 
additional daily fiber, someone would 
need to take 40 pills a day 
• increasing water intake to at least 
64 oz daily is needed so fiber can work 
properly. Daily intake of caffeinated 
beverages would increase the need for 
water intake owing to caffeine’s diuretic 
properties. 
Proper Bowel Movements
When advising patients on a proper 
bowel movement, the following key points 
should be emphasized:
• Spending excessive time on the toilet is 
harmful. Avoid sitting on the toilet more 
than two minutes
• The rectum empties better when in a 
squatting position. When using a West-
ern toilet, place a stool under your feet 
and lean forward to mimic that position
• Do not clean excessively and avoid 
cleansing wipes. Use water without 
chemicals. Using a bidet attachment 
eases the cleaning process in a quick and 
simple manner.
CONCLUSION
Most anal health problems are a result 
of inadequate fiber and water intake along 
with poor bowel and bathroom habits. 
With improved awareness and understand-
ing on the physician’s part, and guided 
changes in dietary intake and bathroom 
behavior modifications on the patient’s 
part, most patients will have complete 
resolution of their symptoms. Accurate 
evaluation and diagnosis are the key. This 
can be achieved with a thorough history 
and physical examination. The assumption 
by patients and physicians that most anal 
problems are caused by “hemorrhoids” 
leads to an error in diagnosis, incorrect 
management strategies, worsening of 
disease-related symptoms, development 
of new symptoms such as contact derma-
titis, and delay in accurate diagnosis and 
resolution of symptoms. Avoiding harmful 
products such as anal wipes and steroid 
ointments or suppositories is important 
because contact dermatitis is associated 
with worsening of the anal symptoms and 
delayed symptom improvement, once an 
accurate diagnosis has been made. If there 
is a question as to the correct diagnosis or 
treatment, referral to a specialist in diseases 
of the anal and rectal area can be helpful. 
Online resources may be found in the Side-
bar: Useful Online Resources. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgment
Mary Corrado, ELS, provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Chang J, McLemore E, Tejirian T. Anal health care 
basics. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-222. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-222.
References
 1. Grucela A, Salinas H, Khaitov S, Steinhagen RM, 
Gorfine SR, Chessin DB. Prospective analysis 
of clinician accuracy in the diagnosis of benign 
anal pathology: comparison across specialties 
and years of experience. Dis Colon Rectum 2010 
Jan;53(1):47-52. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
dcr.0b013e3181bbfc89.
 2. Boyapati A, Tam M, Tate B, Lee A, Palmer A, 
Nixon R. Allergic contact dermatitis to 
methylisothiazolinone: exposure from baby wipes 
causing hand dermatitis. Australas J Dermatol 2013 
Nov;54(4):264-7. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
ajd.12062.
 3. Timmermans A, De Hertog S, Gladys K, Vanacker H, 
Goossens A. ‘Dermatologically tested’ baby toilet 
tissues: a cause of allergic contact dermatitis in 
adults. Contact Dermatitis 2007 Aug;57(2):97-9. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0536.2007.01161.x.
 4. Gardner KH, Davis MD, Richardson DM, Pittelkow MR. 
The hazards of moist toilet paper: allergy to 
the preservative methylchloroisothiazolinone/
methylisothiazolinone. Arch Dermatol 2010 
Aug;146(8):886-90. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archdermatol.2010.114.
 5. Zoli V, Tosti A, Silvani S, Vincenzi C. Moist toilet 
papers as possible sensitizers: review of the 
literature and evaluation of commercial products in 
Italy. Contact Dermatitis 2006 Oct;55(4):252-4. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0536.2006.00919.x.
 6. Ulrich G, Schmutz JL, Trechot P, Commun N, 
Barbaud A. Sensitization to petrolatum: an unusual 
cause of false-positive drug patch-tests. Allergy 2004 
Sep;59(9):1006-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1398-9995.2004.00452.x.
 7. Adams BB, Sheth PB. Perianal ulcerations from 
topical steroid use. Cutis 2002 Jan;69(1):67-8.
 80
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-222
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Anal Health Care Basics
 8. Wald A, Bharucha AE, Cosman BC, Whitehead WE. 
ACG clinical guideline: management of benign 
anorectal disorders. Am J Gastroenterol 2014 
Aug;109(8):1141-57. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
ajg.2014.190.
 9. Sajid MS, Whitehouse PA, Sains P, Baig MK. 
Systematic review of the use of topical diltiazem 
compared with glyceryltrinitrate for the nonoperative 
management of chronic anal fissure. Colorectal Dis 
2013 Jan;15(1):19-26. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1463-1318.2012.03042.x.
 10. Schiano di Visconte M, Munegato G. Glyceryl 
trinitrate ointment (0.25%) and anal cryothermal 
dilators in the treatment of chronic anal fissures. 
J Gastrointest Surg 2009 Jul;13(7):1283-91. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11605-009-0889-4.
 11. Goldman L, Kitzmiller K. Perianal atrophoderma 
from topical corticosteroids. Arch Dermatol 1973 
Apr;107(4):611-2. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archderm.1973.01620190083022.
 12. Tejirian T, Abbas MA. Sitz bath: where is the 
evidence? Scientific basis of a common practice. Dis 
Colon Rectum 2005 Dec;48(12):2336-40. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10350-005-0085-x.
 13. Nelson RL, Thomas K, Morgan J, Jones A. Non 
surgical therapy for anal fissure. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2012 Feb 15;2:CD003431. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.cd003431.pub3.
 14. Moesgaard F, Nielsen ML, Hansen JB, Knudsen JT. 
High-fiber diet reduces bleeding and pain in patients 
with hemorrhoids: a double-blind trial of Vi-Siblin. Dis 
Colon Rectum 1982 Jul-Aug;25(2):454-6. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/bf02553653.
 15. Alonso-Coello P, Mills E, Heels-Ansdell D, et al. 
Fiber for the treatment of hemorrhoids complications: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2006 Jan;101(1):181-8. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1572-0241.2005.00359.x.
 16. Alonso-Coello P, Guyatt G , Heels-Ansdell D, et al. 
Laxatives for the treatment of hemorrhoids. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2005 Oct 19;(4):CD004649. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.cd004649.pub2.
 17. Johannsson HO, Graf W, Påhlman L. Bowel habits 
in hemorrhoid patients and normal subjects. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2005 Feb;100(2):401-6. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1572-0241.2005.40195.x.
 18. Sakakibara R, Tsunoyama K, Hosoi H, et al. 
Influence of body position on defecation in humans. 
Low Urin Tract Symptoms 2010 Apr;2(1):16-21. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1757-5672.2009.00057.x.
 19. Dimmer C, Martin B, Reeves N, Sullian F. Squatting 
for the prevention of heamorrhoids? Townsend Letter 
for Doctors and Patients 1996 Oct;(159):66-70.
 20. Sikirov D. Comparison of straining during defecation 
in three positions: results and implications for human 
health. Dig Dis Sci 2003 Jul;48(7):1201-5. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1024180319005.
 21. Rad S. Impact of ethnic habits on defecographic 
measurements. Arch Iran Med 2002 Apr;5(2):115-7.
 22. Greenspon J, Williams SB, Young HA, Orkin BA. 
Thrombosed external hemorrhoids: outcome after 
conservative or surgical management. Dis Colon 
Rectum 2004 Sep;47(9):1493-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s10350-004-0607-y.
 23. Clinical Practice Committee, American 
Gastroenterological Association. American 
Gastroenterological Association medical position 
statement: diagnosis and treatment of hemorrhoids. 
Gastroenterology 2004 May;126(5):1461-2. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2004.03.001.
 24. Rivadeneira DE, Steele SR, Ternent C, Chalasani S, 
Buie WD, Rafferty JL; Standards Practice Task 
Force of The American Society of Colon and Rectal 
Surgeons. Practice parameters for the management 
of hemorrhoids (revised 2010). Dis Colon Rectum 
2011 Sep;54(9):1059-64. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/dcr.0b013e318225513d.
 25. Russell MM, Ko CY. Management of hemorrhoids: 
mainstay of treatment remains diet modification 
and office-based procedures [Internet]. Rockville, 
MD: National Guideline Clearinghouse, Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2012 Jul 16 [cited 
2016 Mar 18]. Available from: www.guideline.gov/
expert/expert-commentary.aspx?id=37828.
 26. Norton C. Fecal incontinence and biofeeedback 
therapy. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 2008 
Sep;37(3):587-604. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
gtc.2008.06.008.
 27. Clemens R, Kranz S Mobley AR, et al. Filling 
America’s fiber intake gap: summary of a roundtable 
to probe realistic solutions with a focus on grain-
based foods. J Nutr 2012 Jul;142(7):1390S-401S. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3945/jn.112.160176.
 28. US Department of Agriculture, US Department of 
Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans, 2010 [Internet]. 7th Edition, Washington, 
DC: US Government Printing Office, 2010 Dec 
[cited 2016 Apr 18]. Available from: http://health.gov/
dietaryguidelines/dga2010/dietaryguidelines2010.pdf.
Bubo
Bubo is an apostem breeding within the anus in the rectum 
with great hardness but little aching. This I say, before it 
ulcerates, is nothing else than a hidden cancer … . Out of the 
bubo [cancer] goes hard excretions and sometime they may 
not pass, because of the constriction caused by the bubo, and 
they are retained firmly within the rectum … . I never saw nor 
heard of any man that was cured … but I have known many 
that died of the foresaid sickness.
— John of Arderne, 1307-1392, English surgeon: Father of English Surgery
 81
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-253
SOUL OF THE HEALER
Bamberg 
photograph
Samuel H Glassner, MD
This photograph was taken in the city of Bamberg, in southern Germany. The historic Town of Bamberg is a designated 
UNESCO World Heritage Site—some of its well-preserved medieval architecture and layout dates back to the 11th 
century. The sculpture pictured here, Centurione I, represents a modern (2002) interpretation of classical themes.
Dr Glassner is a retired Emergency Physician from the Walnut Creek Medical Center in CA.
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-253
 82
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-241
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Special Report
Implementation of the YMCA Diabetes Prevention Program 
throughout an Integrated Health System: A Translational Study
Ron Adams, MD; Christopher J Hebert, MD, MS; Linda McVey; Roger Williams, MEd 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-241
E-pub: 10/21/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-241
ABSTRACT
Context: HealthSpan Physicians (HSP), an integrated medi-
cal system in Northeast Ohio, partnered with the Young Men’s 
Christian Association (YMCA) of Greater Cleveland to implement 
a referral system for the evidence-based Diabetes Prevention 
Program (DPP) throughout HSP. The YMCA of USA employs a 
cost-effective, customized version of the original DPP in which 
coaches take the place of in-house clinical staff. Efficacy of the 
YMCA DPP was shown earlier in the DEPLOY Study. 
Objective: To improve outcomes of metrics used in the 
DEPLOY Study. 
Design: Observational study focusing on engagement, 
persistence, recruitment, and adherence to the DPP. In August 
2014, HSP mailed an invitation to 2200 patients identified 
as both Medicare eligible and at risk of prediabetes to attend 
no-obligation information sessions about the DPP. After these 
sessions, YMCA staff called interested participants and asked 
them to enroll in and to commit to the program. Motivation and 
reinforcement were provided to patients through 
YMCA-provided 
signs, brochures, and posters; the HSP Web site; and in-person 
conversations with primary care physicians.
Main Outcome Measures: Average weight loss at the end of 16 
weeks in the program and average retention through Session 9.
Results: Of the 2200 patients contacted, 351 (16.0%) re-
sponded by attending the information session, and 228 enrolled 
in the 
YMCA DPP (11.3%) and persisted through at least Week 9. 
This result is an improvement over the 1.7% of eligible enrollees 
who responded to the DEPLOY Study’s mailing.
Conclusions: A marketing approach to implementing the 
YMCA 
DPP in an integrated medical system results in excellent outcomes.
INTRODUCTION
As reported by the Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC), more than 86 million patients have prediabetes, 
defined as impaired glucose tolerance (2-hour plasma glucose 
level between 140 and 199 mg/dL) or impaired fasting glucose 
level between 100 and 125 mg/dL.1 People with prediabetes are at 
increased risk for development of Type 2 diabetes.2 Obesity and/or 
overweight conditions (body mass index [BMI] > 25 kg/m2) are 
major contributing factors to prediabetes and Type 2 diabetes. 
However, the progression from prediabetes to Type 2 diabetes 
can be significantly slowed and/or reduced by patients’ adhering 
to the protocol of an evidence-based Diabetes Prevention Pro-
gram (DPP), developed in the mid-1990s with funding from 
the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney 
Diseases (NIDDK). In the first 3 years of the randomized, 
NIDDK-sponsored DPP Outcomes Study, the DPP lifestyle 
intervention group reduced the number of new cases of Type 2 
diabetes by 58% compared with a placebo group.3 In more than 
10 years of randomized trials, the diabetes incidence in high-risk 
adults was reduced by 34% with intensive lifestyle intervention 
through the DPP
.4
The DPP as originally constructed5 was hard to implement and 
sustain in busy health care settings, where cost was also a major 
issue.6 This problem has called for real-world adaptation, as with 
the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) of the USA’s cus-
tomized 52-week version of the program (16 weekly sessions fol-
lowed by 9 more sessions during the following 8 months), wherein 
specially trained lifestyle coaches provide mentoring and support 
to the participants in group settings.7 Even with referrals from pri-
mary care physicians (PCPs), enrollment and program attendance/
adherence has been challenging in YMCA implementation efforts. 
For instance, in the well-known DEPLOY Study (Translating the 
Diabetes Prevention Program into the Community)—involving the 
Indiana School of Medicine and the YMCA of Indianapolis—there 
was a 1.7% client enrollment resulting from the initial mailing to 
7500 Indianapolis households (Figure 1).6p357
Although the long-term effects of untreated prediabetes are 
well-known, education and information-only approaches to cli-
ents with prediabetes and to health providers have not resulted in 
adherence to the three pillars of prediabetes treatment: diet and 
nutrition change, change in exercise habits, and lifestyle change.8 
Unchecked obesity is a prime predictor of prediabetes, leading to 
the onset of Type 2 diabetes.
Despite this knowledge in patients and providers alike, the 
YMCA has experienced difficulty in attracting new clients to the 
preventive intervention of the YMCA DPP and in securing client 
adherence to the program protocol.
Here, we report unusually high outcomes in initial attendance, 
persistence, and weight loss resulting from a marketing approach 
to implementation of the DPP
. This accomplishment was made 
possible through a partnership between the YMCA of Greater 
Cleveland and HealthSpan Physicians (HSP), a division of Mercy 
Health in Northeast Ohio.
Ron Adams, MD, is the former Associate Medical Director for Quality at HealthSpan and the Learning Director for Better Health 
Partnership and is currently the  Vice-Chair of Practicing Transformation for the Medicine Institute at the Cleveland Clinic in OH. E-mail: 
adamsr8@ccf.org. Christopher J Hebert, MD, MS, is the Systems Director of Quality at Mercy Health in Cincinnati, OH. E-mail: 
cjhebert@healthspan.org. Linda McVey is the Executive Director of Health Initiatives for the YMCA of Greater Cleveland in OH. E-mail: 
lmcvey@clevelandymca.org. Roger Williams, MEd, is a freelance Scientific Writer in Cleveland, OH. E-mail: rlloydwilliams2@yahoo.com.
 83
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-241
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Implementation of the YMCA Diabetes Prevention Program throughout an Integrated Health System: A Translational Study
METHODS
The initial thrust of the present partnership and translational 
study between the YMCA of Greater Cleveland and HSP
, an 
integrated medical system, has been to motivate attendance at 
information sessions. The next goal was to encourage enrollment 
in the YMCA’s DPP and adherence to the program protocol 
through at least the first nine weeks of the program. Nine weeks’ 
attendance is the CDC-approved standard for persistence in the 
program, leading presumably to lasting behavior change.9
Because of demographic factors (location, income, and employ-
ment patterns), the present study was able to attract primarily 
(95%) African American women with prediabetes in the research 
cohort. The women were predominately older than age 50 years. 
Most were Medicare patients. 
Obesity, as stated, is a leading indicator of risk for the onset of 
Type 2 diabetes. As Hamman et al10 found in a large field study 
of DPP participants after 3 years of follow-up: “Weight loss was 
the dominant predictor of reduced diabetes incidence ... For ev-
ery kilogram of weight loss there was a 16% reduction in risk.”
Race is another major contributing variable in efforts to 
maintain weight loss. Largely because of obesity or overweight 
conditions, some racial and ethnic groups have a much higher 
risk for development of Type 2 diabetes. In 2003 to 2004, ap-
proximately 30% of non-Hispanic white adults were obese, as 
were 45% of non-Hispanic black adults and 36.8% of Mexican 
Americans. In that same period, black women exhibited the 
highest rates of overweight and obesity, at 58% of the population 
aged 40 to 59 years compared with about 38% of non-Hispanic 
white women of the same age.11 Study after study has shown 
that both achievement and maintenance of weight loss has been 
particularly problematic for African American women, and the 
DPP protocol has been no exception.12,13 In one controlled study 
using the DPP among different groups, West et al14 found that 
African American women achieved and sustained roughly half 
the weight loss experienced by other ethnic groups.
Pilot Study (Phase 1)
In October 2013, HSP of Northeast Ohio and the YMCA of 
Greater Cleveland entered into a collaboration in which HSP 
would refer its eligible clients with prediabetes and the YMCA 
would conduct its customized version of the program (up to 25 
sessions during the course of a year using trained lifestyle coaches). 
The first 9 weeks of the program focused on engagement, persis-
tence, and recruitment.
In Phase 1 of this project, the pilot phase, the partners relied 
primarily on the following tactics to attract clients. First, the PCP 
recommended that his/her client investigate the YMCA DPP
, 
because the client was suspected of having prediabetes. Second, if 
interested, the patient picked up an engagement brochure in the 
examination office—which was noted in the patient’s record—
giving a description of the program’s content, plus the time and 
location of the next informational session. Also provided was a 
YMCA telephone number to call with questions. We then relied 
on the patient’s own motivation (Stage 2 in the DiClemente and 
Prochaska “Stages of Change” hierarchy, “Contemplation” of 
lifestyle change) as to whether the patient would show up for the 
information session.15 At this point, HSP engaged in a minimum 
of 2 telephone calls to repeat the invitation to attend the infor-
mation session to those who had picked up the informational 
brochure in either the outer office or the examination room.
Initial efforts were focused on 2 HSP locations, each of which 
featured a predominately African American population. From Oc-
tober 2013 to July 2014, there were approximately 100 referrals 
to the information sessions, which resulted in 33 enrollees in the 
yearlong program. The enrollees provided consent to the tracking 
measures that were to be used. After 5 months of Phase 1 partici-
pation in the YMCA DPP
, the following outcomes were reported: 
1) 17 patients, or slightly more than 50%, persisted in the program 
through Week 16, the final weekly session; 2) of these 17 patients, 
the average weight loss was approximately 4.7% of body weight, 
which conforms closely to the national average at this stage. The 
goal for the 16-week period was 7% of body weight lost. 
Phase 2 
Because of the perceived success of the pilot effort, the project 
entered into Phase 2 (August 2014 through November 2015), 
extended to the entirety of the HSP network of patients in 
Northeast Ohio.
Thanks to a grant for Medicare-eligible older adults, Phase 2 
of the project began in August 2014 with an HSP mailer to 2200 
clients who had been identified in the electronic health record as 
both Medicare eligible and at risk of diabetes. The mailer invited 
them to information sessions to be held throughout the region. 
A follow-up mailer was sent to 1200 clients largely duplicative 
of these same people.
In addition, HSP and the YMCA decided to employ more of 
a marketing approach, featuring many touchpoints, or “touches” 
(methods or modes of contact between the organization and the 
consumer), and direct contact from the Population Management 
Figure 1. Implementation of the YMCA’s Diabetes Prevention Program in the 
DEPLOY Study.1
1 Ackermann RT, Finch EA, Brizendine E, Zhou H, Marrero DG. Translating the Diabetes 
Prevention Program into the community. The DEPLOY pilot study. Am J Prev Med 2008 
Oct;35(4):357-63. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2008.06.035.
YMCA = Young Men’s Christian Association; DPP = Diabetes Prevention Program.
 84
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-241
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Implementation of the YMCA Diabetes Prevention Program throughout an Integrated Health System: A Translational Study
Department staff. Via a referral form at our Cleveland locations, 
we captured the names of the clients who were referred to the 
YMCA DPP
, which set into motion the following mechanism. 
Anyone who showed interest in the program—and was per-
ceived as eligible—was exposed to additional motivators pro-
vided through signage, brochures, and telephone follow-up for 
scheduled sessions, in which the name of the PCP was invoked. 
A sample phone script follows:
Hi! I’m calling on behalf of Dr ___, from HealthSpan. In a 
recent visit, [s/]he noted that you were very possibly prediabetic 
and were in danger of developing Type 2 diabetes if this condition 
were not brought under control. Your doctor also mentioned the 
YMCA’s Diabetes Prevention Program, in which trained coaches 
help you to bring about necessary changes in ____.
The next no-obligation information session on the YMCA’s Dia-
betes Prevention Program is scheduled for ___ at either 1 pm or 
6 pm. Which session would be most convenient for you to attend? 
[If needed] We have other sessions … .
As described by Jay Conrad Levinson,16 lead author of the best-
selling book, Guerilla Marketing for Non-Profits, the idea here is 
(once a name is captured): “Follow-up, Follow-up, Follow-up!” 
At HSP
, all were involved: the PCP
, the clinical staff, and (us-
ing the electronic health records) the Population Management 
Department.
RESULTS
The summary impact of Phase 2, in terms of engagement and 
subsequent enrollment in the YMCA’s DPP
, was much greater 
than usually experienced with a direct-mail campaign and re-
sulted in a greater turnout than in previous YMCA joint projects. 
Outcomes were
1. Of the 2200 Medicare patients identified as having or likely 
to have prediabetes and encouraged to attend a YMCA in-
formation session in their community, 185 attended various 
information sessions.
2. Of the attendees, 168 evidenced interest in enrolling in the 
program.
3. After screening, 160 remained eligible and provided informed 
consent, and 152 formally enrolled in the program.
4. Remarkably, 137 of these persisted in the program through the 
9th class or longer. As mentioned previously, the 9th class is 
the CDC-approved standard for persistence in the program.
With this success, we amplified our efforts, involving support-
ive follow-up telephone calls from our Population Management 
Department. We sent a second mailer to 1200 persons from a 
duplicative group of Medicare clients identified—with the help 
of our electronic health record—as likely to have prediabetes. 
These results are displayed in Table 1, with an overall enrollment 
of 248 persons and a persistence rate through Week 9 of 228 en-
rollees, or 11.3% of those perceived as eligible for the program. 
This represents a far greater persistence rate than similar efforts 
heretofore reported in the DPP literature.17,18
Finally, in terms of weight loss, program outcomes exceeded 
national averages for the YMCA DPP
, which are average weight 
loss at the end of the weekly sessions (week 16) of 4.6% and aver-
age retention (persistence) through Session 9 of 83.6%. As can be 
seen in Table 2, our corresponding figures were an average weight 
loss of 5.37% and a persistence rate through Week 9 of 91%. 
There were only 20 dropouts in the program after Phase 1 and 
even fewer (N = 5) after the conclusion of Phase 2. This lower 
dropout rate in Phase 2 was counterintuitive because of the ini-
tially high participation rate. This phenomenon will be the subject 
of further analysis in forthcoming publications.
Tentatively, we have identified the salient factors in the success 
of the program as 1) PCP referral, 2) intervention from Popu-
lation Management with personalized telephone calls, and 3) 
personalized follow-up from YMCA staff. The follow-up process, 
designed to maximize marketing touches with the patient, can 
best be summarized as
• PCP provides the patient referral and fills out referral form
• Population Management employee makes a telephone call to 
remind the patient of the upcoming information session and 
encourages attendance
• Patient attends the information session and provides a release 
of information to obtain BMI and blood test results
• Release documents are sent to Population Management to 
verify the BMI and qualifying blood test
• Information is sent to the YMCA
• YMCA makes up to three calls to patients who met the enroll-
ment criteria to invite them to enroll in the program; those 
who did not meet the criteria are not invited to enroll.
Table 1. HealthSpan Physicians’ and the YMCA’s Diabetes 
Prevention Program enrollment data (October 13, 2013 to 
September 4, 2015)
 
 
Participant category
Group 1 
(October 
13, 2013)
Group 2  
(April 15, 
2014)
 
 
Total
Patients perceived as eligible  
and sent a letter
2200a
1220
3420
Attended an information session
186
165
351
Registered initial interest
168
158
326
Remained eligible after screening
160
118
278
Enrolled and attended the first class
152
96
248
Attended the ninth classb
137
91
228
Dropped out before the ninth class
15
5
20
a Of this total, 1220 patients received an additional duplicate mailing in March 2015 for 
classes commencing April 15, 2015.
b The ninth class is taken as the client’s measure of efficacy/changed behavior, 
according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
YMCA = Young Men’s Christian Association.
Table 2. Weight loss outcome measures in 228 participants  
who completed the program (Phase 2)a
Measure
Percentage
Persistence (attended ninth class)
91.0
Percentage of body weight loss
Mean
5.37
Median
5.57
a Program completion was defined as completing a minimum of 9 classes, with some 
groups still in progress at the time of this writing.
 85
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-241
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Implementation of the YMCA Diabetes Prevention Program throughout an Integrated Health System: A Translational Study
DISCUSSION
Cost-Effectiveness
In conceiving cost-effectiveness metrics for the YMCA’s DPP
, 
there are at least 3 perspectives to be considered: 1) the cost of 
“doing nothing”—the cost to the patient and the medical pro-
vider/insurer incurred in treating diabetes itself, 2) the cost of 
the “next best (medicinal)” alternative, and 3) the added years 
of life expectancy.
With respect to the cost of doing nothing, the American Dia-
betes Association provides these statistics: “People with diabetes 
have health care expenditures that are 2.3 times higher ($13,741 
vs $5853) than expenditures that would be expected for this same 
population in the absence of diabetes … [suggesting that] diabetes 
is responsible for $7888 in excess expenditures per year for the 
person with diabetes.”19 This latter figure is exclusive of indirect 
costs (unemployment, absenteeism, etc), which are considerable.
There is a significant difference in cost of the YMCA’s DPP vs 
the cost of some recently approved weight loss drug treatments, 
which also result in an average 5% sustained weight loss over 
time (which is the Food and Drug Administration standard as 
of October 10, 2015).20 As of this writing, the Food and Drug 
Administration has approved 5 weight loss drugs, ranging in cost 
from orlistat at $173/month to injectable liraglutide (Victoza) at 
$658/month.21 The latter is approved for weight loss only in pa-
tients with Type 2 diabetes, but higher-dose liraglutide marketed 
as Saxenda was approved for weight management in December 
2014 for use in obese adults (BMI of 30 kg/m2 or greater) or in 
overweight adults (BMI of 27 kg/m2 or greater) who have at least 
1 weight-related condition such as hypertension, Type 2 diabetes, 
or dyslipidemia.22 Alternatively, the full cost of the YMCA of the 
USA’s DPP is $429/year ($36 per month), which carries with it 
a proven 5% average weight loss and is therefore less costly, with 
fewer risks, than any of the above-mentioned drugs. 
Although there are various formulations of added life expec-
tancy, the calculation is pretty much in the eyes of the beholder. 
At minimum, 29% of all adults with prediabetes progress to a 
diagnosis of Type 2 diabetes at the rate of 5% to 15% per year.3,19 
According to some experts, Type 2 diabetes reduces life expectancy 
by 6 to 10 years.23 Previously cited studies have shown that the 
DPP
, particularly with older adult populations, has been able to 
reduce the incidence of new cases of diabetes by 71%.
Phase 3
Because of the perceived efficacy of this project in the Northeast 
Ohio region, the HSP-YMCA partnership in the YMCA’s DPP 
has been extended statewide, throughout the Mercy\HealthSpan 
Integrated Medical system and wherever YMCAs are located (ap-
proximately 11 regional YMCAs and upward of 200,000 potential 
prediabetic referrals). On the basis of the Greater Cleveland experi-
ence and the learnings that resulted therefrom, we expect even great-
er rates of enrollment and engagement than those reported above.
In terms of scalability to other integrated health systems, 
Matt Longjohn, MD, of the YMCA offered the following ob-
servation (personal communication, July 14, 2015)a: “The rapid 
transformation of our health care system towards accountability 
and value indicates that the collaboration between HSP and the 
YMCA in Ohio will be an attractive model for clinicians, health 
care systems and policy makers to explore and replicate.”
Limitations
A key limitation of this current study is that it was an obser-
vational study and not a randomized clinical trial. The analytic 
results were not intended to reflect an experimental design. In 
future and ongoing work as the program expands, we will have 
the opportunity to conduct a more rigorous stepped-wedge or 
cluster randomized trial, incorporating controls and taking into 
account critical factors unobserved in the current analysis (eg, 
selection, dropout, and intent-to-treat analysis).
CONCLUSIONS
The earlier DEPLOY study demonstrated that the YMCA 
possesses both a promising vehicle for the dissemination of the 
DPP lifestyle intervention and one that is cost-effective. The pres-
ent study indicates what is possible in an integrated health care 
system with a concentrated systemwide effort in reaching and 
engaging those at risk of developing diabetes. Both HSP and the 
YMCA embraced principles of marketing in which a maximum 
number of “touches” and follow-up with potential clients was 
the key ingredient. 
Now that the client has been engaged, it remains to be seen 
how long on average patients will persist in the lifestyle change 
that has been found to be effective. In our next effort together, 
HSP and the YMCA are engaging in a pilot study focusing on 
maintenance of lifestyle change in the YMCA DPP participants. 
We have designed a project, termed SISTERS,24 which makes use 
of avatars in a home setting to encourage exercise and thus weight 
loss maintenance. We propose to enhance our current capital-
intense, facility-based care delivery system with an in-home digital 
health-enabled obesity-care delivery system, working in concert 
with the YMCA DPP
. v
a National Health Officer, YMCA of the USA, Chicago, IL.
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to disclose. 
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge Adam Perzynski, PhD;  
Matt Longjohn, MD; and John Boltri, MD, FAAFP for their assistance  
in the preparation of this manuscript. 
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health Communications provided  
editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Adams R, Hebert C, McVey L, Williams R. Implementation of the YMCA 
Diabetes Prevention Program throughout an integrated health system: 
A translational study. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-241. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.7812/TPP/15-241.
References
 1. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion; Division 
of Diabetes Translation. National Diabetes Statistics Report, 2014. Estimates of 
Diabetes and its Burden in the United States [Internet]. Atlanta, GA: Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention; 2014 [cited 2015 Jul 14]. Available from: www.cdc.
gov/diabetes/pubs/statsreport14/national-diabetes-report-web.pdf.
 86
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-241
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Implementation of the YMCA Diabetes Prevention Program throughout an Integrated Health System: A Translational Study
 2. Gerstein HC, Santaguida P, Raina P, et al. Annual incidence and relative risk of 
diabetes in people with various categories of dysglycemia: a systematic overview and 
meta-analysis of prospective studies. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2007 Dec;78(3):305-
12. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.diabres.2007.05.00.
 3. Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, et al; Diabetes Prevention Program 
Research Group. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle 
intervention or metformin. New Engl J Med 2002 Feb 7;346(6):393-403. DOI:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa012512.
 4. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group; Knowler WC, Fowler SE, 
Hamman RF, et al. 10-year follow-up of diabetes incidence and weight loss in the 
Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Lancet 2009 Nov 14;34(9702): 
1677-86. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(09)61457-4.
 5. The Diabetes Prevention Program. Design and methods for a clinical trial in  
the prevention of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 1999 Apr;22(4):623-34. DOI:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.2337/diacare.22.4.623.
 6. Ackermann RT, Finch EA, Brizendine E, Zhou H, Marrero DG. Translating the 
Diabetes Prevention Program into the community. The DEPLOY Pilot Study. 
Am J Prev Med 2008 Oct;35(4):357-63. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
amepre.2008.06.035.
 7. YMCA’s Diabetes Prevention Program [Internet]. Chicago, IL: YMCA of the USA; 
2016 [cited 2016 Apr 30]. Available from: www.ymca.net/diabetes-prevention.
 8. Tussing-Humphreys LM, Fitzgibbon ML, Kong A, Odoms-Young A. Weight loss 
maintenance in African American women: a systematic review of the behavioral 
lifestyle intervention literature. J Obes 2013;2013:437369. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1155/2013/437369.
 9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Diabetes Recognition Program: 
standards and operating procedures [Internet]. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention; 2015 Jan 1 [cited 2016 Apr 12]. Available from: www.cdc.gov/
diabetes/prevention/pdf/dprp-standards.pdf.
 10. Hamman RF, Wing RR, Edelstein SL, et al. Effect of weight loss with lifestyle 
intervention on risk of diabetes. Diabetes Care 2006 Sep;29(9):2102-7. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.2337/dc06-0560.
 11. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, McDowell MA, Tabak CJ, Flegal KM. Prevalence 
of overweight and obesity in the United States: 1999-2004. JAMA 2006 Apr 
5;295(13):1549-55. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.295.13.1549.
 12. Kumanyika SK. Obesity treatment in minorities. In: Wadden TA, Stunkard AJ, editors. 
Handbook of obesity treatment. New York, NY: The Guilford Press; 2002. p 416-46.
 13. Karanja N, Stevens VJ, Hollis JF, Kumanyika SK. Steps to soulful living 
(steps): a weight loss program for African-American women. Ethn Dis 2002 
Summer;12(3):363-71.
 14. West DS, Elaine Prewitt T, Bursac Z, Felix HC. Weight loss of black, white, and 
Hispanic men and women in the Diabetes Prevention Program. Obesity (Silver 
Spring) 2008 Jun;16(6):1413-20. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/oby.2008.224.
 15. DiClemente CC, Prochaska JO, Fairhurst SK, Velicer WF, Velasquez MM, Rossi JS. 
The process of smoking cessation: an analysis of precontemplation, contemplation, 
and preparation stages of change. J Consult Clin Psychol 1991 Apr;59(2):295-304. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-006x.59.2.295.
 16. Levinson JC, Adkins F, Forbes C. Guerrilla marketing for nonprofits. Irvine, CA: 
Entrepreneur Media, Inc; 2010.
 17. Chou CH, Burnet DL, Meltzer DO, Huang ES. The effectiveness of diabetes 
prevention programs in community settings [Internet]. New York, NY: New York 
State Health Foundation; 2015 Mar [cited 2015 Sep 8]. Available from: http://
nyshealthfoundation.org/uploads/resources/report-diabetes-prevention-in-community-
settings.pdf.
 18. Fitzgibbon ML,Tussing-Humphries LM, Porter JS, Martin IK, Odems-Young A, 
Sharp LK. Weight loss and African-American women: a systematic review of the 
behavioral weight loss intervention literature. Obes Rev 2012 Mar 13(3):192-2013.
 19. American Diabetes Association. Economic Costs of Diabetes in the US in 2012. 
Diabetes Care 2013 Apr; 36(4):1033-46.
 20. US Department of Health and Human Services; Food and Drug Administration; 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER). Guidance for industry: developing 
products for weight management. Draft guidance [Internet]. Rockville, MD: Food and 
Drug Administration; 2007 Feb [cited 2016 Sep 16]. Available from: www.fda.gov/
downloads/Drugs/.../Guidances/ucm071612.pdf.
 21. GoodRx Web site [Internet]. Santa Monica, CA: GoodRx, Inc; c2016 [cited 2015 
Nov 3]. Available from: www.goodrx.com.
 22. FDA approves weight-management drug Saxenda [Internet]. Silver Spring, MD: US 
Food and Drug Administration; 2014 Dec 23 [cited 2016 Apr 8]. Available from:  
www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm427913.htm.
 23. Maddox N. Profiles of an aging society: Diabetes. Washington, DC: Gerontological 
Society of America; 2010.
 24. Perzynski A, McVey L, Murphy P, Williams RL. Non-immersive virtual reality gaming 
to promote weight loss management amongst African-American women in the 
Diabetes Prevention Program: the “SISTERS” project. Poster presentation at the 33rd 
Annual Scientific Meeting of the Obesity Society; 2015 Nov 2-7; Los Angeles, CA.
Carbon in Fat
Every carbon in fat is derived from sugar that man ate or that the cow ate.  
Oil or fat is nothing more than congealed candy.
— Rachmiel Levine, MD, 1910-1998, physician and researcher  
in how insulin increases the body’s use of blood sugars
 87
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-220
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Special Report
Assessing the Value of High-Quality Care for Work-Associated  
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome in a Large Integrated Health Care  
System: Study Design
Craig Conlon, MD, PhD; Steven Asch MD, MPH; Mark Hanson, PhD; Andrew Avins, MD, MPH; Barbara Levitan;  
Carol Roth, BSN, MPH; Michael Robbins, PhD; Michael Dworsky, PhD; Seth Seabury, PhD; Teryl Nuckols MD, MSHS 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-220
E-pub: 10/03/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-220
ABSTRACT
Context: Little is known about quality of care for occupational 
health disorders, although it may affect worker health and work-
ers’ compensation costs. Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is a com-
mon work-associated condition that causes substantial disability.
Objective: To describe the design of a study that is assessing 
quality of care for work-associated CTS and associations with 
clinical outcomes and costs. 
Design: Prospective observational study of 477 individuals 
with new workers’ compensation claims for CTS without acute 
trauma who were treated at 30 occupational health clinics from 
2011 to 2013 and followed for 18 months. 
Main Outcome Measures: Timing of key clinical events, 
adherence to 45 quality measures, changes in scores on the 
Boston Carpal Tunnel Questionnaire and 12-item Short Form 
Health Survey Version 2 (SF-12v2), and costs associated with 
medical care and disability. 
Results: Two hundred sixty-seven subjects (56%) received a 
diagnosis of CTS and had claims filed around the first visit to oc-
cupational health, 104 (22%) received a diagnosis before that visit 
and claim, and 98 (21%) received a diagnosis or had claims filed 
after that visit. One hundred seventy-eight (37%) subjects had time 
off work, which started around the time of surgery in 147 (83%) 
cases and lasted a median of 41 days (interquartile range = 42 days).
Conclusions: The timing of diagnosis varied, but time off work 
was generally short and related to surgery. If associations of quality of 
care with key medical, economic, and quality-of-life outcomes are 
identified for work-associated CTS, systematic efforts to evaluate and 
improve quality of medical care for this condition are warranted.
INTRODUCTION
Efforts to ensure that patients receive high-quality medical 
care have intensified in recent years, as the public has come to 
appreciate the pervasiveness of quality problems and their effects 
on clinical outcomes and costs.1-3 Because the entities paying for 
improvements in quality seldom reap the benefits,4 national pro-
grams designed to drive improvement now exist in most health 
care sectors.5-7 Workers’ compensation accounts for a relatively 
small percentage of US health care expenditures,8 but it has a 
unique characteristic9: Financial incentives for health care payers 
are intrinsically aligned with improving quality. 
When workers return to health and function faster, employ-
ers may experience financial benefits because the employers are 
responsible for both medical and disability costs under workers’ 
compensation policies. Workers stand to gain not only clinically 
with a better recovery, but also financially because disability ben-
efits cover only a portion of lost wages.10 Assuring the quality of 
care for occupational disorders may, therefore, present a unique 
opportunity to benefit both workers and their employers. A 2005 
study from Spain demonstrated that improving care for muscu-
loskeletal disorders reduced medical care and disability costs.11 
Yet, little is known about the quality of health care provided in 
workers’ compensation systems in the US. 
Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is a common work-associated 
condition that can cause severe functional impairment and lead to 
sizable medical and disability costs.12,13 Working with policymak-
ers, payers, and providers in the California workers’ compensation 
system, we sought to measure quality of care for CTS, to assess 
the value of higher quality of care to workers and employers, and 
to lay the groundwork for ongoing quality assessment and im-
provement programs in workers’ compensation settings. However, 
a major challenge to achieving this objective was conducting a 
rigorous evaluation of the relationship between quality of care for 
CTS and clinical and economic outcomes. A partnership between 
Kaiser Permanente Northern California Regional Occupational 
Health Department (KPNC-ROH), Kaiser Foundation Health 
Plan, and researchers at the RAND Corporation in Santa Monica, 
CA, made such a study possible. 
Craig Conlon, MD, PhD, is the Medical Director of Employee Health Services for Kaiser Permanente in Oakland, CA. E-mail: 
craig.x.conlon@kp.org. Steven Asch, MD, MPH, is Chief of Health Services Research for the Veterans Administration Palo 
Alto Health Care System in Menlo Park, and Co-Chief of the Division of General Medical Disciplines at Stanford University 
in Palo Alto, CA. E-mail: steven.asch@va.gov. Mark Hanson, PhD, is a Senior Project Associate for the RAND Corporation in 
Santa Monica, CA. E-mail: mhanson@rand.org. Andrew Avins, MD, MPH, is a Research Scientist at the Division of Research 
in Oakland, CA. E-mail: andy.l.avins@kp.org. Barbara Levitan is a Survey Researcher for the RAND Corporation in Santa 
Monica, CA. E-mail: blevitan@rand.org. Carol Roth, BSN, MPH, is a Project Associate for the RAND Corporation in Santa 
Monica, CA. E-mail: roth@rand.org. Michael Robbins, PhD, is an Associate Statistician for the RAND Corporation in Santa 
Monica, CA. E-mail: mrobbins@rand.org. Michael Dworsky, PhD, is an Associate Economist for the RAND Corporation in 
Santa Monica, CA. E-mail: mdworsky@rand.org. Seth Seabury, PhD, is an Associate Professor of Research in Emergency 
Medicine at the Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles. E-mail: seabury@usc.edu 
Teryl Nuckols, MD, MSHS, is a Health Services Researcher for the RAND Corporation in Santa Monica and the Director of 
the Division of Internal Medicine at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, CA. E-mail: teryl.nuckols@cshs.org.
 88
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-220
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Assessing the Value of High-Quality Care for Work-Associated Carpal Tunnel Syndrome in a Large Integrated Health Care System: Study Design 
In this article, we explain our study design and research ap-
proach, the unique characteristics of KPNC-ROH that were 
essential to conducting this analysis, and the implications that 
the study findings may have for the care of future patients with 
work-associated conditions treated at KPNC-Occupational 
Health Centers, elsewhere in California, and across the country. 
This approach can serve as a model for future studies designed to 
measure quality of care for patients in state workers’ compensa-
tion systems. If we identify associations of quality of care with 
key medical, economic, and quality-of-life outcomes, systematic 
efforts to measure and improve quality would be warranted.
Here, we describe 7 major steps that we have undertaken in our 
effort to evaluate the value of high-quality care for work-associated 
CTS: 1) developing quality-of-care measures for CTS, 2) selecting 
and recruiting the study population, 3) measuring quality of care, 
4) assessing patient outcomes, 5) measuring medical care costs, 6) 
measuring disability benefit costs, and 7) measuring other costs 
to workers and employers. Steps 4 through 7 are still under way.
DEVELOPING QUALITY-OF-CARE MEASURES 
FOR CARPAL TUNNEL SYNDROME
To evaluate the quality of care for a condition such as CTS, spe-
cific measures were needed. Measure development often considers 
the framework of Donabedian,14 wherein quality can be assessed 
by examining the characteristics of the health care delivery system 
in which care is provided (its “structure”), the interactions between 
patients and physicians (“process”), and the changes in health that 
occur after receiving care (“outcome”). Care processes are widely 
studied because this focus gives specific information on what types 
of improvements are needed, and the quality measures are tailored 
to patient characteristics so case-mix adjustment is less a concern 
than when assessing outcomes.15 The National Committee for 
Quality Assurance (NCQA), for example, monitors how often 
patients in various health plans receive recommended vaccina-
tions and cancer screenings, among other aspects of care.7 Before 
the current endeavor, no CTS-specific process measures existed. 
We therefore developed a set of quality measures that could be 
applied to CTS, including work-associated CTS, meaning CTS that 
has been ascribed to occupational activities. We used a variation of 
the well-established RAND/UCLA (University of California, Los 
Angeles) Appropriateness Method, which incorporates a system-
atic review of the literature and a quantitative assessment reflect-
ing the judgment of a group of experts.16,17 This method has good 
reliability and good content, construct, and predictive validity,18-21 
and it has been used to develop measures of quality and surgical 
appropriateness for other musculoskeletal disorders as well as other 
conditions.2,22-24 
Accordingly, we identified care processes for CTS that may be 
associated with improved outcomes and then asked content experts 
and a project advisory board, including the Director of KPNC-
ROH, to refine, add, and delete draft measures. An 11-member 
multidisciplinary panel of experts in CTS reviewed a synopsis of 
the literature and rated the validity, feasibility, and importance of 
draft quality measures and the appropriateness of surgery in diverse 
clinical scenarios. Literature review methods and panel methods for 
selecting valid quality measures have been described previously.25-28 
The full set of CTS measures addresses evaluation and moni-
toring; nonoperative management; electrodiagnostic testing; 
activity assessment and management; surgical appropriateness; 
and perioperative care. The current effort focuses on evaluation 
and monitoring (11 measures), nonoperative treatment (11 mea-
sures), activity assessment and management (10 measures), and 
appropriateness of surgery (13 measures), as shown in Table 1. 
During analysis, scores on individual measures will be aggregated 
into these categories. For these 45 measures, we developed a guid-
ance document with detailed specifications for how each measure 
is to be scored, including eligibility criteria, definitions of terms, 
and adherence criteria. We also developed a paper data collection 
tool and pilot-tested it at a large workers’ compensation insurance 
company (California State Compensation Insurance Fund) and 
at KPNC-ROH. When issues potentially affecting feasibility or 
reliability were identified, the tool was refined accordingly.29 We 
later programmed the tool in Microsoft Access (Microsoft Corp, 
Redmond, WA) and conducted further pilot testing.
Pilot-testing also suggested that workers’ compensation claims 
for CTS may be filed at variable times in the clinical course of 
care. Some patients were referred to a KPNC-Occupational 
Health Center, received a diagnosis, and submitted a workers’ 
compensation claim within a short timeframe. However, CTS had 
been diagnosed in other patients years before they filed a claim. 
Our study design accounted for this issue in two ways. First, the 
eligibility criteria for each measure included specific timeframes 
related to specific milestones in the clinical course of care. Physi-
cians should perform certain tasks, for example, when evaluat-
ing symptoms that could represent CTS or when making a new 
diagnosis. Second, the data collection tool included the dates of 
major milestones related to measure eligibility, including making 
the first visit to a KPNC-Occupational Health Center for symp-
toms related to CTS, receiving a diagnosis of work-associated 
CTS, stopping work because of CTS, having surgery for CTS, 
and returning to work. Any diagnoses from before study enroll-
ment required a positive electrodiagnostic test or an assessment 
by a specialist in musculoskeletal disorders.
SELECTING AND RECRUITING A STUDY POPULATION
Identifying a suitable population was the most substantial chal-
lenge this study faced. Given that our objectives included inform-
ing health care policy, we sought workers with CTS from diverse 
industries. Also, we needed access to high-quality databases that 
included diagnosis and treatment codes, medical care utilization, 
time off work, and disability ratings, among other variables. Many 
large studies of musculoskeletal disorders have been conducted in 
countries with national databases,30,31 offering access to popula-
tions of adequate sample size and reducing the time and expense 
involved in recruiting subjects. Few national databases are avail-
able in the US, but some large integrated health care systems have 
both large patient populations and advanced databases.
Although KPNC is best known for its large regional integrated 
health care systems and prepaid (ie, capitated) care, KPNC-ROH 
is a major provider of fee-for-service occupational health care in 
Northern California. It has been selected by numerous large and 
small employers, workers’ compensation insurance carriers, and 
 89
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-220
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Assessing the Value of High-Quality Care for Work-Associated Carpal Tunnel Syndrome in a Large Integrated Health Care System: Study Design  
Table 1. Quality measures used in study by aspect of care, type of quality problem, and panelist-rated importance score, and 
description of provider task
 
Measure 
 
Aspect of care
Type of quality 
problem
Importance 
score
 
Description of provider task
Evaluation and monitoring: Obtain history, perform physical examination, order tests, and monitor symptoms
1
New symptoms characteristic of CTS require detailed history
Underuse
8
Obtain history
2
New symptoms characteristic of CTS should lead to suspicion
Underuse
7
Obtain history
3
New hand or forearm pain requires evaluation for “red flags”
Underuse
8
Obtain history
4
New symptoms inconsistent with CTS require evaluation
Underuse
8
Obtain history
5
New CTS diagnosis requires assessment of medical risk factors
Underuse
8
Obtain history
6
New suspicion of CTS requires specific physical examination
Underuse
8
Perform physical examination
7
New suspicion of CTS requires evaluation for excessive weight
Underuse
6
Perform physical examination
8
Imaging should be used selectively for suspected CTS
Overuse
7
Order tests
9
Symptoms should be monitored after new diagnosis of CTS
Underuse
7
Monitor symptoms
10
Work-associated CTS symptoms require prompt follow-up
Underuse
8
Monitor symptoms
11
Preoperative electrodiagnostic testing is required for work-associated CTS
Underuse
9
Order tests
Nonoperative treatment: Prescribe splints, medications, and other treatments correctly
1
Splints should be placed in neutral position
Underuse
7
Prescribe splints correctly
2
An attempt at splinting should last at least 6 weeks
Underuse
7
Prescribe splints correctly
3
NSAIDs should not be used for CTS
Overuse
7
Prescribe medications correctly
4
Muscle relaxants should not be used for CTS
Overuse
7
Prescribe medications correctly
5
Opioids should not be used for CTS
Overuse
7
Prescribe medications correctly
6
Diuretics should not be used for CTS
Overuse
7
Prescribe medications correctly
7
Corticosteroid treatment requires discussion of risks
Overuse
6
Prescribe medications correctly
8
Discuss benefits of surgery when offering steroids to patients with severe CTS
Underuse
8
Prescribe medications correctly
9
Steroids for work-associated symptoms require follow-up
Underuse
7
Prescribe medications correctly
10
Limit steroid injections to 4
Overuse
7
Prescribe medications correctly
11
Laser therapy should not be used for CTS
Overuse
7
Order other treatment correctly
Activity assessment and management: Assess activity, assess causation, educate patients, recommend activity changes, and monitor activity
1
New CTS diagnosis requires detailed occupational history
Underuse
6
Assess activity
2
New CTS diagnosis requires assessment of occupational factors: Vibration, force, 
and repetition
Underuse
7
Assess activity
3
New CTS diagnosis requires assessment of nonoccupational factors: Vibration, 
force, and repetition
Underuse
7
Assess activity
4
Exacerbating activities should be identified when symptoms limit functioning
Underuse
7
Assess activity
5
Rationale for work association should be documented
Underuse
7
Assess causation
6
Patients with a new diagnosis of CTS should be educated about the condition
Underuse
7
Educate patients
7
Exposures to vibration, force, and repetition should be minimized
Underuse
7
Recommend activity changes
8
Work status should be monitored when CTS appears work associated
Underuse
7
Monitor activity
9
Return to work after CTS-related disability requires follow-up assessment that 
includes functional limitations
Underuse
6
Monitor activity
10
Prolonged CTS-related disability should trigger evaluation
Underuse
7
Monitor activity
Surgical appropriatenessa: Assure potential benefits of surgery exceed risks
1
Compelling indications for surgery when CTS is mild
Underuse
9
Perform necessary surgery
2
Compelling indications for surgery when CTS is moderate, Part 1
Underuse
9
Perform necessary surgery
3
Compelling indications for surgery when CTS is moderate, Part 2
Underuse
9
Perform necessary surgery
4
Compelling indications for surgery when CTS is severe, Part 1
Underuse
9
Perform necessary surgery
5
Compelling indications for surgery when CTS is severe, Part 2
Underuse
9
Perform necessary surgery
6
Compelling indications for surgery when CTS is severe, Part 3
Underuse
9
Perform necessary surgery
7
Avoidance of carpal tunnel surgery during pregnancy
Overuse
9
Avoid inappropriate surgery
8
Compelling contraindications for surgery when CTS is mild, Part 1
Overuse
9
Avoid inappropriate surgery
9
Compelling contraindications for surgery when CTS is mild, Part 2
Overuse
9
Avoid inappropriate surgery
10
Compelling contraindications for surgery when CTS is moderate, Part 1
Overuse
9
Avoid inappropriate surgery
11
Compelling contraindications for surgery when CTS is moderate, Part 2
Overuse
9
Avoid inappropriate surgery
12
Compelling contraindications for surgery when CTS is moderate, Part 3
Overuse
9
Avoid inappropriate surgery
13
Compelling contraindications for surgery when CTS is moderate, Part 4
Overuse
9
Avoid inappropriate surgery
a Parts apply to different subpopulations within a given severity of carpal tunnel syndrome.
CTS = carpal tunnel syndrome; NSAID = nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug. 
 90
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-220
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Assessing the Value of High-Quality Care for Work-Associated Carpal Tunnel Syndrome in a Large Integrated Health Care System: Study Design 
third-party administrators of workers’ compensation claims. Oc-
cupational conditions are referred to KPNC-Occupational Health 
Center specialists based in 30 clinics. In addition to an electronic 
medical record system, KPNC-ROH maintains a comprehensive 
database of workers’ compensation claims that includes information 
on employer, payer, patient characteristics and diagnoses, recom-
mended worksite accommodations, recommended and actual work 
status, health care utilization and claims (by diagnosis), and pre-
scriptions and pharmacy claims (by diagnosis). Copies of California 
workers’ compensation forms, including Doctor’s First Reports, 
Progress Reports, and Permanent and Stationary Reports, are also 
included. About 70% of patients treated by KPNC-Occupational 
Health Centers also have general health insurance through KPNC.
The KPNC-ROH partners in this study used these internal work-
ers’ compensation databases to prospectively identify 1009 adults 
aged 18 years and older who had a primary or secondary diagnosis 
of CTS that was linked to a workers’ compensation claim (July 
2011 to February 2013). We included secondary diagnoses of CTS 
because some patients with claims related to other upper extremity 
conditions are later found to have CTS. After KPNC-ROH con-
tacted potential subjects, 630 (67.9%) consented to participate; 
another 81 were found to be ineligible (ineligible subjects included 
KPNC employees, subjects who did not speak English or Spanish, 
or subjects who were unable to provide consent), 113 declined to 
participate, and 185 could not be reached (Figure 1). Given the 
challenges inherent in making a diagnosis of CTS, subjects re-
mained eligible if the diagnosis was later changed or the workers’ 
compensation claim was dropped or denied, enabling us to evalu-
ate the quality of the initial evaluation and its effects on outcomes.
MEASURING QUALITY OF CARE
In addition to recruiting an appropriate and sizable population, 
we needed to assess the quality of care by multiple physicians in 
different locations, including ancillary services such as physical 
therapy or imaging. A systemwide electronic medical record system 
eliminated the problem of legibility and made data from multiple 
sites and physicians accessible. 
Specially trained medical-record abstractors at the KPNC Division 
of Research with experience collecting data for quality measurement 
reviewed each subject’s electronic medical record and identified vis-
its related to the CTS claim. Abstractors collected data needed to 
determine eligibility and adherence for each quality measure. After 
excluding patients with no visits to KPNC-Occupational Health 
Center physicians (n = 19) or CTS related to an acute injury (acute 
injuries were excluded from the study; n = 13), abstractors reviewed 
records for 477 patients. Abstractors also obtained additional vari-
ables, including work status at each visit, clinical symptoms and signs, 
results of electrodiagnostic tests, and the dates of major milestones in 
the clinical course of care (see section Developing Quality-of-Care 
Measures for Carpal T
unnel Syndrome). 
To ensure that assessments of quality were valid and reliable, 
abstractors underwent a 2-day training session, including applying 
the guidance document and Microsoft Access data collection tool 
(described earlier) to practice cases. Abstractors initially reviewed 
medical records in pairs, discussed findings, and resolved any dis-
crepancies together and, when questions arose, with the research 
team. Next, to ensure proficiency, we compared abstractors’ reviews 
for 3 cases against those of an occupational medicine physician. 
Subsequently, abstractors scored cases independently, except for 
reliability assessments. Through site visits and phone meetings, an 
experienced nurse researcher (CR) monitored data validity, clarified 
definitions of terms and variables, and maintained a log of ques-
tions and answers. A total of 58 cases underwent duplicate review, 
including 35 used to estimate reliability. 
ASSESSING PATIENT OUTCOMES
We used a prospective, observational study design to examine the 
relationship between quality of care for CTS and patient outcomes. 
Telephone surveys measured changes in each patient’s symptoms 
and functional status between the time of claim submission and 
18 months later. Of the 630 subjects initially recruited, 17 were 
found to be ineligible; 509 (83.0%) of the remaining 613 subjects 
completed the baseline survey, 14 declined, and 90 could not be 
reached. For the follow-up survey, 429 (84.3% of the 509 subjects 
who filled out the baseline survey) responded, 18 declined, 2 were 
deceased, and 60 could not be reached.
To assess outcomes, we used the Boston Carpal Tunnel Ques-
tionnaire and the 12-item Short-Form Health Survey Version 2 
because condition-specific instruments tend to be more responsive 
and general instruments facilitate comparisons across conditions. 
The Boston Carpal Tunnel Questionnaire is specifically tailored 
for CTS and has demonstrated validity, reliability, and responsive-
ness.32-39 It includes 2 subscales: symptom severity and functional 
status. Overall scores are obtained by calculating the mean response 
across component questions; weighting each question according to 
Figure 1. Enrollment of Study Subjects, Survey Responses, and Medical Record 
Review.
KP = Kaiser Permanente.
 91
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-220
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Assessing the Value of High-Quality Care for Work-Associated Carpal Tunnel Syndrome in a Large Integrated Health Care System: Study Design  
the importance to the patient increases responsiveness.32 The widely 
used 12-item Short Form Health Survey Version 2 includes physi-
cal and mental health component scores, with the former being 
more responsive in CTS.33 Finally, we obtained information on any 
permanent disability via the medical record and Permanent and 
Stationary Reports completed by the treating physicians.
To enable adjustment for covariates, surveys included questions 
on prior workers’ compensation claims in the study hand (the hand 
with work-associated CTS included in the study); duration, loca-
tion, and timing of CTS symptoms; involvement of an attorney; 
demographic covariates; medical conditions associated with CTS; 
whether the patient received care for those symptoms before or in 
addition to being seen at KPNC-Occupational Health Center; and 
smoking status, alcohol or substance abuse, and anxiety. 
MEASURING MEDICAL CARE COSTS
To evaluate the association between quality and costs, detailed 
information was needed on the costs of medical care related to CTS, 
including physician visits, physical and occupational therapy visits, 
medications, diagnostic tests, and surgery. Accordingly, KPNC-
ROH provided RAND partners with de-identified datasets contain-
ing procedure codes, diagnosis codes, dates of service, and billed 
amounts for all services billed to workers’ compensation. Because 
many workers’ compensation claims involved additional diagnoses, 
we included only services involving diagnosis codes potentially re-
lated to CTS. We adjusted the billed amounts to match California’s 
fee schedule and summed the spending associated with each CTS 
claim from the time of submission until 18 months later. Of the 
477 patients for whom quality of care was assessed, 3 lacked data 
on medical care expenditures because of having had only a single 
visit to a KPNC-Occupational Health Center.
MEASURING DISABILITY BENEFIT COSTS
Because of the importance of disability costs when considering the 
value of high-quality care for work-associated CTS, we needed to 
estimate the costs associated with temporary and permanent disability 
benefits. Actual payments were not available to us, so we needed to 
estimate them based on other information. Physicians at KPNC-
Occupational Health Centers document activity restrictions and 
work status in detail at each clinic visit, and the physicians’ Permanent 
and Stationary Reports with permanent disability ratings are part of 
the medical record. “Work status” is documented by the physicians 
as “full duty,” “off work,” or “work with restriction of activities.” 
Using work status documented at each visit with a primary 
treating physician as well as data from the KPNC-ROH workers’ 
compensation database, we constructed event histories that tracked 
each patient’s daily work status throughout the 18-month follow-up 
period. We estimated statutory temporary total disability benefits 
using each patient’s self-reported monthly personal income before 
filing the claim, and statutory permanent disability benefits based 
on patients’ permanent disability ratings and statewide data on 
earnings losses for patients with CTS.
MEASURING OTHER COSTS TO WORKERS AND EMPLOYERS
CTS imposes a variety of costs on workers and employers 
beyond the financial cost of medical and disability benefits paid 
by the workers’ compensation system during the first 18 months 
of a claim.40-43 Employers are responsible for the lifetime cost of 
medical treatment for occupational injury and illness, and most 
spending on the average workers’ compensation claim occurs well 
after our follow-up period.44
To estimate uncompensated economic losses for workers during 
the 18-month follow-up period, we used self-reported data from 
our baseline and follow-up surveys on employment, monthly 
wages, annual household and personal income, job changes, 
out-of-pocket medical spending, and out-of-pocket personal care 
expenditures. We used these data to estimate the effect of higher-
quality care on labor income, employment, return to work at the 
at-injury employer, and out-of-pocket medical costs.
Table 2. Characteristics of study population at submission  
of workers’ compensation claim for CTS (N = 509)
Characteristic category
Value
Demographic characteristics
Age, years, mean (SD)
 47.6 (10.4)
Female sex, %
 73.3
Spanish speaking, %
4
Clinical characteristics
Right hand is study hand (affected hand, or dominant hand if 
bilateral), %
81.1
Katz hand diagram rating, %
Classic
5.1
Probable
34.6
Possible
55.4
Unlikely
4.9
Median nerve digit score, %
2 (most likely)
86.8
1 (intermediate)
8.3
0 (least likely)
4.9
Self-efficacy (1-4, confidence in ability to manage CTS), mean 
(SD)
2.3 (0.8)
Health status measures
Boston Carpal Tunnel Questionnaire
Symptom severity score (1-5, 5 = worst), mean (SD)
2.9 (0.8)
Functional status score (1-5, 5 = worst), mean (SD)
2.5 (0.9)
Short Form Health Survey (12 Item, Version 2)
Physical component score (1-100, 100 = best), mean (SD)
 40.1 (9.7)
Mental component score (1-100, 100 = best), mean (SD)
 50.4 (11.5)
Economic characteristics
Work status, %
Working full time
63.5
Working part time
11.0
Not working
25.0
Personal income (US$) in last 4 weeks, %
≤ 1600
24.2
1601-2500
14.9
2501-3750
15.9
3751-5000
19.3
5001-6250
9.2
> 6251
8.6
Data missing
7.9
CTS = carpal tunnel syndrome; SD = standard deviation.
 92
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-220
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Assessing the Value of High-Quality Care for Work-Associated Carpal Tunnel Syndrome in a Large Integrated Health Care System: Study Design 
In addition to the costs of reduced employment and earnings 
that are borne by workers, employers may also bear the cost of 
absenteeism (time off work) and “presenteeism” (reduced pro-
ductivity while at work) because of residual disability following 
recovery from CTS. We estimated costs associated with absentee-
ism and presenteeism at baseline and follow-up using standardized 
instruments and monetized the employer costs using data on the 
daily wage rate and multipliers estimated by Nicholson et al41 for 
absenteeism and by Pauly et al42 for presenteeism.
ANALYSIS
First, we have undertaken descriptive analyses. Table 2 presents 
key characteristics of the study population obtained from the 
baseline survey at claim submission. The age and sex of the study 
population is typical for CTS, including disproportionately affect-
ing women.45 The personal income in the study population was 
relatively high, consistent with the geographic area. 
Figures 2 through 6 show the timing of major milestones in rela-
tion to study enrollment for the 477 patients for whom quality of 
care was assessed. These milestones include making the first visit 
to a KPNC-Occupational Health Center for CTS-related symp-
toms, receiving a diagnosis of work-associated CTS, stopping work 
because of CTS, having surgery for CTS, and returning to work. 
Looking at the timing for when these 477 subjects met the 
first 2 milestones, most subjects fell into 1 of 4 groups. The most 
common situation was for both the first visit and the diagnosis to 
occur within 1 week of study enrollment (267 subjects, 56.1%). 
For 104 subjects (21.8%), the diagnosis preceded the first visit 
and enrollment by at least a week, and sometimes by several years: 
This could reflect later referral to a KPNC-Occupational Health 
Center, transfer of care, or recurrent symptoms. The first visit 
preceded both diagnosis and enrollment by a week or more in 
48 subjects (10.0%): This could indicate that physicians did not 
suspect CTS initially or sought additional evidence before mak-
ing a diagnosis. For 50 subjects (10.5%), the first visit and the 
diagnosis occurred within a week of each other but more than a 
week before enrollment. In these cases, the occupational medicine 
physician may have documented a provisional diagnosis of CTS 
at the first visit but delayed linking it to a workers’ compensa-
tion claim pending greater insight into work association. These 
findings highlight the importance of tailoring eligibility for each 
measure to the specific clinical circumstances at a given time point. 
For example, some measures related to the initial evaluation would 
not apply to patients who already have well-established diagnoses 
of work-associated CTS at the time of presentation to a KPNC-
Occupational Health Center.
Regarding the other 3 major milestones, 178 subjects (37.3%) 
stopped work because of CTS. The median interval from study 
enrollment to stopping work was 91 days (interquartile range = 
103 days). Most patients who stopped work did so to have surgery, 
consistent with practices at KPNC-ROH. Of patients who stopped 
work because of CTS, 147 (82.6%) stopped working within a week 
of surgery. A few patients stopped work and underwent surgery 
before presenting to a KPNC-Occupational Health Center. The 
median duration off work was 41 days (interquartile range = 42 
days) among the 163 patients for which this could be calculated. 
Figure 2. Clinical milestones: Percentage of study subjects achieving each 
milestone by weeks from study enrollment (time = 0): Making first visit to KPNC-
ROH because of symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome.
KPNC-ROH = Kaiser Permanente Northern California-Regional Occupational Health 
Department.
Figure 3. Clinical milestones: Percentage of study subjects achieving each 
milestone by weeks from study enrollment (time = 0): Receiving a diagnosis of 
work-associated carpal tunnel syndrome.
Figure 4. Clinical milestones: Percentage of study subjects achieving each 
milestone by weeks from study enrollment (time = 0): Stopping work because of 
carpal tunnel syndrome.
 93
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-220
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Assessing the Value of High-Quality Care for Work-Associated Carpal Tunnel Syndrome in a Large Integrated Health Care System: Study Design  
After performing these descriptive analyses, we plan to under-
take 2 basic types of multivariate regression analyses. The first will 
involve examining rates of adherence to the measures individu-
ally and by aspect of care, and then using multivariate regression 
models to identify predictors of receiving recommended care. 
Such predictors will include demographic characteristics, clini-
cal features of the CTS (eg, symptom duration, pattern, timing, 
and severity; neurologic signs; results of electrodiagnostic test-
ing), characteristics of workers’ compensation claims (eg, having 
a prior claim, involvement of an attorney), clinic characteristics 
(specifically, volume of patients with CTS treated per year in 
each of the 30 clinics). 
We plan to use a patient-measure-level dataset in this regression 
analysis. Each patient will contribute 1 observation (ie, row) to 
this dataset per quality measure for which they are eligible (eg, 10 
observations if eligible for 10 measures). Patient-level character-
istics (eg, sex and age) will be copied to each corresponding ob-
servation, a categorical variable will represent the quality measure 
for the observation, and a binary variable will indicate whether 
care for the patient adhered to the recommendation in the qual-
ity measure. We plan to use logistic regression with patient-level 
random effects to control for patient-level heterogeneity and will 
use measure-level fixed effects to control for variability in the pass 
rates across the measures. 
The second type of analysis will involve examining whether pa-
tients who receive higher-quality care, specifically those who have 
less evidence of underuse and overuse of care, have better clinical 
outcomes, less disability, and lower costs. Clinical outcomes in-
clude changes in scores on the Boston Carpal Tunnel Question-
naire and the 12-item Short Form Health Survey Version 2 from 
baseline to 18 months. Disability outcomes will include days on 
temporary disability and the presence of permanent disability un-
der the workers’ compensation claim. Cost outcomes will include 
health care expenditures related to the workers’ compensation 
claim for CTS as well as disability-related costs. 
We will also use multivariate regression to assess the relation-
ship between quality of care and clinical and economic outcomes. 
These analyses must be performed at the patient level, instead 
of the patient-measure level, because changes in health and 
costs occur at the patient level. Hence, we will need to develop 
patient-level indexes that aggregate data on adherence to measure 
recommendations. For instance, we will create indexes reflecting 
underuse of care and overuse of care, and indexes for each aspect 
of care (ie, diagnostic evaluation, nonoperative treatment, activ-
ity management, and appropriateness of surgery). Creating each 
index will involve dividing the number of times care adhered to 
the recommendations within a group of related measures (eg, 
related to underuse), by the number of times each patient was 
eligible for those measures. We will weight the indexes by the 
measures’ importance scores. We will tailor the modeling approach 
(eg, linear, Poisson) to each outcome of interest. For example, we 
assume Poisson regression will be needed to determine how days 
on temporary disability vary with quality of care. All analyses 
will control for relevant patient-level characteristics, including 
demographic characteristics, CTS symptoms, clinical signs, elec-
trodiagnostic test results, and characteristics that have been found 
to influence clinical and cost outcomes for work-associated CTS. 
CONCLUSIONS
We have undertaken a comprehensive effort to evaluate the 
quality of medical care provided to individuals with work-asso-
ciated CTS, and to assess the associations between quality and 
both clinical outcomes and diverse costs. However, to achieve our 
goals, we needed to overcome multiple challenges. These included 
developing a set of quality measures de novo, recruiting a sizable 
and diverse population, assessing quality by reviewing medical 
records from multiple treating physicians over a 12-month period, 
comparing patients’ self-reported outcomes at claim submission 
and 18 months later, and using diverse sources of data to estimate 
health care, disability payment, and other costs. Necessary data 
sources included surveys, medical records, administrative data 
sets on health care utilization, detailed information on work 
status, and Permanent and Stationary Reports. In partnership 
with KPNC-ROH, which provides a high volume of care for 
Figure 5. Clinical milestones: Percentage of study subjects achieving each 
milestone by weeks from study enrollment (time = 0): Having surgery for carpal 
tunnel syndrome.
Figure 6. Clinical milestones: Percentage of study subjects achieving each 
milestone by weeks from study enrollment (time = 0): Returning to work.
 94
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-220
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Assessing the Value of High-Quality Care for Work-Associated Carpal Tunnel Syndrome in a Large Integrated Health Care System: Study Design 
occupational disorders, we were able to recruit and survey 509 
adults shortly after submission of workers’ compensation claims 
in 2011 to 2013 and obtain the requisite data. The final stages 
of data collection and analysis are under way. We hope that this 
study can eventually provide a model for future efforts to test 
the association between quality of care and outcomes in workers’ 
compensation for other conditions or in other settings. 
Evidence that higher-quality care for work-associated CTS is 
associated with improved outcomes or lower costs would have 
important implications for patients treated at a KPNC-Occupa-
tional Health Center, elsewhere in California, and in workers’ 
compensation systems across the country. Several prior studies 
have demonstrated that greater adherence to recommended care 
processes is associated with improved patient outcomes.18,19,24 
Workers’ compensation is unique in the US health care system 
in that the parties responsible for health care expenditures, em-
ployers and workers’ compensation payers, are also responsible 
for disability costs. This creates a natural alignment of incentives 
such that employers and payers may experience returns on invest-
ments in quality. More importantly, individuals with occupational 
disorders stand to benefit from better health, a more rapid return 
to work, and reduced economic losses. 
If we find that higher-quality care is associated with improved 
outcomes and lower costs, as hypothesized, systematic efforts to 
monitor and improve quality would be warranted. To date little 
has been done to improve quality of care for patients with occu-
pational disorders, in contrast with the myriad efforts in place in 
other health care settings. For example, the Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid Services has instituted various public reporting poli-
cies and financial penalties for hospitals, targeting deficient care 
processes and worse-than-expected outcomes, including readmis-
sions, health care-associated infections, and other problems. For 
commercial health plans, the National Committee for Quality 
Assurance has long overseen the Healthcare Effectiveness Data 
and Information Set, which issues report cards that highlight 
preventive care and the treatment of chronic diseases. Best prac-
tices for incentivizing and improving quality could be adapted 
from other health care sectors to workers’ compensation settings 
in California and elsewhere.
Our descriptive analyses reveal some potential challenges. In 
our population, time off work was relatively short and largely 
limited to patients undergoing surgery. This may make it harder 
for us to detect associations between quality and time on tempo-
rary disability.46 At least one in five patients were diagnosed with 
work-associated CTS before presenting to a KPNC-Occupational 
Health Center—and some even underwent surgery. This could 
hamper future efforts to improve care for this population. Finally, 
we detected some delays between presentation to a KPNC- 
Occupational Health Center and diagnosis of CTS, and between 
diagnosis of CTS and the filing of a claim. This can be warranted 
in some patients, such as those with atypical symptoms. However, 
such delays also can contribute to worse outcomes.47-49 
This research effort has several limitations. Some patients in 
our sample who had an initial diagnosis of CTS were found to 
have other conditions. However, our quality measures were de-
signed to include the challenges in making an accurate diagnosis 
of CTS. We have so far been unable to include quality measures 
related to electrodiagnostic studies and perioperative care, which 
may reduce our ability to detect an association between quality, 
outcomes, and costs. Finally, because of the unique environment 
at KPNC-ROH, potential findings may not be fully reflective of 
conditions in workers’ compensation settings nationwide. The 
quality of care for CTS may also be higher at KPNC-ROH, 
making it harder to detect an effect at KPNC-ROH on clinical 
outcomes and costs.
Demonstrating an association between higher-quality care for 
work-associated CTS and both clinical outcomes and costs has 
important implications for policy. If associations are detected as 
a result of the work we have undertaken, systematic efforts to 
monitor and improve quality of care for patients with CTS will be 
warranted at KPNC-ROH, across California, and nationwide. v
Disclosure Statement
The RAND Corporation has received funding from Insurance and Care NSW, 
Australia, for the evaluation of workers’ compensation treatment guidelines 
(Teryl Nuckols), and from the Collaborative Spine Research Foundation (Teryl 
Nuckols).The author(s) have no other potential conflicts of interest to report. 
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by a grant from the Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality (5R01HS018982-03). Prior stages in the work (quality measure 
development) was supported with funding from the California Commission 
on Health and Safety and Workers’ Compensation (CHSWC) and with an 
unrestricted gift from Zenith Insurance. CHSWC is a state-sponsored joint 
labor-management body charged with examining the health and safety and 
workers’ compensation systems in California and recommending administrative 
or legislative modifications to improve their operation. The funders played no 
role in the design, conduct, or reporting of this work.
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health Communications provided editorial 
assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Conlon C, Asch S, Hanson M, et al. Assessing the value of high-quality care 
for work-associated carpal tunnel syndrome in a large integrated health care 
system: Study design. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-220. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.7812/TPP/15-220.
References
 1. Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. Value in health care: accounting for 
cost, quality, safety, outcomes, and innovation. Workshop summary. Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press; 2009 Dec 16.
 2. McGlynn EA, Asch SM, Adams J, et al. The quality of health care delivered to adults 
in the United States. N Engl J Med 2003 Jun 26;348(26):2635-45. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMsa022615.
 3. Key features of the Affordable Care Act by year [Internet]. Washington, DC: US 
Department of Health and Human Services; 2015 Aug 13 [cited 2016 Apr 25]. 
Available from: www.hhs.gov/healthcare/facts/timeline/timeline-text.html.
 4. Leatherman S, Berwick D, Iles D, et al. The business case for quality: case studies 
and an analysis. Health Aff (Millwood) 2003 Mar-Apr;22(2):17-30. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1377/hlthaff.22.2.17.
 5. ACS National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (ACS NSQIP) [Internet]. 
Chicago, IL: American College of Surgeons; c2016 [cited 2016 Apr 8]. Available from: 
www.facs.org/quality-programs/acs-nsqip.
 6. Roadmap for quality measurement in the traditional medicare fee-for-service 
program [Internet]. Baltimore, MD: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; 
2009 [cited 2016 Apr 25]. Available from: www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-
Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-Instruments/QualityInitiativesGenInfo/Downloads/
QualityMeasurementRoadmap_OEA1-16_508.pdf.
 95
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-220
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Assessing the Value of High-Quality Care for Work-Associated Carpal Tunnel Syndrome in a Large Integrated Health Care System: Study Design  
 7. HEDIS & performance measurement [Internet]. Washington, DC: National Committee 
for Quality Assurance; c2016 [cited 2016 Apr 25]. Available from: www.ncqa.org/
HEDISQualityMeasurement.aspx.
 8. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary National Health 
Statistics Group. National health expenditure accounts [Internet]. Baltimore, MD: 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; 2013 [cited 2016 Apr 25]. Available 
from: www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-systems/statistics-trends-and-
reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/nationalhealthaccountshistorical.html.
 9. Porter ME. What is value in health care? N Engl J Med 2010 Dec 23;363(26):2477-
81. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1011024.
 10. Uncompensated wage loss for injured workers with permanent disabilities 
[Internet]. San Francisco, CA: State of California Department of 
Industrial Relations; 2007 May [cited 2016 Apr 25]. Available from: www.
dir.ca.gov/dwc/UncompensatedWageLossforInjuredWorkerswithPD/
UncompensatedWageLossforInjuredWorkerswithPD.html.
 11. Abásolo L, Blanco M, Bachiller J, et al. A health system program to reduce 
work disability related to musculoskeletal disorders. Ann Intern Med 2005 Sep 
20;143(6):404-14. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-143-6-200509200-
00005. Erratum in: Ann Intern Med 2005 Dec 6;143(11):W165. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.7326/0003-4819-143-11-200512060-00026-w1.
 12. Dale AM, Harris-Adamson C, Rempel D, et al. Prevalence and incidence of carpal 
tunnel syndrome in US working populations: pooled analysis of six prospective 
studies. Scand J Work Environ Health 2013 Sep 1;39(5):495-505. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.5271/sjweh.3351.
 13. Spector JT, Turner JA, Fulton-Kehoe D, Franklin G. Pre-surgery disability 
compensation predicts long-term disability among workers with carpal tunnel 
syndrome. Am J Ind Med 2012 Sep;55(9):816-32. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
ajim.22029.
 14. Donabedian A. Evaluating the quality of medical care. Milbank Mem Fund Q 1966 
Jul;44(3):Suppl:166-206. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0009.2005.00397.x.
 15. Brook RH, McGlynn EA, Cleary PD. Quality of health care. Part 2: measuring quality 
of care. N Engl J Med 1996 Sep 26;335(13):966-70. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/
NEJM199609263351311.
 16. Fitch K, Bernstein SJ, Aguilar MD, et al. The RAND/UCLA appropriateness method 
user’s manual. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 2001.
 17. Shekelle P. The appropriateness method. Med Decis Making 2004 Mar-
Apr;24(2):228-31. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0272989X04264212.
 18. Hepner KA, Rowe M, Rost K, et al. The effect of adherence to practice guidelines on 
depression outcomes. Ann Intern Med 2007 Sep 4;147(5):320-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.7326/0003-4819-147-5-200709040-00007.
 19. Higashi T, Shekelle PG, Adams JL, et al. Quality of care is associated with survival 
in vulnerable older patients. Ann Intern Med 2005 Aug 16;143(4):274-81. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-143-4-200508160-00008.
 20. Shekelle PG, Chassin MR, Park RE. Assessing the predictive validity of the RAND/
UCLA appropriateness method criteria for performing carotid endarterectomy. Int J 
Technol Assess Health Care 1998 Fall;14(4):707-27. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
s0266462300012022.
 21. Shekelle PG, Kahan JP, Bernstein SJ, Leape LL, Kamberg CJ, Park RE. The 
reproducibility of a method to identify the overuse and underuse of medical 
procedures. N Engl J Med 1998 Jun 25;338(26):1888-95. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1056/nejm199806253382607.
 22. Ganz DA, Chang JT, Roth CP, et al. Quality of osteoarthritis care for community-
dwelling older adults. Arthritis Rheum 2006 Apr 15;55(2):241-7. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/art.21844.
 23. MacLean CH, Louie R, Leake B, et al. Quality of care for patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis. JAMA 2000 Aug 23-30;284(8):984-92. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jama.284.8.984.
 24. Quintana JM, Escobar A, Arostegui I, et al. Health-related quality of life and 
appropriateness of knee or hip joint replacement. Arch Intern Med 2006 Jan 23; 
166(2):220-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinte.166.2.220.
 25. Maggard MA, Harness NG, Chang WT, Parikh JA, Asch SM, Nuckols TK; Carpal 
Tunnel Quality Group. Indications for performing carpal tunnel surgery: clinical 
quality measures. Plast Reconstr Surg 2010 Jul;126(1):169-79. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/prs.0b013e3181da8685. Erratum in: Plast Reconstr Surg 2011 
Feb;127(2):1024. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/prs.0b013e31820c039b.
 26. Nuckols T, Harber P, Sandin K, et al. Quality measures for the diagnosis and non-
operative management of carpal tunnel syndrome in occupational settings. J Occup 
Rehabil 2011 Mar;21(1):100-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10926-010-9260-6.
 27. Nuckols TK, Maggard Gibbons M, Harness NG, Chang WT, Chung KC, Asch SM; 
Carpal Tunnel Quality Group. Clinical quality measures for intraoperative and 
perioperative management in carpal tunnel surgery. Hand (N Y) 2011 Jun;6(2):119-31. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11552-011-9325-9.
 28. Sandin KJ, Asch SM, Jablecki CK, Kilmer DD, Nuckols TK; Carpal Tunnel Quality 
Group. Clinical quality measures for electrodiagnosis in suspected carpal tunnel 
syndrome. Muscle Nerve 2010 Apr;41(4):444-52. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
mus.21617.
 29. Nuckols TK, Griffin A, Asch SM, et al. RAND/UCLA quality-of-care measures for 
carpal tunnel syndrome: tools for assessing quality of care and appropriateness of 
surgery [Internet]. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 2011 [cited 2016 Apr 25]. 
Available from: www.rand.org/pubs/technical_reports/TR809.html.
 30. Andersen JH, Thomsen JF, Overgaard E, et al. Computer use and carpal tunnel 
syndrome: a 1-year follow-up study. JAMA 2003 Jun 11;289(22):2963-9. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.289.22.2963.
 31. Atroshi I, Gurnmesson C, Ornstein E, Johnsson R, Ranstam J. Carpal tunnel 
syndrome and keyboard use at work: a population-based study. Arthritis Rheum 2007 
Nov;56(11):3620-5. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.22956.
 32. Amadio PC, Silverstein MD, Ilstrup DM, Schleck CD, Jensen LM. Outcome 
assessment for carpal tunnel surgery: the relative responsiveness of generic, arthritis-
specific, disease-specific, and physical examination measures. J Hand Surg Am 1996 
May;21(3):338-46. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0363-5023(96)80340-6.
 33. Bessette L, Sangha O, Kuntz KM, et al. Comparative responsiveness of generic 
versus disease-specific and weighted versus unweighted health status measures 
in carpal tunnel syndrome. Med Care 1998 Apr;36(4):491-502. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00005650-199804000-00005.
 34. Cohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. 2nd ed. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1988.
 35. Gay RE, Amadio PC, Johnson JC. Comparative responsiveness of the disabilities 
of the arm, shoulder, and hand, the carpal tunnel questionnaire, and the SF-36 to 
clinical change after carpal tunnel release. J Hand Surg Am 2003 Mar;28(2):250-4. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00005650-199804000-00005.
 36. Katz JN, Gelberman RH, Wright EA, Lew RA, Liang MH. Responsiveness of self-
reported and objective measures of disease severity in carpal tunnel syndrome. Med 
Care 1994 Nov;32(11):1127-33. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00005650-199411000-
00005.
 37. Leite JC, Jerosch-Herold C, Song F. A systematic review of the psychometric 
properties of the Boston Carpal Tunnel Questionnaire. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 
2006 Oct 20;7:78. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00005650-199411000-00005.
 38. Levine DW, Simmons BP, Koris MJ, et al. A self-administered questionnaire for the 
assessment of severity of symptoms and functional status in carpal tunnel syndrome. 
J Bone Joint Surg Am 1993 Nov;75(11):1585-92.
 39. Sambandam SN, Priyanka P, Gul A, Ilango B. Critical analysis of outcome measures 
used in the assessment of carpal tunnel syndrome. Int Orthop 2008 Aug;32(4):497-
504. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00264-007-0344-7.
 40. Boden LI, Galizzi M. Economic consequences of workplace injuries and illnesses: lost 
earnings and benefit adequacy. Am J Ind Med 1999 Nov;36(5):487-503. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/(sici)1097-0274(199911)36:5<487::aid-ajim1>3.0.co;2-2.
 41. Nicholson S, Pauly MV, Polsky D, Sharda C, Szrek H, Berger ML. Measuring 
the effects of work loss on productivity with team production. Health Econ 2006 
Feb;15(2):111-23. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hec.1052.
 42. Pauly MV, Nicholson S, Polsky D, Berger ML, Sharda C. Valuing reductions in on-the-
job illness: ‘presenteeism’ from managerial and economic perspectives. Health Econ 
2008 Apr;17(4):469-85. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/Hec.1266.
 43. Reville RT, Polich S, Seabury SA, Giddens E. Permanent disability at private, self-
insured firms. A study of earnings loss, replacement, and return to work for workers’ 
compensation claimants. Santa Monica, CA: RAND; 2001.
 44. Bellusci D. California workers’ compensation at 100 years part II: how do we rate? 
Part 2. Proceedings of the WCIRB Annual Workers’ Compensation Conference; 2015 
Jun 11; San Francisco, CA. Oakland, CA: WCIRB California; 2015 Jun 17.
 45. Kleopa KA. In the clinic. Carpal tunnel syndrome. Ann Intern Med 2015 Sep 
1;163(5):ITC1. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/AITC201509010.
 46. Cheadle A, Franklin G, Wolfhagen C, et al. Factors influencing the duration of 
work-related disability: a population-based study of Washington State workers’ 
compensation. Am J Public Health 1994 Feb;84(2):190-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.2105/ajph.84.2.190.
 47. Daniell WE, Fulton-Kehoe D, Chiou LA, Franklin GM. Work-related carpal tunnel 
syndrome in Washington State workers’ compensation: temporal trends, clinical 
practices, and disability. Am J Ind Med 2005 Oct;48(4):259-69. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/ajim.20203.
 48. Steyers CM. Recurrent carpal tunnel syndrome. Hand Clin 2002 May;18(2):339-45. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0749-0712(01)00005-1.
 49. Wickizer TM, Franklin G, Fulton-Kehoe D, et al. Improving quality, preventing 
disability and reducing costs in workers’ compensation healthcare: a population-
based intervention study. Med Care 2011 Dec;49(12):1105-11. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/MLR.0b013e31823670e3.
 96
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-226
SOUL OF THE HEALER
Girl with a Pearl Earring 
oil paint on canvas
Zhanna Vishnevskaya, MD
This oil painting is an original reproduction of the famous painting by Johannes Vermeer (1632-1675), Girl with a 
Pearl Earring, which is housed at The Mauritshuis in The Hague, The Netherlands. Every artist has been encouraged 
to copy works by renowned masters to better understand the skill and spirit that inform a great artist’s vision.
All medical practitioners know their jobs can be demanding and overwhelming. Recharging daily is necessary for 
continuing to work like a genius and having a balanced life. Dr Vishnevskaya has found that painting is the best way 
to refresh her mind. Aside from painting, she enjoys playing guitar, writing, and learning languages.
Dr Vishnevskaya is a Physician in the Department of Family Medicine at Pinole Medical Offices in CA.
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-226
 97
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-248
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Special Report
Amniotic Fluid Embolism: Using the Medical Staff Process  
to Facilitate Streamlined Care
Peter M Hession, MD; Cynthia J Millward, MD; Joyce E Gottesfeld, MD; Thomas F Rehring, MD;  
Kevin B Miller, MD; Paul M Chetham, MD; S Kel Muckleroy, MD; Christopher A Bates, MD; Harris W Hollis, Jr, MD 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-248
E-pub: 08/17/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-248
ABSTRACT
Amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) is a catastrophic consequence of labor and delivery 
that often results in maternal and neonatal death. These poor outcomes are related largely 
to the rarity of the event in a population overwhelmingly biased by overall good health. 
Despite the presence of national AFE registries, there are no published algorithmic ap-
proaches to its management, to our knowledge. The purpose of this article is to share a 
care pathway developed by a multidisciplinary group at a community teaching hospital. 
Post hoc analysis of a complicated case of AFE resulted in development of this pathway, 
which addresses many of the major consequences of AFE. We offer this algorithm as a 
template for use by any institution willing to implement a clinical pathway to treat AFE. 
It is accompanied by the remarkable case outcome that prompted its development. 
INTRODUCTION
Amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) has 
remained an enigmatic and catastrophic 
complication of pregnancy since it was 
initially described in 1926.1 Anesthesi-
ologists are often the first physicians to 
recognize the initial signs of impending 
cardiovascular collapse and to coordinate 
the care of the critically ill mother and 
fetus. Maternal death directly attributed 
to AFE was not well known until the 
seminal publication by Steiner and Lush-
baugh2 in 1941. To date, the exact patho-
physiology of AFE remains incompletely 
understood. Early reports postulated 
that the syndrome was embolic in na-
ture.3 Contemporary thinking suggests 
an immunologic etiology4 because am-
niotic fluid contains proinflammatory, 
vasospastic, and coagulative substances 
that cause acute lung injury, ventricular 
dysfunction, and activation of clotting 
factors predisposing to disseminated 
intravascular coagulation (DIC).5 The 
syndrome frequently manifests the fol-
lowing symptoms: maternal hypoxia, 
hypotension, DIC, seizure activity, and 
fetal distress.4,6 Mortality rates ranging 
from 20% to 60% have been reported 
recently.7
The incidence of AFE ranges from ap-
proximately 1 case per 15,200 deliveries 
in North America to 1 per 53,800 deliv-
eries in Europe.8 The sporadic occurrence 
of AFE means most anesthesiologists, 
obstetricians, and delivery units are not 
prepared for the herculean efforts that 
are necessary to achieve both maternal 
and neonatal survival. Table 1 lists the 
most frequent elements of the clinical 
presentation that should alert the anes-
thesiologist and obstetrician to the pos-
sibility of AFE. The triad of hypotension, 
hypoxemia with respiratory failure, and 
DIC should prompt immediate imple-
mentation of the proposed AFE man-
agement pathway described later in this 
article. It was developed following the 
successful outcome of the case reported 
here. Clearly, the classic triad is not al-
ways present, and milder cases of AFE 
may not include all common manifesta-
tions. A high index of suspicion is critical 
for a favorable outcome. 
CASE ILLUSTRATION 
A 33-year-old pregnant woman, grav-
ida 1, para 0, was admitted at 41 weeks 
gestation for a scheduled induction of la-
bor because she was past her due date. Her 
medical history included glomerulone-
phritis during childhood, which resolved 
after 1 year of prednisone treatment. Her 
obstetric history was unremarkable with 
an uncomplicated pregnancy. After ad-
mission, the patient was given 2 doses of 
misoprostol; she experienced spontaneous 
rupture of membranes and entered active 
labor. Approximately 2 hours after an un-
eventful epidural placement, the patient 
became hypotensive, and fetal monitor-
ing documented severe bradycardia. Fe-
tal distress prompted emergent cesarean 
delivery. Maternal seizures began during 
the cesarean delivery, with subsequent 
Peter M Hession, MD, is a Cardiac Anesthesiologist at Saint Joseph Hospital in Denver, CO. E-mail: peter.hession@sclhs.net. Cynthia J Millward, MD, is 
a Chief Resident in General Surgery at Saint Joseph Hospital in Denver, CO. E-mail: cynthia.japhet@sclhs.net. Joyce E Gottesfeld, MD, is an Attending 
Obstetrician/Gynecologist at the Franklin Medical Center in Denver, CO. E-mail: joyce.e.gottesfeld@kp.org. Thomas F Rehring, MD, is the Director of 
Quality, Colorado Permanente Medical Group in Denver. E-mail: thomas.f.rehring@kp.org. Kevin B Miller, MD, is a Cardiac Surgeon at Saint Joseph 
Hospital in Denver, CO. E-mail: kevin.miller@sclhs.net. Paul M Chetham, MD, is a Cardiac Anesthesiologist at the Franklin Medical Center in 
 
Denver, CO. E-mail: paul.chetham@kp.org. S Kel Muckleroy, MD, is a General Surgeon at the Englewood Medical Center in Denver, CO. E-mail: 
stephen.k.muckleroy@kp.org. Christopher A Bates MD, is a Critical Care Pulmonologist in the Department of Critical Care Pulmonology and Sleep 
 
Apnea at the Franklin Medical Center in Denver, CO. E-mail: christopher.a.bates@kp.org. Harris W Hollis, Jr, MD, is the Senior Research Advisor in 
 
the Department of Graduate Medical Education: General Surgery at Saint Joseph Hospital in Denver, CO. E-mail: harriswhitt.hollisjr@sclhs.net.
Table 1. Clinical presentation  
of amniotic fluid embolisma
 
Symptom or sign
Frequency of 
occurrence, %
Hypotension
100
Fetal distress
100
Pulmonary edema or ARDS
93
Cardiopulmonary arrest
87
Coagulopathy
83
Dyspnea
49
Seizure
48
a Excerpted and reprinted with kind permission from: 
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 172(4 
Pt 1), Clark SL, Hankins GD, Dudley DA, Dildy GA, 
Porter TF. Amniotic fluid embolism: analysis of the 
national registry, p 1158-67: Table V, with permission 
from Elsevier.
ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome.
credits available for this article — see page 128.
 98
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-248
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Amniotic Fluid Embolism: Using the Medical Staff Process to Facilitate Streamlined Care 
cardiac arrest requiring cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation. This maternal collapse was 
consistent with AFE. 
Five minutes into the resuscitation, 
a live female infant was delivered via 
cesarean delivery. After 75 minutes of 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, the pa-
tient remained in cardiopulmonary ar-
rest and experienced DIC. The massive 
transfusion protocol was initiated, and 
a cardiac surgeon was recruited. Ap-
propriate cannulae in the right femoral 
artery and vein were placed to establish 
full cardiopulmonary support (CPS) via 
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
(ECMO). After the initiation of CPS, 
massive abdominal distention was noted, 
suspicious for active intraabdominal hem-
orrhage. Exploratory laparotomy by the 
obstetrician and on-call general surgeon 
revealed 3 L of intraabdominal blood. 
The left uterine artery was ligated, and 
the abdomen was closed. 
In the intensive care unit (ICU), a tem-
perature control protocol for brain cool-
ing was initiated in an attempt to preserve 
brain function. The patient remained on 
CPS and a regimen of vasopressors as 
needed. DIC persisted, as manifested by 
hemorrhage and progressive abdominal 
distention. Embolization of the uterine 
arteries by an interventional radiologist 
was attempted, but during the attempt, 
the right lower extremity developed 
critical limb ischemia as a consequence 
of femoral cannulation for CPS. The 
patient was returned emergently to the 
operating room, where groin cannula-
tion was replaced by ascending aorta 
and right atrial cannulation for CPS. 
Arterial flow to the ischemic right lower 
extremity was reestablished but resulted 
in compartment syndrome treated with 
a four-compartment fasciotomy by the 
vascular surgery team. A total hysterec-
tomy and left salpingo-oophorectomy 
were necessary to control hemorrhage. 
Raw bleeding surfaces in the pelvis were 
treated by packing maneuvers. 
The patient returned to the ICU, 
where transfusion was continued. Once 
the DIC resolved, packing was removed 
from the pelvis. After stabilization, CPS 
was discontinued. During the entire re-
suscitation, the patient received a total 
of 154 U of packed red blood cells, 78 U 
of fresh frozen plasma, 25 U of platelets, 
12 U of cryoprecipitate, and 2 doses of 
Factor VII to control the DIC. 
After resuscitation, cardiopulmonary 
stabilization, and resolution of coagulopa-
thy, the patient recovered. She was dis-
charged from the hospital on postpartum 
Day 26. The infant was discharged 9 days 
after birth. Mother and baby are doing 
well, with no deficits at 3-year follow-up. 
DISCUSSION
The successful outcome in this case 
prompted a post hoc analysis by a multi-
disciplinary task force to clarify emergent 
processes that might improve future out-
comes. Despite recent advances in prena-
tal care, AFE remains a most perplexing 
and frequently fatal consequence of par-
turition. Major risk factors predisposing 
to AFE include maternal age older than 
35 years, cesarean delivery, vacuum or 
forceps-assisted delivery, placenta pre-
via or abruption, eclampsia, and fetal 
distress.8 There have been previously 
published reports analyzing complex 
treatment modalities for maternal sup-
port in the immediate postpartum set-
ting when AFE is encountered.7,8 The 
proinflammatory pathology of AFE 
manifests as the clinical scenario of re-
spiratory failure, cardiovascular collapse, 
coagulopathy, and occasionally seizure 
activity. The circulatory and respira-
tory support following maternal collapse 
can include the use of ventricular assist 
devices, ECMO, inhalation of nitrous 
oxide, and cardiopulmonary bypass with 
or without intra-aortic balloon pump.4,9,10 
This illustrative case demonstrates the 
benefit of a multidisciplinary approach to 
the complex care required to treat AFE. 
Larger multispecialty integrated health 
care organizations are in a pivotal position 
to champion refinements in clinical care 
pathways. Other authors have suggested 
that multidisciplinary teamwork offers 
the most effective strategy for maternal 
and fetal survival.11 However, an inter-
disciplinary decision tree is difficult for 
the anesthesiologist and obstetrician to 
assimilate in the frenetic environment 
that accompanies AFE. Rapid informa-
tion dissemination for recruitment of 
resources and specialty providers is critical 
for a successful outcome. 
On the basis of the experience with 
a ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm 
and fetal distress protocols already imple-
mented at our institution, an AFE algo-
rithm was developed. The algorithm was 
vetted through the medical staff process, 
approved, and promoted in the hopes of 
clarifying the emergent management of 
AFE (Figure 1). In this care pathway, the 
On-Call Nursing Supervisor serves as the 
initial multidisciplinary coordinator dur-
ing the “mobilization of resources” phase 
of treatment. This allows the attending 
anesthesiologist and obstetrician to focus 
on the mother with the full knowledge 
that a previously vetted algorithm will fa-
cilitate coordination of all essential aspects 
of care, including that of the neonate. Sep-
arate subalgorithms for anesthesiologists, 
obstetricians, cardiac surgeons, intensiv-
ists, general surgeons, and neonatologists 
are integrated into the one-page AFE 
algorithm to streamline the processes and 
to maximize the chance that smaller but 
critical decisions are accomplished in rapid 
sequence. We postulate that a similar AFE 
algorithm could be easily adopted in any 
hospital willing to merge the best aspects 
of its own facility’s previously established 
protocols, such as those for emergent fetal 
distress, massive transfusion, or ruptured 
abdominal aortic aneurysm. 
The ultimate goal of the algorithm is to 
decrease variability in care and to stream-
line care pathways, which are likely to op-
timize outcomes. The rarity of this event 
makes proof of this hypothesis extremely 
difficult, but we contend that drills similar 
to mass casualty exercises or treatment 
of malignant hyperthermia are useful. 
We note that during the period of time 
required to obtain clinical acceptance of 
this care pathway by multiple depart-
ments, an interval maternal death caused 
by AFE occurred. This adverse outcome, 
which occurred in the absence of a defined 
… during the period of time 
required to obtain clinical 
acceptance of this care pathway 
by multiple departments, 
an interval maternal death 
caused by AFE occurred.
 99
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-248
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Amniotic Fluid Embolism: Using the Medical Staff Process to Facilitate Streamlined Care 
clinical pathway, attests to the need for a 
streamlined approach to the management 
of AFE. Our institution is currently in the 
process of implementing proactive AFE 
training for our anesthesiologists. We also 
firmly support the concept of debriefing 
following each event to modify processes 
as needed.
Once the anesthesiologist or obstetri-
cian recognizes cardiopulmonary collapse, 
the AFE algorithm can be implemented 
by a single phone call to the Nursing 
Supervisor. Figure 1 outlines in detail 
the AFE algorithm now in place at our 
institution. Each subalgorithm provides 
a checklist to be considered by the in-
dividual specialty services. Limiting the 
document to one page provides sim-
plicity for rapid information transfer 
and streamlined implementation. This 
algorithm is not an attempt to compre-
hensively address each variable that may 
present in an individual case. It is an 
overarching document designed to limit 
major oversights in care. There are areas 
of controversy in the blood product ratios 
used to manage massive transfusion, in 
the use of ECMO for CPS, and in the lev-
els for targeted temperature control (see 
Figure 1, Blood Bank, Cardiac Surgery, 
and Anesthesia). Individual institutions 
can tailor recommendations to regional 
preferences (practice standards) with 
appropriate support from the literature.
Intensivists rapidly assume ongoing 
management of the multiple organ fail-
ure and hemodynamic instability on the 
patient’s arrival in ICU. Recruitment of 
specialists early in the chain of events 
facilitates the transition from the labor 
deck to the ICU. The added expertise of 
those critical care specialists makes it less 
likely that maternal and fetal stabilization 
efforts will fail.
While the obstetrician focuses on deliv-
ery of the infant and control of maternal 
DIC and uterine hemorrhage with the 
assistance of the general surgeon, the 
anesthesiologist and cardiac surgeon can 
manage cardiopulmonary failure. In ad-
dition to securing the airway, perform-
ing advanced cardiac life support on the 
mother, pediatric advanced life support 
on the infant, and administering blood 
products via the massive transfusion 
protocol, the anesthesiologist(s) may per-
form transesophageal echocardiography. 
Figure 1. Algorithmic management of amniotic fluid embolism (AFE).
ACLS = Advanced Cardiac Life Support; CPR = cardiopulmonary resuscitation; CV = cardiovascular; DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation; ECMO/CPS = extracorporeal mem-
brane oxygenation/cardiopulmonary support; FFP = fresh frozen plasma; ICU = intensive care unit; lab = laboratory; MTP = massive transfusion protocol; OB = obstetrics; OR = operating 
room; PALS = Pediatric Advanced Life Support; PRBC = packed red blood cell; RN = registered nurse; TEE = transesophageal echocardiography.
 100
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-248
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Amniotic Fluid Embolism: Using the Medical Staff Process to Facilitate Streamlined Care 
Transesophageal echocardiography can 
be useful at identifying amniotic debris 
in the atrium, facilitating removal on 
cardiopulmonary bypass.12 ECMO/
CPS using extracorporeal bypass or 
left ventricular assist devices has been 
described as a means to treat acute 
cardiopulmonary failure. Ecker and as-
sociates13 recently reported in the New 
England Journal of Medicine a similar 
case requiring extensive CPS. Diagno-
sis and management of AFE is elegantly 
outlined in their report. The CESAR 
trial suggested that ECMO for treat-
ment of reversible respiratory failure 
was superior to conventional ventilation 
because it increased survival without se-
vere disability.14 Some investigators have 
challenged the CESAR trial results and 
methods. Other articles also promote the 
use of ECMO for treatment of reversible 
respiratory failure and acute respiratory 
distress syndrome, but all suggest that 
validation and prospective studies are 
necessary to determine the optimal tim-
ing of initiation and specific indications 
to standardize the use of ECMO in such 
settings.15-19 As in this case, the use of 
ECMO to treat cardiopulmonary failure 
in the setting of AFE has been described 
by other investigators.4,5,7,9,10,13 The car-
diac surgeon will determine whether to 
initiate CPS on the basis of general in-
dications demonstrated in the Sidebar: 
Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation 
Checklist. In the ICU, the general sur-
geon or surgical intensivist may adopt 
management strategies that include use 
of lung protective ventilation, targeted 
temperature control for preservation of 
neurologic function,20 and early enteral 
vs parenteral nutritional support. 
When such a checklist is in place 
before the acute event occurs, lessons 
learned from prior experience are not 
forgotten in the protracted interim. Each 
subspecialty can be automatically and 
seamlessly integrated to provide a unique 
and critical service in management of 
the multisystem organ failure associated 
with AFE. This article combines our 
experience and knowledge gained from 
the excellent work of others5-7,13 into a 
one-page document that is posted in the 
labor and delivery suites, in the main 
operating rooms, and at selected critical 
locations for easy visibility and accessi-
bility. We are in the process of develop-
ing drills to facilitate implementation. 
Ideally, such drills will be incorporated 
in periodic training in a manner simi-
lar to mass casualty exercises. Regional 
practice variations in other institutions 
will mandate changes at the individual 
hospital level, but the general principles 
outlined herein constitute a best practice 
model approved by our institution and 
based on the current literature. Similar 
algorithmic decision trees have shown 
utility in the management of malignant 
hyperthermia, acute coronary syn-
dromes, and acute stroke.21-25 
CONCLUSION
The establishment of a multidisci-
plinary care pathway for the manage-
ment of AFE is designed to improve 
maternal and neonatal survival. After a 
successful maternal and neonatal out-
come following a case of AFE at our 
institution, the course of events and 
components of care were reviewed, and 
the parties involved were questioned in 
an effort to ascertain the elements nec-
essary to reproduce such a monumental 
success in future cases of AFE. Our 
analysis suggests that the collaborative 
effort between multidisciplinary care 
providers, including early initiation of 
the massive transfusion protocol and 
implementation of appropriate CPS, 
were the critical components for success. 
Algorithmic treatment is intended to 
decrease variability, mitigate physician 
stress, and streamline responses. We offer 
this report as a template for management 
of AFE and to encourage other institu-
tions to be proactive in their modifica-
tions and implementation of similar 
algorithmic approaches to AFE. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgment
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health 
Communications provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Hession PM, Millward CJ, Gottesfeld JE, et al. 
Amniotic fluid embolism: Using the medical staff 
process to facilitate streamlined care. Perm J 2016 
Fall;20(4):15-248. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/15-248.
References
 1. Meyer JR. Embolia pulmonar amnio caseosa. Brasil 
Medico 1926;2:301-3.
 2. Steiner PE, Lushbaugh CC. Maternal pulmonary 
embolism by amniotic fluid as a cause of obstetric 
shock and unexpected death in obstetrics. JAMA 
1941 Oct 11;117(15):1245-54. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/jama.1941.02820410023008.
 3. Masson RG, Ruggieri J, Siddiqui MM. Amniotic fluid 
embolism: definitive diagnosis in a survivor. Am Rev 
Respir Dis 1979 Jul;120(1):187-92.
 4. Gist RS, Stafford IP, Leibowitz AB, Beilin Y. 
Amniotic fluid embolism. Anesth Analg 2009 
May;108(5):1599-602. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1213/
ane.0b013e31819e43a4.
 5. Clark SL. Amniotic fluid embolism. Crit Care Clin 
1991 Oct;7(4):877-82.
 6. Clark SL, Hankins GD, Dudley DA, Dildy GA, 
Porter TF. Amniotic fluid embolism: analysis of 
Extracorporeal Membrane 
Oxygenation Checklist1
Algorithmic management of amniotic  
fluid embolism 
(Start ECMO consideration if  
Carrico Index: PaO2/FIO2 < 150)
Indications for ECMO
• Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome 
(ARDS) present
• Severe hyoxemia (PaO2/FIO2) < 80 despite 
PEEP 15 cm-20 cm H2O
• (PaO2/FIO2) < 50 consider early ECMO
• Uncompensated hypercarbia (pH < 7.15)
• Excessively high plateau airway pressure  
on ventilator 
• Hypercarbic respiratory failure 
Contraindications to ECMO
Relative Contraindications
• High-pressure ventilation (peak inspiratory 
pressure > 30 cm of water) for > 7 days
• High FIO2 requirements (> 0.8) for > 7 days
• Limited vascular access
• Refusal to accept blood products
• Any condition or organ dysfunction that  
would limit the likelihood of overall benefit 
from ECMO such as severe, irreversible  
brain injury or untreatable metastatic cancer
Absolute Contraindications
• Contraindication to anticoagulation
• ECMO as bridge to lung transplantation  
if transplantation will not be considered
1 New York Presbyterian Center for Acute Respiratory 
Failure [Internet]. New York, NY: New York-
Presbyterian/Allen Hospital; 2016 [cited 2016 Jun 9]. 
Available from: http://nyp.org/services/carf/for-
physicians/indications-for-ecmo.html.
ECMO = extracorporeal membrane oxygenation;  
PEEP = positive end-expiratory pressure.
 101
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-248
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Amniotic Fluid Embolism: Using the Medical Staff Process to Facilitate Streamlined Care 
the national registry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995 
Apr;172(4 Pt 1):1158-67. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/0002-9378(95)91474-9.
 7. Clark SL. Amniotic fluid embolism. Obstet Gynecol 
2014 Feb;123(2 Pt 1):337-48. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/aog.0000000000000107.
 8. Conde-Agudelo A, Romero R. Amniotic fluid 
embolism: an evidence-based review. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2009 Nov;201(5):445.e1-13. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2009.04.052. Erratum in: 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2010 Jan;202(1):92. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2009.11.043.
 9. Shen HP, Chang WC, Yeh LS, Ho M. Amniotic fluid 
embolism treated with emergency extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation: a case report. J Reprod Med 
2009 Nov-Dec;54(11-12):706-8.
 10. Ho CH, Chen KB, Liu SK, Liu YF, Cheng HC, Wu RS. 
Early application of extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation in a patient with amniotic fluid embolism. 
Acta Anaesthesiol Taiwan 2009 Jun;47(2):99-102. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s1875-4597(09) 
60033-3.
 11. Clarke J, Butt M. Maternal collapse. Curr Opin Obstet 
Gynecol 2005 Apr;17(2):157-60. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/01.gco.0000162185.53478.34.
 12. Vellayappan U, Attias MD, Shulman MS. 
Paradoxical embolization by amniotic fluid seen 
on the transesophageal echocardiography. Anesth 
Analg 2009 Apr;108(4):1110-2. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1213/ane.0b013e318195b4e3.
 13. Ecker JL, Solt K, Fitzsimons MG, MacGillivray TE. 
Case records of the Massachusetts General 
Hospital. Case 40-2012. A 43-year-old woman with 
cardiorespiratory arrest after a cesarean section. 
N Engl J Med 2012 Dec 27;367(26):2528-36. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMcpc1201413.
 14. Peek GJ, Elbourne D, Mugford M, et al. Randomised 
controlled trial and parallel economic evaluation 
of conventional ventilatory support versus 
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for severe 
adult respiratory failure (CESAR). Health Technol 
Assess 2010 Jul;14(35):1-46. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.3310/hta14350.
 15. Combes A, Bacchetta M, Brodie D, Müller T, 
Pellegrino V. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
for respiratory failure in adults. Curr Opin Crit 
Care 2012 Feb;18(1):99-104. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/MCC.0b013e32834ef412.
 16. MacLaren G, Combes A, Bartlett RH. Contemporary 
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for adult 
respiratory failure: life support in the new era. 
Intensive Care Med 2012 Feb;38(2):210-20. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00134-011-2439-2.
 17. Malagon I, Greenhalgh D. Extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation as an alternative to ventilation. Curr 
Opin Anaesthesiol 2013 Feb;26(1):47-52. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/ACO.0b013e32835bf1be.
 18. Turner DA, Cheifetz IM. Extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation for adult respiratory failure. Respir 
Care 2013 Jun;58(6):1038-52. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.4187/respcare.02255.
 19. Williams KE. Extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation for acute respiratory distress 
syndrome in adults. AACN Adv Crit Care 2013 Apr-
Jun;24(2):149-58. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
NCI.0b013e31828a09ff.
 20. Nielsen N, Wetterslev J, Cronberg T, et al; TTM Trial 
Investigators. Targeted temperature management at 
33°C versus 36°C after cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med 
2013 Dec 5;369(23):2197-206. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMoa1310519.
 21. Patel MD, Brice JH, Moss C, et al. An evaluation 
of emergency medical services stroke protocols 
and scene times. Prehosp Emerg Care 2014 Jan-
Mar;18(1):15-21. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/1090
3127.2013.825354.
 22. Peng B, Ni J, Anderson CS, et al; SMART 
Investigators. Implementation of a structured 
guideline-based program for the secondary 
prevention of ischemic stroke in China. Stroke 2014 
Feb;45(2):515-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/
STROKEAHA.113.001424.
 23. Runciman WB, Webb RK, Klepper ID, Lee R, 
Williamson JA, Barker L. The Australian Incident 
Monitoring Study. Crisis management—validation 
of an algorithm by analysis of 2000 incident reports. 
Anaesth Intensive Care 1993 Oct;21(5):579-92.
 24. Field LC, McEvoy MD, Smalley JC, et al. Use 
of an electronic decision support tool improves 
management of simulated in-hospital cardiac arrest. 
Resuscitation 2014 Jan;85(1):138-42. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.resuscitation.2013.09.013.
 25. McEvoy MD, Field LC, Moore HE, Smalley JC, 
Nietert PJ, Scarbrough SH. The effect of adherence 
to ACLS protocols on survival of event in the setting 
of in-hospital cardiac arrest. Resuscitation 2014 
Jan;85(1):82-7. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
resuscitation.2013.09.019.
A Discipline
Medicine is a discipline, in which the effort is made to use knowledge 
procured in various ways in order to effect certain practical ends. … It harbors 
no preconceptions as to diseases or their cure. … It has progressively become 
less cocksure and more modest. It distrusts general propositions, a priori 
explanations, grandiose and comforting generalizations. It needs theories only 
as convenient summaries in which a number of ascertained facts may be used 
tentatively to define a course of action. It makes no effort to use its discoveries 
to substantiate a principle formulated before the facts were even suspected.
— Abraham Flexner, 1866-1959, American educator,  
reformer of medical and higher education in the US and Canada
 102
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-250
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Special Report
Integrated Research and the Garfield Memorial  
National Research Fund—An Unobstructed View
Ed Thomas, RN, MBA 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-250
E-pub: 09/07/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-250
ABSTRACT
The idea of integrated care has been discussed for many years. It is the belief of those 
supporting and managing the Garfield Memorial National Research Fund that a similar 
idea, integrated research, needs to be discussed and tested. This process begins with 
rethinking the proposal format. This article elaborates on the enhanced proposal format 
and presents powerful patient stories to demonstrate how integrated research can help 
deliver better patient care.
INTRODUCTION
Research is only as good as the good it 
can do. This viewpoint drives the selection 
of initiatives and projects supported by 
the Garfield Memorial National Research 
Fund (GMF), which requires researchers 
to explain how their investigative efforts 
will result in operational improvement 
that will benefit patients and members—
either at the point of care or at the systems 
or processes levels.
The Kaiser Permanente (KP) Board of 
Directors chartered the GMF in 1987 
to honor the research career of Sidney 
Garfield, MD. His pursuit of innova-
tion based on high-quality, member-
focused health care has been a mainstay 
of the GMF’s approach since inception. 
The GMF funds KP researchers and 
clinicians, and it has a long history of 
collaborating with public and private 
funders and non-KP researchers when 
they are working with a principal inves-
tigator from KP
.
INTEGRATED RESEARCH
For decades the GMF approach to re-
quests for proposals has been similar to that 
of academic models, with a heavy emphasis 
on methods. The mantra of “research into 
practice” has great appeal, but the reality is 
that academic models at times fall short of 
operational and rapidly changing industry 
imperatives. Across the health care indus-
try, the idea of integrated care has been 
discussed and considered for many years. 
It is the belief and intention of those sup-
porting and managing the GMF that a 
similar idea—integrated research—must 
be discussed and tested. The GMF began 
exploring the concept by redesigning the 
format of proposals to focus on members, 
patients, families, and communities. Pro-
posals were then expected to be centered 
on a story that the people who use and 
provide health services will easily relate 
to and understand. Thus the principle of 
integrated research was born.
THE POWER OF STORY
Story is a compelling approach, as every 
clinician trained in SOAP (Subjective, 
Objective, Assessment, Plan) notes knows 
well. Bringing forward the importance of 
story fits well within the developing field 
of precision medicine, wherein individu-
als’ genetics, environment, and lifestyle 
are taken into account when considering 
their disease treatment and prevention. 
Below are several examples of individual 
stories that shift our discussion toward 
better understanding of the relationship 
between patients and the health care deliv-
ery system, the system’s barriers to access, 
and what questions drive the research that 
accelerates improvement.
Prostate Cancer Screening
A 65-year-old man calls the clinic to 
request laboratory testing before his ap-
pointment for a routine physical. His pri-
mary care physician (PCP) includes blood 
tests for prostate-specific antigen (PSA), 
cholesterol, and glucose. The first of these 
tests shows an elevated PSA level. The 
patient does some reading online about 
the potential complications of prostate 
cancer treatments and decides he does 
not want a biopsy. The PSA test result 
prompts conversations with his PCP in 
the following months and years.
A 53-year-old man, new to KP
, calls 
his PCP’s office, upset that PSA screen-
ing was not included in the blood tests 
ordered at his last office visit. He wants 
to know why and suspects a cost-cutting 
initiative. The office schedules a ten-
minute telephone appointment with the 
patient to explain.
Breast Cancer Screening
A 43-year-old woman attends an ap-
pointment for a routine Papanicolaou test 
and asks whether she should undergo a 
mammogram; her physician recommends 
screening and signs a mammogram or-
der. After the mammogram, the patient 
receives a call and is told that abnormali-
ties were detected and additional mam-
mogram views of the areas in question are 
needed. She calls her PCP’s office asking 
for medication to help her sleep, as her 
anxiety about the mammogram result is 
causing insomnia. She looks into pur-
chasing life insurance. The subsequent 
mammogram shows no abnormalities. 
She approaches all future screening tests 
with skepticism.
Ed Thomas, RN, MBA, is the Director of the Garfield Memorial National Research Fund for Kaiser 
Permanente and The Permanente Federation in Oakland, CA. E-mail: edward.thomas@kp.org.
 103
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-250
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Integrated Research and the Garfield Memorial National Research Fund—An Unobstructed View 
Ovarian Cancer
The following excerpt from a consent 
letter tells a story that is very relevant to 
the women in a high-risk group and was 
the driving force behind a specific project’s 
selection for GMF funding: “You are being 
asked to participate in this research study 
because you are a woman aged between 
30 to 70 years who has a mutation in the 
BRCA gene and is at risk for developing 
ovarian cancer.” Consider for a moment 
how this one sentence forever changes a 
woman’s life path and how a health system 
should respond to women and their loved 
ones who express concern after receiving 
such a message.
CONCLUSION
The principle of integrated research re-
quires the investigator to consider, at each 
step of a patient’s care, how the research 
will do the most good. The answer may be, 
for example, better communication in the 
health care system or improvements in de-
cision making by insurance providers. The 
research may identify barriers limiting the 
options the health care system can offer or 
the amount of time that can be dedicated 
to discussions between clinicians and pa-
tients and their families, clarify whether a 
team care approach offers benefits, or ad-
dress any other set of questions that will 
potentially lead to better patient care. v 
Dislcosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgement
Leslie Parker, ELS, provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Thomas E. Integrated research and the 
Garfield Memorial National Research Fund—an 
unobstructed view. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-250. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-250.
So That Few May Reach The Goal
The few who reach the intuitive perception of truth must be preceded 
by the host of workers, most of them forgotten, whose role it has been to 
accumulate the facts that constitute the raw material of successful working 
hypotheses, of the intuitions of discovery. The immense wastefulness of 
organic life, which demands that thousands of germs perish so that one 
may live, has its counterpart in the processes of intellectual life; many 
must run, so that one or a few may reach the goal.
— Robert Platt, Baron Platt, Bt, MD, FRCP, 1900-1978,  
British physician who specialized in kidney disease research
 104
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-242
CASE REPORTS
Refractory Depression, Fatigue, Irritable Bowel Syndrome,  
and Chronic Pain: A Functional Medicine Case Report
Gregory Plotnikoff, MD, MTS, FACP; Melissa Barber, MSc 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-242
E-pub: 10/14/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-242
Editor’s note: A companion editorial to this article is available on page 125  
and online at: www.thepermanentejournal.org/issues/2016/fall/6240-fm.html.
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Single-disorder or single-organ-system clinical 
practice guidelines are often of limited usefulness in guiding 
effective management of patients with chronic multidimension-
al signs and symptoms. The presence of multiple long-standing 
medical problems in a given patient despite intensive medical 
effort suggests that addressing systemic core imbalances could 
complement more narrowly focused approaches.
Case Presentation: A 72-year-old man experiencing long-
standing depression, fatigue, irritable bowel syndrome, and 
chronic pain in the context of additional refractory illnesses was 
assessed and treated, guided by a system-oriented approach to 
underlying core imbalances termed functional medicine. 
This pa-
tient was referred from a team of clinicians representing primary 
care, cardiology, gastroenterology, hematology, and psychology. 
Prior treatment had been unsuccessful in managing multiple 
chronic comorbidities. Diagnostic assessment included com-
prehensive stool and nutritional/metabolic laboratory testing.
Results: The blood-, urine-, or stool-based measurements of 
relevant markers for multiple systemic issues, including diges-
tion/absorption, inflammation, oxidative stress, and methylation, 
identified previously unrecognized root causes of his constella-
tion of symptoms. These functional measurements guided ratio-
nal recommendations for dietary choices and supplementation. 
The patient experienced steady and significant improvement 
in his mental health, fatigue, chronic pain, and irritable bowel 
syndrome—as well as the unexpected resolution of his chronic 
idiopathic pancytopenia. 
Conclusion: The success in this case suggests that other pa-
tients with chronic, complex, and treatment-refractory illness 
may benefit from a system-oriented assessment of core imbal-
ances guided by specialized nutritional/metabolic and digestive 
laboratory testing. 
INTRODUCTION
Single-disorder clinical practice guidelines are often of lim-
ited usefulness in guiding effective management of patients with 
chronic multidimensional signs and symptoms. The presence 
of multiple long-standing medical problems, despite excellent 
medical care, suggests that new questions or perspectives may 
be helpful. For example, assessment of underlying key common 
pathways for all diseases, such as gastrointestinal dysfunction, 
proinflammatory imbalance, and oxidative stress, could augment 
the more traditional organ-system-oriented, discipline-focused 
approach. The organizing principle of the approach taken here, 
termed functional medicine, is that restoration of health requires 
defining and addressing seven potential core imbalances that may 
underlie any given disease state. These seven categories are 1) as-
similation (digestion, absorption, microbiomics, respiration), 2) 
defense and repair (immune function, inflammation, infection), 
3) energy (production, regulation), 4) biotransformation and 
elimination (toxicity, detoxification), 5) transport (cardiovascular 
and lymphatic systems), 6) communication (hormones, neu-
rotransmitters, cytokines), and 7) structural integrity (membranes, 
fascia, bacterial translocation). The core belief is that imbalance 
in one or more of these seven common disease pathways may be 
the root cause of many seemingly disparate conditions. 
This case illustrates how specialized laboratory testing iden-
tified previously unrecognized physiologic and biochemical 
dysfunction in a complex patient. This dysfunction in several 
common disease pathways was both clinically relevant and 
inexpensively modifiable. The result was substantial clinical 
improvement and a markedly improved patient quality of life.
CASE PRESENTATION
Initial Visit (February 2012)
A 72-year-old man was referred to a board-certified internist 
specializing in complex, refractory illnesses in February 2012. 
The patient’s primary goal, stated at his first visit, was to “walk 
Gregory Plotnikoff, MD, MTS, FACP, is a Senior Consultant for Minnesota Personalized Medicine  
in Minneapolis. E-mail: gregory.plotnikoff@gmail.com. Melissa Barber, MSC, is a Research Associate 
at the Integrative Medicine Institute in Portland, OR. E-mail: msbarber@integrativemed.org.
Table 1. Medical history timeline
1940s
Heartburn and gastric reflux
1950s
Depression since adolescence
1960s
Began smoking; increased alcohol consumption
1999
Pancreatitis, alcoholic hepatitis, and liver failure 
(subsequently resolved)
2004
Idiopathic pancytopenia; no alcohol consumption beginning 
in 2004
2012
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
2012
Specialized digestive and nutritional laboratory testing
2012-2015
Treatment for pancreatic insufficiency, nutritional and 
digestive imbalances
2013
Resolution of idiopathic pancytopenia and irritable bowel 
syndrome; decreased depression, fatigue, and pain
 105
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-242
CASE REPORTS
Refractory Depression, Fatigue, Irritable Bowel Syndrome, and Chronic Pain: A Functional Medicine Case Report 
out of the office with more hope.” He wrote that it was “very 
hard to function. I wake after 9 hours of sleep and still feel tired. 
I don’t have the emotional or physical strength to accomplish 
much. This is frustrating and I am on a cycle of becoming more 
depressed, more frustrated, and more helpless.”
In addition to chronic fatigue and depression, the patient 
reported 1) heartburn, frequent gas, bloating, and diarrhea al-
ternating with constipation; 2) right lower quadrant abdominal 
cramping, worsening after bowel movements; and 3) wide-
spread arthralgias and myalgias. See Table 1 through 6 (Tables 
4 and 5 available online at: www.thepermanentejournal.org/
files/15-242.pdf), and the Sidebar: Important Medical History 
for a list of the patient’s medical considerations.
Initial Clinical Findings
Patient-reported outcome instruments (higher scores indicate 
worse symptoms):
• Brief Fatigue Inventory: total fatigue interference score of 37/60
• Brief Pain Inventory: total pain interference score 36/70
• Patient Health Questionnaire-9: total score 13 (moderate 
depression 10-14).
Physical Examination 
• Blood pressure 118/54 mmHg, pulse 74 beat/min and regu-
lar. Body mass index, 21.6 (calculated as weight in kilograms 
divided by height in meters squared)
• Anicteric with clear lungs and normal cardiac examination
• Abdomen tender to palpation of the right upper quadrant and 
epigastric area
• No hepatosplenomegaly
• Palpation in the left lower quadrant resulted in right lower 
quadrant discomfort
• No ascites present 
• No edema in extremities (cool, pale fingers with slow capillary 
refill)
• No palmar erythema
• No asterixis.
DIAGNOSTIC ASSESSMENTS
The patient’s concern of a reduced quality of life secondary to 
depression, fatigue, and gastrointestinal distress was part of a re-
markable medical history as a survivor of end-stage liver failure and 
alcoholism. However, his depression, fatigue, widespread pain, and 
gastrointestinal symptoms did not resolve from medical treatments 
of specific diagnoses and individual symptoms. A clinical decision 
was made to evaluate the root causes of this patient’s symptoms 
from a functional medicine perspective with comprehensive and 
structured stool1,2 and nutritional diagnostic panels. A Compre-
hensive Digestive Stool Analysis 2.0 (CDSA 2.0) and Nutritional 
Evaluation (NutrEval) from a Clinical Laboratory Improvement 
Amendments-certified laboratory (Genova Diagnostics, Ashe-
ville, NC) were ordered. These kits offer bundled laboratory tests 
that provide insight into the function and status of several of the 
core pathways. Additionally, given the presence of environmental 
stressors and a decreased sense of personal efficacy, he was referred 
for Resilience Training or Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction.
OTHER RELEVANT LABORATORY RESULTS
This patient had previously been found to be vitamin D 
deficient. However, he was not on vitamin D supplementation 
at his first visit and supplementation (2000 IU) was begun. In 
addition this patient’s dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate (DHEAS) 
level was low normal and DHEA 5 mg sublingually each morning 
was started.3
FOLLOW-UP AND OUTCOMES
The patient was evaluated four times between April 2012 and 
January 2013. With each subsequent visit, he reported steady 
improvement in his mood, overall energy, and chronic pain. He 
was compliant with the dietary recommendations and supple-
ments outlined in Table 3. He elected to not pursue Resilience 
Training or Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction.
He experienced minor episodes of dizziness with two near 
syncopal episodes, for which he was referred to his cardiologist. 
Important Medical History
 1. Gastric reflux since childhood
 2. Depression since adolescence with persistently elevated 
Patient Health Questionnaire-9 scores as an adult, consis-
tent with moderately severe depression
 3. Twenty pack-year smoking history (quit smoking March 
1996)
 4. Alcoholism (age 28 to 62 years): alcoholic hepatitis, chron-
ic pancreatitis, pancreatic pseudocyst, and liver failure in 
1999—successfully sober since 2004
 5. Successful discharge from hospice with resolution of end-
stage liver failure, 2004
 6. Cardiovascular disease: hypertension, dyslipidemia, coro-
nary stents, and claudication
 7. Diagnosed with idiopathic pancytopenia in 2004 
 8. Type 2 diabetes mellitus since 2012
 9. Osteoarthritis
10. Homocysteinemia with homozygous MTHFR (methylene-
tetrahydrofolate reductase C677T) polymorphism
11. Surgical history: cholecystectomy, tonsillectomy, and anal 
fissure repair 
Table 2. Medications and supplements at presentation
Medications
Dosage
Lisinopril/hydrochlorothiazide
40 mg/25 mg/d
Trazadone 
150 mg/d
Effexor 
225 mg/d
Ranitidine 
75 mg 2x/d
Cilostazol 
1 tablet 2x/d before meals
Atorvastatin
10 mg/d
Cytomel
5 mg/d
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
As needed
Rolaids
As needed
Supplements
Centrum silver multivitamins 
1 tablet/d
Folic acid
400 mg/d
Glucosamine/chondroitin
1500 mg/1200 mg 2x/d
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine HCL)
50 mg/d
 106
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-242
CASE REPORTS
Refractory Depression, Fatigue, Irritable Bowel Syndrome, and Chronic Pain: A Functional Medicine Case Report 
Repeat testing at his local hospital in December 2012 demon-
strated persistent pancreatic insufficiency with an undetectable 
pancreatic elastase 1 and persistent Candida glabrata overgrowth 
in the stool even though the patient was no longer symptomatic. 
These findings supported continued prescription of pancreatic 
enzyme support, probiotics, and a diet rich in prebiotics. The 
patient’s oncologist noted an “inexplicable resolution” of the 
patient’s idiopathic pancytopenia in July 2013 and reported 
that his physical and laboratory examinations were normal at 
that time.
In January 2013, patient-reported outcomes had improved 
significantly:
• Brief Fatigue Inventory: total fatigue interference score of 19/60 
• Brief Pain Inventory: total pain interference score 20/70 
• Patient Health Questionnaire-9: total score 10.
DISCUSSION
Mental health disorders and gastrointestinal complaints are 
often components of complex, chronic illnesses that can challenge 
linear pharmacologic management.4,5 System-oriented, functional 
Table 3. Stool and urine metabolic testing results and therapeutic interventions
Visit no.
Laboratory biomarkersa
Diagnostic significance
Therapeutic interventions
1
Pancreatic elastase-1 < 15 (Ref: > 201 mg/g)
Fecal fat 50.1 (Ref: 2.6-32.4 mg/g)
Long chain fatty acids 43.8 (Ref: 1.3-23.7 mg/g)
Phenylacetic acid (PAA) 0.32 mmol/mol creatinine (Ref: ≤ 0.12)
Pancreatic exocrine 
insufficiency
Pancrelipase 12,000 units with each meal
2
Candida glabrata 2+ (Ref: potential pathogen)
Arabinose 158 (Ref: ≤ 96)
Tartaric acid 66 (≤ 15)
Yeast overgrowth (sensitive 
to fluconazole)
Fluconazole 100 mg daily for 4 weeks
3
No growth for beneficial bacteria (Lactobacillus, E coli)
4+ growth (Citrobacter braakii and youngae)
Dihydroxyphenylpropionic acid 6.1 (Ref: ≤ 5.3)
Benzoic acid 0.06 (Ref: ≤ 0.05)
Hippuric acid 611 (Ref: ≤ 603)
Dysbiosis
Probiotics (multiple: Lactobacillus and 
Bifidobacteria species plus Saccharamyces 
boulardii) daily
Soluble/insoluble fiber-containing foods in diet
4
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase polymorphism
Sarcosine 53 (Ref: ≤ 48)
Impaired folate cycle and 
methylation pathways
Discontinue folic acid supplementation
Switch to L-5-methyltetrahydrofolate 400 mg/d 
plus vitamin B12 as methylfolate 500 mg/d
5
Lysine 39 (Ref: 45-286)
α-Aminoadipic acid < detection limit (Ref: 11-73)
Glycine 341 (Ref: 639-3306)
Histadine 242 (Ref: 271-993)
Insufficient amino acids 
Lysine 1000 mg/day for 2 months
Glycine 1000 mg/day for 2 months
Chew proteins thoroughly (eat slowly)
6
Cystathionine 4 (Ref: 6-33)
Glutathione 486 (Ref: ≥ 669 mmol/L)
Impaired trans-sulfuration 
pathways
Pyridoxal-5-phosphate (vitamin B6) 50 mg/d
Molybdenum 75 mg/d (multivitamin)
7
Ethanolamine 71 (Ref: 208-514)
Glycine 341 (Ref: 639-3306)
Impaired choline metabolism
Eat lecithin-containing foods (eg, egg yolks, 
peanuts) 
Support folate cycle and methylation 
8
Adipic acid 3.9 (Ref: ≤ 2.8)
Borderline elevated beta-OH-butyric acid 2.0 (Ref: ≤ 2.8)
Borderline elevated HMG 12 (Ref: ≤ 15)
Borderline elevated ornithine 20 (Ref: 4-21)
Impaired energy production, 
ketosis
Beta-oxidation of fats
Pyruvate dehydrogenase 
(carbohydrate metabolism)
Oxidative phosphorylation
Add magnesium glycinate 400 mg/d
B vitamin support (multivitamin)
Alpha-lipoic acid 200 mg/d
Liberalize carbohydrate intake
Eat more frequently
9
8-OH-dG 18 (Ref: ≤ 15 mg/g creatinine)
Cysteine 82 (Ref: 21-78)
Glutathione 486 (Ref: ≥ 669 mmol/L)
Pyroglutamic acid 48 (Ref: 16-34)
Coenzyme Q10 0.20 (Ref: 0.43-1.49 mg/ml)
Excessive oxidative stress/
overwhelmed defense 
mechanisms
Coenzyme Q10 (Ubiquinol) 200 mg/d
Alpha-lipoic acid 200 mg/d
Support glutathione production via transsulfuration
Support glutathione production via diet: foods rich 
in vitamins E and C and sulfur
Avoid use of acetaminophen
10
Omega 3 index 3.0 (Ref: ≥ 4.0)
Vaccenic acid 1.18 (Ref: ≤ 1.13 wt %)
Eicosapentaenoic acid 0.29 (Ref: ≤ 0.26 wt %)
Arachidonic acid 22 (Ref: 15-21 wt %)
Long-chain omega-3 fatty 
acid insufficiency with 
omega 6 excess
Omega-3 fatty acid: 2 g EPA and DHA/d
Cook with olive oil (low heat) or high-oleic acid 
safflower oil (higher heat)
a All biomarkers reported in mmol/L creatinine unless otherwise noted.
DHA = docosahexaenoic acid; EPA = eicosapentaenoic acid; HMG = hydroxymethylglutaryl; Ref = reference; wt % = weighted percentage.
 107
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-242
CASE REPORTS
Refractory Depression, Fatigue, Irritable Bowel Syndrome, and Chronic Pain: A Functional Medicine Case Report 
medicine approaches, supported by laboratory findings, can help 
engage patient and clinician in a therapeutic partnership to ad-
dress genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors that may be 
important in complex, chronic diseases.6
The intersection of depression, fatigue, widespread pain, and 
gastrointestinal symptoms in this patient had implications in 
multiple systems.7,8 This justified a switch in the diagnostic focus 
from the customary organ-based systems to whole-body systems. 
Table 3 delineates the systemic issues important in this case, such 
as inflammation, oxidative stress, or impaired methylation. The 
blood-, urine-, or stool-based measurements of the relevant mark-
ers for each issue guided rational recommendations for dietary 
choices and supplementation. 
Addressing systemic issues in chronic, complex illness comple-
ments a more traditional organ-system approach. In this case, ad-
dressing one fundamental imbalance may have addressed several 
disparate conditions. For example, diagnosing and addressing this 
patient’s digestive dysfunction and the intestinal ecology imbal-
ances not only improved digestive function but also improved 
several metabolic and nutritional markers known to be correlated 
with depression, fatigue, and myalgias.
Likewise, the reduction in his myalgias allowed this patient with 
diabetes with proven atherosclerosis to remain on atorvastatin. 
HMG Co-A reductase inhibitors (statins) are known to block 
production of coenzyme Q10; however, supplementation is not 
routinely recommended. The very low serum coenzyme Q10 mea-
sured in this patient suggested that supplementation might be of 
benefit.8,9 The reduction in his arthralgias also allowed this patient 
who presented with low glutathione levels to avoid acetaminophen 
(which depletes glutathione). His low levels of glutathione were 
treated with a diet rich in vitamins C, E, molybdenum, selenium, 
and methionine- or cysteine-containing amino acids. The im-
proved levels of both coenzyme Q10 and glutathione enhanced 
native oxidative stress management, known to help reduce pain, 
depression, and fatigue.10 Finally, correction of all these systemic 
issues may have contributed to the unexpected resolution of his 
idiopathic pancytopenia after eight years. 
CONCLUSION
David Sackett, one of the pioneers of evidence-based medicine, 
said “Without clinical expertise, even excellent evidence may be 
inappropriate for an individual patient.”11 The comprehensive ap-
proach outlined here integrated the clinical expertise found in organ-
system-based disciplines with the perspective of functional medicine’s 
systems-biology approach. This integration was possible because of 
external evidence from specialized stool and nutritional diagnostic 
panels. This combination resulted in effective management of mul-
tiple comorbidities that had previously been minimally responsive 
to treatment. The interference score for this patient’s chronic fatigue 
was reduced by nearly 50% (from 37/60 to 19/60). The interference 
score for his chronic pain was reduced by nearly 40% (from 36/70 to 
20/70). His Patient Health Questionnaire-9 score declined by 25% 
(13 to 10). His gastrointestinal function improved greatly without 
significant increases in pharmaceuticals. Therapeutic recommenda-
tions were based on measurements of nutritional and digestive status 
and function. The success in this case suggests that other patients 
with chronic, complex, and treatment-refractory illness may benefit 
from a functional medicine, system-oriented approach guided by 
nutritional and digestive laboratory testing. 
Patient Perspective
“I experienced at least a 50% reduction in pain and improve-
ment in my quality of life. My anxiety is reduced, I am more 
relaxed, and feel stronger. The most helpful has been the work 
with my gut issues. I am almost like clockwork now.” v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to disclose. Written consent was 
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report.
Acknowledgment
This case report was prepared according to the CARE Guidelines by Gagnier, 
Kienle, Altman, et al, published in the Journal of Clinical Epidemiology in 2014.
Mary Corrado, ELS, provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Plotnikoff G, Barber M. Refractory depression, fatigue, irritable bowel syndrome, 
and chronic pain: A functional medicine case report. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4): 
15-242. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-242. 
References
 1. Goepp J, Fowler E, McBride T, Landis D. Frequency of abnormal fecal biomarkers 
in irritable bowel syndrome. Glob Adv Health Med 2014 May;3(3):9-15. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.7453/gahmj.2013.099.
 2. Parsons K, Goepp J, Dechairo B, et al. Novel testing enhances irritable bowel 
syndrome medical management: the IMMINENT study. Glob Adv Health Med 2014 
May;3(3):25-32. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7453/gahmj.2013.100.
 3. Rutkowski K, Sowa P, Rutkowska-Talipska J, Kuryliszyn-Moskal A, Rutkowski R. 
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA): hypes and hopes. Drugs 2014 Jul;74(11):1195-
207. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s40265-014-0259-8.
 4. Kelly JR, Kennedy PJ, Cryan JF, Dinan TG, Clarke G, Hyland NP. Breaking down the 
barriers: the gut microbiome, intestinal permeability and stress-related psychiatric 
disorders. Front Cell Neurosci 2015 Oct 14;9:392. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/
fncel.2015.00392.
 5. Assies J, Mocking R, Lok A, Ruhé HG, Pouwer F, Schene AH. Effects of oxidative 
stress on fatty acid- and one-carbon-metabolism in psychiatric and cardiovascular 
disease comorbidity. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2014 Sep;130(3):163-80. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/acps.12265.
 6. Bennett P, Bland JS, Galland L, et al. Textbook of functional medicine. 2010 ed. Gig 
Harbor, WA: Institute for Functional Medicine; 2010.
 7. Vaváková M, Ďuračová Z, Trebatická J. Markers of oxidative stress and 
neuroprogression in depression disorder. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2015;2015:898393. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2015/898393.
 8. Potgieter M, Pretorius E, Pepper MS. Primary and secondary coenzyme Q10 
deficiency: the role of therapeutic supplementation. Nutr Rev 2013 Mar;71(3):180-8. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/nure.12011.
 9. Morris G, Anderson G, Berk M, Maes M. Coenzyme Q10 depletion in medical and 
neuropsychiatric disorders: potential repercussions and therapeutic implications. Mol 
Neurobiol 2013 Dec;48(3):883-903. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12035-013-8477-8.
 10. Maes M, Kubera M, Obuchowiczwa E, Geohler L, Brzeszcz J. Depression’s multiple 
comorbidities explained by (neuro)inflammatory and oxidative & nitrosative stress 
pathways. Neuro Endocrinol Lett 2011;32(1):7-24.
 11. Sackett DL, Rosenberg WM, Gray JA, Haynes RB, Richardson WS. Evidence based 
medicine: what it is and what it isn’t. BMJ 1996 Jan 13;312(7023):71-2. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.312.7023.71.
Table 6. Patient-reported outcome instrument scoresa
Instruments
February 2012
January 2013
Brief Fatigue Inventory
37
19
Brief Pain Inventory
36
20
Patient Health Questionnaire-9
13
10
a Higher score equals worse symptoms.
 108
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-005
CASE REPORTS
Effectiveness of Cannabidiol Oil for Pediatric Anxiety and  
Insomnia as Part of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Case Report
Scott Shannon, MD, ABIHM; Janet Opila-Lehman, ND 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-005
E-pub: 10/12/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-005
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Anxiety and sleep 
disorders are often the result of posttrau-
matic stress disorder and can contribute 
to an impaired ability to focus and to 
demonstration of oppositional behaviors. 
Case Presentation: These symptoms 
were present in our patient, a ten-year-
old girl who was sexually abused and 
had minimal parental supervision as a 
young child under the age of five. Phar-
maceutical medications provided partial 
relief, but results were not long-lasting, 
and there were major side effects. A 
trial of cannabidiol oil resulted in a 
maintained decrease in anxiety and a 
steady improvement in the quality and 
quantity of the patient’s sleep.
Discussion: Cannabidiol oil, an in-
creasingly popular treatment of anxiety 
and sleep issues, has been documented 
as being an effective alternative to phar-
maceutical medications. This case study 
provides clinical data that support the 
use of cannabidiol oil as a safe treatment 
for reducing anxiety and improving 
sleep in a young girl with posttraumatic 
stress disorder. 
INTRODUCTION
Cannabidiol (CBD) oil is a naturally oc-
curring constituent of industrial hemp and 
marijuana, which are collectively called 
cannabis. CBD oil is 1 of at least 85 can-
nabinoid compounds found in cannabis 
and is popular for its medicinal benefits. 
After tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), CBD 
oil is the second-most-abundant compo-
nent of cannabis. Other names for CBD oil 
include CBD-rich hemp oil, hemp-derived 
CBD oil, or CBD-rich cannabis oil. Con-
sidered to be generally safe, CBD has been 
used medicinally for decades. However, 
CBD is not medical marijuana and should 
be distinguished from high-CBD strains 
of medical marijuana, which do contain 
THC, such as “Charlotte’s Web.”
The most abundant compound in can-
nabis, THC is also a cannabinoid. The 
THC component induces the psychoac-
tive effect, “high.” A cannabis plant has 
different amounts of CBD and THC 
depending on the strain and thus provides 
different recreational or medicinal effects. 
The cannabinoid profile of industrial hemp 
or medical marijuana is ideal for people 
looking for the medical benefits of CBD 
without the “high” of the THC. 
The mechanism of action of CBD is 
multifold.1-3 Two cannabinoid receptors 
are known to exist in the human body: 
CB1 and CB2 receptors. The CB1 recep-
tors are located mainly in the brain and 
modulate neurotransmitter release in a 
manner that prevents excessive neuronal 
activity (thus calming and decreasing 
anxiety), as well as reduces pain, reduces 
inflammation, regulates movement and 
posture control, and regulates sensory 
perception, memory, and cognitive func-
tion.a2 An endogenous ligand, anan-
damide, which occurs naturally in our 
bodies, binds to the CB1 receptors through 
the G-protein coupling system. CBD has 
an indirect effect on the CB1 receptors 
by stopping the enzymatic breakdown of 
anandamide, allowing it to stay in the sys-
tem longer and provide medical benefits.4 
CBD has a mild effect on the CB2 recep-
tors, which are located in the periphery in 
lymphoid tissue. CBD helps to mediate the 
release of cytokines from the immune cells 
in a manner that helps to reduce inflam-
mation and pain.2 
Other mechanisms of action of CBD 
include stimulation of vanilloid pain recep-
tors (TRPV-1 receptor), which are known 
to mediate pain perception, inflamma-
tion, and body temperature.5 In addition, 
CBD may exert its anti-anxiety effect by 
activating adenosine receptors which play 
a significant role in cardiovascular function 
and cause a broad anti-inflammatory effect 
throughout the body.5 At high concentra-
tions, CBD directly activates the 5-HT1A 
serotonin receptor, thereby conferring an 
antidepressant effect.6 Cannabidiol has 
been found to be an antagonist at the po-
tentially new third cannabinoid receptor, 
GPR55, in the caudate nucleus and puta-
men, which if stimulated may contribute 
to osteoporosis.7
Since the 1940s, a considerable number 
of published articles have dealt with the 
chemistry, biochemistry, pharmacology, 
and clinical effects of CBD.8 The last de-
cade has shown a notable increase in the 
scientific literature on CBD, owing to its 
identification for reducing nausea and 
vomiting, combating psychotic disorders, 
reducing inflammation, decreasing anxi-
ety and depression, improving sleep, and 
increasing a sense of well-being.9-12 Find-
ings presented at the 2015 International 
Cannabinoid Research Society at its 25th 
Annual Symposium reported the use of 
CBD as beneficial for kidney fibrosis and 
inflammation, metabolic syndrome, over-
weight and obesity, anorexia-cachexia syn-
drome, and modification of osteoarthritic 
and other musculoskeletal conditions.13-16
Although studies have demonstrated the 
calming, anti-inflammatory, and relaxing 
effects of CBD, clinical data from actual 
cases is minimal. This case study offers 
evidence that CBD is effective as a safe 
alternative treatment to traditional psy-
chiatric medications for reducing anxiety 
and insomnia.17
CASE PRESENTATION
A ten-year-old girl presented in Janu-
ary 2015 for a reevaluation of behaviors 
related to her diagnosis of posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) secondary to sexual 
Scott Shannon, MD, ABIHM, is an Assistant Clinical Professor of Psychiatry 
at the University of Colorado School of Medicine in Fort Collins. E-mail: 
scottshannon@cowisp.net. Janet Opila-Lehman, ND, is a Naturopathic Physician 
at the Wholeness Center in Fort Collins, CO. E-mail: j.opila.lehman@gmail.com.
 109
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-005
CASE REPORTS
Effectiveness of Cannabidiol Oil for Pediatric Anxiety and Insomnia as Part of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Case Report 
abuse. Her chief issues included anxiety, 
insomnia, outbursts at school, suicidal 
ideation, and self-destructive behaviors. 
Her grandmother, who has permanent 
custody of the patient and her younger 
brother, accompanied her.
Our patient had been seen for an initial 
evaluation in January 2012 and received 
a diagnosis of PTSD secondary to sexual 
abuse on the basis of her history, clinical 
observations, and behaviors (Table 1). 
Her father had died 6 months earlier in a 
motor vehicle accident, and our patient’s 
maternal grandparents became her perma-
nent guardians. Before her father’s death, 
our patient had no supervision from her 
father and very little supervision from her 
mother. An 11-year-old boy had molested 
her when she was 3 years old. Her medi-
cal history included her mother having 
methadone addiction, alcoholism, bipolar 
disorder, and depression. Her mother used 
marijuana her entire pregnancy with the 
girl. The patient presented in January 2012 
as displaying aggressive, disobedient, im-
pulsive, and sexually inappropriate behav-
iors. She also demonstrated low self-esteem 
and anxiety and had poor sleep (restless, 
interrupted, and unable to sleep alone). 
Workup during 2012 included labora-
tory studies, which ruled out a thyroid 
dysfunction and an iron or vitamin D 
deficiency. The patient was started on a 
Table 1. Timeline
Date
Presentation
Medications
Supplements
Other
January 31, 
2012
New evaluation: 7.5-year-old girl. History 
of sexual abuse and neglect. Issues: 
Insomnia, sexual behaviors. Diagnosis: 
PTSD secondary to sexual abuse.
None
Melatonin, 1 mg/night
February 14, 2012, laboratory values: 
TSH, 2.46 mIU/L (reference range, 0.47-
4.68 mIU/L); ferritin: 21 ng/mL (reference 
range, 10-150 ng/mL).
February 16, 2012, laboratory values: 
Vitamin D3: 39 ng/mL (reference range, 
20-50 ng/mL)
February 20, 
2012
Sleeping 2-3 hours/night. Started counseling; 
Cooperative and good behavior at counseling 
session. Anxious, traumatized.
Clonidine, 0.05 
mg (half tablet) at 
bedtime
Inositol, 3 g 3 times/d; EPA fish 
oil, 500 mg/d
Eye movement desensitization and 
reprocessing therapy recommended
February 22, 
2012
Did not do well with clonidine because of 
hallucinations, so she discontinued that 
treatment. Behavior still very rough; sleep 
poor.
Started 
imipramine 
therapy, 25 mg  
at bedtime
March 7, 2012: ECG was normal
August 8, 
2012a
Good summer. In play therapy. Overall 
better sleep and energy with imipramine 
therapy. Patient’s 6-year-old brother also 
now in therapy.
Imipramine,  
25 mg at bedtime
January 21, 
2015
Returned for evaluation and treatment after 
3 years. Suicidal ideation; cut self on leg; 
defiant and stubborn. Had psychotherapy 
3 years straight twice a month. Sleeps with 
brother; can’t sleep alone.
Off all 
medications for 
past 18 months
Melatonin, 5 mg; St John’s 
wort, 450 mg twice/d; 
magnesium, 300 mg/d; 
diphenhydramine, 25 mg/night
February 16, 
2015
Hard to manage. Has outbursts at school.
Magnesium and St John’s 
wort: stopped treatment; EPA 
fish oil, 750 mg/d; 
diphenhydramine, 25 mg/night
February 11, 2015: Normal cortisol and 
DHEA levels
March 16, 
2015
Better overall. Started animal-assisted 
therapy.
EPA fish oil, 750 mg/d; 
diphenhydramine, 25 mg/night
Started a regimen of CBD oil, 25 mg  
(1 capsule)/d at 6 pm
April 14, 2015
Sleeping better with CBD treatment. Getting 
biofeedback. Has stomachaches. Mood is 
more at ease.
EPA fish oil, 750 mg/d; 
diphenhydramine, 25 mg/night
CBD oil, 25 mg (1 capsule)/d at 6 pm
May 26, 2015
“Ghosts” waking patient up at night.
EPA fish oil, 750 mg/d
CBD oil, 25 mg (1 capsule)/d at 6 pm
July 22, 2015
Sleeping better; able to sleep in own room 
3-4 nights/wk.
EPA fish oil, 750 mg/d
CBD liquid, 12 mg (in 4 sublingual sprays)/
night; 12 mg more (in 4 sublingual sprays) 
during the day as needed for anxiety, 
typically 3 or 4 times/wk
August 24, 
2015
Sleeping well. Handling school well.
EPA fish oil, 750 mg/d
CBD oil, 25 mg (1 capsule)/night; CBD 
liquid, 6-12 mg (in 2-4 sublingual sprays) 
as needed for anxiety, typically 2 or 3 
times/wk
a There were additional visits in 2012 with no substantial changes.
CBD = cannabidiol; DHEA = dehydroepiandrosterone; ECG = electrocardiogram; EPA = eicosapentaenoic acid; PTSD = posttraumatic stress disorder; TSH = thyroid stimulating 
hormone.
 110
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-005
CASE REPORTS
Effectiveness of Cannabidiol Oil for Pediatric Anxiety and Insomnia as Part of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Case Report 
regimen of 1 mg/night of melatonin, which 
helped her sleep duration. Three grams of 
inositol 3 times a day and 500 mg/d of 
eicosapentaenoic fish oil were also helpful 
in reducing her anxiety. A trial of cloni-
dine was implemented, which resulted in 
hallucinations and thus was discontinued. 
The patient was switched to a regimen of 
25 mg of imipramine at bedtime to de-
crease her anxiety, which appeared to be 
helpful. Counseling sessions were started. 
The patient continued psychotherapy for 
3 years, but she was not seen again in our 
clinic until the return visit in January 
2015, when she was not receiving any of 
her medications and supplements.
At the patient’s return in January 2015, 
she demonstrated the same prominent 
symptoms as at her initial presentation. 
At that time, the initial treatment in-
cluded the following supplements and 
medications to assist with her sleep and 
anxiety: melatonin, 5 mg/night; magne-
sium, 300 mg/d; and diphenhydramine 
(Benadryl), 25 mg/night. Our patient 
demonstrated slight gains but was still hav-
ing outbursts at school and was reportedly 
difficult to manage at home. In addition, 
her underlying anxiety continued. 
Cannabidiol oil was explored as a po-
tential additional treatment to help her 
insomnia and anxiety, but we deferred 
for two months while we waited for a 
response from other interventions. The 
grandmother preferred reducing the phar-
macologic load given her granddaughter’s 
failure to respond long term to psychiatric 
medications.
In March 2015, CBD oil was recom-
mended as a potential additional treatment 
to help her insomnia and anxiety, and 
her grandmother provided full informed 
consent. Our patient was administered the 
Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children18 and 
the Screen for Anxiety Related Disorders 
(SCARED)19 before taking the CBD oil 
and each month afterward for the next 5 
months. Test scores on the Sleep Distur-
bance Scale for Children and Screen for 
Anxiety Related Disorders demonstrated 
an improvement (Table 2).
A trial of CBD supplements (25 mg) 
was then initiated at bedtime, and 6 mg 
to 12 mg of CBD sublingual spray was 
administered during the day as needed for 
anxiety. A gradual increase in sleep quality 
and quantity and a decrease in her anxiety 
were noted. After 5 months, the patient 
was sleeping in her own room most nights 
and handling the new school year with no 
difficulties. No side effects were observed 
from taking the CBD oil. 
DISCUSSION
Studies repeatedly recognize the preva-
lence of an anxiety-provoked sleep disor-
der after a traumatic experience.20 Our 
patient was definitely experiencing this 
phenomenon, which was aggravated by 
daily stressful activities. 
The main finding from this case study 
is that CBD oil can be an effective com-
pound to reduce anxiety and insomnia 
secondary to PTSD. A review of the lit-
erature suggests some benefits from the 
use of CBD because of its anxiolytic and 
sleep-inducing effects.9 Animal studies 
support use of this treatment and report 
that “CBD may block anxiety-induced 
[rapid eye movement] sleep alteration via 
its anxiolytic effect on the brain.”21
The strength of this particular case is 
that our patient was receiving no phar-
maceutical medications (other than non-
prescription diphenhydramine) but only 
nutritional supplements and the CBD 
oil to control her symptoms. Her scores 
on the sleep scale and the anxiety scale 
consistently and steadily decreased during 
a period of 5 months (see Table 2). She 
was ultimately able to sleep through the 
night most nights in her own room, was 
less anxious at school and home, and dis-
played appropriate behaviors. The patient’s 
grandmother (her caregiver) reported: “My 
granddaughter’s behaviors are definitely 
better being on the CBD. Her anxiety is 
not gone, but it is not as intense and she is 
much easier to be around. She now sleeps 
in her own room most of the time, which 
has never happened before.” 
Further study will need to be conducted 
to determine the permanency of our pa-
tient’s positive behaviors and how long she 
will need to continue taking the CBD oil. 
We do not have a reasonable foundation 
to recommend dosing from the scientific 
literature. However, in our experience, 
this supplement given 12 mg to 25 mg 
once daily appears to provide relief of 
key symptoms with minimal side effects. 
Our patient did not voice any complaints 
or discomfort from the use of CBD. We 
routinely asked about headache, fatigue, 
and change in appetite or agitation in ad-
dition to conducting a routine psychiatric 
evaluation. Although CBD is considered 
generally safe,17 the long-term effects are 
yet to be studied.
The ultimate goal is to gradually taper 
her off the use of CBD oil and transition 
our patient into lifelong coping strategies 
such as yoga, meditation, and various other 
therapeutic activities. v
a GW Pharmaceuticals is the founder of the Cannabinoid 
Research Institute, directed by Philip Robson, MD. 
Further research articles listed.
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgments
CannaVest Corp, San Diego, CA, which had 
no involvement in the case study or distribution 
of the product, provided the CBD oil that was 
administered to the patient. No financial support 
was provided. 
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health 
Communications provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Shannon S, Oplia-Lehman J. Effectiveness of 
cannabidiol oil for pediatric anxiety and insomnia as 
part of posttraumatic stress disorder: A case report. 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-005. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.7812/TPP/16-005.
Table 2. Patient’s clinical progress in 
sleep and anxiety
 
Date of visit
Sleep scale 
scorea
SCARED 
scoreb
March 16, 2015
59
34
May 25, 2015
42
24
July 22, 2015
41
19
August 24, 2015
37
16
September 22, 2015
38
18
a A score of more than 50 is considered indicative of 
a sleep disorder on the Sleep Disturbance Scale for 
Children. 
b A SCARED score over 25 indicates a high probability 
of a childhood anxiety disorder.
SCARED = Screen for Anxiety Related Disorders.
CBD oil can be an effective 
compound to reduce anxiety and 
insomnia secondary to PTSD.
 111
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-005
CASE REPORTS
Effectiveness of Cannabidiol Oil for Pediatric Anxiety and Insomnia as Part of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Case Report 
References
 1. Campos AC, Moreira FA, Gomes FV, Del Bel EA, 
Guimarães FS. Multiple mechanisms involved in the 
large-spectrum therapeutic potential of cannabidiol 
in psychiatric disorders. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 
Biol Sci 2012 Dec 5;367(1607):3364-78. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2011.0389.
 2. Mechanism of action [Internet]. Cambridge, United 
Kingdom: GW Pharmaceuticals plc; c2014 [cited 
2015 Aug]. Available from: www.gwpharm.com/
mechanism-of-action.aspx. 
 3. McPartland JM, Guy G. The evolution of cannabis 
and coevolution with the cannabinoid receptor—a 
hypothesis. In: Guy GW, Whittle BA, Robson 
PJ, editors. The medicinal uses of cannabis and 
cannabinoids. 1st ed. London, United Kingdom: 
Pharmaceutical Press; 2004. p 71-102.
 4. Leweke FM, Piomelli D, Pahlisch F, et al. Cannabidiol 
enhances anandamide signaling and alleviates 
psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia. Transl 
Psychiatry 2012 Mar 20;2:e94. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/tp.2012.15.
 5. Lee MA. CBD: how it works. O’Shaughnessy’s 
[Internet] 2011 Autumn [cited 2016 Apr 26]:14. 
Available from: www.os-extra.cannabisclinicians.org/
wp-content/uploads/2012/07/CBDiary21.pdf.
 6. Crippa JA, Derenusson GN, Ferrari TB, et al. Neural 
basis of anxiolytic effects of cannabidiol (CBD) in 
generalized social anxiety disorder: a preliminary 
report. J Psychopharmacol 2011 Jan;25(1):121-30. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0269881110379283.
 7. McHugh D, Tanner C, Mechoulam R, Pertwee RG, 
Ross RA. Inhibition of human neutrophil 
chemotaxis by endogenous cannabinoids and 
phytocannabinoids: evidence for a site distinct from 
CB1 and CB2. Mol Pharmacol 2008 Feb;73(2): 
441-50. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1124/
mol.107.041863.
 8. Zhornitsky S, Potvin S. Cannabidiol in humans—
the quest for therapeutic targets. Pharmaceuticals 
(Basel) 2012 May 21;5(5):529-52. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.3390/ph5050529.
 9. Zuardi AW. Cannabidiol: from an inactive cannabinoid 
to a drug with wide spectrum of action. Rev Bras 
Psiquiatr 2008 Sep;30(3):271-80. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1590/s1516-44462008000300015.
 10. Burstein S. Cannabidiol (CBD) and its analogs: a 
review of their effects on inflammation. Bioorg Med 
Chem 2015 Apr 1;23(7):1377-85. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bmc.2015.01.059.
 11. Fernández-Ruiz J, Sagredo O, Pazos MR, et al. 
Cannabidiol for neurodegenerative disorders: 
important new clinical applications for this 
phytocannabinoid? Br J Clin Pharmacol 2013 
Feb;75(2):323-33. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1365-2125.2012.04341.x.
 12. Zuardi AW, Crippa JA, Hallak JE, Moreira FA, 
Guimarães FS. Cannabidiol, a Cannabis sativa 
constituent, as an antipsychotic drug. Braz J Med 
Biol Res 2006 Apr;39(4):421-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1590/s0100-879x2006000400001.
 13. Fingerle J. CB2 agonism protects from inflammation 
related kidney damage and fibrosis. Proceedings of 
the 25th Anniversary Symposium of the International 
Cannabinoid Research Society; 2015 Jun 28-Jul 3; 
Wolfville, Nova Scotia, Canada.
 14. Purohit V. Role of cannabinoids in chronic pain. 
Proceedings of the 25th Anniversary Symposium 
of the International Cannabinoid Research Society; 
2015 Jun 28-Jul 3; Wolfville, Nova Scotia, Canada.
 15. Starowicz K. Role of endocannabinoid system in 
pathogenesis of osteoarthritic pain. Proceedings of 
the 25th Anniversary Symposium of the International 
Cannabinoid Research Society; 2015 Jun 28-Jul 3; 
Wolfville, Nova Scotia, Canada.
 16. Liu A. Therapeutic efficacy of a peripherally restricted 
CB1R antagonist/AMPK activator in diet-induced 
obesity/metabolic syndrome. Proceedings of the 
25th Anniversary Symposium of the International 
Cannabinoid Research Society; 2015 Jun 28-Jul 3; 
Wolfville, Nova Scotia, Canada.
 17. Bergamaschi MM, Queiroz RH, Zuardi AW, 
Crippa JA. Safety and side effects of cannabidiol, 
a Cannabis sativa constituent. Curr Drug Saf 
2011 Sep 1;6(4):237-49. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.2174/157488611798280924.
 18. Ferreira VR, Carvalho LB, Ruotolo F, de Morais JF, 
Prado LB, Prado GF. Sleep disturbance scale 
for children: translation, cultural adaptation, and 
validation. Sleep Med 2009 Apr;10(4):457-63. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sleep.2008.03.018.
 19. Birmaher B, Khetarpal S, Cully M, Brent D, 
McKenzie S. Screen for child anxiety related 
disorders (SCARED) [Internet]. Pittsburgh, PA: 
Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, University 
of Pittsburgh; 1995 Oct [cited 2016 Apr 26]. 
Available from: www.pediatricbipolar.pitt.edu/content.
asp?id=2333#3304.
 20. Pace-Schott EF, Germain A, Milad MR. Sleep and 
REM sleep disturbance in the pathophysiology of 
PTSD: the role of extinction memory. Biol Mood 
Anxiety Disord 2015 May 29;5:3. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/s13587-015-0018-9.
 21. Hsiao YT, Yi PL, Li CL, Chang FC. Effect of 
cannabidiol on sleep disruption induced by the 
repeated combination tests consisting of open field 
and elevated plus-maze in rats. Neuropharmacology 
2012 Jan;62(1):373-84. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.08.013.
Marijuana and Medicine
Scientific data indicate the potential therapeutic value of cannabinoid drugs, 
primarily [tetrahydrocannabinol], for pain relief, control of nausea and 
vomiting, and appetite stimulation; smoked marijuana, however, is a crude 
[tetrahydrocannabinol] delivery system that also delivers harmful substances.
— Joy JE, Watson SJ Jr, Benson JA Jr. Marijuana and medicine: Assessing the science base. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1999.
 112
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-238
CASE REPORTS
A General Pediatrics and Integrative Medicine Approach  
to Pervasive Refusal Syndrome: A Case Report
Tido von Schoen-Angerer, MD, MPH; Elisabeth Helmschmidt, Dr Med; René Madeleyn, Dr Med;  
Reinhard Kindt, Dr Med; Christoph Möller, Prof Dr Med; Gunver Sophia Kienle, Dr Med; Jan Vagedes, Dr Med, MA 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-238
E-pub: 09/02/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-238
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Pervasive refusal syndrome (PRS) describes 
children with social withdrawal who become unable to walk, 
eat, or care for themselves. This case report examines whether 
an integrative medicine approach is useful for treating PRS.
Case Presentation: A seven-year-old girl with symptoms most 
consistent with PRS and depression was admitted to a pediatric 
ward in Germany that integrates conventional pediatric and 
psychosomatic care with anthroposophic medicine. She was 
integrated into the structured activities of the ward and received 
massages, movement therapy, and color light therapy. Her par-
ents were fully integrated into her care. After four weeks, she 
talked again, showed increased appetite, and supported herself 
when moved passively. She made a full recovery within four 
weeks after hospital discharge. 
Discussion: Integration of parents and an integrative medicine 
approach providing a variety of comforting sensory experiences 
was helpful for this patient with PRS. 
INTRODUCTION
Pervasive refusal syndrome (PRS) describes children with dra-
matic social withdrawal who refuse or are unable to walk, eat, 
or care for themselves, typically refusing any help.1 The etiology 
has been discussed as a sensitivity-stressor spectrum of traumatic 
experiences.2 A multidisciplinary, structured, inpatient psychiatric 
approach that provides persistent, realistic optimism and restricted 
parent visits has been recommended.3,4 There is documentation 
of one child being treated on a general pediatric ward with full 
integration of parents into her care5 and one child treated at 
home.6 Complementary and alternative medicine approaches 
seem to have a place in child psychiatry,7 but there are no reports 
detailing their use in PRS.
CASE PRESENTATION
Presenting Concerns
A seven-year-old white girl presented with unclear loss of 
energy and diffuse headaches. Her symptoms worsened during 
the next four weeks with the addition of loss of appetite. After 
a viral infection of the upper respiratory tract, she began to 
experience generalized weakness of the limbs, with increasing 
gait difficulties (Figure 1). 
In her medical history, the patient had colic in early infancy and 
Stage 1 Lyme borreliosis at age 5 years. Typical child development 
milestones were met. During preschool she had difficulties detach-
ing from her mother and complained about frequent abdominal 
pain. The family physician described her as an intelligent, almost 
overly alert, sensitive, and anxious child. Her weight fluctuated 
at or above the third percentile for age. She began primary school 
at age six full of enthusiasm and was well performing and well 
integrated. A few months into the first school year, she seemed 
increasingly exhausted, eagerly awaiting each weekend and not 
wanting to return to school after holidays. The girl lived with 
her parents and a younger brother. Both parents had been feeling 
overworked the previous year; the mother had been near burnout 
and taken time off work.
During a 6-week hospitalization for diagnostic work-up at a 
pediatric neurology center, the girl became wheelchair bound, 
refused to eat, and lost further weight, requiring feeding by na-
sogastric tube. Her speech became slow and poorly pronounced, 
and she whimpered and cried for hours every day. She was 
transferred to a child psychiatric ward, where she received diag-
noses of moderate depression, mixed dissociative disorder, and 
separation anxiety. Treatment with haloperidol was started. Her 
parents interrupted the hospitalization and medication after 16 
days because they did not agree with the restricted twice-weekly 
visits and a pharmaceutical treatment approach. She was then 
admitted to a general pediatric ward with an integrative medicine 
approach at the Filderklinik in Stuttgart, Germany, on referral 
from the family physician. 
At physical examination, the girl did not speak but appeared 
alert and smiled as a positive response to questions. Sitting 
in a wheelchair with her head hanging to the side, no active 
movements occurred. There was no spasticity, posturing, or 
negativism. Muscle tendon reflexes were present and symmetric. 
Babinski sign was absent. She whimpered even in response to 
light touch. Findings from examination of the heart, lungs, and 
abdomen were normal. The child’s body mass index was 11.4 
kg/m2 (below the third percentile). 
Tido von Schoen-Angerer, MD, MPH, is a Researcher at the ARCIM Institute in Filderstadt, Germany, and an Attending Physician in the Department 
of Pediatrics at Fribourg Hospital in Switzerland. E-mail: tido.von.schoenangerer@gmail.com. Elisabeth Helmschmidt, Dr Med, is a Pediatrician at 
the Filderklinik in Filderstadt, Germany. E-mail: e.helmschmidt@filderklinik.de. René Madeleyn, Dr Med, is the Head of the Pediatric Neurology 
unit at the Filderklinik in Filderstadt, Germany. E-mail: r.madeleyn@filderklinik.de. Reinhard Kindt, Dr Med, is a General Practitioner in private 
practice in Hannover, Germany. E-mail: reinhard.kindt@posteo.de. Christoph Möller, Prof Dr Med, is the Chief of the Department of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatric at Children’s Hospital Auf der Bult in Hannover, Germany. E-mail: moeller@hka.de. Gunver Sophia Kienle, Dr Med, is a 
Senior Researcher at the Institute for Applied Epistemology and Medical Methodology at the University of Witten/Herdecke in Freiburg im Breisgau, 
Germany. E-mail: gunver.kienle@ifaemm.de. Jan Vagedes, Dr Med, MA, is the Scientific Director at the ARCIM Institute in Filderstadt, Germany,  
and a Researcher in the Department of Pediatrics at the University Hospital Tübingen, Germany. E-mail: j.vagedes@arcim-institute.de.
 113
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-238
CASE REPORTS
A General Pediatrics and Integrative Medicine Approach to Pervasive Refusal Syndrome: A Case Report 
Extensive diagnostic evaluations for infectious, metabolic, 
neoplastic, and endocrine causes of her neurologic symptoms 
were carried out during the initial neurologic hospitalization. All 
the following parameters were found to be normal: cerebrospi-
nal fluid analyzed for cells, chemistry panel, Borrelia burgdorferi 
serologic analysis, polymerase chain reaction for Herpes simplex 
and picornavirus; complete blood cell count; electrolytes; liver 
function tests; thyroid function tests; vitamin B12 levels; cortisol 
levels; screening tests for metabolic diseases; copper elimination 
tests for Wilson disease; and antibodies for gluten intolerance. In 
addition, magnetic resonance imaging of the head and spine and 
electroencephalography had normal results. Lively muscle tendon 
reflexes excluded Guillain-Barré syndrome. No intelligence test 
was performed.
The working diagnosis on arrival to our service was PRS because 
her withdrawal affected eating, mobilization, speech, and school at-
tendance and required hospitalization, and because she would react 
negatively to encouragement and praise.3,8 Crying and whimpering 
were atypical for PRS, and depression was considered as an addi-
tional diagnosis. Depression could not, however, explain the level of 
somatic impairment in the absence of depressive stupor, agitation, 
diurnal variation, or psychomotor retardation.2 Separation anxiety 
seemed present but could not explain the extent of the symptoms. 
Although she had illness gains in the form of paternal attention, 
her condition fit less with conversion disorder, which more typ-
ically affects one organ system at a time; additionally, neurologic 
inconsistencies that are diagnostic of conversion muscle weakness 
were missing.9 A psychotic disorder with predominantly negative 
symptoms was ruled out because she was always adequate in visual 
contact and her sense of reality was intact. Although mutism can 
be part of catatonia, she had none of the motor signs of this con-
dition.10 It should be noted, however, that some catatonia experts 
consider PRS a misnomer for catatonia.11 
Therapeutic Intervention and Treatment
The hospital setting was a pediatric ward that integrates conven-
tional care with anthroposophic medicine.12 The team included 
physicians, nurses, special educators, and therapists, offering spe-
cialized movement therapy,13 rhythmic massage,14 art therapies, 
and color light therapy.15 Specific nursing techniques included 
massages and compresses. Medications in low homeopathic di-
lutions were used in addition to conventional medications. Ele-
ments of Waldorf special education were integrated into the ward 
routines.16 A pediatrician experienced in child psychiatry and a 
senior pediatric neurologist were involved in this patient’s care.
The parents were told that, as a sensitive and anxious child, 
their daughter seemed to have “pulled back” because she had too 
quickly exhausted her energy with her alert and active approach 
toward an increasingly demanding environment. The therapy 
goal was recovery through comforting sensory and whole-body 
experiences, with initial acceptance of her regression. 
We allowed the mother to be present throughout the hospiliza-
tion to let the girl feel secure, accepting potential reinforcement of 
the mother-child attachment. An initial four-week stay was agreed 
to by the parents. All therapies would at least be tried; there was 
an understanding that a nasogastric tube would be placed if she 
lost further weight. 
The girl was integrated into joint meals with patients, parents, 
and staff; joint morning and evening gatherings of all children in 
a circle; and a daily play group for preschool children. She would 
sit in her wheelchair rather than play, but from her eye expressions 
she appeared increasingly engaged. She was spoon-fed, progressing 
gradually from pureed to solid food and eventually a regular diet. 
A special educator played to her on a harp and read her stories. 
The patient received daily gentle abdominal massages with mal-
low oil (Malva arborea), and rhythmic massage of the legs with 
ointment containing pallasites, a mineral. She had twice-weekly 
Figure 1. Timeline.
 114
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-238
CASE REPORTS
A General Pediatrics and Integrative Medicine Approach to Pervasive Refusal Syndrome: A Case Report 
oil-dispersion baths with gold-rose blossom oil and, toward the 
end, evening mustard footbaths.
In movement therapy (eurythmy therapy), movements were 
first shown by the therapist and connected to short stories. Later 
the therapist would move the girl’s arms and legs; during Week 4 
the patient began giving active support during arm movements. 
Color light therapy sessions involved sitting five to eight min-
utes in front of different metal-colored glasses (manganese-violet, 
iron-blue, red-gold, and cobalt-blue). 
Only one family therapy session took place with both parents.
Anthroposophic medications were administered as follows:
1. Before admission and continued until hospital Day 9: Bryophyl-
lum 50% trituration, Bryophyllum argento cultum Rh D3 (D 
denotes decimal dilution, ie, D2 = 1:102, D3 = 1:103, etc), and 
Gentiana Magenglobuli D4.
2. From hospital Day 9 onward: “Aufbaukalk 1, Weleda” (contain-
ing Apatit D5, Cucurbita pepo D2); “Aufbaukalk 2, Weleda” 
(containing Conchae, Quercus D3); and Levisticum D4.
3. Started between hospital Days 12 and 21: Siderit D6; Argentum 
metallicum praeparatum D20; Apis D4/Levisticum D3; and 
Berberis D2/Quarz D19.
Apis/Levisticum and Berberis/Quarz were manufactured by 
Wala Heilmittel GmbH, Bad Boll, Germany; all other medica-
tions were manufactured by Weleda AG, Schwäbisch Gmünd, 
Germany.
Follow-up and Outcomes
During the course of 4 weeks, the girl began to talk again. Her 
appetite increased, although she gained only 900 g of weight 
(still below the third percentile). At the end of the hospitaliza-
tion, she gave support when moved passively and began moving 
while asleep. On discharge, she expressed a desire to not be seen 
in her wheelchair. After discharge, she gradually started walking 
and within a month made an almost full recovery (except for a 
stiff walk). A scheduled subsequent hospitalization was no lon-
ger needed. A year later, eating habits, weight, body movements, 
and strength were normal, and she was interacting actively with 
friends. She now attends a small class in a different school to 
provide a more socially protected learning environment; she has 
no academic difficulties. 
The parents read the final report and gave signed informed 
consent for its publication. The mother said of their daughter, 
“The worst thing was not having a diagnosis for a long time. 
At the Filderklinik she wanted to avoid being again fed by na-
sogastric tube and therefore decided to eat. This became her 
first step toward recovery. In the months preceding her illness, 
it seemed as if her ambitions were outpacing her energy; this 
exhausted her. Today she has fully recovered but is less in a 
hurry to achieve things.” 
DISCUSSION
PRS and depression appeared the most likely diagnoses in 
this sensitive, high-achieving girl. Within the spectrum of re-
sistance, withdrawal and regression were dominant rather than 
refusal.17 Recovery was exceptionally fast,18 probably helped 
by absence of severe trauma or family dysfunction, as well as 
the maintained level of cooperation with the patient, and the 
therapeutic approach. 
We think that the pleasurable atmosphere of a general pedi-
atric ward, body and sensory stimulation therapies, as well as a 
developed structure of group activities were the main “therapeu-
tic agent.”19 Full parental integration seemed important too. It 
is unclear whether enmeshed mother-child relationships in PRS 
are primary or secondary to the child becoming ill.3 Our concept 
worked similarly well for two additional children with PRS who 
presented to our clinic. 
Anthroposophic medicine is an integrative treatment system 
based on a holistic understanding of humans and nature that 
considers a close interconnection between body, mind, and spirit 
in its therapeutic approach.12,20 Anthroposophic medicine is in-
tegrated with conventional medicine in hospitals and medical 
practices and is most prevalent in central Europe.12 It is practiced 
by physicians, therapists, and nurses and is used across a range 
of medical specialties. A Health-Technology Assessment Report 
and a 2011 update identified 265 clinical studies on the efficacy 
and effectiveness of anthroposophic medicine.21-23
The integrative treatment approach with anthroposophic 
medicine seemed helpful in this case, but separating out how 
the specific therapies contributed to the overall progress is not 
feasible. Medications play a limited role in treatment of PRS. 
Because anthroposophic medications were used simultaneously 
with various other therapies, their benefit cannot be determined 
for this single case.
By describing therapeutic concept, setting, and all interven-
tions, a whole-systems research approach was taken.24 A limitation 
of this report is that no intelligence test was performed, because 
the girl’s intelligence was perceived as above average. Another 
limitation is that replication requires a multidisciplinary approach 
and a team with psychiatric experience that few general pediatric 
departments can offer. Other methods than those used here could 
be considered to provide comforting sensory stimulation, such as 
Snoezelen multisensory stimulation therapy.25 
CONCLUSION
An integrative medicine approach with various complementary 
therapies focused on comforting and sensory stimulation, were 
helpful in this case of PRS and depression. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
Acknowledgments
Dr Sally Hargreaves (Imperial College London) and Dr Kavitha Kolappa 
(Harvard Medical School) provided helpful comments on the manuscript.
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health Communications provided editorial 
assistance.
… the pleasurable atmosphere of a general 
pediatric ward, body and sensory stimulation 
therapies, as well as a developed structure of group 
activities were the main “therapeutic agent.”
 115
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-238
CASE REPORTS
A General Pediatrics and Integrative Medicine Approach to Pervasive Refusal Syndrome: A Case Report 
How to Cite this Article
von Schoen-Angerer T, Helmschmidt E, Madeleyn R, et al. A general pediatrics 
and integrative medicine approach to pervasive refusal syndrome: A case report. 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-238. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-238.
References
 1. Lask B, Britten C, Kroll L, Magagna J, Tranter M. Children with pervasive refusal. 
Arch Dis Child 1991 Jul;66(7):866-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/adc.66.7.866.
 2. Nunn KP, Lask B, Owen I. Pervasive refusal syndrome (PRS) 21 years on: a re-
conceptualisation and a renaming. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2014 Mar;23(3): 
163-72. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00787-013-0433-7.
 3. Jaspers T, Hanssen GM, van der Valk JA, Hanekom JH, van Well GT, Schieveld JN. 
Pervasive refusal syndrome as part of the refusal-withdrawal-regression spectrum: 
critical review of the literature illustrated by a case report. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
2009 Nov;18(11):645-51. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00787-009-0027-6.
 4. Nunn KP, Thompson SL, Moore SG, English M, Burke EA, Byrne N. Managing 
pervasive refusal syndrome: strategies of hope. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry 1998 
Apr;3(2):229-49. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1359104598032007.
 5. Edwards H, Done A. Caring for Sophie. A child with pervasive refusal 
syndrome. Paediatr Nurs 2004 Jun;16(5):39-42. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7748/
paed2004.06.16.5.39.c927.
 6. Wright B, Beverley D. Pervasive refusal syndrome. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry 
2012 Apr;17(2):221-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1359104511403680.
 7. Simkin DR, Popper CW. Overview of integrative medicine in child and adolescent 
psychiatry. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am 2013 Jul;22(3):375-80, v. DOI:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chc.2013.05.002.
 8. Thompson SL, Nunn KP. The pervasive refusal syndrome: the RAHC experience.  
Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry 1997 Jan;2(1):145-65. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1177/1359104597021010.
 9. Stone J, Warlow C, Sharpe M. The symptom of functional weakness: a controlled 
study of 107 patients. Brain 2010 May;133(Pt 5):1537-51. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1093/brain/awq068.
 10. Fink M, Taylor MA. The catatonia syndrome: forgotten but not gone. Arch Gen  
Psychiatry 2009 Nov;66(11):1173-7. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archgenpsychiatry. 
2009.141.
 11. Dhossche D, Kellner CH. Pervasive refusal syndrome: a misnomer for catatonia. 
Asian J Psychiatr 2015 Dec;18:113. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajp.2015.09.002.
 12. Kienle GS, Albonico HU, Baars E, Hamre HJ, Zimmermann P, Kiene H. 
Anthroposophic medicine: an integrative medical system originating in Europe. 
Glob Adv Health Med 2013 Nov;2(6):20-31. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7453/
gahmj.2012.087.
 13. Kienle GS, Hampton Schwab J, Murphy JB, et al. Eurythmy therapy in anxiety.  
Altern Ther Health Med 2011 Jul-Aug;17(4):56-63.
 14. Hamre HJ, Witt CM, Glockmann A, Ziegler R, Willich SN, Kiene H. Rhythmical 
massage therapy in chronic disease: a 4-year prospective cohort study. J Altern 
Complement Med 2007 Jul-Aug;13(6):635-42. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/
acm.2006.6345.
 15. Altmaier M. [Metallfarblichttherapie: Zur Forschung und Entwicklung einer neuen 
Therapie auf anthroposophischer Grundlage]. Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Info 3 
Verlag; 2010 Jun 1.
 16. Sobo EJ. Salutogenic education? Movement and whole child health in a Waldorf 
(Steiner) school. Med Anthropol Q 2015 Jun;29(2):137-56. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/maq.12140.
 17. Jans T, Ball J, Preiss M, Haberhausen M, Warnke A, Renner TJ. Pervasive refusal 
syndrome. Three German cases provide further illustration. Z Kinder Jugendpsychiatr 
Psychother 2011 Sep;39(5):351-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1024/1422-4917/
a000128.
 18. Guirguis S, Reid C, Rao S, Grahame V, Kaplan C. Follow-up study of four cases of 
pervasive refusal syndrome. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2011 May;20(5):271-4. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00787-011-0169-1.
 19. Green J, Burke M. The ward as a therapeutic agent. In: Green J, Jacobs B, editors. 
In-patient child psychiatry: modern practice, research and the future. Hove, East 
Sussex, United Kingdom: Routledge; 1998. p 93-109.
 20. Heusser P. [Anthroposophische Medizin und Wissenschaft: Beiträge zu einer 
integrativen medizinischen Anthropologie]. Stuttgart, Germany: Schattauer; 2011.
 21. Kienle GS, Kiene H, Albonico HU. Anthroposophic medicine: effectiveness, utility, 
costs, safety. Stuttgart, Germany: Schattauer; 2006.
 22. Kienle GS, Glockmann A, Grugel R, Hamre HJ, Kiene H. [Clinical research on 
anthroposophic medicine: update of a health technology assessment report and 
status quo]. [Article in German]. Forsch Komplementmed 2011;18(5):269-82. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000331812.
 23. Hamre HJ, Kiene H, Ziegler R, et al. Overview of the publications from the 
Anthroposophic Medicine Outcomes Study (AMOS): a whole system evaluation 
study. Glob Adv Health Med 2014 Jan;3(1):54-70. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7453/
gahmj.2013.010.
 24. Boon H, Macpherson H, Fleishman S, et al. Evaluating complex healthcare 
systems: a critique of four approaches. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2007 
Sep;4(3):279-85. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ecam/nel079.
 25. Hotz GA, Castelblanco A, Lara IM, Weiss AD, Duncan R, Kuluz JW. Snoezelen: 
a controlled multi-sensory stimulation therapy for children recovering from 
severe brain injury. Brain Inj 2006 Jul;20(8):879-88. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/02699050600832635.
Equal
When the disease is stronger than the patient, the physician will 
not be able to help at all. When the strength of the patient is greater 
than the strength of the disease, he does not need a physician at 
all. But when both are equal, then one needs a physician who will 
support the patient’s strength and help him against the disease.
— Abu Bakr Muhammad Ibn Zakariya al Razi, 854-925, Persian polymath, 
physician, alchemist, and philosopher
 116
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-048
COMMENTARY
Ethical Analysis for Physicians Considering the Provision  
of Life-Ending Medication in Compliance with the California  
End of Life Option Act
D Malcolm Shaner, MD 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-048
E-pub: 06/16/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-048 
ABSTRACT
The End of Life Option Act in California, effective June 9, 2016, permits physicians 
to prescribe lethal medication to patients confirmed to be terminally ill and capable 
of independently making and carrying out a decision to ingest deadly medication. 
Medicine has traditionally excluded the provision of deadly medication from proper 
practice. Physicians reasonably may hold to that limit. However, honoring a repeated 
request from a capable, terminally ill patient to receive life-ending medication still can 
be considered to be a moral and permissible approach to relieve suffering. A physician 
choosing to expand his/her role within this narrowly defined context allows the patient 
to assume authority for a deeply personal decision that may belong to the patient more 
than to anyone else.
INTRODUCTION
This article details an ethical rationale 
for the physician prescribing life-ending 
medications for capable, terminally ill pa-
tients who will then decide for themselves 
whether to end their lives this way. It also 
provides guidance for the physician who 
wonders whether this service should be of-
fered within the context of an agreement 
to work collaboratively as physicians. More 
than one ethical approach may be used 
to examine this clinical situation. This 
particular analysis is offered to promote 
a moral understanding among physicians 
practicing together within the Southern 
California Permanente Medical Group 
(SCPMG). The approach includes those 
who appreciate the actions permitted in 
the End of Life Option Act (EOLOA) as 
useful to Kaiser Permanente (KP) patients 
and those who may hold an opposing opin-
ion. Physicians who have not yet decided 
which approach to consider appropriate 
may benefit from this discussion.
Legislative Highlights 
The state of Oregon implemented 
the Death with Dignity Act in 1997,1 
adopting a process for “Physician Aid-
In-Dying.” Although commonly referred 
to as “Physician-Assisted Suicide,” many 
patients were satisfied with receiving the 
medication without taking it. Numer-
ous attempts to repeal the Act failed. 
In 2006, the US Supreme Court ruled 
in favor of Oregon, upholding the law.2
KP Northwest adopted procedures to 
comply with the Oregon law to include 
participation by physicians within North-
west Permanente.
In California, skilled lobbying efforts, 
high-profile cases, significant voter sup-
port, and precedents from other states led 
to the proposal of the EOLOA.3 Initially 
the California Medical Association (CMA) 
opposed the legislation, relying on a posi-
tion statement held since 1987. After a poll 
and discussion, the CMA changed its po-
sition to “neutral” in May 2015.4 Despite 
eloquent objections by some physicians 
reluctant to be placed in a role proscribed 
by traditional values and after withdrawal 
of CMA opposition, the EOLOA was 
signed into law in 2015 and implemented 
on June 9, 2016.
The CMA position change and the 
enacted law are at odds with the current 
American Medical Association position 
(see Sidebar: American Medical Associa-
tion Opinion 2.211—Physician-Assisted 
Suicide), leaving California physicians in a 
quandary about existing and potential roles.
Since the passage of the law, discus-
sions have included attempts to reverse 
the EOLOA through referendum or 
other political processes. A referendum 
attempt failed for lack of signatures in 
January 2016.
The California End of Life Option Act
The EOLOA3 details circumstances 
under which physicians in California, in-
cluding those within SCPMG, may legally 
provide life-ending medications to termi-
nally ill patients. KP has remained neutral 
on the subject of the EOLOA. After passage 
of the law, a KP Southern California task 
force formed to organize efforts to comply 
with the EOLOA. The task force asked the 
physician CoDirector of the KP Southern 
California Bioethics Program to provide 
an ethical analysis for SCPMG physicians. 
This article shares that analysis (see Sidebar: 
Ethical Analysis Summary). 
Within the context of the law, a termi-
nally ill patient with access to adequate pal-
liative care, who is capable of making this 
decision without coercion or impairment 
from psychiatric illness, may express a per-
sistent wish to consciously ingest, under 
his/her own power, a physician-prescribed, 
life-ending medication. That medication 
allows the dying patient to determine the 
time and nature of death rather than leav-
ing it to the course of illness.
Provisions of the EOLOA include that 
the patient must
1. be age 18 years or older; capable of 
making “medical” decisions as assessed 
by an attending and consulting physi-
cian; and, if needed, as assessed by either 
a psychologist or a psychiatrist
D Malcolm Shaner, MD, is the CoDirector of the Bioethics Program for Kaiser Permanente 
Southern California in Pasadena. E-mail: malcolm.shaner@kp.org.
 117
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-048
COMMENTARY
Ethical Analysis for Physicians Considering the Provision of Life-Ending Medication in Compliance with the California End of Life Option Act  
2. have a disease that within reasonable 
medical judgment, and confirmed by a 
consulting physician, will result in death 
within 6 months 
3. be able to make an affirmative, conscious, 
and physical act to self-administer and 
ingest the aid-in-dying medication
4. make two oral requests to an attending 
physician, separated by at least 15 days 
and associated with a completed, written 
request
5. be a California resident.
Once the medications have been se-
cured by the patient, s/he assumes moral 
authority over whether to take them. 
California is, to some degree, relieved 
of the moral implications of disallowing 
patients to take their lives in this manner 
and assumes some responsibility to con-
firm that the process does not result in 
harm. The EOLOA can be considered to 
be a legal device necessary in the context 
of the current California law that allows 
patients to receive controlled substances 
only through a physician’s prescription. Al-
though individual physician participation 
in this act is optional, this legal situation 
requires physician participation for the Act 
to be operationalized.
Practically, the participating physician 
takes three steps (Figure 1):
1. confirm appropriate medical care has 
been fully explored and the aims of 
medicine have been addressed
2. validate that a patient is qualified to re-
ceive the medication under the EOLOA 
and within the exercise of a physician’s 
best medical judgment
3. provide the prescription to the patient.
AN ETHICAL RATIONALE
Some believe that any step a physician 
takes toward providing any patient with 
lethal medication violates traditional 
prohibitions against offering lethal or 
poisonous medication.5,6 This view holds 
that the physician acting in such a role 
is either engaging in or is complicit in 
an immoral act—or at least not practic-
ing medicine in the traditional role of 
medicine as a healing profession. In this 
traditional framework, the prescription 
of life-ending medication could be seen 
as eroding the credibility and fabric of a 
social understanding of the practice of 
medicine. Some may consider that such 
a serious change might undermine the 
American Medical Association Opinion 2.211—Physician-Assisted Suicide1
Physician-assisted suicide occurs when a physician facilitates a patient’s death by provid-
ing the necessary means and/or information to enable the patient to perform the life-ending 
act (eg, the physician provides sleeping pills and information about the lethal dose, while 
aware that the patient may commit suicide).
It is understandable, though tragic, that some patients in extreme duress—such as those 
suffering from a terminal, painful, debilitating illness—may come to decide that death is 
preferable to life. However, allowing physicians to participate in assisted suicide would 
cause more harm than good. Physician-assisted suicide is fundamentally incompatible 
with the physician’s role as healer, would be difficult or impossible to control, and would 
pose serious societal risks.
Instead of participating in assisted suicide, physicians must aggressively respond to the 
needs of patients at the end of life. Patients should not be abandoned once it is determined 
that cure is impossible. Multidisciplinary interventions should be sought including specialty 
consultation, hospice care, pastoral support, family counseling, and other modalities. Patients 
near the end of life must continue to receive emotional support, comfort care, adequate 
pain control, respect for patient autonomy, and good communication. (I, IV)
Issued June 1994
1. Opinion 2.211: physician-assisted suicide [Internet]. Chicago, IL: American Medical Association; 1994 Jun [cited 
2016 Feb 28]. Available from: www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/physician-resources/medical-ethics/code-medical-ethics/
opinion2211.page.
Figure 1. Flow chart of process for physician involvement in the EOLOA. 
EOLOA = End of Life Option Act.
 118
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-048
COMMENTARY
Ethical Analysis for Physicians Considering the Provision of Life-Ending Medication in Compliance with the California End of Life Option Act 
pillars on which the profession of medi-
cine is founded and damage related provi-
sions for professional conduct. Physicians 
holding this view may understandably 
regard those who prescribe life-ending 
medication as unprofessional and fear 
that the prescription of aid-in-dying 
drugs will destroy patient trust in the 
physician’s commitment to cure.
Physicians who choose to participate in 
the provisions of the EOLOA also uphold 
key notions of professional responsibility. 
Particularly important in this view is the 
practical realization of the worth and 
centrality of individual human values 
in every aspect of medical professional 
activity. For these physicians, it follows 
that a sensitive and empathic response 
that honors individual beliefs, dignity, 
and perceived suffering may, in some 
contexts, understandably result in the 
prescription of life-ending medication. 
The physician fulfills a patient’s request, 
giving the patient a measure of control 
over an uncontrollable illness, and con-
firming that a moral community accepts 
the patient’s decision. This view holds 
further that patients will trust physicians 
additionally to facilitate a more comfort-
able end, while addressing perhaps the 
greatest suffering—physical, emotional, 
existential—that patients experience. 
Although one physician within SCPMG 
may not accept another’s position on this 
compelling issue, tolerance by physicians 
of the plurality of opinions and the dif-
ferent social roles of medical profession-
als that result remains deeply important. 
Tolerance fosters mutual respect, en-
hances working relationships, and pro-
vides for a broader understanding that 
physicians who care deeply about their 
patients may not agree on this particular 
issue. This ethical analysis is offered to 
promote understanding among SCPMG 
physicians and with it, a commitment 
to professional values that continue to 
inspire patient trust and appreciation. 
EMPIRIC BASIS FOR THE  
END OF LIFE OPTION ACT
For those patients whose underly-
ing disease has no cure, physicians offer 
treatment for suffering: the palliation of 
symptoms. The growth of the specialty of 
palliative medicine over the last decades 
is a testimony to the complexity of this 
treatment. Despite appropriate palliation, 
some patients facing death will still request 
life-ending medication. The reasons for 
this request have been categorized in vari-
ous ways as seen by those engaged in this 
activity who poll their particular patient 
populations. See Sidebar: Euthanasia 
Research for examples and extracts from 
one Web site promoting the discussion 
of euthanasia. 
THE MORAL BASIS
Although palliation of symptoms may 
not be enough for some terminally ill 
patients to want to continue life, this fact 
does not oblige physicians to provide the 
means by which a patient might end it. 
On what moral basis, then, can physicians 
participate in the validation of a patient’s 
request for life-ending medications, con-
firm the patient’s access to palliative care, 
and in the proper situation prescribe 
deadly medication?
Ethical Analysis Summary
Some physicians within California will choose to participate in the End of Life Option 
Act (EOLOA). They will feel they are doing the right thing when they prescribe life-ending 
medications for capable, terminally ill patients who will then decide for themselves whether 
to end their lives this way. Other physicians may feel uncomfortable participating, believ-
ing that prescribing lethal medication may be immoral or outside the proper practice of 
medicine. Undecided physicians may suspend judgment, waiting to be convinced by a 
particular patient with a terminal illness making an understandable request.
The arguments offered in this article are intended to help physicians make their own 
decision and to appreciate the decisions of other physicians. Although a physician may 
disagree with another’s position, tolerance is important. Tolerance fosters mutual respect, 
enhances working relationships, and provides for the broader understanding that physicians 
who care deeply about their patients on this particular issue may not agree.
Physicians who value traditional medicine: For these physicians prescribing fatal doses 
of medication to patients is just wrong; it is contrary to the proper practice of medicine 
as handed down through millennia. Medicine is about healing; ending life can never be 
considered healing. There must be some absolute moral standard on which medicine is 
founded. Just as physicians should not participate in torture or the execution of criminals, 
physicians also should not participate in suicide or encourage patients to kill themselves. 
Physicians should focus solely on providing sufficient palliative and hospice resources to 
the terminally ill to reduce the likelihood of such requests.
Physicians for whom the morality of this specific end-of-life decision is relative and 
not absolute: These physicians feel that, when there is no way to heal the dying patient, 
the best approach is to allow the patient to decide this issue. When the Hippocratic Oath 
was written, a dying patient might have received assistance from nonphysicians to obtain 
life-ending preparations. The traditional practice of medicine did not prevent patients from 
obtaining these drugs; it only disallowed physicians from providing them. Well-intended 
modern laws restrict independent patient access to lethal medications without a physician’s 
prescription. The patient may understandably view a physician’s refusal to prescribe these 
medications as being unfairly obstructive. The EOLOA allows a physician to honor a dying 
patient’s request to obtain a life-ending prescription. Although prescribing lethal doses of 
medication violates the tenets of traditional medicine, it is considered reasonable with the 
safeguards of the EOLOA. The physician prescribes the drugs, allowing the patient to as-
sume authority for this personal decision. In addition, the physician provides comfort to the 
patient, giving him/her a measure of control over an uncontrollable illness, and confirming 
that a moral community accepts the patient’s decision. Although many concerns of the dying 
can be adequately addressed by palliative or hospice care, these have limits with regard to 
the ability to restore lost autonomy, to promote personal dignity, to make life sufficiently 
enjoyable, and to lessen a patient’s sense of burden on loved ones.
Thus, the act of prescribing a fatal dose of medication is not within the traditional practice 
of medicine. Physicians may reasonably hold to that limit. However, delivery of life-ending 
medications to the terminally ill can still be considered an approach to relieve suffering 
that is both moral and permissible.
 119
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-048
COMMENTARY
Ethical Analysis for Physicians Considering the Provision of Life-Ending Medication in Compliance with the California End of Life Option Act  
From the Hippocratic Corpus comes a 
direction to know when medicine can 
no longer be helpful and to know when 
to step away.7 This is stated succinctly in 
the following:
First I will define what I conceive 
medicine to be. In general terms, it is to 
do away with the sufferings of the sick, to 
lessen the violence of their diseases, and to 
refuse to treat those who are overmastered 
by their diseases, realizing that in such 
cases medicine is powerless.7
In modern understanding of the above, 
physicians continue to offer relief of suf-
fering to those overmastered by disease 
while ceasing attempts that predictably 
will be ineffective at treating the underly-
ing illness. However, in the context of the 
time in which the Hippocratic Corpus was 
conceived, the patient, family or persons 
other than physicians might morally and 
reasonably seek provisions towards an 
expedited death through herbal drugs. 
The Greeks had the knowledge to quickly 
effectuate a death as evidenced by the 
death of Socrates, a contemporary of 
Hippocrates.
Suicide was not uncommon in an-
cient Greece. Plato and the stoic, Zeno, 
described the appropriateness of suicide 
under certain conditions and perhaps 
the cowardliness of it under others.8 
Hippocrates held the view that physi-
cians should not be associated with this 
controversial practice and clearly and 
unequivocally placed it outside the limit 
of the proper practice of medicine.8 
Ironically, after hundreds of years of 
concerned moral and religious argument, 
the medicalization of suicide transferred 
some of this controversy into an arena 
perhaps least equipped to deal with it. 
The physician’s role, circumscribed by 
traditional prohibitions, was limited to 
describing and attempting to reverse 
underlying psychiatric self-destructive 
motivation. The traditional practice of 
medicine had no ability to endorse eutha-
nasia or to facilitate suicide. Over time, 
the involvement of the medical profession 
may have promoted an inappropriate 
generalization that all those seeking to kill 
themselves were mentally ill and its corol-
lary that treatment of underlying mental 
illness might be the most satisfactory ap-
proach for suicidal inclination. 
TRADITIONAL MEDICINE 
AND MODERN BALANCE 
The traditional understanding of the 
proper practice of medicine has been 
that medicine offers therapeutics through 
which a process of “healing” or “making 
whole again” may take place. This is stated 
eloquently by Edmund Pellegrino9p40:
Medicine must be concerned with the 
“good” of the patient. As David Thom-
asma and I have emphasized elsewhere, 
the patient’s good is a compound notion. 
It is not synonymous with the patient’s 
medical good. Healing means “to make 
whole again.” Therefore, ascertaining 
and enhancing all four realms of the pa-
tient’s good are involved in healing—the 
patient’s biomedical good, his own concep-
tion of the good for him as an individual, 
his good as a member of the human species 
(ie, the good for humans), and his good 
as a spiritual being (ie, the good for the 
soul). The concept of wholeness, together 
with its asymptotic attainment through 
relationships between, and among, persons 
is the specific end of medicine. It is not an 
end proper to any of the sciences basic to 
medicine. But without a concept of heal-
ing, medicine as such does not exist.
For some patients, the traditional prac-
tice of medicine has limitations. In these 
Euthanasia Research1
The Oregon Department of Human Services explained in its March 9, 2006 “Eighth 
Annual Report on Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act”:
“The most frequently reported concerns included a decreasing ability to participate in ac-
tivities that make life enjoyable (89%), loss of dignity (89%), and losing autonomy (79%) …”
From: Pearlman RA, Starks H. Chapter 6. Why do people seek physician-assisted death? 
In: Quill TE, Battin MP. Physician-assisted dying: the case for palliative care and patient 
choice. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press; 2004. p 91-101:
“Motivating Factor
• Illness-related experiences
- Feeling weak, tired, and uncomfortable 24 (69%)
- Loss of function 23 (66%)
- Pain or unacceptable side effects of pain medication 14 (40%)
• Threats to sense of self
- Loss of sense of self 22 (63%)
- Desire for control 21 (60%)
- Long-standing beliefs in favor of hastened death 5 (14%)
• Fears about the future
- Fears about future quality of life and dying 21 (60%)
- Negative past experiences with dying 17 (49%)
- Fear of being a burden on others 3 (9%).”
From: Ganzini L, Harvath TA, Jackson A, Goy ER, Miller LL, Delorit MA. Experiences 
of Oregon nurses and social workers with hospice patients who requested assistance 
with suicide. N Engl J Med 2002 Aug 22;347(8):582-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMsa020562:
“According to the hospice nurses, the most important reasons for requesting assistance 
with suicide, among patients who received prescriptions for lethal medications, were a desire 
to control the circumstances of death, a desire to die at home, the belief that continuing 
to live was pointless, and being ready to die. Depression and other psychiatric disorders, 
lack of social support, and concern about being a financial drain were, according to nurses, 
relatively unimportant …
Hospice social workers reported that the desire to control the circumstances of death, the 
wish to die at home, loss of independence or fear of such loss, and loss of dignity or fear of 
such loss were the most important reasons for requesting prescriptions for lethal medications; 
the median score for all these reasons was 5 on the 1-to-5 scale. They ranked lack of social 
support and depression as the least important reasons; the median score for both was 1 …”
1. Why do patients request physician-assisted death (aka physician-assisted suicide)? [Internet]. Santa Monica, 
CA: ProCon.org; 2008 Jun 10 [cited 2016 Feb 5]. Available from: http://euthanasia.procon.org/view.answers.
php?questionID=000199.
 120
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-048
COMMENTARY
Ethical Analysis for Physicians Considering the Provision of Life-Ending Medication in Compliance with the California End of Life Option Act 
uncommon situations, there is no healing 
that can be accomplished medically, no 
healing that can be appreciated by the pa-
tient, no social understanding of healing, 
and no spiritual understanding of healing. 
Without a concept of healing, the tra-
ditional practice of medicine ceases to ex-
ist. A physician’s determination that the 
patient has been overmastered by disease 
and is beyond healing may be the most 
difficult of the three steps described above 
that operationalize the EOLOA. Although 
there is an ongoing role for the medical 
profession to palliate symptoms, once a 
patient finds existence within a threat of 
imminent and unavoidable death to lack 
meaning, palliation of symptoms cannot 
return a patient to an acceptable state. At 
that juncture, although the patient may 
derive some benefit from palliative thera-
peutics, those therapeutics can not be un-
derstood summarily as “healing.” 
In the very distant past, physicians 
encountering this situation might have 
stepped aside, leaving patients and fami-
lies to decide how to proceed, including 
the possibility of suicide. In the current 
scenario, with implementation of the 
EOLOA, the participating physician must 
detail that for an individual patient, no 
medical concept of healing, and no promo-
tion of “good” in its compound notion, is 
understandable by the physician or by the 
patient. This “diagnosis” that confirms that 
the patient is “overmastered by disease” 
and unable to heal or be healed signals the 
limits of traditional medicine. This stage 
marks the point where moral authority for 
a decision regarding dying under this law 
may be assumed by the patient. 
Physicians have elaborated professional 
values that might guide this expanded role. 
The relief of suffering has been discussed 
extensively in the literature.10 Another 
professional value is that of humanism. 
As described by Pellegrino, “Humanism 
encompasses a spirit of sincere concern 
for the centrality of human values in every 
aspect of professional activity. This con-
cern focuses on respect for the freedom, 
dignity, worth, and belief systems of the 
individual person, and it implies a sensi-
tive, nonhumiliating, and empathetic way 
of helping with some problem or need.”9p88 
Respect for the individual person may not 
require ceding to the individual patient 
authority to ingest deadly medication. The 
“humane” action, although commonly 
described as offering life-ending medica-
tion, cannot be determined from such an 
analysis. However, in humanism’s explicit 
call to respect individual freedom and be-
liefs, some physicians find justification to 
expand a role for physicians in the specified 
context of continued patient suffering, in 
the absence of a known process for heal-
ing, and for an individual who repeatedly 
requests life-ending medication.
The EOLOA details a process intended 
to protect vulnerable patients and, simul-
taneously, to preserve the integrity of in-
dividual physician moral decision making. 
The EOLOA mandates that each physician 
be allowed to decide whether participation 
for that physician is ethically acceptable 
and to be protected from social or profes-
sional consequences of that assessment. 
Both physician and patient are permitted 
to participate in the legal process or to 
decline involvement. Although the phy-
sician and patient are both granted legal 
permission to engage in this action, each 
must also grant permission to the other 
for the process to move forward. Although 
permissions are essential to procedure, this 
approach is morally unsatisfying in that 
permission cannot make a morally wrong 
act right. The hope is that in areas of moral 
uncertainty and lack of clear social guid-
ance, vetted agreements by those involved 
will provide safeguards against abuse.
When a physician first receives a request 
from a patient for life-ending medication, 
the physician should explore the request in 
sufficient detail to determine whether the 
request is valid. To confirm the diagnosis 
and prognosis, additional opinions may be 
required. The physician should confirm the 
patient’s understanding of current medical 
care to ensure that the request does not 
come as a result of end-of-life treatment 
that can be improved. Maximizing the 
palliation of symptoms including pain, 
incontinence, and nausea may make the 
patient more comfortable. In addition, 
improving issues of independence, au-
tonomy, spiritual distress, and dignity may 
be essential for some patients. 
The physician must confirm that the 
patient has decision-making capacity, free 
from the coercive influence of others, and 
can self-administer and ingest the medi-
cation. The patient must be emotionally 
and psychologically prepared. Over time, 
the physician reassesses a judgment by the 
patient that current and foreseeable life 
lacks meaning. Once the physician has 
confirmed the validity of the request, the 
physician delivers the prescription to the 
pharmacy. The patient then receives the 
drugs from the pharmacy and assumes the 
moral authority to choose whether to take 
the medication. 
Today, previously open avenues to ob-
tain optimal deadly drugs without a phy-
sician’s prescription are largely closed to 
patients. Only physicians licensed within 
the state of California may place optimal 
lethal prescriptions within legal reach of 
the California patient. Advising terminally 
ill patients requesting lethal medication 
to find nonprescription means to their 
death remains irresponsible practically 
and socially.
Once a capable patient has been deter-
mined to be terminally ill, no interest of 
the state or claim of the medical profession, 
religion, or any other individual overrides a 
patient’s request to own a decision whether 
to take life-ending medication. In the past, 
state laws intended to protect patients from 
unsafe prescriptions have placed physi-
cians in the position of denying patients 
this option. 
With the EOLOA, physicians may opt 
out of a position that obstructs a dying 
patient’s request to assume moral authority 
for this decision. To do so, such a physician 
must violate traditional medical prohibi-
tions against the prescription of deadly 
… the patient’s good is a compound notion … 
It is not synonymous with the patient’s medical good.  
Healing means “to make whole again.”  
Therefore, ascertaining and enhancing all  
four realms of the patient’s good are involved in healing …
 121
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-048
COMMENTARY
Ethical Analysis for Physicians Considering the Provision of Life-Ending Medication in Compliance with the California End of Life Option Act  
medications as detailed above. A diagnosis 
of terminal illness signals the time that for 
the patient seeking aid in dying, a physi-
cian can consider validating such a patient 
request. After validation, the participating 
physician then may decide to act in a role 
expanded beyond traditional medicine to 
include the prescription of medications to 
assist in dying.
CONCLUSION
Thus, the act of prescribing a fatal 
dose of medication is not within the 
traditional practice of medicine. Physi-
cians reasonably may hold to that limit. 
However, honoring a repeated request 
from a capable, terminally ill patient to 
receive life-ending medication still can be 
considered to be a moral and permissible 
approach to relieve suffering. A physician 
choosing to expand his/her role within this 
narrowly defined context allows the patient 
to assume authority for a deeply personal 
decision that may belong to the patient 
more than to anyone else. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgment
Special thanks are offered to the Medical 
Bioethics Directors of the Bioethics Program 
of Kaiser Permanente Southern California for 
the collegial discussions relevant to this issue. 
Additionally acknowledged are the written 
suggestions of David Lerman, PhD; Mark J Bliton, 
PhD; Felicia Cohn, PhD; Craig Nelson, PhD, CLS; 
Paula Goodman-Crews, MSW, LSCW; and Linda 
Washburn, RN. Mason Shaner is acknowledged for 
assistance with Figure 1.
How to Cite this Article
Shaner DM. Ethical analysis for physicians 
considering the provision of life-ending medication 
in compliance with the California End of Life Option 
Act. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-048. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-048.
References
 1. The Oregon Death with Dignity Act. ORS 127.800-
127.897 (1997 Oct 27).
 2. Gonzales v Oregon. 546 US 243 (2006 Jan 17).
 3. California Assembly Bill No. 15. AB-15 End of life. 
Ch. 1, Part 1.85, Sect. 443 (2015 Oct 5).
 4. California Medical Association removes opposition to 
physician aid in dying bill [Internet]. Sacramento, CA: 
California Medical Association; 2015 May 20 [cited 
2016 Apr 22]. Available from: www.cmanet.org/news/
press-detail/?article=california-medical-association-
removes.
 5. Hippocrates of Cos. The oath. Cambridge, MA: Loeb 
Classical Library, Harvard University Press; 1923. p 
LCL 147:298-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.4159/DLCL.
hippocrates_cos-oath.1923.
 6. Pellegrino ED. Some things ought never be done: 
moral absolutes in clinical ethics. Theor Med Bioeth 
2005;26(6):469-86. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11017-005-2201-2.
 7. Hippocrates. The art. In: Loeb edition of the 
Hippocratic corpus, vol II, translated by Jones WHS. 
London, Great Britain: William Heinemann Ltd; 1923. 
p 192.
 8. Edelstein L. Ancient medicine: selected papers of 
Ludwig Edelstein. Temkin O, Temkin CL, editors. 
Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press; 
1967 Oct 1. p 14-9.
 9. Pellegrino ED. The philosophy of medicine reborn: 
a Pellegrino reader. Engelhardt HT Jr, Jotterand F, 
editors. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame; 
2008. p 40.
 10. Quill TE. Physicians should “assist in suicide” 
when it is appropriate. J Law Med Ethics 2012 
Spring;40(1):57-65. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1748-720x.2012.00646.x.
Friend
I have come to believe that a content life is one that gracefully carries  
death on its shoulder as a friend and not a feared adversary.
— The Least of These Brethren: A Doctor’s Story of Hope and Miracles on an Inner-City AIDS Ward.  
Daniel J Baxter, MD, American author and physician
 122
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-023
COMMENTARY
An Ethics of Permission:  
A Response to the California End of Life Option Act
Craig Nelson, PhD, CLS 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-023
E-pub: 08/17/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-023
ABSTRACT
An ethics of permission can be helpful in framing a response 
to the ethical differences surrounding the California End of Life 
Option Act. Law does not define morality, and reaching a moral 
understanding demands thorough reflection. An ethics of permis-
sion examines the ethical demands of a permissive law for both 
clinician and patient. Serving the good of the patient, respecting 
professional conscience, and following the law are three ethical 
elements. Although developing an ethics of permission includes 
these three elements, these elements do not exhaust all the moral 
implications involved. An ethics of permission also includes the 
importance of exercising professional tolerance in the honoring 
of clinicians who choose to participate or refuse to participate. In 
addition, an ethics of permission also provides insight in imple-
menting just and fair behavior among medical professionals.
INTRODUCTION 
On October 5, 2015, California Governor Jerry Brown signed 
into law the End of Life Option Act (EOLOA),1 legalizing physi-
cian aid in dying in that state. The law took effect June 9, 2016. 
Before the enactment of this law, a physician who provided a 
lethal agent would be liable to criminal charges of homicide or 
of assisting suicide. The law specifies the process a physician must 
follow to prescribe any aid-in-dying medication, including refer-
ral to another physician for medical confirmation of diagnosis, 
prognosis, and capacity. The process is entirely voluntary, with 
liability protections for both those who choose to participate and 
for those who decline to participate. Eligible patients must be age 
18 years or older, residents of California, and of sound mind, and 
have a diagnosis of a terminal illness that, subject to reasonable 
medical judgment, will prove fatal within 6 months. These pa-
tients also must be capable of self-administering the aid-in-dying 
drug. In addition, eligible patients must make 2 oral requests to 
a physician separated by a 15-day waiting period, which must be 
followed by a witnessed written request. The prescribing “attend-
ing physician” must be appropriately licensed and registered with 
the Drug Enforcement Administration. It is the responsibility of 
this physician to inform the patient of alternatives such as pallia-
tive care. A “consulting physician” must certify the diagnosis and 
reassess the mental competence of the patient in question. If either 
physician deems the judgment of the patient to be impaired, the 
patient must be referred for a psychiatric evaluation. An impor-
tant distinction should be made between the anticipatory grief 
of finality and depression.
The State of California is continuing to walk through a new 
legal and moral threshold but not without ethical questions. Ethi-
cal questions existed before the law was written. Physicians have 
prescribed medications that may relieve pain and have the double 
effect of sedating or diminishing respiratory function under the 
common practice of palliative sedation. Questions that recur in-
clude themes such as providing compassion and beneficence in 
the presence of terminal physical pain and disability; the right of 
patients to exercise free choice and autonomy; and deeply held 
views on the sanctity of life, faithfulness to the healing, and the 
“first do no harm” imperative of medicine. Other ethical ques-
tions include the professional autonomy of clinicians, the risk 
of coercion for the elderly and the debilitated, and the ethical 
obligations of those who opt out of participating. 
Terminally ill Californians are now able under law to request 
life-ending drugs. Is there a helpful way to describe an ethical 
approach to recurring ethical questions? Ethical expertise in 
the work of clinical ethics has been both principle centered 
and context centered.2 This knowledge of ethical conversation 
has historically relied on theories and principles such as teleol-
ogy (describing which action would bring about the goal be-
ing sought), deontology (defining what one’s duty is), justice, 
autonomy and beneficence, and casuistry (adapting ethical 
principles to circumstances and emphasizing sensitivity to par-
ticular cases).3 These theories and principles all help us focus 
more clearly on patient preferences, quality-of-life questions, 
contextual issues including patient and family values, monetary 
resources, religious beliefs, and cultural factors. 
The questions surrounding the EOLOA represent moral diver-
sity; because universally accepted normative answers are unreach-
able, we should not expect to discover a monolithic right or wrong 
answer. It is important to describe a reflective approach that is 
capable of providing direction in forming a moral understanding 
for the recurring ethical questions. The adversarial issues around 
physician-assisted death ultimately are of primary concern to the 
patient, the family, and the local community. Political debate at 
the state level is less important than are religious and cultural 
attitudes confronting patients asking permission of their family 
and their God to take life-ending medication.
ETHICS OF PERMISSION
In California, how can clinicians begin to talk about the 
EOLOA with respect for diversity and still embrace a personal 
moral position? I propose exploring what we mean by an ethics 
Craig Nelson, PhD, CLS, is the Director of Medical Bioethics at the South Bay Medical Center in Harbor City, CA, 
and a Claremont School of Theology Library Scholar in CA. E-mail: cnelson540@aol.com.
 123
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-023
COMMENTARY
An Ethics of Permission: A Response to the California End of Life Option Act 
of permission. An ethics of permission is not advocating for 
a “permissive society” but provides a common understanding 
that shapes some basic ground rules for coexisting ethical posi-
tions. An ethics of permission used in this commentary is not 
championing the permission to engage in the EOLOA. I am not 
trying to defend the rationale of the EOLOA. Rather, an ethics 
of permission is describing how to treat one another regarding 
the EOLOA. A permissive law creates an ethical demand. This 
demand is both the recognition that there is an ethical obligation 
for all because of the existence of the law and a particular ethical 
behavior because the law affects those individuals who appreciate 
the actions permitted in the aid-in-dying statute and those who 
may hold a different moral position. In other words, regarding 
the EOLOA, how should professionals act toward one another 
and toward their patients? 
Because the EOLOA was created as a permissive law, no one 
is obligated to engage in its formal activity. Clinicians to one 
degree or another become materially involved in its activity. But 
how? Should health care professionals answer questions about 
the EOLOA and even refer patients interested in it to a health 
care professional who may have a comfortable conscience in 
participating in what the law outlines? Is it ethical to be a barrier 
to a patient wanting referral to a health care professional who is 
comfortable in participating in what the law permits? Is it an ethi-
cal obligation to refer a patient to a willing clinician? Is there an 
implied obligation to refer patients interested in exercising their 
right to participate in the EOLOA that should be an essential 
component of the conscientious objection process? An answer 
to these questions should never produce actions that legitimate 
patient abandonment.
In a culture of diversity, such as in California, health care pro-
fessionals coming from different moral viewpoints must find a 
way of relating to each other without primarily saying that those 
embracing the opposing viewpoints are morally suspect. It is 
important to work together by creating an approach to moral 
diversity that will preserve teamwork, collaboration, and com-
munication. This is not advocating for a broad brushstroke 
of ethical relativism and that anything is morally acceptable 
as long as it is what you say you believe. An ethics of permis-
sion for physician-assisted death emphasizes the importance 
of understanding professional tolerance, the value of honoring 
conscientious refusal to participate, and the goal of promoting 
fairness and justice. In reviewing the potential adversarial na-
ture of discourse surrounding the ethics of physician-assisted 
death, being in favor or against physician-assisted death is not 
simply divided into two opposing positions. People may be in 
favor of it for others but not for themselves or vice versa, or 
under some circumstances but not others. The downside of not 
employing an ethics of permission can hinder a realization of 
moral understanding and lead to moral cacophony in the delivery 
of compassionate, integrated health care. 
Once a patient enters a clear trajectory of clinical decline 
caused by a terminal disease that includes a likely prognosis of 
death within six months, the limits of medicinal cure are realized. 
Some patients may want to avoid living in such a state of clinical 
decline and believe that the burdens of treatment outweigh the 
probability of life extension. 
The conceptual balance dwells between questions of how pa-
tients survive and thrive with illness and how they minimize the 
prolongation of their dying process by taking aid-in-dying medi-
cation in the face of terminal and severely disabling illness. The 
distinction between treating the disease and relieving suffering is 
important. Healing moves into more of an existential expression 
when palliation can help minimize the suffering from disease and 
help the patient search for peace and meaning for the quality of 
life that remains.4 Sometimes the reach of effective palliation is 
perceived as falling short of realizing its goal. 
The good of the patient must be sought in one’s own particular 
existential circumstance through both curing and healing,5 but 
healing involves the whole person, not just his/her physiologic 
condition. An ethics of permission applies to those clinicians in 
good conscience who believe participating in the law helps termi-
nal patients deal with existential suffering in their specific context 
in the only possible way they can,5 and there seems no other way 
for a quality of life to be experienced that honors their lived values. 
An ethics of permission should nurture fairness, tolerance, and 
justice. For an ethics of permission to be fair, it should uphold 
professional tolerance for all involved. In other words, to adopt 
fairness as a procedural notion hinges on choosing to adopt a 
shared moral point of view.6 This can mean that those who choose 
to participate and those who choose not to participate are both 
enjoined to exercise professional tolerance toward the other. Fair-
ness is a key concept in social and professional tolerance as we all 
perform our duties in a social context in which we are affected 
by the opinions and actions of other decision makers. These have 
been noted as “interdependence situations,”7 and the intent to be 
fair is important to uphold.8 Some research indicates that when 
people from different ages, cultures, religions, and educational 
backgrounds judge cases involving helping or harming others, they 
do so in a universally informed and shared way.9 The key, however, 
is discerning how to define help and how to define harm. This is 
an important distinction involved in physician aid in dying. This 
will be perspectival, and a specific and contextual understanding 
of the “good of the patient” from the patient’s perspective will 
always play a major role in the distinction.10
Physicians who decide not to formally participate in the EO-
LOA should exercise tolerance toward those who in good con-
science participate in the law believing that they are serving the 
good of the patient from the patient’s perspective. Physicians who 
do opt to participate should exercise tolerance toward physicians 
who decide not to participate. This tolerance does not imply that 
they are accepting their colleague’s moral posture as their own. 
Tolerance allows for plurality of belief and can be the ingredient 
of reciprocal exchange; tolerance and goodwill are exchanged 
… health care professionals coming from different 
moral viewpoints must find a way of relating to each 
other without primarily saying that those embracing 
the opposing viewpoints are morally suspect. 
 124
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-023
COMMENTARY
An Ethics of Permission: A Response to the California End of Life Option Act 
in a cooperative act between individuals who possess different 
moral positions.11
For an ethics of permission to be just, it must treat all pro-
fessionals as they deserve, whether they choose to participate 
in the law or choose not to participate in validating a patient’s 
request for life-ending drugs. Justice should also facilitate social 
cooperation.12 Hayek13 reminds us that an objective standard 
of justice must not make one either too powerful or too weak 
and should be embedded in a dialogue of human experience 
and reflection. This means that each clinician has a specific hu-
man experience and moral reflection that should be allowed 
expression, while refraining from believing that s/he possesses 
proprietary knowledge about what is morally acceptable for all. 
Justice hinges on accepting difference with respect.
All clinicians deserve to exercise their professional conscience. 
This conscience can cause a physician to find merit in participat-
ing in the validation described within the law or to find merit 
in abstaining from providing such validation. The law allows for 
restitution for those physicians who find their moral posture to 
differ from that of physicians who choose to participate. Their 
conscientious refusal to participate should be tolerated by physi-
cians who believe in participating in the law. In this way, those 
physicians from each moral position receive what they deserve: 
tolerance and respect. Forrester14 emphasizes that justice must 
remain robust enough to face real conflicts of interest and un-
derstanding, and visionary enough to call forth a passionate com-
mitment to thoroughly examine one’s self-interest while being 
mindful of the other.
CONCLUSION
This brief commentary introduced an ethical approach to 
questions surrounding the enactment of the EOLOA. It sug-
gested that an ethics of permission should be considered as a lens 
and guide for those who have different ethical positions.15,16 An 
ethics of permission is one step in developing a more practical 
understanding of professional tolerance, of how to encourage 
conscientious refusal, and how to provide a fervent commitment 
to promote justice and fairness that maintains a focus on the good 
of the patient. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
Acknowledgment
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health Communications provided editorial 
assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Nelson C. An ethics of permission: A response to the California End of Life 
Option Act. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-023. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/16-023.
References
 1. California Assembly Bill No. 15. AB-15 End of life. Ch1, Part1.85, Sect 443 (2015 Oct 5).
 2. Walker MU. Keeping moral space open. New images of ethics consulting. Hastings 
Cent Rep 1993 Mar-Apr;23(2):33-40. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3562818.
 3. Frankena WK. Ethics. Foundations of philosophy series. 1st ed. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall; 1973.
 4. Frankl VE. Man’s search for meaning. Boston, MA: Beacon Press; 2006. p 121.
 5. Nelson C. Curing and healing. Oneing: Evidence 2014 Oct;2(2):57-62.
 6. Hollis M. Trust within reason. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press; 
1998. p 92, 96.
 7. De Cremer D, van Dijk E. Fairness and ethics in social decision making. Soc Justice 
Res 2003 Sep;16(3):191-4. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1025989927725.
 8. Guroglu B, van den Bos W, Rombouts S, Crone E. Unfair? It depends: neural 
correlates of fairness in social context. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 2010 Dec;5(4): 
414-23. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsq013. 
 9. Hauser M. What’s fair? The unconscious calculus of our moral faculty. Novartis 
Found Symp 2007;278:41-50, discussion 50-5,89-96,216-21. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/9780470030585.ch4.
 10. Pellegrino E. The philosophy of medicine reborn: a Pelligrino Reader (ND Studies in 
Medical Ethics). Notre Dame, IN: Notre Dame University Press; 2008. p 164-73.
 11. Molm LD, Collett JL, Schaefer DR. Conflict and fairness in social exchange. Social 
Forces 2006 Jun;84(4):2331-52. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/sof.2006.0100.
 12. MacIntyre A. Whose justice? Whose rationality? Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre 
Dame Press; 1988. p 3.
 13. Hayek FA. Law, legislation and liberty, volume 2: the mirage of social justice. 2nd 
edition, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press; 1978. p 75.
 14. Forrester DB. Christian justice and public policy. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 1997. p 128.
 15. Quill T. Physicians should “assist in suicide” when it is appropriate. J Law Med Ethics 
2012 Spring;40(1):57-65. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-720X.2012.00646.x. 
 16. Pellegrino ED. Some things ought never be done: moral absolutes in clinical ethics. 
Theor Med Bioeth 2005;26(6):469-86 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11017-005-
2201-2.
Wisdom
To die well is the height of wisdom of life.
— Søren Kierkegaard, 1813-1855, Danish philosopher, theologian,  
poet, social critic, and religious author
 125
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-109
EDITORIAL
Form Follows Function: A Functional Medicine Overview
Patrick Hanaway, MD 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-109
E-pub: 10/14/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-109
Editor’s note: This Commentary is a 
companion to Refractory Depression, 
Fatigue, Irritable Bowel Syndrome,  
and Chronic Pain: A Functional Medi-
cine Case Report on page 104 (available 
at: www.thepermanentejournal.org/ 
issues/2016/fall/6239-ibs.html). Also 
note that material describing the foun-
dation and practice of Functional 
Medicine has been excerpted, with per-
mission, from Introduction to Functional 
Medicine by David S Jones and Sheila 
Quinn, ©The Institute for Functional 
Medicine, 2016.
In this issue, Plotnikoff 1 presents a case 
report using an innovative systems-biology 
approach known as Functional Medicine 
to improve the overall health status of a 
72-year-old man with multiple complex, 
chronic, comorbid conditions. Expensive 
technology was not required, and treat-
ment focused on the correction of com-
mon physiologic imbalances, along with 
lifestyle modifications in diet and nutrition. 
It is noteworthy that this relatively low-cost 
intervention was able to reverse long-term 
symptoms and diseases, while decreasing 
utilization of health services. This case 
highlights a significant opportunity to move 
the focus of care toward root cause analysis, 
which, when combined with the power of 
lifestyle modification, can help to bend the 
cost curve and improve the value of care. 
In 2010, 86% of all health care spending 
was for people with one or more chronic 
medical conditions.2 In 2014, national 
health expenditures grew to $3.0 trillion 
or $9523 per person, and accounted for 
17.5% of gross domestic product.3 If we 
do not adopt new approaches by 2022, 
annual health care costs in the US will rise 
to more than 20% of gross domestic prod-
uct,4 making the cost of care in our current 
care model economically unsustainable. 
The current focus in health policy is on 
value-based care, which can be thought of 
simply as outcomes divided by cost.5 One 
would like to think that increased costs 
produce improved outcomes, but this is 
not the case. The US spends 1.5 times to 
2 times more per person on health care 
than other industrialized countries (per 
Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development),6 but falls last in most 
categories of health outcomes, including 
infant mortality, percentage with multiple 
chronic diseases, and life expectancy.7
Our current health care model fails to 
address the causes of and the solutions 
for chronic disease. We segregate lifestyle 
medicine from clinical care and fail to rec-
ognize the urgent need for a continuum-of-
care model that reverses illness, promotes 
health, and optimizes function. This type 
of transformation requires a perspective 
different from what is currently present in 
our costly health care system.8 Randomized 
controlled trials comparing Functional 
Medicine, a systems-biology approach, 
with the current standard of care are 
underway at the Cleveland Clinic, along 
with unique approaches to measure global 
patient outcomes (with National Institute 
of Health’s PROMIS [Patient-Reported 
Outcomes Measurement Information 
System] measures) and total cost of care 
(with insurers’ claims-based data). 
Functional Medicine provides a new 
operating system for 21st-century medi-
cine.9 This transformation will require 
us to validate appropriate clinical models 
and support clinical practices with tools 
and compensation to promote behavior 
change, especially in nutrition. According 
to the Milken Institute,4 opportunities 
for improving value within our health 
care system can be found in many areas: 
behavioral changes, innovations in tech-
nology, improved delivery of services and 
communication, health education, and 
wellness programs.
The Gordian knot of chronic disease 
will be solved by shifting our focus from 
suppression and management of symptoms 
to addressing their underlying causes. 
Specifically, we must integrate what 
we know about human biochemistry, 
physiology, and behavior change with 
scientific, personalized care that addresses 
the causes of complex, chronic disease—
which are rooted in modifiable lifestyle 
choices, environmental exposures, and 
gene expression. This fundamental 
principle has fostered rapidly growing 
interest in Functional Medicine.
Definition: Functional Medicine is 
a systems-biology-based model that 
empowers patients and practitioners to 
work together to achieve the highest 
expression of health by addressing the 
underlying causes of disease. Functional 
Medicine uses a unique operating 
system and personalized therapeutic 
interventions to support individuals 
in achieving optimal wellness.
Functional Medicine can be described 
as the clinical application of systems biol-
ogy. Chronic disease is usually preceded 
by a decline in function of the body’s 
systems. Functional Medicine sees health 
and illness along a continuum that changes 
over time as we interact with our environ-
ment. Additionally, Functional Medicine 
improves patient health by helping clini-
cians to identify and reverse dysfunction 
in biochemistry, physiology, and behavior. 
Each patient represents a unique, com-
plex set of inter-related environmental and 
lifestyle influences on function (including 
genetic vulnerabilities). These factors cre-
ate opportunities for health maintenance 
or disease progression. Lifestyle choices 
and environmental exposures can push us 
toward (or away from) disease by turning 
on—or off— certain genes. This, in turn, 
Patrick Hanaway, MD, is the Medical Director for the Center for Functional Medicine 
at the Cleveland Clinic in OH and Chief Medical Education Officer for the Institute 
for Functional Medicine in Federal Way, WA. E-mail: patrickhanaway@fxmed.com.
 126
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-109
EDITORIAL
Form Follows Function: A Functional Medicine Overview
may impair certain biological functions: 
assimilation, defense and repair, energy 
production, biotransformation, commu-
nication, transport, and structural integ-
rity—the seven core clinical imbalances. 
To assist clinicians in understanding 
and applying Functional Medicine, The 
Institute for Functional Medicine9 has 
created a highly innovative way of rep-
resenting the patient’s signs, symptoms, 
and common pathways of disease. Orga-
nizing the seven biological systems and 
clinical imbalances into the Functional 
Medicine Matrix Model creates an intel-
lectual bridge between the basic science 
literature on physiologic mechanisms of 
disease and the relevance of clinical appli-
cations. Functional Medicine posits that, 
with scientific rigor, clinical wisdom, and 
innovative tools, we can identify many of 
the underlying drivers (both triggers and 
mediators) of chronic disease, allowing us 
to reverse these clinical imbalances, often 
before overt disease is present.
In Plotnikoff’s case study,1 overt disease 
is already present. Through the lens of 
Functional Medicine, the author is able 
to identify underlying drivers of dysfunc-
tion—recognizing pancreatic insufficiency 
and alterations in the microbiome; nutri-
tional depletion, with need for methyl sup-
port and omega-3 fats; and severe oxidative 
stress. These imbalances in assimilation, 
energy production, and nutrition are ac-
tivators of overall imbalance, manifesting 
as symptoms and multiple comorbidities. 
In this case, one expression of disease may 
arise from the interconnection of multiple 
clinical imbalances, whereas one clinical 
imbalance may be the root cause of mul-
tiple, seemingly different conditions. An 
essential precept in Functional Medicine 
is that restoring balance—in the patient’s 
environmental inputs and in the body’s 
fundamental physiologic processes—is 
the key to restoring health.9 As John F 
Kennedy stated, “A rising tide lifts all 
the boats.”10
Functional Medicine treatment usu-
ally involves a broad array of therapies, 
from dietary interventions and lifestyle 
changes to high-quality nutraceuticals and 
targeted pharmaceuticals. The hierarchy 
of approach moves from fundamental 
lifestyle and nutritional interventions to a 
prioritization of the aforementioned clini-
cal imbalances, then iterative follow-up 
of symptoms and assessment of patient-
reported outcomes measures. Ultimately, 
we find that when patients embrace 
these foundational principles, they have 
improvement in function and decreased 
health care utilization. The bottom line 
for patients is to achieve outcomes that 
encompass the entire continuum of 
care—especially the health status achieved, 
including survival, functional status, and 
quality of life.11
The Functional Medicine approach is 
done within the context of a therapeutic 
relationship. The role of connection, deep 
listening, reflection, presence, humility, 
vulnerability, trust, and gratitude are es-
sential for healing to occur.12 The skills to 
assess a patient’s readiness to change and 
provide appropriate coaching are as im-
portant as understanding the underlying 
clinical imbalances and treating with the 
correct therapies.
Functional Medicine practice highlights 
these four essential components 
1. Listening to the patient’s illness narrative 
on the initial intake
2. Evaluating, prioritizing, and focusing on 
the patient’s modifiable lifestyle factors
3. Organizing the patient’s clinical imbal-
ances by underlying causes into a sys-
tems biology matrix framework; and 
4. Creating a therapeutic partnership be-
tween doctor and patient.
Functional Medicine is relevant to all 
health care disciplines and specialties, all 
of which can apply this approach using 
the Functional Medicine Matrix Model as 
a template for organizing data and uncov-
ering new understanding. The Functional 
Medicine operating system and approach 
build a cross-disciplinary model and pro-
vide effective clinical tools to prevent, treat, 
and reverse complex chronic disease. As we 
move from Case Reports to randomized 
controlled trials and population-based 
trials, Functional Medicine research will 
offer insight into the best ways to improve 
the value of the care we offer. v
Discosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
How to Cite this Article
Hanaway P. Form follows function: A functional 
medicine overview. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):16-109. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/16-109.
References
 1. Plotnikoff G, Barber M. Refractory depression, 
fatigue, irritable bowel syndrome and chronic pain: 
A functional medicine case report. Perm J 2016 
Fall;20(4):15-242. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/15-242.
 2. Gerteis J, Izrael D, Detiz, D, et al. Multiple chronic 
conditions chartbook: 2010 medical expenditure 
panel survey data. AHRQ Publications No, Q14-
0038. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality; 2014 Apr.
 3. NHE fact sheet [Internet]. Baltimore, MD: Centers 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services; updated 2015 
Aug 10 [cited 2016 Jul 22]. Available from: www.cms.
gov/research-statistics-data-and-systems/statistics-
trends-and-reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/nhe-
fact-sheet.html.
 4. An unhealthy America: The economic burden of 
chronic disease [Internet]. Santa Monica, CA: Milken 
Institute; 2016 [cited 2016 Aug 29]. Available from: 
www.chronicdiseaseimpact.com/.
 5. Porter ME. What is value in health care? N Engl 
J Med 2010 Dec 23;363(26):2477-81. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1011024.
 6. OECD. Health at a glance 2015: OECD indicators. 
Paris: OECD publishing; 2015. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/health_glance-2015-en.
 7. Squires D, Anderson C. US health care from a global 
perspective: Spending, use of services, prices, and 
health in 13 countries [Internet]. New York, NY: 
The Commonwealth Fund; 2015 [cited 2016 Aug 
29]. Available from: www.commonwealthfund.org/
publications/issue-briefs/2015/oct/us-health-care-
from-a-global-perspective.
 8. Jones DS, Hofmann L, Quinn S. 21st century 
medicine: A new model for medical education and 
practice. Gig Harbor, WA: The Institute for Functional 
Medicine; 2010, rev 2011.
 9. Jones DS, Quinn S. Introduction to functional 
medicine. Gig Harbor, WA: The Institute for 
Functional Medicine; 2016.
 10. Kennedy JF. Remarks in Heber Springs, Arkansas, 
at the dedication of Greers Ferry Dam, October 3, 
1963 [Internet]. Santa Barbara, CA: The American 
Presidency Project; 1999-2016 [cited 2016 Jul 
22]. Available from: www.presidency.ucsb.edu/
ws/?pid=9455.
 11. Porter ME, Larson S, Lee TH. Standardizing patient 
outcomes measurement. N Engl J Med 2016 
Feb;374(6):504-6. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMp1511701.
 12. Churchill LR, Schenck D. Healing skills for medical 
practice. Ann Intern Med 2008 Nov 18;149(10):720-4. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-149-10-
200811180-00006.
Lifestyle choices and 
environmental exposures 
can push us toward (or away 
from) disease by turning 
on—or off— certain genes.
 127
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-227
NARRATIVE MEDICINE
Her Glistening Eyes
Ahmed Z Obeidat, MD, PhD 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-227
E-pub: 09/23/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-227
It all started with a clot. Large portions of our patient’s domi-
nant hemisphere were damaged. She was intubated and too sleepy 
to even open her eyes. Her family gathered around her, antici-
pating a moment of life. Together we reviewed her brain images. 
“It was a large stroke that deprived segments of her left brain of 
oxygen and nutrients,” I said.
Her family craved answers. They asked, “Will she ever wake 
up?” “Will she recognize us again?” “If she does, will she talk, 
walk, eat, or be able to live on her own?”
“It is too early to know. Let’s give her some time,” I replied.
A few days after her admission to the hospital, she opened her 
eyes and was successfully extubated, but she was not moving her 
right side, and her eyes were looking to the left. She was unable 
to vocalize or engage with her surroundings. 
Her family was starting to accept the mini-
mal chance of her recovery. However, they 
remained at her bedside all the time, talking 
to her as if she could respond. 
One morning, as part of my daily checks 
on her, I walked into her room and greeted 
her son who was sitting on a bed next to her. 
He had a smile on his face and said, “She is improving. Last night 
she appeared more awake; she opened her eyes and seemed to be 
‘mindful.’” I was excited as I performed my neurologic exam. The 
results were largely unchanged, however, with the exception of a 
new look in her eyes, I read it as an expression of life. That same 
day, she was transferred from the intensive care unit to the regular 
floor. I continued to check on her every morning. She remained 
sleepy and poorly interactive, but she started to move her right 
forearm in a sporadic and frail manner. I noted that despite her 
somnolence and continued silence, she started to follow some 
instructions. In spite of my perception of her slight improve-
ment, she could not participate in physical therapy and remained 
too sleepy to swallow. Chart notes continued to describe her as 
drowsy and at high risk of aspiration. Her nasogastric feeding tube 
was not a permanent access, and we planned for the placement 
of a gastrostomy tube. The Social Work Department had found 
her a place at a nursing home near her family residence, and her 
discharge from the hospital was imminent.
One day, as the end of our patient’s hospital stay neared, her 
son grasped my attention with these words: “Last night, she 
mentioned my name, touched my head, and pulled me close to 
her heart as if I were her baby again. She smiled and followed 
my steps around the room.” I was surprised to hear that she was 
so different at night—she kept her eyes closed during most of 
my morning visits and could hardly move her unaffected side. I 
inquired about that. Her son answered, “My mother became a 
night person after her stroke.”
That night I felt guilty and stayed up late thinking about her. 
“Is she more awake?” “Shall we reassess her now?” “Shall we re-
peat the swallow evaluation at night?” “What if she is able to?” 
“What if she qualifies for rehabilitation?” I felt like I should do 
something. I wanted her to go to rehabilitation. I wanted her to 
go home. I wanted her taste buds to enjoy food again. I could 
see hidden potential beneath her glistening eyes.
The next morning, I expressed my concerns to the team. We all 
agreed to do our best to wake her up. To help her, we administered 
amantadine and asked all other teams to reassess her as late as pos-
sible that day. I was pleasantly surprised to witness her gain a soft 
diet and participate in physical therapy. In fact, she was evaluated 
by our Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Department, passed 
their assessment, and was transferred to a rehabilitation center 
on the basis of their recommendation. There, she participated in 
an intensive exercise plan and was later discharged home in good 
condition. Her glistening eyes were inspiring. Her great family 
support and our teamwork had indeed been successful. 
I believe that this case made me a better physician—I learned 
that patient recovery is far beyond a signed daily progress note. I 
now check on all my patients at least twice, in the morning and 
later in the evening just before I leave work. Being a busy resident 
doesn’t justify overlooking such details in patient recovery. Brain 
pathologies can affect sleep patterns and distort arousal.1 These 
changes can indeed confound the journey toward true recovery 
and can result in suboptimal outcomes.
Finally, I wonder how many patients are just like her. Being 
sleepy is one thing, but failing the poststroke assessment is an-
other. Daytime hypersomnia has been described in patients fol-
lowing acute stroke.1 Several mechanisms for hypersomnia have 
been proposed, ranging from alterations in sleep physiology to 
changes in respiratory function including central sleep apnea.1
This case serves to remind us of the possibility of a sleep-wake inver-
sion following acute stroke and the potential impact of this change on 
patient disposition and ultimate outcomes. Further prospective stud-
ies aiming to investigate an association between acute hypersomnia, 
posthospitalization disposition, and functional outcomes are likely 
to unravel novel interventions to improve poststroke recovery. v
Disclosure Statement
The author has no conflicts of interest to disclose.
How to Cite this Article
Obeidat AZ. Her glistening eyes. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-227.  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/TPP/10.7812/15-227.
Reference
 1. Bassetti CL. Sleep and stroke. Semin Neurol 2005 Mar;25(1):19-32.  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-2005-867073
Ahmed Z Obeidat, MD, PhD, is a Resident in the Department of Neurology at the 
University of Cincinnati Medical Center in OH. E-mail: ahmed.obeidat@uc.edu
My mother 
became 
a night 
person after 
her stroke.
 1
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-205
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Physicians’, Nurses’, and Medical Assistants’ Perceptions  
of the Human Papillomavirus Vaccine in a Large Integrated 
Health Care System
Jordan Mills, DO, PhD; Patrick Van Winkle, MD; Macy Shen, PhD; Christina Hong, MD; Sharon Hudson, PhD 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-205
E-pub: 09/14/2016 
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-205
ABSTRACT
Context: Vaccination against the human papillomavirus (HPV) decreases risks of cancer 
and genital warts and the need for gynecologic procedures, yet nationwide vaccination 
rates are low. Previous surveys exploring this phenomenon have not included input
from nurses and medical assistants, who play integral roles in HPV vaccine delivery.
Objective: 
To understand perceptions of HPV vaccine delivery among physicians, nurses, 
and medical assistants in a large integrated health care system in Southern California.
Design: Online surveys were sent to 13 nurse administrators and 75 physicians. 
Physicians were instructed to forward the survey to nurses and medical assistants with 
whom they work. 
Results: A total of 76 surveys were completed, consisting of 52 physicians, 16 clini-
cal nurses and medical assistants, and 8 nurse administrators. Physicians’ perceptions 
of vaccine safety or strength of recommendation did not differ by specialty department. 
Physicians reportedly perceived the HPV vaccine as safer than did clinical nurses and 
medical assistants (p < 0.001), who indicated they wanted more education on the 
safety and efficacy of the vaccine before being comfortable strongly recommending 
it. Respondents advised that all clinicians could improve in their roles as HPV vaccine 
advocates through patient counseling and providing informational literature and that 
workflow standardization was needed to minimize missed vaccination opportunities. 
Conclusion: Physicians reportedly perceive the HPV vaccine as safer compared with 
nurses and medical assistants. Both groups think that more education of nonphysician staff is 
needed. Having proper systems in place is also vital to improving vaccination compliance.
INTRODUCTION
The Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) reports that 79 million 
Americans are infected with the human 
papillomavirus (HPV), with 14 million 
new cases detected each year; plus, HPV 
contributes to an estimated 26,200 new 
cancers each year in the US.1 In addition 
to malignancy, HPV causes premalignant 
diseases, anogenital warts, and laryngeal 
papillomatosis, which makes it the most 
common sexually transmitted infection and 
the cause of a substantial economic burden 
on the US health care system.2
Vaccination against HPV has been avail-
able for girls since 2006 and boys since 2011 
as 2 inactivated vaccines. Gardasil (Merck & 
Co, Kenilworth, NJ) is a quadrivalent vac-
cine against HPV Types 16, 18, 6, and 11, 
and Cervarix (GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, 
Middlesex, UK) is a bivalent vaccine for 
HPV Types 16 and 18. Currently, HPV vac-
cination consists of a 3-dose series approved 
by the US Food and Drug Administration 
and endorsed in the US by the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices. 
HPV vaccination provides both clinical 
effectiveness and economic benefits to all 
international health care systems, and sta-
tistical models consistently show the cost 
and quality benefits that will be achieved.3 
Vaccination against HPV has already 
demonstrated decreased risks of cervical 
cancer and genital warts and the need for 
fewer gynecologic procedures, including 
colposcopy and the loop electrosurgical 
excision procedure.4 Despite the reported 
safety and efficacy of HPV vaccines as well 
as the potential impact on the eradication of 
preinvasive and invasive carcinomas associ-
ated with HPV, a national problem exists in 
the initiation and completion rates of the 
vaccine series. 
The CDC estimates that only one-third 
of eligible women have initiated vaccina-
tion, and the initiation and completion 
rates have varied from 14% to 56% and 
from 24% to 56%, respectively.5-7 In 2012, 
according to the CDC,1 53.8% of girls 
received the first dose of the series, and 
33.4% completed all 3 doses of the series; 
most HPV vaccines are delivered in the 
primary care setting.8 Between 2007 and 
2009, HPV uptake in a university-based 
primary care system among 11,535 eligible 
women was only 18%,9 and only 10% of 
this group received all 3 doses. In addition, 
a 2010 survey of 1741 men aged 18 to 26 
years reported that 51.8% had heard of 
HPV, but only 34.8% had heard of the 
HPV vaccine.10 A university-based pediatric 
practice reported that 82% of adolescents 
had missed opportunities for HPV vaccina-
tion during preventive care visits between 
2006 and 2011.11 
The struggles of national HPV vaccina-
tion programs are not limited to health 
care systems outside Kaiser Permanente 
(KP). Although KP is an integrated health 
care system with a proven track record in 
vaccination programs such as influenza 
Jordan Mills, DO, PhD, is an Addiction Medicine Fellow in the Department of Family Medicine and 
Community Health at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison. E-mail: 
millsdoc@gmail.com. Patrick Van Winkle, MD, is a Pediatric Hospitalist at the Anaheim Medical Center and the 
Pediatric Area Research Chair for Kaiser Permanente Orange County in CA. E-mail: patrick.j.vanwinkle@kp.org. 
 
Macy Shen, PhD, is a Postdoctoral Scholar in the Department of Oral Biology and Medicine at the University 
of California Los Angeles School of Dentistry. E-mail: macy.macy@gmail.com. Christina Hong, MD, is an 
Obstetrician/Gynecologist at the Orange County Medical Center in Irvine, CA. E-mail: christina.x.hong@kp.org. 
Sharon Hudson, PhD, is a Behavioral Scientist in the Department of Research and Evaluation for Kaiser 
Permanente Southern California in Pasadena, CA. E-mail: sharon.m.hudson@kp.org.
 2
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-205
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Physicians’, Nurses’, and Medical Assistants’ Perceptions of the Human Papillomavirus Vaccine in a Large Integrated Health Care System 
and is a participant of the CDC program, 
Vaccine Safety Datalink, KP’s success with 
HPV vaccine initiation and completion rates 
has been limited. In 2007, a Southern Cali-
fornia Permanente Medical Group study of 
34,193 women reported only a 41.9% series 
completion rate.12 
Multiple issues hinder the success of HPV 
vaccination programs in the US. This vacci-
nation touches on issues of sexuality, paren-
tal autonomy, and cost.6 The main barriers 
identified are the education of parents and 
clinicians, financial limits related to access to 
care, and lack of clinician recommendation. 
Among parental issues, it was found that 
lack of personal knowledge and lack of per-
ceived need for the vaccine was reported in 
19.4% and 18.8%, respectively.6 In addition, 
18.3% of parents believed their daughters 
were not sexually active and did not need to 
be vaccinated, whereas 13.1% of the time 
they reported not being informed by their 
clinician of the importance of the vaccine.6 
Moreover, mothers’ attitudes toward preven-
tion appear to influence HPV vaccine uptake 
in adolescent girls, and maternal utilization 
of preventive care and maternal history of 
genital warts may influence HPV vaccine 
uptake in adolescent boys.13,14 Threats to 
parental autonomy regarding sex education 
and concerns that education programs may 
undermine abstinence messages or condone 
risky sexual behavior have been unfounded 
concerns.15 
Barriers to vaccine uptake have been 
addressed in patient and clinician surveys, 
which have thus far been limited in scope. 
Previous surveys have either omitted special-
ties in which the HPV vaccine is given rou-
tinely or included only physicians, without 
attempting to understand the perceptions 
and experiences of nonphysician staff who 
may have strong influences on HPV vac-
cine uptake. In the current study, we aimed 
to understand perceptions of HPV vaccine 
delivery in a large integrated health care sys-
tem in Southern California through a survey 
of physicians, medical assistants, clinical 
nurses, and administrative nursing staff in 
the Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology 
(OB/GYN), Family Medicine, and Internal 
Medicine Departments. 
METHODS
KP Southern California is a large integrat-
ed health care organization serving more than 
4 million members. The Orange County 
Service Area includes 2 hospitals and 16 pri-
mary care clinics and is located in a primarily 
suburban area of Southern California. The 
clinics are staffed by registered nurses (RNs), 
licensed vocational nurses (LVNs), and medi-
cal assistants (three groups considered collec-
tively as ancillary staff) who assist physicians 
with determining which vaccines are needed 
at any given visit and often communicate this 
information to patients and their caregivers. 
The department administrators help set the 
policies and procedures for the ancillary staff 
regarding how to communicate with physi-
cians and patients. 
A 12-question open- and close-ended 
survey, developed from previously published 
clinician surveys,16,17 was e-mailed directly to 
selected physicians and department adminis-
trators to complete via an online survey tool 
(SurveyMonkey, Palo Alto, CA; Figure 1 
available at: www.thepermanentejournal.org/
images/2016/15-205Fig1.pdf). Physician 
recipients were asked to forward the survey 
to the team’s lead RNs or LVNs and medical 
assistants they work with most frequently.
One or two physicians from each of the 
clinic locations in each subspecialty were 
selected to participate. Selection was based 
on the physician’s length of tenure with KP
, 
to leverage physician familiarity with KP 
vaccination protocols and to generate action-
able information. Thus, this was a purposive 
sample rather than a random selection. All 
88 surveys sent
75 to Physicians
52 (75%)  
Physicians responded
18/20 (90%)  
Pediatrics
7/18 (39%)  
Nurses & Medical Assistants
18/25 (72%)  
Family Medicine
7/18 (39%)  
Nurses & Medical Assistants
14/23 (61%)  
OB/GYN
2/18 (11%)  
Nurses & Medical Assistants
2/7 (29%)  
Internal Medicine
0/2 (0%)  
Nurses & Medical Assistants
8 (61%)  
DAs responded
13 to Department 
Administrators (DAs)
Figure 2. Algorithm of analysis of survey respondents.a
a Physicians sent the survey to their medical assistants and clinical nurses at our request; we did not send the survey directly to the staff.
OB/GYN = Obstetrics and Gynecology.
 3
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-205
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Physicians’, Nurses’, and Medical Assistants’ Perceptions of the Human Papillomavirus Vaccine in a Large Integrated Health Care System  
department administrators from primary 
care clinics involved in the administration 
of the HPV vaccine were selected to par-
ticipate. (Each clinic has a single department 
administrator.)
Surveys were sent via a SurveyMonkey 
link in an e-mail message on October 20, 
2014. Recipients were given until December 
1, 2014, to complete the survey. At the end 
of November, an additional e-mail was sent 
as a reminder to recipients who had not yet 
completed the survey. Responses were coded 
independently by 2 members of the research 
team and then consolidated and entered into 
a spreadsheet (Microsoft Excel, Microsoft, 
Redmond, WA). 
Chi-squared tests were conducted to 
compare categorical response rates regarding 
respondents’ perceptions of vaccine safety 
and reported strength of recommendation to 
patients by specialty department (OB/GYN, 
Pediatrics, Family Medicine, and Internal 
Medicine) and by respondent role (physi-
cian, clinical nurse, and medical assistant). 
Data were analyzed with statistical analysis 
software (SAS [Statistical Analysis System] 
Version 9.2, SAS Institute Inc, Cary, NC). 
Statistical analyses were 2-sided, and p < 0.05 
was considered significant. Nonclinical 
nurses were excluded in the statistical analysis 
because of low sample size (n = 8). Responses 
from family medicine and internal medicine 
physicians were combined for categorical 
comparisons because of the low number of 
internal medicine responses (n = 2). 
RESULTS
A total of 76 respondents returned 
completed surveys, most of whom were 
physicians (n = 52, 75% response rate). 
Physicians in the Family Medicine Depart-
ment (n = 18) and the Pediatrics Depart-
ment (n = 18) were the most responsive. 
Response rates were lower for clinical 
nurses and medical assistants (31%) and 
for nonclinical nurses (administrators; 61%; 
Figure 2). 
Perceptions of Vaccine Safety
Perceptions of vaccine safety between 
physicians in different departments and 
between physicians and clinical nurses 
and medical assistants are shown in 
Tables 1 and 2, respectively. There was no 
significant difference in perceptions of vac-
cine safety between physicians by specialty 
department, but overall physicians did per-
ceive the vaccine to be safer than did clinical 
nurses and medical assistants. 
Two pediatricians cited concerns regard-
ing adverse neurologic effects of the vaccine. 
They reported: “Some neurologic concerns 
have surfaced regarding this vaccine. I am a 
little concerned” and “I have some hesitation 
because anecdotally I have had patients who 
have experienced neurological symptoms and 
refuse beyond their first dose.”  The author of 
the first quotation reported perceiving the 
vaccine as very safe and recommending it 
somewhat strongly to patients, whereas the 
author of the second quote reported per-
ceiving the vaccine as somewhat safe and 
recommending it very strongly to patients. 
Thus, only a small number of physicians 
were concerned specifically about neurolog-
ic effects of the vaccine, and they still tended 
to recommend it to patients. In addition to 
neurologic concerns, 5 respondents cited 
concerns about dizziness/fainting after vac-
cine administration; 4 reported witnessing 
this in their patients. Interestingly, despite 
this concern, 2 of the 5 reported somewhat 
strongly recommending, and 3 of the 5 
reported very strongly recommending the 
vaccine to patients.
Reported Strength of Recommendation
There was no significant difference in 
strength of recommendation of the vaccine 
between physicians by specialty depart-
ment (Table 1) or between physicians and 
clinical nurses/medical assistants (Table 2). 
Table 1. Physicians’ perceptions of vaccine safety and strength of recommendation  
by subspecialty departmenta
 
 
Perception
 
Pediatrics  
(n = 18), no. (%)
 
OB/GYN  
(n = 14), no. (%)
Family and internal 
medicine  
(n = 20), no. (%)
 
 
p value
Vaccine safety
Very safe
16 (89)
14 (100)
20 (100)
0.14
Somewhat safe
2 (11)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Somewhat unsafe
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Very unsafe
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Strength of recommendation
Very strong
15 (83)
12 (86)
13 (65)
0.35
Somewhat strong
3 (17)
2 (14)
5 (25)
Somewhat weak
0 (0)
0 (0)
2 (10)
Weak
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
a χ2 analysis by physician specialty department.
OB/GYN = obstetrics and gynecology.
Table 2. Perceptions of vaccine safety and strength of recommendation  
by provider typea
 
 
Perception
 
Physicians  
(n = 52), no. (%)
Clinical nurses and 
medical assistants 
 
(n = 16), no. (%)
 
 
p value
 
Nonclinical nurses 
(n = 8)b, no. (%)
Vaccine safety
Very safe
50 (96)
8 (50)
< 0.001
3 (38)
Somewhat safe
2 (4)
8 (50)
2 (25)
Somewhat unsafe
0 (0)
0 (0)
2 (25)
Very unsafe
0 (0)
0 (0)
1 (13)
Strength of recommendation
Very strong
40 (77)
9 (56)
0.11
5 (63)
Somewhat strong
10 (19)
7 (44)
1 (13)
Somewhat weak
2 (4)
0 (0)
1 (13)
Weak
0 (0)
0 (0)
1 (13)
a χ2 analysis compared responses of physicians vs clinical nurses and medical assistants. Nonclinical nurses were not 
included in the statistical analysis because of low sample size.
b Percentage does not total to 100 because of rounding.
 4
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-205
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Physicians’, Nurses’, and Medical Assistants’ Perceptions of the Human Papillomavirus Vaccine in a Large Integrated Health Care System 
Five respondents (2 physicians and 3 
nurses and medical assistants) reported a 
perceived need for more education on the 
safety and efficacy of the HPV vaccine for 
nonphysicians. Sample comments were 
as follows: “With better understanding of 
[the] topic, staff can do more patient teach-
ing,”  and “Educate back-office staff so they 
feel stronger in recommending the vaccine.”
Respondent-Reported Reasons Given by 
Patients and Parents for Declining Vaccine
The most common reason for refusing 
the HPV vaccine identified by parents to 
the respondents was that the vaccine is not 
safe because it is too new (n = 22), or the 
patient is too young and thus vulnerable to 
side effects (n = 11). Specifically for males, 
11 respondents reported that parents think 
the risk of HPV for males is low; thus, there 
is no need for the vaccine. For instance, one 
respondent said, “[Parents think] that it does 
not ‘affect’ males so there is no reason to get it.”
Another common reason given for not 
wanting the vaccine is because the virus 
is transmitted sexually. Most respondents 
reported that patients and parents deny 
sexual activity and thus perceived no need 
for the HPV vaccine. Comments reportedly 
heard from parents included the following: 
“My child is not having sex”; “We don’t believe 
in premarital sex”; “My daughter is not sexu-
ally active [or] promiscuous; we go to church 
[and] she is not that kind of girl.” This link 
between the vaccine and a sexually transmit-
ted disease (STD) was inherently part of the 
language used by respondents to illustrate 
their patients’ perceptions and beliefs. An-
other said, “They don’t need an STD vaccine 
at their age.” 
Counseling Topics
The most common point that respondents 
reported discussing with female patients 
in relation to the HPV vaccine was the 
decreased risk of cervical cancer (n = 50), 
followed by the decreased risk of genital 
warts (n = 17). The most common point 
that respondents reported discussing with 
male patients was decreased risk of anogeni-
tal cancer (n = 32), followed by decreased 
risk of anogenital warts (n = 19). For both 
female and male patients, the third most 
common topic discussed by respondents was 
the ubiquitous nature of the virus as a sexu-
ally transmitted infection with no cure that 
can be asymptomatic and easily transmitted 
(n = 29 for males and n = 22 for females). 
Nine respondents reported that they empha-
size the decrease in risk of abnormal results 
of Papanicolaou tests and thus the need for 
additional procedures such as colposcopy. 
Eleven respondents thought that both 
physicians and ancillary staff could im-
prove in their respective roles as HPV 
vaccine advocates. Specific areas for im-
provement identified included consistency 
of message (“Train providers to have [a] con-
sistent message regarding benefits”), assertive-
ness (“Physicians [need] to be more engaged 
in explaining the vaccine”), and complete-
ness (“I find the parents who refuse never got 
a full explanation”). One OB/GYN reported 
regularly using self-disclosure to advocate 
for the HPV vaccine: “I let everyone know I 
vaccinated my own child.” Ten respondents 
reported that they emphasize the nature 
of the HPV vaccine as a three-dose series.
Workflow/Institutional Procedures
Thirteen distinct workflows were re-
ported by respondents to describe the 
events of an office visit in which the patient 
is identified as eligible for the initial HPV 
vaccine dose. There was no clear pattern 
when evaluated by department specialty or 
role as physician, nurse, or medical assistant. 
Three physicians reported that they teach 
their medical assistants to put the vaccine 
in the chief complaint section of the patient 
encounter. Moreover, two of the three phy-
sicians indicated that this is an established 
protocol but that the medical assistants do 
not routinely do it.
KP Orange County uses Epic software 
(Epic Systems Corp, Verona, WI) for its 
electronic medical records in the inpatient 
and outpatient settings. During a clinic en-
counter, ancillary staff are taught to “pend” 
certain orders (including the HPV vaccine) 
in the order entry section of the encounter. 
Physicians can then simply sign the order 
with a click of the mouse. In our sample, 
2 physicians saw a need for improvement 
in this practice by ancillary staff. For ex-
ample, one stated, “If my medical assistant 
doesn’t pend [the HPV vaccine order], I forget 
to look.” 
Nearly all respondents reported that after 
administration of the first HPV dose, the 
patient is advised verbally to get the second 
and third doses by the physician (n = 35), 
nurse or medical assistant (n = 38), or both 
(n = 28). Thirty-one respondents reported 
including some type of recommendation 
in the printed handout given to patients 
at the conclusion of the encounter. Five 
reported that often 1 or all of these steps 
are overlooked during the visit. Twenty-
nine respondents indicated that an effort is 
made to schedule a follow-up appointment 
with a nurse for the next HPV vaccine dose 
before the patient is discharged home from 
the encounter. Half of the respondents 
recommended some kind of reminder 
system after the first HPV vaccine dose, by 
text message, e-mail, phone, or postal mail 
(n = 38). Eleven respondents recommended 
contacting patients who do not come for 
follow-up visits with a nurse for their second 
and third doses to reschedule.
Nine respondents emphasized the im-
portance of initiating the vaccination series 
before the advent of sexual activity. Four 
respondents recommended that physicians 
broach the subject of the HPV vaccine 
with parents well before the patient reaches 
age 9 years by providing information on 
HPV and the vaccine via mail, e-mail, 
or phone or through direct discussion at 
well-child examinations. One pediatrician 
recommended routinely starting the series 
at age 9 rather than age 11 years. 
DISCUSSION
Common Themes of Survey
In the current survey, all physicians 
reported perceiving the HPV vaccine as 
somewhat safe or very safe. Such a strong 
testament to the safety of the vaccine has not 
been observed in previous surveys, in which 
at least a few physicians have considered 
the HPV vaccine unsafe, with some even 
choosing to not recommend it for eligible 
patients.18,19 Proportionally more of these 
clinicians have been family physicians 
rather than pediatricians or OB/GYNs. 
In a survey of 1013 physicians, the pedia-
tricians and OB/GYNs were more likely 
than family physicians were to “always” 
recommend the vaccine.20 In contrast, we 
found no difference in perception of vac-
cine safety or strength of recommendation 
between family physicians, pediatricians, or 
OB/GYNs. Possible explanations for this 
include our relatively small sample size, the 
emphasis placed on preventive medicine at 
KP as an integrated health care system, and 
 5
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-205
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Physicians’, Nurses’, and Medical Assistants’ Perceptions of the Human Papillomavirus Vaccine in a Large Integrated Health Care System  
mounting data providing reassurance that 
the vaccine is safe.6,7 Surveys continue to 
identify safety as the predominant concern 
among patients and parents.17,21,22
The most commonly reported safety 
concern by physicians and ancillary staff
 
in our survey was the potential for adverse 
neurologic effects associated with the HPV 
vaccine, specifically fainting immediately 
after vaccine administration. This adverse 
effect was found to be so common after 
vaccine licensure that the US Food and 
Drug Administration changed prescribing 
information to include information about 
preventing falls and possible injuries from 
fainting after HPV vaccination, although 
the vaccine benefit-risk profile was still 
considered acceptable in adolescent girls 
and women.23 A few respondents cited 
general neurologic disease as an additional 
concern. A recent study of almost 4 mil-
lion women in Denmark and Sweden 
followed-up from 2006 to 2013 showed 
no association between the HPV vaccine 
and the development of multiple sclerosis 
or other demyelinating diseases.24 
Besides physician input, there is potential 
value in the thoughts of nonphysician staff 
who interact directly and indirectly with 
patients and parents to influence decision 
making, which previous surveys have not 
explored. We observed that physicians re-
portedly perceive the HPV vaccine as safer 
than do clinical nurses and medical assistants. 
Several respondents, including clinical nurses 
and medical assistants, reported a need for 
more education for ancillary staff about 
the safety and efficacy of the HPV vaccine. 
Medical assistants, nurses, and possibly even 
receptionists involved in direct patient care 
may greatly influence the decision making 
of parents and patients, and their role in the 
advocacy for the HPV vaccine deserves fur-
ther study. A follow-up study with a larger 
sample size of medical assistants and nurses 
with assurance of anonymity is needed.
Although 100% of physicians and clini-
cal nurses/medical assistants in our sample 
reportedly considered the HPV vaccine 
as somewhat or very safe, one-fourth and 
one-eighth of nonclinical nurses reportedly 
considered the HPV vaccine as somewhat 
and very unsafe, respectively. Additionally, 
1 nonclinical nurse (administrator) reported 
weakly recommending the vaccine com-
pared with no physicians or clinical nurses/
medical assistants. Nonclinical nurses at KP 
are largely involved in establishing work-
flows used by clinical nurses and medical 
assistants, in governing how and when to 
discuss the vaccine with patients, and in 
facilitating the utilization of the vaccine for 
the physician (eg, providing the HPV vac-
cine in the chief complaint of the encounter 
and/or pending the order for the physician). 
Because of the integrated and streamlined 
nature of vaccine delivery at KP
, a negative 
perception of the HPV vaccine among 
nonclinical nurses may actually impede 
vaccination efforts to a larger degree than 
negative perceptions held by clinical nurses 
and medical assistants involved in direct 
patient care. This finding highlights the 
need for education of nonclinical nurses as 
well as clinical nurses and medical assistants 
about the safety and efficacy of the HPV 
vaccine to improve coverage rates as well as 
the need for workflow standardization for 
vaccine delivery. 
Respondents identified timing as a criti-
cal aspect of vaccine delivery, emphasizing 
the nature of the HPV vaccine as a 3-dose 
series. In a 2008 KP Northwest survey of 
3490 females between ages 11 and 26 years, 
899 (26%) responded. Emphasis of the 
3-dose schedule from the clinical care team 
to the patient was predictive of improved 
rates of series completion.25
Another commonly reported counseling 
point relating to the timing of the vaccine 
was the importance of initiating the vac-
cination series before the advent of sexual 
activity. Second only to safety concerns, 
parental denial of the patient’s sexual activ-
ity and the perception of the HPV vaccine 
as an STD vaccine were cited as major 
barriers to vaccine uptake, consistent with 
previous surveys.26 A recent study of a large 
cohort of female adolescents found that 
HPV vaccination was not associated with 
increases in sexually transmitted infections 
after one year, suggesting that vaccination is 
unlikely to promote unsafe sexual activity.15 
Clinicians can use this data to address the 
STD-vaccine barrier with parents. 
Another crucial aspect of vaccine tim-
ing—when to give the vaccine—was ad-
dressed by survey respondents, yielding 
novel proposals to help overcome HPV 
vaccination barriers. Some respondents 
recommended that the subject of the HPV 
vaccine be discussed with parents well 
before the patient reaches age 9 years, with 
a single pediatrician recommending start-
ing the series at age 9 years rather than age 
11 years, which is still within the CDC 
recommendations. Adopting such recom-
mendations could serve to educate parents 
on HPV vaccine safety and efficacy and 
thereby dispel common myths.
Given the major challenges to improv-
ing HPV vaccination coverage, we must 
be open to trying novel approaches that 
pose no obvious risk, even if they are not 
yet validated by large-scale studies. Several 
specific intriguing recommendations were 
made by at least one respondent of the cur-
rent survey, including the practice of self-
disclosure (ie, providers advising patients 
and parents that they give the HPV vaccine 
to their own children), which has been 
demonstrated to be a powerful motivational 
tool in patient-clinician interactions.27 
Other specific suggestions included incen-
tivizing vaccination uptake and completion 
either financially or in some other way and 
using presumptive recommendation strate-
gies when discussing the vaccine—“We have 
to do some shots”—instead of “What do you 
want to do about shots?”
Limitations
The objective of the current study was 
to obtain sufficient input from physicians, 
medical assistants, and clinical and non-
clinical nurses to compare safety and ef-
ficacy perceptions between physicians and 
ancillary staff and across specialties. Because 
of the low response rate for clinical nurses 
and medical assistants (31%), the statistical 
analysis was not as robust as originally in-
tended. The low response rate was caused by 
either the physician not sending the survey 
as requested or the nurses and medical as-
sistants failing to complete the survey after 
receiving it from the physician. Future sur-
veys should be sent directly to all potential 
respondents, facilitating direct follow-up for 
nonresponders. Additionally, the survey did 
not distinguish between clinical nurses and 
medical assistants. Both positions involve 
direct outpatient care but in slightly dif-
ferent capacities. It is certainly possible that 
individuals from these groups hold different 
views that could have been overlooked. 
Our survey did provide a good mix of 
responses from Family Medicine, OB/GYN, 
and Pediatric Departments, but the response 
 6
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-205
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Physicians’, Nurses’, and Medical Assistants’ Perceptions of the Human Papillomavirus Vaccine in a Large Integrated Health Care System 
rate from the Internal Medicine Department 
was low. Most internal medicine physicians 
in KP Orange County work exclusively or 
predominantly in the inpatient setting and 
thus do not have the opportunity to discuss 
the HPV vaccine with patients, as do family 
medicine physicians, who work predomi-
nantly in outpatient clinics. The two in-
ternal medicine physicians who responded 
do routinely work in the outpatient clinic 
and occasionally see patients eligible for 
the HPV vaccine. Statistical analyses were 
conducted with and without addition of 
the internal medicine physician responses 
to those of family medicine physicians, and 
the results were unchanged.
CONCLUSION
Physicians perceive the HPV vaccine as 
safer than do clinical nurses and medical 
assistants and purport to recommend it 
more strongly compared with nonclini-
cal nurses. Medical assistants and clinical 
nurses who serve on the front lines of vac-
cine advocacy report that they need more 
education on the safety and efficacy of the 
HPV vaccine. Concerns about safety and 
possible promotion of sexual activity are 
the most frequently reported barriers lim-
iting HPV vaccine coverage. Vaccination 
uptake may increase through improved 
advocacy by physicians and ancillary staff, 
predicated on improved provider and pa-
tient education. Workflow standardization 
is needed to ensure minimization of missed 
vaccination opportunities. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgments
We thank the physicians, nurses, and medical 
assistants of Kaiser Permanente Orange County 
who participated in the survey. We also acknowledge 
Marla Reicks, PhD, RD, Professor of Food Science 
and Nutrition at the University of Minnesota, St Paul, 
for assistance with qualitative data analysis. 
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health 
Communications provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Mills J, Van Winkle P, Shen M, Hong C, Hudson S. 
Physicians’, nurses’, and medical assistants’ 
perceptions of the human papillomavirus vaccine in 
a large integrated health care system. Perm J 2016 
Fall;20(4):15-205. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/15-205.
References
 1. Stokley S, Jeyarajah J, Yankey D, et al; Immunization 
Services Division, National Center for Immunization 
and Respiratory Diseases, CDC; Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC). Human papillomavirus 
vaccination coverage among adolescents, 2007-2013, 
and postlicensure vaccine safety monitoring, 2006-
2014—United States. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014 Jul;63(29):620-4.
 2. Jemal A, Simard EP, Dorell C, et al. Annual 
report to the nation on the status of cancer, 1975-
2009, featuring the burden and trends in human 
papillomavirus (HPV)-associated cancers and HPV 
vaccination coverage levels. J Natl Cancer Inst 2013 
Feb 6;105(3):175-201. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
jnci/djs491.
 3. Crosignani P, De Stefani A, Fara GM, et al. Towards 
the eradication of HPV infection through universal 
specific vaccination. BMC Public Health 2013 Jul 
11;13:642. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-
13-642.
 4. Villa LL, Costa RL, Petta CA, et al. High sustained 
efficacy of a prophylactic quadrivalent human 
papillomavirus types 6/11/16/18 L1 virus-like particle 
vaccine through 5 years of follow-up. Br J Cancer 
2006 Dec 4;95(11):1459-66. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/sj.bjc.6603469.
 5. Rahman M, McGrath CJ, Hirth JM, Berenson AB. 
Age at HPV vaccine initiation and completion among 
US adolescent girls: trend from 2008 to 2012. 
Vaccine 2015 Jan 29;33(5):585-7. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.12.021.
 6. Jin XW, Lipold L, Sikon A, Rome E. Human 
papillomavirus vaccine: safe, effective, underused. 
Cleve Clin J Med 2013 Jan;80(1):49-60. DOI:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.3949/ccjm.80a.12084.
 7. Markowitz LE, Tsu V, Deeks SL, et al. Human 
papillomavirus vaccine introduction—the first five 
years. Vaccine 2012 Nov 20;30 Suppl 5:F139-48. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.05.039. 
Erratum in: Vaccine 2014 Feb 26;32(10):1225. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.01.013.
 8. Gold R, Naleway A, Riedlinger K. Factors predicting 
completion of the human papillomavirus vaccine 
series. J Adolesc Health 2013 Apr;52(4):427-32. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2012.09.009.
 9. Rolnick SJ, Parker ED, Nordin JD, et al. Self-report 
compared to electronic medical record across eight 
adult vaccines: do results vary by demographic 
factors? Vaccine 2013 Aug 20;31(37):3928-35. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.06.041.
 10. Lu PJ, Williams WW, Li J, et al. Human 
papillomavirus vaccine initiation and awareness:  
US young men in the 2010 National Health Interview 
Survey. Am J Prev Med 2013 Apr;44(4):330-8. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2012.11.027.
 11. Wong CA, Taylor JA, Wright JA, Opel DJ, 
Katzenellenbogen RA. Missed opportunities for 
adolescent vaccination, 2006-2011. J Adolesc 
Health 2013 Oct;53(4):492-7. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2013.05.009.
 12. Chao C, Velicer C, Slezak JM, Jacobsen SJ. 
Correlates for completion of 3-dose regimen of HPV 
vaccine in female members of a managed care 
organization. Mayo Clin Proc 2009 Oct;84(10):864-
70. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.4065/84.10.864.
 13. Chao C, Slezak JM, Coleman KJ, Jacobsen SJ. 
Papanicolaou screening behavior in mothers and 
human papillomavirus vaccine uptake in adolescent 
girls. Am J Public Health 2009 Jun;99(6):1137-42. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2008.147876.
 14. Hechter RC, Chao C, Sy LS, et al. Quadrivalent 
human papillomavirus vaccine uptake in adolescent 
boys and maternal utilization of preventive care and 
history of sexually transmitted infections. Am J Public 
Health 2013 Sep;103(9):e63-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.2105/ajph.2013.301495.
 15. Jena AB, Goldman DP, Seabury SA. Incidence 
of sexually transmitted infections after 
human papillomavirus vaccination among 
adolescent females. JAMA Intern Med 2015 
Apr;175(4):617-23. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jamainternmed.2014.7886.
 16. Quinn GP, Murphy D, Malo TL, Christie J, 
Vadaparampil ST. A national survey about human 
papillomavirus vaccination: what we didn’t ask, but 
physicians wanted us to know. J Pediatr Adolesc 
Gynecol 2012 Aug;25(4):254-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpag.2012.02.007.
 17. Perkins RB, Clark JA. What affects human 
papillomavirus vaccination rates? A qualitative 
analysis of providers’ perceptions. Womens Health 
Issues 2012 Jul-Aug;22(4):e379-86. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.whi.2012.04.001.
 18. McRee AL, Gilkey MB, Dempsey AF. HPV vaccine 
hesitancy: findings from a statewide survey of health 
care providers. J Pediatr Health Care 2014 Nov-
Dec;28(6):541-9. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
pedhc.2014.05.003.
 19. Perkins RB, Clark JA. Providers’ attitudes 
toward human papillomavirus vaccination in 
young men: challenges for implementation of 
2011 recommendations. Am J Mens Health 
2012 Jul;6(4):320-3. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1557988312438911.
 20. Vadaparampil ST, Malo TL, Kahn JA, et al. 
Physicians’ human papillomavirus vaccine 
recommendations, 2009 and 2011. Am J Prev Med 
2014 Jan;46(1):80-4. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
amepre.2013.07.009.
 21. Darden PM, Thompson DM, Roberts JR, et al. 
Reasons for not vaccinating adolescents: National 
Immunization Survey of Teens, 2008-2010. 
Pediatrics 2013 Apr;131(4):645-51. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1542/peds.2012-2384.
 22. Vadaparampil ST, Murphy D, Rodriguez M, Malo TL, 
Quinn GP. Qualitative responses to a national 
physician survey on HPV vaccination. Vaccine 
2013 Apr 26;31(18):2267-72. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.02.063.
 23. Angelo MG, Zima J, Tavares Da Silva F, Baril L, 
Arellano F. Post-licensure safety surveillance for 
human papillomavirus-16/18-AS04-adjuvanted 
vaccine: more than 4 years of experience. 
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2014 May;23(5): 
456-65. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/pds.3593.
 24. Scheller NM, Svanström H, Pasternak B, et al. 
Quadrivalent HPV vaccination and risk of multiple 
sclerosis and other demyelinating diseases of the 
central nervous system. JAMA 2015 Jan 6;313(1):54-
61. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2014.16946.
 25. Naleway AL, Gold R, Drew L, Riedlinger K, 
Henninger ML, Gee J. Reported adverse events 
in young women following quadrivalent human 
papillomavirus vaccination. J Womens Health 
(Larchmt) 2012;21:425-32. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1089/jwh.2011.2895
 26. Perkins RB, Clark JA. Providers’ perceptions of 
parental concerns about HPV vaccination. J Health 
Care Poor Underserved 2013 May;24(2):828-39. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/hpu.2013.0080.
 27. Tallman K, Janisse T, Frankel RM, Sung SH, Krupat 
E, Hsu JT. Communication practices of physicians 
with high patient-satisfaction ratings. Perm J 2007 
Winter;11(1):19-29. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/06-106.
 1
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-060
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Trends in Type of Original Psoriasis Publications by Decade,  
1960 to 2010
Eric Sako, MD; Shannon Famenini, MD; Jashin J Wu, MD 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-060
E-pub: 08/15/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-060
ABSTRACT
Context: Research investigating psoriasis has spanned decades, and as our understand-
ing of the disease has evolved, the focus of publications has changed.
Objective: We sought to characterize the trends in original psoriasis-related research 
from 1960 to 2010 chronologically by decade.
Methods: A literature review was performed using the keyword psoriasis in the MED-
LINE database. All original psoriasis-related articles published at the beginning of each 
decade were searched and categorized by study type and topic.
Main Outcome Measure: Number of articles per topic.
Results: A total of 869 original psoriasis-related articles were found. The number 
of publications increased 18 fold over 5 decades. The immunology and pathogenesis 
of psoriasis was the most frequently researched topic (36%), and retrospective studies 
were the most common study type (37%). Recent highly published topics included 
biologic therapy, genetics, and psoriasis-associated cardiovascular disease.
Conclusion: Original psoriasis-related publications have grown substantially 
since 1960. Basic science research into the immunology and pathogenesis has been 
and continues to be the mainstay of psoriasis research. Recent research trends sug-
gest the focus has expanded to topics such as psoriasis-associated cardiovascular 
disease, genetics, and biologic therapy. 
INTRODUCTION
Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin 
condition affecting 2% of the population, 
and it can be physically and psychologi-
cally debilitating.1 Although psoriasis was 
first described in 1841, it was the 1960s 
that first saw a surge in psoriasis-related 
research. Initial studies focused on the ke-
ratinocyte, and nonmalignant proliferation 
and reduced differentiation were found to 
be hallmarks of psoriasis.2
Since then, considerable achievements 
have changed the way psoriasis is viewed. 
Advances in technology have allowed re-
searchers to gain an understanding of the 
molecular mechanisms driving the disease. 
Breakthroughs in biologic therapy have 
revolutionized the way psoriasis is man-
aged. Recent research suggests that patients 
with psoriasis have a systemic inflamma-
tory state, putting them at increased risk 
of cardiovascular complications, including 
metabolic syndrome, peripheral vascular 
disease, stroke, myocardial infarction, 
and cardiac death.3,4 Some articles suggest 
that tumor necrosis factor inhibitors may 
decrease the risk of stroke and myocardial 
infarction in patients with psoriasis.5,6
As understanding of the disease has con-
tinued to evolve over five decades, research 
interests have expanded. Our goal is to iden-
tify these new components to gain a better 
understanding of the current landscape 
and future direction of psoriasis-related 
research. On the basis of recent study find-
ings, we hypothesized that there would be 
a higher proportion of recent publications 
investigating psoriasis-associated cardio-
vascular disease and biologic therapy. To 
our knowledge, no study has systemati-
cally examined research trends in this field. 
We sought to accomplish this through 
a literature review, wherein all original 
psoriasis-related articles published at the 
beginning of each decade, starting in 1960, 
were categorized by study type and topic.
METHODS
To evaluate trends in psoriasis re-
search, we extracted articles from the 
MEDLINE database using the keyword 
psoriasis for the calendar years of 1960, 
1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010. We 
excluded articles that were not original 
research, were not available in English, or 
were not primarily focused on psoriasis. 
Systematic reviews, meta-analyses, case 
reports, literature reviews, and editorials 
were excluded.
Articles that met inclusion criteria were 
classified by study type as follows: clini-
cal trial, basic science, retrospective, and 
cross-sectional. The clinical trials topic 
included randomized trials and prospec-
tive nonrandomized trials. Basic science 
studies were defined as studies that re-
quired specialized or extensive laboratory 
testing outside a clinical trial or animal 
models. Retrospective studies included 
observational studies. Cross-sectional 
studies were generally time-independent, 
questionnaire-based studies. 
These articles were then linked by their 
subject matter to 1 of 13 topics: topi-
cal therapy, oral therapy, phototherapy, 
biologics, other therapy, genetics, im-
munology and pathogenesis of psoria-
sis, cardiovascular comorbidities, other 
comorbidities, infection, cancer, quality 
of life, and epidemiology and cost. These 
topics were thought to capture the variety 
of broad research topics that have been 
covered in psoriasis research. Therapy-
based topics such as topical therapy en-
compassed studies that evaluated any 
aspect of the treatment, including but 
not limited to cost, efficacy, side effects, 
and pharmacology. Genetics articles 
focused on the hereditary nature of the 
disease. Immunology and pathogenesis of 
Eric Sako, MD, is a Dermatology Resident at the University of California, Los Angeles. E-mail: eric.sako@gmail.com. 
 
Shannon Famenini, MD, is a Resident in the Department of Internal Medicine at University of California, Irvine. 
E-mail: ffamenini@gmail.com. Jashin J Wu, MD, is the Director of Dermatology Research for the Department of 
Dermatology at the Los Angeles Medical Center in CA. E-mail: jashinwu@gmail.com.
 2
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-060
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Trends in Type of Original Psoriasis Publications by Decade, 1960 to 2010 
psoriasis was a broad heading that covered 
the mechanisms and manifestations of the 
disease. Publications dealing with car-
diovascular comorbidities, infection, or 
cancer looked at the association between 
psoriasis and each of these entities. Stud-
ies of other comorbidities investigated the 
association between psoriasis and other 
diseases. Quality of life included studies 
that investigated the impact psoriasis has 
on the patient’s well-being and emotional 
state. Epidemiology and cost consisted of 
studies that analyzed the pattern of dis-
ease or the financial impact. If an article’s 
subject matter covered multiple topics, 
the article was categorized into the topic 
that fit best. 
Percentages for topic type were calcu-
lated by dividing the number of articles 
by the total number of articles that year. 
Percentage increase from decade to decade 
was calculated by dividing the number of 
articles in a given decade by the number 
of articles in the comparative decade then 
subtracting 1 and converting to a percent. 
RESULTS
Original Psoriasis Research
Our search yielded 869 original psori-
asis-related publications (Table 1). There 
was a linear increase in the number of 
original articles from 1960 to 1980, with 
7 times more articles published in 1980 
than in 1960. Although the years 1990 
and 2000 experienced a modest increase 
in publications, 2010 saw a 101% rise 
compared with the previous decade.
Trends in Study Topic
Immunology and pathogenesis of 
psoriasis was the most-researched topic, 
totaling 300 articles and comprising 35% 
of the total research found, followed 
by studies in topical therapy (n = 102, 
12%) and phototherapy (n = 102, 12%; 
see Table 1). The least-researched topics 
overall were cancer (n = 8, 1%), infection 
(n = 10, 1%), and other comorbidities (n 
= 23, 3%). 
Immunology and pathogenesis of pso-
riasis comprised 47%, 40%, and 26% 
Table 1. Original psoriasis articles by study type and topic 
Decade
Study type
Topical 
Oral 
Photo
Biologics
Other 
Genetics
IP
CV
OCM
Infection
Cancer
QOL
EC
Total
1960 
Clinical trial
2
3
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
Basic science
0
0
0
0
2
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
Retrospective
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
1
1
0
4
Cross-sectional
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Subtotal
2
3
1
0
2
0
9
0
0
0
1
1
0
19
1970 
Clinical trial
11
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
22
Basic science
3
4
0
0
0
4
26
0
0
0
0
0
0
37
Retrospective
5
1
1
0
0
0
5
2
0
1
0
1
0
16
Cross-sectional
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
Subtotal
20
16
2
0
0
4
31
2
0
1
0
1
0
77
1980 
Clinical trial
3
6
12
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
22
Basic science
1
1
15
0
0
1
44
0
0
0
0
0
0
62
Retrospective
4
4
15
0
1
6
10
3
4
0
0
0
1
48
Cross-sectional
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
2
Subtotal
8
11
42
0
2
7
54
3
4
0
0
2
1
134
1990 
Clinical trial
19
6
6
2
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
38
Basic science
7
5
3
0
1
2
39
0
0
0
0
0
0
57
Retrospective
4
3
4
0
0
2
14
0
3
0
2
0
1
33
Cross-sectional
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
3
4
Subtotal
30
14
13
2
6
4
53
0
3
0
2
1
4
132
2000 
Clinical trial
14
4
12
4
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
41
Basic science
5
0
1
1
1
7
46
0
2
1
1
0
0
65
Retrospective
4
3
1
1
1
9
19
0
5
2
1
0
7
53
Cross-sectional
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
0
9
Subtotal
23
7
14
6
9
16
65
0
7
3
2
9
7
168
2010 
Clinical trial
15
7
14
30
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
70
Basic science
3
1
4
0
1
4
58
0
0
0
0
0
0
71
Retrospective
1
2
12
26
8
24
30
25
9
6
3
2
15
163
Cross-sectional
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
14
35
Subtotal
19
10
30
56
13
28
88
25
9
6
3
23
29
339
 Total
102
61
102
64
32
59
300
30
23
10
8
37
41
869
CV = cardiovascular comorbidities; EC = epidemiology and cost; IP = immunology and pathogenesis of psoriasis; OCM = other comorbidities; oral = oral therapy;  
other = other comorbidities; photo = phototherapy; QOL = quality of life; topical = topical therapy.
 3
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-060
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Trends in Type of Original Psoriasis Publications by Decade, 1960 to 2010 
of total psoriasis articles in 1960, 1990, 
and 2010, respectively (Table 2). Publi-
cations in immunology and pathogenesis 
of psoriasis initially grew quickly, rising 
488% from 1960 to 1990, and continued 
to grow steadily, with 66% more articles 
published in 2010 than in 1990.
Research into phototherapy rose 
steeply in 1980 (Figure 1), comprising 
31% of the articles published that year, 
14 times more than the number of articles 
published in 1960 and 1970 combined. 
However, interest in phototherapy waned 
in the following decades, comprising only 
9.8%, 8.3%, and 8.8% of total articles 
published in 1990, 2000, and 2010, 
respectively. 
Some topics have experienced de-
creased publication. Oral therapy and 
topical therapy were the second and third 
most researched topics in 1960, respec-
tively, but were only the eighth and ninth 
in 2010 (Figure 1). The subjects made up 
16% (oral) and 11% (topical) of total 
articles in 1960 but totaled just 3% and 
5% in 2010. This represents a 29% and 
37% decrease in the number of articles 
from 1990. 
Biologic therapy publications, however, 
increased dramatically in recent decades 
(Figure 1). There were 56 articles (17%) 
published in 2010, a 7-fold rise in the 
number of publications compared to 
1990 through 2000, when only 8 were 
published.
Similarly, published research in cardio-
vascular comorbidities, which was not 
found in 1960 or 1990, grew tremen-
dously in 2010, comprising 7% of total 
research (Figure 1). The total number of 
articles in 2010 (25) was more than what 
was published for all the previous years 
combined (5). Research into epidemiol-
ogy and cost, quality of life, and genetics 
also experienced a remarkable growth 
in publications in 2010, with 625%, 
2400%, and 600% increases, respectively, 
over 1990.
Trends in Study Type
Retrospective studies were the most 
common study type, with 317 original 
articles (37%), followed by basic science 
studies (35%) and clinical trials (23%; 
Table 1). Immunology and pathogen-
esis of psoriasis was the most common 
retrospective study topic, with a 25% 
share. In addition, immunology and 
pathogenesis of psoriasis accounted 
for 73% of total basic science research. 
The most common clinical trials were 
in topical therapy (32%), followed by 
Table 2. Percentage of total research stratified by topic and decade
 
Research topics
 
1960
 
1990
 
2010
Change,  
1960 to 1990
Change,  
1990 to 2010
Immunology and pathogenesis
47
40
26
+ 488
+ 66
Biologic therapy
0
1
17
NA
+ 2700
Phototherapy
5
10
9
+ 1200
+ 130
Genetics
0
3
8
NA
+ 600
Epidemiology and cost
0
3
8
NA
+ 625
Cardiovascular 
0
0
7
0%
NA
Quality of life
5
1
7
0%
+ 2400
Topical therapy
11
23
5
 + 1400
- 37
Other therapy
11
4
4
+ 200
+ 116
Oral therapy
16
11
3
+ 366
- 29
Other comorbidities
0
2
3
NA
+ 200
Infections
0
0
2
NA
NA
Cancer
5
2
1
+ 100
+ 50
NA = not applicable.
Figure 2. Number of articles by study type and decade.
Figure 1. Number of articles by topic and decade.
CV = cardiovascular comorbidities; oral = oral therapy; photo = phototherapy;  
topical = topical therapy.
 4
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-060
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Trends in Type of Original Psoriasis Publications by Decade, 1960 to 2010 
phototherapy (23%). Quality of life 
studies made up most of the cross-
sectional studies (63%), followed by 
epidemiology and cost (33%).
Basic science studies were the most 
published in early decades, comprising 
38% to 48% of original studies until 
2000 (Figure 2). In 2010, basic science 
studies comprised only 21% of total re-
search but still produced more articles 
(n = 71) than in 2000 (n = 65). The 
number of retrospective studies varied 
throughout the years but in 2010 ex-
perienced a strong rise, with more than 
100 more original articles than in year 
2000. The number of clinical trials and 
cross-sectional studies rose steadily 
through the years, with almost 2-fold 
and 4-fold increases in the number of 
articles in 2010 vs 2000. This rise in 
cross-sectional studies corresponded to 
the rise in articles related to quality of 
life, which were almost exclusively time 
dependent and questionnaire based.
DISCUSSION
For decades, investigators have en-
deavored to identify the cause of pso-
riasis and discover better treatments for 
 
this condition. This has brought about 
remarkable discoveries that have altered 
the way dermatologists view and treat 
psoriasis. The aim of this retrospective 
study was to capture the trends in pso-
riasis research by categorizing original 
psoriasis-related articles published at 
the beginning of each decade, starting 
in 1960. 
We found that original psoriasis-related 
publications grew steadily since 1960 
and have experienced a surge in the last 
decade. These results are encouraging 
and reflect a robust and thriving research 
interest in psoriasis. This is likely a result 
of multiple factors, including increased 
availability of funding, growing inter-
est from pharmaceutical companies, 
advancements in technology used in 
research, an increased number of der-
matology and skin biology journals, an 
increased number of physicians and sci-
entists engaged in research, and an expan-
sion in the type of available treatments.7
Our study also demonstrates that re-
search interests have drastically shifted 
from decade to decade. Although basic 
science publications in immunology 
and pathogenesis continue to be the 
mainstay of psoriasis research, focus on 
other research topics has evolved. Re-
search in the 1960s and 1970s focused 
on the available treatments of the disease 
at the time: topical and oral therapy, 
which included immunosuppressant 
agents such as methotrexate.8 Attention 
shifted to phototherapy in 1980, which 
corresponded with the discovery of pho-
tochemotherapy (psoralen-ultraviolet A) 
in the mid-1970s.9 In 1990, research in 
phototherapy had dissipated, instead 
replaced by renewed interest in topical 
and oral therapy. In particular, studies 
evaluating cyclosporine and systemic 
retinoids were frequent.10-12
Since 2000, there has been a marked 
change in the direction of psoriasis re-
search. The emergence of tumor necrosis 
factor inhibitor therapy for psoriasis 
occurred during this period, sparking 
a series of clinical trials that showed re-
markable clinical outcomes and changed 
the way dermatologists manage psoria-
sis.13-15 Furthermore, with advancements 
in DNA technology, publications that 
analyzed the genetics of psoriasis grew 
quickly. Last, although the association of 
psoriasis with cardiovascular disease had 
been speculated on for some time, the 
topic received increased attention in re-
cent years.16 Large clinical trials revealed 
an increased risk of myocardial infarction 
and stroke in patients with psoriasis.17,18 
We predict that these high-impact topics 
will continue to be frequently published 
in contemporary literature. 
We acknowledge certain limitations to 
the study. We limited our study to the 
number of articles and did not assess the 
impact of the articles themselves. Further 
studies involving citation analysis could 
be useful. In addition, we drew conclu-
sions about research performed during 
a decade on the basis of one year of re-
search at the beginning of that decade. 
The year may not have been representa-
tive of that decade because of sampling 
error. We were limited by our university’s 
subscriptions to peer-reviewed journals, 
and some articles may not have been 
accessible. If an article’s topic could be 
categorized under multiple topics, the re-
viewer chose the best-fit topic. Therefore, 
our conclusions might have varied if we 
had categorized these articles differently. 
Furthermore, the topics and study types 
were subjectively chosen, thought to 
best represent broad topics in psoriasis 
research. Results might have varied if 
different topics were chosen.
CONCLUSION
The diversity of publications topics in 
psoriasis research continues to grow at a 
rapid pace, and recent discoveries have 
paved the way for future research. Al-
though research topics have changed over 
the decades, the goal has remained to better 
understand the disease and its treatment 
for the benefit of the patient. v
Disclosure Statement
Dr Wu has received research funding from 
AbbVie, Inc, North Chicago, IL; Amgen, Inc, 
Thousand Oaks, CA; and Pfizer, Inc, New York, NY. 
The other authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose. 
Acknowledgment
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health 
Communications provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Sako E, Famenini S, Wu JJ. Trends in the type  
of original psoriasis publications by decade,  
1960-2010. Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-060.  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-060.
References
 1. Nestle FO, Kaplan DH, Barker J. Psoriasis. N Engl J 
Med 2009 Jul 30;361(5):496-509. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMra0804595.
 2. Sabat R, Sterry W, Phillip S, Wolk K. Three decades 
of psoriasis research: where has it led us? Clin 
Dermatol 2007 Nov-Dec;25(6):504-9. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clindermatol.2007.08.002.
 3. Samarasekera EJ, Neilson JM, Warren RB, 
Parham J, Smith CH. Incidence of cardiovascular 
disease in individuals with psoriasis: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. J Invest Dermatol 2013 
Oct;133(10):2340-6.  DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
jid.2013.149. 
 4. Wu JJ, Poon KY, Channual JC, Shen AY. Association 
between tumor necrosis factor inhibitor therapy and 
myocardial infarction risk in patients with psoriasis. 
Arch Dermatol 2012 Nov 1;148(11):1244-50. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archdermatol.2012.2502.
 5. Solomon DH, Massarotti E, Garg R, Liu J, 
Canning C, Schneeweiss S. Association between 
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs and diabetes 
risk in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis. 
JAMA 2011 Jun 22;305(24):2525-31. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2011.878.
 6. Ahlehoff O, Skov L, Gislason G, et al. Cardiovascular 
disease event rates in patients with severe psoriasis 
treated with systemic anti-inflammatory drugs: a 
Danish real-world cohort study. J Intern Med 2013 
 5
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-060
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Trends in Type of Original Psoriasis Publications by Decade, 1960 to 2010 
Feb; 273(2):197-204. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1365-2796.2012.02593.x.
 7. Wilgus ML, Adcock PA, Takashima A. Volume, 
trend and citation analyses of skin related 
publications from 1966 to 2003. J Dermatol Sci 2005 
Mar;37(3):125-136. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jdermsci.2004.10.010.
 8. Rees RB, Bennett JH, Maibach HI, Arnold HL. 
Methotrexate for psoriasis. Arch Dermatol 1967 
Jan;95(1):2-11. 
 9. Hönigsmann H. History of phototherapy in 
dermatology. Photochem Photobiol Sci 2013 
Jan;12(1):16-21. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/
c2pp25120e.
 10. Ellis CN, Gorsulowsky DC, Hamilton TA, et al.  
Cyclosporine improves psoriasis in a double-blind 
study. JAMA 1986 Dec 12;256(22):3110-6.  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.1986. 
03380220076026.
 11. Gollnick H, Orfanos CE. [Etretinate: pro and con. 
Risk-benefit analysis of systemic retinoid therapy in 
psoriasis and recent developments: free aromatic 
acid, arotinoids]. [Article in German]. Hautarzt 1985 
Jan;36(1):2-9.
 12. Mueller W, Herrmann B. Cyclosporin A for psoriasis. 
N Engl J Med 1979 Sept 6;301(10):555. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJM197909063011015.
 13. Oh CJ, Das KM, Gottlieb AB. Treatment with anti-
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) monoclonal 
antibody dramatically decreases the clinical activity 
of psoriasis lesions. J Am Acad Dermatol 2000 May; 
42(5 Pt 1):829-30. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1067/
mjd.2000.105948.
 14. Chaudhari U, Romano P, Mulcahy LD, Dooley LT, 
Baker DG, Gottlieb AB. Efficacy and safety of 
infliximab monotherapy for plaque-type psoriasis: a 
randomised trial. Lancet 2001 Jun 9;357(9271): 
1842-7. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(00)04954-0.
 15. Schopf RE, Aust H, Knop J. Treatment of psoriasis 
with the chimeric monoclonal antibody against 
tumor necrosis factor alpha, infliximab. J Am Acad 
Dermatol 2002 Jun;46(6):886-91. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1067/mjd.2002.120472.
 16. Ena P, Madeddu P, Glorioso N, Cerimele D, 
Rappelli A. High prevalence of cardiovascular 
diseases and enhanced activity of the renin-
angiotensin system in psoriatic patients. Acta Cardiol 
1985;40(2):199-205.
 17. Gelfand JM, Neimann AL, Shin DB, Wang X, 
Margolis DJ, Troxel AB. Risk of myocardial infarction 
in patients with psoriasis. JAMA 2006 Oct 11; 
296(14):1735-41. DOI; http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jama.296.14.1735.
 18. Gelfand JM, Dommasch ED, Shin DB, et al. The risk 
of stroke in patients with psoriasis. J Invest Dermatol 
2009 Oct;129(10):2411-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/jid.2009.112.
 1
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-168
CASE REPORTS
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome in Sarcoidosis:  
A Case Report of a Rare Neurologic Manifestation
Ajinkya Sonambekar, MD, MBBS; Nikhil Gupta, MD, MBBS; Akanksha Swadi, MD, MBBS;  
Laxmikant Ramkumarsingh Tomar, MD, MBBS 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-168
E-pub: 09/14/2016 
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-168
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Sarcoidosis is a multisystemic inflammatory
disease with myriad clinical manifestations. Neurologic in-
volvement in sarcoidosis is uncommon. Peripheral neuropathic 
presentations include mononeuropathy, mononeuritis multiplex, 
and generalized sensory, motor, autonomic, and sensorimotor
polyneuropathies.
Case Presentation: We report a case of carpal tunnel syn-
drome caused by sarcoidosis in a 30-year-old woman. Other 
causes of carpal tunnel syndrome were ruled out. The patient 
responded well to the standard line of corticosteroid treatment 
and wrist splinting.
Discussion: Carpal tunnel syndrome caused by sarcoidosis is 
a rare presentation. The mechanism of neurologic involvement 
in sarcoidosis is not clear.
INTRODUCTION
Neurologic involvement is reported in 5% to 10% of patients 
with sarcoidosis.1 Some authors consider neurosarcoidosis a totally 
different entity. Most often, a presentation of neurosarcoidosis 
is multiple fluctuating and remitting cranial nerve palsies. Non-
cranial neuropathy has been reported in 15% to 40% of cases 
of neurosarcoidosis.2 Scott et al3 reported a case series in which 
peripheral neuropathy developed in 6% to 18% of patients with 
neurosarcoidosis. 
CASE PRESENTATION 
A 30-year-old woman presented with complaints of tingling 
and numbness in her right hand. On detailed inquiry, the patient 
also had a history of malaise, anorexia, weight loss, and cough 
for 1 month. There was no associated muscular weakness of the 
right hand, fever, or any other systemic involvement. There was 
no history of tuberculosis. She was a nonsmoker and a nonal-
coholic. Results of the physical examination revealed a positive 
Tinel sign. There was no skin lesion or lymphadenopathy. The 
systemic findings were normal. 
The patient underwent many investigations (Table 1), of 
which relevant ones included a Mantoux test response of 0 mm 
at 48 hours and increased angiotensin-converting enzyme levels 
of 200 U/L. Fasting blood glucose level was 86 mg/dL, and the 
thyroid function test had a normal result. Nerve conduction 
studies showed carpal tunnel syndrome of the right hand with 
involvement of the sensory component without motor deficit. 
A chest computed tomography scan was obtained and showed 
right paratracheal and bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy, which was 
nonnecrotic without any calcification (Figure 1). A parenchymal 
lesion showed a reticulonodular pattern and suggested a diagnosis 
of sarcoidosis. Fine-needle aspiration cytology of the mediastinal 
lymph node showed noncaseating granulomas without any acid-
fast bacilli and confirmed the diagnosis of sarcoidosis. 
Ajinkya Sonambekar, MD, MBBS, is a Physician at the University College of Medical Sciences and at 
Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital in Dilshad Garden, Delhi, India. E-mail: ajinkya.sonambekar@gmail.com. 
Nikhil Gupta, MD, MBBS, is a Fellow in Clinical Immunology & Rheumatology at the Christian Medical 
College in Vellore, India. E-mail: nik.gupta4u@gmail.com. Akanksha Swadi, MD, MBBS, is a Radiologist 
at Byramjee Jeejeebhoy Government Medical College in Pune, India. E-mail: akanksha.swadi@gmail.com. 
 
Laxmikant Ramkumarsingh Tomar, MD, MBBS, is a Resident in the Neurology Department at the 
Govind Ballabh Pant Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and Research in Delhi, India. 
E-mail: drlaxmikantucms@yahoo.com.
Table 1. Case timeline
Day
Symptoms and treatment
1
Complaints of tingling and numbness in right hand, malaise, 
anorexia, weight loss, and cough for 1 month
Physical examination revealed positive Tinel sign. Systemic 
findings were normal
3
Mantoux test response was 0 mm at 48 hours and increased 
angiotensin-converting enzyme level of 200 U/L
Blood glucose level and thyroid function test had normal results
Nerve conduction studies showed carpal tunnel syndrome of right 
hand with involvement of sensory component without motor deficit
4
Chest computed tomography scan showed right paratracheal and 
bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy, which was nonnecrotic without any 
calcification. Parenchymal lesion showed reticulonodular pattern 
and suggested sarcoidosis
Other causes of carpal tunnel syndrome were ruled out
6
Fine-needle aspiration cytology of mediastinal lymph node  
showed noncaseating granulomas without any acid-fast bacilli  
and confirmed the diagnosis of sarcoidosis
7
Treatment started with corticosteroids
Carpal tunnel splint was prescribed
21
Symptoms of malaise, cough, anorexia, and weight loss subsided
33
Neuropathic symptoms of tingling and numbness of right hand  
started subsiding
Began tapering corticosteroid
100
Neuropathic symptoms recovered completely
150
Steroid dosage tapering completed and stopped
 2
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-168
CASE REPORTS
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome in Sarcoidosis: A Case Report of a Rare Neurologic Manifestation 
The patient was treated with corticosteroids, after which her 
symptoms of malaise, cough, anorexia, and weight loss subsided. 
Other causes of carpal tunnel syndrome were ruled out. A car-
pal tunnel splint was prescribed for the patient, after which she 
recovered. 
DISCUSSION
This patient, who presented with neurologic complaints, 
turned out to have a case of neurosarcoidosis with carpal tunnel 
syndrome. Other common causes of carpal tunnel syndrome were 
ruled out on investigations. 
The mechanism of neurologic involvement in sarcoidosis is not 
clear. Granulomatous inflammation of nerve layers, secondarily 
caused by vasculitic neuropathy, demyelination, panangiitis, com-
pression by sarcoid tissue, or thick edema under perineural tissue are 
some of the proposed causes of nerve involvement in sarcoidosis.2 
Treatment is mainly corticosteroid based and physical therapy. Our 
patient responded well to the standard line of treatment. 
An association of carpal tunnel syndrome with sarcoidosis is 
rare, and our case adds to the existing sparse, English-language 
literature.2,4-6 The etiopathogenesis of carpal tunnel syndrome 
in sarcoidosis is not clearly defined. Thinking well beyond com-
monness may help in detecting the underlying cause of carpal 
tunnel syndrome, or else the diagnosis might be missed. Specific 
therapy in such cases may help in alleviating patient suffering 
and working toward the common goal of better patient care. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
Acknowledgment
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health Communications provided editorial 
assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Sonambekar A, Gupta N, Swadi A, Tomar LR. Carpal tunnel syndrome in 
sarcoidosis: A case report of a rare neurologic manifestation. Perm J 2016 
Fall;20(4):15-168. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-158.
References 
 1. Burns TM. Neurosarcoidosis. Arch Neurol 2003 Aug;60(8):1166-8. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/archneur.60.8.1166.
 2. Nakatani-Enomoto S, Aizawa H, Koyama S, Kuroda K, Kimura T, Kikuchi K. Transient 
swelling of peripheral nerves in a case of neurosarcoidosis. Intern Med 2004 
Nov;43(11):1078-81. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.43.1078.
 3. Scott TF. Neurosarcoidosis: progress and clinical aspects. Neurology 1993 
Jan;43(1):8-12.
 4. Niemer GW, Bolster MB, Buxbaum L, Judson MA. Carpal tunnel syndrome in 
sarcoidosis. Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung Dis 2001 Oct;18(3):296-300.
 5. Yanardağ H, Pamuk ON, Kiziltan M, Yildiz H, Demirey S, Karayel T. An increased 
frequency of carpal tunnel syndrome in sarcoidosis. Results of a study based on 
nerve conduction study. Acta Medica (Hradec Kralove) 2003;46(4):201-4.
 6. Shambaugh GE, Cirksena WJ, Newcomer KL. Carpal tunnel syndrome as 
manifestation of sarcoidosis. Arch Intern Med 1964 Dec;114:830-3. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/archinte.1964.03860120142018.
Figure 1. Chest computed tomography scan showing right paratracheal and 
bilateral hilar nonnecrotic, noncalcific lymphadenopathy.
 1
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-206
CLINICAL MEDICINE
Image Diagnosis: Hemorrhagic Bullae  
in a Primary Varicella Zoster Virus Infection
Cátia Canelas, MD; João M Carvas, MD; Cristiana Sevivas, MD; Dina Carvalho, MD 
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-206
E-pub: 09/01/2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-206
CASE REPORT
A 47-year-old man, 20 pack-per-year 
smoker, and heavy alcohol drinker, with 
an episode of pulmonary tuberculosis 10 
years previously, presented to the Emer-
gency Department with 7 days of cough, 
mucous sputum, and abdominal pain. 
Additionally, he presented with 5 days of 
a pruriginous skin rash that started on the 
thorax but rapidly disseminated to the en-
tire body, and with 3 days of fever. Physical 
examination revealed dyspnea, polypnea, 
fever, dispersed ronchi bilaterally upon 
chest auscultation, and dispersed papules, 
pustules, and hemorrhagic vesicular le-
sions on the skin and oral mucosa (Figures 
1 and 2).
A thoracic computed tomography scan 
showed peribronchovascular parenchy-
matous densities with areas of ground-
glass opacity, suggesting an infectious 
process with endobronchial dissemination 
 
(Figure 3). Fiberoptic bronchoscopy 
showed scattered ulcerated and vesicular 
lesions in the airway lining. Blood tests 
showed cytolytic hepatitis and rhabdomy-
olysis. Despite treatment with acyclovir, 
ceftriaxone, and azithromycin, the patient 
deteriorated rapidly and exhibited severe 
acute respiratory distress syndrome, with 
a PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 95 mmHg. At 
this point our patient was transferred to 
the intensive care unit to be started on 
mechanical ventilation, hemodialysis for 
acute kidney injury, norepinephrine car-
diovascular support for septic shock, and 
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, 
which he continued for 20 days. The sep-
sis workup from admission was sterile for 
bacteria, fungi, and mycobacteria; serology 
studies for hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C 
virus, and human immunodeficiency virus 
were negative; and no relevant immuno-
suppression factors could be identified. 
Serologic tests were positive for varicella 
zoster virus (VZV)-specific immunoglobu-
lin G and immunoglobulin M, determined 
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
and enzyme-linked fibrinolytic assay. The 
serum was also positive for VZV deoxyri-
bonucleic acid, determined by polymerase 
chain reaction. Because our patient had 
no known history of chickenpox, and had 
never been vaccinated for VZV, we made 
the diagnosis of primary VZV infection. 
By day 35 after admission, our patient had 
improved sufficiently and was transfered to 
the medical ward.
DISCUSSION
Chickenpox is usually a benign disease, 
but in immunocompromised individu-
als it can lead to clinical complications 
with significant morbidity and mortality.1 
VZV infection causes primarily chicken-
pox, which is characterized by a typically 
disseminated skin rash.2 Lung infection 
because of VZV is uncommon, and it 
usually occurs two to seven days after the 
appearance of skin rash. The initial cuta-
neous lesions of varicella often involve the 
scalp, face, and/or trunk and are pruritic, 
erythematous macules. The maculopapular 
phase of infection evolves to a vesicular 
phase, during which fluid-filled vesicles 
Cátia Canelas, MD, is a Resident in the Department of Internal Medicine at Centro Hospitalar de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro in Vila 
Real, Portugal. E-mail: catiacanelas@gmail.com. João M Carvas, MD, is a Resident in the Department of Internal Medicine at Centro 
Hospitalar de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro in Vila Real, Portugal. E-mail: jmcarvas@gmail.com. Cristiana Sevivas, MD, is a Graduate 
Assistant in the Department of Internal Medicine at Centro Hospitalar de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro in Vila Real, Portugal. E-mail: 
cristiana.sousa@gmail.com. Dina Carvalho, MD, is a Graduate Assistant in the Department of Internal Medicine at Centro Hospitalar de 
Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro in Vila Real, Portugal. E-mail: dinamota@gmail.com.
Figure 1. Image of the patient’s anterior thorax and upper abdomen. Note the diffuse maculopapular and 
vesicular lesions with hematic content.
 2
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4):15-206
CLINICAL MEDICINE
Image Diagnosis: Hemorrhagic Bullae in a Primary Varicella Zoster Virus Infection 
appear in existing or new erythematous 
lesions, leading to the typical “dewdrop on 
a rose petal”3 appearance. In the case we 
report here, the skin lesions were not the 
typical dewdrop on a rose petal appearance 
because of the hemorrhagic content of the 
vesicles. Hemorrhagic vesicles in chicken-
pox are very unusual and are generally as-
sociated with severe immunodeficiency.4,5
This was a case of VZV pneumonia in a 
young adult patient with an unusual skin 
rash and acute respiratory distress syn-
drome, which has a high severity even for 
this age group. Our patient had no known 
history of contact with infected persons or 
evidence of congenital or acquired immu-
nodeficiency beyond what was caused by 
chronic alcohol and tobacco abuse. Some 
components of tobacco smoke are known to 
suppress important pathways of the innate 
respiratory immune system.6 Clinical stud-
ies have also shown that the incidence of 
acute respiratory distress syndrome is much 
higher in patients with a known history of 
alcohol abuse.7 This case highlights the im-
pact these two habits can have as immuno-
suppressant factors.8,9 Primary infection by 
VZV in adults and immunocompromised 
individuals may have a more severe presen-
tation and serious complications. Prompt 
and accurate diagnosis is essential to prevent 
life-threatening sequelae. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
How to Cite this Article
Canelas C, Carvas JM, Sevivas C, Carvalho D. 
Image diagnosis: Hemorrhagic bullae in primary 
varicella zoster virus infection. Perm J 2016 
Fall;20(4):15-206. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/15-206.
References
 1. Breuer J, Whitley R. Varicella zoster virus: natural 
history and current therapies of varicella and herpes 
zoster. Herpes 2007 Sep;14 Suppl 2:25-9. Erratum 
in: Herpes 2007 Dec;14(3):74.
 2. Heininger U, Seward JF. Varicella. Lancet 2006 
Oct 14;368(9544):1365-76. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69561-5. Erratum in: 
Lancet 2007 Feb 17;369(9561):558. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60274-8.
 3. Arvin AM. Varicella-zoster virus. Clin Microbiol Rev 
1996 Jul;9(3):361-81.
 4. Hirota T, Hirota Y, Ichimiya M, et al. Atypical varicella 
seen in a woman with atopic dermatitis. Acta 
Dermatol Kyoto 1998;93(1):65-8.
 5. Martínez Segura JM, Gutiérrez Oliver A, Maraví 
Poma E, Jiménez Urra I. [Severe chickenpox 
pneumonia]. [Article in Spanish]. Rev Clin Esp 2003 
Dec;203(12):591-4.
 6. Hristova M, Spiess PC, Kasahara DI, Randall MJ, 
Deng B, van der Vliet A. The tobacco smoke 
component, acrolein, suppresses innate 
macrophage responses by direct alkylation of c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2012 
Jan;46(1):2333. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1165/
rcmb.2011-0134oc.
 7. Berkowitz DM, Danai PA, Eaton S, Moss M, 
Martin GS. Alcohol abuse enhances pulmonary 
edema in acute respiratory distress syndrome. 
Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2009 Oct;33(10):1690 6. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-0277.2009.01005.x.
 8. Ellis ME, Neal KR, Webb AK. Is smoking a risk factor 
for pneumonia in adults with chickenpox? Br Med 
J (Clin Res Ed) 1987 Apr 18;294(6578):1002. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.294.6578.1002.
 9. Laso FJ, Iglesias-Osma C, Ciudad J, López A, 
Pastor I, Orfao A. Chronic alcoholism is associated 
with an imbalanced production of Th-1/Th-2 
cytokines by peripheral blood T cells. Alcohol Clin 
Exp Res 1999 Aug;23(8):1306 11. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00000374-199908000-00003.
Figure 2. Magnified image of the patient’s upper 
abdomen, showing the dispersed skin lesions 
in greater detail. Note the small maculopapular 
erythematous lesions and large vesicles with 
hemorrhagic content.
Figure 3. Computed tomography scan of the 
patient’s thorax showing peribronchovascular 
parenchymatous densities with areas of ground-
glass opacity.
Key to Success
The power of making a correct diagnosis is the key to all success in the treatment of skin 
disease; without this faculty, the physician can never be a thorough dermatologist, and 
therapeutics at once cease to hold their proper position, and become empirical.
— Louis A Duhring, MD, 1845-1913, American physician and professor of dermatology
 128
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4)
Objective 1  
Integrate learned 
knowledge and 
increase competence/
confidence to support 
improvement and 
change in specific 
practices, behaviors, 
and performance.
Objective 2  
Lead in further developing “Patient-
Centered Care” activities by acquiring 
new skills and methods to overcome 
barriers, improve physician/patient 
relationships, better identify diagnosis 
and treatment of clinical conditions, 
as well as, efficiently stratify health 
needs of varying patient populations.
Objective 3  
Implement changes and 
apply updates in services and 
practice/policy guidelines, 
incorporate systems and 
quality improvements, and 
effectively utilize evidence-
based medicine to produce 
better patient outcomes. 
Article 1
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Article 2 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Article 3
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Article 4
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
The Kaiser Permanente National CME Program is accredited by the 
Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education (ACCME) to provide 
continuing medical education for physicians.
The Kaiser Permanente National CME Program designates this journal-based 
CME activity for 4 AMA PRA Category 1 Credits™. Physicians should claim 
only the credit commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity.
This form is also available online: www.thepermanentejournal.org
What other changes, if any, do you plan to make in your practice as  
a result of reading these articles?
______________________________________________________
______________________________________________________ 
 
______________________________________________________
Section D. (Please print)
 
Name  ____________________________________________
 
 Physician 
 Non-Physician  
 
Title  ____________________________________________
 
E-mail  ____________________________________________ 
 
Address  ____________________________________________
 
  ____________________________________________
 Signature  ____________________________________________
 
 Date  ____________________________________________
Mail or fax completed form to:  
The Permanente Journal 
500 NE Multnomah St, Suite 100 
Portland, Oregon 97232  
Phone: 503-813-3286 
Fax: 503-813-2348
Article 1. (page 11) Safe and Effective Implementation  
of Telestroke in a US Community Hospital Setting
The use of telemedicine may be an important tool for the evaluation of treatment  
of potential stroke patients. All of the below are ways in which telemedicine improves  
stroke care delivery except:
 a. identification of patients potentially eligible for endovascular intervention
 b. eliminating the bedside physician from the decision-making process
 c. aiding in thrombolytic decisions
 d. aiding in triage decisions
Implementation of telestroke led to:
 a. increased rate of intracranial hemorrhage
 b. increased patient transfers
 c. increased rate of tissue plasminogen activator administration
 d. significant physician dissatisfaction
Article 2. (page 27) Standardizing Management of Adults  
with Delirium Hospitalized on Medical-Surgical Units
Posthospitalization, patients who are diagnosed with delirium have higher rates of:
 a. mortality
 b. patient satisfaction
 c. hip fractures
 d. opiate abuse
The medication guidelines that were developed as part of this pilot recommend use  
of which of the following for treatment of delirium unrelated to alcohol withdrawal?
 a. anticholinergics
 b. sedatives and hypnotics
 c. lorazepam
 d. haloperidol
Article 3. (page 74) Anal Health Care Basics 
When a patient has an anal complaint such as pain and bleeding, you should:
 a. assume it is hemorrhoids and advise use of Preparation H
 b. tell him/her it happens and will resolve on its own
 c. perform an anoscopy, and then prescribe steroid-based treatments
 d. perform external examination and a digital rectal exam if possible, and then treat  
correctly if the diagnosis is clear or refer to a specialist if there is any question  
regarding the diagnosis
Steroid-based treatments for anal problems such as hemorrhoids:
 a. have been shown to decrease hemorrhoidal bleeding
 b. should be avoided because they have not been shown to help
 c. almost always relieve anal pain
 d. should be prescribed for any anal complaint
Article 4. (page 97) Amniotic Fluid Embolism:  
Using the Medical Staff Process to Facilitate Streamlined Care
Which of the following signs or symptoms occurs in less than half of the cases  
of amniotic fluid embolism?
 a. pulmonary edema or acute respiratory distress syndrome
 b. fetal distress
 c. hypotension
 d. seizures
 e. cardiopulmonary arrest
Each of the following are indications for the institution of extracorporeal membrane  
oxygenation except:
 a. acute respiratory distress syndrome
 b. hypocarbic respiratory failure
 c. excessively high plateau airway pressure on ventilator
 d. severe hypoxemia despite positive end-expiratory pressure of 15cm - 20cm H2O
 e. severe hypoxemia < 50
Section A. 
Section B. 
Key
5 = highly likely
4 = likely
3 = unsure
2 = unlikely
1 = highly unlikely
0 = I already did this
Referring to the CME articles, how likely is it that you will implement this learning to improve your practice within the next 3 months? 
Section C. 
 5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
Physicians may earn up to 1 AMA PRA Category 1 CreditTM per article for reading and analyzing the designated CME ar-
ticles published in each edition of TPJ. Each edition has four articles available for review. Other clinicians for whom CME 
is acceptable in meeting educational requirements may report up to four hours of participation. The CME evaluation form 
may be completed online or via mobile Web at www.tpjcme.org. The Certification of Credit will be e-mailed immediately 
upon successful completion. Alternatively, this paper form may be completed and returned via fax or mail to the address 
listed below. All Sections must be completed to receive credit. Certification of Credit will be mailed within two months of 
receipt of the paper form. Completed forms will be accepted until January 2018.
To earn CME for reading each article designated for AMA PRA Category 1 Credit, you must:
• Score at least 50% in the posttest
• Complete the evaluation and provide your contact information
Fall 2016  
CME Evaluation Program
Perm J 2016 Fall;20(4)
