 Clinical Infectious Diseases
2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e45
Clinical Infectious Diseases®  2017;65(12):e45–e80
2017 Infectious Diseases Society of America Clinical 
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of 
Infectious Diarrhea
Andi L. Shane, MD1 Rajal K. Mody, MD2 John A. Crump, MD3 Phillip I. Tarr,4 Theodore S. Steiner, MD5 Karen Kotloff, MD6 Joanne M. Langley, MD7 Christine 
Wanke, MD8 Cirle Alcantara Warren, MD9 Allen C. Cheng, PhD10 Joseph Cantey, MD11 and Larry K. Pickering, MD12
1Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Emory University and Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia; 2Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental 
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia; 3Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina; Centre 
for International Health, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand; 4Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO; 5Nutrition, Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO; 5Division of Infectious Diseases, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 6Division of Infectious 
Disease and Tropical Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, and the Center for Vaccine Development, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD; 7Department of Pediatrics, 
Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS; 8Division of Nutrition and Infection, Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts,Cirle Alcantara Warren, MD; 9Division of Infectious Diseases and International 
Health, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia; 10School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 11Division of Infectious Diseases, Department 
of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina; and 12Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia
These guidelines are intended for use by healthcare professionals who care for children and adults with suspected or confirmed 
infectious diarrhea. They are not intended to replace physician judgement regarding specific patients or clinical or public health situ-
ations. This document does not provide detailed recommendations on infection prevention and control aspects related to infectious 
diarrhea.
Keywords.  diarrhea; infectious; diagnostics; management; prevention. 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The following evidence-based guidelines for management of 
infants, children, adolescents, and adults in the United States 
with acute or persistent infectious diarrhea were prepared by 
an expert panel assembled by the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America (IDSA) and replace guidelines published in 2001 [1]. 
Public health aspects of diarrhea associated with foodborne 
and waterborne diarrhea, international travel, antimicrobial 
agents, immunocompromised hosts, animal exposure, certain 
sexual practices, healthcare-associated diarrheal infections, 
and infections acquired in childcare and long-term care facil-
ities will be referred to in these guidelines, but are not cov-
ered extensively due to availability of detailed discussions of 
this information in other publications. For recommendations 
pertaining to Clostridium difficile, refer to the existing IDSA/
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA) 
guidelines on C. difficile infections, which are in the process of 
being updated.
Summarized below are recommendations made in the 
updated guidelines for diagnosis and management of infectious 
diarrhea. The Panel followed a process used in development of 
other IDSA guidelines [2] which included a systematic weight-
ing of the strength of recommendation and quality of evidence 
using GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation) [3–7]. A detailed description of the 
methods, background, and evidence summaries that support each 
of the recommendations can be found online in the full text of the 
guidelines.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 
THE DIAGNOSIS AND 
MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIOUS DIARRHEA
Clinical, Demographic, and Epidemiologic Features
I. In people with diarrhea, which clinical, demographic, or epidemio-
logic features have diagnostic or management implications? (Tables 1–3)
Recommendations.
1. 
A detailed clinical and exposure history should be 
obtained from people with diarrhea, under any circum-
stances, including when there is a history of similar illness 
in others (strong, moderate).
2. People with diarrhea who attend or work in child care 
centers, long-term care facilities, patient care, food 
service, or recreational water venues (eg, pools and 
lakes) should follow jurisdictional recommendations 
for outbreak reporting and infection control (strong, 
high).
I D S A  G U I D E L I N E
© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Received 17 July 2017; editorial decision 19 July 2017; accepted 26 July 2017.
Correspondence: A. L. Shane, MD, MPH, MSc, Associate Professor of Pediatrics and Interim 
Clinical Division Chief, Division of Pediatric Infectious Disease, Marcus Professor of Hospital 
Epidemiology and Infection Control, Emory University School of Medicine and Children’s 
Healthcare of Atlanta, 2015 Uppergate Drive NE, Rm. 504A, Atlanta, GA 30322. (ashane@
emory.edu).
DOI: 10.1093/cid/cix669
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e46 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
II. In people with fever or bloody diarrhea, which clinical, demo-
graphic, or epidemiologic features have diagnostic or management 
implications? (Tables 1–3)
Recommendations.
3. 
People with fever or bloody diarrhea should be evaluated 
for enteropathogens for which antimicrobial agents may 
confer clinical benefit, including Salmonella enterica sub-
species, Shigella, and Campylobacter (strong, low).
4. 
Enteric fever should be considered when a febrile person 
(with or without diarrhea) has a history of travel to areas in 
which causative agents are endemic, has had consumed foods 
prepared by people with recent endemic exposure, or has 
laboratory exposure to Salmonella enterica subspecies enter-
ica serovar Typhi and Salmonella enterica subspecies enter-
ica serovar Paratyphi (strong, moderate). In this document, 
Salmonella Typhi represents the more formal and detailed 
name Salmonella enterica subspecies enterica serovar Typhi, 
and Salmonella Paratyphi corresponds to the Paratyphi serovar.
III. What clinical, demographic, or epidemiologic features are asso-
ciated with complications or severe disease? (Tables 2 and 3)
Recommendations.
Table 1. Modes of Acquisition of Enteric Organisms and Sources of Guidelines
Mode
Title
URL
Author/Issuing Agency
International travel
Expert Review of the Evidence Base for 
Prevention of Travelers’ Diarrhea
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19538575
DuPont et al [113]
Medical Considerations Before International 
Travel
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27468061
Freedman et al [207]
The Yellow Book
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/ 
yellowbook-home-2014
CDC
Travelers Health
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel
CDC
Immunocompromised 
hosts
Guidelines for the Prevention and Treatment 
of Opportunistic Infections in HIV-Infected 
Adults and Adolescents
http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/lvguidelines/ 
adult_oi.pdf
CDC/NIH/HIVMA/IDSA
Guidelines for the Prevention and Treatment 
of Opportunistic Infections in HIV-Exposed 
and HIV-Infected Children
http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/lvguidelines/ 
oi_guidelines_pediatrics.pdf
CDC/NIH/HIVMA/IDSA
Foodborne and waterborne
Surveillance for Foodborne Disease 
Outbreaks—United States, 2009–2010
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ 
mm6203a1.htm?s_cid=mm6203a1_w
CDC
Food Safety
http://www.cdc.gov/foodsafety/
CDC
Healthy Water
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/healthywater
CDC
Antimicrobial-associated 
(C. difficile)
Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium 
difficile Infection in Adults and Children 
2017 Update (in press)
http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/651706
IDSA/SHEA
2010 Clinical Practice Guidelines for 
Clostridium difficile Infection in Adults
https://www.idsociety.org/ 
Organ_System/#Clostridiumdifficile
IDSA/SHEA
Healthcare-associated
Healthcare-Associated Infections
http://www.cdc.gov/hai/
CDC
Child care settings
Caring for Our Children: National Health and 
Safety Performance Standards; Guidelines 
for Early Care and Education Programs
http://nrckids.org.
AAP
, APHA, NRC
Recommendations for Care of Children in 
Special Circumstances—Children in Out- 
of-Home Child Care (pp 132–51)
http://redbook.solutions.aap.org/redbook.aspx
AAP
Managing Infectious Diseases in Child Care 
and Schools
http://ebooks.aappublications.org/content/manag-
ing-infectious-diseases-in-child-care-and-schools- 
3rd-edition
AAP
Long-term care settings
Nursing Homes and Assisted Living (Long- 
term Care Facilities)
http://www.cdc.gov/longtermcare/
CDC
Infection Prevention and Control in the Long-
term Care Facility
http://www.shea-online.org/assets/files/position-pa-
pers/ic-ltcf97
.pdf
SHEA/APIC
Zoonoses
Compendium of Measures to Prevent 
Disease Associated With Animals in Public 
Settings
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ 
rr6004a1.htm?s_cid=rr6004a1_w
CDC
Exposure to Nontraditional Pets at Home 
and to Animals in Public Settings: Risks to 
Children
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/ 
content/122/4/876
Pickering et al [51]
Review of Institute of Medicine and National 
Research Council Recommendations for 
One Health Initiative
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/19/12/12-1659_ 
article.htm
Rubin et al [208]
Abbreviations: AAP
, American Academy of Pediatrics; APHA, American Public Health Association; APIC, Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology; CDC, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HIVMA, HIV Medicine Association; IDSA, Infectious Diseases Society of America; NIH, National Institutes of 
Health; NRC, National Resource Center for Health and Safety in Child Care and Early Education; SHEA, Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e47
5. 
People of all ages with acute diarrhea should be evaluated 
for dehydration, which increases the risk of life-threat-
ening illness and death, especially among the young and 
older adults (strong, high).
6. 
When the clinical or epidemic history suggests a possible 
Shiga toxin–producing organism, diagnostic approaches 
should be applied that detect Shiga toxin (or the genes that 
encode them) and distinguish Escherichia coli O157:H7 
from other Shiga toxin–producing E. coli (STEC) in stool 
(strong, moderate). If available, diagnostic approaches that 
can distinguish between Shiga toxin 1 and Shiga toxin 2, 
which is typically more potent, could be used (weak, mod-
erate). In addition, Shigella dysenteriae type 1, and, rarely, 
other pathogens may produce Shiga toxin and should be 
considered as a cause of hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS), 
especially in people with suggestive international travel or 
personal contact with a traveler (strong, moderate).
7. 
Clinicians should evaluate people for postinfectious and 
extraintestinal manifestations associated with enteric 
infections (strong, moderate) [8].
Diagnostics
IV. Which pathogens should be considered in people presenting with 
diarrheal illnesses, and which diagnostic tests will aid in organism 
identification or outbreak investigation?
Recommendations.
8. 
Stool testing should be performed for Salmonella, Shigella, 
Campylobacter, Yersinia, C. difficile, and STEC in people 
with diarrhea accompanied by fever, bloody or mucoid 
stools, severe abdominal cramping or tenderness, or signs 
of sepsis (strong, moderate). Bloody stools are not an 
expected manifestation of infection with C. difficile. STEC 
O157 should be assessed by culture and non-O157 STEC 
should be detected by Shiga toxin or genomic assays 
(strong, low). Sorbitol-MacConkey agar or an appropriate 
chromogenic agar alternative is recommended to screen 
for O157:H7 STEC; detection of Shiga toxin is needed to 
detect other STEC serotype (strong, moderate).
9. 
Blood cultures should be obtained from infants <3 months 
of age, people of any age with signs of septicemia or when 
enteric fever is suspected, people with systemic manifesta-
tions of infection, people who are immunocompromised, 
people with certain high-risk conditions such as hemolytic 
anemia, and people who traveled to or have had contact 
with travelers from enteric fever–endemic areas with a 
febrile illness of unknown etiology (strong, moderate).
10. Stool testing should be performed under clearly iden-
tified circumstances (Table 2) for Salmonella, Shigella, 
Campylobacter, Yersinia, C. difficile, and STEC in sympto-
matic hosts (strong, low). Specifically,
a. 
 
Test for Yersinia enterocolitica in people with persistent 
abdominal pain (especially school-aged children 
with right lower quadrant pain mimicking appendi-
citis who may have mesenteric adenitis), and in peo-
ple with fever at epidemiologic risk for yersiniosis, 
including infants with direct or indirect exposures to 
raw or undercooked pork products.
b. 
 
In addition, test stool specimens for Vibrio species in 
people with large volume rice water stools or either 
exposure to salty or brackish waters, consumption 
of raw or undercooked shellfish, or travel to chol-
era-endemic regions within 3 days prior to onset of 
diarrhea.
11. A broader set of bacterial, viral, and parasitic agents should 
be considered regardless of the presence of fever, bloody or 
mucoid stools, or other markers of more severe illness in 
the context of a possible outbreak of diarrheal illness (eg, 
multiple people with diarrhea who shared a common meal 
or a sudden rise in observed diarrheal cases). Selection 
of agents for testing should be based on a combination of 
host and epidemiologic risk factors and ideally in coordin-
ation with public health authorities (strong, moderate).
12. A broad differential diagnosis is recommended in immu-
nocompromised people with diarrhea, especially those 
with moderate and severe primary or secondary immune 
deficiencies, for evaluation of stool specimens by cul-
ture, viral studies, and examination for parasites (strong, 
moderate). People with acquired immune deficiency syn-
drome (AIDS) with persistent diarrhea should undergo 
additional testing for other organisms including, but not 
limited to, Cryptosporidium, Cyclospora, Cystoisospora, 
microsporidia, Mycobacterium avium complex, and cyto-
megalovirus (strong, moderate).
13. Diagnostic testing is not recommended in most cases 
of uncomplicated traveler’s diarrhea unless treatment 
is indicated. Travelers with diarrhea lasting 14 days or 
longer should be evaluated for intestinal parasitic infec-
tions (strong, moderate). Testing for C. difficile should be 
performed in travelers treated with antimicrobial agent(s) 
within the preceding 8–12 weeks. In addition, gastrointes-
tinal tract disease including inflammatory bowel disease 
(IBD) and postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) 
should be considered for evaluation (strong, moderate).
14. Clinical consideration should be included in the interpre-
tation of results of multiple-pathogen nucleic acid amp-
lification tests because these assays detect DNA and not 
necessarily viable organisms (strong, low).
15. All specimens that test positive for bacterial pathogens 
by culture-independent diagnostic testing such as anti-
gen-based molecular assays (gastrointestinal tract panels), 
and for which isolate submission is requested or required 
under public health reporting rules, should be cultured in 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e48 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
the clinical laboratory or at a public health laboratory to 
ensure that outbreaks of similar organisms are detected and 
investigated (strong, low). Also, a culture may be required in 
situations where antimicrobial susceptibility testing results 
would affect care or public health responses (strong, low).
16. Specimens from people involved in an outbreak of enteric 
disease should be tested for enteric pathogens per public 
health department guidance (strong, low).
V. Which diagnostic tests should be performed when enteric fever or 
bacteremia is suspected?
Recommendation.
17. Culture-independent, including panel-based multiplex 
molecular diagnostics from stool and blood specimens, and, 
when indicated, culture-dependent diagnostic testing should 
be performed when there is a clinical suspicion of enteric fever 
(diarrhea uncommon) or diarrhea with bacteremia (strong, 
moderate). Additionally, cultures of bone marrow (particu-
larly valuable if antimicrobial agents have been adminis-
tered), stool, duodenal fluid, and urine may be beneficial to 
detect enteric fever (weak, moderate). Serologic tests should 
not be used to diagnose enteric fever (strong, moderate).
VI. When should testing be performed for Clostridium difficile?
Recommendation.
18. Testing may be considered for C. difficile in people >2 years 
of age who have a history of diarrhea following antimicrobial 
use and in people with healthcare-associated diarrhea (weak, 
high). Testing for C. difficile may be considered in people 
who have persistent diarrhea without an etiology and with-
out recognized risk factors (weak, low). A single diarrheal 
stool specimen is recommended for detection of toxin or a 
Table 2. Exposure or Condition Associated With Pathogens Causing Diarrhea
Exposure or Condition
Pathogen(s)
Foodborne
 Foodborne outbreaks in hotels, cruise ships, resorts,  
restaurants, catered events
Norovirus, nontyphoidal Salmonella, Clostridium perfringens, Bacillus cereus, Staphylococcus 
aureus, Campylobacter spp, ETEC, STEC, Listeria, Shigella, Cyclospora cayetanensis, 
Cryptosporidium spp
 Consumption of unpasteurized milk or dairy products
Salmonella, Campylobacter, Yersinia enterocolitica, S. aureus toxin, Cryptosporidium, and 
STEC. Listeria is infrequently associated with diarrhea, Brucella (goat milk cheese), 
Mycobacterium bovis, Coxiella burnetii
 Consumption of raw or undercooked meat or poultry
STEC (beef), C. perfringens (beef, poultry), Salmonella (poultry), Campylobacter (poultry), 
Yersinia (pork, chitterlings), S. aureus (poultry), and Trichinella spp (pork, wild game meat)
 Consumption of fruits or unpasteurized fruit juices, vegeta-
bles, leafy greens, and sprouts
STEC, nontyphoidal Salmonella, Cyclospora, Cryptosporidium, norovirus, hepatitis A, and 
Listeria monocytogenes
 Consumption of undercooked eggs
Salmonella, Shigella (egg salad)
 Consumption of raw shellfish
Vibrio species, norovirus, hepatitis A, Plesiomonas
Exposure or contact
 Swimming in or drinking untreated fresh water
Campylobacter, Cryptosporidium, Giardia, Shigella, Salmonella, STEC, Plesiomonas 
shigelloides
 Swimming in recreational water facility with treated water
Cryptosporidium and other potentially waterborne pathogens when disinfectant concentra-
tions are inadequately maintained
 Healthcare, long-term care, prison exposure, or employment
Norovirus, Clostridium difficile, Shigella, Cryptosporidium, Giardia, STEC, rotavirus
 Child care center attendance or employment
Rotavirus, Cryptosporidium, Giardia, Shigella, STEC
 Recent antimicrobial therapy
C. difficile, multidrug-resistant Salmonella
 Travel to resource-challenged countries
Escherichia coli (enteroaggregative, enterotoxigenic, enteroinvasive), Shigella, Typhi and 
nontyphoidal Salmonella, Campylobacter, Vibrio cholerae, Entamoeba histolytica, Giardia, 
Blastocystis, Cyclospora, Cystoisospora, Cryptosporidium
 Exposure to house pets with diarrhea
Campylobacter, Yersinia
 Exposure to pig feces in certain parts of the world
Balantidium coli
 Contact with young poultry or reptiles
Nontyphoidal Salmonella
 Visiting a farm or petting zoo
STEC, Cryptosporidium, Campylobacter
Exposure or condition
 Age group
Rotavirus (6–18 months of age), nontyphoidal Salmonella (infants from birth to 3 months of 
age and adults >50 years with a history of atherosclerosis), Shigella (1–7 years of age), 
Campylobacter (young adults)
 Underlying immunocompromising condition
Nontyphoidal Salmonella, Cryptosporidium, Campylobacter, Shigella, Yersinia
 Hemochromatosis or hemoglobinopathy
Y
. enterocolitica, Salmonella
 AIDS, immunosuppressive therapies
Cryptosporidium, Cyclospora, Cystoisospora, microsporidia, Mycobacterium avium–intercellu-
lare complex, cytomegalovirus
 Anal-genital, oral-anal, or digital-anal contact
Shigella, Salmonella, Campylobacter, E. histolytica, Giardia lamblia, Cryptosporidium as well as 
sexually transmitted infections
Abbreviations: ETEC, enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli; STEC, Shiga toxin–producing Escherichia coli.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e49
toxigenic C. difficile strain (eg, nucleic acid amplification test-
ing) (strong, low). Multiple specimens do not increase yield.
VII. What is the optimal specimen (eg, stool, rectal swab, blood) for 
maximum yield of bacterial, viral, and protozoal organisms (for cul-
ture, immunoassay, and molecular testing)? (Table 5)
Recommendation.
19.  The optimal specimen for laboratory diagnosis of infectious 
diarrhea is a diarrheal stool sample (ie, a sample that takes the 
shape of the container). For detection of bacterial infections, if a 
timely diarrheal stool sample cannot be collected, a rectal swab 
may be used (weak, low). Molecular techniques generally are 
more sensitive and less dependent than culture on the quality of 
specimen. For identification of viral and protozoal agents, and 
C. difficile toxin, fresh stool is preferred (weak, low).
VIII. What is the clinical relevance of fecal leukocytes or lactoferrin 
or calprotectin in a person with acute diarrhea?
Recommendation.
20.  Fecal leukocyte examination and stool lactoferrin detection 
should not be used to establish the cause of acute infectious 
diarrhea (strong, moderate). There are insufficient data avail-
able to make a recommendation on the value of fecal calpro-
tectin measurement in people with acute infectious diarrhea.
IX. In which clinical scenarios should nonmicrobiologic diagnostic 
tests be performed (eg, imaging, chemistries, complete blood count, 
and serology)?
Recommendations.
21.  Serologic tests are not recommended to establish an eti-
ology of infectious diarrhea or enteric fever (strong, low), 
but may be considered for people with postdiarrheal HUS 
in which a stool culture did not yield a Shiga toxin–pro-
ducing organism (weak, low).
22.  A peripheral white blood cell count and differential and sero-
logic assays should not be performed to establish an etiology of 
diarrhea (strong, low), but may be useful clinically (weak, low).
23.  Frequent monitoring of hemoglobin and platelet counts, 
electrolytes, and blood urea nitrogen and creatinine is 
recommended to detect hematologic and renal function 
abnormalities that are early manifestations of HUS and 
precede renal injury for people with diagnosed E. coli 
O157 or another STEC infection (especially STEC that 
produce Shiga toxin 2 or are associated with bloody diar-
rhea) (strong, high). Examining a peripheral blood smear 
for the presence of red blood cell fragments is necessary 
when HUS is suspected (strong, high).
24.  Endoscopy or proctoscopic examination should be con-
sidered in people with persistent, unexplained diar-
rhea who have AIDS, in people with certain underlying 
medical conditions as well as people with acute diarrhea 
with clinical colitis or proctitis and in people with per-
sistent diarrhea who engage in anal intercourse (strong, 
low). Duodenal aspirate may be considered in select 
people for diagnosis of suspected Giardia, Strongyloides, 
Cystoisospora, or microsporidia infection (weak, low).
25.  Imaging (eg, ultrasonography, computed tomography, or 
magnetic resonance imaging) may be considered to detect 
aortitis, mycotic aneurysms, signs and symptoms of peri-
tonitis, intra-abdominal free air, toxic megacolon, or extra-
vascular foci of infection in older people with invasive 
Salmonella enterica or Yersinia infections if there is sus-
tained fever or bacteremia despite adequate antimicrobial 
therapy or if the patient has underlying atherosclerosis or 
has recent-onset chest, back, or abdominal pain (weak, low).
X. What follow-up evaluations of stool specimens and nonstool tests 
should be performed in people with laboratory-confirmed patho-
gen-specific diarrhea who improve or respond to treatment, and in 
people who fail to improve or who have persistent diarrhea?
Recommendations.
26.  Follow-up testing is not recommended in most people for 
case management following resolution of diarrhea (strong, 
moderate). Collection and analysis of serial stool speci-
mens using culture-dependent methods for Salmonella 
enterica subspecies enterica serovar Typhi or Salmonella 
enterica subspecies enterica serovar Paratyphi, STEC, 
Shigella, nontyphoidal Salmonella, and other bacterial 
pathogens are recommended in certain situations by local 
health authorities following cessation of diarrhea to enable 
return to child care, employment, or group social activities 
(strong, moderate). Practitioners should collaborate with 
local public health authorities to adhere to policies regard-
ing return to settings in which transmission is a consider-
ation (strong, high).
27.  A clinical and laboratory reevaluation may be indicated in 
people who do not respond to an initial course of therapy 
and should include consideration of noninfectious condi-
tions including lactose intolerance (weak, low).
28.  Noninfectious conditions, including IBD and IBS, should 
be considered as underlying etiologies in people with 
symptoms lasting 14 or more days and unidentified 
sources (strong, moderate).
29. 
 Reassessment of fluid and electrolyte balance, nutritional 
status, and optimal dose and duration of antimicrobial 
therapy is recommended in people with persistent symp-
toms (strong, high).
Empiric Management of Infectious Diarrhea
XI. When is empiric antibacterial treatment indicated for children 
and adults with bloody diarrhea and, if indicated, with what agent?
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e50 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
a. 
What are modifying conditions that would support 
antimicrobial treatment of children and adults with 
bloody diarrhea?
b. 
In which instances should contacts be treated empiric-
ally if the agent is unknown?
Recommendations.
30. In immunocompetent children and adults, empiric anti-
microbial therapy for bloody diarrhea while waiting for 
results of investigations is not recommended (strong, low), 
except for the following:
a. 
Infants <3 months of age with suspicion of a bacterial 
etiology.
b. 
Ill immunocompetent people with fever documented 
in a medical setting, abdominal pain, bloody diar-
rhea, and bacillary dysentery (frequent scant bloody 
stools, fever, abdominal cramps, tenesmus) presump-
tively due to Shigella.
c. 
People who have recently travelled internation-
ally with body temperatures ≥38.5°C and/or signs 
of sepsis (weak, low). See https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/
travel/yellowbook/2016/the-pre-travel-consultation/
travelers-diarrhea.
31.  The empiric antimicrobial therapy in adults should be 
either a fluoroquinolone such as ciprofloxacin, or azithro-
mycin, depending on the local susceptibility patterns and 
travel history (strong, moderate). Empiric therapy for chil-
dren includes a third-generation cephalosporin for infants 
<3 months of age and others with neurologic involvement, 
or azithromycin, depending on local susceptibility pat-
terns and travel history (strong, moderate).
32.  Empiric antibacterial treatment should be considered 
in immunocompromised people with severe illness and 
bloody diarrhea (strong, low).
33.  Asymptomatic contacts of people with bloody diarrhea 
should not be offered empiric treatment, but should be 
advised to follow appropriate infection prevention and 
control measures (strong, moderate).
34.  People with clinical features of sepsis who are suspected 
of having enteric fever should be treated empirically with 
broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy after blood, stool, 
and urine culture collection (strong, low). Antimicrobial 
therapy should be narrowed when antimicrobial suscep-
tibility testing results become available (strong, high). If 
an isolate is unavailable and there is a clinical suspicion 
of enteric fever, antimicrobial choice may be tailored to 
susceptible patterns from the setting where acquisition 
occurred (weak, low).
35. 
 Antimicrobial therapy for people with infections attrib-
uted to STEC O157 and other STEC that produce Shiga 
toxin 2 (or if the toxin genotype is unknown) should be 
avoided (strong, moderate). Antimicrobial therapy for 
people with infections attributed to other STEC that do 
not produce Shiga toxin 2 (generally non-O157 STEC) 
is debatable due to insufficient evidence of benefit or the 
potential harm associated with some classes of antimicro-
bial agents (strong, low).
XII. When is empiric treatment indicated for children and adults 
with acute, prolonged, or persistent watery diarrhea and, if indi-
cated, with what agent?
a. 
What are modifying conditions that would support 
empiric antimicrobial treatment of children and adults 
with watery diarrhea?
b. 
In which instances, if any, should contacts be treated 
empirically if the agent is unknown?
Recommendations.
36.  In most people with acute watery diarrhea and without recent 
international travel, empiric antimicrobial therapy is not rec-
ommended (strong, low). An exception may be made in people 
who are immunocompromised or young infants who are ill-ap-
pearing. Empiric treatment should be avoided in people with 
persistent watery diarrhea lasting 14 days or more (strong, low).
37. 
 Asymptomatic contacts of people with acute or persistent 
watery diarrhea should not be offered empiric or preven-
tive therapy, but should be advised to follow appropri-
ate infection prevention and control measures (strong, 
moderate).
Directed Management of Infectious Diarrhea
XIII. How should treatment be modified when a clinically plausible 
organism is identified from a diagnostic test?
Recommendation.
38. 
 Antimicrobial treatment should be modified or discon-
tinued when a clinically plausible organism is identified 
(strong, high).
Supportive Treatment
XIV. How should rehydration therapy be administered?
Recommendations.
39.  Reduced osmolarity oral rehydration solution (ORS) is 
recommended as the first-line therapy of mild to moder-
ate dehydration in infants, children, and adults with acute 
diarrhea from any cause (strong, moderate), and in people 
with mild to moderate dehydration associated with vomit-
ing or severe diarrhea.
40.  Nasogastric administration of ORS may be considered 
in infants, children, and adults with moderate dehydra-
tion, who cannot tolerate oral intake, or in children with 
normal mental status who are too weak or refuse to drink 
adequately (weak, low).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e51
41.  Isotonic intravenous fluids such as lactated Ringer’s and normal 
saline solution should be administered when there is severe 
dehydration, shock, or altered mental status and failure of ORS 
therapy (strong, high) or ileus (strong, moderate). In people 
with ketonemia, an initial course of intravenous hydration may 
be needed to enable tolerance of oral rehydration (weak, low).
42.  In severe dehydration, intravenous rehydration should be 
continued until pulse, perfusion, and mental status normalize 
and the patient awakens, has no risk factors for aspiration, and 
has no evidence of ileus (strong, low). The remaining deficit 
can be replaced by using ORS (weak, low). Infants, children, 
and adults with mild to moderate dehydration should receive 
ORS until clinical dehydration is corrected (strong, low).
43. 
 Once the patient is rehydrated, maintenance fluids should 
be administered. Replace ongoing losses in stools from 
infants, children, and adults with ORS, until diarrhea and 
vomiting are resolved (strong, low).
XV. When should feeding be initiated following rehydration?
Recommendations.
44  Human milk feeding should be continued in infants and 
children throughout the diarrheal episode (strong, low).
45. 
 Resumption of an age-appropriate usual diet is recom-
mended during or immediately after the rehydration pro-
cess is completed (strong, low).
Ancillary Management
XVI. What options are available for symptomatic relief, and when 
should they be offered?
Recommendations.
46.  Ancillary treatment with antimotility, antinausea, or 
antiemetic agents can be considered once the patient is 
adequately hydrated, but their use is not a substitute for 
fluid and electrolyte therapy (weak, low).
47.  Antimotility drugs (eg, loperamide) should not be given 
to children <18 years of age with acute diarrhea (strong, 
moderate). Loperamide may be given to immunocompe-
tent adults with acute watery diarrhea (weak, moderate), 
but should be avoided at any age in suspected or proven 
cases where toxic megacolon may result in inflammatory 
diarrhea or diarrhea with fever (strong, low).
48. 
 Antinausea and antiemetic (eg, ondansetron) may be 
given to facilitate tolerance of oral rehydration in children 
>4 years of age and in adolescents with acute gastroenteri-
tis associated with vomiting (weak, moderate).
XVII. What is the role of a probiotic or zinc in treatment or preven-
tion of infectious diarrhea in children and adults?
Recommendations.
49.  Probiotic preparations may be offered to reduce the symp-
tom severity and duration in immunocompetent adults 
and children with infectious or antimicrobial-associated 
diarrhea (weak, moderate). Specific recommendations 
regarding selection of probiotic organism(s), route of deliv-
ery, and dosage may be found through literature searches 
of studies and through guidance from manufacturers.
50. 
 Oral zinc supplementation reduces the duration of diar-
rhea in children 6 months to 5 years of age who reside in 
countries with a high prevalence of zinc deficiency or who 
have signs of malnutrition (strong, moderate).
XVIII. Which asymptomatic people with an identified bacterial 
organism from stool culture or molecular testing should be treated 
with an antimicrobial agent?
Recommendations.
51. 
 Asymptomatic people who practice hand hygiene and live 
and work in low-risk settings (do not provide healthcare or 
child or elderly adult care and are not food service employ-
ees) do not need treatment, except asymptomatic people 
with Salmonella enterica subspecies enterica serovar Typhi 
in their stool who may be treated empirically to reduce 
potential for transmission (weak, low). Asymptomatic 
people who practice hand hygiene and live and work in 
high-risk settings (provide healthcare or child or elderly 
adult care and are food service employees) should be 
treated according to local public health guidance (strong, 
high).
Prevention
XIX. What strategies, including public health measures, are benefi-
cial in preventing transmission of pathogens associated with infec-
tious diarrhea?
Recommendations.
52.  Hand hygiene should be performed after using the toilet, 
changing diapers, before and after preparing food, before eat-
ing, after handling garbage or soiled laundry items, and after 
touching animals or their feces or environments, especially 
in public settings such as petting zoos (strong, moderate).
53.  Infection control measures including use of gloves and 
gowns, hand hygiene with soap and water, or alcohol-based 
sanitizers should be followed in the care of people with 
diarrhea (strong, high). The selection of a hand hygiene 
product should be based upon a known or suspected path-
ogen and the environment in which the organism may 
be transmitted (strong, low). See https://www.cdc.gov/
hicpac/2007IP/2007isolationPrecautions.html.
54.  Appropriate food safety practices are recommended to 
avoid cross-contamination of other foods or cooking sur-
faces and utensils during grocery shopping, food prepara-
tion, and storage; ensure that foods containing meats and 
eggs are cooked and maintained at proper temperatures 
(strong, moderate).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e52 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
55.  Healthcare providers should direct educational efforts toward 
all people with diarrhea, but particularly to people with primary 
and secondary immune deficiencies, pregnant women, parents 
of young children, and the elderly as they have increased risk of 
complications from diarrheal disease (strong, low).
56.  Ill people with diarrhea should avoid swimming, water-related 
activities, and sexual contact with other people when sympto-
matic while adhering to meticulous hand hygiene (strong, low).
XX. What are the relative efficacies and effectiveness of vaccines 
(rotavirus, typhoid, and cholera) to reduce and prevent transmission 
of pathogens associated with infectious diarrhea, and when should 
they be used?
Recommendations.
57.  Rotavirus vaccine should be administered to all infants 
without a known contraindication (strong, high).
58.  Two typhoid vaccines (oral and injectable) are licensed 
in the United States but are not recommended routinely. 
Typhoid vaccination is recommended as an adjunct to 
hand hygiene and the avoidance of high-risk foods and 
beverages, for travelers to areas where there is moderate 
to high risk for exposure to Salmonella enterica subspecies 
enterica serovar Typhi, people with intimate exposure (eg, 
household contact) to a documented Salmonella enter-
ica subspecies enterica serovar Typhi chronic carrier, and 
microbiologists and other laboratory personnel routinely 
exposed to cultures of Salmonella enterica subspecies enter-
ica serovar Typhi (strong, high). Booster doses are recom-
mended for people who remain at risk (strong, high).
59. 
 A live attenuated cholera vaccine, which is available as a 
single-dose oral vaccine in the United States, is recom-
mended for adults 18–64 years of age who travel to chol-
era-affected areas (strong, high). See https://www.cdc.gov/
cholera/vaccines.html.
XXI. How does reporting of nationally notifiable organisms identi-
fied from stool specimens impact the control and prevention of diar-
rheal disease in the United States?
Recommendation.
60.  All diseases listed in the table of National Notifiable Diseases 
Surveillance System at the national level, including those 
that cause diarrhea, should be reported to the appropriate 
state, territorial, or local health department with submis-
sion of isolates of certain pathogens (eg, Salmonella, STEC, 
Shigella, and Listeria) to ensure that control and prevention 
practices may be implemented (strong, high).
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
The greatest burden of infectious diarrhea occurs in low- and 
middle-income countries, where inadequate sanitation and 
hygiene are prevalent. Nonetheless, economic development 
also creates opportunities for introduction and transmission 
of enteric pathogens, including global travel, food importa-
tions, mass production and distribution of food, municipal 
water systems serving large segments of the population, and 
widespread use of childcare, long-term care, and recreational 
water facilities. Other risk factors include hospitalization, ani-
mal exposures (especially in public venues), and certain sex-
ual practices (Figure 1). Outbreaks attributed to contaminated 
food and water and contact with infected people and animals 
continue to occur. Challenge studies involving adult volun-
teers and epidemiologic studies including those in child care 
centers show that infections with Cryptosporidium, Entamoeba 
histolytica, Giardia, norovirus, rotavirus, Shiga toxin–produc-
ing E. coli (STEC), and Shigella are spread by low inocula, and 
result in secondary transmission. As a result, a considerable 
burden of diarrheal disease occurs in the United States due 
to a wide variety of endemic and outbreak-associated infec-
tions with enteric pathogens that are capable of causing acute 
and persistent infectious diarrhea in infants, children, adoles-
cents, and adults, sometimes complicated by extraintestinal 
manifestations.
The widening array of recognized enteric pathogens, 
known epidemiologic risk factors often associated with spe-
cific pathogens (Table 2), increasing number of immuno-
suppressed people in the United States, increasing number 
and availability of diagnostic methods (Table 5), increas-
ing numbers of isolates resistant to antimicrobial agents, 
risk of severe illness including hemolytic uremic syndrome 
(HUS) due to STEC and Guillain-Barré syndrome following 
Campylobacter infection, and enhanced demand for cost 
containment sharpen the need for evidence-based clinical 
and public health guidelines. With the growing availabil-
ity of multiplex diagnostic panels that can simultaneously 
detect several enteric pathogens, clinicians can expect to see 
patients from whom >1 pathogen is detected [9], potentially 
making selection of therapy with appropriate antimicrobial 
agents difficult. Research is needed to help interpret the clin-
ical significance of such findings.
These guidelines will focus on the clinical presentation of 
acute and persistent diarrhea, with emphasis on infectious etiol-
ogies in the industrialized world, specifically the United States, 
where diagnostic services are widespread, public health systems 
are in place, and endemic cholera and typhoid fever have long 
been controlled. For the approach to diagnosis and manage-
ment of diarrheal illness in resource-challenged settings, refer 
to the guidelines published by the World Health Organization 
(WHO) [10]. It is important to note that at the time that this 
guideline was published, the Clostridium difficile guidelines 
were still in development and, while every effort was made to 
ensure that the recommendations were concordant, there may 
be minor differences.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e53
DISEASE BURDEN AND CLINICAL PRESENTATIONS
The WHO defines diarrhea as passage of 3 or more loose or 
liquid stools per 24 hours, or more frequently than is normal 
for an individual person [10]. Frequent passing of formed stools 
is not diarrhea, nor is passing of loose, “pasty” stools by infants 
consuming human milk.
Several clinical presentations of infectious diarrhea have 
been described, each of which has different, albeit overlapping, 
etiologies, treatments, and outcomes:
1. 
 Acute watery diarrhea (includes cholera) and acute bloody 
diarrhea (includes dysentery, which manifests as frequent 
scant stools with blood and mucus) that lasts <7 days [11]. 
Acute vomiting and/or diarrhea, often referred to as acute 
gastroenteritis, is a frequent cause of outpatient visits and 
hospitalizations in the United States.
2. 
 Prolonged diarrhea that lasts 7–13 days.
3. 
 Persistent diarrhea that lasts 14–29 days.
4.  Chronic diarrhea that lasts 30 days or longer.
Acute gastroenteritis is a frequent cause of outpatient visits and 
hospitalizations in the United States, with an estimated annual 
burden of 179 million outpatient visits, nearly 500 000 hospitaliza-
tions, and >5000 deaths [12]. Specific data on acute gastroenteri-
tis in adults are sparse, with 1.5% of all hospital discharges coded 
as gastroenteritis. The lifetime risk of being discharged from the 
hospital with a diagnosis of gastroenteritis is estimated to be 1 in 8 
among adults in the United States [13]. The estimated prevalence 
of diarrhea among adults the month before interview was 3%–7% 
with the rate being age-dependent [14]. Disease incidence is high-
est among children <5 years; however, the percentages of hospi-
talization and death are highest in persons 65 years or older [15].
The Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network 
(FoodNet) national surveillance system maintained by Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is perhaps the most 
comprehensive source of data on the pathogen-specific burden of 
diarrheal disease in the United States. Norovirus and Salmonella 
enterica subspecies were the leading pathogens among the 24 gas-
troenteritis pathogens transmissible by food that were assessed. 
Whereas norovirus (58%) exceeded Salmonella enterica subspe-
cies (11%) as a cause of illness, Salmonella enterica subspecies 
exceeded norovirus as a cause of hospitalization (35% vs 28%) 
and death (28% vs 11%). Rotavirus was the most common path-
ogen among children <5 years before rotavirus vaccine intro-
duction, causing an estimated 3 million annual episodes of acute 
gastroenteritis, >500 000 outpatient visits and 27 000 hospitaliza-
tions, and about 25 deaths [16–18]. Norovirus has assumed the 
lead since introduction of rotavirus vaccine, and is associated 
with nearly 1 million ambulatory care visits and 14 000 hospi-
talizations annually [19, 20]. The most common bacterial path-
ogens in this age group are Salmonella enterica subspecies (42%), 
Campylobacter (28%), Shigella (21%), Yersinia (5%), and E. coli 
O157 (3%) [20]. Together these 5 pathogens caused an estimated 
291 000 illnesses, 103 000 physician visits, 7800 hospitalizations, 
and 64 deaths yearly. Before introduction of rotavirus vaccine, 
an average of 369 children aged <5 years died from diarrhea 
Figure 1. Considerations when evaluating people with infectious diarrhea. Modified from Long SS, Pickering LK, Pober CG, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric 
Infectious Diseases, 4th ed. New York: Elsevier Saunders, 2012.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e54 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
each year; among infants, the risk of death was increased among 
African Americans and those with prematurity, low birth weight, 
less maternal education, and low income [21].
Most acute diarrhea episodes in previously healthy, immuno-
competent people are of short duration and self-resolving, and are 
of viral or unknown etiology. Therefore, laboratory investigation 
generally is not warranted. However, many factors may justify the 
expense and complexity of laboratory testing including epidemio-
logic (Table 2) and clinical features (Table 3), which encompass 
diarrhea in immunocompromised people, noninfectious and 
extraintestinal manifestations associated with enteric pathogens 
(Table 4), the potential for results of laboratory investigation to 
impact management, and suspicion of an outbreak situation.
The burden of acute gastroenteritis has been reduced since 
implementation of 2 US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–
licensed rotavirus vaccines, recommended by the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) in 2006 and 2008 
[22]. Clinically significant disease and hospitalization and office 
visits have been decreased in infants who have received a rotavi-
rus vaccine (direct protection) as well as in adults through com-
munity protection of unvaccinated infants and age-ineligible 
children and adults [23, 24] (indirect, or community protection) 
living in high- and middle-income countries and reductions in 
all-cause diarrhea deaths in several middle-income countries.
Reduction of acute infectious diarrhea also can be achieved 
through general measures, including use of hand hygiene; proper 
food preparation and storage; avoidance of high-risk foods such 
as undercooked meat and seafood, unpasteurized milk, and 
soft cheese made with unpasteurized milk; avoidance of unsafe 
water; use of infection prevention and control measures in hos-
pitals, childcare, and nursing home settings; appropriate use of 
antimicrobial agents; and appropriate pet selection and super-
vision of contact with animals, specifically in public settings. In 
addition, people with diarrhea should refrain from recreational 
water activities, food preparation or service, and sexual activities 
while symptomatic. Specific preventive measures, in addition to 
routine use of rotavirus vaccine in infants [25], include typhoid 
and cholera vaccines for travelers when indicated [26].
Highly effective measures are available to prevent and treat 
diarrheal disease and its complications. Avoiding dehydration 
by ensuring adequate fluid and electrolyte intake for replace-
ment and maintenance is the mainstay of diarrheal illness man-
agement. Increasing resistance to antimicrobial agents and risk 
of worsening illness (such as diarrhea associated with C. diffi-
cile) can result from antimicrobial and antimotility drug use and 
highlight the need for appropriate use of these interventions.
METHODOLOGY
Panel Composition
A panel of multidisciplinary experts in management of infectious 
diarrhea in children and adults was convened in 2012. The panel 
consisted of pediatricians and internists with expertise in clinical 
medicine, infectious disease, epidemiology, gastroenterology, 
preventive medicine, nutrition, microbiology, and enteric dis-
ease. Panel participants included representatives from the Society 
for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA), CDC, and the 
IDSA Standards and Practice Guidelines Committee (SPGC). The 
guideline was reviewed and endorsed by SHEA and the Pediatric 
Infectious Diseases Society. The guideline was also reviewed and 
approved by the IDSA SPGC and the Board of Directors.
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and 
Evaluation Approach and Process Overview
The panel applied GRADE to the assessment of quality of evi-
dence and development of recommendations [3–7]. The qual-
ity of evidence is categorized as high, moderate, low, or very 
low; the strength of recommendation is categorized as strong 
or weak (Figure 2). Key factors that determine the strength of 
recommendation include quality of evidence, balance between 
desirable and undesirable effects, and values and preferences. 
Teleconferences and face-to-face meetings were held in which a 
list of 21 clinical questions to be addressed in the guidelines was 
generated, discussed, and prioritized.
Table 3. Clinical Presentations Suggestive of Infectious Diarrhea 
Etiologies
Finding
Likely Pathogens
Persistent or chronic 
diarrhea
Cryptosporidium spp, Giardia lamblia, Cyclospora 
cayetanensis, Cystoisospora belli, and 
Entamoeba histolytica
Visible blood in stool
STEC, Shigella, Salmonella, Campylobacter, 
Entamoeba histolytica, noncholera Vibrio spe-
cies, Yersinia, Balantidium coli, Plesiomonas
Fever
Not highly discriminatory—viral, bacterial, and 
parasitic infections can cause fever. In general, 
higher temperatures are suggestive of bacte-
rial etiology or E. histolytica. Patients infected 
with STEC usually are not febrile at time of 
presentation
Abdominal pain
STEC, Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, 
Yersinia, noncholera Vibrio species, 
Clostridium difficile
Severe abdominal pain, 
often grossly bloody 
stools  
(occasionally nonbloody), 
and minimal or no fever
STEC, Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, and 
Yersinia enterocolitica
Persistent abdominal pain 
and fever
Y
. enterocolitica and Y
. pseudotuberculosis; may 
mimic appendicitis
Nausea and vomiting last-
ing ≤24 hours
Ingestion of Staphylococcus aureus enterotoxin 
or Bacillus cereus (short-incubation emetic 
syndrome)
Diarrhea and abdomi-
nal cramping lasting 
1–2 days
Ingestion of Clostridium perfringens or B. cereus 
(long-incubation emetic syndrome)
Vomiting and nonbloody 
diarrhea lasting 2–3 days 
or less
Norovirus (low-grade fever usually present during 
the first 24 hours in 40% if infections)
Chronic watery diarrhea, 
often lasting a year or 
more
Brainerd diarrhea (etiologic agent has not been 
identified); postinfectious irritable bowel 
syndrome
Abbreviation: STEC, Shiga toxin–producing Escherichia coli.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e55
Literature Review, Analysis, and Selection
The panel identified current and valid studies from both the 
Medline and Embase databases, with a focus on randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs), allowing for admission of systematic 
reviews and extant practice guidelines if adequate RCTs and 
method validation studies for diagnostics did not exist. The 
search period included 1 January 2000–31 December 2013. 
Data published after 1 January 2014 also were considered in the 
final preparation of the manuscript. The search was restricted 
to English-language articles and largely was confined to US 
and/or North American sources. English-language studies with 
European authors also were included for the purpose of deter-
mining diagnostic guidelines. For international travel–associ-
ated infections, such as enteric fever and cholera, geographic 
restrictions were not applied. Selected references with relevant 
updates to practice were included.
Following removal of duplicate and irrelevant studies, the 
panel based judgments regarding inclusion in the guidelines 
on evidence demonstrated by the aggregated RCTs and/or the 
strength of evidence indicated in a systematic review of mul-
tiple studies. Articles were evaluated for relevance to each of 
the focus sections in the guidelines, up to and including: back-
ground; clinical presentations; diagnostics; treatment of non-
responders and persistence; management (specific treatment, 
supportive treatment, empiric treatment, ancillary treatment); 
epidemiology and surveillance; prevention; and future treat-
ments. Primary key search terms were as follows: acute gastro-
enteritis, antimotility agents, antimicrobial agents, antiparasitic 
agents, cholera, C. difficile, colitis, diarrhea/dehydration, dys-
entery, enteric fever, enteric pathogens, enterocolitis, enzyme 
immunoassay, gastroenteritis, hand hygiene, management, 
molecular diagnostics, pseudomembranous enterocolitis, pro-
biotics, rehydration, rotavirus, and STEC.
Guideline and Conflicts of Interest
All panel members complied with IDSA policy on conflict of 
interests, which requires disclosure of any financial or other 
interest that might be construed as constituting an actual, 
potential, or apparent conflict. Members were provided IDSA’s 
conflicts of interest disclosure statement and asked to identify 
associations with companies developing products that might 
be affected by promulgation of the guideline. Information was 
requested regarding employment, consultancies, stock owner-
ship, honoraria, research funding, expert testimony, speaking 
engagements, and membership on company advisory commit-
tees. Decisions were made on a case-by-case basis as to whether 
an individual’s role should be limited as a result of a conflict. 
Potential conflicts of interest are listed in the Notes section.
Future Revision Dates
At annual intervals, the panel chair, SPGC liaison advisor, and 
SPGC chair will determine the need for guideline revisions by 
reviewing current literature. If necessary, the entire panel will 
be reconvened. When appropriate, the panel will recommend 
revisions to the IDSA SPGC, Board of Directors, and other col-
laborating organizations for review and approval.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 
THE DIAGNOSIS AND 
MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIOUS DIARRHEA
Clinical, Demographic, and Epidemiologic Features
I. In people with diarrhea, which clinical, demographic, or epidemio-
logic features have diagnostic or management implications? (Tables 
2–4)
Recommendations.
1. 
 A detailed clinical and exposure history should be 
obtained from people with diarrhea, under any circum-
stances, including when there is a history of similar illness 
in others (strong, moderate) (Figure 1).
2.  People with diarrhea who attend or work in child care 
centers, long-term care facilities, patient care, food service, 
or recreational water venues (eg, pools and lakes) should 
follow jurisdictional recommendations for outbreak 
reporting and infection control (strong, high).
Evidence Summary. 
A broad range of exposures or conditions have been impli-
cated as sources of infections with specific pathogens (Table 2). 
Exposures or conditions that may suggest certain causes of 
infectious diarrhea include consumption of shellfish, raw 
milk, unpasteurized juice, undercooked meats, fish, or eggs, or 
Table 4. Postinfectious Manifestations Associated With Enteric 
Pathogens
Manifestation
Organism(s)
Erythema nodosum
Yersinia, Campylobacter, Salmonella, Shigella
Glomerulonephritis
Shigella, Campylobacter, Yersinia
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Campylobacter
Hemolytic anemia
Campylobacter, Yersinia
Hemolytic uremic 
syndrome
STEC, Shigella dysenteriae serotype 1
Immunoglobulin 
A nephropathy
Campylobacter
Reactive arthritisa
Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, Yersinia, 
rarely Giardia, and Cyclospora cayetanensis
Postinfectious irritable 
bowel syndrome
Campylobacter, Salmonella, Shigella, STEC, 
Giardia
Meningitis
Listeria, Salmonella (infants ≤3 months of age are 
at high risk)
Intestinal perforation
Salmonella including Salmonella Typhi, Shigella, 
Campylobacter, Yersinia, Entamoeba histolytica
Ekiri syndrome (lethal, 
toxic encephalopathy) 
and/or seizure
Shigella
Aortitis, osteomyelitis, 
extravascular deep tis-
sue focus
Salmonella, Yersinia
Abbreviation: STEC, Shiga toxin–producing Escherichia coli.
aIncludes Reiter syndrome.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e56 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
Table 5. Laboratory Diagnostics for Organisms Associated With Infectious Diarrhea
Etiologic Agent
Diagnostic Procedures
Optimal Specimen
Clostridium difficile
NAAT
Stool
GDH antigen with or without toxin detection followed  
by cytotoxin or Clostridium difficile toxin or toxigenic 
C. difficile strain
Salmonella enterica, Shigella spp, Campylobacter spp
Routine stool enteric pathogen culturea or NAAT
Stool
Salmonella enterica serovars Typhi and Paratyphi (enteric fever)
Routine culture
Stool, blood, bone marrow,  
and duodenal fluid
Shiga toxin–producing Escherichia coli
Culture for E. coli O157:H7b and Shiga toxin  
immunoassay or NAAT for Shiga toxin genes
Stool
Yersinia spp, Plesiomonas spp, Edwardsiella tarda,  
Staphylococcus aureus, E. coli (enterotoxigenic, enteroinvasive, 
enteropathogenic, enteroaggregative)
Specialized stool culture or molecular assaysc or NAAT
Stool
Clostridium perfringens
Specialized procedure for toxin detectiond
Stool
Bacillus cereus, S. aureus
Specialized procedure for toxin detectiond
Food
Clostridium botulinum
Mouse lethality assay (performed at a state public  
health laboratory, or CDC) e,f,g
Serum, stool, gastric  
contents, vomitus
Entamoeba histolytica; Blastocystis hominih;
Dientamoeba fragilish; Balantidium coli; Giardia lamblia; nema-
todes (generally not associated with diarrhea) including Ascaris 
lumbricoides, Strongyloides stercoralisi, Trichuris trichiura, hook-
worms; cestodes (tapeworms); trematodes (flukes)
Ova and parasite examination including  
permanent stained smeari or NAAT
Stool
Duodenal fluid for Giardia  
and Strongyloides
E. histolytica
E. histolytica species-specific immunoassay or NAAT
Stool
G. lambliaj
EIA or NAAT
Stool
Cryptosporidium spp [121]j
Direct fluorescent immunoassay, EIA, or NAAT
Stool
Cyclospora cayetanensis, Cystoisospora bellik
Modified acid-fast staink performed on  
concentrated specimen, ultraviolet fluorescence  
microscopy, or NAAT
Stool
Microsporidia (now classified as a fungus)
Modified trichrome staink performed on 
concentrated specimen
Stool
Histologic examination with electron microscopic 
confirmation
Small bowel biopsy
Calicivirus (norovirus, sapovirus)k; enteric adenovirus; enterovirus/ 
parechovirusk; rotavirus
NAAT
Stool
Rotavirus, enteric adenovirus
EIA
Stool
Enteric adenovirusl; enterovirus/parechovirus
Viral culture
Stool
Cytomegalovirus
Histopathological examination
Biopsy
Cytomegalovirus culture
Biopsy
The field of rapid diagnostic testing is rapidly expanding. We expect that additional diagnostic assays will become available following publication of these guidelines, specifically pan-
el-based molecular diagnostics, including NAAT
. Contact the laboratory for instructions regarding container, temperature, and transport guidelines to optimize results.
Abbreviations: CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; EIA, enzyme immunoassay; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; NAAT
, nucleic acid amplification test.
aRoutine stool culture in most laboratories is designed to detect Salmonella spp, Shigella spp, Campylobacter spp, and E. coli O157 or Shiga toxin–producing E. coli, but this should be 
confirmed with the testing laboratory.
bIt is recommended that laboratories routinely process all stool specimens submitted for bacterial culture for the presence of Shiga toxin–producing strains of E. coli including O157:H7
. 
However, in some laboratories, O157:H7 testing is performed only by specific request.
cSpecialized cultures or molecular assays may be required to detect these organisms in stool specimens. The laboratory should be notified whenever there is a suspicion of infection due 
to one of these pathogens.
dBacillus cereus, Clostridium perfringens, and Staphylococcus aureus are associated with diarrheal syndromes that are toxin mediated. An etiologic diagnosis is made by demonstration of 
toxin in stool for C. perfringens and demonstration of toxin in food for B. cereus and S. aureus. 
eToxin assays are either performed in public health laboratories or referred to laboratories specializing in such assays.
fTesting for Clostridium botulinum toxin is either performed in public health laboratories or referred to laboratories specializing in such testing. The toxin is lethal and special precautions 
are required for handling. Class A bioterrorism agent and rapid sentinel laboratory reporting schemes must be followed. Immediate notification of a suspected infection to the state health 
department is mandated.
gImplicated food materials may also be examined for C. botulinum toxin, but most hospital laboratories are not equipped for food analysis.
hThe pathogenicity of Blastocystis hominis and Dientamoeba fragilis remains controversial. In the absence of other pathogens, they may be clinically relevant if symptoms persist. 
Reporting semiquantitative results (rare, few, many) may help determine significance and is a College of American Pathologists accreditation requirement for participating laboratories.
iDetection of Strongyloides in stool may require the use of Baermann technique or agar plate culture.
jCryptosporidium and Giardia lamblia testing is often offered and performed together as the primary parasitology examination. Further studies should follow if the epidemiologic setting or 
clinical manifestations suggest parasitic disease.
kThese stains may not be routinely available.
lEnteric adenoviruses may not be recovered in routine viral culture.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e57
contaminated fruits or vegetables; exposure to contaminated 
drinking or recreational water; contact with animals or their 
feces or environment; recent antimicrobial therapy; interna-
tional travel; institutional exposure; and anal or oral sexual con-
tact [27–47].
Of great importance are exposures associated with food. 
In a review of outbreaks of foodborne illness investigated by 
FoodNet between 2003 and 2008 [48], a specific food vehicle was 
identified in 232 of 1200 (32%) outbreaks [49]. Outbreaks were 
most commonly reported to be associated with commercial food 
preparation; this is likely to reflect that outbreaks associated with 
a single restaurant or other establishment may be more likely 
than other outbreaks to be noticed, reported to public health 
officials, and investigated. Other important exposures impli-
cated in outbreaks include animal contact [41, 50, 51], recrea-
tional water exposure [52], and sexual practices [53] (Table 2).
Outbreaks of diarrhea in institutional settings are a substan-
tial public health problem. The National Outbreak Reporting 
System [54] collects data on waterborne and foodborne disease 
outbreaks, person-to-person transmitted disease outbreaks, 
animal contact disease outbreaks, environmental contamination 
disease outbreaks, and other enteric illness outbreaks. During 
2009–2013, the National Outbreak Reporting System reported 
10 756 acute gastroenteritis outbreaks for which the primary 
mode of transmission occurred through person-to-person 
contact, environmental contamination, and unknown modes 
of transmission. These outbreaks resulted in 356 530 reported 
illnesses, 5394 hospitalizations, and 459 deaths. In 7001 out-
breaks where a setting was reported, 70% occurred in long-term 
care facilities. In contrast, 59% of Shigella-associated outbreaks 
and 36% of Salmonella-associated outbreaks were identified in 
childcare facilities. Norovirus was implicated in 84% of 2430 
outbreaks where an etiology was suspected or confirmed; bac-
terial pathogens were identified in a substantial minority [55]. 
During 2009–2013, norovirus accounted for most deaths and 
healthcare visits associated with acute gastroenteritis out-
breaks. Specific infection control guidelines are recommended 
for control of norovirus and the extremely chlorine-tolerant 
Cryptosporidium in institutional settings [56, 57]. Food worker 
health or hygiene has been identified as a contributing factor in 
Figure 2. Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e58 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
64% of foodborne outbreaks associated with restaurants in the 
United States [58].
II. In people with fever or bloody diarrhea, which clinical, demo-
graphic, or epidemiologic features have diagnostic or management 
implications? (Tables 2–4)
Recommendations.
3. 
 People with fever or bloody diarrhea should be evaluated 
for enteropathogens for which antimicrobial agents may 
confer clinical benefit including Salmonella enterica sub-
species, Shigella, and Campylobacter (strong, low).
4.  Enteric fever should be considered when a febrile person 
(with or without diarrhea) has a history of travel to areas in 
which causative agents are endemic, has consumed foods 
prepared by people with recent endemic exposure, or has 
had laboratory exposure to Salmonella enterica subspecies 
enterica serovar Typhi and Salmonella enterica subspecies 
enterica serovar Paratyphi (strong, moderate). In this docu-
ment, Salmonella Typhi represents the more formal and 
detailed name Salmonella enterica subspecies enterica ser-
ovar Typhi, and Salmonella Paratyphi corresponds to the 
Paratyphi serovar.
Evidence Summary. 
Although bacterial causes of diarrhea can have similar clinical 
presentations, they differ with regard to clinical management. 
For example, whereas antimicrobial agents may be indicated for 
Campylobacter or Shigella infections, they are not indicated for 
STEC or for most Salmonella infections.
Identification of bacterial agents can prevent other unnecessary 
procedures such as colonoscopy, abdominal surgery, or medical 
treatment for suspected ulcerative colitis. Conversely, negative 
stool studies for infectious pathogens increase suspicion for non-
infectious conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi and Paratyphi A and 
Paratyphi B cause bacteremic illnesses referred to respectively 
as typhoid and paratyphoid fever, and collectively as enteric 
fever. These conditions are characterized by fever that may 
be associated with headache, lethargy, malaise, and abdom-
inal pain, followed by hepatosplenomegaly and stupor. While 
the portal of entry is the gastrointestinal tract, diarrhea is an 
uncommon feature [59].
Typhoid fever incidence is high in parts of South and Southeast 
Asia, and moderate in Central and South America, Africa, 
Central and East Asia, and Oceania [60]. Typhoid fever out-
breaks in the United States are uncommon and usually associated 
with foodborne transmission from an asymptomatic carrier [61]. 
FoodNet data from the period 2004–2009 demonstrated that a 
history of travel was reported in 68% of patients with Salmonella 
enterica serovar Typhi and 50% of patients with Salmonella enter-
ica serovar Paratyphi [35]. Typhoid fever may be difficult to dis-
tinguish from other febrile conditions in returned travelers, and 
can present with fever without focus, abdominal pain without 
diarrhea, or with extraintestinal foci of infection [62].
III. What clinical, demographic, or epidemiologic features are asso-
ciated with complications or severe disease? (Tables 2–4)
Recommendations.
5. 
 People of all ages with acute diarrhea should be evaluated 
for dehydration, which increases the risk of life-threat-
ening illness and death, especially among the young and 
older adults (strong, high).
6. 
 When the clinical or epidemic history suggests a possible 
Shiga toxin–producing organism, diagnostic approaches 
should be applied that detect Shiga toxin (or the genes that 
encode them) and distinguish E. coli O157:H7 from other 
STEC in stool (strong, moderate). If available, diagnostic 
approaches that can distinguish between Shiga toxin 1 and 
Shiga toxin 2, which is typically more potent, could be used 
(weak, moderate). In addition, Shigella dysenteriae type 1 
and, rarely, other pathogens may produce Shiga toxin and 
should be considered as a cause of HUS, especially in peo-
ple with suggestive international travel or personal contact 
with a traveler (strong, moderate).
7.  Clinicians should evaluate people for postinfectious and 
extraintestinal manifestations associated with enteric 
infections (strong, moderate) [8]. (Table 4)
Evidence Summary.
Volume depletion is a frequently identified risk factor for diar-
rhea-related deaths in people of all ages in the United States; 
other related risk factors include fluid and electrolyte disorders, 
nontraumatic shock, and acute renal failure [63, 64]. In addition, 
dehydration at the time of admission among children with post-
diarrheal HUS is associated with an increased need for dialysis 
[65]. Intravenous fluid administered during the diarrhea phase 
of STEC infections reduces the risk of oligoanuric renal failure 
among those children who subsequently develop HUS [66].
Although most patients with laboratory-confirmed STEC 
who develop HUS have bloody diarrhea, approximately 10% do 
not [67]. In addition to patient reported bloody diarrhea or vis-
ibly bloody stool, other factors independently associated with 
increased risk of STEC O157 infection compared with other 
enteric infections in patients of all ages include abdominal ten-
derness and absence of fever at first medical evaluation [68]. 
Approximately 65% of patients infected with E. coli O157 will 
have a peripheral white blood cell count >10 000 cells/µL [69]. 
Early identification of STEC infections is important to reduce 
the risk of complications and the risk of person-to-person 
transmission. It is important to perform both cultures for STEC 
O157 and test for Shiga toxin (either in broth cultures, not stool) 
or the genes that encode this toxin family, because STEC O157 
is the most consistently virulent STEC in the United States, and 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e59
early identification through culture can aid in clinical manage-
ment and public health control measures. Detection of all other 
STEC serotypes first requires detection of Shiga toxin (or the 
genes that encode them) [70].
STEC carrying Shiga toxin 2 (stx2) genes are associated 
with increased risk of both bloody diarrhea and HUS [71, 72]. 
In the United States, most STEC stains isolated from patients 
with HUS are serogroup O157, and are stx2 positive. New mul-
tiplex nucleic acid amplification tests (MP-NAATs) that can 
detect evidence of multiple pathogens and toxins can distin-
guish between Shiga toxins 1 and 2 and some assays also dis-
tinguish E. coli O157. Although clinical laboratories cannot 
typically differentiate between subtypes of Shiga toxin 2, sub-
types 2a, 2c, and 2d are associated with more severe disease 
[73]. Known postinfectious manifestations of infections with 
their associated enteric organisms are listed in Table 4. When 
a clinical syndrome consistent with one of these manifestations 
is encountered, an exposure history should be obtained along 
with a diagnostic evaluation and directed management, which 
may have public health or outbreak evaluation implications. 
Early identification of particularly virulent STEC infection (eg, 
STEC O157 and other Shiga toxin 2–producing strains) facili-
tates rapid implementation of measures in the home that pre-
vent cross-contamination [74].
Diagnostics
IV. Which pathogens should be considered in people presenting with 
diarrheal illnesses, and which diagnostic tests will aid in organism 
identification or outbreak investigation?
Recommendations.
8. 
Stool testing should be performed for Salmonella, Shigella, 
Campylobacter, Yersinia, C. difficile, and STEC in people 
with diarrhea accompanied by fever, bloody or mucoid 
stools, severe abdominal cramping or tenderness, or 
signs of sepsis (strong, moderate). Bloody stools are not 
an expected manifestation of infection with C. difficile. 
STEC O157 should be assessed by culture and non-O157 
STEC should be detected by Shiga toxin or genomic assays 
(strong, low). Sorbitol-MacConkey agar or an appropriate 
chromogenic agar alternative is recommended to screen 
for O157:H7 STEC; detection of Shiga toxin is needed to 
detect other STEC serotype (strong, moderate).
9. 
 Blood cultures should be obtained from infants <3 months 
of age, people of any age with signs of septicemia or when 
enteric fever is suspected, people with systemic manifesta-
tions of infection, people who are immunocompromised, 
people with certain high-risk conditions such as hemolytic 
anemia, and people who traveled to or have had contact 
with travelers from enteric fever–endemic areas with a 
febrile illness of unknown etiology (strong, moderate).
10.  Stool testing should be performed under clearly iden-
tified circumstances (Table 2) for Salmonella, Shigella, 
Campylobacter, Yersinia, C. difficile, and STEC in sympto-
matic hosts (strong, low). Specifically,
a. 
Test for Yersinia enterocolitica in people with persis-
tent abdominal pain (especially school-aged children 
with right lower quadrant pain mimicking appendi-
citis who may have mesenteric adenitis), and in peo-
ple with fever at epidemiologic risk for yersiniosis, 
including infants with direct or indirect exposures to 
raw or undercooked pork products.
b. 
In addition, test stool specimens for Vibrio species in 
people with large volume rice water stools or either 
exposure to salty or brackish waters, consumption 
of raw or undercooked shellfish, or travel to chol-
era-endemic regions within 3 days prior to onset of 
diarrhea.
11.  A broader set of bacterial, viral, and parasitic agents 
should be considered regardless of the presence of fever, 
bloody or mucoid stools, or other markers of more severe 
illness in the context of a possible outbreak of diarrheal 
illness (eg, multiple people with diarrhea who shared 
a common meal or a sudden rise in observed diarrheal 
cases). Selection of agents for testing should be based 
on a combination of host and epidemiologic risk factors 
and ideally in coordination with public health authorities 
(strong, moderate).
12.  A broad differential diagnosis is recommended in immu-
nocompromised people with diarrhea, especially those 
with moderate and severe primary or secondary immune 
deficiencies, for evaluation of stool specimens by cul-
ture, viral studies, and examination for parasites (strong, 
moderate). People with acquired immune deficiency syn-
drome (AIDS) with persistent diarrhea should undergo 
additional testing for other organisms including, but not 
limited to, Cryptosporidium, Cyclospora, Cystoisospora, 
microsporidia, Mycobacterium avium complex, and cyto-
megalovirus (CMV) (strong, moderate).
13.  Diagnostic testing is not recommended in most cases of 
uncomplicated traveler’s diarrhea unless treatment is indi-
cated. Travelers with diarrhea lasting 14 days or longer 
should be evaluated for intestinal parasitic infections 
(strong, moderate). Testing for C. difficile should be per-
formed in travelers treated with antimicrobial agent(s) 
within the preceding 8–12 weeks. In addition, gastroin-
testinal tract disease including IBD and postinfectious 
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) should be considered for 
evaluation (strong, moderate).
14.  Clinical consideration should be included in the interpre-
tation of results of MP-NAAT because these assays detect 
DNA and not necessarily viable organisms (strong, low).
15.  All specimens that test positive for bacterial patho-
gens by culture-independent diagnostic testing such as 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e60 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
antigen-based molecular assays (gastrointestinal tract 
panels) and for which isolate submission is requested or 
required under public health reporting rules should be 
cultured in the clinical laboratory or at a public health 
laboratory to ensure that outbreaks of similar organisms 
are detected and investigated (strong, low). Also, a culture 
may be required in situations where antimicrobial suscep-
tibility testing results would affect care or public health 
responses (strong, low).
16. 
 Specimens from people involved in an outbreak of enteric 
disease should be tested for enteric pathogens per public 
health department guidance (strong, low).
Evidence Summary.
Determination of the precise cause of diarrhea is not always nec-
essary. Assessment of a stool specimen to determine the cause 
should be performed on patients at high risk of severe illness 
and for whom identification of a pathogen would be important 
for the patient or for public health reasons. As first described 
in the original IDSA guidelines on management of infectious 
diarrhea [1], diagnostic algorithms that combine clinical and 
epidemiologic factors that meet requirements of clinical med-
icine and public health are needed. Although the majority of 
diarrheal illnesses are self-limited and identification of the 
infectious etiology often has little value to these individual 
patients, for certain infections, an organism-specific diagno-
sis is important to guiding clinical management. Furthermore, 
from a public health perspective, an organism-specific diag-
nosis is valuable for the majority of diarrheal illnesses because 
identification of an organism facilitates outbreak detection and 
monitoring of disease trends. Selective testing recommenda-
tions below are based on clinical management needs as well as 
on the efficient use of diagnostic testing to meet the needs of 
public health surveillance systems.
Identification of bacterial pathogens can be important for 
both clinical management and public health disease control 
efforts. However, testing all patients with acute diarrhea for 
these pathogens would be inefficient. Among adults presenting 
with diarrhea to emergency departments in the United States, 
17% of patients who submitted a stool specimen (as opposed 
to rectal swab) were found to have a bacterial enteric infection. 
A bacterial etiology was found in 5%–11% of children seeking 
care in emergency departments and outpatient settings [75–
77]. Restricting testing to patients with bloody stools, fever, or 
abdominal tenderness can increase the likelihood of identify-
ing a bacterial pathogen [68, 76–79] (Table 5). Risk factors for 
invasive nontyphoidal Salmonella infection include young and 
advanced age, impaired immunity due to human immunodefi-
ciency virus (HIV) infection and cytotoxic chemotherapy, mal-
nutrition, hemoglobinopathies, recent malaria, and cirrhosis 
[80–82]. Other bacterial infections, including Campylobacter 
[83] and Shigella [44, 84] and Listeria infections are more 
likely to be severe or recurrent in patients with HIV infection. 
Aneurysms of the aorta and aortitis can occur in elderly patients 
with invasive nontyphoidal salmonellosis or yersiniosis [85, 86].
Risk factors for invasive noncholera vibriosis, especially 
Vibrio vulnificus infections, are chronic liver disease (including 
cirrhosis, alcoholic liver disease, and hepatitis), iron overload 
states (hemochromatosis, hemolytic anemia, or chronic renal 
failure) and other immunocompromising conditions [87, 88].
Yersinia enterocolitica can be associated with an array of 
clinical presentations including, but not limited to, nonbloody 
diarrhea, bloody diarrhea, and a febrile pseudoappendicular 
syndrome that can mimic appendicitis. Invasive yersiniosis in 
an adult may be associated with the presence of mycotic aneu-
rysms [86]. Foods that have been associated with Y. enterocolit-
ica infections include pork (eg, chitterlings) and dairy products. 
Higher risk groups in the United States include young African 
American and Asian children, especially during winter months, 
as well as diabetics and those with chronic liver disease, malnu-
trition, or iron-overload states. The higher rates among African 
American children had been attributable to cross-contam-
ination within the home during preparation of chitterlings, a 
seasonal dish prepared from pig intestines. However, the high 
incidence rates in African American children observed in the 
late 1990s have declined dramatically following preventive 
health campaigns focusing on avoidance of cross-contamin-
ation in the kitchen [89].
Identification and investigation of outbreaks together serve 
important roles in reducing the burden of diarrheal illnesses 
by truncating the duration of the outbreak and uncovering the 
contributing factors that led to the outbreak so that those fac-
tors can be addressed to prevent future outbreaks and illnesses. 
An organism-specific diagnosis usually is necessary for public 
health control efforts, because clinical factors alone rarely are 
sufficient to distinguish between etiologic agents. Identifying 
the etiologic agent(s) from ill people is important for case find-
ing and investigating possible sources of infection. The most 
common cause of diarrheal disease outbreaks is norovirus, but 
a broad range of bacterial and parasitic agents have been impli-
cated in outbreaks [90–94]. The specific pathogens for which 
to test may vary by clinical presentation and exposures. Health 
departments can provide guidance on testing, and often public 
health laboratories can assist in testing for agents that exceed 
the diagnostic capacity of the clinical laboratory.
Immunocompromised people are more likely to experience 
severe or prolonged illness. Diarrhea in immunocompromised 
patients may involve a broad spectrum of potential causes, includ-
ing bacterial, viral, parasitic, and fungal pathogens depending on 
underlying immune status [95]. In addition, people with HIV-
associated immune compromise are at risk for diarrhea due to 
enteroaggregative E. coli [96–98], Cryptosporidium [99], micro-
sporidia [100–102], Cystoisospora belli (formerly Isospora belli), 
CMV, and Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) [95, 103]. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e61
Besides stool examination, other investigations may be nec-
essary for the HIV-infected patient, including blood cultures 
for diagnosis of MAC infection and colonoscopy with biopsy 
for CMV enteritis. Diarrhea caused by some protozoa (eg, 
Cryptosporidium, Cyclospora, Cystoisospora) or microsporidia is 
more likely to be severe, chronic, or relapsing in immunocom-
promised people, particularly those with impaired cell-mediated 
immunity, including advanced HIV infection [104]. Because 
microscopic examination of stool for ova and parasites is 
unlikely to include testing for Cryptosporidium and Cyclospora, 
clinicians should specifically request Cryptosporidium and/or 
Cyclospora testing. Noninfectious etiologies including adverse 
effects of antiretroviral therapy or chemotherapy also may 
account for persistent diarrhea in immunocompromised hosts. 
In some patients with diarrhea lasting ≥30 days, testing for HIV 
may be appropriate [105].
Chronic and severe norovirus infection has been reported in 
patients receiving immunosuppression following organ trans-
plantation [106]. Patients who acquire norovirus infection 
while hospitalized, especially people with immunocompro-
mising conditions and people of advanced age, may be more 
likely to die. Guidelines for prevention and control of norovirus 
gastroenteritis outbreaks in healthcare settings have been pub-
lished [56]. People >90 years of age residing in long-term care 
facilities have a 20%–30% increased risk of death and hospital-
ization during norovirus outbreaks [107]. However, diagnosis 
of norovirus infections largely has been limited to infections 
occurring as part of outbreaks. Localized outbreaks affect-
ing hospital wards and long-term care facilities may be more 
likely to be investigated [107–109]. Investigations to assess the 
endemic rates of norovirus infection are ongoing. Persistent 
non-vaccine-related and vaccine-related rotavirus diarrhea 
has been reported in young children with primary immunode-
ficiency [110, 111], but rotavirus disease and hospitalizations 
overall have been reduced markedly since licensure of the 2 
ACIP-recommended rotavirus vaccines [112].
The majority of traveler’s diarrhea is self-limited, caused by 
bacterial and, to a lesser extent, viral pathogens, and lasts for 
<7 days. Most TD is self-treatable with oral rehydration ther-
apy, and, for nonbloody diarrhea in adults, an antimotility agent 
[113]. Approximately 10% of traveler’s diarrhea is caused by 
parasitic infections, which can persist for weeks to months, with 
giardiasis being the most common. Clostridium difficile–asso-
ciated diarrhea is of increasing concern among travelers with 
persistent diarrhea, especially travelers with recent antimicro-
bial agent therapy, either as self-treatment for traveler’s diarrhea 
or for other indications [114, 115]. The distribution of gastroin-
testinal tract pathogens varies substantially by region of travel. 
In a US FoodNet study between 2004 and 2009, the majority of 
cases of typhoid fever, paratyphoid fever, and Shigella dysente-
riae infection among others, were associated with travel [35]. 
An abnormal d-xylose absorption test indicates the possibility 
of tropical sprue, which is most common in adults visiting trop-
ical areas for long periods of time.
Multipathogen nucleic acid amplification tests can simulta-
neously detect viral, parasitic, and bacterial agents, including 
some pathogens that previously could not be easily detected 
in the clinical setting such as norovirus, and enterotoxigenic 
E. coli (ETEC), enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC), and entero-
aggregative E. coli (EAEC) in less time than traditional meth-
ods. The short time to results could reduce inappropriate use 
of antimicrobial agents to treat infections that do not require 
antimicrobial therapy and could shorten the time to targeted 
management and isolation measures for certain infections such 
as STEC O157. With these assays, it is common to detect the 
presence of >1 pathogen that may differ with regard to clinical 
management [116–118]. Furthermore, even a positive result for 
1 pathogen should be interpreted in the context of the patient’s 
clinical presentation, because less is known about the clinical 
significance of tests that detect nucleic acid as compared with 
traditional assays that generally detect viable organisms. The 
importance of detection of multiple pathogens in the same spec-
imen is often unclear; it is unknown if all pathogens detected in 
the specimen are clinically relevant or if one is more strongly 
associated with the illness.
Interpretation of results will improve as more data become 
available regarding the performance of these assays. For at least 
one assay, current data show that concordance with traditional 
diagnostic methods may vary by pathogen [118]. Some experts 
have proposed that these assays may be particularly well suited 
for making an organism-specific diagnosis in immunocom-
promised patients [119]. The current FDA-cleared multiplex 
assays do not quantify the amount of nucleic acid present. 
Development of quantitative assays may aid in interpretation 
of results [120].
Guidelines by IDSA and the American Society for 
Microbiology (ASM) on utilization of the clinical microbiology 
laboratory describe optimal tests for detection of pathogens, 
including those causing diarrhea [121]. The complete findings 
are summarized in Table 5. Since publication of those guide-
lines, several gastrointestinal panels that detect >20 viral, bac-
terial, and parasitic enteric organisms have become available. 
The availability of one of these panels as well as other assays may 
vary among clinical laboratories, making requisitions unique to 
the laboratory to which the sample is submitted.
There are important drawbacks to the increasing use of cul-
ture-independent diagnostic tests (CIDTs), including enzyme 
immunoassays and NAATs in the clinical setting. First, replace-
ment of culture by CIDT in clinical laboratories will impede 
outbreak detection and investigation. Public health has made 
important strides in detecting, investigating, and controlling 
outbreaks of enteric illness using molecular subtyping of the 
infecting bacterial strains in public health laboratories [122]. The 
net effect of this enhanced surveillance and control has been to 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e62 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
prevent thousands of illnesses [123]. Replacement of culture by 
CIDT without preserving access to isolates will impede detec-
tion of dispersed outbreaks, and thus reduce the capacity of 
public health to control and to prevent them. Second, for the 
individual, CIDTs do not provide information on antimicrobial 
susceptibility to guide clinical management. Actions are needed 
to avoid this negative impact on public health. In the short term, 
specimens that test positive for a bacterial pathogen by a CIDT 
for which isolate submission is requested or required under pub-
lic health reporting rules should be cultured, either at the clinical 
laboratory or at a public health laboratory. Cultured organisms 
can be sent to public health laboratories for species identification, 
serotyping and further subtyping by molecular methods (eg, 
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, and, more recently, whole-ge-
nome sequencing). Subtyping enables detection of increases in 
infections caused by a specific strain and also facilitates outbreak 
investigations by increasing the probability that case-patients 
included in an investigation are likely to have had a common 
exposure. In the longer term, culture-independent methods that 
serve clinical diagnostic needs and are able to provide subtyping 
information to distinguish strains are needed [124–128].
V. Which diagnostic tests should be performed when enteric fever or 
bacteremia is suspected?
Recommendation.
17. 
 Culture-independent, including panel-based multiplex 
molecular diagnostics from stool and blood specimens, 
and, when indicated, culture-dependent diagnostic testing 
should be performed when there is a clinical suspicion of 
enteric fever (diarrhea uncommon) or diarrhea with bac-
teremia (strong, moderate). Additionally, cultures of bone 
marrow (particularly valuable if antimicrobial agents have 
been administered), stool, duodenal fluid, and urine may 
be beneficial to detect enteric fever (weak, moderate). 
Serologic tests should not be used to diagnose enteric fever 
(strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary. 
For the diagnosis of enteric fever, aerobic blood culture has a 
sensitivity of approximately 50% compared with the more inva-
sive and technically complex acquisition of bone marrow culture 
[129]. Bone marrow culture is likely to be more sensitive than 
blood culture for diagnosis of invasive nontyphoidal Salmonella 
enterica infection [130, 131]. Routine aerobic blood culture is 
recommended as the routine practical conventional diagnostic 
and for the initial diagnostic assessment in people with suspected 
enteric fever or invasive salmonellosis [129–131]. In enteric 
fever, culture of other samples such as stool, duodenal fluid, and 
urine may be helpful. Due to poor performance characteristics, 
serologic tests should not be used for diagnosis of enteric fever. 
Nucleic acid amplification tests lack sensitivity for detection of 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi in blood, but may be useful for 
rapid detection and identification of Salmonella enterica serovar 
Typhi in research settings [129, 130].
Blood culture should be performed in all people with signs of 
septicemia and when enteric fever is suspected. Blood cultures 
may be considered in immunocompromised people who are 
febrile or from whom bacterial pathogens are detected by stool 
testing. Some clinical laboratories are now using blood culture 
technology that can identify a pathogen without isolation [132]. 
In these situations, it is essential to isolate the organism to facilitate 
antimicrobial susceptibility testing and additional molecular char-
acterization by public health laboratories. As the median magni-
tude of bacteremia in enteric fever and invasive nontyphoidal 
Salmonella enterica disease are low at 0.3 and 1.0 colony-forming 
units/mL of blood, respectively, larger volumes of blood need to be 
obtained to maximize detection [131]. Two to three 20-mL blood 
cultures are adequate for detection of bacteremia in adults [133]. 
Lower volumes may be sufficient for detection in infants and 
children who have higher magnitudes of bacteremia than adults 
[131]. Blood cultures may be drawn simultaneously and should be 
collected prior to administration of antimicrobial agents to max-
imize sensitivity. Continuously monitored blood culture systems 
may shorten the time to detection and improve sensitivity com-
pared with manual blood culture methods.
VI. When should testing be performed for Clostridium difficile?
Recommendation.
18.  Testing may be considered for C. difficile in people >2 years 
of age who have a history of diarrhea following antimicrobial 
use and in people with healthcare-associated diarrhea (weak, 
high). A single diarrheal stool specimen is recommended for 
detection of toxin or a toxigenic C. difficile strain (eg, NAAT) 
(strong, low). Multiple specimens do not increase yield.
Evidence Summary.
A complete discussion of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) 
in adults and children will be addressed in the updated IDSA/
SHEA guidelines devoted to this topic [134].
Up to 85% of patients with C. difficile provide a history of 
exposure to antimicrobial agents within the previous 28 days. 
Although a wide range of antimicrobial agents has been impli-
cated, the most strongly associated with development of CDI 
include cephalosporins, β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitors, clin-
damycin, and quinolones. However, the strength of associ-
ation between antibiotic classes and development of CDI may 
be confounded by hospitalization, use of multiple antibiotic 
classes, and duration of exposure. There is increasing recogni-
tion of community-acquired C. difficile; some strains appear to 
be genetically distinct from hospital strains.
Children occasionally develop severe C. difficile disease, 
but this appears to be uncommon, and occurs mostly among 
older children. Concomitantly with adults, the incidence of 
infection has increased among hospitalized children, and 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e63
community-acquired infections with hypervirulent strains have 
emerged, but the severity of disease has not increased as it has 
with adults. In the absence of well-controlled studies that take 
into account the frequency of asymptomatic colonization, it 
remains uncertain whether these new epidemiologic patterns 
represent an emerging burden of disease or an increased rate 
of asymptomatic colonization among children with comorbid-
ities and exposure to factors that alter the intestinal microbiota 
such as hospitalization, antibiotics, and immunosuppression. 
The high frequency (up to 70%) of asymptomatic coloniza-
tion among healthy newborns is another factor that confounds 
understanding of the epidemiology of CDI in children. These 
rates gradually fall to adult levels as the microbiota of the lower 
intestine becomes established by about 2 years of age, but none-
theless render the significance of identifying the organism or 
toxin in an individual child <2 years of age uncertain.
Clostridium difficile should be considered in patients with 
diarrhea occurring in hospitals. Studies have found that C. dif-
ficile is more prevalent in diarrheal stools obtained >72 hours 
after admission. Colonization is common in hospitalized 
patients and residents of long-term care facilities. Because 
asymptomatic carriage is recognized, patients without diarrhea 
should not be tested or treated. In the laboratory, this is usually 
implemented using a rejection policy for formed stool.
A number of different testing assays and algorithms combin-
ing different assays are available. Though kits that test for toxin 
A and B appear to demonstrate poor sensitivity compared with 
C. difficile cytotoxicity assay (CCA) or toxigenic culture, evi-
dence suggests that patients with positive toxigenic culture and 
positive CCA have a poorer outcome than those with a nega-
tive CCA result. In the future, when it is possible to reconstruct 
the genome from specimens without first culturing the isolate, 
molecular subtype–based epidemiology may help in controlling 
the spread of this organism.
VII. What is the optimal specimen (eg, stool, rectal swab, blood) for 
maximum yield of bacterial, viral, and protozoal organisms (for cul-
ture, immunoassay, and molecular testing)? (Table 5)
Recommendation.
19. 
 The optimal specimen for laboratory diagnosis of infec-
tious diarrhea is a diarrheal stool sample (ie, a sample that 
takes the shape of the container). For detection of bacterial 
infections, if a timely diarrheal stool sample cannot be col-
lected, a rectal swab may be used (weak, low). Molecular 
techniques generally are more sensitive and less dependent 
than culture on the quality of specimen. For identification 
of viral and protozoal agents, and C. difficile toxin, fresh 
stool is preferred (weak, low).
Evidence Summary.
A diarrheal stool sample provides greater fecal material and 
is less prone to environmental degradation when compared 
with a rectal swab. Viral and bacterial infectious agents were 
more likely to be detected from stool samples (49% of cases 
in one study) than from rectal swabs (9% of cases) in adults 
presenting to emergency departments with diarrhea; detec-
tion of norovirus, rotavirus, and bacterial pathogens was 4- to 
6-fold greater from stools samples than from rectal swabs. For 
a thorough review on how samples should be collected, stored, 
and transported, see the IDSA/ASM Guide to Utilization of 
the Microbiology Laboratory [121]; the recommendations for 
infectious diarrhea in these previously published guidelines are 
summarized in Table 5. In general, only a single stool speci-
men is required. However, culture of additional specimens may 
increase the sensitivity to detect bacterial pathogens in patients 
with persistent diarrhea [135].
Clinical laboratories that have adopted newer CIDTs may 
have different specimen requirements. However, even in these 
circumstances, collection of a diarrheal stool specimen is 
important for culture of samples that test positive by CIDT for 
bacterial pathogens for public health considerations and anti-
microbial susceptibility testing, until CIDTs that can serve these 
functions are available in the clinical setting [128].
VIII. What is the clinical relevance of fecal leukocytes or lactoferrin 
or calprotectin in a person with acute diarrhea?
Recommendation.
20. 
 Fecal leukocyte examination and stool lactoferrin detec-
tion should not be used to establish the cause of acute 
infectious diarrhea (strong, moderate). There are insuf-
ficient data available to make a recommendation on the 
value of fecal calprotectin measurement in people with 
acute infectious diarrhea.
Evidence Summary. 
Fecal leukocyte examination may be used to differentiate 
inflammatory diarrhea from secretory diarrhea, but performs 
poorly to establish the infectious cause of diarrhea, especially 
among inpatients [136]. Fecal leukocyte morphology degrades 
in feces during transport and processing, making accurate rec-
ognition and quantitation difficult. In inflammatory diarrhea, 
fecal leukocytes are intermittently present and unevenly distrib-
uted in stool, limiting sensitivity. Lactoferrin has been used as a 
surrogate marker for fecal leukocytes as it is not degraded dur-
ing transport and processing [137]. Lactoferrin screening has 
been proposed as a cost-saving measure to select a subgroup of 
stool samples with higher pretest probability of being positive 
for bacterial pathogens by stool culture [137], but is not used 
commonly in stool processing algorithms by clinical laborato-
ries. Furthermore, lactoferrin also is present in noninfectious 
IBD, resulting in decreased specificity for infectious inflamma-
tory diarrhea [138, 139]. Lactoferrin is a normal component of 
human milk and therefore may be present in varying amounts 
in stools of infants who consume human milk, making assay 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e64 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
results difficult to interpret in these infants. Calprotectin is a 
protein released in large quantities by granulocytes during 
inflammatory processes. Calprotectin is an established marker 
of intestinal inflammation used in patients with IBD. There are 
limited and conflicting reports about the value of measuring 
fecal calprotectin levels in patients with acute infectious diar-
rhea. Whereas some studies in children and adults suggest that 
higher calprotectin levels may suggest bacterial etiologies of 
diarrhea [140, 141], other studies have not found diagnostic 
value [142, 143].
IX. In which clinical scenarios should nonmicrobiologic diagnostic 
tests be performed (eg, imaging, chemistries, complete blood count, 
and serology)?
Recommendations.
21.  Serologic tests are not recommended to establish an eti-
ology of infectious diarrhea or enteric fever (strong, low), 
but may be considered for people with postdiarrheal HUS 
in which a stool culture did not yield a Shiga toxin–pro-
ducing organism (weak, low).
22.  A peripheral white blood cell count and differential and 
serologic assays should not be performed to establish an 
etiology of diarrhea (strong, low), but may be useful clin-
ically (weak, low).
23.  Frequent monitoring of hemoglobin and platelet 
counts, electrolytes, and blood urea nitrogen and cre-
atinine is recommended to detect hematologic and 
renal function abnormalities that are early manifes-
tations of HUS and precede renal injury for people 
with diagnosed E. coli O157 or another STEC infec-
tion (especially STEC that produce Shiga toxin 2 or 
are associated with bloody diarrhea) (strong, high). 
Examining a peripheral blood smear for the presence 
of red blood cell fragmentation is necessary when HUS 
is suspected (strong, high).
24.  Endoscopy or proctoscopic examination should be consid-
ered in people with persistent, unexplained diarrhea who 
have AIDS, in people with certain underlying conditions 
as well as people with acute diarrhea with clinical colitis 
or proctitis and in people with persistent diarrhea who 
engage in anal intercourse (strong, low). Duodenal aspi-
rates may be considered in select people for diagnosis of 
suspected Giardia, Strongyloides, Cystoisospora, or micro-
sporidia infection (weak, low).
25.  Imaging (eg, ultrasonography, computed tomography, or 
magnetic resonance imaging) may be considered to detect 
aortitis, mycotic aneurysms, signs or symptoms of peritoni-
tis, intra-abdominal free air, toxic megacolon, or extravascu-
lar foci of infection in older people with invasive Salmonella 
enterica or Yersinia infections if there is sustained fever or 
bacteremia despite adequate antimicrobial therapy or if the 
patient has underlying atherosclerosis or has recent-onset 
chest, back, or abdominal pain (weak, low).
Evidence Summary. 
Although not useful in most circumstances, serologic tests 
can aid in diagnosing an antecedent STEC infection (the CDC 
has validated testing available for serogroups O157 and O111) 
among patients with HUS if a Shiga toxin–producing organism 
has not been identified by stool culture and Shiga toxin test-
ing [67]. Due to poor performance characteristics, serologic 
tests, such as the Widal test, should not be used for diagnosis of 
enteric fever [62].
The total white blood cell count and differential may pro-
vide suggestion of a bacterial etiology when viral or parasitic 
etiologies also are being considered. The total white blood cell 
count and neutrophil count are often increased with invasive 
bacterial pathogens and the platelet count may be elevated. In 
situations of bacterial sepsis, the total white blood cell count 
and platelet count may be lowered compared with normal val-
ues for age. Shigellosis can be associated with a leukemoid reac-
tion. A white blood cell count that is within range for age and 
a lymphocytic predominance may occur with viral etiologies. 
An increased eosinophil count may occur with parasitic infec-
tions that involve a tissue phase. A high total white blood cell 
count and neutrophil count often occur in patients with STEC 
O157 infections who subsequently develop HUS [144, 145]. 
Monocyte predominance may suggest the presence of an intra-
cellular pathogen such as Salmonella [146].
As HUS evolves over time, a single complete blood cell count 
is not sufficient to define risk. In fact, a near-normal hemoglo-
bin value may suggest dehydration. Patients with a decreasing 
platelet count trend during days 1–14 of the diarrheal illness 
are at greater risk of developing HUS. Daily monitoring can 
stop when the platelet count begins to increase or stabilize in 
patients with resolved or resolving symptoms. Patients with an 
increasing creatinine level and blood pressure and signs of vol-
ume overload should be monitored closely and should receive 
care in a center that can manage acute renal failure [147].
Endoscopy with small bowel biopsy is useful for diagnosis of 
MAC and microsporidiosis. If colitis is suspected, sigmoidos-
copy with biopsy of abnormal mucosa may assist in differenti-
ating infectious colitis from inflammatory bowel disease, CMV 
disease, or C. difficile colitis. Abdominal computed tomogra-
phy may detect mucosal thickening or other changes related 
to colitis and is helpful when intestinal disease is considered. 
Proctoscopic examination may be useful in diagnosing proctitis 
in patients who have had receptive anal intercourse. Duodenal 
aspirate has been shown to be useful in the diagnosis of Giardia 
and Strongyloides infection in patients with recurring diarrhea 
in whom stool evaluation did not yield an etiology [148, 149].
Although aortitis and aneurysm formation are rare compli-
cations of Salmonella and Yersinia diarrhea, they are universally 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e65
fatal without appropriate medical and surgical treatment. Delays 
in diagnosis have been associated with poor prognosis [85, 86].
X. What follow-up evaluations of stool specimens and nonstool tests 
should be performed in people with laboratory-confirmed patho-
gen-specific diarrhea who improve or respond to treatment, and in 
people who fail to improve or who have persistent diarrhea?
Recommendations.
26.  Follow-up testing is not recommended in most people for 
case management following resolution of diarrhea (strong, 
moderate). Collection and analysis of serial stool speci-
mens using culture-dependent methods for Salmonella 
enterica subspecies enterica serovar Typhi or Salmonella 
enterica subspecies enterica serovar Paratyphi, STEC, 
Shigella, nontyphoidal Salmonella, and other bacterial 
pathogens are recommended in certain situations by local 
health authorities following cessation of diarrhea to enable 
return to child care, employment, or group social activities 
(strong, moderate). Practitioners should collaborate with 
local public health authorities to adhere to policies regard-
ing return to settings in which transmission is a consider-
ation (strong, high).
27.  A clinical and laboratory reevaluation may be indicated in 
people who do not respond to an initial course of therapy 
and should include consideration of noninfectious condi-
tions, including lactose intolerance (weak, low).
28.  Noninfectious conditions, including IBD and post- IBS, 
should be considered as underlying etiologies in people 
with symptoms lasting 14 or more days and unidentified 
sources (strong, moderate).
29. 
 Reassessment of fluid and electrolyte balance, nutritional 
status, and optimal dose and duration of antimicrobial 
therapy is recommended in people with persistent symp-
toms (strong, high) (Figure 1).
Evidence Summary. 
The usual duration of symptoms of diarrhea with or without 
medical therapy can be expected to vary by organism, but dur-
ation of up to 10–14 days or longer can occur. Persistent car-
riage is a concern for some etiologic agents, such as Salmonella, 
STEC, and Shigella, and there are public health concerns stem-
ming from prolonged carriage for people working in food ser-
vice, child care, group settings, and long-term care facilities. 
The majority of patients with diarrhea will not have a labora-
tory diagnosis, so laboratory-based specific recommendations 
would be of minimal use. Repeat stool cultures are required in 
certain situations to enable return to employment and group 
social activities; these requirements may differ by local juris-
diction. When required, repeat testing is best done using tra-
ditional culture methods, as CIDTs do not indicate that living 
organisms are present, and have not been validated as suitable 
for proof of cure.
All patients should be educated about mode of spread of diar-
rheal diseases, typically fecal-oral, and warned that they poten-
tially may be infectious to others after symptom resolution and 
for ensuing weeks to months. Careful hand hygiene should be 
observed, particularly if the patient is involved in food prepa-
ration, child or adult education, or healthcare. Specific situa-
tions in which additional follow-up should be considered are 
listed below.
As jurisdictional and state regulations regarding the number 
and timing of stool cultures required for return to the child care 
setting may vary, clinicians are advised to consult their local 
public health authority for guidance. As an example, 3 negative 
stool cultures obtained at least 24 hours apart, at least 48 hours 
after cessation of antimicrobial therapy, and not earlier than 
1 month after symptom onset may be required for readmission 
of children and staff with Salmonella serovar Typhi infection. 
If any stool culture yields Salmonella Typhi, obtain monthly 
stool cultures during the subsequent 12 months until at least 
3 consecutive stool cultures are without growth of Salmonella 
Typhi. Negative stool culture results typically are not required 
for return to childcare settings in children or staff with nonty-
phoidal Salmonella enterica serovar infections. For STEC, chil-
dren are excluded from child care until diarrhea resolves, and 2 
stool cultures negative for the organism typically are required 
for readmission [150]. Given the increasing detection of non-
O157 STEC infections in recent years, some jurisdictions have 
begun basing exclusion policies of people with STEC on the 
observed virulence of the illness and virulence gene profile of 
the infecting strain. Regular and consistent follow-up of patients 
recovering from diarrhea-associated HUS is recommended 
until laboratory and clinical parameters have returned to nor-
mal values. Parameters of concern include indicators of renal 
function, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. There is no consen-
sus for the frequency of follow-up laboratory testing beyond the 
point that clinical and laboratory resolution is achieved.
In the situation where a pathogen has not been identified, it 
may be reasonable to reevaluate stool and/or blood if there is 
evidence of systemic symptoms, for evaluation for a previously 
undetected pathogen.
If clinical symptoms worsen, there are several possible expla-
nations. If an antimicrobial agent has been given, antibiotic-as-
sociated diarrhea (non–C. difficile) should be considered. If the 
patient is hospitalized or has had healthcare exposure, C. diffi-
cile becomes an additional consideration, particularly if there is 
fever or leukocytosis >20 000 cells/μL [151], and stool should 
be assessed for C. difficile toxin or a toxigenic C. difficile strain 
(eg, NAAT). Stool also should be submitted for culture and 
susceptibility to determine the presence of a bacterial etiology. 
If a bacterial etiology is confirmed and an antimicrobial agent 
is indicated or has been used, susceptibility testing may reveal 
whether the worsening symptoms could be due to antimicrobial 
agent resistance.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e66 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
Table 6. Recommended Antimicrobial Agents by Pathogen
Indication
First Choice
Alternative
Comments/Considerations
Bacteriaa
 Campylobacter
Azithromycin
Ciprofloxacin
 Clostridium difficile
Oral vancomycin
Fidaxomicin
Fidaxomicin not currently recommended for people 
<18 years of age. Metronidazole is still acceptable treat-
ment for nonsevere CDI in children and as a second-line 
agent for adults with nonsevere CDI (eg, who cannot 
obtain vancomycin or fidaxomicin at a reasonable cost).
 Nontyphoidal 
Salmonella entericab
Usually not indicated for  
uncomplicated infection
NA
Antimicrobial therapy should be considered for groups at 
increased risk for invasive infection: neonates (up to 
3 months old), persons >50 years old with suspected 
atherosclerosis, persons with immunosuppression, 
cardiac disease (valvular or endovascular), or significant 
joint disease. If susceptible, treatment with ceftriaxone, 
ciprofloxacin, TMP-SMX, or amoxicillin.
 Salmonella enterica 
Typhi or Paratyphib
Ceftriaxone or ciprofloxacin
Ampicillin or TMP-SMX or 
azithromycin
 Shigellaa
Azithromycinc or ciprofloxacina,  
or ceftriaxone
TMP-SMX or ampicillin if susceptible Clinicians treating people with shigellosis for whom anti-
biotic treatment is indicated should avoid prescribing 
fluoroquinolones if the ciprofloxacin MIC is 0.12 μg/ 
mL or higher even if the laboratory report identifies the 
isolate as susceptible. See https://emergency. 
cdc.gov/han/han00401.asp
 Vibrio cholerae
Doxycyclined
Ciprofloxacin, azithromycin, or 
ceftriaxone
 Non–Vibrio choleraed
Usually not indicated for noninvasive disease.  
Single-agent therapy for noninvasive disease if 
treated.
Invasive disease: ceftriaxone plus doxycycline
Usually not indicated for noninvasive 
disease. Single-agent therapy for 
noninvasive disease if treated.
Invasive disease: TMP-SMX plus an 
aminoglycoside
 Yersinia enterocolitica
TMP-SMX
Cefotaxime or ciprofloxacin
Parasites
 Cryptosporidium spp
Nitazoxanide (HIV-uninfected, HIV-infected  
in combination with effective cART):
Effective cART:
Immune reconstitution may lead to 
microbiologic and clinical response 
[154, 209, 210]
NA
 Cyclospora cayetanensis
TMP-SMX
Nitazoxanide (limited data)
Patients with HIV infection may require higher doses or 
longer durations of TMP-SMX treatment
 Giardia lamblia
• Tinidazole
Note: Based on data from HIV-uninfected children
• Nitazoxanide
Metronidazole
Note: Based on data from HIV- 
uninfected children
• Tinidazole is approved in the United States for children 
aged ≥3 years. It is available in tablets that can be 
crushed.
• Metronidazole has high frequency of gastrointestinal side 
effects. A pediatric suspension of metronidazole is not 
commercially available but can be compounded from 
tablets. Metronidazole is not FDA approved for the treat-
ment of giardiasis.
 Cystoisospora belli
TMP-SMX
Pyrimethamine
Potential second-line alternatives:
• Ciprofloxacin
• Nitazoxanide
 Trichinella spp
Albendazole
Alternative: mebendazole
• Therapy less effective in late stage of infection, when 
larvae encapsulate in muscle
Fungus
 Microsporidia
For disseminated (not ocular) and intestinal infection 
attributed to microsporidia other than Enterocytozoon 
bieneusi or Vittaforma corneae:
• Albendazole after initiation of cART and resolution of 
signs and symptoms
For E. bieneusi or V. corneae infections:
• Fumagillin recommended for treatment of infections 
due to E. bieneusi in HIV-infected adults
NA
Effective cART therapy:
• Immune reconstitution may lead to microbiologic and 
clinical response
• Fumagillin for systemic use is unavailable in the United 
States and data on dosing in children are unavailable.
• Consultation with an expert is recommended.
Abbreviations: cART
, combination antiretroviral therapy; CDI, Clostridium difficile infection; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; MIC, minimum 
inhibitory concentration; NA, not applicable; TMP-SMX, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
aFor information on susceptibility patterns in the United States, see the National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System (NARMS; http://www.cdc.gov/narms). Susceptibility testing 
should be considered when a therapeutic agent is selected.
bIf invasive disease is suspected or confirmed, ceftriaxone is preferred over ciprofloxacin due to increasing resistance to ciprofloxacin.cMost clinical laboratories do not test for azithromy-
cin susceptibility.
dPrimary therapy is aggressive rehydration; antibiotics are adjunctive therapy.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e67
Persistent symptoms (>14 days after onset) may last for 
months or even years and may respond to a similar manage-
ment strategy. Protozoa (including Cryptosporidium species, 
Cyclospora cayetanensis, Cystoisospora belli, and Giardia lam-
blia) and microsporidia are considerations, particularly in 
an immunocompromised host. Diagnosis of these pathogens 
(Table 5) optimally is performed via microscopy or antigen 
detection. Treatment, where possible or advisable, is outlined 
in Table 6. When assessments for infectious agents do not 
yield an etiology, consideration of noninfectious illnesses and 
inflammatory processes should occur [152]. Both IBD and 
celiac disease are considerations. Postinfectious functional 
gastrointestinal disorders, including irritable bowel syndrome 
(PI-IBS), may occur in 3%–10% of adults following bacterial 
diarrhea. Symptoms attributable to PI-IBS generally resolve 
within 1 year, but may persist for several years. Assessment 
and management by a gastroenterologist for these conditions 
should be considered.
Although definitive studies are lacking, molecular-epide-
miologic assessments and outbreak investigations suggest 
that reinfection with enteric pathogens and possible recur-
rence of clinical symptoms are more likely to occur among 
people who reside in crowded settings with impaired access 
to hand hygiene. Recurrent symptomatic infections are more 
likely to occur with enteric pathogens with higher rates of 
infectivity and when cross-protection to infection with other 
strains does not result from an infection with one strain or 
serovar.
Assessment of dosing of an antimicrobial agent to ensure 
that therapeutic levels are or were achieved may be indicated. 
In some situations, adjunctive therapy such as a probiotic may 
be beneficial in restoration of dysbiosis due to the pathogen 
or treatment [153]. The administration of nitazoxanide has 
resulted in reduction of clinical symptoms in nonresponders 
and people with persistent symptoms [154, 155]. Nutritional 
rehabilitation and fluid and electrolyte administration are the 
mainstays of management, with a preference for enteral admin-
istration when tolerated.
Noninfectious etiologies of diarrhea should be considered if 
an individual with a worsening clinical course remains unre-
sponsive to management. Imaging, including colonoscopy or 
endoscopy, may be indicated and consultation with a gastro-
enterologist may be beneficial in directing evaluation in the 
worsening host.
The persistence of organisms in the gastrointestinal tract as 
detected by stool assessments varies by organism and host fac-
tors. While asymptomatic shedding may result in transmission 
of an organism from person to person, the more clinically rel-
evant issue relates to an infection that results in clinical symp-
tomatology. In people who are able to practice meticulous hand 
hygiene and who are not employed in a setting where trans-
mission could result in a severe infection or outbreak, repetitive 
testing will not result in clinical benefit and will be detrimental 
in terms of cost and use of limited healthcare resources. When 
the result(s) of testing will not impact management, follow-up 
testing should be deferred. However, in situations where treat-
ment failures are more likely to occur or the infecting pathogen 
has demonstrated multidrug resistance, a test of cure may be 
beneficial.
Empiric Management of Infectious Diarrhea
XI. When is empiric antibacterial treatment indicated for children 
and adults with bloody diarrhea and, if indicated, with what agent?
a. 
What are modifying conditions that would support 
antimicrobial treatment of children and adults with 
bloody diarrhea?
b. 
In which instances should contacts be treated empiric-
ally if the agent is unknown?
Recommendations (Table 6).
30. In immunocompetent children and adults, empiric anti-
microbial therapy for bloody diarrhea while waiting for 
results of investigations is not recommended (strong, low), 
except for the following:
a. 
Infants <3 months of age with suspicion of bacterial 
etiology.
b. 
Ill immunocompetent people with fever documented 
in a medical setting, abdominal pain, bloody diar-
rhea, and bacillary dysentery (frequent scant bloody 
stools, fever, abdominal cramps, tenesmus) presump-
tively due to Shigella.
c. 
People who have recently traveled internation-
ally with body temperatures ≥38.5°C and/or signs 
of sepsis (weak, low). See https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/
travel/yellowbook/2016/the-pre-travel-consultation/
travelers-diarrhea.
31.  The empiric antimicrobial therapy in adults should be 
either a fluoroquinolone such as ciprofloxacin, or azithro-
mycin, depending on the local susceptibility patterns and 
travel history (strong, moderate). Empiric therapy for chil-
dren includes a third-generation cephalosporin for infants 
<3 months of age and others with neurologic involvement, 
or azithromycin, depending on local susceptibility pat-
terns and travel history (strong, moderate).
32.  Empiric antibacterial treatment should be considered 
in immunocompromised people with severe illness and 
bloody diarrhea (strong, low).
33.  Asymptomatic contacts of people with bloody diarrhea 
should not be offered empiric treatment, but should be 
advised to follow appropriate infection prevention and 
control measures (strong, moderate).
34.  People with clinical features of sepsis who are suspected 
of having enteric fever should be treated empirically with 
broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy after blood, stool, 
and urine culture collection (strong, low). Antimicrobial 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e68 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
therapy should be narrowed when antimicrobial suscep-
tibility testing results become available (strong, high). If 
an isolate is unavailable and there is a clinical suspicion 
of enteric fever, antimicrobial choice may be tailored to 
susceptible patterns from the setting where acquisition 
occurred (weak, low).
35. 
 Antimicrobial therapy for people with infections attrib-
uted to STEC O157 and other STEC that produce Shiga 
toxin 2 (or if the toxin genotype is unknown) should be 
avoided (strong, moderate). Antimicrobial therapy for 
people with infections attributed to other STEC that do 
not produce Shiga toxin 2 (generally non-O157 STEC) 
is debatable due to insufficient evidence of benefit or the 
potential harm associated with some classes of antimicro-
bial agents (strong, low).
Evidence Summary. 
Intestinal perforation and death were more common in case series 
of patients with typhoid fever in the preantibiotic era (before 
1950) than in the antibiotic era (after 1950) [156]. Patients with 
enteric fever treated early in their clinical courses have better out-
comes than patients treated later [157]. Time to loss of fever was 
longer and case fatality ratio was higher among series of patients 
receiving supportive treatment only and patients receiving low 
doses of appropriate antimicrobial therapy compared with 
patients receiving recommended doses [158].
In adults, as in children, bloody diarrhea can be due to infec-
tious and noninfectious causes. The presence of fever, abdom-
inal pain, or vomiting is more suggestive of infection, which 
in these cases is likely to be due to an invasive/inflammatory 
pathogen. The most commonly identified pathogens in this cat-
egory in North America are Salmonella, Campylobacter, C. dif-
ficile, Shigella, and STEC. Several RCTs specifically examining 
the benefit of empiric treatment of adults with acute, severe 
diarrhea, overall have demonstrated an average of 1 day shorter 
symptoms with an antimicrobial agent compared with placebo. 
However, these data are considered low quality due to incon-
sistency and indirectness. The antimicrobial agents utilized in 
the most recent of these studies were fluoroquinolones; previ-
ous data on trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) are 
not considered applicable today because of high rates of resist-
ance. In general, the largest treatment effect was seen in patients 
with salmonellosis, followed by campylobacteriosis, but anti-
microbial treatment also was accompanied by an increase in 
prolonged Salmonella shedding and occasional shedding of 
quinolone-resistant Campylobacter. Moreover, the benefit of 
antimicrobial treatment of proven Campylobacter infection is 
small, and antimicrobial agents are not recommended for most 
cases of proven Salmonella diarrhea. Given that the vast major-
ity of inflammatory infectious diarrhea episodes are self-limited 
and that the treatment benefit is modest, in most cases the risks 
of treatment outweigh the benefits. Exceptions may occur in 
severe infections and in infections occurring in immunocom-
promised hosts. Severe CDIs have doubled in incidence since 
2001 and can mimic other forms of infectious colitis. While 
most cases are associated with healthcare and recent anti-
microbial agent use, there has been an increase in communi-
ty-acquired cases with minimal or even no antimicrobial agent 
exposure. Use of concomitant antimicrobial agents is associated 
with decreased cure rates and higher relapse rates in CDI.
STEC infections also must be a consideration in any patient 
with bloody diarrhea, even when fever is present, but particu-
larly when it is absent. Treatment of STEC O157 infections and 
likely non-O157 STEC infections that produce Shiga toxin 2 
with fluoroquinolones, β-lactams, TMP-SMX, and metronida-
zole in patients of all ages should be avoided because of evidence 
of harm. Although very limited data are available on the possi-
ble risks or benefits associated with treating people with these 
infections with macrolide antibiotics, insufficient evidence of 
benefit and some evidence for harm favors avoidance of these 
agents among people infected with STEC O157 or other STEC 
that produce Shiga toxin 2 [159]. Insufficient data are available 
to assess the risks and benefits associated with treating less viru-
lent STEC infections (ie, STEC that do not produce Shiga toxin 
2) with antibiotics. However, because the Shiga toxin profile is 
often unknown when treatment is considered and because no 
clear benefit exists for treating patients with diarrhea caused by 
less virulent STEC infections with antibiotics, avoidance of anti-
biotic treatment is recommended.
Several RCTs have demonstrated a small but significant 
benefit for antimicrobial therapy in reducing the duration of 
symptoms in Campylobacter gastroenteritis. A meta-analy-
sis confirmed an average of 1 day shorter duration of illness 
with fluoroquinolone or macrolide treatment compared with 
placebo [160]. However, symptoms in all cases in these studies 
were self-limited and the treatment effect appeared to be largest 
in patients treated early in the illness course. Earlier, directed 
treatment may become more feasible with the increasing use of 
CIDT, facilitating organism identification. Furthermore, there 
is no evidence that antimicrobial therapy prolongs the carrier 
state or encourages clinical relapses in campylobacteriosis, so 
the risk of treatment is relatively small. Although quinolone 
resistance may develop during therapy, person-to-person 
spread of drug-resistant Campylobacter is not believed to be a 
common scenario. Hence, it is reasonable to treat patients with 
particularly prolonged or severe disease. Fatal Campylobacter 
infections remain rare, but are more common in severely immu-
nocompromised hosts, and despite the lack of evidence, it is 
reasonable to offer treatment to immunocompromised patients 
with otherwise uncomplicated Campylobacter gastroenteritis.
The choice of antimicrobial agent may change due to evolv-
ing resistance patterns [161]. Fluoroquinolone resistance in US 
and Canadian patients without international travel remains low, 
but is significantly higher in many commonly visited countries 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e69
(ranging from 56% in Mexico to >92% in Thailand) [162, 163]. 
Macrolide resistance remains much less common (<5% among 
human isolates in the United States [164]). Hence, azithromy-
cin can be recommended as primary treatment for traveler’s 
diarrhea in Thailand based on randomized trial data, and also 
should be considered first-line treatment for Campylobacter 
infection in travelers to other locations unless fluoroquinolone 
susceptibility is confirmed. Other antimicrobial agents that may 
be effective in individual Campylobacter isolates include TMP-
SMX and tetracyclines, although in general, resistance rates are 
considerably higher and there is no advantage to these agents 
over azithromycin.
XII. When is empiric treatment indicated for children and adults 
with acute, prolonged, or persistent watery diarrhea and, if indi-
cated, with what agent?
a. 
What are modifying conditions that would support 
empiric antimicrobial treatment of children and 
adults with watery diarrhea?
b. 
In which instances, if any, should contacts be treated 
empirically if the agent is unknown?
Recommendations (Table 6).
36.  In most people with acute watery diarrhea and without 
recent international travel, empiric antimicrobial therapy 
is not recommended (strong, low). An exception may be 
made in people who are immunocompromised or young 
infants who are ill-appearing. Empiric treatment should be 
avoided in people with persistent watery diarrhea lasting 
14 days or more (strong, low).
37. 
 Asymptomatic contacts of people with acute or persistent 
watery diarrhea should not be offered empiric or preven-
tive therapy, but should be advised to follow appropri-
ate infection prevention and control measures (strong, 
moderate).
Evidence Summary. 
Watery diarrhea can be the primary manifestation of either an 
inflammatory or non-inflammatory intestinal tract infection. 
The presence of high fever or significant abdominal pain, and 
duration >3 days are suggestive of inflammatory infection with 
indications for investigation (Table 3). While several RCTs have 
shown a benefit of empiric treatment prior to culture results in 
these cases, the evidence is of low quality due to inconsistency 
and indirectness. Combined with the relatively small benefit of 
empiric treatment (1 day shorter illness on average), empiric 
treatment cannot be recommended. In the absence of signs and 
symptoms to suggest inflammatory bacterial infection, viral 
infection becomes significantly more likely and antimicro-
bial treatment is ineffective and potentially harmful, making 
empiric treatment even less desirable.
Persistent watery diarrhea generally should not be treated in the 
absence of an identified cause. This syndrome in otherwise healthy 
adults and children is only rarely due to bacterial infection, and 
bacteria that are reported to be associated with prolonged diarrhea 
(such as Aeromonas, Plesiomonas, C. difficile, and EAEC) are often 
not detected on routine stool culture. When persistent diarrhea is 
caused by infection, the most common etiologic agents are proto-
zoal (including parasites such as Giardia lamblia, Cryptosporidium 
species, Cyclospora cayetanensis, and Cystoisospora belli, depend-
ing in part on the epidemiologic setting) and are best managed 
with pathogen-specific therapy (rather than empiric therapy 
before the infection is diagnosed). One exception to this is persis-
tent diarrhea in patients who are severely immunocompromised 
(including people with AIDS), in which more conventional path-
ogens such as Campylobacter and Salmonella may persist. While it 
remains preferable to identify a specific cause in these cases, there 
are situations where an empiric trial with an antimicrobial agent 
may be considered to provide symptomatic benefit to optimize 
tolerance of highly active antiretroviral therapy.
Directed Management of Infectious Diarrhea
XIII. How should treatment be modified when a clinically plausible 
organism is identified from a diagnostic test?
Recommendation.
38. 
 Antimicrobial treatment should be modified or discon-
tinued when a clinically plausible organism is identified 
(strong, high) Table 6.
Evidence Summary. 
Recommendations for antimicrobial agents by pathogen with 
first and alternative choices are listed in Table 6 for commonly 
identified bacterial (Campylobacter, C. difficile, nontyphoidal 
Salmonella, Shigella, Vibrio cholerae, non–Vibrio cholerae, 
Yersinia enterocolitica) and other organisms (Cryptosporidium, 
Cyclospora, Giardia, Cystoisospora, and microsporidia).
Supportive Treatment
XIV. How should rehydration therapy be administered?
Recommendations (Table 7)
39.  Reduced ORS is recommended as the first-line therapy 
of mild to moderate dehydration in infants, children, and 
adults with acute diarrhea from any cause (strong, mod-
erate), and in people with mild to moderate dehydration 
associated with vomiting or severe diarrhea.
40.  Nasogastric administration of ORS may be considered 
in infants, children and adults with moderate dehydra-
tion, who cannot tolerate oral intake, or in children with 
normal mental status who are too weak or refuse to drink 
adequately (weak, low).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e70 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
41.  Isotonic intravenous fluids such as lactated Ringer’s and 
normal saline solution should be administered when there 
is severe dehydration, shock, or altered mental status and 
failure of ORS therapy (strong, high) or ileus (strong, 
moderate). In people with ketonemia, an initial course of 
intravenous hydration may be needed to enable tolerance 
of oral rehydration (weak, low).
42. In severe dehydration, intravenous rehydration should be 
continued until pulse, perfusion, and mental status nor-
malize and the patient awakens, has no risk factors for 
aspiration, and has no evidence of ileus. The remaining 
deficit can be replaced by using ORS (weak, low). Infants, 
children, and adults with mild to moderate dehydration 
should receive ORS until clinical dehydration is corrected 
(strong, low).
43. 
 Once the patient is rehydrated, maintenance fluids should 
be administered. Replace ongoing losses in stools from 
infants, children, and adults with ORS, until diarrhea and 
vomiting are resolved (strong, low).
Evidence Summary. 
Replacement of water, electrolytes, and nutrients lost during diar-
rhea is essential in the management of diarrhea. During diarrhea, 
the coupled transport of sodium and glucose across the intesti-
nal brush border remains intact, and leads to enhanced water 
absorption, enabling oral rehydration. Oral rehydration has been 
credited with saving millions of lives in the management of dehy-
dration in all age groups, regardless of the cause, and is recom-
mended by the WHOs and as the first line of rehydration [165].
The safety and efficacy of ORS, in comparison to intravenous 
rehydration therapy (IVT), was evaluated in a meta-analysis of 
17 RCTs involving 1811 patients aged <18 years from high-in-
come and low-income countries. There were no important clin-
ical differences in failure to rehydrate, weight gain at discharge, 
hyponatremia or hypernatremia, duration of diarrhea, or total 
fluid intake at 6 or 24 hours between children receiving ORS and 
IVT. Phlebitis occurred more often in children receiving IVT, and 
paralytic ileus occurred more often with ORS (though the latter 
difference was not statistically different). The model estimated that 
4% of children treated with ORS would fail and require IVT [166].
Standard WHO-ORS (osmolarity 311 mmol/L) was the rec-
ommended agent for several decades [167]. Despite its ability 
to hydrate, WHO-ORS had limitations, including inability to 
reduce the volume or duration of diarrhea, and concerns that 
it could lead to hypernatremia, especially in noncholera diar-
rhea in which salt losses are reduced. In 2002, a hypotonic 
ORS with total osmolarity <250 mmol/L was recommended by 
the WHO and subsequently by various other advisory bodies 
as first-line therapy for mild to moderate dehydration caused 
by diarrhea of all causes [168]. In a meta-analysis of 14 RCTs 
involving children <5 years of age with diarrheal dehydration 
(all causes) from low- and high-income countries, reduced 
Table 7. Fluid and Nutritional Management of Diarrhea
Degree of Dehydrationa
Rehydration Therapy
Replacement of Losses During Maintenancec
Mild to moderate 
dehydration
Infantsb and children: ORS, 50–100 mL/kg over 3–4 hours
Adolescents and adults (≥30 kg): ORS, 2–4 L
Infants and children:
<10 kg body weight: 60–120 mL ORS for each diarrheal stool or 
vomiting episode, up to ~500 mL/day
>10 kg body weight: 120–240 mL ORS for each diarrheal stool or 
vomiting episode; up to ~1 L/day
Adolescents and adults:
Ad libitum, up to ~2 L/day
Replace losses as above as long as diarrhea or vomiting continues
Severe dehydration
Infants: Malnourished infants may benefit from smaller-volume, 
frequent boluses of 10 mL/kg body weight due to reduced 
capacity to increase cardiac output with larger volume 
resuscitation.
Children, adolescents, and adults: Intravenous isotonic crystal-
loid boluses, per current fluid resuscitation guidelines, until 
pulse, perfusion, and mental status return to normal. Adjust 
electrolytes and administer dextrose based on chemistry 
values. Administer up to 20 mL/kg body weight until pulse, 
perfusion, and mental status return to normal.
Infants and children:
<10 kg body weight: 60–120 mL ORS for each diarrheal stool or 
vomiting episode, up to ~500 mL/day
>10 kg body weight: 120–240 mL ORS for each diarrheal stool or 
vomiting episode; up to ~1 L/day
Adolescents and adults:
Ad libitum, up to ~2 L/day
Replace losses as above as long as diarrhea or vomiting continue. 
If unable to drink, administer either through a nasogastric tube or 
give 5% dextrose 0.25 normal saline solution with 20 mEq/L 
potassium chloride intravenously.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Managing acute gastroenteritis among children: oral rehydration, maintenance, and nutritional therapy. MMWR Recomm 
Rep 2003; 52(RR-16):1–16 and World Health Organization. The treatment of diarrhoea: a manual for physicians and other senior health workers (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/rr5216a1.htm).
Low-osmolarity ORS can be given to all age groups, with any cause of diarrhea. It is safe in the presence of hypernatremia as well as hyponatremia (except when edema is present). 
Some commercially available formulations that can be used as ORS include Pedialyte Liters (Abbott Nutrition), CeraLyte (Cero Products), and Enfalac Lytren (Mead Johnson). Popular bev-
erages that should not be used for rehydration include apple juice, Gatorade, and commercial soft drinks.
Abbreviation: ORS, oral rehydration solution.
aA variety of scales are available to grade the severity of dehydration in young children but no single, standard, validated method exists. Note that signs of dehydration may be masked 
when a child is hypernatremic.
bBreastfed infants should continue nursing throughout the illness.
cAfter rehydration is complete, maintenance fluids should be resumed along with an age-appropriate normal diet offered every 3–4 hours. Children previously receiving a lactose-contain-
ing formula can tolerate the same product in most instances. Diluted formula does not appear to confer any benefit.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e71
osmolarity ORS was associated with fewer unscheduled infu-
sions [165], reduced stool output, and decreased vomiting 
compared with WHO-ORS. In a meta-analysis of adults and 
children with cholera, reduced osmolarity ORS (≤270 mmol/L) 
was associated with more biochemical hyponatremia compared 
with WHO-ORS (osmolarity ≥310 mmol/L), although no sig-
nificant differences in serious consequences were noted based 
on the 4 RCTs included in the analysis [169]. Recipients of a 
polymer-based oral rehydration solution demonstrated fewer 
unscheduled intravenous infusions compared with pediatric 
recipients of WHO-ORS ≥310 mmol/L who had acute watery 
diarrhea or diarrhea attributed to a cholera infection. The 
polymer-based ORS was also favored over the hypo-osmolar 
ORS ≤270 mmol/L, although there were insufficient data to 
adequately power the analysis [170]. ORS is an integral compo-
nent of rehydration and may be used effectively in combination 
with intravenous therapy and with transition to enteral feeding.
XV. When should feeding be initiated following rehydration?
Recommendations.
44.  Human milk feeding should be continued in infants and 
children throughout the diarrheal episode (strong, low).
45. 
 Resumption of an age-appropriate usual diet is recom-
mended during or immediately after the rehydration pro-
cess is completed (strong, low).
Evidence Summary. 
Early studies showing that children who resumed feeding during 
or after rehydration had improved nutritional outcome [171] led 
to multiple guidelines supporting this practice. A meta-analysis 
(12 RCT, most performed 20 years ago and for which reporting of 
methodology was incomplete) showed that early feeding (within 
12 hours of beginning rehydration) was as safe and effective as 
later feeding among children aged <6 years old with acute diar-
rhea from low-, middle-, and high-income countries [172]. There 
was no significant difference between early and late refeeding 
groups in the need for unscheduled intravenous therapy, number 
of children with vomiting and persistent diarrhea, and length of 
hospital stay. Data were insufficient to assess differences in dur-
ation of diarrhea, stool output, or weight gain. A meta-analysis 
of 33 trials involving children <5 years of age with acute diarrhea 
(mostly inpatients from high- and middle-income countries) 
found that a lactose-free diet reduced the duration of diarrhea by 
an average of 18 hours and reduced treatment failure (continued 
or worsening diarrhea or vomiting, the need for additional rehy-
dration, or continuing weight loss) by one half [173]. In adults, 
early refeeding decreases intestinal permeability caused by infec-
tions, reduces illness duration, and improves nutritional out-
comes. This is particularly important in low- and middle-income 
countries, where underlying preexisting malnutrition is often a 
factor. Although the BRAT (bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast) 
diet and the avoidance of dairy are commonly recommended, 
supporting data for those interventions are limited. Instructing 
patients to refrain from eating solid food for 24 hours also does 
not appear to be useful [174].
Ancillary Management
XVI. What options are available for symptomatic relief, and when 
should they be offered?
Recommendations.
46.  Ancillary treatment with antimotility, antinausea, or 
antiemetic agents can be considered once the patient is 
adequately hydrated, but their use is not a substitute for 
fluid and electrolyte therapy (weak, low).
47.  Antimotility drugs (eg, loperamide) should not be given 
to children <18 years of age with acute diarrhea (strong, 
moderate). Loperamide may be given to immunocompe-
tent adults with acute watery diarrhea (weak, moderate), 
but should be avoided at any age in suspected or proven 
cases where toxic megacolon may result in inflammatory 
diarrhea or diarrhea with fever (strong, low).
48. 
 An antinausea and antiemetic (eg, ondansetron) may be 
given to facilitate tolerance of oral rehydration in children 
>4 years of age and in adolescents with acute gastroenteri-
tis associated with vomiting (weak, moderate).
Evidence Summary. 
Ancillary treatment for acute infectious diarrhea includes 
antimotility and antisecretory agents to shorten duration of 
diarrhea in adults, and antiemetic agents to facilitate oral rehy-
dration in people with significant vomiting. Oral rehydration 
has been shown to be useful in all ages, and antiemetics such 
as dimenhydrinate have been beneficial in adults. Ondansetron 
is a serotonin 5-HT3 receptor antagonist used for treatment of 
nausea and vomiting in various settings [175]. During acute 
gastroenteritis, studies have shown that more children receiv-
ing ondansetron, compared with placebo, had resolution of 
vomiting; ondansetron reduced the immediate need for hospi-
talization or intravenous rehydration [176]. However, ondan-
setron did not decrease hospitalization rates at 72 hours after 
discharge from the emergency department. There was no sig-
nificant increase in adverse events, but diarrhea was reported 
as a side effect of ondansetron treatment in several studies 
[177–179]. Ondansetron can reduce vomiting in children and 
reduce the need for hospitalization for rehydration, although it 
may increase stool volume. A recommendation cannot be made 
for the routine use of antiemetic agents for acute gastroenteritis 
in children <4 years of age or in adults. Bismuth subsalicylate is 
mildly effective. Racecadotril reduces stool volume but is not 
available in North America [180, 181].
Loperamide is a locally acting opioid receptor agonist that 
decreases the muscular tone and motility of the intestinal wall. 
In children with mild to moderate dehydration associated with 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e72 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
mostly nonbacterial pathogens, a meta-analysis of earlier stud-
ies has shown that loperamide reduced diarrhea prevalence at 
both 24 and 48 hours after onset of treatment, and reduced the 
total duration of diarrhea [182]. These studies excluded children 
with moderate to severe dehydration (or some did not include 
hydration status) and bloody diarrhea. Adverse events includ-
ing ileus, abdominal distension, and lethargy tended to occur 
in subjects receiving treatment. Deaths have been reported in 
0.54% of children given loperamide, and all of these events 
occurred in children <3 years old. In healthy adults, loperamide 
has been shown to be effective in reducing diarrhea, but most 
of the studies have been focused on travelers to resource-chal-
lenged countries and the drug was used in combination with 
antimicrobial agents [183]. In these studies, loperamide was 
not associated with increased occurrence of adverse events. 
Loperamide significantly reduces stool volume in traveler’s 
diarrhea and in most noncholera watery diarrhea syndromes.
Patients should be advised about medications with the 
potential to increase the risk of complications from diarrhea, 
particularly antidiarrheal and antimicrobial agents. Limited 
reports suggest that routine use of medications with anti-
cholinergic properties may lead to increased risk of severe 
outcomes, including death, from diarrhea caused by C. difficile 
and Clostridium perfringens, a toxin-mediated illness [91, 184, 
185]. Clinical conditions also have worsened following admin-
istration of antimotility agents to patients with shigellosis and 
infection with STEC. Antimicrobial agents and antidiarrheal 
medications administered to people with diarrhea caused by 
STEC infections may increase the risk of HUS.
XVII. What is the role of a probiotic or zinc in treatment or preven-
tion of infectious diarrhea in children and adults?
Recommendations.
49. Probiotic preparations may be offered to reduce the symp-
tom severity and duration in immunocompetent adults 
and children with infectious or antimicrobial-associated 
diarrhea (weak, moderate). Specific recommendations 
regarding selection of probiotic organism(s), route of deliv-
ery, and dosage may be found through literature searches 
of studies and through guidance from manufacturers.
50. 
 Oral zinc supplementation reduces the duration of diar-
rhea in children 6 months to 5 years of age who reside in 
countries with a high prevalence of zinc deficiency or who 
have signs of malnutrition (strong, moderate).
Evidence Summary. 
Most trials report that probiotics decrease diarrhea duration 
and stool frequency with a sustained beneficial effect across all 
outcomes. No adverse events have been directly attributable to 
probiotics in healthy recipients; case reports of bacteremia or 
fungemia with molecularly matched isolates to the probiotic 
organism have occurred in critically ill or immunocompromised 
people. The interpretations of many studies are limited by sta-
tistical heterogeneity due to varying definitions of diarrhea, 
outcome measurements, probiotic product, treatment regi-
mens, participants, and settings [186].
Despite the limitations of meta-analyses, a reduction in mean 
duration of diarrhea by 25 hours (95% confidence interval, 16–34 
hours) was noted among 455 participants in 35 trials; a reduc-
tion in the risk of diarrhea with a duration >4 days was noted 
among 2850 participants enrolled in 29 trials; and a reduction 
in stool frequency was noted on the second day of symptoms 
among 2751 participants enrolled in 20 trials. Overall, efficacy 
of probiotic supplementation was greater for participants with 
an identified viral etiology of diarrhea. However, this may be 
due to the fact that diarrhea of a viral etiology is more prevalent 
than that of a bacterial etiology [177, 187–190].
In a meta-analysis of 24 RCTs mostly conducted in Asia 
and in resource-limited settings, oral zinc supplementation 
appeared to shorten the duration of acute diarrhea in children 
who are 6 months to 5 years of age by 10 hours with an even 
greater reduction (27 hours) among children who have signs 
of malnutrition [191]. The effect on hospitalization and death 
could not be measured. The duration of treatment of persistent 
diarrhea was shortened by about 16 hours. Vomiting was noted 
to be more common in infants and children who received zinc 
supplementation compared with children who were not given 
zinc. An RCT among Polish children 3–48 months of age with 
acute diarrhea did not find a significant benefit from a 10-day 
course of zinc on the duration of diarrhea [192]. An RCT eval-
uating the efficacy of a 14-day course of zinc in US outpatients 
and inpatients aged 6 months to 6 years with acute diarrhea is 
ongoing [193].
XVIII. Which asymptomatic people with an identified bacterial 
organism from stool culture or molecular testing should be treated 
with an antimicrobial agent?
Recommendations.
51.  Asymptomatic people who practice hand hygiene and live 
and work in low-risk settings (do not provide healthcare or 
child or elderly adult care and are not food service employ-
ees) do not need treatment except asymptomatic people 
with Salmonella enterica subspecies enterica serovar Typhi 
in their stool who may be treated empirically to reduce 
potential for transmission (weak, low). Asymptomatic peo-
ple who practice hand hygiene and live and work in high-
risk settings (provide healthcare or child or elderly adult 
care and are food service employees) should be treated 
according to local public health guidance (strong, high).
Evidence Summary. 
Adults with acute nontyphoidal Salmonella enterica diar-
rhea commonly continue to sporadically shed the organism 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e73
in stool asymptomatically for weeks [194]. Although there 
is a risk of these individuals spreading infection to others, 
particularly through food handling and close contact, out-
breaks related to known carriers appear to be rare, and can 
be avoided through proper hand hygiene [195, 196]. The 
only randomized trial of decolonization was in Thailand, 
where antimicrobials failed to show a benefit over placebo, 
although reacquisition rather than persistence may have 
explained this failure [197]. Despite the paucity of evidence, 
some state and local laws mandate negative stool cultures 
prior to resuming work; in these situations, treatment may 
be considered.
Asymptomatic shedding of Salmonella serovar Typhi after 
acute infection is quite common, and can persist beyond a year 
in a small percentage of patients. These chronic carriers can 
spread infection to others if proper hand hygiene practices are 
not followed. One small randomized, controlled trial and one 
nonrandomized trial have showed high efficacy rates for decol-
onization with fluoroquinolones [198, 199].
Prevention
XIX. What strategies, including public health measures, are benefi-
cial in preventing transmission of pathogens associated with infec-
tious diarrhea?
Recommendations.
52.  Hand hygiene should be performed after using the toilet, 
changing diapers, before and after preparing food, before 
eating, after handling garbage or soiled laundry items, 
and after touching animals or their feces or environments, 
especially in public settings such as petting zoos (strong, 
moderate).
53.  Infection control measures including use of gloves and 
gowns, hand hygiene with soap and water, or alco-
hol-based sanitizers should be followed in the care of 
people with diarrhea (strong, high). The selection of a 
hand hygiene product should be based upon a known 
or suspected pathogen and the environment in which 
the organism may be transmitted (strong, low). See 
https://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/2007IP/2007isolation-
Precautions.html.
54.  Appropriate food safety practices are recommended to 
avoid cross-contamination of other foods or cooking sur-
faces and utensils during grocery shopping, food prepara-
tion, and storage; ensure that foods containing meats and 
eggs are cooked and maintained at proper temperatures 
(strong, moderate).
55. Healthcare providers should direct educational efforts 
toward all people with diarrhea, but particularly to people 
with primary and secondary immune deficiencies, preg-
nant women, parents of young children, and the elderly as 
they have increased risk of complications from diarrheal 
disease (strong, low).
56.  Ill people with diarrhea should avoid swimming, water-re-
lated activities, and sexual contact with other people when 
symptomatic while adhering to meticulous hand hygiene 
(strong, low).
Evidence Summary. 
Infectious agents that cause diarrhea are transmitted predom-
inately by the fecal-oral route. Organisms in stool are trans-
mitted to a susceptible host through contact transmission via 
contamination of inanimate surfaces, the hands of infected 
people and their caregivers, and vectors such as water or food, 
and contact with animals or their environment. The infected 
person may be shedding organisms in diarrheal stool, be in 
the convalescent phase of a diarrheal illness, or have asymp-
tomatic shedding. Standard practices and transmission-based, 
or additional precautions, are the foundation for preventing 
transmission of infectious agents in the healthcare setting [200] 
and provide various infection control measures for all patient 
care settings. Standard practices are used at all times, whereas 
additional precautions are implemented based on patient symp-
toms or signs and/or diagnoses of certain microorganisms. For 
example, as part of standard practices, healthcare providers 
practice hand hygiene before and after each patient contact, 
use personal protective equipment depending on the patient 
care activity, and follow recommendations regarding patient 
placement and environmental cleaning. A patient with diarrhea 
would be placed on contact, in addition to standard, precau-
tions. The reader is referred to detailed guidelines of the CDC’s 
Healthcare Infection Practices Advisory Committee for further 
information about the specific infection control measures for 
contact precautions and with particular diarrheal agents [200].
In the community, transmission of diarrheal pathogens can 
be interrupted by access to clean water and appropriately han-
dled food, as well as hand hygiene before and after each contact 
with the ill person or their body fluids. This includes appropri-
ate hand hygiene after using the toilet, after handling diapers at 
home and in out-of-home child care [201], before and after pre-
paring food, before eating, and after handling patients’ personal 
items, or after touching pets or animals or their feces or envi-
ronments, particularly in public settings (such as petting zoos 
and public farms) [202]. The spread of infectious diarrhea in 
child care settings can be decreased by training child care pro-
viders in infection control procedures, maintaining cleanliness 
of surfaces, keeping food preparation duties and areas separate 
from child care activities and exercising adequate hand hygiene, 
cohorting ill children, and excluding ill child care providers and 
food handlers. Alcohol-based hand hygiene is recommended, 
unless there is visible soiling, in which case hand hygiene with 
water and soap is necessary. When Cryptosporidium, noro-
virus, or a known spore-forming pathogen such as C. difficile 
is an infecting agent, hand hygiene with soap and water may 
be more effective than use of an alcohol-based sanitizer [203]. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e74 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
Some diarrheal agents are reportable to public health authori-
ties (See Question XXI), and public health may place infected 
food handlers, recreational water staff, healthcare providers, or 
child care providers on furlough until the risk of transmission is 
eliminated or reduced.
The CDC recommends that no one eat or drink unpasteur-
ized dairy products or undercooked meat. Specific groups of 
patients have increased risk of complications with diarrheal 
disease and warrant specific attention to education about diar-
rheal disease risk, such as the immunocompromised, pregnant 
women, people with chronic liver disease, the elderly, and 
parents caring for young infants. Education with attention to 
the particular epidemiology of risk for that individual and/
or their caregiver should be provided by healthcare providers. 
Information on food safety can be found at the US Department 
of Health and Human Services [204].
XX. What are the relative efficacies and effectiveness of vaccines 
(rotavirus, typhoid, and cholera) to reduce the prevention and trans-
mission of pathogens associated with infectious diarrhea, and when 
should they be used?
Recommendations.
57.  Rotavirus vaccine should be administered to all infants 
without a known contraindication (strong, high).
58.  Two typhoid vaccines (oral and injectable) are licensed 
in the United States but are not recommended routinely. 
Typhoid vaccination is recommended as an adjunct to 
hand hygiene and the avoidance of high-risk foods and 
beverages for travelers to areas where there is moderate to 
high risk for exposure to Salmonella enterica subspecies 
enterica serovar Typhi, people with intimate exposure (eg, 
household contact) to a documented Salmonella Typhi 
chronic carrier, and microbiologists and other laboratory 
personnel routinely exposed to cultures of Salmonella 
Typhi (strong, high). Booster doses are recommended for 
people who remain at risk (strong, high).
59. 
 A live attenuated cholera vaccine, which is available as a 
single-dose oral vaccine in the United States, is recom-
mended for adults 18–64 years of age who travel to chol-
era-affected areas (strong, high). See https://www.cdc.gov/
cholera/vaccines.html.
Evidence Summary. 
Prior to introduction of rotavirus vaccine programs in the 
United States in 2006, rotavirus was the leading cause of acute 
gastroenteritis, resulting in medical visits and hospitalization in 
children <5 years of age. Following large phase 3 trials demon-
strating efficacy of vaccine against any rotavirus infection of 
74%–87%, and against severe gastroenteritis of 85%–98%, 
universal infant rotavirus vaccination was recommended by 
ACIP [202]. Rotavirus surveillance has demonstrated signifi-
cant reductions in outpatient visits and hospitalization, as well 
as evidence of benefit in nonimmunized older people [23]. 
Two live, attenuated orally administered rotavirus vaccines are 
available in the United States: a pentavalent rotavirus vaccine 
(Rotateq, Merck) given in a 3-dose schedule, and a monovalent 
vaccine (Rotarix, GSK) given in a 2-dose schedule.
Currently, there are 2 licensed vaccines in the United States 
for prevention of typhoid fever, each offering 50%–80% protec-
tion [26]. Typhoid vaccination is recommended for travelers to 
areas where there is increased risk for exposure to Salmonella 
Typhi. The Ty21a vaccine is a live, attenuated, oral vaccine con-
taining the Salmonella Typhi strain. Ty21a available as enteric 
capsules and is licensed in the United States for use in immu-
nocompetent people including children ≥6 years of age; the rec-
ommended boosting interval is every 5 years. The parenteral 
Vi-polysaccharide vaccine is licensed in the United States for 
children ≥2 years of age and adults. The recommended boosting 
interval is every 2 years. Typhoid vaccines do not offer protec-
tion against Salmonella Paratyphi A, B, or C infection.
CVD 103-HgR is a live, attenuated single-dose oral cholera vac-
cine available for adults in the United States who plan to travel to 
cholera-affected areas, defined as areas of endemic cholera trans-
mission, outbreak (epidemic), or recent activity (within the past 
year). Two inactivated oral vaccines are available in other coun-
tries. Cholera immunization is not required for travelers entering 
the United States from cholera-affected areas, and the WHO no 
longer recommends immunization for travel to or from areas with 
cholera infection. No country requires cholera vaccine for entry.
XXI. How does reporting of nationally notifiable organisms identi-
fied from stool specimens impact the control and prevention of diar-
rheal disease in the United States?
Recommendation.
60.  All diseases listed in the table of National Notifiable 
Diseases Surveillance System at the national level, including 
those that cause diarrhea, should be reported to the appro-
priate state, territorial, or local health department, with 
submission of isolates of certain pathogens (eg, Salmonella, 
STEC, Shigella, Listeria) to ensure that control and preven-
tion practices may be implemented (strong, high).
Evidence Summary. 
Clinical healthcare providers and public health practitioners 
have overlapping interests in and responsibilities for diagno-
sis, management, and prevention of infectious diarrhea. For 
clinicians, early diagnosis of an acute episode of diarrhea can 
occasionally result in interventions that alleviate symptoms and 
reduce secondary transmission. For public health practitioners, 
prompt notification of pathogen-specific diagnoses and molecu-
lar testing of isolates obtained through public health surveillance 
can lower rates of transmission and lead to timely detection and 
control of outbreaks. To reduce the morbidity and mortality 
associated with infectious diarrhea, the clinical and public health 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e75
practitioner communities must work closely together to identify 
optimal diagnostic, treatment, and prevention methods.
Public health officials at US state and territorial health depart-
ments and the CDC collaborate in determining which diseases 
should be nationally notifiable, as well as timeframes for report-
ing. The Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists, with 
advice from the CDC, makes recommendations annually for 
additions and deletions to the list of nationally notifiable dis-
eases. Clinicians, hospitals, and laboratories in the United States 
are required to report diseases, conditions, or outbreaks as deter-
mined by local, state, or territorial law or regulation, as outlined 
in each jurisdiction’s list of reportable conditions. Additional 
and specific reporting requirements should be obtained from the 
appropriate local, state, or territorial health departments.
Reports of certain infections to public health authorities 
should be accompanied by submission of an isolate to the pub-
lic health laboratory. Further characterization of some infect-
ing pathogens in public health laboratories has been critical to 
identifying, stopping, and preventing many dispersed outbreaks 
through laboratory-based surveillance that utilizes isolate sub-
typing to detect outbreaks caused specific strains [123]. This type 
of surveillance began in the 1960s with serotyping of Salmonella 
isolates. In the 1990s, more discriminatory subtyping was intro-
duced through pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, with the advent 
of the PulseNet surveillance system [123]. In recent years, higher 
resolution subtyping such as whole-genome sequencing is being 
performed by public health laboratories to detect outbreaks even 
more quickly [205]. The impact of these techniques on surveil-
lance systems has been vast, including the passage of the Food 
Safety Modernization Act, and the development of new stand-
ards for beef and poultry by the US Department of Agriculture. 
Continuing to detect and respond to such outbreaks is a vital part 
of making our food and water systems safer. As CIDT diagnostic 
panels become used more frequently, public health departments 
may request that specimens be cultured in public health labora-
tories if unable to be cultured in the clinical diagnostic laboratory.
While laboratory-based surveillance like PulseNet is critical 
to detecting outbreaks, especially those consisting of widely dis-
persed infections, most diarrheal disease outbreaks are local-
ized events and are often detected by the astute clinician [123]. 
Therefore, healthcare providers should adhere to local and state 
reporting requirements regarding any unusual cluster of diar-
rheal illness, regardless if an etiology has been determined or 
if the determined etiologies are typically not reportable, so that 
control measures may be implemented and the pathogen and 
source of infection identified to guide appropriate preventive 
strategies specific to the community at risk.
Attempts to detect pathogens in people with diarrhea provide 
public health benefit (beyond those described in the diagnostics 
section above) in which the individual may either serve as the 
sentinel case of an outbreak or serve as a risk for the initiation 
of an outbreak. People who work in healthcare, especially but 
not limited to those who provide care for immunocompromised 
people (HIV infected, those with cancer, or transplant recipients) 
should undergo diagnostic testing when symptomatic. Other sit-
uations in which diagnostic stool evaluation may be appropriate 
include child care providers (adult or child), child care attendees 
(adult or child), people involved in food preparation or delivery, 
people who work at recreational water facilities, or people who 
work at or live in residential facilities such as residential or group 
homes, prisons, or long-term care facilities. Cruise ships also have 
been associated with outbreaks of gastrointestinal tract illness, 
including diarrhea. If an outbreak is suspected (in a school, college 
dormitory, or activity group), the health official in charge should 
consider obtaining diagnostic testing to optimize intervention. 
Culture-dependent investigations, when a bacterial pathogen is 
involved, can assist in determining resistance patterns of enteric 
pathogens circulating in the community to permit development 
of appropriate treatment or management regimens.
All organisms listed in the table of Infectious Diseases 
Designated as Notifiable at the National Level (http://wwwn.
cdc.gov/nndss/) should be reported. The CDC acts as a com-
mon repository for states and territories for collecting data and 
reporting of nationally notifiable diseases. Reports of occur-
rences of nationally notifiable diseases are transmitted to the 
CDC each week from the 50 US states, 2 cities (Washington, 
District of Columbia and New York, New York) and 5 territo-
ries (American Samoa, Commonwealth of Northern Mariana 
Islands, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the US Virgin Islands). 
Provisional data are published weekly in the Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report; final data are published each year by 
the CDC in the annual “Summary of Notifiable Diseases, United 
States” [206]. The timeliness of the provisional weekly reports, in 
addition to laboratory-based surveillance, provides information 
that the CDC and state or local epidemiologists use to detect dis-
ease occurrence and more effectively interrupt outbreaks. The 
finalized annual data provide information on reported disease 
incidence that is necessary for study of epidemiologic trends 
and development of disease-prevention policies. The CDC is the 
sole repository for these national data, which are used widely by 
local, state, and federal public health and other agencies.
The following 13 conditions, which are associated with 
infectious diarrhea, are included in the table of Infectious 
Diseases Designated as Notifiable at the National Level—
United States, 2017 (https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/conditions/
notifiable/2017/):
• 
Campylobacteriosis
• 
Cholera
• 
Cryptosporidiosis
• 
Cyclosporiasis
• 
Giardiasis
• 
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome, postdiarrheal
• 
Salmonellosis
• 
Shiga toxin–producing Escherichia coli
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e76 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
• 
Shigellosis
• 
Trichinellosis (trichinosis)
• 
Typhoid fever
• 
Vibriosis
• 
Foodborne disease outbreak
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
A key challenge in the diagnosis and management of people 
with infectious diarrhea is the use and interpretation of molec-
ular-based diagnostics. Differentiating colonization from active 
infection, obtaining antimicrobial susceptibility results, pro-
viding optimal management, and preventing transmission are 
areas in need of additional research as nonculture diagnostics 
replace traditional culture-based methods. Despite the evolution 
of diagnostics, the optimal management of people with infec-
tious diarrhea centers on obtaining a thorough exposure history 
and performing a physical examination. This information ena-
bles the clinician to selectively apply diagnostics and judiciously 
administer therapy. Interrupting transmission of communicable 
enteric infections is essential in preserving public health.
Notes
Financial support. Support for these guidelines was provided by the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America.
Acknowledgments. The expert panel expresses its gratitude for thoughtful 
reviews of an earlier version by Drs Herbert Dupont, Richard L. Guerrant, 
and Timothy Jones. The panel thanks the IDSA for supporting guideline 
development, and specifically Vita Washington for her continued support 
throughout the guideline process. Appreciation is expressed to Dr Nathan 
Thielman for his contributions to the initial stages of guideline development 
and Dr Faruque Ahmed for his continued support and guidance regarding 
the GRADE system. Many thanks to Reed Walton for her assistance at many 
levels, William Thomas for help with the literature review, and Bethany 
Sederdahl for her editorial assistance.
Disclaimer. The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention.
Potential conflicts of interest. The following list is a reflection of what has 
been reported to the IDSA. To provide thorough transparency, the IDSA 
requires full disclosure of all relationships, regardless of relevancy to the 
guideline topic. Evaluation of such relationships as potential conflicts of inter-
est is determined by a review process which includes assessment by the SPGC 
Chair, the SPGC liaison to the development panel and the Board of Directors 
liaison to the SPGC and if necessary, the Conflicts of Interest (COI) Task 
Force of the Board. This assessment of disclosed relationships for possible 
COI will be based on the relative weight of the financial relationship (ie, mon-
etary amount) and the relevance of the relationship (ie, the degree to which 
an association might reasonably be interpreted by an independent observer 
as related to the topic or recommendation of consideration). The reader of 
these guidelines should be mindful of this when the list of disclosures is 
reviewed. The institution at which A. L. S. has received research grants from 
the Division of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases of the National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), and the Gerber Foundation, 
from which she has received salary support, and she has received honoraria 
from SLACK and travel subsidies from International Scientific Association 
for Probiotics and Prebiotics (https://isappscience.org/) to attend annual 
meetings, J. C. has received research grants from the US Army, and stocks 
and bonds from Ariad and SIS Pharmaceuticals. A. C. has received research 
grants from CSL Behring and National Health & Medical Research. J. A. C. 
has received research grants from the CDC, National Institutes of Health 
(NIH), UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, Bill & 
Melinda Gates Foundation, and New Zealand Health Research Council. J. M. 
L.’s institution has received research grants from Merck, GlaxoSmithKline, 
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Pfizer, PCIRN, Dynavax, 
and Afexa. T. S. has received research grants from Merck, Crohn’s and Colitis 
Canada, and CIHR; has received honoraria from Merck, Bristol-Meyers 
Squibb, Wyeth, and Pendopharm; and has served as a consultant on research 
contracts for Merck, Rebiotix, Acetlion, and Sanofi Pasteur. P. I. T. has received 
research grants from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, the NIAID, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. C. 
W
. has received research grants from the NIH, GlaxoSmithKline, and Merck, 
and served as a consultant for Pfizer and Thera Pharmaceuticals. C. A. W
. 
has received research grants from NIH, NIAID and received a patent from 
the University of Virginia. All other authors report no potential conflicts. All 
authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts 
of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the content of the 
manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. Guerrant RL, Van Gilder T, Steiner TS, et al; Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. Practice guidelines for the management of infectious diarrhea. Clin 
Infect Dis 2001; 32:331–51.
2. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Handbook on clinical practice guideline 
development, 2015. Available at: http://www.idsociety.org/uploadedFiles/IDSA/
Guidelines-Patient_Care/IDSA_Practice_Guidelines/IDSA%20Handbook%20
on%20CPG%20Development%2010.15.pdf. Accessed 15 January 2015.
3. Guyatt GH. U.S. GRADE Network. Approach and implications to rating the qual-
ity of evidence and strength of recommendations using the GRADE methodol-
ogy. Available at: http://www.gradeworkinggroup.org/. Accessed July 2015.
4. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al; GRADE Working Group. Going from evi-
dence to recommendations. BMJ 2008; 336:1049–51.
5. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al; GRADE Working Group. Incorporating 
considerations of resources use into grading recommendations. BMJ 2008; 
336:1170–3.
6. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al; GRADE Working Group. GRADE: an 
emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommenda-
tions. BMJ 2008; 336:924–6.
7. Jaeschke R, Guyatt GH, Dellinger P, et al; GRADE Working Group. Use of 
GRADE grid to reach decisions on clinical practice guidelines when consensus is 
elusive. BMJ 2008; 337:a744.
8. Cohen SH, Gerding DN, Johnson S, et al; Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of 
America; Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clinical practice guidelines for 
Clostridium difficile infection in adults: 2010 update by the Society for Healthcare 
Epidemiology of America (SHEA) and the Infectious Diseases Society of America 
(IDSA). Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2010; 31:431–55.
9. Wessels E, Rusman LG, van Bussel MJ, Claas EC. Added value of multiplex 
Luminex Gastrointestinal Pathogen Panel (xTAG GPP) testing in the diagnosis of 
infectious gastroenteritis. Clin Microbiol Infect 2014; 20:O182–7.
10. World Health Organization (WHO). Diarrhoea. Available at: http://www.who.
int/topics/diarrhoea/en/. Accessed 15 January 2015.
11. Strand TA, Sharma PR, Gjessing HK, et al. Risk factors for extended duration of 
acute diarrhea in young children. PLoS One 2012; 7:e36436.
12. Scallan E, Griffin PM, Angulo FJ, Tauxe RV, Hoekstra RM. Foodborne illness 
acquired in the United States—unspecified agents. Emerg Infect Dis 2011; 
17:16–22.
13. Mounts AW, Holman RC, Clarke MJ, Bresee JS, Glass RI. Trends in hospitali-
zations associated with gastroenteritis among adults in the United States, 1979–
1995. Epidemiol Infect 1999; 123:1–8.
14. Roy SL, Scallan E, Beach MJ. The rate of acute gastrointestinal illness in developed 
countries. J Water Health 2006; 4(suppl 2):31–69.
15. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Foodborne Diseases Active 
Surveillance Network (FoodNet): FoodNet surveillance report for 2014 (final 
report). Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2016.
16. Malek MA, Curns AT, Holman RC, et al. Diarrhea- and rotavirus-associated 
hospitalizations among children less than 5 years of age: United States, 1997 and 
2000. Pediatrics 2006; 117:1887–92.
17. Payne DC, Staat MA, Edwards KM, et al. Active, population-based surveillance 
for severe rotavirus gastroenteritis in children in the United States. Pediatrics 
2008; 122:1235–43.
18. Parashar UD, Alexander JP, Glass RI; Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices (ACIP), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Prevention 
of rotavirus gastroenteritis among infants and children. Recommendations of the 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e77
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 
2006; 55:1–13.
19. Payne DC, Vinjé J, Szilagyi PG, et al. Norovirus and medically attended gastroen-
teritis in U.S. children. N Engl J Med 2013; 368:1121–30.
20. Esposito DH, Holman RC, Haberling DL, et al. Baseline estimates of diarrhea-as-
sociated mortality among United States children before rotavirus vaccine intro-
duction. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2011; 30:942–7.
21. Parashar UD, Kilgore PE, Holman RC, Clarke MJ, Bresee JS, Glass RI. Diarrheal 
mortality in US infants. Influence of birth weight on risk factors for death. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med 1998; 152:47–51.
22. Leshem E, Lopman B, Glass R, et al. Distribution of rotavirus strains and 
strain-specific effectiveness of the rotavirus vaccine after its introduction: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2014; 14:847–56.
23. Anderson EJ, Shippee DB, Weinrobe MH, et al. Indirect protection of adults from 
rotavirus by pediatric rotavirus vaccination. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 56:755–60.
24. Tam CC, O’Brien SJ, Tompkins DS, et al; IID2 Study Executive Committee. 
Changes in causes of acute gastroenteritis in the United Kingdom over 15 years: 
microbiologic findings from 2 prospective, population-based studies of infectious 
intestinal disease. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 54:1275–86.
25. Cortese MM, Parashar UD; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 
Prevention of rotavirus gastroenteritis among infants and children: recommen-
dations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 
Recomm Rep 2009; 58:1–25.
26. Jackson BR, Iqbal S, Mahon B; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC). Updated recommendations for the use of typhoid vaccine—Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices, United States, 2015. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2015; 64:305–8.
27. Voetsch AC, Van Gilder TJ, Angulo FJ, et al; Emerging Infections Program 
FoodNet Working Group. FoodNet estimate of the burden of illness caused by 
nontyphoidal Salmonella infections in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 
38(suppl 3):S127–34.
28. Voetsch AC, Angulo FJ, Jones TF, et al. Reduction in the incidence of invasive 
listeriosis in Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network sites, 1996–2003. 
Clin Infect Dis 2007; 44:513–20.
29. Varma JK, Samuel MC, Marcus R, et al. Listeria monocytogenes infection from 
foods prepared in a commercial establishment: a case-control study of potential 
sources of sporadic illness in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 44:521–8.
30. Samuel MC, Vugia DJ, Shallow S, et al. Epidemiology of sporadic Campylobacter 
infection in the United States and declining trend in incidence, FoodNet 1996–
1999. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 38(suppl 3):S165–74.
31. Roy SL, DeLong SM, Stenzel SA, et al. Risk factors for sporadic cryptosporidiosis 
among immunocompetent persons in the United States from 1999 to 2001. J Clin 
Microbiol 2004; 42:2944–51.
32. Mermin J, Hutwagner L, Vugia D, et al; Emerging Infections Program FoodNet 
Working Group. Reptiles, amphibians, and human Salmonella infection: a popu-
lation-based, case-control study. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 38(suppl 3):S253–61.
33. Marcus R, Varma JK, Medus C, et al. Re-assessment of risk factors for sporadic 
Salmonella serotype Enteritidis infections: a case-control study in five FoodNet 
sites, 2002–2003. Epidemiol Infect 2007; 135:84–92.
34. Kimura AC, Reddy V, Marcus R, et al; Emerging Infections Program FoodNet 
Working Group. Chicken consumption is a newly identified risk factor for spo-
radic Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis infections in the United States: a 
case-control study in FoodNet sites. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 38(suppl) 3:S244–52.
35. Kendall ME, Crim S, Fullerton K, et al. Travel-associated enteric infections diag-
nosed after return to the United States, Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance 
Network (FoodNet), 2004–2009. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 54(suppl 5): S480–7.
36. Kassenborg HD, Hedberg CW, Hoekstra M, et al; Emerging Infections Program 
FoodNet Working Group. Farm visits and undercooked hamburgers as major risk 
factors for sporadic Escherichia coli O157:H7 infection: data from a case-control 
study in 5 FoodNet sites. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 38(suppl 3):S271–8.
37. Jones TF, Ingram LA, Fullerton KE, et al. A case-control study of the epidemi-
ology of sporadic Salmonella infection in infants. Pediatrics 2006; 118:2380–7.
38. Johnson LR, Gould LH, Dunn JR, Berkelman R, Mahon BE; FoodNet Travel 
Working Group. Salmonella infections associated with international travel: a 
Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network (FoodNet) study. Foodborne 
Pathog Dis 2011; 8:1031–7.
39. Hennessy TW, Cheng LH, Kassenborg H, et al; Emerging Infections Program 
FoodNet Working Group. Egg consumption is the principal risk factor for spo-
radic Salmonella serotype Heidelberg infections: a case-control study in FoodNet 
sites. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 38(suppl 3):S237–43.
40. Haley CC, Ong KL, Hedberg K, et al. Risk factors for sporadic shigellosis, FoodNet 
2005. Foodborne Pathog Dis 2010; 7:741–7.
41. Hale CR, Scallan E, Cronquist AB, et al. Estimates of enteric illness attributable to 
contact with animals and their environments in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 
2012; 54(suppl 5):S472–9.
42. Fullerton KE, Scallan E, Kirk MD, et al. Case-control studies of sporadic enteric 
infections: a review and discussion of studies conducted internationally from 
1990 to 2009. Foodborne Pathog Dis 2012; 9:281–92.
43. Friedman CR, Hoekstra RM, Samuel M, et al; Emerging Infections Program 
FoodNet Working Group. Risk factors for sporadic Campylobacter infection in 
the United States: a case-control study in FoodNet sites. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 
38(suppl 3):S285–96.
44. Aragón TJ, Vugia DJ, Shallow S, et al. Case-control study of shigellosis in San 
Francisco: the role of sexual transmission and HIV infection. Clin Infect Dis 
2007; 44:327–34.
45. Lynch MF, Blanton EM, Bulens S, et al. Typhoid fever in the United States, 1999–
2006. JAMA 2009; 302:859–65.
46. Vojdani JD, Beuchat LR, Tauxe RV. Juice-associated outbreaks of human illness in 
the United States, 1995 through 2005. J Food Prot 2008; 71:356–64.
47. Morris JG Jr. Cholera and other types of vibriosis: a story of human pandemics 
and oysters on the half shell. Clin Infect Dis 2003; 37:272–80.
48. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Foodborne Diseases Active 
Surveillance Network (FoodNet). Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/foodnet/
index.html. Accessed 15 August 2015.
49. Murphree R, Garman K, Phan Q, Everstine K, Gould LH, Jones TF. Characteristics 
of foodborne disease outbreak investigations conducted by Foodborne Diseases 
Active Surveillance Network (FoodNet) sites, 2003–2008. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 
54(suppl 5): S498-503.
50. Steinmuller N, Demma L, Bender JB, Eidson M, Angulo FJ. Outbreaks of enteric 
disease associated with animal contact: not just a foodborne problem anymore. 
Clin Infect Dis 2006; 43:1596–602.
51. Pickering LK, Marano N, Bocchini JA, Angulo FJ; Committee on Infectious 
Diseases. Exposure to nontraditional pets at home and to animals in public set-
tings: risks to children. Pediatrics 2008; 122:876–86.
52. Hlavsa MC, Roberts VA, Kahler AM, et al. Outbreaks of illness associated with 
recreational water—United States, 2011–2012. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2015; 64:668–72.
53. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Shigella flexneri serotype 3 
infections among men who have sex with men—Chicago, Illinois, 2003–2004. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2005; 54:820–2.
54. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). National Outbreak Reporting 
System (NORS). Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/nors/. Accessed 15 August 2015.
55. Wikswo ME, Kambhampati A, Shioda K, et al. Outbreaks of acute gastroenteri-
tis transmitted by person-to-person contact, environmental contamination, and 
unknown modes of transmission—United States, 2009–2013. MMWR Surveill 
Summ 2015; 64:1–16.
56. MacCannell T, Umscheid CA, Agarwal RK, Lee I, Kuntz G, Stevenson KB; 
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee—HICPAC. 
Guideline for the prevention and control of norovirus gastroenteritis outbreaks 
in healthcare settings. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2011; 32:939–69.
57. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Prevention and control 
measures for outbreaks at childcare facilities. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/
parasites/crypto/childcare/index.html. Accessed 2 March 2017.
58. Gould LH, Rosenblum I, Nicholas D, Phan Q, Jones TF. Contributing factors in 
restaurant-associated foodborne disease outbreaks, FoodNet sites, 2006 and 2007. 
J Food Prot 2013; 76:1824–8.
59. Date KA, Newton AE, Medalla F, et al. Changing patterns in enteric fever inci-
dence and increasing antibiotic resistance of enteric fever isolates in the United 
States, 2008–2012. Clin Infect Dis 2016; 63:322–9.
60. Crump JA, Luby SP, Mintz ED. The global burden of typhoid fever. Bull World 
Health Organ 2004; 82:346–53.
61. Olson MT, Siddiqui MT, Ali SZ. The differential diagnosis of squamous cells in 
pancreatic aspirates: from contamination to adenosquamous carcinoma. Acta 
Cytol 2013; 57:139–46.
62. Saphra I, Winter JW. Clinical manifestations of salmonellosis in man; an evalu-
ation of 7779 human infections identified at the New York Salmonella Center. N 
Engl J Med 1957; 256:1128–34.
63. Frenzen PD. Mortality due to gastroenteritis of unknown etiology in the United 
States. J Infect Dis 2003; 187:441–52.
64. Kilgore PE, Holman RC, Clarke MJ, Glass RI. Trends of diarrheal disease-associ-
ated mortality in US children, 1968 through 1991. JAMA 1991; 274:1144–48.
65. Balestracci A, Martin SM, Toledo I, Alvarado C, Wainsztein RE. Dehydration at 
admission increased the need for dialysis in hemolytic uremic syndrome children. 
Pediatr Nephrol 2012; 27:1407–10.
66. Hickey CA, Beattie TJ, Cowieson J, et al. Early volume expansion during diarrhea 
and relative nephroprotection during subsequent hemolytic uremic syndrome. 
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2011; 165:884–9.
67. Mody RK, Luna-Gierke RE, Jones TF, et al. Infections in pediatric postdiarrheal 
hemolytic uremic syndrome: factors associated with identifying Shiga toxin-pro-
ducing Escherichia coli. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2012; 166:902–9.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e78 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
68. Slutsker L, Ries AA, Greene KD, Wells JG, Hutwagner L, Griffin PM. Escherichia 
coli O157:H7 diarrhea in the United States: clinical and epidemiologic features. 
Ann Intern Med 1997; 126:505–13.
69. Wong CS, Mooney JC, Brandt JR, et al. Risk factors for the hemolytic uremic 
syndrome in children infected with Escherichia coli O157:H7: a multivariable ana-
lysis. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55:33–41.
70. Gould LH, Bopp C, Strockbine N, et al; Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC). Recommendations for diagnosis of Shiga toxin–producing 
Escherichia coli infections by clinical laboratories. MMWR Recomm Rep 2009; 
58:1–14.
71. Ethelberg S, Olsen KE, Scheutz F, et al. Virulence factors for hemolytic uremic 
syndrome, Denmark. Emerg Infect Dis 2004; 10:842–7.
72. Werber D, Fruth A, Buchholz U, et al. Strong association between shiga tox-
in-producing Escherichia coli O157 and virulence genes stx2 and eae as possible 
explanation for predominance of serogroup O157 in patients with haemolytic 
uraemic syndrome. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2003; 22:726–30.
73. Scheutz F, Teel LD, Beutin L, et al. Multicenter evaluation of a sequence-based 
protocol for subtyping Shiga toxins and standardizing Stx nomenclature. J Clin 
Microbiol 2012; 50:2951–63.
74. Werber D, Mason BW, Evans MR, Salmon RL. Preventing household transmis-
sion of Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli O157 infection: promptly separat-
ing siblings might be the key. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 46:1189–96.
75. Denno DM, Shaikh N, Stapp JR, et al. Diarrhea etiology in a pediatric emergency 
department: a case control study. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55:897–904.
76. Denno DM, Stapp JR, Boster DR, et al. Etiology of diarrhea in pediatric outpatient 
settings. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2005; 24:142–8.
77. Klein EJ, Boster DR, Stapp JR, et al. Diarrhea etiology in a children’s hospi-
tal emergency department: a prospective cohort study. Clin Infect Dis 2006; 
43:807–13.
78. McGregor AC, Whitty CJ, Wright SG. Geographic, symptomatic and laboratory 
predictors of parasitic and bacterial causes of diarrhoea in travellers. Trans R Soc 
Trop Med Hyg 2012; 106:549–53.
79. Koplan JP, Fineberg HV, Ferraro MJ, Rosenberg ML. Value of stool cultures. 
Lancet 1980; 2:413–6.
80. Crump JA, Medalla FM, Joyce KW, et al. Antimicrobial resistance among inva-
sive nontyphoidal Salmonella enterica isolates in the United States: National 
Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System, 1996 to 2007. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2011; 55:1148–54.
81. Berkley JA, Lowe BS, Mwangi I, et al. Bacteremia among children admitted to a 
rural hospital in Kenya. N Engl J Med 2005; 352:39–47.
82. Hsu RB, Lin FY. Risk factors for bacteraemia and endovascular infection due to 
non-typhoid Salmonella: a reappraisal. QJM 2005; 98:821–7.
83. Angulo FJ, Swerdlow DL. Bacterial enteric infections in persons infected with 
human immunodeficiency virus. Clin Infect Dis 1995; 21(suppl 1):S84–93.
84. Keddy KH, Sooka A, Crowther-Gibson P, et al; Group for Enteric, Respiratory, 
and Meningeal Disease Surveillance in South Africa (GERMS-SA). Systemic shig-
ellosis in South Africa. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 54:1448–54.
85. Lopes RJ, Almeida J, Dias PJ, Pinho P, Maciel MJ. Infectious thoracic aortitis: a 
literature review. Clin Cardiol 2009; 32:488–90.
86. Cover TL, Aber RC. Yersinia enterocolitica. N Engl J Med 1989; 321:16–24.
87. Haq SM, Dayal HH. Chronic liver disease and consumption of raw oysters: a 
potentially lethal combination—a review of Vibrio vulnificus septicemia. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2005; 100:1195–9.
88. Daniels NA. Vibrio vulnificus oysters: pearls and perils. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 
52:788–92.
89. Ong KL, Gould LH, Chen DL, et al. Changing epidemiology of Yersinia entero-
colitica infections: markedly decreased rates in young black children, Foodborne 
Diseases Active Surveillance Network (FoodNet), 1996–2009. Clin Infect Dis 
2012; 54(suppl 5): S385–90.
90. Brunkard JM, Ailes E, Roberts VA, et al. Surveillance for waterborne disease 
outbreaks associated with drinking water—United States, 2007–2008. MMWR 
Surveill Summ 2011; 60:38–68.
91. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Fatal foodborne Clostridium 
perfringens illness at a state psychiatric hospital—Louisiana, 2010. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2012; 61:605–8.
92. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Surveillance for foodborne 
disease outbreaks—United States, 2009–2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2013; 62:41–7.
93. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Vital signs: Listeria illnesses, 
deaths, and outbreaks—United States, 2009–2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2013; 62:448–52.
94. Hall AJ, Wikswo ME, Pringle K, et al. Vital signs: foodborne norovirus 
 
outbreaks—United States, 2009–2012. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014; 
63:491–5.
95. Krones E, Högenauer C. Diarrhea in the immunocompromised patient. 
Gastroenterol Clin North Am 2012; 41:677–701.
96. Mayer HB, Wanke CA. Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli as a possible cause of 
diarrhea in an HIV-infected patient. N Engl J Med 1995; 332:273–4.
97. Wanke CA, Mayer H, Weber R, Zbinden R, Watson DA, Acheson D. 
Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli as a potential cause of diarrheal disease in adults 
infected with human immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 1998; 178:185–90.
98. Durrer P, Zbinden R, Fleisch F, et al. Intestinal infection due to enteroaggregative 
Escherichia coli among human immunodeficiency virus-infected persons. J Infect 
Dis 2000; 182:1540–4.
99. Flanigan T, Whalen C, Turner J, et al. Cryptosporidium infection and CD4 counts. 
Ann Intern Med 1992; 116:840–2.
100. Wanke CA, Cohan D, Thummakul T, et al. Diarrheal disease in patients infected 
with human immunodeficiency virus in Bangkok, Thailand. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
1999; 60:871–4.
101. Knox TA, Spiegelman D, Skinner SC, Gorbach S. Diarrhea and abnormalities of 
gastrointestinal function in a cohort of men and women with HIV infection. Am 
J Gastroenterol 2000; 95:3482–9.
102. Asmuth DM, DeGirolami PC, Federman M, et al. Clinical features of micro-
sporidiosis in patients with AIDS. Clin Infect Dis 1994; 18:819–25.
103. Horsburgh CR Jr. Mycobacterium avium complex infection in the acquired immu-
nodeficiency syndrome. N Engl J Med 1991; 324:1332–8.
104. Stark D, Barratt JL, van Hal S, Marriott D, Harkness J, Ellis JT. Clinical signif-
icance of enteric protozoa in the immunosuppressed human population. Clin 
Microbiol Rev 2009; 22:634–50.
105. Fine KD, Schiller LR. AGA technical review on the evaluation and management 
of chronic diarrhea. Gastroenterology 1999; 116:1464–86.
106. Westhoff TH, Vergoulidou M, Loddenkemper C, et al. Chronic norovirus infec-
tion in renal transplant recipients. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2009; 24:1051–3.
107. Trivedi TK, Desai R, Hall AJ, Patel M, Parashar UD, Lopman BA. Clinical charac-
teristics of norovirus-associated deaths: a systematic literature review. Am J Infect 
Control 2013; 41:654–7.
108. Desai R, Hembree CD, Handel A, et al. Severe outcomes are associated with geno-
group 2 genotype 4 norovirus outbreaks: a systematic literature review. Clin Infect 
Dis 2012; 55:189–93.
109. Greig JD, Lee MB. Enteric outbreaks in long-term care facilities and recommen-
dations for prevention: a review. Epidemiol Infect 2009; 137:145–55.
110. Patel NC, Hertel PM, Estes MK, et al. Vaccine-acquired rotavirus in infants with 
severe combined immunodeficiency. N Engl J Med 2010; 362:314–9.
111. Patel NC, Hertel PM, Hanson IC, et al. Chronic rotavirus infection in an infant 
with severe combined immunodeficiency: successful treatment by hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation. Clin Immunol 2012; 142:399–401.
112. Tate JE, Parashar UD. Rotavirus vaccines in routine use. Clin Infect Dis 2014; 
59:1291–301.
113. DuPont HL, Ericsson CD, Farthing MJ, et al. Expert review of the evidence base 
for prevention of travelers’ diarrhea. J Travel Med 2009; 16:149–60.
114. Neuberger A, Saadi T, Shetern A, Schwartz E. Clostridium difficile Infection in 
travelers—a neglected pathogen? J Travel Med 2013; 20:37–43.
115. Connors BA. Travelers’ diarrhea: CDC Health Information for International 
Travel. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2016. Available at: https://
wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2016/the-pre-travel-consultation/travel-
ers-diarrhea. Accessed 17 February 2017.
116. Kahlau P, Malecki M, Schildgen V, et al. Utility of two novel multiplexing assays 
for the detection of gastrointestinal pathogens—a first experience. SpringerPlus 
2013; 2:106.
117. Mengelle C, Mansuy JM, Prere MF, et al. Simultaneous detection of gastrointesti-
nal pathogens with a multiplex Luminex-based molecular assay in stool samples 
from diarrhoeic patients. Clin Microbiol Infect 2013; 19:E458–65.
118. Claas EC, Burnham CA, Mazzulli T, Templeton K, Topin F. Performance of the 
xTAG gastrointestinal pathogen panel, a multiplex molecular assay for simultane-
ous detection of bacterial, viral, and parasitic causes of infectious gastroenteritis. 
J Microbiol Biotechnol 2013; 23:1041–5.
119. Guarino A, Giannattasio A. New molecular approaches in the diagnosis of acute 
diarrhea: advantages for clinicians and researchers. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 
2011; 27:24–9.
120. Operario DJ, Houpt E. Defining the causes of diarrhea: novel approaches. Curr 
Opin Infect Dis 2011; 24:464–71.
121. Baron EJ, Miller JM, Weinstein MP, et al. A guide to utilization of the microbi-
ology laboratory for diagnosis of infectious diseases: 2013 recommendations by 
the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and the American Society for 
Microbiology (ASM). Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:e22–121.
122. Boxrud D, Monson T, Stiles T, Besser J. The role, challenges, and support of 
PulseNet laboratories in detecting foodborne disease outbreaks. Public Health 
Rep 2010; 125(suppl 2):57–62.
123. Scharff RL, Besser J, Sharp DJ, Jones TF, Peter GS, Hedberg CW. An economic 
evaluation of PulseNet: a network for foodborne disease surveillance. Am J Prev 
Med 2016; 50:S66–73.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2017 IDSA Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diarrhea • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • e79
124. Cronquist AB, Mody RK, Atkinson R, et al. Impacts of culture-independent diag-
nostic practices on public health surveillance for bacterial enteric pathogens. Clin 
Infect Dis 2012; 54(suppl 5):S432–9.
125. Jones TF, Gerner-Smidt P. Nonculture diagnostic tests for enteric diseases. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2012; 18:513–4.
126. Atkinson R, Maguire H, Gerner-Smidt P. A challenge and an opportunity to 
improve patient management and public health surveillance for food-borne 
infections through culture-independent diagnostics. J Clin Microbiol 2013; 
51:2479–82.
127. Relman DA. Metagenomics, infectious disease diagnostics, and outbreak investi-
gations: sequence first, ask questions later? JAMA 2013; 309:1531–2.
128. Caliendo AM, Gilbert DN, Ginocchio CC, et al; Infectious Diseases Society of 
America (IDSA). Better tests, better care: improved diagnostics for infectious dis-
eases. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57(suppl 3):S139–70.
129. Parry CM, Hien TT, Dougan G, White NJ, Farrar JJ. Typhoid fever. N Engl J Med 
2002; 347:1770–82.
130. Bhan MK, Bahl R, Bhatnagar S. Typhoid and paratyphoid fever. Lancet 2005; 
366:749–62.
131. Wain J, Diep TS, Ho VA, et al. Quantitation of bacteria in blood of typhoid fever 
patients and relationship between counts and clinical features, transmissibility, 
and antibiotic resistance. J Clin Microbiol 1998; 36:1683–7.
132. Altun O, Almuhayawi M, Ullberg M, Ozenci V. Clinical evaluation of the 
FilmArray blood culture identification panel in identification of bacteria and 
yeasts from positive blood culture bottles. J Clin Microbiol 2013; 51:4130–6.
133. Lee A, Mirrett S, Reller LB, Weinstein MP. Detection of bloodstream infections in 
adults: how many blood cultures are needed? J Clin Microbiol 2007; 45:3546–8.
134. Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and the Society for 
Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA). Clostridium difficile infec-
tion in adults and children. In press. Available at: https://www.idsociety.org/
Organ_System/#Clostridiumdifficile.
135. Ethelberg S, Olsen KE, Gerner-Smidt P, Mølbak K. The significance of the num-
ber of submitted samples and patient-related factors for faecal bacterial diagnos-
tics. Clin Microbiol Infect 2007; 13:1095–9.
136. Savola KL, Baron EJ, Tompkins LS, Passaro DJ. Fecal leukocyte stain has diagnos-
tic value for outpatients but not inpatients. J Clin Microbiol 2001; 39:266–9.
137. Huicho L, Campos M, Rivera J, Guerrant RL. Fecal screening tests in the approach to 
acute infectious diarrhea: a scientific overview. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1996; 15:486–94.
138. Fine KD, Ogunji F, George J, Niehaus MD, Guerrant RL. Utility of a rapid fecal 
latex agglutination test detecting the neutrophil protein, lactoferrin, for diag-
nosing inflammatory causes of chronic diarrhea. Am J Gastroenterol 1998; 
93:1300–5.
139. Kane SV, Sandborn WJ, Rufo PA, et al. Fecal lactoferrin is a sensitive and spe-
cific marker in identifying intestinal inflammation. Am J Gastroenterol 2003; 
98:1309–14.
140. Chen CC, Huang JL, Chang CJ, Kong MS. Fecal calprotectin as a correlative 
marker in clinical severity of infectious diarrhea and usefulness in evaluating bac-
terial or viral pathogens in children. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2012; 55:541–7.
141. Weh J, Antoni C, Weiß C, Findeisen P, Ebert M, Böcker U. Discriminatory poten-
tial of C-reactive protein, cytokines, and fecal markers in infectious gastroenteri-
tis in adults. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2013; 77:79–84.
142. Czub E, Nowak JK, Moczko J, et al. Comparison of fecal pyruvate kinase isoform M2 
and calprotectin in acute diarrhea in hospitalized children. Sci Rep 2014; 4:4769.
143. Whitehead SJ, Shipman KE, Cooper M, Ford C, Gama R. Is there any value in 
measuring faecal calprotectin in Clostridium difficile positive faecal samples? J 
Med Microbiol 2014; 63:590–3.
144. Bell BP, Griffin PM, Lozano P, Christie DL, Kobayashi JM, Tarr PI. Predictors of 
hemolytic uremic syndrome in children during a large outbreak of Escherichia coli 
O157:H7 infections. Pediatrics 1997; 100:E12.
145. Buteau C, Proulx F, Chaibou M, et al. Leukocytosis in children with Escherichia 
coli O157:H7 enteritis developing the hemolytic-uremic syndrome. Pediatr Infect 
Dis J 2000; 19:642–7.
146. Rydström A, Wick MJ. Monocyte recruitment, activation, and function in the 
gut-associated lymphoid tissue during oral Salmonella infection. J Immunol 2007; 
178:5789–801.
147. Holtz LR, Neill MA, Tarr PI. Acute bloody diarrhea: a medical emergency for 
patients of all ages. Gastroenterology 2009; 136:1887–98.
148. Goka AK, Rolston DD, Mathan VI, Farthing MJ. Diagnosis of Strongyloides and 
hookworm infections: comparison of faecal and duodenal fluid microscopy. 
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1990; 84:829–31.
149. Goka AK, Rolston DD, Mathan VI, Farthing MJ. The relative merits of faecal and 
duodenal juice microscopy in the diagnosis of giardiasis. Trans R Soc Trop Med 
Hyg 1990; 84:66–7.
150. Pickering LK. The Red Book: 2012 report of the committee on infectious diseases. 
Elk Grove, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2012.
151. van der Wilden GM, Chang Y, Cropano C, et al. Fulminant Clostridium difficile 
colitis: prospective development of a risk scoring system. J Trauma Acute Care 
Surg 2014; 76:424–30.
152. Dupont HL. Gastrointestinal infections and the development of irritable bowel 
syndrome. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2011; 24:503–8.
153. Bendali F, Madi N, Sadoun D. Beneficial effects of a strain of Lactobacillus par-
acasei subsp. paracasei in Staphylococcus aureus-induced intestinal and colonic 
injury. Int J Infect Dis 2011; 15:e787–94.
154. Rossignol JF, Kabil SM, Said M, Samir H, Younis AM. Effect of nitazoxanide 
in persistent diarrhea and enteritis associated with Blastocystis hominis. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005; 3:987–91.
155. Cohen SA. Use of nitazoxanide as a new therapeutic option for persistent diar-
rhea: a pediatric perspective. Curr Med Res Opin 2005; 21:999–1004.
156. Butler T, Knight J, Nath SK, Speelman P, Roy SK, Azad MA. Typhoid fever compli-
cated by intestinal perforation: a persisting fatal disease requiring surgical man-
agement. Rev Infect Dis 1985; 7:244–56.
157. Hosoglu S, Aldemir M, Akalin S, Geyik MF, Tacyildiz IH, Loeb M. Risk factors for 
enteric perforation in patients with typhoid fever. Am J Epidemiol 2004; 160:46–50.
158. van den Bergh ET, Gasem MH, Keuter M, Dolmans MV. Outcome in three groups 
of patients with typhoid fever in Indonesia between 1948 and 1990. Trop Med Int 
Health 1999; 4:211–5.
159. Freedman SB, Xie J, Neufeld MS, et al; Alberta Provincial Pediatric Enteric 
Infection Team (APPETITE). Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli infection, 
antibiotics, and risk of developing hemolytic uremic syndrome: a meta-analysis. 
Clin Infect Dis 2016; 62:1251–8.
160. Ternhag A, Asikainen T, Giesecke J, Ekdahl K. A meta-analysis on the effects 
of antibiotic treatment on duration of symptoms caused by infection with 
Campylobacter species. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 44:696–700.
161. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). National Antimicrobial 
Resistance Monitoring System for Enteric Bacteria (NARMS). Available at: http://
www.cdc.gov/narms/. Accessed 30 August 2015.
162. Zaidi MB, McDermott PF, Campos FD, et al. Antimicrobial-resistant 
Campylobacter in the food chain in Mexico. Foodborne Pathog Dis 2012; 9:841–7.
163. Serichantalergs O, Pootong P, Dalsgaard A, et al. PFGE, Lior serotype, and anti-
microbial resistance patterns among Campylobacter jejuni isolated from travel-
ers and US military personnel with acute diarrhea in Thailand, 1998–2003. Gut 
Pathog 2010; 2:15.
164. Ge B, Wang F, Sjölund-Karlsson M, McDermott PF. Antimicrobial resistance in 
Campylobacter: susceptibility testing methods and resistance trends. J Microbiol 
Methods 2013; 95:57–67.
165. Hahn S, Kim S, Garner P. Reduced osmolarity oral rehydration solution for treat-
ing dehydration caused by acute diarrhoea in children. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 2002; 1:CD002847.
166. Hartling L, Bellemare S, Wiebe N, Russell K, Klassen TP, Craig W. Oral versus 
intravenous rehydration for treating dehydration due to gastroenteritis in chil-
dren. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; 3:CD004390.
167. Pulungsih SP, Punjabi NH, Rafli K, et al. Standard WHO-ORS versus reduced-os-
molarity ORS in the management of cholera patients. J Health Popul Nutr 2006; 
24:107–12.
168. King CK, Glass R, Bresee JS, Duggan C; Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Managing acute gastroenteritis among children: oral rehydration, 
maintenance, and nutritional therapy. MMWR Recomm Rep 2003; 52:1–16.
169. Musekiwa A, Volmink J. Oral rehydration salt solution for treating cholera: </= 
270 mOsm/L solutions vs >/= 310 mOsm/L solutions. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 2011; 12:CD003754.
170. Gregorio GV, Gonzales ML, Dans LF, Martinez EG. Polymer-based oral rehydra-
tion solution for treating acute watery diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2009; 2:CD006519.
171. Brown KH, Gastañaduy AS, Saavedra JM, et al. Effect of continued oral feeding 
on clinical and nutritional outcomes of acute diarrhea in children. J Pediatr 1988; 
112:191–200.
172. Gregorio GV, Dans LF, Silvestre MA. Early versus delayed refeeding for children 
with acute diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; 7:CD007296.
173. MacGillivray S, Fahey T, McGuire W. Lactose avoidance for young children with 
acute diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 10:CD005433.
174. Barr W, Smith A. Acute diarrhea. Am Fam Physician 2014; 89:180–9.
175. Cubeddu LX, Trujillo LM, Talmaciu I, et al. Antiemetic activity of ondansetron in 
acute gastroenteritis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1997; 11:185–91.
176. Fedorowicz Z, Jagannath VA, Carter B. Antiemetics for reducing vomiting related 
to acute gastroenteritis in children and adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2011; 9:CD005506.
177. Freedman SB, Ali S, Oleszczuk M, Gouin S, Hartling L. Treatment of acute gas-
troenteritis in children: an overview of systematic reviews of interventions com-
monly used in developed countries. Evid Based Child Health 2013; 8:1123–37.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e80 • CID 2017:65 (15 December) • Shane et al
178. Ramsook C, Sahagun-Carreon I, Kozinetz CA, Moro-Sutherland D. A rand-
omized clinical trial comparing oral ondansetron with placebo in children with 
vomiting from acute gastroenteritis. Ann Emerg Med 2002; 39:397–403.
179. Yilmaz HL, Yildizdas RD, Sertdemir Y. Clinical trial: oral ondansetron for reduc-
ing vomiting secondary to acute gastroenteritis in children—a double-blind ran-
domized study. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2010; 31:82–91.
180. Gallelli L, Colosimo M, Tolotta GA, et al. Prospective randomized double-blind 
trial of racecadotril compared with loperamide in elderly people with gastroen-
teritis living in nursing homes. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2010; 66:137–44.
181. Lehert P, Chéron G, Calatayud GA, et al. Racecadotril for childhood gastroenteri-
tis: an individual patient data meta-analysis. Dig Liver Dis 2011; 43:707–13.
182. Li ST, Grossman DC, Cummings P. Loperamide therapy for acute diarrhea in 
children: systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med 2007; 4:e98.
183. Riddle MS, Arnold S, Tribble DR. Effect of adjunctive loperamide in combination 
with antibiotics on treatment outcomes in traveler’s diarrhea: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 47:1007–14.
184. Bos J, Smithee L, McClane B, et al. Fatal necrotizing colitis following a foodborne 
outbreak of enterotoxigenic Clostridium perfringens type A infection. Clin Infect 
Dis 2005; 40:e78–83.
185. Koo HL, Koo DC, Musher DM, DuPont HL. Antimotility agents for the treatment 
of Clostridium difficile diarrhea and colitis. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 48:598–605.
186. Shane AL, Cabana MD, Vidry S, et al. Guide to designing, conducting, publishing 
and communicating results of clinical studies involving probiotic applications in 
human participants. Gut Microbes 2010; 1:243–53.
187. Hempel S, Newberry SJ, Maher AR, et al. Probiotics for the prevention and treat-
ment of antibiotic-associated diarrhea: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
JAMA 2012; 307:1959–69.
188. Nixon AF, Cunningham SJ, Cohen HW, Crain EF. The effect of Lactobacillus GG 
on acute diarrheal illness in the pediatric emergency department. Pediatr Emerg 
Care 2012; 28:1048–51.
189. Dinleyici EC, Vandenplas Y; PROBAGE Study Group. Lactobacillus reuteri DSM 
17938 effectively reduces the duration of acute diarrhoea in hospitalised children. 
Acta Paediatr 2014; 103:e300–5.
190. Sindhu KN, Sowmyanarayanan TV, Paul A, et al. Immune response and intesti-
nal permeability in children with acute gastroenteritis treated with Lactobacillus 
rhamnosus GG: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Clin Infect 
Dis 2014; 58:1107–15.
191. Lazzerini M, Ronfani L. Oral zinc for treating diarrhoea in children. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2013; 1:CD005436.
192. Patro B, Szymanski H, Szajewska H. Oral zinc for the treatment of acute gastro-
enteritis in Polish children: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. 
J Pediatr 2010; 157:984–8 e1.
193. Children’s Hospital Boston. Oral zinc for the treatment of acute diarrhea in 
US children [NCT01198587]. Available at: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01198587?term=NCT01198587&rank=1. Accessed 15 July 2014.
194. Buchwald DS, Blaser MJ. A review of human salmonellosis: II. duration of 
excretion following infection with nontyphi Salmonella. Rev Infect Dis 1984; 
6:345–56.
195. Khuri-Bulos NA, Abu Khalaf M, Shehabi A, Shami K. Food handler-associated 
Salmonella outbreak in a university hospital despite routine surveillance cultures 
of kitchen employees. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994; 15:311–4.
196. Tauxe RV, Hassan LF, Findeisen KO, Sharrar RG, Blake PA. Salmonellosis in 
nurses: lack of transmission to patients. J Infect Dis 1988; 157:370–3.
197. Sirinavin S, Thavornnunth J, Sakchainanont B, Bangtrakulnonth A, 
Chongthawonsatid S, Junumporn S. Norfloxacin and azithromycin for treatment 
of nontyphoidal Salmonella carriers. Clin Infect Dis 2003; 37:685–91.
198. Gotuzzo E, Guerra JG, Benavente L, et al. Use of norfloxacin to treat chronic 
typhoid carriers. J Infect Dis 1988; 157:1221–5.
199. Ferreccio C, Morris JG Jr, Valdivieso C, et al. Efficacy of ciprofloxacin in the treat-
ment of chronic typhoid carriers. J Infect Dis 1988; 157:1235–9.
200. Siegel JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, Chiarello L; Health Care Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee. 2007 guideline for isolation precautions: prevent-
ing transmission of infectious agents in health care settings. Am J Infect Control 
2007; 35:S65–164.
201. Aronson SS. Diseases in child care and schools: a quick reference guide. 3rd ed. 
Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2013.
202. Wikswo ME, Hall AJ; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Outbreaks of 
acute gastroenteritis transmitted by person-to-person contact—United States, 
2009–2010. MMWR Surveill Summ 2012; 61:1–12.
203. Liu P, Yuen Y, Hsiao HM, Jaykus LA, Moe C. Effectiveness of liquid soap and hand 
sanitizer against Norwalk virus on contaminated hands. Appl Environ Microbiol 
2010; 76:394–9.
204. US Department of Health and Human Services. Keep food safe. Available at: 
http://www.foodsafety.gov/keep/index.html. Accessed 15 January 2016.
205. Jackson BR, Tarr C, Strain E, et al. Implementation of nationwide real-time 
whole-genome sequencing to enhance listeriosis outbreak detection and investi-
gation. Clin Infect Dis 2016; 63:380–6.
206. Adams DA, Thomas KR, Jajosky RA, et al. Summary of notifiable infectious 
diseases and conditions—United States, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016; 63:1–152.
207. Freedman DO, Chen LH, Kozarsky PE. Medical considerations before interna-
tional travel. N Engl J Med 2016; 375:247–60.
208. Rubin C, Myers T, Stokes W, et al. Review of institute of medicine and national 
research council recommendations for One Health initiative. Emerg Infect Dis 
2013; 19:1913–7.
209. Fox LM, Saravolatz LD. Nitazoxanide: a new thiazolide antiparasitic agent. Clin 
Infect Dis 2005; 40:1173–80.
210. Rossignol JF, Ayoub A, Ayers MS. Treatment of diarrhea caused by 
Cryptosporidium parvum: a prospective randomized, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled study of nitazoxanide. J Infect Dis 2001; 184:103–6.Notes
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/12/e45/4557073 by guest on 02 June 2019
