 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / June 16, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 23 
615
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Pregnancy Outcomes After Maternal Zika Virus Infection During Pregnancy —  
U.S. Territories, January 1, 2016–April 25, 2017
Carrie K. Shapiro-Mendoza, PhD1; Marion E. Rice, MPH2,3; Romeo R. Galang, MD2; Anna C. Fulton, MPH2; 
Kelley VanMaldeghem, MPH2; Miguel Valencia Prado, MD4; Esther Ellis, PhD5; Magele Scott Anesi, MPH6; Regina M. Simeone, MPH2; 
Emily E. Petersen, MD1; Sascha R. Ellington, MSPH1; Abbey M. Jones, MPH2; Tonya Williams, PhD7; Sarah Reagan-Steiner, MD8; 
Janice Perez-Padilla, MPH9; Carmen C. Deseda, MD4; Andrew Beron, MPH, MLS5; Aifili John Tufa, MPH10; Asher Rosinger, PhD11,12; 
Nicole M. Roth, MPH2; Caitlin Green, MPH2; Stacey Martin, MSc9; Camille Delgado Lopez, MPH4; Leah deWilde5; Mary Goodwin, MA, MPA1; 
H. Pamela Pagano, DrPH1; Cara T. Mai, DrPH2; Carolyn Gould, MD9; Sherif Zaki, MD8; Leishla Nieves Ferrer, MPH4; Michelle S. Davis, PhD5; 
Eva Lathrop, MD2; Kara Polen, MPH2; Janet D. Cragan, MD2; Megan Reynolds, MPH2; Kimberly B. Newsome, MPH2; Mariam Marcano Huertas4; 
Julu Bhatangar, PhD8; Alma Martinez Quiñones, MPH4; John F. Nahabedian, MS2; Laura Adams, DVM9; Tyler M. Sharp, PhD9; 
W. Thane Hancock, MD13; Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD15; Cynthia A. Moore, MD, PhD2; Denise J. Jamieson, MD1; Jorge L. Munoz-Jordan, PhD9; 
Helentina Garstang, DCHMS16; Afeke Kambui, MPH10; Carolee Masao, DCHMS17; Margaret A. Honein, PhD2; Dana Meaney-Delman, MD14; 
Zika Pregnancy and Infant Registries Working Group
On June 8, this report was posted as an MMWR Early Release 
on the MMWR website (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr). 
Pregnant women living in or traveling to areas with local 
mosquito-borne Zika virus transmission are at risk for Zika 
virus infection, which can lead to severe fetal and infant brain 
abnormalities and microcephaly (1). In February 2016, CDC 
recommended 1) routine testing for Zika virus infection of 
asymptomatic pregnant women living in areas with ongoing 
local Zika virus transmission at the first prenatal care visit, 2) 
retesting during the second trimester for women who initially 
test negative, and 3) testing of pregnant women with signs or 
symptoms consistent with Zika virus disease (e.g., fever, rash, 
arthralgia, or conjunctivitis) at any time during pregnancy (2). 
To collect information about pregnant women with laboratory 
evidence of recent possible Zika virus infection* and outcomes 
in their fetuses and infants, CDC established pregnancy and 
infant registries (3). During January 1, 2016–April 25, 2017, 
U.S. territories† with local transmission of Zika virus reported 
2,549 completed pregnancies§ (live births and pregnancy losses 
at any gestational age) with laboratory evidence of recent pos-
sible Zika virus infection; 5% of fetuses or infants resulting from 
these pregnancies had birth defects potentially associated with 
Zika virus infection¶ (4,5). Among completed pregnancies with 
positive nucleic acid tests confirming Zika infection identified in 
the first, second, and third trimesters, the percentage of fetuses 
or infants with possible Zika-associated birth defects was 8%, 
5%, and 4%, respectively. Among liveborn infants, 59% had 
Zika laboratory testing results reported to the pregnancy and 
infant registries. Identification and follow-up of infants born to 
women with laboratory evidence of recent possible Zika virus 
infection during pregnancy permits timely and appropriate 
clinical intervention services (6).
To characterize pregnancies with laboratory evidence of 
recent possible Zika virus infection and outcomes of completed 
pregnancies, data were abstracted from prenatal, delivery, 
and birth hospitalization records. These abstracted data were 
included in the Zika pregnancy and infant registries,** which 
* Maternal laboratory evidence of recent possible Zika virus infection was defined 
as 1) Zika virus infection detected by a Zika virus RNA nucleic acid test (NAT) 
(e.g., reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction [RT-PCR]) on any 
maternal, placental, fetal, or infant specimen (referred to as NAT-confirmed) or 
2) detection of recent Zika virus infection or recent unspecified flavivirus 
infection by serologic tests on a maternal, fetal, or infant specimen (i.e., either 
positive or equivocal Zika virus immunoglobulin M [IgM] and Zika virus plaque 
reduction neutralization test [PRNT] titer ≥10, regardless of dengue virus PRNT 
value; or negative Zika virus IgM, and positive or equivocal dengue virus IgM, 
and Zika virus PRNT titer ≥10, regardless of dengue virus PRNT titer). Infants 
with positive or equivocal Zika virus IgM are included, provided a confirmatory 
PRNT has been performed on a maternal or infant specimen. The use of PRNT 
for confirmation of Zika virus infection, including in pregnant women and 
infants, is not routinely recommended in Puerto Rico; dengue virus is endemic 
and cross-reactivity is likely to occur in most cases (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/
laboratories/lab-guidance.html). In Puerto Rico, detection of a positive Zika 
IgM result in a pregnant woman, fetus or infant (within 48 hours after delivery) 
was considered sufficient to indicate recent possible Zika virus infection.
† Pregnancies reported to the registries in this report included births or pregnancy 
losses occurring in the U.S. territories of American Samoa, Puerto Rico, and 
U.S. Virgin Islands and the U.S. freely associated states of Federated States of 
Micronesia and Marshall Islands. Outcomes from multiple gestation pregnancies 
were counted once.
 § Completed pregnancies included live births and pregnancy losses at any 
gestational age with maternal, placental, fetal, or infant laboratory evidence 
of recent possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy.
 ¶ “Birth defects potentially associated with Zika virus infection during 
pregnancy” refers to the birth defects included in the CDC Zika surveillance 
case definition (November 2016). The definition covers all birth defects that 
have been reported as being potentially related to Zika virus infection and 
includes brain abnormalities, microcephaly (confirmed and possible), neural 
tube defects and other early brain malformations; eye abnormalities; and 
consequences of central nervous system dysfunction, such as joint contractures 
and congenital sensorineural deafness (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/
pregnancy-outcomes.html).
 
** The Zika Pregnancy and Infant Registries include the U.S. Zika Pregnancy 
Registry (USZPR) and the Puerto Rico Zika Active Pregnancy Surveillance 
System (PR ZAPSS). The USZPR and PR ZAPSS are both enhanced 
surveillance systems that collect data on pregnancy and infant outcomes in 
pregnancies with laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection and use 
similar methods. All U.S. states, the District of Columbia, and all U.S. 
territories except Puerto Rico are collaborating in the USZPR. Because Puerto 
Rico has the largest population among U.S. territories, CDC and the Puerto 
Rico Department of Health established a separate Zika pregnancy registry, 
called Puerto Rico Zika Active Pregnancy Surveillance System.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
616 
MMWR / June 16, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 23
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
were established by CDC in collaboration with state, territorial, 
tribal, and local health departments. The number of completed 
pregnancies with laboratory evidence of recent possible Zika 
virus infection and a subset with positive nucleic acid tests 
(NAT)†† confirming Zika virus infection (NAT-confirmed) 
from the registries were analyzed. Pregnancies were included 
in this analysis if the pregnancy was completed in the U.S. 
territories on or before April 25, 2017, and reported to the 
registries on or before May 24, 2017, and if there was labora-
tory evidence of possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy.
Clinical birth defects experts reviewed abstracted registry data to 
identify each fetus or infant with birth defects meeting the standard 
CDC surveillance criteria for possible Zika-associated birth defects 
(4,5) and divided them into two mutually exclusive categories: 
1) brain abnormalities and/or microcephaly and 2) neural tube 
defects, eye abnormalities, or consequences of central nervous 
system dysfunction among fetuses or infants without evidence of 
other brain abnormalities or microcephaly (4,5). Analyses were 
stratified by maternal symptom status§§ and trimester of maternal 
symptom onset or laboratory specimen collection date.¶¶ The 
percentage (with 95% confidence intervals [CI]) of fetuses or 
infants with possible Zika-associated birth defects was calculated 
for a binomial proportion using the Wilson score interval.
To describe infant testing and screening (6) reported to the 
Zika pregnancy and infant registries, the percentages of live-
born infants with 1) laboratory testing results for Zika virus 
infection at birth, 2) postnatal neuroimaging (cranial ultra-
sound, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, 
or radiograph) findings, and 3) hearing screening results were 
calculated. Information about infant testing and screening 
during birth hospitalization was based on data reported to the 
registries for births on or before April 25, 2017. 
The U.S. territories reported 3,930 pregnancies with labora-
tory evidence of recent possible Zika infection to the registries 
during January 1, 2016–May 24, 2017, including 2,549 
(65%) pregnancies completed on or before April 25, 2017, 
which resulted in 2,464 (97%) liveborn infants and 85 (3%) 
pregnancy losses. Among women with completed pregnan-
cies, 1,561 (61%) reported signs or symptoms compatible 
with Zika virus infection during pregnancy, 966 (38%) were 
asymptomatic, and symptom information was missing for 22 
(1%). Maternal symptoms or positive laboratory test results 
were identified in the first, second, and third trimesters for 
21%, 43%, and 34% of women, respectively; timing of 
infection was missing or occurred periconceptionally for 41 
pregnancies (2%) (Table 1).
Among the 2,549 completed pregnancies, 122 (5%) resulted 
in a fetus or infant with possible Zika-associated birth defects 
(5% among symptomatic and 4% among asymptomatic 
women) (Table 1). The same percentage of birth defects (5%) 
was observed among the subset of 1,508 (59%) pregnancies 
with NAT-confirmed Zika virus infections (5% among symp-
tomatic and 7% among asymptomatic women). Among the 
122 fetuses or infants that met the surveillance case definition 
for possible Zika-associated birth defects, 108 (89%) were 
classified as having brain abnormalities and/or microcephaly. 
Possible Zika-associated birth defects were reported among 
pregnant women with symptom onset or positive maternal 
laboratory test results identified during all trimesters. Among 
women with symptoms or a positive test result identified dur-
ing the first, second, and third trimesters, 6%, 5%, and 4% 
of infants or fetuses, respectively, were reported with possible 
Zika-associated birth defects. Among pregnancies with NAT-
confirmed maternal infections, possible Zika-associated birth 
defects were reported in 8%, 5%, and 4% of infants or fetuses 
with maternal symptoms or positive laboratory results identi-
fied during the first, second, and third trimesters, respectively.
Among liveborn infants, 59% had Zika laboratory testing 
results reported to the pregnancy and infant registries. Of the 
infants, 52% had postnatal neuroimaging findings reported, 
and 79% had hearing screening results reported during birth 
hospitalization (Table 2).
Discussion
Among completed pregnancies with laboratory evidence 
of recent possible maternal Zika virus infection in the U.S. 
territories, about one in 20 fetuses or infants had a possible 
Zika-associated birth defect. When analysis was restricted to 
NAT-confirmed Zika virus infection in the first trimester, about 
one in 12 fetuses or infants had a possible Zika-associated 
birth defect. Zika-associated birth defects were reported after 
identification of maternal symptoms or positive test results in 
each trimester.
The overall estimate of 5% of fetuses or infants with pos-
sible Zika-associated birth defects among completed preg-
nancies with NAT-confirmed infections might be affected by 
the smaller proportion of total completed pregnancies with 
symptom onset or a positive test result during the first trimes-
ter (18%) than during the second or third trimesters (81%). 
 
†† Pregnancies with nucleic acid tests (NAT) confirming Zika infection include 
those with a maternal, placental, fetal, or infant specimen in which the presence 
of Zika virus RNA was documented by a positive NAT.
 
§§ A pregnant woman is considered symptomatic if one or more signs or 
symptoms consistent with Zika virus disease (acute onset of fever, rash, 
arthralgia, or conjunctivitis) is reported. A pregnant woman is considered 
asymptomatic if these signs or symptoms are not reported.
 
¶¶ Gestational timing of Zika virus infection was calculated using the earliest 
date of maternal serum, urine, or whole blood collection that tested positive 
for Zika virus infection by NAT or serologic testing or symptom onset date 
if symptomatic. Gestational age dating was based on first trimester ultrasound. 
If ultrasound was unavailable, dating was based on the last menstrual period. 
If ultrasound and last menstrual period were unavailable, gestational age was 
based on information provided on the laboratory requisition form.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / June 16, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 23 
617
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 1. Pregnancy outcomes* for 2,549 completed pregnancies† with laboratory evidence of recent possible maternal Zika virus infection, 
by symptom status and timing of symptom onset or specimen collection date — Zika Pregnancy and Infant Registries,§ U.S. territories, 
January 1, 2016–April 25, 2017
Characteristic
No. with 
brain abnormalities 
and/or  
microcephaly¶
No. with NTDs  
and early brain 
malformations, 
eye abnormalities, 
or consequence of 
CNS dysfunction  
without 
brain abnormalities 
or microcephaly
Total no. with 
≥1 birth defect
Total no.  
of completed  
pregnancies
Percentage with 
Zika virus–associated 
birth defect,  
(95% CI**)
Any laboratory evidence of recent possible Zika virus infection††
Total
108
14
122
2,549
5 (4–6)
Maternal symptom status§§
Symptoms of Zika virus 
infection reported
68
11
79
1,561
5 (4–6)
No symptoms of Zika virus 
infection reported
38
3
41
966
4 (3–6)
Timing¶¶ of symptoms or specimen collection date***
First trimester†††
27
5
32
536
6 (4–8)
Second trimester§§§
46
5
51
1,096
5 (4–6)
Third trimester¶¶¶
31
4
35
876
4 (3–6)
Recent NAT-confirmed Zika virus infection in maternal, placental, fetal, or infant specimen****
Total
71
9
80
1,508
5 (4–7)
Maternal symptom status††††
Symptoms of Zika virus 
infection reported
54
9
63
1,279
5 (4–6)
No symptoms of Zika virus 
infection reported
16
0
16
225
7 (4–11)
Timing§§§§ of symptoms or specimen collection date***
First trimester†††
18
4
22
276
8 (5–12)
Second trimester§§§
34
2
36
726
5 (4–7)
Third trimester¶¶¶
17
3
20
494
4 (3–6)
Abbreviations: CI = confidence interval; CNS = central nervous system; IgM = immunoglobulin M; NAT = nucleic acid test; NTD = neural tube defect; RT-PCR = reverse 
transcription–polymerase chain reaction.
 
* Outcomes for multiple gestation pregnancies are counted once.
 
† Includes 2,464 live births and 85 pregnancy losses.
 
§ U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry and Puerto Rico Zika Active Pregnancy Surveillance System.
 
¶ Microcephaly was defined as head circumference at delivery <3rd percentile for infant sex and gestational age regardless of birthweight. When multiple head 
circumference measurements were available, the majority of those measurements had to be <3rd percentile for a designation of microcephaly. A clinical diagnosis 
of microcephaly or mention of microcephaly or small head in the medical record was not required. (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/pregnancy-outcomes.html).
 ** 95% CI for a binomial proportion using Wilson score interval.
 
†† Includes maternal, placental, fetal, or infant laboratory evidence of recent possible Zika virus infection based on presence of Zika virus RNA by a positive NAT 
(e.g., RT-PCR), serologic evidence of a recent Zika virus infection, or serologic evidence of a recent unspecified flavivirus infection.
 
§§ Maternal symptom (i.e., fever, rash, arthralgia, or conjunctivitis) status was unknown for 22 completed pregnancies; of these, two resulted in fetuses or infants 
with brain abnormalities with or without microcephaly.
 
¶¶ Maternal Zika virus infection was reported in the periconceptional period (i.e., the 8 weeks before conception [6 weeks before and 2 weeks after the first day of 
the last menstrual period]) in 21 completed pregnancies; of these, one resulted in a fetus or infant with brain abnormalities with or without microcephaly. Timing 
of maternal Zika virus infection was unknown for 20 completed pregnancies; of these, three resulted in fetuses or infants with brain abnormalities with or without 
microcephaly.
 *** Gestational timing of Zika virus infection was calculated using the earliest date of maternal serum, urine, or whole blood collection that tested positive for Zika 
virus infection by NAT or serologic testing or symptom onset date if symptomatic.
 ††† First trimester is defined as 2 weeks after last menstrual period to 13 weeks, 6 days gestational age based on estimated date of delivery.
 §§§ Second trimester is defined as 14 weeks to 27 weeks, 6 days gestational age based on estimated date of delivery.
 ¶¶¶ Third trimester is defined as 28 weeks gestational age or later based on estimated date of delivery.
 
**** Includes maternal, placental, fetal, or infant laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection based on the presence of Zika virus RNA by a positive NAT (e.g., RT-PCR).
 †††† Maternal symptom status was unknown for four completed pregnancies; of these, one resulted in a fetus or infant with brain abnormalities with or 
without microcephaly.
 
§§§§ Maternal Zika virus infection was reported in the periconceptional period (i.e., the 8 weeks before conception [6 weeks before and 2 weeks after the first day of 
last menstrual period]) in six pregnancies; of these, one resulted in a fetus or infant with brain abnormalities with or without microcephaly. Timing of maternal 
Zika virus infection was unknown for six pregnancies; of these, two resulted in fetuses or infants with brain abnormalities with or without microcephaly.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
618 
MMWR / June 16, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 23
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 2. Infant Zika virus testing and screening at birth for 2,464 live-born infants from completed pregnancies with laboratory evidence of 
recent possible Zika virus infection — Zika Pregnancy and Infant Registries,* U.S. territories, January 1, 2016–April 25, 2017
Testing and screening
Live-born infants
With birth defects†
No. (%)
Without birth defects
No. (%)
Total
No. (%)
Total
116 (5)
2,348 (95)
2,464 (100)
Infant Zika virus testing
≥1 infant specimen§ test result reported to Zika pregnancy and infant registries
64 (55)
1,381 (59)
1,445 (59)
Infant screening at birth
Postnatal neuroimaging¶ conducted and findings reported to Zika pregnancy and infant registries
69 (59)
1,219 (52)
1,288 (52)
Hearing screening conducted and results reported to Zika pregnancy and infant registries
105 (91)
1,840 (78)
1,945 (79)
 * U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry and Puerto Rico Zika Active Pregnancy Surveillance System.
 † Includes infants with one or more of the following birth defects potentially associated with Zika virus infection: brain abnormality and/or microcephaly or possible 
microcephaly, neural tube defect and other early brain malformation, eye abnormality, or consequence of central nervous system dysfunction.
 § Infant specimens include serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid.
 ¶ Neuroimaging includes any imaging of the infant head, including cranial ultrasound, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, or radiograph reported 
to the Zika pregnancy registries based on neuroimaging guidance published August 19, 2016. (Russell K, Oliver SE, Lewis L, et al. Update: interim guidance for the 
evaluation and management of infants with possible congenital Zika virus infection—United States, August 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:870–8).
Because available data suggest that the risk for birth defects is 
higher when infection occurs early in pregnancy (5,7) and there 
are ongoing pregnancies with infection in the first trimester, it 
will be important to continue to monitor pregnancy outcomes 
to determine the impact of infection early in pregnancy on 
the percentage of infants with possible Zika-associated birth 
defects. Possible Zika-associated birth defects were identi-
fied in pregnancies with symptoms or laboratory evidence of 
recent possible maternal Zika virus infection in each trimester 
of pregnancy. Challenges with determining the exact timing 
of infection limit interpretation; however, adverse outcomes 
following infection throughout pregnancy are consistent with 
adverse outcomes associated with some other congenital infec-
tions (8). For example, severe central nervous system sequelae 
(hearing loss, seizures, or chorioretinitis) have been reported 
following congenital cytomegalovirus infection later in preg-
nancy, with the highest risk following first trimester infection 
(8). The continued follow-up of infants is critical to elucidating 
the impact of Zika virus infection during pregnancy beyond 
abnormalities detected at birth. Monitoring of ongoing preg-
nancies with laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika virus 
infection and the continued follow-up of infant status beyond 
birth hospitalization can inform public health recommenda-
tions for testing, evaluation, and care. Additional information 
about the full spectrum of outcomes can improve access to 
early intervention (https://www2.ed.gov/programs/osepeip/
index.html) and services for children with special health care 
needs (https://mchb.hrsa.gov/maternal-child-health-topics/
children-and-youth-special-health-needs).
Consistent with previously reported data from the 50 U.S. 
states regarding primarily travel-associated Zika virus infections 
in pregnancy, about one in 20 fetuses or infants had possible 
Zika-associated birth defects (5). However, the report from 
U.S. states included a larger percentage of pregnancies with 
imprecise timing of infection, thereby limiting any direct com-
parison of the percentage of affected pregnancies by trimester 
of infection. This report from the territories, with more robust 
late pregnancy data, suggests a risk for birth defects throughout 
pregnancy; further study is needed to confirm this finding. 
The percentage of infants with possible Zika-associated birth 
defects after infection identified in the first trimester was 8% 
(95% CI = 5%–12%) in the U.S. territories compared with 
15% (95% CI = 8%–26%) in the U.S. states (5); the confi-
dence intervals for these estimates overlap and both are based 
on relatively small numbers. In addition, for the analysis of the 
U.S. territories data, a more restrictive definition of confirmed 
infection, limited to NAT-confirmed infection, was used.
The findings in this report are subject to at least seven limita-
tions. First, the actual number of infants who had Zika virus test-
ing and postnatal screenings might be underestimated because 
of delays in reporting results to medical records and changes 
to clinical guidance for infants in August 2016 (6). Second, 
misclassification of microcephaly might have occurred because 
of imprecise measurements of head circumference at birth and 
difficulties with consistent surveillance for microcephaly, which 
could result in overascertainment or underascertainment of 
microcephaly (9). Third, other potential etiologies for these birth 
defects (e.g., genetic or other infectious causes) were not assessed 
in this analysis. Fourth, lack of postnatal neuroimaging might 
have led to underascertaining brain abnormalities; just over half 
of infants had postnatal neuroimaging reported at birth, despite 
recommendations that all infants born to mothers with labora-
tory evidence of possible Zika infection receive such imaging (6). 
Some infants might have additional imaging in the outpatient 
setting; planned efforts to follow these infants at 2 months and 
beyond might provide additional data. Fifth, the actual number 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / June 16, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 23 
619
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
of Zika virus infections among pregnant women in the U.S. ter-
ritories might be underestimated. Investigation of a 2007 Zika 
virus disease outbreak in Yap, Federated States of Micronesia, 
suggested that up to 80% of Zika virus infections might be 
asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic (10). The percentage of 
asymptomatic infections in the U.S. territories (38%) was much 
lower than that reported from Yap and lower than that suggested 
by data from the Zika pregnancy and infant registries from the 
U.S. states (62%) (5,10). However, in the U.S. territories, Zika 
virus testing of women during pregnancy was recommended 
regardless of symptom status, whereas a household survey of 
the general population was conducted in Yap. Sixth, because of 
limitations in the specificity of current serologic testing, some 
pregnant women who were reported to the Zika pregnancy 
and infant registries might have had other flavivirus infections. 
However, rates of dengue virus transmission were low in Puerto 
Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands during 2016 (https://disease-
maps.usgs.gov/mapviewer/), and dengue virus infection is not 
known to cause birth defects. Finally, some women who were 
infected with Zika virus before pregnancy might have a persistent 
immunologic response resulting in a positive immunoglobulin 
M test detectable during pregnancy. Analyses restricted to preg-
nancies with NAT-confirmed Zika virus infection indicated a 
similar proportion of infants with birth defects. However, even 
with NAT testing, timing of maternal infection might be inex-
act, especially given that Zika virus RNA might persist during 
pregnancy (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/laboratories/lab-guidance.
html), and because most Zika virus infections are asymptomatic 
or have mild, nonspecific symptoms.
This report adds information about the number of possible 
Zika-associated birth defects with laboratory evidence of 
recent possible or NAT-confirmed Zika virus infection during 
pregnancy among women living in the U.S. territories and 
supplements findings from the U.S. states. It also provides 
new estimates for the proportion of infants with a birth defect 
after identification of maternal Zika virus infection in the first, 
second, and third trimesters of pregnancy, and provides evi-
dence that birth defects might occur following documentation 
of symptom onset or positive laboratory testing during any 
trimester. Moreover, based on data reported to the pregnancy 
and infant registries, this report highlights potential gaps in 
testing and screening of infants with possible congenital Zika 
virus infection in U.S. territories at birth. Identification and 
follow-up of infants born to mothers with laboratory evidence 
of recent possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy can 
facilitate timely and appropriate clinical intervention services 
and assessment of future needs (2,6). Information about adher-
ence to the recommended newborn testing and screening can 
improve monitoring and care of infants affected by Zika.
Acknowledgments
Adaliz Reyes Ortiz, Ashley A. Derieux Otero, Ashley Ann Mendez 
Escobar, Puerto Rico Department of Health; Carlos M. Martínez Morán, 
Diliana I. Maldonado-Castillo, Division of Congenital and 
Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and 
Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Francheska M. Méndez Carrión, 
Puerto Rico Department of Health; Francisco J. Garcia, MS, Genesis 
Burgos Lebron, Glorimar Melendez-Rosario, MPH, Heysha Figueroa 
Meléndez, Jennifer M. Toro-Rivera, Division of Congenital and 
Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and 
Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Joel M. Calderón López, Puerto 
Rico Department of Health; Jonathan Sanchez-Garcia, MPH, 
Marangeli Olan-Martinez, MPH, Maria De Lourdes Cotto Torres, 
Maria E. Rivera Falcon, MBA, María M. De León-Pérez, Maritza 
Lago Hernandez, Natalie Romero Rivera, Nichole Avilés Cabrera, 
Paloma D. Reyes Correa, Vanessa Adrover, Division of Congenital 
and Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects 
and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Paz E. Velasco, MD, Vita 
Skilling, DCHMS, DpCH, Livinson A. Taulung, DCHMS, Patricia 
Tilfas, Hibson Palik, Rose Joe, Salome Martin, William Nena, Cecilia 
Sigrah, Kosrae Department of Health Services, Federated States of 
Micronesia; Edlen J. Anzures, Leslie Fox-Levya, Ransen Hansen Jr., 
Jill A. McCready, MSPH, Republic of the Marshall Islands Ministry 
of Health; Barry Perry, MS, Braeanna Hillman, Carrie DeJesus, 
Summary
What is already known on this topic?
Zika virus infection during pregnancy causes serious brain 
abnormalities and/or microcephaly and has been associated 
with other severe birth defects. Local transmission of Zika virus 
was reported in U.S. territories in 2016.
What is added by this report?
Overall, about 5% of fetuses and infants born to women with 
laboratory evidence of recent possible Zika virus infection in the 
U.S. territories had possible Zika-associated birth defects, the 
same as the percentage reported in the 50 U.S. states during 
2016. Possible Zika-associated birth defects including brain 
abnormalities and/or microcephaly were reported following Zika 
virus infection during every trimester of pregnancy. Among 
completed pregnancies with positive nucleic acid tests confirm-
ing Zika virus infection identified in the first, second, and third 
trimesters, the percentages of fetuses or infants with possible 
Zika-associated birth defects was 8%, 5%, and 4%, respectively.
What are the implications for public health practice?
Current data suggest that Zika virus infection during any 
trimester of pregnancy might result in Zika-associated birth 
defects. Identification and follow-up of infants born to women 
with laboratory evidence of recent possible Zika virus infection 
during pregnancy can facilitate timely and appropriate clinical 
intervention services and assessment of future needs. 
Information about adherence to the recommended newborn 
testing and screening can improve monitoring and care of 
infants affected by Zika.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
620 
MMWR / June 16, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 23
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
MS, Cosme Harrison, MPH, Eleanor Joy Joseph, Irene Guendel, 
PhD, Krystal Seger, MSPH, Natasha Lamens, U.S. Virgin Islands 
Department of Health; Ngoc-Phuong Luu, MD, Paul White, PhD, 
Commonwealth Health Care Corporation, Commonwealth of the 
Northern Mariana Islands; Josephine O’Mallan, Guam Department 
of Public Health and Social Services; Feauina Meaole, American 
Samoa Department of Health; Carrie Reed, PhD, CDC; Elizabeth 
Irvin-Barnwell, PhD, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease 
Registry; Emily Piercefield, MD, Jason A. Wilken, PhD, Joseph 
Roth Jr., MPH, Julie Shaffner, MS, MPH, Kari Yacisin, MD, Karrie-
Ann Toews, MPH, Konrad E. Hayashi, MD, Nevin K. Krishna, 
MS, MPH, Niketta A. Womack, MPH, Onalee Grady-Erickson, 
Orion McCotter, MPH, Paul J. Weidle, PharmD, Phillip M. Talboy, 
Ramona Finnie, DrPH, Rebecca L. Laws, PhD, Ruth Link-Gelles, 
PhD, Shannon Stokley, DrPH, Tracy L. Ayers, PhD, Yao-Hsuan 
Chen, PhD, Khadija R. Turay, PhD, CDC; Leah Graziano, Agency 
for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; Meng-Yu Chen, MD, 
Rodel Desamu-Thorpe, MD, S. Christine Zahniser, MPH, Arlene J. 
Shaw, MPH, CDC.
Conflict of Interest
Ms. Fulton reported personal fees from Population Services 
International (March 2015−December 2016), Dexis Consulting 
Group (January−June 2015), and Public Health Institute (August−
December 2014) outside the submitted work. No other conflicts of 
interest were reported.
 1Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC; 2Division of Congenital and 
Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
Disabilities, CDC; 3Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education; 4Puerto 
Rico Department of Health; 5U.S. Virgin Islands Department of Health; 
6American Samoa Department of Health; 7Division of Human Development 
and Disability, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
Disabilities, CDC; 8Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, 
National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 
9Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, National Center for Emerging and 
Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 10Pacific Island Health Officers 
Association; 11Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC; 12Division of Health 
Nutrition Examination Surveys, National Center for Health Statistics, CDC; 
13Division of State and Local Readiness, Office of Public Health Preparedness 
and Response, CDC; 14Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging 
and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 15Division of Public Health 
Information Dissemination, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and 
Laboratory Services; 16Republic of the Marshall Islands Ministry of Health; 
17Kosrae Department of Health Services, Federated States of Micronesia.
Corresponding author: Margaret A. Honein, mrh7@cdc.gov, 770-402-0160.
Zika Pregnancy and Infant Registries Working Group
Adriana Rico, MPH, Division of Emergency Operations, Office of 
Public Health Preparedness and Response, CDC; Alba Phippard, MPH, 
Division of Global Migration and Quarantine, National Center for 
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; Alexis B. Peterson, 
PhD, Division of Unintentional Injury Prevention, National Center 
for Injury Prevention and Control, CDC; Ana Pomales, MS, Agency 
for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; Annelise C. Arth, MPH, 
April Dawson, MPH, Division of Congenital and Developmental 
Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
Disabilities, CDC; Araceli Rey, MPH, Argelia Figueroa, MSc, Audilis 
Sanchez, MPH, Division of Global Migration and Quarantine, 
National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 
Brittany Robinson, MPH, Division of Congenital and Developmental 
Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
Disabilities, CDC; Daniel B. Williams, MA, Division of Global HIV 
and TB, Center for Global Health, CDC; Deborah L. Dee, PhD, 
Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC; Divia P
. Forbes, MSPH, 
Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National Center for HIV/
AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC; Elizabeth C. 
Ailes, PhD, Division of Congenital and Developmental Disorders, 
National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, 
CDC; Frances Marrero, Division of Reproductive Health, National 
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC; 
Gamola Z. Fortenberry, PhD, Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC; 
Hilda Razzaghi, PhD, Division of Congenital and Developmental 
Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
Disabilities, CDC; Jean Y. Ko, PhD, Division of Reproductive 
Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health 
Promotion, CDC; Jennifer N. Lind, PharmD, Division of Congenital 
and Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and 
Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Kenneth Lee Dominguez, MD, 
Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, 
Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC; Kristie Clarke, MD, 
Global Immunization Division, Center for Global Health, CDC; Maria 
Flores, Division of Global Migration and Quarantine, National Center 
for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; Matthew S. 
Biggerstaff, ScD, Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization 
and Respiratory Diseases, CDC; Melissa Danielson, MSPH, Division of 
Human Development and Disability, National Center on Birth Defects 
and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Monica Molina, MPH, Division 
of State and Local Readiness, Office of Public Health Preparedness and 
Response, CDC; Nicholas J. Somerville, MD, Epidemic Intelligence 
Service, CDC; Rachel Blumenfeld, MPH, Division of Congenital 
and Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and 
Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Raegan A. Tuff, PhD, Office of the 
Director, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health 
Promotion, CDC; Rebecca J. Free, MD, Division of Emergency 
Operations, Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, 
CDC; Sae-Rom Chae, MD, Division of Foodborne, Waterborne and 
Environmental Diseases, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic 
Infectious Diseases, CDC; Sara Andrist, MPH, Global Immunization 
Division, Center for Global Health, CDC; Shin Y. Kim, MPH, 
Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC; Tanya L. Williams, MPH, 
Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC; Theresa A. Harrington, 
MD, Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for 
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; Tracy Thomason, 
Office of the Director, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention 
and Health Promotion, CDC; Vikram Krishnasamy, MD, Division of 
Foodborne, Waterborne and Environmental Diseases, National Center 
for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / June 16, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 23 
621
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
References
1. Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA, Petersen LR. Zika virus and 
birth defects—reviewing the evidence for causality. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:1981–7. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsr1604338
2. Oduyebo T, Igbinosa I, Petersen EE, et al. Update: interim guidance for 
health care providers caring for pregnant women with possible Zika virus 
exposure—United States, July 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:739–44. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6529e1
3. Simeone RM, Shapiro-Mendoza CK, Meaney-Delman D, et al.; Zika 
and Pregnancy Working Group. Possible Zika virus infection among 
pregnant women—United States and territories, May 2016. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:514–9. https://doi.org/10.15585/
mmwr.mm6520e1
4. Honein MA, Dawson AL, Petersen EE, et al.; US Zika Pregnancy Registry 
Collaboration. Birth defects among fetuses and infants of US women 
with evidence of possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy. JAMA 
2017;317:59–68. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.19006
5. Reynolds MR, Jones AM, Petersen EE, et al.; U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry 
Collaboration. Vital signs: update on Zika virus-associated birth defects 
and evaluation of all U.S. infants with congenital Zika virus exposure—
U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2017;66:366–73. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6613e1
 6. Russell K, Oliver SE, Lewis L, et al.; Contributors. Update: interim 
guidance for the evaluation and management of infants with possible 
congenital Zika virus infection—United States, August 2016. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:870–8. https://doi.org/10.15585/
mmwr.mm6533e2
 7. Cuevas EL, Tong VT, Rozo N, et al. Preliminary report of microcephaly 
potentially associated with Zika virus infection during pregnancy—
Colombia, January–November 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:1409–13. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6549e1
 8. Pass RF, Fowler KB, Boppana SB, Britt WJ, Stagno S. Congenital 
cytomegalovirus infection following first trimester maternal infection: 
symptoms at birth and outcome. J Clin Virol 2006;35:216–20. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2005.09.015
 9. Cragan JD, Isenburg JL, Parker SE, et al.; National Birth Defects 
Prevention Network. Population-based microcephaly surveillance in the 
United States, 2009 to 2013: An analysis of potential sources of variation. 
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 2016;106:972–82. https://doi.
org/10.1002/bdra.23587
 
10. Duffy MR, Chen TH, Hancock WT, et al. Zika virus outbreak on Yap 
Island, Federated States of Micronesia. N Engl J Med 2009;360:2536–43. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0805715
