 The Central Nervous System and the Gut Microbiome
Gil Sharon1,*, Timothy R. Sampson1, Daniel H. Geschwind2,3,4,5,6, and Sarkis K. 
Mazmanian1,*
1Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, 
California 91125, USA
2Program in Neurobehavioral Genetics, Semel Institute, and Program in Neurogenetics, 
University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA
3Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los 
Angeles, California 90095, USA
4Interdepartmental Program in Neuroscience, University of California, Los Angeles, California 
90095, USA
5Center for Autism Treatment and Research, Semel Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA
6Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los 
Angeles, California 90095, USA
Summary
Neurodevelopment is a complex process governed by both intrinsic and extrinsic signals. While 
historically studied by researching the brain, inputs from the periphery impact many neurological 
conditions. Indeed, emerging data suggests communication between the gut and the brain in 
anxiety, depression, cognition and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The development of a healthy, 
functional brain depends on key pre- and post-natal events that integrate environmental cues, such 
as molecular signals from the gut. These cues largely originate from the microbiome, the 
consortium of symbiotic bacteria that reside within all animals. Research over the past few years 
reveals that the gut microbiome plays a role in basic neurogenerative processes such as the 
formation of the blood-brain-barrier, myelination, neurogenesis, and microglia maturation, and 
also modulates many aspects of animal behavior. Herein, we discuss the biological intersection of 
neurodevelopment and the microbiome, and explore the hypothesis that gut bacteria are integral 
contributors to development and function of the nervous system, and the balance between mental 
health and disease.
Correspondences: gsharon@caltech.edu & sarkis@caltech.edu. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 November 3; 167(4): 915–932. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.10.027.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Introduction
The development of the mammalian brain is an intricate process that lasts through 
adolescence and into early adulthood in humans. Further, the process of brain development 
involves extraordinary, large-scale long distance migration of cells during fetal development 
to specific regions or layers, as well as navigation of their processes across even longer 
distances (often hundreds of cell body diameters) to build the specific circuits that underlie 
behavior (Geschwind and Rakic, 2013; Marín and Rubenstein, 2003). The complexity and 
protracted pre- and post-natal time course over which these events occur, makes them highly 
sensitive and even vulnerable to environmental factors. In fact, many of the processes 
governing brain development are driven by extrinsic cues and experiences that shape the 
developing brain through both generative and regressive events. As the gut is our largest 
portal to the molecular universe, various dietary components have been shown to interact 
directly with the developing brain and to induce functional alterations in the mature brain 
(Chang et al., 2009; Zeisel, 2004), and there is now mounting evidence for a role by the gut 
microbiome in directing and facilitating developmental processes in the brain with long term 
implications to health (Figure 1, Table 1).
The mammalian microbiome consists of unique assemblages of microorganisms (i.e., 
bacteria, archaea, fungi, and viruses) associated with various niches in and on the body. 
Research in animal models and humans has inextricably linked gut bacteria to the 
development and function of the immune system. The presence of entire immune cell types 
requires the microbiome, and specific microbes have been discovered that either promote or 
ameliorate immunologic disorders such as type 1 diabetes, asthma and inflammatory bowel 
disease (Round and Mazmanian, 2009). If the gut microbiome can so profoundly impact the 
immune system, why would its influence not reach the nervous system? Indeed, germ-free 
(GF) mice, devoid of all associated microorganisms, exhibit increased risk-taking behaviors 
and hyperactivity, while also displaying learning and memory deficits compared to 
conventional (specific pathogen free; SPF) mice (Clarke et al., 2013; Gareau et al., 2011; 
Heijtz et al., 2011; Neufeld et al., 2011) (Table 1). Further, GF mice show changes in 
expression of the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor (5-HT1A), neurotrophic factors (e.g., 
BDNF), and NMDA receptor subunits in the hippocampus (Bercik et al., 2011a; Heijtz et al., 
2011; Sudo et al., 2004), while also displaying impaired blood-brain barrier function, as well 
as increased myelination in the prefrontal cortex (Braniste et al., 2014; Hoban et al., 2016)
(Table 1; Figure 1). There is also evidence, albeit preliminary and mostly from animal 
models, for a potential role for the microbiome in neuropsychiatric conditions, including 
depression and anxiety (Foster and McVey Neufeld, 2013), autism spectrum disorder (ASD) 
(Krajmalnik-Brown et al., 2015), schizophrenia (Severance et al., 2014) and even 
Parkinson’s (PD) and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Keshavarzian et al., 2015).
In this Review, we discuss the intersection between the mammalian microbiome and the 
brain in both humans and animal models. We explore developmental trajectories and the 
outcomes of interactions between microbes and the brain during prenatal development, as 
well as postnatally and to adulthood where microbial communities are established. Further, 
we highlight potential paradigms by which host-associated microorganisms may play an 
active role in both supporting health and potentiating disease states. By correlating microbial 
Sharon et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 activities to progressive structural and functional events in the brain in mouse models and 
humans, we propose pathways whereby the gut microbiome may contribute to 
neurodevelopment and neurodegeneration. Uncovering microbial and host pathways that 
regulate these connections may provide novel approaches for addressing behavioral, 
psychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders.
Major processes in neurodevelopment coincide with changes in the 
maternal and neonatal gut microbiome
Prenatal brain development
On the third week after conception in humans, after gastrulation is complete, neural stem 
cells differentiate from the epiblast, marking the first event in a sequence that would 
eventually result in the adult brain. In the cerebral cortex, which is most elaborated in 
humans (Geschwind and Rakic, 2013), neural progenitor cells proliferate in the ventricular 
zone (NPCs; also known as radial glial cells) proliferate in the ventricular zone. Committed 
progenitors or neurons that migrate over a distance of many cell body diameters through the 
intermediate zone to the cortical plate, while NPCs remain in the proliferative zone 
(Kriegstein and Alvarez-Buylla, 2009; Rakic, 1988). While cortical neurogenesis is 
complete (for the most part) by mid gestation, gliogenesis is primarily a postnatal process. 
Anterior-posterior and dorsal-ventral patterning of the nervous system occurs via the same 
basic rules, factors and pathways that pattern the body, and the signature of the regulatory 
factor gradients that govern the “Protomap” that underlies the spatial and structural 
differentiation of the brain are present in germinal zones of the developing embryonic brain 
(Marín and Rubenstein, 2003; Rakic, 1988; Stiles and Jernigan, 2010).
Following a massive neuronal expansion and migration during cortical development, 
approximately 50% of neurons undergo apoptosis during the final weeks of gestation (38–
41) and only those that have been integrated into networks, and supported by neurotrophic 
signals, survive (Ceni et al., 2014). Neurotrophins, amongst them brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF), serve as signals for neuron survival, promote maintenance and 
differentiation of various cell populations (Ichim et al., 2012), and mediate various stages of 
neuronal circuitry establishment (Park and Poo, 2013). According to the neurotrophic 
hypothesis, the more connections a neuron makes, the higher the concentration of 
neurotrophins around it, and hence the higher chance of survival (Oppenheim, 1989). 
Neurogenesis is influenced by the presence of microorganisms. Specifically, neurogenesis in 
the dorsal hippocampus of adult GF mice is increased compared to conventional mice 
(Ogbonnaya et al., 2015). Interestingly, colonization of GF mice at weaning could not 
reverse this phenotype, indicating that microbial signals very early in life reduce rates of 
neurogenesis in the hippocampus. Moreover, adult GF mice exhibit increased volume of the 
amygdala and hippocampus (specifically CA2/3), and differ in dendrite morphology, while 
no differences in total brain volume were recorded between GF and SPF animals (Luczynski 
et al., 2016a). By tapping into pathways that govern neuronal differentiation and survival, 
via neurotrophins and their receptors, gut microbes can influence the fate of neurons in 
various regions of the brain and subsequently neurodevelopment and health.
Sharon et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In contrast to neurons, astroglia, and oligodendrocytes, microglia are central nervous system 
(CNS)-resident innate immune cells derived from a primitive subset of macrophages in the 
yolk sac. Although still controversial, recent reports indicate that microglia are not derived 
from monocytes, but rather develop earlier and express distinct cell markers, different from 
bone marrow-derived macrophages (specifically Ly-6ChiCCR2+ monocytes) that replenish 
the CNS following brain injury (Bennett et al., 2016; Ginhoux et al., 2010; Nayak et al., 
2014; Varvel et al., 2012). In contrast, microglia were shown to originate from CD45-c-kit+ 
erythromyeloid progenitor cells and mature as CD45+c-kit-CX3CR1+ cells in the CNS. In 
mice, studies show that microglia enter the brain through circulation by embryonic day 8.5 
(E8.5), start expressing the microglial marker Tmem119 as early as postnatal day 6 and 
become fully ramified throughout the brain by postnatal day 28 (Bennett et al., 2016; Nayak 
et al., 2014). Microglia originate from yolk-sac progenitor cells, and can be replenished by 
bone-marrow derived macrophages upon insult; both cell types can be subjected to microbial 
signals during early development (Erny et al., 2015; Khosravi et al., 2014). A central role for 
the microbiota in the development and maturation of the microglia has recently emerged 
(Erny et al., 2015; Matcovitch-Natan et al., 2016). In the absence of the microbiota, mice 
harbor microglia with significantly altered developmental states. These microglia display 
morphological characteristics and a gene expression profile that indicate an arrest in their 
developmental maturation, and subsequently are maintained in an immature status (Erny et 
al., 2015; Matcovitch-Natan et al., 2016). Notably, microglia derived from GF mice display 
limited responses towards viral infection and microbially-associated molecular patterns 
(MAMPs). Such defective responses can be rescued by administration of short-chain fatty-
acids (SCFAs)(Erny et al., 2015).
The blood-brain-barrier (BBB) forms during gestation and serves as a selective barrier 
between the brain and circulation. The importance of gut microbiome and microbial 
metabolites in the formation of the BBB has been exemplified in GF mice (Braniste et al., 
2014). In the absence of gut microorganisms, the BBB is more permeable to 
macromolecules, compared to conventionally-raised animals, mediated by decreased 
expression of key tight-junction proteins in the brain endothelium. Furthermore, 
permeability decreased upon colonization of GF animals, or, alternatively, administration of 
the SCFA butyrate that is produced as a result of bacterial fermentation in the gut (Braniste 
et al., 2014). Correspondingly, the BBB in the sterile fetus is permeable, compared to the 
adult BBB (Møllgård and Saunders, 1986). Recently, a lymphatic vasculature of the brain 
that drains from the cerebrospinal fluid in the adjacent subarachnoid space and the 
intrastitial fluid, to the deep cervical lymph nodes was discovered (Aspelund et al., 2015). 
This network allows easy passage for various immune cells as well as macromolecules and 
metabolites in and out of the brain (Aspelund et al., 2015; Louveau et al., 2015). The BBB 
and the brain lymphatic vasculature serve as a gateway for various signals to the brain, such 
as circulating immune cells and soluble molecules (including hormones and 
neurotransmitters, both host and microbial in origin), and along with stimulation of the 
vagus nerve, represent mechanisms that facilitate direct and indirect transmission of 
microbial signals from the gut to the brain.
Sharon et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The maternal gut and vaginal microbiome during pregnancy and its effect on offspring 
behavior
The maternal microbiome is distinct and dynamically changing during pregnancy compared 
to other periods in female life (DiGiulio et al., 2015; Koren et al., 2012; MacIntyre et al., 
2015; Nuriel-Ohayon et al., 2016; Romero et al., 2014a). With the progression of pregnancy, 
various taxa change in abundance with some becoming more dominant over others. For 
example, in the gut some Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria appear to increase in relative 
abundance in the third trimester, compared to the first (DiGiulio et al., 2015; Koren et al., 
2012). The vaginal microbiome during pregnancy remains dominated by Lactobacillus 
species; however as pregnancy progresses the species composition varies between stable, 
common states termed community state types (CSTs). CSTs with higher microbial diversity 
in the vagina are associated with preterm birth (DiGiulio et al., 2015; Romero et al., 2014b). 
Some data suggest that the mammalian fetus is not necessarily sterile as commonly 
predicted. Studies advocate that the placenta and, at times, the amniotic fluid surrounding 
the fetus, harbor distinct bacterial populations (Aagaard et al., 2014; DiGiulio, 2012; 
Kuperman and Koren, 2016; Zheng et al., 2015a); however these findings remain 
controversial and require further investigation, as Lauder and colleagues (2016) 
demonstrated. Significant work is needed to validate and implement this information for 
therapeutic or diagnostic applications.
Variation in maternal microbial populations have been suggested to modulate the 
microbiome, neurodevelopment, and behavior of the offspring (Jašarević et al., 2015a). 
Perinatal administration of antibiotics can affect offspring health and immune status in both 
humans and mouse models (Russell et al., 2013; Stensballe et al., 2013). Administration of 
nonabsorbable antibiotics to rodent dams resulted in shifts of both the maternal and 
offspring gut microbiomes and induced hypoactivity compared to controls (Degroote et al., 
2016; Tochitani et al., 2016). Moreover, offspring exhibited anxiety-like behavior and 
deficits in locomotion (Tochitani et al., 2016). Similarly, offspring Wistar rats exhibited 
reduced social behavior and increased anxiety as a result of nonabsorbable antibiotics 
administration to dams early in gestation (Degroote et al., 2016). A recent report indicates 
that maternal diet may also change both the microbial population and behavior of offspring 
(Buffington et al., 2016), following clinical data showing an association between maternal 
obesity and an ASD diagnosis in children (Krakowiak et al., 2012). A maternal high-fat diet 
in mice was sufficient to render offspring that are less social and exhibited repetitive 
behavior, compared to controls fed normal chow. The social deficit in these mice could be 
reversed by administration of Lactobacillus reuteri, found to be missing in the gut 
microbiome of high-fat diet offspring (Buffington et al., 2016). Similarly, behavioral deficits 
induced by antibiotic treatment during pregnancy could be rescued by cross-fostering 
offspring with control dams (Degroote et al., 2016; Tochitani et al., 2016). These examples 
indicate that maternal microbial populations can impact behavioral outcomes in the 
offspring. Whether these changes are mediated indirectly through effects on maternal 
behavior, or directly alter fetal brain development, remains to be determined.
While the fetal environment may or may not harbor a microbiome, the fetus is inarguably 
exposed to microbial products from the mother, such as secondary metabolites, fermentation 
Sharon et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 products, LPS, and/or peptidoglycan (PG). MacPherson and colleagues (2016) elegantly 
demonstrated that microbial metabolites produced in the maternal gut during transient 
colonization of otherwise GF mice with an auxotrophic strain of Escherichia coli can reach 
the fetal compartment and induce a specific developmental program prenatally. Bacterial cell 
wall components can also affect offspring: PG can cross the placenta and reach the fetal 
brain, where it induces proliferation of neurons in the frontal cortex, via increased 
expression of FOXG1, a critical regulator of forebrain development and neurogenesis. 
Offspring exposed to PG prenatally exhibit decreased cognitive function (Humann et al., 
2016). Exposure to other microbial products prenatally and neonatally has impacts on 
offspring behavior. Offspring to dams exposed to propionic acid or LPS, injected 
subcutaneously, exhibited anxiety-like behaviors (Foley et al., 2014). These effects were 
observed even when offspring were exposed neonatally, suggesting a direct effect on the 
offspring rather than on maternal behavior (Foley et al., 2014). The maternal microbiome, 
the microbiome transmitted to offspring, their metabolites, and other microbial products are 
important in driving a developmental program in a healthy trajectory, and when perturbed 
are sufficient to induce behavioral deficits in offspring.
The maternal immune system comes in close interaction with both gut microorganisms and 
the fetus. Immune activation during gestation has potentially severe implications on 
offspring physiology, neuropathology and behavior, as well as the microbiome (reviewed by 
Estes and McAllister, 2016; Knuesel et al., 2014). Large-scale epidemiological studies have 
demonstrated that prenatal infections significantly increase the risk for schizophrenia in 
offspring (Khandaker et al., 2013), and data support involvement in ASD as well, although 
less conclusively (Gardener et al., 2011). Based on these findings, rodent models for 
maternal immune activation (MIA) have been developed, where prenatal administration of 
the Toll-like receptor ligands LPS or Poly(inosine:cytosine) as surrogates for infection 
induced detrimental effects on offspring neuropathology and behavior (Estes and McAllister, 
2016). Furthermore, changes in offspring microbiome following MIA have been reported 
with implications on the metabolomic profile in the serum of these offspring (Hsiao et al., 
2013). Intervention with the human commensal bacterium Bacteroides fragilis corrected 
many of the adverse effects induced by MIA (Hsiao et al., 2013). Specifically, B. fragilis 
treatment decreased intestinal barrier permeability and lowered the concentration of 
potentially pathogenic metabolites (Hsiao et al., 2013). Furthermore, a recent study found 
that MIA phenotypes depend on Th17 cells and the production of IL-17A (Choi et al., 
2016); Interestingly, the development of this T helper cell was previously shown to depend 
on gut bacteria (Ivanov et al., 2009). MIA models demonstrate one possible axis through 
which the gut microbiome and immune system act in concert to shape offspring physiology, 
behavior, and neuropathology.
Postnatal brain development
Postnatal brain development is predominantly governed by synaptic development and 
plasticity, including the overproduction and elimination of synapses during the first decade 
of human life (Paolicelli et al., 2011; Zuchero and Barres, 2015). Although neurogenesis is 
highly limited postnatally and is confined to the subventricular zone of the lateral ventricle 
and the subgranular zone of the hippocampal dentate gyrus, glial cells continue proliferating, 
Sharon et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 migrating and differentiating throughout postnatal development and partially throughout life. 
Glial progenitors proliferate in the subventricular zone of the forebrain and migrate to 
various regions of the brain, where they differentiate to oligodendrocytes and astrocytes 
(Menn et al., 2006). Oligodendrocyte progenitor cells extend processes to neighboring axons 
and differentiate to oligodendrocytes and myelinate these axons, a process that extends over 
the first 2–3 decades of life in the frontal lobes of the cerebral cortex and that is crucial to 
development of higher cognitive function in humans.
Long-term antibiotic treatment of adult mice is sufficient to induce decreased neurogenesis 
in the hippocampus of adult mice, and results in deficits in the novel object recognition task 
(Möhle et al., 2016). Voluntary exercise and probiotic treatment are sufficient to rescue these 
phenotypes (Möhle et al., 2016). Reduced numbers of CD45+CD11b+Ly-6chiCCR2+ 
monocytes, but not microglia, were observed in the brains of antibiotic-treated animals. 
Remarkably, CCR2−/− knock-out animals, as well as Ly-6chi-monocyte depleted animals, 
show reduced hippocampal neurogenesis. Lastly, adoptive transfer of Ly-6chi monocytes into 
antibiotic-treated animals was sufficient to rescue the neurogenesis phenotype in the 
hippocampus, indicating that circulating monocytes play an important role in adult 
neurogenesis (Möhle et al., 2016). These reports suggest that neurogenesis, apoptosis, and 
synaptic pruning may be regulated by signals from the microbiome. However, more research 
is needed to mechanistically study the role of the microbiome in these processes in both 
animal models and humans. Adult neurogenesis can also be promoted by serotonin (Alenina 
and Klempin, 2015), and gut bacteria have been shown to play a role in serotonergic 
pathways both in the gut and in various regions of the brain (reviewed by O’Mahoni et al., 
(2015).
During postnatal brain development, astrocytes and microglia are thought to facilitate 
pruning of weak neuronal synapses by complement activation and subsequent phagocytosis 
(Hong and Stevens, 2016). In the absence of microglia, for example, the adult brain harbors 
significantly more synapses, exemplifying that these glial cells are necessary for synaptic 
pruning (Paolicelli et al., 2011; Zhan et al., 2014). While complement components are 
secreted by multiple cells in the CNS, astrocytes and microglia are major producers of 
complement (Bahrini et al., 2015; Stephan et al., 2012). Microglia produce copious amounts 
of C1q, the first protein in the complement activation cascade, and express various 
complement receptors (Schafer et al., 2012; Stephan et al., 2012). Synaptic pruning, as well 
as other processes, shape neuronal connections after cell differentiation and migration, 
refining neuronal networks following major events in postnatal brain development.
Proper conductance in neuronal axons is essential for information and signal relay, and 
myelination is a critical process in the development of a healthy brain that continues well 
into adolescence (Davison and Dobbing, 1966). Two reports demonstrated that the presence 
of an intact gut microbiome modulates myelination. In these studies, myelin-related 
transcripts were increased in the prefrontal cortex, but not other brain regions, as a result of 
antibiotic-treatment (Gacias et al., 2016) or in GF mice (Hoban et al., 2016). Interestingly, 
while antibiotic treatment was sufficient to induce elevated expression of myelin-related 
genes in non-obese-diabetic (NOD) mice and could be transferred by microbiome 
transplantation from these mice to C57Bl/6 mice (Gacias et al., 2016), colonization of GF 
Sharon et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 animals with SPF microbiota did not rescue the myelin phenotype (Hoban et al., 2016). 
These observations suggest that early-life exposure to the microbiome is necessary for 
dynamic response to changes in the microbiome later in life. In addition, Oligodendrocyte 
development and differentiation relies on various signals, among them are the chemokine 
CXCL1 and its receptor CXCR2. Notably, CXCL1 expression was shown to be differentially 
induced in the brains of an ischemic stroke mouse model, in mice with different microbiotas, 
suggesting a potential role during homeostasis and development, although further 
investigation is needed (Benakis et al., 2016).
The early life gut microbiome and its impact on brain development and behavior
Under the assumption that the fetus is sterile of bacteria, the first direct encounter an infant 
has with the microbial world is during birth. Infants born via vaginal delivery are colonized 
by microbial populations that are closely related to maternal vaginal populations, dominated 
by Lactobacillus and Prevotella species (Dominguez-Bello et al., 2010). In contrast, infants 
born by cesarean-section (C-section) are exposed to and colonized by skin microbes such as 
Staphylococcus and Corynebacterium (Bäckhed et al., 2015; Dominguez-Bello et al., 2010). 
This initial exposure to such distinct microbial populations has various implications over the 
health and development of a newborn, with long-term consequences. In addition, prenatal 
stress changes the vaginal microbiome, and has been shown to subsequently remodel the gut 
microbiome and metabolome of the offspring(Jašarević et al., 2015b). It has been 
documented that children born by C-section are at a higher risk for autoimmune diseases 
(Sevelsted et al., 2015). However, some restoration towards vaginal-derived microbial status 
can be achieved by exposing newborns to vaginal microorganisms derived from their 
mothers (Dominguez-Bello et al., 2016). The infant microbiome is highly sensitive to 
various perturbations like changes in diet and antibiotic treatment (Bäckhed et al., 2015; 
Koenig et al., 2011; Yassour et al., 2016). Moreover, infants are exposed to vertical 
acquisitions of novel microorganisms through intimate interaction with parents and siblings, 
as well as exposure to new environments (Bäckhed et al., 2015; Bordenstein and Theis, 
2015; Rosenberg and Zilber-Rosenberg, 2016). Bäckhed and colleagues (2015) have 
identified signature taxa for various stages during the first year of life. While the newborns’ 
gut is predominantly aerobic and inhabited by Bifidobacterium, Enterococcus, Escherichia/
Shigella, Streptococcus, Bacteroides, and Rothia, gut bacterial populations are significantly 
closer to those of mothers, and more anaerobic, by the age of one. At this stage, children are 
already colonized with Clostredium, Ruminococcus, Veilonella, Roseburia, Akkermansia, 
Alistipes, Eubacterium, Faecalibacterium and Prevotella, in addition to other bacteria. The 
gut microbiome during the first three years of life is more amenable and prone to 
perturbations. Interestingly, as some bacteria can be transmitted from mother to newborn, 
probiotic administration to mothers during pregnancy can transfer specific species to 
newborns (Dotterud et al., 2015). Hence, this period of life is critical for the establishment of 
a healthy, stable microbiome (Lloyd-Price et al., 2016a; Yatsunenko et al., 2012).
Disruption of the microbiome, by administration of antibiotics or drastic changes in diet, or 
conversely, augmentation with probiotic microorganisms, has profound effects on the 
microbial community and its trajectory through life. Perturbations of the microbial 
community may have significant impacts on the developing individual, with long lasting 
Sharon et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 effects on metabolism, physiology and immune status, as has been suggested in animal 
studies (Blaser, 2016; Kuperman and Koren, 2016; Zeissig and Blumberg, 2014). Others 
have reported that antibiotic administration during the first year of life was correlated with 
depression and behavioral difficulties later in life (Slykerman et al., 2016). The 
administration of antibiotics pre- or post-natally changes the physiological status of the 
mother or its offspring in animal models, and subsequently may impact the developmental 
trajectory of the offspring’s brain, or alternatively modulate behavior via primary effects on 
maternal behavior. Partial depletion of an animal’s associated microbiota for a short period 
of time may not always impact behavior; a short-term treatment of rat neonates with 
vancomycin had no effect on anxiety- and depressive-like behaviors in adulthood. However, 
during adulthood these rats showed visceral hypersensitivity, indicating that gut microbes 
can impact nociception (Amaral et al., 2008; O’Mahony et al., 2014). In adult mice, a seven-
day course of nonabsorbable antibiotics was sufficient to decrease anxiety-like behavior. 
Interestingly, this effect was short-lasting, and behavior normalized to baseline within two 
weeks (Bercik et al., 2011a), as the microbiome likely returned to its initial state. Long-term 
broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment from weaning through adulthood restructured the 
microbiome and subsequently modulated brain chemistry and behavior (Desbonnet et al., 
2015). Correspondingly, GF animals display various behavioral and developmental 
phenotypes, compared to SPF animals (Arentsen et al., 2015; Bercik et al., 2011a; 
Desbonnet et al., 2014; Gareau et al., 2011; Heijtz et al., 2011; Luczynski et al., 2016b; 
Neufeld et al., 2011) (Table 1, Fig. 1). These observations indicate a close connection 
between the microbiome and behavior, and suggest possible pathways through which they 
interact.
Probiotic administration augments the population with a specific microbe, either transiently 
or permanently, and can change the microbiome profile and function, as well as interact with 
the host. Probiotic bacteria have been demonstrated to alter, reverse, or prevent various 
conditions in mouse models and humans. In addition, experiments with reconstitution of the 
gut microbial population with healthy consortia by fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) 
are underway (Borody and Khoruts, 2012; Hourigan and Oliva-Hemker, 2016). Beneficial 
bacteria were found to reduce responses to stress and anxiety, depressive-like behavior, 
promote social behavior, decrease repetitive behavior, and improve cognitive function and 
communication in animals (Ait-Belgnaoui et al., 2012, 2014; Bercik et al., 2011b; Bravo et 
al., 2011; Buffington et al., 2016; Gareau et al., 2011; Hsiao et al., 2013; Sudo et al., 2004; 
Sun et al., 2016). This concept has been also expanded to humans where healthy volunteers 
that consumed a fermented milk product (containing several different probiotic bacteria) 
showed different brain activity during an emotional faces attention task, as measured by 
fMRI, in brain regions that control processing of sensation and emotion (Tillisch et al., 
2013).
Mounting evidence suggests that the communication between the brain and gut microbial 
populations is bi-directional (Bailey et al., 2011; Carabotti et al., 2015; Moussaoui et al., 
2014; Park et al., 2013). Using the maternal separation model in mice, De Palma et al. 
(2015) demonstrated profound differences in the gut microbiome in response to early-life 
stress resulted in an anxiety-like phenotype. Moreover, gene expression in the amygdala 
differs between GF and SPF animals (Stilling et al., 2015). A reciprocal effect by gut 
Sharon et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 bacteria has been reported as well, where specific bacteria, or complete microbial 
assemblages, had effects on host stress- and depression-like behaviors (Bercik et al., 2011a; 
Gacias et al., 2016; Sudo et al., 2004). While it is yet unclear if these examples are driven by 
a direct gut-brain interaction, or mediated by other physiological factors induced by the 
disease state, these reports and others exemplify potential interactions between the 
microbiome, the gastrointestinal tract, and the brain.
The adult “steady-state” microbiome
In adulthood, the microbiome reaches a relative equilibrium in terms of bacterial abundance 
and diversity, and does not change significantly under stable environmental or health 
conditions. Known determinants that shape the microbiome are genetics (Goodrich et al., 
2016), diet (Carmody et al., 2015; David et al., 2014), lifestyle (Allen et al., 2015; Kang et 
al., 2014) and geography (Rampelli et al., 2015; Yatsunenko et al., 2012). Health is defined 
rather ambiguously as “..the absence of any overt disease” (Aagaard et al., 2013; Lloyd-
Price et al., 2016a). The healthy human microbiome was recently reviewed extensively by 
Huttenhower and colleagues (2016a). The human microbiome is niche-specific, with 
microbial diversity and abundance differing significantly from niche to niche. Each of these 
niches is colonized by specific microbial assemblages, with the phyla Bacteroidetes and 
Firmicutes dominating the intestine, Streptococcus sp. dominating the oral cavity, 
Corynebacterium, Propionibacterium, and Staphylococcus dominating the skin, and 
Lactobacillus dominating the vagina (Lloyd-Price et al., 2016a). Higher microbial diversity 
is correlated with health and functional redundancy (Lozupone et al., 2012; Moya and 
Ferrer, 2016). Importantly, the healthy microbiome is temporally stable, even when 
subjected to recurrent mild disturbances (Dethlefsen et al., 2008; Oh et al., 2016; Schloissnig 
et al., 2013). Decreased diversity, or lack of redundancy, in the microbiome has been 
reported in multiple diseases (Lloyd-Price et al., 2016a).
The microbiome in neurodevelopmental and mood disorders
Neurodevelopmental disorders are classically studied from a genetic perspective (Parikshak 
et al., 2015; de la Torre-Ubieta et al., 2016). However, gastrointestinal comorbidities and 
food allergies are common in neurodevelopmental disorders, suggesting a role for the gut 
microbiome (de Theije et al., 2014). Thus, an appreciation for a microbial role in these 
conditions has been gained through profiling bacterial populations in fecal samples of 
patients and controls. Recent reports support the notion that the microbiome, or its 
disruption, can contribute to the pathology of various neurologic disorders, using mouse 
models and intervention studies. Evidence in rodent models suggests a direct link between 
the gut microbiota and stress and anxiety (reviewed by (Foster and McVey Neufeld, 2013). 
These observations in animal models is supported by data in human subjects that associates 
the gut microbiome in IBD to stress disorders (Bonaz and Bernstein, 2013; Fond et al., 
2014).
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
The gut microbiome of ASD children has been studied in multiple different cohorts using 
various methodologies, and a consensus between studies was rarely reported. It appears as 
Sharon et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 though these small studies fail to generate a coherent picture, although differences in species 
richness and their diversity between ASD and controls have been repeatedly reported (De 
Angelis et al., 2013; Finegold et al., 2002, 2010; Kang et al., 2013; Parracho et al., 2005; 
Son et al., 2015; Williams et al., 2011, 2012). The gut microbiome of ASD patients have 
increased abundance and diversity of Clostridia species, and a general increase in non-spore 
forming anaerobes and microaerophilic bacteria, compared to neurotypical controls (De 
Angelis et al., 2013; Finegold et al., 2002, 2010; Parracho et al., 2005). Gastrointestinal 
comorbidities are significantly more prevalent in children with ASD compared to controls 
(Mannion et al., 2013; McElhanon et al., 2014). These comorbidities often coincide with 
differences in the gut microbiome of these children (Son et al., 2015; Williams et al., 2011, 
2012). Interestingly, Sutterella was found in close association with the intestinal epithelium 
of ASD children presenting gastrointestinal symptoms, while it was absent in controls 
(Williams et al., 2012). Interestingly, Kang et al. (2013), reported the absence of specific 
probiotic members of the community such as Prevotella from the ASD gut bacterial 
population, suggesting that augmenting the microbiome with a specific microbe may be 
beneficial. These studies, and others, indicate a potential relationship between the 
microbiome (or specific microbes) and the brain in autism. Large-scale cross-center studies, 
using standardized methodologies, would help delineate what are the significant differences 
in the gut microbiome of ASD patients. Subsequent functional studies into the properties of 
the gut microbiome in ASD will shed light on mechanism by which the gut microbiome 
contributes to pathology and behavior. Understanding interactions between specific 
microbial species and the brain during development may help unravel the etiology of this 
enigmatic disorder.
Schizophrenia
To date, few studies of the schizophrenia microbiome exist. Higher incidence of lactic-acid 
bacteria in the oropharyngeal microbiome was reported, compared to controls (Castro-Nallar 
et al., 2015). Interestingly, a Lactobacillus specific phage was also discovered in high 
abundance (Yolken et al., 2015). Another study reported a blood-specific microbiome in 
schizophrenia patients, compared to controls, with higher alpha and beta diversity (Mangul 
et al., 2016; Severance et al., 2013). Further research in large populations is needed to show 
whether these differences are consistent throughout the population, further profiles 
microbiomes associated with this condition, and test the potential roles for gut microbes in 
the etiology of schizophrenia.
Depression (Major Depressive Disorder; MDD)
Evidence in rodent models suggest that the gut microbiome plays a role in depressive-like 
behaviors (Bravo et al., 2011; Desbonnet et al., 2010; Ferreira Mello et al., 2013). 
Gastrointestinal symptoms are associated with depression, with approximately 20% of 
patients reporting such symptoms (Mussell et al., 2008). One hypothesis claims that 
depression, or subsets of this disorder, is a microglial disorder, as the onset of depression 
often follows intense inflammatory episodes in the brain, or conversely, decline in microglial 
function (Yirmiya et al., 2015). Interestingly, minocycline, a tetracycline antibacterial agent 
known to inhibit the activation of microglia, can diminish depressive behaviors in rodents 
(Molina-Hernández et al., 2008; Zheng et al., 2015b) and humans (Miyaoka et al., 2012), 
Sharon et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and has been suggested as a potent antidepressant. In light of recent evidence on the role of 
the microbiome in microglia maturation and activation (Erny et al., 2015; Matcovitch-Natan 
et al., 2016), it is compelling to speculate that the microbiome impacts depression by 
influencing microglial maturation and activation. It should be noted, however, that it is yet to 
be determined whether the antidepressive effects of minocycline are due to its antimicrobial 
properties, inhibition of microglial activation, or a combination of the two. Recently, Zheng 
et al. (2016) have shown that the beta-diversity of the gut microbiome in MDD patients is 
significantly different from that of healthy controls, with significantly more Actinobacteria 
and less Bacteroidetes in MDD associated microbial populations. Further, the authors 
transplanted human samples from MDD and control samples to GF mice, and show that 
recipients of MDD samples exhibit depressive-like phenotypes, compared to controls (Zheng 
et al., 2016). These findings were reproduced by another group, where decreased bacterial 
richness and diversity were reported in depression, and depressive-like phenotypes could be 
transmitted by fecal transplantation into rats (Kelly et al., 2016). Mouse and human studies 
now show that the microbiome plays an active role in driving depressive-like behaviors, 
suggesting potential new avenues for therapeutic development.
Neurodegeneration and the microbiome in old age
Throughout aging, mammals undergo physiological changes that increase susceptibility to 
disease. Interestingly, the incidence of some gastrointestinal diseases increase with age 
(Britton and McLaughlin, 2013), and prevalence of diagnosed GI disorders is approximately 
24% in people over 65 (Alameel et al., 2012). Notably, the enteric nervous system 
degenerates with age, starting in adulthood. Cholinergic nerves, as well as enteric glia cells, 
are lost in both the myenteric plexus and the submucosal plexus (Phillips and Powley, 2007). 
This degeneration is partially responsible for the increase in bowel motility symptoms 
prevalent in the elderly (O’Mahony et al., 2002).
The microbiome also undergos profound remodeling in elderly populations (over 65 years 
old)(Biagi et al., 2011; O’Toole and Claesson, 2010; Salazar et al., 2014). Major shifts in 
bacterial taxa have been reported in the fecal microbiome of elderly people, compared to 
infants and young adults, and these shifts correlate with health status and frailty in elderly 
people (Claesson et al., 2011; van Tongeren et al., 2005). Notably, while in adulthood 
Firmicutes outnumber Bacteroidetes in the gut, it appears as though the ratio shifts in favor 
of Bacteroidetes in the elderly (Claesson et al., 2011; Mariat et al., 2009). Specifically, 
Bacteroides, Alistipes, Parabacteroides, and Proteobacteria (gamma-proteobacteria, 
specifically) are significantly more prevalent in the elderly compared to younger adults 
(Claesson et al., 2011; Mariat et al., 2009). Moreover, various studies show that the 
microbiome of elderly living in the community have a similar microbial diversity to that of 
younger adults than that of elderly people staying in short or long term care facilities 
(Claesson et al., 2012). Langlie et al. (2014) reported that similar differences occur in older 
mice, compared to a younger group, and is highly correlated with mouse frailty. A clinical 
study, testing the effects of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG consumption in an elderly cohort, 
found that the probiotic restructured the bacterial population towards an anti-inflammatory 
phenotype that favors the survival and growth of beneficial microbes and elevated SCFA 
production (Eloe-Fadrosh et al., 2015). The microbiome in the elderly population is 
Sharon et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 significantly different from that of younger adults, is less diverse and resilient, and can be 
modulated by environmental factors and interventions.
Remarkably, the gut microbiome of centenarians differs significantly from that of other 
adults (Biagi et al., 2010, 2016). Biagi and colleagues found that a core gut microbiome, 
comprised of species in the Bacteroidaceae, Lachnospiraceae, and Ruminococcaceae 
families, is associated with the human host throughout life, with decreasing cumulative 
abundance. Specifically, Coprococcus, Roseburia, and Faecalibacterium, were found to be 
negatively correlated with age (Biagi et al., 2016). Other genera are positively correlated 
with age; among these are Oscillospira and Akkermansia (Biagi et al., 2016). Interestingly, 
certain subdominant bacterial species are enriched in centenarians, some of which are 
known to exert beneficial functions on their host, and may play a role in maintenance of 
health in old age (Biagi et al., 2016). Insights into the microbiome of centenarians may 
unravel specific microbes with beneficial and protective effect on the host.
The microbiome in neurodegenerative diseases
How initial interactions with gut microbes alter events later in life, such as during 
neurodegenerative diseases, is still unclear. A small number of studies to date have 
demonstrated different gut microbial populations in both human and animal models of 
neurodegenerative disease. Preliminary observations in the APP/PS1 mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) indicate that these animals harbor decreased Allobaculum and 
Akkermansia, with an increase in Rikenellaceae compared to wild-type controls (Harach et 
al., 2015). Concurrently, individuals afflicted with Parkinson’s disease (PD) display 
significantly different fecal and mucosal microbial populations (Hasegawa et al., 2015; 
Keshavarzian et al., 2015; Scheperjans et al., 2015). Prevotellaceae show decreased, while 
Lactobacilliaceae have increased, abundance compared to controls (Hasegawa et al., 2015; 
Scheperjans et al., 2015). Relative levels of Enterobacteraceae in feces is sufficient to 
discriminate between specific forms of PD; patients displaying the tremor-dominant form of 
PD had significantly lower Enterobacteraceae relative abundance than those with the more 
severe postural and gait instability (Scheperjans et al., 2015). In fact, intestinal biopsies of 
PD patients have indicated increased tissue-associated E. coli compared to healthy controls 
(Forsyth et al., 2011), further demonstrating the presence of an altered gut microbial 
community in individuals diagnosed with neurodegenerative diseases. However, this 
research correlating changes in the microbiome and neurodegeneration remain largely 
descriptive; how different microbial populations arise, and their physiological consequences, 
if any, remain unknown.
Neuroinflammation is postulated to play a key role in the pathology of neurodegenerative 
diseases (Cappellano et al., 2013; Glass et al., 2010). Proinflammatory cytokines produced 
both in the brain and periphery modulate neuronal function and can initiate pathologic cell 
death (Koprich et al., 2008; McCoy and Tansey, 2008). Given the importance of microglia 
functions in both the prevention and promotion of neurodegenerative processes, it is 
tempting to speculate that the gut microbiota may influence these inflammatory diseases of 
the aging brain. As discussed above, bacterial fermentation products, namely SCFAs, can 
drive the maturation of microglia and are needed for maintenance of mature microglia (Erny 
Sharon et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 et al., 2015). Interestingly, decreased SCFA concentrations in feces from PD patients, 
compared to controls, were recently reported (Unger et al., 2016). Passage of MAMPs from 
the intestine and into the brain may produce low levels of inflammation (Pal et al., 2015). 
Such persistent, proinflammatory signaling has been linked to the severity of 
neurodegenerative disease (Cappellano et al., 2013; Glass et al., 2010). Interestingly, a 
recent report suggests that a physiologic role of the amyloid protein Aβ, known to form 
pathogenic plaques in AD, is as an antimicrobial agent to eliminate bacterial infection in the 
brain (Kumar et al., 2016). Studies to understand the long-term consequences of 
neurophysiological changes by the microbiota are critical.
While dysfunction in BBB integrity and maturation of microglia could have global effects, a 
recent study has revealed a specific example of neurodegenerative disease mediated by gut 
microbes. In a mouse model of sporadic uveitis, an inflammation of the middle layer of the 
eye, animals exhibit increased inflammation and loss of cells in the neuroretina leading to 
vision dysfunction. This inflammation is mediated by autoreactive T cells that recognize 
antigens present in the retina, a typically immune-privileged tissue. The activation of 
autoreactive T cells in these mice is dependent on the microbiota (Horai et al., 2015). In fact, 
not only are these T cells reactive towards retinal proteins, they are also capable of 
recognizing microbial antigens present in the gut (Horai et al., 2015). At this time, however, 
the microbial antigen driving this autoimmune neuroinflammation is unknown. Nonetheless, 
this observation suggests that “molecular mimicry” of host molecules present in the 
microbiota can trigger autoimmune responses that promote neurodegeneration. Other 
microbial molecules that mimic host structures have been suggested to play roles in 
promoting immune responses during AD and PD (Friedland, 2015; Hill and Lukiw, 2015). 
Therefore, one might consider the early developmental presence of certain gut microbes that 
produce these molecular mimics to potentially act as risk factors for specific immune and 
neurodegenerative diseases. However, no direct observation of this hypothesis has been 
reported to date, and the link between age-dependent influences to the microbiome and 
neuropathology are an active area of research.
Perspective
The microbiome plays a significant role in the well-being of its host. While much of the 
research on this topic to date has demonstrated that different bacterial populations are 
associated with certain clinical conditions, it is unclear for the most part whether these 
differences are causative, promote and/or enhance disease, or instead are a consequence of 
otherwise unrelated pathophysiology. Future research should tackle this challenging 
question in order to understand the intricate interaction between mammals (or any other 
host) and their associated microbial community. We must not continue exercises in simply 
cataloging bacterial populations. Rather, we must extend this foundational research approach 
to test the functional and ecological roles that a given microbial population plays, as well as 
decipher the physiological effects individual bacteria or consortia of bacteria have on their 
animal hosts. It is of importance to address questions of cause and effect: are changes in the 
microbiome underlying the pathophysiology or are they a result thereof? Are the effects on 
behavior direct, or a result of other fundamental physiological changes? Are there defined 
microbial features that are necessary and sufficient to support proper neurodevelopment and 
Sharon et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 prevent neurodegeneration? The use of animal models is a great tool for studying basic 
processes in health and disease. However, we must use caution in extrapolating results to the 
human condition, and strive to use preclinical findings as one of several approaches to 
inform human health and disease.
While research on the gut-brain axis is still in relative infancy, certain basic rules have begun 
to emerge. It appears as though specific neurological pathways evolved to respond to the 
effect of microbial population, while others are unaffected by microbiome “instruction” and 
subject to purely genomic or other environmental cues. Interaction with host-associated 
microbial communities, either directly via microbial metabolites or indirectly by the 
immune, metabolic or endocrine systems, can supply the nervous system with real-time 
information about the environment. These cues converge to control basic developmental 
processes in the brain such as barrier function, immune surveillance, and neurogenesis. The 
mechanistic understanding of how different microbial populations, beneficial or pathogenic, 
govern these and other functions related to health and disease holds promise in the 
diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of specific neuropathologies. Determining how a 
microbiome, changing with Westernization and other environmental factors, impacts a 
human population with growing rates of neurodevelopmental disorders and increasing life 
expectancy represents an urgent challenge to biomedical research, and to society.
Acknowledgments
The authors apologize to colleagues whose work could not be included in this Review. We thank Drs. Hiutung Chu 
and Wei-li Wu, as well as Carly Stewart for critical reading of this manuscript. The authors are supported by the 
Meixner Postdoctoral Fellowship in Translational Research (to G.S.) and the Larry L. Hillblom Foundation 
Postdoctoral Fellowship (to T.R.S). Research in the Mazmanian laboratory is funded by grants from the National 
Institutes of Health (MH100556, DK078938, GM099535 and NS085910), the Department of Defense, the Heritage 
Medical Research Institute, and the Simons Foundation.
References
Aagaard K, Petrosino J, Keitel W, Watson M, Katancik J, Garcia N, Patel S, Cutting M, Madden T, 
Hamilton H, et al. The Human Microbiome Project strategy for comprehensive sampling of the 
human microbiome and why it matters. FASEB J. 2013; 27:1012–1022. [PubMed: 23165986] 
Aagaard K, Ma J, Antony KM, Ganu R, Petrosino J, Versalovic J. The placenta harbors a unique 
microbiome. Sci Transl Med. 2014; 6:237ra65.
Ait-Belgnaoui A, Durand H, Cartier C, Chaumaz G, Eutamene H, Ferrier L, Houdeau E, Fioramonti J, 
Bueno L, Theodorou V. Prevention of gut leakiness by a probiotic treatment leads to attenuated HPA 
response to an acute psychological stress in rats. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2012; 37:1885–1895. 
[PubMed: 22541937] 
Ait-Belgnaoui A, Colom A, Braniste V, Ramalho L, Marrot A, Cartier C, Houdeau E, Theodorou V, 
Tompkins T. Probiotic gut effect prevents the chronic psychological stress-induced brain activity 
abnormality in mice. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2014; 26:510–520. [PubMed: 24372793] 
Alenina N, Klempin F. The role of serotonin in adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Behav Brain Res. 
2015; 277:49–57. [PubMed: 25125239] 
Allen JM, Berg Miller ME, Pence BD, Whitlock K, Nehra V, Gaskins HR, White BA, Fryer JD, 
Woods JA. Voluntary and forced exercise differentially alters the gut microbiome in C57BL/6J 
mice. J Appl Physiol. 2015; 118:1059–1066. [PubMed: 25678701] 
Amaral FA, Sachs D, Costa VV, Fagundes CT, Cisalpino D, Cunha TM, Ferreira SH, Cunha FQ, Silva 
TA, Nicoli JR, et al. Commensal microbiota is fundamental for the development of inflammatory 
pain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008; 105:2193–2197. [PubMed: 18268332] 
Sharon et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Arentsen T, Raith H, Qian Y, Forssberg H, Diaz Heijtz R. Host microbiota modulates development of 
social preference in mice. Microb Ecol Health Dis. 2015; 26:29719. [PubMed: 26679775] 
Aspelund A, Antila S, Proulx ST, Karlsen TV, Karaman S, Detmar M, Wiig H, Alitalo K. A dural 
lymphatic vascular system that drains brain interstitial fluid and macromolecules. J Exp Med. 2015; 
212:991–999. [PubMed: 26077718] 
Bäckhed F, Roswall J, Peng Y, Feng Q, Jia H, Kovatcheva-Datchary P, Li Y, Xia Y, Xie H, Zhong H, et 
al. Dynamics and Stabilization of the Human Gut Microbiome during the First Year of Life. Cell 
Host Microbe. 2015; 17:690–703. [PubMed: 25974306] 
Bahrini I, Song J-H, Diez D, Hanayama R. Neuronal exosomes facilitate synaptic pruning by up-
regulating complement factors in microglia. Sci Rep. 2015; 5:7989. [PubMed: 25612542] 
Bailey MT, Dowd SE, Galley JD, Hufnagle AR, Allen RG, Lyte M. Exposure to a social stressor alters 
the structure of the intestinal microbiota: implications for stressor-induced immunomodulation. 
Brain Behav Immun. 2011; 25:397–407. [PubMed: 21040780] 
Benakis C, Brea D, Caballero S, Faraco G, Moore J, Murphy M, Sita G, Racchumi G, Ling L, Pamer 
EG, et al. Commensal microbiota affects ischemic stroke outcome by regulating intestinal 
[gamma][delta] T cells. Nat Med. 2016; 22:516–523. [PubMed: 27019327] 
Bennett ML, Bennett FC, Liddelow SA, Ajami B, Zamanian JL, Fernhoff NB, Mulinyawe SB, Bohlen 
CJ, Adil A, Tucker A, et al. New tools for studying microglia in the mouse and human CNS. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016; 113:E1738–E1746. [PubMed: 26884166] 
Bercik P, Denou E, Collins J, Jackson W, Lu J, Jury J, Deng Y, Blennerhassett P, Macri J, McCoy KD, 
et al. The intestinal microbiota affect central levels of brain-derived neurotropic factor and 
behavior in mice. Gastroenterology. 2011a; 141:599–609. 609.e1–e3. [PubMed: 21683077] 
Bercik P, Park AJ, Sinclair D, Khoshdel A, Lu J, Huang X, Deng Y, Blennerhassett PA, Fahnestock M, 
Moine D, et al. The anxiolytic effect of Bifidobacterium longum NCC3001 involves vagal 
pathways for gut–brain communication. Neurogastroenterology & Motility. 2011b; 23:1132–1139. 
[PubMed: 21988661] 
Biagi E, Nylund L, Candela M, Ostan R, Bucci L, Pini E, Nikkïla J, Monti D, Satokari R, Franceschi 
C, et al. Through ageing, and beyond: gut microbiota and inflammatory status in seniors and 
centenarians. PLoS One. 2010; 5:e10667. [PubMed: 20498852] 
Biagi E, Franceschi C, Rampelli S, Severgnini M, Ostan R, Turroni S, Consolandi C, Quercia S, Scurti 
M, Monti D, et al. Gut Microbiota and Extreme Longevity. Curr Biol. 2016; 26:1480–1485. 
[PubMed: 27185560] 
Blaser MJ. Antibiotic use and its consequences for the normal microbiome. Science. 2016; 352:544–
545. [PubMed: 27126037] 
Bonaz BL, Bernstein CN. Brain-gut interactions in inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterology. 
2013; 144:36–49. [PubMed: 23063970] 
Bordenstein SR, Theis KR. Host Biology in Light of the Microbiome: Ten Principles of Holobionts 
and Hologenomes. PLoS Biol. 2015; 13:e1002226. [PubMed: 26284777] 
Borody TJ, Khoruts A. Fecal microbiota transplantation and emerging applications. Nat Rev 
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012; 9:88–96.
Braniste V, Al-Asmakh M, Kowal C, Anuar F, Abbaspour A, Tóth M, Korecka A, Bakocevic N, Ng 
LG, Guan NL, et al. The gut microbiota influences blood-brain barrier permeability in mice. Sci 
Transl Med. 2014; 6:263ra158.
Bravo JA, Forsythe P, Chew MV, Escaravage E, Savignac HM, Dinan TG, Bienenstock J, Cryan JF. 
Ingestion of Lactobacillus strain regulates emotional behavior and central GABA receptor 
expression in a mouse via the vagus nerve. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:16050–16055. 
[PubMed: 21876150] 
Britton E, McLaughlin JT. Ageing and the gut. Proc Nutr Soc. 2013; 72:173–177. [PubMed: 
23146206] 
Buffington SA, Di Prisco GV, Auchtung TA, Ajami NJ, Petrosino JF, Costa-Mattioli M. Microbial 
Reconstitution Reverses Maternal Diet-Induced Social and Synaptic Deficits in Offspring. Cell. 
2016; 165:1762–1775. [PubMed: 27315483] 
Sharon et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cappellano G, Carecchio M, Fleetwood T, Magistrelli L, Cantello R, Dianzani U, Comi C. Immunity 
and inflammation in neurodegenerative diseases. Am J Neurodegener Dis. 2013; 2:89–107. 
[PubMed: 23844334] 
Carabotti M, Scirocco A, Maselli MA, Severi C. The gut-brain axis: interactions between enteric 
microbiota, central and enteric nervous systems. Ann Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015; 28:203–209.
Carmody RN, Gerber GK, Luevano JM Jr, Gatti DM, Somes L, Svenson KL, Turnbaugh PJ. Diet 
dominates host genotype in shaping the murine gut microbiota. Cell Host Microbe. 2015; 17:72–
84. [PubMed: 25532804] 
Castro-Nallar E, Bendall ML, Pérez-Losada M, Sabuncyan S, Severance EG, Dickerson FB, Schroeder 
JR, Yolken RH, Crandall KA. Composition, taxonomy and functional diversity of the oropharynx 
microbiome in individuals with schizophrenia and controls. PeerJ. 2015; 3:e1140. [PubMed: 
26336637] 
Ceni, C.; Unsain, N.; Zeinieh, MP.; Barker, PA. Neurotrophins in the Regulation of Cellular Survival 
and Death. In: Lewin, GR.; Carter, BD., editors. Neurotrophic Factors. Springer; Berlin 
Heidelberg: 2014. p. 193-221.
Chang C-Y, Ke D-S, Chen J-Y. Essential fatty acids and human brain. Acta Neurol Taiwan. 2009; 
18:231–241. [PubMed: 20329590] 
Choi GB, Yim YS, Wong H, Kim S, Kim H, Kim SV, Hoeffer CA, Littman DR, Huh JR. The maternal 
interleukin-17a pathway in mice promotes autism-like phenotypes in offspring. Science. 2016; 
351:933–939. [PubMed: 26822608] 
Claesson MJ, Cusack S, O’Sullivan O, Greene-Diniz R, de Weerd H, Flannery E, Marchesi JR, Falush 
D, Dinan T, Fitzgerald G, et al. Composition, variability, and temporal stability of the intestinal 
microbiota of the elderly. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108(Suppl 1):4586–4591. [PubMed: 
20571116] 
Clarke G, Grenham S, Scully P, Fitzgerald P, Moloney RD, Shanahan F, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. The 
microbiome-gut-brain axis during early life regulates the hippocampal serotonergic system in a 
sex-dependent manner. Mol Psychiatry. 2013; 18:666–673. [PubMed: 22688187] 
David LA, Maurice CF, Carmody RN, Gootenberg DB, Button JE, Wolfe BE, Ling AV, Devlin AS, 
Varma Y, Fischbach MA, et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. 
Nature. 2014; 505:559–563. [PubMed: 24336217] 
Davison AN, Dobbing J. Myelination as a vulnerable period in brain development. Br Med Bull. 1966; 
22:40–44. [PubMed: 5321813] 
De Angelis M, Piccolo M, Vannini L, Siragusa S, De Giacomo A, Serrazzanetti DI, Cristofori F, 
Guerzoni ME, Gobbetti M, Francavilla R. Fecal microbiota and metabolome of children with 
autism and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e76993. 
[PubMed: 24130822] 
Degroote S, Hunting D, Baccarelli AA, Takser L. Maternal gut and fetal brain connection: Increased 
anxiety and reduced social interactions in Wistar rat offspring following peri-conceptional 
antibiotic exposure. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2016
De Palma G, Blennerhassett P, Lu J, Deng Y, Park AJ, Green W, Denou E, Silva MA, Santacruz A, 
Sanz Y, et al. Microbiota and host determinants of behavioural phenotype in maternally separated 
mice. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:7735. [PubMed: 26218677] 
Desbonnet L, Garrett L, Clarke G, Kiely B, Cryan JF, Dinan TG. Effects of the probiotic 
Bifidobacterium infantis in the maternal separation model of depression. Neuroscience. 2010; 
170:1179–1188. [PubMed: 20696216] 
Desbonnet L, Clarke G, Shanahan F, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Microbiota is essential for social 
development in the mouse. Mol Psychiatry. 2014; 19:146–148. [PubMed: 23689536] 
Desbonnet L, Clarke G, Traplin A, O’Sullivan O, Crispie F, Moloney RD, Cotter PD, Dinan TG, Cryan 
JF. Gut microbiota depletion from early adolescence in mice: Implications for brain and behaviour. 
Brain Behav Immun. 2015; 48:165–173. [PubMed: 25866195] 
Dethlefsen L, Huse S, Sogin ML, Relman DA. The pervasive effects of an antibiotic on the human gut 
microbiota, as revealed by deep 16S rRNA sequencing. PLoS Biol. 2008; 6:e280. [PubMed: 
19018661] 
Sharon et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DiGiulio DB. Diversity of microbes in amniotic fluid. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2012; 17:2–11. 
[PubMed: 22137615] 
DiGiulio DB, Callahan BJ, McMurdie PJ, Costello EK, Lyell DJ, Robaczewska A, Sun CL, Goltsman 
DSA, Wong RJ, Shaw G, et al. Temporal and spatial variation of the human microbiota during 
pregnancy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112:11060–11065. [PubMed: 26283357] 
Dominguez-Bello MG, Costello EK, Contreras M, Magris M, Hidalgo G, Fierer N, Knight R. Delivery 
mode shapes the acquisition and structure of the initial microbiota across multiple body habitats in 
newborns. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:11971–11975. [PubMed: 20566857] 
Dominguez-Bello MG, De Jesus-Laboy KM, Shen N, Cox LM, Amir A, Gonzalez A, Bokulich NA, 
Song SJ, Hoashi M, Rivera-Vinas JI, et al. Partial restoration of the microbiota of cesarean-born 
infants via vaginal microbial transfer. Nat Med. 2016; 22:250–253. [PubMed: 26828196] 
Dotterud CK, Avershina E, Sekelja M, Simpson MR, Rudi K, Storrø O, Johnsen R, Øien T. Does 
Maternal Perinatal Probiotic Supplementation Alter the Intestinal Microbiota of Mother and 
Child? J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2015; 61:200–207. [PubMed: 25782657] 
Erny D, Hrabě de Angelis AL, Jaitin D, Wieghofer P, Staszewski O, David E, Keren-Shaul H, 
Mahlakoiv T, Jakobshagen K, Buch T, et al. Host microbiota constantly control maturation and 
function of microglia in the CNS. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:965–977. [PubMed: 26030851] 
Estes ML, McAllister AK. Maternal immune activation: Implications for neuropsychiatric disorders. 
Science. 2016; 353:772–777. [PubMed: 27540164] 
Ferreira Mello BS, Monte AS, McIntyre RS, Soczynska JK, Custódio CS, Cordeiro RC, Chaves JH, 
Mendes Vasconcelos SM, Nobre HV Júnior, Florenço de Sousa FC, et al. Effects of doxycycline 
on depressive-like behavior in mice after lipopolysaccharide (LPS) administration. J Psychiatr Res. 
2013; 47:1521–1529. [PubMed: 23835040] 
Finegold SM, Molitoris D, Song Y, Liu C, Vaisanen M-L, Bolte E, McTeague M, Sandler R, Wexler H, 
Marlowe EM, et al. Gastrointestinal microflora studies in late-onset autism. Clin Infect Dis. 2002; 
35:S6–S16. [PubMed: 12173102] 
Finegold SM, Dowd SE, Gontcharova V, Liu C, Henley KE, Wolcott RD, Youn E, Summanen PH, 
Granpeesheh D, Dixon D, et al. Pyrosequencing study of fecal microflora of autistic and control 
children. Anaerobe. 2010; 16:444–453. [PubMed: 20603222] 
Foley KA, Ossenkopp KP, Kavaliers M, Macfabe DF. Pre- and neonatal exposure to lipopolysaccharide 
or the enteric metabolite, propionic acid, alters development and behavior in adolescent rats in a 
sexually dimorphic manner. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e87072. [PubMed: 24466331] 
Fond G, Loundou A, Hamdani N, Boukouaci W, Dargel A, Oliveira J, Roger M, Tamouza R, Leboyer 
M, Boyer L. Anxiety and depression comorbidities in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS): a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2014; 264:651–660. [PubMed: 
24705634] 
Forsyth CB, Shannon KM, Kordower JH, Voigt RM, Shaikh M, Jaglin JA, Estes JD, Dodiya HB, 
Keshavarzian A. Increased intestinal permeability correlates with sigmoid mucosa alpha-synuclein 
staining and endotoxin exposure markers in early Parkinson’s disease. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e28032. 
[PubMed: 22145021] 
Foster JA, McVey Neufeld K-A. Gut–brain axis: how the microbiome influences anxiety and 
depression. Trends Neurosci. 2013; 36:305–312. [PubMed: 23384445] 
Friedland RP. Mechanisms of molecular mimicry involving the microbiota in neurodegeneration. J 
Alzheimers Dis. 2015; 45:349–362. [PubMed: 25589730] 
Gacias M, Gaspari S, Santos P-MG, Tamburini S, Andrade M, Zhang F, Shen N, Tolstikov V, Kiebish 
MA, Dupree JL, et al. Microbiota-driven transcriptional changes in prefrontal cortex override 
genetic differences in social behavior. Elife. 2016:5.
Gardener H, Spiegelman D, Buka SL. Perinatal and neonatal risk factors for autism: a comprehensive 
meta-analysis. Pediatrics. 2011; 128:344–355. [PubMed: 21746727] 
Gareau MG, Wine E, Rodrigues DM, Cho JH, Whary MT, Philpott DJ, Macqueen G, Sherman PM. 
Bacterial infection causes stress-induced memory dysfunction in mice. Gut. 2011; 60:307–317. 
[PubMed: 20966022] 
Geschwind DH, Rakic P. Cortical evolution: judge the brain by its cover. Neuron. 2013; 80:633–647. 
[PubMed: 24183016] 
Sharon et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Ginhoux F, Greter M, Leboeuf M, Nandi S, See P, Gokhan S, Mehler MF, Conway SJ, Ng LG, Stanley 
ER, et al. Fate mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia derive from primitive macrophages. 
Science. 2010; 330:841–845. [PubMed: 20966214] 
Glass CK, Saijo K, Winner B, Marchetto MC, Gage FH. Mechanisms underlying inflammation in 
neurodegeneration. Cell. 2010; 140:918–934. [PubMed: 20303880] 
Gomez de Agüero M, Ganal-Vonarburg SC, Fuhrer T, Rupp S, Uchimura Y, Li H, Steinert A, 
Heikenwalder M, Hapfelmeier S, Sauer U, et al. The maternal microbiota drives early postnatal 
innate immune development. Science. 2016; 351:1296–1302. [PubMed: 26989247] 
Goodrich JK, Davenport ER, Waters JL, Clark AG, Ley RE. Cross-species comparisons of host genetic 
associations with the microbiome. Science. 2016; 352:532–535. [PubMed: 27126034] 
Harach T, Marungruang N, Dutilleul N, Cheatham V, Mc Coy KD, Neher JJ, Jucker M, Fåk F, Lasser 
T, et al. Reduction of Alzheimer’s disease beta-amyloid pathology in the absence of gut 
microbiota. 2015
Hasegawa S, Goto S, Tsuji H, Okuno T, Asahara T, Nomoto K, Shibata A, Fujisawa Y, Minato T, 
Okamoto A, et al. Intestinal Dysbiosis and Lowered Serum Lipopolysaccharide-Binding Protein in 
Parkinson’s Disease. PLoS One. 2015; 10:e0142164. [PubMed: 26539989] 
Heijtz RD, Wang S, Anuar F, Qian Y, Björkholm B, Samuelsson A, Hibberd ML, Forssberg H, 
Pettersson S. Normal gut microbiota modulates brain development and behavior. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences. 2011; 108:3047–3052.
Hill JM, Lukiw WJ. Microbial-generated amyloids and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Front Aging 
Neurosci. 2015; 7:9. [PubMed: 25713531] 
Hoban AE, Stilling RM, Ryan FJ, Shanahan F, Dinan TG, Claesson MJ, Clarke G, Cryan JF. 
Regulation of prefrontal cortex myelination by the microbiota. Transl Psychiatry. 2016; 6:e774. 
[PubMed: 27045844] 
Hong S, Stevens B. Microglia: Phagocytosing to Clear, Sculpt, and Eliminate. Dev Cell. 2016; 38:126–
128. [PubMed: 27459063] 
Horai R, Zárate-Bladés CR, Dillenburg-Pilla P, Chen J, Kielczewski JL, Silver PB, Jittayasothorn Y, 
Chan CC, Yamane H, Honda K, et al. Microbiota-Dependent Activation of an Autoreactive T Cell 
Receptor Provokes Autoimmunity in an Immunologically Privileged Site. Immunity. 2015; 
43:343–353. [PubMed: 26287682] 
Hourigan SK, Oliva-Hemker M. Fecal microbiota transplantation in children: a brief review. Pediatr 
Res. 2016; 80:2–6. [PubMed: 26982451] 
Hsiao EY, McBride SW, Hsien S, Sharon G, Hyde ER, McCue T, Codelli JA, Chow J, Reisman SE, 
Petrosino JF, et al. Microbiota modulate behavioral and physiological abnormalities associated 
with neurodevelopmental disorders. Cell. 2013; 155:1451–1463. [PubMed: 24315484] 
Humann J, Mann B, Gao G, Moresco P, Ramahi J, Loh LN, Farr A, Hu Y, Durick-Eder K, Fillon SA, 
et al. Bacterial Peptidoglycan Traverses the Placenta to Induce Fetal Neuroproliferation and 
Aberrant Postnatal Behavior. Cell Host Microbe. 2016; 19:388–399. [PubMed: 26962947] 
Ichim G, Tauszig-Delamasure S, Mehlen P. Neurotrophins and cell death. Exp Cell Res. 2012; 
318:1221–1228. [PubMed: 22465479] 
Ivanov II, Atarashi K, Manel N, Brodie EL, Shima T, Karaoz U, Wei D, Goldfarb KC, Santee CA, 
Lynch SV, et al. Induction of intestinal Th17 cells by segmented filamentous bacteria. Cell. 2009; 
139:485–498. [PubMed: 19836068] 
Jašarević E, Rodgers AB, Bale TL. A novel role for maternal stress and microbial transmission in early 
life programming and neurodevelopment. Neurobiol Stress. 2015a; 1:81–88. [PubMed: 25530984] 
Jašarević E, Howerton CL, Howard CD, Bale TL. Alterations in the Vaginal Microbiome by Maternal 
Stress Are Associated With Metabolic Reprogramming of the Offspring Gut and Brain. 
Endocrinology. 2015b; 156:3265–3276. [PubMed: 26079804] 
Kang DW, Park JG, Ilhan ZE, Wallstrom G, Labaer J, Adams JB, Krajmalnik-Brown R. Reduced 
incidence of Prevotella and other fermenters in intestinal microflora of autistic children. PLoS 
One. 2013; 8:e68322. [PubMed: 23844187] 
Kang SS, Jeraldo PR, Kurti A, Miller MEB, Cook MD, Whitlock K, Goldenfeld N, Woods JA, White 
BA, Chia N, et al. Diet and exercise orthogonally alter the gut microbiome and reveal independent 
associations with anxiety and cognition. Mol Neurodegener. 2014; 9:36. [PubMed: 25217888] 
Sharon et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Kelly JR, Borre Y, O’Brien C, Patterson E, el Aidy S, Deane J, Kennedy PJ, Beers S, Scott K, 
Moloney G, et al. Transferring the blues: Depression-associated gut microbiota induces 
neurobehavioural changes in the rat. J Psychiatr Res. 2016
Keshavarzian A, Green SJ, Engen PA, Voigt RM, Naqib A, Forsyth CB, Mutlu E, Shannon KM. 
Colonic bacterial composition in Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord. 2015; 30:1351–1360. 
[PubMed: 26179554] 
Khandaker GM, Zimbron J, Lewis G, Jones PB. Prenatal maternal infection, neurodevelopment and 
adult schizophrenia: a systematic review of population-based studies. Psychol Med. 2013; 43:239–
257. [PubMed: 22717193] 
Khosravi A, Yáñez A, Price JG, Chow A, Merad M, Goodridge HS, Mazmanian SK. Gut microbiota 
promote hematopoiesis to control bacterial infection. Cell Host Microbe. 2014; 15:374–381. 
[PubMed: 24629343] 
Knuesel I, Chicha L, Britschgi M, Schobel SA, Bodmer M, Hellings JA, Toovey S, Prinssen EP. 
Maternal immune activation and abnormal brain development across CNS disorders. Nat Rev 
Neurol. 2014; 10:643–660. [PubMed: 25311587] 
Koenig JE, Spor A, Scalfone N, Fricker AD, Stombaugh J, Knight R, Angenent LT, Ley RE. 
Succession of microbial consortia in the developing infant gut microbiome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A. 2011; 108(Suppl 1):4578–4585. [PubMed: 20668239] 
Koprich JB, Reske-Nielsen C, Mithal P, Isacson O. Neuroinflammation mediated by IL-1$\beta$ 
increases susceptibility of dopamine neurons to degeneration in an animal model of Parkinson’s 
disease. J Neuroinflammation. 2008; 5:1–12. [PubMed: 18171484] 
Koren O, Goodrich JK, Cullender TC, Spor A, Laitinen K, Bäckhed HK, Gonzalez A, Werner JJ, 
Angenent LT, Knight R, et al. Host remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes 
during pregnancy. Cell. 2012; 150:470–480. [PubMed: 22863002] 
Krajmalnik-Brown R, Lozupone C, Kang D-W, Adams JB. Gut bacteria in children with autism 
spectrum disorders: challenges and promise of studying how a complex community influences a 
complex disease. Microb Ecol Health Dis. 2015; 26:26914. [PubMed: 25769266] 
Krakowiak P, Walker CK, Bremer AA, Baker AS, Ozonoff S, Hansen RL, Hertz-Picciotto I. Maternal 
metabolic conditions and risk for autism and other neurodevelopmental disorders. Pediatrics. 2012; 
129:e1121–e1128. [PubMed: 22492772] 
Kriegstein A, Alvarez-Buylla A. The glial nature of embryonic and adult neural stem cells. Annu Rev 
Neurosci. 2009; 32:149–184. [PubMed: 19555289] 
Kumar DKV, Choi SH, Washicosky KJ, Eimer WA, Tucker S, Ghofrani J, Lefkowitz A, McColl G, 
Goldstein LE, Tanzi RE, et al. Amyloid-β peptide protects against microbial infection in mouse 
and worm models of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Transl Med. 2016; 8:340ra72.
Kuperman AA, Koren O. Antibiotic use during pregnancy: how bad is it? BMC Med. 2016; 14:91. 
[PubMed: 27312712] 
Lauder AP, Roche AM, Sherrill-Mix S, Bailey A, Laughlin AL, Bittinger K, Leite R, Elovitz MA, 
Parry S, Bushman FD. Comparison of placenta samples with contamination controls does not 
provide evidence for a distinct placenta microbiota. Microbiome. 2016; 4:29. [PubMed: 27338728] 
Lloyd-Price J, Abu-Ali G, Huttenhower C. The healthy human microbiome. Genome Med. 2016a; 
8:51. [PubMed: 27122046] 
Lloyd-Price J, Abu-Ali G, Huttenhower C. The healthy human microbiome. Genome Med. 2016b; 
8:51. [PubMed: 27122046] 
Louveau A, Smirnov I, Keyes TJ, Eccles JD, Rouhani SJ, Peske JD, Derecki NC, Castle D, Mandell 
JW, Lee KS, et al. Structural and functional features of central nervous system lymphatic vessels. 
Nature. 2015; 523:337–341. [PubMed: 26030524] 
Lozupone CA, Stombaugh JI, Gordon JI, Jansson JK, Knight R. Diversity, stability and resilience of 
the human gut microbiota. Nature. 2012; 489:220–230. [PubMed: 22972295] 
Luczynski P, Whelan SO, O’Sullivan C, Clarke G, Shanahan F, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Adult microbiota-
deficient mice have distinct dendritic morphological changes: differential effects in the amygdala 
and hippocampus. Eur J Neurosci. 2016a
Sharon et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Luczynski P, McVey Neufeld K-A, Oriach CS, Clarke G, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Growing up in a 
Bubble: Using Germ-Free Animals to Assess the Influence of the Gut Microbiota on Brain and 
Behavior. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2016b
MacIntyre DA, Chandiramani M, Lee YS, Kindinger L, Smith A, Angelopoulos N, Lehne B, 
Arulkumaran S, Brown R, Teoh TG, et al. The vaginal microbiome during pregnancy and the 
postpartum period in a European population. Sci Rep. 2015; 5:8988. [PubMed: 25758319] 
Mangul S, Olde Loohuis LM, Ori A, Jospin G, Koslicki D, Yang HT, Wu T, Boks MP, Lomen-Hoerth 
C, Wiedau-Pazos M, et al. Total RNA Sequencing reveals microbial communities in human blood 
and disease specific effects. 2016
Mannion A, Leader G, Healy O. An investigation of comorbid psychological disorders, sleep 
problems, gastrointestinal symptoms and epilepsy in children and adolescents with Autism 
Spectrum Disorder. Res Autism Spectr Disord. 2013; 7:35–42.
Mariat D, Firmesse O, Levenez F, Guimarăes V, Sokol H, Doré J, Corthier G, Furet J-P. The 
Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio of the human microbiota changes with age. BMC Microbiol. 2009; 
9:123. [PubMed: 19508720] 
Marín O, Rubenstein JLR. Cell migration in the forebrain. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2003; 26:441–483. 
[PubMed: 12626695] 
Matcovitch-Natan O, Winter DR, Giladi A, Vargas Aguilar S, Spinrad A, Sarrazin S, Ben-Yehuda H, 
David E, Zelada González F, Perrin P, et al. Microglia development follows a stepwise program 
to regulate brain homeostasis. Science. 2016
McCoy MK, Tansey MG. TNF signaling inhibition in the CNS: implications for normal brain function 
and neurodegenerative disease. J Neuroinflammation. 2008; 5:45. [PubMed: 18925972] 
McElhanon BO, McCracken C, Karpen S, Sharp WG. Gastrointestinal symptoms in autism spectrum 
disorder: a meta-analysis. Pediatrics. 2014; 133:872–883. [PubMed: 24777214] 
Menn B, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Yaschine C, Gonzalez-Perez O, Rowitch D, Alvarez-Buylla A. Origin of 
oligodendrocytes in the subventricular zone of the adult brain. J Neurosci. 2006; 26:7907–7918. 
[PubMed: 16870736] 
Miyaoka T, Wake R, Furuya M, Liaury K, Ieda M, Kawakami K, Tsuchie K, Taki M, Ishihara K, Araki 
T, et al. Minocycline as adjunctive therapy for patients with unipolar psychotic depression: an 
open-label study. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2012; 37:222–226. [PubMed: 
22349578] 
Möhle L, Mattei D, Heimesaat MM, Bereswill S, Fischer A, Alutis M, French T, Hambardzumyan D, 
Matzinger P, Dunay IR, et al. Ly6Chi Monocytes Provide a Link between Antibiotic-Induced 
Changes in Gut Microbiota and Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis. Cell Rep. 2016; 15:1945–
1956. [PubMed: 27210745] 
Molina-Hernández M, Tellez-Alcántara NP, Pérez-García J, Olivera-Lopez JI, Jaramillo-Jaimes MT. 
Antidepressant-like actions of minocycline combined with several glutamate antagonists. Prog 
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2008; 32:380–386. [PubMed: 17933448] 
Møllgård K, Saunders NR. The development of the human blood-brain and blood-CSF barriers. 
Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 1986
Moussaoui N, Braniste V, Ait-Belgnaoui A, Gabanou M, Sekkal S, Olier M, Théodorou V, Martin 
PGP, Houdeau E. Changes in intestinal glucocorticoid sensitivity in early life shape the risk of 
epithelial barrier defect in maternal-deprived rats. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e88382. [PubMed: 
24586321] 
Moya A, Ferrer M. Functional Redundancy-Induced Stability of Gut Microbiota Subjected to 
Disturbance. Trends Microbiol. 2016; 24:402–413. [PubMed: 26996765] 
Mussell M, Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JBW, Herzog W, Löwe B. Gastrointestinal symptoms in 
primary care: prevalence and association with depression and anxiety. J Psychosom Res. 2008; 
64:605–612. [PubMed: 18501261] 
Nayak D, Roth TL, McGavern DB. Microglia development and function. Annu Rev Immunol. 2014; 
32:367–402. [PubMed: 24471431] 
Neufeld KM, Kang N, Bienenstock J, Foster JA. Reduced anxiety-like behavior and central 
neurochemical change in germ-free mice. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2011; 23:255–264. e119. 
[PubMed: 21054680] 
Sharon et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Nuriel-Ohayon M, Neuman H, Koren O. Microbial changes during pregnancy, birth and infancy. Front 
Microbiol. 2016:7. [PubMed: 26858696] 
Ogbonnaya ES, Clarke G, Shanahan F, Dinan TG, Cryan JF, O’Leary OF. Adult Hippocampal 
Neurogenesis Is Regulated by the Microbiome. Biol Psychiatry. 2015; 78:e7–e9. [PubMed: 
25700599] 
Oh J, Byrd AL, Park M, Kong HH, Segre JA. NISC Comparative Sequencing Program. Temporal 
Stability of the Human Skin Microbiome. Cell. 2016; 165:854–866. [PubMed: 27153496] 
O’Mahony D, O’Leary P, Quigley EMM. Aging and intestinal motility: a review of factors that affect 
intestinal motility in the aged. Drugs Aging. 2002; 19:515–527. [PubMed: 12182688] 
O’Mahony SM, Felice VD, Nally K, Savignac HM, Claesson MJ, Scully P, Woznicki J, Hyland NP, 
Shanahan F, Quigley EM, et al. Disturbance of the gut microbiota in early-life selectively affects 
visceral pain in adulthood without impacting cognitive or anxiety-related behaviors in male rats. 
Neuroscience. 2014; 277:885–901. [PubMed: 25088912] 
O’Mahony SM, Clarke G, Borre YE, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Serotonin, tryptophan metabolism and the 
brain-gut-microbiome axis. Behav Brain Res. 2015; 277:32–48. [PubMed: 25078296] 
Oppenheim RW. The neurotrophic theory and naturally occurring motoneuron death. Trends Neurosci. 
1989; 12:252–255. [PubMed: 2475935] 
Pal GD, Shaikh M, Forsyth CB, Ouyang B, Keshavarzian A, Shannon KM. Abnormal 
lipopolysaccharide binding protein as marker of gastrointestinal inflammation in Parkinson 
disease. Front Neurosci. 2015; 9:306. [PubMed: 26388718] 
Paolicelli RC, Bolasco G, Pagani F, Maggi L, Scianni M, Panzanelli P, Giustetto M, Ferreira TA, 
Guiducci E, Dumas L, et al. Synaptic pruning by microglia is necessary for normal brain 
development. Science. 2011; 333:1456–1458. [PubMed: 21778362] 
Parikshak NN, Gandal MJ, Geschwind DH. Systems biology and gene networks in 
neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders. Nat Rev Genet. 2015; 16:441–458. 
[PubMed: 26149713] 
Park H, Poo M-M. Neurotrophin regulation of neural circuit development and function. Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2013; 14:7–23. [PubMed: 23254191] 
Park AJ, Collins J, Blennerhassett PA, Ghia JE, Verdu EF, Bercik P, Collins SM. Altered colonic 
function and microbiota profile in a mouse model of chronic depression. Neurogastroenterol 
Motil. 2013; 25:733–e575. [PubMed: 23773726] 
Parracho HMRT, Bingham MO, Gibson GR, McCartney AL. Differences between the gut microflora 
of children with autistic spectrum disorders and that of healthy children. J Med Microbiol. 2005; 
54:987–991. [PubMed: 16157555] 
Pärtty A, Kalliomäki M, Wacklin P, Salminen S, Isolauri E. A possible link between early probiotic 
intervention and the risk of neuropsychiatric disorders later in childhood: a randomized trial. 
Pediatr Res. 2015; 77:823–828. [PubMed: 25760553] 
Phillips RJ, Powley TL. Innervation of the gastrointestinal tract: patterns of aging. Auton Neurosci. 
2007; 136:1–19. [PubMed: 17537681] 
Pressler R, Auvin S. Comparison of Brain Maturation among Species: An Example in Translational 
Research Suggesting the Possible Use of Bumetanide in Newborn. Front Neurol. 2013; 4:36. 
[PubMed: 23596438] 
Rakic P. Specification of cerebral cortical areas. Science. 1988; 241:170–176. [PubMed: 3291116] 
Rampelli S, Schnorr SL, Consolandi C, Turroni S, Severgnini M, Peano C, Brigidi P, Crittenden AN, 
Henry AG, Candela M. Metagenome Sequencing of the Hadza Hunter-Gatherer Gut Microbiota. 
Curr Biol. 2015; 25:1682–1693. [PubMed: 25981789] 
Romero R, Hassan SS, Gajer P, Tarca AL, Fadrosh DW, Nikita L, Galuppi M, Lamont RF, 
Chaemsaithong P, Miranda J, et al. The composition and stability of the vaginal microbiota of 
normal pregnant women is different from that of non-pregnant women. Microbiome. 2014a; 2:4. 
[PubMed: 24484853] 
Romero R, Hassan SS, Gajer P, Tarca AL, Fadrosh DW, Bieda J, Chaemsaithong P, Miranda J, 
Chaiworapongsa T, Ravel J. The vaginal microbiota of pregnant women who subsequently have 
spontaneous preterm labor and delivery and those with a normal delivery at term. Microbiome. 
2014b; 2:18. [PubMed: 24987521] 
Sharon et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Rosenberg E, Zilber-Rosenberg I. Microbes Drive Evolution of Animals and Plants: the Hologenome 
Concept. MBio. 2016:7.
Round JL, Mazmanian SK. The gut microbiota shapes intestinal immune responses during health and 
disease. Nat Rev Immunol. 2009; 9:313–323. [PubMed: 19343057] 
Russell SL, Gold MJ, Willing BP, Thorson L, McNagny KM, Finlay BB. Perinatal antibiotic treatment 
affects murine microbiota, immune responses and allergic asthma. Gut Microbes. 2013; 4:158–
164. [PubMed: 23333861] 
Schafer DP, Lehrman EK, Kautzman AG, Koyama R, Mardinly AR, Yamasaki R, Ransohoff RM, 
Greenberg ME, Barres BA, Stevens B. Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity 
and complement-dependent manner. Neuron. 2012; 74:691–705. [PubMed: 22632727] 
Scheperjans F, Aho V, Pereira PAB, Koskinen K, Paulin L, Pekkonen E, Haapaniemi E, Kaakkola S, 
Eerola-Rautio J, Pohja M, et al. Gut microbiota are related to Parkinson’s disease and clinical 
phenotype. Mov Disord. 2015; 30:350–358. [PubMed: 25476529] 
Schloissnig S, Arumugam M, Sunagawa S, Mitreva M, Tap J, Zhu A, Waller A, Mende DR, Kultima 
JR, Martin J, et al. Genomic variation landscape of the human gut microbiome. Nature. 2013; 
493:45–50. [PubMed: 23222524] 
Semple BD, Blomgren K, Gimlin K, Ferriero DM, Noble-Haeusslein LJ. Brain development in rodents 
and humans: Identifying benchmarks of maturation and vulnerability to injury across species. 
Prog Neurobiol. 2013; 106–107:1–16.
Sevelsted A, Stokholm J, Bønnelykke K, Bisgaard H. Cesarean section and chronic immune disorders. 
Pediatrics. 2015; 135:e92–e98. [PubMed: 25452656] 
Severance EG, Gressitt KL, Stallings CR, Origoni AE, Khushalani S, Leweke FM, Dickerson FB, 
Yolken RH. Discordant patterns of bacterial translocation markers and implications for innate 
immune imbalances in schizophrenia. Schizophr Res. 2013; 148:130–137. [PubMed: 23746484] 
Severance EG, Yolken RH, Eaton WW. Autoimmune diseases, gastrointestinal disorders and the 
microbiome in schizophrenia: more than a gut feeling. Schizophr Res. 2014
Slykerman RF, Thompson J, Waldie KE, Murphy R, Wall C, Mitchell EA. Antibiotics in the first year 
of life and subsequent neurocognitive outcomes. Acta Paediatr. 2016
Son JS, Zheng LJ, Rowehl LM, Tian X, Zhang Y, Zhu W, Litcher-Kelly L, Gadow KD, Gathungu G, 
Robertson CE, et al. Comparison of Fecal Microbiota in Children with Autism Spectrum 
Disorders and Neurotypical Siblings in the Simons Simplex Collection. PLoS One. 2015; 
10:e0137725. [PubMed: 26427004] 
Stensballe LG, Simonsen J, Jensen SM, Bønnelykke K, Bisgaard H. Use of antibiotics during 
pregnancy increases the risk of asthma in early childhood. J Pediatr. 2013; 162:832–838.e3. 
[PubMed: 23140881] 
Stephan AH, Barres BA, Stevens B. The complement system: an unexpected role in synaptic pruning 
during development and disease. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2012; 35:369–389. [PubMed: 22715882] 
Stiles J, Jernigan TL. The basics of brain development. Neuropsychol Rev. 2010; 20:327–348. 
[PubMed: 21042938] 
Stilling RM, Ryan FJ, Hoban AE, Shanahan F, Clarke G, Claesson MJ, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Microbes 
& neurodevelopment--Absence of microbiota during early life increases activity-related 
transcriptional pathways in the amygdala. Brain Behav Immun. 2015; 50:209–220. [PubMed: 
26184083] 
Sudo N, Chida Y, Aiba Y, Sonoda J, Oyama N, Yu X-N, Kubo C, Koga Y. Postnatal microbial 
colonization programs the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal system for stress response in mice. J 
Physiol. 2004; 558:263–275. [PubMed: 15133062] 
Sun J, Wang F, Ling Z, Yu X, Chen W, Li H, Jin J, Pang M, Zhang H, Yu J, et al. Clostridium 
butyricum attenuates cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury in diabetic mice via modulation of gut 
microbiota. Brain Res. 2016; 1642:180–188. [PubMed: 27037183] 
de Theije CGM, Bavelaar BM, Lopes da Silva S, Korte SM, Olivier B, Garssen J, Kraneveld AD. Food 
allergy and food-based therapies in neurodevelopmental disorders. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 
2014; 25:218–226. [PubMed: 24236934] 
Sharon et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Tillisch K, Labus J, Kilpatrick L, Jiang Z, Stains J, Ebrat B, Guyonnet D, Legrain-Raspaud S, Trotin 
B, Naliboff B, et al. Consumption of fermented milk product with probiotic modulates brain 
activity. Gastroenterology. 2013; 144:1394–1401. 1401.e1–e4. [PubMed: 23474283] 
Tochitani S, Ikeno T, Ito T, Sakurai A, Yamauchi T, Matsuzaki H. Administration of Non-Absorbable 
Antibiotics to Pregnant Mice to Perturb the Maternal Gut Microbiota Is Associated with 
Alterations in Offspring Behavior. PLoS One. 2016; 11:e0138293. [PubMed: 26789865] 
van Tongeren SP, Slaets JPJ, Harmsen HJM, Welling GW. Fecal microbiota composition and frailty. 
Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005; 71:6438–6442. [PubMed: 16204576] 
de la Torre-Ubieta L, Won H, Stein JL, Geschwind DH. Advancing the understanding of autism 
disease mechanisms through genetics. Nat Med. 2016; 22:345–361. [PubMed: 27050589] 
Unger MM, Spiegel J, Dillmann K-U, Grundmann D, Philippeit H, Bürmann J, Faßbender K, 
Schwiertz A, Schäfer K-H. Short chain fatty acids and gut microbiota differ between patients 
with Parkinson’s disease and age-matched controls. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2016
Varvel NH, Grathwohl SA, Baumann F, Liebig C, Bosch A, Brawek B, Thal DR, Charo IF, Heppner 
FL, Aguzzi A, et al. Microglial repopulation model reveals a robust homeostatic process for 
replacing CNS myeloid cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:18150–18155. [PubMed: 
23071306] 
Williams BL, Hornig M, Buie T, Bauman ML, Cho Paik M, Wick I, Bennett A, Jabado O, Hirschberg 
DL, Lipkin WI. Impaired carbohydrate digestion and transport and mucosal dysbiosis in the 
intestines of children with autism and gastrointestinal disturbances. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e24585. 
[PubMed: 21949732] 
Williams BL, Hornig M, Parekh T, Lipkin WI. Application of novel PCR-based methods for detection, 
quantitation, and phylogenetic characterization of Sutterella species in intestinal biopsy samples 
from children with autism and gastrointestinal disturbances. MBio. 2012:3.
Yassour M, Vatanen T, Siljander H, Hämäläinen A-M, Härkönen T, Ryhänen SJ, Franzosa EA, 
Vlamakis H, Huttenhower C, Gevers D, et al. Natural history of the infant gut microbiome and 
impact of antibiotic treatment on bacterial strain diversity and stability. Sci Transl Med. 2016; 
8:343ra81.
Yatsunenko T, Rey FE, Manary MJ, Trehan I, Dominguez-Bello MG, Contreras M, Magris M, Hidalgo 
G, Baldassano RN, Anokhin AP, et al. Human gut microbiome viewed across age and geography. 
Nature. 2012; 486:222–227. [PubMed: 22699611] 
Yirmiya R, Rimmerman N, Reshef R. Depression as a microglial disease. Trends Neurosci. 2015; 
38:637–658. [PubMed: 26442697] 
Yolken RH, Severance EG, Sabunciyan S, Gressitt KL, Chen O, Stallings C, Origoni A, Katsafanas E, 
Schweinfurth LAB, Savage CLG, et al. Metagenomic Sequencing Indicates That the 
Oropharyngeal Phageome of Individuals With Schizophrenia Differs From That of Controls. 
Schizophr Bull. 2015; 41:1153–1161. [PubMed: 25666826] 
Zeisel SH. Nutritional importance of choline for brain development. J Am Coll Nutr. 2004; 23:621S– 
626S. [PubMed: 15640516] 
Zeissig S, Blumberg RS. Life at the beginning: perturbation of the microbiota by antibiotics in early 
life and its role in health and disease. Nat Immunol. 2014; 15:307–310. [PubMed: 24646587] 
Zhan Y, Paolicelli RC, Sforazzini F, Weinhard L, Bolasco G, Pagani F, Vyssotski AL, Bifone A, Gozzi 
A, Ragozzino D, et al. Deficient neuron-microglia signaling results in impaired functional brain 
connectivity and social behavior. Nat Neurosci. 2014; 17:400–406. [PubMed: 24487234] 
Zheng J, Xiao X, Zhang Q, Mao L, Yu M, Xu J. The Placental Microbiome Varies in Association with 
Low Birth Weight in Full-Term Neonates. Nutrients. 2015a; 7:6924–6937. [PubMed: 26287241] 
Zheng L-S, Kaneko N, Sawamoto K. Minocycline treatment ameliorates interferon-alpha-induced 
neurogenic defects and depression-like behaviors in mice. Front Cell Neurosci. 2015b; 9:5. 
[PubMed: 25674053] 
Zheng P, Zeng B, Zhou C, Liu M, Fang Z, Xu X, Zeng L, Chen J, Fan S, Du X, et al. Gut microbiome 
remodeling induces depressive-like behaviors through a pathway mediated by the host’s 
metabolism. Mol Psychiatry. 2016; 21:786–796. [PubMed: 27067014] 
Zuchero JB, Barres BA. Glia in mammalian development and disease. Development. 2015; 142:3805–
3809. [PubMed: 26577203] 
Sharon et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Intersections of gut microorganisms and basic developmental processes
Basic developmental processes driven directly or indirectly by gut microbes and their 
products. (A) Gut microorganisms relay messages to the brain via various direct and indirect 
mechanisms. (B) Basic neurodevelopmental processes are modulated as a result of 
colonization of GF animals or depletion of gut bacteria by antibiotics. Specifically, the 
following processes are modulates: blood-brain barrier (BBB) formation and integrity 
(Braniste et al., 2014), neurogenesis (Möhle et al., 2016; Ogbonnaya et al., 2015), microglia 
maturation and ramification (Erny et al., 2015; Matcovitch-Natan et al., 2016), myelination 
(Gacias et al., 2016; Hoban et al., 2016), and expression of neurotrophins (Bercik et al., 
2011a, 2011b; Desbonnet et al., 2015), neurotransmitters (Bercik et al., 2011a; O’Mahony et 
al., 2015), and their respective receptors.
Sharon et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Major events in mammalian brain development
Developmental trajectories and key neurodevelopmental events in mice and humans 
(adapted from(Knuesel et al., 2014; Pressler and Auvin, 2013; Semple et al., 2013). E-
embryonic age, P-postnatal age, GSW-gestational week. Bacterial taxa on the right panel are 
the dominant ones at each life stage (Bäckhed et al., 2015; Lloyd-Price et al., 2016b; Nuriel-
Ohayon et al., 2016).
Sharon et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sharon et al.
Page 27
Table 1
Perturbation of the microbiome and microbial products can affect behavioral outcomes in mouse models and 
humans
Treatment / 
pertubation to 
microbiome
Effects on behavior
Known/Persumed Mechanism (by 
correlation)
Reference
Prenatal effects
Abx
Offspring exhibited anxiety-like 
behavior and hypoactivity, as well as 
decreased sociability
Dysbiotic microbiome
Tochitani et 
al., 2016; 
Degroote et 
al., 2016
High-fat diet
Social deficit and repetitive behavior 
in offsprings
Dysbiotic microbiome; deficient 
VTA synaptic plasticity and 
oxytocin
Buffington et 
al., 2016
Peptidoglycan
Offspring show decreased cognitive 
function
TLR-2 mediated neuroprolifiration 
via FoxG1 induction in fetal cortex
Humann et 
al., 2016
Prenatal stress
Change in offspring microbiome, gut 
and brain metabolome
Dysbiotic microbiome; altered free 
amino-acid levels in offspring brain
Jašarević et 
al., 2015b
Maternal immune 
activation by Poly(I:C) 
administration
Change in offspring microbiome and 
metabolome, increase repetitive 
behavior, anxiety-like behavior, 
social deficit, communication deficit
IL-6 and IL-17A mediated 
behavioral and cortical development 
abnormalities; Dysbiotic 
microbiome.
Smith et al., 
2007; Hsiao 
et al., 2013; 
Choi et al., 
2016
Propionic acid
Offspring exhibited anxiety-like 
behavior
-
Foley et al., 
2014
Postnatal effects
Perinatal Abx
Visceral hypersensitivity
Dysbiotic microbiome; decreased 
expression of various genes 
involved in pain preception in the 
lumbosacral region of the spine
O’Mahony et 
al., 2014
Abx (short-term)
Short-term anxiolytic effect
Dysbiotic microbiome; increased 
BDNF levels in hippocampus, and 
decreased in the amygdala; 
phenotype independent of 
sympathetic and parasympathetic 
pathways
Bercik et al., 
2011a
Abx (Long-term)
Anxiolytic effect, cognitive deficits
Dysbiotic microbiome; increased 
tryptophan and decreased 
kynurenine in serum; increased 
noradrenaline in hippocampus and 
increased L-DOPA in amygdala; 
decreased BDNF in the 
hippocampus and vasopressin 
expression in the hypothalamus
Desbonnet et 
al., 2015
Deficits in memory formation
Decreased BDNF and c-Fos 
expression in the CA1 region of the 
hippocampus
Gareau et al., 
2011
Colonization of GF Swiss Webster 
with BALB/c microbiome increased 
exploratory behavior, while the 
reciprocal colonization of GF 
BALB/c mice with Swiss Webster 
microbiome reduced exploration
GF Swiss Webster mice comlonize 
with Swiss Webster microbiota have 
higher levels of BDNF in the 
hippocampus, but not in the 
amygdala, compared to GF mice 
colonized with microbiota from 
BALB/c mice
Bercik et al., 
2011a
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sharon et al.
Page 28
Treatment / 
pertubation to 
microbiome
Effects on behavior
Known/Persumed Mechanism (by 
correlation)
Reference
Germ-Free Animals
Increased motor activity and reduced 
anxiety-like behavior compared to 
SPF
GF mice, compared to SPF controls, 
show: increased turnover of 
noradrenaline, dopamine, and 
serotonin in the striatum ; decreased 
expression of NGFI-A in the frontal 
cortex, BDNF in the basolateral 
amygdala and CA1 region of 
hippocampus, and dopamine D1 
receptor in the dendate gyrus; 
differences in gene expression in 
hippocampus, frontal cortex, and 
striatum; higher expression of 
synaptophysin and PSD-95 
(increased synaptogenesis)
Heijtz et al., 
2011
Reduced anxiety-like behavior
GF mice had decreased expression 
of NR2B in the amygdala; increased 
expression of BDNF and decreased 
expression of 5HT1A in the dentate 
gyrus
Neufeld et al., 
2011
Increased stress-induced HPA 
response
GF animals, compared to SPF 
controls, show: increased levels of 
stress-induced acetylcholine and 
corticosterone (HPA-axis); 
decreased expression of NR-1 in the 
cortex, and of NR-2a in the cortex 
and hippocampus; BDNF levels 
were lower in the cortex and 
hippocampus
Sudo et al., 
2004
Reduced social behavior
-
Desbonnet et 
al., 2014
Increased social behavior
Decreased expression of specific 
BDNF transcripts in the amygdala
Arentsen et 
al., 2015
Clostridium butyricum 
administration restored cognitive 
function in mouse model for vascular 
dementia
Restoration correlated with 
increased levels of the SCFA 
butyrate in feces and brains, and 
accompanied by activation of the 
BDNF-PI3K/Akt pathway in the 
hippocampus
Liu et al., 
2015
Clostridium butyricum protected 
from cerebral ischemia/reperfusion 
injury in diabetic mice
Anti-apoptotic effects via Akt 
activation; restoration of bacterial 
diversity
Sun et al., 
2016
Lactobacillus farciminis prevented 
stress-induced intestinal permeability 
and neuroinflammation in mice
Decreased intestinal permeability 
that mediated the following stress-
induced phenotypes: increased CRF 
expression in PVN; increased 
expression of proinflammatory 
cytokines in blood and increased 
plasma levels of corticosterone
Ait-
Belgnaoui et 
al., 2012
Lactobacillus helveticus R0052 and 
Bifidobacterium longum R0175 
(Probio’Stick®) protected from 
effects of water avoidence stress in 
mice and decreased intestinal barrier 
dysfunction
Probiotic treatment attentuated 
plasma levels of HPA/ANS-related 
corticosterone, adrenaline, and 
noradrenaline, as a result of stress 
induction, as well as activation of 
nuclei in the PVN, amygdala, CA3 
of the hippocampus, and the dentate 
gyrus. Additionally, The expression 
of various genes related to
Ait-
Belgnaoui et 
al., 2014
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sharon et al.
Page 29
Treatment / 
pertubation to 
microbiome
Effects on behavior
Known/Persumed Mechanism (by 
correlation)
Reference
Probiotic Administration
Lactobacillus rhamnosus (JB-1) 
reduced stress induced anxiety- and 
depression-like behaviors in mice
Probiotic decreased levels of stress-
induced plasma corticosterone; 
changed expression levels of 
GABAB1b, GABAAa1, and GABAAa2 
thorughout the brain in a vagus-
dependent manner
Bravo et al., 
2011
Lactobacillus rhamnosus (R0011) 
and Lactobacillus helveticus (R0052) 
(Lacidofil) reduced anxiety-like 
behaviors in mice
Increased BDNF and c-Fos 
expression in the hippocampus
Gareau et al., 
2011
Lactobacillus reuteri corrected social 
deficit in mice
Probiotic restored levels of oxytocin 
producing cells in the PVN and 
synaptic plasticity in the VTA
Buffington et 
al., 2016
Monoassociation with 
Bifidobacterium infantis reversed 
increased stress-induced HPA 
response in GF mice
Treatment of GF mice with 
probiotic or colonizing with SPF 
microbiome early in development 
normalized levels of stress-induced 
acetylcholine and corticosterone; 
normalized expression of NR1 in 
the cortex, and of NR2a in the 
cortex and hippocampus; 
normalized BDNF levels in the 
cortex and hippocampus
Sudo et al., 
2004
Bifidobacterium longum NCC3001 
reduced colitis-induced anxiety-like 
behaviors in mice
Probiotic decreased anxiety, but not 
pathology, in a vagus-dependant 
manner; excitability of enteric 
neurons incubated in probiotic-
fermented media was lower than 
controls
Bercik et al., 
2011b
Fermented milk product affected 
brain activity in regions processing 
emotion and sensation in healthy 
human subjects
Probiotic reduced activity in 
response to an emotional faces 
attention task in the insula cortex 
and somatosensory cortex
Tillisch et al., 
2013
Bacteroides fragilis corrected 
anxiety-like and repetitive behaviors 
in mice
Partial restoration of microbial 
community; restoration of intestinal 
barrier function
Hsiao et al., 
2013
Abx - Antibiotics; GF - Germ-free ; SPF - Specific pathogen free; VTA - ventral tegmental area; BDNF - brain-derived neurotropic ;HPAfactor; 
NR2B - N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit 2B; 5HT1A - serotonine receptor 1A; SCFA - short-chain fatty-acid; HPA - hypothalamus-pituitary-
adrenal axis; ANS - autonomous nervous system; PVN - paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus;
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
