 T O X I C I T Y S C R E E N I N G
2017 © The Authors,
some rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science.
High-throughput screening of tyrosine kinase inhibitor
cardiotoxicity with human induced pluripotent stem cells
Arun Sharma,1,2,3* Paul W. Burridge,1,2,4* Wesley L. McKeithan,1,5,6 Ricardo Serrano,7
Praveen Shukla,1,2,3 Nazish Sayed,1,2,3 Jared M. Churko,1,2,3 Tomoya Kitani,1,2,3 Haodi Wu,1,2,3
Alexandra Holmström,1,2,3 Elena Matsa,1,2,3 Yuan Zhang,1,2,3 Anusha Kumar,1,2,3 Alice C. Fan,8
Juan C. del Álamo,7 Sean M. Wu,1,2,3 Javid J. Moslehi,9 Mark Mercola,1,3,5 Joseph C. Wu1,2,3†
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), despite their efficacy as anticancer therapeutics, are associated with cardiovascular
side effects ranging from induced arrhythmias to heart failure. We used human induced pluripotent stem cell–
derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs), generated from 11 healthy individuals and 2 patients receiving cancer treat-
ment, to screen U.S. Food and Drug Administration–approved TKIs for cardiotoxicities by measuring alterations in
cardiomyocyte viability, contractility, electrophysiology, calcium handling, and signaling. With these data, we gener-
ated a “cardiac safety index” to reflect the cardiotoxicities of existing TKIs. TKIs with low cardiac safety indices exhibit
cardiotoxicity in patients. We also derived endothelial cells (hiPSC-ECs) and cardiac fibroblasts (hiPSC-CFs) to ex-
amine cell type–specific cardiotoxicities. Using high-throughput screening, we determined that vascular endo-
thelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2)/platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)–inhibiting TKIs
caused cardiotoxicity in hiPSC-CMs, hiPSC-ECs, and hiPSC-CFs. With phosphoprotein analysis, we determined that
VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs led to a compensatory increase in cardioprotective insulin and insulin-like growth
factor (IGF) signaling in hiPSC-CMs. Up-regulating cardioprotective signaling with exogenous insulin or IGF1 im-
proved hiPSC-CM viability during cotreatment with cardiotoxic VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs. Thus, hiPSC-CMs
can be used to screen for cardiovascular toxicities associated with anticancer TKIs, and the results correlate with
clinical phenotypes. This approach provides unexpected insights, as illustrated by our finding that toxicity can be
alleviated via cardioprotective insulin/IGF signaling.
INTRODUCTION
Small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have markedly im-
proved life expectancy for cancer patients (1). Since the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) approval of imatinib for treating chronic
myeloid leukemia, dozens of TKIs have been developed. TKIs inhibit
the phosphorylation activity of hyperactive receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs)
in cancer cells, stymieing enhanced cell survival, proliferation, and migration
phenotypes associated with cancer progression. However, some TKIs
are linked to severe cardiotoxicities including heart failure, reduced left
ventricular ejection fraction, myocardial infarction, or arrhythmias (2, 3).
Given these life-threatening complications, new approaches are needed
to assess the cardiotoxicity of anticancer drugs.
Preclinical platforms for evaluating drug cardiotoxicity use animal
models, which inaccurately predict human cardiac pathophysiology be-
cause of interspecies differences in cardiac structure, electrophysiology,
and genetics (4). In vitro drug cardiotoxicity assessments also use non-
human cells transfected with the human ether-à-go-go–related gene
(hERG), which encodes a cardiac potassium channel, to evaluate
drug-induced alterations in cardiac electrophysiology (5). Primary hu-
man cardiomyocytes, which are ideal for assessing drug cardiotoxici-
ties, are difficult to procure and maintain (6). Because primary human
cardiomyocytes are terminally differentiated, it is impossible to obtain
sufficient quantities for cardiotoxicity screening. Human induced plu-
ripotent stem cells (hiPSCs), however, provide an alternative (7). Human
cardiomyocytes can be mass-produced from hiPSCs with chemically
defined differentiation (8). Patient-specific hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes
(hiPSC-CMs) recapitulate cardiovascular disease phenotypes for dilated
cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, left ventricular noncom-
paction, long QT syndrome, viral cardiomyopathy, and others (9–14).
Here, we used patient-specific hiPSC-CMs, hiPSC-derived endothe-
lial cells (hiPSC-ECs), and hiPSC-derived cardiac fibroblasts (hiPSC-
CFs) from 11 healthy individuals and 2 cancer patients receiving TKIs
to evaluate the cardiotoxicities of 21 FDA-approved TKIs. We also
used cytotoxicity and high-throughput cell contractility assessments
to establish a TKI “cardiac safety index.”
RESULTS
Expression of cardiomyocyte markers and RTKs
in hiPSC-CMs
Eleven hiPSC lines were produced from the somatic tissues of 11
healthy individuals by cellular reprogramming with lentivirus or Sendai
virus–based vectors expressing the transcription factors OCT4, SOX2,
KLF4, and MYC. These individuals were a diverse group of males and
females of various ages. Two additional hiPSC lines were created from
two individuals receiving TKIs for cancer treatment (fig. S1A). All
hiPSC lines expressed pluripotency markers (fig. S1B). hiPSC-CMs
were produced with a chemically defined differentiation protocol
(Fig. 1A). The hiPSC-CMs expressed standard cardiomyocyte markers
1Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA. 2Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford Uni-
versity School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 3Division of Cardiology, Depart-
ment of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
4Department of Pharmacology and Center for Pharmacogenomics, Northwestern Uni-
versity School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. 5Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical
Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. 6Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. 7Depart-
ment of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92092, USA. 8Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford Univer-
sity School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 9Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Cardio-Oncology Program, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37212, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: joewu@stanford.edu
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Sharma et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017)
15 February 2017
1 of 13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 1. hiPSC-CMs exhibit sarcomeric proteins and express human RTK families. (A) Diagram of study workflow. Somatic tissue samples were obtained from 13
individuals and reprogrammed into hiPSC colonies with either Sendai virus or lentivirus vectors expressing the transcription factors OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and MYC (OKSM).
hiPSCs were differentiated into hiPSC-CMs, hiPSC-ECs, and hiPSC-CFs. Purified cardiomyocytes were treated with TKIs and examined for alterations in cell viability,
contractility, cellular signaling, and gene expression. (B) Confocal microscopic immunofluorescence images of differentiated hiPSC-CMs expressing the sarcomeric
markers cardiac troponin T (TNNT2) and a-actinin (ACTN2). DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. (C) Day 30 hiPSC-CMs from five healthy control lines expressing major
RTKs including INSR, IGF1R, PDGFRA, and KDR. High TNNT2 and low PECAM1 expression indicates a pure hiPSC-CM population devoid of ECs. n = 3 biological replicates
conducted for gene expression analysis in each hiPSC-CM line. Data are means ± SEM. RPKM, reads per kilobase per million.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Sharma et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017)
15 February 2017
2 of 13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (Fig. 1B) (8). Cardiomyocytes exhibited spontaneous beating and were
purified for downstream assays (movie S1). Five healthy control
hiPSC-CM lines were chosen for RTK expression analysis; all exhibited
near-identical RTK expression (Fig. 1C). KDR encoding vascular endo-
thelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2), PDGFRA encoding platelet-
derived growth factor receptor a (PDGFRa), INSR encoding insulin
receptor, and IGF1R encoding insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) re-
ceptor were highly expressed.
High-throughput analysis of TKI-induced cytotoxicity and
contractility in hiPSC-CMs
Twenty-one small-molecule TKIs were used for a high-throughput
cardiotoxicity screen in hiPSC-CMs (table S1). Many TKIs inhibit
multiple RTK families and induce cardiotoxicities including left ven-
tricular dysfunction, myocardial infarction, and arrhythmias. Howev-
er, the net benefit with respect to cancer treatment outweighs these
risks, and these drugs are frequently prescribed at major cancer treat-
ment centers (table S2). We included the highly cardiotoxic anthra-
cycline doxorubicin as a positive control for toxicity. Using the
PrestoBlue cell viability assay, we found that the VEGFR2/PDGFR-
inhibiting TKIs sorafenib, regorafenib, and ponatinib induced the
most cell death in hiPSC-CMs, with median lethal dose (LD50) values
of 3.4, 7.1, and 4.3 mM, respectively (Fig. 2A). Doxorubicin was ex-
tremely cytotoxic to hiPSC-CMs at an LD50 of 0.78 mM. TKIs not
strongly associated with cytotoxicity, such as imatinib or erlotinib,
had LD50 values of 78.20 and 87.60 mM, respectively. Sorafenib, regor-
afenib, and ponatinib were highly cytotoxic in all 11 healthy control
hiPSC-CM lines, as measured with quantitative and qualitative viabil-
ity assays (figs. S2, A to C, and S3). We also performed cytotoxicity
assays in hiPSC-CMs and hiPSC-ECs derived from two individuals
with kidney cancer (fig. S4). These individuals received two TKIs each:
sunitinib as first-line treatment and axitinib as second-line treatment.
These patients experienced no significant clinical cardiotoxicity from
either agent. As expected, we did not observe a significant difference in
cytotoxicity between TKI-receiving patient hiPSC-CMs and healthy
control hiPSC-CM lines after subjecting them to sunitinib or axitinib.
To avoid lab-to-lab biases and variations in hiPSC-CM quality, we
performed contractility assessment in CMs derived from commercial-
ly available, healthy control hiPSCs. We observed alterations in
hiPSC-CM beating rate and other parameters at doses lower than
the LD50 cytotoxicity values after treatment with multiple TKIs such
as nilotinib and vandetanib, suggesting that irregular beating arises
before cardiomyocyte death (Fig. 2B and fig. S5). We also determined
hiPSC-CM contractility parameters in response to increasing TKI
concentrations, effective drug concentrations at which contractility al-
terations initially appeared, and TKI concentrations at which hiPSC-
CM contraction ceased (Fig. 2C and figs. S6 and S7). To accurately
assess TKI toxicity, we investigated whether toxic TKI concentrations
observed in cytotoxicity and contractility assays matched doses
experienced by patients. We obtained patient Cmax values from FDA
literature, providing an estimate of maximum TKI blood plasma con-
centrations in patients (Fig. 2C). By normalizing our in vitro data on
cessation of beating, effective concentration, and LD50 cytotoxicity
values to literature-reported Cmax values, we developed a cardiac safety
index, a metric that identifies clinically cardiotoxic TKIs (see Materials
and Methods, Fig. 2C, and fig. S7 for details).
Three of seven compounds with cardiac safety indices at or be-
low 0.10 (doxorubicin, nilotinib, and vandetanib) were previously
labeled with FDA black box cardiotoxicity warnings. A safety index
value of 0.10 was chosen as our threshold for highly cardiotoxic drugs
because it marked a separation in the safety index between clinically
cardiotoxic, black boxed drugs (doxorubicin, nilotinib, and vandetanib)
and other compounds not commonly associated with cardiotoxicity.
Nilotinib and vandetanib, which cause QT interval prolongation and
arrhythmias, were selected for further analysis. Three of the TKIs with
safety indices under 0.10 were VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs (re-
gorafenib, sorafenib, and vandetanib). Regorafenib and sorafenib had
safety indices comparable to that of the cardiotoxic anthracycline dox-
orubicin. Thus, VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs induced cardiotoxi-
cities in hiPSC-CMs at clinically relevant concentrations comparable
to the doses that patients experience. In patients, VEGFR2/PDGFR-
inhibiting TKIs cause various toxicities including hypertension, heart
failure, and QT interval prolongation (15).
Confirmation of toxicity for the known QT interval–
prolonging TKIs nilotinib and vandetanib in hiPSC-CMs
QT interval prolongation remains a major concern during drug devel-
opment (16). Because nilotinib and vandetanib cause dangerous QT
interval prolongation and arrhythmias clinically, we conducted addi-
tional contractility, calcium imaging, and electrophysiological analyses
in four healthy control hiPSC-CM lines treated with nilotinib or van-
detanib (fig. S8). We selected dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and axitinib,
which are not associated with contractility abnormalities at clinically
relevant doses prescribed to patients (per clinical literature and our
previous data), as negative controls for toxicity. We observed a pro-
longation in cardiomyocyte contraction time after nilotinib or vande-
tanib treatment at clinically relevant concentrations as low as 3.7 mM
(fig. S8). Neither DMSO nor axitinib elicited contraction irregularities
at clinically relevant concentrations.
We also conducted calcium imaging of hiPSC-CMs after a 2-hour
nilotinib or vandetanib treatment (Fig. 3A). At clinically relevant con-
centrations (Fig. 2C and table S1), nilotinib and vandetanib prolonged cal-
cium transient duration and decreased beat rate in hiPSC-CMs (Fig. 3, B
and C). The electrophysiologically “safe” drugs (DMSO control, imatinib,
and axitinib) did not significantly alter calcium transient amplitude, tran-
sient duration, or beating rate (Fig. 3C); nilotinib and vandetanib altered
cardiomyocyte electrophysiology (Fig. 4). We subjected hiPSC-CMs to an
acute TKI treatment up to 10 min or to a longer treatment for 2 hours and
recorded cellular electrophysiology with patch clamping (Fig. 4A). With
acute treatment, TKIs at clinically relevant concentrations did not alter
action potential (AP) duration (Fig. 4B). However, after 2 hours, the
QT interval–prolonging TKIs nilotinib and vandetanib significantly pro-
longed AP duration and decreased cellular beating rate (Fig. 4, C and D).
Drugs not known to alter cardiac electrophysiology, such as DMSO,
imatinib, and axitinib, did not alter AP duration. These results demon-
strate that detrimental arrhythmogenic effects of known QT interval–
prolonging TKIs such as nilotinib and vandetanib can be recapitulated
in hiPSC-CMs, as assessed by contractility assays, calcium imaging, and
patch clamp electrophysiology.
Analysis of TKI cardiotoxicity in hiPSC-ECs and hiPSC-CFs
We next derived endothelial cells (hiPSC-ECs) and cardiac fibroblasts
(hiPSC-CFs) from hiPSCs to determine cell type–specific differences
in cardiotoxicity. hiPSC-ECs were produced with a chemically defined
differentiation protocol using small-molecule Wnt signaling modula-
tors, fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and VEGF stimulation, and
magnetic-activated cell sorting of CD31+/CD144+ populations (fig.
S9A). These hiPSC-ECs exhibited standard EC morphologies, markers,
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Sharma et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017)
15 February 2017
3 of 13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 2. High-throughput analysis of TKI toxicity in purified hiPSC-CMs allows for the development of a TKI cardiac safety index. (A) Dose-response curves
quantifying cytotoxicity after a 72-hour TKI treatment of five healthy control hiPSC-CM lines using a PrestoBlue viability assay. n = 5 biological replicates conducted per
line. Data are means ± SEM. (B) Evaluation of hiPSC-CM contractility after a 72-hour TKI treatment with the IC200 Kinetic Imaging Cytometer. Average results from
triplicate wells shown at each concentration. Red indicates decreased contraction rate, whereas green indicates increased contraction rate. (C) Values gathered from
cytotoxicity and contractility analyses in hiPSC-CMs. Green shading indicates values associated with less cardiotoxicity. Red shading indicates values associated with
higher cardiotoxicity. Cessation of beating is the concentration at which >50% of triplicate wells ceased beating. Effective concentration is the concentration at which a
significant alteration in all listed contractility parameters was detected (see fig. S7 and Materials and Methods for details). Amplitude of effect is the degree to which all
listed contractility parameters were altered at the effective concentration (see Materials and Methods for details). LD50 is the TKI concentration at which a 50% loss in
viability is observed from viability assays, averaged across patient hiPSC-CM lines. Patient Cmax represents the maximum TKI blood plasma concentration experienced
by patients reported in FDA literature. The cardiac safety index is a value from 0 to 1 that normalizes contractility and viability parameters to patient Cmax and combines
these parameters to provide a relative metric for TKI cardiotoxicity. Highlighted drugs (surrounded by a red rectangle) have a safety index at or below 0.10, our
threshold for highly cardiotoxic compounds. Clinically reported cardiotoxicities are alterations in patient cardiac function (see table S1). QT, QT interval prolongation;
Hy, hypertension; LV, left ventricular ejection fraction decrease; HF, heart failure; MI, myocardial infarction; TdP, Torsades de pointes; SCD, sudden cardiac death; Brady,
bradycardia; PE, pericardial effusion; Vas, vascular abnormalities; Afib, atrial fibrillation; **cardiovascular toxicity–associated boxed warning; #noncardiovascular toxicity–
associated boxed warning.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Sharma et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017)
15 February 2017
4 of 13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and functionality (fig. S9, B to D). As in hiPSC-CMs, sorafenib, regor-
afenib, and ponatinib were the most cytotoxic TKIs in hiPSC-ECs (fig.
S9E). We also developed a custom hiPSC-CF differentiation protocol
using small-molecule Wnt signaling modulation, FGF2 and VEGFA
stimulation, and negative sorting for ECs (fig. S10A). These hiPSC-
CFs were negative for cardiomyocyte markers, expressed mesenchy-
mal and myofibroblast markers, and were morphologically similar
to primary cardiac fibroblasts (fig. S10, B to E). These hiPSC-CFs ex-
hibited TKI cytotoxicity profiles similar to those of hiPSC-CMs and
hiPSC-ECs, with sorafenib, regorafenib, and ponatinib eliciting the
highest cytotoxicities (fig. S10F). We next treated undifferentiated
hiPSCs with our TKI panel to determine whether noncardiovascular
cell types exhibit toxicities similar to hiPSC-CMs, hiPSC-ECs, and
hiPSC-CFs (fig. S11). hiPSCs exhibited a unique TKI cytotoxicity
profile, showing higher toxicity from VEGFR2/PDGFR dual inhibitors
than did cardiovascular derivatives (hiPSC-CMs, hiPSC-ECs, and
hiPSC-CFs). For example, axitinib, the least cytotoxic TKI in hiPSC-
CMs, was extremely toxic to hiPSCs. Doxorubicin was also substan-
tially more toxic in hiPSCs than in cardiovascular cell types. These
results suggest that the VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs sorafenib,
regorafenib, and ponatinib exhibit cell type–specific cytotoxicities that
differ between cardiovascular and noncardiovascular cell types.
Evaluation of RTK phosphorylation status in hiPSC-CMs after
TKI treatment
To elucidate TKI-induced signaling alterations, we used an RTK pro-
teome profiler to assess RTK phosphorylation after treatment with
VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs (Fig. 5 and fig. S12). Drugs were
added to hiPSC-CMs at subcytotoxic concentrations. We observed a
dose-dependent decline in VEGFR2 and PDGFRa phosphorylation
after VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKI treatment, with axitinib elicit-
ing the strongest dual inhibition, suggesting that these TKIs can inhibit
functionally relevant signaling pathways in hiPSC-CMs. ErbB2, ErbB4,
and epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (EGFR2) phosphorylation re-
mained constant over increasing TKI concentrations. Cabozantinib, a
known Axl inhibitor, decreased Axl phosphorylation. Notably, we ob-
served increased INSR and IGF1R phosphorylation after treatment
with ponatinib and axitinib, suggesting a compensatory augmentation
in insulin/IGF signaling during VEGFR2/PDGFR inhibition.
Evaluation of insulin- and IGF1-mediated compensatory
cardioprotection during TKI treatment
Treatment with insulin or IGF1 can enhance cardiac function during
adverse events (17, 18). Given that insulin/IGF signaling was up-
regulated after treatment with VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs,
we hypothesized that this compensatory up-regulation protects
hiPSC-CMs from TKI toxicity. To determine whether exogenous in-
sulin or IGF1 could enhance cardioprotective signaling in hiPSC-CMs,
we used a high-throughput kinase phosphorylation array (Fig. 6A and
fig. S13). Both IGF1 and insulin enhanced phosphorylation of the
antiapoptotic Akt protein network. Cell survival was enhanced when
hiPSC-CMs exposed to ponatinib were concurrently treated with
IGF1 or insulin (Fig. 6B). This observation was confirmed quantita-
tively with CellTiter-Glo viability assays (Fig. 6C). Additionally, we ob-
served that IGF1 and insulin treatment rescued hiPSC-CMs from
doxorubicin cytotoxicity (fig. S14). To confirm that the effect of insulin/
IGF1 was a result of enhanced cardiomyocyte survival rather than
proliferation, we assessed the cell number at early time points after
TKI treatment. We observed an increase in viability merely 12 hours
after TKI treatment, confirming that insulin and IGF augment cardi-
omyocyte survival (fig. S15). We next evaluated the gene expression
response in hiPSC-CMs during treatment with the VEGFR2/PDGFR-
inhibiting TKIs sorafenib, regorafenib, and ponatinib and observed an
increase in growth factor receptor gene expression (Fig. 7). NRP2, en-
coding for the noncanonical VEGFR neuropilin 2, was up-regulated in
our microarray. We subsequently conducted RNA sequencing (RNA-
seq) analysis of five healthy control hiPSC-CM lines treated with 1 mM
VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKI sorafenib for 72 hours and observed
increased expression of KDR, encoding for the VEGFR2 receptor, and
VEGFC, encoding for the VEGFC ligand (fig. S16). These gene expres-
sion analyses suggest that noncanonical VEGF-binding receptors and
VEGF signaling pathway members are up-regulated to compensate for
losing canonical VEGFR signaling after treatment with VEGFR2/
PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs. A summary of the compensatory cardiopro-
tective signaling model is shown in Fig. 8. Together, our data suggest
Fig. 3. hiPSC-CMs exhibit alterations in intracellular calcium handling after a
2-hour treatment with known QT interval–prolonging TKIs. (A) Schematic il-
lustrating TKI treatment regimen for hiPSC-CMs before calcium imaging. (B) Raw
line scans of individual hiPSC-CM calcium transients after TKI treatment at indi-
cated clinically relevant concentrations and calcium dye treatment over multiple
beats. (C) Quantification of hiPSC-CM calcium imaging parameters after a 2-hour
TKI treatment. n = 10 cells recorded for each condition. Data are presented as
box-and-whisker plots showing the minimum, first quartile, median, mean, third
quartile, and maximum of the data set. Student’s t test indicates significance com-
pared to control (*P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Sharma et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017)
15 February 2017
5 of 13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 4. hiPSC-CMs exhibit alterations in cellular electrophysiology after a 2-hour treatment with known QT interval–prolonging TKIs. (A) Schematic illustrating
setup for acute and 2-hour TKI treatment before AP recording. (B) Representative AP tracings after acute TKI treatment for up to 10 min at clinically relevant concentrations in
hiPSC-CMs. (C) Representative AP tracings after a 2-hour TKI treatment at clinically relevant concentrations in hiPSC-CMs. (D) Quantification of hiPSC-CM electrophysiological
parameters after a 2-hour TKI treatment. Data are means ± SEM. *P < 0.05, compared to DMSO, Student’s t test. n = 10 cells recorded for each condition.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Sharma et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017)
15 February 2017
6 of 13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 that VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs elicit a compensatory increase
in cardioprotective insulin/IGF1 signaling (phosphorylation) in
hiPSC-CMs. This cardioprotective signaling can be harnessed with ex-
ogenous insulin/IGF1 ligands to enhance cardiomyocyte survival. Si-
multaneously, VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs increase the
downstream gene expression of VEGF pathway members to compen-
sate for an upstream loss in VEGF signal transduction.
DISCUSSION
TKIs are a major class of cancer therapeutics, with revenues from
these drugs annually reaching billions of dollars (19). However,
many TKIs, like other chemotherapeutics, exhibit substantial cardi-
otoxicities (3). Our results demonstrate that hiPSC-CMs can assess
TKI cardiotoxicity in a high-throughput fashion. We evaluated 21
FDA-approved TKIs using hiPSC-CMs derived from 11 healthy in-
dividuals and 2 patients receiving TKIs as cancer therapy. From the
data obtained, we developed a cardiac safety index integrating TKI-
induced cytotoxicity measurements, contractility assessments, and
literature-reported TKI blood plasma concentrations in patients.
We also validated the negative effects of known cardiotoxic TKIs.
Previous studies evaluated TKI cardiotoxicity using animals and
other in vitro models (20). Sorafenib, one of the three most cytotoxic
TKIs in our study, induces cardiomyocyte death and contractility de-
fects in the zebrafish heart and causes ventricular dysfunction and
heart failure clinically (table S2) (20). Ponatinib, withdrawn briefly
for adverse vascular events, was reported to induce mitochondrial
stress and elicit contraction abnormalities in hiPSC-CMs, corroborat-
ing our results (21, 22). Although regorafenib has a black box warning
for liver toxicity, our study demonstrates that regorafenib can in-
duce cardiotoxicity at clinically relevant doses similar to other
VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs (23). This is reasonable because
sorafenib and regorafenib (also known as fluoro-sorafenib) have si-
milar molecular structures (24).
The seven drugs with cardiac safety indices at or below 0.10, our
threshold for highly cardiotoxic compounds, cause clinical cardio-
toxicities including heart failure, ventricular dysfunction, myocardial
infarction, and arrhythmias (table S2). Six of these seven drugs are
widely prescribed at major cancer treatment centers at greater than
10,000 doses annually (table S2). Three of the seven compounds with
safety indices at or below 0.10 (doxorubicin, vandetanib, and niloti-
nib) have cardiotoxicity-associated FDA black box warnings, lending
validity to our cardiac safety index. We also confirmed the clinical
arrhythmia-inducing potential of nilotinib and vandetanib by con-
tractility assay, patch clamp electrophysiology, and calcium imaging
in hiPSC-CMs.
Three of the four TKIs with the lowest safety indices (sorafenib,
regorafenib, and vandetanib) were VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs,
piquing our interest in further studying this class of drugs. Clinically,
these TKIs cause cardiovascular toxicities including hypertension,
heart failure, and QT prolongation (15). The VEGFR2/PDGFR-
inhibiting TKIs sorafenib, regorafenib, and ponatinib induced the
highest levels of cytotoxicity in hiPSC-ECs, hiPSC-CFs, and hiPSC-
CMs alike. The high hiPSC-EC toxicity we observed with VEGFR2/
PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs such as ponatinib is consistent with the vas-
cular toxicity observed clinically with these TKIs (1). The cytotoxicity
profile for undifferentiated hiPSCs was substantially different from
that of hiPSC-derived cardiovascular derivatives. For example, the
VEGFR2/PDGFR inhibitor axitinib was the least cytotoxic TKI in
hiPSC-CMs. However, it was extremely toxic to hiPSCs, perhaps be-
cause hiPSCs are highly sensitive to alterations to RTK signaling due
to their pluripotent state. Doxorubicin was lethal to hiPSCs even at
0.1 mM, likely because it is a highly effective DNA intercalating
agent for killing hyperproliferative cell types such as cancer cells
and hiPSCs. The hiPSC-CMs also expressed the major RTK kinase
families targeted by TKIs in our panel (INSR, IGF1R, PDGFRa,
and VEGFR2), lending validity to our model. However, we did not
observe a subject-specific difference in TKI-induced cardiotoxicity be-
tween the 11 hiPSC-CM lines made from healthy individuals and the
2 made from TKI-treated patients. This was expected because neither
of the individuals receiving TKI treatment developed severe clinical
cardiotoxicity from TKI treatment, as would have been seen if any
of the subjects exhibited a genetic predisposition to TKI-induced car-
diotoxicity that could be recapitulated in vitro.
The VEGF and PDGFR signaling pathways are critical regulators
of cardiovascular development. VEGF regulates EC function and promotes
Fig. 5. Treatment with VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs causes dose-dependent
alterations in RTK signaling in hiPSC-CMs. Normalized quantification of RTK
phosphorylation in purified hiPSC-CMs treated with 0 to 1 mM of the VEGFR2/
PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs sorafenib, cabozantinib, ponatinib, axitinib, regorafenib,
or sunitinib for 72 hours. Phosphorylation array blots are shown in fig. S12. n = 3
biological replicates conducted. Data are means ± SEM.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Sharma et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017)
15 February 2017
7 of 13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 cardiomyocyte survival (25, 26). Al-
though nanomolar concentrations of
sorafenib, regorafenib, and ponatinib
caused complete VEGFR2/PDGFR in-
hibition, cytotoxicity was observed at
micromolar concentrations, suggest-
ing that VEGFR2/PDGFR inhibition
may not directly cause hiPSC-CM cyto-
toxicity. However, VEGFR2/PDGFR in-
hibition may provide a secondary benefit
to hiPSC-CMs. VEGFR2/PDGFR-
inhibiting TKIs such as ponatinib and
axitinib led to compensatory hyperacti-
vation of cardioprotective insulin/IGF1
signaling. Axitinib, the strongest inhibitor
of VEGFR2 and PDGFRa phosphoryl-
ation per our kinase assays, induced the
strongest compensatory effect along with
ponatinib, enhancing INSR/IGF1R phos-
phorylation twofold. This TKI-induced
compensatory effect is fortuitous because
insulin and IGF1 are cardioprotective dur-
ing adverse cardiac events (17, 18). Al-
though VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs
may cause cardiomyocyte cytotoxicity, they
may “prime” hiPSC-CMs for stimulation
with prosurvival factors.
We harnessed this compensatory ef-
fect to enhance hiPSC-CM survival dur-
ing VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKI
treatment with either insulin or IGF1,
augmenting antiapoptotic Akt signaling.
We observed a cardioprotective effect
with insulin and IGF1 during ponatinib
treatment but not with sorafenib or re-
gorafenib. This may be because, per
our RTK phosphorylation arrays, ponati-
nib elicited the strongest compensatory
increase in INSR/IGF1R phosphoryl-
ation among these three TKIs. We also
observed reduced doxorubicin cytotox-
icity after IGF1 and insulin pretreatment,
suggesting that these growth factors
might alleviate anthracycline cardio-
toxicity in cardiomyocytes, corroborating
other studies (27). Phosphorylation of
RTKs such as ErbB2, ErbB4, EGFR2,
and Axl was not significantly altered by
VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs, ex-
cept by the known Axl inhibitor cabo-
zantinib. Because insulin and IGF1 also
induce cell cycle activity, we investigated
whether they enhance hiPSC-CM prolif-
eration instead of survival (28). To test
for a prosurvival effect, we substantially
shortened the TKI treatment but still ob-
served an increase in hiPSC-CM viability
after insulin/IGF1 pretreatment. To fur-
ther safeguard against confounding
Fig. 6. Insulin and IGF1 activate cardioprotective signaling pathways and alleviate cytotoxicity in hiPSC-
CMs. (A) Phosphorylation arrays demonstrating alterations in hiPSC-CM kinase activity after a 12-hour IGF1 or insulin
treatment. n = 3 biological replicate phosphorylation arrays conducted. Data are means ± SEM. *P < 0.05, Student’s t test.
We observed a significant increase in phosphorylation of the following protein amino acid residues after IGF1 treatment
(P values listed): Akt1/2/3-S473 (0.01), Akt1/2/3-T308 (0.04), GSK3a/b-S21/S9 (0.03), p53-S15 (0.002), p53-S392 (0.02), p53-
S46 (0.003), PRAS40-T246 (0.001), TOR-S2448 (0.0001), and WNK1-T60 (0.002). We observed a significant increase in
phosphorylation of the following protein amino acid residues after insulin treatment (P values listed): Akt1/2/3-S473
(0.01), Akt1/2/3-T308 (0.04), GSK3a/b-S21/S9 (0.005), p53-S46 (0.04), PRAS40-T246 (0.007), TOR-S2448 (0.01), and
WNK1-T60 (0.006). (B) Immunofluorescence of hiPSC-CMs treated with sorafenib, regorafenib, or ponatinib at increasing
concentrations for 72 hours in the presence of IGF1 or insulin. Calcein-AM stains viable cells. (C) CellTiter-Glo quantifi-
cation of hiPSC-CM viability with or without insulin/IGF1 cotreatment during TKI treatment. n = 5 biological replicates
conducted. IGF and insulin treatment significantly rescued ponatinib toxicity (P = 0.004). Data are means ± SEM.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Sharma et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017)
15 February 2017
8 of 13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 effects of insulin/IGF1-induced proliferation, we used day 30 postdiffer-
entiation hiPSC-CMs, which exhibit lower mitotic activity than do youn-
ger cells (28). Finally, we conducted gene expression analysis to elucidate
gene networks altered by TKI treatment. The VEGFR2/PDGFR-
inhibiting TKIs sorafenib, regorafenib, and ponatinib induced a twofold
increase in the expression of neuropilin 2, a noncanonical VEGFR (29).
Thus, hiPSC-CMs may compensate for VEGFR2 signaling loss by up-
regulating auxiliary and canonical VEGFR expression, thus facilitat-
ing VEGF signaling in the absence of VEGFR2 kinase activity. RNA-
seq analysis revealed an up-regulation of KDR (VEGFR2 receptor)
and an up-regulation in the expression of VEGF ligands. This suggests
that in hiPSC-CMs, the upstream blockade of the phosphorylation
cascade by VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs causes a downstream in-
crease in the gene expression of VEGF pathway members, potentially
to compensate for the loss of upstream VEGFR signaling (Fig. 8).
In summary, we used hiPSC-CMs, hiPSC-ECs, and hiPSC-CFs to
screen for the cardiotoxicity of 21 FDA-approved TKIs and
established a cardiac safety index for TKI toxicity. We also validated
the known cardiotoxicities of FDA black boxed TKIs in our hiPSC-CM
platform. Although TKIs target various RTK families, we observed that
VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs exhibited high cardiotoxicity on
multiple cardiovascular cell types. These cardiotoxicities could be res-
cued by co-opting compensatory prosurvival insulin/IGF1 signaling
pathways. There is substantial interest in deriving hiPSCs from a broader
cohort of individuals to establish a population-level, prospective, pre-
clinical toxicity assessment to better inform drug development. As
presented here, a combination of electrophysiological, functional,
and genetic assays and continued advances in hiPSC biology will en-
able the development of efficient high-throughput platforms for
preemptively screening potential chemotherapeutic compounds for
cardiotoxicities.
Fig. 7. Treatment with sorafenib, regorafenib, or ponatinib leads to hyper-
activation of compensatory signaling through noncanonical VEGFRs. (A) Micro-
array heat map illustrating differentially expressed genes after a 72-hour sorafenib,
regorafenib, and ponatinib treatment in hiPSC-CMs. Cells were treated with 1 mM TKI
to avoid cytotoxicity at higher doses. Red indicates high gene expression, and blue
indicates low gene expression. (B) Graph represents fold expression change (com-
pared to control) of significantly altered genes after drug treatment. Significantly
altered genes defined by P < 0.05 compared to untreated control. Multiple P-value
comparisons made using one-way between-subject analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Fig. 8. Model for the activation of compensatory survival signaling in hiPSC-
CMs in response to treatment with VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs. (A) In
hiPSC-CMs, the RTKs VEGFR2, PDGFRa, INSR, and IGF1R are upstream of prosurvi-
val signaling pathways. (B) Our results suggest that VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKIs
up-regulate INSR and IGF1R signaling (phosphorylation) to compensate for the
loss of VEGFR/PDGFR signaling (phosphorylation). This compensatory effect can
augment cardiomyocyte survival during TKI treatment via introduction of exoge-
nous insulin and IGF1 ligands. We observed an increase in the downstream gene
expression of noncanonical VEGF-binding receptors and VEGFR pathway mem-
bers, presumably to compensate for VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKI-induced loss
in upstream VEGFR signaling (phosphorylation).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Sharma et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017)
15 February 2017
9 of 13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
To investigate the cardiotoxicity of FDA-approved TKIs in hiPSC-
CMs, 11 healthy individuals and 2 individuals receiving TKIs for
cancer therapy were recruited and consented. Either skin punch biop-
sies or blood draws were performed to obtain primary tissue samples
for hiPSC production. Reprogramming of either skin fibroblasts or
peripheral blood mononuclear cells to hiPSCs was conducted accord-
ing to previously published protocols (8, 30). A minimum of n = 3
biological replicates were conducted for each experiment, with de-
tails in the figure legends.
Chemically defined differentiation of hiPSC-CMs
The hiPSCs were differentiated into hiPSC-CMs using a chemically
defined protocol and maintained in medium supplemented with hu-
man albumin and ascorbic acid (8). This cardiomyocyte maintenance
medium was devoid of growth factors such as insulin and IGF1. Dif-
ferentiated cells were glucose-starved and supplemented with 5 mM
sodium DL-lactate to metabolically select hiPSC-CMs (31). When re-
plating, hiPSC-CMs were dissociated with TrypLE Express (Life Tech-
nologies) and reseeded on Matrigel-coated plates.
TKI stocks and cardioprotective growth factor treatments
TKI stocks (LC Laboratories) were resuspended in 10 mM DMSO
and stored at −80°C. Insulin (Life Technologies) was stored at −20°C,
and Long-R3 IGF1 (Sigma-Aldrich) was stored at 4°C. For cell viabil-
ity rescue experiments, day 30 to 35 postdifferentiation hiPSC-CMs
were pretreated with insulin or IGF1 for 12 hours before TKI treat-
ment, when insulin or IGF1 was resupplemented.
High-throughput imaging and quantitative viability assays
Day 30 to 35 postdifferentiation hiPSC-CMs were plated on Matrigel
at 25,000 cells per well of a 384-well plate (Greiner Bio-One). Cells
were treated with TKIs at 0 to 100 mM for 72 hours unless otherwise
specified. Immunostaining qualitatively assessed cell viability per pre-
vious protocols (8). For quantitative viability measurements, cells were
treated with CellTiter-Glo Viability Assay (Promega), CCK8 (Dojin-
do), or PrestoBlue reagent (Life Technologies) per manufacturer-
recommended procedures. High-throughput imaging and viability
assays were conducted using a Cytation 5 plate reader/imager (BioTek
Instruments). Prism (GraphPad) was used for curve fitting, LD50 cal-
culations, and statistical analysis.
High-throughput hiPSC-CM contractility assessment
After a 72-hour TKI treatment, hiPSC-CMs were washed with Tyrode’s
solution. Imaging dye was prepared by diluting Hoechst 33258 (H3569,
Life Technologies) to 4 mg/ml and wheat germ agglutinin–Alexa Flu-
or 488 conjugate (W11261, Life Technologies) to 5 mg/ml in Tyrode’s
solution. Solution was added to hiPSC-CMs and incubated at 37°C
and 5% CO2 for 15 min. After rewashing with Tyrode’s solution,
hiPSC-CMs were incubated for 15 min before imaging. The IC200
Kinetic Imaging Cytometer (Vala Sciences) recorded a 6.5-s time se-
ries of contracting hiPSC-CMs at 100 Hz at 20× magnification per
well of a 384-well plate.
Safety coefficients based on contractility parameters
Safety coefficients presented in this paper are computed as follows.
Cessation of beating is the concentration at which >50% of tripli-
cate wells ceased beating. Effective concentration for the ith metric
(ECi) is a concentration that presents a statistically significant con-
tractility difference (P < 0.05) from baseline. Amplitude of the effect
(AEi) quantifies the magnitude of such departures from baseline as the
log2 of the ratio of the metric value EVi at concentration ECi, hereinafter
referred to as effective value (EVi), to the value of the metric BVi at
baseline concentration. Additionally, i = 1…M, where M is the number
of metrics obtained from the contractility analysis (M = 9 in this paper:
Tpeak, Trise, Tfall, total contraction time, Dpeak, Dvalley, Dp2v, contraction
rate, and relaxation rate).
AEi ¼ log2
EVi
BMi
�
�
Average amplitude of effect (AE) is obtained by averaging the dif-
ferent AEi’s.
AE ¼ l
M ∑
M
i¼l AEi
Average effective concentration (EC) is a weighted average of the
different effective concentrations using each respective amplitude of ef-
fect as weight.
EC ¼
∑
M
i¼l ECi⋅AEi
∑
M
i¼l AEi
The rationale for this EC expression is that it considers all different
ECs and introduces a bias toward the ECs corresponding to metrics that
most prominently alter normal cell behavior.
Calcium imaging
Day 30 to 40 postdifferentiation hiPSC-CMs were reseeded in Matrigel-
coated eight-well Lab-Tek II chambers (Nalge Nunc International) and
were treated with TKIs for 2 hours. Cells were treated with 5 mM Fluo-4
AM and 0.02% Pluronic F-127 (Molecular Probes) in Tyrode’s solution
for 15 min at 37°C and washed with Tyrode’s solution afterward. Ca2+
imaging was conducted using a Zeiss LSM 510 Meta confocal micro-
scope (Carl Zeiss AG) and analyzed using Zen software. Spontaneous
Ca2+ transients were obtained at 37°C using a single-cell line scan mode.
Electrophysiology
Whole-cell APs were recorded with patch clamp technique, as previ-
ously described (8). Cultured hiPSC-CMs were dissociated using Try-
pLE and plated as single cells on glass coverslips coated with Matrigel.
Cells were placed in an RC-26C recording chamber (Warner) and
mounted onto an inverted microscope (Nikon). The chamber was
continuously perfused with warm (35° to 37°C) extracellular solution
of the following composition: 150 mM NaC1, 5.4 mM KCl, 1.8 mM
CaCl2, 1.0 mM MgCl2, 1.0 mM Na pyruvate, 15 mM Hepes, and 15 mM
glucose; pH was adjusted to 7.4 with NaOH. Glass micropipettes (2-
to 3-megohm tip resistance) were fabricated from standard wall boro-
silicate glass capillary tubes (Sutter BF 100-50-10) and filled with the
following intracellular solution: 120 mM KCl, 1.0 mM MgCl2, 10 mM
Hepes, 10 mM EGTA, and 3 mM Mg-ATP; pH was adjusted to 7.2
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Sharma et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017)
15 February 2017
10 of 13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 with KOH. Single-beating cardiomyocytes were selected, and APs were
recorded in whole-cell current clamp mode using an EPC 10 patch clamp
amplifier (HEKA). External solution containing 0.1% DMSO (vehicle)
was applied to establish the baseline. Then, cells were treated with TKI
solution containing imatinib, axitinib, nilotinib, or vandetanib (LC Lab-
oratories). Data were acquired using PATCHMASTER software (HEKA),
digitized at 1.0 kHz, and analyzed using FITMASTER (HEKA), Igor Pro
(WaveMetrics), and Prism 5 (GraphPad). For recordings on differentiated
ventricular-like hiPSC-CMs, the maximum diastolic potential of single
cardiomyocytes varied from −70 to −50 mV, action potential amplitude
(APA) was greater than 90 mV, and action potential duration (APD)90/
APD50 was less than 1.20. Only cardiomyocytes satisfying the aforemen-
tioned criteria were ventricular-like cardiomyocytes and selected for as-
sessing the effects of TKIs. Baseline APs were recorded for 3 min before
application of the drug and at 3, 5, and 10 min while keeping a con-
tinuous perfusion with the drug. In a separate series of experiments, the
drugs were added for 2 hours at 37°C before patching. Average responses
of n = 10 APs were analyzed per treatment. Significant APD90 prolonga-
tion is defined as >10% change in APD90.
Kinase phosphorylation profiling
Phosphorylation of human RTKs and other phosphoproteins was
determined using Human Phospho-RTK Array or Human
Phospho-Kinase Antibody Array (R&D Systems). Day 30 to 35 post-
differentiation hiPSC-CMs were treated with TKIs for 72 hours and
lysed. Lysate was incubated overnight on an RTK or phosphokinase
panel and subsequently with an anti–phosphotyrosine–horseradish
peroxidase antibody to assess phosphorylation. Blots were developed
using Gel Doc XR (Bio-Rad). Phosphorylation intensity was deter-
mined using ImageJ software.
Gene expression
RTK expression in hiPSC-CMs was determined using Ion AmpliSeq
(Life Technologies). RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Micro Kit
(Qiagen). Complementary DNA libraries were synthesized using the
Ion AmpliSeq Transcriptome Human Gene Expression Kit. Libraries
were added to Ion PI chips and loaded onto an Ion Chef instrument
for template preparation. Transcriptome sequencing was conducted
on an Ion Proton sequencing system (Life Technologies). For expres-
sion analysis of hiPSC-CMs after TKI treatment, a GeneChip Hu-
man Gene 1.0 ST DNA microarray was used (Affymetrix).
Statistical analysis
Data are presented as means ± SEM unless otherwise specified. Com-
parisons are conducted via Student’s t test, unless otherwise specified,
with significant differences defined by *P < 0.05 or **P < 0.01. For
microarray experiments, multiple P-value comparisons were made
using a one-way between-subject ANOVA (P < 0.05) and Affymetrix
Transcriptome Analysis Console 2.0 software.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/377/eaaf2584/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. hiPSCs exhibit characteristic morphologies and markers of pluripotent stem cells.
Fig. S2. Quantitative and qualitative cell viability assays illustrate sorafenib, regorafenib, and
ponatinib cytotoxicity in hiPSC-CMs.
Fig. S3. Quantitative cell viability assays on additional hiPSC-CM lines demonstrate VEGFR2/
PDGFR-inhibiting TKI toxicity.
Fig. S4. Quantitative cell viability assays in hiPSC-CMs and hiPSC-ECs derived from patients
receiving TKI treatment.
Fig. S5. Commercially available, healthy control hiPSC-CMs exhibit alterations in cellular
contractility after a 72-hour TKI treatment.
Fig. S6. Heat maps of high-throughput contractility analysis on commercially available, healthy
control hiPSC-CMs treated with TKIs.
Fig. S7. Extended calculations for TKI safety index after a 72-hour TKI treatment on
commercially available, healthy control hiPSC-CMs.
Fig. S8. hiPSC-CMs exhibit alterations in cellular contractility after a 72-hour treatment with
known QT interval–prolonging TKIs.
Fig. S9. hiPSC-ECs exhibit EC characteristics and demonstrate cytotoxicity in response to TKI treatment.
Fig. S10. hiPSC-CFs exhibit properties of adult cardiac fibroblasts and demonstrate cytotoxicity
in response to TKI treatment.
Fig. S11. hiPSCs demonstrate a TKI cytotoxicity profile that is unique from those of hiPSC-CMs,
hiPSC-ECs, and hiPSC-CFs.
Fig. S12. VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKI treatment in hiPSC-CMs results in activation of
compensatory insulin/IGF1 signaling.
Fig. S13. IGF1 and insulin treatment activates cardioprotective Akt signaling in hiPSC-CMs.
Fig. S14. IGF1 and insulin treatment rescues doxorubicin toxicity in hiPSC-CMs.
Fig. S15. IGF1 and insulin treatment rescues ponatinib toxicity at early time points in hiPSC-CMs.
Fig. S16. RNA-seq of hiPSC-CMs treated with the VEGFR2/PDGFR-inhibiting TKI sorafenib
illustrates compensatory hyperactivation of VEGF signaling.
Table S1. Small-molecule TKIs selected for high-throughput cardiotoxicity screen.
Table S2. Adverse cardiac events associated with small-molecule TKIs selected for high-
throughput cardiotoxicity screen.
Movie S1. hiPSC-CMs before purification via glucose deprivation.
References (32–50)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. J. J. Moslehi, M. Deininger, Tyrosine kinase inhibitor–associated cardiovascular toxicity in
chronic myeloid leukemia. J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 4210–4218 (2015).
2. E. T. H. Yeh, C. L. Bickford, Cardiovascular complications of cancer therapy: Incidence,
pathogenesis, diagnosis, and management. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 53, 2231–2247 (2009).
3. T. Force, D. S. Krause, R. A. Van Etten, Molecular mechanisms of cardiotoxicity of tyrosine
kinase inhibition. Nat. Rev. Cancer 7, 332–344 (2007).
4. H. R. Lu, R. Mariën, A. Saels, F. De Clerck, Species plays an important role in drug-induced
prolongation of action potential duration and early afterdepolarizations in isolated
Purkinje fibers. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 12, 93–102 (2001).
5. P. Liang, F. Lan, A. S. Lee, T. Gong, V. Sanchez-Freire, Y. Wang, S. Diecke, K. Sallam,
J. W. Knowles, P. J. Wang, P. K. Nguyen, D. M. Bers, R. C. Robbins, J. C. Wu, Drug screening
using a library of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes reveals
disease-specific patterns of cardiotoxicity. Circulation 127, 1677–1691 (2013).
6. J. S. Mitcheson, J. C. Hancox, A. J. Levi, Cultured adult cardiac myocytes: Future
applications, culture methods, morphological and electrophysiological properties.
Cardiovasc. Res. 39, 280–300 (1998).
7. K. Takahashi, K. Tanabe, M. Ohnuki, M. Narita, T. Ichisaka, K. Tomoda, S. Yamanaka,
Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell
131, 861–872 (2007).
8. P. W. Burridge, E. Matsa, P. Shukla, Z. C. Lin, J. M. Churko, A. D. Ebert, F. Lan, S. Diecke,
B. Huber, N. M. Mordwinkin, J. R. Plews, O. J. Abilez, B. Cui, J. D. Gold, J. C. Wu, Chemically
defined generation of human cardiomyocytes. Nat. Methods 11, 855–860 (2014).
9. A. Sharma, C. Marceau, R. Hamaguchi, P. W. Burridge, K. Rajarajan, J. M. Churko, H. Wu,
K. I. Sallam, E. Matsa, A. C. Sturzu, Y. Che, A. Ebert, S. Diecke, P. Liang, K. Red-Horse,
J. E. Carette, S. M. Wu, J. C. Wu, Human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived
cardiomyocytes as an in vitro model for coxsackievirus B3-induced myocarditis and
antiviral drug screening platform. Circ. Res. 115, 556–566 (2014).
10. F. Lan, A. S. Lee, P. Liang, V. Sanchez-Freire, P. K. Nguyen, L. Wang, L. Han, M. Yen,
Y. Wang, N. Sun, O. J. Abilez, S. Hu, A. D. Ebert, E. G. Navarrete, C. S. Simmons, M. Wheeler,
B. Pruitt, R. Lewis, Y. Yamaguchi, E. A. Ashley, D. M. Bers, R. C. Robbins, M. T. Longaker,
J. C. Wu, Abnormal calcium handling properties underlie familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy pathology in patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell Stem
Cell 12, 101–113 (2013).
11. H. Wu, J. Lee, L. G. Vincent, Q. Wang, M. Gu, F. Lan, J. M. Churko, K. I. Sallam, E. Matsa,
A. Sharma, J. D. Gold, A. J. Engler, Y. K. Xiang, D. M. Bers, J. C. Wu, Epigenetic regulation of
phosphodiesterases 2A and 3A underlies compromised b-adrenergic signaling in an iPSC
model of dilated cardiomyopathy. Cell Stem Cell 17, 89–100 (2015).
12. A. Moretti, M. Bellin, A. Welling, C. B. Jung, J. T. Lam, L. Bott-Flügel, T. Dorn, A. Goedel,
C. Höhnke, F. Hofmann, M. Seyfarth, D. Sinnecker, A. Schomig, K.-L. Laugwitz, Patient-
specific induced pluripotent stem-cell models for long-QT syndrome. N. Engl. J. Med. 363,
1397–1409 (2010).
13. P. W. Burridge, Y. F. Li, E. Matsa, H. Wu, S.-G. Ong, A. Sharma, A. Holmström, A. C. Chang,
M. J. Coronado, A. D. Ebert, J. W. Knowles, M. L. Telli, R. M. Witteles, H. M. Blau,
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Sharma et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017)
15 February 2017
11 of 13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 D. Bernstein, R. B. Altman, J. C. Wu, Human induced pluripotent stem cell–derived
cardiomyocytes recapitulate the predilection of breast cancer patients to doxorubicin-
induced cardiotoxicity. Nat. Med. 22, 547–556 (2016).
14. K. Kodo, S.-G. Ong, F. Jahanbani, V. Termglinchan, K. Hirono, K. InanlooRahatloo,
A. D. Ebert, P. Shukla, O. J. Abilez, J. M. Churko, I. Karakikes, G. Jung, F. Ichida, S. M. Wu,
M. P. Snyder, D. Bernstein, J. C. Wu, iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes reveal abnormal TGF-b
signalling in left ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. Nat. Cell Biol. 18,
1031–1042 (2016).
15. W. Li, K. Croce, D. P. Steensma, D. F. McDermott, O. Ben-Yehuda, J. Moslehi, Vascular and
metabolic implications of novel targeted cancer therapies: Focus on kinase inhibitors.
J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 66, 1160–1178 (2015).
16. M. G. Fradley, J. Moslehi, QT prolongation and oncology drug development. Card.
Electrophysiol. Clin. 7, 341–355 (2015).
17. A. K. Jonassen, M. N. Sack, O. D. Mjøs, D. M. Yellon, Myocardial protection by insulin at
reperfusion requires early administration and is mediated via Akt and p70s6 kinase cell-
survival signaling. Circ. Res. 89, 1191–1198 (2001).
18. M. Buerke, T. Murohara, C. Skurk, C. Nuss, K. Tomaselli, A. M. Lefer, Cardioprotective effect
of insulin-like growth factor I in myocardial ischemia followed by reperfusion. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92, 8031–8035 (1995).
19. A. Hill, D. Gotham, J. Fortunak, J. Meldrum, I. Erbacher, M. Martin, H. Shoman, J. Levi,
W. G. Powderly, M. Bower, Target prices for mass production of tyrosine kinase inhibitors
for global cancer treatment. BMJ Open 6, e009586 (2016).
20. H. Cheng, G. Kari, A. P. Dicker, U. Rodeck, W. J. Koch, T. Force, A novel preclinical strategy
for identifying cardiotoxic kinase inhibitors and mechanisms of cardiotoxicity. Circ. Res.
109, 1401–1409 (2011).
21. V. Prasad, S. Mailankody, The accelerated approval of oncologic drugs: Lessons from
ponatinib. JAMA 311, 353–354 (2014).
22. D. R. Talbert, K. R. Doherty, P. B. Trusk, D. M. Moran, S. A. Shell, S. Bacus, A multi-parameter
in vitro screen in human stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes identifies ponatinib-induced
structural and functional cardiac toxicity. Toxicol. Sci. 143, 147–155 (2015).
23. G. D. Demetri, P. Reichardt, Y.-K. Kang, J.-Y. Blay, P. Rutkowski, H. Gelderblom,
P. Hohenberger, M. Leahy, M. von Mehren, H. Joensuu, G. Badalamenti, M. Blackstein,
A. Le Cesne, P. Schöffski, R. G. Maki, S. Bauer, B. B. Nguyen, J. Xu, T. Nishida, J. Chung,
C. Kappeler, I. Kuss, D. Laurent, P. G. Casali; GRID Study Investigators, Efficacy and safety
of regorafenib for advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumours after failure of imatinib
and sunitinib (GRID): An international, multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled,
phase 3 trial. Lancet 381, 295–302 (2013).
24. S. M. Wilhelm, J. Dumas, L. Adnane, M. Lynch, C. A. Carter, G. Schutz, K.-H. Thierauch,
D. Zopf, Regorafenib (BAY 73–4506): A new oral multikinase inhibitor of angiogenic,
stromal and oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinases with potent preclinical antitumor
activity. Int. J. Cancer 129, 245–255 (2011).
25. S. J. Kattman, A. D. Witty, M. Gagliardi, N. C. Dubois, M. Niapour, A. Hotta, J. Ellis, G. Keller,
Stage-specific optimization of activin/nodal and BMP signaling promotes cardiac
differentiation of mouse and human pluripotent stem cell lines. Cell Stem Cell 8, 228–240
(2011).
26. F. J. Giordano, H. P. Gerber, S. P. Williams, N. VanBruggen, S. Bunting, P. Ruiz-Lozano,
Y. Gu, A. K. Nath, Y. Huang, R. Hickey, N. Dalton, K. L. Peterson, J. Ross Jr., K. R. Chien,
N. Ferrara, A cardiac myocyte vascular endothelial growth factor paracrine pathway is
required to maintain cardiac function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 5780–5785
(2001).
27. B. S. Lee, J. Oh, S. K. Kang, S. Park, S. H. Lee, D. Choi, J. H. Chung, Y. W. Chung, S.-M. Kang,
Insulin protects cardiac myocytes from doxorubicin toxicity by Sp1-mediated
transactivation of survivin. PLOS ONE 10, e0135438 (2015).
28. T. C. McDevitt, M. A. Laflamme, C. E. Murry, Proliferation of cardiomyocytes derived from
human embryonic stem cells is mediated via the IGF/PI 3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway.
J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 39, 865–873 (2005).
29. B. Favier, A. Alam, P. Barron, J. Bonnin, P. Laboudie, P. Fons, M. Mandron, J. P. Herault,
G. Neufeld, P. Savi, J.-M. Herbert, F. Bono, Neuropilin-2 interacts with VEGFR-2 and VEGFR-
3 and promotes human endothelial cell survival and migration. Blood 108, 1243–1250
(2006).
30. J. M. Churko, P. W. Burridge, J. C. Wu, Generation of human iPSCs from human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells using non-integrative Sendai virus in chemically defined
conditions. Methods Mol. Biol. 1036, 81–88 (2013).
31. S. Tohyama, F. Hattori, M. Sano, T. Hishiki, Y. Nagahata, T. Matsuura, H. Hashimoto,
T. Suzuki, H. Yamashita, Y. Satoh, T. Egashira, T. Seki, N. Muraoka, H. Yamakawa, Y. Ohgino,
T. Tanaka, M. Yoichi, S. Yuasa, M. Murata, M. Suematsu, K. Fukuda, Distinct metabolic flow
enables large-scale purification of mouse and human pluripotent stem cell-derived
cardiomyocytes. Cell Stem Cell 12, 127–137 (2013).
32. I. Banerjee, K. Carrion, R. Serrano, J. Dyo, R. Sasik, S. Lund, E. Willems, S. Aceves, R. Meili,
M. Mercola, J. Chen, A. Zambon, G. Hardiman, T. A. Doherty, S. Lange, J. C. del Álamo,
V. Nigam, Cyclic stretch of embryonic cardiomyocytes increases proliferation, growth,
and expression while repressing Tgf-b signaling. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 79, 133–144 (2015).
33. R. B. Natale, S. Thongprasert, F. A. Greco, M. Thomas, C.-M. Tsai, P. Sunpaweravong,
D. Ferry, C. Mulatero, R. Whorf, J. Thompson, F. Barlesi, P. Langmuir, S. Gogov,
J. A. Rowbottom, G. D. Goss, Phase III trial of vandetanib compared with erlotinib in
patients with previously treated advanced non–small-cell lung cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 29,
1059–1066 (2011).
34. E. A. Perez, M. Koehler, J. Byrne, A. J. Preston, E. Rappold, M. S. Ewer, Cardiac safety of
lapatinib: Pooled analysis of 3689 patients enrolled in clinical trials. Mayo Clin. Proc. 83,
679–686 (2008).
35. O. Gunnarsson, N. R. Pfanzelter, R. B. Cohen, S. M. Keefe, Evaluating the safety and
efficacy of axitinib in the treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Manag. Res.
7, 65–73 (2015).
36. W. T. A. van der Graaf, J. Y. Blay, S. P. Chawla, D.-W. Kim, B. Bui-Nguyen, P. G. Casali,
P. Schöffski, M. Aglietta, A. P. Staddon, Y. Beppu, A. Le Cesne, H. Gelderblom, I. R. Judson,
N. Araki, M. Ouali, S. Marreaud, R. Hodge, M. R. Dewji, C. Coens, G. D. Demetri,
C. D. Fletcher, A. P. Dei Tos, P. Hohenberger, E. S. Tissue, G. Bone Sarcoma; EORTC Soft
Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group and the PALETTE Study Group, Pazopanib for metastatic
soft-tissue sarcoma (PALETTE): A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3
trial. Lancet 379, 1879–1886 (2012).
37. J. E. Cortes, D.-W. Kim, J. Pinilla-Ibarz, P. le Coutre, R. Paquette, C. Chuah, F. E. Nicolini,
J. F. Apperley, H. J. Khoury, M. Talpaz, J. DiPersio, D. J. DeAngelo, E. Abruzzese, D. Rea,
M. Baccarani, M. C. Müller, C. Gambacorti-Passerini, S. Wong, S. Lustgarten, V. M. Rivera,
T. Clackson, C. D. Turner, F. G. Haluska, F. Guilhot, M. W. Deininger, A. Hochhaus,
T. Hughes, J. M. Goldman, N. P. Shah, H. Kantarjian; PACE Investigators, A phase 2 trial of
ponatinib in Philadelphia chromosome–positive leukemias. N. Engl. J. Med. 369,
1783–1796 (2013).
38. A. Grothey, E. Van Cutsem, A. Sobrero, S. Siena, A. Falcone, M. Ychou, Y. Humblet,
O. Bouché, L. Mineur, C. Barone, A. Adenis, J. Tabernero, T. Yoshino, H.-J. Lenz,
R. M. Goldberg, D. J. Sargent, F. Cihon, L. Cupit, A. Wagner, D. Laurent; CORRECT Study
Group, Regorafenib monotherapy for previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer
(CORRECT): An international, multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.
Lancet 381, 303–312 (2013).
39. M. Schmidinger, C. C. Zielinski, U. M. Vogl, A. Bojic, M. Bojic, C. Schukro, M. Ruhsam,
M. Hejna, H. Schmidinger, Cardiac toxicity of sunitinib and sorafenib in patients with
metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 26, 5204–5212 (2008).
40. J. Zang, S. Wu, L. Tang, X. Xu, J. Bai, C. Ding, Y. Chang, L. Yue, E. Kang, J. He, Incidence and
risk of QTc interval prolongation among cancer patients treated with vandetanib: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLOS ONE 7, e30353 (2012).
41. H. M. Kantarjian, J. E. Cortes, D. W. Kim, H. J. Khoury, T. H. Brummendorf, K. Porkka,
G. Martinelli, S. Durrant, E. Leip, V. Kelly, K. Turnbull, N. Besson, C. Gambacorti-Passerini,
Bosutinib safety and management of toxicity in leukemia patients with resistance or
intolerance to imatinib and other tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Blood 123, 1309–1318 (2014).
42. M. Talpaz, N. P. Shah, H. Kantarjian, N. Donato, J. Nicoll, R. Paquette, J. Cortes, S. O’Brien,
C. Nicaise, E. Bleickardt, M. A. Blackwood-Chirchir, V. Iyer, T.-T. Chen, F. Huang,
A. P. Decillis, C. L. Sawyers, Dasatinib in imatinib-resistant Philadelphia chromosome–
positive leukemias. N. Engl. J. Med. 354, 2531–2541 (2006).
43. R. Kerkela, L. Grazette, R. Yacobi, C. Iliescu, R. Patten, C. Beahm, B. Walters, S. Shevtsov,
S. Pesant, F. J. Clubb, A. Rosenzweig, R. N. Salomon, R. A. Van Etten, J. Alroy, J.-B. Durand,
T. Force, Cardiotoxicity of the cancer therapeutic agent imatinib mesylate. Nat. Med. 12,
908–916 (2006).
44. T. D. Kim, P. le Coutre, M. Schwarz, P. Grille, M. Levitin, S. Fateh-Moghadam, F. J. Giles,
B. Dörken, W. Haverkamp, C. Köhncke, Clinical cardiac safety profile of nilotinib.
Haematologica 97, 883–889 (2012).
45. E. Bronte, G. Bronte, G. Novo, F. Bronte, M. G. Bavetta, G. Lo Re, G. Brancatelli, V. Bazan,
C. Natoli, S. Novo, A. Russo, What links BRAF to the heart function? New insights from the
cardiotoxicity of BRAF inhibitors in cancer treatment. Oncotarget 6, 35589–35601 (2015).
46. G. Kim, A. E. McKee, Y.-M. Ning, M. Hazarika, M. Theoret, J. R. Johnson, Q. C. Xu, S. Tang,
R. Sridhara, X. Jiang, K. He, D. Roscoe, W. D. McGuinn, W. S. Helms, A. M. Russell,
S. P. Miksinski, J. F. Zirkelbach, J. Earp, Q. Liu, A. Ibrahim, R. Justice, R. Pazdur, FDA
approval summary: Vemurafenib for treatment of unresectable or metastatic melanoma
with the BRAFV600E mutation. Clin. Cancer Res. 20, 4994–5000 (2014).
47. J. R. Infante, L. A. Fecher, G. S. Falchook, S. Nallapareddy, M. S. Gordon, C. Becerra,
D. J. DeMarini, D. S. Cox, Y. Xu, S. R. Morris, V. G. R. Peddareddigari, N. T. Le, L. Hart,
J. C. Bendell, G. Eckhardt, R. Kurzrock, K. Flaherty, H. A. Burris III, W. A. Messersmith, Safety,
pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and efficacy data for the oral MEK inhibitor
trametinib: A phase 1 dose-escalation trial. Lancet Oncol. 13, 773–781 (2012).
48. J. C. Byrd, J. R. Brown, S. O’Brien, J. C. Barrientos, N. E. Kay, N. M. Reddy, S. Coutre,
C. S. Tam, S. P. Mulligan, U. Jaeger, S. Devereux, P. M. Barr, R. R. Furman, T. J. Kipps,
F. Cymbalista, C. Pocock, P. Thornton, F. Caligaris-Cappio, T. Robak, J. Delgado,
S. J. Schuster, M. Montillo, A. Schuh, S. de Vos, D. Gill, A. Bloor, C. Dearden, C. Moreno,
J. J. Jones, A. D. Chu, M. Fardis, J. McGreivy, F. Clow, D. F. James, P. Hillmen; RESONATE
Investigators, Ibrutinib versus ofatumumab in previously treated chronic lymphoid
leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 371, 213–223 (2014).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Sharma et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017)
15 February 2017
12 of 13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 49. A. Tartarone, G. Gallucci, C. Lazzari, R. Lerose, L. Lombardi, M. Aieta, Crizotinib-induced
cardiotoxicity: The importance of a proactive monitoring and management. Future Oncol.
11, 2043–2048 (2015).
50. E. T. Yeh, MD Anderson Practices in Onco-Cardiology (University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, 2016).
Acknowledgments: We thank K. Red-Horse for assistance with confocal imaging. We also
thank E. Yeh from the MD Anderson Cancer Center for information regarding TKI usage and
cardiotoxicity prevalence. We acknowledge the Stanford High-Throughput Bioscience Center for
assistance with high-throughput imaging and plate reader assays. We thank A. Olson
from the Stanford Neuroscience Microscopy Service for help with calcium imaging. Funding:
We acknowledge support from the American Heart Association Predoctoral Fellowship
(13PRE15770000) and NSF Graduate Research Fellowship (DGE-114747) (A.S.); NIH (K99/R00
HL121177) and American Heart Association Beginning Grant-in-Aid (14BGIA20480329) (P.W.B.); NIH
Director’s Pioneer Award, American Heart Association Grant-in-Aid, and Endowed Faculty Scholar
Award of the Lucile Packard Foundation for Children and Child Health Research Institute at Stanford
(S.M.W.); and Burroughs Wellcome Foundation Innovation in Regulatory Science, American Heart
Association Established Investigator Award, and NIH (R01 HL132875, R01 HL130020, R01 HL128170,
R01 HL123968, and R24 HL117756) (J.C.W.). Author contributions: A.S., P.W.B., and J.C.W.
designed the study and participated in data analysis and manuscript writing. A.S. and P.W.B.
participated in all experimental work. W.L.M. and R.S. conducted high-throughput contractility
assessments. P.S. performed patch clamp electrophysiology. N.S. assisted with deriving hiPSC-
CMs and hiPSC-ECs from patients receiving TKI treatment. J.M.C. performed microarray and
RNA-seq analysis. T.K. assisted with high-throughput toxicity analysis. H.W. conducted calcium
imaging. A.H. conducted hiPSC-EC differentiation and characterization. E.M. assisted with gene
expression analysis. Y.Z. performed immunocytochemistry and edited the manuscript. A.K.
performed immunocytochemistry and edited the manuscript. A.C.F. assisted with patient
recruitment. J.C.d.A., S.M.W., J.J.M., M.M., and J.C.W. assisted with study design and manuscript
editing. Competing interests: M.M. holds equity in and is on the scientific advisory board for
Vala Sciences, a company offering high-content screening services, particularly instrumentation
used for measuring the electrical and contractile physiology of cardiomyocytes, and is on the
scientific advisory board of Stem Cell Theranostics, a company that uses patient-specific
hiPSC-CMs for drug discovery. J.C.W. is a cofounder and is on the scientific advisory board of
Stem Cell Theranostics. Other authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data
and materials availability: The gene expression data are found at Gene Expression Omnibus
with accession no. GSE8894 and GSE89411.
Submitted 14 January 2016
Resubmitted 21 July 2016
Accepted 21 November 2016
Published 15 February 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf2584
Citation: A. Sharma, P. W. Burridge, W. L. McKeithan, R. Serrano, P. Shukla, N. Sayed,
J. M. Churko, T. Kitani, H. Wu, A. Holmström, E. Matsa, Y. Zhang, A. Kumar, A. C. Fan,
J. C. del Álamo, S. M. Wu, J. J. Moslehi, M. Mercola, J. C. Wu, High-throughput screening of
tyrosine kinase inhibitor cardiotoxicity with human induced pluripotent stem cells. Sci. Transl.
Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Sharma et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf2584 (2017)
15 February 2017
13 of 13
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 induced pluripotent stem cells
High-throughput screening of tyrosine kinase inhibitor cardiotoxicity with human
Juan C. del Álamo, Sean M. Wu, Javid J. Moslehi, Mark Mercola and Joseph C. Wu
Churko, Tomoya Kitani, Haodi Wu, Alexandra Holmström, Elena Matsa, Yuan Zhang, Anusha Kumar, Alice C. Fan, 
Arun Sharma, Paul W. Burridge, Wesley L. McKeithan, Ricardo Serrano, Praveen Shukla, Nazish Sayed, Jared M.
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf2584
, eaaf2584.
9
Sci Transl Med 
anticancer drugs are cardiotoxic.
limit the toxicity of this class of drug. This screening method is expected to reveal early on whether potential 
up-regulating protective insulin/IGF pathways, prompting the authors to devise a combination treatment that may
analysis even revealed that VEGFR2-inhibiting drugs caused cells to try to compensate for the toxic effects by 
highly informative, with low values corresponding to those drugs known to cause heart problems in patients. The
transduction and integrating the results, they calculated a drug-specific ''cardiac safety index.'' This index proved 
inhibitors altered their physiology. By measuring cell death, contraction, excitability, calcium dynamics, and signal
cells from human induced pluripotent stem cells and then examined how a battery of anticancer tyrosine kinase 
saving money, time, and perhaps lives. To this end, Sharma and colleagues derived heart
−−
halt development
 
Discovery early in its life cycle that an anticancer drug causes heart damage (a common side effect) can
Failing fast for tyrosine kinase inhibitors
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/377/eaaf2584
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/02/13/9.377.eaaf2584.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/11/478/eaau8866.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/435/eaah5457.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/377/eaaf2584#BIBL
This article cites 49 articles, 16 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 4, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
