 nutrients
Review
Paradoxical Effects of Fruit on Obesity
Satya P. Sharma 1, Hea J. Chung 2, Hyeon J. Kim 3 and Seong T. Hong 1,*
1
Department of Biomedical Sciences and Institute for Medical Science,
Chonbuk National University Medical School, Jeonju 54907, Korea; satyapriya83@gmail.com
2
Department of Microbiology, Seonam University Medical School, Namwon 55724, Korea;
hjchung@chonbuk.ac.kr
3
JINIS BDRD Institute, JINIS Biopharmaceuticals Co., 948-9 Dunsan, Bongdong, Wanju 55321, Korea;
hjkim@jinisbio.com
*
Correspondence: seonghong@chonbuk.ac.kr; Tel.: +82-63-270-3105
Received: 21 July 2016; Accepted: 4 October 2016; Published: 14 October 2016
Abstract: Obesity is exponentially increasing regardless of its preventable characteristics. The current
measures for preventing obesity have failed to address the severity and prevalence of obesity,
so alternative approaches based on nutritional and diet changes are attracting attention for the
treatment of obesity. Fruit contains large amounts of simple sugars (glucose, fructose, sucrose, etc.),
which are well known to induce obesity. Thus, considering the amount of simple sugars found
in fruit, it is reasonable to expect that their consumption should contribute to obesity rather than
weight reduction. However, epidemiological research has consistently shown that most types of
fruit have anti-obesity effects. Thus, due to their anti-obesity effects as well as their vitamin and
mineral contents, health organizations are suggesting the consumption of fruit for weight reduction
purposes. These contradictory characteristics of fruit with respect to human body weight management
motivated us to study previous research to understand the contribution of different types of fruit to
weight management. In this review article, we analyze and discuss the relationships between fruit
and their anti-obesity effects based on numerous possible underlying mechanisms, and we conclude
that each type of fruit has different effects on body weight.
Keywords: obesity; fruit; anti-obesity; pro-obesity
1. Introduction
The significant enhancement in food production during the agriculture revolution in the 18th and
early 19th centuries has resolved the problem of famine to an extent, which had constantly threatened
the survival of the human species, but paradoxically, modern humans are living in an era when
easy access to the energy-dense food is a concern because continuous intake of an energy-dense diet
positively influences the body–energy equilibrium and can cause obesity. Throughout the world,
modern societies are faced with the problems of obesity and obesity-related diseases. According to the
World Health Organization (WHO), worldwide obesity has doubled since 1980. At present, >1.9 billion
adults and >42 million children under the age of 5 years are overweight worldwide, indicating its
prevalence in all age groups [1].
Obesity is a multifactorial disease caused by biological, behavioral, and environmental
factors [2–5], but it is mainly attributed to low physical activity and high consumption of
energy-dense food for a prolonged period [6]. Obesity is now one of the main problems in
modern society, and intensive research is currently underway to search for a solution to obesity [7].
Current management of obesity has been done at the individual level as well as at the community
level. The individual preventions for obesity are mostly based on pharmacosurgical interventions
with little success.
The outcomes of pharmaceutical drug use for weight management are not
Nutrients 2016, 8, 633; doi:10.3390/nu8100633
www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
2 of 16
significant, and the long-term consumption of these anti-obesity agents might have severe side
effects [8]. Surgical manipulations are only useful in the most extreme cases [9]. In addition to
the individual-base, population- or community-level intervention for obesity has been pursued by
modifying behavioral factors like increasing physical activities, reduction in sedentary lifestyle, healthy
diet, and so forth [10–12]. Policies and environmental changes also contribute to weight management.
In this context, increasing fruit and vegetable intake is widely recommended for preventing and/or
treating obesity [13–15].
The beneficial health effects of fruit are well established [16,17]. The consumption of fruit
is known to attenuate obesity and obesity-related diseases such as diabetes and coronary heart
disease [18–22]. Similar to the western population, fruit consumption has a dose-response relationship
with cardiovascular disease in Asia [23,24].
However, in contrast to fruit intake, there is no
significant association between the intake of vegetables and hypertriglyceridemia [23,24]. Furthermore,
several meta-analyses have provided strong evidence that higher consumption of fruit and vegetables is
associated with a lower risk of all-causes mortality, including cardiovascular disease and cancer [25–28].
Thus, low fruit consumption is considered to be the fourth leading contributor to the global disease
burden, and thus one of the major attributable risk factors for diseases such as being overweight
(high body-mass index (BMI)), hyperglycemia, and hypercholesterolemia [29].
Clearly, fruit has beneficial effects on health through its anti-obesity effects. Many clinical studies
have shown that increasing the daily consumption of fruit is inversely correlated to weight gain [30].
It was also shown that the consumption of whole fruit contributes to a reduced risk of long-term
weight gain in adults by reducing the total energy intake [31]. Several mechanisms are thought
to be responsible for the anti-obesity effect produced by fruit, but still it is tough to point out a
particular mechanism that allows some simple sugar-rich fruits to contribute to anti-obesity. Most types
of fruit have very high simple sugar content, such as sucrose, fructose, glucose, etc. [32]. Thus,
considering that the overconsumption of simple sugars is one of the main causes of obesity and
related diseases [33–35], it is perhaps surprising that the consumption of fruit is associated with
anti-obesity in most cases. For this review, we searched available health sciences electronic database,
including MEDLINE, Science Direct, Google Scholar, and the Web of Science in two independent
phases. First, the paper selection was made exclusively for epidemiological studies to support the
anti-obesity and pro-obesity effects of fruit published in the last 20 years, from 1996 to June 2016.
Combination of following keywords was used in the process of paper selection: fruit, whole fruit,
fruit juice, canned fruit, dried fruit, obesity, body weight, weight gain, BMI, and waist circumference.
Second, the search was performed for gathering the information to support anti-obesity and pro-obesity
mechanisms, which had no time limitation. Here, we included studies that showed the link between
fruit consumption and obesity, thereby providing insights into how simple sugar-rich fruits may
contribute to anti-obesity.
2. Anti-Obesity Effect of Fruits
Numerous interventional and observational human trials based on longitudinal and cross-section
study designs ranging from small to large population sets in various countries have investigated the
close association between the consumption of fruit and obesity. Based on precise anthropometric
analyses related to obesity, such as body weight, BMI, and waist circumference (WC), the majority of
these studies have suggested that fruit intake is inversely associated with obesity, as shown in Figure 1.
These human studies of the association between fruit and obesity can be broadly classified into three
different categories: (i) intervention randomized clinical trials (IRCTs); (ii) prospective cohort studies;
and (iii) cross-section studies.
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
3 of 16
Nutrients 2016, 8, 633 
3 of 16 
 
 
Figure 1. Higher consumption of daily fruit is recommended by health organizations as a key factor 
for maintaining a healthy body weight via various mechanisms. 
2.1. Intervention Randomized Clinical Trials (IRCTs) 
IRCTs conducted in obese and overweight individuals have shown that fruit intake 
significantly suppresses obesity [36–40]. The first of these studies reported the impact of low and 
high fruit diets on the body weight, BMI, and WC of obese Spanish females with a BMI of 34.9 ± 2.3 
kg∙m–2 and average age of 32.6 ± 5.8 years [36]. After 8 weeks of fruit intervention, there were 
significant reductions in all parameters in both groups, but a comparative analysis only detected a 
significant difference in WC. Fujioka et al. reported another IRCT in American obese individuals with a 
mean BMI of 35.6 ± 4.7 kg∙m−2 and a broad age range of 18–65 years, a larger sample size (n = 77), and 
longer follow‐up [37]. This was a four‐armed double‐blinded placebo trial with three intervention 
groups, who consumed extra fresh grapefruit, grapefruit juice, and apple juice. The body weight was 
reduced in all groups, but the parameters in the group who consumed fresh grapefruit were 
significantly different compared with the placebo. Another study with apple and pear intake in a 
hypocaloric diet found significant reductions in body weight and BMI compared with eating oat 
cookies after 10 weeks [38]. In this IRCT, three groups of obese Brazilian women with a BMI of 31.9 ± 
4.2 kg∙m−2 and average age of 44.1 ± 5.4 years received 300 g/day of either apple or pear as a fruit in 
their diet, whereas the control group consumed 60 g/day oat cookies for 10 weeks. In another IRTC 
where the original aim was to evaluate the effect of mangosteen juice on obesity biomarkers in 
American middle‐aged obese population, increased mangosteen juice intake for 8 weeks 
significantly reduced the BMI and body fat mass [39]. A recent intervention study found that 
pomegranate juice intake significantly reduced fat accumulation, but the changes in body weight 
and BMI were not clinically significant [40]. Finally, the outcomes of intervention studies conducted 
in obese individuals have shown that fruit intake ameliorates obesity‐associated parameters, e.g., 
reduced body weight, improved BMI, and decreased WC. Considering that the intervention studies 
mentioned above were conducted for short time periods, the impact of fruit intake on obesity 
appears to be very significant. 
2.2. Prospective Observational Studies 
Prospective human studies also support the inverse association between fruit and obesity, 
where these studies have reported data obtained from obese or overweight populations as well as 
comparisons with normal weight individuals. Most of the studies do not specify the factors that were 
Figure 1. Higher consumption of daily fruit is recommended by health organizations as a key factor
for maintaining a healthy body weight via various mechanisms.
2.1. Intervention Randomized Clinical Trials (IRCTs)
IRCTs conducted in obese and overweight individuals have shown that fruit intake significantly
suppresses obesity [36–40]. The first of these studies reported the impact of low and high fruit diets on
the body weight, BMI, and WC of obese Spanish females with a BMI of 34.9 ± 2.3 kg·m−2 and average
age of 32.6 ± 5.8 years [36]. After 8 weeks of fruit intervention, there were significant reductions
in all parameters in both groups, but a comparative analysis only detected a significant difference
in WC. Fujioka et al. reported another IRCT in American obese individuals with a mean BMI of
35.6 ± 4.7 kg·m−2 and a broad age range of 18–65 years, a larger sample size (n = 77), and longer
follow-up [37]. This was a four-armed double-blinded placebo trial with three intervention groups,
who consumed extra fresh grapefruit, grapefruit juice, and apple juice. The body weight was reduced in
all groups, but the parameters in the group who consumed fresh grapefruit were significantly different
compared with the placebo. Another study with apple and pear intake in a hypocaloric diet found
significant reductions in body weight and BMI compared with eating oat cookies after 10 weeks [38].
In this IRCT, three groups of obese Brazilian women with a BMI of 31.9 ± 4.2 kg·m−2 and average
age of 44.1 ± 5.4 years received 300 g/day of either apple or pear as a fruit in their diet, whereas the
control group consumed 60 g/day oat cookies for 10 weeks. In another IRTC where the original aim
was to evaluate the effect of mangosteen juice on obesity biomarkers in American middle-aged obese
population, increased mangosteen juice intake for 8 weeks significantly reduced the BMI and body fat
mass [39]. A recent intervention study found that pomegranate juice intake significantly reduced fat
accumulation, but the changes in body weight and BMI were not clinically significant [40]. Finally,
the outcomes of intervention studies conducted in obese individuals have shown that fruit intake
ameliorates obesity-associated parameters, e.g., reduced body weight, improved BMI, and decreased
WC. Considering that the intervention studies mentioned above were conducted for short time periods,
the impact of fruit intake on obesity appears to be very significant.
2.2. Prospective Observational Studies
Prospective human studies also support the inverse association between fruit and obesity,
where these studies have reported data obtained from obese or overweight populations as well
as comparisons with normal weight individuals. Most of the studies do not specify the factors that
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
4 of 16
were controlled in the trails. However, the individuals with severe illnesses such as metabolic disorders,
terminal diseases, cardiovescular diseases, and other serious illnesses that can influnece the end results
were not included in these studies; however, smoking, drinking, physical activity, diet intake, etc. were
not restricted but were monitered in the course of the studies. In 1997, Stamler et al. reported that a
higher amount of energy intake in the form of fruit resulted in greater weight loss [41]. In this study,
5%–6% of the total energy provided as whole fruit or fruit juice was considered to be responsible
for an annual average weight loss of 2.3–6.8 kg. He et al. conducted a 12-year prospective study in
a large population of borderline overweight middle-aged female nurses (n = 74,063) with a BMI of
24.9 kg·m−2 and an average age of 50.7 ± 7 years [42]. They reported that an increased amount of fruit
in the diet reduced the likelihood of obesity. They stated that 0.22 increments and 1.86 increments in
fruit servings per day reduced the risk of obesity by up to 14% and 24%, respectively. Vioque et al. also
reported an inverse correlation between higher whole fruit intake and weight gain [43]. Buijsse et al.
reported that an increase of 100 g per day in the whole fruit intake was correlated with an average
weight loss of 0.017 kg in the overweight population based on data collected from five European
countries [44]. Rautiainen et al. tested the relationship between fruit intake and weight gain in
postmenopausal normal-weight women, thereby demonstrating that a greater intake of fruit alone
reduced the risk of becoming obese [45]. A meta-analysis of 17 independent prospective studies
reported by Schwingshackl also suggested that the intake of fruit has an inverse association with
weight gain [46]. Other prospective studies have also found negative associations between fruit intake
and weight gain or obesity [47–52]. Most of these prospective studies indicated that fruit intake may
be linked with body weight maintenance among normal weight or marginally overweight individuals.
These studies also showed that the increases in body weight were slightly lower in a relatively high
fruit intake study group compared with those who consumed less fruit.
2.3. Cross-Sectional Studies
Several cross-sectional studies support the inverse relationship between the amounts of fruit
consumed and weight gain over a period of time [53–57]. The first cross-sectional study published in
the USA by Serdula et al. in 1996 considered a large population of adult men and women (n = 21,892;
men = 9292, women = 12,599; age > 18 years). This study showed similar fruit consumption rates
in all of the different body weight groups, where the results indicated no association between fruit
intake and body weight [53]. After two years in 1998, Trudeau et al. also found no association between
fruit consumption and BMI [54]. In 2002, Lin and Morrison performed a survey of a large adult
population in the USA (n = 9117, male = 4709, female = 4408, age > 19) and found a negative association
between fruit consumption and body weight [55]. After four years in 2008, Moreira and Padrao also
reported a negative association between fruit and obesity, but only in women and not in men [56].
In the same year, Davis et al. reported a negative relationship between daily fruit intake and body
weight [57]. Two of these studies found inverse correlations only in female individuals and not in the
male population [54,56]. However, the results reported from most of these studies of large populations
including males and females detected a negative relationship between fruit consumption and obesity,
but self-reporting of end results by the participants were used to analyze the final outcome in most of
cases, thereby reducing the reliability of the final results.
3. Probable Mechanisms for the Anti-Obesity Effect of Fruit
As it is known that multiple mechanisms are responsible for producing the complex obesity
condition, thus, only one specific mechanism cannot be considered exclusively for obesity reduction or
restricting weight gain by fruit consumption. In particular, multiple concepts or mechanisms may be
responsible for the anti-obesity effects of fruit. Figure 2 shows the possible mechanisms related to the
anti-obesity effects of fruit, which are discussed in the following paragraphs.
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
5 of 16
Nutrients 2016, 8, 633 
5 of 16 
 
 
Figure 2. Possible mechanisms responsible for the anti‐obesity or pro‐obesity effects of fruits. 
3.1. Fruit Reduces Calorific Consumption 
In daily diet, replacing the energy‐dense food with increased amount of fruit appears to be 
inversely correlated with weight gain. The underlying mechanism responsible for the anti‐obesity 
effect of fruit is not clearly understood. One logical explanation for weight reduction by fruit 
consumption may be a decrease in the total energy intake and a consequent amelioration of energy 
disequilibrium. Energy homeostasis plays a key role in obesity generation, where a chronic positive 
disequilibrium in energy homeostasis is thought to be an underlying cause that generates 
pathophysiological changes, thereby resulting in obesity. A positive influence on energy 
homeostasis increases the growth of adipose tissue for storing excess energy, which accelerates the 
growth of the persistent fat mass, thereby resulting in the excessive accumulation of adipose tissue 
in the condition of obesity [58]. Fruit is considered a low‐energy‐dense food based on two features. 
First, most types of fruit contain negligible amounts of fat, which is the major energy‐producing 
macronutrient and the main contributor to obesity generation [59]. Second, fruit contains a large 
amount of water and a considerable amount of dietary fiber, which may be responsible for further 
diluting the energy density [16,20]. Thus, fruit provides a lower amount of energy per unit 
compared with westernized processed food, which can negatively affect the energy balance [60]. 
Therefore, the addition of fruit to the daily diet reduces overall energy consumption and improves 
the energy disequilibrium. Thus, the continuous intake of fruit may restrict weight gains, reduce the 
fat mass, and control obesity. 
3.2. Fruit Provides Prolonged Satiety 
Satiety is a physiological process, which regulates the appetite or hunger by secreting several 
biochemical signal peptides from various parts of the body [61]. Food enriched with dietary fiber 
leads to an extended satiety state, which can reduce the gross food intake and directly influence the 
Figure 2. Possible mechanisms responsible for the anti-obesity or pro-obesity effects of fruits.
3.1. Fruit Reduces Calorific Consumption
In daily diet, replacing the energy-dense food with increased amount of fruit appears to be
inversely correlated with weight gain. The underlying mechanism responsible for the anti-obesity effect
of fruit is not clearly understood. One logical explanation for weight reduction by fruit consumption
may be a decrease in the total energy intake and a consequent amelioration of energy disequilibrium.
Energy homeostasis plays a key role in obesity generation, where a chronic positive disequilibrium in
energy homeostasis is thought to be an underlying cause that generates pathophysiological changes,
thereby resulting in obesity. A positive influence on energy homeostasis increases the growth of
adipose tissue for storing excess energy, which accelerates the growth of the persistent fat mass,
thereby resulting in the excessive accumulation of adipose tissue in the condition of obesity [58]. Fruit is
considered a low-energy-dense food based on two features. First, most types of fruit contain negligible
amounts of fat, which is the major energy-producing macronutrient and the main contributor to obesity
generation [59]. Second, fruit contains a large amount of water and a considerable amount of dietary
fiber, which may be responsible for further diluting the energy density [16,20]. Thus, fruit provides a
lower amount of energy per unit compared with westernized processed food, which can negatively
affect the energy balance [60]. Therefore, the addition of fruit to the daily diet reduces overall energy
consumption and improves the energy disequilibrium. Thus, the continuous intake of fruit may restrict
weight gains, reduce the fat mass, and control obesity.
3.2. Fruit Provides Prolonged Satiety
Satiety is a physiological process, which regulates the appetite or hunger by secreting several
biochemical signal peptides from various parts of the body [61]. Food enriched with dietary fiber leads
to an extended satiety state, which can reduce the gross food intake and directly influence the total
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
6 of 16
energy consumption [62]. Dietary fiber is known to create a viscous gel-like environment in the small
intestine, which delays gastric emptying and reduces the activity of enzymes responsible for digesting
carbohydrate, fat, and protein. Moreover, this slower digestion of energy-generating macronutrients
increases the nutrient-receptor communication for a prolonged period, so the secretion of intestinal
satiety hormones may subsequently reduce the hunger sensation and finally decrease the consumption
of food [63,64]. In addition, the gel produced by soluble fiber increases the volume of undigested food
and reduces the amount of calories extracted, thereby reducing the total energy acquired from the
diet [65–67]. Nearly all types of fruit contain high amounts of dietary fiber, and if they are consumed
whole, they can enhance the satiety state and reduce feelings of hunger [68].
3.3. Fruit Micronutrients Influence Obesity-Associated Metabolic Pathways
Micronutrients are essential nutritional elements, which are required in very small amounts to
maintain good health but their deficiency can cause various health conditions, including metabolic
disorders. Micronutrient deficiencies are correlated with obesity through various mechanisms [69].
For instance, low concentrations of vitamins have been reported in obese populations in several
studies [70–73]. In particular, vitamins A, E, and C are negatively associated with fat deposition or
central obesity [74–76]. This influence of vitamins on fat mass reduction is attributed to leptin resistance
and the downregulation of genes involved in adipocyte generation and differentiation [77]. In addition
to vitamins, minerals are crucial micronutrients when considering obesity in general. Minerals such as
zinc [78,79], iron [80,81], and calcium [82] have inverse correlations with fat generation or obesity in
animal studies as well as in human trials. Thus, to reduce the incidence of obesity, the micronutrient
concentration should be maintained at the desired level in the body by natural or formulated resources.
Fruit is one of the most endowed and accessible providers of essential micronutrients among natural
foods [16,20]. Thus, the consumption of fruit can provide essential micronutrients to limit obesity via
various mechanisms. Therefore, the presence of various micronutrients in different types of fruit could
be one of the underlying mechanisms responsible for their anti-obesity effect. However, further studies
are required to provide direct evidence for the anti-obesity effects of micronutrients in fruits.
3.4. Non-Essential Phytochemicals in Fruit Augment Their Anti-Obesity Effects
Numerous phytochemicals are found in fruit, where they are typically byproducts of
multiple plant metabolic pathways or synthesized exclusively for multiple protective mechanisms,
such as combating infectious diseases, surviving under environmental stress conditions, and due
to excessive exposure to ultraviolet radiation [17].
Most fruit phytochemicals are not essential
for our vital functions or human nutrients.
However, they have desirable health benefits by
decreasing the risk of multiple illnesses, such as cancers, type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases,
and obesity [83,84]. In particular, fruit phytochemicals explicitly have anti-obesity effects, according to
numerous studies, by beneficially altering multiple physiological cascades, e.g., reducing oxidative
stress via their anti-oxidant properties, suppressing adipogenesis, inhibiting the differentiation of
preadipocytes, stimulating lipolysis, initiating the apoptosis of adipocytes, and limiting lipogenesis [85].
Plant phytochemicals can be categorized into six main classes, but fruit phytochemicals are
primarily phenolic compounds. Specific isolated phenolic compounds such as resveratrol, caffeic acid,
naringenin, proanthocyanidins, catechins, and cyanidin are known anti-obesity compounds found in
fruit [17,85–88]. A previous study performed phenolic phytochemical profiling in 25 of the most
commonly consumed fruits, and found that each fruit contained unique phenolic constituents
in substantial amounts as well as in proportion to others [89].
Among the 25 types of fruit,
wild blue- and blackberries accumulated the highest phenolic phytochemical contents, followed
by pomegranate, cranberry, blueberry, plum, and apple. Obviously, the beneficial health effects of the
abundant phytochemicals found in fruit may contribute synergistically to the anti-obesity effects of
fruit consumption.
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
7 of 16
3.5. Effects of Fruit on Gut Microbial Ecology
Human gut microbes are thought to affect health [90] by modulating the metabolic phenotype [91].
In particular, the microbial community of obese individuals is surprisingly distinct from that of their
non-obese or lean counterparts [92]. This change in the gut microbial ecosystem may be affected
by several internal and external factors [93–97]. Diet is the main daily external source and the key
factor that can influence the gut microbial ecology rapidly and substantially [98,99]. The dietary
components that influence the gut microbial ecology are enriched in dietary fiber, and polyphenols can
increase the ratios of the bacterial phyla Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria, which are predominant in
lean individuals, but decrease the prevalence of Firmicutes and Proteobacteria, which are dominant
in the obese gut community [100–102]. Therefore, the incorporation of fruit in the diet drives the
gut ecology toward an anti-obese condition by increasing the prevalence of lean-type bacteria but
reducing that of obese-type bacteria. At present, insufficient studies have investigated the direct
relationship between fruit consumption and changes in the gut microbial community. However,
it was recently reported that the phylum Bacteriodetes was abundant in a fruit-consumption group
who exhibited significant reductions in body weight [103]. Similarly, increasing the fruit content of
children’s meals led to increases in the bacterial phyla Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria, which are
related to lean individuals [104]. More studies are required of the detailed mechanisms responsible for
the modulatory effects of the gut microbial ecology on host obesity and the incorporation of fruit in
the diet to modulate the beneficial effects of the gut microbial ecology.
3.6. Undiscovered Mechanisms
Fruit are complex biochemical products of plants. The detailed compositions of various fruits
are known, but the biochemical compositions of each fruit are not well understood [16,105].
Every year, new types of phytochemicals are reported in different fruits with various beneficial
health properties [17]. In addition, the complexity of obesity is well known because various impaired
molecular and physiological pathways are involved in the establishment of the pathophysiological
state of obesity. Therefore, given the unknown biochemicals in fruit and their relationship with
obesity, various mechanisms are probably undiscovered, and it will take several years before they
are elucidated.
4. Probable Mechanisms for the Pro-Obesity Effect of Fruit
4.1. Fruits with Pro-Obesity Effects
Despite the recognized anti-obesity effect of fruit, several studies have also demonstrated
the pro-obesity effects of certain types of fruit. An early study was conducted in preschool-aged
children [106] as a cross-sectional trial in the USA, which analyzed the impact of various dietary
components on the health and growth of infants and young children. The comparative statistical
analysis performed in this study showed that higher fruit juice consumption in children significantly
increased the probability of becoming obese as well as lower height. According to the dietary guidelines
in the USA, 8 ounces of 100% fruit juice contain most phytochemicals and almost as much as the whole
fruit, but it excludes dietary fiber [107]. Thus, the outcomes of this study contradicted the current
understanding of the beneficial health effects of fruit and fruit products. Six years later, Field et al.
provided supported for this earlier investigation based on a prospective cohort study of a group of
pre-adolescent and adolescent boys and girls [108]. Their analysis based on 15,000 American children
suggested that the consumption of a fruit-rich diet could explain weight gains in the preadolescent
and adolescent age groups if the total calorific intake was not adjusted according to their requirements.
In 2006, Rush et al. conducted a randomized controlled study and found that a high kiwi fruit intake
increased the body weight compared with non-consumers of the same fruit [109]. In the same year,
another study found a positive association between fruit juice consumption and adiposity in children
aged 1 to 4 years [110]. However, increased adipose tissue mass was found only in the already obese or
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
8 of 16
overweight children, and increased fruit juice intake only augmented the risk of weight gain or obesity.
In 2007, Libuda et al. reported on the ongoing longitudinal DONALD study of German adolescent
boys and girls. Their statistical analysis showed that fruit juice consumption was positively associated
with BMI in girls, but there was only a cross-sectional association in boys [111]. In 2011, Makkes et al.
also reported a positive association between fruit juice intake and BMI in school-going children aged
8–10 years based on cross-sectional trials conducted in Guatemala. The consumption of fruit juice,
either homemade or commercially produced, resulted in a significantly higher BMI in children [112].
In 2015, Shefferly et al. reported the results of a longitudinal study conducted in a large group of U.S.
children aged 2–5 years, which suggested that greater consumption of fruit juices on a regular basis
was correlated with a higher increase in BMI with age [113].
However, the final outcomes of many of these human trials regarding fruit intake and its
correlation with weight support the pro-obesity effects of certain fruits. Many epidemiological studies
have confirmed the pro-obesity effects of various fruits, but the precise mechanisms responsible for
obesity development due to fruit consumption are not yet established. Therefore, we discuss some
factors that may be responsible for the weight gain effects of consuming these fruits, as shown in
Figure 2.
4.2. Fruit Increases Simple Sugars Intake
Among the various possible pro-obesity factors related to fruit, the high concentration of fruit
sugars is considered to be the main factor responsible for weight gain via the increased consumption of
some fruit. A higher daily intake of sugars is associated with an increased risk of metabolic disorders,
specifically obesity [114–116], according to many epidemiological and animal studies [117–119].
In particular, simple sugars, such as glucose and fructose, are thought to be the main source for
generating fatty acids by hepatic de novo lipogenesis, which may increase the levels of hepatic and
circulatory triglycerides, as well as the circulating levels of very-low- and low-density lipoproteins,
thereby resulting in increases in adipose tissue and obesity [120–122]. Most fruits are well known
to be rich sources of naturally occurring sugars, particularly simple sugars such as glucose, sucrose,
fructose, etc. [32]. Therefore, consuming an increased proportion of fruit containing higher amounts of
sugars in the daily diet may directly increase the ingestion of simple sugars to positively influence
the body energy equilibrium. This positive impact on the body energy equilibrium due to the
increased consumption of fruit rich in simple sugars may lead to obesity over a long period. Thus,
the consumption of certain types of fruit that are rich in simple sugars is the most likely mechanism
for the association between obesity and fruit consumption.
4.3. Improper Form of Fruit Supplements with Pro-Obesity Effects
Commercialization of food increases the availability of ready-to-eat fruit that excels the
accessibility of exotic fruits as well as increase the shelf-life. Commercially processed fruits are
available in various forms like dried, canned, juices, etc. However, fruit juice often contains similar or
more nutrients compared to whole fruit, but significant reduction in dietary fibers reduce the satiety
state and enhance the hunger feeling, contributing to additional intake of foods [123]. Canned fruit,
most of the time, contains a high amount of simple sugar for taste and/or conservation purposes.
This supplement of simple sugar to fruits increases calorie intake. Dried fruits contain a negligible
amount of water, which makes them energy-dense compared to the whole fruit. Processed fruits
contain more sugars, less fiber or less water, making them high-energy-dense food compared to whole
fruits [124]. Hence, replacing whole fruit with any common processed fruit type could be a possible
contributor to the obesity.
5. Discussion
Over the past 30 years, many studies have investigated the effects of fruit consumption on obesity.
Most of these studies support the inverse correlation between fruit intake and unhealthy weight gain
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
9 of 16
or obesity, irrespective of the study type. As mentioned earlier, various health organizations have
stated that the amount of fruit in the daily diet has a negative relationship with weight gain (Figure 1),
but there is still insufficient concrete evidence to establish a convincing mechanism, so the benefits
of fruit consumption are in a confused state. However, various underlying explanations have been
suggested for obesity reduction by fruit consumption, as shown in Figure 2, but the low-energy density
of fruit is widely accepted as having a negative impact on the body energy balance. Fruit can negatively
influence energy homeostasis via two basic mechanisms: by providing less energy per serving and
reducing the daily food intake by extending satiety. Positive energy homeostasis is the fundamental
cause of obesity, so both mechanisms can help to reduce the total energy inflow and ameliorate this
disequilibrium in energy homeostasis by influencing it negatively. This lower energy intake increases
the requirement for calories to meet the body’s daily requirements. Therefore, to compensate for the
required daily amount of calories, the body utilizes stored energy from white adipose tissue, and this
negative flow of energy from adipose tissue lowers the fat mass. Hence, a steady intake of fruit can
reduce central obesity as well as preventing weight gain, thereby controlling obesity.
In addition to correcting defective energy homeostasis, the second main anti-obesity mechanism
related to fruit involves the essential and nonessential phytochemicals provided by fruit. Fruit are
natural providers of essential required micronutrients such as vitamins and minerals, which are also
responsible for producing anti-obesity effects via various mechanisms, e.g., reducing the proliferation
of adipocytes and differentiation, which ultimately decreases adipogenesis and controls obesity.
Therefore, the abundance of essential micronutrients in fruit may also be responsible for their
anti-obesity effects. In addition to micronutrients, fruits accumulate abundant amounts of various
phytochemicals, which are not essential bodily requirements, but they also contribute to the control of
obesity. These phytochemicals influence the expression levels of various genes, which can repair the
impaired pathophysiological cascades involved with obesity generation, e.g., by reducing oxidative
stress, controlling hyperlipidemia by enhancing lipolysis and decreasing lipogenesis, and decreasing
the fat mass by reducing adipogenesis and increasing adipoapoptosis. Thus, fruit phytochemicals may
also augment the anti-obesity properties of fruit, although they are not essential bodily requirements.
The concentrations of anti-obesity-related elements are very low in fruit so more human trials are
required to draw any conclusions regarding the roles of essential and nonessential fruit phytochemicals
in the control of obesity.
Finally, a very new concept related to fruit and their anti-obesity effects is that fruit can modify
the gut microbial community. However, the association between gut microbes and obesity is a recent
concept, although it is widely accepted because of the distinct gut microbial communities found in
lean and obese individuals. The predominant bacterial phylum found in lean people may reduce
energy absorption and maintain a healthy body weight. Several animal trials have shown that a steady
intake of fruit can transform the gut ecology so it matches that found in a lean population. Therefore,
this may be a crucial mechanism involved with the weight reduction process due to increased daily
fruit intake. Thus, we have summarized various mechanisms related to fruit and their anti-obesity
effects, but it is not possible to suggest that a single mechanism is responsible for weight control or
obesity reduction. Indeed, all of mechanisms described above may work synergistically to produce the
anti-obesity effects of fruit consumption, as shown in Figure 2.
By contrast, several studies support the pro-obesity effects of fruit, and a few mechanisms are
thought to be responsible for generating obesity via fruit intake, as described in Figure 2. In particular,
the abundance of simple sugars in fruit is the main direct factor that is considered to be responsible.
Thus, fruit accumulates simple sugars rather than fat, but this can still be important, particularly
fructose. High fructose concentrations in food are directly associated with many metabolic disorders,
especially obesity via de novo lipogenesis. In addition, consuming fruit in different forms other than
whole fruit can increase the calorific intake and positively influence energy homeostasis to eventually
promote obesity. Thus, the generation of obesity or weight gain by consuming large amount of fruit or
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
10 of 16
fruit products is an avoidable problem. Likewise, fruit and fruit products contribute to the obesity;
it might be possible that fruit can also influence the metabolically healthy obesity (MHO) [125].
The results of several human studies support the pro-obesity effects of fruit, but the reported
trials have various limitations such as a lack of total daily energy intake records for participants or the
self-reporting of fruit intake by participants, which make their results debatable. In addition, it should
be noted that the pro-obesity effects are often limited to specific age groups in children or preadolescent
individuals. Moreover, studies that considered fruit juices and processed fruits in an energy-dense
form should be distinguished from those of unprocessed fruit. A large number of population-based
studies support the anti-obesity effects of fruit but several animal studies provide experimental proof
of an inverse relationship between body weight and specific types of fruit or fruit groups via various
mechanisms, such as altering the expression of various genes involved in obesity generation or
reducing the appetite. No previous animal trials have tested the pro-obesity effects of fruit. Indeed,
despite the high sugar content of any type of fruit, some fruits produce anti-obesity effects, thereby
indicating that the anti-obesity mechanisms of fruits can suppress the pro-obesity effects by working
synergistically in order to reduce obesity. Furthermore, some types of fruit have weight-reducing
or weight-restricting effects on obese people, but the mechanisms responsible for these effects are
still not well understood. Therefore, various fruits may have other weight-reducing components that
remain undiscovered. Thus, further experiments are required to discover the mechanisms related to
the unidentified anti-obesity factors in these types of fruit. Hence, the anti-obesity effects of fruit are
more obvious than their pro-obesity effects. The possible mechanisms of weight reduction due to fruit
consumption, e.g., low-energy-dense food, satiety factor production, and the effects of micronutrients
on metabolic pathways, have indirect correlations with obesity and the intake of fruit, but they still
have no direct support, particularly in humans. Therefore, extensive experiments are required to
establish robust mechanisms for the anti-obesity effects of fruit.
6. Conclusions
Previous studies of the effects of fruit on obesity have shown that their anti-obesity effects are
greater than their pro-obesity effects in most cases, as demonstrated in this review. Moreover, the final
outcomes of these anti-obesity studies support the inclusion of higher amounts of fruit in our daily
food intake to reduce weight, as well as promote a healthy life style by increasing physical activity and
reducing the intake of sugar and fat. However, most types of fruit contain large amounts of simple
sugars, which are well-known contributory factors to obesity and obesity-related diseases. Therefore,
the high level intake of particular forms of fruit such as fruit juice is not advisable in certain age
groups, especially children. In addition, it has been suggested that plant fiber and phytochemicals
may be responsible for the anti-obesity effects of fruit, but cereals are also rich in phytochemicals and
fiber yet they have no remarkable anti-obesity effects. Therefore, more human trials are required to
address these two mechanisms. In addition to the possible anti-obesity mechanisms discussed above,
we consider that various other important unknown components present in fruit may be responsible
for preventing obesity. Furthermore, the anti-obesity properties of known fruit components need to be
verified. Thus, future research should be focusing on identifying anti-obesity components in fruit as
an urgent and important task in order to understand the scientific mechanism of obesity but also to
develop a method for controlling obesity by increasing fruit consumption.
Acknowledgments: This research was supported by the Technology Development Program for Agriculture and
Forestry No. 313040-3, Ministry for Food, Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Republic of Korea.
Author Contributions: Satya P. Sharma, Seong T. Hong reviewed the research articles and equally contributed in
manuscript writing. Hyeon J. Kim and Seong T. Hong supervised the whole process and reviewed the manuscript.
All authors approved the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
11 of 16
References
1.
World Health Organisation. Fact Sheet N◦311. Available online: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/
factsheets/fs311/en/ (accessed on 30 June 2016).
2.
Keith, S.W.; Redden, D.T.; Katzmarzyk, P.T.; Boggiano, M.M.; Hanlon, E.C.; Benca, R.M.; Ruden, D.;
Pietrobelli, A.; Barger, J.L.; Fontaine, K.R.; et al. Putative contributors to the secular increase in obesity:
Exploring the roads less traveled. Int. J. Obes. (Lond.) 2006, 30, 1585–1594. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Janesick, A.S.; Shioda, T.; Blumberg, B. Transgenerational inheritance of prenatal obesogen exposure.
Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 2014, 398, 31–35. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Swinburn, B.A.; Sacks, G.; Hall, K.D.; McPherson, K.; Finegood, D.T.; Moodie, M.L.; Gortmaker, S.L.
The global obesity pandemic: Shaped by global drivers and local environments. Lancet 2011, 378, 804–814.
[CrossRef]
5.
Gregor, M.F.; Hotamisligil, G.S. Inflammatory mechanisms in obesity. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2011, 29, 415–445.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Hall, K.D.; Sacks, G.; Chandramohan, D.; Chow, C.C.; Wang, Y.C.; Gortmaker, S.L.; Swinburn, B.A.
Quantification of the effect of energy imbalance on bodyweight. Lancet 2011, 378, 826–837. [CrossRef]
7.
Bray, G.A.; Frühbeck, G.; Ryan, D.H.; Wilding, J.P. Management of obesity. Lancet 2016, 387, 1947–1956.
[CrossRef]
8.
Ryan, D.; Heaner, M. Guidelines (2013) for managing overweight and obesity in adults. Preface to the full
report. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2014, 22, S1–S3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Mechanick, J.I.; Youdim, A.; Jones, D.B.; Garvey, W.T.; Hurley, D.L.; McMahon, M.M.; Heinberg, L.J.;
Kushner, R.; Adams, T.D.; Shikora, S.; et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the perioperative nutritional,
metabolic, and nonsurgical support of the bariatric surgery patient—2013 update: Cosponsored by American
Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, The Obesity Society, and American Society for Metabolic & Bariatric
Surgery. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2013, 21, S1–S27. [PubMed]
10.
Kumanyika, S.K.; Obarzanek, E.; Stettler, N.; American Heart Association Council on Epidemiology;
Prevention, Interdisciplinary Committee for Prevention. Population-based prevention of obesity: The need
for comprehensive promotion of healthful eating, physical activity, and energy balance: A scientific statement
from American Heart Association Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Interdisciplinary Committee for
Prevention (formerly the expert panel on population and prevention science). Circulation 2008, 118, 428–464.
[PubMed]
11.
Sacks, F.M.; Bray, G.A.; Carey, V.J.; Smith, S.R.; Ryan, D.H.; Anton, S.D.; McManus, K.; Champagne, C.M.;
Bishop, L.M.; Laranjo, N.; et al. Comparison of weight-loss diets with different compositions of fat, protein,
and carbohydrates. N. Engl. J. Med. 2009, 360, 859–873. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Hu, T.; Mills, K.T.; Yao, L.; Demanelis, K.; Eloustaz, M.; Yancy, W.S., Jr.; Kelly, T.N.; He, J.; Bazzano, L.A.
Effects of low-carbohydrate diets versus low-fat diets on metabolic risk factors: A meta-analysis of
randomized controlled clinical trials. Am. J. Epidemiol. 2012, 176, S44–S54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Huo, R.; Du, T.; Xu, Y.; Xu, W.; Chen, X.; Sun, K.; Yu, X. Effects of Mediterranean-style diet on glycemic
control, weight loss and cardiovascular risk factors among type 2 diabetes individuals: A meta-analysis.
Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2015, 69, 1200–1208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Boeing, H.; Bechthold, A.; Bub, A.; Ellinger, S.; Haller, D.; Kroke, A.; Leschik-Bonnet, E.; Müller, M.J.;
Oberritter, H.; Schulze, M.; et al. Critical review vegetables and fruit in the prevention of chronic diseases.
Eur. J. Nutr. 2012, 51, 637–663. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Strategies to Prevent Obesity and Other Chronic Diseases: The CDC
Guide to Strategies to Increase the Consumption of Fruits and Vegetables; U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services: Atlanta, GA, USA, 2011.
16.
Slavin, J.L.; Lloyd, B. Health benefits of fruits and vegetables. Adv. Nutr. 2012, 3, 506–516. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
17.
Liu, R.H. Health-promoting components of fruits and vegetables in the diet. Adv. Nutr. 2013, 4, 384S–392S.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Tohill, B.C.; Seymour, J.; Serdula, M.; Kettel-Khan, L.; Rolls, B.J. What epidemiologic studies tell us about
the relationship between fruit and vegetable consumption and body weight. Nutr. Rev. 2004, 62, 365–374.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
12 of 16
19.
Rolls, B.J.; Ello-Martin, J.A.; Tohill, B.C. What can intervention studies tell us about the relationship between
fruit and vegetable consumption and weight management? Nutr. Rev. 2004, 62, 1–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Devalaraja, S.; Jain, S.; Yadav, H. Exotic Fruits as Therapeutic Complements for Diabetes, Obesity and
Metabolic Syndrome. Food Res. Int. 2011, 44, 1856–1865. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Montonen, J.; Knekt, P.; Jarvinen, R.; Reunanen, A. Dietary antioxidant intake and risk of type 2diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2004, 27, 362–366. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Fung, T.T.; Chiuve, S.E.; McCullough, M.L.; Rexrode, K.M.; Logroscino, G.; Hu, F.B. Adherence to a
DASH-style diet and risk of coronary heart disease and stroke in women. Arch. Intern. Med. 2008, 168,
713–720. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Du, H.; Li, L.; Bennett, D.; Guo, Y.; Key, T.J.; Bian, Z.; Sherliker, P.; Gao, H.; Chen, Y.; Yang, L.; et al. China
kadoorie biobank study. Fresh fruit consumption and major cardiovascular disease in China. N. Engl. J. Med.
2016, 374, 1332–1343. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Yuan, C.;
Lee, H.J.;
Shin, H.J.;
Stampfer, M.J.;
Cho, E. Fruit and vegetable consumption and
hypertriglyceridemia: Korean National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys (KNHANES) 2007–2009.
Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2015, 69, 1193–1199. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
He, F.J.; Nowson, C.A.; MacGregor, G.A. Fruit and vegetable consumption and stroke: Meta-analysis of
cohort studies. Lancet 2006, 367, 320–326. [CrossRef]
26.
World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research. Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity,
and the Prevention of Cancer: A Global Perspective; AICR: Washington, DC, USA, 2007.
27.
Wang, X.; Ouyang, Y.; Liu, J.; Zhu, M.; Zhao, G.; Bao, W.; Hu, F.B. Fruit and vegetable consumption
and mortality from all causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer: Systematic review and dose-response
meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. BMJ 2014, 349, 1–14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Oyebode, O.; Gordon, D.V.; Walker, A.; Mindell, J.S. Fruit and vegetable consumption and all-cause,
cancer and CVD mortality: Analysis of Health Survey for England data. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 2014,
68, 856–862. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Lim, S.S.; Vos, T. A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors
and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2010. Lancet 2012, 380, 2224–2260. [CrossRef]
30.
Alinia, S.; Hels, O.; Tetens, I. The potential association between fruit intake and body weight—A review.
Obes. Rev. 2009, 10, 639–647. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Hebden, L.; O’Leary, F.; Rangan, A.; Singgih, L.E.; Hirani, V.; Allman, F.M. Fruit Consumption and Adiposity
Status in Adults: A Systematic Review of Current Evidence. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2015, 55, 1–51.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
Lee, J. Sorbitol, Rubus fruit, and misconception. Food Chem. 2015, 166, 616–622. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Van-Dam, R.M.; Seidell, J.C. Carbohydrate intake and obesity. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2007, 61, S75–S99. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
34.
Bosy, W.A.; Müller, M.J. Impact of carbohydrates on weight regain. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 2015,
18, 389–394. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Buyken, A.E.; Goletzke, J.; Joslowski, G.; Felbick, A.; Cheng, G.; Herder, C.; Brand-Miller, J.C. Association
between carbohydrate quality and inflammatory markers: Systematic review of observational and
interventional studies. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2014, 99, 813–833. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Rodríguez, M.C.; Parra, M.D.; Marques, L.I.; de Morentin, B.E.; González, A.; Martínez, J.A. Effects of two
energy-restricted diets containing different fruit amounts on body weight loss and macronutrient oxidation.
Plant Foods Hum. Nutr. 2005, 60, 219–224. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.
Fujioka, K.; Greenway, F.; Sheard, J.; Ying, Y. The effects of grapefruit on weight and insulin resistance:
Relationship to the metabolic syndrome. J. Med. Food 2006, 9, 49–54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.
De Oliveira, M.C.; Sichieri, R.; Venturim Mozzer, R. A low-energy-dense diet adding fruit reduces weight
and energy intake in women. Appetite 2008, 51, 291–295. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Udani, J.K.; Singh, B.B.; Barrett, M.L.; Singh, V.J. Evaluation of Mangosteen juice blend on biomarkers of
inflammation in obese subjects: A pilot, dose finding study. Nutr. J. 2009, 8, 1–7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
González, O.M.; Martínez, A.E.; Espinel-Bermúdez, M.C.; Pérez-Rubio, K.G. Effect of pomegranate juice on
insulin secretion and sensitivity in patients with obesity. Ann. Nutr. Metab. 2011, 58, 220–223. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
13 of 16
41.
Stamler, J.; Dolecek, T.A. Relation of food and nutrient intakes to body mass in the special intervention and
usual care groups in the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1997, 65, 366S–373S.
[PubMed]
42.
He, K.; Hu, F.B.; Colditz, G.A.; Manson, J.E.; Willett, W.C.; Liu, S. Changes in intake of fruits and vegetables
in relation to risk of obesity and weight gain among middle-aged women. Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord.
2004, 28, 1569–1574. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Vioque, J.; Weinbrenner, T.; Castelló, A.; Asensio, L.; Garcia de la Hera, M. Intake of fruits and vegetables in
relation to 10-year weight gain among Spanish adults. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2008, 16, 664–670. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
44.
Buijsse, B.; Feskens, E.J.; Schulze, M.B.; Forouhi, N.G.; Wareham, N.J.; Sharp, S.; Palli, D.; Tognon, G.;
Halkjaer, J.; Tjønneland, A.; et al. Fruit and vegetable intakes and subsequent changes in body weight in
European populations: Results from the project on Diet, Obesity, and Genes (DiOGenes). Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
2009, 90, 202–209. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
Rautiainen, S.; Wang, L.; Lee, I.M.; Manson, J.E.; Buring, J.E.; Sesso, H.D. Higher Intake of Fruit, but Not
Vegetables or Fiber, at Baseline Is Associated with Lower Risk of Becoming Overweight or Obese in
Middle-Aged and Older Women of Normal BMI at Baseline. J. Nutr. 2015, 145, 960–968. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
46.
Schwingshackl, L.; Hoffmann, G.; Kalle-Uhlmann, T.; Arregui, M.; Buijsse, B.; Boeing, H. Fruit and Vegetable
Consumption and Changes in Anthropometric Variables in Adult Populations: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis of Prospective Cohort Studies. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, 1–19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.
Schulz, M.; Kroke, A.; Liese, A.D.; Hoffmann, K.; Bergmann, M.M.; Boeing, H. Food groups as predictors for
short-term weight changes in men and women of the EPIC-Potsdam cohort. J. Nutr. 2002, 132, 1335–1340.
[PubMed]
48.
Drapeau, V.; Després, J.P.; Bouchard, C.; Allard, L.; Fournier, G.; Leblanc, C.; Tremblay, A. Modifications in
food-group consumption are related to long-term body-weight changes. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2004, 80, 29–37.
[PubMed]
49.
Nooyens, A.C.; Visscher, T.L.; Schuit, A.J.; van Rossum, C.T.; Verschuren, W.M.; Van Mechelen, W.; Seidell, J.C.
Effects of retirement on lifestyle in relation to changes in weight and waist circumference in Dutch men:
A prospective study. Public Health Nutr. 2005, 8, 1266–1274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Linde, J.A.; Utter, J.; Jeffery, R.W.; Sherwood, N.E.; Pronk, N.P.; Boyle, R.G. Specific food intake, fat and
fiber intake, and behavioral correlates of BMI among overweight and obese members of a managed care
organization. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act. 2006, 3, 42–50. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Sánchez-Villegas, A.; Bes-Rastrollo, M.; Martínez-González, M.A.; Serra-Majem, L. Adherence to a
Mediterranean dietary pattern and weight gain in a follow-up study: The SUN cohort. Int. J. Obes. (Lond.)
2006, 30, 350–358. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.
Te Velde, S.J.; Twisk, J.W.; Brug, J. Tracking of fruit and vegetable consumption from adolescence into
adulthood and its longitudinal association with overweight. Br. J. Nutr. 2007, 98, 431–438. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
53.
Serdula, M.K.; Byers, T.; Mokdad, A.H.; Simoes, E.; Mendlein, J.M.; Coates, R.J. The association between fruit
and vegetable intake and chronic disease risk factors. Epidemiology 1996, 7, 161–165. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.
Trudeau, E.; Kristal, A.R.; Li, S.; Patterson, R.E. Demographic and psychosocial predictors of fruit and
vegetable intakes differ: Implications for dietary interventions. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 1998, 98, 1412–1417.
[CrossRef]
55.
Lin, B.H.; Morrison, R.M. Higher fruit consumption linked with lower body mass index. Food Rev. 2002, 25,
28–32.
56.
Moreira, P.; Padrao, P. Educational, economic and dietary determinants of obesity in Portuguese adults:
A cross-sectional study. Eat. Behav. 2006, 7, 220–228. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Davis, J.N.; Hodges, V.A.; Gillham, M.B. Normal-weight adults consume more fiber and fruit than their
age- and height-matched overweight/obese counterparts. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2006, 106, 833–840. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
58.
Hill, J.O.; Wyatt, H.R.; Peters, J.C. Energy balance and obesity. Circulation 2012, 126, 126–132. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
14 of 16
59.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Available online: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Food/
IngredientsPackagingLabeling/LabelingNutrition/UCM169225.pdf (accessed on 28 June 2016).
60.
Mozaffarian, D.; Hao, T.; Rimm, E.B.; Willett, W.C.; Hu, F.B. Changes in diet and lifestyle and long-term
weight gain in women and men. N. Engl. J. Med. 2011, 364, 2392–2404. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61.
Blundell, J.; de Graaf, C.; Hulshof, T.; Jebb, S.; Livingstone, B.; Lluch, A.; Mela, D.; Salah, S.; Schuring, E.;
van der Knaap, H.; et al. Appetite control: Methodological aspects of the evaluation of foods. Obes. Rev.
2010, 11, 251–270. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.
Halford, J.C.; Harrold, J.A. Satiety-enhancing products for appetite control: Science and regulation of
functional foods for weight management. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 2012, 71, 350–362. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63.
French, S.J.; Read, N.W. Effect of guar gum on hunger and satiety after meals of differing fat content:
Relationship with gastric emptying. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1994, 59, 87–91. [PubMed]
64.
Baer, D.J.; Rumpler, W.V.; Miles, C.W.; Fahey, G.C., Jr. Dietary fiber decreases the metabolizable energy
content and nutrient digestibility of mixed diets fed to humans. J. Nutr. 1997, 127, 579–586. [PubMed]
65.
Burton, F.B. Dietary fiber and energy regulation. J. Nutr. 2000, 130, 272S–275S.
66.
Spiller, G.A. (Ed.) CRC Hand Book of Dietary Fiber in Human Nutrition, 3rd ed.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL,
USA, 2001.
67.
Lairon, D. Dietary fiber, dietary lipids. In Advanced Dietary Fiber Technology; McCleary, B.V., Prosky, L., Eds.;
Blackwell Science: Oxford, UK, 2001; pp. 177–185.
68.
Flood-Obbagy, J.E.; Rolls, B.J. The effect of fruit in different forms on energy intake and satiety at a meal.
Appetite 2009, 52, 416–422. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69.
García, O.P.; Long, K.Z.; Rosado, J.L. Impact of micronutrient deficiencies on obesity. Nutr. Rev. 2009, 67,
559–572. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.
Aasheim, E.T.; Hofsø, D.; Hjelmesaeth, J.; Birkeland, K.I.; Bøhmer, T. Vitamin status in morbidly obese
patients: A cross-sectional study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2008, 87, 362–369. [PubMed]
71.
Galan, P.; Viteri, F.E.; Bertrais, S.; Czernichow, S.; Faure, H.; Arnaud, J.; Ruffieux, D.; Chenal, S.; Arnault, N.;
Favier, A.; et al. Serum concentrations of beta-carotene, vitamins C and E, zinc and selenium are influenced
by sex, age, diet, smoking status, alcohol consumption and corpulence in a general French adult population.
Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2005, 59, 1181–1190. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72.
Myara, I.; Alamowitch, C.; Michel, O.; Heudes, D.; Bariety, J.; Guy-Grand, B.; Chevalier, J. Lipoprotein
oxidation and plasma vitamin E in nondiabetic normotensive obese patients. Obes. Res. 2003, 11, 112–120.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
73.
Reitman, A.; Friedrich, I.; Ben, A.A.; Levy, Y. Low plasma antioxidants and normal plasma B vitamins and
homocysteine in patients with severe obesity. Isr. Med. Assoc. J. 2002, 4, 590–593. [PubMed]
74.
Vaughan, L.A.; Benyshek, D.C.; Martin, J.F. Food acquisition habits, nutrient intakes, and anthropometric
data of Havasupai adults. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 1997, 97, 1275–1282. [CrossRef]
75.
Johnston, C.S.; Beezhold, B.L.; Mostow, B.; Swan, P.D. Plasma vitamin C is inversely related to body mass
index and waist circumference but not to plasma adiponectin in nonsmoking adults. J. Nutr. 2007, 137,
1757–1762. [PubMed]
76.
Viroonudomphol, D.; Pongpaew, P.; Tungtrongchitr, R.; Changbumrung, S.; Tungtrongchitr, A.; Phonrat, B.;
Vudhivai, N.; Schelp, F.P. The relationships between anthropometric measurements, serum vitamin A and E
concentrations and lipid profiles in overweight and obese subjects. Asia Pac. J. Clin. Nutr. 2003, 12, 73–79.
[PubMed]
77.
Aeberli, I.; Molinari, L.; Spinas, G.; Lehmann, R.; l’Allemand, D.; Zimmermann, M.B. Dietary intakes of fat
and antioxidant vitamins are predictors of subclinical inflammation in overweight Swiss children. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. 2006, 84, 748–755. [PubMed]
78.
Arsenault, J.E.; Havel, P.J.; López de Romaña, D.; Penny, M.E.; Van Loan, M.D.; Brown, K.H. Longitudinal
measures of circulating leptin and ghrelin concentrations are associated with the growth of young Peruvian
children but are not affected by zinc supplementation. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2007, 86, 1111–1119. [PubMed]
79.
Padmavathi, I.J.; Kishore, Y.D.; Venu, L.; Ganeshan, M.; Harishankar, N.; Giridharan, N.V.; Raghunath, M.
Prenatal and perinatal zinc restriction: Effects on body composition, glucose tolerance and insulin response
in rat offspring. Exp. Physiol. 2009, 94, 761–769. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
15 of 16
80.
Pinhas-Hamiel, O.; Newfield, R.S.; Koren, I.; Agmon, A.; Lilos, P.; Phillip, M. Greater prevalence of iron
deficiency in overweight and obese children and adolescents. Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 2003, 27,
416–418. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
81.
Lecube, A.; Carrera, A.; Losada, E.; Hernández, C.; Simó, R.; Mesa, J. Iron deficiency in obese postmenopausal
women. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2006, 14, 1724–1730. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.
Villarroel, P.; Villalobos, E.; Reyes, M.; Cifuentes, M. Calcium, obesity, and the role of the calcium-sensing
receptor. Nutr. Rev. 2014, 72, 627–637. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.
Scalbert, A.; Manach, C.; Morand, C.; Rémésy, C.; Jiménez, L. Dietary polyphenols and the prevention of
diseases. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2005, 45, 287–306. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.
Pandey, K.B.; Rizvi, S.I. Plant polyphenols as dietary antioxidants in human health and disease. Oxid. Med.
Cell. Longev. 2009, 2, 270–278. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85.
Meydani, M.; Hasan, S.T. Dietary polyphenols and obesity. Nutrients 2010, 2, 737–751. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86.
Wang, S.; Moustaid-Moussa, N.; Chen, L.; Mo, H.; Shastri, A.; Su, R.; Bapat, P.; Kwun, I.; Shen, C.L. Novel
insights of dietary polyphenols and obesity. J. Nutr. Biochem. 2014, 25, 1–18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87.
Rupasinghe, H.P.; Sekhon-Loodu, S.; Mantso, T.; Panayiotidis, M.I. Phytochemicals in regulating fatty
acid β-oxidation: Potential underlying mechanisms and their involvement in obesity and weight loss.
Pharmacol. Ther. 2016, 8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88.
Amiot, M.J.; Riva, C.; Vinet, A. Effects of dietary polyphenols on metabolic syndrome features in humans:
A systematic review. Obes. Rev. 2016, 17, 573–586. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.
Wolfe, K.L.; Kang, X.; He, X.; Dong, M.; Zhang, Q.; Liu, R.H. Cellular antioxidant activity of common fruits.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 2008, 56, 8418–8426. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90.
Guarner, F.; Malagelada, J.R. Gut flora in health and disease. Lancet 2003, 361, 512–519. [CrossRef]
91.
Li, M. Symbiotic gut microbesmodulate human metabolic phenotypes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2008, 105,
2117–2122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.
Turnbaugh, P.J.; Hamady, M.; Yatsunenko, T.; Cantarel, B.L.; Duncan, A.; Ley, R.E.; Sogin, M.L.; Jones, W.J.;
Roe, B.A.; Affourtit, J.P.; et al. A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins. Nature 2009, 457, 480–484.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
93.
Albenberg, L.G.; Wu, G.D. Diet and the intestinal microbiome: Associations, functions, and implications for
health and disease. Gastroenterology 2014, 146, 1564–1572. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94.
Walker, A.W.; Ince, J.; Duncan, S.H. Dominant and diet-responsive groups of bacteria within the human
colonic microbiota. ISME J. 2011, 5, 220–230. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95.
Hooper, L.V.; Littman, D.R.; Macpherson, A.J. Interactions between the microbiota and the immune system.
Science 2012, 336, 1268–1273. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96.
Cotter, P.D.; Stanton, C.; Ross, R.P.; Hill, C. The impact of antibiotics on the gut microbiota as revealed by
high throughput DNA sequencing. Discov. Med. 2012, 70, 193–199.
97.
Clarke, S.F.; Murphy, E.F.; O’Sullivan, O. Exercise and associated dietary extremes impact on gut microbial
diversity. Gut 2014, 63, 1913–1920. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98.
Wu, G.D.; Chen, J.; Hoffmann, C. Linking long-term dietary patterns with gut microbial enterotypes. Science
2011, 334, 105–108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99.
Scott, K.P.; Gratz, S.W.; Sheridan, P.O.; Flint, H.J.; Duncan, S.H. The influence of diet on the gut microbiota.
Pharmacol. Res. 2013, 69, 52–60. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Simpson, H.L.; Campbell, B.J. Review article: Dietary fibre-microbiota interactions. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther.
2015, 42, 158–179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Parkar, S.G.; Stevenson, D.E.; Skinner, M.A. The potential influence of fruit polyphenols on colonic microflora
and human gut health. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2008, 124, 295–298. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Tzounis, X.; Vulevic, J.; Kuhnle, G.G.; George, T.; Leonczak, J.; Gibson, G.R.; Kwik-Uribe, C.; Spencer, J.P.
Flavanol monomer-induced changes to the human faecal microflora. Br. J. Nutr. 2008, 99, 782–792. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
103. Noratto, G.D.; Garcia-Mazcorro, J.F.; Markel, M.; Martino, H.S.; Minamoto, Y.; Steiner, J.M.; Byrne, D.;
Suchodolski, J.S.; Mertens-Talcott, S.U. Carbohydrate-free peach (Prunus persica) and plum (Prunus salicina)
[corrected] juice affects fecal microbial ecology in an obese animal model. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e101723.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 633
16 of 16
104. De Filippo, C.; Cavalieri, D.; di Paola, M.; Ramazzotti, M.; Poullet, J.B.; Massart, S.; Collini, S.; Pieraccini, G.;
Lionetti, P. Impact of diet in shaping gut microbiota revealed by a comparative study in children from Europe
and rural Africa. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 14691–14696. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Liu, R.H. Health benefits of fruit and vegetables are from additive and synergistic combinations of
phytochemicals. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2003, 78, 517S–520S. [PubMed]
106. Dennisocn, B.A.; Rockwell, H.L.; Baker, S.L. Excess fruit juice consumption by preschool-aged children is
associated with short stature and obesity. Pediatrics 1997, 99, 15–22.
107. U.S. Department of Agriculture; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for
Americans, 7th ed.; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC, USA, 2010.
108. Field, A.E.; Gillman, M.W.; Rosner, B.; Rockett, H.R.; Colditz, G.A. Association between fruit and vegetable
intake and change in body mass index among a large sample of children and adolescents in the United
States. Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 2003, 27, 821–826. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Rush, E.; Ferguson, L.R.; Cumin, M.; Thakur, V.; Karunasinghe, N.; Plank, L. Kiwifruit consumption reduces
DNA fragility: A randomized controlled pilot study in volunteers. Nutr. Res. 2006, 26, 197–201. [CrossRef]
110. Faith, M.S.; Dennison, B.A.; Edmunds, L.S.; Stratton, H.H. Fruit juice intake predicts increased adiposity
gain in children from low-income families: Weight status-by-environment interaction. Pediatrics 2006, 118,
2066–2075. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Libuda, L.; Alexy, U.; Sichert-Hellert, W.; Stehle, P.; Karaolis-Danckert, N.; Buyken, A.E.; Kersting, M.
Pattern of beverage consumption and long-term association with body-weight status in German
adolescents—Results from the DONALD study. Br. J. Nutr. 2008, 99, 1370–1379. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Makkes, S.; Montenegro, B.G.; Groeneveld, I.F.; Doak, C.M.; Solomons, N.W. Beverage consumption and
anthropometric outcomes among schoolchildren in Guatemala. Matern. Child. Nutr. 2011, 7, 410–420.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Shefferly, A.; Scharf, R.J.; DeBoer, M.D. Longitudinal evaluation of 100% fruit juice consumption on BMI
status in 2–5-year-old children. Pediatr. Obes. 2016, 11, 221–227. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Rippe, J.M.; Angelopoulos, T.J. Added sugars and risk factors for obesity, diabetes and heart disease. Int. J.
Obes. (Lond.) 2016, 40, S22–S27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Bray, G.A.; Popkin, B.M. Dietary sugar and body weight: Have we reached a crisis in the epidemic of obesity
and diabetes? Diabetes Care 2014, 37, 950–956. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Lustig, R.H.; Schmidt, L.A.; Brindis, C.D. Public health: The toxic truth about sugar. Nature 2012, 482, 27–29.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Bray, G.A.; Nielsen, S.J.; Popkin, B.M. Consumption of high-fructose corn syrup in beverages may play a
role in the epidemic of obesity. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2004, 79, 537–543. [PubMed]
118. Te Morenga, L.; Mallard, S.; Mann, J. Dietary sugars and body weight: Systematic review and meta-analyses
of randomised controlled trials and cohort studies. BMJ 2012, 346, 1–25. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
119. Kanarek,
R.B.;
Orthen-Gambill,
N.
Differential
effects
of
sucrose,
fructose
and
glucose
on
carbohydrate-induced obesity in rats. J. Nutr. 1982, 112, 1546–1554. [PubMed]
120. Tappy, L.; Lê, K.A. Metabolic effects of fructose and the worldwide increase in obesity. Physiol. Rev. 2010, 90,
23–46. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Hellerstein, M.K.; Schwarz, J.M.; Neese, R.A. Regulation of hepatic de novo lipogenesis in humans.
Annu. Rev. Nutr. 1996, 16, 523–557. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Samuel, V.T. Fructose induced lipogenesis: From sugar to fat to insulin resistance. Trends Endocrinol. Metab.
2011, 22, 60–65. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Clemens, R.; Drewnowski, A.; Ferruzzi, M.G.; Toner, C.D.; Welland, D. Squeezing fact from fiction about
100% fruit juice. Adv. Nutr. 2015, 6, 236S–243S. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Choose MyPlate.gov. Washington (DC): United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), 2011. Available
online: http://www.choosemyplate.gov (accessed on 21 August 2016).
125. Camhi, S.M.; Whitney Evans, E.; Hayman, L.L.; Lichtenstein, A.H.; Must, A. Healthy eating index and
metabolically healthy obesity in U.S. adolescents and adults. Prev. Med. 2015, 77, 23–27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
