 REVIEW
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory? The role of
epigenetics in nutritional programming, metabolic disease,
aging and exercise
Adam P. Sharples, Claire E. Stewart and Robert A. Seaborne
Stem Cells, Ageing and Molecular Physiology (SCAMP) Research Unit,
Exercise Metabolism and Adaptation Research Group (EMARG), Research
Institute for Sport and Exercise Sciences (RISES), Liverpool John Moores
University, Liverpool, UK
Summary
Skeletal muscle mass, quality and adaptability are fundamental in
promoting muscle performance, maintaining metabolic function
and supporting longevity and healthspan. Skeletal muscle is
programmable and can ‘remember’ early-life metabolic stimuli
affecting its function in adult life. In this review, the authors pose
the question as to whether skeletal muscle has an ‘epi’-memory?
Following an initial encounter with an environmental stimulus,
we discuss the underlying molecular and epigenetic mechanisms
enabling skeletal muscle to adapt, should it re-encounter the
stimulus in later life. We also define skeletal muscle memory and
outline the scientific literature contributing to this field. Further-
more, we review the evidence for early-life nutrient stress and
low birth weight in animals and human cohort studies, respec-
tively, and discuss the underlying molecular mechanisms culmi-
nating in skeletal muscle dysfunction, metabolic disease and loss
of skeletal muscle mass across the lifespan. We also summarize
and discuss studies that isolate muscle stem cells from different
environmental niches in vivo (physically active, diabetic, cachec-
tic, aged) and how they reportedly remember this environment
once isolated in vitro. Finally, we will outline the molecular and
epigenetic mechanisms underlying skeletal muscle memory and
review the epigenetic regulation of exercise-induced skeletal
muscle adaptation, highlighting exercise interventions as suitable
models to investigate skeletal muscle memory in humans. We
believe that understanding the ‘epi’-memory of skeletal muscle
will enable the next generation of targeted therapies to promote
muscle growth and reduce muscle loss to enable healthy aging.
Key words: ageing; aging; aging muscle; beta-catenin; cellu-
lar programming; developmental programming; DNA methy-
lation; epigenetics; exercise; fibre number; fibre type; foetal
programming; forkhead box; healthspan; histone acetylation;
histone
deacetylation;
histone
modification;
insulin-like
growth factor; lifespan; metabolic programming; muscle
memory; muscle precursor cell; muscle stem cell; myf5;
myoblast; myocyte; myoD; myogenesis; myogenin; myogenic
regulatory factor; MRF4; NFKB; nutritional programming;
obesity; sarcopenia; tumour necrosis factor alpha; type II
diabetes; myostatin.
Scope and aims of the review
For the purposes of this review, the author defines skeletal muscle
memory as:
The capacity of skeletal muscle to respond differently
to environmental stimuli in an adaptive or maladap-
tive manner if the stimuli have been previously
encountered.
We therefore suggest that skeletal muscle memory refers to both
cellular and tissue retention of prior environmental stimuli or stress such
as those from acute or chronic exercise, muscle damage/injury, disease
or changes in nutrients which culminate in altered behaviour, if the
stimulus is re-encountered. Ultimately, this is important for skeletal
muscle because if the environment encountered is an anabolic or
positive one, muscle may respond to these later-life stimuli with additive
muscle growth or healthy maintenance across the lifespan; however, if
the environment is catabolic or negative, it may become more
susceptible to muscle mass loss in later life. This therefore has important
consequences, as sufficient quantity and quality of skeletal muscle are
required not only to sustain performance in elite sport but also to
enhance lifespan and promote healthspan into older age [recently
reviewed in Sharples et al. (2015b)].
Historically, the term ‘programming’ has been used to define similar
processes of ‘memory’ in cells or tissues. Programming however, can
evoke a slightly different perception in the minds of scientists even
within similar biological fields. For example, programming in embryonic
stem cell biology refers to the programme that controls pluripotency in
embryonic stem (ES) cells, and reprogramming is a human intervention
whereby adult cells are returned to pluripotent embryonic-like states,
where any previous environmental encounters experienced during
development or with age are essentially re-set. This is therefore
somewhat distinct from tissue or cells retaining information after a
stimulus or stress in readiness for future stimuli that when re-
encountered may bring about further adaptation, or maladaptation.
Metabolic or nutrient programming is another example of a phe-
nomenon linked, yet somewhat distinct to what we define as skeletal
muscle memory above. This usually refers to a change in nutritional
stimuli such as global calorie or protein restriction or a high-fat diet that
changes physiology and metabolism of the organism during develop-
ment that is usually then fixed into older postnatal age. Therefore, these
adaptations continue even without confrontation with the same
stimulus/stress that initiated them. The majority of work in the metabolic
programming field is undertaken using in utero studies, therefore also
Correspondence
Dr Adam Philip Sharples, Stem Cells, Ageing and Molecular Physiology (SCAMP)
Research Unit, Exercise Metabolism and Adaptation Research Group (EMARG),
Research Institute for Sport and Exercise Sciences (RISES), Liverpool John Moores
University, Liverpool, UK. Tel.: +447812732670; e-mails: a.sharples@ljmu.ac.uk;
a.p.sharples@googlemail.com
Accepted for publication 24 March 2016
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
603
Aging Cell (2016) 15, pp603–616
Doi: 10.1111/acel.12486
Aging
 
Cell
 termed foetal or developmental programming, where the offspring
encounter different environmental stimuli during pregnancy and the
phenotypes postbirth (sometimes into adulthood or old age) are
dependent on these earlier life occurrences. This field provided some
of the earliest evidence to suggest that skeletal muscle was pro-
grammable and evolved into the research field encompassing foetal
origins of health and disease. Given that this particular field is beginning
to examine the molecular and epigenetic mechanisms of these
phenomena and provide insights into the concept of muscle memory
defined above, this literature is reviewed below.
In addition to the skeletal muscle being programmable, there is also
now emerging evidence that suggests even after short-term environ-
mental stimuli, skeletal muscle can retain molecular information in order
to be primed for future plasticity following encounters with the same
stimulus. Just as we do when we suddenly recall a past childhood
memory after being in contact with the same or similar stimuli in
adulthood, we propose that skeletal muscle could behave within a
similar conceptual framework via distinct molecular mechanisms. We
suggest that epigenetics, in particular, could mechanistically underpin
muscle memory as defined above; therefore, we present the term
muscle ‘epi’-memory in this review to capture this notion.
Epigenetics is defined as the study of changes in organisms caused
by the modification of gene expression rather than the alteration of the
genetic code itself (Oxford Dictionary, 2015). Because environmental
stimuli, stresses or encounters cause modifications in gene expression,
turning genes on or off, and muscle memory is defined as the capacity
for skeletal muscle to respond or adapt differently to environmental
stimuli if encountered previously, it suggests that epigenetics could
mechanistically underpin skeletal muscle memory. Epigenetic modifica-
tions can be extremely transient, for example after a simple bout of
acute metabolic stress (high-intensity aerobic exercise) (Barres et al.,
2012), or obstinately stable, termed genetic inheritance, even being
passed to daughter generations of cells (Hansen et al., 2008; Ng &
Gurdon, 2008; Petruk et al., 2012). Critically, it has been reported that
epigenetic DNA marks maintained in germlines and even RNAs can be
transferred to the next generation in mammals (Anway et al., 2005;
Campos et al., 2014; Gapp et al., 2014; Liebers et al., 2014; Grandjean
et al., 2015; Sharma et al., 2016), contributing to ‘heritable’ metabolic
disease (Grandjean et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2016; Donkin et al., 2016).
This evidence firmly points to epigenetics playing an important role in the
retention of information into later life. Finally, our group has recently
shown that skeletal muscle cells retain epigenetically modified DNA
‘tags’ (methyl groups) as a result of early-life inflammatory stress and
that they seemingly retain this information until later in their proliferative
lifespan in vitro (Sharples et al., 2015a), a concept that is discussed later
in this review (and depicted in Fig. 1). We therefore believe that skeletal
muscle memory is underpinned by epigenetic modifications (‘epi’-
memory).
Therefore, in this review, we will; (i) outline the emergence of
scientific evidence contributing to the notion of skeletal muscle memory
including metabolic/foetal programming studies and the underlying
molecular mechanisms; (ii) discuss the importance of memory/program-
ming in metabolic disease and the underlying molecular mechanisms; (iii)
review the data within epidemiological research where aging cohort
studies support skeletal muscle programming in humans; (iv) summarize
and discuss the evidence for muscle memory from animal tissue models
and where muscle stem cells have been isolated under different
environmental niches in vivo, for example physically active, diabetic,
cachexic and aged, and how they ‘memorize’ this environment once
isolated in vitro; (v) finally, we will outline the proposed molecular and
epigenetic mechanisms underlying skeletal muscle memory and review
the epigenetic regulation of exercise-induced skeletal muscle adaptation,
highlighting exercise interventions as suitable models to investigate
skeletal muscle memory.
Emergence of evidence for skeletal muscle memory
Early-life nutrient restriction and the programming of
skeletal muscle fibre number, composition and size
The Dutch famine (1944–1945), affecting women in the first trimester of
pregnancy, was associated with an increased prevalence of coronary
heart disease, raised lipids and obesity in the offspring. Severe
malnourishment during late gestation was also related to impaired
glucose tolerance of the offspring into adult life (Ravelli et al., 1998,
1999; Roseboom et al., 2000a,b). The influence of this catastrophic
event was only fully realized in the late 1990s as these children were
tracked into adulthood; it had, however, been observed some 16 years
previously that malnutrition during pregnancy in rats reduced general
cell numbers in the offspring (McLeod et al., 1972). These studies
resulted in a programme of research in the field of foetal/developmental
programming (later also defined as metabolic/nutritional programming),
with basic and clinical scientists examining how these early-life encoun-
ters impacted health and function or dysfunction into adulthood and old
age. Follow-up animal studies have reported nutritional programming in
the liver (Gluckman et al., 2007), kidney, lung (Brameld et al., 2000;
Yakubu et al., 2007a,b), adipose tissue (Budge et al., 2003), the brain
(Guzman-Quevedo et al., 2013) and even skeletal muscle. More
recently, a smaller subgroup of individuals (150 men and women) from
the Dutch famine birth cohort (aged 68) were reported to display
increased mortality and were more frequently admitted to hospital for
age-related disease. In the same study, at the organ/system level, the
authors demonstrated larger increases in levels of aging biomarkers in
the brain, bone, skeletal muscle and the eye. At the cellular level,
increased inflammation, oxidative stress and decreased telomere length
of DNA, a hallmark of cellular senescence, were evident (de Rooij &
Roseboom, 2013). Overall, this evidence has led to the emergence of the
notion that, even decades later, organs, tissues and even cells can be
programmed as a result of early-life foetal environmental encounters.
Skeletal muscle tissue is the largest metabolic organ. Therefore,
skeletal muscle was an early target of assessment in metabolic
programming studies. It is important to note that the gestational
nutritional manipulations implemented in experiments detailed in this
review occur at different times and for differing durations, and this may
impact on data interpretation when attempting to compare across
experiments or to draw conclusions. It is therefore important to
understand the time course of developing skeletal muscle in the
different mammalian models used. It is also important to appreciate
that the majority of studies in the mammalian developmental program-
ming field are undertaken in sheep due to their similar pregnancies to
humans. The first fibres formed in skeletal muscle development and
growth are called primary muscle fibres and in mammals begin to
develop at 32 days during gestation and continue to form up to
approximately 38 days. Primary myofibres have myofibrils that are
peripherally located and surround an axial core of nuclei and cytoplasm
(Beermann et al., 1978). Secondary fibres then use the primary fibres as
a scaffold and develop after 38–62 days (Wilson et al., 1992). They are
derived from PAX7-positive precursor cells that become activated
myoblasts that terminally fuse/differentiate into myotubes and subse-
quently mature into muscle fibres parallel to the primary fibres, and go
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory?, A. P. Sharples et al.
604
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 on to make up the majority of skeletal muscle. This process is driven by a
dramatic downregulation of PAX7 and sequential activation of muscle-
specific myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs), myf5 (proliferation), myoD
(early fusion), myogenin (fusion) and mrf4 (late fusion/myotube matu-
ration) (as reviewed in Sabourin & Rudnicki, 2000; Maltin et al., 2001).
This is followed by an advancement of tertiary myofibre development
from 62 days (Wilson et al., 1992). In rodents, the primary fibres develop
at 14–16 days, secondary fibres around 17–19 days (Wilson et al., 1988)
and tertiary formation thereafter. Generally, the primary fibres become
slow (type I/oxidative), whereas secondary fibres become fast fibres (type
IIA: fast, mixed oxidative and glycolytic and type IIB: fast, glycolytic)
(Draeger et al., 1987).
To the authors’ knowledge, it was first observed that prenatal nutrition
negatively affected skeletal muscle fibre growth and composition in the
offspring, where a 30% reduction in total calories consumed reduced the
number of fast fibres in both the soleus and lumbrical muscles of
newborn rats (Wilson et al., 1988). Importantly, re-feeding of the mothers
during lactation was unable to restore fibre number in the soleus of
restricted offspring vs. controls, yet was able to restore fibre number in the
lumbrical muscle (Wilson et al., 1988). This suggested that fibre number
within the rat soleus was fixed into older age, but this effect was fibre type
dependent. It was later confirmed in other species (guinea pig) that 40–
60% total nutrient restriction throughout gestation reduced birth weight
of the offspring and reduced myofibre number in the biceps brachii by 20–
26% (Ward & Stickland, 1991; Dwyer & Stickland, 1994; Dwyer et al.,
1995). Together with a reduction in fibre number, it has been demon-
strated that global nutrient restriction during pregnancy can also impact
on the composition (fibre type) and size of the fibre. In ewes, 50% globally
reduced maternal nutrition between 30–70 days of gestation resulted in
fewer fast and increased slow fibre numbers in the vastus lateralis, 14 days
postpartum, vs. relevant controls, an observation notwithstanding in the
group restricted at 30–70 days or between 55–95 days (Fahey et al.,
2005). Furthermore, 50% nutrient restriction in the conception period
(minus 6–18 days of gestation) reduced myofibre number of the mid-
gestation foetus but had no effect on foetal weight (Quigley et al., 2005).
Therefore, it appears that the impact of nutrient restrictions on fibre type,
composition and size is gestation dependent, with a general view that
earlier restriction impacts fibre number, mid-gestation impacts fibre
composition (predominantly fast fibres) and later restriction impacts
muscle size and weight. However, to complicate this observation, it has
been subsequently shown that a similar, yet longer phase of global
restriction (50%) in ewes between 28 and 70 days of gestation actually
increased fast myosin type IIb isoforms, albeit on a background of reduced
total myofibre number, in the longissimus dorsi of 8-month-old offspring
(Zhu et al., 2006). It is therefore worth postulating that adaptations are
dependent on timing, duration, degree of restriction and the muscles
impacted, for example, the triceps brachii (both slow- and fast-twitch
myofibres) suffer reduced fibre and capillary density in the offspring of
restricted ewes in response to restricted maternal diet vs. no change in the
soleus (majority slow-twitch myofibres) under the same conditions
(Costello et al., 2008). Coupled with altered fibre number, composition
and muscle size, reduced maternal nutrition during 28–78 days of
gestation in ewes results in increases in fat mass (both subcutaneous
and visceral) and reduced lean mass in the offspring (Ford et al., 2007).
The translation to human studies however, is somewhat compounded, in
that women who are lean and on a restricted diet during pregnancy are
generally speaking also equivalently lean and restricted pre-pregnancy.
Therefore, to simulate this situation, researchers investigated the impact
of low (excessively lean) maternal body scores (LBS) before and throughout
gestation in ewes vs. high body score (HBS) ewes (obese) (Costello et al.,
2013). Here, bioptic samples highlighted impairments in the skeletal
muscle of the offspring produced by LBS mothers, including reductions in
total myofibre density, fast fibre size and capillary-to-myofibre ratio
(Costello et al., 2013), observations similar to those in nutrient-restricted
studies. While questions remain and specifics need to be determined,
overall, it is clear that as a consequence of nutrient restriction in utero,
skeletal muscle demonstrates the alterations in fibre number, composition
and size, which prevail into later life, despite normal feeding patterns.
Maternal protein restriction and skeletal muscle
programming
The majority of the studies above manipulated nutritional intake via a
40–60% global reduction in food consumed. Some studies have also
altered specific macronutrients to measure the impact of individual
nutritional components on metabolic programming. With respect to
skeletal muscle, as protein feeding is important in protein synthesis and
muscle maintenance across the lifespan, a particular interest has focused
on protein-restricted rodent maternal diets, where rats that had their
protein intake restricted (9% vs. 18% in controls as a proportion of total
matched calories from protein) during mid-pregnancy (8–14 days in
rats), demonstrated significantly reduced muscle fibre number and
density in their 4-week-old offspring (Mallinson et al., 2007). As with
the restriction of total energy, these observations were fibre type and
muscle group dependent where the number and density of fast-twitch
fibres in the soleus were found to be reduced in the offspring after early
(0–7 days), mid (8–14 days)- and late (15–22 days) restriction, whereas in
the gastrocnemius, only a reduction in the density of slow-twitch fibres
occurred at mid (8–14 days)-restriction (Mallinson et al., 2007). A more
recent study suggested that a more severe maternal protein restriction at
mid (7–14 days)-gestation (6% of total calories from protein vs. 17% in
control group) reduced type I fibre diameter by 20% together with a
reduction in type IIa fibres by 5%, while type IIb fibres actually increased
by 5% vs. the aged matched control group in aged rat offspring (365
days old) (Confortim et al., 2015). Finally, in the same study it was
shown that protein restriction during gestation results in a reduction in
size of neuromuscular junctions; as age-related decline in muscle is
associated with denervation (Confortim et al., 2015), these fascinating
findings suggest an important role for early-life encounters on muscle
size and function into old age, which is discussed later in this review.
Therefore once again, although there are some discrepancies in the
specific fibre-type changes following protein restriction, on a back-
ground of differences in muscle groups studied, timing of protein
restriction and sampling of the offspring, it is clear that the general
consensus is that muscle size is reduced following maternal protein
restriction. The important role of protein per se has been illustrated in
guinea pig models, where all dietary components were reduced to 60%
of the ad libitum level, but pregnant mothers were supplemented with
protein, to the same level as controls during gestation. It was reported
that muscle fibre number in the offspring returned back to the level of
the ad libitum-fed controls (Dwyer & Stickland, 1994). This however, is
also observed when carbohydrates are supplemented back, but not fat
(Dwyer & Stickland, 1994), suggesting that at least in this study, the
different macronutrients have an equal role in the programming of fibre
number. Further, supplementing with higher protein (55% vs. 20% in
control) during rat gestation and weaning reduces birth weight by 7%
by a reduction in adipose tissue (31%) (Desclee de Maredsous et al.,
2016). Overall these studies suggest that programming due to protein
restriction may be somewhat reversible by protein feeding during
gestation or lactation.
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory?, A. P. Sharples et al.
605
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 Proposed molecular mechanisms of reduced muscle size
under maternal nutrient restriction
Although a vast number of studies contribute to what we know about
morphological and compositional adaptations of skeletal muscle into
adulthood and following early-life nutrient stress, there are few studies
to
investigate
the
potential
molecular
mechanisms
of
metabolic
programming. However, foetuses of globally (50%) nutrient-restricted
mothers have a reduced activity of protein synthetic pathways, including
a reduced activation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) at
Ser2448 and ribosomal protein S6 (p70S6K) at Ser235/336 with
corresponding reductions in fibre size and the number of secondary
fibres (Zhu et al., 2004). The alterations in protein activity in this study
reportedly occurred without the change in the total levels of the
signalling proteins, energy sensing activity (e.g. 50 adenosine monophos-
phate-activated protein kinase/AMPK) or protein degradative signalling
(Zhu et al., 2004). However, reductions in upstream protein kinase B
(PKB or Akt) total protein levels were observed in offspring from LBS
mothers (Costello et al., 2013). Further, upstream of this intracellular
signalling, it has also been observed that restricted global maternal
nutrition (60%) altered gene expression of the ligand, insulin-like growth
factor II (IGF-II), in the skeletal muscle of sheep fetuses sampled at 80
days gestation (Brameld et al., 2000). In this study, IGF-I was found to be
not altered locally in the skeletal muscle, but was reduced in production
by the liver. It may be hypothesized that greater IGF-II may have actually
led to earlier and enhanced differentiation in muscle during gestation,
causing a disruption of myofibre number. This, however, is only
speculative as overexpression of IGF-II by our group has been shown
to have this role in adult muscle cells (Stewart et al., 1996) and not as
yet, developing muscle tissue. Alternatively, this could be due to a
compensatory mechanism to attempt to promote mesoderm growth
(Morali et al., 2000) in the face of nutrient restriction, especially when it
has been previously observed in work by our group that IGF-IIR knockout
increased circulating IGF-II and the mice were 25–30% larger vs. controls
(Lau et al., 1994). A recent study suggested that the reduction in muscle
size seen in the offspring of rat mothers subjected to protein restriction
(8% total calories vs. 20% total calories) was also due to the reductions
in amino acid response (AAR) pathway-related genes and an elevation of
autophagy-related genes. Interestingly, in this study, the authors alluded
to the concept of muscle memory stating that the muscle at 38 days
postpartum had ‘memorized’ the early-life low-protein environment
(Wang et al., 2015). Furthermore, a low-protein maternal diet in pigs
increased the gene expression of the ligand myostatin and its receptor
(activin type II receptor) in 35-day-old offspring (Liu et al., 2015).
Myostatin is a potent negative regulator of muscle mass (McPherron &
Lee, 1997); therefore, these studies add to the growing data set,
suggesting that alterations in protein synthetic/degradative pathways in
utero impact on muscle composition in later life (Liu et al., 2015).
It has also been proposed that glucose-restricted sheep (40%) have
decreased protein accretion, driven not by reductions in protein synthe-
sis, a finding that is in opposition to Zhu et al., (2004) and Costello et al.
(2013), but by an increase in protein degradation via the skeletal mus-
cle ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (Brown et al., 2014). In this study,
increased mRNA production of atrogin 1 (MAFbx1) and muscle ring
finger 1 (MuRF1) (Brown et al., 2014) were reported, both ubiquitin
ligases important in the tagging of proteins for degradation. No
alterations, however, were observed in autosome–lysosome pathways,
for example mRNA for cathepsin L1, BCL2/adenovirus E1B 19-kDa
protein-interacting protein (BNIP3) or beclin 1. It is also worth mention-
ing when trying to account for these potential discrepancies that the
muscle of these offspring in studies by Costello et al. (2013) and Zhu
et al., (2014) were sampled after gestation into adulthood, whereas the
study by Brown et al. (2014) sampled 8-week-old foetuses. Furthermore,
the studies by Costello et al., 2013 and Zhu et al., 2014 showed a
reduction in protein synthetic signalling, via the manipulation of total
nutritional content across all macronutrients, whereas glucose was the
only nutrient restricted when ubiquitin-proteasome pathway was
impaired (Brown et al., 2014). Therefore, with the caveat that not all
studies investigated protein degradation, it would perhaps be suitable to
hypothesize that a reduction in other macronutrients (e.g. protein, as
this usually makes up the other largest macronutrient to be restricted)
may, as expected, drive the reductions in protein synthesis (e.g. via
mTOR), whereas the reductions in glucose (carbohydrate) may drive
increases in protein degradation, something that has previously been
observed in starvation in the skeletal muscle cells via the activation of
forkhead box (FOXO) transcription factors leading to the activation of
atrogin 1 gene expression and subsequent protein degradation (Sandri
et al., 2004). However, the role of FOXO in nutritional programming
requires further investigation in skeletal muscle during nutrient restric-
tion. To the authors’ knowledge, it has only been investigated in the
offspring of maternally obese sheep who are overnourished. Here, sheep
consumed 150% of the recommended global nutrient intake for
60 days prior to conception and 75 days into gestation at which point
the foetal muscle was sampled (Tong et al., 2009). The sampled muscle
demonstrated increased FOXO3a and nuclear factor kappa light chain
enhancer of activated B cells (NF-jB) signalling (via increased IkappaB
kinase (IKKb) and p65 activity). Due to FOXO’s role in mediating NF-jB-
driven inflammation (van der Horst & Burgering, 2007) in the skeletal
muscle [reviewed in Li et al. (2008)] and obesity [reviewed in Tornatore
et al. (2012)], as well as its role in quiescence mammalian cells
(Bowerman, 2005) and muscle atrophy (Sandri et al., 2004), the authors
hypothesized that FOXO could be involved in the reduction of
myogenesis observed in the foetal muscle of obese mothers. Indeed,
they found that the foetal muscle had reduced fibre size and reductions
in MRFs controlling myogenesis via the reduced content of myoD and
myogenin as well as the intermediate protein filament desmin and, in an
earlier study by the same group, increased adipogenesis (Zhu et al.,
2008). This drop in myogenesis was observed with reduced beta-catenin,
which has been shown to be involved in the activation of transcription of
the above MRFs (Cossu & Borello, 1999). As FOXO diverts beta-catenin
away from the nucleus where it is unable to form an active transcription
complex with members of the TCF family of transcription factors
involved in the transcription of the MRFs (Almeida et al., 2007), these
findings suggested that FOXO may be involved in mediating the
reductions in myogenesis and fibre size in the foetal muscle. Although
protein degradation was not directly analysed in this study, the
observations point to a potentially important role for FOXO in the
programming effect in skeletal muscle following early-life nutrient stress.
NF-jB’s signalling has also been shown to be involved in atrophy of
skeletal muscle via protein degradation (reviewed in Jackman &
Kandarian, 2004; Bakkar et al., 2008), but also plays a role in early
muscle cell survival where NF-jB inhibition in the presence of an
apoptotic dose of tumour necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) exacerbates cell
death (Stewart et al., 2004). Furthermore, as both NF-jB and FOXO
have been linked with cell survival instead of growth, that is, shifting
cellular function towards oxidative stress resistance and DNA repair
(Brunet et al., 2004; Greer & Brunet, 2005; Wang et al., 2007), and are
associated with lifespan extension (Giannakou et al., 2004; Alic et al.,
2014), these molecules could be fundamental in programming and
perhaps memory, particularly impacting in later life where impaired DNA
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory?, A. P. Sharples et al.
606
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 repair and oxidative stress are linked with the muscle loss and sarcopenia
(reviewed in Jackson & McArdle, 2011). This is especially relevant when
maternal obesity in ewes has been shown to increase fibrogenesis vs.
skeletal muscle tissue accretion in the foetal skeletal muscle (Tong et al.,
2009), a hall mark of sarcopenia, and one of the fundamental causes of
reduced muscle force and quality (force per cross-sectional area of
muscle) (reviewed in Serrano & Munoz-Canoves, 2010; Mann et al.,
2011). It is also worth noting that as well as protein restriction, high-fat
gestational rodent feeding and postpartum rodent feeding have been
shown to reduce protein synthetic signalling via p70S6 kinase 1 and 4E
binding protein-1 phosphorylation while also manipulating FOXO and
NF-jB action. Overall, these studies suggest that the mechanisms for
reduced muscle size following maternal nutrient restriction involve
reductions in protein synthetic signalling and increases in protein
degradative signalling, with the latter perhaps
more likely when
carbohydrates alone are restricted. High-fat diets are also detrimental to
muscle size via reduced myogenic cues, reduced protein synthetic
signalling, increased protein degradation and enhanced inflammation.
Nutrient/metabolic programming and the impact on
metabolism and metabolic disease
Metabolic programming is also clinically important, as it has been
suggested that early-life stress-induced alterations in skeletal muscle fibre
type and size may predispose individuals to metabolic abnormalities such
as obesity (Tanner et al., 2002) and type II diabetes (Marin et al., 1994).
Indeed, nutrient restriction during mid- and late gestation (but not early
gestation) results in glucose intolerance in response to an intravenous
glucose tolerance test (IGTT) (Gardner et al., 2005; Ford et al., 2007). It is
worth noting that in this study this phenomenamay not have not been due
to muscle tissue but may have been a result of reduced adipose tissue
disposal of glucose via reductions in insulin-responsive glucose transporter
4 (GLUT4), an observation that was not found in the skeletal muscle.
However, the glucose intolerance observed was not related to insulin
deficiency as insulin area under the curve in response to an IGTT was
actually increased in the offspring of global restricted maternal nourish-
ment (Gardner et al., 2005). Furthermore, in the skeletal muscle specif-
ically,
a
key
enzyme
controlling
fat
oxidation,
carnitine
palmitoyltransferase-1, has been shown to be reduced by approximately
25% in the skeletal muscle of ewe offspring from nutrient-restricted
parents, where intramuscular triglyceride content (IMTG) was also found
to be increased contributing to an increased fat deposition (Zhu et al.,
2006). As increased IMTG content predisposes insulin resistance in the
skeletalmuscle(Phillipset al., 1996;Krssaket al., 1999),thesefindingsare
suggestive of an increased likelihood of diabetes. Furthermore, rats
considered small for their gestational age (Deng et al., 2014) and humans
with low birth weight (Ozanne et al., 2005) can also develop insulin
resistance and glucose intolerance. Indeed, it was observed that in Danish
low birth weight men, levels of GLUT4 protein abundance and insulin
signalling [protein kinase C zeta (PKCz) and the p85a/p110b subunits of
phosphoinositol-3-kinase)] were found to be reduced in their skeletal
muscle (Ozanne et al., 2005), overall pointing to an altered glucose
handling and a predisposition to type II diabetes in response to early foetal
environmental encounters. To relate this altered phenotype of low birth
weightinhumansto foetalnutrientrestriction,inthe samestudy,ratswere
exposedto low-protein diets duringgestation andlactation,where therats
exhibited changes similar to the Danish men with low birth weights
(Ozanne et al., 2005). Later studies have also confirmed the above
findings, where gestational low protein (6% vs. 20% in control) in rats led
to insulin resistance in adult offspring by involving an inadequate insulin-
induced phosphorylation of the Insulin receptor, insulin receptor sub-
strate-1 (IRS-1) and Akt substrate of 160 kDa (AS160) as well as an
impaired GLUT4 translocation and the corresponding increases in glucose
and insulin levels when subjected to an IGTT (Blesson et al., 2014). Indeed,
maternal low protein (8%) and postnatal high diets (45%) in the rats have
been shown to increase the risk of type II diabetes by decreasing skeletal
muscle oxidative respiration, via increased sirtuin 3 (Sirt3), and potentially
by decreasing the activity of succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) (Claycombe
et al., 2015). Protein restriction in maternal rat and subsequent acute
fasting of the resulting offspring can also alter the metabolic properties of
faster muscle fibres (EDL vs. soleus) (Aragao et al., 2014). It was observed
in this study that fasting in the offspring on a background of maternal
protein restriction reduced the gene expression of lipid metabolism
regulators peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors alpha (PPARa),
PPARd and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator
1-alpha (PGC-1a – an important regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis
and carbohydrate/lipid metabolism) to the same extent as nonfasted
controls in their slow-twitch (soleus) muscles, yet, in faster fibres (EDL)
control animals were protected from fasting-induced reductions in gene
expression, whereas the protein-restricted group demonstrated impair-
ments, a phenomenon that the authors described as metabolic ‘inflexi-
bility’ (Aragaoet al.,2014).However,itwasclear thatinthisstudythe fast-
twitch muscle was able to retain information from early-life encounters
with nutrient stress and was subsequently more susceptible to later-life
stress of the same kind, demonstrating skeletal muscle memory.
Overall, to substantiate that nutritional programming influences
metabolic inadequacies; hypertension, insulin resistance and obesity
have been observed in the adult offspring of obese C57BL/6J mice
(Samuelsson et al., 2008; Shelley et al., 2009). Also, the skeletal muscles
from foetuses from obese sheep have blunted insulin and AMPK
signalling as well as an increased inflammatory cytokine tumour necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-a), in their plasma, suggesting the development of
insulin resistance in these offspring (Zhu et al., 2008). Somewhat
counterintuitively however, high-fat diets during gestation in pigs have
been seen to increase myofibre cross-sectional area (Fainberg et al.,
2014). However, pigs are encouraged to eat high-fat diets once born,
and therefore, it may be suggested that their mothers may offer some
kind of protection for their foetuses, as high-fat diets during pregnancy
in other mammalian and human studies seem to have only negative
consequences for metabolic disease risk (Khan et al., 2005; Srinivasan
et al., 2006; Elahi et al., 2009). An important recent study in mice has
also shown that high-fat diets during both gestation and lactation result
in insulin resistance and obesity in the offspring, with increased
inflammation originating in the adipose tissue (Kruse et al., 2015). An
observation confirmed a background of genetic deletion of gastric
inhibitory polypeptide receptor (GIPR) that has previously been shown to
prevent high-fat diet-induced obesity (Kruse et al., 2015). However, if
prenatal high-fat diets are followed by normal diets consumed after
pregnancy, it seems that offspring may not develop obesity but type II
diabetes via increased cytokine activation, inflammation and mitochon-
drial dysfunction (Latouche et al., 2014). These alarming effects of early-
life nutritional stress have culminated in the recent UK guidelines in the
importance of maternal weight and diet in influencing the risk of obesity
and type II diabetes in humans (NICE 2010).
Programming in human muscle memory: Evidence from
epidemiological studies and relevance to sarcopenia
Together with metabolic disorders, in human aging cohort studies, low
birth weight and malnutrition have been associated with the decline in
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory?, A. P. Sharples et al.
607
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 the skeletal muscle mass, low strength and slower gait speed in men and
women into old age (Sayer et al., 2004b, 2008; Sayer & Cooper, 2005;
Patel et al., 2010, 2011, 2012, 2014). This leads to the earlier onset of
the geriatric disorder known as sarcopenia and is therefore perhaps
suggestive that sarcopenia may have origins in foetal and early life.
Indeed, the reductions in muscle size and strength have been strongly
associated with birth weight independently of height and weight and
even when social class, physical activity, smoking and alcohol are
adjusted for (Sayer et al., 2004b). Furthermore, birth weight has shown
a positive association with adult body mass index and fat-free mass, but
not with measures of adult fat mass (Sayer et al., 2004a), again
indicating that lean body mass reductions in old age, a hall mark of
sarcopenia, can be somewhat determined in early life. These impair-
ments in muscle function are associated with earlier onset of disability,
morbidity and mortality (Laukkanen et al., 1995; Rantanen et al., 1999,
2002; Rantanen, 2003; Gale et al., 2007). The mechanisms of these
early-life environmental differences and their impact on muscle mass and
strength in these cohort studies have begun to be investigated using a
cross-sectional design investigating those with lower vs. higher grip
strength or lean body mass. Lower transcript expression of vitamin D
receptor and interferon gamma in skeletal muscle tissue was associated
with higher lean mass and lower gene expression of interleukin 6 (IL-6),
tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) and interleukin-1 receptor (IL1R1)
in community-dwelling older men (Patel et al., 2014). Furthermore,
lower myostatin was also associated with higher grip strength in
community-dwelling older men, whereas lower IL-6 in the serum was
associated with lower strength (Patel et al., 2014), suggesting overall
that the inflammation and catabolic/protein degradative regulators are
found to be increased in aged cohorts who have reduced strength and
lean body mass, observed previously to be correlated with low birth
weight. Although epigenetics is considered an important modulator of
these foetal origins of metabolism, and studies in other animal models
and tissues are beginning to take place, for example reviewed in Saffery
(2014), there are limited epigenetic studies into the early-life origins of
sarcopenia. This may be partly due to the expensive nature of the
genome-wide type analysis and access to these human cohorts as well as
complex, expensive-equivalent aging studies in animal models. There is,
however, an important study to date that characterizes the methylome
and transcriptome of aged, but disease-free, skeletal muscle vs. young
adults (Zykovich et al., 2014). These types of studies need to be
conducted in
the skeletal muscle of
maternal nutrient-restricted
offspring into old age and human cohort studies that have early-life
malnourishment or low birth weights in order to distinguish important
epigenetic mechanisms of the foetal origins of health and disease. It is
also important that future studies assess the epigenetic response of these
animals or human cohorts to a later-life nutrient, muscle growth or loss
stimuli in order to address the mechanisms of muscle memory.
Muscle cellular memory: Evidence from animal
tissue models and muscle-derived stem cells from
humans under different environmental niches
Memory from positive anabolic/growth encounters
In 2010, an important study in mice suggested that the increased muscle
nuclei in fibres (myonuclei) acquired via a mechanical overload stimulus
are retained even when a subsequent period of denervation-induced
muscle loss was encountered vs. controls (Bruusgaard et al., 2010).
These studies were expanded by the same group in 2013, whereby
testosterone was administered to mice for 3 months, enabling robust
muscle hypertrophy that was accompanied by an increase in myonuclei
(Bruusgaard et al., 2010; Egner et al., 2013; Gundersen, 2016). These
myonuclei were subsequently retained during muscle size losses follow-
ing a period of testosterone withdrawal. Most importantly, when
mechanical overload was presented to the animals that had received an
earlier encounter of testosterone vs. controls, they exhibited a 31%
increase in muscle cross-sectional area vs. control mice that showed no
growth in the same period of time (Bruusgaard et al., 2010; Egner et al.,
2013). This study therefore alludes to a mechanism whereby muscle has
the capacity to adapt to a muscle growth stimulus (overload) with a
positive adaptation if hypertrophic stimuli (testosterone) have been
encountered previously, in line with our definition of muscle memory in
this review. More evidence for memory of positive environments comes
from studies that derived muscle ‘stem’ or precursor cells from humans.
These studies are important as skeletal muscle tissue is terminally
differentiated or postmitotic; therefore, skeletal muscle has its own
resident stem cell population known as satellite cells that have mitotic
potential and therefore contribute to muscle regeneration, repair and
turnover via the process of proliferation, migration and fusion into the
existing fibres (reviewed in Sharples & Stewart, 2011). Populations of the
mitotic cells also self-renew to allow the replenishment of the stem cell
pool for future regenerative bouts (Troy et al., 2012). Importantly, a
recent study derived these muscle stem cells from active and inactive
(sedentary) individuals. The cells derived from active humans displayed
an improved ability to uptake glucose and were somewhat protected
from palmitate-induced insulin resistance vs. cells isolated from seden-
tary humans (Green et al., 2013; Valencia & Spangenburg, 2013). These
types of cellular studies are also important as they suggest that muscle
cells retain molecular information even after isolation outside of their
environmental niches. Also, as these cells have mitotic and self-renewal
capabilities, they may be fundamental in passing epigenetic modifica-
tions onto daughter populations of cells and therefore involved in
regulating skeletal muscle memory, something that is discussed below
with respect to epigenetics regulating muscle stem cell self-renewal into
old age.
Memory from negative catabolic encounters from disease,
inflammation and nutrient stress
In the same vein as the studies above regarding the memory of positive
environments, earlier work from our group has shown that human
muscle stem cells derived from the skeletal muscle bioptic samples of
patients with cancer, display memory of the environment from which
they were derived. These cells exhibit inappropriate proliferation vs. aged
matched cells derived from the muscle biopsies of healthy control
patients (Foulstone et al., 2003). While at an endocrine level, the IGF
system between the groups was not different, at a cellular level,
inappropriate IGFBP-3 expression by the muscle cells derived from the
patients with cancer was associated with dysregulated cell retrieval and
behaviour (Foulstone et al., 2003). These were the first reported studies
to identify dysregulated local expression of the IGF system in human
skeletal muscle stem cells and associated memory of the derived muscle
milieu. Since these earlier studies it has been demonstrated that
myotubes grown from muscle-derived cells isolated from obese humans
have greater intramyocellular lipid contents due to the membrane
relocation of fatty acid translocase (FAT/CD36) (Aguer et al., 2010).
More recently, this concept has been confirmed and discussed by four
further papers (three original works and one review), again collectively
suggesting that muscle-derived cells retain a ‘memory’ of negative
encounters once isolated from different environmental niches, where (i)
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory?, A. P. Sharples et al.
608
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 muscle-derived cells from obese patients do not respond to lipid
oversupply with the same gene expression signatures vs. control (Maples
& Brault, 2015); (ii) muscle-derived cells from intrauterine growth-
restricted sheep foetuses exhibit deficiencies in proliferation vs. controls
(Yates et al., 2014); (iiii) skeletal muscle stem cells isolated from prenatal
50% global nutrient-restricted mice offspring or early postnatal high-fat
diet (60% of total calories from fat) offspring have a reduced number of
muscle precursor cells and a 32% decrease in the capacity of these cells
to regenerate after injury (Woo et al., 2011). Interestingly, in the same
study it was reported that a high-fat diet also evoked reductions in the
Fig. 1 A proposed schematic representation of skeletal muscle ‘epi’-memory.
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory?, A. P. Sharples et al.
609
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 number of muscle stem cells retrieved from skeletal muscle tissue and
was associated with larger reductions (44%) in regeneration (chow 16%
vs. high-fat diet 9%), suggesting that the environment in which the
muscle cells were derived could be remembered and subsequently affect
the muscle repair and regeneration in later life (Woo et al., 2011); (iv)
finally, the vast majority of aged muscle stem cells isolated from aged
animals and humans or those replicatively aged in culture have an
impaired or delayed differentiation/regenerative capacity (Allen et al.,
1982; Charge et al., 2002; Lorenzon et al., 2004; Lees et al., 2006;
Carlson & Conboy, 2007; Lancioni et al., 2007; Bigot et al., 2008;
Hidestrand et al., 2008; Pietrangelo et al., 2009; Beccafico et al., 2010;
Sharples et al., 2010, 2011, 2012; Kandalla et al., 2011; Merritt et al.,
2013; Zwetsloot et al., 2013) or display delayed differentiation (Corbu
et al., 2010). Very few studies showed no impact of age on differen-
tiation of the isolated muscle stem cells (Shefer et al., 2006; Alsharidah
et al., 2013); where even these studies reported aged muscle to have
fewer stem cells to begin with (Shefer et al., 2006). Furthermore, the
ability of these cells to self-renew, depleting the stem cell pool (Bigot
et al., 2015), appears to be impaired with age, a process that may be
epigenetically regulated (discussed below). Importantly, all of these
studies highlight that the epigenetic regulation of muscle ‘stem’ cells
with mitotic potential could be important in the concept of muscle
memory with respect to metabolic function, muscle repair and regen-
eration in skeletal muscle tissue.
Epigenetics underpins programming and gives
muscle an ‘Epi-memory’
Epigenetics translated means ‘above genetics’ and is defined as changes
in gene activity and expression as a result of transient or stable structural
modifications (primarily to DNA or histones, but also post-transcriptional
modification of RNA) without altering the genetic code. The modifica-
tions are caused directly to DNA via methylation, or at the level of the
surrounding core histones (H)2A, H2B, H3 and H4. Histones have long N-
terminal tails, meaning that they are readily prone to methylation (me),
acetylation (ac), phosphorylation (p), ubiquitination (ub), SUMOylation,
ADP-ribosylation and finally citrullination (reviewed in Bannister &
Kouzarides, 2011). DNA methylation and histone modification result in
alterations in gene transcription. DNA methylation primarily occurs on
CpG dinucleotide pairs at the 50 site of cytosine bases creating 5-
methylcytosine (5mC). This usually leads to gene suppression when
occurring within a promoter region of a gene via blocking the access of
RNA polymerase after the enlistment of methyl CpG binding domain
(MBD) proteins (Bogdanovic & Veenstra, 2009). Other DNA methylation
that occurs at intragenic sites, however, has an extremely variable impact
on gene transcription, only when intragenic methylation leads to
repressing the function of long-range gene enhancers and it has been
shown to more consistently suppress gene expression (Weber et al.,
2007; Schmidl et al., 2009), and intragenic methylation can also be
involved in modulating alternative splicing of the gene (Shukla et al.,
2011; Sati et al., 2012; Maunakea et al., 2013). The process of DNA
methylation and demethylation is controlled by DNA methyltransferases
(DNMTs) and demethylases, called the ten-eleven translocation (TET)
enzymes. De novo methylation is controlled by methyltransferases
DNMT3a and DNMT3b, whereas DNMT1 maintains methylation (Trasler
et al., 2003). Once methylation is not required, TET1, 2 and 3 convert
the 5mC to 5-hydroxymethyl cytosine (5hmC) for the subsequent
removal via base excision repair (Tahiliani et al., 2009; Ito et al., 2010).
Histone modifications, however, are more complex than DNA methyla-
tion in their action to activate or suppress gene transcription. Generally,
histone methylation of lysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4me3) is associated
with an increased gene expression as is acetylation of numerous lysine
residues of histones H3 and H4 (acetyl H3 and acetyl H4), whereas
trimethylation of lysines 9 and 27 of histone H3 (H3K9me 2/3 and
H3K27me3) and lysine 20 of histone H4 (H4K20me3) is involved in gene
suppression (reviewed in Schuettengruber et al., 2011). Acetylation of
histones is controlled by the histone acetyltransferases (HATs) such as
K-Lysine acetyltransferase 2A (KAT2A or GCN5), P300/CBP-associated
factor (PCAF), CREB-binding protein (CBP), p300, K-Lysine acetyltrans-
ferase 5 (Tip60) and male absent on the first (MOF), that add acetyl
groups to/from target histones. In contrast, deacetylases (HDACs)
remove acetyl groups, including the class I (HDAC 1-3 and 8), class II
(HDAC 4–7, 9–10), class III (Sirt1-7) and class IV HDACs (HDAC11). As
described above, acetylation of histones leads to active transcription, and
HATs therefore have been associated with active gene expression and
the HDACs gene suppression (reviewed in Wang et al., 2009). For the
purposes of this review, the above summarized mechanisms are
currently those that are studied with respect to skeletal muscle memory.
For a more detailed role of histone modifications in modulating gene
expression, this is reviewed extensively in Bannister & Kouzarides (2011).
Despite epigenetic modifications underpinning gene expression
operating following changes in environmental stimuli (reviewed in
Bhutani et al., 2011), there are few studies to investigate the potential
epigenetic modulation of skeletal muscle cell memory. Currently, there
are more extensive data that exist regarding the epigenetic control of
muscle stem cells and the process of myogenesis and muscle stem cell
function (reviewed in Dilworth & Blais, 2011; Segales et al., 2015; Laker
& Ryall, 2016), including work by ourselves on the class III HDAC sirtuin 1
(Saini et al., 2012). However, a very recent study has investigated the
underlying epigenetics in muscle-derived cells of obese patients where
lipid oversupply in these cells induced increased DNA methylation of
PPARd with the subsequent greater suppression of PPARd gene
expression vs. nonobese controls (Maples & Brault, 2015). Despite the
subjects in the control group not being aged matched with the obese
group, where the obese group were on average almost 7 years older,
this study implies that epigenetic modification of lipid metabolism genes
after encountering a negative metabolic environment (obesity) was
retained once isolated in culture, and that epigenetic regulation of lipid
metabolism genes were important mediators of metabolic function
when a similar later-life environment (lipid oversupply) was encountered.
At the tissue level, another study to investigate the potential epigenetic
mechanisms underpinning metabolic programming as a consequence of
maternal protein restriction vs. controls (8% vs. 20%) suggested that the
reduction in PGC-1a gene expression in the offspring’s skeletal muscle
was underpinned by increases in its own promoter methylation (Zeng
et al., 2013). Furthermore, early (postnatal) high-carbohydrate diets
reduced Glut4 transcription in the skeletal muscle of the adult offspring
(100 days postgestation) via epigenetic modifications including an
increased methylation of the Glut4 promoter and acetylation of H2
variant (H2A.Z) and H4, importantly highlighting a novel epigenetic
mechanism contributing to early-life nutrient stress that is associated
with later-life adult insulin resistance and obesity (Raychaudhuri et al.,
2014). In humans, the relationship between nutrient stress and the
potential epigenetic modulation of diabetes and obesity was also
investigated where only 5 days of a high-fat feeding (50% extra calories
distributed as 60% fat vs. controls with no extra calorie consumption
and diet made up of 35% fat) reportedly altered DNA methylation of
over 6508 genes of 14475 genes studied (Jacobsen et al., 2012).
Interestingly, there was a slow reversibility of DNA methylation when the
high-fat diet was switched back to the control diet for 6–8 weeks, where
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory?, A. P. Sharples et al.
610
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 out of the top 10% of altered genes post the high-fat diet, only 66% of
these genes had a methylation status in the opposite direction, with only
5% of these significant (Jacobsen et al., 2012). Importantly this study
suggests that methylation could be retained and the implication that
CpG methylation could perhaps be preserved or built up over time after
multiple high-fat diet periods. De novo vs. maintained methylation, as
discussed above, is controlled by DNMTs that also increased post the
high-fat diet in the same study, where both de novo regulating DNMT3a
and maintaining DNMT1 mRNA increased (Jacobsen et al., 2012). The
authors did not study the activity of these enzymes that may also
underpin the maintenance of methylation some 6–8 weeks later.
Importantly, our group has shown that skeletal muscle cells have an
increased susceptibility to the impaired differentiation after encountering
TNF-a inflammatory stress in later proliferative life if the cells have
experienced an earlier, acute TNF-a stress (Sharples et al., 2015a),
suggestive of a morphological memory of catabolic stress in myoblasts.
Importantly, in this study, the muscle cells that experienced even an
acute cytokine stress in early life retained elevated myoD methylation
even after 30 population doublings (Sharples et al., 2015a). This study
therefore suggests an important epigenetic mechanism via the retention
of DNA methylation of important myogenic regulatory genes throughout
proliferative lifespan in the muscle cells following early-life inflammatory
stress. The de novo and maintenance of this methylation via modulating
DNMTs and TETs now requires further investigation in this model. It has
previously been shown in developing xenopus embyo’s that memory of
myoDs active gene state can persist through 24 cell divisions in the
absence of transcription (Ng & Gurdon 2008). Interestingly, rather than
methylation of the myoD promoter, this epigenetic memory was
regulated by the association of histone H3.3 with the myoD promoter
(Ng & Gurdon 2008), where histone H3.3 requires future investigation in
adult muscle cell models of memory such as those described by Sharples
et al., (2015a) above. As chronic TNF-a is increased in the circulation
(Greiwe et al., 2001; Bruunsgaard & Pedersen, 2003; Bruunsgaard et al.,
2003a,b) and in that produced by skeletal muscle tissue in aged
individuals (Greiwe et al., 2001; Leger et al., 2008) as well as being
associated with sarcopenia and muscle loss (reviewed in (Saini et al.,
2006; Sharples et al., 2015b), these studies suggest a potential
important mechanism for muscle memorys involment in muscle loss
with age. Furthermore, recent pioneering research deriving aged human
muscle stem cells showed impairments in the ability of these cells to self-
renew (Bigot et al., 2015), as described above, a process that is required
to replenish the stem cell pool across the lifespan. In this study was
reported that elderly muscle stem cells once isolated in culture
demonstrated significantly lower proportion of reserve (PAX7-expres-
sing) cells and an impaired ability for these cells to be incorporated as
satellite cells when engrafted back into immunodeficient mice vs. young
human muscle stem cells (Bigot et al., 2015). Importantly, these cells
also had higher global DNA methylation (assessed via whole DNA
methylome array). Importantly, by using a demethylation agent, 5-aza-
20-deoxycytidine (5AZA) in culture, aged muscle stem cells improved
their self-renewal capacity. Of particular interest, the authors reported
that increased DNA methylation of sprouty1 (or SPYR1 a known
regulator of self-renewal/quiescence) corresponded with the reduced
SPRY1 transcription (Bigot et al., 2015). By knocking down SPYR1 to 5%
using small interfering RNA (siRNA), even in the presence of global
demethylation via 5AZA treatment, the capacity to self-renew in these
cells was completely abolished, confirming the important role of
epigenetically regulated SPRY1 in the loss of the muscle stem cell pool
with age. This manuscript now opens up the possibility of epigenetic
characteristics being ‘reset’ in aged muscle to restore normal function
where self-renewal is fundamental to the capacity of muscle to respond
to repeated regenerative bouts across the lifespan, demonstrating a clear
clinical translation. Earlier work also suggested that increased senescence
in isolated muscle stem cells from aged mice, characterized by an
increased in p16INK4, was controlled epigenetically by the polycomb
protein 1/H2A ubiquitination (PRC1/H2Aub) and the subsequent loss in
repressive function of P16INK4a gene expression (Sousa-Victor et al.,
2014), importantly, also suggesting that, together with DNA methyla-
tion, histone modifications can also be retained by muscle cells once
isolated from their niches that may subsequently affect their function
into old age. Overall, these studies strongly suggest that epigenetic
modifications are retained throughout the lifespan and can affect
skeletal muscle function in later life. Importantly, these types of
epigenetic modifications could be targeted therapeutically in future to
‘reset’ skeletal muscle loss associated with aging or perhaps even
diseases such as cachexia.
Epigenetics of exercise adaptation and exercise interventions
as a suitable model to investigate skeletal muscle memory
Muscle memory originally entered scientific literature synonymous to
motor learning, where the learning of a motor task involves consolidat-
ing a specific movement pattern through repetition. Within exercise or
strength and conditioning settings, muscle ‘memory’ is largely an
anecdotal phrase used to describe the ability of adult human skeletal
muscle to respond more advantageously to stimuli that have already
been encountered in the past, where applied practitioners often describe
the ability of individual muscle to respond more quickly, for example
after injury or the off-season, to an environmental stimulus, such as a
period of resistance or aerobic training that has already been experi-
enced in the past. There is currently evidence that muscle responds
morphologically and functionally differently following retraining (i.e.
following an earlier period of exercise and cessation/detraining of
exercise), especially postresistance exercise (Staron et al., 1991; Taaffe &
Marcus, 1997; Henwood & Taaffe, 2008; Taaffe et al., 2009), that
myonuclei are retained after prior anabolic hormonal/exercise encoun-
ters (Bruusgaard et al., 2010; Egner et al., 2013; Gundersen, 2016) and
finally that epigenetic modification occurs in the skeletal muscle
following exercise (reviewed in Ntanasis-Stathopoulos et al., 2013; Goto
et al., 2015). However, the epigenetic mechanisms for exercise-induced
muscle memory still require further investigation.
Most notably, with respect to exercise-induced epigenetic adapta-
tions, 60 min of acute high-intensity cycling exercise (75% VO2 max/
maximal aerobic capacity) induced histone acetylation of H3 in skeletal
muscle, a process that was found to be controlled by the removal of the
HDACs from the nucleus (McGee et al., 2009). Furthermore, following
initial studies suggesting that PGC-1a hypermethylation resulted in
associated reductions in mitochondrial content in patients with type 2
diabetes (Barres et al., 2009), it has subsequently been observed that
there was reduced DNA methylation of PGC-1a, mitochondrial tran-
scription factor A (TFAM) and pyruvate dehydrogenase lipoamide kinase
isozyme 4 (PDk4) (all associated with mitochondrial biogenesis) imme-
diately post acute aerobic exercise at 80% of maximal aerobic capacity
(until 1674 KJ was expended) and a reduction in PPARd methylation 3 h
post exercise, corresponding with reductions in their own gene
expression (3 h post exercise for PGC-1a, PDK4 and PPAR-d, immedi-
ately post for TFAM) (Barres et al., 2012). Lower exercise intensities
(40% vs. 80% VO2 max until 1674 KJ was expended) were, however,
found to evoke no methylation changes in the above-mentioned genes
(Barres et al., 2012). More, recently 120 min of steady-state exercise
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory?, A. P. Sharples et al.
611
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 (60% Vo2 peak) reportedly increased methylation in the promoter of
fatty acid-binding protein 3 (FABP3) after 4 h of recovery resulting in the
impaired mRNA transcription (Lane et al., 2015). Furthermore, suppres-
sion of DNA methylation was also associated with increased basal mRNA
levels of the PGC-1a promoter A after exercise but not the PGC-1a
promoter B where this was controlled by the methylation of lysine 4 on
histone 3 (H3K4me3) (Lochmann et al., 2015). With respect to chronic
exercise, 6 months of supervised aerobic exercise 3 9 1 h per week
(varied intensity) changed the methylation of several genes associated
with metabolism (Nitert et al., 2012). These included increases in DNA
methylation of runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) and my-
ocyte-specific enhancer factor 2A (MEF2A), transcription factors involved
in exercise-induced changes in Glut4 expression influencing glucose
uptake in skeletal muscle (Smith et al., 2007, 2008). Furthermore, in the
same study, methylation of NADH dehydrogenase ubiquinone 1 subunit
C2 (NDUFC2) increased, encoding an enzyme that is part of the
respiratory chain (Olsson et al., 2011), as well as observed alterations in
the methylation of adiponectin receptors 1 and 2 and bradykinin
receptor (BDKRB2), which are both involved in regulating metabolism in
the skeletal muscle (Taguchi et al., 2000; Yamauchi et al., 2003).
Together with epigenetic alterations at the tissue level, epigenetic
modifications are observed in satellite cells after exercise-induced
activation (Fujimaki et al., 2014). Increased Wnt/beta-catenin signalling
post exercise caused histone modifications promoting gene activation
such as H3K4me2 and H3Ac together with corresponding decreases in
gene suppressing H3K9me2 on MyF5 and myoD gene promoters that
subsequently led to observed exit from the quiescent states in satellite
cells and increased number of dividing satellite cells post exercise
(Fujimaki et al., 2014). Most notably, exercise in obese mothers (mice)
rescued hypermethylation of PGC-1a and corresponding reductions in
mRNA levels of PGC-1a, Glut4, Cox4 and CytoC together with the loss in
metabolic function in later life of the offspring that was a consequence
of the obese in utero environment in the nonexercise group (Laker et al.,
2014). Collectively, the above studies fascinatingly suggest that both
acute and chronic exercise stimuli can cause epigenetic modifications in
skeletal muscle, with the later studies suggesting that an exercise
stimulus in the parents can be ‘remembered’ by the offspring. However,
it remains to be seen whether these exercise-induced methylation
changes can be retained, or over what period they are lost before a
further acute or chronic exercise encounter is required to have the same
or accumulative effect. There are currently little or no studies into
epigenetic modulation post acute anabolic stimuli such as that of acute
resistance exercise or those induced by muscle hypertrophy via chronic
resistance exercise. To the authors’ knowledge, there are also no studies
investigating the epigenetic mechanisms underlying muscle adaptation
to prior encounters with muscle growth or loss associated with
resistance exercise or metabolic adaptation associated with aerobic
exercise. Importantly, studies are required to understand skeletal muscle
memory of muscle loss encounters associated with disuse or inactivity, or
following nutrient feeding, for example via amino acid administration, or
nutrient stress, for example CHO restriction or calorie restriction. Finally,
it is unknown whether the skeletal muscle can retain any increase or
suppression of methylation if a similar exercise stimulus is encountered in
later life, or more stably retain these changes following chronic exercise.
As exercise stimuli are routinely undertaken in human skeletal muscle
adaptation studies, we propose that exercise via exposure to ‘earlier life’
training followed by the cessation of training (detraining) back to
baseline and then followed by subsequent retraining would be a suitable
model to investigate the epigenetic adaptation of skeletal muscle
memory at the tissue and cellular level. Finally, it will be fundamental to
experimentally determine the importance of epigenetic modifications
using the memory evoking models described above in both terminally
differentiated muscle fibres/tissue and satellite cells that do have mitotic
potential. As muscle tissue is postmitotic, it could be assumed that
epigenetic modifications would be more transient and perhaps impor-
tant for more acute adaptation. On the other hand, satellite cells can
proliferate, self-renew and potentially pass on epigenetic modifications
to daughter populations (Sharples et al., 2015a); therefore once
incorporated into tissue as myonuclei, this would perhaps implicate a
role for satellite cells in memory of the muscle tissue later in life. These
notions require important future attention to determine the epigenetic
adaptation of skeletal muscle memory and the importance of these
modifications both at the cellular and tissue level (depicted in Fig. 1).
Conclusion
Skeletal muscle memory is defined as ‘The capacity of skeletal muscle
to respond differently to environmental stimuli in an adaptive or
maladap-tive manner if the stimuli have been previously encountered.’
Based on the evidence from metabolic programming studies in animal
models, epidemiological evidence in humans as well as a suggested
retention of epigenetic information in skeletal muscle cells isolated
from different environmental niches or over daughter populations, we
suggest that; memory in skeletal muscle is underpinned by epigenetic
modifications (epi-memory). The future study of epigenetic modifica-
tions during periods of muscle growth, loss, and regrowth, as well as
during metabolic disease and aging across the lifespan, has the
potential to pave the way for future understanding into the mecha-
nisms of skeletal muscle adaptation and plasticity and potentially
provide novel therapeutic targets for ameliorating muscle loss condi-
tions.
Funding info
No funding information provided.
Conflict of interest
None declared.
References
Aguer C, Mercier J, Man CY, Metz L, Bordenave S, Lambert K, Jean E, Lantier L,
Bounoua L, Brun JF, Raynaud de Mauverger E, Andreelli F, Foretz M, Kitzmann M
(2010) Intramyocellular lipid accumulation is associated with permanent
relocation ex vivo and in vitro of fatty acid translocase (FAT)/CD36 in obese
patients. Diabetologia 53, 1151–1163.
Alic N, Tullet JM, Niccoli T, Broughton S, Hoddinott MP, Slack C, Gems D, Partridge
L (2014) Cell-nonautonomous effects of dFOXO/DAF-16 in aging. Cell Rep. 6,
608–616.
Allen RE, McAllister PK, Masak KC, Anderson GR (1982) Influence of age on
accumulation of alpha-actin in satellite-cell-derived myotubes in vitro. Mech.
Ageing Dev. 18, 89–95.
Almeida M, Han L, Martin-Millan M, O’Brien CA, Manolagas SC (2007) Oxidative
stress antagonizes Wnt signaling in osteoblast precursors by diverting beta-
catenin from T cell factor- to forkhead box O-mediated transcription. J. Biol.
Chem. 282, 27298–27305.
Alsharidah M, Lazarus NR, George TE, Agley CC, Velloso CP, Harridge SD (2013)
Primary human muscle precursor cells obtained from young and old donors
produce similar proliferative, differentiation and senescent profiles in culture.
Aging Cell, 12, 333–344.
Anway MD, Cupp AS, Uzumcu M, Skinner MK (2005) Epigenetic transgenera-
tional actions of endocrine disruptors and male fertility. Science 308, 1466–
1469.
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory?, A. P. Sharples et al.
612
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 Aragao RD, Guzman-Quevedo O, Perez-Garcia G, Manhaes-de-Castro R, Bolanos-
Jimenez F (2014) Maternal protein restriction impairs the transcriptional metabolic
flexibility of skeletal muscle in adult rat offspring. Br. J. Nutr., 112, 328–337.
Bakkar N, Wang J, Ladner KJ, Wang H, Dahlman JM, Carathers M, Acharyya S,
Rudnicki MA, Hollenbach AD, Guttridge DC (2008) IKK/NF-kappaB regulates
skeletal myogenesis via a signaling switch to inhibit differentiation and promote
mitochondrial biogenesis. J. Cell Biol. 180, 787–802.
Bannister AJ, Kouzarides T (2011) Regulation of chromatin by histone modifica-
tions. Cell Res. 21, 381–395.
Barres R, Osler ME, Yan J, Rune A, Fritz T, Caidahl K, Krook A, Zierath JR (2009)
Non-CpG methylation of the PGC-1alpha promoter through DNMT3B controls
mitochondrial density. Cell Metab. 10, 189–198.
Barres R, Yan J, Egan B, Treebak JT, Rasmussen M, Fritz T, Caidahl K, Krook A,
O’Gorman DJ, Zierath JR (2012) Acute exercise remodels promoter methylation
in human skeletal muscle. Cell Metab. 15, 405–411.
Beccafico S, Riuzzi F, Puglielli C, Mancinelli R, Fulle S, Sorci G, Donato R (2010)
Human muscle satellite cells show age-related differential expression of S100B
protein and RAGE. Age (Dordr), 33, 523–541.
Beermann DH, Cassens RG, Hausman GJ (1978) A second look at fiber type
differentiation in porcine skeletal muscle. J. Anim. Sci. 46, 125–132.
Bhutani N, Burns DM, Blau Helen M (2011) DNA demethylation dynamics. Cell
146, 866–872.
Bigot A, Jacquemin V, Debacq-Chainiaux F, Butler-Browne GS, Toussaint O, Furling
D, Mouly V (2008) Replicative aging down-regulates the myogenic regulatory
factors in human myoblasts. Biol. Cell 100, 189–199.
Bigot A, Duddy WJ, Ouandaogo ZG, Negroni E, Mariot V, Ghimbovschi S, Harmon
B, Wielgosik A, Loiseau C, Devaney J, Dumonceaux J, Butler-Browne G, Mouly V,
Duguez S (2015) Age-associated methylation suppresses SPRY1, leading to a
failure of re-quiescence and loss of the reserve stem cell pool in elderly muscle.
Cell Rep. 13, 1172–1182.
Blesson CS, Sathishkumar K, Chinnathambi V, Yallampalli C (2014) Gestational
protein restriction impairs insulin-regulated glucose transport mechanisms in
gastrocnemius muscles of adult male offspring. Endocrinology 155, 3036–3046.
Bogdanovic O, Veenstra GJ (2009) DNA methylation and methyl-CpG binding
proteins:
developmental
requirements
and
function.
Chromosoma
118,
549–565.
Bowerman B (2005) Cell biology. Oxidative stress and cancer: a beta-catenin
convergence. Science 308, 1119–1120.
Brameld JM, Mostyn A, Dandrea J, Stephenson TJ, Dawson JM, Buttery PJ,
Symonds ME (2000) Maternal nutrition alters the expression of insulin-like
growth factors in fetal sheep liver and skeletal muscle. J. Endocrinol. 167, 429–
437.
Brown LD, Thorn SR, O’Meara MC, Lavezzi JR, Rozance PJ (2014) A physiological
increase in insulin suppresses muscle-specific ubiquitin ligase gene activation in
fetal sheep with sustained hypoglycemia. Physiol. Rep. 2, e12045.
Brunet A, Sweeney LB, Sturgill JF, Chua KF, Greer PL, Lin Y, Tran H, Ross SE,
Mostoslavsky R, Cohen HY (2004) Stress-dependent regulation of FOXO
transcription factors by the SIRT1 deacetylase. Science 303, 2011–2015.
Bruunsgaard H, Pedersen BK (2003) Age-related inflammatory cytokines and
disease. Immunol. Allergy Clin. North Am. 23, 15–39.
Bruunsgaard H, Andersen-Ranberg K, Hjelmborg JB, Pedersen BK, Jeune B (2003a)
Elevated levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha and mortality in centenarians. Am.
J. Med. 115, 278–283.
Bruunsgaard H, Ladelund S, Pedersen AN, Schroll M, Jorgensen T, Pedersen BK
(2003b) Predicting death from tumour necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6 in
80-year-old people. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 132, 24–31.
Bruusgaard JC, Johansen IB, Egner IM, Rana ZA, Gundersen K (2010) Myonuclei
acquired by overload exercise precede hypertrophy and are not lost on
detraining. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 15111–15116.
Budge H, Dandrea J, Mostyn A, Evens Y, Watkins R, Sullivan C, Ingleton P,
Stephenson T, Symonds ME (2003) Differential effects of fetal number and
maternal
nutrition
in
late
gestation
on
prolactin
receptor
abundance
and adipose tissue development in the neonatal lamb. Pediatr. Res. 53,
302–308.
Campos EI, Stafford JM, Reinberg D (2014) Epigenetic inheritance: histone
bookmarks across generations. Trends Cell Biol. 24, 664–674.
Carlson ME, Conboy IM (2007) Loss of stem cell regenerative capacity within aged
niches. Aging Cell 6, 371–382.
Charge SB, Brack AS, Hughes SM (2002) Aging-related satellite cell differentiation
defect occurs prematurely after Ski-induced muscle hypertrophy. Am. J. Physiol.
Cell Physiol. 283, C1228–C1241.
Chen Q, Yan M, Cao Z, Li X, Zhang Y, Shi J, Feng GH, Peng H, Zhang X, Zhang Y,
Qian J, Duan E, Zhai Q, Zhou Q (2016) Sperm tsRNAs contribute to
intergenerational inheritance of an acquired metabolic disorder. Science 351,
397–400.
Claycombe KJ, Roemmich JN, Johnson L, Vomhof-DeKrey EE, Johnson WT (2015)
Skeletal muscle Sirt3 expression and mitochondrial respiration are regulated by a
prenatal low-protein diet. J. Nutr. Biochem. 26, 184–189.
Confortim HD, Jeronimo LC, Centenaro LA, Felipe PP, Brancalhao RM, Michelin
MS, Torrejais MM (2015) Effects of aging and maternal protein restriction on the
muscle fibers morphology and neuromuscular junctions of rats after nutritional
recovery. Micron (Oxford, England: 1993) 71, 7–13.
Corbu A, Scaramozza A, Badiali-DeGiorgi L, Tarantino L, Papa V, Rinaldi R,
D’Alessandro R, Zavatta M, Laus M, Lattanzi G, Cenacchi G (2010) Satellite cell
characterization from aging human muscle. Neurol. Res. 32, 63–72.
Cossu G, Borello U (1999) Wnt signaling and the activation of myogenesis in
mammals. EMBO J. 18, 6867–6872.
Costello PM, Rowlerson A, Astaman NA, Anthony FE, Sayer AA, Cooper C, Hanson
MA, Green LR (2008) Peri-implantation and late gestation maternal undernu-
trition differentially affect fetal sheep skeletal muscle development. J. Physiol.
586, 2371–2379.
Costello PM, Hollis LJ, Cripps RL, Bearpark N, Patel HP, Sayer AA, Cooper C,
Hanson MA, Ozanne SE, Green LR (2013) Lower maternal body condition during
pregnancy affects skeletal muscle structure and glut-4 protein levels but not
glucose tolerance in mature adult sheep. Reprod. Sci. (Thousand Oaks, Calif.)
20, 1144–1155.
Deng HZ, Deng H, Cen CQ, Chen KY, Du ML (2014) Post-receptor crosstalk
between growth hormone and insulin signal in rats born small for gestational
age with catch-up growth. PLoS One 9, e100459.
Desclee de Maredsous C, Oozeer R, Barbillon P, Mary-Huard T, Delteil C, Blachier F
(2016). High-protein exposure during gestation or lactation or after weaning has
a period-specific signature on rat pup weight, adiposity, food intake, and
glucose homeostasis up to 6 weeks of age. J Nutr 146, 21–29.
Dilworth FJ, Blais A (2011) Epigenetic regulation of satellite cell activation during
muscle regeneration. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2, 18.
Donkin I, Versteyhe S, Ingerslev LR, Qian K, Mechta M, Nordkap L, Mortensen B,
Appel EV, Jorgensen N, Kristiansen VB, Hansen T, Workman CT, Zierath JR,
Barres R (2016) Obesity and bariatric surgery drive epigenetic variation of
spermatozoa in humans. Cell Metab. 23, 369–378.
Draeger A, Weeds AG, Fitzsimons RB (1987) Primary, secondary and tertiary
myotubes in developing skeletal muscle: a new approach to the analysis of
human myogenesis. J. Neurol. Sci. 81, 19–43.
Dwyer CM, Stickland NC (1994) Supplementation of a restricted maternal diet with
protein or carbohydrate alone prevents a reduction in fetal muscle fibre number
in the guinea-pig. Br. J. Nutr. 72, 173–180.
Dwyer CM, Madgwick AJ, Ward SS, Stickland NC (1995) Effect of maternal
undernutrition in early gestation on the development of fetal myofibres in the
guinea-pig. Reprod. Fertil. Dev. 7, 1285–1292.
Egner IM, Bruusgaard JC, Eftestol E, Gundersen K (2013) A cellular memory
mechanism aids overload hypertrophy in muscle long after an episodic exposure
to anabolic steroids. J. Physiol. 591, 6221–6230.
Elahi MM, Cagampang FR, Mukhtar D, Anthony FW, Ohri SK, Hanson MA (2009)
Long-term maternal high-fat feeding from weaning through pregnancy and
lactation predisposes offspring to hypertension, raised plasma lipids and fatty
liver in mice. Br. J. Nutr. 102, 514–519.
Fahey AJ, Brameld JM, Parr T, Buttery PJ (2005) The effect of maternal
undernutrition before muscle differentiation on the muscle fiber development
of the newborn lamb. J. Anim. Sci. 83, 2564–2571.
Fainberg HP, Almond KL, Li D, Rauch C, Bikker P, Symonds ME, Mostyn A (2014)
Impact of maternal dietary fat supplementation during gestation upon skeletal
muscle in neonatal pigs. BMC Physiol. 14, 6.
Ford SP, Hess BW, Schwope MM, Nijland MJ, Gilbert JS, Vonnahme KA, Means WJ,
Han H, Nathanielsz PW (2007) Maternal undernutrition during early to mid-
gestation in the ewe results in altered growth, adiposity, and glucose tolerance
in male offspring. J. Anim. Sci. 85, 1285–1294.
Foulstone EJ, Savage PB, Crown AL, Holly JM, Stewart CE (2003) Adaptations of
the IGF system during malignancy: human skeletal muscle versus the systemic
environment. Horm. Metab. Res. 35, 667–674.
Fujimaki S, Hidaka R, Asashima M, Takemasa T, Kuwabara T (2014) Wnt protein-
mediated satellite cell conversion in adult and aged mice following voluntary
wheel running. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 7399–7412.
Gale CR, Martyn CN, Cooper C, Sayer AA (2007) Grip strength, body composition,
and mortality. Int. J. Epidemiol. 36, 228–235.
Gapp K, Jawaid A, Sarkies P, Bohacek J, Pelczar P, Prados J, Farinelli L, Miska E,
Mansuy IM (2014) Implication of sperm RNAs in transgenerational inheritance of
the effects of early trauma in mice. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 667–669.
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory?, A. P. Sharples et al.
613
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 Gardner DS, Tingey K, Van Bon BW, Ozanne SE, Wilson V, Dandrea J, Keisler DH,
Stephenson T, Symonds ME (2005) Programming of glucose-insulin metabolism
in adult sheep after maternal undernutrition. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr.
Comp. Physiol. 289, R947–R954.
Giannakou ME, Goss M, Junger MA, Hafen E, Leevers SJ, Partridge L (2004) Long-
lived Drosophila with overexpressed dFOXO in adult fat body. Science 305, 361.
Gluckman PD, Lillycrop KA, Vickers MH, Pleasants AB, Phillips ES, Beedle AS,
Burdge GC, Hanson MA (2007) Metabolic plasticity during mammalian
development is directionally dependent on early nutritional status. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 104, 12796–12800.
Goto S, Kawakami K, Naito H, Katamoto S, Radak Z (2015) Epigenetic Modulation
of Gene Expression by Exercise. In Nutrition, Exercise and Epigenetics:
Ageing Interventions. (Yu BP, ed.). New York, USA: Springer International
Publishing, pp. 85–100.
Grandjean V, Fourre S, De Abreu DA, Derieppe MA, Remy JJ, Rassoulzadegan M
(2015) RNA-mediated paternal heredity of diet-induced obesity and metabolic
disorders. Sci. Rep. 5, 18193.
Green CJ, Bunprajun T, Pedersen BK, Scheele C (2013) Physical activity is
associated with retained muscle metabolism in human myotubes challenged
with palmitate. J. Physiol. 591, 4621–4635.
Greer EL, Brunet A (2005) FOXO transcription factors at the interface between
longevity and tumor suppression. Oncogene 24, 7410–7425.
Greiwe JS, Cheng B, Rubin DC, Yarasheski KE, Semenkovich CF (2001) Resistance
exercise decreases skeletal muscle tumor necrosis factor alpha in frail elderly
humans. FASEB J. 15, 475–482.
Gundersen K (2016) Muscle memory and a new cellular model for muscle atrophy
and hypertrophy. J. Exp. Biol. 219, 235–242.
Guzman-Quevedo O, Da Silva Aragao R, Perez Garcia G, Matos RJ, de Sa Braga
Oliveira A, Manhaes de Castro R, Bolanos-Jimenez F (2013) Impaired hypotha-
lamic mTOR activation in the adult rat offspring born to mothers fed a low-
protein diet. PLoS One 8, e74990.
Hansen KH, Bracken AP, Pasini D, Dietrich N, Gehani SS, Monrad A, Rappsilber J,
Lerdrup M, Helin K (2008) A model for transmission of the H3K27me3
epigenetic mark. Nat. Cell Biol. 10, 1291–1300.
Henwood TR, Taaffe DR (2008) Detraining and retraining in older adults following
long-term muscle power or muscle strength specific training. J. Gerontol. A Biol.
Sci. Med. Sci. 63, 751–758.
Hidestrand M, Richards-Malcolm S, Gurley CM, Nolen G, Grimes B, Waterstrat A,
Zant GV, Peterson CA (2008) Sca-1-expressing nonmyogenic cells contribute to
fibrosis in aged skeletal muscle. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 63, 566–579.
van der Horst A, Burgering BM (2007) Stressing the role of FoxO proteins in
lifespan and disease. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8, 440–450.
Ito S, D’Alessio AC, Taranova OV, Hong K, Sowers LC, Zhang Y (2010) Role of Tet
proteins in 5mC to 5hmC conversion, ES-cell self-renewal and inner cell mass
specification. Nature 466, 1129–1133.
Jackman RW, Kandarian SC (2004) The molecular basis of skeletal muscle atrophy.
Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 287, C834–C843.
Jackson MJ, McArdle A (2011) Age-related changes in skeletal muscle reactive
oxygen species generation and adaptive responses to reactive oxygen species. J.
Physiol. 589, 2139–2145.
Jacobsen SC, Brons C, Bork-Jensen J, Ribel-Madsen R, Yang B, Lara E, Hall E,
Calvanese V, Nilsson E, Jorgensen SW, Mandrup S, Ling C, Fernandez AF, Fraga
MF, Poulsen P, Vaag A (2012) Effects of short-term high-fat overfeeding on
genome-wide DNA methylation in the skeletal muscle of healthy young men.
Diabetologia 55, 3341–3349.
Kandalla PK, Goldspink G, Butler-Browne G, Mouly V (2011) Mechano Growth
Factor E peptide (MGF-E), derived from an isoform of IGF-1, activates human
muscle progenitor cells and induces an increase in their fusion potential at
different ages. Mech. Ageing Dev. 132, 154–162.
Khan IY, Dekou V, Douglas G, Jensen R, Hanson MA, Poston L, Taylor PD (2005)
A high-fat diet during rat pregnancy or suckling induces cardiovascular
dysfunction in adult offspring. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol.
288, R127–R133.
Krssak M, Falk Petersen K, Dresner A, DiPietro L, Vogel SM, Rothman DL, Roden M,
Shulman GI (1999) Intramyocellular lipid concentrations are correlated with
insulin sensitivity in humans: a 1H NMR spectroscopy study. Diabetologia 42,
113–116.
Kruse M, Keyhani-Nejad F, Isken F, Nitz B, Kretschmer A, Reischl E, de Las Heras
Gala T, Osterhoff MA, Grallert H, Pfeiffer AF (2015) A high fat diet during mouse
pregnancy and lactation targets GIP-regulated metabolic pathways in adult male
offspring. Diabetes, 65, 574–584.
Laker RC, Ryall JG (2016) DNA methylation in skeletal muscle stem cell
specification, proliferation, and differentiation. Stem Cells Int. 2016, 9.
Laker RC, Lillard TS, Okutsu M, Zhang M, Hoehn KL, Connelly JJ, Yan Z (2014)
Exercise prevents maternal high-fat diet-induced hypermethylation of the Pgc-
1alpha gene and age-dependent metabolic dysfunction in the offspring.
Diabetes 63, 1605–1611.
Lancioni H, Lucentini L, Palomba A, Fulle S, Micheli MR, Panara F (2007) Muscle
actin isoforms are differentially expressed in human satellite cells isolated from
donors of different ages. Cell Biol. Int. 31, 180–185.
Lane SC, Camera DM, Lassiter DG, Areta JL, Bird SR, Yeo WK, Jeacocke NA, Krook
A, Zierath JR, Burke LM, Hawley JA (2015) Effects of sleeping with reduced
carbohydrate availability on acute training responses. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985)
119, 643–655.
Latouche C, Heywood SE, Henry SL, Ziemann M, Lazarus R, El-Osta A, Armitage
JA, Kingwell BA (2014) Maternal overnutrition programs changes in the
expression of skeletal muscle genes that are associated with insulin resistance
and defects of oxidative phosphorylation in adult male rat offspring. J. Nutr. 144,
237–244.
Lau MM, Stewart CE, Liu Z, Bhatt H, Rotwein P, Stewart CL (1994) Loss of the
imprinted IGF2/cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor results in
fetal overgrowth and perinatal lethality. Genes Dev. 8, 2953–2963.
Laukkanen P, Heikkinen E, Kauppinen M (1995) Muscle strength and mobility as
predictors of survival in 75–84-year-old people. Age Ageing 24, 468–473.
Lees SJ, Rathbone CR, Booth FW (2006) Age-associated decrease in muscle
precursor cell differentiation. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 290, C609–C615.
Leger B, Derave W, De Bock K, Hespel P, Russell AP (2008) Human sarcopenia
reveals an increase in SOCS-3 and myostatin and a reduced efficiency of Akt
phosphorylation. Rejuvenation Res. 11, 163–175B.
Li H, Malhotra S, Kumar A (2008) Nuclear factor-kappa B signaling in skeletal
muscle atrophy. J. Mol. Med. (Berlin, Germany) 86, 1113–1126.
Liebers R, Rassoulzadegan M, Lyko F (2014) Epigenetic regulation by heritable
RNA. PLoS Genet. 10, e1004296.
Liu X, Pan S, Li X, Sun Q, Yang X, Zhao R (2015) Maternal low-protein diet affects
myostatin signaling and protein synthesis in skeletal muscle of offspring piglets
at weaning stage. Eur. J. Nutr. 54, 971–979.
Lochmann TL, Thomas RR, Bennett JP Jr, Taylor SM (2015) Epigenetic modifications
of the PGC-1alpha promoter during exercise induced expression in mice. PLoS
One 10, e0129647.
Lorenzon P, Bandi E, de Guarrini F, Pietrangelo T, Schafer R, Zweyer M, Wernig A,
Ruzzier F (2004) Ageing affects the differentiation potential of human
myoblasts. Exp. Gerontol. 39, 1545–1554.
Mallinson JE, Sculley DV, Craigon J, Plant R, Langley-Evans SC, Brameld JM (2007)
Fetal exposure to a maternal low-protein diet during mid-gestation results in
muscle-specific effects on fibre type composition in young rats. Br. J. Nutr. 98,
292–299.
Maltin CA, Delday MI, Sinclair KD, Steven J, Sneddon AA (2001) Impact of
manipulations of myogenesis in utero on the performance of adult skeletal
muscle. Reproduction (Cambridge, England) 122, 359–374.
Mann CJ, Perdiguero E, Kharraz Y, Aguilar S, Pessina P, Serrano AL, Munoz-
Canoves P (2011) Aberrant repair and fibrosis development in skeletal muscle.
Skelet Muscle 1, 21.
Maples JM, Brault JJ (2015) Lipid exposure elicits differential responses in gene
expression and DNA methylation in primary human skeletal muscle cells from
severely obese women. Physiol. Genomics 47, 139–146.
Marin P, Andersson B, Krotkiewski M, Bjorntorp P (1994) Muscle fiber composition
and capillary density in women and men with NIDDM. Diabetes Care 17, 382–386.
Maunakea AK, Chepelev I, Cui K, Zhao K (2013) Intragenic DNA methylation
modulates alternative splicing by recruiting MeCP2 to promote exon recogni-
tion. Cell Res. 23, 1256–1269.
McGee SL, Fairlie E, Garnham AP, Hargreaves M (2009) Exercise-induced histone
modifications in human skeletal muscle. J. Physiol. 587, 5951–5958.
McLeod KI, Goldrick RB, Whyte HM (1972) The effect of maternal malnutrition on
the progeny in the rat. Studies on growth, body composition and organ
cellularity in first and second generation progeny. Aust. J.Exp. Biol. Med. Sci. 50,
435–446.
McPherron AC, Lee SJ (1997) Double muscling in cattle due to mutations in the
myostatin gene. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 12457–12461.
Merritt EK, Stec MJ, Thalacker-Mercer A, Windham ST, Cross JM, Shelley DP,
Tuggle SC, Kosek DJ, Kim JS, Bamman MM (2013) Heightened muscle
inflammation susceptibility may impair regenerative capacity in aging humans.
J. Appl. Physiol., 115, 937–948.
Morali OG, Jouneau A, McLaughlin KJ, Thiery JP, Larue L (2000) IGF-II promotes
mesoderm formation. Dev. Biol. 227, 133–145.
Ng RK, Gurdon JB (2008) Epigenetic inheritance of cell differentiation status. Cell
Cycle 7, 1173–1177.
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory?, A. P. Sharples et al.
614
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 NICE (2010) Weight management before, during and after pregnancy. In PH27
(TNIfHaCE (NICE), eds). London, UK: The National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE), pp. 1–57.
Nitert MD, Dayeh T, Volkov P, Elgzyri T, Hall E, Nilsson E, Yang BT, Lang S,
Parikh H, Wessman Y, Weishaupt H, Attema J, Abels M, Wierup N, Almgren
P, Jansson PA, Ronn T, Hansson O, Eriksson KF, Groop L, Ling C (2012)
Impact of an exercise intervention on DNA methylation in skeletal muscle
from first-degree relatives of patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 61,
3322–3332.
Ntanasis-Stathopoulos J, Tzanninis J, Philippou A, Koutsilieris M (2013) Epigenetic
regulation on gene expression induced by physical exercise. J. Musculoskelet.
Neuronal Interact. 13, 133–146.
Olsson AH, Ronn T, Ladenvall C, Parikh H, Isomaa B, Groop L, Ling C (2011) Two
common genetic variants near nuclear-encoded OXPHOS genes are associated
with insulin secretion in vivo. Eur. J. Endocrinol. 164, 765–771.
Oxford Dictionary (2015) http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/
epigenetics
Ozanne SE, Jensen CB, Tingey KJ, Storgaard H, Madsbad S, Vaag AA (2005) Low
birthweight is associated with specific changes in muscle insulin-signalling
protein expression. Diabetologia 48, 547–552.
Patel HP, Syddall HE, Martin HJ, Stewart CE, Cooper C, Sayer AA (2010)
Hertfordshire sarcopenia study: design and methods. BMC Geriatr. 10, 43.
Patel H, Syddall HE, Martin HJ, Cooper C, Stewart C, Sayer AA (2011) The
feasibility and acceptability of muscle biopsy in epidemiological studies: findings
from the Hertfordshire Sarcopenia Study (HSS). J. Nutr. Health Aging 15, 10–15.
Patel HP, Jameson KA, Syddall HE, Martin HJ, Stewart CE, Cooper C, Sayer AA
(2012) Developmental influences, muscle morphology, and sarcopenia in
community-dwelling older men. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 67, 82–87.
Patel HP, Al-Shanti N, Davies LC, Barton SJ, Grounds MD, Tellam RL, Stewart CE,
Cooper C, Sayer AA (2014) Lean mass, muscle strength and gene expression in
community dwelling older men: findings from the Hertfordshire Sarcopenia
Study (HSS). Calcif. Tissue Int. 95, 308–316.
Petruk S, Sedkov Y, Johnston DM, Hodgson JW, Black KL, Kovermann SK, Beck S,
Canaani E, Brock HW, Mazo A (2012) TrxG and PcG proteins but not methylated
histones remain associated with DNA through replication. Cell 150, 922–933.
Phillips DI, Caddy S, Ilic V, Fielding BA, Frayn KN, Borthwick AC, Taylor R (1996)
Intramuscular triglyceride and muscle insulin sensitivity: evidence for a relation-
ship in nondiabetic subjects. Metabolism 45, 947–950.
Pietrangelo T, Puglielli C, Mancinelli R, Beccafico S, Fano G, Fulle S (2009)
Molecular basis of the myogenic profile of aged human skeletal muscle satellite
cells during differentiation. Exp. Gerontol. 44, 523–531.
Quigley SP, Kleemann DO, Kakar MA, Owens JA, Nattrass GS, Maddocks S, Walker
SK (2005) Myogenesis in sheep is altered by maternal feed intake during the
peri-conception period. Anim. Reprod. Sci. 87, 241–251.
Rantanen T (2003) Muscle strength, disability and mortality. Scand. J. Med. Sci.
Sports 13, 3–8.
Rantanen T, Guralnik JM, Foley D, Masaki K, Leveille S, Curb JD, White L (1999)
Midlife hand grip strength as a predictor of old age disability. JAMA 281, 558–
560.
Rantanen T, Avlund K, Suominen H, Schroll M, Frandin K, Pertti E (2002) Muscle
strength as a predictor of onset of ADL dependence in people aged 75 years.
Aging Clin. Exp. Res. 14, 10–15.
Ravelli AC, van der Meulen JH, Michels RP, Osmond C, Barker DJ, Hales CN, Bleker
OP (1998) Glucose tolerance in adults after prenatal exposure to famine. Lancet
351, 173–177.
Ravelli AC, van Der Meulen JH, Osmond C, Barker DJ, Bleker OP (1999) Obesity at
the age of 50 y in men and women exposed to famine prenatally. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr. 70, 811–816.
Raychaudhuri N, Thamotharan S, Srinivasan M, Mahmood S, Patel MS, Devaskar
SU (2014) Postnatal exposure to a high-carbohydrate diet interferes epigenet-
ically with thyroid hormone receptor induction of the adult male rat skeletal
muscle glucose transporter isoform 4 expression. J. Nutr. Biochem. 25, 1066–
1076.
de Rooij SR, Roseboom TJ (2013) The developmental origins of ageing: study
protocol for the Dutch famine birth cohort study on ageing. BMJ Open. 3,
e003167.
Roseboom TJ, van der Meulen JH, Osmond C, Barker DJ, Ravelli AC, Bleker OP
(2000a) Plasma lipid profiles in adults after prenatal exposure to the Dutch
famine. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 72, 1101–1106.
Roseboom TJ, van der Meulen JH, Osmond C, Barker DJ, Ravelli AC, Schroeder-
Tanka JM, van Montfrans GA, Michels RP, Bleker OP (2000b) Coronary heart
disease after prenatal exposure to the Dutch famine, 1944–45. Heart (British
Cardiac Society)84, 595–598.
Sabourin LA, Rudnicki MA (2000) The molecular regulation of myogenesis. Clin.
Genet. 57, 16–25.
Saffery R (2014) Epigenetic change as the major mediator of fetal programming in
humans: are we there yet? Ann. Nutr. Metab. 64, 203–207.
Saini A, Al-Shanti N, Stewart CE (2006) Waste management – cytokines, growth
factors and cachexia. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 17, 475–486.
Saini A, Al-Shanti N, Sharples AP, Stewart CE (2012) Sirtuin 1 regulates skeletal
myoblast survival and enhances differentiation in the presence of resveratrol.
Exp. Physiol. 97, 400–418.
Samuelsson AM, Matthews PA, Argenton M, Christie MR, McConnell JM,
Jansen EH, Piersma AH, Ozanne SE, Twinn DF, Remacle C, Rowlerson A,
Poston L, Taylor PD (2008) Diet-induced obesity in female mice leads to
offspring hyperphagia, adiposity, hypertension, and insulin resistance: a
novel murine model of developmental programming. Hypertension 51, 383–
392.
Sandri M, Sandri C, Gilbert A, Skurk C, Calabria E, Picard A, Walsh K, Schiaffino S,
Lecker SH, Goldberg AL (2004) Foxo transcription factors induce the atrophy-
related ubiquitin ligase atrogin-1 and cause skeletal muscle atrophy. Cell 117,
399–412.
Sati S, Tanwar VS, Kumar KA, Patowary A, Jain V, Ghosh S, Ahmad S, Singh M,
Reddy SU, Chandak GR, Raghunath M, Sivasubbu S, Chakraborty K, Scaria V,
Sengupta S (2012) High resolution methylome map of rat indicates role of
intragenic DNA methylation in identification of coding region. PLoS One 7,
e31621.
Sayer AA, Cooper C (2005) Fetal programming of body composition and
musculoskeletal development. Early Hum. Dev. 81, 735–744.
Sayer AA, Syddall HE, Dennison EM, Gilbody HJ, Duggleby SL, Cooper C, Barker
DJ, Phillips DI (2004a) Birth weight, weight at 1 y of age, and body composition
in older men: findings from the Hertfordshire Cohort Study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
80, 199–203.
Sayer AA, Syddall HE, Gilbody HJ, Dennison EM, Cooper C (2004b) Does
sarcopenia originate in early life? Findings from the Hertfordshire cohort study. J.
Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 59, M930–M934.
Sayer AA, Dennison EM, Syddall HE, Jameson K, Martin HJ, Cooper C (2008) The
developmental origins of sarcopenia: using peripheral quantitative computed
tomography to assess muscle size in older people. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med.
Sci. 63, 835–840.
Schmidl C, Klug M, Boeld TJ, Andreesen R, Hoffmann P, Edinger M, Rehli M (2009)
Lineage-specific DNA methylation in T cells correlates with histone methylation
and enhancer activity. Genome Res. 19, 1165–1174.
Schuettengruber B, Martinez AM, Iovino N, Cavalli G (2011) Trithorax group
proteins: switching genes on and keeping them active. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
12, 799–814.
Segales J, Perdiguero E, Munoz-Canoves P (2015) Epigenetic control of adult
skeletal muscle stem cell functions. FEBS J. 282, 1571–1588.
Serrano AL, Munoz-Canoves P (2010) Regulation and dysregulation of fibrosis in
skeletal muscle. Exp. Cell Res. 316, 3050–3058.
Sharma U, Conine CC, Shea JM, Boskovic A, Derr AG, Bing XY, Belleannee C,
Kucukural A, Serra RW, Sun F, Song L, Carone BR, Ricci EP, Li XZ, Fauquier L,
Moore MJ, Sullivan R, Mello CC, Garber M, Rando OJ (2016) Biogenesis and
function of tRNA fragments during sperm maturation and fertilization in
mammals. Science 351, 391–396.
Sharples AP, Stewart CE (2011) Myoblast models of skeletal muscle hypertrophy
and atrophy. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 14, 230–236.
Sharples AP, Al-Shanti N, Stewart CE (2010) C2 and C2C12 murine skeletal
myoblast models of atrophic and hypertrophic potential: relevance to disease
and ageing? J. Cell. Physiol. 225, 240–250.
Sharples AP, Al-Shanti N, Lewis MP, Stewart CE (2011) Reduction of myoblast
differentiation following multiple population doublings in mouse C2 C12 cells: a
model to investigate ageing? J. Cell. Biochem. 112, 3773–3785.
Sharples AP, Player DJ, Martin NR, Mudera V, Stewart CE, Lewis MP (2012)
Modelling in vivo skeletal muscle ageing in vitro using three-dimensional
bioengineered constructs. Aging Cell 11, 986–995.
Sharples A, Polydorou I, Hughes D, Owens D, Hughes T, Stewart C (2015a) Skeletal
muscle cells possess a ‘memory’ of acute early life TNF-a exposure: role of
epigenetic adaptation. Biogerontology DOI: 10.1007/s10522-015-9604-x Epub
Ahead of Print, 1–15.
Sharples AP, Hughes DC, Deane CS, Saini A, Selman C, Stewart CE (2015b)
Longevity and skeletal muscle mass: the role of IGF signalling, the sirtuins,
dietary restriction and protein intake. Aging Cell 14, 511–523.
Shefer G, Van de Mark DP, Richardson JB, Yablonka-Reuveni Z (2006) Satellite-cell
pool size does matter: defining the myogenic potency of aging skeletal muscle.
Dev. Biol. 294, 55–66.
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory?, A. P. Sharples et al.
615
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 Shelley P, Martin-Gronert MS, Rowlerson A, Poston L, Heales SJ, Hargreaves IP,
McConnell JM, Ozanne SE, Fernandez-Twinn DS (2009) Altered skeletal muscle
insulin signaling and mitochondrial complex II-III linked activity in adult offspring
of obese mice. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 297, R675–R681.
Shukla S, Kavak E, Gregory M, Imashimizu M, Shutinoski B, Kashlev M,
Oberdoerffer P, Sandberg R, Oberdoerffer S (2011) CTCF-promoted RNA
polymerase II pausing links DNA methylation to splicing. Nature 479, 74–79.
Smith JAH, Collins M, Grobler LA, Magee CJ, Ojuka EO (2007) Exercise and CaMK
activation both increase the binding of MEF2A to the Glut4 promoter in skeletal
muscle in vivo. Am. J. Physiol. – Endocrinol. Metabol. 292, E413–E420.
Smith JAH, Kohn TA, Chetty AK, Ojuka EO (2008) CaMK activation during exercise
is required for histone hyperacetylation and MEF2A binding at the MEF2 site on
the Glut4 gene. Am. J. Physiol. – Endocrinol. Metabol. 295, E698–E704.
Sousa-Victor P, Gutarra S, Garcia-Prat L, Rodriguez-Ubreva J, Ortet L, Ruiz-Bonilla
V, Jardi M, Ballestar E, Gonzalez S, Serrano AL, Perdiguero E, Munoz-Canoves P
(2014) Geriatric muscle stem cells switch reversible quiescence into senescence.
Nature 506, 316–321.
Srinivasan M, Katewa SD, Palaniyappan A, Pandya JD, Patel MS (2006) Maternal
high-fat diet consumption results in fetal malprogramming predisposing to the
onset of metabolic syndrome-like phenotype in adulthood. Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab. 291, E792–E799.
Staron RS, Leonardi MJ, Karapondo DL, Malicky ES, Falkel JE, Hagerman FC, Hikida
RS (1991) Strength and skeletal muscle adaptations in heavy-resistance-trained
women after detraining and retraining. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 70, 631–640.
Stewart CE, James PL, Fant ME, Rotwein P (1996) Overexpression of insulin-like
growth factor-II induces accelerated myoblast differentiation. J. Cell. Physiol.
169, 23–32.
Stewart CE, Newcomb PV, Holly JM (2004) Multifaceted roles of TNF-alpha in
myoblast destruction: a multitude of signal transduction pathways. J. Cell.
Physiol. 198, 237–247.
Taaffe DR, Marcus R (1997) Dynamic muscle strength alterations to detraining and
retraining in elderly men. Clin. Physiol. 17, 311–324.
Taaffe DR, Henwood TR, Nalls MA, Walker DG, Lang TF, Harris TB (2009)
Alterations in muscle attenuation following detraining and retraining in
resistance-trained older adults. Gerontology 55, 217–223.
Taguchi T, Kishikawa H, Motoshima H, Sakai K, Nishiyama T, Yoshizato K,
Shirakami A, Toyonaga T, Shirontani T, Araki E, Shichiri M (2000) Involvement of
bradykinin in acute exercise-induced increase of glucose uptake and GLUT-4
translocation in skeletal muscle: studies in normal and diabetic humans and rats.
Metabolism 49, 920–930.
Tahiliani M, Koh KP, Shen Y, Pastor WA, Bandukwala H, Brudno Y, Agarwal S, Iyer
LM, Liu DR, Aravind L, Rao A (2009) Conversion of 5-methylcytosine to 5-
hydroxymethylcytosine in mammalian DNA by MLL partner TET1. Science 324,
930–935.
Tanner CJ, Barakat HA, Dohm GL, Pories WJ, MacDonald KG, Cunningham PR,
Swanson MS, Houmard JA (2002) Muscle fiber type is associated with obesity
and weight loss. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 282, E1191–E1196.
Tong JF, Yan X, Zhu MJ, Ford SP, Nathanielsz PW, Du M (2009) Maternal obesity
downregulates myogenesis and beta-catenin signaling in fetal skeletal muscle.
Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 296, E917–E924.
Tornatore L, Thotakura AK, Bennett J, Moretti M, Franzoso G (2012) The nuclear
factor kappa B signaling pathway: integrating metabolism with inflammation.
Trends Cell Biol. 22, 557–566.
Trasler J, Deng L, Melnyk S, Pogribny I, Hiou-Tim F, Sibani S, Oakes C, Li E, James SJ,
Rozen R (2003) Impact of Dnmt1 deficiency, with and without low folate diets, on
tumor numbers and DNA methylation in Min mice. Carcinogenesis 24, 39–45.
Troy A, Cadwallader AB, Fedorov Y, Tyner K, Tanaka KK, Olwin BB (2012)
Coordination of satellite cell activation and self-renewal by Par-complex-
dependent asymmetric activation of p38alpha/beta MAPK. Cell Stem Cell 11,
541–553.
Valencia AP, Spangenburg EE (2013) Remembering those ‘lazy’ days–imprinting
memory in our satellite cells. J. Physiol. 591, 4371.
Wang F, Nguyen M, Qin F, Tong Q (2007) SIRT2 deacetylates FOXO3a in response
to oxidative stress and caloric restriction. Aging Cell 6, 505–514.
Wang Z, Zang C, Cui K, Schones DE, Barski A, Peng W, Zhao K (2009) Genome-
wide mapping of HATs and HDACs reveals distinct functions in active and
inactive genes. Cell 138, 1019–1031.
Wang H, Wilson GJ, Zhou D, Lezmi S, Chen X, Layman DK, Pan YX (2015)
Induction of autophagy through the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4)-
dependent amino acid response pathway in maternal skeletal muscle may
function as the molecular memory in response to gestational protein restriction
to alert offspring to maternal nutrition. Br. J. Nutr. 114, 519–532.
Ward SS, Stickland NC (1991) Why are slow and fast muscles differentially affected
during prenatal undernutrition? Muscle Nerve 14, 259–267.
Weber M, Hellmann I, Stadler MB, Ramos L, Paabo S, Rebhan M, Schubeler D
(2007) Distribution, silencing potential and evolutionary impact of promoter
DNA methylation in the human genome. Nat. Genet. 39, 457–466.
Wilson SJ, Ross JJ, Harris AJ (1988) A critical period for formation of secondary
myotubes defined by prenatal undernourishment in rats. Development 102,
815–821.
Wilson SJ, McEwan JC, Sheard PW, Harris AJ (1992) Early stages of myogenesis in a
large mammal: formation of successive generations of myotubes in sheep tibialis
cranialis muscle. J. Muscle Res. Cell Motil. 13, 534–550.
Woo M, Isganaitis E, Cerletti M, Fitzpatrick C, Wagers AJ, Jimenez-Chillaron J, Patti
ME (2011) Early life nutrition modulates muscle stem cell number: implications
for muscle mass and repair. Stem Cells Dev. 20, 1763–1769.
Yakubu DP, Mostyn A, Hyatt MA, Kurlak LO, Budge H, Stephenson T, Symonds
ME (2007a) Ontogeny and nutritional programming of mitochondrial proteins
in the ovine kidney, liver and lung. Reproduction (Cambridge, England) 134,
823–830.
Yakubu DP, Mostyn A, Wilson V, Pearce S, Alves-Guerra MC, Pecqueur C, Miroux
B, Budge H, Stephenson T, Symonds ME (2007b) Different effects of maternal
parity, cold exposure and nutrient restriction in late pregnancy on the
abundance of mitochondrial proteins in the kidney, liver and lung of postnatal
sheep. Reproduction (Cambridge, England) 133, 1241–1252.
Yamauchi T, Kamon J, Ito Y, Tsuchida A, Yokomizo T, Kita S, Sugiyama T,
Miyagishi M, Hara K, Tsunoda M, Murakami K, Ohteki T, Uchida S, Takekawa
S, Waki H, Tsuno NH, Shibata Y, Terauchi Y, Froguel P, Tobe K, Koyasu S,
Taira K, Kitamura T, Shimizu T, Nagai R, Kadowaki T (2003) Cloning of
adiponectin receptors that mediate antidiabetic metabolic effects. Nature 423,
762–769.
Yates DT, Clarke DS, Macko AR, Anderson MJ, Shelton LA, Nearing M, Allen RE,
Rhoads RP, Limesand SW (2014) Myoblasts from intrauterine growth-restricted
sheep fetuses exhibit intrinsic deficiencies in proliferation that contribute to
smaller semitendinosus myofibres. J. Physiol., 592, 3113–3125.
Zeng Y, Gu P, Liu K, Huang P (2013) Maternal protein restriction in rats leads to
reduced PGC-1alpha expression via altered DNA methylation in skeletal muscle.
Mol. Med. Rep. 7, 306–312.
Zhu MJ, Ford SP, Nathanielsz PW, Du M (2004) Effect of maternal nutrient
restriction in sheep on the development of fetal skeletal muscle. Biol. Reprod.
71, 1968–1973.
Zhu MJ, Ford SP, Means WJ, Hess BW, Nathanielsz PW, Du M (2006) Maternal
nutrient restriction affects properties of skeletal muscle in offspring. J. Physiol.
575, 241–250.
Zhu MJ, Han B, Tong J, Ma C, Kimzey JM, Underwood KR, Xiao Y, Hess BW, Ford
SP, Nathanielsz PW, Du M (2008) AMP-activated protein kinase signalling
pathways are down regulated and skeletal muscle development impaired in
fetuses of obese, over-nourished sheep. J. Physiol. 586, 2651–2664.
Zwetsloot KA, Childs TE, Gilpin LT, Booth FW (2013) Non-passaged muscle
precursor cells from 32-month old rat skeletal muscle have delayed proliferation
and differentiation. Cell Prolif. 46, 45–57.
Zykovich A, Hubbard A, Flynn JM, Tarnopolsky M, Fraga MF, Kerksick C, Ogborn D,
MacNeil L, Mooney SD, Melov S (2014) Genome-wide DNA methylation changes
with age in disease-free human skeletal muscle. Aging Cell 13, 360–366.
Does skeletal muscle have an ‘epi’-memory?, A. P. Sharples et al.
616
ª 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
