 UCLA
UCLA Previously Published Works
Title
Primary, Adaptive, and Acquired Resistance to Cancer Immunotherapy
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5st231s3
Journal
CELL, 168(4)
ISSN
0092-8674
Authors
Sharma, P
Hu-Lieskovan, S
Wargo, JA
et al.
Publication Date
2017-02-09
DOI
10.1016/j.cell.2017.01.017
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
 Leading Edge
Review
Primary, Adaptive, and Acquired Resistance
to Cancer Immunotherapy
Padmanee Sharma,1,* Siwen Hu-Lieskovan,2 Jennifer A. Wargo,3 and Antoni Ribas2,*
1Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology and Immunology,The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX 77030, USA
2Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of California, Los Angeles and the Jonsson Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
3Department of Melanoma Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA
*Correspondence: padsharma@mdanderson.org (P.S.), aribas@mednet.ucla.edu (A.R.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.01.017
SUMMARY
Cancer immunotherapy can induce long lasting responses in patients with metastatic cancers of a
wide range of histologies. Broadening the clinical applicability of these treatments requires an
improved understanding of the mechanisms limiting cancer immunotherapy. The interactions be-
tween the immune system and cancer cells are continuous, dynamic, and evolving from the initial
establishment of a cancer cell to the development of metastatic disease, which is dependent on im-
mune evasion. As the molecular mechanisms of resistance to immunotherapy are elucidated, action-
able strategies to prevent or treat them may be derived to improve clinical outcomes for patients.
Introduction
Metastatic cancers remain an incurable disease for the great
majority of patients, as the intrinsic genomic instability common
to all cancers facilitates the escape from cytotoxic or targeted
therapies. The recent breakthroughs in the understanding of tu-
mor immune biology and the development of newer generation
of cancer immunotherapies have opened a brand new chapter
in the war against cancer. This change in landscape is based
on the discovery of cancer immune checkpoints and the suc-
cess of checkpoint inhibitors, as well as the advances in tech-
nology to generate genetically modified immune cells (Miller
and Sadelain, 2015). The focus of treatment has shifted from
the tumor itself to the host’s immune system, to mobilize im-
mune cells to recognize and eventually eliminate the cancer
cells. A hallmark of immunotherapy is the durability of re-
sponses, most likely due to the memory of the adaptive immune
system, which translates into long-term survival for a subset of
patients.
Early efforts to harness the immune system in cancer control,
pioneered by Dr. William B. Coley in the 1890s (Coley, 1910),
were overlooked due to the lack of consistency in response
and were soon overwhelmed by the development of more effec-
tive treatments such as radiotherapy and chemotherapy. How-
ever, investigations continued to unravel and elucidate the inter-
actions between the immune system and cancer cells. The
concept of cancer immunosurveillance, which was proposed
by Paul Ehrlich (Ehrlich, 1956) and enriched by Burnet and
Thomas (Burnet, 1971) in the 1950s, stated that the emergence
of malignant cells is a frequent event but is suppressed by the
host’s natural immunity, that cancer develops when this immu-
nity is weakened, and that lymphocytes are responsible for this
process. Finally, the cancer immune-editing concept was eluci-
dated by Schreiber and colleagues in 2002 (Dunn et al., 2002),
recognizing a dual role of the host’s immunity, both as an
extrinsic tumor suppressor and a facilitator of tumor growth
and progression, acting across three sequential phases—elimi-
nation, equilibrium and escape—through constant interactions
between tumor cells, immune cells, and the tumor microenviron-
ment. Importantly, host immune responses and tumor genomics
are tightly related, as illustrated by the notion that neoantigens
arising from genomic mutations may shape immune responses
(Schumacher and Schreiber, 2015); however, these responses
may prove ineffective against a heterogeneous and evolving tu-
mor microenvironment.
The process of T cell activation involves antigen presentation
by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules on
the antigen-presenting cells (APCs) to the corresponding T cell
receptor (TCR) on naive T cells. The interaction of costimulatory
molecules CD28 and B7 is required for full activation, which is
tightly regulated by inhibitory checkpoints to avoid collateral
damage and autoimmunity. The CTLA-4 receptor on activated
effector T cells and regulatory T cells (Tregs) was discovered in
the 1980s (Brunet et al., 1987). Seminal work by James Allison
and colleagues showed that CTLA-4 competes with CD28 for
B7 ligands and inhibits proliferation and IL-2 secretion by
T cells (Krummel and Allison, 1995) and that CTLA-4 blocking an-
tibodies could treat tumors in immune competent animal models
(Leach et al., 1996). Subsequent clinical testing resulted in the
approval of ipilimumab for treatment of advanced melanoma in
2011, the first in class CTLA-4 checkpoint inhibitor approved
by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (Hodi et al.,
2010; Robert et al., 2011). Pooled data from clinical trials of ipili-
mumab confirmed durable clinical responses, depicted by a
plateau in the survival curve beginning around year 3, that lasted
Cell 168, February 9, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Inc.
707
 10 years or more in a subset of approximately 21% of patients
(Schadendorf et al., 2015). In 2015, ipilimumab was also
approved by the FDA as adjuvant therapy for locally advanced
melanoma. Due to enhanced immune responses, possibly dur-
ing early stages of T cell activation, significant immune-related
toxicities have been observed, but most can be managed by sys-
temic steroid therapy.
Another checkpoint receptor expressed by activated T cells,
programed death 1 (PD-1), was cloned in 1992 (Ishida et al.,
1992), and subsequently its ligand PD-L1 was characterized
(Dong et al., 1999; Freeman et al., 2000). PD-L1 expression
can be constitutive or induced in many tumors to evade immune
attack. Since PD-L1 expression can be induced by IFNg, which
is expressed during an active anti-tumor immune response, it
has been referred to as a mechanism of adaptive immune resis-
tance (Table 1). Antibodies blocking the PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibi-
tory axis can unleash activated tumor-reactive T cells and have
been shown in clinical trials to induce durable anti-tumor re-
sponses in increasing numbers of tumor histologies, including
the tumor types that are not traditionally considered immuno-
therapy sensitive (Okazaki et al., 2013; Zou et al., 2016). This
led to the approval of two anti-PD1 antibodies (pembrolizumab
and nivolumab) and one anti-PD-L1 antibody (atezolimumab)
for the treatment of advanced melanoma, non-small-cell lung
cancer, renal cell carcinoma, head and neck squamous carci-
noma, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and bladder cancer. Currently
there are over ten anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1 antibodies in various
stages of clinical testing in many different tumor types. Interest-
ingly, there have been thousands of patients receiving PD-1
blockade therapy thus far, with similar immune related toxicities
as observed for anti-CTLA-4 but with generally lower frequency,
possibly because the PD-1 and PD-L1 checkpoint may act later
in the T cell response, resulting in a more restricted T cell reac-
tivity toward tumor cells, with the majority of patients tolerating
treatment well (Larkin et al., 2015b). Due to the non-overlapping
mechanism of action of anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD1 antibodies
(Das et al., 2015; Gubin et al., 2014), clinical testing of the com-
bination of these two classes of checkpoint inhibitors showed
improved clinical response (up to 60%) in melanoma at the
expense of significantly increased frequency of toxicities (Larkin
et al., 2015a). The combination of CTLA4 and PD-1 and PD-L1
checkpoint blockade has been approved as front line therapy
for advanced melanoma patients and is being tested in other tu-
mor types with different dose levels and intervals of anti-CTLA4
to reduce toxicity.
Cell-based immunotherapy was pioneered by many investiga-
tors, including Alex Fefer, Phil Greenberg, Zelig Eshhar, Steven
Rosenberg, and colleagues in the 1980s, inspired by the correla-
tion of the number of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and
survival in some cancers. This process required TILs to be iso-
lated from the patient’s surgical specimen, expanded in vitro,
and re-infused back to the lymphocyte-depleted patient. In
these studies, sufficient TILs could not be isolated or expanded
from tumors of approximately 50%–60% of patients, which
limited the number of patients who could be treated. For patients
who could be treated with the expanded TILs, the reported
response rate was 50% for melanoma, including 20% complete
responses, and 95% of these complete responders had more
than 5 years of survival (Rosenberg et al., 2011). This approach,
however, requires large surgical samples, experienced aca-
demic centers, and tumors enriched with anti-tumor T cells,
which is a rare event for most tumor types. The recent advance
of gene transfer technologies and T cell engineering has enabled
more versatile approaches, including adoptive cell transfer (ACT)
of the patient’s peripheral T cells that are genetically modified
to target cancer specific antigens, via physiological TCRs or
chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) (Sadelain, 2016; Yang and
Rosenberg, 2016). TCRs are usually cloned from TILs that are
reactive to specific cancer antigens with no or very limited
expression in normal adult tissue but are widely expressed by
cancer cells. Such TCRs recognize tumor antigen presented in
the context of the MHC. Clinical success has been documented
(Yee et al., 2015). The TCR approach allows intracellular antigen
targets but is MHC restricted and can be subject to treatment
failure for tumors that have downregulated their MHC surface
expression. CAR technology was first developed by Eshhar
et al., 1993, who genetically engineered T cells with chimeric
genes, linking single chain antibodies (scFv) targeting tumor
cell surface antigens to intracellular signaling adaptors for
TCR: in the first generation, to the T cell specific activating z
chain of the CD3 complex. Subsequent modification with co-
stimulatory molecules CD28 (second generation) and 4-1BB
(third generation) has enabled the expansion of T cells while re-
taining function upon repeated antigen exposure. CAR T cells do
not require MHC restriction and can be engineered to enhance
T cell function. Recent clinical success with CD19 targeting
CAR to treat CD19+ B cell malignancy has shown great success,
with a remarkable 90% complete remission in a cohort of 30 pa-
tients with relapsed or refractory pediatric acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL), and two thirds of these patients remained in
remission after 6 months (Maude et al., 2014). The biggest chal-
lenge facing the field of ACT is the identification of target tumor
antigens that are not expressed by normal tissues, both to maxi-
mize specificity and efficacy and to minimize toxicity (Fesnak
Table 1. Terminology for Different Resistance Mechanisms to Immunotherapy
Term
Description
primary resistance
A clinical scenario where a cancer does not respond to an immunotherapy strategy. The mechanistic basis of
lack of response to immunotherapy may include adaptive immune resistance.
adaptive immune
resistance
A mechanism of resistance where a cancer is recognized by the immune system but it protects itself by adapting
to the immune attack. Given the evolving nature of the immune/cancer cell interaction, this could clinically manifest
as primary resistance, mixed responses or acquired resistance.
acquired resistance
A clinical scenario in which a cancer initially responded to immunotherapy but after a period of time it relapsed
and progressed.
708
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 et al., 2016). A commonly seen toxicity in ACT therapy is cytokine
release syndrome, which can be life-threatening and requires
prompt management with steroids and IL-6 receptor antibody
(tocilizumab).
Despite the unprecedented durable response rates observed
with cancer immunotherapies, the majority of patients do not
benefit from the treatment (primary resistance), and some
responders relapse after a period of response (acquired resis-
tance). Several common cancer types have shown very low fre-
quency of response (breast, prostate, and colon cancers), and
heterogeneous responses have been seen even between
distinct tumors within the same patient (Figure 1). For the pur-
poses of this review, we have categorized primary, adaptive,
and acquired resistance as described in Table 1, in keeping
with the most typical conceptualization for practicing clinicians.
However, in considering resistance mechanisms to immune-
based therapies, it is important to remember that the immune
response is dynamic and constantly evolving in each patient,
either as a result of the patient’s own environmental and genetic
factors or as a result of treatment interventions, including sur-
gery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and immunotherapy.
Anti-tumor immune responses that are ongoing throughout the
course of a patient’s disease may be affected by many of these
factors, and the establishment of resistance mechanisms rele-
vant to immunotherapeutic failure may pre-date immunotherapy
challenge. Without recourse to detailed immune and tumor
characterization, these resistance mechanisms can be divided,
clinically, into those that prevent a patient from ever responding
to an immunotherapy or those that facilitate relapse after an
initial response. Thus, although resistance to immunotherapies
may manifest at different times, in many cases, similar or over-
lapping mechanisms enable tumor cells to evade anti-tumor im-
mune responses. We discuss known resistance mechanisms
and provide rationale for combination therapies to overcome
resistance.
Primary and Adaptive Resistance to Immunotherapy
Patients who have primary resistance to checkpoint inhibitors
do not respond to the initial therapy. Ongoing studies indicate
that both tumor-cell-intrinsic and tumor-cell-extrinsic factors
contribute to the resistance mechanisms (Table 2). The most
straightforward reason why a tumor would not respond to im-
mune checkpoint therapy or ACT is lack of recognition by
T cells because of absence of tumor antigens (Gubin et al.,
2014). Alternatively, cancer cells may have tumor antigens but
develop mechanisms to avoid presenting them on the surface
restricted by MHC, due to alterations in the antigen-presenting
machinery (such as proteasome subunits or transporters associ-
ated with antigen processing), beta-2-microglobulin (B2M), or
MHC itself (Marincola et al., 2000; Sucker et al., 2014). B2M is
required for HLA class I folding and transport to the cell surface,
and its genetic deficiency leads to lack of CD8 T cell recognition
(Figures 2 and 3).
Tumor-Cell-Intrinsic Factors for Primary and Adaptive
Resistance
Tumor-cell-intrinsic factors that contribute to immunotherapy
resistance include expression or repression of certain genes
and pathways in tumor cells that prevent immune cell infiltration
or function within the tumor microenvironment. These mecha-
nisms may exist at the time of initial presentation, highlighting
primary resistance mechanisms, or these mechanisms may
Figure 1. Clinical Scenarios of Primary, Adaptive, and Acquired
Resistance to Immunotherapy
(A) Patient’s tumor is resistant to immunotherapy with no active immune
response.
(B) Patient’s tumor is resistant to immunotherapy; active anti-tumor immune
response, but turned off by checkpoints or other adaptive resistance mech-
anisms.
(C) Patient has an initial response to immunotherapy but later progressed;
heterogeneous population and selection of resistant clones that were present
before treatment started.
(D) Patient has an initial response to immunotherapy but later progressed; true
acquired resistance during the immunotherapy.
Table 2. Mechanisms of Primary and Adaptive Resistance to
Immunotherapy
Mechanism
Examples
tumor cell
intrinsic
absence of antigenic
proteins
low mutational burden
lack of viral antigens
lack of cancer-testis antigens
overlapping surface proteins
absence of antigen
presentation
deletion in TAP
deletion in B2M
silenced HLA
genetic T cell
exclusion
MAPK oncogenic signaling
stabilized b-catenin
mesenchymal transcriptome
oncogenic PD-L1 expression
insensibility
to T cells
mutations in interferon gamma
pathway signaling
tumor cell
extrinsic
absence of
T cells
lack of T cells with tumor
antigen-specific TCRs
inhibitory immune
checkpoints
VISTA, LAG-3, TIM-3
immunosuppressive
cells
TAMs, Tregs
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
709
 evolve later, highlighting adaptive resistance mechanisms. Mul-
tiple tumor-intrinsic mechanisms have recently been identified
and include (1) signaling through the mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) pathway and/or loss of PTEN expression, which
enhances PI3K signaling, (2) expression of the WNT/b-catenin
signaling pathway, (3) loss of interferon-gamma (IFNg) signaling
pathways, and (4) lack of T cell responses as result of loss of tu-
mor antigen expression.
Oncogenic signaling through the MAPK pathway results in the
production of VEGF and IL-8, among many other secreted pro-
teins, which have known inhibitory effects on T cell recruitment
and function (Liu et al., 2013). Similarly, loss of PTEN, which en-
hances PI3K signaling and is a common phenomenon across
several cancers, including 30% of melanomas, was found to
be associated with resistance to immune checkpoint therapy
(Peng et al., 2016). PTEN loss in tumors of the Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) melanoma dataset correlated with significantly
decreased gene expression of IFNg, granzyme B, and CD8+
T cell infiltration; importantly, the frequency of PTEN deletions
and mutations was higher in non-T-cell-inflamed tumors as
compared to T-cell-inflamed tumors. In a murine model, PTEN-
knockout tumors were less susceptible to adoptive cell therapy
than PTEN-expressing tumors.
The potential of oncogenic signaling pathways to induce T cell
exclusion from cancers has also been described through the
stabilization of b -catenin resulting in constitutive WNT signaling
(Spranger et al., 2015). In a murine model, tumors with elevated
b-catenin lacked a subset of dendritic cells (DCs) known as
CD103+ DCs, due to decreased expression of CCL4, a chemokine
Figure 2. Known Intrinsic Mechanisms of
Resistance to Immunotherapy
(A) Intrinsic factors that lead to primary or adaptive
resistance including lack of antigenic mutations,
loss of tumor antigen expression, loss of HLA
expression, alterations in antigen processing ma-
chinery, alterations of several signaling pathways
(MAPK, PI3K, WNT, IFN), and constitutive PD-L1
expression.
(B) Intrinsic factors that are associated with ac-
quired resistance of cancer, including loss of
target
antigen,
HLA,
and
altered
interferon
signaling, as well as loss of T cell functionality.
that attracts CD103+ DCs. In addition, mu-
rine tumors lacking b-catenin responded
effectively to immune checkpoint therapy
whereas b-catenin-positive tumors did
not.
Non-T-cell-inflamed
human
mela-
noma tumors, which lacked T cells and
CD103+ DCs in the tumor microenviron-
ment, had significantly higher expression
oftumorintrinsicb-cateninsignalinggenes.
Cancer cells that constitutively express
immunosuppressive cell surface ligands
like PD-L1 may actively inhibit anti-tumor
T cell responses. A genetic amplification
of a locus in chromosome 9 that contains
the genes for the two ligands of PD-1 (PD-
L1 and PD-L2) and the interferon gamma
receptor signaling molecule Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) is termed the
PDJ amplicon (Ansell et al., 2015; Green et al., 2010; Rooney
et al., 2015). PDJ is amplified in the malignant Reed-Sternberg
cells in Hodgkin’s disease, and anti-PD-1 therapy results in
objective responses in over 80% of patients with chemo-
therapy-refractory Hodgkin’s disease (Ansell et al., 2015). Other
mechanisms that have been described as leading to constitutive
PD-L1 expression by cancer cells include PTEN deletions or
PI3K and/or AKT mutations (Lastwika et al., 2016; Parsa et al.,
2007), EGFR mutations (Akbay et al., 2013), MYC overexpres-
sion (Casey et al., 2016), CDK5 disruption (Dorand et al., 2016),
and an increase in PD-L1 transcripts stabilized by truncation of
the 30 UTR of this gene (Kataoka et al., 2016). It is currently un-
clear whether constitutive PD-L1 expression resulting from these
oncogenic signaling processes results in decreased or increased
likelihood of responding to anti-PD-1 and PD-L1 therapy, but it
may indeed result in lack of response to other cancer immuno-
therapy strategies by actively inhibiting anti-tumor T cells.
The interferon-gamma pathway is emerging as a key player
in primary, adaptive, and acquired resistance to checkpoint
blockade therapy (Gao et al., 2016; Pardoll, 2012; Ribas, 2015;
Shin et al., 2016; Zaretsky et al., 2016). It has both favorable
and detrimental effects on anti-tumor immune responses. Inter-
feron-gamma produced by tumor-specific T cells that have
recognized their cognate antigen on cancer cells or APCs in-
duces an effective anti-tumor immune response through (1)
enhanced tumor antigen presentation that occurs as a result of
increased expression of proteins, such as MHC molecules,
involved in antigen presentation, (2) recruitment of other immune
710
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 cells, and (3) direct anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects
on tumor cells (Platanias, 2005). But continuous interferon-
gamma exposure can lead to immunoediting of cancer cells, re-
sulting in immune escape (Benci et al., 2016; Shankaran et al.,
2001). One mechanism by which cancer cells could escape the
effects of interferon gamma is by downregulating or mutating
molecules involved in the interferon gamma signaling pathway,
which goes through the interferon gamma receptor chains
JAK1 and/or JAK2 and the signal transducer and activators of
transcription (STATs) (Darnell et al., 1994). In cell line and animal
models, mutations or epigenetic silencing of molecules in the
interferon receptor signaling pathway results in loss of the anti-
tumor effects of interferon gamma (Dunn et al., 2005; Kaplan
et al., 1998). Analysis of tumors in patients who did not respond
to therapy with the anti-CTLA-4 antibody ipilimumab revealed an
enriched frequency of mutations in the interferon gamma
pathway genes interferon gamma receptor 1 and 2 (IFNGR1
and IFNGR2), JAK2, and interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1)
(Gao et al., 2016). Any of these mutations would prevent
signaling in response to interferon gamma and give an advan-
tage to the tumor cells escaping from T cells, thereby resulting
in primary resistance to anti-CTLA-4 therapy. Mutations in this
pathway would additionally result in lack of PD-L1 expression
upon interferon gamma exposure, thereby resulting in cancer
cells that would be genetically negative for inducible PD-L1
expression. In such a scenario, blocking PD-L1 or PD-1 with
therapeutic antibodies would not be useful, and these would
be patients who are primary resistant to anti-PD-1 therapy
(Shin and Ribas, 2015; Shin et al., 2016).
An additional cancer-cell-intrinsic mechanism of primary
resistance to immunotherapy is expression of a certain set of
genes that were found to be enriched in tumors from patients
Figure 3. Known Extrinsic Mechanisms of
Resistance to Immunotherapy
This includes CTLA-4, PD1, and other immune
checkpoints, T cell exhaustion and phenotype
change, immune suppressive cell populations
(Tregs, MDSC, type II macrophages), and cytokine
and metabolite release in the tumor microenvi-
ronment (CSF-1, tryptophan metabolites, TGF-b,
adenosine).
Abbreviations
are
as
follows:
APC, antigen-presenting cells; MHC, major his-
tocompatibility complex; TCR, T cell receptor;
Treg, regulatory T cell; MDSC, myeloid-derived
suppressor cell; Mɸ II, type II macrophage.
who did not respond to anti-PD-1 ther-
apy, termed innate anti-PD-1 resistance
signature, or IPRES (Hugo et al., 2016).
These genes that lead to lack of response
are related to mesenchymal transforma-
tion, stemness, and wound healing and
are preferentially expressed by cancers
that seldom respond to PD-1 blockade
therapy, such as pancreatic cancer.
Epigenetic modification of the DNA
in cancer cells may lead to changes
in gene expression of immune-related
genes, which can impact antigen pro-
cessing, presentation, and immune evasion (Karpf and Jones,
2002; Kim and Bae, 2011). Therefore, demethylating agents
may enable re-expression of immune related genes, with poten-
tial for therapeutic impact, especially in the setting of combina-
tion treatment with immunotherapy. (He
´ ninger et al., 2015). His-
tone deacetylase inhibitors led to increased expression of MHC
and tumor-associated antigens, which synergized with ACT
therapy to improve anti-tumor responses in a murine melanoma
model (Vo et al., 2009). Similarly, in a lymphoma model, hypome-
thylating agents were found to increase CD80 expression on tu-
mor cells, with aconcomitant increase in tumor-infiltrating CD8+
T cells (Wang et al., 2013). These pre-clinical data indicate the
potential to reverse the epigenetic changes in cancer cells,
which may enable enhanced immune recognition and response
to immunotherapy.
Tumor-Cell-Extrinsic Factors for Primary and Adaptive
Resistance
Tumor-cell-extrinsic mechanisms that lead to primary and/or
adaptive resistance involve components other than tumor cells
within the tumor microenvironment, including Tregs, myeloid
derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), M2 macrophages, and other
inhibitory immune checkpoints, which may all contribute to inhi-
bition of anti-tumor immune responses.
Tregs, which can be identified by expression of the FoxP3
transcription factor, have a central role in maintaining self-
tolerance (Rudensky, 2011). The existence of suppressor
T cells that could downregulate immune responses of anti-
gen-specific T cells was first identified nearly four decades
ago in thymectomized, lethally irradiated, bone-marrow-recon-
stituted mice (Gershon and Kondo, 1970). Tregs are known to
suppress effector T cell (Teff) responses by secretion of certain
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
711
 inhibitory cytokines, such as IL-10, IL-35, and TGF-b, or by
direct cell contact (Oida et al., 2003; Sakaguchi et al., 2008;
Sundstedt et al., 2003). Published data indicate that many hu-
man tumors are infiltrated by Tregs (Chaudhary and Elkord,
2016; Ormandy et al., 2005; Woo et al., 2002). A vast number
of murine studies have shown that the depletion of Treg cells
from the tumor microenvironment can enhance or restore
anti-tumor immunity (Linehan and Goedegebuure, 2005; Viehl
et al., 2006). In murine models, response to anti-CTLA-4 ther-
apy was shown to be associated with an increase in the ratio
of Teffs to Tregs (Quezada et al., 2006). This shift in the ratio
of Teffs to Tregs was found to be a result of both an increase
in Teffs and depletion of Tregs in a murine tumor model (Simp-
son et al., 2013). These data suggest that tumors for which
immunotherapy is unable to increase Teffs and/or deplete
Tregs to increase the ratio of Teffs to Tregs are likely to be
resistant to treatment, either initially or during the relapsed
disease setting. However, it is possible that tumor-infiltrating
Tregs may co-exist with other immune cells, indicating a poten-
tially immune-responsive tumor. A retrospective study of pa-
tients treated with anti-CTLA-4 reported that a high baseline
expression of FoxP3+ Tregs in the tumor was associated with
better clinical outcomes (Hamid et al., 2011). Additional studies
are ongoing to determine the impact of tumor-infiltrating Tregs
on clinical outcomes for patients who receive treatment with
immunotherapy agents.
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) have emerged as
major regulators of immune responses in various pathological
conditions, including cancer. MDSCs were initially defined in
murine models and were characterized by the expression of
CD11b (CR3A or integrin aM) and Gr-1 markers (Bronte et al.,
1998; Talmadge and Gabrilovich, 2013). Human MDSCs express
markers such as CD11b+and CD33+ but are mostly negative for
HLA-DR and lineage-specific antigens (Lin), including CD3,
CD19, and CD57. Monocytic MDSCs are HLA-DR�, CD11b+,
CD33+, and CD14+ and granulocytic MDSCs are HLA-DR�,
CD11b+, CD33+, CD15+; however, mature monocytes express
HLA-DR (Wesolowski et al., 2013). MDSCs have been implicated
in promoting angiogenesis, tumor cell invasion, and metastases
(Yang et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2008). Furthermore, clinical find-
ings have shown that the presence of MDSCs correlates with
reduced survival in human cancers, including breast cancer
and colorectal cancer (Solito et al., 2011). Reports suggest that
the presence of MDSCs in the tumor microenvironment corre-
lates with decreased efficacy of immunotherapies, including im-
mune checkpoint therapy (Meyer et al., 2014), adoptive T cell
therapy (Kodumudi et al., 2012), and DC vaccination (Laborde
et al., 2014). Therefore, eradicating or reprogramming MDSCs
could enhance clinical responses to immunotherapy. Indeed, in
melanoma, breast cancer, and head and neck murine tumor
models, selective inactivation of macrophage PI3Kg synergized
with immune checkpoint inhibitors to promote tumor regression
and increase survival (De Henau et al., 2016; Kaneda et al.,
2016). In one study, the investigators demonstrated that mice
lacking PI3Kg or tumor-bearing mice treated with PI3Kg inhibi-
tors (TG100-115 or IPI-549) had reduced tumor growth, which
was associated with enhanced expression of pro-inflammatory
cytokines and inhibition of immune-suppressive factors in the tu-
mors (Kaneda et al., 2016). Moreover, genes and proteins asso-
ciated with immune activation were upregulated in macrophages
that were treated with PI3Kg inhibitors or those from mice lack-
ing PI3Kg. These data established PI3Kg as a molecular switch
that regulates macrophage function. The investigators also
demonstrated that a PI3Kg inhibitor (TG100-115) plus anti-PD-
1 led to improved tumor rejection and survival of tumor-bearing
mice (Kaneda et al., 2016). In a second study, tumor-bearing
mice treated with triple-combination therapy, a PI3Kg inhibitor
(IPI-549) plus anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1, had improved tumor
regression and long-term survival as compared to dual therapy
with anti-CTLA-4 plus anti-PD-1 (De Henau et al., 2016). These
pre-clinical studies highlight inhibitors of PI3Kg as a therapeutic
potential for combination strategies with immune checkpoint
therapy in cancer patients.
Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are another subset of
cells that seem to affect responses to immunotherapy. TAMs
include both M1 macrophages, which are involved in promoting
anti-tumor immunity, and the M2 macrophages, which possess
pro-tumorigenic properties (Chanmee et al., 2014). M1 and M2
macrophages can be distinguished based on the differential
expression of transcription factors and surface molecules and
the disparities in their cytokine profile and metabolism (Biswas
and Mantovani, 2010; Hu et al., 2016). Clinical studies have
shown an association between higher frequencies of TAMs
and poor prognosis in human cancers (Hu et al., 2016). In a
chemically induced mouse model of lung adenocarcinoma,
depletion of TAMs reduced tumor growth as a result of downre-
gulation of M2 and/or TAM recruitment, possibly due to the
inactivation of CCL2 and/or CCR2 signaling (Fritz et al., 2014).
Likewise, depletion of M2 macrophages in various murine tumor
models, including cutaneous T cell lymphoma (Wu et al., 2014),
colon cancer, lung cancer, breast cancer (Luo et al., 2006),
and melanoma (Ries et al., 2014; Ruffell et al., 2014; Tham
et al., 2015), have shown similar results. Several reports have
discussed the role of macrophages in mediating therapeutic
resistance in cancer (De Palma and Lewis, 2013; Ruffell et al.,
2014; Ruffell and Coussens, 2015). Reports suggest that macro-
phages can directly suppress T cell responses through pro-
grammed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) in hepatocellular carcinoma
(Kuang et al., 2009) and B7-H4 in ovarian carcinoma (Kryczek
et al., 2006). To overcome the potential resistance mechanism
of macrophages, investigators tested blockade of CSF-1R,
a receptor for macrophage-colony stimulating growth factor,
in a murine model of pancreatic cancer and demonstrated
decreased frequencies of TAMs, with subsequent increase in
interferon production and restrained tumor progression. Impor-
tantly, neither PD-1 nor CTLA-4 blockade could significantly
reduce tumor growth in the murine model, results that were
similar to findings from single agent studies in patients with
pancreatic cancer (Le et al., 2013; Zhu et al., 2014). However,
CSF1R blockade in combination with either an antibody against
PD-1 or CTLA-4, in addition to gemcitabine, led to improved
tumor regression (Zhu et al., 2014). These data suggest that
CSF-1R blockade induced reduction of TAMs, which enabled
response to immune checkpoint therapy. Similarly, in a mela-
noma model, CSF-1R inhibitor was shown to synergize with
ACT therapy (Mok et al., 2014). Several early phase clinical trials
712
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 are underway to test the combination of CSF-1R inhibition with
checkpoint inhibitors (Table 3).
The immune response is dynamic and signals that enhance
anti-tumor immune responses also tend to turn on inhibitory
genes and pathways in order to tightly regulate the immune
response. For example, initial T cell activation, via TCR signaling
and CD28 co-stimulation, eventually leads to increased expres-
sion of the inhibitory CTLA-4 immune checkpoint (Leach et al.,
1996). Similarly, effector T cell responses such as increased
IFNg production leads to increased expression of the PD-L1
protein on multiple cell types, including tumor cells, T cells and
macrophages, which can engage the PD-1 receptor on T cells
to suppress anti-tumor immunity (Chen, 2004; Dong et al.,
2002). Apart from this, IFNg may additionally promote the
expression of immunosuppressive molecules such as indolai-
mine-2,
3-deoxygenase
(IDO),
a
tryptophan-metabolizing
enzyme that can contribute to peripheral tolerance and can
have a direct negative effect on effector T cell function (Gajewski
et al., 2013). Similarly, carcinoembryonic antigen cell adhesion
molecule-1 (CEACAM1), seems to be another inhibitory mole-
cule that is induced by IFNg (Takahashi et al., 1993), (Gray-
Owen and Blumberg, 2006). Therapeutic antibodies blocking
CEACAM1 (Ortenberg et al., 2012) and TIM-3 have resulted in
enhanced anti-tumor immune responses (Pardoll, 2012; Sa-
kuishi et al., 2010). A recent study in an immunocompetent
mouse model of lung adenocarcinoma demonstrated that recur-
rent tumors after anti-PD-1 treatment were due to increased
expression of TIM-3 on T cells. Notably, anti-PD-1 plus anti-
TIM-3 led to improved responses in the tumor bearing mice.
Similarly, two lung cancer patients who developed recurrent dis-
ease after anti-PD-1 treatment were found to have increased
TIM-3 expression on T cells (Koyama et al., 2016).
Immune suppressive cytokines are often released by tumor or
macrophages for local suppression of anti-tumor immune re-
sponses. Transforming growth factor b (TGF-b) is a cytokine
that plays important roles in angiogenesis and immunosuppres-
sion by stimulating Tregs (Lebrun, 2012). Increased levels of
TGF-b are associated with poor prognosis in multiple tumor
types (Lin and Zhao, 2015; Massague
´ , 2008). Preclinical models
have shown synergy combining TGF-b receptor kinase inhibitor
with anti-CTLA-4, which led to anti-tumor responses in a mela-
noma model (BRAFV600EPTEN�/�) (Hanks et al., 2014). Another
pre-clinical study consisting of radiation therapy combined
with TGF-b inhibition also demonstrated anti-tumor responses
(Vanpouille-Box et al., 2015). Adenosine was shown to inhibit
T cell proliferation and cytotoxic function via the A2A receptor
on T cells (Zhang et al., 2004) as well as to promote metastasis
via the A2B receptor on tumor cells (Mittal et al., 2016). In addi-
tion, CD73 is the enzyme that dephosphorylates adenosine
monophosphate (AMP) to form adenosine, thus also suppress-
ing immune function and promoting tumor cell metastasis (Stagg
et al., 2010), and also stimulates angiogenesis (Allard et al.,
2014). High expression of CD73 is associated with poor prog-
nosis in different cancer types (Leclerc et al., 2016; Loi et al.,
2013; Turcotte et al., 2015). CD73 is also a potential biomarker
for anti-PD-1 therapy, with high expression limiting anti-PD-1 ef-
ficacy, which can be rescued by concomitant A2A blockade
(Beavis et al., 2015).
Specific chemokines and chemokine receptors are important
for trafficking of MDSCs and Tregs to the tumor. For example, tu-
mors secrete ligands CCL5, CCL7, and CXCL8, bind to their re-
ceptors CCR1 or CXCR2 expressed on subtypes of MDSCs
(Highfill et al., 2014), and attract MDSCs in the tumor microenvi-
ronment. Inhibitors of these chemokine receptors could abro-
gate immune evasion and improve anti-tumor T cell responses.
CCR4 is highly expressed by Tregs in the blood and tumors (Su-
giyama et al., 2013), and anti-CCR4 inhibits Treg recruitment as
well as promotes antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotox-
icity (ADCC), further reducing the Treg population (Chang
et al., 2012). CXCR4 is a receptor for the chemokine CXCL12,
which has been shown to promote an immunosuppressive tumor
microenvironment through several mechanisms, including Treg
localization (Gil et al., 2014).
Acquired Resistance to Immunotherapy
A hallmark of cancer immunotherapy has been the induction
of long lasting tumor responses. However, with higher activity
and broader use of immunotherapies, the denominator of pa-
tients with a tumor response has increased and the chances
of finding patients who responded for a period of time and
then progressed, termed acquired resistance, increases. It is
becoming clear that approximately one fourth to one third of pa-
tients with metastatic melanoma who have objective responses
to checkpoint blockade therapy with anti-CTLA-4 or anti-PD-1
will relapse over time, even despite receiving continued therapy
(Schachter et al., 2016). The potential mechanisms of relapse
include loss of T cell function, lack of T cell recognition by down-
regulation of tumor antigen presentation, and development of
escape mutation variants in the cancer (Figures 2 and 3). There
is evidence that each of these mechanisms can lead to acquired
resistance to checkpoint inhibitor therapy or ACT.
If the anti-tumor T cells change their functional phenotype
and stop exerting their cytotoxic activity, then a patient who re-
sponded to immunotherapy may develop a tumor relapse even
if everything else continues to be the same. Acquired resistance
to TCR-engineered ACT is rather frequent, with high initial anti-
tumor response followed by a high frequency of tumor relapses
within months. This has been evident with the ACT of T cells ex-
pressing TCRs to melanosomal antigens (MART-1, gp100) and
to cancer testis antigens (NY ESO-1) (Chodon et al., 2014; Mor-
gan et al., 2006; Robbins et al., 2011). By studying how the TCR
transgenic T cells change their functionality after ACT to humans,
it has been reported that the initial highly cytolytic profile when
administered shifts over time to a Th2-type cytokine release
and lack of cytotoxic functions in late time points when recov-
ered from patients at the time of tumor relapse (Ma et al.,
2013; Ma et al., 2011).
It was already well documented by the 1990s that some
patients who initially respond to cancer immunotherapies with
IL-2 or TIL ACT might develop acquired resistance through
loss of the shared component of all HLA class I molecules,
B2M, which leads to absence of surface expression of HLA
class I (D’Urso et al., 1991; Restifo et al., 1996). B2M is required
for HLA class I folding and transport to the cell surface, and
its genetic deficiency would lead to lack of CD8 T cell recog-
nition. This mechanism of acquired resistance has also been
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
713
 Table 3. Examples of Combination Therapies Being Developed to Overcome Resistance to Cancer Immunotherapy
Broad Approach
Specific Approach
Examples in Clinical Testing
combination checkpoint
blockade
anti-PD-1/L1 plus anti-CTLA4
Durvalumab + tremelimumab
Nivolumab + ipilimumab
Pembrolizumab + ipilimumab
anti-PD-1 plus anti-PD-L1
MEDI0680 + durvalumab
PDR001 + FAZ053
anti-PD-1/L1 plus anti-TIM 3
Nivolumab + TSR022
PDR001 + MBG453
anti-PD-1/L1 plus anti-LAG 3
Nivolumab + BMS 986016
PDR001 + LAG525
Pembrolizumab + IMP321
REGN2810 + REGN3767
checkpoint blockade plus
immune-stimulatory agents
anti-PD-1/L1 plus anti-41BB/CD137
Avelumab + utomilumab
Nivolumab + urelumab
Pembrolizumab + utomilumab
anti-CTLA4 plus anti-OX40
anti-PD-1/L1 plus anti-OX40
anti-CTLA4 plus Anti-PD-1/L1 plus anti-OX40
anti-41BB/CD137 plus anti-OX40
Atezolimumab + MOXR0916 ± bevacizumab
Avelumab + PF-04518600
Durvalumab + MEDI0562
Pembrolizumab + GSK3174998
Tremelimumab + durvalumab + MEDI6469
Tremelimumab + MEDI0562
Utomilumab + PF-04518600
anti-CTLA4 plus anti-CD40
anti-PD-1/L1 plus anti-CD40
Atezolimumab + RO7009789
Tremelimumab + CP870893
anti-PD-1/L1 plus anti-GITR
Nivolumab + BMS986156
PDR001 + GWN323
anti-PD-1/L1 plus anti-ICOS
Nivolumab + JTX-2011
checkpoint blockade plus
metabolic modulators
anti-CTLA-4 plus IDO inhibitors
anti-PD-1/L1 plus IDO inhibitors
Atezolizumab + GDC0919
Ipilimumab + epacadostat
Ipilimumab + indoximid
Nivolumab + BMS986205
Pembrolizumab+ epacadostat
anti-PD-1/L1 plus A2AR inhibitors or anti-CD73
Atezolizumab + CPI-444
Durvalumab + MEDI9447
PDR001+ PBF509
checkpoint blockade plus
other immune modulators
anti-PD-1/L1 plus TGFb inhibitors
Nivolumab + LY2157299
PDR001 + NIS793
anti-PD-1/L1 plus CXCR4 inhibitors
Nivolumab + ulocuplumab
Durvalumab + LY2510924
anti-PD-1/L1 plus CCR4 inhibitors
Nivolumab + mogamulizumab
anti-PD-1/L1 plus anti-CD27
Nivolumab + varlilumab
Atezolizumab + varlilumab
anti-PD-1/L1 plus CD122-biased cytokine
Nivolumab + NKTR-214
anti-PD-1/L1 plus yeast-derived soluble b-glucan
Pembrolizumab + Imprime PGG
anti-PD-1/L1 plus anti- TRAIL-DR5
Nivolumab + DS-8273a
anti-PD-1/L1 plus glutaminase inhibitor
Nivolumab + CB839
anti-PD-1/L1 plus IAP inhibitor
PDR001 + LCL161
checkpoint blockade plus
macrophage inhibitors
anti-CTLA4 plus CSF1R inhibitors
anti-PD-1/L1 plus CSF1R inhibitors
Durvalumab + Pexidartinib (PLX3397)
Durvalumab + LY3022855
Nivolumab + FPA008
Pembrolizumab + Pexidartinib
PDR001 + BLZ945
Tremelimumab + LY3022855
(Continued on next page)
714
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 Table 3.
Continued
Broad Approach
Specific Approach
Examples in Clinical Testing
checkpoint blockade plus
injectable therapies
anti-CTLA-4 plus oncolytic viruses
anti-PD-1/L1 plus oncolytic viruses
Ipilimumab + Talimogene Laherparepvec
Nivolumab + Talimogene Laherparepvec
Pembrolizumab + DNX2401
Pembrolizumab + Talimogene Laherparepvec
anti-CTLA4 plus TLR agonists
anti-PD-1/L1 plus TLR agonists
Ipilimumab + MGN1703
Pembrolizumab + CMP001
Pembrolizumab + SD101
Tremelimumab + PF-3512676
checkpoint blockade plus
cancer vaccines
anti-CTLA4 plus DC vaccine
anti-PD-1/L1 plus DC vaccine
anti-PD-1/L1 plus peptide vaccine
anti-PD-1/L1 plus neoantigen vaccine
Durvalumab + ADXS11-001
Durvalumab + TPIV200/huFR-1
Ipilimumab + GVAX
Nivolumab + GVAX + CRS207
Nivolumab + CIMAvax
Nivolumab+ CV301
Nivolumab + NEO-PV-01
Nivolumab + Viagenpumatucel-L (HS-110)
Pembrolizumab + ADXS31-142
Durvalumab ± tremelimumab + IMCgp100
checkpoint blockade plus
adoptive cell transfer (ACT)
anti-CTLA4 plus ACT
anti-PD-1/L1 plus ACT
anti-PD-1/L1 plus anti-CD137 plus ACT
Atezolimuamb + KTE-C19
Ipilimumab + NYESO TCR ACT
Nivolumab + NYESO TCR ACT
Nivolumab + urelumab + TIL ACT
Pembrolizumab + TIL ACT
Ipilimumab + modified CD8 T cell ACT
Pembrolizumab + modified CD8 T cell ACT
checkpoint blockade plus
targeted therapies
anti-CTLA4 plus BRAF+MEK inhibitors
anti-CTLA4 plus VEGF inhibitors
anti-PD-1/L1 plus BRAF+MEK inhibitors
anti-PD-1/L1 plus EGFR inhibitors
anti-PD-1/L1 plus VEGF inhibitors
anti-PD-1/L1 plus PI3K delta inhibitor
Atezolizumab + bevacizumab versus sunitinib
Atezolizumab + trametinib
Atezolizumab + vemurafenib ± cobimetinib
Durvalumab + ensartinib (ALK inhibitor)
Durvalumab + gefitinib
Durvalumab + trametinib ± dabrafenib
Ipilimumab + bevacizumab
Ipilimumab + dabrafenib ± trametinib
Ipilimumab +vemurafenib
Nivolumab + sunitinib or pazopanib
Nivolumab + trametinib ± dabrafenib
PDR001 + sorafenib
Pembrolizumab + dabrafenib + trametinib
Pembrolizumab + lenalidomide
Pembrolizumab + nintedarnib
Pidilizumab + lenalidomide
Tremelimumab + sunitinib
Nivolumab + SYM004
anti-PD-1/L1 plus PARP inhibitors
Atezolizumab + Veliparib
Durvalumab + olaparib
BGB-A317 + BGB-290
anti-PD-1/L1 plus mTOR inhibitor
PDR001 + everolimus
anti-PD-1/L1 plus pan RAF inhibitor
PDR001 + LXH254
anti-PD-1/L1 plus glutaminase inhibitor
Nivolumab + CB839
checkpoint blockade plus
radiation therapy (RT)
anti-CTLA4 plus RT
anti-PD-1/L1 plus RT
anti-CTLA4 plus Anti-PD-1/L1 plus RT
Atezolizumab + stereotactic radiation therapy
Pembrolizumab + cisplatin/radiotherapy
Pembrolizumab + sterotactic body radiotherapy
Pembrolizumab + hypofractionated radiotherapy
(Continued on next page)
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
715
 documented in a case of late acquired resistance to anti-PD-1
therapy, where the resistant cells had a new and homozygous
truncating mutation in B2M, leading to lack of surface expression
of HLA class I (Zaretsky et al., 2016). In two other cases of tumor
relapse, there were copy-number-neutral loss-of-function muta-
tions in JAK1 or JAK2, concurrent with loss of heterozygosity
due to deletion of the wild-type allele, which were absent in the
baseline biopsies. These mutations allowed the cancer cells to
escape from the anti-proliferative effects of interferon gamma
(Zaretsky et al., 2016). Additional evidence of loss of antigen-
presenting machinery leading to acquired resistance to cancer
immunotherapy is provided by a case of a patient with metastatic
colorectal carcinoma who responded to TIL ACT. The therapeu-
tic
TIL
recognized
mutated
KRAS
G12D
presented
by
HLA-C*08:02, resulting in an objective tumor response for
9 months, followed by an isolated relapse in a lesion that had
lost HLA-C*08:02 in chromosome 6 (Tran et al., 2016). Therefore,
acquired resistance to anti-PD-1 therapy and ACT could be
mediated through genetic mechanisms that altered antigen-pre-
senting machinery and interferon gamma signaling.
Because anti-tumor T cells are specific for cancer cells that
express their cognate antigen, it is possible that cancers may
develop acquired resistance through decreased expression or
mutations in these tumor antigens. Data suggest that anti-tumor
T cells turned on by checkpoint blockade therapy primarily
recognize mutational neoantigens (Schumacher and Schreiber,
2015; van Rooij et al., 2013). Therefore, genetic deletions,
mutations, or epigenetic changes that would lead to loss of
expression of these mutational neoantigens presented by MHC
molecules might result in acquired resistance to checkpoint
blockade therapy. However, thus far there has not been evi-
dence of such mechanisms in the clinic. CAR T cells are also an-
tigen-specific, but they rely on the whole protein expression
on the cancer cell surface. In some cases of patients with ALL
who responded initially to CD19 CAR T cell ACT, it has been
documented that the epitope in the CD19 protein sequence
that is recognized by the CAR can be selectively deleted at pro-
gression (Ruella et al., 2016) and that preexisting alternatively
spliced CD19 isoforms might predispose to acquired resistance
(Sotillo et al., 2015). Therefore, there is evidence from the clinic
that loss of the target of the anti-tumor T cells can result in pro-
gression to cancer immunotherapy.
This yin and yang of the immune response, which results in im-
mune editing and eventually immune escape, is clearly a factor
as we administer immunotherapeutic agents and attempt to
drive anti-tumor immune responses, which may encounter a
multitude of inhibitory pathways, either during initial treatment
or at the time of relapsed disease. Additional inhibitory immune
checkpoints that are often expressed in the tumor microenviron-
ment include LAG-3, TIGIT, VISTA, and many more that are be-
ing identified in ongoing studies (Topalian et al., 2015). Several
clinical trials are currently underway to test antibodies against
these inhibitory pathways, both as monotherapy and combina-
tion therapy strategies (Anderson et al., 2016; Sharma and Alli-
son, 2015). To date, the combination of anti-CTLA-4 (ipilimumab)
plus anti-PD-1 (nivolumab) has demonstrated improved clinical
outcomes as compared to monotherapy, and this combination
was recently FDA-approved for patients with metastatic mela-
noma (Larkin et al., 2015a). We will need data from ongoing
and future clinical trials to determine whether combination
therapies targeting other inhibitory pathways, either as doublets
or triplets in concurrent or sequential treatment strategies,
will effectively overcome the resistance mechanisms that act
to regulate immune responses and provide additional clin-
ical benefit.
Monitoring Resistance Mechanisms
There are significant efforts underway to identify reliable predic-
tive biomarkers of response and resistance to checkpoint
inhibitors in baseline tumor biopsies in patients on immune
checkpoint blockade. To date, the best predictive biomarkers
identified include total tumor mutational load (Roszik et al.,
2016; Snyder et al., 2014), as well as markers of an effective
immune infiltrate within a tumor signifying a ‘‘hot’’ tumor
Table 3.
Continued
Broad Approach
Specific Approach
Examples in Clinical Testing
checkpoint blockade plus
chemotherapy
anti-CTLA4 plus chemotherapy
anti-PD-1/L1 plus chemotherapy
anti-CTLA4 plus Anti-PD-1/L1 plus chemotherapy
Atezolizumab + carboplatin/paclitaxel
Atezolizumab + carboplatin/gemcitabine
Durvalumab + paclitaxel
Ipilimumab +carboplatin/paclitaxel
Ipilimumab +dacarbazine
Nivolumab + platinum doublets
Pembrolizumab + carbo/paclitaxel or carbo/pemetrexed
checkpoint blockade plus
epigenetic modifications
anti-PD-1/L1 plus histone deacetylase inhibitors
anti-PD-1/L1 plus hypomethylating agents
Azacitidine + entinostat followed by nivolumab
Atezolizumab + azacitidine
Nivolumab + RRX001
Pembrolizumab + CC486
Pembrolizumab + CC486 + romidepsin
Pembrolizumab + romidepsin
Pembrolizumab + vorinostat + tamoxifen
PDR001 + panobinostat
checkpoint blockade plus
NK activation
anti-CTLA4 plus anti-KIR
anti-PD-1/L1 plus anti-KIR
Ipilimumab + lirilumab
Nivolumab + lirilumab
716
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 microenvironment, typified by an increased number of CD8+
cytotoxic T lymphocytes in proximity to PD-L1-positive cells
(Taube et al., 2014; Tumeh et al., 2014). Mutational load is highly
relevant, given that tumors with a higher mutational load exhibit
higher levels of neoantigens capable of inducing anti-tumor im-
mune responses, translating into a higher likelihood of response
to immune checkpoint blockade across several cancer types
(Rizvi et al., 2015; Snyder et al., 2014; Van Allen et al., 2015).
In addition to genomic markers and immune regulatory gene
expression profiles (Hugo et al., 2016), immune markers in pre-
treatment biopsies, including the density and distribution of
CD8+ T lymphocytes, PD-L1 expression, and T cell clonality
(Taube et al., 2014; Tumeh et al., 2014), have also been associ-
ated with differential responses to immune checkpoint blockade,
although significant limitations exist when each of these bio-
markers is assessed in isolation. Integrative approaches incor-
porating analysis of several of these features have also been
developed, such as the cancer immunogram, which incorpo-
rates analysis of seven distinct features within the tumor
microenvironment: tumor sensitivity to immune effectors, tumor
foreignness, general immune status, immune cell infiltration,
absence of checkpoint molecule expression, absence of soluble
inhibitors such as interleukin-1 and interleukin-6, and absence
of inhibitory tumor metabolism (Blank et al., 2016). These efforts
are critical and will ultimately contribute to more personalized
treatment strategies for cancer immunotherapy.
An emerging strategy in elucidating mechanisms of response
and resistance to immune checkpoint blockade involves the
assessment of longitudinal tumor samples throughout the
course of treatment. This approach is powerful because it tran-
scends conventional analysis of static time points and seeks to
identify superior predictive biomarkers by assessing dynamic re-
sponses to cancer treatment. Such an approach has been em-
ployed to better understand response and resistance to immune
checkpoint blockade (Chen et al., 2016; Hugo et al., 2016; Ma-
dore et al., 2015; Tumeh et al., 2014) and has yielded important
information that would not have been elucidated through anal-
ysis of static unpaired biopsies. A key example is in a recent
report describing immune markers in longitudinal tumor samples
of patients on immune checkpoint blockade, demonstrating that
although pre-treatment markers were largely non-predictive, im-
mune markers in early-on-treatment samples were highly predic-
tive of treatment response (Chen et al., 2016). In addition to this,
resistance mechanisms were identified via pairwise comparison
of gene expression profiles in pre- to on-treatment tumor sam-
ples of responders versus non-responders, including defects in
interferon signaling as well as antigen processing and presenta-
tion (Chen et al., 2016). This approach is currently under-utilized
but is gaining traction in light of advantages over assessment of
static baseline biomarkers (Figure 4), as well as an increasing
need to better understand responses to a growing number of
immunotherapeutic approaches. However nuances exist with re-
gard to immune monitoring in the tumor microenvironment
(Wargo et al., 2016), and an appreciation of the importance of
concurrent monitoring in the peripheral blood is growing, though
the ideal assays to perform are still being elucidated.
Overcoming Resistance to Immunotherapy
On the basis of insights gained (Hugo et al., 2016; Snyder et al.,
2014; Van Allen et al., 2015), efforts are currently underway to
derive actionable strategies to combat therapeutic resistance
to immunotherapy. This includes fundamental efforts to trans-
form immunologically ‘‘cold’’ tumors into ‘‘hot’’ tumors through
the use of several approaches (Corrales et al., 2015; Holmgaard
et al., 2013; Tang et al., 2016) and also involves tactics to either
enhance endogenous T cell function (Gubin et al., 2014; Hodi
et al., 2010; Miller et al., 2002; Redmond et al., 2007; Ribas
et al., 2015; Weber et al., 2015) or to adoptively transfer anti-
gen-specific T lymphocytes via ex vivo expansion of tumor-infil-
trating lymphocytes (Rosenberg et al., 2011) or via administra-
tion of antigen-specific engineered T cells (via transduction
with CARs or TCRs) (Beatty et al., 2014; Kalos et al., 2011).
Though some of these approaches involve treatment with
drugs as monotherapy (including monoclonal antibodies), the
majority of contemporary approaches focus on combination
strategies in an effort to overcome resistance associated
with treatment with single-pronged efforts (Table 3) (Hicklin
et al., 1998; Moon et al., 2014; Ninomiya et al., 2015). A prime
example of enhanced efficacy with combination therapy is the
use of combined therapy with blocking antibodies against two
key immune checkpoints, CTLA-4 and PD-1, which results in
significantly higher response rates to therapy and improved sur-
vival in patients with metastatic melanoma (Larkin et al., 2015a;
Postow et al., 2015; Wolchok et al., 2013). The rationale for this
combination approach is several fold, as blocking several check-
points on anergized tumor-specific T cells has been shown to be
more efficacious (Berrien-Elliott et al., 2013; Curran et al., 2010;
Redmond et al., 2014; Spranger et al., 2014) and CTLA-4
blockade may itself facilitate the conversion of a tumor
Figure 4. Schema for Analysis of Baseline and Longitudinal Tumor,
Blood, and Other Samples
(A) Baseline assessment of the tumor microenvironment typically involves
molecular analysis for mutational load, driver mutations, and gene expression,
with immune profiling including analysis of CD8+ T cells, PD-L1 expression,
and T cell clonality.
(B) Longitudinal evaluation of fresh serial human specimens (tumor, blood,
serum, and microbiome) during treatment (at pre-treatment, early-on-treat-
ment, and progression time points) allows for deep analysis to unveil potential
mechanisms of therapeutic resistance.
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
717
 microenvironment from ‘‘cold’’ to ‘‘hot’’ (Simpson et al., 2013).
Indeed, each of these checkpoint inhibitors has been shown to
have both overlapping and unique effects on tumor-specific
T cells (Gubin et al., 2014), substantiating the use of these in
combination. Numerous other strategies combining immune
modulation of the tumor microenvironment with immune check-
point inhibitor therapy are currently being tested in clinical trials
(Puzanov
et
al.,
2016)
(NCT02263508,
NCT02626000,
NCT02565992, NCT02043665, NCT02501473). Vaccine strate-
gies against identified neoantigen epitopes are also being com-
bined with immunotherapeutic approaches, though mature data
are not available regarding efficacy.
Another combination strategy with strong clinical and pre-clin-
ical rationale involves the use of molecularly targeted therapy in
conjunction with immunotherapy. The most extensively studied
cancer type treated with this strategy is melanoma, though the
concept is now being widely extended across solid and liquid tu-
mors. The rationale for combining these treatments is that treat-
ment with molecularly targeted therapy can have a substantial
effect on anti-tumor immunity and potential synergy when used
with immunotherapy (Homet Moreno et al., 2015; Hu-Lieskovan
et al., 2015; Koya et al., 2012). Perhaps most illustrative of this is
oncogenic BRAF in melanoma. Though treatment with BRAF-
targeted therapy alone provides limited durable disease control
(Chapman et al., 2011; Hauschild et al., 2012), it is associated
with favorable effects in the tumor microenvironment, including
increased antigen (Boni et al., 2010) and HLA expression (Brad-
ley et al., 2015), increased T cell infiltrate, reduced immunosup-
pressive cytokines (Frederick et al., 2013; Wilmott et al., 2012),
and improved T cell function (Comin-Anduix et al., 2010). Thus,
treatment with molecularly targeted therapy may indeed help
convert a ‘‘cold’’ microenvironment to a ‘‘hot’’ one, with resultant
increased expression of PD-L1 via the phenomenon of adaptive
resistance (Taube et al., 2012), further supporting a multi-modal-
ity treatment approach. Emerging strategies to enhance re-
sponses to immunotherapy are being developed based on novel
insights into T cell and overall immune function. Examples of
this include insights into metabolic reprogramming of T cells to
enhance therapeutic responses (Buck et al., 2016; Chang and
Pearce, 2016) and via modulation of the gut microbiome to
augment responses to cancer immunotherapy (Sivan et al.,
2015; Ve
´ tizou et al., 2015).
Complexities exist when attempting to validate these combina-
tion strategies given that the extent of possible combinations far
outnumbers the human and technical resources available. There
is an urgent need to test these combinations in appropriate pre-
clinical models and expedite clinical translation through novel ap-
proaches to clinical trial design. In addition, we need to have a
deep understanding of the kinetics of the immune response to
each of these agents in isolation as well as in combination in order
to narrow the search space of biologically promising and optimal
combination strategies. Immune responses to targeted agents
may be short-lived (Cooper et al., 2014), thus proper timing and
sequence of therapy must be strongly considered.
Conclusions
Great advances have occurred in the field of cancer immuno-
therapy as a result of elegant research work conducted to eluci-
date the mechanisms that regulate anti-tumor T cell responses,
including eventual translation of these concepts to the clinic.
This has allowed the rational design and clinical development
of treatment strategies that might result in tumor regression
and long-term survival for patients with metastatic cancer. How-
ever, the benefit, to date, has been limited to a minority of pa-
tients with certain cancer types. In addition, as a result of more
successful immunotherapy treatments, we now have a signifi-
cant subset of patients who initially respond but eventually
relapse. Bringing clinical benefit to the majority of patients re-
quires a complete understanding of the mechanisms that would
lead to an effective anti-tumor response and the different tumor-
cell-intrinsic and -extrinsic factors that would result in primary,
adaptive, and acquired resistance to immunotherapy. Elucida-
tion of these mechanisms will reveal important clues as to the
next steps that need to be taken to potentially overcome resis-
tance to immunotherapy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy,
NIH/NCI grants R01 CA1633793 (P.S.), R35 CA197633, and P01 CA168585
(A.R.), Cancer Prevention Research in Texas (CPRIT) grant RP120108 (P.S.),
the Ressler Family Fund, the Garcia-Corsini Family Fund, the Samuels Family
Fund, and the Grimaldi Family Fund (A.R.), and a Stand Up To Cancer-Cancer
Research Institute Cancer Immunology Dream Team Translational Research
Grant (SU2C-AACR-DT1012; P.S. and A.R.). S.H.-L. was supported by a Career
Development Award from the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), a
Tower Cancer Research Foundation Grant, a Dr. Charles Coltman Fellowship
Award from the Hope Foundation, and a UCLA KL2 Award.
REFERENCES
Akbay, E.A., Koyama, S., Carretero, J., Altabef, A., Tchaicha, J.H., Christen-
sen, C.L., Mikse, O.R., Cherniack, A.D., Beauchamp, E.M., Pugh, T.J., et al.
(2013). Activation of the PD-1 pathway contributes to immune escape in
EGFR-driven lung tumors. Cancer Discov. 3, 1355–1363.
Allard, B., Turcotte, M., Spring, K., Pommey, S., Royal, I., and Stagg, J. (2014).
Anti-CD73
therapy
impairs
tumor
angiogenesis.
Int.
J.
Cancer
134,
1466–1473.
Anderson, A.C., Joller, N., and Kuchroo, V.K. (2016). Lag-3, Tim-3, and TIGIT:
Co-inhibitory Receptors with Specialized Functions in Immune Regulation.
Immunity 44, 989–1004.
Ansell, S.M., Lesokhin, A.M., Borrello, I., Halwani, A., Scott, E.C., Gutierrez, M.,
Schuster, S.J., Millenson, M.M., Cattry, D., Freeman, G.J., et al. (2015). PD-1
blockade with nivolumab in relapsed or refractory Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 311–319.
Beatty, G.L., Haas, A.R., Maus, M.V., Torigian, D.A., Soulen, M.C., Plesa, G.,
Chew, A., Zhao, Y., Levine, B.L., Albelda, S.M., et al. (2014). Mesothelin-spe-
cific chimeric antigen receptor mRNA-engineered T cells induce anti-tumor
activity in solid malignancies. Cancer Immunol. Res. 2, 112–120.
Beavis, P.A., Slaney, C.Y., Milenkovski, N., Henderson, M.A., Loi, S., Stagg, J.,
Kershaw, M.H., and Darcy, P.K. (2015). CD73: A potential biomarker for anti-
PD-1 therapy. OncoImmunology 4, e1046675.
Benci, J.L., Xu, B., Qiu, Y., Wu, T.J., Dada, H., Twyman-Saint Victor, C.,
Cucolo, L., Lee, D.S., Pauken, K.E., Huang, A.C., et al. (2016). Tumor interferon
signaling regulates a multigenic resistance program to immune checkpoint
blockade. Cell 167, 1540–1554.
Berrien-Elliott, M.M., Jackson, S.R., Meyer, J.M., Rouskey, C.J., Nguyen, T.L.,
Yagita, H., Greenberg, P.D., DiPaolo, R.J., and Teague, R.M. (2013). Durable
adoptive immunotherapy for leukemia produced by manipulation of multiple
regulatory pathways of CD8+ T-cell tolerance. Cancer Res. 73, 605–616.
718
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 Biswas, S.K., and Mantovani, A. (2010). Macrophage plasticity and interaction
with lymphocyte subsets: cancer as a paradigm. Nat. Immunol. 11, 889–896.
Blank, C.U., Haanen, J.B., Ribas, A., and Schumacher, T.N. (2016). Cancer
immunology. The ‘‘cancer immunogram.’’. Science 352, 658–660.
Boni, A., Cogdill, A.P., Dang, P., Udayakumar, D., Njauw, C.N., Sloss, C.M.,
Ferrone, C.R., Flaherty, K.T., Lawrence, D.P., Fisher, D.E., et al. (2010). Selec-
tive BRAFV600E inhibition enhances T-cell recognition of melanoma without
affecting lymphocyte function. Cancer Res. 70, 5213–5219.
Bradley, S.D., Chen, Z., Melendez, B., Talukder, A., Khalili, J.S., Rodriguez-
Cruz, T., Liu, S., Whittington, M., Deng, W., Li, F., et al. (2015). BRAFV600E
co-opts a conserved MHC class I internalization pathway to diminish antigen
presentation and CD8+ T-cell recognition of melanoma. Cancer Immunol.
Res. 3, 602–609.
Bronte, V., Wang, M., Overwijk, W.W., Surman, D.R., Pericle, F., Rosenberg,
S.A., and Restifo, N.P. (1998). Apoptotic death of CD8+ T lymphocytes after
immunization: induction of a suppressive population of Mac-1+/Gr-1+ cells.
J. Immunol. 161, 5313–5320.
Brunet, J.F., Denizot, F., Luciani, M.F., Roux-Dosseto, M., Suzan, M., Mattei,
M.G., and Golstein, P. (1987). A new member of the immunoglobulin superfam-
ily–CTLA-4. Nature 328, 267–270.
Buck, M.D., O’Sullivan, D., Klein Geltink, R.I., Curtis, J.D., Chang, C.H., Sanin,
D.E., Qiu, J., Kretz, O., Braas, D., van der Windt, G.J., et al. (2016). Mitochon-
drial Dynamics Controls T Cell Fate through Metabolic Programming. Cell 166,
63–76.
Burnet, F.M. (1971). Immunological surveillance in neoplasia. Transplant. Rev.
7, 3–25.
Casey, S.C., Tong, L., Li, Y., Do, R., Walz, S., Fitzgerald, K.N., Gouw, A.M.,
Baylot, V., Gu
¨ tgemann, I., Eilers, M., and Felsher, D.W. (2016). MYC regulates
the antitumor immune response through CD47 and PD-L1. Science 352,
227–231.
Chang, C.H., and Pearce, E.L. (2016). Emerging concepts of T cell metabolism
as a target of immunotherapy. Nat. Immunol. 17, 364–368.
Chang, D.-K., Sui, J., Geng, S., Muvaffak, A., Bai, M., Fuhlbrigge, R.C., Lo, A.,
Yammanuru, A., Hubbard, L., Sheehan, J., et al. (2012). Humanization of an
anti-CCR4 antibody that kills cutaneous T-cell lymphoma cells and abrogates
suppression by T-regulatory cells. Mol. Cancer Ther. 11, 2451–2461.
Chanmee, T., Ontong, P., Konno, K., and Itano, N. (2014). Tumor-associated
macrophages as major players in the tumor microenvironment. Cancers
(Basel) 6, 1670–1690.
Chapman, P.B., Hauschild, A., Robert, C., Haanen, J.B., Ascierto, P., Larkin,
J., Dummer, R., Garbe, C., Testori, A., Maio, M., et al.; BRIM-3 Study Group
(2011). Improved survival with vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E
mutation. N. Engl. J. Med. 364, 2507–2516.
Chaudhary, B., and Elkord, E. (2016). Regulatory T Cells in the Tumor Microen-
vironment and Cancer Progression: Role and Therapeutic Targeting. Vaccines
(Basel) 4.
Chen, L. (2004). Co-inhibitory molecules of the B7-CD28 family in the control of
T-cell immunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 4, 336–347.
Chen, P.L., Roh, W., Reuben, A., Cooper, Z.A., Spencer, C.N., Prieto, P.A.,
Miller, J.P., Bassett, R.L., Gopalakrishnan, V., Wani, K., et al. (2016). Analysis
of Immune Signatures in Longitudinal Tumor Samples Yields Insight into Bio-
markers of Response and Mechanisms of Resistance to Immune Checkpoint
Blockade. Cancer Discov. 6, 827–837.
Chodon, T., Comin-Anduix, B., Chmielowski, B., Koya, R.C., Wu, Z., Auer-
bach, M., Ng, C., Avramis, E., Seja, E., Villanueva, A., et al. (2014). Adoptive
transfer of MART-1 T-cell receptor transgenic lymphocytes and dendritic
cell vaccination in patients with metastatic melanoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 20,
2457–2465.
Coley, W.B. (1910). The treatment of inoperable sarcoma by bacterial toxins
(the mixed toxins of the Streptococcus erysipelas and the Bacillus prodigio-
sus). Proc. R. Soc. Med. 3(Surg Sect), 1–48.
Comin-Anduix, B., Chodon, T., Sazegar, H., Matsunaga, D., Mock, S., Jalil, J.,
Escuin-Ordinas, H., Chmielowski, B., Koya, R.C., and Ribas, A. (2010). The
oncogenic BRAF kinase inhibitor PLX4032/RG7204 does not affect the viability
or function of human lymphocytes across a wide range of concentrations. Clin.
Cancer Res. 16, 6040–6048.
Cooper, Z.A., Juneja, V.R., Sage, P.T., Frederick, D.T., Piris, A., Mitra, D., Lo,
J.A., Hodi, F.S., Freeman, G.J., Bosenberg, M.W., et al. (2014). Response
to BRAF inhibition in melanoma is enhanced when combined with immune
checkpoint blockade. Cancer Immunol. Res. 2, 643–654.
Corrales, L., Glickman, L.H., McWhirter, S.M., Kanne, D.B., Sivick, K.E.,
Katibah, G.E., Woo, S.R., Lemmens, E., Banda, T., Leong, J.J., et al. (2015).
Direct activation of STING in the tumor microenvironment leads to potent
and systemic tumor regression and immunity. Cell Rep. 11, 1018–1030.
Curran, M.A., Montalvo, W., Yagita, H., and Allison, J.P. (2010). PD-1 and
CTLA-4 combination blockade expands infiltrating T cells and reduces regula-
tory T and myeloid cells within B16 melanoma tumors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 107, 4275–4280.
D’Urso, C.M., Wang, Z.G., Cao, Y., Tatake, R., Zeff, R.A., and Ferrone, S.
(1991). Lack of HLA class I antigen expression by cultured melanoma cells
FO-1 due to a defect in B2m gene expression. J. Clin. Invest. 87, 284–292.
Darnell, J.E., Jr., Kerr, I.M., and Stark, G.R. (1994). Jak-STAT pathways and
transcriptional activation in response to IFNs and other extracellular signaling
proteins. Science 264, 1415–1421.
Das, R., Verma, R., Sznol, M., Boddupalli, C.S., Gettinger, S.N., Kluger, H.,
Callahan, M., Wolchok, J.D., Halaban, R., Dhodapkar, M.V., and Dhodapkar,
K.M. (2015). Combination therapy with anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1 leads to
distinct immunologic changes in vivo. J. Immunol. 194, 950–959.
De Henau, O., Rausch, M., Winkler, D., Campesato, L.F., Liu, C., Cymerman,
D.H., Budhu, S., Ghosh, A., Pink, M., Tchaicha, J., et al. (2016). Overcoming
resistance to checkpoint blockade therapy by targeting PI3Kg in myeloid cells.
Nature 539, 443–447.
De Palma, M., and Lewis, C.E. (2013). Macrophage regulation of tumor re-
sponses to anticancer therapies. Cancer Cell 23, 277–286.
Dong, H., Zhu, G., Tamada, K., and Chen, L. (1999). B7-H1, a third member of
the B7 family, co-stimulates T-cell proliferation and interleukin-10 secretion.
Nat. Med. 5, 1365–1369.
Dong, H., Strome, S.E., Salomao, D.R., Tamura, H., Hirano, F., Flies, D.B.,
Roche, P.C., Lu, J., Zhu, G., Tamada, K., et al. (2002). Tumor-associated
B7-H1 promotes T-cell apoptosis: a potential mechanism of immune evasion.
Nat. Med. 8, 793–800.
Dorand, R.D., Nthale, J., Myers, J.T., Barkauskas, D.S., Avril, S., Chirieleison,
S.M., Pareek, T.K., Abbott, D.W., Stearns, D.S., Letterio, J.J., et al. (2016).
Cdk5 disruption attenuates tumor PD-L1 expression and promotes antitumor
immunity. Science 353, 399–403.
Dunn, G.P., Bruce, A.T., Ikeda, H., Old, L.J., and Schreiber, R.D. (2002). Can-
cer immunoediting: from immunosurveillance to tumor escape. Nat. Immunol.
3, 991–998.
Dunn, G.P., Bruce, A.T., Sheehan, K.C., Shankaran, V., Uppaluri, R., Bui, J.D.,
Diamond, M.S., Koebel, C.M., Arthur, C., White, J.M., and Schreiber, R.D.
(2005). A critical function for type I interferons in cancer immunoediting. Nat.
Immunol. 6, 722–729.
Ehrlich, P. (1956). Collected Papers in Four Volumes Including A Complete
Bibliography (Pergamon Press).
Eshhar, Z., Waks, T., Gross, G., and Schindler, D.G. (1993). Specific activation
and targeting of cytotoxic lymphocytes through chimeric single chains con-
sisting of antibody-binding domains and the gamma or zeta subunits of the
immunoglobulin and T-cell receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 720–724.
Fesnak, A.D., June, C.H., and Levine, B.L. (2016). Engineered T cells:
the promise and challenges of cancer immunotherapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer 16,
566–581.
Frederick, D.T., Piris, A., Cogdill, A.P., Cooper, Z.A., Lezcano, C., Ferrone,
C.R., Mitra, D., Boni, A., Newton, L.P., Liu, C., et al. (2013). BRAF inhibition
is associated with enhanced melanoma antigen expression and a more
favorable tumor microenvironment in patients with metastatic melanoma.
Clin. Cancer Res. 19, 1225–1231.
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
719
 Freeman, G.J., Long, A.J., Iwai, Y., Bourque, K., Chernova, T., Nishimura, H.,
Fitz, L.J., Malenkovich, N., Okazaki, T., Byrne, M.C., et al. (2000). Engagement
of the PD-1 immunoinhibitory receptor by a novel B7 family member leads to
negative regulation of lymphocyte activation. J. Exp. Med. 192, 1027–1034.
Fritz, J.M., Tennis, M.A., Orlicky, D.J., Lin, H., Ju, C., Redente, E.F., Choo,
K.S., Staab, T.A., Bouchard, R.J., Merrick, D.T., et al. (2014). Depletion of
tumor-associated macrophages slows the growth of chemically induced
mouse lung adenocarcinomas. Front. Immunol. 5, 587.
Gajewski, T.F., Schreiber, H., and Fu, Y.X. (2013). Innate and adaptive immune
cells in the tumor microenvironment. Nat. Immunol. 14, 1014–1022.
Gao, J., Shi, L.Z., Zhao, H., Chen, J., Xiong, L., He, Q., Chen, T., Roszik, J.,
Bernatchez, C., Woodman, S.E., et al. (2016). Loss of IFN-g pathway genes
in tumor cells as a mechanism of resistance to anti-CTLA-4 therapy. Cell
167, 397–404.
Gershon, R.K., and Kondo, K. (1970). Cell interactions in the induction of toler-
ance: the role of thymic lymphocytes. Immunology 18, 723–737.
Gil, M., Komorowski, M.P., Seshadri, M., Rokita, H., McGray, A.J., Opyrchal,
M., Odunsi, K.O., and Kozbor, D. (2014). CXCL12/CXCR4 blockade by onco-
lytic virotherapy inhibits ovarian cancer growth by decreasing immunosup-
pression and targeting cancer-initiating cells. J. Immunol. 193, 5327–5337.
Gray-Owen, S.D., and Blumberg, R.S. (2006). CEACAM1: contact-dependent
control of immunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6, 433–446.
Green, M.R., Monti, S., Rodig, S.J., Juszczynski, P., Currie, T., O’Donnell, E.,
Chapuy, B., Takeyama, K., Neuberg, D., Golub, T.R., et al. (2010). Integrative
analysis reveals selective 9p24.1 amplification, increased PD-1 ligand expres-
sion, and further induction via JAK2 in nodular sclerosing Hodgkin lymphoma
and primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma. Blood 116, 3268–3277.
Gubin, M.M., Zhang, X., Schuster, H., Caron, E., Ward, J.P., Noguchi, T., Iva-
nova, Y., Hundal, J., Arthur, C.D., Krebber, W.J., et al. (2014). Checkpoint
blockade cancer immunotherapy targets tumour-specific mutant antigens.
Nature 515, 577–581.
Hamid, O., Schmidt, H., Nissan, A., Ridolfi, L., Aamdal, S., Hansson, J., Guida,
M., Hyams, D.M., Go
´ mez, H., Bastholt, L., et al. (2011). A prospective phase II
trial exploring the association between tumor microenvironment biomarkers
and clinical activity of ipilimumab in advanced melanoma. J. Transl. Med.
9, 204.
Hanks, B.A., Holtzhausen, A., Evans, K., Heid, M., and Blobe, G.C. (2014).
Combinatorial TGF-beta}signaling blockade and anti-CTLA-4 antibody immu-
notherapy in a murine BRAFV600E-PTEN-/-transgenic model of melanoma.
ASCO Annual Meeting Proceedings.
Hauschild, A., Grob, J.J., Demidov, L.V., Jouary, T., Gutzmer, R., Millward, M.,
Rutkowski, P., Blank, C.U., Miller, W.H., Jr., Kaempgen, E., et al. (2012).
Dabrafenib in BRAF-mutated metastatic melanoma: a multicentre, open-label,
phase 3 randomised controlled trial. Lancet 380, 358–365.
He
´ ninger, E., Krueger, T.E., and Lang, J.M. (2015). Augmenting antitumor im-
mune responses with epigenetic modifying agents. Front. Immunol. 6, 29.
Hicklin, D.J., Wang, Z., Arienti, F., Rivoltini, L., Parmiani, G., and Ferrone, S.
(1998). beta2-Microglobulin mutations, HLA class I antigen loss, and tumor
progression in melanoma. J. Clin. Invest. 101, 2720–2729.
Highfill, S.L., Cui, Y., Giles, A.J., Smith, J.P., Zhang, H., Morse, E., Kaplan,
R.N., and Mackall, C.L. (2014). Disruption of CXCR2-mediated MDSC tumor
trafficking enhances anti-PD1 efficacy. Sci. Transl. Med. 6.
Hodi, F.S., O’Day, S.J., McDermott, D.F., Weber, R.W., Sosman, J.A., Haanen,
J.B., Gonzalez, R., Robert, C., Schadendorf, D., Hassel, J.C., et al. (2010).
Improved survival with ipilimumab in patients with metastatic melanoma.
N. Engl. J. Med. 363, 711–723.
Holmgaard, R.B., Zamarin, D., Munn, D.H., Wolchok, J.D., and Allison, J.P.
(2013). Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase is a critical resistance mechanism in anti-
tumor T cell immunotherapy targeting CTLA-4. J. Exp. Med. 210, 1389–1402.
Homet Moreno, B., Mok, S., Comin-Anduix, B., Hu-Lieskovan, S., and Ribas,
A. (2015). Combined treatment with dabrafenib and trametinib with immune-
stimulating antibodies for BRAF mutant melanoma. OncoImmunology 5,
e1052212.
Hu, W., Li, X., Zhang, C., Yang, Y., Jiang, J., and Wu, C. (2016). Tumor-asso-
ciated macrophages in cancers. Clin. Transl. Oncol. 18, 251–258.
Hu-Lieskovan, S., Mok, S., Homet Moreno, B., Tsoi, J., Robert, L., Goedert, L.,
Pinheiro, E.M., Koya, R.C., Graeber, T.G., Comin-Anduix, B., and Ribas, A.
(2015). Improved antitumor activity of immunotherapy with BRAF and MEK
inhibitors in BRAF(V600E) melanoma. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 279ra41.
Hugo, W., Zaretsky, J.M., Sun, L., Song, C., Moreno, B.H., Hu-Lieskovan, S.,
Berent-Maoz, B., Pang, J., Chmielowski, B., Cherry, G., et al. (2016). Genomic
and Transcriptomic Features of Response to Anti-PD-1 Therapy in Metastatic
Melanoma. Cell 165, 35–44.
Ishida, Y., Agata, Y., Shibahara, K., and Honjo, T. (1992). Induced expression
of PD-1, a novel member of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily, upon pro-
grammed cell death. EMBO J. 11, 3887–3895.
Kalos, M., Levine, B.L., Porter, D.L., Katz, S., Grupp, S.A., Bagg, A., and June,
C.H. (2011). T cells with chimeric antigen receptors have potent antitumor
effects and can establish memory in patients with advanced leukemia. Sci.
Transl. Med. 3, 95ra73.
Kaneda, M.M., Messer, K.S., Ralainirina, N., Li, H., Leem, C.J., Gorjestani, S.,
Woo, G., Nguyen, A.V., Figueiredo, C.C., Foubert, P., et al. (2016). PI3Kg is a
molecular switch that controls immune suppression. Nature 539, 437–442.
Kaplan, M.H., Wurster, A.L., and Grusby, M.J. (1998). A signal transducer and
activator of transcription (Stat)4-independent pathway for the development of
T helper type 1 cells. J. Exp. Med. 188, 1191–1196.
Karpf, A.R., and Jones, D.A. (2002). Reactivating the expression of methylation
silenced genes in human cancer. Oncogene 21, 5496–5503.
Kataoka, K., Shiraishi, Y., Takeda, Y., Sakata, S., Matsumoto, M., Nagano, S.,
Maeda, T., Nagata, Y., Kitanaka, A., Mizuno, S., et al. (2016). Aberrant PD-L1
expression through 30-UTR disruption in multiple cancers. Nature 534,
402–406.
Kim, H.J., and Bae, S.C. (2011). Histone deacetylase inhibitors: molecular
mechanisms of action and clinical trials as anti-cancer drugs. Am. J. Transl.
Res. 3, 166–179.
Kodumudi, K.N., Weber, A., Sarnaik, A.A., and Pilon-Thomas, S. (2012).
Blockade of myeloid-derived suppressor cells after induction of lymphopenia
improves adoptive T cell therapy in a murine model of melanoma. J. Immunol.
189, 5147–5154.
Koya, R.C., Mok, S., Otte, N., Blacketor, K.J., Comin-Anduix, B., Tumeh, P.C.,
Minasyan, A., Graham, N.A., Graeber, T.G., Chodon, T., and Ribas, A. (2012).
BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib improves the antitumor activity of adoptive cell
immunotherapy. Cancer Res. 72, 3928–3937.
Koyama, S., Akbay, E.A., Li, Y.Y., Herter-Sprie, G.S., Buczkowski, K.A.,
Richards, W.G., Gandhi, L., Redig, A.J., Rodig, S.J., Asahina, H., et al.
(2016). Adaptive resistance to therapeutic PD-1 blockade is associated with
upregulation of alternative immune checkpoints. Nat. Commun. 7, 10501.
Krummel, M.F., and Allison, J.P. (1995). CD28 and CTLA-4 have opposing
effects on the response of T cells to stimulation. J. Exp. Med. 182, 459–465.
Kryczek, I., Zou, L., Rodriguez, P., Zhu, G., Wei, S., Mottram, P., Brumlik, M.,
Cheng, P., Curiel, T., Myers, L., et al. (2006). B7-H4 expression identifies
a novel suppressive macrophage population in human ovarian carcinoma.
J. Exp. Med. 203, 871–881.
Kuang, D.M., Zhao, Q., Peng, C., Xu, J., Zhang, J.P., Wu, C., and Zheng, L.
(2009). Activated monocytes in peritumoral stroma of hepatocellular carci-
noma foster immune privilege and disease progression through PD-L1.
J. Exp. Med. 206, 1327–1337.
Laborde, R.R., Lin, Y., Gustafson, M.P., Bulur, P.A., and Dietz, A.B. (2014).
Cancer Vaccines in the World of Immune Suppressive Monocytes (CD14(+)
HLA-DR(lo/neg) Cells): The Gateway to Improved Responses. Front. Immunol.
5, 147.
Larkin, J., Chiarion-Sileni, V., Gonzalez, R., Grob, J.J., Cowey, C.L., Lao, C.D.,
Schadendorf, D., Dummer, R., Smylie, M., Rutkowski, P., et al. (2015a). Com-
bined Nivolumab and Ipilimumab or Monotherapy in Untreated Melanoma.
N. Engl. J. Med. 373, 23–34.
720
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 Larkin, J., Lao, C.D., Urba, W.J., McDermott, D.F., Horak, C., Jiang, J., and
Wolchok, J.D. (2015b). Efficacy and safety of nivolumab in patients with
BRAF V600 mutant and BRAF wild-type advanced melanoma: a pooled anal-
ysis of 4 clinical trials. JAMA Oncol. 1, 433–440.
Lastwika, K.J., Wilson, W., 3rd, Li, Q.K., Norris, J., Xu, H., Ghazarian, S.R., Ki-
tagawa, H., Kawabata, S., Taube, J.M., Yao, S., et al. (2016). Control of PD-L1
expression by oncogenic activation of the AKT-mTOR pathway in non-small
cell lung cancer. Cancer Res. 76, 227–238.
Le, D.T., Lutz, E., Uram, J.N., Sugar, E.A., Onners, B., Solt, S., Zheng, L.,
Diaz, L.A., Jr., Donehower, R.C., Jaffee, E.M., and Laheru, D.A. (2013). Eval-
uation of ipilimumab in combination with allogeneic pancreatic tumor cells
transfected with a GM-CSF gene in previously treated pancreatic cancer.
J. Immunother. 36, 382–389.
Leach, D.R., Krummel, M.F., and Allison, J.P. (1996). Enhancement of anti-
tumor immunity by CTLA-4 blockade. Science 271, 1734–1736.
Lebrun, J.-J. (2012). The dual role of TGFb in human cancer: from tumor sup-
pression to cancer metastasis. ISRN Mol. Biol. 2012, 381428.
Leclerc, B.G., Charlebois, R., Chouinard, G., Allard, B., Pommey, S., Saad, F.,
and Stagg, J. (2016). CD73 expression is an independent prognostic factor in
prostate cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 22, 158–166.
Lin, R.L., and Zhao, L.J. (2015). Mechanistic basis and clinical relevance of the
role of transforming growth factor-b in cancer. Cancer Biol. Med. 12, 385–393.
Linehan, D.C., and Goedegebuure, P.S. (2005). CD25+ CD4+ regulatory
T-cells in cancer. Immunol. Res. 32, 155–168.
Liu, C., Peng, W., Xu, C., Lou, Y., Zhang, M., Wargo, J.A., Chen, J.Q., Li, H.S.,
Watowich, S.S., Yang, Y., et al. (2013). BRAF inhibition increases tumor infiltra-
tion by T cells and enhances the antitumor activity of adoptive immunotherapy
in mice. Clin. Cancer Res. 19, 393–403.
Loi, S., Pommey, S., Haibe-Kains, B., Beavis, P.A., Darcy, P.K., Smyth, M.J.,
and Stagg, J. (2013). CD73 promotes anthracycline resistance and poor
prognosis in triple negative breast cancer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110,
11091–11096.
Luo, Y., Zhou, H., Krueger, J., Kaplan, C., Lee, S.H., Dolman, C., Markowitz,
D., Wu, W., Liu, C., Reisfeld, R.A., and Xiang, R. (2006). Targeting tumor-asso-
ciated macrophages as a novel strategy against breast cancer. J. Clin. Invest.
116, 2132–2141.
Ma, C., Fan, R., Ahmad, H., Shi, Q., Comin-Anduix, B., Chodon, T., Koya, R.C.,
Liu, C.C., Kwong, G.A., Radu, C.G., et al. (2011). A clinical microchip for eval-
uation of single immune cells reveals high functional heterogeneity in pheno-
typically similar T cells. Nat. Med. 17, 738–743.
Ma, C., Cheung, A.F., Chodon, T., Koya, R.C., Wu, Z., Ng, C., Avramis, E.,
Cochran, A.J., Witte, O.N., Baltimore, D., et al. (2013). Multifunctional T-cell an-
alyses to study response and progression in adoptive cell transfer immuno-
therapy. Cancer Discov. 3, 418–429.
Madore, J., Vilain, R.E., Menzies, A.M., Kakavand, H., Wilmott, J.S., Hyman, J.,
Yearley, J.H., Kefford, R.F., Thompson, J.F., Long, G.V., et al. (2015). PD-L1
expression in melanoma shows marked heterogeneity within and between pa-
tients: implications for anti-PD-1/PD-L1 clinical trials. Pigment Cell Melanoma
Res. 28, 245–253.
Marincola, F.M., Jaffee, E.M., Hicklin, D.J., and Ferrone, S. (2000). Escape of
human solid tumors from T-cell recognition: molecular mechanisms and func-
tional significance. Adv. Immunol. 74, 181–273.
Massague
´ , J. (2008). TGFbeta in Cancer. Cell 134, 215–230.
Maude, S.L., Frey, N., Shaw, P.A., Aplenc, R., Barrett, D.M., Bunin, N.J., Chew,
A., Gonzalez, V.E., Zheng, Z., Lacey, S.F., et al. (2014). Chimeric antigen re-
ceptor T cells for sustained remissions in leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 371,
1507–1517.
Meyer, C., Cagnon, L., Costa-Nunes, C.M., Baumgaertner, P., Montandon, N.,
Leyvraz, L., Michielin, O., Romano, E., and Speiser, D.E. (2014). Frequencies of
circulating MDSC correlate with clinical outcome of melanoma patients
treated with ipilimumab. Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 63, 247–257.
Miller, J.F., and Sadelain, M. (2015). The journey from discoveries in funda-
mental immunology to cancer immunotherapy. Cancer Cell 27, 439–449.
Miller, R.E., Jones, J., Le, T., Whitmore, J., Boiani, N., Gliniak, B., and Lynch,
D.H. (2002). 4-1BB-specific monoclonal antibody promotes the generation
of tumor-specific immune responses by direct activation of CD8 T cells in a
CD40-dependent manner. J. Immunol. 169, 1792–1800.
Mittal, D., Sinha, D., Barkauskas, D., Young, A., Kalimutho, M., Stannard, K.,
Caramia, F., Haibe-Kains, B., Stagg, J., and Khanna, K.K. (2016). Adenosine
2B receptor expression on cancer cells promotes metastasis. Cancer Res. 76.
Mok, S., Koya, R.C., Tsui, C., Xu, J., Robert, L., Wu, L., Graeber, T.G., West,
B.L., Bollag, G., and Ribas, A. (2014). Inhibition of CSF-1 receptor improves
the antitumor efficacy of adoptive cell transfer immunotherapy. Cancer Res.
74, 153–161.
Moon, E.K., Wang, L.C., Dolfi, D.V., Wilson, C.B., Ranganathan, R., Sun, J.,
Kapoor, V., Scholler, J., Pure, E., Milone, M.C., et al. (2014). Multifactorial
T-cell hypofunction that is reversible can limit the efficacy of chimeric antigen
receptor-transduced human T cells in solid tumors. Clin. Cancer Res. 20,
4262–4273.
Morgan, R.A., Dudley, M.E., Wunderlich, J.R., Hughes, M.S., Yang, J.C.,
Sherry, R.M., Royal, R.E., Topalian, S.L., Kammula, U.S., Restifo, N.P., et al.
(2006). Cancer regression in patients after transfer of genetically engineered
lymphocytes. Science 314, 126–129.
Ninomiya, S., Narala, N., Huye, L., Yagyu, S., Savoldo, B., Dotti, G., Heslop,
H.E., Brenner, M.K., Rooney, C.M., and Ramos, C.A. (2015). Tumor indole-
amine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) inhibits CD19-CAR T cells and is downregulated
by lymphodepleting drugs. Blood 125, 3905–3916.
Oida, T., Zhang, X., Goto, M., Hachimura, S., Totsuka, M., Kaminogawa, S.,
and Weiner, H.L. (2003). CD4+CD25- T cells that express latency-associated
peptide on the surface suppress CD4+CD45RBhigh-induced colitis by a TGF-
beta-dependent mechanism. J. Immunol. 170, 2516–2522.
Okazaki, T., Chikuma, S., Iwai, Y., Fagarasan, S., and Honjo, T. (2013). A rheo-
stat for immune responses: the unique properties of PD-1 and their advan-
tages for clinical application. Nat. Immunol. 14, 1212–1218.
Ormandy, L.A., Hillemann, T., Wedemeyer, H., Manns, M.P., Greten, T.F., and
Korangy, F. (2005). Increased populations of regulatory T cells in peripheral
blood of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res. 65, 2457–2464.
Ortenberg, R., Sapir, Y., Raz, L., Hershkovitz, L., Ben Arav, A., Sapoznik, S.,
Barshack, I., Avivi, C., Berkun, Y., Besser, M.J., et al. (2012). Novel immuno-
therapy for malignant melanoma with a monoclonal antibody that blocks
CEACAM1 homophilic interactions. Mol. Cancer Ther. 11, 1300–1310.
Pardoll, D.M. (2012). The blockade of immune checkpoints in cancer immuno-
therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer 12, 252–264.
Parsa, A.T., Waldron, J.S., Panner, A., Crane, C.A., Parney, I.F., Barry, J.J.,
Cachola, K.E., Murray, J.C., Tihan, T., Jensen, M.C., et al. (2007). Loss of tumor
suppressor PTEN function increases B7-H1 expression and immunoresist-
ance in glioma. Nat. Med. 13, 84–88.
Peng, W., Chen, J.Q., Liu, C., Malu, S., Creasy, C., Tetzlaff, M.T., Xu, C.,
McKenzie, J.A., Zhang, C., Liang, X., et al. (2016). Loss of PTEN promotes
resistance to T cell-mediated immunotherapy. Cancer Discov. 6, 202–216.
Platanias, L.C. (2005). Mechanisms of type-I- and type-II-interferon-mediated
signalling. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5, 375–386.
Postow, M.A., Chesney, J., Pavlick, A.C., Robert, C., Grossmann, K.,
McDermott, D., Linette, G.P., Meyer, N., Giguere, J.K., Agarwala, S.S., et al.
(2015). Nivolumab and ipilimumab versus ipilimumab in untreated melanoma.
N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 2006–2017.
Puzanov, I., Milhem, M.M., Minor, D., Hamid, O., Li, A., Chen, L., Chastain, M.,
Gorski, K.S., Anderson, A., Chou, J., et al. (2016). Talimogene Laherparepvec
in Combination With Ipilimumab in Previously Untreated, Unresectable Stage
IIIB-IV Melanoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 34, 2619–2626.
Quezada, S.A., Peggs, K.S., Curran, M.A., and Allison, J.P. (2006). CTLA4
blockade and GM-CSF combination immunotherapy alters the intratumor
balance of effector and regulatory T cells. J. Clin. Invest. 116, 1935–1945.
Redmond, W.L., Gough, M.J., Charbonneau, B., Ratliff, T.L., and Weinberg,
A.D. (2007). Defects in the acquisition of CD8 T cell effector function after
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
721
 priming with tumor or soluble antigen can be overcome by the addition of an
OX40 agonist. J. Immunol. 179, 7244–7253.
Redmond, W.L., Linch, S.N., and Kasiewicz, M.J. (2014). Combined targeting
of costimulatory (OX40) and coinhibitory (CTLA-4) pathways elicits potent
effector T cells capable of driving robust antitumor immunity. Cancer Immunol.
Res. 2, 142–153.
Restifo, N.P., Marincola, F.M., Kawakami, Y., Taubenberger, J., Yannelli, J.R.,
and Rosenberg, S.A. (1996). Loss of functional beta 2-microglobulin in meta-
static melanomas from five patients receiving immunotherapy. J. Natl. Cancer
Inst. 88, 100–108.
Ribas, A. (2015). Adaptive Immune Resistance: How Cancer Protects from Im-
mune Attack. Cancer Discov. 5, 915–919.
Ribas, A., Puzanov, I., Dummer, R., Schadendorf, D., Hamid, O., Robert, C.,
Hodi, F.S., Schachter, J., Pavlick, A.C., Lewis, K.D., et al. (2015). Pembrolizu-
mab versus investigator-choice chemotherapy for ipilimumab-refractory mel-
anoma (KEYNOTE-002): a randomised, controlled, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol.
16, 908–918.
Ries, C.H., Cannarile, M.A., Hoves, S., Benz, J., Wartha, K., Runza, V., Rey-
Giraud, F., Pradel, L.P., Feuerhake, F., Klaman, I., et al. (2014). Targeting tu-
mor-associated macrophages with anti-CSF-1R antibody reveals a strategy
for cancer therapy. Cancer Cell 25, 846–859.
Rizvi, N.A., Hellmann, M.D., Snyder, A., Kvistborg, P., Makarov, V., Havel, J.J.,
Lee, W., Yuan, J., Wong, P., Ho, T.S., et al. (2015). Cancer immunology. Muta-
tional landscape determines sensitivity to PD-1 blockade in non-small cell lung
cancer. Science 348, 124–128.
Robbins, P.F., Morgan, R.A., Feldman, S.A., Yang, J.C., Sherry, R.M., Dudley,
M.E., Wunderlich, J.R., Nahvi, A.V., Helman, L.J., Mackall, C.L., et al. (2011).
Tumor regression in patients with metastatic synovial cell sarcoma and mela-
noma using genetically engineered lymphocytes reactive with NY-ESO-1.
J. Clin. Oncol. 29, 917–924.
Robert, C., Thomas, L., Bondarenko, I., O’Day, S., Weber, J., Garbe, C.,
Lebbe, C., Baurain, J.F., Testori, A., Grob, J.J., et al. (2011). Ipilimumab plus
dacarbazine for previously untreated metastatic melanoma. N. Engl. J. Med.
364, 2517–2526.
Rooney, M.S., Shukla, S.A., Wu, C.J., Getz, G., and Hacohen, N. (2015). Mo-
lecular and genetic properties of tumors associated with local immune cyto-
lytic activity. Cell 160, 48–61.
Rosenberg, S.A., Yang, J.C., Sherry, R.M., Kammula, U.S., Hughes, M.S.,
Phan, G.Q., Citrin, D.E., Restifo, N.P., Robbins, P.F., Wunderlich, J.R., et al.
(2011). Durable complete responses in heavily pretreated patients with meta-
static melanoma using T-cell transfer immunotherapy. Clin. Cancer Res. 17,
4550–4557.
Roszik, J., Haydu, L.E., Hess, K.R., Oba, J., Joon, A.Y., Siroy, A.E., Karpinets,
T.V., Stingo, F.C., Baladandayuthapani, V., Tetzlaff, M.T., et al. (2016). Novel
algorithmic approach predicts tumor mutation load and correlates with immu-
notherapy clinical outcomes using a defined gene mutation set. BMC Med.
14, 168.
Rudensky, A.Y. (2011). Regulatory T cells and Foxp3. Immunol. Rev. 241,
260–268.
Ruella, M., Barrett, D.M., Kenderian, S.S., Shestova, O., Hofmann, T.J.,
Perazzelli, J., Klichinsky, M., Aikawa, V., Nazimuddin, F., Kozlowski, M.,
et al. (2016). Dual CD19 and CD123 targeting prevents antigen-loss relapses
after CD19-directed immunotherapies. J. Clin. Invest. 126, 3814–3826.
Ruffell, B., and Coussens, L.M. (2015). Macrophages and therapeutic resis-
tance in cancer. Cancer Cell 27, 462–472.
Ruffell, B., Chang-Strachan, D., Chan, V., Rosenbusch, A., Ho, C.M., Pryer, N.,
Daniel, D., Hwang, E.S., Rugo, H.S., and Coussens, L.M. (2014). Macrophage
IL-10 blocks CD8+ T cell-dependent responses to chemotherapy by sup-
pressing IL-12 expression in intratumoral dendritic cells. Cancer Cell 26,
623–637.
Sadelain, M. (2016). Chimeric antigen receptors: driving immunology towards
synthetic biology. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 41, 68–76.
Sakaguchi, S., Yamaguchi, T., Nomura, T., and Ono, M. (2008). Regulatory
T cells and immune tolerance. Cell 133, 775–787.
Sakuishi, K., Apetoh, L., Sullivan, J.M., Blazar, B.R., Kuchroo, V.K., and Ander-
son, A.C. (2010). Targeting Tim-3 and PD-1 pathways to reverse T cell exhaus-
tion and restore anti-tumor immunity. J. Exp. Med. 207, 2187–2194.
Schachter, J. R.A., Long GV, Arance A, Grob JJ, Mortier L, Daud A, Carlino MS,
McNeil CM, Lotem M, Larkin J, Lorigan P, Neyns B, Blank CU, Petrella TM, Ha-
mid O, Zhou H, Ebbinghaus S, Ibrahim N, Robert C (2016). Pembrolizumab
versus ipilimumab for advanced melanoma: final overall survival analysis of
KEYNOTE-006. Clin Oncol 34 (suppl; abstr 9504).
Schadendorf, D., Hodi, F.S., Robert, C., Weber, J.S., Margolin, K., Hamid, O.,
Patt, D., Chen, T.-T., Berman, D.M., and Wolchok, J.D. (2015). Pooled analysis
of long-term survival data from phase II and phase III trials of ipilimumab in un-
resectable or metastatic melanoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 33.
Schumacher, T.N., and Schreiber, R.D. (2015). Neoantigens in cancer immu-
notherapy. Science 348, 69–74.
Shankaran, V., Ikeda, H., Bruce, A.T., White, J.M., Swanson, P.E., Old, L.J.,
and Schreiber, R.D. (2001). IFNgamma and lymphocytes prevent primary
tumour development and shape tumour immunogenicity. Nature 410,
1107–1111.
Sharma, P., and Allison, J.P. (2015). Immune checkpoint targeting in cancer
therapy: toward combination strategies with curative potential. Cell 161,
205–214.
Shin, D.S., and Ribas, A. (2015). The evolution of checkpoint blockade as a
cancer therapy: what’s here, what’s next? Curr. Opin. Immunol. 33, 23–35.
Shin, D.S., Zaretsky, J.M., Escuin-Ordinas, H., Garcia-Diaz, A., Hu-Lieskovan,
S., Kalbasi, A., Grasso, C.S., Hugo, W., Sandoval, S., Torrejon, D.Y., et al.
(2016). Primary Resistance to PD-1 Blockade Mediated by JAK(1/2) Mutations.
Cancer Discov.
Simpson, T.R., Li, F., Montalvo-Ortiz, W., Sepulveda, M.A., Bergerhoff, K.,
Arce, F., Roddie, C., Henry, J.Y., Yagita, H., Wolchok, J.D., et al. (2013). Fc-
dependent depletion of tumor-infiltrating regulatory T cells co-defines
the efficacy of anti-CTLA-4 therapy against melanoma. J. Exp. Med. 210,
1695–1710.
Sivan, A., Corrales, L., Hubert, N., Williams, J.B., Aquino-Michaels, K., Earley,
Z.M., Benyamin, F.W., Lei, Y.M., Jabri, B., Alegre, M.L., et al. (2015).
Commensal bifidobacterium promotes antitumor immunity and facilitates
anti-PD-L1 efficacy. Science 350, 1084–1089.
Snyder, A., Makarov, V., Merghoub, T., Yuan, J., Zaretsky, J.M., Desrichard,
A., Walsh, L.A., Postow, M.A., Wong, P., Ho, T.S., et al. (2014). Genetic basis
for clinical response to CTLA-4 blockade in melanoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 371,
2189–2199.
Solito, S., Falisi, E., Diaz-Montero, C.M., Doni, A., Pinton, L., Rosato, A.,
Francescato, S., Basso, G., Zanovello, P., Onicescu, G., et al. (2011). A human
promyelocytic-like population is responsible for the immune suppression
mediated by myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Blood 118, 2254–2265.
Sotillo, E., Barrett, D.M., Black, K.L., Bagashev, A., Oldridge, D., Wu, G., Suss-
man, R., Lanauze, C., Ruella, M., Gazzara, M.R., et al. (2015). Convergence of
Acquired Mutations and Alternative Splicing of CD19 Enables Resistance to
CART-19 Immunotherapy. Cancer Discov. 5, 1282–1295.
Spranger, S., Koblish, H.K., Horton, B., Scherle, P.A., Newton, R., and Gajew-
ski, T.F. (2014). Mechanism of tumor rejection with doublets of CTLA-4, PD-1/
PD-L1, or IDO blockade involves restored IL-2 production and proliferation of
CD8(+) T cells directly within the tumor microenvironment. J. Immunother.
Cancer 2, 3.
Spranger, S., Bao, R., and Gajewski, T.F. (2015). Melanoma-intrinsic b-catenin
signalling prevents anti-tumour immunity. Nature 523, 231–235.
Stagg, J., Divisekera, U., McLaughlin, N., Sharkey, J., Pommey, S., Denoyer,
D., Dwyer, K.M., and Smyth, M.J. (2010). Anti-CD73 antibody therapy
inhibits breast tumor growth and metastasis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
107, 1547–1552.
Sucker, A., Zhao, F., Real, B., Heeke, C., Bielefeld, N., Mabetaen, S., Horn, S.,
Moll, I., Maltaner, R., Horn, P.A., et al. (2014). Genetic evolution of T-cell
722
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 resistance in the course of melanoma progression. Clin. Cancer Res. 20,
6593–6604.
Sugiyama, D., Nishikawa, H., Maeda, Y., Nishioka, M., Tanemura, A.,
Katayama, I., Ezoe, S., Kanakura, Y., Sato, E., Fukumori, Y., et al. (2013).
Anti-CCR4 mAb selectively depletes effector-type FoxP3+CD4+ regulatory
T cells, evoking antitumor immune responses in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 110, 17945–17950.
Sundstedt, A., O’Neill, E.J., Nicolson, K.S., and Wraith, D.C. (2003). Role for IL-
10 in suppression mediated by peptide-induced regulatory T cells in vivo.
J. Immunol. 170, 1240–1248.
Takahashi, H., Okai, Y., Paxton, R.J., Hefta, L.J., and Shively, J.E. (1993). Dif-
ferential regulation of carcinoembryonic antigen and biliary glycoprotein by
gamma-interferon. Cancer Res. 53, 1612–1619.
Talmadge, J.E., and Gabrilovich, D.I. (2013). History of myeloid-derived sup-
pressor cells. Nat. Rev. Cancer 13, 739–752.
Tang, D.Y., Ellis, R.A., and Lovat, P.E. (2016). Prognostic Impact of Autophagy
Biomarkers for Cutaneous Melanoma. Front. Oncol. 6, 236.
Taube, J.M., Anders, R.A., Young, G.D., Xu, H., Sharma, R., McMiller, T.L.,
Chen, S., Klein, A.P., Pardoll, D.M., Topalian, S.L., and Chen, L. (2012). Coloc-
alization of inflammatory response with B7-h1 expression in human melano-
cytic lesions supports an adaptive resistance mechanism of immune escape.
Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 127ra37.
Taube, J.M., Klein, A., Brahmer, J.R., Xu, H., Pan, X., Kim, J.H., Chen, L.,
Pardoll, D.M., Topalian, S.L., and Anders, R.A. (2014). Association of PD-1,
PD-1 ligands, and other features of the tumor immune microenvironment
with response to anti-PD-1 therapy. Clin. Cancer Res. 20, 5064–5074.
Tham, M., Khoo, K., Yeo, K.P., Kato, M., Prevost-Blondel, A., Angeli, V., and
Abastado, J.P. (2015). Macrophage depletion reduces postsurgical tumor
recurrence and metastatic growth in a spontaneous murine model of mela-
noma. Oncotarget 6, 22857–22868.
Topalian, S.L., Drake, C.G., and Pardoll, D.M. (2015). Immune checkpoint
blockade: a common denominator approach to cancer therapy. Cancer Cell
27, 450–461.
Tran, E., Robbins, P.F., Lu, Y.C., Prickett, T.D., Gartner, J.J., Jia, L., Pasetto,
A., Zheng, Z., Ray, S., Groh, E.M., et al. (2016). T-Cell Transfer Therapy Target-
ing Mutant KRAS in Cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 375, 2255–2262.
Tumeh, P.C., Harview, C.L., Yearley, J.H., Shintaku, I.P., Taylor, E.J., Robert,
L., Chmielowski, B., Spasic, M., Henry, G., Ciobanu, V., et al. (2014). PD-1
blockade induces responses by inhibiting adaptive immune resistance. Nature
515, 568–571.
Turcotte, M., Spring, K., Pommey, S., Chouinard, G., Cousineau, I., George, J.,
Chen, G.M., Gendoo, D.M., Haibe-Kains, B., Karn, T., et al. (2015). CD73 is
associated with poor prognosis in high-grade serous ovarian cancer. Cancer
Res. 75, 4494–4503.
Van Allen, E.M., Miao, D., Schilling, B., Shukla, S.A., Blank, C., Zimmer, L.,
Sucker, A., Hillen, U., Geukes Foppen, M.H., Goldinger, S.M., et al. (2015).
Genomic correlates of response to CTLA-4 blockade in metastatic melanoma.
Science 350, 207–211.
van Rooij, N., van Buuren, M.M., Philips, D., Velds, A., Toebes, M., Heemskerk,
B., van Dijk, L.J., Behjati, S., Hilkmann, H., El Atmioui, D., et al. (2013). Tumor
exome analysis reveals neoantigen-specific T-cell reactivity in an ipilimumab-
responsive melanoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 31, e439–e442.
Vanpouille-Box, C., Diamond, J.M., Pilones, K.A., Zavadil, J., Babb, J.S., Formenti,
S.C.,Barcellos-Hoff,M.H.,andDemaria,S.(2015).TGFbis amasterregulatorofra-
diation therapy-induced antitumor immunity. Cancer Res. 75, 2232–2242.
Ve
´ tizou, M., Pitt, J.M., Daille
` re, R., Lepage, P., Waldschmitt, N., Flament, C.,
Rusakiewicz, S., Routy, B., Roberti, M.P., Duong, C.P., et al. (2015). Anticancer
immunotherapy by CTLA-4 blockade relies on the gut microbiota. Science
350, 1079–1084.
Viehl, C.T., Moore, T.T., Liyanage, U.K., Frey, D.M., Ehlers, J.P., Eberlein, T.J.,
Goedegebuure, P.S., and Linehan, D.C. (2006). Depletion of CD4+CD25+
regulatory T cells promotes a tumor-specific immune response in pancreas
cancer-bearing mice. Ann. Surg. Oncol. 13, 1252–1258.
Vo, D.D., Prins, R.M., Begley, J.L., Donahue, T.R., Morris, L.F., Bruhn, K.W., de
la Rocha, P., Yang, M.-Y., Mok, S., Garban, H.J., et al. (2009). Enhanced anti-
tumor activity induced by adoptive T-cell transfer and adjunctive use of the his-
tone deacetylase inhibitor LAQ824. Cancer Res. 69, 8693–8699.
Wang, L.X., Mei, Z.Y., Zhou, J.H., Yao, Y.S., Li, Y.H., Xu, Y.H., Li, J.X., Gao,
X.N., Zhou, M.H., Jiang, M.M., et al. (2013). Low dose decitabine treatment in-
duces CD80 expression in cancer cells and stimulates tumor specific cytotoxic
T lymphocyte responses. PLoS ONE 8, e62924.
Wargo, J.A., Reddy, S.M., Reuben, A., and Sharma, P. (2016). Monitoring im-
mune responses in the tumor microenvironment. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 41,
23–31.
Weber, J.S., D’Angelo, S.P., Minor, D., Hodi, F.S., Gutzmer, R., Neyns, B., Ho-
eller, C., Khushalani, N.I., Miller, W.H., Jr., Lao, C.D., et al. (2015). Nivolumab
versus chemotherapy in patients with advanced melanoma who progressed
after anti-CTLA-4 treatment (CheckMate 037): a randomised, controlled,
open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 16, 375–384.
Wesolowski, R., Markowitz, J., and Carson, W.E., 3rd. (2013). Myeloid derived
suppressor cells - a new therapeutic target in the treatment of cancer.
J. Immunother. Cancer 1, 10.
Wilmott, J.S., Long, G.V., Howle, J.R., Haydu, L.E., Sharma, R.N., Thompson,
J.F., Kefford, R.F., Hersey, P., and Scolyer, R.A. (2012). Selective BRAF inhib-
itors induce marked T-cell infiltration into human metastatic melanoma. Clin.
Cancer Res. 18, 1386–1394.
Wolchok, J.D., Kluger, H., Callahan, M.K., Postow, M.A., Rizvi, N.A., Lesokhin,
A.M., Segal, N.H., Ariyan, C.E., Gordon, R.-A., Reed, K., et al. (2013). Nivolu-
mab plus ipilimumab in advanced melanoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 369, 122–133.
Woo, E.Y., Yeh, H., Chu, C.S., Schlienger, K., Carroll, R.G., Riley, J.L., Kaiser,
L.R., and June, C.H. (2002). Cutting edge: Regulatory T cells from lung cancer
patients directly inhibit autologous T cell proliferation. J. Immunol. 168,
4272–4276.
Wu, X., Schulte, B.C., Zhou, Y., Haribhai, D., Mackinnon, A.C., Plaza, J.A.,
Williams, C.B., and Hwang, S.T. (2014). Depletion of M2-like tumor-associated
macrophages delays cutaneous T-cell lymphoma development in vivo.
J. Invest. Dermatol. 134, 2814–2822.
Yang, J.C., and Rosenberg, S.A. (2016). Chapter Seven—Adoptive T-Cell
Therapy for Cancer. In Advances in Immunology, D.S. Robert, ed. (Academic
Press), pp. 279–294.
Yang, L., DeBusk, L.M., Fukuda, K., Fingleton, B., Green-Jarvis, B., Shyr, Y.,
Matrisian, L.M., Carbone, D.P., and Lin, P.C. (2004). Expansion of myeloid im-
mune suppressor Gr+CD11b+ cells in tumor-bearing host directly promotes
tumor angiogenesis. Cancer Cell 6, 409–421.
Yang, L., Huang, J., Ren, X., Gorska, A.E., Chytil, A., Aakre, M., Carbone, D.P.,
Matrisian, L.M., Richmond, A., Lin, P.C., and Moses, H.L. (2008). Abrogation of
TGF beta signaling in mammary carcinomas recruits Gr-1+CD11b+ myeloid
cells that promote metastasis. Cancer Cell 13, 23–35.
Yee, C., Lizee, G., and Schueneman, A.J. (2015). Endogenous T-Cell Therapy:
Clinical Experience. Cancer J. 21, 492–500.
Zaretsky, J.M., Garcia-Diaz, A., Shin, D.S., Escuin-Ordinas, H., Hugo, W., Hu-
Lieskovan, S., Torrejon, D.Y., Abril-Rodriguez, G., Sandoval, S., Barthly, L.,
et al. (2016). Mutations Associated with Acquired Resistance to PD-1
Blockade in Melanoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 375, 819–829.
Zhang, H., Conrad, D.M., Butler, J.J., Zhao, C., Blay, J., and Hoskin, D.W.
(2004). Adenosine acts through A2 receptors to inhibit IL-2-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT5 in T lymphocytes: role of cyclic adenosine 30,50-
monophosphate and phosphatases. J. Immunol. 173, 932–944.
Zhu, Y., Knolhoff, B.L., Meyer, M.A., Nywening, T.M., West, B.L., Luo, J.,
Wang-Gillam, A., Goedegebuure, S.P., Linehan, D.C., and DeNardo, D.G.
(2014). CSF1/CSF1R blockade reprograms tumor-infiltrating macrophages
and improves response to T-cell checkpoint immunotherapy in pancreatic
cancer models. Cancer Res. 74, 5057–5069.
Zou, W., Wolchok, J.D., and Chen, L. (2016). PD-L1 (B7-H1) and PD-1 pathway
blockade for cancer therapy: Mechanisms, response biomarkers, and combi-
nations. Sci. Transl. Med. 8.
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
723
