 Environmental Research Letters
LETTER • OPEN ACCESS
Quantifying expert consensus against the
existence of a secret, large-scale atmospheric
spraying program
To cite this article: Christine Shearer et al 2016 Environ. Res. Lett. 11 084011
 
View the article online for updates and enhancements.
Related content
Corrigendum: Quantifying expert
consensus against the existence of a
secret, large-scale atmospheric spraying
program (2016 Environ. Res. Lett. 11
084011)
Christine Shearer, Mick West, Ken
Caldeira et al.
-
The importance of assessing and
communicating scientific consensus
Edward W Maibach and Sander L van der
Linden
-
Consensus on consensus: a synthesis of
consensus estimates on human-caused
global warming
John Cook, Naomi Oreskes, Peter T
Doran et al.
-
Recent citations
The importance of assessing and
communicating scientific consensus
Edward W Maibach and Sander L van der
Linden
-
This content was downloaded from IP address 85.203.44.48 on 01/06/2019 at 12:33
 Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 129501
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/12/129501
CORRIGENDUM
Corrigendum: Quantifying expert consensus against the existence of
a secret, large-scale atmospheric spraying program (2016 Environ.
Res. Lett. 11 084011)
Christine Shearer1,2, Mick West3, Ken Caldeira4 and Steven J Davis1,2
1 Department of Earth System Science, University of California, Irvine, Croul Hall, Irvine, CA 92697, USA
2 Near Zero, Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford, CA 943053, USA
3 Metabunk.org, Shingle Springs, CA 95682, USA
4 Department of Global Ecology, Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
Corrigendum
Unfortunately there was an error in figure 2. The
number (n) for the pie charts (a)–(d) should have read
49—the number of respondents to the question of
whether a secret, large-scale atmospheric spraying
program was the most parsimonious explanation for the
photos. Additionally, in figure 2(a), two of the blocks in
OPEN ACCESS
RECEIVED
7 October 2016
ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
21 October 2016
PUBLISHED
22 November 2016
Original content from this
work may be used under
the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 3.0
licence.
Any further distribution of
this work must maintain
attribution to the
author(s) and the title of
the work, journal citation
and DOI.
Figure 2.
© 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd
 the bar chart had the same label ‘Different combustion
efficiency/engine’; the block for n=5 should have
instead read‘Differentaircraftsizes/types’.Figure2with
the correct number and label is above. All other data
remains the same. Original photos can be viewed at
www.ess.uci.edu/~sjdavis/SLAP/.
Introduction
The first line should have read: ‘In a recent interna-
tional survey of 3105 people,’ not 3015 people.
Atmospheric deposition
The discussion of the third sample in the section on
atmospheric deposition should have read: ‘Twenty-
three experts (82%) rejected the results as evidence of
SLAP, while four (14%) did not know or were unsure.’
The Nguyen et al 1998 reference and citation should
have read:
Minnis P, YoungDF, GarberDP, Nguyen L, SmithWL Jr
and Palikonda R 1998 Transformation of contrails into
cirrusduring SUCCESSGeophys.Res.Lett.251157–60
2
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 129501
C Shearer et al
 Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 084011
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/8/084011
LETTER
Quantifying expert consensus against the existence of a secret,
large-scale atmospheric spraying program
Christine Shearer1,2, Mick West3, Ken Caldeira4 and Steven J Davis1,2
1 Department of Earth System Science, University of California, Irvine, Croul Hall, Irvine, CA 92697, USA
2 Near Zero, Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford, CA 943053, USA
3 Metabunk.org, Shingle Springs, CA 95682, USA
4 Department of Global Ecology, Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
E-mail: sjdavis@uci.edu
Keywords: contrails, chemtrails, atmospheric deposition, secret large-scale atmospheric spraying program, geoengineering
Abstract
Nearly 17% of people in an international survey said they believed the existence of a secret large-scale
atmospheric program (SLAP) to be true or partly true. SLAP is commonly referred to as ‘chemtrails’ or
‘covert geoengineering’, and has led to a number of websites purported to show evidence of
widespread chemical spraying linked to negative impacts on human health and the environment. To
address these claims, we surveyed two groups of experts—atmospheric chemists with expertize in
condensation trails and geochemists working on atmospheric deposition of dust and pollution—to
scientifically evaluate for the first time the claims of SLAP theorists. Results show that 76 of the 77
scientists (98.7%) that took part in this study said they had not encountered evidence of a SLAP, and
that the data cited as evidence could be explained through other factors, including well-understood
physics and chemistry associated with aircraft contrails and atmospheric aerosols. Our goal is not to
sway those already convinced that there is a secret, large-scale spraying program—who often reject
counter-evidence as further proof of their theories—but rather to establish a source of objective
science that can inform public discourse.
Introduction
In a recent international survey of 3015 people, 2.6% of
the respondents said it was ‘completely true’ that there
is a secret government program that uses airplanes to
put harmful chemicals into the air, and 14% said this is
‘partly true’ (Mercer et al 2011). The existence of such a
program, popularly referred to as ‘chemtrails’, has
gained a passionate following of people who link
sprayed chemicalstonegative impacts onhumanhealth
and the environment. As described below, much of the
support for ‘chemtrails’-related theories has appeared
on the internet, and not in peer-reviewed contexts.
Social scientists have noted parallels between belief in
claims of a secret, large-scale atmospheric spraying
program (SLAP) and growing public distrust of elites
and social institutions (Cairns 2014, Cairns and Stir-
ling 2014, Bakalaki2016).
Individuals who assert the existence of such a SLAP
assume different purposes of the program. Initially, the
mostcommonlyinferredgoalswerecontroloverpopula-
tion, food supply, and/or the weather. However, with the
emergence of research on climate geoengineering in the
early 2000s (Crutzen 2006), SLAP has also been increas-
ingly explained as geoengineering of the Earth’s climate
system (Cairns 2014). SLAP activists can be aggressive,
and academics assessing climate geoengineering using
computer models have been subjected to threats for their
allegedroleinasecretsprayingprogram(Keith2013).
The existence of actual research programs that
involve spraying or dispersing material in the atmos-
phere is seen, by some, as evidence in favor of SLAP
theory. For example, cloud seeding entails spraying
small particles of substances, such as dry ice or silver
iodide, onto clouds in order to increase precipitation.
The technique has been used by some states and coun-
tries, with modest results: the California Department
of Water Resources has estimated a four percent
annual precipitation increase attributable to the com-
bined state seeding projects (Hunter 2007).
OPEN ACCESS
RECEIVED
19 April 2016
REVISED
21 June 2016
ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
18 July 2016
PUBLISHED
10 August 2016
Original content from this
work may be used under
the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 3.0
licence.
Any further distribution of
this work must maintain
attribution to the
author(s) and the title of
the work, journal citation
and DOI.
© 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd
 Despite the prevalence of the SLAP theory, there
here have been few attempts to seriously and scientifi-
cally evaluate the claims of its proponents. In 2000, the
US Environmental Protection Agency, Federal Avia-
tion Administration, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, and the National Oceanic and Atmo-
spheric Administration posted a fact sheet to assure
the public that the government is not operating a
large-scale atmospheric spraying program (EPA, FAA,
NASA and NOAA 2000). There have been no peer-
reviewed studies in the scientific literature addressing
SLAP claims. Meanwhile, a growing number of studies
have shown that quantifying and communicating the
scientific consensus on contested issues such as vac-
cine safety and climate change can help lower public
misperceptions and uncertainty (Myers et al 2015, van
der Linden et al 2015, van der Linden et al 2015).
Here, therefore, we report the results of an expert
survey in which we asked experts on atmospheric
chemistry and atmospheric deposition to scientifically
evaluate the claims of SLAP theorists. We find broad
scientific consensus against the existence of a secret,
large-scale atmospheric spraying program. Our goal is
not to sway those already convinced that there is a
secret, large-scale spraying program—who often
reject counter-evidence as further proof of their the-
ories—but rather to establish a source of objective,
peer-reviewed science that can inform public dis-
course in the future by seriously addressing the under-
lying concerns of science, governance, and public trust
(Cairns 2014).
Methods
There are multiple websites dedicated to exposing the
existence of SLAP, including ‘Geoengineering Watch’
(geoengineeringwatch.org) and ‘Global Sky Watch’
(globalskywatch.com). These websites collect and dis-
play data in support of the SLAP theory. This data
most commonly falls into two categories: (1) photo-
graphs of trails left behind by airplanes and (2)
elemental analyses of water, soil, and snow samples.
The websites claim condensation trails, or contrails,
should evaporate right away, and therefore persistent
trails are evidence of chemical spraying. They also post
test results suggesting above normal levels of elements
—particularly strontium, barium, and aluminum—
which they argue also indicates chemical spraying.
In order to evaluate these data, we developed two
surveys (the complete survey protocols are available at:
http://nearzero.org/elicitation/review/a2592e56-
cb21-4849-baa2-560d456707c8 and http://nearzero.
org/elicitation/review/d172e2d8-89fa-4bcc-a90f-
c28a58bc7cf0) and administered each survey to a dif-
ferent group of experts: (1) atmospheric scientists with
expertize in condensation trails and (2) geochemists
working on atmospheric deposition of dust and pollu-
tion on the Earth’s surface.
Expert participants were selected by using the ISI
Web of Science to identify the authors of the most-
cited peer-reviewed publications covering these topics
that have been published in the past 20 years
(1994–2014). In the first case, we searched for papers
with the topic ‘contrail’. For experts on atmospheric
deposition, we used the search terms ‘atmospheric
deposition’ AND (‘aluminum’ OR ‘barium’ OR
‘strontium’), which narrowed the results to experts
working on the elements most frequently pointed to as
evidence of spraying by the analyses of SLAP propo-
nents, and excluded other types of deposition events
such as acid rain and nitrogen run-off. For the pur-
poses of this study, we define ‘contrail expert’ and
‘atmospheric deposition expert’ to be a person who
has co-authored one or more of the 100 most-cited
papers in each search.
Using these criteria, we identified 220 contrail
experts and 255 atmospheric deposition experts. A
survey invitation was sent out: 49 contrail experts and
65 atmospheric deposition experts could not be
reached with our contact information or explicitly dis-
qualified themselves as experts on the survey topic.
This left a total sample population of 171 for contrails
and 190 for atmospheric deposition. Of these, 49
experts completed the contrail survey and 28 com-
pleted the atmospheric deposition survey—a response
rate of 29% and 15%, respectively. The lower response
rate for deposition may have in part been due to the
wider breadth of knowledge covered in the survey
leading more people to disqualify themselves as
experts. All invited experts were informed that the sur-
vey would be confidential: participant names are lis-
ted, but responses are not attributed to specific
experts. Contrail experts had an average of 26 years
professional experience in their field (with a median of
26 years), and deposition experts 22 years (with a med-
ian of 20 years).
The surveys asked the two groups of experts to
assess data that have been presented on websites as evi-
dence of SLAP. In both surveys, the first question
asked was: ‘Have you, in your work or personal life,
ever come across evidence that you think indicates the
existence of a secret large-scale atmospheric spraying
program?’ Participants could choose either yes or no,
or write in their own response.
Trails behind aircraft
SLAP proponents argue that condensation trails, or
contrails, should evaporate quickly after the passing of
an aircraft, and that more persistent trails are evidence
of chemical spraying. Our contrail survey consisted of
four pictures taken from SLAP websites that have been
cited as evidence of a SLAP. In each case, the experts
were first asked whether they thought the most
parsimonious (i.e. simplest) explanation involved a
SLAP. They were then asked to explain the photo and
offer a reference to the scientific literature that best
2
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 084011
 described the mechanism(s) that account for the
phenomena shown in the photo. They were also asked
whether trails behind aircraft persist for longer time
periods today than when air travel first began, and the
factors underlying any change.
Atmospheric deposition
SLAP proponents argue that seemingly abnormal
concentrations of elements such as strontium, barium,
and aluminum in water, soil, and snow samples are the
result of sprayed chemicals. Our survey asked experts
to evaluate photocopies of three different laboratory
analyses of elemental concentrations in samples of
pond sediment, filter media, and snow that were
posted on the SLAP website, Geoengineering Watch.
Additionally, experts were asked to evaluate the
appropriateness of the sampling methods recom-
mended by SLAP websites, and whether they have
observed any secular changes in the environmental
concentrations of strontium, barium, and aluminum
over their careers, and the factors underlying any
change.
Results
In response to the general question of whether they
have ever encountered evidence that indicates the
existence of SLAP, 76 of the total 77 expert respon-
dents (98.7%) answered no (figure 1). Further, when
asked about their degree of confidence that they would
have come across such evidence, the average confi-
dence levels were 86% and 55% for contrail and
atmospheric deposition experts, respectively. The
one participant who answered yes said the evidence
s/he had come across was ‘high levels of atm[ospheric]
barium in a remote area with standard ‘low’ soil
barium’.
Trails behind aircraft
Figure 2 shows the four photos assessed by contrail
experts. In each case, 100% of the experts indicated
that the simplest explanation of the trails in the photo
was not a secret, large-scale atmospheric spraying
program. To the contrary, the experts often agreed
about the physical mechanisms on display in each
photo, and indicated that none were out of the
ordinary or explained by events outside of normal
contrail formation. There were also many common
citations, suggesting the mechanisms behind the
contrails shown are well documented in the peer-
reviewed literature.
The first photo showed three trails in the sky, one
thick and long and the other two thinner and shorter
(figure 2(a)). SLAP proponents have argued that con-
densation trails should evaporate quickly, and therefore
persistent trails of varying lengths indicate differences in
how much and/or how long aircraft have been spraying
chemicals. In contrast, 39 (80%) of the contrail experts
stated that the larger trail in the photo was likely in an
area of higher humidity, while 35 experts (71%) indi-
cated that the thicker and longer size of the larger trail
was related to greater altitude. Some experts also sug-
gested that different types of aircraft may have made the
trails and that their fuel efficiencies may have differed
(10% and 12%, respectively), either of which could also
affect the size and density of the condensation trail. The
most common citation was Schumann’s ‘On conditions
for contrail formation from aircraft exhausts’ (Schu-
mann1996),citedbynine(18%)oftheexperts.
The second photo showed a trail broken by a gap
(figure 2(b)). SLAP proponents have argued that such a
gap reflects that chemical spraying was turned on, then
off, then on again. Forty (82%) and eight (16%) of the
contrail experts explained the gap as an area of particu-
larly dry or warm air, respectively, which made it more
difficult for the condensation trail to persist. Eleven
experts (22%) also suggested the gap could be due to
subsidence or an upwelling of air. Citations for this
phenomenon were diverse, with the most common
reference being again Schumann’s ‘On conditions’
(Schumann1996) and Schumann’s ‘Formation,proper-
ties, and climate effects of contrails’ (Schumann 2005),
bothcitedby6%ofexperts.
The third photo showed a plane with thick, dense
trails behind each wingtip and spanned by a color
spectrum (figure 2(c)). SLAP proponents have argued
such phenomena—thick, persistent contrails and
rainbow colors—are both evidence of heavy chemical
spraying. Thirty contrail experts (61%) instead
explained the dense trails by the presence of moist air
that was supersaturated, with the colors due to light
refracting through ice crystals (19 experts, or 39%) or
diffusion or scattering by small water droplets or ice
crystals (11 experts, or 22%). The most common refer-
ence was Gierens et al’s ‘Aerodynamic contrails: phe-
nomenology and flow physics’ (Gierens et al 2009),
cited by 11 (22%) of the experts.
The fourth photo showed a swirling sky of trails,
spanning different densities and lengths (figure 2(d)).
SLAP proponents have argued such a thick patchwork
of trails suggest widespread spraying. Contrails experts
Figure 1. Of 77 experts surveyed, 98.7% (76) said they had not
encountered evidence that indicates the existence of a secret,
large-scale atmospheric spraying program (SLAP), and 1.3%
(1) said they had.
3
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 084011
 suggested the depicted were likely related to military,
research, or acrobatic aircraft (29 experts, 59%), or air-
craft circling in a holding pattern, perhaps near an air-
port (21 experts, 43%). The different trail sizes were
also attributed to wind shear, advection, or high alti-
tude winds (14 experts, 29%). The most common
reference was ‘Transformation of contrails into cirrus
during SUCCESS’ (Nguyen et al 1998), cited by four
(8%) of respondents.
In response to the question of whether trails behind
aircraft are persisting for longer periods of time now
than they did when plane travel first began, 23 experts
(47%) answered no, 18 experts (37%) answered yes,
and 8 experts (16%) offered no response. Among those
indicating they thought trails are now lasting longer, the
top reasons given were: Aircraft flying higher (17
experts, 35%), modern and larger engines that produce
more water vapor (11 experts, 22%), more plane traffic
leading to planesflying athigheraltitudes where contra-
ils are more likely to form (nine experts, 18%), higher
water vapor content of the atmosphere due to climate
change (six experts, 12%), and decreased temperature
of aircraft exhaust related to improved fuel efficiency
(fiveexperts, 10%).
Atmospheric deposition
Figure 3 shows the responses to photocopies of three
different laboratory analyses that SLAP proponents
argue show high and abnormal concentrations indica-
tive of chemical spraying. For each analysis, experts
were first asked if the simplest explanation of the trails
in the photo was a secret, large-scale atmospheric
spraying program. They were then asked to write in
how they interpreted the results.
The first lab result on the survey showed the con-
centrations of aluminum, barium, and strontium
measured in a sample of pond sediment/sludge: 375
parts per million (ppm) for aluminum, 3.1 ppm for
barium, and 345 parts per billion (ppb) for strontium
(figure 3(a)). Twenty-four atmospheric deposition
experts (86%) responded that the simplest explanation
of these results did not involve a SLAP, and four
Figure 2. Presented with four different images of trails behind aircraft (a)–(d), experts uniformly responded that a secret, large-scale
atmospheric spraying program (SLAP) was not the most parsimonious explanation for the depicted phenomena (pie charts). In each
case, the stacked bars show the experts’ most common alternative explanations. The photo in part (b) has been reproduced with
permission from Forest M. Mims III.
4
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 084011
 experts (14%) said they did not know how to interpret
the results. Eleven experts (39%) indicated that the
lab results showed typical concentrations of alumi-
num in sediment/sludge, and six (21%) said they were
likely of natural origin (e.g. minerals in sludge). As
summarized by one expert, ‘All three of these elements
are major constituents of crustal material. The con-
centrations reported for the three elements are much
less than what is present in average upper continental
crust’. Another stated: ‘It looks like about five grams of
average soil or desert dust in a liter of sludge, quite
reasonable’.
The second sample showed the concentrations of
elements in a sample of airborne particulates taken in
May 2008 in Phoenix, Arizona (figure 3(b)). Barium is
reported at 556 000 ppb, copper at 197 000 ppb, and
manganese at 562 000 ppb. The results appear to show
concentrations of all three elements far beyond their
maximum contaminant levels (MCLs), which are listed
on the results as 2000 ppb for barium and copper, and
100 ppb for manganese. One expert (4%) said the results
may be evidence of a SLAP—the same expert who said
s/he had previously come across high levels of atmo-
spheric barium. Twenty-five experts (89%) rejected the
results as evidence of SLAP, while two (7%) did not
know or were unsure. When asked to write in their
interpretation, 12 experts (49%) said they wanted more
data first, such as atmospheric conditions and proximity
to industry. Four experts (14%) said the concentrations
were average or typical. As stated by one expert: ‘The
concentrations per unit mass look like average soil or
desert dust. The MCL values are not relevant, and look
to be based on drinking water standards’. The MCL
values used were indeed based on drinking water, and
notairborneparticulates.
The third sample showed the concentration for the
elemental make-up of metals from a snow surface sam-
ple taken in July 2008 on Mount Shasta, California
Figure 3. Presented with copies of results from three different elemental analyses of pond sediment (a), airborne particles (b) and snow
(c), in each case >80% of experts responded that a secret, large-scale atmospheric spraying program (SLAP) was not the most
parsimonious explanation for the depicted phenomena (pie charts). However, in each case a few experts (2–4) were ‘not sure’, and 1
expert responded that SLAP was the most parsimonious explanation of the elemental concentrations in the airborne and snow
samples. For each set of results, the stacked bars show the experts’ most common alternative explanations.
5
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 084011
 (figure 3(c)). Aluminum is measured at 611 ppm, bar-
ium at 83 ppb, and strontium at 383 ppb. Twenty-three
experts (82%) rejected the results as evidence of SLAP,
while fourteen (14%) did not know or were unsure.
When asked to interpret the results, many experts (ele-
ven, or 39%) again said they were not sure and wanted
moredata,whilesevenexperts(25%)saidtheconcentra-
tionswereaverageortypical.A differentexpert(4%) said
the result may be evidence of a SLAP, writing ‘Unless,
there is some kind of Al[uminum] pollution source in
the direct neighborhood, the results for are ridiculously
high and indeed suspicious’. Another expert who rejec-
ted the sample as evidence of a SLAP said the results did
show ‘very high Al concentrations for a snow sample’
which ‘makes me think it cannot just be snow’. Indeed,
the sample was not just snow, but snow surface. One
expert explained: ‘As before, these data are actually low
relative to crustal composition’ while another described
thesampleasshowing‘normaldustfall’.
We also asked experts to evaluate the advice of one
SLAP website on how non-specialists can collect sam-
ples of surface water to obtain evidence relevant to
‘aerosol geoengineering’:
If you are testing a pond, then the only
thing different is how you collect the
sample. The very bottom of the pond is
where the elements stack up. Turn your
jar upside down and get the mouth to the
bottom of the pond or still waterK.the
older the pond the higher the readings.
Turn the jar over and collect both the
water and a LITTLE of the bottom
sediment.
Twenty of the deposition experts (71%) either dis-
agreed or strongly disagreed with the instructions,
with 17 (61%) explaining that collecting the ‘bottom
sediment’ would contaminate the water sample
(figure 4(a)). The remaining eight respondents (29%)
were neutral; no expert said they agreed with the
instructions. As stated by one expert: ‘The non-specia-
list is instructed to add sediments to the water which
will not give an accurate measurement of metal con-
centrations in surface water itself—soils/sediments/
sludge are more concentrated in these elements
than water and will contaminate the water sample’.
Another stated: ‘The sampling will entrain both sedi-
ments and water; sediments are naturally high in trace
metals and will not reveal anything about concentra-
tions in the overlying water’.
The same website also has step-by-step instruc-
tions for how to collect samples of rain and snow,
recommending the use of mason jars to collect the
samples, and then to shake or stir the samples:
(1) If you can get brand new, never used mason jars,
but clean used jars and lids will work.
(2) Place as many of these into the rain or snow as
possible (you can pour all their contents into
one jar).
(3) When transferring from one container to another,
IT IS CRITICAL TO RE-SUSPEND the sample...
shake the jar with the lid on, or stir with a sterilized
instrument. Alternatively, you can ‘back and forth’
the samples, allowing a little ‘fall’ to create enough
turbulence to re-suspend any contaminants that
may be stuck to the glass.
(4) Seal with the lid and ring and place into the
refrigerator. Take to the lab as soon as possible,
preferably the next morning.
(5) Take the sample to your local lab, use a lab that tests
‘well water’Kthey are certified and this is easy for
them. Call them first, make sure you have the right
lab. You ARE NOT looking for something like a
‘well analysis’Kwhich is pretty expensiveKyou
just want to test a rain sample, in a sterile mason jar
for specific metals.
Six experts (23%) were neutral and three experts
(11%) agreed with the instructions; none strongly
agreed (figure 4(b)). Nineteen experts (68%) disagreed
or strongly disagreed with those instructions, with over
half (15 experts, 54%) saying a jar glass and metal lid
would likely contain trace elements that would con-
taminate the sample. One expert who strongly
disagreed with the instructions wrote: ‘the jar will con-
taminate the sample, as will the metal lid, particularly if
you shake it! I cannot imagine a worse protocol for col-
lecting a sample, the data would be totally worthless’.
Another said: ‘To analyze metals in environmental sam-
ples, glass needs to go through an acid wash to remove
anyresidualmetals.Otherwise,plasticshouldbeused’.
Finally, we asked the deposition experts if they
have noticed a general increase in environmental con-
centrations of aluminum, barium, and/or strontium
over their careers. Only six (21%) thought concentra-
tions of aluminum had increased, and three each
(11%) barium and strontium. Of the experts who
thought that concentrations might have increased, the
increase was primarily attributed to changes in indus-
trial, agricultural, or natural processes.
Both contrail and deposition experts were allowed
to rate their level of expertize and confidence for each
survey question, an option used by less than a third of
participants in either survey. For the contrail survey,
experts reported the lowest level of confidence for the
question regarding duration of contrails, and the high-
est level of confidence and expertize for their assess-
ment of the photos. Deposition experts were more
likely to report lower levels of confidence regarding
their analysis of the test samples, and higher levels of
confidence and expertize in their assessment of the
sampling instructions.
6
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 084011
 Discussion
For the contrail survey, no expert thought they had
ever come across evidence of a SLAP. Further, no
expert thought any of the four photos in the survey—
cited as evidence of chemical spraying on SLAP
websites—were best explained by chemical spraying.
On the contrary, there was a high degree of consensus
on the natural mechanisms accounting for the phe-
nomena in each photo. For many photos, there was
also overlap on the peer-reviewed studies that best
explained each photo.
Where there may be some slight agreement with
SLAP theorists was with the 18 experts (37%) who
thought trails may now be persisting for longer peri-
ods of time. However, they attributed the longer dura-
tion of trails to known factors such as larger engines
and fuel efficiencies that create cooler water vapor and
allow increased plane traffic to fly at higher altitudes,
leading to more persistent condensation trails.
For the deposition survey, 80%–89% of respon-
dents for each of the three samples presented did not
think the simplest explanation involved chemical
spraying. It should be noted, however, that eleven
experts (39%) were not sure how to interpret the
results from either the airborne particulates or snow
surface samples (figures 3(b) and (c), respectively),
saying they wanted more information and context. Yet
while SLAP proponents argue all the samples show
abnormally high levels of metal concentrations, the
experts who did offer an analysis mostly said the sam-
ples showed average concentrations given the fact that
they were not simply water, air, snow but sludge, sedi-
ment, and dust samples.
Although many experts were not sure how to
interpret the second and third samples, most disagreed
or strongly disagreed with the sampling instructions
offered on the SLAP website for collecting surface
water, rain, and snow testing (figure 4). The main
reason offered for disagreeing with the surface water
sample instructions is that adding sediments would
increase measurement of metal concentrations, as
levels are higher in sediment than water. There was
also concern that the instructions for rain and snow
samples did not include sufficient information for pre-
venting contamination.
Conclusion
A small but vocal group of people have been advocat-
ing that there exists a SLAP that is spraying dangerous
chemicals from aircraft. Some people believing these
theories have constructed websites that purport to
show evidence of ongoing widespread spraying. With
the exception of a fact sheet presented by government
agencies in year 2000 (EPA, FAA, NASA and
NOAA 2000), these claims have not been addressed by
the scientific community, which may lead the broader
Figure 4. Presented with the sampling instructions offered on a SLAP website for collecting surface water (a), and rain and snow (b)
samples, >60% of surveyed experts disagreed with the advice, in each case expressing concerns about contamination of samples.
7
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 084011
 public to be confused or uncertain about the validity of
the claims and data.
We therefore offer the first peer-reviewed expert
response on SLAP data, from both atmospheric scien-
tists with expertize in condensation trails and geoche-
mists working on atmospheric deposition of dust and
pollution. Results show that 76 out of 77 (98.7%) of
scientists that took part in this study said there was no
evidence of a SLAP, and that the data cited as evidence
could be explained through other factors, such as typi-
cal contrail formation and poor data sampling instruc-
tions presented on SLAP websites.
The number of aircraft contrails has been increas-
ing. There have been revelations over the decades of
governments undertaking action in secret without the
informed consent of the population. It is reasonable
that ordinary citizens should want questions answered
Table 1. Expert participants in contrails survey (alphabetical order).
Name
Institution
Andrew Carleton
Penn State University
Andrew Heidinger
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
Andrew Heymsfield
National Center for Atmospheric
Research
Andrew J Weinheimer
National Center for Atmospheric
Research
Brian A Ridley
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
Bruce Anderson
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
Bryan Baum
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Charles A Brock
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
Charles E Kolb
Aerodyne Research
Christine Fichter
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Christos Zerefos
University of Athens
Cynthia Twohy
NorthWest Research Associates
Darrel Baumgardner
Droplet Measurement Technologies
David Doelling
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
David Kratz
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
David Lee
Manchester Metropolitan University
David Lewellen
West Virginia University
David J Travis
University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
Donald P Garber
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
Eleftheratos
Konstantinos
University of Athens
Gaby Radel
University of Reading
Guy Febvre
Observatory of Atmospheric Physics at
Clermont-Ferrand
Hartmut Grassl
Max Planck Institute for Meteorology
Jack Dibb
University of New Hampshire
Karen Rosenlof
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
Klaus Gierens
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Larry Miloshevich
Milo Scientific
Markus Garhammer
Ludwig-Maximilians-University
Matthias Tesche
Stockholm University
Michael Ponater
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Michael Prather
University of California, Irvine
Otto Klemm
University of Muenster
Patrick Minnis
National Aeronautics & Space
Administration
Piers Forster
University of Leeds
R Paul Lawson
Stratton Park Engineering Company
Rabi Palikonda
National Aeronautics & Space
Administration
Reinhold Busen
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Robert Sausen
Institute of Atmospheric Physics
Robert Talbot
University of Houston
Ru-Shan Gao
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
Sonia M Kreidenweis
Colorado State University
Stephan Bakan
Max Planck Institute for Meteorology
Tatiana Khokhlova
University of Washington
Thilo Stilp
European Aviation Group for Occupa-
tional Safety and Health
Tove Svenby
Norwegian Institute for Air Research
Ulrich Schumann
Institute of Atmospheric Physics
Ulrike Burkhardt
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Table 1. (Continued.)
Name
Institution
Volker Grewe
Institute of Atmospheric Physics
William L Smith
National Aeronautics and Space
Table 2. Expert participants in atmospheric deposition survey
(alphabetical order).
Name
Institution
Anne-Catherine Pierson-
Wickmann
University of Rennes 1
Carmen Nezat
Eastern Washington University
Carol Kendall
US Geological Survey
Chris Measures
University of Hawaii
Christopher Hissler
Gabriel Lippmann Public
Research Centre
Clifton Buck
Franklin College
Daniel Engstrom
University of Minnesota
David Grantz
University of California at
Riverside
Dominik Weiss
Imperial College London
Heleen de Wit
Norwegian Institute for Water
Research
Jan Kramers
University of Johannesburg
Jill Schrlau
Oregon State University
Joanna Clark
University of Reading
Josef Hejzlar
Institute of Hydrobiology
Kiminori Shitashima
Kyushu University
Lubos Boruvka
Czech University of Life Sciences
Prague
Marjorie Schulz
US Geological Survey
Mark Smits
Hasselt University
Matt Kulp
US National Park Service
Nicolas Belanger
University of Quebec
Pavel Rosendorf
T. G. Masaryk Water Research
Institute
Robert Duce
Texas A&M University
Rolf David Vogt
University of Oslo
Scott Bailey
US Forest Service
Steve Howell
University of Hawaii
Tomas Navratil
Czech Geological Survey
William Landing
Florida State University
Wim de Vries
University in Wageningen
8
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 084011
 concerning health, climate change, and pollution.
While we understand that many of the fears under-
lying SLAP theories may be legitimate, the evidence as
evaluated here does not point to a secret atmospheric
spraying program. Changes in aircraft technologies
may be causing contrails to persist longer than they
used to, and changes in industrial development could
potentially be increasing aerosol deposition in some
areas. But the focus on a secret, large-scale atmo-
spheric spraying program may be taking attention
away from real, underlying problems that need
addressing.
References
Bakalaki A 2016 Chemtrails, crisis, and loss in an interconnected
world Vis. Anthropol. Rev. 32 12–23
Cairns R 2014 Climates of suspicion:‘chemtrail’conspiracy
narratives and the international politics of geoengineering
Geogr. J. 182 70–84
Cairns R and Stirling A 2014 ‘Maintaining planetary systems’ or
‘concentrating global power?’ High stakes in contending
framings of climate geoengineering Glob. Environ. Change 28
25–38
Crutzen P J 2006 Albedo enhancement by stratospheric sulfur
injections: a contribution to resolve a policy dilemma? Clim.
Change 77 211–20
EPA, FAA, NASA, and NOAA 2000 Aircraft Contrails Factsheet
(www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/policy_guidance/envir_
policy/media/contrails.pdf) (accessed 12 November 2015)
Gierens K, Kärcher B, Mannstein H and Mayer B 2009 Aerodynamic
contrails: phenomenology and flow physics J. Atmos. Sci. 66
217–26
Hunter S M 2007 Optimizing cloud seeding for water and energy in
California A Pier-Final Project Report California Energy
Commission, CEC-500-2007-008 (www.energy.ca.gov/
2007publications/CEC-500-2007-008/CEC-500-2007-
008.PDF)
Keith D 2013 A Case for Climate Engineering (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press)
Mercer A M, Keith D W and Sharp J D 2011 Public understanding of
solar radiation management Environ. Res. Lett. 6
044006
Myers T A, Maibach E, Peters E and Leiserowitz A 2015 Simple
messages help set the record straight about scientific
agreement on human-caused climate change: the results of
two experiments PloS One 10 e0120985
Nguyen L, Smith W L Jr and Palikonda R 1998 Transformation of
contrails into cirrus during SUCCESS Geophys. Res. Lett. 25
1157–60
Schumann U 1996 On conditions for contrail formation from
aircraft exhausts Meteorol. Zeitschrift 5 4–23 (http://elib.dlr.
de/32128/1/mz-96.pdf)
Schumann U 2005 Formation, properties and climatic effects of
contrails C. R. Phys. 6 549–65
van der Linden S L, Clarke C E and Maibach E W 2015 Highlighting
consensus among medical scientists increases public support
for vaccines: evidence from a randomized experiment BMC
Public Health 15 1
van der Linden S L, Leiserowitz A A, Feinberg G D and
Maibach E W 2015 The scientific consensus on climate
change as a gateway belief: experimental evidence PloS One
10 e0118489
9
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 084011
