 October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
1
Review
published: 16 October 2017
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01311
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Kjetil Taskén, 
University of Oslo, Norway
Reviewed by: 
Lawrence Kane, 
 
University of Pittsburgh, 
 
United States 
 
Hu Zeng, 
Mayo Clinic Minnesota, 
United States
*Correspondence:
Hesham M. Shehata 
hesham.shehata@gladstone.ucsf.edu; 
Clovis Steve Palmer 
 
cpalmer@burnet.edu.au
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted 
 
to T Cell Biology, 
 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Immunology
Received: 18 August 2017
Accepted: 28 September 2017
Published: 16 October 2017
Citation: 
Shehata HM, Murphy AJ, Lee MkS, 
Gardiner CM, Crowe SM, Sanjabi S, 
Finlay DK and Palmer CS (2017) 
Sugar or Fat?—Metabolic 
Requirements for Immunity 
to Viral Infections. 
Front. Immunol. 8:1311. 
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01311
Sugar or Fat?—Metabolic 
Requirements for immunity  
to viral infections
Hesham M. Shehata1*, Andrew J. Murphy2, Man kit Sam Lee2, Clair M. Gardiner3,  
Suzanne M. Crowe 4,5, Shomyseh Sanjabi 1, David K. Finlay 3 and Clovis Steve Palmer 4,5,6*
1 
Virology and Immunology, Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA, United States, 2 
Haematopoiesis and Leukocyte Biology, 
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 3 
School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College 
Dublin, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, Dublin, Ireland, 4 
Centre for Biomedical Research, Burnet Institute, Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia, 5 
Department of Infectious Diseases, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 6 
Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
The realization that an intricate link exists between the metabolic state of immune cells 
and the nature of the elicited immune responses has brought a dramatic evolution to the 
field of immunology. We will focus on how metabolic reprogramming through the use of 
glycolysis and fatty-acid oxidation (sugar or fat) regulates the capacity of immune cells 
to mount robust and effective immune responses. We will also discuss how fine-tuning 
sugar and fat metabolism may be exploited as a novel immunotherapeutic strategy to 
fight viral infections or improve vaccine efficacy.
Keywords: immunometabolism, glycolysis, mTOR, Hiv, T cells, viral infection
iNTRODUCTiON
In response to an immunological challenge, such as a viral infection, cells of the immune system 
engage in robust growth and proliferation to generate effector cells that produce large quantities 
of effector molecules, such as cytokines and cytotoxic granules. Therefore, immune activation is 
associated with prodigious biosynthetic and energy demands, and immune cells must efficiently and 
robustly engage in metabolic reprogramming to generate sufficient energy to fuel these demands. 
Thus, immune cells reprogram cellular metabolic pathways that utilize both sugar and fat to accom-
modate the increased synthesis of metabolic intermediates required to synthesize cellular compo-
nents and immunological effector molecules (e.g., amino acids, nucleotides, lipids). Developing a 
strong understanding of these biosynthetic pathways has immense implications for fine-tuning T cell 
functions for immunotherapeutic purposes (1).
Metabolic pathways in naïve T cells (Tn) are configured to efficiently convert glucose into energy, 
in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which is the main requirement for these relatively 
quiescent cells. After immune activation, T cells undergo substantial metabolic changes, involving 
the induction of metabolic genes that result in highly elevated levels of nutrient uptake, includ-
ing glucose, glutamine, and other amino acids (2–5). Yet, even under aerobic conditions, rapidly 
proliferating T cells ferment glucose to lactate despite the presence of oxygen (6–8). This metabolic 
adaptation called the Warburg effect was first described in cancer cells, which utilize glucose 
predominantly via glycolysis for growth and survival even in the presence of oxygen (7, 8). The 
biological reasons underlying this metabolic switch to fermenting glucose to lactate has remained 
poorly understood since Otto Warburg first described the phenomenon in cancer cells over 90 years 
ago (9). It has been appreciated that high rates of glucose uptake allow glycolytic intermediates to 
 2
Shehata et al.
Immunometabolism During Viral Infections
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
be used for biosynthetic pathways, such as the pentose phosphate 
pathway and the one-carbon metabolic pathway for the synthesis 
of nucleotides and for generating the precursors for lipid and 
amino-acid biosynthesis required for cell growth and prolifera-
tion (9, 10). However, these biosynthetic demands only account 
for less than 10% of the increased glucose uptake driven by the 
Warburg effect (11, 12). Thus, it is clear that the increased glucose 
uptake has other critical functions. Recently, new evidence points 
that glucose and glutamine can be shunted to the hexosamine 
biosynthetic pathway (HBP) which controls the production of 
uridine diphosphate N-acetyl glucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) that 
is a substrate for protein glycosylation, which has critical down-
stream implications for T cell clonal expansion and function (13). 
Thus, the adoption of an activated phenotype from the naïve state 
is accompanied by elevated glycolysis that fuels the generation 
of the precursors required for cellular growth and proliferation.
Like activated T cells, monocytes and dendritic cells stimulated 
with toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists, growth, differentiation, 
and inflammatory cytokine production rely on glycolysis and 
produce high levels of lactate. For cells of the myeloid lineage, 
metabolic analyses have so far focused on those driven by bacte-
rial infections and those critical for monocyte differentiation 
into inflammatory macrophage subsets (14). In both scenarios, 
macrophages have been shown to adopt a glycolytic phenotype. 
This review will focus on metabolic changes that underpin T cell 
functions. However, we will briefly discuss the role of monocyte 
and macrophage metabolism in orchestrating systemic inflam-
mation and disease outcomes in chronic viral infections.
We will emphasize the key metabolic pathways that regulate 
the development and function of T cells during their response 
to acute and chronic infections. In particular, we will focus on 
how metabolic reprogramming orchestrates the cell fate decision 
and functions of CD8+ T cells. We will also discuss in detail how 
metabolism alters CD8+, CD4+ T cell, and monocyte functions 
in the context of HBV and HIV infection. Relevant to this dis-
cussion are the recent developments in the field to manipulate 
immunometabolism as an attractive target for immunotherapy. 
Thus, intervention studies geared to manipulate key metabolic 
checkpoints during inflammatory immune responses have gar-
nered widespread interest, particularly in the context of vaccine 
development and for therapeutic purposes.
MeTABOLiC ReQUiReMeNTS OF T CeLLS
The synthesis of lactate is essential to allow T cells to have elevated 
glycolytic flux. If one considers glucose as a key source of carbon 
for cellular biosynthesis, the export of large amounts of glucose-
derived carbons as lactate seems wasteful and inefficient; however, 
rapidly proliferating T cells prefer to switch their metabolism to 
fermenting glucose to lactate, even in the presence of oxygen 
(7). As indicated above, while the increased glucose uptake is 
used to fuel other biosynthetic demands, this only accounts for 
a small fraction of the high amount of acquired glucose (11, 12). 
Instead, new evidence suggests that the surplus glucose can flux 
through the HBP that yields UDP-GlcNAc (13). UDP-GlcNAc 
is a substrate for O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) that functions 
to add O-linked-β-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) to the 
serine/threonine residues of intracellular proteins. Interestingly, 
O-GlcNacylation was shown to stabilize the expression of the 
proto oncogene, c-myc in T cells. Deletion of OGT led to a failure 
in c-myc stabilization and significantly impaired T cell clonal 
expansion and self-renewal (13). This highlighted the critical role 
that glucose and glutamine funneled through HBP has on T cell 
biology.
One key outcome of the T cell response is formation of immu-
nological memory in the form of memory T (Tm) cells. Tm cells 
are long-lived cells that primarily use oxidative metabolism: they 
have low rates of aerobic glycolysis and rely on mitochondrial 
oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) (1). Tm cells have a higher 
mitochondrial mass than Tn cells, providing them with greater 
respiratory capacity that allows them to engage high rates of 
OXPHOS to generate ATP immediately following restimulation 
(15). However, OXPHOS is fueled differently in Tm cells than Tn 
cells. Tm cells adopt a metabolic configuration in which glucose 
is used to fuel fatty-acid synthesis, and these fatty acids are stored 
as triglycerides before being metabolized via β-oxidation to fuel 
OXPHOS (15–17). From a bioenergetics standpoint, this would 
seem like an inefficient mechanism to fuel OXPHOS as fatty-acid 
synthesis uses ATP. Nonetheless, this seemingly futile cycle of 
fatty-acid synthesis and fatty-acid oxidation (FAO) is important 
for Tm survival (16, 17). One advantage is that it allows Tm to 
concurrently engage glycolysis and OXPHOS, thus maintaining 
the machinery for rapid induction of metabolic flux through 
these pathways upon antigen recognition, and so facilitating 
rapid functional responses that are characteristic of Tm (15, 18).
Glucose and lipid metabolism are important in determin-
ing CD8+ T cell effector (Teff) versus Tm differentiation. 
Pharmacological inhibition of glycolysis promotes Tm formation, 
and mice deficient in lipid metabolism fail to generate Tm (19). 
Additionally, modulating the signaling pathways that control 
glucose and lipid metabolism, such as mTORC1 and AMPK sign-
aling, affects the balance of CD8+ Teff and Tm formation (20, 21).
Cellular metabolism directly regulates T cell fates and func-
tions as metabolic enzymes and metabolites regulate T cell 
signaling and effector molecule production. For instance, the 
glycolytic enzyme glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(GAPDH) binds to the three prime untranslated region (3′UTR) 
of interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and IL-2 mRNA and regulates their 
expression (22). This function is likely not unique to GAPDH, as 
numerous metabolic enzymes from diverse metabolic pathways, 
including fatty-acid synthesis, are mRNA binding proteins (23). 
Additionally, the glycolytic metabolite phosphoenolpyruvate 
is an important signaling molecule in T cells that controls the 
duration of T cell receptor (TCR)-induced Ca2+ signaling (24).
DiFFeReNTiAL USe OF GLUCOSe OR 
FATTY-ACiD MeTABOLiSM ReGULATeS 
THe DeveLOPMeNT AND OPTiMAL 
FUNCTiONS OF CD8+ Teff AND Tm CeLLS, 
ReSPeCTiveLY
During the resting phase, CD8+ Tn cells primarily use OXPHOS 
driven by FAO (Figure 1). While glycolysis only generates two 
 FiGURe 1 | Metabolic requirements of naïve CD8+ T cells (Tn). Glucose and 
fatty acids are major nutrient sources for immune cells and are metabolized 
predominantly via OXPHOS and FAO in naïve T cells (Tn). Glycolytic enzymes 
like GAPDH when not involved in glycolysis may engage the 3′-UTR of 
effector cytokines like IFN-γ and IL-2 and suppress their production. CPT1a, 
carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A; FAs, fatty acids; FAO, fatty-acid oxidation; 
GAPDH, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; G-6-PI, glucose-6-
phosphate isomerase; IFN-γ, interferon-γ; OXPHOS, oxidative 
phosphorylation; TCA, tricarboxylic acid cycle; 3′UTR, three prime 
untranslated region.
3
Shehata et al.
Immunometabolism During Viral Infections
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
molecules of ATP, OXPHOS generates more ATPs to maintain 
homeostasis (8, 10, 25, 26). This is consistent with their high 
expression of the hallmark enzyme of FAO, carnitine palmitoyl 
transferase 1a (Cpt1a) and low expression of the first-step gly-
colytic enzyme, hexokinase-2 (27). However, upon encountering 
antigen, Teff development requires a reprogramming to glycolysis 
that is accompanied by, and supports, rapid proliferation (clonal 
expansion) and acquisition of specialized effector functions 
(cytokine production and cytotoxicity) (16, 28). The ability to 
access key nutrients during the effector phase depends on the 
expression of dedicated transporters. The high-affinity glucose 
transporter 1 (Glut-1) is the major glucose transporter in T cells 
(29, 30) and Glut-1 protein expression is upregulated during TCR 
engagement and Teff generation (3, 27, 31).
Teff generated early during an immune response are more 
efficient at glucose uptake, as measured by 2-NBDG, a fluorescent 
glucose analog and Seahorse technology (Figure 2). The Seahorse 
Extracellular Flux Analyzer can be used to profile the metabolic 
phenotypes of cells by simultaneously measuring the extracellular 
acidification rate (ECAR) and oxygen consumption rate (OCR) 
in real time from a relatively low number of cells. ECAR and OCR 
are proportional to aerobic glycolysis and OXPHOS, respectively. 
In particular, ECAR quantifies proton concentration sensed by 
electrode probes as a consequence of lactate production and is 
therefore used as a proxy for aerobic glycolysis. Using Seahorse, 
it was shown that CD8+ Teff, generated by activation of CD8+ 
T cells in the presence of IL-2, have almost fourfold greater 
glycolytic capacity as indicated by increased ECAR than cells 
activated in the presence of IL-15, which resemble Tm (32). This 
is also commensurate with the observation that murine CD8+ Teff 
generated after infection with Listeria monocytogenes has a higher 
glycolytic capacity than Tn and Tm cells. In addition, Teff have a 
high expression of key enzymes in the glycolytic pathway, includ-
ing phosphoglycerate mutase and lactate dehydrogenase. CD8+ 
Teff also have significantly higher intracellular levels of glycolytic 
metabolites, such as glucose-6-phosphate and phosphoenolpyru-
vate, than CD8+ Tn (27). Notably, inhibiting glycolysis in CD8+ 
Teff with the glucose analog 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG), an inhibi-
tor of hexokinase-2, suppresses IFN-γ, tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF)-α, and granulocyte and macrophage-colony stimulating 
factor (GM-CSF) cytokine production in response to anti-CD3 
and anti-CD28 TCR stimulation (28, 33). 2-deoxyglucose also 
abrogated the cytolytic machinery (i.e., the expression of perforin 
and granzymes B and C), which translated to impaired cytotoxic-
ity of CD8+ Teff against P815-B7.1 tumor cells (28). Development 
of early CD8+ Teff requires a metabolic switch from OXPHOS in 
CD8+ Tn to glycolysis to sustain Teff homeostasis and function 
(Figure 2). In contrast, when an infection is cleared, late CD8+ Teff 
become less reliant on glycolysis and are more efficient at uptake 
of long fatty-acid chains such as palmitate that drives FAO (16). 
This is consistent with the high expression of CD36, which binds 
long-chain fatty acids and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (16). In 
sum, the efficient generation of effector cells demands a switch 
from FAO to glycolysis to generate early Teff and, thereafter, a 
switch to OXPHOS driven by FAO for late Teff (Figures 2 and 4).
MiTOCHONDRiAL OXPHOS FUeLeD  
BY FAO eNHANCiNG CD8+ Tm 
DeveLOPMeNT AND ReCALL CAPACiTY
Tm cells acquire a metabolic phenotype that depends on FAO 
and OXPHOS (Figures 3 and 4). Overexpressing the glycolytic 
enzyme phosphoglycerate mutase 1 (pgam1) in antigen-specific 
CD8+ T cells impaired their expansion in response to vaccinia 
virus upon rechallenge (27). In stark contrast, CD8+ T cells 
treated with 2-DG, to suppress glycolysis during T cell priming, 
retained a memory phenotype and had an augmented production 
of IFN-γ and TNF-α and, more importantly, were more efficient 
at controlling tumor development (27). This suggested that an 
“always on” glycolytic switch impedes functional development of 
CD8+ Tm (27). Also, adoptive transfer of 2-NBDGloCD8+ T cells 
had a greater capacity for long-term survival than 2-NBDGhi cells. 
Thus, higher uptake of glucose is associated with short-lived effec-
tor cells (SLECs), whereas CD8+ T cells that utilize less glucose are 
endowed with the capacity to become long-lived memory cells 
(Figure 4).
These conclusions contrast with a recent report showing that 
a constitutively active glycolytic pathway did not impair the dif-
ferentiation and function of Tm CD8+ T cells, but that augmented 
glycolysis provided sufficient energy to drive Tm development 
(34). This study used a mouse model with a genetic deletion of 
 FiGURe 2 | Metabolic requirements of effector CD8+ T cells (Teff). Early generation of effector cells requires a metabolic reprogramming from OXPHOS and FAO 
toward aerobic glycolysis with increased OXPHOS driven by FAO in late effector stage. A hallmark of aerobic glycolysis is elevated aerobic glycolysis and secretion 
of lactate. PPP intermediates are elevated to support synthesis of nucleotides, proteins and lipids for cell growth, proliferation, and effector responses. In activated 
effector cells, the HBP may utilize F-6-P to form glucosamine-6-phosphate by glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase in the presence of glutamine. This is a 
key step in the production of UDP-GlcNAc, a substrate for protein glycosylation. GAPDH a key glycolytic enzyme may disengage the 3′-UTR of effector cytokines to 
perform its metabolic role, thereby inducing cytokine production. Activated effector cells also increase glutamine uptake which generates α-KG via anaplerosis. This 
α-KG supports the TCA cycle under condition of limited pyruvate and acetyl-CoA. α-KG may also directly activate mTOR. CPT1a, carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A; 
FAs, fatty acids; FAO, fatty-acid oxidation; F-6-P
, fructose-6-phosphate; GAPDH, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; HBP
, hexosamine biosynthetic 
pathway; α-KG, α-ketoglutarate; OXPHOS, oxidative phosphorylation; PPP
, pentose phosphate pathway; mTOR, mechanistic target of rapamycin; TCA, 
tricarboxylic acid cycle; UDP-GlcNAc, uridine diphosphate N-acetyl glucosamine; 3′-UTR, three prime untranslated region.
4
Shehata et al.
Immunometabolism During Viral Infections
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
the von-Hippel Lindau (VHL) protein. Deletion of VHL, which 
negatively regulates hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), leads to 
constitutive HIF activity and high HIF activity in turn leads to 
significantly augmented glycolysis accompanied by reduced 
OXPHOS. This study provided a novel approach to deciphering 
whether metabolic preference was central to memory cell genera-
tion and function. It showed that selectively enhancing glycolysis 
and diminishing OXPHOS did not hamper the development 
or function of Tm cells, but importantly, wild-type and VHL-
deficient cells had similar levels of ATP. One explanation that the 
authors provide to reconcile the observations from this study with 
those showing that fatty-acid-fueled OXPHOS is essential for Tm 
development is that the availability of sufficient levels of ATP may 
play a key role in regulating cell fate decisions. In this regard, CD8+ 
Teff destined to differentiate into Tm must meet a certain “ATP 
threshold” to enable their differentiation and optimal function as 
Tm irrespective of the metabolic pathway utilized to generate the 
required levels of ATP. Therefore, it can be reasoned that without 
genetic or pharmacologic manipulation, late Teff may specifically 
undergo metabolic reprogramming in favor of FAO because this 
metabolic pathway selectively yields higher levels of ATP. In the 
case of genetic manipulation such as VHL deletion, constitutively 
active glycolysis may meet the required ATP threshold that is suf-
ficient to drive normal Tm differentiation (34). It remains to be 
determined whether VHL deficiency in mice may also have other 
indirect effects on metabolic reprogramming.
Interestingly, CD8+ Tm cells acquire extracellular glucose 
and channel it to synthesize fatty acids in the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER), a process dependent on the enzyme, lysosomal 
acid lipase (LAL). LAL is critical in hydrolyzing cholesteryl 
esters and triglycerides within LDL particles into free cholesterol 
and free fatty acids (FFAs) (35, 36). The newly synthesized fatty 
acids from glucose-derived carbon are subsequently utilized for 
mitochondrial FAO and OXPHOS (Figure 3). Inhibiting FAO, by 
transduction of transgenic CD8+ T cells with retrovirus express-
ing short hairpin RNA (shRNA) against LAL, markedly impaired 
the development of CD8+ Tm cells (16). Similarly, inhibiting LAL 
with shRNA or treatment with chloroquine or genetic deletion 
of the glycerol channel, aquaporin 9 in mice, compromised the 
survival of CD8+ Tm generated in vitro and in vivo (16, 17, 37). 
Similarly, exogenous uptake of FFAs by the lipid chaperone 
proteins, FABP4 and FABP5, is critical for the long-term mainte-
nance and survival of long-lived tissue-resident memory (TRM) 
cells in the skin where there is a ready source of lipids. Notably, 
antigen-specific CD8+ T cells lacking expression of FABP4 and 
FABP5 lost their functional competence in conferring protec-
tion against skin vaccinia virus infection (38). Pharmacologic 
inhibition of FAO by etomoxir, which inhibits Cpt1a, similarly 
 FiGURe 3 | Metabolic requirements of memory CD8+ T cells (Tm). Increased 
mitochondrial density and a metabolic configuration toward OXPHOS and 
FAO allows Tm cells to concurrently engage in both glycolysis and OXPHOS 
for rapid metabolic flux upon antigen recognition to facilitate a rapid and 
robust functional response. GDCs are used for FA synthesis in the ER, which 
can undergo FAO to generate acetyl-CoA to fuel the TCA cycle to generate 
ATP
. CPT1a, carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; 
FAs, fatty acids; FAO, fatty-acid oxidation; GDCs, glucose-derived carbons; 
OXPHOS, oxidative phosphorylation; TCA, tricarboxylic acid cycle.
5
Shehata et al.
Immunometabolism During Viral Infections
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
impaired CD8+ T cell-mediated protection against vaccinia virus 
infection, suggesting that acquisition of FFAs that subsequently 
fuel FAO-driven OXPHOS is closely coupled to the long-term 
survival and function of TRM cells (38).
The switch from glycolysis to OXPHOS may also be promoted 
by the essential amino acid, L-arginine (39). In vitro TCR-activated 
human CD4+ T cells rapidly acquire and consume L-arginine, 
which leads to an increase in molecular intermediates of the urea 
cycle and nucleotides, sugar derivatives, and other amino acids. 
L-arginine uptake inhibited expression of Glut-1 and enzymes 
essential in the glycolytic pathway (39). Consequently, glucose 
uptake and glycolysis were diminished, but this was accompanied 
by an increase in the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) metabolites 
and mitochondrial OXPHOS. Pre-treatment of OT-I T cells with 
L-arginine permitted more robust in vivo responses against B16-
OVA tumor cells, and in general, L-arginine promoted a central 
memory-like phenotype that may be, in part, due to an increase in 
OXPHOS accompanied by the decrease in glycolysis (39). These 
data suggest that limiting glycolysis and promoting OXPHOS 
through FAO during the contraction of Teff and transition to 
memory pave the way for optimal development and function of 
CD8+ Tm.
A recent study interrogating why Tm cells primarily rely on 
FAO while Teff use aerobic glycolysis showed that mitochondrial 
remodeling plays a critical role in instructing T cell metabolic 
reprogramming (40). Mitochondrial ultrastructural analysis 
using electron microscopy revealed that unlike Teff cells which 
had punctate mitochondria that undergo fission, Tm cells had 
densely packed fused mitochondria which was commensurate 
with a high-protein expression of the mitochondrial inner 
membrane fusion protein, optic atrophy 1 (Opa1) (40). Opa1 
was shown to be critical for promoting mitochondrial fusion 
and cristae remodeling in Tm cells as its absence led to disrupted 
cristae organization and reduced electron transport chain 
activity. This lead to the inability to generate Tm cells through 
inefficient FAO, reduced OCR/ECAR ratios, and reduced spare 
respiratory capacity (SRC), a parameter that quantifies a cell’s 
ability to respond to increased energy demand and depends on 
FAO in CD8+ Tm (40). While absence of Opa1 did not alter Teff 
cell generation, enforcing mitochondrial fusion in Teff cells either 
pharmacologically using the fusion promoter, hydrazone M1 and 
the fission inhibitor, Mdivi-1, or through genetic overexpression 
of Opa1, led to enhanced OXPHOS and SRC, and promoted the 
development of Tm cells even under Teff cell differentiation con-
ditions. However, Opa1-deficient Teff were shown to utilize FAO 
at a similar extent as controls, suggesting that Opa1 is dispensable 
for FAO. As fine-tuning metabolism has enormous implications 
for immunotherapy, pharmacologically enforcing mitochondrial 
fusion in OT-I Teff significantly enhanced their ability to confer 
better protection in mice harboring EL4-OVA expressing tumors 
compared with recipients of control treated cells. Taken together, 
this suggests that mitochondrial dynamics through fission and 
fusion is a key player in the metabolic reprogramming promoting 
Teff versus Tm cells, respectively (40).
Critically, while a metabolic switch to FAO may be necessary 
for development of Tm cells, it does not translate to a complete 
shutdown of the glycolytic pathway. In fact, effector memory 
CD8+ T cells, which are considered to be the most efficient at 
executing recall responses, depend on glycolysis for early produc-
tion of IFN-γ (18). This finding does not contradict other reports 
showing that FAO is critical for Tm function, but highlights an 
important dependence of CD8+ T cells on glycolytic flux to sup-
port their effector function and to enable fatty-acid synthesis for 
FAO (Figure 4).
mTOR, THe SeRiNe–THReONiNe KiNASe 
THAT iNTeGRATeS vARiOUS MeTABOLiC 
AND iNFLAMMATORY CUeS, iS A 
CeNTRAL PLAYeR iN CD8+ Teff AND Tm 
DeveLOPMeNT
The evolutionarily conserved serine/threonine protein kinase, 
mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), integrates various 
stimuli to activate the metabolic pathways that ultimately drive 
cellular growth and effector functions. mTOR consists of two 
functionally distinct multiprotein complexes, mTORC1 and 
mTORC2. RAPTOR (regulatory-associated protein of mTOR) 
and RICTOR (rapamycin-insensitive companion of mTOR) are 
the essential core adaptor components of mTORC1 and mTORC2, 
respectively (41). Mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 
(mTORC1) responds to amino acids, oxygen, energy, and growth 
factors and is acutely sensitive to the inhibitor, rapamycin (41). 
On the other hand, mTORC2 responds to growth factors and 
 FiGURe 4 | Metabolic reprogramming playing a critical role in governing the generation and function of CD8+ effector (Teff) and memory cells (Tm). This figure 
summarizes some of the major pathways and molecular players involved at each stage of CD8+ T cell differentiation following viral infections and how these 
pathways influence the magnitude of the Teff and Tm responses. Metabolic pathways, key enzymes, transcription factors, or intervention strategies that are 
decreased or that would hamper the development of Tm are shown in red, while those that enhance Tm responses are shown in green.
6
Shehata et al.
Immunometabolism During Viral Infections
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
modulates cellular survival and cytoskeletal restructuring and 
is insensitive to acute rapamycin treatment, although chronic 
exposure can disrupt its molecular structure (41). The role of 
mTOR as a key checkpoint in metabolic reprogramming warrants 
investigating its role in CD8+ Teff and Tm development. Indeed, a 
large body of evidence supports the view that mTOR is a central 
player in regulating CD8+ Teff and Tm generation by control-
ling metabolism and the key T-box transcription factors, T-bet, 
and Eomesodermin (Eomes) that promote Teff and long-term 
memory, respectively (42–47).
Inhibiting mTORC1 activity with rapamycin or the AMPK 
activator metformin augmented the development of memory 
precursor effector cells (MPECs) and long-lived Tm cells that 
were more functionally robust at eliciting protective immunity 
during recall responses (19, 20). Moreover, asymmetric partition-
ing of mTORC1 during cellular division of CD8+ T cells leads to 
the generation of two daughter cells, CD8hi and CD8lo, cells with 
different mTORC1 activities and metabolic requirements (48). 
CD8hi cells with higher mTORC1 activity have a higher glycolytic 
dependency and develop into effector cells while being inefficient 
at generating long-term Tm cells. In contrast, CD8lo cells with 
significantly lower mTORC1 activity are less glycolytic, have a 
higher mitochondrial mass, and develop more superior long-
lived Tm cells (48, 49). Complementing these findings, T cells 
deficient in tuberous sclerosis complex 1 or 2 (TSC1/2), which 
inhibits mTORC1 activity, are highly glycolytic and failed to 
develop long-term antigen-specific Tm, but were more proficient 
in the development of effector cells that were largely KLRG1+ 
cells, also known as SLECs (49, 50). However, treating transferred 
OT-I TSC2−/− cells with rapamycin in vivo was associated with a 
higher expression of CD127 and the transcription factor Eomes, 
which is critical in development of Tm, and more importantly, 
rapamycin treatment enhanced their recall response (Figure 4).
In keeping with the prominent role of mTORC1 in regulating 
metabolism, TSC2-deficient CD8+ T cells that have high levels 
of mTORC1 activity are highly glycolytic, which is enabled by 
the high-level expression of Glut-1 and phosphofructokinase. In 
contrast, CD8+ T cells deficient in Rheb, an mTORC1 activator, 
had a decreased glycolytic capacity. This biological phenotype 
can be relegated to the capacity of mTORC1 to control glycolysis 
through the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) transcription fac-
tor complex, which in turn regulates the expression of the key gly-
colytic enzymes and glucose transporters (3, 51). Commensurate 
with reduced glycolysis, Rheb-deficient CD8+ T cells had higher 
mitochondrial mass and SRC (3, 15, 32). Notably, greater mito-
chondrial mass enforces efficient SRC and permits a more robust 
recall response (15, 32).
Until recently, little was known about how mTORC2 influences 
CD8+ Teff and Tm generation. RICTOR-deficient T cells have 
increased expression of CD127 and Eomes and lower expression 
 7
Shehata et al.
Immunometabolism During Viral Infections
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
of T-bet, suggesting that mTORC2 constrains development of 
MPECs (49, 52). In addition, RICTOR deficiency augmented 
the development of long-term Tm cells, which were superior in 
cytokine production (49). As anticipated, enhanced development 
of Tm was closely related to a higher expression of Cpt1a and SRC. 
Thus, mTOR activity is central to regulating the differentiation of 
CD8+ Teff and Tm cells, by acting as a rheostat for fine-tuning 
metabolic reprogramming (19, 46, 49).
In terms of metabolic reprogramming, in the absence of either 
mTORC1 (Rheb−/−) or mTORC2 (Rictor−/−) activity, CD8+ T cells 
demonstrate enhanced mitochondrial mass, OCR, SRC, and 
high expression levels of Cpt1a, all of which promote the optimal 
development and function of Tm with an oxidative phenotype 
(49, 52). Notably, in the absence of mTORC2, CD8+ T cells have 
a marked increase in glycolytic flux (ECAR) in memory CD8+ 
T cells (49). In contrast, loss of mTORC1 leads to a significant 
decrease in ECAR, Glut-1, and phosphofructokinase (49). Taken 
together, the loss of mTORC2 orchestrates a metabolic profile 
that supports the development of both Teff and Tm responses. 
Therefore, it appears that mTORC1 rather than mTORC2 is 
dispensable for metabolic programming of CD8+ T cells toward 
a glycolytic phenotype.
Our current knowledge on T cell metabolism has been largely 
restricted to acute infections in mouse models. Knowledge on 
which metabolic pathways are critical during chronic infections 
in humans is limited but has recently gained momentum particu-
larly in the hepatitis B and HIV fields.
MeTABOLiC RePROGRAMMiNG OF CD8+ 
T CeLLS DURiNG CHRONiC HBv AND Hiv 
iNFeCTiON
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), approxi-
mately 240 million people in the world are infected with hepatitis 
B virus (HBV). Chronic infection with HBV leads to serious 
liver disease, and infected individuals are at a high risk of liver 
cirrhosis, hepatic cellular carcinoma, and liver failure. Current 
treatments that suppress viral replication must be continued on 
a life-long basis, and thus, there is a significant need to define 
a therapy that will cure or control HBV infection. In addition 
to targeting the virus directly, the immune system can be tar-
geted therapeutically. The immune system during chronic viral 
infections becomes impaired or “exhausted” (53). It becomes 
overwhelmed with continuous high-level antigen exposure and 
associated inflammation, so that immune cells are no longer 
functionally effective.
This is particularly true for HBV-specific CD8+ T cells (54). 
The metabolism of CD8+ T cells is affected during chronic HBV 
infection and likely contributes to their impaired functions. 
HBV-specific CD8+ T cells were unable to efficiently metabolize 
glucose by OXPHOS and had associated mitochondrial dysfunc-
tion, including a lower mitochondrial membrane potential and 
impaired OXPHOS capability. However, IL-12 reversed this and 
boosted OXPHOS in HBV-specific CD8+ T cells (55). Interestingly, 
genes encoding key components of the mitochondrial electron 
transport chain that drive OXPHOS were lower in exhausted 
human CD8+ T cells with chronic HBV infection than in patients 
who controlled their infection (56). HBV-specific CD8+ T cells 
from these patients also had less mitochondrial polarization 
but higher mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) than 
resolved patients or healthy controls. Notably, using antioxidants 
to reverse mitochondrial dysfunction in exhausted HBV-specific 
CD8+ T cells increased the expression of mitochondrial electron 
transport chain components and enhanced their IFN-γ and TNF-
α producing capacity after in vitro HBV-core-peptide stimulation 
(56). These studies suggest that enhancing mitochondrial function 
reverses the impaired functionality associated with exhaustion in 
human CD8+ T cells (56).
Nearly 40 million people worldwide are living with HIV. Of 
these only 17 million have access to antiretroviral treatment 
(ART) to suppress viral load and halt disease progression to 
AIDS (57). The critical role of CD8+ T cells in controlling HIV 
replication has been noted in simian immunodeficiency virus 
(SIV) infection where depletion of CD8+ T cells exacerbates viral 
loads in infected rhesus monkeys (58). Similarly, in HIV-infected 
patients, escape mutations in MHC-I restricted epitopes reflect a 
key role that HIV-specific CD8+ T cells have in controlling viral 
loads by imposing a selection pressure (59). HIV-specific CD8+ 
T cells in acute infection fail to generate biosynthetic and energy 
requirements, leading to augmented apoptosis (60). In particular, 
the reduced survival during acute HIV infection was attributed 
to increased mitochondrial dysfunction and significant down-
regulation of the NRF2-mediated oxidative stress response, which 
degrades oxidized proteins. Compared with chronically activated 
HIV-specific CD8+ T cells, in acute HIV infection, CD8+ T cells 
have less mTOR activity, but more protein ubiquitination and 
purine metabolism (60). Additionally, reduced expression of 
CD127 led to reduced STAT5 phosphorylation after IL-7 stimu-
lation in vitro. This was associated with reduced downstream 
activation of PI3K, AKT, and Bcl-2 expression after IL-7 stimula-
tion and reduced cytokine production (IFN-γ, TNF-α, and IL-2) 
after cognate peptide stimulation (60). Although not examined 
comprehensively in the context of glucose or lipid metabolism, 
the work highlighted here argues for a link between metabolic 
and transcriptional defects and impaired CD8+ T cell functions 
during acute HIV infection.
With respect to chronic HIV infection, evidence of metabolic 
reprogramming in CD8+ T cells has been lacking. However, 
chronic antigen stimulation is accompanied by upregulation of 
negative regulatory checkpoints, including PD-1 and CTLA-4 
(61). Specifically, in a model of chronic TCR stimulation in CD4+ 
T cells, ligation of PD-1 augmented Cpt1a expression, SRC, and 
FAO, but inhibited glycolysis and glutaminolysis where glutamine 
is deaminated to produce glutamate which is then converted to 
α-ketoglutarate (α-KG). α-KG is critical for fueling the TCA cycle 
and for maintaining ATP production. Furthermore, increased 
glutamine uptake during glycolysis is essential as an amine donor 
to generate glucosamine-6-phosphate from fructose-6-phosphate 
by the rate limiting HBP enzyme glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate 
transaminase (62). This suggests that the HBP can compete with 
glycolysis for fructose-6-phosphate and with glutaminolysis for 
glutamine in activated T cells. CTLA-4 engagement also inhibited 
Glut-1 and glutamine transporters, leading to reduced glycolysis 
 8
Shehata et al.
Immunometabolism During Viral Infections
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
and glutaminolysis. Implicit in these findings is that PD-1 and 
CTLA-4 ligation may prevent robust generation of effector cells 
by inhibiting glycolysis and glutaminolysis, which are critical 
for supporting their differentiation. Given this and the previous 
discussion of CD8+ T cell metabolism in HBV, chronic infections, 
such as HBV and HIV, lead to altered glycolysis, OXPHOS, and 
increased mitochondrial dysfunction through the high-level 
expression of ROS. Future studies will need to address this 
essential and unresolved question of how HIV influences the 
metabolism of CD8+ Teff and Tm in patients with or without ART.
Understanding how cellular metabolism links to dysfunc-
tional immune responses in acute and chronic diseases will help 
to tailor therapies with maximum beneficial effects through the 
rejuvenation of T cell functions.
MeTABOLiC RePROGRAMMiNG iN CD4+ 
T CeLLS DURiNG Hiv iNFeCTiON
CD4+ T helper (Th) cell lineage differentiation is closely coupled 
to specific metabolic pathways. For example, glycolysis is critical 
for supporting Th1, Th17, and Th2 differentiation, whereas FAO 
enhances regulatory T cell (Treg) differentiation (14, 63–66). 
Interestingly, new data suggest that aerobic glycolysis and glu-
taminolysis have critical roles in driving the differentiation of 
Th cells. In activated CD4+ T cells, aerobic glycolysis occurs in 
parallel with glutaminolysis where glutamine is converted to glu-
tamate. It has been shown that in T cells, aerobic glycolysis, and 
glutaminolysis promote pro-inflammatory Th17 cell fate at the 
expense of iTreg development. As glucose and glutamine drive 
the HBP, aerobic glycolysis and glutaminolysis effectively starve 
and lower the availability of the precursors required to drive the 
HBP that produces UDP-GlcNAc. This leads to reduced N-glycan 
branching in T cells and in turn promotes Th17 development 
over inducible Treg (iTreg) differentiation (62). Specifically, sup-
plementing T cells with GlcNAC blocked Th17 differentiation 
and promoted the differentiation of iTregs even in the presence 
of Th17 polarizing conditions by blocking the endocytic loss of 
CD25 (62). To demonstrate the utility of GlcNAC in regulating 
Th17 cell differentiation, oral delivery of GlcNAc in a mouse 
model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) 
where pathogenesis is dependent on Th17 responses significantly 
impeded disease progression. This provides evidence to show 
that manipulating metabolic pathways can rheostatically fine 
tune T cell fates and function (67). On another front, glutamine 
starvation was shown to drive the differentiation of iTreg cells 
at the expense of Th1 cells, which is a consequence of reduced 
α-KG (68). This observation also underscores the critical role of 
TCA intermediates like α-KG to regulate the epigenetic status of 
activated T cells. Indeed, increased glutaminolysis is essential for 
tet2-mediated demethylation and regulation of the epigenetic 
landscape required for Th1 differentiation (68). It is important 
to keep in mind that lactate, a byproduct of aerobic glycolysis is 
commonly used as a major readout of glycolysis. However, since 
glutamine can be metabolized to lactate, the level of glycolytic 
metabolism may be overestimated in many of the currently used 
protocols. Thus, total lactate production may be a cumulative 
measure of both glycolysis and glutaminolysis.
How metabolic pathways regulate CD4+ T cell differentiation 
has been described in great detail in a number of excellent reviews 
(14, 63–66). In the following section, we will focus on how CD4+ 
T cell metabolism is altered by HIV infection.
iMMUNe ACTivATiON AND eXHAUSTiON 
ARe KeY HALLMARKS OF Hiv iNFeCTiON
The exact mechanisms by which HIV evades the immune sys-
tem, causing immune deterioration, persistent inflammation, 
and reservoir establishment, have eluded HIV researchers 
for over three decades. These unresolved questions are major 
obstacles for the development of effective preventative vac-
cines, therapeutics to induce robust immunological recovery, 
and a cure for HIV. Immunometabolism has challenged old 
paradigms and fostered novel hypotheses and dynamic insights 
into HIV pathogenesis.
CD4+ T cells are preferentially targeted by HIV (69), although 
subsets of CD16+ monocytes and macrophages may also be 
infected (70, 71). In acute HIV infection, CD4+ T cells rapidly 
decline in the gut and in the periphery, followed by partial CD4+ 
T cell recovery, and then an inexorable depletion of this cell 
population over time in untreated individuals, leading to AIDS 
within 6–10 years (72, 73), though this is not universal. Acute 
HIV infection is associated with high levels of CD4+ and CD8+ 
T cell activation and exhaustion, which is often maintained 
throughout chronic infection due to prolonged exposure to 
antigenic and inflammatory signals even in anti-retroviral-
treated individuals (74, 75). Markers of T cell activation, such as 
CD38 and HLADR, remain elevated above normal in HIV posi-
tive individuals with durable viral suppression on ART (76). 
Moreover, elevated expression of co-inhibitory receptors, such 
as PD-1, TIGIT, CD160, and 2B4, is associated with function-
ally exhausted HIV-specific and non-specific CD8+ T cells with 
reduced proliferative capacity and impaired effector functions 
(77–80).
iMPACT OF CD4+ T CeLL MeTABOLiSM 
ON Hiv DiSeASe PROGReSSiON
CD4+ T cells from HIV positive individuals exhibit a glycolytic 
phenotype, featuring significantly increased cell-surface expres-
sion of Glut-1, abnormally high hexokinase activity, and lactate 
production (81). This metabolic state differs from quiescent cells 
where OXPHOS predominates as the major pathway to provide 
energy and is reminiscent of the metabolic profile seen in tumor 
cells. This may be interpreted as a metabolic sequelae to sustain 
activation, proliferation, and effector cytokine production, 
such as IFN-γ (82). Indeed, high Glut-1 expression on CD4+ 
T cells is positively associated with markers of T cell activation 
 
(e.g., CD38, HLA-DR), and low CD4+ T cell counts in untreated 
patients (81). Similarly, individuals categorized as immunological 
non-responders (i.e., treated HIV positive persons with low CD4+ 
T cell counts despite prolonged HIV suppression) have a high 
frequency of circulating CD4+Glut-1+ T cells (81). Interestingly, a 
low frequency of circulating CD4+Glut-1+ T cells was seen in HIV 
 9
Shehata et al.
Immunometabolism During Viral Infections
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
long-term non-progressors, who maintain normal CD4+ T cell 
counts despite being infected with HIV for more than 10 years 
without ART (81). Evidence shows that Glut-1 is selectively 
required for CD4+ T cell activation (83) and the Glut-1-mediated 
metabolic pathway is a critical regulator of HIV infection in 
CD4+ T cells (81, 84). As activated CD4+ T cells are the favored 
targets of HIV, one could speculate that Glut-1 is an intrinsic 
marker of an activated state essential for HIV infection. In vivo 
Glut-1 expression on CD4+ T cells in HIV positive individuals is 
regulated, at least in part, by cytokines, such as IL-7, which is also 
implicated in Glut-1 cell-surface trafficking via STAT5-mediated 
Akt activation (30).
ReGULATORS OF GLUCOSe 
MeTABOLiSM iN CD4+ T CeLLS  
DURiNG Hiv iNFeCTiON
Metabolic exhaustion owing to the SRC of CD4+ T cells and 
directed by hyperactivation of PI3K-Akt-mTOR axis might 
contribute to CD4+ cell loss in HIV infection (14). Indeed, 
glycolytic flux is increased in in vitro-HIV-infected primary 
CD4+ T cells (85). Furthermore, infected primary CD4+ T cells 
cultured in galactose had a survival advantage over those cul-
tured in glucose, and this was associated with reduced caspase 
3 activity and apoptosis. Interestingly, glycolytic flux proceeded 
without alteration in levels of key glycolytic enzymes, such as 
hexokinase 2, GAPDH, and pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2), leaving 
the authors to speculate that glycolysis may ensue by way of allos-
teric regulation or post-translational modification of glycolytic 
enzymes. PPARy-dependent fatty-acid uptake critically regulated 
metabolic reprogramming in TCR triggered CD4+ T cells (86), 
but the involvement of this pathway in T cell metabolic activation 
in HIV infection is unknown.
eFFeCTS OF mTOR ON Hiv iNFeCTiviTY 
AND PeRSiSTeNCe
Mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 regulates CCR5 
expression required for viral entry of CCR5 (R5)-tropic HIV, 
and mTORC2 controls phosphorylation of protein kinase C for 
nuclear Factor-κB (NF-κb) induction of HIV transcription (87). 
Dual targeting of mTORC1/2 complex with INK128 inhibited 
replication of R5-tropic and CXCR4 (X4)-tropic HIV strains BaL 
and HXB2, respectively, in primary peripheral blood lympho-
cytes (PBLs). However, INK128 activity was more potent against 
R5 than X4 strains due to reduced CCR5 levels, which interrupt 
fusion of CD4+ T cells with the R5 envelope (87). Regulation 
of mTORC2 by INK128 interferes with NF-κB induction that 
may prevent recruitment of the transcription factor positive 
transcription elongation factor b to the HIV long-terminal repeat 
and suppress viral transcription. Remarkably, INK128 inhibited 
a multidrug-resistant HIV clone NL4329129-2, which carries 
the reverse transcriptase gene amplified from a patient with 
multidrug-resistant HIV. More importantly, INK128 suppressed 
HIV in a preclinical animal model of NOD/SCID/IL-2Rγnull mice 
reconstituted with human PBLs and infected with BaL (87). 
Thus, mTOR inhibitors in cancer therapy may be considered for 
repurposing to help control HIV in patients who have failed ART 
therapy due to drug resistance.
Another critical hallmark of HIV is establishment of a stable 
latently infected HIV reservoir within days of infection, pre-
dominantly within the memory CD4+ T cell compartment (88). 
The role of immunometabolism in HIV latency was highlighted 
in which a genome-wide screen on different HIV latency models 
and HIV-infected patient cells uncovered an essential role of 
mTOR complex in HIV latency. mTOR inhibitors Torin1 and 
pp242 targeting mTORC1 and mTORC2 strongly suppressed 
latent HIV reactivation after TCR-mediated CD4+ T cell activa-
tion. Inhibiting these complexes was associated with suppressed 
CDK9 phosphorylation and activation that in turn abrogated 
Tat-dependent and -independent transactivation of the HIV 
promotor (87). This corroborated a recent study showing that 
the HIV regulatory gene, tat, hyperactivates mTORC1 activity 
in a PI3K-dependent manner for synthesis of biomolecules for 
virion production and latent viral reactivation. This is mediated 
via activation of carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase 2, aspartate 
transcarbamylase, dihydroorotase, and repression of initiation 
factor 4E-binding protein 1 activity, which regulates nucleotide 
biogenesis and protein translation, respectively. Furthermore, 
inhibiting mTORC1 or PI3K inhibits viral replication and 
reactivation (89, 90). In another study, rapamycin unexpectedly 
failed to inhibit HIV reactivation in in vitro TCR-activated rest-
ing CD4+ T cells from individuals on suppressive ART. However, 
co-treatment of TCR-activated CD4+ T cells from ART-treated 
patients with rapamycin dramatically reduced cellular prolifera-
tion and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-2, 
TNF, and MIP1-α while reducing markers of T cell activation 
(CD25) and exhaustion (PD-1) and preserving basal CTL-
mediated killing of infected cells (91). This provided an experi-
mental model supporting a curative approach in which mTOR 
drugs could mitigate LRA-mediated inflammatory responses 
and toxicity while maximally reactivating the HIV reservoir. This 
provides new therapeutic opportunities to suppress homeostatic 
proliferation of key HIV reservoir cells and reverse latency 
(i.e., “starving the reservoir”) (14, 92). Indeed, genome-wide 
screening using in vitro models of HIV latency has identified 
the mTOR complex as a critical modulator of HIV latency (93). 
Thus, a combined approach modulating HIV reservoir metabolic 
machinery with or without cellular activators (to reverse latency) 
to limit pro-inflammatory cytokine production and homeostatic 
proliferation represents a novel chain of thought in HIV cure 
research (91).
MeTABOLiC CONTROL OF MONOCYTeS 
iN Hiv
Like CD4+ T cells, monocytes contribute to chronic HIV infec-
tion (94). HIV-infected CD16+ monocytes have markedly greater 
Glut-1 expression, glucose uptake, and lactate production than 
CD14+CD16− monocytes (95). HIV likely hijacks the glycolytic 
pathway of CD16+ monocytes for viral replication; however, 
confirmation of this, by inhibiting the glycolytic pathway, is 
 10
Shehata et al.
Immunometabolism During Viral Infections
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
needed. Notably, as the gut becomes “leaky” due to a loss of 
mucosal integrity, plasma lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is elevated 
in HIV positive patients (96), which may contribute to the 
increased activation of monocytes during HIV infection. This 
allows microbial products, such as LPS, to cross into the blood-
stream, creating an inflammatory environment for circulating 
monocytes. Indeed, Glut-1+ monocytes express higher levels of 
TNF-α than Glut-1- monocytes, and the abundance of circulat-
ing Glut-1+ monocytes is strongly correlated with inflammation 
(95). Remarkably, increased Glut-1 expression on intermediate 
monocytes from HIV-infected women is associated with subclini-
cal cardiovascular disease, suggesting a link between monocyte 
dysfunctional metabolism and inflammatory-mediated HIV- 
associated comorbidities (97). So far, the contribution of meta-
bolic pathways in monocyte subsets to their specific functions 
has not been explored and requires investigation. The common 
theme emerging across the various leukocyte populations reveals 
that, in response to inflammatory stimuli, cells re-direct their 
metabolic preference to utilize glucose through the glycolytic 
pathway. What remains to be defined is the precise metabolic 
regulators that are induced to achieve this glycolytic state in 
monocytes, and how long this switch in metabolism lasts in 
these cells. In the context of LPS-activated monocytes, the high 
glycolytic rate is orchestrated by mTOR and HIF-1α, both known 
master regulators of glycolysis (51).
Thus, it will be important to determine if changing the 
metabolic phenotype of monocytes could alter their functional 
phenotypes in the blood, and if this affects the outcome of innate 
immune cell responses during HIV infection.
iNTeRveNTiON APPROACHeS THAT 
MODULATe THe MeTABOLiC PROFiLe 
AND mTOR ACTiviTY iN iMMUNe CeLLS 
COULD Be USeD TO FiNe TUNe THeiR 
DeveLOPMeNT AND FUNCTiON
At present, a large body of evidence implicates metabolic path-
ways and their regulation by mTOR in governing development 
and function of Teff and Tm cells. One can, thus, envisage a 
potential benefit for interventions to direct the more efficient 
and optimal development of Teff versus Tm cells after an infec-
tion or vaccination. Some of the most obvious candidates are 
sirolimus (Rapamune) and everolimus (Certican), which are 
mTOR inhibitors and have been approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration as immunosuppressors for use in the context 
of organ transplantation (98). Other interesting candidates 
are metformin, which has been used in the treatment of type 
2 diabetes and 2-DG (99–101). 2-deoxyglucose has been used 
for decades as a tracer in autoradigraphic and positron emis-
sion tomography (PET) imaging and was tested recently in 
pre-clinical trials in patients with solid tumors and epilepsy 
(99–101). However, further studies are needed to fully warrant 
the therapeutic use of 2-DG which has been shown to interfere 
with N-linked glycosylation of intracellular proteins in which 
glycans are added to the nitrogen of asparagine or arginine side 
chains (102). Because of its structural similarity to mannose 
which is essential in the glycosylation process, 2-DG effectively 
impedes N-glycosylation which is necessary for the proper 
folding of proteins (102). As a consequence, 2-DG may cause 
ER stress and lead to cellular apoptosis (102). On another front, 
accruing evidence suggests that ligation of PD-1 promotes FAO 
by enhancing expression of Cpt1a and inhibiting glycolysis in 
CD4+ T cells (103). Importantly, PD-1, which is highly expressed 
on exhausted CD8+ T cells, regulates their metabolic fitness 
during effector cell development (104). Blocking PD-1 in vivo 
or using PD-1-deficient LCMV-specific P14 cells reduced mito-
chondrial mass and increased glycolytic capacity in response 
to chronic clone 13 LCMV infection (104). Additionally, PD-1 
deficiency correlated with a higher expression of the peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator 1α (PGC-1α), which 
regulates mitochondrial biogenesis and OXPHOS. This increase 
in PGC-1α correlated with reduced mitochondrial mass and 
enhanced glycolysis, yielding a more pronounced expansion and 
competitive fitness of PD-1-deficient, exhausted CD8+ T cells 
during the effector phase. Therefore, 2-DG and PD-1 ligation are 
potentially attractive targets for boosting FAO, which promotes 
Tm development and function.
Moreover, the cross talk between mTORC1 and mTORC2 is 
critical in regulating CD8+ Teff versus Tm cell fates via specific 
transcriptional reprogramming (105). Specific mTORC1 knock-
down impairs mTORC2 activity and AKT-dependent activation 
(105). Interestingly, mTORC1 and mTORC2 regulate FOXO-1 via 
AKT-dependent phosphorylation. Rapamycin treatment impairs 
FOXO-1 phosphorylation, and this promotes its nuclear retention 
where it represses T-bet and drives the expression of Eomes, Tcf-1 
transcription factors, and CPT1a, which collectively drives CD8+ 
Tm development (52, 105). On the other hand, higher mTORC1 
activity leads to the phosphorylation and inactivation of FOXO-1 by 
promoting its nuclear export leading to reduced Eomes, but higher 
T-bet which promote CD8+ Teff differentiation (105). Additionally, 
inhibiting glycolysis using 2-DG also promotes the nuclear com-
partmentalization of FOXO-1(27). Therefore, inhibition of AKT 
or FOXO-1 phosphorylation is certainly additional avenues that 
warrant further investigation. On another front, mTORC1 activ-
ity is induced by amino-acid uptake, in particular, leucine which 
promotes mTOR localization to lysosomes that prompt mTOR 
activation. Inhibiting amino-acid transporters may be another way 
to modulate intracellular mTOR activity. Other key regulators of 
mTOR and metabolism are IL-2 and IL-15. Indeed, IL-2 tips the 
balance in favor of Teff instead of Tm development. In contrast, 
IL-15 is a key regulator of memory development that may occur in 
part through its capacity to enhance mitochondrial mass and SRC. 
Other signaling modulators downstream of IL-15, such as AMPK 
and STAT5, contribute to metabolic reprogramming (106). Thus, 
several attractive candidates exist that can serve as targets for novel 
therapeutic approaches to augment superior CD8+ Tm development 
and function.
CONCLUDiNG ReMARKS
The link between metabolic regulation and its downstream 
sequelae on the activation and function of the immune system has 
enormous immunotherapeutic potential. This begs the question 
 11
Shehata et al.
Immunometabolism During Viral Infections
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
of whether sugar or fat metabolism needs to be manipulated to 
promote more robust immune responses. Our review highlights 
that both sugar and fat metabolism are critical in orchestrating 
decisions relating to the function and fate of immune cells. 
Translating the knowledge from metabolic reprograming at the 
cellular level to the bedside, whether to treat acute or chronic viral 
infections or inflammatory diseases is yet to be established. One 
concern about using mTOR and PI3Kinase as immunotherapies 
is fear of toxicity and undesirable effects. However, glucose uptake 
by insulin-sensitive cells, such as adipocytes, is regulated by 
other glucose transporter isoforms (e.g., Glut-4), which are less 
responsive to inflammatory signals than Glut-1 (107). Thus, while 
these drugs may be explored for the “block and lock” (suppress 
HIV reactivation) or “starve” (inhibit homeostatic proliferation of 
the reservoir) HIV cure strategies, reversal of immune exhaustion 
through modulation of CD8+ metabolism may improve CTL-
mediated killing of infected cells (91).
Further studies are needed to understand how metabolic 
reprogramming of one or several immune cell types can influence 
the functionality of other immune cells. Finally, future studies 
will need to investigate how to rheostatically modulate specific 
immune cells in vivo without causing any harm, and how these 
approaches should be timed with respect to boosting immune 
responses to vaccines.
AUTHOR CONTRiBUTiONS
HS, AM, ML, CG, SS, DF, and CP wrote the manuscript. HS and 
CP designed figures. SC provided overall critical evaluation and 
offered insightful suggestions to improve content. All edited the 
manuscript and approved the final version for submission.
FUNDiNG
CP was funded by the Australian Centre for HIV and Hepatitis 
Virology Research (ACH2) and a 2010 developmental grant 
(CNIHR) from the University of Washington Center for AIDS 
Research (CFAR), an NIH-funded program (grant number 
AI027757), which is supported by the following NIH Institutes 
and Centers (NIAID, NCI, NIMH, NIDA, NICHD, NHLBI, 
NIA). CSP is a recipient of the CNIHR and ACH2 grant. SC is a 
recipient of a National Health and Medical Research Council of 
Australia (NHMRC) Principal Research Fellowship. SS was sup-
ported by National Institutes of Health (NIH; grant number DP2 
AI112244), Center for AIDS Research (CFAR) Pilot Award (grant 
number P30 AI027763 and CNIHR P30 AI027767), California 
HIV/AIDS Research Program IDEA Award (CHRP; grant 
number ID15-GI-059), and the amfAR Institute for HIV Cure 
Research, with funding from amfAR (grant number 109301).
ReFeReNCeS
1. Pearce EL, Poffenberger MC, Chang CH, Jones RG. Fueling immunity: 
insights into metabolism and lymphocyte function. Science (2013) 342(6155): 
1242454. doi:10.1126/science.1242454 
2. Wang R, Dillon CP, Shi LZ, Milasta S, Carter R, Finkelstein D, et al. The tran-
scription factor Myc controls metabolic reprogramming upon T lymphocyte 
activation. Immunity (2011) 35(6):871–82. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2011.09.021 
3. Finlay DK, Rosenzweig E, Sinclair LV, Feijoo-Carnero C, Hukelmann JL, 
 
Rolf J, et al. PDK1 regulation of mTOR and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 
integrate metabolism and migration of CD8+ T cells. J Exp Med (2012) 
209(13):2441–53. doi:10.1084/jem.20112607 
4. Sinclair LV, Rolf J, Emslie E, Shi YB, Taylor PM, Cantrell DA. Control of 
amino-acid transport by antigen receptors coordinates the metabolic repro-
gramming essential for T cell differentiation. Nat Immunol (2013) 14(5): 
500–8. doi:10.1038/ni.2556 
5. Ma EH, Bantug G, Griss T, Condotta S, Johnson RM, Samborska B, et al. Serine 
is an essential metabolite for effector T cell expansion. Cell Metab (2017) 
25(2):345–57. doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2016.12.011 
6. Warburg O, Wind F, Negelein E. The metabolism of tumors in the body. J Gen 
Physiol (1927) 8(6):519–30. doi:10.1085/jgp.8.6.519 
7. Wang T, Marquardt C, Foker J. Aerobic glycolysis during lymphocyte prolif-
eration. Nature (1976) 261(5562):702–5. doi:10.1038/261702a0 
8. Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB. Understanding the Warburg 
effect: the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation. Science (2009) 
324(5930):1029–33. doi:10.1126/science.1160809 
9. Donnelly RP, Finlay DK. Glucose, glycolysis and lymphocyte responses. Mol 
Immunol (2015) 68(2 Pt C):513–9. doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2015.07.034 
10. Lunt SY, Vander Heiden MG. Aerobic glycolysis: meeting the metabolic 
requirements of cell proliferation. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol (2011) 27:441–64. 
doi:10.1146/annurev-cellbio-092910-154237 
11. Hume DA, Radik JL, Ferber E, Weidemann MJ. Aerobic glycolysis and 
lymphocyte transformation. Biochem J (1978) 174(3):703–9. doi:10.1042/
bj1740703 
12. DeBerardinis RJ, Mancuso A, Daikhin E, Nissim I, Yudkoff M, Wehrli S, 
 
et al. Beyond aerobic glycolysis: transformed cells can engage in glutamine 
metabolism that exceeds the requirement for protein and nucleotide syn-
thesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007) 104(49):19345–50. doi:10.1073/pnas. 
0709747104 
13. Swamy M, Pathak S, Grzes KM, Damerow S, Sinclair LV, van Aalten DM, 
et al. Glucose and glutamine fuel protein O-GlcNAcylation to control T cell 
self-renewal and malignancy. Nat Immunol (2016) 17(6):712–20. doi:10.1038/
ni.3439 
14. Palmer CS, Cherry CL, Sada-Ovalle I, Singh A, Crowe SM. Glucose metab-
olism in T cells and monocytes: new perspectives in HIV pathogenesis. 
EBioMedicine (2016) 6:31–41. doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.02.012 
15. van der Windt GJW
, O’Sullivan D, Everts B, Huang SCC, Buck MD, Curtis JD, 
 
et al. CD8 memory T cells have a bioenergetic advantage that underlies 
their rapid recall ability. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013) 110(35):14336–41. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1221740110 
16. O’Sullivan D, van der Windt GJW, Huang SCC, Curtis JD, Chang CH, 
 
Buck MD, et al. Memory CD8(+) T cells use cell-intrinsic lipolysis to support 
the metabolic programming necessary for development. Immunity (2014) 
41(1):75–88. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2014.06.005 
17. Cui G, Staron MM, Gray SM, Ho PC, Amezquita RA, Wu J, et al. IL-7-induced 
glycerol transport and TAG synthesis promotes memory CD8+ T cell longev-
ity. Cell (2015) 161(4):750–61. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.03.021 
18. Gubser PM, Bantug GR, Razik L, Fischer M, Dimeloe S, Hoenger G, et al. 
Rapid effector function of memory CD8+ T cells requires an immediate-early 
glycolytic switch. Nat Immunol (2013) 14(10):1064–72. doi:10.1038/ni.2687 
19. Pearce EL, Walsh MC, Cejas PJ, Harms GM, Shen H, Wang LS, et al. Enhancing 
CD8 T-cell memory by modulating fatty acid metabolism. Nature (2009) 
460(7251):103–7. doi:10.1038/nature08097 
20. Araki K, Turner AP, Shaffer VO, Gangappa S, Keller SA, Bachmann MF, 
et al. mTOR regulates memory CD8 T-cell differentiation. Nature (2009) 
460(7251):108–12. doi:10.1038/nature08155 
21. Rolf J, Zarrouk M, Finlay DK, Foretz M, Viollet B, Cantrell DA. AMPK alpha 
1: a glucose sensor that controls CD8 T-cell memory. Eur J Immunol (2013) 
43(4):889–96. doi:10.1002/eji.201243008 
22. Chang CH, Curtis JD, Maggi  LB Jr, Faubert B, Villarino AV
, O’Sullivan D, et al. 
Posttranscriptional control of T cell effector function by aerobic glycolysis. 
Cell (2013) 153(6):1239–51. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.016 
 12
Shehata et al.
Immunometabolism During Viral Infections
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
23. Castello A, Fischer B, Eichelbaum K, Horos R, Beckmann BM, Strein C, 
et al. Insights into RNA biology from an atlas of mammalian mRNA-binding 
proteins. Cell (2012) 149(6):1393–406. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2012.04.031 
24. Ho PC, Bihuniak JD, Macintyre AN, Staron M, Liu XJ, Amezquita R, et al. 
Phosphoenolpyruvate is a metabolic checkpoint of anti-tumor T cell responses. 
Cell (2015) 162(6):1217–28. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.08.012 
25. Berg JM, Tymoczko JL, Stryer L. Biochemistry. Section 30.1, Metabolism Con­
sist of Highly Interconnected Pathways. New York: W H Freeman (2002).
26. Delmastro-Greenwood MM, Piganelli JD. Changing the energy of an immune 
response. Am J Clin Exp Immunol (2013) 2(1):30–54. 
27. Sukumar M, Liu J, Ji Y, Subramanian M, Crompton JG, Yu ZY, et al. Inhibiting 
glycolytic metabolism enhances CD8(+) T cell memory and antitumor 
function. J Clin Invest (2013) 123(10):4479–88. doi:10.1172/Jci69389 
28. Cham CM, Driessens G, O’Keefe JP, Gajewski TF. Glucose deprivation inhibits 
multiple key gene expression events and effector functions in CD8+ T cells. 
Eur J Immunol (2008) 38(9):2438–50. doi:10.1002/eji.200838289 
29. Wieman HL, Wofford JA, Rathmell JC. Cytokine stimulation promotes glucose 
uptake via phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase/Akt regulation of Glut1 activity and 
trafficking. Mol Biol Cell (2007) 18(4):1437–46. doi:10.1091/mbc.E06-07-0593 
30. Wofford JA, Wieman HL, Jacobs SR, Zhao Y, Rathmell JC. IL-7 promotes 
Glut1 trafficking and glucose uptake via STAT5-mediated activation of Akt 
to support T-cell survival. Blood (2008) 111(4):2101–11. doi:10.1182/blood- 
2007-06-096297 
31. Frauwirth KA, Riley JL, Harris MH, Parry RV, Rathmell JC, Plas DR, et al. 
The CD28 signaling pathway regulates glucose metabolism. Immunity (2002) 
16(6):769–77. doi:10.1016/S1074-7613(02)00323-0 
32. van der Windt GJW, Everts B, Chang CH, Curtis JD, Freitas TC, Amiel E, 
et al. Mitochondrial respiratory capacity is a critical regulator of CD8(+) 
T cell memory development. Immunity (2012) 36(1):68–78. doi:10.1016/j.
immuni.2011.12.007 
33. Jacobs SR, Herman CE, MacIver NJ, Wofford JA, Wieman HL, Hammen JJ, 
 
et al. Glucose uptake is limiting in T cell activation and requires CD28-
mediated akt-dependent and independent pathways. J Immunol (2008) 
180(7):4476–86. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.180.7.4476 
34. Phan AT, Doedens AL, Palazon A, Tyrakis PA, Cheung KP, Johnson RS, et al. 
Constitutive glycolytic metabolism supports CD8+ T cell effector memory 
differentiation during viral infection. Immunity (2016) 45(5):1024–37. 
doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2016.10.017 
35. Burke JA, Schubert WK. Deficient activity of hepatic acid lipase in choles-
terol ester storage disease. Science (1972) 176(4032):309–10. doi:10.1126/
science.176.4032.309 
36. Pagani F, Pariyarath R, Garcia R, Stuani C, Burlina AB, Ruotolo G, et al. New 
lysosomal acid lipase gene mutants explain the phenotype of Wolman disease 
and cholesteryl ester storage disease. J Lipid Res (1998) 39(7):1382–8. 
37. Lee J, Walsh MC, Hoehn KL, James DE, Wherry EJ, Choi Y. Regulator of fatty 
acid metabolism, acetyl coenzyme a carboxylase 1, controls T cell immunity. 
J Immunol (2014) 192(7):3190–9. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1302985 
38. Pan Y, Tian T, Park CO, Lofftus SY, Mei S, Liu X, et al. Survival of tissue- 
resident memory T cells requires exogenous lipid uptake and metabolism. 
Nature (2017) 543(7644):252–6. doi:10.1038/nature21379 
39. Geiger R, Rieckmann JC, Wolf T, Basso C, Feng Y, Fuhrer T, et al. L-arginine 
modulates T cell metabolism and enhances survival and anti-tumor activity. 
Cell (2016) 167(3):829–42.e13. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.031 
40. Buck MD, O’Sullivan D, Klein Geltink RI, Curtis JD, Chang CH, Sanin DE, 
et al. Mitochondrial dynamics controls T cell fate through metabolic pro-
gramming. Cell (2016) 166(1):63–76. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.05.035 
41. Laplante M, Sabatini DM. mTOR signaling in growth control and disease. 
Cell (2012) 149(2):274–93. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.017 
42. Intlekofer AM, Takemoto N, Wherry EJ, Longworth SA, Northrup JT, 
Palanivel VR, et al. Effector and memory CD8+ T cell fate coupled by T-bet 
and eomesodermin. Nat Immunol (2005) 6(12):1236–44. doi:10.1038/ni1268 
43. Intlekofer AM, Takemoto N, Kao C, Banerjee A, Schambach F, Northrop JK, 
 
et al. Requirement for T-bet in the aberrant differentiation of unhelped 
memory CD8+ T cells. J Exp Med (2007) 204(9):2015–21. doi:10.1084/jem. 
20070841 
44. Joshi NS, Cui W
, Chandele A, Lee HK, Urso DR, Hagman J, et al. Inflammation 
directs memory precursor and short-lived effector CD8(+) T cell fates 
via the graded expression of T-bet transcription factor. Immunity (2007) 
27(2):281–95. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2007.07.010 
45. Banerjee A, Gordon SM, Intlekofer AM, Paley MA, Mooney EC, Lindsten T, 
 
et al. Cutting edge: the transcription factor eomesodermin enables CD8+ 
T cells to compete for the memory cell niche. J Immunol (2010) 185(9): 
4988–92. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1002042 
46. Rao RR, Li QS, Odunsi K, Shrikant PA. The mTOR kinase determines 
effector versus memory CD8(+) T cell fate by regulating the expression of 
transcription factors T-bet and eomesodermin. Immunity (2010) 32(1):67–78. 
doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2009.10.010 
47. Paley MA, Gordon SM, Bikoff EK, Robertson EJ, Wherry EJ, Reiner SL. 
Technical advance: fluorescent reporter reveals insights into eomesodermin 
biology in cytotoxic lymphocytes. J Leukoc Biol (2013) 93(2):307–15. 
doi:10.1189/jlb.0812400 
48. Pollizzi KN, Sun IH, Patel CH, Lo YC, Oh MH, Waickman AT, et al. Asymmetric 
inheritance of mTORC1 kinase activity during division dictates CD8(+) 
 
T cell differentiation. Nat Immunol (2016) 17(6):704–11. doi:10.1038/ni.3438 
49. Pollizzi KN, Patel CH, Sun IH, Oh MH, Waickman AT, Wen J, et al. 
mTORC1 and mTORC2 selectively regulate CD8(+) T cell differentiation. 
J Clin Invest (2015) 125(5):2090–108. doi:10.1172/JCI77746 
50. Shrestha S, Yang K, Wei J, Karmaus PW, Neale G, Chi H. Tsc1 promotes the 
differentiation of memory CD8+ T cells via orchestrating the transcriptional 
and metabolic programs. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014) 111(41):14858–63. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1404264111 
51. Cheng SC, Quintin J, Cramer RA, Shepardson KM, Saeed S, Kumar V, et al. 
mTOR- and HIF-1 alpha-mediated aerobic glycolysis as metabolic basis 
for trained immunity. Science (2014) 345(6204):1579. doi:10.1126/science. 
1250684 
52. Zhang L, Tschumi BO, Lopez-Mejia IC, Oberle SG, Meyer M, Samson G, 
et al. Mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2 controls CD8 T cell memory 
differentiation in a Foxo1-dependent manner. Cell Rep (2016) 14(5):1206–17. 
doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.095 
53. Schurich A, Henson SM. The many unknowns concerning the bioenergetics 
of exhaustion and senescence during chronic viral infection. Front Immunol 
(2014) 5:468. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2014.00468 
54. Gogoi D, Borkakoty B, Biswas D, Mahanta J. Activation and exhaustion 
of adaptive immune cells in hepatitis B infection. Viral Immunol (2015) 
28(7):348–53. doi:10.1089/vim.2014.0115 
55. Schurich A, Pallett LJ, Jajbhay D, Wijngaarden J, Otano I, Gill US, et al. 
Distinct metabolic requirements of exhausted and functional virus-specific 
CD8 T cells in the same host. Cell Rep (2016) 16(5):1243–52. doi:10.1016/j.
celrep.2016.06.078 
56. Fisicaro P, Barili V, Montanini B, Acerbi G, Ferracin M, Guerrieri F, et al. 
Targeting mitochondrial dysfunction can restore antiviral activity of 
exhausted HBV-specific CD8 T cells in chronic hepatitis B. Nat Med (2017) 
23(3):327–36. doi:10.1038/nm.4275 
57. UNAIDS. Global AIDS Update [Online]. (2016). Available from: http://www.
unaids.org/sites/default/files/media_asset/global-AIDS-update-2016_en.pdf
58. Schmitz JE, Kuroda MJ, Santra S, Sasseville VG, Simon MA, Lifton MA, et al. 
Control of viremia in simian immunodeficiency virus infection by CD8+ 
lymphocytes. Science (1999) 283(5403):857–60. doi:10.1126/science.283. 
5403.857 
59. Borrow P, Lewicki H, Wei X, Horwitz MS, Peffer N, Meyers H, et al. Antiviral 
pressure exerted by HIV-1-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) during 
primary infection demonstrated by rapid selection of CTL escape virus. Nat 
Med (1997) 3(2):205–11. doi:10.1038/nm0297-205 
60. Trautmann L, Mbitikon-Kobo FM, Goulet JP
, Peretz Y, Shi Y, Van Grevenynghe J, 
 
et al. Profound metabolic, functional, and cytolytic differences characterize 
HIV-specific CD8 T cells in primary and chronic HIV infection. Blood (2012) 
120(17):3466–77. doi:10.1182/blood-2012-04-422550 
61. Chiu YL, Shan L, Huang H, Haupt C, Bessell C, Canaday DH, et al. 
Sprouty-2 regulates HIV-specific T cell polyfunctionality. J Clin Invest (2013) 
124(1):198–208. doi:10.1172/JCI70510 
62. Araujo L, Khim P, Mkhikian H, Mortales CL, Demetriou M. Glycolysis and 
glutaminolysis cooperatively control T cell function by limiting metabolite 
supply to N-glycosylation. Elife (2017) 6:e21330. doi:10.7554/eLife.21330 
63. Ghesquiere B, Wong BW, Kuchnio A, Carmeliet P. Metabolism of stromal 
and immune cells in health and disease. Nature (2014) 511(7508):167–76. 
doi:10.1038/nature13312 
64. Buck MD, O’Sullivan D, Pearce EL. T cell metabolism drives immunity. J Exp 
Med (2015) 212(9):1345–60. doi:10.1084/jem.20151159 
 13
Shehata et al.
Immunometabolism During Viral Infections
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
65. Almeida L, Lochner M, Berod L, Sparwasser T. Metabolic pathways in T cell 
activation and lineage differentiation. Semin Immunol (2016) 28(5):514–24. 
doi:10.1016/j.smim.2016.10.009 
66. Palmer CS, Hussain T, Duette G, Weller TJ, Ostrowski M, Sada-Ovalle I, et al. 
Regulators of glucose metabolism in CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells. Int Rev 
Immunol (2016) 35(6):477–88. doi:10.3109/08830185.2015.1082178 
67. Grigorian A, Araujo L, Naidu NN, Place DJ, Choudhury B, Demetriou M. 
N-acetylglucosamine inhibits T-helper 1 (Th1)/T-helper 17 (Th17) cell res-
ponses and treats experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J Biol Chem  
(2011) 286(46):40133–41. doi:10.1074/jbc.M111.277814 
68. Klysz D, Tai X, Robert PA, Craveiro M, Cretenet G, Oburoglu L, et al. 
Glutamine-dependent alpha-ketoglutarate production regulates the balance 
between T helper 1 cell and regulatory T cell generation. Sci Signal (2015) 
8(396):ra97. doi:10.1126/scisignal.aab2610 
69. Michael NL, Louie LG, Rohrbaugh AL, Schultz KA, Dayhoff DE, Wang CE, 
et al. The role of CCR5 and CCR2 polymorphisms in HIV-1 transmission 
and disease progression. Nat Med (1997) 3(10):1160–2. doi:10.1038/
nm0397-338 
70. Verani A, Pesenti E, Polo S, Tresoldi E, Scarlatti G, Lusso P, et al. Cutting edge: 
CXCR4 is a functional coreceptor for infection of human macrophages by 
CXCR4-dependent primary HIV-1 isolates. J Immunol (1998) 161(5):2084–8. 
71. Ellery PJ, Tippett E, Chiu YL, Paukovics G, Cameron PU, Solomon A, et al. 
The CD16(+) monocyte subset is more permissive to infection and preferen-
tially harbors HIV-1 in vivo. J Immunol (2007) 178(10):6581–9. doi:10.4049/
jimmunol.178.10.6581 
72. Guadalupe M, Reay E, Sankaran S, Prindiville T, Flamm J, McNeil A, et al. 
Severe CD4+ T-cell depletion in gut lymphoid tissue during primary human 
immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection and substantial delay in restoration 
following highly active antiretroviral therapy. J Virol (2003) 77(21):11708–17. 
doi:10.1128/JVI.77.21.11708-11717.2003 
73. Brenchley JM, Schacker TW, Ruff LE, Price DA, Taylor JH, Beilman GJ, 
et al. CD4(+) T cell depletion during all stages of HIV disease occurs pre-
dominantly in the gastrointestinal tract. J Exp Med (2004) 200(6):749–59. 
doi:10.1084/jem.20040874 
74. Sousa AE, Carneiro J, Meier-Schellersheim M, Grossman Z, Victorino RMM. 
CD4 T cell depletion is linked directly to immune activation in the pathogen-
esis of HIV-1 and HIV-2 but only indirectly to the viral load. J Immunol (2002) 
169(6):3400–6. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.169.6.3400 
75. Doitsh G, Galloway NL, Geng X, Yang Z, Monroe KM, Zepeda O, et al. Cell 
death by pyroptosis drives CD4 T-cell depletion in HIV-1 infection. Nature 
(2014) 505(7484):509–14. doi:10.1038/nature12940 
76. Buggert M, Frederiksen J, Lund O, Betts MR, Biague A, Nielsen M, et al. 
CD4+ T cells with an activated and exhausted phenotype distinguish immu-
nodeficiency during aviremic HIV-2 infection. AIDS (2016) 30(16):2415–26. 
doi:10.1097/QAD.0000000000001223 
77. Trautmann L, Janbazian L, Chomont N, Said EA, Gimmig S, Bessette B, et al. 
Upregulation of PD-1 expression on HIV-specific CD8+ T cells leads to revers-
ible immune dysfunction. Nat Med (2006) 12(10):1198–202. doi:10.1038/ 
nm1482 
78. Vigano S, Banga R, Bellanger F, Pellaton C, Farina A, Comte D, et al. CD160-
associated CD8 T-cell functional impairment is independent of PD-1 expres-
sion. PLoS Pathog (2014) 10(9):e1004380. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1004380 
79. Chew GM, Fujita T, Webb GM, Burwitz BJ, Wu HL, Reed JS, et al. TIGIT 
marks exhausted T cells, correlates with disease progression, and serves as a 
target for immune restoration in HIV and SIV infection. PLoS Pathog (2016) 
12(1):e1005349. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1005349 
80. Tauriainen J, Scharf L, Frederiksen J, Naji A, Ljunggren HG, Sonnerborg A, 
et al. Perturbed CD8+ T cell TIGIT/CD226/PVR axis despite early initiation 
of antiretroviral treatment in HIV infected individuals. Sci Rep (2017) 7:40354. 
doi:10.1038/srep40354 
81. Palmer CS, Ostrowski M, Gouillou M, Tsai L, Yu D, Zhou JL, et al. Increased 
glucose metabolic activity is associated with CD4 R T-cell activation and 
depletion during chronic HIV infection. AIDS (2014) 28(3):297–309. 
doi:10.1097/Qad.0000000000000128 
82. Cretenet G, Clerc I, Matias M, Loisel S, Craveiro M, Oburoglu L, et al. 
Cell surface Glut1 levels distinguish human CD4 and CD8 T lymphocyte 
subsets with distinct effector functions. Eur J Immunol (2016) 46:443–443. 
doi:10.1038/srep24129 
83. Macintyre AN, Gerriets VA, Nichols AG, Michalek RD, Rudolph MC, 
Deoliveira D, et al. The glucose transporter glut1 is selectively essential for 
CD4 T cell activation and effector function. Cell Metab (2014) 20(1):61–72. 
doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2014.05.004 
84. Loisel-Meyer S, Swainson L, Craveiro M, Oburoglu L, Mongellaz C, Costa C, 
 
et al. Glut1-mediated glucose transport regulates HIV infection. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A (2012) 109(7):2549–54. doi:10.1073/pnas.1121427109 
85. Hollenbaugh JA, Montero C, Schinazi RF, Munger J, Kim B. Metabolic profil-
ing during HIV-1 and HIV-2 infection of primary human monocyte-derived 
macrophages. Virology (2016) 491:106–14. doi:10.1016/j.virol.2016.01.023 
86. Angela M, Endo Y, Asou HK, Yamamoto T, Tumes DJ, Tokuyama H, et al. 
Fatty acid metabolic reprogramming via mTOR-mediated inductions of 
PPARgamma directs early activation of T cells. Nat Commun (2016) 7:13683. 
doi:10.1038/ncomms13683 
87. Heredia A, Le N, Gartenhaus RB, Sausville E, Medina-Moreno S, Zapata JC, 
et al. Targeting of mTOR catalytic site inhibits multiple steps of the HIV-1 
lifecycle and suppresses HIV-1 viremia in humanized mice. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A (2015) 112(30):9412–7. doi:10.1073/pnas.1511144112 
88. Chomont N, El-Far M, Ancuta P, Trautmann L, Procopio FA, Yassine-Diab B, 
 
et al. HIV reservoir size and persistence are driven by T cell survival and 
homeostatic proliferation. Nat Med (2009) 15(8):893–900. doi:10.1038/
nm.1972 
89. Kumar B, Arora S, Ahmed S, Banerjea AC. Hyperactivation of mammalian 
target of rapamycin complex 1 by HIV-1 is necessary for virion production 
and latent viral reactivation. Faseb J (2017) 31(1):180–91. doi:10.1096/fj. 
201600813R 
90. Palmer CS, Duette GA, Wagner MCE, Henstridge DC, Saleh S, Pereira C, 
 
et al. Metabolically active CD4+ T cells expressing Glut1 and OX40 
preferentially harbor HIV during in vitro infection. FEBS Lett (2017). 
doi:10.1002/1873-3468.12843 
91. Martin AR, Pollack RA, Capoferri A, Ambinder RF, Durand CM, Siliciano RF. 
 
Rapamycin-mediated mTOR inhibition uncouples HIV-1 latency reversal 
from cytokine-associated toxicity. J Clin Invest (2017) 127(2):651–6. 
doi:10.1172/Jci89552 
92. Palmer CS, Henstridge DC, Yu D, Singh A, Balderson B, Duette G, et al. 
Emerging role and characterization of immunometabolism: relevance to 
HIV pathogenesis, serious non-AIDS events, and a cure. J Immunol (2016) 
196(11):4437–44. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1600120 
93. Besnard E, Hakre S, Kampmann M, Lim HW, Hosmane NN, Martin A, 
et al. The mTOR complex controls HIV latency. Cell Host Microbe (2016) 
20(6):785–97. doi:10.1016/j.chom.2016.11.001 
94. Angelovich TA, Hearps AC, Maisa A, Martin GE, Lichtfuss GF, Cheng WJ, 
et al. Viremic and virologically suppressed HIV infection increases age- 
related changes to monocyte activation equivalent to 12 and 4 years of aging, 
respectively. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr (2015) 69(1):11–7. doi:10.1097/
QAI.0000000000000559 
95. Palmer CS, Anzinger JJ, Zhou J, Gouillou M, Landay A, Jaworowski A, et al. 
Glucose transporter 1-expressing proinflammatory monocytes are elevated 
in combination antiretroviral therapy-treated and untreated HIV+ subjects. 
J Immunol (2014) 193(11):5595–603. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1303092 
96. Brenchley JM, Price DA, Schacker TW, Asher TE, Silvestri G, Rao S, et al. 
Microbial translocation is a cause of systemic immune activation in chronic 
HIV infection. Nat Med (2006) 12(12):1365–71. doi:10.1038/nm1511 
97. Butterfield TR, Hanna DB, Kaplan RC, Kizer JR, Durkin HG, Young MA, 
et al. Increased glucose transporter-1 expression on intermediate monocytes 
from HIV-infected women with subclinical cardiovascular disease. AIDS 
(2017) 31(2):199–205. doi:10.1097/Qad.0000000000001320 
98. Casanovas T, Argudo A, Pena-Cala MC. Everolimus in clinical practice in 
long-term liver transplantation: an observational study. Transplant Proc 
(2011) 43(6):2216–9. doi:10.1016/j.transproceed.2011.06.015 
99. Garriga-Canut M, Schoenike B, Qazi R, Bergendahl K, Daley TJ, Pfender 
RM, et al. 2-Deoxy-D-glucose reduces epilepsy progression by NRSF-CtBP-
dependent metabolic regulation of chromatin structure. Nat Neurosci (2006) 
9(11):1382–7. doi:10.1038/nn1791 
100. Stein M, Lin HX, Jeyamohan C, Dvorzhinski D, Gounder M, Bray K, et al. 
Targeting tumor metabolism with 2-deoxyglucose in patients with castrate- 
resistant prostate cancer and advanced malignancies. Prostate (2010) 
70(13):1388–94. doi:10.1002/pros.21172 
 14
Shehata et al.
Immunometabolism During Viral Infections
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1311
101. Wang YS, Wei JM, Li L, Fan C, Sun Y. Combined use of metformin and 
everolimus is synergistic in the treatment of breast cancer cells. Oncol Res 
(2015) 22(4):193–201. doi:10.3727/096504015x14348950540999 
102. Zhang D, Li J, Wang F, Hu J, Wang S, Sun Y. 2-Deoxy-D-glucose targeting 
of glucose metabolism in cancer cells as a potential therapy. Cancer Lett 
(2014) 355(2):176–83. doi:10.1016/j.canlet.2014.09.003 
103. Patsoukis N, Bardhan K, Chatterjee P, Sari D, Liu B, Bell LN, et al. PD-1 alters 
T-cell metabolic reprogramming by inhibiting glycolysis and promoting 
lipolysis and fatty acid oxidation. Nat Commun (2015) 6:6692. doi:10.1038/
ncomms7692 
104. Bengsch B, Johnson AL, Kurachi M, Odorizzi PM, Pauken KE, Attanasio J, 
 
et al. Bioenergetic insufficiencies due to metabolic alterations regulated 
by the inhibitory receptor PD-1 are an early driver of CD8(+) T cell 
exhaustion. Immunity (2016) 45(2):358–73. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2016. 
07.008 
105. Rao RR, Li Q, Gubbels Bupp MR, Shrikant PA. Transcription factor 
Foxo1 represses T-bet-mediated effector functions and promotes memory 
CD8(+) T cell differentiation. Immunity (2012) 36(3):374–87. doi:10.1016/j.
immuni.2012.01.015 
106. Mihaylova MM, Shaw RJ. The AMPK signalling pathway coordinates cell 
growth, autophagy and metabolism. Nat Cell Biol (2011) 13(9):1016–23. 
doi:10.1038/ncb2329 
107. Maratou E, Dimitriadis G, Kollias A, Boutati E, Lambadiari V, Mitrou P, 
et al. Glucose transporter expression on the plasma membrane of resting 
and activated white blood cells. Eur J Clin Invest (2007) 37(4):282–90. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2362.2007.01786.x 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Shehata, Murphy, Lee, Gardiner, Crowe, Sanjabi, Finlay and 
Palmer. This is an open­access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in 
other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited 
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted 
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not 
comply with these terms.
