 Tissue-Specific Progenitor and Stem Cells
Grafted Subventricular Zone Neural Stem Cells
Display Robust Engraftment and Similar
Differentiation Properties and Form New Neurogenic
Niches in the Young and Aged Hippocampus
ASHOK K. SHETTY,* BHARATHI HATTIANGADY*
Key Words. Cell transplantation x Cellular therapy x Hippocampal neurogenesis x Neural stem cells x
Stem cell grafts x Subventricular zone stem cells
ABSTRACT
As clinical application of neural stem cell (NSC) grafting into the brain would also encompass aged
people, critical evaluation of engraftment of NSC graft-derived cells in the aged hippocampus has sig-
nificance. We examined the engraftment and differentiation of alkaline phosphatase-positive NSCs
expanded from the postnatal subventricular zone (SVZ), 3 months after grafting into the intact young
or aged rat hippocampus. Graft-derived cells engrafted robustly into both young and aged hippo-
campi. Although most graft-derived cells pervasively migrated into different hippocampal layers,
the graft cores endured and contained graft-derived neurons expressing neuron-specific nuclear an-
tigen (NeuN) and g-amino butyric acid in both groups. A fraction of migrated graft-derived cells in
the neurogenic subgranular zone-granule cell layer also expressed NeuN. Neuronal differentiation
was, however, occasionally seen amid graft-derived cells that had migrated into non-neurogenic
regions, where substantial fractions differentiated into S-100b+ astrocytes, NG2+ oligodendrocyte
progenitors, or Olig2+ putative oligodendrocytes. In both age groups, graft cores located in non-
neurogenicregionsdisplayedmanydoublecortin-positive(DCX+)immatureneuronsat3monthsafter
grafting. Analyses of cells within graft cores using birth dating andputative NSC markers revealed that
DCX+neuronswerenewlybornneuronsderivedfromengraftedcellsandthatputativeNSCspersisted
withinthegraftcores.Thus,bothyoungandagedhippocampisupportrobustengraftmentandsimilar
differentiation of SVZ-NSC graft-derived cells. Furthermore, some grafted NSCs retain the “stemness”
feature and produce new neurons even at 3 months after grafting, implying that grafting of SVZ-NSCs
into the young or aged hippocampus leads to establishment of new neurogenic niches in non-
neurogenic regions. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1204–1215
SIGNIFICANCE
The results demonstrate that advanced age of the host at the time of grafting has no major adverse
effects on engraftment, migration, and differentiation of grafted subventricular zone-neural stem
cells (SVZ-NSCs) in the intact hippocampus, as both young and aged hippocampi promoted excellent
engraftment, migration, and differentiation of SVZ-NSC graft-derived cells in the present study.
Furthermore, SVZ-NSC grafts showed ability for establishing neurogenic niches in non-neurogenic
regions, generating new neurons for extended periods after grafting. This phenomenon will be
beneficial if these niches can continuously generate new neurons and glia in the grafted hippocam-
pus, as newly generated neurons and glia are expected to improve, not only the microenvironment,
but also the plasticity and function of the aged hippocampus. Overall, these results have significance
because the potential application of NSC grafting for treatment of neurodegenerative disorders at
early stages of disease progression and age-related impairments would mostly involve aged persons
as recipients.
INTRODUCTION
Neural stem/progenitor cells (NSCs) competent
for creating new neurons and glia endure in the
adult and aged brain. Such NSCs are particularly
conspicuous in neurogenic regions of the brain,
such as the anterior subventricular zone (SVZ)
of the forebrain [1, 2] and the subgranular zone
(SGZ) of the dentate gyrus (DG) in the hippocam-
pus [3–7]. Enhanced NSC activity in response to
injury is a conspicuous feature in the young and
adult brain, which results in increased production
Institute for Regenerative
Medicine, Texas A&M Health
Science Center College of
Medicine at Scott & White,
Temple, Texas, USA; Research
Service, Olin E. Teague
Veterans’ Medical Center,
Central Texas Veterans
Health Care System, Temple,
Texas, USA; Department of
Molecular and Cellular
Medicine, Texas A&M Health
Science Center College of
Medicine, College Station,
Texas, USA; Division of
Neurosurgery, Duke
University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina, USA;
Research and Surgery
Services, Durham Veterans
Affairs Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina, USA
*Contributed equally.
Correspondence: Ashok K.
Shetty, Ph.D., Institute for
Regenerative Medicine, Texas
A&M Health Science Center
College of Medicine at Scott &
White, 5701 Airport Road,
Module C, Temple, Texas 76501,
USA. Telephone: 254-771-6804;
E-Mail: Shetty@medicine.
tamhsc.edu
Received September 30, 2015;
accepted for publication April 1,
2016; published Online First on
May 18, 2016.
©AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2016/$20.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.5966/sctm.2015-0270
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1204–1215 www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
TISSUE-SPECIFIC PROGENITOR AND STEM CELLS
 of new neurons. Such increased neurogenesis in the SVZ after
conditions such as stroke or traumatic brain injury has been
shown to be reparative in many studies [8–13]. However, the
functional consequences of increased NSC activity and neurogen-
esis in the DG after brain injury are largely unknown.
Studies in certain disease models have suggested that injury-
inducedincreasedDGneurogenesis isusefulfor partialself-repair
and/or maintenance of cognitive function. In contrast, studies in
other models such as seizures have suggested detrimental conse-
quences for hippocampus function because of the abnormal inte-
gration of newly born neurons [14–19] Furthermore, the response
of NSCs to injury in the aged brain, in particular, in the hippocam-
pus,hasbeenfoundtobegreatlyimpaired[20,21].Additionally,no
evidence is available to date for wide-ranging functional recovery
with spontaneous replacement of degenerated neurons by new
neurons produced from endogenous NSCs in the DG, as NSC-
derived neurons seem to differentiate only into DG granule cells
even when substantial neurodegeneration is present in the adjoin-
ing CA3 region [22, 23]. Thus, aging, Alzheimer’s disease, or injury-
related neurodegeneration in the hippocampus is not followed by
adequateself-repair[20,21,24–28].Therefore,testingthesurvival,
differentiation, and beneficial effects of grafting of NSCs expanded
from diverse sources in the developing and adult brain into the
adult and aged hippocampus under intact and injured conditions
has considerable significance.
Multipotent NSCs from the developing and adult brain that
could be expanded in culture as neurospheres using mitogens
such as fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) and epidermal growth
factor(EGF)areoneofthedonorcelltypesconsideredsuitablefor
grafting in neurodegenerative disorders [29, 30]. This is because
such NSCs can be expanded in culture for extended periods from
diverse sources [1, 31–33]. Moreover, newly developed technol-
ogies allow direct conversion of somatic cells, such as fibroblasts,
lymphocytes, or glia, into multipotent NSCs [34–36], which could
facilitate grafting of patient-specific NSCs in the future. Thus, inter-
est is great in ascertaining the engraftment, differentiation, and in-
tegration of NSCs in the adult brain using distinct animal models
of neurological disorders. Yet, as clinical application of neural cell
grafting would also include elderly people afflicted with neurode-
generation, analyses of the potential of different NSCs for engraft-
mentanddifferentiationintheagedbrainarenecessary.Therefore,
in the present study, we quantified the engraftment, distribution,
and differentiation of EGF- and FGF-2-responsive NSCs isolated
from the anterior SVZ after grafting into the intact hippocampus
of young (3–4-month-old) and aged (22–24-month-old) rats. The
donor NSCs were isolated from postnatal day 2 (PND2) rat pups
expressingalkalinephosphatase(AP)transgeneinallcells,expanded
in vitro as neurospheres, and labeled with 59-bromodeoxyuridine
(BrdU). Graft-derived cells were analyzed 3 months after grafting us-
ing markers of neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocyte progenitors, ol-
igodendrocytes, and putative NSCs. In addition, the potential
proliferation of graft-derived cells was assessed 1 month after
grafting through dual and triple immunofluorescence methods us-
ing graft cell, birth dating, and/or putative NSC markers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Young adult (3–4-month-old) and aged (22–24-month-old) Fischer
344 rats were obtained from Harlan Sprague Dawley (Indianapolis,
IN, http://www.harlan.com). The institutional animal care and use
committees of the Duke University Medical Center, Durham Vet-
erans Affairs Medical Center (Durham, NC), Texas A&M Health Sci-
ence Center College of Medicine, and Central Texas Veterans
Health Care System (Temple, TX) approved all the procedures per-
formed in the present study. Supplemental online Figure 1 illus-
trates the experimental design used in the present study.
Preparation of Subventricular Zone-Neural Stem Cells
for Grafting
The methods used to prepare the SVZ-NSCs are described in the
supplemental online data. For grafting, cell suspensions having
greater than 80% cell viability were chosen, and live cells were ad-
justed to a density of 1.00 3 105 viable cells per microliter. The
finalcellsuspensionwastreatedwith20ng/mlbrain-derivedneu-
rotrophic factor (BDNF) before grafting; the addition of BDNF to
the final cell suspension enhances the survival and differentiation
of graft-derived cells in the host hippocampus [37]. The cells were
maintained at 4°C throughout the grafting procedure.
In Vitro Differentiation Studies of Subventricular Zone-
Neural Stem Cells
In order to examine the differentiation potential of neurosphere
cells expanded from SVZ-NSCs that were used for grafting, neuro-
sphere cells were incubated in culture dishes coated with poly-D-
lysine and containing Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium, F12, and
B-27 nutrient mixture for 4–7 days, as described previously [29, 30].
The cultures were stained for identification of b-III tubulin (TuJ-1)-
positive neurons, g-amino butyric acid-positive (GABA+) inhibitory
neurons, glial fibrillary acidic protein-positive (GFAP+) astrocytes,
and RIP+ oligodendrocytes, using single and dual immunofluores-
cence methods described in our previous reports [30, 38]. The an-
tibodies used are listed in supplemental online Table 1.
Grafting of Subventricular Zone-Neural Stem Cells Into
the Young and Aged Hippocampus
The methods used for grafting are detailed in the supplemental
online data. One microliter of SVZ-NSC suspension comprising
∼100,000 live cells was injected into each of the three sites in the
hippocampus(i.e.,300,000livecellsinthreetransplantsforeachhip-
pocampus)inseveralspurtsoveraperiodof1–2minutes[20,37,39,
40]. Based on the BrdU-labeling index (92.1% of all cells) in the cell
suspension, this amounted to grafting of 92,100 BrdU+ cells per
graft and 276,300 BrdU+ cells per hippocampus.
Tissue Processing
Three months after grafting, rats belonging to both young adult
and aged groups underwent intracardiac perfusions with 4%
paraformaldehyde. The brains were dissected, postfixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde overnight, and treated with increasing con-
centrations (10%, 20%, and 30%) of sucrose solution. Thirty-
micrometer-thick sections were cut coronally through the entire
hippocampus using a cryostat and collected serially in 24-well
plates containing phosphate buffer.
Quantification of Engrafted Graft-Derived Cells
Serial sections (every 10th) from the grafted animals (n = 5 per
group) were first processed for AP or BrdU immunostaining as de-
scribed in our earlier reports [37, 40–42]. The antibodies used are
Shetty, Hattiangady
1205
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 listed in supplemental online Table 1. We used AP immunostain-
ing to identify the graft cores and migrated graft-derived cell clus-
ters in the hippocampus. Because AP is expressed diffusely in
membranes and cytoplasm, individual graft-derived cells could
not be ascertained using light microscopy, however. Therefore,
we chose BrdU-immunostained sections for quantification of
the approximate numbers of engrafted cells, as BrdU immuno-
staining clearly demonstrated nuclei of graft-derived cells that
retained BrdU. Cells positive for BrdU were counted in serial sec-
tions through the entire anteroposterior extent of the hippocampus
usingtheopticalfractionatorcountingmethodinaStereoInvestigator
system (MBF Bioscience, Williston, VT, http://www.mbfbioscience.
com)comprisingacolordigitalvideocamera(OptronicsInc.,Muskogee,
OK, http://www.optronicsinc.com) interfaced with a Nikon E600
microscope (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan, http://www.nikon.com), by
employing methods described in our earlier reports [37, 43]. Ad-
ditional details on counting methods are available in the
supplemental online data. The overall engraftment in each
age group is expressed as the number of BrdU+ graft-derived
cells recovered per hippocampus.
Analyses of the Presence of Microglia/Macrophages
Among BrdU+ Structures
To determine whether a significant fraction of BrdU immuno-
reactive structures or elements represented microglia or mac-
rophages that had ingested BrdU material from dead cells, we
quantified the percentages of BrdU+ elements/structures
found inside ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule 1-
positive (IBA-1+) microglia using BrdU and IBA-1 dual immuno-
fluorescence and Z-section analyses in a confocal microscope.
The antibodies used are listed in supplemental online Table 1.
Analyses of Graft Cell Differentiation in the Host Brain
We quantified the phenotype of graft-derived cells through dual
immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy for BrdU or AP with
distinct neural cell antigens. The neural cell antigens included
markers of (a) neurons (TuJ-1); (b) mature neurons (neuron-
specific nuclear antigen [NeuN]); (c) inhibitory interneurons
(GABA); (d) astrocytes (GFAP); (e) mature astrocytes (S-100b); (f)
oligodendrocyte progenitors (NG2); and (g) putative oligodendro-
cytes (Olig2). The dual immunofluorescence methods used have
been described in our earlier reports [4, 37, 42, 44]. The antibodies
used are listed in supplemental online Table 1. Dual-labeled cells
werequantifiedthrough Z-sectionanalysesusinganFv10i confocal
microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan, http://www.olympus-ims.
com). For assessment of each neural cell antigen expression, four
to six sections through the hippocampus were examined in every
animal belonging to the two age groups (n = 4 per group).
Analyses of Newly Born Neurons Within Graft Cores
The possible production of new neurons within the graft cores lo-
catedinnon-neurogenicregionsofthehippocampus,atanextended
time point after grafting, was examined through transplantation of
SVZ-NSCsderivedfromtransgenicmiceexpressingalkalinephospha-
tase transgene in all cells (AP transgenic mice) and subsequent dual
immunofluorescence analysis of hippocampal tissues for AP and
DCX. The antibodies used are listed in supplemental online
Table 1. Young and aged animals perfused 3 months after graft-
ing were used for this analysis.
Analyses of Proliferating Cells and Putative NSCs Among
Graft-Derived Cells
Both proliferation of graft-derived cells and neuronal differen-
tiation of new cells produced by grafts were assessed in
additional subgroups of animals (n = 4 per group) through pre-
vious labeling of donor NSCs (i.e., at the time of grafting) with
chlorodeoxyuridine (CldU) and subsequent labeling of prolifer-
ating grafted cells via injections of iododeoxyuridine (IdU; 12
daily injections at 50 mg/kg), 1 month after grafting. The animals
were perfused 24 hours after the last IdU injection, and thebrain
tissues were processed for IdU and DCX dual immunofluores-
cence and CldU, IdU, and DCX triple immunofluorescence. Using
Z-section analyses in a confocal microscope, the generation of
new cells and neurons by graft-derived cells within graft cores
(i.e., IdU+ cells expressing DCX and CldU+ and IdU+ cells express-
ing DCX) were confirmed. In addition, the presence of putative
NSCs within the graft cores was examined using triple immuno-
fluorescence for AP, GFAP, and Sox-2. The antibodies used are
listed in supplemental online Table 1.
Statistical Analysis
All data are expressed as the mean 6 SEM. The data from young
adult and aged rats (n = 4–5 animals per group) were compared
using a two-tailed, unpaired Student t test.
RESULTS
In Vitro Differentiation of SVZ-NSCs
Neurosphere cells expanded from anterior SVZ-NSCs differenti-
ated into TuJ-1+ neurons, GFAP+ astrocytes, and RIP+ oligoden-
drocytes (supplemental online Fig. 2A1–B3). The percentages
of primary neurosphere cells that differentiated into TuJ-1+ neu-
rons(∼24%),GFAP+astrocytes (∼70%), S-100b+matureastrocytes
(53%), and O4/RIP+ oligodendrocytes (∼12%–14%) after 7 days of
incubation in differentiation medium have been described in our
previous report [30]. A vast majority of Tuj1+ neurons (∼90%) de-
rivedfromSVZ-NSCsalsoexpressedtheinhibitory neurotransmit-
ter GABA (supplemental online Fig. 2C1–C3). Thus, SVZ-NSCs
expanded from PND2 brains showed a propensity for differenti-
ating mostly into astrocytes and GABA-ergic neurons in standard
culture conditions.
Distribution and Engraftment of Graft-Derived Cells
Labeling of SVZ-NSCs with BrdU before grafting facilitated exam-
ination of the distribution or migration of individual graft-derived
cells in the host hippocampus, and the presence of AP transgene
allowed identification of graft cores and clusters of migrating
cells. Examination of SVZ-NSC graft-derived cells using BrdU
immunostaining at 3 months after grafting revealed the engraft-
ment and widespread migration of graft-derived cells in both
young and aged animals (Fig. 1A1–1B4). However, smaller graft
cores persisted in areas such as the hippocampal fissure, the
CA1 stratum radiatum or the junction of DG, the CA3b subregion,
and the lateral ventricle in both age groups of animals (Fig. 1A1,
1A2, 1B1, 1B2). Supplemental online Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the
locations of graft cores in additional young and aged animals. AP
immunostaining also revealed graft cores in these regions (data
not illustrated). Graft-derived cells in both young and aged hosts
migrated into neurogenic and non-neurogenic regions of the
1206
Neural Stem Cell Grafts and Aged Hippocampus
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 hippocampus. A significant number of engrafted cells could be
seen in the subgranular zone and/or granule cell layer of the
DG (Fig. 1A4, 1B4). Such migrated cells could also be observed
with AP-NeuN dual immunofluorescence (supplemental online
Fig. 5).
Quantification of the number of BrdU+ graft-derived cells
through BrdU immunostaining of serial sections through the
entire hippocampus and stereological counting of BrdU+ cells
revealed that the overall engraftment of cells derived from
SVZ-NSC grafts into the hippocampus was robust in both age
groups (equivalent to 240%–262% of injected cells; Fig. 1C1).
To verify that greater fractions of BrdU+ structures did not
represent microglia or macrophages that have ingested BrdU
material from dead cells, we quantified the percentages of
BrdU+ elements/structures found inside IBA-1+ microglia (Fig.
1D1–1E3). This analysis revealed that ,5% of BrdU+ structures
were found inside the IBA-1+ microglia in both young and aged
hippocampi (Fig. 1F), implying that a vast majority of BrdU+ struc-
tures represent graft-derived cells that have differentiated into
neurons or glia in both age groups. However, measurement of
the BrdU+ graft cell number does not provide an accurate quan-
tification of the absolute graft cell yield, as dilution of BrdU in
some grafted NSCs is conceivable owing to their division
more than a few times after grafting. Because the progeny of
graft-derived NSCs lacking BrdU were not accounted for in our
BrdU+ graft cell counts, the graft cell yield derived was likely
underestimated in both groups. It is also possible that one
environment (e.g., young hippocampus) promotes increased
proliferation ofNSCs than theother environment(e.g.,agedhip-
pocampus), leading to loss of the BrdU label in greater fractions
of graft-derived cells. Hence, the BrdU+ graft cell counts cannot
be considered as absolute graft cell yields. Nonetheless, consid-
ering that the recovery of BrdU+ cells in both young and aged
hippocampi (662,772–722,554 cells per hippocampus; Fig.
1C1) is considerably higher than the numbers of BrdU+ NSCs ini-
tially grafted (276,300 live BrdU+ cells through three grafts per
hippocampus), the results do suggest that the environment in
both young and aged hippocampi is conducive for engraftment
of greater fractions of NSC graft-derived cells. Furthermore, the
volumeofhippocampusandthe adjoiningbrainregionscontain-
ing graft-derived cells was found to be similar between the
young and aged animals (Fig. 1C2), suggesting that advanced
host age at the time of grafting did not negatively affect
the migration of cells derived from SVZ-NSCs grafts in the
hippocampus.
Differentiation of BrdU+ Graft-Derived Cells Into
Neurons and Glia
Weexamined the neuronal differentiation of BrdU+ graft-derived
cells that remained in the graft core, that migrated into the sub-
granular zone-granule cell layer (SGZ-GCL) of the DG, and that in-
vaded into all other regions of the hippocampus (non-neurogenic
regions),usingBrdU-NeuNdualimmunofluorescenceandconfocal
microscopy (Fig. 2). Differentiation of some graft-derived cells into
NeuN+ mature neurons could be clearly seen in graft cores located
inbothyoung and agedhippocampi (Fig.2A1–2B3). Quantification
revealed that the overall differentiation of graft-derived cells into
NeuN+ mature neurons was 15%–17% for graft cores, which did
not vary between the young and aged hosts (Fig. 2F). A fraction
of graft-derived cells that migrated into the SGZ-GCL also
differentiated into NeuN+ mature neurons in both young and aged
hippocampi (Fig. 2C1–2D3). Measurement of BrdU-NeuN dual-
labeled cells among all BrdU+ cells revealed that 31% of graft-
derived cells differentiated into NeuN+ mature neurons in the
SGZ-GCL of the young hippocampus (Fig. 2F). However, in the
SGZ-GCL of the aged hippocampus, only 20% of graft-derived cells
differentiated into NeuN+ neurons (Fig. 2F), implying that the aged
SGZ-GCL is less conducive for neuronal differentiation of NSC graft-
derived cells. Neuronal differentiation was also observed occasion-
ally among graft-derived cells that migrated into non-neurogenic
regions of the hippocampus or into the adjoining cortex (Fig.
2E1–2E3).
Dual immunofluorescence analyses for BrdU and GABA
revealed differentiation of graft-derived cells into GABA-ergic
neurons in both young and aged hippocampi (Fig. 3A1, 3A2).
Quantification demonstrated that 20%–21% of NSC graft-
derived cells differentiated into GABA+ neurons in the young
and aged hippocampi, with most such neurons observed in the
graft core and the dentate gyrus (Fig. 3A3). Analyses of glia
revealed that 36%–41% of graft-derived cells differentiated into
S-100b-positive mature astrocytes (Fig. 4A1–4A3), 48%–51% dif-
ferentiatedintoGFAP+astrocytes(Fig.4B1–4B3),and22%–25%dif-
ferentiated into Olig2+ oligodendrocyte-like cells (Fig. 4C1–4C3).
Thus, differentiation of NSC graft-derived cells into neurons
and glia did not vary considerably between the hippocampus of
youngandagedhosts.TheonlyexceptionistheSGZ-GCL,inwhich
the neuronal differentiation of graft-derived cells somewhat de-
clined in the aged host.
Differentiation of AP+ Graft-Derived Cells Into Neurons
and Glia
To further authenticate the graft cell differentiation results
obtained with dual immunofluorescence for BrdU and neural an-
tigens,wealsoexamineddifferentiationofAP+graft-derivedcells
within graft cores using dual immunofluorescence methods for
AP-NeuN, AP-GABA, AP-S100b, and AP-NG2 (Fig. 5A1–5A7). Con-
focal microscopic analyses using Z-sectioning revealed that frac-
tions of AP+ graft-derived cells that differentiate into NeuN+
mature neurons (19%–21%), GABA+ interneurons (21%–23%),
S-100b-positive mature astrocytes (34%–38%), and NG2+ oligo-
dendrocyte precursor cells (22%–24%) were comparable be-
tween grafts in the young and aged hippocampi (Fig. 5A7, 5B7,
5C7, 5D7). In addition, the percentages of neurons, GABA-ergic
interneurons, and astrocytes among graft-derived BrdU+ or
AP+ cells were comparable (Figs. 2–5).
DCX+ Immature Neurons Within Graft Cores Located in
Non-Neurogenic Regions
Examination of sections with single DCX immunostaining at 3
months after grafting revealed the presence of large numbers
of DCX+ immature neurons within graft cores that were located
in both neurogenic and non-neurogenic regions of young and
aged hippocampi. The graft cores in the non-neurogenic regions
were mostly found in the hippocampal fissure adjoining the CA1
stratumradiatumorinCA1andCA3regions (Fig.6A1–6A3).Clus-
ters of immature DCX+ neurons with conspicuous dendrites of
variablelengthandcomplexitywereobservedwithingraftcores,
suggesting that they were likely newly born neurons. We next
analyzed sections processed for AP (a transgene expressed in
all grafted cells) and DCX dual immunofluorescence, which
Shetty, Hattiangady
1207
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 revealed that virtually all DCX+ immature neurons within the
graft cores were positive for AP (Fig. 6B1–6B4), implying that
DCX+ immature neurons were generated from grafted cells.
Proliferating Cells and Newly Generated Neurons
Within Graft Cores
To examine whether DCX+ neurons found within graft cores were
indeed born after grafting, we assessed the proliferation of graft-
derived cells through previous labeling of donor NSCs (i.e., at the
time of grafting) with CldU and subsequent labeling of proliferat-
ing grafted cells via intraperitoneal injections of IdU (12 daily in-
jections at 50 mg/kg), 1 month after grafting into both young and
aged hippocampi. Tissues processed 24 hours after the last IdU
injection for IdU and DCX dual immunofluorescence confirmed
thegeneration ofnewlyborn neuronswithin thegraftcores(Fig.
6C1–6C6). In both young and aged hippocampi, 39%–40% of
DCX+ neurons in the graft core were positive for IdU, and
68%–70% of IdU+ cells expressed DCX (Fig. 6C7, 6C8), implying
that the pattern of neurogenesis occurring in the graft cores was
comparable between the young and aged hippocampi. More-
over, CldU, IdU, and DCX triple immunofluorescence and confo-
cal microscopic characterization confirmed the proliferation of
CldU+ graft-derived cells within graft cores in both young and
aged hippocampi (Fig. 7A1–7A4). Some cells positive for both
CldU and IdU (i.e., proliferating graft-derived cells) also
Figure 1.
Distribution of BrdU-labeled cells derived from subventricular zone-neural stem cell (SVZ-NSC) grafts in the intact young hippocampi
(A1, A2) and intact aged hippocampi (B1, B2) at 3 months after grafting. (A3, A4, B3, B4): Magnified views of regions from (A2) and (B2), re-
spectively. (A3, B3): Graft-derived BrdU+ cells within graft cores and in the surrounding regions. (A4, B4): Graft-derived cells that have migrated
intothesubgranularzone-granulecelllayer(SGZ-GCL)oftheDG.Scalebars=500mm(B1)and50mm(B4).BarchartscomparenumbersofBrdU+
cellsrecoveredperhippocampus(C1)andvolumesofbraintissuecontaininggraft-derivedcells(C2)betweentheintactyounghippocampusand
the intact aged hippocampus. (D1–E3): The occasional presence of BrdU+ elements inside IBA-1+ cells in the young (D1–D3) and aged (E1–E3)
hippocampi, suggesting that only a very small fraction of BrdU+ elements were debris ingested by microglial cells (arrows). (D1–E3, Insets):
Magnified views of IBA-1+ microglia containing BrdU+ elements. Scale bar = 25 mm (E1). (F): Bar chart depicting fractions of BrdU+ structures
found inside IBA-1+ microglia. Abbreviations: BrdU, 59-bromodeoxyuridine; DG, dentate gyrus; DH, dentate hilus; GCL, granule cell layer; ML,
molecular layer.
1208
Neural Stem Cell Grafts and Aged Hippocampus
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 expressed DCX (Fig. 7A1–7B4), denoting neuronal differenti-
ation of cells born from graft-derived cells. In addition, the
graft cores displayed the presence of triple-labeled cells
expressing AP (graft cell marker), GFAP (NSC marker), and
Sox-2 (another NSC marker), suggesting that putative NSCs
reside inside graft cores located in both young and aged hip-
pocampi (Fig. 7C1–7D4).
DISCUSSION
These results provide novel evidence that NSCs from the anterior
SVZ display predominantly similar engrafting and differentiation
properties when transplanted into the intact young or aged hippo-
campus. Multiple parameters of graft cell behavior in the host
hippocampus were comparable between the two age groups.
These included the extent of engraftment and migration of
graft-derived cells; the degree of differentiation into NeuN+
mature neurons within graft cores; the proficiency for generating
GABA+interneurons orS-100b+orGFAP+astrocytes, NG2+oligo-
dendrocyteprecursors,andOlig2+oligodendrocyte-likecells;and
an ability to establish neurogenic niches in non-neurogenic re-
gions,generatingnewneuronsatextendedperiodsaftergrafting.
The only exception is the extent of neuronal differentiation of
graft-derived cells that migrated into the neurogenic SGZ-GCL,
because greaterfractions ofgraft-derived cellsdifferentiatedinto
Figure 3.
Fractions of cells derived from the subventricular zone-
neuralstemcellgraftsdifferentiatedintoGABA+neuronsintheintact
young (A1) and aged (A2) hippocampi. (Insets): Orthogonal views of
GABA+ neurons indicated by arrows in A1 and A2. Scale bars = 40 mm
(A1) and 20 mm (A2). (A3): Bar chart shows percentages of graft-
derived cellsthatdifferentiatedintoGABA+neuronsinyoungandaged
hippocampi. Abbreviation: GABA, g-amino butyric acid.
Figure 2.
Fractions of cells derived from the SVZ-NSC grafts differ-
entiate into neurons (arrowheads). BrdU+ graft-derived cells (red)
differentiate into neurons expressing the NeuN (green) in the in-
tact young hippocampus (A1–A3) and the intact aged hippocam-
pus (B1–B3). (C1–D3): NeuN expression (green) in BrdU+ graft-
derived cells (red) that have migrated into the granule cell layer
of the intact young hippocampus (C1–C3) and the intact aged hip-
pocampus (D1–D3). (E1–E3): The expression of TuJ-1 (green)
among BrdU+ graft-derived cells (red) that have migrated into
the non-neurogenic region of the intact young hippocampus. Scale
bars = 50 mm (A1–A3, E1, E3) and 25 mm (B1–B3, C1–C3, D1–D3).
(F): Bar charts show percentages of graft-derived cells that differ-
entiated into NeuN-positive mature neurons within graft cores
and among graft-derived cells that have migrated into the SGZ-
GCL of the dentate gyrus in the young and aged hippocampi,
The extent of neuronal differentiation is similar in the two age
groups for graft cores. However, greater percentages of graft-
derived cells differentiated into neurons in the in SGZ-GCL
of the young hippocampus (p , .05). Abbreviations: BrdU, 59-
bromodeoxyuridine; NeuN, neuron-specific nuclear antigen;
SGZ-GCL, subgranular zone-granule cell layer; SVZ-NSC, subven-
tricular zone-neural stem cell; TuJ-1, b-III tubulin.
Shetty, Hattiangady
1209
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 neurons in the young hippocampus compared with the aged hip-
pocampus. These results underscore that advanced age of the
host at the time of grafting has no significant adverse effects
on engraftment, migration, and differentiation of grafted SVZ-
NSCs in the intact hippocampus.
The overall engraftment of graft-derived cells was equivalent
to 240%–262% of injected cells in the present study, considerably
greaterthanthe∼116%engraftmentobserved forSVZ-NSCgrafts
placed into the young hippocampus shortly after injury [30]. This
suggests that grafted SVZ-NSCs proliferated considerably after
grafting into the intact young or the aged hippocampus. Another
study using grafts of NSCs from the fetal hippocampus showed
poor engraftment in the injured aged hippocampus [45]. The dis-
crepancy in the extent of engraftment between the previous
studies and the present study likely reflects a greater level of in-
flammation in the injured hippocampus at the time of grafting
compared with noinflammation inthe intactyounghippocampus
and relatively milder inflammation in the intact aged hippocam-
pus, because greatly elevated inflammation can interfere with
NSC graft cell survival [46]. It is also noteworthy that the extent
of survival of SVZ-NSC graft-derived cells in the present study
differed greatly from the results of embryonic day 19 (E19)
hippocampal cell grafting into intact young and aged hippocampi
reported previously, in which only 18%–23% of grafted cells sur-
vivedtransplantation[40,47,48].Engraftmentoffetalhippocam-
pal cells was also modest after grafting into the lesioned aged
hippocampus in the absence of graft augmentation strategies
[48, 49], consistent with the poor engraftment of fetal cells trans-
planted using standard conditions in multiple neurodegenerative
disease models, including Parkinson’s disease [50]. Differences in
engraftment between fetal hippocampal cells and postnatal
SVZ-NSCs in the intact young or aged hippocampus reflect dis-
similarities in the intrinsic properties between the two types of
donor cells. Cells harvested from E19 hippocampus are postmitotic
neurons committed to differentiation into hippocampal CA1 or CA3
pyramidal neurons and hence are likely more vulnerable to grafting
procedure-induced hypoxia and trauma. In contrast, neurosphere
cells derived from postnatal SVZ-NSCs are undifferentiated imma-
ture cells showing a high propensity for proliferation that can cope
with grafting procedure-related hypoxia and trauma better and
hence continue their proliferation after grafting. Furthermore, NSCs
resideinahypoxicmicroenvironmentwithinthebrain[51],andphys-
iological hypoxia has been demonstrated to stimulate the survival,
growth, proliferation, and multipotency of NSCs [52, 53]. A re-
cent study, in addition, has demonstrated that hypoxia upre-
gulates the calcium-activated calcineurin-NFATc4 pathway in
Figure4.
Fractions ofcellsderivedfromthesubventricularzone-neuralstemcellgraftsdifferentiated intoS-100b+(A1,A2)andGFAP+(B1,B2)
astrocytes and Olig2+ oligodendrocyte-like cells (C1, C2) in the intact young (A1, B1, C1) and aged (A2, B2, C2) hippocampi. (Insets): Orthogonal
views of cells indicated by arrows in A1, A2, B1, and B2. Scale bar = 20 mm (A1, B1, B2) and 10 mm (A2, C1, C2). Bar charts show percentages of
graft-derived cells that differentiated into S-100b+ astrocytes (A3), GFAP+ astrocytes (B3), and Olig2+ oligodendrocyte-like cells (C3) in the
young and aged hippocampi. Abbreviation: GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein.
1210
Neural Stem Cell Grafts and Aged Hippocampus
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 NSCs, which stimulates their self-renewal and proliferation [51].
Thus, the robust engraftment of NSC-derived cells in the present
study compared with the poor engraftment of transplanted fetal
cells reported previously is likely related to the grafting
procedure-related hypoxia and propensity of donor SVZ-NSCs
for proliferation and multipotent differentiation after grafting.
Figure 5.
Differentiation of cells derived from the subventricular zone-neural stem cell grafts into neurons and glia in the young and aged
hippocampi, as revealed through dual immunofluorescence for AP (graft cell marker) and neural antigens (arrows). (A1–A6): AP+ graft-derived
cells that have differentiated into NeuN-expressing neurons in a young hippocampus (A1–A3) and an aged hippocampus (A4–A6). (B1–B6): AP+
graft-derived cells that have differentiated into GABA-expressing interneurons in a young hippocampus (B1–B3) and an aged hippocampus
(B4–B6). (C1–C6): AP+ graft-derived cells that have differentiated into S-100b-expressing mature astrocytes in a young hippocampus
(C1–C3) and an aged hippocampus (C4–C6). Arrowheads in (C4–C6) denote S-100b+ host astrocytes. (D1–D6): AP+ graft-derived cells that have
differentiated into NG2-expressing oligodendrocyte precursor cells in a young hippocampus (D1–D3) and an aged hippocampus (D4–D6). Scale
bars = 50 mm (A5, B5, C5, D5). Bar charts compare percentages of NeuN+ neurons (A7), GABA+ interneurons (B7), S-100b+ astrocytes (C7), and
NG2+ oligodendrocyte precursors (D7) among graft-derived AP+ cells between the two age groups. Abbreviations: AP, alkaline phosphatase;
GABA, g-amino butyric acid; NeuN, neuron-specific nuclear antigen.
Shetty, Hattiangady
1211
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 The extent of migration of graft-derived cells in the young or
aged hippocampus was pervasive in the present study, which
was evidenced through engrafting of transplant-derived cells in vir-
tually all layers of the hippocampus. This behavior differs from the
fetal hippocampal cell grafts, which have been reported to stay
mostly as clusters at the location of grafting [40, 47–49]. The dis-
crepancy in migratory behavior between the two donor cell types
again reflects the state of lineage commitment of donor cells. First,
E19 hippocampal cells are destined to become CA1 and CA3 pyra-
midal neurons and have finished their short migration in the
hippocampal primordium at the time of harvesting [40, 47]. In con-
trast, postnatal SVZ-NSC-derived cells are immature proliferating
cells known to display long-distance migration into the olfactory
bulb along the rostral migratory stream in vivo [2].Second, E19 hip-
pocampal cells mostly differentiate into neurons after grafting, but
SVZ-NSC-derived cells differentiate partially into neurons and pre-
dominantlyintogliaaftertransplantation.Glialcellstypicallydisplay
a higher propensity for migration than neurons after grafting [54],
which could have also contributed toward the excellent migration
of the SVZ-NSC graft-derived cells observed in the present study.
Figure6.
PresenceofDCX+immatureneuronsingraftcoresat3monthsaftergrafting.(A1,A2):ExamplesofgraftsdisplayingDCX+immatureneurons
inintactyounghippocampi. (A3): Anexampleof agraftintheagedhippocampus exhibitingDCX+immature neurons. (Insets):Magnifiedviews of graft
regions showing the morphology of immature DCX+ neurons. (B1–B4): DCX-expressing neurons among graft-derived cells expressing AP. Note that a
fraction of AP+ graft-derived cells express DCX (arrowheads). (C1–C6): IdU-positive newly born cells expressing DCX within graft cores (arrowheads)
located in a young hippocampus (C1–C3) and an aged hippocampus (C4–C6). Arrows denote DCX+ neurons that lack IdU. Bar charts compare the
percentageofDCX+neuronsthatexpressIdU(C7)andthepercentageofIdU+cellsthatexpressDCX(C8)ingraftslocatedintheyoungandagedhippocampi.
Scalebars=200mm(A1,B1,C1),50mm(insets),and50mm(B1–C6).Abbreviations:AP,alkalinephosphatase;DAPI,49,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole;DCX,
doublecortin; GCL, granule cell layer; HF, hippocampal fissure; IdU, iododeoxyuridine; ML, molecular layer; SGZ, subgranular zone.
1212
Neural Stem Cell Grafts and Aged Hippocampus
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 Comparable differentiation of SVZ-NSC graft-derived cells into
NeuN+ mature neurons (within graft cores), GABA+ interneurons,
S-100b+ and GFAP+ astrocytes, NG2+ oligodendrocyte precursors,
and Olig2+ oligodendrocyte-like cells was observed between the
young and aged hippocampus. This was evident from analyses of
graft-derived cells using either a label (BrdU) or a transgene (AP)
marker. These results suggest that the favorable response of the in-
tact host hippocampus to support the survival, proliferation, and dif-
ferentiationofSVZ-NSCgraft-derivedcellsremainssteadywithaging.
This is somewhat surprising because aging induces multiple adverse
changesinthebrain.Theseincludedecreasedlevelsofcriticalneuro-
trophic factors that are known to support the survival, proliferation,
anddifferentiationofgraftedcells[55–58],delayedvascularizationof
grafts, and decreased permissiveness for graft axon growth and syn-
aptogenesis [59]. Furthermore, the aged brain displays increased ox-
idative stress [60, 61], decreased microvasculature and cerebral
blood flow [62], and a chronic low level of inflammation in the form
of hypertrophied astrocytes and activated microglia [63, 64]. Thus, it
is possible that the intrinsic properties of SVZ-NSCs, particularly their
abilitytothriveinhypoxicconditions,supporttheirengraftment,pro-
liferation, and neuronal and glial differentiation in the aged hippo-
campus to levels seen in the intact young hippocampus. However,
one exception to this rule is neuronal differentiation of SVZ-NSC
graft-derived cells that migrated into the neurogenic SGZ-
GCL, where a greater percentage of graft-derivedcellsdifferen-
tiated into neurons in the young hippocampus than in the aged
hippocampus. This discrepancy might be related to specific and
drastic age-related changes occurring in the neurogenic dentate
gyrus, which could include greatly declined FGF-2 and brain-
derived neurotrophic factor signaling [57, 65–68], altered expres-
sionofgenesthatpromoteneuronaldifferentiation[69],andcon-
siderable microglial activation associated with increased levels of
reactive oxygen species and proinflammatory cytokines [70].
Another interesting aspect of the present study is that the
grafted SVZ-NSCs showed an ability to establish neurogenic niches
in non-neurogenicregions of both young and aged hippocampi.This
wasevidencedthroughderivationofDCX-expressingnew,immature
neurons from graft-derived cells within graft cores located in non-
neurogenic regions such as the hippocampal fissure, CA3 subfield,
or the CA1 stratum radiatum even at 3 months after grafting. Se-
quentiallabelingwithCldU(atthetimeofgrafting)andIdU(1month
after grafting) further confirmed that the immature DCX+ neurons
found within graft cores were generated from graft-derived cells
in both young and aged hippocampi. Because the host age did
not influence this phenomenon, it is likely that the intrinsic property
of SVZ-NSCs promoted the establishment of neurogenic niches. This
possibility is also supported by observations that grafting of NSCs
from the postnatal hippocampus into a young or aged hippocampus
does not result in the generation of DCX+ immature neurons from
graft cores at 3 months after grafting [71]. However, it remains to
bedeterminedwhetherthisisanexclusivefeatureofSVZ-NSCgrafts
or NSC grafts derived from other sources such as human embryonic
stem cells (hESCs) and human induced pluripotent stem cells
(hiPSCs) would also exhibit this property. Because neurosphere cells
expandedfromSVZ-NSCsusedforgraftingcomprisedavarietyofcell
types, including multipotent type 1 radial glia-like cells, type 2 tran-
sient amplifying cells, and DCX-expressing immature neurons, the
typeofcellthatpromotedthedevelopmentofneurogenicniche
is unknown. Based on intrinsic properties, it is likely that type 1
radial glial cells within the grafts promoted neurogenic niche
development by their ability for self-renewal and to generate
highly proliferating type 2 transient amplifying cells. Character-
ization with markers such as AP, GFAP, and Sox-2 did reveal that
putative NSCs derived from grafts persist within graft cores.
Nonetheless, additional studies are needed in the future for
the identification of the specific cell type that will promote
the establishment of neurogenic niches with definitive markers
of NSCs and intermediate progenitors and whether such niches
can be established in lesioned brain areas.
CONCLUSION
The present results demonstrate that advanced age of the host at
the time of grafting has no major adverse effects on engraftment,
Figure 7.
DCX-expressingneuronsamonggraft-derivedcellsexpressing
CldU and IdU. (A1–B4): Generation of new DCX+ neurons from graft-
derived cells in the young (A1–A4) and aged (B1–B4) hippocampi. Note
that a fraction of proliferating cells (IdU+ cells; arrows in A2 and B2)
amongCldU+graftcellpopulation(arrowsinA1andB1)expressDCX(ar-
rows in A3 and B3), implying that these DCX+ neurons were generated
from graft-derived cells during IdU administration (i.e., 1 month after
grafting). (A1–A4): CldU+ graft-derived cells that lack IdU indicated by ar-
rowheads (i.e., nonproliferating graft-derived cells). (B1–B4): CldU and
IdU+ cells that lack DCX indicated by arrowheads (i.e., newly born cells
thatdidnotdifferentiateintoDCX+neurons).(C1–C4):Graftcorescontain
putative neural stem cells (NSCs). Note the presence of putative NSCs
(triple-labeledcellsindicatedbyarrowsinC1–D4)expressingAP(graftcell
marker; C1, D1), GFAP (NSC marker; C2, D2), and Sox-2 (another NSC
marker; C3, D3). (C1–C4): Host cells expressing GFAP and Sox-2 (arrow-
heads). Asterisks indicate examples of a host astrocyte that expresses
GFAP but not Sox-2. Scale bars = 50 mm (A1–B4) and20 mm (C1–C4). Ab-
breviations: AP, alkaline phosphatase; CldU, chlorodeoxyuridine; DCX,
doublecortin; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; IdU, iododeoxyuridine.
Shetty, Hattiangady
1213
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 migration,anddifferentiation ofgraftedSVZ-NSCs in theintacthip-
pocampus, as both young and aged hippocampi promoted robust
engraftment, migration, and differentiation of SVZ-NSC graft-
derivedcells.Furthermore,SVZ-NSCgraftsshowedabilityforestab-
lishing neurogenic niches in non-neurogenic regions and generating
newneuronsforextendedperiodsaftergrafting.Thisphenomenonis
beneficialifthesenichescancontinuouslygeneratenewneuronsand
gliainthegraftedhippocampus,asnewlygeneratedneuronsandglia
areexpected toimprovenotonlythemicroenvironmentbutalsothe
plasticity and function of the aged hippocampus. Overall, these re-
sultshavesignificancebecausethepotentialapplicationofNSCgraft-
ing for treatment of neurodegenerative disorders at early stages of
disease progression and age-related impairments would mostly
involve aged persons as recipients. Nonetheless, additional studies
areneededtodeterminethefunctionalimplicationsofSVZ-NSCgraft-
ingintotheagedhippocampusandwhetherNSCsfromothersources
such as hESCs and hiPSCs would exhibit similar behavior.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Mahendra S. Rao (National Institutes of Health) for
providing breeding pairs of transgenic alkaline phosphatase-
expressing rats for our studies. We also thank Dr. Bing Shuai
and Sahithi Attaluri for providing outstanding technical
assistance to our study. This work was supported by the State
of Texas (Emerging Technology Funds to A.K.S.), the Department
of VeteransAffairs(VA MeritAward, I01BX002351,to A.K.S.),and
the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (Grant
R01 NS054780 to A.K.S). Dr. Shetty is also a research career scien-
tist at the Olin E. Teague Veterans’ Medical Center, Central Texas
Veterans Health Care System, Temple, Texas. The contents of this
article suggest the views of the authors and do not represent the
views of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs or the U.S.
Government.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.K.S.:conceptionanddesign,collection and/orassemblyofdata,
data analysis and interpretation, composite figure preparation,
manuscript writing, financial support; B.H.: conception and de-
sign, collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis and inter-
pretation, individual figure preparation, manuscript writing.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The other authors indicated no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Reynolds BA, Weiss S. Generation of neu-
rons and astrocytes from isolated cells of the
adult mammalian central nervous system. Sci-
ence 1992;255:1707–1710.
2
Ihrie RA, Alvarez-Buylla A. Lake-front prop-
erty: A unique germinal niche by the lateral ventri-
cles of the adult brain. Neuron 2011;70:674–686.
3
Eriksson PS, Perfilieva E, Bj¨
ork-Eriksson T
et al. Neurogenesis in the adult human hippo-
campus. Nat Med 1998;4:1313–1317.
4
Hattiangady B, Shetty AK. Aging does not al-
ter the number or phenotype of putative stem/
progenitor cells in the neurogenic region of the
hippocampus.NeurobiolAging2008;29:129–147.
5
Ming GL, Song H. Adult neurogenesis in the
mammalianbrain:Significant answersandsignif-
icant questions. Neuron 2011;70:687–702.
6
Yao J, Mu Y, Gage FH. Neural stem cells:
Mechanisms and modeling. Protein Cell 2012;
3:251–261.
7
Spalding KL, Bergmann O, Alkass K et al.
Dynamicsofhippocampalneurogenesisinadult
humans. Cell 2013;153:1219–1227.
8
Raber J, Fan Y, Matsumori Y et al. Irradia-
tion attenuates neurogenesis and exacerbates
ischemia-induced deficits. Ann Neurol 2004;
55:381–389.
9
Zhang R, Zhang Z, Zhang C et al. Stroke
transientlyincreasessubventricularzonecelldi-
vision from asymmetric to symmetric and in-
creases neuronal differentiation in the adult
rat. J Neurosci 2004;24:5810–5815.
10
Zhu W, Fan Y, Hao Q et al. Postischemic
IGF-1gene transfer promotes neurovascular re-
generation after experimental stroke. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 2009;29:1528–1537.
11
Sun F, Wang X, Mao X et al. Ablation of
neurogenesis attenuates recovery of motor
function after focal cerebral ischemia in
middle-aged mice. PLoS One 2012;7:e46326.
12
Wang F, Maeda N, Yasuhara T et al. The
therapeutic potential of human umbilical cord
blood transplantation for neonatal hypoxic-
ischemic brain injury and ischemic stroke. Acta
Med Okayama 2012;66:429–434.
13
Shetty AK, Jin K. Neural stem cell activity
andneurogenesisafterstroke.In:ShettyAK,ed.
NeuralStemCellsinHealthandDisease.Hackensack,
NJ: World Scientific Press, 2015.
14
Scharfman HE, Goodman JH, Sollas AL.
Granule-like neurons at the hilar/CA3 border
after status epilepticus and their synchrony
with area CA3 pyramidal cells: Functional impli-
cations of seizure-induced neurogenesis. J Neu-
rosci 2000;20:6144–6158.
15
Scharfman HE, Sollas AE, Berger RE et al.
Perforant path activation of ectopic granule
cellsthatarebornafterpilocarpine-inducedsei-
zures. Neuroscience 2003;121:1017–1029.
16
JungKH,ChuK,LeeSTetal.Cyclooxygenase-
2 inhibitor, celecoxib, inhibits the altered
hippocampal neurogenesis with attenuation
of spontaneous recurrent seizures following
pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus. Neuro-
biol Dis 2006;23:237–246.
17
Pun RY, Rolle IJ, Lasarge CL et al.
Excessive activation of mTOR in postnatally
generated granule cells is sufficient to cause
epilepsy. Neuron 2012;75:1022–1034.
18
ScharfmanHE,PierceJP.Newinsightsinto
the role of hilar ectopic granule cells in the den-
tate gyrus based on quantitative anatomic anal-
ysisandthree-dimensionalreconstruction.Epilepsia
2012;53(suppl 1):109–115.
19
HosfordBE,DanzerSC.Neurogenesisand
dentate granule cell development in epilepsy.
In: Shetty AK, ed. Neural Stem Cells in Health
and Disease. Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific
Press, 2015:151–190.
20
Hattiangady B, Rao MS, Shetty AK. Plas-
ticity of hippocampal stem/progenitor cells to
enhance neurogenesis in response to kainate-
induced injury is lost by middle age. Aging Cell
2008;7:207–224.
21
Rao MS, Hattiangady B, Shetty AK. Status
epilepticus during old age is not associated with
enhanced hippocampal neurogenesis. Hippo-
campus 2008;18:931–944.
22
Hattiangady B, Rao MS, Shetty AK. Chronic
temporal lobe epilepsy is associated with severely
declined dentate neurogenesis in the adult hippo-
campus. Neurobiol Dis 2004;17:473–490.
23
Hattiangady B, Shetty AK. Decreased neuro-
naldifferentiationofnewlygeneratedcellsunderlies
reducedhippocampalneurogenesisinchronictem-
poral lobe epilepsy. Hippocampus 2010;20:97–112.
24
Feng R, He W, Ochi H. A new murine ox-
idative stress model associated with senes-
cence. Mech Ageing Dev 2001;122:547–559.
25
Jin K, Sun Y, Xie L et al. Post-ischemic
administration of heparin-binding epidermal
growth factor-like growth factor (HB-EGF) re-
duces infarct size and modifies neurogenesis
after focal cerebral ischemia in the rat.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2004;24:399–408.
26
Boekhoorn K, Joels M, Lucassen PJ. In-
creased proliferation reflects glial and vascular-
associated changes, but not neurogenesis in
the presenile Alzheimer hippocampus. Neuro-
biol Dis 2006;24:1–14.
27
Zhang RL, Zhang ZG, Chopp M. Gene pro-
files within the adult subventricular zone niche:
Proliferation, differentiation and migration of
neural progenitor cells in the ischemic brain.
Curr Mol Med 2007;7:459–462.
28
Crews L, Adame A, Patrick C et al. In-
creasedBMP6levelsinthebrainsofAlzheimer’s
disease patients and APP transgenic mice are
accompanied by impaired neurogenesis. J Neu-
rosci 2010;30:12252–12262.
29
Shetty AK. Progenitor cells from the CA3
region of the embryonic day 19 rat hippocam-
pus generate region-specific neuronal pheno-
types in vitro. Hippocampus 2004;14:595–614.
1214
Neural Stem Cell Grafts and Aged Hippocampus
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 30
Hattiangady B, Shetty AK. Neural stem cell
grafting counteracts hippocampal injury-mediated
impairments in mood, memory, and neurogenesis.
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2012;1:696–708.
31
ShettyAK,TurnerDA.Invitrosurvivalanddif-
ferentiation of neurons derived from epidermal
growth factor-responsive postnatal hippocampal
stem cells: Inducing effects of brain-derived neuro-
trophic factor. J Neurobiol 1998;35:395–425.
32
Palmer TD, Markakis EA, Willhoite AR
et al. Fibroblast growth factor-2 activates a la-
tent neurogenic program in neural stem cells
from diverse regions of the adult CNS. J Neuro-
sci 1999;19:8487–8497.
33
BarkhoBZ,ZhaoX.Adultneuralstemcells:Re-
sponse to stroke injury and potential for therapeutic
applications.CurrStemCellResTher2011;6:327–338.
34
Han DW, Tapia N, Hermann A et al. Direct
reprogramming of fibroblasts into neural stem cells
by defined factors. Cell Stem Cell 2012;10:465–472.
35
Ring KL, Tong LM, Balestra ME et al. Di-
rectreprogrammingofmouseandhumanfibro-
blasts into multipotent neural stem cells with a
single factor. Cell Stem Cell 2012;11:100–109.
36
Cassady JP, D’Alessio AC, Sarkar S et al.
Direct lineage conversion of adult mouse liver
cells and B lymphocytes to neural stem cells.
Stem Cell Rep 2014;3:948–956.
37
HattiangadyB,RaoMS,ZamanVetal.Incor-
poration of embryonic CA3 cell grafts into the adult
hippocampus at 4-months after injury: Effects of
combined neurotrophic supplementation and cas-
paseinhibition.Neuroscience2006;139:1369–1383.
38
Shetty AK, Hattiangady B. Postnatal age
governstheextentofdifferentiationofhippocam-
pal CA1 and CA3 subfield neural stem/progenitor
cells into neurons and oligodendrocytes. Int J Dev
Neurosci 2013;31:646–656.
39
Hattiangady B, Shetty AK. Neural stem
cell grafting in an animal model of chronic tem-
poral lobe epilepsy. Curr Protoc Stem Cell Biol
2011;Chapter 2:Unit2D.7.
40
ShettyAK,TurnerDA.Enhancedcellsurvival
in fetal hippocampal suspension transplants
graftedtoadultrathippocampusfollowingkainate
lesions: A three-dimensional graft reconstruction
study. Neuroscience 1995;67:561–582.
41
Rao MS, Hattiangady B, Shetty AK. Fetal
hippocampal CA3 cell grafts enriched with FGF-
2 and BDNF exhibit robust long-term survival
and integration and suppress aberrant mossy fi-
ber sprouting in the injured middle-aged hippo-
campus. Neurobiol Dis 2006;21:276–290.
42
Rao MS, Hattiangady B, Rai KS et al. Strat-
egies for promoting anti-seizure effects of hippo-
campalfetalcellsgraftedintothehippocampusof
rats exhibiting chronic temporal lobe epilepsy.
Neurobiol Dis 2007;27:117–132.
43
RaoMS,ShettyAK.Efficacyofdoublecor-
tin as a marker to analyse the absolute number
and dendritic growth of newly generated neu-
rons in the adult dentate gyrus. Eur J Neurosci
2004;19:234–246.
44
Waldau B, Hattiangady B, Kuruba R et al.
Medial ganglionic eminence-derived neural stem
cell grafts ease spontaneous seizures and restore
GDNF expression in a rat model of chronic tempo-
ral lobe epilepsy. STEM CELLS 2010;28:1153–1164.
45
Shetty AK, Rao MS, Hattiangady B. Be-
havior of hippocampal stem/progenitor cells
following grafting into the injured aged hippo-
campus. J Neurosci Res 2008;86:3062–3074.
46
Darsalia V, Allison SJ, Cusulin C et al. Cell
number and timing of transplantation deter-
mine survival of human neural stem cell grafts
in stroke-damaged rat brain. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 2011;31:235–242.
47
Shetty AK, Madison RD, Bradley J et al.
Quantitative graft integration of fetal hippo-
campal transplants labeled with 59 bromodeox-
yuridine into normal adult hippocampus. Exp
Neurol 1994;126:205–224.
48
Zaman V, Shetty AK. Survival of fetal hip-
pocampal CA3 cell grafts in the middle-aged and
aged hippocampus: Effect of host age and deaf-
ferentation. J Neurosci Res 2002;70:190–199.
49
Zaman V, Shetty AK. Fetal hippocampal
CA3 cell grafts enriched with fibroblast growth
factor-2 exhibit enhanced neuronal integration
intothelesionedagingrathippocampusinakai-
nate model of temporal lobe epilepsy. Hippo-
campus 2003;13:618–632.
50
Brundin P, Karlsson J, Emg˚
ard M et al. Im-
proving the survival of grafted dopaminergic
neurons:Areviewovercurrentapproaches.Cell
Transplant 2000;9:179–195.
51
Moreno M, Fern´
andez V, Monllau JM et al.
Transcriptional profiling of hypoxic neural stem
cells identifies calcineurin-NFATc4 signaling
as a major regulator of neural stem cell biology.
Stem Cell Rep 2015;5:157–165.
52
Studer L, Csete M, Lee SH et al. Enhanced
proliferation, survival, and dopaminergic differ-
entiation of CNS precursors in lowered oxygen.
J Neurosci 2000;20:7377–7383.
53
Chen ZY, Asavaritikrai P, Prchal JT
et al. Endogenous erythropoietin signaling is
required for normal neural progenitor cell pro-
liferation. J Biol Chem 2007;282:25875–25883.
54
Han SS, Liu Y, Tyler-Polsz C et al. Trans-
plantation of glial-restricted precursorcells into
the adult spinal cord: Survival, glial-specific dif-
ferentiation, and preferential migration in
white matter. Glia 2004;45:1–16.
55
YurekDM,Fletcher-TurnerA.Differential
expression of GDNF, BDNF, and NT-3 in the ag-
ing nigrostriatal system following a neurotoxic
lesion. Brain Res 2001;891:228–235.
56
Shetty AK, Rao MS, Hattiangady B et al.
Hippocampalneurotrophinlevelsafterinjury:Re-
lationship to the age of the hippocampus at the
time of injury. J Neurosci Res 2004;78:520–532.
57
Shetty AK, Hattiangady B, Shetty GA.
Stem/progenitor cell proliferation factors FGF-
2, IGF-1, and VEGF exhibit early decline during
the course of aging in the hippocampus: Role
of astrocytes. Glia 2005;51:173–186.
58
Erickson KI, Prakash RS, Voss MW et al.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor is associated
with age-related decline in hippocampal vol-
ume. J Neurosci 2010;30:5368–5375.
59
Granholm AC, Helt C, Srivastava N et al.
Effects of age and GDNF on noradrenergic in-
nervation of the hippocampal formation: Stud-
ies from intraocular grafts. Microsc Res Tech
2001;54:298–308.
60
Nicolle MM, Gonzalez J, Sugaya K et al.
Signatures of hippocampal oxidative stress in
aged spatial learning-impaired rodents. Neuro-
science 2001;107:415–431.
61
Marosi K, Bori Z, Hart N et al. Long-term
exercise treatment reduces oxidative stress in
the hippocampus of aging rats. Neuroscience
2012;226:21–28.
62
Brown WR, Thore CR. Review: Cerebral
microvascular pathology in ageing and neurode-
generation. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2011;
37:56–74.
63
Kohman RA, Bhattacharya TK, Kilby C
et al. Effects of minocycline on spatial learning,
hippocampal neurogenesis and microglia in
aged and adult mice. Behav Brain Res 2013;
242:17–24.
64
Kodali M, Parihar VK, Hattiangady B
et al. Resveratrol prevents age-related memory
and mood dysfunction with increased hippo-
campal neurogenesis and microvasculature,
and reduced glial activation. Sci Rep 2015;5:
8075.
65
Jin K, Sun Y, Xie L et al. Neurogenesis and
aging: FGF-2 and HB-EGF restore neurogenesis
in hippocampus and subventricular zone of
aged mice. Aging Cell 2003;2:175–183.
66
Gooney M, Messaoudi E, Maher FO
et al. BDNF-induced LTP in dentate gyrus is im-
paired with age: Analysis of changes in cell
signaling events. Neurobiol Aging 2004;25:
1323–1331.
67
Hattiangady B, Rao MS, Shetty GA et al.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor, phosphory-
lated cyclic AMP response element binding pro-
tein and neuropeptide Y decline as early as
middle age in the dentate gyrus and CA1 and
CA3 subfields of the hippocampus. Exp Neurol
2005;195:353–371.
68
Kang W, H´
ebert JM. FGF signaling is nec-
essary for neurogenesis in young mice and suf-
ficient to reverse its decline in old mice. J
Neurosci 2015;35:10217–10223.
69
Shetty GA, Hattiangady B, Shetty AK. Neu-
ral stem cell- and neurogenesis-related gene ex-
pression profiles in the young and aged dentate
gyrus. Age (Dordr) 2013;35:2165–2176.
70
Gemma C, Bachstetter AD, Bickford PC.
Neuron-microglia dialogue and hippocampal
neurogenesis in the aged brain. Aging Dis
2010;1:232–244.
71 Shetty AK, Hattiangady B. Survival and
differentiation of stem/progenitor cells from
the postnatal hippocampus following graft-
ing into the intact or injured young adult
and aged hippocampus. Paper presented at:
Society for Neuroscience Annual Meeting;
October 14–18, 2006; Atlanta, GA.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
Shetty, Hattiangady
1215
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
