 L I F E S C I E N C E S
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to
original U.S. Government
Works. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
NonCommercial
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Hierarchies in light sensing and dynamic interactions
between ocular and extraocular sensory networks in
a flatworm
Nishan Shettigar,1,2 Asawari Joshi,1 Rimple Dalmeida,1,2 Rohini Gopalkrishna,1 Anirudh Chakravarthy,1
Siddharth Patnaik,1 Manoj Mathew,3 Dasaradhi Palakodeti,1* Akash Gulyani1*
Light sensing has independently evolved multiple times under diverse selective pressures but has been exam-
ined only in a handful among the millions of light-responsive organisms. Unsurprisingly, mechanistic insights
into how differential light processing can cause distinct behavioral outputs are limited. We show how an orga-
nism can achieve complex light processing with a simple “eye” while also having independent but mutually
interacting light sensing networks. Although planarian flatworms lack wavelength-specific eye photoreceptors,
a 25 nm change in light wavelength is sufficient to completely switch their phototactic behavior. Quantitative
photoassays, eye-brain confocal imaging, and RNA interference/knockdown studies reveal that flatworms are
able to compare small differences in the amounts of light absorbed at the eyes through a single eye opsin and
convert them into binary behavioral outputs. Because planarians can fully regenerate, eye-brain injury-regeneration
studies showed that this acute light intensity sensing and processing are layered on simple light detection. Unlike
intact worms, partially regenerated animals with eyes can sense light but cannot sense finer gradients. Planarians
also show a “reflex-like,” eye-independent (extraocular/whole-body) response to low ultraviolet A light, apart from
the “processive” eye-brain–mediated (ocular) response. Competition experiments between ocular and extraocular
sensory systems reveal dynamic interchanging hierarchies. In intact worms, cerebral ocular response can override
the reflex-like extraocular response. However, injury-regeneration again offers a time window wherein both
responses coexist, but the dominance of the ocular response is reversed. Overall, we demonstrate acute light
intensity–based behavioral switching and two evolutionarily distinct but interacting light sensing networks in a
regenerating organism.
INTRODUCTION
The ability to sense and respond to light has evolved more than once
and significantly influenced fitness of life forms across nature. Al-
though vision in image-forming vertebrate eyes has been a subject
of longstanding fascination, light sensing can evolve in multiple ways.
Of the millions of species that respond to light, quantitative studies on
the functional and behavioral consequences of light sensing are
limited to only a few organisms, especially among invertebrates.
However, a better appreciation of the diversity in light-induced be-
havior may be key to understanding eye evolution (1–3). It has been
reasoned that evolutionary selection is thought to act not just on
sensory structures but much more directly and robustly on light-
mediated behavior (1). Any ability to turn information present in
incident light into specific behavioral outputs can lead to a fitness
advantage. Therefore, quantitative studies on how different orga-
nisms process light and respond to specific light inputs are likely
to be extremely valuable.
Light sensing systems have been classified in different ways based
on the types of photoreceptors, sensing structures, the neural net-
works underlying sensory apparatus as well as innovations that en-
hance specific behavioral functions (1–5). Simple cup-shaped eyes or
eye pits having a pigment cell for directional screening and an array
of photoreceptors represent an important eye class (1, 2, 4). Such
eyes, at a minimum, sense the presence and direction of light and
may be capable of more advanced functions, classified as low-resolution
vision (1). This eye type is present in multiple species, spread across
the animal kingdom, and likely constitutes an important evolutionary
advance (1, 3). However, although some information exists on
elements of “low-resolution vision”–like gross spatial mapping (2),
these eyes are severely understudied. Little is known on how these
simple eyes can convert diverse but defined light stimuli into clear be-
havioral outputs.
Many planarian flatworms have such simple, lensless, cup-shaped
eyes broadly classified under low-resolution vision and offer consid-
erable attraction for studying light sensing and behavior (1, 4, 6).
Flatworms, such as Schmidtea mediterranea and Dugesia species,
have prototypic rhabdomeric eyes, with pigment cells and bipolar
photoreceptor neurons (PRNs) (fig. S1) (6–10) with a single opsin
reported as the primary photosensor (11, 12). The planarian eye is
also a true cerebral eye, with the two eyespots coupled to an early ex-
ample of a bilobed, brain-like structure (13, 14). Planarians may also
be valuable for the study of eye evolution and function because they
are members of Lophotrochozoa (12, 15, 16), one of the most under-
studied groups in animal phylogeny when compared to other major
superphyletic assemblages of the Bilateria, namely, Deuterostomia
and Ecdysozoa (15, 16). Apart from this, planarians have remarkable
whole-body regeneration potential (17, 18), including the ability
to regenerate their brain (dorsal ganglion) and eyes within days
(19, 20). Although the process of regeneration has attracted attention
(20, 21), much less is known in terms of how regeneration is linked
to recovery of sensory function. Therefore, planarians offer unique
1Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine (inStem), National
Centre for Biological Sciences, GKVK Post, Bangalore 560065, India. 2Shanmugha
Arts, Science, Technology and Research Academy (SASTRA) University, Tirumalai-
samudram, Thanjavur 613401, India. 3National Centre for Biological Sciences,
GKVK Post, Bangalore 560065, India.
*Corresponding author. Email: akashg@instem.res.in (A.G.); dasaradhip@instem.
res.in (D.P.)
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
1 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 opportunities to study how simple eye and light-sensing structures,
which are important in the study of eye evolution, can process dis-
tinct light stimuli.
Although conceptual understanding of simple eyes is limited, even
more elusive is the interplay between different kinds of light responses,
having distinct evolutionary histories (22, 23). Apart from eye-based
sensing, metazoans can also sense light independent of specific eye
structures (22, 24, 25). Therefore, light responses have also been
classified as ocular (eye-mediated) and extraocular (eye-independent)
(25–27). Extraocular or eye-independent light sensing has been re-
ported in many different organisms, including recent examples like
Drosophila larvae (27), Caenorhabditis elegans (28), and Platynereis
(23). Extraocular photoreception provides a distinct framework in
which light can modulate behavior and may also hold important clues
on the overall evolution of light sensing in nature. Although eye-based
(ocular) (29, 30) and extraocular (23, 27, 28) light sensing systems have
been examined separately, almost nothing is known about relation-
ships and interactions between ocular and extraocular systems in
the same organism.
Here, we show that both ocular and extraocular photoresponses
are prominent in planarians, with the distinct light responses
showing striking hierarchies. We discovered that a simple cup-
shaped eye and the associated network are able to resolve acute dif-
ferences in light stimuli with striking precision and fidelity; even
small changes in light input lead to complete switching of light-
induced behavior. Further, injury-regeneration offers a way to tempo-
rallyuncouple gross sensing fromthe abilityto resolve finer differences,
offering unprecedented new insights into the buildup of comparative
neural processing in eye-brain regeneration. We further show how
simple injury-regeneration experiments also allow us to examine,
probably for the first time, the dynamic interactions between the
two independent (ocular and extraocular) light sensing networks
in the same organism.
RESULTS
Behavioral photoswitching in wavelength choice assays
Planarians are known to be light-aversive, with broad sensitivity to vis-
ible light (6, 10, 31, 32). We confirmed that S. mediterranea are nega-
tively phototactic (movement away fromlight) when illuminated by any
single wavelength in the range of 365 to 625 nm (fig. S2, A and C). This
demonstrates that planarians are aversive to each of these light wave-
lengths individually. We then examined planarian behavior in dual-
wavelength/binary choice assays. This line of inquiry was significant be-
cause planarians have only one known opsin and hence would not be
expected to easily discriminate light wavelengths in binary choice as-
says. In this assay, planarians are simultaneously subjected to two light
inputs, of distinct wavelengths and carefully controlled intensities, and
worm movement is recorded (Fig. 1A). To our surprise, planarians ap-
pear to fully discriminate between light inputs of distinct wavelengths in
binary choice assays (Fig. 1, A to C). For instance, if provided a choice
between blue (450 nm) and green (545 nm) light of equal intensity, vir-
tually all worms move away from the blue light toward green, with a
discrimination index (DI) approaching 1 (0.85 ± 0.022). Although pla-
narians are aversive to each of these light wavelengths individually (fig.
S2C), the animals are able to compare the simultaneously provided
inputs and make a clear behavioral choice. Similarly, if provided a
choice between red light (625 nm) and green light (545 nm), planar-
ians consistently move away from green (Fig. 1B).
We then examined the precision of this apparent discrimination.
We found that planarians appear to efficiently differentiate light in-
puts ~25 nm apart in wavelength (Fig. 1C). DI is consistently high
(>0.9) whether the choice assay is performed between 500 and 590 nm,
500 and 545 nm, or 500 and 525 nm, with the worms avoiding 500 nm
in each of these cases (Fig. 1C and movies S1 and S2). Further, these
precise (~25 nm) behavioral choices are seen across the visible
spectrum. Planarians consistently “discriminate” between 450 and
425 nm, 525 and 545 nm, 545 and 590 nm, and 590 and 625 nm light
inputs (DI > 0.85; Fig. 1D). Comprehensive binary choice assays
showed peak avoidance to be at 450 to 500 nm, with avoidance drop-
ping off on either side of this peak (in choice assays: 425 nm preferred to
450 nm, 525 nm preferred to 500 nm, 545 nm preferred to 525 nm, and
so on; Fig. 1D).
Acute light intensity sensing in planarians
Apparent wavelength discrimination by planarians in binary choice
assays was surprising. Previous works point to only one major opsin
as the primary sensor in the eye PRNs (11, 12, 31) with no evidence of
wavelength-specific photoreceptors. We therefore asked whether the
discrimination observed is a consequence of true “wavelength detec-
tion” or simply a comparative sensing of individual light wave-
lengths, all detected by a broad-spectrum photosensor. For this, we
first examined whether planarian “wavelength choice” could be
reversed through light intensity compensation. This is indeed the
case. For instance, although planarians initially preferred the 525 nm
over the 500 nm light, increasing the intensity (photon flux = photon
fluence rate = number of photons per unit area per unit time) of the
525 nm light input (500 nm was kept constant) led to a neutralization
(DI ~ 0) followed by the eventual overturning of choice (Fig. 2A).
Significantly, the increase in photon fluence rate required for a rever-
sal in choice scales with increasing difference in wavelength. The
photon fluence rate required to reverse the 545/500 nm choice is
~2× the photon fluence rate required to reverse the 525/500 nm
choice (Fig. 2A). Upon further examination, we found that it was
possible to systematically abrogate choice through light intensity
compensation across a wide wavelength range. Increasing the pho-
ton fluence rate of the “less-aversive” wavelength in multiple binary
choice assays neutralized the clear choice that was observed when
equal photon fluence rate was used (Fig. 2A). The generation of a
clear “isoluminance point” through light intensity compensation
for different wavelength pairs used in binary choice assays suggested
that the observed planarian behavior is a form of acute intensity
sensing. Phototactic choice is likely being achieved through compar-
ative analysis of the amount of light absorbed at the eye, primarily
through a broad-sensing opsin.
Conceptually, spectral differences can be converted into changes
in “effective intensities” of light sensed at the eye depending on the
absorption spectrum of the photoreceptor. We therefore surmised
that the spectral properties of this single opsin photoreceptor should
be encoded in the choice behavior. Specifically, the prediction would
be that the peak of the absorption spectra would be the most aversive
stimuli in binary choice assays and that more light would be required
to neutralize choice as the spectral distance from the peak increases.
Therefore, we measured the minimum light (number of photons per
unit area per unit time, specifically photon fluence rates Fl) required
to neutralize choice for each light wavelength in binary choice assays
against a constant 500 nm light input (F500). According to the principle
of classical “action” spectroscopy, at the point of choice neutralization,
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
2 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 the photoresponse (proportional to the product of extinction co-
efficient and number of photons incident) for the two inputs should
be identical (33) and can be used to build an action spectra. The data
showed that across the visible region, the amount of light required to
scramble choice gradually increases away from 450 to 500 nm (peak
aversion). Further, the wavelength plot of the photon fluence ratios
(F500/Fl) at choice neutralization yielded a behavioral action profile
(see Fig. 2B and Materials and Methods) that resembled the absorption
spectra of a single photoreceptor. This action response curve could be
matched for a preliminary comparison to the predicted absorption
spectra of the “alpha band” of a single hypothetical opsin (Fig. 2B),
based on Govardovskii’s template (34).
It is remarkable that the measurement of light intensity modulation
in wavelength choice assays could yield a response curve or behavioral
“action spectrum.” In addition, the unimodal shape of this choice neu-
tralization response profile strongly supports the model of planarians
using a single primary photoreceptor for eye-based sensing. To address
this further, we then examined the spatial distribution of the primary
opsin in the planarian eye. Previous works show that light intensity–
independent, true “color” vision requires multiple opsin pigments and
multiple opsins tend to show spatial segregation in PRNs in eye
structures (35–38). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) imaging
of the Smed eye opsin mRNA shows that the primary opsin likely
expresses throughout the eye (Fig. 3, A and B). Costaining with labeled
anti-arrestin (VC-1) antibody allowed us to mark every single PRN,
and imaging with confocal microscopy revealed that every single
PRN does express the primary eye opsin (Fig. 3, B and C, and movies
S3 and S4). These data strongly suggest that all PRNs likely use the
same primary opsin photoreceptor for sensing. We then performed
RNA interference (RNAi)–based knockdown of the primary eye opsin
gene (11, 12, 39). Knockdown of this single opsin mRNA attenuates
light sensing response across the visible spectrum in planarians (fig. S3),
providing further evidence that acute discrimination shown by planar-
ians in binary choice assays does not depend on wavelength-specific
photoreceptors.
Hierarchical light processing revealed through regeneration
Our data so far suggest that the organisms are able to resolve small
differences in effective intensities of light sensed at the eye and convert
these differences into binary behavioral outputs. This behavioral fidel-
ity points to highly efficient post-sensory comparative processing
mediated through the visual neural network. To address this, we
Fig. 1. Planarians show the ability to resolve light inputs of distinct wavelengths. (A) Schematic of the binary phototactic choice assay performed. Two simulta-
neous light inputs of specific wavelengths were provided, and the movement of planarians was measured to determine the choice made—either movement away from
l2 (R1 localization), away from l1 (R3 localization), or no choice (R2 localization). (B) DI shown here for binary choice assays performed with either of the following light
pairs: blue and green (450 and 545 nm), green and red (545 and 625 nm), or blue and red (450 and 625 nm). Results of measurements on 10 worms, n = 6. Error bars
indicate SEM. DI as indicated here and detailed in Materials and Methods. (C) Data from binary phototactic choice assay between a 500 nm light input and a second
wavelength (525/545/590 nm). DI = (NR3 − NR1)/total number of worms, where NR is the number of worms in a region. A DI value of 1 or −1 indicates a complete
aversion or preference for the 500 nm light relative to the second wavelength. A value of 0 indicates no preference. All choice measurements were performed by
providing constant light intensity of 316 mW/cm2 (± 10) for both inputs. Results of measurements on 30 worms, n = 5. (D) Wavelength discrimination assay performed
with wavelengths from 425 to 625 nm with ~25 nm spectral separation. Results of measurements on 10 worms, n = 4. (B to D) Error bars indicate SEM.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
3 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 exploited the ability of planarians to regenerate their eye and the brain
after amputation. Specifically, we examined the return of phototactic
ability, including fine intensity discrimination (assayed through
wavelength choice) as a function of regeneration. After amputation,
planarians show head regeneration approximately over a week (40).
Eye spots (pigmentation) become visible after ~4 days (Fig. 4A). If
we examine the return of single-input light sensing and response in
a light-dark assay, planarians show a robust negative phototactic re-
sponse by ~5 days after amputation (fig. S4); this response is stable
thereon. Remarkably, however, in binary choice assays at days 5 and
6 after amputation, planarians do not show clear phototactic choices
seen with intact worms. Consistent choice behavior with multiple,
closely spaced inputs is seen significantly later in regeneration (Fig. 4B).
Regeneration experiments show a hierarchy in light sensing and
processing wherein the acute “effective intensity” discrimination is
layered on a gross ability of the worms to detect light. In regenera-
tion, by day 5 after amputation, a basic eye structure is established
(20), and the visual network is able to signal to the locomotor sys-
tem, leading to gross light-dark phototaxis (Fig. 4B). However, at
this stage, the worms do not show acute intensity discrimination.
The return of this finer discrimination, over subsequent days, likely
requires further rebuilding in the visual network such that compar-
ative processing of two very similar inputs can be accomplished.
Imaging of the planarian neural network shows that significant
changes occur in the regenerating planarian brain at specific time
points that correlate with functional recovery of light sensing. Laser
scanning confocal immunofluorescence microscopy with a synaptic
marker reveals that by day 5 after amputation, a basic framework of
the regenerated ventral nerve cord, cephalic ganglion (brain), and
the eye gets assembled, consistent with behavior. However, there is
a substantial enrichment and enlargement of the planarian cephalic
ganglia between days 5 and 7 after amputation. This can be seen
from representative imaging planes (Fig. 4D) and analysis of all
z-stacks corresponding to the two cephalic lobes of the dorsal gan-
glion (movies S5 to S9) during regeneration. This progressive en-
richment of neural network was further tested through a careful
examination of functional recovery. Figure 4C shows that although
coarse “discrimination” is restored to an extent by day 6 (90 nm
differences in l; DI = 0.67 ± 0.014), the ability to do finer discrim-
ination is significantly delayed. An ability to discriminate between
inputs 25 nm apart is only seen 12 days after head removal (Fig. 4C).
These data showing progressive enhancement of behavioral com-
plexity with time provide a significant new insight that “functionally
relevant regeneration” continues much after gross repair of organ
systems has occurred.
Eye-independent, directional light avoidance in planarians
Planarians are highly light-aversive and show complex light discrimi-
nation through their cerebral eyes. We then examined whether planar-
ians have other modes of light sensing, including eye-independent
modes. For this, we observed the response of head-removed (ampu-
tated) planarians to light. We found that S. mediterranea showed a
striking extraocular, whole-body response to long-wavelength ultra-
violet (UV) light (Fig. 5A and movie S10). Although there are early
reports suggesting whole-body light sensing in planarians (10, 32),
we quantitatively examined this sensing in the context of our new
findings. Movie S10 shows that although freshly decapitated (head-
removed) planarians show no significant movement in “visible/
white” light, illumination with long-wavelength UV light (360 to
400 nm) leads to robust movement of the headless worm away from
light. This movement of headless worms, in response to UV, is remi-
niscent of motion exhibited by intact worms. To test the precise
wavelength sensitivity of this extraocular photoavoidance, we examined
the response of head-amputated planarians when stimulated with light
wavelengths ranging from 365 to 625 nm (fig. S5). Head-amputated
worms responded primarily to wavelength from ~365 to ~395 nm in
photoavoidance assays, with significantly reduced or no response at
405 nm and beyond. Modified photoavoidance assays showed that
Fig. 2. Light intensity–based neutralization of wavelength choice yields an
“action” spectrum that resembles an opsin absorption curve. (A) Overturning
of choice through light intensity dosage. Binary choice experiments were initially
performed with equal amounts of photon flux (photon fluence rate − X = 1.59 ×
1014/s per cm2). Photon flux of less-aversive input was then increased as indi-
cated. Results of measurements on 10 worms, n = 4. (B) Putative action spectrum
determined by measuring the amount of light required for choice neutralization
in binary choice assays with respect to 500 nm (near peak). Plotted here is a ratio
of photon fluence rates (F500/Fl) versus wavelength (l) in nanometers at the point
of choice neutralization. The photon fluence rate at 500 nm was kept constant
(1.59 × 1014/s per cm2), whereas the amount of light for other wavelengths (Fl)
was modulated to determine minimum light required for choice neutralization in
binary assays. For all wavelengths other than 450 nm, an increase in photon flu-
ence rate was required to neutralize choice with 500 nm. Results of measure-
ments on 10 worms, n = 4. This obtained profile was matched with the
predicted spectrum of the alpha band of an opsin with a lmax of 475 nm, based
on Govardovskii’s template (34).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
4 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 the time taken for movement of head-removed pieces out of a light spot
was significantly greater for 405 nm compared to inputs in the 365 to
385 nm region (fig. S6), showing a clear wavelength-dependent atten-
uation of this photoavoidance behavior. There was little or no response
at longer wavelengths across the visible spectrum. This showed that ex-
traocular photoresponse was reliant on a sensory network distinct from
the cerebral eye–based system, with distinctive photoreceptor molecules
(see Discussion). Asymmetric and localized illumination of head-
removed worms with 385 nm light spots (movie S11) further con-
firmed that the extraocular photoresponse to long UV is directional.
In these assays, amputated pieces show movement/turning away from
the direction of light.
Dynamic interplay among ocular and extraocular
sensing networks
Planarians appear to have separate ocular and extraocular sensing
systems. This provides a unique opportunity to explore the relation-
ship and contrasts between these distinct sensing modalities in a
single organism. To pursue this, we first illuminated worms simulta-
neously with long UV (395 nm) and “visible” light (500 nm) and
measured their choice. Remarkably, in these dual-wavelength choice
assays, planarians show movement away from the 500 nm light,
“preferring” the 395 nm light of the same intensity (DI = 0.8 ±
0.05). Although both long UV and visible light are aversive signals,
if provided simultaneously, the worms make a clear choice, showing
greater aversion to visible light (Fig. 5C). This is noteworthy. Planar-
ians sense visible light through their cerebral eye. On the other hand,
UV light sensing (extraocular) is dispersed throughout the planarian
body. In a competition experiment, the aversive response through
the cerebral eye appears to be dominant. This hierarchy is consistent
with the extraocular (whole-body) response being a reflex-like re-
sponse, whereas the ocular response is a brain-mediated processive
response. To test this further, we compared how the extraocular and
the ocular responses scale with light dosage. Extraocular phototaxis
shows clear dose dependence—the time taken for a headless worm to
move out of a circular spot, in response to UV, progressively reduces
with an increase in light intensity followed by saturation (Fig. 5B).
In contrast, for ocular photoreception, the total phototactic time is
Fig. 3. Smed eye opsin expression is restricted only to eye and is expressed in all PRNs. (A) Confocal Z-projected image of FISH of Smed eye opsin (red) and 4′,6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (blue) highlighting cephalic ganglion in the worms. Scale bar, 100 mm. (B) Representative stack of laser scanning confocal image of
Smed eye opsin (red) FISH showing individual photoreceptor cells. Scale bar, 10 mm. (C) VC-1 (green) antibody staining along with Smed eye opsin FISH (red) merged
with the transmitted image showing eye pigmentation. Dorsal, middle, and ventral stacks (top to bottom) showing coexpression of arrestin and Smed eye opsin. Scale
bars, 10 mm.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
5 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 4. Mapping recovery of planarian phototactic abilities during regeneration. (A) Images showing head regeneration in S. mediterranea from days 1 to 8. (B) Wave-
length discrimination assay performed on regenerating worms, with blue and green (450 and 545 nm), green and red (545 and 625 nm), and blue and red (450 and
625 nm) light inputs. Measurements with 10 worms each, n = 6. Gray dashed line indicates the return of single-wavelength input (500 nm) negative phototactic
ability (see also fig. S4). (C) Comparative recovery of finer wavelength discrimination ability in regeneration. Binary choice assays with the light wavelength pairs
500/590, 500/545, and 500/590 nm over regeneration. Measurements on 10 worms each, n = 4. (B and C) Error bars indicate SEM. ns, not significant. (D) Immu-
nostaining of planarian cephalic ganglion using SYNORF1 antibody during the course of regeneration from days 3 to 7. Scale bar, 100 mm. *P < 0.05.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
6 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 5. Planarian extraocular photoresponse and hierarchical relationship with ocular light response. (A) Snapshots of amputated worms showing light
avoidance under UV light (350 to 400 nm) and no light avoidance under white light (W). (B) Dose dependence of extraocular photoresponse. Time taken for a headless
tail piece (24 hours after amputation) to move out of a circular spot of the 365 or 395 nm light (n = 30; see details in the Supplementary Materials). (C) Interplay between
ocular and extraocular light response in regeneration. DI for choice assays between 395 and 500 nm light in anterior and posterior regenerates during time course of
regeneration. DI for intact worms is also shown (right). Error bars indicate SEM. (D) Conceptual model indicates multiple facets and diversity in planarian light sensing.
The ocular response mediated through the cerebral eye is a “processive” response, including the capacity for wavelength discrimination. This discrimination appears
dependent on comparative processing of input signals through the visual network. On the other hand, the extraocular response to UV light appears to be a more
rudimentary response with the ventral nerve cord and peripheral network likely functioning as an integrator, collecting and mediating a whole-body response leading
to coordinated phototaxis. Both ocular and extraocular light sensing modalities engage the same motor machinery.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
7 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 insensitive to dosage (fig. S7). Because extraocular response involves
whole-body sensing, the speed of response appears to depend on the
total light sensed across the worm. However, in contrast, because the
ocular response appears to be subject to processing by the neural
network, the total time required for movement is insensitive to light
dosage (Fig. 5D). In addition, head-removed worms fail to show any
spectral choice (fig. S8) unlike intact worms that show processing-
based discrimination in binary choice assays.
We then examined this hierarchical relationship between the
brain-mediated ocular and the whole-body extraocular responses
during eye-brain regeneration. Figure 5C shows aversive choice be-
tween UV light (395 nm) and visible light (500 nm) plotted as a
function of time after head removal. As expected, freshly cut decapi-
tated worms subjected to UV/visible choice show movement away
from UV. Head-removed, eyeless worms cannot sense visible light;
hence, UV response dominates. Expectedly, this choice pattern is
maintained until 4 days after decapitation—there is no functional
eye or any response to visible light (fig. S4). However, by day 5 after
injury, planarians regenerate a “functional” eye and a phototactic re-
sponse to visible light (fig. S4). Therefore, by day 5, the eye-brain is
functionally connected to the locomotor systems, and planarians re-
spond to stimuli sensed at the eye. However, at this stage (day 5), the
extraocular response retains its dominance over the nascent cerebral re-
sponse in choice assays, wherein regenerating worms still show move-
ment away from UV (toward visible light) (Fig. 5C). This is opposite to
the behavior with intact worms. Remarkably, this result implies that re-
generating worms that have sufficiently regenerated a functional eye
and brain capable of phototaxis behave similarly to headless, tail pieces
in ocular-extraocular choice experiments. Subsequently, there is a
transition about day 7 after decapitation, wherein the choice is
reversed. By day 7 after injury, the regenerating planarians resemble
intact worms, wherein the ocular, brain-mediated response is stronger
and can override the extraocular response (Fig. 5C). These data re-
veal the remarkable plasticity in the cross-talk between the two distinct
responses—ocular and extraocular—mediated by two independent but
interacting neural networks in the same organism.
DISCUSSION
Planarian flatworms are highly light-aversive organisms often found
in dark, aqueous environments shielded from direct light (41). Al-
though reports of photoavoidance responses to visible and UV light
in planarians exist, a conceptual and mechanistic understanding of
light sensing in these organisms is limited. How do planarian flat-
worms respond to light? What are the different ways in which planar-
ians, with prototypic “simple” eyes, process information encoded in
light stimuli? Several of these questions have remained open. Our data
show that planarians have at least two independent light responses,
ocular and extraocular, anchored in distinct sensory networks. The
ocular response to visible light is mediated through the cerebral eye
(fig. S1A), whereas the extraocular response is a whole-body response,
with head-removed planarians able to respond to even small doses of
long UV light (Fig. 5B). Our work uncovers new light sensing and pro-
cessing modalities while also showing how independent light sensing
systems can interact.
In examining the ocular (eye-based) sensing, we made new dis-
coveries. In binary wavelength choice assays, planarians show
consistent phototactic choice with exceptional fidelity throughout
the visible spectrum. Even a 25 nm change in wavelength inputs is
sufficient to fully switch the phototactic behavior. Although differ-
ential single-input photophobic responses have been reported (10),
this is the first report on how planarians or similar organisms can
acutely sense closely spaced spectral stimuli and convert them into
these distinct behavioral outputs. Conventionally, specific photo-
receptors are required for true wavelength detection (35–37). However,
planarians reportedly have only a single, broad-sensing opsin photo-
receptor in the eye (11, 31). Our data show that this single opsin is
expressed throughout the eye, within every individual PRN (Fig. 3, B
and C, and movies S3 and S4). In organisms with wavelength-specific
opsins, these tend to be spatially confined to subsets of PRNs in the eye,
allowing for true wavelength detection (38). Besides, our RNAi knock-
down of the primary eye opsin leads to reduced photosensitivity across
the spectral range (fig. S3). These data strongly suggest a single opsin
photoreceptor in the eye.
So how do the animalsrespond to smallchangesin light wavelengths
without specific photoreceptors? Broad-sensing photoreceptors should
be refractory to small spectral changes. Photoreceptors are extremely
sensitive “photon counters,” but once an opsin is photoexcited by one
of two spectrally similar stimuli, the wavelength information is “lost”
(35). The phototactic choice seen in our assays is not true “wavelength
discrimination” but a manifestation of an acute intensity sensing using a
single photosensor. We find that simple modulation of light intensities
is sufficient to neutralize and even reverse wavelength choice (Fig. 2A).
Further, measurements of intensities (photon fluence rate) required
to neutralize wavelength choice (behavior) yield a putative action
spectrum, demonstrating the robustness of response (Fig. 2B). Al-
though this unimodal action spectrum is consistent with a single
eye opsin, further microspectroscopic analysis would be required
to precisely define the absorption profile of the eye.
We propose that worms sense small wavelength changes by com-
paring the effective intensity of light inputs sensed at the eye. In the
simplest scenario, the signal sensed would scale with the actual ab-
sorption of light by the eye. For any given wavelength, the light ab-
sorbed would be a function of the intensity of incident light and
extinction coefficient of the photoreceptors. Given two equal intensity
(photon fluence rate) light inputs of different wavelengths (even with a
single opsin photoreceptor type), there will be differences in the
amount of light sensed at the eye, reflecting the intrinsic absorption
spectrum of the opsin. Remarkably, when illuminated with closely
spaced spectral inputs, the animals are able to convert small differ-
ences in effective intensities into virtually binary behavioral choices.
Differences in effective intensities likely lead to changes in aggregate
PRN response and signaling to a putative downstream processing
center. The networks are able to parse these differences in effective
intensities through comparative processing, leading to phototactic
choice. This choice can also be described as acute gradient sensing.
Gradient sensing is seen in other organisms, such as Platynereis (42)
and Drosophila larvae (43). Although planarians appear too acutely
sensitive, this ability to sense light gradients likely represents a
widespread evolutionary advance. Further work would be required
using RNAi and imaging methods to look for mechanistic and struc-
tural underpinnings of acute gradient sensing.
In contrast to this “processive” cerebral eye light sensing, the high-
sensitivity planarian whole-body extraocular photoresponse appears to
be a reflex-like response (Fig. 5, B and D, and fig. S6). Unlike with ocular
response, the extraocular response times scale strongly with light inten-
sity; also, wavelength choice patterns, seen with eye-mediated sensing,
are absent. The extraocular response network appears to integrate
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
8 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 whole-body sensing events, finally leading to directional phototaxis
(Fig. 5, A and D). Even the photoreceptor(s) mediating the extraocular
response is distinct from the eye opsin, with different spectral ranges.
High sensitivity to long UV (proxy for filtered sunlight) is consistent
with the environmental niche of many planarians. Being highly light-
aversive, a whole-body response may be beneficial. Many planarians
can also propagate through fission (41, 44). A robust, phototactic ex-
traocular response would allow newly fissioned, vulnerable tail pieces
to avoid direct or bright light.
How is UV-A sensed and processed? Opsins are some of the most
widely expressed light sensing proteins in the animal kingdom (26). Ex-
traocular sensing using opsins has been seen in several organisms
spread across different phyla (26). However, novel photoreceptors can-
not be discounted. For instance, Drosophila larvae (27) and C. elegans
(28) reportedly use unconventional light receptors resembling gusta-
tory receptors for extraocular sensing (named Gr28b in Drosophila
and LITE-1 in C. elegans). Reports also suggest that transient receptor
potential ankyrin 1 (TRPA1) channels may also respond to UV light
(27, 45). To list the possible extraocular photoreceptor molecules in
Schmidtea, we conducted a preliminary investigation using bio-
informatics. A pipeline designed to look for opsin-like proteins in the
existing planarian transcriptome yields six candidates (fig. S9), exclud-
ing the previously identified eye opsin. We were unable to find any
homologs for LITE-1 and Gr28b in our analysis, but found one TRP
channel candidate when comparing Schmidtea TRP channel homologs
with UV-sensitive human and Drosophila TRPA1 channels (fig. S10).
Our preliminary analysis, based on molecules that have been implicated
in extraocular photoreception in other organisms (opsins, gustatory
receptor–like, andTRP channels), yields some candidate photoreceptor(s).
Further work would be required to identify the light receptor(s).
Planarian tails show coordinated movement away from UV, sug-
gesting an independent neuronal signaling–dependent locomotor re-
sponse. Where does the photosensing occur? In some organisms
showing extraocular sensing, photoreceptor molecules have been re-
ported in neurons (23, 27, 28). Classical nervous system studies and
immunostaining have showed the existence of subepidermal nerve
plexus in planarians (46–48). Therefore, it is conceivable that light
sensing molecules present in these neurons lead to extraocular re-
sponse. There have been reports on ectopic eyes present in polychaetes
(49); however, there is little or no information on these photoreceptive
structures in planarians. Investigating the structural and functional
underpinnings of this high-sensitivity extraocular response would
be fascinating.
Because planarians show full eye-brain regeneration after injury,
it is possible to address the nature of light sensing and processing in
unprecedented ways. Examining functional recovery of light sensing
revealed a hierarchical, multilayered sensing paradigm. For eye-
mediated light sensing, our data from wavelength choice experiments
performed over eye-brain regeneration showed how gross sensing
could be temporally delineated from finer sensing (Fig. 4A). There
is a period of time when regenerating worms (unlike intact worms)
can sense light but cannot show clear behavioral choices in binary
wavelength assays. Thus, the effective intensity–based acute gradient
sensing is layered on a basic ability to detect light, with a progressive
buildup of sensing and processing capacity. We show that the ability to
discriminate closely spaced inputs (~25 nm changes) recovers signif-
icantly later than crude discrimination abilities (Fig. 4C). This reveals
that functional recovery continues much after gross regeneration of
the eye-brain structures is complete. Full functional recovery likely re-
quires fine-tuning of sensing and processing capabilities, involving
pruning and patterning of the neural networks. Regeneration data
support our model that acute sensing likely involves significant post-
sensory comparative processing. Confocal imaging of planarian brain
using a synaptic marker over regeneration is consistent with progressive
buildup of neural capacity (Fig. 4D). Although gross regeneration of
basic brain structures appears to be complete by about day 5 after de-
capitation, significant enrichment of synaptic density coincides with the
recovery of acute sensing and processing abilities. Light sensing assays
established here may provide a new way to functionally “map” neural
regeneration (Fig. 6A).
Existence of two independent light sensing networks in planarians,
along with eye-brain regeneration capacity, againallows unique lines of
inquiry. For intact worms, in competition experiments, the cerebral oc-
ular response can override the reflex-like extraocular response, setting
upabaselinehierarchyamongtheresponses(Fig.5C).Ocular-extraocular
choice experiments during regeneration reveal remarkable plasticity in
these hierarchies. During eye-brain regeneration, there is a period of
~36 hours wherein both the extraocular and ocular responses “func-
tionally” coexist, but the developing eye-brain axis is unable to override
the reflex-like extraocular response (Figs. 5C and 6B). Thereafter,
following a clear transition, the dominance of the ocular or brain-
mediated response is reestablished (Figs. 5C and 6B). If the extraocular
response is a more rudimentary, ancient response predating the eye
and a processive brain, then does regeneration coincidently mimic as-
pects of evolutionary trajectories?
Ocular-extraocular choice experiments over regeneration also pro-
vide new insights into how the eye-brain network interacts with the
whole-body light sensing network (Figs. 5C and 6A). A headless worm
can undergo locomotion in response to UV. By about day 5 in regen-
eration (after head removal), a cerebral eye and a minimal brain are
established, which link to the ventral nerve cord, whole-body nervous
system, and the locomotion machinery. This link of the visual network
to the locomotor network is sufficient to generate movement in re-
sponse to light. However, it appears that the signaling flux from the
cerebral eye and brain at this point is still insufficient to override the
extraocular or reflex-type response anchored in the whole-body neu-
ral network. After day 7, we propose that this signal from the eye-brain
to the whole-body system strengthens, allowing overriding of the ex-
traocular response (Fig. 6B). Appearance of a threshold wherein
brain-mediated response begins to dominate a whole-body response
has implications for how the eye and the cephalic ganglion regenerate
and how connectivity between two distinct neural networks, the ce-
phalic ganglion and the ventral nerve cord in this case, is established
and fine-tuned during regeneration. To our knowledge, this may be
the first report of its kind, describing such clear and dynamically inter-
changing hierarchies between two distinct light sensory systems, all
revealed through relatively simple phototactic choice assays per-
formed over regeneration.
In summary, this study significantly affects our fundamental
understanding of light sensing responses. Our work highlights the re-
markable diversity and plasticity in light sensing and processing that
remain unexplored in nature. Because planarians have eye structures
and neural networks that appear simple yet similar to those observed
in other animals, these acute and distinct light sensing and processing
abilities may be more widespread in nature. This work also sets the
stage for a comprehensive examination of light-induced behavior in
flatworms wherein new questions based on comparative visual process-
ing and regeneration of neural networks can now be addressed. Our
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
9 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 6. Hierarchical light sensing and processing in planarians revealed through recovery of function with regeneration. (A) Schematic showing a timeline of
return of different phototactic abilities during head regeneration in S. mediterranea. By day 5 after amputation, worms sense light but have no ability to finer intensity
discrimination (assayed through wavelength choice), which is acquired gradually significantly later. See (B) for ocular control. (B) Model for hierarchical relationship
between networks regulating ocular and extraocular sensing, including switching during regeneration. During days 1 to 4 after amputation, worms show only extra-
ocular response anchored in ventral nerve cord (VNC) and peripheral neurons. By about day 5, ocular response recovers in worms, but signaling flux from cerebral visual
networks is unable to override signals resulting from extraocular photosensing. Ocular and extraocular photosensing coexist, but extraocular sensing is dominant in
competition assays. Day 7 onward, flux from visual network strengthens, allowing the ocular response to be dominant, as in intact worms. Black arrow indicates visible
light input, whereas violet arrow indicates long UV light input.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
10 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 results demonstrating the interplay between ocular and extraocular
light sensing networks are likely without precedent and reveal the rich
and multilayered light responses in planarians that can now be
examined further.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Light source and measurements
Wavelength-specific light-emitting diode (LED) light sources were
procured from Roithner Lasertechnik. The specific LEDs used were
365 nm (XSL-365-5E), 395 nm (RLS-UV395), 425 nm (LED425-6-
30), 450 nm (LED450-01), 500 nm (LED500-10-30), 525 nm
(LED525-01), 545 nm (LED545-04), 590 nm (LED590-03), and 625 nm
(B5B-435-TL). Each LED is referred by its peak wavelength in the
study. A suitable LED circuit along with a regulatable power source
to drive the LEDs was assembled. This allowed precise control of
LED light intensities. Custom-designed OptoLED illumination system
(Cairn Research) (fig. S11) was also used for extraocular-mediated be-
havior experiments. Light power measurements were made using
Newport power meter 1918-R and 918D detector. Light measure-
ments for all initial binary choice experiments were made at microwatt
per square centimeter (mW/cm2; intensity). All behavior experiments
were performed with approximate measurement error of ±10 mW. For
the experiments involving neutralization (and overturning) of
wavelength choice, the unit of light measurement and intensity was
photon flux or photon fluence rate (number of photons per unit time
per unit area). This was done to ensure consistency with the theory of
action spectroscopy and to build a wavelength-dependent response
function using light intensity required for neutralization of choice be-
havior. The stability of the signal was checked for the duration of the
experiment in all cases.
Planarian maintenance
S. mediterranea was maintained at standard laboratory conditions
(50). Worms were fed beef liver extract once in 3 days. Worms
were starved for at least 2 days before the start of any experiment.
In addition, behavior experiments were performed in a dark room
maintained at 20°C.
Planarian negative phototaxis (single-input sensing)
Earlier work shows that planarians respond broadly to visible light, with
subtle differences in response to colors (10). Using single-wavelength
phototaxis assays, we confirmed that planarians (S. mediterranea) are
negatively phototactic to visible light (fig. S2C). Sensitivity attenuates at
wavelengths ≥625 nm (fig. S2C). The setup for the single-input, light-
dark phototaxis has been illustrated in figs. S2A and S11. Planarians
were starved for at least 2 days for all phototaxis experimentation on
intact or regenerating worms. Light-dark phototaxis assays with planar-
ians were performed on a glass slide (75 mm × 25 mm × 1.25 mm).
About 5 ml of medium was added to the slide, and a single planarian
was placed in the center region (R2, 10 mm wide; fig. S2A) using a
Pasteur pipette. Following this, LED light was turned on (all intensities
were set to ~316 mW/cm2) such that illumination was spatially polar-
ized creating a lit (R1) and a relatively dark zone (R3). After 2 min, the
region (fig. S2A) in which the planarian is present is determined. This
is repeated for several worms, and a DI is calculated. DI was calculated
by using the formula: DI = (NR3 − NR1)/total N (where NR is the num-
ber of worms in a region, and N is the number of worms). A DI value of
1 or −1 indicates a complete aversion or preference for the provided
wavelength of light, respectively. A value of 0 indicates no preference.
Phototaxis during regeneration was also performed as described above,
except that the position of the worm was determined after 3 min.
Wavelength discrimination choice assays
All planarian choice assays were performed according to the sche-
matic shown in Fig. 1A. LED lights were used as above. For all binary
wavelength choice assays with equal intensities, two equal-intensity
light inputs at a constant light intensity of 316 (±10) mW/cm2 were
used. Similar to the single-input phototactic assay described above,
each worm was placed in the center region and allowed to make a
choice with a cutoff time of 2 min. Outcomes can be movement to
region 1, region 2, or no choice. Similarly, binary choice experiments
were performed during regeneration, and the position of the worm
(for calculation of DI) was determined after 3 min.
For experiments testing overturning of wavelength choice
through light intensity dosage (Fig. 2A), the initial effective photon
fluence rate (number of photons per unit time per unit area) was set
at X (1.59 × 1014/s per cm2) (for both wavelengths). Increasing dos-
age of the less-aversive input was provided as 2X, 4X, or 8X as indi-
cated in the figures. For building a behavioral response profile to
address intensity-based wavelength choice neutralization (Fig. 2B),
we measured the increase in photons (photon fluence rate) required
to neutralize (randomize) choice relative to the 500 nm light at X
photon fluence rate (1.59 × 1014/s per cm2). Choice neutralization
experiments were performed with 425, 450, 525, and 545 nm as sec-
ond wavelengths. According to the principle of a classical action
spectroscopy, at the point of choice neutralization, the photo-
response (R; proportional to the product of extinction coefficient
and number of photons incident) for the two inputs should be iden-
tical (33) and can be used to build an action spectrum
R500 ¼ Rl ¼> e500 : el ¼ 1=F500 : 1=Fl
(33) where R is the photoresponse, e is the extinction coefficient, and
F is the photon fluence rate (number of photons per unit time per
unit area). Therefore, the plot of ratio of photon fluence rates
(F500/Fl) versus wavelength (l) in nanometers at the point of choice
neutralization should resemble the absorption spectra of the photo-
receptor (33). As described above, the photon fluence rate at 500 nm
was kept constant (1.59 × 1014/s per cm2), whereas the amount of
light for other wavelengths (Fl) was modulated to determine
minimum light required for choice neutralization in binary assays. This
obtained profile was matched with the predicted spectrum of the alpha
band of an opsin with a lmax of 475 nm, based on Govardovskii’s
template (34).
Extraocular photoreception and phototaxis
For determining wavelengths that affect extraocular phototaxis, pla-
narian tail pieces (24 hours after decapitation; fig. S2B) were subjected
to phototaxis assays similar to the single-input phototaxis assays. We
measured the extraocular response using LEDs that showed their peak
response at the following wavelengths from 365 to 625 nm. The inten-
sity of all the light sources was kept constant at 126 (±10) mW/cm2. To
examine the dosage (light intensity) dependence of extraocular pho-
toreception (Fig. 5B), we performed a modified phototaxis assay.
Worms were placed in a petri dish 24 hours after decapitation with
planarian medium and allowed to relax for ~30 min without any light
or mechanical disturbance. A 1-cm light circle was made to fall on the
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
11 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 worm, and the time it took the worm to escape from the circle of light
was calculated and plotted against the intensity of light used. For light
dosage experiments with extraocular response, the light wavelengths
used were 365 and 395 nm, and the light intensity was varied from ~31
to ~506 mW/cm2. To understand the attenuation of extraocular response
on the visible side of the spectrum, we performed photoavoidance
experiments with 365, 385, and 405 nm wavelengths at a photon flux
of 2.33 × 1014/s per cm2 and recorded the response time.
Ocular versus extraocular binary choice assays
Binary choice assays were performed using 395 and 500 nm light in-
puts using intact worms by maintaining constant light intensities of
126 (±10) mW/cm2. Similarly, to study the ocular-extraocular choice
over regeneration, we subjected anterior regenerates (tail-forming
head) and posterior regenerates (head-forming tail) to similar binary
phototactic choice assaysover a period of 8 days after head amputation.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization
The heads of asexual planarians 5 to 10 mm in length were cut and
processed for FISH as per the protocol described by Pearson et al.
(51) with significant modifications. The reduction step after fixation
was omitted, and the worms were stored in methanol after dehydra-
tion. Bleaching was performed for 2 hours using a formamide-based
solution (1.2% H2O2, 5% formamide, and 0.5× SSC) as described by
King and Newmark (52) after rehydration. The post-hybridization
washes, antibody blocking, incubation of peroxidase-conjugated anti-
digoxigenin antibody, and post–antibody incubation washes were
performed as per the protocol by King and Newmark (52). The de-
velopment of the fluorescent signal was performed using a tyramide
signal amplification (TSA) reaction as per the protocol by King and
Newmark (52). The tyramide conjugates were synthesized according to
the protocol described by Hopman et al. (53) from N-hydroxysuccinimide
esters of Alexa Fluor 647 (A2006, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The TSA
reaction was followed by at least five washes of 20 min each with
PBSTx (phosphate-buffered saline with 0.3% Triton X-100) before fur-
ther processing or mounting with a Mowiol-based mounting medium
prepared. For experiments involving immunostaining followed by
FISH, the protocol mentioned below was followed.
Whole-body immunofluorescence and imaging
Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy was performed to visu-
alize changes in the planarian nervous system over regeneration.
Immunostaining of the planarian nervous system was carried out
as described by Sánchez Alvarado and Newmark (39) with modifi-
cations using SYNORF1 (3C11, Developmental Studies Hybridoma
Bank) or VC-1 [anti-arrestin (a gift from K. Agata)] as the primary
antibody. Horse serum (10%) was used as the blocking solution. A
donkey anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488/555 (A-21206/A31570, Life
Technologies) secondary antibody was used at dilution 1:500, with
an incubation time of 90 min at room temperature. Imaging was
performed on an LSM 780 Zeiss confocal microscope and analyzed
using ImageJ V. 1.48 (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda) (54).
All stereomicroscope images were taken using Olympus SZX16.
RNAi-mediated knockdown
Planarian eye opsin (Smed eye opsin) sequence was obtained from the
published planarian eye transcriptome (12). A region of the transcript
was cloned using the following primers: Smed eye_opsin, AACACTC-
GATGGGCTTGGG(forward) and CCCTGTGAGAGCCATAAGGG
(reverse). From the cloned region, double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) was
synthesized as described by Rouhana et al. (55) with modifications.
Planarians were amputated as shown in fig. S2B. Three 69-nl injec-
tions with either opsin or control (green fluorescent protein) dsRNA
(2 mg/ml) were made on days 1 to 3 of anterior-regenerating worms.
Subsequently, these regenerates were examined for light response on
days 5 to 7 after amputation. Specifically, the regenerating worms were
subjected to single-input, light-dark choice using the light inputs (425,
500, and 625 nm at 63 mW/cm2) as described earlier. DI was calculated
for opsin knockdown and control worms and then plotted.
Movie recording
All behavioral movies were recorded with Point Grey camera (GS3-
U3-41C6NIR-C or BFLY-PGE-20E4M-CS). Fujinon 3.8- to 13-mm
Varifocal C-mount lens were attached to the camera along with an
infrared long-pass filter if required. All of these were mounted on
an adjustable mounting pole as shown in fig. S11. Optic fiber used
for probing in movie S11 was procured from Thorlabs as a part of
customized OptoLED light system. Movie S10 was recorded on an
Olympus MVX10 microscope using DP71 camera.
Bioinformatic analysis
To identify opsin homologs in planarians, we used 821 opsin se-
quences from Porter et al. (56) as a reference data set. To make a non-
redundant planarian transcriptome data set, we used CD-HIT (57) to
cluster multiple transcriptomes (58–61). Reverse blast was performed
with (evalue = 1 × 10−10; coverage, 35%) 821 opsin sequences to iden-
tify homologous sequences in S. mediterranea. We identified 172 pu-
tative opsin-like candidates. A total of 143 of 172 transcripts that had
PFAM domain PF00001.16 (opsin G protein–coupled receptor classi-
fication) were taken for further analysis. We built a hidden Markov
model (HMM) for 821 opsin sequences and compared it with the
143 transcript profiles. Of 143 transcripts, 130 matched the HMM
profile with evalue <1 × 10−10. We used TmHMM (www.cbs.dtu.dk/
services/TMHMM-2.0/) to predict transmembrane (TM) helices for
130 transcripts. We only considered transcripts with seven TM helices
with optimum loop length for further analysis. Further, 66 transcripts
with seven TM helices were selected. From previous reports on opsin
sequences from other organisms, we know that Lys (K) residue in the
seventh (last) TM helix is the amino acid residue to which retinal binds
via a Schiff base linkage (62). This TM helix has an NPxxY(x)6F
sequence motif (62). We took the seventh (last) TM helix for 66 S.
mediterranea transcripts along with 821 opsin sequence and per-
formed multiple sequence alignment using MacVector. To predict
the sequence motif, we used MEME (http://meme-suite.org/). Six of
66 sequences had Lys (K) residue and complete/partial (one amino
acid missing/substitution) NPxxY(x)6F motif conservation. We pre-
dicted tertiary structures of the six opsin sequences using homology
modeling (https://swissmodel.expasy.org/). Squid opsin (2z73) was
obtained as a closest hit to our modeled three-dimensional (3D) struc-
ture of six opsins. Energy-minimized 3D structure was aligned using
PyMOL (https://www.pymol.org/). In addition, we obtained a root
mean square deviation of 0.167 Å, suggesting high structural simi-
larity. We did phylogenetic analysis of the identified six putative
opsins from S. mediterranea using MEGA7 (maximum likelihood,
50 bootstraps). The obtained phylogenetic tree was visualized using
TreeDyn (www.phylogeny.fr/one_task.cgi?task_type=treedyn). Seven TRP
channels were identified by Inoue et al. (63) in Dugesia japonica. We
identified the homologs of these sequences in S. mediterranea using
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
12 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 PlanMine database (http://planmine.mpi-cbg.de) (64). Phylogenetic
analysis of seven Smed TRP channels with human and Drosophila
TRPA1 channels was then performed using TreeDyn.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using a nonparametric Wilcoxon
signed-rank test.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/3/7/e1603025/DC1
fig. S1. Planarian light sensing apparatus.
fig. S2. Planarians are aversive to light across a broad wavelength range.
fig. S3. Planarian eye opsin knockdown attenuates light sensing across the color spectrum.
fig. S4. Recovery of single-input light sensing and response during head regeneration.
fig. S5. Wavelength dependence of extraocular photoreception.
fig. S6. Extraocular response attenuates in visible light (~405 nm and longer).
fig. S7. Aggregate time taken for eye-mediated phototaxis is insensitive to light intensity.
fig. S8. Lack of wavelength discrimination in extraocular photoresponse.
fig. S9. Phylogenetic tree (maximum likelihood) of planarian opsin sequence.
fig. S10. Phylogenetic analysis of Smed TRP channels along with known UV-sensitive TRPA1
channels (human and Drosophila).
fig. S11. Light setup for phototaxis experiments and recording.
movie S1. Planarian worm shows wavelength discrimination.
movie S2. Planarians show robust wavelength discrimination (group response).
movie S3. Imaging Smed eye opsin expression.
movie S4. Smed eye opsin is expressed in all photoreceptor cells.
movie S5. Regenerating cephalic ganglion (day 3).
movie S6. Regenerating cephalic ganglion (day 4).
movie S7. Regenerating cephalic ganglion (day 5).
movie S8. Regenerating cephalic ganglion (day 6).
movie S9. Regenerating cephalic ganglion (day 7).
movie S10. Extraocular photoreception and phototaxis in planarians.
movie S11. Light avoidance (extraocular) response to long UV is directional.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. D.-E. Nilsson, Eye evolution and its functional basis. Vis. Neurosci. 30, 5–20 (2013).
2. D.-E. Nilsson, The evolution of eyes and visually guided behaviour. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 364, 2833–2847 (2009).
3. N. Randel, G. Jékely, Phototaxis and the origin of visual eyes. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B
Biol. Sci. 371, 20150042 (2016).
4. D. Arendt, J. Wittbrodt, Reconstructing the eyes of Urbilateria. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B
Biol. Sci. 356, 1545–1563 (2001).
5. D. Arendt, H. Hausen, G. Purschke, The ‘division of labour’ model of eye evolution. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 364, 2809–2817 (2009).
6. E. Saló, R. Batistoni, chap. 2, The Planarian Eye: A Simple and Plastic System with Great
Regenerative Capacity, in Animal Models in Eye Research, P. A. Tsonis, Ed. (Elsevier, 2008),
pp. 15–26.
7. H. M. Brown, T. E. Ogden, The electrical response of the planarian ocellus. J. Gen. Physiol.
51, 237–253 (1968).
8. K. S. Carpenter, M. Morita, J. B. Best, Ultrastructure of the photoreceptor of the planarian
Dugesia dorotocephala. Cell Tissue Res. 148, 143–158 (1974).
9. Y. Kishida, Electron microscopic studies on the planarian eye. I. Fine structures of the
normal eye. Sci. Rep. Kanazawa Univ. 12, 75–110 (1967).
10. T. R. Paskin, J. Jellies, J. Bacher, W. S. Beane, Planarian phototactic assay reveals
differential behavioral responses based on wavelength. PLOS ONE 9, e114708 (2014).
11. D. Pineda, J. Gonzalez, M. Marsal, E. Salo, Evolutionary conservation of the initial eye
genetic pathway in planarians. Belg. J. Zool. 131, 77–82 (2001).
12. S. W. Lapan, P. W. Reddien, Transcriptome analysis of the planarian eye identifies ovo as a
specific regulator of eye regeneration. Cell Rep. 2, 294–307 (2012).
13. H. B. Sarnat, M. G. Netsky, The brain of the planarian as the ancestor of the human brain.
Can. J. Neurol. Sci. 12, 296–302 (1985).
14. K. Agata, Y. Soejima, K. Kato, C. Kobayashi, Y. Umesono, K. Watanabe, Structure of the
planarian central nervous system (CNS) revealed by neuronal cell markers. Zoolog. Sci. 15,
433–440 (1998).
15. K. Tessmar-Raible, D. Arendt, Emerging systems: Between vertebrates and arthropods,
the Lophotrochozoa. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 13, 331–340 (2003).
16. O. Simakov, T. A. Larsson, D. Arendt, Linking micro- and macro-evolution at the cell type
level: A view from the lophotrochozoan Platynereis dumerilii. Brief. Funct. Genomics 12,
430–439 (2013).
17. P. W. Reddien, A. Sánchez Alvarado, Fundamentals of planarian regeneration. Annu. Rev.
Cell Dev. Biol. 20, 725–757 (2004).
18. E. Saló, The power of regeneration and the stem-cell kingdom: Freshwater planarians
(Platyhelminthes). Bioessays 28, 546–559 (2006).
19. F. Cebrià, M. Nakazawa, K. Mineta, K. Ikeo, T. Gojobori, K. Agata, Dissecting planarian
central nervous system regeneration by the expression of neural-specific genes.
Dev. Growth Differ. 44, 135–146 (2002).
20. T. Inoue, H. Kumamoto, K. Okamoto, Y. Umesono, M. Sakai, A. Sánchez Alvarado, K. Agata,
Morphological and functional recovery of the planarian photosensing system during
head regeneration. Zoolog. Sci. 21, 275–283 (2004).
21. T. Takano, J. N. Pulvers, T. Inoue, H. Tarui, H. Sakamoto, K. Agata, Y. Umesono,
Regeneration-dependent conditional gene knockdown (Readyknock) in planarian:
Demonstration of requirement for Djsnap-25 expression in the brain for negative
phototactic behavior. Dev. Growth Differ. 49, 383–394 (2007).
22. T. W. Cronin, S. Johnsen, Extraocular, non-visual, and simple photoreceptors: An
introduction to the symposium. Integr. Comp. Biol. 56, 758–763 (2016).
23. B. Backfisch, V. B. Veedin Rajan, R. M. Fischer, C. Lohs, E. Arboleda, K. Tessmar-Raible,
F. Raible, Stable transgenesis in the marine annelid Platynereis dumerilii sheds new light
on photoreceptor evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 193–198 (2013).
24. M. L. Porter, Beyond the eye: Molecular evolution of extraocular photoreception. Integr.
Comp. Biol. 56, 842–852 (2016).
25. D. M. Steven, The dermal light sense. Biol. Rev. Camb. Philos. Soc. 38, 204–240 (1963).
26. K.-W. Yau, R. C. Hardie, Phototransduction motifs and variations. Cell 139, 246–264 (2009).
27. Y. Xiang, Q. Yuan, N. Vogt, L. L. Looger, L. Y. Jan, Y. N. Jan, Light-avoidance-mediating
photoreceptors tile the Drosophila larval body wall. Nature 468, 921–926 (2010).
28. A. Ward, J. Liu, Z. Feng, X. Z. S. Xu, Light-sensitive neurons and channels mediate
phototaxis in C. elegans. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 916–922 (2008).
29. E. Pennisi, Evolution of developmental diversity. Evo-devo devotees eye ocular origins
and more. Science 296, 1010–1011 (2002).
30. S. Yamaguchi, C. Desplan, M. Heisenberg, Contribution of photoreceptor subtypes to
spectral wavelength preference in Drosophila. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 5634–5639
(2010).
31. H. M. Brown, H. Ito, T. E. Ogden, Spectral sensitivity of the planarian ocellus. J. Gen.
Physiol. 51, 255–260 (1968).
32. G. H. Parker, The Reactions of Planarians: With and Without Eyes, to Light, vol. 115 of
Contributions from the Zoölogical Laboratory of the Museum of Comparative Zoölogy at
Harvard College (Harvard University, 1900).
33. E. Schäfer, L. Fukshansky, W. Shropshire Jr., in Photomorphogenesis (Springer, 1983).
34. V. I. Govardovskii, N. Fyhrquist, T. Reuter, D. G. Kuzmin, K. Donner, In search of the visual
pigment template. Vis. Neurosci. 17, 509–528 (2000).
35. T. H. Goldsmith, Optimization, constraint, and history in the evolution of eyes. Q. Rev. Biol.
65, 281–322 (1990).
36. A. Kelber, L. S. V. Roth, Nocturnal colour vision—Not as rare as we might think. J. Exp. Biol.
209, 781–788 (2006).
37. F. Pichaud, A. Briscoe, C. Desplan, Evolution of color vision. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 9,
622–627 (1999).
38. J. Rister, C. Desplan, The retinal mosaics of opsin expression in invertebrates and
vertebrates. Dev. Neurobiol. 71, 1212–1226 (2011).
39. A. Sánchez Alvarado, P. A. Newmark, Double-stranded RNA specifically disrupts gene
expression during planarian regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96, 5049–5054
(1999).
40. T. Sandmann, M. C. Vogg, S. Owlarn, M. Boutros, K. Bartscherer, The head-regeneration
transcriptome of the planarian Schmidtea mediterranea. Genome Biol. 12, R76 (2011).
41. R. A. Medved, E. F. Legner, Feeding and reproduction of the planarian, Dugesia dorotocephala
(Woodworth), in the presence of Culex peus Speiser. Environ. Entomol. 3, 637–641 (1974).
42. N. Randel, A. Asadulina, L. A. Bezares-Calderón, C. Verasztó, E. A. Williams, M. Conzelmann,
R. Shahidi, G. Jékely, Neuronal connectome of a sensory-motor circuit for visual
navigation. eLife 3, e02730 (2014).
43. E. A. Kane, M. Gershow, B. Afonso, I. Larderet, M. Klein, A. R. Carter, B. L. de Bivort,
S. G. Sprecher, A. D. T. Samuel, Sensorimotor structure of Drosophila larva phototaxis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, E3868–E3877 (2013).
44. C. M. Child, Physiological isolation of parts and fission in Planaria. Dev. Genes Evol. 30,
159–205 (1910).
45. N. W. Bellono, L. G. Kammel, A. L. Zimmerman, E. Oancea, UV light phototransduction
activates transient receptor potential A1 ion channels in human melanocytes. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 2383–2388 (2013).
46. C. González-Estévez, D. A. Felix, M. D. Smith, J. Paps, S. J. Morley, V. James, T. V. Sharp,
A. A. Aboobaker, SMG-1 and mTORC1 act antagonistically to regulate response to injury
and growth in planarians. PLOS Genet. 8, e1002619 (2012).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
13 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 47. K. G. Ross, K. C. Omuro, M. R. Taylor, R. K. Munday, A. Hubert, R. S. King, R. M. Zayas, Novel
monoclonal antibodies to study tissue regeneration in planarians. BMC Dev. Biol. 15, 2
(2015).
48. J. Baguñà, R. Ballester, The nervous system in planarians: Peripheral and gastrodermal
plexuses, pharynx innervation, and the relationship between central nervous system
structure and the acoelomate organization. J. Morphol. 155, 237–252 (1978).
49. G. Purschke, D. Arendt, H. Hausen, M. C. M. Müller, Photoreceptor cells and eyes in
Annelida. Arthropod Struct. Dev. 35, 211–230 (2006).
50. N. J. Oviedo, C. L. Nicolas, D. S. Adams, M. Levin, Establishing and maintaining a colony of
planarians. CSH Protoc. 2008, pdb.prot5053 (2008).
51. B. J. Pearson, G. T. Eisenhoffer, K. A. Gurley, J. C. Rink, D. E. Miller, A. Sánchez Alvarado,
Formaldehyde-based whole-mount in situ hybridization method for planarians. Dev. Dyn.
238, 443–450 (2009).
52. R. S. King, P. A. Newmark, In situ hybridization protocol for enhanced detection of gene
expression in the planarian Schmidtea mediterranea. BMC Dev. Biol. 13, 8 (2013).
53. A. H. N. Hopman, F. C. S. Ramaekers, E. J. M. Speel, Rapid synthesis of biotin-,
digoxigenin-, trinitrophenyl-, and fluorochrome-labeled tyramides and their application
for in situ hybridization using CARD amplification. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 46, 771–777
(1998).
54. J. Schindelin, I. Arganda-Carreras, E. Frise, V. Kaynig, M. Longair, T. Pietzsch, S. Preibisch,
C. Rueden, S. Saalfeld, B. Schmid, J.-Y. Tinevez, D. J. White, V. Hartenstein, K. Eliceiri,
P. Tomancak, A. Cardona, Fiji: An open-source platform for biological-image analysis.
Nat. Methods 9, 676–682 (2012).
55. L. Rouhana, J. A. Weiss, D. J. Forsthoefel, H. Lee, R. S. King, T. Inoue, N. Shibata, K. Agata,
P. A. Newmark, RNA interference by feeding in vitro-synthesized double-stranded RNA to
planarians: Methodology and dynamics. Dev. Dyn. 242, 718–730 (2013).
56. M. L. Porter, J. R. Blasic, M. J. Bok, E. G. Cameron, T. Pringle, T. W. Cronin, P. R. Robinson,
Shedding new light on opsin evolution. Proc. Biol. Sci. 279, 3–14 (2012).
57. W. Li, A. Godzik, Cd-hit: A fast program for clustering and comparing large sets of protein
or nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics 22, 1658–1659 (2006).
58. B. L. Cantarel, I. Korf, S. M. C. Robb, G. Parra, E. Ross, B. Moore, C. Holt, A. Sánchez Alvarado,
M. Yandell, MAKER: An easy-to-use annotation pipeline designed for emerging model
organism genomes. Genome Res. 18, 188–196 (2008).
59. M. J. Blythe, D. Kao, S. Malla, J. Rowsell, R. Wilson, D. Evans, J. Jowett, A. Hall, V. Lemay,
S. Lam, A. A. Aboobaker, A dual platform approach to transcript discovery for the
planarian Schmidtea mediterranea to establish RNAseq for stem cell and regeneration
biology. PLOS ONE 5, e15617 (2010).
60. S.-Y. Liu, C. Selck, B. Friedrich, R. Lutz, M. Vila-Farré, A. Dahl, H. Brandl, N. Lakshmanaperumal,
I. Henry, J. C. Rink, Reactivating head regrowth in a regeneration-deficient planarian
species. Nature 500, 81–84 (2013).
61. S. M. C. Robb, K. Gotting, E. Ross, A. Sánchez Alvarado, SmedGD 2.0: The Schmidtea
mediterranea genome database. Genesis 53, 535–546 (2015).
62. S. D’Aniello, J. Delroisse, A. Valero-Gracia, E. K. Lowe, M. Byrne, J. T. Cannon, K. M. Halanych,
M. R. Elphick, J. Mallefet, S. Kaul-Strehlow, C. J. Lowe, P. Flammang, E. Ullrich-Lüter,
A. Wanninger, M. I. Arnone, Opsin evolution in the Ambulacraria. Mar. Genomics 24 (Pt. 2),
177–183 (2015).
63. T. Inoue, T. Yamashita, K. Agata, Thermosensory signaling by TRPM is processed by brain
serotonergic neurons to produce planarian thermotaxis. J. Neurosci. 34, 15701–15714 (2014).
64. H. Brandl, H. Moon, M. Vila-Farré, S.-Y. Liu, I. Henry, J. C. Rink, PlanMine—A mineable
resource of planarian biology and biodiversity. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, D764–D773 (2016).
Acknowledgments: We thank V. Lakshmanan for his help in bioinformatics analysis. We are
grateful to M. K. Mathew, M. Panicker, A. Ramesh, S. Sane, T. Mukherjee, R. Muddashetty,
R. Sambasivan, S. Mayor, and U. S. Bhalla for their discussions and advice. We thank
S. Ramaswamy and the Technologies for the Advancement of Science. We are also grateful to
the Central Imaging and Flow Cytometry Facility, Sequencing facility, the mechanical and
electronic workshops, and other facilities at the National Centre for Biological Sciences
(NCBS)–Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine (inStem) campus. Funding:
The support from inStem core funds and Department of Biotechnology (DBT), India, is
gratefully acknowledged. Work in A.G. laboratory is also supported by the following grants:
102/IFD/SAN/999/2014-2015 (DBT), BT/IN/Germany–BMBF/03/AG/2015-16 (DBT), and INT/
SWISS/SNSF/P-50/2015 (Department of Science and Technology). D.P. is supported by
Welcome/DBT India Alliance (GrantID: 500160/Z/09/Z). N.S. is grateful to the University Grants
Commission for the fellowship support. Author contributions: N.S. designed and performed
the experiments, analyzed the data, and assisted in manuscript writing. A.J. and S.P.
assisted N.S. in performing behavioral experiments and experimental setups. R.D. and A.C.
performed immunostaining and assisted in imaging. R.G. helped perform choice overturning
and dose dependence experiments. M.M. assisted with light setups and the experimental
design. D.P. provided expertise in planarian biology, experimental design, and bioinformatic
analysis. A.G. conceived the project, designed the experiments, directed the study, analyzed
the data, and wrote the manuscript with contributions from the other authors. Competing
interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials
availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper
and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to this paper may be requested
from the authors.
Submitted 1 December 2016
Accepted 27 June 2017
Published 28 July 2017
10.1126/sciadv.1603025
Citation: N. Shettigar, A. Joshi, R. Dalmeida, R. Gopalkrishna, A. Chakravarthy, S. Patnaik,
M. Mathew, D. Palakodeti, A. Gulyani, Hierarchies in light sensing and dynamic interactions
between ocular and extraocular sensory networks in a flatworm. Sci. Adv. 3, e1603025 (2017).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Shettigar et al., Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1603025
28 July 2017
14 of 14
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 networks in a flatworm
Hierarchies in light sensing and dynamic interactions between ocular and extraocular sensory
Mathew, Dasaradhi Palakodeti and Akash Gulyani
Nishan Shettigar, Asawari Joshi, Rimple Dalmeida, Rohini Gopalkrishna, Anirudh Chakravarthy, Siddharth Patnaik, Manoj
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.1603025
 (7), e1603025.
3
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/7/e1603025
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/07/24/3.7.e1603025.DC1
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
