 Cancer nanomedicine: progress, challenges and opportunities
Jinjun Shi1, Philip W. Kantoff2, Richard Wooster3, and Omid C. Farokhzad1,4
1Center for Nanomedicine and Department of Anesthesiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA
2Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, 
USA
3Tarveda Therapeutics, Watertown, Massachusetts 02472, USA
4King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia
Abstract
The intrinsic limits of conventional cancer therapies prompted the development and application of 
various nanotechnologies for more effective and safer cancer treatment, herein referred to as 
cancer nanomedicine. Considerable technological success has been achieved in this field, but the 
main obstacles to nanomedicine becoming a new paradigm in cancer therapy stem from the 
complexities and heterogeneity of tumour biology, an incomplete understanding of nano–bio 
interactions and the challenges regarding chemistry, manufacturing and controls required for 
clinical translation and commercialization. This Review highlights the progress, challenges and 
opportunities in cancer nanomedicine and discusses novel engineering approaches that capitalize 
on our growing understanding of tumour biology and nano–bio interactions to develop more 
effective nanotherapeutics for cancer patients.
The growing interest in applying nanotechnology to cancer is largely attributable to its 
uniquely appealing features for drug delivery, diagnosis and imaging, synthetic vaccine 
development and miniature medical devices, as well as the therapeutic nature of some 
nanomaterials themselves1–6 (BOX 1). Nanotherapies that incorporate some of these 
features (for example, improved circulation and reduced toxicity) are already in use today, 
and others show great promise in clinical development, with definitive results expected in 
the near future. Several therapeutic nanoparticle (NP) platforms, such as liposomes, albumin 
NPs and polymeric micelles, have been approved for cancer treatment, and many other 
nanotechnology-enabled therapeutic modalities are under clinical investigation, including 
chemotherapy, hyperthermia, radiation therapy, gene or RNA interference (RNAi) therapy 
and immunotherapy (TABLE 1).
Correspondence to O.C.F. ofarokhzad@bwh.harvard.edu. 
Competing interests statement
The authors declare competing interests: see Web version for details.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Cancer. 2017 January ; 17(1): 20–37. doi:10.1038/nrc.2016.108.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 1
Distinctive features of nanotechnology in oncological applications
•
Improvement of the drug therapeutic index by increasing efficacy and/or 
reducing toxicities
•
Targeted delivery of drugs in a tissue-, cell- or organelle-specific manner
•
Enhancement of the pharmaceutical properties (for example, stability, 
solubility, circulating half-life and tumour accumulation) of therapeutic 
molecules
•
Enabling of sustained or stimulus-triggered drug release
•
Facilitation of the delivery of biomacromolecular drugs (for example, DNA, 
small interfering RNA (siRNA), mRNA and protein) to intracellular sites of 
action
•
Co-delivery of multiple drugs to improve therapeutic efficacy and overcome 
drug resistance, by providing more precise control of the spatiotemporal 
exposure of each drug and the delivery of appropriate drug ratio to the target 
of interest
•
Transcytosis of drugs across tight epithelial and endothelial barriers (for 
example, gastrointestinal tract and the blood–brain barrier)
•
More sensitive cancer diagnosis and imaging
•
Visualization of sites of drug delivery by combining therapeutic agents with 
imaging modalities, and/or real-time feedback on the in vivo efficacy of a 
therapeutic agent
•
Provision of new approaches for the development of synthetic vaccines
•
Miniaturized medical devices for cancer diagnosis, drug screening and 
delivery
•
Inherent therapeutic properties of some nanomaterials (for example, gold 
nanoshells and nanorods, and iron oxide nanoparticles) upon stimulation
Along with enormous progress in the field of cancer nanomedicine (FIG. 1), we have also 
gradually realized the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead. Foremost, the complexity 
and the heterogeneity of tumours make it clear that careful patient selection is required to 
identify those most likely to benefit from a given nanotherapy. This is analogous to the 
targeted therapies approved or under development for use in specific biomarker-defined 
patient populations. Most therapeutic NPs for solid tumour treatment are administered 
systemically; they accumulate in the tumour through the enhanced permeability and 
retention (EPR) effect7–10, which is generally thought to be the product of leaky tumour 
vasculature and poor lymphatic drainage. However, this interpretation of EPR is somewhat 
oversimplified, as multiple biological steps in the systemic delivery of NPs can influence the 
effect, such as NP–protein interaction, blood circulation, extravasation into and interaction 
Shi et al.
Page 2
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with the perivascular tumour microenvironment (TME), tumour tissue penetration and 
tumour cell internalization. In turn, NP properties (for example, size, geometry, surface 
features, elasticity, stiffness, porosity, composition and targeting ligand) can influence these 
biological processes, thus determining the EPR effect and therapeutic outcomes (FIG. 2). 
Nevertheless, it is important to point out that most of our current understanding of NP 
behaviour in vivo is based on animal data, and its translation to NP behaviour in humans 
remains largely unexplored. Although several studies have examined the pharmacokinetics 
(PK) of nanotherapeutics across species in preclinical and clinical studies11–13, relatively 
few have correlated data across species to determine whether and how NP safety and 
efficacy in humans can be better predicted from preclinical animal models.
This Review aims to identify gaps in our understanding of why cancer nanomedicine has yet 
to fulfil its promise in prolonging patient survival, and to offer an overview of our current 
grasp of tumour biology and nano–bio interactions as they relate to maximization of the 
impact of cancer nanotherapeutics. Given the presumed crucial role of EPR, we present 
recent progress in exploring this effect and identifying markers to predict responses to 
nanotherapies, and in developing new strategies to enhance systemic NP delivery for more 
pronounced EPR and therapeutic benefit. We also examine the fundamentals behind the 
development of nanotechnologies to target the TME, which has such an important role in 
tumour progression and metastasis14,15, and lastly, provide our perspective on challenges to 
the clinical translation of cancer nanomedicines.
Arsenal of nanomedicine platforms
Nanotechnology has made important contributions to oncology over the past several decades 
(FIG. 1; TABLE 1). Liposomes (for example, liposomal doxorubicin (LD); Doxil and 
Myocet) were the first class of therapeutic NPs to receive clinical approval for cancer 
treatment16, and along with other lipid-based NPs, still represent a large proportion of 
clinical-stage nanotherapeutics. Although encapsulating drugs in liposomes has been 
broadly shown to improve PK and biodistribution, as yet no marketed liposomal therapeutic 
agents have exhibited an overall survival (OS) benefit when directly compared with the 
conventional parent drug17. The recent phase III results of liposomal cytarabine–
daunorubicin (Vyxeos; also known as CPX-351) compared with the standard of care 
regimen of cytarabine and daunorubicin in patients with high-risk acute myeloid leukaemia, 
showed improved OS of 9.56 months versus 5.95 months18. This is encouraging for the field 
of cancer nanomedicine and regulatory filing for the approval of Vyxeos is projected in late 
2016. NP albumin-bound paclitaxel (nab-paclitaxel; Abraxane) was the second class of 
nanomedicines to be commercialized. The nab platform enables formulation of hydrophobic 
drugs while largely mitigating the need to use toxic excipients. The result may be a better-
tolerated drug that can be used at higher doses and administered more quickly, thus enabling 
a higher drug Cmax and plasma area under the curve (AUC). Upon intravenous infusion, nab-
paclitaxel rapidly dissociates into its albumin and paclitaxel constituents and has not been 
demonstrated to substantially alter the PK and biodistribution of paclitaxel. Although the 
every-3-week dosing schedule of nab-paclitaxel is superior to paclitaxel in terms of response 
rate and time to progression for patients with breast cancer19, a once-per-week dosing 
schedule did not show similar trends in progression-free survival (PFS) or OS and 
Shi et al.
Page 3
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 furthermore, showed increased toxicity20. Polymeric micelles (for example, Genexol-PM21 
and NK105 (REF. 22)) and polymeric NPs (for example, CRLX101 (REF. 23), BIND-014 
(REF. 11) and AZD-2811 Accurin24) are two newer classes of cancer nanotherapeutic agent. 
Most recently, disappointing clinical results have been reported for BIND-014, CRLX101 
and NK105, underscoring the need to rethink development strategies, including potential 
patient selection to identify those most likely to respond to nanotherapeutics. Inorganic 
nanomaterials (for example, gold nanoshell25, iron oxide NP26 and hafnium oxide NP27) are 
also being investigated for use in cancer patients, with the iron oxide NP-based 
NanoTherm26 already marketed in Europe for glioblastoma.
More intriguingly, our understanding of nano–bio interactions and the arsenal of 
nanomedicine platforms are expanding rapidly. The total number of papers related to 
‘nanoparticle’ on PubMed nearly doubled every 2 years between 2000 and 2014, surpassing 
the remarkable rise of the number of publications on ‘monoclonal antibody’ (mAb) in the 
1980s. In the case of mAb this translated to the development of important therapeutics, and 
we expect a similar transformative impact from the rise of nanomedicine in the years to 
come.
Beyond their widely reported use as carriers for chemotherapeutics, NPs have shown 
potential for the delivery of various new anticancer therapeutic agents, including molecularly 
targeted agents24, antisense oligonucleotides28,29, small interfering RNA (siRNA)30–33, 
mRNA34 and DNA inhibitor oligonucleotides35. Furthermore, the use of viral NPs for 
therapeutic delivery has been facilitated by genetic and chemical engineering techniques36. 
Examples include the use of adeno-associated virus, approved by the European Commission 
for lipoprotein lipase deficiency37, lentivirus currently in various clinical trials for cell-based 
gene therapy and immunotherapy of various diseases including cancer38, and engineered 
plant viruses (for example, tobacco mosaic virus and potato virus X) for cancer therapy in 
animal models39,40. With their endogenous origin and organ tropism, exosomes have also 
been proposed for carrying anticancer payloads to target tumours41. Lastly, novel inorganic 
NPs such as nanodiamond42,43 and graphene44,45 have received considerable attention for 
cancer therapy.
We are also already seeing in-depth innovation in nanomedicine strategies. By integrating 
diagnostic and therapeutic functions into a single NP formulation, theranostic nanomedicine 
offers a promising strategy to monitor the PK and accumulation of therapeutics and the 
progression of disease, giving important insights into heterogeneities both within tumours 
and between patients for potential personalized treatment46,47. By co-delivering multiple 
active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), NPs have also facilitated synergistic cancer 
therapy and avoided some mechanisms of drug resistance, as evidenced by the large number 
of in vivo examples (TABLE 2). In addition to drug delivery, nanotechnology is gaining 
momentum in the area of cancer immunotherapy. NPs have become increasingly attractive 
as potent antigen or adjuvant carriers for the development of synthetic vaccines, with 
enhanced tissue penetration and/or access to lymphatics, preferential uptake by antigen-
presenting cells, sustained release of antigens or adjuvants and NP-mediated phagosome 
escape of antigens for cross-presentation4,48–50.
Shi et al.
Page 4
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Nanotechnology may also hold great potential for addressing the shortcomings associated 
with biologics, including mAbs that are used for cancer immunotherapy. For example, the 
administration of biologic drugs can induce the formation of antidrug antibodies (ADAs) 
that may adversely affect their safety and efficacy51. Recently engineered tolerogenic NPs 
carrying rapamycin were shown to abolish the formation of ADAs for biologics in mice and 
non-human primates52, and human clinical trials are currently ongoing53. Our expectation is 
that by gaining a deeper insight into nano–bio interactions and the personalization of 
nanomedicines, and through the application of nanotechnology to existing and emerging 
therapeutic modalities, we will begin to realize the true potential of nanomedicine in cancer 
and beyond.
The EPR effect in predictive nanomedicine
Despite efforts to develop non-invasive administration (for example, oral, pulmonary, nasal 
and transdermal) of NPs54–56, most cancer nanotherapeutics are delivered intravenously for 
systemic transport to tumours. The preferential accumulation of NPs in tumours is generally 
ascribed to defective tumour vessels and impaired lymphatics in the tissue: enhanced 
permeability of the abnormal tumour microvasculature enables NPs to enter the tumour 
interstitial space, while suppressed lymphatic drainage causes retention within the tissue. 
The EPR effect7–10 has become the foundation of NP delivery to solid tumours. 
Nevertheless, it is increasingly clear that EPR varies substantially between both patients and 
tumour types, and even within the same patient or tumour type over time. However, little 
effort has been made to address the effect of EPR on nanotherapeutic efficacy. Several 
preliminary clinical studies have already suggested the value of stratifying subpopulations of 
cancer patients according to their likelihood of accumulating NPs through EPR57–59, 
implying that predictive markers for EPR may have a role in the clinical success of cancer 
nanotherapies.
In our previous review of EPR9, we discussed the parameters of the TME, some of which 
are well characterized for their interactions with NPs, whereas others are considered a ‘black 
box’ requiring extensive investigation. Recently, there has been growing emphasis on the 
role of tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs) in NP–TME interactions60–63. TAMs have 
also been proposed as a reservoir of nanotherapeutics from which the payload is gradually 
released to neighbouring tumour cells62. Using high-resolution intravital imaging 
microscopy, a recent work systematically studied the extravasation and intratumoural 
distribution of two different types of NP63: the clinically approved 30 nm magnetic NP 
(MNP) ferumoxytol64 and a 90 nm polymeric NP composed of poly(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic 
acid)-b-poly(ethylene glycol) (PLGA-PEG)11,65,66. Despite differences in both size and 
composition, MNP and polymeric NP exhibited similar PK after simultaneous intravenous 
injection, and colocalized to varying degrees in cancer cells and TAMs. Furthermore, after 
co-administration of MNPs and docetaxel-encapsulated PLGA-PEG NPs, tumour MNP 
levels showed a significant correlation with NP payload levels. Consequently, the MNP 
accumulation level successfully predicted the anticancer efficacy of the therapeutic 
polymeric NPs. A pilot clinical study was also recently initiated to assess ferumoxytol as a 
marker to predict tumour response to the nanoliposomal irinotecan MM-398 (REFS 
57,61,67). Preliminary analysis of lesion size reduction in six cancer patients suggests a 
Shi et al.
Page 5
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 positive association with ferumoxytol levels in the lesions at 24 hours57, although a larger 
study is required for validation. We expect further similar findings to pave the way for 
companion imaging particles, such as ferumoxytol, to be used in patient selection and 
predictive nanomedicine (FIG. 3a).
Therapeutic NPs labelled with radioisotopes (for example, 111In, 99mTc, 123I and 64Cu) have 
also been used to monitor biodistribution and tumour accumulation through non-invasive 
imaging techniques that include single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), 
computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET)58,59,68–71. A recent 
clinical study demonstrates that high tumour accumulation of LD as determined by 
quantitative imaging of [99mTc]LD, is positively associated with the response and survival of 
patients with unresectable pleural mesothelioma treated with a combination of LD and 
cisplatin59. A high degree of heterogeneity in tumour accumulation was also revealed by 
PET–CT imaging of 64Cu-loaded liposomes in canine cancers, with six of seven carcinomas 
compared with only one of four sarcomas displaying high uptake of liposomes72. These 
results highlight the potential of radioisotope-labelled therapeutic NPs to assess patient 
suitability for nanotherapies (FIG. 3b). Although incorporation of contrast agents in 
therapeutic NPs can provide important insights into tumour heterogeneities and EPR, the 
development of such theranostic NPs may pose additional complexity in terms of design, 
synthesis, scaling and regulatory considerations47.
Aside from developing imaging NPs as potential markers of therapeutic efficacy, few studies 
have aimed to identify EPR-predictive gene, protein or cell biomarkers (FIG. 3c). The ratio 
of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) to tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP1) in 
the circulation, as well as vessel wall collagen content, has been shown to predict EPR for 
liposomes73,74. Various circulating biomarkers associated with angiogenesis, such as 
angiogenic factors (for example, vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), fibroblast 
growth factor 2 (FGF2), MMP9, interleukin-8 (IL-8), IL-6 and hepatocyte growth factor 
(HGF)), proteins and peptides (for example, endostatin and tumstatin), and endothelial cells 
and endothelial progenitor cells, have been described75,76. However, their role, along with 
other potential biomarkers in predicting EPR, needs further investigation in preclinical and 
correlative clinical studies.
Enhancing drug delivery to the tumour
NP–protein interactions
When a NP enters a biological environment (for example, blood, interstitial fluid or 
extracellular matrix (ECM)), its surface is rapidly covered by various biomolecules 
(typically proteins), leading to the formation of a ‘corona’ (REFS 77–81) (FIG. 2b). The 
adsorption of proteins alters the particle size, stability and surface properties and, more 
importantly, provides the NPs with a biological identity that determines the physiological 
responses they elicit, ranging from cellular uptake and intracellular trafficking to PK, 
biodistribution and toxicity (FIG. 2c–f). For instance, the binding of opsonins can trigger 
recognition and clearance by the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS)79. Conversely, it has 
also been suggested that a corona rich in dysopsonin proteins (for example, apolipoproteins 
and albumin), which inhibit phagocytic uptake, could contribute to the stealth effect of 
Shi et al.
Page 6
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 NPs82–84. While ligand-functionalized NPs might lose targeting capability when a protein 
corona forms on their surface85, decoration of NPs with some particular plasma proteins 
could improve delivery to specific organs. One recent example is the finding that 
apolipoprotein E is essential for some siRNA lipoplexes to target hepatocytes in vivo86. In 
contrast, NP–protein interactions in clinical settings can also trigger hypersensitivity 
reactions in patients by activating the complement system87.
Using various analytical techniques, several studies have extensively characterized the 
protein corona (for example, its composition, density, conformation, thickness, affinity and 
dynamics) on certain nanomaterials (for example, gold, silica and polystyrene NPs and 
liposomes)88. It is now clear that NP–protein interactions are highly dependent on the NP 
physicochemical properties, exposure time as well as protein source and concentration. 
However, we still do not have a clear picture of how NP properties (FIG. 2a) and protein 
adsorption patterns (FIG. 2b) correlate with specific physiological responses (FIG. 2c–f). 
With high-throughput characterization of the serum protein corona fingerprint in a library of 
105 different gold NPs, a quantitative multivariate model was developed to predict 
interaction of NPs with cells89. Protein corona fingerprints and physicochemical properties 
of 17 liposomal formulations were recently used to predict multiple biological interactions 
including cellular uptake and viability of various tumour cells90. Attention was also paid to 
the crucial role of human disease type on the composition of the protein corona and its 
effects on cellular uptake and toxicity of NPs91. Nevertheless, most of these studies were 
focused on NP–protein interactions in vitro, and little effort has been made to study protein 
corona formation in vivo and its correlation with PK, biodistribution and therapeutic 
efficacy. It is noteworthy that the very few in vivo evaluations of the protein corona 
demonstrated significant differences between in vitro and in vivo results92.
Moreover, we think that this field could be further advanced by addressing the following 
questions. Do we need specific protein-knockout mouse models to validate and explain the 
observations from in vitro studies and normal mice? In addition to the widely studied 
proteins in serum, how do the proteins in other biological environments, such as the TME, 
affect the corona, NP interactions with tumour cells and NP penetration across the tumour 
ECM? What new techniques will we need to more precisely characterize and quantify the in 
situ protein corona? We expect that by extending the methodology of quantitative structure–
activity relationships to diverse NP platforms and biological responses, such nanomics 
approaches could facilitate a deeper understanding and better control of the nano–bio 
interface and prompt more rational design of safe, effective and even patient-specific 
nanomedicines.
Blood circulation
There is a relationship between blood circulation half-life (FIG. 2c) and the efficiency with 
which a NP passively extravasates from the microvasculature into the TME. For tissues with 
relatively large blood flow and particles that efficiently extravasate from the 
microcirculation, a relatively short blood circulation half-life may be sufficient for the 
desired accumulation in the tumour. Conversely, for poorly perfused tissues or particles with 
Shi et al.
Page 7
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 low extravasation efficiency, a longer circulation half-life may be necessary to enhance 
exposure in the tumour microvasculature, enabling extravasation to occur progressively.
One major factor limiting circulation time is the non-specific interaction between NPs and 
serum proteins discussed above, which can promote opsonization and recognition by the 
MPS. Among various approaches to developing long-circulating NPs, the most widely used 
is PEG grafting on to the NP surface93,94, such as Doxil, a ‘stealth liposome’ with a 
circulation half-life of approximately 2 days95. Although pegylation can reduce protein 
adsorption through hydrophilicity and steric repulsion effects to avoid MPS clearance, such 
a simplistic view of ‘stealth’ long-circulating particles, which was coined more than 25 years 
ago (‘Stealth’ being a trademark of Liposome Technology, Inc., Menlo Park, California, 
USA), is becoming outdated. For example, increasing the density of PEG on a gold NP 
surface can decrease the amount and change the types of protein that bind to the NPs, 
reducing macrophage uptake in vitro82. More recently, pegylation of polystyrene NPs has 
been shown to selectively enrich the adsorption of clusterin to the NP surface, contributing 
to the decreased nonspecific macrophage uptake in vitro96. The mechanical stiffness and 
elasticity of particles has also been recognized to influence MPS sequestration97,98.
Another biologically inspired strategy to extend residence time in blood is to modify NPs 
with ‘self’ markers that prevent normal cells from activating the MPS. The bottom-up 
approach is chemical conjugation of self markers such as CD47 peptides99 to the NP 
surface, which can inhibit phagocytosis. The top-down method is to coat NPs with a 
membrane of erythrocytes, leukocytes or thrombocytes, thus ‘camouflaging’ them to help 
reduce MPS elimination100–103. Although the circulation half-life of cell membrane-coated 
NPs is longer than that of ‘bare’ NPs, it is still much shorter than that of the cells 
themselves. Therefore, more efforts are required to examine the changes in the cell 
membrane, including its components and elasticity, after the NP surface has been coated.
Extravasation to the TME
Extravasation of NPs from the systemic circulation to tumours (FIG. 2d,e) can be influenced 
by aberrant tumour vasculature, the perivascular TME and the NP itself. The metabolic 
demands of rapidly dividing cancer cells result in the formation of neovasculature that is 
architecturally abnormal and exhibits a ‘leakiness’ distinct from that occurring with 
inflammation. Unlike the endothelial lining of normal vasculature, which has a turnover of 
approximately 1,000 days, the endothelium in tumours can double approximately every 10 
days104, and the resulting microvasculature does not have clearly defined morphology with 
distinct venules, arterioles or capillaries. In the case of inflammation, the extravasation of 
immune cells occurs primarily at the level of the venules105. However, the exact contribution 
of various segments of the tumour neovasculature to permeability remains poorly 
understood. In addition to an arsenal of inflammatory mediators such as histamine106,107, 
the interaction of tight junction modulators such as cationic polymers with endothelium can 
also induce endothelial contraction and tight junction disassembly, leading to vascular 
leakiness108. For tumours, both vascular permeability and blood velocity are complex and 
kinetically variable from segment to segment109. The spatiotemporal changes in vascular 
permeability can also be in part explained by the recent observation of transient opening and 
Shi et al.
Page 8
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 closing of pores, referred to as ‘dynamic vents’, in the walls of tumour vessels110. With an 
adequate NP circulation half-life, the dynamic vents could potentially improve delivery to 
tumours (in particular for large NPs). Furthermore, vascular mediators such as nitric oxide 
and angiotensin II could enhance tumour vascular permeability for more effective NP 
extravasation10,111. There is also considerable variability in blood viscosity and oncotic 
pressure in various segments of the vasculature and TME, influencing the movement of NPs 
into and out of the tumour interstitium. Further studies will help to elucidate the mechanisms 
involved in NP extravasation into tumours, improving engineering and design schemes for 
efficient NP accumulation.
The impact of NP physicochemical properties on tumour extravasation and accumulation has 
also been examined. For example, in hyperpermeable murine colon adenocarcinoma, 30, 50, 
70 and 100 nm polymeric micelles all demonstrated similar extravasation and anticancer 
activity, whereas in hypopermeable pancreatic tumours, only the 30 nm micelles showed 
sufficient accumulation112. This study further indicates the influence of tumour 
heterogeneity on nanotherapeutic efficacy, underscoring the need for personalized 
nanomedicine. Compared with nanospheres, some elongated nanostructures (for example, 
the nanoworm113 and the nanorod114) improve tumour accumulation. Non-spherical 
particles also tend to accumulate and adhere to the endothelial cells that line vessel walls 
better than spherical or quasi-hemispherical particles, enhancing site-specific delivery115,116. 
However, the effect of NP shape on extravasation can be very complicated, depending on the 
tumour models studied117.
Other unique strategies have also been proposed to enhance extravasation of NPs to the 
tumour interstitial space. Exploiting the ‘tumour-tropic’ property of certain cells (for 
example, mesenchymal stem cells, macrophages and monocytes)118–121, therapeutic NPs 
can either be attached to the cell surface or loaded into the cells for homing to tumours. 
Recently, an innovative approach used two types of communicating NP to amplify tumour 
targeting and accumulation122: the photothermal heating of ‘signalling’ gold nanorods 
disrupts tumour blood vessels to initiate extravascular coagulation, which can be recognized 
by the ‘receiving’ NPs in circulation, which bind to the resulting clot.
Tumour penetration
Despite the emphasis on extravasation and accumulation in NP delivery, it is now known 
that, depending on the therapeutic payload, deep and uniform tumour penetration of 
nanotherapeutics may also be crucial for optimal outcomes. Studies of macrmolecules (for 
example, dextrans123 and antibodies124) demonstrate that size and binding affinity affect 
both diffusion kinetics and depth of tissue penetration. For instance, higher-affinity 
antibodies that bind to target antigens on cancer cells penetrate tissue less efficiently than 
lower-affinity antibodies against the same target124. This is because during tissue penetration 
higher-affinity antibodies tend to bind tightly to the target and become internalized, whereas 
lower-affinity antibodies tend to bypass their target and thus penetrate deeper. Much can be 
learned from antibody studies to aid in the design of nanotechnologies for cancer targeting, 
such as the pros and cons of adding targeting ligands on the NP surface47; although this may 
Shi et al.
Page 9
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 enhance cellular uptake and lengthen tissue residence, it may also reduce the depth of 
tumour penetration.
Therapeutic NPs, nearly always larger than antibodies, tend to become trapped in the ECM 
around the microvessels from which they extravasate125 (FIG. 2e). Challenges include the 
physiological barriers intrinsic to the TME, such as the dense interstitial matrix composed of 
collagen fibres and other proteins, and the elevated interstitial fluid pressure (IFP) induced 
by hyperpermeability of abnormal vasculature and lack of functional lymphatics deep in the 
tumour tissue125,126. These in turn reduce convective transport of NPs across the vessel wall 
and into the interstitial space. Nonspecific uptake by perivascular stromal cells such as 
TAMs60–63 can further limit the diffusion of nanotherapeutics. It is also noteworthy that 
mean tumour intercapillary distances generally range from approximately 80 to hundreds of 
micrometres127–129, presenting another obstacle to NPs reaching tumour cells that are 
further from vessels.
For enhanced tumour penetration, one possible solution is to tune the physicochemical 
properties of NPs to penetrate diffusional barriers in the interstitial matrix. Smaller NPs 
could more readily diffuse throughout the tumour tissue130–132, but very small particles (for 
example, <5 nm) may be quickly cleared by renal filtration. Moreover, small NPs have a 
large surface area to volume ratio and a short diffusion distance for encapsulated drugs, 
limiting their drug-carrying and controlled-release capabilities. Nanorods (15 nm × 54 nm) 
have also exhibited more rapid tumour penetration than 35 nm nanospheres114, possibly 
related to their shorter dimension, although both have a 33–35 nm hydrodynamic diameter 
and nearly identical diffusion rates in water. In addition, surface modification with tumour-
specific penetrating peptides, such as the cyclic peptide CRGDK/RGPD/EC (also called 
iRGD), has also been shown to substantially increase the depth of NP delivery into tumour 
parenchyma133,134. Further systematic study of NP–TME interactions through real-time in 
vivo imaging techniques, such as intravital microscopy135, may identify the optimal particle 
properties for rapid diffusion. TME-modification approaches, such as degrading the tumour 
ECM and inhibiting the activity of tumour-associated fibroblasts to reduce their production 
of matrix components, which were previously overviewed136, could likewise assist NPs in 
permeating tumour tissues.
Recently, an alternative novel multistage delivery strategy has been proposed to address the 
penetration problem137. Small-molecule drug conjugates (SMDCs)138 and miniaturized 
biologic drug conjugates (mBDCs), including peptide–drug conjugates139, were developed 
to address the large size shortcoming of antibody–drug conjugates (ADCs), which limits 
their tumour tissue penetrability. SMDCs and mBDCs can also enhance retention and 
cellular uptake by tumours compared with free drug alone. However, their considerable 
drawbacks include poor PK, which may limit their tumour exposure and therapeutic impact. 
By incorporating SMDCs and mBDCs into controlled-release polymeric NPs for multistep 
delivery to tumours, it may be possible to combine the superior PK and tumour 
accumulation of NPs with the deep penetration and specific tumour cell targeting of released 
SMDCs and mBDCs for optimal targeted cancer therapy137.
Shi et al.
Page 10
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 There have also been reports of similar multistage delivery platforms130,140 in which very 
small NPs (for example, approximately 10 nm quantum dots) are first loaded into large 
particles, such as approximately 3.5 μm hemispherical mesoporous silicon140 or 
approximately 100 nm gelatin NPs130. When the large particles reach the tumour vasculature 
or are exposed to the TME, the released smaller NPs can then readily diffuse throughout the 
interstitial space of the tumour. Other stimuli-responsive multistage delivery platforms have 
recently been developed for various hard-to-treat solid tumours141,142.
Cellular uptake and intracellular trafficking
Effective cell internalization may also have an important role in enhancing NP retention, 
EPR and therapeutic efficacy, as many nanomedicines act on intracellular targets. This is 
particularly true for biomacromolecule payloads such as those involved in the RNAi 
pathway (for example, siRNA and microRNA (miRNA)), which require cytosolic delivery 
for bioactivity143–145. To improve cellular uptake, one approach is to decorate the NPs with 
targeting ligands that recognize specific receptors on the tumour cell surface9,146,147 (FIG. 
2f). Moreover, active targeting is of importance when tissue accumulation does not depend 
on EPR (for example, vascular targeting)148 or when the delivery of therapeutic agents 
requires active transcytosis of physiological barriers such as the intestinal mucosa or the 
blood–brain barrier149–151. Since the concept of active NP targeting was introduced more 
than 30 years ago152,153, a few examples have made their way into clinical trials9, including 
targeted liposomes (for example, HER2 (also known as ERBB2) single-chain variable 
fragment (scFv)-targeted liposome (MM-302)154), the first targeted and controlled-release 
polymeric NP (BIND-014)11 and the first targeted siRNA NP (CALAA-01)30. Even without 
targeting ligands, NPs can still be engineered for increased uptake by tumour cells by 
exploiting size- and shape-dependent cell internalization155,156.
In addition, it may be important to investigate the effect of cancer cell mutations on NP 
internalization. Pancreatic cancer cells with KRAS mutations show elevated 
macropinocytosis of proteins such as albumin, and the ability of extracellular albumin to 
enhance the proliferation of cancer cells after glutamine starvation is also dependent on 
oncogenic KRAS expression157. This study indicates that macropinocytosis might enhance 
the uptake of drugs such as paclitaxel when it is bound to albumin, partly explaining the 
recent success of nab-paclitaxel in treating advanced pancreatic cancer largely driven by 
oncogenic KRAS158. Whether such an oncogenic mutation effect also applies to NP 
endocytosis remains unclear. It should also be noted that our current understanding of NP–
cell interactions is generally based on in vitro studies, which may not reflect the 
heterogeneity of tumour cells in vivo. Recent advances in high-resolution cellular in vivo 
imaging methods have enabled the detailed analysis of single-cell PK and cell-to-cell 
variability in tumours159–162, and are expected to provide insights into NP interaction with 
tumour cells and the TME in vivo.
After internalization, NPs must either release their therapeutic payload for diffusion through 
the cellular compartments to reach the target, or be directed through intracellular trafficking 
pathways to release therapeutics in the appropriate subcellular location. For cytosolic 
delivery of biomacromolecules such as siRNA, NP endosomal escape is crucial. Cationic 
Shi et al.
Page 11
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 lipid-, lipid-like material- and polymer-based NPs have shown great promise in siRNA 
delivery163–165. Notably, most RNAi nanotherapeutic agents in clinical trials for cancer 
treatment are composed of liposomes or lipid NPs (TABLE 1). Although these lipid-based 
NPs are currently not functionalized with ligands for active targeting, targeted NP delivery 
could further enhance tumour accumulation and retention and cellular uptake of 
siRNA144,166. Despite clinical trial success, the efficiency of lipid NP-mediated siRNA 
release from endosomes remains low (1–2%)167, and approximately 70% of the internalized 
siRNA may undergo Niemann–Pick type C1-mediated exocytosis168. Thus, alternative 
strategies will be necessary to develop NP platforms with highly efficient endosomal escape. 
Besides cytosolic delivery, targeting intracellular organelles such as the nucleus, 
mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi has also been pursued. Whereas some NPs 
have been developed for specific uptake by these subcellular compartments169–174, the 
underlying barriers of organelle membranes to the transport of NPs need to be further 
explored.
Controlled drug release
An equally important yet often overlooked consideration is that systemically administered 
NPs may gradually release their payload during circulation (FIG. 2g), such that long-
circulating particles with slow tumour extravasation may hold relatively small payloads by 
the time they reach the TME. Therefore, simultaneous consideration of drug release, NP PK 
and NP extravasation is required to achieve optimal outcomes.
We think that the design of optimal NP systems requires a deep understanding of several 
complex parameters: the interplay between NP PK and drug PK, between encapsulated drug 
and released drug in plasma, between drug Cmax and NP Cmax, between drug plasma AUC 
and NP plasma AUC; and factors that may differentially affect plasma versus tumour PK and 
AUC. Conventional small-molecule drugs generally reach their plasma Cmax during the 
intravenous infusion period, followed by a reduction in plasma drug concentration. 
Similarly, for drug-encapsulated controlled-release NPs, Cmax will be reached during 
infusion, yet the plasma concentration of the released drug will in general be very low 
initially and progressively increase, reaching its Cmax after some period of NP circulation. 
Importantly, the drug Cmax achieved through release from NPs is unlikely to ever reach the 
levels achieved with intravenous administration of free drug. Therefore, drug-associated 
toxicities related to Cmax may be mitigated using NPs. On the other hand, plasma AUC will 
be relatively similar for free drug and NP-released drug, with one key difference: the AUC 
of NP-released drug will be generally broad and flat, whereas the AUC for free drug is likely 
to be peaked, with a tail. The implications are that although certain toxicities may be 
reduced with the use of NPs, the AUC-related toxicity may be harder to overcome with NPs 
even though the total dose is released over a longer period of time. When drugs are delivered 
by NPs, the tumour PK and AUC are dramatically different from those of drugs given in the 
conventional form, in part because EPR results in differential tumour accumulation of NPs 
to a greater extent than free drugs and the drug released from NPs localized to tumours can 
lead to higher tumour drug concentrations over a longer period of time. Most publications 
demonstrate that NPs enhance delivery of drugs to tumours. A subset of studies show that 
over time, tumour drug Cmax, PK and/or AUC175–178 are improved compared with 
Shi et al.
Page 12
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 conventional dosage. However, these increases in tumour drug accumulation have not always 
translated into improved patient OS, begging several questions. Does the increase in tumour 
drug concentration broadly occur in patients or is patient selection needed to identify the 
subpopulation likely to accumulate NPs? Is increased tumour dose universally beneficial for 
all drugs or does that depend on the drug?
To precisely control drug release, various stimuli-responsive NPs have been developed and 
are summarized in a recent review article179. In general, these NPs are designed to recognize 
subtle environmental changes associated with the TME and tumour cells (for example, pH, 
redox state and enzymes) or to be activated by external stimuli (for example, heat, light, 
magnetic field or ultrasound), triggering the release of the payload (FIG. 2g). To some 
degree, external stimulation enables tailored drug-release profiles with temporal and spatial 
control. Thermosensitive liposomes (for example, the LD ThermoDox) for heat-mediated 
drug release are the most advanced clinical stage platform to date. In 2013, ThermoDox 
failed to meet its primary end point of PFS in a phase III study for hepatocellular carcinoma, 
and is now undergoing a phase III study with OS as the primary end point (see TABLE 1). 
More recent stimuli-responsive nanomaterials being investigated include pH- or redox-
sensitive polymeric NPs142,180–182, ultrasound-responsive polymer-grafted silica NPs183 and 
near-infrared light-responsive graphene oxide nanosheets184, among others. The clinical 
potential of these newer systems remains to be determined.
Overall, with continuous improvements in our understanding of the biological steps in 
systemic NP delivery, a myriad of new strategies have been developed for enhancing drug 
delivery to tumours and therapeutic responses. As most of these results are from animal 
studies, further clinical validation is necessary.
Targeting the TME and the premetastatic niche
As the TME has an important role in tumour development, progression and metastasis and in 
the emergence of drug resistance, it has also been considered a target for cancer 
treatment14,15,185. As discussed above, TME modification also offers an alternative strategy 
for enhancing the tumour accumulation and penetration of NPs107,136. Compared with 
cancer cells, one advantage of targeting non-tumoural cells in the TME is that they are likely 
to be more genetically stable and thus less prone to develop drug resistance185. However, 
targeting non-tumoural cells raises the challenge of achieving a therapeutic effect while 
minimizing toxicity to normal cells; how TME modification affects tumour growth and 
metastasis needs more careful examination. Beyond the TME of the primary tumour, the 
environmental conditions required for metastatic cells to survive and proliferate have also 
received considerable attention in the development of new therapeutic avenues186. Early 
interference with the formation of the premetastatic niche may be particularly beneficial in 
the treatment of malignancies that tend to metastasize.
Tumour vasculature
Much effort has focused on NP-mediated selective drug delivery to the tumour vasculature 
(FIG. 4a), which is crucial to tumour growth and metastasis148. This is commonly achieved 
by coating NPs with ligands that bind specifically to overexpressed receptors such as αvβ3 
Shi et al.
Page 13
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 integrin187 on the surface of tumour endothelial cells. In vivo studies in mice revealed that 
inhibiting angiogenesis can cause regression of established tumours or suppression of 
metastasis188,189. Besides targeted NPs, several non-targeted cationic lipid or polymeric NP 
platforms have been designed for preferential delivery of siRNA to vascular 
endothelium190–192. A recent unique formulation called 7C1 specifically reduced the 
expression of target endothelial genes at low siRNA doses without substantially reducing 
their expression in pulmonary immune cells, hepatocytes or peritoneal immune cells192. By 
silencing VEGF receptor 1 (VEGFR1) or delta-like protein 4 (DLL4) involved in 
angiogenesis, 7C1 RNAi NPs reduced growth and metastasis of Lewis lung carcinoma in 
mouse models in vivo192. This interesting system could also be used to study how 
interactions with serum proteins direct nanomaterials to endothelial cells in vivo.
Stromal cells
Targeting stromal cells such as tumour-associated fibroblasts and macrophages has also been 
proposed for cancer treatment (FIG. 4a). A unique docetaxel-conjugated NP platform called 
Cellax significantly depleted α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA)-expressing fibroblasts, 
reducing tumour ECM and IFP, increasing vascular permeability and suppressing 
metastasis193. This effect is presumably through the adsorption of serum albumin on Cellax, 
followed by specific interaction with α-SMA+ fibroblasts that also express elevated levels of 
the albumin-binding protein, secreted acidic cysteine-rich glycoprotein (SPARC). 
Differentiation of TAMs to a pro-tumorigenic or immunosuppressive (M2-like) phenotype 
has commonly been associated with tumour progression and poor patient outcome194. By 
inhibiting the activity of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), 
hydrazinocurcumin-loaded NPs can ‘re-educate’ TAMs to transform from an M2-like into an 
antitumorigenic M1 phenotype for inhibited tumour growth195. PEG-sheddable, mannose-
modified NPs have also been developed to efficiently target TAMs that have elevated 
expression of mannose receptors, while minimizing uptake by macrophages of the MPS196. 
Furthermore, NP-based co-delivery of multiple agents targeting both TME and tumour cells 
has produced synergistic anticancer effects197–199. However, TME-targeting strategies must 
be pursued with care, as tumour stroma exhibits bipolar activity in tumorigenesis200.
Metastatic microenvironment
NP delivery to the major sites of metastasis (for example, lungs, liver, lymph nodes, brain 
and bone) and metastatic tumour cells themselves have been comprehensively discussed 
elsewhere201. A newly developed system of polymeric micelles formulated from polymer–
drug conjugates has shown promising therapeutic efficacy in a mouse model of colon cancer 
with lung metastasis202, and in a pilot study of one patient with castration-resistant prostate 
cancer with lung and bone metastases203. Comparatively little effort has been devoted to 
exploiting nanotechnology to modify the premetastatic microenvironmental niche and 
suppress tumour growth. In a recent study, a bone-homing polymeric NP platform was 
engineered for spatiotemporally controlled delivery of therapeutic agents204 (FIG. 4b). After 
pretreatment with alendronate-conjugated, bortezomib-loaded polymeric NPs, mice showed 
significantly slower myeloma tumour growth and prolonged survival. The application of 
such pretreatment strategies for protecting the organs vulnerable to metastasis could be 
Shi et al.
Page 14
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 accelerated by revealing which microenvironmental factors control the intravasation, 
adhesion and growth of metastatic tumour cells and how this is achieved.
Challenges in clinical translation
Controllable and reproducible synthesis
The determination of optimal physicochemical parameters is crucial for the successful 
development of therapeutic NPs. A considerable amount has been learnt regarding individual 
factors that can confer effective immune evasion, tumour extravasation and diffusion, cell 
targeting and internalization, and controlled drug release65,66,78,205,206. Nevertheless, 
systematic parallel screening of the myriad of NP properties remains difficult, owing to the 
challenge of rapid, precise and reproducible synthesis of NP libraries with distinct features. 
Compared with traditional bulk techniques, which generally form NPs with high 
polydispersity, microfluidic technologies have recently attracted attention for high-speed 
self-assembly of NPs with narrower size distribution, tunable physical and chemical 
characteristics and greater batch-to-batch reproducibility207–211. Similarly, particle 
replication in non-wetting template (PRINT) technology has enabled the synthesis of 
monodisperse NPs with precise control over size, shape, chemical composition, drug loading 
and surface properties212,213. Such advances could eventually facilitate NP discovery, 
analogous to the way high-throughput screening of small molecules advanced drug 
discovery.
Evaluation and screening
With the rapid emergence of NPs composed of novel biomaterials or nanostructures, in vitro 
evaluation is important to identify biocompatible candidates before animal testing is 
pursued. In vitro assays can also improve our understanding of NP–cell interactions. 
However, as conventional in vitro models using cells cultured in multiwell plates lack the 
complexity of biological tissues and control over fluid flow, such platforms may not capture 
the intricate interplay of NPs with physiological barriers. Recent efforts to develop 
biomimetic ‘organ/tumour-on-a-chip’ tools214–216 may avoid the limitations of current in 
vitro models. The incorporation of tumour-like spheroids into a microfluidic channel could 
offer insights into the effects of interstitial flow, cell binding and particle size on NP 
accumulation and diffusion216. Comparison of NP behaviours in such chip systems with 
animal models may offer a preview of the potential of these biomimetic microdevices.
To assess in vivo NP performance (for example, PK, biodistribution, efficacy and safety), the 
use of animal models is obligatory. Whereas some studies have demonstrated PK scaling 
across different species (including humans) for different nanotherapeutics11–13,32, one well-
recognized obstacle is the discrepancy between the efficacies obtained in preclinical studies 
and the outcomes from clinical trials, in large part owing to the lack of tumour models that 
can recapitulate human cancers217,218. Diverse animal models are currently available, 
including cell line-based subcutaneous and orthotopic xenografts, patient-derived xenografts 
(PDXs) and genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs). However, no single model can 
fully reproduce all aspects of human malignancy, and EPR is generally more consistent in 
animal models than in cancer patients9. Furthermore, considering the major contribution of 
Shi et al.
Page 15
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tumour metastases to cancer mortality, models of human tumour metastasis will be 
invaluable for the evaluation of EPR and NP penetration and targeting in metastatic tissues 
compared with primary tumours. The translation of nanotherapeutics may be greatly 
improved by the development of animal models that mimic closely the heterogeneity and 
anatomical histology of human tumours, such as high-fidelity PDXs219, humanized mouse 
models220 and GEMMs with aggressive metastasis221.
Scalable manufacturing
Another challenge to clinical development stems from the escalating complexity in the 
chemistry, manufacturing and controls (CMC) and good manufacturing practice (GMP) 
requirements as NP technologies transition from preclinical to clinical development, 
subsequent commercialization and beyond, as long as the product is on the market. Although 
the shared goal of CMC and GMP is to assure that a product consistently meets a 
predetermined standard of quality, they involve different but overlapping approaches and 
regulation. The scale-up of simple NPs, including liposomes and polymeric systems with 
small-molecule APIs that have desirable physicochemical properties, can be achieved using 
manufacturing unit operations readily available and widely used in the pharmaceutical 
industry. The scale-up of more complex nanomedicines may pose additional CMC and GMP 
challenges, and require modification of existing unit operations or development of novel 
manufacturing processes. Examples include nanomedicines that integrate biological 
targeting ligands or biological components, carry a combination of two or more therapeutics, 
are formulated through layer-by-layer assembly or comprise multiple functional units such 
as theranostics or multistage systems.
In general, large-scale and reproducible synthesis will be more difficult when NP 
formulation involves multiple steps or complicated technologies. Indeed, the transition from 
laboratory to clinic is nearly always accompanied by the optimization of formulation 
parameters, or even a change in formulation methods, making forward thinking of scale-up 
considerations an important aspect of early NP design and engineering. The PRINT 
technology is amenable to reproducible fabrication of NPs213, yet scaling to kilograms 
remains to be demonstrated. A coaxial turbulent jet mixer technology, which has the 
advantages of homogeneity, reproducibility and tunability normally accessible only in 
microscale mixing techniques such as microfluidics, has recently been developed for mass 
production of polymeric NPs (potential of ~3 kg/day per channel)222. Although today the 
mainstay of NP manufacturing remains bulk synthesis, robust and versatile approaches such 
as PRINT and turbulent jet mixer technologies, which can prepare NPs at throughputs 
suitable for industrial-scale production, may accelerate clinical translation.
Conclusion
Like most other scientific advances that have revolutionized medicine over the past decades, 
cancer nanomedicine must also mature before its full impact can be realized. Improving our 
understanding of tumour heterogeneity and identifying EPR markers will enable selection of 
patients maximally responsive to nanotherapies. A full understanding of nano–bio 
interactions, systemic transport of NPs to tumour cells and targeting of NPs to the TME or 
Shi et al.
Page 16
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 premetastatic niche will lead to safer and more efficacious nanotherapeutics. Addressing the 
challenges of controllable, reproducible and scalable NP synthesis, as well as NP screening 
and evaluation, will facilitate clinical development. Although most approved nanomedicines 
have used existing drugs as payloads, we expect the next generation of nanomedicines to 
increasingly incorporate new molecular entities (for example, kinase inhibitors24) and novel 
classes of therapeutic agent (for example, siRNA, mRNA and gene editing).
In summary, we are rapidly acquiring a much deeper understanding of the challenges and 
opportunities presented by cancer nanomedicine. This Review has explored the importance 
of the convergence of nanotechnology and tumour biology for more successful development 
and clinical translation of nanotherapeutics. We expect that nanomedicines will shift the 
paradigm of cancer treatment, and that the true goal of cancer nanomedicine — dramatic 
improvement in patient survival — will become a reality in the foreseeable future.
Acknowledgments
We thank R. Weissleder, R. K. Jain, U. H. von Andrian and M. Mahmoudi for helpful discussions. This work was 
supported by the grants US National Institutes of Health (NIH) CA151884 (O.C.F.), EB015419 (O.C.F.), 
R00CA160350 (J.S.) and CA200900 (J.S.); US Department of Defense (DoD) Prostate Cancer Research Program 
(PCRP) Synergistic Idea Development Award W81XWH-15-1-0728 (O.C.F. and J.S.); David Koch–Prostate Cancer 
Foundation (PCF) Award in Nanotherapeutics (O.C.F. and P.W.K.); Movember–PCF Challenge Award (O.C.F. and 
J.S.); PCF Young Investigator Award (J.S.); and National Research Foundation of Korea (K1A1A2048701) 
(O.C.F.).
Glossary
Nanoparticle (NP)
Particle of any shape with dimensions in the 1–100 nm range, as defined by the International 
Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC). Despite this size restriction, the term 
nanoparticles commonly applies to structures that are up to several hundred nanometres in 
size, although key is that design of the nanostructure produces a unique function and 
property.
Enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect
The mechanism resulting from pathophysiological processes (for example, leaky tumour 
vasculature, poor lymphatic drainage and tumour microenvironment interactions) that leads 
to the accumulation and retention of nanoparticles or macromolecules in tumours.
Nano–bio interactions
The interactions between nanoparticles and biological systems (for example, serum proteins, 
extracellular matrix, cells and organelles) that determine the biological fates of 
nanoparticles, such as circulation half-life, biodistribution, tumour accumulation, tumour 
cell internalization and tumour microenvironment distribution.
Excipients
Substances other than the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) that are included in the 
manufacturing process of a medication or are contained in a finished pharmaceutical product 
dosage form.
Shi et al.
Page 17
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cmax
The maximum serum concentration that a drug or nanoparticle achieves after administration.
Area under the curve (AUC)
The area between the curve and the x-axis in a plot of drug or nanoparticle blood plasma 
concentration against time.
Payloads
The therapeutic or diagnostic agents carried by nanoparticles.
Opsonins
Plasma proteins (for example, immunoglobulins, complement proteins and fibrinogen) that 
coat a foreign particle to facilitate its uptake and destruction by phagocytic cells.
Mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS)
Part of the immune system composed of scavenging monocytes and macrophages, located in 
reticular connective tissue surrounding, for example, the liver, spleen, lung and bone 
marrow.
Nanomics
The collective study and characterization of the interactions between nanomaterials and 
biological systems.
Circulation half-life
The period required for drugs or nanoparticles in the blood to be reduced by one-half of a 
given concentration or amount.
Oncotic pressure
A form of osmotic pressure exerted by colloids in a solution, such as proteins in the plasma 
of a blood vessel.
Polydispersity
The heterogeneity of particle or molecule size in a mixture.
References
1. Ferrari M. Cancer nanotechnology: opportunities and challenges. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005; 5:161–171. 
[PubMed: 15738981] 
2. Peer D, et al. Nanocarriers as an emerging platform for cancer therapy. Nat Nanotechnol. 2007; 
2:751–760. [PubMed: 18654426] 
3. Shi J, Votruba AR, Farokhzad OC, Langer R. Nanotechnology in drug delivery and tissue 
engineering: from discovery to applications. Nano Lett. 2010; 10:3223–3230. [PubMed: 20726522] 
4. Swartz MA, Hirosue S, Hubbell JA. Engineering approaches to immunotherapy. Sci Transl Med. 
2012; 4:148rv9.
5. Kearney CJ, Mooney DJ. Macroscale delivery systems for molecular and cellular payloads. Nat 
Mater. 2013; 12:1004–1017. [PubMed: 24150418] 
6. Smith, AD. Big moment for nanotech: oncology therapeutics poised for a leap. OncLive. 2013. 
http://www.onclive.com/publications/Oncology-live/2013/June-2013/Big-Moment-for-Nanotech-
Oncology-Therapeutics-Poised-for-a-Leap
Shi et al.
Page 18
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 7. Matsumura Y, Maeda H. A new concept for macromolecular therapeutics in cancer chemotherapy: 
mechanism of tumoritropic accumulation of proteins and the antitumor agent smancs. Cancer Res. 
1986; 46:6387–6392. This paper described the EPR effect in cancer, which has become the 
foundational underpinning for the delivery of NPs and macromolecules to solid tumours. [PubMed: 
2946403] 
8. Gerlowski LE, Jain RK. Microvascular permeability of normal and neoplastic tissues. Microvasc 
Res. 1986; 31:288–305. This study demonstrated higher microvascular permeability of 
macromolecules into tumours than into normal tissues, providing a rational basis for the use of 
large-size therapeutic agents in cancer treatment. [PubMed: 2423854] 
9. Bertrand N, Wu J, Xu X, Kamaly N, Farokhzad OC. Cancer nanotechnology: the impact of passive 
and active targeting in the era of modern cancer biology. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2014; 66:2–25. 
[PubMed: 24270007] 
10. Maeda H. Toward a full understanding of the EPR effect in primary and metastatic tumors as well 
as issues related to its heterogeneity. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2015; 91:3–6. [PubMed: 25579058] 
11. Hrkach J, et al. Preclinical development and clinical translation of a PSMA-targeted docetaxel 
nanoparticle with a differentiated pharmacological profile. Sci Transl Med. 2012; 4:128ra39. First-
in-human testing of a targeted, controlled-release polymeric NP for cancer chemotherapy. 
12. Eliasof S, et al. Correlating preclinical animal studies and human clinical trials of a 
multifunctional, polymeric nanoparticle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110:15127–15132. 
[PubMed: 23980155] 
13. Zuckerman JE, et al. Correlating animal and human phase Ia/Ib clinical data with CALAA-01, a 
targeted, polymer-based nanoparticle containing siRNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 
111:11449–11454. [PubMed: 25049380] 
14. Joyce JA. Therapeutic targeting of the tumor microenvironment. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:513–520. 
[PubMed: 15950901] 
15. Meads MB, Gatenby RA, Dalton WS. Environment-mediated drug resistance: a major contributor 
to minimal residual disease. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:665–674. [PubMed: 19693095] 
16. Barenholz Y. Doxil®—the first FDA-approved nano-drug: lessons learned. J Control Release. 
2012; 160:117–134. [PubMed: 22484195] 
17. Petersen GH, Alzghari SK, Chee W, Sankari SS, La-Beck NM. Meta-analysis of clinical and 
preclinical studies comparing the anticancer efficacy of liposomal versus conventional non-
liposomal doxorubicin. J Control Release. 2016; 232:255–264. [PubMed: 27108612] 
18. Celator Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Celator announces phase 3 trial for VYXEOS™ (CPX-351) in 
patients with high-risk acute myeloid leukemia demonstrates statistically significant improvement 
in overall survival. prnewswire. 2016. http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/celator-
announces-phase-3-trial-for-vyxeos-cpx-351-in-patients-with-high-risk-acute-myeloid-leukemia-
demonstrates-statistically-significant-improvement-in-overall-survival-300235620.html
19. Gradishar WJ, et al. Phase III trial of nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel compared with 
polyethylated castor oil-based paclitaxel in women with breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2005; 
23:7794–7803. [PubMed: 16172456] 
20. Rugo HS, et al. Randomized phase III trial of paclitaxel once per week compared with nanoparticle 
albumin-bound nab-paclitaxel once per week or ixabepilone with bevacizumab as first-line 
chemotherapy for locally recurrent or metastatic breast cancer: CALGB 40502/NCCTG N063H 
(Alliance). J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33:2361–2369. [PubMed: 26056183] 
21. Ahn HK, et al. A phase II trial of Cremorphor EL-free paclitaxel (Genexol-PM) and gemcitabine in 
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014; 74:277–
282. [PubMed: 24906423] 
22. Kato K, et al. Phase II study of NK105, a paclitaxel-incorporating micellar nanoparticle, for 
previously treated advanced or recurrent gastric cancer. Invest New Drugs. 2012; 30:1621–1627. 
[PubMed: 21728023] 
23. Clark AJ, et al. CRLX101 nanoparticles localize in human tumors and not in adjacent, 
nonneoplastic tissue after intravenous dosing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016; 113:3850–3854. 
[PubMed: 27001839] 
Shi et al.
Page 19
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 24. Ashton S, et al. Aurora kinase inhibitor nanoparticles target tumors with favorable therapeutic 
index in vivo. Sci Transl Med. 2016; 8:325ra17.
25. Hirsch LR, et al. Nanoshell-mediated near-infrared thermal therapy of tumors under magnetic 
resonance guidance. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003; 100:13549–13554. [PubMed: 14597719] 
26. Maier-Hauff K, et al. Efficacy and safety of intratumoral thermotherapy using magnetic iron-oxide 
nanoparticles combined with external beam radiotherapy on patients with recurrent glioblastoma 
multiforme. J Neurooncol. 2011; 103:317–324. [PubMed: 20845061] 
27. Maggiorella L, et al. Nanoscale radiotherapy with hafnium oxide nanoparticles. Future Oncol. 
2012; 8:1167–1181. [PubMed: 23030491] 
28. Dritschilo A, et al. Phase I study of liposome-encapsulated c-raf antisense 
oligodeoxyribonucleotide infusion in combination with radiation therapy in patients with advanced 
malignancies. Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12:1251–1259. [PubMed: 16489081] 
29. Elazar V, et al. Sustained delivery and efficacy of polymeric nanoparticles containing osteopontin 
and bone sialoprotein antisenses in rats with breast cancer bone metastasis. Int J Cancer. 2010; 
126:1749–1760. [PubMed: 19739076] 
30. Davis ME, et al. Evidence of RNAi in humans from systemically administered siRNA via targeted 
nanoparticles. Nature. 2010; 464:1067–1070. This study reported the first therapeutic knockdown 
in humans by polymeric NP-based systemic siRNA delivery. [PubMed: 20305636] 
31. Tabernero J, et al. First-in-humans trial of an RNA interference therapeutic targeting VEGF and 
KSP in cancer patients with liver involvement. Cancer Discov. 2013; 3:406–417. [PubMed: 
23358650] 
32. Schultheis B, et al. First-in-human phase I study of the liposomal RNA interference therapeutic 
Atu027 in patients with advanced solid tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:4141–4148. [PubMed: 
25403217] 
33. Jensen SA, et al. Spherical nucleic acid nanoparticle conjugates as an RNAi-based therapy for 
glioblastoma. Sci Transl Med. 2013; 5:209ra152.
34. Islam MA, et al. Biomaterials for mRNA delivery. Biomater Sci. 2015; 3:1519–1533. [PubMed: 
26280625] 
35. Tolcher AW, et al. A phase 1 study of the BCL2-targeted deoxyribonucleic acid inhibitor (DNAi) 
PNT2258 in patients with advanced solid tumors. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014; 73:363–
371. [PubMed: 24297683] 
36. Yildiz I, Shukla S, Steinmetz NF. Applications of viral nanoparticles in medicine. Curr Opin 
Biotechnol. 2011; 22:901–908. [PubMed: 21592772] 
37. Yla-Herttuala S. Endgame: glybera finally recommended for approval as the first gene therapy 
drug in the European Union. Mol Ther. 2012; 20:1831–1832. [PubMed: 23023051] 
38. Naldini L. Gene therapy returns to centre stage. Nature. 2015; 526:351–360. [PubMed: 26469046] 
39. Shukla S, DiFranco NA, Wen AM, Commandeur U, Steinmetz NF. To target or not to target: active 
versus passive tumor homing of filamentous nanoparticles based on potato virus X. Cell Mol 
Bioeng. 2015; 8:433–444. [PubMed: 26316894] 
40. Czapar AE, et al. Tobacco mosaic virus delivery of phenanthriplatin for cancer therapy. ACS Nano. 
2016; 10:4119–4126. [PubMed: 26982250] 
41. Batrakova EV, Kim MS. Using exosomes, naturally-equipped nanocarriers, for drug delivery. J 
Control Release. 2015; 219:396–405. [PubMed: 26241750] 
42. Chow EK, et al. Nanodiamond therapeutic delivery agents mediate enhanced chemoresistant tumor 
treatment. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:73ra21.
43. Mochalin VN, et al. Adsorption of drugs on nanodiamond: toward development of a drug delivery 
platform. Mol Pharm. 2013; 10:3728–3735. [PubMed: 23941665] 
44. Jiang T, et al. Furin-mediated sequential delivery of anticancer cytokine and small-molecule drug 
shuttled by graphene. Adv Mater. 2015; 27:1021–1028. [PubMed: 25504623] 
45. Liu Z, Robinson JT, Sun X, Dai H. PEGylated nanographene oxide for delivery of water-insoluble 
cancer drugs. J Am Chem Soc. 2008; 130:10876–10877. [PubMed: 18661992] 
Shi et al.
Page 20
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 46. Choi KY, Liu G, Lee S, Chen X. Theranostic nanoplatforms for simultaneous cancer imaging and 
therapy: current approaches and future perspectives. Nanoscale. 2012; 4:330–342. [PubMed: 
22134683] 
47. Cheng Z, Al Zaki A, Hui JZ, Muzykantov VR, Tsourkas A. Multifunctional nanoparticles: cost 
versus benefit of adding targeting and imaging capabilities. Science. 2012; 338:903–910. 
[PubMed: 23161990] 
48. Smith DM, Simon JK, Baker JR Jr. Applications of nanotechnology for immunology. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2013; 13:592–605. A seminal review of various nanotechnologies and nanomaterials for 
a broad range of immunological applications, including cancer vaccine development. [PubMed: 
23883969] 
49. Irvine DJ, Swartz MA, Szeto GL. Engineering synthetic vaccines using cues from natural 
immunity. Nat Mater. 2013; 12:978–990. [PubMed: 24150416] 
50. Rosenthal JA, Chen L, Baker JL, Putnam D, DeLisa MP. Pathogen-like particles: biomimetic 
vaccine carriers engineered at the nanoscale. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2014; 28:51–58. [PubMed: 
24832075] 
51. Schellekens H. The immunogenicity of therapeutic proteins. Discov Med. 2010; 9:560–564. 
[PubMed: 20587346] 
52. Kishimoto, TK., et al. Improving the efficacy and safety of biologic drugs with tolerogenic 
nanoparticles. Nat Nanotechnol. 2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2016.1135
53. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02648269?term
54. Garbuzenko OB, et al. Inhibition of lung tumor growth by complex pulmonary delivery of drugs 
with oligonucleotides as suppressors of cellular resistance. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 
107:10737–10742. [PubMed: 20498076] 
55. Liechty WB, Caldorera-Moore M, Phillips MA, Schoener C, Peppas NA. Advanced molecular 
design of biopolymers for transmucosal and intracellular delivery of chemotherapeutic agents and 
biological therapeutics. J Control Release. 2011; 155:119–127. [PubMed: 21699934] 
56. Yu, M., Wu, J., Shi, J., Farokhzad, OC. Nanotechnology for protein delivery: overview and 
perspectives. J Control Release. 2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.1010.1012
57. Ramanathan RK, et al. Pilot study in patients with advanced solid tumors to evaluate feasibility of 
ferumoxytol (FMX) as tumor imaging agent prior to MM398, a nanoliposomal irinotecan (nalIRI). 
Cancer Res. 2014; 74(Suppl) abstr. CT224. 
58. Koukourakis MI, et al. Liposomal doxorubicin and conventionally fractionated radiotherapy in the 
treatment of locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer and head and neck cancer. J Clin Oncol. 
1999; 17:3512–3521. [PubMed: 10550149] 
59. Arrieta O, et al. High liposomal doxorubicin tumour tissue distribution, as determined by 
radiopharmaceutical labelling with 99mTc-LD, is associated with the response and survival of 
patients with unresectable pleural mesothelioma treated with a combination of liposomal 
doxorubicin and cisplatin. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014; 74:211–215. [PubMed: 24817602] 
60. Daldrup-Link HE, et al. MRI of tumor-associated macrophages with clinically applicable iron 
oxide nanoparticles. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:5695–5704. [PubMed: 21791632] 
61. Kalra AV, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging with an iron oxide nanoparticle demonstrates the 
preclinical feasibility of predicting intratumoral uptake and activity of MM-398, a nanoliposomal 
irinotecan (nal-IRI). Cancer Res. 2014; 74(Suppl):2065.
62. Miller MA, et al. Tumour-associated macrophages act as a slow-release reservoir of nano-
therapeutic Pt(IV) pro-drug. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:8692. [PubMed: 26503691] 
63. Miller MA, et al. Predicting therapeutic nanomedicine efficacy using a companion magnetic 
resonance imaging nanoparticle. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 7:314ra183. This paper reported that 
imaging nanoprobes can be used to predict the accumulation and efficacy of therapeutic NPs, 
paving the road for potential patient selection for high EPR and personalized nanomedicine. 
64. Bashir MR, Bhatti L, Marin D, Nelson RC. Emerging applications for ferumoxytol as a contrast 
agent in MRI. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2015; 41:884–898. [PubMed: 24974785] 
65. Farokhzad OC, et al. Targeted nanoparticle-aptamer bioconjugates for cancer chemotherapy in 
vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:6315–6320. [PubMed: 16606824] 
Shi et al.
Page 21
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 66. Gu F, et al. Precise engineering of targeted nanoparticles by using self-assembled biointegrated 
block copolymers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 105:2586–2591. This paper described the 
development of self-assembled targeted NPs, enabling the creation and screening of libraries of 
targeted nanotherapeutics with optimal biophysicochemical properties. [PubMed: 18272481] 
67. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01770353?term
68. Harrington KJ, et al. Effective targeting of solid tumors in patients with locally advanced cancers 
by radiolabeled pegylated liposomes. Clin Cancer Res. 2001; 7:243–254. [PubMed: 11234875] 
69. Koukourakis MI, et al. High intratumoural accumulation of stealth liposomal doxorubicin (Caelyx) 
in glioblastomas and in metastatic brain tumours. Br J Cancer. 2000; 83:1281–1286. [PubMed: 
11044350] 
70. Seymour LW, et al. Hepatic drug targeting: phase I evaluation of polymer-bound doxorubicin. J 
Clin Oncol. 2002; 20:1668–1676. [PubMed: 11896118] 
71. Lee H, et al. A gradient-loadable 64Cu-chelator for quantifying tumor deposition kinetics of 
nanoliposomal therapeutics by positron emission tomography. Nanomedicine. 2015; 11:155–165. 
[PubMed: 25200610] 
72. Hansen AE, et al. Positron emission tomography based elucidation of the enhanced permeability 
and retention effect in dogs with cancer using copper-64 liposomes. ACS Nano. 2015; 9:6985–
6995. [PubMed: 26022907] 
73. Yokoi K, et al. Serum biomarkers for personalization of nanotherapeutics-based therapy in different 
tumor and organ microenvironments. Cancer Lett. 2014; 345:48–55. This study reported serum 
biomarkers for the EPR effect in tumours, which may aid in selecting patients with a higher 
likelihood of NP accumulation and thus therapeutic response. [PubMed: 24370567] 
74. Yokoi K, et al. Capillary-wall collagen as a biophysical marker of nanotherapeutic permeability 
into the tumor microenvironment. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:4239–4246. [PubMed: 24853545] 
75. Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis: therapeutic implications. N Engl J Med. 1971; 285:1182–1186. 
[PubMed: 4938153] 
76. Sessa C, Guibal A, Del Conte G, Ruegg C. Biomarkers of angiogenesis for the development of 
antiangiogenic therapies in oncology: tools or decorations? Nat Clin Pract Oncol. 2008; 5:378–
391. [PubMed: 18560389] 
77. Cedervall T, et al. Understanding the nanoparticle-protein corona using methods to quantify 
exchange rates and affinities of proteins for nanoparticles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007; 
104:2050–2055. [PubMed: 17267609] 
78. Nel AE, et al. Understanding biophysicochemical interactions at the nano–bio interface. Nat Mater. 
2009; 8:543–557. [PubMed: 19525947] 
79. Mahmoudi M, et al. Protein–nanoparticle interactions: opportunities and challenges. Chem Rev. 
2011; 111:5610–5637. [PubMed: 21688848] 
80. Monopoli MP, Aberg C, Salvati A, Dawson KA. Biomolecular coronas provide the biological 
identity of nanosized materials. Nat Nanotechnol. 2012; 7:779–786. This article reviewed the basic 
concept of NP corona and its structure and composition, and highlights how the properties of the 
corona may affect the biological responses of NPs. [PubMed: 23212421] 
81. Salvador-Morales C, Zhang L, Langer R, Farokhzad OC. Immunocompatibility properties of lipid-
polymer hybrid nanoparticles with heterogeneous surface functional groups. Biomaterials. 2009; 
30:2231–2240. [PubMed: 19167749] 
82. Walkey CD, Olsen JB, Guo H, Emili A, Chan WC. Nanoparticle size and surface chemistry 
determine serum protein adsorption and macrophage uptake. J Am Chem Soc. 2012; 134:2139–
2147. [PubMed: 22191645] 
83. Ritz S, et al. Protein corona of nanoparticles: distinct proteins regulate the cellular uptake. 
Biomacromolecules. 2015; 16:1311–1321. [PubMed: 25794196] 
84. Ogawara K, et al. Pre-coating with serum albumin reduces receptor-mediated hepatic disposition of 
polystyrene nanosphere: implications for rational design of nanoparticles. J Control Release. 2004; 
100:451–455. [PubMed: 15567509] 
Shi et al.
Page 22
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 85. Salvati A, et al. Transferrin-functionalized nanoparticles lose their targeting capabilities when a 
biomolecule corona adsorbs on the surface. Nat Nanotechnol. 2013; 8:137–143. [PubMed: 
23334168] 
86. Dong Y, et al. Lipopeptide nanoparticles for potent and selective siRNA delivery in rodents and 
nonhuman primates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:3955–3960. [PubMed: 24516150] 
87. Chanan-Khan A, et al. Complement activation following first exposure to pegylated liposomal 
doxorubicin (Doxil): possible role in hypersensitivity reactions. Ann Oncol. 2003; 14:1430–1437. 
[PubMed: 12954584] 
88. Walkey CD, Chan WC. Understanding and controlling the interaction of nanomaterials with 
proteins in a physiological environment. Chem Soc Rev. 2012; 41:2780–2799. [PubMed: 
22086677] 
89. Walkey CD, et al. Protein corona fingerprinting predicts the cellular interaction of gold and silver 
nanoparticles. ACS Nano. 2014; 8:2439–2455. [PubMed: 24517450] 
90. Bigdeli A, et al. Exploring cellular interactions of liposomes using protein corona fingerprints and 
physicochemical properties. ACS Nano. 2016; 10:3723–3737. [PubMed: 26882007] 
91. Hajipour MJ, Laurent S, Aghaie A, Rezaee F, Mahmoudi M. Personalized protein coronas: a “key” 
factor at the nanobiointerface. Biomater Sci. 2014; 2:1210–1221.
92. Sakulkhu U, et al. Ex situ evaluation of the composition of protein corona of intravenously injected 
superparamagnetic nanoparticles in rats. Nanoscale. 2014; 6:11439–11450. [PubMed: 25154771] 
93. Gref R, et al. Biodegradable long-circulating polymeric nanospheres. Science. 1994; 263:1600–
1603. This pioneering work described the development of long-circulating polymeric NPs, which 
have since been used in several biomedical applications such as drug delivery, medical imaging 
and RNAi and gene therapy. [PubMed: 8128245] 
94. Knop K, Hoogenboom R, Fischer D, Schubert US. Poly(ethylene glycol) in drug delivery: pros and 
cons as well as potential alternatives. Angew Chem Int Ed. 2010; 49:6288–6308.
95. Gabizon A, Shmeeda H, Barenholz Y. Pharmacokinetics of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin: 
review of animal and human studies. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2003; 42:419–436. [PubMed: 
12739982] 
96. Schottler S, et al. Protein adsorption is required for stealth effect of poly(ethylene glycol)- and 
poly(phosphoester)-coated nanocarriers. Nat Nanotechnol. 2016; 11:372–377. [PubMed: 
26878141] 
97. Key J, et al. Soft discoidal polymeric nanoconstructs resist macrophage uptake and enhance 
vascular targeting in tumors. ACS Nano. 2015; 9:11628–11641. [PubMed: 26488177] 
98. Anselmo AC, et al. Elasticity of nanoparticles influences their blood circulation, phagocytosis, 
endocytosis, and targeting. ACS Nano. 2015; 9:3169–3177. [PubMed: 25715979] 
99. Rodriguez PL, et al. Minimal “self” peptides that inhibit phagocytic clearance and enhance 
delivery of nanoparticles. Science. 2013; 339:971–975. This paper described a biologically 
inspired strategy in developing NPs that can reduce MPS recognition for enhanced drug delivery. 
[PubMed: 23430657] 
100. Hu CM, et al. Erythrocyte membrane-camouflaged polymeric nanoparticles as a biomimetic 
delivery platform. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011; 108:10980–10985. This article reported a 
unique biomimetic strategy to extend the systemic circulation of NPs by ‘tricking’ the immune 
system. [PubMed: 21690347] 
101. Parodi A, et al. Synthetic nanoparticles functionalized with biomimetic leukocyte membranes 
possess cell-like functions. Nat Nanotechnol. 2013; 8:61–68. [PubMed: 23241654] 
102. Hu CM, et al. Nanoparticle biointerfacing by platelet membrane cloaking. Nature. 2015; 
526:118–121. [PubMed: 26374997] 
103. Hu Q, et al. Anticancer platelet-mimicking nanovehicles. Adv Mater. 2015; 27:7043–7050. 
[PubMed: 26416431] 
104. Hobson B, Denekamp J. Endothelial proliferation in tumours and normal tissues: continuous 
labelling studies. Br J Cancer. 1984; 49:405–413. [PubMed: 6201181] 
105. Nourshargh S, Alon R. Leukocyte migration into inflamed tissues. Immunity. 2014; 41:694–707. 
[PubMed: 25517612] 
Shi et al.
Page 23
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 106. Ashina K, et al. Histamine induces vascular hyperpermeability by increasing blood flow and 
endothelial barrier disruption in vivo. PLoS ONE. 2015; 10:e0132367. [PubMed: 26158531] 
107. Maeda H, Nakamura H, Fang J. The EPR effect for macromolecular drug delivery to solid 
tumors: improvement of tumor uptake, lowering of systemic toxicity, and distinct tumor imaging 
in vivo. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2013; 65:71–79. [PubMed: 23088862] 
108. Deli MA. Potential use of tight junction modulators to reversibly open membranous barriers and 
improve drug delivery. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009; 1788:892–910. [PubMed: 18983815] 
109. Thurber GM, Weissleder R. A systems approach for tumor pharmacokinetics. PLoS ONE. 2011; 
6:e24696. [PubMed: 21935441] 
110. Matsumoto Y, et al. Vascular bursts enhance permeability of tumour blood vessels and improve 
nanoparticle delivery. Nat Nanotechnol. 2016; 11:533–538. [PubMed: 26878143] 
111. Seki T, Fang J, Maeda H. Enhanced delivery of macromolecular antitumor drugs to tumors by 
nitroglycerin application. Cancer Sci. 2009; 100:2426–2430. [PubMed: 19793083] 
112. Cabral H, et al. Accumulation of sub-100 nm polymeric micelles in poorly permeable tumours 
depends on size. Nat Nanotechnol. 2011; 6:815–823. This study highlighted the effect of NP size 
on accumulation in hypovascular and hypervascular tumours. [PubMed: 22020122] 
113. Park JH, et al. Magnetic iron oxide nanoworms for tumor targeting and imaging. Adv Mater. 
2008; 20:1630–1635. [PubMed: 21687830] 
114. Chauhan VP, et al. Fluorescent nanorods and nanospheres for real-time in vivo probing of 
nanoparticle shape-dependent tumor penetration. Angew Chem Int Ed. 2011; 50:11417–11420.
115. Gentile F, et al. The effect of shape on the margination dynamics of non-neutrally buoyant 
particles in two-dimensional shear flows. J Biomech. 2008; 41:2312–2318. [PubMed: 18571181] 
116. Kolhar P, et al. Using shape effects to target antibody-coated nanoparticles to lung and brain 
endothelium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110:10753–10758. [PubMed: 23754411] 
117. Smith BR, et al. Shape matters: intravital microscopy reveals surprising geometrical dependence 
for nanoparticles in tumor models of extravasation. Nano Lett. 2012; 12:3369–3377. A seminal 
work on the effect of particle geometry on extravasation and accumulation in different tumour 
models. [PubMed: 22650417] 
118. Cheng H, et al. Nanoparticulate cellular patches for cell-mediated tumoritropic delivery. ACS 
Nano. 2010; 4:625–631. [PubMed: 20121215] 
119. Roger M, et al. Mesenchymal stem cells as cellular vehicles for delivery of nanoparticles to brain 
tumors. Biomaterials. 2010; 31:8393–8401. [PubMed: 20688391] 
120. Choi MR, et al. A cellular trojan horse for delivery of therapeutic nanoparticles into tumors. Nano 
Lett. 2007; 7:3759–3765. [PubMed: 17979310] 
121. Alizadeh D, Zhang L, Hwang J, Schluep T, Badie B. Tumor-associated macrophages are 
predominant carriers of cyclodextrin-based nanoparticles into gliomas. Nanomedicine. 2010; 
6:382–390. [PubMed: 19836468] 
122. von Maltzahn G, et al. Nanoparticles that communicate in vivo to amplify tumour targeting. Nat 
Mater. 2011; 10:545–552. [PubMed: 21685903] 
123. Dreher MR, et al. Tumor vascular permeability, accumulation, and penetration of macromolecular 
drug carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006; 98:335–344. [PubMed: 16507830] 
124. Rudnick SI, et al. Influence of affinity and antigen internalization on the uptake and penetration of 
anti-HER2 antibodies in solid tumors. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:2250–2259. [PubMed: 21406401] 
125. Jain RK, Stylianopoulos T. Delivering nanomedicine to solid tumors. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2010; 
7:653–664. [PubMed: 20838415] 
126. Jain RK, Baxter LT. Mechanisms of heterogeneous distribution of monoclonal antibodies and 
other macromolecules in tumors: significance of elevated interstitial pressure. Cancer Res. 1988; 
48:7022–7032. [PubMed: 3191477] 
127. Awwad HK, el Naggar M, Mocktar N, Barsoum M. Intercapillary distance measurement as an 
indicator of hypoxia in carcinoma of the cervix uteri. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1986; 
12:1329–1333. [PubMed: 3759554] 
128. Yoshii Y, Sugiyama K. Intercapillary distance in the proliferating area of human glioma. Cancer 
Res. 1988; 48:2938–2941. [PubMed: 3359450] 
Shi et al.
Page 24
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 129. West CM, Cooper RA, Loncaster JA, Wilks DP, Bromley M. Tumor vascularity: a histological 
measure of angiogenesis and hypoxia. Cancer Res. 2001; 61:2907–2910. [PubMed: 11306466] 
130. Wong C, et al. Multistage nanoparticle delivery system for deep penetration into tumor tissue. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011; 108:2426–2431. This study demonstrated a multistage NP 
delivery strategy with long circulation for the EPR effect and deep tumour penetration for 
delivery into the dense collagen matrix of the tumour. [PubMed: 21245339] 
131. Chauhan VP, et al. Normalization of tumour blood vessels improves the delivery of 
nanomedicines in a size-dependent manner. Nat Nanotechnol. 2012; 7:383–388. [PubMed: 
22484912] 
132. Tong R, Chiang HH, Kohane DS. Photoswitchable nanoparticles for in vivo cancer chemotherapy. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110:19048–19053. [PubMed: 24191048] 
133. Sugahara KN, et al. Tissue-penetrating delivery of compounds and nanoparticles into tumors. 
Cancer Cell. 2009; 16:510–520. [PubMed: 19962669] 
134. Ren Y, et al. Targeted tumor-penetrating siRNA nanocomplexes for credentialing the ovarian 
cancer oncogene. ID4 Sci Transl Med. 2012; 4:147ra112.
135. Pittet MJ, Weissleder R. Intravital imaging. Cell. 2011; 147:983–991. [PubMed: 22118457] 
136. Chauhan VP, Jain RK. Strategies for advancing cancer nanomedicine. Nat Mater. 2013; 12:958–
962. [PubMed: 24150413] 
137. Bilodeau MT, et al. Pentarins: improved tumor targeting through nanoparticle encapsulation of 
miniaturized biologic drug conjugates. Cancer Res. 2015; 75(Suppl) abstr. 3674. 
138. Vlahov IR, Leamon CP. Engineering folate-drug conjugates to target cancer: from chemistry to 
clinic. Bioconjug Chem. 2012; 23:1357–1369. [PubMed: 22667324] 
139. Firer MA, Gellerman G. Targeted drug delivery for cancer therapy: the other side of antibodies. J 
Hematol Oncol. 2012; 5:70. [PubMed: 23140144] 
140. Tasciotti E, et al. Mesoporous silicon particles as a multistage delivery system for imaging and 
therapeutic applications. Nat Nanotechnol. 2008; 3:151–157. [PubMed: 18654487] 
141. Xu R, et al. An injectable nanoparticle generator enhances delivery of cancer therapeutics. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2016; 34:414–418. [PubMed: 26974511] 
142. Li HJ, et al. Stimuli-responsive clustered nanoparticles for improved tumor penetration and 
therapeutic efficacy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016; 113:4164–4169. [PubMed: 27035960] 
143. Whitehead KA, Langer R, Anderson DG. Knocking down barriers: advances in siRNA delivery. 
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2009; 8:129–138. [PubMed: 19180106] 
144. Davis ME. The first targeted delivery of siRNA in humans via a self-assembling, cyclodextrin 
polymer-based nanoparticle: from concept to clinic. Mol Pharm. 2009; 6:659–668. [PubMed: 
19267452] 
145. Zhu X, et al. Long-circulating siRNA nanoparticles for validating prohibitin1-targeted non-small 
cell lung cancer treatment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015; 112:7779–7784. [PubMed: 
26056316] 
146. Shi J, Xiao Z, Kamaly N, Farokhzad OC. Self-assembled targeted nanoparticles: evolution of 
technologies and bench to bedside translation. Acc Chem Res. 2011; 44:1123–1134. [PubMed: 
21692448] 
147. Farokhzad OC, Langer R. Impact of nanotechnology on drug delivery. ACS Nano. 2009; 3:16–20. 
[PubMed: 19206243] 
148. Howard M, et al. Vascular targeting of nanocarriers: perplexing aspects of the seemingly 
straightforward paradigm. ACS Nano. 2014; 8:4100–4132. [PubMed: 24787360] 
149. Pridgen EM, et al. Transepithelial transport of Fc-targeted nanoparticles by the neonatal fc 
receptor for oral delivery. Sci Transl Med. 2013; 5:213ra167. This paper described the 
development of a novel NP technology that can successfully traverse across the digestive tract, 
potentially opening up new opportunities in cancer nanomedicine beyond intravenous 
administration, including oral delivery of anticancer macromolecules. 
150. Cheng Y, Morshed RA, Auffinger B, Tobias AL, Lesniak MS. Multifunctional nanoparticles for 
brain tumor imaging and therapy. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2014; 66:42–57. [PubMed: 24060923] 
Shi et al.
Page 25
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 151. Zhu X, et al. Polymeric nanoparticles amenable to simultaneous installation of exterior targeting 
and interior therapeutic proteins. Angew Chem Int Ed. 2016; 55:3309–3312.
152. Leserman LD, Barbet J, Kourilsky F, Weinstein JN. Targeting to cells of fluorescent liposomes 
covalently coupled with monoclonal antibody or protein A. Nature. 1980; 288:602–604. 
[PubMed: 7442804] 
153. Heath TD, Fraley RT, Papahdjopoulos D. Antibody targeting of liposomes: cell specificity 
obtained by conjugation of F(ab’)2 to vesicle surface. Science. 1980; 210:539–541. [PubMed: 
7423203] 
154. Espelin CW, Leonard SC, Geretti E, Wickham TJ, Hendriks BS. Dual HER2 targeting with 
trastuzumab and liposomal-encapsulated doxorubicin (MM-302) demonstrates synergistic 
antitumor activity in breast and gastric cancer. Cancer Res. 2016; 76:1517–1527. [PubMed: 
26759238] 
155. Gratton SE, et al. The effect of particle design on cellular internalization pathways. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2008; 105:11613–11618. [PubMed: 18697944] 
156. Chithrani BD, Ghazani AA, Chan WC. Determining the size and shape dependence of gold 
nanoparticle uptake into mammalian cells. Nano Lett. 2006; 6:662–668. [PubMed: 16608261] 
157. Commisso C, et al. Macropinocytosis of protein is an amino acid supply route in Ras-transformed 
cells. Nature. 2013; 497:633–637. [PubMed: 23665962] 
158. Narayanan V, Weekes CD. Nanoparticle albumin-bound (nab)-paclitaxel for the treatment of 
pancreas ductal adenocarcinoma. Gastrointest Cancer. 2015; 5:11–19.
159. Thurber GM, et al. Single-cell and subcellular pharmacokinetic imaging allows insight into drug 
action in vivo. Nat Commun. 2013; 4:1504. [PubMed: 23422672] 
160. Chittajallu DR, et al. In vivo cell-cycle profiling in xenograft tumors by quantitative intravital 
microscopy. Nat Methods. 2015; 12:577–585. [PubMed: 25867850] 
161. Laughney AM, et al. Single-cell pharmacokinetic imaging reveals a therapeutic strategy to 
overcome drug resistance to the microtubule inhibitor eribulin. Sci Transl Med. 2014; 
6:261ra152.
162. Dubach JM, et al. In vivo imaging of specific drug-target binding at subcellular resolution. Nat 
Commun. 2014; 5:3946. [PubMed: 24867710] 
163. Kanasty R, Dorkin JR, Vegas A, Anderson D. Delivery materials for siRNA therapeutics. Nat 
Mater. 2013; 12:967–977. [PubMed: 24150415] 
164. Ozpolat B, Sood AK, Lopez-Berestein G. Liposomal siRNA nanocarriers for cancer therapy. Adv 
Drug Deliv Rev. 2014; 66:110–116. [PubMed: 24384374] 
165. Zuckerman JE, Davis ME. Clinical experiences with systemically administered siRNA-based 
therapeutics in cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2015; 14:843–856. [PubMed: 26567702] 
166. Chen Y, Zhu X, Zhang X, Liu B, Huang L. Nanoparticles modified with tumor-targeting scFv 
deliver siRNA and miRNA for cancer therapy. Mol Ther. 2010; 18:1650–1656. [PubMed: 
20606648] 
167. Gilleron J, et al. Image-based analysis of lipid nanoparticle-mediated siRNA delivery, 
intracellular trafficking and endosomal escape. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:638–646. [PubMed: 
23792630] 
168. Sahay G, et al. Efficiency of siRNA delivery by lipid nanoparticles is limited by endocytic 
recycling. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:653–658. [PubMed: 23792629] 
169. Xu ZP, et al. Subcellular compartment targeting of layered double hydroxide nanoparticles. J 
Control Release. 2008; 130:86–94. [PubMed: 18614254] 
170. Cheng FY, et al. Stabilizer-free poly(lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles for multimodal 
biomedical probes. Biomaterials. 2008; 29:2104–2112. [PubMed: 18276001] 
171. Boddapati SV, et al. Mitochondriotropic liposomes. J Liposome Res. 2005; 15:49–58. [PubMed: 
16194927] 
172. Boddapati SV, D’Souza GG, Erdogan S, Torchilin VP, Weissig V. Organelle-targeted 
nanocarriers: specific delivery of liposomal ceramide to mitochondria enhances its cytotoxicity in 
vitro and in vivo. Nano Lett. 2008; 8:2559–2563. [PubMed: 18611058] 
Shi et al.
Page 26
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 173. Marrache S, Dhar S. Engineering of blended nanoparticle platform for delivery of mitochondria-
acting therapeutics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:16288–16293. [PubMed: 22991470] 
174. Yameen B, et al. Insight into nanoparticle cellular uptake and intracellular targeting. J Control 
Release. 2014; 190:485–499. [PubMed: 24984011] 
175. Kalra AV, et al. Preclinical activity of nanoliposomal irinotecan is governed by tumor deposition 
and intratumor prodrug conversion. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:7003–7013. [PubMed: 25273092] 
176. Koizumi F, et al. Novel SN-38-incorporating polymeric micelles, NK012, eradicate vascular 
endothelial growth factor-secreting bulky tumors. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:10048–10056. [PubMed: 
17047068] 
177. Nakajima TE, et al. Antitumor effect of SN-38-releasing polymeric micelles, NK012, on 
spontaneous peritoneal metastases from orthotopic gastric cancer in mice compared with 
irinotecan. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:9318–9322. [PubMed: 19010905] 
178. Hamaguchi T, et al. NK105, a paclitaxel-incorporating micellar nanoparticle formulation, can 
extend in vivo antitumour activity and reduce the neurotoxicity of paclitaxel. Br J Cancer. 2005; 
92:1240–1246. [PubMed: 15785749] 
179. Mura S, Nicolas J, Couvreur P. Stimuli-responsive nanocarriers for drug delivery. Nat Mater. 
2013; 12:991–1003. This article reviewed the different types of stimuli-responsive NPs for 
controlled drug delivery. [PubMed: 24150417] 
180. Xu X, et al. Ultra-pH-responsive and tumor-penetrating nanoplatform for targeted siRNA delivery 
with robust anti-cancer efficacy. Angew Chem Int Ed. 2016; 55:7091–7094.
181. Wu J, et al. Hydrophobic cysteine poly(disulfide)-based redox-hypersensitive nanoparticle 
platform for cancer theranostics. Angew Chem Int Ed. 2015; 54:9218–9223.
182. Wang Y, et al. A nanoparticle-based strategy for the imaging of a broad range of tumours by 
nonlinear amplification of microenvironment signals. Nat Mater. 2014; 13:204–212. [PubMed: 
24317187] 
183. Paris JL, Cabanas MV, Manzano M, Vallet-Regi M. Polymer-grafted mesoporous silica 
nanoparticles as ultrasound-responsive drug carriers. ACS Nano. 2015; 9:11023–11033. 
[PubMed: 26456489] 
184. He Q, et al. NIR-responsive on-demand release of CO from metal carbonyl-caged graphene oxide 
nanomedicine. Adv Mater. 2015; 27:6741–6746. [PubMed: 26401893] 
185. Quail DF, Joyce JA. Microenvironmental regulation of tumor progression and metastasis. Nat 
Med. 2013; 19:1423–1437. [PubMed: 24202395] 
186. Psaila B, Lyden D. The metastatic niche: adapting the foreign soil. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:285–
293. [PubMed: 19308068] 
187. Neri D, Bicknell R. Tumour vascular targeting. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005; 5:436–446. [PubMed: 
15928674] 
188. Murphy EA, et al. Nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery to tumor vasculature suppresses 
metastasis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 105:9343–9348. [PubMed: 18607000] 
189. Hood JD, et al. Tumor regression by targeted gene delivery to the neovasculature. Science. 2002; 
296:2404–2407. [PubMed: 12089446] 
190. Santel A, et al. RNA interference in the mouse vascular endothelium by systemic administration 
of siRNA-lipoplexes for cancer therapy. Gene Ther. 2006; 13:1360–1370. [PubMed: 16625242] 
191. Fehring V, et al. Delivery of therapeutic siRNA to the lung endothelium via novel lipoplex 
formulation DACC. Mol Ther. 2014; 22:811–820. [PubMed: 24390281] 
192. Dahlman JE, et al. In vivo endothelial siRNA delivery using polymeric nanoparticles with low 
molecular weight. Nat Nanotechnol. 2014; 9:648–655. [PubMed: 24813696] 
193. Murakami M, et al. Docetaxel conjugate nanoparticles that target α-smooth muscle actin-
expressing stromal cells suppress breast cancer metastasis. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:4862–4871. 
[PubMed: 23907638] 
194. Mantovani A, Sica A. Macrophages, innate immunity and cancer: balance, tolerance, and 
diversity. Curr Opin Immunol. 2010; 22:231–237. [PubMed: 20144856] 
Shi et al.
Page 27
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 195. Zhang X, et al. Hydrazinocurcumin encapsuled nanoparticles “re-educate” tumor-associated 
macrophages and exhibit anti-tumor effects on breast cancer following STAT3 suppression. PLoS 
ONE. 2013; 8:e65896. [PubMed: 23825527] 
196. Zhu S, Niu M, O’Mary H, Cui Z. Targeting of tumor-associated macrophages made possible by 
PEG-sheddable, mannose-modified nanoparticles. Mol Pharm. 2013; 10:3525–3530. [PubMed: 
23901887] 
197. Sengupta S, et al. Temporal targeting of tumour cells and neovasculature with a nanoscale 
delivery system. Nature. 2005; 436:568–572. [PubMed: 16049491] 
198. Guo S, et al. Co-delivery of cisplatin and rapamycin for enhanced anticancer therapy through 
synergistic effects and microenvironment modulation. ACS Nano. 2014; 8:4996–5009. [PubMed: 
24720540] 
199. Park J, et al. Combination delivery of TGF-β inhibitor and IL-2 by nanoscale liposomal polymeric 
gels enhances tumour immunotherapy. Nat Mater. 2012; 11:895–905. [PubMed: 22797827] 
200. Mueller MM, Fusenig NE. Friends or foes—bipolar effects of the tumour stroma in cancer. Nat 
Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:839–849. [PubMed: 15516957] 
201. Schroeder A, et al. Treating metastatic cancer with nanotechnology. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 
12:39–50. This review highlighted the opportunities and challenges in developing 
nanotechnologies to treat metastatic cancer. 
202. Tsukigawa K, et al. Synthesis and therapeutic effect of styrene-maleic acid copolymer-conjugated 
pirarubicin. Cancer Sci. 2015; 106:270–278. [PubMed: 25529761] 
203. Dozono H, et al. HPMA copolymer-conjugated pirarubicin in multimodal treatment of a patient 
with stage IV prostate cancer and extensive lung and bone metastases. Target Oncol. 2016; 
11:101–106. [PubMed: 26194363] 
204. Swami A, et al. Engineered nanomedicine for myeloma and bone microenvironment targeting. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:10287–10292. This paper described NPs that target the bone 
microenvironment as an alternative targeting strategy for cancer. [PubMed: 24982170] 
205. Alexis F, Pridgen E, Molnar LK, Farokhzad OC. Factors affecting the clearance and 
biodistribution of polymeric nanoparticles. Mol Pharm. 2008; 5:505–515. [PubMed: 18672949] 
206. Perrault SD, Walkey C, Jennings T, Fischer HC, Chan WC. Mediating tumor targeting efficiency 
of nanoparticles through design. Nano Lett. 2009; 9:1909–1915. [PubMed: 19344179] 
207. Karnik R, et al. Microfluidic platform for controlled synthesis of polymeric nanoparticles. Nano 
Lett. 2008; 8:2906–2912. [PubMed: 18656990] 
208. Valencia PM, et al. Single-step assembly of homogenous lipid-polymeric and lipid-quantum dot 
nanoparticles enabled by microfluidic rapid mixing. ACS Nano. 2010; 4:1671–1679. [PubMed: 
20166699] 
209. Rhee M, et al. Synthesis of size-tunable polymeric nanoparticles enabled by 3D hydrodynamic 
flow focusing in single-layer microchannels. Adv Mater. 2011; 23:H79–H83. [PubMed: 
21433105] 
210. Chen D, et al. Rapid discovery of potent siRNA-containing lipid nanoparticles enabled by 
controlled microfluidic formulation. J Am Chem Soc. 2012; 134:6948–6951. [PubMed: 
22475086] 
211. Kim Y, et al. Mass production and size control of lipid-polymer hybrid nanoparticles through 
controlled microvortices. Nano Lett. 2012; 12:3587–3591. [PubMed: 22716029] 
212. Rolland JP, et al. Direct fabrication and harvesting of monodisperse, shape-specific 
nanobiomaterials. J Am Chem Soc. 2005; 127:10096–10100. [PubMed: 16011375] 
213. Xu J, et al. Future of the particle replication in nonwetting templates (PRINT) technology. Angew 
Chem Int Ed. 2013; 52:6580–6589. This article reviewed the PRINT technology and its 
application in the biomedical and material sciences. 
214. Toh YC, et al. A microfluidic 3D hepatocyte chip for drug toxicity testing. Lab Chip. 2009; 
9:2026–2035. [PubMed: 19568671] 
215. Huh D, et al. Reconstituting organ-level lung functions on a chip. Science. 2010; 328:1662–1668. 
This report described the development of ‘organ-on-a-chip’ and its potential for use in screening 
drugs and nanotherapeutics. [PubMed: 20576885] 
Shi et al.
Page 28
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 216. Albanese A, Lam AK, Sykes EA, Rocheleau JV, Chan WC. Tumour-on-a-chip provides an optical 
window into nanoparticle tissue transport. Nat Commun. 2013; 4:2718. [PubMed: 24177351] 
217. Choi SY, et al. Lessons from patient-derived xenografts for better in vitro modeling of human 
cancer. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2014; 79–80:222–237.
218. Sharpless NE, Depinho RA. The mighty mouse: genetically engineered mouse models in cancer 
drug development. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2006; 5:741–754. [PubMed: 16915232] 
219. Lin D, et al. High fidelity patient-derived xenografts for accelerating prostate cancer discovery 
and drug development. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:1272–1283. [PubMed: 24356420] 
220. Rongvaux A, et al. Development and function of human innate immune cells in a humanized 
mouse model. Nat Biotechnol. 2014; 32:364–372. [PubMed: 24633240] 
221. Hubbard GK, et al. Combined MYC activation and Pten loss are sufficient to create genomic 
instability and lethal metastatic prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 2016; 76:283–292. [PubMed: 
26554830] 
222. Lim JM, et al. Ultra-high throughput synthesis of nanoparticles with homogeneous size 
distribution using a coaxial turbulent jet mixer. ACS Nano. 2014; 8:6056–6065. [PubMed: 
24824296] 
223. Bangham AD, Horne RW. Negative staining of phospholipids and their structural modification by 
surface-active agents as observed in the electron microscope. J Mol Biol. 1964; 8:660–668. 
[PubMed: 14187392] 
224. Folkman J, Long DM. The use of silicone rubber as a carrier for prolonged drug therapy. J Surg 
Res. 1964; 4:139–142. [PubMed: 14130164] 
225. Langer R, Folkman J. Polymers for the sustained release of proteins and other macromolecules. 
Nature. 1976; 263:797–800. [PubMed: 995197] 
226. Samyang Biopharm. History. SamyangBiopharm. 2016. https://www.samyangbiopharm.com/eng/
Aboutus/history
227. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2013. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00689065?term
228. MagForce. MagForce Nanotechnologies AG receives European regulatory approval for its Nano 
Cancer® therapy. magforce.de. 2010. http://www.magforce.de/en/presse-investoren/news-events/
detail/article/magforce-nanotechnologies-ag-erhaelt-europaeische-zulassung-fuer-die-nano-
krebsR-therapie.html
229. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01300533?term
230. Inman, S. FDA approves second-line MM-398 regimen for metastatic pancreatic cancer. OncLive. 
2015. http://www.onclive.com/web-exclusives/fda-approves-mm-398-regimen-for-metastatic-
pancreatic-cancer
231. Stathopoulos GP, et al. Liposomal cisplatin combined with paclitaxel versus cisplatin and 
paclitaxel in non-small-cell lung cancer: a randomized phase III multicenter trial. Ann Oncol. 
2010; 21:2227–2232. [PubMed: 20439345] 
232. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01644890?term
233. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2008. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00377936?term
234. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2010. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00542048?term
235. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2013. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01537536?term
236. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2012. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00448305?term
237. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02494570?term
238. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02646319?term
Shi et al.
Page 29
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 239. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2015. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01380769?term
240. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02187302?term
241. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2014. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01652079?term
242. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02213744?term
243. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01792479?term
244. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02283320?term
245. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01812746?term
246. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2014. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00964080?term
247. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2014. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01702129?term
248. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02112656?term
249. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01696084?term
250. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00361842?term
251. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00848042?term
252. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2015. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01679470?term
253. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02379845?term
254. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02340156?term
255. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02340117?term
256. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01733238?term
257. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02226965?term
258. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2014. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01435720?term
259. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01808638?term
260. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2015. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01262235?term
261. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02191878?term
262. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02314052?term
263. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01829971?term
264. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2011. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00882180?term
Shi et al.
Page 30
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 265. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2012. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01158079?term
266. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01591356?term
267. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01505153?term
268. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2015. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00409188?term
269. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2012. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00952692?term
270. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2015. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01095848?term
271. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2012. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01052142?term
272. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2014. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00860522?term
273. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2012. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00356980?term
274. Tardi PG, et al. Drug ratio-dependent antitumor activity of irinotecan and cisplatin combinations 
in vitro and in vivo. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009; 8:2266–2275. [PubMed: 19671743] 
275. Zhang YF, Wang JC, Bian DY, Zhang X, Zhang Q. Targeted delivery of RGD-modified liposomes 
encapsulating both combretastatin A-4 and doxorubicin for tumor therapy: in vitro and in vivo 
studies. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2010; 74:467–473. [PubMed: 20064608] 
276. Shim G, et al. Trilysinoyl oleylamide-based cationic liposomes for systemic co-delivery of siRNA 
and an anticancer drug. J Control Release. 2011; 155:60–66. [PubMed: 20971142] 
277. Xu Z, et al. The characteristics and performance of a multifunctional nanoassembly system for the 
co-delivery of docetaxel and iSur-pDNA in a mouse hepatocellular carcinoma model. 
Biomaterials. 2010; 31:916–922. [PubMed: 19846217] 
278. Yang Y, et al. Nanoparticle delivery of pooled siRNA for effective treatment of non-small cell 
lung cancer. Mol Pharm. 2012; 9:2280–2289. [PubMed: 22686936] 
279. Ko YT, Falcao C, Torchilin VP. Cationic liposomes loaded with proapoptotic peptide D-
(KLAKLAK)2 and Bcl-2 antisense oligodeoxynucleotide G3139 for enhanced anticancer 
therapy. Mol Pharm. 2009; 6:971–977. [PubMed: 19317442] 
280. Lv S, et al. Co-delivery of doxorubicin and paclitaxel by PEG-polypeptide nanovehicle for the 
treatment of non-small cell lung cancer. Biomaterials. 2014; 35:6118–6129. [PubMed: 
24794923] 
281. Duan X, et al. Smart pH-sensitive and temporal-controlled polymeric micelles for effective 
combination therapy of doxorubicin and disulfiram. ACS Nano. 2013; 7:5858–5869. [PubMed: 
23734880] 
282. Tang S, et al. Inhibition of metastasis and growth of breast cancer by pH-sensitive poly (β-amino 
ester) nanoparticles co-delivering two siRNA and paclitaxel. Biomaterials. 2015; 48:1–15. 
[PubMed: 25701027] 
283. Ediriwickrema A, Zhou J, Deng Y, Saltzman WM. Multi-layered nanoparticles for combination 
gene and drug delivery to tumors. Biomaterials. 2014; 35:9343–9354. [PubMed: 25112935] 
284. Wang Y, Gao S, Ye WH, Yoon HS, Yang YY. Co-delivery of drugs and DNA from cationic core-
shell nanoparticles self-assembled from a biodegradable copolymer. Nat Mater. 2006; 5:791–796. 
[PubMed: 16998471] 
285. Lee SJ, et al. Co-delivery of VEGF and Bcl-2 dual-targeted siRNA polymer using a single 
nanoparticle for synergistic anti-cancer effects in vivo. J Control Release. 2015; 220:631–641. 
[PubMed: 26307351] 
286. Devulapally R, et al. Polymer nanoparticles mediated codelivery of antimiR-10b and antimiR-21 
for achieving triple negative breast cancer therapy. ACS Nano. 2015; 9:2290–2302. [PubMed: 
25652012] 
Shi et al.
Page 31
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 287. Xu X, et al. Enhancing tumor cell response to chemotherapy through nanoparticle-mediated 
codelivery of siRNA and cisplatin prodrug. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110:18638–18643. 
[PubMed: 24167294] 
288. Deng ZJ, et al. Layer-by-layer nanoparticles for systemic codelivery of an anticancer drug and 
siRNA for potential triple-negative breast cancer treatment. ACS Nano. 2013; 7:9571–9584. 
[PubMed: 24144228] 
289. Jiang T, Mo R, Bellotti A, Zhou J, Gu Z. Gel-liposome-mediated co-delivery of anticancer 
membrane-associated proteins and small-molecule drugs for enhanced therapeutic efficacy. Adv 
Funct Mater. 2014; 24:2295–2304.
290. Zheng M, et al. Single-step assembly of DOX/ICG loaded lipid—polymer nanoparticles for 
highly effective chemo-photothermal combination therapy. ACS Nano. 2013; 7:2056–2067. 
[PubMed: 23413798] 
291. Werner ME, et al. Folate-targeted nanoparticle delivery of chemo- and radiotherapeutics for the 
treatment of ovarian cancer peritoneal metastasis. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:8548–8554. [PubMed: 
21843904] 
292. Han L, et al. Plasmid pORF-hTRAIL and doxorubicin co-delivery targeting to tumor using 
peptide-conjugated polyamidoamine dendrimer. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:1242–1252. [PubMed: 
20971503] 
293. Lee IH, et al. Targeted chemoimmunotherapy using drug-loaded aptamer-dendrimer 
bioconjugates. J Control Release. 2011; 155:435–441. [PubMed: 21641946] 
294. Fang JH, et al. Magnetic core-shell nanocapsules with dual-targeting capabilities and co-delivery 
of multiple drugs to treat brain gliomas. Adv Healthc Mater. 2014; 3:1250–1260. [PubMed: 
24623647] 
295. Wang L, et al. Synergistic anticancer effect of RNAi and photothermal therapy mediated by 
functionalized single-walled carbon nanotubes. Biomaterials. 2013; 34:262–274. [PubMed: 
23046752] 
296. Xiao Z, et al. DNA self-assembly of targeted near-infrared-responsive gold nanoparticles for 
cancer thermo-chemotherapy. Angew Chem Int Ed. 2012; 51:11853–11857.
297. Liu T, et al. Drug delivery with PEGylated MoS2 nano-sheets for combined photothermal and 
chemotherapy of cancer. Adv Mater. 2014; 26:3433–3440. [PubMed: 24677423] 
Shi et al.
Page 32
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Historical timeline of major developments in the field of cancer nanomedicine
EPR, enhanced permeability and retention; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; nab, 
nanoparticle albumin bound; NP, nanoparticle; PLGA-PEG, poly(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic 
acid)-b poly(ethylene glycol); PRINT, particle replication in non wetting template; siRNA, 
small interfering RNA.
Shi et al.
Page 33
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. The impact of nanoparticle properties on systemic delivery to tumours
Nanoparticles (NPs) can be made from different materials and have various physicochemical 
properties (for example, size, geometry, surface features, elasticity and stiffness, among 
others) and can be modified with a myriad of targeting ligands of different surface density 
(part a). NP properties affect the biological processes involved in the delivery to tumour 
tissues, including interactions with serum proteins (part b), blood circulation (part c), 
biodistribution (part d), extravasation to perivascular tumour microenvironment through the 
leaky tumour vessels and penetration within the tumour tissue (part e), and tumour cell 
targeting and intracellular trafficking (part f). NPs can also be designed to control the release 
profile of payloads (part g). ID, injected dose.
Shi et al.
Page 34
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Potential markers for predicting EPR effect and nanotherapeutic efficacy
a | Companion imaging agents (for example, ferumoxytol nanoparticle (NP)) have been 
applied to predict the accumulation of poly(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic acid)-b-poly(ethylene 
glycol) (PLGA-PEG) NP-encapsulated docetaxel and its anticancer activity in solid tumours, 
and ferumoxytol is currently in clinical trials to determine its feasibility as a predictive 
marker for the liposomal irinotecan MM-398. b | Therapeutic NPs labelled with imaging 
agents (for example, radioisotopes), also called theranostic NPs, have been used to monitor 
their biodistribution and tumour accumulation using various imaging techniques both 
preclinically and clinically. c | Serum and tissue biomarkers may also serve as surrogate 
markers for the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect, as suggested by one 
recent example showing strong correlation of liposome accumulation in tumours with the 
relative ratio of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) to tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 
1 (TIMP1) in the circulation.
Shi et al.
Page 35
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Nanoparticle targeting of the tumour microenvironment and the premetastatic niche
Targeting of the tumour vasculature or stromal cells in the tumour microenvironment (part a) 
and the premetastatic microenvironments such as the bone marrow niche, where induction of 
the osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells enhances bone strength and 
volume (part b). Cell-specific targeting can be achieved via the modification of nanoparticles 
(NPs) with ligands that bind to specific receptors (for example, αvβ3 integrin and mannose 
receptor) on the surface of tumour endothelial cells, stromal cells or other target cells. It 
should be noted that even without targeting ligands, NPs can be engineered for preferential 
cellular uptake. The payloads released from NPs localized in tumours or premetastatic 
tissues can also be nonspecifically taken up by these cells.
Shi et al.
Page 36
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Shi et al.
Page 37
Table 1
Examples of clinical-stage nanomedicines for cancer therapy
Therapy
modality
Generic name
and/or proprietary
name
Nanotechnology
platform
Active
pharmaceutical
ingredients
Cancer type
Status
Refs
Chemotherapy: non-targeted delivery
Liposomal doxorubicin (Doxil)
Pegylated liposome
Doxorubicin
HIV-related Kaposi sarcoma, ovarian cancer, and 
multiple myeloma
Approved by FDA
6
Liposomal daunorubicin (DaunoXome)
Liposome
Daunorubicin
HIV-related Kaposi sarcoma
Approved by FDA
6
Liposomal vincristine (Marqibo)
Liposome
Vincristine sulfate
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
Approved by FDA
6
Liposomal irinotecan (Onivyde or 
MM-398)
Pegylated liposome
Irinotecan
Post-gemcitabine metastatic pancreatic cancer
Approved by FDA
230
Liposomal doxorubicin (Myocet)
Liposome
Doxorubicin
Metastatic breast cancer
Approved in Europe 
and Canada
6
Mifamurtide (Mepact)
Liposome
Muramyl tripeptide phosphatidyl-ethanolamine
Nonmetastatic, resectable osteosarcoma
Approved in Europe
6
Nab-paclitaxel (Abraxane)
Albumin NP
Paclitaxel
Breast, lung and pancreatic cancer
Approved by FDA
6
SMANCS
Polymer conjugate
Neocarzinostatin
Liver and renal cancer
Approved in Japan
6
Polymeric micelle paclitaxel (Genexol-
PM)
Polymeric micelle
Paclitaxel
Breast cancer and NSCLC
Approved in Korea
6
Liposomal cisplatin (Lipoplatin)
Pegylated liposome
Cisplatin
NSCLC
Phase III
231
NK-105
Polymeric micelle
Paclitaxel
Metastatic or recurrent breast cancer
Phase III
232
Liposomal paclitaxel (EndoTAG-1)
Liposome
Paclitaxel
Pancreatic cancer, liver metastases and HER2 
negative and triple-negative breast cancer
Phase II
233–236
Nab-rapamycin (ABI-009)
Albumin NP
Rapamycin
Advanced malignant PEComa and advanced 
cancer with mTOR mutations
Phase II
237,238
CRLX 101
Polymeric NP
Camptothecin
NSCLC, metastatic renal cell carcinoma and 
recurrent ovarian, tubal or peritoneal cancer
Phase II
239–241
Chemotherapy: targeted delivery
MM-302
HER2 targeting liposome
Doxorubicin
HER2-positive breast cancer
Phase II/III
242
BIND-014
PSMA-targeting polymeric NP
Docetaxel
NSCLC and mCRPC
Phase II
243–245
MBP-426
TfR targeting liposome
Oxaliplatin
Gastric, oesophageal and gastro-oesophageal 
adenocarcinoma
Phase I/II
246
Anti EGFR immunoliposomes loaded with 
doxorubicin
EGFR targeting liposome
Doxorubicin
Solid tumours
Phase I
247
Chemotherapy: stimuli-responsive delivery
ThermoDox
Liposome
Doxorubicin
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Phase III
248
Chemotherapy: combinatorial delivery
Liposomal cytarabine–daunorubicin 
(CPX-351 or Vyxeos)
Liposome
Cytarabine and daunorubicin (5:1)
High-risk acute myeloid leukaemia
Phase III
249
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Shi et al.
Page 38
Therapy
modality
Generic name
and/or proprietary
name
Nanotechnology
platform
Active
pharmaceutical
ingredients
Cancer type
Status
Refs
CPX-1
Liposome
Irinotecan and floxuridine (1:1)
Advanced colorectal cancer
Phase II
250
Hyperthermia
NanoTherm
Iron oxide NP
NA
Glioblastoma
Approved in Europe
6
AuroLase
Silica core with a gold nanoshell
NA
Head and neck cancer, and primary and metastatic 
lung tumours
Pilot study
251,252
Radiotherapy
NBTXR3
Hafnium oxide NP
NA
Adult soft tissue sarcoma
Phase II/III
253
Gene or RNAi therapy
SGT53
TfR targeting liposome
Plasmid encoding normal human wild-type p53 
DNA
Recurrent glioblastoma and metastatic pancreatic 
cancer
Phase II
254,255
PNT2258
Liposome
DNA oligonucleotide against BCL-2
Relapsed or refractory non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Phase II
256,257
SNS01-T
Polyethylenimine NP
siRNA against eIF5A and plasmid expressing eIF5A 
K50R
Relapsed or refractory B cell malignancies
Phase I/II
258
Atu027
Liposome
siRNA against protein kinase N3
Advanced or metastatic pancreatic cancer
Phase I/II
259
TKM-080301
Lipid NP
siRNA against PLK1
Neuroendocrine tumours, adrenocortical 
carcinoma and advanced hepatocellular 
carcinoma
Phase I/II
260,261
DCR MYC
Lipid NP
Dicer-substrate siRNA against MYC
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Phase I/II
262
MRX34
Liposome
miR 34 mimic
Primary liver cancer, solid tumours and 
haematological malignancies
Phase I
263
CALAA-01
TfR targeting polymeric NP
siRNA against ribonucleotide reductase M2
Solid tumours
Phase I
227
ALN-VSP02
Lipid NP
siRNAs against KSP and VEGFA
Solid tumours
Phase I
264,265
siRNA EPHA2 DOPC
Liposome
siRNA against EPHA2
Advanced cancers
Phase I
266
pbi shRNA STMN1 LP
Lipid NP
shRNA against stathmin 1
Advanced and/or metastatic cancer
Phase I
267
Immunotherapy
Tecemotide
Liposome
MUC1 antigen
NSCLC
Phase III
268
dHER2 + AS15
Liposome
Recombinant HER2 (dHER2) antigen and AS15 
adjuvant
Metastatic breast cancer
Phase I/II
269
DPX-0907
Liposome
Multi-tumour associated antigens
HLA-A2-positive advanced stage ovarian, breast 
and prostate cancer
Phase I
270
Lipovaxin-MM
Liposome
Melanoma antigens
Malignant melanoma
Phase I
271
JVRS 100
Lipid NP
Plasmid DNA
Relapsed or refractory leukaemia
Phase I
272
CYT 6091
Colloidal gold NP
TNF
Advanced solid tumours
Phase I
273
EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; eIF5A, eukaryotic initiation factor 5A; EPHA2, ephrin type A receptor 2; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; HLA A2, human leukocyte antigen A2; KSP, kinesin spindle protein (also known as KIF11); mCRPC, metastatic 
castration resistant prostate cancer; miR, microRNA; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; MUC1, membrane bound mucin 1; NA, not applicable; nab, nanoparticle albumin bound; NP, nanoparticle; NSCLC, non small cell lung cancer; PEComa, perivascular epithelioid cell 
tumours; PEG, poly(ethylene glycol); PLK1, polo like kinase 1; PSMA, prostate specific membrane antigen; RNAi, RNA interference; shRNA, short hairpin RNA; siRNA, small interfering RNA; SMANCS, poly(styrene co maleic acid) conjugated neocarzinostatin; TfR, 
transferrin receptor; TNF, tumour necrosis factor; VEGFA, vascular endothelial growth factor A.
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Shi et al.
Page 39
Table 2
In vivo examples of nanoparticle-mediated combination therapies for cancer treatment in mouse tumour 
models
Nanotechnology platform
Active pharmaceutical ingredients
Therapeutic mechanism
Tumour model
Refs
Organic NPs
Liposomes or lipid-based 
NPs
Irinotecan and cisplatin
Combination of chemotherapies
SCLC
274
Combretastatin and doxorubicin
Combining anti-angiogenesis and 
chemotherapy
Melanoma
275
Doxorubicin and antisense 
oligonucleotides
Combination of chemotherapy and 
antisense therapy (targeting MRP1 
and BCL 2)
NSCLC
54
Vorinostat and siRNA
Combination of chemotherapy and 
RNAi therapy (targeting MCL1)
Cervical cancer
276
Docetaxel and DNA
Combination of chemotherapy and 
gene therapy using survivin 
suppressor
Hepatocellular carcinoma
277
siRNAs
RNAi therapies against MDM2, 
MYC and VEGFA
NSCLC
278
Oligonucleotide G3139 and D-
(KLAKLAK)2 peptide
Combining antisense therapy 
(targeting BCL-2) and peptide-
enhancing apoptosis
Melanoma
279
Polymeric micelles or NPs
Doxorubicin and paclitaxel
Combination of chemotherapies
NSCLC
280
Doxorubicin and disulfiram
Combination of chemotherapy and 
anti-drug resistance
Drug-resistant breast cancer
281
Paclitaxel and siRNAs
Combination of chemotherapy and 
RNAi therapy (targeting SNAIL 
and TWIST)
Breast cancer
282
Camptothecin and DNA
Combination of chemotherapy and 
gene therapy using TRAIL 
encoded plasmid
Colon cancer
283
Paclitaxel and DNA
Combination of chemotherapy and 
gene therapy using IL-12-encoded 
plasmid
Breast cancer
284
siRNAs
RNAi therapies against VEGFA 
and BCL 2
Prostate cancer
285
Antisense oligonucleotides
Antisense therapies against 
miRNAs miR 10b and miR 21
Triple-negative breast cancer
286
Lipid–polymer hybrid NPs
Combretastatin and doxorubicin
Combining anti-angiogenesis and 
chemotherapy
Melanoma and Lewis lung 
carcinoma
197
Cisplatin and siRNAs
Combination of chemotherapy and 
RNAi therapy (targeting REV1 
and REV3L)
Prostate and breast cancer
287
Doxorubicin and siRNA
Combination of chemotherapy and 
RNAi therapy against MRP1
Triple-negative breast cancer
288
Doxorubicin and TRAIL
Combination of chemotherapy and 
cytokine-induced apoptosis
Breast cancer
289
TGFβ inhibitor SB505124 and IL-2
Enhancing tumour immunotherapy
Melanoma
199
siRNAs and miRNA
Combination of RNAi therapy 
(targeting MYC, MDM2 and 
VEGFA) and miR 34a induced 
apoptosis
Lung metastasis
166
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Shi et al.
Page 40
Nanotechnology platform
Active pharmaceutical ingredients
Therapeutic mechanism
Tumour model
Refs
Cisplatin and pyrolipid
Combination of chemotherapy and 
photodynamic therapy
Head and neck cancer
290
Paclitaxel and yittrium-90
Combination of chemotherapy and 
radiotherapy
Ovarian intraperitoneal metastasis
291
Dendrimers
Doxorubicin and DNA
Combination of chemotherapy and 
gene therapy using TRAIL 
encoded plasmid
Liver cancer
292
Doxorubicin and CpG 
oligonucleotides
Combination of chemotherapy and 
immunotherapy
Prostate cancer
293
Inorganic NPs
Iron oxide NP
Doxorubicin and curcumin
Combination of chemotherapies
Glioma
294
Graphene
Doxorubicin and TRAIL
Combination of chemotherapy and 
cytokine-induced apoptosis
NSCLC
44
Carbon nanotube
siRNA
Combination of hyperthermia and 
RNAi therapy
Prostate cancer
295
Gold nanorod
Doxorubicin
Combination of hyperthermia and 
chemotherapy
Cervical cancer
296
MoS2 nanosheet
Doxorubicin
Combination of hyperthermia and 
chemotherapy
Breast cancer
297
IL, interleukin; MCL1, myeloid cell leukaemia 1; MoS2, molybdenum sulfide; miRNA, microRNA; MRP1, multi drug resistance associated 
protein 1 (also known as ABCC1); NPs, nanoparticles; NSCLC, non small cell lung cancer; RNAi, RNA interference; SCLC, small cell lung 
cancer; siRNA, small interfering RNA; TGFβ, transforming growth factor-β; TRAIL, tumour necrosis factor (TNF) related apoptosis inducing 
ligand; VEGFA, vascular endothelial growth factor A.
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 30.
