 REVIEW ARTICLE
Universal screening for chronic hepatitis C virus
Mitchell L. Shiffman
Liver Institute of Virginia, Bon Secours Health System, Richmond and Newport News, VA, USA
DOI: 10.1111/liv.13012
Abstract
Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection affects an estimated 123 million persons worldwide and is the leading cause of cir-
rhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma in most countries. Approximately 75% of persons with chronic HCV were born between
the years 1945–1965 and screening of patients in this birth cohort is now advocated. Unfortunately, these recommendations
are not readily applied and a sizable population of infected persons who could benefit from treatment fall outside the birth
cohort. Universal screening for HCV would be optimal. However, the primary limitation once patients are identified is access-
ing treatment which remains restricted in most countries.
Keywords
hepatitis C virus – risk factors – sustained virological response – universal screening
Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a world-
wide problem. It is currently estimated that approxi-
mately 3 million persons in the USA have chronic HCV
infection and worldwide, the rate of chronic HCV
approaches 123 million (1, 2). On average, 2% of the
world’s population is infected with HCV. The highest
prevalence is found in Egypt where 22% of the entire
population has HCV; the majority with genotype 4 (3).
Chronic HCV is the most common cause of cirrhosis
and in those countries where hepatitis B is not endemic;
this virus is the major etiologic factor leading to hepato-
cellular carcinoma (HCC). In the USA, many countries
throughout Europe and in Japan approximately 70% of
all persons with HCC have cirrhosis from decades of
chronic HCV infection (4).
Studies from both the USA and France have demon-
strated that the majority of persons currently infected
with HCV acquired this infection during the 1980s
through the transfusion of contaminated blood prod-
ucts before HCV was identified and removed from the
blood supply and through intravenous or intranasal
drug use (5, 6). Since 1991–1992, when anti-HCV test-
ing of the blood supply was initiated in many countries
throughout the world and the practice of reusing syr-
inges and other medical equipment ceased, drug use has
become the single greatest risk factor for transmitting
HCV infection (7). The majority of persons with HCV
worldwide have had chronic infection for more than
20–30 years. This accounts for the rising rates of cirrho-
sis, HCC and liver-related mortality which are not
expected to peak until the year 2020 (8, 9).
For the first time since HCV was identified in 1989,
we now have the tools to eradicate HCV in nearly all
patients with this infection. Highly effective oral anti-
viral therapy is now available for all genotypes of
chronic HCV. These treatments offer a sustained viro-
logic response (SVR) and ‘cure’ HCV in over 95% of
nearly all patient subgroups in just 8–24 weeks. The
specific combination of anti-viral agents and the dura-
tion of therapy currently utilized for HCV treatment is
dependent upon the viral genotype, viral load, degree of
liver fibrosis, and whether the patient has, or has not,
received previous HCV treatment. The data to support
the use of these agents and the treatment algorithms
developed for the various subpopulations of patients
with HCV are detailed in many of the other manuscripts
included in this supplement to Liver International.
However, simply having an effective treatment for
HCV is insufficient to impact the natural history of the
disease. A treatment for HCV with a cure rate of 80%
will only have a marginal impact on liver-related mor-
tality unless this therapy is applied to the entire affected
Correspondence
Mitchell L. Shiffman, MD, Liver Institute of Virginia, 5855 Bremo Road, Suite 509, Richmond, VA 23229, USA
Tel: +804 977 8920; Fax: +804 282 2918
e-mail: Mitchell_shiffman@bshsi.org
Handling editor: Francesco Negro
Received 27 October 2015; Accepted 27 October 2015
Liver Int. 2016; 36 (Suppl. S1): 62–66
Liver International (2015)
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
62
Liver International ISSN 1478-3223
 population. When applied to 25%, 50%, 75% and the
entire affected population a curative treatment for HCV
is associated with a reduction in liver-related mortality
by only 15%, 30%, 50% and 70% respectively (8). It is
therefore apparent that an effective strategy is required
to identify all persons infected with HCV. It is also
important that treatment is provided to infected persons
and mechanisms to prevent re-infection in those who
have been cured but continue to participate in risky
behaviors is established. Universal screening to identify
all persons infected with HCV that is then linked to uni-
versal treatment is essential we are to eradicate this
virus.
Identifying patients with HCV
In 1998 the Center for Disease Control (CDC) in the
USA recommended that patients with recognized risk
factors are the most likely to be infected and should be
screened for HCV (10). The risk behaviors found to be
associated with infection include past or current intra-
venous drug use, past or current intranasal drug use,
receiving a blood transfusion, an organ transplant or tis-
sue graft prior to 1992 when these products were first
screened for anti-HCV, hemodialysis, receiving a tattoo
in an unregulated setting, incarceration, healthcare
workers who sustained a needle stick or mucosal splash
exposure from a patient with HCV, and babies born to
mothers with chronic HCV. Of these risk factors, using
intravenous and intranasal drug are the most prevalent
in society. Unfortunately, strategies which are based
upon a medical provider asking a patient about their
risk behaviors for HCV have largely failed to identify the
majority of infected patients (11). It is currently esti-
mated that 45–85% of selected populations with chronic
HCV are unaware they are infected. Only 7% of persons
with HCV identified through the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) resulted
from risk factor based screening (12).
The highest rate of HCV infection in the USA is in
persons born between the years 1945–1965. The inci-
dence of HCV in this ‘baby boomer’ cohort is 3.25%.
This is nearly five-fold higher than in any other age
grouping. Persons with HCV within this age cohort
account for about 75% of all persons with HCV in the
USA (13). In 2012, both the CDC and the United States
public health task force recommended that all persons
born within this two decade period receive one-time
testing for anti-HCV (11, 13).
The more difficult question is how birth cohort
screening should be implemented. It has been advocated
that incorporating queries and reminder flags into the
electronic medical record (EMR) would enable physi-
cians to recognize the need for HCV screening (14).
However, many reminder flags regarding various health
maintenance issues already exist in the EMR, many of
these flags are frequently triggered during any given
office visit and the physician often has limited time to
address all of these queries with the patient. As opposed
to many countries throughout the world with a national
healthcare service, there is no single nationwide EMR in
the USA where a medical provider can verify that birth
cohort screening actually occurred. This creates both
missed opportunities and duplication of HCV screening
in the multifaceted and often disjoint USA healthcare
environment. I have personally seen many patients with
multiple anti-HCV tests performed in several different
physician offices and several different hospital systems.
The hospital setting is a potentially good location to
conduct birth cohort screening. In prospective studies
4.3% of 2325 baby boomers who visited the emergency
department and 4.2% of 3168 hospitalized patients were
found to have chronic HCV infection (15, 16). These val-
ues are somewhat higher than reported in the general
baby boomer population and reflect the observation that
patients who come to the hospital typically have multiple
co-morbidities and a higher prevalence for HCV risk fac-
tors than the general population. In contrast, only 0.2–
0.8% of baby boomers who were tested for HCV when
the presented for routine colon cancer screening colono-
scopy were found to have chronic HCV (17, 18).
There is little doubt that birth cohort screening is
clearly preferable to risk-factor based screening. A recent
study has demonstrated that 68% of persons with HCV
infection would have been identified through a birth
cohort testing strategy, compared to only 27% with a
risk-based approach (19). However, birth cohort screen-
ing is still inefficient, it is not applied to the entire birth
cohort who presents for medical care, it leaves more than
25% of those with chronic HCV infection unrecognized
and therefore falls far short of Universal screening.
Linkage to care
Identifying HCV is of little utility unless patients are
then linked to a provider who can appropriately evalu-
ate and treat HCV infection. In a recent EMR review
Key points
• Birth cohort screening does not recognize a signifi-
cant fraction of persons with chronic hepatitis C
virus (HCV) and falls short of Universal screening.
• Improved strategies which link patients identified
with HCV to providers who can properly evaluate
and treat this disease is required.
• Restricted access to HCV medication by insurance
carriers and governmental bodies is the single
greatest impediment to treating HCV infection
today.
• Universal screening for HCV can identify patients
with chronic HCV and co-morbidities which
enhance fibrosis progression.
Liver Int. 2016; 36 (Suppl. S1): 62–66
Liver International (2016)
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
63
Shiffman
Universal screening for chronic HCV
 from a large healthcare system, no action was taken in
30% of patients who tested positive for HCV (20). Other
studies have demonstrated that only about 15% of per-
sons diagnosed with chronic HCV have received treat-
ment (21). The failure to link diagnosis to treatment is
multifactorial. However, for the past 20 years the single
greatest impediment to treatment has been the side
effects of interferon and ribavirin based therapy, which
are contraindications to utilize these medications in
patients with cardiac, renal, neurological, psychiatric and
other co-morbidities (22). Interferon and ribavirin could
also not be utilized in patients with advanced cirrhosis.
In addition, many patients without any contraindication
to interferon and ribavirin based therapy have previously
refused HCV treatment simply because of the side effect
profile and low SVR rate associated with these medica-
tions. Medication side effects should no longer be a bar-
rier to HCV treatment. The current oral anti-viral agents
are extremely well tolerated, associated with minimal
adverse effects, can be utilized in most patients who had
contraindications to interferon based therapy, are admin-
istered for only 8–24 weeks and yield SVR rates that
exceed 95% in almost all patient populations.
What may be the major challenge moving forward is
the limited number of providers who currently evaluate
and treat patients with chronic HCV. Birth cohort
screening, despite its short comings, will no doubt iden-
tify many more patients with HCV and unless the cur-
rent providers are able to become more efficient, or the
provider base increases, patients will have to wait longer
to be evaluated and initiate HCV treatment. Patients
who are motivated to seek treatment will sustain this
wait and/or overcome other obstacles to achieve HCV
treatment. In contrast, patients who lack the motivation
or the education to overcome the barriers of the health-
care system will likely fade and loose access to care.
Patient care coordinators can assist patients in navigat-
ing and overcoming these obstacles, receive specialty
care and achieve successful HCV therapy (23,24). The
simplicity of the current treatment should entice more
physicians, including primary care providers, to evaluate
and treat HCV. Patients with cirrhosis or significant co-
morbidities could be referred to specialists.
Limitations to universal treatment
The primary reason for universal screening is to identify
and then universally treat all patients with chronic HCV
and reduce liver-related mortality. The major impedi-
ment to this goal is the cost of the current HCV thera-
pies and the total cost required for Universal treatment.
At the 8th Paris Hepatitis Conference in January 2015,
an Around the World Table panel discussion addressed
‘How to improve access to therapy?’ for all patients with
chronic HCV. Speakers from various European, North
and
South
American
countries
resonated
similar
themes. It became readily apparent that many private
insurance carriers and governmental agencies have
addressed this issue simply by restricting access to HCV
treatment except for those patients with histologically
advanced bridging fibrosis or cirrhosis (fibrosis stage 3
and 4). While it is true that patients with advanced
fibrosis and cirrhosis are at the greatest risk for develop-
ing complications of end-stage liver disease and require
treatment; it is not true that patients with histologically
milder forms of the disease are devoid of disease risk.
The extrahepatic manifestations of HCV including cryo-
globulinemia, glomerulonephritis and chronic kidney
disease, neuropathy, diabetes mellitus and lymphoma
contribute to significant morbidity and mortality in
many patients with histologically mild HCV. Achieving
SVR prevents patients from developing these extrahep-
atic manifestations. However, eradication of HCV is not
typically associated with resolution of the extrahepatic
injury once it has occurred (24). A healthcare policy
focusing on only histologic injury as the basis for treat-
ment is therefore shortsighted. Pharmaceutical manu-
factures, insurance carriers and governmental agencies
must negotiate a settlement that is equitable for all par-
ties that will allow all patients with chronic HCV the
ability to access treatment.
Identifying co-morbidities of fibrosis progression
An important aspect of Universal screening is to identify
patients with co-morbidities which contribute to liver dis-
ease progression. The most important of these co-mor-
bidities includes alcohol use, non-alcoholic fatty liver
(NAFL), HIV co-infection, and co-infection with hepatitis
B virus (HBV). Patients who cannot access HCV treat-
ment and must defer therapy are at greater risk for fibro-
sis progression if they have one or more of these co-
morbidities. These patients should probably be monitored
at more frequent intervals than HCV patients without fac-
tors which promote liver injury. Patients in whom HCV
has been eradicated remain at risk for fibrosis progression
if these co-morbidities are not addressed.
Several studies have demonstrated that use of regular
alcohol consumption leads to more rapid fibrosis pro-
gression, increases the risk of developing cirrhosis and
HCC in patients with chronic HCV (25, 26). The
amount of ‘safe’ alcohol intake in patients with chronic
HCV is controversial with many authorities stating that
only no alcohol is acceptable in this setting. Limiting
alcohol to no more than a single beverage on special
occasions seems to be a reasonable and safe compromise
for patients without cirrhosis (27, 28). All patients
found to have chronic HCV should be counselled
regarding alcohol intake. Patients in whom HCV is
cured should continue to limit their alcohol use to allow
for fibrosis regression and return of liver histology to
normal (29). Patients with cirrhosis should not con-
sume alcohol even after achieving SVR unless it can be
demonstrated that they have resolved cirrhosis.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver has also been shown to
cause fibrosis progression in patients with chronic HCV
Liver Int. 2016; 36 (Suppl. S1): 62–66
Liver International (2016)
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
64
Universal screening for chronic HCV
Shiffman
 (30). Obese persons with metabolic syndrome and
chronic HCV should be counselled regarding NAFL,
diet, exercise and encouraged to lose weight. Although
the need to perform a liver biopsy for diagnosis and
staging of HCV has largely been replaced by non-inva-
sive techniques such as Fibroscan and serum markers it
would not be unreasonable to consider liver biopsy for
diagnosis of steatohepatitis in a patient with chronic
HCV. This is especially true in a patient with features of
metabolic syndrome who continues to have elevated
liver transaminases after achieving SVR.
Patients who are co-infected with HCV and HIV
and/or HBV have been shown to have more rapid fibro-
sis progression compared to patients with HCV mono-
infection (31, 32). Patients discovered to have HIV and/
or HBV co-infection should have these viruses treated
with an appropriate anti-viral regimen.
Are there persons in whom HCV treatment should
not be considered
Given that the current all-oral anti-viral regimens are
highly effective and easy to administer one must ask; is
there any patient with HCV who should not be treated.
Several scenarios do indeed exist. Patients with acute
HCV have a 15–20% chance of spontaneous resolution
(33). It is best that these patients be monitored and
allowed to resolve the infection spontaneously if they can.
Treatment could be offered to those patients who develop
chronic HCV. Patients with histologically mild HCV but
severe co-morbid health issues and a limited life expec-
tancy also do not require treatment. It is unlikely that
HCV will affect morbidity or mortality in such patients.
The treatment of chronic HCV in persons who are
currently using intravenous narcotic drugs and have no
plans to stop this behavior is highly controversial. On
the one hand, eradication of HCV in this population
could theoretically reduce the spread of HCV. However,
as opposed to HIV, where chronic anti-viral therapy
prevents
re-infection,
long-term
protection
against
HCV re-infection does not occur in patients with HCV
following SVR. As a result, patients who continue to use
injection narcotic drugs, can become re-infected with
HCV and recent studies have demonstrated this risk is
between 5% and 10% annually (34, 35). In one of these
studies, hospitalization or death from narcotic overdose
was also significant (34). These data indicate that per-
sons with chronic HCV who continue to use intra-
venous narcotics have two serious disorders; chronic
HCV and narcotic drug addiction. To treat one without
addressing the other is no different than not counseling
a patient with HCV regarding alcohol abuse.
Conclusion
Highly effective oral anti-viral therapy now allows us to
treat and cure chronic HCV in the vast majority of
persons with this infection. This provides for the first
time, the ability to significantly reduce the need for liver
transplantation and liver-related mortality in this dis-
ease. Our next challenge is to identify all persons with
HCV infection and to find the means to treat all persons
with chronic HCV when appropriate.
Acknowledgements
Financial support: No financial support was received to
support the writing of this manuscript.
Conflict of interest: Dr Shiffman has received consult-
ing fees from Abbvie, Achillion, Bristol-Myers-Squibb,
Gilead, and Merck; grant support from Abbvie, Achil-
lion, Beckman-Colter, Bristol-Myers-Squibb, Boehrin-
ger-Ingelheim, Conatus, Gilead, Hologic, Intercept and
Lumena and Speaker Fees from Abbvie, Bayer, Bristol-
Myers Squibb, Gilead and Janssen.
References
1. Denniston MM, Jiles RB, Drobeniuc J, et al. Chronic hep-
atitis C virus infection in the United States, National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2003 to 2010.
Ann Intern Med 2014; 160: 293–300.
2. Shepard CW, Finelli L, Alter MJ. Global epidemiology of
hepatitis C virus infection. Lancet Infect Dis 2005; 5: 558–
67.
3. Frank C, Mohamed MK, Strickland GT, et al. The role of
parenteral antischistosomal therapy in the spread of hep-
atitis C virus in Egypt. Lancet 2000; 355: 887–91.
4. El-Serg HB. Epidemiology of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Clin Liver Dis 2001; 5: 87–106.
5. Armstrong GL, Alter MJ, McQuillan GM, Margolis HS.
The past incidence of hepatitis C virus infection: implica-
tions for the future burden of chronic liver disease in the
United States. Hepatology 2000; 31: 777–82.
6. Deuffic S, Buffat L, Poynard T, Valleron AJ. Modeling the
hepatitis C virus epidemic in France. Hepatology 1999; 29:
1596–601.
7. Alter MJ. Prevention of spread of hepatitis C. Hepatology
2002; 36: S93–8.
8. Davis GL, Alter MJ, El-Serag H, Poynard T, Jennings LW.
Aging of hepatitis C virus (HCV)-infected persons in the
United States: a multiple cohort model of HCV prevalence
and disease progression. Gastroenterology 2010; 138: 513–21.
9. Zalesak M, Francis K, Gedeon A, et al. Current and future
disease progression of the chronic HCV population in the
United States. PLoS ONE 2013; 8: e63959.
10. Ward JW. The epidemiology of chronic hepatitis C and
one-time hepatitis C virus testing of persons born during
1945 to 1965 in the United States. Clin Liver Dis 2013; 17:
1–11.
11. Smith BD, Morgan RL, Beckett GA, et al. Hepatitis C virus
testing of persons born during 1945-1965: recommenda-
tions from the Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion. Ann Intern Med 2012; 157: 817–22.
12. Denniston MM, Klevins RM, McQuillan GM, Jiles RB.
Awareness of infection, knowledge of hepatitis C, and
medical follow-up among individuals testing positive for
hepatitis C: National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey 2001-2008. Hepatology 2012; 55: 1652–61.
Liver Int. 2016; 36 (Suppl. S1): 62–66
Liver International (2016)
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
65
Shiffman
Universal screening for chronic HCV
 13. Moyer VA. Screening for hepatitis C infection in adults.
US preventative services task force recommendation state-
ment. Ann Intern Med 2013; 159: 349–57.
14. Hsu L, Bowlus CL, Stewart SL, et al. Electronic messages
increase hepatitis B screening in at-risk Asian American
patients: a randomized, controlled trial. Dig Dis Sci 2013;
58: 807–14.
15. Gailbraith JW, Franco RA, Donnelly JP, et al. Unrecognized
chronic hepatitis C virus infection among baby boomers in
the emergency department. Hepatology 2015; 61: 776–82.
16. Turner BJ, Taylor BS, Hanson JT, et al. Implementing
hospital-based baby boomer C virus screening and linkage
to care: strategies, results and costs. J Hosp Med 2015; 10:
510–6.
17. Sears DM, Cohen DC, Ackerman K, Ma JE, Song J. Birth
cohort screening for chronic hepatitis during colonoscopy
appointments. Am J Gastroenterol 2013; 108: 981–9.
18. Myers RP, Crotty P, Town S, et al. Acceptability and yield
of birth-cohort screening for hepatitis C virus in a Cana-
dian population being screened for colorectal cancer: a
cross-sectional study. CMAJ Open 2015; 3: E62–7.
19. Mahajan R, Xing J, Liu SJ, et al. Mortality among persons
in care with hepatitis C virus infection: the Chronic
Hepatitis Cohort Study (CHeCS), 2006-2010. Clin Infect
Dis 2014; 58: 1055–61.
20. Liu Y, Lawrence RH, Falck-Ytter Y, Watts B, Hirsch AA.
Evaluating a hepatitis c quality gap: missed opportunities
for HCV-related cares. Am J Manag Care 2014; 20: e257–64.
21. Holmberg SD, Spradling PR, Moorman AC, Denniston
MM. Hepatitis C in the United States. N Engl J Med 2013;
368: 1859–61.
22. Sulkowski MS, Cooper C, Hunyady B, et al. Management
of adverse effects of Peg-IFN and ribavirin therapy for
hepatitis C. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2011; 8: 212–23.
23. Trooskin SB, Poceta J, Towey CM, et al. Results from a
geographically focused, community-based HCV screening,
linkage-to-care and patient navigation program. J Gen
Intern Med 2015; 30: 950–7.
24. Shiffman ML, Benhamou Y. Cure of HCV related liver dis-
ease. Liver Int 2015; 35(Suppl. 1): 71–7.
25. Poynard T, Bedossa P, Opolon P. Natural history of liver
fibrosis progression in patients with chronic hepatitis C.
Lancet 1997; 349: 825–32.
26. Harris DR, Gonin R, Alter HJ, et al. The relationship of
acute transfusion-associated hepatitis to the development
of cirrhosis in the presence of alcohol abuse. Ann Intern
Med 2001; 134: 120–4.
27. Westin J, Lagging LM, Spak F, et al. Moderate alcohol
intake increases fibrosis progression in untreated patients
with hepatitis C virus infection. J Viral Hepat 2002; 9:
235–41.
28. Cheung O, Sterling RK, Salvatori J, et al. Mild alcohol
consumption is not associated with increased fibrosis in
patients with chronic hepatitis C. J Clin Gastroenterol
2011; 45: 76–82.
29. Shiffman ML, Sterling RK, Contos M, et al. Long term
changes in liver histology following treatment of chronic
hepatitis C virus. Ann Hepatol 2014; 13: 340–9.
30. Ortiz V, Berenguer M, Rayon JM, Carrasco D, Berenguer
J. Contribution of obesity to hepatitis C-related fibrosis
progression. Am J Gastroenterol 2002; 97: 2408–14.
31. Thein HH, Yi Q, Dore GJ, Krahn MD. Natural history
of hepatitis C virus infection in HIV-infected individu-
als and the impact of HIV in the era of highly active
antiretroviral therapy: a meta-analysis. AIDS 2008; 22:
1979–91.
32. Zarski JP, Bohn B, Bastie A, et al. Characteristics of
patients with dual infection by hepatitis B and C viruses. J
Hepatol 1998; 28: 27–33.
33. Pawlotsky JM. Use and interpretation of virological tests
for hepatitis C. Hepatology 2002; 36(Suppl. 1): S65–73.
34. Valerio H, Goldberg DJ, Lewsey J, et al. Evidence of con-
tinued injecting drug use after attaining sustained treat-
ment-induced
clearance
of
the
hepatitis
C
virus:
implications for reinfection. Drug Alcohol Depend 2015;
154: 125–31.
35. Marco A, Esteban JI, Sol�
e C, et al. Hepatitis C virus rein-
fection
among
prisoners
with
sustained
virological
response after treatment for chronic hepatitis C. J Hepatol
2013; 59: 45–51.
Liver Int. 2016; 36 (Suppl. S1): 62–66
Liver International (2016)
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
66
Universal screening for chronic HCV
Shiffman
