 Reversing behavioral abnormalities in mice exposed to maternal 
inflammation
Yeong Shin Yim1,2, Ashley Park1,2, Janet Berrios1,2, Mathieu Lafourcade1,2, Leila M. 
Pascual1,2, Natalie Soares1,2, Joo Yeon Kim1,2, Sangdoo Kim3, Hyunju Kim3, Ari Waisman4, 
Dan R. Littman5,6, Ian R. Wickersham1, Mark T. Harnett1,2, Jun R. Huh3,†, and Gloria B. 
Choi1,2
1McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139, USA
2Department of Brain and Cognitive Neuroscience, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
3Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology and Program in Innate Immunity, Department of 
Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA
4Institute for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University 
Mainz, Mainz, Germany
5Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine of the Skirball Institute, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA
6Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY 10016, USA
Viral infection during pregnancy is correlated with increased frequency of 
neurodevelopmental disorders. This phenomenon has been studied in mice prenatally 
subjected to maternal immune activation (MIA). We previously showed that maternal T 
helper 17 (Th17) cells promote the development of cortical and behavioral abnormalities in 
MIA-affected offspring. Here, we show that cortical abnormalities are preferentially 
localized to a region encompassing the dysgranular zone of the primary somatosensory 
cortex (S1DZ). Moreover, activation of pyramidal neurons in this cortical region was 
sufficient to induce MIA-associated behavioral phenotypes in wild-type animals, while 
reduction in neural activity rescued the behavioral abnormalities in MIA-affected offspring. 
Furthermore, sociability and repetitive behavioral phenotypes could be selectively 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.R.H. (Jun.Huh@umassmed.edu) and G.B.C. (gbchoi@mit.edu).
†Present address: Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02115, USA and Evergrande Center for Immunological Diseases, Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.
Author Contributions Y.S.Y., I.W., M.H., D.R.L., J.R.H., and G.B.C. designed the experiments and/or provided advice and technical 
expertise. Y.S.Y., A.P., J.B., M.L., L.P., N.S., J.K, S.K., and H.K. performed the experiments. Y.S.Y., J.R.H., and G.B.C. wrote the 
manuscript with inputs from the co-authors.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 September 28; 549(7673): 482–487. doi:10.1038/nature23909.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 modulated according to the efferent targets of S1DZ. Our work identifies a cortical region 
primarily, if not exclusively, centered on the S1DZ as the major node of a neural network 
that mediates behavioral abnormalities observed in offspring exposed to maternal 
inflammation.
In humans, viral infection during pregnancy has been correlated with increased frequency of 
neurodevelopmental disorders in offspring1–6. This phenomenon has been modeled in 
mice7–10. We previously reported that the offspring from pregnant dams injected with 
polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)), which mimics viral infection, on embryonic day 
12.5 (E12.5) exhibit behavioral abnormalities including abnormal communication, increased 
repetitive behaviors, and deficits in sociability11. In parallel to the behavioral abnormalities, 
we also observed that MIA-affected offspring display patches of disorganized cortical 
cytoarchitecture during embryonic development as well as in adulthood. The cortical 
phenotype was manifested as a loss of the cortical layer-specific markers special AT-rich 
sequence-binding protein 2 (SATB2) and T-brain-1 (TBR1)11. Development of both MIA-
associated behavioral phenotypes (MIA behaviors) and cortical patches were prevented by 
knocking out a key transcriptional regulator of Th17 cells, retinoic acid receptor-related 
orphan nuclear receptor gamma t (RORγt), in maternal T-cells, or by inhibiting the activity 
of their effector cytokine IL-17a in pregnant dams11. These observations suggested that the 
maternal Th17 cell/IL-17a pathway is crucial for inducing MIA behaviors and for generating 
cortical patches in the offspring. However, whether the cortical phenotype is the underlying 
cause of the behavioral abnormalities in MIA offspring remained undetermined.
Characterization of cortical patches
We first wished to determine the distribution of cortical patches in the brains of adult MIA 
offspring by matching the locations of cortical regions that lack expression of SATB2 or 
TBR1 to those in a reference mouse brain atlas (Fig. 1a)12. Cortical patches found in 
individual animals often retained similar mediolateral (ML) and dorsoventral (DV) 
coordinates through serial coronal sections, suggesting that many form a single continuous 
patch extending along the AP axis, rather than forming a series of independent patches 
(Extended Data Fig. 1a). Although cortical patches were detected at multiple locations 
throughout the cortex, they were prevalently observed in the primary somatosensory cortex 
(S1) at the anteroposterior (AP) level ~0.5 mm posterior to the Bregma (AP=−0.5 mm) 
(90 % of animals, N=10) (Fig. 1b and Extended Data Fig. 1), as well as in the secondary 
motor cortex (M2) and other cortical regions, including the temporal association area (TeA) 
(80% and 40% of animals, respectively, N=10) (Fig 1b and Extended Data Fig. 1). Cortical 
patches were also most predominantly present in S1 with respect to both their number and 
sizes (Extended Data Fig. 1d), and often present in S1 unilaterally (60% of animals, N=10). 
Furthermore, registration of cortical patches in individual MIA animals onto the same 
reference plane near ~AP −0.5mm revealed that the cortical patches most consistently 
centered on S1DZ, a region of the primary somatosensory cortex that is morphologically 
characterized by the absence of a discernible 4th cortical layer and implicated in muscle- 
and joint-related functions (56% of animals, N=50) (Fig. 1c, and Extended Data Fig. 2)13–15. 
Based on these results, we decided to carry out further analysis on S1 patches near ~AP−0.5 
mm.
Yim et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Deficits in interneuron function or dys-regulation of neural activity in the somatosensory 
pathway have been previously associated with both genetic and environmental mouse 
models of neurodevelopmental disorders16–18. On a similar note, we found that S1 cortical 
patches of MIA offspring display a specific loss of PV expression, which marks a class of 
interneurons derived from the medial ganglionic eminence19. This deficit in PV expression 
could reflect either the loss of PV protein expression or the loss of neurons marked by PV. 
We observed no significant differences in the expression of the neuron-specific marker 
NeuN20 or of the vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP)19 which is expressed in 
interneurons derived from the caudal ganglionic eminence, between PBS control and MIA 
offspring (Fig. 1d, e, and Extended Data Fig. 3a,b). To test whether the decrease in the 
number of PV+ neurons results in a diminished inhibitory drive onto S1 pyramidal neurons, 
we used whole-cell patch clamp recordings to measure the miniature Inhibitory Post-
Synaptic Currents (mIPSCs) in S1 pyramidal neurons of PBS or MIA offspring. We indeed 
observed a reduction in frequency, but not amplitude, of mIPSC (Extended Data Fig. 3c–h) 
paralleled by an increase in the number of S1 neurons that express c-Fos, a marker of 
neuronal activation (Fig. 1f, g and Extended Data Fig. 3i, j).
Cortical patches are predictive of MIA behaviors
In order to determine whether the development of MIA-associated behaviors and the 
appearance of cortical patches depend on the developmental timing at which MIA is 
induced, we injected poly(I:C) into pregnant dams at embryonic stages E12.5, E15.5, or 
E18.5, and assessed their offspring for MIA-associated behavioral phenotypes. We first 
examined the offspring’s ability to communicate by measuring the ultrasonic vocalization 
(USV) made by pups upon separation from their mothers at postnatal day 9 (P9). As 
previously reported11, pups from pregnant dams injected with poly(I:C) at E12.5 (MIA 
offspring) emitted more USV calls than pups from PBS-injected dams (PBS offspring). 
However, such an increase was not observed in the offspring from dams injected with 
poly(I:C) either at E15.5 or E18.5 (Extended Data Fig. 4d–g). We also examined repetitive 
behaviors using the marble-burying assay, natural inclination towards social targets with the 
sociability assay as well as anxiety-related behaviors by measuring the time spent by adult 
MIA offspring at the center of an open field (Extended Data Fig. 4a–c). For all behaviors, 
we observed deficits in the offspring when exposed to prenatal MIA at E12.5. Again, the 
offspring’s behaviors from mothers injected with poly(I:C) either at E15.5 or E18.5 were 
indistinguishable from those from PBS-injected mothers (Extended Data Fig. 4h–n), except 
for a reduction observed in the center time during the open field assay for offspring exposed 
to MIA at E15.5. Importantly, chamber preference during habituation and the total 
interaction time during the sociability assay and the total distance traveled during the 
sociability and open field assays were similar between the different treatment groups 
suggesting that differences in activity or arousal levels cannot explain the observed 
behavioral differences (Extended Data Fig. 4i, k, l, n). Our data strongly indicate that all 
behavioral abnormalities emerge from a discrete developmental stage, allowing us to 
examine whether the presence of cortical patches is predictive of MIA behavioral 
phenotypes. Indeed we observed cortical patches in the S1 in 79% of offspring from dams 
injected with poly(I:C), but not PBS, at E12.5. Yet, cortical patches were seen only in 13% 
Yim et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 or none of the offspring when poly(I:C) was administered at E15.5 or E18.5, respectively 
(Fig. 2a). Thus, maternal-inflammation induced at E15.5 and E18.5, unlike at E12.5, was 
ineffective in generating cortical patches and also failed to produce behavioral abnormalities 
in MIA offspring. Furthermore, the size of the S1 cortical patches correlated with the 
severity of behavioral phenotypes: the cortical patch sizes ranged between 0 (absence of the 
cortical patch) and 1 mm2 and were positively correlated with the marble burying index, 
while negatively correlated with both sociability and time spent in the center of an open field 
(Fig. 2b–d). The total distance traveled during the sociability assay was not affected by patch 
size (Fig. 2e). The size of cortical patches found outside of S1 also did not correlate with the 
severity of behavioral abnormalities (Extended Data Fig. 4o–q).
The accompanying paper by Kim et al. demonstrates that a single species of bacteria – 
segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB) – present in C57BL/6 animals bred by Taconic 
Biosciences, but not in those from Jackson Laboratory, is required in mothers to induce 
behavioral abnormalities in MIA offspring (Kim et al., accompanying paper). All animals 
used in this study were also from mouse colonies carrying SFB. In accordance with our 
observation above, we found that the size of cortical patches in MIA offspring from SFB-
present (SFB+) dams was highly correlated with the severity of the offspring’s behavioral 
phenotypes, but not with the total distance traveled during the behavioral assay (Fig. 2f–i). 
On the other hand, offspring from SFB-absent (SFB−), MIA-exposed mothers did not exhibit 
S1 cortical patches.
Lastly, we previously showed that recombinant IL-17a injected into the ventricles of the 
developing brain requires intact IL-17a receptor subunit A (IL-17Ra) expression in the fetus 
to induce MIA-associated phenotypes11. We also previously noted that IL-17Ra expression 
is upregulated in the cortical plate upon MIA. This induction is mostly restricted to 
ankyrin-3 (Ank3)+ and NeuN+ postmitotic neurons, but not paired box 6 (Pax6)+ neuronal 
progenitors (Extended Data Fig. 5a)20–22. In line with this observation, knocking-out 
IL-17Ra in offspring using a Cre driver line specific for the nervous system – Nestin-Cre23 – 
prevented the development of S1 cortical patches and the associated phenotypes; loss of 
SATB2 and PV expression or increase in the number of c-Fos+ neurons was not observed in 
these animals. As expected, brain-specific abrogation of IL-17Ra in offspring also rescued 
MIA-induced behavioral abnormalities (Extended Data Fig. 5b–j). Together, these data 
collectively show that the presence of cortical patches is highly predictive of MIA-induced 
behaviors. They further suggest that timing of inflammation, composition of maternal gut 
bacteria as well as IL-17Ra expression in the fetal brain dictate the severity of MIA-induced 
behavioral phenotypes in the offspring by contributing to the formation of S1 cortical 
patches.
Increasing neural activity in the S1DZ region drives MIA behaviors
Our characterization of cortical patches indicated that an increase in the overall neural 
activity within S1 could be a major factor driving abnormal behavioral phenotypes in MIA 
offspring (Fig. 1f, g and Extended Data Fig. 3c–j). Indeed, previous studies suggested that 
deficits in interneuron development and subsequent perturbations of excitation/inhibition 
(E/I) balance could be the underlying cause(s) of neurodevelopmental disorders24–33. We 
Yim et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 thus asked if increasing neural activity in S1 could recapitulate MIA-induced behaviors in 
WT adult animals. We virally expressed either Enhanced Yellow Fluorescent Protein 
(EYFP), channelrhodopsin (ChR2)34, or halorhodopsin (NpHR)35 using the neuron-specific 
promoter, human Synapsin 1 (hSyn1) (Fig. 3c and Extended Data Fig. 6a). Both the virus 
and the optical fibers were bilaterally targeted to a region centered on S1DZ (S1DZ region), 
where cortical patches were most consistently observed in MIA animals (Fig. 3a). Animals 
were subsequently subjected to the behavioral assays described above, while receiving 
optical stimulation at 3-minutes intervals (a 3 minute-‘On’ session followed by a 3 minute-
‘Off’ session or vice versa) (Fig. 3b). Increasing neural activity with ChR2 in wild-type 
(WT) offspring resulted in enhanced marble burying behaviors, impaired sociability without 
any effects on total interaction time, and reduced time spent at the center of an open field 
(Fig. 3d–h and Extended Data Fig. 6). On the other hand, photostimulation of EYFP-
expressing neurons in the control group failed to induce any MIA-associated behaviors. 
Furthermore, reducing neural activity in S1 using NpHR did not generate behavioral 
abnormalities, with the exception of a slight, yet significant, increase in marble burying 
behavior compared to the EYFP-expressing control group (Fig. 3e). This effect is likely due 
to non-specific inhibition of different types of neurons in the photostimulated region. 
Therefore, to specifically isolate the contribution of only excitatory glutamatergic neurons, 
we used a Cre-dependent strategy to express opsins under the control of the vesicular 
Glutamate Transporter 2 promoter (vGluT2) (Fig. 3i)36. Increasing activity of vGluT2+ 
neurons using ChR2 recapitulated all three MIA-associated behaviors, while 
photostimulation in NpHR- or EYFP-expressing animals failed to induce these behavioral 
abnormalities (Fig 3j–n and Extended Data Fig. 7a–f). We also selectively modulated neural 
activity in PV+ neurons by virally driving Cre-dependent opsin expression in PV-Cre 
animals (Fig. 3o)37. Inhibiting the activity of the PV+ neuronal population with NpHR 
mimicked the decrease in the number of PV+ neurons observed in the MIA-cortical patches 
and recapitulated all three MIA-associated behavioral phenotypes (Fig. 3p–t and Extended 
Data Fig. 7g–l). On the other hand, photostimulation of EYFP- or ChR2-expressing animals 
did not produce any observable deficits (Fig. 3q–t).
We next examined whether the ability to drive these MIA behaviors is a general feature of 
S1 or is specific to the S1DZ region (~AP=−0.5), where we predominantly observed cortical 
patches. We targeted ChR2 and optical implants into four additional anterior and posterior 
regions of S1, while keeping the ML coordinates consistent (Extended Data Fig. 8a–c). 
Photostimulation of these off-target regions did not elicit MIA phenotypes in the marble 
burying or sociability assays (Extended Data Fig. 8d–f). The same manipulation carried out 
medially in the forelimb region (S1FL) or laterally in the barrel field of primary 
somatosensory cortex (S1BF) also failed to induce any behavioral abnormalities (Extended 
Data Fig. 8g–l). Lastly, since cortical patches are often observed only in one hemisphere 
(Extended Data Fig. 1), we asked if unilateral manipulation of neural activity in the S1DZ 
region is sufficient to produce MIA behavioral phenotypes. Targeting ChR2 and optical 
implants to either hemisphere unilaterally increased the number of c-Fos+ neurons both in 
ipsilateral as well as contralateral S1 and was capable of driving MIA behaviors similarly to 
the bilateral stimulation (Extended Data Fig. 9). Taken together, these results demonstrate 
that MIA-like behaviors can be recapitulated in WT animals either through the activation of 
Yim et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 excitatory neurons or the inhibition of PV+ inhibitory neurons and that this feature is 
primarily localized to the cortical region centered on the S1DZ.
Reducing neural activity in the S1DZ region rescues MIA behaviors
We next asked whether reduction of neural activity in the S1DZ region of MIA offspring is 
sufficient to correct the observed behavioral abnormalities. Photostimulation of NpHR-
expressing animals decreased the number of c-Fos+ cortical neurons when compared to 
those in photostimulated EYFP-expressing MIA animals (Fig. 4a,b and Extended Data Fig. 
10a). This inhibition of neural activity was sufficient to suppress enhanced marble burying, 
restore sociability, and increase the time spent in the center of the open field to levels 
observed in control PBS animals (Fig. 4c–f and Extended Data Fig. 10). Photostimulation of 
EYFP- or ChR2-expressing animals did not rescue any behavioral deficits (Fig. 4c–f). Thus, 
the foregoing data demonstrate that acute reduction in neural activity in the S1DZ region is 
sufficient to rescue behavioral abnormalities in MIA offspring prenatally exposed to 
maternal inflammation.
Distinct populations of S1DZ neurons selectively modulate MIA behaviors
To gain insight into the downstream neural circuits involved in eliciting MIA-associated 
behaviors, we next examined the efferent targets of the S1DZ. We injected an anterogradely-
labeling adeno-associated virus (AAV) driving EYFP into the S1DZ and an AAV driving 
mCherry into either the S1FL or S1BF. These tracing studies revealed that the S1DZ exhibits 
largely distinct efferent targets compared to the S1FL and S1BF regions (Fig. 5a, b and 
Extended Data Fig. 11). The S1DZ selectively sends axons to a sub-region of M2, striatum 
as well as TeA. To test the role of these distinct downstream regions in eliciting MIA-
behaviors, we injected retrogradely transported rabies virus (RV)38 expressing EYFP, 
Chronos (excitatory opsin)39 or ArchT (inhibitory opsin)40 into the TeA to retrogradely label 
S1DZ neurons in WT animals (Fig. 5c, d). Photostimulation of Chronos-positive, TeA-
projecting neurons in the S1DZ generated sociability deficits without affecting total 
interaction time, but failed to induce increased marble burying phenotypes (Fig. 5e–g and 
Extended Data Fig. 12a–f). Photostimulation of EYFP- or ArchT-expressing neurons did not 
produce any behavioral deficits. Thus, in otherwise WT animals, increasing the neural 
activity of the neurons in the S1DZ that project to the TeA recapitulated MIA-associated 
sociability deficits, but not the repetitive marble burying phenotypes. Conversely, in MIA 
animals, decreasing the neural activity of this S1DZ neuronal population with ArchT 
restored normal sociability, but failed to suppress the enhanced marble burying phenotype 
(Fig. 5e–g and Extended Data Fig. 12a–f). We also manipulated the activity of the striatum-
projecting S1DZ neurons and found that this population, when activated using Chronos, 
induced enhanced marble-burying phenotype in WT animals without modulating sociability. 
On the other hand, decreased neural activity in this population suppressed the enhanced 
marble burying behavior without correcting sociability deficits in MIA offspring (Fig. 5k–m 
and Extended Data Fig. 12g–l). The TeA- or striatum-projecting S1DZ populations equally 
modulated the amount of time spent in the center of an arena in the open field assay (Fig. 5h, 
n and Extended Data Fig. 12). These data suggest that the neurons in S1DZ region 
Yim et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 projecting to the TeA or striatum selectively modulate interactions with social targets and 
repetitive behaviors, respectively.
Discussion
Identifying neural circuits and components that modulate behaviors aberrantly manifested in 
patients with neurodevelopmental disorders is critical for developing therapeutic approaches. 
One challenge to achieving this goal is the paucity of animal models in which discrete brain 
areas are known to mediate disorder-associated behavioral symptoms. Here we identified a 
restricted brain region centered on S1DZ as a component of the neural circuit that mediates 
MIA-induced behavioral abnormalities. S1DZ has been implicated in proprioceptive 
functions13–15. It will be crucial to elucidate the nature of the afferent information to the 
S1DZ region and how this information is differentially processed in the downstream targets 
of healthy and diseased brains. Our data indicate that IL-17Ra expression in the fetal brain is 
necessary to mediate the MIA effects. The cell type impacted by IL-17Ra activation upon 
MIA, and mechanisms by which the receptor activation induces cortical patches in S1 need 
to be identified in the future. Furthermore, it is interesting to note that the main efferent 
targets of the S1DZ, such as the TeA and M2, are also locations in which cortical patches are 
frequently found in MIA offspring (Fig. 1b and Extended Data Fig. 1b, d). This observation 
suggests that cortical patch formation in MIA offspring may be intricately linked to 
concerted neural activity among the connected brain regions. While similar cortical patches 
were observed in prefrontal and temporal cortical tissues of children with autism41, it will be 
informative to examine whether cortical patches are also found in S1 of human patients with 
neurodevelopmental disorders. Of note, we cannot rule out a possibility that general MIA-
induced behavioral abnormalities are driven by heightened anxiety. It also should be noted 
that in some MIA animals, cortical patches were only observed outside of S1 (12 % of 
animals, n=50), suggesting that S1DZ region might be one of the nodes within a larger 
network that controls MIA-impacted behaviors. This MIA mouse model with discrete, 
functionally-relevant perturbations in the S1DZ region, might provide access to a network 
that modulates behaviors across different mouse models of neurodevelopmental disorders.
Materials and Methods
Animals
All experiments were performed in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of 
Laboratory Animals and were approved by the National Institutes of Health and the 
Committee and Animal Care at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. C57BL/6 mice were 
purchased from Taconic (USA), and Nestin-cre (003771), PV-cre (008069), and vGluT2-cre 
(016963) mice from Jackson laboratory (USA). IL-17Rafl/lfl mice were described 
previously42. All mice were crossed and maintained in-house with C57BL/6 mice from 
Taconic. Mice were analyzed with the following primers for the presence of SFB using 
qPCR: SFB736-F 5′-GACGCTGAGGCATGAGAGCAT-3′, SFB844-R: 5′-
GACGGCACGGATTGTTATTCA-3′ for SFB; UniF340 5′-
ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGT-3′, UniR514 5′-ATTACCGCGGCTGCTGGC-3′ for 
total commensal bacteria. IL-17Rafl/fl animals were crossed with Nestin-cre to remove 
Yim et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 IL-17Ra in the brain. The following primers were used to genotype progenies: IL-17Ra-
flox-1-F 5′-GGCAGCCTTTGGGATCCCAAC-3′, IL-17Ra-flox-2-R 5′-
CTACTCTTCTCACCAGCGCGC-3′ for WT 336bps/Floxed 377bps; IL-17Ra-flox-2-R, 
IL-17Ra-flox-3-F 5′-GTGCCCACAGAGTGTCTTCTGT-3′ for KO 478bps; and Cre-F 5′-
GCGGTCTGGCAGTAAAAACTATC-3′, Cre-R 5′-
GTGAAACAGCATTGCTGTCACTT-3′ for Nestin-cre 100bps. For gender discrimination 
of each embryo, PCR was carried out using sry (sex-determining region of the Y 
chromosome) gene specific primers: 5′-ACAAGTTGGCCCAGCAGAAT-3′, and 5′-
GGGATATCAACAGGCTGCCA-3′.
Maternal Immune Activation
Mice were mated overnight and females were checked daily for the presence of seminal 
plugs, noted as embryonic day 0.5 (E0.5). On E12.5, pregnant female mice were weighed 
and injected with a single dose of poly(I:C) (20mg/kg i.p., Sigma Aldrich, USA), which was 
incubated at 70°C for 20 min and cooled down to 25°C for 1hr before injection. Each dam 
was returned to its cage and left undisturbed until the birth of its litter. All pups remained 
with the mother until weaning on postnatal day 21 (P21), at which time mice were group-
housed at a maximum of 5 per cage with same-sex littermates. For checking the effect of 
poly(I:C) administration at different time points during pregnancy, we injected poly(I:C) into 
pregnant dams on E12.5, E15.5, or E18.5.
Stereotaxic injection
All surgeries were carried out using aseptic techniques and animals were pre-operatively 
injected with the following dosages of anesthetics and analgesics: ketamine (100mg/kg i.p.), 
xylazine (10mg/kg i.p.), and slow-release buprenorphine (1mg/kg s.c.). All stereotaxic 
reference points were set at Bregma for the AP axis, at the midline for the ML axis, and at 
the surface of the brain for the DV axis. For optogenetic experiments, animals received 
bilateral stereotaxic injections of one of the following viruses at rates of <0.1 ml/min: 
AAV2-hSyn-EYFP, AAV2-hSyn-ChR2:EYFP, AAV2-hSyn-NpHR3.0:EYFP, AAV2-EF1a-
DIO-Cre:EYFP, AAV2-EF1a-DIO-ChR2:EYFP, or AAV2-EF1a-DIO-NpHR3.0:EYFP (UNC 
vector core, USA). These viruses were injected into one of the following coordinates: the 
cortical area near S1DZ (AP = −0.5 mm; ML = ±2.5~3.0 mm; DV = 0.8 mm), off-targets 
±0.5 mm or ±1.0 mm along the AP axis (AP = 0.5 mm, ML = ±3.0 mm, DV = 0.8 mm; AP 
= 0.0 mm, ML = ±3.0 mm, DV = 0.8 mm; AP = −1.0 mm, ML = ±3.0 mm, DV = 0.8 mm; 
and AP = −1.5 mm, ML = ±3.0 mm, DV = 0.8 mm), S1FL (AP = −0.5 mm, ML = ±2.0 mm, 
DV = 0.8 mm), or S1BF (AP = −0.5 mm, ML = ±3.5 mm, DV = 0.8 mm). Subsequently, 
fiber optic implants (300 μm core size, Thorlabs, USA) were bilaterally placed 500 μm 
above the virus injection sites.
For stimulating the specific S1DZ/TeA and S1DZ/Striatum connections, rabies virus (RV-
EYFP, RV-Chronos:EYFP or RV-ArchT:EYFP; Ian R. Wickersham at MIT) was bilaterally 
introduced into either the TeA (AP=−1.75 mm, ML= ±4.15 mm, DV=1.65 mm) or striatum 
(AP= −0.2mm, ML= ±2.7mm, DV= 2.5mm) and optic fiber implants were placed onto the 
S1DZ (AP = −0.5 mm, ML = ±2.5 mm, DV = 0.3 mm).
Yim et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For anterograde tracing, AAV2-hSyn-EYFP was injected into the S1DZ and AAV2-hSyn-
mCherry into either the S1FL or S1BF.
All brain section schematics for showing virus injection sites and optic fiber implantation 
sites were drawn using Adobe Illustrator to closely resemble the corresponding sections in 
the Paxinos brain atlas12.
Behavioral analysis
All behavioral training and testing were carried out in accordance with previously 
established behavioral schemes11 with modifications. Animals were tested during light cycle 
and were transferred to the behavior testing room with light control (80 lux) for 1hr before 
the start of experiments. Experimenters were blind to the treatment group.
Ultrasonic vocalizations—On P9, mouse pup ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs) were 
detected for 3 min using an Ultra-Sound Gate CM16/CMPA microphone (AviSoft, 
Germany) and SAS Prolab software (AviSoft, Germany) in a sound attenuation chamber 
under stable temperature (19–22°C). For further characterization of the USVs, the 
sonograms from the 1st minute of the recordings were classified into ten distinct categories 
in accordance to previously established methods43 and were analyzed for the total number of 
calls made and the average duration of the calls.
Three-chamber social approach assay—Male mice (8~12-weeks-old) were tested for 
sociability using a 3-chamber social approach paradigm. An empty object-containment cage 
(circular metallic cages, Stoelting Neuroscience) was each placed into the left and right 
chambers of a 3-chamber arena (50cm×35cm×30cm), which the experimental mice freely 
investigated for 10 min (exploration period / habituation). The following day, the mice 
underwent another 10 min exploration period (habituation). Immediately after, the mice 
were confined to the center chamber, while a social object (unfamiliar C57BL/6 male 
mouse) and an inanimate object (Rubber object of a similar size as the social object) were 
placed alternatingly into either the left or right object-containment cage. Barriers to the 
adjacent chambers were removed, and the mice were allowed to explore the 3-chamber arena 
for 10 min. Approach behavior was defined as interaction time (i.e. sniffing, approach) with 
targets in each chamber (within 2 cm). Sessions were video-recorded and object approach 
behavior and total distance moved were analyzed using EthoVision tracking system (Noldus, 
Netherlands). % Interaction was calculated as the percentage of time spent investigating the 
social target or the inanimate object out of the total investigation time for both objects.
Marble burying test—Mice were placed into testing arenas (arena size: 
40cm×20cm×30cm, bedding depth: 3cm) each containing 20 glass marbles (laid out in four 
rows of five marbles equidistant from one another). At the end of the 15-min exploration 
period, mice were carefully removed from the testing cages and the number of marbles 
buried was recorded. The marble burying index was arbitrarily defined as the following: 1 
for marbles covered >50% with bedding, 0.5 for marbles covered <50% with bedding, or 0 
for anything less.
Yim et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Open field test—Mice underwent a 15-min exploration period in the testing arena (arena 
size: 50cm×50cm×35cm). Sessions were video-recorded and analyzed for time spent in the 
center (center size: 25cm × 25cm) using EthoVision Noldus tracking system (Noldus, 
Netherlands).
Behavioral analysis with optical stimulation
After two weeks of recovery, animals were assessed using the behavioral schemes described 
above. During behavioral assays, animals were given 3 min of laser stimulation (On session, 
ChR2: 405nm, 6mW, 20Hz, 50% duty cycle; Chronos: 488nm, 6mW, 20Hz, 50% duty cycle; 
NpHR3.0 and ArchT: 595nm, 8mW, 20Hz, 50% duty cycle) followed by 3 min of no 
stimulation (Off session). Animals started with either an On or Off session in a 
counterbalanced manner. Photostimulation was controlled with a waveform generator 
(Keysight, 33220A, USA) and Ethovision XT (Noldus, Netherlands). Behavioral analysis 
was conducted as described earlier using EthoVision Noldus tracking system (Noldus, 
Netherlands).
For quantitative analysis of photostimulation-dependent activation of virus expressing 
neurons, mice were sacrificed 1 hr after the end of the behavioral testing. Brain slices were 
double-labeled for c-Fos (sc-7270, Santa Cruz, USA; ABE457, Millipore, USA) and EYFP 
(ab5450, Abcam, USA). The percentage of neurons expressing c-Fos (c-Fos+EYFP+/EYFP
+) within a 500 μm × 500μm area, 300μm below the optical fiber placement was calculated. 
Behavioral results from mice without viral infection or with inaccurate targeting of virus or 
fiber implantations were excluded. Experimenter was blind to the treatment groups.
Slice Preparation for Whole-Cell Electrophysiology
Mice were anesthetized with pentobarbital (40mg/kg i.p.) and intracardially perfused with 
ice-cold dissection buffer (in mM: 87 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 75 
sucrose, 10 dextrose, 1.3 ascorbic acid, 7 MgCl2 and 0.5 CaCl2) bubbled with 95% O2-5% 
CO2. Brains were rapidly removed and immersed in ice-cold dissection buffer. 
Somatosensory cortical sections were dissected and 300μm coronal slices were prepared 
using a Leica VT1200S vibratome (Leica, USA). Slices recovered for 20 min in a 35°C 
submersion chamber filled with oxygenated artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) (in mM: 
124 NaCl, 3 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 1 MgCl2, 2 CaCl2, and 20 glucose) and then 
kept at room temperature for >40 min until use.
Voltage-Clamp Recordings
Miniature Inhibitory Postsynaptic Currents—To specifically isolate miniature 
inhibitory postsynaptic currents (mIPSCs), slices were placed in a submersion chamber 
maintained at 32°C, perfused at 2 ml/min with oxygenated aCSF (as described above) 
containing 1μM TTX, 100μM DL-APV, and 20μM DNQX and held at 0mV. Cells were 
visualized using an Olympus BX-51 equipped with infrared differential interference contrast 
(IR-DIC) optics. Pyramidal neurons from Layer II/III of PBS control offspring or 
corresponding upper portion of the cortex of MIA offspring were identified by intrinsic 
membrane properties present in S1 and morphological confirmation of spiny dendrites. 
Patch pipettes were pulled from thick-walled borosilicate glass (P-2000, Sutter Instruments 
Yim et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Novato, USA). Open tip resistances were between 2.5–6MΩ and were back-filled with an 
internal containing the following (in mM): 100 CsCH3SO3, 15 CsCl, 2.5 MgCl2, 10 Hepes, 
5 QX-314, 5 BAPTA, 4 Mg-ATP, 0.3 Mg-GTP, and 0.025 Alexa-568 with pH adjusted to 
7.25 with 1M CsOH and osmolarity adjusted to ~295 mOsm by the addition of sucrose or 
water. Voltage-clamp recordings were performed in whole-cell configuration using patch-
clamp amplifier (Multiclamp 700B, Molecular Devices or Amplifier BVC-700A, Dagan) 
and data were acquired and analyzed using pClamp 10 software (Molecular Devices) or a 
template matching algorithm in MatLab. Pipette seal resistances were >1GΩ and pipette 
capacitive transients were minimized before breakthrough. Changes in series and input 
resistance were monitored throughout the experiment by giving a test pulse every 30s and 
measuring the amplitude of the capacitive current. Slices were subsequently fixed in 4% 
PFA for post-hoc validation. Cells were discarded if series resistance rose above 20MΩ. The 
experimenter was blinded during the acquisition and analysis of the postsynaptic currents.
Immunohistochemistry
For cryosectioning, animals were intracardially perfused, and the brain was dissected out, 
fixed with 4% PFA in PBS overnight at 4°C, and cryoprotected in 30% sucrose solution. The 
left hemisphere was marked with a needle and the sections were coronally sliced at 40μm 
using a cryostat (Leica, USA). For vibratome sectioning, animals were intracardially 
perfused, and the brain was fixed with 4% PFA in PBS overnight at 4°C. The brains were 
coronally sliced at either 50 or 100μm with a Leica VT1000S vibratome (Leica, USA).
Slices were permeabilized with blocking solution containing 0.4% Triton X-100 and 2% 
goat serum in PBS for 1 h at room temperature (RT) and then incubated with anti-rabbit-
TBR1 (ab31940, Abcam, USA), anti-mouse-SATB2 (ab51502, Abcam, USA), anti-rabbit-
PV (PV27, Swant, Switzerland), anti-rabbit-VIP (20077, Immunostar, USA), anti-mouse-
NeuN (MAB377X, Millipore, USA), or anti-rabbit-c-Fos (sc-7270, Santa Cruz, USA; 
ABE457, Millipore, USA) antibodies overnight at 4°C. The following day, slices were 
incubated with fluorescently conjugated secondary antibodies (Invitrogen, USA) for 1 hr at 
RT with Neurotrace (Invitrogen, USA), and mounted in Vectashield mounting medium 
containing 4′,6-Diamidino-2-Phenylindole, Dihydrochloride (DAPI; Vector laboratories, 
USA). Images of stained slices were acquired using a confocal microscope (LSM710; Carl 
Zeiss, Germany) with a 20X objective lens; all image settings were kept constant across the 
same batch of experimental groups.
For anterograde-tracing, brains were sliced into 100μm sections, and the prepared slices 
were labeled with anti-chicken-GFP (ab5450, Abcam, USA), anti-rabbit-DsRed (632496, 
Clontech, USA) and DAPI. Images were acquired with a confocal microscope and then 
aligned to the Paxinos brain atlas12.
Double In Situ Hybridization
E14.5 male embryos were obtained from dams treated with poly(I:C) at E12.5. The heads 
were frozen on dry ice and embedded in Tissue Tek O.C.T. (Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA). 
The blocks were sectioned at 16μm thickness using a cryostat (Leica, USA). Fluorescent in 
situ hybridization was performed using an amplification technology according to the 
Yim et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 manufacturer’s protocol (ViewRNA ISH Tissue Assay kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). 
Briefly, the sections were fixed in 4% PFA at 4°C for 16–18 hr and dehydrated by 
sequentially soaking the slides in 50%, 70%, and 100% ethanol. il17ra (NM_008359, Cat#: 
VB1-10258), ank3 (NM_170728, Cat#: VB6-17256), and pax6 (NM_013627, Cat#: 
VB6-11573) probes were applied to the sections and incubated for 3 h at 40°C.
In situ Hybridization followed by Immunohistochemistry
The sectioned embryo brain slices at 16μm thickness were fixed in 4% PFA at RT for 10 min 
and were permeabilized in 70% ethanol at 4°C for 12–18hr. Sections were further 
permeabilized in RNase-free 8% SDS for 10min. Samples were rinsed to remove SDS, and 
fluorescent in situ hybridization for il17ra transcripts were performed according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol (ViewRNA ISH Tissue Assay kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). 
The samples were subsequently processed for immunohistochemistry with anti-NeuN 
antibody (MAB377X, Millipore, USA).
Colocalization Coefficients for anterograde-tracing results
Percentage of co-localized projection fibers (co-localization coefficient) from S1FL or S1BF 
with those from S1DZ was calculated using ImageJ software (Manders’ coefficient) 
(Extended Data Fig. 11). The co-localization coefficient was represented as S1DZ/S1FL or 
S1FL/S1DZ and S1DZ/S1BF or S1BF/S1DZ. S1DZ/S1FL or S1DZ/S1BF reflects the 
percentage of S1FL or S1BF projection fibers within the region of interest (ROI) that is co-
localized with those from S1DZ. S1FL/S1DZ or S1BF/S1DZ reflects the percentage of 
S1DZ projection fibers co-localized with those from S1FL or S1BF. Coste’s algorithm was 
used to define the threshold for each image used in this experiment.
Analysis of cortical patches
Cortical patches were identified by the absence of SATB2 or TBR1 expression. Cortical 
regions that met the following criteria were not included as cortical patches: (1) when the 
area had weak, but not the absence of, SATB2 or TBR1 expression; (2) when the area 
displayed tissue damage. Spatial locations of the cortical patches were determined based on 
their distance from the midline of the brain and the layer structures of the cortex. These 
locations were matched to their corresponding regions in a mouse brain atlas (Paxinos brain 
atlas)12.
For cortical patch analysis of the whole brain (Ext. Fig. 1), cortical patches were drawn onto 
a schematic derived form the Paxinos brain atlas12 using Adobe Illustrator. For closer 
analysis of those located within AP0.38~ −1.34 (Ext. Fig. 2), the brain section schematic 
was drawn using Adobe Illustrator in reference to the anatomical structures of the coronal 
section at AP-0.46 in the Paxinos brain atlas12. The size of the cortical patches was 
calculated using Zen Software (Carl Zeiss, Germany) and scaled using Adobe Illustrator to 
reflect the actual size as accurately as possible.
Cell types within the cortical patches of the S1 were characterized by staining brain slices 
from PBS and MIA offspring for PV, VIP or NeuN in conjunction with SATB2 or TBR1. 
The cortical region of interest (width: 300μm), centered on a cortical patch in MIA offspring 
Yim et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 or the corresponding area in PBS offspring, was divided into 10 equal laminar blocks (bin) 
representing different depths of the cortex. Individual marker positive cells (SATB2, PV, 
VIP, or NeuN) were quantified manually. VIP staining was observed both in cells bodies as 
well as in processes; only the former was included in counts. Experimenter was blind to the 
treatment groups.
Conventional RT-PCR
Total RNA was isolated from S1 of adult brains using Quick-RNA mini-prep kits (Zymo, 
USA). cDNA was synthesized using 200μg total RNA using oligo dT (PROTOSCRIPT 
FIRST STRAND CDNA SYNTHESIS KIT, NEB). For conventional RT-PCR, 1μl of cDNA 
synthesized as described above was diluted in 10μl of KAPA Taq PCR kit (KAPA 
Biosystems). il17ra and gapdh mRNA expression were assessed using the following primers: 
Il17ra 5′-CCACTCTGTAGCACCCCAAT-3′ and 5′-CAGGCTCCGTAGTTCCTCAG-3′; 
gapdh 5′-CGACTTCAACAGCCTCCCACTCTTCC-3′ and 5′-
TGGGTGGTCCAGGTTTCTTACTCCTT-3′.
Statistics and Reproducibility
Statistical analyses were performed using Prism software. The results from behavioral 
experiments and quantification of individual marker-positive cells were tested using One-
way, Two-way, or Two-way repeated measures ANOVAs followed by Tukey post-hoc tests, 
or unpaired two-tailed t-test. The correlation between behavioral severity and cortical patch 
size was tested using Linear regression. The distribution of cortical patches was tested using 
Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn post-hoc test. Sample sizes were chosen with 
adequate power based on the literature as well as our previous studies, in general without 
using statistical methods to predetermine sample size11. Animals were randomized into 
different groups with approximately comparable numbers of animals in each group 
whenever possible. No samples or data points were arbitrarily excluded from statistical 
analysis. Key experiments, including the location of cortical patches, anterograde tracing 
experiments, and behavioral experiments with optical modulation, were all independently 
repeated with similar observations. All data are represented as mean ± s.e.m.
Data availability
Source data containing raw data for the main and extended data figures are available in the 
online version of the paper (Supplementary source data tables). All other data are available 
from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.
Yim et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Fig. 1. Distribution of cortical patches in the cortex of MIA offspring
a, The locations of the cortical patches of 10 individual MIA animals were matched to their 
corresponding AP levels in the Paxinos brain atlas. Different colors represent the patches 
from different mice. The sub-regions, in which the cortical patches were observed in more 
than 3 or 5 animals, are circled in blue or red, respectively. The mouse brain in this figure 
has been reproduced with permission from Paxinos. b, Prevalence of cortical patches in 
Yim et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 different cortical sub-regions of the MIA offspring described in (a) (n=10-mice/2-
independent experiments). c, Prevalence of cortical patches at different AP levels of the 
brain in the MIA offspring described in (a) (n=10-mice/2-independent experiments). 
Individual AP levels correspond to those in the schematic images of Extended Data Fig. 1. 
d, The size and frequencies of cortical patches found in different cortical sub-regions of the 
MIA offspring described in (a) (n=10-mice/2-independent experiments). PrL: Prelimbic, 
MO: Medial orbital, DLO: Dorsolateral orbital, DI: Dysgranular insular, FrA: Frontal 
association cortex, M1: Primary motor cortex, M2: Secondary motor cortex, S1: Primary 
somatosensory cortex, S2: Secondary somatosensory cortex, V1: Primary visual cortex, V2: 
Secondary visual cortex, AUD: Secondary auditory cortex, dorsal area, AU1: Primary 
auditory cortex, AUV: Secondary auditory cortex, ventral area, Cg/RS: Cingulate/
Retrosplenial cortex, and TeA: Temporal association cortex. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01 as 
calculated by Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA with Dunn post-hoc test (d). Graphs indicate 
mean ± s.e.m.
Yim et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Fig. 2. Distribution of cortical patches located within 0.38 ~ −1.34 AP in the 
brains of MIA offspring
a, Schematics of the cortical patches located within 0.38~ −1.34 AP in the brains of MIA 
offspring plotted onto the atlas plane near ~ −0.5 AP. The size of the cortical patches in the 
schematic is scaled to reflect the actual size as accurately as possible. Blue indicates the 
cortical patches from one hemisphere and red from the other. The mouse brain in this figure 
has been reproduced with permission from Paxinos. b, Representative images of the cortical 
patches in the brains of MIA offspring (a) stained with TBR1 or SATB2 and counterstained 
with DAPI. The number, locations, and sizes of the cortical patches observed at a given AP 
level along with each animal’s behavioral performance on the marble burying (marble 
Yim et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 burying index), sociability (% Social target), and the time spent in the center (s) of an open 
field are indicated. White arrows indicate cortical patches. Scale bar represents 300μm.
Extended Data Fig. 3. MIA offspring display reduced inhibitory drive onto pyramidal neurons in 
S1 cortical patches
a, Images cropped in layer I, II, and III of S1 and stained for SATB2 (red) with PV, VIP, or 
NeuN (green) in offspring from PBS (a) or Poly(I:C) (b) injected dams. Brain slices are 
counterstained with DAPI (blue). White dotted lines indicate the boundary of cortical 
patches in MIA offspring. Scale bar represents 100μm. For images shown in Fig. 1d. c. 
Representative traces of mIPSCs from pyramidal neurons in S1DZ of PBS or MIA offspring. 
d–e, Average population data depicting the frequency (d) and amplitude (e) of 
Yim et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pharmacologically isolated mIPSCs from S1DZ pyramidal neurons described in (c) (n=14-
biological independent samples/6-mice/6-independent experiments and 12-biological 
independent samples/6-mice/6-independent experiments from PBS and MIA offspring, 
respectively). f, Representative traces of mIPSCs from pyramidal neuron in S1DZ or med. 
S1BF of MIA offspring. g–h, Average population data depicting the frequency (g) and 
amplitude (h) of pharmacologically isolated mIPSCs from S1 pyramidal neurons described 
in (f) (n=7-biological independent samples/3-mice/3-independent experiments and 7-
biological independent samples/3-mice/3-independent experiments for S1DZ and med. 
S1BF from MIA offspring, respectively). i, Representative image of the S1, stained for 
DAPI (blue) and c-Fos (green) from adult offspring of PBS- or poly(I:C)-treated mother. 
Arrows indicate the boundaries of different subregions in the S1. Scale bar represents 
300μm. S1FL: Primary somatosensory, forelimb, S1DZ: Primary somatosensory, 
dysgranular zone, S1BF: Primary somatosensory, barrel field. j, Quantification of c-Fos+ 
cells throughout the S1 (n=4 PBS and 4 Poly(I:C) mice/4-independent experiments). * 
p<0.05, **p<0.01 as calculated by two-tailed unpaired t-test (d,e,g,h,j). Graphs indicate 
mean ± s.e.m.
Yim et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Fig. 4. The development of MIA-associated behaviors depends on the time point 
at which MIA is induced
a–c, Schematics of the marble burying test (a), sociability test (b), and open field test (c). d. 
Representative spectrographs of the USVs for PBS and E12.5. e, The ultrasonic vocalization 
(USV) index represents the number of USVs made by the pups (n=20, 24, 21, and 22 mice 
for PBS, E12.5, E15.5, or E18.5 groups/5-independent experiments). f–g, The sonograms of 
USVs emitted by the pups are classified into ten distinct categories and analyzed for the 
number of calls made and the duration of the calls (msec) within the 1st minute of the 
recording (n=13 and 10 for pups from PBS- and Poly(I:C)-injected mothers, respectively, at 
E12.5/3-independent experiments). h–n, The marble burying index (the percentage of 
marbles buried during the 15-min marble burying test) (h), % time spent in social chamber 
during habituation period of the sociability test (i), % interaction during the sociability test 
(the percentage of time spent investigating the social or inanimate stimulus out of the total 
exploration time of both objects during the 10-min sociability test) (j), the total interaction 
time (the total exploration time of both objects during the 10-min sociability test) (k), the 
total distance moved during the sociability test (l), the time spent in the center of an open 
field (m), and the total distance moved during the open field test (n) of the adult offspring 
described in (e) (n= 12/19/15/9-mice, 7/7/7/5-independent experiments for PBS/E12.5/
E15.5/E18.5 groups). o–q, The size of cortical patches found outside of S1 (within AP 0.38~
−1.34mm) in offspring from dams injected with poly(I:C) at E12.5 is plotted against the 
severity of the featured MIA phenotypes on the marble burying test (o), sociability test as % 
social target (the percentage of time spent investigating the social stimulus out of the total 
exploration time of both objects) (p), and open field test (q). Black solid lines represent the 
regression line and gray dotted lines represent 95% confidence intervals (n=19-mice/7-
independent experiments) for E12.5 group. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01 as calculated by two-tailed 
unpaired t-test (f,g), two-way ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc tests (j), one-way ANOVA with 
Tukey post-hoc tests (e,h,i,k,l,m,n), and Linear regression (o,p,q). Graphs indicate mean ± 
s.e.m.
Yim et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Fig. 5. IL-17Ra expression is required in the fetal brain to induce behavioral 
abnormalities upon MIA
a, Representative images of the embryonic cortex at E14.5 stained for il17ra (green) and 
ank3, NeuN or pax6 (red) in offspring from poly(I:C)-injected dams. Brain slices were 
counterstained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar represents 200μm. (n=3-mice/2-independent 
experiments) b, Schematic showing the breeding scheme. Homozygous IL-17Ra KO 
animals carrying Nestin-Cre transgene were crossed to homozygous IL-17Ra conditional 
line (IL-17Rafl/fl). c, il17ra and gapdh mRNA expression levels in S1 of WT or IL-17Rafl/
KO;Cre mice were measured using conventional RT-PCR. Image indicates mRNA 
expression levels found in individual animals (n=6-mice/2-independent experiments). d, 
Representative images of SATB2 (red) expression in S1 of offspring with indicated 
Yim et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 genotypes (WT, IL-17Rafl/KO, or IL-17Rafl/KO;Cre) from mothers injected with PBS or 
poly(I:C). Scale bar represents 100μm (n=5, 4, 7, and 8 mice from WT (PBS), WT 
(Poly(I:C)), IL-17Rafl/KO (Poly(I:C)), and IL-17Rafl/KO;Cre (Poly(I:C))/4-independent 
experiments). e, Quantification of PV positive cells in regions centered on S1 cortical 
patches around AP-0.46mm, divided into ten equal bins representing different depths of the 
cortex, of MIA offspring or in corresponding regions of PBS offspring with indicated 
genotypes (n=5, 4, 7, and 8 mice from WT (PBS), WT (Poly(I:C)), IL-17Rafl/KO 
(Poly(I:C)), and IL-17Rafl/KO;Cre (Poly(I:C))/4-independent experiments). f, Quantification 
of c-Fos+ cells in the S1 at around AP-0.46mm (n=3, 3, 7, and 5 mice, from WT (PBS), WT 
(Poly(I:C)), IL-17Rafl/KO (Poly(I:C)), and IL-17Rafl/KO;Cre (Poly(I:C))/4-independnt 
experiments). g–j, The marble burying index (g), the % interaction (h) and the total 
interaction time (i) during the sociability test, and the time spent in the center of an open 
field (j) of the adult offspring described in (b) (n= 10, 8, 9, and 10 mice for WT (PBS), WT 
(Poly(I:C)), IL-17Rafl/KO (Poly(I:C)), and IL-17Rafl/KO;Cre (Poly(I:C)) groups/5-
independent experiments). * p<0.05, ** p<0.01 as calculated by two-way repeated measures 
ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc tests for statistical comparison between the WT (Poly(I:C)) 
and IL-17Rafl/KO;Cre (Poly(I:C)) (e), one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc tests (f,g,i,j), 
and two-way ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc tests (h). Graphs indicate mean ± s.e.m.
Yim et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Fig. 6. Increasing neural activity in WT animals induces MIA behavioral 
phenotypes
a, Representative images of c-Fos expression upon photostimulation of the S1DZ in WT 
offsprings from mothers injected with PBS at E12.5 (PBS offspring). In these animals, 
AAV2-EF1α-DIO-EYFP, ChR2-EYFP, or NpHR-EYFP viruses were targeted to the S1DZ. 
Coronal sections of the brains were stained for c-Fos (red) and EYFP (green), and 
counterstained with neurotrace (NT, blue). Scale bar represents 100um. b–f, The marble 
burying index (the percentage of marbles buried during the 18-min marble burying test) (b), 
the % social target (the percentage of time spent investigating the social stimulus out of the 
total exploration time of both objects) (c), the total interaction time during the sociability test 
(d), the time spent in the center of an open field (e), and the total distance moved during the 
open field test (f) are plotted as averages from each individual 3-min sessions. Light blue 
indicates the laser ‘On’ sessions (‘Laser On-Off’: n=6, 5, and 8 mice/4-independent 
experiments; ‘Laser Off-On’: n=6, 7, and 10 mice/4-independent experiments from the 
AAV2-hSyn-EYFP, ChR2-EYFP, or NpHR-EYFP injected PBS offspring). * p<0.05, ** 
Yim et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 p<0.01 as calculated by two-way repeated measures ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc tests. 
Graphs indicate mean ± s.e.m.
Extended Data Fig. 7. Increasing neural activity in vGluT2-positive neurons or decreasing neural 
activity in PV-positive neurons of WT animals creates MIA behavioral phenotypes
a,g, Representative images of c-Fos expression upon photostimulation of the S1DZ in 
vGluT2-Cre (a) or PV-Cre (g) animals injected with AAV2-EF1α-DIO-EYFP, ChR2-EYFP, 
or NpHR-EYFP viruses. Coronal sections of the brains were stained for c-Fos (red) and 
EYFP (green), and counterstained with neurotrace (NT, blue). Scale bar represents 100um. 
Yim et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 b–l, The marble burying index, the % social target, the total interaction time during the 
sociability test, the time spent in the center of an open field, and the total distance moved 
during the open field test with vGluT2-cre (b–f) and PV-cre (h–l) animals are plotted as 
averages from each individual 3-min sessions. Light blue indicates the laser ‘On’ sessions 
(‘Laser On-Off’: n=5, 8, and 6 mice, 4-independent experiments; ‘Laser Off-On’: n=5, 9, 
and 5 mice, 5-independent experiments for vGluT2-Cre animals injected with AAV2-EF1α-
DIO-EYFP, ChR2-EYFP, or NpHR-EYFP; ‘Laser On-Off’: n=7, 6, and 8 mice, 6-
independent experiments; ‘Laser Off-On’: n=6, 6, and 7 mice, 5-independent experiments 
for PV-Cre animals injected with AAV2-EF1α-DIO-EYFP, ChR2-EYFP, or NpHR-EYFP). * 
p<0.05, ** p<0.01 as calculated by two-way repeated measures ANOVA with Tukey post-
hoc tests. Graphs indicate mean ± s.e.m.
Extended Data Fig. 8. The ability to create MIA behavioral phenotypes by increasing neural 
activity in WT animals is specific with respect to the AP level and the sub-region of the primary 
somatosensory cortex
Yim et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a, Schematics (top) and representative images (bottom) of the five sites in the S1 of WT 
animals injected with either AAV2-hSyn-EYFP or AAV2-hSyn-ChR2-EYFP virus (green) 
(AP= +0.5, +0.0, −0.5, −1.0, or −1.5mm). The mouse brain in this figure has been 
reproduced with permission from Paxinos. Scale bar represents 300μm. b, Representative 
images of c-Fos expression upon photostimulation of the injection sites in animals as 
prepared in (a). Coronal sections of the brains were stained for c-Fos (red) and EYFP 
(green), and counterstained with neurotrace (NT, blue). Scale bar represents 100μm. c, The 
percentage of EYFP+ neurons expressing c-Fos upon photostimulation of the injection site 
(n=5 for WT animals injected with AAV2-hSyn-EYFP at AP=−0.5mm and n=5, 5, 5, 5, and 
5 for animals injected with AAV2-hSyn-ChR2-EYFP at AP=0.5, 0.0, −0.5, −1.0, or −1.5mm, 
3-independent experiments, respectively). d–f, The marble burying index (d), the % 
interaction (during the 1st laser-on session) of the sociability test (e), and the total interaction 
time (during the 1st laser-on session) of the sociability test (f) for animals prepared as in (a) 
(n=12 for WT animals injected with AAV2-hSyn-EYFP at AP=−0.5mm and n=12, 12, 12, 
12, and 12 for those injected with AAV2-hSyn-ChR2-EYFP at AP=0.5, 0.0, −0.5, −1.0, or 
−1.5mm, 6-independent experiments, respectively). g, A schematic showing the 
superimposed virus injection sites from individual WT animals, in which AAV2-hSyn-
ChR2-EYFP was delivered into the S1FL (blue), S1DZ (red), or S1BF (green). The mouse 
brain in this figure has been reproduced with permission from Paxinos. h, Representative 
images of c-Fos expression upon photostimulation of the injection sites shown in (g). 
Coronal sections of the brains were stained for c-Fos (red) and EYFP (green), and 
counterstained with neurotrace (NT, blue). Scale bar represents 100μm. i, The percentage of 
EYFP+ neurons co-expressing c-Fos upon photostimulation of the injection site (n=7 mice 
for EYFP and 8 mice for S1FL, S1DZ, and S1BF; 3-independent experiments). j–l, The 
marble burying index (j), the % interaction (during the 1st laser-on session) of the sociability 
test (k), and the total interaction time (during the 1st laser-on session) of the sociability test 
(l) for animals prepared as in (g) (n=7 for WT animals injected with AAV2-hSyn-EYFP into 
S1DZ and n=10, 12, and 10 for WT animals injected with AAV2-hSyn-ChR2-EYFP into 
S1FL, S1DZ, or S1BF; 3-independent experiments). S1HL: Primary somatosensory, 
hindlimb, S1FL: Primary somatosensory, forelimb, S1: Primary somatosensory cortex, 
S1DZ: Primary somatosensory, dysgranular zone, S1BF: Primary somatosensory, barrel 
field, S1ShNc: Primary somatosensory, shoulder and neck, S1Tr: Primary somatosensory, 
trunk. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01 as calculated by two-way ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc tests 
(e,k) and one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc tests (c,d,f,i,j,l). Graphs indicate mean ± 
s.e.m.
Yim et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Fig. 9. Unilateral increase in neural activity of the S1DZ region creates MIA 
behaviors in WT animals
a, Schematic showing the unilateral virus injection and optic-fiber implantation in the S1DZ 
of WT animals injected with AAV2-hSyn-EFYP, ChR2-EYFP, or NpHR-EFYP. The mouse 
brain in this figure has been reproduced with permission from Paxinos. b, Representative 
images of c-Fos expression upon photostimulation of the injection sites shown in (a). 
Coronal sections of the brains were stained for c-Fos (red) and EYFP (green), and 
counterstained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar represents 100μm. c, The percentage of EYFP+ 
neurons co-expressing c-Fos upon photostimulation of the injection site (n=9, 10, and 6 mice 
for WT animals injected with AAV2-hSyn-EYFP, ChR2-EYFP, or NpHR-EYFP into S1DZ; 
3-independent experiments). d, The number of c-Fos+ cells in the contralateral hemisphere 
of the injection site for the animals described in (c). e–h, The marble burying index (e), the 
% interaction (during the 1st laser-on session) of the sociability test (f), the total interaction 
time (during the 1st laser-on session) of the sociability test (g), the time spent in the center of 
an open field (during the 1st laser-on session) (h), and the total distance moved during the 
open field test (during the 1st laser-on session) (i) of animals prepared as in (a) (n=9, 12, and 
10 for WT animals injected with AAV2-hSyn-EYFP, ChR2-EYFP, or NpHR-EYFP into 
S1DZ; 3-independent experiments). * p<0.05, ** p<0.01 as calculated by two-way ANOVA 
with Tukey post-hoc tests (f) and one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc tests (c,d,e,g,h,i). 
Graphs indicate mean ± s.e.m.
Yim et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Fig. 10. Reducing neural activity in the cortical region centered on the S1DZ 
corrects the behavioral abnormalities of MIA offspring
a, Quantification of c-Fos+ cells in the S1DZ of adult offspring from mothers injected with 
PBS or Poly(I:C), and of adult Poly(I:C) offspring, in which AAV2-hSyn-EYFP was injected 
into the S1DZ (n=5, 4, and 4 mice for PBS, Poly(I:C), and Poly(I:C);EYFP groups, 
respectively; 3-independent experiments). b, AAV2-hSyn-EYFP was targeted into the S1DZ 
of adult offspring from either PBS or Poly(I:C) treated mothers. The accumulation of marble 
burying index over their behavioral session is plotted based on the laser schemes (‘Laser On-
Off’: n=7 and 7; ‘Laser Off-On’: n=7 and7 for AAV2-hSyn-EYFP injected PBS and 
Poly(I:C) offspring; 3-independent experiments, respectively). c–g, AAV2-hSyn-EYFP, 
ChR2-EYFP, or NpHR-EYFP viruses were targeted to the S1DZ of MIA offspring 
(poly(I:C)). The marble burying index (c), the % social target (d) and the total interaction 
time (e) of the sociability test, the time spent in the center of an open field (f), and the total 
distance moved during the open field test (g) are plotted as averages from each individual 3-
min sessions. Light blue indicates the laser ‘On’ sessions (‘Laser On-Off’: n=6, 5, and 10; 
‘Laser Off-On’: n=5, 5, and10 for AAV2-hSyn-EYFP, ChR2-EYFP, or NpHR-EYFP injected 
MIA offspring; 5-independent experiments). * p<0.05, ** p<0.01 as calculated by one-way 
Yim et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc tests (a) and two-way repeated measures ANOVA with Tukey 
post-hoc tests (b,c,d,e,f,g). Graphs indicate mean ± s.e.m.
Extended Data Fig. 11. The S1FL, S1DZ, and S1BF exhibit distinct efferent targets
a,c, AAV2-hSyn-mCherry and AAV2-hSyn-EYFP were injected into the S1FL and S1DZ (a) 
or S1BF and S1DZ (c), respectively. The two cortical regions project to distinct sub-regions 
of the M2, the striatum, and the associative cortices. Representative images are aligned to 
their corresponding AP levels in the Paxinos brain atlas (n=5). Scale bar represents 1mm. 
Yim et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 b,d, Quantification of percentage of co-localized projection fibers, represented as % co-
localization, from S1FL with those from S1DZ within the regions of interest (ROI; n= 5) (b) 
and from S1BF with those from S1DZ within the regions of interest (ROI;n=5) (d). S1DZ/
S1FL (S1DZ/S1BF) reflects the percentage S1FL (S1BF) projection fibers within the ROI 
co-localized with those from S1DZ, while S1FL/S1DZ (S1BF/S1DZ) reflects vice versa. 
The mouse brain in this figure has been reproduced with permission from Paxinos. Graph 
indicates mean ± s.e.m.
Yim et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Fig. 12. Distinct populations of S1DZ neurons projecting to TeA or Striatum 
selectively modulate marble burying and sociability phenotypes
a, Percentage of EYFP/c-Fos co-expressing neurons upon stimulation of animals described 
in Fig. 5c (n=6/6/6/6-mice, 3-independent experiments (PBS;RV-EYFP/Chronos/ArchT, 
MIA;RV-ArchT)). b–f, Performance on the marble burying test (b) (‘Laser On-Off’: 
n=4/8/5/7-mice for PBS;EYFP/PBS;Chronos/PBS;ArchT/MIA;ArchT, 4/7/5/7-independent 
experiments and ‘Laser Off-On’: n=5/5/5/5-mice for PBS;EYFP/PBS;Chronos/PBS;ArchT/
MIA;ArchT, 5/5/5/5-independent experiments), the % social target (c) and the total 
interaction time during the sociability test (d) (‘Laser On-Off’: n=4/6/9/9-mice for 
PBS;EYFP/PBS;Chronos/PBS;ArchT/MIA;ArchT, 4/5/7/7-independent experiments and 
‘Laser Off-On’: n=6/6/6/6-mice for PBS;EYFP/PBS;Chronos/PBS;ArchT/MIA;ArchT, 
5/5/5/5-independent experiments), and the time spent in center (e) and the total distance 
moved during the open field test (f) (‘Laser On-Off’: n=4/4/3/5-mice for PBS;EYFP/
PBS;Chronos/PBS;ArchT/MIA;ArchT, 4/4/3/5-independent experiments and ‘Laser Off-
On’: n=3/3/4/6-mice for PBS;EYFP/PBS;Chronos/PBS;ArchT/MIA;ArchT, 3/3/4/5-
independent experiments). g, Percentage of EYFP/c-Fos co-expressing neurons upon 
stimulation of animals described in Fig. 5i (n=6/6/6/6-mice, 3-independent experiments 
(PBS;RV-EYFP/Chronos/ArchT, MIA;RV-ArchT)). h–l, Performance on the marble burying 
test (h) (‘Laser On-Off’: n=4/4/4/4-mice for PBS;EYFP/PBS;Chronos/PBS;ArchT/
MIA;ArchT, 4-independent experiments and ‘Laser Off-On’: n=3/4/4/4-mice for 
PBS;EYFP/PBS;Chronos/PBS;ArchT/MIA;ArchT, 3-independent experiments), the % 
social target (i) and the total interaction time during the sociability test (j) (‘Laser On-Off’: 
n=4/3/3/3-mice for PBS;EYFP/PBS;Chronos/PBS;ArchT/MIA;ArchT, 3-independent 
experiments and ‘Laser Off-On’: n=3/3/3/4-mice for PBS;EYFP/PBS;Chronos/PBS;ArchT/
MIA;ArchT, 3-independent experiments), and the time spent in center (k) and the total 
distance moved during the open field test (l) (‘Laser On-Off’: n=3/5/4/6-mice for 
PBS;EYFP/PBS;Chronos/PBS;ArchT/MIA;ArchT, 3/5/4/5-independent experiments and 
‘Laser Off-On’: n=2/4/4/4-mice for PBS;EYFP/PBS;Chronos/PBS;ArchT/MIA;ArchT, 
2/4/4/4-independent experiments).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Jeong Tae Kwon, Michael D. Reed, Daniel Cho, and Shivani Bigler for assistance with experiments and 
thank Dr. Barbara Noro and Dr. Charles Jennings for critical reading of the manuscript. This work was supported by 
the Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative (J.R.H. and D.R.L.), Simons Foundation to the Simons Center 
for the Social Brain at MIT (Y.S.Y., J.R.H. and G.B.C.), Robert Buxton (G.B.C.), Hock E. Tan and K. Lisa Yang 
Center for Autism Research (G.B.C), the DFG grants CRC/TRR 128 project A07 and WA1600/8-1 (A.W.), the 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute (D.R.L.), the National Research Foundation of Korea grants MEST-35B-2011-
E00012 (S.K.) and NRF-2014R1A1A1006089 (H.K.), the Searle Scholars Program (J.R.H.), the Pew Scholar for 
Biomedical Sciences (J.R.H.), the Kenneth Rainin Foundation (J.R.H) and the National Institutes of Health grants 
R01DK106351 and R01DK110559 (J.R.H.).
References
1. Atladóttir HO, et al. Maternal infection requiring hospitalization during pregnancy and autism 
spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev Disord. 2010; 40:1423–1430. [PubMed: 20414802] 
Yim et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2. Patterson PH. Immune involvement in schizophrenia and autism:etiology, pathology and animal 
models. Behav Brain Res. 2009; 7:313–321.
3. Brown AS, et al. Elevated maternal C-reactive protein and autism in a national birth cohort. Mol 
Psychiatry. 2014; 19:259–264. [PubMed: 23337946] 
4. Atladóttir HO, et al. Association of family history of autoimmune diseases and autism spectrum 
disorders. Pediatrics. 2009; 124:687–694. [PubMed: 19581261] 
5. Ashwood P, Wills S, Van de Water J. The immune response in autism: a new frontier for autism 
research. J Lekoc Biol. 2006; 80:1–15.
6. Lee BK, et al. Maternal hospitalization with infection during pregnancy and risk of autism spectrum 
disorders. Brain Behav Immun. 2015; 44:199–105.
7. Smith SE, Li J, Garbett K, Mirnics K, Patterson PH. Maternal immune activation alters fetal brain 
development through interleukin-6. J Neurosci. 2007; 27:10695–10702. [PubMed: 17913903] 
8. Meyer U, Feldon J. Neural basis of psychosis-related behaviour in the infection model of 
schizophrenia. Behav Brain Res. 2009; 204:322–334. [PubMed: 19154759] 
9. Shi L, Fatemi SH, Sidwell RW, Patterson PH. Maternal influenza infection causes marked 
behavioral and pharmacological changes in the offspring. J Neurosci. 2003; 23:297–302. [PubMed: 
12514227] 
10. Malkova NV, Yu CZ, Hsiao EY, Moore MJ, Patterson PH. Maternal immune activation yields 
offspring displaying mouse versions of the three core symptoms of autism. Brain Behav Immun. 
2012; 26:607–616. [PubMed: 22310922] 
11. Choi GB, et al. The maternal interleukin-17a pathway in mice promotes autism-like phenotypes in 
offspring. Science. 2016; 351:933–939. DOI: 10.1126/science.aad0314 [PubMed: 26822608] 
12. Paxinos G, Franklin K. The mouse brain in stereotaxic coordinates. 2004
13. Lee T, Kim U. Descending projections from the dysgranular zone of rat primary somatosensory 
cortex processing deep somatic input. J Comp Neurol. 2012; 520:1021–1046. [PubMed: 
21935942] 
14. Welker W, Sanderson KJ, Shambes GM. Patterns of afferent projections to transitional zones in the 
somatic sensorimotor cerebral cortex of albino rats. Brain Res. 1984; 292:261–267. [PubMed: 
6692159] 
15. Chapin JK, Lin CS. Mapping the body representation in the SI cortex of anesthetized and awake 
rats. J Comp Neurol. 1984; 229:199–213. [PubMed: 6438190] 
16. Gogolla N, et al. Common circuit defect of excitatory-inhibitory balance in mouse models of 
autism. J Neurodev Disord. 2009; 1:172–181. [PubMed: 20664807] 
17. Orefice LL, et al. Peripheral Mechanosensory Neuron Dysfunction Underlies Tactile and 
Behavioral Deficits in Mouse Models of ASDs. Cell. 2016; 166:299–313. [PubMed: 27293187] 
18. Selby L, Z C, Sun QQ. Major defects in neocortical GABAergic inhibitory circuits in mice lacking 
the fragile X mental retardation protein. Neurosci Lett. 2007; 412:227–232. [PubMed: 17197085] 
19. Kepecs A, Fishell G. Interneuron cell types are fit to function. Nature. 2014; 605:318–326.
20. Mullen RJ, Buck CR, Smith AM. NeuN, a neuronal specific nuclear protein in vertebrates. 
Development. 1992; 116:201–211. [PubMed: 1483388] 
21. Haubst N, et al. Molecular dissection of Pax6 function: the specific roles of the paired domain and 
homeodomain in brain development. Development. 2004; 131:6131–6140. [PubMed: 15548580] 
22. Paez-Gonzalez P, et al. Ank3-dependent SVZ niche assembly is required for the continued 
production of new neurons. Neuron. 2011; 71:61–75. [PubMed: 21745638] 
23. Giusti SA, et al. Behavioral phenotyping of Nestin-Cre mice: implications for genetic mouse 
models of psychiatric disorders. J Psychiatr Res. 2014; 55:87–95. [PubMed: 24768109] 
24. Rubenstein JL, Merzenich MM. Model of autism: increased ratio of excitation/inhibition in key 
neural systems. Genes Brain Behav. 2003; 2:255–267. [PubMed: 14606691] 
25. Chao HT, et al. Dysfunction in GABA signalling mediates autism-like stereotypies and Rett 
syndrome phenotypes. Nature. 2010; 468
26. Han S, Tai C, Jones CJ, Scheuer T, Catterall WA. Enhancement of inhibitory neurotransmission by 
GABAA receptors having α2,3-subunits ameliorates behavioral deficits in a mouse model of 
autism. Neuron. 2014; 81:1282–1289. [PubMed: 24656250] 
Yim et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 27. Peñagarikano O, et al. Absence of CNTNAP2 leads to epilepsy, neuronal migration abnormalities, 
and core autism-related deficits. Cell. 2011; 147:235–246. [PubMed: 21962519] 
28. Nelson SB, Vallakh V. Excitatory/Inhibitory Balance and Circuit Homeostasis in Autism Spectrum 
Disorders. Neuron. 2015; 87:684–698. [PubMed: 26291155] 
29. Wöhr M, et al. Lack of parvalbumin in mice leads to behavioral deficits relevant to all human 
autism core symptoms and related neural morphofunctional abnormalities. Transl Psychiatry. 
2015; 10:e525.
30. Canetta S, et al. Maternal immune activation leads to selective functional deficits in offspring 
parvalbumin interneurons. Mol Psychiatry. 2016; 21:956–968. [PubMed: 26830140] 
31. Blundell J, et al. Neuroligin-1 deletion results in impaired spatial memory and increased repetitive 
behavior. J Neurosci. 2010; 30:2115–2129. [PubMed: 20147539] 
32. Tabuchi K, et al. A neuroligin-3 mutation implicated in autism increases inhibitory synaptic 
transmission in mice. Science. 2007; 318:71–76. [PubMed: 17823315] 
33. Etherton MR, Blaiss CA, Powell CM, Südhof TC. Mouse neurexin-1alpha deletion causes 
correlated electrophysiological and behavioral changes consistent with cognitive impairments. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106:17998–18003. [PubMed: 19822762] 
34. Zhang F, Wang LP, Boyden ES, Deisseroth K. Chrannelrhodopsin-2 and optical control of 
excitable cells. Nat Methods. 2006; 3:785–792. [PubMed: 16990810] 
35. Zhang F, et al. Multimodal fast optical interrogation of neural circuitry. Nature. 2007; 446:633–
639. [PubMed: 17410168] 
36. Vong L, et al. Leptin action on GABAergic neurons prevents obesity and reduces inhibitory tone to 
POMC neurons. Neuron. 2011; 71:142–154. [PubMed: 21745644] 
37. Hippenmeyer S, et al. A developmental switch in the response of DRG neurons to ETS 
transcription factor signaling. PLoS Biol. 2005; 3:e159. [PubMed: 15836427] 
38. Wickersham IR, Finke S, Conzelmann K, Callaway EM. Retrograde neuronal tracing with a 
deletion-mutant rabies virus. Nat Methods. 2007; 4:47–49. [PubMed: 17179932] 
39. Klapoetke NC, et al. Independent optical excitation of distinct neural populations. Nat Methods. 
2014; 11:338–346. [PubMed: 24509633] 
40. Chow BY, et al. High-performance genetically targetable optical neural silencing by light-driven 
proton pumps. Nature. 2010; 463:98–102. [PubMed: 20054397] 
41. Stoner R, et al. Patches of disorganization in the neocortex of children with autism. N Engl J Med. 
2014; 27:1209–1219.
42. El Malki K, et al. An alternative pathway of imiquimod-induced psoriasis-like skin inflammation 
in the absence of interleukin-17 receptor a signaling. J Invest Dermatol. 2013; 133:441–451. 
[PubMed: 22951726] 
43. Scattoni ML, Gandhy SU, Ricceri L, Crawley JN. Unusual repertoire of vocalizations in the BTBR 
T+tf/J mouse model of autism. PLoS One. 2008; 27:e3067.
Yim et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Cortical patches observed in offspring of dams following MIA
a, Representative S1 image of adult MIA offspring. Arrow indicates cortical patch. Scale 
bar, 500μm. b, Prevalence of cortical patches (n=10-mice/2-independent experiments) in 
MIA offspring. c, Superimposed image of cortical patches within AP 0.38–1.34mm (n=50-
mice/12-independent experiments). The mouse brain in this figure has been reproduced with 
permission from Paxinos. Scale indicates frequencies of patches (high=red; low=blue). d, 
Representative images of S1. White dotted-lines indicate boundary of cortical patches. Scale 
bar, 100μm. e, Quantification of SATB2+/PV+/VIP+/NeuN+ cells in S1cortical patches 
(n=4/4-mice (PBS/Poly(I:C)), 3-independent experiments for SATB2/VIP/NeuN; n=5/5-
mice (PBS/Poly(I:C)), 3-independent experiments for PV). f, Representative images of c-Fos 
expression in S1. Scale bar, 100μm. g, Quantification of c-Fos expression in S1 (n=4/4-mice 
(PBS/Poly(I:C)); 3-independent experiments). *p<0.05,**p<0.01 as calculated by two-way 
repeated measures ANOVA with Tukey (e) and two tailed unpaired t-test (g). Graphs 
indicate mean±s.e.m.
Yim et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. The presence and size of cortical patches are predictive of MIA-induced behaviors and 
their severity in offspring
a, Top: Representative S1 images of adult offspring from PBS- (E12.5;n=12-mice/7-
independent experiments) and poly(I:C)-injected dams (E12.5/E15.5/E18.5; n=19/15/9-
mice, 7/7/5-independent experiments). Bottom: Percentage of offspring with cortical patches 
in S1. Arrows indicate cortical patch. Scale bar, 100μm. b–i, Cortical patch size plotted 
against behavioral severity on marble burying (b,f), sociability (c,g), and open field tests 
(d,h), and total distance moved during sociability (e,i) for offspring exposed to MIA at 
E12.5/E15.5 (b–e) (n=19/15-mice, 7-independent experiments) or offspring from SFB+ 
Taconic-dam/SFB− Jackson-dam (f-i) (n=16/14-mice, 2-independent experiments). Green 
solid lines represent regression line; gray dotted lines indicate 95% confidence intervals for 
E12.5 (b–e) or SFB+ (f–i) groups. *p<0.05,**p<0.01 as calculated by Linear regression (b–
i).
Yim et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Increasing neural activity in the S1DZ region induces MIA behavioral phenotypes in 
WT mice
a, Schematics (left) and representative image (right) of EYFP-expressing virus injection site 
in the S1DZ-centered cortical region. The mouse brain in this figure has been reproduced 
with permission from Paxinos. Scale bar, 1mm. b, Optical stimulation protocol. Laser was 
given in a counterbalanced manner. c,i,o, Schematic of labeled cells (green) in PBS offspring 
(c), vGluT2-Cre (i), or PV-cre mice (o) (Pyr:Pyramidal neuron, PV:Parvalbumin-positive 
neuron, Ast:Astrocyte). d,j,p, Percentage of EYFP+ neurons co-expressing c-Fos upon 
photostimulation (n=8/8/8-mice, 4-independent experiments (PBS offspring;AAV2-hSyn-
EYFP/ChR2/NpHR); n=6/6/6-mice, 3-independent experiments (vGluT2-Cre;AAV2-EF1a-
DIO-EYFP/ChR2/NpHR); n=8/8/8-mice, 4-independent experiments (PV-cre;AAV2-EF1a-
DIO-EYFP/ChR2/NpHR)). e-h,k-n,q-t, Marble burying index (18-min) (e,k,q), % 
interaction (f,l,r) and total interaction time (g,m,s) during 1st laser-on session of the 
sociability test, and time spent in center during 1st laser-on session of the open field test 
(h,n,t) (n=12/12/18-mice, 5-independent experiments (PBS offspring;AAV2-hSyn-EYFP/
ChR2/NpHR); n=10/17/11-mice, 5-independent experiments (vGluT2-Cre;AAV2-EF1a-
DIO-EYFP/ChR2/NpHR); n=13/12/15-mice, 6-independent experiments (PV-cre;AAV2-
EF1a-DIO-EYFP/ChR2/NpHR)). *p<0.05,**p<0.01 as calculated by two-way ANOVA 
(f,l,r) and one-way ANOVA (d,e,g,h,j,k,m,n,p,q,s,t) with Tukey post-hoc tests. Graphs 
indicate mean±s.e.m.
Yim et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Reducing neural activity in the S1DZ region corrects behavioral abnormalities in MIA 
offspring
a, Representative images of c-Fos expression upon photostimulation of the S1DZ region in 
MIA offspring. Scale bar, 100μm. b, Percentage of EYFP/c-Fos co-expressing neurons upon 
stimulation (n=6/6/6-mice; 3-independent experiments (MIA;AAV2-hSyn-EYFP/ChR2/
NpHR)). c–f, Performance on marble burying test (c), % interaction (d) and total interaction 
time (e) during the sociability test, and time spent in center during the open field assay (f) 
(n=8/11/10/20-mice; 5/5/5/7-independent experiments (PBS;AAV2-hSyn-EYFP/
MIA;AAV2-hSyn-EYFP/ChR2/NpHR)). *p<0.05,**p<0.01 as calculated by two-way 
ANOVA (d) and one-way ANOVA (b,c,e,f) with Tukey post-hoc tests. Graphs indicate mean
±s.e.m.
Yim et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Distinct populations of S1DZ neurons selectively modulate marble burying and 
sociability phenotypes
a–b, Anterograde-tracing using AAV2-hSyn-mCherry (S1FL/S1BF) and AAV2-hSyn-EYFP 
(S1DZ) (n=5-mice/4-independent experiments). c,i, Schematics of optic fiber implantation 
(S1DZ) and virus injection sites in TeA (c) or dorsolateral striatum (i). The mouse brain in 
this figure has been reproduced with permission from Paxinos. d,j, Representative image of 
EYFP/c-Fos/DAPI expression in S1DZ after photostimulation (3-independent experiments). 
Scale bar, 300μm. e-h,k-n, Performance on the marble burying test (e,k) 
(TeA:n=9/13/10/12-mice; 7-independent experiments, striatum: n=7/8/8/8-mice; 5-
independent experiments (PBS;RV-EYFP/Chronos/ArchT, MIA;RV-ArchT)), % interaction 
(f,l) and total interaction time (g,m) during the sociability test (TeA:n=10/12/15/15-mice; 7-
independent experiments, striatum:n=7/6/6/7-mice; 5-independent experiments (PBS;RV-
EYFP/Chronos/ArchT, MIA;RV-ArchT)), and the open field test (h,n) (TeA:n=7/7/7/11-
mice;7-independent experiments, striatum:n=5/9/8/10-mice;5-independent experiments 
(PBS;RV-EYFP/Chronos/ArchT, MIA;RV-ArchT)). *p<0.05,**p<0.01 as calculated by two-
way ANOVA (f,l) and one-way ANOVA (e,g,h,k,m,n) with Tukey post-hoc tests. Graphs 
indicate mean±s.e.m.
Yim et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
