 The Dynamics of Functional Brain Networks: Integrated Network 
States during Cognitive Task Performance
James M. Shine1,2,*, Patrick G. Bissett1, Peter T. Bell3, Oluwasanmi Koyejo1, Joshua H. 
Balsters4, Krzysztof J. Gorgolewski1, Craig A. Moodie1, and Russell A. Poldrack1
1Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 2Neuroscience Research 
Australia, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia 3University of Queensland 
Centre for Clinical Research, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia 4Department of 
Health Sciences and Technology, Neural Control of Movement Laboratory, ETH Zurich, 
Switzerland
Abstract
Higher brain function relies upon the ability to flexibly integrate information across specialized 
communities of brain regions, however it is unclear how this mechanism manifests over time. In 
this study, we used time-resolved network analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging data 
to demonstrate that the human brain traverses between functional states that maximize either 
segregation into tight-knit communities or integration across otherwise disparate neural regions. 
Integrated states enable faster and more accurate performance on a cognitive task, and are 
associated with dilations in pupil diameter, suggesting that ascending neuromodulatory systems 
may govern the transition between these alternative modes of brain function. Together, our results 
confirm a direct link between cognitive performance and the dynamic reorganization of the 
network structure of the brain.
Within the brain, a highly dynamic functional landscape unfolds on a relatively fixed 
structural scaffold (Deco et al., 2015; Shen et al., 2015) in which the emergence of 
momentary neural coalitions forms the basis for complex cognitive functions (Bassett et al., 
2015; Cole et al., 2014), learning (Bassett et al., 2011) and consciousness (Barttfeld et al., 
2015; Godwin et al., 2015). This view of brain function highlights the role of individual 
brain regions within the context of a broader neural network (Bullmore and Sporns, 2012). 
Others have noted the importance of time-sensitive descriptions of brain activity in 
understanding the functional relevance of alterations in this network structure under different 
behavioral conditions (Varela et al., 2001).
*Corresponding Author/Lead Contact: macshine@stanford.edu. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Author Contributions
JMS, PGB, OK, PTB and RAP designed the analysis. JMS performed the analysis and wrote the first draft. PGB performed the Drift 
Diffusion Model analysis. JMS, PTB, OK, PGB, JHB, KJG, CAM and RAP reviewed and edited the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Published in final edited form as:
Neuron. 2016 October 19; 92(2): 544–554. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2016.09.018.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Time-resolved analyses of functional neuroimaging data provide a unique opportunity to 
examine these time-varying reconfigurations in global network structure. These experiments 
provide a sensitive method for non-invasively identifying time-sensitive shifts in inter-areal 
synchrony, which has been proposed as a key mechanism for effective communication 
between distant neural regions (Fries, 2015; Varela et al., 2001). To this end, recent 
experiments using functional MRI data have demonstrated that global brain signals 
transition between states of high and low connectivity strength over time (Zalesky et al., 
2014) and that these fluctuations are related to coordinated patterns of network topology 
(Betzel et al., 2015), however the psychological relevance of these fluctuations in network 
topology remain poorly understood.
In the present work, we show that dynamic fluctuations in network structure relate to 
ongoing cognitive function, and further demonstrate a relation between these fluctuations 
and integration within a network of frontoparietal, striatal and thalamic regions that track 
with the ascending neuromodulatory system of the brain, as characterized using 
pupillometry (Joshi et al., 2016). Together, the results of our experiments provide 
mechanistic evidence to support the role of global network integration in effective cognitive 
performance.
Results
Fluctuations in Network Cartography
To elucidate fluctuations in the network structure of the brain over time, we computed a 
windowed estimate of functional connectivity (Shine et al., 2015) from a cohort of 92 
unrelated subjects obtained from the Human Connectome Project (HCP; see Materials and 
Methods; Smith et al., 2013). After identifying the community structure of the brain’s 
functional connectivity network (Rubinov and Sporns, 2010), we estimated the importance 
of each region for maintaining this evolving network structure by calculating its connectivity 
both within (WT) and between (BT) each community (see Experimental Procedures; 
Guimerà and Nunes Amaral, 2005; Sporns and Betzel, 2015). While previous studies have 
clustered these metrics at the regional level using pre-defined cartographic boundaries 
(Guimerà and Nunes Amaral, 2005; Mattar et al., 2015), we hypothesized that the brain 
should fluctuate as a whole between cartographic extremes that were characterized by either 
segregation (i.e. the extent to which communication occurs primarily within tight-knit 
communities of regions) or integration (i.e. the degree of communication between distinct 
regions; Deco et al., 2015), which might otherwise be obscured by reduction into classes 
defined by these arbitrary cartographic boundaries.
To test this hypothesis in the resting state, we created a novel analysis technique to assess the 
temporal classification into two states without requiring the grouping of each region into a 
pre-defined cartographic class (Guimerà and Nunes Amaral, 2005) which we refer to here as 
the “cartographic profile”. Subject-level k-means clustering of these full profiles across time 
(k = 2, with stable clustering at higher values of k; see Materials and Methods and Figure 
S1) identified modes of information processing that were characterized by either integration 
or segregation (Figure 1a). The resting brain explored a dynamical repertoire within this 
topological regime (greater than expected by a stationary null model), fluctuating 
Shine et al.
Page 2
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 aperiodically between the integrated and segregated temporal states, with the majority of 
time spent in integrated states (70.32 ± 1.4% of rest session; all variability measures reported 
as standard deviations). Although the majority of the group-level fluctuations occurred in 
inter-modular connectivity (i.e. BT values transitioned between high and low states en 
masse), we also observed window-to-window fluctuations in intra-modular connectivity 
(WT) within individual parcels (see Video 1 [http://github.com/macshine/coupling] for a 
demonstration of the fluctuations of the cartographic profile over time).
The two states also showed differential patterns of regional inter-modular connectivity 
(Figures 1c and 2d), with the integrated states characterized by a global increase in inter-
modular communication across the brain (FDR α < 0.05 for all 375 individual parcels). This 
was also reflected in graph-theoretic measures of network-wide integration: temporal 
windows associated with segregated states had significantly elevated modularity (QS = 0.55 
± 0.1 vs. QI = 0.42 ± 0.2; Cohen’s d = 0.9; p = 10−11; Sporns and Betzel, 2015) whereas 
those associated with the integrated states had greater global efficiency (ES = 0.18 ± 0.03 vs. 
EI = 0.24 ± 0.05; d = 1.5; p = 10−8; Bullmore and Sporns, 2012). The shift towards 
integration was most prominent in sensory and attentional networks (Figure 1d; FDR α < 
0.05), whereas segregated states were associated with relatively higher participation within 
regions in the default mode network, suggesting that the cartographic profile may reflect 
changes in the engagement of attention and cognition over time (Corbetta and Shulman, 
2002). Importantly, the fluctuations in global network topology occurred independently of 
the mean framewise displacement in each TR (mean r = 0.01 ± 0.01), nuisance signals from 
cerebrospinal fluid and deep cerebral white matter (mean r = −0.02 ± 0.01) and of the 
number of modules estimated within each temporal window (mean r = 0.03 ± 0.10).
Task-based Alterations in the Cartographic Profile
We next examined whether the balance between network integration and segregation tracked 
with ongoing cognitive function using data from a cognitively-demanding “N-back” task 
(Barch et al., 2013). We observed a strong correlation between fluctuations in cartography 
across all parcels and the blocks of the experimental task (group mean Pearson’s r = 0.521; 
R2 = 0.27; p = 10−10; Figure 2a & Video 2), as well as a distinct alteration in the 
cartographic profile when compared to the resting state (Figure 2b). These changes were 
coincident with increased task-driven connectivity between frontoparietal, dorsal attention, 
cingulo-opercular and visual networks (2-back versus 0-back blocks; FDR q < 0.05; Figure 
S4), suggesting that global integration may have facilitated communication between 
otherwise segregated systems during more challenging 2-back condition. Importantly, the 
extent of integration remained correlated with the task regressor even after controlling for 
the global signal (mean r = 0.452 ± 0.21; p = 10−10) and the mean time-resolved 
connectivity across all parcels (mean r = 0.393 ± 0.14; p = 10−9), suggesting that the 
fluctuations in topology were not simply driven by constraints imposed by the task structure.
Together, these results suggest that the brain transitions into a state of higher global 
integration in order to meet extrinsic task demands. Indeed, all of the 375 regions showed a 
significant shift towards greater inter-modular connectivity (BT) during the N-back task 
when compared to the resting state (FDR α < 0.05 for all 375 regions). Despite this global 
Shine et al.
Page 3
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 shift towards integration, the effect was most pronounced within frontoparietal, default 
mode, striatal and thalamic regions (Figure 2c), many of which have been previously 
identified as belonging to a ‘rich club’ of densely-interconnected, high degree ‘hub’ nodes 
that are critical for the resilience and stability of the global brain network (van den Heuvel 
and Sporns, 2013). Importantly, the involvement of these highly interconnected hub regions 
during the task would likely facilitate effective communication between specialist regions 
that would otherwise remain isolated, thus affording a larger repertoire of potential 
responses to deal with the challenges of the task.
To determine whether network topology was sensitive to specific task demands, we 
calculated the cartographic profile in the remaining six tasks from the HCP in the same 
cohort of 92 subjects (Barch et al., 2013). While the performance of each task also led to an 
increase in global integration relative to rest, the effect was less pronounced than the lateral 
shift observed in the N-back task, particularly when compared to the relatively simple Motor 
task (88.8% of parcels showed higher BT in the N-back task; FDR α < 0.05). This effect was 
quantified by estimating the affine transformation required to align each subjects resting 
cartographic profile with their profile during each task (transformation along the BT axis 
relative to rest; Figure 2d). These results demonstrate that the extent of reconfiguration 
varies as a function of task: the relatively simple motor task, which involved repetitive 
movements of specific effectors, was associated with greatest segregation, whereas the more 
complex N-back task, which required complex working memory updating and cognitive 
control, was associated with greatest integration. The other five tasks recruited levels of 
integration between these two extremes. Together, these results suggest that integration may 
be particularly important for more difficult tasks, perhaps involving cognitive control, 
however additional work will be necessary to identify the specific demands that drive global 
integration.
Investigating the Relationship Between Cartography and Behavior
Based on these findings, we predicted that a more globally integrated network architecture 
would give rise to faster, more effective information processing during task performance. To 
test this hypothesis, we fit a drift diffusion model to each subject’s behavior (response time 
distributions and accuracy) on the more cognitively challenging 2-back trials within the N-
back task using the EZ-diffusion model (Wagenmakers et al., 2007; Figure 3a). The 
diffusion model provides a decomposition of behavioral performance into cognitively-
relevant latent variables representing the speed and accuracy of information processing (drift 
rate – ‘v’), the speed of perceptual and motor processes not directly related to the decision 
process (non-decision time – ‘t’) and a flexible measure of response caution (boundary 
separation – ‘a’; Ratcliff, 1978). Theoretically, faster progression throughout all stages of 
information processing from perception through action should be reflected in a positive 
relationship between global integration and both faster drift rate and shorter non-decision 
time, whereas integration should be independent of the boundary parameter.
We compared these model parameters to the mean N-back cartographic profile across the 
Discovery cohort (Figure 3a). The extent of global network integration in the cartographic 
profile was positively correlated with drift rate (Figure 3b), inversely correlated with non-
Shine et al.
Page 4
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 decision time (Figure 3c), and had no relationship to the boundary threshold. Each of these 
patterns was replicated in a separate cohort of 92 subjects. For both drift rate and non-
decision time (and in both the Discovery and Replication cohort), the relationship between 
cognitive function and integration was most pronounced across frontoparietal, striatal, 
thalamic and pallidal regions (FDR α < 0.05; Figure 3b and 3c). Together, these results 
suggest that a globally efficient, integrated network architecture supports fast, effective 
computation throughout the cognitive processing stream (Krienen et al., 2014), potentially 
through the facilitation of parallel processing mechanisms (Sigman and Dehaene, 2008).
Network Cartography Fluctuates with Pupil Diameter
Based on the results of these experiments, we hypothesized that neuromodulatory brain 
systems that mediate neural gain control (Aston-Jones and Cohen, 2005) may play an 
important role in regulating global integration. Recent invasive electrophysiological 
recordings in non-human primates have shown that non-luminance-related fluctuations pupil 
diameter tracks with neural firing in ascending neuromodulatory systems, such as the locus 
coeruleus, confirming the well-established proposal (Kahneman, 1973) that pupil diameter is 
a surrogate measure for arousal and task engagement (McGinley et al., 2015). Therefore, we 
measured pupil diameter from individuals in a separate resting state dataset (14 individuals; 
TR = 2s; 3.5mm3 voxels; 204 volumes; Murphy et al., 2014) and compared alterations in 
pupil diameter with the cartographic profile (w = 10 TRs). As predicted, we observed a 
positive correlation between pupil diameter and mean BT (group mean r = 0.241 +/− 0.06; 
R2 = 0.06; p = 10−5; Figure 4) that was maximal within frontoparietal, striatal and thalamic 
regions. In keeping with Eldar et al. (2013), these results suggest that the observed global 
fluctuations in network structure over time may have been driven by ongoing dynamic 
alterations in ascending neuromodulatory input to the cortex and subcortex, which through 
the modulation of neural gain, may have mediated increases in connectivity between 
otherwise segregated regions of the brain.
Identifying Regions Related to Global Integration
To further investigate the neurobiological mechanisms responsible for fluctuations in 
network topology over time, we used a parcel-wise conjunction analysis (Nichols et al., 
2005) to identify a set of regions that were significantly related to drift rate, non-decision 
time and pupil diameter. This analysis revealed a right-lateralized network of frontal, 
parietal, thalamic and striatal regions that were associated with consistently elevated BT 
across the three comparisons (blue; Figure 4c) and a set of regions in visual cortex and 
insula that were associated with elevated WT (red; Figure 4c). Together, these results 
highlight a distributed network of brain regions that mediate the computational integration 
required for effective cognitive processing.
Reproducibility
To test the reproducibility of our results, we performed three separate replication analyses: i) 
on a second resting state session from the same cohort of 92 unrelated subjects; ii) on a 
different cohort of 92 unrelated subjects from the HCP consortium; and iii) on 152 subjects 
from a separate dataset acquired at a different scanning site, using high-resolution functional 
data from the NKI Rockland dataset (Nooner et al., 2012). For each analysis in the resting 
Shine et al.
Page 5
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 state, we replicated the analyses described above and then summarized each outcome 
measure of interest at the group level (minimum r = 0.564; all p < 0.001; see Materials and 
Methods). In the task data, each of the relationships identified between the cartographic 
profile and behavior were replicated in the second set of 92 individuals from the HCP (both r 
> 0.610; p < 0.001; Figure S2). These results suggest that the time-resolved measures 
identified in this study were reliable across sessions, individuals and independent datasets 
collected using different scanners and imaging protocols.
Discussion
In this manuscript, we mapped the spatiotemporal dynamics of complex network structure in 
the human brain, revealing a dynamical system that fluctuates between segregated and 
integrated network topology (Figure 1). The cartographic profile observed in the resting state 
was modulated by the performance of a range of cognitive tasks in proportion to task 
demands (Figure 2). Importantly, the extent to which the brain was globally integrated was 
correlated with faster drift rate and shorter non-decision time during the N-back task, 
suggesting that integration relates to fast and effective cognitive performance (Figure 3). We 
then showed that integration within the functional connectome correlated with increases in 
pupil diameter (Figure 4), highlighting a potential neurobiological mechanism responsible 
for modulating network-level dynamics in the human brain. Finally, we were able to 
demonstrate that a network of right-lateralized frontoparietal, striatal and thalamic regions 
were responsible for mediating the effects of integration on cognitive function (Figure 4c).
In our final experiment, we demonstrated that the fluctuations in network cartography in the 
resting state correlate with changes in pupil diameter (Figure 4), which itself is a marker of 
arousal and behavioral engagement (McGinley et al., 2015). The locus coeruleus (Aston-
Jones and Cohen, 2005) is known to modulate pupil diameter (Joshi et al., 2016), and thus 
by inference, may play a role in the modulation of fluctuations in global network topology 
through phasic alterations in neural gain (Eldar et al., 2013). Thus, our results extend 
previous studies that have demonstrated a crucial link between neural gain and functional 
connectivity (Eldar et al., 2013; Yellin et al., 2015) by showing that fluctuations in neural 
gain are linked to alterations in network topology, that in turn, relate to effective behavioral 
performance.
There is a wealth of evidence to suggest that neuromodulatory inputs can have complex, 
non-linear effects on network organization and behavior (Bargmann and Marder, 2013), 
perhaps as a result of the balance between the ‘top-down’ attentional modulation of network 
architecture (Sara, 2009) and ‘bottom-up’ neuromodulatory input from the brainstem (Safaai 
et al., 2015). The network of right-lateralized cortical regions consistently associated with 
elevations in integration in our study provides further support for this hypothesis (Figure 4c), 
as ascending noradrenergic inputs preferentially impact neural function within the right 
cortical hemisphere (Pearlson and Robinson, 1981). While our results suggest a crucial role 
for ascending noradrenergic gain control, the topological organization of the functional 
connectome is likely to arise as the end result of multiple competing factors, including 
changes in tone within other neuromodulatory systems, such as the basal cholinergic nuclei 
(Steriade and McCarley, 2013), local interactions among functional regions, and activity in 
Shine et al.
Page 6
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 other diffuse projection systems, such as the intralaminar thalamic nuclei (Van der Werf et 
al., 2002).
Irrespective of the precise mechanism driving global fluctuations, our results suggest that 
system-wide alterations in network topology facilitate more effective behavioral 
performance, a hypothesis that has already garnered support from studies both in network 
dynamics (Kitzbichler et al., 2011) and pupillometery (Murphy et al., 2016). There is now 
growing evidence to support the notion that the brain traverses a metastable state-space in 
time (Deco et al., 2015), balancing the opposing tendencies for specialized, segregated 
processing with the need for global coordination and integration (Tognoli and Kelso, 2014). 
In addition, others have recently shown that fluctuations in network topology relate to 
distinct patterns of behavior during cognitive tasks (Alavash et al., 2016; Vatansever et al., 
2015). Here, we extend these studies by demonstrating fluctuations in network topology that 
relate to computationally-meaningful measures of effective behavioral performance.
Although we were able to demonstrate that greater system-wide integration was associated 
with improved cognitive performance on an N-back task, the precise role of network 
topology in cognition requires further exploration. The N-back task is often used as a 
measure of cognitive control, which itself is a complex construct composed of dissociable 
sub-components, such as updating, set-shifting and response inhibition (Miyake et al., 
2000), that likely rely on overlapping, yet distinct, neural architectures (Duncan, 2010; 
Poldrack et al., 2011). We demonstrated that the extent of reconfiguration varies as a 
function of task: the relatively simple motor task, which involved repetitive movements of 
specific effectors, was associated with greatest segregation, whereas the more complex 
cognitive N-back task, which required complex working memory updating and cognitive 
control, was associated with greatest integration. The other five tasks recruited levels of 
integration between these two extremes (see Figure 2d). Together, these results suggest that 
integration may be particularly important for more difficult tasks, perhaps involving 
cognitive control, however additional work will be necessary to identify the specific 
cognitive demands that drive global integration.
There are also some important limitations to note in our study. Firstly, although we provide 
indirect evidence for the relationship between neural gain and effective cognitive 
performance, the direct relationship between ascending neuromodulatory input to the brain 
and network topology requires further confirmation, perhaps utilizing the temporal 
resolution afforded by electrophysiological measures or the direct investigation of the 
influence of major neurotransmitter systems using neuromodulatory techniques, such as 
optogenetics. Secondly, on the basis of fMRI data alone, it is not possible to determine 
whether global integration facilitated increased connectivity between otherwise disparate 
regions, or whether the topological changes were merely a necessary bi-product of increased 
communication between specialist regions of the brain (Ramsey et al., 2010). Although the 
resolution of this question would likely require the causal manipulation of the brain (Keller 
et al., 2014), the utilization of computational modeling approaches may offer some insight 
into the underlying mechanism (Deco et al., 2015). Finally, although we directly compared 
the MTD approach to sliding window Pearson’s correlation, the standard approach used to 
calculate time-resolved connectivity, there are many techniques used to estimate these 
Shine et al.
Page 7
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 measures (Hutchison et al., 2012) and as such, further work is required to determine the 
robustness of the fluctuations in network topology across multiple time-sensitive 
connectivity metrics.
Together, our results demonstrate that global brain integration is closely related to cognitive 
function during an N-back task. By catalyzing communication between specialist regions of 
the brain that would otherwise remain segregated, global integration increases an individuals 
ability to accomplish complex cognitive tasks, potentially accelerating behavioral innovation 
and improving fitness in novel scenarios (Shanahan, 2012). As such, global integration is an 
important candidate mechanism responsible for the evolution of complex brain networks 
(van den Heuvel et al., 2016), and hence, for explaining the mechanism through which the 
brain creates complex, adaptive behavior.
Experimental Procedures
Data acquisition
For the primary discovery analysis, minimally preprocessed resting fMRI data were acquired 
from 100 unrelated participants from the Human Connectome Project (mean age 29.5 years, 
55% female; Glasser et al., 2013). For each participant, 14 minutes 30 seconds of resting 
state data were acquired using multiband gradient-echo EPI. The following parameters were 
used for data acquisition: TR = 720 ms, echo time = 33.1 ms, multiband factor = 8, flip 
angle = 52 degrees, field of view = 208×180 mm (matrix = 104 × 90), 2×2×2 isotropic 
voxels with 72 slices, alternated LR/RL phase encoding.
In addition to the discovery analysis, we also performed an extensive series of replication 
analyses including: i) data from the same participants using resting state data acquired 
during a second rest scan during the same scanning session; ii) an independent cohort of 100 
unrelated participants from the HCP dataset using identical acquisition parameters at the 
same scanning site; and iii) an out-of-sample replication using data collected from the NKI 
Rockland sample (TR = 650msec; voxel-size 3mm3) as part of the 1000 Functional 
Connectomes Project (Nooner et al., 2012).
Data pre-processing
Bias field correction and motion correction (12 linear DOF using FSL’s FLIRT) were 
applied to the HCP resting state data as part of the minimal preprocessing pipeline (Glasser 
et al., 2013). The first 100 time points were discarded from the data due to the presence of 
an evoked auditory signal associated with noise in the scanner. Resting state data acquired 
from the NKI Rockland sample were realigned to correct for head motion and then each 
participants’ functional scans were registered to both their T1-weighted structural image and 
then to the MNI152 atlas using FSLs boundary based registration and Advanced 
Normalization Tools software (Avants et al., 2008). After co-registration, data were 
manually inspected and of the 173 original participants, 11 [6.3%] scans were discarded due 
insufficient coverage of orbitofrontal cortex, temporopolar cortex and/or cerebellum.
Temporal artifacts were identified in each dataset by calculating framewise displacement 
(FD) from the derivatives of the six rigid-body realignment parameters estimated during 
Shine et al.
Page 8
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 standard volume realignment (Power et al., 2014), as well as the root mean square change in 
BOLD signal from volume to volume (DVARS). Frames associated with FD > 0.5mm or 
DVARS > 5% were identified, and participants with greater than 20% of the resting time 
points exceeding these values were excluded from further analysis (HCP group 1: 8/100; 
HCP group 2: 8/100; NKI group: 10/162). Due to concerns associated with the alteration of 
the temporal structure of the images, the data used in the main analysis were not ‘scrubbed’ 
(Power et al., 2014), however we did compare the results of our experiment with scrubbed 
data (missing values corrected using interpolation) and found strong correspondence 
between the outcome measures of the two studies (see Validation). Following artifact 
detection, nuisance covariates associated with the 12 linear head movement parameters (and 
their temporal derivatives), FD, DVARS, and anatomical masks from the CSF and deep 
cerebral WM were regressed from the data using the CompCor strategy (Behzadi et al., 
2007). Finally, in keeping with previous time-resolved connectivity experiments (Bassett et 
al., 2015), a temporal band pass filter (0.071 < f < 0.125 Hz) was applied to the data (see 
Validation).
Brain parcellation
Following pre-processing, the mean time series was extracted from 375 pre-defined regions-
of-interest (ROI). To ensure whole-brain coverage, we extracted: 333 cortical parcels (161 
and 162 regions from the left and right hemispheres, respectively) using the Gordon atlas 
(Gordon et al., 2014), 14 subcortical regions from Harvard-Oxford subcortical atlas 
(bilateral thalamus, caudate, putamen, ventral striatum, globus pallidus, amygdala and 
hippocampus), and 28 cerebellar regions from the SUIT atlas (Diedrichsen et al., 2009). 
These ROIs were chosen to maximize our ability to interrogate fluctuations in network 
architecture over time, however it bears mention that functional divisions may differ across 
subjects (Laumann et al., 2015).
Time-resolved functional connectivity
To estimate functional connectivity between the 375 ROIs, we used a recently described 
statistical technique (Multiplication of Temporal Derivatives [MTD]; Shine et al., 2015) that 
allows greater temporal resolution of time-resolved connectivity in BOLD time series data 
when compared to the conventional sliding-window Pearson’s correlation coefficient (Shine 
et al., 2015). The MTD is computed by calculating the point-wise product of temporal 
derivative of pairwise time series (Equation 1). The MTD is averaged over a temporal 
window, w in order to reduce the contamination of high-frequency noise in the time-resolved 
connectivity data. Code is freely available at https://github.com/macshine/coupling/.
[1]
Equation 1 – Multiplication of Temporal Derivatives, where for each time point, t, the MTD 
for the pairwise interaction between region i and j is defined according to equation 1, where 
dt is the first temporal derivative of the ith or jth time series at time t, σ is the standard 
Shine et al.
Page 9
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 deviation of the temporal derivative time series for region i or j and w is the window length 
of the simple moving average. This equation can then be calculated over the course of a time 
series to obtain an estimate of time-resolved connectivity between pairs of regions.
Time-resolved functional connectivity
Time-resolved functional connectivity was calculated between all 375 brain regions using 
the MTD (Shine et al., 2015) within a sliding temporal window of 14 time points (10.1 
seconds for HCP; 16 time points for NKI data ~ 10.4 seconds). Individual functional 
connectivity matrices were calculated within each temporal window, thus generating an 
unthresholded (that is, signed and weighted) 3D adjacency matrix (region × region × time) 
for each participant. Previous work has shown that, when using the MTD, a window length 
of seven time points provides optimal sensitivity and specificity for detecting dynamic 
changes in functional connectivity structure in simulated time series data (Shine et al., 
2015). To balance these benefits with the need to track changes in slow cortical fluctuations 
which are hypothesized to fluctuate at ~0.1 Hz (Shen et al., 2015), we used a temporal 
window of 14 time points to calculate a simple moving average of the MTD, which allowed 
for estimates of signals at approximately 0.1 Hz. While there are statistical arguments to 
suggest that the potential effects of noise can render estimation of connectivity matrices 
difficult with smaller samples, it is currently unclear whether these issues will have the same 
effects on the covariance estimates created with the MTD. However, we note that the MTD 
is more sensitive to changes in covariance than connectivity (Shine et al., 2015) and others 
have shown that covariance is a more reliable marker of coupling strength in BOLD data 
(Cole et al., 2016). Most importantly, as we show, our analyses were reliable and replicable 
using the MTD across multiple datasets.
Time- resolved community structure
The Louvain modularity algorithm from the Brain Connectivity Toolbox (BCT; (Rubinov 
and Sporns, 2010) was used in combination with the MTD to estimate both time-averaged 
and time-resolved community structure. The Louvain algorithm iteratively maximizes the 
modularity statistic, Q, for different community assignments until the maximum possible 
score of Q has been obtained (see Equation 2). The modularity estimate for a given network 
is therefore a quantification of the extent to which the network may be subdivided into 
communities with stronger within-module than between-module connections.
[2]
Equation 2 – Louvain modularity algorithm, where v is the total weight of the network (sum 
of all negative and positive connections), wij is the weighted and signed connection between 
regions i and j, eij is the strength of a connection divided by the total weight of the network, 
and δMiMj is set to 1 when regions are in the same community and 0 otherwise. ‘+’ and ‘−’ 
superscripts denote all positive and negative connections, respectively.
Shine et al.
Page 10
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For each temporal window, the community assignment for each region was assessed 500 
times and a consensus partition was identified using a fine-tuning algorithm from the Brain 
Connectivity Toolbox (BCT, http://www.brain-connectivity-toolbox.net/). This afforded an 
estimate of both the time-resolved modularity (QT) and cluster assignment (CiT) within each 
temporal window for each participant in the study. All graph theoretical measures were 
calculated on weighted and signed connectivity matrices (Rubinov and Sporns, 2010) and 
the γ parameter was set to 1.
Based on time-resolved community assignments, we estimated within-module connectivity 
by calculating the time-resolved module-degree Z-score (WT; within module strength) for 
each region in our analysis (Equation 3; Guimerà and Nunes Amaral, 2005).
[3]
Equation 3 – Module degree Z-score, WiT, where κiT is the strength of the connections of 
region i to other regions in its module si at time T, 
 is the average of κ over all the 
regions in si at time T, and σκsiT is the standard deviation of κ in si at time T.
Time- resolved hub structure
The participation coefficient, BT, quantifies the extent to which a region connects across all 
modules (i.e. between-module strength) and has previously been used to successfully 
characterize hubs within brain networks (e.g. see Power et al., 2013). The BT for each region 
was calculated within each temporal window using Equation 4.
[4]
Equation 4 - Participation coefficient BiT, where κisT is the strength of the positive 
connections of region i to regions in module s at time T, and κiT is the sum of strengths of 
all positive connections of region i at time T. The participation coefficient of a region is 
therefore close to 1 if its connections are uniformly distributed among all the modules and 0 
if all of its links are within its own module.
Cartographic profiling
To track fluctuations in cartography over time, we created a novel analysis technique that did 
not require the labeling of each node into a pre-defined cartographic class (Guimerà and 
Nunes Amaral, 2005). For each temporal window, we computed a joint histogram of within- 
and between-module connectivity measures, which we refer to here as a “cartographic 
profile” (Figure 1). Code for this analysis is freely available at https://github.com/macshine/
Shine et al.
Page 11
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 integration/. To test whether the cartographic profile of the resting brain fluctuated over time 
between two topological extremes, we performed clustering of temporal windows without 
the use of cartographic class labels. To do so, we classified the joint histogram of each 
temporal window (which is naïve to cartographic boundaries) over time using a k-means 
clustering analysis (k = 2). As a result of this analysis, each window was assigned to one of 
two clusters. K-means was repeated with 500 random restarts to mitigate the sensitivity of k-
means to initial conditions.
To ensure that the a priori choice of two clusters for the k-means analysis was reflective of 
the broader patterns in the data across multiple values of k, we reran the clustering analysis 
in the discovery cohort of 92 subjects across a range of k values (2-20) and then compared 
the resultant cluster partitions to the k = 2 clusters by calculating the mutual information 
between the each pair of partitions. The partition identified at each value of k was strongly 
similar to the pattern identified at k = 2 (mean mutual information = 0.400 ± 0.02; Figure 
S1). We also provided further evidence for this partition by performing a principle 
component analysis for each subject’s data – this test demonstrated that the first two 
principle components for each subject were associated with the integrated (20.2 ± 1.4% 
variance) or segregated state (4.9 ± 2.3% of variance).
To explicitly test whether the resting brain fluctuated more frequently than a stationary null 
model, we calculated the absolute value of the window-to-window difference in the mean BT 
score for each iteration of a VAR null model. In keeping with Zalesky et al. (Zalesky et al., 
2014), VAR model order was set at 11, appropriately mimicking the expected temporal 
signature of the BOLD response in 0.72s TR data. The mean covariance matrix across all 92 
subjects from the discovery group was used to generate 2500 independent null data sets, 
which allows for the appropriate estimation of the tails of non-parametric distributions 
(Nichols and Holmes, 2002). These time series were then filtered in a similar fashion to the 
BOLD data. For each analysis, the maximum statistic was concatenated for each 
independent simulation. We then calculated the 95th percentile of this distribution and used 
this value to determine whether the resting state data fluctuated more frequently than the null 
model. In the discovery cohort, 16.1 ± 1.1% of temporal windows were associated with 
deviations ≥ 95th percentile of the VAR null model (i.e. greater than the predicted 5%), 
suggesting that the resting state was associated with significant dynamic fluctuations in 
topology. Importantly, the significant fluctuations along the BT axis remained after 
correcting for ongoing changes in the number of modules per temporal window.
To estimate patterns of topology associated with each state, the original 3D connectivity 
matrix containing MTD values was then reorganized into those windows associated with the 
two states (defined in the k-means analysis; k =2). The modularity of these windows 
associated with each of the two states were then compared statistically using an independent 
samples t-test. Importantly, the two states were matched on graph density, suggesting that 
the fluctuations in BT did not occur simply due to alterations in network sparsity over time. 
A similar technique was used to estimate the global efficiency of each temporal window. As 
global efficiency (Equation 5) cannot be computed from networks with negative weights 
(Barch et al., 2013), we first thresholded the connectivity matrix within each window to 
Shine et al.
Page 12
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 include only positive edge weights before calculating global efficiency on the remaining 
connected component.
[5]
Equation 4 – global efficiency of a network, where n denotes the total nodes in the network 
and di,j denotes the shortest path between a node i and neighboring node j.
To estimate the patterns of brain connectivity associated with each state, we binned each 
region’s WT and BT scores into those windows associated with either integrated or 
segregated states (using the k = 2 partition). We then compared the regional WT and BT 
scores across the two states using an independent-samples t-test. As expected, all 375 
parcels demonstrated higher BT in the more Integrated states, whereas none of the 375 
parcels showed significantly different WT in either state (FDR α < 0.05). For interpretation 
and display, regional BT scores were converted into Z-scores and then projected onto surface 
renderings (Figure 1). We also performed a targeted analysis to determine whether activity 
and connectivity within the default network were related to fluctuations in BT (activity: 
group mean r = −0.044 ± 0.09; p = 10−5; and connectivity: group mean r = 0.127 ± 0.09; p = 
10−12).
Task-based alterations in the cartographic profile
To assess task-based functional connectivity, preprocessed data from the original 92 
unrelated subjects from the discovery cohort were collected while these subjects performed 
seven different tasks in the fMRI (see Barch et al., 2013 for further details of each 
experimental paradigm). The mean time series was then extracted from the same 375 regions 
as defined in the resting state analysis. To control for spurious patterns of connectivity 
associated with task-evoked activity, we first regressed the HRF-convolved task block data 
from each time series. The MTD metric was then calculated on the residuals of this 
regression using a window length of 14 TRs (~10 seconds at 0.72 second TR). These data 
were then subjected to a cartographic profiling analysis in a similar fashion to the resting 
state data. We also directly modeled the mean time-resolved network-level connectivity 
associated with 2-back and 0-back blocks in the N-back task using a mixed-effects general 
linear model (FDR q < 0.05; Figure S4). The network membership of each of the parcels 
was defined according to a previous study (Gordon et al., 2014).
To compare the patterns of time-resolved connectivity across the N-back task to those 
observed during rest, we tested whether any bins within the 2-dimensional cartographic 
profile were significantly modulated by task by running a mixed-effects general linear model 
analysis at the individual level, fitting the group-averaged joint histogram to regressors 
tracking two-back, zero-back and rest blocks in both the Motor and the N-back task, 
separately. We then compared the task blocks and the resting state data statistically using 
separate two-sided, one-sample t-tests across subjects (FDR α < 0.05). We observed a 
rightward deviation in the mean cartographic profile during the 2-back vs 0-back block, 
Shine et al.
Page 13
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 however to allow direct comparison across tasks and rest, we opted to include the mean 2-
back profile for each comparison described in the main manuscript. A similar analysis was 
run comparing the mean WT and BT across all 375 parcels. As in previous steps, the regional 
BT scores were converted into Z-scores (otherwise the regional heterogeneity associated 
with each task would be hidden within the much-larger mean effect) and then projected onto 
surface renderings (Figure 2).
In order to assess the alteration in the cartographic profile as a function of task performance, 
we estimated the affine transformation (using a correlation cost function with 3 degrees of 
freedom, including translation and rotation parameters) between each individual subjects’ 
resting state cartographic profile and the profile observed in each of the seven tasks. To 
ensure that any differences observed during task performance were not confounded by 
fluctuations in global signal or connectivity, we replicated the analysis after separately 
regressing the global signal and the mean MTD value across all parcels (global signal: mean 
r = 0.452 ± 0.21, p = 10−10; mean MTD: mean r = 0.393 ± 0.14 p = 10−9).
Investigating the Relationship Between Cartography and Behavior
To interrogate the relationship between the cartographic profile and behavioral performance, 
we fit an EZ-diffusion model to the performance measures from the N-back task 
(Wagenmakers et al., 2007). This model takes in the mean RT on correct trials, mean 
variance of RT across correct trials, and mean accuracy across the task and computes from 
them a value for drift rate, boundary separation, and non-decision time – the three main 
parameters for the diffusion model (Figure 3). We used the EZ-diffusion model instead of 
alternative diffusion fitting routines (e.g. fast-dm or DMAT) because previous work has 
shown that the EZ-diffusion model is particularly effective for recovering individual 
differences in parameter values, which were of particular interest in this experiment (van 
Ravenzwaaij and Oberauer, 2009). After fitting each subjects data to the diffusion model, we 
then performed a group-level Pearson’s correlation between each bin of the mean joint 
histogram in each task and the three outcome measures associated with the N-back task: the 
drift rate (Figure 3b), the non-decision time (Figure 3c) and the boundary threshold (results 
not shown, as no bins survived multiple comparisons correction). The model was fit on 
results from the 2-back task blocks, as a many subjects made no errors on the 0-back 
condition, thus precluding our ability to fit their data to the parameters of the drift diffusion 
model. For each comparison, the null hypothesis of no relationship was rejected after false 
discovery rate correction (p < 0.05). We also compared the cartographic profile with median 
reaction time and accuracy for both the cohorts and observed a similar relationship between 
integration and improved performance.
Some work suggests that the EZ-diffusion model performs poorly when there are 
"contaminants" in the data (Ratcliff et al., 2015), which are trials in which the usual 
diffusion parameters do not apply (like fast guesses and attentional lapses). We searched for 
evidence of contaminants in our data and found no evidence of them (i.e. the few fast 
responses [110 RTs <400ms across both samples] were not guesses [93% accuracy was the 
same as the 93% accuracy for all trials). Therefore, we proceeded with the EZ-diffusion 
Shine et al.
Page 14
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 model, which performs as well or better than more complicated fitting routines when 
contaminants are not present (Ratcliff et al., 2015; van Ravenzwaaij and Oberauer, 2009).
Network Cartography Fluctuates with Pupil Diameter
To test the hypothesis that fluctuations in cartography related to activity in ascending 
neuromodulatory systems, we acquired a separate dataset of 14 individuals (mean age: 29 
years; 8/14 male) in which pupil diameter was measured over time during the quiet resting 
state (TR = 2s; 3.5mm3 voxels; 204 volumes; Murphy et al., 2014). Participants were 
instructed to relax, think of nothing in particular and maintain fixation for 8 min at a 
centrally presented crosshair (subtending 0.650 of the visual angle). BOLD fMRI data were 
preprocessed using SPM8 software (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). Pupil diameter was 
recorded continuously from the left eye at rest and during task using an iView X MRI-SV 
eye tracker (SMI, Needham, MA) at a sampling rate of 60 Hz. Pupillometric data were 
thoroughly pre-processed to remove potential sources of noise (see Murphy et al., 2014 for 
details) and then down-sampled to a 0.5 Hz sampling rate (in order to match the sampling 
frequency of the fMRI data). A pupil diameter vector for each scanning run was then 
convolved with the informed basis set to yield three pupil regressors of interest per 
participant. The mean of these regressors was then correlated with the cartographic profile 
across all temporal windows for each of the 14 subjects (mean correlation: r = 0.241 ± 0.06). 
A set of one-sample t-tests was then used to test whether the correlation between each bin of 
the cartographic profile was significantly different from zero (FDR α < 0.05). A similar t-
test was used to determine whether the correlation between the mean BT and pupil diameter 
was significantly greater than zero across the cohort of 14 subjects.
Identifying Regions Related to Global Integration
We used a parcel-wise conjunction analysis (Nichols et al., 2005) to identify a set of regions 
in which the BT and WT were significantly related to drift rate, non-decision time and pupil 
diameter. For each comparison in turn, we determined whether the WT/BT individual parcel 
was significantly correlated with each outcome measure of interest above chance (FDR α < 
0.05). We then binarized the resultant parcel vectors and calculate a conjunction analysis, 
separately for both WT and BT. Results were then projected onto surface renderings for 
interpretation.
Replication analysis
To quantify how well our results replicated across sessions and datasets, we calculated 
group-level correlations between each of the measures identified in our analysis. Overall, we 
observed a strong positive correlation between the outcome measures identified in the two 
sessions (for all statistical tests, p < 0.001): graph measures – rWT, = 0.982, rBT = 0.957; and 
mean cartographic profiles rCart = 0.982 (Figure S2). We also confirmed the presence of 
these results in a unique cohort of 92 unrelated participants from the HCP: graph measures – 
rWT = 0.971, rBT = 0.967; and mean cartographic profiles – rCart = 0.973 (Figure S2). We 
also observed similarly positive relationships between the group-level outcome measures 
estimated from the HCP and NKI data (for all statistical tests, p < 0.001): graph measures – 
rWT = 0.941, rBT = 0.857; and mean cartographic profiles – rCart = 0.927 (Figure S2). In 
Shine et al.
Page 15
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 addition, the same fluctuations observed in the HCP dataset were also present in the NKI 
dataset (see Video 3 at http://github.com/macshine/coupling).
Finally, the linear relationships between behavioral performance and the cartographic profile 
were consistent across the discovery and replication datasets. A spatial correlation between 
the two datasets was strongly positive for both the relationship with drift rate (r = 0.613; R2 
= 0.37; p = 10−11; Figure S3) and non-decision time (r = 0.681; R2 = 0.46; p = 10−15; Figure 
S3), but the null hypothesis could not be rejected for the diffusion boundary (p > 0.500).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
The data reported in this paper were made publicly available by the Human Connectome Project and 1000 
Functional Connectomes project. There were no conflicts of interest for any authors. We would like to thank 
Vanessa Sochat for her assistance with implementation, Peter Murphy, Redmond O’Connell and Ian Robertson for 
their work collecting and analyzing the data used for the pupillometry analysis, Jamie Li for help with data analysis, 
Michael Riis and Ian Eisenberg for their insights and Tim Laumann, Claire O’Callaghan, Rick Shine and Rav Suri 
for their critical review of the manuscript.
References
Alavash M, Thiel CM, Giessing C. Dynamic coupling of complex brain networks and dual-task 
behavior. NeuroImage. 2016; 129:233–246. [PubMed: 26803061] 
Aston-Jones G, Cohen JD. An Integrative Theory of Locus Coeruleus-Norepinephrine Function: 
Adaptive Gain and Optimal Performance. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2005; 28:403–450. [PubMed: 
16022602] 
Avants BB, Epstein CL, Grossman M, Gee JC. Symmetric diffeomorphic image registration with 
cross-correlation: evaluating automated labeling of elderly and neurodegenerative brain. Med Image 
Anal. 2008; 12:26–41. [PubMed: 17659998] 
Barch DM, et al. Function in the human connectome: task-fMRI and individual differences in 
behavior. NeuroImage. 2013; 80:169–189. [PubMed: 23684877] 
Bargmann CI, Marder E. From the connectome to brain function. Nat Meth. 2013; 10:483–490.
Barttfeld P, Uhrig L, Sitt JD, Sigman M, Jarraya B, Dehaene S. Signature of consciousness in the 
dynamics of resting-state brain activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2015; 112:887–892. 
[PubMed: 25561541] 
Bassett DS, Wymbs NF, Porter MA, Mucha PJ, Carlson JM, Grafton ST. Dynamic reconfiguration of 
human brain networks during learning. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2011; 108:7641–7646. 
[PubMed: 21502525] 
Bassett DS, Yang M, Wymbs NF, Grafton ST. Learning-induced autonomy of sensorimotor systems. 
Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:744–751. [PubMed: 25849989] 
Behzadi Y, Restom K, Liau J, Liu TT. A component based noise correction method (CompCor) for 
BOLD and perfusion based fMRI. NeuroImage. 2007; 37:90–101. [PubMed: 17560126] 
Betzel RF, Fukushima M, He Y, Zuo X-N, Sporns O. Dynamic fluctuations coincide with periods of 
high and low modularity in resting-state functional brain networks. NeuroImage. 2015; 127:287–
297. [PubMed: 26687667] 
Bullmore E, Sporns O. The economy of brain network organization. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2012; 
13:336–349. [PubMed: 22498897] 
Cole MW, Bassett DS, Power JD, Braver TS, Petersen SE. Intrinsic and task-evoked network 
architectures of the human brain. Neuron. 2014; 83:238–251. [PubMed: 24991964] 
Shine et al.
Page 16
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cole MW, Yang GJ, Murray JD, Repovs G. Functional connectivity change as shared signal dynamics. 
Journal of Neuroscience Methods. 2016; 259:22–39. [PubMed: 26642966] 
Corbetta M, Shulman GL. Control of Goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nat. 
Rev. Neurosci. 2002; 3:215–229.
Deco G, Tononi G, Boly M, Kringelbach ML. Rethinking segregation and integration: contributions of 
whole-brain modelling. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2015; 16:430–439. [PubMed: 26081790] 
Diedrichsen J, Balsters JH, Flavell J, Cussans E, Ramnani N. A probabilistic MR atlas of the human 
cerebellum. NeuroImage. 2009; 46:39–46. [PubMed: 19457380] 
Duncan J. The multiple-demand (MD) system of the primate brain: mental programs for intelligent 
behaviour. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 2010; 14:172–179. [PubMed: 20171926] 
Eldar E, Cohen JD, Niv Y. The effects of neural gain on attention and learning. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 
16:1146–1153. [PubMed: 23770566] 
Fries P. Rhythms for Cognition: Communication through Coherence. Neuron. 2015; 88:220–235. 
[PubMed: 26447583] 
Glasser MF, et al. The minimal preprocessing pipelines for the Human Connectome Project. 
NeuroImage. 2013; 80:105–124. [PubMed: 23668970] 
Godwin D, Barry RL, Marois R. Breakdown of the brain's functional network modularity with 
awareness. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2015; 112:3799–3804. [PubMed: 25759440] 
Gordon EM, Laumann TO, Adeyemo B, Huckins JF, Kelley WM, Petersen SE. Generation and 
Evaluation of a Cortical Area Parcellation from Resting-State Correlations. Cereb. Cortex. 2014; 
26:288–303. [PubMed: 25316338] 
Guimerà R, Nunes Amaral LA. Functional cartography of complex metabolic networks. Nature. 2005; 
433:895–900. [PubMed: 15729348] 
Hutchison RM, Womelsdorf T, Gati JS, Everling S, Menon RS. Resting-state networks show dynamic 
functional connectivity in awake humans and anesthetized macaques. Hum Brain Mapp. 2012; 
34:2154–2177. [PubMed: 22438275] 
Joshi S, Li Y, Kalwani RM, Gold JI. Relationships between Pupil Diameter and Neuronal Activity in 
the Locus Coeruleus, Colliculi, and Cingulate Cortex. Neuron. 2016; 89:221–234. [PubMed: 
26711118] 
Keller CJ, Honey CJ, Megevand P, Entz L, Ulbert I, Mehta AD. Mapping human brain networks with 
cortico-cortical evoked potentials. Phil Trans B. 2014; 369:20130528.
Kitzbichler MG, Henson RNA, Smith ML, Nathan PJ, Bullmore ET. Cognitive effort drives workspace 
configuration of human brain functional networks. J. Neurosci. 2011; 31:8259–8270. [PubMed: 
21632947] 
Krienen FM, Yeo BTT, Buckner RL. Reconfigurable task-dependent functional coupling modes cluster 
around a core functional architecture. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., B, Biol. Sci. 2014; 
369:20130526–20130526. [PubMed: 25180304] 
Laumann TO, Gordon EM, Adeyemo B, Snyder AZ. Functional System and Areal Organization of a 
Highly Sampled Individual Human Brain. Neuron. 2015; 87:657–670. [PubMed: 26212711] 
Mattar MG, Cole MW, Thompson-Schill SL, Bassett DS. A Functional Cartography of Cognitive 
Systems. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2015; 11:e1004533. [PubMed: 26629847] 
McGinley MJ, Vinck M, Reimer J, Batista-Brito R. Waking state: rapid variations modulate neural and 
behavioral responses. Neuron. 2015; 87:1143–1161. [PubMed: 26402600] 
Miyake A, Friedman NP, Emerson MJ, Witzki AH, Howerter A, Wager TD. The Unity and Diversity 
of Executive Functions and Their Contributions to Complex “Frontal Lobe” Tasks: A Latent 
Variable Analysis. Cognitive Psychology. 2000; 41:49–100. [PubMed: 10945922] 
Murphy PR, O'Connell RG, O'Sullivan M, Robertson IH, Balsters JH. Pupil diameter covaries with 
BOLD activity in human locus coeruleus. Hum Brain Mapp. 2014; 35:4140–4154. [PubMed: 
24510607] 
Murphy PR, van Moort ML, Nieuwenhuis S. The Pupillary Orienting Response Predicts Adaptive 
Behavioral Adjustment after Errors. PLoS ONE. 2016; 11:e0151763. [PubMed: 27010472] 
Nichols T, Brett M, Andersson J, Wager T, Poline J-B. Valid conjunction inference with the minimum 
statistic. NeuroImage. 2005; 25:653–660. [PubMed: 15808966] 
Shine et al.
Page 17
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Nichols TE, Holmes AP. Nonparametric permutation tests for functional neuroimaging: a primer with 
examples. Hum Brain Mapp. 2002; 15:1–25. [PubMed: 11747097] 
Nooner KB, et al. The NKI-Rockland Sample: A Model for Accelerating the Pace of Discovery 
Science in Psychiatry. Front. Neurosci. 2012; 6:152. [PubMed: 23087608] 
Pearlson GD, Robinson RG. Suction lesions of the frontal cerebral cortex in the rat induce 
asymmetrical behavioral and catecholaminergic responses. Brain Research. 1981; 218:233–242. 
[PubMed: 7196790] 
Poldrack RA, Kittur A, Kalar D, Miller E, Seppa C, Gil Y, Parker DS, Sabb FW, Bilder RM. The 
Cognitive Atlas: Toward a Knowledge Foundation for Cognitive Neuroscience. Front 
Neuroinform. 2011; 5:17. [PubMed: 21922006] 
Power JD, Mitra A, Laumann TO, Snyder AZ, Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE. Methods to detect, 
characterize, and remove motion artifact in resting state fMRI. NeuroImage. 2014; 84:320–341. 
[PubMed: 23994314] 
Power JD, Schlaggar BL, Lessov-Schlaggar CN, Petersen SE. Evidence for hubs in human functional 
brain networks. Neuron. 2013; 79:798–813. [PubMed: 23972601] 
Ramsey JD, Hanson SJ, Hanson C, Halchenko YO, Poldrack RA, Glymour C. Six problems for causal 
inference from fMRI. NeuroImage. 49:1545–1558.
Ratcliff R. A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological review. 1978; 85:59–108.
Ratcliff R, Thompson CA, McKoon G. Modeling individual differences in response time and accuracy 
in numeracy. Cognition. 2015; 137:115–136. [PubMed: 25637690] 
Rubinov M, Sporns O. Complex network measures of brain connectivity: Uses and interpretations. 
NeuroImage. 2010; 52:1059–1069. [PubMed: 19819337] 
Safaai H, Neves R, Eschenko O, Logothetis NK, Panzeri S. Modeling the effect of locus coeruleus 
firing on cortical state dynamics and single-trial sensory processing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2015; 112:12834–12839. [PubMed: 26417078] 
Sara SJ. The locus coeruleus and noradrenergic modulation of cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2009; 
10:211–223. [PubMed: 19190638] 
Shanahan M. The brain's connective core and its role in animal cognition. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., 
B, Biol. Sci. 2012; 367:2704–2714. [PubMed: 22927569] 
Shen K, Hutchison RM, Bezgin G, Everling S, McIntosh AR. Network structure shapes spontaneous 
functional connectivity dynamics. J. Neurosci. 2015; 35:5579–5588. [PubMed: 25855174] 
Shine JM, Koyejo O, Bell PT, Gorgolewski KJ, Gilat M, Poldrack RA. Estimation of dynamic 
functional connectivity using Multiplication of Temporal Derivatives. NeuroImage. 2015; 
122:399–407. [PubMed: 26231247] 
Sigman M, Dehaene S. Brain mechanisms of serial and parallel processing during dual-task 
performance. J. Neurosci. 2008; 28:7585–7598. [PubMed: 18650336] 
Smith SM, et al. Resting-state fMRI in the Human Connectome Project. NeuroImage. 2013; 80:144–
168. [PubMed: 23702415] 
Sporns O, Betzel RF. Modular Brain Networks. Annu Rev Psychol. 2015; 67 annurev–psych–122414–
033634. 
Steriade, MM.; McCarley, RW. Brainstem control of wakefulness and sleep. Springer; New York, NY: 
2013. 
Tognoli E, Kelso J. The metastable brain. Neuron. 2014; 81:35–48. [PubMed: 24411730] 
van den Heuvel MP, Bullmore ET, Sporns O. Comparative Connectomics. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences. 2016; 20:345–361. [PubMed: 27026480] 
van den Heuvel MP, Sporns O. Network hubs in the human brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 2013; 
17:683–696. [PubMed: 24231140] 
Van der Werf YD, Witter MP, Groenewegen HJ. The intralaminar and midline nuclei of the thalamus. 
Anatomical and functional evidence for participation in processes of arousal and awareness. Brain 
Research Reviews. 2002; 39:107–140. [PubMed: 12423763] 
van Ravenzwaaij D, Oberauer K. How to use the diffusion model: Parameter recovery of three 
methods: EZ, fast-dm, and DMAT. Journal of Mathematical Psychology. 2009; 53:463–473.
Shine et al.
Page 18
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Varela F, Lachaux JP, Rodriguez E. The brainweb: phase synchronization and large-scale integration. 
Nature reviews Neuroscience. 2001; 2:229–239. [PubMed: 11283746] 
Vatansever D, Menon DK, Manktelow AE, Sahakian BJ, Stamatakis EA. Default Mode Dynamics for 
Global Functional Integration. J. Neurosci. 2015; 35:15254–15262. [PubMed: 26586814] 
Wagenmakers E-J, van der Maas HLJ, Grasman RPPP. An EZ-diffusion model for response time and 
accuracy. Psychon Bull Rev. 2007; 14:3–22. [PubMed: 17546727] 
Yellin D, Berkovich-Ohana A, Malach R. Coupling between pupil fluctuations and resting-state fMRI 
uncovers a slow build-up of antagonistic responses in the human cortex. NeuroImage. 2015; 
106:414–427. [PubMed: 25463449] 
Zalesky A, Fornito A, Cocchi L, Gollo LL, Breakspear M. Time-resolved resting-state brain networks. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2014; 111:10341–10346.
Shine et al.
Page 19
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Dynamic fluctuations in cartography
a) upper: a representative time series of the mean BT for a single individual from the 
Discovery cohort (HCP #100307); lower: each temporal window was partitioned into one of 
two topological ‘states’ using k-means clustering (red: ‘Segregated’ and blue: ‘Integrated’); 
b) the mean cartographic profile of both the Segregated and Integrated states (HCP 
Discovery cohort; n = 92); c) regions with greater WT in the Integrated than Segregated 
state; and d) regions with greater BT in the Integrated than Segregated state.
Shine et al.
Page 20
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Alteration of cartographic profile during task performance
a) time series plot demonstrating the close temporal relationship between mean BT across 
100 subjects (thick black line; individual subject data plotted in grey) and task-block 
regressors (blue line) – Pearson’s correlation between regressor and group mean BT: r = 
0.521); b) regions of the 2-dimensional joint histogram that were significantly different 
between N-back task blocks and the resting state (paired-samples t-test) – colored points 
indicate regions that survived false discovery correction (FDR α < 0.05): red/yellow – 
increased frequency during N-back task blocks; blue/light blue – increased frequency during 
resting state (FDR α < 0.05); c) surface projections of parcels associated with higher WT 
(left) or BT (right) during the N-back task, when compared the resting state – frontoparietal 
and subcortical ‘hub’ regions showed elevated BT during task, whereas WT was elevated in 
primary systems and decreased in default mode regions; d) a plot quantifying the shift away 
from the cartographic profile in the resting state (along the between-module (BT) 
connectivity axis) across the six tasks in the HCP dataset.
Shine et al.
Page 21
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Relationship between task performance and the cartographic profile
a) a graphical depiction of the drift-diffusion model, which uses the mean and standard 
deviation of a subjects reaction time and performance accuracy to estimate the ‘drift rate’, or 
rate of evidence accumulation (v), the length of non-decision time (t) and the response 
boundary (a); b) left – group-level correlation between drift rate on the N-back task and each 
bin of the mean cartographic profile during the N-back task in the Discovery cohort; right – 
parcels showing a positive correlation between mean BT and drift rate; and c) left – group-
level correlation between non-decision time on the N-back task and each bin of the mean 
cartographic profile during the N-back task in the Discovery cohort; right – parcels showing 
a negative correlation between mean BT and non-decision time. False discovery rate, alpha = 
0.05. No bins of the cartographic profile showed a consistent response with the response 
boundary. Similarly, no parcels showed a significant correlation between WT and any of the 
three diffusion model fits.
Shine et al.
Page 22
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Relationship between cartography and pupillometery
a) an example time series (subject #1) showing the covariance between the pupil diameter 
(after convolution with a hemodynamic response function; blue) and mean between-module 
connectivity (BT; red); b) mean Pearson correlation between each bin of the cartographic 
profile and the convolved pupil diameter. Across the cohort of 14 subjects, we observed a 
positive relationship between pupil diameter and network-level integration (FDR α = 0.05); 
c) results from a conjunction analysis (FDR α < 0.05) that compared relationships between 
WT (red) or BT (blue) and drift-rate (positive correlation), non-decision time (inverse 
correlation) and pupillometery (positive correlation). There were no cerebellar parcels above 
threshold in all three contrasts.
Shine et al.
Page 23
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
