 Article
The Rockefeller University Press  
$30.00
J. Exp. Med. 2016 Vol. 213 No. 3 337–354
www.jem.org/cgi/doi/10.1084/jem.20150900
337
Cardiovascular disease remains the leading cause of death in 
the United States, and its prevalence is rapidly rising in de-
veloping countries. The underlying pathological process in 
coronary artery disease (CAD) is atherosclerosis, which was 
formerly considered a cholesterol deposition disease, but is 
now recognized to be a chronic inflammatory syndrome 
(Hansson and Hermansson, 2011; Witztum and Lichtman, 
2014). Hypertension, smoking, diabetes, and obesity are 
well-established accelerators, but the molecular mechanisms 
are poorly understood. Conventional risk factor management 
leaves patients at high risk for heart attack or stroke, empha-
sizing the need for new strategies (Moore et al., 2013). A key 
pathogenic event is the recruitment of monocyte-derived 
cells into the subendothelial space, where they differentiate 
into macrophages, ingest lipids, turn into foam cells, remove 
debris and participate in efferocytosis. Plaque-residing mac-
rophages secrete cytokines, enzymes, and growth factors, are 
cytotoxic, produce reactive oxygen species (ROS), and pres-
ent antigen to T cells (Shirai et al., 2015). The clinical use of 
C-reactive protein (CRP) as a reliable biomarker for cardio-
vascular disease and its outcome assigns a particular role to 
the inflammatory cytokine IL-6, which is a major inducer of 
CRP (Ridker et al., 2008).
A typifying feature of macrophages is their plasticity 
and ability to respond to environmental cues (Martinez et 
al., 2013; Martinez and Gordon, 2014). Functional subsets are 
broadly classified into inflammatory M1 and tissue-repara-
tive M2 macrophages with M1 polarization resulting from 
IFN-γ and TLR ligand exposure (Martinez et al., 2008). M1 
macrophages dominate in the vulnerable shoulder of ath-
erosclerotic lesions, whereas M2 macrophages reside in the 
adjacent adventitia (Stöger et al., 2012). In late atherosclero-
sis, M1 macrophages facilitate formation of the necrotic core 
and destabilize lesion. The role of microenvironmental signals 
versus cell-indigenous abnormalities in the genesis of patho-
genic macrophages is unknown. Interestingly, monocytes that 
have not yet infiltrated the tissue may already respond to in-
flammatory stimuli. Specifically, in response to tissue injury 
caused by acute myocardial infarction, monocytes up-regu-
late expression of CD14, LGA 
LS1, ITG 
AM, CD163, IFN 
GR1, CYBB, CD93, DUSP6, IL13RA1, TLR2, and several 
cell cycle genes (Ruparelia et al., 2015). Whether monocytes 
in at-risk individuals are more susceptible to activating stim-
uli is currently unknown.
Oxidative stress, as imposed by cigarette smoking, is a 
core risk factor for atherosclerosis (Fearon and Faux, 2009). 
ROS can damage proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and DNA, 
but also function as second messengers to alter protein ki-
nases, phosphatases, phospholipases, and transcription fac-
Abnormal glucose metabolism and enhanced oxidative stress accelerate cardiovascular disease, a chronic inflammatory condi-
tion causing high morbidity and mortality. Here, we report that in monocytes and macrophages of patients with atherosclerotic 
coronary artery disease (CAD), overutilization of glucose promotes excessive and prolonged production of the cytokines IL-6 
and IL-1β, driving systemic and tissue inflammation. In patient-derived monocytes and macrophages, increased glucose uptake 
and glycolytic flux fuel the generation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, which in turn promote dimerization of the 
glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) and enable its nuclear translocation. Nuclear PKM2 functions as a protein ki-
nase that phosphorylates the transcription factor STAT3, thus boosting IL-6 and IL-1β production. Reducing glycolysis, scav-
enging superoxide and enforcing PKM2 tetramerization correct the proinflammatory phenotype of CAD macrophages. In 
essence, PKM2 serves a previously unidentified role as a molecular integrator of metabolic dysfunction, oxidative stress and 
tissue inflammation and represents a novel therapeutic target in cardiovascular disease.
The glycolytic enzyme PKM2 bridges metabolic and 
inflammatory dysfunction in coronary artery disease
Tsuyoshi Shirai,1 Rafal R. Nazarewicz,1,4 Barbara B. Wallis,1 Rolando E. Yanes,1 Ryu Watanabe,1 
Marc Hilhorst,1 Lu Tian,3 David G. Harrison,4 John C. Giacomini,2 Themistocles L. Assimes,2 
Jörg J. Goronzy,1 and Cornelia M. Weyand1
1Division of Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, 2Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, and 3Division of Biostatistics, 
Department of Health Research and Policy, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305
4Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232
© 2016 Shirai et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share 
Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike 3.0 Unported license, as described at http 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/3 
.0 
/).
Correspondence to Cornelia M. Weyand: cweyand@stanford.edu
Abbreviations used: 2-DG, 2-deoxy-glucose; CAD, coronary artery disease; CRP, 
C-reactive protein; ECAR, extracellular acidification rate; HIF-1α, hypoxia-inducible 
factor-1α; mtROS, mitochondrial ROS; NAP 
DH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
phosphate-oxidase; NOX, NAP 
DH oxidase; OCR, oxygen consumption rate; PEP, 
phosphoenolpyruvate; PKM2, pyruvate kinase M2; ROS, reactive oxygen species.
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
on June 3, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20150900
Published Online: 29 February, 2016 | Supp Info: 
 Glucose utilization in CAD macrophages | Shirai et al.
338
tors (Liu et al., 2005). H2O2 imposes its regulatory control 
through reversible oxidization of cysteine residues. ROS are 
an inevitable byproduct of the mitochondrial electron trans-
fer and, as such, directly relate to metabolic activity (Korge 
et al., 2008). Immune cells, including macrophages, depend 
on glycolysis as a major energy source (O’Neill and Har-
die, 2013; Colegio et al., 2014; Huang and Pearce, 2014). In 
recent studies, metabolic intermediates have been suggested 
to regulate IL-1β production in macrophages, e.g., succi-
nate stabilizes hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α), driving 
production of IL-1β, but not IL-6 or TNF (Tannahill et al., 
2013). Importantly, the glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase 
M2 (PKM2) also controls HIF-1α activity, and thus IL-1β 
induction (Palsson-McDermott et al., 2015).
Glucose metabolism of lesion-residing macrophages is 
up-regulated, such that atherosclerotic lesions can be visual-
ized by positron emission tomography using 18F-fluorodeox-
yglucose (Rudd et al., 2002). Abnormal glucose metabolism 
is a core aspect of metabolic syndrome; a cluster of conditions 
associated with high risk for heart disease, stroke and diabe-
tes (Grundy et al., 2004). Here, we directly implicate excess 
glucose utilization in pathogenic monocyte and macrophage 
functions and chronic inflammation. We find that monocytes 
from CAD patients are prone to differentiate into IL-6 and 
IL-1β–producing effector cells, and maintain this property as 
they differentiate into macrophages. This hyperinflammatory 
state is mechanistically dependent on glycolytic activity and 
glucose-induced ROS production by the mitochondria. ROS 
production within macrophages changes the oligomeric as-
sembly of the redox-sensing enzyme PKM2, enabling its nu-
clear import and phosphorylation of STAT3, to promote IL-6 
and IL-1β production. Our results indicate that PKM2 is a 
previously unidentified pinnacle checkpoint that connects 
glucose overutilization to inflammatory effector functions, 
marking this metabolite and nuclear kinase as a novel ther-
apeutic target to correct aberrant inflammatory immune re-
sponses in atherosclerosis.
RES 
ULTS
Circulating monocytes in CAD 
patients are hyperinflammatory
To understand how monocytes and macrophages contribute 
to inflammatory pathology in CAD, we analyzed the distribu-
tion of monocyte subsets in CAD patients and age-matched 
healthy individuals. Patients had reduced frequencies of classi-
cal CD14++CD16– monocytes, and instead expanded the in-
termediate CD14++CD16+ subset (Fig. 1, A and B). Elevated 
numbers of intermediate monocytes have been proposed to 
predict cardiovascular events (Rogacev et al., 2012). The rela-
tively small population of nonclassical monocytes was similar 
in both study cohorts.
Gene expression profiling of freshly isolated mono-
cytes revealed that patient-derived cells were poised to 
produce IL-6 and IL-1β, as well as the chemokine CCL18 
(Fig. 1 C). T
o investigate how the shift in monocyte subsets 
and the altered gene expression in patient-derived cells may 
ultimately impact macrophage effector functions, we isolated 
CD14++CD16– and CD14++CD16+ cells by fluorescence-ac-
tivated cells sorting, differentiated them into macrophages 
and analyzed their cytokine production. As shown in Fig. 1 D, 
macrophages originating from the intermediate monocyte 
population produced significantly higher amounts of IL-1β, 
IL-6, and TNF
, confirming that these cells are biased toward 
inflammatory effector functions.
Hyperinflammatory CAD M1 macrophages 
produce excess IL-6 and IL-1β
In the atherosclerotic plaque, monocytes recruited from the 
circulation differentiate into macrophages in response to local 
macrophage colony-stimulating factor before they display 
their proatherogenic functions (Hansson and Libby, 2006). T
o 
test whether reprogrammed CAD monocytes memorize their 
bias toward inflammatory cytokine production upon enter-
ing the tissue space, we first compared ex vivo–differentiated 
macrophages from patients and controls. Macrophages were 
polarized toward the M1 or M2 phenotype and gene expres-
sion profiles were analyzed (Fig. 2 A). Patient-specific signa-
tures in M1 macrophages, defined as a greater than fourfold 
difference in gene expression, included the proinflammatory 
cytokines IL-6 and IL-1β, the chemokine CCL18, and mul-
tiple chemokine receptors (CCR1, CCR2, CXCR4, CCR7, 
and CCR5). Expression of IL-6 and IL-1β was markedly 
increased in CAD patients, but TNF expression was indis-
tinguishable between cases and controls. Krüppel-like factor 
2 and 4, negative regulators of inflammatory genes (Maha-
beleshwar et al., 2011), were significantly down-regulated in 
patient-derived cells. Similar to the findings in monocytes 
(Fig. 1 C), expression of NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreduc-
tase1, a target gene of the ROS-sensitive transcription factor 
NF-E2–related factor 2 (Itoh et al., 2010), was strikingly in-
creased in patient macrophages, suggesting that the cells are 
under oxidative stress.
The cytokine production potential was confirmed by 
staining of intracellular cytokine stores. Macrophage activa-
tion induced down-regulation of CD14 (Fig. 2 B). In healthy 
individuals, CD14low macrophages accounted for 20–30%, 
but in CAD patients, the CD14low population was doubled in 
resting and stimulated populations (Fig. 2 C). Cytokine pro-
duction was predominantly a feature of CD14lowCD11bhigh 
CD16low cells (Fig. 2 D). TLR4 expression was similar in all 
macrophage populations (unpublished data).
Macrophages poised to produce IL-6 and IL-1β were 
markedly increased in CAD patients (Fig. 2, E and F), confirm-
ing the gene expression data. Kinetic studies after stimulation 
demonstrated significantly higher frequencies of IL-1β–pro-
ducing macrophages in the patients at 6 h. Differences in 
control and CAD macrophages were most pronounced for 
IL-6, an important biomarker of cardiovascular risk (Ridker 
et al., 2000). Less than 20% of stimulated healthy macrophages 
synthesized IL-6 (Fig. 2 G). Conversely, CAD macrophages 
 339
JEM Vol. 213, No. 3
rapidly produced IL-6, with 30–40% of stimulated cells laden 
with IL-6 protein. Frequencies of TNF+ macrophages were 
indistinguishable in patients and controls. Cytokine produc-
tion by CD14high macrophages was similar in all study cohorts.
To control for the possible effect of medications fre-
quently taken by CAD patients, we recruited healthy indi-
viduals taking aspirin, statins, β-blockers, or ACE inhibitors. 
Frequencies of IL-1β–, IL-6–, or TNF-producing macro-
phages were essentially unaffected by exposure to such drugs 
(Fig. 2 H). Macrophages were cultured in relevant doses of as-
pirin, lisinopril, simvastatin, or metoprolol, and none of these 
drugs increased IL-6 and IL-1β production beyond the level 
of untreated cells (unpublished data).
In essence, monocytes in CAD patients are committed 
to the production of proinflammatory cytokines, and most of 
the abnormalities persist once cells have differentiated into 
macrophages. In macrophages, excess cytokine production is 
selective for IL-6 and IL-1β, whereas TNF production is in-
distinguishable in CAD and controls.
IL-6–producing macrophages in CAD
To seek for a role of IL-6+ macrophages in the disease pro-
cess, we first localized IL-6–containing tissue macrophages 
in the atherosclerotic plaque (Fig. 3 A). Also, the frequency 
of IL-6+ macrophages induced ex vivo correlated with 
high-sensitivity CRP measurements in the donor patient 
(Fig. 3 B), suggesting that IL-6 release by such effector 
cells contributes to the systemic inflammatory syndrome 
of CAD. Correlative studies of the frequencies of IL-6+ 
macrophages in individual patients with clinical parameters 
demonstrated significantly higher frequencies in patients 
that had diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension, or hyper-
lipidemia, all considered risk factors for coronary events 
(Fig. 3, C and D). Most importantly, frequencies of IL-6+ 
macrophages increased progressively with the presence of 
one, two, or three comorbidities, suggesting additive ef-
fects of each risk factor.
Excess IL-6 and IL-1β generation is ROS dependent
NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 up-regulation in CAD 
monocytes and macrophages suggested increased oxidative 
stress (Fig. 1 C and Fig. 2 A), which was confirmed by quan-
tification of intracellular ROS levels (Fig. 4, A–C). Compared 
with healthy controls, CAD monocytes generated significantly 
higher ROS concentrations in resting as well as activated cells 
(Fig. 4 A). In patient-derived macrophages, ROS levels were 
Figure 1. Hyperinflammatory monocytes in CAD patients. PBMCs isolated from healthy controls and CAD patients were stained with CD14, CD16, 
and HLA-DR, and frequencies of monocyte subsets were measured by flow cytometry. Representative dot plots (A) and frequencies of the three monocyte 
subpopulations (B) are shown. (C) Monocytes from seven controls and seven CAD patients were stimulated with LPS/IFN-γ, and RNA expression of genes 
was measured by quantitative RT-PCR. Heat map displays expression of genes with data presented as the log2 value. (D) Classical and intermediate mono-
cytes were sorted by flow cytometry, differentiated into macrophages, and stimulated with LPS/IFN-γ, and then cytokine RNA expression was measured by 
RT-PCR (n = 6). Values are mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01.
 Glucose utilization in CAD macrophages | Shirai et al.
340
doubled compared with controls (Fig. 4, B and C). T
o exam-
ine the relationship between aberrant ROS generation and 
cytokine production, cells were pretreated with the super-
oxide dismutase mimetic T
empol (Wilcox, 2010). Scavenging 
superoxide reduced IL-6 and IL-1β production, whereas 
TNF 
remained unaffected (Fig. 4, D and E). These data implicated 
superoxide or one of its products, such as peroxynitrite, in 
promoting macrophage inflammatory effector functions.
ROS derive from several cellular sources, foremost 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate-oxidases 
(NOX) and mitochondria (Nathan and Cunningham-Bus-
sel, 2013). NOX2 is the predominant isoform in human 
macrophages (Fig. 4 F). Neither NOX2 knockdown by 
RNA interference (Fig. 4, G and H) nor NOX2 assembly 
inhibition by gp91dstat (Rey et al., 2001; Fig. 4 I) affected 
cytokine production; eliminating NOX-derived ROS as rel-
evant in regulating the inflammatory phenotype of CAD 
macrophages. Pretreatment with Mitotempo, a mitochon-
dria-target ROS scavenger (Dikalova et al., 2010), signifi-
cantly reduced the frequencies of IL-6– and IL-1β–producing 
macrophages without changing TNF production (Fig. 4, J 
and K), suggesting that mitochondria control the inflamma-
tory behavior of macrophages in cardiovascular disease.
Glucose fuels the excess ROS production
Cellular ROS are a byproduct of the mitochondrial respi-
ratory chain, conveying signals from multiple substrates, in-
cluding glycolysis-derived pyruvate. We deprived the cells of 
Figure 2. CAD macrophages produce ex-
cessive IL-6 and IL-1β. (A) Monocytes were 
isolated from five healthy controls and five 
CAD patients, differentiated into macrophages 
using macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(M-CSF) and polarized into M1 and M2 cells. 
Gene expression was measured using quanti-
tative RT-PCR. Heat map displays expression of 
genes with data presented as the log2 values. 
(B) Macrophages from healthy controls and 
CAD patients were stimulated with LPS/IFN-γ 
for 6 and 24 h. CD14 expression was analyzed 
by flow cytometry. Representative histograms 
are shown. (C) Frequencies of CD14low macro-
phages in five healthy controls and five CAD 
patients at indicated time points after stimu-
lation. (D) Production of IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF 
was measured by intracellular staining using 
flow cytometry in M0 (dashed lines) and M1 
macrophages (solid lines). Percentage of cy-
tokine producing macrophages (E) and mean 
fluorescent intensities (MFI) of intracellular 
cytokine stains (F) in the CD14low population 
6 h after LPS/IFN-γ stimulation (15 controls 
[blue] and 16 CAD patients [red]). (G) Cytokine 
production at the indicated time points after 
LPS/IFN-γ stimulation assessed by intracellular 
cytokine staining in healthy controls (blue; 
n = 8) and CAD patients (red; n = 7). (H) Fre-
quencies of cytokine-producing macrophages 
were compared in healthy individuals not tak-
ing medications (n = 14) and those taking the 
indicated medications (n = 5 per treatment). 
Values are mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01.
 341
JEM Vol. 213, No. 3
glucose using 2-deoxy-glucose (2-DG), a glucose analogue 
that inhibits hexokinase and phosphoglucose isomerase 
(Ralser et al., 2008). 2-DG treatment for 6 h did not affect 
the viability of macrophages, but significantly decreased IL-6 
and IL-1β production, whereas TNF appeared to be glucose 
independent (Fig. 5, A, B, and E). Similarly, removal of exoge-
nous glucose attenuated IL-6 and IL-1β, but not TNF
, induc-
tion (Fig. 5, C and D). Glucose restriction (2-DG) and ROS 
scavenging (Tempol) effectively diminished IL-6 and IL-1β 
transcripts concentrations (Fig. 5 F), suggesting that ROS in-
terfere with transcriptional regulation of cytokines.
T
o test whether monocytes and macrophages of CAD 
patients are prone to use more glucose, glucose uptake was 
quantified in resting and activated monocytes (Fig. 5 G) and 
in resting and activated macrophages (Fig. 5 H). Glucose up-
take was significantly enhanced in patient-derived cells. T
o 
mechanistically link glucose uptake and ROS production, we 
measured mitochondrial ROS (mtROS) with the mitochon-
dria-targeted MitoSOX probe (Fig. 5 I). Levels of mtROS 
were directly correlated to the dose of glucose taken up 
by the cell (Fig. 5 I).
Higher mitochondrial activity in CAD monocytes and 
macrophages was confirmed by Seahorse extracellular flux 
assays (Fig. 6). Oxygen consumption rates (OCRs) and extra-
cellular acidification rates (ECARs) were analyzed 3 h after 
stimulation with LPS/IFN-γ, timed such that mitochondrial 
function was assessed while the cells were producing cyto-
kines. Activated CAD monocytes and macrophages were dis-
tinguished from control cells by significantly higher OCR. 
After uncoupling, patient-derived cells were able to use ox-
ygen much more effectively than controls (Fig. 6, A and D), 
which is indicative of a higher respiratory reserve capacity 
and suggests the presence of adaptive mechanisms preparing 
the mitochondria for higher substrate load. In parallel, pa-
tient-derived cells had up-regulated glycolytic flux and gen-
erated more lactate, as indicated by higher ECAR (Fig. 6, B 
and E). Because both ECAR and OCR were elevated in pa-
tients, the ECAR/OCR ratio was indistinguishable between 
cases and controls (Fig. 6, C and F).
These results identified glucose uptake as an upstream 
event in the functional abnormalities of CAD monocytes 
and macrophages and mechanistically linked excess glucose 
utilization and tight coupling of the mitochondrial electron 
transport chain to oxidative stress.
CAD macrophages overexpress the glycolytic enzyme PKM2
Gene expression profiling revealed that M1 polarized macro-
phages from CAD patients overexpressed eight genes required 
for glucose uptake and breakdown (PKM2, GLUT3, PDK1, 
PFK 
FB3, HK2, PGK1, PFK1, and GLUT1; Fig. 7 A), as well 
as the two glycolytic master regulators c-Myc and HIF-1α. In 
M2-polarized cells from patients and controls, glycolysis-re-
lated genes were low in abundance and expressed at indistin-
guishable levels between the two groups. Based on transcript 
levels, GLUT1 was by far the dominant glucose transporter 
in macrophages, followed by a fivefold lower transcript level 
for GLUT3. Essentially, no transcripts were found for the in-
sulin-dependent GLUT4 transporter or GLUT2 (Fig. 7 B).
PKM2, one of the isoforms of the enzyme that cat-
alyzes the final step of glycolysis and converts phospho-
Figure 3. IL-6–producing macrophages 
in patients with CAD. (A) Frozen sections 
of carotid atheromas were immunostained 
with anti–IL-6 (green), anti-CD68 (red), and 
DAPI (blue), and analyzed by fluorescence 
microscopy. One representative of three inde-
pendent experiments. Bar, 20 µm. (B) Plasma 
high-sensitivity CRP (hsCRP) is correlated with 
the frequency of ex vivo–generated IL-6–pro-
ducing macrophages for each individual pa-
tient. (C) Patients are stratified according to 
the absence and presence of type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (DM), hypertension (HTN), and hyper-
lipidemia (HL). Each symbol represents the fre-
quency of IL-6–producing macrophages from 
each individual patient. (D) The frequency of 
IL-6–producing macrophages in each individ-
ual patient is correlated with the number of 
comorbidities (DM, HTN, or HL). *, P < 0.05; **, 
P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.
 Glucose utilization in CAD macrophages | Shirai et al.
342
Figure 4. ROS scavenging corrects the inflammatory phenotype of CAD macrophages. (A) Resting or activated monocytes were loaded with 5 µM 
CellROX Deep Red and intracellular ROS levels were analyzed by flow cytometry. Summarized mean fluorescent intensities (MFI) from n = 10 healthy 
controls and n = 10 CAD patients are shown. (B and C) Macrophages from controls and CAD patients were stimulated with LPS/IFN-γ for 2, 4, 6, and 
24 h. Cells were then loaded with CellROX Deep Red and intracellular ROS levels were analyzed by flow cytometry. Representative dot plots (B) and MFI 
from macrophages of n = 7 healthy controls and n = 7 CAD patients (C) are shown. (D and E) CAD macrophages were stimulated for 6 h under M1-po-
larizing conditions in the absence (red) and presence (green) of the ROS scavenger Tempol (50 µM) and intracellular cytokines were measured by flow 
cytometry. (F) Total RNA was purified from ex vivo–generated macrophages, and expression of NOXs was measured by qRT-PCR (n = 3). (G) Macrophages 
were transfected with either siControl RNA or siNOX2 RNA, and total RNA was purified at the indicated times. NOX2 expression was measured by qRT-
PCR (n = 3). (H) CAD macrophages were transfected with control or NOX2 siRNA and intracellular cytokines were measured by flow cytometry after 6 h 
of stimulation (n = 5). (I) CAD macrophages were stimulated in the absence and presence of gp91dstat (50 µM). Intracellular cytokines were measured 
by flow cytometry (n = 5). (J and K) CAD macrophages were treated with or without Mitotempo (20 µM). Intracellular cytokines were analyzed after 6 h 
of stimulation (n = 6). All data are mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.
 343
JEM Vol. 213, No. 3
enolpyruvate (PEP) to pyruvate (Noguchi et al., 1986), is 
typically expressed in tumor cells (Christofk et al., 2008a). 
We found that PKM2 is also the dominant isoform in human 
macrophages (Fig. 7 C). Confocal microscopy demon-
strated abundant expression of PKM2 protein in control 
macrophages and even higher levels in CAD macrophages 
(Fig. 7 D). Healthy cells contained an evenly distributed pat-
tern of cytoplasmic PKM2. In CAD macrophages, however, 
PKM2 assembled in a punctate pattern, with perinuclear 
dominance and nets distributed throughout the nucleus. 
Quantification of the nuclear signal demonstrated that CAD 
nuclei consistently contained more PKM2 protein than con-
trol cells (Fig. 7, D and E).
T
o verify the importance of PKM2 in CAD, we eval-
uated PKM2 expression in atheromatous lesions. PKM2 was 
found in all atherosclerotic plaques, almost entirely localizing 
to CD68+ macrophages (Fig. 7 F).
These data identified PKM2 as a constitutive element in 
atheroma-related macrophages and raised the question of the 
enzyme’s cytoplasmic versus nuclear functions.
PKM2 dimerization in CAD monocytes and macrophages
PKM2 can change its oligomeric status, ranging from meta-
bolically low-activity monomeric and dimeric forms to met-
abolically high-activity tetrameric forms. Among glycolytic 
enzymes, the oligomeric PKM2 stands out as a redox-sensitive 
Figure 5. Glucose deprivation disrupts proinflammatory effector functions and ROS production. M0 macrophages were generated from CAD 
patients, stimulated with LPS/IFN-γ for 6 h and intracellular cytokines were measured by flow cytometry. Glycolytic activity was suppressed with 10 mM 
of 2-DG (A and B) or glucose-free medium (C and D). Representative histograms of intracellular cytokine stains and frequencies of cytokine-producing 
macrophages from five independent experiments are shown. (E) CAD macrophages were stimulated with LPS and IFN-γ for 6 h in the absence or presence 
of 10 mM of 2-DG. Macrophages were then stained with 7-AAD and viability of cells was measured by flow cytometry. Representative histograms from 
four independent experiments are shown. (F) CAD macrophages were stimulated with LPS and IFN-γ for 6 h in the absence or presence of 10 mM of 2-DG 
or 50 µM of Tempol. Expression of IL-1β and IL-6 was measured by qRT-PCR (n = 4). (G) Glucose uptake in monocytes was measured using the fluores-
cence-labeled glucose analogue, 2-NBDG. Summarized MFI from 12 independent experiments are shown. (H) Glucose uptake in macrophages was measured 
using the 2-NBDG. Summarized MFI from 10 independent experiments are shown. (I) Macrophages from CAD patients were stimulated for 4 h, and loaded 
with 5 µM of MitoSOX to quantify mtROS levels. Data represent ΔMFI compared with resting cells from four independent experiments. All data are mean 
± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.
 Glucose utilization in CAD macrophages | Shirai et al.
344
molecule (Anastasiou et al., 2011). Dimeric PKM2 has low 
pyruvate kinase activity and, in cancer cells, can enter the nu-
cleus (Gao et al., 2012), whereas tetrameric PKM2 is highly 
active in converting PEP to pyruvate. In contrast to murine 
macrophages, in which monomers are the predominant iso-
form (Palsson-McDermott et al., 2015), human monocytes 
and macrophages mostly contain dimeric PKM2 (Fig. 8, 
A–D). In control monocytes, PKM2 protein levels were low, 
with no detectable tetramers. In contrast, CAD monocytes 
spontaneously contained PKM2 expression levels, which 
were doubled, most of the protein in dimeric form (Fig. 8, 
A and B). PKM2 protein expression was markedly higher in 
macrophages (Fig. 8, C and D). Resting CAD macrophages 
had detectable PKM2 tetramers, which were lost after ac-
tivation. Also, monomeric PKM2 was barely detectable in 
healthy macrophages, but was present in CAD macrophages 
(Fig. 8 C). Consistently, CAD monocytes and macrophages 
possessed significantly higher amounts of dimeric PKM2 
compared with control cells (Fig. 8, B and D). Parallel to the 
activation-induced ROS increase (Fig. 4, B and C), LPS/
IFN-γ stimulation shifted PKM2 into the nucleus, as demon-
strated by confocal microscopy and Western blotting (Fig. 8, 
E–G). ROS scavenging prevented the enzyme’s nuclear im-
port. Impairing glycolytic activity with 2-DG essentially 
trapped PKM2 in the cytoplasm (Fig. 8 G). Thus, ROS in-
duced by macrophage activation promptly changed the mol-
ecule’s oligomeric state, down-regulating metabolically active 
tetramers. Conversely, T
empol or 2-DG treatment stabilized 
the tetrameric configuration, prevented dimerization, and ef-
fectively blocked nuclear translocation (Fig. 8 H).
T
o examine the impact of PKM2’s oligomeric status 
on cytokine production, we enforced PKM2 tetrameric as-
sembly with the small molecule ML265 (Walsh et al., 2010), 
which excludes the enzyme from the nucleus (Fig. 8, I and J). 
ML265 significantly suppressed production of IL-6 and IL-1β, 
but not of 
TNF
. 
These results linked the inflammatory pheno-
type of CAD macrophages to PKM2’s oligomeric state and 
subcellular localization and implicated glucose utilization and 
ROS in regulating the dimer/tetramer ratio of the enzyme.
Glycolysis and ROS promote STAT3 
phosphorylation via PKM2 dimerization
The selectivity for IL-6 and IL-1β, but not TNF
, guided the 
search for mechanisms downstream of PKM2 nuclear trans-
location. PKM2 directly interacts with HIF-1α, promoting 
transactivation of HIF-1 target genes (Luo et al., 2011). Con-
sistent with Tannahill et al. (2013), HIF-1α inhibition re-
duced IL-1β, but IL-6 and TNF production were unaffected 
(Fig. 9 A), eliminating HIF-1α as the main regulator of IL-6 
and IL-1β in CAD macrophages. IL-6 and IL-1β promoters 
share binding sites for STAT3, which is not implicated in 
TNF 
transcription in macrophages (Samavati et al., 2009). In cancer 
cells, dimeric PKM2 can use PEP as a phosphate donor to 
phosphorylate tyrosine residues in STAT3 (Gao et al., 2012; 
Yang et al., 2014b, 2015). T
o explore STAT3’s role in glycol-
ysis-driven and ROS-induced maldifferentiation, we assessed 
Figure 6. Mitochondrial respiration and 
glycolysis assays in monocytes and macro-
phages. (A–C) OCRs (A) and ECARs (B) were 
measured with the Seahorse Bioscience XF96 
analyzer in monocytes 3 h after LPS/IFN-γ 
stimulation. Summarized graph from seven 
healthy controls and eight CAD patients is 
shown. Mitochondrial function was probed 
by the serial addition of oligomycin, FCCP, 
and antimycin A/rotenone as indicated. (C) 
ECAR-OCR ratios in controls and CAD patients. 
(D–F) OCR (D) and ECAR (E) were determined 
with the Seahorse Bioscience XF96 analyzer in 
macrophages 3 h after LPS/IFN-γ stimulation. 
Summarized graph from four healthy controls 
and six CAD patients is presented. Oligomycin, 
FCCP, and antimycin A/rotenone were added 
serially as in A and B. (F) ECAR-OCR ratios cal-
culated for controls and patients. All data are 
mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01.
 345
JEM Vol. 213, No. 3
STAT3 phosphorylation under M1-polarizing conditions. 
M1 stimulation clearly induced phosphorylation of STAT3 at 
Y705 (Fig. 9 B), and treatment with a STAT3-specific phos-
phorylation inhibitor, Stattic (McMurray, 2006), significantly 
reduced IL-6 and IL-1β (Fig. 9, C and D). Removal of ROS 
or restriction of glycolytic breakdown effectively interfered 
with pSTAT3 accumulation (Fig. 9, E–G), verifying the role 
of ROS and glucose metabolism in STAT3 activation.
T
o test whether PKM2 dimerization affected STAT3 
phosphorylation, we forced PKM2 into tetrameric assembly 
with ML265. Preventing PKM2 dimerization reduced STAT3 
phosphorylation (Fig. 9, H and I). T
o visualize the physical 
association of PKM2 and pSTAT3, we used the proximity 
ligation assay (PLA). In resting M0 cells, PKM2 and pSTAT3 
did not co-localize, but came together exclusively in the nu-
cleus after LPS/IFN-γ stimulation (Fig. 9 J). ROS scavenging 
(T
empol), slowing glycolysis (2-DG), and preventing PKM2 
dimer formation (ML265) were all highly effective in pre-
venting nuclear PKM2-pSTAT3 co-localization (Fig. 9 K).
DIS 
CUS 
SION
Macrophages are key pathogenic drivers of vascular disease; 
they produce inflammatory cytokines, inflammation-acceler-
ating chemokines, tissue-damaging proteases, and ROS. The 
current study demonstrates that monocytes and macrophages 
from CAD patients maldifferentiate and respond to M1-po-
larizing conditions with a hyperinflammatory phenotype. 
Gene expression studies (Fig. 2 A) identified a signature con-
sisting of a cluster of cytokines and oxidative stress markers, 
which predicted that these innate immune cells are unable 
Figure 7. Overexpression of the glycolytic 
enzyme PKM2 in CAD macrophages. (A) Ex 
vivo–generated macrophages from five con-
trols and five CAD patients were stimulated 
with LPS/IFN-γ (M1) or IL-4/IL-13 (M2) for 
48 h and genes related to glucose metabolism 
were quantified by RT-PCR. Heat map displays 
the fold change increase of gene expression 
presented as the log2 value of relative mRNA 
expression (see color scale). (B) Total RNA 
was purified from macrophages, and expres-
sion of the glucose transporters GLUT1-4 was 
measured by qRT-PCR (n = 3). (C) Gene ex-
pression of the PKM1 and PKM2 isoforms in 
CAD macrophages was assessed by RT-PCR in 
three independent experiments. (D) Confocal 
images were acquired in ex vivo–generated 
macrophages stimulated with LPS/IFN-γ for 
3 h and stained with anti-PKM2 (green). Nu-
clei were localized by DAPI (blue). Bars, 20 µm. 
(E) Bar graph represents averaged data from 
experiments quantifying the fluorescent signal 
within nuclei (n = 4 healthy controls and n = 
7 CAD patients). All data are mean ± SEM. **, 
P < 0.01. (F) Frozen sections of carotid ath-
eromas were stained with anti-PKM2 (green), 
anti-CD68 (red), and DAPI (blue) and analyzed 
by fluorescence microscopy. One representa-
tive of four independent experiments is shown. 
Bars, 100 µm; (inset) 20 µm.
 Glucose utilization in CAD macrophages | Shirai et al.
346
Figure 8. Dimeric PKM2 in inflammatory CAD monocytes and macrophages. (A) Monocytes from healthy controls and CAD patients were activated 
with LPS/IFN-γ. Cells were treated with 5 mM of di-succinimidyl suberate for 30 min before lysis, and protein extracts were analyzed by immunoblotting 
to identify oligomeric forms of PKM2. (B) Bar graph represents averaged data from n = 8 healthy controls and n = 9 CAD patients. (C) Macrophages from 
healthy controls and CAD patients were stimulated with LPS/IFN-γ, and protein extracts were analyzed by immunoblotting to identify oligomeric forms of 
PKM2. GAP 
DH was used as a loading control. (D) Bar graph represents averaged immunoblot data from seven independent experiments. (E) CAD macro-
phages were stained with anti-PKM2 (green) as indicated. Aliquots were treated with Tempol (50 µM) or 2-DG (10 mM). Distribution of PKM2 was analyzed 
by confocal microscopy. Nuclei were localized by DAPI (blue). Bar, 50 µm. (F) The bar graphs represent averaged data of the fluorescent signal within the 
nucleus (n = 5–6). (G) Nuclear protein extracts from CAD macrophages were analyzed by immunoblotting to identify PKM2. Lamin A/C was used as loading 
control. One representative of two independent experiments is shown. (H) Tetrameric assemblies of PKM2 were resolved by immunoblotting protein extracts 
of CAD macrophages prepared under nonreducing conditions. Aliquots were stimulated in the presence of Tempol or 2-DG. One representative of three 
independent experiments is shown. (I and J) PKM2 dimerization was inhibited in CAD macrophages by treating with ML265 (50 µM). Intracellular cytokines 
were measured by flow cytometry. Representative histograms (I) and summary of 8 independent experiments (J) are shown. Values are mean ± SEM. *, P < 
0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.
 347
JEM Vol. 213, No. 3
Figure 9. PKM2 regulates inflammatory effector functions via phosphorylation of STAT3. (A) CAD macrophages were stimulated for 6 h with or 
without the HIF-1α inhibitor CAS 934593–90-5 (10 µM). Intracellular cytokines were measured by flow cytometry in n = 5 experiments. (B) CAD macro-
phages were stimulated for 0, 3, and 24 h, and phosphorylation of STAT3 (Y705) was analyzed by flow cytometry. One representative of 3 independent 
experiments is shown. (C and D) CAD macrophages were stimulated for 6 h with or without the STAT3 inhibitor Stattic (5 µM) and intracellular cytokines 
were measured by flow cytometry. Representative histograms and results from 7 independent experiments are shown. (E–G) pSTAT3 was quantified by flow 
cytometry in CAD macrophages 3 h after stimulation in the absence or presence of Tempol (E; n = 5), 2-DG (F; n = 5), or glucose-free medium (G; n = 6). 
The fold change in MFI is plotted. (H and I) CAD macrophages were treated with ML265, stimulated and analyzed for pSTAT3 by flow cytometry. Repre-
sentative histograms and results from 5 independent experiments. (J) Co-localization of pSTAT3 and PKM2 analyzed by confocal microscopy. Resting (M0) 
or M1-stimulated CAD macrophages in the absence (M1) and presence of Tempol, 2-DG, or ML265, were stained with anti-pSTAT3 and anti-PKM2. Close 
proximity (<40 nm) of pSTAT3 and PKM2 produces a red fluorescent signal. The blue signal indicates DAPI-stained nuclei. Bar, 50 µm. (K) Quantification of 
the fluorescent signal produced by pSTAT3/PKM2 co-localization (n = 4). Values represent mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.
 Glucose utilization in CAD macrophages | Shirai et al.
348
to properly detoxify ROS. Both patient-derived monocytes 
and macrophages produce excessive amounts of IL-6 and 
IL-1β. Circulating monocyte populations in CAD patients 
were characterized by a more than threefold expansion of 
the CD14++CD16+ intermediate population, which was 
poised for IL-6 and IL-1β production, and the abnormality 
persisted as the cells matured into macrophages, consistent 
with a defect that affects monocytic cells relatively early in 
their life cycle. Molecular studies implicated the glucose–
ROS–PKM2–STAT3 pathway, in which glucose overutiliza-
tion leads to unbalanced ROS generation (Fig. 5 I) and the 
redox-sensitive enzyme PKM2 transitions from the cytoplasm 
into the nucleus (Fig. 8, E–G). Nuclear PKM2 functions as 
a protein kinase, activates STAT3, and drives IL-6 and IL-1β 
transcription in a pSTAT3-dependent manner (Fig. 9, C, D, 
and H–K). Thus, hyperinflammatory macrophage reactivity 
is rooted in nutrient oversupply, compatible with gene-envi-
ronment interactions that ultimately lead to host-damaging 
immune responses. This study identifies a new paradigm in 
human atherosclerosis, where PKM2 acts as a master regula-
tor and the glucose–ROS–PKM2–STAT3 axis provides en-
tirely new opportunities for antiinflammatory interventions 
in cardiovascular disease.
Individuals with diabetes or with prediabetic metabolic 
abnormalities are at high risk for aggressive atherosclerotic 
disease (Selvin et al., 2004). Glycemic control is recognized 
as effective in preventing microvascular complications (Fox 
et al., 2015). The benefit of reducing blood glucose levels 
for prevention of macrovascular disease is more nuanced, 
with an overall modest but statistically significant reduction 
in major cardiovascular disease outcomes (Ray et al., 2009; 
Boussageon et al., 2011). Here, we provide a molecular frame-
work connecting glucose overutilization to deleterious in-
flammatory effector functions committed by monocytes and 
macrophages. In tissue studies, we found that atheroma-re-
siding macrophages almost all express high levels of PKM2 
(Fig. 7 F). CAD macrophages had a signature of parallel acti-
vation of glucose transporters and genes mediating glycolytic 
breakdown (Fig. 7 A). Remarkably, pyruvate dehydrogenase 
kinase was part of the transcriptional program, signifying a 
decoupling of glycolysis from the glutamine-fueled TCA 
cycle and essentially removing CAD macrophages from 
physiological control mechanisms. We further demonstrated 
that 2-DG, which starves cells of glucose, is a highly effec-
tive intervention to normalize CAD macrophage cytokine 
production (Fig. 5, A and B). ROS scavenging and enforcing 
PKM2 tetramerization were partially successful, suggesting 
that the pinnacle abnormality lies in glucose oversupply of 
the cells. Indeed, even resting monocytes and macrophages 
of CAD patients over-use glucose (Fig. 5, G and H), strongly 
supporting the notion that excess availability of glucose is a 
fundamental defect. Glucose utilization fueling cytokine pro-
duction was selective for IL-6 and IL-1β, and excluded TNF
, 
in line with a lack of clinical benefit from TNF blockade in 
CAD patients. Interference with glycolysis and ROS pro-
duction left TNF unaffected, indicative of separate regulatory 
networks for the proinflammatory cytokines. Notably, TNF 
behaved differently from IL-6 and IL-1β, in that TNF pro-
duction was higher in CAD monocytes, but indistinguishable 
in macrophages from cases and controls.
A second defect in CAD macrophages lies in the break-
down of PKM2-controlled negative feedback mechanisms. 
PKM2 exerts check point control of cellular energy levels, 
redox homeostasis, production of secretable biomass and cel-
lular proliferation. T
o integrate these functions, the enzyme 
has pleotropic capabilities and, in CAD macrophages, several 
of its functional activities are critically involved in convert-
ing host-protective immune cells into injurious effector cells. 
Physiologically, PKM2 hyperactivity is disrupted by negative 
feedback regulation, readapting the cell’s glycolytic activity 
to its needs. Our current data indicate that this mechanism is 
malfunctioning in CAD macrophages. Normally, posttrans-
lational PKM2 modifications shift the equilibrium between 
high-activity tetramers and low-activity dimers. PKM2 phos-
phorylation at Y105 inhibits tetramer formation by causing 
the release of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (Christofk et al., 
2008b; Hitosugi et al., 2009). High glucose concentration 
stimulates PKM2 acetylation, which decreases enzyme ac-
tivity, promotes lysosomal-dependent degradation via chap-
erone-mediated autophagy (Lv et al., 2011), and leads to 
nuclear loading with monomeric and dimeric PKM2 (Lv et 
al., 2013). Intracellular ROS oxidize PKM2 at C358 (An-
astasiou et al., 2011). Succinyl-5-aminoimidazole-4-carbox-
amide-1-ribose-5′-phosphate binding induces nuclear import 
and protein kinase activity of PKM2 (Keller et al., 2014). In 
human monocytes and macrophages, the major oligomeric 
status of PKM2 is the dimer (Fig. 8, A and C), which is differ-
ent from the dominance of monomers in mouse cells (Pals-
son-McDermott et al., 2015) and suggests species-specific 
regulatory mechanisms. In human macrophages, monomers 
and tetramers disappear and PKM2 transitions into the nu-
cleus after stimulation (Fig. 8, C and E–G). Inhibition of gly-
colysis by 2-DG and scavenging ROS by T
empol suppress 
these changes, implying that oxidation-dependent PKM2 
modification is necessary for its nuclear import. Given that 
dimeric PKM2 appears to be the dominant form of PKM2 
in human macrophages, it is unlikely that dimerization alone 
is sufficient to enable nuclear import. Further studies need to 
explore why negative feedback mechanisms seem to fail in 
CAD cells, permitting glycolysis to progress unopposed. One 
possibility is that dimeric PKM2 acts in a positive feed-for-
ward loop, enhancing the glycolytic machinery by bolstering 
c-Myc and HIF-1α. Also, PKM2 dimerization, by funnel-
ing glucose into the pentose phosphate pathways, enhances 
availability of biosynthetic precursor molecules required for 
cytokine synthesis. In essence, PKM2 dimerization directly 
and indirectly feeds the pathogenic behavior of inflammatory 
macrophages (Yang et al., 2014a).
One remarkable finding of the current study was the 
persistence of differences in metabolic and cytokine regu-
 349
JEM Vol. 213, No. 3
lation from monocytes to ex vivo–matured macrophages, 
compatible with patient-specific differences in epigenetic 
imprinting. Macrophages clearly memorized the metabolic 
reprogramming of their precursor cells. Recent data show 
that monocytes can build immunological memory via epi-
genetic reprogramming, and epigenetic pathways are now 
considered as potential therapeutic targets in atherosclero-
sis (Neele et al., 2015). Exposure of monocytes to oxidized 
low-density lipoprotein induces histone modifications that 
result in a long-lasting proinflammatory phenotype (Bekker-
ing et al., 2014). Also, smoking, one of the strongest risk fac-
tors for CAD, is associated with DNA methylation (Reynolds 
et al., 2015). Notably, PKM2 is required for dissociation of 
histone deacetylase 3 from the Myc promoter (Yang et al., 
2012), which implies a role in epigenetic regulation of mac-
rophage polarization (Ivashkiv, 2013).
The unexpected finding of this study was the critical 
role of ROS in regulating cytokine production and, more 
importantly, that ROS were derived from the mitochondria 
and not from NOX2, a quintessential ROS source in phago-
cytic cells (Fig. 4, H and I). This does not discount the role 
of NOX2 in other pathological conditions. Indeed, we have 
recently shown a critical role of this subunit in immune ac-
tivation of myeloid-derived dendritic cells, where it seems 
critical in lipid oxidation and formation of immunogenic 
isoketal-protein adducts (Kirabo et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2015). 
There is also evidence of substantial interplay between the 
NOX and mtROS production, such that one can enhance the 
other in a feed-forward fashion.
The coexistence of high glycolytic flux and PKM2 di-
merization and the inability of the cells to rebalance their 
redox homeostasis suggest additional defects, possibly con-
nected to control of mitochondrial function or perturbations 
of ROS scavenging. Decreased formation of metabolically ac-
tive PKM2 should divert glucose into the pentose phosphate 
pathway and provide reducing potential to detoxify ROS. In 
CAD macrophages, even chronically elevated ROS concen-
trations are insufficient to disrupt further glycolytic flux. Also, 
the elevation of intracellular ROS in nonstimulated cells em-
phasizes that the redox balance is fundamentally flawed.
Scavenging mtROS had antiinflammatory effects and 
glucose feeding directly induced mtROS formation. Over-
expression of the GLUT1 enhances ROS production in 
RAW264.7 macrophages, identifying glucose supply as a 
critical factor in setting mitochondrial activity (Freemerman 
et al., 2014). Recent studies have molecularly connected ox-
idative stress and proinflammatory cytokine production with 
mtROS functioning as signal-transducing molecules that 
up-regulate inflammatory cytokines via distinct molecular 
pathways (Naik and Dixit, 2011; Jin et al., 2014; Wang et al., 
2014). Elevated mtROS levels correlate with persistent acti-
vation of JNK and p38 in periodic fever syndromes (Bulua 
et al., 2011). Also, divergent inflammasome-dependent path-
ways have been implicated in cytokine production regulated 
by mitochondrial dysfunction (Nakahira et al., 2011; Zhou 
et al., 2011). Analysis of mitochondrial respiration and of 
extramitochondrial glycolysis revealed a robust up-regula-
tion of both energy-generating pathways in patient-derived 
cells. The defect was present in monocytes and maintained 
in macrophages. Although the poststimulation enhancement 
of glycolytic flux was expected, the persistently high oxygen 
consumption in patient-derived cells was indicative of con-
tinuously high mitochondrial activity and a failure to prop-
erly balance extramitochondrial and mitochondrial energy 
production. Further evidence for mitochondrial dysfunction 
came from uncoupling experiments, which revealed a robust 
respiratory reserve capacity in patient-derived cells. Insuffi-
cient uncoupling is a primary mechanism driving mtROS 
production and essentially indicates that mitochondria in 
CAD cells have lost a major protective mechanism. Possible 
causes include chronic glucose overload, in line with the sur-
plus glucose uptake shown in Fig. 5 and the up-regulation of 
glucose transporters shown in Fig. 7. The defect was present 
in nondiabetic patients, eliminating elevated blood glucose as 
the sole cause. Persistent up-regulation of the glucose trans-
porters and the glycolytic machinery suggest a fundamen-
tal abnormality in glucose handling. Also, molecular studies 
are needed to explore the underlying defects that allow the 
cells to tightly couple respiration with ATP generation and 
weaken physiological protection mechanisms. 
T
o date, molec-
ular evidence for mitochondrial damage in CAD monocytes 
and macrophages is lacking.
Direct proinflammatory effects of glucose are difficult to 
distinguish from general energy needs that immune cells have; 
the distinction will require direct and detailed comparisons 
of healthy and patient-derived cells. Glycolytic activity sup-
ports de novo synthesis of fatty acids in dendritic cells, 2-DG 
reduces protein synthesis because of insufficient ER/Golgi 
formation, and glycolysis alters the posttranslational regula-
tion of IL-6, IL-12, and TNF (Everts et al., 2014). In CAD 
macrophages, both T
empol and 2-DG suppressed, but did not 
abrogate IL-6 and IL-1β transcription, suggesting that ROS/
glucose-dependent cytokine production can be therapeuti-
cally targeted without threatening the cell’s survival. 
Tannahill 
et al. (2013) have implicated a succinate-dependent mecha-
nism in regulating IL-1β, but not IL-6 or TNF production 
through a direct stabilizing effect of succinate on HIF-1α, 
which in turn functions as a transcriptional coactivator specif-
ically for IL-1β, but not IL-6. In contrast, macrophages from 
CAD patients maldifferentiate into IL-6 and IL-1β–produc-
ing effector cells (Fig. 2, E–G). In this pathology, IL-6 holds 
particular relevance, as it dovetails with epidemiological stud-
ies identifying IL-6 as a robust biomarker for cardiovascular 
risk (Ridker et al., 2000). IL-6 also provides important signals 
to T cells, driving them from the antiinflammatory T regula-
tory phenotype to IL-17–producing cells (Korn et al., 2008). 
In human atherosclerosis, IL-6 appears to hold a pinnacle role 
among other proinflammatory cytokines.
A limitation of the current study is the use of human 
samples, donated by healthy individuals and patients. Al-
 Glucose utilization in CAD macrophages | Shirai et al.
350
though we rigorously matched for age and sample handling, 
we did not match for medications or for diet. The persistence 
of the functional abnormalities in macrophages during ex 
vivo culture made an acute drug effect unlikely. T
o further 
examine whether drugs used in CAD management could 
prime monocytes to develop into proinflammatory macro-
phages, we studied cells from healthy individuals, who were 
taking such medications (aspirin, statins, β-blockers, and ACE 
inhibitors; Fig. 2 H) and did not observe an impact on cyto-
kine production. Also, such medications have been considered 
to have antiinflammatory, and not proinflammatory, effects.
Our study has potential implications for the treat-
ment of CAD and its associated inflammation. Interven-
tions targeting lipids reduce acute coronary events, but 
have marginal effects on atheroma volume (Libby, 2013). 
Lipid-lowering therapies may confer plaque stabilization, 
trumping mechanical interventions that reduce luminal ste-
nosis without modifying plaque inflammation (Libby and 
Aikawa, 2002). Because patients appropriately treated with 
statins are still at considerable risk for CAD, there is great 
unmet need for novel therapeutic strategies. Anti-inflamma-
tory approaches are being explored for prevention of acute 
coronary syndrome (Everett et al., 2013). The Canakinumab 
Antiinflammatory Thrombosis Outcomes Study is assessing 
IL-1β inhibition in CAD (Ridker et al., 2011). Possibly, nor-
malization of IL-1β and IL-6 production in macrophages 
would be even more effective without imposing broad im-
munosuppression on the host. The NIH has launched a trial 
to evaluate the use of the broad immunosuppressant meth-
otrexate for preventing cardiovascular events. Targeting the 
glucose–ROS–PKM2–STAT3 pathway would allow sup-
pressing not only excessive IL-1β, but also preventing over-
production of IL-6, thus correcting the hyperinflammatory 
behavior of the innate immune system in atherosclerotic 
patients. Because TNF is spared from this pathomechanism, 
this important immune defense would remain intact. A core 
abnormality of CAD monocytic cells lies in their excess 
ROS production, which is surprisingly NOX independent. 
A better understanding of that defect should allow the de-
sign of upstream interventions. In malignant cells, PKM2 
is a key mediator of the Warburg effect, fueling cancer cell 
growth through metabolic rewiring. Similarities in the 
molecular reprogramming of cancer cells and CAD mac-
rophages should be therapeutically exploited, and medica-
tions with anti-Warburg effects could be repurposed to treat 
cardiovascular disease.
MAT 
ERI 
ALS AND MET 
HODS
Patients and controls. 
 The study population included 140 
CAD patients and 105 healthy control subjects. Patients had 
unequivocal CAD with at least one documented myocardial 
infarction and were enrolled >90 d after an ischemic event. 
Demographic characteristics of the patients are given in 
Table 1. Demographically matched healthy individuals were 
recruited from the Stanford Blood Center (n = 105; age: 66.8 
± 7.1 yr; 90.5% male). 
They had no personal or family history 
of autoimmune disease, cancer, chronic viral infection, or any 
other inflammatory syndrome. 
The study was approved by the 
Institutional Review Board and written informed consent 
was obtained from all participants.
Cells and culture. 
 PBMCs were isolated using density gra-
dient centrifugation using Lymphoprep (STE 
MCE 
LL T
ech-
nologies). Monocytes isolated by plastic adherence were 
differentiated into macrophages in RPMI 1640 medium 
(Life T
echnologies) supplemented with 20 ng/ml of M-CSF 
(eBioscience) and 10% of FBS (Lonza) for 5 d. Alternatively, 
monocytes were isolated using the EasySep human mono-
cyte enrichment kit without CD16 depletion (STE 
MCE 
LL T
echnologies). Macrophages were further differentiated 
into M1 or M2 macrophages by stimulation with 100 U/
ml of IFN-γ (Sino Biologicals) and 100 ng/ml of LPS (Sig-
ma-Aldrich), or 10 ng/ml of IL-4 and 10 ng/ml of IL-13 
(Sino Biologicals). Attached macrophages were dissociated 
from plates using StemPro Accutase Cell Dissociation Re-
agent (Life T
echnologies).
T
o scavenge ROS, macrophages were stimulated in the 
presence of the ROS-scavenger T
empol (Sigma-Aldrich) or 
the mtROS scavenger MitoT
empo (Santa Cruz Biotechnol-
ogy, Inc.). Assembly of the NOX2 membrane complex was 
inhibited with gp91dstat (Anaspec). Glycolytic activity was 
blocked with 10 mM of 2-DG or by using glucose free RPMI 
1640 medium (Life T
echnologies). PKM2 tetramerization 
Table 1. Clinical characteristics of patients with CAD
Parameters
Patients (n = 140)
Age (mean ± SD)
70.0 ± 8.4
Male
99.0%
Ethnicity
 Caucasian
76.6%
 African-American
3.7%
 Asian
9.3%
BMI (mean ± SD)
30.9 ± 5.7
Diabetes mellitus
53.1%
Hypertension
85.7%
Hyperlipidemia
88.0%
Family history of CAD
32.4%
Smoking
 Current
12.5%
 Former
73.7%
Treatment
 ACE inhibitor
48.6%
 ATII receptor blocker
28.6%
 β-blocker
76.4%
 Ca-antagonist
44.4%
 Diuretic
38.0%
 Anti-platelet
81.1%
 Anti-coagulant
30.6%
 Statin
90.5%
 Biguanide
23.9%
 Sulfonylurea
10.3%
 Insulin
20.6%
 351
JEM Vol. 213, No. 3
was enforced with 50 µM of ML265 (Cayman Chemical). 
HIF-1α was inhibited with 10 µM of CAS (934593–90-5; 
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.). STAT3 phosphorylation was 
inhibited with 5 µM of Stattic (Sigma-Aldrich).
Quantitative RT-PCR. 
 
T
otal RNA was extracted with RNeasy 
Mini kits (QIA 
GEN) and cDNA was reverse transcribed using 
a Maxima First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific). The expression of genes was determined using 
QuantiT
ect SYBR Green PCR master mix (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific) and a Real Plex2 Mastercycler (Eppendorf). The 
primers used are listed in Table S1. Gene transcript numbers 
were standardized and adjusted relative to β-actin transcripts.
Flow cytometry. 
 CD14 and CD16 surface expression was 
measured using the FACS Fortessa (BD); data were analyzed 
with FlowJo Software (Tree Star). Monocyte subpopulations 
were sorted with the FAC 
SAria II (BD). Monocytes were 
stained with allophycocyanin (APC)-conjugated anti-CD14 
(BD), Pacific Blue–conjugated anti-CD16 (BioLegend), and 
FITC-conjugated anti–HLA-DR (BD). T
o evaluate cyto-
kine production in macrophages, intracellular cytokine stain-
ing was performed in resting and stimulated cells (LPS and 
IFN-γ for the indicated hours). Golgi stop (BD) was added 
for the last 6 h of culture. Macrophages were stained with 
APC-conjugated anti-CD14 antibodies (BD), permeabilized 
using the Cytofix/Cytoperm Kit (BD), and stained with Pa-
cific Blue–conjugated anti–IL-1β antibodies (BioLegend), 
FITC-conjugated anti–IL-6 antibodies (BioLegend), and phy-
coerythrin-conjugated anti-TNF antibodies (BD). Cell via-
bility was assessed by 7-amino-actinomycin D (BD) staining.
Measurement of ROS. 
 Macrophages or monocytes were stim-
ulated with LPS and IFN-γ for the indicated times in RPMI 
medium with the indicated glucose concentrations, and then 
stained with 5 µM of CellROX Deep Red reagent (Molecu-
lar Probes) for 30 min or MitoSOX (Molecular Probes) for 
10 min at 37°C. Macrophages were then washed with PBS 
and analyzed by flow cytometry.
Measurement of glucose uptake. 
 Resting or stimulated mac-
rophages or monocytes were incubated in glucose-free RPMI 
medium containing 5 µM of fluorescent d-glucose analogue 
2-[N-(7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazol-4-yl) amino]-2-deoxy-
d-glucose (Cayman Chemical) for 60 min at 37°C (Zou et al., 
2005). Fluorescent intensities were analyzed by flow cytometry.
siRNA-mediated knockdown. 
 T
o knock down NOX2 expres-
sion, 1 nM of small interference RNA oligonucleotides were 
transfected into macrophages using INT 
ERF 
ERin (Poly-
plus Transfection). Oligo duplex RNA specific for NOX2 
was purchased from Life T
echnologies. As a negative con-
trol, negative control siRNA (Life T
echnologies) was used. 
48 h after transfection, macrophages were stimulated as de-
scribed in Cells and culture.
Mitochondrial respiration and glycolysis assays. 
 Cellular 
OCR and ECAR were measured in monocytes and macro-
phages stimulated with LPS and INF-γ for 3 h. Measurements 
were taken at 37°C using an XF96 extracellular analyzer 
(Seahorse Bioscience). Cells were seeded in 96-well plates 
and medium was changed to unbuffered DMEM (DMEM 
supplemented with 25 mM glucose, 31 mM NaCl, and 2 mM 
GlutaMax, pH 7.4) and incubated at 37°C in a non-CO2 
incubator for 1 h. All reagents were adjusted to pH 7.4. Three 
measurements were taken before and after addition of oligo-
mycin (1 µg/ml), FCCP (0.5 µM), and the combination of 
antimycin A (10 µM) and rotenone (10 µM). OCR and 
ECAR were calculated by the Seahorse Wave software.
Western blotting. 
 Monocytes and macrophages were col-
lected and lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, 
50 mM, NaCl, 1% 
Triton X-100, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF
, 
10 g/ml aprotinin, 10 g/ml leupeptin, 10 mM sodium pyro-
phosphate, 50 mM sodium fluoride, and 1 mM sodium or-
thovanadate). Nuclear proteins were extracted using NE-PER 
Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagents (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific). Nonreducing conditions were applied for 
the detection of PKM2 dimeric and tetrameric forms. For the 
detection of oligomers, cells were treated with 5 mM of 
di-succinimidyl suberate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30 
min before lysis. Lysates were separated by SDS-PAGE, trans-
ferred to nitrocellulose membranes, and incubated with the 
following antibodies: anti-PKM2 (Cell Signaling T
echnol-
ogy), anti-GAP 
DH (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), anti- 
Lamin A/C (Genentech), horseradish peroxidase-conjugated 
anti-Ig (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), and IRDye 800CW 
anti-Ig (LI-COR Biosciences). 
The enhanced chemilumines-
cence detection system (GE Healthcare) was used to detect 
bands with peroxidase activity, or membranes were scanned 
with an Odyssey fluorescence scanner (LI-COR).
Confocal microscopy. 
 Differentiated and stimulated macro-
phages seeded on glass coverslips were incubated with spe-
cific antibodies for 1 h at room temperature, followed by 
Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated secondary antibodies (Life 
T
echnologies) for 1 h at room temperature. Cells on cover-
slips were mounted in Vectashield with DAPI (Vector Labo-
ratories) and examined using the 488- and 405-nm lines of 
the argon ion and diode lasers in a confocal imaging system 
(LSM 710; Carl Zeiss). All experiments included controls 
without primary antibody.
Immunohistochemistry. 
 OCT
-embedded sections of carotid 
arteries from CAD patients were sectioned at 10-µm intervals 
and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde solution (Affymetrix). 
After blocking with 5% normal goat serum (Invitrogen), sec-
tions were incubated with unconjugated primary antibody 
overnight. Primary antibodies included rabbit anti–human 
PKM2 (1:100; Cell Signaling 
T
echnology), rabbit anti-human 
IL-6 (1:400; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and mouse anti–
 Glucose utilization in CAD macrophages | Shirai et al.
352
human CD68 (1:100; Dako). Isotype-matched primary anti-
bodies served as control. Tissue sections were then stained 
with secondary antibodies, Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated goat 
anti–rabbit IgG and Alexa Fluor 544–conjugated goat anti–
mouse IgG (Life T
echnologies) for 2 h, and mounted with 
DAPI-containing mounting medium (Molecular Probes). 
Tissue sections were examined using fluorescence microscopy.
Detection of STAT3 phosphorylation. 
 Phosphorylation of 
STAT3 at Y705 was assessed at the single-cell level by Phos-
flow (BD). In brief, macrophages were stimulated with IFN-γ 
and LPS, fixed with Cytofix buffer (BD) at 37°C for 10 min, 
permeabilized with Phosflow Perm buffer III (BD) for 30 
min on ice, and then stained with phycoerythrin-conjugated 
anti-pSTAT3 (Y705) antibodies (BD). Stained cells were an-
alyzed by flow cytometry.
Proximity ligation assay (PLA). 
 Resting and stimulated mac-
rophages were attached to cover glasses; paraformaldehyde 
fixed and labeled with PKM2 or phospho-STAT3 (Y705) 
antibodies (Cell Signaling Technology). To visualize close 
co-localization of the two proteins, we applied the PLA 
protocol (Olink Bioscience), in which antibodies against a 
protein pair are attached to short chains of complementary 
DNA oligonucleotides, which hybridize when in close 
proximity. Enzymatic ligation of the oligonucleotides gen-
erates a circularized DNA strand that serves as a template. 
The amplification reaction product remains attached to the 
antibody-protein complex and is visualized through the hy-
bridization of fluorescently labeled oligonucleotides. A flu-
orescence signal occurs only when two proteins are in close 
juxtaposition (40 nm). Signals of fluorescent PLA probes 
indicating co-localization/co-compartmentalization of two 
proteins were acquired with a confocal imaging sys-
tem (LSM 710; Carl Zeiss).
Statistical analysis. 
 Statistical significance was calculated by 
the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test when comparing two 
groups or by one-way or two-way ANO 
VA when comparing 
three or more groups. All analyses were performed using 
Prism software (GraphPad Software). In all analyses, P < 0.05 
was taken to indicate statistical significance. Power analysis 
was performed to minimally yield an 80% chance to detect a 
significant difference.
ACK 
NOW 
LED 
GME 
NTS
This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (NIH; 
AR042547, AI044142, HL058000, AI108891, HL117913, AG045779) and by the Gove-
nar Discovery Fund. R.R. Nazarewicz was supported in part by American Heart Asso-
ciation grant 14SDG20410081. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors 
and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Submitted: 29 May 2015
Accepted: 1 February 2016
REFERENCES
Anastasiou, D., G. Poulogiannis, J.M. Asara, M.B. Boxer, J.K. Jiang, M. Shen, 
G. Bellinger, A.T. Sasaki, J.W
. Locasale, D.S. Auld, et al. 2011. Inhibition 
of pyruvate kinase M2 by reactive oxygen species contributes to cellular 
antioxidant responses. Science. 334:1278–1283. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1211485
Bekkering, S., J. Quintin, L.A. Joosten, J.W
. van der Meer, M.G. Netea, and 
N.P
. Riksen. 2014. Oxidized low-density lipoprotein induces long-term 
proinflammatory cytokine production and foam cell formation via 
epigenetic reprogramming of monocytes. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 
34:1731–1738. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1161 
/ATV 
BAHA 
.114 
.303887
Boussageon, R., T. Bejan-Angoulvant, M. Saadatian-Elahi, S. Lafont, C. 
Bergeonneau, B. Kassaï, S. Erpeldinger, J.M. Wright, F
. Gueyffier, and 
C. Cornu. 2011. Effect of intensive glucose lowering treatment on all 
cause mortality, cardiovascular death, and microvascular events in type 2 
diabetes: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 343(jul26 
1):d4169. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1136 
/bmj 
.d4169
Bulua, A.C., A. Simon, R. Maddipati, M. Pelletier, H. Park, K.Y
. Kim, M.N. 
Sack, D.L. Kastner, and R.M. Siegel. 2011. Mitochondrial reactive 
oxygen species promote production of proinflammatory cytokines and 
are elevated in TNFR1-associated periodic syndrome (TRA 
PS). J. Exp. 
Med. 208:519–533. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20102049
Christofk, H.R., M.G. Vander Heiden, M.H. Harris, A. Ramanathan, R.E. 
Gerszten, R. Wei, M.D. Fleming, S.L. Schreiber, and L.C. Cantley. 2008a. 
The M2 splice isoform of pyruvate kinase is important for cancer 
metabolism and tumour growth. Nature. 452:230–233. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature06734
Christofk, H.R., M.G. Vander Heiden, N. Wu, J.M. Asara, and L.C. Cantley. 
2008b. Pyruvate kinase M2 is a phosphotyrosine-binding protein. Nature. 
452:181–186. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature06667
Colegio, O.R., N.Q. Chu, A.L. Szabo, T. Chu, A.M. Rhebergen, V
. Jairam, 
N. Cyrus, C.E. Brokowski, S.C. Eisenbarth, G.M. Phillips, et al. 2014. 
Functional polarization of tumour-associated macrophages by tumour-
derived lactic acid. Nature. 513:559–563. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nature13490
Dikalova, A.E., A.T. Bikineyeva, K. Budzyn, R.R. Nazarewicz, L. McCann, 
W
. Lewis, D.G. Harrison, and S.I. Dikalov. 2010. 
Therapeutic targeting of 
mitochondrial superoxide in hypertension. Circ. Res. 107:106–116. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1161 
/CIR 
CRE 
SAHA 
.109 
.214601
Everett, B.M., A.D. Pradhan, D.H. Solomon, N. Paynter, J. Macfadyen, E. 
Zaharris, M. Gupta, M. Clearfield, P
. Libby, A.A. Hasan, et al. 2013. 
Rationale and design of the Cardiovascular Inflammation Reduction 
Trial: a test of the inflammatory hypothesis of atherothrombosis. Am. 
Heart J. 166:199–207.e15. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ahj 
.2013 
.03 
.018
Everts, B., E. Amiel, S.C. Huang, A.M. Smith, C.H. Chang, W
.Y
. Lam, V
. 
Redmann, T.C. Freitas, J. Blagih, G.J. van der Windt, et al. 2014. TLR-
driven early glycolytic reprogramming via the kinases TBK1-IKKɛ 
supports the anabolic demands of dendritic cell activation. Nat. Immunol. 
15:323–332. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ni 
.2833
Fearon, I.M., and S.P
. Faux. 2009. Oxidative stress and cardiovascular disease: 
novel tools give (free) radical insight. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 47:372–381. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.yjmcc 
.2009 
.05 
.013
Fox, C.S., S.H. Golden, C. Anderson, G.A. Bray, L.E. Burke, I.H. de Boer, 
P
. Deedwania, R.H. Eckel, A.G. Ershow, J. Fradkin, et al. American 
Heart Association Diabetes Committee of the Council on Lifestyle and 
Cardiometabolic Health, Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on 
Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery 
and Anesthesia, Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research, 
and the American Diabetes Association. 2015. Update on Prevention 
of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults With T
ype 2 Diabetes Mellitus in 
Light of Recent Evidence: A Scientific Statement From the American 
Heart Association and the American Diabetes Association. Circulation. 
132:691–718. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1161 
/CIR 
.0000000000000230
 353
JEM Vol. 213, No. 3
Freemerman, A.J., A.R. Johnson, G.N. Sacks, J.J. Milner, E.L. Kirk, M.A. 
Troester, A.N. Macintyre, P
. Goraksha-Hicks, J.C. Rathmell, and L. 
Makowski. 2014. Metabolic reprogramming of macrophages: glucose 
transporter 1 (GLUT1)-mediated glucose metabolism drives a 
proinflammatory phenotype. J. Biol. Chem. 289:7884–7896. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M113 
.522037
Gao, X., H. Wang, J.J. Yang, X. Liu, and Z.R. Liu. 2012. Pyruvate kinase M2 
regulates gene transcription by acting as a protein kinase. Mol. Cell. 
45:598–609. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.molcel 
.2012 
.01 
.001
Grundy, S.M., H.B. Brewer Jr., J.I. Cleeman, S.C. Smith Jr., C. LenfantAmerican 
Heart Association. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. 2004. 
Definition of metabolic syndrome: Report of the National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute/American Heart Association conference on 
scientific issues related to definition. Circulation. 109:433–438. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1161 
/01 
.CIR 
.0000111245 
.75752 
.C6
Hansson, G.K., and A. Hermansson. 2011. The immune system in 
atherosclerosis. Nat. Immunol. 12:204–212. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
ni 
.2001
Hansson, G.K., and P
. Libby. 2006. The immune response in atherosclerosis: 
a double-edged sword. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:508–519. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri1882
Hitosugi, T., S. Kang, M.G. 
Vander Heiden, T.W
. Chung, S. Elf, K. Lythgoe, S. 
Dong, S. Lonial, X. 
Wang, G.Z. Chen, et al. 2009. 
Tyrosine phosphorylation 
inhibits PKM2 to promote the Warburg effect and tumor growth. Sci. 
Signal. 2:ra73. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/scisignal 
.2000431
Huang, S.C.C., and E.J. Pearce. 2014. For macrophages, Ndufs is enough. 
Immunity. 41:351–353. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2014 
.09 
.004
Itoh, K., J. Mimura, and M. Yamamoto. 2010. Discovery of the negative 
regulator of Nrf2, Keap1: a historical overview. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 
13:1665–1678. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1089 
/ars 
.2010 
.3222
Ivashkiv, L.B. 2013. Epigenetic regulation of macrophage polarization and 
function. Trends Immunol. 34:216–223. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.it 
.2012 
.11 
.001
Jin, Z., W
. Wei, M. Yang, Y
. Du, and Y
. Wan. 2014. Mitochondrial complex 
I activity suppresses inflammation and enhances bone resorption by 
shifting macrophage-osteoclast polarization. Cell Metab. 20:483–498. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cmet 
.2014 
.07 
.011
Keller, K.E., Z.M. Doctor, Z.W
. Dwyer, and Y
.S. Lee. 2014. SAI 
CAR 
induces protein kinase activity of PKM2 that is necessary for sustained 
proliferative signaling of cancer cells. Mol. Cell. 53:700–709. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.molcel 
.2014 
.02 
.015
Kirabo, A., V
. Fontana, A.P
. de Faria, R. Loperena, C.L. Galindo, J. Wu, A.T. 
Bikineyeva, S. Dikalov, L. Xiao, W
. Chen, et al. 2014. DC isoketal-
modified proteins activate T cells and promote hypertension. J. Clin. 
Invest. 124:4642–4656. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI74084
Korge, P
., P
. Ping, and J.N. Weiss. 2008. Reactive oxygen species production 
in energized cardiac mitochondria during hypoxia/reoxygenation: 
modulation by nitric oxide. Circ. Res. 103:873–880. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1161 
/CIR 
CRE 
SAHA 
.108 
.180869
Korn, T., M. Mitsdoerffer, A.L. Croxford, A. Awasthi, V
.A. Dardalhon, G. 
Galileos, P
. 
Vollmar, G.L. Stritesky, M.H. Kaplan, A. Waisman, et al. 2008. 
IL-6 controls Th17 immunity in vivo by inhibiting the conversion of 
conventional T cells into Foxp3+ regulatory T cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA. 105:18460–18465. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0809850105
Libby, P
. 2013. Mechanisms of acute coronary syndromes and their 
implications for therapy. N. Engl. J. Med. 368:2004–2013. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1056 
/NEJMra1216063
Libby, P
., and M. Aikawa. 2002. Stabilization of atherosclerotic plaques: new 
mechanisms and clinical targets. Nat. Med. 8:1257–1262. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm1102 
-1257
Liu, H., R. Colavitti, I.I. Rovira, and T. Finkel. 2005. Redox-dependent 
transcriptional regulation. Circ. Res. 97:967–974. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1161 
/01 
.RES 
.0000188210 
.72062 
.10
Luo, W
., H. Hu, R. Chang, J. Zhong, M. Knabel, R. O’Meally, R.N. Cole, 
A. Pandey, and G.L. Semenza. 2011. Pyruvate kinase M2 is a PHD3-
stimulated coactivator for hypoxia-inducible factor 1. Cell. 145:732–744. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2011 
.03 
.054
Lv, L., D. Li, D. Zhao, R. Lin, Y
. Chu, H. Zhang, Z. Zha, Y
. Liu, Z. Li, Y
. 
Xu, et al. 2011. Acetylation targets the M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase 
for degradation through chaperone-mediated autophagy and promotes 
tumor growth. Mol. Cell. 42:719–730. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.molcel 
.2011 
.04 
.025
Lv, L., Y
.P
. Xu, D. Zhao, F
.L. Li, W
. Wang, N. Sasaki, Y
. Jiang, X. Zhou, T.T. 
Li, K.L. Guan, et al. 2013. Mitogenic and oncogenic stimulation of 
K433 acetylation promotes PKM2 protein kinase activity and nuclear 
localization. Mol. Cell. 52:340–352. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.molcel 
.2013 
.09 
.004
Mahabeleshwar, G.H., D. Kawanami, N. Sharma, Y
. Takami, G. Zhou, H. 
Shi, L. Nayak, D. Jeyaraj, R. Grealy, M. White, et al. 2011. The myeloid 
transcription factor KLF2 regulates the host response to polymicrobial 
infection and endotoxic shock. Immunity. 34:715–728. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2011 
.04 
.014
Martinez, F
.O., and S. Gordon. 2014. The M1 and M2 paradigm of 
macrophage activation: time for reassessment. F1000Prime Rep. 6:13. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.12703 
/P6 
-13
Martinez, F
.O., A. Sica, A. Mantovani, and M. Locati. 2008. Macrophage 
activation and polarization. Front. Biosci. 13:453–461. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.2741 
/2692
Martinez, F
.O., L. Helming, R. Milde, A. Varin, B.N. Melgert, C. Draijer, B. 
Thomas, M. Fabbri, A. Crawshaw, L.P
. Ho, et al. 2013. Genetic programs 
expressed in resting and IL-4 alternatively activated mouse and human 
macrophages: similarities and differences. Blood. 121:e57–e69. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1182 
/blood 
-2012 
-06 
-436212
McMurray, J.S. 2006. A new small-molecule Stat3 inhibitor. Chem. Biol. 
13:1123–1124. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.chembiol 
.2006 
.11 
.001
Moore, K.J., F
.J. Sheedy, and E.A. Fisher. 2013. Macrophages in atherosclerosis: 
a dynamic balance. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13:709–721. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri3520
Naik, E., and V
.M. Dixit. 2011. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species drive 
proinflammatory cytokine production. J. Exp. Med. 208:417–420. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20110367
Nakahira, K., J.A. Haspel, V
.A. Rathinam, S.J. Lee, T. Dolinay, H.C. Lam, J.A. 
Englert, M. Rabinovitch, M. Cernadas, H.P
. Kim, et al. 2011. Autophagy 
proteins regulate innate immune responses by inhibiting the release 
of mitochondrial DNA mediated by the NALP3 inflammasome. Nat. 
Immunol. 12:222–230. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ni 
.1980
Nathan, C., and A. Cunningham-Bussel. 2013. Beyond oxidative stress: an 
immunologist’s guide to reactive oxygen species. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 
13:349–361. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri3423
Neele, A.E., J. Van den Bossche, M.A. Hoeksema, and M.P
.J. de Winther. 
2015. Epigenetic pathways in macrophages emerge as novel targets in 
atherosclerosis. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 763(Pt A):79–89. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ejphar 
.2015 
.03 
.101
Noguchi, T., H. Inoue, and T. Tanaka. 1986. The M1- and M2-type isozymes 
of rat pyruvate kinase are produced from the same gene by alternative 
RNA splicing. J. Biol. Chem. 261:13807–13812.
O’Neill, L.A., and D.G. Hardie. 2013. Metabolism of inflammation limited 
by AMPK and pseudo-starvation. Nature. 493:346–355. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature11862
Palsson-McDermott, E.M., A.M. Curtis, G. Goel, M.A. Lauterbach, F
.J. 
Sheedy, L.E. Gleeson, M.W
. van den Bosch, S.R. Quinn, R. Domingo-
Fernandez, D.G. Johnston, et al. 2015. Pyruvate kinase M2 regulates 
 Glucose utilization in CAD macrophages | Shirai et al.
354
Hif-1α activity and IL-1β induction and is a critical determinant of the 
warburg effect in LPS-activated macrophages. Cell Metab. 21:65–80. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cmet 
.2014 
.12 
.005
Ralser, M., M.M. Wamelink, E.A. Struys, C. Joppich, S. Krobitsch, C. Jakobs, 
and H. Lehrach. 2008. A catabolic block does not sufficiently explain 
how 2-deoxy-D-glucose inhibits cell growth. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 
105:17807–17811. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0803090105
Ray, K.K., S.R. Seshasai, S. Wijesuriya, R. Sivakumaran, S. Nethercott, D. 
Preiss, S. Erqou, and N. Sattar. 2009. Effect of intensive control of glucose 
on cardiovascular outcomes and death in patients with diabetes mellitus: 
a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet. 373:1765–1772. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0140 
-6736(09)60697 
-8
Rey, F
.E., M.E. Cifuentes, A. Kiarash, M.T. Quinn, and P
.J. Pagano. 2001. 
Novel competitive inhibitor of NAD(P)H oxidase assembly attenuates 
vascular O(2)(-) and systolic blood pressure in mice. Circ. Res. 89:408–
414. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1161 
/hh1701 
.096037
Reynolds, L.M., M. 
Wan, J. Ding, J.R. 
Taylor, K. Lohman, D. Su, B.D. Bennett, 
D.K. Porter, R. Gimple, G.S. Pittman, et al. 2015. DNA Methylation of 
the Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Repressor Associations With Cigarette 
Smoking and Subclinical Atherosclerosis. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 8:707–
716. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1161 
/CIR 
CGE 
NET 
ICS 
.115 
.001097
Ridker, P
.M., N. Rifai, M.J. Stampfer, and C.H. Hennekens. 2000. Plasma 
concentration of interleukin-6 and the risk of future myocardial 
infarction among apparently healthy men. Circulation. 101:1767–1772. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1161 
/01 
.CIR 
.101 
.15 
.1767
Ridker, P
.M., E. Danielson, F
.A. Fonseca, J. Genest, A.M. Gotto Jr., J.J. 
Kastelein, W
. Koenig, P
. Libby, A.J. Lorenzatti, J.G. MacFadyen, et al. 
JUP 
ITER Study Group. 2008. Rosuvastatin to prevent vascular events 
in men and women with elevated C-reactive protein. N. Engl. J. Med. 
359:2195–2207. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1056 
/NEJMoa0807646
Ridker, P
.M., T. Thuren, A. Zalewski, and P
. Libby. 2011. Interleukin-1β 
inhibition and the prevention of recurrent cardiovascular events: rationale 
and design of the Canakinumab Anti-inflammatory Thrombosis 
Outcomes Study (CAN 
TOS). Am. Heart J. 162:597–605. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ahj 
.2011 
.06 
.012
Rogacev, K.S., B. Cremers, A.M. Zawada, S. Seiler, N. Binder, P
. Ege, G. 
Große-Dunker, I. Heisel, F
. Hornof, J. Jeken, et al. 2012. CD14++CD16+ 
monocytes independently predict cardiovascular events: a cohort study 
of 951 patients referred for elective coronary angiography. J. Am. Coll. 
Cardiol. 60:1512–1520. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jacc 
.2012 
.07 
.019
Rudd, J.H., E.A. Warburton, T.D. Fryer, H.A. Jones, J.C. Clark, N. Antoun, P
. 
Johnström, 
A.P
. Davenport, P
.J. Kirkpatrick, B.N. 
Arch, et al. 2002. Imaging 
atherosclerotic plaque inflammation with [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose 
positron emission tomography. Circulation. 105:2708–2711. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1161 
/01 
.CIR 
.0000020548 
.60110 
.76
Ruparelia, N., J. Godec, R. Lee, J.T. Chai, E. Dall’Armellina, D. McAndrew, J.E. 
Digby, J.C. Forfar, B.D. Prendergast, R.K. Kharbanda, et al. 2015. Acute 
myocardial infarction activates distinct inflammation and proliferation 
pathways in circulating monocytes, prior to recruitment, and identified 
through conserved transcriptional responses in mice and humans. Eur. 
Heart J. 36:1923–1934. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/eurheartj 
/ehv195
Samavati, L., R. Rastogi, W
. Du, M. Hüttemann, A. Fite, and L. Franchi. 2009. 
STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation is critical for interleukin 1 beta and 
interleukin-6 production in response to lipopolysaccharide and live 
bacteria. Mol. Immunol. 46:1867–1877. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.molimm 
.2009 
.02 
.018
Selvin, E., S. Marinopoulos, G. Berkenblit, T. Rami, F
.L. Brancati, N.R. Powe, 
and S.H. Golden. 2004. Meta-analysis: glycosylated hemoglobin and 
cardiovascular disease in diabetes mellitus. Ann. Intern. Med. 141:421–
431. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.7326 
/0003 
-4819 
-141 
-6 
-200409210 
-00007
Shirai, T., M. Hilhorst, D.G. Harrison, J.J. Goronzy, and C.M. Weyand. 
2015. Macrophages in vascular inflammation—From atherosclerosis 
to vasculitis. Autoimmunity. 48:139–151. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3109 
/08916934 
.2015 
.1027815
Stöger, J.L., M.J. Gijbels, S. van der Velden, M. Manca, C.M. van der 
Loos, E.A. Biessen, M.J. Daemen, E. Lutgens, and M.P
. de Winther. 
2012. Distribution of macrophage polarization markers in human 
atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis. 225:461–468. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.atherosclerosis 
.2012 
.09 
.013
Tannahill, G.M., A.M. Curtis, J. Adamik, E.M. Palsson-McDermott, A.F
. 
McGettrick, G. Goel, C. Frezza, N.J. Bernard, B. Kelly, N.H. Foley, et al. 
2013. Succinate is an inflammatory signal that induces IL-1β through 
HIF-1α. Nature. 496:238–242. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature11986
Walsh, M.J., K.R. Brimacombe, D. Anastasiou, 
Y
. 
Yu, W
.J. Israelsen, B.S. Hong, 
W
. Tempel, S. Dimov, H. Veith, H. Yang, et al. 2010. ML265: A potent 
PKM2 activator induces tetramerization and reduces tumor forma-
tion and size in a mouse xenograft model. In Probe Reports from the 
NIH Molecular Libraries Program. National Center for Biotechnology 
Information. Bethesda, MD.
Wang, Y
., G.Z. Wang, P
.S. Rabinovitch, and I. Tabas. 2014. Macrophage 
mitochondrial oxidative stress promotes atherosclerosis and nuclear 
factor-κB-mediated inflammation in macrophages. Circ. Res. 114:421–
433. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1161 
/CIR 
CRE 
SAHA 
.114 
.302153
Wilcox, C.S. 2010. Effects of tempol and redox-cycling nitroxides in models 
of oxidative stress. Pharmacol. Ther. 126:119–145. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.pharmthera 
.2010 
.01 
.003
Witztum, J.L., and A.H. Lichtman. 2014. 
The influence of innate and adaptive 
immune responses on atherosclerosis. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 9:73–102. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1146 
/annurev 
-pathol 
-020712 
-163936
Wu, J., M.A. Saleh, A. Kirabo, H.A. Itani, K.R. Montaniel, L. Xiao, W
. Chen, 
R.L. Mernaugh, H. Cai, K.E. Bernstein, et al. 2015. Immune activation 
caused by vascular oxidation promotes fibrosis and hypertension. J. Clin. 
Invest. 21:22–25.
Yang, L., M. Xie, M. Yang, Y
. Yu, S. Zhu, W
. Hou, R. Kang, M.T. Lotze, T.R. 
Billiar, H. Wang, et al.. 2014a. PKM2 regulates the Warburg effect and 
promotes HMGB1 release in sepsis. Nat. Commun. 5:4436. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ncomms5436
Yang, P
., Z. Li, R. Fu, H. Wu, and Z. Li. 2014b. Pyruvate kinase M2 facilitates 
colon cancer cell migration via the modulation of STAT3 signalling. 
Cell. Signal. 26:1853–1862. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cellsig 
.2014 
.03 
.020
Yang, P
., Z. Li, H. Li, Y
. Lu, H. Wu, and Z. Li. 2015. Pyruvate kinase M2 
accelerates pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion and cell proliferation 
induced by lipopolysaccharide in colorectal cancer. Cell. Signal. 
27:1525–1532. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cellsig 
.2015 
.02 
.032
Yang, W
., 
Y
. Xia, D. Hawke, X. Li, J. Liang, D. Xing, K. Aldape, T. Hunter, W
.K. 
Alfred Yung, and Z. Lu. 2012. PKM2 phosphorylates histone H3 and 
promotes gene transcription and tumorigenesis. Cell. 150:685–696. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2012 
.07 
.018
Zhou, R., A.S. 
Yazdi, P
. Menu, and J. Tschopp. 2011. A role for mitochondria 
in NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Nature. 469:221–225. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature09663
Zou, C., 
Y
. Wang, and Z. Shen. 2005. 2-NBDG as a fluorescent indicator for 
direct glucose uptake measurement. J. Biochem. Biophys. Methods. 64:207–
215. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jbbm 
.2005 
.08 
.001
