 1 3
Med Microbiol Immunol
DOI 10.1007/s00430-016-0481-y
REVIEW
Effects of prebiotics on immune system and cytokine expression
Parisa Shokryazdan1 · Mohammad Faseleh Jahromi1,2 · Bahman Navidshad3 · 
Juan Boo Liang1 
Received: 26 May 2016 / Accepted: 27 September 2016 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016
Introduction
According to the definition suggested by Gibson and Rob-
erfroid [15], prebiotic was initially defined as “a non-digest-
ible food ingredient that beneficially affects the host by 
selectively stimulating the growth and/or activity of one or 
a limited number of bacteria in the colon, and thus improves 
host health.” However, the new definition by Gibson et al. 
[14] describes a prebiotic as “a selectively fermented ingre-
dient that allows specific changes, both in the composition 
and/or activity in the gastrointestinal microbiota that con-
fers benefits upon host wellbeing and health.” Gibson et al. 
[14] suggested that to classify a food or feed component as 
a prebiotic it must meet the following criteria: (1) resist-
ance to gastric acidity, hydrolysis by mammalian enzymes 
and gastrointestinal absorption, (2) being fermentable by 
the specific intestinal microflora and (3) being able to selec-
tively stimulate the growth and/or activity of intestinal bac-
teria associated with health and well-being of the host. As a 
functional food component, prebiotics, like probiotics, are 
conceptually intermediate between foods and drugs, and 
they are mainly oligosaccharide (OSC) carbohydrates, such 
as fructooligosaccharides (FOS), galactooligosaccharides 
(GOS), xylooligosaccharides (XOS) and mannooligosac-
charides (MOS).
Prebiotics have several beneficial effects on animals and 
humans. As it is given in Table 1, one of the main beneficial 
effects of prebiotic is stimulation of immune system. There 
is an increasing interest in modulation of the immune sys-
tem using prebiotics in both human and animals [1, 25, 26, 
32, 34, 47] regardless this effect is direct, or indirect resulted 
from stimulation of immunomodulatory bacteria and pro-
duction of microbial compounds, such as short-chain fatty 
acids (SCFAs). Such microbial compounds are known to 
affect immune system by binding to the G-protein-coupled 
Abstract Nowadays, use of prebiotics as feed and food 
additives has received increasing interest because of the 
beneficial effects of prebiotics on the health of animals and 
humans. One of the beneficial effects of prebiotics is stim-
ulation of immune system, which can be direct or indirect 
through increasing population of beneficial microbes or pro-
biotics, especially lactic acid bacteria and bifidobacteria, in 
the gut. An important mechanism of action of probiotics and 
prebiotics, by which they can affect the immune system, is 
changing the expression of cytokines. The present review 
tried to summarize the findings of studies that investigated 
the effects of prebiotics on immune system with focusing 
on their effects on cytokine expression. Generally, most of 
reviewed studies indicated beneficial effects for prebiotics 
in terms of improving immune system, by increasing the 
expression of anti-inflammatory cytokines, while reduc-
ing the expressions of proinflammatory cytokines. How-
ever, most of studies mainly considered the indirect effects 
of prebiotics on the immune system (through changing the 
composition and population of gut microbiota), and their 
direct effects still need to be further studied using prebiotics 
with different degree of polymerization in different hosts.
Keywords Prebiotic · Oligosaccharide · Cytokine · 
Immunomodulatory · Inflammatory
 
* Juan Boo Liang 
 
jbliang@upm.edu.my
1 
Institute of Tropical Agriculture, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 
43400 Serdang, Malaysia
2 
Agriculture Biotechnology Research Institute of Iran (ABRII), 
East and North-East Branch, P.O.B. 91735 844, Mashhad, Iran
3 
Department of Animal Science, University of Mohaghegh 
Ardabili, Ardabil, Iran
  
Med Microbiol Immunol
1 3
receptors of immune cells within gut-associated lymphoid 
tissues (GALT) [4]. Although there are some reviews on 
the effects of prebiotics on the immune function, the aim 
of the present work is to summarize the finding of avail-
able researches that investigated the effect of prebiotics on 
immune system, by focusing on cytokines expression.
Intestinal microbiota and immunity
The microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) inhabits a 
complex ecosystem [48] and health of this ecosystem is very 
important for animal and human health. Having a healthy gut 
is achieved by increasing colonization of beneficial microbes 
and reducing populations of pathogenic ones in the intestine 
[42]. To emphasize the important effects of gut microbiota on 
the immune system, germfree mice can provide the best evi-
dences, as these mice have deficiency in the development of 
their GALT. These mice may have decreased intraepithelial 
lymphocytes, Peyer’s patches (PP) with impaired germinal 
center development, and also less IgA-secreting plasma cells 
as well as fewer CD4+ T cells in their lamina propria [3, 31, 
50]. Exposing to different microbial species can restart GALT 
development in germfree animals, which is another evidence 
for the fact that gut microorganisms have an important role in 
the development of immune function [38].
Direct and indirect effects of prebiotics  
on the immune system
Considering the major role of gut microbiota in the immune 
system of the host, it has been reported that enhancement 
of the immune function in prebiotic-treated hosts is mainly 
due to enhancement of the population of beneficial bacteria 
and their products in the gut, which is considered as indirect 
effects of prebiotics on the immune system. However, effects 
of prebiotics on the immune function may be direct, indirect 
or both.
In the case of indirect effects, many studies showed 
that prebiotics are able to change the balance of intesti-
nal microbial population toward increasing the population 
of beneficial and protective bacteria, such as bifidobacte-
ria and lactobacilli, while reducing the disease-inducing 
or pathogenic bacteria, in both animal models and human 
studies [9, 25, 28, 44]. For example, OSCs are able to block 
the adhesion of pathogens to the epithelial cells. Even 
before introducing OSCs as prebiotic by Gibson and Rob-
erfroid [15], some studies investigated the ability of man-
nose, monomer of MOS, for inhibition of Salmonella infec-
tions. They found that Salmonella can bind to mannose 
via type 1 fimbriae (finger-like projections), so mannose 
reduced the pathogen colonization in the GIT [37].
The increase in population of beneficial microbes in the 
GIT, which is due to the supplementation of probiotics and/
or prebiotics [22, 23], leads to express their positive effects 
on the function of immune system mainly through induc-
ing changes in the expression of cytokines, especially in the 
intestinal cells. It may be due to the microbial cells them-
selves or their products. It has been reported that absorbed 
SCFAs from the intestine can affect the expression of genes 
responsible for cytokine production in the tissue of desti-
nation. For example, butyrate significantly inhibits the pro-
duction of proinflammatory cytokines interferon (IFN)-γ 
and interleukin (IL)-2 in rat mesenteric lymph nodes 
(MLNs), so that the ratio of IFN-γ to IL-10 measured in 
Table 1  Proposed benefits of prebiotics for immunity and health of hosts
Modified from reports of Langen et al. [28] and Steed and Macfarlane [44]
Prebiotic effect
Mechanisms/expected results
Changing in the composition and population of gut microflora
Selectively stimulating beneficial members of the gut microflora with 
immunomodulatory activity (such as bifidobacteria and lactobacilli)
Inhibiting epithelial adhesion and invasion of pathogenic microbes
Increasing production of fermentation products by gut microflora
Increasing production of SCFAs, vitamins, bacteriocins and other antimi-
crobial compounds. Butyrate, propionate, acetate and pyruvate are able to 
beneficially change the expression of cytokines and improve immunity
Simulating intestinal barrier function
Improving intestinal permeability
Increasing production of mucus
Direct simulation of immune system
Increasing anti-inflammatory cytokines
Decreasing proinflammatory cytokines
Beneficial effects on GALT and mucosal immune system
Increasing the mucosal Ig, altering cytokine and lymphocyte expression, 
increasing the secretory IgA
Improving nutrients absorption
Improving small intestine development
Increasing villi height, crypt depth and number of goblet cells per villus
 Med Microbiol Immunol 
1 3
MLNs was reduced in the presence of butyrate [28]. Some 
cell culture studies also showed that butyrate inhibits pro-
duction of proinflammatory IL-2 and IFN-γ, while acetate 
and propionate increase the production of anti-inflamma-
tory cytokine IL-10 [6].
Microbial cells themselves are also able to directly 
change the expression of cytokines through the pattern 
recognition receptors, such as the toll-like receptors, and 
also through the interactions of enterocytes and immune 
cells with pathogen-associated molecular patterns, like 
lipopolysaccharides (LPS, which is a membrane com-
pound in Gram-negative bacteria), and lipoteichoic acids 
and unmethylated CpG DNA, which are present on the 
surface of all microorganisms regardless of pathogenicity. 
These interactions lead to a range of chain events caus-
ing cytokine production toward expressing an appropriate 
immune response [33, 46].
In the case of direct effects of prebiotics on the immune 
system, Roller et al. [40], Ito et al. [21] and Seifert and 
Watzl [41] suggested that some prebiotic OSCs can be 
directly absorbed in the intestinal cells and change the 
expression of genes. Ito et al. [21] measured the effect of 
OSCs with different degree of polymerization (DP) on 
cytokine production in CD4+ T cells. Based on the role 
of lactic acid bacteria (LAB) in development of intestinal 
immune system, their hypothesis was that all of the treat-
ments containing prebiotics with different DP (DP4, DP8 
and DP16) that can increase the number of lactobacilli in 
the cecum are able to increase the production of cytokines, 
such as IFN-γ and IL-10. However, the enhancement of 
cytokine production by CD4+ T cells was seen only in rats 
received DP4 treatment and not in those received DP8 or 
DP16 treatments, indicating this possibility that prebiotics 
with a lower DP may be absorbed intactly through the intes-
tine, and the cells in GLAT are capable of recognizing them, 
as discussed by Seifert and Watzl [41]. A study on mice also 
showed that feeding FOS (DP4) increased the production 
of IFN-γ and IL-10 in CD4+ T cells which were derived 
from PP when stimulated by a sonicated bifidus component 
[45]. Moreover, PP lymphocytes of rats receiving oligof-
ructose (fructans with DP2 to 8)-enriched inulin showed an 
enhancement in the production of IL-10 and IFN-γ under 
concanavalin A stimulation [40].
In vitro studies using cell lines also confirmed the direct 
effects of prebiotics on the immune function and expres-
sion of cytokines [1, 2].
Cytokines
The term “cytokine” is originated from the two 
Greek words: “cyto” meaning cell and “kinos” mean-
ing movement. Cytokines are a large, diverse family 
of small cell signaling molecules of peptide, protein 
or glycoprotein with molecular weight smaller than 
30 kDa. Although the main function of these mole-
cules is immunomodulatory capabilities, they are also 
involved in cell differentiation and directed migrations. 
Main producers of cytokines are helper T (Th) cells, 
macrophages, B lymphocytes and mast cells which 
are directly involved in the immune system. They can 
also be produced by endothelial fibroblast and stro-
mal cells [27, 49]. They are involved in cell-to-cell 
communication in immune responses and stimulating 
the movement of cells toward sites of inflammation, 
infection and trauma [50]. Cytokines may act on the 
cells that secreted them (autocrine action), on nearby 
cells (paracrine action) or in some instances on distant 
cells (endocrine action) [50]. There are many differ-
ent cytokines with different vital roles in the body of 
humans and animals. Cytokines act along with specific 
cytokine inhibitors and soluble cytokine receptors to 
express the appropriate immune response. Physiologi-
cally, they have an important role in inflammation and 
systemic inflammatory states. Based on the promoting 
or suppressing effects of cytokines on the immune sys-
tem, they are divided into proinflammatory and anti-
inflammatory cytokines, respectively [7].
Proinflammatory cytokines are involved in the up-reg-
ulation of inflammatory reactions [50]. Interleukin-1α and 
IL-1β are proinflammatory cytokines that participate in the 
regulation of immune responses, inflammatory reactions 
and hematopoiesis [43]. The IL-1 ligands and receptors 
are primarily associated with acute and chronic inflamma-
tion, and their effects are more intense than other cytokines 
[11]. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α is another proinflam-
matory cytokine that is able to induce inflammation and to 
inhibit tumorigenesis.
The anti-inflammatory cytokines are a series of immu-
noregulatory molecules that control the proinflammatory 
cytokine responses. Major anti-inflammatory cytokines 
include IL-1 receptor antagonist, IL-4, IL-10, IL-11 and 
IL-13. The IL-10 can be considered the most important 
anti-inflammatory cytokine with the ability of down-regu-
lation of proinflammatory cytokines and their receptors.
Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), interferon (IFN)-α, 
IL-6 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-β can be either 
anti-inflammatory or proinflammatory cytokines in differ-
ent circumstances.
Among different kinds of cytokines, interleukins, inter-
ferons, chemokines and tumor necrosis factor have been 
more investigated and documented in terms of their expres-
sions and biological functions by prebiotic supplementa-
tions. In the following sections, after a brief introduction 
on these cytokines, the effects of prebiotics on their expres-
sions are discussed.
  
Med Microbiol Immunol
1 3
Interleukins
Interleukins are main member of cytokines, which have 
variety of actions depending on the interleukins themselves 
and their target cells. They promote the development and 
differentiation of T and B lymphocytes and hematopoietic 
cells. The list of ILs that are important during the supple-
mentation of prebiotics is presented in Table 2.
Interferons
Interferons are a group of cytokines that involve in anti-
viral protections. They are made and released in response 
to pathogens, especially viruses. Interferons released from 
a pathogens-infected cell, especially a virus-infected cell, 
causing nearby cells to extend their anti-viral defences. 
Natural killer (NK) cells and macrophages are activated 
by interferons, and the host defences are enhanced also 
by interferons through up-regulation of antigen presenta-
tion, which in turn is the result of increasing the expression 
of major histocompatibility complex antigens.
Chemokines
Chemokine are cytokines that induce directed chemot-
axis in nearby responsive cells, causing direct cell migra-
tion, adhesion and activation. For example, they cause 
migration of white blood cells from the blood stream across 
the vascular endothelium [10]. Important chemokine mem-
bers are monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), 
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and cytokine-
induced neutrophil chemoattractant-1 (CINC-1), which are 
expressed in response to inflammation. The MCP-1 is an 
important chemokine that can regulate the migration and 
infiltration of monocytes/macrophages [10].
Tumor necrosis factor
Tumor necrosis factor is a cytokine involved in systemic 
inflammation and making up the acute-phase reaction. It is 
produced by activated macrophages, CD4+ lymphocytes, 
NK cells, neutrophils, mast cells, eosinophils and neu-
rons. The main role of TNF is regulating inflammatory and 
immune responses by the regulation of immune cells.
Effects of prebiotics on cytokines
As the focusing point of the present review, in this sec-
tion, we tried to summarize the findings of studies that 
investigated effects of different prebiotics on expression of 
cytokines.
In the literature, the effect of prebiotics on expression 
of IL-1 is not consistent. A prebiotic combination of inu-
lin and oligofructose in the drinking water of rats signifi-
cantly decreased the expression of cecal proinflammatory 
IL-1β [17]. This effect of prebiotic was also reported by 
other scientists [5, 16, 47]. In contrast, expression of IL-1β 
gene was up-regulated in the probiotics/prebiotics-treated 
macaques [25]. Many studies showed that prebiotic OSCs 
mainly change the expression of IL-1β although only few 
reports showed the effects of prebiotics on IL-1α [5].
Vulevic et al. [47] studied the effect of a mixture of 
GOS (galactans) on the immune function of healthy elderly 
volunteers. They found that consumption of the galactans 
(5.5 g/d) for 10 weeks increased the production of anti-
inflammatory cytokine IL-10, while reducing produc-
tion of proinflammatory cytokines IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-α. 
Lecerf et al. [29] reported that supplementation with inu-
lin and XOS for 4 weeks in healthy volunteers reduced the 
expression of IL-1β, IL-8, IL-12 and TNF-α, but increased 
Table 2  Interleukins that were reported to have biological function during prebiotic supplementations Source Khadka [24]
Interleukin
Producer
Target
IL-1 (α and β)
Macrophages, B cells, monocytes, dendritic cells
T helper cells, B cells, natural killer (NK) cells, macrophages, 
endothelium
IL-2
Th1-cells
Activated T cells and B cells, NK cells, macrophages, oligo-
dendrocytes
IL-4
Th2 cells, just activated naive CD4+ cell, memory CD4+ 
cells, mast cells, macrophages
Activated B cells, T cells, endothelium
IL-6
Macrophages, Th2 cells, B cells, astrocytes, endothelium
Activated B cells, plasma cells, hematopoietic stem cells, T 
cells
IL-8
Macrophages, lymphocytes, epithelial cells, endothelial cells
Neutrophils, basophils, lymphocytes
IL-10
Monocytes, Th2 cells, CD8+ T cells, mast cells, macrophages, 
B cell
B cells, mast cells, Th1 cells, Th2 cells
IL-12
Dendritic cells, B cells, T cells, macrophages
Activated T cells, NK cells
IL-17
Th17 cells
Epithelium, endothelium
 Med Microbiol Immunol 
1 3
IL-13 and IL-10 expressions in the blood. In another study 
on humans [8], oligofructose-enriched inulin was com-
pared with maltodextrin and caused a significant decrease 
in the levels of IL-6, TNF-α and plasma LPS as compared 
with maltodextrin. Decreases in levels of IFN-γ and high-
sensitivity C-reactive protein and an increase in the level 
of IL-10 were not significant in the oligofructose-enriched 
inulin group as compared to the maltodextrin group. In a 
study by Furrie et al. [13], a synbiotic containing Bifido-
bacterium longum and a inulin–oligofructose prebiotic was 
used to investigate its effects on ulcerative colitis (UC, an 
acute and chronic inflammatory disease of the large bowel). 
In the test group receiving synbiotic, there were significant 
reductions in mRNA levels of human beta defensins 2, 3 
and 4, which are strongly up-regulated in active UC. The 
levels of proinflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-1α, 
which induce defensin expression, were also reduced in the 
test group, especially the IL-1α cytokine, which its concen-
tration returned to the levels found in normal healthy tis-
sues. In another study on patients with UC by Faghfoori 
et al. [12], levels of TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-8 decreased in 
the group receiving germinated barley foodstuff (a prebi-
otic consisting insoluble glutamine-rich protein and dietary 
fiber), compared with the control group. For IL-6 and IL-8, 
this reduction was significant.
In a study on mice, animals receiving prebiotic showed a 
lower plasma LPS, cytokines (IL-1a, IL-1b, TNF-α, MCP-
1, MIP-1α, INF-γ, IL-6, IL-10, IL-18 and IL-15), and also 
a reduced hepatic expression of inflammatory and oxidative 
stress markers [5]. Mice receiving FOS and inulin showed 
an improved response to Salmonella vaccine. The splenic 
cell cultures at the first week post-immunization revealed an 
enhancement in the production of cytokines, such as IFN-γ, 
IL-12 and TNF-α, and also Salmonella-specific blood IgG 
and fecal IgA. Hence, the prebiotic mixture stimulated the 
mucosal immunity toward having an improved response to 
the Salmonella vaccine [44]. Hosono et al. [19] reported 
that the secretion of IgA by PP cells of mice received FOS 
was up-regulated in response to FOS by a dose-dependent 
pattern, and CD4+ T cells from PP had a dose-dependent 
enhancement in production of anti-inflammatory cytokines 
IFN-γ and IL-10 and a high response in production of 
IL-5 and IL-6. Consuming the prebiotic raffinose by mice 
increased IL-12 production in PP [35], which, in turn, 
can enhance IFN production in PP [30]. Roller et al. [40] 
found enhancement in the production of IL-10 in PP by 
prebiotic (inulin enriched with oligofructose) supplementa-
tion in the diet of rats. They also found a strong correla-
tion between the concentrations of IFN and IL-10. Since in 
PP, IFN and IL-10 are primarily produced by Th1 (for the 
IFN) and Th2/T-regulatory lymphocytes and dendritic cells 
(for the IL-10), they concluded that the prebiotic simulta-
neously activated different T-lymphocyte subpopulations 
and/or dendritic cells. In another study by Hoentjen et al. 
[18], an inulin/oligofructose combination reduced colitis in 
transgenic rats, which was associated with alteration of gut 
microbiota, decrease in tissue proinflammatory cytokines, 
like IL-1β and IFN-γ, increase in cecal TGF-β and increase 
in immunomodulatory molecules.
In an investigation by Rodríguez et al. [39], inflamed 
colonic tissue in untreated colitis rats showed increased 
expressions of the MCP-1, CINC-1 and ICAM-1 in com-
parison with healthy rats, and the FOS clearly down-regu-
lated these mediators. In one of our previous studies on rats 
(to be published data), in which no inflammation-induced 
compound was used, expression of MCP-1 and ICAM-1 
genes significantly reduced in the intestine of prebiotic 
(containing OligoPKC)-treated rats, and prebiotic had no 
effect on expression of CINC-1 gene.
Several cytokines are known for promoting tight-
junction disruption in the gut. Gut permeability is con-
trolled by several specific tight-junction proteins. Among 
these, zonula occluden-1 (ZO-1) and occludin have been 
suggested to be the key markers of tight-junction integ-
rity. In a study by Cani et al. [5], prebiotic oligofructose 
enhanced ZO-1 and occludin mRNA in the jejunum of 
mice. Animals receiving prebiotic showed lower plasma 
concentrations of some of cytokines known for promot-
ing tight-junction disruption, such as TNF-α, IL-1b, IL-1α, 
IL-6 and IFN-γ. Moreover, a significant reduction in the 
chemokines MCP-1 and macrophage inflammatory protein 
(MIP)-1α was observed. There was also a positive correla-
tion between intestinal proglucagon and tight-junction pro-
teins mRNA (ZO-1, occludin). Hence, they suggested that 
the expression of prebiotic-induced intestinal proglucagon 
mRNA and the consequent glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-2 
production may positively affect the gut barrier integrity.
In broilers, dietary supplementation with oligochitosan 
(derived from chitin) increased the expression of IL-1β and 
IL-6 in the lymphocyte. Chitosan oligosaccharides supple-
mentation also increased serum concentrations of IgG, IgA 
and IgM compared with broilers fed the control and the 
positive control diets [20].
In pigs, up to 8.5 g/L polydextrose supplementation 
decreased the expression of TNF-α, IL-8 and IL-1β. Feed-
ing 1.7 and 17 g/L polydextrose increased the IL-10 levels 
compared to the 0 g/L polydextrose. Base on the finding, 
the level of prebiotic supplementation is an important fac-
tor to simulate the expression of genes in the animal tissues 
[16].
In an in vitro study by Badia et al. [1], βGM 
(β-galactomannan prebiotic) was compared to Saccharo-
myces cerevisiae var. Boulardii, a proven probiotic, for its 
effects against Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. 
They indicated that βGM has a higher ability than the 
probiotic in inhibiting Salmonella-induced inflammatory 
  
Med Microbiol Immunol
1 3
Table 3  Effects of prebiotics on expression of cytokines
Prebiotic
Host/cell culture
Immunity effect
Effect on cytokines
Reference
Fructooligosaccharides (DP4)
CD4+ T cells derived from Peyer’s patches
Enhancement of IFN-γ and IL-10 produc-
tion
[45]
Raffinose
Mice
Suppressing serum IgE response by reduc-
ing Th2-type immune response against 
oral antigen
Increase in IL-12 secretion from PP in 
BALB/c mice, increase in IFN-γ in 
transgenic mice, increase in secretion of 
IL-2 and decrease in secretion of IL-4 
from CD4 + T cells of mesenteric lymph 
nodes of the transgenic mice
[35]
Fructooligosaccharides
Murine Peyer’s patch cells
Up-regulation of IgA secretion in PP cells 
and suppression of systemic immune 
response to type 2 helper T dominant
Increase in production of IFN-γ and IL-10 
and a high response in production of IL-5 
and IL-6
[19]
Oligofructose (fructans with DP2 to 
8)-enriched inulin
Rats
Enhancement in production of IL-10 and 
IFN-γ in Peyer’s patches lymphocytes
[40]
Inulin and oligofructose
Mice
Down-regulation of the expression of cecal 
IL-1β
[36]
Inulin and fructooligosaccharides
Rats
Reducing colitis in transgenic rats and 
alteration of gut microbiota
Reduction in tissue concentrations of IL-1β 
and IFN-γ, increase in cecal TGF-β
[18]
Bifidobacterium longum and fructooligo-
saccharides/inulin
Patients with active ulcerative colitis
Reduction in the disease signs
Down-regulation of IL-1α and TNF-α
[13]
Oligochitosan
Chickens
Increase in serum concentrations of IgG, 
IgA and IgM
Up-regulation of IL-1β and IL-6 in lym-
phocyte
[20]
Galactooligosaccharides
Humans
Increase in phagocytosis
Up-regulation of IL-10, Down-regulation 
of IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-α
[47]
Oligofructose
Mice
Lowering plasma lipopolysaccharide, 
decreasing hepatic expression of inflam-
matory and oxidative stress markers
Down-regulation of IL-1α, IL-1β, TNF-α, 
MCP-1, IL-6, IL-10, IL-18 and IL-15
[5]
Fructooligosaccharides and inulin
Mice
Increasing the Salmonella-specific blood 
IgG and fecal IgA, improving host 
response to the Salmonella vaccine
Up-regulation of IFN-γ, IL-12 and TNF-α
[44]
Fructooligosaccharides
Colitic rats
Down-regulation of MCP-1, CINC-1 and 
ICAM-1
[39]
Inulin fructans (DP4, DP8, DP16, DP23)
Rats
Increased cecal IgA concentrations in the 
order of DP4 > DP8 > DP16
Positive correlation between concentration 
of IgA and lactic acid bacteria population
Only DP4 up-regulated IFN-γ and IL-10
[21]
Germinated barley foodstuff (a prebiotic 
consisting insoluble glutamine-rich pro-
tein and dietary fiber)
Patients with ulcerative colitis 
Reduction in serum levels of TNF-α, IL-6 
and IL-8
[12]
 Med Microbiol Immunol 
1 3
mRNA of TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, granulocyte mac-
rophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), MCP-1 and 
MIP-3α on porcine IPI-2I cell line. In addition, the prebi-
otic βGM was compared to Saccharomyces cerevisiae var. 
Boulardii for its effects against enterotoxigenic E. Coli [2]. 
It showed similar effects as the probiotic by decreasing the 
mRNA enterotoxigenic E. coli-induced gene expression of 
TNF-α, IL-6, IL8, GM-CSF, MCP-1 and MIP3α on intesti-
nal IPI-2I cells.
The findings of the above-mentioned studies are pre-
sented in Table 3 and sorted in ascending order based on 
the year of publication.
Conclusion
Generally, many studies on different hosts/cell cultures 
showed beneficial effects of prebiotics on the function of 
immune system, by regulating the expression of pro- and 
anti-inflammatory cytokines. However, most of available 
researches mainly considered the indirect effects of prebi-
otics on immune system, in which prebiotics improve the 
immune function through increasing the population of 
beneficial gut microbes, while reducing pathogens. On 
the other hand, only few studies and little information are 
available on the direct action of prebiotics toward improv-
ing the host immunity. It is important that the direct immu-
nomodulatory effects of prebiotics be further studied using 
prebiotics with different degree of polymerization in differ-
ent hosts.
Acknowledgments The present study was supported by the Minis-
try of Higher Education Malaysia under the LRGS Fasa 1/2012 grant, 
UPM/700-1/3/LRGS.
Compliance with ethical standards 
Conflict of interest The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest with respect to the authorship and/or publication of this article.
References
 1. Badia R, Brufau MT, Guerrero-Zamora AM, Lizardo R, 
Dobrescu I, Martin-Venegas R, Ferrer R, Salmon H, Martínez P, 
Brufau J (2012) β-Galactomannan and Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
var. Boulardii modulate the immune response against Salmonella 
enterica serovar Typhimurium in porcine intestinal epithelial and 
dendritic cells. Clin Vaccine Immunol 19:368–376
 2. Badia R, Zanello G, Chevaleyre C, Lizardo R, Meurens F, Mar-
tínez P, Brufau J, Salmon H (2012) Effect of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae var. Boulardii and β-galactomannan oligosaccharide 
on porcine intestinal epithelial and dendritic cells challenged 
in vitro with Escherichia coli F4 (K88). Vet Res 43:4–15
 3. Bandeira A, Mota-Santos T, Itohara S, Degermann S, Heusser C, 
Tonegawa S, Coutinho A (1990) Localization of gamma/delta T 
Table 3  continued
Prebiotic
Host/cell culture
Immunity effect
Effect on cytokines
Reference
Polydextrose
Pigs
8.5 g/L polydextrose down-regulated the 
expression of TNF-α, IL-8 and IL-1β
1.7 and 17 g/L polydextrose increased the 
expression of IL-10
[16]
Inulin and xylooligosaccharide
Humans
Down-regulation of IL-1b, IL-8, IL-12 and 
TNF-a and up-regulation of IL-13 and 
IL-10
[29]
β-Galactomannan
Porcine IPI-2I cell line
Inhibition of Salmonella-induced inflam-
matory mRNA of TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6, 
IL-8, granulocyte macrophage colony-
stimulating factor (GM-CSF), MCP-1 and 
MIP-3α
[1]
β-Galactomannan
Porcine IPI-2I cell line
Decreasing mRNA enterotoxigenic E. coli-
induced gene expression of TNF-α, IL-6, 
IL8, GM-CSF, MCP-1 and MIP-3α
[2]
Inulin/probiotic
Macaques
Up-regulation of cecal IL-1β
[25]
Oligofructose-enriched inulin
Humans
Reduced fasting plasma glucose and plasma 
lipopolysaccharide
Down-regulation of IL-6 and TNF-α
Numerically increase in IL-10 and reduc-
tion of IFN-γ
[8]
  
Med Microbiol Immunol
1 3
cells to the intestinal epithelium is independent of normal micro-
bial colonization. J Exp Med 172:239–244
 4. Brown AJ, Goldsworthy SM, Barnes AA, Eilert MM, Tcheang 
L, Daniels D, Muir AI, Wigglesworth MJ, Kinghorn I, Fraser 
NJ (2003) The Orphan G protein-coupled receptors GPR41 and 
GPR43 are activated by propionate and other short chain carbox-
ylic acids. J Biol Chem 278:11312–11319
 5. Cani PD, Possemiers S, Van De Wiele T, Guiot Y, Everard A, 
Rottier O, Geurts L, Naslain D, Neyrinck A, Lambert DM (2009) 
Changes in gut microbiota control inflammation in obese mice 
through a mechanism involving GLP-2-driven improvement of 
gut permeability. Gut 58:1091–1103
 6. Cavaglieri CR, Nishiyama A, Fernandes LC, Curi R, Miles 
EA, Calder PC (2003) Differential effects of short-chain 
fatty acids on proliferation and production of pro-and anti-
inflammatory cytokines by cultured lymphocytes. Life Sci 
73:1683–1690
 7. Clark RSB, Kochanek P (eds) (2012) Brain injury. Springer Sci-
ence & Business Media, Berlin
 8. Dehghan P, Gargari BP, Jafar-Abadi MA (2014) Oligofructose-
enriched inulin improves some inflammatory markers and met-
abolic endotoxemia in women with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a 
randomized controlled clinical trial. Nutrition 30:418–423
 9. Denji KA, Mansour MR, Akrami R, Ghobadi S, Jafarpour S, 
Mirbeygi S (2015) Effect of dietary prebiotic mannan oligosac-
charide (MOS) on growth performance, intestinal microflora, 
body composition, haematological and blood serum biochemical 
parameters of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) juveniles. J 
Fish Aquat Sci 10:255
 
10. Deshmane SL, Kremlev S, Amini S, Sawaya BE (2009) Mono-
cyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1): an overview. J Inter-
feron Cytokine Res 29:313–326
 
11. Dinarello CA (2011) Interleukin-1 in the pathogenesis and treat-
ment of inflammatory diseases. Blood 117:3720–3732
 
12. Faghfoori Z, Navai L, Shakerhosseini R, Somi MH, Nikniaz Z, 
Norouzi MF (2011) Effects of an oral supplementation of ger-
minated barley foodstuff on serum tumour necrosis factor-α, 
interleukin-6 and-8 in patients with ulcerative colitis. Ann Clin 
Biochem 48:233–237
 
13. Furrie E, Macfarlane S, Kennedy A, Cummings JH, Walsh SV, 
O’neil DA, Macfarlane GT (2005) Synbiotic therapy (Bifidobac-
terium longum/Synergy 1) initiates resolution of inflammation in 
patients with active ulcerative colitis: a randomised controlled 
pilot trial. Gut 54:242–249
 
14. Gibson GR, Probert HM, Van Loo J, Rastall RA, Roberfroid MB 
(2004) Dietary modulation of the human colonic microbiota: 
updating the concept of prebiotics. Nutr Res Rev 17:259–275
 
15. Gibson GR, Roberfroid MB (1995) Dietary modulation of the 
colonic microbiota: introducing the concept of prebiotics. J Nutr 
125:1401–1412
 
16. Herfel TM, Jacobi SK, Lin X, Fellner V, Walker DC, Jouni ZE, 
Odle J (2011) Polydextrose enrichment of infant formula demon-
strates prebiotic characteristics by altering intestinal microbiota, 
organic acid concentrations, and cytokine expression in suckling 
piglets. J Nutr 141:2139–2145
 
17. Hoentjen F, Tannock G, Mulder C, Dieleman L (2006) The 
prebiotic combination inulin/oligofructose prevents colitis in 
HLA-B27 rats by immunomodulation and changes in intestinal 
microflora. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 18:A27
 
18. Hoentjen F, Welling GW, Harmsen HJ, Zhang X, Snart J, Tan-
nock GW, Lien K, Churchill TA, Lupicki M, Dieleman LA 
(2005) Reduction of colitis by prebiotics in HLA-B27 transgenic 
rats is associated with microflora changes and immunomodula-
tion. Inflamm Bowel Dis 11:977–985
 
19. Hosono A, Ozawa A, Kato R, Ohnishi Y, Nakanishi Y, Kimura 
T, Nakamura R (2003) Dietary fructooligosaccharides induce 
immunoregulation of intestinal IgA secretion by murine Peyer’s 
patch cells. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 67:758–764
 
20. Huang RL, Deng ZY, Yang CB, Yin YL, Xie MY, Wu GY, Li TJ, 
Li LL, Tang ZR, Kang P (2007) Dietary oligochitosan supple-
mentation enhances immune status of broilers. J Sci Food Agric 
87:153–159
 
21. Ito H, Takemura N, Sonoyama K, Kawagishi H, Topping DL, 
Conlon MA, Morita T (2011) Degree of polymerization of inu-
lin-type fructans differentially affects number of lactic acid bac-
teria, intestinal immune functions, and immunoglobulin A secre-
tion in the rat cecum. J Agric Food Chem 59:5771–5778
 
22. Jahromi MF, Altaher YW, Shokryazdan P, Ebrahimi R, Ebrahimi 
M, Idrus Z, Goh YM, Tufarelli V, Liang JB (2015) Dietary sup-
plementation of a mixture of Lactobacillus strains enhances per-
formance of broiler chickens raised under heat stress conditions. 
Int J Biometeorol. doi:10.1007/s00484-015-1103-x
 
23. Jahromi MF, Liang JB, Shokryazdan P, Ebrahimi R, Navidshad 
B, Abdullah N (2015) Extraction and characterization of oligo-
saccharides from palm kernel cake. Bioresources 11:674–695
 
24. Khadka A (2014) Interleukins in therapeutics. PharmaTutor 
2:67–72
 
25. Klatt NR, Canary LA, Sun X, Vinton CL, Funderburg NT, Mor-
cock DR, Quiñones M, Deming CB, Perkins M, Hazuda DJ 
(2013) Probiotic/prebiotic supplementation of antiretrovirals 
improves gastrointestinal immunity in SIV-infected macaques. J 
Clin Invest 123:903–907
 
26. Kogut MH, Swaggerty CL (2012) Effects of prebiotics and pro-
biotics on the host immune response. In: Callaway TR, Ricke SC 
(eds) Direct-fed microbials and prebiotics for animals. Springer, 
New York
 
27. Lackie J (2010) A dictionary of biomedicine. Oxford University 
Press, Oxford
 
28. Langen LV, Mirjam A, Dieleman LA (2009) Prebiotics in 
chronic intestinal inflammation. Inflamm Bowel Dis 15:454–462
 
29. Lecerf J-M, Dépeint F, Clerc E, Dugenet Y, Niamba CN, Rhazi 
L, Cayzeele A, Abdelnour G, Jaruga A, Younes H (2012) Xylo-
oligosaccharide (XOS) in combination with inulin modulates 
both the intestinal environment and immune status in healthy 
subjects, while XOS alone only shows prebiotic properties. Br J 
Nutr 108:1847–1858
 
30. Macdonald TT, Monteleone G (2001) IL-12 and Th1 immune 
responses in human Peyer’s patches. Trends Immunol 
22:244–247
 
31. Martin R, Nauta A, Ben Amor K, Knippels L, Knol J, Garssen 
J (2010) Early life: gut microbiota and immune development in 
infancy. Benef Microbes 1:367–382
 
32. Mccarville J (2012) Effects of prebiotic fibre diets on rat 
mucosal intestinal and systemic immunity and in vitro mechanis-
tic analysis of anti-inflammatory effects of Lactobacillus strains 
on rat and human intestinal epithelial cells. http://hdl.handle.
net/10155/275
 
33. Medzhitov R (2007) Recognition of microorganisms and activa-
tion of the immune response. Nature 449:819–826
 
34. Murarolli VDA, Burbarelli MFC, Polycarpo GV, Ribeiro PAP, 
Moro MEG, Albuquerque R (2014) Prebiotic, probiotic and 
symbiotic as alternative to antibiotics on the performance and 
Immune response of broiler chickens. Rev Bras Cienc Avic 
16:279–284
 
35. Nagura T, Hachimura S, Hashiguchi M, Ueda Y, Kanno T, 
Kikuchi H, Sayama K, Kaminogawa S (2002) Suppressive effect 
of dietary raffinose on T-helper 2 cell-mediated immunity. Br J 
Nutr 88:421–426
 
36. Olivier JG, Van Aardenne JA, Dentener FJ, Pagliari V, Ganzeveld 
LN, Peters JA (2005) Recent trends in global greenhouse gas 
emissions: regional trends 1970–2000 and spatial distribution of 
key sources in 2000. Environ Sci 2:81–99
 Med Microbiol Immunol 
1 3
 
37. Oyofo BA, Deloach JR, Corrier DE, Norman JO, Ziprin RL, 
Mollenhauer HH (1989) Prevention of Salmonella typhimurium 
colonization of broilers with d-mannose. Poult Sci 68:1357–1360
 
38. Rakoff-Nahoum S, Paglino J, Eslami-Varzaneh F, Edberg S, 
Medzhitov R (2004) Recognition of commensal microflora by 
toll-like receptors is required for intestinal homeostasis. Cell 
118:229–241
 
39. Rodríguez-Cabezas ME, Camuesco D, Arribas B, Garrido-Mesa 
N, Comalada M, Bailón E, Cueto-Sola M, Utrilla P, Guerra-
Hernández E, Pérez-Roca C (2010) The combination of fruc-
tooligosaccharides and resistant starch shows prebiotic additive 
effects in rats. Clin Nutr 29:832–839
 
40. Roller M, Rechkemmer G, Watzl B (2004) Prebiotic inulin 
enriched with oligofructose in combination with the probiotics 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus and Bifidobacterium lactis modulates 
intestinal immune functions in rats. J Nutr 134:153–156
 
41. Seifert S, Watzl B (2007) Inulin and oligofructose: review of 
experimental data on immune modulation. J Nutr 137:2563–2567
 
42. Shokryazdan P, Sieo CC, Kalavathy R, Liang JB, Alitheen NB, 
Faseleh Jahromi M, Ho YW (2014) Probiotic potential of Lacto-
bacillus strains with antimicrobial activity against some human 
pathogenic strains. Biomed Res Int. doi:10.1155/2014/927268
 
43. Sims JE, March CJ, Cosman D, Widmer MB, Macdonald HR, 
Mcmahan CJ, Grubin CE, Wignall JM, Jackson JL, Call SM 
(1988) cDNA expression cloning of the IL-1 receptor, a member 
of the immunoglobulin superfamily. Science 241:585–589
 
44. Steed H, Macfarlane S (2009) Mechanisms of prebiotic impact 
on health. In: Charalampopoulos D, Rastall RA (eds) Prebiotics 
and probiotics science and technology. Springer Science & Busi-
ness Media, Berlin
 
45. Takahashí T, Nakagawa E, Nara T, Yajima T, Kuwata T (1998) 
Effects of orally ingested Bifidobacterium longum on the 
mucosal IgA response of mice to dietary antigens. Biosci Bio-
technol Biochem 62:10–15
 
46. Vance RE, Isberg RR, Portnoy DA (2009) Patterns of pathogen-
esis: discrimination of pathogenic and nonpathogenic microbes 
by the innate immune system. Cell Host Microbe 6:10–21
 
47. Vulevic J, Drakoularakou A, Yaqoob P, Tzortzis G, Gibson 
GR (2008) Modulation of the fecal microflora profile and 
immune function by a novel trans-galactooligosaccharide mix-
ture (B-GOS) in healthy elderly volunteers. Am J Clin Nutr 
88:1438–1446
 
48. Wilson KH, Blitchington RB (1996) Human colonic biota stud-
ied by ribosomal DNA sequence analysis. Appl Environ Micro-
biol 62:2273–2278
 
49. Younger P (2007) Stedman’s medical dictionary. Ref Rev 
21:41–42
 
50. Zhang J-M, An J (2007) Cytokines, inflammation and pain. Int 
Anesthesiol Clin 45:27–37
