 Countermeasures That Work:
A Highway Safety Countermeasure Guide
For State Highway Safety Offices
Eighth Edition, 2015
  
 
 
 
Disclaimer 
 
This publication is distributed by the U.S. Department of Transportation, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, in the interest of information exchange. The opinions, findings, 
and conclusions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and not necessarily those 
of the Department of Transportation or the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The 
United States Government assumes no liability for its content or use thereof. If trade or 
manufacturers’ names or products are mentioned, it is because they are considered essential to 
the object of the publication and should not be construed as an endorsement. The United States 
Government does not endorse products or manufacturers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suggested APA Format Citation: 
 
Goodwin, A., Thomas, L., Kirley, B., Hall, W., O’Brien, N., & Hill, K. (2015, November). 
Countermeasures that work: A highway safety countermeasure guide for State highway 
safety offices, Eighth edition. (Report No. DOT HS 812 202). Washington, DC: National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration. 
 
  
i 
Technical Report Documentation Page 
 
1. Report No. 
2. Government Accession No. 
3. Recipient’s Catalog No. 
DOT HS 812 202 
    
    
4. Title and Subtitle 
5. Report Date 
Countermeasures That Work: A Highway Safety Countermeasure Guide 
for State Highway Safety Offices, Eighth Edition, 2015 
November 2015 
6. Performing Organization Code 
    
7. Author(s) 
Arthur Goodwin, Libby Thomas, Bevan Kirley, William Hall, Natalie 
O’Brien, and Kate Hill 
8. Performing Organization Report 
No. 
 
    
9. Performing Organization Name and Address 
10. Work Unit No. (TRAIS) 
University of North Carolina Highway Safety Research Center 
730 Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard 
CB # 3430 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3430 
    
11. Contract or Grant No. 
 
12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address 
13. Type of Report and Period 
Covered 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
Office of Behavioral Safety Research 
1200 New Jersey Avenue SE. 
Washington, DC 20590 
FINAL REPORT 
 
14. Sponsoring Agency Code 
    
15. Supplementary Notes 
Kristie Johnson, Ph.D., served as the Contracting Officer’s Representative on this project. 
16. Abstract 
The guide is a basic reference to assist State Highway Safety Offices in selecting effective, evidence-based 
countermeasures for traffic safety problem areas. These areas include: 
• 
Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving; 
• 
Seat Belts and Child Restraints; 
• 
Speeding and Speed Management; 
• 
Distracted and Drowsy Driving; 
• 
Motorcycle Safety; 
• 
Young Drivers; 
• 
Older Drivers; 
• 
Pedestrians; and 
• 
Bicycles. 
 
The guide: 
• describes major strategies and countermeasures that are relevant to SHSOs; 
• summarizes strategy/countermeasure use, effectiveness, costs, and implementation time; and 
• provides references to the most important research summaries and individual studies. 
17. Key Words 
18. Distribution Statement 
Alcohol-Impaired Driving, Drug-Impaired Driving, Seat Belts, Child 
Restraints, Speeding, Distracted Driving, Drowsy Driving, Motorcycle 
Safety, Young Drivers, Older Drivers, Pedestrians, Bicycles, Unsafe 
Driving 
Document is available to the public 
from the National Technical 
Information Service www.ntis.gov. 
19 Security Classif. (of this report) 
20. Security Classif. (of this page) 
21 No. of 
Pages 
22. Price 
Unclassified 
Unclassified 
437 
    
  
ii 
Table of Contents 
 
 
 
 
Preface to the Eighth Edition, 2015  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
viii 
 
Introduction  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
Purpose of the Guide  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
How to Use the Guide 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
Abbreviations, Acronyms, and Initialisms Used   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
Overview  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-1 
 
Strategies to Reduce Impaired Driving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-4 
 
Resources  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-5 
 
Countermeasures That Work  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-7 
 
Deterrence  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-10 
 1. Deterrence Laws  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-12 
1.1 Administrative License Revocation or Suspension   
 
 
 
 
 
1-12 
1.2 Open Containers  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-14 
1.3 High-BAC Sanctions  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-15 
1.4 BAC Test Refusal Penalties  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-17 
1.5 Alcohol-Impaired Driving Law Review  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-19 
 
 2. Deterrence: Enforcement  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-21 
 
 
2.1 Publicized Sobriety Checkpoints  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-21 
 
 
2.2 High Visibility Saturation Patrols 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-24 
 
 
2.3 Preliminary Breath Test Devices  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-25 
 
 
2.4 Passive Alcohol Sensors  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-26 
 
 
2.5 Integrated Enforcement  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-27 
 
 3. Deterrence: Prosecution and Adjudication 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-29 
3.1 DWI Courts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-29 
 
 
3.2 Limits on Diversion and Plea Agreements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-31 
3.3 Court Monitoring  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-33 
3.4 Sanctions  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-34 
 
 4. Deterrence: DWI Offender Treatment, Monitoring, and Control  
 
 
 
1-36 
 
 
4.1 Alcohol Problem Assessment and Treatment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-36 
 
 
4.2 Alcohol Interlocks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-38 
 
 
4.3 Vehicle and License Plate Sanctions  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-41 
 
 
4.4 DWI Offender Monitoring 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-43 
 
 
4.5 Lower BAC Limits for Repeat Offenders 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-45 
 
 5. Prevention, Intervention, Communications and Outreach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-46 
 
 
5.1 Alcohol Screening and Brief Interventions  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-47 
 
 
5.2 Mass Media Campaigns  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-49 
 
 
5.3 Responsible Beverage Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-51 
 
 
5.4 Alternative Transportation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-53 
 
 
5.5 Designated Drivers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-54 
  
iii 
 
 6. Underage Drinking and Drinking and Driving  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-56 
 
 
6.1 Minimum Legal Drinking Age 21 Laws  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-57 
 
 
6.2 Zero-Tolerance Law Enforcement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-59 
 
 
6.3 Alcohol Vendor Compliance Checks  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-61 
 
 
6.4 Other Legal Minimum Drinking Age 21 Law Enforcement  
 
 
 
1-63 
 
 
6.5 Youth Programs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-65 
 
 7. Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-67 
 
 
7.1 Enforcement of Drug-Impaired Driving  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-69 
 
 
7.2 Drug-Impaired Driving Laws  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-71 
 
 
7.3 Education Regarding Medications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-73 
 
Alcohol and Drug-Impaired Driving References  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-75 
 
 
 
2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
Overview  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-1 
Strategies to Improve the Safety of Passenger Vehicle Occupants  
 
 
 
2-4 
Resources  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-5 
Countermeasures That Work  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-7 
 
Countermeasures Targeting Adults  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-10 
 
 
1. Seat Belt Use Laws  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-10 
 
 
1.1 State Primary Enforcement Seat Belt Use Laws  
 
 
 
 
 
2-10 
1.2 Local Primary Enforcement Seat Belt Use Laws and Ordinances 
 
2-13 
1.3 Increased Belt Use Law Penalties: Fines and Driver’s License Points 2-14 
 
 
2. Seat Belt Law Enforcement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-15 
 
 
 
2.1 Short-Term, High Visibility Seat Belt Law Enforcement 
 
 
 
2-15 
 
 
 
2.2 Combined Seat Belt and Alcohol Enforcement, Nighttime  
 
 
2-17 
 
 
 
2.3 Sustained Enforcement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-19 
 
 
3. Communications and Outreach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-20 
 
 
 
3.1 Communications and Outreach Supporting Enforcement 
 
 
 
2-20 
 
 
 
3.2 Communications and Outreach Strategies for Low-Belt-Use Groups 
2-21 
 
Countermeasures Targeting Children and Youth  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-24 
4. Child/Youth Occupant Restraint Laws  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-24 
4.1 Strengthening Child/Youth Occupant Restraint Laws 
 
 
 
 
2-24 
5. Child Restraint/Booster Seat Law Enforcement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-26 
 
 
 
5.1 Short-Term, High Visibility Child Restraint/Booster Law Enforcement 2-26 
6. Communications and Outreach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-28 
 
 
 
6.1 Communications and Outreach Strategies for Older Children 
 
 
2-28 
 
 
 
6.2 Communications and Outreach Strategies for Child Restraint and  
Booster Seat Use  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-30 
7. Other Strategies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-32 
 
 
 
7.1 School Programs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-32 
 
 
 
7.2 Inspection Stations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-33 
 
Seat Belts and Child Restraints References  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-35 
 
  
iv 
3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
Overview  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-1 
 
Strategies to Reduce Speeding and Aggressive Driving  
 
 
 
 
 
3-5 
 
Resources  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-9  
 
Countermeasures That Work  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-11 
 
1. Laws 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-13 
 
 
 
1.1 Speed Limits  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-13 
 
 
 
1.2 Aggressive Driving and Other Laws  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-17 
2. Enforcement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-19 
 
2.1 Automated Enforcement  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-19 
 
2.2 High Visibility Enforcement  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-24 
 
2.3 Other Enforcement Methods  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-28 
3. Penalties and Adjudication  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-31 
 
3.1 Penalty Types and Levels  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-31 
 
3.2 Diversion and Plea Agreement Restrictions; Traffic Violator School 
3-35 
 
 
4. Communications and Outreach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-37 
 
4.1 Communications and Outreach Supporting Enforcement 
 
 
 
3-37 
Speed and Aggressive-Driving References  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-39 
 
4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
Overview  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4-1  
 
Strategies to Reduce Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4-4 
 
Resources  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4-6 
 
Countermeasures That Work  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4-8 
 
 
1. Laws and Enforcement  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4-10 
 
 
 
1.1 Graduated Driver Licensing Requirements for Beginning Drivers  
4-10 
 
 
 
1.2 Cell Phone and Text Messaging Laws 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4-12 
 
 
 
1.3 High Visibility Cell Phone and Text Messaging Enforcement  
 
4-15 
 
 
 
1.4 General Driver Drowsiness and Distraction Laws 
 
 
 
 
 
4-17 
 
 
2. Communications and Outreach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4-19 
 
 
 
2.1 Communications and Outreach on Drowsy Driving  
 
 
 
 
4-19 
 
 
 
2.2 Communications and Outreach on Distracted Driving 
 
 
 
 
4-21 
 
 
3. Other Countermeasures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4-23 
 
 
 
3.1 Employer Programs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4-23 
 
 
 
3.2 Medical Conditions and Medications  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4-25 
 
Distracted and Drowsy Driving References  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4-27 
 
5. Motorcycle Safety 
Overview  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-1  
 
Strategies to Improve Motorcycle Safety  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-3 
 
Resources  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-4 
 
Countermeasures That Work  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-5 
 
 
1. Motorcycle Helmets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-7 
 
 
 
1.1 Universal Coverage State Motorcycle Helmet Use Laws 
 
 
 
 
5-7 
 
 
 
1.2 Motorcycle Helmet Use Promotion Programs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-10 
 
 
 
1.3 Motorcycle Helmet Law Enforcement: Noncompliant Helmets  
 
5-11 
  
v 
 
 
2. Alcohol Impairment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-13 
 
 
 
2.1 Alcohol-Impaired Motorcyclists: Detection, Enforcement and  
Sanctions  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-13 
 
 
 
2.2 Alcohol-Impaired Motorcyclists: Communications and Outreach 
 
5-15 
 
 
3. Motorcycle Rider Licensing and Training  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-17 
 
 
 
3.1 Motorcycle Rider Licensing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-17 
 
 
 
3.2 Motorcycle Rider Training 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-20 
 
 
4. Communications and Outreach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-22 
 
 
 
4.1 Communications and Outreach: Conspicuity and Protective Clothing 5-22 
 
 
 
4.2 Communications and Outreach: Other Driver Awareness of  
Motorcyclists  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-24 
 
Motorcycle Safety References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-25 
 
6. Young Drivers 
Overview  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-1  
 
Strategies to Reduce Crashes Involving Young Drivers  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-3 
 
Resources  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-5 
 
Countermeasures That Work  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-6 
 
 
1. Graduated Driver Licensing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-8 
 
 
 
1.1 Graduated Driver Licensing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-8 
 
 
 
1.2 GDL Learner’s Permit Length, Supervised Hours 
 
 
 
 
 
6-10 
 
 
 
1.3 GDL Intermediate License Nighttime Restrictions  
 
 
 
 
6-12 
 
 
 
1.4 GDL Intermediate License Passenger Restrictions  
 
 
 
 
6-13 
 
 
 
1.5 GDL Cell Phone Restrictions  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-15 
 
 
 
1.6 GDL Belt Use Requirements  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-17 
1.7 GDL Intermediate License Violation Penalties  
 
 
 
 
 
6-18 
 
 
2. Driver Education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-19 
 
 
 
2.1 Pre-Licensure Driver Education  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-19 
 
 
 
2.2 Post-Licensure or Second-Tier Driver Education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-22 
 
 
3. Parents  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-23 
 
 
 
3.1 Parental Role in Teaching and Managing Young Drivers 
 
 
 
6-23 
 
 
4. Traffic Law Enforcement  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-27 
 
 
 
4.1 Enforcement of GDL and Zero-Tolerance Laws  
 
 
 
 
 
6-27 
 
Young Driver References  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-29 
 
7. Older Drivers  
Overview  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-1  
 
Strategies to Reduce Crashes and Injuries Involving Older Drivers  
 
 
 
7-4 
Resources  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-6  
 
Countermeasures That Work  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-7 
 
 
1. Communications and Outreach  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-9 
 
 
 
1.1 Formal Courses for Older Drivers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-9 
 
 
 
1.2 General Communications and Education  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-11 
 
 
2. Licensing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-13 
 
 
 
2.1 License Screening and Testing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-13 
 
 
 
2.2 Referring Older Drivers to Licensing Agencies  
 
 
 
 
 
7-15 
  
vi 
 
 
 
2.3 License Restrictions  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-18 
 
 
 
2.4 Medical Advisory Boards  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-20 
 
 
 
2.5 License Renewal Policies: In-Person Renewal, Vision Test  
 
 
7-22 
 
 
3. Traffic Law Enforcement  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-25 
 
 
 
3.1 Law Enforcement Roles  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-25 
 
Older Driver References  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-26 
 
8. Pedestrians  
Overview  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-1  
 
Strategies to Increase Pedestrian Safety  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-8 
Resources  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-9  
 
Countermeasures That Work  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-12 
 
 
1. Pre-School Aged Children  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-14 
 
 
 
1.1 Children’s Safety Clubs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-14 
 
 
 
1.2 Child Supervision  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-16 
 
 
2. School-Age Children  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-18 
 
 
 
2.1 Elementary-Age Child Pedestrian Training  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-18 
 
 
 
2.2 Safe Routes to School  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-22 
 
 
 
2.3 Child School Bus Training 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-25 
 
 
3. Impaired Pedestrians 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-27 
 
 
 
3.1 Impaired Pedestrians: Communications and Outreach 
 
 
 
 
8-27 
 
 
 
3.2 “Sweeper” Patrols of Impaired Pedestrians  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-28 
 
 
4. All Pedestrians  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-30 
 
 
 
4.1 Pedestrian Safety Zones  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-30 
 
 
 
 
 
4.2 Reduce and Enforce Speed Limits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-32 
 
 
 
4.3 Conspicuity Enhancement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-34 
4.4 Targeted Enforcement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-36 
 
 
 
4.5 Driver Training 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-38 
 
 
 
4.6 Pedestrian Gap Acceptance Training  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-39 
 
 
 
4.7 University Educational Campaign 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-40 
 
Pedestrian Safety References  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8-42 
 
9. Bicycles  
Overview  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-1  
 
Strategies to Reduce Bicycle Crashes and Injuries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-5 
Resources  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-7  
 
Countermeasures That Work  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-9 
 
 
1. Children 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-11 
 
 
 
1.1 Bicycle Helmet Laws for Children 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-11 
 
 
 
1.2 Safe Routes to School  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-14 
 
 
 
1.3 Bicycle Safety Education for Children 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-16 
 
 
 
1.4 Cycling Skills Clinics, Bike Fairs, Bike Rodeos  
 
 
 
 
 
9-19 
 
 
2. Adults  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-21 
 
 
 
2.1 Bicycle Helmet Laws for Adults  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-21 
 
 
 
2.2 Bicycle Safety Education for Adult Cyclists  
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-23 
 
 
3. All Bicyclists  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-25 
  
vii 
 
 
 
3.1 Active Lighting and Rider Conspicuity  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-25 
 
 
 
3.2 Promote Bicycle Helmet Use With Education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-28 
 
 
 
3.3 Enforcement Strategies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-30 
 
 
 
3.4 Motorists Passing Bicyclist Laws  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-32 
 
 
4. Drivers and Bicyclists  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-33 
 
 
 
4.1 Driver Training 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-33 
 
 
 
4.2 Share the Road Awareness Programs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-35 
 
Bicycle Safety References  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-36 
  
viii 
 
 
Preface to the Eighth Edition, 2015 
 
 
 
This edition of Countermeasures That Work was prepared by the University of North Carolina 
Highway Safety Research Center. Researchers who contributed to this edition include Arthur 
Goodwin, Libby Thomas, Bevan Kirley, William Hall, Natalie O’Brien, and Kate Hill. The 
original Countermeasures That Work was prepared in 2005 by James H. Hedlund, Ph.D., of 
Highway Safety North, with the assistance of Barbara Harsha, executive director of the 
Governors Highway Safety Association. The chapters on pedestrian and bicycle safety were 
added in the Second Edition by William A. Leaf of Preusser Research Group.  
 
All chapters have been revised and updated for this edition. Information and research studies 
through May 31, 2014, have been reviewed and included as appropriate. Data has been updated 
to include information from 2013 FARS (Fatality Analysis Reporting System).  
 
 
User Suggestions and Future Editions 
 
NHTSA will update this guide biennially and may expand it with additional problem areas and 
countermeasures as appropriate. In particular, NHTSA is considering adding sections on drugs 
other than alcohol and pupil transportation to the next edition. Users are invited to provide their 
suggestions and recommendations for the guide: 
• How can it be improved, in form and content? 
• Specific comments on information in the guide. 
• Additional problem areas to include. 
• Additional countermeasures to include for the current problem areas. 
• Additional key references to include. 
 
Please send your suggestions and recommendations to: 
 
Countermeasures That Work 
NHTSA 
Office of Behavioral Safety Research, NTI-130 
1200 New Jersey Avenue SE.     
Washington, DC 20590 
 
or by e-mail to kristie.johnson@dot.gov 
 
  
1 
Introduction 
 
 
 
Purpose of the Guide 
 
This guide is a basic reference to assist State Highway Safety Offices (SHSOs) in selecting 
effective, science-based traffic safety countermeasures for major highway safety problem areas. 
The guide 
o describes major strategies and countermeasures that are relevant to SHSOs; 
o summarizes their use, effectiveness, costs, and implementation time; and 
o provides references to the most important research summaries and individual studies. 
 
The guide is not intended to be a comprehensive list of countermeasures available for State use 
or a list of expectations for SHSO implementation. For a description of an optimal State 
countermeasure program, SHSOs should refer to the Highway Safety Program Guidelines, which 
delineate the principal components of each of the major program areas.  
 
States should identify problem areas through systematic data collection and analysis and are 
encouraged to continue to apply innovation in developing appropriate countermeasures. The 
evaluations summarized in this guide allow SHSOs to benefit from the experience and 
knowledge gained by others and to select countermeasure strategies that either have proven to be 
effective or that have shown promise. States choosing to use innovative programs can contribute 
to the collective knowledge pool by carefully evaluating the effectiveness of their efforts and 
publishing the findings for the benefit of others.  
 
How to Use the Guide  
 
What’s included: The guide contains a chapter for each problem area. Each chapter begins with 
a brief overview of the problem area’s size and characteristics, the main countermeasure 
strategies, a glossary of key terms, and a few general references. Next, a table lists specific 
countermeasures and summarizes their effectiveness, costs, use, and implementation time. Each 
countermeasure is then discussed in approximately one page. 
 
The guide provides an overview and starting point for readers to become familiar with the 
behavioral strategies and countermeasures in each program area. It has attempted to include 
countermeasures that have the most evidence of effectiveness as well as those that are used most 
regularly by SHSOs. Only those countermeasures that could be supported by traditional highway 
safety grant programs have been considered. In addition, updates to the guide are based only on 
published research. Unpublished programs and efforts are not included in this edition. 
 
Some countermeasure areas are covered in more depth than others due to the availability of 
published research. For example, impaired driving has a long and rich research history while 
other topics, such as driver distraction and drowsiness, have received less attention. This 
difference in the availability of published research findings is due to a number of factors, 
including the relative scale of the problem areas, the availability of reliable data on the frequency 
  
2 
and characteristics of some safety problems, and the challenge of conducting scientifically valid 
studies in certain behavioral areas.  
 
References are provided for each countermeasure. When possible, summaries of available 
research are cited, with web links where available, so users can find most of the evaluation 
information in one place. If no summaries are available, one or two key studies are cited. There 
has been no attempt to list all research, current studies, or program information available on any 
countermeasure. Readers interested in any problem area or in specific countermeasures are urged 
to consult the references. Although all web links in this guide were accurate at the time of 
publication, please note that web links may change periodically. For broken links to NHTSA 
documents, we recommend searching NHTSA’s behavioral safety research reports 
(ntlsearch.bts.gov/repository/ntlc/nhtsa/index.shtm). For broken links to other reports or 
documents, refer to the website for the agency that produced the report. 
 
What’s not included: Since the guide is intended as a tool for SHSO use, it does not include 
countermeasures for which SHSOs have little or no authority or responsibility, or that cannot be 
supported under typical highway safety grant programs. For example, the guide does not include 
vehicle- or roadway-based solutions. Also, it does not include countermeasures that already are 
in place in every State, such as .08 grams per deciliter blood alcohol concentration laws. Finally, 
the guide does not include administrative or management topics such as traffic safety data 
systems and analyses, program planning and assessments, State and community task forces, or 
comprehensive community traffic safety programs.  
 
What the effectiveness data mean: The effectiveness of any countermeasure can vary 
immensely from State to State or community to community. What is done is often less important 
than how it is done. The best countermeasure may have little effect if it is not implemented 
vigorously, publicized extensively, and funded satisfactorily. Evaluation studies generally 
examine and report on high-quality implementation because there is little interest in evaluating 
poor implementation. Also, the fact that a countermeasure is being evaluated usually gets the 
attention of those implementing it, so that it is likely to be done well. The countermeasure 
effectiveness data presented in this guide probably shows the maximum effect that can be 
realized with high-quality implementation. Many countermeasures have not been evaluated well, 
or at all, as noted in the effectiveness data. Effectiveness ratings are based primarily on 
demonstrated reductions in crashes; however, changes in behavior and knowledge are taken into 
account in the ratings when crash information is not available. 
 
NCHRP Guides: The National Cooperative Highway Research Program is developing a series 
of guides for State Departments of Transportation to use in implementing the American 
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials Strategic Highway Safety Plan. This 
guide draws heavily on the published NCHRP guides and on several draft guides. It differs from 
the NCHRP guides because it is written for SHSOs, contains only behavioral countermeasures, 
and is considerably more concise. Readers are urged to consult the NCHRP guides relevant to 
their interests. They are available at http://safety.transportation.org/guides.aspx. 
 
NCHRP has also developed a framework for estimating the costs and benefits associated with 
behavioral countermeasures. Each of the countermeasures included in Countermeasures That 
  
3 
Work was reviewed, and the potential savings of the countermeasures were projected. The 
subsequent report was designed to help States in selecting countermeasures that will result in the 
greatest reduction in crashes, injuries, and fatalities. Readers can find a copy of the report at 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_622.pdf.  
 
Cochrane Reviews: In several of the chapters, Cochrane Reviews are cited. The Cochrane 
Collaboration is a nonprofit organization that produces and disseminates systematic reviews of 
the effects of healthcare interventions. The database of reviews is published quarterly as part of 
the Cochrane Library. More information about Cochrane Reviews can be found at 
www.cochrane.org/. 
 
Disclaimers: As with any attempt to summarize a large amount of sometimes-conflicting 
information, this guide is highly subjective. All statements, judgments, omissions, and errors are 
solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of NHTSA. 
Users who disagree with any statement or who wish to add information or key references are 
invited to send their comments and suggestions for future editions (see bottom of page vii for 
details).  
 
New traffic safety programs and research appear almost weekly. Websites change frequently. 
This means that this guide was out-of-date even before it was published. Readers interested in a 
specific problem area or countermeasures are urged to contact NHTSA for up-to-date 
information. 
 
Abbreviations, Acronyms, and Initialisms Used 
 
• AAA: was the American Automobile Association but now the organization uses only the 
initials 
• AAAFTS: AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety 
• AAMVA: American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators 
• AARP: was the American Association of Retired Persons but now the organization uses 
only the initials 
• AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials 
• ADTSEA: American Driver and Traffic Safety Education Association 
• ALR: administrative license revocation 
• ALS: administrative license suspension 
• AMA: American Medical Association 
• ASA: American Society on Aging 
• BAC: blood alcohol concentration, measured in grams per deciliter (g/dL) 
• BrAC: breath alcohol concentration, measured in grams per 210 liters of breath (g/210L)  
• CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
• CPSC: Consumer Product Safety Commission 
• CTIA: Cellular Telecommunications and Internet Association 
• DOT: Department of Transportation (Federal or State) 
• DWI: driving while impaired or intoxicated, and also often includes DUI, driving under 
the influence 
  
4 
• DWS: driving while [driver’s license is] suspended 
• FHWA: Federal Highway Administration 
• FMCSA: Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration 
• GDL: graduated driver licensing 
• GHSA: Governors Highway Safety Association 
• HOS: hours of service 
• IIHS: Insurance Institute for Highway Safety 
• ITS: Intelligent Transportation Systems 
• MAB: medical advisory board 
• MSF: Motorcycle Safety Foundation 
• NCHRP: National Cooperative Highway Research Program 
• NCSDR: National Center for Sleep Disorders Research 
• NCUTLO: National Committee on Uniform Traffic Laws and Ordinances 
• NHTSA: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  
• NIAAA: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (a branch of NIH) 
• NIH: National Institutes of Health 
• NMSL: National Maximum Speed Limit 
• NSC: National Safety Council 
• NSF: National Sleep Foundation 
• NTSB: National Transportation Safety Board 
• SFST: Standardized Field Sobriety Tests 
• SHSO: State Highway Safety Office 
• SMSA: National Association of State Motorcycle Safety Administrators 
• STEP: selective traffic enforcement program 
• TIRF: Traffic Injury Research Foundation 
• TRB: Transportation Research Board 
• UVC: Uniform Vehicle Code 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 1 
1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving  
 
 
 
Overview 
 
In 2013, 10,076 people were killed in crashes involving alcohol-impaired drivers (defined as 
drivers or motorcycle riders with blood alcohol concentrations (BACs) of >.08 g/dL), a decrease 
of 2.5% from the 10,336 fatalities in 2012 (NHTSA, 2014a). Fatalities in crashes involving 
alcohol-impaired drivers continue to represent almost one-third (31%) of the total motor vehicle 
fatalities in the United States (NHTSA, 2014a). See NHTSA’s most recent Traffic Safety Facts 
(NHTSA, 2014a) for the latest national and State data. 
 
Trends. Alcohol-impaired driving dropped steadily from 1982 to the mid-1990s. A study 
showed that much of this decrease could be attributed to alcohol-related legislation (e.g., .08 
BAC, administrative license revocation, and minimum drinking age laws) and to demographic 
trends (e.g., the aging of the population and the increased proportion of female drivers) (Dang, 
2008). However, during this period there also was substantial public attention to the issue of 
alcohol-impaired driving, a growth of grassroots organizations such as Mothers Against Drunk 
Driving and Remove Intoxicated Drivers, increased Federal programs and funding, State task 
forces, increased enforcement and intensive publicity, all of which combined to help address this 
critical traffic safety problem. 
 
As the chart shows, alcohol-impaired driving fatalities changed very little between 1992 and 
2007, but then began declining again in 2008. This decrease likely reflects, in part, the recent 
economic recession. 
 
 
Source: NHTSA (2014a, 2014b) 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 2 
As shown in the next chart, the rate of alcohol-impaired driving fatalities, based on vehicle miles 
traveled (VMT), has also declined noticeably in recent years. However, the percentage of 
fatalities in the United States that involve alcohol-impaired driving has remained essentially 
unchanged during this time (NHTSA, 2014b).  
 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Fatality Rate per 100 Million VMT
Percent
Year
Percentage of U.S. Driving Fatalites Who Were Alcohol-
Impaired and Alcohol-Impaired Fatality Rate by VMT
Percent Alcohol-related
Fatality rate per 100 Million VMT
 
Source: NHTSA (2014a, 2014b) 
 
One age group has shown an especially sizeable decrease in alcohol-related traffic fatalities. 
Between 1996 and 2005, the percentage of fatally injured 16- to 18-year-old drivers with positive 
BACs (.01 g/dL or higher) decreased by up to 16% (Ferguson, Teoh, & McCartt, 2007). Self-
reported drinking and driving among high school students has also declined. In 1991, 22% of 
high school students reported drinking and driving in the past 30 days, compared to just 10% of 
high school students in 2011 (CDC, 2012). It should be noted that most States implemented 
graduated driver licensing systems (GDL) during this time period. GDL systems have had a 
substantial impact on reducing the crash risk of young, beginning drivers. (For more information 
on young drivers and GDL, see Chapter 6.) 
 
Drinking and driving characteristics. According to CDC, half (52%) of U.S. adults can be 
considered “regular” drinkers; that is, they have consumed at least 12 drinks during the past year 
(CDC, 2014). An estimated 112 million trips are made annually by drivers with BACs of .08 or 
higher (CDC, 2011). Studies show drivers are arrested once for every 80 trips they make with 
BACs over .08 (Ferguson, 2012). The 2007 National Roadside Survey estimated that 12.4% of 
drivers on weekend nights have positive BACs, while 2.2% have BACs of .08 or higher 
(Compton & Berning, 2009; Lacey et al., 2009a). This represents a significant reduction from 
1996, when 16.9% of drivers had positive BACs and 4.3% had BACs of .08 or higher. 
 
NHTSA surveyed approximately 7,000 people in 2008 and asked about a variety of attitudes and 
behaviors related to drinking and driving (Moulton, Peterson, Haddix, & Drew, 2010). Twenty 
percent reported they had driven within 2 hours of drinking alcohol in the past year. Males, 
college graduates, and unmarried individuals were more likely than their respective counterparts 
to report driving after drinking too much. Similarly, a AAA Foundation survey of 3,103 U.S. 
residents conducted in 2013 found that 96% believe it is unacceptable to drink and drive. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 3 
Nonetheless, 13% reported having driven when they may have been close to, or above, the illegal 
limit within the past 12 months (AAA Foundation, 2014). 
 
Alcohol-impaired drivers include both occasional drinkers who may drive after drinking too 
much, as well as persistent offenders who regularly drive while impaired. Impaired drivers may 
be considered “high risk” if they have high BACs, prior convictions, or problems with alcohol. 
For example, among drivers involved in fatal crashes during 2013 with positive BACs (.01 or 
higher), 56% had BACs at or above .15 (NHTSA, 2014a). Additionally, one-quarter of all 
drivers arrested for impaired driving and 30% of drivers convicted of impaired driving each have 
a prior DWI conviction (Warren-Kigenyi & Coleman, 2014). 
 
Alcohol-impaired driving fatalities are affected by several external factors including geography, 
urbanization, road structure and conditions, and economic activity, as well as by a State’s laws 
and programs. For all of these reasons, both the current level of alcohol-impaired driving and the 
progress in reducing alcohol-impaired driving vary greatly from State to State. For example, 
comparing all 50 States and the District of Columbia the proportion of drivers in fatal crashes 
with BACs of .08 or higher in 2013 ranged from 17% in the lowest State to 44% in the highest 
(NHTSA, 2014a). 
 
Drug-impaired driving characteristics. There is considerably less research on drug-impaired 
driving than alcohol-impaired driving. However, two roadside surveys suggest some drivers have 
detectable levels of one or more drugs in their systems. In a study for NHTSA, Lacey et al. 
(2009b) collected voluntary and anonymous oral fluid samples from 7,719 drivers across the 
United States in 2007, and blood samples from 3,276 drivers. Among nighttime drivers who 
provided oral fluid and/or blood samples: 
• 11.3% tested positive for an illegal drug; 
• 3.9% tested positive for a medication (i.e., a prescription or over-the-counter drug); and 
• 1.1% tested positive for both an illegal drug and a medication. 
 
Marijuana was the most commonly detected illegal drug, followed by cocaine. Among those 
drivers who tested positive for an illegal drug, 28% also tested positive for alcohol (Lacey et al., 
2009b). 
 
In a roadside survey in Canada, researchers collected oral fluid samples from approximately 
1,200 nighttime drivers (Beirness & Beasley, 2010). Similar to the U.S. study, 10% of drivers 
tested positive for drug use. This was slightly higher than the percentage of drivers who tested 
positive for alcohol use (8%). Of the drug positive cases, most (88%) involved a single drug, the 
most common being marijuana or cocaine. Male drivers were more likely than female drivers to 
test positive for drugs (Beirness & Beasley, 2010).  
 
In both the U.S. and Canadian studies, it is important to keep in mind that a positive drug test 
does not necessarily indicate “impairment.” The level of drugs detected may have been too low 
to be impairing. Moreover, many drugs can be detected in oral or blood tests long after their 
effects have diminished. For example, marijuana can be detected for 30 days or longer among 
heavy users. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 4 
Although some countries such as Sweden and Finland have carefully tracked the prevalence of 
drug-impaired driving (Ojaniemi et al., 2009), little is known about trends in drug-impaired 
driving in the United States. One study from Washington State found a significant increase in 
methamphetamine use among fatally injured drivers between 1992 and 2002 (Schwilke, Sampaio 
dos Santos, & Logan, 2006). In part, this likely reflects larger trends in the drug’s popularity. 
 
Research on whether drug use contributes to crashes is limited. A NHTSA study found 18% of 
all fatally injured drivers in 2009 tested positive for drugs (NHTSA, 2010). However, not all 
fatally injured drivers were tested. Additionally, States varied widely in the types of drugs they 
tested for, and many times the test results were not known. When considering only those fatally 
injured drivers who were tested with known results, 33% tested positive for drugs (NHTSA, 
2010). Narcotics and cannabinoids (e.g., marijuana) accounted for almost half of the positive test 
results. In addition, 48% of fatally injured drivers who tested positive for drugs also tested 
positive for alcohol (ONDCP, 2010). Although drugs are often detected among drivers involved 
in crashes, this does not necessarily imply drug impairment played a causal role in the crash. At 
present, the evidence is mixed on whether cannabis and benzodiazepines increase crash risk, 
while fewer studies have examined the risks associated with stimulants, opioids, and other drugs 
(Stewart, 2006). 
 
In 2010, the Office of National Drug Control Policy announced an initiative to decrease the 
prevalence of drug-impaired driving 10% by 2015 (ONDCP, 2010). The initiative encourages 
States to adopt per se drug impairment laws, provide increased training to law enforcement on 
identifying drug-impaired drivers, and further data collection. 
 
Strategies to Reduce Impaired Driving 
 
Four basic strategies are used to reduce alcohol-impaired crashes and drinking and driving: 
• Deterrence: enact, publicize, enforce, and adjudicate laws prohibiting alcohol-impaired 
driving so that people choose not to drive impaired; 
• Prevention: reduce drinking and keep drinkers from driving; 
• Communications and outreach: inform the public of the dangers of impaired driving and 
establish positive social norms that make driving while impaired unacceptable; and 
• Alcohol treatment: reduce alcohol dependency or addiction among drivers. 
 
In this chapter, deterrence countermeasures are divided into four sections: (1) laws, (2) 
enforcement, (3) prosecution and adjudication, and (4) offender treatment, monitoring, and 
control. Prevention, intervention, communications, and outreach countermeasures are combined 
in a single section. Finally, the Underage Drinking and Drinking and Driving section includes 
deterrence, prevention, and communications measures specific to this age group. 
 
This chapter also briefly considers countermeasures to address drugs other than alcohol. Drugs 
pose quite different and difficult issues at every step, from estimating their prevalence and effect 
on driving, to developing effective laws and strategies for enforcement, prevention, and 
treatment. However, many of the countermeasures to address alcohol-impaired driving may also 
deter drug-impaired driving. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 5 
Many other traffic safety countermeasures help reduce alcohol-impaired and drug-impaired 
driving- related crashes and casualties but are not discussed in this chapter. A number of 
vehicular strategies may be helpful in detecting or preventing impaired driving. For example, 
NHTSA has studied the feasibility of using vehicle-based sensors to detect alcohol-related 
impairment in drivers (Lee et al., 2010). There are also many environmental countermeasures, 
such as improved vehicle structures and centerline rumble strips, that may reduce the likelihood 
of crashes and/or injuries sustained by impaired drivers. However, vehicular and environmental 
countermeasures are not included in this chapter because State Highway Safety Offices have 
little or no authority or responsibility for them. 
 
Resources 
 
The agencies and organizations listed below can provide more information on impaired driving 
and links to numerous other resources. 
• National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: 
o Impaired Driving - www.nhtsa.gov/Impaired 
o Impaired Driving (Alcohol-Related) Reports - 
www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Research+&+Evaluation/Impaired+driving+ 
(alcohol-related)+reports 
o Impaired Driving (Drug-Related) Reports - 
www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Research+&+Evaluation/Impaired+driving+(drug-
related)+reports 
o Behavioral Safety Research Reports - 
ntlsearch.bts.gov/repository/ntlc/nhtsa/index.shtm 
• Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: 
www.cdc.gov/MotorVehicleSafety/Impaired_Driving/impaired-drv_factsheet.html 
• Office of National Drug Control Policy: www.whitehouse.gov/ondcp/drugged-driving 
• American Automobile Association: http://duijusticelink.aaa.com/for-the-public 
• Governors Highway Safety Association: 
www.ghsa.org/html/issues/impaireddriving/index.html 
• Insurance Institute for Highway Safety: www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/t/alcohol-impaired-
driving/topicoverview 
• Mothers Against Drunk Driving: www.madd.org 
• National Safety Council: 
www.nsc.org/safety_road/DriverSafety/Pages/ImpairedDriving.aspx 
• Traffic Injury Research Foundation: www.tirf.ca 
 
For overviews of alcohol-impaired driving prevalence, risks, legislation, research, and 
recommended strategies, see NHTSA’s Alcohol and Highway Safety: A Review of the State of 
Knowledge (Voas & Lacey, 2011), NCHRP’s A Guide for Reducing Alcohol-Related Collisions 
(NCHRP, 2005), and the eE-Circular produced by TRB’s Alcohol, Other Drugs, and 
Transportation Committee (TRB, 2013). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 6 
Key terms 
• BAC: Blood alcohol concentration in the body, expressed in grams of alcohol per 
deciliter (g/dL) of blood, usually measured with a breath or blood test 
• BrAC: Breath alcohol concentration 
• DUID: Driving Under the Influence of Drugs 
• DWI: the offense of driving while impaired by alcohol. In different States the offense 
may be called driving while intoxicated, driving under the influence (DUI), or other 
similar terms. 
• MADD: Mothers Against Drunk Driving 
• PAS: Passive alcohol sensor, a device to detect alcohol presence in the air near a driver’s 
face, used to estimate whether the driver has been drinking 
• PBT: Preliminary breath test device, a small hand-held alcohol sensor used to estimate or 
measure a driver’s BrAC 
• SFST: Standardized Field Sobriety Tests, a battery of three tests (One-Leg Stand, Walk- 
and-Turn, and Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus) used by law enforcement at the roadside to 
estimate whether a driver is at or above the illegal limit of .08 BAC 
• Illegal per se law: A law that makes it an offense to operate a motor vehicle with a BAC 
at or above a specified level 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 7 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
2.1 Publicized sobriety checkpoints  
 
$$$ 
Medium 
Short 
2.2 High visibility saturation patrols 
 
$$ 
High 
Short 
2.3 Preliminary Breath Test devices (PBTs)† 
 
$$ 
High 
Short 
2.4 Passive alcohol sensors†† 
 
$$ 
Unknown 
Short 
2.5 Integrated enforcement 
 
$ 
Unknown 
Short 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
3.1 DWI courts† 
 
$$$ 
Low 
Medium 
3.2 Limits on diversion and plea agreements††  
$ 
Medium 
Short 
3.3 Court monitoring†† 
 
$ 
Low 
Short 
3.4 Sanctions 
 
Varies 
Varies 
Varies 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
1.1 ALR/ALS 
 
$$$ 
High 
Medium 
 1.2 Open containers 
 
$ 
High 
Short 
 1.3 High-BAC sanctions 
 
$ 
Medium 
Short 
 1.4 BAC test refusal penalties 
 
$ 
Unknown 
Short 
 1.5 Alcohol-impaired driving law review 
 
$$ 
Unknown 
Medium 
 
Countermeasures That Work 
 
Countermeasures to reduce alcohol-impaired driving are listed below and discussed individually 
in the remainder of this chapter. The table is intended to give a rough estimate of each 
countermeasure’s effectiveness, use, cost, and time required for implementation. The symbols 
and terms used are described below. Effectiveness, cost, and time to implement can vary 
substantially from State to State and community to community. Costs for many countermeasures 
are difficult to measure, so the summary terms are very approximate. See each countermeasure 
discussion for more information. 
 
1. Deterrence: Laws 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Deterrence: Enforcement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
† Proven for increasing arrests 
†† Proven for detecting impaired drivers 
 
3. Deterrence: Prosecution and Adjudication 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
† Proven for reducing recidivism 
†† Proven for increasing convictions
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 8 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
4.1 Alcohol problem assessment, treatment 
 
Varies 
High 
Varies 
4.2 Alcohol ignition interlocks† 
 
$$ 
Medium 
Medium 
4.3 Vehicle and license plate sanctions† 
 
Varies 
Medium 
Medium 
4.4 DWI offender monitoring† 
 
$$$ 
Unknown 
Varies 
4.5 Lower BAC limit for repeat offenders 
 
$ 
Low 
Short 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
6.1 Minimum drinking age 21 laws 
 
$$$ 
High 
Low 
6.2 Zero-tolerance law enforcement 
 
$ 
Unknown 
Short 
6.3 Alcohol vendor compliance checks† 
 
$$ 
Unknown 
Short 
6.4 Other minimum legal drinking age 21 law 
enforcement 
 
$$ 
Varies 
Varies 
6.5 Youth programs 
 
Varies 
High 
Medium 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
7.1 Enforcement of drug-impaired driving 
 
$$ 
Unknown 
Short 
7.2 Drug-impaired driving laws 
 
Unknown 
Medium† 
Short 
7.3 Education regarding medication 
 
Unknown 
Unknown 
Long 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
5.1 Alcohol screening and brief intervention 
 
$$ 
Medium 
Short 
5.2 Mass-media campaigns 
 
$$$ 
High 
Medium 
5.3 Responsible beverage service 
 
$$ 
Medium 
Medium 
5.4 Alternative transportation 
 
$$ 
Unknown 
Short 
5.5 Designated drivers 
 
$ 
Medium 
Short 
 
4. Deterrence: DWI Offender Treatment, Monitoring, and Control 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
† Proven for reducing recidivism 
 
5. Prevention, Intervention, Communications and Outreach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Underage Drinking and Drinking and Driving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
† Proven for reducing sales to underage people 
 
7. Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
† Use for drug per se laws 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 9 
 
Effectiveness: 
- Demonstrated to be effective by several high-quality evaluations with 
consistent results 
- Demonstrated to be effective in certain situations 
- Likely to be effective based on balance of evidence from high-quality evaluations 
or other sources 
- Effectiveness still undetermined; different methods of implementing this 
countermeasure produce different results 
- Limited or no high-quality evaluation evidence 
 
Effectiveness is measured by reductions in crashes or injuries unless noted otherwise. See 
individual countermeasure descriptions for information on effectiveness size and how 
effectiveness is measured. 
 
Cost to implement: 
$$$: requires extensive new facilities, staff, equipment, or publicity, or makes heavy 
demands on current resources 
$$: requires some additional staff time, equipment, facilities, and/or publicity 
$: can be implemented with current staff, perhaps with training; limited costs for equipment, 
facilities, and publicity 
 
These estimates do not include the costs of enacting legislation or establishing policies. 
 
Use: 
High: more than two-thirds of the States, or a substantial majority of communities 
Medium: between one-third and two-thirds of States or communities 
Low: less than one-third of the States or communities 
Unknown: data not available 
 
Time to implement: 
Long: more than one year 
Medium: more than three months but less than one year 
Short: three months or less 
 
These estimates do not include the time required to enact legislation or establish policies. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 10 
Deterrence 
 
Deterrence means enacting laws that prohibit driving while impaired, publicizing and enforcing 
those laws, and punishing the offenders. Deterrence works by changing behavior through the fear 
of apprehension and punishment. If drivers believe that impaired driving is likely to be detected 
and that impaired drivers are likely to be arrested, convicted and punished, many will not drive 
while impaired by alcohol. This strategy is called general deterrence when it influences the 
general driving public. An example would be well publicized and highly visible enforcement 
activities such as sobriety checkpoints. In contrast, specific deterrence refers to efforts to 
influence drivers who have been arrested for impaired driving so they will not continue to drive 
while impaired by alcohol. An example of this approach would include ignition interlocks or 
vehicle sanctions for DWI offenders. 
 
Deterrence works when consequences are swift, sure, and severe (with swift and sure being more 
important in affecting behavior than severe). All States have the basic laws in place to define 
impaired driving, set illegal per se limits at .08 BAC, and provide standard penalties. 
 
Deterrence, however, is far from straightforward, and complexities can limit the success of 
deterrence measures. For instance: 
• Detecting alcohol-impaired drivers is difficult. Law enforcement agencies have limited 
resources, and (except at checkpoints) officers must observe some traffic violation or 
other aberrant behavior before they can stop a motorist. 
• Conviction also may be difficult. DWI laws are extremely complicated (20 pages or more 
in some State codes); the evidence needed to define and demonstrate impairment is 
complex; judges and juries may not impose specified penalties if they believe the 
penalties are too severe. 
• The DWI control system is complex. There are many opportunities for breakdowns in the 
system that allow impaired drivers to go unaddressed. 
 
DWI control system operations and management. The DWI control system consists of a set of 
laws together with the enforcement, prosecution, adjudication, and offender follow-up policies 
and programs to support the laws. In this complicated system, the operations of each component 
affect all the other components. Each new policy, law, or program affects operations throughout 
the system, often in ways that are not anticipated. 
 
This guide documents 19 specific impaired-driving countermeasures in the deterrence section, in 
four groups: (1) laws, (2) enforcement, (3) prosecution and adjudication, and (4) offender 
treatment, monitoring, and control. But the overall DWI control system, including its 
management and leadership, is more important than any individual countermeasure. 
 
Studies have highlighted the key characteristics of an efficient and effective DWI control system 
(Hedlund & McCartt, 2002; Robertson & Simpson, 2003): 
• Training and education for law enforcement, prosecutors, judges, and probation officers; 
• record systems that are accurate, up-to-date, easily accessible, and able to track each DWI 
offender from arrest through the completion of all sentence requirements; 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 11 
• adequate resources for staff, facilities, training, equipment, and new technology; and 
• coordination and cooperation within and across all components. 
 
A few of the countermeasures discussed in this guide, such as BAC test refusal penalties 
(Chapter 1, Section 1.4), alcohol-impaired driving law review (1.5), and DWI courts (3.1), are 
directed at improving DWI system operations. In some instances, the most important action that 
SHSOs can take to reduce alcohol-impaired driving is to review and improve DWI control 
system operations, perhaps using a State DWI task force and/or a State impaired-driving program 
assessment. 
 
Ulmer, Hedlund, and Preusser (1999) investigated why some States reduced alcohol-related 
traffic fatalities more than others. They concluded that there is no “silver bullet,” no single 
critical law, enforcement practice, or communications strategy. Once a State has effective laws, 
high visibility enforcement, and substantial communications and outreach to support them, the 
critical factors are strong leadership, commitment to reducing impaired driving, and adequate 
funding. Although 15 years have passed, the basic findings of Ulmer et al. (1999) are still 
applicable. SHSOs should keep this in mind as they consider the specific countermeasures in this 
chapter. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 12 
1. Deterrence: Laws 
 
1.1 Administrative License Revocation or Suspension (ALR or ALS) 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$$ 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
 
Administrative license suspension (ALS) laws allow law enforcement and driver licensing 
authorities to suspend a driver's license if the driver fails or refuses to take a BAC test. 
Administrative license revocation (ALR) laws are similar, except the offender must re-apply for 
a license once the suspension period ends. Usually the arresting officer takes the license at the 
time that a BAC test is failed or refused. The driver typically receives a temporary license that 
allows the driver time to make other transportation arrangements and to request and receive an 
administrative hearing or review. In most jurisdictions, offenders may obtain an occupational or 
hardship license during part or all of the revocation or suspension period (NHTSA, 2008a). 
NHTSA recommends that ALR laws include a minimum license suspension of 90 days 
(NHTSA, 2006a). A model ALR law is provided by National Committee on Uniform Traffic 
Laws and Ordinances (NCUTLO, 2007). 
 
ALR and ALS laws provide for swift and certain penalties for DWI, rather than the lengthy and 
uncertain outcomes of criminal courts. They also protect the driving public by removing some 
DWI offenders from the road (but see the discussion of driving with a suspended license, under 
“other issues,” below). More information about ALR laws can be found in the NCHRP Report 
500 guide on reducing impaired-driving (NCHRP, 2005, Strategy C1) and NHTSA’s Traffic 
Safety Facts on ALR (NHTSA, 2008a). 
 
Use: As of July 2015, 41 States and the District of Columbia had some form of ALR or ALS law 
(IIHS, 2015). Thirty-five States had a minimum license suspension of at least 90 days, as 
recommended by NHTSA. 
 
Effectiveness: Many State ALR and ALS laws have been in place for decades, and much of the 
research examining the effectiveness of these laws is now quite old. For example, a summary of 
12 evaluations through 1991 found ALR and ALS laws reduced crashes of different types by an 
average of 13% (Wagenaar, Zobek, Williams, & Hingson, 2000). A more recent study examining 
the long-term effects of license suspension policies across the United States concluded that ALR 
reduces alcohol-related fatal crash involvement by 5%, saving an estimated 800 lives each year 
(Wagenaar & Maldonado-Molina, 2007). See DeYoung (2013a) for a review of the research on 
the effectiveness of ALR/ALS laws. 
 
Costs: ALR/ALS laws require funds to design, implement, and operate a system to record and 
process administrative license actions. In addition, a system of administrative hearing officers 
must be established and maintained. Some States have recovered ALR or ALS system costs 
through offender fees (Century Council, 2008; NHTSA, 2008a). 
 
Time to implement: Six to 12 months are required to design and implement the system and to 
recruit and train administrative hearing officers. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 13 
Other issues: 
• Two-track system: Under ALR or ALS laws, drivers face both administrative and 
criminal actions for DWI. The two systems operate independently. Drivers whose 
licenses have been suspended or revoked administratively still may face criminal actions 
that also may include license suspension or revocation. This two-track system has been 
challenged in some States. All State supreme courts have ruled against these challenges 
(NHTSA, 2008a). 
• Driving with a suspended license: Some DWI offenders continue to drive on occasion 
with suspended or revoked licenses (Lenton, Fetherston, & Cercarelli, 2010; McCartt, 
Geary, & Nissen, 2002). For strategies to reduce driving with a suspended or revoked 
license, see NCHRP (2003), and Chapter 1, Sections 4.2, 4.3 and 5.4. 
• Delaying license reinstatement: Many DWI offenders do not reinstate their licenses 
when they are eligible to do so. About half (49%) of DWI offenders delay license 
reinstatement for at least a year, while 30% delay reinstatement for 5 years or more 
(Voas, Tippetts, & McKnight, 2010). Studies show offenders who delay reinstatement are 
more likely to recidivate than those who have their licenses restored (Voas et al., 2010). 
This suggests it may be important to encourage DWI offenders to reinstate their licenses 
once eligible, but with appropriate controls such as ignition interlocks (Chapter 1, Section 
4.2) and close monitoring (Section 4.4). 
• Hearings: An effective ALR system will restrict administrative hearings to the relevant 
facts: that the arresting officer had probable cause to stop the vehicle and require a BAC 
test and that the driver refused or failed the test. Such a system will reduce the number of 
hearings requested, reduce the time required for each hearing, and minimize the number 
of licenses that are reinstated. When an administrative hearing is not restricted in this 
way, it can serve as an opportunity for the defense attorney to question the arresting 
officer about many aspects of the DWI case. This may reduce the chance of a criminal 
DWI conviction (Hedlund & McCartt, 2002). Officers often spend substantial time 
appearing in person at ALR hearings, and a case may be dismissed if an officer fails to 
appear. Some States use telephonic hearings to solve these problems (Wiliszowski, Jones, 
& Lacey, 2003). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 14 
1.2 Open Containers 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Short 
 
Open-container laws prohibit the possession of any open alcoholic beverage container and the 
consumption of any alcoholic beverage by motor vehicle drivers or passengers. These laws 
typically exempt passengers in buses, taxis, and the living quarters of mobile homes. 
 
In 1998, Congress required States to enact open-container laws or have a portion of their Federal 
aid highway construction funds redirected to alcohol-impaired driving or hazard elimination 
activities (NHTSA, 2008b). To comply, State open-container laws must: 
• Prohibit possession of alcoholic beverage containers and consumption of alcohol in 
motor vehicles; 
• Cover the entire passenger area; 
• Apply to all types of alcoholic beverages; 
• Apply to all vehicle occupants; 
• Apply to all vehicles on public highways; and 
• Provide for primary enforcement of the law. 
 
Certain exceptions are permitted. NHTSA has prepared a question and answer sheet that 
describes common pitfalls for compliance with the minimum Federal requirements 
(www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/administration/programs-grants/Q&A-Sections_154+164.pdf). For 
additional information, see www.fhwa.dot.gov/map21/guidance/guidepentransprov.cfm.  
 
Use: As of October 2014, 37 States and the District of Columbia had open-container laws that 
complied with the Federal requirements (FHWA, 2014).  
 
Effectiveness: The only study of open-container law effectiveness (Stuster, Burns, & Fiorentino, 
2002) examined 4 States that enacted laws in 1999. It found the proportion of alcohol-involved 
fatal crashes appeared to decline in three of the 4 States during the first 6 months after the laws 
were implemented, but the declines were not statistically significant. In general, the proportion of 
alcohol-involved fatal crashes was higher in States with no open-container laws than in States 
with laws (Stuster et al., 2002). Survey data in both law and no-law States show strong public 
support for open-container laws (NHTSA, 2008b). 
 
Costs: Open-container law costs depend on the number of offenders detected and the penalties 
applied to them. 
 
Time to implement: Open-container laws can be implemented as soon as appropriate legislation 
is enacted. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 15 
1.3 High-BAC Sanctions 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Short 
 
Almost all States increase the penalties for the standard impaired driving (DWI) offense for 
repeat offenders. Some States also have increased the penalties for drivers with high BACs, 
typically .15 to .20. Half of all impaired drivers in crashes or arrests have BACs of .15 or higher 
(Century Council, 2008). 
 
High-BAC sanctions are based on the observation that many high-BAC drivers are habitual 
impaired-driving offenders, even though they may not have records of previous arrests and 
convictions. Moreover, drivers with high BACs put themselves and other road users at risk: 
Two-thirds (68%) of impaired drivers involved in fatal crashes in 2013 had BACs of .15 or 
greater (NHTSA, 2014a). Enhanced sanctions for high-BAC drivers vary by State, and may 
include mandatory assessment and treatment for alcohol problems, close monitoring or home 
confinement, installation of an ignition interlock, and vehicle or license plate sanctions (see 
Chapter 1, Sections 4.1, 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4). NHTSA recommends that sanctions for first-time 
offenders with high BACs be comparable to those for repeat offenders (NHTSA, 2008c). 
 
Use: As of December 2012, 49 States and the District of Columbia have increased penalties for 
drivers with high BACs (NCSL, 2014a). Mississippi is the only State without such a law.  
 
Effectiveness: In the only evaluation of high-BAC sanctions to date, McCartt and Northrup 
(2003, 2004) found that Minnesota’s law appears to have increased the severity of case 
dispositions for high-BAC offenders, although the severity apparently declined somewhat over 
time. They also found some evidence of an initial decrease in recidivism among high-BAC first 
offenders (which again dissipated with time). The BAC test refusal rate declined for first 
offenders and was unchanged for repeat offenders after the high-BAC law was implemented. The 
authors pointed out that Minnesota’s law had a high threshold of .20 BAC, relatively strong 
administrative and criminal sanctions, and strong penalties for BAC test refusal. 
 
Costs: High-BAC sanctions will produce increased costs if the high-BAC penalties are more 
costly per offender than the lower-BAC penalties. Over a longer period, if high-BAC sanctions 
reduce recidivism and deter alcohol-impaired driving, then costs will decrease. 
 
Time to implement: High-BAC sanctions can be implemented as soon as appropriate legislation 
is enacted. 
 
Other issues: 
• Test refusal: High-BAC sanctions may encourage some drivers to refuse the BAC test 
unless the penalties for test refusal are at least as severe as the high-BAC penalties. See 
Chapter 1, Section 1.4. 
• Child endangerment laws: Similar to high-BAC laws, child endangerment laws 
recognize there are certain instances where impaired drivers pose extreme risk to others. 
In 2013, there were 200 children 14 or younger who were killed in alcohol-impaired-
driving crashes. Of those, 121 were occupants of vehicles with drivers who had BACs of 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 16 
.08 or higher (NHTSA, 2014a). Child endangerment laws create a separate offense or 
enhance DWI penalties for impaired drivers who carry children. Presently, 46 States and 
DC have separate or higher penalties for impaired drivers who have children in their 
vehicles (Advocates for Highway & Auto Safety, 2014).  
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 17 
1.4 BAC Test Refusal Penalties 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
 
All States have implied consent laws stipulating that people implicitly consent to be tested if they 
are suspected of impaired driving (NHTSA, 2008d). However, some drivers refuse to provide 
breath or blood samples for BAC tests. Nationwide, an average of 24% of drivers arrested for 
DWI refuse the BAC test, although this figure ranges from 1% to 82% depending on the State 
(Jones & Nichols, 2012; Namuswe, Coleman, & Berning, 2014). A driver’s BAC is a critical 
piece of evidence in an alcohol-impaired driving case. The absence of a BAC test can make it 
more difficult to convict the impaired driver. 
 
All States have established separate penalties for BAC test refusal, typically involving 
administrative license revocation or suspension. If the penalties for refusal are less severe than 
the penalties for failing the test, many drivers will refuse. The Model DWI code sets a more 
severe penalty for test refusal than for test failure (NCUTLO, 2007). 
 
Reduced test refusal rates will help the overall DWI control system by providing better BAC 
evidence. Having driver BACs may increase DWI and high-BAC DWI convictions, increase the 
likelihood that prior DWI offenses will be properly identified, and provide the courts with better 
evidence for offender alcohol assessment. For a thorough discussion of issues related to BAC 
test refusal, see NHTSA’s 2008 Report to Congress (Berning et al., 2008). See also Voas et al. 
(2009) for a history of implied consent laws in the United States and a review of the research on 
breath test refusal. 
 
Use: The relative penalties in each State for failing and refusing a BAC test cannot be 
categorized in a straightforward manner due to the complexity of State alcohol-impaired driving 
laws and the differences in how these laws are prosecuted and adjudicated. As of 2008, all States 
except Nevada imposed administrative sanctions for test refusal (NHTSA, 2008d). See 
NHTSA’s Digest of Impaired Driving and Selected Beverage Control Laws for more detail on 
each State’s laws (NHTSA, 2015). 
 
Effectiveness: Zwicker, Hedlund, and Northrup (2005) found that test refusal rates appear to be 
lower in States where the consequences of test refusal are greater than the consequences of test 
failure. No study has examined whether stronger test refusal penalties are associated with 
reduced alcohol-impaired crashes. 
 
Costs: There are no direct costs of increasing penalties for BAC test refusal. 
 
Time to implement: Increased BAC test refusal penalties can be implemented as soon as 
appropriate legislation is enacted. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 18 
Other issues: 
• Criminalizing test refusal: As of 2013, BAC test refusal was a criminal offense in 18 
States (NHTSA, 2015). Criminalizing test refusal may reduce refusal rates and increase 
the likelihood of convictions for DWI (Jones & Nichols, 2012). It also ensures the drivers 
will be identified as repeat offenders upon subsequent arrests. 
• Warrants: To reduce breath test refusals and increase the number of drivers successfully 
prosecuted for DWI, some States issue warrants for drivers who refuse to provide breath 
tests. Issued by a judge or magistrate, the warrant requires the driver to provide a blood 
sample, by force if necessary. One study reviewed how warrants are used in 4 States – 
Arizona, Michigan, Oregon, and Utah (Hedlund & Beirness, 2007). They found that 
warrants may successfully reduce breath test refusals and result in more pleas, fewer 
trials, and more convictions. Although warrants require additional time for law 
enforcement, officers report the chemical evidence obtained from the warrant are of great 
value and worth the effort to obtain (Haire, Leaf, Presser, & Solomon, 2011). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 19 
1.5 Alcohol-Impaired Driving Law Review 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Medium 
 
Alcohol-impaired driving laws in many States are extremely complex. They are difficult to 
understand, enforce, prosecute, and adjudicate, with many inconsistencies and unintended 
consequences. In many States, a thorough review and revision would produce a system of laws 
that would be far simpler and more understandable, efficient, and effective. 
 
DWI laws have evolved over the past 30 years to incorporate new definitions of the offense of 
driving while impaired (illegal per se laws), new technology and methods for determining 
impairment (BAC tests, SFSTs), and new sentencing and monitoring alternatives (electronic 
monitoring, alcohol ignition interlocks). Many States modified their laws to incorporate these 
new ideas without reviewing their effect on the overall DWI control system. The result is often 
an inconsistent patchwork. Robertson and Simpson (2003) summarized the opinions of hundreds 
of law enforcement officers, prosecutors, judges, and probation officials across the country: 
“Professionals unanimously support the simplification and streamlining of existing DWI 
statutes” (p. 18). See also Hedlund and McCartt (2002). 
 
NCUTLO has prepared a model DWI law, which has been incorporated into the Uniform 
Vehicle Code (NCUTLO, 2007). It addresses BAC testing, BAC test refusals, higher penalties 
for high-BAC drivers, ALR hearing procedures, and many other issues of current interest. States 
can use the NCUTLO model as a reference point in reviewing their own laws. In addition, the 
Traffic Injury Research Foundation has a guidebook to assist policymakers in leading a strategic 
review of DWI systems, with the goal of streamlining systems and closing loopholes that can be 
exploited by offenders (Robertson, Vanlaar, & Simpson, 2007). NHTSA also has created several 
guidebooks, including one to assist States in establishing an Impaired-Driving Statewide Task 
Force to review key legislation and improve current DWI systems (Fell & Langston, 2009), and 
another to assist officials and the general public in establishing a task force at a local or regional 
level (Fell, Fisher, & McKnight, 2011). 
 
At a State’s request, NHTSA will facilitate an Impaired Driving Assessment (IDA) to evaluate 
the State’s impaired driving system and to make recommendations for strengthening its 
programs, policies, and practices. NHTSA and the SHSO assemble an assessment team 
comprised of national and State experts in impaired driving. The team reviews and documents 
the strengths and weaknesses of the State’s existing impaired driving system.  
 
Use: No data are available on which States have reviewed and revised their DWI laws. 
 
Effectiveness: A recent study examined outcomes in States that conducted NHTSA-led IDAs or 
Special Management Reviews (SMRs; Fell, Auld-Owens, & Snowden, 2013). States varied in 
the degree to which they followed through with the recommendations outlined in the 
assessments. However, as a group, States which conducted an IDA or SMR demonstrated a 
greater reduction in fatal crashes than States which did not conduct assessments. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 20 
To date, no studies have examined the effectiveness of law reviews in reducing alcohol-impaired 
crashes. The effect of a law review will depend on the extent of inconsistencies and 
inefficiencies in a State’s current laws. A law review can be an important action a State can take 
to address its alcohol-impaired driving problem, because a thorough law review will examine the 
function of the entire DWI control system and will identify problem areas. The immediate effect 
of a law review should be a more efficient and effective DWI control system. 
 
Costs: The review will require substantial staff time. Implementation costs of course will depend 
on the extent to which the laws are changed. 
 
Time to implement: It can take considerable time to identify qualified stakeholders and 
establish a task force to conduct the law review. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 21 
2. Deterrence: Enforcement 
 
2.1 Publicized Sobriety Checkpoints  
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$$ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Short 
 
At a sobriety checkpoint, law enforcement officers stop vehicles at a predetermined location to 
check whether the driver is impaired. They either stop every vehicle or stop vehicles at some 
regular interval, such as every third or tenth vehicle. The purpose of checkpoints is to deter 
driving after drinking by increasing the perceived risk of arrest. To do this, checkpoints should 
be highly visible, publicized extensively, and conducted regularly, as part of an ongoing sobriety 
checkpoint program. Fell, Lacey, and Voas (2004) provide an overview of checkpoint 
operations, use, effectiveness, and issues. See Fell, McKnight, and Auld-Owens (2013) for a 
detailed description of six high visibility enforcement programs in the United States, including 
enforcement strategies, visibility elements, use of media, funding, and many other issues.  
 
Use: Sobriety checkpoints are authorized in 38 States and the District of Columbia (NHTSA, 
2015), but few States conduct them regularly. According to GHSA (2015a), only 16 States 
conduct checkpoints on a weekly basis. The main reasons checkpoints are not used more 
frequently are lack of law enforcement personnel and lack of funding (Fell, Ferguson, Williams, 
& Fields, 2003). 
 
Effectiveness: CDC’s systematic review of 15 high-quality studies found that checkpoints 
reduce alcohol-related fatal crashes by 9% (Guide to Community Preventive Services, 2012). 
Similarly, a meta-analysis found that checkpoints reduce alcohol-related crashes by 17%, and all 
crashes by 10 to 15% (Erke, Goldenbeld, & Vaa, 2009). Publicized sobriety checkpoint 
programs are proven effective in reducing alcohol-related crashes among high risk populations 
including males and drivers 21 to 34 (Bergen et al., 2014).  
 
In recent years, NHTSA has supported a number of efforts to reduce alcohol-impaired driving 
using publicized sobriety checkpoint programs. Evaluations of statewide campaigns in 
Connecticut and West Virginia involving sobriety checkpoints and extensive paid media found 
decreases in alcohol-related fatalities following the program, as well as fewer drivers with 
positive BACs at roadside surveys (Zwicker, Chaudhary, Maloney, & Squeglia, 2007; Zwicker, 
Chaudhary, Solomon, Siegler, & Meadows, 2007). In addition, a study examining demonstration 
programs in 7 States found reductions in alcohol-related fatalities between 11% and 20% in 
States that employed numerous checkpoints or other highly visible impaired driving enforcement 
operations and intensive publicity of the enforcement activities, including paid advertising (Fell, 
Langston, Lacey, & Tippetts, 2008). States with lower levels of enforcement and publicity did 
not demonstrate a decrease in fatalities relative to neighboring States. See also NHTSA’s 
Strategic Evaluation States initiative (NHTSA, 2007a; Syner et al., 2008), the Checkpoint 
Strikeforce program (Lacey et al., 2008), and the national Labor Day holiday campaign: Drunk 
Driving. Over the Limit. Under Arrest (Solomon et al., 2008). 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 22 
Costs: The main costs are for law enforcement time and for publicity. A typical checkpoint using 
15 or more officers can cost $5,000 to $7,000 (Robertson & Holmes, 2011). However, law 
enforcement costs can be reduced by operating checkpoints with smaller teams of 3 to 5 officers 
(NHTSA, 2002; NHTSA, 2006b; Stuster & Blowers, 1995). Law enforcement agencies in two 
rural West Virginia counties were able to sustain a year-long program of weekly low-staff 
checkpoints. The proportion of nighttime drivers with BACs of .05 g/dL and higher was 70% 
lower in these counties compared to drivers in comparison counties that did not operate 
additional checkpoints (Lacey, Ferguson, Kelley-Baker, & Rider, 2006). These smaller 
checkpoints can be conducted for as little as $500 to $1,500 (Maistros, Schneider, & Beverly, 
2014). NHTSA has a guidebook available to assist law enforcement agencies in planning, 
operating and evaluating low-staff sobriety checkpoints (NHTSA, 2006b). 
 
Checkpoint publicity can be costly if paid media are used. For the Checkpoint Strikeforce 
program, paid media budgets ranged from $25,000 in West Virginia to $433,000 in Maryland 
(Fell et al., 2013). Publicity for checkpoints can also include earned media. 
 
Time to implement: Sobriety checkpoints can be implemented very quickly if officers are 
trained in detecting impaired drivers, SFST, and checkpoint operational procedures. See NHTSA 
(2002) for implementation information. 
 
Other issues: 
• Legality: Checkpoints currently are permitted in 38 States and the District of Columbia 
(NHTSA, 2015). Twelve States do not allow checkpoints, either because there is no 
statutory provision (Alaska, Mississippi, and South Carolina) or because checkpoints 
violate the State’s constitution or are prohibited under State law (Idaho, Iowa, Michigan, 
Minnesota, Montana, Oregon, Rhode Island, Texas, Washington, Wisconsin, and 
Wyoming). States where checkpoints are not permitted may use other enforcement 
strategies such as saturation patrols (see Chapter 1, Section 2.2). 
• Visibility: Checkpoints must be highly visible and publicized extensively to be effective. 
Communication and enforcement plans should be coordinated. Messages should clearly 
and unambiguously support enforcement. Paid media may be necessary to complement 
news stories and other earned media, especially in a continuing checkpoint program. See 
Fell et al. (2013) for additional recommendations concerning checkpoint visibility. 
• Arrests: The primary purpose of publicized sobriety checkpoint programs is to deter 
impaired driving, not to increase arrests. However, impaired drivers detected at 
checkpoints should be arrested and arrests should be publicized, but arrests at 
checkpoints should not be used as a measure of effectiveness. The number of contacts 
would be a more appropriate measure. A secondary value of publicized sobriety 
checkpoint programs is checkpoints may also be used to check for valid driver licenses, 
seat belt use, outstanding warrants, stolen vehicles, and other traffic and criminal 
infractions. 
• Combining checkpoints with other activities: To enhance the visibility of their law 
enforcement operations, some jurisdictions combine checkpoints with other activities, 
such as saturation patrols. For example, some law enforcement agencies conduct both 
checkpoints and saturation patrols during the same weekend. Others alternate checkpoints 
and saturation patrols on different weekends as part of a larger publicized impaired 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 23 
driving enforcement effort. NHTSA strongly supports that officers conducting such 
activites be trained in the SFST battery. 
 
• Standardized Field Sobriety Tests: Officers have used SFSTs for more than 20 years to 
identify impaired drivers. The SFST is a test battery that includes the horizontal gaze 
nystagmus test, the walk-and-turn test, and the one-leg-stand test. Research shows the 
combined components of the SFST are 91% accurate in identifying drivers with BACs 
above the illegal limit of .08 (Stuster & Burns, 1998). However, some police agencies do 
not require officers to receive SFST training. States may request an SFST assessment 
which looks at a State’s application of the basic law enforcement tool for detecting 
impaired drivers. 
 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 24 
2.2 High Visibility Saturation Patrols  
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: High 
Time: Short 
 
A saturation patrol (also called a blanket patrol or dedicated DWI patrol) consists of a large 
number of law enforcement officers patrolling a specific area to look for drivers who may be 
impaired. These patrols usually take place at times and locations where impaired driving crashes 
commonly occur. Like publicized sobriety checkpoint programs, the primary purpose of 
publicized saturation patrol programs is to deter driving after drinking by increasing the 
perceived risk of arrest. To do this, saturation patrols should be publicized extensively and 
conducted regularly, as part of an ongoing saturation patrol program. A “how-to” guide for 
planning and publicizing saturation patrols and sobriety checkpoints is available from NHTSA 
(2002). NHTSA strongly recommends that officers conducting these activities be trained in the 
SFST battery. 
 
Use: A survey conducted by The Century Council (2008) reported that 44 States used saturation 
patrols. 
 
Effectiveness: A demonstration program in Michigan, where sobriety checkpoints are prohibited 
by State law, revealed that saturation patrols can be effective in reducing alcohol-related fatal 
crashes when accompanied by extensive publicity (Fell, Langston, Lacey, & Tippetts, 2008). 
 
Costs: The main costs are for law enforcement time and for publicity. Saturation patrol 
operations are quite flexible in both the number of officers required and the time that each officer 
participates in the patrol. As with sobriety checkpoints, publicity can be costly if paid media is 
used. 
 
Time to implement: Saturation patrols can be implemented within three months if officers are 
trained in detecting impaired drivers and in SFST. See NHTSA (2002) for implementation 
information. 
 
Other issues: 
• Legality: Saturation patrols are legal in all jurisdictions. 
• Publicity: As with sobriety checkpoints, saturation patrols should be highly visible and 
publicized extensively to be effective in deterring impaired driving. Communication and 
enforcement plans should be coordinated. Messages should clearly and unambiguously 
support enforcement. Paid media may be necessary to complement news stories and other 
earned media, especially in a continuing saturation patrol program (NCHRP, 2005, 
Strategy B1). 
• Arrests: Saturation patrols can be very effective in arresting impaired drivers. For 
example, law enforcement officers in Minnesota conducted 290 saturation patrols during 
2006, in which they stopped 33,923 vehicles and arrested 2,796 impaired drivers (Century 
Council, 2008). Similar to publicized sobriety checkpoint programs, publicized saturation 
patrol programs are also effective in detecting other driving and criminal offenses. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 25 
2.3 Preliminary Breath Test Devices (PBTs) 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $$ 
Use: High 
Time: Short 
†Proven for increasing arrests 
 
A preliminary breath test device is a small hand-held alcohol sensor used to estimate or measure 
a driver’s BrAC. Law enforcement officers use PBTs in the field to help establish evidence for a 
DWI arrest. The driver blows into a mouthpiece and the PBT displays either a numerical BAC 
level, such as .12, or a BAC range, such as a red light for BACs at or above .08. 
 
Several PBT models are available commercially. They are quite accurate and generally reliable. 
For a “Conforming Products List” of alcohol testing and screening instruments, including PBTs, 
see www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2012-06-14/pdf/2012-14581.pdf. 
 
Use: PBTs are used in 33 States to provide evidence of alcohol use to support DWI arrests 
(Century Council, 2008). This evidence of alcohol use is admissible in court in approximately 
half the States, but in most States PBT evidence cannot be used to establish a driver’s BAC. 
California allows officers to use PBT evidence to enforce zero-tolerance laws for drivers under  
21; officers at the roadside can issue a citation and seize the driver’s license (Ferguson, Fields, & 
Voas, 2000). 
 
Effectiveness: Law enforcement officers generally agree that PBTs are useful. Sixty-nine 
percent of the 2,731 law enforcement officers surveyed by Simpson and Robertson (2001) 
supported greater PBT availability and use. PBTs are especially valuable for two classes of 
drivers who may appear to perform normally on many tasks: drivers with a high tolerance to 
alcohol (Simpson & Robertson, 2001) and drivers under 21 who may be in violation of zero-
tolerance laws (Ferguson et al., 2000). PBTs also can be useful at crash scenes where a driver is 
injured and unable to perform a Standardized Field Sobriety Test. There is some evidence that 
PBT use increases DWI arrests and reduces alcohol-involved fatal crashes (Century Council, 
2008). 
 
Costs: PBTs cost from $200 to $600 apiece. Many law enforcement departments have only a 
limited number of PBTs and many patrol officers do not have regular access to them. Officers 
surveyed by Simpson and Robertson (2001) estimated that three-fourths of all DWI arrests occur 
on routine patrols, so DWI detection would be substantially improved if every patrol officer had 
a PBT. 
 
Time to implement: PBTs can be used as soon as they are purchased and officers are trained in 
their use and maintenance. PBT instruments must have regular calibration checks. Most law 
enforcement agencies have the facilities to conduct these checks. 
 
Other issues: 
• The “one test” rule: Some State statutes allow only one chemical BAC test to be taken 
from a driver arrested for DWI. These States do not use PBTs because an evidential BAC 
test cannot be requested if an officer previously has taken a PBT test in the field. 
• Other drugs: A PBT will not detect the presence of drugs other than alcohol. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 26 
2.4 Passive Alcohol Sensors (PAS) 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $$ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
†Proven for detecting impaired drivers 
 
A passive alcohol sensor is a device to detect alcohol presence in the air. The sensor usually is 
integrated into a flashlight or clipboard. Officers hold the flashlight or clipboard near the driver’s 
mouth, where it measures alcohol presence in the air where the driver is breathing. The PAS can 
be used without the driver’s knowledge and without any probable cause because the PAS is 
considered “an extension of the officer’s nose” and records information that is “in plain view” 
(Preusser, 2000). 
 
Several PAS models are available commercially. They generally are reliable and effective at 
detecting alcohol in the surrounding ambient air. In one study, both breath samples and PAS 
measures were obtained from over 12,000 drivers. Results showed that PAS scores were a strong 
predictor of a driver’s BAC status, leading to the conclusion that “the PAS can be an effective 
tool for officers when deciding whether to initiate a DWI investigation” (Voas, Romano, & Peck, 
2006). NHTSA does not maintain a list of PAS models. 
 
Use: PAS units typically are used at the vehicle window after a traffic stop or at a checkpoint. A 
PAS report of alcohol presence may give the officer probable cause to request further 
examination with SFSTs or a PBT device. No data are available on how many PAS units are in 
use. 
 
Effectiveness: The PAS is especially effective at detecting impaired drivers at checkpoints, 
where officers must screen drivers quickly with little or no opportunity to observe the drivers on 
the road. Evaluations show that officers using PAS at checkpoints can detect 50% more drivers 
at BACs of .10 and above than officers not using PAS (Century Council, 2008; Farmer, Wells, 
Ferguson, & Voas, 1999; Fell et al., 2004; Voas, 2008). The PAS appears to be especially 
effective in assisting officers who rarely make arrests for DWI (Fell, Compton, & Voas, 2008). 
 
Costs: PAS units cost from $300 to $700 apiece. 
 
Time to implement: PAS units can be used as soon as they are purchased and officers are 
trained in their use and maintenance. Training can usually be accomplished quickly. 
 
Other issues: 
• Acceptance by law enforcement: Officers tend to dislike using the PAS. Common 
reasons given by officers for not using PAS units are that they require them to be closer 
to the drivers than they wish to be, they require some portion of officers’ attention at a 
time when they may have other things to be concerned about (including personal safety), 
or they may keep officers from having a hand free. Other officers believe they can detect 
the odor of alcohol accurately without assistance from PAS devices (Preusser, 2000). 
• Other drugs: As with a PBT, a PAS will not detect the presence of drugs other than 
alcohol. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 27 
2.5 Integrated Enforcement 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
 
Impaired drivers are detected and arrested through regular traffic enforcement and crash 
investigations as well as through special impaired driving checkpoints and saturation patrols. A 
third opportunity is to integrate impaired-driving enforcement into special enforcement activities 
directed primarily at other offenses such as speeding or seat belt nonuse, especially since 
impaired drivers often speed or fail to wear seat belts. (Such operations can be particularly 
effective when conducted at night.) 
 
Use: There are no data on how frequently integrated enforcement methods are used. 
 
Effectiveness: Jones, Joksch, Lacey, Wiliszowski, and Marchetti (1995) conducted a three-site 
evaluation of integrated impaired driving, speed, and seat belt use enforcement. Sites that 
combined high publicity with increased enforcement reduced crashes likely to involve alcohol 
(such as single-vehicle nighttime crashes) by 10% to 35%. They concluded that the results were 
encouraging but not definitive. The Massachusetts Saving Lives comprehensive programs in six 
communities used integrated enforcement methods. The programs reduced fatal crashes 
involving alcohol by 42% (Hingson et al., 1996). About half the speeding drivers detected 
through these enforcement activities had been drinking and about half the impaired drivers were 
speeding. See also Voas and Lacey (2011), NCHRP (2005, Strategy B2), and Stuster (2000). 
 
Costs: As with other enforcement strategies, the primary costs are for law enforcement time and 
for publicity. 
 
Time to implement: Impaired driving can be integrated into other enforcement activities within 
three months if officers are trained in detecting impaired drivers and in SFST. 
 
Other issues: 
• Publicity: Integrated enforcement activities should be publicized extensively to be 
effective in deterring impaired driving and other traffic offenses. Paid media may be 
necessary to complement news stories and other earned media, especially in an ongoing 
program (NCHRP, 2005, Strategy B2). 
• Priorities: Integrated enforcement activities send a message to the public and to law 
enforcement officers alike that traffic safety is not a single-issue activity. 
• Citizen reporting programs: Some jurisdictions have dedicated programs where drivers 
can call to report suspected impaired drivers. Such programs can generate support for law 
enforcement efforts and increase the perception in the community that impaired drivers 
will be caught. A study of a grassroots DWI witness reward program in Stockton, 
California, found a significant decrease in alcohol-related injury/fatality crashes 
following the program, relative to six comparison communities (Van Vleck & Brinkley, 
2009). In 2007, MADD Canada launched a program called “Campaign 911” to encourage 
the general public to report impaired drivers. Calls to 911 increased sharply after the 
program was implemented, as did the number of vehicles stopped and the number of 
criminal charges issued (Solomon & Chamberlain, 2013). The effect of the program on 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 28 
crashes was not examined. NHTSA offers a manual for law enforcement agencies and 
local organizations who are interested in establishing a citizen’s DWI reporting program 
in their community (Kelley-Baker, Brainard, Lacey, Vishnuvajjala, & Cobb, 2008).  
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 29 
3. Deterrence: Prosecution and Adjudication 
 
3.1 DWI Courts 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $$$ 
Use: Low 
Time: Medium 
† Proven for reducing recidivism 
 
Based on the drug court model, DWI Courts are specialized courts dedicated to changing the 
behavior of DWI offenders through intensive supervision and treatment. A dedicated DWI Court 
provides a systematic and coordinated approach to prosecuting, sentencing, monitoring, and 
treating DWI offenders. Prosecutors and judges in DWI Courts specialize in DWI cases. A DWI 
Court’s underlying goal is to change offenders’ behavior by identifying and treating their alcohol 
problems and by holding offenders accountable for their actions. 
 
Intensive supervision is a key component of DWI Courts. Probation officers monitor offenders 
closely and report any probation infraction to the judge immediately for prompt action. 
Restrictions and monitoring are gradually relaxed as offenders demonstrate responsible behavior. 
DWI Courts follow the model established by almost 2,500 Drug Courts around the Nation 
(Huddleston, Marlowe, & Casebolt, 2008; NADCP, 2009; NCHRP, 2005, Strategy D3). See 
Brunson and Knighten (2005), Practice #1, for a comprehensive overview of DWI Courts. 
 
A DWI Court can reduce recidivism because judge, prosecutor, probation staff, and treatment 
staff work together as a team to assure that alcohol treatment and other sentencing requirements 
are satisfied for offenders on an individual basis. A key feature of a DWI Court is that the team 
meets regularly, giving all parties an opportunity to discuss the status of a case. Judges can then 
immediately revise restrictions, if appropriate. DWI Courts can be more efficient and effective 
than regular courts because judges and prosecutors closely supervise the offenders and are 
familiar with the complex DWI laws, evidentiary issues, sentencing options, and the offenders. 
NHTSA (2003a) describes the operation of a DWI Court in Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
 
Use: As of August 2014, the National Center for DWI Courts reported 216 designated DWI 
Courts in 31 States (NCDC, 2014). In addition, there were 409 hybrid DWI/Drug Courts, which 
are Drug Courts that also take DWI offenders. States with the most designated DWI Courts 
include Michigan (21), Georgia (20), Missouri (20), Texas (17), and Pennsylvania (14). 
 
Effectiveness: A systematic review found that DWI courts appear to be effective at reducing 
recidivism, although the available studies had too many shortcomings to draw definitive 
conclusions (Marlowe et al., 2009). A more recent meta-analysis of 28 studies suggests DWI 
Courts reduce recidivism among DWI offenders by approximately 50% compared to traditional 
court programs (Mitchell, Wilson, Eggers, & MacKenzie, 2012). However, the authors note that 
more rigorous experimental evaluations of DWI courts are still needed.  
 
A number of individual program evaluations show that DWI Courts can be successful. Low DWI 
recidivism rates have been found for graduates of DWI Courts in Athens (Georgia), Maricopa 
County (Arizona), Los Angeles County (California), and elsewhere (Marlowe et al., 2009). One 
study in Michigan found that DWI court participants were 19 times less likely to be rearrested 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 30 
for DWI within two years than a comparison group of offenders who were in traditional 
probation (Michigan Supreme Court & NPC Research, 2008). Another study of three DWI 
Courts in Georgia found that offenders who graduated from the court program had a 9% 
recidivism rate within the next 4 years, compared to a 24% recidivism rate for a comparison 
group of offenders processed in traditional courts (Fell, Tippetts, & Langston, 2011). 
 
Evaluations have shown that close monitoring and individualized sanctions for DWI offenders 
reduce recidivism (see Chapter 1, Section 4.4). When these are incorporated within a 
comprehensive DWI Court program, their effect is likely to be even greater. 
 
Costs: DWI Court costs are difficult to estimate and compare with regular courts. Costs may be 
greater because more probation officers will be needed to reduce caseloads and to provide close 
monitoring, and because judges must allocate time to meet regularly with probationers and to 
deal with any probation violations. However, total time offenders spend in jail is reduced, thus 
saving the justice system time and money (Michigan Supreme Court & NPC Research, 2008). 
Moreover, DWI Courts may reduce long-term system costs substantially if they decrease DWI 
recidivism as expected. According to one estimate, for every dollar invested in Drug Courts, 
taxpayers save up to $3.36 (NADCP, 2009). 
 
Time to implement: DWI Courts can be implemented 4 to 6 months after the participating 
organizations agree on the program structure if enough trained prosecutors, judges, probation 
officers, and treatment providers are available. Otherwise, planning and implementation may 
require a year or more. 
 
Other issues: 
• Traffic Safety Resource Prosecutors and Judicial Outreach Liaisons: DWI cases can 
be highly complex and difficult to prosecute, yet they are often assigned to the least 
experienced prosecutors. In one survey, about half of prosecutors and judges said the 
training and education they received prior to assuming their position was inadequate for 
preparing them to prosecute and preside over DWI cases (Robertson & Simpson, 2002a). 
Traffic Safety Resource Prosecutors (TSRPs) are current (or former) prosecutors who 
specialize in the prosecution of traffic crimes, and DWI cases in particular. They provide 
training, education, and technical support to other prosecutors and law enforcement 
agencies within their State. Judicial Outreach Liaisons (JOLs) are current (or former) 
judges who are experienced in handling DWI cases. Many JOLs have presided over DWI 
or Drug Courts. They share information and provide education to judges and other court 
personnel about DWI cases. NHTSA has developed a manual to assist new TSRPs 
(NHTSA, 2007b) and guidelines for creating State JOLs (NHTSA, 2013a). 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 31 
3.2 Limits on Diversion and Plea Agreements 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Short 
† Proven for increasing convictions 
 
Diversion programs defer sentencing while a DWI offender participates in some form of alcohol 
education or treatment. In many States, charges are dropped or the offender’s DWI record is 
erased if the education or treatment is completed satisfactorily. 
 
A survey of prosecutors found that of defendants who plead guilty, 67% negotiated a plea 
agreement resulting in a reduced penalty (Robertson & Simpson, 2002a). Negotiated plea 
agreements are a necessary part of efficient and effective DWI prosecution and adjudication. 
However, plea agreements in some States allow offenders to eliminate any record of a DWI 
offense and to have their penalties reduced or eliminated. 
 
Effective DWI control systems can use a variety of adjudication and sanction methods and 
requirements. The key feature is that an alcohol-related offense must be retained on the 
offender’s record (Hedlund & McCartt, 2002; NCHRP, 2005; NTSB, 2000; Robertson & 
Simpson, 2002a). Otherwise, offenders who recidivate will receive less severe penalties than if 
the original charge had been retained on their record. 
 
Use: As of 2006, 33 States provided for diversion programs in State law or statewide practice, 
and local courts and judges in some additional States also offer diversion programs (NHTSA, 
2006c). The Century Council (2008) documented diversion programs restrictions in several 
States. As of December 2013, 14 States had anti-plea-bargaining statutes limiting plea 
agreements in certain cases (NHTSA, 2015). 
 
Effectiveness: The evidence for the effectiveness of diversion programs has been mixed (Voas 
& Fisher, 2001). Although a few studies have shown diversion programs reduce recidivism, 
others have shown no benefits. However, there is substantial anecdotal evidence that diversion 
programs, by eliminating the offense from the offender’s record, allow repeat offenders to avoid 
being identified (Hedlund & McCartt, 2002). Eliminating or establishing limits on diversion 
programs should remove a major loophole in the DWI control system. 
 
Wagenaar et al. (2000) reviewed 52 studies of plea agreement restrictions applied in combination 
with other DWI control policies and found they reduced various outcome measures by an 
average of 11%. However, the effects of plea agreement restrictions by themselves cannot be 
determined in these studies. The only direct study of plea agreement restrictions was completed 
over 20 years ago (Surla & Koons, 1989; NTSB, 2000). It found that plea agreement restrictions 
reduced recidivism in all three study communities. 
 
Costs: Costs for eliminating/limiting diversion programs can be determined by comparing the 
per-offender costs of the diversion program and the non-diversion sanctions. Similarly, costs for 
restricting plea agreements will depend on the relative costs of sanctions with and without the 
plea agreement restrictions. In addition, if plea agreements are restricted, some charges may be 
dismissed or some offenders may request a full trial, resulting in significant costs. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 32 
 
Time to implement: Eliminating/limiting diversion programs and restricting plea agreements 
statewide may require changes to a State's DWI laws. Once legislation is enacted, policies and 
practices can be changed within three months. Individual prosecutor offices and courts also can 
change local policies and practices without statewide legislation. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 33 
3.3 Court Monitoring 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $ 
Use: Low 
Time: Short 
† Proven for increasing convictions 
 
In court monitoring programs, citizens observe, track, and report on DWI court or administrative 
hearing activities. Court monitoring provides data on how many cases are dismissed or pled 
down to lesser offenses, how many result in convictions, what sanctions are imposed, and how 
these results compare across different judges and different courts. Court monitoring programs 
usually are operated and funded by citizen organizations such as MADD. 
 
Use: As of 2006, court monitoring programs were active in at least 13 States (Syner, 2006). It is 
generally believed that court monitoring has decreased substantially since the mid-1980s, when 
Probst, Lewis, Asunka, Hershey, and Oram (1987) identified over 300 programs in the United 
States. 
 
Effectiveness: Shinar (1992) found that court-monitored cases in Maine produced higher 
conviction rates and stiffer sentences than unmonitored cases. Probst et al. (1987) found that 
judges, prosecutors, and other officials in 51 communities believed that court monitoring 
programs helped increase DWI arrests, decrease plea agreements, and increase guilty pleas. 
 
Costs: The main requirement for a court monitoring program is a reliable supply of monitors. 
Monitors typically are unpaid volunteers from MADD, Remove Intoxicated Drivers (RID), or a 
similar organization. Modest funds are needed to establish and maintain court monitoring records 
and to publicize the results. 
 
Time to implement: Court monitoring programs can be implemented very quickly if volunteer 
monitors are available. A few weeks will be required to set up the program and train monitors. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 34 
3.4 Sanctions 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Varies 
Time: Varies 
 
The standard court sanctions for DWI offenses are driver’s license suspension or revocation, 
fines, jail, and community service. All States use some combination of these sanctions. Details of 
each State’s laws may be found in NHTSA’s Digest of Impaired Driving and Selected Beverage 
Control Laws (NHTSA, 2015). Some States set mandatory minimum levels for some sanctions, 
which often increase for second and subsequent offenders. 
 
DWI offenders also may have their driver’s licenses revoked or suspended administratively and 
may have sanctions imposed on their vehicles or license plates. See Chapter 1, Section 1.1, 
Administrative License Revocation or Suspension, and Chapter 1, Section 4.3, Vehicle and 
License Plate Sanctions, for discussions of these sanctions. See also NHTSA’s Guide to 
Sentencing DWI Offenders (NHTSA, 2006d) for an overview of sanctions and sentencing 
practices for judges and prosecutors, with extensive references. The Guide also includes 
screening and brief intervention, alcohol treatment, and DWI courts. 
 
License suspension or revocation: All States allow post-conviction license actions. As of 2013, 
22 States and the District of Columbia set mandatory minimum lengths for first offenders 
(NHTSA, 2015). This suspension or revocation typically runs concurrently with any 
administrative license action. In most States, offenders may obtain an occupational or hardship 
license during part or all of the revocation or suspension period. 
 
Although administrative license actions are highly effective in reducing crashes (see Chapter 1, 
Section 1.1), court-imposed license actions appear less effective. A study of 46 States found that 
post-conviction license suspension had no discernible effects on alcohol-related fatal crashes 
(Wagenaar & Maldonado-Molina, 2007). As discussed in Chapter 1, Section 1.1, some DWI 
offenders continue to drive with a suspended or revoked license, and many DWI offenders do not 
reinstate their license when they are eligible to do so. Consequently, long court-imposed license 
suspensions may do little to reduce recidivism. Instead, it may be important to encourage DWI 
offenders to reinstate their licenses, but with appropriate controls such as ignition interlocks 
(Section 4.2) and close monitoring (Section 4.4). 
 
Fines: Most States impose fines on DWI offenders. As of 2013, 29 States and the District of 
Columbia had mandatory minimum fines for first offenders, ranging from $100 (West Virginia) 
to $1,500 (Alaska) (NHTSA, 2015). In addition to fines, offenders often face substantial costs for 
license reinstatement, mandated alcohol education or treatment, insurance rate increases, and 
legal fees. Available evidence suggests that fines appear to have little effect on reducing alcohol-
impaired driving. For example, Wagenaar et al. (2008) examined alcohol-related fatal crashes 
across 32 States and concluded that mandatory fines “do not have clearly demonstrable general 
deterrent or preventive effects” (p. 992). Another study from Australia found the size of fines 
was unrelated to recidivism rates among DWI offenders (Weatherburn & Moffatt, 2011). Even 
though fines may not reduce alcohol-impaired driving, they do help support the system 
financially. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 35 
Jail: All States allow some DWI offenders to be sentenced to jail. The length of sentences varies 
by State and often depends on the number of prior convictions, the driver’s BAC level, whether 
the crash resulted in an injury or fatality, whether a child passenger was present (child 
endangerment laws), and a number of other factors. Additionally, some States allow community 
service in lieu of jail. Details of each State’s laws may be found in NHTSA’s Digest of Impaired 
Driving and Selected Beverage Control Laws (NHTSA, 2015). 
 
Jail is the most severe and most contentious of the DWI sanctions. Jail is expensive: estimated to 
be $20,267 in Ohio per inmate per year, for example (Century Council, 2008). Judges and 
prosecutors may be reluctant to use limited jail space for DWI offenders rather than “real” 
criminals. Offenses with mandatory jail terms may be pled down, or judges simply may ignore 
the mandatory jail requirement (Robertson & Simpson, 2002b). 
 
Research on the effectiveness of jail is equivocal at best (Voas & Lacey, 2011, pp. 215-216; 
NTSB, 2000). Very short (48-hour) jail sentences for first offenders may be effective (NTSB, 
2000) and the threat of jail may be effective as a deterrent (as is done in DWI and Drug Courts), 
but other jail policies appear to have little effect. Wagenaar et al. (2000) reviewed 18 studies and 
concluded: “The balance of the evidence clearly suggests the ineffectiveness of mandatory jail 
sentence policies” (p. 12). In fact, they find “numerous studies that indicate that [mandatory jail] 
might be a counterproductive policy” (p. 12) that increases alcohol-related crashes. 
 
Community service: Many States allow community service as part of a DWI offender’s 
sentence and 11 States allow community service in lieu of mandatory jail for first-time offenders 
(NHTSA, 2015). Community service can provide benefits to society if offenders perform useful 
work, but even if appropriate jobs can be found there are costs for program operation, offender 
supervision, and liability. The effects of community service programs on alcohol-impaired 
driving have not been evaluated (Century Council, 2008). 
 
Victim Impact Panels: DWI offenders are often required to attend a Victim Impact Panel, in 
which offenders hear from individuals whose lives have been permanently altered by an impaired 
driver. Each year, an estimated 400,000 offenders attend Victim Impact Panels, conducted by 
more than 200 MADD chapters across the United States (Voas & Lacey, 2011). Although Victim 
Impact Panels are intuitively appealing, most studies suggest they do not reduce recidivism 
(Crew & Johnson, 2011; deBaca, Lapham, Liang, & Skipper, 2001; Shinar & Compton, 1995; 
Wheeler, Rogers, Tonigan, & Woodall, 2004). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 36 
4. Deterrence: DWI Offender Treatment, Monitoring, and Control 
 
4.1 Alcohol Problem Assessment and Treatment 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: High 
Time: Varies 
 
It is widely recognized that many DWI first offenders and most repeat offenders are dependent 
on alcohol or have alcohol use problems. They likely will continue to drink and drive unless their 
alcohol problems are addressed. A DWI arrest provides an opportunity to identify offenders with 
alcohol problems and to refer them to treatment as appropriate. However, treatment should not be 
provided in lieu of other sanctions or as part of a plea bargain or diversion program that 
eliminates the record of a DWI offense (see Chapter 1, Section 3.2). 
 
Alcohol problem assessment can take many forms, from a brief paper-and-pencil questionnaire to 
a detailed interview with a treatment professional. Alcohol treatment can be even more varied, 
ranging from classroom alcohol education programs to long-term inpatient facilities. For brief 
overviews of alcohol assessment and treatment programs and further references see Century 
Council (2008), Dill and Wells-Parker (2006), Voas and Lacey (2011), NCHRP (2005, Strategy 
C4), and Robertson, Simpson, and Parsons (2008). 
 
Part of the assessment process is determining the likelihood that an offender will continue to 
drive impaired. Under a cooperative agreement, NHTSA and the American Probation and Parole 
Association developed a screening tool – the Impaired Driving Assessment (IDA) – to determine 
an offender’s risk of recidivism, and to help determine the most appropriate and effective 
community supervision program to reduce that risk (APPA, 2014). Pilot testing of the IDA 
revealed that probation failure is commonly associated with extensive prior legal histories, 
mental health problems, and higher levels of alcohol/drug use.  
 
Use: All States have provisions under State law for alcohol treatment (NHTSA, 2015). However, 
the nature of the treatment – and to whom it applies – varies greatly. Some States mandate 
treatment, especially for repeat offenders, but usually treatment is at the court’s discretion. 
 
Effectiveness: Even the best of the many assessment instruments currently in use is subject to 
error. Chang, Gregory, and Lapham (2002) found that none correctly identified more than 70% 
of offenders who were likely to recidivate. However, the assessment process itself can have 
therapeutic benefits. See Chapter 1, Section 5.1 on alcohol screening and brief interventions. 
 
Wells-Parker, Bangert-Drowns, McMillan, and Williams (1995) reviewed the studies evaluating 
treatment effectiveness. They found that, on average, treatment reduced DWI recidivism and 
alcohol-related crashes by 7 to 9%. Treatment appears to be most effective when combined with 
other sanctions and when offenders are monitored closely to assure that both treatment and 
sanction requirements are met (Century Council, 2008; Dill & Wells-Parker, 2006). 
 
Costs: Treatment expenses vary widely depending on program type. However, several studies 
suggest alcohol abuse treatment can be cost effective. For example, a study from California 
found every dollar spent on treatment potentially saved taxpayers up to $7 (Gerstein et al., 1994). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 37 
Offenders can bear some of the costs of both assessment and treatment, though provisions must 
be made for indigent offenders. 
 
Time to implement: Implementation time also varies depending on program type. The simplest 
can be implemented in several months, while others may take years. 
 
Other issues: 
• Treatment options: There are many effective treatment options for alcohol problems 
including cognitive-behavioral therapy, group counseling, pharmacological interventions 
(e.g., naltrexone, acamprosate), and brief interventions (see Chapter 1, Section 5.1). It is 
important that treatment be tailored to the individual. Also, combining therapies can 
result in better outcomes because DWI offenders usually have a range of diverse and 
complex problems (Dill & Wells-Parker, 2006). 
• DWI Courts: Alcohol problem assessment and treatment are an integral part of DWI 
Courts. In addition, a DWI Court can sanction offenders who fail to complete assigned 
treatment programs. See Chapter 1, Section 3.1. 
• Other mental health issues: Alcohol assessment and treatment provide an opportunity 
to address other problems that may underlie or contribute to problems with alcohol. One 
study found that more than 60% of DWI repeat offenders have experienced other 
psychiatric disorders in addition to alcohol-related problems, such as post-traumatic 
stress disorder, anxiety disorders, and bipolar disorder (Shaffer et al., 2007). This is 
substantially higher than the rate of about 30% for the general population. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 38 
4.2 Alcohol Ignition Interlocks 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $$ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Medium 
† Proven for reducing recidivism 
 
An alcohol ignition interlock prevents a vehicle from starting unless the driver provides a breath 
sample with a BAC lower than a pre-set level, usually .02. Interlocks typically are used as a 
condition of probation for DWI offenders, to prevent them from driving while impaired by 
alcohol after their driver’s licenses have been reinstated. 
 
Interlocks are highly effective in allowing a vehicle to be started by sober drivers but not by 
alcohol-impaired drivers. A post-start retest requires the driver to remain sober while driving. A 
data recorder logs the driver’s BAC at each test and can be used by probation officers to monitor 
the offender’s drinking and driving behavior. Marques and Voas (2010) provide an overview of 
interlock use, effectiveness, operational considerations, and program management issues. 
Marques (2005), Beirness and Robertson (2005), and Robertson, Vanlaar, and Beirness (2006) 
summarize interlock programs in the United States and other countries and discuss typical 
problems and solutions. See also Brunson and Knighten (2005), Practice #5, NCHRP (2003, 
Strategy C2), and proceedings from the 11th Annual International Alcohol Interlock Symposium 
(Robertson, Holmes, & Vanlaar, 2011).  
 
NHTSA offers an ignition interlock toolkit to assist policymakers, highway safety professions, 
and advocates (Mayer, 2014). In addition, NHTSA has published a report, Case Studies of 
Ignition Interlock Programs, featuring State ignition interlock programs (Fieldler, Brittle, & 
Stafford, 2012). Finally, NHTSA has created model guidelines to assist States in developing and 
implementing highly effective interlock programs based on successful practices in the United 
States and other countries (NHTSA, 2013b). 
 
Use: All 50 States and the District of Columbia allow interlocks to be used for some DWI 
offenders (NHTSA, 2013a). In 25 States and 4 California counties, interlocks are mandatory for 
all convicted offenders, including first offenders (IIHS, 2015). Four States (Indiana, Montana, 
North Dakota, and South Dakota) and the District of Columbia currently have no mandatory 
interlock requirements (IIHS, 2015).  
 
Despite widespread laws, a relatively small percentage of eligible offenders have an interlock 
installed. However, interlock use has more than doubled in the past 5 years, from 146,000 in 
2008 to 304,600 in 2013 (based on information supplied by interlock distributors; Roth, 2014). 
Given the roughly 1.4 million arrests in the United States each year for DWI, the ratio of 
installed interlocks to arrests is approximately 1 in 5. Use of interlocks is substantially higher 
when they are required as a prerequisite to license reinstatement. For example, among DWI 
offenders in Florida who were subject to the State’s interlock requirement, 93% installed 
interlocks once they qualified for reinstatement (Voas, Tippetts, Fisher, & Grosz, 2010). Use of 
interlocks is also higher when interlocks are offered as an alternative to home confinement via 
electronic monitoring (Roth, Marques, & Voas, 2009). Through a combination of these measures, 
New Mexico currently installs interlocks in the vehicles of half of all convicted DWI offenders – 
the highest level of penetration of any State (Marques, Voas, Roth, & Tippetts, 2010). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 39 
 
Effectiveness: A review of 15 studies of interlock effectiveness found that offenders who had 
interlocks installed in their vehicles had recidivism rates that were 75% lower than drivers who 
did not have interlocks installed (Elder et al., 2011). Findings were similar for first offenders and 
repeat offenders. After interlocks were removed, however, the effects largely disappeared, with 
interlock and comparison drivers having similar recidivism rates. Although only three studies 
have examined the effects of interlocks on crashes, the limited evidence suggests that alcohol- 
related crashes decrease while interlocks are installed in vehicles (Elder et al., 2011). One 
limitation of interlock research is that study participants often are not randomly assigned to 
interlock or no-interlock groups, so there may be important pre-existing differences between 
groups. However, the preponderance of evidence suggests that interlocks are a highly effective 
method for preventing alcohol-impaired driving – and possibly crashes – while they are installed. 
 
Costs: Presently, offenders pay approximately $65 to $90 per month for interlocks, not including 
installation fees that can range from $100 to $250 (Marques & Voas, 2010). Offenders usually 
pay these costs; however, some States, such as Illinois and New Mexico, have indigent funds and 
unaffordability criteria to reduce the costs for low income offenders. 
 
Time to implement: Interlock programs may require enabling legislation. Once authorized, 
interlock programs require 4 to 6 months to implement a network of interlock providers. 
 
Other issues: 
• Barriers to use: Interlocks have demonstrated their effectiveness in controlling impaired 
driving while they are installed. In light of this success, their limited use may be due to 
several factors, such as lengthy license suspension periods, offenders who delay license 
reinstatement, judges who lack confidence in the interlock technology or who fail to 
enforce “mandatory” interlock requirements, interlock costs, and localities that lack 
enough interlock providers. In an effort to increase the number of offenders who drive 
interlock-equipped vehicles, some States have made the alternatives to interlocks more 
undesirable. For example, pilot programs in Indiana and New Mexico found that roughly 
two-thirds of offenders chose to have interlocks installed when the alternative was house 
arrest with electronic monitoring (Marques et al., 2010; Voas, Blackman, Tippetts, & 
Marques, 2001). Other States allow offenders to shorten (or eliminate) the license 
suspension period if they are willing to operate an interlock-installed vehicle. For 
example, Colorado reduced the license suspension period from one year to one month for 
offenders who apply for an interlock (NCSL, 2014a). Arkansas, Maine, Mississippi, and 
Nebraska recently passed similar laws. For a discussion of barriers to interlock use, see 
Beirness and Marques (2004), Beirness, Clayton, and Vanlaar (2008), Beirness and 
Robertson (2005), and NCHRP (2003, Strategy C2). 
• Compliance with interlocks: Some offenders have relatively high rates of breath test 
failures and other violations, typically near the beginning of their participation in an 
interlock program (Vanlaar, McKiernan, & Robertson, 2013; Vanlaar, Robertson, 
Schaap, & Vissers, 2010). Offenders are becoming familiar with the equipment, and in 
some cases may be testing the limits of the devices. Presently, few jurisdictions use the 
compliance data collected by interlocks to identify offenders who may be at high risk for 
recidivism. The data could also be used to require an extension of the interlock period for 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 40 
those with poor compliance, or even to inform treatment options (Marques et al., 2010). 
To improve compliance with interlocks, it is important to closely monitor offenders 
during their participation in an interlock program. One study found that offenders who 
were closely monitored (e.g., their data was reviewed weekly and they received letters 
documenting their progress) had fewer initial breath test failures and other indicators of 
non-compliance than offenders who received standard monitoring through the State 
licensing office (Zador, Ahlin, Rauch, Howard, & Duncan, 2011). Similarly, an in-depth 
study of three State interlock programs found non-compliance was highest in the State 
with less consistent monitoring practices (California) than in the two States with stronger 
monitoring practices (Florida and Texas) (Vanlaar et al., 2013). 
• First-time offenders: There are special issues concerning interlocks and first-time 
offenders. In many States, first offenders are not monitored by the criminal justice 
system. Consequently, it can be difficult to respond to violations and to ensure that first- 
time offenders complete the interlock program. Despite challenges in closely monitoring 
first-time offenders, evidence suggests interlocks effectively reduce recidivism among 
this group while the interlock is installed (Marques et al., 2010; McCartt, Leaf, Farmer, & 
Eichelberger, 2012). For more information about issues in implementing interlock 
programs with first-time offenders, see Robertson, Homes, and Vanlaar (2010). 
• Rural areas: For offenders living in rural areas, access to an interlock service provider 
can be problematic (NHTSA, 2014d). Interlock service providers may be limited or non-
existent in rural jurisdictions, requiring offenders to drive long distances to get an 
interlock installed or serviced. To improve the availability of interlocks, States can 
require vendors to provide service to rural areas as a prerequisite for obtaining a contract 
with the State (NHTSA, 2014d). 
• Public support: There is strong support among the general public for ignition interlocks. 
In two national surveys, approximately 80% of respondents approved of requiring 
interlocks in the vehicles of convicted DWI offenders, including first offenders (AAA 
Foundation, 2014; McCartt, Wells, & Teoh, 2010). Moreover, about 65% of respondents 
favored having alcohol detection technology in all new vehicles. The general public also 
believes strongly that interlocks work. In a NHTSA survey, respondents were asked 
about the effectiveness of eight strategies to reduce or prevent impaired driving. 
Interlocks ranked highest in the percentage who rated the strategy “very effective” (63%) 
(Moulton et al., 2010). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 41 
4.3 Vehicle and License Plate Sanctions 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: Varies 
Use: Medium 
Time: Short 
† Proven for reducing recidivism 
 
In recent years, many States have implemented sanctions affecting a DWI offender’s license 
plate or vehicle. These sanctions are intended to prevent the offender from driving the vehicle 
while the sanctions are in effect, and also to deter impaired driving by the general public. Vehicle 
and plate sanctions include: 
• Special license plates for drivers whose licenses have been revoked or suspended. The 
plates allow family members and other people to drive the offender’s vehicle but permit 
law enforcement to stop the vehicle to verify that the driver is properly licensed. 
• License plate impoundment. Officers seize and impound or destroy the license plate. 
• Vehicle immobilization. Vehicles are immobilized on the offender’s property with a 
“boot” or “club.” 
• Vehicle impoundment. Vehicles are stored in a public impound lot. 
• Vehicle forfeiture. Vehicles are confiscated and sold at auction. 
 
NHTSA (2008e), DeYoung (2013b), and Voas, Fell, McKnight, and Sweedler (2004) give an 
overview of vehicle and license plate sanctions and are the basic references for the information 
provided below. See also Brunson and Knighten (2005), Practice #4, and NCHRP (2003), 
Strategies B1, B2, and C1. All vehicle and license plate sanctions require at least several months 
to implement. 
 
Use, effectiveness, and costs: 
• Special license plates: Permitted in Georgia, Hawaii, Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, 
and Ohio (Voas, McKnight, Falb, & Fell, 2008). Ohio requires special plates for all first- 
time offenders with BACs of .17 and above and for all repeat offenders. Effectiveness 
and costs have not been evaluated in any State. In the 1990s Oregon and Washington 
adopted a version of this strategy by allowing arresting officers to place a “zebra stripe” 
sticker on the license plate at the time of arrest. Oregon’s program proved effective in 
reducing DWI recidivism but Washington’s did not. Use has been discontinued in both 
States (NCHRP, 2003, Strategy B1; NHTSA, 2008e). 
• License plate impoundment: Used in 17 States (McKnight, Watson, Voas, & Fell, 2008). 
In Minnesota, license plate impoundment administered by the arresting officer was 
shown to reduce both recidivism and driving with a suspended license, especially among 
the youngest offenders (Leaf & Preusser, 2011; Rogers, 1995). Since plate impoundment 
does not involve the courts, it occurs quickly, consistently, and efficiently (NCHRP, 
2003, Strategy B2; NHTSA, 2008e; NTSB, 2000). Fourteen States allow for impounding 
a vehicle’s registration (McKnight et al., 2008McKnight, Watson, Voas, & Fell, 2008). 
• Vehicle immobilization: Laws in 16 States allow vehicle immobilization (Voas et al., 
2008). An evaluation in Ohio found that immobilization reduced recidivism (Voas, 
Tippetts, & Taylor, 1998). Costs are minimal compared to impoundment or forfeiture 
(NCHRP, 2003, Strategy C1; NTSB, 2000). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 42 
• Vehicle impoundment: 27 States and the District of Columbia allow for vehicle 
impoundment and some use it extensively (Voas et al., 2008). Vehicle impoundment 
reduces recidivism while the vehicle is in custody and to a lesser extent after the vehicle 
has been released. The strategy is costly, as storage fees can be $20 daily and owners may 
abandon low-value vehicles rather than pay substantial storage costs (NCHRP, 2003, 
Strategy C1; NTSB, 2000). In California, impoundment programs are administered 
largely by towing contractors and supported by fees paid when drivers reclaim their 
vehicles or by the sale of unclaimed vehicles. An evaluation of California’s impoundment 
law found both first-time and repeat offenders whose vehicles were impounded had fewer 
subsequent arrests for driving with a suspended license and fewer crashes (DeYoung, 
1997). 
• Vehicle forfeiture: Thirty-five States have provisions allowing vehicle forfeiture for 
impaired driving and/or driving with a suspended license (Voas et al., 2008); however, 
there is little information on its use or effectiveness. Vehicle forfeiture programs must 
pay storage costs until the vehicles are sold or otherwise disposed (NCHRP, 2003, 
Strategy C1; NTSB, 2000). 
 
Other issues: 
• To whom are vehicle sanctions applied: Most vehicle sanctions have been applied to 
repeat offenders rather than first offenders, although some States also apply vehicle 
sanctions to high-BAC first offenders (e.g., BACs of .15 or higher). If someone other 
than the offender owns the vehicle, the vehicle owner should be required to sign an 
affidavit stating they will not allow the offender to drive the vehicle while the suspension 
is in effect (NHTSA, 2008e). 
• Administrative issues: All license plate and vehicle sanctions require an administrative 
structure to process the license plates or vehicles. Laws should permit officers to 
impound vehicles or license plates at the time of arrest so offenders do not have the 
opportunity to transfer vehicle ownership (NHTSA, 2008e). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 43 
4.4 DWI Offender Monitoring 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $$$ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Varies 
† Proven for reducing recidivism 
 
The most successful methods for controlling convicted DWI offenders and reducing recidivism 
have the common feature that they monitor offenders closely. Close monitoring can be 
accomplished at various levels and in various ways, including a formal intensive supervision 
program, home confinement with electronic monitoring, and dedicated detention facilities. South 
Dakota’s 24/7 Sobriety Project is one example of an intensive supervision program. Participants 
are multiple offenders who are required to use no alcohol or drugs as a condition of remaining in 
the community and avoiding incarceration. The program includes daily breath testing, 
transdermal devices that monitor for alcohol consumption, and random drug testing. If an 
offender tests positive for alcohol or drugs, they are taken into custody and appear before a judge 
within 24 hours. The goal of the program is to ensure that sanctions are swift and certain. South 
Dakota’s 24/7 Sobriety Project has been adopted in three additional rural States: Montana, North 
Dakota, and Wyoming. 
 
For overviews of DWI offender monitoring and further references, see Century Council (2008) 
and NCHRP (2005, Strategy D4). See also Wiliszowski, Fell, McKnight, and Tippetts (2011) for 
more information about intensive supervision programs and descriptions of eight different 
programs, and Fisher, McKnight, and Fell (2013) for additional details about South Dakota’s 
24/7 Sobriety Project. Information about transdermal alcohol monitoring, including six case 
studies, can be found in McKnight, Fell, and Auld-Owens (2012). DWI Courts and alcohol 
ignition interlocks, which are discussed in Chapter 1, Sections 3.1 and 4.2, also assist in 
monitoring offenders closely. Finally, guidelines for community supervision of DWI offenders 
are available from NHTSA (Dunlap, Mullins, & Stein, 2008). 
 
Use: Little data are available showing how extensively these programs are used. The most 
commonly used transdermal device is SCRAM (Secure Continuous Remote Alcohol 
Monitoring). In 2011, there were approximately 50,000 persons being monitored with SCRAM 
devices in the United States, roughly two-thirds of whom were DWI offenders (Fell & 
McKnight, 2013). In total, 48 States have used the SCRAM device with at least some offenders, 
while 34 States have used the device with more than 1,000 offenders (Fell & McKnight, 2013). 
The number of States using other types monitoring programs and devices is unknown. 
 
Effectiveness: Intensive supervision programs, home confinement with electronic monitoring, 
and dedicated detention facilities all have been evaluated in individual settings and show 
substantial reductions in DWI recidivism. Two studies of South Dakota’s 24/7 Sobriety Program 
have found reductions in recidivism of up to 74% among program participants compared to 
controls (Kilmer, Nicosia, Heaton, & Midgette, 2013; Loudenburg, Drube, & Leonardson, 2010). 
Recidivism was reduced by one-half in an intensive supervision program in Oregon (Lapham, 
Kapitula, C’de Baca, & McMillan, 2006) and by one-third in an electronic monitoring program 
in Los Angeles County, California (Brunson & Knighten, 2005; Jones, Wiliszowski, & Lacey, 
1996). A dedicated detention facility in Baltimore County had a 4% recidivism rate one year 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 44 
after program completion, compared to a normal recidivism rate of 35% for offenders (Century 
Council, 2008). 
 
Costs: All close monitoring programs are more expensive than the standard high-caseload and 
low-contact probation but less expensive than jail. Offenders in 24/7 programs typically pay $4 
per day for breath testing, while electronic monitoring fees typically range from $5 to $10 per 
day (Fell & McKnight, 2013). A goal of 24/7 programs is to be self-sufficient (i.e., entirely 
funded by offenders). New Mexico estimated that intensive supervision costs $2,500 per offender 
per year compared to $27,500 per offender per year for jail (Century Council, 2008). Dedicated 
detention facility costs can approach jail costs: $37 per day in the Baltimore County dedicated 
detention facility compared to $45 per day for jail (Century Council, 2008). Offenders can bear 
some program costs, especially for the less expensive alternatives (Century Council, 2008). 
 
Time to implement: All close monitoring programs require many months to plan and 
implement. Dedicated facilities require years to plan and build. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 45 
4.5 Lower BAC Limits for Repeat Offenders 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Low 
Time: Short 
 
All States now have an illegal per se BAC limit of .08. All States also have a BAC limit of .02 or 
lower for drivers under 21. These laws reinforce the minimum drinking age 21 laws in all States 
that prohibit people under 21 from purchasing or possessing alcohol in public. As of 
2001, 5 States also lowered the BAC limit for people convicted of DWI, to emphasize that they 
should not be driving after drinking even moderate amounts (Jones & Rodriguez-Iglesias, 2004). 
 
Use: No recent study has quantified the number of States that have established lower BAC limits.  
 
Effectiveness: In 1988, Maine established a .05 g/dL BAC limit for 1 year after a first DWI 
offense and for 10 years after a subsequent offense. Violators received an administrative license 
suspension. In 1995, this BAC limit was lowered to .00. Hingson, Heeren, and Winter (1998) 
evaluated the 1988 law and concluded that it reduced the proportion of repeat offender drivers in 
fatal crashes by 25%. Jones and Rodriguez-Iglesias (2004) evaluated the overall effects of both 
laws, using data from 1988-2001. They also concluded that the laws contributed to a reduction in 
the proportion of repeat offenders in fatal crashes, primarily due to a reduction in drivers at 
BACs of .10 and higher. 
 
Costs: Implementation and operation costs are minimal. Jones and Rodriguez-Iglesias (2004) 
found that Maine’s laws had little or no effect on the operations of the DWI control system. 
 
Time to implement: Lower BAC limit laws can be implemented as soon as legislation is 
enacted. 
 
Other issues: 
• Lower BAC limits for all drivers: Laboratory studies suggest impairment in driving 
ability begins at levels below .08 g/dL BAC. Consequently, many countries, and some 
U.S. jurisdictions (e.g., Colorado and West Virginia), impose penalties for all drivers who 
have BACs of .05 or higher (not just repeat offenders). Evaluations from other countries 
suggest lower BAC limits reduce alcohol-impaired crashes (NHTSA, 2003b). For 
example, a law introduced in British Columbia, Canada, in 2010 included an 
administrative 3-day license suspension and possible vehicle impoundment for drivers 
with BAC levels between .05 and .08. The law was intended to maximize deterrence by 
increasing the certainty and swiftness of sanctions. In the year after the law took effect, 
there was a 40% decrease in alcohol-related fatal crashes (Macdonald et al., 2013). 
Moreover, roadside surveys revealed a 44% decrease in drivers with BACs of .05 or 
higher, and a 59% decrease in drivers with BACs over .08 (Beirness & Beasley, 2014). In 
sum, administrative penalties beginning at .05 g/dL BAC appear to increase deterrence 
among the general population without creating an additional burden on the court system. 
A small majority (63%) of drivers in the United States support lowering the BAC limit 
for all drivers from .08 to .05 (AAA Foundation, 2014). The National Transportation 
Safety Board (NTSB) has recommended a BAC level of .05 for all drivers (NTSB, 2013). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 46 
5. Prevention, Intervention, Communications, and Outreach 
 
Prevention and intervention. 
 
Prevention and intervention strategies seek to reduce drinking, or to prevent driving by people 
who have been drinking. Prevention and intervention work through laws, policies, and programs 
that: 
• control hours, locations, and promotions of alcohol sales; 
• implement responsible alcohol service practices; 
• control alcohol purchase and use through increased alcohol taxes and restrictions on 
consumption in public locations such as parks and sports facilities; or 
• provide alternatives to driving for people who have been drinking. 
 
Prevention and intervention measures are especially important for those under 21. These are 
discussed in the Youth section that follows. 
 
Many prevention and intervention measures fall under the authority of a State’s alcohol control 
board rather than the SHSO. However, the SHSO can be a critical partner in many prevention 
and intervention activities. Only countermeasures directly associated with drinking and driving 
are discussed in this section. For information regarding more general countermeasures directed at 
alcohol, see Grube and Stewart (2004), Toomey and Wagenaar (1999), and Alcohol 
Epidemiology Program (2000). 
 
Communications and outreach. 
 
Communications and outreach strategies seek to inform the public of the dangers of driving 
while impaired by alcohol and to promote positive social norms of not driving while impaired. 
As with prevention and intervention, education through various communications and outreach 
strategies is especially important for youth under 21. Education may occur through formal 
classroom settings, news media, paid advertisements and public service announcements, and a 
wide variety of other communication channels such as posters, billboards, web banners, and the 
like. 
 
Communications and outreach strategies are a critical part of many deterrence and prevention 
strategies. This section discusses only stand-alone communications and outreach 
countermeasures. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 47 
5.1 Alcohol Screening and Brief Interventions 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Short 
 
Alcohol screening uses a few questions to estimate the level and severity of alcohol use and to 
determine whether a person may be at risk of alcohol misuse or dependence (SAMHSA, 2007). 
Brief interventions are short, one-time encounters with people who may be at risk of alcohol- 
related injuries or other health problems. Brief interventions focus on the awareness of the 
problem and motivation toward behavior change (SAMHSA, 2015). The combination of alcohol 
screening and brief intervention is most commonly used with injured patients in emergency 
departments or trauma centers. Patients are screened for alcohol use problems and, if appropriate, 
are counseled on how alcohol can affect injury risk and overall health. Patients also may be 
referred to a follow-up alcohol treatment program. Brief interventions take advantage of a 
“teachable moment” when a patient can be shown that alcohol use can have serious health 
consequences.  
 
Higgins-Biddle and Dilonardo (2013) and Dill, Wells-Parker, and Soderstrom (2004) provide a 
summary of alcohol screening and brief intervention studies. Also, NHTSA and the American 
Public Health Association (APHA) have produced an alcohol and brief intervention guide for 
public health practitioners (Guard & Rosenblum, 2008). Finally, NHTSA offers a toolkit to assist 
in conducting screening and brief intervention on college campuses (Quinn-Zobeck, 2007). 
 
Use: Approximately one-half of trauma centers screen patients for alcohol problems and one- 
third use some form of brief intervention (NCHRP, 2005, Strategy A4; Schermer et al., 2003). 
Alcohol screening and brief interventions also are used in colleges, primary care medical 
facilities, and social service settings (NCHRP, 2005, Strategy A4). 
 
Effectiveness: Many studies show that alcohol screening and brief interventions in medical 
facilities can reduce drinking and self-reported driving after drinking (D’Onofrio & Degutis, 
2002; Moyer, Finney, Swearingen, & Vergun, 2002; Wilk, Jensen, & Havighurst, 1997). Dill et 
al. (2004) reviewed 9 studies that evaluated alcohol screening and brief intervention effects on 
injury. These studies generally found that alcohol screening and brief interventions reduced both 
drinking and alcohol-related traffic crashes and injuries. 
 
Costs: Alcohol screening and brief interventions in medical facilities require people with special 
training to administer the intervention. However, several studies show the intervention is cost 
effective, and substantially reduces future health care costs (e.g., hospital and emergency room 
visits) (Guard & Rosenblum, 2008). 
 
Time to implement: Procedures for alcohol screening and brief interventions are readily 
available from APHA (Guard & Rosenblum, 2008), the American College of Emergency 
Physicians (ACEP, 2006), and the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
(NIAAA, 2005), and can be implemented as soon as staff is identified and trained. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 48 
Other issues: 
• Alcohol exclusion laws: An alcohol exclusion law (Uniform Accident and Sickness 
Policy Provision Law or UPPL) allows insurance companies to deny payment to hospitals 
for treating patients who are injured while impaired by alcohol or a non-prescription drug 
(NHTSA, 2008f). These laws may cause hospitals to be reluctant to determine the BACs 
of injured drivers and may limit the use of alcohol screening (although screening does not 
measure the patient's BAC). As of May 2015, alcohol exclusion laws were in effect in 37 
States (GHSA, 2015b), though the extent to which insurance companies deny payment is, 
at best, sporadic. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 49 
5.2 Mass Media Campaigns 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$$ 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
 
A mass media campaign consists of intensive communications and outreach activities regarding 
alcohol-impaired driving that use radio, television, print, and other mass media, both paid and/or 
earned. Mass media campaigns are a standard part of every State’s efforts to reduce alcohol- 
impaired driving. Some campaigns publicize a deterrence or prevention measure such as a 
change in a State’s DWI laws or a checkpoint or other highly visible enforcement program. 
Others promote specific behaviors such as the use of designated drivers, illustrate how impaired 
driving can injure and kill, or simply urge the public not to drink and drive. Campaigns vary 
enormously in quality, size, duration, funding, and every other way imaginable. Effective 
campaigns identify a specific target audience and communications goal and develop messages 
and delivery methods that are appropriate to – and effective for – the audience and goal 
(Williams, 2007). 
 
Use: Most States use some form of alcohol-impaired driving mass media campaign every year. 
Mass media campaigns are an essential part of many deterrence and prevention countermeasures 
that depend on public knowledge to be effective. 
 
Effectiveness: Most mass media campaigns are not evaluated. Elder et al. (2004) studied the few 
available high-quality evaluations. The campaigns being evaluated were carefully planned, well- 
funded, well-executed, achieved high levels of audience exposure (usually by using paid 
advertising), had high-quality messages that were pre-tested for effectiveness, and were 
conducted in conjunction with other impaired-driving activities. These mass media campaigns 
were associated with a 13% reduction in alcohol-related crashes. Levy, Compton, and Dienstfrey 
(2004) documented the costs and media strategy of a high-quality national media campaign and 
its effects on driver knowledge and awareness. 
 
Costs: High-quality and effective mass media campaigns are expensive. Funds are needed for 
market research, design, pre-testing, and production. Paid advertising expenses depend on the 
media chosen and the media markets needed to reach the target audience. 
 
Time to implement: A high-quality mass media campaign will require at least 6 months to 
research, plan, produce, and distribute. 
 
Other issues: 
• Campaign quality: Poor-quality or stand-alone campaigns that are not tied to program 
activities are unlikely to be effective. Similarly, although public service announcements 
are a relatively inexpensive way to deliver messages about impaired driving, they are 
likely to be aired infrequently, reach small audiences, miss the target audience and have 
little or no effect. To be successful, mass media campaigns must be carefully pre-tested, 
communicate information not previously known, be long-term, and have substantial 
funding (Williams, 2007). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 50 
• Comprehensive media strategy: Mass media campaigns should be planned as part of an 
overall communications and outreach strategy that supports specific impaired driving 
activities, such as enforcement. 
• Fear appeals: A common approach in media campaigns is to provoke fear or anxiety by 
depicting the severe negative consequences of impaired driving (e.g., injuries/deaths; 
grieving family members). Although commonly used, the evidence suggests this 
approach can potentially increase undesirable behaviors (Wundersitz, Hutchinson, & 
Wooley, 2010). For this reason, fear appeals should be used with caution and other types 
of approaches should be considered first. 
• Social norms campaigns: Social norms marketing campaigns are a more recent 
approach to reducing alcohol-related crashes. They are built on the premise that an 
individual’s behavior is influenced by his or her perceptions of how most people behave. 
A study in Montana demonstrates the potential effectiveness of this approach. Surveys of 
young adults 21 to 34 years old in Montana revealed that only 20% had driven in the 
previous month after consuming two or more alcoholic drinks, although more than 90% 
thought their peers had done so. Based on this finding, a paid media campaign was 
developed with the normative message, “MOST Montana Young Adults (4 out of 5) 
Don’t Drink and Drive.” By the end of the campaign, there was a 13.7% decrease in 
young adults who reported driving after drinking relative to a comparison community 
(Linkenbach & Perkins, 2005). 
• Social media: NHTSA and some States have begun using social networking sites to 
reach the general public with messages concerning alcohol-impaired driving. Although 
sites such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube can effectively and inexpensively reach 
large numbers of people, there are no evaluations of alcohol-impaired driving campaigns 
that use this approach. Similar to mass media campaigns and other types of 
communication described above, social media is unlikely to be effective as a stand-alone 
strategy; however, it may be a useful approach when combined with other 
communications to support specific impaired driving activities. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 51 
5.3 Responsible Beverage Service 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Medium 
 
Responsible beverage service covers a range of alcohol sales policies and practices that prevent 
or discourage restaurant and bar patrons from drinking to excess or from driving while impaired 
by alcohol. Server training programs teach servers how to recognize the signs of intoxication and 
how to prevent intoxicated patrons from further drinking and from driving. Management policies 
and programs include limits on cheap drinks and other promotions, support for designated driver 
programs, strong commitment to server training, and strong support for servers who refuse 
alcohol to intoxicated patrons. NCHRP (2005, Strategy A2) provides an overview of responsible 
beverage service. See also Wagenaar and Tobler (2007) and Voas and Lacey (2011; pp. 131-137) 
for reviews and discussion of the research literature on this issue. 
 
Beginning in the early 1980s, a major effort was undertaken to encourage alcohol servers to 
comply with laws prohibiting the sale of alcoholic beverages to visibly intoxicated patrons. Since 
that time, many “server intervention” programs have been developed as a means of securing 
more responsible behavior on the part of servers. Some States have mandatory programs that 
require at least some alcohol retail employees to attend a server training course. Other States 
have voluntary programs that provide incentives for retailers to participate (e.g., liability 
protection or insurance discounts). The quality of server training programs can vary 
considerably. Wagenaar and Tobler (2007) note that many server training laws “are not 
optimally designed, do not ensure quality training, and do not ensure all servers are consistently 
trained, or retained periodically” (p. 158). 
 
Server training programs are the only segment of responsible beverage service for adults that has 
been documented and evaluated well. Activities directed at people under 21 are discussed 
separately in Chapter 1, Sections 6.1 through 6.4. 
 
Use: As of 2005, 17 States had some form of mandatory server training program in place; 
another 15 States had voluntary programs (Wagenaar & Tobler, 2007). 
 
Effectiveness: The findings on the effectiveness of server training have been mixed. In their 
systematic review, Shults et al. (2001) found five high-quality evaluations of server training 
programs. They concluded that “intensive, high-quality, face-to-face server training, when 
accompanied by strong and active management support, is effective in reducing the level of 
intoxication in patrons” (p. 80). When server training programs are not intensive and are not 
supported, they are unlikely to result in greater refusals of service to intoxicated patrons. 
 
Few studies have examined the effect of server training on alcohol-impaired crashes. An 
evaluation of a statewide server training program in Oregon found a 23% reduction in single- 
vehicle nighttime injury crashes following the program (Holder & Wagenaar, 1994). However, 
Molof and Kimball (1994) reviewed the same Oregon program and observed no decline in 
alcohol-related fatalities. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 52 
Costs: A typical alcohol server course takes about 4 to 8 hours. Course costs can be borne by the 
servers themselves, their employers, or the State. 
 
Time to implement: Server training courses are offered by several private vendors and can be 
implemented in a few weeks. A statewide requirement for server training or more general 
responsible beverage service policies would require time to enact any necessary legislation, 
establish policies, and provide for program administration. 
 
Other issues: 
• Program quality: The quality of responsible beverage service programs can vary 
enormously, from excellent to abysmal. Management support can vary from enthusiastic 
to nonexistent. Shults et al. (2001) clearly limit their conclusions to high-quality 
programs with strong management support. The Alcohol Epidemiology Program (2000) 
cites several server training program evaluation studies that found no effect and notes that 
these programs may have been poorly supported or implemented. Grube and Stewart 
(2004) emphasize that management policy and its implementation may be at least as 
important as server training in determining responsible beverage service program 
effectiveness. 
• Dram shop laws: As of 2013, 41 States have laws that allow individuals injured by an 
intoxicated driver to recover damages from the licensed establishment that served or sold 
the alcohol in at least some situations (NHTSA, 2015). The potential threat of legal 
liability can provide strong encouragement to retailers to adopt responsible beverage 
service policies and practices. Research shows the implementation of dram shop laws is 
associated with reductions in alcohol-related crashes and fatalities (Voas & Lacey, 2011). 
• Enforcement of responsible beverage service: Enforcement of alcohol service laws is 
key, but largely lacking. Mosher et al. (2009) identified three main reasons for this: (1) a 
lack of societal and political will to address violations; (2) limited resources for 
enforcement operations; and (3) statutory provisions that make collection of evidence 
overly burdensome. As a result, action against licensed establishments has historically 
been limited to case law action involving serious crashes. Although alcohol enforcement 
by police is almost exclusively directed toward drivers, research has demonstrated that 
enforcement of alcohol service laws can help ensure alcohol retailers follow responsible 
serving practices. For example, an enforcement program in Michigan resulted in a three- 
fold increase in refusals of service to “pseudo-patrons” who simulated intoxication 
(McKnight & Streff, 1994). 
• “Last Drink” programs: The goal of Last Drink programs is to determine where 
someone who was apprehended for impaired driving consumed their last drink prior to 
the arrest. This information is then provided to licensing authorities who may issue a 
warning letter to the retail establishment or take disciplinary action. An evaluation of a 
last drink program in Washington State found mixed results. No change was observed in 
retail establishment practices, but there were reductions in impaired-driving arrests and 
lower BAC levels among arrested drivers in the intervention community (Ramirez, 
Nguyen, Cannon, Carmona, & Freisthler, 2008). Similar pilot program have been tried in 
Australia, Canada, and New Zealand, although effectiveness data is lacking. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 53 
5.4 Alternative Transportation 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
 
Alternative transportation describes methods by which people can get to and from places where 
they drink without having to drive. Alternative transportation supplements normal public 
transportation provided by subways, buses, taxis, and other means. 
 
Ride service programs transport drinkers home from, and sometimes to and between, drinking 
establishments using taxis, private cars, buses, tow trucks, and even police cars. Some will drive 
the drinker’s car home along with the drinker. Most operate only for short periods of the year, 
such as the Christmas and New Year’s holidays. Many are free; some charge users a minimal 
fee; some are operated commercially on a for-profit basis. Ride service programs are relatively 
inexpensive and easy for communities to implement. Although it can be difficult to measure the 
effectiveness of these programs, they can play a role in a community’s efforts to reduce drinking 
and driving. For an overview, see Decina, Foss, Tucker, Goodwin, and Sohn (2009) and NCHRP 
(2003, Strategy E1). 
 
Use: During the 1980s, 325 programs were in operation in 44 States and the District of Columbia 
(Harding, Apsler, & Goldfein, 1987). There is limited information on ride service programs 
currently in operation, although some data is available on the NHTSA Buzzed Driving Facebook 
page: www.facebook.com/buzzeddrivingisdrunkdriving. 
 
Effectiveness: Three studies have evaluated ride service programs. The first examined one year- 
round and one holiday program. Both functioned smoothly and delivered rides but neither 
demonstrated any effect on crashes (Molof et al., 1995). The second study examined a year- 
round program in Aspen, Colorado, and concluded that it reduced injury crashes in the 
surrounding county by 15% (Lacey, Jones, & Anderson, 2000). Finally, a program using older 
luxury vehicles in Wisconsin that provided rides to and from bars resulted in a 17% decline in 
alcohol-related crashes during the first year (Rothschild, Mastin, & Miller, 2006). The program 
became largely self-sustaining through fares and tavern contributions. These three programs and 
others are summarized in Decina et al. (2009). After reviewing select programs, Decina et al. 
(2009) concluded that a model alternative transportation program (i.e., one that reduces alcohol- 
related crashes) should be continually available, free to users, and convenient and easy to use. 
 
Costs: The major ride service program costs are for the rides that are provided. Short-term ride 
service programs can be operated largely with donated rides. Year-round programs need enough 
steady funding to accommodate demand (NCHRP, 2003, Strategy E1). 
 
Time to implement: Short-term ride service programs can be established and operated 
informally in a few weeks. Longer-term programs need to establish long-term strategies for 
funding and managing the program. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 54 
5.5 Designated Drivers 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Short 
 
Designated drivers are individuals who agree not to drink so they can drive their friends who 
have been drinking. Formal designated driver programs in drinking establishments provide 
incentives such as free soft drinks for people who agree to be designated drivers. Usually, 
though, designated driver arrangements are completely informal. 
 
The designated driver concept has been questioned on two grounds: (1) designated drivers may 
still drink, though perhaps less than the passengers; and (2) it may encourage passengers to drink 
to excess. In a national roadside survey, Fell, Voas, and Lange (1997) found self-identified 
designated drivers were more likely to have a positive BAC in comparison to all drivers on the 
road. Also, some designated drivers had very high BACs, especially those coming from bars. 
Apparently some groups of drinkers had selected the designated driver near the end of a night of 
drinking. To be effective, Voas and Lacey (2011) argue the designated driver must be chosen 
before the drinking begins, and must be willing to abstain (or substantially limit) his or her 
drinking. 
 
Use: The designated driver concept is widely understood and accepted. Surveys show that 
designated driver use is common. In NHTSA’s general population survey of 7,000 people, 44% 
said they had served as a designated driver during the past year, and 33% reported riding with a 
designated driver (Moulton et al., 2010). 
 
Effectiveness: Because designated drivers are informally determined and somewhat imprecisely 
defined, it’s no surprise there is little data on the impact of designated drivers on crashes. CDC’s 
systematic review found insufficient evidence to determine the effectiveness of designated driver 
programs (Ditter et al., 2005). A review from Australia concluded that designated driver 
programs can successfully increase awareness and use of designated drivers, but evidence for 
changes in alcohol-related crashes is inconclusive (Nielson & Watson, 2009). However, the 
authors note the lack of supporting evidence “does not necessarily mean that such programs 
should be discouraged. On the contrary, it highlights the need for them to be better implemented 
and evaluated” (Nielson & Watson, 2009, p.36).  
 
The “Skipper” designated driver program in Queensland, Australia is a good example of a 
partially successful program. The program provides free soft drinks to persons who agree to stay 
sober and serve as designated drivers. The program was pilot tested in 41 venues, and was 
heavily advertised through radio, earned media, and on-premise promotions. Self-report surveys 
showed awareness for the program was very high, and the proportion of respondents who 
reported acting as, or using, a designated driver increased after the program was implemented. 
However, roadside surveys found no change in the proportion of drivers who had been drinking, 
and there were no changes in alcohol-related crashes (Watson & Watson, 2014).  
 
Costs: The only costs associated with informal designated driver programs are for publicity. 
Designated drivers can be promoted independently or can be included with other impaired 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 55 
driving publicity. Establishments that operate formal designated driver programs have minimal 
costs for the drinks provided and for publicity. 
 
Time to implement: Designated driver promotion can be implemented in a few weeks and 
formal programs can be established equally quickly. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 56 
6. Underage Drinking and Drinking and Driving 
 
Teenagers drink and drive less often than adults, but they are more likely to crash when they do 
drink and drive (Williams, 2003). Teenagers are inexperienced with both driving and drinking. 
Consequently, they have a higher crash risk at all BAC levels than adult drivers (Mayhew et al., 
1986; Zador, Krawchuck, & Voas, 2000). Alcohol-related crashes among teenagers are typically 
associated with driving at nighttime, on weekends, and with passengers (Bingham, Shope, 
Parow, & Raghunathan, 2009). 
 
Many of the countermeasures described in previous sections of this chapter apply not only to 
adults, but to teenagers as well. However, there are some countermeasures to reduce drinking 
and alcohol-related crashes that are directed specifically to those under 21. 
 
Since 1988, minimum-drinking-age laws in all States prohibit youth under 21 from possessing 
alcohol. Most States also prohibit minors from purchasing and consuming alcohol beverages. 
These laws influence all youth impaired-driving strategies. For people 21 and older, drinking is 
legal but driving while impaired by alcohol is not. With a BAC limit of .08, drivers know they 
should not drive after drinking “too much,” but are faced with mixed messages at low levels of 
alcohol, because lower BAC’s are not illegal per se. The message for those under 21 is 
unambiguous: they should not be drinking at all, and certainly should not be driving after 
drinking. 
 
Zero-tolerance laws in all States reinforce this message by setting a maximum BAC limit of .02 
or less for drivers under 21. This effectively prohibits driving after drinking any amount of 
alcohol. Presently, zero-tolerance laws are not actively publicized or enforced by many States. In 
addition, compliance checks of alcohol vendors can reduce the availability of alcohol to those 
under 21, though again this strategy is not used as widely as it could be. There are many other 
policies and programs reinforcing the no-drinking message that are directed primarily at adults 
(beer keg registration, social host liability) or take place in schools or youth organizations 
(Students Against Destructive Decisions chapters, alcohol-free prom and graduation parties). 
Youth receive education and information about alcohol and alcohol-impaired driving in schools 
and colleges, through licensing agencies, and through media directed to youth. 
 
The minimum-drinking-age laws and the no-drinking message for youth mean that youth 
impaired-driving activities must work hand-in-hand with activities to control youth drinking. 
With the exception of zero-tolerance law enforcement and alcohol vendor compliance checks, 
many of the countermeasures discussed below require cooperative activities between traditional 
highway safety organizations, such as law enforcement and motor vehicle departments, and 
community, health, and educational organizations with a social agenda broader than traffic 
safety. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 57 
6.1 Minimum Legal Drinking Age 21 Laws 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Low 
 
The primary strategy to reduce underage drinking, as well as drinking and driving, has been 
restricting access to alcohol via minimum purchase age laws. Since July 1988, the minimum 
legal drinking age (MLDA) has been 21 in all States. There is strong evidence that MLDA-21 
laws reduce drinking, driving after drinking, and alcohol-related crashes and injuries among 
youth (Hingson et al., 2004; McCartt, Hellinga, & Kirley, 2010; Shults et al., 2001; Wagenaar & 
Toomey, 2002). In fact, MLDA-21 laws reduced youth drinking and driving more than youth 
drinking alone (using the measurements of self-reporting and testing of impaired drivers in fatal 
crashes). Drinking and driving has become less socially acceptable among youth, and more 
youth have separated their drinking from their driving (Hedlund et al., 2001). 
 
The specific laws implementing MLDA 21 for alcohol vendors, adults, and youth differ 
substantially from State to State. See the Alcohol Policy Information System (APIS) for State-
by-State summaries of some of the key provisions: 
http://alcoholpolicy.niaaa.nih.gov/State_Profiles_of_Underage_Drinking_Laws.html. 
 
Use: The minimum age to purchase alcohol is 21 in all 50 States and the District of Columbia. 
Surprisingly, in a 2008 survey of the general public conducted by NHTSA, only 71% of 
respondents believed there was a minimum legal drinking age in the United States. Of those who 
said there was a minimum legal drinking age, 86% correctly identified the legal drinking age as 
21 (Moulton et al., 2010). 
 
Effectiveness: Several reviews point to the effectiveness of MLDA-21 laws. Shults et al. (2001) 
identified 33 published studies examining the effects of changing the legal drinking age. Overall, 
changes to the MLDA affected alcohol-related crashes by 10% to 16%, with crashes decreasing 
when the MLDA was raised, and increasing when it was lowered. Wagenaar and Toomey (2002) 
reviewed 79 high-quality studies examining the relationship between the legal minimum 
drinking age and crashes. Of these studies, 58% found fewer crashes associated with a higher 
MLDA, whereas none found fewer crashes associated with a lower MLDA. These findings 
prompted McCartt, Hellinga, and Kirley (2010) to conclude: “The highway safety benefits of 
MLDA-21 have been proven, and the cause and effect relationship between MLDA and highway 
crashes is clear. Deaths go up when the drinking age is lowered, and they go down when it is 
raised” (p. 180). NHTSA estimates that MLDA-21 laws have saved 28,230 lives since 1975, and 
an estimated 550 lives in 2010 alone (NHTSA, 2012). 
 
Costs: There are no direct costs of MLDA-21 laws. Costs may be needed for enforcement of 
MLDA-21 laws. (See Chapter 1, Sections 6.2 and 6.3). 
 
Time to implement: MLDA-21 laws can be implemented as soon as appropriate legislation is 
enacted. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 58 
Other issues: 
• Repealing MLDA-21 laws: Between 2007 and 2010, 6 States introduced legislation 
allowing at least some people under 21 to purchase and consume certain types of alcoholic 
beverages (McCartt et al., 2010). To date, none of these bills have passed. Perhaps the most 
notable (and highly publicized) effort to lower the MLDA was a statement signed by 
approximately 120 college and university presidents in 2008 suggesting the MLDA be 
lowered to 18. This group questioned the validity of MLDA-21 research, and advocated for 
education in place of laws to reduce drinking among young people. Many organizations, 
including NHTSA, have opposed lowering the legal drinking age. There has been more 
research on the minimum legal drinking than perhaps any other alcohol-control policy 
(Wechsler & Nelson, 2010). Most traffic safety experts have concluded that MLDA-21 laws 
are effective, and they recommend strengthening enforcement of MLDA-21 laws and 
establishing policies to support them. For further discussion of this issue, see Wechsler and 
Nelson (2010) and McCartt, Hellinga, and Kirley (2010). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 59 
6.2 Zero-Tolerance Law Enforcement 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
 
Zero-tolerance laws set a maximum BAC of .02 or less for drivers under 21. Violators have their 
driver’s licenses suspended or revoked. There is strong evidence that zero-tolerance laws reduce 
alcohol-related crashes and injuries (Voas & Lacey, 2011; NCHRP, 2005, Strategy B3; Shults et 
al., 2001). Fell, Fisher, Voas, Blackman, and Tippetts (2009) estimate that zero-tolerance laws 
save 159 lives each year. 
 
However, zero-tolerance laws often are not actively enforced or publicized (Hedlund et al., 2001; 
Voas & Lacey, 2011). Studies have found that young drivers are not arrested in proportion to 
their involvement in alcohol-related crashes (Hingson, Assailly, & Williams, 2004). One 
exception is the State of Washington, where a study found that arrests for alcohol violations 
among 16- to 20-year-old drivers increased by about 50% after the zero-tolerance law went into 
effect (McCartt, Blackman, & Voas, 2007). Enforcement may be greater in Washington because 
the law allows officers to request a test for alcohol based on suspicion of either a DWI or zero-
tolerance offense. In other States where drivers can only be tested if DWI is suspected, zero-
tolerance laws may be more difficult to enforce. 
 
Use: Zero-tolerance laws have been in effect in all States since 1998. The degree to which zero-
tolerance laws are enforced in States is unknown. 
 
Effectiveness: An early study in Maryland found that alcohol-involved crashes for drivers under 
21 dropped by 21% in 6 counties after the zero-tolerance law was implemented. After the law 
was publicized extensively, these crashes dropped by an additional 30% (Blomberg, 1992). No 
other studies have examined the effect of increasing enforcement and publicity for an existing 
zero-tolerance law. Lacey, Jones, and Wiliszowski (2000) documented how zero-tolerance laws 
are administered and enforced in 4 States. Highly publicized enforcement has proven effective in 
increasing compliance with many traffic safety laws and reducing crashes and injuries: see for 
example sobriety checkpoints (Chapter 1, Section 2.1) and seat belt use mobilizations (Chapter 2, 
Section 2.1). 
 
Costs: Zero-tolerance laws can be enforced during regular patrols or during special patrols 
directed at times and areas when young impaired drivers may be present. Enforcement will 
require moderate costs for appropriate training, publicity, and perhaps equipment (see Other 
Issues). 
 
Time to implement: Enforcement programs can be implemented within 3 or 4 months, as soon 
as appropriate training, publicity, and equipment are in place. 
 
Other issues: 
• Zero-tolerance-law provisions: Zero-tolerance laws are far easier to enforce if the 
offense is an administrative rather than criminal violation, and if law enforcement 
officers can use PBTs (preliminary breath test devices) at the roadside to determine if the 
law has been violated and to seize the driver’s license if it has (Jones & Lacey, 2001). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 60 
Some State laws require the same probable cause as for a standard DWI arrest, or even 
require a full DWI arrest, before a BAC test for a zero-tolerance-law violation can be 
administered. In these States, the zero-tolerance law is not enforced independently of the 
standard DWI law, and in fact young drivers may not be aware of the zero-tolerance law 
(Hingson et al., 2004). 
• PBT and PAS: Preliminary breath test devices (PBTs) are important to effective and 
efficient enforcement in States that allow PBT use for zero-tolerance laws. A passive 
alcohol sensor (PAS) can help officers detect violators who have consumed alcohol. See 
Chapter 1, Sections 2.3 and 2.4. 
• Holding juveniles in custody: A complication of enforcing zero-tolerance laws is 
deciding how and where to hold young offenders once they are taken into custody. 
NHTSA helped produce an implementation guide for developing a juvenile holdover 
program (NHTSA, 2001). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 61 
6.3 Alcohol Vendor Compliance Checks 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $$ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
† Proven for reducing sales to underage people 
 
In all 50 States, alcohol venders are required to verify the age of young customers to be sure they 
are at least 21. However, several studies suggest young people can obtain alcohol without much 
difficulty. Across various studies, young buyers successfully purchased alcohol in 44% to 97% 
of attempts without showing identification (NCHRP, 2005, Strategy A3). To reduce the 
likelihood that alcohol vendors sell alcohol to underage people, law enforcement officers can 
conduct frequent compliance checks. In a compliance check or “sting,” law enforcement officers 
watch as underage people attempt to purchase alcohol and cite the server or vendor for an 
MLDA-21 violation if a sale is made. Vendors can include on-premise retailers (e.g., bars and 
restaurants) or off-premise outlets (e.g., convenience stores or liquor stores). 
 
An effective compliance check program works primarily through deterrence. The goal is to 
increase the perception among vendors they will be caught if they sell alcohol to underage 
people. To maximize deterrence, compliance checks should: 
• Be conducted frequently and on an unscheduled basis. Vendors should know that 
compliance checks are taking place, but should not know exactly when they will occur. 
• Be conducted at all vendors, not just a sample of vendors in the community. One study 
showed the benefits of compliance checks did not generalize to vendors who were not 
checked (Wagenaar, Toomey, & Erickson, 2005). 
• Be well-publicized among vendors and the community at large. This will discourage 
young people from trying to obtain alcohol, and encourage vendors to put policies and 
procedures in place that prevent the sale of alcohol to underage customers. 
• Be sustained over time. The effects of compliance checks decay over a few months, so an 
ongoing program is needed to maintain deterrence (Wagenaar et al., 2005). 
 
A good resource on how to conduct compliance checks is the Alcohol Epidemiology Program’s 
Alcohol Compliance Checks: A Procedures Manual for Enforcing Alcohol Age-of-Sale Laws, 
available at www.aep.umn.edu/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/comp_check_maunal_-
updated_2013.docx. 
 
Use: Although many jurisdictions conduct compliance checks of alcohol retailers at least 
occasionally, few jurisdictions do so frequently. 
 
Effectiveness: Several studies document that well-publicized and vigorous compliance checks 
reduce alcohol sales to youth; for example, a review of 8 high quality studies found that 
compliance checks reduced sales to underage people by an average of 42% (Elder et al., 2007). 
The effect of compliance checks on motor vehicle crashes has not been studied. 
 
Costs: Compliance checks require time from law enforcement or alcohol beverage control staff. 
These costs can be supported, in part, though alcohol license fees or fines collected from non- 
compliant vendors. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 62 
Time to implement: Compliance checks can be implemented within three months if officers are 
trained in proper procedures. 
 
Other issues: 
• Penalties for violations: To increase the likelihood that penalties will be quickly and 
consistently enforced, all penalties for violations should be administrative in nature 
(NCHRP, 2005, Strategy A3). Also, the penalties must be substantial enough to deter 
alcohol vendors from selling to underage people. Some States employ graduated penalties 
for vendors who fail compliance checks, where both fines and suspension periods 
increase with each violation (NCHRP, 2005, Strategy A3). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 63 
6.4 Other Minimum Legal Drinking Age 21 Law Enforcement 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Varies 
Time: Varies 
 
MLDA-21 law enforcement is very limited in many communities (Hedlund et al., 2001). 
Enforcement can take several forms, as summarized by Stewart (1999): 
• Actions directed at alcohol vendors: compliance checks to verify that vendors will not 
sell to youth (see Chapter 1, Section 6.3). 
• Actions directed at youth: “use and lose” laws that confiscate the driver’s license of an 
underage drinker, “Cops in Shops” directed at underage alcohol purchasers, law 
enforcement “party patrols” using party dispersal techniques, and penalties for using false 
identification. 
• Actions directed at adults: beer keg registration laws, enforcement of laws prohibiting 
purchasing alcohol for youth, shoulder tap operations, and programs to limit parties 
where parents provide alcohol to youth. 
 
While these enforcement strategies have been used frequently, few have been evaluated. Several 
strategies are briefly described below, along with any supporting research evidence. 
 
“Use and lose” laws: These laws allow confiscation of the driver’s license or postpone licensure 
for a period of time for youth who violate a State’s MLDA-21 law. Ulmer et al. (2001) 
investigated “use and lose” law implementation and effects in Pennsylvania. License suspensions 
for violations of MLDA-21 appeared to reduce subsequent traffic violations and crashes. In a 
national study, Fell et al. (2009) found “use and lose” laws were associated with a 5% decrease 
in fatal crashes among underage drivers. The study estimated that 165 lives would be saved each 
year if all States had these laws. “Use and lose” laws can be implemented quickly and 
inexpensively once enacted. To be effective, they should be publicized extensively. As of 2013, 
30 States and the District of Columbia had “use and lose” laws and another 10 States had “use 
and lose” authority that may be applied in varying circumstances (Alcohol Policy Information 
System, 2014a). 
 
Keg registration laws: These laws link beer keg purchasers to an identification number on the 
keg, which provides a method of identifying adults who supply beer to parties attended by youth. 
As of 2013, 30 States and the District of Columbia had mandatory keg registration laws (Alcohol 
Epidemiology Program, 2000). In the only study on the effectiveness of these laws, keg 
registration was shown to be associated with reduced traffic fatality rates in 97 U.S. communities 
(Cohen, Mason, & Scribner, 2001). However, the authors could not conclude that keg 
registration caused the lower fatality rates. 
 
Media campaigns: Ohio has conducted a statewide media campaign, Parents Who Host Lose 
the Most, since 2000. The campaign informs parents and youth about Ohio’s underage drinking 
laws and attempts to discourage parents from providing alcohol to underage drinkers at parties. 
Telephone surveys in 2006 showed that about 55% of parents and youth had heard messages 
about underage drinking (Applied Research Center, 2008). About two-thirds of those who had 
heard a message said that it prompted a conversation between parents and their teenagers about 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 64 
drinking. In comparison with surveys conducted in 2001, there was a 42% decrease among youth 
who reported knowing of parents who host parties where alcohol is served to teens. 
 
Underage Drinking Tipline: In 2006, Kansas launched a statewide underage drinking tipline: 
866-MustB21. The toll-free tipline operates 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, for citizens to report 
parties involving underage drinking, plans to purchase alcohol for underage people, and 
willingness of retailers to sell alcohol to underage people. The effect of the tipline has not been 
evaluated. Nebraska introduced a statewide underage drinking tipline in 2009, using the same 
phone number as Kansas. 
 
Social Host Liability: Under social host laws, adults who host underage drinking parties 
(specific laws), or who allow underage drinking to occur on their property (general laws), can be 
held accountable if the young person is subsequently involved in a crash. This liability might 
discourage adults (parents, older siblings, and friends) from purchasing alcohol for underage 
people or hosting an underage party. Conducting source investigations, in which law 
enforcement teams identify the providers of the alcohol, can be resource intensive and time 
consuming (Curtis & Ramirez, 2011). Moreover, the few research studies that have examined the 
effect of social host liability laws have obtained conflicting findings (Voas & Lacey, 2011). 
Nonetheless, comprehensive and well-publicized efforts to hold providers accountable appear to 
be promising. Social host laws, and their accompanying penalties, vary from State to State. A 
description of each State’s social host laws may be found in NHTSA’s Digest of Impaired 
Driving and Selected Beverage Control Laws (NHTSA, 2015). Another good resource is 
available from the Alcohol Policy Information System (2014b).  
 
Comprehensive community programs: Several comprehensive community initiatives have 
reduced youth drinking and alcohol-related problems (Hingson et al., 2004; Shults et al., 2009). 
These initiatives typically bring together several community government departments, such as 
schools, health, and law enforcement, with alcohol sellers, parents, youth, and citizen 
organizations. They may include school-based programs, law enforcement, media, and other 
intervention strategies. They require strong leadership and organization. They may take many 
months to plan and implement. Costs depend on the activities included. One example is a 
campaign conducted in Huntington, West Virginia, that included checkpoints to look for 
violations of the MLDA-21 law, checks of alcohol outlets to reduce sales to minors, and 
publicity for program activities. Roadside surveys conducted before and during the program 
showed a 93% drop in 16- to 20-year-old drivers having BACs greater than .05 g/dL (IIHS, 
2008). Another promising program is Oregon’s Reducing Youth Access to Alcohol. The program 
involves community mobilization including “reward and reminder” visits (where vendors receive 
rewards if they decline to sell alcohol to a minor), regular compliance checks, enforcement of 
minor in possession laws, and media advocacy. The program has been effective in reducing the 
sale of alcohol to minors: successful purchase attempts by minors dropped from 24% before the 
program to 5% afterwards. Additionally, the individual communities with the strongest programs 
also experienced reductions in underage drinking (Flewelling et al., 2013). NHTSA has produced 
a guide on how communities can prevent underage drinking, available at: 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/alcohol/Community%20Guides%20HTML/Guides_index.html. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 65 
6.5 Youth Programs 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
 
States and communities have conducted extensive youth drinking-and-driving-prevention 
programs over the past 25 years. These programs seek to motivate youth not to drink, not to 
drink and drive, and not to ride with a driver who has been drinking. Although some programs 
use scare tactics, many employ positive messages and methods: providing positive role models 
that discourage alcohol use, promoting positive norms that do not involve alcohol, and 
encouraging youth activities that do not involve or lead to alcohol use. 
 
The best-known youth program is associated with SADD, founded in 1981 as Students Against 
Driving Drunk, then renamed Students Against Destructive Decisions. SADD currently has 
nearly 10,000 chapters in the United States, with approximately 350,000 active student members 
(SADD, 2014). Some States conduct similar activities under different names, such as Students 
Taking a New Direction (STAND) in Colorado and Stopping Automobile Fatalities Through 
Youth Efforts (SAFTYE) in Washington State. One specific activity, operated either by a youth 
program or independently, is Project Graduation, which provides alcohol-free prom and 
graduation parties for high school students. See Hedlund et al. (2001) for brief examples of State 
programs. 
 
A more recent type of approach focuses on “social norms” or “normative feedback.” Social 
norms programs are based on studies showing that students often overestimate alcohol use 
among their peers. By providing students with accurate information about drinking, social norms 
programs reduce the pressure that light- or non-drinkers feel to drink, and help heavier drinkers 
realize their drinking is atypical (Perkins, 2002, 2003). Although many social norms programs 
focus on alcohol or other substance use, a few have addressed drinking and driving. Examples of 
social norms programs can be found at the National Social Norms Institute 
(www.socialnorms.org). 
 
Use: Youth programs of some type are conducted in most, if not all, States. 
 
Effectiveness: CDC’s systematic review found there was insufficient evidence to determine the 
effectiveness of youth programs (Elder et al., 2005). Two studies have attempted to evaluate 
SADD’s activities and effects. One study, in two schools, found that neither school implemented 
the model SADD program well and found no evidence of effects on any drinking and driving 
measure. The second study, in 6 schools, found that SADD activities affected drinking and 
driving attitudes as well as self-reported drinking and driving (Hedlund et al., 2001). 
 
One study has examined the long-term effects of a social norms program on drinking and 
driving. Breath samples were taken from students at a large public university as they returned 
home late at night. Following the social norms program, there was a marginally significant 
decrease in drivers who registered a positive BAC, from 15.3% to 10.8%. Among drivers who 
had been drinking, self-reported number of drinks consumed and measured BACs decreased, as 
did the number of drinking-drivers who reported having five or more drinks at one sitting on the 
night of the survey (Goodwin, 2004). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 66 
 
Costs: Youth program costs can vary substantially depending on the size and nature of the 
individual activities. States have spent substantial funds, both Federal and non-Federal, on youth 
drinking-and-driving programs. These funds have been used for a variety of youth education, 
enforcement, and program activities. 
 
Time to implement: With model programs available and organizations such as SADD and 
MADD available for assistance, youth programs can be started easily in 6 months. 
 
Other Issues: 
• Other programs aimed at youths: There are a wide variety of programs that are 
directed at youths. To increase the perceived risks of drinking and driving, many schools 
have employed fatal vision goggles, peer-to-peer programs, role plays, or drunk-driving 
crash reenactments (e.g., “Every 15 Minutes”). Although popular, the vast majority of 
these programs have not been evaluated. The few existing studies suggest these types of 
programs may produce changes in knowledge or attitudes, but have little or no effect on 
behaviors (Hover, Hover, & Young, 2000; Jewell & Hupp, 2005). Broader community-
based programs have had much greater success at reducing drinking and driving among 
youth than standard education programs (see Chapter 1, Section 6.4). 
• Mandatory education for young offenders: Young people who violate zero-tolerance 
or MLDA-21 laws are often required to attend an alcohol or traffic safety education 
program. Unfortunately, these programs often fail to produce positive outcomes. For 
example, Rhode Island’s Reducing Youthful Dangerous Driving program was mandated 
for youths 16 to 20 years old who received driving citations or who had substance-related 
offenses. The 20 hour program consisted of 4 group sessions and 2 emergency 
department visits. Twelve months following the program, there was no difference 
between program participants and a comparison group in terms of high-risk driving 
behaviors and traffic citation recidivism (Baird, Nirenberg, Longabaugh, & Mello, 2013).  
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 67 
7. Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
The impairing effects of alcohol and the dangers of drinking and driving are well-documented. 
By contrast, there is considerably less research investigating the potentially impairing effects of 
drugs on drivers. Berning and Smither (2014), Compton, Vegega, and Smither (2009) and 
Stewart (2006) summarize some of the challenges in studying, measuring, and creating 
countermeasures to address drug-impaired driving: 
• There is a wide range of drugs, both licit and illicit, that can potentially impair driving. 
Moreover, the list of drugs in common usage is constantly changing. 
• Although the relationship between BAC and driving impairment is clear and well- 
documented, the relationship between blood levels of drugs and driving impairment has 
not been established for drugs other than alcohol. 
• Alcohol can be measured reliably through breath tests, but other types of drugs can only 
be measured through more intrusive tests of bodily fluids such as blood, urine, or saliva. 
• Alcohol leaves the body in a predictable pattern, whereas other drugs are eliminated at 
many rates; hence, timing is critical when conducting a drug test. In addition, blood 
levels of certain drugs can accumulate with repeated administrations, and can be detected 
well after impairment has ceased. 
• It is not unusual for drivers to take more than one impairing drug at the same time or to 
combine drugs with alcohol. Although individual drugs, taken at normal doses, may not 
impair driving, drug effects may be synergistic when taken together and substantially 
increase the risk of a crash. 
 
Despite these challenges, a growing body of research suggests that many illicit, prescription, and 
over-the-counter drugs may impair a driver’s ability to operate a vehicle (for reviews, see Couper 
& Logan, 2004; Jones, Shinar, & Walsh, 2003; and Kelly, Darke, & Ross, 2004). Much of this 
research has involved laboratory or experimental studies using driving simulators, although some 
epidemiological studies have examined the effect of drugs on crash prevalence and risk. See 
Compton et al. (2009) for a discussion of this research. 
 
In most cases, the research investigating the effect of drugs on driving has had variable results, in 
large part depending on the type of methodology employed. The crash risk associated with 
specific types of drugs is summarized below.  
• Benzodiazepines: Common benzodiazepines include Valium, Xanax, and Klonopin. 
Several studies suggest benzodiazepine users are at increased risk of being involved in a 
crash (Movig et al., 2004; Rapoport et al., 2009), although some studies have not found 
these results. The risk appears to depend on the type of benzodiazepine used, the dose, 
the time since last use, and whether the drug was combined with alcohol (Dassanayake, 
Michie, Carter, & Jones, 2011; Leung, 2011).  
• Marijuana: The findings for marijuana also have been mixed, although a recent meta-
analysis of epidemiological data concluded marijuana doubles the risk of a property 
damage or fatal crash (Asbridge, Hayden, & Cartwright, 2012). However, another study 
found only a 50% increase in the risk of property damage crashes, and no increase in the 
risk of fatal or injury crashes (Elvik, 2013). Generally, the risk appears highest when 
marijuana has been used recently, and especially when marijuana is combined with 
alcohol (Beirness & Simpson, 2006; Sewell, Poling, & Sofuoglu, 2009).  
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 68 
• Stimulants: There have been fewer studies examining the risks of stimulants such as 
amphetamines and cocaine on driving. The available studies suggest stimulants are 
strongly associated with fatal crashes (Elvik, 2013). 
• Narcotics: Several studies have showed that narcotic drugs such as morphine, heroin, 
and opiates increase crash risk. One case-control study found a three times higher risk of 
a fatal crash when a driver is under the influence of a narcotic (Li et al., 2013). However, 
this study used FARS data which has a number of limitations with respect to the 
interpretation, reporting, and testing of drug impairment in fatal crashes (Berning & 
Smither, 2014). 
• Antihistamines: The relationship between antihistamines and motor vehicle crashes is 
ambiguous (Moskowitz & Wilkinson, 2004). A small connection has been found between 
first-generation antihistamines and crashes, but second-generation antihistamines appear 
to cause less sedation.  
• Antidepressants: Second generation antidepressant medications such as selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) do not seem to impair driving performance, but this 
is not necessarily the case with older types of antidepressants (Brunnauer & Laux, 2013). 
 
Compton et al. (2009) describe four basic issues that must be addressed to better understand the 
extent of the problem of drug-impaired driving: 
• What drugs impair driving ability? 
• What drug dose levels are associated with impaired driving? 
• How frequently are impairing drugs being used by drivers? 
• What drugs are associated with higher crash rates? 
 
In sum, there are still sizeable gaps in our understanding of the effects of drugs on driving. In 
their review of drug-impaired driving, Jones et al. (2003) concluded: “The role of drugs as a 
causal factor in traffic crashes involving drug-positive drivers is still not understood … . Current 
research does not enable one to predict with confidence whether a driver testing positive for a 
drug, even at some measured level of concentration, was actually impaired by that drug at the 
time of crash” (p. 96). Perhaps the one consistent finding across studies is the risk of driver 
impairment increases substantially when drugs are combined with alcohol. 
 
Similar to alcohol-impaired driving, drug-impaired driving is primarily addressed through a 
combination of laws, enforcement, and education. Relatively few countermeasures have been 
developed to address drug-impaired driving, and there has been little evaluation of drug-
impaired-driving countermeasures. Much more research is needed to better understand the nature 
and degree of traffic safety risk posed by drugs, as well as the effectiveness of potential 
countermeasures to address this issue. See the guide on drug-impaired driving produced by the 
Center for Problem-Oriented Policing for more information about drug-impaired driving 
countermeasures (CPOP, 2012). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 69 
7.1 Enforcement of Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
 
Enforcement of drug-impaired driving laws can be difficult. Typically, drug-impaired driving is 
only investigated when a driver is obviously impaired but the driver's BAC is low. If drivers 
have BACs over the illegal limit, many officers and prosecutors do not probe for drugs as in 
many States drug-impaired driving carries no additional penalties. 
 
Although several devices are available that allow officers to screen suspects for illegal drug use 
at point-of-contact, none have been proven to be accurate and reliable (Compton et al., 2009). 
Many law enforcement agencies employ drug recognition experts (DREs) to assist in 
investigating potential drug-impaired driving cases. (NHTSA recommends that DREs participate 
in HVE activities and checkpoints, and respond to serious and fatal crashes.) DREs use a 
standardized procedure to observe a suspect’s appearance, behavior, vital signs, and performance 
on psychophysical and physiological tests to determine whether and what type of drug or drug 
category may have been used. If drug intoxication is suspected, a blood or urine sample is 
collected and submitted to a laboratory for confirmation. 
 
Use: As of August 2014, all 50 States and the District of Columbia had Drug Evaluation and 
Classification (DEC) programs, which are designed to train officers to become DREs (GHSA, 
2015c). These programs have prepared approximately 1,500 instructors and trained more than 
7,000 officers (National Sobriety Testing Resource Center, 2014). During 2013, there were 
26,100 drug evaluations conducted by DREs (National Sobriety Testing Resource Center, 2014). 
This is equivalent to less than 4 evaluations per DRE. This suggests drug-impaired driving 
arrests are not as common in comparison to arrests for alcohol- impaired driving. However, it 
should be noted that the number of drug-impaired driving arrests cannot be known as many 
States only record “impaired driving” arrests, and do not separate alcohol from drug arrests. 
Additionally, many arrests are a combination of drugs and alcohol. 
 
Effectiveness: Several studies have shown DRE judgments of drug impairment are corroborated 
by toxicological analysis in 85% or more of cases (NHTSA, 1996). However, one experimental 
laboratory study found DREs' ability to distinguish between impaired and non-impaired 
individuals was moderate to poor for several types of drugs including marijuana, codeine, and 
amphetamines (Shinar, Schechtman, & Compton, 2000). This study showed DREs tended to rely 
on just one or two “pivotal” cues to identify specific drug impairment. To date, there have been 
no studies examining the effectiveness of enforcement in reducing drug-impaired driving or 
crashes. 
 
Costs: As with other enforcement strategies, the primary costs are for law enforcement time and 
training. The time to conduct a DRE evaluation can be 2 to 3 hours. Training includes 72 hours 
of classroom instruction and approximately 50 hours of field work. 
 
Time to implement: Drug-impaired driving enforcement can be integrated into other 
enforcement activities within three months; however, time will be needed to train DREs in 
detecting drug impairment. DRE training consists of 9 days of classroom instruction, and DRE 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 70 
candidates are also required to perform a number of supervised field evaluations in order to 
become certified (Compton et al., 2009). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 71 
7.2 Drug-Impaired Driving Laws 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Unknown 
Use: Medium† 
Time: Short 
†Use for drug per se laws 
 
Although most States have laws that prohibit the use of impairing drugs by drivers, there is a 
great deal of variability in how States approach this issue. In some States, impairment-based 
statutes stipulate that prosecution must prove the driver was impaired (for example, by driving 
recklessly or erratically). Other States have per se laws in which it is illegal to operate a motor 
vehicle if there is any detectable level of a prohibited drug in a driver’s system. Hence, a positive 
drug test is sufficient for conviction. This is equivalent to “zero tolerance.” 
 
Lacey, Brainard, and Snitow (2010) conducted interviews with law enforcement officers, 
prosecutors, and other traffic safety professionals in States with per se laws. Most were 
supportive of such laws. Although they did not believe per se laws made enforcement easier, 
they reported these laws had a positive effect on the prosecution and conviction of drug-impaired 
drivers. Moreover, discussions with officers and prosecutors in States without per se laws also 
revealed relatively high conviction rates, with few cases reaching trial (Lacey, Brainard, & 
Snitow, 2010). 
 
NHTSA’s Report to Congress includes a model drug-impaired driving law (Compton et al., 
2009). Because the relationship between blood levels of drugs and driving impairment has not 
been established for drugs other than alcohol, the model law does not include a per se provision. 
However, NHTSA recommends States include enhanced penalties for drivers who are under the 
influence of multiple drugs (including alcohol). In addition, NHTSA recommends State statutes 
provide separate and distinct sanctions for alcohol- and drug-impaired driving (Compton et al., 
2009). 
 
For a detailed discussion of issues related to drug-impaired driving laws, see DuPont et al. 
(2012). The authors make a number of recommendations including improvement of drug testing 
technology, enactment of laws requiring drug testing of all drivers in injury crashes, and adding 
drug use to underage zero-tolerance laws. See also Reisfeld, Goldberger, Gold, and DuPont 
(2012) for arguments in favor of per se laws for drug-impaired driving and a discussion of the 
challenges of establishing impaired drug thresholds equivalent to a .08 g/dL BAC. Finally, see 
NHTSA (2007c) for recommendations to improve the prosecution of drug-impaired driving 
cases. 
 
Use: As of May 2015, 19 States had per se laws that forbid the presence of any prohibited drug 
while a driver is in control of a vehicle (GHSA, 2015c). In addition, Oklahoma passed an 
additional per se law provision in 2013 allowing a driver to be charged with impaired driving if 
any amount of Schedule I chemical or controlled substance or their metabolites or analogs is 
found in the driver’s blood, saliva, urine, or other bodily fluids within two hours of arrest 
(NCSL, 2014a). In addition, 2 States (North Carolina and South Dakota) have per se laws that 
apply only to those younger than 21, and 5 States (California, Colorado, Idaho, Kansas, and West 
Virginia) have made it illegal for a drug addict or habitual drug user to drive a vehicle (Lacey, 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 72 
Brainard, & Snitow, 2010). More information about the drug-impaired driving laws in each State 
can be found in Lacey et al. (2010), NCSL (2014a), and Walsh (2009). 
 
Effectiveness: Lacey et al. (2010) tried to determine whether drug per se laws increased drug-
impaired driving arrests and convictions. However, they were hampered by the fact that States do 
not record drug-impaired offenses separately from alcohol-impaired offenses. To date, there have 
been no evaluations of the effect of drug-impaired driving laws on the prevalence of drug-
impaired driving or crashes. 
 
Costs: The costs of drug-impaired driving laws will depend on the number of offenders detected 
and the penalties applied to them. 
 
Time to implement: Drug-impaired driving laws can be implemented as soon as appropriate 
legislation is enacted, although time will be needed to train law enforcement officers, 
prosecutors, and judges about the new legislation and to inform the general public. 
 
Other issues: 
• Per se laws and prescription medications: Some States with per se laws for drug-
impaired driving exclude prescription medications from the list of prohibited drugs. 
Others require the driver to provide a valid prescription to avoid being charged or 
convicted for drug-impaired driving. Using a medication as prescribed, however, can lead 
to impairments in driving ability. For that reason, it is important that warning labels 
include information about the risks of using medications while driving. Also, physicians 
and pharmacists should counsel patients about driving risks, as appropriate. See Chapter 
1, Section 7.3 for more information about patient education regarding medications. See 
also Voas, DuPont, Shea, and Talpins (2012) for a discussion of issues related to per se 
laws and prescription medications. 
• Drug testing of fatally injured drivers: Driver drug use is not reported in all fatal 
crashes. Moreover, laboratories are inconsistent with drugs they test, results they report, 
and the thresholds for determining a positive test result. To better understand and track 
the drug-impaired driving problem in the United States, improved data and data 
collection on drug-impaired drivers is needed. Logan et al. (2013) describe minimum 
recommendations for toxicological investigation of fatal motor vehicle crashes. 
• Public support: There is strong approval among the general public for laws that prohibit 
drug-impaired driving. A 2013 survey by the AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety found 
that 80% of drivers support per se laws for marijuana (AAA Foundation, 2014). 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 73 
7.3 Education Regarding Medications 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Unknown 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Long 
 
Some medications prescribed by a doctor can pose a risk for drivers. It is important that 
physicians, pharmacists, and patients receive information about the potential risk of motor 
vehicle crashes associated with certain medications. Perhaps the simplest way to achieve this 
would be through clear warning labels on packages. The European Union has developed a 
warning label system as part of the DRUID program (Driving Under the Influence of Drugs, 
Alcohol and Medicines). The system has four categories: 
• 0. No warning. 
• I. Be careful: Read the patient leaflet carefully before driving. 
• II. Be very careful: Seek advice from a physician or pharmacist before driving. 
• III. Danger – Do not drive: Seek medical advice before driving again. 
Entire classes of drugs may be classified in a particular category. For example, all hypnotic drugs 
are classified as category III. The system also includes a pictogram on the medication packaging 
warning the patient not to drive when taking the medication. Any labeling scheme in the United 
States would need to be systematic. Presently, labeling is inconsistent and dependent on the 
individual pharmacy/pharmacist. 
 
The International Council on Alcohol, Drugs, and Traffic Safety has developed a categorization 
system for medicinal drugs that can affect driving performance (ICADTS, 2007). The list was 
intended for physicians and pharmacists so they could better identify medications that could 
impair driving skills and look for safer alternatives when possible. In 2008 and 2009, NHTSA 
convened an expert panel to develop a list of medications (or classes of medications) that may be 
“safe” for driving; however, the panel found inadequate information about specific medications 
to develop such a list (Kay & Logan, 2011). 
 
The effects of medications on driving are a particular concern with older drivers. Nearly 70% of 
people 55 and older use at least one prescription medication that could potentially impair driving 
(MacLennan, Owsley, Rue, & McGwin, 2009). In addition, research shows that older drivers 
taking three or more impairing medications are 87% more likely to be involved in a crash 
(LeRoy & Morse, 2008). 
 
For reviews on medications and road safety, see de Gier (2006) and Vandrevala, Helman, 
Turner, and Stone (2010). 
 
Use and Effectiveness: There is little information available on how frequently this 
countermeasure is used in the United States, or how effective it has been in raising awareness, 
increasing knowledge, or changing behavior. NHTSA has worked with Walgreens, the country's 
largest drugstore chain, to develop a curriculum for pharmacists on medication-impaired driving. 
The curriculum includes modules that cover potentially driver-impairing prescription drugs, laws 
relating to medication use and DUI, and the role of pharmacists in counseling patients regarding 
medications and driving risk. A pilot test with 640 pharmacists showed the curriculum was 
effective in increasing pharmacists’ knowledge of medication-related impaired driving (Lococo 
& Tyree, 2007). 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 74 
 
Legrand, Boets, Meesman, and Verstraete (2012) tested several methods of training and 
administering the DRUID system with pharmacists in Belgium. Following training, more 
pharmacists reported being aware of the effects of medications on driving, and more pharmacists 
talked with their patients about driving-related risks. The results were strongest among 
pharmacists who had the DRUID system integrated into their existing computer software for 
dispensing medications.  
 
Studies with patients have been less encouraging. Smyth, Sheehan, and Siskind (2013) 
conducted interviews with patients who were using medications that could influence their 
driving. Half (49%) did not recall seeing the warning label on the medication. Instead, there was 
a high level of confidence among patients that they could determine themselves whether it was 
safe to drive. Monteiro, Huiskes, Van Dijk, Van Weert, & De Gier (2013) investigated the 
effectiveness of pictograms in communicating the degree of driving risk associated with certain 
medications. It was apparent that many patients failed to fully understand what was being 
conveyed by pictograms, and often misjudged how risky it would be to drive while taking the 
medication.  
 
Costs: Targeted education to physicians and pharmacists (through drug categorization systems) 
and to drivers (through warning labels) would be needed. The former would likely be the most 
costly. 
 
Time to implement: Targeted communications could require a year or more to plan, produce, 
and distribute. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 75 
Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving References 
 
AAA Foundation. (2014). 2013 Traffic Safety Culture Index. Retrieved from 
www.aaafoundation.org/sites/default/files/TSCI%202013%20Final%20FTS%20Format.pdf 
 
Advocates for Highway & Auto Safety. (2014). 2014 roadmap of state highway safety laws. 
Retrieved from http://saferoads.org/files/2014_roadmap_report.pdf 
 
Alcohol Epidemiology Program. (2000). Alcohol policies in the United States: Highlights from 
the 50 States. Minneapolis, MI: University of Minnesota, School of Public Health. Retrieved 
from 
www.impacteen.org/generalarea_PDFs/Alcohol%20Policies%20in%20the%20United%20States.
PDF 
 
Alcohol Policy Information System. (2014a). Underage drinking: Use/lose: Driving privileges. 
Retrieved from 
http://alcoholpolicy.niaaa.nih.gov/Loss_of_Driving_Privileges_for_Alcohol_Violations_by_Min
ors_Use_Lose_Laws.html 
 
Alcohol Policy Information System. (2014a). Underage drinking: Prohibitions against hosting 
underage drinking parties. Retrieved from 
http://alcoholpolicy.niaaa.nih.gov/Prohibitions_Against_Hosting_Underage_Drinking_Parties.ht
ml 
 
American College of Emergency Physicians. (2006). Alcohol screening and brief intervention in 
the ED. Retrieved from www.acep.org/practres.aspx?id=34358 
 
Applied Research Center. (2008). Executive summary of “Parents Who Host, Lose the Most: 
Don’t Be a Party to Teenage Drinking” campaign survey. Middletown, OH: Applied Research 
Center, Miami University Middletown. Retrieved from 
www.drugfreeactionalliance.org/files/PWHExecSummary2006.pdf 
 
Asbridge, M., Hayden, J. A., & Cartwright, J. L. (2012). Acute cannabis consumption and motor 
vehicle collision risk: Systematic review of observational studies and meta-analysis. BMJ: 
British Medical Journal, 344:e536, doi: 10.1136/bmj.e536. 
 
Baird, J., Nirenberg, T. D., Longabaugh, R., & Mello, M. J. (2013). The effect of group-adapted 
motivational interviewing on traffic convictions and driving behaviors of court-adjudicated 
youth. Traffic Injury Prevention, 14, 572-577. 
 
Beirness, D. J., & Beasley, E. E. (2010). A roadside survey on alcohol and drug use among 
drivers in British Columbia. Traffic Injury Prevention, 11, 215-221. 
 
Beirness, D. J., & Beasley, E. E. (2014). An evaluation of immediate roadside prohibitions for 
drinking drivers in British Columbia: Findings from roadside surveys. Traffic Injury Prevention, 
15, 288-233. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 76 
 
Beirness, D. J., Clayton, A., & Vanlaar, W. (2008). An investigation of the usefulness, the 
acceptability and impact on lifestyle of alcohol ignition interlocks in drink-driving offenders 
(Report No. 88). Retrieved from the UK Department of Transport website: 
www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roadsafety/research/rsrr/theme3/investigation.pdf 
 
Beirness, D. J., & Robertson, R. D. (2005). Alcohol interlock programs: Enhancing acceptance, 
participation and compliance. Retrieved from the Traffic Injury Research Foundation website: 
www.tirf.ca/publications/PDF_publications/Hilton_Head_Proceedings.pdf 
 
Beirness, D. J., & Simpson, H. M. (2006). Role of cannabis and benzodiazepines in motor 
vehicle crashes. In Drugs and traffic: A symposium. Transportation Research Circular, Number 
E-C096, pp. 12-21. Retrieved from the Transportation Research Board website: 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/circulars/ec096.pdf 
 
Bergen, G., Pitan, A., Qu, S., Shults, R. A., Chattopadhyay, S. K., Elder, R. W., … Calvert, W. 
B. (2014). Publicized sobriety checkpoint programs: A community guide systematic review. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 46(5)¸ 529-539. 
 
Berning, A., Compton, R., Vegega, M., Beirness, D., Hedlund, J., Jones, R., & Nichols, J. 
(2008). Refusal of intoxication testing: A report to Congress (Report No. DOT HS 811 098). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/81 
1098.pdf 
 
Berning, A., & Smither, D. D. (2014). Understanding the limitations of drug test information, 
reporting, and testing practices in fatal crashes (Report No. DOT HS 812 072). Retrieved from 
the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/812072-UnderstandLimitsDrugTest-
ResearchNote.pdf  
 
Bingham, C. R., Shope, J. T., Parow, J. E., & Raghunathan, T. E. (2009). Crash types: Markers 
of increased risk of alcohol-involved crashes among teen drivers. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 
and Drugs, 70, 528-535. 
 
Blomberg, R. D. (1992). Lower BAC limits for youth: Evaluation of the Maryland .02 law 
(Report No. DOT HS 807 859). Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports 
Library website: http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25800/25857/DOT-HS-807-859.pdf 
 
Brunnauer, A., & Laux, G. (2013). The effects of most commonly prescribed second generation 
antidepressants on driving ability: A systematic review. Journal of Neural Transmission, 120, 
225-232. 
 
Brunson, W., & Knighten, P. (Eds.). (2005). Strategies for addressing the DWI offender: 10 
promising sentencing practices (Report No. DOT HS 809 850). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/enforce/PromisingSentence/images/10Promising.pdf 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 77 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2011). Vital signs: Alcohol-impaired driving 
among adults—United States, 2010. MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 60, 1351–
1356. Retrieved from 
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6039a4.htm?scid=mm6039a4 w 
 
CDC. (2012). Vital signs: Drinking and driving among high school students aged >= 16 years – 
United States, 1991-2011. MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 61, 796–800. 
Retrieved from www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6139a5.htm?s_cid=mm6139a5_w 
 
CDC. (2014). Summary health statistics for U.S. adults: National Health Interview Survey, 2012. 
Retrieved from www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_10/sr10_260.pdf 
 
The Century Council. (2008). Hardcore drunk driving: A sourcebook of promising strategies, 
laws & programs. Retrieved from www.centurycouncil.org/drunk-driving/hardcore-drunk-
driving-sourcebook 
 
Chang, I., Gregory, C., & Lapham, S. C. (2002). Review of screening instruments and 
procedures for evaluating DWI (Driving while intoxicated/impaired) offenders. Retrieved from 
 
Cohen, D. A., Mason, K., & Scribner, R. A. (2001). The population consumption model, alcohol 
control practices, and alcohol-related traffic fatalities. Preventive Medicine, 34, 187. 
 
Compton, R., & Berning, A. (2009). Results of the 2007 National Roadside Survey of Alcohol 
and Drug Use by Driver (Report No. DOT HS 811 175). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8111
75.pdf 
 
Compton, R., Vegega, M., & Smither, D. (2009). Drug-impaired driving: Understanding the 
problem and ways to reduce it: A report to Congress (Report No. DOT HS 811 268). Retrieved 
from 
 
Couper, F. J., & Logan, B. K. (2004). Drugs and human performance fact sheets (Report No. 
DOT HS 809 725). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/research/job185drugs/drugs_web.pdf 
 
Crew, B. K., & Johnson, S. E. (2011). Do victim impact programs reduce recidivism for 
operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated? Findings from an outcomes evaluation. Criminal 
Justice Studies, 24, 153-163. 
 
Curtis, S. C., & Ramirez, R. L. (2011). Source investigations: A tool to combat impaired driving 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 519). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811519.pdf 
 
Dang, J. N. (2008). Statistical analysis of alcohol-related driving trends, 1982-2005 (Report No. 
DOT HS 810 942). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/810942.pdf 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 78 
 
Dassanayake, T., Michie, P., Carter, G., & Jones, A. (2011). Effects of benzodiazepines, 
antidepressants, and opioids on driving. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
epidemiological and experimental evidence. Drug Safety, 34, 125-156. 
 
DeBaca, J. C., Lapham, S. C., Liang, H. C., & Skipper, B. J. (2001). Victim impact panels: Do 
they impact drunk drivers? A follow-up of female and male first-time and repeat offenders. 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 62, 615-620. 
 
Decina, L. E., Foss, R. D., Tucker, M. E., Goodwin, A., and Sohn, J. (2009). Alternative 
transportation programs: A countermeasure for reducing impaired driving (Report No. DOT HS 
811 188). Retrieved from1188.pdf 
 
De Gier, H. (2006). Medicinal drugs: Critical review of present knowledge and statements for 
discussion. In Drugs and traffic: A symposium. Transportation Research Circular, Number E- 
C096, pp. 68-77. Retrieved from the Transportation Research Board website: 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/circulars/ec096.pdf 
 
DeYoung, D. J. (1997). An evaluation of the specific deterrent effect of vehicle impoundment on 
suspended, revoked and unlicensed drivers in California (Report No. DOT HS 808 727). 
Retrieved from NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library website: 
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25900/25940/DOT-HS-808-727.pdf 
 
DeYoung, D. J. (2013a). Traffic safety impact of judicial and administrative driver license 
suspension. In Countermeasures to address impaired driving offenders: Toward an integrated 
model (Transportation Research Circular, Number E-C174, pp. 41-53). Retrieved from the 
Transportation Research Board website: http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/circulars/ec174.pdf 
 
DeYoung, D. J. (2013b). Controlling the risk of impaired drivers through use of vehicle-based 
sanctions: Impoundment, forfeiture, and license plate sanctions. In Countermeasures to address 
impaired driving offenders: Toward an integrated model (Transportation Research Circular, 
Number E-C174, pp. 20-31). Retrieved from the Transporation Research Board website: 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/circulars/ec174.pdf 
 
Dill, P. L., & Wells-Parker, E. (2006). Court-mandated treatment for convicted drinking drivers. 
Alcohol Research & Health, 29, 41-8. Retrieved from 
pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/arh291/41-48.htm 
 
Dill, P. L., Wells-Parker, E., & Soderstrom, C. A. (2004). The emergency care setting for 
screening and intervention for alcohol use problems among injured and high-risk drivers: A 
review. Traffic Injury Prevention, 5, 278-291. 
 
Ditter, S. M., Elder, R. W., Shults, R. A., Sleet, D. A., Compton, R., & Nichols, J. L. (2005). 
Effectiveness of designated driver programs for reducing drinking and driving and alcohol- 
involved crashes: A systematic review. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 28(5S), 280- 
287. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 79 
 
D'Onofrio, G., & Degutis, L. C. (2002). Preventive care in the emergency department: Screening 
and brief intervention for alcohol problems in the emergency department: A systematic review. 
Academic Emergency Medicine, 5, 627-638. 
 
Dunlap, K. L., Mullins, T. G., & Stein, M. (2008). Guidelines for Community Supervision of 
DWI Offenders (Report No. DOT HS 810 940). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/81 
0940.pdf 
 
DuPont, R. L., Voas, R. B., Walsh, J. M., Shea, C., Talpins, S. K., & Neil, M. M. (2012). The 
need for drugged driving per se laws: A commentary. Traffic Injury Prevention, 13, 31-42. 
 
Elder, R. W., Lawrence, B., Janes, G., Brewer, R. D., Toomey, T. L., Hingson, R. W., … 
Fielding, J. (2007). Enhanced enforcement of laws prohibiting sale of alcohol to minors. 
Systematic review of effectiveness for reducing sales and underage drinking (Transportation 
Research Circular: Traffic Safety and Alcohol Regulation). Number E-C123, 181- 
187). Retrieved from the TRB website: onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/circulars/ec123.pdf 
 
Elder, R. W., Nichols, J. L., Shults, R.A., Sleet, D. A., Barrios, L. C., Compton, R., & the Task 
Force on Community Preventive Services. (2005). Effectiveness of school-based programs for 
reducing drinking and driving and riding with drinking drivers. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 28(5S), 288-297. Retrieved from www.thecommunityguide.org/mvoi/mvoi-AJPM-
evrev-school-based.pdf 
 
Elder, R. W., Shults, R. A., Sleet, D. A., Nichols, J. L., Thompson, R. S., Rajab, W., & the Task 
Force on Community Preventive Services. (2004). Effectiveness of mass media campaigns for 
reducing drinking and driving and alcohol-involved crashes. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 27, 57-65. Retrieved from www.thecommunityguide.org/mvoi/massmedia_ajpm.pdf 
 
Elvik, R. (2013). Risk of road accident associated with the use of drugs: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of evidence from epidemiological studies. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 60, 
254-267. 
 
Erke, A., Goldenbeld, C., & Vaa, T. (2009). The effects of drink-driving checkpoints on crashes 
– A meta-analysis. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 41, 914-923. 
 
Farmer, C. M., Wells, J. K., Ferguson, S. A., & Voas, R. B. (1999). Field evaluation of the PAS 
III Passive Alcohol Sensor. Traffic Injury Prevention, 1, 55-61. 
 
Federal Highway Administration. (2014). Notice - Apportionment of funds for the period 
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on May 31, 2015, pursuant to the Highway and 
Transportation Funding Act of 2014. Retrieved from the FHWA website: 
www.fhwa.dot.gov/legsregs/directives/notices/n4510778.cfm  
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 80 
Fell, J., Auld-Owens, A., & Snowden, C. (2013). Evaluation of impaired driving assessments and 
special management reviews in reducing impaired driving fatal crashes in the United States. 
Annals of Automotive Medicine, 57, 33-44. 
 
Fell, J. C., Compton, C., & Voas, R. B. (2008). A note on the use of passive alcohol sensors 
during routine traffic stops. Traffic Injury Prevention, 9, 534-538. 
 
Fell, J. C., Ferguson, S. A., Williams, A. F., & Fields, M. (2003). Why are sobriety checkpoints 
not widely adopted as an enforcement strategy in the United States? Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 35, 897-902. 
 
Fell, J. C., Fisher, D. A., & McKnight, A. S. (2011). A guide for local impaired-driving task 
forces, Vol. I: Final report (Report No. DOT HS 811 460A). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811460a.pdf 
 
Fell, J. C., Fisher, D. A., Voas, R. B., Blackman, K., & Tippetts, A. S. (2009). The impact of 
underage drinking laws on alcohol-related fatal crashes of young drivers. Alcoholism: Clinical 
and Experimental Research, 33, 1208-1219. 
 
Fell, J. C., Lacey, J. H., & Voas, R. B. (2004). Sobriety checkpoints: Evidence of effectiveness is 
strong, but use is limited. Traffic Injury Prevention, 5, 220-227. 
 
Fell, J. C., & Langston, E. A. (2009). A guide for statewide impaired-driving task forces (Report 
No. DOT HS 811 203). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/81 
1203.pdf 
 
Fell, J. C., Langston, E. A., Lacey, J. H., & Tippetts, A. S. (2008). Evaluation of seven publicized 
enforcement demonstration programs to reduce impaired driving: Georgia, Louisiana, 
Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Texas, Indiana, and Michigan (Report No. DOT HS 810 
941). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/81 
0941.pdf 
 
Fell, J. C., & McKnight, A. S. ( 2013). Transdermal alcohol monitoring (TAM) in compliance 
with abstinence: Records from 250,000 offenders in the United States. Proceedings of the 2013 
Australasian Road Safety Research, Policing & Education Conference. Brisbane, Queensland. 
Retrieved from http://acrs.org.au/files/arsrpe/Paper%2019%20-%20Fell%20-
%20Alcohol%20and%20Driving.pdf 
 
Fell, J. C., McKnight, A. S., & Auld-Owens, A. (2013). Increasing impaired-driving enforcement 
visibility: Six case studies (Report No. DOT HS 811 716). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811716.pdf 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 81 
Fell, J. C., Tippetts, A. S., & Langston, E. A. (2011). An evaluation of the three Georgia DUI 
courts (Report No. DOT HS 811 450). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811450.pdf 
 
Fell, J., Voas, R. B., & Lange, J. E. (1997). Designated driver concept: Extent of use in the USA. 
Journal of Traffic Medicine, 25(3–4), 109-114. 
 
Ferguson, S. A. (2012). Alcohol-impaired driving in the United States: Contributors to the 
problem and effective countermeasures. Traffic Injury Prevention, 13, 427-441. 
 
Ferguson, S. A., Fields, M., & Voas, R. B. (2000). Enforcement of zero-tolerance laws in the 
United States. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Alcohol, Drugs and 
Traffic Safety, Stockholm, Sweden. Retrieved from 
www.icadts.org/proceedings/2000/icadts2000-108.pdf 
 
Ferguson, S. A., Teoh, E. R., & McCartt, A. T. (2007). Progress in teenage crash risk during the 
last decade. Journal of Safety Research, 38, 137-145. 
 
Fieldler, K., Brittle, C., & Stafford, S. (2012). Case studies of ignition interlock programs 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 594). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811594.pdf 
 
Fisher, D. A., McKnight, A. S., & Fell, J. C. (2013). Intensive DWI supervision in urban areas—
Feasibility study (Report No. DOT HS 811 861). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811861.pdf 
 
Flewelling, R. L., Grube, J. W., Paschall, M. J., Biglan, A., Kraft, A., Black,  
C. … Ruscoe, J. (2013). Reducing youth access to alcohol: Findings from a community-based 
randomized trial. American Journal of Community Psychology, 51, 264-277. 
 
Gerstein, D., Johnson, R., Harwood, H., Fountain, D., Suiter, N., & Malloy, K. (1994). 
Evaluating recovery services: The California Drug and Alcohol Treatment Assessment 
(CALDATA). Sacramento, CA: California Department of Alcohol and Drug Problems. 
 
Governors Highway Safety Association. (2015a). Sobriety Checkpoint Laws. (2015, May). 
Retrieved from www.ghsa.org/html/stateinfo/laws/checkpoint_laws.html 
 
GHSA. (2015b). Drunk Driving Laws. (2015, May). Retrieved from 
www.ghsa.org/html/stateinfo/laws/impaired_laws.html 
 
GHSA. (2015c). Drug Impaired Driving Laws. (2015, May). Retrieved from 
www.ghsa.org/html/stateinfo/laws/dre_perse_laws.html 
 
Goodwin, A. H. (2004). A social norms approach to reduce drinking-driving among university 
students. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic 
Safety. Glasgow, Scotland. Retrieved from www.icadts.org/T2004/pdfs/O42.pdf 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 82 
 
Grube, J., & Stewart, K. (2004). Preventing impaired driving using alcohol policy. Traffic Injury 
Prevention, 5, 199-207. 
 
Guard, A., & Rosenblum, L . (2008). Alcohol screening and brief intervention: A guide for 
public health practitioners. Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. 
Retrieved from www.integration.samhsa.gov/clinical-
practice/alcohol_screening_and_brief_interventions_a_guide_for_public_health_practitioners.pdf 
 
Guide to Community Preventive Services. (2012). Reducing alcohol-impaired driving: 
Publicized sobriety checkpoint programs. Retrieved from 
www.thecommunityguide.org/mvoi/AID/sobrietyckpts.html. 
 
Haire, E. R., Leaf, W. A., Presser, D. F., & Solomon, M. G. (2011). Use of warrants to reduce 
breath test refusals: Experiences from North Carolina (Report No. DOT HS 811 461). Retrieved 
from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811461.pdf 
 
Harding, W., Apsler, R., & Goldfein, J. (1987, July). A directory of ride service programs 
(Report No. DOT HS 807 146). Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports 
Library website: http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25700/25760/DOT-HS-807-146_001.pdf 
 
Hedlund, J. H., & Beirness, D. J. (2007). Use of warrants for breath test refusals: Case studies 
(Report No. DOT HS 810 852). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website:www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Fil
es/810852.pdf 
 
Hedlund, J. H., & McCartt, A. T. (2002). Drunk driving: Seeking additional solutions. 
Retrieved from the AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety website: 
www.aaafoundation.org/pdf/DrunkDriving-SeekingAdditionalSolutions.pdf 
 
Higgins-Biddle, J., & Dilonardo, J. (2013). Alcohol and highway safety: Screening and brief 
intervention for alcohol problems as a community approach to improving traffic safety (Report 
No. DOT HS 811 836). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811836.pdf 
 
Hingson, R. W., Assailly, J., & Williams, A. F. (2004). Underage drinking: Frequency, 
consequences, and interventions. Traffic Injury Prevention, 5, 228-236. 
 
Hingson, R., Heeren, T., & Winter, M. (1998). Effects of Maine’s 0.05% legal blood alcohol 
level for drivers with DWI convictions. Public Health Reports, 113, 440-446. 
 
Hingson, R., McGovern, T., Howland, J., Heeren, T., Winter, M., & Zakocs, R. (1996). Reducing 
alcohol-impaired driving in Massachusetts: the Savings Lives Program. American Journal of 
Public Health, 86, 791-797. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 83 
Holder, H. D., & Wagenaar, A. C. (1994). Mandated server training and reduced alcohol- 
involved traffic crashes: A time series analysis of the Oregon experience. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 26, 89-97. 
 
Hover, A. R., Hover, B. A., & Young, J. C. (2000). Measuring the effectiveness of a community- 
sponsored DWI intervention for teens. American Journal of Health Studies, 16, 171-176. 
 
Huddleston, C. W., III, Marlowe, D.B., & Casebolt, R. (2008). Painting the current picture: A 
national report card on drug courts and other problem-solving court programs in the United 
States, Vol. II, No. 1. Retrieved from the National Drug Court Institute website: 
www.ndci.org/sites/default/files/ndci/PCPII1_web%5B1%5D.pdf 
 
International Council on Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety. (2007). Categorization system for 
medicinal drugs affecting driving performance. Retrieved from 
www.icadts.nl/reports/medicinaldrugs1.pdf 
 
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety. (2008). Campaign spurs big drop in night drinking, 
driving. Status Report, 43(6), 4-5. Retrieved from the IIHS website: 
www.iihs.org/externaldata/srdata/docs/sr4306.pdf  
 
IIHS. (2015). Alcohol-impared driving: DUI/DWI. (2015, July). Retrieved from the IIHS 
website: www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/laws/dui?topicName=alcohol-impaired-driving 
 
Jewell, J., & Hupp, S. D. A. (2005). Examining the effects of fatal vision goggles on changing 
attitudes and behaviors related to drinking and driving. The Journal of Primary Prevention, 26, 
553-565. 
 
Jones, R. K., Joksch, H. C., Lacey, J. H., Wiliszowski, C., & Marchetti, L. (1995). Summary 
report: Field test of combined speed, alcohol, and safety belt strategies (Report No. DOT HS 
808 242). Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library website:  
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25900/25919/DOT-HS-808-242.pdf 
 
Jones, R. K., & Nichols, J. L. (2012). Breath test refusals and their effect on DWI prosecution 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 551). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811551.pdf 
 
Jones, R. K., & Rodriguez-Iglesias, C. (2004). Evaluation of lower BAC limits for convicted OUI 
offenders in Maine (Report No. DOT HS 809 827). Retrieved from the NHTSA website:  
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/alcohol/Maine- BAC-Limits/index.htm 
 
Jones, R. K., Shinar, D., & Walsh, J. M. (2003). State of knowledge of drug-impaired driving 
(Report No. DOT HS 809 642). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/research/StateofKnwlegeDrugs/StateofKnwlegeDrugs/pages/TO 
C.html 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 84 
Jones, R. K., Wiliszowski, C., & Lacey, J. H. (1996). Evaluation of alternative programs for 
repeat DWI offenders (Report No. DOT HS 808 493). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/research/pub/hs808493.pdf 
 
Kay, G. G., & Logan, B. K. (2011). Drugged driving expert panel report: A consensus protocol 
for assessing the potential of drugs to impair driving (Report No. DOT HS 808 493). Retrieved 
from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811438.pdf 
 
Kelley-Baker, T., Brainard, K., Lacey, J., Vishnuvajjala, R., & Cobb, P. (2008). Implementing a 
DWI citizen’s reporting program using the Extra Eyes model (Report No. DOT HS 811 038). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8110
38.pdf 
 
Kelly, E., Darke, S., & Ross, J. (2004). A review of drug use and driving: Epidemiology, 
impairment, risk factors and risk perceptions. Drug and Alcohol Review, 23, 319-344. 
 
Kilmer, B., Nicosia, N., Heaton, P., & Midgette, G. (2013). Efficacy of frequent monitoring with 
swift, certain and modest sanctions for violations: Insights from South Dakota’s 24/7 Project. 
American Journal of Public Health, 103, e37-e43. 
 
Lacey, J., Brainard, K., & Snitow, S. (2010). Drug per se laws: A review of their use in states 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 317). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/impaired_driving/pdf/811317.pdf 
 
Lacey, J. H., Ferguson, S. A., Kelley-Baker, T., & Rider, R. P. (2006). Low-manpower 
checkpoints: Can they provide effective DUI enforcement for small communities? Traffic Injury 
Prevention, 7, 213-218. 
 
Lacey, J. H., Kelley-Baker, T., Brainard, K., Tippetts, S., & Lyakhovich, M. (2008). Evaluation 
of the Checkpoint Strikeforce Program (Report No. DOT HS 811 056). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8110 
56.pdf 
 
Lacey, J. H., Kelley-Baker, T., Furr-Holden, D., Voas, R. B., Romano, E., Torres, P., … Berning, 
A. (2009a). 2007 national roadside survey of alcohol and drug use by drivers: Alcohol results 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 248). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8112 
48.pdf 
 
Lacey, J. H., Kelley-Baker, T., Furr-Holden, D., Voas, R. B., Romano, E., Ramirez, A., … 
Berning, A. (2009b). 2007 national roadside survey of alcohol and drug use by drivers: Drug 
results (Report No. DOT HS 811 249). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8112 
49.pdf 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 85 
 
Lacey, J. H., Jones, R. K., & Anderson, E. W. (2000). Evaluation of a full-time ride service 
program: Aspen, Colorado’s Tipsy Taxi service (Report No. DOT HS 809 155). Retrieved from 
the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/research/tipsytaxi/toc.htm 
 
Lacey, J. H., Jones, R. K., & Wiliszowski, C. H. (2000). Zero-tolerance laws for youth: Four 
states’ experience (Report No. DOT HS 809 803). Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration. Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library 
website: http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25900/25963/DOT-HS-809-053.pdf 
 
Lapham, S. C., Kapitula, L. R., C’de Baca, J., & McMillan, G. P. (2006). Impaired-driving 
recidivism among repeat offenders following an intensive court-based intervention. Accident 
Analysis and Prevention, 38, 162-169. 
 
Leaf, W. A., & Preusser, D. F. (2011). Evaluation of Minnesota’s vehicle plate impoundment law 
for impaired drivers (Report No. DOT HS 811 351). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811351.pdf 
 
Lee, J. D., Fiorentino, D., Reyes, M. L., Brown, T. L., Omar, A., Fell, J., Ward, N., & Dufour, R. 
(2010). Assessing the feasibility of vehicle-based sensors to detect alcohol impairment 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 358). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/NVS/Crash%20Avoidance/Technical%20Publications/2010/8113 
58.pdf 
 
Legrand, S-A., Boets, S., Meesman, U., & Verstraete, A. G. (2012). Medicines and driving: 
Evaluation of training and software support for patient counseling by pharmacists. International 
Journal of Clinical Pharmacy, 34, 633-643. 
 
Lenton, S., Fetherston, J., & Cercarelli, R. (2010). Recidivist drink drivers’ self-reported reasons 
for driving whilst unlicensed – A qualitative study. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 42, 637- 
644. 
 
LeRoy, A. A., & Morse, M. L. (2008). Multiple medications and vehicle crashes: Analysis of 
databases (Report No. DOT HS 810 858). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8108 
58.pdf 
 
Leung, S. Y. (2011). Benzodiazepines, opioids and driving: An overview of the experimental 
research. Drug and Alcohol Review, 30, 281-286. 
 
Levy, M., Compton, R., & Dienstfrey, S. (2004). Public perceptions of the July 2003 “You Drink 
& Drive. You Lose” crackdown: Telephone surveys show the media campaign reaches target 
audience (Traffic Safety Facts: Research Note. Report No. DOT HS 809 708). Retrieved from 
the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/research/RN-
public04/RN%20PublicPercep/images/Public_Perceptions.pdf%20 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 86 
Li, G., Brady, J. E., & Chen, Q. (2013). Drug use and fatal motor vehicle crashes: A case-control 
study. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 60, 205-210. 
 
Linkenbach, J., & Perkins, H. W. (2005). Montana’s MOST of Us Don’t Drink and Drive 
campaign: A social norms strategy to reduce impaired driving among 21-34-Year-olds (Report 
No. DOT HS 809 869). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/alcohol/SocialNorms_Strategy/pages/TOC.htm 
 
Lococo, K., & Tyree, R. (2007). Medication related impaired driving. MedScape Education. 
Retrieved from: www.medscape.org/viewprogram/31244 
 
Logan, B. K., Lowrie, K. J., Turri, J. L., Yeakel, J. K., Limoges, J. F., Miles, A.K. … Farrell, L.J. 
(2013). Recommendations for toxicological investigation of drug-impaired driving and motor 
vehicle fatalities. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 37, 552-558. 
 
Loudenburg, R., Drube, G., & Leonardson, G. (2010). South Dakota’s 24/7 sobriety program 
evaluation findings report. Salem, SD: Mountain Plains Evaluation, LLC. Retrieved from: 
apps.sd.gov/atg/dui247/AnalysisSD24.pdf 
 
Macdonald, S., Zhao, J., Martin, G., Brubacher, J., Stockwell, T., Arason, N., Steinmetz, S., & 
Chan, H. (2013). The impact on alcohol-related collisions of the partial decriminalization of 
impaired driving in British Columbia, Canada. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 59, 200-205. 
 
MacLennan, P. A., Owsley, C., Rue, L. W., & McGwin, G. (2009). Older adults’ knowledge 
about medications that can impact driving. Retrieved from the AAA Foundation for Traffic 
Safety website: 
www.aaafoundation.org/pdf/KnowledgeAboutMedicationsAndDrivingReport.pdf 
 
Maistros, A. R., Schneider, W. H., & Beverly, R. (2014, January). Low manpower checkpoints: 
An efficiency and optimization case study of OVI enforcement tools. Presentation at the 93rd 
Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board, Washington, DC, January 12-16, 2014.  
 
Marlowe, D. B., Festinger, D. S., Arabia, P. L., Croft, J. R., Patapis, N. S., & Dugosh, K.L. 
(2009). A systematic review of DWI court program evaluations. Drug Court Review, 6(2), 1-52. 
Retrieved from 
www.ndci.org/sites/default/files/ncdc/DCR%2C%20Vol.%206%2C%20No.%202.pdf  
 
Marques, P. R. (Ed.). (2005). Alcohol ignition interlock devices vol. II: Research, policy, and 
program status 2005. Retrieved from the International Council on Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic 
Safety website: www.icadts.org/reports/AlcoholInterlockReport2.pdf 
 
Marques, P. R., & Voas, R. B. (2010). Key features for ignition interlock programs (Report 
No. DOT HS 811 262). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/impaired_driving/pdf/811262.pdf 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 87 
Marques, P. R., Voas, R. B., Roth, R., & Tippetts, A. S. (2010). Evaluation of the New Mexico 
ignition interlock program (Report No. DOT HS 811 410). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811410.pdf 
 
Mayer, R. (2014). Ignition interlocks – What you need to know: A toolkit for policymakers, 
highway safety professionals, and advocates (2nd ed., Report No. DOT HS 811 883). Retrieved 
from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/IgnitionInterlocks_811883.pdf  
 
Mayhew, D. R., Donelson, A. C., Beirness, D. J., & Simpson, H. M. (1986). Youth alcohol and 
relative risk of crash involvement. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 18, 273-287. 
 
McCartt, A. T., Blackman, K., & Voas, R. B. (2007). Implementation of Washington State’s zero 
tolerancelLaw: Patterns of arrests, dispositions, and recidivism. Traffic Injury Prevention, 8, 339-
345. 
 
McCartt, A. T., Geary, L. L., & Nissen, W. J. (2002). Observational study of the extent of driving 
while suspended for alcohol-impaired driving (Report No. DOT HS 809 491). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/research/observation_study/index.htm%20 
 
McCartt, A. T., Hellinga, L. A., & Kirley, B. B. (2010). The effects of minimum legal drinking 
age 21 laws on alcohol-related driving in the United States. Journal of Safety Research, 41, 173- 
181. 
 
McCartt, A. T. Leaf, W. A., Farmer, C. M., & Eichelberger, A. H. (2012). Washington State’s 
alcohol ignition interlock law: Effects on recidivism among first-time DUI offenders. Retrieved 
from the IIHS website: www.iihs.org/research/topics/pdf/r1168.pdf 
 
McCartt, A. T., & Northrup, V. S. (2003). Enhanced sanctions for higher BACs: Evaluation of 
Minnesota's high-BAC law (Report No. DOT HS 809 677). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/alcohol/EnhancedSanctions/ 
 
McCartt, A. T., & Northrup, V. S. (2004). Effects of enhanced sanctions for high-BAC DWI 
drivers on case dispositions and rates of recidivism. Traffic Injury Prevention, 5, 270-277. 
 
McCartt, A. T., Wells, J. K., & Teoh, E. R. (2010). Attitudes toward in-vehicle advanced alcohol 
detection technology. Traffic Injury Prevention, 11, 156-164. 
 
McKnight, A. S., Fell, J. C., & Auld-Owens, A. (2012). Transdermal alcohol monitoring: Case 
studies (Report No. DOT HS 811 603). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811603.pdf 
 
McKnight, A. J., & Streff, F. M. (1994). The effect of enforcement upon service of alcohol to 
intoxicated patrons of bars and restaurants. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 26, 79-88. 
 
McKnight, A. S., Watson, D. E., Voas, R. B., & Fell, J. C. (2008). Update of vehicle sanction 
laws and their application: Volume II – Vehicle sanctions by state (Report No. DOT HS 811 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 88 
028B). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8110 
28b.pdf 
 
Michigan Supreme Court and NPC Research. (2008). Michigan DUI courts outcome evaluation: 
Final report executive summary. Lancing, MI: Michigan Supreme Court State Court 
Administrative Office. Retrieved from 
www.npcresearch.com/Files/MI_DUI_Outcome_Evaluation_EXECUTIVE_SUMMARY_Re- 
Release_March_2008.pdf 
 
Mitchell, O., Wilson, D. B., Eggers, A., & MacKenzie, D. L. (2012). Assessing the effectiveness 
of drug courts on recidivism: A meta-analytic review of traditional and non-traditional drug 
courts. Journal of Criminal Justice, 40, 60-71. 
 
Molof, M., Dresser, J., Ungerleider, S., Kimball, C., & Schaefer, J. (1995). Assessment of year- 
round and holiday ride service programs (Report No. DOT HS 808 203). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library website: 
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25800/25865/DOT-HS-808-203.pdf 
 
Molof, M. J., & Kimball, C. (1994). A study of the implementation and effects of Oregon's 
mandatory alcohol server training program. Eugene, OR: Oregon Research Services Inc. 
 
Monteiro, S. P., Huiskes, R., Van Dijk, L., Van Weert, J., & De Gier, J. J. (2013). How effective 
are pictograms in communicating risk about driving-impairing medicines? Traffic Injury 
Prevention, 14, 299-308. 
 
Mosher, J., Hauck, A., Carmona, M., Treffers, R., Reitz, D., Curtis, C., … Saetta, S. (2009). 
Legal research report: Laws prohibiting alcohol sales to intoxicated persons (Report No. DOT 
HS 811 142). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8111 
42.pdf 
 
Moskowitz, H., & Wilkinson, C. J. (2004). Antihistamines and driving-related behavior: A 
review of the evidence for impairment (Report No. DOT HS 809 714). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/research/antihistamines/Antihistamines%20Web/images/Antihista 
mines%20text.pdf 
 
Moulton, B. E., Peterson, A., Haddix, D., & Drew, L. (2010). National survey of drinking and 
driving attitudes and behaviors: 2008. Volume II: Findings report (Report No. DOT HS 811 
343). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811343.pdf 
 
Movig, K. L., Mathijssen, M. P., Nagel, P. H. , van Egmond, T., de Gier, J. J., Leufkens, H.G., & 
Egberts, A.C. (2004). Psychoactive substance use and the risk of motor vehicle accidents. 
Accident Analysis and Prevention, 36, 631-636. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 89 
Moyer, A., Finney, J. W., Swearingen, C. E., & Vergun, P. (2002). Brief interventions for 
alcohol problems: A meta-analytic review of controlled investigations in treatment-seeking and 
non-treatment-seeking populations. Addiction, 97, 279-292. 
 
National Association of Drug Court Professionals. (2009). The facts on drug courts. Retrieved 
from the National Association of Drug Court Professionals website: 
www.nadcp.org/sites/default/files/nadcp/Facts%20on%20Drug%20Courts%20.pdf 
 
National Cooperative Highway Research Program, Vol. 2. (2003). A guide for addressing 
collisions involving unlicensed drivers and drivers with suspended or revoked licenses. Retrieved 
from the TRB website: trb.org/publications/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v2.pdf 
 
NCHRP, Vol. 16. (2005). A guide for reducing alcohol-related collisions. Retrieved from the 
Transportation Research Board website: trb.org/publications/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v16.pdf 
 
National Center for DWI Courts. (2014). Find a DWI court. Alexandria, VA: Author. Retrieved 
from www.dwicourts.org/find-a-court 
 
National Conference of State Legislatures. (2014a). Traffic safety trends: State legislative action 
2013. Retrieved from www.ncsl.org/documents/transportation/2013Trafficsafetytrends.pdf 
 
NCSL. (2014b). State medical marijuana laws, 8/14/2014. Retrieved from the National 
Conference of State Legislatures website: www.ncsl.org/research/health/state-medical-
marijuana-laws.aspx 
 
National Committee on Uniform Traffic Laws and Ordinances. (2007). 2007 model DUI law. 
Retrieved from www.ncutlo.org/2007dui.htm 
 
National Drug Court Institute. (2011). Painting the current picture: A national report on drug 
courts and other problem-solving court programs in the United States. Retrieved from 
www.ndci.org/sites/default/files/nadcp/PCP%20Report%20FINAL.PDF 
 
Namuswe, E. A., Coleman, H. L., & Berning, A. (2014). Traffic safety facts, Research note: 
Breath test refusal rates in the United States – 2011 update. Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/Breath_Test_Refusal_Rates-811881.pdf  
 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. (1996). Drug evaluation and classification 
program. Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/drepp 
.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2001). An implementation guide for juvenile holdover programs. Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/alcohol/juvenile/index.html 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 90 
NHTSA. (2002). Saturation patrols and sobriety checkpoints: A how-to guide for planning and 
publicizing impaired driving enforcement efforts (Report No. DOT HS 809 063). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/alcohol/saturation_patrols/index.html 
 
NHTSA. (2003a). Criminal justice summit on impaired driving (Report No. DOT HS 809 605). 
Retrieved from www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/enforce/CrimJustSum-HTML/ 
 
NHTSA. (2003b). Traffic safety facts, Laws: .08 BAC illegal per se level. Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/drowsy_driving1/New-fact-sheet03/Point08BAC.pdf  
 
NHTSA. (2006a). Uniform guidelines for state highway safety programs. Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/nhtsa/whatsup/tea21/tea21programs/pages/ImpairedDrivingPDF.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2006b). Low-staffing sobriety checkpoints (Report No. DOT HS 810 590). Retrieved 
from 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/enforce/LowStaffing_Checkpoints/images/LowStaffing.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2006c). Office of impaired driving and occupant protection, personal communication, 
July 21, 2006. 
 
NHTSA. (2006d). A guide to sentencing DWI offenders. Second edition, 2005 (Report No. DOT 
HS 810 555). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/alcohol/dwioffenders/A%20Guide2.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2007a). Evaluation of the national impaired driving high-visibility enforcement 
campaign: 2003-2005 (Report No. DOT HS 810 789). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/YDY 
DYL_2001-05.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2007b). Traffic safety resource prosecutor’s manual (Report No. DOT HS 810 706). 
Retrieved from www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/enforce/ProsecutorsManual/index.htm 
 
NHTSA. (2007c). Priorities and strategies for improving the investigation of toxicology results, 
and prosecution of drug-impaired driving cases (Report No. DOT HS 810 708). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/research/PrioritiesStarteg/Job%203653%20NSC%20Report.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2008a). Traffic safety facts, Laws: Administrative license revocation (Report No. DOT 
HS 810 878). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Communication%20&%20Consumer%20Information/Articles/As
sociated%20Files/810878.pdf  
 
NHTSA. (2008b). Traffic safety facts, Laws: Open container laws (Report No. DOT HS 810 
882W). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Communication%20&%20Consumer%20Information/Articles/As
sociated%20Files/810882.pdf  
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 91 
NHTSA. (2008c). Traffic safety facts, Laws: High BAC laws (Report No. DOT HS 810 883). 
Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Communication%20&%20Consumer%20Information/Articles/As
sociated%20Files/810883.pdf  
 
NHTSA. (2008d). Traffic safety facts, Laws: Blood alcohol concentration test refusal laws 
(Report No. DOT HS 810 884W). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Communication%20&%20Consumer%20Information/Articles/As
sociated%20Files/810884.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2008e). Traffic safety facts, Laws: Vehicle and license plate sanctions (Report No. 
DOT HS 810 880). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Communication%20&%20Consumer%20Information/Articles/As
sociated%20Files/810880.pdf  
 
NHTSA. (2008f). Traffic safety facts, Laws: Alcohol exclusion laws (Report No. DOT HS 
810 885). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Communication%20&%20Consumer%20Information/Articles/As
sociated%20Files/810885.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2009). Traffic safety facts: 2008 traffic safety annual assessment – Highlights (Report 
No. DOT HS 811 172). Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811172.PDF 
 
NHTSA. (2010). Traffic safety facts: Crash stats. Drug involvement of fatally injured drivers 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 383). Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811415.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2012). Traffic safety facts, 2010 data: State alcohol impaired driving estimates (Report 
No. DOT HS 811 612). Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811612.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2013a). Guidelines for creating state judicial outreach liaisons (Report No. DOT HS 
811 783). Retrieved from www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811783.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2013b). Model guideline for state ignition interlock programs (Report No. DOT HS 
811 859). Retrieved from www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811859.pdf 
 
NHTSA (2014a). Traffic safety facts, 2013 data: Alcohol-impaired driving (Report No. DOT HS 
812 102). Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812102.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2014b). Traffic safety facts 2012 (Report No. DOT HS 812 032). Retrieved from 
www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812032.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2014c). Traffic safety facts, 2012 data: State alcohol-impaired-driving estimates 
(Report No. DOT HS 812 017). Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812017.pdf 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 92 
NHTSA. (2014d). Ignition interlock: An investigation into rural Arizona judges’ perceptions 
(Report No. DOT HS 812 025). Retrieved from www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/812025-
Ignition-Interlock-Investigation-Rural-AZ-Judges.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2015). Digest of impaired driving and selected beverage control laws, 28th edition 
(Report No. DOT HS 812 119). Retrieved from www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/812119-
2013ImpairedDrivingDigest.pdf  
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (2005). A pocket guide for alcohol 
screening and brief intervention. Retrieved from 
pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Practitioner/PocketGuide/pocket_guide.htm 
 
Nielson, A. L., & Watson, B. (2009). The effectiveness of designated driver programs. Journal of 
the Australasian College of Road Safety, 20(2), 32-37. 
 
National Transportation Safety Board. (2000). Actions to reduce fatalities, injuries, and crashes 
involving the hard core drinking driver (NTSB/SR-00/01). Retrieved from the NTSB website: 
www.ntsb.gov/publictn/2000/sr0001.pdf 
 
NTSB. (2013). Reaching zero: Actions to eliminate alcohol-impaired driving (NTSB/SR-13/01). 
Retrieved from www.ntsb.gov/safety/safety-studies/Documents/SR1301.pdf 
 
Office of National Drug Control Policy. (2010). National drug control strategy, 2010. Retrieved 
from https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/ondcp/policy-and-research/ndcs2010_0.pdf 
 
Perkins, H. W. (2002). Social norms and the prevention of alcohol misuse in collegiate contexts. 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 14(S), 164-172. 
 
Perkins, H. W. (Ed.). (2003). The emergence and evolution of the social norms approach to 
substance abuse prevention. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
 
Probst, J., Lewis, J., Asunka, K., Hershey, J., & Oram, S. (1987). Assessment of citizen group 
court monitoring programs (Report No. DOT HS 807 113). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library website: ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25700/25759/DOT-
HS-807-113_001.pdf 
 
Quinn-Zobeck, A. (2007). Screening and brief intervention tool kit for college and university 
campuses (Report No. DOT HS 810 751). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/links/sid/3672Toolkit/ 
 
Ramirez, R., Nguyen, D., Cannon, C., Carmona, M, & Freisthler, B. (2008). A campaign to 
reduce impaired driving through retail-oriented enforcement in Washington state (Report No. 
DOT HS 810 913). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8109
13.pdf 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 93 
Rapoport, M. J., Lanctot, K. L., Steiner, D. L., Bedard, M., Vingilis, E., et al. (2009). 
Benzodiazepine use and driving: A meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,s 70, 663-673. 
 
Reisfeld, G. M., Goldberger, B. A., Gold, M. S., & DuPont, R. L. (2012). The mirage of 
impairing drug concentration thresholds: A rationale for zero tolerance per se driving under the 
influence of drugs laws. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 36, 353-356. 
 
Robertson, R. D., & Holmes, E. A. (2011). Effective strategies to reduce drunk driving: Sobriety 
checkpoints. Retrieved from the TIRF website: 
www.tirf.ca/publications/PDF_publications/2011_DWI_WG_Sobriety_Checkpoints_8.pdf 
 
Robertson, R. D., Holmes, E., & Vanlaar W. G. M. (2010). The implementation of alcohol 
interlocks for first offenders: A case study. Retrieved from the TIRF website: 
http://tirf.ca/publications/PDF_publications/CC_2010_Report_web.pdf 
 
Robertson, R. D., Holmes, E., & Vanlaar, W (Eds.). (2011). Alcohol interlocks: Harmonizing 
policies and practices: Proceedings of the 11th International Interlock Symposium, Montebello, 
Canada, Oct. 17-19, 2010. Ottawa: Traffic Injury Research Foundation.  
 
Robertson, R. D., & Simpson, H. M. (2002a). DWI system improvements for dealing with hard 
core drinking drivers: Prosecution. Retrieved from the TIRF website: 
www.tirf.ca/publications/document_request.php?docid=33 
 
Robertson, R. D., & Simpson, H. M. (2002b). DWI system improvements for dealing with hard 
core drinking drivers: Sanctioning. Retrieved from the TIRF website: 
www.tirf.ca/publications/document_request.php?docid=41 
 
Robertson, R. D., & Simpson, H. M. (2003). DWI system improvement: Stopping the revolving 
door. Retrieved from the TIRF website: 
www.tirf.ca/publications/document_request.php?docid=60 
 
Robertson, R. D., Simpson H. M., & Parsons P. (2008). Screening, assessment and treatment of 
DWI offenders: A guide for justice professionals and policy makers. Retrieved from the TIRF 
website: www.tirf.ca/publications/publications_show.php?pub_id=223 
 
Robertson, R. D., Vanlaar, W. G. M., & Beirness, D. J. (2006). Alcohol interlock programs: A 
global perspective. Retrieved from the TIRF website: 
www.tirf.ca/publications/document_request.php?docid=89 
 
Robertson, R., Vanlaar, W., & Simpson, H. (2007). 10 steps to a strategic review of the DWI 
system: A guidebook for policymakers. Retrieved from the TIRF website: 
www.tirf.ca/publications/document_request.php?docid=106 
 
Rogers, A. (1995). Effects of Minnesota’s license plate impoundment law on recidivism of 
multiple DWI violators. Journal of Safety Research, 26, 125-126. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 94 
Roth, R. (2014). 2013 survey of currently-installed interlocks in the U.S. Retrieved from 
www.rothinterlock.org/2013_survey_of_currently_installed_interloks_in_the_us.pdf 
 
Roth, R., Marques, P. R., & Voas, R. B. (2009). A note on the effectiveness of the house-arrest 
alternative for motivating DWI offenders to install ignition interlocks. Journal of Safety 
Research, 40, 437-441. 
 
Rothschild, M. L., Mastin, B., & Miller, T. W. (2006). Reducing alcohol-impaired driving 
crashes through the use of social marketing. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 38, 1218-1230. 
 
Students Against Destructive Decisions. (2014). SADD by the Numbers. Retrieved from the 
SADD website: www.sadd.org/numbers.htm 
 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2015). Screening, brief 
intervention, referral, and treatment. Retrieved from www.samhsa.gov/sbirt  
 
Schermer, C. R., Gentilello, L. M., Hoyt, D. B., Moore, E. E., Moore, J. B., Rozycki, G., & 
Feliciano, D. V. (2003). National survey of trauma surgeons’ use of alcohol screening and brief 
intervention. The Journal of Trauma: Injury, Infection, and Critical Care, 55, 849-856. 
 
Schwilke, E. W., Sampaio dos Santos, M. I., & Logan, B. K. (2006). Changing patterns of drug 
and alcohol use in fatally injured drivers in Washington State. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 51, 
1191-1198. 
 
Sewell, R. A., Poling, J., & Sofuoglu, M. (2009). The effect of cannabis compared with alcohol 
on driving. The American Journal on Addictions, 18, 185-193. 
 
Shaffer, H. J., Nelson, S. E., LaPlante, D. A., LaBrie, R. A., Albanese, M., & Caro, G. (2007). 
The epidemiology of psychiatric disorders among repeat DUI offenders accepting a treatment- 
sentencing option. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 75, 795-804. 
 
Shinar, D. (1992). Impact of court monitoring on the adjudication of driving while intoxicated 
(DWI). Accident Analysis and Prevention, 24, 167-179. 
 
Shinar, D., & Compton, R. P. (1995). Victim impact panels: Their impact on DWI recidivism. 
Alcohol, Drugs and Driving, 11, 73-87. 
 
Shinar, D., Schechtman, E., & Compton, R. P. (2000) Signs and symptoms predictive of drug 
impairment. In 15th International Conference on Alcohol, Drugs & Traffic Safety. May 22-26, 
2000. Stockholm, Sweden. Retrieved from the ICADTS website: 
www.icadts.org/proceedings/2000/icadts2000-045.pdf  
 
Shults, R. A., Elder R. W., Nichols, J. L., Sleet, D. A., Compton, R., et al. (2009). Effectiveness 
of multicomponent programs with community mobilization for reducing alcohol-impaired 
driving. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 37, 360-371. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 95 
Shults, R. A., Elder, R. W., Sleet, D. A., Nichols, J. L., . . . Thompson, R. S. (2001). Review of 
evidence regarding interventions to reduce alcohol-impaired driving. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, 21(4S), 66-84. Retrieved from www.thecommunityguide.org/mvoi/mvoi- 
AJPM-evrev-alchl-imprd-drvng.pdf 
 
Simpson, H.M., and Robertson, R.D. (2001). DWI system improvements for dealing with hard 
core drinking drivers: Enforcement. Retrieved from the TIRF website: 
www.tirf.ca/publications/document_request.php?docid=163 
 
Smyth, T., Sheehan, M., & Siskind, V. (2013). Hospital outpatients’ responses to taking 
medications with driving warnings. Traffic Injury Prevention, 14, 18-25. 
 
Solomon R., & Chamberlain, E. (2013). Developments in Canadian community-based impaired 
driving initiatives: MADD Canada’s “Campaign 911.” 20th Annual International Conference on 
Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety. Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. 
 
Solomon, M. G., Hedlund, J. H., Haire, E. R., Chaffe, R. H. B., & Cosgrove, L. A. (2008). The 
2006 national Labor Day impaired driving enforcement crackdown: Drunk driving. Over the 
Limit. Under Arrest (Report No. DOT HS 811 039). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8110 
39.pdf 
 
Stewart, K. (1999). Strategies to reduce underage alcohol use: Typology and brief overview. 
Retrieved from www.udetc.org/documents/strategies.pdf 
 
Stewart, K. (2006). Overview and summary. In: Drugs and Traffic: A Symposium 
(Transportation Research Circular, Number E-C096, pp. 2-10.) Retrieved from the TRB website: 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/circulars/ec096.pdf 
 
Stuster, J. W. (2000). Increasing the opportunity to examine impaired drivers. In Issues and 
Methods in the Detection of Alcohol and Other Drugs (TRB Circular E-C020, pp. D10-D14). 
Retrieved from the TRB website: onlinepubs.trb.org/Onlinepubs/circulars/ec020.pdf 
 
Stuster, J. W., & Blowers, P. (1995). Experimental evaluation of sobriety checkpoint programs 
(Report No. DOT HS 808 287).  Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports 
Library website:  ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25900/25932/DOT-HS-808-287.pdf 
 
Stuster, J., & Burns, M. (1998). Validation of the standardized field sobriety test battery at BACs 
below 0.10 percent (Report No. DOT HS 808 839). Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral 
Safety Research Reports Library website: ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25900/25935/DOT-HS-808-
839.pdf 
 
Stuster, J., Burns, M., & Fiorentino, D. (2002). Open container laws and alcohol involved 
crashes: Some preliminary data (Report No. DOT HS 809 426). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/alcohol/OpenContainer/HS809426.pdf%20 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 96 
Surla, L.T., & Koons, S.M. (1989). An evaluation of the elimination of plea bargaining for DWI 
offenders (Report No. DOT HS 807 435). Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety 
Research Reports Library website: http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25800/25803/DOT-HS-807-
435.pdf 
 
Syner, J. (2006). Personal communication. 
 
Syner, J., Jackson, B., Dankers, L., Naff, B., Hancock, S., & Siegler, J. (2008). Strategic 
evaluation states initiative – Case studies of Alaska, Georgia, and West Virginia (Report No. 
DOT HS 810 923). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8109 
23.pdf 
 
Toomey, T. L., & Wagenaar, A. C. (1999). Policy options for prevention: the case of alcohol, 
Journal of Public Health Policy, 20, 192-13. 
 
TRB. (2013). Countermeasures to address impaired driving offenders: Toward an integrated 
model. Retrieved from the TRB website: http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/circulars/ec174.pdf 
 
Ulmer, R. G., Hedlund, J. H., & Preusser, D. F. (1999). Determine why alcohol-related fatalities 
decreased in five states - Final report. (Contract DTHN22-97-D-05018). Washington, DC: 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. 
 
Ulmer, R. G., Shabanova, V. I., & Preusser, D. F. (2001). Evaluation of use and lose laws 
(Report No. DOT HS 809 285). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/research/pub/alcohol-laws/eval- of-law/ 
 
Vandrevala, T., Helman, S., Turner, C., & Stone, B. (2010). Medication and road safety: A 
scoping study (Road Safety Research Report No. 116). Retrieved from 
www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roadsafety/research/rsrr/theme3/report16review.pdf 
 
Vanlaar, W., McKiernan, A., & Robertson, R. (2013). Behavioral patterns of interlocked 
offenders: Phase II. Retrieved from the TIRF website: 
www.tirf.ca/publications/PDF_publications/Behavioral_Patterns_of_%20Interlocked_Offenders_
Phase_II_6.pdf 
 
Vanlaar, W., Robertson, R., Schaap, D., & Vissers, J. (2010). Understanding behavioural 
patterns of interlocked offenders to inform the efficient and effective implementation of interlock 
programs: How offenders on an interlock learn to comply. Retrieved from the TIRF website: 
www.tirf.ca/publications/document_request.php?docid=204 
 
Van Vleck, V. N. L., & Brinkley, G. L. (2009). Alert eyes and DWIs: An indirect evaluation of a 
DWI witness reward program in Stockton, CA. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 41, 581-587. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 97 
Voas, R. B. (2008). A new look at NHTSA’s evaluation of the 1984 Charlottesville sobriety 
checkpoint program: Implications for current checkpoint issues. Traffic Injury Prevention, 9, 22-
30. 
 
Voas, R. B., Blackman, K. O., Tippetts, A. S., & Marques, P. R. (2001). Motivating DUI 
offenders to install interlocks: avoiding jail as an incentive. Alcoholism: Clinical and 
Experimental Research, 25, 102A. 
 
Voas, R. B., Fell, J. C., McKnight, A.S., & Sweedler, B. M. (2004). Controlling impaired driving 
through vehicle programs: an overview. Traffic Injury Prevention, 5, 292-298. 
 
Voas, R. B., & Fisher, D. A. (2001). Court procedures for handling intoxicated drivers. Alcohol 
Research and Health World, 25, 32-42. 
 
Voas, R. B., Kelley-Baker, T., Romano, E., & Vishnuvajjala, R. (2009). Implied-consent laws: A 
review of the literature and examination of current problems and related statutes. Journal of 
Safety Research, 40, 77-83. 
 
Voas, R. B., & Lacey, J. H. (2011). Alcohol and highway safety 2006: A review of the state of 
knowledge (Report No. DOT HS 811 374). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811374.pdf 
 
Voas, R. B., McKnight, A. S., Falb, T., & Fell, J. C. (2008). Update of vehicle sanction laws 
and their application: Volume I – summary (Report No. DOT HS 811 028A).  Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8110 
28a.pdf 
 
Voas, R. B., Romano, E., & Peck, R. (2006). Validity of the passive alcohol sensor for estimating 
BACs in DWI-enforcement operations. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 67, 714-721. 
 
Voas, R. B., Tippetts, A. S., Fisher, D., & Grosz, M. (2010). Requiring suspended drunk drivers 
to install alcohol interlocks to reinstate their licenses: Effective? Addiction, 105, 1422-1428. 
 
Voas, R. B., Tippetts, A. S., & McKnight, A. S. (2010). DUI offenders delay license 
reinstatement: a problem? Alcoholims: Clinical and Experimental Research, 34, 1282-1290. 
 
Voas, R. B., Tippetts, S., & Taylor, E. (1998). Temporary Vehicle Impoundment in Ohio: A 
Replication and Confirmation. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 30, 651-655. 
 
Wagenaar, A. C., & Maldonado-Molina, M. M. (2007). Effects of drivers’ license suspension 
policies on alcohol-related crash involvement: Long-term follow-up in forty-six states. 
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 31, 1399-1406. 
 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 98 
Wagenaar, A. C., Maldonado-Molina, M. M., Erickson, D. J. Ma, L., Tobler, A. L., & Komro, K. 
A. (2008). General deterrence effects of U.S. statutory DUI fine and jail penalties: Long-term 
follow-up in 32 states. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 39, 982-994. 
 
Wagenaar, A. C., & Tobler, A. L. (2007). Alcohol sales and service to underage youth and 
intoxicated patrons. Effects of responsible beverage service training and enforcement 
interventions. In Traffic Safety and Alcohol Regulation: A Symposium, June 5-6, 2006, Irvine, 
CA (Transportation Research Circular, No. E-C123, pp. 141-163). Retrieved from the TRB 
website: onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/circulars/ec123.pdf 
 
Wagenaar, A. C., Toomey, T. L., & Erickson, D. J. (2005). Preventing yough access to alcohol: 
outcomes from a multi-community time-series trial. Addiction, 100, 335-345. 
 
Wagenaar, A. C., Zobek, T. S., Williams, G. D., & Hingson, R. (2000). Effects of DWI control 
efforts: A systematic review of the literature from 1960-1991. Minneapolis, MN: University of 
Minnesota School of Public Health. 
 
Walsh, J. M. (2009). A state-by-state analysis of laws dealing with driving under the influence of 
drugs (Report No. DOT HS 811 236). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811236.pdf 
 
Warren-Kigenyi, N., & Coleman, H. (2014). Traffic safety facts, research note. DWI recidivism 
in the United States: An examination of state-level driver data and the effect of look-back periods 
on recidivism prevalence (Report No. DOT HS 811 991). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811991-DWI_Recidivism_in_USA-tsf-rn.pdf 
 
Watson, A., & Watson, B. (2014). An outcome evaluation of the ‘Skipper’ designated driver 
program. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 66, 27-35. 
 
Weatherburn, D., & Moffatt, S. (2011). The specific deterrent effect of higher fines on drink- 
driving offenders. British Journal of Criminology, 51, 789-803. 
 
Wechsler, H., & Nelson, T. F. (2010). Will increasing alcohol availability by lowering the 
minimum legal drinking age decrease drinking and related consequences among youths? 
American Journal of Public Health, 100, 986-992. 
 
Wells-Parker, E., Bangert-Drowns, R., McMillan, R., & Williams, M. (1995). Final results from 
a meta-analysis of remedial interventions with drink/drive offenders. Addiction, 90, 907-926. 
 
Wheeler, D. R., Rogers, E. M., Tonigan, J. S., & Woodall, W. G. (2004). Effectiveness of 
customized Victim Impact Panels on first-time DWI offender inmates. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 36, 29-35. 
 Chapter 1. Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving 
 
1 - 99 
Wiliszowski, C. H., Jones, R. K., & Lacey, J. H. (2003). Examining the effectiveness of Utah’s 
law allowing for telephonic testimony at ALR hearings (Report No. DOT HS 809 602). Retrieved 
from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/research/Utah_telephonic 
/Images/UTAH.PDF%20 
 
Wiliszowski, C., Fell, J., McKnight, S., & Tippetts, S. (2011). An evaluation of intensive 
supervision programs for serious DWI offenders (Report No. DOT HS 811 446). Retrieved from 
the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811446.pdf 
 
Wilk, A. L., Jensen, N. M., & Havighurst, T. C. (1997). Meta-analysis of randomized control 
trials addressing brief interventions in heavy alcohol drinkers. Journal of General Internal 
Medicine, 12, 274-83. 
 
Williams, A. F. (2003). Teenage drivers: patterns of risk. Journal of Safety Research, 34, 5-15.  
 
Williams, A. F. (2007). Public information and education in the promotion of highway safety 
(Research Results Digest 322). Retrieved from the TRB website: http://onlinepubs.trb.org/ 
onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rrd_322.pdf 
 
Wundersitz, L. N., Hutchinson, T. P., & Wooley, J. E. (2010). Best practice in road safety mass 
media campaigns: A literature review. Retrieved from the Centre for Automotive Safety 
Research website: http://casr.adelaide.edu.au/reports 
 
Zador, P. L., Ahlin, E. M., Rauch, W. J., Howard, J. M., & Duncan, G. D. (2011). The effects of 
closer monitoring on driver compliance with interlock restrictions. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 43, 1960-1967. 
 
Zador, P. L., Krawchuk, S. A., & Voas, R. B. (2000). Alcohol-related relative risk of driver 
fatalities and driver involvement in fatal crashes in relation to driver age and gender: An update 
using 1996 data. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 61, 387-395. 
 
Zwicker, T. J., Chaudhary, N. K., Maloney, S., & Squeglia, R. (2007). Connecticut’s 2003 
impaired-driving high-visibility enforcement campaign (Report No. DOT HS 810 689). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/810689.pdf 
 
Zwicker, T. J., Chaudhary, N. K., Solomon, M.G., Siegler, J. N., & Meadows, J. D. (2007). West 
Virginia’s impaired driving high-visibility enforcement campaign, 2003-2005 (Report No. DOT 
HS 810 792). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20 
Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/WVA ImpairedDrivingLow.pdf 
 
Zwicker, T. J., Hedlund, J., & Northrup, V. S. (2005). Breath test refusals in DWI enforcement: 
An interim report (Report No. DOT HS 809 876). Retrieved from the NTHSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/809876.pdf 
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 1 
2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints  
 
 
Overview 
 
Abundant research has shown that correctly using an appropriate child restraint or seat belt is the 
single most effective way to save lives and reduce injuries in crashes. Lap and shoulder 
combination seat belts, when used, reduce the risk of fatal injury to front-seat passenger car 
occupants by 45% and the risk of moderate-to-critical injury by 50% (Kahane, 2000). For light-
truck occupants, seat belts reduce the risk of fatal injury by 60% and moderate-to-critical injury 
by 65% (Kahane, 2000 ). 
 
NHTSA estimates that correctly used child restraints are even more effective than seat belts in 
reducing fatalities. Child restraints reduce fatalities by 71% for infants younger than 1 year old 
and by 54% for children 1 to 4 years old in passenger cars. In light trucks, the fatality reductions 
are 58% for infants and 59% for children 1 to 4 years old (NCSA, 1996). In addition, research 
conducted by the Partners for Child Passenger Safety Program at the Children’s Hospital of 
Philadelphia found that belt-positioning booster seats reduce the risk of injury to children 4 to 8 
years in crashes by 45% when compared to the effectiveness of seat belts alone (Arbogast, 
Jermakian, Kallan, & Durbin, 2009). 
 
Trends. The challenge is to convince all passenger vehicle occupants to buckle up. Current data 
show that observed seat belt use nationwide was 87% in 2014 for adult drivers and right-front 
seat passengers (Pickrell & Choi, 2015). Seat belt use was over 90% in 19 States with 4 States 
achieving belt use rates higher than 95% (Alabama, 97.3%; California, 97.4%; Georgia, 95.5%; 
and Oregon, 98.2%). However, seat belt use was less than 75% in 5 States (Massachusetts, 
74.8%; Mississippi, 74.4%; Montana, 74.0%; New Hampshire, 73.0%, and South Dakota, 
68.7%) and one U.S. Territory (American Samoa, 74.9%) (Chen, 2014). Nationally, seat belt use 
has increased dramatically since seat belt use laws went into effect in the early 1980s. With the 
exception of 2011, the National seat belt use rate has been steadily increasing since at least 1995. 
 
 
 
 
Source: Pickrell and Liu (2014) 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 2 
 
In general, overall restraint use for children is higher than what is demonstrated in the adult 
population, particularly among the youngest children. In 2013, the observed restraint use for 
children less than 13 years old was 91% (ranging from 98% for children younger than 1 to 89% 
for children 8 to 12) (Pickrell & Choi, 2014).  
 
 
*Restraint use rates do not indicate correct use. 
Source: Pickrell and Choi (2014) 
 
However, restraint use for children is more complicated than simply “restrained versus 
unrestrained.” In addition to overall restraint use, it is also important to consider correct restraint 
use. In March 2011, NHTSA and the American Academy of Pediatrics strengthened their child 
restraint guidelines. The current recommendations include keeping children rear-facing until the 
rear-facing capabilities of the car seat are out grown (with the American Academy of Pediatrics 
specifying rear-facing until a minimum of 2 years old), then forward-facing with a harness until 
the harness is out grown by height or weight, and then booster seat use until the seat belt fits 
properly on its own (Durbin, Committee on Injury, Violence, and Poison Prevention, 2011; 
NHTSA, 2014b).  
 
The 2013 National Survey of the Use of Booster Seats (Pickrell & Choi, 2014) details the 
recommendations and observed restraint use for children under 1, 1 to 3, 4 to 7, and 8 to 12. 
Since 2011, there have been some improvements in the proportion of children riding optimally 
restrained. The proportion of children 1 to 3 riding in rear-facing child restraints increased from 
7% in 2010 to 10% in 2013, and only 9% of children 1 to 3 were prematurely riding in booster 
seats, a decrease from 12% in 2011. Restraint use does vary by race and ethnicity. Across all 
ages, non-Hispanic White children had the highest restraint use (age birth to 12 months, 100%; 1 
to 3, 99%, 4 to 7, 96%; 8 to 12, 95%) and non-Hispanic Black children had the lowest (age birth 
to 12 months, 96% [tied with Hispanic children]; 1 to 3, 85%, 4 to 7, 78%; 8 to 12, 69%).  
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 3 
Despite high observed belt use rates, many unrestrained people die in crashes each year. In 2013, 
21,132 passenger vehicle occupants were killed in crashes (NCSA, 2015). Of these, 49% were 
known to be unrestrained. In 2013, 437 children under 13 were killed as passengers in motor 
vehicle crashes, 38% of which were unrestrained (FARS data). 
 
History of Occupant Restraint Laws. All new passenger cars had some form of seat belts 
beginning with lap belts in 1964, shoulder belts in 1968, and integrated lap and shoulder belts in 
1974 (ACTS, 2001). However, few occupants used the belts. The first widespread survey 
completed in 19 cities in 1982, observed 11% belt use for drivers and front-seat passengers 
(Williams & Wells, 2004). This survey became the benchmark for tracking belt use nationally.  
 
New York enacted the first belt use law in 1984 with other States soon following. Evaluations of 
the first seat belt laws found that seat belt use increased following implementation of the law 
from baseline levels of about 15% to 20% to post-law use rates of about 50% (Nichols & 
Ledingham, 2008). As of July 2014, all States except New Hampshire require adult passenger 
vehicle drivers and front seat occupants to wear seat belts and 28 States also require seat belts for 
all rear seat passengers (GHSA, 2014a; IIHS, 2014). 
 
Between 1978 and 1985, every State and the District of Columbia passed laws requiring child 
restraints for young child passengers (Kahane, 1986), and most of these laws have since been 
amended and strengthened to include more children and to close loopholes and exemptions. Still, 
great variation exists on the requirements and ages covered by State child restraint laws. See 
IIHS (2014) and GHSA (2014b) for a summary of State law requirements.  
 
For more information on the history of belt systems, belt use laws, enforcement programs, and 
belt use trends, see ACTS (2001), Solomon et al. (2004), Milano, McInturff, and Nichols (2004), 
NCHRP (2004), NHTSA (2001, 2003b), Williams and Wells (2004), and Hedlund, Gilbert, 
Ledingham, and Preusser (2008). 
 
 
 
Strategies to Improve the Safety of Passenger Vehicle Occupants 
 
The most effective strategy for achieving and maintaining restraint use at acceptable levels is 
well publicized high visibility enforcement of strong occupant restraint use laws. The 
effectiveness of high visibility enforcement has been documented repeatedly in the United States 
and abroad. The strategy’s three components – laws, enforcement, and publicity – cannot be 
separated: effectiveness decreases if any one of the components is weak or missing (Nichols & 
Ledingham, 2008; Tison & Williams, 2010). 
 
These high visibility, short-duration seat belt law enforcement programs, often called STEPs 
(Selective Traffic Enforcement Programs), “STEP waves,” or “blitzes,” were demonstrated in 
individual communities in the late 1980s. North Carolina’s Click It or Ticket program took this 
model statewide beginning in 1993 and raised the use rate above 80% (Williams & Wells, 2004). 
The Click It or Ticket model expanded nationwide in 2003 (Solomon, Compton, & Preusser, 
2004) and belt use increased in almost all States from 2000-2006, in part due to the Click It or 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 4 
Ticket seatbelt enforcement programs (Tison & Williams, 2010). Since then, most States have 
continued to increase or maintain their seat belt use rates (Chen, 2014). 
 
Other strategies have been implemented to increase the correct use of child restraints. Child 
restraint misuse is an issue that has been a concern for many years. In reaction to the high levels 
of child restraint misuse and incompatibility issues between seat belts and child restraints, a 
concept of standardized child restraint installation, initially called ISOFIX, was completed as an 
international standard in 1999 (Klinich, Manary, & Weber, 2012). The intent of ISOFIX, later 
renamed as LATCH (Lower Anchors and Tethers for Children) as implemented in the United 
States, was to provide a simpler way to install child restraints and reduce misuse using special 
attachments that fasten to anchors built into the vehicle. LATCH consists of two components in 
the vehicle – the lower anchors and the top tether anchors – with complimentary connectors on 
the child restraint. However, even with LATCH, misuse remains a problem. A 2011 
observational study found that fewer than 50% of forward-facing child restraints were installed 
using the top tether, an important component of the LATCH system (Jermakian & Wells, 2011). 
 
The National Child Restraint Use Special Study found 5 common child restraint use errors 
including using the wrong harness slot, positioning the harness retainer clip incorrectly, failing to 
correctly tighten the harness strap, installing the seat too loosely, and improperly positioning the 
lap belt on a child using a booster seat (NHTSA, 2012). 
 
In order to combat this misuse, programs have been implemented to provide parents and other 
caregivers with “hands-on” assistance with the installation and use of child restraints. The 
NHTSA Standardized Child Passenger Safety Training Course, complemented by the Safe Kids 
national certification process, developed and implemented a system to train safety professionals 
and other interested parties in the fundamentals of correctly choosing and installing the proper 
car seat for child passengers. Individuals who successfully completed the course are certified to 
educate the public in using child restraints properly and provide caregivers with this “hands-on” 
assistance (Womack, De La Zerda, Block, & Guzzetta, 2005). As of December 2013, there were 
35,953 certified CPS technicians and instructors (Safe Kids Worldwide, 2013). 
 
Child passenger safety inspection stations are places or events where parents and caregivers can 
receive assistance from certified CPS technicians, and are popular services provided by a variety 
of local CPS programs. Child passenger safety inspection stations are commonly housed at 
public health departments, fire departments, law enforcement agencies, healthcare organizations, 
family and social services departments, and other organizations that serve the community. 
Guidebooks are available on how local programs can set up and operate a mobile CPS clinic or 
permanent inspection station (NHTSA, 2003a). Seat belt and child restraint use may also be 
affected by vehicle design features such as the comfort and convenience of belt systems, and by 
lights, buzzers or gear shift interlocks to remind occupants to buckle up (NHTSA, 2003b; Van 
Houten, Malenfant, Reagan, Sifrit, & Compton, 2009). These vehicular countermeasures are not 
included in this guide because SHSOs have little or no authority or responsibility for them. 
 
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 5 
Resources 
 
The agencies and organizations listed below can provide more information on seat belt use and 
child passenger safety, and links to numerous other resources. 
 
Seat Belts and Child Passenger Safety 
• National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: 
o Occupant Protection - www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Occupant+Protection 
o Parents Central - www.safercar.gov/parents/index.htm 
o Research and Evaluation - www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Research+&+Evaluation 
o Behavioral Safety Research Reports - 
ntlsearch.bts.gov/repository/ntlc/nhtsa/index.shtm 
• Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Injury Prevention & Control: Motor Vehicle 
Safety: www.cdc.gov/Motorvehiclesafety/index.html 
• Governors Highway Safety Association: 
www.ghsa.org/html/issues/occprotection/index.html 
• Insurance Institute for Highway Safety: 
o Safety Belt Use - www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/t/safety-belts/topicoverview 
o Children - www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/t/child-safety/topicoverview 
• National Safety Council: 
o Seat Belts - www.nsc.org/safety_road/DriverSafety/Pages/SeatBelts.aspx 
o Child Safety Seats & Boosters - 
www.nsc.org/safety_road/DriverSafety/Pages/ChildPassengerSafety.aspx 
• AAA: 
o Seat Belts - http://exchange.aaa.com/safety/roadway-safety/safety-belts/ 
o Child Passenger Safety - http://exchange.aaa.com/safety/child-safety/ 
• AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety: www.aaafoundation.org 
 
Child Passenger Safety 
• American Academy of Pediatrics, Annual Car Seat information For Families guide: 
www.healthychildren.org/English/safety-prevention/on-the-go/Pages/Car-Safety Seats-
Information-for-Families.aspx 
• Automotive Safety Program, Riley Hospital for Children: www.preventinjury.org 
• Center for Injury Research and Prevention, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia: 
www.research.chop.edu/programs/injury/ 
• Safe Ride News Publications: www.saferidenews.com 
• SafetyBeltSafe U.S.A.: www.carseat.org 
University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute: www.cpsbestpractice.org 
 
 
Key terms 
• Primary enforcement: laws that permit child passenger safety law and seat belt use law 
violators to be stopped and cited by a law enforcement officer independently of any other 
traffic violation. 
• Secondary enforcement: laws that permit child passenger safety law and seat belt use law 
violators to be cited only after they have been stopped for some other traffic violation. 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 6 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
2.1 Short term, high visibility seat belt law 
enforcement 
 
$$$ 
Medium† 
Medium 
2.2 Combined seat belt and alcohol 
enforcement, nighttime 
 
$$$ 
Unknown 
Medium 
2.3 Sustained enforcement 
 
Varies 
Unknown 
Varies 
 
Countermeasures That Work 
 
Countermeasures to increase seat belt use are listed below and discussed individually in this 
chapter. The table is intended to give a rough estimate of each countermeasure’s effectiveness, 
cost, use, and time required for implementation. The terms used are described below. 
Effectiveness, cost, and time to implement can vary substantially from State to State and 
community to community. Costs for many countermeasures are difficult to measure, so the 
summary terms are very approximate. See each countermeasure discussion for more information 
on each item. 
 
Countermeasures Targeting Adults 
 
1. Seat Belt Use Laws 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
1.1 State primary enforcement seat belt use 
laws 
 
$ 
Medium 
Short 
1.2 Local primary enforcement seat belt use 
laws 
 
$ 
Low 
Short 
1.3 Increased seat belt use law penalties 
† 
$ 
Low 
Short 
†Effectiveness has been demonstrated for increased fines but has not yet been demonstrated for driver’s 
license points. 
 
2. Seat Belt Law Enforcement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
†Used in many jurisdictions but often only once or twice each year 
 
3. Communications and Outreach 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
3.1 Supporting enforcement 
 
Varies 
Medium 
Medium 
3.2 Strategies for low-belt-use groups 
† 
Unknown 
Unknown 
Medium 
†For programs supporting enforcement 
 
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 7 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
5.1 Short high-visibility CR law enforcement 
 
$$$ 
Medium† 
Medium 
 
 
Countermeasures Targeting Children and Youth 
 
4. Child/Youth Occupant Restraint Laws 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
4.1 Strengthening child/youth occupant 
restraint laws 
 
 
$ 
 
High 
 
Short 
 
5. Child Restraint/Booster Seat Law Enforcement 
 
 
 
† Used in many jurisdictions but often only once or twice each year 
 
6. Communications and Outreach 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
6.1 Strategies for older children 
 
Varies 
Unknown 
Medium 
6.2 Strategies for child restraint and booster 
seat use 
† 
Varies 
Unknown 
Medium 
† For stand-alone programs not supporting enforcement 
 
7. Other Strategies 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
7.1 School programs 
 
Varies 
Unknown 
Varies 
7.2 Inspection stations 
 
$$ 
High 
Short 
 
 
Effectiveness: 
- Demonstrated to be effective by several high-quality evaluations with 
consistent results 
- Demonstrated to be effective in certain situations 
- Likely to be effective based on balance of evidence from high-quality evaluations 
or other sources 
- Effectiveness still undetermined; different methods of implementing this 
countermeasure produce different results 
- Limited or no high-quality evaluation evidence 
 
Effectiveness is measured by increases in observed occupant restraint use and decreases in motor 
vehicle occupant crash injuries. See individual countermeasure descriptions for information on 
effectiveness size and how effectiveness is measured. 
 
Cost to implement: 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 8 
$$$: requires extensive new facilities, staff, equipment, or publicity, or makes heavy 
demands on current resources 
$$: requires some additional staff time, equipment, and/or facilities 
$: can be implemented with current staff, perhaps with training; limited costs for equipment 
or facilities 
These estimates do not include the costs of enacting legislation or establishing policies. 
 
Use: 
High: more than two-thirds of the States, or a substantial majority of communities 
Medium: between one-third and two-thirds of States or communities 
Low: fewer than one-third of the States or communities 
Unknown: data not available 
 
Time to implement: 
Long: more than one year 
Medium: more than three months but less than one year 
Short: three months or less 
These estimates do not include the time required to enact legislation or establish policies. 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 9 
Countermeasures Targeting Adults 
 
1. Seat Belt Use Laws 
 
1.1 State Primary Enforcement Seat Belt Use Laws 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Short 
 
Primary enforcement seat belt use laws permit law enforcement officers to stop and cite a 
violator independent of any other traffic violation. Secondary enforcement laws allow law 
enforcement officers to cite violators only after they first have been stopped for some other 
traffic violation. 
 
Use: As of August 2014, 33 States and the District of Columbia had primary belt use laws, 16 
States had secondary enforcement laws, and New Hampshire had no belt use law applicable to 
adults (GHSA, 2014a; IIHS, 2014). However, some States only have primary enforcement for 
certain occupants (for instance drivers or people older than a specified age) and secondary 
enforcement for other occupants (for example, North Carolina’s seat belt law is primary for 
drivers and front seat passengers 16 and older but secondary for rear seat passengers 16 and 
older).  
 
Effectiveness: In 2014, belt use averaged 90% in the 33 States and District of Columbia with 
primary belt laws and 79% in States with weaker enforcement laws (Pickrell & Choi, 2015). 
Nichols, Tippetts, et al. (2010) examined the relationship between the type of seat belt law 
enforcement and seat belt use between 1997 and 2008. Compared with secondary laws, primary 
laws were associated with a higher observed seat belt use (10 to 12% higher) and higher seat belt 
use among front-seat occupants killed in crashes (9% higher) (NHTSA, 2014b). 
 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s systematic review of 13 high-quality studies 
(Shults, Nichols, Dinh-Zarr, Sleet, & Elder, 2004) found that primary laws increase belt use by 
about 14 percentage points and reduce occupant fatalities by about 8% compared to secondary 
laws. Similarly, Nichols, Tippetts, Fell, Eichelberger, and Haseltime (2014) found that primary 
enforcement laws were associated with a 9- to 10-percentage-point increase in belt use. In 
another study, Farmer and Williams (2005) found that passenger vehicle driver death rates 
dropped by 7% when States changed from secondary to primary enforcement.  
 
Research has provided strong support that changing from secondary to primary enforcement seat 
belt laws increases occupant seat belt use during the nighttime hours as well as the daytime hours 
(Chaudhary, Tison, & Casanova, 2010; Masten, 2007). Chaudhary et al. (2010) evaluated the 
effects of Maine's change from secondary to primary enforcement of their seat belt law. 
Observational surveys conducted over an 18-month period after this change went into effect 
measured increases in seat belt use from 77% to 84% during the daytime and from 69% to 81% 
at night. 
 
Hedlund et al. (2008) studied the effects of primary law changes on seat belt use and occupant 
fatalities in Michigan, New Jersey, Washington, Delaware, Illinois, and Tennessee. Strong 
evidence was found that primary seat belt laws increase seat belt use. Furthermore, statistically 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 10 
significant decreases in the number of front-seat passenger vehicle occupant fatalities were found 
in Michigan and Washington and the decrease in New Jersey was marginally significant. The 
lack of significant effects on fatalities in Illinois and Tennessee, as well as a marginal increase in 
Delaware, was attributed in part to the short amount of time since the implementation of the 
primary provisions in these States as well as the small number of fatalities in Delaware. 
 
Costs: Once legislation has been enacted to upgrade a secondary law to primary, the costs are to 
publicize the change and enforce the new law. Publicity costs to inform the public of the law 
change should be low because the media will cover the law change extensively. Law 
enforcement can adapt its secondary law enforcement strategies for use under the primary law or 
may be able to use new strategies permitted by the primary law. States wishing to increase 
enforcement and publicity to magnify the effect of the law change will incur additional costs (see 
Chapter 2, Section 2.1). 
 
Time to implement: A primary belt use law can be implemented as soon as the law is enacted 
unless it has a delayed effective date. 
 
Other issues: 
• Partial coverage seat belt laws: Most State belt use laws cover passengers over a 
specified age and are designed to work in combination with child passenger safety laws 
covering younger passengers. However, belt use laws do not cover adult rear seat 
passengers in 23 States (GHSA, 2014a; IIHS, 2014). Most States’ laws exempt some 
vehicles, such as those designed for more than 10 passengers, taxis, postal delivery 
vehicles, farm vehicles, pickup trucks, or vehicles not required to have seat belts 
(Glassbrenner, 2005). Some States exempt passengers for specified medical or physical 
reasons (Glassbrenner, 2005). A good belt use law should be comprehensive, covering all 
seating positions equipped with a seat belt in all passenger vehicles (ACTS, 2001; 
NCUTLO, 2004; NHTSA, 2003b). Such a law sends a clear and consistent message to 
the public. 
• Opposition to primary seat belt laws: Opponents of primary seat belt use laws claim 
that primary laws impinge on individual rights and provide opportunities for law 
enforcement to harass minority groups. Studies in several States have found that minority 
groups were ticketed at similar or lower rates than others after a primary law was 
implemented (Shults et al., 2004; Tison, Williams, Chaudhary, & Nichols, 2011). When 
Michigan changed from a secondary to a primary law, harassment complaints were very 
uncommon both before and after the law change. The proportion of seat belt use citations 
issued to minority groups decreased under the primary law. In a telephone survey, the 
vast majority of people who actually received seat belt citations did not feel that they 
were singled out on the basis of race, age, or gender. However, some minorities and 
young drivers reported perceptions of harassment (Eby, Kostyniuk, Molnar, Vivoda, & 
Miller, 2004). 
• Effect on low-seat-belt-use groups: Studies in States that changed their law from 
secondary to primary show that belt use increased across a broad range of drivers and 
passengers. In some States, belt use increased more for low-belt-use groups, including 
Hispanics, African-Americans, and impaired drivers, than for all occupants (Shults et al., 
2004). 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 11 
1.2 Local Primary Enforcement Seat Belt Use Laws and Ordinances 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Low 
Time: Short 
 
In some States with secondary enforcement belt use laws, individual communities have enacted 
and enforced community-wide primary laws or ordinances. These laws differ from statewide 
laws only in that they are enacted, publicized, and enforced locally. 
 
Use: No data is available on how many communities have primary laws. 
 
Effectiveness: The available evidence suggests that local primary belt laws increase belt use 
(Lucke et al. 2004) 
 
St. Louis County, Missouri, implemented a primary seat belt use ordinance in March 2007. 
Following implementation of this ordinance, the St. Louis County Police Department conducted 
an intense high visibility enforcement campaign, accompanied by publicity in the form of 
variable message boards and permanent road signs, along an 8-mile corridor on State Highway 
21. Observational surveys were conducted along the Highway 21 corridor and a control site prior 
to the start of the enforcement and immediately after its conclusion. The observational surveys 
measured an increase in belt use from 83% to 88% along the Highway 21 corridor and a small, 
59% to 57% decrease in belt use along the control corridor (Nichols, Solomon, Chaffe, & 
Preusser, 2010). 
 
Costs: As with a statewide law, the costs are for publicity and enforcement. Both must be 
directed to the community itself. 
 
Time to implement: As with a statewide law, a local law can be implemented as soon as it is 
enacted. The law’s debate and passage likely will generate initial publicity. 
 
Other issues: See the discussion under Chapter 2, Section 1.1, Primary Enforcement Belt Use 
Laws. 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 12 
1.3 Increased Belt Use Law Penalties: Fines and Driver’s License Points 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $ 
Use: Low 
Time: Short 
†Effectiveness has been demonstrated for increased fines but has not yet been demonstrated for driver’s 
license points 
 
Penalties for most belt use law violations are low. As of August 2014, a violation resulted in a 
typical fine of $25 or more in all but 15 States (IIHS, 2014). Low fines may not convince 
nonusers to buckle up and may also send a message that belt use laws are not taken seriously. 
 
Most States penalize serious traffic law violations by assessing demerit points against a driver’s 
license. Drivers lose their licenses if they accumulate more than a specified number of points 
within a specified period of time.  
 
Use: As of August 2014, 12 primary law States and 3 secondary law States had maximum fines 
of $30 or more for at least some occupants (IIHS, 2014). As of March 2009, 3 jurisdictions, the 
District of Columbia, Georgia, and New Mexico, assessed driver license points for all seat belt 
law violations (Decina, Hall, & Lococo, 2010). 
 
Effectiveness: The effect of driver’s license points on belt use has not been evaluated. Houston 
and Richardson (2006) studied the effects of belt law type (primary or secondary), fine level, and 
coverage (front seat only or front and rear seats) using belt use data from 1991 to 2001. They 
found that primary belt laws and higher fines increase belt use. 
 
Nichols, Tippetts, et al. (2010 and 2014) examined the relationship between seat belt violation 
fine and belt use and found that increasing fines was associated with increased belt use. 
Increasing a State’s fine from $25 to $60 was associated with an increase of 3% to 4% in both 
observed belt use and belt use among front-seat occupants killed in crashes. Similarly, increasing 
the fine from $25 to $100 was associated with an increase of 6% to 7%. 
 
Costs: The direct costs associated with increasing fine levels or assessing driver’s license points 
are minimal. 
 
Time to implement: Both measures can be implemented as soon as they are publicized and 
appropriate changes are made to the motor vehicle records systems. 
 
Other issues: 
• Balance: If penalties are excessively low, then they may have little effect. If they are 
excessively high, then law enforcement officers may be reluctant to issue citations and 
judges may be reluctant to impose them. States should choose penalty levels that strike an 
appropriate balance. 
• Penalty levels are part of a system: Penalty levels are part of the complete system of 
well-publicized enforcement of strong belt use laws. Appropriate penalty levels help 
make strong laws. But without effective enforcement, judicial support, and good 
publicity, increased penalties may have little effect. 
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 13 
2. Seat Belt Law Enforcement 
 
2.1 Short-Term, High Visibility Seat Belt Law Enforcement 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$$ 
Use: Medium† 
Time: Medium 
† Used in many jurisdictions but often only once or twice each year 
 
The most common high visibility belt law enforcement method consists of short (typically 
lasting for two weeks), intense, highly publicized periods of increased belt law enforcement, 
frequently using checkpoints (in States where checkpoints are permitted), saturation patrols, or 
enforcement zones. These periods sometimes are called STEP waves (Selective Traffic 
Enforcement Programs) or blitzes. The method was developed in Canada in the 1980s (Boase, 
Jonah, & Dawson, 2004) and demonstrated in several United States communities (Williams & 
Wells, 2004). It was implemented statewide in North Carolina in 1993 using the Click It or 
Ticket slogan (Reinfurt, 2004), and subsequently adopted in other States under different names 
and sponsors (Solomon et al., 2004). NHTSA’s Click It or Ticket high visibility enforcement 
model is described in detail in Solomon, Chaudhary, and Cosgrove (2003) and Solomon, Chaffe, 
and Cosgrove (2007). 
 
All high visibility enforcement programs include communications and outreach strategies that 
use some combination of earned media (news stories) and paid advertising. Communications and 
outreach can be conducted at local, State, regional, or national levels. 
 
Use: Most States currently conduct short-term, high visibility belt law enforcement programs in 
May of each year as part of national seat belt mobilizations (Hinch, Solomon, & Tison, 2014). 
Some States also conduct seat belt mobilizations in November. NHTSA has supported these 
campaigns. More than 10,000 law enforcement agencies took part in the May 2012 campaign 
(Hinch et al., 2014). See Milano et al. (2004) for a detailed account of the history and evolution 
of the national campaigns. 
 
Effectiveness: Hedlund et al. (2008) compared 16 States with high seat belt rates and 15 States 
with low seat belt rates. The single most important difference between the two groups was the 
level of enforcement, rather than demographic characteristics or the amount spent on media. 
High-belt-use States issued twice as many citations per capita during their Click It or Ticket 
campaigns as low-belt-use States. Similarly, Hinch et al. (2014) found that law enforcement in 
primary belt use law States issued more seat belt citations in the 2012 campaign than did law 
enforcement in secondary belt use law States. 
 
CDC’s systematic review of 15 high-quality studies (Dinh-Zarr et al., 2001; Shults et al., 2004) 
found that short-term, high visibility enforcement programs increased belt use by about 16 
percentage points, with greater gains when pre-program belt use was lower. Because many of the 
studies were conducted when belt use rates were considerably lower than at present, new 
programs likely will not have as large an effect. Following the enforcement program, belt use 
often dropped by about 6 percentage points demonstrating the ratchet effect typical of these 
programs (belt use increases during and immediately after the program and then decreases 
somewhat, but remains at a level higher than the pre-program belt use). 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 14 
 
The May 2002 Click It or Ticket campaign evaluation demonstrated the effect of different media 
strategies. Belt use increased by 8.6 percentage points across 10 States that used paid advertising 
extensively in their campaigns. Belt use increased by 2.7 percentage points across 4 States that 
used limited paid advertising and increased by only 0.5 percentage points across 4 States that 
used no paid advertising (Solomon, Ulmer, & Preusser, 2002). Milano et al. (2004) summarize 
an extensive amount of information from national telephone surveys conducted in conjunction 
with each national campaign from 1997 through 2003.  
 
The 2012 Click It or Ticket campaign used extensive paid advertising ($8 million nationally and 
$12 million in individual States). National belt use following the campaign increased to 86% 
from 84% in 2011 (Hinch et al., 2014).  
 
Since 2002 there has been a history of using extensive paid advertising both nationally and 
within States to support the Click it or Ticket campaign with clear enforcement images and 
messages. National belt use has increased significantly since then (from 75% in 2002 to 87% in 
2014).  
 
Costs: High visibility enforcement campaigns are expensive. They require extensive time from 
State highway safety office and media staff and often from consultants to develop, produce, and 
distribute publicity and time from law enforcement officers to conduct the enforcement. Paid 
advertising increases a campaign’s effectiveness, but can be quite expensive. In the average 
State, paid advertising costs were nearly $350,000 for the 2007 campaign (Solomon, Preusser, et 
al., 2009). More recently, the 2012 Click It or Ticket campaign used extensive paid advertising 
($8 million nationally and $12 million in individual States). 
 
Time to implement: A high visibility enforcement program (including media) requires 4 to 6 
months to plan and implement. 
 
Other issues: 
• Effects in primary and secondary belt law States: High visibility enforcement 
campaigns are effective in both primary and secondary law States. NHTSA’s 2003 
evaluation found that belt use increased by 4.6 percentage points across the primary law 
States and by 6.6 percentage points across the secondary law States with the primary law 
States having had higher use rates before the campaigns (Solomon et al., 2003). 
NHTSA’s evaluation of the 2004 Click It or Ticket campaign found that the campaign 
increased belt use in 25 secondary jurisdictions by an average of 3.7 percentage points. 
Belt use decreased in the remaining 5 jurisdictions by an average of 2.3 percentage points 
(Solomon et al., 2007).  
• Effects on low-belt-use groups: CDC’s systematic review observed that short-term, high 
visibility enforcement campaigns increased belt use more among traditionally lower-belt-
use groups, including young drivers, rural drivers, males, African-Americans, and 
Hispanics (Shults et al., 2004). See Chapter 2, Section 3.2 for further discussion on 
strategies to reach low-belt-use groups. 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 15 
 
2.2 Combined Seat Belt and Alcohol Enforcement, Nighttime 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$$ 
Use: Low 
Time: Medium 
 
Short-term, high visibility seat belt law enforcement programs (Chapter 2, Section 2.1) require 
substantial funding and law enforcement resources. In addition, a number of States have 
experienced smaller gains in seat belt use associated with enforcement campaigns after 
conducting them for several years (Nichols & Ledingham, 2008). These programs also have been 
conducted almost exclusively during the daylight hours, and the available data suggest that belt 
use is lower at night (Chaudhary, Alonge, & Preusser, 2005; Hedlund et al., 2004; Nichols & 
Ledingham, 2008). 
 
According to 2013 FARS data, almost two-thirds (62%) of passenger vehicle occupants killed in 
crashes between 9 p.m. and 6 a.m. were unrestrained (FARS data). In contrast, 40% of fatally 
injured passenger vehicle occupants in daytime crashes were unrestrained (FARS data). 
Furthermore, according to FARS data for the 10-year period from 2004 to 2013, nighttime seat 
belt use was on average 18 percentage points lower than daytime belt use (FARS data). 
 
Available data and program evaluations suggest that more emphasis on seat belt enforcement 
during the late-night hours and in conjunction with alcohol laws can provide additional gains in 
seat belt use and injury reduction (Nichols & Ledingham, 2008). Retaining the short-term, high- 
intensity enforcement model but including other traffic safety issues such as impaired driving 
(DWI) and excessive speed, can be effective since the same drivers tend to drink, speed, and not 
buckle up. In particular, combined DWI and belt law checkpoints, saturation patrols, or 
enforcement zone operations can be conducted at night, when belt use is lower, DWI higher, and 
crash risk greater than during the day. Using night-vision technology, where permitted, or other 
light enhancing technologies can assist with nighttime enforcement. The first demonstration of 
this strategy took place in 2004 in Reading, Pennsylvania (Chaudhary et al., 2005). See Chapter 
1, Section 2.5 “Integrated Enforcement” for further discussion on combined seat belt and alcohol 
enforcement. 
 
Use: There is little information available on how frequently the multifocused high visibility 
enforcement strategy is used. One demonstration of a nighttime program in Pennsylvania was 
conducted in 2004 (Chaudhary et al., 2005), another demonstration program involving three 
North Carolina communities was conducted in 2007 (Solomon, Chaffe, & Preusser, 2009), and 
Washington State conducted a two-year statewide high visibility nighttime seat belt enforcement 
program from May 2007 through May 2009 (Thomas, Blomberg, & Van Dyk, 2010). 
 
Effectiveness: A 2004 nighttime high visibility belt enforcement program in Reading, 
Pennsylvania, increased nighttime front-seat-occupant belt use by 6 percentage points, from 50% 
to 56%. Daytime belt use increased by 3 percentage points, from 56% to 59% (Chaudhary et al., 
2005). 
 
A 2007 evaluation of three high visibility enforcement demonstration programs designed to 
improve nighttime seat belt use in three communities – two in North Carolina with a primary seat 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 16 
belt law and one in West Virginia with a secondary law -- concluded that nighttime high- 
visibility seat belt law enforcement programs can be effective for increasing nighttime belt use. 
Furthermore, roadside breath tests used to collect BAC measures in one North Carolina 
community indicated that the program also decreased drinking and driving (Solomon, Chaffe, et 
al., 2009). 
 
An evaluation of the first year of the Washington nighttime seat belt enforcement program found 
that the program, which used a combination of high visibility enforcement and both paid and 
earned media, has contributed to an increase in observed nighttime belt use (from 94.6% to 
95.7%) without a decrease in daytime belt use. The program also looked at the characteristics of 
observed drivers (through self-report, driving, and criminal records). While impossible to 
summarize all their findings, it is clear that there are notable differences between unrestrained 
and restrained drivers by time of day. For example, unrestrained nighttime drivers were 2.7 times 
more likely than restrained daytime drivers to have had a felony arrest and 3.0 times more likely 
to have had an alcohol citation. The program continued through May 2009 (Thomas, Blomberg, 
& Van Dyk, 2010). 
 
Costs: The costs of combined high visibility enforcement programs are similar to and probably 
somewhat greater than the costs of programs directed exclusively at belt law violators (Chapter 
2, Section 2.1). Publicity must be directed at different offenses in turn, and law enforcement 
officers must have the training and equipment to address different offenses. Nighttime programs 
may entail somewhat higher costs if new night-vision technology is used. 
 
Time to implement: Combined or nighttime high visibility enforcement programs require 4 to 6 
months to plan and implement. 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 17 
 
2.3 Sustained Enforcement 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Varies 
 
Some jurisdictions, including California, Oregon, and Washington, enforce their belt use laws 
vigorously as part of customary traffic enforcement activities. 
 
Use: The extent of vigorous sustained belt law enforcement, with or without extensive publicity, 
is unknown. 
 
Effectiveness: There are few studies of the effectiveness of sustained enforcement (Hedlund, 
Preusser, & Shults, 2004). California, Oregon, and Washington, States that are reported to use 
sustained enforcement, have recorded statewide belt use well above national belt use rates since 
2002 (California: 91 to 97%; Oregon: 88 to 98%; Washington: 93 to 98%) (Chen, 2014). 
 
Nichols and Ledingham (2008) conducted a review of the impact of enforcement, as well as 
legislation and sanctions, on seat belt use over the past two decades and concluded that sustained 
enforcement (implemented as a component of regular patrols or as special patrols) is as effective 
as “blitz” enforcement (short-term, high visibility enforcement) and unlike blitz campaigns, is 
not usually associated with abrupt drops in belt use after program completion. 
 
Costs: Sustained enforcement may require funds for publicity. As with short-term, high- 
visibility enforcement programs, publicity costs will depend on the mix of earned and paid 
media. 
 
Time to implement: Sustained enforcement by law enforcement officers can be implemented 
immediately. Extensive publicity will take three or four months to plan and implement initially, 
but this time will decrease once the program has been implemented for some period of time. 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 18 
3. Communications and Outreach 
 
3.1 Communications and Outreach Supporting Enforcement 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Medium 
Time: Medium 
 
Effective, high visibility communications and outreach are an essential part of successful seat 
belt law high visibility enforcement programs (Solomon et al., 2003). Paid advertising can be a 
critical part of the media strategy. Paid advertising brings with it the ability to control message 
content, timing, placement, and repetition (Milano et al., 2004). 
 
Use: All high visibility enforcement programs include communications and outreach strategies 
that use some combination of earned media (news stories) and paid advertising. Communications 
and outreach can be conducted at local, State, regional, or national levels. 
 
Effectiveness: The May 2002 Click It or Ticket campaign evaluation demonstrated the effect of 
different media strategies. Belt use increased by 8.6 percentage points across 10 States that used 
paid advertising extensively in their campaigns. Belt use increased by 2.7 percentage points 
across 4 States that used limited paid advertising and increased by only 0.5 percentage points 
across 4 States that used no paid advertising (Solomon et al., 2002). Milano et al. (2004) 
summarize an extensive amount of information from national telephone surveys conducted in 
conjunction with each national campaign from 1997 through 2003. 
 
Costs: Paid advertising can be expensive. In the average State, paid advertising costs were nearly 
$350,000 for the 2007 campaign (Solomon, Preusser, et al., 2009). 
 
Time to implement: An effective media campaign requires 4 to 6 months to plan and 
implement. 
 
Other Issues: 
• Social media: NHTSA and some States have begun using social networking sites to 
reach the general public with messages concerning seat belt use. Although sites such as 
Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube can effectively and inexpensively reach large numbers 
of people, there are no evaluations of seat belt use campaigns that use this approach. 
Social media is unlikely to be effective as a stand-alone strategy; however, it may be a 
useful approach when combined with other communications to support specific 
campaigns. Additionally, because information shared via social media may travel 
quickly, it is essential that States ensure the message they want to convey is accurate. 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 19 
 
3.2 Communications and Outreach Strategies for Low-Belt-Use Groups 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: Varies 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Medium 
† For programs supporting enforcement 
 
Nationally, seat belt use is at 87% (Pickrell & Choi, 2015), with 41 States and the District of 
Columbia having seat belt use at 80% or higher (Chen, 2014). This indicates the large majority 
of drivers and passengers are wearing their seat belts; however, there remains a proportion of the 
population who still do not buckle up regularly. 
 
Generally, seat belt use rates for male occupants are lower than rates for female occupants, 84% 
and 88% respectively in 2012. This trend has been evident since at least 2003 (Pickrell, 2014). 
Similarly, belt use rates for occupants 16 to 24 years old tends to be lower than the use rates of 
other age groups. In 2012, belt use was 80% for occupants 16 to 24, 87% for occupants 8 to 15, 
87% for occupants 25 to 69, and 88% for those occupants 70 and older (Pickrell, 2014). Since 
2005, belt use rates for black occupants have been lower than use rates for members of other 
races. In 2012, belt use for black occupants was 77% compared to 86% among white occupants, 
and 92% among members of other races (Pickrell, 2014). Additionally, NHTSA’s 2014 National 
Occupant Protection Use Survey indicated belt use was lower for front seat passengers (85%) 
compared to drivers (87%), pick-up truck occupants (77%) compared to occupants of passenger 
cars (88%) and vans/SUVs (89%), and was lower in rural areas (83%) compared to urban (86%) 
and suburban (89%) areas (Pickrell & Choi, 2015). NHTSA’s 2007 national telephone survey 
found the same patterns with males, young drivers, rural drivers, and pickup truck drivers-all 
reporting lower seat belt use (Boyle & Lampkin, 2008, p. iv). 
 
Most non-seat belt users report wearing seat belts at least some of the time. In NHTSA’s 2007 
national telephone survey, only 1% of drivers said they never used their belts and another 1% 
said they rarely used seat belts (Boyle & Lampkin, 2008). Backseat passengers are more 
frequently unbelted: 11% said they never use belts and another 6% said they rarely use them, 
while only 58% reported wearing belts all the time (Boyle & Lampkin, 2008). The most frequent 
reasons given by drivers for not wearing a belt were that they: were only driving a short distance 
(59%), forgot (52%), were in a rush (39%), or they found the belt uncomfortable (35%) (Boyle 
& Lampkin, 2008). 
 
Use: Communications and outreach campaigns directed at low-belt-use groups are likely 
common, but no summary is available. 
 
Effectiveness: Communications and outreach campaigns directed at low-belt-use groups have 
been demonstrated to be effective for targeted programs that support, and are supported by, 
enforcement. The effectiveness of stand-alone programs not supported by enforcement is 
unclear, though North Dakota has demonstrated success with its 2003 “Pick Up the Habit for 
Someone You Love” campaign. 
 
High visibility enforcement programs generally have been effective in increasing belt use (see 
Chapter 2, Section 2.1; Shults et al., 2004). Their publicity messages and placement can be 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 20 
directed at specific lower-belt-use groups. The 2011 Click It or Ticket campaign targeted 18- to 
34-year old males and found they were more likely than the general population to have heard 
about special enforcement efforts (21% versus 17%) and were more likely to have heard 
messages to buckle up (75% versus 71%), but were somewhat less likely to think a ticket was 
likely if they did not wear their seatbelt while driving (64% versus 66%) (Nichols & Solomon, 
2013). 
 
Trauma Nurses Talk Tough, originally developed in Oregon in 1988, is a seat belt diversion 
program implemented by trauma nurses in a hospital setting that targets drivers who have been 
ticketed for not wearing a seat belt. The program was implemented in Robeson County, North 
Carolina, a diverse county whose seat belt rates were consistently lower than the rest of the State. 
Those who went through the program were more likely to have a positive outlook on the use of 
seat belts. Following the program, observed seat belt use increased significantly in the county at 
8 survey locations (from 81% to 86%) and 2 additional sites (from 69% to 78%) (NHTSA, 
2014c; Thomas, Blomberg, Fairchild, & Cosgrove, 2014).  
 
The 5 States of NHTSA’s Region 6 conducted a two-week “Buckle Up in Your Truck” paid 
advertising campaign immediately before their May 2004 Click It or Ticket campaign. The truck 
campaign’s message complemented the Click It or Ticket message by focusing on the dangers of 
riding unrestrained in a truck and stressing the usefulness of belts in rollover crashes. The 
campaign spent nearly $600,000 for paid advertising in the 5 participating States. Surveys at the 
end of the campaign, before any enforcement-based Click It or Ticket publicity, showed that belt 
use among pickup truck occupants increased by about 2 percentage points. Following the Click It 
or Ticket publicity, belt use among pickup truck occupants increased by another 6 percentage 
points (Solomon, Chaffe, et al., 2007). 
 
In a November 2004 follow-up study, an intensive campaign using the same “Buckle Up in Your 
Truck” message was conducted in Amarillo, Texas. The campaign used paid advertising 
emphasizing belt law enforcement as well as earned media featuring local law enforcement 
officers. Belt use in pickup trucks increased by 12 percentage points in Amarillo and belt use in 
cars increased by 8 percentage points. At the same time, belt use in a comparison community 
increased by 5 percentage points for pickup truck occupants and by 4 percentage points for car 
occupants (Solomon, Chaffe, et al., 2007). 
 
Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, and Nebraska (in NHTSA’s Region 7) implemented a similar “Buckle 
Up in Your Truck” program in May 2006 and 2007. The campaign sought to increase seat belt 
use among pickup truck occupants by focusing on the dangers of riding unbuckled and 
increasing awareness of ongoing enforcement efforts. Following this campaign, these States also 
conducted statewide Click It or Ticket campaigns that included additional paid media and 
enforcement directed at occupants of all vehicle types. The “Buckle Up in Your Truck” 
campaign did increase the awareness of “buckle up in trucks” messages, but in terms of observed 
seat belt use, the Click It or Ticket campaign had the greater effect (Nichols, Tison, Solomon, 
Ledingham, Preusser, & Siegler, 2009). 
 
NHTSA’s Region 5 implemented a Rural Demonstration Program prior to the May 2005 Click It 
or Ticket mobilization. The goal of the Rural Demonstration Project was to evaluate strategies 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 21 
for increasing seat belt usage in rural areas. Paid media was used to notify rural residents that 
seat belt laws were being enforced. Active enforcement was included during the initial phase in 3 
of the 6 Region 5 States (Illinois, Indiana, Ohio), but only the paid media component was 
implemented in the remaining three States (Minnesota, Michigan, Wisconsin). During the 
Demonstration Project phase, States that had intensified enforcement had significant increases in 
usage in their targeted rural areas. All 6 Region 5 States intensified enforcement during the Click 
It or Ticket mobilization, but States that had intensified enforcement during the Demonstration 
Project showed substantially greater overall statewide gains during the Click It or Ticket phase 
than did the States that had not intensified enforcement during the Rural Demonstration Program 
(Nichols, Ledingham, & Preusser, 2007). 
 
Demonstration programs conducted in Kentucky, Mississippi, North Dakota, and Wyoming 
during 2004–2007 sought to increase seat belt use through a variety of innovative approaches. 
The primary method employed by Mississippi, North Dakota, and Wyoming was to target low- 
belt-use counties for additional enforcement and enforcement focused publicity. The seat belt 
laws in Kentucky and Mississippi were also upgraded from secondary to primary enforcement 
during the demonstration programs. All 4 States achieved significant statewide increases in belt 
use above baseline belt use rates (Blomberg, Thomas, & Cleven, 2009). 
 
The North Dakota and Amarillo campaigns are well-documented examples of successful 
programs that target low-belt-use groups. They used all the characteristics of effective 
communications and outreach campaigns: good target audience research, effective and creative 
message development, and good message placement using both paid and earned media. The 
overall South Central Region campaign produced only modest gains, but Kentucky (67% to 76% 
statewide), Mississippi (58% to 65% in targeted counties), North Dakota (66% to 80% in 
targeted counties), and Wyoming (55% to 70% in targeted counties) were able to achieve 
significant increases in seat belt use through their programs (Blomberg, Thomas, & Cleven, 
2009). 
 
North Dakota’s “Pick Up the Habit for Someone You Love” campaign in 2003 provides one of 
the few examples of a successful communications and outreach program not directly connected 
to enforcement. It was directed at male pickup drivers, whose pre-program belt use was 20 
percentage-points lower than the statewide 63% rate. A survey of these drivers identified 
effective message goals (choose and remember to buckle up), message strategies (motivation 
through loved ones, sometimes using humor), and message placement (combining paid and 
earned radio and television, posters, and public relations events). The program increased 
observed belt use of male pickup drivers by 7 percentage points at a total cost of $295,000 
(North Dakota DOT, 2004). 
 
Costs: As with enforcement-related communications and outreach, costs vary depending on 
program quality and delivery. Paid advertising can be expensive. 
 
Time to implement: A good media campaign will require 4 to 6 months to plan and implement. 
 
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 22 
 
Countermeasures Targeting Children and Youth 
 
4. Child/Youth Occupant Restraint Laws 
 
4.1 Strengthening Child/Youth Occupant Restraint Laws 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Short 
 
Beginning with Tennessee, every State between 1978 and 1985 passed laws requiring children 
traveling in motor vehicles to be restrained in child restraints appropriate for the child’s age and 
size (Kahane, 1986). Today, State child restraint laws vary in terms of who is covered by the 
law, the types of restraints required, and where in the vehicle the restraints can be positioned. In 
some States, children as young as 5 may be restrained using the adult seat belt, while other State 
laws require children up to age 9 or 80 pounds or 57 inches tall to be restrained in a child 
restraint or booster seat (GHSA, 2014b; IIHS, 2014). Research has shown that laws requiring a 
child restraint or booster seat for children 4 to 7 are associated with a decrease in fatalities 
(Mannix et al., 2012).  
 
In general, young children are usually covered by child restraint laws, while older children and 
adults are covered by seat belt laws. However, in 5 States some children under 16 are covered by 
neither law (IIHS, 2014). Most child passenger safety laws are primary; however, most seat belt 
laws start coverage before a child reaches 18, so older children and teens might be covered by a 
secondary enforcement seat belt law in some States. Research has found that teens living in a 
secondary enforcement State are less likely to report wearing their seat belt than teens living in 
primary enforcement States (Garcia-Espana, Winston, & Durbin, 2012). Strong occupant 
restraint use laws should be comprehensive, covering all seating positions equipped with a seat 
belt in all passenger vehicles (ACTS, 2001; NCUTLO, 2006; NHTSA, 2003b; NHTSA, 2006). 
Such a law sends a clear and consistent message to the public. NHTSA and various partners have 
encouraged States to expand their child restraint laws to include “booster” provisions that covers 
children until they are big enough for the lap and shoulder belts to fit properly.  
 
Use: As of August 2014, all but one State had enacted child restraint laws covering children 
through at least age 5 (South Dakota’s law only covers children 4 and younger) (IIHS, 2014). 
However, a wide variation in age, height, and weight requirements exists between the laws of the 
various States (GHSA, 2014b; IIHS, 2014). 
 
Effectiveness: Research conducted by Arbogast et al. (2009) found that transitioning children 
from child restraints with harnesses to belt-positioning booster seats instead of vehicle seat belts 
provides significant safety benefits for children at least through 8, and that belt-positioning 
booster seats lower the risk of injury to children in crashes by 45% compared to the use of 
vehicle seat belts alone. A number of studies evaluated the effect of booster provisions in States’ 
laws on booster seat use (Gunn, Phillippi, & Cooper, 2007). Observational surveys conducted in 
Washington State before their booster seat law was expanded found that only 21% of children 
between 4 and 8 were using booster seats (Ebel, Koepsell, Bennett, & Rivara, 2003). Following a 
new law requiring booster seats for children weighing between 40 and 60 pounds or younger 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 23 
than 6 years old, observational surveys in Washington State found close to half of children 4 to 8 
years old in a booster seat (Stehr & Lovrich, 2003). 
 
One study evaluated the effects of Tennessee’s “booster” provisions that added new 
requirements for 4- to 8-year-olds in 2005 (Gunn et al., 2007). Pre- and post-law observational 
survey data revealed a significant increase in booster seat use among 4- to 8-year-olds from 29% 
to 39%. Decina et al. (2008) reported that an observational study conducted to evaluate a 
demonstration program found a 9-percentage-point increase in the use of child restraints, 
including booster seats, for children 4 to 8 following enactment of an enhanced child restraint 
law (booster seat law) in Wisconsin. Similarly, a second evaluation of Wisconsin’s booster seat 
law found that while total booster seat use did increase, the law did not impact all children 
equally. Specifically, use of booster seats and proper use of booster seats varied among different 
racial and socioeconomic groups suggesting that further study is needed of the effects of booster 
seat legislation on all children (Brixey, Corden, Guse, & Layde, 2011). 
 
A number of research studies (Fell et. al., 2005; Margolis, Bracken, & Stewart, 1996) have found 
restraint use levels among children and teens covered by restraint use laws are higher than those 
not covered, and that injury levels among children covered by child passenger safety laws are 
lower than children not covered. 
 
Costs: The costs of expanding a restraint use law to include all seating positions in all passenger 
vehicles are minimal. 
 
Time to implement: Expanded restraint use law coverage can be implemented as soon as the 
law is enacted and publicized. 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 24 
 
5. Child Restraint/Booster Seat Law Enforcement 
 
5.1 Short-Term High Visibility Child Restraint/Booster Law Enforcement 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $$$ 
Use: Medium† 
Time: Medium 
† Used in many jurisdictions but often only once or twice each year 
 
As noted in Section 2.1, high visibility short-duration belt law enforcement programs, such as 
Click It or Ticket, have proven to be the most effective countermeasure to date for increasing seat 
belt use. NHTSA typically includes child restraint and booster seat use and enforcement as a part 
of their Click It or Ticket campaigns. There is concern, however, that law enforcement officers 
are reluctant to enforce child restraint laws due to a lack of commitment by their departments and 
a lack of knowledge on the part of officers on the subject of child restraints (Decina, Lococo, 
Ashburn, Hall, & Rose, 2008; Decina, Temple, & Dorer, 1994; NHTSA, 1990). More recent 
research demonstrates that effective approaches for enforcing child restraint laws – in particular 
booster seat laws – are possible, but they depend on top management support and enforcement 
methods that are dedicated to booster seat and other child restraint laws (Decina, Hall, & Lococo, 
2010). 
 
As with high visibility enforcement aimed at adult occupants (section 3.1), enforcement of child 
restraint/booster laws should be coupled with high visibility communications and outreach 
(Solomon et al., 2003). Paid advertising can be a critical part of the media strategy. Paid 
advertising brings with it the ability to control message content, timing, placement, and repetition 
(Milano et al., 2004). 
 
Use: Most States currently conduct short-term, high visibility seat belt law enforcement 
programs in May of each year as part of national seat belt mobilizations (Solomon et al., 2004; 
Solomon, Chaffe, et al., 2007). 
 
Effectiveness: In their systematic review of evidence of effectiveness for child restraint 
interventions, Zaza et al. (2001) determined that community-wide information plus enhanced 
enforcement campaigns were effective in increasing child restraint use. 
 
Costs: High visibility enforcement campaigns are expensive. They require extensive time from 
State highway safety offices, time from law enforcement officers to conduct the enforcement, 
and time from media staff and often from consultants to develop, produce, and distribute 
publicity. Paid advertising increases a campaign’s effectiveness but can be quite expensive. 
 
Time to implement: A high visibility enforcement program requires 4 to 6 months to plan and 
implement. 
 
Other issues: 
• Barriers to enhanced enforcement programs: Decina et al. (2008) concluded that 
barriers to enhanced enforcement programs, especially as related to booster seats, 
include: low awareness of child restraint laws among parents/caregivers; low perception 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 25 
of risk to child passengers; lack of knowledge about the safety benefits of booster seats 
among the public; lack of knowledge about the safety benefits of booster seats among law 
enforcement officers and members of the courts; low threat of being ticketed for 
violations; and lack of commitment to child passenger safety by law enforcement top 
management. 
• Strategies to enhance enforcement programs: NHTSA (1990) suggests that in order to 
maximize child restraint enforcement efforts, certain activities should be part of the 
overall program. These are: media coverage of enforcement and public information 
activities by the local press and radio and television stations; training of law enforcement 
officers in the benefits of child passenger protection and methods of effective law 
enforcement; information activities aimed at target audiences; information activities 
coinciding with community events; child restraint distribution programs; and public 
service announcements and other media coverage. Decina et al. (2010) found that the 
most effective approaches for enforcing booster seat laws depend on top management 
support to enforce these laws, having resources to support dedicated booster seat law 
enforcement programs, and enforcement methods that are dedicated to booster seat and 
other child restraint laws. 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 26 
 
6. Communications and Outreach 
 
6.1 Communications and Outreach Strategies for Older Children 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Medium 
 
As noted by Kuhn and Lam (2008a; 2008b), there is not a great deal of information on the 
factors influencing restraint use for children 8 to 15 years old. The few available studies have 
tended to focus on changing nonuse behaviors without investigating attitudinal or motivational 
factors that might be useful in developing additional strategies. 
 
Use: There is beginning to be more of an emphasis on developing and implementing programs 
targeting children 8 to 15. In January 2015, NHTSA will announce a new campaign for older 
children with material and resources for States and programs interested in targeting this age 
group. Some pilot programs have been implemented and evaluated that can be used as resources 
for program development. One extensive resource available is the report titled Increasing Seat 
Belt Use Among 8- to 15-Year-Olds: Volumes I and II (Kuhn & Lam, 2008a, 2008b). 
 
Effectiveness: The few studies that have been conducted have produced encouraging results. 
The Avoiding Tween Tragedy Project was a comprehensive program aimed at increasing 
restraint use among 8- to 15-year-olds in Berks County, Pennsylvania. The program included 
education at elementary, middle, and high schools, law enforcement participation, earned and 
paid media, and participation in community events. Restraint use increased significantly 
following the program (13% at elementary schools, 17% at middle schools, and 20% at high 
schools). Among elementary school students, back seat positioning also increased. The authors 
recommend that future programs targeting this age group focus on high visibility enforcement 
and education using materials designed for this age group. Because the behaviors of this age 
group are strongly influenced by others, a legislative focus on primary enforcement of restraint 
use for all occupants should be pursued if not already in place (Alonge et al., 2012). 
 
The Just Get It Across program developed by the Rainbow Babies and Children’s Hospital in 
Cleveland, Ohio targeted parents of 13- to 15-year-olds with a message encouraging parents to 
promote seat belt use among their teens (program description and implementation: University 
Hospitals Rainbow Babies & Children’s Hospital Injury Prevention Center, 2014). The program 
demonstrated increases in knowledge of seat belt laws and teen-reported reminders to wear seat 
belts by parents. Observed seat belt use by parents and teens also increased in the target 
community; however, it is not clear what role the program had in this increase because seat belt 
use in the control community also increased (program evaluation: Zakrajsek, Eby, Molnar, St. 
Louis, & Zanier, 2014).  
 
Colorado and Nevada implemented a Teen Seat Belt Demonstration Project in 2007-2008 
consisting of publicity and enforcement. Each State held four enforcement waves focused in 
areas and times when teenagers were most likely to be driving. In addition to increases in teen 
awareness of seat belt messages and enforcement, teen belt use increased significantly in both 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 27 
States (5% in Colorado and 8% in Nevada) (Nichols, Haire, Solomon, Ellison-Potter, & 
Cosgrove, 2011). 
 
The Automotive Coalition for Traffic Safety launched two pilot programs in 2005 targeting 8- to 
15-year-olds, sometimes called “tweens.” These brief school and community-based interventions 
targeted both children and their parents. Both programs were successful in changing knowledge 
and attitudes of the parents and children, but limited observations did not show significant 
changes in belt use among the targeted children (Jennings, Merzer, & Mitchell, 2006) 
Costs: Program costs will depend on the size of the target audience and the components of the 
program. 
 
Time to implement: Complete programs will require at least four months to plan and 
implement. School programs may require a full year. 
 
 
 
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 28 
 
6.2 Communications and Outreach Strategies for Child Restraint and Booster Seat Use 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Medium 
 
Both the American Academy of Pediatrics and NHTSA recommend children stay rear-facing as 
long as possible until they outgrow the height or weight limits of the seat, and then use a 
forward-facing harness for as long as possible. However, observational data from the 2013 
National Survey of the Use of Booster Seats (NSUBS) show that 7% of children under age 1 
were moved to a forward-facing child restraint. Similarly, 17% of children 1 to 3 were not in a 
rear- or forward-facing child restraint but were instead in a booster seat, the seat belt alone, or 
were unrestrained (Pickrell & Choi, 2014). 
 
Booster seats are recommended until the lap/shoulder combination belt fits properly on its own, 
typically when a child is 8 to 12 years old. However, 2013 NSUBS data show that children are 
moving into the seat belt much earlier than is recommended. In 2013, 24% of children 4 to 7 
were restrained using the seat belt alone and 46% were using a booster seat. Only 10% of 
children 8 to 12 were using booster seats (Pickrell & Choi, 2014). 
 
Since then, there has been positive movement on child restraint use, particularly with extended 
rear-facing and extended harnessing. In 2013, 10% of children 1 to 3 were rear-facing, a 
significant increase from 7% in 2011. Similarly, fewer children 1 to 3 were prematurely moved 
to booster seats (9% in 2013 compared to 12% in 2011). While not statistically significant, in 
2013 more children 4 to 7 were riding in car seats or booster seats compared with 2011 (66% 
versus 65%) (Pickrell & Choi, 2014). 
 
Use: Communications and outreach campaigns directed at booster-seat-age children are likely 
common, but no summary is available. 
 
Effectiveness: The effectiveness of communication and outreach strategies aimed at booster seat 
use is unclear. Will, Sabo, and Porter (2009) used a threat-based message to increase booster seat 
use among attendees of two large daycare/after school programs in Eastern Virginia. The 
intervention included a video made with images to invoke emotions, crash test footage, well-
respected experts, and personal stories to convey a message of high-threat consequences without 
using gore. The study found significant increases in overall restraint use and booster seat use 
following exposure to the intervention and concluded that applying messages of high-threat 
consequences (without gore) to booster seat interventions is a promising approach. Similarly, a 
number of studies have also used a different threat-based message (“No Regrets”) with some 
success (Bryant-Stephens, Garcia-Espana, & Winston, 2013; Winston, Erkoboni, & Xie, 2007). 
Another study found that the strongest predictors of booster seat use among Canadian parents of 
4- to 9-year-olds was the parents’ knowledge of the purpose and benefit of booster seat use as 
well as perceived community norms (Bruce et al., 2011). 
 
The Strike Out Child Passenger Injury program used community sports programs to promote 
booster seat use among 4 to 7-year-olds in 20 rural communities across four States. In the 
intervention communities, information about proper restraint use was shared in conjunction with 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 29 
T-ball season. In addition to information, parents were given the opportunity to meet with a CPS 
Technician during a T-ball event in order to get a personal assessment and recommendation for 
proper restraint use. Child restraints and booster seats were provided to families in need and 
baseball themed prizes were provided to participants. Control communities received only an 
informational brochure. Following the short program, proper restraint use increased in 
intervention communities in 3 of 4 States. This study demonstrated that tailoring a program to fit 
in an established community event can have a short term impact on restraint use in a rural 
community where resources are limited (Aitken et al., 2013). 
 
Costs: As with enforcement-related communications and outreach, costs vary depending on 
program quality and delivery. 
 
Time to implement: A good educational campaign will require 4 to 6 months to plan and 
implement. 
 
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 30 
 
7. Other Strategies 
 
7.1 School Programs 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Varies 
 
Schools provide well-defined and somewhat controlled audiences for seat belt use programs. 
Education and other communications strategies can be tailored to a specific audience. While 
these programs are often well received in the community, there is limited information on their 
effectiveness. 
 
Use: There are no data on the number of school programs operating currently. 
 
Effectiveness: School programs have been shown to increase belt use in the few evaluations of 
school programs that have been conducted. Williams, Wells, and Ferguson (1997) conducted a 
pilot program to increase restraint use and rear seating position among elementary schools and 
day care centers. The programs, held in conjunction with an ongoing statewide Click It or Ticket 
program, included letters and pamphlets sent to parents, proper restraint use demonstrations, 
assemblies emphasizing proper restraint use (at the schools), and enforcement checkpoints. 
Proper use increased substantially at elementary schools (36% to 64%; 49% to 71%) with 
smaller increases at the daycare centers (71% to 76%; 60% to 75%). The researchers concluded 
also that enforcement is a key ingredient of programs even among school age children. 
 
See Section 6.1 Communications and Outreach Strategies for Older Children for additional 
information about programs targeting school-aged children. 
 
Costs: Program costs will depend on the size of the target audience and the components of the 
program. 
 
Time to implement: School policies can be implemented immediately. Complete programs will 
require at least 4 months to plan and implement and may require a full year. 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 31 
7.2 Inspection Stations 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: High 
Time: Short 
 
The misuse of child restraints has been a concern for many years. A number of programs have 
been implemented to provide parents and other caregivers with “hands-on” assistance with the 
installation and use of child restraints in an effort to combat widespread misuse. Child passenger 
safety (CPS) inspection stations, sometimes called “fitting stations” are places or events where 
parents and caregivers can receive this assistance from certified CPS technicians. Guidebooks on 
how local programs can set up and operate a mobile CPS clinic or permanent inspection station 
are available from NHTSA (NHTSA, 2003a). 
 
Use: Child restraint inspection stations have become common components of State and local 
child passenger safety programs. There are over 5,500 inspection stations registered with 
NHTSA (NHTSA, 2014b). 
 
Effectiveness: One study found that Safe Kids child restraint inspection events held at car 
dealerships, hospitals, retail outlets and other community locations positively changed parents’ 
behavior and increased their knowledge over a 6-week follow-up period: children arriving at the 
second event were restrained more safely and more appropriately than they were at the first 
(Dukehart, Walker, Lococo, Decina, & Staplin, 2007). 
 
Another study evaluated whether a “hands-on” educational intervention makes a difference in 
whether or not parents correctly use their child restraints. All study participants received a free 
child restraint and education, but the experimental group also received a hands-on demonstration 
of correct installation and use of the child restraint in their own vehicles. Parents who received 
this demonstration were also required to demonstrate in return that they could correctly install 
the restraint. Follow-up observations found that the intervention group was four times more 
likely to correctly use their child restraints than was the control group (Tessier, 2010). 
 
A recent evaluation of the child restraint fitting station network in New South Wales, Australia, 
found that children whose parents attended a fitting station were significantly more likely to be 
properly restrained than children whose parents had not visited a fitting station. While specific to 
Australia, these results suggest similar benefits are possible in the United States (Brown, Finch, 
Hatfield, & Bilston, 2011). 
 
Costs: Program costs will depend on the size of the target audience, the components of the 
program, and the level of services offered. 
 
Time to implement: Complete programs typically require several months to plan and 
implement. 
 
Other issues:  
• Programs to make child seats available at low cost: One of the issues identified when 
child passenger safety laws were being considered was the costs associated with 
obtaining child restraints. Because of this, many State and local organizations initiated 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 32 
programs to make child restraints available at low or no cost to parents though child 
restraint loan or rental programs (Zaza et al., 2001). Since then, the popularity of these 
programs has decreased significantly as child restraints have become more readily 
available and funding for such programs scarce. Much of the research on this topic is 
quite old. Zaza et al. (2001) conducted a systematic review of evidence of effectiveness 
for five interventions, including child restraint distribution programs. Evidence suggests 
child restraint distribution coupled with education can be effective. However, the studies 
evaluated were mostly from the 1980s when child passenger safety laws were first being 
passed and the availability and costs of child restraints were much different. It is not clear 
how the results of this research apply to today. Louis and Lewis (1997) conducted a 
project to increase child restraint use in low-income minority families. Families in the 
program were divided into two study groups with both groups receiving free child 
restraints. One group also received education regarding child restraint use. The results of 
the study indicated that distributing child restraints resulted in increased long-term use 
among a low-use population. 
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 33 
 
Seat Belts and Child Restraints References 
 
Alonge, M., Alonge, C., O’Donnell, J., Harnish, A., Matz, M., & Decina, L. A. (2012). Avoiding 
“tween” tragedies: Demonstration project to increase seat belt use among 8- to 15-year-old 
motor vehicle occupants (Report No. DOT HS 811 096). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811096.pdf 
 
Aitken, M. E., Miller, B. K., Anderson, B. L., Swearinger, C. J., Monroe, K. W.,Daniels, D., . . . 
Mullins, S. H. (2013). Promoting use of booster seats in rural areas through community sports 
programs. The Journal of Rural Health, 29. S70-S78.  
 
Automotive Coalition for Traffic Safety. (2001). 2001 seat belt summit: Policy options for 
increasing seat belt use in the United States. Arlington, VA: Author.  
 
Arbogast, K. B., Jermakian, J. S., Kallan, M. J., & Durbin, D. R. (2009). Effectiveness of belt 
positioning booster seats: An updated assessment. Pediatrics, 124, 1281-1286. 
 
Blomberg, R. D., Thomas, F. D., & Cleven, A. M. (2009). Innovative seat belt demonstration 
programs in Kentucky, Mississippi, North Dakota, and Wyoming (Report No. DOT HS 811 080). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury% 
20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/811080.pdf 
 
Boase, P., Jonah, B. A., & Dawson, N. (2004). Occupant restraint use in Canada. Journal of 
Safety Research, 35, 223-229. 
 
Boyle, J. M. & Lampkin, C. (2008). 2007 Motor vehicle occupant safety survey. Volume 2 seat 
belt report (Report No. DOT HS 810 975). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8109
75.pdf 
 
Brixey, S. N., Corden, T. E., Guse, C. E., & Layde, P. M. (2011). Booster seat legislation: Does 
it work for all children? Injury Prevention, 17, 233-237. 
 
Brown, J., Finch, C. F., Hatfield, J., Bilston, L. E. (2011). Child restraint fitting stations reduce 
incorrect restraint use among child occupants. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 43, 1128-1133. 
 
Bruce, B. S., Snowden, A. W., Cunningham, C., Cramm, C. L., Whittle, K., Correale, H., . . . 
Harrold, J. (2011). Predicting parents’ use of booster seats. Injury Prevention, 17, 313-318. 
 
Bryant-Stephens, T., Garcia-Espana, J. F., & Winston, F. K. (2013). Boosting restraint norms: A 
community-delivered campaign to promote booster seat use. Traffic Injury Prevention, 14, 578-
583. 
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 34 
Chaudhary, N. K., Alonge, M., & Preusser, D. F. (2005). Evaluation of the Reading, PA 
nighttime safety belt enforcement campaign: September 2004. Journal of Safety Research, 36, 
321-326. 
 
Chaudhary, N. K., Tison, J., & Casanova, T. (2010). Evaluation of Maine's seat belt law change 
from secondary to primary enforcement (Report No. DOT HS 811 259). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811259.pdf 
 
Chen, Y. Y. (2014). Seat belt use in 2013 – use rates in the states and territories (Report No. 
DOT HS 812 030). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812030.pdf 
 
Decina, L. E., Hall, W. L., & Lococo, K.H. (2010). Booster seat law enforcement: Examples 
from Delaware, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Washington (Report No. DOT HS 811 247). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811247.pdf 
 
Decina, L. E., & Lococo, K. H. (2004). Misuse of child restraints (Report No. DOT HS 809 
671). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/research/Misuse/images/misusescreen.pdf  
 
Decina, L. E., Lococo, K. H., Ashburn, W., Hall, W. L., & Rose, J. (2008). Identifying strategies 
to improve the effectiveness of booster seat laws (Report No. DOT HS 810 969). Retrieved from 
the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library website: 
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/30000/30100/30188/810969.pdf 
 
Decina, L. E., Temple, M. G., & Dorer, H. S. (1994). Local police enforcement, public 
information And education strategies to foster more and proper use of child safety seats by 
toddlers: Evaluation of a demonstration project. Final report (Report No. DOT HS 808 120). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library website:  
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25800/25861/DOT-HS-808-120.pdf 
 
Dinh-Zarr, T. B., Sleet, D. A., Shults, R. A., Zaza, S., Elder, R. W., Nichols, J. L., Thompson, R. 
S., Sosin, D. M., & the Task Force on Community Preventive Services. (2001). Reviews of 
Evidence Regarding Strategies to Increase the Use of Safety Belts. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, 21, 48-65. Retrieved from www.thecommunityguide.org/mvoi/mvoi-
AJPM-evrev-seat-belts.pdf 
 
Dukehart, J. G., Walker, L., Lococo, K., Decina, L. E., & Staplin, L. (2007). Safe Kids checkup 
events: A national study. Retrieved from the Safe Kids Worldwide website: 
www.safekids.org/assets/docs/ourwork/research/research-report-cps-2006.pdf 
 
Durbin, D. R., & Committee on Injury, Violence, and Poison Prevention. (2011). Policy 
statement – child passenger safety. Pediatrics, 127, 788-793. 
 
Ebel, B. E., Koepsell, T. D., Bennett, E. E., & Rivara, F. P. (2003). Too small for a seat belt: 
Predictors of booster seat use by child passengers. Pediatrics, 111, e323-e327. 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 35 
 
Eby, D. W., Kostyniuk, L. P., Molnar, L. J., Vivoda, J. M., & Miller, L. L. (2004). The effect of 
changing from secondary to primary safety belt enforcement on police harassment. Accident 
Analysis and Prevention, 36, 819-828. 
 
Farmer, C. M., & Williams, A. F. (2005). Effect on fatality risk of changing from secondary to 
primary seat belt enforcement. Journal of Safety Research, 36, 189-194. 
 
Fatality Analysis Reporting System. (2015). (Custom data analysis). Washington, DC: National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration.  
 
Fell, J. C., Baker, T. K., McKnight, A. S., Brainard, K., Langston, E., Rider, R., Levy, D., & 
Grube, J. (2005). Increasing teen safety belt use: A program and literature review (Report No. 
DOT HS 809 899). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/NewDriver/TeenBeltUse/images/DOTHS809899TeenBeltUse. 
pdf 
 
Garcia-Espana, J. F., Winston, F. K., & Durbin, D. R. (2012). Safety belt laws and disparities in 
safety belt use among US high-school drivers. American Journal of Public Health, 102, 1128-
1134. 
 
Glassbrenner, D. (2005). Safety belt use in 2005: Use rates in the states and territories (Report 
No. DOT HS 809 970). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/809970.pdf 
 
Governors Highway Safety Association. (2014a). Seat belt laws. Retrieved from 
www.ghsa.org/html/stateinfo/laws/seatbelt_laws.html 
 
GHSA. (2014b). Child Passenger Safety Laws. Retrieved from 
www.ghsa.org/html/stateinfo/laws/childsafety_laws.html 
 
Gunn, V. L., Phillippi, R. M., & Cooper, W. O. (2007). Improvement in booster seat use in 
Tennessee. Pediatrics, 119, 131-136. 
 
Hedlund, J. H., Preusser, D. F., & Shults, R. A. (2004). A research agenda for increasing safety 
belt use in the United States. Journal of Safety Research, 35, 231-235. 
 
Hedlund, J., Gilbert, S. H., Ledingham, K., & Preusser, D. (2008). How states achieve high seat 
belt use rates (Report No. DOT HS 810 962). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/810962.pdf 
 
Hinch, M., Solomon, M., & Tison, J. (2014). The Click It or Ticket evaluation, 2012 (Report No. 
DOT HS 811 989).  Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811989-The_Click_It_or_Ticket_Eval_2012_RN_TSF.pdf 
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 36 
Houston, D. J., & Richardson, L. E. (2006). Getting Americans to buckle up: The efficacy of 
state seat belt laws. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 37, 1114-1120. 
 
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (2014). Safety belt and child restraint laws. Arlington, 
VA: Author. Retrieved from the IIHS website: www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/laws/safetybeltuse? 
topicName=safety-belts 
 
Jennings, C., Merzer, A., & Mitchell, P. (2006). Tween traffic safety: Influencing 8- to 12-year- 
olds to sit safely buckled in a back seat. Arlington, VA: Automotive Coalition for Traffic Safety. 
 
Kahane, C. J. (1986). An evaluation of child passenger safety: The effectiveness and benefits of 
safety seats (Report No. DOT HS 806 890). Retrieved from the NHTSA website:  www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/806890.pdf 
 
Kahane, C. J. (2000). Fatality reduction by safety belts for front-seat occupants of cars and light 
trucks: Updated and expanded estimates based on 1986-99 FARS data (Report No. DOT HS 809 
199). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/809199.pdf 
 
Klinich, K. D., Manary, M. A., & Weber, K. B. (2012). Crash protection for child passengers: 
rationale for best practice. UMTRI Research Review, 43, 1-35. 
 
Kuhn, M., & Lam, J. (2008a). Increasing seat belt use among 8- to 15-year-olds: Volume I: 
Findings (Report No. DOT HS 810 965). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8109
65.pdf 
 
Kuhn, M., & Lam, J. (2008b). Increasing seat belt use among 8- to 15-year-olds: Volume II: 
Appendices (Report No. DOT HS 810 966). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8109
66.pdf 
 
Louis, B., & Lewis, M. (1997). Increasing car seat use for toddlers from inner-city families. 
American Journal of Public Health, 87, 1044-1045. 
 
Lucke, R., Raub, R. A., Pfefer, R., Neuman, T. R., Slack, K. L., & Hardy, K. K. (2004). A guide 
for increasing seatbelt use (Report No. 500, Vol. 11). Retrieved from the TRB website: 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v11.pdf 
 
Mannix, R., Fleegler, E., Meehan III, W. P., Schutzman, S. A., Hennelley, K., Nigrovic, L., & 
Lee, L. K. (2012). Booster seat laws and fatalities in children 4 to 7 years of age. Pediatrics, 130, 
996-1002. 
 
Margolis, L. H., Bracken, J., & Stewart, J.R. (1996). Effects of North Carolina's mandatory 
safety belt law on children. Injury Prevention. 2, 32-35. 
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 37 
Masten, S. (2007). The effects of changing to primary enforcement on daytime and nighttime seat 
belt use. Research note (Report No. DOT HS 810 743). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
Files/810743.pdf 
 
Milano, M., McInturff, B., & Nichols, J. L. (2004). The effect of earned and paid media 
strategies in high-visibility enforcement campaigns. Journal of Safety Research, 35, 203-214. 
 
National Center for Statistics and Analysis. (1996). Research note: Revised estimates of child 
restraint effectiveness (Report No. 96855). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/96855.pdf  
 
NCSA. (2014). 2013 motor vehicle crahes: Overview (Traffic Safety Facts Research Note. 
Report No. DOT HS 812 101). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812101.pdf 
 
NCSA. (2015). Occupant protection: 2013 data (Traffic Safety Facts. Report No. DOT HS 812 
153). Retreived from the NHTSA website: www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812153.pdf  
 
National Committee on Uniform Traffic Laws and Ordinances. (2004). Model Occupant 
Protection Law. Sun City West, AZ: Author. 
 
National Cooperative Highway Research Program. (2004). A guide for increasing seatbelt use. 
Retrieved from the TRB website: http://trb.org/publications/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v11.pdf 
 
National Committee on Uniform Traffic Laws and Ordinances. (2006). Model child restraint act. 
Retrieved from www.ncutlo.org/restraint.htm 
 
NHTSA. (1990). Enforcing child passenger safety laws: Eight community strategies (Report No. 
DOT HS 807 631). Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library 
website: website: http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25800/25880/DOT-HS-807-631.pdf 
 
 
NHTSA. (2003a). A guide to implementing child passenger safety inspection stations (Report 
No. DOT HS 809 627). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/childps/CPSInspectionStation/ 
 
NHTSA. (2003b). Initiatives to address safety belt use. Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/SafetyBelt/OPIPT_FinalRpt_07-17-03.html 
 
NHTSA. (2006). Uniform guidelines for state highway safety programs - occupant protection. 
Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/nhtsa/whatsup/tea21/tea21programs/pages/OccupantProtection.htm 
 
NHTSA. (2012). National child restraint use special study (Report No. DOT HS 811 679). 
Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811679.pdf 
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 38 
NHTSA. (2014a). Traffic safety facts 2012 data: occupant protection (Report No. DOT HS 811 
892). Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811892.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2014b). Parents central. Retrieved from www.safercar.gov/parents/CarSeats.htm 
 
NHTSA (2014c). Demonstration of the trauma nurses talk tough seat belt diversion program in 
North Carolina reaches high-risk drivers (Report No. DOT HS 811 874).  Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811874-Trauma_Nurses_Talk_Tough_SeatBelt_NC_High-
Risk-TT.pdf  
 
Nichols, J. L., & Ledingham, K. A. (2008). The impact of legislation, enforcement, and sanctions 
on safety belt use (NCHRP Report 601). Retrieved from the TRB website: 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_601.pdf 
 
Nichols, J., Haire, E., Solomon, M., Ellison-Potter, P., & Cosgrove, L. (2011). Evaluation of teen 
seat belt demonstration projects in Colorado and Nevada (Report No. DOT HS 811 518). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811518.pdf 
 
Nichols, J. L., Ledingham, K. A., & Preusser, D. F. (2007). Effectiveness of the May 2005 rural 
demonstration program and the Click It or Ticket mobilization in the Great Lakes region: First 
year results (Report No. DOT HS 810 753). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/buckleup/CIOT2005_effectiveness/images/810753l.pdf 
 
Nichols, J. L., Solomon, M. G., Chaffe, R. H. B., & Preusser, D. F. (2010). Evaluation of a 
county enforcement program with a primary seat belt ordinance: St. Louis County, Missouri 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 292). Retreived from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports 
Library website: http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/32000/32900/32972/6804-811292-050710-v1a.pdf 
 
Nichols, J. L., & Solomon, M. G. (2013). Click It or Ticket evaluation, 2011 (Report No. 
DOT HS 811 779). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811779.pdf 
 
Nichols, J. L., Tippetts, A. S., Fell, J. C., Auld-Owend, A., Wiliszowski, C. H., Haseltine, P. W., 
& Eichelberger, A. (2010). Strategies to increase seat belt use: An analysis of levels of fines and 
the type of law (Report No. DOT HS 811 413). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/occupant_protection/pdf/811413.pdf 
 
Nichols, J. L., Tison, J., Solomon, M. G., Ledingham, K. A., Preusser, D. F., & Siegler, J. N. 
(2009). Evaluation of the “Buckle Up in Your Truck” programs (Report No. DOT HS 811 131). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8111
31.pdf 
 
Nichols, J. L., Tippetts, A. S., Fell, J. C., Eichelberger, A. H., & Haseltime, P. W. (2014). The 
effects of primary enforcement laws and fine levels on seat belt usage in the United States. 
Traffic Injury Prevention, 15, 640-644. 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 39 
 
North Dakota Department of Transportation. (2004). “Pick Up the Habit for Someone You Love” 
campaign (Contract PHSP4030301). Bismarck ND: Author 
 
Pickrell, T. M. (2014). Occupant restraint use in 2012: Results from the National Occupant 
Protection Use Survey controlled intersection study (Report No. DOT HS 811 872). Retrieved 
from the NHTSA website: 
www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811872.pdf 
 
Pickrell, T. M., & Choi, E-H. (2014). The 2013 National Survey of the Use of Booster Seats 
(Report No. DOT HS 812 037). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812037.pdf 
 
Pickrell, T. M., & Choi, E-H. (2015). Seat belt use in 2014 – Overall results (Traffic Safety Facts 
Research Note. Report No. DOT HS 812 113). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812113.pdf 
 
Pickrell, T. M., & Liu, C. (2014). Seat belt use in 2013 – Overall results (Traffic Safety Facts 
Research Note. Report No. DOT HS 811 875). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811875.pdf 
 
Reinfurt, D. W. (2004). Click It or Ticket in North Carolina: A decade of progress. Journal of 
Safety Research, 35, 181-188. 
 
Safe Kids Worldwide. (2013). 2013 certification program accomplishments. Retrieved from 
http://cert.safekids.org/sites/default/files/2013_certannual_report.pdf 
 
Shults, R. A., Nichols, J. L., Dinh-Zarr, T. B., Sleet, D. A., & Elder, R. W. (2004). Effectiveness 
of primary enforcement safety belt laws and enhanced enforcement of safety belt laws: A 
summary of the guide to community preventive services systematic reviews. Journal of Safety 
Research, 35, 189-196. 
 
Solomon, M. G., Chaffe, R. H. B., & Cosgrove, L. A. (2007). May 2004 Click It or Ticket seat 
belt mobilization evaluation (Report No. DOT HS 810 716). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20 
Files/CIOT2004FinalReport.pdf 
 
Solomon M. G., Chaffe, R. H. B., & Preusser, D. F. (2009). Nighttime enforcement of seat belt 
laws: An evaluation of three community programs (Report No. DOT HS 811 189). Retrieved 
from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/ 
Associated%20Files/811189.pdf 
 
Solomon, M. G., Chaudhary, N. K., & Cosgrove, L. A. (2003). May 2003 Click It or Ticket 
safety belt mobilization evaluation final report (Report No. DOT HS 809 694). Retrieved from 
the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/airbags/clickit_ticke03/ciot-
report04/CIOT%20May%202003/ 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 40 
 
Solomon, M. G., Compton, R. P., & Preusser, D. F. (2004). Taking the “Click It or Ticket” 
model nationwide. Journal of Safety Research, 35, 197-201. 
 
Solomon, M. G., Gilbert, S. H. Nichols, J., Chaffe, R. H. B., Tison, J., & Chaudhary, N. K. 
(2007). Evaluation of the May 2005 Click It or Ticket mobilization to increase seat belt use 
(Report No. DOT HS 810 778). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/2005
CIOTReport.pdf 
 
Solomon, M. G., Preusser, D. F., Tison, J., & Chaudhary, N. K. (2009) Evaluation of the May 
2007 Click It or Ticket mobilization (Report No. DOT HS 811 239). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811239.pdf 
 
Solomon, M. G., Ulmer, R. G., & Preusser, D. F. (2002). Evaluation of Click It or Ticket model 
programs (Report No. DOT HS 809 498). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/airbags/clickitcomposite/clickit_composite.pdf 
 
Stehr, S. D., & Lovrich, N. (2003). An assessment of child car booster seat usage in the state of 
Washington. Pullman, WA: Washington State University. 
 
Tessier, K. (2010). Effectiveness of hands-on education for correct child restraint use by parents. 
Accident Analysis & Prevention, 42(4), 1041-1047. 
 
Thomas III, F. D., Blomberg, R. D., Van Dyk, J. (2010). Evaluation of the first year of the 
Washington nighttime seat belt enforcement program (Report No. DOT HS 811 295). Retrieved 
from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811295.pdf 
 
Thomas, F. D., Blomberg, R. D., Fairchild, J., & Cosgrove, L. (2014). Demonstration of the 
trauma nurses talk tough seat belt diversion program in North Carolina (Report No. DOT HS 
811 873). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811873-
Trauma_Nurses_Talk_Tough_SeatBelt.pdf 
 
Tison, J., & Williams, A.F. (2010). Analyzing the first years of the Click It or Ticket 
mobilizations (Report No. DOT HS 811 232). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811232.pdf 
 
Tison, J., Williams, A. F., Chaudhary, N. K., & Nichols, J. L. (2011). Determining the 
relationship of primary seat belt laws to minority ticketing (Report No. DOT HS 811 535). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811535.pdf 
 
University Hospitals Rainbow Babies & Children’s Hospital Injury Prevention Center. (2014). 
Creating a campaign for parents of pre-drivers to encourage seat belt use by 13- to 15-year-olds 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 894). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: nti/pdf/811894-
Campaign_for_Parents_of_Pre-Drivers_to_Encourage_Seat_Belt_Use.pdf 
 
 Chapter 2. Seat Belts and Child Restraints 
 
2 - 41 
Van Houten, R., Malenfant, J. E. L., Reagan, I., Sifrit, K., & Compton, R. (2009). Pilot tests of a 
seat belt gearshift delay on the belt use of commercial fleet drivers (Report No. DOT HS 811 
230). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811230.pdf 
 
Will, K. E., Sabo, C. S., & Porter, B. E. (2009). Evaluation of the Boost 'em in the Back Seat 
Program: Using fear and efficacy to increase booster seat use. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 
41, 57-65. 
 
Williams, A. F., & Wells, J. K. (2004). The role of enforcement programs in increasing seat belt 
use. Journal of Safety Research, 35, 175-180. 
 
Williams, A. F., Wells, J. K., & Ferguson, S. A. (1997). Development and evaluation of 
programs to increase proper child restraint use. Journal of Safety Research, 28, 69-73. 
 
Winston F.K., Erkoboni D., & Xie D. (2007). Identifying interventions that promote belt-
positioning booster seat use for parents with low educational attainment. Journal of Trauma, 63, 
S29–S38. 
 
Womack, K. N., De La Zerda, S., Block, A. W., & Guzzetta, C. S. (2005). Assessment of the 
NHTSA standardized Child Passenger Safety (CPS) training course (Report No. DOT HS 809 
885). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/research/CPS_ 
Assessment/images/809_885.pdf 
 
Zakrajsek, J. S., Eby, D. W., Molnar, L. J., St. Louis, R., & Zanier, N. (2014). Evaluating Just 
Get It Across: A parent-directed demonstration program to increase young teen seat belt use 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 893). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811893-Evaluating_Just_Get_It_Across_a_Parent-
Directed_Demonstration_Program.pdf 
 
Zaza, S., Sleet, D. A., Thompson, R. S., Sosin, D. M., & Bolen, J. C. (2001). Reviews of 
evidence regarding interventions to increase use of child safety seats. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, 21, 31-47. 
 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 1 
3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
Overview 
 
Characteristics and problem size: Speeding. Speeding-related fatalities have generally trended 
downward since 2007, as shown in the figure below. In 2013, there were 9,613 speed-related 
fatalities, a decrease of 7% from the 10,329 fatalities in 2012 (NHTSA, 2015). Despite generally 
decreasing numbers over the past seven years, speeding is a contributing factor in 29% of fatal 
U.S. crashes (NCSA, 2015), a percentage that has remained relatively unchanged for decades. 
 
 
 
 
Source: NCSA (2015), NHTSA (2015) 
 
Younger drivers, particularly young, male drivers, continued to be the most likely to be identified 
as speeding in fatal crashes in 2013. Thirty-five percent (35%) of male drivers in both 15- to 20-
year-old and 21- to 24-year-old age groups involved in fatal crashes were speeding; however, this 
percentage was slightly lower than the 39 percent for both groups in 2010. Other risk factors 
associated with speeding in 2012 included driver alcohol use, lack of seat belt wearing, driver not 
being properly licensed, nighttime hours, and wet and icy road surfaces at the time of the crash. 
In addition, motorcycle drivers were overrepresented in fatal crashes involving speeding (34% 
were speeding) compared to passenger vehicle drivers (21%) and light truck drivers (18%) 
(NCSA, 2015). 
 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 2 
The legal definitions of speeding include exceeding the posted speed limit, driving too fast for 
existing conditions, and racing. Speeding becomes an element of aggressive driving when a 
vehicle’s speed substantially exceeds the prevailing travel speeds of other vehicles, and other 
driving behaviors contribute to unsafe conditions, e.g., tailgating, weaving, and rapid lane 
changes. Speeding is a more clearly defined problem than aggressive driving, and strategies to 
reduce speeding (and other serious traffic law violations) may provide a means to address the 
problem of aggressive driving. 
 
Speeding is legally defined by States and municipalities in terms of a “basic speed rule” and 
statutory maximum speed limits. Although the wording of the basic speed rule varies, it usually 
requires drivers to drive at a reasonable and prudent rate for roadway conditions. This is open to 
the officer’s judgment, but is frequently related to weather, surface conditions, congestion, or 
other environmental conditions. Statutory speed limits set maximum limits for different types of 
roads, and generally apply to all roads of that type even when the limits are not posted. These 
limits can be superseded by limits posted for specific roadway segments, usually determined on 
the basis of an engineering study. Special Report 254 of the Transportation Research Board, 
which reviewed much of the past research regarding the effects of speed and speed limits on 
crashes, describes the reasons for setting speed limits and other actions for managing travel 
speeds (TRB, 1998). The TRB guide contains much valuable information that is still very 
relevant for setting limits and managing speeds. A more recent document prepared by the Global 
Road Safety Partnership (Howard, Mooren, Nilsson, Quimby, & Vadeby, 2008) with input from 
U.S. experts, updates speed management guidance based on more recent knowledge, and 
describes the evolution of practices used by countries with a zero deaths vision and framework. 
For example, practices used in such countries no longer rely on the 85th percentile or other 
operating speed distributions, but set limits according to injury minimization principles. A 
detailed description and comparison of these and other methods is provided in Methods and 
Practices for Setting Speed Limits: An Informational Report (Forbes, Gardner, McGee, & 
Srinivasan, 2012), prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers in cooperation with 
FHWA.  
 
Speeding can be dangerous on all types of roads. In 2013, 47% of vehicles involved in speed-
related fatal crashes occurred on roads posted at 50 mph or less, and 27% occurred on roads 
posted at 40 mph or less (NHTSA, 2015, Table 33). In 2013, 16.2% of speeding-related fatalities 
occurred on Interstate highways and other expressways, with 25% occurring on local streets, 
20% on non-interstate collectors, and 38% on non-interstate principal and minor arterials 
combined (NCSA, 2015). 
 
Speeding is also common. A 2007 nationally-representative observational survey for NHTSA 
estimated that, in free-flowing traffic, 48% of drivers on limited access highways were exceeding 
the speed limit, 60% were exceeding speed limits on other major arterials, and 61% were 
exceeding speed limits on minor arterials and collectors. Many drivers were exceeding the posted 
speed limit by more than 10 mph on all of these road types, including 16% on limited access 
roads, 14% on major arterials, and 15% on minor arterials and collectors (Huey, De Leonardis, 
Shapiro, & Freedman, 2012). The survey was repeated in 2009, and found that free-flow speeds 
on limited access highways increased by 6 mph as compared with 2007. The percentage of 
drivers exceeding the speed limit by more than 10 mph increased from 16% in 2007 to 19% in 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 3 
2009 on limited access highways. There was little change in speeds on major and minor arterials 
from 2007 to 2009. Slight declines (0.3 to 0.5 mph) in mean speeds were observed for major 
arterials, with slight increases (0.2 to 0.4 mph) on minor arterials and collectors. The percentage 
of drivers exceeding the speed limit by more than 10 mph increased on minor arterials and 
collectors (from 15% to 16%) from 2007 to 2009 (Huey, De Leonardis, & Freedman, 2012.) 
Traffic Tech summaries are available for both studies (NHTSA, 2012a; NHTSA, 2012b).  
 
Drivers themselves also report a high percentage of speeding. The most recent nationally-
representative survey of drivers conducted for NHTSA suggests that some trends in driver 
attitudes and speeding behaviors may be improving (Schroeder, Kostyniuk, & Mack, 2012). In 
1997, 31% of surveyed drivers reported passing other cars more often than other cars passed 
them. In 2011, 27% of surveyed drivers indicated passing other drivers more often. The 
percentage of drivers who reported that they enjoy the feeling of driving fast also declined, from 
40% in 1997 to 27% in 2011. In addition, the percentage who thought the faster they drive, the 
more alert they are decreased (from 29% in 1997 to 15% in 2011), as did the percentage who 
reported that they try to get where they are going as fast as they can (from 30% in 1997 to 21% in 
2011). A few trends did not improve: driver impatience with slower drivers was about the same 
in 2011 (61%) as in 1997 (60%). In addition, the proportion of drivers stopped by police for 
speeding was fairly similar over these different survey periods. Other driver beliefs were 
sometimes at odds with each other. For example, two-thirds of drivers agreed strongly that “It is 
unacceptable to exceed the limits by more than 20 mph,” and 91% agreed that “Everyone should 
obey the speed limit because it’s the law.” Yet 82% agreed that “People should keep up with the 
flow of traffic,” and 51% agreed that speeding tickets have more to do with raising money than 
they do with reducing speeding.  
 
Drivers in the 2011 survey were grouped (by analysis) into three clusters or categories according 
to their responses on six questions about speeding behavior (Schroeder, Kostyniuk, & Mack, 
2012). Of the sample, 30% were classified as “frequent” speeders. Forty percent of the sample of 
drivers was classified as “sometime” speeders, and 30% as “non-speeders” or drivers who rarely 
speed. The vast majority of speeders reported that they often pass others, speed by at least 15 
mph on multi-lane divided highways and two-lane highways and by at least 10 mph on 
residential streets, and were five times more likely to have been stopped for speeding in the past 
12 months than non-speeders. Unfortunately, speeders also reported taking other risky actions 
more often than non-speeders and sometime speeders. Speeders reported talking on the phone or 
texting more often, using seat belts less often, and drinking before driving slightly more often 
than the other groups. Speeders also tended to be younger compared to non-speeders and 
sometime speeders, and to view the need to do something about speeding as less important. 
Across all drivers, however, 87% of surveyed drivers thought it was very important (48%) or 
somewhat important (39%) that something is done to reduce speeding.  
 
Another recent study characterized motivations and types of speeders using naturalistic driving 
data (Richard et al., 2012, for a summary of findings; also see Richard et al., 2013a, 2013b). 
Speeders were classified into four general patterns based on the percentage of trips with speeding 
and the average amount of speeding per trip. The four patterns were: (1) incidental or infrequent 
speeders (few trips with speeding and little speeding on those trips); (2) situational speeders (few 
trips with speeding but a lot of speeding on those trips); (3) casual speeders (many trips with 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 4 
speeding but only small amounts of speeding on those trips trip); and (4) habitual speeders 
(speeding on most trips with a lot of speeding on those trips). Young males and young females in 
urban settings and young males in rural settings were more likely than older drivers to have trips 
with speeding. Follow-up focus groups revealed some interesting differences between speeding 
drivers and those that did not speed. Particularly interesting was the drivers’ perception of the 
meaning of posted speed limits. Drivers that sped a lot considered posted limits to be guidelines 
rather than strict limits, while the non-speeders considered speed limits to be firm limits not to be 
exceeded.  
 
Characteristics and problem size: Aggressive and risky driving. Aggressive and risky driving 
actions are also perceived to be common, although they are difficult to measure accurately. In 
NHTSA’s 2002 survey of speeding and unsafe driving behaviors, 40% of drivers reported that 
they sometimes enter an intersection “just as the light turned from yellow to red,” and 11% said 
they often did this. In the same survey, 10% reported sometimes cutting in front of another 
driver, and 2% said they often did this (NHTSA, 2004). About one-third (34%) of drivers 
reported that they feel threatened by other drivers at least several times monthly (NHTSA, 2004). 
The 2011 National Survey of Speeding Attitudes and Behaviors did not ask about these other 
risky behaviors. NHTSA has estimated that two-thirds of traffic fatalities involve behaviors 
commonly associated with aggressive driving such as speeding, red-light running, and improper 
lane changes (NHTSA, 2001a). Similarly, the AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety estimated that 
56% of fatal crashes involved one or more driver actions typically associated with aggressive 
driving, the most common being excessive speed (AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety, 2009). 
 
Aggressive driving is generally understood to mean driving actions that markedly exceed the 
norms of safe driving behavior and that directly affect other road users by placing them in 
unnecessary danger. Aggressive driving may involve driver anger, attempts to gain an advantage 
over other drivers, and deliberate violations and deviations from normal traffic speeds (NCHRP, 
2003a). It has proven challenging to arrive at a consensus for a theoretical definition of 
aggressive driving, and hence to come up with a working definition. Not every moving violation 
is considered to be aggressive driving. However, multiple violations that encroach on others’ safe 
space, such as driving much faster than prevailing speeds, following too closely, making unsafe 
lane changes, and running red lights, either on one occasion or over a period of time, may 
indicate a pattern of aggressive driving. Although some States have passed laws criminalizing 
aggressive driving, it should not be confused with road rage, which is an intentional assault by a 
driver or passenger with a motor vehicle or a weapon that occurs on the roadway or is 
precipitated by an incident on the roadway. 
 
Causes of aggressive driving can include both personal influences, such as peer or social 
pressures, and environmental triggers. A predisposal to styles or habits of driving that frequently 
puts others at risk might be the norm for a small proportion of drivers, while others may be 
provoked to drive aggressively, at least occasionally, by exceptional congestion, work zone 
delays, poorly timed traffic signals, being late, and other frustrating conditions. Other drivers’ 
actions are also sources of irritation for “reactive” style drivers. More than half of drivers in one 
study reported that they would react aggressively, particularly to being impeded, by others’ 
reckless driving or actions perceived as directly hostile (Björklund, 2008). Other life stressors, 
such as combat deployments, may also contribute to aggressive driving (Sarkar, 2009). Driving 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 5 
actions are, however, ultimately under individual drivers’ control. Behavioral countermeasures 
for speeding and aggressive driving must reinforce and help teach such control. 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 6 
Strategies to Reduce Speeding and Aggressive Driving  
 
Speeding and aggressive driving actions, such as red-light running, involve traffic law violations. 
Therefore, deterrence through traffic law enforcement is the basic behavioral strategy that has 
been used to control them. This strategy involves the same components used to deter alcohol-
impaired driving or seat belt nonuse: highly publicized and highly visible enforcement of 
practical, sound, and broadly accepted laws. Speed limits should be set carefully, taking into 
account the road segment’s design, vulnerable users, traffic operations, land use and 
environmental conditions (Speed Management, 2008). Information on different speed limit 
setting approaches is described in Methods and Practices for Setting Speed Limits, a report 
sponsored by FHWA and ITE available at http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/speedmgt/ref_mats 
/fhwasal2004/. Additionally, the NCHRP Guide for Addressing Aggressive-Driving Collisions 
(NCHRP, 2003a) suggests that successful anti- aggressive driving programs place an emphasis 
on enforcing all traffic laws. Such a strategy increases respect for all laws and the public’s 
expectation that traffic laws should be obeyed. 
 
Speed enforcement can be conducted through regular traffic patrols; sustainable levels of 
widespread, randomly-allocated enforcement (Newstead, Cameron, & Leggett, 2001); intense, 
highly publicized enforcement periods; and automated speed or red-light enforcement. The 
sections in this chapter discuss relevant laws and sanctions, special enforcement techniques, and 
publicity. 
 
Although often thought of as primarily an enforcement problem, increasingly researchers and 
practitioners are recognizing the critical importance of road design and traffic engineering 
measures to support established speed limits, manage speed, and reduce fatalities and injuries. 
Traffic calming measures, including area-wide traffic calming and low speed zones on collector 
streets and near schools, parks, and other areas, can reduce speeds and crashes (Speed 
Management, 2008; TRB, 1998; also see Engineering Countermeasures for Reducing Speeds: A 
Desktop Reference of Potential Effectiveness, 2009. FHWA Office of Safety website: 
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/speedmgt/ref_mats/eng_count/). Although such measures must be 
carefully implemented so as not to shift speeding or safety problems to other locations, they can 
be useful on both local streets and transition areas such as State highways that pass through 
towns or rural villages (Bagdade et al., 2012). Roundabout intersection designs and road diets 
also reduce speed and crashes and can, at the same time, improve traffic flows in some situations 
(NCHRP, 2007; 2008; 2011). Well-timed and coordinated traffic signals can improve traffic flow 
and reduce red-light running and are potentially useful for managing speeds. Adequately 
designed turn bays and entrance and exit ramps can reduce improper merging and driving on the 
shoulder (NCHRP, 2003a, Strategy B1). Advance warnings of congestion or delays and well-
designed and managed work zones may also decrease unexpected frustration. Intelligent 
Transportation System technologies such as real-time transit information, variable speed limits, 
variable message signs, traffic control warning devices and other systems that respond to 
changing traffic and environmental conditions and provide motorists with timely information, 
also hold promise for improving mobility and safety by mitigating causes of delay and warning 
of hazardous conditions that require lower speeds. Company policies, backed up with speed 
monitors and logs or even speed regulators, can reduce commercial vehicle speeding. A variety 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 7 
of measures to reduce congestion, such as mass-transit or ride-sharing, can also diminish driver 
frustration that leads to aggressive driving (Shinar & Compton, 2004). 
 
Vehicle technologies that interact with the environment, such as adaptive cruise control and 
intelligent speed adaptation, hold promise. Adaptive cruise control works similarly to standard 
cruise control, except that, in addition to maintaining a speed set by the driver, a radar system in 
the front of the vehicle detects and responds to other vehicles in the lane ahead to maintain a safe 
following distance. Intelligent Speed Adaptation, or ISA, involves in-vehicle devices that 
“know” the speed limit through accurate speed limit mapping and vehicle location data, and 
provide a warning or active controls to help prevent speeding above limits (see Sections 2.3 and 
3.1). These environmental and vehicular strategies are generally not included in this guide 
because State Highway Safety Offices (SHSOs) have little or no direct authority or responsibility 
for them. However, in partnership with other groups, such strategies may be encouraged through 
Highway Safety Plans.  
 
Any measures that can achieve reductions in average operating speeds, including lower speed 
limits, enhanced enforcement, and communications campaigns, as well as engineering measures, 
are expected to reduce fatal and injury crashes (AASHTO, 2010). Small changes in average 
speed are predicted to have a substantial impact. For example, a reduction of 3 mph in average 
operating speed on a road with a baseline average operating speed of 30 mph is expected to 
produce a reduction of 27% in injury crashes and 49% in fatal crashes (AASHTO, 2010; p. 3-57, 
Table 3E-2). The effects on injury and fatal crashes of changes in average roadway operating 
speed are also greater, as a percentage, at lower initial average speeds than at higher speeds. The 
table below reproduces Table 3E-2 from the Highway Safety Manual and shows crash 
modification factors (CMFs) for fatal and injury crash reductions. To determine the expected 
crash reductions for different changes in average speed, subtract the CMF from 1. In the example 
described above – a 3 mph reduction from an initial average operating speed of 30 mph – the 
CMF is .73, so 1 - .73 is .27, or a 27% reduction in injury crashes. Actual effects may vary 
depending on the type of countermeasure and other factors. No single strategy will be 
appropriate for all locations, and combinations of treatments may be needed to obtain speed limit 
compliance and achieve crash reduction goals.  
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 8 
 
Expected injury and fatal crash modifications by change in 
average operating speed* 
Injury Crashes 
Change 
in avg. 
speed 
Baseline average operating speed in mph 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
-5 
0.57 
0.66 
0.71 
0.75 
0.78 
0.81 
-4 
0.64 
0.72 
0.77 
0.8 
0.83 
0.85 
-3 
0.73 
0.79 
0.83 
0.85 
0.87 
0.88 
-2 
0.81 
0.86 
0.88 
0.9 
0.91 
0.92 
-1 
0.9 
0.93 
0.94 
0.95 
0.96 
0.96 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1.1 
1.07 
1.06 
1.05 
1.04 
1.04 
2 
1.2 
1.15 
1.12 
1.1 
1.09 
1.08 
3 
1.31 
1.22 
1.18 
1.15 
1.13 
1.12 
4 
1.43 
1.3 
1.24 
1.2 
1.18 
1.16 
5 
1.54 
1.38 
1.3 
1.26 
1.22 
1.2 
Fatal Crashes 
-5 
0.22 
0.36 
0.48 
0.58 
0.67 
0.75 
-4 
0.36 
0.48 
0.58 
0.66 
0.73 
0.8 
-3 
0.51 
0.61 
0.68 
0.74 
0.8 
0.85 
-2 
0.66 
0.73 
0.79 
0.83 
0.86 
0.9 
-1 
0.83 
0.86 
0.89 
0.91 
0.93 
0.95 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1.18 
1.14 
1.11 
1.09 
1.07 
1.05 
2 
1.38 
1.28 
1.22 
1.18 
1.14 
1.1 
3 
1.59 
1.43 
1.34 
1.27 
1.21 
1.16 
4 
1.81 
1.59 
1.46 
1.36 
1.28 
1.21 
5 
2.04 
1.75 
1.58 
1.46 
1.36 
1.27 
NOTE: Although data used to develop these CMFs are international, the results 
apply to North American conditions. 
*This table can be used to estimate expected changes in injury and fatal crashes (if 
no Crash Modification Factors are available) for treatments reducing average travel 
speeds of a road by the amounts listed.  
Source: Reproduced from AASHTO (2010), p. 3-57; Table 3E-2. Crash Modification 
Factors for Changes in Average Operating Speed from Highway Safety Manual. 
 
Setting appropriate speed limits and managing traffic speeds requires cooperative efforts 
between State Departments of Transportation (DOTs) and SHSOs, law enforcement agencies and 
others. SHSOs are also encouraged to act cooperatively with State DOTs to identify their 
speeding and aggressive driving traffic safety problems and to adopt comprehensive plans and 
programs to address them. NCHRP (2009), and other guides in the NCHRP report 500 series, 
provide more detailed information and steps to develop comprehensive safety plans. For 
example, a comprehensive strategy may begin with data analysis to prioritize corridors, 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 9 
intersections or other areas with crash problems related to speeding or aggressive driving. 
Analyses may require, at a minimum, crash data and roadway inventory data, both of which are 
typically maintained and analyzed by State DOTs. Next steps should include identifying other 
important partners, establishing crash reduction goals, and performing additional diagnosis such 
as through interdisciplinary, roadway safety audits to identify the specific problems and potential 
solutions. Next, program developers should conduct economic and feasibility analyses to 
prioritize among alternate solutions and develop implementation plans. Finally, partners 
cooperate to implement engineering, enforcement and communications strategies to achieve the 
desired behaviors and target crash reductions. Combining appropriate countermeasures may 
achieve greater effects. Communications strategies are important to support enforcement and 
some types of engineering countermeasures. See NCHRP (2003a) for specific examples of 
cooperative strategies on aggressive driving, and NCHRP (2009) for more information on speed 
limit setting, roadway design, traffic enforcement, and public information and educational 
strategies to reduce speeding-related crashes. State highway safety offices can also promote 
dissemination of effective practices through the types of safety projects recommended and 
funded. 
 
The same cooperative methods can be useful in addressing local speeding or aggressive driving 
concerns, for example, in a neighborhood or on a road segment or corridor. Public safety, local 
public works or engineering departments, the State DOT, and potentially other partners including 
community leaders and concerned citizens should be involved at an early stage in the speed 
management process. An interdisciplinary speed management working group may help to foster 
long-term commitment, cooperation, and improvement over time (Bagdade et al. 2012).  
 
The Department of Transportation, together with GHSA and several national organizations 
sponsored a National Forum on Speeding in June 2005. The forum’s invited presentations 
documented speed-related issues and highlighted speed management practices in Australia, 
Canada, and the Netherlands. The presentations are available at www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/ 
injury/enforce/Speed_Forum_Presentations/. The forum report presented an action agenda 
(NHTSA, 2005). The Department of Transportation’s 2005 Speed Management Strategic 
Initiative formalized the Federal speed management plan and contains a comprehensive set of 
engineering, enforcement, and education strategies to reduce speeding-related fatalities and 
injuries (FWHA, FMCSA, & NHTSA, 2005). A key component of the Speed Management 
Strategic Initiative has been to emphasize the interdisciplinary nature of effective speed 
management, whereby engineering, enforcement, and the judiciary are all critical components.  
 
The recent national Speed Management Program Plan updated the national speed management 
goals and actions for the U.S. Department of Transportation. This Plan emphasizes the 
importance of comprehensive and cooperative efforts, and outlines the national role in helping 
States and local agencies reduce speeding-related crashes, injuries and fatalities using the 
traditional approaches of engineering, enforcement, education and evaluation (U.S. DOT, 2014). 
This national plan has several goals and objectives for the DOT related to developing knowledge 
about the relationships between travel speed and speed limits on crash risk, causes and types of 
speeding, and developing and testing innovation measures such as variable speed limits 
combined with automated enforcement and other new technologies. The plan also aims to 
provide leadership for public policy decision-making, and technical assistance and tools to help 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 10 
agencies develop speed management strategies that meet local needs. The Plan promotes the 
development of data driven models that target enforcement resources where they are most 
needed to achieve the greatest safety benefits.  
 
The national efforts to address dangerous speeding and aggressive driving include better 
understanding of speeding in relation to road designs and environments, and the motivations and 
choices of drivers. More comprehensive or different types of measures may be needed to address 
certain types of speeders, including flagrant and repeat offenders, than are generally employed. 
As part of a comprehensive road safety strategy, the United Kingdom has embarked upon an 
ambitious research program known as High UnSafe Speed Accident Reduction (HUSSAR) to 
understand the human, psychological, and emotional factors in speeding and other dangerous 
driver behaviors so that interventions may better target barriers to speed compliance (Fuller et 
al., 2008a; Fuller et al., 2008b; Stradling et al., 2008; and others). As already mentioned, several 
recent U.S. studies have also begun to characterize speeding motivations and attitudes and types 
of speeding behaviors that may warrant different types of strategies. 
 
A significant body of research has also emerged in the past few years shedding light on 
characteristics of angry and aggressive drivers and risk-taking tendencies such as impulsiveness 
or even genetic predispositions. A few pilot studies have noted glimmers of success in helping 
some of these drivers achieve better control. As examples, a group in Estonia pilot tested an 
intervention with promising results (Paaver et al., 2013). The intervention was provided by 
trained psychologists and focused on teaching driving students about impulsive personality and 
information processing styles, different types of impulsivity and how to recognize such 
tendencies in oneself, and potential situational triggers that may induce subjects to behave 
impulsively and take risks. The test group had half as many speeding violations over a year 
following the intervention as a control group of students from the same driving schools. Another 
effort in the United Kingdom developed and trialed an intensive personal intervention to target 
attitudes, skills, and knowledge relating to crash risk among young men with a number of social 
and behavioral risk factors and high levels of road traffic collisions (Tapp, Pressley, Baugh, & 
White, 2013). The intervention sought to teach “smoothness and control.” The study measured 
positive and long-lasting impacts among the men who completed the program. One of the 
challenges, however, was achieving recruitment and completion among this cohort. 
 
A small study pilot tested a work-related driver behavior modification program using feedback 
and goal setting, as well as a social-norming branding (Newman, Lewis, & Warmerdam, 2014). 
This trial showed at least short-term improvement in drivers’ compliance with speed limits. 
These and other research efforts may ultimately lead to changes in education, training, and 
enforcement interventions that will have more beneficial effects on safety than most driver 
interventions to date. 
 
Resources 
 
As mentioned in the introduction, this document is restricted to behavioral countermeasures that 
are typically under the direct authority of SHSOs. But a comprehensive, multifaceted approach 
that incorporates assessing and addressing engineering and environmental issues as well as 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 11 
enforcement, legislative, and program evaluation needs, is essential to most effectively reduce 
speeding-related crashes and injuries. 
 
Other resources and links: 
• National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
o Aggressive Driving - www.nhtsa.gov/Aggressive 
o Enforcement and Justice Services - 
www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Enforcement+&+Justice+Services 
o Research and Evaluation - www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Research+&+Evaluation 
o Behavioral Safety Research Reports - 
ntlsearch.bts.gov/repository/ntlc/nhtsa/index.shtm 
• FHWA Safety Office, Speed Management Safety page and links: 
 
 safety.fhwa.dot.gov/speedmgt/ 
o Speed Concepts: Informational Guide - 
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/speedmgt/ref_mats/fhwasa10001/ 
o Methods and Practices for Setting Speed Limits- 
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/speedmgt/ref_mats/fhwasa12004/ 
• AASHTO Highway Safety Manual: www.highwaysafetymanual.org/ 
o AASHTO Strategic Highway Safety Plan, including the NCHRP Report 500 series 
guides on reducing crashes: www.trb.org/Main/Blurbs/152868.aspx 
• Centers for Disease Control, Community Speed Reduction and Public Health. Health 
Resources In Action resources: 
www.cdc.gov/healthyplaces/healthtopics/transportation/practice.htm 
• Crash Modification Factors Clearinghouse: www.cmfclearinghouse.org/ 
• NCHRP Report 504, Design Speed, Operating Speed, and Posted Speed Practices: 
 
onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_504.pdf 
• NCHRP Report 622, Effectiveness of Behavioral Highway Safety Countermeasures: 
www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=14195 
• Transportation Research Board Special Report 254, Managing Speed: Review of Current 
Practice for Setting and Enforcing Speed Limits: 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/sr/sr254.pdf Global Road Safety Partnership, Speed 
Management: Road Safety Manual for Decision-makers and Practitioners: 
www.who.int/roadsafety/projects/manuals/speed_manual/en/ 
• Transportation Research Information Services (TRIS) database – bibliographic database 
of transportation-related research: tris.trb.org 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 12 
Countermeasures That Work 
 
Countermeasures to reduce aggressive driving and speeding are listed below and discussed 
individually in this chapter. The table is intended to give a rough estimate of each 
countermeasure’s effectiveness, use, cost, and time required for implementation. The terms used 
are described below. Effectiveness, cost, and time to implement can vary substantially from State 
to State and community to community. Costs for many countermeasures are difficult to measure, 
so the summary terms are very approximate. See each countermeasure discussion for more 
information. 
 
1. Laws 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
1.1 Speed limits 
† 
$ 
High 
Short 
1.2 Aggressive driving laws 
 
$ 
Low 
Short 
† When enforced and obeyed 
 
2. Enforcement 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
2.1 Automated enforcement 
 
$$$† 
Medium 
Medium 
2.2 High visibility enforcement 
 
$$$ 
Low†† 
Medium 
2.3 Other enforcement methods 
 
Varies 
Unknown 
Varies 
† Can be covered by income from citations 
†† For aggressive driving, but use of short-term, high visibility enforcement campaigns for speeding 
is more widespread 
 
3. Penalties and Adjudication 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
3.1 Penalty types and levels 
 
Varies 
High 
Low 
3.2 Diversion and plea agreements 
 
Varies 
Unknown 
Varies 
 
4. Communications and Outreach 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
4.1 Public Information supporting enforcement  
Varies 
Medium 
Medium 
 
 
Effectiveness: 
- Demonstrated to be effective by several high-quality evaluations with 
consistent results 
- Demonstrated to be effective in certain situations 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 13 
 
 
- Likely to be effective based on balance of evidence from high-quality evaluations 
or other sources 
- Effectiveness still undetermined; different methods of implementing this 
countermeasure produce different results 
- Limited or no high-quality evaluation evidence 
 
Effectiveness is measured by reductions in crashes or injuries unless noted otherwise. 
See individual countermeasure descriptions for information on effectiveness size and how 
effectiveness is measured. 
 
Cost to implement: 
$$$: requires extensive new facilities, staff, or equipment, or makes heavy demands on 
current resources 
$$: requires some additional staff time, equipment, and/or facilities 
$: can be implemented with current staff, perhaps with training; limited costs for equipment 
or facilities 
 
These estimates do not include the costs of enacting legislation or establishing policies. 
 
Use: 
High: more than two-thirds of the States, or a substantial majority of communities 
Medium: between one-third and two-thirds of States or communities 
Low: fewer than one-third of the States or communities 
Unknown: data not available 
 
Time to implement: 
Long: more than one year 
Medium: more than three months but less than one year 
Short: three months or less 
 
These estimates do not include the time required to enact legislation or establish policies. 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 14 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Short 
 
1. Laws 
 
1.1 Speed Limits 
 
 
 
† When enforced and obeyed 
 
Speed limits are only one part of the system that attempts to control driving speeds. Well-
established speed limits based on the use of appropriate engineering practices form the basis for 
roadway design and operations. Active enforcement and supportive adjudication are also 
essential to support established limits (NHTSA, FHWA, & FMCSA, 2014).  
 
Speed limits are set both by legislation and by administrative action. General speed limits apply 
to all roads in a class, such as rural interstates or local streets. They are set by State, municipal, 
or even at times by Federal law based on tradeoffs between safety, travel efficiency, and 
community concerns, taking into account the design characteristics of each road class. Speed 
zones apply to road segments where the general speed limit is thought to be inappropriate. Speed 
limits in these zones usually are set by administrative action based on the road segment’s free- 
flowing travel speeds, crash experience, road and land use conditions, and other factors (TRB, 
1998). 
 
The effects of maximum speed limits on speeds, crashes, and casualties have been studied 
extensively over the past 40 years. However, recent actions by States raising maximum limits, as 
well as changes in road design, hardware, vehicles, and drivers suggest that new studies may be 
needed. In 1974, the 55 mph National Maximum Speed Limit (NMSL) was enacted to conserve 
fuel. Travel decreased, speeds decreased on roads where the speed limit was lowered to 55 mph, 
and total traffic fatalities decreased by 9,100 from 1973. The slower and more uniform speeds 
due to the 55 mph limit are judged to have saved between 3,000 and 5,000 lives in 1974 (TRB, 
1984). As fuel became plentiful again, travel increased and compliance with the 55 mph limit 
decreased markedly (TRB, 1984). In 1987, Congress allowed States to raise speed limits to 65 
mph on rural interstate highways. States that raised their limits generally saw increases of about 
4 mph in average speeds and 85th percentile speeds and statistically significant increases in 
traffic fatalities on these roads (TRB, 1998). In 1995, Congress repealed the NMSL and returned 
full authority to set speed limits back to the States. Again, increased speed limits produced 
modest increases in both average and 85th percentile speeds as well as increases in traffic 
fatalities (TRB, 1998; for the most recent analysis, see TRB, 2006). Speed limit increases from 
75 to 80 mph on rural Texas interstates in 2006 also resulted in increased speeds relative to a 
comparison highway where the limit wasn’t changed (Retting & Cheung, 2008).  
 
Relatively few studies have examined the safety effects of speed limit changes on lower-speed 
roads. Earlier studies found little effect on driving speeds or crash rates when speed limits were 
raised to near the 85th percentile travel speed or lowered to near the 35th percentile speed, either 
on rural roads or on urban and suburban arterials (TRB, 1998, p. 6). However, a recent study 
from the City of Edmonton (Alberta province, Canada) found that speeds on residential streets 
decreased significantly when limits were lowered and supported with enforcement or other 
measures. Specifically, this study found significant speed reductions (3.9 to 4.9 km/h [2.4 to 3.0 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 15 
mph], three and six months after treatment, respectively) when posted speed limits in residential 
areas were reduced from 50 km/h (31 mph) to 40 km/h (25 mph). Changes in posted limits were 
accompanied by education and enforcement measures, but no changes were made to the 
roadway. Speeds were reduced on both collector and local road types, in all types of 
communities, for light and heavy vehicles, for different times of day and on weekends and 
weekdays. Compliance improved over time up to six months post-implementation (Islam, El-
Basyouny, & Ibrahim, 2013). Following the lowering of urban default maximum speed limits 
from 60 km/hr (37.3 mph) to 50 km/h (31.1 mph) in 2003 in Adelaide (South Australia), low 
speed roads showed a significant reduction in mean speed from 46.9 km/h (29.1 mph) to 44.8 
km/h (27.8 mph) (Kloeden & Woolley, 2010). Between 2003 and 2010, yearly mean speeds have 
remained lower than before the limits were changed, fluctuating between a high of 44.8 km/h 
(27.8 mph) and a low of 43.3 km/h (26.9 mph).  
 
When urban speed limits were increased from 50 to 70 km/h (from 31 to 43 mph) or from 70 to 
80 km/h (from 43 to 50 mph) on 19 urban road segments in Hong Kong, crashes increased by 20 
to 30% (Wong, Sze, Lo, Hung, & Loo, 2005).  
 
A systematic evaluation of changed speed limits on rural roads and motorways in Sweden also 
found fairly consistent increases in travel speeds on all types of rural roads when limits were 
raised and decreases on roads where limits were lowered. Increases of the posted speed limit by 
10 km/hr (6.2 mph) led to increases in speeds on the order of about 3 to 3.6 km/h (1.9 to 2.2 
mph) in mean speeds (weighted for segments length and volume, and including all vehicles on a 
section for a given time period, not just free flow speeds). Decreases of the posted speed limit of 
10 km/hr (6.2 mph) led to decreases of about 2 to 3.3 km/hr (1.2 to 2 mph) for most road types 
(Vadeby & Forsman, 2014). These findings are generally in line with those of earlier studies of 
the effects of changing limits by 5 or more mph (TRB, 1998). 
 
Use: A speed limit is in effect on all road segments in all States. For summaries of each State’s 
maximum speed limits see the Governors Highway Safety Association (GHSA, 2015c) and the 
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS, 2015b) websites. NHTSA (2011) provides a 
publication with each State’s complete speed limit laws. 
 
Effectiveness: Lower maximum speed limits definitely reduce crashes and casualties when 
lower limits result in reduced speeds. In general, speeds tend to decrease, but to a lower degree 
than the reduction in limits. Similarly, when limits are raised, speeds tend to increase by a 
smaller amount than the change in limits. The same holds true on any road: if a lower speed limit 
yields reduced operating speeds, crashes and injuries are expected to decrease (AASHTO, 2010). 
A more comprehensive effort that includes changes to the roadway and/or enhanced enforcement 
may be required to reduce travel speeds by the desired amount, especially if the road design does 
not reflect the desired speed limit and operating speeds (TRB, 1998). The State of Victoria, 
Australia implemented a comprehensive effort to reduce speeds that combined review and 
adjustment of speed limits, covert and overt forms of enforcement, a media campaign, penalty 
restructuring, and other efforts. An evaluation found these combined elements reduced injury 
crashes by 10% and fatal crashes by 27% (D’Elia, Newstead, & Cameron, 2007). 
 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 16 
Costs: The immediate costs of changing speed limits are for new signage and for publicizing the 
new limit. Enforcing the new limit may involve substantial costs. 
 
Time to implement: Speed limit changes can be implemented quickly, as soon as signage is in 
place and the new limits are publicized. 
 
Other issues: 
• Public acceptance, roadway characteristics, enforcement, and publicity: Lowering 
speed limits can reduce average driving speeds, but it is generally difficult to enforce and 
obtain broad compliance with a lower speed limit on a roadway designed for much higher 
speeds (TRB, 1998). Thus, speed limits must be considered as part of a system including 
roadway design and other characteristics, active enforcement, and publicity (TRB, 1998). 
• Rational speed limits: Speed limits on many road segments are frequently not obeyed, 
and average travel speeds on these segments substantially exceed the speed limit. One 
strategy that has been proposed to increase overall safety is to carefully set and enforce 
credible speed limits for homogeneous road segments. Once credible, also called rational, 
speed limits are established, aggressive enforcement is used to enforce close to the actual 
limit. The goal of this strategy is to increase the public’s overall acceptance of speed 
limits while reducing the number of people driving at speeds considerably higher than the 
limit. Evidence suggests that drivers’ perceptions of safe speed are in fact influenced by 
their expectation of what speed above the limit would trigger a ticket (Mannering, 2009). 
Therefore, lower tolerances would help to increase the perception of the risk of exceeding 
limits by even small amounts. Although consistency in speed limit setting practices 
should provide better information about appropriate speeds to drivers, the safety effects of 
combining rational speed limit setting (with limits raised to between the 50th and 85th 
percentile free flow operating speed) with enhanced enforcement close to the new limit 
are uncertain. Reviews of the evidence suggest that it can be difficult to implement or 
sustain enhanced levels of enforcement. In general, higher speed limits are very likely to 
lead to higher average speeds if nothing is done to the road or enhanced enforcement is 
not maintained (Hauer, 2009). Higher average speeds are predicted to lead to an increase 
in fatal and injury crashes (ASHTO, 2010).When testing the effects of raising speed 
limits, followed by enhanced enforcement in Mississippi and Virginia, average speeds 
increased in both locations. In Virginia, average speeds tended to increase about 2 mph at 
locations where the limit was raised by 5 mph and by 3 to 4 mph where it was raised by 
15 mph (Freedman, De Leonardis, Polson, Levi, & Burkhardt, 2007). In Virginia, average 
speed increased by a statistically significant 3 to 4 mph when the limit was raised from 55 
to 65 mph on two rural Virginia highways (Fontain, Park, & Son, 2007). Speed variance 
did not increase and compliance overall was improved in Virginia, which supplemented 
stricter enforcement with enhanced roadside signs, media publicity, and brochures 
(Fontain et al., 2007). Average speeds as well as speed variance increased in Mississippi, 
where limits were increased on different sections of one route by 5 to 15 mph and the 
number of extreme speeders were not reduced, except on sections where limits were 
increased by 15 mph (Freedman et al., 2007). Mississippi chose to enforce only flagrant 
violators (at least 5 mph above the limit). Crash effects were inconclusive over both of 
these fairly short term evaluations (1 to 1.5 years), although crashes were higher during 
the Mississippi trial compared to a prior three year period. A test in Minnesota yielded 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 17 
more promising, though inconclusive crash trends (Harder & Bloomfield, 2007). The 
Minnesota campaign, which used speeding and crash histories to help target enforcement, 
effectively reduced mean speeds and especially excessive speeding (speeds of 70 mph 
and more), but the study period was insufficient to assess crash trends. Extensive radio 
publicity supplemented by earned media was used in the Minnesota campaign, but it was 
unclear if these efforts were successful at reaching the target audience. 
• Variable speed limits: Speed limits that may adjust to adverse or changing 
environmental conditions are considered by FHWA to have promise in restoring 
credibility of speed limits on some highways. Variable speed limits (VSLs) have long 
been used on European freeways to manage speed and traffic flows. As of 2007, six 
metropolitan areas in the United States were employing enforceable, variable speed limits 
on freeways (posted on changeable message signs) (RITA, 2007). Variable speed limits 
have also been tested in Michigan work zones (FHWA, 2004). A high quality study of 
safety effects of variable limits deployed on freeways in the St. Louis area reported crash 
reductions of 8%. The congestion relief benefits were not as high as the public and 
agencies had hoped, however, leading to somewhat equivocal support for the measure 
(Bham et al., 2010). No other quality evaluations are available at present. Preliminary 
investigation of a Wyoming freeway VSL system showed speed reductions from 0.47 to 
0.75 mph for every mph reduction in speed limit (Buddemeyer, Young, & Dorsey-Spitz, 
2010). Other States that have used VSL systems to alter speed limits for weather 
conditions include Alabama, Delaware, and Washington (Katz et al., 2012). Automated 
speed enforcement could potentially be linked to variable limits to increase compliance. 
• Work Zone speed limits: If drivers perceive that limits are too low, workers are not 
present, and other changes to the roadway do not seem to justify the lower limits, they 
may not comply, and extensive enforcement may be needed to enforce the limit 
(NCHRP, 2013).
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 18 
 
 
1.2 Aggressive Driving and Other Laws 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Low 
Time: Short 
 
Aggressive driving actions are covered by specific traffic laws, such as the laws regarding 
speeding, improper lane changes, and following too closely, or by general laws, such as those 
that target reckless driving. Most existing reckless driving statues carry relatively minor penalties 
and may be difficult to prosecute according to NHTSA (NHTSA, 2001a). Aggressive drivers, as 
distinct from aggressive driving, often can be identified as those who violate traffic laws 
repeatedly or whose violations lead to crashes producing serious injury or death. Therefore, the 
primary traffic law strategy to address aggressive driving is to assure that more severe penalties 
are available for repeat offenders and for violations causing death or serious injuries. Existing 
statutes, including reckless driving laws, may be strengthened or aggressive driving laws may be 
enacted. 
 
NHTSA’s 1999 Symposium on Aggressive Driving and the Law recommended that States 
implement laws targeting aggressive drivers by providing for: 
• enhanced penalties for repeat offenders, including increased driver’s license points, 
license suspension or revocation, higher fines, and jail or probation; and 
• felony charges for violations resulting in serious injury or death (NHTSA, 2001a). 
 
NHTSA also developed a model statute that defines aggressive driving as three moving 
violations in a single driving incident and a number of States have adopted similar laws; 
however, aggressive driving violations may be difficult to enforce and prosecute (Flango & 
Keith, 2004). The NCHRP Aggressive Driving Guide also suggests a strategy of applying 
increased sanctions and treatment for repeat offenders and serious offenses (NCHRP, 2003a, 
Strategy A3).  
 
Use: In general, States provide for increased penalties for repeat offenders and for violations 
with serious consequences. Eleven States have aggressive driving laws (GHSA, 2015a). 
 
Effectiveness: There is as yet no evidence for whether aggressive driving laws in general, or 
increased penalties in particular, affect aggressive driving and related crashes. See Chapter 3, 
Section 3.1 for a discussion of the effects of driver improvement actions in general. 
 
Costs: The only immediate costs of the recommended law changes are to publicize the new or 
altered laws. Additional costs may result as drivers are sentenced to more costly sanctions. 
 
Time to implement: Law changes can be implemented quickly, once legislation is passed and 
publicized.  
 
Other issues: 
• Public acceptance, enforcement, and publicity: Law changes by themselves cannot 
reduce aggressive driving. Traffic laws in general and aggressive driving laws in 
particular are essential to, but only a part of, a system that includes broad public 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 19 
acceptance, active enforcement, effective adjudication, and publicity (NHTSA, 2001a). 
• Record-keeping: Information on prior convictions of offenders must be up-to-date and 
available to prosecutors and court officials so that repeat and flagrant violators may be 
prosecuted in keeping with the strategy to increase sanctions for these offenders. 
Providing the technology and ability for patrol officers to obtain up-to-date driver history 
information at the time of traffic stops is another strategy recommended to deal with 
drivers with suspended or revoked licenses who continue to violate traffic laws (NCHRP, 
2003b). 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 20 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$$† 
Use: Medium 
Time: Medium 
 
2. Enforcement 
 
2.1 Automated Enforcement 
 
 
 
† Can be covered by income from citations 
 
Automated enforcement is used in some jurisdictions to reduce red-light running and speeding 
above limits. At intersections with traffic lights, automated cameras take photographs of vehicles 
entering the intersection on a red light. Citations are sent to the vehicle’s registered owner. 
FHWA’s Red- Light Camera Systems Operational Guidelines (FHWA, 2005) provides 
information on red-light camera program costs, effectiveness, implementation, and other issues. 
Speed cameras, also called photo radar or automated speed enforcement, operate similarly, 
recording a vehicle’s speed using radar or other instrumentation and taking a photograph of the 
vehicle when it exceeds a threshold limit. NCHRP (2012), and NHTSA and FHWA (2008) have 
released automated enforcement program and operational guides with information on identifying 
problems and setting up and maintaining an effective and transparent, community-supported 
enforcement program using speed or red light cameras. 
 
Use: Red-light cameras are used extensively in other industrialized countries and were first 
employed in the United Sates in 1993 (NCSRLR, 2002). As of June 2015, red-light cameras were 
being used in about 460 communities in 24 States, the District of Columbia, and the U.S. Virgin 
Islands. Speed cameras were being used in approximately 134 jurisdictions in 12 States, the 
District of Columbia, and the U.S. Virgin Islands, including four statewide work zone automated 
enforcement programs (in Illinois, Maryland, Oregon, and Washington) (GHSA, 2015b; IIHS, 
2015a). Speed cameras also are used extensively in other countries (WHO, 2004). 
 
Effectiveness: Red-light camera effectiveness has been studied fairly extensively. Summary 
reviews conclude that they increase rear-end crashes, reduce side-impact crashes (the target 
group), and reduce overall crash severity (Aeron-Thomas & Hess, 2006; Decina, Thomas, 
Srinivasan, & Staplin, 2007; Maccubbin, Staples, & Salwin, 2001; McGee & Eccles, 2003; 
Retting, Ferguson, & Hakkert, 2003; Washington & Shin, 2005; WHO, 2004). Because there 
tend to be increases in lower-severity rear end crashes that somewhat offset reductions in the 
target group of higher- severity angle crashes, cameras were found to be more beneficial at 
intersections with a higher ratio of angle crashes to rear-end crashes. The best-controlled studies 
have found that intersections with high total volumes, higher entering volumes on the main road, 
longer green (through) cycle lengths, protected left turn phases, and higher publicity may also 
increase the safety and cost benefits of red light camera enforcement (Council, Persaud, Eccles, 
Lyon, & Griffith, 2005; Washington & Shin, 2005). Other factors that may improve safety 
benefits included the posting of warning signs in advance of the intersection. Washington and 
Shin (2005) also caution that less expensive engineering solutions should be sought before 
implementing camera programs. 
 
Speed cameras can also reduce crashes substantially. Decina et al. (2007) reviewed 13 safety 
impact studies of automated speed enforcement internationally, including one study from a U.S. 
jurisdiction. The best-controlled studies suggest injury crash reductions relating to the 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 21 
introduction of speed cameras are likely to be in the range of 20 to 25% at conspicuous, fixed 
camera sites. Covert, mobile enforcement programs also result in significant crash reductions 
area-wide (Thomas, Srinivasan, Decina, & Staplin, 2008). Recent crash-based studies from the 
United States have reported positive safety benefits of crash and speed reductions from mobile 
camera enforcement on 14 urban arterials in Charlotte, North Carolina (Cunningham Hummer, & 
Moon, 2008), and from fixed camera enforcement on an urban Arizona freeway (Shin, 
Washington, & van Schalkwyk, 2009). 
 
The Shin et al. (2009) study examined effects of a fixed camera enforcement program applied to 
a 6.5-mile urban freeway section through Scottsdale, Arizona. The speed limit on the enforced 
freeway was 65 mph; the enforcement trigger was set to 76 mph. Total target crashes were 
reduced by an estimated 44 to 54%, injury crashes by 28 to 48%, and property damage only 
crashes by 46 to 56% during the 9-month program period. Since analyses found low speeding 
detection rates during peak travel times, the target crashes (speeding-related crashes) were 
considered to be those that occurred during non-peak flow periods (weekends, holidays, and non- 
peak weekdays hours). In addition to the crash reductions, average speed was decreased by about 
9 mph and speed variance also decreased around the enforced zones. Another positive finding 
from this study was that all types of crashes appeared to be reduced, with the possible exception 
of rear-end crashes, for which effects were non-significant. Thus, there were no obvious trade-
offs of decreases in some crash types at the expense of increases in others. The program effects 
should be considered short-term. There was also very limited examination of spillover effects, 
including the possibility of traffic or crash diversion to other routes. 
 
In 2009/2010, the freeway speed camera program in Arizona was discontinued as the result of a 
political decision based on a variety of factors. A mobile speed camera operator was shot and 
killed on a deployment, creating concerns for the safety of personnel in the field. Additionally, a 
change in administration in the State shifted the view of automated enforcement in general, and 
on the freeways around Phoenix, in particular. 
 
Pilot project evaluations of speed camera use in the United States have also obtained promising 
speed reductions from fixed speed cameras in low-speed, school zones in Portland, Oregon 
(Freedman et al., 2006), and low-speed limit residential streets and school zones in Montgomery 
County, Maryland (Retting, Farmer, & McCartt, 2008). In the latter case, speed reductions 
attributed to spillover from the automated enforcement program were also observed on 
unenforced comparison streets (Retting et al., 2008). The percentage of speeders was also 
substantially reduced when police-operated photo radar enforcement vans were present in a work 
zone on a non-interstate highway in Portland, Oregon, but there was no carry-over when the 
enforcement was not present (Joerger, 2010). Given that there was no evidence of any 
accompanying signs or publicity, there was, however, no reason to expect carry-over outside of 
the enforced periods. Crash and injury outcomes were not evaluated in these studies. 
 
Costs: Costs will be based on equipment choices, operational and administrative characteristics 
of the program, and specific negotiations with vendors. Cameras may be purchased, leased, or 
installed and maintained by contractors for a negotiated fee (NHTSA & Federal Highway 
Administration, 2008). In 2001, red-light film-based camera systems cost about $50,000 to 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 22 
$60,000 and digital systems were around $100,000 to purchase and $25,000 to install. Monthly 
operating costs were about $5,000 (Maccubbin et al., 2001). Most jurisdictions contract with 
private vendors to install and maintain the cameras and, to process images and violations. A 
substantial portion of the fines from red-light citations is generally used to cover program costs 
(Washington & Shin, 2005). 
 
Fixed speed camera costs may not be similar to those for red-light camera programs, based on 
volume of activity and violations they generate. An economic analysis estimated the total cost 
savings of the Scottsdale freeway fixed speed enforcement were from $16.5 to $17.1 million per 
year, considering only camera installation and operational cost estimates and crash cost impacts 
(other potential economic impacts were not considered) (Shin, Washington, & van Schalkwyk, 
2009). Chen (2005) provides an extensive analysis of the costs and benefits of the British 
Columbia, Canada, mobile speed camera program and estimated a societal savings of C$114 
million and a savings of over C$38 million for the Insurance Corporation of British Columbia 
(ICBC) that funded the program. Gains, Heydecker, Shrewsbury, and Robertson (2004) reported 
a 4:1 overall societal cost to benefit ratio of operating the national (fixed) speed camera program 
in the U.K. based on 33% reductions in personal injury crashes at camera sites and a 40% 
reduction in the number of people killed and seriously injured. 
 
Time to implement: Once any necessary legislation is enacted, automated enforcement 
programs generally require 4 to 6 months to plan, publicize, and implement. 
 
Other issues: 
• Laws: Many jurisdictions using automated enforcement are in States with laws 
authorizing its use. Some States permit automated enforcement without a specific State 
law. Others prohibit or restrict some forms of automated enforcement (GHSA, 2015b; 
IIHS, 2015a). In yet others, there is no specific statute, and it cannot be inferred from case 
law whether the State allows automated enforcement. As of February 2010, 9 States had 
statutes specifically authorizing the use of automated speed enforcement, three implicitly 
allowed automated speed enforcement (but had no specific authorizing statute), and 6 had 
statutes allowing specific or limited automated speed enforcement (NHTSA, 2011). See 
NCUTLO (2004) for a model automated enforcement law. 
• 
Public acceptance: Public surveys typically show strong support for red-light cameras 
and somewhat weaker support for speed cameras (NHTSA, 2004). A 2011 nationally-
representative survey of drivers found that 86% thought automated speed cameras would 
be acceptable to enforce speed limits in school zones. Significant majorities also thought 
they would be acceptable at high-crash locations (84%), in construction zones (74%), and 
in areas that would be hazardous for police officers to stop vehicles (70%) or would cause 
congestion (63%). Thirty-five percent thought automated camera enforcement of speeds 
is acceptable on all roads (Schroeder, Kostyniuk, & Mack, 2012). Support appears 
highest in jurisdictions that have implemented red-light or speed cameras. A survey of 
District of Columbia residents found 76% favored speed cameras, with even higher 
support among non-drivers (Cicchino, Wells, & McCartt, 2014). A larger majority of 
87% favored the use of red light cameras. Interestingly, support was lower for measures 
not currently in use, including photo-enforcement of stop signs (50%) and yielding at 
crosswalks (47%). Again, support was higher among non-drivers for these measures 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 23 
(Cicchino et al., 2014). However, efforts to institute automated enforcement often are 
opposed by people who believe that speed or red-light cameras intrude on individual 
privacy or are an inappropriate extension of law enforcement authority. They also may be 
opposed if they are viewed as revenue generators rather than methods for improving 
safety. Drivers responding to the NHTSA survey, although indicating support generally 
for automated enforcement in certain types of locations or conditions, were also more 
likely to somewhat agree or strongly agree with the statement that speed cameras are used 
to generate revenue (70%) than with the statement that speed cameras are used to prevent 
accidents (55%) (Schroeder et al., 2012). Such concerns should be carefully and openly 
addressed in any automated enforcement program. FHWA recommends, for example, that 
per citation payment arrangements to private contractors should be avoided to reduce the 
appearance of conflicts of interest (FHWA, 2005). A case study from Portland Oregon’s 
RLC program indicates that the vendor payment structure is a blended contract. The 
vendor receives a fixed amount per intersection to install and operate the cameras (the 
city picks the sites) and a monthly amount based on the number of citations that are 
issued (NCHRP, 2012). The marginal amount decreases with more citations issued. The 
current payment structure is $27 per citation for the first 500 paid citations in a month, 
$20 for citations 501-700, and $18 for each paid citation over 700. A couple of research 
papers have discussed how Australia and the United Kingdom have dealt with the 
opponents of and controversies associated with speed cameras and expanded programs at 
the same time (Delaney, Diamantopoulou, & Cameron, 2003; Delaney, Ward, Cameron, 
& Williams, 2005). Also see NCHRP (2012) for more in-depth description of best 
practices for speed camera programs and case study examples of sustained programs. 
• Legality: State courts have consistently supported the constitutionality of automated 
enforcement (Poole, 2012). 
• Covert versus overt enforcement: Covert, mobile speed camera enforcement programs 
may provide a more generalized deterrent effect and may have the added benefit that 
drivers are less likely to know precisely when and where cameras are operating. Drivers 
may therefore be less likely to adapt to cameras by taking alternate routes or speeding up 
after passing cameras, but data are lacking to confirm this idea (Thomas et al., 2008). 
Public acceptance may be somewhat harder to gain with more covert forms of 
enforcement (NHTSA & FHWA, 2008). Fixed, or signed, conspicuous mobile 
enforcement may also be more noticeable and achieve more rapid site-specific speed and 
crash reductions at high crash locations. However, the use of general signs in jurisdictions 
with automated enforcement (not at specifically enforced zones), media, and other 
program publicity about the need for speed enforcement may help to overcome the idea 
that covert enforcement is unfair, and promote the perception that enforcement is 
widespread, enhancing deterrence effects. Based on lessons learned abroad, a mix of 
conspicuous and covert forms of enforcement may be most effective. See Belin, Tillgren, 
Vedung, Cameron, & Tingvall (2010) for a comparison of Australian covert and Swedish 
fixed, overt systems. NHTSA and FHWA’s operational guidelines document outlines 
other considerations of overt and covert speed enforcement and signing strategies 
(NHTSA & FHWA, 2008). 
• Halo effects: More research is needed to shed light on spillover effects (positive or 
negative) of automated speed enforcement programs of varying characteristics. While 
fixed cameras may yield more dramatic decreases in crashes at the treated sites (which, 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 24 
however, are often sites with high crash frequencies that are likely to decrease in 
subsequent years) than mobile enforcement, there is little reason to expect that there 
would be a significant positive spillover effect. In fact some studies have detected crash 
migration related to conspicuous, fixed camera enforcement (Decina et al., 2007). There 
is also a possibility of negative spillover resulting from mobile camera enforcement, but 
signing and random deployment practices may reduce that possibility (Thomas, 
Srinivasan, et al., 2008). 
• Average speed (over distance) enforcement: A review of the evidence to date suggests 
that enforcement (using multiple cameras and camera sites) of average motorist speed 
over distance is associated with reductions in average and 85th percentile speeds, and the 
proportion of speeding vehicles. Such systems have the potential to reduce speed 
variability and improve traffic flow characteristics, and may help to avoid negative halo 
effects such as crash migration to downstream sites that fixed or overt mobile 
enforcement sometimes experience (Soole, Watson, and Fleiter, 2013). 
• Enforcement threshold: Victoria, Australia has had success with a program that 
tightened enforcement tolerances as part of an overall speed management package that 
included automated and other enforcement, publicity, and penalty restructuring (D’Elia, 
Newstead, & Cameron, 2007). A recent experiment in Finland also found that lowering 
the enforcement threshold of fixed, speed camera enforcement on a rural, two-lane road 
from 20 km/h (12.4 mph) above the limit to 4 km/h (2.5 mph) above the limit (advertised 
as zero tolerance) and publicity of the measure reduced mean speeds by 2.5 km/h (1.6 
mph) and speed variance by 1.1 km/h (0.7 mph) in comparison with a similar, camera-
enforced corridor where the threshold was not reduced (Luoma, Rajamäki, & Malvivuo, 
2012). The percentage of vehicles exceeding the speed limit was reduced from 23% to 
10%, so deterrence of speeding was increased without increasing the processed citations 
(police or administrative burden). The speed effect of the reduced threshold was within 
the range of effect of the initial implementation of the automated camera enforcement. 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 25 
2.2 High Visibility Enforcement 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$$ 
Use: Low-Medium† Time: Medium 
† Use is low for aggressive driving, but use of short-term, high visibility enforcement campaigns for 
speeding is more widespread 
 
High visibility enforcement campaigns have been used to deter speeding and aggressive driving 
through both specific and general deterrence. In the high visibility enforcement model, law 
enforcement targets selected high-crash or high-violation geographical areas using either 
expanded regular patrols or designated aggressive driving patrols. This model is based on the 
same principles as high visibility seat belt and alcohol-impaired-driving enforcement: to 
convince the public that speeding and aggressive driving actions are likely to be detected and that 
offenders will be arrested and punished (see Chapter 1, Alcohol-Impaired Driving, Sections 
2.1 and 2.2, and Chapter 2, Seat Belt Use, Section 2.1). 
 
In the high visibility enforcement model, officers focus on drivers who commit common 
aggressive driving actions such as speeding, following too closely, and running red lights. 
Enforcement is publicized widely. The strategy is very similar to saturation patrols directed at 
alcohol-impaired drivers (Chapter 1, Section 2.2). Because speeding and aggressive driving are 
moving violations, officers cannot use checkpoints. Rather, they must observe driving behavior 
on the road. 
 
NHTSA’s Aggressive Driving Enforcement: Strategies for Implementing Best Practices 
(NHTSA, 2000) provides brief descriptions of 12 aggressive driving enforcement programs from 
around the country. A few examples:  
• The Albuquerque, New Mexico, Safe Streets program used saturation patrols in four 
high-crash and high-crime areas, writing tickets when infractions were observed. At 
about the midpoint of the program, traffic enforcement focus was shifted from the high 
crime neighborhoods to high crash corridors and intersections. On freeways they 
observed speeding and aggressive driving from a “cherry picker” platform and radioed 
to patrol officers. See www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/enforce/safestreets/index.htm for 
more information including some measures of program effects.  
• The greater Washington, DC, area multi-agency Smooth Operator program uses shared 
publicity and coordinated enforcement waves with marked and unmarked patrol 
vehicles as well as nontraditional vehicles. This program provides a website link where 
the public can report observed instances of aggressive driving: 
(www.smoothoperatorprogram.com/aggressive_reporting.html). Also see the District’s 
web page about the program (http://mpdc.dc.gov/node/208412). The State of Maryland 
also participates in Smooth Operator (see Sprattler, 2012). 
• The Washington State Patrol’s Enforcement Target Zero Program involves State troopers, 
county sheriff’s deputies and city and tribal police officers collaborating to focus on those 
violations proven to cause fatal or serious injury collisions. The program uses mapping to 
target resources and experienced officers and training on completing investigations and 
arrest reports to assist with prosecution. See www.wsp.wa.gov/targetzero/targetzero.htm 
for more information. 
 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 26 
See a few other examples of high visibility speed and aggressive driving enforcement programs 
in GHSA’s Survey of the States: Speeding and Aggressive Driving (2012), and NHTSA’s 
Aggressive Driving Programs (NHTSA, 2001b). 
 
Use: High visibility speed enforcement campaigns are common, with most States providing some 
funding for speed equipment (47 States and Guam), overtime enforcement (42 States and Guam), 
or speed public information campaigns (31 States and Guam) (Sprattler, 2012). Relatively few 
States fund aggressive driving-related equipment or enforcement (six States; Sprattler, 2012) and 
it is likely that high visibility aggressive driving enforcement campaigns are not common. 
NCHRP (2003a, Strategy A1) provides a few examples of aggressive driving enforcement 
programs.  
 
Effectiveness: Moon and Hummer (2010) estimated that 8 to 9% of the total and injury crash 
reduction effects of around 25% associated with an automated mobile, speed enforcement 
program in Charlotte, NC, were attributable to media coverage of the program. In addition to 
results from automated camera enforcement programs (see Section 2.1), which typically 
incorporate a significant amount of publicity and media coverage (see section 4.1), some crash-
based effectiveness evidence comes from NHTSA demonstrations in three communities. All 
three demonstrations lasted 6 months and included extensive publicity but differed in other 
respects. Milwaukee was the most successful. Red-light running decreased at targeted 
intersections. Crashes in the city dropped by 12% in targeted corridors and by 2% in comparison 
corridors (McCartt, Leaf, Witkowski, & Solomon, 2001). The Indianapolis demonstration was 
not a success. Average speeds dropped slightly. Total crashes increased 32% over the previous 
year. Crashes increased more in the demonstration area than in other areas, and the proportion of 
crashes involving aggressive driving behaviors also increased in the demonstration areas (Stuster, 
2004). Tucson had mixed results. Average speeds dropped moderately. Total crashes increased 
10% in the demonstration areas and decreased in comparison areas. However, the proportion of 
crashes involving aggressive driving behaviors decreased by 8% in the demonstration areas 
(Stuster, 2004). 
 
Several studies have reported reductions in crashes or reductions in speeding or other violations 
attributed to both general and targeted high visibility speed enforcement campaigns. Although 
the evidence is not conclusive, the trends are promising. These efforts have included a substantial 
increase in general traffic enforcement in Fresno, California (Davis et al., 2006), and a 
community-based high visibility speed enforcement campaign, entitled Heed the Speed, in the 
Phoenix, Arizona-area that aimed to reduce pedestrian crashes and injuries (Blomberg & Cleven, 
2006). No particular publicity measures were noted for the Fresno campaign, but it is likely that 
the increase from 20 to 84 traffic patrol officers, the addition of 20 new police motorcycles and 
radar guns, and more than 3-fold increase in citations in two years generated some publicity. 
Publicity measures for the Heed the Speed campaign included street and yard signs, educational 
material and active participation of neighborhood groups. Speed reductions were greatest in 
neighborhoods where new vertical traffic calming measures were also installed (Blomberg & 
Cleven, 2006; also see a Traffic Tech summary, NHTSA, 2006).  
 
A recent effort to scale-up the Heed the Speed program to six (out of 25 total) police districts in 
Philadelphia, met with limited success and some challenges. There were both unique challenges, 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 27 
including State legal restrictions on the use of radar for issuing citations, and other challenges, 
which the planned use of a new speed enforcement technology was unable to overcome. These 
other challenges such as competing law enforcement priorities, equipment loss, funding 
limitations, difficulty engaging public involvement, and gaining message penetration that were 
experienced in Philadelphia may also be challenges in other large cities. Even without an 
increase in speeding citations, however, there were decreasing trends in percentages of speeders 
on 17 of 24 streets over the three years of the program, especially on the streets that received a 
type of engineering treatment– three-dimensional painted markings that simulate traffic calming 
devices. Other treatments included ensuring appropriate posting of limits, message-oriented signs 
with and without speed limit reminders along the roadways, and flyers and other outreach. See 
also Section 4.1 Communications and Outreach in Support of Enforcement for more information. 
 
A 2008 test of a 4-week, high visibility enforcement campaign along a 6-mile corridor with a 
significant crash history in London, U.K., found significant reductions in driver speeding in the 
enforced area. There was also a halo effect up to two weeks following the end of the campaign 
(Walter, Broughton, & Knowles, 2011). A crash-based analysis was not conducted. The 
campaign was covered by print media as well as by billboards and active messaging along the 
enforced corridor. 
 
High visibility model programs to target specific aggressive driving actions around large trucks 
have also been undertaken in several States. The program, known as TACT (Ticketing 
Aggressive Cars and Trucks) is modeled on the Click It or Ticket belt use campaigns. An 
evaluation found promising results in reducing the number of targeted violations as the program 
was implemented in Washington State; effects on crashes or injuries were not determined (Nerup 
et al., 2006; Thomas, Blomberg, Peck, Cosgrove, & Salzberg, 2008). 
 
In summary, the evaluation evidence suggests that high visibility, anti-speeding and aggressive 
driving enforcement campaigns have promise, but safety benefits are far from guaranteed. Given 
challenges in administering police enforcement resources, one approach to develop a sustainable 
and effective campaign may be to randomly target low levels of conspicuous enforcement on an 
unpredictable basis to a larger share of network roads that account for a significant majority of 
injury crashes on the entire network (Newstead, Cameron, & Leggett, 2001). Such a program 
may warrant expanding enforcement coverage to many more roads in a jurisdiction to increase 
network-wide deterrence. In Queensland, Australia, the Random Road Watch enforcement 
program aims explicitly to cover a large portion of the road network where serious crashes occur, 
not just crash black spots, by randomly targeting police enforcement for two hour periods from 6 
a.m. to midnight using marked, parked police vehicles. Significant reductions in fatal and all 
crashes were estimated for the enforced zones that translated into statewide reductions of 12% in 
all severity of crashes and 15% of the State’s fatal road crashes (including non-metro areas). No 
additional publicity was undertaken; it is unknown how much free publicity the program 
generated. 
 
Other methods making use of enforcement time halos such as enforcing a corridor or other area 
for up to 4 weeks as described earlier, and then rotating the enforcement to another zone could 
also be utilized to maximize enforcement’s deterrent effects. 
 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 28 
Costs: As with alcohol-impaired driving and seat belt use enforcement campaigns, the main 
costs are for law enforcement time and for publicity. The Minnesota Speed Management 
Program cost approximately $3 million, with $2.5 million for increased enforcement, $350 
thousand for paid media (primarily radio), and $150 thousand for data collection and evaluation. 
The Minnesota DOT and State Patrol also made significant in-kind contributions toward project 
management, sign installation, speed detection equipment, engineering reviews, and fuel and 
vehicle costs (Harder & Bloomfield, 2007). The Milwaukee demonstration received a $650,000 
grant and the other two demonstrations each received a $200,000 grant. Public-private partners 
(such as those in interests in injury prevention and public health) may be able to assist with 
publicity.  
 
Time to implement: High visibility enforcement campaigns may require 4 to 6 months to plan, 
publicize, and implement. 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 29 
2.3 Other Enforcement Methods 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Varies 
 
Many traffic enforcement operations help to deter speeding and aggressive driving as well as 
other traffic offenses. In addition to high visibility enforcement campaigns (Chapter 3, Section 
2.2) and automated enforcement (Section 2.1), a number of new technologies have been 
recommended to address speeding and aggressive driving (NHTSA, 2001). Law enforcement 
agencies around the country have also conducted innovative and effective aggressive driving 
enforcement programs (NHTSA, 2000). 
 
Technology: Both external and in-vehicle technologies may help in several ways. 
• In-car video equipment in patrol cars allows law enforcement to record aggressive 
driving actions and can enhance the ability to prosecute and convict offenders (NHTSA, 
2001). 
• Laser speed measuring equipment can provide more accurate and reliable evidence of 
speeding (NHTSA, 2001a). 
• Unstaffed speed display devices, also known as speed trailers, can show drivers that they 
are speeding and may encourage some drivers to slow down, but effects may last only as 
long as the devices are in place (Donnell & Cruzado, 2008). They may also suggest to 
drivers that speeds are being monitored or enforcement is nearby. Signs that provided 
either an implication that speeds were being monitored or a social norms message 
(average speed at the site; your speed) were effective at reducing speeds in a 50 km/h 
zone although not as much as in earlier studies (Wrapson, Harre, & Murrell, 2006). Other 
studies have shown that speed trailers or portable changeable message signs, which may 
include speed feedback plus other messages such as “Slow Down Now” can be effective 
in reducing speeds in work zones (Brewer, Pesti, & Schneider, 2006; Mattox, Sarasua, 
Ogle, Eckenrode, & Dunning, 2007) and school zones (Lee, Lee, Choi, & Oh, 2006). 
Automated speed display monitors also provide a method to collect location-specific 
travel speed data. Speed feedback devices are likely to be more effective on two-lane 
highways than multi-lane ones. In addition, they may not provide accurate speed 
indications if traffic volumes are too high (NCHRP, 2013). Speeds seem to rebound 
quickly downstream and as soon as the devices are removed (Walter & Broughton, 2011; 
Hajbabaie, Medina, Wang, Rahim, & Chitturi, 2011).  
• In work zones, a combination of a parked police vehicle and speed feedback trailer 
reduced average and 85th percentile traffic stream speeds and free flow speeds to a 
similar degree as automated camera enforcement, whereas the effect of speed trailers 
alone was the same as no treatment. Parked police alone was also effective, but to a lesser 
extent than the combination of police + trailer or the camera system. The number of 
speeders above 10 mph over the limit was essentially reduced to zero by both the 
automated enforcement and police + trailer combination. However, the treatment effects 
on speeds in work zones disappeared within 40 – 50 minutes of removal (Hajbabaie et al., 
2011). See the NCHRP (2013) Report 746 for in-depth discussion of advantages, 
disadvantages and deployment considerations for various methods of traffic enforcement 
in work zones. According to this report, which provides state of the knowledge for work 
zone enforcement, there have been insufficient controlled trials to identify the optimal 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 30 
mix of enforcement types and other treatments for different highway types, geometries, 
and work zone situations. The report reiterates the importance of work zone speed limits 
that reflect the situation, including the presence of workers or alignment changes.  
• Drone radar - A study of the use of this technology in work zones suggests that it may be 
effective at reducing overall speed of the traffic stream, with particularly large speed 
reductions among vehicles equipped with radar detectors (Eckenrode, Sarasua, Mattox, 
Ogle, & Chowdhury, 2007). Both in-vehicle driver warning systems, as well as 
traditional cruise control, are widely available technologies that may be well-accepted by 
drivers to help govern their own speeds (Sivak et al., 2007; Young & Regan, 2007). 
• Intelligent Speed Adaptation (ISA) involves in-vehicle devices that “know” the speed 
limit through accurate digital maps of speed limits and global positioning system (GPS) 
data of the vehicle location. ISA systems can either warn when the speed limit is being 
exceeded or apply active controls to slow the vehicle. A recent pilot study was conducted 
in the United States among a group of repeat violators. (See section 3.1 for information 
about this study.) The devices have been widely studied in European countries for 
acceptability and effects on driver behavior with more widespread on-road trials currently 
underway. (See 
http://ec.europa.eu/transport/wcm/road_safety/erso/knowledge/Content/20_speed/intellig
ent_speed_adaptation_isa_.htm for more information.) In Europe, the effects on speeding 
have been fairly dramatic for both warning and control type ISA systems, decreasing the 
amount of speeding and narrowing the speed distributions (Carsten, 2012; Lai & Carsten, 
2012; van der Pas, Kessels, Veroude, & van Wee, 2014). These are very promising 
results for potential crash and injury reductions. However, a widespread implementation 
and trial have yet to be documented. While there remain issues to be resolved, including 
the extent to which behaviors in international trials are generalizable to the United States, 
the main roadblock to implementation may be political (Carsten, 2012) rather than safety 
or technological reasons. Some issues uncovered in recent trials include that serious 
offenders were more likely to disable or over-ride the devices than other drivers (van der 
Pas et al., 2014), and may be less likely to adopt ISA use, even with incentives (Chorlton, 
Hess, Jamson, & Wardman, 2012; De Leonardis, Huey, & Robinson, 2014). It is not clear 
if drivers’ behavior may change after the devices are inactivated, or when they are 
disabled. Drivers’ intentions to speed and actual behaviors were assessed following 
driving with an Intelligent Speed Adaptation in-vehicle system that provided direct 
resistance to speeding (Chorlton & Connor, 2012). While measured intentions to speed 
and impressions of time-savings that could be gained by speeding were decreased among 
the participants, actual speeding behavior after the system was inactivated returned to 
pre-exposure levels within 4 weeks. 
• According to researchers from the U.K., the devices may potentially be over-ridden 
where they may be most needed (Lai & Carsten, 2012). Other uncertainties also still exist 
about driver behaviors or adaptations, and even external forces that may potentially affect 
the costs and benefits of ISA (van der Pas et al., 2012). Finally, there is a need to provide 
current and accurate maps of speed limits (Carsten, 2012).  
• A study of the effects of in-vehicle warning and monitoring systems was disappointing 
with respect to speed control by young teens (Farmer, Kirley, & McCartt, 2010). Even 
with parental notification (immediate or delayed) and with or without in-vehicle alerts, 
there was either no reduction in instances of teens exceeding the limit by more than 10 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 31 
mph or initial declining trends reversed after a few weeks. 
• Alerts or speed monitoring combined with rewards may work better than alerts and 
monitoring alone. Several field tests from Europe have found that drivers exceeded limits 
less when offered economic incentives such as reduced insurance premiums or discounts 
(for lease vehicles). Results were positive for lease car drivers in the Netherlands 
(Mazureck & van Hattem, 2006), young drivers in the Netherlands (Bolderdijk, 
Knockaert, Steg, & Verhoef, 2011), and members of a large motor club in Sweden 
(Stigson, Hagborg, Kullgre, & Krafft, 2014).  
 
Many jurisdictions use some of the above technologies. Each has costs for new equipment, 
maintenance, and training, and perhaps other costs. In the case of ISA, accurate digital maps of 
speed limits are needed. 
 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 32 
 
3. Penalties and Adjudication 
 
3.1 Penalty Types and Levels 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: Varies 
Use: High 
Time: Low 
† For general traffic offenses 
 
Penalty types and levels for speeding and the various traffic offenses included under aggressive 
driving are part of each State’s overall driver control system. Penalties typically are low for first 
offenses that do not produce serious crashes and casualties and include small fines and perhaps a 
few demerit points assessed against the driver’s license. When violations cause a crash producing 
serious injury or death, the offense may carry criminal charges and sanctions may be more 
severe. As discussed in Chapter 3, Section 1.2, NHTSA’s Aggressive Driving Symposium and 
NCHRP’s Aggressive Driving Guide recommend enhanced penalties for repeat aggressive 
driving offenders and felony charges for offenses resulting in serious injury or death (NCHRP, 
2003a, Strategy A3; NHTSA, 2001a). 
 
States use the demerit point system in an attempt to prevent drivers from committing repeated 
traffic offenses. As drivers accumulate demerit points, States use various actions and penalties 
such as warning letters, educational brochures, group counseling meetings, individual 
counseling, administrative hearings, and driver’s license suspension or revocation (Masten & 
Peck, 2004). Penalty levels and types for speeding and aggressive driving offenses should be 
considered within the context of a State’s overall driver control and problem driver remediation 
system. 
 
Use: Each State has a system of penalties for traffic offenses. Each system includes more severe 
penalties for significant individual offenses, such as those producing serious injury or death, and 
for repeated offenses, often determined through accumulated driver’s license demerit points. 
 
Effectiveness: Generally, for penalties to be effective, perceived risk of getting caught must be 
high. Evidence is mixed about effectiveness of varying severity of penalties. Masten and Peck 
(2004) reviewed the effectiveness evidence for different driver improvement and driver control 
actions, including penalty levels and types, from 35 high-quality studies of 106 individual actions 
and penalties. They found that, taken together, all actions and penalties reduced subsequent 
crashes by 6% and violations by 8%. Even simple warning letters had some effect on both 
violations and crashes. The effect increased as the “obtrusiveness” of the action increased, with 
license suspension or revocation the most effective by far. The authors noted that the threat of 
license suspension probably is responsible for the effectiveness of the weaker actions such as 
warning letters. Educational brochures by themselves had no effect. However, administrative 
penalties imposed by the driver licensing agency were more effective than penalties imposed by 
the courts. 
 
In Norway, Elvik and Christensen (2007) reported there was a weak tendency for speeding 
violations to decrease near camera-enforced sites in response to increasing fixed penalties over 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 33 
time. However, there was no general effect of increasing fixed penalties over the road system at 
large. The researchers thought this was likely due to the overall low risk of detection. 
 
Recent evaluations of the introduction of penalty point systems in European and middle-eastern 
countries, including Kuwait in 2006, suggest that the introduction of penalty points, including for 
speeding, have significantly reduced road traffic injuries (Akhtar & Ziyab, 2014). Although the 
time series analysis may not have been able to control for all confounders, including driver 
education weeks and the volume of citations, the results of this and other studies suggest that 
introduction of a penalty system can be an effective safety measure, in conjunction with 
enforcement and education. However, the long-term effects of penalty systems are somewhat 
uncertain and likely depend on how they continue to be implemented. 
 
For example, research in Maryland found that various legal consequences for speeding had little 
impact on future citations for individual drivers (Lawpoolsri, Li, & Braver, 2007). Drivers who 
received legal consequences had the same likelihood of receiving another speeding citation as 
drivers who escaped legal consequences. Only fines coupled with probation before judgment 
(PBJ) was associated with a reduced risk of receiving a subsequent speeding ticket (Lawpoolsri 
et al., 2007). A follow-on longitudinal study found that the 54% of cited drivers who opted for 
court appearance to contest their speeding citations were more likely to be involved in future 
crashes and receive future speeding citations than drivers who accepted a guilty verdict and paid 
fines by mail (Li et al., 2011). In addition, whether drivers who opted for court appearance 
received guilty or not-guilty verdicts, or had charges dismissed had little effect on deterrence of 
future speeding or prevention of crashes, even controlling for prior driver histories and other 
potential confounders. Only suspended types of prosecutions (e.g. probation before judgment or 
other suspension) were associated with somewhat decreased risk of speeding recidivism and 
future crashes, but a still higher risk compared to those who paid fines by mail. The two types of 
suspended prosecutions associated with somewhat reduced future speeding and crash risk both 
provide some incentive to avoid additional citations that would result in a reinstatement of 
charges and potential loss of license. Also, many of the drivers receiving suspended judgments 
may have had reduced exposure owing to having prior alcohol traffic violations and license 
restriction/suspension. 
 
Similar to the results from Maryland, a U.K. study that examined survey and conviction data 
found that the immediate threat of being disqualified from driving deterred those with points on 
their license from further speeding. However, for a subset of drivers, the threat of this sanction 
did not appear to affect their choice to speed (Corbett, Delmonte, Quimby, & Grayson, 2008). 
 
Most evidence suggests there is at least a subset of drivers for whom sanctions and increasing 
penalties do not seem to have the desired deterrent effect. Many studies and NHTSA statistics 
verify the prevalence of young, male driver involvement in speeding crashes. A review of the 
literature by Fuller et al. (2008a) suggests that young males may simply be immature, with 
incomplete development of self-knowledge, self-control, social responsibility and independence 
of judgment. Drivers with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may be particularly at 
risk because of self-control challenges. In addition, there is evidence of socially deviant speeders 
for whom speeding is associated with other forms of risk taking. These groups are distinguished 
from those who speed unintentionally due to failure to perceive risks and adjust accordingly 
(Fuller et al., 2008a). 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 34 
 
Repeat offenders: Repeat speeding and aggressive driving offenders may be especially difficult 
to deter. Recommended methods to reach them include: 
• Enhanced penalties, including increased driver’s license points, immediate license 
suspension or revocation, higher fines, and jail or probation, but research described in this 
section makes clear that the availability of such penalties alone is unlikely to lead to 
individual deterrence of speeding. See Chapter 3, Sections 1.2 and 3.1, for more 
information. The certainty of punishment may be more important than the level of 
penalty (Li et al., 2011; Shinar, 2007). Furthermore, courts may be reluctant to impose 
the most serious penalties, such as license suspension, for speeding violations, or simply 
unable to effectively prosecute speeders as charged. 
• Improved traffic record systems, to better identify repeat offenders and to allow patrol 
officers to immediately access a driver’s complete driving record (NCHRP, 2003b; 
NHTSA, 2001a). There are no studies of the effects of improved record systems on repeat 
offenders. Costs and implementation time will vary. 
• Providing alternate modes of transportation, electronic monitoring, enforced restrictions 
or limits on mobility through license plate “striping” or vehicle impoundment are other 
recommendations to address unlicensed drivers, including those who have already 
received the maximum penalties but continue to drive (NCHRP, 2003b). 
 
In the future, there may be potential to utilize ISA (vehicle-based speed monitoring and warning 
or control of speed) systems for repeat offenders. A Maryland pilot study assessed the effects of 
an ISA warning type system on speeding behavior among 78 volunteer drivers who had at least 
three speeding violations in the prior three years (De Leonardis, Huey, & Robinson, 2014). Both 
verbal and red LED light alerts were provided in real time to the drivers any time their speed 
exceeded the speed limit on a given road by more than 8 miles per hour. Subjects’ speeding 
behavior was monitored for two weeks prior to the systems being activated, for four weeks with 
the warning systems activated, and for a two-week follow-up period with the alert systems 
deactivated. Results were promising. Drivers sped more than 8 mph over the limit a small, but 
significantly lower proportion of the distance driven during the alerting phase (0.43) compared to 
the baseline phase (0.45). Proportion of speeding also remained somewhat lower (0.44) during 
the two-week follow-up period when the systems were turned off except among the more 
habitual speeders, who immediately resumed their normal speeds. However, participants were 
very concerned about providing driving speed data to insurance or licensing agencies. They 
anticipated negative consequences, including the potential for revocation of their driver licenses 
and increased insurance premiums. Such concerns would need to be addressed to encourage 
drivers to voluntarily use such a system to help control their speed (De Leonardis et al., 2014). In 
general, the systems seemed to be well accepted by a majority of the drivers, except for the 
concerns mentioned. Two types of ISA – speed alerting and speed-controlling – were also 
evaluated among a group of serious speeders in the Netherlands (van der Pas, Kessels, Veroude, 
& van Wee, 2014). While the devices were active, there was much less speeding, but once 
inactivated, levels of speeding quickly rebounded to normal levels. 
 
Costs: Costs vary by penalty type. For example, warning letters are very cheap once a record 
system has been established to identify drivers who should receive letters. Individual counseling 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 35 
and administrative hearings may require substantial staff time. Some costs may be recovered 
through offender fees. 
 
Time to implement: Most changes in penalty levels can be implemented quickly within a 
State’s overall driver improvement system. 
 
Other issues: 
• Public acceptance, enforcement, and publicity: Changes in speeding and aggressive 
driving sanctions by themselves cannot reduce speeding and aggressive driving. To be 
effective, sanctions must be well known to violators and they must have a high 
probability of being imposed (Preusser, Williams, Nichols, Tison, & Chaudhary, 2008). 
Traffic laws, penalty types, and penalty levels are essential to, but only a part of, a system 
that includes broad public acceptance, active enforcement, effective administration of 
penalties, and publicity (NHTSA, 2001a). 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 36 
3.2 Diversion and Plea Agreement Restrictions; Traffic Violator School 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Varies 
 
In many jurisdictions, drivers who have accumulated a specific number of demerit points on their 
driver’s licenses are given the option of attending Traffic Violator School in order to reduce their 
punishment. In most instances, if they complete Traffic Violator School, their traffic offenses are 
dismissed or removed from their driving record (Masten & Peck, 2004). 
 
Negotiated plea agreements are a necessary part of an effective and efficient court system. 
However, plea agreements may allow offenders to have their penalties reduced or eliminated, for 
example if a driver is allowed to avoid a driver’s license suspension by attending Traffic Violator 
School. 
 
Use: No data are available on the number of jurisdictions in which Traffic Violator School is 
available or the number of offenders who use Traffic Violator School to reduce their penalties. 
Similarly, no data are available on the use of other plea agreements for speeding or aggressive 
driving violations. 
 
Effectiveness: Masten and Peck’s review (2004) included high-quality studies of over 30 group 
meeting programs, including Traffic Violator School. Taken together, these group-meeting 
programs reduced subsequent crashes by 5% and violations by 8%. Masten and Peck point out 
that Traffic Violator School programs in California increased, rather than decreased, crashes 
because they allowed offenders to escape more severe penalties and start again with a clean 
driving record. Their review was not able to determine whether other Traffic Violator School 
programs that dismissed an offender’s violation had similar negative effects. These reductions or 
eliminations of penalties also make it difficult to use driver histories to track and provide serious 
sanctions to repeat violators. 
 
Costs: Costs for establishing diversion or Traffic Violator School programs will depend on the 
nature of the program. Costs include developing and maintaining a tracking system, notifying 
offenders, and administering the Traffic Violator School. Costs for limiting or eliminating 
diversion programs, plea agreements, and Traffic Violator School can be determined by 
comparing the per-offender costs of these programs with the costs of the penalties that would 
otherwise be applied. 
 
Time to implement: Diversion or Traffic Violator School programs will require at least 6 
months to establish and implement. They can be modified within a few months. 
 
Other issues: 
• Diversion and plea agreement issues in alcohol-impaired driving: Diversion and plea 
agreements have been discussed and evaluated more extensively for alcohol-impaired 
driving offenses than for speeding and aggressive driving offenses. See Chapter 1, 
Section 3.2 for additional discussion. 
• Public acceptance, enforcement, and publicity: Changes in the adjudication of 
speeding and aggressive driving infractions, such as limiting or eliminating diversion and 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 37 
plea agreements, by themselves cannot reduce speeding and aggressive driving. Traffic 
laws and adjudication are essential to, but only a part of, a system that includes broad 
public acceptance, active enforcement, and publicity (NHTSA, 200la). 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 38 
4. Communications and Outreach 
 
4.1 Communications and Outreach Supporting Enforcement 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Medium 
Time: Medium 
 
Effective, high visibility communications and outreach are an essential part of successful speed 
and aggressive-driving enforcement programs (NCHRP, 2003a; NHTSA, 2000). All of the 
examples discussed in Chapter 3, Sections 2.2, High visibility Enforcement, and 2.3, Other 
Enforcement Methods, used extensive communications campaigns to support their enforcement 
efforts. Most campaigns to date have not used paid advertising. The success of paid advertising 
in seat belt use campaigns (Chapter 2, Section 3.1) suggests that it is worth considering for speed 
and aggressive driving enforcement campaigns.  
 
The objective should be to provide information about the program, including expected safety 
benefits, and to persuade motorists that detection and punishment for violations is likely. See also 
NCHRP (2003a, Strategy A2). Communications and outreach programs urging drivers to behave 
courteously or not to speed are unlikely to have any effect unless they are tied to vigorous 
enforcement (NCHRP, 2003a, Strategy A2). Campaign messages that are pre-tested to ensure 
they are relevant to the target audience and that reach the audience with sufficient intensity and 
duration to be perceived and noticed are most likely to be effective (Preusser et al., 2008). Other 
State and community partners may also help leverage resources and achieve a wider reach if they 
have common goals and concerns (GHSA, 2004).  
 
A recent assessment report prepared for the Governor’s Highway Safety Association also 
recommends raising the priority of speed enforcement as a traffic safety priority among law 
enforcement agencies, the general public and the courts (Sprattler, 2012). Such an effort may 
require careful framing of the message that speed enforcement is a public injury prevention 
strategy. Health Resources in Action developed community resources for the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention highlighting injury-reduction and public health and community livability 
issues in relation to speed and speed management (Health Resources in Action, 2013; and other 
resources available at www.cdc.gov/healthyplaces/healthtopics/transportation/practice.htm.)  
 
Use: Most aggressive driving and speed enforcement programs have a communications and 
outreach component. At least half the States have a named public awareness campaign (Sprattler, 
2012). 
 
Effectiveness: A recent meta-analysis of 67 worldwide studies of the effect of road safety 
campaigns on crashes suggests a general campaign effect of 9%; however, anti-drunk-driving 
campaigns were considerably more effective than anti-speeding campaigns (Phillips, Ulleberg, & 
Vaa, 2011). Other evidence comes from publicity associated with automated enforcement 
programs. Reductions in crashes in Victoria, Australia, have been attributed to a television 
advertising campaign that supported, but did not relate directly, to automated speed enforcement 
initiatives (Bobevski, Hosking, Oxley, & Cameron, 2007). A study from Charlotte, NC also 
found that publicity from an aggressive media outreach campaign and on-going publicity related 
to automated enforcement was responsible for an 8 to 9% reduction in crashes. Effects carried 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 39 
over for several months after the program ended before gradually returning to pre-intervention 
levels (Moon & Hummer, 2010). Earlier evidence from Australia also suggested that paid media 
advertising could enhance the effectiveness of automated speed enforcement (Cameron, Cavallo, 
& Gilbert, 1992). The evidence from seat belt (Chapter 2, Sections 2.1, 2.2, and 3.1) and alcohol-
impaired driving (Chapter 1, Sections 2.1 and 2.2) enforcement programs also strongly suggests 
that good communications and outreach are essential to a successful enforcement program. 
 
Costs: Good media campaigns can be expensive. See Chapter 2, Section 3.1. 
 
Time to implement: An effective media campaign requires 4 to 6 months to plan and 
implement. 
 
Other issues: 
• Effective campaign characteristics: The Phillips et al. (2011) meta-analysis of publicity 
campaigns attempted to identify factors associated with successful campaigns. The 
researchers caution that they could not assess factors that were not reported on frequently, 
or had little variation, and also could not assess important program aspects such as the 
degree of publicity achieved, whether a campaign addressed the social norm, or whether 
behavioral change was achieved. As mentioned above, they found that speed-based 
campaigns were generally less effective than alcohol-themed ones. In addition, results 
suggested that the type of message delivery had an effect. Messages delivered through 
personal communications or at the roadside (such as variable and mixed message signs, 
etc.) were independently associated with greater effectiveness than campaigns that used 
mass media. Roadside delivery may provide the message in a context-relevant way that is 
more proximal to the potentially negative behaviors (such as speeding), while personal 
communications may improve processing of the message and message uptake compared 
with mass media delivery (Phillips et al., 2011). However, the authors emphasized that 
the potential target reach of mass media suggests it still be considered a viable method of 
delivery.  
• As found in Philadelphia’s Heed the Speed campaign, getting message penetration 
through signs, flyers and other community outreach is a challenge in a large urban setting 
(Blomberg, Thomas, & Marziani, 2012).
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 40 
Speed and Speed Management References 
 
AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety (2009). Aggressive driving: Research update. Retrieved from 
www.aaafoundation.org/pdf/AggressiveDrivingResearch 
Update2009.pdf 
 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. (2010). Highway safety 
manual, 1st Ed.  Retrieved from the AASHTO website: www.highwaysafetymanual.org 
 
Aeron-Thomas, A. S., & Hess, S. (2006) Red-light cameras for the prevention of road traffic 
crashes. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006, Issue 2, CD003862. Retrieved 
from onlinelibrary.wiley.com/o/cochrane/clsysrev/articles/CD003862/pdf_fs.html 
 
Akhtar, S. & Ziyab, A. H. (2013) Impact of the penalty points system on severe road traffic 
injuries in Kuwait. Traffic Injury Prevention, 14, 743-748. 
 
Bagdade, J., Nabors, D., McGee, H., Miller, R., & Retting, R. (2012). Speed management: A 
manual for local rural road owners (Report No. FHWA-SA-12-027). Retrieved from the FHWA 
website: 
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/local_rural/training/fhwasa010413spmgmt/speedmanagementguide.pd
f 
 
Belin, M-Å, Tillgren, P., Vedung, E., Cameron, M., & Tingvall, C. (2010). Speed cameras in 
Sweden and Victoria, Australia—A case study. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 42, 2165– 
2170. 
 
Bham, G. H., Long, S., Baik, H., Ryan, T., Gentry, L., Lall, K., Arezoumandi, M., Liu, D., Li, T., 
& Schaeffer, B. (2010). Evaluation of variable speed limits on I-270/I-255 in St. Louis (Report 
No. OR11-014). Retrieved from the Missouri Department of Transporation website: 
http://library.modot.mo.gov/RDT/reports/Ri08025/or11014app.pdf 
 
Björklund, G. M. (2008). Driver irritation and aggressive behaviour. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 40, 1069-1077. 
 
Blomberg, R. D., & Cleven, A. M. (2006). Pilot test of Heed the Speed, A program to reduce 
speeds in residential neighborhoods (Report No. DOT HS 810 648). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/research/HeedSpeedWeb/images/HeedTheSpeedLo.pdf 
 
Blomberg, R. D., Thomas III, F. D., & Marziani, B. J. (2012). Demonstration and evaluation 
of the Heed the Speed pedestrian safety program (Report No. DOT HS 811 515). Retrieved from 
the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library website: 
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/45000/45700/45709/811515.pdf 
 
Bobevski, I., Hosking, S., Oxley, P., & Cameron, M. (2007). Generalized linear modeling of 
crashes and injury severity in the context of the speed-related initiatives in Victoria during 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 41 
2000-2002 (Report No. 268). Retrieved from the Monash University Accident Research Centre 
website: www.monash.edu.au/miri/research/reports/muarc268.pdf 
 
Bolderdijk, J., Knockaert, J., Steg E. M., & Verhoef, E. T. (2011). Effects of pay-as-you-drive 
vehicle insurance on young drivers' speed choice: Results of a Dutch field experiment. Accident 
Analysis and Prevention, 43, 1181-1186. 
 
Brewer, M. A., Pesti, G., & Schneider IV, W. (2006). Improving compliance with work zone 
speed limits. Transportation Research Record, 1948, 67-76. 
 
Buddemeyer, J., Young, R. K., & Dorsey-Spitz, B. (2010). Rural, variable speed limit system for 
southeast Wyoming. Transportation Research Record, 2189, 37-44. 
 
Cameron, M. A., Cavallo, A., & Gilbert, A. (1992). Crash-based evaluation of the speed camera 
program in Victoria 1990-91. Phase 1: general effects, Phase 2: effects of program mechanisms 
(Report No. 42). Victoria, Australia: Monash University Accident Research Centre. 
 
Carsten, O. (2012). Is intelligent speed adaptation ready for deployment? Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 48, 1–3. 
 
Chen, G. (2005). Safety and economic impacts of photo radar program. Traffic Injury 
Prevention, 6, 299-307. 
 
Chorlton, K., & Conner, M. (2012). Can enforced behavior change attitudes: Exploring the 
influence of Intelligent Speed Adaptation. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 48, 49-56. 
 
Chorlton, K., Hess, S., Jamson, S., & Wardman, M. (2012). Deal or no deal: Can incentives 
encourage widespread adoption of intelligent speed adaptation devices? Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 48, 73-82. 
 
Cicchino, J. B., Wells, J. K. & McCartt, A. T. (2014) Survey about pedestrian safety and 
attitudes toward automated traffic enforcement in Washington, D.C. Traffic Injury Prevention, 
15, 414-423. 
 
Corbett, C., Delmonte, E., Quimby, A., & Grayson, G. (2008). Does the threat of disqualification 
deter drivers from speeding? (Road Safety Research Report No.96). Retrieved from 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20090417002224/http:/www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roadsafety
/research/rsrr/theme2/threat.pdf 
 
Council, F. M., Persaud, B., Eccles, K., Lyon, C., & Griffith, M. S. (2005). Safety evaluation of 
red-light cameras (FHWA-HRT-05-048). Retrieved from the FHWA website: 
www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/research/safety/05048/05048.pdf  
 
Cunningham, C. M., Hummer, J. E., & Moon, J. P. (2008). Analysis of automated speed 
enforcement cameras in Charlotte, NC. Transportation Research Record, 2078, 127-134.  
 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 42 
Davis, J. W., Bennink, L. D., Pepper, D. R., Parks, S. N., Lemaster, D. M., & Townsend, R. N. 
(2006). Aggressive traffic enforcement: a simple and effective injury prevention program. 
Journal of Trauma, 60, 972-977. 
 
Decina, L. E., Thomas, L., Srinivasan, R., & Staplin L. (2007). Automated enforcement: A 
compendium of worldwide evaluations of results (Report No. DOT HS 810 763). Retrieved from 
the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/HS81 
0763.pdf 
 
Delaney, A., Diamantopoulou, K., & Cameron, M. (2003). MUARC’s speed enforcement 
research: Principles learnt and implications for practice (Report No. 20). Retrieved from the 
Monash University Accident Research Centre website: 
www.monash.edu.au/miri/research/reports/muarc200.pdf 
 
Delaney, A., Ward, H., Cameron, M., & Williams, A. F. (2005). Controversies and speed 
cameras: Lessons learnt internationally. Journal of Public Health Policy, 26, 404-415. 
 
De Leonardis, D., Huey, R., & Robinson, E. (2014). Investigation of the use and feasibility of 
speed warning systems (Report No. DOT HS 811 996). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811996-InvestUseFeasSpeedWarnSys.pdf  
 
D’Elia, A., Newstead, S., & Cameron, M. (2007). Overall impact during 2001-2004 of Victorian 
speed-related package (Report No. 267). Retrieved from the Monash University Accident 
Research Centre website: www.monash.edu/miri/research/reports/muarc267.pdf  
 
Donnell, E. T., & Cruzado, I. (2008). Effectiveness of speed minders in reducing driving speeds 
on rural highways in Pennsylvania. Retrieved from the Pennsylania Transportation Institute 
website: www.pti.psu.edu/pti_docs/06_07rprts/PTI%202007-
57%20Lit%20Synthesis%20Report_s.pdf  
 
Eckenrode, R. T., Sarasua, W. A., Mattox, J. H., III, Ogle, J. H., & Chowdhury, M. A. (2007). 
Revisiting the use of drone radar to reduce speed in work zones: South Carolina’s experience. 
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2015, 19-27.  
 
Engineering Countermeasures for Reducing Speeds (2009): A desktop reference of potential 
effectiveness. Retrieved from the FHWA Office of Safety website: 
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/speedmgt/ref_mats/eng_count/ 
 
Elvik, R., & Christensen, P. (2007). The deterrent effect of increasing fixed penalties: The 
Norwegian Experience. Journal of Safety Research, 38, 689-695. 
 
Farmer, C. M., Kirley, B. B., & McCartt, A. T. (2010). Effects of in-vehicle monitoring on the 
driving behavior of teenagers. Journal of Safety Research, 41, 39-45. 
 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 43 
Federal Highway Administration. (2004). A field test and evaluation of variable speed limits in 
work zones. Prepared in response to report to accompany Department of Transportation and 
related agencies Appropriations Bill, 2000. Retrieved from 
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/speedmgt/vslimits/docs/michiganvsl.pdf 
 
FHWA. (2005). Red-light camera systems operational guidelines. Retrieved from 
safety.fhwa.dot.gov/intersection/redlight/cameras/fhwasa05002/fhwasa05002.pdf 
 
Flango, V. E., & Keith, A. L. (2004). How useful is the new aggressive driving legislation? 
Court Review, Winter 2004, 34-41. 
 
Fontaine, M. D., Park, B., & Son, H. (2007). Demonstration and evaluation of rational speed 
limits: Virginia Department of Transportation evaluations. Charlottesville, VA: Center for 
Transportation Studies. Retrieved from 
http://s3.amazonaws.com/zanran_storage/cts.virginia.edu/ContentPages/53679140.pdf 
 
Forbes, G. J., Gardner, T., McGee, H., & Srinivasan, R. (2012). Methods and practices for 
setting speed limits: An informational report (Report No. FHWA-SA-12-004). Retrieved from 
the FHWA website: http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/speedmgt/ref_mats/fhwasa12004/  
 
Freedman, M., De Leonardis, D., Polson, A., Levi, S., & Burkhardt, E. (2007). Field test of the 
impact of setting and enforcing rational speed limits; Final report for Gulfport, Mississippi-- 
demonstration community (Report No. DOT HS 810 849). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/hs810 
849.pdf 
 
Freedman, M., De Leonardis, D., Raisman, G., Inyo Swan, D., Davis, A., Levi, S., Rogers, I., & 
Bergeron, E. (2006). Demonstration of automated speed enforcement in school zones in 
Portland, Oregon (Report No. DOT HS 810 764). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/HS81 
0764.pdf 
 
Fuller, R., Bates, H., Gormley, M., Hannigan, B., Stradling, S., Broughton, P., Kinnear, N., & 
O’Dolan, C. (2008). The conditions for inappropriate high speed: A review of the research 
literature from 1995 to 2006 (Road Safety Research Report 92). Retrieved from 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http:/www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roadsafety/research/rsrr/th 
eme2/conditions1.pdf 
 
Fuller, R., Hannigan, B., Bates, H., Gormley, M., Stradling, S., Broughton, P., Kinnear, N., & 
O’Dolan, C. (2008). Understanding inappropriate high speed: A qualitative analysis (Road 
Safety Research Report 94).  Retrieved from 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20090417002224/http:/www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roadsafety
/research/rsrr/theme2/analysis.pdf 
 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 44 
Gains, A., Heydecker, B., Shrewsbury, J., & Robertson S. (2004). The national safety camera 
program: Three-year evaluation report. London: PA Consulting Group. Retrieved from 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20090104005813/http:/www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roadsafety
/speedmanagement/nscp/nscp/thenationalsafetycameraprogr4597 
 
Governors Highway Safety Association. (2004). Partnering with State Highway Safety Offices: 
Tips and tactics for success (Report No. DOT HS 809 748). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/outreach/TipsandTactics/images/Tip%20and%20Tacticslo.pdf 
 
GHSA. (2015a). Aggressive driving laws, June 2015. Retrieved from 
www.ghsa.org/html/stateinfo/laws/aggressivedriving_laws.html 
 
GHSA. (2015b). Speed and red light camera laws, June 2015. Retrieved from 
www.ghsa.org/html/stateinfo/laws/auto_enforce.html 
 
GHSA. (2015c). Speed limit laws, June 2015. Retrieved from 
www.ghsa.org/html/stateinfo/laws/speedlimit_laws.html 
 
Hajbabaie, A., Medina, J. C., Wang, M.-H., Rahim, F. B., & Chitturi, M. (2011). Sustained and 
halo effects of various speed reduction treatments in Highway Work Zones. Transportation 
Research Record, 2265, 118-128. 
 
Harder, K. A., & Bloomfield, J. R. (2007). Evaluating the effectiveness of the Minnesota speed 
management program. Retrieved from www.lrrb.org/PDF/200721.pdf 
 
Hauer, E. (2009). Speed and safety. Transportation Research Record, 2103, 10-17. 
 
Health Resources in Action. (2013). Public health impact: Community speed reduction. 
Retrieved from http://hria.org/uploads/catalogerfiles/2013-speed-reduction-
resources/ImpactBrief_120313.pdf  
 
Howard, E., Mooren, L., Nilsson, G., Quimby, A., & Vadeby, A. (2008). Speed management: 
Road safety manual for decision-makers and practitioners. Geneva: Global Road Safety 
Partnership.  Retrieved from the WHO website: 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/43915/1/9782940395040_eng.pdf   
 
Huey, R., De Leonardis, D., & Freedman, M. (2012). National traffic speeds survey II: 2009 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 638). Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports 
Library website: http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/45000/45700/45706/811638.pdf  
 
Huey, R., De Leonardis, D., Shapiro, G., & Freedman, M. (2012). National traffic speeds survey 
I: 2007 (Report No. DOT HS 811 663). Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research 
Reports Library website: http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/45000/45800/45877/811663.pdf  
 
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS). (2009). Q&As: Red light cameras. Retrieved from 
www.iihs.org/research/qanda/rlr.html 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 45 
 
IIHS. (2010). Maximum posted speed limits, August 2010.Retrieved from 
www.iihs.org/laws/speedlimits.aspx 
 
IIHS. (2015a). Automated enforcement: June 2015. Retrieved from 
www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/laws/automated_enforcement?topicName=speed  
 
IIHS. (2015b). Speed limits: June 2015. Retrieved from 
www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/laws/speedlimits  
 
Islam, M. T., El-Basyouny, K., & Ibrahim, S. E. (2013). The impact of lowered residential speed 
limits on vehicle speed behavior. Safety Science, 62, 483-494. 
 
Joerger, M. (2010). Photo radar speed enforcement in a state highway work zone: Yeon Avenue 
demonstration project (Report No. OR-RD-10-17). Salem, OR: Oregon Department of 
Transportation. Retrieved from 
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/speedmgt/ref_mats/fhwasa1304/resources2/32%20-
%20Photo%20Radar%20Speed%20Enforcement%20In%20A%20State%20Highway%20Work
%20Zone-%20Demonstration%20Project%20Yeon%20Avenue.pdf 
 
Katz, B., O'Donnell, C., Donoughe, K., Atkinson, J., Finley, M., Balke, K., Kuhn, B., &  
Warren, D. (2012). Guidelines for the use of variable speed limit systems in wet weather (Report 
No. FHWA-SA-12-022). Retrieved from the FHWA website: 
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/speedmgt/ref_mats/fhwasa12022/index.cfm  
 
Kloeden, C. N. & Woolley, J. E. (2012). Vehicle speeds in South Australia 2010 (Report No. 
CASR097). Retrieved from the CASR website: 
http://casr.adelaide.edu.au/publications/list?id=1281 
 
Lai, F., & Carsten, O. (2012). What benefit does Intelligent Speed Adaptation deliver: A close 
examination of its effect on vehicle speeds. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 48, 4-9. 
 
Lawpoolsri, S., Li, J., & Braver, E. R. (2007). Do speeding tickets reduce the likelihood of 
receiving subsequent speeding tickets? A longitudinal study of speeding violators in Maryland. 
Traffic Injury Prevention, 8, 26-34. 
 
Lee, C., Lee, S., Choi, B., & Oh, Y. (2006). Effectiveness of speed-monitoring displays in speed 
reduction in school zones. Transportation Research Record, 1973, 27-35. 
 
Li, J., Amr, S., Braver, E. R., Langenberg, P., Zhan, M., Smith, G. S., & Dischinger, P. C. 
(2011). Are current law enforcement strategies associated with a lower risk of repeat speeding 
citations and crash involvement? A longitudinal study of speeding Maryland drivers. Annals of 
Epidemiology, 21, 641-647. 
 
Luoma, J., Rajamäki, R., & Malvivuo, M. (2012). Effects of reduced threshold of automated 
speed enforcement on speed and safety. Transportation Research Part F, 15, 243-248. 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 46 
 
Maccubbin, R., Staples, B., & Salwin, A. (2001). Automated enforcement of traffic signals: A 
literature review. Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library 
website: http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/11000/11700/11790/RLCLitReview.pdf 
 
Mannering, F. (2009). An empirical analysis of driver perceptions of the relationship between 
speed limits and safety. Transportation Research Part F, 12, 99-106. 
 
Masten, S. V., & Peck, R. C. (2004). Problem driver remediation: A meta-analysis of the driver 
improvement literature. Journal of Safety Research, 35, 403-425. 
 
Mattox, J. H. III, Sarasua, W. A., Ogle, J. H., Eckenrode, R. T., & Dunning, A. E. (2007). 
Development and evaluation of a speed-activated sign to reduce speeds in work zones. 
Transporation Research Record: Journal of the Tranportation Research Board, 2007, 3-11. 
Transportation Research Board 86th Annual Meeting, Transportation Research Board. 
 
Mazureck, U., & van Hattem, J. (2006). Rewards for safe driving behavior: Influence on 
following distance and speed. Transportation Research Record, 1980, 31-38. 
 
McCartt, A. T., Leaf, W. A., Witkowski, T. L., & Solomon, M. G. (2001). Evaluation of the 
aggression suppression program, Milwaukee, Wisconsin (Report No. DOT HS 809 395). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/research/Aggressionwisc/contents.htm 
 
McGee, H. W., & Eccles, K. A. (2003). Impact of red light camera enforcement on crash 
experience (NCHRP Synthesis No. 310). Retrieved from the TRB website: 
onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_syn_310.pdf 
 
Moon, J-P. & Hummer, J. E. (2010). Speed enforcement cameras in Charlotte, North Carolina: 
Estimation of longer-term safety effects. Transportation Research Record, 2182, 31-39. 
 
National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP). (2003a). Guidance for 
implementation of the AASHTO Strategic Highway Safety Plan, volume 1: A guide for 
addressing aggressive-driving collisions. Retrieved from the TRB website: 
onlinepubs.trb.org/Onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v1.pdf 
 
NCHRP. (2003b). Guidance for implementation of the AASHTO Strategic Highway Safety Plan, 
volume 2: A guide for addressing collisions involving unlicensed drivers and drivers with 
suspended or revoked licenses. Retrieved from the TRB website: 
onlinepubs.trb.org/Onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v2.pdf 
 
NCHRP. (2007). Applying Roundabouts in the United States, NCHRP Report 572. Retrieved 
from the TRB website: http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_572.pdf 
 
NCHRP. (2008). Crash Reduction Factors for Traffic Engineering and ITS Improvements 
(Project 17-25). Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board.  
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 47 
 
NCHRP. (2009). Guidance for implementation of the AASHTO Strategic Highway Safety 
Plan,volume 23: A guide for reducing speeding-related crashes. Retrieved from the TRB 
website: onlinepubs.trb.org/Onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v23.pdf 
 
NCHRP. (2011). Evaluation of safety strategies at signalized intersections (Report 705). 
Retrieved from the TRB website: http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_705.pdf  
 
NCHRP. (2012). Automated enforcement for speeding and red light running (Report 729). 
Retrieved from the TRB website: http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_729.pdf 
 
NCHRP. (2013). Traffic enforcement strategies for work zones (Report 746). Retrieved from the 
TRB website: http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_746.pdf 
 
National Campaign to Stop Red Light Running. (2002). Stop on Red = Safe on Green: A guide to 
red light camera programs. Retrieved from 
http://elkgrovepd.org/UserFiles/Servers/Server_118017/File/StopOnRedSafeOnGreen.pdf 
 
National Committee on Uniform Traffic Laws and Ordinances (NCUTLO). (2004). Automated 
traffic law enforcement model law. Retrieved from the NCUTLO website: 
www.ncutlo.org/autoenforce622.htm 
 
National Center for Statistics and Analysis. (2015). Speeding: 2013 data. (Traffic Safety Facts. 
Report, No. DOT HS 812 162). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812162.pdf  
 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. (2000). Aggressive driving enforcement: 
Strategies for implementing best practices. Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/enforce/aggressdrivers/aggenforce/index.html 
 
NHTSA. (2001a). National aggressive driving action guide: A criminal justice approach (Report 
No. DOT HS 809 351). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/enforce/DOT%20Aggress%20Action/index.htm 
 
NHTSA. (2001b). Aggressive driving programs (Report No. DOT HS 808 730). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/enforce/AggressiveDrivingHTML/Aggressive_index.htm 
 
NHTSA. (2004). National survey of speeding and unsafe driving attitudes and behavior: 2002; 
Vol. II: Findings (Report No. DOT HS 809 730). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/research/speed_volII_finding/SpeedVolumeIIFindingsFinal.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2005). National forum on speeding: Strategies for reducing speed-related fatalities 
and injuries (Report No. DOT HS 809 963). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/enforce/NatForumSpeeding/images/SpeedingForum.pdf 
 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 48 
NHTSA (2006). Pilot test of Heed the Speed, a program to reduce speeds in residential 
neighborhoods (Traffic Safety Facts: Traffic Tech - Technology Transfer Series. Report No. 
316). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Communication%20%26%20Consumer%20Information/Traffic%
20Tech%20Publications/Associated%20Files/Traffic_Tech_316.pdf 
 
NHTSA (2008). Speed enforcement program guidelines (Report No. DOT HS 810 915). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library website: 
ntl.bts.gov/lib/30000/30100/30165/810915.pdf 
 
NHTSA (2011). Summary of state speed laws, 11th ed. (Report No. DOT HS 811 457). 
Retrieved from www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811457.pdf 
 
NHTSA (2012a). National traffic speeds survey I: 2007 (Traffic tech: Technology transfer series. 
Report No. DOT HS 811 644). Retrieved from www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/traffic_tech/811644.pdf 
 
NHTSA (2012b). National traffic speeds survey II: 2009. (Traffic tech: Technology transfer 
series. Report No. DOT HS 811 647). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811647.pdf  
 
NHTSA (2012c). Demonstration and evaluation of the Heed the Speed pedestrian safety 
program (Traffic tech: Technology transfer series. Report No. DOT HS 811 607). Retrieved 
from www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/traffic_tech/811607.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2015) Traffic Safety Facts 2013 (Report No. DOT HS 812 139). Retrived from www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812139.pdf 
 
NHTSA & Federal Highway Administration. (2008). Speed Enforcement Camera Systems: 
Operational Guidelines (Report No. DOT HS 810 916). Washington, DC: National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration. Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports 
Library website: http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/30000/30100/30166/810916.pdf 
 
NHTSA, FHWA, & Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration. (2014). Speed management 
program plan (Report No. DOT HS 812 028). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/812028-SpeedMgtProgram.pdf 
 
Nerup, P., Salzberg, P., VanDyk, J., Porter, L., Blomberg, R., Thomas, F. D., & Cosgrove, L. 
(2006). Ticketing aggressive cars and trucks in Washington state: High visibility enforcement 
applied to share the road safety (Report No. DOT HS 810 603). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/Aggressive/TACT/pages/contents.htm  
 
Newnam, S., Lewis, I., & Warmerdam, A. (2014). Modifying behaviour to reduce over-speeding 
in work-related drivers: An objective approach. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 64, 23-29. 
 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 49 
Newstead, S. V., Cameron, M. H., & Leggett, L. M. W. (2001). The crash reduction 
effectiveness of a network-wide traffic police deployment system. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 33, 393-406. 
 
Ojaniemi K. K., Lintonen, T. P., Impinen, A. OLillsunde, P. M., & Ostamo, A. I. (2009). Trends 
in driving under the influence of drugs: A register-based study of DUID suspects during 
19772007. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 41, 191-196. 
 
Paaver, M., Eensoo, D., Kaasik, K., Vaht, M., Mäestu, J., & Harro, J. (2013). Preventing risky 
driving: A novel and efficient brief intervention focusing on acknowledgement of personal risk 
factors. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 50, 430-437. 
 
Phillips, R. O., Ulleberg, P., & Vaa, T. (2011). Meta-analysis of the effect of road safety 
campaigns on accidents. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 43, 1204-1218. 
 
Poole, B. (2012). An overview of automated enforcement systems and their potential for 
improving pedestrian and bicyclist safety (White Paper Series). Retrieved from the Pedestrian 
and Bicycle Information Center 
www.pedbikeinfo.org/cms/downloads/WhitePaper_AutomatedSafetyEnforcement_PBIC.pdf  
 
Preusser, D. F., Williams, A. F., Nichols, J. L., Tison, J., & Chaudhary, N. K. (2008). 
Effectiveness of behavioral highway safety countermeasures (NCHRP Report No. 622). 
Retrieved from the Transportation Research Board website: 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_622.pdf 
 
Retting, R., & Cheung, I. (2008). Traffic speeds associated with implementation of 80 mph speed 
limits on West Texas rural interstates. Journal of Safety Research 39, 529-534. 
 
Retting, R. A., Ferguson, S. A., & Hakkert, A. S. (2003). Effects of red light cameras on 
violations and crashes: A review of the international literature. Traffic Injury Prevention, 4, 17- 
23. 
 
Retting, R. A., Farmer, C. M., & McCartt, A. T. (2008) Evaluation of automated speed 
enforcement in Montgomery County, Maryland. Traffic Injury Prevention 9, 440-445. 
 
Richard, C. M., Campbell, J. L., Lichty, M. G., Brown, J. L., Chrysler, S., Lee, J. D., Boyle, L., 
& Reagle, G. (2012). Motivations for speeding, volume I: Summary report (Report No. DOT HS 
811 658). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811658.pdf 
 
Richard, C. M., Campbell, J. L., Lichty, M. G., Brown, J. L., Chrysler, S., Lee, J. D., Boyle, L., 
& Reagle, G. (2013a). Motivations for speeding, volume II: Findings report (Report No. DOT 
HS 811 818). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811818.pdf 
 
Richard, C. M., Campbell, J. L., Lichty, M. G., Brown, J. L., Chrysler, S., Lee, J. D., Boyle, L., 
& Reagle, G. (2013b). Motivations for speeding, volume III: Appendices (Report No. DOT HS 
811 819). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811819.pdf  
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 50 
 
Research and Innovative Technology Administration. (2007). Deployment statistics. Washington, 
DC: Research and Innovative Technology Administration. Retrieved from 
www.itsdeployment.its.dot.gov/ [Note: RITA is no longer a functioning DOT mode. It was  
merged into the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Research and Technology in January 2014.]  
 
Sarkar, S. (2009). Driving behaviors, risk perceptions, and stress: An examination of military 
personnel during wartime deployment. In Transportation Research Board 88th Annual Meeting 
Compendium of Papers DVD. Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board. 
 
Schroeder, P., Kostyniuk, L., & Mack, M. (2013). 2011 National survey of speeding attitudes 
and behaviors (Report No. DOT HS 811 865). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/2011_N_Survey_of_Speeding_Attitudes_and_Behaviors_8118
65.pdf 
 
Shin, K., Washington, S. P., & van Schalkwyk, I. (2009). Evaluation of the Scottsdale Loop 101 
automated speed enforcement demonstration program. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 41, 
393-403. 
 
Shinar, D. (2007). Traffic safety and human behavior. Bingley,UK: Emerald Publishing Group, 
Ltd. 
 
Shinar, D., & Compton, R. (2004). Aggressive driving: An observational study of driver, vehicle, 
and situational variables. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 36, 429-437. 
 
Sivak, M., Luoma, J., Flannagan, M. J., Bingham, C. R., Eby, D. W., & Shope, J. T. (2007). 
Traffic safety in the U.S.: Re-examining major opportunities. Journal of Safety Research, 38, 
337-355. 
 
Soole, D. W., Watson, B. W., & Fleiter, J. J. (2013). Effects of average speed enforcement on 
speed compliance and crashes: A review of the literature. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 54, 
46-56. 
 
Sprattler, K. (2012). Survey of the states: Speeding and aggressive driving. Retrieved from the 
GHSA website: www.ghsa.org/html/files/pubs/survey/2012_speed.pdf  
 
Stigson, H. Hagborg, J., Kullgren, A., & Krafft, M. (2014). A one year pay-as-you-speed trial 
with economic incentives for not speeding. Traffic Injury Prevention, 15, 612-618. 
 
Stradling, S., Broughton, P., Kinnear, N., O’Dolan, C., Fuller, R., Gormley, M., & Hannigan, B. 
(2008). Understanding inappropriate high speed: A quantitative analysis. Road Safety Research 
Report 93. London: Department for Transport. Retrieved from 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20090417002224/http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roadsafet
y/research/rsrr/theme2/safety93.pdf 
 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 51 
Stuster, J. (2004). Aggressive driving dnforcement: Evaluation of two demonstration programs 
(Report No. DOT HS 809 707). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/research/AggDrivingEnf/images/AggresDrvngEnforce-5.0.pdf 
 
Tapp, A., Pressley, A., Baugh, M., & White, P. (2013). Wheels, skills and thrills: A social 
marketing trail to reduce aggressive driving from young men in deprived areas. Accident 
Analysis & Prevention, 58, 148-157. 
 
Thomas, F. D., Blomberg, R. D., Peck, R. C., Cosgrove, L. A., & Salzberg, P. M. (2008). 
Evaluation of a high-visibility enforcement project focused on passenger vehicles interacting 
with commercial vehicles. Journal of Safety Research, 39, 459-468. 
 
Thomas, L. J., Srinivasan, R., Decina, L. E., & Staplin L. (2008). Safety effects of automated 
speed enforcement programs: Critical review of international literature. Transportation Research 
Record, 2078,117-126. 
 
Transportation Research Board. (1984). 55: A decade of experience. (Transportation Research 
Board Special Report 254). Washington, DC: Author. 
 
TRB. (1998). Managing speed: Review of current practice for setting and enforcing speed limits 
(Transportation Research Board Special Report 254). Retrieved from 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/sr/sr254.pdf  
 
TRB. (2006). Safety impacts and other implications of raised speed limits on high-speed 
roads (Research Results Digest 303). Retrieved from 
onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rrd_303.pdf 
 
U.S. DOT. (2014). Speed management program plan (Report No. DOT HS 812 028). Retrieved 
from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/812028-SpeedMgtProgram.pdf 
 
Vadeby, A., & Forsman, Å. (2014). Evaluation of new speed limits in Sweden: A sample survey. 
Traffic Injury Prevention, 15, 778-785. 
 
van der Pas, J. W. G. M., Kessels, J., Veroude, B. D. G., & van Wee, B. (2014). Intelligent speed 
assistance for serious speeders: The results of the Dutch Speedlock trial. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 72, 78-94. 
 
van der Pas, J. W. G. M., Marchau, V. A. W. J., Walker, W. E., van Wee, G. P., & Vlassenroot, 
S. H. (2012). ISA implementation and uncertainty: A literature review and expert elicitation 
study. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 48, 83-96. 
 
Walter, L., & Broughton, J. (2011). Effectiveness of speed indicator devices: An observational 
study in South London. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 43, 1355-1358. 
 
Walter, L., Broughton, J., & Knowles, J. (2011). The effects of increased police enforcement 
along a route in London. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 43, 1219–1227. 
 Chapter 3. Speeding and Speed Management 
 
 
3 - 52 
 
Washington, S. P. & Shin, K. (2005). The impact of red light cameras (automated enforcement) 
on safety in Arizona (Report No. FHWA-AZ-05-550). Washington, DC: Federal Highway 
Administration. Retrieved from http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25000/25016/AZ550.pdf 
 
World Health Organization. (2004). World report on road traffic injury prevention. Geneva: 
World Health Organization. 
 
Wong, S. C., Sze, N. N., Lo, H. K., Hung, W. T., & Loo, B. P. Y. (2005). Would relaxing speed 
limits aggravate safety? A case study of Hong Kong. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 37, 377- 
388. 
 
Wrapson, W., Harre, N., & Murrell, P. (2006). Reductions in driver speed using posted feedback 
of speeding information: Social comparison or implied surveillance? Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 38, 1119-1126. 
 
Young, K. L., & Regan, M. A. (2007). Use of manual speed alerting and cruise control devices 
by car drivers. Safety Science, 45, 473-485. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 1 
4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving  
 
 
Overview 
 
Distracted driving and drowsy driving are common, though both are difficult to define, measure, 
and sometimes observe. Both distracted and drowsy driving result in large part from lifestyle 
patterns and choices: they are societal issues rather than just driving and transportation system 
issues. For these reasons, few behavioral highway safety countermeasures have been shown to 
reduce distracted or drowsy driving, although a number of new countermeasures are currently 
being developed and evaluated. 
 
Distracted driving has received a great deal of attention in recent years. The U.S. Department of 
Transportation has held two distracted driving summits in Washington DC, developed a 
“Blueprint for Ending Distracted Driving” (NHTSA, 2012), and created a website to address this 
issue (www.distraction.gov). Although much of the attention and research has concentrated on 
cell phones (and texting), this is just one of many potential distractions behind the wheel. 
Attention and research on drowsiness has concentrated on commercial truck drivers, but the 
problem is far more widespread. 
 
Problem size and characteristics: distracted driving. Distraction occurs when a driver’s 
attention is diverted away from driving to some other activity. A distraction can be produced by 
something a driver sees or hears, some physical task not directly involved in driving such as 
eating or operating the car radio, or mental activities such as conversations on a cell phone 
(NHCRP, 2005, Section III). 
 
In 2013, AAA Foundation surveyed 3,103 U.S. residents and found that nine in ten (88%) say 
distracted driving is a “somewhat” or “much bigger” problem today compared to three years ago, 
and 89% believe drivers talking on cell phones are a “somewhat” or “very serious” threat to their 
personal safety (AAAFTS, 2013). Similarly, a survey in 2011 of 1,208 Canadian drivers found 
that 74% reported distracted drivers are a “very” or “extremely” serious problem, up from about 
40% in 2005 (Marcoux, Valnaar, & Robertson, 2012). 
 
Although people are concerned about distracted driving, they frequently admit to engaging in 
such behaviors behind the wheel. NHTSA conducted a telephone survey of a nationally 
representative sample of more than 6,000 drivers in 2012, asking about a variety of attitudes and 
behaviors related to distracted driving (Schroeder, Meyers, & Kostyniuk, 2013). Among the 
behaviors that drivers reported doing at least sometimes: 
• 80% talked to other passengers; 
• 68% adjusted the car radio; 
• 47% ate or drank; 
• 40% made or accepted phone calls; 
• 36% interacted with children in the back seat; 
• 35% used a navigational system; 
• 25% changed CDs, DVDs, or tapes; 
• 20% used a smartphone for driving directions; 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 2 
• 14% read e-mail or text messages; 
• 10% sent text messages or email; 
• 9% did personal grooming. 
. 
In the AAA Foundation survey, two-thirds (67%) of respondents admitted to talking on the 
phone while driving during the past 30 days (AAAFTS, 2013). A third (35%) admitted to 
reading text messages while driving, and a fourth (26%) had sent text messages. The AAA 
Foundation summed their findings by observing that drivers have a “Do as I say, not as I do” 
attitude with regard to distracted driving – they view these behaviors as dangerous, but engage in 
them nevertheless. 
 
The role of distraction in crashes can be difficult to determine, because pre-crash distractions 
often leave no evidence for law enforcement officers or crash investigators to observe, and 
drivers are understandably reluctant to admit to having been distracted during a crash. According 
to NHTSA’s NCSA, there were 3,154 fatalities in distraction-affected crashes in 2013 (NCSA, 
2015). This represents an 7% decrease from the 3,380 fatalities in 2012. Ten percent (2,910) of 
all fatal crashes are distraction-affected crashes (NCSA, 2015). Distracted-affected crashes is a 
new measure that focuses on distractions that are most likely to affect crash involvement, such as 
distraction by dialing a cellular phone or texting and distraction by an outside person/event 
(NHTSA, 2015).  
 
The risks posed by specific distracted driving behaviors are not well understood. The “100 car” 
study monitored 100 drivers for a year using specialized instrumentation, and examined the risk 
associated with engaging in various secondary tasks compared to regular driving. In the table 
below, a change in risk greater than 1 represents an increase in risk due to the secondary task, 
while a change in risk less than 1 represents a decrease in risk. For example, drivers are 3.38 
times more likely to be in a crash or near crash while reading and driving compared to regular 
driving (Klauer et al., 2006). 
 
Estimated Change in Crash Risk When Engaging in 
Secondary Tasks, Adult Drivers in the 100-Car Study 
Type of Secondary Task 
Change in Risk 
Reaching for a moving object 
8.82 
Insect in vehicle 
6.37 
Looking at external object 
3.70 
Reading 
3.38 
Applying makeup 
3.13 
Dialing a hand held device 
2.79 
Inserting/retrieving CD 
2.25 
Eating 
1.57 
Reaching for a non-moving object 
1.38 
Talking/listening to hand-held device 
1.29 
Drinking from an open container 
1.03 
Passenger in the adjacent seat 
0.39 
Child in rear seat 
0.33 
Note: Bold indicates a significant change in crash risk.  
Source: Klauer et al. (2006), p.30. 
 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 3 
Klauer et al. (2014) used in-vehicle cameras and sensors to study distracted behaviors among 42 
newly licensed (novice) drivers. The findings are shown in the table below. Novices were eight 
times more likely to be involved in a crash or near crash when dialing a cell phone, and seven 
times more likely to be involved in a crash or near crash when reaching for a cell phone. Texting, 
looking at a roadside object, eating, and reaching for an object (other than a cell phone) were 
also associated with increased risk. In general, the risks posed by various types of distraction 
appear more problematic for young drivers than adult drivers. 
 
Estimated Change in Crash Risk When Engaging in Secondary 
Tasks, Newly Licensed (Novice) Drivers 
Type of secondary task 
Change in risk 
Using a cell phone 
 
 
Dialing 
8.3 
 
Talking 
n.s. 
 
Texting 
3.9 
 
Reaching for phone 
7.1 
Reaching for object (other than cell phone) 
8.0 
Looking at outside object 
3.9 
Adjusting radio/HVAC 
n.s. 
Adjusting other controls 
n.s. 
Eating 
3.0 
Note: n.s. indicates no significant change in crash risk.  
Source: Klauer et al. (2014). 
 
Regardless of driver age, many of the highest-risk activities require the driver to look away from 
the roadway. This finding is supported by another naturalistic study which compared the effects 
of distraction associated with hand-held, portable hands-free, and integrated hands-free phones 
(Fitch et al., 2013). Simply talking on a cell phone was not associated with an increased risk of a 
crash or near crash, regardless of what type of phone was being used. However, visual-manual 
subtasks, such as dialing or answering a phone, increased the amount of time drivers took their 
eyes off the roadway and increased the risk of a crash or near-crash.  
 
Given the possible visual, manual, and cognitive attention changes caused by secondary tasks 
while driving, none of the distractions listed in the tables above is easily addressed. Moreover, it 
is important to note that many of the studies on distracted driving and its consequences were 
conducted prior to the proliferation of text messaging, GPS navigation systems, and built-in 
technologies. Consequently, it is possible that distraction-related crashes will escalate as the 
prevalence, diversity, and use of new technologies continues to increase. 
 
Problem size and characteristics: drowsy driving. Several U.S. and international telephone 
surveys provide consistent estimates of the prevalence and key characteristics of drowsy driving. 
A 2010 survey of 2,000 U.S. residents found 41% of drivers reported having ever fallen asleep or 
nodding off while driving (AAA Foundation, 2010). Four percent of drivers reported falling 
asleep while driving in the past month, while 11% had done so within the past year. Similarly, a 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention survey of almost 150,000 U.S. residents found that 
4.2% reported having fallen asleep while driving at least once in the past 30 days (CDC, 2013). 
NHTSA surveyed 4,010 drivers in spring 2002 and found 11% reported that they had nodded off 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 4 
while driving during the past year (Royal, 2003). Of those who nodded off, 66% said they had 6 
or fewer hours of sleep the previous night. 
 
These surveys provide additional useful information about drowsy driving. All three found that 
young drivers and male drivers were more likely than older drivers and female drivers to have 
dozed off at the wheel (AAA Foundation, 2010; CDC, 2013; Royal, 2003). Moreover, driving 
while drowsy does not just occur late at night. About one-third of those drivers who admit to 
nodding off say the most recent incident occurred in the afternoon (noon to 6 p.m.), which might 
be attributable to circadian rhythms. Drowsy driving is also not limited to long trips – roughly 
half of the drivers who nodded off had been driving for an hour or less. 
 
It’s often difficult to determine whether drowsy driving contributed to a crash. Similar to 
distracted driving, drivers may be reluctant to admit they dozed off following a crash. NHTSA 
estimated that 2.5% of fatal crashes and 2% of injury crashes between 2005 and 2009 involved 
drowsy driving (NHTSA, 2011). A study by the AAA Foundation using data from 1999 through 
2008 found that driver drowsiness may have contributed to 7% of all crashes and 16.5% of fatal 
crashes (Tefft, 2012). Again, differences between these studies reflect the difficulty in 
determining whether driver drowsiness may have been a contributing factor to the crash. 
 
 
Strategies to Reduce Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
The obvious way to reduce distracted or drowsy driving crashes is to convince or require drivers 
to get enough sleep and to pay attention to their driving. These are very difficult goals. Drowsy 
driving may result from lifestyles that include insufficient or irregular sleep (shift workers, for 
instance) or from medical problems – issues beyond a driver’s immediate control. Many drivers 
consider some distractions, such as eating or drinking, listening to the radio, or talking on a cell 
phone, to be important and common activities and are unlikely to give them up. Moreover, 
studies indicate that drivers themselves are poor judges of the performance decrements that result 
from distracting activities (Horrey, Lesch, & Garabet, 2008). 
 
Behavioral strategies for distracted or drowsy driving focus on removing some of the underlying 
causes or promoting awareness of the risks. Currently, few studies have examined whether the 
standard behavioral countermeasures of laws, enforcement, and sanctions (which are used 
successfully for alcohol impairment, seat belt use, aggressive driving, and speeding) are effective 
for distracted or drowsy drivers. However, standard behavioral countermeasures have been 
studied with young drivers: some graduated driver licensing provisions help reduce distracted 
and drowsy driving by limiting the number of passengers, prohibiting nighttime driving, and 
restricting cell phone use (see Chapter 6, Sections 1.3 to 1.5). 
 
Distracted or drowsy driving that is related to a driver’s job may be reduced through employer 
policies and programs. Links to employer-based resources and the Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration are available through distraction.gov. Drowsy driving caused by medical 
conditions such as sleep apnea or by drugs or medications may be addressed through policies, 
communications, and outreach. Similarly, communications and outreach may be useful in raising 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 5 
awareness of specific distraction or drowsiness issues among certain high-risk populations. 
However, it is unknown if any of these strategies has been evaluated. 
 
There are a variety of environmental and vehicular strategies to address distracted and drowsy 
driving. Rumble strips, both on the shoulder and the centerline, have demonstrated their 
effectiveness in preventing crashes associated with inattention or drowsiness. Other roadway 
improvements, such as wide and visible edge lines, more easily visible road signs, and better 
lighting at night can help drivers who are not fully alert. Vehicular strategies also can address 
driver distraction and drowsiness. Collision avoidance technologies such as lane departure 
warning, crash-imminent braking, and forward collision warning hold promise for reducing 
crashes among drivers who are drowsy or inattentive (IIHS, 2012). Such technologies, once 
available only in luxury brands, are now offered in many new vehicles. Additionally, in-vehicle 
technology in the future may be able to detect driver distraction or drowsiness, by monitoring 
driver performance and then alerting drivers (Donmez, Boyle, & Lee, 2007; May & Baldwin, 
2009; Papadelis et al., 2007; Sahayadhas, Sundaraj, & Murugappan, 2012). On the other hand, 
built-in technologies such as navigation and entertainment systems in vehicles may create more 
potential distractions. NHTSA developed Visual-Manual Driver Distraction Guidelines for In-
Vehicle Electronic devices pertaining to original equipment in-vehicle electronic devices 
(Visual-Manual NHTSA Driver Distraction Guidelines for In-Vehicle Electronic Devices, 2013). 
Although voluntary, the Guidelines encourage automobile manufactures to design in-vehicle 
devices so that potentially distracting tasks are limited while driving. This chapter only addresses 
behavioral strategies. It does not include environmental, vehicular, and engineering 
countermeasures because State Highway Safety Offices do not have authority or responsibility in 
these areas 
 
Driver drowsiness is a critical issue for commercial drivers. The Federal Motor Carrier Safety 
Administration regulates drowsiness in commercial driver through Hours of Service regulations, 
driver logs and inspections (see for example FMCSA, 2008). FMCSA has an extensive drowsy 
driver research program focused on commercial drivers (FMCSA, 2005). Additionally, NHTSA 
has developed a prototype Drowsy Driver Warning System that appears promising in reducing 
drowsiness among drivers of heavy vehicles (Blanco et al., 2009). As with the environmental and 
vehicular countermeasures mentioned above, commercial driver countermeasures are not 
discussed in this guide because they do not fall under SHSO jurisdiction. 
 
 
Resources 
 
The agencies and organizations listed below can provide more information on distracted and 
drowsy driving and links to numerous other resources. 
• U.S. Department of Transportation website on distracted driving: www.distraction.gov 
• National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: 
o Research and Evaluation - www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Research+&+Evaluation 
o Behavioral Safety Research Reports - 
http://ntlsearch.bts.gov/repository/ntlc/nhtsa/index.shtm 
• Governors Highway Safety Association: www.ghsa.org 
• National Safety Council: 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 6 
www.nsc.org/safety_road/Distracted_Driving/Pages/distracted_driving.aspx 
• National Conference of State Legislatures: 
 www.ncsl.org/issues- research/transport/spotlight-distracted-driving.aspx 
• National Sleep Foundation: www.sleepfoundation.org 
• Insurance Institute for Highway Safety: www.iihs.org 
• AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety: www.aaafoundation.org 
 
For overviews of distracted driving prevalence, risks, legislation, research, and recommended 
strategies, see:  
 
• NHTSA’s Understanding the Effects of Distracted Driving and Developing Strategies to 
Reduce Resulting Deaths and Injuries: A Report to Congress (Vegega, Jones, & Monk, 
2013). 
• NHTSA’s Driver Distraction: A Review of the Current State-of-Knowledge (Ranney, 
2008). 
• Overview of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration’s Driver Distraction 
Program (NHTSA, 2010a).  
• GHSA’s Distracted Driving: What Research Shows and What States Can Do (GHSA, 
2011).  
• World Health Organization’s Mobile Phone Use: A Growing Problem of Driver 
Distraction (WHO/NHTSA, 2011).  
 
For overviews on drowsy driving, see NCHRP (2005), TIRF (2009), and Grigo & Baldock 
(2011). 
 
 
Key terms 
• GDL: Graduated driver licensing, a three-phase system for beginning drivers consisting 
of a learner’s permit, a provisional license, and a full license. A learner’s permit allows 
driving only while supervised by a fully licensed driver. A provisional license allows 
unsupervised driving under certain restrictions. 
• NCSDR: National Center for Sleep Disorders Research 
• NSF: National Sleep Foundation. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 7 
Countermeasures That Work 
 
Countermeasures to reduce distracted and drowsy driving are listed below and discussed 
individually in this chapter. The table is intended to give a rough estimate of each 
countermeasure’s effectiveness, use, cost, and time required for implementation. The symbols 
and terms used are described below. Effectiveness, cost, and time to implement can vary 
substantially from State to State and community to community. Costs for many countermeasures 
are difficult to measure, so the summary terms are very approximate. See each countermeasure 
discussion for more information. 
 
1. Laws and Enforcement 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
1.1 GDL requirements for beginning drivers 
† 
$ 
High 
Medium 
1.2 Cell phone and text messaging laws 
 
$ 
Medium 
Short 
1.3 High visibility cell phone/text messaging 
enforcement 
 
$$$ 
Low 
 
Medium 
1.4 General drowsiness and distraction laws 
 
Varies 
High†† 
Short 
† Effectiveness proven for nighttime and passenger restrictions 
†† Included under reckless driving; use of explicit drowsiness and distraction laws is low 
 
2. Communications and Outreach 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
2.1 Drowsy driving 
 
$$ 
Unknown 
Medium 
2.2 Distracted driving 
 
$$ 
High 
Medium 
 
3. Other Countermeasures 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
3.1 Employer programs 
 
$ 
Unknown 
Short 
3.2 Education regarding medical conditions and 
medications 
 
Variable 
Unknown 
Medium 
 
 
Effectiveness: 
- Demonstrated to be effective by several high-quality evaluations with 
consistent results 
- Demonstrated to be effective in certain situations 
- Likely to be effective based on balance of evidence from high-quality evaluations 
or other sources 
- Effectiveness still undetermined; different methods of implementing this 
countermeasure produce different results 
- Limited or no high-quality evaluation evidence 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 8 
 
Effectiveness is measured by reductions in crashes or injuries unless noted otherwise. 
See individual countermeasure descriptions for information on effectiveness size and how 
effectiveness is measured. 
 
Cost to implement: 
$$$: requires extensive new facilities, staff, equipment, or publicity, or makes heavy 
demands on current resources 
$$: requires some additional staff time, equipment, facilities, and/or publicity 
$: can be implemented with current staff, perhaps with training; limited costs for equipment 
or facilities 
 
These estimates do not include the costs of enacting legislation or establishing policies. 
 
Use: 
High: more than two-thirds of the States, or a substantial majority of communities 
Medium: between one-third and two-thirds of States or communities 
Low: fewer than one-third of the States or communities 
Unknown: data not available 
 
Time to implement: 
Long: more than one year 
Medium: more than three months but less than one year 
Short: three months or less 
 
These estimates do not include the time required to enact legislation or establish policies. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 9 
1. Laws and Enforcement 
 
1.1 Graduated Driver Licensing Requirements for Beginning Drivers 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $ 
 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
† Effectiveness proven for nighttime and passenger restrictions 
 
Studies suggest teenagers and adults are similar in terms of how often they engage in potentially 
distracting activities while driving (Foss & Goodwin, 2014; Klauer et al., 2014). However, as 
mentioned in the introduction, teens are at higher risk for a crash when engaged in distracting 
activities compared to adults (Klauer et al., 2014). Teens are newer at the task of driving, so 
driving requires more of their attention than is the case for experienced drivers (Lansdown, 
2002). Moreover, key areas of the brain are still developing during adolescence, making it 
difficult for teens to manage potential distractions (Keating, 2007). A number of studies also 
suggest teens are more likely than adults to drive while drowsy (AAA Foundation, 2010; CDC, 
2013; Royal, 2003). 
 
Several elements of graduated driver licensing (GDL) reduce the likelihood of drowsiness and 
distractions for newly licensed drivers. For example, nighttime driving is typically restricted 
under GDL. Driving at night is more dangerous than during the day and also may pose greater 
risks of drowsy driving. In addition, GDL systems usually include a passenger restriction. 
Passengers, especially teenage passengers, are a major source of distraction for young, beginning 
drivers (Foss & Goodwin, 2014). Cell phones can also distract drivers (see Chapter 4, Section 
1.2), so they are often restricted under GDL. The NCHRP guide for reducing crashes involving 
young drivers describes the key provisions of GDL laws (NCHRP, 2007). The Insurance Institute 
for Highway Safety (IIHS, 2014a) and the Governors Highway Safety Association (GHSA, 
2014a) summarize State GDL laws. These summaries are updated monthly. See Chapter 6, 
Sections 1.1 to 1.7, for a complete discussion of GDL for beginning young drivers. 
 
Use: As of July 2014, all 50 States and the District of Columbia had some GDL components in 
place. The laws in 49 States and the District of Columbia do not allow driving during certain 
nighttime hours. Laws in 45 States and the District of Columbia limit the number of passengers 
allowed with a driver with a provisional license (GHSA, 2014a; IIHS, 2014a). Thirty-eight States 
and the District of Columbia prohibit the use of cell phones, both hand-held and hands-free, by 
drivers with learner’s permits or provisional licenses or by drivers under 18 (GHSA, 2014a; 
IIHS, 2014a). 
 
Effectiveness: Several studies document that nighttime and passenger GDL restrictions reduce 
teenage driver crashes and injuries (Hedlund & Compton, 2005; NCHRP, 2007; Williams, 
2007a). The only evaluation of a GDL cell phone restriction suggests these laws may have little 
effect on teenage drivers’ cell phone use (Foss, Goodwin, McCartt, & Hellinga, 2009; Goodwin, 
O’Brien, & Foss, 2012). 
 
Costs: Publicity for GDL restriction changes can be delivered directly by the Department of 
Motor Vehicles to young drivers as they apply for their learner’s permits and provisional 
licenses, so costs can be minimal. Information about GDL restrictions can also be provided 
through driver education courses. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 10 
 
Time to implement: GDL nighttime, passenger, or cell phone restriction changes require several 
months to implement for drivers receiving a provisional license. They then will take one or two 
years before all provisionally licensed drivers are subject to the new restrictions. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 11 
1.2 Cell Phone and Text Messaging Laws 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Short 
 
Cell phones have become an essential feature of modern life. In a NHTSA survey of more than 
6,000 U.S. residents, 60% admitted to answering phone calls while driving and 51% reported 
making phone calls (Schroeder et al., 2013). Half (50%) of cell phone users reported no 
differences in their driving when using a cell phone. NHTSA’s 2012 national observation survey 
found 5% of drivers on the road at any given moment were using hand-held cell phones, 
unchanged since 2009 (NHTSA, 2014). The percent of drivers who were manipulating a hand-
held device (e.g., texting or dialing) increased from 0.6% in 2009 to 1.5% in 2012. NHTSA 
currently estimates that 9% of drivers are using some type of phone (hand-held or hands-free) in 
a typical daylight moment (NHTSA, 2014). These estimates may underrepresent cell phone use 
given the inherent difficulty in accurately observing these behaviors. 
 
Many studies have investigated the effects of cell phone use on driving (See Caird, Willness, 
Steel, & Scialfa, 2008, and McCartt, Hellinga, & Braitman, 2006, for reviews). Experiments on 
simulators or test tracks indicate that talking on a cell phone has some effect on driving 
performance, most commonly slowed reaction times, but these experiments cannot measure the 
impact on crash risk. For reasons outlined in the overview, it can be difficult to determine 
whether cell phones contribute to individual crashes. Two studies examining cell phone billing 
records concluded that drivers are four times more likely to be involved in a serious crash when 
talking on a cell phone (McEvoy et al., 2005; Redelmeier & Tibshirani, 1997). In addition, these 
two studies and others have found that hands-free phones offer little or no safety advantage over 
hand-held phones (Caird et al., 2008; Ishigami & Klein, 2009). However, recent studies have 
questioned the estimates of crash risk and argued the real risk may be much smaller (Farmer, 
Braitman, & Lund, 2010; Young, 2012). Studies using in-vehicle cameras and sensors to study 
distracted behaviors suggest talking on a cell phone increases risk by a small, non-significant 
amount (Klauer et al., 2006, 2014).  
 
There is less disagreement about the dangers posed by texting while driving. In a study using 
highly instrumented commercial motor vehicles, texting drivers were 23 times more likely to be 
involved in a crash, near-crash, or other safety-critical event compared to uneventful baseline 
driving (Olson et al., 2009). This is supported by experimental studies using driving simulations, 
which suggest that texting drivers spend up to 400% more time looking away from the road and 
are more likely to leave their lane than when not text messaging (Drews, Yazdani, Godfrey, 
Cooper, & Strayer, 2009; Hosking, Young, & Regan, 2009). In the NHTSA survey, only 14% of 
drivers admitted to sending text messages or emails while driving (Schroeder et al., 2013). 
 
States have been very active in using legislation to address this issue. Since 2000, every State has 
considered legislation to curtail distracted driving or driver cell phone use. In 2013, legislators in 
40 States considered approximately 170 bills related to distracted driving (NCSL, 2014). No 
State completely bans all types of cell phone use for all drivers. Bans on texting are more 
common than bans on hand-held cell phone use. Overall, public support is high for this 
legislation. In surveys of the general public, between 70% and 80% favor bans on hand-held cell 
phone use, and 88% to 96% support bans on texting while driving (AAFTS, 2013; Guarino, 
2013; Schroeder et al., 2013). 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 12 
 
Use: As of July 2014, talking on a hand-held cell phone was prohibited in 14 States (California, 
Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Maryland, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New 
York, Oregon, Vermont, Washington, and West Virginia) and the District of Columbia (GHSA, 
2014b; IIHS, 2014b). The cell phone bans in each of these States are primary laws. In addition, 
several local jurisdictions such as Chicago, Illinois and Cheyenne, Wyoming have enacted their 
own restrictions on cell phones. At present, no State restricts hands-free phone use for all drivers. 
 
Most States prohibit text messaging while driving. As of July 2014, 44 States and the District of 
Columbia prohibit text messaging for all drivers (GHSA, 2014b; IIHS, 2014b). NHTSA has 
prepared a sample bill to assist States in crafting new legislation to prohibit texting while driving 
(NHTSA, 2010b). 
 
Effectiveness: Evaluations in New York, Connecticut, the District of Columbia, and in other 
countries consistently show that cell phone laws reduce hand-held phone use by about 50% 
shortly after the laws take effect (McCartt et al., 2006). Moreover, these reductions in hand-held 
cell phone use are maintained 3 to 7 years later (McCartt, Hellinga, Strouse, & Farmer, 
2010). However, it is unknown whether these laws lead to increased use of hands-free devices. 
 
The effectiveness of hand-held cell phone bans in reducing crashes is still unclear. Nikolaev, 
Robbins, and Jacobson (2010) examined driving injuries and fatalities in 62 counties in New 
York State both before and after a hand-held cell phone ban took effect. Forty-six counties 
showed a significant decrease in injury crashes following the ban, and 10 counties showed a less-
significant decrease in fatal crashes. Although encouraging, the study did not include a control 
group to account for other factors that may have decreased crashes. A study by the Highway 
Loss Data Institute (HLDI) investigated State-level automobile insurance collision claims in 
California, Connecticut, New York and the District of Columbia. When compared to neighboring 
States, there was no change in collision claim frequency after these jurisdictions implemented 
hand-held cell phone bans (HLDI, 2009). However, the data from the Highway Loss Data 
Institute is proprietary and an independent analysis of the data has not been conducted. Also, not 
all crashes result in a collision claim, so collision claim rates may differ from crash rates. 
 
Two studies have examined the effectiveness of laws prohibiting texting while driving. One 
study evaluated the effect of a texting ban in Michigan (Ehsani, Bingham, Ionides, & Childers, 
2014); the other examined insurance collision claims in States with texting bans compared to 
neighboring States without such bans (HLDI, 2010). Both studies found small increases in 
various types of crashes and collision claims following enactment of texting bans. One possible 
explanation is that texting drivers attempt to avoid detection by hiding their phones from view, 
which may result in more time with drivers’ eyes off the roadway.  
 
Costs: As with any law, costs are required to publicize and enforce it. A hand-held cell phone 
law can be enforced during regular traffic patrol because drivers who are using a hand-held 
phone can be observed relatively easily. However, some States with cell phone bans allow 
drivers to use a phone for specific purposes while driving (e.g., navigation), which can make 
enforcement more challenging. As with other traffic safety laws, paid advertising supporting 
highly visible law enforcement may be necessary to achieve substantial effects (see Chapter 4, 
Section 1.3). 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 13 
 
Time to implement: A cell phone law can be implemented quickly, as soon as it is publicized. 
 
Other issues: 
• Cell phone blockers: In recent years, several manufacturers have created systems that can 
block a cell phone from making (or receiving) calls while a person is driving. These systems 
detect when the phone is in motion. During that time, incoming calls are automatically 
diverted to voicemail and incoming texts are not shown until the driver has stopped moving. 
Typically, these systems allow exceptions for phone calls from pre-specified numbers, and 
all allow emergency calls to 911. Although these systems are potentially applicable to all 
drivers, they have largely been marketed to parents of teen drivers. Researchers at the Texas 
Transportation Institute (TTI) tried to evaluate a cell phone disabling device for teens; 
however, they encountered difficulty recruiting families and very strong resistance by parents 
and teens to the device (Benden, Fink, & Stafford, 2012). NHTSA funded a study examining 
the effect of a filtering/blocking application on the cell phones of 44 Michigan DOT 
employees. When the application was active, participants placed and answered fewer calls 
while their vehicle was in motion. However, participants were not very accepting of the 
application, and the application was not completely reliable (Funkhouser & Sayer, 2013). 
• Voice-to-text technology: There are several applications that allow drivers to send and 
receive text messages using voice rather than manual entry. Although the research on these 
applications is limited, it appears voice-to-text technology may offer little or no safety 
benefit. In a recent study, 42 participants drove instrumented vehicles on a closed course 
while texting manually or using one of two voice-to-text applications. In all three conditions, 
reaction times were slower and drivers spent more time looking away from the roadway 
(Yager, 2013). More research is needed, but the findings suggest texting impairs driving 
performance, regardless of what method of texting is used. 
 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 14 
1.3 High Visibility Cell Phone and Text Messaging Enforcement 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$$ 
Use: Low 
Time: Medium 
 
Numerous studies demonstrate that high visibility enforcement (HVE) can be effective in curbing 
alcohol-impaired driving and increasing seat belt use among drivers (see Chapter 1, Section 2.1 
and Chapter 2, Section 2.1). Recently, NHTSA has examined whether the HVE model could be 
effective in reducing hand-held cell phone use and texting among drivers. 
 
Similar to sobriety checkpoints, the objective is to deter cell phone use by increasing the 
perceived risk of a ticket. The HVE model combines dedicated law enforcement with paid and 
earned media supporting the enforcement activity. Enforcement officers actively seek out cell 
phone users through special roving patrols, or through spotter techniques where a stationary 
officer will radio ahead to another officer when a driver using a cell phone is detected. Officers 
report that higher vantage points, SUVs, and unmarked vehicles can assist in identifying 
violators (Chaudhary, Casanova-Powell, Cosgrove, Reagan, & Williams, 2014). Both earned and 
paid media are critical to ensure the general public is aware of the enforcement activity, and to 
create the impression that violators will be caught. 
 
NHTSA has conducted a high visibility enforcement demonstration project aimed at reducing 
cell phone use among drivers. The message of the program is: “Phone in one hand. Ticket in the 
other.” Pilot programs were tested in Hartford, Connecticut, and Syracuse, New York, in April 
2010 through April 2011. Law enforcement officers conducted four waves of enforcement during 
the course of the year. Approximately 100 to 200 citations were issued per 10,000 population 
during each enforcement wave. Paid media (TV, radio, and online advertisements and billboards) 
and earned media (e.g., press events and news releases) supported the enforcement activity. For 
more details about the program, see Chaudhary et al. (2014). 
 
To examine the effectiveness of high visibility enforcement in larger jurisdictions, NHTSA 
recently implemented a HVE campaign in Delaware and in nine California counties in the 
Sacramento area. Three waves of enforcement were conducted between November 2012 and 
June 2013. Paid and earned media were similar to that in Hartford and Syracuse. See Schick, 
Vegega, and Chaudhary (2014) for more information. 
 
Use: To date, only a handful of States have implemented high visibility enforcement programs to 
address talking and texting among drivers. 
 
Effectiveness: Results from the NHTSA HVE program suggest hand-held cell phone use among 
drivers dropped 57% in Hartford and 32% in Syracuse (Chaudhary et al., 2014). The percentage 
of drivers observed manipulating a phone (e.g., texting or dialing) also declined. Public 
awareness of distracted driving was already high before the program, but surveys suggest 
awareness of the program and enforcement activity increased in both Hartford and Syracuse. 
Surveys also showed most motorists supported the enforcement activity. In California and 
Delaware, similar reductions in cell phone use were observed following the campaign, although 
decreases were also noted in comparison communities (Schick et al., 2014). Although the results 
are encouraging, the effect of these HVE campaigns on crashes is unknown. Note that the 
evidence for effectiveness is based on community and smaller statewide programs that targeted 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 15 
hand-held cell phone use. There is no evidence available that HVE programs targeting texting 
will be as effective. 
 
Costs: High visibility enforcement campaigns are expensive. They require time from law 
enforcement officers to conduct the enforcement. In addition, time is needed from State highway 
safety office and media staff and often from consultants to develop, produce, and distribute 
advertising, educational materials, and other communications tools. In the NHTSA 
demonstration program, both Connecticut and New York received $200,000 to implement and 
evaluate the program, and each State contributed an additional $100,000 to the Federal funds. 
Paid media costs for the program in the two States were over $500,000.  
 
Time to implement: A high visibility enforcement program requires 4 to 6 months to plan and 
implement. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 16 
1.4 General Driver Drowsiness and Distraction Laws 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: High† 
Time: Short 
† Included under reckless driving; use of explicit drowsiness and distraction laws is low 
 
States implicitly prohibit driving while seriously distracted or drowsy through their reckless 
driving laws (NCHRP, 2005, Strategy C2). These existing laws in each State allow individuals to 
be cited and prosecuted if they cause a crash due to distracted or drowsy driving; however, the 
extent to which States pursue cases of inattentive driving is currently unknown. 
 
Several States have laws that specifically target the issue of drowsy drivers. In 2003, New Jersey 
enacted “Maggie’s Law” under which drivers can be prosecuted for vehicular homicide if they 
have not slept in 24 hours and they cause a crash in which someone is killed. Arkansas has a 
similar law – drivers can be charged with negligent homicide if the driver is involved in a fatal 
crash and has not slept in 24 hours. In 2009, Maine enacted a general distracted driving law. A 
driver who is involved in a crash or who commits an infraction can be cited for distracted driving 
if a police officer believes that to be the underlying cause. The law defines distraction as an 
activity not necessary to the operation of the vehicle that impairs, or could impair, the ability to 
drive safely. Utah has a law that prohibits “careless driving,” which is defined as committing a 
moving violation (other than speeding) while being distracted by one or more activities unrelated 
to driving (GHSA, 2012). Potentially distracting activities covered by the law include talking on 
a hand-held phone, searching for an item in the vehicle, or attending to personal hygiene or 
grooming. 
 
No studies have evaluated whether general reckless driving laws or specific drowsy or distracted 
driving laws have any effect (except for cell phone laws: see Chapter 4, Section 1.2). Based on 
extensive experience in other traffic safety areas, it is likely that these laws will have little or no 
effect unless they are vigorously publicized and enforced. See Chapter 1, Sections 2.1 on 
alcohol-impaired driving, Chapter 2, Sections 2.1, 3.1, and 3.2 on seat belt use laws, and Chapter 
3, Sections 2.2 and 4.1 on aggressive driving and speeding laws. Enforcement of drowsy or 
distracted driving laws is likely to be especially difficult because drowsiness and distraction 
often are difficult to observe, measure, and document. Nevertheless, these laws may increase the 
impact of communications and outreach efforts to reduce drowsy and distracted driving 
discussed in Chapter 4, Sections 2.1 and 2.2 (see also NCHRP, 2005, Strategy C2). 
 
Use: New Jersey, Maine, and Utah are the only States with laws explicitly addressing drowsy 
driving or distractions other than cell phones (Chapter 4, Section 1.2). Other States include these 
conditions under their laws regarding reckless driving or similar offenses. 
 
Effectiveness: The effects of any laws on reducing drowsy or distracted driving are unknown. 
 
Costs: Costs are required for publicity and enforcement. Enforcement costs likely will be 
minimal, as most enforcement likely will be included under regular traffic patrols or combined 
with enforcement activities directed primarily at other offenses such as alcohol-impaired or 
aggressive driving. However, special patrols to enforce distracted or drowsy driving laws will 
entail greater costs, especially if overtime is required for law enforcement officers. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 17 
 
Time to implement: A new drowsy or distracted driving law can be implemented quickly, as 
soon as it is publicized and law enforcement patrol officers are trained. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 18 
2. Communications and Outreach 
 
2.1 Communications and Outreach on Drowsy Driving 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Medium 
 
Drowsy driving typically occurs because drivers don’t get enough sleep. This apparently obvious 
statement is well-documented. In a NHTSA telephone survey, 66% of the drivers who reported 
they had nodded off while driving had 6 or fewer hours of sleep the previous night (Royal, 
2003). Stutts, Wilkins, and Vaughn (1999) interviewed 467 crash-involved drowsy drivers 
(Reported as “fatigued” or “asleep” by the investigating officer) and 529 other crash-involved 
drivers who were not drowsy. Half of the drowsy drivers had 6 or fewer hours of sleep the 
previous night compared to fewer than 10% of the other drivers. 
 
States and national organizations such as the National Sleep Foundation have conducted drowsy 
driving communications and outreach campaigns directed to the general public (NCHRP, 2005, 
Strategy C1; NSF, 2004). Campaign goals usually include: 
• raising awareness of the dangers of drowsy driving; 
• motivating drivers to take action to reduce drowsy driving; and 
• providing information on what drivers can do, either before they start out on a trip or if 
they become drowsy while driving. 
 
NHTSA and NCSDR (the National Center for Sleep Disorders Research) identified three groups 
that are over-involved in drowsy driving crashes: drivers in their teens and 20s, shift workers, 
and people suffering from sleep apnea or narcolepsy (NHTSA, 2001). The joint NHTSA-
NCSDR Report to Congress on drowsy driving recommended that communications and outreach 
on drowsy driving be directed to these groups, especially to young drivers (NHTSA, 1999). This 
information can be delivered in several ways. Driver education programs can include information 
on both drowsy and distracted driving, and the new model curriculum developed by NHTSA and 
the American Driver and Traffic Safety Education Association includes both 
(www.adtsea.org/ADTSEA%20Curriculum%20Free%20Download.html). See Chapter 4, 
Sections 3.1 and 3.2, for additional discussion of shift workers and medical conditions, 
respectively. 
 
The ultimate goal of drowsy driving communications and outreach is to change driver behavior; 
however, there are substantial obstacles. As discussed in other chapters, communications and 
outreach by themselves rarely change driving behavior (Chapter 1, Section 5.2; Chapter 2, 
Sections 3.1 and 3.2; Chapter 3, Section 4.1; see also NCHRP, 2005, Strategy C1). To have any 
chance of success, stand-alone campaigns must be carefully pre-tested, communicate health 
information not previously known, be long-term, and have substantial funding (Williams, 
2007b). 
 
An additional barrier is that drowsy driving is a byproduct of busy lifestyles that do not include 
enough sleep. The only truly effective method to prevent drowsy driving crashes is to get enough 
sleep (Nguen, Jauregui, & Dinges, 1998; NHTSA, 2001). Traffic safety messages urging enough 
sleep may be overwhelmed by the other demands on a driver’s time that are responsible for 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 19 
insufficient sleep. Focus group discussions with young men and shift workers, two groups at high 
risk of drowsy driving, supported this conclusion (Nelson, Isaac, & Graham, 2001). Most shift 
workers and many young men understood well the risks caused by lack of sleep. Many had 
crashed or almost crashed after falling asleep at the wheel or had friends who had crashed. But 
neither their knowledge nor their crash experience changed their sleep habits. They sacrificed 
sleep for the demands of their work, families, and social lives. Campaigns directed to young 
drivers also must overcome the higher risk-taking behavior and overall immaturity of young 
drivers discussed in Chapter 6. Based on NCHRP research, no drowsy driving communications 
and outreach program for the general public has been evaluated (NCHRP, 2005, Strategies C1 
and D2). 
 
In Greece, a national communication campaign was implemented in 2008-2009 to curb drowsy 
driving. Entitled “Sleep, but not at the wheel,” the campaign was designed to raise awareness of 
the risks of driving while tired, and to increase knowledge of effective countermeasures to reduce 
fatigue (e.g., taking short breaks while driving). The campaign included thousands of TV and 
radio messages, as well as posters and leaflets distributed across the country (Adamos, Nathanail, 
& Kapetanopoulou, 2013).  
 
Use: Utah is the only State known to have conducted a drowsy driving campaign for the general 
public (see NCHRP, 2005, Strategy C1). However, several States including California, Florida, 
Pennsylvania, and Texas have instituted a drowsy or distracted driving awareness week/month.  
 
Effectiveness: The communication campaign in Greece was shown to increase awareness for the 
causes and effects of fatigue on drivers, and there was a small self-reported increase in the 
percent of drivers who reported stopping and resting when they got tired (Adamos et al., 2013). 
The effect of the program on drowsy driver crashes is unknown. Beyond this, there are no other 
studies of any campaign’s effects on driver knowledge, attitudes, or behavior.  
 
Costs: A high-quality campaign will be expensive to develop, test, and implement. 
 
Time to implement: A high-quality campaign will require at least 6 months to plan, produce, 
and distribute. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 20 
2.2 Communications and Outreach on Distracted Driving 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
 
Distracted driving communications and outreach campaigns for the general public face different, 
but equally difficult, obstacles than drowsy driving campaigns. Drivers “know” at some level 
that they should be alert. However, as discussed in the Overview, distractions come in many 
forms. Distractions outside the car are not under the driver’s control. Many distractions inside the 
car also cannot be controlled easily (conversations, children), or are intentional (listening to the 
radio or CD player, eating). They may in fact be useful, to keep drivers alert on a long trip. 
 
There is strong public support for communications and outreach to reduce distracted driving. For 
example, 80% of respondents in a Canadian survey agreed that greater awareness and education 
efforts are needed to alert drivers to the problem of distracted driving (Vanlaar et al., 2007). 
Many organizations have developed or conducted distracted driving communications and 
outreach campaigns directed to the general public. Some carry a general “pay attention” 
message, while others are directed at specific behaviors such as cell phone use. Examples of 
communications and outreach: 
• “U Drive, U Text, U Pay.” A program released by NHTSA in 2014 in support of texting 
ban enforcement during Distracted Driving Awareness Month 
(www.ghsa.org/html/issues/distraction/april2014.html) 
• “Put It Down.” A national campaign by the U.S. Department of Transportation to 
discourage the public from driving distracted  
• “Faces of Distracted Driving.” A national campaign created by DOT that tells the stories 
of families who are victims of crashes involving a distracted driver  
• “No Phone Zone” by Oprah Winfrey 
• “On the Road, Off the Phone” by the National Safety Council 
• “Decide to Drive” by the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons/Alliance of 
Automobile Manufacturers  
• “Texting While Driving: It Can Wait” by AT&T 
 
Driving while distracted is a particular concern with teenage drivers (Foss & Goodwin, 2014; 
NHTSA, 2012). GDL passenger and cell phone restrictions directly address two sources of 
distractions, as discussed in Chapter 4, Section 1.1. Broader communications and outreach efforts 
for young drivers regarding distracted driving also have been proposed. For example, a growing 
number of States are including distracted driving as a required component of driver education, 
the State’s driver license test, or information provided in the driver license manual (GHSA, 
2010). Some States have also developed their own education materials and programs aimed at 
teen drivers. See GHSA (2010) for links to these materials. 
 
A campaign at the University of Kansas combined traditional media (e.g., newspaper ads), social 
media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter), and “guerilla marketing” strategies to increase awareness about 
the dangers of texting and driving, and to foster a negative view of texting and driving among the 
college community (Atchley & Geana, 2013a). The campaign promotes a “TXT L8R. Drive 
Safer” message. A survey of students at the University of Kansas found 75% had seen the TXT 
L8R message, and a third (32%) reported talking with a friend during the last month about the 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 21 
risks of texting while driving (Atchley & Geana, 2013b). See Atchley and Geana (2013a) for 
more information about the TXT L8R campaign. 
 
The ultimate goal of these campaigns is to change driver behavior, but they face substantial 
obstacles. As discussed in other chapters, communications and outreach by themselves rarely 
change driving behavior (Chapter 1, Section 5.2; Chapter 2, Section 3.1; Chapter 3, Section 4.1; 
see also NCHRP, 2005, Strategy C1). To have any chance, stand-alone campaigns must be 
carefully pre-tested, communicate health information not previously known, be long-term, and 
have substantial funding (Williams, 2007b). A broad “stay alert” message may be too general to 
have any impact. Also, commonly-used fear appeals are generally ineffective and in some cases 
may actually encourage greater distracted driving, especially among young adults (Lennon, 
Rentfro, & O’Leary, 2010). This “boomerang effect” of fear appeals is thought to occur because 
people deny the threat or feel their personal freedom is threatened, making the undesirable 
behavior even more attractive (Lennon et al., 2010).  
 
Use: A recent survey by GHSA found that 41 States and the District of Columbia have 
implemented public information/education campaigns to address distracted driving (GHSA, 
2010). In addition, a number of States have developed distracted driving PSAs. 
 
Effectiveness: Based on NCHRP research, there are no studies of any campaign’s effects on 
driver knowledge, attitudes, or behavior (NCHRP, 2005, Strategies C1 and D2). 
 
Costs: A high-quality campaign will be expensive to develop, test and implement. 
 
Time to implement: A high-quality campaign will require at least 6 months to plan, produce and 
distribute. 
 
Other issues: 
• Non-traditional communication channels: At least 16 States as well as NHTSA now 
use social networking sites to educate motorists about distracted driving (GHSA, 2010). 
Sites such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube can effectively and inexpensively reach 
large numbers of people. Social networking sites are especially popular among young 
people, who are often a primary target of distracted driving campaigns. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 22 
3. Other Countermeasures 
 
3.1 Employer Programs 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
 
Drowsy driving is closely related to a person’s employment. In 2008, the National Sleep 
Foundation conducted a survey of 1,000 U.S. residents who were employed full time. Those who 
work 50 or more hours per week were three times as likely to report driving drowsy on a weekly 
basis compared to those who work 30-40 hours per week (Swanson, Drake, & Arnedt, 2012).  
 
Shift workers are one employment group at high risk for drowsy-driving crashes. Shift workers 
include people who work long or irregular hours or who work at night, including many law 
enforcement officers (NCHRP, 2005, Strategy D6). Another at-risk group for drowsy driving 
crashes is medical interns, who frequently work extended shifts of 24 hours or more. Barger et al. 
(2005) collected monthly reports from 2,737 interns. Interns were 2.3 times more likely to report 
a crash and 5.9 times more likely to report a near miss after an extended shift than a shorter shift. 
Each extended shift in a month increased the monthly risk of a crash during the commute from 
work by 16%. NHTSA and NCSDR have produced a comprehensive workplace education 
program for shift workers. It includes information on sleep habits in general and drowsy driving 
in particular. Program material that includes a video, posters, brochures for workers and their 
families, tip cards, a PowerPoint training session, and an administrator’s guide are available at 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/drowsy_driving1/human/drows_driving/. Employer programs 
can also include medical condition testing/education. See Section 3.2 for more information about 
medical conditions, medications, and drowsy driving. 
 
There are many ways States can work with employers to address distracted and drowsy driving. 
Some States, such as Delaware and Kentucky, have established corporate outreach programs 
related to distracted driving (GHSA, 2010). The programs usually involve dissemination of 
traffic safety materials to employers, or sometimes directly to the employees themselves. States 
can also assist employers in promoting and enforcing policies to reduce distracted driving. 
Legally, employers can be held accountable for employees who are using a cell phone (or 
otherwise distracted) and who are involved in a crash as part of their work (NSC, 2012). 
Employers can protect themselves by implementing policies that prohibit distracted driving and 
by monitoring compliance. New Jersey has developed a sample cell phone use policy for 
businesses, available at www.nj.gov/lps/hts/downloads/Sample_Cell_Phone_Policy.pdf. The 
National Safety Council has developed a policy kit to assist employers with implementing or 
strengthening a cell phone ban, available at http://shop.nsc.org/eProducts-Cell-Phone-Policy- 
Download-P252.aspx. Additionally, a sample employer policy is available at 
www.distraction.gov/content/get-involved/employers.html. 
 
Use: At least 16 States and the District of Columbia work with employers in their State to 
develop distracted driving policies (GHSA, 2010). The number of employers who use the 
NHTSA/NCSDR program is not known. 
 
Effectiveness: The NHTSA/NCSDR program was tested by more than 20 U.S. companies and 
was well received by workers and management. It has not been evaluated further (NCHRP, 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 23 
2005, Strategy D3). No other employer distracted or drowsy driving program has been evaluated. 
 
Costs: Since a comprehensive program is available at no cost, program costs will consist only of 
material production and employer time for training. 
 
Time to implement: An employer program can be implemented within three months. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 24 
3.2 Education Regarding Medical Conditions and Medications 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Variable 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Medium 
 
A number of chronic medical conditions and sleep disorders can potentially compromise sleep 
and elevate feelings of fatigue (Smolensky, Di Milia, Ohayon, & Philip, 2011). Three disorders, 
in particular, can cause drivers to fall asleep at the wheel: 
• Insomnia is the subjective experience of having difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep. 
It affects an estimated 11% of the U.S. population (NSF, 2008). People suffering from 
insomnia often report daytime sleepiness that interferes with their daily activities. 
• Sleep apnea is a breathing disorder characterized by brief interruptions of breathing 
during sleep, perhaps as many as 20 to 60 per hour (NSF, 2009a). By fragmenting 
nighttime sleep, sleep apnea produces daytime sleepiness. NSF estimates that about 4% 
of men and 2% of women are affected by sleep apnea. It can be treated by physical or 
mechanical therapy or by surgery. 
• Narcolepsy is a disorder of the central nervous system’s sleep-wake mechanism that can 
cause narcoleptics to fall asleep suddenly at any time (NSF, 2009b). It is quite rare, 
affecting about one person in 2,000. It can be treated with medications. 
 
Several studies suggest that people suffering from insomnia are 2 to 3 times more likely to be 
involved in motor vehicle crashes than those without insomnia (Smolensky et al., 2011). 
Similarly, research also shows that people with sleep apnea are up to 6 times more likely to be 
involved in a crash (Teran-Santos, Jiminez-Gomez, & Cordero-Guevara, 1999). It has been 
estimated that crashes among people with sleep apnea cost approximately 16 billion dollars each 
year (Sassani et al., 2004). The number of crashes resulting from narcolepsy is not known. 
 
Most cases of sleep apnea or narcolepsy are undiagnosed and untreated (NCHRP, 2005, Strategy 
D6; NHTSA, 1998). Indeed, falling asleep at the wheel may be one of the main ways to raise the 
possibility of a sleep disorder and motivate a driver to seek medical attention (NHTSA, 1998). 
Once treated, people with sleep apnea have crash rates that are no higher than the general 
population (George, 2001). 
 
There are many other medical conditions that can potentially compromise sleep or increase 
daytime feelings of fatigue such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and 
rheumatoid or osteoarthritis. For a review of medical disorders and conditions that may affect 
sleep and driving risk, see Smolensky et al. (2011). 
 
Many common prescription and over-the-counter medications can also cause drowsiness. 
Warning labels on the medications note this and caution users against driving or other activities 
that could be affected by drowsiness. For more information about how medications can impair 
drivers, see Chapter 1, Section 7.3. 
 
The principal countermeasures to address sleep apnea, narcolepsy, and medication effects are 
(NCHRP, 2005, Strategy D6): 
1. Communications and outreach on sleep disorders to increase overall awareness of their 
symptoms, consequences, and treatment. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 25 
2. Efforts with driver licensing medical advisory boards to increase their awareness of these 
conditions as they review driver fitness for licensing. 
3. Efforts with physicians to increase their awareness of these conditions and their potential 
effects on driving, to treat these conditions as appropriate, and to counsel their patients to 
take steps to reduce the risk of drowsy driving. 
 
Additionally, it is important that pharmacies and drug makers include patient education about the 
potentially impairing effects of certain medications on driving (see Chapter 1, Section 7.3).  
 
Use and Effectiveness: There is no known information available on how frequently these 
countermeasures are used or on how effective they have been in raising awareness, increasing 
knowledge, or affecting behavior. 
 
Costs: Targeted communications and outreach to drivers (through driver licensing handbooks or 
flyers in license renewal material) or to physicians (through medical associations) would be 
relatively inexpensive. A communications and outreach campaign directed at all drivers will be 
expensive to develop, test and implement. See Chapter 1, Section 5.2 and Chapter 2, Sections 2.1 
and 3.1, for additional discussion. 
 
Time to implement: Either targeted or general communications and outreach activities will 
require at least 6 months to plan, produce, and distribute. Efforts with driver licensing medical 
advisory boards could be implemented quickly. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 26 
Distracted and Drowsy Driving References 
 
AAA Foundation. (2010). Asleep at the wheel: The prevalence and impact of drowsy driving. 
Retrieved from www.aaafoundation.org/pdf/2010DrowsyDrivingReport.pdf 
 
AAA Foundation. (2013). Distracted driving and perceptions of hands-free technologies. 
Findings from the 2013 Traffic Safety Culture Index. Retrieved from 
www.aaafoundation.org/sites/default/files/2013%20TSCI%20Cognitive%20Distraction.pdf 
 
Adamos, G., Nathanail, E. G., & Kapetanopoulou, P. (2013). Do road safety communication 
campaigns work? How to assess the impact of a national fatigue campaign on driver behavior. 
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2364, 62-70. 
 
Atchley, P., & Geana, M. (2013a). The texting and driving epidemic: Changing norms to change 
behavior. Topeka, KS: Kansas Department of Transportation. Retrieved from the Kansas 
Department of Transportation website: 
http://idmweb.ksdot.org/PublicLib/publicDoc.asp?ID=003830364 
 
Atchley, P., & Geana, M. (2013b). TXT L8R: Lessons from a targeted safety campaign. 
Presentation at the 31st Annual Lifesavers Conference. Denver, Colorado. Retrieved from 
www.lifesaversconference.org/handouts2013/Atchley1.pdf 
 
Barger, L. K., Cade, B. E., Ayas, N. T., Cronin, J. W., Rosner, B., Speizer, F. E., & Czeisler, C. 
A. (2005). Extended work shifts and the risk of motor vehicle crashes among interns. New 
England Journal of Medicine, 352, 125-134. 
 
Benden, M., Fink, R., & Stafford, J. (2012). Teen driver cell phone blocker (Report No. UTCM 
10-15-47). Washington, DC: Department of Transportation. Retrieved from 
http://utcm.tamu.edu/publications/final_reports/Benden_10-15-47.pdf 
 
Blanco, M., Bocanegra, J. L., Morgan, J. F., Fitch, G. M, Medina, A., Olson, R. L., . . . 
Zimmermann, R. P. (2009). Assessment of a drowsy driver warning system for heavy-vehicle 
drivers: Final report (Report No. DOT HS 811 117). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/DOT/NHTSA/NRD/Multimedia/PDFs/Crash%20Avoidance/2009/811117.p
df 
 
Caird, J. K., Willness, C. R., Steel, P., & Scialfa, C. (2008). A meta-analysis of the effects of cell 
phones on driver performance. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 40, 1282-1293. 
 
Charlton, S. G. (2009). Driving while conversing: Cell phones that distract and passengers who 
react. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 41, 160-173 
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013, January). Drowsy driving – 19 States and the 
District of Columbia, 2009-2010. Centers for Disease Control Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, 61, Nos 51 & 52, 1033-1037. Retrieved from 
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6151a1.htm  
 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 27 
Chaudhary, N. K., Casanova-Powell, T. D., Cosgrove, L., Reagan, I., & Williams, A. (2014). 
Evaluation of NHTSA distracted driving demonstration projects in Connecticut and New 
York (Report No. DOT HS 81 635). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811635_Eval_NHTSA_Distracted_Driving_Demo_Proj_Com
m_CT_and_NY.pdf 
 
Donmez, B., Boyle, L. N, & Lee, J.D. (2007). Safety implications of providing real-time 
feedback to distracted drivers. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 39, 581-590. 
 
Drews, F. A., Pasupathi, M., & Strayer, D. L. (2008). Passenger and cell phone conversations in 
simulated driving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 14, 392-400. 
 
Drews, F. A., Yazdani, H., Godfrey, C. N., Cooper, J. M., & Strayer, D. L. (2009). Text 
messaging in simulated driving. Human Factors, 51, 762-770. 
 
Ehsani, J. P., Bingham, C. R., Ionides, E., & Childers, D. (2014). The impact of Michigan’s text 
messaging restriction on motor vehicle crashes. Journal of Adolescent Health, 54, S68-S74. 
 
Farmer, C. M., Braitman, K. A., & Lund, A. K. (2010). Cell phone use while driving and 
attributable crash risk. Traffic Injury Prevention, 11, 466-470. 
 
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration. (2005). 5-Year strategic plan, FY2005-FY2009. 
Retrieved from www.fmcsa.dot.gov/facts-research/research- technology/report/rt-5year-
strategicplan.htm 
 
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration. (2008). Hours-of-service regulations. Retrieved 
from www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/topics/hos/hos-2005.htm 
 
Fitch, G. A., Soccolich, S. A., Guo, F., McClafferty, J., Fang, Y., Olson, R. L., . . . Dingus, T. A. 
(2013). The impact of hand-held and hands-free cell phone use on driving performance and 
safety-critical event risk (Report No. DOT HS 811 757). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/NVS/Crash%20Avoidance/Technical%20Publications/2013/8117
57.pdf 
 
Foss, R. D., Goodwin, A. H. (2014). Distracted driver behaviors and distracting conditions 
among adolescent drivers: Findings from a naturalistic study. Journal of Adolescent Health, 54, 
S50-S60. 
 
Foss, R. D., Goodwin, A. H., McCartt, A. T., & Hellinga, L. A. (2009). Short-term effects of a 
teenage driver cell phone restriction. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 41, 419-424. 
 
Funkhouser, D., & Sayer, J. R. (2013). Cell phone filter/blocker technology field test (Report No. 
DOT HS 811 863). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/NVS/Crash%20Avoidance/Technical%20Publications/2013/Cell_
Phone_Filter_Blocker_Technology_Field_Test_811863.pdf 
 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 28 
George, C. F. P. (2001). Reduction in motor vehicle collisions following treatment of sleep 
apnoea with nasal CPAP. Thorax, 56, 508-512. 
 
Governors Highway Safety Association. (2010). Curbing distracted driving: 2010 survey of state 
safety programs. Retrieved from the GHSA website: www.distraction.gov/files/research/GHSA-
2010_distraction.pdf 
 
Guarino, J. (2013). Survey reveals public open to ban on hand-held cell phone use and texting. 
RITA Bureau of Transportation Statistics, Special Report. Retrieved from: 
www.rita.dot.gov/bts/sites/rita.dot.gov.bts/files/special_report_january_2013_0.pdf 
 
Governor’s Highway Safety Association (GHSA). (2011). Distracted driving: What research 
shows and what states can do. Retrieved from www.ghsa.org/html/files/pubs/sfdist11.pdf  
 
GHSA. (2014a). Graduated Driver Licensing (GDL) laws. Retrieved from 
www.statehighwaysafety.org/html/stateinfo/laws/license_laws.html 
 
GHSA. (2014b). Cell phone restrictions - state and local jurisdictions. Retrieved from 
www.statehighwaysafety.org/html/stateinfo/laws/cellphone_laws.html 
 
Goodwin, A. H., O’Brien, N. P., & Foss, R. D. (2012). Effect of North Carolina's restriction on 
teenage driver cell phone use two years after implementation. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 
48, 363-367. 
 
Grigo, J. A. L., & Baldock, M. R. J. (2011). Sleepiness and road crashes: Challenges of 
definition and Measurement. Retrieved from the Centre for Automotive Safety Research website: 
http://casr.adelaide.edu.au/casrpubfile/1097/CASR082.pdf 
 
Guarino, J. (2013). Survey reveals public open to ban on hand-held cell phone use and texting. 
RITA Bureau of Transportation Statistics, Special Report. Retrieved from 
www.rita.dot.gov/bts/sites/rita.dot.gov.bts/files/special_report_january_2013_0.pdf 
 
Hedlund, J., & Compton, R. (2005). Graduated driver licensing research in 2004 and 2005. 
Journal of Safety Research, 36, 109-119. 
 
Highway Loss Data Institute. (2009). Hand-held cellphone laws and collision claim frequencies 
(Highway Loss Data Institute Bulletin, Vol. 26, No.17). Retrieved from: 
www.iihs.org/research/topics/pdf/HLDI_Cellphone_Bulletin_Dec09.pdf  
 
Horrey, W. J., Lesch, M. F., & Garabet, A. (2008). Assessing the awareness of performance 
decrements in distracted drivers. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 40, 675-682. 
 
Hosking, S. G., Young, K. L., & Regan, M. A. (2009). The effects of text messaging on young 
drivers. Human Factors, 51, 582-592. 
 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 29 
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety. (2012a). U.S. licensing systems for young drivers: Laws 
as of July 2010. Retrieved from www.iihs.org/laws/ 
graduatedLicenseIntro.aspx 
 
IIHS. (2012). They’re working: Insurance collision claims data show which new technologies are 
preventing crashes. Status Report, 47. Retrieved from 
www.iihs.org/iihs/sr/statusreport/article/47/5/1 
 
IIHS. (2014a). Teenagers: State laws. Retrieved from 
www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/laws/graduatedlicenseintro?topicName=teenagers 
 
IIHS. (2014b). Distracted driving: State laws. Retrieved from 
www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/laws/cellphonelaws?topicName=distracted-driving 
 
Ishigami, Y., & Klein, R. M. (2009). Is a hands-free phone safer than a handheld phone? Journal 
of Safety Research, 40, 157-164. 
 
Keating, D. P. (2007). Understanding adolescent development: Implications for driving safety. 
Journal of Safety Research, 38, 147-157. 
 
Klauer, S. G., Dingus, T. A., Neale, V. L., Sudweeks, J. D., & Ramsey, D. J. (2006). The impact 
of driver inattention on near-crash/crash risk: An analysis using the 100-car naturalistic driving 
study data (Report No. DOT HS 810 594). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/NRD/Multimedia/PDFs/Crash%20Avoidance/Driver%20Distracti 
on/810594.pdf 
 
Klauer, S. G., Guo, F., Simons-Morton, B. G., Ouimet, M. C., Lee, S. E., & Dingus, T. A. 
(2014). Distracted driving and risk of road crashes among novice and experienced drivers. The 
New England Journal of Medicine, 370, 54-59.  
 
Lansdown, T.C. (2002). Individual differences during driver secondary task performance: 
Verbal protocol and visual allocation findings. Accident Analysis and Prevention¸ 34, 655-662. 
 
Lennon, R., Rentfro, R., & O’Leary, B. (2010). Social marketing and distracted driving 
behaviors among young adults: The effectiveness of fear appeals. Academy of Marketing Studies, 
14, 95–113. 
 
Marcoux, K. D., Valnaar, W. G. M., & Robertson, R. D. (2012). The Road Safety Monitor 2012: 
Distracted driving trends. Retrieved from the TIRF website: 
www.tirf.ca/publications/PDF_publications/RSM_2011_Distracted_Driving_Eng_3.pdf 
 
May, J. F., & Baldwin, C. L. (2009). Driver fatigue: The importance of identifying causal factors 
of fatigue when considering detection and countermeasure technologies. Transportation 
Research Part F, 12, 218-224. 
 
McCartt, A. T., Hellinga, L. A., & Braitman, K. A. (2006). Cell phones and driving: Review of 
research. Traffic Injury Prevention, 7, 89-106. 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 30 
 
McCartt, A. T., & Hellinga, L. A., Strouse, L. M., & Farmer, C. M. (2010). Long-term effects of 
handheld cell phone laws on driver handheld cell phone use. Traffic Injury Prevention, 11, 133- 
141. 
 
McEvoy, S. P. Stevenson, M. R., McCartt, A. T., Woodward, M., Haworth, C., Palamara, P., & 
Cercarelli, R. (2005). Role of mobile phones in motor vehicle crashes resulting in hospital 
attendance: A case-crossover study. British Medical Journal, 331, 428-434. 
 
National Center for Statistics and Analysis. (2015). Traffic Safety Facts, Research Note: 
Distracted Driving 2013. (Report No. DOT HS 812 132). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812132.pdf  
 
National Cooperative Highway Research Program. (2005). A guide for addressing collisions 
involving distracted or fatigued drivers. Retrieved from the TRB website: 
onlinepubs.trb.org/Onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v14.pdf 
 
NCHRP. (2007). A guide for reducing collisions involving young drivers. Retrieved from the 
TRB website: onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v19.pdf 
 
National Conference of State Legislatures. (2014). Traffic safety trends: State legislative action 
2013. Retrieved from www.ncsl.org/documents/transportation/2013Trafficsafetytrends.pdf 
 
Nelson, T. F., Isaac, N. E., & Graham, J. D. (2001). Development and testing of countermeasures 
for fatigue related highway crashes. Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/drowsy_driving1/listening/title.htm#title 
 
Nguen, L. T., Jauregui, B., & Dinges, D. F. (1998). Changing behaviors to prevent drowsy 
driving and promote traffic safety: Review of proven, promising, and unproven techniques. 
Retrieved from the AAA Foundation website: www.aaafoundation.org/pdf/drowsydriving.pdf 
 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. (2001). Drowsy driving and automobile 
crashes. Retrieved from www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/ 
pdf/808707.pdf  
 
NHTSA. (2010a). Overview of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration’s driver 
distraction program (Report No. DOT HS 811 299). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/distracted_driving/pdf/811299.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2010b). Sample law to prohibit texting while driving. Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/rulemaking/pdf/Texting_Law_021910.pdf 
 
 
NHTSA. (2011). Drowsy driving (Report No. DOT HS 811 449). Retrieved from www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811449.pdf  
 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 31 
NHTSA. (2012). Blueprint for ending distracted driving (Report No. DOT HS 811 629). 
Retrieved from www.distraction.gov/download/campaign- materials/8747-811629-060712-v5-
Opt1-Web-tag.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2014). Traffic safety facts, research note: Driver electronic device use in 2012 (Report 
No. DOT HS 811 884). Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811884.pdf 
 
Nikolaev, A. G., Robbins M. J., & Jacobson, S. H. (2010). Evaluating the impact of legislation 
prohibiting hand-held cell phone use while driving. Transportations Research Part A, 44, 182- 
193. 
 
National Safety Council. (2012). Employer liability and the case for comprehensive cell phone 
policies. Retrieved from 
www.nsc.org/safety_road/Distracted_Driving/Documents/CorpLiability_wp.pdf 
 
National Sleep Foundation. (2004). Drive Alert - Arrive Alive national campaign. Washington, 
DC: Author. 
 
NSF. (2008). 2008 “Sleep in America” poll.Retrieved from 
www.sleepfoundation.org/sites/default/files/2008%20POLL%20SOF.PDF 
 
NSF. (2009a). Obstructive sleep apnea and sleep. Retrieved from 
www.sleepfoundation.org/article/sleep-related-problems/obstructive-sleep-apnea-and-sleep 
 
NSF. (2009b). Narcolepsy and sleep. Retrieved from www.sleepfoundation.org/article/sleep-
related-problems/narcolepsy-and-sleep 
 
Olson, R. L., Hanowski, R. J., Hickman, J. S., & Bocanegra, J. (2009). Driver distraction in 
commercial vehicle operations (Report No. FMCSA-RRR-09-042). Retrieved from the FMCSA 
website: www.fmcsa.dot.gov/sites/fmcsa.dot.gov/files/docs/FMCSA-RRR-09-042.pdf 
 
Papadelis, C., Chen, Z., Kourtidou-Papadeli, C., Bamidis, P. D., Chouvarda, I., Bekiaris, E., & 
Maglaveras, N. (2007). Monitoring sleepiness with on-board electrophysiological recordings for 
preventing sleep-deprived traffic accidents. Clinical Neurophysiology, 118, 1906-1922. 
 
Ranney, T. A. (2008). Driver distraction: A review of the current state-of-knowledge (Report 
No. DOT HS 810 787). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/NRD/Multimedia/PDFs/Crash%20Avoidance/2008/810787.pdf 
 
Redelmeier, D. A., & Tibshirani, R. J. Association between cellular telephone calls and motor 
vehicle collisions. The New England Journal of Medicine, 336, 453-458. 
 
Royal, D. (2003). National survey of distracted and drowsy driving attitudes and behavior: 2002 
volume I: Findings (Report No. DOT HS 809 566). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/drowsy_driving1/survey-distractive03/index.htm 
 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 32 
Sassani, A., Findley, L. J., Kryger, M., Goldlust, E., George, C., & Davidson, T. M. (2004). 
Reducing motor-vehicle collisions, costs, and fatalities by treating obstructive sleep apnea 
syndrome. Sleep, 27, 453-458. 
 
Sahayadhas, A., Sundaraj, K., & Murugappan, M. (2012). Detecting driver drowsiness based on 
sensors: A review. Sensors, 12, 16937-16953. 
 
Schick, A., Vegega, M., & Chaudhary, N. (2014). Distracted driving high-visibility enforcement 
demonstrations in California and Delaware (Report No. DOT HS 811 993). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811993DistractedDrivingHighVisibility 
Enforcement_CA-DE-TT.pdf 
 
Schroeder, P., Meyers, M., & Kostyniuk, L. (2013). National survey on distracted driving 
attitudes and behaviors – 2012 (Report No. DOT HS 811 729). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811729.pdf 
 
Smolensky, M. H., Di Milia, L., Ohayon, M. M., & Philip, P. (2011). Sleep disorders, medical 
conditions, and road accident risk. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 43, 533-548. 
 
Stutts, J. C., Wilkins, J. W., & Vaughn, B. V. (1999). Why do people have drowsy driving 
crashes? Input from drivers who just did. Retrieved from the AAA Foundation website: 
www.aaafoundation.org/pdf/Sleep.pdf 
 
Swanson, L. M., Drake, C., & Arnedt, J. T. (2012). Employment and drowsy driving: A survey 
of American workers. Behavioral Sleep Medicine, 10, 250-257. 
 
Tefft, B. C. (2012). Prevalence of motor vehicle crashes involving drowsy drivers, United States, 
1999-2008. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 45, 180-186. 
 
Teran-Santos, J., Jiminez-Gomez, A., & Cordero-Guevara, J. (1999). The association between 
sleep apnea and the risk of traffic accidents. The New England Journal of Medicine, 340, 847- 
851. 
 
Traffic Injury Research Foundation (TIRF). (2009). The facts about fatigued driving in Ontario: 
A guidebook for police. Retrieved from 
publications/2009_Facts_Fatigue_Driving_Ontario_Police_Guide book.pdf 
 
Vegega, M., Jones, B., & Monk, C. (2013). Understanding the effects of distracted driving and 
developing strategies to reduce resulting deaths and injuries: A report to Congress (Report No. 
DOT HS 812 053). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/UnderstandingEffectsDistractDriving.pdf 
 
Visual-Manual NHTSA Driver Distraction Guidelines for In-Vehicle Electronic Devices, 78 Fed. 
Reg, 24,818 (proposed April 26, 2013).  
 
 Chapter 4. Distracted and Drowsy Driving 
 
4 - 33 
World Heath Organization & NHTSA. (2011). Mobile phone use: A growing problem of driver 
distraction. Retrieved from the WHO website: 
www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/publications/road_traffic/distracted_driving_en.pdf  
 
Williams, A. F. (2007a). Contribution of the components of graduated licensing to crash 
reductions. Journal of Safety Research, 38, 177-184. 
 
Williams, A. F. (2007b). Public information and education in the promotion of highway safety 
(Research Results Digest 322). Retrieved from the TRB website: 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rrd_322.pdf 
 
 
Yager, C. (2013). An evaluation of the effectiveness of voice-to-text programs at reducing 
incidences of distracted driving. Retrieved from the Texas A&M Transportation Institute 
website: http://swutc.tamu.edu/publications/technicalreports/600451-00011-1.pdf 
 
Young, R. A. (2012). Cell phone use and crash risk. Epidemiology, 23, 116-118. 
 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 1 
5. Motorcycle Safety 
 
 
Overview 
 
A motorcycle is inherently more difficult to operate than a passenger vehicle because it requires 
more physical skill. The relationship of speed and balance is also a critical consideration when 
riding a motorcycle, as the stability of a motorcycle is relative to speed. A motorcycle becomes 
more stable as speed increases, although it becomes less maneuverable. At very low speeds, the 
motorcycle rider must balance the motorcycle. 
 
A motorcycle offers the rider little protection in a crash. Crash data confirm this observation. 
NHTSA estimates that per vehicle mile traveled, motorcyclists are about 26 times more likely 
than passenger car occupants to die in traffic crashes. Motorcyclists are killed at a rate of 22.92 
per 100 million vehicle miles traveled (VMT) as compared to 0.86 fatalities per 100 million 
VMT for passenger cars (NCSA, 2015). 
 
Trends. Motorcycling has become increasingly popular over the last 10 years even as total 
vehicle miles traveled has declined. Not surprisingly, there has been a corresponding increase in 
crashes and fatalities involving motorcyclists. From 2000 to 2008, the crash data shows that 
number of motorcyclists killed in crashes increased by 83% and the number of motorcyclists 
injured increased by 92%. In 2008, motorcyclist fatalities increased for the 11th consecutive year 
to a level not seen since 1980 (NHTSA, 2009). Motorcyclist fatalities decreased in 2009, but 
then began rising again. In 2013, there were 4,668 fatalities, a decrease of 6% from 2012 
(NCSA, 2015). Motorcyclists accounted for 14% of total motor vehicle related fatalities during 
2013 (NCSA, 2015). 
 
 
 
Source data: NCSA (2015) 
 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 2 
 
In the 10-year period from 2004 to 2013, over half of motorcyclists injured in crashes were 
injured in single-vehicle crashes (FARS data). Approximately two-thirds (65%) of motorcyclist 
injuries during this time period occurred during daylight hours, more than two-thirds occurred 
during the months from April to September, and almost two-thirds (63%) occurred on weekdays. 
On average, about 85% of those injured were male and about 15% female. And about 9% of 
those injured were passengers. These trends have remained relatively consistent over this 10-year 
period, although there are year-to-year fluctuations. 
 
One trend that is changing is an increase in fatalities and injuries among older motorcyclists. In 
2013, 73% of the motorcyclists killed in crashes were 30 or older and 55% were 40 or older. The 
change in only 10 years is striking: in 2004, 68% were 30 or older and 46% were 40 or older 
(NHTSA, 2015). Similarly, while the number of motorcyclists involved in injury crashes has 
increased among all age groups, injuries among motorcyclists 50 and older have increased at the 
fastest rate. Motorcyclists 50 and older were estimated to account for 28% to 30% of 
motorcyclists injured nationally during 2012 and 2013, compared with 19% during 1998 and 
1999 (FARS data). 
 
Speeding is more prevalent in fatal crashes involving motorcycle operators than among other 
types of motor vehicle operators. Thirty-four percent of all motorcyclists involved in fatal 
crashes in 2013 were speeding, compared to 21% of passenger car drivers (NHTSA, 2015). 
Motorcyclists involved in fatal crashes had worse prior driving records than other passenger 
vehicle drivers, including more DWI convictions, speeding convictions, and suspensions or 
revocations (NHTSA, 2015). In 2013, 28% of the motorcyclists killed in crashes had BACs of 
.08 g/dL or higher (NHTSA, 2015). Forty-one percent of fatally injured motorcyclists were not 
wearing helmets (NHTSA, 2015), although the percentage varies considerably from State to 
State. Additionally, 25% of the motorcyclists involved in crashes in 2012 did not have valid 
motorcycle operator licenses (NHTSA, 2015). 
 
Other trends in motorcycle safety relate to the types of motorcycles being produced and 
purchased. While registrations of all types of motorcycles have increased from 2000 to 2005, 
registrations for supersport type motorcycles, which are built on racing bike frames and reach 
speeds of nearly 190 mph, have climbed even faster. Whereas combined registrations for all 
motorcycle styles were 51% higher in 2005 than in 2000, supersport registrations were 83% 
higher (IIHS, 2007). Fatalities are three to four times higher among registered supersport owners 
as well, but these rates do not control for other possible risk factors (IIHS, 2007; Teoh & 
Campbell, 2010). The more recent IIHS analysis by Teoh and Campbell of 6 years of data also 
found that fatally injured supersport-style motorcycle riders were about twice as likely as 
standard/cruiser riders to have been speeding and half as likely to have been alcohol-impaired, 
after accounting for rider age and gender. These results suggest that the types of risks taken may 
vary in association with the style of bike chosen (Teoh & Campbell, 2010). Supersport riders 
also tend to be younger. In 2005, the average age was 27 among those fatally injured while 
riding these bikes, compared to an average age of 44 for cruiser and standard motorcycles (IIHS, 
2007). 
 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 3 
Another emerging trend is the increased use of low-powered cycles such as mopeds and scooters. 
State laws defining and regulating these vehicles vary significantly by State, making it difficult 
to track trends. While these are different vehicles in terms of their speed and power capabilities 
(most States classify these vehicles based on a maximum speed, generally 25 to 30 mph), most of 
the countermeasures aimed at motorcycles would also apply to low-powered cycles.  
 
 
Strategies to Improve Motorcycle Safety 
 
There are various existing strategies to improve motorcycle safety that have been extensively 
reviewed in published research. Motorcycle riders should be properly trained and licensed. They 
should be alert and aware of the risks they face while riding; in particular, they should not be 
impaired by alcohol. All motorcycle riders should wear motorcycle helmets that meet Federal 
Motor Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS) 218 and clothing that provides both protection and 
visibility. These and other strategies are discussed in the National Agenda for Motorcycle Safety 
(NAMS), a comprehensive, collaborative, and multidisciplinary blueprint for motorcycle safety 
(NHTSA, 2000a). The recommendations of the NAMS were prioritized in 2013 (NHTSA, 2013). 
See also the NAMS Implementation Guide (NHTSA, 2006a), NHTSA’s Motorcycle Safety 
Program Plan (NHTSA, 2006b), the U.S. DOT Action Plan to Reduce Motorcycle Fatalities 
(U.S. DOT, 2007), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Motorcycle Safety Guide 
(CDC, 2011). In addition, a review of State Motorcycle Safety Program Technical Assessments 
summarizes program recommendations, implementations, and barriers to implementation from 9 
State motorcycle safety program technical assessments conducted by NHTSA (Baer & Skemer, 
2009). 
 
The most important demonstrable objectives for improving motorcycle safety are to increase 
helmet use, reduce alcohol-impaired motorcycle riding, increase proper licensing, and promote 
lifelong learning through the completion of rider training courses. These objectives are all 
difficult to accomplish. Universal helmet laws are extremely effective in assuring that virtually 
all motorcycle riders use helmets, but they also are politically difficult to enact and retain. 
Strategies using only communications and outreach to promote helmet use, reduce impaired 
motorcycling, and increase licensing appear to have been no more successful with motorcycle 
riders than with other drivers. 
 
Another objective is to increase other motorists’ awareness of motorcyclists by increasing the 
visibility of motorcyclists and by educating other drivers on the importance of sharing the road 
with motorcycles. Daytime running lights for motorcycles improve motorcycle conspicuity. Most 
motorcycles on the road have headlights that turn on automatically when the engines are started 
(NCHRP, 2008, Strategy 11.1 D2). In addition, 23 States require daytime headlight use for all 
motorcycles manufactured since 1980 (and Pennsylvania requires daytime headlight use for 
motorcycles manufactured since 1986; MSF, 2014). Modulating headlights, which cause the 
headlight to move from high- to low beam rapidly, also increase motorcycle visibility (Olson, 
Halstead-Nussloch, & Sivak, 1979), but integration of these devices into the motorcycle fleet has 
been slow. Vehicle technologies such as antilock brakes also have the potential to enhance 
motorcycle safety (Bayly, Regan, & Hosking, 2006). For example, two studies by IIHS found 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 4 
that motorcycles with antilock brakes had a lower fatal crash involvement than motorcycles 
without antilock brakes (Teoh, 2011, 2013). 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 5 
 
Resources 
 
Many environmental factors can also affect motorcycle safety. Slippery roadway surfaces and 
markings, surface irregularities and debris, unpaved shoulders, and unforgiving roadway barriers 
all can be dangerous. These issues are not included in this guide because State Highway Safety 
Offices have little or no authority or responsibility for them. Also, this guide does not include 
administrative or management countermeasures such as traffic safety data systems and analyses, 
program planning and assessments, State and community task forces, or comprehensive multi-
pronged community traffic safety strategies. See National Cooperative Highway Safety Research 
Report 500, Volume 22 Guide for Addressing Collisions Involving Motorcycles, for a thorough 
discussion of environmental and other strategies: 
www.trb.org/Publications/Public/Blurbs/A_Guide_for_Addressing_Collisions_Involving_Motor
c_160626.aspx 
 
For a broad set of resources for State safety agencies and on-going research efforts:  
• Government Accountability Office’s Report to Congressional Committees – 
www.gao.gov/assets/660/650037.pdf 
• Guide to Community Preventive Services Community Guide: Use of Motorcycle Helmets 
– www.thecommunityguide.org/mvoi/motorcyclehelmets/index.html 
 
NHTSA’s web pages: 
• Motorcycles - www.nhtsa.gov/Safety/Motorcycles 
• Research and Evaluation - www.nhtsa.gov/Research/Behavioral+Research 
• Behavioral Safety Research Reports - 
http://ntlsearch.bts.gov/repository/ntlc/nhtsa/index.shtm 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 6 
Countermeasures That Work 
 
Countermeasures to improve motorcycle safety are listed below and discussed individually in 
this chapter. The table is intended to give a rough estimate of each countermeasure’s 
effectiveness, use, cost, and time required for implementation. The symbols and terms used are 
described below. Effectiveness, cost, and time to implement can vary substantially from State to 
State and community to community. Costs for many countermeasures are difficult to measure, so 
the summary terms are very approximate. See each countermeasure discussion for more 
information. 
 
1. Motorcycle Helmets 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
1.1 Universal coverage State motorcycle 
helmet use laws 
 
$ 
Medium 
Short 
1.2 Helmet use promotion programs 
 
Varies 
Unknown 
Varies 
1.3 Helmet law enforcement; noncompliant 
helmets 
 
$ 
Unknown 
Medium 
 
2. Alcohol Impairment 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
2.1 Alcohol impairment: detection, 
enforcement, and sanctions 
 
Varies 
Unknown 
Varies 
2.2 Alcohol impairment: communications 
 
$$ 
Medium 
Medium 
 
3. Motorcycle Rider Licensing and Training 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
3.1 Motorcycle rider licensing 
 
$ 
High 
Medium 
3.2 Motorcycle rider training 
 
$$ 
High 
Varies 
 
4. Communications and Outreach 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
4.1 Conspicuity and protective clothing 
 
Varies 
High 
Medium 
4.2 Other driver awareness of motorcyclists 
 
Varies 
High 
Medium 
 
Effectiveness: 
- Demonstrated to be effective by several high-quality evaluations with 
consistent results 
- Demonstrated to be effective in certain situations 
- Likely to be effective based on balance of evidence from high-quality evaluations 
or other sources 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 7 
- Effectiveness still undetermined; different methods of implementing this 
countermeasure produce different results 
- Limited or no high-quality evaluation evidence 
 
Effectiveness is measured by reductions in crashes or injuries unless noted otherwise. See 
individual countermeasure descriptions for information on effectiveness size and how 
effectiveness is measured. 
 
Cost to implement: 
$$$: requires extensive new facilities, staff, equipment, or publicity, or makes heavy 
demands on current resources 
$$: requires some additional staff time, equipment, facilities, and/or publicity 
$: can be implemented with current staff, perhaps with training; limited costs for equipment 
or facilities 
 
These estimates do not include the costs of enacting legislation or establishing policies. 
 
Use: 
High: more than two-thirds of the States, or a substantial majority of communities 
Medium: between one-third and two-thirds of States or communities 
Low: fewer than one-third of the States or communities 
Unknown: data not available 
 
Time to implement: 
Long: more than one year 
Medium: more than three months but less than one year 
Short: three months or less 
 
These estimates do not include the time required to enact legislation or establish policies. 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 8 
1. Motorcycle Helmets 
 
1.1 Universal Coverage State Motorcycle Helmet Use Laws 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Short 
 
Motorcycle helmets are highly effective in protecting motorcycle riders’ heads in a crash. 
Research indicates that helmets reduce motorcycle rider fatalities by 22 to 42% and brain injuries 
by 41 to 69% (Coben, Steiner, & Miller, 2007; Cummings, Rivara, Olson, & Smith, 2006; 
Deuterman, 2004; Liu, Ivers, Norton, Blows, & Lo, 2008; NHTSA, 2003; NHTSA, 2006a). A 
Cochrane Collaboration review of 61 studies concluded that risk reductions were on the high end 
of the ranges mentioned above, with higher quality studies indicating that the protective effect of 
helmets was about a 42% reduction in risk of fatality in a crash and 69% for risk of a head injury 
in a crash. This review found that there was insufficient evidence to determine the effect on neck 
or facial injuries, or the effects of various types of FMVSS 218 compliant helmets on injury 
outcomes (Liu et al., 2008). Others have found no evidence that helmets increase the risk of neck 
injuries (Brewer et al., 2013; NCHRP, 2008, Strategy E1; NHTSA, 2000a; Philip et al., 2013; 
Ulmer & Preusser, 2003).  
 
State universal coverage helmet-use laws are effective at increasing helmet use. In 2013, 
observed compliant helmet use was 89% across States with universal helmet laws that cover all 
riders, and 48% across States with no law or laws covering only young riders (Pickrell & Choi, 
2015). A systematic review of U.S. motorcycle helmet laws found that States with universal 
coverage laws: (1) had motorcycle helmet use rates 53 percentage points higher than States with 
partial coverage or no law; (2) had 29% fewer deaths; and (3) had lower fatality rates per 
registered motorcycle and per vehicle mile traveled (Guide to Community Preventive Services, 
2013).  
 
Nationally in 2013, DOT-compliant helmet use increased to 64%, and use of noncompliant 
helmets decreased from 7% in 2013 to 5% in 2014 (Pickrell & Choi, 2015). Additionally, helmet 
non-use decreased slightly from 33% in 2013 to 31% in 2014 (Pickrell & Choi, 2015). 
 
The first universal helmet law was enacted in 1966. Universal laws were in effect in 47 States 
and the District of Columbia by 1975. After Federal penalties were eliminated in 1975 for States 
failing to have a universal law, about half the States repealed their laws. Several States have 
enacted or repealed helmet laws since then. The IIHS (2014) summarizes the helmet law history 
in each State. 
 
Use: As of June 2015, 19 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin and 
Northern Mariana Islands had helmet laws covering all riders. Three States (Illinois, Iowa, and 
New Hampshire) did not have motorcycle helmet laws (GHSA, 2015; IIHS, 2015). Guam and 
most other States had laws covering only riders under a specified age, typically 18 or 21 (GHSA, 
2015; IIHS, 2015). The motorcycle helmet laws of 23 States also apply to all low-powered 
cycles. Twenty-five States and the District of Columbia have motorcycle helmet laws that cover 
some low-powered cycles, typically those with engine displacements under 50cc (IIHS, 2015). 
 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 9 
Effectiveness: Studies of helmet use among motorcyclists indicate that universal helmet use 
laws are effective in increasing helmet use, which reduces injuries, decreases hospital 
admissions and treatment costs, and lowers insurance claims. Studies in States that enacted 
universal helmet laws observed use rates of 90% or higher immediately after the laws became 
effective, compared to 50% or lower before the laws (Ulmer & Preusser, 2003, Section II). States 
that repealed universal helmet laws observed the opposite effect, as use rates dropped from 
above 90% to about 50% (Kyrychenko & McCartt, 2006; Preusser, Hedlund, & Ulmer, 2000, 
Section V; Ulmer & Preusser, 2003, Sections IV and V). Reenactment of a universal law in 
Louisiana (after a cycle of repeals and reenactments since 1968) resulted in an increase in use 
among riders involved in crashes, from 42% before reenactment to 87% following (Gilbert, 
Chaudhary, Solomon, Preusser, & Cosgrove, 2008). 
 
The Community Preventive Services Task Force conducted a systematic review of 69 studies 
(through August 2012) evaluating motorcycle helmet laws in the United States. It found that 
universal coverage motorcycle helmet laws consistently increased helmet use and decreased 
injuries and deaths associated with motorcycling. The Task Force concluded that universal 
coverage laws were substantially more effective than partial coverage laws or no law (Guide to 
Community Preventive Services, 2013).  
 
The U.S. General Accountability Office (GAO) reviewed 46 methodologically sound studies of 
State helmet laws published before 1990. GAO concluded that motorcycle rider fatality rates 
were 20 to 40% lower with universal helmet laws (GAO, 1991; Ulmer & Preusser, 2003, Section 
II). Studies since 1990 confirm these results (Cummings et al., 2006; Houston & Richardson, 
2008; Kyrychenko & McCartt, 2006; Morris, 2006; Ulmer & Northrup, 2005; Ulmer & Preusser, 
2003, Section II).  
 
Some States have helmet laws that only cover young riders. Helmet use is generally low in these 
States (GAO, 1991), and non-comprehensive laws do not translate into meaningful reductions in 
young rider fatalities rates (Brooks et al., 2010; Houston, 2007). Additionally, Weiss, Agimi, and 
Steiner (2010) compared the risk of traumatic brain injury among youth in States with limited- 
age helmet laws and States with universal helmet laws. They found a 37% increase in risk of 
traumatic brain injury requiring hospitalization for youth in States with partial coverage helmet 
laws compared to States with universal helmet laws. A reduction in fatality rates among all ages 
was estimated for partial coverage laws compared to no law by Houston & Richardson (2008), 
but the effect was much smaller (7% to 8%) than that for universal coverage (22% to 33%). 
Moreover, when Florida eliminated the requirement that all motorcycle riders 21 and older wear 
helmets, there was an 81% increase in motorcyclist fatalities (Ulmer & Northrup, 2005). 
Fatalities even increased among riders under 21 who were still covered by the helmet law. 
 
Hospital admissions and treatment costs have also increased following repeal of universal helmet 
laws (Derrick & Faucher, 2009; GAO, 1991). Almost half of all motorcyclists admitted to 
hospitals lacked sufficient health care insurance or were covered by government services, so the 
public ultimately shares many of these costs, as well as a greater long-term burden of care 
(Derrick & Faucher, 2009; GAO, 1991). In addition, an analysis of insurance claims data found 
that when Michigan’s helmet law was amended from a universal coverage law to a partial 
coverage law, claims increased by more than 22% compared with control States (HLDI, 2013). 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 10 
The Community Preventive Services Task Force found in their systematic review of 22 studies 
that universal coverage motorcycle helmet laws resulted in significant economic benefits (Guide 
to Community Preventive Services, 2013).  
 
The studies show that universal coverage laws provide greater safety and cost benefits than laws 
that cover only a specific age group. 
 
Costs: Once legislation requiring universal helmet use has been enacted, implementation costs 
are minimal. The inevitable controversy surrounding the legislation will help to publicize the 
new law extensively. Motorcycle helmet laws can be enforced during regular traffic patrol 
operations because helmet use is easily observed. 
 
Time to implement: Although a universal helmet use law can be implemented as soon as the 
law is enacted, enacting such a law is a complex and time-consuming process. 
 
Other issues: 
• Opposition to motorcycle helmet laws: Any effort to enact a universal helmet law can 
expect immediate, well-coordinated, and highly political opposition (NHTSA, 2003). 
Helmet law opponents claim that helmet laws impinge on individual rights. They also 
claim that helmets interfere with motorcycle riders’ vision or hearing, though research 
shows that these effects are minimal (NHTSA, 1996). See Jones and Bayer (2007) for a 
history of opposition to helmet laws in the United States. Derrick and Faucher (2009) 
also discuss national policy, organized opposition, and helmet law changes over the past 
four decades. 
• Noncompliant helmets: Some riders in States with universal helmet laws wear helmets 
that do not comply with FMVSS 218 (Pickrell & Liu, 2014). See the discussion in 
Chapter 5, Section 1.3. 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 11 
1.2 Motorcycle Helmet Use Promotion Programs 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Varies 
 
A few States without universal motorcycle helmet use laws promote helmet use through 
communications and outreach campaigns. To date, there is little evidence that these efforts to 
educate and promote helmet use among motorcyclists in the absence of universal helmet laws are 
effective, unless the publicity helps to gain enactment of such laws (NCHRP 2008). A parallel 
experience is evident in the efforts to increase seat belt use through educational and promotional 
efforts prior to the enactment of laws requiring seat belt use. Years of educational and 
promotional campaigns did little to increase seat belt use. It was only after laws requiring use 
were enacted that seat belt use began to rise substantially (NCHRP, 2008). 
 
The MSF, GHSA, NHTSA, and other groups encourage helmet use. NHTSA has developed 
helmet use promotion brochures, flyers and public service announcements suitable for television 
and radio that are available online. NCHRP (2008) describes elements that should be included in 
a campaign should one be undertaken. 
 
Use: Baer, Ayotte, and Baldi (2010) distributed self-report surveys to States on their motorcycle 
safety programs and received responses from 45 States. Thirty-three of the 43 States that 
responded to a question on helmet use promotion, both with and without helmet laws, indicated 
they actively promote helmet use, but the nature and extent of these promotions is unknown. 
Only one State reported using paid broadcast media spots. 
 
Effectiveness: There appear to be no formal evaluations of the effect of helmet use promotion 
programs in States without universal helmet laws (NCHRP, 2008). However, helmet use remains 
substantially lower in States without universal helmet laws than in States with such laws 
(Pickrell, & Liu, 2014). 
 
Costs: Good communications and outreach campaigns can be expensive to develop and 
implement: see Chapter 2, Section 3.1. Helmet use promotion material is available from various 
sources including MSF, NHTSA (2003), and from States that have conducted these campaigns. 
 
Time to implement: A proper campaign, including market research, material development, and 
message placement, will require at least 6 months to plan and implement. Baseline data and post-
campaign evaluation can require an additional 6 months or longer.  
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 12 
1.3 Motorcycle Helmet Law Enforcement: Noncompliant Helmets 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Medium 
 
Law enforcement officers in universal helmet law States easily can observe and cite motorcycle 
riders who are not wearing helmets. This likely explains why helmet use rates are high in 
universal helmet law States (Chapter 5, Section 1.1). In addition, many States require 
motorcyclists to wear helmets that comply with FMVSS 218, and Federal regulations require all 
motorcycle helmets sold in the United States to meet or exceed the FMVSS 218 standards. 
Helmets that do not meet the FMVSS 218 performance requirements are considered 
noncompliant. The prioritized recommendations of the National Agenda for Motorcycle Safety 
lists effective strategies to increase the use of FMVSS 218-compliant helmets as a high priority 
item (NHTSA, 2013b). Use of noncompliant helmets by all riders decreased from 7% in 2013 to 
5% in 2014 according to a nationally representative observational survey of helmet use (Pickrell 
& Choi, 2015). Use of compliant helmets increased to 64%. 
 
Motorcycle riders wearing noncompliant helmets are essentially no safer than if they wore no 
helmets at all. NHTSA tested a number of non-compliant helmets and found that the energy 
allowed to transfer to the head by the non-compliant helmet gave a 100 percent probability of 
fatal head injuries (NHTSA, 2007b). In addition to offering no energy-absorbing materials, a 
noncompliant helmet often covers only a portion of the rider’s head and has inadequate or 
unused chin straps so the helmet is not likely to stay on the rider’s head in a crash (NHTSA, 
2007b). A recent study also found that not all compliant helmets provide the same level of 
protection. Brewer et al. (2013) found a reduced risk of injury to motorcyclists wearing full face 
helmets compared to other types of DOT-compliant helmets.  
 
The challenge of motorcycle helmet law enforcement in States requiring FMVSS 218-compliant 
helmets is to actively identify and cite motorcycle riders wearing noncompliant helmets. 
Identifying a noncompliant helmet is easier than proving that it is noncompliant. Some 
noncompliant helmets have spikes or other protrusions, making them fairly easy to identify as 
noncompliant. Compliant helmets are formally identified by a DOT label on the back of the 
helmet. However, counterfeit DOT stickers are easily available and are found on many 
noncompliant helmets (although some noncompliant helmets may have labels that say they are 
novelty helmets and not motorcycle helmets). As a result of these stickers, it is difficult to 
enforce a noncompliant helmet citation in some courts (NHCRP, 2008, Strategy E1). In May 
2011, NHTSA issued a Final Rule (effective May 2013) to strengthen helmet labeling 
requirements and to make it easier to prove that a helmet is noncompliant. For helmet laws to be 
effective, such laws must be vigorously enforced, extensively publicized, and adequately funded. 
NHTSA prepared a video clip for motorcyclists and law enforcement demonstrating how to 
identify compliant and noncompliant helmets and how to choose a helmet that fits properly 
(NHTSA, 2006b). NHTSA also produced a brochure on how to identify noncompliant helmets 
(NHTSA, 2004). 
 
Use: Sixteen of 43 States that reported to Baer, Ayotte, and Baldi (2010) indicated that they 
conduct law enforcement activities to identify and cite noncompliant-helmet wearers, but only 
States having universal helmet laws would implement such programs (19 States and the District 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 13 
of Columbia as of June 2015; GHSA, 2015; IIHS, 2015). In 2007, the New York State Police 
pilot-tested a motorcycle safety checkpoint enforcement program. In the pilot effort, 225 
motorcycles of 280 passing through the checkpoint were inspected. Traffic citations were issued 
to 104 motorcyclists; the most common citation (41 issued) was for operating with a non-
compliant helmet (Salmon, 2008). 
 
Effectiveness: The effectiveness of an active helmet law enforcement program on noncompliant 
helmet use has not been evaluated. 
 
Costs: Since helmet laws can be enforced during regular traffic patrols, the only costs will be for 
training law enforcement officers, prosecutors, and judges to identify noncompliant helmets. 
 
Time to implement: An active helmet-law enforcement program requires planning an effective 
enforcement strategy, training law enforcement officers to identify noncompliant helmets and to 
carry out the enforcement, and training for prosecutors and judges to assure that citations will be 
prosecuted and adjudicated. This training can require 4 to 6 months to implement. Publications 
are available to help with non-compliant helmet identification, but other program aspects and 
training may need to be developed or adapted. These elements may require 6 months or longer.  
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 14 
2. Alcohol Impairment 
 
2.1 Alcohol-Impaired Motorcyclists: Detection, Enforcement, and Sanctions 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Varies 
 
Alcohol impairment is a substantial problem for motorcyclists, even more than for drivers of 
other motor vehicles. In 2013, 27% of motorcycle riders involved in fatal crashes had BACs of 
.08 or higher, which is higher than passenger car drivers (23%) and light-truck drivers (21%) 
(NHTSA, 2015). Even higher proportions of fatally injured 35- to 49-year-old riders had BACs 
of .08 or higher (33% for riders 35 to 39, 40% for riders 40 to 44, 40% for riders 45 to 49; 
NHTSA, 2015). An additional 7% of motorcycle riders in fatal crashes had at least some 
measurable level of alcohol in their blood (BAC .01 to .07 g/dL). Fatally injured motorcycle 
riders with BAC levels .08 g/dL or higher were less likely to wear helmets than were sober riders 
(NHTSA, 2015). Furthermore, in 2013 40% of riders killed in single-vehicle crashes had BACs 
of .08 or above, and on weekend nights this figure climbed to 63% (FARS data). The 2007 
National Roadside Survey similarly found that 5.6% of motorcycle riders on weekend nights had 
BACs of .08 or above, as compared to 2.3% of passenger vehicle drivers (Lacey et al., 2009a). 
 
Motorcyclists are included in and affected by the comprehensive strategies to reduce alcohol- 
impaired driving discussed in detail in Chapter 1. However, some law enforcement and sanction 
strategies may be especially useful for motorcyclists, while others may be less effective. 
 
Law enforcement officers on traffic patrol use characteristic driving behaviors, or cues, to 
identify drivers who may be impaired by alcohol. Some of the cues for motorcycle riders, such as 
trouble maintaining balance at a stop, are different from those for cars and trucks. Stuster (1993) 
identified and validated 14 cues useful for identifying alcohol-impaired motorcycle riders. 
NHTSA prepared a brochure, a law enforcement training video, and a pocket detection guide 
discussing the cues (NHTSA, 2000b). The cues for motorcycle riders are part of the Standardized 
Field Sobriety Tests training given to all law enforcement officers. 
 
Vehicle impoundment or forfeiture can be an effective deterrent to drinking and driving for all 
drivers (see Chapter 1, Section 4.3). It may be even more effective for motorcyclists. Research 
by Becker, McKnight, Nelkin, and Piper (2003) confirmed earlier findings that many 
motorcyclists do not find traditional impaired driving sanctions such as fines and license 
suspension to be effective deterrents, although self-reported beliefs may not reflect actual 
effectiveness of these other sanctions. However, motorcyclists tended to be highly concerned for 
the safety and security of their motorcycles. 
 
These findings suggest a potentially effective strategy to reduce alcohol-impaired motorcycling: 
high visibility enforcement using officers trained in identifying impaired motorcycle riders and 
other motor vehicle drivers, with offender sanctions including vehicle impoundment or 
forfeiture. This strategy would treat motorcyclists on an equal footing with other vehicle drivers 
in impaired-driving enforcement and publicity. 
 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 15 
Use: Thirty-two of 43 responding States reported having programs to focus on spotting impaired 
motorcyclists or on enforcing laws related to operating motorcycles while impaired (Baer et al., 
2010). NHTSA (2006a) provides examples and links of State programs that distribute the 
NHTSA cue cards and brochures widely to law enforcement (Illinois), present this information in 
a web-based seminar for officers (Minnesota), and regularly establish high visibility law 
enforcement presence at major rider events (Ohio, Wisconsin). 
 
Effectiveness: Some agencies have reported some success in using the cues for identifying 
alcohol-impaired motorcycle riders, but no evaluation data on the extent of their use are available 
(NCHRP, 2008, Strategy B3). Although there is limited evidence of the effects of enforcement 
and sanctions on impaired motorcycle riding, sobriety checkpoints and saturation patrols have 
proven to be effective for reducing impaired driving and crashes generally. See Chapter 1 for 
more information on enforcement strategies and other tools. 
 
Costs: Law enforcement training costs are low and training material is available. Enforcement 
itself can be carried out during regular traffic patrol and as part of all impaired driving 
enforcement programs. A major campaign including alcohol-impaired motorcyclists may require 
additional costs for publicity. 
 
Time to implement: Law enforcement training can be conducted quickly. A major campaign 
will require 4 to 6 months to plan and implement. 
 
Other issues: 
• BAC limits: BAC levels as low as .05 g/dL caused some detectable levels of impairment, 
primarily in reaction time, among experienced riders in tests on controlled courses 
(Creaser et al., 2007). Puerto Rico passed a law in 2007 lowering the BAC limit for 
motorcyclists to .02. 
• Drugs other than alcohol: Drugs other than alcohol can impair motorcycle riders. 
Potentially impairing drugs include over-the-counter and prescription medications as well 
as illegal drugs. The 2007 National Roadside Survey reported that 31.9% of nighttime 
weekend motorcycle riders who provided oral fluid and/or blood samples tested positive 
for drugs (illegal drugs or medications), as compared to 16.5% of passenger car drivers 
(Lacey et al., 2009b). The extent to which various drugs impair driving performance or 
contribute to crashes is not well understood, however, for either four-wheeled vehicles or 
for motorcycles. Furthermore, individual differences in metabolism of drugs and level of 
impairment, as well as multiple-drug use complicate the understanding of drug 
impairement on motor vehicle drivers (Compton, Vegega, & Smither, 2009). (See 
Compton et al.’s [2009] Report to Congress on drug-impaired driving for a discussion of 
current knowledge and recommendations for improving States data and records systems 
and statutes.) Law enforcement should consider drugs as potential impairing agents for 
motorcycle riders just as for other vehicle operators. See also Chapter 1, Section 7 on 
drug-impaired driving. 
• Targeted enforcement: As with other crash problems, better identification of problem 
areas (either impaired riding or impaired riding crashes) and targeting enforcement to 
such locations, events, or times could improve enforcement effectiveness. 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 16 
2.2 Alcohol-Impaired Motorcyclists: Communications and Outreach 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Medium 
 
Many States have conducted communications and outreach campaigns directed at drinking and 
riding. See NHTSA (2006a) and NCHRP (2008, Strategy B1) for more information and links. 
Organizations including AMA and MSF have produced campaigns and material on drinking and 
riding. See NHTSA (2006a) and NCHRP (2008) for strategies for implementation, examples, 
and links to materials. There are few evaluations of the effectiveness of any of these campaigns 
at any level, from awareness to knowledge and attitude change to any effect on motorcyclists’ 
drinking and riding behavior. The experience of drinking and driving campaigns directed at all 
drivers suggests that they are unlikely to have a positive effect unless they are carefully 
researched and planned, well-funded, well executed, achieve high levels of target audience 
exposure (perhaps using paid advertising), use high-quality messages that are pre-tested for 
effectiveness, and are conducted in conjunction with enforcement activities directed at impaired 
motorcyclists. See Chapter 1, Section 5.2, for further discussion. 
 
A focus group study (Becker et al., 2003) examined motorcyclists’ attitudes, beliefs, and 
behaviors regarding drinking and riding. It concluded that many motorcyclists have strong 
feelings of freedom, independence, and individual responsibility and believe that drinking 
motorcyclists endanger only themselves. Consequently, they believe that government efforts to 
discourage drinking and riding are inappropriate. These beliefs also limit some motorcyclists’ 
willingness to take actions to prevent others from riding while impaired. 
 
A program, “Riders Helping Riders,” targets the expressed willingness of some motorcycle 
riders to help other riders by encouraging them to intervene to prevent other motorcycle riders 
from riding impaired and to create a stronger safety culture among motorcyclists. This program 
is based on the beliefs and attitudes of riders from focus group research (McKnight & Becker 
2007a, 2007b; McKnight, Becker, & Tippetts, 2008), and is available on a CD for individual and 
group use. The material was pilot-tested in Georgia. Riders’ attitudes and intentions toward 
intervening seemed to improve based on surveys taken before and immediately after training. 
Longer-term evidence of attitude change, interventions actually carried out, or definitive safety 
effects from behavioral changes will require exposure to large numbers of riders and longer 
follow-up of crashes (McKnight et al., 2008McKnight, Becker, & Tippetts, 2008). 
 
Another program called “Green-Yellow-Red” was recently developed and tested in Wisconsin 
(Aguilar & Delehanty, 2009). The campaign sought to educate motorcycle riders about the 
dangers of drinking and riding, encourage them to make safer choices, and provide impaired 
motorcycle riders with secure storage of their motorcycles so that they could find safe transport 
home. A coalition was established that included motorcycle riders, tavern owners, law 
enforcement, and local businesses, and substantial media attention was obtained at the program 
kick-off. While there is evidence that riders were willing to leave their motorcycles in secure 
storage containers, only small changes in rider behavior and alcohol-related motorcycle crashes 
were observed following the program (Aguilar & Delehanty, 2009). 
  
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 17 
Rider groups can play critical roles in planning and implementing activities to reduce drinking 
and riding. Some State and local rider groups sponsor alcohol-free events or adopt alcohol-free 
policies. As examples, the Fox Valley, Wisconsin, Harley Owners Group (H.O.G.) chapter has 
an alcohol-free policy for all organized rides and Illinois American Bikers Aimed Toward 
Education (ABATE) sponsors alcohol-free rides (NHTSA, 2006a, Section 1). 
 
Use: Many States have conducted anti-drinking-and-riding campaigns (NHTSA, 2006a; 
NCHRP, 2008, Strategy C1), but the total number of States that have done so is unknown. Some 
examples of States campaigns include Connecticut’s “Open the Throttle, Not the Bottle” and 
Minnesota’s “Drinking and Riding: A Really Bad Idea.” Many other States have brochures and 
other material. It also is not known how many States have included messages directed to 
motorcyclists in their overall alcohol-impaired driving campaigns. However, motorcycle riders 
are now included in the “Drunk Driving. Over the Limit. Under Arrest” paid media spots. 
NHTSA administers Incentive Grants for States that apply and meet regulatory criteria for 
programs that prevent impaired riding. 
 
Effectiveness: There are no evaluations of the safety effectiveness of any drinking and riding 
campaigns. 
 
Costs: A good campaign will require substantial funds to conduct market research, design and 
test messages, and place campaign material where it will reach motorcyclists frequently. 
 
Time to implement: A substantive campaign will require at least 12 months to research, design, 
test, and implement. A vigorous implementation will require a significant duration in order to be 
effective.
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 18 
3. Motorcycle Rider Licensing and Training 
 
3.1 Motorcycle Rider Licensing 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
 
All 50 States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico require motorcycle riders to obtain a 
motorcycle operator license or endorsement before they ride on public highways (MSF, 2012). 
The goal of licensing is to assure that motorcycle riders have the minimum skills needed to 
operate motorcycles safely (NHTSA, 2000a). 
 
State motorcycle licensing practices vary substantially. Most States have learner’s permits 
requiring only vision and/or knowledge tests. A motorcycle rider with a learner’s permit can ride 
only in restricted circumstances, typically some combination of no passengers, only during 
daylight hours, and only with the supervision of a fully licensed motorcyclist. A riding skills test 
is required for full licensure (Alabama does not require a skills test for licensure). Two-thirds of 
the States use one of three tests developed by the MSF and American Association of Motor 
Vehicle Administrators, while one-third use their own test. Most States will waive the skills test, 
and sometimes the knowledge test, for motorcyclists who have completed approved motorcycle 
rider training courses, if the student passes the knowledge and skills tests administered at the 
conclusion of the course. See Motorcycle Safety Foundation (2012) for a summary of each 
State’s licensing requirements and procedures and NCHRP (2008, Strategy C1) for brief 
summaries of the major skills tests currently in use. 
 
The effectiveness of motorcycle operator licensing is not known. This is perhaps not surprising 
given the variability of licensing tests and procedures. NAMS recommends research to “ensure 
that licensing tests measure skill and behaviors required for crash avoidance” (NHTSA, 2000a). 
NCHRP (2008, Strategies C2 and C3) describes strategies to couple training and licensing to 
help ensure that riders are both trained and obtain the necessary endorsements, but notes that 
there are no evaluations of whether increasing the proportion of motorcycle riders who are 
validly licensed would reduce motorcycle crashes or injuries. 
 
Despite State requirements, many motorcycle riders are not properly licensed. In 2013, 25% of 
motorcycle riders involved in fatal crashes did not have valid motorcycle licenses, compared to 
12% of passenger vehicle drivers who were not properly licensed (NHTSA, 2015). Licensing 
systems in some States provide no incentive to become fully licensed because learner’s permits 
may be renewed indefinitely (NCHRP, 2008, Strategy C3; MSF, 2012). 
 
The Prioritized Recommendations of the NAMS (NHTSA, 2013) recommends the following 
approaches to encourage full licensure: 
• Merge rider education/training and licensing into one-stop operations (Medium Priority) 
• States issue motorcycle endorsements immediately upon course completion (Medium 
priority) 
• Identify and remove barriers to obtaining a motorcycle endorsement (Low Priority) 
• Enforce penalties for improperly licensed riders (Low Priority) 
• Insurance policies should not be valid for improperly licensed riders (Low Priority) 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 19 
• Train license examiners in motorcycle issues (Medium Priority) 
• Develop and evaluate enhanced licensing model using graduated licensing concepts 
(Medium Priority) 
• Research to assure that licensing tests measure crash avoidance skills, behaviors (Low 
Priority) 
 
The NCHRP (2008, Strategy C3) describes how Maryland and Minnesota used some of these 
strategies to increase proper licensing for motorcycle riders. Maryland used the additional 
strategy of comparing their vehicle registration and driver licensing files. A letter was sent to 
each owner of a registered motorcycle who did not have a motorcycle operator’s license. The 
letter reminded each registered owner that a motorcycle endorsement was required of anyone 
operating the registered motorcycle. This quick and inexpensive strategy caused 1,700 owners to 
become licensed within 4 months. A randomized controlled experiment of this intervention 
suggested that while the method did increase licensure, a large percentage remained unlicensed 
(Braver et al., 2007). California also tried this approach with similar licensure results (Limrick & 
Masten, 2013). Effective July 22, 2007, the State of Washington added an authorization to 
impound vehicles operated by drivers without a proper endorsement (including, but not limited 
to, motorcycles). However, an evaluation of the effects of this law did not find a significant 
impact on new or total motorcycle endorsements following implementation of the law 
(McKnight, Billheimer, & Tippetts, 2013). 
 
Maryland and Pennsylvania have “one-stop shops” that provide a motorcycle endorsement 
immediately upon successful completion of a State-approved motorcycle rider training course or 
test, without having to wait after receiving a permit. For Pennsylvania’s procedures, see 
www.pamsp.com/CourseInfo_Basic.aspx. 
 
Baer, Cook, and Baldi (2005) reviewed and summarized each State’s motorcycle education and 
licensing programs and practices. A companion report (Baer, Baldi, & Cook, 2005) describes 
training and licensing programs and actions to promote training and licensing. Under a 
cooperative agreement with NHTSA, AAMVA has updated its Motorcycle Operator Licensing 
System and Integrating Motorcycle Rider Education and Licensing manuals, by publishing the 
Guidelines for Motorcycle Operator Licensing (GMOL). The GMOL provides guidelines for 
State motorcycle licensing programs (Hanchulak & Robinson, 2009). 
 
Use: All States require motorcycle riders to obtain a motorcycle license or endorsement to ride 
on public highways. Less than half of responding States indicated that they enforce laws relating 
to improperly licensed motorcyclists (Baer et al., 2010). 
 
Effectiveness: The effectiveness of current licensing and testing on crashes and safety has not 
been evaluated. An evaluation of a California program to increase licensure among improperly 
licensed motorcycle owners through DMV letters found that while the letters did increase 
licensure, there was no identifiable causal effect on crash involvements or traffic violations 
(Limerick & Masten, 2013). 
 
Costs: Most States charge a small fee for the motorcycle licensing tests (MSF, 2010). The costs 
of changing the licensing tests and procedures depend on the extent of changes and the amount 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 20 
of retraining needed for licensing examiners as well as what portion of costs are covered by 
licensing fees. 
 
Time to implement: Developing new policies to encourage higher rates of full motorcycle 
licensure (including limiting the number of times a provisional license may be renewed, 
administrative practices such as adding testing times and locations, or training motorcycle 
license examiners), or procedures such as waiving the skills test for those who have passed an 
approved training course, would likely require 6 to 12 months to implement. Enforcement of 
motorcycle licensing requirements could occur more readily, if requirements for full licensure 
are clear enough to enforce. 
 
Other issues: 
• Graduated driver licensing (GDL): The NAMS recommended that States enhance 
motorcycle licensing practices by incorporating and evaluating use of GDL concepts 
(NHTSA, 2000a) and ranks it as a medium priority item in the Prioritized 
Recommendations of the National Agenda for Motorcycle Safety (NHTSA, 2013b). 
Additionally, the United States Government Accountability Office recommended 
graduated licensing for motorcyclists as a high priority research item in a 2012 Report to 
Congress (GAO, 2012).  
 
 
Most States employ graduated driver licensing for beginning automobile drivers. Under 
GDL, new drivers must pass through learner’s permit and provisional license stages 
before becoming fully licensed. A learner’s permit allows driving only while supervised 
by a fully licensed driver and a provisional license prohibits unsupervised driving under 
certain conditions, such as at night or with passengers. GDL programs for automobile 
drivers have been shown to be effective in reducing crashes (Hedlund, Shults, & 
Compton, 2003, 2006; Williams, Tefft, & Grabowski, 2012). Evaluations in New 
Zealand and evidence from Quebec suggest that the same may be true for motorcyclists 
(Mayhew & Simpson, 2001). NHTSA’s Guidelines for Motorcycle Operator Licensing 
includes a model graduated licensing program for motorcycle riders (Hanchulak & 
Robinson, 2009). 
 
 
Many States currently place restrictions on motorcycle riders with a learner’s permit or 
younger than a specified age (MSF, 2012). For example, California GDL prohibits 
passengers, freeway riding, and nighttime riding during the learner permit stage and 
requires all people under 21 to complete a motorcycle rider training course offered by the 
California Highway Patrol. In Utah, motorcycle endorsements are restricted to 
motorcycles no larger than the size of the motorcycle used for the skills test, or used 
during the approved State training course (substitute). The endorsement can be changed 
by testing on a larger size motorcycle. 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 21 
3.2 Motorcycle Rider Training 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: High 
Time: Varies 
 
As of 2013, all 50 States offered rider education (MSF, 2013). Sixty percent of the 44 States that 
responded to a survey question from Baer et al. (2010) reported they were able to accommodate 
all riders seeking training within a calendar year. Training also is provided by some rider 
organizations (for example, some ABATE and Gold Wing groups), manufacturers (Harley-
Davidson), the U.S. Military, and others. Many States encourage training either by requiring it 
for all motorcycle operators or those under a specified age, or by waiving some testing 
requirements for motorcycle riders who complete and pass an approved training course (Baer, 
Cook, & Baldi, 2005). Most entry-level training uses the Basic RiderCourse curricula developed 
by the Motorcycle Safety Foundation. The Experienced RiderCourse suite (ERC) is offered to 
riders with some previous experience or for seasoned riders who want additional training; 
however, the ERC represents a very small part of total training provided. 
 
Although training is available, it is not at all clear what constitutes appropriate rider education 
and training, or whether current training reduces crashes. Evidence suggests that in addition to 
teaching motorcycle control skills, programs would better prepare riders if they trained riders to 
recognize potentially hazardous riding situations and encourage riders to assess their own risks 
and limitations, and to ride within those constraints (e.g., Clarke, Ward, Bartle, & Truman, 2007; 
Elliott, Baughan, & Sexton, 2007). NHTSA supported the development of Model National 
Standards for Entry Level Rider Training, released in August 2011. These Model Standards 
recommend content that should be included in all motorcycle rider training courses. States are 
encouraged to go beyond the standards to address State-specific crash needs (NHTSA, 2011). 
 
The NAMS encourages training (NHTSA, 2000a). NHTSA’s Motorcycle Safety Program Plan 
recommends that States conduct frequent and timely education and training at sites that are 
accessible throughout the State (NHTSA, 2006b). NCHRP (2008, Strategy C2) further 
recommends that States evaluate crash experience, compare data and crash scenarios with 
training and licensing practices, and make adjustments as needed to ensure practices are 
effectively targeting crash problems. This effort requires cooperation on the part of multiple 
agencies, including those responsible for collecting and analyzing crash data and those 
responsible for training and licensing.  
 
States should provide motorcycle training on a timely basis to all who wish to take it. See Baer, 
Baldi, and Cook (2005) and NHTSA (2006a) for examples of successful methods to use training 
capacity more effectively, including creative scheduling, centralized on- line registration 
systems, and use of private providers.  
 
Use: Most States offer training to both experienced and beginning motorcycle riders. For more 
information about the features of training and education programs offered by the States, see 
Baer, Ayotte, and Baldi (2010). 
 
Effectiveness: Kardamanidis, Martiniuk, Stevenson, and Thistlethwaite (2010) evaluated the 
results of 23 studies for a Cochrane Review and found conflicting evidence with regard to the 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 22 
effectiveness of motorcycle rider training in reducing crashes or offenses. Due to the poor quality 
of available studies (most of the studies had likely selection and detection bias) the authors were 
unable to draw any conclusions about its effectiveness. However, data suggests that having 
mandatory pre-license training for motorcyclists may reduce crashes and offenses by 
discouraging motorcycle riding, thus limiting exposure. 
 
Costs: Rider training programs are funded in part by the States and in part by fees paid by the 
students who take them. Many States offset some or all of their costs through motorcycle license 
or student registration fees. 
 
Time to implement: Rider training currently is conducted in all States. Training capacity is 
limited by the number of available training sites (a broad expanse of paved surface is required), 
qualified instructors, and motorcycles for students to use during training. Some measures to 
increase capacity can be implemented quickly while others may take 6 to 12 months.  
 
Other issues: 
• Training for other motorcycle configurations (three-wheeled motorcycles and 
motorcycles pulling trailers): Several motorcycle organizations offer courses addressing 
these special motorcycle configurations. These courses have not been evaluated. 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 23 
4. Communications and Outreach 
 
4.1 Communications and Outreach: Conspicuity and Protective Clothing 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
 
Motorcycle riders should wear clothing that provides both protection and visibility. FMVSS 218 
helmets (Chapter 5, Sections 1.1-1.3) with face shields protect the eyes from wind and foreign 
objects in addition to protecting the head in a crash (Brewer et al., 2013). Well-constructed 
jackets, pants, boots, and gloves can prevent abrasions and bruises. If made of impact-resistant 
material, they even may prevent arm and leg fractures or serious torso and spinal cord injuries 
(NHTSA, 2000a). The benefits of protective clothing, in particular protective clothing equipped 
with body armor, was further confirmed by a series of studies of Australian motorcyclists 
involved in crashes (de Rome et al., 2011; de Rome et al., 2012). 
 
A common perception among riders is that a frequent cause of motorcycle crashes involving 
other vehicles is that other vehicle drivers do not see the motorcycle. The 1981 Hurt et al. (1981) 
study from the United States and a 2007 study from the U.K. (Clarke, Ward, Bartle, & Truman, 
2007) report that right-of-way collisions involving other motorists are more frequently the fault 
of the other motorist. Failure of the other motor vehicle driver to perceive the motorcyclist seems 
to occur in a significant portion of these types of crashes (Clarke et al., 2007). One easy way to 
increase motorcycle conspicuity is through continuous headlight use. Most motorcycles 
manufactured since 1979 have headlights that turn on automatically when the vehicle is started 
(NCHRP, 2008, Strategy D2). Additionally, 24 States require daytime headlight use for all 
motorcycles manufactured after a certain date (all at least 20 years ago) (MSF, 2014). 
 
A second way to increase conspicuity is to wear brightly colored clothing, use white or bright- 
colored helmets (for increased visibility during daylight), and incorporate retro-reflective 
materials or devices (for increased visibility at night). Research studies confirm that 
motorcyclists wearing conspicuous clothing or helmets are less likely to be involved in a crash 
(Wells et al., 2004; NCHRP, 2008, Strategy D1). However, many riders choose not to wear 
brightly colored clothing or riding gear. 
 
As discussed in the introduction of this chapter, auxiliary head and brake lights, flashing 
headlights, and other vehicle technologies enhance conspicuity, but the effects on crashes have 
not been studied. Adoption of these technologies may be useful to promote among the 
motorcycling community, may require changes in laws if visibility enhancing technologies are 
restricted by States, and may also involve working with manufacturers and producers of 
motorcycles and auxiliary devices (NCHRP, 2008). 
 
There are no data on how many motorcycle riders wear various types of protective clothing 
(other than helmets) or use auxiliary devices. Helmet manufacturers and distributors report that 
more than half the helmets sold for street use are black and the predominant color of motorcycle 
clothing is black (NCHRP, 2008, Strategy D1). 
 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 24 
Communications and outreach campaigns promoting protective and conspicuous clothing have 
been conducted by States and by motorcyclist organizations. The NCHRP (2008, Strategy D1) 
provides examples of material from Oregon and the MSF and references to additional material 
from the SMSA, and the Gold Wing Road Riders Association. 
 
Use: Of the 44 States responding to a survey question, 33 reported encouraging conspicuity- 
enhancing clothing and helmets to enhance motorcyclists’ visibility (Baer et al., 2010). The 
extent or nature of these efforts is unknown. 
 
Effectiveness: The use of high visibility clothing and protective gear enhances safety. There is 
some limited evidence to suggest that a program aimed at increasing conspicuous and protective 
clothing could be successful. An Australian study found that the observed proportion of riders 
wearing full body protection increased in the month following an enforcement/educational 
campaign with an emphasis on conspicuous and protective clothing (among other safety issues). 
However, it is unclear whether any potential benefits were sustained (Baldock et al., 2012).  
 
Costs: Good communications and outreach campaigns can be expensive to develop and 
implement: see Chapter 2, Section 3.1. Information promoting protective and conspicuous 
clothing is available from various sources including MSF, other motorcyclist organizations, and 
States that have conducted these campaigns (NCHRP, 2008, Strategy D1). 
 
Time to implement: A proper campaign, including market research, message development and 
testing, and implementation, will require at least 6 months to plan and implement. 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 25 
4.2 Communications and Outreach: Other Driver Awareness of Motorcyclists 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
 
In general, studies show that when motorcycles crash with other vehicles, the other vehicle driver 
usually violates the motorcyclist’s right-of-way (Clarke et al., 2007; Elliott et al., 2007; NCHRP, 
2008, Strategy F3; NHTSA, 2000a). Motorcycles and motorcyclists are smaller visual targets 
than cars or trucks, resulting in low conspicuity (see Chapter 5, Section 4.1). Also, drivers may 
not expect to see motorcycles on the road (NCHRP, 2008, Strategy F3; NHTSA, 2000a). Clarke 
et al. (2007) reported that even when motorcyclists were using headlights and high-conspicuity 
clothing drivers sometimes failed to notice them. 
 
Several States have conducted communications and outreach campaigns to increase other 
drivers’ awareness of motorcyclists. Typical themes are “Share the Road” or “Watch for 
Motorcyclists.” Some States build campaigns around “Motorcycle Awareness Month,” often in 
May, early in the summer riding season. Many motorcyclist organizations, including MSF, 
SMSA, the Gold Wing Road Riders Association, and State and local rider groups, have driver 
awareness material available. See NHTSA (2006a, Section 5) and NCHRP (2008, Strategy F3) 
for links and references. Some organizations also make presentations on drivers’ awareness of 
motorcyclists to driver education classes. 
 
NHTSA developed model language on sharing the road safely with motorcyclists. The model 
language is appropriate for traffic safety education courses, driver manuals, and other 
communication and outreach activities (NHTSA, 2007a). NHTSA developed a “Share the Road” 
program planner for use by States, communities, and the motorcycling community  
(see www.trafficsafetymarketing.gov/ShareTheRoad ). 
 
Use: Thirty-six of 44 States that responded to a survey question reported that they communicate 
about ways for drivers to increase their awareness of motorcycles and motorcyclists (Baer et al., 
2010). NHTSA (2006a, Section 5) and NCHRP (2008, Strategy F3) provide examples or links to 
campaigns from a dozen States. 
 
Effectiveness: There are no evaluations of the effectiveness of campaigns to increase driver 
awareness of motorcyclists (NCHRP, 2008, Strategy F3). 
 
Costs: Good communications and outreach campaigns can be expensive to develop and 
implement: see Chapter 2, Section 3.1. Motorcyclist awareness material is available from various 
sources including the MSF, other motorcyclist organizations, and States that have conducted 
these campaigns (NCHRP, 2008, Strategy F3). 
 
Time to implement: A proper campaign, including market research, message development and 
testing, and implementation, will require at least 6 months to plan and implement. 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 26 
Motorcycle Safety References 
 
Aguilar, M., & Delehanty, H. (2009). A social marketing initiative to reduce impaired 
motorcycle operation (Report No. DOT HS 811 095). Washington, DC: National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration. Retrieved from: 
www.ridesmartflorida.com/images/projectgreenyellowred.pdf 
 
Baer, J. D., Ayotte, K., & Baldi, S. (2010). Evaluation of state motorcycle safety programs 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 269). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/ 
Pubs/811269.pdf 
 
Baer, J. D., Baldi, S., & Cook, A. L. (2005). Promising practices in motorcycle rider education 
and licensing (Report No. DOT HS 809 922). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/motorcycle/MotorcycleRider/ 
 
Baer, J. D., Cook, A. L., & Baldi, S. (2005). Motorcycle rider education and licensing: A review 
of programs and practices (Report No. DOT HS 809 852). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/motorcycle/McycleRiderWeb/pages/index.htm 
 
Baer, J., & Skemer, M. (2009). Review of state motorcycle safety program technical assessments 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 082). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811082.pdf 
 
Baldock, M., Kloeden, C., Lydon, M., Raftery, S., Grigo, J., & Ponte, G. (2012). The use of 
protective clothing by motorcyclists in Victoria: Evaluation of the Community Policing and 
Education Program. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACRS National Conference - A Safe System: 
Expanding the Research : 9-10 August, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, 2012: 11 p. 
Retrieved from: http://acrs.org.au/wp-content/uploads/46_Baldock-PR-.pdf 
 
Bayly, M., Regan, M., & Hosking, S. (2006). Intelligent transport systems and motorcycle 
safety (Report No. 260). Retrieved from the Monash University Accident Research 
Centre: www.monash.edu.au/muarc/reports/muarc260.pdf 
 
Becker, L. R., McKnight, A. S., Nelkin, V. S., & Piper, D. L. (2003). Drinking, riding, and 
prevention: A focus group study (Report No. DOT HS 809 490). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/motorcycle/drinkrideprevent/DrinkRidePrevention.pdf 
 
Braver, E. R., Kufera, J. A., Volpini, K. D., Lawpoolsri, S., Joyce, J. J., Alexander, M. T., & 
Ellison-Potter, P. (2007). Persuasion and licensure: A randomized controlled intervention trial to 
increase licensure rates among Maryland motorcycle owners. Traffic Injury Prevention, 8, 39-46. 
 
Brewer, B. L., Diehl, A.H., Johnson, L.S., Salomone, J.P., Wilson, K.L., Atallah, H.Y., … 
Rozycki, G. S. (2013). Choice of motorcycle helmet makes a difference: A prospective 
observational study. Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, 75, 88-91. 
 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 27 
Brewer, B. L., Diehl, A.H., Johnson, L.S., Salomone, J.P., Wilson, K.L., Atallah, H.Y., 
Feliciano, D. V., & Rozycki, G. S. (2013). Choice of motorcycle helmet makes a difference: 
A prospective observational study. Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, 75, 88-91. 
 
Brooks, E., Naud, S., & Shapiro, S. (2010). Are youth-only motorcycle helmet laws better 
than none at all? American Journal of Forensic Medicine and Pathology, 31, 125-129. 
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2011). Motorcycle safety: How to save lives 
and save money. Atlanta, GA: Author. Retrieved from 
www.cdc.gov/motorvehiclesafety/pdf/mc2012/MotorcycleSafetyBook.pdf 
 
Clarke, D. D., Ward, P., Bartle, C., & Truman, W. (2007). The role of motorcyclist and other 
driver behaviour in two types of serious accident in the UK. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 39, 974-981. 
 
Coben, J. H., Steiner, C. A., & Miller, T. R. (2007). Characteristics of motorcycle-related 
hospitalizations: Comparing states with different helmet laws. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention,39, 190-196. 
 
Compton, R., Vegega, M., & Smithers. D. (2009) Drug-impaired driving: Understanding the 
problem and ways to reduce it: A report to Congress (Report No. HS 811 268). Retrieved from 
the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811268.pdf 
 
Creaser, J. I., Ward, N. J., Rakauskas, M. E., Boer, E., Shankwitz, C., & Nardi, F. (2007). Effects 
of alcohol on motorcycle riding skills (Report No. DOT HS 810 877). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/HS81
0877.pdf 
 
Cummings, P., Rivara, F. P., Olson, C. M., & Smith, K. M. (2006). Changes in traffic crash 
mortality rates attributed to use of alcohol, or lack of a seat belt, air bag, motorcycle helmet, 
or bicycle helmet, United States, 1982-2001. Injury Prevention, 12, 148-154. 
 
Derrick, A. J. & Faucher, L. D. (2009). Motorcycle helmets and rider safety: A legislative crisis. 
Journal of Public Health Policy, 30, 226-242. 
 
De Rome, L., Ivers, R., Fitzharris, M., Du, W., Haworth, N., Heritier, S., & Richardson, D. 
(2011). Motorcycle protective clothing: Protection from injury or just the weather? 
Accident Analysis & Prevention, 43, 1893-1900. 
 
De Rome, L., Ivers, R., Fitzharris, M., Haworth, N., Heritier, S., & Richardson, D. (2012). 
Effectiveness of motorcycle protective clothing: Riders’ health outcomes in the six 
months following a crash. Injury, 43, 2035-2015. 
 
Deuterman, W. (2004). Motorcycle helmet effectiveness revisited (Report No. DOT HS 809 715). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/809715.pdf 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 28 
 
Elliott, M. A., Baughan, C. J., & Sexton, B. F. (2007). Errors and violations in relation 
to motorcyclists’ crash risk. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 39, 491-499. 
 
Fatality Analysis Reporting System. (2015). Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration. Custom data analysis. 
 
General Accounting Office. (1991). Highway safety: Motorcycle helmet laws save lives and 
reduce costs to society. Washington, DC: U.S. General Accounting Office (now the Government 
Accountability Office). 
 
Gilbert, H., Chaudhary, N., Solomon, M., Preusser, D., & Cosgrove, L. (2008). Evaluation of the 
reinstatement of the helmet law in Louisiana (Report No. DOT HS 810 956). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8109
56.pdf 
 
Government Accountability Office. (2012). Motorcycle safety increasing Federal 
funding flexibility and identifying research priorities would help support states’ safety efforts. 
Retrieved from www.gao.gov/assets/660/650037.pdf 
 
Governors Highway Safety Association. (2014). Helmet laws. Washington, DC: Author. 
Retrieved from www.ghsa.org/html/stateinfo/laws/helmet_laws.html 
 
Guide to Community Preventive Services. (2013). Motor vehicle-related injury prevention: 
Use of motorcycle helmets. Retrieved from 
www.thecommunityguide.org/mvoi/motorcyclehelmets/index.html 
 
Hanchulak, D., & Robinson, B. (2009). Guidelines for motorcycle operator licensing (Report 
No. DOT HS 811 141). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8111
41.pdf 
 
Hedlund, J., Shults, R. A., & Compton, R. (2003). What we know, what we don’t know, and 
what we need to know about graduated driver licensing. Journal of Safety Research, 34, 
107-115. 
 
Hedlund, J., Shults, R. A., & Compton, R. (2006). Graduated driver licensing and teenage 
driver research in 2006. Journal of Safety Research, 37, 107-121. 
 
Highway Loss Data Institute (2013). The effects of Michigan’s weakened motorcycle helmet use 
law on insurance losses. Retrieved from the IIHS website: www.iihs.org/media/13465fd7-23d7-
46fd-a15e-ddf13d66c490/-2043639476/HLDI%20Research/Bulletins/hldi_bulletin_30.09.pdf 
 
Houston, D. J. (2007). Are helmet laws protecting young motorcyclists? Journal of Safety 
Research, 38, 329-336. 
 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 29 
Houston, D. J., & Richardson, L. E. (2008). Motorcyclist fatality rates and mandatory helmet-
use laws. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 40, 200-208. 
 
Hurt, H. H., Ouellet, J. V., & Thom, D. R. (1981). Motorcycle accident cause factors and 
identification of countermeasures, Volume 1: Technical report (Report No. DOT HS-05 63). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Library website: 
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/30000/30900/30965/805863.pdf  
 
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS). (2007). These machines are designed for the 
racetrack. Insurance Institute for Highway Safety Status Report, 42(9). 
 
IIHS. (2014). Motorcycle helmet use, July, 2014. Retrieved from 
www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/laws/helmetuse?topicName=motorcycles 
 
Jones, M. M., & Bayer, R. B. (2007). Paternalism & its discontents: Motorcycle helmet 
laws, libertarian values, and public health. American Journal of Public Health, 97, 208-217. 
 
Kardamanidis, K., Martiniuk, A., Stevenson, M.R., & Thistlethwaite, K. (2010). 
Motorcycle rider training for the prevention of road traffic crashes. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews 2010, Issue 10. Art. No.: CD005240. DOI: 
10.1002/14651858.CD005240.pub2 
 
Kyrychenko, S. Y., & McCartt, A.T. (2006). Florida’s weakened motorcycle helmet law: Effects 
on death rates in motorcycle crashes. Traffic Injury Prevention, 7, 55-60. 
 
Lacey, J. H., Kelley-Baker, T., Furr-Holden, D., Voas, R. B., Romano, E., Torres, P., … 
Berning, A. (2009a). 2007 National roadside survey of alcohol and drug use by drivers: Alcohol 
results (Report No. DOT HS 811 248). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8112
48.pdf 
 
Lacey, J.H., Kelley-Baker, T., Furr-Holden, D., Voas, R.B., Romano, E., Ramirez, A., … 
Berning, A. (2009b). 2007 National roadside survey of alcohol and drug use by drivers: Drug 
results (Report No. DOT HS 811 249). Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration. Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8112
49.pdf 
 
Liu, B. C., Ivers, R., Norton, R., Blows, S., & Lo, S. K. (2008). Helmets for Preventing Injury in 
Motorcycle Riders. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 1. Art No.: CD004333. 
 
Limrick, K.J. & Masten, S. V. (2013). Evaluation of a contact letter to increase licensure among 
improperly licensed California motorcycle owners (Report No. CAL-DMV-RSS-13-241). Elk 
Grove, CA: California Office of Traffic Safety. Retrieved from: 
http://apps.dmv.ca.gov/about/profile/rd/r_d_report/Section_6/S6-241.pdf 
 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 30 
Mayhew, D. R., & Simpson, H. M. (2001). Graduated licensing for motorcyclists. Retrieved 
from the TIRF website: 
www.tirf.ca/publications/PDF_publications/GDL%20for%20Motorcyclists%20Report.pdf 
 
McKnight, A. S., & Becker, L. R. (2007a). Impaired motorcycle operation, final report volume 
II: Riders Helping Riders instructor’s guide (Report No. DOT HS 810 907). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8109
07.pdf 
 
McKnight, A. S., & Becker, L. R. (2007b). Impaired motorcycle operation, final report, volume 
III: Riders Helping Riders student manual (Report No. DOT HS 810 908). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8109
08.pdf 
 
McKnight, A. S., Becker, L. R., & Tippetts, A. S. (2008). Impaired motorcycle operation, final 
report, volume I: Riders Helping Riders evaluation (Report No. DOT HS 811 023). Retrieved 
from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8110
23.pdf 
 
McKnight, A. S., Billheimer, J. W., & Tippetts, S. (2013). An examination of Washington state’s 
vehicle impoundment law for motorcycle endorsements (Report No. DOT HS 811 696). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811696.pdf 
 
Morris, C. C. (2006). Generalized linear regression analysis of association of universal helmet 
laws with motorcyclist fatality rates. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 38, 142-147. 
 
Motorcycle Safety Foundation (MSF). (2012). State motorcycle operator licensing - 2012. 
Retrieved from www.msf-usa.org/downloads/State-Motorcycle-Operator-Licensing-CSI-
2012.pdf  
 
MSF. (2013). State motorcycle rider education programs – 2013. Retrieved from www.msf-
usa.org/downloads/Rider-Ed-Programs-CSI.pdf 
 
MSF. (2014). State on-highway motorcycle equipment requirements. Retrieved from www.msf-
usa.org/downloads/Equipment_Chart-MSFlogo.pdf 
 
National Center for Statistics and Analysis. (2015, May). Motorcycles: 2013 data (Traffic Safety 
Facts. Report No. DOT HS 812 148). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812148.pdf 
 
National Cooperative Highway Research Program. (2008). Guidance for implementation of the 
AASHTO Strategic Highway Safety Plan, volume 22: A guide for addressing collisions involving 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 31 
motorcycles (NCHRP Report 500). Retrieved from the TRB website: 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v22.pdf 
 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. (1996). Do motorcycle helmets interfere with 
the vision and hearing of riders? (Traffic Tech. Technology Transfer Series No. 127). Retrieved 
from 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Communication%20&%20Consumer%20Information/Studies%2
0&%20Reports/Associated%20Files/tt127.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2000a). National Agenda for Motorcycle Safety. (Report No. DOT HS 809 156). 
Retrieved from www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/motorcycle/00-NHT-212-
motorcycle/index.html 
 
NHTSA. (2000b). The detection of DWI motorcyclists. Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/motorcycle/610DWIMotorcyWeb/pages/807856-
Detection-DWI-Motorcyclists.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2003). The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration motorcycle safety 
program (Report No. DOT HS 809 539). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/motorcycle/motorcycle03/index.htm 
 
NHTSA. (2004). How to identify unsafe motorcycle helmets (Report No. DOT HS 807 880 
(revised). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/motorcycle/UnsafeHelmetID/images/UnsafeHelmets.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2006a). Implementation guide for the National Agenda for Motorcycle Safety (Report 
No. DOT HS 810 680). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/motorcycle/NAMS2006/images/ImplementationGui
de.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2006b). 2006 Motorcycle safety program plan (Report No. DOT HS 810 615). 
Retrieved from www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/motorcycle/MotorcycleSafety.pdf 
 
 
NHTSA. (2007a). Share the road with motorcycles (Report No. DOT HS 809 713). Retrieved 
from www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/motorcycle/ShareTheRoad/ 
 
NHTSA. (2007b). Traffic safety facts, research note: Summary of novelty helmet performance 
testing (Report No. DOT HS 810 752). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Studies%20&%20Reports/Associat 
ed%20Files/Novelty_Helmets_TSF.pdf 
 
NHTSA (2011). Model national standards for entry-level motorcycle rider training (Report No. 
DOT HS 811 503). Retrieved from www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811503.pdf 
 
NHTSA (2012). Data retrieved from the Fatality Analysis Reporting System. 
 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 32 
NHTSA. (2013). Prioritized recommendations of the National Agenda for Motorcycle Safety 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 789). Retrieved from www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811789.pdf 
 
Olson, P. L., Halstead-Nussloch, R., & Sivak, M. (1979). Development and testing of techniques 
for increasing the conspicuity of motorcycles and motorcycle drivers. Washington, DC: National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Retrieved from 
http://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/2027.42/487/2/43121.0001.001.pdf 
 
Philip, A. F., Fangman, W., Junlin, L., Lilienthal, M., & Choi, K. (2013). Helmets prevent 
motorcycle injuries with significant economic benefits. Traffic Injury Prevention, 14, 496-500. 
 
Pickrell, T. M., & Liu, C. (2014, March). Motorcycle Helmet Use in 2013—Overall Results. 
(Traffic Safety Facts Research Note. Report No. DOT HS 812 010). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812010.pdf 
 
Preusser, D. F., Hedlund, J. H., & Ulmer, R. G. (2000). Evaluation of motorcycle helmet law 
repeal in Arkansas and Texas (Report No. DOT HS 809 131). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/motorcycle/EvalofMotor.pdf 
 
Salmon, D. A. (2008). Reducing motorcycle fatalities through checkpoints and education: The 
New York State experience. The Police Chief, vol. LXXV, no. 7. Retrieved from 
www.policechiefmagazine.org/magazine/index.cfm?fuseaction=display&article_id=1536&issue
_id=72008 
 
National Association of State Motorcycle Safety Administrators. (2008). Annual SMSA state 
motorcycle program surveys. Indiana, PA: Author. 
 
Stuster, J. (1993). The detection of DWI motorcyclists (Report No. DOT HS 807 839). Retrieved 
from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library website: 
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25800/25868/DOT-HS-807-839.pdf 
 
Teoh, E. R. (2011). Effectiveness of antilock braking systems in reducing motorcycle 
fatal crashes. Traffic Injury Prevention, 12, 169-173. 
 
Teoh, E.R. (2013). Effects of antilock braking systems on motorcycle fatal crash rates: An 
update. Retrieved from the IIHS website: 
www.iihs.org/frontend/iihs/documents/masterfiledocs.ashx?id=2042 
 
Teoh, E. R., & Campbell, M. (2010). Role of motorcycle type in fatal motorcycle crashes. 
Journal of Safety Research, 41, 507-512. 
 
Ulmer, R. G., & Preusser, D. F. (2003). Evaluation of the repeal of motorcycle helmet laws in 
Kentucky and Louisiana (Report No. DOT HS 809 530). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/PEOPLE/injury/pedbimot/motorcycle/kentuky-la03/index.html 
 
 Chapter 5. Motorcycles 
 
5 - 33 
Ulmer, R. G., & Northrup, V. S. (2005). Evaluation of the repeal of the all-rider motorcycle 
helmet law in Florida (Report No. DOT HS 809 849). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/motorcycle/flamcreport/pages/Index.htm 
 
U.S. Department of Transportation. (2007). U.S. Department of Transportation action plan to 
reduce motorcycle fatalities (Report No. DOT HS 810 855). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Communication%20&%20Consumer%20Information/Articles/As 
sociated%20Files/4640-report2.pdf 
 
Weiss, H., Agimi, Y., & Steiner, C. (2010). Youth motorcycle-related brain injury by 
state helmet law type: United States, 2005-2007. Pediatrics, 126, 1149-1155. 
 
Wells, S., Mullin, B., Norton, R., Langley, J., Connor, J., Lay-Yee, R., & Jackson, R. 
(2004). Motorcycle rider conspicuity and crash-related injury: case-control study. British 
Medical Journal, 328, 857. 
 
Williams, A. F., Tefft, B. C., & Grabowski, J. G. (2012). Graduated Driver Licensing 
research, 2010-present. Journal of Safety Research, 43, 195-203. 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 1 
6. Young Drivers 
 
 
Overview 
 
Motor vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death for teenagers in the United States. In 2013, 
1,691 drivers 15 to 20 years old were killed and another estimated 177,000 were injured in motor 
vehicle crashes (FARS data). In comparison with adult drivers, young drivers are substantially 
over-involved in crashes. In 2013, drivers 15 to 20 made up 5.8% of licensed drivers in the 
United States, yet they made up 9% of total drivers in fatal crashes, and 13% of drivers in all 
crashes (FARS data). As shown in the figure below, drivers 16 to 20 years old have the highest 
involvement in fatal crashes of any age group. 
 
 
 
 
Source: NHTSA (2015), Table 62 
 
 
As shown in the figure below, young driver involvement in fatal crashes increases with age. 
However, the rate of young driver fatalities per 10,000 licensed drivers is relatively stable - 
between 1.0 and 1.6. 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 2 
 
 
Sources: Analysis of data from the U.S. Department of Transportation's Fatality Analysis Reporting System 
(FARS data) 
 
Per mile driven, young drivers are even more over-involved than older drivers. In 2008, drivers 
16 to 19 years old were involved in 4.6 fatal crashes per 100 million miles of travel, compared to 
3.8 for drivers 20 to 24 and 1.2 for drivers 30 to 59 years old (McCartt & Teoh, 2014). Only 37% 
of the people killed in young driver crashes are the teen driver themselves; the majority of 
fatalities in young driver crashes (63%) are passengers of the teen driver, occupants of other 
vehicles, or nonmotorists (Shults & Ali, 2010). 
 
Trends. Between 1996 and 2012, there was a 74% decrease in the fatal crash rate for 16-year-
old drivers per population, and a 64% decrease for 17-year-old drivers. By comparison, fatal 
crash rates declined by 34% among adult drivers 30 to 59 (McCartt & Teoh, 2014). There was a 
similarly large decrease in police reported crashes during the same time period. Police-reported 
crashes per population fell 65% for 16-year-olds and 50% for 17-year-olds (McCartt & Teoh, 
2014). The reasons for the dramatic reductions in fatal and police-reported crashes among 16- 
and 17-year-olds are not entirely known; however, it is noteworthy that most States implemented 
new, multi-stage licensing systems during this time period. 
 
Young-driver characteristics. Young drivers have high crash risks for two main reasons, as 
documented by extensive research (summarized in Hedlund, Shults, & Compton, 2003). First, 
they are inexperienced, just learning to drive. The mechanics of driving require much of their 
attention, so safety considerations frequently are secondary. They do not have experience in 
recognizing potentially risky situations or in reacting appropriately and controlling their vehicles 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 3 
in these situations. Second, normal adolescent development involves an increase in novelty 
seeking and risk taking behaviors (Kelley, Schochet, & Landry, 2004). In fact, research on 
adolescent development suggests that key areas of the brain involved in judgments and decision 
making are not fully developed until the mid-20s (Dahl, 2008; Keating, 2007; Steinberg, 2007). 
 
Inexperience makes certain circumstances more dangerous for younger drivers. In addition, 
immaturity increases the likelihood of young drivers putting themselves in risky circumstances. 
NHTSA has identified five areas of concern in relation to younger drivers: 
• Nighttime Driving: Driving is more difficult and dangerous at night for everyone, but 
particularly for teenagers. Young drivers have less experience driving at night than 
during the day, and drowsiness and alcohol may be more of a factor at night (Lin & 
Fearn, 2003; Williams, 2003). 
• Drinking and Driving: Young drivers’ inexperience with both driving and drinking means 
that they have a higher crash risk at all BAC levels than older drivers (Voas, Torres, 
Romano, & Lacey, 2012; Williams, 2003). 
• Passenger Interactions: Teenage passengers can distract young drivers and encourage 
them to take risks (Foss & Goodwin, 2014; Lin & Fearn, 2003; Williams, 2003). 
• Belt Use: Seat belts reduce the risk of injury or fatality in a crash (see Chapter 2, 
Overview), but teenage drivers and passengers have slightly lower belt use rates than 
older drivers and passengers (Ferguson, 2003). 
• Cell Phone Use: All drivers are at higher risk when talking or texting (see Chapter 4, 
Section 1.2); however, young drivers have more difficulty handling distractions (Lee, 
2007). 
 
 
Strategies to Reduce Crashes Involving Young Drivers 
 
Graduated driver licensing (GDL) addresses both the inexperience and immaturity of young 
drivers. GDL provides a structure in which beginning drivers gain substantial driving experience 
in less- risky situations. GDL raises the minimum age of full licensure and helps parents manage 
their teenage drivers. GDL’s effectiveness in reducing young driver crashes has been 
demonstrated many times (Masten, Foss, & Marshall, 2013; Russell, Vandermeer, & Hartling, 
2011; Shope, 2007; Simpson, 2003; Williams, Tefft, & Grabowski, 2012). 
 
Driver education was developed to teach both driving skills and safe driving practices. Based on 
evaluations to date, driver education for beginning drivers does a good job at teaching driving 
skills, but has not definitively been shown to reduce the number of crashes or crash rate. Rather, 
some research has suggested that it lowers the age at which teenagers become licensed, and 
therefore increases exposure, so its overall effect is to increase the number of crashes (Roberts et 
al., 2006; Thomas, Blomberg, & Fisher, 2012a; Vernick et al., 1999). Current research is 
investigating ways to integrate driver education with GDL and is developing second-level 
programs for drivers who have acquired basic driving skills and have been, or are nearing, 
licensure. Driver education must be combined with an effective GDL program that does not 
allow a lower licensing age. Many States have completed NHTSA-sponsored driver education 
assessments in an effort to strengthen their programs and align with national standards. 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 4 
Parents play a key role in their teenagers’ driving. In many States a parent or guardian must sign 
the driver’s license application for a teenager under 18 and parents can withdraw their approval 
at any time. Parents can set limits on their teenagers’ driving. In addition, parents can be 
involved explicitly and formally through GDL requirements such as minimum hours of 
supervised driving practice, or they can be involved voluntarily and informally. Several parent- 
teen driving guide programs can provide assistance. At least one driving guide program has 
successfully encouraged parents to impose more driving restrictions on their teens (Simons- 
Morton, 2007). Recently, technologies have become available to assist parents in monitoring 
their newly licensed teen driver. When combined with a comprehensive system for providing 
feedback to parents and teens, these technologies have been promising in reducing the incidence 
of risky driving behaviors among teens (Carney, McGehee, Lee, Reyes, & Raby, 2010; Farah et 
al., 2014; McGehee, Raby, Carney, Lee, & Reyes, 2007; Simons-Morton et al., 2013). Finally, 
several States are now requiring parent involvement in driver education, usually in the form of a 
mandatory parent orientation class. All of these approaches are promising, though none have 
been shown as of yet to reduce young driver crashes or fatalities. 
 
Young drivers are subject to several traffic laws that apply only to them. GDL systems have been 
adopted by all 50 States to help novices gain experience in safe settings. Minimum legal drinking 
age (MLDA) and zero-tolerance BAC laws apply specifically to persons under 21, and are 
discussed in Chapter 1. In addition, a number of States have restrictions on cell phone use and 
texting that apply only to young drivers (see Chapter 4, Section 1.2). With all of these, 
enforcement is critical if the laws are to have any effect. The law enforcement system faces 
several problems when dealing with young drivers. In deciding whether to make a traffic stop, it 
can be difficult for law enforcement officers to determine a person’s age to know whether GDL 
and zero-tolerance laws apply. It has been suggested that a vehicle decal identifying a driver as 
“young” and subject to GDL requirements, may be beneficial for enforcement reasons. New 
Jersey is the first State to pass legislation requiring young drivers subject to GDL restrictions to 
be identified via a vehicle decal. Recent studies examining the effectiveness of the decal 
requirement in New Jersey found that citations for violations of licensing restrictions sharply 
increased and police reported crashes decreased the year after the decal requirement went into 
effect (Curry, Pfeiffer, Localio, & Durbin, 2013; McCartt, Oesch, Williams, & Powell 2012). 
Even if the driver is young, teens may only be stopped for a primary offense, such as speeding. 
Once stopped, there may be a tendency for officers in some situations not to make arrests or for 
prosecutors to dismiss charges because the offender is “just a kid.” Finally, the legal system 
imposes additional requirements for people under the age of legal adulthood (18 in most States). 
See NHTSA and NIAAA (1999) for a discussion of these requirements and processes for 
alcohol-related offenses. 
 
Young drivers are discussed in other chapters of this guide. See in particular: 
• Chapter 1, Alcohol-Impaired Driving, Sections 6.1-6.4 (minimum-drinking-age-21 laws, 
zero-tolerance BAC laws, school and youth alcohol programs). 
• Chapter 4, Distracted and Drowsy Driving, Sections 1.1, 2.1, 2.2, and 3.1 (GDL 
requirements, communications and outreach, and employer programs). 
• Chapter 5, Motorcycle Safety, Section 3.1 (GDL for motorcyclists). 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 5 
Except for GDL requirements applying to automobile drivers, these discussions are not repeated 
in this chapter. 
 
Environmental and vehicular strategies can improve safety for young drivers, as they can for all 
drivers. However, these types of countermeasures are not included because State Highway Safety 
Offices do not have authority or responsibility in these areas. 
 
 
Resources 
 
The agencies and organizations listed below can provide more information on young drivers and 
links to numerous other resources. 
• National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: 
o Teen Drivers - www.nhtsa.gov/Teen-Drivers 
o Driver Safety Research Reports: New Drivers -
www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Research+&+Evaluation/Driver+Safety+Research+R
eports:+New+Drivers+and+Older+Drivers 
o Behavioral Safety Research Reports - 
http://ntlsearch.bts.gov/repository/ntlc/nhtsa/index.shtm 
• Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: 
www.cdc.gov/Motorvehiclesafety/Teen_Drivers/index.html 
• Governors Highway Safety: Association: www.ghsa.org/html/issues/teens/index.html 
• Insurance Institute for Highway Safety: 
www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/t/teenagers/topicoverview 
• National Safety Council: www.nsc.org/safety_road/TeenDriving/Pages/teen_driving.aspx 
• American Automobile Association: http://exchange.aaa.com/safety/teen-driver-safety/ 
 
For an overview of young-driver issues and research, see the papers in the June 2006 Supplement 
of Injury Prevention (ip.bmjjournals.com/content/vol12/suppl_1/), the special issue of the 2007 
Journal of Safety Research (www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/00224375/38/2), or the 
special issue of the 2008 American Journal of Preventive Medicine 
(www.ajpmonline.org/issue/S0749-3797%2808%29X0014-5). See also Williams et al. (2012) 
for a summary of much of the research on young driver issues. Additionally, an NCHRP Report 
500 guide for the American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators’ Strategic Highway 
Safety Plan provides a detailed discussion of strategies for reducing crashes involving young 
drivers (NCHRP, 2007) and GHSA recently published “Curbing Teen Driver Crashes: An In-
Depth Look at State Initiatives” (GHSA, 2012) which describes strategies States are currently 
employing to reduce teen driver crashes. 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 6 
Countermeasures That Work 
 
Countermeasures to improve young-driver safety are listed below and discussed individually in 
this chapter. The table is intended to give a rough estimate of each countermeasure’s 
effectiveness, use, cost, and time required for implementation. The symbols and terms used are 
described below. Effectiveness, cost, and time to implement can vary substantially from State to 
State and community to community. Costs for many countermeasures are difficult to measure, so 
the summary terms are very approximate. See each countermeasure discussion for more 
information. 
 
1. Graduated Driver Licensing 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
1.1 Graduated driver licensing (GDL) 
 
$ 
High 
Medium 
1.2 Learner’s permit length, supervised hours 
 
$ 
High 
Medium 
1.3 Intermediate - nighttime restrictions 
 
$ 
High 
Medium 
1.4 Intermediate - passenger restrictions 
 
$ 
High 
Medium 
1.5 Cell phone restrictions 
 
$ 
Medium 
Medium 
1.6 Belt use requirements 
 
$ 
Low 
Medium 
1.7 Intermediate - violation penalties 
 
$ 
High 
Medium 
 
2. Driver Education 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
2.1 Pre-licensure driver education 
 
$$$ 
Medium 
Long 
2.2 Post-licensure driver education 
 
$$$ 
Low 
Long 
 
3. Parents 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
3.1 Parent roles in teaching and managing 
 
$$ 
Medium 
Short 
 
4. Traffic Law Enforcement 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
4.1 Enforcement of GDL and zero-tolerance 
laws 
 
 
$$ 
 
Unknown 
 
Short 
 
 
Effectiveness: 
- Demonstrated to be effective by several high-quality evaluations with 
consistent results 
- Demonstrated to be effective in certain situations 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 7 
 
 
- Likely to be effective based on balance of evidence from high-quality evaluations 
or other sources 
- Effectiveness still undetermined; different methods of implementing this 
countermeasure produce different results 
- Limited or no high-quality evaluation evidence 
 
Effectiveness is measured by reductions in crashes or injuries unless noted otherwise. 
See individual countermeasure descriptions for information on effectiveness size and how 
effectiveness is measured. 
 
Cost to implement: 
$$$: requires extensive new facilities, staff, equipment, or publicity, or makes heavy 
demands on current resources 
$$: requires some additional staff time, equipment, facilities, and/or publicity 
$: can be implemented with current staff, perhaps with training; limited costs for equipment 
or facilities 
 
These estimates do not include the costs of enacting legislation or establishing policies. 
 
Use: 
High: more than two-thirds of the States, or a substantial majority of communities 
Medium: between one-third and two-thirds of States or communities 
Low: fewer than one-third of the States or communities 
Unknown: data not available 
 
Time to implement: 
Long: more than one year 
Medium: more than three months but less than one year 
Short: three months or less 
 
These estimates do not include the time required to enact legislation or establish policies. 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 8 
1. Graduated Driver Licensing 
 
1.1 Graduated Driver Licensing 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
 
GDL is a three-phase system for beginning drivers, consisting of a learner’s permit, an 
intermediate license, and a full license. A learner’s permit allows driving only while supervised 
by a fully licensed driver. An intermediate license allows unsupervised driving under certain 
restrictions. These usually include limits on driving at night or with teenage passengers. The 
learner’s permit and the intermediate license each must be held for a specified minimum period 
of time. 
 
GDL serves two functions: reducing risk and reducing exposure. GDL allows beginning drivers 
to acquire driving experience in less-risky situations, under direct supervision during the 
learner’s permit phase. It helps young drivers avoid dangerous conditions such as late-night 
driving or driving with teenage passengers in the vehicle during the intermediate phase. GDL 
delays full licensure by requiring a minimum time in both the learner’s permit and intermediate 
phases. Compared to earlier requirements in many jurisdictions, where beginning drivers could 
receive a full license at 16 (and sometimes earlier) by passing a minimal driving test, GDL 
reduces the amount of driving by 16-year-olds. GDL also assures that young drivers are more 
mature when they receive their first unrestricted license. In surveys, both parents and teenagers 
strongly support GDL overall (Williams, Ferguson, Leaf, & Preusser, 1998). Based on a recent 
national survey, the majority of parents support GDL policies that are as strong as, or even 
stronger, than policies currently in place in the United States (Williams, Braitman, & McCartt, 
2011). 
 
All States now have some form of GDL in place. However, as of October 2011, no State GDL 
systems met all of the qualification criteria set forth by MAP-21 for GDL incentive grants. Some 
States, for example, have night restrictions beginning later than 10 p.m., or allow teens to carry 
more than one passenger younger than 21. GHSA (2014a) and IIHS (2014a) document GDL laws 
in each State. These websites are updated monthly. The papers in the special issue of the 2007 
Journal of Safety Research describe GDL’s history, components, effectiveness, parental roles, 
potential enhancements, and research needs. Strategies for implementing or improving GDL 
systems are described in NCHRP’s Guide for Reducing Collisions Involving Young Drivers 
(NCHRP, 2007, strategies A1 through A5). See also NHTSA’s Traffic Safety Facts on GDL 
(NHTSA, 2008) and Report to Congress (Compton & Ellison-Potter, 2008). 
 
Use: All States and the District of Columbia had some GDL components in place as of August 
2014. In addition, all States and D.C. had a three-phase GDL system in place (GHSA, 2014a; 
IIHS, 2014a). 
 
Effectiveness: GDL’s effectiveness in reducing young driver crashes and fatalities has been 
well-documented (Baker, Chen, & Li, 2007; Fell, Jones, Romano, & Voas, 2011; Lyon, Pan, & 
Li, 2012; McCartt, Teoh, Fields, Braitman, & Hellinga, 2010; Masten, Foss, & Marshall, 2011; 
Masten et al., 2013; Russel et al, 2011; Shope, 2007; Simpson, 2003). The most restrictive GDL 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 9 
programs – those with at least a 6-month holding period during the learner stage, a night 
restriction beginning no later than 10 p.m., and restrictions allowing no more than one teen 
passenger – are associated with a 38% reduction in fatal crashes and a 40% reduction in injury 
crashes among 16-year-old drivers (Baker et al., 2007). In addition to reducing crashes, GDL is 
associated with declines in hospitalization rates and charges for 16-year-old drivers (Margolis, 
Masten, & Foss, 2007; Pressley, Benedicto, Trieu, Kendig, & Barlow, 2009). 
 
Costs: GDL’s primary costs result from the intermediate license, which adds to licensing agency 
workload by requiring each beginning driver to receive three licenses in succession rather than 
two. These costs are typically covered by small fees charged by the licensing agency. 
 
Time to implement: Licensing changes typically require up to a year to plan, publicize, and 
implement. 
 
Other issues: 
• Age of licensure: In recent years, there has been discussion about the most appropriate 
age for allowing teenagers to drive independently (Williams, 2009; Williams, McCartt, 
Mayhew, & Watson, 2013). Licensing ages vary from State to State, from a low of 14½ 
in South Dakota to a high of 17 in New Jersey. Delaying licensure, either through higher 
entry ages or GDL requirements such as extended learner stages, can reduce young driver 
crashes. For example, New Jersey’s GDL system has eliminated most crashes among 16- 
year-old drivers, and has reduced crashes among 17-year-olds by 16% (Williams, 
Chaudhary, Tefft, & Tison, 2010). However, a national study found a significant increase 
in fatal crash rates among 18-year-olds associated with stronger GDL components 
(Masten et al., 2011). In addition, licensure rates have decreased among young teenagers 
during recent years (HLDI, 2013; Shults & Williams, 2013). Thus, there is concern that 
teens may be delaying licensure until they are 18 or older in order to avoid GDL 
provisions, thus leading them to miss out on the safety benefits of GDL. Based on 
findings from additional studies, it appears the economic recession and lack of 
employment for young teenagers has been the driving force behind the delay of licensure 
and not avoidance of GDL, specifically (HLDI, 2013; Tefft, Williams, & Grabowski, 
2013a; Williams, 2011). 
 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 10 
 
1.2 GDL Learner’s Permit Length, Supervised Hours 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
 
With a learner’s permit, novices can drive when accompanied by an adult supervisor. The 
learner’s permit allows and encourages beginning drivers to acquire substantial driving 
experience. To aid this, most States require the learner’s permit to be held for a minimum period 
of time and most require a minimum number of supervised driving hours. Surveys show that 
parents and teenagers strongly support the learner’s permit holding period and supervised driving 
requirements (Block & Walker, 2008; Mayhew, 2003; McKay, Coben, Larkin, & Shaffer, 2008). 
 
Use: As of August 2014, 48 States and the District of Columbia required learner’s permits to be 
held for at least 6 months, with 8 of these States requiring a minimum holding period of a full 
year. However, two States (Connecticut and South Dakota) reduce the required length of time for 
a permit to be held if the young driver completed driver’s education (IIHS, 2014a).  
 
Forty-six States and the District of Columbia required some minimum number of supervised 
driving hours, about half of them requiring 50 hours. Forty-two States plus D.C. required that at 
least some of these hours be obtained at night. In addition, a few States required additional 
supervised hours to be completed during the intermediate license phase (IIHS, 2014a). Some 
States reduced or eliminated supervised driving requirements for driver education graduates. This 
is not recommended, since evidence suggests this practice results in higher crash rates among 
young drivers (Mayhew, 2007). 
 
Effectiveness: Since learner’s permit drivers are being supervised, it is not surprising that crash 
rates during the learner’s permit period are very low. For young drivers holding their first 
unsupervised license, the limited available evidence suggests that crash rates decreased after 
jurisdictions with no learner’s permit holding requirement implemented a 6-month requirement 
(Ehsani, Bingham, & Shope, 20013; Mayhew, 2003). Moreover, longer permit holding periods 
appear to result in even larger crash reductions. Masten et al. (2013) found that a 9- to 12-month 
leaner’s permit holding period resulted in 26% lower fatal crash incidence among 16-year-old 
drivers and 17% lower incidence among 17- year-olds. 
 
However, the effect of supervised hours is currently unclear. Some studies have found supervised 
hours requirements lead to reductions in fatal crashes, when hourly requirements are combined 
with a mandatory learner’s permit holding period (Baker, Chen & Li, 2006; Lyon et al., 2012). 
However, recent evaluations have found no relationship between the number of required 
supervised driving hours and fatal crash involvement among young drivers (Ehsani et al., 2013; 
Foss, Masten, Goodwin & O’Brien, 2012; Masten et al., 2013; McCartt et al., 2010). Based on 
telephone interviews with parents in 5 States, only 32% knew the correct number of supervised 
driving hours their teen was required to complete (Foss et al., 2012; O’Brien, Foss, Goodwin, & 
Masten, 2013). Therefore, the lack of effect of supervised hours on fatal crash outcomes may be 
explained, in part, by a lack of parental knowledge of the supervised driving requirements.  
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 11 
Costs: Once GDL is in place, requirements for the learner’s permit can be implemented at very 
little cost. 
 
Time to implement: GDL requirement changes typically require about 6 months to notify the 
public and implement the changes. 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 12 
1.3 GDL Intermediate License Nighttime Restrictions 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
 
Driving at night increases the fatal crash risk per mile of travel for all drivers, and especially for 
teenage drivers (Hedlund et al., 2003; Williams, 2003; Tefft, Williams, & Grabowski, 2013b). A 
recent study found that the rate of driver fatalities was 5 times higher among 16- and 17-year- 
olds from 10 p.m. to 5:59 a.m. compared to driving during the day (Tefft et al., 2013b). At night, 
driving is more difficult, driver drowsiness is more common, and alcohol is more likely to be 
used. Many intermediate license drivers have limited experience driving at night. For all of these 
reasons, a night driving restriction helps reduce risk for intermediate level drivers. 
 
The restricted hours vary widely, from 6 p.m. to 6 a.m. in the most restrictive State, to 1 a.m. to 5 
a.m. in the least restrictive (GHSA, 2014a; IIHS, 2014a). The most common hours are 11 p.m. or 
midnight to 5 or 6 a.m. However, a starting time earlier than midnight will prevent more crashes, 
especially since teenage driver crashes occur more frequently before midnight than after (Foss & 
Goodwin, 2003; Williams, 2003). NHTSA’s Motor Vehicle Occupant Safety Survey found that 
73% of the general public believe teenagers should not be allowed to drive unsupervised after 9 
p.m. (Block & Walker, 2008). Another national survey of parents found 90% support a nighttime 
driving restriction, with 77% saying it should be 10 p.m. or earlier (Williams et al., 2011). 
 
Use: As of August 2014, 49 States and the District of Columbia restricted intermediate license 
drivers from driving during specified nighttime hours. (The exception is Vermont.) Many States 
allowed driving during the restricted hours for work or school-related activities (GHSA, 2014a; 
IIHS, 2014a). 
 
Effectiveness: The effectiveness of nighttime driving restrictions in reducing both nighttime 
driving and nighttime crashes has been demonstrated conclusively (Fell et al., 2011; Hedlund et 
al., 2003; Hedlund & Compton, 2005; Lin & Fearn, 2003; Lyon et al., 2012; Masten et al., 2013; 
McCartt et al., 2010). The earlier a night restriction begins, the greater the reduction in crashes. 
For example, night restrictions that begin at 9 p.m. are associated with an 18% reduction in fatal 
crashes compared to no restriction. The reduction is only 9% when the night restriction begins 
at1 a.m. (McCartt et al., 2010). 
 
Costs: Once GDL is in place, a nighttime driving restriction can be implemented or modified at 
very little cost. 
 
Time to implement: GDL requirement changes typically require about 6 months to notify the 
public and implement the changes. 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 13 
1.4 GDL Intermediate License Passenger Restrictions 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
 
Young passengers are associated with a substantial increase in the risk of a fatal crash for teenage 
drivers (Chen, Baker, Braver, & Li, 2000; Ouimet et al., 2010; Preusser, Ferguson, & Williams, 
1998; Tefft et al., 2013b). Each additional passenger is associated with an additional increase in 
fatal crash risk (Chen et al., 2000; Preusser et al., 1998; Tefft et al., 2013b). Fatal crash risks are 
highest when young male drivers carry same age passengers, especially if those passengers are 
also male (Chen et al., 2000; Ouimet et al., 2010; Tefft et al., 2013b). 
 
To reduce this risk, most States include a passenger restriction in their GDL requirements for 
intermediate licensees. According to NHTSA’s Motor Vehicle Occupant Safety Survey, 86% of 
the general public believe that teenagers should have a restriction on the number of teenage 
passengers they can carry (Block & Walker, 2008). Also, in a recent national survey 89% of 
parents say they support passenger restrictions; 82% think the passengers limit should be one or 
less (Williams et al., 2011). 
 
Use: As of August 2014, 46 States and the District of Columbia restricted in some way the 
number of passengers who can be carried by an intermediate license driver (GHSA, 2014a; IIHS, 
2014a). The most common passenger restrictions limit teenage drivers to zero or just one 
passenger. Some restrictions apply to all passengers and some only to passengers younger than a 
specified age. A few States allow exceptions for transporting family or household members. 
 
Effectiveness: There is growing evidence that passenger restrictions are effective in reducing 
young driver crashes, though the restrictions sometimes are violated (Carpenter & Pressley, 
2013; Fell et al., 2011; Goodwin & Foss, 2004; Lyon et al., 2012; Masten et al., 2013; McCartt et 
al., 2010; Williams, 2007). California allows no passengers younger than 20 for teenagers who 
hold intermediate licenses. Four studies demonstrate the positive effects of this restriction. For 
example, one study showed a 38% decrease in 16-year-old-driver crashes in California in which 
a teen passenger was killed or injured (Williams, 2007). A NHTSA study evaluated passenger 
restrictions in three States, California, Massachusetts, and Virginia. Results showed 16-year-old- 
driver crashes were reduced in all three States, as were motor-vehicle-related injuries among 15- 
to 17-year-olds (Chaudhary, Williams, & Nissen, 2007). In North Carolina, a teen passenger 
restriction was enacted independent of any other changes to the State’s GDL system. Subsequent 
to this restriction, 16-year-old-driver crashes involving multiple passengers decreased by 32% 
(Foss, 2009). Recent national studies have also found large crash rate reductions for passenger 
restrictions. For example, McCartt et al. (2010) found a 21% reduction in fatal crashes among 
15- to 17-year-olds when no passengers were permitted and a 7% reduction when one passenger 
was allowed. Similarly, Masten et al. (2013) found a 20% lower fatal crash rate among 16-year-
old drivers and a 12% lower fatal crash rate among 17-year-old drivers when no more than one 
young passenger was allowed for at least the first six months of independent driving.  
 
Costs: Once GDL is in place, a passenger restriction can be implemented at very little cost. 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 14 
Time to implement: GDL requirement changes typically require about 6 months to notify the 
public and implement the changes. 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 15 
 
1.5 GDL Cell Phone Restrictions 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Medium 
 
As discussed in Chapter 4, Section 1.2, young drivers are at a greater risk of crashing when they 
engage in distracting behaviors (Ferguson, 2003; Klauer et al., 2014). Specifically with regards to 
cell phone use, young drivers are at higher risk of crashing when they reach for a cell phone, dial 
a cell phone, or text while driving compared to when they do not engage in these behaviors 
(Klauer et al., 2014). To reduce this risk, a growing number of States include cell phone 
restrictions in their GDL laws. See Chapter 4, Section 1.2 for a discussion of cell phone laws 
applying to all drivers. 
 
Use: As of August 2014, 38 States and the District of Columbia prohibit cell phone use for 
young drivers. These bans cover all cell phone use, not just hand-held phones. In some States the 
cell phone restrictions cover teenagers holding a learner’s permit and intermediate license; in 
other States the restrictions cover all drivers under a certain age, such as 18 or 19 (GHSA, 2014b; 
IIHS, 2014b). Fourteen States and D.C. prohibit hand-held cell phone use for all drivers. In 
addition, 44 States and D.C. prohibit text messaging for all drivers and 4 States ban text 
messaging among young drivers (see Chapter 4, Section 1.2). 
 
Effectiveness: There is conflicting evidence regarding the effectiveness of cell phone restrictions 
on young drivers’ behaviors and crash outcomes. In 2009, a study examined the short-term 
effects of a teenage driver cell phone restriction in North Carolina, and found that 5 months after 
a ban on cell phones took effect, the proportion of teens using cell phones while driving was 
unchanged (Foss, Goodwin, McCartt, & Hellinga, 2009). A follow-up study evaluated the long-
term effect of North Carolina’s cell phone restriction two years after the law went into effect 
(Goodwin, O’Brien, & Foss, 2011). Teenagers were observed at high schools in North Carolina 
and also in South Carolina, which did not have a cell phone restriction. In both States, there was 
a decrease in cell phone use. However, the decrease in cell phone use did not significantly differ 
between the two States, despite increased awareness of the restriction among licensed teens in 
North Carolina (Goodwin et al., 2011).  
 
Two studies have examined the effects of cell phone bans on young driver crashes (Lim & Chi, 
2013; Ehsani, Bingham, Ionides, & Childers, 2014). Lim and Chi (2013) examined the 
relationship between cell phone bans and fatal crashes among drivers 20 years old and younger. 
They compared States across the United States that had no cell phone restrictions, cell phone 
restrictions that applied only to young drivers, and cell phone restrictions that applied to all 
drivers regardless of age. They found that cell found restrictions that applied to all drivers 
regardless of age were associated with a decrease in fatal crashes among young drivers. 
However, States that had cell phone restrictions that only applied to young drivers had no 
significant effect. Conversely, Ehsani et al. (2014) examined the effects of Michigan’s universal 
texting law on crash types among 16- and 17-year-old drivers and found a slight increase in more 
serious types of crashes including fatal/disabling injury crashes and non-disabling injury crashes. 
However, they found a slight decrease in less severe crashes (e.g., possible injury/PDO crashes).  
 
Costs: Once GDL is in place, a cell phone restriction can be implemented at very little cost. 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 16 
 
Time to implement: GDL requirement changes typically require about 6 months to notify the 
public and implement the changes. 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 17 
1.6 GDL Belt Use Requirements 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Low 
Time: Medium 
 
Properly worn seat belts can dramatically reduce the risk of injury or death to vehicle occupants 
in the event of a crash (NHTSA, 2001; NCSA, 2015). Seat belts are particularly important for 
teenage drivers because of their elevated crash risk. Nonetheless, teenage drivers and passengers 
have lower seat belt use rates than older drivers and passengers (NHTSA, 2009). Belt use is 
particularly low among teenagers who are male, drive pickup trucks, and live in rural areas (Kim, 
Depue, Spence, & Reine, 2009). 
 
Young drivers are covered by seat belt laws in all States (with the exception of New Hampshire, 
which only requires seat belts for people under 18) (GHSA 2014c; IIHS, 2014c). Some States 
explicitly require belt use under their GDL laws. An explicit belt use requirement in a State’s 
GDL law may have more influence on beginning drivers than the State’s overall belt use law, 
especially in States where a GDL belt use requirement is coupled with primary enforcement for 
young drivers and in States where seat belt violations result in delayed graduation to the next 
GDL stage. 
 
Use: In 2005, GDL laws in 15 States explicitly required seat belt use (AAA, 2005). Sanctions for 
violating this requirement varied across the States. 
 
Effectiveness: To date, there has been only one evaluation of the effects of explicit seat belt use 
requirements in GDL laws. Tennessee and Wisconsin both have a seat belt restriction within their 
States’ GDL program. Evaluations of the restrictions in these two States found little, if any, 
effect on teen driver belt use (Freedman & Levi, 2008). One problem is that teens (and parents) 
may not be aware when seat belt laws are part of a State’s GDL system. For example, surveys in 
North Carolina have shown very high awareness for the State’s nighttime and passenger 
restrictions, but only 3% of teens and 5% of parents were aware of the special GDL provision 
concerning seat belts (Goodwin & Foss, 2004). 
 
Costs: Once GDL is in place, a belt use requirement can be implemented at very little cost. 
 
Time to implement: GDL requirement changes typically require about 6 months to notify the 
public and implement the changes. 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 18 
1.7 GDL Intermediate License Violation Penalties 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
 
A probationary feature is included in the intermediate phase of many graduated licensing 
systems, which is commonly referred to as contingent advancement. Typically, contingent 
advancement means that an intermediate license holder must maintain a violation free driving 
record for a specified amount of time before they can obtain a full license.  
 
Use: Almost all States penalize some GDL or traffic law violations by delaying full licensure 
(IIHS & TIRF, 2004). 
 
Effectiveness: The few evaluations of early stand-alone probationary license systems generally 
found no substantial benefits (McKnight & Peck, 2003; Simpson, 2003). No recent evaluations 
have attempted to separate out the effect of penalties for GDL or other traffic law violations from 
the overall effects of GDL. 
 
An enforcement/education program dubbed “Ticket Today = License Delay” (the equals sign is 
not pronounced) highlighted the resulting delay in licensure for teenagers who are convicted of a 
moving violation, seat belt violation or GDL violation. Although teens and their parents clearly 
perceived the increased enforcement, the program had only minimal effects on seat belt use and 
compliance with GDL restrictions (Goodwin, Wells, Foss, & Williams, 2006). In general, it 
appears that awareness of penalties for license violations among parents and teens is relatively 
low, enforcement is rare, and licensing delays are not always applied even when violations are 
enforced (Goodwin & Foss, 2004; Steenbergen et al., 2001; Williams, 2007). 
 
Costs: Once GDL is in place, penalties for violating its provisions can be changed at very little 
cost. 
 
Time to implement: GDL requirement changes typically require about 6 months to notify the 
public and implement the changes. 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 19 
2. Driver Education 
 
2.1 Pre-Licensure Driver Education 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$$ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Long 
 
Driver education has long been advocated and used to teach both driving skills and safe driving 
practices. Driver education in high schools grew in popularity in the 1950s, using a standard 
curriculum of at least 30 hours classroom instruction and 6 hours on-the-road driving practice. 
By about 1970, approximately 14,000 high schools taught driver education to about 70% of all 
eligible teenagers. Many States and insurance companies encouraged driver education: States 
licensed graduates at an earlier age and insurance companies reduced auto insurance premiums 
for graduates. During the 1980s driver education offerings decreased as State and Federal 
funding for driver education decreased. By the early 1990s fewer than half of all high schools 
offered driver education and the majority of beginning drivers did not take driver education. See 
Smith (1994), Mayhew (2007), or Williams, Preusser, and Ledingham (2009) for a concise 
review of the history of driver education in the United States, and see Beanland, Goode, Salmon, 
and Lenné (2013) for a recent review of the effectiveness of driver training programs. 
 
The study most well known in the United States for evaluating the effect of driver education on 
crash rates is the extensive NHTSA-sponsored study in DeKalb County, Georgia, in the late 
1970s. Over 16,000 students were randomly assigned to three groups: standard driver education; 
an 80-hour long course including classroom, simulation, driving range, and on-the-road 
components; and a control group of no formal driver education. The initial analysis found no 
significant difference in crashes or traffic violations among the three groups (Smith, 1994). A 
second analysis, which tracked the students’ driving records for a longer period of time, found a 
slight crash reduction for standard course graduates during their first months of driving only, and 
no difference between the long course and no course graduates (Smith, 1994). See Vernick 
(1999) or Williams et al. (2009) for brief summaries of all DeKalb study analyses. 
 
Roberts et al. (2006) concluded from three well-designed evaluations in Australia, New Zealand, 
and the United States that driver education may lower the age at which teenagers become 
licensed but does not affect their crash rates once they do become licensed. The net effect of 
driver education may increase crashes because it puts more young drivers on the road. Vernick et 
al. (1999) reached the same conclusion from a review of 9 studies, 8 from the United States. and 
1 from Australia. It has been suggested that crash outcomes are not appropriate or fair measures 
for driver education, and are unrealistic to expect (Waller, 2003). 
 
In contrast, a recent archival study concluded there is a decrease in crash risk associated with 
driver education (4.3%, AAA, 2014), but this reduction is modest compared with those 
associated with GDL. This result is consistent with the suggestion that it may be unreasonable to 
expect pre-licensure driver education to produce sizable changes in crash risk given the amount 
of time and resources dedicated to it (Waller, 2003). Given that an effect of this size would 
require research that includes over 140,000 students to reliably detect differences in crash rates 
between students who do and do not complete driver education, it is unsurprising that most 
previous evaluations have failed to detect any effect of driver education. 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 20 
 
Based primarily on results that indicated no consistent notable effect of driver education, 
NHTSA concluded that driver education should be integrated into State GDL programs 
(Compton & Ellison-Potter, 2008; Thomas et al., 2012a). It also concluded that driver education 
should be “distributed over time.” NHTSA proposed a two-stage driver education system, both 
pre-licensure and post-licensure. (See Chapter 6, Section 2.2 for further discussion.) In addition, 
NHTSA and the driver education community has developed national administrative standards to 
enhance driver education delivery in the States (NHTSA, 2010). NHTSA offers a State 
Assessment Program to assist States in meeting those standards. At the request of a State, 
NHTSA will send a team of experts who will analyze and make recommendations for improving 
the driver education program. 
 
Many States offer incentives for taking driver education. Twenty-five States encourage driver 
education by allowing teens to get unrestricted licenses at an earlier age if they complete driver 
education, and 18 States offer other incentives such as reducing the required number of 
supervised driving hours, waiving portions of licensing tests, or lowering the minimum permit 
age (Thomas et al., 2012a). Research shows that driver education “discounts” increase, rather 
than reduce, crashes (Mayhew, 2007). For example, a study in British Columbia found that crash 
rates were 27% higher for driver education graduates who reduced their learner’s permit holding 
period by three months, than for non-graduates (Wiggins, 2004). 
 
Use: NHTSA recently completed an investigation of driver education requirements in the United 
States. and found that 23 States and the District of Columbia require some form of driver 
education before licensure for anyone younger than 18 (Thomas et al., 2012a). Most commonly 
this includes 30 hours of classroom instruction and 6 hours of behind-the-wheel practice, 
although requirements vary considerably across States. For example, 15 States now accept online 
driver education in lieu of standard in-person classroom-based instruction (Thomas et al., 2012b). 
Most States offer both commercial and high school driver education programs (Thomas et al., 
2012a). 
 
Effectiveness: Driver education leads to earlier licensure in some States and does not reduce 
crash rates (Mayhew, 2007; Roberts et al, 2006; Thomas et al., 2012a; Vernick et al., 1999; 
Williams et al., 2009). Nonetheless, there has been a growing interest in improving and 
evaluating driver education. Future directions for driver education were summarized in a research 
circular by the Transportation Research Board (TRB, 2006). In addition, the AAA Foundation 
for Traffic Safety has produced a series of publications that provide practical information on how 
to conduct evaluations of driver education (Clinton & Lonero, 2006), and NHTSA conducted a 
feasibility study on evaluating driver education curriculum (Williams et al., 2009). 
 
In addition, there have been recent advances in the development in new types of driver education 
programs (summarized in Thomas et al., 2012a). Given that visual scanning, attention 
maintenance, and speed management are likely responsible for many crashes among young 
drivers, a number of new programs have been developed that focus on teaching these higher- 
order knowledge and skills, generally using computer simulation. Although many of these 
programs have demonstrated short-term training effects, it is still unknown how long the training 
effects are maintained. More importantly, it is unknown if the training effects will carry over into 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 21 
real world driving environments and result in crash reductions among young drivers (Thomas et 
al., 2012a). 
 
Costs: Even a minimal driver education course of 30 hours in the classroom and 6 hours on the 
road requires extensive funds. Driver education also requires students to find time for it in their 
schedules of high school classes, extracurricular and summer activities, and jobs. 
 
Time to implement: A driver education course requires at least a year to plan and implement. 
 
Other issues: 
• Parent involvement: There has been a growing interest in integrating parents into driver 
education. For example, three States (Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Montana) and four 
counties in Northern Virginia require parents to attend a parent information/orientation 
session as a part of their teen’s driver education requirements (GHSA, 2013). Virginia 
passed legislation in 2009 requiring a minimum of 90 minutes of parent participation in 
the in-classroom portion of driver education. Similarly, Massachusetts and Connecticut 
require a parent to attend a 2-hour driver education orientation program. In 2012, 
Montana revised their Traffic Education Standards to include a provision that parents of 
teens in driver education must attend a mandatory session and the State specified the 
content that must be included in the information session. Parents appear to support these 
requirements. In a recent national survey, a majority (70%) of parents reported that 
orientation courses should be required (Williams et al., 2011). Nonetheless, research has 
not yet determined the most effective way to involve parents in the driver education 
process (GHSA, 2013).  
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 22 
2.2 Post-Licensure or Second-Tier Driver Education 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $$$ 
Use: Low 
Time: Long 
†Post-licensure driver education received a one star rating because its effectiveness has not yet been evaluated  
 
As discussed in Chapter 6, Section 2.1, standard pre-licensure driver education leads to earlier 
licensure but does not reduce crash rates. Based on this conclusion, driver education research has 
sought to develop post-licensure driver education curricula and to integrate driver education with 
GDL (Smith, 1994). These “second-tier” post-licensure courses teach safety-related information, 
building on the on-road experience that the students have acquired in their initial months of 
driving. They should not be confused with “advanced driving performance” courses that teach 
driving skills such as panic braking, skid control, and evasive lane-changing maneuvers. 
 
Previous post-licensure driver education courses were remedial, directed at drivers who had 
accumulated enough violations or crashes to warrant some attention. For this audience, post- 
licensure driver education had no effect (Ker et al., 2005, 2006). 
 
Initiatives in Australia and Europe may provide insight on potential approaches for post-license 
training for beginning drivers (Senserrick, 2007; Twisk & Stacey, 2007). Christie and colleagues 
have developed a model “best practice” curriculum for intermediate license drivers with at least 
6 months of driving experience in Australia (Christie, Harrison, & Johnston, 2004). The 8-hour 
curriculum consists of eight modular sessions with a mentor or coach, including one-on-one 
driving and discussion, group observation and discussion of driving behavior, and telephone 
follow-up. However, this curriculum has yet to be evaluated.  
 
NHTSA has completed a feasibility study in anticipation of a major evaluation of the benefits of 
an integrated driver education and GDL program (Hedlund & Compton, 2005). 
 
Use: Post-licensure driver education is still under development. Michigan is the only State that 
has adopted a two-stage system of driver education (Mayhew, 2007). 
 
Effectiveness: Post-licensure driver education has not yet been evaluated. 
 
Costs: If a post-licensure driver education program proves to be effective, it likely will require 
substantial funds to implement. 
 
Time to implement: Any course requires at least a year to plan and implement. 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 23 
3. Parents 
 
3.1 Parental Role in Teaching and Managing Young Drivers 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Short 
 
Most parents are heavily involved in teaching driving skills to their beginning teenage drivers 
and supervising their driving while they have a learner’s permit. Parents are in the best position 
to enforce GDL restrictions for intermediate drivers and to impose additional driving restrictions 
on their teenagers. Parents strongly support GDL; however, many parents do not understand the 
dangers of high-risk situations, such as driving with teenage passengers. Parents could use 
guidance and assistance in during this process (Hedlund et al., 2003; NCHRP, 2007, Strategies 
C1-C3). For summaries of the research on parent involvement in teen driving, see Simons-
Morton and Ouimet (2006) or Simons-Morton, Ouimet, and Catalano (2008). For a recent review 
of promising parent programs, see GHSA (2013). 
 
The majority of States provide some form of guidance materials to parents of teen drivers in the 
form of booklets/brochures and/or videos, and many of the materials are provided online. 
However, it has been demonstrated that passive dissemination of information to parents is not an 
effective method to change parents’ behaviors and ultimately reduce teen driver crashes 
(Chaudhary, Ferguson, & Herbel, 2004; Goodwin, Waller, Foss, & Margolis, 2006). In hopes of 
better equipping parents to supervise and manage their teens’ driving, there has been a growing 
interest in programs that involve direct interaction and engagement with parents. Although many 
such programs have been developed, the following four programs are highlighted because they 
have been evaluated and shown promising results: Checkpoints, Green Light for Life, Steering 
Teens Safe, and Teen Driving Plan 
 
Checkpoints: The original Checkpoints program, developed by Simons-Morton and colleagues at 
the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, is a program that uses videos 
and periodic newsletters to reinforce the need for parents to limit their newly licensed teens’ 
driving under risky conditions. A central feature of the program is a written agreement that 
parents and teens review and sign. The agreement limits teens’ driving under various high-risk 
situations, such as driving at night, with other teens in the car, or in bad weather (Simons-Morton 
& Hartos, 2003). The facilitated Checkpoints program has been adapted from the original version 
to include a 30-minute in-person session to introduce teens and parents to the Checkpoints 
program, and to have them work in pairs to begin developing a parent-teen driving agreement 
(Zakrajsek, Shope, Ouimet, Wang, & Simons-Morton, 2009).  
 
Green Light for Life (GLL): This program has been implemented in Israel since 2005 (Taubman 
& Lotan, 2011; Toledo, Lotan, Taubman, & Grimberg, 2012). From 2005-2008 approximately 
130,000 families have participated in the program. GLL consists of an in-person, 45-minute 
meeting with a parent and their young driver prior to entering the accompanied driving phase, 
otherwise known as the learner’s permit stage in the United States During the meeting, parents 
and teens are encouraged to get as much supervised driving practice as possible in a variety of 
conditions. Parents are encouraged to share their hazard perception knowledge and skills with 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 24 
their teen driver. Strategies for dealing with in-vehicle dynamics between the teen and parent are 
also discussed. Families are given a booklet and CD to take home. 
 
Steering Teens Safe: This is a 45-minute in-person program that focuses on improving parents’ 
communication skills by teaching them to use motivational interviewing techniques to talk to 
their teens about safe driving. Parents receive a DVD and a workbook with 19 safe driving 
lessons to help parents to discuss, demonstrate, and practice safe driving behaviors and skills 
with their teens. Steering Teens Safe is intended for parents of teens who are in the learner permit 
phase (Peek-Asa et al., 2014; Ramirez et al., 2013).  
 
Teen Driving Plan (TDP): This is a web-based program for parents to use during the learner 
permit phase to increase the quantity and quality of their supervised driving practice. The Teen 
Driving Plan includes 53 web-based videos, a web-based planner to help teens and parents 
structure their practice sessions, and a web-based log to record and rate driving practice sessions 
(Mirman et al., 2014). 
 
Use: Checkpoints is available on the web. Steering Teens Safe and Teen Driving Plan are still 
being evaluated and are not available for the public. Green Light for Life is not currently 
available in the United States. 
 
Effectiveness:  
 
Checkpoints: Results from testing in several States show the original Checkpoints program 
produces modest increases in parents’ restrictions on teen driving (Simons-Morton & Hartos, 
2003; Simons-Morton, Hartos, Leaf, & Preusser, 2005). However, a study in Connecticut found 
no differences in violations or crashes for families who participated in the Checkpoints program 
when compared with families who did not participate in the program (Simons-Morton, Hartos, 
Leaf, & Preusser, 2006). 
 
The facilitated Checkpoints program has recently been evaluated and has had promising results. 
Zakrajsek et al. (2009) evaluated the program delivered by trained health educators in driver 
education classes and found that, relative to a comparison group, parents who participated in the 
facilitated Checkpoints program showed greater awareness of teen driving risks, were more likely 
to complete a parent-teen driving agreement, and reported setting stricter limits on their teens’ 
driving during the intermediate license phase. Zakrajsek et al. (2013) conducted an evaluation of 
the facilitated Checkpoints program delivered by driver education instructors and also found that 
parents who participated in the program were more likely to report that they used a parent teens 
driving agreement and had stricter limits on their teens’ driving. Teens also self-reported less 
risky driving. However, they found no differences in crashes for teens who participated in the 
program compared to teens who did not participate. 
 
Green Light for Life: To date, Green Light for Life has undergone two evaluations. Taubman and 
Lotan (2011) examined the effectiveness of the GLL program by comparing self-reports of 362 
teenagers who participated in the program with 376 teens who did not. They found no difference 
in the amount of accompanied driving teens obtained during the supervised driving phase or the 
level of reckless driving reported. However, teenagers who participated in the program reported 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 25 
more positive attitudes about the supervised driving phase and reported less crash involvement. 
A recent national study evaluated injury crash involvement between teens who participated in the 
GLL program during 2005-2007 compared to teens that did not participate in the program. Based 
on analysis of injury crash data during the first two years after licensing, teens who participated 
in GLL had 10% lower injury crash rates (Toledo et al., 2012). Nonetheless, both studies suffered 
from the possible effects of self-selection bias. A follow-up study is underway to examine 
behavior and crash data of young drivers at the individual level, in an attempt to address this 
potential bias. 
 
Steering Teens Safe: To date, the Steering Teens Safe program has been evaluated via one 
randomized controlled trial (Peek-Asa et al., 2014). The study examined the effectiveness of 
parent communication about driving safety as perceived by the teen driver, and the teens’ self-
reported risky driving. Teens in the Steering Teens Safe program reported a higher quality of 
parent communication than control teens, and the teens in the program reported a 21% reduction 
in self-reported risky driving compared with control teens.  
 
Teen Driving Plan: To date, one randomized controlled trial has been conducted to measure the 
effects of the Teen Driving Plan. Mirman et al. (2014) found that families who used the Teen 
Driving Plan reported more driving practice in various environments and situations (i.e., night 
and bad weather) compared to teens not in the program. In addition, teens that were in the Teen 
Driving Plan group were less likely to be terminated during an on-road driving test compared to 
teens not in the program (6% and 15%, respectively). 
 
Although evaluations of programs to assist parents have not yet shown reductions in young 
driver crashes, there is still reason to be optimistic. Programs such as Checkpoints have increased 
parent limit setting, and several studies show that teenagers whose parents impose more strict 
driving limits report fewer risky driving behaviors, traffic violations and crashes (see Simons- 
Morton, 2007, for a review). Educational programs alone are unlikely to produce changes in 
behavior. However, education in combination with other strategies may deliver stronger results. 
 
Costs: Checkpoints is available on the web; however, in order to use the facilitated version, staff 
time would be needed to implement in the in-person session.  
 
Time to implement: The original Checkpoints program and the facilitated program are available 
immediately. However, to implement the facilitated Checkpoints program on a large scale, it 
would likely take a year for planning, staff training, and dissemination. Green Light for Life, 
Steering Teens Safe, and the Teen Driving Plan program are not yet available. 
 
Other issues: 
• Electronic monitoring: Various technologies have been developed to aid parents in 
monitoring their teenage drivers. For example, many GPS companies offer “teen 
tracking” services that will notify parents if their teens go beyond boundaries, or are 
speeding at any given time. Video-based devices, such as DriveCam, can provide visual 
monitoring of teen drivers. When these technologies are combined with weekly report 
cards to parents, they can reduce the incidence of risky driving behaviors among teens 
(Carney et al., 2010; Farah et al., 2014, Farmer, Kirley, & McCartt, 2010; McGehee et 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 26 
al., 2007; Musicant & Lampel, 2010, Simons-Morton et al., 2013). However, more 
research is needed to determine the impact of electronic monitoring on crashes and 
fatalities among young drivers. 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 27 
 
4. Traffic Law Enforcement 
 
4.1 Enforcement of GDL and Zero-Tolerance Laws 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
 
Two traffic laws apply only to young drivers: GDL laws and zero-tolerance laws that set a 
maximum BAC of .02 or less for drivers under 21. As discussed in Chapter 1, Section 6.2, zero-
tolerance laws are not actively publicized or enforced. It’s likely that increased publicity and 
enforcement would reduce teenage drinking and driving. 
 
GDL laws, discussed in Chapter 6, Sections 1.1-1.6, also appear not to be enforced vigorously. 
Some GDL provisions such as nighttime driving restrictions are inherently difficult to enforce 
because violations are difficult to detect (Hedlund et al., 2003). A study in one State found that 
intermediate license drivers and their parents were quite aware of their GDL law’s nighttime and 
passenger restrictions. Both restrictions were violated, though not frequently. Teenagers 
expressed little concern regarding GDL enforcement. Although surveys of law enforcement 
officers found that most were supportive of GDL, officers were not familiar with GDL details 
and considered GDL enforcement a low priority (Goodwin & Foss, 2004). Another study found 
that teen drivers reported frequently violating passenger restrictions, with and/or without their 
parents’ knowledge/permission, because local police did not routinely enforce GDL restrictions 
(Chaudhary et al., 2007). 
 
Parents are in the best position to enforce GDL requirements (Chapter 6, Section 3.1). However, 
some law enforcement support for GDL nighttime driving and teenage passenger restrictions 
may be useful to emphasize that the requirements are important. GDL law violations are 
penalized by driver license actions, such as suspension or revocation of the learner’s permit or 
intermediate license or an extension of the time before full licensure. This means they can be 
applied administratively and do not involve criminal court proceedings. As noted in Chapter 1, 
Section 6.2, administrative penalties for zero-tolerance laws are far easier to enforce than 
criminal penalties. Another issue with enforcement concerns the difficulties in identifying drivers 
that qualify as falling under the GDL system in a given State. It has been suggested, and is one of 
NHTSA’s GDL recommendations, that young drivers should be required to affix a vehicle decal 
identifying them as qualifying for the GDL program to make them more readily identifiable. 
New Jersey is the first State to implement this potential countermeasure. 
 
Use: The amount of enforcement of zero-tolerance and GDL laws is unknown but probably is 
low. 
 
Effectiveness: Zero-tolerance law publicity and enforcement likely will reduce teenage drinking 
and driving, as discussed in Chapter 1, Section 6.2. Similarly, high visibility enforcement of 
GDL provisions should encourage compliance with nighttime and passenger restrictions. One 
study investigated whether well-publicized enforcement, including checkpoints near high 
schools, could increase compliance with seat belt laws and GDL provisions. The study found 
only modest increases in seat belt use and compliance with the GDL passenger restriction, 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 28 
although levels of compliance prior to the enforcement efforts were already high (Goodwin, 
Wells, Foss, & Williams, 2006). 
 
Recent studies evaluating the effectiveness of vehicle decals in New Jersey have found increases 
in citations for violations of licensing restrictions and decreases in crash rates among 
intermediate license holders in the year after the requirement went into effect (Curry et al., 2013; 
McCartt et al., 2012). 
 
Costs: See Chapter 1, Section 6.2, for zero-tolerance law enforcement strategies and costs. GDL 
law enforcement costs will depend on how the enforcement is conducted. Enforcement through 
regular patrols will require moderate costs for training. Special patrols or checkpoints will 
require additional staff time. All enforcement will require good publicity to both teens and 
parents. Publicity to teens can be delivered through high schools, colleges, recreational venues 
attended by youth, and media directed to youth. The cost of vehicle decals can be paid for by the 
licensee when they receive a learner’s permit or intermediate license. In Virginia, vehicle decals 
cost $4 for a pair.  
 
Time to implement: Enforcement programs can be implemented within three or four months, as 
soon as appropriate training, publicity, and equipment are in place. 
 
Other issues: 
• Compliance with restrictions: Several studies have shown that teenagers do not always 
comply with GDL restrictions (Goodwin & Foss, 2004; Williams, Nelson, & Leaf, 2002). 
To the extent that teens do not adhere to restrictions, the effectiveness of GDL may be 
reduced. It should be noted, however, that GDL has been shown to be effective even in 
the absence of police enforcement. For example, focus groups with parents and teen 
drivers conducted in California, Massachusetts, and Virginia revealed that passenger 
restrictions were frequently violated in all three States, but even incomplete adherence to 
the restrictions had a positive impact on teen driver crashes (Chaudhary et al., 2007). In 
general, compliance with restrictions will be higher in States that have well-designed 
GDL systems with restrictions that are considered reasonable by parents and teens (Foss 
& Goodwin, 2003). 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 29 
Young Driver References 
 
AAA Public Affairs. (2005). GDL Laws. Heathrow, FL: AAA. 
 
Baker, S. P., Chen, L-H., & Li, G. (2006). National evaluation of Graduated Driver Licensing 
programs (Report No. DOT HS 810 614). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/NewDriver/GDLReport/images/GDLReport.pdf 
 
Baker, S. P., Chen, L-H., & Li, G. (2007). Nationwide review of Graduated Driver Licensing. 
Retrieved from the AAA Foundation website: 
www.aaafoundation.org/pdf/NationwideReviewOfGDL.pdf 
 
Beanland, V., Goode, N., Salmon, P. M., & Lenné, M. G. (2013). Is there a case for driver 
training? A review of the efficacy of pre- and post-licence driver training. Safety Science, 51, 
127-137. 
 
Block, A. W., & Walker, S. (2008). 2007 Motor Vehicle Occupant Safety Survey: Driver 
education and graduated driver licensing (Report No. DOT HS 811 047). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8110
47.pdf 
 
Carney, C., McGehee, D. V., Lee, J. D., Reyes, M. L. & Raby, M. (2010). Using an event- 
triggered video intervention system to expand the supervised learning of newly licensed 
adolescent drivers. American Journal of Public Health, 100, 1101-1106. 
 
Carpenter, D., & Pressley, J. C. (2013). Graduated driver licensing nighttime compliance in U.S. 
teen drivers involved in fatal motor vehicle crashes. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 56, 110-
117. 
 
Christie, R., Harrison, W., & Johnston, D. (2004). Development of a novice driver education 
curriculum for the ATSB (Report CR 222). Canberra, Australia: Australian Transport Safety 
Bureau. Retrieved from 
www.infrastructure.gov.au/roads/safety/publications/2004/Edu_Nov_Dr.aspx 
 
Chaudhary, N. K., Ferguson, S.A., & Herbel, S. B. (2004). Tennessee’s novice driver safety 
project: A program to increase parental involvement. Traffic Injury Prevention, 5, 356-361. 
 
Chaudhary, N., Williams, A., & Nissen, W. (2007). Evaluation and compliance of passenger 
restrictions in a Graduated Driver Licensing program (Report No. DOT HS 810 781). Retrieved 
from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8107
81Scr.pdf 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 30 
Chen, L., Baker, S. P., Braver, E. R., & Li, G. (2000). Carrying passengers as a risk factor for 
crashes fatal to 16- and 17-year-old drivers. Journal of the American Medical Association, 283, 
1578-1582. 
 
Clinton, K. M., & Lonero, L. (2006). Guidelines for evaluating driver education programs. 
Retrieved from the AAA Foundation website: 
www.aaafoundation.org/pdf/EvaluatingDriverEducationProgramsGuidelines.pdf 
 
Compton, R. P., & Ellison-Potter, P. (2008). Teen driver crashes: A report to Congress (Report 
No. DOT HS 811 005). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8110 
05.pdf 
 
Curry A. E., Pfeiffer M. R., Localio R., & Durbin, D. (2013) Graduated driver licensing decal 
law: Effect on young probationary drivers. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 44, 1-7. 
 
Dahl, R. E. (2008). Biological, developmental, and neurobehavioral factors relevant to adolescent 
driving risks. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 35(3S), S278-S284. 
 
Ehsani, J. P., Bingham, C. R., Ionides, E., & Childers, D. (2014). The impact of Michigan's text 
messaging restriction on motor vehicle crashes. Journal of Adolescent Health, 54(5S), S6-S15. 
 
Ehsani, J. P., Bingham, C. R., & Shope, J. T. (2013). The effect of the learner license Graduated 
Driver Licensing components on teen drivers’ crashes. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 59, 
327-336. 
 
Farah, H., Musicant, O., Shimshoni, Y., Toledo, T., Grimberg, E., Omer, H., & Lotan, T. (2014). 
Can providing feedback on driving behavior and training on parental vigilant care affect male 
teen drivers and their parents? Accident Analysis and Prevention, 69, 62-70. 
 
Farmer, C. M., Kirley, B. B., & McCartt, A. T. (2010). Effects of in-vehicle monitoring on the 
driving behavior of teenagers. Journal of Safety Research, 41, 39-45. 
 
Fell, J. C., Jones, K., Romano, E., & Voas, R. (2011). An evaluation of graduated driver 
licensing effects on fatal crash involvements of young drivers in the United States. Traffic Injury 
Prevention, 12, 423-431. 
 
Ferguson, S. A. (2003). Other high-risk factors for young drivers - how graduated licensing does, 
doesn’t, or could address them. Journal of Safety Research, 34, 71-77. 
 
Federal Highway Administration. (2014). Highway statistics 2012. Retrieved from 
www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/statistics/2012/dl20.cfm 
 
Foss, R. D. (2009). Effect of adding a passenger restriction to an already effective GDL system. 
Presentation at the TRB [ANB30(1)] Young Driver Mid-year Meeting, Washington, DC, July 
13-14, 2009. Available at www.youngdriversafety.org/docs/2009/Foss.pdf 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 31 
 
Foss, R., & Goodwin, A. (2003). Enhancing the effectiveness of graduated driver licensing 
legislation. Journal of Safety Research, 34, 79-84. 
 
Foss, R. D., & Goodwin, A. H. (2014). Distracted driver behaviors and distracting conditions 
among adolescent drivers: Findings from a naturalistic study. Journal of Adolescent Health, 54, 
S50-S60. 
 
Foss, R. D., Goodwin, A. H., McCartt, A. T., & Hellinga, L. A. (2009). Short-term effects of a 
teenage driver cell phone restriction. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 41, 419-424. 
 
Foss, R. D., Masten, S. V., Goodwin, A. H., & O’Brien, N. P. (2012). The role of supervised 
driving requirements in Graduated Driver Licensing programs (Report No. DOT HS 811 550). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811550.pdf 
 
Freedman, M., & Levi, S. (2008, April). Evaluation of a seat belt restriction in a Graduated 
Driver Licensing program. Presentation at the 2008 Lifesavers Conference. Portland, OR. 
 
Governors Highway Safety Association (GHSA). (2012). Curbing teen driver crashes: An in-
depth look at state initiatives. Retrieved from http://ghsa.org/html/publications/pdf/sfteens12.pdf 
 
GHSA. (2013). Promoting parent involvement in teen driving. Retrieved from 
www.teensafedriver.com/doc/promoting-parent-involvement-in-teen-driving.pdf 
 
GHSA. (2014a). Graduated licensing laws. Retrieved from 
ghsa.org/html/stateinfo/laws/license_laws.html 
 
GHSA. (2014b). Distracted driving laws. Retrieved from 
www.statehighwaysafety.org/html/stateinfo/laws/cellphone_laws.html 
 
GHSA. (2014c). Seat belt laws. Retrieved from 
www.ghsa.org/html/stateinfo/laws/seatbelt_laws.html 
 
Goodwin, A. H., & Foss, R. D. (2004). Graduated driver licensing restrictions: Awareness, 
compliance, and enforcement in North Carolina. Journal of Safety Research, 35, 367-374. 
 
Goodwin, A. H., Waller, M. W., Foss, R. D., & Margolis, L. H. (2006). Parental supervision of 
teenage drivers in a graduated licensing system. Traffic Injury Prevention, 7, 224-231. 
 
Goodwin, A. H., Wells, J. K., Foss, R. D., & Williams, A. F. (2006). Encouraging compliance 
with graduated driver licensing restrictions. Journal of Safety Research, 37, 343-351. 
 
Goodwin, A. H., O’Brien, N. P., & Foss, R. D. (2011). Effect of North Carolina's restriction on 
teenage driver cell phone use two years after implementation. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 
48, 363-367. 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 32 
Hedlund, J., & Compton, R. (2005). Graduated driver licensing research in 2004 and 2005. 
Journal of Safety Research, 36, 109-114. 
 
Hedlund, J., Shults, R. A., & Compton, R. (2003). What we know, what we don’t know, and 
what we need to know about graduated driver licensing. Journal of Safety Research, 34, 107- 
115. 
  
Highway Loss Data Institute. (2013). Evaluation of changes in teenage driver exposure. 
Highway Loss Data Institute Bulletin, 30(17). Retrieved from the IIHS website: 
www.iihs.org/media/9e8ce82c-8744-4157-9080-0efffb97076d/-
292726267/HLDI%20Research/Bulletins/hldi_bulletin_30.17.pdf 
 
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety. (2014a). U.S. licensing systems for young drivers: Laws 
as of August 2014.Retrieved from 
www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/laws/graduatedlicenseintro?topicName=teenagers  
 
IIHS. (2014b). Distracted driving: State laws. Retrieved from 
www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/laws/cellphonelaws?topicName=distracted-driving 
 
IIHS. (2014c). Safety belt and child restraint laws. Retrieved from 
www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/laws/safetybeltuse?topicName=safety-belts 
 
IIHS & TIRF. (2004). Graduated Licensing: A blueprint for North America. Arlington, VA: 
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety and Ottawa: Traffic Injury Research Foundation. 
 
Keating, D. P. (2007). Understanding adolescent development: Implications for driving safety. 
Journal of Safety Research, 38, 147-157. 
 
Kelley, A. E, Schochet, T., & Landry, C. F. (2004). Risk taking and novelty seeking in 
adolescence: Introduction to part I. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1021, 27–32. 
 
Ker, K., Roberts, I., Collier, T., Beyer, F., Bunn, F., & Frost, C. (2005). Post-license driver 
education for the prevention of road traffic crashes: A systematic review of randomised 
controlled trials. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 37, 305-313. 
 
Ker, K., Roberts, I., Collier, T., Beyer, F., Bunn, F., & Frost, C. (2006). Post-license driver 
education for the prevention of road traffic crashes. The Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews, Issue 2. Retrieved from www.cochrane.org/reviews/en/ab003734.html 
 
Kim, S., Depue, L., Spence, L., & Reine, J. (2009). Analysis of teenage seat belt use: From the 
2007 Missouri high school seat belt survey. Journal of Safety Research, 40, 311-316.  
 
Klauer, S. G., Guo, F., Simons-Morton, B. G., Ouimet, M. C., Lee, S. E., & Dingus, T. A. 
(2014). Distracted driving and risk of road crashes among novice and experienced drivers. The 
New England Journal of Medicine, 370, 54-59 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 33 
Lee, J. D. (2007). Technology and teen drivers. Journal of Safety Research, 38, 203-213. 
 
Lim, S. H. & Chi J. (2013). Are cell phone laws in the U.S. effective in reducing fatal crashes 
involving young drivers? Transport Policy, 27, 158-163. 
 
Lin, M-L., & Fearn, K. T. (2003). The provisional license: Nighttime and passenger restrictions - 
a literature review. Journal of Safety Research, 34, 51-61. 
 
Lyon, J. D., Pan, R., & Li, J. (2012). National evaluation of the effect of graduated licensing laws 
on teenager fatality and injury crashes. Journal of Safety Research, 43, 29-37. 
 
Margolis, L. H., Masten, S. V., & Foss, R. D. (2007). The effects of Graduated Driver Licensing 
on hospitalization rates and charges for 16- and 17-year-olds in North Carolina. Traffic Injury 
Prevention, 8, 35-38. 
 
Masten, S. V., Foss, R., & Marshall, S. (2011). Graduated driver licensing and fatal crashes 
involving 16- to 19-year-old drivers. Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 306, 1099-
1103. 
 
Masten, S. V., Foss, R. D., & Marshall, S. (2013). Graduated driver licensing program 
component calibrations and their association with fatal crash involvement. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 57, 105-113. 
 
Mayhew, D. R. (2003). The learner’s permit. Journal of Safety Research, 34, 35-43.  
 
Mayhew, D. R. (2007). Driver education and graduated licensing in North America: Past, 
present, and future. Journal of Safety Research, 38, 229-235. 
 
McCartt, A. T., Oesch, N. J., Williams, A. F., & Powell, T. C. (2012). New Jersey’s license plate 
decal requirement for graduated driver licenses: Attitudes of parents and teenagers, observed 
decal use, and citations for teenage driving violations. Traffic Injury Prevention, 14, 244-258 
 
McCartt, A. T., Teoh, E. R., Fields, M., Braitman, K. A., & Hellinga, L. A. (2010). Graduated 
licensing laws and fatal crashes of teenage drivers: A national study. Traffic Injury Prevention, 
11, 240-248. 
 
McCartt, A. T & Teoh, E. R. (2014). Tracking progress in teenage crash risk in the United States 
since the advent of Graduated Driver Licensing programs. Retrieved from the IIHS website: 
www.iihs.org/frontend/iihs/documents/masterfiledocs.ashx?id=2069 
 
McGehee, D. V., Raby, M., Carney, C., Lee, J. D., & Reyes, M. L. (2007). Extending parental 
mentoring using an event triggered video intervention in rural teen drivers. Journal of Safety 
Research, 38, 215-227. 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 34 
McKay, M. P., Coben, J. H., Larkin, G. L., & Shaffer, A. (2008). Attitudes of teenagers and 
their parents to Pennsylvania’s Graduated Driver Licensing system. Traffic Injury Prevention, 
9, 217-223. 
 
McKnight, A. J., & Peck, R. C. (2003). Graduated driver licensing and safer driving. Journal of 
Safety Research, 34, 85-89. 
 
Mirman J. H., Curry A. E., Winston F. K., Wang W., Elliott M. R, Schultheis, M. T., . . . Durbin, 
D. R. (2014). Effect of the teen driving plan on the driving performance of teenagers before 
licensure: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Pediatrics, 168, 764-71. 
 
Musicant, O., & Lampel, L. (2010). When technology tells novice drivers how to drive. 
Transportation Research Record: Journal of Transportation Research Board, 2182, 8-15. 
 
National Center for Statistics and Analysis. (2015). Occupant protection: 2013 data (Traffic 
Safety Facts DOT HS 812 153). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812153.pdf 
 
National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP). (2007). A guide for reducing 
collisions involving young drivers. Retrieved from the TRB website: 
onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v19.pdf 
 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. (2001). Fifth/sixth report to Congress: 
Effectiveness of occupant protection systems and their use (Report No. DOT HS 809 442). 
Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/809-442.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2008). Traffic safety facts, laws: Graduated Driver Licensing system (Report No. DOT 
HS 810 888W). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Teen%20Driver/files/810888Grad 
DriverLicense.pdf 
 
NHTSA (2009). Traffic safety facts, seat belt use in 2008: Demographic results (Report No. 
DOT HS 811 183). Retrieved from www.nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811183.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2010). Novice teen driver education and training administrative standards. Retrieved 
from 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Teen%20Driver/files/TeenDriverE 
TAS-1.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2015). Traffic Safety Facts, 2013: A Compilation of Motor Vehicle Crash Data from 
the Fatality Analysis Reporting System and the General Estimates System (Report No. DOT HS 
812 139). Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812139.pdf  
 
NHTSA & NIAAA. (1999). Sentencing and dispositions of youth DUI and other alcohol 
offenses: A guide for judges and prosecutors (Report No. DOT HS 808 891). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/alcohol/youthdui/acknowledge.html 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 35 
 
O’Brien, N. P., Foss, R. D., Goodwin, A. H., & Masten, S. V. (2013). Supervised hours 
requirements in graduated driver licensing: Effectiveness and parent awareness. Accident 
Analysis & Prevention, 50, 330-335. 
 
Ouimet, M. C., Simons-Morton, B. G., Zador, P. L., Lerner, N. D., Freedman, M., Duncan, G. 
D., & Wang, J. (2010). Using the U.S. National Household Travel Survey to estimate the impact 
of passenger characteristics on young drivers’ relative risk of fatal crash involvement. Accident 
Analysis and Prevention, 42, 689-694. 
 
Peek-Asa, C., Cavanaugh, J. E.,Yang, J. Chande, V.,Young,T., & Ramierz, M. (2014). Steering 
teens safe: A randomized trial of a parent-based intervention to improve safe teen driving. BMC 
Public Health, 14, 777. 
 
Preusser, D. F., Ferguson, S. A., & Williams, A. F. (1998). The effect of teenage passengers on 
the fatal crash risk of teenage drivers. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 30, 217-222.  
 
Pressley, J. C., Benedicto, C. B., Trieu, L., Kendig, T., & Barlow, B. (2009). Motor vehicle 
injury, mortality, and hospital charges by strength of Graduated Driver Licensing laws in 36 
states. The Journal of Trauma: Injury Infection, and Critical Care, 67(1 Supp.), S43-S53. 
 
Ramirez, M., Yang, J.,Young, T.,Roth, L., Garinger, A., Snetselaar, L., & Peek-Asa, C. (2013). 
Implementation evaluation of Steering Teens Safe: Engaging parents to deliver a new parent-
based teen driving intervention to their teens. Health Education & Behavior, 40, 426-434. 
 
Roberts, I., & Kwan, I. (2006). School based driver education for the prevention of traffic 
crashes. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 2. DOI: 
10.1002/14651858.CD003201. Retrieved from www.cochrane.org/reviews/en/ab003201.html 
 
Russell K. F., Vandermeer, B., & Hartling, L. (2011). Graduated Driver Licensing for reducing 
motor vehicle crashes among young drivers. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 
10. Retrieved from http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD003300.pub3/pdf/  
 
Senserrick, T. M. (2007). Recent developments in young driver education, training and licensing 
in Australia. Journal of Safety Research, 38, 237-244. 
 
Shope, J. T. (2007). Graduated driver licensing: Review of evaluation results since 2002. Journal 
of Safety Research, 38, 165-175. 
 
Shults, R. A., & Ali, B. (2010). Drivers aged 16 or 17 years involved in fatal crashes - United 
States, 2004-2008. MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 59(41), 1329-1334. 
 
Shults, R. A., & Williams, A. F. (2013). Trends in driver licensing status and driving among high 
school seniors in the United States, 1996-2010. Journal of Safety Research, 46, 167-70. 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 36 
Simons-Morton, B. G. (2007). Parental involvement in novice teen driving: Rationale, evidence 
of effects, and potential for enhancing graduated driver licensing effectiveness. Journal of Safety 
Research, 38, 193-202. 
 
Simons-Morton, B. G., Bingham, C. R., Ouimet, M. C., Pradhan, A. K., Chen, R., Barretto, A., & 
Shope, J.T. (2013). The effect on teenage risky driving of feedback from a safety monitoring 
system: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Adolescent Health, 53, 21-26. 
 
Simons-Morton, B. G., & Hartos, J. L. (2003). How well do parents manage young driver crash 
risks? Journal of Safety Research, 34, 91-97. 
 
Simons-Morton, B. G., Hartos, J. L., Leaf, W. A., & Preusser, D. (2005). The persistence of 
effects of the Checkpoints program on parental restrictions of teen driving privileges. American 
Journal of Public Health, 95, 447-452. 
 
Simons-Morton, B. G., Hartos, J. L., Leaf, W. A., & Preusser, D. (2006). The effects of the 
Checkpoints program on parent-imposed driving limits and crash outcomes among Connecticut 
novice teen drivers at 6-months post-licensure. Journal of Safety Research, 37, 9-15. 
 
Simons-Morton, B. G. & Ouimet, M. C. (2006). Parent involvement in novice teen driving: A 
review of the literature. Injury Prevention, 12, i30-i37. 
 
Simons-Morton, B. G., Ouimet, M. C., & Catalano, R. F. (2008). Parenting and the young driver 
problem. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 35(3S), S294-S303. 
 
Simpson, H. M. (2003). The evolution and effectiveness of graduated licensing. Journal of Safety 
Research, 34, 25-34. 
 
Smith, M. F. (1994). Research agenda for an improved novice driver education program. Report 
to Congress, May 31, 1994 (Report No. DOT HS 808 161). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/research/pub/drive-ed.pdf 
 
Steenbergen, L. C., Kidd, P. S., Pollack, S., McCoy, C., Pigman, J. G., & Agent, K. R. (2001). 
Kentucky’s graduated licensing program for young drivers: Barriers to effective local 
implementation. Injury Prevention, 7, 286-291. 
 
Steinberg, L. (2007). Risk taking in adolescence: New perspectives from brain and behavioral 
science. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 55-59. 
 
Taubman-Ben-Ari, O. & Lotan, T. (2011). The contribution of a novel intervention to enhance 
safe driving among young drivers in Israel. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 43, 352-359. 
 
Tefft, B. C., Williams, A. F., & Grabowski, J. G. (2013a). Timing of driver’s license acquisition 
and reasons for delay among young people in the United States. Retrieved from the AAA 
Foundation website: 
www.aaafoundation.org/sites/default/files/Teen%20Licensing%20Survey%20FINAL_0.pdf  
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 37 
 
Tefft, B. C., Williams, A. F., & Grabowski, J. G. (2013b). Teen driver risk in relation to age and 
number of passengers, United States, 2007-2010. Traffic Injury Prevention, 14, 283-292. 
 
Thomas, F. D., Blomberg, R. D., & Fisher, D. L. (2012a). A fresh look at the state of driver 
education in America (Report No. DOT HS 811 543). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811543.pdf 
 
Thomas, F. D., Blomberg, R. D., Korbelak, K., Stutts, J., Wilkins, J., Lonero, L., . . . Black, D. 
(2012b). Examination of supplemental driver training and online basic driver education (Report 
No. DOT HS 811 609). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811609.pdf 
 
Toledo, T., Lotan, T., Taubman-Ben-Ari, O., & Grimberg, E. (2012). Evaluation of a program to 
enhance young drivers’ safety in Israel. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 45, 705-710. 
 
Transportation Research Board. (2006). Driver education: The path ahead. (Transportation 
research circular Vol. E-C101). Retrieved from 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/circulars/ec101.pdf 
 
Twisk, D. A. M., & Stacey, C. (2007). Trends in young driver risk and countermeasures in 
European countries. Journal of Safety Research, 38, 245-257. 
 
Voas, R. B., Torres, P., Romano, E., & Lacey, J. H. (2012). Alcohol-related risk of driver 
fatalities: An update using 2007 data. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 73(3), 341-50. 
 
Vernick, J. S., Li, G., Ogaitis, S., MacKenzie, E. J., Baker, S. P., & Gielen, A. C. (1999). Effects 
of high school driver education on motor vehicle crashes, violations, and licensure. American 
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 16, 40-46. 
 
Waller, P. F. (2003). The genesis of GDL. Journal of Safety Research, 34, 17-23.  
 
Wiggins, S. (2004). Graduated licensing program: Interim evaluation report - Year 3. Victoria, 
BC: Insurance Corporation of British Columbia. 
 
Williams, A. F. (2003). Teenage drivers: patterns of risk. Journal of Safety Research, 34, 5-15.  
 
Williams, A. F. (2007). Contribution of the components of graduated licensing to crash 
reductions. Journal of Safety Research, 38, 177-184.  
 
Williams, A. F. (2009). Licensing age and teenage driver crashes: A review of the evidence. 
Traffic Injury Prevention, 10, 9-15. 
 
Williams, A. F. (2011). Teenagers’ licensing decisions and their views of licensing policies: A 
national survey. Traffic Injury Prevention, 12(4), 312-319. 
 
 Chapter 6. Young Drivers 
 
6 - 38 
Williams, A. F., Braitman, K. A., & McCartt, A. T. (2011). Views of parents of teenagers about 
licensing policies: A national survey, Traffic Injury Prevention, 12, 1-8 
 
Williams, A. F., Chaudhary, N. K., Tefft, B. C., & Tison, J. (2010). Evaluation of New Jersey’s 
graduated driver licensing program. Traffic Injury Prevention, 11, 1-7. 
 
Williams, A. F., Ferguson, S. A., Leaf, W. A., & Preusser, D. F. (1998). Views of parents of 
teenagers about graduated licensing system. Journal of Safety Research, 29, 1-7. 
 
Williams, A. F., McCartt, A. T., Mayhew, D. R., & Watson, B. (2013). Licensing age issues: 
Deliberations from a workshop devoted to this topic. Traffic Injury Prevention, 14, 237-243. 
 
Williams, A. F., Nelson, L. A., & Leaf, W. A. (2002). Responses of teenagers and their parents to 
California’s graduated licensing system. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 34, 835-842. 
 
Williams, A. F., Preusser, D. F. & Ledingham, K. A. (2009). Feasibility study on evaluating 
driver education curriculum (Report No. DOT HS 811 108). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8111
08.pdf 
 
Williams, A. F., Tefft, B. C., & Grabowski, J. G. (2012). Graduated driver licensing research, 
2010-present. Journal of Safety Research, 43, 195-203. 
 
Zakrajsek, J. S., Shope, J. T., Greenspan, A. I., Wang, J., Bingham, L. R., & Simons-Morton, B. 
G. (2013). Effectiveness of a parent-directed teen driver safety intervention (Checkpoints) 
delivered by driver education instructors. Journal of Adolescent Health, 53, 27-33. 
 
Zakrajsek, J. S., Shope, J. T., Ouimet, M. C., Wang, J., & Simons-Morton, B. G. (2009). Efficacy 
of a brief group parent-teen intervention in driver education to reduce teenage driver injury risk. 
Family& Community Health, 32, 175-188. 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 1 
7. Older Drivers  
 
 
Overview 
 
In 2013, more than 17% of licensed drivers in the United States were 65 or older. By 2030 this 
proportion is expected to rise to at least 20%. As drivers age, their physical and mental abilities, 
driving behaviors, and crash risks all change, though age itself does not determine driving 
performance. Many features of the current system of roads, traffic signals and controls, laws, 
licensing practices, and vehicles were not designed to accommodate older drivers. Older 
Americans are increasingly dependent on driving to maintain their mobility, independence, and 
health. The challenge is to balance mobility for older drivers with safety for all road users. 
 
Trends. From 1982 to 2013, the proportion of licensed drivers 65 and older rose from 11.2% to 
17.3 % while the proportion of these older drivers in fatal crashes rose more rapidly, from 7.0% 
to 17.0%. 
 
People 65 and Older: Number and Proportion of Total Populations 
 
Resident Population 
Licensed Drivers 
Drivers In Fatal Crashes 
Year 
Million 
% 
Million 
% 
N 
% 
1982 
26.8 
11.6% 
16.8 
11.2% 
3,894 
7.0% 
2013 
44.6 
14.1% 
36.8 
17.3% 
5,671 
17.0% 
2030 
72.8* 
19.3%* 
60.4* 
> 20%* 
? 
? 
*Estimated 
Source: FARS data; FHWA Highway Statistics (1995, 2015); NHTSA (2015); U.S. Census Bureau (2014) 
 
The United States population 65 and older increased at a much faster rate (15.1%) than the total 
population (9.7%) between the years 2000 and 2010 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2014). By 2030, the 
Census Bureau estimates that the resident population over 65 will double the 2010 population, to 
over 72 million, and will comprise 19.3% of the total population.  
 
The licensed driver population likely will grow even faster. The proportion of people 65 or older 
who held a driver’s license rose from 63% in 1982 to 82% in 2013. If the licensure rate remains 
the same, by 2030 there will be nearly twice as many older drivers in the United States as there 
are today. As of 2013, 90.5% of people 65 to 69 are licensed, as are 87.7 of people 70 to 74, 
83.6% of people 75 to 79, 76.3% of people 80 to 84, and 57.6% of people 85 and older (FHWA, 
2015). The licensure rate probably will increase because tomorrow’s older people likely will be 
healthier and more accustomed to driving than today’s. By 2030, if 85% of older people are 
licensed there will be close to 61 million licensed drivers at least 65 years old. 
 
Older driver characteristics. Certain changes are inevitable as drivers age (Potts et al., 2004; 
National Cooperative Highway Research Program [NCHRP], 2004, Section III) 
• Physical capabilities diminish. Hearing, muscle tone, reaction time, and vision 
(especially at night) all decline, though at very different rates for different people. 
• Fragility increases. The same force produces more serious injuries to a 70-year-old than 
to a 20-year-old. Injuries take longer to heal. 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 2 
• Cognitive capabilities can diminish. Driving is a complex activity that requires a variety 
of high-level cognitive skills that can diminish through changes that occur with normal 
aging and/or as a result of dementia. 
• Many older drivers use medications. These may be necessary to control disease or 
health conditions but also may cause drowsiness or otherwise affect driving. Older 
drivers are less likely than younger people to drive after drinking or using recreational 
drugs. 
• Older drivers rarely drive aggressively or speed. However, they may exhibit other risky 
behaviors such as driving more slowly than prevailing traffic or failing to detect or 
accurately judge the speed of an oncoming vehicle while making a left turn. 
• Most older drivers reduce their driving mileage as their lifestyles change. Many older 
drivers recognize and avoid driving in situations in which they feel uncomfortable, such 
as at night, on high-speed roads, or in unfamiliar situations (Staplin & Lococo, 2003). 
 
 
 
 
Source: NHTSA (2014b), Table 62 
 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 3 
 
 
 
 
Source: Insurance Institute for Highway Safety [IIHS] (2014a) 
 
These characteristics produce the following results. 
• The older driver crash rate per licensed driver is lower than for younger drivers. 
• However, the fatal crash rate for drivers ages 65 and older per mile traveled is higher 
than for all but the drivers ages 16-34 (IIHS, 2014a). This is due to changes in driving 
habits and increased susceptibility to injury among older drivers: 
o Older drivers drive fewer miles annually than younger drivers but tend to drive 
more on local roads where there are more potential hazards, such as traffic 
congestion and confusing intersections (Wang, Kosonski, Schwartzberg, & 
Shanklin, 2003). However, the majority of older drivers’ fatal crashes occur on 
rural roadways (Stutts, Martell, & Staplin, 2009). 
o Because older drivers are more fragile, a crash is more likely to produce a serious 
injury or fatality than for younger drivers. Fragility, as measured by deaths per 
driver involved in a crash, begins to increase at 60 to 64 and increases steadily 
with advancing age. Fragility, rather than an increased tendency to get into 
crashes, accounts for about 60% to 95% (depending on age group and gender) of 
the increased death rates per miles traveled in older drivers (Li, Braver, & Chen, 
2003). 
o More recent research has concluded that the fatal crash risk for drivers 70 and 
older declined during the 1997-2008 time period at a rate faster than that for the 
comparison group of 35- to 54-year-old drivers. The authors suggest that this 
reduction in fatality risk for the older drivers is due to their decreased likelihood 
of being involved in crashes combined with an increase in their chances of 
survival when they are involved in crashes (Cheung & McCartt, 2010).  
o Recent improvement in occupant restraint systems have been shown to improve 
crash outcomes across age groups. Although these recent changes have benefitted 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 4 
younger occupants to a greater extent than older occupants, all occupants are safer 
when belted (Kahane, 2013). 
o Even more recently, the declines in the national fatal crash rate for drivers 70 and 
older were greater than the declines for middle age drivers during the 2007–2012 
time period. During this time, fatal crash rates per licensed driver fell 42% for 
drivers 70 and older and 30% for 35- to 54-year-old drivers. The 49% decline in 
the national fatal crash involvement rate for drivers 80 and older was the largest 
for any age group (Cicchino & McCartt, 2014). 
 
Another informative study titled Identifying Behaviors and Situations Associated With Increased 
Crash Risk for Older Drivers reviewed published literature and analyzed the most recent national 
crash data to identify driving behaviors/performance errors, and combinations of driver, vehicle, 
and roadway/environmental characteristics associated with increased crash involvement by older 
drivers (Stutts, Martell, & Staplin, 2009). The study found that drivers over 70 were 
overrepresented in a variety of types of crashes, but that drivers 60 and older were less likely 
than younger drivers to be involved in alcohol- or speed-related crashes. The older drivers were 
also underrepresented in nighttime-related crashes, probably due in part to this group’s tendency 
to avoid driving at night. Another general trend is that as drivers get older, they tend to be 
overrepresented in crashes that require navigating more complex situations such as intersections, 
left turns, and reacting to an impending crash (Stutts, Martell, & Staplin, 2009). 
 
 
Strategies to Reduce Crashes and Injuries Involving Older Drivers 
 
The overall goal of older-driver-related countermeasures is to enable older drivers to retain as 
much mobility through driving as is consistent with safety on the road for themselves, their 
passengers, and other road users. “Safe mobility for life” is the key phrase used in the U.S. 
Department of Transportation’s Safe Mobility for a Maturing Society: Challenges and 
Opportunities plan published in 2003 (U.S. DOT, 2003). A number of strategies that could be 
addressed on the State or local level to address this goal were established in this plan. These 
include educating and training older drivers to assess their driving capabilities and limitations; 
improving skills when possible; voluntarily limiting driving to circumstances in which they can 
drive safely; helping drivers adapt to medical or functional conditions that may affect driving 
through treatment (such as eyeglasses or cataract surgery to improve vision) or through vehicle 
adaptations (such as extra mirrors, extended gear shift levers, or hand controls); and using license 
renewal procedures or referrals from law enforcement, physicians, family, or friends to identify 
older drivers who cannot drive safely, in certain situations or at all, and restrict or revoke their 
driver’s licenses. 
 
In 2005, NHTSA developed an “Older Driver Traffic Safety Plan” that synthesized research 
findings and expert opinions and guided research and programs involving NHTSA during the 
next few years (NHTSA, 2005). 
 
Building on that work, NHTSA produced another “Older Driver Program Five-Year Strategic 
Plan” in 2010 focused on how NHTSA will address the safety needs of older drivers through the 
years 2012-2017 (NHTSA, 2010). Based on interviews and expert panel input and other 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 5 
research, NHTSA identified three main program initiatives (communications, partnerships, and 
driver licensing policies) to guide the implementation of its “Older Driver Traffic Safety Plan” 
for 2012-2017. 
 
In 2013, NHTSA developed “Traffic Safety for Older People – 5-Year Plan” to address traffic 
safety concerns of older drivers, passengers, and pedestrians. The plan describes research and 
other program activities in the near term (within the next two years), short term (three to five 
years), and long term (beyond five years from the initiation of the plan). The plan was developed 
around four main elements: data, vehicle, behavior, and pedestrian safety. NHTSA notes that this 
plan is intended to be a dynamic guide that will be reviewed and modified in response to new 
research and other information related to traffic safety for older persons (NHTSA, 2013). 
 
It is important to note that there are a number of vehicular, environmental, and societal strategies 
that are critical to provide safety and mobility for older people but are for the most part beyond 
the control of SHSOs. Vehicles can be designed with better crash protection for older and more 
easily injured occupants, with controls and displays that are easier to see, reach and understand, 
and with crash warning and crash avoidance technology. These measures will make vehicles 
safer for everyone, not just older people. Aftermarket vehicle devices such as one-hand joystick 
driving controls can make driving possible or easier for people with some physical limitations. 
Roadways with separate left turn lanes, protected left turn signal phases, larger and more-visible 
signage, more- visible lane markings, rumble strips, and a host of other measures will assist all 
drivers. These subjects are not discussed in this guide because they do not fall under direct 
SHSO jurisdiction. However, it is important that SHSOs become at least somewhat familiar with 
basic concepts of transportation planning and engineering – such as those mentioned above – 
since SHSOs can be expected to play increasingly important roles in partnerships to enhance 
older driver safety and mobility efforts. 
 
NHTSA’s “Highway Safety Program Guideline No. 13 - Older Driver Safety” provides States 
with key elements of a comprehensive older driver safety program that aims to reduce older 
driver crashes, fatalities, and injuries. Many of the elements listed can be addressed directly by 
SHSOs. As noted by NHTSA, “each State older driver safety program should address driver 
licensing and medical review of at-risk drivers, medical and law enforcement education, roadway 
design, and collaboration with social services and transportation services providers” to maximize 
benefits. The document also includes recommendations for program management, 
communications, and program evaluation and data components that should be included in a State 
older driver safety program (NHTSA, 2014). 
 
Of all the subject areas in this guide, those related to older drivers are perhaps the most complex 
because they involve so many issues beyond traffic safety. Sooner or later, in the interest of 
safety, most older drivers must restrict or eliminate driving, either by choice or as the result of 
the State licensing authority restricting or revoking the license. Frequently, this has substantial 
effects on the older driver’s mobility and on physical and mental health. State Highway Safety 
Offices and licensing agencies cannot act alone but must plan and implement their older driver 
policies and programs as part of integrated community activities to improve older people’ safety, 
mobility, and health. As just one example, some communities have established referral centers 
where people can go for “one-stop” access to resources for addressing the full range of 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 6 
transportation safety and mobility issues, including driving skills assessment, educational 
courses, licensing regulations and practices, and public transportation. See Stutts (2005) for 
summaries of comprehensive programs for older drivers in 6 States. 
 
Several studies and policy papers discuss these issues. See in particular the Department of 
Transportation’s Safe Mobility for a Maturing Society: Challenges and Opportunities (U.S. 
DOT, 2003) and NCHRP’s Guide for Addressing Collisions Involving Older Drivers (NCHRP, 
2004) for excellent summaries and references to further information. The Organisation for 
Economic Co-Operation and Development’s Ageing and Transport: Mobility Needs and Safety 
Issues (OECD, 2001) presents a discussion from an international perspective. The NCHRP 
synthesis Improving the Safety of Older Road Users (Stutts, 2005) summarizes State activities as 
of 2005. A report issued by the AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety (Stutts & Wilkins, 2009) 
documents current United States policies and practices for improving the safety of older drivers 
and identifies model programs. These policies and practices and model programs are made 
available through the AAAFTS “Driver Licensing Policies and Practices” and “Noteworthy 
Initiatives” databases that can be searched by State or by policy/topic area. 
 
 
Resources 
 
The agencies and organizations listed below can provide more information on older drivers and 
links to numerous other resources. 
• National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: 
o Senior Drivers - www.nhtsa.gov/Senior-Drivers 
o Driver Safety Research Reports: Older Drivers – 
www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Driver+Safety+Research+Reports:+Older+Drivers 
• Behavioral Safety Research Reports - ntlsearch.bts.gov/repository/ntlc/nhtsa/index.shtm 
• Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Injury Prevention & Control: Motor Vehicle 
Safety: Older Adult Drivers: 
www.cdc.gov/Motorvehiclesafety/Older_Adult_Drivers/index.html 
• AAA: seniordriving.aaa.com/ 
• AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety: www.aaafoundation.org 
• AARP: aarp.org/driversafety 
• Governors Highway Safety Association: www.ghsa.org/html/issues/olderdriver.html 
• Insurance Institute for Highway Safety:  
 
www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/t/older-drivers/topicoverview 
• National Center on Senior Transportation: www.seniortransportation.net/ 
• National Safety Council: 
www.nsc.org/safety_road/DriverSafety/Pages/MatureDrivers.aspx 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 7 
 
Countermeasures That Work 
 
Countermeasures to improve older driver safety are listed below and discussed individually in 
this chapter. The table is intended to give a rough estimate of each countermeasure’s 
effectiveness, use, cost, and time required for implementation. The terms and symbols used are 
described below. Effectiveness, cost, and time to implement can vary substantially from State to 
State and community to community. Costs for many countermeasures are difficult to measure, so 
the summary terms are very approximate. See each countermeasure discussion for more 
information. 
 
1. Communications and Outreach 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
1.1 Formal courses for older drivers 
 
$ 
Low 
Short 
1.2 General communications and education 
 
$ 
Unknown 
Short 
 
2. Licensing 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
2.1 License screening and testing 
 
$$ 
High 
Medium 
2.2 Referring older drivers to DMVs 
 
$$ 
Low 
Medium 
2.3 License restrictions 
 
$ 
Unknown 
Short 
2.4 Medical advisory boards 
 
Varies 
High 
Medium 
2.5 License renewal policies 
 
$$$ 
Medium 
Medium 
 
3. Traffic Law Enforcement 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
3.1 Law enforcement roles 
 
Varies 
Medium 
Varies 
 
Effectiveness: 
 
- Demonstrated to be effective by several high-quality evaluations with 
consistent results 
- Demonstrated to be effective in certain situations 
- Likely to be effective based on balance of evidence from high-quality evaluations 
or other sources 
- Effectiveness still undetermined; different methods of implementing this 
countermeasure produce different results 
- Limited or no high-quality evaluation evidence 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 8 
Effectiveness is measured by reductions in crashes or injuries unless noted otherwise. 
 
See individual countermeasure descriptions for information on effectiveness size and how 
effectiveness is measured. 
 
Cost to implement: 
$$$: requires extensive new facilities, staff, equipment, or publicity, or makes heavy 
demands on current resources 
$$: requires some additional staff time, equipment, facilities, and/or publicity 
$: can be implemented with current staff, perhaps with training; limited costs for equipment 
or facilities 
 
These estimates do not include the costs of enacting legislation or establishing policies. 
 
Use: 
High: more than two-thirds of the States, or a substantial majority of communities 
Medium: between one-third and two-thirds of States or communities 
Low: fewer than one-third of the States or communities 
Unknown: data not available 
 
Time to implement: 
Long: more than one year 
Medium: more than three months but less than one year 
Short: three months or less 
 
These estimates do not include the time required to enact legislation or establish policies 
 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 9 
 
1. Communications and Outreach 
 
 
1.1 Formal Courses for Older Drivers 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Low 
Time: Short 
 
Formal courses specifically for older drivers are offered by organizations including AAA, 
AARP, and the National Safety Council, either independently or under accreditation by States 
(NCHRP, 2004, Strategy D2; Stutts, 2005, Table 12). AARP’s Driver Safety Program is the 
largest of these courses. AARP developed the initial version in 1979 and the current version 
named “AARP Smart Driver Course,” is offered both in the classroom and online (AARP, 2013). 
The courses typically involve 6 to 10 hours of classroom training in basic safe driving practices 
and in how to adjust driving to accommodate age-related cognitive and physical changes. As of 
2010, 36 States and the District of Columbia mandated automobile insurance discounts for 
graduates of accredited courses (AARP, 2010). 
 
Courses combining classroom and on-the-road instruction have been offered in a few locations 
(NCHRP, 2004, Strategy D2). 
 
Use: Courses are taught in all States but reach only a small fraction of older drivers. For 
example, AARP reports that over 700,000 people each year complete the AARP Driver Safety 
Program nationwide, which represents approximately 1% of the eligible driving population 50 
and older (AARP, 2009). 
 
Effectiveness: Graduates of both the AARP classroom and online courses report that they 
changed some driving behaviors as a result of the course (AARP, 2009; Skufca, 2008). However, 
none of the courses has been shown to reduce crashes (NCHRP, 2004, Strategy D2). NHTSA’s 
Older Road User Research Plan includes the high-priority research problem statement, “Do 
assessment and retraining programs improve driving?” (Raymond, Knoblauch, & Nitzburg, 
2001, Table 1). The most thorough evaluation studied approximately 200,000 course graduates 
and a 360,000-driver comparison group in California from 1988 to 1992. It found that course 
graduates had fewer citations but no fewer crashes than non-graduates (Janke, 1994; NCHRP, 
2004, Strategy D2). AARP also concluded that its course reduces citations but has not been 
shown to reduce crashes (AARP, 2009). 
 
A study conducted in 2004 evaluated the effects of a well-designed three-hour educational 
course promoting safe driving strategies for older drivers with some visual defects. Course 
graduates reported that they regulated their driving more following the course than a control 
group that did not attend the course. There was no significant difference in crash rates between 
course graduates and the control group (Owsley, McGwin, Phillips, McNeal, & Stalvey, 2004). 
 
Another 2004 study involving a systematic review of studies evaluating the effectiveness of 
driver retraining programs (Kua, Korner-Bitensky, Desrosiers, Man-Song-Hing, & Marshall, 
2007) reached a similar conclusion as did Owsley et al., (2004). These researchers reported that 
while there is moderate evidence that educational interventions improve driving awareness and 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 10 
behavior, these interventions do not reduce crashes in older drivers. Regardless, the authors felt 
that the evidence regarding the effectiveness of retraining aimed at older drivers is encouraging 
enough warrant further research. 
 
More recent evaluations of courses for older drivers have produced mixed results related to the 
crash rates of drivers attending these courses. Marottoli (2007) concluded that a training program 
that combined classroom education with on-road training improved the performance of older 
drivers on written and on-road tests and may allow these drivers to retain their licenses longer, 
but did not attempt to assess the program’s impact on subsequent crash rates. Bedard et al. 
(2008) concluded that an in-class education program coupled with on-road education led to 
improvements in the participants’ knowledge of safe driving practices and improvements on 
some aspects of safe driving performance, but that further research is required to determine if 
these changes will affect crash rates. 
 
Nasvadi and Vavrik (2007) conducted research in British Columbia evaluating the crash risk of 
drivers after attending a safe driving class and found that, at least in some cases, these classes 
may produce a negative benefit - that these classes were associated with an increased number of 
crashes for men 75 and older. However, attendance in these classes had no effect on crashes of 
younger men and women of all ages. Though acknowledging several limitations of this study, the 
authors stress that “Recognizing and understanding characteristics and behaviors of older drivers 
who attend remedial driver education is essential to the design and delivery of successful driver 
safety programs.” 
 
Korner-Bitensky, Kua, von Zweck, and Van Benthem (2009) conducted a review of articles 
published between 2004 and 2008 on the effectiveness of older driver retraining programs for 
improving driving skills and reducing crash rates. Four studies met the inclusion criteria for the 
review and provided strong evidence that education combined with on-road training improves 
driving performance. They also found moderate evidence that education alone is not effective in 
reducing crashes and that physical retraining does improve driving performance. The value of 
physical training in addition to education is reinforced by the results of research by Romoser and 
Fisher (2009). They found that active training, such as practice with feedback, is a more effective 
strategy for increasing older drivers’ likelihood of side-to-side scanning, looking for threats, 
during turns than is passive training (classroom lecture or video only) or no training. 
 
Costs: Costs for making courses for older drivers available can be minimal since they have been 
developed and are offered by organizations such as AAA, AARP, and NSC. Courses typically 
charge a small fee, which may be offset by insurance discounts available to graduates. 
 
Time to implement: Courses are offered regularly by AAA, AARP, NSC, and other 
organizations. 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 11 
 
1.2 General Communications and Education 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
 
Many organizations offer educational material for older drivers to inform them of driving risks, 
help them assess their driving knowledge and capabilities, suggest methods to adapt to and 
compensate for changing capabilities, and guide them in restricting their driving in more risky 
situations (NCHRP, 2004, Strategy D2). 
 
Self-assessment tools include: 
• AAA’s Roadwise Review, a CD-ROM and instruction booklet; 
• AARP’s Older Driver Skill Assessment and Resource Guide; 
• American Medical Association’s Am I a Safe Driver? one-page checklist; and 
• University of Michigan’s Driving Decisions Workbook. See Stutts (2005) for brief 
descriptions and web links. 
 
Other programs and material include: 
• Drive Well, a joint program of American Society on Aging and NHTSA; 
• Getting Around, from Emergency Nurses CARE, on safe driving decisions, pedestrian 
safety, and safe medication use; and 
• Information from NHTSA and many State motor vehicle offices on general issues of 
older drivers or specific topics such as driving with glaucoma or arthritis. 
 
See NCHRP (2004, Strategy D2) and Stutts (2005) for examples, brief descriptions, and web 
links. See also AAAFTS (2009b) for examples of public information and awareness material 
included in their “Noteworthy Initiatives” database. 
 
Other material is available to assist drivers and family members in understanding how aging 
affects driving, the effects of medications and health conditions, how to assess an older driver’s 
skills, how to use specialized vehicle equipment to adapt to certain physical limitations, how to 
guide older drivers into voluntarily restricting their driving, and how to report older drivers to the 
department of motor vehicles if necessary (Stutts, 2005). Examples include: 
 
• 
NHTSA’s series of fact sheets and more detailed information for older drivers and their 
families and friends, available from NHTSA’s older driver program website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Older+Drivers 
• 
AAA’s How to Help an Older Driver; 
• 
AARP’s At the Crossroads: A Guide to Alzheimer’s Disease, Dementia and Driving; 
• 
The Association for Driver Rehabilitation Specialists’ series of fact sheets on issues 
such as driving after a stroke, driving with rheumatoid arthritis, and driving after a limb 
amputation; 
• 
New York State Office for the Aging’s When You Are Concerned: A handbook for 
families, friends and caregivers worried about the safety of an aging driver. 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 12 
Use: Data are not available on how frequently these programs or material are used. 
 
Effectiveness: The limited information available suggests that some material may increase 
driver’s knowledge. There are no known evaluations of the effects of this material on driving or 
on crashes (NCHRP, 2004, Strategy D2). As discussed in Chapter 7, Section 1.1, none of the 
more structured formal courses has been shown to reduce crashes. NHTSA’s Older Road User 
Research Plan includes the high-priority research problem statement, “Do assessment and 
retraining programs improve driving?” (Raymond et al., 2001). 
 
Costs: Funds are required for producing and distributing material. 
 
Time to implement: Material and programs are available and ready for use. 
 
Other issues: 
• Seat belt use: Seat belts are even more effective in preventing injuries and fatalities to 
older than to younger occupants (NCHRP, 2004, Strategy E1). While belt use among 
older occupants is comparable to that of younger occupants – 88% for occupants 70 and 
older and for occupants 25 to 69 in 2013 (Pickrell & Liu, 2015) – the fact remains that 
nearly 1 in 8 older occupants is unbelted. Communications and outreach on the benefits 
of seat belt use may be more effective with older occupants than with younger because 
they may be more attentive to health and safety issues. For example, signs urging seat 
belt use increased belt use substantially in 6 senior communities compared to controls, 
and use remained higher after 4 years (Cox, Cox, & Cox, 2005). No other State or local 
seat belt use efforts directed at older occupants have been identified (NCHRP, 2004, 
Strategy E1). 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 13 
 
2. Licensing 
 
2.1 License Screening and Testing 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $$ 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
† Proven for identifying drivers whose driving should be limited 
 
State licensing agencies vary considerably in their procedures for screening and evaluating a 
driver’s abilities and skills (NCHRP, 2004, Strategy C2). Many State guidelines are outdated, 
incomplete, or not based on actual functional impairment. Most do not include all the 
recommendations on medical conditions from the 1st and 2nd Editions of the Physician’s Guide 
to Assessing and Counseling Older Drivers (Carr, Schwartzberg, Manning, & Sempek, 2010; 
Wang et al., 2003). 
 
NHTSA and AAMVA have developed Model Driver Screening and Evaluation Program 
Guidelines for Motor Vehicle Administrators (Staplin & Lococo, 2003). This was the final stage 
in a research program that investigated the relationships between functional impairment and 
driving skills; methods to screen for functional impairment; and the cost, time, legal, ethical, and 
policy implications of the guidelines (Staplin, Lococo, Gish, & Decina, 2003a). 
 
The Model Driver Guidelines’ goal is to keep drivers on the road as long as they are safe, 
through early identification and assessment together with counseling, remediation, and license 
restriction when needed (Staplin & Lococo, 2003). The guidelines outline a complete process of 
driver referral, screening, assessment, counseling, and licensing action (Staplin & Lococo, 2003). 
They include 9 simple visual inspection tests that licensing agency personnel can administer to 
screen for functional ability (Staplin & Lococo, 2003). A survey of State motor vehicle 
departments outlines some of the legal, policy, cost, and other criteria that must be met before 
the guidelines could be implemented in some States (Staplin & Lococo, 2003, Appendix C). The 
guidelines were tested in Maryland (Staplin, Lococo, Gish, & Decina, 2003b). 
 
The screening and testing of older drivers was a major issue discussed during the 2008 North 
American License Policies Workshop sponsored by the AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety. One 
of the general themes of this workshop was that “while certain declines are generally associated 
with aging, consensus is lacking on whether or at what age individuals should be required to be 
screened or tested. Regardless, it is generally accepted that final licensing decisions should be 
based on functional performance, not age, as there is wide variation in how individuals age” 
(Molnar & Eby, 2008, p.3). 
 
Use: All States screen and test drivers referred to them, though their procedures and criteria vary 
considerably (NCHRP, 2004, Strategy C2). No State appears to have implemented the model 
guidelines. U.S. DOT recommends that further testing and evaluation of the guidelines are 
needed (U.S. DOT, 2003). See also the AAAFTS (2009a) “Driver Licensing Policies and 
Practices” database showing each State's driver licensing policies and practices regarding older 
and medically at-risk drivers. 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 14 
Effectiveness: There is strong evidence that State screening and assessment programs identify 
some drivers who should not be driving at all or whose driving should be limited. The Maryland 
pilot test of the model guidelines concluded that “the analysis results ... have provided perhaps 
the best evidence to date that functional capacity screening, conducted quickly and efficiently, in 
diverse settings, can yield scientifically valid predictions about the risk of driving impairment 
experienced by older individuals” (Staplin et al., 2003b). In a study that evaluated the use of a 
screening tool on Alabama drivers 18 to 87 (Edwards et al., 2008), older drivers performed 
significantly worse than younger drivers and older drivers with a crash history performed worse 
than older drivers without crashes. 
 
A NHTSA-sponsored project conducted by Eby et al. (2008) had the goal of improving upon 
existing self-screening tools for older drivers by focusing on symptoms associated with medical 
conditions. A self-screening survey was created to provide feedback to older drivers to increase 
general awareness of issues associated with driving and the aging process, and to provide 
recommendations for behavioral changes and vehicle modifications to make to be able to 
maintain safe driving. Evaluation of the self-screening instrument found it to have positive value, 
but primarily as a “screening tool to determine gross impairment rather than fitness to drive” 
(Eby et al., 2008, p. 19). 
 
Costs: The model guideline functional screening tests can be administered for less than $5 per 
driver, including administrative and support service costs (Staplin et al., 2003a). 
 
Time to implement: States should be able to modify their driver license screening and 
assessment procedures in 4 to 6 months. 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 15 
 
2.2 Referring Older Drivers to Licensing Agencies 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: $$ 
Use: Low 
Time: Medium 
† Proven for increasing physician referrals 
 
Older drivers come to the attention of licensing agencies at regular license renewals, as discussed 
in Chapter 7, Section 2.1, or when they are referred to the licensing agency for reevaluation of 
their driving skills. 
 
Licensing agencies in all States accept reevaluation referrals for drivers of any age. A survey of 
all State licensing agencies found that three sources accounted for 85% of referrals: law 
enforcement (37%), physicians and other medical professionals (35%), and family and friends 
(13%) (Stutts, 2005). The remaining 15% came from crash and violation record checks, courts, 
self-reports, and other sources. 
 
Law enforcement officers have the opportunity to observe drivers directly at traffic stops or 
crashes. With appropriate training they can identify many drivers who should be referred to the 
licensing agency for assessment. NHTSA has developed and field-tested a set of cues that 
officers can use to identify potentially impaired drivers (NHTSA, 1998; see also NCHRP, 2004, 
Strategy C3, and Stutts, 2005, Chapter 7). 
 
Physicians are in an excellent position to assess if changes in their patients’ physical or cognitive 
abilities may increase their crash risk. In addition to assessment, physicians should provide 
counseling and assistance on driving as needed and refer patients to the licensing agency if 
appropriate. In 6 States, physicians are required to report patients who have specific medical 
conditions such as epilepsy or dementia (NCHRP, 2004, Strategy C3). Other States require 
physicians to report “unsafe” drivers, with varying guidelines for defining “unsafe.” Physicians 
must balance their legal and ethical responsibilities to protect their patient’s health and 
confidentiality with their duty to protect the general public from unsafe drivers. Physicians have 
been held liable for damages from crashes involving patients because they failed to report the 
patient to the licensing agency (Wang et al., 2003, Chapter 7). 
 
NHTSA’s Physician’s Guide to Assessing and Counseling Older Drivers (Wang et al., 2003; 
Carr et al., 2010), prepared in cooperation with the AMA, provides detailed information for 
physicians and medical professionals. Chapter 8 has an extensive summary of State licensing and 
reporting laws. Chapter 9 contains a list of medical conditions and medications that may impair 
driving and consensus recommendations on what action to take for each. Other chapters include 
information on treatment and rehabilitation options that may allow patients to continue to drive 
and on how to counsel patients about retiring from driving. See also Lococo (2003, Appendix C) 
for State-level information and NCHRP (2004, Strategy C3) for overall discussion. 
 
Chapter 3 of the second edition of the Physician’s Guide to Assessing and Counseling Older 
Drivers (Carr et al., 2010) discusses the assessment of functional abilities and provides 
physicians with the instructions and basic forms needed for them to conduct a brief in-office 
“Assessment of Driving-Related Skills” (ADReS). The ADReS screening tool assesses some 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 16 
aspects of the key functional areas of vision, cognition, and motor/sensory functions to help 
physicians identify specific areas of concern as they relate to driving. An evaluation of ADReS 
(McCarthy, Mann, & Lanford, 2009) suggests that while this tool was able to identify all of the 
study participants who failed the behind-the-wheel test included as a part of the study, the 
ADReS may need to be revised to give physicians a more effective and efficient tool for in-office 
assessments. 
 
In order to encourage more use of the Physician’s Guide to Assessing and Counseling Older 
Drivers, a five-module curriculum that includes slides, video case segments, and handouts was 
developed by the AMA. The goal is to heighten knowledge and skills necessary for a clinician to 
evaluate driver fitness in a typical care encounter, and to develop a plan for further evaluation by 
other specialists or licensing authorities if needed. An evaluation of this curriculum found that 
continuing education training can enhance the confidence and clinical practices of health 
professionals as related to driver fitness evaluations and mobility planning (Meuser, Carr, 
Irmiter, Schwartzberg, & Ulfarsson, 2010). 
 
Many States have established procedures for family members and friends to report drivers of any 
age whose abilities may be impaired. NCHRP (2004, Strategy C3) provides examples and web 
links for programs in Florida, Missouri, Minnesota, and Oregon. 
 
States can increase driver referrals by establishing and publicizing procedures for referring 
drivers, establishing referral policies and providing appropriate training and information to law 
enforcement officers, and informing physicians and health professionals of their responsibilities. 
NCUTLO’s model law on reporting drivers with a physical or mental disability (NCUTLO, 
2005) describes the responsibilities of health care providers and of State Medical Advisory 
Boards, driver licensing agencies, and license examiners. NHTSA, in collaboration with the 
American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators has produced a guide titled “Driver 
Fitness Medical Guidelines” that is designed to provide guidance to licensing agencies that can 
be used in making decisions about an individual’s fitness for driving (NHTSA, 2009c). 
Guidelines are provided for a variety of physical limitations and impairments as well as medical 
conditions. In addition, this guide provides information that can be used by State licensing 
agencies to educate medical professionals about the effects of functional impairments and 
medical conditions on safe driving in order to encourage them to refer drivers for additional 
evaluations related to driving. 
 
Use: A survey of all State licensing agencies found that fewer than 100,000 drivers 65 and older 
are referred each year from all sources, or fewer than 0.4% of the 28.6 million older licensed 
drivers (Stutts, 2005, Appendix E). The number of referrals varies substantially across the States, 
from a few hundred to 50,000. 
 
Effectiveness: States that establish and publicize effective referral procedures will increase 
referrals. NCHRP (2004, Strategy C3) provides examples and web links. As one example, 
Pennsylvania increased physician referrals substantially by sending letters to all physicians 
(NCHRP, 2004, Strategy C3). 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 17 
A study of Missouri’s voluntary reporting law and the resulting licensing outcomes found that 
the crash involvement of reported drivers decreased after implementation of the law and, to a 
lesser degree, mortality declined as well. Though the Missouri law is not specific as to age, the 
mean age of reported drivers was 80 and only 3.5% of the 4,100 individuals (Reported by a 
combination of law enforcement officers, driver license office staff, physicians, family members 
and others) retained their drivers’ licenses after the process. (Meuser, Carr, & Ulfarsson, 2009). 
 
The mandatory reporting law in Oregon was enacted in 2002 and requires primary physicians 
and other health care providers that function as a primary provider to report cognitively impaired 
drivers to the Department of Motor Vehicles. Reports by primary care providers result in 
automatic suspensions of driving privileges, but the suspended driver has the opportunity to 
request retesting and/or a hearing to appeal the suspension. A study of this Oregon law found 
that over 1,600 drivers reported as being cognitively impaired between 2003 and 2006, with the 
majority of the reported drivers being older than 80. The most common cognitive impairments 
were in judgment and problem solving, but impairments in memory and reaction time 
impairments were also reported about half the time. Of the 1,664 people reported who lost their 
licenses, less than 20% requested retesting or a hearing to contest their license suspensions and 
only about 10% of the total number reported and suspended (173) regained their driving 
privileges (Snyder & Ganzini, 2009). 
 
Costs: Costs for establishing and publicizing effective referral procedures vary depending on the 
procedures adopted, but should not be extensive. Educational and training publications are 
available for use with law enforcement and medical professionals. Funds will be required to 
distribute this material and for general communications and outreach. If referrals increase 
substantially, then licensing agency administrative costs will increase. 
 
Time to implement: States seeking to improve referrals will require at least 6 months to 
develop, implement, and publicize new policies and procedures. 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 18 
 
2.3 License Restrictions 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
 
If a State licensing agency determines through screening, assessment, medical referrals, road 
tests, or other means that a driver poses excessive risks only in certain situations, the driver can 
be issued a restricted license. This process of “graduated de-licensing” preserves the driver’s 
mobility while protecting the driver, passengers, and others on the road. Drivers whose vision is 
adequate during daylight hours but not at night present an obvious example. Their licenses can 
be restricted to daylight driving only. Other common restrictions limit driving to a specific 
geographical area, such as the town or county where the driver lives, or limit driving only to low- 
speed roads. 
 
The AAAFTS (2009b) “Noteworthy Initiatives” database lists Iowa, Kansas, and Minnesota as 
having noteworthy restricted licensing programs. Iowa offers tailored drive tests that allow 
drivers to be tested in their own community on roads they would typically drive and, if 
successful, these drivers are allowed to drive where they have demonstrated proficiency. Iowa 
license examiners conduct approximately 100 to 150 such examinations each year. Kansas offers 
a "Local Drive" road test program where, if a driver makes a written request, an examiner will 
meet the driver in his/her community and conduct the test on routes of the driver’s own 
choosing. The driver must agree that the license will be restricted to areas close to home and 
possible specific routes. Kansas conducts about 200 to 250 local drive tests each year. In 
Minnesota, drivers who live in a rural area and only need driving privileges close to home may 
arrange for a road test examiner to go to the driver's home. Examiners perform only about 25 of 
these road tests per year, and they may result in very customized licenses such as being limited to 
a specific route, specific hours of the day, or any combination of restrictions as appropriate. 
 
Use: Iowa and Utah are known to issue restricted licenses (Stutts, 2005; Vernon, Diller, Cook, 
Reading, & Dean, 2001). A survey of State licensing agencies found that two-thirds of the States 
said that restricted licenses would be feasible under current State policies, though two-thirds of 
these would require legislative changes before restricted licenses could be issued (Staplin & 
Lococo, 2003). The number of States that currently issue restricted licenses specifically for older 
drivers is not known, but the AAAFTS (2009a) “Driver Licensing Policies and Practices” 
database shows that 46 States and the District of Columbia place at least some types of 
conditions or restrictions on licenses of older and/or medically at-risk drivers. The most common 
restriction is the requirement of corrective lenses. 
 
Effectiveness: Several studies show that driver license restrictions lower the crash risk for these 
drivers, though their crash risk is still higher than for similar-age drivers with unrestricted 
licenses (NCHRP, 2004, Strategy C2; Vernon et al., 2001). Research conducted by Braitman, 
Chaudhary, and McCartt (2010) found that license restrictions may be an effective alternative to 
complete driving cessation, and provide drivers with some degree of continued mobility and 
independence. However, they also concluded that while the overall safety benefits of license 
restrictions may be unknown, license restrictions tend to reduce driving exposure, especially in 
higher risk situations. 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 19 
 
Langford and Koppel (2011) found that imposition of a license restriction was usually associated 
with a reduction in absolute crash rates, and identified three restrictions that produced lower 
crash rates and can be thought of as major components of a graduated driving reduction program. 
The three restrictions are driving within a specified distance of home, not driving at night, and 
driving only in specified areas. 
 
An evaluation of the “local drive test” (LDT) option offered to older Iowa drivers who might not 
otherwise be able to renew their licenses found that the overall crash rate of the LDT drivers was 
higher than for the general population of licensed drivers 65 and older, but was lower than the 
overall driver crash rate for Iowa drivers (Stutts & Wilkins, 2012). 
 
Costs: Once drivers have been screened and assessed, the costs of issuing a restricted license are 
minimal. 
 
Time to implement: Restricted licenses can be implemented as soon as any needed policy or 
legislation changes are enacted. 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 20 
 
2.4 Medical Advisory Boards 
 
Effectiveness: † 
Cost: Varies 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
† Quality varies considerably 
 
Thirty-four States and the District of Columbia have medical advisory boards (MABs) to assist 
the licensing agencies in evaluating people with medical conditions or functional limitations that 
may affect their ability to drive (AAAFTS, 2009a). MABs generally make policy 
recommendations on what licensing actions are appropriate for people with specific medical 
conditions or functional limitations. Most State MABs review individual cases, though this 
activity varies widely: 7 States reported that their MABs review 1,000 cases or more annually 
while another 7 review 10 or fewer cases (Lococo, 2003). 
 
In 2003, NHTSA and AAMVA surveyed MAB practices in all States. Lococo (2003) contains 
the results: detailed documentation of how each State’s medical review is organized; how drivers 
are identified, referred, screened, and assessed; and what licensing actions can be taken. 
 
MABs should play a key role in each State as the link between health care professionals, 
licensing agencies, law enforcement, and the public. They should take the lead in defining how 
various medical conditions and functional impairments affect driving; defining medical 
assessment and oversight standards; improving awareness and training for healthcare providers, 
law enforcement, and the public; advising health care professionals how drivers can compensate 
for certain medical conditions or functional impairments; and reviewing individual cases. AAA 
has developed its list of best practices and recommendations for MABs based on the NHTSA- 
AAMVA study findings (AAA, 2004). The National Traffic Safety Board has made similar 
recommendations (NTSB, 2004). In June 2005, NHTSA released a summary of recommended 
strategies for MABs and national medical guidelines for driving, prepared in collaboration with 
AAMVA (Lococo & Staplin, 2005). 
 
As noted above, NHTSA and AAMVA produced a guide in September 2009 titled “Driver 
Fitness Medical Guidelines” that is designed to provide guidance to licensing agencies in making 
decisions about an individual’s fitness for driving (NHTSA, 2009c). These guidelines, as well as 
NHTSA’s Physician’s Guide to Assessing and Counseling Older Drivers (Wang et al., 2003; 
Carr et al., 2010), can be used to provide guidance to MABs as they define how various medical 
conditions and functional impairments affect driving and what steps can be taken to compensate 
for any limitations noted due to relevant conditions and limitations. 
 
Use: The AAAFTS (2009a) Driver Licensing Policies and Practices database shows that 34 
States have MABs or obtain input from the drivers’ physicians or anonymous physicians. 
 
Effectiveness: There are no known studies evaluating the effects of MABs. Maryland’s MAB 
reviewed over 500 individual cases in 2004 and recommended license suspension for about two-
thirds of the cases (Soderstrom, 2005). 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 21 
Costs: MABs are comprised of physicians and other health care professionals together with 
appropriate administrative staff. Costs will be minimal for an MAB whose activities are limited 
to policy recommendations. Costs for an MAB that evaluates individual cases will depend on the 
caseload. 
 
Time to implement: States probably will need at least a year to establish and staff an MAB, 
depending on what duties the MAB undertakes. States likely can expand the functions of an 
existing MAB in 6 months. 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 22 
 
2.5 License Renewal Policies: In-Person Renewal, Vision Test 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$$ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Medium 
 
Driver’s licenses in most States are valid for 4 to 6 years, longer in a few States. To renew an 
expiring license, drivers in many States must appear in person, pay the license fee, and have new 
pictures taken for their licenses. A few States require a vision test for license renewal. Some 
States allow all drivers to renew by mail or electronically. 
 
More than half the States change license renewal requirements for drivers older than a specified 
age, typically 65 or 70. These changes may include a shorter interval between renewals, in- 
person renewal (no renewal by mail or electronically), or a vision test at every renewal. A very 
few States require written or road tests for some older renewal applicants. AAA (2010), IIHS 
(2010), and Stutts (2005, Chapter 5) summarize these requirements.  
 
License examiners report that the driver’s appearance at the motor vehicle office is the single 
most important criterion for identifying a person of any age whose driving skills may be 
impaired (NCHRP, 2004, Strategy C2). This observation is supported by Morrisey and 
Grabowski (2005), who found that in-person license renewal was associated with reduced traffic 
fatalities among the oldest drivers. Frequent in-person renewals and vision tests may be more 
useful for older drivers than for younger drivers because their abilities may change more quickly. 
AAMVA recommends that all drivers renew licenses in person and pass a vision test at least 
every 4 years (Staplin & Lococo, 2003; Stutts, 2005). Very few States meet these 
recommendations for all drivers. In-person renewals would be even more useful, for drivers of 
all ages, if they included functional ability tests as recommended in the NHTSA-AAMVA Model 
Driver Screening and Evaluation Program Guidelines for Motor Vehicle Administrators (Staplin 
& Lococo, 2003) (see Chapter 7, Section 2.1). 
 
The value of in-person renewals and vision tests are further supported by a AAA Foundation for 
Traffic Safety study that analyzed the effects of laws and licensing policies in 46 U.S. States on 
the fatal crash involvement rates of older drivers during the years 1985 – 2011 (Tefft, 2014). 
Requiring in-person renewal instead of allowing online or mail-in renewals was associated with 
a 9% reduction in fatal crash involvement rates for drivers ages 55 and above. The effects of the 
in-person renewal requirement were greatest for the oldest age group studied, those 85 and older. 
There is question, however, whether the large effects of in-person renewal requirements were 
due to the examiners being able to remove unsafe older drivers from the driving population or to 
older drivers possibly ceasing to drive prematurely. Other driver license renewal policies 
investigated – vision test, knowledge test, on-road driving test, and mandatory reporting laws for 
physicians – were not found to reduce fatal crash involvement rates of older drivers.  
 
Use: At least 31 States and the District of Columbia have one or more different license renewal 
requirements for older drivers than for younger drivers. These include 21 States with a shorter 
interval between renewals, 11 that prohibit online and/or renewals by mail, 8 plus the District of 
Columbia that require vision tests or other vision screening at renewal, and 1 State that requires 
road tests for applicants 75 and older. On the other hand, Oklahoma and Tennessee reduce or 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 23 
waive licensing fees for older drivers and Tennessee driver’s licenses issued to people 65 or 
older do not expire. In addition, Maryland, Minnesota, Nevada and the District of Columbia have 
specific provisions that prohibit licensing personnel from treating people differently solely due to 
age (IIHS, 2014b).  
 
Effectiveness: License examiners report that in-person renewals and vision tests are effective in 
identifying people whose driving skills may be impaired (NCHRP, 2004, Strategy C2). No 
known data are available on the number of potentially impaired drivers identified through these 
practices or on the effects of more frequent renewals and vision tests on crashes. Furthermore, 
studies regarding the effectiveness of vision screening for license renewal indicate that the value 
of the vision tests commonly used for licensing decisions as predictors of increased crash risk is 
inconclusive and that the aspects of vision currently assessed for licensing do not adequately 
explain unsafe driving (Bohensky, Charlton, Odell, & Keefe, 2008). Nonetheless, one study 
found that fatalities among drivers 80 years and older in Florida decreased by 17% after the State 
passed a law requiring these drivers to pass a vision test before renewing their driver licenses 
(McGwin, Sarrels, Griffin, Owsley, & Rue, 2008). 
 
Thomas, Blomberg, Knodler, and Romoser (2013) examined driver licensing policies and 
procedures for drivers ages 65 and older. They selected four States for in-depth study (Kansas, 
Illinois, Iowa, and New Hampshire) and six comparison States (Indiana, Minnesota, Missouri, 
Nebraska, Vermont, and Wisconsin). The study States that were chosen had policies with the 
potential to reduce older driver crashes, including shorter renewal periods, in-person renewal, 
and vision testing for older drivers. In addition, Illinois and New Hampshire mandated a road test 
for every renewal. Four or five years of crash data were examined in all 10 States to measure 
population-based and per-licensed-driver crash rates for drivers of all ages.  
 
Contrary to what might be expected, the older drivers supported and accepted their State’s efforts 
to assure the safety of older drivers. Analysis of crash data for all 10 States revealed either stable 
or declining crash rates per 1,000 licensed drivers with increasing age for each 5-year age group 
within each State. Crash rates per licensed driver for the different 5-year age groups showed a 
similar pattern, with declining rates with increasing age in all States other than Illinois and New 
Hampshire, the two States that require an on-road test at renewal for all drivers over 75. The 
overall trend in crash rates suggests that the shorter renewal periods, in-person renewal, and 
vision testing for older drivers have very little effect on older driver crashes. 
 
Costs: More-frequent license renewals or additional testing at renewal impose direct costs on 
driver licensing agencies. For example, a State that reduces the renewal time from 6 years to 3 
years for drivers 65 and older would approximately double the licensing agency workload 
associated with these drivers. If 15% of licensed drivers in the State are 65 and older, then the 
agency’s overall workload would increase by about 15% to process the renewals. If more 
frequent renewals and vision tests identify more drivers who require additional screening and 
assessment, then additional costs are imposed. See Chapter 7, Section 2.1, for additional 
discussion. 
 
Time to implement: A vision test requirement for renewal or a change in the renewal interval 
can be implemented within months. The new requirements will not apply to all drivers for 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 24 
several years, until all currently valid licenses have expired and drivers appear at the driver 
licensing agency for licensing renewal. 
 
Other issues: 
• 
Age discrimination: A few States explicitly provide that age alone is not a justification 
for reexamining a driver’s qualifications (AAA, 2010; IIHS, 2010; IIHS, 2014b). These 
States have the same license renewal interval for all drivers and/or have specific 
provisions that prohibit licensing personnel from treating people differently solely due to 
age. 
• 
Road tests and medical reports: Several Australian States require a medical report, a 
road test, or both for drivers over a specified age to renew their licenses. Langford, 
Fitzharris, Koppell, and Newstead (2004) compared Australian States with and without 
these requirements. They found that Australian States with these requirements had higher 
older-driver crash rates than States without them. They conclude that there are “no 
demonstrable road safety benefits” to requiring medical reports or road tests for older 
drivers. 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 25 
 
3. Traffic Law Enforcement 
 
3.1 Law Enforcement Roles 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Medium 
Time: Varies 
 
Law enforcement plays three overall roles in improving the safety of older drivers: 
• Enforce traffic laws. In particular, active publicized enforcement of seat belt use laws can 
help increase belt use for older drivers and occupants. See Chapter 2, Section 2.1, for 
discussion. 
• Identify drivers with potential driving impairments and refer them to licensing agencies. 
Traffic stops and crash investigations provide officers excellent opportunities to observe 
and evaluate driving behavior. See Chapter 7, Section 2.2, for discussion. 
• Provide information and education. Law enforcement officers have formed many 
partnerships with public and private organizations to give talks, teach safe driving 
courses, work with media on news stories and public service announcements, and other 
communications and outreach initiatives. Stutts (2005) summarizes several examples. 
NHTSA (2003) lists law enforcement programs that were active in 2003. They include 
training for officers, training for older drivers, and community relations programs that 
promote safety. 
 
NHTSA’s Older Driver Law Enforcement Course is available through the International 
Association of Directors of Law Enforcement Standards and Training. The 4-hour course 
provides background on older driver issues and discusses traffic stops, referring older drivers to 
licensing agencies, and community outreach. 
 
Use: NHTSA (2003) describes older driver programs in 28 States. 
 
Effectiveness: Law enforcement officers provide more than one-third of all referrals to licensing 
agencies for driver screening and assessment (Chapter 7, Section 2.2). 
 
Costs: Costs vary depending on the nature and scope of activities. 
 
Time to implement: Implementation time varies depending on the nature and scope of activities. 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 26 
 
Older Driver References 
 
American Automobile Association (AAA). (2004). AAA basic best practices for medical 
advisory/review boards. Heathrow, FL: Author. Retrieved from 
www.aaaexchange.com/Assets/Files/2006651520520.13MABbestpractices.pdf 
 
AAA. (2010). Senior licensing laws. Heathrow, FL: Author. Retrieved from 
www.aaaexchange.com/Main/Default.asp?CategoryID=3&SubCategoryID=73 
 
AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety (AAAFTS). (2009a). Driver licensing policies and 
practices: Driver licensing policies and practices database. Retrieved from 
http://lpp.seniordrivers.org/lpp/ 
 
AAAFTS. (2009b). Driver licensing policies and practices: Noteworthy initiatives database. 
Retrieved from http://lpp.seniordrivers.org/lpp/ 
 
AARP. (2009). AARP driver safety program history and facts. Retrieved from 
www.aarp.org/families/driver_safety/driver_program/a2004-06-21-ds_history.html 
 
AARP. (2010). AARP driver safety program history and facts Retrieved from 
www.aarp.org/home-garden/transportation/info-05-
2010/dsp_article_program_history_and_facts/?cq_ck=1274207993910.html 
 
AARP. (2013). Why take a driver safety course? Retrieved from www.aarp.org/home-
garden/transportation/info-05-2010/why-take-a-driver-safety-course.html 
 
Bedard, M., Porter, M. M., Marshall, S., Isherwood, I., Riendeau, J., Weaver, B., . . . Miller-
Polgar, J. (2008). The combination of two training approaches to improve older adults’ driving 
safety. Traffic Injury Prevention, 9, 70-76. 
 
Bohensky, M., Charlton, J., Odell, M., & Keefe, J. (2008). Implications of vision testing for 
older driver licensing. Traffic Injury Prevention, 9, 304-313. 
 
Braitman, K. A., Chaudhary, N. K., & McCartt, A. T. (2010). Restricted licensing among older 
drivers in Iowa. Journal of Safety Research, 41, 481–486. 
 
Carr, D. B., Schwartzberg, J. G., Manning, L., & Sempek, J. (2010). Physician’s guide to 
assessing and counseling older drivers, 2nd edition (Report No. DOT HS 811 298). Retrieved 
from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/older_drivers/pdf/811298.pdf 
 
Cheung, I., & McCartt, A. T. (2010). Declines in fatal crashes of older drivers: Changes in 
crash risk and survivability. Retrieved from the IIHS website: 
www.iihs.org/research/topics/pdf/r1140.pdf 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 27 
Cicchino, J. B., & McCartt, A. T. (2014). Trends in older driver crash involvement rates and 
survivability in the United States: An update. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 72, 44-54. 
 
Cox, C. D., Cox, B. S., & Cox D. J. (2005). Long-term benefits of prompts to use safety belts 
among drivers exiting senior communities. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 38, 533-536. 
Retrieved from www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=1309715 
 
Eby, D. W., Molnar, L. J., Kartje, P., St. Louis, R. M., Parow, J. E., Vivoda, J. M., & Neumeyer, 
A. L. (2008). Older driver self-screening based on health concerns, volume I: Technical report 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 046A). Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration. Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library 
website: http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/30000/30500/30584/811046a.pdf 
 
Edwards, J. D., Leonard, K. M., Lunsman, M., Dodson, J., Bradley, S., Myers, C. A., & Hubble, 
B. (2008). Acceptability and validity of older driver screening with the Driving Health Inventory. 
Accident Analysis & Prevention, 40, 1157-1163. 
 
Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS). (2015). Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration. Custom data analysis. 
 
Federal Highway Administration. (1995). Licensed drivers by sex and age group, 1963-1995. 
Retrieved from www.fhwa.dot.gov/ohim/summary95/dl220.pdf 
 
 
FHWA. (2015). Distribution of licensed drivers - 2013 by sex and percentage in each age group 
and relation to population, Table DL-20. Highway Statistics 2013. Retrieved from 
www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/statistics/2013/dl20.cfm 
 
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety. (2010). U.S. driver licensing renewal procedures for 
older drivers, August 2010. Retrieved from www.iihs.org/laws/state_laws/older_drivers.html 
 
IIHS. (2014a). Fatality facts 2012: Older people. Arlington, VA: Author. Retrieved from 
www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/t/older-drivers/fatalityfacts/older-people 
 
IIHS. (2014b). Older drivers; State laws. Arlington, VA: Author. Retrieved from 
www.iihs.org/iihs/topics/laws/olderdrivers?topicName=older-drivers 
 
Janke, M. K. (1994). The mature driver improvement program in California. Sacramento, CA: 
California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
 
Kahane, C. J. (2013). Injury vulnerability and effectiveness of occupant protection technologies 
for older occupants and women (Report No. DOT HS 811 766). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811766.pdf 
 
Korner-Bitensky, N., Kua, A., von Zweck, C., & Van Benthem, K. (2009). Older driver 
retraining: An updated systematic review of evidence of effectiveness. Journal of Safety 
Research, 40, 105-111. 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 28 
 
Kua, A., Korner-Bitensky, N., Desrosiers, J., Man-Son-Hing, M., & Marshall, S. (2007). Older 
driver retraining: A systematic review of evidence of effectiveness. Journal of Safety Research, 
38, 81-90. 
 
Langford, J., Fitzharris, M., Koppell, S., & Newstead, S. (2004). Effectiveness of mandatory 
license testing for older drivers in reducing crash risk among urban older Australian drivers. 
Traffic Injury Prevention, 5, 326-335. 
 
Langford, J., & Koppel, S. (2011). License restrictions as an under-used strategy in managing 
older driver safety. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 43, 487-493. 
 
Li, G., Braver, E. R., & Chen, L. H. (2003). Fragility versus excessive crash involvement as 
determinants of high death rates per vehicle-mile of travel among older drivers. Accident 
Analysis and Prevention, 35, 227-235. 
 
Lococo, K. H. (2003). Summary of medical advisory board practices in the United States. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Transportation. Retrieved from: 
www.mdsupport.org/drivingsummary.pdf 
 
Lococo, K. H., & Staplin, L. (2005). Strategies for medical advisory boards and licensing review 
(Report No. DOT HS 809 874). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/research/MedicalAdvisory/pages/Job%201602%20-
%20final%20new.pdf 
 
Marottoli, R. A. (2007). Enhancement of driving performance among older Drivers. Retrieved 
from the AAA Foundation website: 
www.aaafoundation.org/pdf/enhancingseniordrivingperfreport.pdf 
 
McCarthy, D. P., Mann, W. C., & Lanford, D. (2009). Process and outcomes evaluation of older 
driver screening programs: The assessment of driving-related skills (ADReS) older-driver 
screening tool (Report No. DOT HS 811 113). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8111 
13.pdf 
 
McGwin, G., Sarrels, S. A., Griffin, R., Owsley, C., & Rue, L. W. (2008). The impact of a vision 
screening law on older driver fatality rates. Archives of Opthamology, 126, 1544-1547. 
 
Meuser, T. M., Carr, D. B., & Ulfarsson, G. F. (2009). Motor-vehicle crash history and licensing 
outcomes for older drivers reported as medically impaired in Missouri. Accident Analysis & 
Prevention, 41, 246-252. 
 
Meuser, T. M., Carr, D. B., Irmiter, C., Schwartzberg, J. G. & Ulfarsson, G. F. (2010). The 
American Medical Association older driver curriculum for health professionals: Changes in 
trainee confidence, attitudes, and practice behavior. Gerontology & Geriatrics Education, 31, 
290-309. 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 29 
 
Molnar, L. J. & Eby, D. W. (2008). 2008 North American license policies workshop 
recommendations. Retrieved from the AAA Foundation website: 
www.aaafoundation.org/pdf/LPWorkshopRecommendations.pdf 
 
Morrisey, M. A. & Grabowski, D. C. (2005). State motor vehicle laws and older drivers. Health 
Economics, 14, 407-419. 
 
Nasvadi, G. E., & Vavrik, J. (2007). Crash risk of older drivers after attending a mature driver 
education program. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 39(6), 1073-1079. 
 
National Cooperative Highway Research Program. (2004). A guide for reducing collisions 
involving older drivers. Retrieved from the TRB website: 
onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v9.pdf 
 
National Committee on Uniform Traffic Laws and Ordinances. (2005). Reporting of driver 
impairment model law. Retrieved from www.ncutlo.org/impairment.htm 
 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. (1998). Older drivers: Cues for law 
enforcement (Report No. DOT HS 808 778). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/olddrive/cuesindex.html 
 
NHTSA. (2003). A compendium of law enforcement older driver Programs. Retrieved from  
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/olddrive/LawEnforcementOlderDriver03/index.htm 
 
NHTSA. (2005). Older driver traffic safety Plan. Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/olddrive/OlderDriverPlan/images/OlderDriverSafetyPlan.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2009a). Traffic safety facts, 2008 data: Older population (Report No. DOT HS 811 
161). Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811161.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2009b) Traffic safety facts 2008: A compilation of motor vehicle crash data from the 
Fatality Analysis Reporting System and the General Estimates System (Report No. DOT HS 811 
170). Rerieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811170.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2009c). Driver fitness medical guidelines (Report No. DOT HS 811 210). Retrieved 
from Articles/Associated%20Files/811210.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2010). Older driver program five-year strategic plan 2012-2017 (Report No. DOT HS 
811 432). Retrieved from www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811432.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2013). Traffic safety for older people — 5-Year Plan (Report No. DOT HS 811 837). 
Retrieved from www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/older_drivers/pdf/Older_People_811873.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2014). Highway safety program guideline No. 13 - Older driver safety (Report No. 
DOT HS 812 007D). Retrieved from 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 30 
www.nhtsa.gov/nhtsa/whatsup/tea21/tea21programs/pages/812007D-HSPG13-
OlderDriverSafety.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2015). Traffic safety facts 2013: A compilation of motor vehicle crash data from the 
Fatality Analysis Reporting System and the General Estimates System (Report No. DOT HS 812 
139). Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812139.pdf 
 
National Transportation Safety Board. (2004). Highway special investigation report: Medical 
oversight of noncommercial drivers (NTSB/SIR-04/01 PB2004-917002). Retrieved from 
www.ntsb.gov/publictn/2004/SIR0401.pdf 
 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2001). Ageing and transport: 
Mobility needs and safety issues. Retrieved from www.oecd.org/dataoecd/40/63/2675189.pdf 
 
Owsley, C., McGwin, G., Jr., Phillips, J. M., McNeal, S. F., & Stalvey, B. T. (2004). Impact of 
an education program on the safety of high-risk, visually impaired, older drivers. American 
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 26, 222-229. 
 
Pickrell, T. M., & Liu, C. (2015). Occupant restraint use in 2013: Results from the NOPUS 
controlled intersection study (Report No. DOT HS 812 080). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812080.pdf 
 
Potts, I., Stutts, J., Pfefer, R., Neuman, T. R., Slack, K. L, & Hardy, K. K. (2004). A Guide for 
Reducing Collisions Involving Older Drivers (NCHRP Report 500, Vol. 9). Retrieved from the 
TRB website: http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v9.pdf 
 
Raymond, P., Knoblauch, R., & Nitzburg, M. (2001). Older road user research plan (Report No. 
DOT HS 809 322). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/olddrive/OlderRoad/index.htm 
 
Romoser, M. R. E., & Fisher, D. L. (2009). The effect of active versus passive training strategies 
on improving older drivers’ scanning in intersections. Human Factors, 51, 652-668. 
 
Skufca, L. (2008). 2007 AARP driver safety program course evaluation. Retrieved from the 
AARP website: www.aarp.org/home-garden/transportation/info-01-2008/dsp_07.html 
 
Snyder, K. M., & Ganzini, L. (2009). Outcomes of Oregon’s law mandating physician reporting 
of impaired drivers. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology, 22, 161-165. 
 
Soderstrom, C. A. (2005). University of Maryland School of Medicine, personal communication, 
April, 2005. 
 
Staplin, L., & Lococo, K. H. (2003). Model driver screening and evaluation program. Vol. 3: 
Guidelines for motor vehicle administrators (Report No. DOT HS 809 581). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/olddrive/modeldriver/ 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 31 
Staplin, L., Lococo, K. H., Gish, K. W., & Decina, L. E. (2003a). Model driver screening and 
evaluation program. Vol. 1: Project summary and model program recommendations (Report No. 
DOT HS 809 582). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/olddrive/modeldriver/ 
 
Staplin, L., Lococo, K. H., Gish, K. W., & Decina, L. E. (2003b). Model driver screening and 
evaluation program. Vol. 2: Maryland pilot older driver study (Report No. DOT HS 809 583). 
Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/olddrive/modeldriver/ 
 
Stutts, J. C. (2005). Improving the safety of older road users. Final report (NCHRP Synthesis 
Project 20-5, Synthesis Topic 35-10). Retrieved from the TRB website: 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_syn_348.pdf 
 
Stutts, J. C. & Wilkins, J. (2009). Driver licensing policies and practices: Gearing up for an 
aging population. Project Summary Report. Retrieved from the AAA Foundation website: 
http://lpp.seniordrivers.org/lpp/pdf/DriverLicensePoliciesReport.pdf 
 
Stutts, J. C., Martell, C., & Staplin, L. (2009). Identifying behaviors and situations associated 
with increased crash risk for older drivers (Report No. DOT HS 811 093). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8110 
93.pdf 
 
Stutts, J. C., & Wilkins, J. (2012). Keeping seniors safe and mobile: An evaluation of a local 
drive test option. Retrieved from the AAA Foundation website: 
www.aaafoundation.org/pdf/2012LocalDriveTest.pdf 
 
Tefft, B. C. (2014). Driver license renewal policies and fatal crash involvement rates of older 
drivers, United States, 1985–2011. Retrieved from the AAA Foundation website: 
www.aaafoundation.org/sites/default/files/OlderDriverLicenseRenewal-
FINALFTSFORMAT.pdf 
 
Thomas III, F. D., Blomberg, R. D., Knodler, M., & Romoser, M. R. E. (2013). Licensing 
procedures for older drivers (Report No. DOT HS 811 833). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811833.pdf 
 
U.S. Census Bureau (2014). 65+ in the United States: 2010 (P23-212). Retrieved from: 
www.census.gov/library/publications/2014/demo/p23-212.html 
 
U.S. Department of Transportation. (2003). Safe mobility for a maturing society: Challenges and 
opportunities. Retrieved from: ostpxweb.dot.gov/policy/Data/SafeMobility.pdf 
 
Vernon, D. D., Diller, E., Cook, L., Reading, J., & Dean, J. M. (2001). Further analysis of 
drivers licensed with medical conditions in Utah (Report No. DOT HS 809 211). Retrieved from 
the NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/olddrive/utah/utah_index.htm 
 
 Chapter 7. Older Drivers 
 
7 - 32 
Wang, C. C., Kosinski, C. J., Schwartzberg, J. G., & Shanklin, A. V. (2003). Physician’s guide 
to assessing and counseling older drivers (Report No. DOT HS 809 647). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/olddrive/OlderDriversBook/index.html 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 1 
8. Pedestrians 
 
 
Overview 
 
In 2013, 4,735 pedestrians died and approximately 66,000 were injured in traffic crashes in the 
United States (NHTSA, 2015b). Pedestrians accounted for 14% of total traffic fatalities and 3% 
of total traffic-related injuries. Since 2003, there has been a gradual rise in the proportion of total 
fatalities that were pedestrians. Of the pedestrian fatalities in 2013: 
• Children 14 and younger accounted for 5% of the pedestrian fatalities and an estimated 
15% of all pedestrians injured in traffic crashes; 
• 19% of those killed were adults 65 and older, including 284 pedestrians 80 years and 
older; 
• 69% of those killed were males; 
• 34% of pedestrians fatally injured had BACs of .08 g/dL or greater; 
• 73% of pedestrian fatalities occurred in urban areas; 
• 69% of pedestrian fatalities occurred at non-intersection locations; and 
• 72% of pedestrians were killed in collisions that occurred when it was dark. 
 
Crash Trends. Pedestrian fatalities have dropped gradually over the past 20 years, from an 
average of about 5,500 per year from 1994-1998, to an average of about 4,500 annually for the 
most recent five years (2009-2013, see figure below). The 4,735 pedestrians killed in 2013 was 
2% lower than the number killed in 2012 (4,818). Fatality rate trends—or fatalities adjusted per 
number of walking trips or miles traveled by walking—are unavailable because there is no 
systematically collected and consistent measure of walking (exposure) to estimate and compare 
fatality rates each year. The population-based fatality rate for pedestrians overall was 1.5 per 
100,000 population, with a rate of 2.1 for males and 0.9 for females (NHTSA, 2015b). However, 
population-based rates do not fully account for trends in amounts of walking. 
 
 
Source: NHTSA (2014a, 2014b)  
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 2 
 
While the average age of pedestrians killed has remained similar over the past 10 years, there 
have been fluctuations in the number of pedestrian fatalities among age groups over the last 
decade. The largest decrease in pedestrian fatalities occurred in the age group 35 to 44 and the 
largest increase occurred in the age group 55 to 64. Not all of the changes are explained by 
changes in population by age group, as the population-based rates have also varied by year. 
(Fatalities and fatality rates by population for various age groups are available for 2013 in 
NHTSA’s Traffic Safety Facts reports, NHTSA, 2014a). Differences in amounts or types of 
walking may also play a role, as may other safety factors and chance variation.  
 
 
 
Source: FARS data 
Note that different age group spans are used. The intent of the chart is to compare general trends within 
different age groups, not to compare fatalities by age. 
 
Comparing average fatalities for 2009 – 2013 to those from 2003 – 2007, pedestrian fatalities 
decreased among children 15 and younger, and among young adults 16 to 20 years (see figure). 
For those 35 to 44, a notable decrease in pedestrian fatalities was observed from around 760 per 
year to 600 per year. Decreases for this age group were also observed among bicyclist fatalities. 
Unlike among bicyclists, however, there was also a slight decline in fatalities among pedestrians 
45 to 54. The only age group to observe a large increase in total number of fatalities was among 
those 55 to 64, which as noted earlier may reflect an increase in population and walking among 
this age group. Fatalities went down among those 75 and older; however, pedestrians 75 and 
older had the highest fatality rate per population of any age group in 2013 (2.4 per 100,000 
persons compared to 1.5 for all ages; NHTSA 2014b). Older pedestrians are more likely to die 
from their injuries when struck due to the inherent fragility associated with the aging process. 
Factors that may increase vulnerability to being struck for some older pedestrians include age-
related physical changes that may lead to walking more slowly, difficulty in crossing the curb, 
difficulty judging oncoming vehicle speeds, dealing with turning vehicles at intersections, and 
possible confusion about pedestrian signal phases (Karsch, Hedlund, Tison, & Leaf, 2012). 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 3 
Several studies have also noted the overrepresentation of minorities, immigrants, and low-
income populations in pedestrian-vehicle crashes (Anderson, Vaca, & Chakravarthy, 2010; 
Chakravarthy et al., 2012; Chen, Lin, & Loo, 2011; Murtha, 2005). However, the causes and 
contributing factors of these elevated crash rates are not well understood. Some studies attribute 
higher minority crashes to potential inequities in how pedestrian facilities are distributed across 
areas with different socioeconomic indicators (Kravetz & Noland, 2012). Other studies have 
found that lower income and minority populations have higher transit use and walking rates (or 
exposure) that may help partially explain elevated crash figures (Cottrill & Thakuriah, 2010). 
Still others have postulated that social-behavioral mechanisms and differing “safety cultures” 
play a role in pedestrian crashes, particularly for recent immigrants (Chen, Lin, & Loo, 2011). 
Despite the vulnerability of these groups to pedestrian crashes, there is little information as yet 
about pedestrian safety programs targeted to the specific needs of low-income, minority, or 
immigrant populations, so the effectiveness of countermeasures in reaching these special 
populations is unknown. NHTSA introduced an English as a Second Language program tailored 
to teach basic walking and bicycling safety concepts to adult immigrants learning the English 
language (see www.nhtsa.gov/ESL). NHTSA is in the process of evaluating whether the program 
increases pedestrian and bicycle safety knowledge and intent to change behavior. In addition, the 
updated Resident’s Guide for Creating Safer Communities for Walking and Biking includes 
several case studies on inclusive approaches to outreach, community-based planning, and 
improving conditions for pedestrians (Sandt, Thomas, Langford, & Nabors, 2015). 
 
Walking Trends. The National Household Travel Survey (NHTS), conducted by the Federal 
Highway Administration, has attempted to capture walking and other travel trends in the United 
States According to estimates from these surveys, the number of walking trips increased from 
21.9 billion in 1990 to 20.3 billion in 1995, and to 33.1 billion in 2001 (Santos, McGuckin, 
Nakamoto, Gray, & Liss, 2011). The latest NHTS in 2009 indicates that about 41 billion walking 
trips of all purpose types were made in a year over the 2008 to 2009 survey period (Santos et al., 
2011). It is likely that at least some of the increases in 2001 and 2009 relate to more detailed 
questions prompting respondents to include walk trips in those two years, which was not done in 
the prior surveys (Santos et al., 2011). The 41 billion walking trips in 2009 represents 
approximately 10% of all transportation mode trips reported. About 3% of all trips to work were 
made by walking (Santos et al., 2011). Commuting to work, however, makes up only a small 
percentage (4.5%) of all walking trips (Santos et al., 2011, Table 9). The largest proportion of 
walking trips are made for recreational and social reasons (46%) followed by family and 
personal errands (37%). Walking to school or church made up nearly 9% of walking trips 
(Santos et al., 2011). The next NHTS is planned for 2015. 
 
The increase in number of walking trips is especially significant since it represents an increase in 
the average number of daily walking trips per person (Pucher, Buehler, Merom, & Bauman, 
2011), whereas total daily personal trips per person have been declining since the 1995 survey 
(Santos et al., 2011). The Center for Disease Control and Prevention’s National Health Interview 
Survey collected in 2005 and 2010 assessed changes in prevalence of walking for at least 10 
minutes one or more times in the preceding seven days. Walking prevalence increased 
significantly, from 55.7% in 2005 to 62.0% in 2010. In 2010, walkers were also significantly 
more likely to meet the aerobic physical activity guidelines (CDC, 2012). Using NHTS data, 
Pucher et al.(2011) also found an increase in the percentage of people meeting recommended 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 4 
daily activity levels through walking between 2001 and 2009. CDC is encouraging walking and 
bicycling to help meet physical activity guidelines. The CDC also supports the building of 
communities that provide safe and equitable opportunities to walk such as through implementing 
Complete Streets policies and designs, lower speed limits in urban areas, and other strategies. 
For more information, see 
www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dch/programs/communitiesputtingpreventiontowork/resources/physical_a
ctivity.htm. Also see Health Resources in Action’s web pages on Community Speed Reduction 
and Public Health: www.hria.org/resources/reports/community-speed-reduction/2013-resources-
speed-reduction.html.  
 
Classifying Crash Types. Beginning in the 1970s, pedestrian crashes were categorized into 
types based on (1) pedestrian and motor vehicle pre-crash actions, and (2) crash location. In the 
early 1990s, this methodology was used to type more than 5,000 pedestrian crashes in California, 
Florida, Maryland, Minnesota, North Carolina, and Utah and analyze related characteristics 
(Hunter, Stutts, Pein, & Cox, 1996, summarized in www.walkinginfo.org/pc/types.cfm). 
 Of these pedestrian crashes: 
• The largest major grouping was crashes at or within 50 feet of an intersection, accounting 
for 32% of all crashes. Of these intersection crashes, 30% involved a turning vehicle, 
22% involved a pedestrian dashing into the intersection, and 16% involved a driver 
violation (e.g., running a red light). Older pedestrians were overrepresented in collisions 
with turning vehicles and motorist violations, while children were overrepresented in 
intersection dashes. 
• The second major grouping was crashes occurring in the middle of a block, accounting 
for 26%. In one-third of these, the pedestrian ran into the street and the driver’s view was 
not obscured; one-sixth were “dart-outs” in which the pedestrian walked or ran into the 
street from a location where the pedestrian could not be seen. Children were also 
overrepresented in dash-and-dart-out crashes at midblock locations. 
• Only 7% of the crashes involved a pedestrian walking along a roadway not on a sidewalk. 
In three-quarters of these crashes, the pedestrian was struck from behind while walking in 
the same direction as traffic. Darkness and rural locations were overrepresented in these 
types of collisions. This association is expected since rural areas are less likely to have 
sidewalks and supplemental street lighting. 
 
Crash typing methodology has been used to develop a tool that communities or States may use to 
develop more information about pedestrian and bicycle crashes. The Pedestrian and Bicycle 
Crash Analysis Tool (PBCAT) software assists jurisdictions in typing pedestrian crashes and 
developing a database for analyzing pedestrian crash problems. States and communities can 
utilize the crash type information and other crash characteristics to help select appropriate 
countermeasures. It is important that field review of behaviors and site-specific characteristics be 
taken into consideration before determining whether specific enforcement, educational, or 
engineering countermeasures are appropriate (Zegeer, Sandt, & Scully, 2008). PBCAT may be 
downloaded from www.walkinginfo.org/facts/pbcat/index.cfm. Registration is requested for this 
free software so the user may receive software updates or important technical information.  
 
Another consideration when analyzing crash data is that pedestrian crashes tend to be 
underreported. Many States may not require reporting nor collect off-road or private-road crash 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 5 
records. Non-roadway crashes may, however, constitute a significant portion of pedestrian-
related crashes with motor vehicles. In several studies, parking lot and driveway-related crashes 
represented up to 15% to 25% or more of all reported pedestrian crashes (Stutts & Hunter, 
1999a; Thomas & Levitt, 2014). Many more roadway and non-roadway crashes go unreported. 
Research is needed to better understand the extent and causes of non-roadway pedestrian crashes 
and effective countermeasures. NHTSA’s Not in Traffic Surveillance (NiTS) monitors and 
reports on not-in-traffic-related motor vehicle deaths. Many of these events involve young 
children. See Section 1.1 for more information.  
 
Underreporting of traffic-related crashes on road rights-of-way likely decreases as the crash 
severity increases because police are likely to be called to injury and fatal crashes, and the 
pedestrian is more likely to be transported or seek examination at a health care facility. 
Therefore, the FARS data presented earlier is thought to be a reliable source for estimating 
pedestrian fatal crash frequencies. Even so, not all fatal pedestrian crashes are included in FARS, 
including fatal pedestrian crashes involving a bicycle, or those that did not occur on public roads, 
as already mentioned. 
 
Many more pedestrian injuries, including those due to falls, collisions with bicycles, and others, 
likely go unreported to State crash databases (Stutts & Hunter, 1999a, 1999b), but up-to-date 
information is lacking. Research is also needed to better understand the causes of these types of 
injuries. Maintenance of surfaces and Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliant design of 
sidewalks, landings, and access ramps are certainly important for maintaining smooth surfaces 
and safe and accessible sidewalks and ramps. Other measures, such as providing space for 
bicyclists to ride separated from pedestrian walkways may also be important, but are outside the 
scope of this document.  
 
Crash Factors. A large body of research in the past several decades has established numerous 
factors associated with pedestrian crashes. Pedestrian and driver pre-crash actions and behaviors 
(such as distraction, driver speed, and alcohol use), vehicle type and design, pedestrian and 
vehicle volumes/exposure, and elements of the built environment (including roadway design, 
presence of pedestrian facilities, and street-crossing facilities) all contribute to pedestrian 
crashes. Several studies have provided evidence of the role of the transportation environment in 
pedestrian safety and summarized best practices in engineering and design for pedestrian safety 
(FHWA, 2011; Redmon, 2011; Retting, Ferguson, & McCartt, 2003). Enacting and 
implementing Complete Streets policies has been identified as one of the more low-cost and 
impactful countermeasures, as evidenced by numerous cities and States across the United States. 
For more on Complete Streets, visit www.smartgrowthamerica.org/complete-streets/. Also, 
search for a program in your State or city. 
 
Recent studies have focused on the role of vehicle type, design, and warning systems in the event 
of a crash (Searson & Anderson, 2011), and in the ability of pedestrians and even vehicle 
technology to detect and prevent a crash (Fredriksson, Shin, & Untaroiu, 2011; Greene et al., 
2011). Another recent issue in the literature, as hybrid and electric vehicles constitute a larger 
portion of the vehicle fleet, is the consequence of “quiet” vehicles on pedestrian safety, 
particularly among pedestrians with visual disabilities who rely more on auditory cues to detect 
traffic (Garay-Vega, Pollard, Guthy, & Hastings, 2011).  
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 6 
 
As mentioned above, driving speed is a key risk factor in severe pedestrian crashes. The study by 
Rosen and Sander (2009) is believed to be one of the more robust in terms of estimating the risk 
of pedestrian fatality based on driver impact speeds. The study estimated fatality risk curves 
based on driver impact speeds, ranging from 8% at 50 km/h (31 mph) and reaching 50% at 75 
km/h (about 47 mph). A number of other studies have estimated similar relationships, although 
the magnitude varies somewhat (Leaf & Preusser, 1999; Tefft, 2011). As pedestrians are 
particularly vulnerable to severe injury and fatality when struck by higher-speed vehicles, 
countermeasures aimed at reducing vehicle speeds have the potential to save lives for both 
pedestrians and drivers. Driving speed also appears to affect the tendency for drivers to yield to 
pedestrians at crosswalks, with fewer drivers yielding as speeds increase (Bertulis & Dulaski, 
2014; Gårder, 2004). Speed-related countermeasures are presented in Chapter 3. 
 
The role of alcohol in pedestrian crashes has not been well-defined, based on the lack of 
complete and high-quality data on alcohol use or blood alcohol contents of drivers and 
pedestrians involved in crashes. It has been estimated that alcohol use—by either the driver or 
pedestrian—is a contributing factor in 49% of pedestrian fatalities (NHTSA, 2015b). Alcohol-
related countermeasures that may also help address certain pedestrian crashes are presented in 
Chapter 1. 
 
Cell phone and electronic device use are a source of distraction, not only for motorists, but for 
pedestrians. Talking on cell phones is associated with cognitive distraction that may undermine 
pedestrian safety, particularly among college-age pedestrians who may be more engaged with 
such devices (Hatfield & Murphy, 2007; Nasar, Hecht, & Wener, 2007; Stavrinos, Byington, & 
Schwebel, 2001, 2009). Tests of students performing street crossings in a virtual (simulated) 
environment suggest that accessing the internet with electronic devices, listening to music, or 
texting while walking alters pedestrian behavior. These behaviors may increase missed 
opportunities to cross safely and increase potential risks by reducing looking left and right before 
crossing, and increasing time that eyes are away from the street environment (Byington & 
Schwebel, 2013). Schwebel et al. (2012) found that listening to music and texting were 
associated with more “virtual” hits by cars than among those not distracted; however, the group 
using phones was not more likely to be hit than were undistracted pedestrians.  
 
The conditions of virtual experiments may not, however, reflect real world use or behaviors. 
Results from real-world observational studies are somewhat mixed. For example, Walker et al. 
(2012) found that (apparent) use of portable music devices (earbuds/headphones on ears) did not 
result in differences among females in looking behavior or walking speed before actual road 
crossings on a college campus, whereas males using devices looked for traffic more frequently 
than those not using the devices. Thompson, Rivara, Ayyagari, and Ebel (2013) found that 
pedestrians at real street crossings were less likely to look both ways while texting, and to a 
lesser degree while listening to music, talking with others (present), or engaged in other activities 
(e.g. pushing a stroller). However, talking on a phone did not increase the odds of failing to look. 
Thompson et al. (2013) sampled 20 high risk intersections in Seattle at systematically selected 
intervals and observed that nearly 30% of all pedestrians were using a mobile phone, texting, or 
using a portable music device. When all measured pedestrian safety behaviors (looking for 
traffic, using the crosswalk, and crossing with the walk signal) were grouped into an “optimal” 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 7 
pedestrian crossing behavior, only text messaging and being female were negatively associated 
with optimal crossings, with those who were text messaging being nearly four times more likely 
to exhibit at least one unsafe behavior. Only 26% of all pedestrians exhibited optimal behavior. 
Finally, text messaging and phone use were associated with slower crossing speeds, whereas 
music devices were associated with faster speeds. Pedestrians estimated to be 65 and older also 
exhibited slower crossings compared to other ages, regardless of device use.  
 
As pointed out by some of the above studies, the type and nature of risks and perceptions posed 
by different types of devices or activities may be different (Schwebel et al., 2012). For example, 
some studies have suggested that music is less cognitively distracting for pedestrians or drivers 
than, for example, internet use or texting, but may affect auditory perception of the environment 
and potential threats. 
 
Several studies observed 7% to 30% of pedestrians using varying types of portable electronic 
devices. A study by Cooper et al. (2011), performed throughout several locations in the San 
Francisco Bay Area, reported that pedestrian cell phone or mobile device use was between 7% 
and 15%. Data collected at 10 of NYC’s highest crash intersections in May-June, 2013, found 1 
in 4 pedestrians were talking on a mobile phone or smartphone, wearing head-phones, looking 
down and/or interacting with a mobile phone or smartphone, or engaging in more than one of 
these three behaviors (Basch, Ethan, Rajan, & Basch, 2014). And, as mentioned above, nearly 
30% of all pedestrians systematically observed at intersections in Seattle were using a mobile 
phone, texting, or using a portable music device (Thompson et al., 2013). Nationally-
representative estimates are unavailable, but would likely only capture a snapshot in time, as 
device use continues to grow in popularity.  
 
No comprehensive pedestrian crash database studies of pedestrian distraction have been 
identified, but Lichetenstein et al. (2012) searched the National Electronic Injury Surveillance 
System (NEISS), the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission, Google News 
Archives, and Westlaw Campus Research databases for pedestrian-vehicle crashes involving 
portable music devices that occurred from January 1, 2004 to June 1, 2011. Of 116 total cases 
identified, 52 fatal or injury crashes involved motor vehicles (or bicycles) and 64 involved 
collisions with trains. Across all 116 incidents, most (62 incidents) involved pedestrians aged 15 
to 24. In addition, 34 (29%) of the reports specifically mentioned horns or sirens being sounded 
prior to the victim being hit. FARS/GES data on pedestrian device use or involvement in 
pedestrian crashes is unavailable at the national level. For this update, no evaluations of 
countermeasures to address this issue have been identified. While numerous cities and States 
have passed driver cell phone/texting bans, at least a couple of cities (Rexburg, ID, and Fort Lee, 
NJ) have passed laws banning texting while walking; others are considering such a measure. 
Similarly, while a few communities have made efforts to educate pedestrians on the distraction 
issue (such as Philadelphia’s “distracted pedestrian” lane: 
www.npr.org/2012/04/02/149829299/philadelphia-texting-while-walking-is-no-joke), we are 
unaware of any that have been formally evaluated by the time of this update. 
 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 8 
Strategies to Increase Pedestrian Safety 
Countermeasures in this chapter are primarily aimed at improving safety behaviors of pedestrians 
and drivers through education and enforcement measures, and are organized by pedestrian sub- 
groups: 
• Preschool-age children; 
• School-age children; 
• Alcohol-impaired pedestrians; and 
• All pedestrians. 
 
The final section contains countermeasures that may affect all groups of pedestrians as well as 
drivers. 
 
Basic countermeasure principles include: 
• Reducing vehicle speed, which allows pedestrians and drivers more time to react and 
reduces impact forces if crashes do occur;  
• Reducing exposure to known risky situations through behavioral and environmental 
countermeasures (without necessarily discouraging walking); and  
• Increasing enforcement of pedestrian-friendly laws. 
 
Countermeasures need to be tailored to diverse populations, including groups such as recent 
immigrants who may not be familiar with U.S. traffic laws, the U.S. traffic environment, or may 
not speak or read English. In addition, countermeasures should also address particular problems 
identified within communities or common to a target group, such as older adults or children of 
varying ages.  
 
While not dismissing the importance of vehicle design and the role of the built environment in 
preventing pedestrian crashes, the countermeasures described in this report relate primarily to 
educational and enforcement measures aimed at improving the knowledge and behaviors of road 
users to prevent a crash. However, there is a growing recognition of the importance of road 
design and the built environment in fostering safer user behaviors. A comprehensive approach 
that uses a combination of effective engineering, enforcement, and educational measures may 
have the best chance of achieving desired crash reductions. U.S. DOT recently released a 
national pedestrian safety action plan summary. The plan focuses significant attention on built 
environment research and countermeasures (U.S. DOT, 2014). Key infrastructure resources are 
also included in the Resources section below.  
 
Further, emerging research is exploring whether vehicle technologies, known as Pedestrian 
Crash Avoidance/Mitigation (PCAM) systems, show promise in reducing motor vehicle-
pedestrian crashes (Yanagisawa, Swanson, & Najm, 2014). Current testing is limited to a 
research environment involving light vehicles, and measuring the systems' capabilities to detect a 
pedestrian in the road ahead. The systems may alert drivers, automatically brake, or take other 
measures to prevent crashes with pedestrians.  
 
Finally, the idea that vulnerable road users’ safety may be improved by increasing the numbers 
of pedestrians and bicyclists is gaining traction and some empirical support. A 2009 scanning 
tour by U.S. transportation officials and researchers of Denmark, Sweden, Germany, 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 9 
Switzerland, and the United Kingdom reported that the concept of “safety in numbers” has 
motivated promotion of more bicycling and walking in these countries as a safety 
countermeasure (Fischer et al., 2010). However, encouragement in these countries is done in the 
context of commitments to comprehensive planning, funding, engineering, and design and 
maintenance policies to provide safe and connected pedestrian networks. The scan report also 
documents numerous examples of how these policies are put into practice through traffic 
calming, traffic and parking management, enforcement, education and other systemic 
approaches. Research, from abroad as well as the United States, finds that, although actual 
numbers of crashes may go up with increases in walking, individual risk of crashes with motor 
vehicles (crash rate) is lower as numbers of bicyclists and pedestrians increase (Alliance for 
Biking and Walking, 2014; Geyer, Raford, Ragland, & Pham, 2006; Jacobsen, 2003; Leden, 
Gårder, & Pulkkinen, 2000). The European countries mentioned above are also committed to 
driving down the total numbers of pedestrian fatalities and injuries while increasing walking, and 
many European countries have adopted a toward zero deaths safety philosophy. 
 
A non-linear relationship between traffic volumes (motorist, pedestrian, or bicyclist) and crashes 
has long been demonstrated (AASHTO, 2010; Bhatia & Wier, 2011), but a causal mechanism for 
how increased volumes improve pedestrian safety has not been demonstrated (Bhatia & Wier, 
2011). This means that crashes do not tend to increase in direct proportion to increases in 
volume, but absolute crash numbers are still likely to increase (and have increased) with 
increases in walking – all else being equal. Additionally, all of the studies cited above, and others 
attempting to characterize pedestrian safety relationships, are based on cross-sectional 
comparisons. There are frequently safety factors such as motorist speed, congestion, or law 
enforcement activity that are unmeasured or have not been accounted for in such studies. Also, 
these cross-sectional studies cannot demonstrate the direction of effect – that is, whether a safer 
environment comes before the greater numbers or is a result (Bhatia & Wier, 2011). It is clear, 
however, that a focus on improving the environment, both infrastructure and road users’ 
compliance with laws and safe behaviors, are important to increasing both population-level 
safety (measured as a reduction in population-wide fatalities and injuries) and numbers of 
pedestrians or amounts of walking. As these two elements – safety improvements and increases 
in walking – go together, individual risk will also be reduced. 
 
 
Resources 
 
The agencies and organizations listed below can provide more information on comprehensive 
pedestrian safety issues and countermeasures, and links to numerous other resources. 
 
• National Highway Traffic Safety Administration:  
o  
Pedestrians - www.nhtsa.gov/Pedestrians  
o  
Research and Evaluation - www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Research+&+Evaluation 
o  
Behavioral Safety Research Reports - 
ntlsearch.bts.gov/repository/ntlc/nhtsa/index.shtm 
• Federal Highway Administration: www.fhwa.dot.gov/ 
o  
Office of Planning, Environment, & Realty (Pedestrian and Bicycle Program) - 
www.fhwa.dot.gov/planning/processes/pedestrian_bicycle/  
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 10 
o  
Safety Office, Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety - 
safety.fhwa.dot.gov/ped_bike/ped_focus/ 
o  
Federal Highway Administration Research and Technology, Coordinating, 
Developing, and Delivering Highway Transportation Innovations, Pedestrian and 
Bicyclist Safety www.fhwa.dot.gov/research/topics/safety/pedbike/  
• Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center: www.pedbikeinfo.org  
• National Center for Safe Routes to School: www.saferoutesinfo.org 
• Research and Administrative Technology Administration, National Transportation 
Library, Bicycle and Pedestrian Research: ntlsearch.bts.gov/repository/category.do?cat=5 
• Smart Growth America - National Complete Streets Coalition: 
www.smartgrowthamerica.org/complete-streets 
• SAFE KIDS Worldwide: www.safekids.org 
• Safe Routes to School National Partnership: www.saferoutespartnership.org 
• Safe States Alliance: www.safestates.org/ 
• United States Access Board: www.access-board.gov 
• National Center for Bicycling and Walking: www.bikewalk.org 
• America Walks: www.americawalks.org 
• Alliance for Walking and Biking: www.walkbikealliance.org 
• Association of Pedestrian and Bicycle Professionals: www.apbp.org 
 
Several specific resources that provide further information on engineering, enforcement, and 
educational strategies are: 
• Child Pedestrian Safety Curriculum (NHTSA, 2011): 
www.nhtsa.gov/ChildPedestrianSafetyCurriculum 
• Pedestrian Safer Journey: Skills for Safe Walking for Ages 5 to 18 
www.pedbikeinfo.org/pedsaferjourney/  
• Everyone is a Pedestrian on-line resource: www.nhtsa.gov/everyoneisapedestrian 
• Uniform Guidelines for State Highway Safety Programs: Highway Safety Program 
Guideline No. 14: Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety: 
www.nhtsa.gov/nhtsa/whatsup/tea21/tea21programs/pages/PedBikeSafety.htm 
• How to Develop a Pedestrian Safety Action Plan (FHWA & NHTSA, 2006): 
http://drusilla.hsrc.unc.edu/cms/downloads/howtoguide2006.pdf 
• Pedestrian Safety Training for Law Enforcement (NHTSA, 2011): 
http://mcs.nhtsa.gov/index.cfm/product/786/nhtsa-pedestrian-safety-training-for-law- 
enforcement-cd-rom.cfm 
• The Pedestrian Safety Workshop: A Focus on Older Adults, Instructor Guide (NHTSA, 
2010): www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/older_drivers/pdf/PedSafetyWorkshop-02.pdf  
• Pedestrian Countermeasure Policy Best Practice Report (Redmon, 2011): 
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/ped_bike/tools_solve/fhwasa11017/fhwasa11017.pdf  
• Public Policies for Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety and Mobility: An Implementation 
Project of the Pedestrian and Bicyclist Safety and Mobility International Scan: 
http://katana.hsrc.unc.edu/cms/downloads/PBSPolicReview.pdf 
• AASHTO Guide for the Planning, Design, and Operation of Pedestrian Facilities: 
https://bookstore.transportation.org/item_details.aspx?id=119 
• NCHRP Report 500 Guide for Reducing Collisions Involving Pedestrians (National 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 11 
Cooperative Highway Research Program, 2004): 
onlinepubs.trb.org/Onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v10.pdf 
 
Resources released or updated since the last Countermeasures That Work update:  
• National Center for Safe Routes to School. Enforcement: Role for Law Enforcement in 
SRTS - www.saferoutesinfo.org/program-tools/enforcement-role-law-enforcement-srts 
• NHTSA, 2013: Identifying Countermeasure Strategies to Increase Safety of Older 
Pedestrians – www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811799.pdf 
• FHWA, 2013: PEDSAFE: Pedestrian Safety Guide and Countermeasure Selection 
System - www.pedbikesafe.org/PEDSAFE/ 
• FHWA, 2014: Road Diet Informational Guide - 
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/road_diets/info_guide/rdig.pdf 
• FHWA, 2015: A Resident’s Guide for Creating Safer Communities for Walking and 
Biking - update to be released in early 2015. 
• FHWA, n.d.: Pedestrian Safer Journey - www.pedbikeinfo.org/pedsaferjourney/Safer 
People, Safer Streets: Summary of U.S. Department of Transportation Action Plan to 
Increase Walking and Biking and Reduce Pedestrian and Bicyclist Fatalities (2014): 
www.dot.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/safer_people_safer_streets_summary_doc_acc_v1-
11-9.pdf 
• U.S. DOT website: Everyone is a Pedestrian – 
www.nhtsa.gov/nhtsa/everyoneisapedestrian/index.html 
• World Health Organization, 2013: Pedestrian safety: a road safety manual for decision-
makers and practitioners – 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/79753/1/9789241505352_eng.pdf?ua=1 
 
 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 12 
Countermeasures That Work 
 
Countermeasures to improve pedestrian safety are listed below and discussed individually in the 
remainder of this chapter. The table is intended to give a rough estimate of each 
countermeasure’s effectiveness, use, cost, and time required for implementation. The symbols 
and terms used are described below. Effectiveness, cost, and time to implement can vary 
substantially from State to State and community to community. Costs for many countermeasures 
are difficult to measure, so the summary terms are very approximate. See each countermeasure 
discussion for more information on each item. 
 
1. Preschool-age Children 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
1.1 Children’s safety clubs 
 
Varies 
Unknown 
Unknown 
1.2 Child supervision 
 
$ 
Unknown 
Short 
 
2. School-age Children 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
2.1 Elementary-age child pedestrian training 
 
$ 
Unknown 
Short 
2.2 Safe Routes to School (SRTS) 
 
$ 
High 
Short 
2.3 Child school bus training 
 
$ 
High 
Short 
 
3. Impaired Pedestrians 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
3.1 Communications and outreach 
 
Varies 
Low 
Medium 
3.2 “Sweeper” patrols of impaired pedestrians 
 
$$ 
Low 
Medium 
 
4. All Pedestrians 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
4.1 Pedestrian safety zones 
 
$$$ 
Low 
Medium 
4.2 Reduce and enforce speed limits 
 
$ 
High 
Varies 
4.3 Conspicuity enhancement 
 
$ 
Low 
Medium 
4.4 Targeted enforcement 
 
$$ 
Low 
Short 
4.5 Driver training 
 
$ 
Low 
Medium 
4.6 Pedestrian gap acceptance training 
 
$$ 
Unknown 
Medium 
4.7 University educational campaign 
 
$ 
High 
Medium 
 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 13 
 
Effectiveness: 
- Demonstrated to be effective by several high-quality evaluations with 
consistent results 
- Demonstrated to be effective in certain situations 
- Likely to be effective based on balance of evidence from high-quality evaluations 
or other sources 
- Effectiveness still undetermined; different methods of implementing this 
countermeasure produce different results 
- Limited or no high-quality evaluation evidence 
 
Effectiveness is measured by reductions in crashes or injuries unless noted otherwise. See 
individual countermeasure descriptions for information on effectiveness size and how 
effectiveness is measured. 
 
Cost to implement: 
$$$: requires extensive new facilities, staff, equipment, or publicity, or makes heavy 
demands on current resources 
$$: requires some additional staff time, equipment, facilities, and/or publicity 
$: can be implemented with current staff, perhaps with training; limited costs for equipment, 
facilities, and publicity 
 
These estimates do not include the costs of enacting legislation or establishing policies. 
 
Use: 
High: more than two-thirds of the States, or a substantial majority of communities 
Medium: between one-third and two-thirds of States or communities 
Low: less than one-third of the States or communities 
Unknown: data not available 
 
Time to implement: 
Long: more than one year 
Medium: more than three months but less than one year 
Short: three months or less 
 
These estimates do not include the time required to enact legislation or establish policies. 
 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 14 
1. Preschool-Age Children 
 
1.1 Children’s Safety Clubs 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Unknown 
 
Young children have limited abilities to perceive, understand, and react appropriately to traffic 
hazards. A primary purpose of children’s safety clubs is to help parents and caregivers become 
more involved in educating young children about safe walking practices. Related goals are to 
help promote on-going, age-appropriate training, and safe attitudes towards traffic (Gregersen & 
Nolen, 1994). An equally important outcome of safety clubs is for parents and other caregivers to 
recognize children’s limits and capabilities, and to understand their obligation to provide 
adequate supervision and control (Gregersen & Nolen, 1994). 
 
Motor vehicle crashes involving preschool children often involve slow-moving vehicles, 
frequently backing up in driveways and parking lots (Agran, Winn, & Anderson, 1994; Olson, 
Sklar, Cobb, Sapien, & Zumwalt, 1993). From 2008 to 2011, 883 children 14 and younger were 
killed in non-traffic-related crashes in which they were not occupants of a vehicle (NHTSA, 
2014b). On average 104 of these fatalities involved forward moving vehicles, 95 backing 
vehicles, 7 driverless vehicles, and 15 involved other types, such as children struck near disabled 
or parked vehicles (NHTSA, 2014b). A majority (84%) of these children were age four and 
younger. It is important to teach children age-appropriate lessons about traffic and motor 
vehicles. It is even more important that parents and caregivers take direct responsibility and 
supervise young children carefully near roadways or in any areas where vehicles may be in use 
(Rivara, Bergman, & Drake, 1989). See also the following section, Section 1.2, for more 
information on supervision. 
 
Parents are primary role models and trainers for their children. Research in the United Kingdom 
has examined the interactions and messages between parents and children with regard to road 
safety (Green et al., 2008). The researchers found that parents, while feeling competent to the 
task, were inconsistent role models and lacking in knowledge of best approaches and messages 
to train their children. Moreover, parents did not take full advantage of opportunities to teach 
while walking, and attention was focused more on controlling their children’s behavior than 
teaching, particularly under higher risk situations (Green et al, 2008).  
 
The main development of safety clubs took place in Europe a number of years ago, but they have 
not been adopted broadly in the United States. In many of the European programs, children may 
be enrolled in a traffic safety club when they reach their third birthday. Books on traffic safety 
are then sent to the child every 6 months until they reach 5 years or older (Dragutinovic & 
Twisk, 2006), but other print or electronic media could be provided, bearing in mind that the 
intent is to engage both the parent and child. There do not appear to be any national or statewide 
standards, models, or curricula. 
 
One online game for parents and young children (Otto the Auto, from the California State 
Automobile Association) can be found at www.ottoclub.org. For a British traffic club source, see 
The Children's Traffic Club, www.childrenstrafficclub.com. 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 15 
 
Use: The extent of use of child safety clubs in the United States is unknown.  
 
Effectiveness: Safety clubs are one way to promote understanding and to teach a specific set of 
appropriate behaviors for young pedestrians. However, the knowledge and skill benefits have not 
been found to translate into crash and injury reductions (Dragutinovic & Twisk, 2006; Gregersen 
& Nolen, 1994; West, Sammons, & West, 1993). The one study that evaluated effects on self- 
reported crashes found a negative result, but concluded that no impact on crashes could be 
inferred (Gregersen & Nolen, 1994). 
 
Costs: The costs would depend on the cost of materials and delivery and whether the families are 
charged anything for participation. In most of the clubs, enrollment is free to the participants; 
some charge a fee for enrollment (Dragutinovic & Twisk, 2006). If integrated into preschool 
programs, training for teachers may be needed. 
 
Time to implement: Before a safety club program could be implemented, program material 
must be located and adapted as necessary. Following that, a modest time period would be needed 
to arrange for material, identify target recipients, disseminate information, and train teachers as 
needed. 
 
Other issues: 
• A challenge would be to garner high enrollment among families with lower socio- 
economic status (SES) and low-car-ownership. Participation in child safety clubs has 
been found to be lower among low SES groups in European countries (Dragutinovic & 
Twisk, 2006). 
• It is up to parents and caregivers of young children to use materials appropriately and a 
lack of control makes it difficult to monitor or assess results. 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 16 
1.2 Child Supervision 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
 
The primary purpose of this countermeasure is to increase caregiver supervision of children 
when they are exposed to traffic, or when they are nearby with direct access to traffic. Because 
children do not have the impulse control to make safe walking decisions, these programs can be 
an asset to anyone responsible for the supervision of children. The State can require such training 
for teachers, day care workers, and others licensed to care for children. The programs can also be 
made available to parents, babysitters, or other caretakers through PTAs, faith-based 
organizations or places of worship, medical providers, or even direct mail or internet access.  
 
NHTSA also supports a website to reach parents, Parents Central, to serve as the gateway to keep 
children safe on the road (www.safercar.gov/parents/walking.htm). Parent Central includes 
materials created through a partnership to provide preschool aged children and their parents with 
pedestrian safety messages. Most recently, NHTSA released Teaching Children to Walk Safely 
as They Grow and Develop: A Guide for Parents and Caregivers, with learning objectives and 
tips for caregivers of children ages 4 and older. This resource can be found on the Safe Routes to 
School website (www.saferoutesinfo.org/sites/default/files/TeachingChildrentoWalkSafely.pdf).  
Another NHTSA publication includes Walking Through the Years, Preventing Pedestrian 
Crashes: Preschool/Elementary School Children. NHTSA also has several brochures to educate 
parents and caregivers on child pedestrian safety (www.nhtsa.gov/Pedestrians) as does Safe Kids 
Worldwide, which provides safety tips for parents of young children and links to additional 
resources (www.safekids.org/safetytips/field_age/little-kids-1%E2%80%934-
years/field_risks/pedestrian-safety).  
 
One of the ways to market these programs may be to demonstrate to parents the amount of 
supervision their child/children needs (and effective training). Rivara et al. (1989) and Dunne, 
Asher, and Rivara (1992), for example, have shown that parents consistently overestimate the 
ability of children younger than 9 or 10 to negotiate in traffic. Adults should actively supervise 
children and not assume that their presence will be adequate to ensure safer behavior. 
 
Use: The availability and use of programs to improve child supervision is unknown. Pedestrian 
safety in general may be a topic at preschools, but programs are likely to be unique, without 
consensus objectives, material, or curriculum. Many other outlets such as community centers, 
churches, and local injury prevention offices may be used to reach caregivers and parents of pre-
school age children, but the extent of such outreach, and the penetration of traffic safety 
messages for caregivers is unknown. 
 
Effectiveness: Programs or material can provide helpful training for caregivers if they point out 
specific risks as well as guidelines for the kind and degree of oversight that are necessary, but the 
caregivers need to put the training into practice. Widespread exposure of parents and caregivers 
to this material and resources should be an objective of such programs with the goal to improve 
safety and reduce injuries. 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 17 
Costs: Material for individuals is already available and quite inexpensive. Training for licensed 
caregivers would be inexpensive to develop and distribute. 
 
Time to implement: Short, for existing material; medium, to develop and disseminate a training 
curriculum with material. 
 
Other issues: 
• Differences in cultural, social, and perceived norms for pedestrian safety should be 
considered in the development of programs to improve child supervision. For example, in 
a study by Pfeffer, Fagbemi, and Stennet (2010), 59% of adults held the hands of female 
children compared with 36% who held the hands of male children when crossing a road. 
In another study, children 9 and younger in one cultural group believed that more of their 
peers crossed roadways alone than actually did (Rosenbloom, Sapir-Lavid, & Hadri-
Carmi, 2009). Addressing discrepancies in perceived norms and actual norms may help to 
shift the actual norm toward safer trends. 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 18 
2. School-Age Children 
 
2.1 Elementary-Age Child Pedestrian Training 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
 
The purpose of elementary school pedestrian training is to equip school-age children with 
knowledge and practice to enable them to walk safely in environments with traffic and other 
safety hazards. A number of elementary school pedestrian training programs have been 
developed over the years. NHTSA’s “Willy Whistle” pedestrian safety videos were updated:  
“Stop and Look and Listen with Willy Whistle” (2008) for children grades K-2 emphasizing to 
look left-right-left before crossing, and “Getting There Safely” (2014) for children grades 3-6, 
emphasizing critical thinking with walking around traffic. This video is available at 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=ATyNXDMvBuE. The Willy Whistle film is available for 
download at www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/willie/video.html.  
 
Additional curricula have been developed for rural pedestrian concerns (Cleven & Blomberg, 
1994). Furthermore, WalkSafe, a program adapted from many of these earlier resources, was 
implemented initially as a five-day program in a high risk district in Miami-Dade County, 
Florida and later as a three-day program in all 220 Miami-Dade County elementary schools as 
part of a comprehensive effort to address pedestrian crashes in Miami-Dade County (Zegeer et 
al., 2008a). 
 
In 2011, NHTSA produced a Child Pedestrian Safety Curriculum for elementary age students 
along with an instructor guide (www.nhtsa.gov/ChildPedestrianSafetyCurriculum). Features of 
the curriculum include five lesson plans for each grade group K-1, 2-3, and 4-5 with 
developmentally appropriate lessons and messages, along with caregiver tip sheets, skills 
practice exercises, and student tests to evaluate knowledge change. Although the curriculum was 
pilot tested in schools when it was developed, a formal evaluation is currently underway. 
 
School-based programs are useful to teach basic pedestrian concepts and safe behaviors at 
schools, churches, and other institutions with groups of elementary-aged children. Pedestrian 
safety programs are especially important for children such as those from lower-income families 
and neighborhoods, or those who may be more likely to make risky decisions and are less able to 
control their behavior (Barton & Schwebel, 2007). A study from Australia identified younger 
ages, and attentional and developmental issues including hyperactivity and inattentiveness as 
factors in unsafe road-crossing decisions by children. Children who had some independent 
walking experience were less likely to make incorrect decisions (Congiu et al., 2008). 
 
Other resources that may be used independently or in a group setting include an on-line, video-
training resource, Pedestrian Safer Journey, developed for the Federal Highway Administration. 
This resource provides separate video-based training modules for child pedestrians ages 5 to 9, 
10 to 14, and 15 to 18, and educator materials including discussion guides. These materials are 
available on the PBIC website at www.pedbikeinfo.org/pedsaferjourney/index.html. In addition, 
the National Center for Safe Routes to School hosts extensive educational resources including 
Teaching Children to Walk Safely as They Grow and Develop: A Guide for Parents and 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 19 
Caregivers, with learning objectives and tips for caregivers of children ages 4 and older. This 
resource can be found at 
www.saferoutesinfo.org/sites/default/files/TeachingChildrentoWalkSafely.pdf. Other resources 
and tips for educators, parents, drivers, children, and even neighbors are available at 
http://guide.saferoutesinfo.org/education/ 
 
Resources are also available to help parents become role models and provide on-going practice 
and positive reinforcement. As mentioned in Section 1.1 on preschool age children, NHTSA has 
several brochures to educate parents and caregivers on child pedestrian safety 
(www.nhtsa.gov/Pedestrians). Safe Kids Worldwide also has tips for caregivers and links to 
other resources (www.safekids.org/child-pedestrian-safety).  
 
Use: Unknown. Materials have been available for years, and distributed widely, but not 
necessarily as part of a systematic or national program. In addition, many materials and resources 
have been updated to new technologies and formats such as interactive internet resources and 
video trainings. With schools being called on for a wider variety of services and narrower set of 
teaching requirements, finding time to add child traffic safety modules may be difficult. Newer 
technologies and materials formats may help expand the reach of training materials. 
 
Effectiveness: Child pedestrian training programs have been shown to increase knowledge. 
Long-lasting behavior improvements may be harder to achieve. Evaluations of five-day and 
three-day WalkSafe programs in the Miami school district that used videos, formal curricula, 
workbooks, and outside simulation activities on an imaginary road on school grounds showed 
improvements in safety knowledge compared to before, although no control group was used in 
the evaluation. Improvements were more consistent for grades K-3 than for 4 and 5. Actual in-
traffic behaviors were also reportedly improved in the short term, but did not hold up at 3 months 
after the program and no comparison group was used (Hotz et al., 2004; Hotz et al., 2009). In a 
study of the longer-term impacts of the WalkSafe program, knowledge and behavior of more 
than 1,500 students receiving a one-time per year WalkSafe instruction were evaluated over 2 
years (Livingston et al., 2011). While short- and intermediate-term knowledge retention was 
observed among all grades, long-term (i.e., more than a year) knowledge retention of pedestrian 
safety behaviors were observed only among children moving from 3rd to 4th grade. Knowledge 
change did not appear to result in improved pedestrian behaviors. The authors concluded that 
repetition and reinforcement may be needed for long-term knowledge and behavior change, as 
well as engagement by caregivers. 
 
Another study by Gates, Savolainen, Datta, and Buck (2010) also indicates the importance of 
repetition in school-based trainings. In a study of 930 students in grades 2 to 7 in Detroit, 
pedestrian safety training was provided once and then again seven to 12 months later (Gates et 
al., 2010). Measures of safety violations gathered by observing street-crossing behaviors before 
and after the trainings, as well as knowledge change based on pre/post tests were collected. After 
the initial training, both test scores and observed behaviors improved, but were only partially 
sustained. Once retraining occurred, there was an increase in test scores, and the cumulative 
difference (after initial training and retraining) was consistently larger than the impact of initial 
training alone for both test scores and observational behavioral measures. One trial suggested 
that video-based training may be an effective method for conveying knowledge and appropriate 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 20 
behaviors (Arbogast et al., 2014), although neither before (baseline) nor long-term behavioral 
observations were conducted. Another study suggested that virtual and roadside training are 
more effective than videos for improving behaviors (Schwebel, McClure, & Severson, 2014), but 
more research is needed. Reach, feasibility, and cost are also factors to consider. 
 
Barton, Schwebel, and Morrongiello (2007) also reported that children crossed a road more 
safely immediately following a brief pedestrian safety training that included instruction followed 
by practice crossings on a pretend road. In the United Kingdom, a combination of adult-led 
training and peer discussions for children 5 to 8 led to improved roadside search skills (Tolmie et 
al., 2005). In a small study of mostly white and middle class preschool children, Albert and 
Dolgin (2010) also reported that 4- and 5-year-olds trained by adults in groups of 3 or 4 using a 
play-mat model retained real-world behavioral (street crossing choices) improvement 6 months 
later compared to peers trained using two other less interactive methods or who received no 
training. According to the authors, the success of this treatment may lie in the opportunities for 
peer collaboration and corrective feedback from the adult trainers.  
 
Thus, numerous studies suggest that knowledge and behaviors of young children may be 
improved through education and training programs, but that behavior in real-world traffic 
situations is more likely to be modified if the program incorporates interactive training with 
opportunities for practice and positive reinforcement (Percer, 2009). Effectiveness of school-
based child pedestrian training would also likely be enhanced if it combined child training with 
emphasis to teachers, parents, and other caregivers on the limits of children and the need for 
careful supervision, particularly for those younger than 10 years (see Section 1.2). 
 
Costs: NHTSA publications can be ordered (in limited quantities), or are free for download, and 
can be distributed at low expense. 
 
Time to implement: Short, once a decision is made by a school district to offer such a program. 
Time is needed to review the recommended material, work it into the curriculum, and train 
teachers. As indicated by the above research, the training needs to be repeatedly implemented in 
order to sustain effectiveness. 
 
Other issues: 
• A consensus from reviews is that practical training—that is, learning by doing with 
reinforcement of correct behaviors—is the most effective way for children to learn traffic 
safety skills (Bruce & McGrath, 2005; Dragutinovic & Twisk, 2006; Percer, 2009). The 
need for experiential learning is especially key for younger children who lack the 
capacity to generalize concepts and need to practice in environments with real objects 
that are as close as possible to those they will experience (Dragutinovic & Twisk, 2006). 
Although it can be done with adult supervision, real-world practice may be difficult to 
achieve with large groups of school children and without undue exposure to traffic risks. 
• Classroom education may be enhanced by using outdoor simulation, 3-dimensional 
models, games, or other interactive learning methods such as with computer games and 
models, particularly in adult-led and small-group activities. These methods do not replace 
real-world practice but evidence from a few studies suggests that interactive training with 
opportunities for feedback, correction, and practice (more than one session) may lead to 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 21 
more lasting behavior improvements (Tolmie et al., 2005; Albert & Dolgin, 2009). 
• Hammond, Cherrett, and Waterson (2014) found that trainers often modified the training 
from recommended best practices in a program (“Kerbcraft”) developed to provide 
roadside training for 5- to 7-year-olds in the United Kingdom. This deviation seems to 
have been towards conserving resources by conducting shorter trainings and introducing 
more classroom elements than the program recommended. It isn’t clear, however, if the 
adaptations diminish effectiveness, but that is certainly a risk since the modifications 
have not been evaluated. The other possible implication is that the longer, all-roadside 
training may not be practical for consistent implementation (Hammond et al., 2014). It is 
important that whenever programs are modified, however, that the changed program is 
also evaluated to ensure continued effectiveness.
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 22 
2.2 Safe Routes to School 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Short 
 
From 2004 to 2013, 1,344 people were killed in school-transportation-related crashes—an 
average of 134 fatalities per year (NHTSA, 2015a). Since 2004, 116 school-age pedestrians 
(younger than 19) have died in school-transportation-related crashes.  
 
The goal of Safe Routes to School Programs (SRTS) is to increase the amount of walking and 
bicycling trips to and from school while simultaneously improving safety for children walking or 
bicycling to school. SRTS programs are community-based and are intended to be comprehensive 
in nature. Programs include education of children, school personnel, parents, community 
members, and law enforcement officers about safe bicycling and walking behavior and safe 
driving behavior around pedestrians and bicyclists. In addition, programs include enforcement 
and engineering activities to improve traffic safety and reduce or eliminate risky elements of the 
traffic environment around primary and secondary schools so children can safely bicycle or walk 
to school. 
 
From 2005-2012, SAFETEA-LU legislation required each State to have its own SRTS program 
including a full-time coordinator to manage Federal funds. Each year, up to 70% (but not more 
than 90%) of available Federal funding was to be allocated on infrastructure (engineering) 
improvements, and up to 30% (but not less than 10%) of funding on non-infrastructure projects 
to encourage walking and bicycling to school (public awareness and outreach, enforcement near 
schools, education, and training for volunteers). Educational resources to support these efforts 
are available online from NHTSA on the pedestrian and bicycle safety page, and on the National 
Center for Safe Routes to School (NCSRTS) website (www.saferoutesinfo.org). NCSRTS 
provides information, guidance, and support for community, State, and national SRTS efforts. A 
list of current State SRTS coordinators and funding levels may also be found at the NCSRTS 
website. In June 2012, Congress passed the Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century 
(MAP-21) Act. The Act significantly altered how SRTS and other pedestrian and bicycle 
programs are structured and funded. As a result of MAP 21, funds are no longer provided 
directly to States to fund SRTS activities. SRTS projects have been eligible, since October 2012, 
to compete for funding alongside other pedestrian and bicycle-related programs, including 
former Transportation Enhancements and Recreational Trails projects, as part of a new program 
called Transportation Alternatives, but States may determine funding priorities. Many States and 
localities continue SRTS safety efforts involving education, enforcement, and infrastructure; 
create or enhance partnerships; and develop creative approaches to continue to engage 
communities in SRTS. To learn more, visit www.fhwa.dot.gov/MAP21/.  
 
Use: With the establishment of the national SRTS program, all 50 States and the District of 
Columbia initiated SRTS programs. According to the National Center for SRTS (NCSRTS) 
website, most State SRTS programs are in the process of determining how to handle MAP-21 
legislation. Visit the websites above for details. 
 
Effectiveness: SRTS efforts including education materials and training can be effective in 
teaching children and their parents how to evaluate and choose the safest routes for walking or 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 23 
bicycling to and from school. SRTS programs also can be an effective means to increase 
knowledge and practice of safe behaviors among children and parents walking to school and 
driving around children (see Section 2.1 on Elementary-Age Child Pedestrian Training), improve 
traffic law enforcement (see Sections 4.2 and 4.4), and other safety efforts. It has not been 
possible to clearly demonstrate SRTS program effects on preventing crashes and injuries 
(Dumbaugh & Frank, 2007). Although the full SRTS program emphasizes a comprehensive 
education, enforcement, and engineering approach, some specific implementations have centered 
on site-appropriate engineering changes; results have shown behavioral improvements for 
pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists (Britt, Bergman, & Moffat, 1995). Data for 130 legacy 
SRTS programs (initiated before the national program) were evaluated to ascertain safety effects 
(Blomberg, Cleven, Thomas, & Peck, 2008). Declining trends in school-age child pedestrian and 
bicycle crashes during school trip times were found for both SRTS focus sites and non-SRTS 
sites in the same States. Either no decrease or inconsistent patterns were found for other ages. 
The results suggested that the programs at least did not cause any adverse safety effects on total 
crash numbers although exposure data were lacking to know whether the amounts of biking and 
walking had changed. If children were walking and biking at higher rates in SRTS locations than 
in other areas, or the programs resulted in positive spillover effects to other areas, the programs 
may have reduced crash rates, although data were insufficient to test this (Blomberg et al., 2008).  
 
A 2013 study attempted to assess the safety effects of New York City’s SRTS program. Results 
were encouraging, but again, not conclusively so. The study compared school-aged pedestrian 
injury rates (by population) for traffic injuries that occurred during typical school travel times for 
census areas that had SRTS interventions compared to rates in areas with no such treatments 
(DiMaggio & Li, 2013). Census tracts that covered 30 schools with either short-term 
interventions (apparently low-cost engineering measures such as signs and crosswalk markings) 
or completed capital infrastructure improvement projects were included in the SRTS group. 
Although study design limitations preclude a conclusion that SRTS treatments were responsible, 
the trends were encouraging. Injury rates in census tract areas with SRTS treatments fell 
substantially compared to non-intervention areas, where injury levels remained virtually 
unchanged (DiMaggio & Li, 2013). Since schools were chosen for treatment because of high 
crash rates, it is likely that some of the crash reductions observed were due to a natural tendency 
for crashes to return toward an “average” level (known as regression toward the mean).  
 
A variation on the SRTS theme, “walking school buses,” uses volunteer adults, usually parents, 
to walk a specific route to and from school, collecting or dropping off children on the way, so 
that a group of children walks to school under the supervision of adults. The program has been 
found popular and practical in New Zealand and Italy (Collins & Kearns, 2005; Roberts, 1995). 
Roberts found in New Zealand that when parents walked with children to and from school, the 
risk of injury was 64% lower than the risk for unaccompanied children, though the sample sizes 
were small and the differences were not statistically significant. In a study of fourth grade 
students from eight low-income schools in Houston, Texas, researchers examined the impact of 
walking school buses on several pedestrian behaviors (Mendoza, Watson, & Chen, 2012). 
Researchers found these students were five times more likely to cross at the intersection or 
crosswalk (rather than midblock locations) as opposed to children at schools without walking 
school buses. The National Center for Safe Routes to School has released a primer and training 
materials to help communities plan and launch a walking school bus program, identify 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 24 
community partners, and secure program funding. Materials are available at 
http://apps.saferoutesinfo.org/training/walking_school_bus/.  
 
Costs: Education and encouragement activities associated with SRTS may be low cost and may 
also be eligible for grant funding through the State, and perhaps other sources. Activities 
formerly eligible under Federal SR2S funding are now eligible under the TAP program outlined 
in MAP 21, but funding priorities are established by each State. State contacts may be located on 
the NCSRTS website (http://saferoutesinfo.org/program-tools/find-state-contacts), or search 
individual States’ DOT websites for information about TAP and SR2S funding. Other funding 
sources may also be identified through the SRTS Funding Portal webpage 
(http://saferoutesinfo.org/funding-portal). Material and resources can be accessed at no cost. 
NCSRTS provides downloadable material for State and local SRTS programs. 
 
Time to implement: Once the school or district has decided to implement a SRTS program, a 
range of material, including an on-line step-by-step guide on getting started, is available from 
NCSRTS. Programs funded through State DOTs typically require applications on a funding 
cycle and can take significantly longer to implement. 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 25 
2.3 Child School Bus Training 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Short 
 
The purpose of school bus training for children is to teach school-age children how to safely 
approach, board, disembark, and walk away from school buses. According to NHTSA, 116 
school-aged pedestrians 18 and younger died in school-transportation-related crashes from 2004-
2013 (NHTSA, 2015a). These fatalities represent 9% of all school-transportation-related 
fatalities, most of which (71%) involved occupants of non-school-bus vehicles. Of the 116 
school-aged pedestrian fatalities, 67% were struck by school buses or vehicles functioning as 
school buses, and 33% by other vehicles (passenger cars, etc.). In 2013, 22 pedestrians of all 
ages were killed in school-bus-related crashes. Of those, 16 were struck by buses, and nine were 
struck by other vehicles (NHTSA, 2015a). 
 
Basic training for children who ride school buses should be part of the normal school routine, if 
it is not already. Training should include behavior on the bus as well as getting on or off the bus 
at bus stops or school, obeying bus drivers and bus monitors, emergency evacuation procedures, 
and any topics unique to the school. Additionally, education about safety behaviors of parents in 
school zones and around school buses should be reinforced as part of Back to School night, in 
school bulletins, or other creative means. The Safe Routes to School website has many resources 
(www.saferoutesinfo.org/) and the SRTS program guide includes messages for drivers and tips 
for neighbors living in school walk zones to help improve safety for school-aged pedestrians 
(http://guide.saferoutesinfo.org/education/index.cfm). NHTSA also has a refresher training 
module for school bus drivers (see 
www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/School+Buses/School+Bus+Driver+Training).  
 
Jurisdictions should use a common curriculum for school bus safety training. Targeted behaviors 
include boarding and exiting from the bus and crossing the street to and from the bus. The 
NHTSA Child Pedestrian Safety Curriculum, previously discussed, includes a segment on safety 
around school buses. 
 
Use: Most school districts have some form of school bus training in place, though the content 
and quality of those programs varies. Schools should be eager to provide this training, both for 
child safety and for legal liability. 
 
Effectiveness: Burke, Lapidus, Zavoski, Wallace, and Banco (1996) found that stenciled 
pavement markings, together with in-school training, led to improved behavior in waiting for and 
boarding the school bus compared to training alone for students in grades 4-6. Reductions in 
crashes and injuries are difficult to demonstrate because minimal, basic training is very 
widespread and the choice to adopt a stronger curriculum would be confounded with any number 
of other factors. 
 
Costs: The primary cost for the SHSOs would be in adapting material for their States and 
producing, stocking, and distributing the material. Much of this could be done electronically, 
through school websites, newsletters, press releases, and other regular communications channels. 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 26 
Time to implement: Basic material is available from a variety of organizations, including 
NTHSA, and schools could adopt a curriculum of their choice quickly. 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 27 
3. Impaired Pedestrians 
 
3.1 Impaired Pedestrians: Communications and Outreach 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Low 
Time: Medium 
 
In 2013, 34% of all fatally injured pedestrians had BACs of .08 g/dL or higher, and 38% of all 
fatally injured pedestrians had positive BACs (NHTSA, 2015b).  
 
Communications and outreach to reduce impaired-pedestrian crashes can be directed at a wide 
variety of audiences, including law enforcement, drivers, alcohol servers and vendors, civic and 
neighborhood leaders, faith-based communities, universities, and friends and family of likely 
impaired pedestrians. Impaired pedestrians are also a target audience, of course. However, they 
are viewed as a very difficult audience for communications and outreach to have a meaningful 
effect on their behavior. Reaching others who are in a position to prevent these crashes, or to 
alter the circumstances that lead up to such crashes, may be among the most effective ways to 
achieve success. Some of the countermeasures proposed for impaired drivers in Chapter 1, such 
as responsible beverage service training and alternative transportation, are also appropriate for 
impaired pedestrians. 
 
Use: Low. NHTSA has successfully implemented one zone-based program in Baltimore, 
Maryland that included public service announcements, posters, flyers, and interventions aimed at 
alcohol-impaired pedestrians, but the program is not currently active (Blomberg & Cleven, 
2000). Most impaired-roadway user programs focus on impaired drivers. 
 
Effectiveness: Using 5.5 years of before data and 2 years of after data, Blomberg and Cleven 
(2000) found a 22% decrease in crashes among males 30-59 in the targeted zones where the 
intervention took place. Although encouraging, there have been no demonstrations of crash or 
injury reductions unless the communications and outreach is part of a comprehensive program 
that includes engineering measures and some form of law enforcement involvement, as in the 
case of Blomberg and Cleven. 
 
Costs: The costs for such a program can range from low to high, depending on the extent of the 
campaign that is designed and implemented. 
 
Time to implement: The actual time to implement depends on the scope and ambition of the 
program. 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 28 
3.2 “Sweeper” Patrols of Impaired Pedestrians 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: Varies 
Use: Low 
Time: Medium 
 
The purpose of “sweeping” alcohol-impaired pedestrians from the streets until they no longer 
have high BACs is intended to reduce the exposure of these at-risk pedestrians to traffic, and can 
also address other social issues such as public intoxication and crime. Pedestrians with high 
BACs are at high risk of injury due to motor vehicle crashes. A program of removing alcohol- 
impaired pedestrians from the streets can be effective in reducing their exposure and thus the 
risk. 
 
There are some important issues that need to be resolved when setting up sweeper programs, 
such as how to identify at-risk pedestrians (e.g., calls from bars or direct observers, observation 
by police or health professionals), who will pick up the targets, where will they be kept until they 
are sober, what friends or family need to be notified at the time of the pickup (if any), how the 
pedestrians are returned home after the intervention, and how the costs of the program are borne. 
 
Huntley (1984) focused on police “sweeper” squads and “support on call” programs involving 
taxis and trained escorts to get intoxicated people home or to a detoxification center. Services of 
these types in the Boston area were surveyed. Both types of services appeared practical and 
effective, though the number of people who could be reached by these services was relatively 
small. There was a problem related to the number of available detoxification beds in the 
community. The sweeper squads wanted to deliver intoxicated pedestrians to the mental health 
community, not to police facilities, and they stopped the sweep when the beds were filled. There 
were also problems with the number of taxi drivers who wanted to deal with intoxicated people 
and the availability of volunteer escorts. 
 
Use: Well-publicized sweep operations, which involve picking up intoxicated people from the 
street and letting them “sleep it off,” have been conducted in Puerto Rico and in Gallup, New 
Mexico. Puerto Rico’s program, which included a statute, communications and outreach, and law 
enforcement training, led to a 7% drop in alcohol-related pedestrian crashes (Stewart, 1994). 
There appear to be no well-publicized programs operating now. 
 
Effectiveness: Such programs typically reach only a fraction of those people who need the 
services. The sweeps typically deal with people who are too drunk to walk or even know that 
they are being “swept.” These same people are at risk while they are becoming intoxicated, and, 
in all likelihood, will be at risk again in the near future as they become sober and thus more 
mobile. As described by Huntley (1984), these individuals need intensive treatment for 
alcoholism; and sweeper programs may be useful in identifying potential treatment candidates. 
 
Costs: The program incurs ongoing costs directly related to the effectiveness, i.e., the number of 
people swept up. Depending on how it is set up, the program may incur costs related to the 
sweeper patrol (or law enforcement overtime), the use of facilities, and any subsequent treatment 
requirements.  
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 29 
Time to implement: Once it is decided to offer the program, the logistics for starting it up could 
be handled within weeks or months, depending on the extent and coordination of services. 
 
Other issues: 
• The legal rights of those potentially being swept need to be preserved. 
• Often if law enforcement or other formal agencies are involved, their regular procedures 
would require some formal charge or other processing to take place. Alternatively, a 
sweeper program could be without subsequent consequences to those being swept, with 
no formal records kept. This might eliminate certain organizations or agencies from 
participating. 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 30 
4. All Pedestrians 
 
4.1 Pedestrian Safety Zones 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$$ 
Use: Low 
Time: Medium 
 
The pedestrian safety zone concept was developed in a joint effort study by NHTSA and FHWA 
(Blomberg & Cleven, 1998). The idea is to strive for large decreases in pedestrian crashes and 
injuries by more effectively targeting resources to problem areas. Specifically, the objective of 
pedestrian safety zones is to increase cost-effectiveness of interventions by targeting education, 
enforcement, and engineering measures to geographic areas and audiences where significant 
portions of the pedestrian crash problem exist (NHTSA, 2008). Pedestrian zone programs can 
target a full range of pedestrian crash problems within a limited geographic area or focus on 
particular types of problems that make up a large portion of the problem within a limited area. 
 
Blomberg and Cleven (1998) implemented and analyzed an early pedestrian safety zone program 
in Phoenix, Arizona. Crash data were analyzed to identify areas where older pedestrian crashes 
occurred and “zones” were drawn around the high-incidence areas. Countermeasures were 
developed for the kinds of crashes that involved older pedestrians. The measures included 
lengthening the signal timing to allow more time for older pedestrians to cross the street, 
providing communications and outreach to both drivers and pedestrians living near the crash 
zones, and enhanced enforcement. The result was a significant reduction in crashes and injuries 
involving older pedestrians in the target areas. 
 
In a Miami-Dade County, Florida, comprehensive application of the safety zone strategy, high 
crash zones were identified, and then the characteristics of those crashes were further analyzed 
within the zones (Zegeer, Blomberg et al., 2008). The four zones, comprising less than 1% of the 
total land area of the County, accounted for about 20% of the total number of collisions (Zegeer, 
Henderson et al., 2008). Further analyses identified high child involvement in crashes in some 
areas, young adult involvement in others (particularly at night), and high senior involvement in 
certain corridors. Overall, there was an 8.5% to 13.3% reduction in pedestrian crash rates during 
and following the program implementation compared to control groups (Zegeer, Blomberg, et 
al., 2008). 
 
Use: Pedestrian zone programs are known to have been implemented in only a handful of cities. 
 
Effectiveness: Properly designed and implemented pedestrian zone programs have been shown 
effective in reducing crashes and injuries for older pedestrians (Blomberg & Cleven, 1998), for 
impaired pedestrians (Blomberg & Cleven, 2000), and for child and adult pedestrian crashes in 
Miami-Dade County (Zegeer, Blomberg, et al., 2008; Zegeer, Henderson, et al., 2008). 
 
Costs: Pedestrian zone programs require up-front analysis and planning, countermeasure 
development and tailoring, and implementation. 
 
Time to implement: Medium. A pedestrian zone program can take several months of 
concentrated activity before countermeasures can be implemented. More comprehensive 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 31 
programs, such as in Miami-Dade, may be years-long programs involving data analysis and on-
site evaluations, lining up partners, and identifying, implementing, and evaluating 
countermeasures. Programs to date have included local task forces, usually assembled for the 
program, to take critical leadership roles. 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 32 
4.2 Reduce and Enforce Speed Limits 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Varies 
 
The goal of reducing motorist travel speeds is to increase reaction time for both drivers and 
pedestrians to avoid crashes, as well as reduce the severity of pedestrian injuries when these 
crashes occur. Higher vehicle speeds produce more frequent and more serious pedestrian crashes 
and casualties, as evidenced by several studies (Leaf & Preusser, 1999; Rosen & Sander, 2009; 
Tefft, 2011). The Rosen and Sander (2009) study estimated fatality risk curves based on driver 
impact speeds, ranging from 8% at 50 km/h (31 mph) and reaching 50% at 75 km/h (about 47 
mph).  
 
Reducing speeds through lowering speed limits is a time-honored countermeasure. Evidence 
shows, though, that actual speeds are reduced by only a fraction of the reduction in speed limits – 
typically 1-2 mph speed reduction for every 5 mph speed limit reduction. However, even 1-2 
mph reductions in average speed are estimated to yield substantial fatal and injury crash 
reductions over all, with higher percentage reductions on streets with lower initial speeds 
(AASHTO, 2010, Table 3E-2; and see Chapter 3). Speed affects pedestrian injury severity to an 
even greater degree, as mentioned above and earlier in the chapter, and consequently also affects 
pedestrians’ perceptions of whether it is safe to walk. For maximum effectiveness, speed limit 
reductions need to be accompanied by communications and outreach that inform the public and 
make the case for the speed reduction, and by heightened, visible enforcement (Leaf & Preusser, 
1999). Some reasons that travel speeds do not decrease by the same proportion as speed limit 
reductions, include drivers not noticing the new speed limit, drivers not understanding the safety 
reasons to reduce speed, drivers speeding out of habit, or continuing to keep up with the speeds 
maintained by other drivers. Speed limit reductions need to be made compelling through 
communications strategies (framing the problem), appropriate engineering changes (which may 
include road diets, traffic calming, and roundabouts), and by enforcement (including by 
automated means). On roads intended for higher speeds, measures that separate pedestrians from 
traffic as they travel along the road (on sidewalks), or cross the road (such as median refuges and 
signals that provide pedestrians opportunities to cross) should be provided and are also keys to 
safer environments (Howard, Mooren, Nilsson, Quimby, & Vadeby, 2008). For more on speed-
related issues and countermeasures, see Chapter 3. 
 
Speed limit reductions can be most effective when introduced to a limited area as part of a 
visible area-wide change, for example, identifying a downtown area as a special pedestrian- 
friendly zone through signs, new landscaping or “streetscaping,” lighting, etc. If done cleverly, 
this can be accomplished with relatively modest engineering changes and expense. As mentioned 
above, road diets, a proven safety measure, may be a low-cost way to reduce a “big, wide” street 
that suggests high speeds to drivers and also provide more space for pedestrians, bicyclists, or 
on-street parking. (For more information, see 
http://katana.hsrc.unc.edu/cms/downloads/WhitePaper_RoadDiets_PBIC.pdf for a review of 
road diets and safety effectsand FHWA’s new Road Diet Informational Guide, 
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/road_diets/info_guide/rdig.pdf.) 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 33 
If speed limits are routinely ignored, then enforcing speed limits may be a more effective 
strategy than attempting to change them. Blomberg and Cleven (2006) reported on 
demonstration programs in two cities in which speed limit enforcement, combined with 
engineering changes and extensive publicity, reduced both average speeds and the number of 
excessive speeders in residential neighborhoods. A recent attempt to scale up a similar program 
to a large city (Philadelphia) met with challenges in garnering community involvement and 
increasing enforcement due to a State restriction on using radar to enforce speeds, and seemed to 
have limited success in reducing injuries (Blomberg, Thomas, & Marziani, 2012). However, 
speed reductions were observed on 17 of 24 corridors, six of which had pavement treatments 
simulating traffic calming devices. Although no pedestrian crash reductions were observed in the 
police districts with the program compared to those without, pedestrian crashes were too small in 
number to achieve measurable effects. For more information, see Chapter 3, Sections 1.1, 2.2, 
and 4.1.  
 
Use: High, in the sense that all public roads have a speed limit and speed limit enforcement is 
widely employed. 
 
Effectiveness: Reduced speed limits and enforcement can reduce vehicle speeds and all types of 
crashes and crash severity. The association of pedestrian injury with speed trends strongly 
suggests that pedestrian injuries and crashes will be reduced if travel speeds are reduced, 
although direct evidence is lacking. Just changing speed limits is of limited, though positive, 
effectiveness as described above. 
 
Costs: Simply changing speed limits is low-cost, only requiring updating speed limit signs or, 
where few signs exist, adding some new ones. Combining speed limit changes with 
communications and outreach, enforcement, and engineering changes can be significantly more 
expensive. 
 
Time to implement: Depending on the scope of the program, the time can be very short, or it 
can take several months to a year to plan and implement a complex plan. 
 
Other issues: 
• Speed limit changes exist in the context of other, unchanged speed limits. The normal 
expectation is that there is an overall consistent approach to speed-limit setting. Where, 
for safety, some speed limits need to be reduced in a manner inconsistent with other 
speed limits, there must be clear and visible reminders that distinct conditions exist that 
justify the lower limits. 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 34 
4.3 Conspicuity Enhancement 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Low 
Time: Medium 
 
The purpose of enhancing conspicuity for pedestrians is to increase the opportunity for drivers to 
see and avoid pedestrians, particularly when it is dark and when 72% of pedestrian fatalities 
occur nationally (NHTSA, 2015b). Pedestrians who are more visible are less likely to be struck. 
Retroreflective materials (that is materials that reflect light – such as from car headlights – back 
toward the source) are built into many shoes, including children’s and athletic shoes. Other 
accessories, such as arm or leg bands, gloves, vests, and caps are available from sporting goods 
stores and other vendors. Light sources, including strobes and other flashing lights, are also 
available. Many have been designed for bicyclists but are equally applicable to pedestrians. The 
difficulty with most of these devices is that the user must decide in advance to take and use them. 
Due to the extra step and the appearance of the conspicuity enhancements not looking like 
“normal” clothing, they are very much underused. Light-colored clothing, long a recommended 
solution, does little to improve conspicuity (NCHRP, 2004, Strategy B5). Pedestrians also tend 
to overestimate their own visibility, wrongly assuming if they can see vehicles, vehicles must see 
them (Karsh, Hedlund, Tyson, & Leaf, 2012). See also Chapter 9, Section 3.1 on bicyclist 
conspicuity measures for more information. Bright colored and fluorescent clothing may also 
help to improve daytime conspicuity for pedestrians in some environments, but most research 
has focused on bicyclists and there may be differences in effectiveness for these groups.  
 
More than 15% of pedestrian fatalities in 2012 involved pedestrians who were not visible – dark 
clothing, no lighting, etc. (NHTSA, 2014a, Table 100). There are a number of opportunities for 
improving pedestrian conspicuity. NHTSA’s child education program includes information about 
conspicuity messages targeting different age groups. (See 
www.nhtsa.gov/ChildPedestrianSafetyCurriculum.) Other educational efforts should include a 
focus on being visible at night and in the daytime and making use of the conspicuity aids 
described in this section. Devices designed to be semi-permanently fastened to children’s 
clothing can be provided to parents through schools, group activities, or health care providers. 
Light sticks and reflective bands can be supplied with new cars, or distributed by automobile 
clubs or insurance companies for use during vehicle breakdowns or emergencies. 
 
Use: Retroreflective materials are used regularly in athletic-type shoes, occasionally in 
backpacks and jackets, and minimally in other clothing. 
 
Effectiveness: Widespread use of retroreflective materials would increase the ability of drivers 
to detect pedestrians at night in time to avoid crashes. Pedestrians wearing good retroreflective 
materials, particularly materials that highlight a person’s shape and moving extremities (i.e., 
wrists and ankles), can be detected hundreds of feet farther than can pedestrians in normal 
clothing, even with low-beam illumination (Karsh, Hedlund, Tyson & Leaf, 2012; NCHRP, 
2004, Strategy B5). A study in a controlled (closed road) environment also validated that 
pedestrians are detected more readily when they wear reflective elements on their moving body 
parts rather than attached to the torso (Tyrrell et al., 2009).  
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 35 
Costs: Cost to provide retroreflective materials is low, if such supplementary materials are 
distributed in quantity and added to existing programs. Such items as reflective wrist and ankle 
bands are available commercially. To develop new programs promoting use of conspicuity 
materials would require somewhat more planning and start-up time and costs would also depend 
on communications strategies used. 
 
Time to implement: Promoting increased conspicuity may require development of targeted 
messages and a publicity strategy. 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 36 
 
4.4 Targeted Enforcement 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Low 
Time: Short 
 
The purpose of targeted enforcement is to increase compliance with appropriate traffic laws by 
both pedestrians and motorists. Behavioral pedestrian safety initiatives require improvements in 
unsafe driver or pedestrian behaviors. Once pedestrians and drivers are informed of the behavior 
changes needed and why they are important, enforcement often is necessary to encourage 
compliance. Although enforcement was implied or stated for many of the earlier 
countermeasures, targeted enforcement deserves additional discussion here.  
 
Traffic enforcement is most effective when it is highly visible and publicized, to reinforce the 
message of the required behavior and to raise the expectation that failure to comply may result in 
legal consequences. Enforcement campaigns should be aimed at drivers and pedestrians, starting 
with the communications and outreach efforts that announce, describe and publicize the traffic 
safety campaign. 
 
A coordinated program of targeted enforcement should involve a range of support activities, such 
as communications and outreach to notify the public of the campaign, training law enforcement 
officers on enforcement goals and procedures, and educating prosecutors and judges so they 
understand the purposes of the campaign and are prepared for the increase in citations 
enforcement will produce. A pilot study in North Carolina found that once more stringent 
prosecution was publicized, the court case load did not increase as feared, as more drivers paid 
their citations automatically (Hunter, Thomas, & Stewart, 2001). NHTSA has developed a 
training course aimed at teaching law enforcement personnel the basics of pedestrian safety and 
targeted enforcement techniques: http://mcs.nhtsa.gov/index.cfm/product/786/nhtsa-pedestrian-
safety-training-for-law- enforcement-cd-rom.cfm. An additional resource for law enforcement is 
a guide to pedestrian safety enforcement operations which was released in early 2015: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/812059-PedestrianSafetyEnforceOpera 
HowToGuide.pdf.  
  
Use: Low. Enforcement is largely a local option, and often is integrated into other police duties, 
so special enforcement efforts are difficult to isolate and track. However, the use of targeted 
pedestrian safety enforcement is on the rise. Several localities (including Chicago, Detroit, 
Miami, Pinellas County, Florida and Raleigh/Durham, North Carolina) and States such as New 
Jersey and New Mexico have, within the past few years, implemented training for law 
enforcement officers and conducted targeted enforcement efforts for pedestrian safety. North 
Carolina is expanding its “Watch for Me” campaign, which includes targeted enforcement and 
tailored safety messages. As mentioned in the discussion of crash factors at the beginning of the 
chapter, a few localities have also recently passed laws banning texting while walking, which 
they are now enforcing. Another Florida enforcement program in Gainesville has been evaluated 
and is described below. 
 
Effectiveness: Targeted enforcement can be employed for a wide range of purposes in a wide 
range of circumstances, so effectiveness is context-dependent. In Queens, New York, 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 37 
enforcement was a key part of a campaign that included minor engineering adjustments and 
communications and outreach and reduced pedestrian fatalities (CDC, 1989). In Seattle, a variety 
of communications and outreach and enforcement combinations were tested in conjunction with 
a change in the law for drivers to yield to pedestrians at crosswalks; the authors concluded that 
enforcement was not successful in increasing driver yielding (Britt et al., 1995). A carefully done 
before/after study with a comparison group examined the effects of sustained, enhanced high 
visibility enforcement of motorist yielding to pedestrians, combined with publicity and other 
community outreach in Gainesville, FL (e.g., flyers given to stopped drivers, information sent 
home with school children, roadside feedback signs, and earned and paid media) (Van Houten, 
Malenfant, Blomberg, Huitema, & Casella, 2013; Van Houten, Malenfant, Huitema, & 
Blomberg, 2013). Driver yielding rose throughout the one year study period, which included 
four, two-week waves of enforcement, along with the other activities. Four of the six 
enforcement sites observed significant increases in yielding at the end of the period with a fifth 
experiencing a positive trend. Only one location, on a University campus with an already high 
baseline rate of yielding, did not observe an increase. Yielding also increased at the comparison 
sites, although not by the same degree. Driver awareness of the enforcement, especially 
awareness of the enforcement-related feedback signs, also increased to a high level (from 13% at 
baseline to 78% at the end of the year). Maintenance effects of this effort are being conducted. 
Earlier, Van Houten and Malenfant (2004) had found more modest increases in driver yielding to 
pedestrians in response to a single wave of targeted police enforcement at crosswalks on two 
corridors in Miami Beach, Florida. Warnings and educational flyers were handed out to most 
violators, while citations were issued for flagrant violations. Some publicity also resulted from 
the enforcement efforts. The yielding reductions are promising, but effects on crashes and 
injuries have not yet been documented. 
 
In a NHTSA study by Savolainen, Gates, and Datta (2011), law enforcement officials in Detroit, 
MI implemented two pedestrian-oriented enforcement campaigns at Wayne State University 
aiming to educate campus pedestrians on proper use of crosswalks and the importance of 
obeying signals through the issuance of warnings. The study saw pedestrian violations (walking 
outside the crosswalk or against the signal) reduced 17% to 27% immediately after the 
campaign, with sustained reductions of 8% to 10% several weeks after active enforcement 
ceased. Study authors noted that pedestrian compliance was also heavily associated with the 
presence, quality, and location of pedestrian facilities (including pedestrian signals, bus stops, 
crosswalks, and convenient crossing opportunities). 
 
Costs: The cost of the enforcement is a direct function of the size of the effort; the amount of 
enforcement; and associated supplies, ranging from vehicle operating costs to equipment such as 
speed measurement devices or alcohol test machines. If overtime is used to increase 
enforcement, costs would be higher. 
 
Time to implement: Short. Law enforcement resources can be diverted to targeted enforcement 
very quickly. Support equipment can take longer to acquire and deploy, as can developing a plan 
that coordinates law changes, environmental changes, or support communications and outreach 
with enforcement activities. Communications and outreach are keys to maximal effectiveness. 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 38 
4.5 Driver Training 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Low 
Time: Medium 
 
The purpose of pedestrian safety-related driver training is to increase the sensitivity of drivers to 
the presence and characteristics of pedestrians and their role as drivers to enhance the safety of 
pedestrians. Current training for new drivers typically includes relatively little information on 
other road users. Information on pedestrians can be significantly strengthened. Specifications for 
driver education curricula, typically a State requirement, can be adjusted to include more and 
more specific information on the status of the pedestrian in the traffic environment, right of way 
requirements for driver and pedestrian, other driver and pedestrian responsibilities, categories of 
pedestrian crash types, and key ways drivers can avoid being involved in such crashes. Standards 
for curriculum and training developed by the American Driver and Traffic Safety Education 
Association include some of these pedestrian- related learning objectives (Driver Education 
Working Group, 2009). 
 
One way driver training can incorporate pedestrian and bicyclist concerns for new and existing 
drivers is through “Share the Road” concepts and programs, though many focus exclusively on 
bicycles. One of many such resources is the State of New York’s highly readable Sharing the 
Road Safely (www.safeny.ny.gov/media/share-road.htm). 
 
Use: As noted, all driver education curricula include some information on other road users, but 
the kind of expanded information recommended here is sparse. 
 
Effectiveness: Driver education has not been shown to reduce overall crash rates. The objective 
for adding more pedestrian information would be to increase knowledge and desire to share the 
road safely with pedestrians, of how to avoid the most common types of motor 
vehicle/pedestrian type crashes, and to improve drivers’ anticipation of and interactions with 
pedestrians – as well as improve their behavior as pedestrians. 
 
Costs: Low. The cost would be for the development of the new segments of the standard 
curriculum and for getting it into the material used by driver education instructors and schools. 
 
Time to implement: Material would need to be developed and integrated into the standard driver 
education curriculum, and adjustments made elsewhere in the curriculum to reflect likely 
additional time required for the new pedestrian material. 
 
The same timeframe would be appropriate for making changes to official State driving manuals, 
license exams, and related material and procedures. 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 39 
4.6 Pedestrian Gap Acceptance Training 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Medium 
 
The purpose of pedestrian gap acceptance training is to help pedestrians learn to make better 
road crossing decisions, which may reduce the incidence of crossing-related injuries and 
fatalities. Previous studies have indicated that human error, such as poor judgment in gauging the 
speed and/or distance of oncoming traffic, underlies a significant portion of roadway collisions 
(Hunt, Harper, & Lie, 2011). 
 
Use: Unknown. Preliminary studies have taken place in New Zealand and France but no adult 
simulator trainings on gap acceptance have been found in the United States. 
 
Effectiveness: Hunt, Harper, and Lie (2011) used laboratory-based instruction (e.g., a video 
simulating the roadway environment) to test three different approaches for giving feedback to 
pedestrians in how to better incorporate vehicle speed information to their gap estimates and 
crossing decisions. While the study group was small—58 people age 18 to 80—preliminary 
results indicate that video-based training with a feedback mechanism can be successful in 
improving the accuracy of pedestrians’ estimates of driver speeds. However, improved speed 
estimation did not consistently translate into improved gap-acceptance judgments, and 
participant age played a role in training effectiveness. Older pedestrians, in particular, had 
significantly more conservative gap judgments after the training, which were independent of 
improvements in vehicle speed estimations. 
 
Another study by Dommes and Cavallo (2012) evaluated the effectiveness of an education-based 
intervention aimed at training older pedestrians (60+ years) to improve crossing safety by taking 
into account vehicle speeds. Results showed that after simulated crossing training, the treatment 
group participants crossed more quickly, had larger safety margins, and had fewer close 
encounters than the control group, although differences were no longer significant 6 months after 
training. Also, in contrast to the Hunt et al. study, participants did not appear to improve in 
taking into account vehicle speed when making crossing decisions. The authors concluded that 
age- related perceptual and cognitive difficulties may exist in gauging speed and gap acceptance 
that cannot be remedied by educational training alone. 
 
Costs: Medium. Costs would involve development of the training materials (or adaptation from 
existing study materials) and determining an applicable and appropriate venue to reach the adult 
and senior pedestrian population. 
 
Time to implement: Medium. Training materials could be developed and integrated into 
existing educational channels for adult and senior pedestrians. 
 
Other issues:  
• As mentioned earlier, environmental treatments such as allowing sufficient time for the 
pedestrian crossing in signal timing, median refuges, and careful attention to sidewalk 
accessibility issues are also important to older pedestrians who may have mobility 
declines.  
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 40 
4.7 University Educational Campaign 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $, varies 
Use: High 
Time: Medium 
 
Frequently, university settings are areas of high pedestrian concentrations. This, combined with a 
younger age population who frequently take more risks as both pedestrians and drivers, may 
result in increased pedestrian crashes on roads around and through a campus setting (Zegeer, 
Sandt, & Scully, 2008). At the same time, a university campus may offer an opportune setting to 
reach a well-defined target audience of drivers and pedestrians about the risks of unsafe 
behaviors. Fall of a new academic year may be a good time to reach new students, faculty, and 
staff who may be less familiar with walking and driving in the campus environment. Activities 
may need to be repeated several times a year for maximal effect, during higher risk times such as 
in the fall as day length shortens, and again in spring as weather warms and jogging and other 
outdoor activities may increase. Potential educational messages may include right-of-way rules 
and the importance of yielding right-of-way (pedestrians and drivers), being visible and 
predictable at both day and night times and during inclement weather (pedestrians and cyclists), 
making eye contact at conflict points (pedestrians and drivers), avoiding distractions (pedestrians 
and drivers), and speed control (drivers and potentially cyclists) (Zegeer, Sandt, & Scully, 2008). 
Partnerships may include campus public safety offices, student health and wellness programs, 
city/county public safety agencies, injury prevention agencies, parking and transportation 
services, transit agencies, and student groups. There may be academic or research units on 
campus that could also help with developing a campus campaign. 
 
Use: A number of universities are known to conduct some form of outreach or have pedestrian 
safety campaigns. The University of North Carolina combines educational outreach with targeted 
crosswalk enforcement to remind both motorists and pedestrians of safe yielding behaviors, but 
the program effects have not been evaluated. 
 
Effectiveness: No studies of crash effects are known. The University of South Florida at Tampa 
conducted a one-week campaign in the fall that began with campus administrators, local 
agencies, and elected officials leading a “parade” walk around campus. Over four days, there 
were lectures on walking and biking safely (WalkWise and Bike Smart), and posters and 
booklets with walking and biking rules were distributed across campus. The campaign ended 
with a bicycle celebration event. Zhang, Gawade, Lin, and McPherson (2013) reported some 
improvement in observed safety behaviors, most notably at locations closest to a student center 
where many of the activities took place. They also noted, however, that all groups (drivers, 
pedestrians, and cyclists) self-reported better behavior than was observed in the field, and that 
there were differences in perceptions of the interactions among the groups. For example, drivers 
thought they yielded more frequently to pedestrians than pedestrians thought they did, and vice 
versa.  
 
Effectiveness is likely to be increased when education is combined with appropriate 
infrastructure to facilitate safer interactions. 
 
Costs: Costs vary depending on the activities implemented, but could include costs for events 
and materials. The well-identified campus environment and potential campus partners are 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 41 
characteristics that provide an opportunity to lower and/or share costs when compared to other 
similar types of educational campaigns in a broader community. 
 
Time to Implement: The timeline may be short once problem identification and program 
development has occurred. Time should be allowed to gather campus community input and to 
develop and test materials that resonate with the campus community.  
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 42 
Pedestrian Safety References 
 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. (2010). Highway safety 
manual, 1st Ed. Retrieved from www.highwaysafetymanual.org  
 
Agran, P. F., Winn, D. G., & Anderson, C. L. (1994). Differences in child pedestrian injury 
events by location. Pediatrics, 93, 84-288. 
 
Albert, R. R, & Dolgin, K. G. (2010). Lasting effects of short-term training on preschoolers' 
street-crossing behavior. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 42, 500-508. 
 
Alliance for Biking and Walking (2014). Biking and walking in the United States: 2014 
benchmarking report. Retrieved from 
www.bikewalkalliance.org/storage/documents/reports/2014BenchmarkingReport.pdf  
 
Anderson, C. L., Vaca, F. E. & Chakravarthy, B. (2010). Socioeconomic disparities in 
pedestrian injuries. Injury Prevention, 16, A259. 
 
Arbogast, H., Burke, R. V., Muller, V., Ruiz, P., Knudson, M. M., & Upperman, J. S. (2014). 
Randomized controlled trial to evaluate the effectiveness of a video game as a child pedestrian 
educational tool. Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, 76, 1317-1321. 
 
Barton, B. K., Schwebel, D. C., & Morrongiello, B. A. (2007). Brief report: Increasing children's 
safe pedestrian behaviors through simple skills training. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 32, 
475-80. 
 
Barton, B. K., & Schwebel, D. C. (2007). The influences of demographics and individual 
differences on children’s selection of risky pedestrian routes. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 
32, 343-53. 
 
Basch, C. H., Ethan, D., Rajan, S., & Basch, C. E. (2014). Technology-related distracted walking 
behaviors in Manhattan’s most dangerous intersections. Injury Prevention, 20, 343-346. 
 
Bertulis, T. & Dulaski, D. M. (2014). Driver approach speed and its impact on driver yielding to 
pedestrian behavior at unsignalized crosswalks. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the 
Transportation Research Board, 2464, 46-51. 
 
Bhatia, R., & Wier, M. (2011). “Safety in Numbers” re-examined: Can we make valid or 
practical inferences from available evidence? Accident Analysis and Prevention, 43, 235-240. 
 
Blomberg, R. D. (2001). NHTSA resource guide on laws related to pedestrian and bicycle safety 
(Report No. DOT HS 809 368). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/bike/resourceguide/ 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 43 
Blomberg, R. D., & Cleven, A. M. (1998). Development, Iimplementation, and evaluation of a 
pedestrian safety zone for elderly pedestrians (Report No. DOT HS 808 692). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library website: 
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25900/25984/DOT-HS-808-692.pdf  
 
Blomberg, R. D., & Cleven, A. M. (2000). Development, implementation, and evaluation of a 
countermeasure program for alcohol-involved pedestrian crashes (Report No. DOT HS 809 
067). Retrieved from the NHTSA Behavioral Safety Research Reports Library website: 
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/25000/25900/25960/DOT-HS-809-067.pdf 
 
Blomberg, R. D., & Cleven, A. M. (2006). Pilot test of “Heed the Speed,” a program to reduce 
speeds in residential neighborhoods (Report No. DOT HS 810 648). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/research/HeedSpeedWeb/ 
 
Blomberg, R. D., Cleven, A. M., Thomas, D., & Peck, R. C. (2008). Evaluation of the safety 
benefits of legacy safe routes to school programs (Report No. DOT HS 811 013). Retrieved from 
the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8110
13.pdf 
 
Blomberg, R. D., Thomas, F. D., & Marziani, B. J. (2012). Demonstration and evaluation of the 
Heed the Speed safety program (Report No. DOT HS 811 515). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811515.pdf 
 
Britt, J. W., Bergman, A. B., & Moffat, J. (1995). Law enforcement, pedestrian safety, and driver 
compliance with crosswalk laws: Evaluation of a four-year campaign in Seattle. Transportation 
Research Record, 1485, 160-167. 
 
Bruce, B., & McGrath, P. (2005). Group interventions for the prevention of injuries in young 
children: A systematic review. Injury Prevention, 11, 143-147. 
 
Burke, G. S., Lapidus, G. D., Zavoski, R. W., Wallace, L., & Banco, L. I. (1996). Evaluation of 
the effectiveness of a pavement stencil in promoting safe behavior among elementary school 
children boarding school buses. Pediatrics, 97, 520-523. 
 
Byington, K. W., & Schwebel, D. C. (2013). Effects of mobile Internet use on college student 
pedestrian injury risk. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 51, 78–83. 
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (1989). Queens Boulevard pedestrian safety 
project—New York City. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 38, 61-64. 
 
CDC. (2012). Vital signs: Walking among adults — United States, 2005 and 2010. Morbidity 
and Mortality Weekly Report, 61, 595-601. 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 44 
Chakravarthy, B., Anderson, C. L., Ludlow, J., Lotfipour, S., & Vaca, F. E. (2012). A geographic 
analysis of collisions involving child pedestrians in a large Southern California county. Traffic 
Injury Prevention, 13, 193-198. 
 
Chen, C., Lin, H., & Loo, B. P. Y. (2012). Exploring the impacts of safety culture 
on immigrants’ vulnerability in non-motorized crashes: A cross-sectional study. Journal of 
Urban Health, 89, 138-152. 
 
Collins, D. C., & Kearns, R. A. (2005). Geographies of inequality: Child pedestrian injury and 
walking school buses in Auckland, New Zealand. Social Science and Medicine, 60, 61-69. 
 
Congiu, M., Whelan, M., Oxley, J., Charlton, J., D'Elia, A., & Muir, C. (2008). Child 
pedestrians: Factors associated with ability to cross roads safely and development of a training 
package (Report 283).  Retrieved from the Monash University Accident Research Centre: 
www.monash.edu.au/muarc/reports/muarc283.html 
 
Cooper, J., Schneider, R., Ryan, S., & Co, S. (2012). Documenting targeted behaviors associated 
with pedestrian safety. Presented at Peds Count! 2012: Success, Challenges and Data 
Conference. Retrieved from the SafeTREC website: www.safetrec.berkeley.edu 
 
Cottrill, C. D., & Thakuriah, P. (2010). Evaluating pedestrian crashes in areas with high low- 
income or minority populations. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 42, 1718-1728. 
 
DiMaggio, C. & Li, G. (2013). Effectiveness of a safe routes to school program in preventing 
school-aged pedestrian injury. Pediatrics, 131, 290-296.  
 
Driver Education Working Group. (2009). Novice teen driver education and training 
administrative standards. report from National Conference on Driver Education. Retrieved from 
the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Teen%20Driver/files/TeenDriverE 
TAS-1.pdf 
 
Dommes, A. & Cavallo, V. (2012). Can simulator-based training improve street-crossing safety 
for elderly pedestrians? Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behavior, 15, 
206-218. 
 
Dragutinovic, N. & Twisk, D. (2006). The effectiveness of road safety education: A literature 
review. Retrieved from the SWOV Institute for Road Safety Research website: 
www.swov.nl/rapport/r-2006-06.pdf 
 
Dumbaugh, E., & Frank, L. D. (2007). Traffic safety and safe routes to schools: Synthesizing the 
empirical evidence. Transportation Research Record: Jounal of the Transporatation Research 
Board, 209, 89-97. Retrieved from http://trrjournalonline.trb.org/doi/abs/10.3141/2009-12  
 
Dunne, R. G., Asher, K. N., & Rivara, F. P. (1992). Behavior and parental expectations of child 
pedestrians. Pediatrics, 89, 486-490. 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 45 
 
Federal Highway Administration. (2010). Review - Public policies for pedestrian and bicyclist 
safety and mobility: An implementation project of the pedestrian and bicyclist safety and mobility 
international Scan (Report No. FHWA-PL-10-028). Retrieved from 
http://international.fhwa.dot.gov/pubs/pl10028/pl10028_duplex.pdf  
 
Fischer, E. L., Rousseau, G. K., Turner, S. M., Blais, E. J., Engelhart, C. L., Henderson, D. R., . . 
. Zegeer, C. V. (2010). Pedestrian and bicyclist safety and mobility in Europe (Report No. 
FHWA-PL-10-010). Retrieved from the FHWA website: 
www.international.fhwa.dot.gov/pubs/pl10010/pl10010.pdf 
 
Fredriksson, R., Shin, J., & Untaroiu, C. D. (2011). Potential of pedestrian protection systems-A 
parameter study using finite element models of pedestrian dummy and generic passenger 
vehicles. Traffic Injury Prevention, 12, 398-411. 
 
Garay-Vega, L., Pollard, J. K., Guthy, C., & Hastings, A. (2011). Auditory detectability of hybrid 
electric vehicles by blind pedestrians. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the 
Transportation Research Board, 2248, 68-73. 
 
Gårder, P. E. (2004). The impact of speed and other variables on pedestrian safety in Maine. 
Accident Analysis and Prevention, 36, 533-542.  
 
Gates, T. J., Savolainen, P. T., Datta, T. K,., & Buck, N. (2010). Effect of pedestrian safety 
retraining for elementary and middle school students. Transportation Research Record: Journal 
of the Transportation Research Board, 2198, 145-151. 
 
Geyer, J., Raford, N., Ragland, D., & Pham, T. (2006). The continuing debate about safety in 
numbers—Data from Oakland, CA. Retrieved from the Safe Transportation Research & 
Education Center website: www.its.berkeley.edu/publications/UCB/2006/TSC/UCB-ITS-TSC-
RR-2006-3.pdf 
 
Greene, D., Liu, J., Reich, J., Hirokawa, Y., Shinagawa, A, Ito, H., & Mikami, T. (2011). An 
efficient computational architecture for a collision early- warning system for vehicles, 
pedestrians, and bicyclists. Intelligent Transportation Systems, 12, 942-953. 
 
Green, J., Ayrton, R., Woodall, J., Woodward, J., Newell, C., Cattan, M., & Cross, R. (2008). 
Child–parent interaction in relation to road safety education: Part 2 – Main report. Retrieved 
from the London Department for Transport website: 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20110509101621/http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roadsafet
y/research/rsrr/theme1/no102safetyresearch.pdf 
 
Gregersen, N. P., & Nolen S. (1994). Children's road safety and the strategy of voluntary traffic 
safety clubs. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 26, 463-470. 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 46 
Hammond, J., Cherrett, T., & Waterson, B. (2014). The development of child pedestrian training 
in the United Kingdom 2002 - 2011: A national survey of local authorities. Journal of 
Transportation Safety & Security, 6, 117-129. 
 
Hatfield, J., & Murphy, S. (2007) The effects of mobile phone use on pedestrian crossing 
behaviour at signalised and unsignalised intersections. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 39, 197- 
205. 
 
Hotz, G., Cohn, S., Castelblanco, A., Colston, S., Thomas, M., Weiss, A., . . . The Pediatric 
Pedestrian Injury Task Force. (2004). WalkSafe: A school-based pedestrian safety intervention 
program. Traffic Injury Prevention, 5, 382-389. 
 
Hotz, G., Garces de Marcilla, A., Lutfi, K., Kennedy, A., Castellon, P., & Duncan, R. (2009). 
The WalkSafe program: Developing and evaluating the educational component. Journal of 
Trauma, Injury, Infection, and Critical Care 66, S3 – S9. 
 
Howard, E., Mooren, L., Nilsson, G., Quimby, A., & Vadeby, A. . (2008). Speed management: 
Road safety manual for decision-makers and practitioners. Geneva: Global Road Safety 
Partnership. Available at Retrieved from the WHO website: 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/43915/1/9782940395040_eng.pdf   
 
Hunt, M., Harper, D. N., & Lie, C. (2011). Mind the gap: Training road users to use speed and 
distance when making gap-acceptance decisions. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 43, 2015- 
2023. 
 
Hunter, W. H., Stutts, J. C., Pein, W. E., & Cox, C. L. (1996). Pedestrian and bicycle crash types 
of the early 1990’s (Report No. FHWA-RD-95-163). Washington, DC: Federal Highway 
Administration. Retrieved from www.pedbikeinfo.org/cms/downloads/PedBikeCrashTypes.pdf 
 
Hunter, W. W., Thomas, L. J., Stewart, J. R. (2001). Kill your speed: An evaluation of a rural 
speed enforcement program. Retrieved from the UNC Highway Safety Research Center website: 
www.hsrc.unc.edu/pdf/2001/rural_speed.pdf 
 
Huntley, M. S., Jr. (1984). Pedestrian/alcohol problems: Countermeasures to consider. 
Cambridge, MA: Transportation Systems Center. 
 
Jacobsen, P. L. (2003). Safety in numbers: More walkers and bicyclists, safer walking and 
bicycling. Injury Prevention 9, 205-209. (See also Correction, Injury Prevention (2004), 10, 
127.) 
 
Karsch, H. M., Hedlund, J. M., Tison, J., & Leaf, W. A. (2012). Review of studies on pedestrian 
and bicyclist safety, 1991-2007 (Report No. DOT HS 811 614). Retrieved from the NHTSA 
website: www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811614.pdf  
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 47 
Kravetz, D., & Noland, R. B. (2012). A spatial analysis of income disparities in pedestrian safety 
in northern New Jersey: Is there an environmental justice issue? TRB 91st Annual Meeting 
Compendium of Papers DVD. Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board. 
 
Leaf, W.A., & Preusser, D.F. (1999). Literature review on vehicle travel speeds and pedestrian 
injuries (Report No. DOT HS 809 021). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/research/pub/HS809012.html 
 
Leden, L., Garder, P., & Pulkkinen, U., (2000). An expert judgment model applied to estimating 
the safety effect of a bicycle facility. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 32, 589-599. 
 
Lichenstein, R., Smith, D. C., Ambrose, J. L., & Moody, L. A. (2012). Headphone use and 
pedestrian injury and death in the United States: 2004-2011. Injury Prevention, 18, 287-290. 
 
Livingston, D. H., Suber, I., Snyder, D., Clancy, S. F., Passannante, M. R. & Lavery, R. F. 
(2011). Annual pediatric pedestrian education does not improve pedestrian behavior. Journal of 
Trauma-Injury Infection & Critical Care, 71, 1120-1125. 
 
Mendoza, J. A., Watson, K., Chen, T-A., Baranowski, T., Nicklas, T. A., Uscanga, D. K., & 
Hanfling, M. J. (2012). Impact of a pilot walking school bus intervention on children's pedestrian 
safety behaviors: A pilot study. Health & Place, 18, 24-30. 
 
Murtha, T. (2005). Pedestrian and bicycle safety data in Northeastern Illinois. Presentation to 
Association of Pedestrian and Bicycle Professionals, October 2005. Retrieved from 
www.walkinginfo.org/training/pbic/archive.cfm#part7 
 
Nasar, J., Hecht, P., & Wener, R. (2008). Mobile telephones, distracted attention, and pedestrian 
safety. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 40, 69–75. 
 
National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP). (2004). A guide for reducing 
collisions involving pedestrians. Retrieved the TRB website: 
onlinepubs.trb.org/Onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v10.pdf 
 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. (2008). Zone guide for pedestrian safety 
(Report No. DOT HS 808 742). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/ped/ZoneGuideWeb/pages/index.htm 
 
NHTSA. (2014a). Traffic safety facts 2013 (Report No. DOT HS 812 139). Retrieved from 
www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812139.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2014b). Traffic safety facts: Not-in-traffics surveillance: Child fatality and injury in 
nontraffic crashes - 2008 to 2011 (Report No. DOT HS 811 812). Retrieved from www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811812.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2015a). Traffic safety facts: 2004-2013 data; School-transportation-related crashes 
(Report No. DOT HS 812 170). Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812170.pdf 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 48 
 
NHTSA. (2015b). Traffic safety facts, 2013 data: Pedestrians (Report No. DOT HS 812 124). 
Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812124.pdf 
 
Olson, L. M., Sklar, D. P., Cobb, L., Sapien, R., & Zumwalt, R. (1993). Analysis of childhood 
pedestrian deaths in New Mexico, 1986-1990. Annals of Emergency Medicine, 22, 512-516. 
 
Percer, J. (2009). Child pedestrian safety education: Applying learning and developmental 
theories to develop safe street crossing behaviors (Report No. DOT HS 811 190). Retrieved from 
ther NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8111
90.pdf 
 
Pfeffer, K., Fagbemi, H. P., & Stennet, S. (2010). Adult pedestrian behavior when accompanying 
children on the route to school. Traffic Injury Prevention, 11, 188-193. 
 
Pucher, J., Buehler, R., Merom, D., & Bauman, A. (2011). Walking and cycling in the United 
States, 2001-2009: Evidence from the NHTS. American Journal of Public Health, 101, S310- 
S317. 
 
Redmon, T. (2011). Pedestrian countermeasure policy best practice report: FHWA safety 
program. Retrieved from the FHWA website: 
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/ped_bike/tools_solve/fhwasa11017/fhwasa11017.pdf 
 
Retting, R. A., Ferguson, S. A, & McCartt, A T. (2003). A review of evidence-based traffic 
engineering measures designed to reduce pedestrian–motor vehicle crashes. American Journal of 
Public Health, 93, 1456–1463. 
 
Rivara, F. P., Bergman, A. B., & Drake, C. (1989). Parental attitudes and practices toward 
children as pedestrians. Pediatrics, 84, 1017-1021. 
 
Roberts, I. (1995). Adult accompaniment and the risk of pedestrian injury on the school-home 
journey. Injury Prevention, 1, 242-244. 
 
Rosén, E., & Sander, U. (2009). Pedestrian fatality risk as a function of car impact speed. 
Accident Analysis and Prevention, 41, 536–542. 
 
Rosenbloom, T., Sapir-Lavid, Y., & Hadari-Carmi, O. (2009). Social norms of accompanied 
young children and observed crossing behaviors. Journal of Safety Research, 40, 33-39. 
 
Sandt, L., Thomas, L., Langford, K., & Nabors, D. (2015). A resident’s guide for creating safer 
communities for walking and biking (Report No. FHWA-SA-14-099). Retrieved from the FHWA 
website: http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/PED_BIKE/ped_cmnity/ped_walkguide/index.cfm 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 49 
Santos, A., McGuckin, N., Nakamoto, H. Y., Gray, D., & Liss, S. (2011). Summary of travel 
trends: 2009 National Household Travel Survey (Report No. FHWA-PL-11-011). Retrieved 
from: http://nhts.ornl.gov/2009/pub/stt.pdf 
 
Savolainen, P. T., Gates, T. J., & Datta, T. K. (2011). Implementation of targeted pedestrian 
traffic enforcement programs in an urban environment. Transportation Research Record: 
Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2265, 137-145. 
 
Schwebel, D. C., McClure, L. A., & Severson, J. (2014). Teaching children to cross streets 
safely: A randomized, controlled trial. Health Psychology, 33, 628-638. 
 
Schwebel, D. C., Stavrinos, D., Byington, K. W., Davis, T., O'Neal, E. E., & de Jong, D. (2012). 
Distraction and pedestrian safety: How talking on the phone, texting, and listening to music 
impact crossing the street. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 45, 266-271. 
 
Searson, D. J., & Anderson, R. W. (2011). The global technical regulation on pedestrian safety: 
Likely effects on vehicle design. Presentation at the Australasian Road Safety Research, Policing 
and Education Conference, Perth, Australia. Retrieved from 
http://acrs.org.au/files/arsrpe/The%20Global%20Technical%20Regulation%20on%20pedestrian
%20safety%20Likely%20effects.pdf 
 
Stavrinos, D., Byington, K. W., & Schwebel, D. C. (2009). Effect of cell phone distraction on 
pediatric pedestrian injury risk. Pediatrics, 123, e179-e185. 
 
Stavrinos, D., Byington, K. W., & Schwebel, D. C. (2011). Distracted walking: Cell phones 
increase injury risk for college pedestrians. Journal of Safety Research, 42, 101–107. 
 
Stewart, K. (1994). Report of the ICADTS working group on alcohol-involved 
pedestrians. Retrieved from www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/misc/driving/s25p1.htm 
 
Stutts, J, C., & Hunter, W. W. (1999a). Injuries to pedestrians and bicyclists: An analysis based 
on hospital emergency department data. Retrieved from the FHWA website: 
www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/research/safety/pedbike/99078/ 
 
Stutts, J. C. & Hunter, W. W. (1999b). Motor vehicle and roadway factors in pedestrian and 
bicyclist injuries: An examination based on emergency department data. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 31, 505-514. 
 
Tefft, B.C. (2011). Impact speed and a pedestrian’s risk of severe injury or death. Retrieved 
from the AAA Foundation website: 
www.aaafoundation.org/pdf/2011PedestrianRiskVsSpeed.pdf 
 
Thomas, L. & Levitt, D. (2014). North Carolina pedestrian crash types, 2008-2012. Retrieved 
from the UNC Highway Safety Research Center website: 
www.pedbikeinfo.org/pbcat_nc/pdf/summary_ped_types08-12.pdf 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 50 
Thompson, L. L., Rivara, F. P., Ayyagari, R. C., & Ebel, B. E. (2013). Impact of social and 
technological distraction on pedestrian crossing behaviour: An observational study. Injury 
Prevention, 19, 232-237. 
 
Tolmie, A., Thomson, J. A., Foot, H. C., Whelan, K., Morrison, S., & McLaren, B. (2005). The 
effects of adult guidance and peer discussion on the development of children’s representations: 
Evidence from the training of pedestrian skills. British Journal of Psychology, 96, 181-204. 
 
Transportation Research Board (TRB). (1998). Managing speed: Review of current practices for 
setting and enforcing speed limits (Special Report 254). Retrieved from: 
www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=11387 
 
TRB. (2002). The relative risks of school travel (Special Report 269). Retrieved from 
www.trb.org/news/blurb_detail.asp?id=673 
 
Tyrrell, R. A., Wood, J. M., Chaparro, A., Carberry, T. P., Chub, B-S., & Marszalek, R. P. 
(2009). Seeing pedestrians at night: Visual clutter does not mask biological motion. Accident 
Analysis and Prevention, 41, 506-512. 
 
U.S. Census Bureau. (n/a). American Community Survey. Commuting characteristics by sex. 
Data set: 2006-2008 American community survey 3-Year estimates. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Census Bureau.  
 
U.S. Department of Transportation. (2014). Safer people, safer streets: Summary of U.S. 
Department of Transportation action plan to increase walking and biking and reduce pedestrian 
and bicyclist fatalities. Retrieved from 
www.dot.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/safer_people_safer_streets_summary_doc_acc_v1-11-9.pdf 
 
Van Houten, R., & Malenfant, J. E. L. (2004). Effects of a driver enforcement program on 
yielding to pedestrians. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 37, 351-363. 
 
Van Houten, R., Malenfant, L., Blomberg, R. D., Huitema, B. E., & Casella, S. (2013). 
High-visibility enforcement on driver compliance with pedestrian right-of-way law 
(Report No. DOT HS 811 786). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/811786.pdf 
 
Van Houten, R., Malenfant, L., Huitema, B., & Blomberg, R. (2013). Effects of high-visibility 
enforcement on driver compliance with pedestrian yield right-of-way laws. Transportation 
Research Record, 2393, 41-49. 
 
Walker, E. J., Lanthier, S. N., Risko, E. F., & Kingstone, A. (2012). The effects of personal 
music devices on pedestrian behavior. Safety Science, 50, 123-128. 
 
West, R., Sammons, P., & West, A. (1993). Effects of a traffic club on road safety knowledge 
and self-reported behaviour of young children and their parents. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 25, 609-618. 
 
 Chapter 8. Pedestrians 
 
8 - 51 
Yanagisawa, M., Swanson, E., & Najm, W. G. (2014). Target crashes and safety benefits 
estimation methodology for pedestrian crash avoidance/mitigation systems (Report No. DOT HS 
811 998). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/NVS/Crash%20Avoidance/Technical%20Publications/2014/8119
98TargCrashSafBenEstMethPedCrashAvMitSys.pdf 
 
Zegeer, C. V., Blomberg, R. D., Henderson, D., Masten, S. V., Marchetti, L., Levy, M. M., . . . 
Thomas, L. J. (2008). Evaluation of Miami-Dade pedestrian safety demonstration project. 
Transportation Research Record, 2073, 1-10. 
 
Zegeer, C., Henderson, D., Blomberg, R., Marchetti, L., Masten, S., Fan, Y., . . . Thomas, L. 
(2008). Evaluation of the Miami-Dade pedestrian safety demonstration project (Report No. DOT 
HS 810 964). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20Files/8109
64.pdf 
 
Zegeer, C., Sandt, L., & Scully, M. (2008). How to develop a pedestrian safety action plan. Final 
Report. Retrieved from the FHWA website: 
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/ped_bike/ped_focus/docs/fhwasa0512.pdf 
 
Zhang, Y., Gawade, M., Lin, P. S., & McPherson, T. (2013). Educational campaign for 
improving pedestrian safety: A university campus study. Procedia - Social and Behavioral 
Sciences, 96, 2756-2766. 
 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 1 
9. Bicycles 
 
 
Overview 
 
In 2013, 743 bicyclists died in traffic crashes nationwide, the highest number killed since 2006. 
In addition, approximately 48,000 bicyclists were injured. Bicyclists accounted for 2% of total 
traffic fatalities and 2% of total injuries (NCSA, 2015). Of the bicyclist fatalities during 2013 
(NCSA, 2015): 
• 
Children 14 and younger represented 7% of bicycle fatalities and 11% of injuries; 
• 
Cyclists ages 25 to 64 represented 64% of all bicycle fatalities; 
• 
87% of the bicyclists killed and 83% of those injured were male; 
• 
About 20% of bicyclists killed had BACs of .08 g/dL or higher, with alcohol use by 
either bicyclist, driver, or both reported in more than 29% of fatal crashes. 
 
The majority of bicyclist fatalities occurred in urban areas (68% in 2013), and at non-intersection 
locations (57% in 2013). The number killed of bicyclists in urban areas has remained relatively 
stable over recent years. 
 
Crash Trends. Bicyclist fatalities have increased each of the last three years. The recent uptick 
in fatalities may reflect increases in riding. (See trends in riding below.) There are, however, 
substantial fluctuations in fatalities year-to-year that may not be explained only by exposure. 
Longer term, the trend in bicyclist fatalities is down. Compared to the five year period from 1994 
to 1998 (an average of 795 fatalities), the average number of bicyclist fatalities over the most 
recent five year period was 14% lower (682 per year from 2009 to 2013).  
 
 
 
 
Source: FARS data, NCSA (2015) 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 2 
A recent study assessed the burden of injured bicyclists admitted to hospitals in terms of length 
of hospital stay in days, total hospital charges, and non-routine discharge. Non-routine 
discharges included death, transfer to a nursing or other short-term hospital, or home health care. 
The data came from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS) database. In total, more than $1 
billion of hospital charges, $425 million for motor-vehicle crashes and $588 million for non-
motor vehicle crashes, per year resulted from bicycle crash injuries (Hamann et al., 2013). 
Despite non-motor vehicle collisions (18,457) accounting for nearly 2.7 times as many 
admissions as collisions with motor vehicles (6,877,) from 2002 to 2009, the total economic 
costs of longer hospital stays for those involved in motor vehicle collisions was 72% higher than 
the same costs for the non-motor vehicle collisions, not including further care associated with 
non-routine discharges. 
 
There has been a slight rise in the average age of bicyclists killed over the past decade, from an 
average of 39 in 2004 to 41 in 2013 (NCSA, 2015). Comparing the five year period from 2009 to 
2013 with the period from 2004 to 2008, fatalities increased most among bicyclists ages 45 and 
older, particularly those 55 to 64 (32% higher) (see figure below). It is likely that much of these 
differences relate to changes in population age distributions over this time period, including the 
rapid expansion of older age groups since 2000. It is unclear whether increases in amounts or 
types of riding or other changes in exposure among these age groups may also play a part in the 
increases in fatalities among those in the 45 and older age groups. However, fatalities decreased 
about 40% for bicyclists under 16 years of age and among those aged 35 to 44 over this period.  
 
 
Source: FARS data 
Note that different age group spans are used; the intent of the chart is to compare change in 
fatalities by age group, not to compare fatalities by age. 
 
It is also worth noting that older adult bicyclists are more vulnerable when involved in a crash. 
Recent data from Sweden found that older adult bicyclists were twice as likely to be hospitalized 
when injured, and spent three times as long in the hospital as cyclists under 65 (Scheiman et al., 
2010). 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 3 
Estimates from the American Community Survey (ACS) suggest that the number of U.S. 
workers (of all ages) who travel to work by bicycle increased from 0.4% of workers in 2000 to 
an average of 0.6% of workers for the 2008 to 2012 period (McKenzie, 2014). The share of 
workers that “usually traveled to work” by bicycle increased at a faster rate than any other mode 
of travel (McKenzie, 2014). Fatality rate trends, fatalities adjusted per different measures of 
exposure such as time spent bicycling, number of bicycling trips, or total miles traveled by 
bicycle are currently unavailable because there is no consistent measure of bicycling (exposure) 
to estimate and compare such fatality rates. According to the Federal Highway Administration’s 
National Household Travel Survey (NHTS), which aims to capture all kinds of bicycling trips, 
not just commuting trips, the annual number of bicycling trips has also increased from 1.7 billion 
in 1990 (FHWA, 1990) to 3.3 billion in both 1995 (FHWA, 1995) and 2001 (FHWA, 2001), 
though the various surveys used somewhat different methodologies. For example, the use of 
multiple prompts beginning with the 2001 survey has resulted in capturing more bicycle trips in 
the 2001 and later surveys (Hu & Reuscher, 2004). Results from the latest NHTS, conducted in 
April 2008 through May 2009, indicate that trips made by bicycle have again increased, up to 4.1 
billion per year (Pucher, Buehler, Merom, & Bauman, 2011). The next NHTS is planned for 
2015.  
 
An analysis by Pucher, Buehler, Merom, and Bauman (2011) found the average number of cycle 
trips, and the average miles of cycling per capita per year, each rose a few percentage points 
from 2001 to 2009. More cycling trips were taken by males, adults 24-64, people without cars, 
and people with university degrees. An important note is that while the number of trips has risen, 
there has not been a significant increase in cycling trip rates (e.g., number of trips per capita) on 
a national basis. In select cities, however, there has been a substantial increase in cycling in 
recent years. In a study of nine large cities in the United States and Canada (Chicago, 
Minneapolis, Montréal, New York, Portland, San Francisco, Toronto, Vancouver, and 
Washington, DC), the authors found bike commuting rates more than doubled since 1990, while 
bicycle fatality rates subsequently dropped (Pucher, Buehler, & Seinen, 2011). The authors 
attribute these trends to the substantial investment in infrastructure and bicycle-supportive 
programs implemented in these cities. 
 
In addition to number of trips, exposure to traffic and crashes is affected by where, when, and for 
how long a cyclist rides, as well as the skill, knowledge and application of safe behaviors by the 
cyclist and the drivers around him or her. The risk of a crash may also be increased due to 
inattention, distraction, or impairment by either the bicyclist or driver. The severity of a crash 
also increases with higher impact speeds (AASHTO, 2010). Emerging problems include the use 
of cell phones, media players, or other electronic devices while riding or driving. 
 
Classifying Crash Types. Bicycle crashes can be classified into types based on bicyclist and 
motor vehicle pre-crash actions and the location of the crash. In the early 1990s this 
methodology was used to classify more than 3,000 bicycle-motor vehicle crashes in California, 
Florida, Maryland, Minnesota, North Carolina, and Utah (Hunter, Stutts, Pein, & Cox, 1996). 
The sample was approximately evenly divided among small/rural communities, medium-sized 
cities, and large cities (as opposed to representing the proportion of crashes that occurred in each 
of those area types). Of these bicycle-motor vehicle crashes: 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 4 
• Half (51%) occurred at intersections or were related to intersections. The most common 
type of crash involved bicyclists riding out or through intersections and into the path of a 
motorist. The second most common type of crash involved motorists failing to yield at 
intersections. Another common type included motorists turning or merging into the path 
of a parallel moving bicyclist (same or opposite direction). Child bicyclists were over- 
represented when the bicyclist failed to yield at an intersection and adult bicyclists were 
overrepresented in crashes at intersections where motorists turned across their path. 
• Twenty-two percent of bicycle-motor vehicle crashes occurred at junctions with 
commercial and private driveways or alleys. Children were highly overrepresented in 
these crashes. 
• Twenty-seven percent of bicycle-motor vehicle crashes occurred at roadway sections with 
no special features (meaning no intersections or driveways at the segment near the crash); 
fatal and serious injuries occurred at a higher rate at such non-junction locations. Adult 
cyclists were over-involved in crashes with overtaking motor vehicles at midblock 
locations. 
 
In the Hunter et al. (1996) study, bicyclist factors contributing to crashes, especially at 
intersections or other junctions, included bicyclists riding wrong-way. Thirty-two percent of all 
bicyclists in the study were riding against traffic; for intersection collisions, the proportion was 
42%. In 15% of crashes, bicyclist riding wrong-way was coded as a contributing factor to the 
crash (Hunter et al., 1996). Bicyclist failure to yield was coded in 21% of the study crashes and 
stop sign violations were coded in 8%. Children were overrepresented in stop sign and yield 
violations and crashes on local and two-lane streets, whereas adult bicyclists were more likely to 
contribute to their crashes through alcohol or drug use and lane position and lane change errors. 
The most common driver contributing factor was a yield violation at either an intersection or 
midblock location; however, as mentioned the bicyclist riding wrong-way may have been a 
contributing factor in such crashes. 
 
Different crash types can be targeted by different countermeasures. The Pedestrian and Bicycle 
Crash Analysis Tool (PBCAT) software (www.pedbikeinfo.org/pbcat_us/) is available to assist 
jurisdictions in typing bicycle-motor vehicle crashes and developing a database that contains 
information on pre-crash maneuvers as well as other crash factors. States and communities can 
then analyze their own bicycle crashes and can also use PBCAT and PedSafe 
(www.walkinginfo.org/pedsafe/) to help select appropriate countermeasures.  
 
Bicyclist attributes: Bicyclists come in all ages with many levels of knowledge, skill, 
perception, and judgment. Thus, educational and enforcement programs must take these factors 
into account and be designed to target age-specific concerns and the knowledge, skills and 
behavioral attributes of these different groups of riders. Several studies have also identified 
demographic differences in injury risk, amounts of bicycle riding, and helmet use. Davison et al. 
(2013) found being male and being a recent immigrant were both associated with increased 
bicycling injury risk among Canadian youth. Lower socioeconomic class was associated with 
lower helmet use. Richard, Thélot, and Beck (2013) found helmet use to be lower among 
females, younger and older ages, lower income persons, and urban dwellers than among rural 
and suburban residents in France, although some of the gaps were lessening over time. At a 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 5 
minimum, programs should be inclusive, or incorporate extra focus on groups at higher risk of 
injury.  
 
Bicycles have an even smaller profile than motorcycles, are usually purchased without head 
lights and rear active lights attached, and are more difficult for many motorists to notice than 
four-wheeled vehicles, especially at night. Because they are human powered, there may be 
substantial speed differentials between bicycles and motorized traffic, though this certainly 
varies in high traffic areas and with avid bicyclists. Bicyclists also lack the protective body of a 
motorized vehicle in the event of a crash and some riders feel uncomfortable mingling with 
traffic, especially in high speed, high-volume situations. 
 
Crash Factors. As with all crashes, bicycle crashes often result from multiple contributing 
factors. Bicyclist and driver pre-crash actions and behaviors (such as distraction, driver speed, 
and alcohol/drug use), vehicle type and design, cyclist and vehicle volumes/exposure, and 
elements of the built environment (including roadway design, presence of bicycle facilities) all 
contribute to cycle crashes. Several resources have provided evidence of the role of the 
transportation environment in bicycle safety and summarized best practices in planning, 
engineering, and design for bicycle safety (AASHTO, 2012; FHWA, 2010; NACTO, n.d.). 
Adopting and implementing Complete Streets policies has been identified as one of the lower 
cost and more effective strategies to improve conditions for bicyclists. (For more on Complete 
Streets, visit www.completestreets.org/.) More recent studies have focused on the role of vehicle 
type and design in the event of a crash. Ackery, McLellan, and Redelmeier (2012) found that 
larger motor vehicles—especially freight trucks and SUVs—were overrepresented in bicycle 
crashes compared to other vehicle types. While not dismissing the importance of vehicle design 
and the role of the built environment in preventing bicycle crashes, the countermeasures 
described in this report relate primarily to educational and enforcement measures aimed at 
improving the knowledge and behaviors of road users to prevent or mitigate the severity of a 
crash. 
 
 
Strategies to Reduce Bicycle Crashes and Injuries 
 
Several strategies may be used to decrease bicycle crashes and injuries. 
 
• Increase the use of properly fitted bicycle helmets by all bicyclists, including children and 
adults, and the enforcement of helmet laws to increase compliance. 
• Increase the conspicuity of bicyclists. 
• Reduce distracted riding or driving behaviors (cell phones, headphones, etc.). See the 
chapter on distracted and drowsy driving for countermeasures targeting drivers. 
• Decrease riding or driving while impaired. See the chapter on strategies to reduce 
alcohol-impaired driving. Some of the countermeasures would be applicable to target any 
type of impaired roadway use. 
• Enact laws to facilitate safe, predictable, and efficient bicycling in traffic, to update and 
fill gaps in existing laws. Educate the public on any new laws. 
• Increase traffic law compliance by both motorists and bicyclists. Train law enforcement 
officers in appropriate enforcement strategies. In particular, decrease wrong-way riding, 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 6 
sidewalk riding, and traffic control violations by bicyclists; and decrease speeding, 
cutting off bicyclists, passing too closely, or blocking or driving in a designated bicycle 
lane by motorists. 
• Educate motorists and bicyclists on how they should interact safely with each other and 
what the relevant laws require. 
• Improve bicycle handling skills for bicyclists of all ages. 
• Tailor countermeasures to diverse populations, including groups such as recent 
immigrants who may not be familiar with U.S. traffic laws, the U.S. traffic environment, 
or may not speak or read English. 
 
Most of the above strategies are covered in this chapter under various descriptions. A few, such 
as “reduce distracted riding or driving” are not described because as yet, literature searches do 
not detect any studies that have evaluated laws or programs aiming to reduce distracted riding. A 
recent survey of bicyclist attitudes and behaviors indicates that 21% of bicyclists use an 
electronic device on at least some of their bicycle trips with 9% indicating they use a device 
during nearly all of their trips (Schroeder & Wilbur, 2013). Currently, there is a lack of 
information about the impact of distracted bicycling on bicyclist safety. Organizations with 
existing or new training or educational programs might consider including these topics in 
outreach and educational programs and evaluating how well target audiences respond. Trying 
new strategies and evaluating them is the only way to gain new knowledge of what works. In 
addition, emerging technologies may help to combat distractions associated with those 
technologies. A number of cell phone applications are now available that have the ability to 
block incoming calls and texts while the cyclist (or other driver) is in motion.  
 
Finally, the idea that vulnerable road users’ safety may be improved by increasing the numbers 
of pedestrians and bicyclists is gaining traction and some empirical support. Research from 
abroad as well as the United States finds that, although actual numbers of crashes may go up, 
individual risk of crashes with motor vehicles are often lower as numbers of bicyclists and 
pedestrians increase (Geyer, Raford, Ragland, & Pham, 2006; Jacobsen, 2003; Leden, Garder, & 
Pulkkinen, 2000). A 2009 scanning tour (accesses innovative technologies and practices in other 
countries that could significantly improve highways and highway transportation services in the 
United States) by U.S. transportation officials and researchers of Denmark, Sweden, Germany, 
Switzerland, and the United Kingdom reported that the concept of “safety in numbers” has 
motivated promotion of increased bicycling and walking in these countries as a safety 
countermeasure (Fischer et al., 2010). These European countries are committed to driving down 
the total numbers of bicyclist fatalities and injuries while increasing amounts of bicycling. 
Encouragement in these countries is done in the context of commitments to comprehensive 
planning, funding, engineering and design improvements, and maintenance policies to provide 
safe and connected bicycle networks. The report also documents numerous examples of how 
these policies are put into practice.  
 
A non-linear relationship between traffic volumes (motorist, pedestrian, or bicyclist) and crashes 
has been demonstrated (AASHTO, 2010; Bhatia & Wier, 2011), but a causal mechanism for how 
increased volumes improve bicyclist safety has not been demonstrated (Bhatia & Wier, 2011). 
This means that crashes do not tend to increase in direct proportion to increases in volume, but 
absolute crash numbers are still likely to increase (and have increased) with increases in cycling 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 7 
– all else being equal. Additionally, all of the studies cited above, and others attempting to 
characterize volume and safety relationships, are based on cross-sectional comparisons. Other 
safety factors such as motorist speed, congestion, or law enforcement activity that are 
unmeasured or have not been accounted for in such studies are likely to influence crashes, 
making it challenging to isolate the influence of safety and crashes based on increases in cycling 
alone. Also, cross-sectional studies cannot easily demonstrate the direction of effect – that is, 
whether a safer environment comes before the greater numbers of bicyclists or is a result of that 
increase (Bhatia & Wier, 2011). It is clear, however, that a focus on improving the environment, 
both the infrastructure and road users’ compliance with laws and safe behaviors, are important to 
increasing both population-level safety (measured as a reduction in population-wide fatalities 
and injuries) and numbers of bicyclists or amounts of cycling. As these two elements – safety 
improvements and increases in bicycling – occur collectively (or in combination), individual 
risk, or crash rates, may also be reduced. 
 
 
Resources 
 
The agencies and organizations listed below can provide more information on bicycle safety 
issues and countermeasures and links to numerous other resources. 
• National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: 
o Bicycles - www.nhtsa.gov/Bicycles 
o Research and Evaluation - 
www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Research+&+Evaluation 
o Behavioral Safety Research Reports –  
ntlsearch.bts.gov/repository/ntlc/nhtsa/index.shtm  
• Federal Highway Administration: 
o Office of Planning, Environment, & Realty (Pedestrian and Bicycle Program) - 
www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/bicycle_pedestrian/ 
o Office of Safety: safety.fhwa.dot.gov/ped_bike/ 
• Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: www.cdc.gov/ 
• Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center: www.pedbikeinfo.org/ 
• National Center for Safe Routes to School: www.saferoutesinfo.org 
• SAFE KIDS Worldwide: www.safekids.org  
• Consumer Product Safety Commission: www.cpsc.gov 
• Bicycle Helmet Safety Institute: www.helmets.org 
• Association of Pedestrian and Bicycle Professionals: www.apbp.org 
• Complete Streets Coalition: www.completestreets.org 
• National Center for Bicycling and Walking: www.bikewalk.org 
• Safe Routes to School National Partnership: www.saferoutespartnership.org 
• League of American Bicyclists: www.bikeleague.org 
• Alliance for Walking and Bicycling: www.bikewalkalliance.org 
 
Specific resources that provide further information on engineering, enforcement, and educational 
strategies are: 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 8 
• AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities, 4th Edition, American 
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials: 
bookstore.transportation.org/collection_detail.aspx?ID=116  
• NACTO Urban Bikeway Design Guide, National Association of City Transportation 
Officials: nacto.org/cities-for-cycling/design-guide/  
• Public Policies for Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety and Mobility: An Implementation 
Project of the Pedestrian and Bicyclist Safety and Mobility International Scan: 
katana.hsrc.unc.edu/cms/downloads/PBSPolicyReview.pdf  
• Uniform Guidelines for State Highway Safety Programs: Highway Safety Program 
Guideline No. 14: Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Articles/Associated%20File
s/PedBikeSafety.pdf  
• National Cooperative Highway Safety Research Program,NCHRP Report 500, Volume 
18, A Guide for Reducing Collisions Involving Bicycles (NCHRP, 2008). 
onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v18.pdf  
 
Resources released or updated since the prior edition: 
• Bicycle Safer Journey: Skills for Safe Bicycling for Ages 5 to 18. 
www.pedbikeinfo.org/bicyclesaferjourney/  
• BIKESAFE: Bicycle Countermeasure Selection System. 
www.pedbikesafe.org/BIKESAFE/ 
• National Center for Safe Routes to School (SRTS), Enforcement: Role for Law 
Enforcement in SRTS. www.saferoutesinfo.org/program-tools/enforcement-role-law-
enforcement-srts 
• A Resident’s Guide for Creating a Safer Communities for Walking and Biking. 
www.safety.fhwa.dot.gov/ped_bike/ped_cmnity/ped_walkguide/index.cfm 
 
For more information on education, engineering, vehicular, and legislative practices and 
recommended strategies from Europe, refer to Keeping Children Safe in Traffic by the 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2004). 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 9 
Countermeasures That Work 
 
Countermeasures to improve bicycle safety are listed below and discussed individually in the 
remainder of this chapter. The table is intended to give a rough estimate of each 
countermeasure’s effectiveness, use, cost, and time required for implementation. The symbols 
and terms used are described below. Effectiveness, cost, and time to implement can vary 
substantially from State to State and community to community. Costs for many countermeasures 
are difficult to measure, so the summary terms are very approximate. See each countermeasure 
discussion for more information on each item. 
 
All States are required by Congress and FHWA to have a full-time Pedestrian and Bicyclist 
Coordinator in their Department of Transportation. The coordinator will be aware of active 
programs within the State and will have access to resources for implementing many of the 
countermeasures listed below. 
 
1. Children 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
1.1 Bicycle helmet laws for children 
 
$$ 
Medium 
Short 
1.2 Safe Routes to School (SRTS) 
 
$ 
High 
Short 
1.3 Bicycle safety education for children 
 
$ 
Unknown 
Short 
1.4 Cycling skills clinics, bike fairs, bike rodeos 
 
$ 
Unknown 
Short 
 
2. Adult Bicyclists 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
2.1 Bicycle helmet laws for adults 
 
$ 
Low 
Short 
2.2 Bicycle safety education for adult cyclists 
 
$$ 
Low 
Medium 
 
3. All Bicyclists 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
3.1 Active lighting and rider conspicuity 
 
$ 
High† 
Varies 
3.2 Promote bicycle helmet use with education 
 
$$$ 
Medium 
Medium 
3.3 Enforcement strategies 
 
$$ 
Unknown 
Varies 
3.4 Motorist passing bicyclist laws 
 
$ 
Medium 
Short 
†High for active lighting laws; unknown for promoting other conspicuity measures 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 10 
4. Drivers and Bicyclists 
 
Countermeasure 
Effectiveness 
Cost 
Use 
Time 
4.1 Driver training 
 
$ 
Low 
Medium 
4.2 Share the Road awareness programs 
 
$$ 
Unknown 
Medium 
 
Effectiveness: 
- Demonstrated to be effective by several high-quality evaluations with 
consistent results 
- Demonstrated to be effective in certain situations 
- Likely to be effective based on balance of evidence from high-quality evaluations 
or other sources 
- Effectiveness still undetermined; different methods of implementing this 
countermeasure produce different results 
- Limited or no high-quality evaluation evidence 
 
Effectiveness is measured by reductions in crashes or injuries unless noted otherwise. 
See individual countermeasure descriptions for information on effectiveness size and 
how effectiveness is measured. 
 
Cost to implement: 
$$$: requires extensive new facilities, staff, equipment, or publicity, or makes heavy 
demands on current resources 
$$: requires some additional staff time, equipment, facilities, and/or publicity 
$: can be implemented with current staff, perhaps with training; limited costs for equipment, 
facilities, and publicity 
 
These estimates do not include the costs of enacting legislation or establishing policies. 
 
Use: 
High: more than two-thirds of the States, or a substantial majority of communities 
Medium: between one-third and two-thirds of States or communities 
Low: less than one-third of the States or communities 
Unknown: data not available 
 
Time to implement: 
Long: more than one year 
Medium: more than three months but less than one year 
Short: three months or less 
 
These estimates do not include the time required to enact legislation or establish policies. 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 11 
1. Children 
 
1.1 Bicycle Helmet Laws for Children 
 
Effectiveness:   
Cost: $$ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Short 
 
The purpose of bicycle helmet laws for children is to increase bicycle helmet use, thereby 
reducing the number of severe and fatal head injuries to children involved in bicycle crashes. 
Several meta-analyses discuss the effectiveness of bicycle helmets in reducing head injuries and 
fatalities in all types of crashes including bike-only falls (Attewell, Glase, & McFadden, 2001; 
Thompson, Rivara, & Thompson, 2006). Elvik (2011) focused on all riders, not just children, 
estimating that bicycle helmet use results in about a 42% (95% CI [25, 55]) reduction in the risk 
of a non-fatal head injury. In another case control study, Bambach et al. (2013) found protective 
effects of helmet use to be 50% for moderate injury, 62% for serious injury, and 75% for severe 
head injury. Additional recent studies have reported increased risk of severe injury or death for 
non-use of helmets among riders involved in crashes. For more information, see Section 2.1 
Bicycle Helmet Laws for Adults.  
 
A helmet law is a significant tool in increasing helmet use, but as with all laws effectiveness is 
related to implementation. Legislation effectiveness is enhanced when combined with supportive 
publicity and education campaigns or programs. See, for example, Rivara, Thompson, Patterson, 
and Thompson (1998), Kanny, Schieber, Pryor, and Kresnow (2001), and Rodgers (2002). The 
practical effect of bicycle helmet laws is to encourage parents to require their children to use 
helmets (and educate parents to serve as role models to wear a helmet despite the lack of a law). 
 
Law enforcement and other safety officials can reinforce the need to wear a helmet through 
positive interactions, free, or discounted helmet distribution programs (combined with proper 
helmet fitting), or other positive incentives for helmet use. Publicizing helmet laws and 
child/parent education on helmet fitting and the importance of wearing a helmet every ride may 
enhance effectiveness. Educational programs have been shown to increase knowledge about 
proper use of helmets. See Chapter 9, Sections 1.3 and 3.2 for more information.  
 
Use: As of July 2012, 22 States, the District of Columbia, and at least 201 municipalities or 
counties have child helmet laws (BHSI, 2014). Most U.S. laws cover child bicyclists younger 
than 18. Only 13 States have no State or local bicycle helmet laws. 
 
Effectiveness: Two systematic reviews found that legislation may be effective at increasing 
helmet use (Karkhaneh, Kalenga, Hagel, & Rowe, 2006; Macpherson & Spinks, 2007). Two of 
three controlled studies reported reductions in head or traumatic brain injury following 
legislation (Macpherson & Spinks, 2007). The degree of improvement varied but there was a 
lack of evidence to determine whether enforcement, supporting publicity, and helmet distribution 
efforts explain some of the variation (Karkhaneh et al., 2006; Macpherson & Spinks, 2007). 
There was a non-significant trend toward a greater overall increase in helmet use in communities 
with laws covering all cyclists compared to those covering only children, and effects were larger 
among children (Karkhaneh et al., 2006). Dennis et al. (2010) also found self-reported helmet 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 12 
use was highest in a province with a law covering all ages, next highest in a province with a law 
covering children up to 18, and lowest in a province with no law.  
 
Effectiveness of legislation in reducing head injuries is challenging to assess because of the 
difficulty of controlling for other safety measures that may differ across jurisdictions, and for 
exposure to crashes of different severities across individuals in case control studies. Two recent 
studies from Canada have found somewhat mixed results. Karkaneh et al. (2013) found that 
legislation targeting those less than 18 had a beneficial effect on child, adolescent, and adult 
bicyclists hospitalized for head injury in the province of Alberta, Canada. Helmet use increased 
from 75% to 92% among children, from 30% to 63% among adolescents, and from 52% to 55% 
among adults (Karkaneh et al., 2011). A national study compared trends in provinces with and 
without legislation. Despite lower injury rates in provinces with helmet laws than in those 
without, the effect could not be attributed to the introduction of the laws (Dennis et al., 2013). 
However, the study also found that one province that implemented a law covering all ages, not 
just children, did have a significantly lower injury rate trend for the period covered by the law.  
 
Earlier crash-trend analyses using FARS data suggested that State helmet-use laws for children 
reduce child bicycle fatalities by about 15% in the long run (Grant & Rutner, 2004). Wesson et 
al. (2008) examined before and after trends in child and adult fatalities in Ontario, Canada 
following implementation of a law requiring helmets for riders under 18 years old. A reduction 
was found in child fatalities but not in adult bicycle-related deaths. Supporting data from one 
community suggested that the declines were not due to decreases in child bicycling. The authors 
attributed the lower child mortality rates to multiple factors including education, promotion, and 
general trends. 
 
Costs: A helmet law should be supported with appropriate communications and outreach to 
parents, children, schools, pediatric health care providers, and law enforcement. NHTSA has a 
wide range of material that can be used to educate and promote the use of a helmet every ride, 
demonstrate helmet effectiveness, and educate and demonstrate how to properly fit a helmet. 
Helmets that meet safety requirements can be purchased for under $20. Some States provide free 
or discounted helmets to some children. When considering the costs of providing helmets, 
agencies should consider the benefits. A NHTSA summary of helmet laws reported that “every 
dollar spent on bicycle helmets saves society $30 in indirect medical and other costs” (NHTSA, 
2008). The Bicycle Helmet Safety Institute (BHSI) has information on important considerations 
in buying a helmet, sources for low-cost helmets, and partners such as Safe Kids that may be 
able to help with providing low-cost or free helmets (www.helmets.org/index.htm). A helmet 
should be replaced when it has been involved in a crash, when any part of the helmet is damaged, 
or the foam appears to be dry or changed in texture (brittle). According to BHSI, some 
manufacturers suggest replacement every five years, although BHSI indicates that it may depend 
on use and care of the helmet and that a helmet may provide good protection for longer 
(www.helmets.org/guide.htm).  
 
Time to implement: A bicycle helmet law can be implemented as soon as the appropriate 
legislation is enacted. Enacting local ordinances may take less time than enacting statewide 
legislation. To develop custom communications and outreach, train law enforcement officers on 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 13 
implementing the law, or start a helmet distribution or subsidy program in support of the law 
may require a medium-to longer-term effort. 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 14 
1.2 Safe Routes to School 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High 
Time: Short 
 
The goal of Safe Routes to School (SRTS) Programs is to increase the amount of bicycling and 
walking trips to and from school while simultaneously improving safety for children walking or 
bicycling to school. SRTS programs are community-based and are intended to be comprehensive 
in nature. Programs include education of children, school personnel, parents, community 
members, and law enforcement officers about safe bicycling and walking behavior and safe 
driving behavior around pedestrians and bicyclists. In addition, programs include enforcement 
and engineering activities to improve traffic safety and risky elements of the traffic environment 
around primary and secondary schools so children can safely bicycle or walk to school. 
Information on the role of law enforcement in SRTS is available on the National Center for Safe 
Routes to School (NCSRTS) website (www.saferoutesinfo.org/program-tools/enforcement-role-
law-enforcement-srts).  
 
From 2005 to mid-2012, the SAFETEA-LU legislation required each State to have its own SRTS 
program, including a full-time coordinator to manage Federal funds. Each year, up to 70% (but 
not more than 90%) of available Federal funding was to be allocated on infrastructure 
(engineering) improvements, and up to 30% (but not less than 10%) of funding on non- 
infrastructure projects to encourage walking and bicycling to school (public awareness and 
outreach, enforcement near schools, education, and training for volunteers). Resources to support 
these efforts are available online from NHTSA on the pedestrian safety and bicycle safety pages 
and the NCSRTS website (www.saferoutesinfo.org). NCSRTS provides information, guidance, 
and support for community, State, and national SRTS efforts. A list of current State SRTS 
Coordinators may also be found at the NCSRTS website. In June 2012, Congress passed the 
MAP-21 Act. The Act significantly altered how SRTS and other pedestrian and bicycle programs 
are structured and funded once the previously obligated funding is depleted. As a result of MAP-
21, funds are no longer provided directly to States to fund SRTS activities. SRTS projects have 
instead been eligible, since October 2012, to compete for funding under a new program called 
Transportation Alternatives, alongside other pedestrian and bicycle-related programs including 
former Transportation Enhancements and Recreational Trails projects. Despite the altered 
funding structure, many States and localities pursue non-infrastructure programs, create or 
enhance partnerships, and develop creative approaches to engage communities in SRTS. To learn 
more, visit www.fhwa.dot.gov/MAP21/.  
 
Use: With the establishment of the national SRTS program, all 50 States and the District of 
Columbia had initiated SRTS programs. At the time of this report publication, the details of how 
MAP-21 will affect State SRTS programs were being determined. Visit the website above for 
details and to find State contacts. 
 
Effectiveness: SRTS materials can be effective in teaching children and their parents how to 
assess and choose the safest routes for walking or bicycling to and from school. The material is 
derived from analyses of types of crashes associated with trips to and from school, but it has not 
been possible to directly evaluate effects of these programs on crashes and injuries. Although the 
full program emphasizes broad education, some specific implementations have centered on site- 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 15 
appropriate engineering changes; results have shown behavioral improvements for pedestrians, 
bicyclists, and motorists (NHTSA, 2004). Dumbaugh and Frank (2007) found that many of the 
safety benefits associated with SRTS countermeasures are assumed rather than known. 
 
Costs: Activities associated with SRTS may be low cost and may also be eligible for grant 
funding (non-infrastructure grants mentioned above). Grants are administered by each State’s 
SRTS coordinator. Significant materials and resources can be accessed at no cost. NCSRTS 
provides downloadable material for State and local SRTS programs. 
 
Time to implement: Short for education. Once a school or district has decided to implement an 
SRTS program, a range of materials, including an on-line step-by-step guide on getting started, is 
available from the NCSRTS. Programs funded through State DOTs, including 
engineering/infrastructure components typically require applications on a funding cycle and can 
take significantly longer to implement. 
 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 16 
1.3 Bicycle Safety Education for Children 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
 
The purpose of bicycle education is to teach children basic bicycle handling skills, traffic laws, 
how to ride on streets with traffic present, proper helmet use, bicycle safety checks, and bicycle 
maintenance. As part of a regular school curriculum, education can reach every student, but 
providing training outside of school settings such as through parks and recreation departments, 
community centers or faith-based organizations may be more feasible in some circumstances. 
Community-based programs could also provide greater flexibility in tailoring to meet the needs 
of specific target groups. 
 
Young children are just learning about traffic. They have little experience with which to 
anticipate and interpret potential traffic hazards, and limited abilities to reason and react. Their 
brains are still developing and they lack the maturity and judgment needed to negotiate traffic 
safely and limit risk-taking behaviors. They are also less skilled at riding than older children or 
adults. Young children should not ride without supervision until they are at least 10 years old and 
are able to ride in a straight line, swerve to avoid hazards in the roadway, comfortably start and 
stop their bicycles, and maintain balance at slow speeds. 
 
Readers should note that safe bicycling principles can be counterintuitive, and safety skills taught 
to pedestrians (such as walking facing traffic) do not necessarily hold true for bicyclists. Further, 
bicycle safety skills for children may differ from safety skills needed by adults riding in different 
environments and at different speeds. For example, bicycle education programs may teach 
children to ride their bikes slowly on the sidewalk or adjacent paths, and as far away from the 
roadway as possible. However, adult cyclists may need to be trained on where to position 
themselves in the travel lane, riding in the same direction with traffic, and further from the curb, 
depending on the facility type. For more on adult bicyclist education, see Section 2.2. One 
common theme in bicycle education for both children and adults is the need to scan for potential 
hazards, ride predictably, and use correct hand signals to indicate changes in speed or direction. 
 
Whether school or community-based, bicycle education should include, at a minimum, a 
demonstration and handout on how to properly fit a bicycle helmet, a helmet effectiveness 
demonstration, and an emphasis on wearing a helmet every ride. As noted above, the curriculum 
should also include information on how parents and children should decide what locations are 
safe places to ride, and how children can be predictable and visible to drivers. In addition, 
bicycle safety training should be reinforced (potentially by caregivers), with opportunities to 
practice new skills in appropriate settings (Ellis, 2014). Twisk et al. (2013) found that it may be 
very difficult to improve behaviors in real-traffic situations using educational programs that 
occur in a controlled school setting, even using models for the traffic situations, and even if 
recognition of risks (knowledge) appears to be improved (Twisk et al., 2013).  
 
Bicycle safety training and education may be incorporated into life-long, comprehensive traffic 
safety education, with components assembled from NHTSA or comparable programs. Many 
bicycle safety education materials target children in grades K-8, though some are aimed at 
younger children. Bikeology, a curriculum specifically designed for professional physical 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 17 
education teachers and recreation specialists is suited for middle to high school students of vary 
abilities and with special needs (AAHPERD, 2014). 
 
A listing of many training programs and their characteristics can be found in the FHWA Bicycle 
Safety Education Resource Center, available on the PBIC website: 
www.pedbikeinfo.org/data/library/details.cfm?id=2800. See also the Good Practices Guide for 
Bicycle Safety Education (FHWA, 2005) and the Bicycle and Pedestrian 
Curricula Guide (Safe Routes to School, 2011). NHTSA has also produced publications on how 
to properly fit a bicycle helmet, rules of the road and games to educate children and parents on 
bicycle safety. The material is available in English and Spanish on NHTSA’s Bicycles page. 
Bicycle Safer Journey is an updated series of web-based training videos and discussion guides 
targeted for bicyclists ages 5 to 9, 10 to 14, and 15 to 18. The materials are available on the 
Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center website (www.pedbikeinfo.org/bicyclesaferjourney/). 
 
Use: The use of school-based programs, which is at the discretion of local school districts, is 
unknown. In-school education and training; however, is a frequent part of local SRTS programs. 
In addition to programs offered by teachers and school personnel, local bicycling coalitions 
sometimes offer age-appropriate bicycle training within a school setting. Examples are the 
Bicycle Transportation Alliance in Portland, OR, and the Hawaii Bicycling League (Thomas, 
Masten, & Stutts, 2005). The prevalence of community-based programs is also unknown. 
 
Effectiveness: Both short lecture-based programs and more extensive programs with on-bicycle 
training can increase children’s knowledge of laws and safe behaviors (Ellis, 2014; Hooshmand, 
Hotz, Neilson, & Chandler, 2014; Lachapelle, Noland, & Von Hagen, 2013; Thomas et al., 2005) 
or observed behaviors in an educational context (Ducheyne et al., 2013, 2014), but whether these 
translate into adoption of the safe behaviors is less certain. A 2005 study for NHTSA described 
four school-based, on-bicycle training programs that each achieved sustained knowledge gains, 
and higher average knowledge compared to students who had never had a training course 
(Thomas et al., 2005). Self-reports from students and parents also suggested that safe riding 
behaviors and enjoyment of riding improved, more so in the courses taught on road than those 
taught in a closed course (on the school grounds).  
 
A review of evaluations of 13 educational programs (without legislation enactment) among 
children and youth found that educational programs were effective at increasing observed helmet 
use. Most of the programs also offered discounted or free helmet distribution. Meta-analyses 
found the odds of observed helmet wearing to be more than 2 times higher than at baseline or 
among the non-intervention group, but results were quite varied across the different studies 
(Royal, Kendrick, & Coleman, 2007). The authors were unable to tease apart differences in 
programs that might contribute to different outcomes other than whether they were community-
based or school-based, and whether or not they offered free or reduced-priced helmets. 
Community educational programs that provided free helmets were reported to be more effective 
than programs set in schools or that provided only an opportunity to purchase a discounted 
helmet, although the latter types also increased use. School-based programs also tended to obtain 
best results among the younger participants (Royal et al., 2007). Three of the studies found 
helmet use benefits persisting at 9 to 12 months follow-up, although evidence is still lacking 
regarding longer-term (1 year or more). Based on the evidence of effectiveness of helmets at 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 18 
preventing head-injuries when worn, injury-reduction benefits would be expected from programs 
that increase proper use of helmets. Crash reduction benefits of educational programs have not 
been conclusively demonstrated. Evidence is also lacking as to whether programs might have 
any unintended effects such as reducing amounts of riding or conferring overconfidence in one’s 
riding skills. 
 
Costs: Coalitions may be paid by their associated State to provide training, or otherwise use 
SRTS funds if eligible. Activities formerly eligible under Federal SRTS funding are now eligible 
under the TAP program outlined in MAP-21, but funding priorities are established by each State. 
State contacts may be located on the National Center for Safe Routes to School website 
(http://saferoutesinfo.org/program-tools/find-state-contacts) or search individual States’ DOT 
websites for information about TAP and SRTS funding. Other funding sources may also be 
identified through the SRTS Funding Portal web page (http://saferoutesinfo.org/funding-portal). 
Teachers can provide education using NHTSA’s free materials, but training, administration, and 
supervision of a comprehensive program could increase costs somewhat. 
 
Time to implement: Short, for existing material; medium, to develop and disseminate a training 
curriculum with material. 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 19 
1.4 Cycling Skills Clinics, Bike Fairs, Bike Rodeos 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Short 
 
The purpose of cycling skills clinics, bike fairs, or bike rodeos is to teach children about traffic 
laws that apply to them and how to ride defensively in a number of traffic conditions. The intent 
of these types of activities is to introduce or reinforce bicycle safety concepts learned in a 
classroom with actual on-bike practice and application. It should be part of a more 
comprehensive program of traffic safety education and training, parent education, and other 
efforts.  
 
A cycling skills clinic, bike fair, or rodeo is an event that provides children an opportunity to 
learn and practice bicycling skills. A clinic typically has several stations for specific skills and 
also includes bicycle and helmet inspections. Parental involvement can also be a valuable 
component of bicycle fairs, providing reinforcement of desired safe riding behaviors and 
modeling appropriate bicycling behaviors. Events should also include discussions and examples 
of proper bicycle helmet fitting. 
 
There are a number of bicycle safety courses and models for fairs, rodeos, and clinics. Examples 
include NHTSA (2011), Washington Area Bicyclist Association (undated), Chaplin (2005), 
Minnesota Safety Council (undated), and Williams and Burden (1994). In addition, the League 
of American Bicyclists has numerous League Certified Instructors across the country that can 
teach a variety of classroom-based and on-bicycle courses and new youth instructor training for 
those wishing to be certified to provide cycling skills clinics. 
 
Use: Bicycle safety fairs and rodeos are local events. They are often run by law enforcement, 
school personnel, or other civic and volunteer organizations. There may be permanent 
“neighborhood” layouts where the rodeos are conducted, and the events may be scheduled as 
part of the elementary and middle school curriculum. Although the extent of use is unknown, 
they are increasingly implemented as part of Safe Routes to School projects. 
 
Effectiveness: While cycling skills clinics or rodeos can result in increases in knowledge and 
skills, a review of the research literature does not reveal any studies that document crash and 
injury reduction, at least not in isolation. One program of comprehensive education for preschool 
children and their parents, that included a skills and safety rodeo, led to a doubling of helmet use 
(Britt, Silver, & Rivara, 1998; Rivara & Metrik, 1998). Some studies have found that single 
event bike rodeos did not lead to increases in knowledge or improvements in behaviors or 
attitudes (Macarthur, Parkin, Sidky, & Wallace, 1998); thus, bike rodeos need to be part of a 
larger, more comprehensive program. Again, see Rivara and Metrik (1998) for a more in-depth 
discussion. 
 
Costs: A one-time clinic or rodeo can be operated with volunteers at minimal cost. A permanent 
rodeo facility could cost thousands of dollars. 
 
Time to implement: A one-time clinic or rodeo can be organized in a few months. 
Implementing a permanent program with a facility may take up to a year or longer. 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 20 
2. Adults 
 
2.1 Bicycle Helmet Laws for Adults 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Low 
Time: Short 
 
The purpose of bicycle helmet laws is to reduce the number of severe and fatal injuries resulting 
from bicycle crashes. Bicycle helmets, when worn properly, are the single most effective piece 
of equipment to reduce head injuries in the event of a crash. A recent meta-analysis of bicycle 
helmet effectiveness estimated that bicycle helmet use results in about a 42% (95% CI [25, 55]) 
reduction in the risk of a non-fatal head injury (Elvik, 2011). Other recent studies have also 
found increased risk for all types of severe injury for helmet non-use (Boufous et al., 2012); for 
head and brain injury controlling for alcohol use by the bicyclist (Crocker et al., 2012); and 
controlling for other risk factors such as type of crash, age, and sex of the rider (Persaud et al., 
2012).  
 
According to a nationally-representative population-based survey of attitudes and behaviors 
about walking and biking, 63% of respondents (16 and older) favored laws requiring adults to 
use helmets when bicycling (Schroeder & Wilbur, 2013). However, only 37% of these 
respondents indicated that they use a helmet on all or nearly all rides. Forty-six percent indicated 
they never use a helmet (Schroeder & Wilbur, 2013). 
 
Use: No States have yet enacted laws requiring adults to wear bicycle helmets. More than 60 
local jurisdictions require people of all ages to wear helmets when bicycling (BHSI, 2014).  
 
Effectiveness: Several studies (two studies from Canada, and one study from three New York 
city suburbs) show helmet laws for all ages produce higher helmet wearing rates than laws 
covering only children (Dennis et al., 2010; Karkhaneh et al., 2006; Puder, Visintainer, Spitzer, 
& Casal, 1999), See the Effectiveness section on Bicycle Helmet Laws for Children (Chapter 9, 
Section 1.1) for more information.  
 
Dennis et al. (2013) found suggestive trends that laws in Canadian provinces that cover all ages 
resulted in fewer head injuries as a ratio of all bicycle injuries than no helmet law or a law 
covering only youth. Walter et al. (2011) found a decrease in head injury rates over and above 
decreasing trends in all bicyclist injury rates associated with a comprehensive and long-term 
bicycle helmet use law in New South Wales, Australia. Further, the proportion of cyclists 
involved in crashes who were wearing a helmet increased from 20% to more than 60% among 
children, and to more than 70% among adults. For adults, the increase occurred within two 
months of the law effective date, whereas the increase was more gradual among children. 
Olivier, Walter, and Grzebieta (2013) also found the rate of bicyclist head injuries decreased in 
comparison to the rate of bicyclist arm injuries (used to reflect differences in the amounts of 
riding) since 1991, when the law was enacted, suggesting that benefits continue long term. 
Studies have also found that when children are accompanied by adults using helmets, the 
children are also more likely to be using helmets (Wesson et al., 2008). Universal (all ages) 
helmet requirements for motorcyclists similarly result in higher helmet use rates and the greatest 
reductions in fatalities and injuries (see Chapter 5, Section 1.1). 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 21 
 
Costs: Minimal costs could be incurred for informing and educating the public and providing 
training for enforcement personnel. 
 
Time to implement: A universal helmet use law can be implemented as soon as the law is 
enacted. 
 
Other issues:  
• Encouragement to use helmets: While helmet use is effective for preventing head 
injuries among all ages, some jurisdictions are concerned mandatory helmet use for all 
ages will discourage bicycling. Given that increased riding provides health benefits, some 
agencies prefer to use encouragement in lieu of a law to increase helmet use by adults. 
See Section 3.2 for more information.  
• Helmet standards: All helmets sold in the United States must pass testing standards for 
head protection (“impact attenuation”), requirements to prevent helmets coming off in a 
crash, peripheral vision tests and other requirements developed by the Consumer Product 
Safety Commission (CPSC). Final rules were passed in 1999. The full standards are 
available on the BHSI website (www.helmets.org/index.htm#standards). A folding 
helmet intended to be more convenient to carry that meets the CPSC standards is now 
available per the BHSI website (www.helmets.org/shared.htm#studies).  
• Buying, fitting, and replacing helmets: Most importantly, helmets should fit properly, 
be worn properly, and be worn every time. NHTSA (www.nhtsa.gov/Bicycles) and the 
League of American Bicyclists (http://bikeleague.org/content/smart-cycling-tips-0), 
provide tips on helmet fitting and other guidance on riding safely in traffic. Such tips may 
be included on bike maps and other local resources for bicyclists. Helmets should be 
replaced if involved in a crash. They should also be replaced at some interval just because 
of natural deterioration (e.g., the foam is dented or becomes brittle, there are cracks in the 
outer shell, or the straps breaking or becoming loose). The Bicycle Helmet Safety 
Institute has more information on buying, fitting, and replacing helmets, and also reviews 
new helmets that come out each year and discusses costs (www.helmets.org/). BHSI 
suggests, from the results of impact tests they conducted, that lower-cost helmets are as 
just as impact-resistant as more costly ones. Reflective and bright colors are 
recommended, and rounder helmets are also suggested by BHSI to provide a smoother, 
less snag-prone surface in the event of a crash.  
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 22 
2.2 Bicycle Safety Education for Adult Cyclists 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Low 
Time: Medium 
 
The goal of bicycle safety education for adult bicycle commuters is to improve knowledge of 
laws, risks, and cycling best practices, and to lead to safer cycling behaviors, including riding 
predictably and use of safety materials such as reflective clothing and helmets. 
 
A handful of communities have developed bicycle education programs, with large variation in 
program elements. Common elements include safety ads (e.g. radio, TV, outdoor), dissemination 
of safety materials, bike “ambassadors” and social supports, individual skills training or 
workshops, and coordination with enforcement officers to reinforce safe behaviors. Case study 
summaries are available of programs in Tucson, AZ, Portland, OR, Augusta, ME, Chicago, IL, 
and many other cities (PBIC, 2010). A recent University of Texas at Austin program was 
designed to provide tailored education and encouragement to new or timid bicyclists in the 
African American community and reported improvements in perceptions of comfort and safety 
among those participating (McCray, Durden, & Schaubert, 2013).  
 
NHTSA has developed a campaign, Be a Roll Model, aimed at encouraging all road users, 
including bicyclists, to model safe travel behaviors for their children and others. The campaign 
includes educational materials, tip sheets, and a pledge program for local agencies to adopt and 
disseminate (www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Bicycles/Be+a+Roll+Model). 
 
Use: Low. Adult-oriented safety education programs in the United States are not well 
documented and are rarely formally evaluated. Multiple bicycle groups offer bicycle education to 
adults (and youth) including both classroom and on-bicycle training to help cyclists of varying 
levels enhance their knowledge of traffic laws and rules of the road and skills to ride safely and 
more comfortably in traffic. The oldest and most well known is the League of American 
Bicyclists, see http://bikeleague.org/content/take-class for more information and to find league-
trained cycling instructors (LCI’s as they are called) by geographic area. LCIs typically provide 
group training.  
 
Effectiveness: Unlikely to be effective in reducing crashes without comprehensive and sustained 
efforts to improve the cycling environment. A high-quality evaluation conducted in Brazil by 
Bacchieri, Barros, dos Santos, Goncalves, & Gigante (2010) found that “an intervention based on 
an educational component and the promotion of the active use of safety equipment is not capable 
of reducing accidents among cycling workers” (in this case, male cycling commuters). The study 
concluded that “isolated educational programs, attempting to only change individual behavior, 
are not effective in reducing accidents” and that “the number of accidents will not considerably 
decrease without actions that also include improved road infrastructure and the effective 
application of legislation (with comprehensive and systematic law enforcement)” (Bacchieri et 
al., 2010). 
 
Costs: Medium. Costs may vary depending on the intensity of the educational program. Costs for 
radio/TV ads, print materials, safety equipment, workshop and training events, and personnel 
time could be incurred. 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 23 
 
Time to implement: A comprehensive education program could require several months of start- 
up time to plan and develop program materials. 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 24 
3. All Bicyclists 
 
3.1 Active Lighting and Rider Conspicuity 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: High† 
Time: Varies 
†High for active lighting laws; unknown for promoting other conspicuity measures 
 
Improving bicyclist conspicuity is intended to make bicyclists more visible to motorists and to 
allow motorists more opportunity to see and avoid collisions with bicyclists. A common 
contributing factor for crashes involving bicyclists in the roadway is the failure of the driver to 
notice the bicyclist, particularly at night. White or light-colored clothing, long a recommended 
solution, does little to improve conspicuity at night (NCHRP, 2008, Strategy F2). A study of 
bicyclists admitted to hospitals from bicycling injuries suggested that white upper body clothing 
may provide a protective effect for motor vehicle collisions during daylight hours (Hagel et al., 
2014).  
 
New bicycles must be sold with reflectors meeting the Consumer Product Safety Commission 
requirements. The reflectors may improve a bicycle’s night-time visibility when they are 
illuminated by motor vehicle lights approaching from behind. Active bicycle lighting can also be 
critical for the detection of bicyclists coming toward the path of a motor vehicle, because the 
bicyclist is outside the vehicle’s headlight beam until the last moment (NCHRP, 2008). In most 
States and jurisdictions, bicycles ridden after dark are required by law to have active white front 
lights and most States also require red rear reflectors or active lights. Efforts to increase 
enforcement of laws requiring use of lights is needed to maximize use (NCHRP, vol. 18, 2008). 
Communications and outreach to the general public and law enforcement officers about State and 
local laws regarding the use of active bicycle lighting (and other conspicuity aids) should be 
provided. However, a recent study from Australia found the use of a bicycle light alone, whether 
static or flashing, did not enhance the conspicuity of the bicyclist among study drivers, so 
additional measures to improve conspicuity (such as clothing or reflective leg straps) may be 
needed (Wood et al., 2012).  
 
Most bicycles do not come equipped with permanently-mounted lighting (Osberg, Stiles, & 
Asare, 1998). Newer mounting devices may, however, make it easy to attach or remove lights as 
needed. Many currently available lights may also be easily switched from continuously lit to 
flashing modes. Batteries also last much longer with LED lighting, increasing convenience.  
 
Additional materials attached to bicyclists or their bikes can increase rider conspicuity day or 
night. For daytime, bright-colored or fluorescent clothing, including shirts, vests, caps, etc., make 
the bicyclist more noticeable. In low light conditions (e.g. rain, fog) and at night, the same items 
can have retroreflective (reflects light directly back toward the original source of light) materials 
incorporated in them, to make the bicyclist more visible and identifiable from much greater 
distances. Retroreflective bicycle tires, and now frames, are also available. For example, bright 
neon tubes are designed to be mounted on the bicycle frame, where they cast a bright, broad 
pattern of light onto the roadway, creating the illusion of a vehicle much wider than a bicycle. 
Lower cost stickers to put on rims (or cyclist extremities) and other parts of the bike are also 
available. Pedal reflectors are another option and may help drivers identify cyclists and estimate 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 25 
their speeds based on pedal rotations, though further research is needed. Lights also may be 
applied to helmets or backpacks to make the rider more conspicuous to other vehicles. Other 
emerging active lighting technologies may also enhance conspicuity of nighttime cyclists when 
used. 
 
Use: Most States have laws requiring use of active lights and reflectors on bikes ridden at night. 
There is no data on how frequently active lighting is used among those who bicycle after dark, 
but bicyclists involved in collisions at night appear to use lights infrequently. Use of bicycle 
reflectors is thought to be higher since they come pre-attached to bicycles at purchase, but these 
may be removed, or broken, after purchase, so use is not guaranteed. Nearly three-fourths of U.S. 
survey respondents who reported having ridden in the dark indicated they took some measures, 
either using a bike headlight or reflective/fluorescent gear or clothing, to make themselves more 
visible (Schroeder & Wilbur ,2013).  
 
Most, if not all, athletic shoes contain some retroreflective material. Some athletic clothing also 
has retroreflective material. Bicycle helmets may have retroreflective elements. Some bicyclists 
may be seen wearing additional retroreflective materials, such as vests, jackets, arm bands, or 
rear-mounted reflective triangles located under their bicycle seats. 
 
Effectiveness: A Cochrane review of studies of pedestrian and bicycle conspicuity aids 
concluded that “fluorescent materials in yellow, red, and orange improved driver detection 
during the day...” (Kwan & Mapstone, 2004). Even low beam headlights can illuminate figures 
wearing florescent materials hundreds of feet away, much farther than figures wearing normal 
clothing (NCHRP, 2004, Strategy B5; NCHRP, 2008, Strategy F2). One study among a cohort of 
riders who had participated in a large mass bicycle event found results suggesting that consistent 
use of fluorescent colors provides a protective effect against crashes and injuries (Thornley, 
Woodward, Langley, Ameratunga, & Rodgers, 2008). 
 
A small Australian study found that bicyclist clothing (such as vests and ankle and knee 
reflectors) significantly affected conspicuity, enabling drivers to react to bicyclists from further 
away than when the bicyclist wore only a vest or no reflective material at all (Wood et al., 2012). 
Younger drivers detected and responded to bicyclists more often and from a further distance than 
older drivers. A study of bicyclists admitted to hospital emergency departments in Edmonton and 
Calgary, Canada did not find a significant protective effect for using head or tail lights, for 
retroreflective upper body clothing, nor for other reflective items for nighttime crashes; however, 
the sample size was small, and there was no apparent control for the riding environment or type 
of ambient/street lighting available (Hagel et al., 2014). More research is needed to assess the 
effects of various types of conspicuity aids under different road environments and ambient and 
supplemental light conditions. 
 
Another challenge is getting bicyclists to wear retro-reflective materials and use proper lighting 
and other conspicuity aids routinely (and appropriately). It is possible to obtain widespread use of 
lighting. Osberg et al. (1998) found nearly half of nighttime bicyclists in Paris used active 
lighting, compared to just 14% of Boston bicyclists, reflecting differences in laws, public health 
priorities, and perceived risk. 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 26 
Evidence is unavailable about the effectiveness of various conspicuity promotional measures, or 
of laws requiring use of active lighting at increasing use. NCHRP (2008) suggests that increased 
enforcement of laws enhanced by coordinated communications and outreach efforts could 
heighten awareness among cyclists of the need for using proper lighting and the benefits of 
retroreflective materials at enhancing conspicuity. Logic suggests that if bicyclists are more 
noticeable, the frequency and severity of crashes would likely be reduced. 
 
Costs: Moderate costs are involved for communications and outreach and for law enforcement 
training to enforce active lighting laws. Conspicuity-enhancing gear, such as retroreflective wrist 
and ankle straps, or small active front and back lights, are sometimes distributed for free as part 
of school and community educational efforts. Additional costs for such materials are modest. 
 
Time to implement: Brochures and flyers for a bicycle safety education campaign highlighting 
conspicuity can be created quickly. Often an extra line or two about rider conspicuity can be 
added to existing educational materials and/or reinforced at community events. Several months 
can be taken up by designing, producing, and implementing the communications and outreach 
and law enforcement training for enforcing active lighting laws. See Section 3.3 for more on 
enforcement and available resources. 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 27 
3.2 Promote Bicycle Helmet Use With Education 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$$ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Medium 
 
The purpose of bicycle helmet promotions is to increase use of helmets and thereby decrease the 
number of severe and fatal brain injuries to bicyclists involved in crashes. Bicycle helmet 
promotions are frequent, but are usually aimed at child bicyclists only, often through youth 
health organizations and schools. Promotions can target various barriers to helmet use, including 
absence of a helmet, child and families’ lack of understanding of the importance of helmet use, 
and negative attitudes or beliefs about helmet use. Programs that provide helmets can include 
sponsoring organizations and often involve law enforcement and schools to deliver helmets, fit 
the helmets, and teach proper fitting and use. Promotions can be conducted through single events 
or extended campaigns to promote helmet distribution and use. Helmet promotions should not be 
limited to just children, but should inlude adults requires as well because crashes are not limited 
ot just children ot those who are deemed less skilled at bike riding. Expanding helmet 
promotions to adults requires an expansion in focus, and perhaps different sponsors. However, 
adding adult-oriented riding tips may increase the appeal of the program. Other adult-oriented 
strategies should also be included, such as peer-based interventions on a college campus 
(Buckley, Sheehan, & Chapman, 2009). 
 
Regardless of the target audience, bicycle helmet promotions must include instruction on how to 
properly fit the helmet and the importance of wearing helmets on every trip. See Sections 1.1 and 
2.1 for more information. The Bicycle Helmet Safety Institute has extensive information on 
helmets, purchasing a helmet, helmet fit, when to buy a new helmet, helmet recalls, and the 
difference between helmet brands, see www.helmets.org/. Programs might also need to target 
differences in tendency to adopt helmet use for different riding purposes (recreational versus 
commuting), or riders who identify as only one type of rider (Kakefuda, Stallone, & Gibbs, 
2009). All bicyclists could benefit from utilizing resources that demonstrate how helmets work to 
reduce injury. Moreover, further efforts are needed to encourage parents and authority figures 
(e.g., law enforcement officers, school officials and staff, and health-care professionals) to 
reinforce and model desired behaviors including the use of a properly fitted bicycle helmet every 
ride (Maitland, 2013). Trained and skilled cyclists may also be more likely to adopt helmet use 
(Kakefuda et al., 2009), so adult bicycle training programs that incorporate the importance of 
helmet use may help increase wearing by adult riders. A U.S. survey of attitudes toward 
bicycling and walking indicates that about 34% of respondents who had ridden a bicycle in the 
past year used a helmet for all or nearly all of their rides (Schroeder & Wilbur, 2013). 
 
Use: Most States have conducted bicycle helmet promotions for children within the last few 
years, although only a few have ongoing or regular programs. Some States have conducted 
bicycle helmet promotions for a general audience. 
 
Effectiveness: Bicycle helmets are proven to reduce injuries and fatalities (see Chapter 9, 
Sections 1.1 and 2.1). Helmet promotions are successful in getting more helmets into the hands 
of bicyclists. Rouzier and Alto (1995) describe a comprehensive program of presentations, media 
coverage, messages from doctors to patients, as well as low-cost helmet availability, which 
significantly increased helmet purchases and use for all ages. A peer-led, social marketing 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 28 
program on a medium-sized college campus also raised observed helmet use, at least for the 
short term (Ludwig, Buchholz, & Clarke, 2005). A school-based injury-reduction program 
targeting 13- and 14-year-olds incorporating opportunities for instruction, demonstration, 
rehearsal, feedback, social reinforcement and practice was associated with a 20% increase in 
observed rate of helmet use among this challenging target age group at 6 months follow-up 
(Buckley et al., 2009). In France, voluntary helmet use increased from 7.3% in 2000 to 22 % in 
2010. During that time period, national public awareness and informational campaigns were 
initiated and carried out promoting helmet use among youth, adults with children, and the 
general population (Richard, Thélot, & Beck, 2013).  
 
Recently, a Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis of twenty-two studies evaluating non- 
legislative helmet promotion programs aimed at children under 18 years found the odds of 
observed helmet wearing were significantly greater among those receiving the interventions 
(Owen, Kendrick, Mulvaney, Coleman, & Royal, 2011). The study found the more effective 
programs were community-based (rather than aimed at individuals), provided free rather than 
subsidized helmets, and were set in schools. A Canadian program, Operation Headway, 
involving enforcement of bike helmet legislation, education, rewards for wearing and economic 
penalties for non-wearing, and provision of helmets to low-income groups was evaluated by 
Lockhart, Fenerty, and Walling (2010). The researchers found the program increased wearing 
rates (based on observations pre- and post-intervention), increased knowledge and commitment 
to wearing a helmet, saw greater public awareness of the law through media tracking, and 
improved relationships between police and the public (based on anecdotal evidence). Another 
helmet-use promotion program, involving distributing helmets and information, was evaluated in 
France (Constant, Messiah, Felonneau, & Lagarde, 2012). This study found that the helmet 
promotion program was of value in increasing helmet use, but not sufficient to achieve high rates 
of helmet use among adult cyclists. A related theme of these studies is that population-wide, 
multifaceted, integrated, and repeated prevention programs are needed, which should include 
distribution of free helmets and safety information and strategies to increase peer and parental 
pressure. 
 
Programs that increase proper use of helmets would be expected to reduce injuries in the event of 
a bicycle crash (see Section 1.3). 
 
Costs: The cost for underwriting large numbers of helmets can be quite high, including 
supporting communications and outreach material. Adequate helmets can be purchased for as 
little as $8 each, within reach of most adult bicyclists. Purchase of large quantities of helmets by 
businesses, hospitals, or through partnerships with merchants for example can also lower the cost 
per helmet and make free or subsidized distribution of helmets to at-risk segments of the 
population more feasible.  
 
Time to implement: A good campaign, including market research, material development, and 
message placement, will require at least 6 months to plan and implement. 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 29 
3.3 Enforcement Strategies 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Varies 
 
The purpose of targeted enforcement is to increase compliance with appropriate traffic laws by 
both bicyclists and motorists. Enforcement of traffic laws for all operators, including speed 
enforcement, may help to reduce the severity and frequency of collisions as well as promote 
bicycle safety. (See Chapter 3 for more information on strategies to reduce speeding and 
aggressive driving.) 
 
The SHSO can help ensure correct riding through communications and outreach campaigns and 
through training law enforcement officers about the laws, the safety benefits of obeying the laws, 
and how to enforce bicycle safety-related laws. Some types of violations may be especially 
pertinent to bicyclist safety. For example, motorists may violate bicyclist’ right-of-way following 
an overtaking maneuver by immediately turning right across the bicyclist’s path, or by passing a 
bicyclist too closely (see Section 3.4 below). Similarly, bicyclists riding the wrong-way put 
themselves at greater risk of head-on collisions or angle collisions with motorists pulling out at 
side streets or driveways who are looking to the left for oncoming traffic. By enforcing and 
educating bicyclists and drivers about relevant laws, the motoring and bicycling public may 
become better-informed about the risk of these types of violations and importance of obeying all 
traffic laws. Law enforcement can also reinforce active lighting and helmet use laws in effect by 
stopping and educating offending bicyclists as well as writing citations if appropriate. (Also see 
Chapter 9, Section 1.1, and BIKESAFE Law Enforcement countermeasure for more information: 
www.pedbikesafe.org/BIKESAFE/countermeasures_detail.cfm?CM_NUM=40.) 
 
Law enforcement officers typically receive little to no specialized training in bicycle (or 
pedestrian) safety. NHTSA offers free self-paced interactive training for law enforcement to 
enhance the safety of bicyclists (and pedestrians). Training can be found from several sources 
including: 
• NHTSA’s Law Enforcement’s Roll Call Video: Enforcing Law for Bicyclists: 
www.nhtsa.gov/multimedia/bicycles/bicycle_safety_LE.wmv 
• NHTSA’s Enhancing Bicycle Safety: Law Enforcement’s Role (CD-ROM training): 
www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Bicycles/Enhancing+Bicycle+Safety:+Law+Enforceme
nt's+Role 
• Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center: 
www.pedbikeinfo.org/programs/enforcement.cfm  
• Safe Routes to School’s Enforcement: Role for Law Enforcement in SRTS: 
www.saferoutesinfo.org/program-tools/enforcement-role-law-enforcement-srts  
 
These products can satisfy the needs of departments regardless of how they choose to emphasize 
bicycle safety. Additional training for prosecutors and judges is critical as well so that there is 
appropriate follow-up for citations throughout the judicial system. Educational diversion 
programs are an alternative to other penalties, for adjudication of citations involving bicyclists. 
Diversion programs may be easier to implement in settings such as universities and college 
campuses. For example, UC Berkeley teamed with the East Bay Bicycle Coalition to provide 
free bicycle safety classes as an option to reduce the fine for a bicycle ticket from the UC police 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 30 
department. For more, visit: www.ebbc.org/safety. Other examples of programs can be found at 
the University of Wisconsin (Madison) and through Marin County (California) Bicycle 
Coalition.  
 
A Massachusetts law included measures for enforcement of motorist violations affecting cyclist 
safety, enabling local jurisdictions to cite bicyclists for violating traffic laws under the same 
procedure for ticketing motorists. This legislation has led to increased enforcement for bicyclist 
laws in some jurisdictions. There was some initial confusion in implementing the law, but police 
in Boston are now citing bicyclists for traffic violations as well as looking out for motor vehicle 
violations that they may have overlooked before. Some jurisdictions see the measures as 
primarily an aid to outreach and education of cyclists to increase their safety.  
 
Use: Unknown. Targeted enforcement of bicycle-related violations is likely a rarely used 
intervention. 
 
Effectiveness: Gilchrist, Schieber, Leadbetter, and Davidson (2000) describe an enforcement 
program in Georgia that impounded the bicycles of unhelmeted children and produced long-term 
increases in helmet wearing. This specific example seems unlikely to be broadly popular. 
Increasing community awareness and law enforcement efforts through the training courses and 
approaches noted above could, however, yield benefits that go beyond bicycle safety, to include 
improved community relations and more positive interactions between law enforcement and 
members of the community. A Japanese study by Okinaka and Shimazaki (2011) evaluated the 
effects of vocal and written prompts delivered by security guards on a university campus to 
reinforce safe behaviors (such as dismounting and walking bicycles on a sidewalk). The 
intervention involved posting campus security guards at sidewalk locations. The guards wore 
sashes that read, “Let’s not drive on campus” and provided vocal prompts, “Please get off and 
push [bicycles] to [bike racks] for safety on campus,” and then thanked compliant riders for their 
cooperation. Results indicated the intervention was effective at increasing safe behaviors 
exhibited by bicycle riders in this context. Riders walked their bicycles on the sidewalk 22% of 
the time at baseline, compared to 88% of the time during the intervention phases. 
 
Costs: Training currently exists for law enforcement officers. Roll-call videos can be 
implemented at essentially no cost to the departments. The CD-ROM training can be taken by 
officers on their work or personal computer. It has been designed to allow them eligibility for in-
service training hours. The longer in-person courses take officers away from their regular duties 
or require overtime commitment and may incur a financial cost, making the on-line courses a 
cost effective option. Many States or localities are developing their own training to reflect State 
and local laws. In-person courses may be an added value if they include observations of bicycle-
motorist interactions, on-bicycle experience, and/or training of bicycle safety enforcement 
operation. SHSOs may be able to provide funding for departments to participate in longer 
training courses. Training for prosecutors and judges would likely need to be developed, as 
would a supporting communications and outreach program for the public, motorists and 
bicyclists. 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 31 
Time to implement: For existing law enforcement training, with ongoing presentation 
schedules, implementation time can be quite short. For the full effort described above, a longer 
time frame would be needed. 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 32 
 
3.4 Motorist Passing Bicyclist Laws 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Medium 
Time: Short 
 
The purpose of bicyclist passing laws are to require motor vehicle drivers to leave at least three 
feet of clearance space between the vehicle and the cyclist when overtaking the cyclist, to 
minimize the likelihood of a sideswipe, and to reduce the chance of a close encounter that could 
potentially destabilize or divert the course of a cyclist and cause a crash. 
 
Use: As of August 2014, 25 States are known to have enacted bicyclist passing laws requiring 
drivers to leave a space of more than three feet (National Conference of State Legislatures, 
2014). Nineteen other States have laws requiring motorists to pass at a safe distance and speed, 
but are usually not more specific.  
 
Effectiveness: Love et al. (2012) evaluated the effectiveness of a passing law enacted in 
Baltimore, Maryland. The study saw low compliance with the passing law and little to no 
enforcement of the law by area police. Other factors that influenced passing distance included 
lane width, bicycle infrastructure, cyclist identity, and street type. The authors concluded that in 
addition to the passage of a law, interventions such as driver education, signage, enforcement, 
and bicycle infrastructure changes (such as bike lanes and Complete Streets designs) are needed 
to influence driving behavior and to increase motorist compliance with the three-foot law. 
 
Costs: Minimal costs could be incurred for informing and educating the public and providing 
training for enforcement personnel. 
 
Time to implement: A bicyclist passing law can be implemented as soon as the law is enacted. 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 33 
4. Drivers and Bicyclists 
 
4.1 Driver Training 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $ 
Use: Low 
Time: Medium 
 
The purpose of addressing bicycle safety as part of driver education is to increase the sensitivity 
of drivers to the presence and characteristics of bicyclists and how to safely share the road with 
them. Although driver education and most State driver manuals address sharing the road with 
bicyclists, many devote little attention or emphasis to the topic. NCHRP released model driver 
handbook materials that may be adapted by States to enhance their driver handbook information 
on sharing the road with bicyclists (Thomas, Stutts, & Gillenwater, n.d.). These materials could 
also be used in driver education courses. Other existing print and electronic publications could 
and are being used to increase the emphasis on safe driving around bicyclists. For example, the 
Utah Department of Health developed a 12-minute video to be shown in driver education classes 
to reinforce how drivers can safely share the road with bicyclists. 
 
One standard approach would be to implement a Share the Road module (see Section 4.2), 
covering interactions with bicyclists in driver education curriculums. For complete coverage, the 
same messages would need to be included in State-provided material for new drivers and 
covered by new questions added to the license knowledge exam. Standards for driver education 
curriculum and training developed by the American Driver and Traffic Safety Education 
Association mentions sharing the road with cyclists and pedestrians as a learning objective 
(Driver Education Working Group, 2009). 
 
For links to more resources and discussion of considerations in educating motorists about bicycle 
safety, see the Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center, under Educating Motorists 
(www.pedbikeinfo.org/programs/enforcement_motorists.cfm).  
 
Use: As noted, all driver licensing handbooks have some coverage of driving safely with 
bicycles on the road, but the information may not be very complete and there may be little 
assessment or testing of the material. Information is unavailable on the extent of training 
materials being used. Multiple States, including New Mexico, Louisiana, and Washington, have 
expanded sections on bicycle safety in their driver’s education handbooks and curriculum. (For 
New Mexico’s handbook see page 25 of 
www.nmcycling.org/advocacy/NM_Driver_Manual_Jun11.pdf). 
 
Effectiveness: Driver education has not been shown to reduce overall crash rates. The objective 
for adding more bicycle information would be to increase knowledge and desire to share the road 
safely with bicyclists, of the most common crash types and hazards and to improve new drivers’ 
anticipation of and interactions with bicyclists – as well as improve their behavior as bicyclists. 
Lifelong traffic safety education that includes bicycle training might also provide motorists with 
a greater understanding of bicyclist characteristics and needs and how to safely share the road. 
 
Costs: Free materials such as those listed above are available from NCHRP as well as the 
Transportation Research Board, American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators, and the 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 34 
League of American Bicyclists. The cost would be for the adaptation or development of the new 
segments of the standard curriculum and for getting it into the material used by driver education 
instructors and schools. Changes to State driver manuals and other publications could be done 
within the normal material update budget. 
 
Time to implement: Material would need to be adapted and integrated into the standard driver 
education curriculum, and adjustments made elsewhere in the curriculum to reflect likely 
additional time required for the new bicycle material. 
 
The same timeframe would be expected for making changes to official State driving manuals, 
license exams, and related material and procedures. 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 35 
4.2 Share the Road Awareness Programs 
 
Effectiveness:  
Cost: $$ 
Use: Unknown 
Time: Medium 
 
The purpose of Share the Road programs is to increase drivers’ awareness of bicyclists, as well 
as improve both bicyclist and driver compliance with relevant traffic laws. The National 
Strategies for Advancing Bicycle Safety was developed from a July 2000 conference of bicycle 
advocates, injury prevention specialists, and government representatives (NHTSA, 2001). The 
result was five goals, each with a series of strategies and action steps. The first goal, Motorists 
Will Share the Road, called for the creation of a “coordinated ‘Share the Road’ public education 
campaign that can be adapted at the State and local levels.” 
 
For an example of communication and outreach material, see 
www.pedbikeinfo.org/ee/ed_motorist.htm?/ee/ed_motorist.htm. 
 
Use: Unknown. 
 
Effectiveness: Share the Road awareness materials can be effective in increasing knowledge and 
appropriate attitudes, but as with other awareness programs, there is no evidence of behavior 
change or reductions in crashes. 
 
Costs: Medium, including the costs to develop new publications or tailor current ones. The 
material can be delivered as training for specific target audiences, such as new drivers or all high 
school students, or drivers as they renew their licenses, or general communications and outreach 
intended for mass media delivery. 
 
Time to implement: A good campaign, including market research, message development and 
testing, and implementation, will require at least 6 months to plan and implement. 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 36 
Bicycle Safety References 
 
American Alliance for Health, Physical Education, Recreation and Dance. (2014). Bikeology 
Curriculum and Parent Guide. Retrieved from 
www.shapeamerica.org/publications/resources/teachingtools/qualitype/bicycle_curriculum.cfm  
 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. (2010). Highway safety 
manual, 1st Ed. Retrieved from www.highwaysafetymanual.org 
https://bookstore.transportation.org/search.aspx?Text=highway%20safety%20manual 
 
AASHTO (2012) Guide for the development of bicycle facilities, 4th edition. Retrieved from 
https://bookstore.transportation.org/collection_detail.aspx?ID=116. 
 
Ackery, A. D., McLellan, B. A., & Redelmeier, D. A. (2012). Bicyclist deaths and striking 
vehicles in the USA. Injury Prevention, 18, 22-26. 
 
Alliance for Biking & Walking (2014). The Alliance benchmarking report [Website]. Retrieved 
from www.bikewalkalliance.org/resources/benchmarking  
 
Attewell, R. G., Glase, K., & McFadden, M. (2001). Bicycle helmet efficacy: a meta-analysis. 
Accident Analysis and Prevention, 33, 345-352. 
 
Bacchieri, G., Barros, A. J. D., dos Santos, J. V., Goncalves, H., & Gigante, D. P. (2010). A 
community intervention to prevent traffic accidents among bicycle commuters. Revista De Saude 
Publica, 44, 867-875. 
 
Bambach, M. R., Mitchella, R. J., Grzebieta, R. H., & Olivier, J. (2013). The effectiveness of 
helmets in bicycle collisions with motor vehicles: A case-control study. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention 53, 78-88. 
 
Bicycle Helmet Safety Institute. (2014). Helmet laws for bicycle riders. Retrieved from 
www.helmets.org/mandator.htm 
 
Boufous, S., de Rome, L., Senserrick, T., & Ivers, R. (2012). Risk Factors for severe injury in 
cyclists involved in traffic crashes in Victoria. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 49, 404-409. 
 
Britt, J., Silver, I., & Rivara, F. P. (1998). Bicycle helmet promotion among low income 
preschool children. Injury Prevention, 4, 280-283. 
 
Buckley, L., Sheehan, M., & Chapman, R. (2009). Bicycle helmet wearing among adolescents: 
Effectiveness of school-bsedbased injury prevention countermeasure. Transportation Research 
Record, 2140, 173-181. 
 
Chaplin, L. (2005). An organizer’s guide to bicycle rodeos. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University. 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 37 
Constant, A., Messiah, A., Felonneau, M., & Lagarde, E. (2012). Investigating helmet promotion 
for cyclists: Results from a randomised study with observation of behaviour, using a semi- 
automatic video system. Plos One, 7, e31651. 
 
Crocker, P., King, B., Cooper, H., & Milling, T. J. (2012). Self-reported alcohol use is an 
independent risk factor for head and brain injury among cyclists but does not confound helmets' 
protective effect. Journal of Emergency Medicine, 43, 244-250. 
 
Davison, C., Torunian, M., Walsh, P., Thompson, W., McFaull, S., & Pickett, W. (2013). Bicycle 
helmet use and bicycling-related injury among young Canadians: An equity analysis. 
International Journal for Equity in Health, 12, 48. 
 
Dennis, J., Ramsay, T., Turgeon, A. F., & Zarychanski, R. (2013). Helmet legislation and 
admissions to hospital for cycling related head injuries in Canadian provinces and territories: 
Interrupted time series analysis. BMJ British Medical Journal Online, 346, 2674.  
 
Dennis, J., Potter, B., Ramsay, T., & Zarychanski, R. (2010). The effects of provincial biycle 
helmet legislation on helmet use and bicycle ridership in Canada. Injury Prevention, 16, 219-224. 
 
Driver Education Working Group. (2009). Novice teen driver education and training 
administrative standards. Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/Traffic%20Injury%20Control/Teen%20Driver/files/TeenDriverE
TAS-1.pdf 
 
Ducheyne, F., De Bourdeaudhuij, I., Lenoir, M., & Cardon, G. (2013). Does a cycle training 
course improve cycling skills in children? Accident Analysis and Prevention, 59, 38-45. 
 
Ducheyne, F., De Bourdeaudhuij, I., Lenoir, M., & Cardon, G. (2014). Effects of a cycle training 
course on children’s cycling skills and levels of cycling to school. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 67, 49-60. 
 
Dumbaugh, E., & Frank, L. D. (2007). Traffic safety and Safe Routes to Schools: Synthesizing 
the empirical evidence. Transportation Research record: Journal of the Transportation Research 
Board, 2009, 89-97. 
 
Ellis, J. (2014). Bicycle safety education for children from a developmental and learning 
perspective (Report No. DOT HS 811 880). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: 
www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/bicycles/pdf/Bicycle_Safety_Education_For_Children-811880.pdf  
 
Elvik, R. (2011). Publication bias and time-trend bias in meta-analysis of bicycle helmet 
efficacy: A re-analysis of Attewell, Glase and McFadden, 2001. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 
43, 1245-1251. 
 
Federal Highway Administration. (1990). 1990 Nationwide Personal Transportation Survey. 
Washington, DC: Author. 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 38 
FHWA. (1995). 1995 Nationwide Personal Transportation Survey. Washington, DC: Author.  
 
FHWA. (2001). 2001 National Household Travel Survey. Washington, DC: Author. 
 
FHWA. (2005). Good practices guide for bicycle safety education (Report No. FHWA-SA-02-
001). Retrieved from 
katana.hsrc.unc.edu/cms/downloads/GoodPracticesGuide_BikeSafetyEdu.pdf  
 
FHWA. (2010). Review - Public policies for pedestrian and bicyclist safety and mobility: An 
implementation project of the pedestrian and bicyclist safety and mobility international scan 
(Report No. FHWA-PL-10-028). Retrieved from 
http://international.fhwa.dot.gov/pubs/pl10028/pl10028_duplex.pdf  
 
Fischer, E.L., Rousseau, G. K., Turner, S. M., Blais, E. J., Engelhart, C. L., Henderson, D. R., . . . 
Zegeer, C. V. (2010). Pedestrian and Bicyclist Safety and Mobility in Europe. (Report No. 
FHWA-PL-10_010). Retrieved from the FHWA website: 
www.international.fhwa.dot.gov/pubs/pl10010/pl10010.pdf 
 
Geyer, J., Raford, N., Ragland, D., & Pham, T. (2006). The continuing debate about Safety in 
Numbers—Data from Oakland, CA. Oakland, CA: Safe Transportation Research & Education 
Center, Institute of Transportation Studies, UC Berkeley. 
 
Gilchrist, J., Schieber, R. A., Leadbetter, S., & Davidson, S. C. (2000). Police enforcement as 
part of a comprehensive bicycle helmet program. Pediatrics, 106, 6-9. 
 
Grant, D., & Rutner, S. M. (2004). The effect of bicycle helmet legislation on bicycling fatalities. 
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 23, 595-611. 
 
Hamann, C., Peek-Asa, C., Lynch, C. F., Ramirez, M., & Torner, J. (2013). Burden of 
hospitalizations for bicycling injuries by motor vehicle involvement: United States, 2002 to 
2009. Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, 75, 870-876.  
 
Hagel, B. E., Romanow, N. T. R., Morgunov, N., Embree, T., Couperthwaite, A. B., Voaklander, 
D., & Rowe, B. H. (2014). The relationship between visibility aid use and motor vehicle related 
injuries among bicyclists presenting to emergency departments. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 65, 85-96. 
 
Hooshmand, J., Hotz, G., Neilson, V., & Chandler, L. (2014). BikeSafe: Evaluating a bicycle 
safety program for middle school aged children. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 66, 182-186. 
 
Hu, P. S., & Reuscher, T. R. (2004). Summary of travel trends: 2001 National Household Travel 
Survey (Report No. FHWA-PL-92-027). Washington, DC: Federal Highway Administration. 
Retrieved from http://nhts.ornl.gov/2001/pub/STT.pdf 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 39 
Hunter, W. H., Stutts, J. C., Pein, W. E., & Cox, C. L. (1996). Pedestrian and bicycle crash types 
of the early 1990’s (Report No. FHWA-RD-95-163). Washington, DC: Federal Highway 
Administration. Retrieved from www.pedbikeinfo.org/cms/downloads/PedBikeCrashTypes.pdf 
 
Jacobsen, P. L. (2003) Safety in numbers: more walkers and bicyclists, safer walking and 
bicycling. Injury Prevention 9, 205-209 and 2004, Correction Injury Prevention, 10, 127. 
 
Kakefuda, I., Stallone, L., & Gibbs, J. (2009). Discrepancy in bicycle helmet use among college 
students between two bicycle use purposes: Commuting and recreation. Accident Analysis & 
Prevention, 41, 513-521. 
 
Kanny, D., Schieber, R. A., Pryor, V., & Kresnow, M. J. (2001). Effectiveness of a State law 
mandating use of bicycle helmets among children: an observational evaluation. American 
Journal of Epidemiology, 154, 1072-1076. 
 
Karkhaneh, M., Rowe, B. H., Saunders, L. D., Voaklander, D. C., & Hagel, B. E. (2013). Trends 
in head injuries associated with mandatory bicycle helmet legislation targeting children and 
adolescents. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 59, 206-212. 
 
Karkhaneh, M., Rowe, B. H., Saunders, L. D., Voaklander, D. C., & Hagel, B. E. (2011). Bicycle 
helmet use four years after the introduction of helmet legislation in Alberta, Canada. Accident 
Analysis and Prevention, 43, 788-796. 
 
Karkhaneh, M., Kalenga, J-C., Hagel, B. E., & Rowe, B. H. (2006). Effectiveness of bicycle 
helmet legislation to increase helmet use: A systematic review. Injury Prevention, 12, 67-82. 
 
Kwan, I. & Mapstone, J. (2004). Visibility aids for pedestrians and cyclists: A systematic review 
of randomised controlled trials. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 36, 305–312 
 
Lachapelle, U., Noland, R. B., & Von Hagen, L. A. (2013). Teaching children about bicycle 
safety: An evaluation of the New Jersey Bike School Program. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 
52, 237-249. 
 
Leden, L., Garder, P., and Pulkkinen, U., (2000). An expert judgment model applied to 
estimating the safety effect of a bicycle facility. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 32, 589-599. 
 
Lockhart, S., Fenerty, L., & Walling, S. (2010). Operation headway: A multifaceted bike helmet 
promotion program. Injury Prevention, 16, A161. 
 
Love, D. C., Breaud, A., Burns, S., Margulies, J., Romano, M., & Lawrence, R. (2012). Is the 
three-foot bicycle passing law working in Baltimore, Maryland? Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 48, 451-456. 
 
Ludwig, T. D., Buchholz, C., & Clarke, S. W. (2005). Using social marketing to increase the 
use of helmets among bicyclists. Journal of American College Health, 54, 51-58. 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 40 
Macarthur, C., Parkin, P. C., Sidky, M. & Wallace, W. (1998). Evaluation of a bicycle skills 
training program for young children: a randomized controlled trial. Injury Prevention, 4, 116-
121. 
 
Macpherson, A., & Spinks, A. (2007). Bicycle helmet legislation for the uptake of helmet use 
and prevention of head injuries. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 8. 
 
Maitland, M. (2013). Bicycle helmets: Don’t say something by not saying something. Clinical 
Journal of Sports Medicine, 23, 415-416. 
 
McCray, T., Durden, T., & Schaubert, E. (2013). Cycling in the African American community: 
Safety training guidelines and findings (Report No. SWUTC/13/600451-00070-1). College 
Station, TX: Texas A&M Transportation Institute. Retrieved from 
http://d2dtl5nnlpfr0r.cloudfront.net/swutc.tamu.edu/publications/technicalreports/600451-00070-
1.pdf 
 
McKenzie, B. (2014). Modes less traveled - Bicycling and walking to work in the United States: 
2008-2012. Retrieved from the U.S. Census Bureau website: 
www.census.gov/prod/2014pubs/acs-25.pdf 
 
Minnesota Safety Council. (n.d.). Bike rodeo planning guide. St. Paul, MN: Minnesota Safety 
Council. Retrieved from www.minnesotasafetycouncil.org/bicycle/programs/rodeo/intro.cfm 
 
National Association of City Transportation Officials. (n.d.). Urban bikeway design guide. 
Retrieved from http://nacto.org/cities-for-cycling/design-guide/. 
 
National Conference of State Legislatures. (2014). Safely passing bicyclists chart (8/1/2014). 
Retrieved from www.ncsl.org/research/transportation/safely-passing-bicyclists.aspx 
 
National Cooperative Highway Research Program. (2004). A guide for reducing collisions 
involving pedestrians. Retrieved from the TRB website: 
onlinepubs.trb.org/Onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v10.pdf 
 
NCHRP. (2008). A guide for reducing collisions involving bicycles. Retrieved from the TRB 
website: onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_rpt_500v18.pdf 
 
National Center for Statistics and Analysis. (2015). Bicyclists and other cyclists: 2013 data 
(Traffic Safety Facts. Report No. DOT HS 812 151). Retrieved from the NHTSA website: www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812151.pdf 
 
National Highway Traffic Safety Adminstration. (2001). National strategies for advancing 
bicycle safety (Report No. DOT HS 809 347). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/bike/bicycle_safety/ 
 
NHTSA. (2004). Safe Routes to School: Practice and promise. Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/pedbimot/bike/Safe-Routes-2004/ 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 41 
 
NHTSA. (2008). Bicycle helmet use laws (Report No. DOT HS 810 886W). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/people/injury/TSFLaws/PDFs/810886.pdf 
 
NHTSA. (2011). Bicycling skills clinic guide (Report No. DOT HS 811 260). Retrieved from 
www.nhtsa.gov/Driving+Safety/Bicycles/CyclingSkillsClinic 
 
NHTSA. (2015). Traffic Safety Facts 2012 Data: Bicyclists and Other Cyclists. (Report No. 
DOT HS 812 018). Retrieved from www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812018.pdf  
 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2004). Keeping Children Safe in 
Traffic. Paris, France: Author. Retrieved from 
www.internationaltransportforum.org/Pub/pdf/04ChildrenSafeE.pdf 
 
Okinaka, T., & Shimazaki, T. (2011). The effects of prompting and reinforcement on safe 
behavior of bicycle and motorcycle riders. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 44, 671-674. 
 
Olivier, J., Walter, S. R., & Grzebieta, R. H. (2013). Long term bicycle related head injury trends 
for New South Wales, Australia following mandatory helmet legislation. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 50, 1128-1134. 
 
Osberg, J. S., Stiles, S. C., & Asare, O. K. (1998). Bicycle safety behavior in Paris and Boston. 
Accident Analysis and Prevention, 30, 679-687. 
 
Owen, R., Kendrick, D., Mulvaney, C., Coleman, T., & Royal, S. (2011). Non-legislative 
interventions for the promotion of cycle helmet wearing by children. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews (Online), (11)(11), CD003985. 
 
Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center (PBIC). (2010). Pedestrian and Bicycle Information 
Center Case Study Compendium. Chapel Hill, NC: Author. Retrieved from 
http://katana.hsrc.unc.edu/cms/downloads/pbic_case_study_compendium.pdf 
 
Persaud, N., Coleman, E., Zwolakowski, D., Lauwers, B., & Cass, D. (2012). Nonuse of bicycle 
helmets and risk of fatal head injury: A proportional mortality, case-control study. Canadian 
Medical Association Journal, 184, E921-E923. 
 
Pucher, J., Buehler, R., Merom, D., & Bauman, A. (2011). Walking and cycling in the United 
States, 2001-2009: Evidence from the NHTS. American Journal of Public Health, 101, S310- 
S317. 
 
Pucher, J., Buehler, R., & Seinen, M. (2011). Bicycling renaissance in North America? An 
update and re-appraisal of cycling trends and policies. Transportation Research Part A-Policy 
and Practice, 45, 451-475. 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 42 
Puder, D. R., Visintainer, P., Spitzer, D., & Casal, D. (1999). A comparison of the effect of 
different bicycle helmet laws in 3 New York City suburbs. American Journal of Public Health, 
89, 1736-1738. 
  
Richard, J-B., Thélot, B., & Beck, F. (2013). Evolution of bicycle helmet use and its 
determinants in France: 2000-2010. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 60, 113-120.  
  
Rivara, F. P., & Metrik, J. (1998). Training Programs for Bicycle Safety. Olympia, WA: 
Washington Traffic Safety Commission. 
 
Rivara, F. P., Thompson, D. C., Patterson, M. Q., & Thompson, R. S. (1998). Prevention of 
bicycle-related injuries: helmets, education, and legislation. Annual Review of Public Health, 19, 
293-318. 
 
Rodgers, G. B. (2002). Effects of state helmet laws on bicycle helmet use by children and 
adolescents. Injury Prevention, 8, 42-46. 
 
Royal, S., Kendrick, D., & Coleman, T. (2007). Promoting bicycle helmet wearing by children 
using non-legislative interventions: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Injury Prevention, 13, 
162-167. 
 
Rouzier, P., & Alto, W. A. (1995). Evolution of a successful community bicycle helmet 
campaign. Journal of the American Board of Family Practitioners, 8, 283-287. 
 
Safe Routes to School. (2011). Bicycle and pedestrian curricula guide - Making the case for 
bicycle and pedestrian youth education. Retrieved from 
www.saferoutespartnership.org/sites/default/files/pdf/Curr_Guide_2011_lo.pdf  
 
Scheiman, S., Moghaddas, H. S., Bjornstig, U., Bylundb, P.-O., & Saveman, B.-I. (2010). 
Bicycle injury events among older adults in Northern Sweden: A 10-year population based study. 
Accident Analysis & Prevention, 42, 758-763. 
 
Schroeder, P. & Wilbur, M. (2013). 2012 National survey of bicyclist and pedestrian attitudes 
and behavior, volume 2: Findings report (Report No. DOT HS 811 841 B). Retrieved from the 
NHTSA website: www.nhtsa.gov/nti/811841 
 
Thomas, L. J., Masten, S. V., & Stutts, J. C. (2005). Impact of School-based, Hands-on Bicycle 
Safety Education Approaches for School-Aged Children. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North 
Carolina Highway Safety Research Center. Retrieved from 
www.hsrc.unc.edu/pdf/2005/BikeSafetyEd2005.pdf 
 
Thomas, L, Stutts, J., & Gillenwater, Z. (n.d.). Development of a Model Drivers License 
Handbook: Final Products Description and Summary Report (NCHRP 20-07/Task 212). 
Research for AASHTO Standing Committee on Highways.Retrieved from 
144.171.11.40/cmsfeed/TRBNetProjectDisplay.asp?ProjectID=1227 
 
 Chapter 9. Bicycles 
 
9 - 43 
Thompson, D. C., Rivara, F. P., & Thompson R. (2006). Helmets for preventing head and facial 
injuries in bicyclists. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 2. Retrieved from 
www.cochrane.org/reviews/en/ab001855.html 
 
Thornley, S. J., Woodward, A., Langley, J. D., Ameratunga, S. N. & Rodgers, A. (2008). 
Conspicuity and bicycle crashes: Preliminary findings of the Taupo bicycle study. Injury 
Prevention, 14, 11-18. 
 
Twisk, D., Vlakveld, W., Mesken, J., Shope, J. T., & Kok, G. (2013). Inexperience and risky 
decisions of young adolescents, as pedestrians and cyclists, in interactions with lorries, and the 
effects of competency versus awareness education. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 55, 219-
225. 
 
Walter, S. R., Olivier, J., Churches, T., & Grzebieta, R. (2011). The impact of compulsory cycle 
helmet legislation on cyclist head injuries in New South Wales, Australia. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 43, 2064-2071. 
 
Washington Area Bicyclist Association. (n.d.). Bike/Ped Safety Education Program. Washington, 
DC: Author. Retrieved from www.waba.org/bikingforkids/leaders.php 
 
Wesson, D. E., Stephens, D., Lam, K., Parsons, D., Spence, L., & Parkin, P. C. (2008). Trends in 
pediatric and adult bicycling deaths before and after passage of a bicycle helmet law. Pediatrics, 
122, 605-610. 
 
Williams, J., & Burden, D. (1994). The Guide to Bicycle Rodeos. Woodinville, WA: Outdoor 
Empire Publishing. 
 
Wood, J. M., Tyrrell, R. A., Marszalek, R., Lacherez, P., Carberry, T., & Chu, B. S. (2012). 
Using reflective clothing to enhance the conspicuity of bicyclists at night. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 45, 726-730. 
 
 
 DOT HS 812 202
November 2015
11790-102815-v2b
