 ARTICLE
Long-term paired associative stimulation can restore voluntary
control over paralyzed muscles in incomplete chronic spinal
cord injury patients
Anastasia Shulga1,2, Pantelis Lioumis2, Aleksandra Zubareva2, Nina Brandstack3, Linda Kuusela3,4, Erika Kirveskari5,
Sarianna Savolainen6, Aarne Ylinen1,7 and Jyrki P Mäkelä2,7
Emerging therapeutic strategies for spinal cord injury aim at sparing or restoring at least part of the corticospinal tract at the acute
stage. Hence, approaches that strengthen the weak connections that are spared or restored are crucial. Transient plastic changes in
the human corticospinal tract can be induced through paired associative stimulation, a noninvasive technique in which transcranial
magnetic brain stimulation is synchronized with electrical peripheral nerve stimulation. A single paired associative stimulation
session can induce transient plasticity in spinal cord injury patients. It is not known whether paired associative stimulation can
strengthen neuronal connections persistently and have therapeutic effects that are clinically relevant. We recruited two patients
with motor-incomplete chronic (one para- and one tetraplegic) spinal cord injuries. The patients received paired associative
stimulation for 20–24 weeks. The paraplegic patient, previously paralyzed below the knee level, regained plantarflexion and
dorsiflexion of the ankles of both legs. The tetraplegic patient regained grasping ability. The newly acquired voluntary movements
could be performed by the patients in the absence of stimulation and for at least 1 month after the last stimulation session. In this
unblinded proof-of-principle demonstration in two subjects, long-term paired associative stimulation induced persistent and
clinically relevant strengthening of neural connections and restored voluntary movement in previously paralyzed muscles. Further
study is needed to confirm whether long-term paired associative stimulation can be used in rehabilitation after spinal cord injury by
itself and, possibly, in combination with other therapeutic strategies.
Spinal Cord Series and Cases (2016) 2, 16016; doi:10.1038/scsandc.2016.16; published online 14 July 2016
INTRODUCTION
There is a need for safe, noninvasive treatments to be applied at
the acute and chronic stages after spinal cord injury (SCI).
Therapeutic strategies being developed for the acute stage of
SCI aim at sparing or restoring at least part of the corticospinal
tract.1 In parallel, it is crucial to develop approaches that would
strengthen the weak connections that are spared or restored. In
cell and animal models, plastic changes that lead to strengthening
of neuronal connectivity (long-term potentiation (LTP)) can be
induced by electrical stimulation.2 In humans, LTP-like plasticity
can be achieved by noninvasive brain stimulation.
One of the noninvasive brain stimulation methods extensively
studied in healthy subjects is paired associative stimulation
(PAS).3,4 In PAS, noninvasive transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) is synchronized with noninvasive peripheral nerve electrical
stimulation (PNS); signals are timed to coincide at synapses at
cortical3 or the spinal cord5–7 level to enhance corticospinal
neuron excitability. A single PAS session applied to one nerve can
induce transient (up to 90 min)4 plasticity in healthy subjects;
importantly, one work in healthy subjects has shown that the
effect of the protocol repeated for 3 days lasts for at least 2 days
after the last stimulation session.8 Transient plasticity has also
been induced by PAS in SCI patients,9,10 but effects of repetitive
PAS in SCI patients have never been reported.
PAS combines beneficial effects of both TMS and PNS while
avoiding several detrimental effects. For example, PAS pulse pairs
are delivered once every 5 s. Repetitive TMS (rTMS) without
concomitant PNS can have positive effects in incomplete SCI
patients for 2–3 weeks;11,12 however, in SCI patients, high-intensity
TMS is needed to effectively activate the corticospinal tract,13 and
long-term use of high-frequency and high-intensity rTMS may be
contraindicated for SCI patients with head injury, as rTMS reduces
the seizure threshold.13,14 In contrast, PAS utilizes less risky
low-frequency TMS.
PNS without TMS (for example, peripheral nerve somatosensory
stimulation or vibration) is also beneficial in the rehabilitation
of
incomplete
SCI
patients.15
They
are
applied
only
for
muscles that have remaining voluntary activity and must be
applied simultaneously with voluntary activations of targeted
muscles.15–18 Studies of rTMS and transcranial direct cortical
stimulation are also based on patients with preserved voluntary
activity in the muscles under investigation.11,12,18 PAS induces
plasticity in humans without concomitant effort by the subject;4
we
thus
hypothesized
that
long-term
PAS
could
be
a
1Clinical Neurosciences, Neurology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; 2BioMag Laboratory, HUS Medical Imaging Center, University
of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; 3Department of Radiology, HUS Medical Imaging Center, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland; 4Department of Physics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; 5Clinical Neurosciences, Clinical Neurophysiology, HUS Medical Imaging Center, University of
Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland and 6Validia Rehabilitation Center, Helsinki, Finland.
Correspondence: A Shulga (anastasia.shulga@helsinki.fi)
7These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received 4 February 2016; revised 20 May 2016; accepted 28 May 2016
Citation: Spinal Cord Series and Cases (2016) 2, 16016; doi:10.1038/scsandc.2016.16
© 2016 International Spinal Cord Society All rights reserved 2058-6124/16
www.nature.com/scsandc
 technique that could affect also those muscles which are fully
paralyzed.
Ability of PAS to strengthen neuronal connections persistently
and induce clinically relevant effects after SCI is not known. To
address this question, we recruited two chronic SCI patients with
incomplete motor affision. We show that spinal PAS consisting
of TMS combined with peripheral trains of high-frequency
stimulation, applied for a sufficient period of time, is capable of
restoring voluntary control over previously paralyzed muscles.
PATIENTS AND METHODS
Patients
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Helsinki University
Hospital. Both patients signed an informed consent before the interven-
tion. Both were healthy before the accident that led to the SCI. Both had
standard decompression/fixation surgery immediately after the accident.
Methylprednisolone was not given (according to national guidelines). The
standard-of-care rehabilitation was initiated as soon as possible and
continued before the study and in parallel with the study. The amount of
physical rehabilitation was not increased during the study. After the study,
the newly acquired movements were incorporated into the rehabilitation
by the patients’ own physiotherapists. The magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) images of the patients’ spinal cord at the acute stage and at the
beginning of the project are presented in Figure 1.
A 31-year-old paraplegic female, (patient A; American Spinal Injury
Association Impairment Scale (AIS) C, height 163 cm, right-handed;
neurological level L1) sustained SCI, due to a falling accident (L1 burst
fracture) 2 years and 2 months before enrollment in the study, resulting in
incomplete paraplegia. Figures 1a and b demonstrate that the area of the
acute damage and the chronic posttraumatic atrophy is above the end of
conus medullaris; the patient thus sustained SCI and not a cauda equina
injury. Immediately after injury, she had no motor activity in the legs, and
the sensory level was at L1 bilaterally. During the first 6 months after injury,
she regained activity in the lower limb muscles above the knee level, but
remained fully paralyzed below the knee level; there was no further
neurological improvement for at least 1 year before the beginning of the
study. The lower-extremity motor score before intervention was right/left:
L2 4/3, L3 5/4 and L4-S1 0/0. Her standard-of-care rehabilitation program
consists of physiotherapy two times per week. Patients with SCI at the
thoracolumbar level often have preserved volitional movements in the
proximal muscles and absent responses in the distal muscles;14 our patient
thus is a typical example of this group. The spinal cord independence
measure (SCIM) score of the patient is 76; she uses a wheelchair.
A 53-year-old male (patient B; AIS C, height 174 cm, right-handed;
neurological level C3) sustained SCI due to a traffic accident (C3-5
fractures) 2 years and 3 months before the study, resulting in incomplete
tetraplegia. He had some preserved muscle activity in all muscle groups.
However, part of his hand muscles were fully paralyzed, and he was not
able to grasp (see Supplementary Table for detailed motor scores of the
upper limbs). The AIS motor score of the upper limbs was stable during the
year before the study; the upper-extremity right/left motor score was:
C5 1/1, C6 1/1, C7 1/2, C8 1/3 and T1 1/1. A small syrinx cavity was
visualized in the MRI of the spinal cord (Figure 1d). The patient was
clinically diagnosed with a mild brain injury, but the head MRI was normal.
His standard-of-care rehabilitation consists of physiotherapy three times
per week and occupational therapy two times per week (given on the
same days as physiotherapy), as well as 20–30 min neuromuscular
electrical stimulation three times per week to biceps, shoulders, buttocks,
wrists and abdomen. The neuromuscular electrical stimulation is given
symmetrically and equally to both sides. The symptoms of autonomic
dysreflexia were extremely rare. The SCIM score is 0; he uses a wheelchair
and needs an assistant.
Medication and nutrition of the patients
To ensure that lack of vitamins or minerals would not constrain a possible
therapeutic effect, both patients were instructed to take daily a
multivitamin tablet at a standard dose. At the beginning of the
intervention, patient A used nortriptylline 10 mg and pregabalin 550 mg
per day. During the first week of the intervention, she could reduce the
pregabalin dose to 300 mg per day and, starting from week 6, to 225 mg
per day. Patient B used mirtazapin 30 mg, temazepam 10 mg, clonazepam
2 mg and baclofen 60 mg daily (only drugs affecting the central nervous
system are listed).
Timetable of the stimulation
The timetable is described in Figure 2. The 2- and 1-weeks gaps were
introduced into the program of patient A, because she was traveling.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation
TMS was delivered by an eXimia magnetic stimulator (Nexstim Ltd.,
Helsinki, Finland). The stimulation frequency was 0.2 Hz (Figure 3a). The
stimulation intensity was 90% of the stimulator output for patient A and
100% stimulator output for patient B. Our MRI-guided TMS navigation
Figure 1.
Spinal MRI from patients A and B at the acute (a, c) and
chronic (b, d) stages. (a) Patient A. Sagittal T2-weighted fast spin-echo
(FSE) image of the lumbar spine achieved with 1.5-T MRI scanner.
White star: L1 burst fracture and abnormal narrowing of the spinal
canal due to fracture displacement. White arrow: conus medullaris
ends at the level of L2 vertebra. The fractured L1 was stabilized with
transpedicular fixation through Th12 and L2. The image was taken
1 week after the injury (unrelated to the research project). (b) Patient
A. Sagittal T2-weighted FSE image of the lumbar spine, 3-T MRI
scanner. Posttraumatic atrophy of the distal spinal cord is visualized
(white star). White arrow: the end of conus medullaris (indicated with
white arrow in (a)). The scan was taken before the first stimulation of
the right leg. (c) Patient B. Sagittal T2-weighted FSE image of the
cervical spine achieved with 1.5-T MRI scanner. There is T2 signal
increase representing spinal cord contusion at the C2–C4 level (left-
pointing white arrows). C4 and C5 processus spinosi are fractured
(white stars). Soft-tissue edema as well as disruption of the C3/4
anterior longitudinal ligament and discus (right-pointing white arrow)
are visualized. The image was taken 1 day after the injury (unrelated to
the research project). (d) Patient B. Sagittal T2-weighted three-
dimensional image of the cervical spine, 3-T MRI scanner. Posttrau-
matic atrophy of the spinal cord (black arrows) and trauma-induced
syringomyelia (white arrow) at the C3/4 level are visualized. The scan
was taken before the first stimulation.
Paired associative stimulation: long-term use
A Shulga et al
2
Spinal Cord Series and Cases (2016) 16016
© 2016 International Spinal Cord Society
 system (Navigated Brain Stimulation 4.3 (NBS 4.3), Nexstim Ltd., Helsinki,
Finland) ensured that the TMS stimulation targets of the PAS protocol were
the very same at every stimulation session. The sites of cortical stimulation
were selected separately for each peripheral nerve to be paired in PAS.
For patient B, the targets were selected by mapping the motor cortex.
We selected the sites where the motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) were
most readily elicited from the abductor pollicis brevis, abductor digiti
minimi and brachioradialis muscles to pair them with the median, ulnar
and radial nerve stimulations, respectively. For patient A, such mapping
was challenging, because the representation area of the quadriceps
muscle had spread over almost the entire lower limb representation area
in the primary motor cortex. Consequently, stimulation of several sites
caused quadriceps contraction and movement artifacts in the MEPs. We
selected the sites separately for the peroneal and tibial nerves, partly by
predicting the location of the optimal sites, based on brain anatomy, and
partly by examining the MEPs recorded from the abductor hallucis muscle
for the tibial nerve, and the extensor digitorum brevis/tibialis anterior (TA)
muscles for the peroneal nerves. From these MEPs, we selected as targets
the points that repeatedly produced similar responses.
Electrical peripheral nerve stimulation
Dantec Keypoint electroneuromyography device (Natus Medical Inc.,
Pleasanton, CA, USA) and surface electrodes (Figures 3d–h) (Neuroline
720; Ambu A/S, Ballerup, Denmark) were used for PNS delivered as 50-Hz
trains of 1-ms biphasic square-wave pulses for 100 ms (Figure 3a). The
stimulation intensity was 25 mA. During radial nerve stimulation, the
electrodes were gently pressed against the skin.
Paired associative stimulation
We aimed at the simultaneous arrival of the pre- and postsynaptic volleys at
the corticomotoneuronal synapses. In patient B, we measured the MEP
latencies and F-responses from the abductor pollicis brevis muscle to
estimate the interstimulus interval (ISI) for PAS involving the median nerve,
from the abductor digiti minimi muscle for PAS involving the ulnar nerve,
and from the brachioradialis muscle for PAS involving the radial nerve. We
then calculated the ISIs between the TMS and the first pulse of the PNS train
using the formula (F-latency minus MEP latency), as described in our previous
work.19 According to these calculations, for the right hand we used the − 1-
ms interval (TMS before PNS) for PAS involving the ulnar and radial nerves
and the +1-ms (TMS after PNS) for PAS involving the median nerve. For the
left hand, we used the ISIs of -4 (ulnar and median) and −5 (radial) ms.
In patient A, we did not calculate the ISI, because the determination of
her MEP latency was challenging (see above). We chose a 0-ms ISI (see
Figure 2.
Time course of the experiment. *During weeks 7 and 13, PAS was given only two times per week, **during weeks 5 and 12,
stimulation was given two times per week.
Figure 3.
PAS protocol and the sites of stimulation. (a) Schematic
representation of stimulation protocol. PNS pulse width: 1 ms.
(b) Cortical sites of TMS for patient A were paired with stimulation
of
the
contralateral:
yellow–peroneal
nerve,
red–tibial
nerve.
(c) Cortical sites of TMS for patient B were paired with stimulation
of the contralateral: red–median nerve, yellow–ulnar nerve and
blue–radial nerve. (d–h) Peripheral electrode location for stimulation
of the: (d) tibial nerve (medial side of the ankle behind the medial
malleolus) (e) peroneal nerve (frontal side of the ankle), (f) ulnar
nerve (medial side of the wrist), (g) median nerve (middle of the
wrist) and (h) radial nerve (lateral side of the arm).
Paired associative stimulation: long-term use
A Shulga et al
3
© 2016 International Spinal Cord Society
Spinal Cord Series and Cases (2016) 16016
 Discussion section for the choice of protocol including 50-Hz PNS and its
possible effect on ISIs). The PNS and TMS were triggered by Presentation
software (Neurobehavioral Systems Inc., Albany, CA, USA).
Both patients received PAS for 1 h per limb. In patient A, the duration
was 30 min per nerve, and the stimulation was applied to the tibial and
peroneal nerves. In patient B, the stimulation was applied for 20 min to
each of the median, radial and ulnar nerves.
During PAS and during control PNS (see below), the patients were
instructed to focus on the movements (to have the movement on their
mind; not to attempt the performance of the movement) produced by the
muscles innervated by the stimulated nerves.
Selection of side of the treatment
For patient A, the order of the treatment (first left leg, then right leg) was
selected randomly. For patient B, we selected the right dominant hand for
PAS and left hand for control PNS (see below), since the patient was
presumed to be more motivated for a long pilot treatment if possible
positive outcome would occur in the dominant hand.
Control PNS
To ensure that the observed effects were not due to PNS only, we applied
PAS first only to the right hand of patient B. For the left hand, we applied
only PNS of the median nerve with the same settings as in PAS, but
without concomitant TMS, for 20 min immediately after the PAS sessions
of all three nerves for the right hand. After 12 weeks of control PNS
stimulation, we continued with 12 weeks of PAS for the left hand.
Since we did not include the corresponding control condition for patient A,
we performed 3 PAS and 3 sessions with PNS only on age- and gender-
matched healthy control individual (32-year-old female). PAS protocol was the
same as in patients and was applied for 20 min to right tibial nerve/left motor
cortex. TMS intensity was 100% stimulator output and PNS intensity 15 mA.
MEPs were measured from right abductor hallucis muscle immediately after
and 1 h after PAS or PNS. MEP amplitudes did not increase immediately after
PAS (112 ±12%, n=3 sessions), but did increase significantly 1 h after PAS
(130±1%, P=0.01 by paired sample t-test, n =3 sessions). After PNS alone
there was no increase in MEP amplitudes immediately after (90±2%, n =3
sessions) and 1 h after (72±15%, n=3 sessions) PNS.
Clinical evaluation of the patients
A physician evaluated the sensory scores. Two physiotherapists, with long
experience in working with SCI patients, evaluated the motor scores of
each muscle, manually immobilizing other muscles during testing. The
same physiotherapist and the same physician evaluated all motor scores of
one patient before, during and after intervention. Standard scales of the
AIS examination sheet were used. The evaluators were not blinded to the
treatment, but did not have the results of the previous evaluations
available during examination.
Please see Supplementary Videos.
EMG and MEP recordings
An electromyogram (EMG) was recorded with the built-in EMG device of
our TMS system (eXimia NBS 4.3). The examiner requested the patient to
Figure 4.
EMG recordings from patient A. Vertical gray lines: event of the command to move the foot. (a) Right medial gastrocnemius (GC)
muscle during plantarflexion (foot down). (b) Right TA muscle during dorsiflexion (foot up). (c) Left medial GC during plantarflexion. (d) Left TA
during dorsiflexion. See also Supplementary Videos 1 and 2. See Figure 5 for control recordings.
Paired associative stimulation: long-term use
A Shulga et al
4
Spinal Cord Series and Cases (2016) 16016
© 2016 International Spinal Cord Society
 move, and simultaneously pressed the foot switch to mark the onset of the
movement attempt in the EMG recording. The EMG was processed offline,
using Python (Python Software Foundation, Beaverton, OR, USA). The
signal was band-pass-filtered between 20 and 300 Hz with a Chebyshev
type II filter and notch-filtered at 50 ± 1 Hz. The MEPs were recorded with
the same equipment; 30 MEPs were sampled at an interval of 3.3 s and
quantified offline with Nexstim NBS 4.3 software. In calculating the average
amplitude values, the stimuli eliciting no MEPs were counted as 0. For
graphical presentation of the results, the MEP traces were averaged using
MATLAB (MathWorks Ltd., Nattick, MA, USA) software. All measurements
were done at least 2 days after PAS session.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Project-related MRI images at the chronic stage were acquired with a
3-T Siemens Verio (Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) scanner. The
imaging protocol included structural sequences of the head and spinal
cord at the C2–C3 level and the area of injury.
Statement of ethics
We certify that all applicable institutional and governmental regulations
concerning the ethical use of human volunteers were followed during the
course of this research.
RESULTS
Motor function
For Patient A, we applied PAS that included the tibial and peroneal
nerves (Figures 3d and e), first to the left leg and later to both legs
regularly three times per week (Figure 2). The cortical stimulation
site paired with each nerve was selected separately (Figure 3b).
After the injury, the patient had been able to imagine moving the
left ankle, but lost this ability some months after the injury.
Four weeks after the first PAS of the left leg, the patient reported
that she could again imagine the movements. At 5–6 weeks we
observed first movements at foot dorsiflexion and plantarflexion.
At 8 weeks after the first PAS, we recorded EMG activation during
voluntary plantarflexion (Figure 4c). The EMG activation during
dorsiflexion could be observed at week 20 (Figure 4d).
During the left leg PAS of patient A, the right leg remained
paralyzed below the knee level. The ability to move the right ankle
emerged 3-4 weeks after PAS onset for the right leg, and we
recorded EMG activation at 8 weeks (Figures 4a and b).
Importantly, the patient was able to move the feet also in the
absence of stimulation (Supplementary Videos 1 and 2). At the
1-month evaluation after the last PAS session, the ability to move
was preserved (Figure 4). The control EMGs are shown in Figure 5.
The motor scores of the lower limb muscles not innervated by the
peroneal and tibial nerves did not improve.
For
patient
B,
three
different
left
hemisphere
cortical
stimulation sites (Figure 3c) were paired with the stimulation of
the right median, ulnar and radial nerves. We also stimulated the
median nerve of the left hand without concomitant TMS to
investigate the impact of PNS alone. We observed a rapid increase
in the motor score of the right hand muscles (Figure 6 and
Supplementary Table). The patient regained the ability to grasp
objects (Supplementary Video 3). PNS alone did not affect the
muscles innervated by the left median nerve (Figure 6 and
Supplementary Table). At the evaluation 1 month after the last
PAS session, the increase in the motor score was preserved
(Figure 6 and Supplementary Table). After the 12-week control
PNS of the left hand was completed, we gave PAS to the same
hand for 12 weeks. We observed an increase in the motor score of
the left hand (Figure 6 and Supplementary Table). After 12 weeks
of PAS, there was also a robust improvement in the muscles that
were not innervated by the radial, median or ulnar nerves
(Supplementary Table).
MEP measurements
In patient A, the MEP amplitudes in the TA muscle were decreased
to 55 ± 20% immediately (0 min) after PAS, whereas in the
gastrocnemius muscle they remained at 97 ± 8%. In patient B,
the MEP amplitude in the abductor pollicis brevis muscle
decreased to 32 ± 6% (for each muscle, n = 3 measurements on
different days, 30 MEPs per measurement). The long-term
outcome of the PAS, however, was a robust growth in the MEP
amplitudes over time (Figure 7). This increase in MEP amplitudes
Figure 5.
Control recordings of the EMG traces shown in Figure 4.
(a) EMG from right medial gastrocnemius (GC) during medial
inversion of the hip. The recording was made at the same session as
the one shown in Figure 4a (12-week trace). (b) EMG from left TA
during contraction of quadriceps femoris muscle without attempt to
dorsiflex the ankle. The recording was made in the same session as
the one shown in Figure 4d (20-week trace).
Figure 6.
Motor score of the right and left upper limbs of patient B before (pre-intervention) and 7 (mid-intervention) and 12
(post-intervention) weeks after the first stimulation. Follow-up: 1 month after the last stimulation session. Scores for median, ulnar, radial and
other nerves are shown separately. See Supplementary Table for details. See also Supplementary Video 3.
Paired associative stimulation: long-term use
A Shulga et al
5
© 2016 International Spinal Cord Society
Spinal Cord Series and Cases (2016) 16016
 Figure 7.
Neurophysiological measurements from both patients. (a) MEP recordings from patient A (left leg) and patient B (right arm). Each
trace is an average of 30 MEPs taken in a row at a 3.3-s ISI. BR, brachioradialis muscle (patient B); GC, gastrocnemius muscles; TA, TA muscle
(patient A). Short latencies of MEPs from patient A are explained by the short height of the patient (163 cm); the latency for the vastus
medialis muscle in the left leg was 24 ms. (b, c) MEP amplitudes during different weeks of stimulation. Follow-up: 1 month after the last
stimulation session. The values are averages of 30 MEPs taken in a row. If no MEP was evoked by a stimulus, the amplitude was counted as 0.
The values thus represent both amplitude and persistence of the MEPs. (b) MEPs in the paraplegic individual (left leg). (c) MEPs in the
tetraplegic individual (right arm), ADM, abductor digiti minimi. Left APB: recordings during control PNS.
Paired associative stimulation: long-term use
A Shulga et al
6
Spinal Cord Series and Cases (2016) 16016
© 2016 International Spinal Cord Society
 persisted for at least 1 month after the last stimulation session
(Figures 7b and c). The MEP latencies decreased by 1–1.6 ms in
patient B (but not after the control PNS), and remained the same
in patient A.
Neuropathic pain
Before PAS, patient A reported almost daily throbbing bilateral
pain in close proximity to the L2 sensory level. The level of pain
was 3–6 on the Visual Analog Scale (VAS; 0-no pain; 10-worst
possible pain). During the first week after PAS, the pain diminished
bilaterally, although only the left leg/right cerebral hemisphere
was stimulated. During the 6-month experiment, the patient
experienced pain (VAS 4—5) only on 11 days (half of these 11 days
were associated with an infection). During the 2 weeks of no
stimulation (Figure 2), the pain did not reappear. During the
follow-up period (1 month), the patient experienced pain (VAS 5)
during 4 days, the pain being associated only with provoking
stimuli.
Before the experiment, patient B reported pain of VAS 7 in the
right shoulder and scapular area about three times per week. After
10 PAS sessions, the pain occurred about once in 2 weeks (VAS 7),
and only in the shoulder area. During the follow-up period
(1 month), the incidence and area of pain did not increase.
Sensory scores
The treatment did not affect the sensory scores significantly. In
Patient A, the C2-L1 scores were normal (grade 2 for each segment
in light-touch and pin-prick scores). In the L2-S5 area, the sum of
light-touch and pin-prick scores was 7 before intervention,
8 at week 8 and 9 at week 20. The patient did regain the ability
to feel the ankle movements. In patient B, the sum of light-touch
and pin-prick scores in the C2-T10 area on the right/left sides was
21/16 before and 20/14 after the intervention.
Autonomic functions and spasticity
The
patients
reported
no
effects
on
autonomic
functions.
Spasticity, assessed by the modified Ashworth scale, was not
significantly reduced. Patient A had no spasticity before or after
the intervention. The level of spasticity in patient B varied daily.
Adverse effects
Both patients reported occasional transient musculoskeletal pain
in the back or neck region, resulting from 1.5–3 h of sitting in the
same position during PAS. No other adverse effects were reported.
Immediately after stimulation, we observed redness of the skin
under the stimulating electrodes. This redness resulted from the
increased blood flow in the stimulated region rather than from
mechanical damage to the skin and disappeared in a few hours.
No seizures were observed.
DISCUSSION
Spontaneous recovery 1.5 years after incomplete SCI is rare.20 In
this proof-of-principle study, we demonstrate in two individuals
with chronic incomplete SCI that long-term PAS is capable of
returning some voluntary control over paralyzed muscles. Our
study is the first applying PAS more than once to SCI patients. We
are aware of only one report describing PAS delivered more than
once to a group of neurological patients; in ambulatory chronic
stroke patients, 4 weeks of PAS improved several gait measures.21
SCI patients may be more responsive to PAS than stroke patients;
in stroke, the upper motor neurons are damaged, whereas in SCI,
both the upper and lower motor neurons can be preserved and
only the connectivity between them needs to be re-established.
Our results suggest that a stimulation period exceeding 4 weeks
may be needed to observe the full effect.
We used trains of 50 Hz instead of commonly used single-pulse
or 10-Hz trains4 for PNS in PAS. The combination of TMS with
single peripheral pulses leads to an LTP-like effect at a very limited
range of ISIs; at ISIs outside this range, PAS leads to no effect or to
long-term depression-like plasticity.4,10 In a long-term treatment,
the initially calculated ISI would need to be constantly adjusted, as
conductivity may change over time. Moreover, it is plausible that
the residual fibers after SCI have a wide range of conductivities.
A single high-intensity TMS pulse results in a high-frequency
repetitive discharge of corticospinal neurons.22 The combination
of high-intensity TMS pulses with 50-Hz trains for the peripheral
component of PAS could enable LTP-like effects at wider ranges of
ISIs. Spike-time dependent plasticity is dependent not only on
spike timing, but also on the firing rate, the number of coactive
synaptic inputs and the postsynaptic voltage.23 The 20-ms pulse
interval in a stimulus train may increase the probability of some
of the orthodromic and antidromic volleys arriving at the
corticomotoneuronal synapses within the LTP-inducing window.
When LTP-inducing and long-term depression-inducing timing
interactions occur at the same time, LTP can override long-term
depression.24 We demonstrate here in a healthy individual (see
Methods scetion – control PNS) that PAS with 50 Hz peripheral
component induces MEP facilitation at 1 h after stimulation,
whereas control 50 Hz PNS does not; the absence of MEP
facilitation immediately (0 min) after PAS most probably results
from fatigue of the muscle induced by strong peripheral
stimulation, corresponding to phenomenon observed in the
patients.
We used high-intensity PNS to ensure its efficacy; in SCI patients
the excitability of the peripheral neurons is low.25 Although our
parameters are comparable to those used in routine clinical
neurophysiology
diagnostics
and
are
considered
safe,
this
stimulation intensity would be uncomfortable for a person with
normal sensation. However, both patients tolerated it well, due to
reduced or lack of sensation in the areas where stimulation was
delivered.
Both patients were instructed to focus on the movements
produced by the muscles innervated by the stimulated nerves
during PAS and PNS. It has been previously shown that attention
is critical for PAS-induced plasticity in human motor cortex.26 PAS
procotol enhances the output of the corticospinal tract; it is
possible that thinking about the corresponding movement
during PAS protocol activates also secondary motor areas. Further
research is required to dissect out whether mental concentration
is required for reported therapeutic effects.
In patient A, the treatment was first given to left leg only; during
this time, the right ankle remained paralyzed. In patient B, PNS
and mental concentration on the movement of the left hand
alone did not improve the motor score, whereas subsequent PAS
of the same hand did improve motor performance. Importantly,
we show that when PAS was later applied to the same hand, there
was an improvement in the motor scores; this verifies that the
combination of TMS, PNS and possibly mental concentration on
the movement is responsible for the observed effect of the
intervention. We did not include the control condition in which
TMS would be used without PNS. Low-frequency TMS is, however,
known to have an inhibitory effect,27 and thus it is highly
improbable that TMS alone would have accounted for the
obtained results.
In patient B, the muscles not innervated by the stimulated
nerves showed robust improvement as well, whereas in patient A
there was no such effect. As the hand muscle function is highly
interconnected, better performance of the muscles that were
innervated by the stimulated nerves could have enabled the
patient to use also the other muscles more effectively. It is also
possible that high-intensity TMS and PNS enabled spread of the
activation to adjacent cortical sites and peripheral nerves,
respectively.
Paired associative stimulation: long-term use
A Shulga et al
7
© 2016 International Spinal Cord Society
Spinal Cord Series and Cases (2016) 16016
 Activation of some non-target muscles can be observed on the
Supplementary Videos during motor performance. During clinical
evaluations, the results of which are presented in this study,
each muscle was assessed by the physiotherapist one-by-one with
other muscles immobilized.
In both patients, the MEPs increased over time in all muscles
tested, but no MEP increase was observed immediately after the
PAS sessions (similar phenomenon was observed in the healthy
control individual, see above). The most probable explanation is
fatigue in the initially very weak muscles caused by the 50-Hz
high-intensity PNS.
The sensation scores were not improved. This is not surprising,
because PAS specifically targeted the motor tracts. It remains to
be seen whether long-term PAS protocols can be developed to
also target the sensory tracts28 in SCI patients.
Our study was based on two patients with different levels of
injury and has several limitations. It is a pilot proof-of-principle
study and thus is open-labeled. The main outcome of the
treatment was the appearance of the voluntary movement in
the ankles of patient A and the appearance of the ability to grasp
objects in patient B; the newly acquired voluntary movements did
not lead to increase in SCIM scores (which reflect self-care
capability). Nevertheless, even a weak movement, instead of no
movement at all, will prevent problems associated with complete
paralysis, such as the susceptibility to venous thrombosis, and may
also have a psychological impact. Furthermore, our study leaves
open the question of the optimal duration of the stimulation; it
remains to be seen whether further neurological improvement
could be achieved if the stimulation were continued for longer
periods of time.
Both patients received conventional rehabilitation in parallel
with the study; our research team did not influence the
rehabilitation programs, and the exact role played by the
rehabilitation in the observed effects remains open. The physical
rehabilitation was not increased concurrently with the initiation of
PAS. Patient A received no rehabilitation for the ankle muscles
before the appearance of the movements; this effect was thus due
to PAS only. Both patients received the same conventional
rehabilitation for 2 years before the study, and there was no
improvement in motor scores during the year before PAS.
In chronic complete SCI, the surgical implantation of an epidural
electrical stimulator enabled partial restoration of voluntary
movement in paralyzed muscles when the stimulator was turned
on.29,30 We have demonstrated that in incomplete chronic SCI,
noninvasive stimulation can improve motor performance without
surgery or robotic devices. The adult injured corticospinal tract has
capacity for sprouting and adaptive reorganization at multiple
levels.31,32 Our results justify further research of PAS applied at
earlier stages after SCI, before onset of irreversible muscle
changes.33 Regeneration is only a first step in restoring function;
the axons growing beyond the site of SCI need to make useful
connections as well.1 Further investigation is warranted to explore
whether PAS could enhance the benefit of other repair strategies.
Modifying PAS parameters and possibly applying the stimulation
for even longer periods of time may further improve the
outcomes.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are deeply grateful to our patients for their cooperation and patience. We thank
David Montero-Danger, Suvi Lehto and Outi Nikkilä for excellent technical assistance
and Andrey Zhdanov and Victor Pavlushkov for help with the MATLAB and Python.
We thank Professor Eero Castrén for participation in evaluation of mechanism
underlying the treatment. This study was supported by the Emil Aaltonen Foundation
(AS), Maire Taponen Foundation (AS), Centre for International Mobility (AZ) and the
SalWe Research Program for Mind and Body (Tekes–the Finnish Funding Agency for
Technology and Innovation grant 1104/10; BioMag Laboratory).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conception and design of the study by AS, PL, EK, SS, AY and JPM. Acquisition,
analysis and interpretation of the data by AS, PL, AZ, NB, LK, EK, SS and JPM.
Drafting of the manuscript by AS. All authors contributed to the critical revision
of the manuscript for important intellectual content, approval of the final
version and accountability for all aspects of the work.
COMPETING INTERESTS
PL reports personal fees from Nexstim Ltd., outside the submitted work. The
remaining authors declare no conflict of interest.
REFERENCES
1 Ramer LM, Ramer MS, Bradbury EJ. Restoring function after spinal cord injury:
towards clinical translation of experimental strategies. Lancet Neurol 2014; 1312:
1241–1256.
2 Dan Y, Poo MM. Spike timing-dependent plasticity of neural circuits. Neuron 2004;
441: 23–30.
3 Stefan K, Kunesch E, Cohen LG, Benecke R, Classen J. Induction of plasticity in the
human motor cortex by paired associative stimulation. Brain 2000; 123:
Pt 3572–Pt 3584.
4 Carson RG, Kennedy NC. Modulation of human corticospinal excitability by paired
associative stimulation. Front Hum Neurosci 2013; 7: 823.
5 Taylor JL, Martin PG. Voluntary motor output is altered by spike-timing-
dependent changes in the human corticospinal pathway. J Neurosci 2009; 2937:
11708–11716.
6 Cortes M, Thickbroom GW, Valls-Sole J, Pascual-Leone A, Edwards DJ. Spinal
associative stimulation: a non-invasive stimulation paradigm to modulate spinal
excitability. Clin Neurophysiol 2011; 12211: 2254–2259.
7 Leukel C, Taube W, Beck S, Schubert M. Pathway-specific plasticity in the human
spinal cord. Eur J Neurosci 2012; 10: 1622–1629.
8 McKay DR, Ridding MC, Thompson PD, Miles TS. Induction of persistent changes
in the organisation of the human motor cortex. Exp Brain Res 2002; 1433:
342–349.
9 Roy FD, Yang JF, Gorassini MA. Afferent regulation of leg motor cortex
excitability after incomplete spinal cord injury. J Neurophysiol 2010; 1034:
2222–2233.
10 Bunday KL, Perez MA. Motor recovery after spinal cord injury enhanced by
strengthening
corticospinal
synaptic
transmission.
Curr
Biol
2012;
2224:
2355–2361.
11 Benito J, Kumru H, Murillo N, Costa U, Medina J, Tormos JM et al. Motor and gait
improvement in patients with incomplete spinal cord injury induced by high-
frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation. Top Spinal Cord Inj Rehabil
2012; 182: 106–112.
12 Belci M, Catley M, Husain M, Frankel HL, Davey NJ. Magnetic brain stimulation can
improve clinical outcome in incomplete spinal cord injured patients. Spinal Cord
2004; 427: 417–419.
13 Ellaway PH, Vasquez N, Craggs M. Induction of central nervous system plasticity
by repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation to promote sensorimotor recovery
in incomplete spinal cord injury. Front Integr Neurosci 2014; 8: 42.
14 Nardone R, Holler Y, Brigo F, Orioli A, Tezzon F, Schwenker K et al. Descending
motor pathways and cortical physiology after spinal cord injury assessed by
transcranial magnetic stimulation: a systematic review. Brain Res 2014; 1619:
139–154.
15 Field-Fote
EC.
Exciting
recovery:
augmenting
practice
with
stimulation
to optimize outcomes after spinal cord injury. Prog Brain Res 2015; 218: 103–126.
16 Beekhuizen KS, Field-Fote EC. Sensory stimulation augments the effects of
massed practice training in persons with tetraplegia. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2008;
894: 602–608.
17 Backus D, Cordo P, Gillott A, Kandilakis C, Mori M, Raslan AM. Assisted movement
with proprioceptive stimulation reduces impairment and restores function in
incomplete spinal cord injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2014; 958: 1447–1453.
18 Gomes-Osman J, Field-Fote EC. Cortical vs afferent stimulation as an adjunct to
functional task practice training: a randomized, comparative pilot study in people
with cervical spinal cord injury. Clin Rehabil 2015; 298: 771–782.
19 Shulga A, Lioumis P, Kirveskari E, Savolainen S, Makela JP, Ylinen A. The use of
F-response in defining interstimulus intervals appropriate for LTP-like plasticity
induction in lower limb spinal paired associative stimulation. J Neurosci Methods
2015; 242: C112–C117.
20 Fawcett JW, Curt A, Steeves JD, Coleman WP, Tuszynski MH, Lammertse D et al.
Guidelines for the conduct of clinical trials for spinal cord injury as developed
by
the
ICCP
panel:
spontaneous recovery
after
spinal
cord
injury
and
Paired associative stimulation: long-term use
A Shulga et al
8
Spinal Cord Series and Cases (2016) 16016
© 2016 International Spinal Cord Society
 statistical power needed for therapeutic clinical trials. Spinal Cord 2007; 453:
190–205.
21 Uy J, Ridding MC, Hillier S, Thompson PD, Miles TS. Does induction of plastic
change in motor cortex improve leg function after stroke? Neurology 2003; 617:
982–984.
22 Di Lazzaro V, Ziemann U, Lemon RN. State of the art: Physiology of transcranial
motor cortex stimulation. Brain Stimul 2008; 14: 345–362.
23 Feldman DE. The spike-timing dependence of plasticity. Neuron 2012; 754: 556–571.
24 Sjostrom PJ, Turrigiano GG, Nelson SB. Rate, timing, and cooperativity jointly
determine cortical synaptic plasticity. Neuron 2001; 326: 1149–1164.
25 Dietz V. Behavior of spinal neurons deprived of supraspinal input. Nat Rev Neurol
2010; 63: 167–174.
26 Stefan K, Wycislo M, Classen J. Modulation of associative human motor cortical
plasticity by attention. J Neurophysiol 2004; 921: 66–72.
27 Hallett M, Berrardelli A. Movement disorders. In: Epstein CM, Wassermann EM,
Ziemann U (eds). Oxford Handbook of Transcranial Stimulation. Oxford University
Press:New York, USA, 2008.
28 Wolters A, Schmidt A, Schramm A, Zeller D, Naumann M, Kunesch E et al.
Timing-dependent plasticity in human primary somatosensory cortex. J Physiol
2005; 565: 1039–1052.
29 Harkema S, Gerasimenko Y, Hodes J, Burdick J, Angeli C, Chen Y et al. Effect of
epidural stimulation of the lumbosacral spinal cord on voluntary movement,
standing, and assisted stepping after motor complete paraplegia: a case study.
Lancet 2011; 377: 1938–1947.
30 Angeli CA, Edgerton VR, Gerasimenko YP, Harkema SJ. Altering spinal cord
excitability enables voluntary movements after chronic complete paralysis
in humans. Brain 2014; 137: 1394–1409.
31 Raineteau O, Schwab ME. Plasticity of motor systems after incomplete spinal
cord injury. Nat Rev Neurosci 2001; 4: 263–273.
32 Rosenzweig ES, Courtine G, Jindrich DL, Brock JH, Ferguson AR, Strand SC et al.
Extensive spontaneous plasticity of corticospinal projections after primate spinal
cord injury. Nat Neurosci 2010; 1312: 1505–1510.
33 Biering-Sorensen B, Kristensen IB, Kjaer M, Biering-Sorensen F. Muscle after spinal
cord injury. Muscle Nerve 2009; 404: 499–519.
Supplemental Information accompanies the paper on the Spinal Cord Series and Cases website (http://www.nature.com/scsandc)
Paired associative stimulation: long-term use
A Shulga et al
9
© 2016 International Spinal Cord Society
Spinal Cord Series and Cases (2016) 16016
