 1 
 
Physical Activity Counseling in Primary Care: Insights from 
Public Health & Behavioral Economics 
Kerem Shuval, PhD*,1 Tammy Leonard, PhD2, Jeffrey Drope, PhD1, David 
L. Katz, MD, MPH3, Alpa V. Patel PhD4, Melissa Maitin-Shepard, MPP5, On 
Amir, PhD6, and Amir Grinstein, PhD7  
1Economic and Health Policy Research Program, American Cancer Society, Atlanta, GA 
2 Department of Economics, University of Dallas, Irving, TX 
3Yale University Prevention Research Center, Griffin Hospital, Derby, CT 
4Epidemiology Research Program, American Cancer Society, Atlanta, GA 
5American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Washington, DC 
6 Rady School of Management, University of California San-Diego, La Jolla, CA 
7 D’Amore-McKim School of Business, Northeastern University, Boston, MA; and VU Amsterdam, Faculty 
of Economics and Business Administration, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Running title: Physical Activity & Primary Care 
Key words: Motor activity, Exercise, Counseling, Primary Health Care, Economics, Behavioral 
Number of text pages: 36; Number of Tables: 1; Number of Figures: 0. 
Funding: No funding was received for this study. 
Conflict of Interest: The authors have no conflict of interests pertaining to this study. 
Author contribution: Kerem Shuval and Tammy Leonard: Conception and design, interpretation of 
data/material, writing- original draft, and reviewing and editing subsequent drafts. Jeffrey Drope: 
Conception and design, interpretation of data/material, and writing- review and editing including critical 
review, commentary or revision. David Katz, Alpa Patel, Melissa Maitin-Shepard, On Amir, and Amir 
Grinstein: interpretation of data/material, and writing- review and editing including critical review, 
commentary or revision. 
*  Address correspondence to: Dr. Kerem Shuval, American Cancer Society. 250 Williams Street, 
Atlanta, GA, 30303. Phone #: 404-3297981; Fax #: 404-3276450; Email: Kerem.shuval@cancer.org. 
 2 
 
Abstract 
Physical inactivity has reached epidemic proportions in modern society. Abundant evidence points 
to a causal link between physical inactivity and increased risk for numerous non-communicable 
diseases, such as some types of cancer and heart disease, as well as premature mortality. Yet, 
despite this overwhelming evidence, many individuals do not meet the recommended amount of 
physical activity required to achieve maximum health benefits. Since primary care physicians’ 
advice is highly regarded, clinicians have the unique opportunity to play an important role in 
enabling patients to modify their behavior at the point of care with the goal of guiding patients to 
adopt and maintain an active lifestyle. In the current study, we evaluate pertinent literature from 
the fields of medicine/public health and economics/psychology to suggest a comprehensive 
approach to physical activity counseling at the primary care level. We first examine the public 
health approach to physical activity counseling, and then proceed to offer insights from behavioral 
economics, an emerging field that combines principles from psychology and economics. The 
application of key behavioral economics tools (e.g. pre-commitment contracts, framing) to 
physical activity counseling in primary care is elaborated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
Introduction 
The evidence on the beneficial effects of a physically active lifestyle have been known since the 
1950s, and have been summarized into recommendations with the 1996 Surgeon General Report 
on Physical Activity & Health, the 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans, the Surgeon 
General Call for Action to Promote Walking and Walkable Communities (2015), and the National 
Physical Activity Plan.1–6 Initial evidence was offered in a seminal study by Morris et al. (1953) 
that found the incidence of coronary heart disease to be markedly lower among active conductors 
on double deck buses in London than the bus drivers who had a sedentary occupation.7,8 Since then 
abundant evidence has accumulated linking physical inactivity to increased risk not only of 
coronary heart disease, but also for numerous other chronic conditions, such as some types of 
cancer, type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome, stroke, and depression. 3,9,10 In fact, Lee et al. (2012), 
in an analysis of burden of disease worldwide, estimated that insufficient physical activity 
increases the risk for coronary heart disease by 33%, type 2 diabetes by 20%, and breast and colon 
cancer by 33% and 32%, respectively.9 In addition, Moore et al. (2016), examining prospective 
pooled data on 1.44 million adults, found that high levels of leisure time physical activity are 
associated with lower risk of incurring 13 types of cancer, such as 17% and 13% risk reductions 
for myeloma and rectal cancer, respectively.10 Moreover, among cancer survivors, physical 
activity has been associated with improved survival and has a positive impact on their physical 
function, fatigue, depression, and quality of life.11,12   
Despite this evidence, physical inactivity has become nearly ubiquitous, with an estimated 
31% of the world not meeting the recommended levels of physical activity.1 In the United States 
(US), 51.0% of adults do not meet aerobic physical activity guidelines (based on self-report), and 
~96.5% of adults aged 20-59 years do not meet guidelines based on objective measurement (i.e. 
 4 
 
accelerometry).13,14 Numerous strategies have been attempted to increase physical activity levels 
as a means of combating chronic disease, however, unlike the public health success of tobacco 
control in the US,7 physical activity rates have declined, particularly with regards to transportation, 
occupational, and household related activity.1,15 Leisure time physical activity, however, has 
remained relatively constant. To combat physical inactivity, an important avenue for research and 
practice has been physical activity promotion through primary care. Since primary care physicians’ 
advice is highly regarded, they have the opportunity to motivate patients to change their behavior 
during the physician-patient encounters, which are frequent.16,17 Specifically, 83% of adults and 
92.4% of children had contact with health care professionals in 2014.18 Yet numerous challenges 
affect clinicians’ ability to provide physical activity counseling to their patients. Impediments 
include lack of training on the topic of physical activity counseling, lack of time during the clinical 
encounter, competing tasks and priorities, and insufficient organizational support and financial 
incentives to provide counseling.16,17,19  
While the field of public health offers a number of strategies and frameworks to facilitate 
lifestyle counseling to patients in primary care,20 the primary focus is on cognitive behavioral 
approaches to behavior change following the belief that patients’ decision making is guided by 
conscious factors. The field of behavioral economics (the integration of psychology and 
economics),21 has the potential to complement the public health perspective by acknowledging 
that decision making is influenced by both conscious and unconscious factors which affect choices. 
Moreover, behavioral economics allows for a closer assessment of the decision-making process 
that underlies observed individual physical activity levels. This assessment could potentially lead 
to a clearer understanding of the barriers that impede the decision to become more physically active 
and, in many cases, gives rise to tools that may be used to help overcome those barriers.22 It should 
 5 
 
be noted, however, that while paradigms from public health have been utilized consistently to 
promote physical activity (with mixed success), the application of behavioral economics to the 
field of physical activity, though promising, is preliminary and the evidence is accumulating.23–25 
Nonetheless, behavioral economics can offer insight not only into identifying barriers in the 
decision making process, but also into leveraging a more in-depth understanding of this process to 
aid in promoting physical activity. In the current study, we summarize pertinent literature from the 
fields of medicine/public health and economics/psychology to bring an integrated approach to 
physical activity counseling in primary care. We first examine the public health approach to 
physical activity counseling, and then proceed to offer insights from behavioral economics relevant 
to modifying lifestyle behavior. We conclude by presenting a practical approach to physical 
activity counseling integrating both approaches into the realities of primary care. This integrated 
approach warrants empirical examination in future research.  
 
Physical Activity and Public Health 
The evidence on the detrimental health effects of insufficient physical activity has accumulated 
over the past several decades and has culminated in guidelines underlining the importance of adults 
engaging in at least 150 minutes of moderate intensity physical activity and/or 75 minutes of 
vigorous intensity activity per week, or an equivalent combination.3 These guidelines also indicate 
that children and adolescents should engage in at least 60 minutes each day of moderate to vigorous 
intensity physical activity. Meeting physically activity guidelines is essential to promote health. 
Booth et al. (2002) indicate that from an evolutionary perspective, the human genome has been 
programed to be physically active, and deviating from an active lifestyle has led to the rise of 
 6 
 
chronic diseases.26 While hunter-gatherers spent most of the day moving about just to provide food 
and shelter, in modern society physical activity is not as necessary.26,27  This stems from modern 
society that has ‘engineered’ physical activity out of our daily lives due to increased automation 
at home and on the job.28 In fact, when individuals aim to re-integrate activity into their daily 
routines, they encounter impediments on multiple levels. That is, there are barriers on the 
individual (e.g. lack of time), social (e.g. social support), environmental (exercise facilities), and 
policy levels (e.g. land use policies).29 Intervention programs aimed at increasing the adoption and 
maintenance of physical activity have traditionally focused on the individual level, with mixed 
success.30 To this end, the Guide to Community Preventive Services also recommends interventions 
that focus on enhancing the physical environment (e.g. connectivity of sidewalks) to be conducive 
for an active lifestyle.31 Policy and legislative changes (e.g. physical education requirement) have 
also been suggested as effective approaches to promote physical activity.32    
 
Physical Activity Counseling in Primary Care 
The doctor-patient encounter is an important opportunity for lifestyle counseling as a preventive 
medicine measure.16,33 Several randomized controlled trials have examined the impact of primary 
care providers’ lifestyle counseling on their patients’ physical activity habits and health outcomes. 
For example, the PACE+ study found that primary care-based physical activity counseling (either 
over the phone or by mail) is a feasible means for increasing self-reported physical activity over 
the short term (4-month period) among adults.34 The Green Prescription Program, where providers 
delivered physical activity counseling to their inactive patients during regular visits, found that 
leisure time physical activity increased by 9.7% among patients in the intervention group in 
 7 
 
comparison to the control.35 While the intervention was efficacious over a 12-month period in 
increasing both reported physical activity and quality of life, it did not affect patients’ blood 
pressure or cardiovascular risk. Other interventions were not as fruitful, such as a study by Hillsdon 
et al. (2002) that found that advice to increase physical activity did not significantly increase study 
participants’ energy expenditure over the follow-up period. 36 
In fact, The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) states that based on the current 
evidence, providing patients (without prevalent chronic diseases) with behavioral counseling 
pertaining to increased physical activity in primary care will only result in a small benefit resulting 
in an evidence level of ‘C’.37 However, there is a higher level of evidence (level ‘B’) regarding the 
benefits of providing physical activity counseling (as well as dietary counseling) to patients with 
cardiovascular disease risk factors, obesity, and abnormal glucose levels.38,39 It should be noted, 
as of 2016, that the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act requires coverage of USPSTF A 
and B rated preventive services with no cost sharing for eligible patients in non-grandfathered 
private plans, marketplace (exchange) plans, and expanded Medicaid.40–42 In addition, Medicare 
Part B covers, without cost sharing, obesity screening and counseling to patients with a body mass 
index of 30 and above.43  
A number of organizations suggest incorporating physical activity counseling into primary 
care, irrespective of the existence of a chronic condition, due to the overwhelming evidence on the 
health benefits of physical activity, rather than the effectiveness of physical activity counseling by 
clinicians3,19. The American College of Sports Medicine in collaboration with The American 
Medical Association have initiated Exercise is MedicineTM,44 emphasizing that physical inactivity 
should be considered a “vital sign” in primary care; that is, physical activity should be assessed in 
the clinic alongside other clinical measures, such as blood pressure and weight status.44,45 Hence, 
 8 
 
clinicians should routinely assess physical activity in primary care and prescribe physical activity 
to reduce the incidence of chronic disease and/or as a way to manage chronic conditions (e.g. type 
2 diabetes) and weight maintance.44 Similarly, in the UK, the National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence (NICE), recommends that primary care providers identify patients who are not 
sufficiently active and subsequently provide physical activity counseling.46 In addition, the 
Healthy People 2020 objectives include a goal of increasing the number of physician visits where 
physical activity counseling is provided to all patients, and also to those who are diagnosed with a 
chronic condition (e.g. diabetes).47  
Moreover, there have been calls in leading medical journals (e.g. JAMA) to incorporate 
physical activity counseling in primary care as a preventive medicine measure.48,49 They suggest, 
based on accumulating evidence, that merely advising patients to engage in physical activity is not 
sufficient to facilitate behavior change.20,33 The 5A framework (Assess, Advise, Agree, Assist, 
Arrange) has been suggested as an effective way to encourage patients to adopt physical activity. 
Specifically, Estabrooks et al. (2003) suggests that patients’ levels of activity should be assessed 
in the waiting room by clinic staff.20 This should be followed by the clinician advising the patient 
on the recommended amount, type, and intensity of the activity. Linking this physical activity 
advice to recent laboratory reports indicating the patients’ risk for disease has been suggested, 
though this suggestion warrants further investigation.20 Furthermore, the patients’ readiness to 
change (e.g. stages of change) should be determined and a plan should be tailored to this his/her 
stage of change.50 After this stage, both patient and clinician should agree upon an action plan and 
set attainable activity goals tailored to the patient. The assist phase includes identifying 
impediments to adopting the activity plan and addressing barriers on the personal (e.g. lack of 
time), social (e.g. assisting with social support), and community levels (community opportunities 
 9 
 
for physical activity).20,29 The final stage of the 5A framework includes arranging follow-up visits 
and reminders with the ultimate goal of increasing adherence to the physical activity program.  
The success of the Green Prescription program (previously described),35 likely stems from 
the fact that many of the components of the 5A model were an integral part of the intervention.20 
For example, after the patients received the physical activity prescription, they discussed the plan 
with a primary care professional and jointly agreed on goals.35 In addition, a copy of the activity 
plan was sent to a local sports organization that followed up with patients to encouraged them to 
adhere to their program.35  However, when attempting to implement the 5A approach in the context 
of a busy clinical setting, clinicians encountered some challenges, such as lack of time.51 More 
broadly, outside of the context of a clinical trial, physicians encounter numerous impediments 
when attempting to provide physical activity counseling. Barriers may include insufficient time 
during the patient-physician encounter, insufficient training in the field of physical activity, 
insufficient knowledge on how to counsel effectively, lack of perceived effectiveness of their 
counseling, 
organizational 
barriers, 
insufficient 
counseling 
protocols, 
and 
lack 
of 
reimbursement.17,19 Furthermore, research from the communication and linguistics literature 
suggests that individuals tend to resist (even well-intended) advice from the advice giver (e.g. 
clinician) because it is deemed as asymmetrical and paternalistic in nature.52–54 Finally, clinicians 
who are inactive themselves are less likely to provide physical activity counseling than their active 
counterparts.19  
Indeed, national data from the US and Canada indicate that clinicians are insufficiently 
providing physical activity counseling. In the US, only 32.4% of patients seen by a clinician in 
2010 received physical activity counseling that year.55 The prevalence of physical activity 
counseling was higher for patients with chronic conditions or their risk factors. For example, 
 10 
 
56.3% of diabetic patients received counseling, whereas 46.9% of obese patients were counseled 
on increasing activity.55 In addition, a large Canadian study, examined the physical activity 
counseling habits of over 13,000 physicians. While they found that 85.2% of clinicians asked their 
patients about their physical activity habits, only 26.2% assessed their activity during a physical 
exam or fitness test, and a mere 10.9% referend their patients to others for additional assessments.33 
Thus while physical activity counseling is perceived to be important to clinicians,19 few provide 
comprehensive counseling to their patients. 
 
Physical Activity and Behavioral Economics 
While the public health viewpoint focuses on identification of actions that should be taken to 
reduce morbidity and increase longevity, the economic perspective focuses on the allocation of 
scarce resources to maximize welfare, of which health is only one potential component.56 From an 
economic perspective, the decision to engage in physical activity can be viewed as a decision 
involving an inter-temporal tradeoff between current costs (e.g. time and energy expenditure) and 
future benefits (e.g. improved health).57,58 Physical activity can be regarded as an investment in 
health. Thus, physical activity is an important component of the production of health, which is 
consistent with Becker’s seminal economic theory of investment in human capital and Grossman’s 
adaptation of this model to health.56,58–61 These early traditional economic models assumed that 
individuals were rational decision makers, that individuals had consistent preferences over time, 
and that they made decisions to maximize their utility while having high computational abilities 
and possessing complete information to facilitate decision making.21 More recently, behavioral 
economists have expanded these early models by acknowledging many of these assumptions are 
 11 
 
not always true. In particular, individuals frequently make inconsistent decisions over-time (e.g. 
‘new year’s resolutions’); and rationality is bounded because humans have cognitive limitations 
and limited time to make decisions, which often leads to choices that are not always in their long-
term self-interest.21,62–64 
The inter-temporal trade-off between the costs and benefits of physical activity is a primary 
area of focus for behavioral economists interested in understanding the decision to engage in 
physical activity. Individuals who are willing to ‘pay’ the immediate costs of physical activity to 
obtain health in the future are regarded as having patient time preferences. Having patient time 
preferences, reflective of the ability to delay immediate gratification, has been associated in the 
literature with higher education and income, more financial savings for retirement, better 
preventive health behaviors (e.g. exercising, healthful eating, and not smoking), and improved 
health outcomes (e.g. normal weight status). 57,65–67 In general, most individuals possess impatient 
time preferences, but the degree of patience varies across individuals. It should be noted, that there 
is an inherent complexity when weighing the inter-temporal costs and benefits associated with 
physical activity. Some immediate costs of physical activity are salient and certain (e.g. ‘I will 
sweat and tire!’), but other costs occur with uncertain probability, such as the likelihood of exercise 
induced injury, which in often unknown. In comparison, the health benefits of physical activity 
are almost always probabilistic and documented in the literature (e.g. improved mental health).3,68 
Furthermore, the decision to engage in physical activity has been associated with risk 
preferences.69 As with time preferences, individuals vary in the degree to which they avoid (or 
seek out) risk, and their ability to accurately assess risk. Individuals who have a greater degree of 
tolerance for risk have been found to be more likely to engage in physical activity.69 
 In summary, behavioral economists have identified some predictable decision biases, 
 12 
 
which, once identified, may be leveraged to facilitate choices that will be beneficial instead of 
detrimental.70,71 Next we will describe pertinent sources of decision biases associated with 
engaging in physical activity. While a large set of cognitive biases have been discussed in the 
behavioral economics literature (e.g. probability matching bias), we focus here on two biases 
which seem especially relevant to the health care context: present-time bias and status quo bias. 
We will discuss strategies suggested by behavioral economics as potential solutions to these biases. 
Both general and specific strategies will be mentioned to facilitate effective physical activity 
counselling. The Table summarizes suggested strategies for each decision bias based on the 5A 
framework, previously described. This suggested integrative framework warrants examination in 
the context of the primary care setting in future research.  
 
------------Insert Table Here---------------- 
 
Present Time Bias 
Impatient time preferences result in individuals being overly focused on the here and now. In the 
case of physical activity, activity can be viewed as a tradeoff between ‘should’ behaviors (e.g. ‘I 
should be physically active to improve my health’), and ‘want’ behaviors (e.g. ‘I want to sit on the 
couch and watch TV’).57,58,72 Since the costs of physical activity are tangible at present (require 
time and energy expenditure) and the benefits are in the future and thus not salient, individuals, 
especially those with impatient time preferences, will tend not to be active.73 While time 
preferences could be consistent over time, they often are not, particularly with respect to decisions 
pertaining to health.  For example, an individual will plan to engage in physical activity tomorrow, 
 13 
 
but when tomorrow arrives, the immediate gratification provided by watching TV instead will 
interfere with his/her plan.22 Individuals deviating from their time consistent plan, are regarded as 
being present time bias with self-control problems arising from temptations leading to immediate 
gratifying behavior. Specifically, self-control problems can be described as an inner struggle 
between two selves residing in one human being: a myopic self in conflict with a farsighted self, 
with the myopic self who cares about immediate gratification having the upper hand. 22,74  This 
might happen daily when the myopic self is able to overcome the farsighted self.  
To explore self-control problems, Ariely and Wertenbroch (2002) examined college 
students’ performance in an academic course based exposure to internal or external restrictions. 
70,75 Specifically, in various sub-studies students were asked to submit class-assignments in three 
distinct ways: (1) Self-imposed deadlines; i.e. students selected the deadlines for the assignments 
themselves and receive a penalty if they did not meet the deadlines; (2) ‘Laissez-faire’ condition, 
i.e. students could submit assignments anytime they wanted until the last day of the semester; and 
(3) Externally imposed deadlines, i.e. the course instructor imposed the deadlines on students. 
Interestingly, the class with the externally imposed deadlines received the highest grades, followed 
by self-imposed deadlines, whereas the lowest grades were obtained by the group where no 
restrictions (either external or internal) were imposed.70 Conclusions from this study are that 
external edicts from an authoritarian power (or figure) appear to be the most effective in solving 
self-control problem followed by the utilization of a pre-commitment tool to self-impose 
restriction to improve well-being, that is, grades in this case. When applying these findings to the 
physical activity realm it appears that most of the population is in the ‘Laissez-faire’ condition, 
that is, there are mostly no restrictions imposed on them. Therefore, increasing physical education 
and activity within schools, and setting active transport as the default option, for example, have 
 14 
 
the potential to have the greatest impact on physical activity behavior. However, when setting 
physical activity as the default is not an option, pre-commitment devices to encourage physical 
activity have the potential to be a feasible and effective approach.   
Pre-commitment Contracts 
Pre-commitment contracts (or devices) consist of self-imposed present day costs or restrictions 
that are aimed at increasing one’s welfare in the future.76 An early example of this concept is from 
Greek Mythology, where Ulysses asked his crew to tie him to the mast of a sailing ship and pour 
wax in the crew’s ears to resist being tempted by singing Sirens who had lured sailors to their 
death. 76–78 A modern day application of this concept has been applied to monetary savings. For 
example, Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2006), in a field experiment, examined how a commitment 
device aimed at restricting individuals access to saving funds impacted their overall savings.76 
Study results find that participants who used the commitment device increased their savings by 
81% in comparison to the pre-intervention levels.76 However, 28% of participants did not use the 
commitment device. Those willing to commit could be regarded as sophisticated (i.e. cognizant) 
regarding their self-control problems; that is, at present they are committing to help their future 
selves.76 Thus it is important to increase the awareness of those who are naïve about being present-
bias, in order to enable them to enhance their welfare through the opportunity of utilizing pre-
commitment devices. An additional example comes from the realm of monetary savings: Thaler 
and Benartzi’s (2004) saving program, Save More Tomorrow™, in which participants committed 
in advance to saving future raises in their salary towards retirement.66 Indeed, study findings 
indicated that those who joined the plan increased their saving rates from 3.5% to 12.6% over a 40 
month time period.66  
 15 
 
In addition, a pre-commitment contract could be applied by depositing a sum of money to 
a third party that would be lost or given to charity, if pre-determined goals are not met.73 Since 
humans tend to be loss averse,79 that is, they are more sensitive to losses than the prospect of 
gains,21 the thought of losing even a relatively small sum of money, will encourage adherence to 
the goals they aim to accomplish. This approach has been used successfully in weight loss 
interventions and in smoking cessation programs,80,81 and could be applied to encourage adherence 
to physical activity guidelines. For example, a study by Gine, Karlan and Zinman (2010), found 
that a voluntary commitment contract aimed to help smokers quit increased the likelihood of 
smoking cessation both at 6 and 12-month follow-up periods as measured by a urine test for both 
nicotine and cotinine.82 Similarly, Royer et al. (2015), in a large scale field experiment in a 
Fortune-500 company, found that pre-commitment contracts offered at the end of a brief incentive 
program aimed at increasing gym attendance, lead to sustained behavior change.24   
Financial Incentives  
Providing financial incentives can aid in overcoming present-time bias by increasing the saliency 
of the future benefits of present day behaviors.57 That is, providing financial incentives now for a 
desired behavior (e.g. physical activity) moves the benefits (e.g. improved health) from the future 
into the present via monetary incentives.58 A systematic review by Mitchell et al. (2013) on the 
effects of financial incentives on physical activity, found that incentives not only positively impact 
behavior during the intervention period, but also remain after they subside.83 Furthermore, Mitchell 
suggests that financial incentives are most successful when they are provided for objectively 
determined behavior, such as steps measured via pedometers or gym attendance measured 
electronically, that incentives are guaranteed (versus lottery), and that incentives are most effective 
for previously inactive adults.83 Charness and Gneezy (2009), similarly found that financial 
 16 
 
incentives significantly increased gym attendance for inactive adults; that is, incentives were 
helpful in habit formation, and once incentives were withdrawn, individuals continued to exercise. 
23,84 Loewenstein et al. (2016), found that short run and very modest incentives provided to children 
significantly increased their fruit and vegetable consumption, even after the end of the 
intervention.85 However, it should be noted that the above mentioned incentives were provided as 
part of experiments. While clinicians cannot be expected to provide financial incentives to patients 
on a regular basis, some employers offer incentives. In addition, it is feasible for clinicians to 
provide symbolic encouragement to be physically active at each visit or suggest that patients 
reward themselves. Clinicians can also mention to patients that they could potentially receive 
incentives from their employers for healthy behaviors leading to improved health outcomes.86,87 
Clinicians could also indicate to obese patients, for example, that they may be eligible for weight 
loss counseling including physical activity and dietary changes at no cost sharing (no copayment, 
co-insurance, or deductible) to them.88   
 
Strategies for Dealing with Present Time Bias in the Clinical Setting 
Within the 5A model, when assessing patients’ physical activity levels, clinicians could 
also inquire about patients’ self-control problems (e.g. ‘are you able to hold off on eating a 
tempting chocolate cake laying right in front of you?’), and later suggest strategies to overcome 
present time bias. For example, clinicians could suggest pre-commitment tools when jointly setting 
physical activity goals (i.e. ‘Agree’ phase) and when providing strategies to overcome barriers 
(‘Assist’ phase).20 For example, Karlan, along with colleagues, developed a commercial 
application of pre-commitment contracts, StickK.com, where individuals can enter into a contract 
 17 
 
and deposit money based on pre-determined goals, such as exercising regularly.89 Clinicians (or 
supporting staff) can help patients set-up these tools in advance. A commitment contract can also 
be between friends or colleagues at work in the form of a binding social agreement to engage in 
physical activity daily, such as going for a walk daily during lunch time. In addition, for some 
patients the immediate gratification provided by high step counts from pedometers may offer a 
buffer against the immediate gratification offered by ‘want behaviors’, such as the TV. These step 
counts can be acquired either through walking up the stairs (instead of using the elevator), walking 
to talk to a colleague (instead of emailing), walking meetings, or simply walking for leisure. In 
addition, Milkman et al. (2014) suggested a method of ‘temptation bundling’ to overcome self-
control problems.90 Specifically, in a field experiment, they found that individuals that used ‘low 
brow’ audiobooks at the gym (i.e. a source of immediate gratification) significantly increased their 
attendance at the fitness center in comparison to control group participants who did not use 
audiobooks.72,90 Thus, this strategy could be suggested to patients to increase adherence to their 
physical activity plan. 
In addition, some suggested ways of overcoming present time bias involve improving the 
saliency of future benefits and reducing present costs. For example, making patients aware of the 
direct link between sufficient physical activity and improved health outcomes, through relating 
their lab results to physical activity habits during the patient-doctor encounter;20 this is important 
in making the benefits more salient. In addition, patients experiencing present time bias might 
intend to begin a physical activity program prescribed by their physician, but struggle with 
execution and follow-up. In the clinical setting, after the clinician collaboratively develops a 
physical activity plan with the patient, it is of importance for designated support staff to enroll 
patients in an activity of their choice (e.g. walking club, gym) rather than solely giving them 
 18 
 
instructions. This is likely to help patients in general and with present time bias, in particular, since 
the costs associated with the time and energy required for registration fall under the purview of the 
clinic rather than the patient.  Moreover, identifying opportunities for activity at home (e.g. 
yardwork), in the neighborhood (e.g. walking trails), or for active transport (e.g. cycling to work) 
based on the patient’s preferences can increase the likelihood of adopting and maintaining this 
activity over time.  In addition, identifying social support to regularly engage in the physical 
activity of choice is crucial since this could serve as a binding agreement, thereby increasing the 
likelihood of engaging in physical activity regularly. Furthermore, follow-up appointments should 
be set before the patient has left the clinic so that they are pre-committed to engage in a follow-up 
discussion about the status of their physical activity plan. Finally, clinicians should draw salient 
connections between patients’ behavioral changes and health outcomes during the follow-up 
meetings. For example, clinicians should point out weight maintenance, improved cholesterol 
levels and better glycemic control when they are noted alongside increased physical activity rather 
than assuming patients will draw the cause-effect conclusions themselves. 
 
Status-Quo bias 
A key decision error is based on status quo bias, where individuals tend to take the ‘path of least 
resistance’. Hence, individuals are often unable to make decisions that deviate from what they 
perceive as the status quo. This means that policies establishing default options are very influential 
in determining individual decisions because they effectively set the status quo. The case of organ 
donations, is a case in point, in which nations where the default option is to donate organs (with 
an opt out option) have markedly higher donation rates than countries where the default option is 
 19 
 
not to donate organs (with an opt-in option). Specifically, Johnson and Goldstein (2003) found that 
in European countries that have the ‘opt in’ option for organ donation, the effective consent 
percentage is very low (e.g. Denmark: 4.25%), whereas in countries where with the ‘opt out’ 
option, such as Sweden (85.9%), rates are high.91 Government educational campaigns could 
potentially persuade individuals who live in an ‘opt in’ country to donate organs; however, this 
strategy would likely yield less effective results then setting the default as donating organs, while 
maintaining the ‘opt out’ option. This example is highly applicable to physical activity, since 
individuals often take cues for appropriate levels of activity from their family and peers. For 
example, in families where the norm is to be physically active, the entire family might engage in 
leisure time activity jointly (e.g. cycling), whereas an inactive lifestyle might be the norm in other 
families.92 Additionally, in countries (or cities) with policies and design strategies that promote or 
facilitate active transport (e.g. walking or cycling), transportation-related physical activity rates 
are markedly higher than countries that do not have the infrastructure conducive for active 
transport.93,94 Similarly, school classrooms or office workstations that have standing desks will 
encourage children and adults (respectively) to stand up and move about more, thus leading to 
increased energy expenditure and decreased sitting time.28,95 The evidence-based Guide to 
Community Preventive services recommends community-scale and street-scale urban design and 
land use policies and providing access to places for physical activity, combined with informational 
outreach, as strategies for increasing physical activity.96 When policies and environments facilitate 
and encourage physical activity, people are more likely to be active. In contrast, where the path of 
least resistance is physical inactivity, the status quo in most communities, the population at large 
remains inactive, leading to numerous chronic diseases. 3,14,29 
Asymmetric Paternalism 
 20 
 
A policy approach suggested by behavioral economics to deal with self-harming behaviors is 
asymmetric paternalism.71 Asymmetric paternalism refers to an approach where individuals have 
the opportunity to select one out of a number of alternate options; however, one of the options (the 
one deemed beneficial), is made easier to choose than the others. This approach can help an 
individual achieve his/her own goals, without limiting freedom to choose.71 The asymmetric 
paternalistic approach suggests using choice architecture to facilitate healthy choices.97 For 
example, placing healthy food items at eye level and unhealthy foods away from eyesight will 
encourage choosing healthier items.97 Specifically, Wansink and Hanks (2013) observed that 
arranging healthier foods first at buffets can nudge individuals into selecting these items rather 
than unhealthful options placed further away.98 With regard to physical activity, the asymmetric 
paternalistic approach is well-suited to facilitate physical activity change. A pertinent example is 
encouraging the use of stairwells, by making this option more visible and ‘attractive’ to use (e.g. 
via music or art work) instead of elevators or escalators. This can be conducted in a variety of 
settings, such as workplaces, hospitals, and malls. Signs placed near elevators (or even escalators) 
that nudge people to take the stairs instead of the unhealthy alternative (i.e. using the elevator or 
escalator) are referred to as point of decision prompts. These prompts, along with making 
stairwells move inviting, have been observed to significantly increase stair use in a systematic 
review.31,99 Moreover, schools and workplaces that set the default option as using standing desks 
or integrating physical activity into the course of the day, such as through promoting walking 
meetings or physical activity breaks, will make standing and moving about the norm rather than 
sedentary behavior. 28,100,101 
Framing and Anchoring 
The framing of choices has been found to have a paramount impact on decision-making, 
 21 
 
particularly when making the intertemporal tradeoff between ‘should’ and ‘want’ behaviors. 25,72 
Highlighting the positive attributes of the ‘should behaviors’ (e.g. physical activity) rather than the 
negative ones are important factors which can change the current status quo.102 Thus the public 
health message delivered to patients encouraging them to engage in physical activity should be 
positive and simple.102 For example, First Lady Michelle Obama’s initiative to combat childhood 
obesity, ‘Let’s Move!’, was a good example of a positive and simple message. 102,103 In addition, 
physical activity should be framed as a fun activity (e.g. “go out there, choose an activity you like, 
such as dancing or soccer, and have fun”) rather than an obligatory activity (e.g. “you need to meet 
guidelines because it’s important for improving your health”).25 In addition, a recent study by 
Grinstein and Kronrod (2016) underscored the importance of not only what is said in the health 
message, but also how the message in conveyed.104 Specifically, when encouraging a desired 
behavior (e.g. physical activity), praise can benefit from using an assertive tone, whereas scolding 
should be non-assertive. For example, when examining adherence to the physical activity plan in 
follow-up consultations, the clinician can encourage the patient by stating: “You are regularly 
active according to plan, excellent job!”. However, if the patient is not meeting the agreed upon 
goals, the clinician could state: “You are not meeting the goals you set; you might want to consider 
increasing the frequency of your activity sessions”. An additional factor that should be taken into 
account when providing physical activity counseling is anchoring. Anchoring is a form of priming 
whereby exposure to a reference point impacts subsequent judgment and decision making, often 
without the individual being aware of this effect.105 Social norms can serve as an anchor, where 
both the proximal (e.g. close social network) and distal (e.g. societal norms) influence behavior.25 
In the case of physical activity, changing the norms among friends and family towards a more 
active lifestyle are important factors in behavior change. Additionally, using recent developments 
 22 
 
in information technology to set a desirable anchor (e.g. the entire family strives to exceed 10,000 
steps daily), can encourage an active lifestyle. 106 
 
Strategies for Dealing with Status Quo Bias in the Clinical Setting 
Clinicians should be aware of status quo bias and its potential impact on all stages of the 5A 
process. For example, inactive patients who believe the status quo is to be active regularly may 
exaggerate the degree to which they are active. This could impact accurate assessment of activity. 
In other stages of the 5As, clinicians may leverage status quo bias to encourage adherence to the 
physical activity plan by tailoring their advice. For example, rather than citing statistics about the 
degree to which the US population fails to adhere to physical activity guidelines, clinicians could 
mention success stories of individuals similar to them. Clinicians can also reinforce physical 
activity as a social norm when developing the physical activity plan by identifying specific 
elements of the plan that are commonly undertaken. For example, if a previously inactive 
individual is planning to begin exercising by gradually increasing the frequency and intensity of 
their sessions, the clinician can reinforce this practice by emphasizing that this practice is done by 
many others. For example, the following can be stated: “Did you know that most of my patients 
begin exercising gradually? You’re in good company.” Furthermore, clinicians can assist patients 
in executing physical activity plans by inquiring about their daily routine and helping patients to 
identify common daily opportunities for increased activity such as parks or fitness centers near 
their home, worksite wellness programs, stair usage, use of sit-stand workstations, or ways to 
integrate active transport into the daily routine. Finally, clinicians should be mindful to ensure that 
physical activity counseling is done routinely in their own practices. Having readily available 
 23 
 
physical activity prescriptions, relevant handout material, trained support staff, knowledge of 
physical activity opportunities around them, and connections to physical activity programs and 
resources in the community are all paramount to providing meaningful physical activity 
counseling. In fact, some physicians have begun to create physical activity opportunities for their 
patients with the ‘Walk with a Doc’ initiative.107 There are currently 250 chapters of ‘Walk with a 
Doc’, with 3000 clinicians and health professionals and approximately 200,000 members of the 
community who participate in these walking groups. 
Limitations 
While this study aims to summarize public health and behavioral economics approaches to 
promote physical activity in primary care, there are several limitations that should be 
acknowledged. While taking a comprehensive approach to reviewing pertinent literature, the 
current study should not be interpreted as a systematic review. Additionally, whereas constructs 
from public health have been applied extensively to physical activity promotion, less research is 
available examining the nexus of behavioral economics and physical activity. Therefore, the 
proposed framework linking the 5As with present time and status quo bias should be regarded as 
a suggestion that requires empirical examination in the primary care setting. Finally, although there 
are numerous cognitive biases identified by behavioral economists, the current study focuses on 
the two (present time bias and status quo bias) we deem most relevant to physical activity 
promotion in primary care.  
Conclusion  
Physical inactivity is prevalent in modern society. Since primary care physicians’ advice is 
respected and doctor-patient encounters are frequent, these meetings can be utilized to provide 
 24 
 
physical activity counseling. Consistent and comprehensive physical activity counseling may be 
an important vehicle for reducing the risk of chronic diseases and premature death. Physical 
activity should be assessed in every clinic visit, a detailed physical activity plan should be jointly 
designed with the patient, and goals should be set and monitored. In addition, specific strategies 
should be provided to patients to overcome impediments to activity. While the 5A framework is a 
useful guide to providing effective counseling, behavioral economics might lead to a clearer 
understanding of impediments to physical activity since the decision to engage in physical activity 
is complex and influenced by both conscious and unconscious determinants. Common decision 
errors (i.e. present time bias, status quo bias) are highly relevant to physical activity, and pertinent 
strategies (e.g. pre-commitment contracts, temptation bundling) could be employed to overcome 
these errors. Future research should examine the efficacy and effectiveness of implementing these 
strategies in the context of the primary care setting. While the primary care setting is an important 
avenue to pursue physical activity promotion, it is not the only one. Policies aimed at changing the 
environment to one that is conducive to an active lifestyle are necessary to bring along a sustainable 
change.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 25 
 
Table. Physical activity counseling in primary care: 5As Framework* by decision biases  
5A Component** 
Present Time Bias*** 
Status-Quo Bias*** 
Assess 
Assess physical activity 
levels at baseline and at 
each visit. 
 
 
-Ask the patient about self-control problems; 
briefly explain this phenomenon and 
emphasize how common it is. Emphasize 
that strategies will be provided to help 
achieve activity goals. 
-Be aware that patients’ perceptions of the 
status quo regarding physical activity could 
impact their reported activity.   
 
Advise 
Advise on increasing 
physical activity levels. 
Relate patient’s lab 
results/ symptoms to 
physical inactivity.  
 
 
-Increase patients’ awareness of the link 
between physical activity levels and 
improved health; relating lab results to 
health behavior increases the saliency of the 
benefits of activity.   
 
-Use positive and simple language to deliver the 
public health message of physical activity; 
frame activity as fun.  
-Mention success stories of individuals similar 
to your patient.  
Agree 
Agree on physical 
activity plan that is 
tailored to the patient’s 
interests and 
preferences; jointly set 
goals and milestones. 
Provide detailed 
counseling on the 
frequency, intensity and 
type of activity.  
 
 
- Discuss the challenges often encountered 
when executing future plans. 
-Agree with patients that the future health 
benefits of physical activity are real and 
valuable. 
 
-Reinforce that physical activity is the social 
norm; identify specific elements of the plan that 
are commonly undertaken by others.   
Assist 
Provide pertinent 
strategies to overcome 
impediments to meeting 
physical activity goals.  
 
 
 
-Encourage the use of pre-commitment 
contracts (e.g. pre-depositing money),**** 
and binding “contracts” with family/friends 
or personal trainer to engage in physical 
activity regularly. 
- Suggest using temptation bundling: 
combine ‘want’ behaviors (e.g. TV viewing 
 
-Inquire about your patient’s daily routine and 
help them identify common opportunities for 
increased activity as the default option, such as 
worksite wellness programs, stair usage, the use 
of sit-stand workstations, and joining a physical 
activity program (e.g. ‘Walk with a Doc’). 
 
 26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
on IPad) with ‘should’ behaviors (e.g. 
walking on treadmill).  
- Suggest the use of pedometers or other 
monitoring device (e.g. Fitbit) and set to a 
specific goal (e.g. 10,000 steps a day); this 
provides tangible feedback that may buffer 
the immediate gratification of “want” 
behaviors. 
- Actively enroll patients in an activity of 
their choice (e.g. walking club); this will the 
reduce the ‘costs’, e.g. costs for the patient 
associated with registration.     
- Encourage lifestyle changes for the whole 
family; this will change the social norms and 
set the default as an active lifestyle.  
-  Set activity monitors to meet a goal, such as 
setting prompts on the Fitbit for standing up 
and moving about every 30 min during a day at 
the office. This will facilitate changing the 
status quo from sedentary to more active. 
 
Arrange 
Arrange follow up 
visits and reminders. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
-Arrange follow-up meetings pertaining to 
meeting physical activity goals before 
patients leave the clinic; this will pre-
commitment patients to come back.   
-Draw salient connections between 
patients’ behavioral changes and health 
outcomes (e.g. weight maintenance) 
during the follow-up meetings. 
 
- Establish that physical activity should be the 
status quo and maintain this “theme” 
throughout all follow-up visits. 
- Arrange to have reminders sent to patients to 
engage in activities with others that are 
physically active to reinforce that physical 
activity is the status quo. 
 
* The 5As (Assess, Advise, Agree, Assist, Arrange) is a framework used to provide physical activity counseling.  
** Based on Estabrooks et al. (2003). 20 
*** Individuals deviating from their time consistent plan are regarded as being present time bias with self-control 
problems arising from temptations that result in immediate, gratifying behavior. Status quo bias is a decision error in 
which individuals tend to take the ‘path of least resistance’; that is, they are often unable to make decisions that deviate 
from what is the default option. 
**** Pre-commitment contracts (or devices): consist of self-imposed present day costs or restrictions that are aimed 
at increasing one’s welfare in the future.  
 
 
 
 27 
 
 
References 
1.  
Kohl HW, Craig CL, Lambert EV, et al. The pandemic of physical inactivity: global 
action for public health. Lancet. 2012;380(9838):294-305. 
2.  
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Nutrition, Physical Activity and Obesity: 
Data, Trends and Maps. https://nccd.cdc.gov/NPAO_DTM/. 
3.  
Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee. Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory 
Committee Report, 2008. Washington, DC; 2008. 
4.  
The Surgeon General. Step It Up! The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Promote 
Walking and Walkable Communities. Washington, DC; 2015. 
http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/calls/walking-and-walkable-communities/. 
5.  
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Physical Activity and Health: A Report 
of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA; 1996. 
6.  
National Coalition for Promoting Physical Activity. National Physical Activity Plan. 
http://www.ncppa.org/national-physical-activity-plan. 
7.  
Cummings K. Smoking isn’t cool anymore: The success and continuing challenge of 
public health efforts to reduce smoking. J Public Heal Manag Pract. 2016;22:5-8. 
8.  
Paffenbarger RS, Blair SN, Lee I-M. A history of physical activity, cardiovascular health 
and longevity: the scientific contributions of Jeremy N Morris, DSc, DPH, FRCP. Int J 
Epidemiol. 2001;30:1184-1192. 
 28 
 
9.  
Lee I-M, Shiroma EJ, Lobelo F, Puska P, Blair SN, Katzmarzyk PT. Effect of physical 
inactivity on major non-communicable diseases worldwide: an analysis of burden of 
disease and life expectancy. Lancet. 2012;380(9838):219-229. 
10.  
Moore SC, Lee I, Weiderpass E, et al. Association of Leisure-Time Physical Activity 
With Risk of 26 Types of Cancer in 1.44 Million Adults. JAMA  Intern Med. 
2016;176:816-825. 
11.  
Kushi LH, Doyle C, McCullough M, et al. American Cancer Society Guidelines on 
Nutrition and Physical Activity for Cancer Prevention Reducing the Risk of Cancer With 
Healthy Food Choices and Physical Activity. CA Cancer J Clin. 2012;62:30-67. 
12.  
Fong DYT, Ho JWC, Hui BPH. Physical activity for cancer survivors: meta-analysis of 
randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2012;344:e70. 
13.  
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Exercise or Physical Activity. 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/exercise.htm. Accessed August 7, 2016. 
14.  
Troiano RP, Berrigan D, Dodd KW, Mâsse LC, Tilert T, McDowell M. Physical activity 
in the United States measured by accelerometer. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2008;40(1):181-
188. 
15.  
Ng SW, Popkin BM. Time use and physical activity: a shift away from movement across 
the globe. Obes Rev. 2012;13(8):659-680. 
16.  
Shuval K, DiPietro L, Skinner CS, et al. “Sedentary behaviour counselling”: the next step 
in lifestyle counselling in primary care; pilot findings from the Rapid Assessment Disuse 
Index (RADI) study. Br J Sports Med. 2014;48(19):1451-1455. 
 29 
 
17.  
Katz DL, Shuval K, Comerford BP, Faridi Z, Njike VY. Impact of an educational 
intervention on internal medicine residents’ physical activity counselling: the Pressure 
System Model. J Eval Clin Pract. 2008;14:294-299. 
18.  
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Ambulatory Care Use and Physician office 
visits. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/physician-visits.htm. Accessed November 5, 2016. 
19.  
Hébert ET, Caughy MO, Shuval K. Primary care providers’ perceptions of physical 
activity counselling in a clinical setting: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med. 
2012;46:625-631. 
20.  
Estabrooks PA, Glasgow RE, Dzewaltowski DA. Physical activity promotion through 
primary care. JAMA  J Am Med Assoc Estabrooks PA, Glas RE, Dzewaltowski DA Phys 
Act Promot through Prim care JAMA 2003;289(22)2913-2916. 2003;289(22):2913-2916. 
21.  
Thorgeirsson T, Kawachi I. Behavioral economics: Merging Psychology and Economics 
for Lifestyle Interventions. Am J Prev Med. 2013;44(2):185-189. 
22.  
Roberto CA, Kawachi I, eds. Behavioral Economics & Public Health. 1st ed. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press; 2016. 
23.  
Charles G, Gneezy U. Incentives to Exercise. Econometrica. 2009;77(3):909-931. 
24.  
Royer BH, Stehr M, Sydnor J. Incentives, Commitments, and Habit Formation in 
Exercise: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Workers at a Fortune-500 Company. 
Am Econ J Appl Econ. 2015;7(3):51-84. 
25.  
Zimmerman FJ. Using behavioral economics to promote physical activity. Prev Med 
(Baltim). 2009;49(4):289-291. 
 30 
 
26.  
Booth FW, Chakravarthy M, Spangenburg EE. Exercise and gene expression: 
physiological regulation of the human genome through physical activity. J Physiol. 
2002;543(2):399-411. 
27.  
Bey L, Hamilton MT. Suppression of skeletal muscle lipoprotein lipase activity during 
physical inactivity: a molecular reason to maintain daily low-intensity activity. J Physiol. 
2003;551(Pt 2):673-682. 
28.  
Shuval K, Barlow CE, Finley CE, Gabriel KP, Schmidt MD, Defina LF. Standing, 
Obesity, and Metabolic Syndrome: Findings from the Cooper Center Longitudinal Study. 
Mayo Clin Proc. 2015;90:1524–1532. 
29.  
Sallis JF, Cervero RB, Ascher W, Henderson KA, Kraft MK, Kerr J. An ecological 
approach to creating active living communities. Annu Rev Public Health. 2006;27:297-
322. 
30.  
Faridi Z, Shuval K, Njike VY, et al. Partners reducing effects of diabetes (PREDICT): a 
diabetes prevention physical activity and dietary intervention through African-American 
churches. Health Educ Res. 2010;25(2):306-315. 
31.  
The Guide to Community Preventive Services. Environmental and Policy Approaches to 
Increase Physical Activity: Community-Scale Urban Design Land Use Policies. 
http://www.thecommunityguide.org/pa/environmental-policy/communitypolicies.html. 
32.  
Robertson-Wilson J, Dargavel M, Bryden P, Giles-Corti B. Physical activity policies and 
legislation in schools: a systematic review. Am J Prev Med. 2012;43(6):643-649. 
33.  
Petrella RJ, Lattanzio CN, Overend TJ. Physical Activity Counseling and Prescription 
 31 
 
Among Canadian Primary Care Physicians. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167(16):1774-1781. 
34.  
Calfas KJ, Sallis JF, Zabinski MF, et al. Preliminary Evaluation of a Multicomponent 
Program for Nutrition and Physical Activity Change in Primary Care : PACE+ for Adults. 
Prev Med (Baltim). 2002;161:153-161. 
35.  
Elley CR, Kerse N, Arroll B, Robinson E. Effectiveness of counselling patients on 
physical activity in general practice: cluster randomised controlled trial. Br Med J. 
2003;326(793). 
36.  
Hillsdon M, Thorogood M, White I, Foster C. Advising people to take more exercise is 
ineffective: a randomized controlled trial of physical activity promotion in primary care. 
Int J Epidemiol. 2002;31:808-815. 
37.  
U.S. Preventive Service Task Force. Healthful Diet and Physical Activity for 
Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Adults: Behavioral Counseling. 
https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/RecommendationStateme
ntFinal/healthful-diet-and-physical-activity-for-cardiovascular-disease-prevention-in-
adults-behavioral-counseling. 
38.  
U.S. Preventive Service Task Force. Healthful Diet and Physical Activity for 
Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Adults With Cardiovascular Risk Factors: 
Behavioral Counseling. 
https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/RecommendationStateme
ntFinal/healthy-diet-and-physical-activity-counseling-adults-with-high-risk-of-cvd. 
39.  
U.S. Preventive Service Task Force. USPSTF A and B Recommendations. 
 32 
 
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/uspstf-a-and-b-
recommendations/. Published 2016. Accessed January 1, 2016. 
40.  
U.S. Department of Labor. FAQs about Affordable Care Act Implementation (Part XXIX) 
and Mental Health Parity Implementation. https://www.dol.gov/ebsa/faqs/faq-aca29.html. 
Published 2015. Accessed January 1, 2016. 
41.  
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Reducing Obesity. 
https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid-chip-program-information/by-topics/quality-of-
care/reducing-obesity.html. Accessed January 1, 2016. 
42.  
Public Law 111-148. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-111publ148/pdf/PLAW-111publ148.pdf. 
Published 2010. Accessed January 9, 2016. 
43.  
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. National Coverage Determination (NCD) for 
Intensive Behavioral Therapy for Obesity (210.12). https://www.cms.gov/medicare-
coverage-database/details/ncd-
details.aspx?NCDId=353&ncdver=1&NCAId=253&ver=6&NcaName=Intensive+Behavi
oral+Therapy+for+Obesity&bc=AiAAAAAAIAAA&. Accessed June 10, 2016. 
44.  
American College of Sports Medicine. Exercise is Medicine. 
http://www.exerciseismedicine.org/. 
45.  
Coleman KJ, Ngor E, Reynolds K, et al. Initial Validation of an Exercise “‘Vital Sign’” in 
Electronic Medical Records. Med Sci Sport Exerc. 2012;44(11):2071-2076. 
46.  
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Physical activity: brief advice for adults 
 33 
 
in primary care. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ph44. Published 2013. Accessed July 
5, 2016. 
47.  
Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 2020 Topics and Obejectives- 
Physical Activity. Health People.gov. https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics-
objectives/topic/physical-activity. 
48.  
Auyoung M, Linke SE, Pagoto S, et al. Integrating physical activity in primary care 
practice. Am J Med. 2016;129(10):1022-1029. 
49.  
Berra K, Rippe J, Manson JE. Making Physical Activity Counseling a Priority in Clinical 
Practice: The Time for Action Is Now. JAMA J Am Med Assoc. 2016;314(24):2617-2618. 
50.  
Garber CE, Allsworth JE, Marcus BH, Hesser J, Lapane KL. Correlates of the stages of 
change for physical activity in a population survey. Am J Public Health. 2008;98(5):897-
904. 
51.  
Patel A, Schofield GM, Kolt GS, Keogh JWL. General practitioners’ views and 
experiences of counselling for physical activity through the New Zealand Green 
Prescription program. BMC Fam Pract. 2011;12:119. 
52.  
Goldsmith DJ, MacGeorge EL. The Impact of Politeness and Relationship on Perceived 
Quality of Advice about A Problem. Hum Commun Res. 2000;26(2):234-263. 
53.  
Pilnick A, Dingwall R. On the Remarkable Persistence of Asymmetry in Doctor/Patient 
Interaction: A Critical Review. Soc Sci Med. 2011;72(8):1374-1382. 
54.  
Waring HZ. Peer Tutoring in a Graduate Writing Centre: Identity, Expertise, and Advice 
Resisting. Appl Linguist. 2005;26(2):141-168. 
 34 
 
55.  
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Trends in Adults Receiving a 
Recommendation for Exercise or Other Physical Activity From a Physician or Other 
Health Professional. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db86.htm. 
56.  
Cawley J. An economic framework for understanding physical activity and eating 
behaviors. AmJPrevMed. 2004;27(0749-3797 (Print)):117-125. 
57.  
Shuval K, Si X, Nguyen B, Leonard T. Utilizing Behavioral Economics to Understand 
Adherence to Physical Activity Guidelines Among a Low-Income Urban Community. J 
Phys Act Health. 2015;12:947-953. 
58.  
Leonard T, Shuval K. Behavioral Economic Tools for Promotion of Physical Activity. In: 
Rice T, Hanoch Y, eds. Behavioral Economics and Healthy Behaviors: Key Concepts and 
Current Research. United Kingdom: Routledge – Abingdon. 
59.  
Fuchs VR. Economic Aspects of Health. Vol I. National Bureau of Economic Research 
Conference Report; 1982. 
60.  
Grossman M. The human capital model. Handb Heal Econ. 2000;1:347-408. 
61.  
Becker GS. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special 
Reference to Education, 2nd, Ed. Vol I. National Bureau of Economic Research; 1975. 
62.  
Dellavigna S. Psychology and Economics : Evidence from the Field. J Econ Lit. 
2009;47(2):315-372. 
63.  
Chiteji N. Time-preference, Non-cognitive Skills and Well-being across the Life Course: 
Do Non-cognitive Skills Encourage Healthy Behavior? Am Econ Rev. 2010;100(2):200-
204. 
 35 
 
64.  
Huston SJ, Finke MS. Diet Choice and the Role of Time Preference. J Consum Aff. 
2003;37(1):143-160. 
65.  
Shuval K, Leonard T, Nguyen B, Ngo TH, Yaroch AL. Behavioral Economics and Fruit 
& Vegetable Intake: The Fair Park Study. Heal Behav Policy Rev. 2015;2:92-99. 
66.  
Thaler RH, Benartzi S. Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics to Increase 
Employee Saving. J Polit Econ. 2004;112(1):S164-S187. 
67.  
Huston SJ, Finke MS. Diet Choice and the Role of Time Preference. J Consum Aff. 
2003;37(1):143-160. 
68.  
Sin N, Moskowitz J, Whooley M. Positive Affect and Health Behaviors Across 5 Years in 
Patients With Coronary Heart Disease: The Heart and Soul Study. Psychosom Med. 
2015;77(9):1058-1066. 
69.  
Leonard T, Shuval K, de Oliveira A, Skinner CS, Eckel C, Murdoch JC. Health behavior 
and behavioral economics: economic preferences and physical activity stages of change in 
a low-income African-American community. Am J Health Promot. 2013;27(4):211-221. 
70.  
Ariely D. Predicatably Irrational. New York: HarperCollins; 2008. 
71.  
Loewenstein G, Brennan T, Volpp KG. Asymmetric paternalism to improve health 
behaviors. JAMA. 2007;298(20):2415-2417. 
72.  
Milkman KL, Rogers T, Bazerman MH. Harnessing our inner angels and demons: What 
we have learned about want/should conflicts and how that knowledge can help us reduce 
short-sighted decision making. Perspect Psychol Sci. 2008;3(4):324-338. 
 36 
 
73.  
Shuval K, Drope J, Stoklosa M, Yaroch AL, Pachucki M, Harding M. Time Preferences 
and Physical Activity: Insights from Behavioral Economics. Heal Behav Policy Rev. 
2017;4:53-59. 
74.  
Camerer CF, Loewenstein G, Rabin M, eds. Advances in Behavioral Economics. 1st ed. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 2004. 
75.  
Ariely D, Wertenbroch K. Procrastination, deadlines, and performance: self-control by 
precommitment. Psychol Sci. 2002;13(3):219-224. 
76.  
Ashraf N, Karlan D, Yin W. Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence From a Commitment 
Savings Product in the Philippines. Q J Econ. 2006;121:635-672. 
77.  
Soman D, Ainslie G, Frederick S, et al. The Psychology of Intertemporal Discounting: 
Why are Distant Events Valued Differently from Proximal Ones ? Mark Lett. 
2005;16:347-360. 
78.  
Liu PJ, Wisdom J, Roberto CA, Liu LJ, Ubel PA. Using Behavioral Economics to Design 
More Effective Food Policies to Address Obesity. Appl Econ Perspect Policy. 2014;36:6-
24. 
79.  
Kahneman D, Tversky A. Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk. 
Econometrica. 1979;47(2):263-292. 
80.  
Halpern S, Asch D, Volpp K. Commitment contracts as a way to health. BMJ. 
2012;522:e522.doi: 10.1136/bmj.e522. 
81.  
Loewenstein G, Asch D a, Volpp KG. Behavioral economics holds potential to deliver 
better results for patients, insurers, and employers. Health Aff (Millwood). 
 37 
 
2013;32(7):1244-1250. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2012.1163. 
82.  
Giné X, Karlan D, Zinman J. Put Your Money Where Your Butt Is: A Commitment 
Contract for Smoking Cessation. Am Econ J Appl Econ. 2010;2:213-235. 
83.  
Mitchell MS, Goodman JM, Alter DA, et al. Financial Incentives for Exercise Adherence 
in Adults: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Am J Prev Med. 2013;45(5):658-667. 
84.  
Becker GS, Murphy KM. A theory of rational addiction. J Polit Econ. 1988;96:675-700. 
85.  
Loewenstein G, Price J, Volpp K. Habit formation in children: Evidence from incentives 
for healthy eating. J Health Econ. 2016;45:47-54. 
86.  
Volpp KG, Asch D a., Galvin R, Loewenstein G. Redesigning Employee Health 
Incentives — Lessons from Behavioral Economics. N Engl J Med. 2011;365(5):388-390. 
87.  
Kullgren JT, Troxel AB, Loewenstein G, et al. Individual- versus group-based financial 
incentives for weight loss: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 
2013;158(7):505-514. 
88.  
U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Preventive health services. 
https://www.healthcare.gov/coverage/preventive-care-benefits/. Accessed January 1, 
2016. 
89.  
StickK: Set your goals and acheive them. http://www.stickk.com/. 
90.  
Milkman KL, Minson JA, Volpp KG. Holding the Hunger Games Hostage at the Gym: 
An Evaluation of Temptation Bundling. Manag Sci. 2014;60(2):283-299. 
91.  
Johnson EJ, Goldstein D. Do Defaults Save Lives? Science (80- ). 2003;302:1338-1339. 
 38 
 
92.  
Shuval K, Chiu C-Y, Barlow CE, et al. Family history of chronic disease and meeting 
public health guidelines for physical activity: the cooper center longitudinal study. Mayo 
Clin Proc. 2013;88(6):588-592. 
93.  
Fishman E, Schepers P, Kamphuis C. Dutch Cycling: Quantifying the Health and Related 
Economic Benefits. Am J Public Health. 2015;105(8):e13-5. 
94.  
Fishman E, Böcker L, Helbich M. Adult Active Transport in the Netherlands: An Analysis 
of Its Contribution to Physical Activity Requirements. PLoS One. 2015;7:e0121871. 
95.  
Benden ME, Blake JJ, Wendel ML, Huber JC. The impact of stand-biased desks in 
classrooms on calorie expenditure in children. Am J Public Health. 2011;101(8):1433-
1436. 
96.  
The Guide to Community Preventive Services. Environmental and Policy Approaches to 
Increase Physical Activity: Point-of-Decision Prompts to Encourage Use of Stairs. 
http://www.thecommunityguide.org/pa/environmental-policy/podp.html. 
97.  
Thaler RH, Sunstein CR. Nudge : Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and 
Happiness. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press; 2008. 
98.  
Wansink B, Hanks AS. Slim by Design: Serving Healthy Foods First in Buffet Lines 
Improves Overall Meal Selection. PLoS One. 2013;8(10):e77055. 
99.  
Soler RE, Leeks KD, Buchanan LR, Brownson RC, Heath GW, Hopkins DH. Point-of-
Decision Prompts to Increase Stair Use. Am J Prev Med. 2010;38:292-300. 
100.  Neuhaus M, Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Owen N, Eakin EG. Workplace sitting and height-
adjustable workstations: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Prev Med. 2014;46(1):30-40. 
 39 
 
101.  Lynch BM, Owen N. Too Much Sitting and Chronic Disease Risk : Steps to Move the 
Science Forward. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162:146-147. 
102.  Roberto CA, Kawachi I. Use of psychology and behavioral economics to promote healthy 
eating. Am J Prev Med. 2014;47(6):832-837. 
103.  Let’s Move! http://www.letsmove.gov/. 
104.  Grinstein A, Kronrod A. Does Sparing the Rod Spoil the Child? How Praising, Scolding, 
and Assertive Tone can Encourage Desired Behaviors. J Mark Res. 2016;53(3):433-441. 
105.  Samson A. The Behavioral Economics Guide 2015. 
http://www.behavioraleconomics.com. 
106.  Kendzor DE, Shuval K, Gabriel KP, et al. Impact of a Mobile Phone Intervention to 
Reduce Sedentary Behavior in a Community Sample of Adults: A Quasi-Experimental 
Evaluation. J Med Internet Res. 2016;18:e19. 
107.  Abbasi J. As Walking Movement Grows, Neighborhood Walkability Gains Attention. 
JAMA. 2016;316:382-383. 
 
 
