 SPECIAL ARTICLE
PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 2, August 2017:e20170194
Critical Issues in Food Allergy: A 
National Academies Consensus Report
Scott H. Sicherer, MD, 
a Katrina Allen, MD, PhD, 
b, 
c Gideon Lack, MD, 
d, 
e Steve L. 
Taylor, PhD, 
f Sharon M. Donovan, PhD, RD, 
g Maria Oria, PhDh
The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine convened 
an expert, ad hoc committee to examine critical issues related to food 
allergy. The authors of the resulting report, “Finding a Path to Safety 
in Food Allergy: Assessment of the Global Burden, Causes, Prevention, 
Management, and Public Policy, 
” evaluated the scientific evidence on 
the prevalence, diagnosis, prevention, and management of food allergy 
and made recommendations to bring about a safe environment for those 
affected. The committee recommended approaches to monitor prevalence, 
explore risk factors, improve diagnosis, and provide evidence-based health 
care. Regarding diagnostics, emphasis was placed on utilizing allergy tests 
judiciously in the context of the medical history because positive test results 
are not, in isolation, diagnostic. Evidence-based prevention strategies 
were advised (for example, a strategy to prevent peanut allergy through 
early dietary introduction). The report encourages improved education of 
stakeholders for recognizing and managing as well as preventing allergic 
reactions, including an emphasis on using intramuscular epinephrine 
promptly to treat anaphylaxis. The report recommends improved food 
allergen labeling and evaluation of the need for epinephrine autoinjectors 
with a dosage appropriate for infants. The committee recommended policies 
and guidelines to prevent and treat food allergic reactions in a various 
settings and suggested research priorities to address key questions about 
diagnostics, mechanisms, risk determinants, and management. Identifying 
safe and effective therapies is the ultimate goal. This article summarizes the 
key findings from the report and emphasizes recommendations for actions 
that are applicable to pediatricians and to the American Academy  
of Pediatrics.
abstract
aDivision of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Department 
of Pediatrics, Jaffe Food Allergy Institute, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York; bCentre 
for Food and Allergy Research, Murdoch Children’s 
Research Institute, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia; cInstitute of Inflammation and Repair, University 
of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom; dDivision of 
Asthma, Allergy and Lung Biology, Department of Paediatric 
Allergy, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom; 
eGuy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
United Kingdom; fFood Allergy Research and Resource 
Program, Department of Food Science and Technology, 
University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska; gDepartment of 
Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois, 
Urbana, Illinois; and hNational Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering and Medicine, Washington, DC
As indicated in the full report, the National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine 
activity was supported by federal sponsors: 
the Food and Drug Administration (contract 
HHSP233201400020B/HHSP23337025), the Food 
and Nutrition Service of the US Department of 
Agriculture (grant # FS_NAS_IOM_FY2015_01), 
and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases; and nonfederal sponsors: the Asthma and 
Allergy Foundation of America, the Egg Nutrition 
Center, Food Allergy Research & Education, the 
International Life Sciences Institute North America, 
the International Tree Nut Council Nutrition 
Research & Education Foundation, the National 
Dairy Council, the National Peanut Board, and the 
Seafood Industry Research Fund. The full report 
indicates that any opinions, findings, conclusions, 
or recommendations expressed do not necessarily 
reflect the views of any organization or agency that 
provided support for the project.
Dr Sicherer authored the initial draft of this 
manuscript; Drs Allen, Lack, Taylor, Donovan, and 
Food allergy has become an 
increasingly recognized global health 
concern. Defined as an adverse health 
effect arising from a specific immune 
response that occurs reproducibly on 
exposure to a given food, 
1 the disease 
impacts health and quality of life for 
sufferers and their caregivers.2 A new 
report entitled “Finding a Path to 
Safety in Food Allergy: Assessment 
of the Global Burden, Causes, 
Prevention, Management, and Public 
Policy” (referred to hereafter as “the 
report”) was recently released by 
The National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering and Medicine (NAS) 
(available at www. 
nationalacademies 
. 
org/ 
FoodAllergies).3 Here we describe 
the Report, focusing on key findings 
and recommendations applicable 
to pediatricians and the American 
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP).
The National Academy of Sciences 
was established in 1863 by an Act of 
Congress signed by President Abraham 
Lincoln as a nongovernmental 
To cite: Sicherer SH, Allen K, Lack G, et al. Critical 
Issues in Food Allergy: A National Academies 
Consensus Report. Pediatrics. 2017;140(2): 
e20170194
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 SICHERER et al
institution to advise the nation 
and, in concert with the National 
Academy of Engineering and the 
National Academy of Medicine 
(formerly the Institute of Medicine), 
now functions as the NAS to provide 
independent, objective advice to 
the nation. For the study on food 
allergy, support was received by 3 
federal and 8 nonfederal sponsors* 
and was the product of a study by 
a committee of 15 international 
experts with diverse expertise who 
were vetted for conflicts of interest 
and who considered a vast array 
of issues in the field. The evidence 
base included selective literature 
reviews and evaluation of published 
guidelines and practice parameters, 
and it favored meta-analyses and 
systematic reviews as applicable 
to a variety of topics. Recognizing 
that the etiology and management 
of food allergy involves not only the 
patient, an ecological-developmental 
model of food allergy was considered 
to address numerous interacting 
facets including the environment, 
family, home, child care, the health 
care system, industry, cultural 
practices, and government policy and 
regulation.
The report underscores the central 
role of the immune response 
in defining food allergy, thus 
distinguishing it from other adverse 
*As indicated in the full report, the National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine 
activity was supported by federal sponsors: 
the Food and Drug Administration (contract 
HHSP233201400020B/HHSP23337025), the Food 
and Nutrition Service of the US Department of 
Agriculture (grant # FS_NAS_IOM_FY2015_01), 
and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases; and nonfederal sponsors: the Asthma 
and Allergy Foundation of America, the Egg 
Nutrition Center, Food Allergy Research & 
Education, the International Life Sciences Institute 
North America, the International Tree Nut Council 
Nutrition Research & Education Foundation, the 
National Dairy Council, the National Peanut Board, 
and the Seafood Industry Research Fund. The 
full report indicates that any opinions, findings, 
conclusions, or recommendations expressed 
do not necessarily reflect the views of any 
organization or agency that provided support for 
the project.
responses to food. Food allergy 
results from immunoglobulin E 
(IgE)-mediated and/or non-IgE–
mediated mechanisms, the former 
being more common (potentially 
resulting in anaphylaxis), and is the 
focus of the report. Often, alternative 
causes of adverse reactions to 
foods may be misinterpreted as a 
food allergy. Lactose intolerance 
is one example; the inability to 
digest the sugar lactose results in 
bloating and diarrhea, but is not 
an allergy. Adverse reactions to 
foods may be caused by metabolic, 
pharmacologic, or toxic factors that 
must be distinguished from allergy. 
In the United States, it is common 
for parents to avoid a food on the 
basis of the perception of food 
allergy when in fact most of the time 
diagnostic testing will reveal that 
there is none and the food could be 
added back to the diet.1, 
 
4, 
 
5 Here we 
review and comment on highlights 
of the report that are pertinent 
to pediatricians, pediatric care of 
food allergies, and the AAP as a 
professional organization named as a 
potential actor to accomplish some of 
the committee’s recommendations.
Prevalence
A previous US review concluded 
that food allergy affects >1% to 2% 
and <10% of the population.6 A US 
study published in Pediatrics that 
was based on parental report of 
allergy concluded that up to 8% of 
children have food allergy.7 Several 
studies, including data presented 
by the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC), suggest 
an increase in prevalence in the 
United States.8, 
 
9 However, the 
report points out that prevalence 
estimates vary among studies 
depending on numerous factors, 
including the definition of allergy; 
the foods being considered; whether 
diagnosis is by self-report, testing, or 
a combination of factors; selection 
of participants; age of participants; 
geographical regions; and many 
other factors. Ideal studies include 
medically supervised feeding to 
confirm allergy or tolerance (an 
oral food challenge [OFC]). Studies 
of self-reported allergy typically 
overestimate prevalence.10 Few 
studies include gold standard, 
medically supervised feeding tests, 
with no US studies including them 
since the 1980s.5 Although many 
foods have been noted to cause 
allergic reactions, it is clear that 
cow’s milk, hen’s egg, peanuts, tree 
nuts, and seafood are responsible 
for most of the serious allergic 
reactions.1, 
 
11 Despite an exhaustive 
literature search, the authors of the 
report could not present definitive 
prevalence data for the United 
States. The committee recommended 
approaches for performing studies 
to obtain more accurate prevalence 
estimates, including using modalities 
such as the National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey with 
incorporation of additional testing of 
subsamples with OFCs.
Diagnosis anD Prognosis
The committee recommended that 
“physicians use evidence-based, 
standardized procedures as the basis 
for food allergy diagnosis and avoid 
nonstandardized and unproven 
procedures….When food allergy 
is suspected, the patient should 
be evaluated by a physician who 
has the training and experience to 
select and interpret appropriate 
diagnostic tests.” The AAP’s 
Clinical Report on allergy testing 
emphasizes these fundamentals12 
and, like the National Academies 
report, suggests consideration of 
referral to or consultation with a 
physician specialist (for example, an 
allergist-immunologist).
The basis of these comments stems 
in part from the observation that 
self-reported allergy typically 
overestimates true allergy, and no 
simple tests provide a diagnosis. 
2
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 2, August 2017
In one meta-analysis, the rate of 
self-reported food allergy among 
children was 12%, compared with 
3% when confirmatory testing 
was performed.10 A serious 
misconception about food allergy 
diagnostics relates to equating a 
“positive test result” by a serum 
food-specific IgE (sIgE) blood test 
or skin prick test (SPT) to having 
an allergy to the tested food. These 
tests detect IgE antibodies to the 
food but are not typically intrinsically 
diagnostic. For example, in 111 OFCs 
performed in 44 children avoiding 
foods because of positive test results, 
93% were tolerant of the avoided 
food.13 It is clear that these tests are 
misunderstood by physicians. For 
example, in a survey of 407 primary 
care physicians, 38% indicated 
incorrectly that these sIgE blood 
tests or SPTs were sufficient for 
diagnosis.14 Although overdiagnosis 
is a concern and may be driven by 
overtesting and misinterpretation 
of results, under- or misdiagnosis 
must also be addressed. Assuming 
incorrectly that an allergen has been 
identified without confirmatory 
testing could lead to reexposure to 
the true culprit, resulting in serious 
reactions if the unidentified trigger 
is consumed again. The report 
summarized information from 
previously published guidelines 
and systematic reviews to highlight 
appropriate tests and their use 
and to discuss tests that are not 
recommended.1, 
15, 
 
16
A previous guideline1 suggests 
that the medical history is key in 
diagnosis, and food allergy should be 
considered when allergic symptoms 
occur proximate (within minutes to 
hours) to ingestion of a specific food, 
especially when symptoms occur on 
more than 1 occasion. For example, 
suspicion would be high if a child 
developed urticaria within minutes 
after the ingestion of a peanut, 
especially if an acute reaction such 
as this occurred with more than 1 
exposure. However, suspicion might 
be low if the child routinely ingested 
peanuts and the urticaria persisted 
for days, suggesting a viral rash. 
Food allergy diagnostic testing may 
also be warranted for infants and 
children with moderate to severe 
atopic dermatitis because there is 
a higher rate of food allergy in this 
population, and the food allergy may 
be contributing to the rash. Disorders 
with subacute or chronic symptoms 
that are indicative of a food-related 
origin, such as food protein–induced 
enterocolitis syndrome (severe 
vomiting, lethargy, and sometimes 
hypotension and acidosis starting 2 
hours after ingestion) and allergic 
colitis (mucous-containing, bloody 
stools) also warrant investigation 
for food-allergic triggers, but 
these disorders occur without IgE 
antibodies.1 Food allergy should 
also be considered in children with 
eosinophilic esophagitis. Importantly, 
food allergy is not a typical trigger of 
chronic asthma or chronic rhinitis in 
childhood.
Medical history can help to identify 
the likelihood of a food allergy 
diagnosis (pretest probability) 
and can suggest whether the 
pathophysiology is IgE- or non-
IgE–mediated, which is pertinent for 
test selection and helps to identify 
potential triggers. Importantly, 
details of the history may disclose 
alternative reasons for symptoms 
other than a food allergy. Additional 
diagnostic modalities include 
diagnostic elimination diets, SPT, 
sIgE blood test, and OFC. Neither SPT 
nor sIgE blood test results alone are 
considered sufficient for diagnosis. 
However, in the presence of a strong 
suggestive history of food allergy, 
these can confirm the diagnosis 
without further need for an OFC.1, 
 
12  
Increasingly large skin test wheal 
sizes or sIgE levels correlate with 
higher risks of allergy, but sensitivity 
and specificity are often inadequate 
to confirm a diagnosis.16 Tests that 
measure sIgE to specific proteins in 
foods, a modality called “component 
testing, 
” may improve specificity 
of tests. For example, Ara h 2 is a 
protein in peanuts associated with 
clinical reactions.15, 
17 The OFC, 
particularly when performed in a 
double-blind manner with a placebo, 
is considered a gold standard.18 
Unmasked OFCs are typically 
performed for clinical purposes, 
and double-blind procedures are 
used more often for research. The 
report concluded that a number 
of diagnostic modalities were not 
recommended for routine use, 
including food allergy patch testing 
(atopy patch test), measurement 
of total IgE, and the basophil 
activation test. Other tests were not 
recommended and were considered 
“unproven and non-standardized” for 
diagnosing food allergy. These tests 
include allergen-specific IgA, IgG, 
or IgG4; provocation neutralization; 
immune complexes; human leukocyte 
antigen screening; lymphocyte 
stimulation; facial thermography; 
gastric juice analysis; endoscopic 
allergen provocation; hair analysis; 
applied kinesiology; cytotoxic assays; 
electrodermal testing; mediator 
release assays; bioresonance; and 
iridology.
Although some studies suggest 
laboratory results might help to 
provide insights on severity and 
prognosis, 
19 
–23 there are no simple 
reliable means currently to identify 
these aspects of food allergy. The 
report emphasizes that on the basis 
of test limitations, particularly that 
sensitization alone is not diagnostic, 
physicians should not order “panels” 
of food tests without a rationale.
risk anD PrevenTion
Food allergy is undoubtedly caused 
by a combination of genetic and 
environmental factors.24 The report 
presents a number of risk factors and 
prevention strategies that have been 
evaluated in published studies.
Regarding solid food introduction, the 
authors of the report concluded that 
3
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 SICHERER et al
there is strong evidence regarding 
the early introduction of peanuts 
as being protective against peanut 
allergy in infants at high risk, defined 
by early-onset eczema or coexistent 
egg allergy. This is generally in line 
with recent consensus publications 
and guidelines25, 
 
26 that have 
been endorsed by the AAP and 
whose authors have promoted 
the introduction of peanut protein 
in infant-safe forms for high-risk 
infants as early as 4 to 6 months 
of age after appropriate testing. 
Regarding foods other than peanuts, 
the report indicates that more studies 
are needed to assess whether early 
introduction affects food allergy. 
However, the report concludes that 
“limited evidence…suggests that 
delaying the introduction of egg, cow 
milk and wheat to decrease risk of 
those food allergies has no benefits” 
and discusses a potential benefit 
of introducing these foods in the 
first year of life when the infant is 
developmentally ready (at ∼6 months 
but not before 4 months of age).
The committee also concluded 
that there is limited evidence to 
support or discourage eliminating 
allergenic foods from the diet of 
pregnant or lactating women and 
that evidence for a protective effect 
of breastfeeding is also limited.
There were no changes in 
recommending breastfeeding as 
the preferred feeding for all infants. 
However, the authors of the report 
gave recommendations and drew 
conclusions that differ from findings 
and recommendations on allergy 
prevention that were published in 
a 2008 AAP Clinical Report.27 The 
authors of the AAP Clinical Report 
suggested that specific types of infant 
formulas may be useful for allergy 
prevention in high-risk infants if 
the infants could not exclusively 
be breastfed. In contrast, the NAS 
committee concluded that studies on 
the effects of partially or extensively 
hydrolyzed infant formulas for 
preventing food allergies are 
inconsistent or have methodologic 
flaws and that evidence is therefore 
limited. They concluded that high-
quality randomized clinical studies 
would be needed before these 
formulas could be recommended for 
food allergy prevention.
As a global recommendation, the 
committee advised that public health 
authorities and clinical practice 
guidelines include consistent, clear, 
and evidence-based advice for families 
and health care providers about the 
potential benefits of introducing 
allergenic foods in the first year 
of life to infants when the infant is 
developmentally ready (at ∼6 months 
of age but not before 4 months of 
age, particularly for those at high risk 
of allergy). As noted above, the AAP 
has been involved in updating such 
guidelines26 and is in the process of 
creating an updated Clinical Report on 
prevention of atopic disease.
Regarding risk factors, the committee 
identified limited but consistent 
evidence that skin barrier defects 
(for example, eczema or filaggrin 
gene mutations) play a role in 
sensitization. Although individuals 
with 1 type of atopy (eg, eczema) may 
be at risk for another manifestation 
(eg, food allergy), a new theory 
suggests that skin barrier defects 
and inflammation may provide 
a sensitizing route of exposure 
to proteins in the environment. 
Unfortunately, firm conclusions 
could most often not be reached on a 
number of issues because of limited 
data. The committee considered, 
but could not identify because of 
limited evidence, a link between food 
allergy and nutritional factors such 
as vitamin D, maternal omega-3 fatty 
acid intake, folate supplementation, 
and other nutrients. The committee 
could not identify randomized clinical 
trials or other convincing evidence to 
address other potential hypotheses 
for an increase in food allergy. Only 
a few studies have been published 
on the relationship between changes 
in the microbiota and food allergen 
sensitization, so evidence supporting 
the relationship is limited. Trials on 
probiotics and prebiotics also have 
methodologic limitations, and the 
committee concluded that there 
is not yet evidence to support a 
decreased risk of food allergy from 
using these interventions. Also 
with regard to microbial exposure 
and the “hygiene hypothesis, 
” firm 
conclusions could not be reached 
regarding a relationship between 
food allergy and cesarean delivery, 
use of antibiotics, or exposure to pets 
or animals. Although there is indirect 
evidence that genetics contributes 
to the development of food allergies, 
with those with a family history at 
moderately increased risk, there are 
no conclusive findings regarding 
specific loci. Similarly, epigenetic 
mechanisms are likely involved 
because the apparent rise in food 
allergy has occurred in a short period 
of time and therefore is presumed 
to be secondary to environmental 
causes. These hypotheses are 
underpinned by a recent finding 
that Asian infants born in Asia who 
migrate to Australia in the first 5 
years of life are protected from nut 
allergy, whereas Australian-born 
Asian infants are at a 2 to 3 times 
higher risk of nut allergy than white 
infants born in Australia when 
evaluated for allergy at age 5 years.28
emergency managemenT
The authors of the report reviewed 
the management of food allergic 
reactions and anaphylaxis and 
focuses on prompt use of epinephrine 
to treat anaphylaxis. Researchers 
suggest that epinephrine is safe but 
often underutilized29 
– 
31 and that 
there is poor recognition about both 
how and when to use epinephrine 
autoinjectors. The authors of the 
report identified teenagers as a high-
risk group because they may take 
risks that result in ingestion of an 
allergen and may postpone proper 
treatment. In addition, those with 
4
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 2, August 2017
food allergy and comorbid asthma 
are considered at high risk because 
they may be prone to more severe 
reactions. Epinephrine autoinjectors 
are currently only available in doses 
of 0.15 and 0.30 mg, which are not 
ideal for infants. The committee 
recommended that the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) evaluate the 
need for an epinephrine autoinjector 
with a dosage appropriate for use in 
infants and, if indicated, that industry 
should develop an autoinjector with 
0.075 mg of epinephrine specifically 
designed for use in infants. The 
authors of an AAP Clinical Report 
discuss the dosing of epinephrine 
autoinjectors for first aid management 
of anaphylaxis in the community and 
also raise concerns regarding the best 
dosing for infants.32, 
33
Daily managemenT
Pediatricians should counsel families 
on allergen avoidance for a variety 
of settings, including home, school, 
and travel. At home, care is needed 
during food preparation to avoid 
cross-contact of allergen with safe 
foods. Information about obtaining 
safely packaged foods and managing 
food allergy outside the home is 
reviewed below. Two additional areas 
of emphasis especially pertinent to 
pediatric patients are (1) the need for 
careful nutritional monitoring and 
intervention for children avoiding 
foods because of allergy34; and (2) 
attention to psychosocial aspects of 
managing food allergy, including an 
increased risk of bullying.35, 
 
36 The 
committee recommended that the 
CDC work with other public health 
authorities to initiate a public health 
campaign for the general public, 
those with food allergy, and relevant 
stakeholders to increase awareness 
and empathy as well as to dispel 
misconceptions about food allergy and 
its management. This global approach 
could reduce bullying and risk-taking 
behavior by raising awareness. 
The committee made a number 
of additional recommendations 
applicable to pediatricians and to the 
AAP as outlined in Table 1.
Packaged Foods, Travel, restaurants
Patients and families living with food 
allergies often depend on others to 
obtain safe foods. Obtaining safely 
packaged food is one consideration. 
The current status of labeling is often 
confusing for allergic consumers. In 
the United States, labeling laws require 
plain English terminology to identify 
“major allergens” as ingredients, 
including cow’s milk, hen’s egg, 
wheat, soy, peanuts, tree nuts, fish, and 
crustacean shellfish. For categorical 
foods, specific types must be listed (for 
example, codfish instead of “fish” or 
walnut instead of “nuts”). However, 
the foods considered “nuts” include 
ones that are not necessarily true 
nuts. The committee identified, for 
example, that lychee is erroneously 
considered a nut by the FDA (when 
botanically it is actually a fruit). Other 
allergens, such as sesame, are not 
included in US labeling laws and yet 
different countries include different 
foods in their labeling laws, including 
sesame and others. Advisory labeling, 
also called precautionary labeling (eg, 
“may contain” or “in a facility with”), 
is voluntary and not regulated. There 
has been a proliferation of advisory 
labeling, leading to consumer concerns 
about the veracity of the warnings. 
The committee provided a number of 
recommendations directed toward the 
FDA to improve labeling and create a 
system in which advisory labeling is 
meaningful. For example, evaluation 
of a risk-based labeling system like the 
Voluntary Incidental Trace Allergen 
Labelling program, which is used in 
Australia, could be considered.
Regarding restaurants and food service 
as well as foods prepared in groceries, 
the committee recommended a 
number of training approaches 
and regulatory actions to improve 
safety and the flow of information 
5
TaBle 1  
Recommendations Regarding Management Directed to Pediatricians and/or the AAP
Recommendations From the Report Applicable 
to Pediatricians at the Patient-Care Level or 
Addressable by the AAP
Features, AAP Resources, Current Actions, Potential 
Future Work
The AAP should regularly update guidelines on 
diagnosis, prevention, and management of 
food allergy on the basis of strong scientific 
evidence as emerging scientific data become 
available.
The AAP has a number of Clinical Reports on 
food allergy diagnosis, management of food 
anaphylaxis, and food allergy management 
in schools.12, 
 
27, 
 
32, 
 
33, 
37 It also participated in 
development of guidelines.26 Participation in 
updating and developing resources is needed.
Health care providers should receive training on 
approaches to counseling patients and their 
caregivers. Counseling training is envisioned 
to be provided in part by professional 
organizations through various means, 
including the Internet.
In addition to the guidelines mentioned above, the 
AAP has educational modules on selected topics 
including programming at the annual National 
Conference and Exhibition. More information and 
materials to fulfill these recommendations are still 
needed.
Health care providers should counsel patients 
and their caregivers on food allergies 
by following the most recent guidelines 
emphasizing the need to take age-appropriate 
responsibility. Counseling is particularly 
important for those at high risk and with 
severe food allergy, such as adolescents and 
those with both food allergy and asthma.
The areas of counseling include emergency 
management, avoidance in a variety of settings, 
nutritional counseling, and psychosocial 
counseling.
Health care providers and others should use 
intramuscular epinephrine as a first line of 
emergency management for episodes of food 
allergy anaphylaxis.
The AAP recently released 2 Clinical Reports on these 
topics, including information regarding the use 
of epinephrine for first aid management in the 
community and for providing written plans for 
recognition and treatment of food allergy and 
anaphylaxis.32, 
 
33
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 SICHERER et al
for consumers. In the meantime, it is 
important for pediatricians to advise 
patients to inform restaurants and 
food service establishments of their 
allergy and to discuss details of the 
food’s safety with staff. With regard 
to airline travel, where concerns 
include the safety of food provided 
and exposure to food proteins in the 
closed environment, recommendations 
are directed toward food safety and 
also anaphylaxis recognition and 
management. The recommendations 
include ensuring emergency 
epinephrine capabilities are in place 
for children. The AAP has been 
committed to these issues, and recently 
resolutions were submitted at the 
Annual Leadership Forum regarding 
availability of epinephrine for children 
on airplanes.
schools and early child care and 
education settings
The committee recommended that 
various stakeholders, including 
advocates such as the AAP, participate 
in a task force to address emergency 
management and prevention strategies 
for venues such as schools and early 
care and education settings. The 
authors of the report review some of 
the approaches, including state and 
federal policies, which are important 
for managing food allergy in early care 
and education settings and schools. 
The AAP has been committed to these 
issues as well. The AAP produced 
a Clinical Report on food allergy 
management in schools37 and had 
representation on the CDC Voluntary 
Guidelines for Food Allergy in Schools 
that was referred to in the report and 
was recommended for implementation. 
The CDC guidelines report is 
available at: http:// 
www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
healthyschools/ 
foodallergies/ 
pdf/ 
13_ 
243135_ 
a_ 
food_ 
allergy_ 
web_ 
508. 
pdf.
research neeDs
The committee identified numerous 
areas in need of additional research. 
Some of the priority areas include 
the prevalence and cost of food 
allergies; diagnosis and prognosis; 
risk determinants and prevention; 
management in health care settings, 
food establishments, schools and 
traveling; and curative therapies. Some 
of the areas that may be of interest to 
general pediatric research include the 
best modalities to educate families 
and physicians about management, 
examining barriers to proper testing, 
identifying educational approaches 
and tools to improve physician and 
patient education, utilizing birth 
cohorts and other opportunities for 
prevalence estimates, determining 
the effectiveness of evidence-based 
guidelines and educational programs 
on food allergy management, 
improving the understanding of 
nutritional needs, establishing the 
best means to identify and manage 
psychosocial concerns, monitoring 
the number of food allergic reactions 
that occur in settings such as schools, 
and defining best practices regarding 
management.
six major acTions requireD To 
achieve FooD allergy saFeTy
The committee conceptualized a 
roadmap to safety involving 6 major 
actions that require input from various 
stakeholders, including pediatricians 
and professional organizations such 
as the AAP, to achieve short- and long-
term goals. The first action would 
involve collecting better information 
about prevalence (which is crucial 
for identifying the scope of the 
problem), prioritizing food allergy in 
context of other health diseases, and 
exploring risk factors. The second 
action involves improving the quality 
of diagnosis and providing evidence-
based health care. The third action 
concerns evidence-based prevention 
strategies. As noted previously, data 
are lacking on a variety of potential 
interventional strategies, but exciting 
new approaches, particularly regarding 
prevention of peanut allergy, are 
being promulgated. The fourth action 
is to improve education and training 
of all stakeholders for recognizing 
and managing as well as preventing 
allergic reactions. This work includes 
updating, creating, and implementing 
various guidelines and educational 
programs. The fifth action is to develop 
policies and related practices to help 
prevent and treat severe reactions. 
The sixth and most critical action 
regards research priorities to address 
key questions about diagnostics, 
mechanisms, risk determinants, and 
management. Identifying safe and 
effective therapies is the ultimate goal.
conclusions
Food allergy appears to be increasing 
in prevalence and particularly affects 
children. The National Academies 
report identifies a large number of 
immediately obtainable practice 
goals to improve safety for children 
with food allergies. The committee 
also identified numerous research 
goals. Although the recommendations 
of the report are directed toward 
numerous stakeholders (including 
consumers, patients, allergy 
researchers, health care providers, 
school leaders, manufacturers, 
government agencies, and others), 
pediatricians and the AAP can take a 
prominent seat at the table to ensure 
that the report’s smorgasbord of 
findings and recommendations are 
digested and implemented to reduce 
risks and improve safety for children 
with food allergies.
6
aBBreviaTions
AAP:  
American Academy of 
Pediatrics
CDC:  
Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention
FDA:  
Food and Drug 
Administration
IgE:  
immunoglobulin E
NAS:  
National Academies of 
Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine
OFC:  
oral food challenge
sIgE:  
serum food-specific IgE
SPT:  
skin prick test
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 2, August 2017
reFerences
 1.  
Boyce JA, Assa’ad A, Burks AW, et al;  
NIAID-Sponsored Expert Panel. 
Guidelines for the diagnosis and 
management of food allergy in 
the United States: summary of 
the NIAID-sponsored expert panel 
report. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2010;126(6):1105–1118
 2.  
Lieberman JA, Sicherer SH. Quality of 
life in food allergy. Curr Opin Allergy 
Clin Immunol. 2011;11(3):236–242
 3.  
National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine. Finding 
a Path to Safety in Food Allergy: 
Assessment of Global Burden, Causes, 
Prevention, Management, and Public 
Policy. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press; 2017
 4.  
Burks AW, Jones SM, Boyce JA, et al. 
NIAID-sponsored 2010 guidelines for 
managing food allergy: applications in 
the pediatric population. Pediatrics. 
2011;128(5):955–965
 5.  
Bock SA. Prospective appraisal of 
complaints of adverse reactions 
to foods in children during the 
first 3 years of life. Pediatrics. 
1987;79(5):683–688
 6.  
Chafen JJ, Newberry SJ, Riedl MA,  
et al. Diagnosing and managing 
common food allergies: a systematic 
review. JAMA. 2010;303(18):1848–1856
 7.  
Gupta RS, Springston EE, Warrier 
MR, et al. The prevalence, severity, 
and distribution of childhood food 
allergy in the United States. Pediatrics. 
2011;128(1). Available at: www. 
pediatrics. 
org/ 
cgi/ 
content/ 
full/ 
128/ 
1/ 
e9
 8.  
Branum AM, Lukacs SL. Food allergy 
among children in the United States. 
Pediatrics. 2009;124(6):1549–1555
 9.  
Sicherer SH, Muñoz-Furlong A, Godbold 
JH, Sampson HA. US prevalence of self-
reported peanut, tree nut, and sesame 
allergy: 11-year follow-up. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2010;125(6):1322–1326
 10.  
Rona RJ, Keil T, Summers C, et al. The 
prevalence of food allergy: a meta-
analysis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2007;120(3):638–646
 11.  
Sicherer SH. Epidemiology of food 
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2011;127(3):594–602
 12.  
Sicherer SH, Wood RA; American 
Academy of Pediatrics Section On 
Allergy And Immunology. Allergy testing 
in childhood: using allergen-specific IgE 
tests. Pediatrics. 2012;129(1):193–197
 13.  
Fleischer DM, Bock SA, Spears GC, et al. 
Oral food challenges in children with 
a diagnosis of food allergy. J Pediatr. 
2011;158(4):578–583.e1
 14.  
Gupta RS, Springston EE, Kim JS, et al. 
Food allergy knowledge, attitudes, and 
beliefs of primary care physicians. 
Pediatrics. 2010;125(1):126–132
 15.  
Sampson HA, Aceves S, Bock SA, 
et al; Joint Task Force on Practice 
Parameters; Practice Parameter 
Workgroup. Food allergy: a practice 
parameter update-2014. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2014;134(5):1016–1025.e43
 16.  
Muraro A, Werfel T, Hoffmann-
Sommergruber K, et al; EAACI Food 
Allergy and Anaphylaxis Guidelines 
Group. EAACI food allergy and 
anaphylaxis guidelines: diagnosis and 
management of food allergy. Allergy. 
2014;69(8):1008–1025
 17.  
Klemans RJ, van Os-Medendorp H, 
Blankestijn M, Bruijnzeel-Koomen 
CA, Knol EF, Knulst AC. Diagnostic 
accuracy of specific IgE to components 
in diagnosing peanut allergy: a 
systematic review. Clin Exp Allergy. 
2015;45(4):720–730
 18.  
Sampson HA, Gerth van Wijk R, 
Bindslev-Jensen C, et al. Standardizing 
7
Oria contributed additional perspectives and edited subsequent drafts of this manuscript; and all authors approved the final manuscript as submitted and agree 
to be accountable for all aspects of the work.
The authors are responsible for the content of this article, which does not necessarily represent the views of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, 
and Medicine, their committees, or convening bodies.
Doi: https:// 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1542/ 
peds. 
2017- 
0194
Accepted for publication May 1, 2017
Address correspondence to Scott H. Sicherer, MD, Mount Sinai Hospital, Box 1198, 1 Gustave L Levy Place, New York, NY 10029. E-mail: scott.sicherer@mssm.edu
PEDIATRICS (ISSN Numbers: Print, 0031-4005; Online, 1098-4275).
Copyright © 2017 by the American Academy of Pediatrics
Financial Disclosure: Dr Sicherer received grant support for research from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) and Food Allergy 
Research and Education and royalties from UpToDate. Dr Donovan received grant support for pediatric nutrition research from the National Institutes of Health 
as well as food and pharmaceutical companies. Dr Taylor received grant support for research from the National Institute of Food and Agriculture and from the 
Food Allergy Research and Resource Program consortium of over 90 food manufacturers and/or suppliers as well as royalties from Neogen Corp. Drs Allen, Lack, 
and Oria have indicated they have no financial relationships relevant to this article to disclose.
FunDing: No external funding.
PoTenTial conFlicT oF inTeresT: Drs Sicherer, Allen, Lack, Taylor, and Donovan served as members of the committee for the report discussed herein. Dr Oria 
was the study director for the report discussed herein. Dr Lack has received research support from the NIAID and the UK Food Standards Agency, is on the DBV 
Technologies scientific advisory board, has received a contribution to NIAID contract and/or grant from Food Allergy Research and Education, has received a 
contribution to King’s College London Division of Asthma Allergy and Lung Biology from MRC & Asthma UK Centre, has received the Biomedical Research Centre 
award to Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation from the UK Department of Health through the National Institute for Health Research, has received support for 
a pediatric allergy clinical trial’s unit from the National Peanut Board, has received a discounted Bamba peanut snack from Osem, and has stock and/or stock 
options in DBV Technologies.
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 SICHERER et al
double-blind, placebo-controlled oral 
food challenges: American Academy 
of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology-
European Academy of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology PRACTALL 
consensus report. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2012;130(6):1260–1274
 19.  
Neuman-Sunshine DL, Eckman JA, 
Keet CA, et al. The natural history of 
persistent peanut allergy. Ann Allergy 
Asthma Immunol. 2012;108(5):326–331.
e3
 20.  
Wood RA, Sicherer SH, Vickery BP, et al. 
The natural history of milk allergy in 
an observational cohort. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2013;131(3):805–812
 21.  
Sicherer SH, Wood RA, Vickery BP, et al.  
The natural history of egg allergy in 
an observational cohort. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2014;133(2):492–499
 22.  
Savage J, Sicherer S, Wood R. The 
natural history of food allergy. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 
2016;4(2):196–203, quiz 204
 23.  
Santos AF, Douiri A, Bécares N, et al. 
Basophil activation test discriminates 
between allergy and tolerance in 
peanut-sensitized children. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol. 2014;134(3):645–652
 24.  
Allen KJ, Koplin JJ. Prospects for 
prevention of food allergy. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol Pract. 2016;4(2):215–220
 25.  
Fleischer DM, Sicherer S, Greenhawt 
M, et al; American Academy of 
Allergy, Asthma & Immunology; 
American Academy of Pediatrics, 
American College of Allergy; Asthma 
& Immunology, Australasian Society 
of Clinical Immunology and Allergy; 
Canadian Society of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology; European 
Academy of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology; Israel Association of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology; 
Japanese Society for Allergology; 
Society for Pediatric Dermatology; 
World Allergy Organization. Consensus 
communication on early peanut 
introduction and the prevention 
of peanut allergy in high-risk 
infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2015;136(2):258–261
 26.  
Togias A, Cooper SF, Acebal ML,  
et al. Addendum guidelines for the 
prevention of peanut allergy in the 
United States: report of the National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases-sponsored expert panel. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017; 
139(1):29–44
 27.  
Greer FR, Sicherer SH, Burks AW; 
American Academy of Pediatrics 
Committee on Nutrition; American 
Academy of Pediatrics Section on 
Allergy and Immunology. Effects of 
early nutritional interventions on 
the development of atopic disease 
in infants and children: the role 
of maternal dietary restriction, 
breastfeeding, timing of introduction 
of complementary foods, and 
hydrolyzed formulas. Pediatrics. 
2008;121(1):183–191
 28.  
Panjari M, Koplin JJ, Dharmage SC, 
et al. Nut allergy prevalence and 
differences between Asian-born 
children and Australian-born children 
of Asian descent: a state-wide survey 
of children at primary school entry 
in Victoria, Australia. Clin Exp Allergy. 
2016;46(4):602–609
 29.  
Campbell RL, Bellolio MF, Knutson 
BD, et al. Epinephrine in anaphylaxis: 
higher risk of cardiovascular 
complications and overdose after 
administration of intravenous 
bolus epinephrine compared with 
intramuscular epinephrine. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol Pract. 2015;3(1):76–80
 30.  
Muraro A, Roberts G, Worm M, et al; 
EAACI Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis 
Guidelines Group. Anaphylaxis: 
guidelines from the European Academy 
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. 
Allergy. 2014;69(8):1026–1045
 31.  
Lieberman P, Nicklas RA, Randolph C,  
et al. Anaphylaxis–a practice 
parameter update 2015. Ann Allergy 
Asthma Immunol. 2015;115(5):341–384
 32.  
Sicherer SH, Simons, FE; Section 
on Allergy and Immunology. 
Epinephrine for first-aid management 
of anaphylaxis. Pediatrics. 
2017;139(3):e20164006
 33.  
Wang JS, Sicherer SH; Section on 
Allergy and Immunology. Guidance 
on completing a written allergy 
and anaphylaxis emergency plan. 
Pediatrics. 2017;139(3):e20164005
 34.  
Nowak-Węgrzyn A, Groetch M. 
Nutritional aspects and diets in 
food allergy. Chem Immunol Allergy. 
2015;101:209–220
 35.  
Annunziato RA, Rubes M, Ambrose MA, 
Mullarkey C, Shemesh E, Sicherer SH. 
Longitudinal evaluation of food allergy-
related bullying. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
Pract. 2014;2(5):639–641
 36.  
Herbert L, Shemesh E, Bender B. 
Clinical management of psychosocial 
concerns related to food allergy. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 
2016;4(2):205–213, quiz 214
 37.  
Sicherer SH, Mahr T; American 
Academy of Pediatrics Section on 
Allergy and Immunology. Management 
of food allergy in the school setting. 
Pediatrics. 2010;126(6):1232–1239
8
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 DOI: 10.1542/peds.2017-0194 originally published online July 24, 2017; 
2017;140;
Pediatrics 
and Maria Oria
Scott H. Sicherer, Katrina Allen, Gideon Lack, Steve L. Taylor, Sharon M. Donovan
Critical Issues in Food Allergy: A National Academies Consensus Report
Services
Updated Information &
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/140/2/e20170194
including high resolution figures, can be found at: 
References
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/140/2/e20170194#BIBL
This article cites 36 articles, 10 of which you can access for free at: 
Subspecialty Collections
ub
http://www.aappublications.org/cgi/collection/allergy:immunology_s
Allergy/Immunology
following collection(s): 
This article, along with others on similar topics, appears in the
Permissions & Licensing
http://www.aappublications.org/site/misc/Permissions.xhtml
in its entirety can be found online at: 
Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures, tables) or
Reprints
http://www.aappublications.org/site/misc/reprints.xhtml
Information about ordering reprints can be found online: 
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 DOI: 10.1542/peds.2017-0194 originally published online July 24, 2017; 
2017;140;
Pediatrics 
and Maria Oria
Scott H. Sicherer, Katrina Allen, Gideon Lack, Steve L. Taylor, Sharon M. Donovan
Critical Issues in Food Allergy: A National Academies Consensus Report
 
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/140/2/e20170194
located on the World Wide Web at: 
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is
1073-0397. 
ISSN:
60007. Copyright © 2017 by the American Academy of Pediatrics. All rights reserved. Print 
the American Academy of Pediatrics, 141 Northwest Point Boulevard, Elk Grove Village, Illinois,
has been published continuously since 1948. Pediatrics is owned, published, and trademarked by 
Pediatrics is the official journal of the American Academy of Pediatrics. A monthly publication, it
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
