 Less is More: Neural Activity During Very Brief and Clearly 
Visible Exposure to Phobic Stimuli
Paul Siegel, Ph.D.,
Purchase College, SUNY
Richard Warren,
Purchase College, SUNY
Zhishun Wang, Ph.D.,
New York State Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University
Jie Yang, Ph.D.,
New York State Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University
Don Cohen,
New York University
Jason F. Anderson, M.S.,
University of California, Santa Barbara
Lilly Murray, and
Purchase College/SUNY
Bradley S. Peterson, M.D.
Children’s Hospital Los Angeles & Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California
Abstract
Research on automatic processes in emotion has focused almost exclusively on the provocation of 
fear responses. We have shown, in contrast, that the repeated presentation of masked feared images 
reduces avoidance of a live tarantula by spider-phobic participants. We investigated the neural 
basis for these adaptive effects of masked exposure. We identified 21 spider-phobic and 21 control 
participants using a psychiatric interview, fear questionnaire, and approach behavior towards a live 
tarantula. They received each of three conditions: (1) very brief exposure (VBE) to masked images 
of spiders; (2) clearly visible exposure (CVE) to spiders; and (3) masked images of flowers 
(control). Only VBE to masked spiders generated neural activity more strongly in phobic than in 
control participants, within subcortical fear, attention, higher-order language, and vision systems. 
Counter-intuitively, CVE to the same spiders generated stronger neural activity in control rather 
than phobic participants within these and other systems. VBE activated regions that support fear 
processing in phobic participants without causing them to experience fear consciously. CVE, by 
contrast, deactivated regions supporting fear regulation and caused phobic participants to 
Corresponding Author: Paul Siegel, Ph.D., School of Natural and Social Sciences, Purchase College/ SUNY, 735 Anderson Hill Road, 
Purchase NY, 10577, paul.siegel@purchase.edu. 
The authors report no conflict of interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Hum Brain Mapp. 2017 May ; 38(5): 2466–2481. doi:10.1002/hbm.23533.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experience fear. Activations by CVE to spiders correlated with fear ratings - explicit fear. 
Activations by VBE to masked spiders correlated with color-naming interference of spider words – 
implicit fear. These multiple dissociations between the effects of VBE and CVE to spiders suggest 
that limiting awareness of exposure to phobic stimuli through visual masking paradoxically 
facilitates their processing, while simultaneously minimizing the experience of fear.
Keywords
Fear; Masking; Automatic Processing; Exposure; Phobia
Introduction
The visual masking of phobic and fear-relevant stimuli is frequently used to investigate the 
automaticity of fear responses. Phobic stimuli are those that are feared by a particular group 
of persons. Fear-relevant stimuli are those that posed threats in our evolutionary history, and 
thus biologically prepare us to fear them. Numerous human imaging studies have shown that 
masked phobic and fear-relevant stimuli activate the amygdala even though participants are 
not aware they are viewing these stimuli, suggesting that fear processing is automatic 
(Carlsson, et al., 2004; Etkin, et al., 2003; Larson, et al., 2006; Lipka, et al., 2011; Morris et 
al., 1998, 1999; Whalen, et al., 1998; Whalen, et al., 2004; Williams, et al., 2006). 
Consistent with this interpretation, autonomic fear responses have been elicited by, and 
conditioned to, masked phobic and fear-relevant stimuli, respectively (Balderston, & 
Helstetter, 2010; Esteves, et al., 1994; Katkin, et al., 2001; Öhman & Soares, 1993, 1994, 
1998). This body of masking research has focused almost exclusively on the provocation and 
acquisition of phobic responses.
Other studies, however, have subsequently shown that visual masking can also be used to 
reduce fear. Our group has shown that the repeated presentation of masked phobic images -- 
what we term very brief exposure (VBE) -- reduces avoidance and self-reported fear of a live 
tarantula in spider-phobic persons (Siegel, et al., 2011; Siegel & Gallagher, 2015; Siegel & 
Weinberger, 2009; 2012; Siegel & Warren, 2013a; Weinberger, et al., 2011). These adaptive 
effects endure as long as one year (Siegel & Warren, 2013b). Whereas visible exposure to 
spider images induces sympathetic arousal and subjective distress in phobic participants and 
does not affect their avoidance of the tarantula, VBE to the same masked images reduces 
phobic avoidance and induces neither arousal nor distress, suggesting that its therapeutic 
effects occur automatically. The purpose of masking in VBE is not to eliminate awareness of 
phobic stimuli – to render them “unconscious”, which is very difficult when continuously 
presenting masked phobic, color images – but to severely limit subjective awareness of 
them. A meta-analysis of 250+ phobic participants found that the therapeutic effects of VBE 
occur when these participants lack subjective awareness of the masked stimuli, and thus do 
not experience distress (Warren & Siegel, in preparation). Challenging the clinical 
conviction that only direct confrontation of phobic situations reduces fear, these reproducible 
effects of masked exposure to phobic stimuli on fear-related behaviors suggests the presence 
of adaptive neural processes that reduce, rather than engender, fear responses.
Siegel et al.
Page 2
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The purpose of this study was to investigate the neural basis for the adaptive effects of VBE 
-- masked exposure to phobic images. Thus, the design of this study was based on the 
aforementioned behavioral studies that manipulated the duration of stimulus presentation in 
comparing the effects of VBE and clearly visible exposure to the same phobic images. We 
presented each of three conditions to participants diagnosed with Specific Phobia of spiders 
and healthy, non-phobic participants: (1) masked exposure to images of spiders (VBE); (2) 
clearly visible exposure (CVE) to spiders; and (3) masked images of flowers (control). By 
contrasting the effects of VBE and CVE to phobic stimuli, we assessed how limiting the 
conscious recognition of exposure influences brain activity. VBE is pure exposure: 
participants are instructed to focus intently on repeated trains of masked phobic stimuli, 
rather than give trial-wise responses to those stimuli. To maintain consistency with 
behavioral studies attesting to the adaptive effects of VBE, our study participants were 
similarly instructed. Participants provided on-line fear ratings after each train of stimuli. We 
assessed correlations between neural activity and these fear ratings, as well as other phobic 
behaviors taken prior to the experiment.
Consistent with prior imaging studies of Specific Phobia (Del Casale, et al., 2012; Linares, 
et al., 2012), we expected both masked and visible exposure to spiders – VBE and CVE – to 
activate regions supporting subcortical fear (e.g., amygdala) and visual systems more 
strongly in phobic than in control participants. Because VBE involves focusing intently on 
repeated trains of masked phobic stimuli, we expected it to activate regions supporting 
attention (e.g., dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) in phobic versus control participants. Based on 
our prior findings that VBE automatically reduces phobic participants’ fear of a live 
tarantula, we expected VBE to activate ventral prefrontal cortical (vPFC) regions - which are 
believed to support automatic fear inhibition (Delgado, et al., 2008) – in phobic participants, 
although such activation should not necessarily differ from activation in healthy controls, 
who naturally inhibit fear responses. Based on our prior findings that CVE induces 
sympathetic arousal and subjective distress in phobic participants, we expected CVE to 
deactivate vPFC regions in the phobic group. Thus, in direct contrasts of CVE and VBE to 
spiders in the phobic group, we expected VBE to generate stronger activation of vPFC and 
DLPFC regions than CVE. Correspondingly, CVE would cause phobic participants to 
experience fear, whereas VBE would not. Confirmation of these hypotheses would challenge 
prevailing theory by showing that limiting conscious recognition of phobic stimuli 
paradoxically facilitates the activation of fear processing and regulation systems in the brain, 
suggesting the presence of neural pathways for reducing fear other than those identified 
through conscious, cognitive processing (Delgado, et al., 2008; Hermann et al, 2009).
2. Methods and Materials
2.1 Participants
We studied 21 spider-phobic and 21 healthy control participants, all right-handed, female 
undergraduate students. Women were chosen because previous studies have shown that 
75%–80% of all specific phobics are women (Fyer, 1998; Magee, et al 1996). Potential 
participants were administered the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (First, Spitzer, 
et al., 1997), the Fear of Spiders Questionnaire (FSQ; Szymanski & O’Donohue, 1995), and 
Siegel et al.
Page 3
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a Behavioral Avoidance Test in which they were asked to gradually approach a live tarantula 
(described below; Siegel & Weinberger, 2012). Phobic participants met DSM-V criteria for 
Specific Phobia, did not meet criteria for any other current or lifetime disorder, were in the 
top 15% of the distribution of FSQ scores, exhibited impairing fear of the tarantula, and 
showed color-naming interference of spider words on a Spider Stroop Task, an implicit 
measure of spider fear (Williams, et al., 1996). Non-phobic participants did not meet criteria 
for any disorder, were in the bottom 30% of the distribution of FSQ scores, and displayed no 
avoidance and reported no fear of the tarantula. Average age was 19.7 years (SD = 1.6; 
Range: 18–25). Participants provided written informed consent.
2.2 fMRI Task Design and Stimuli
Two features of the study design built on prior imaging studies of masked stimuli by 
controlling for visual features of the phobic and fear-irrelevant (control) stimuli, and thus 
their effects on neural activity. Prior imaging studies of Specific Phobia have tended to use 
as control stimuli various fear-irrelevant images having visual configurations that differed 
significantly from those of the phobic stimuli (e.g., snakes versus birds, spiders versus 
mushrooms; Alpers, et al, 2009; Leuken, et al., 2001; Schweckendiek, et al., 2010). As 
shown in Figure 1, we used fear-irrelevant stimuli (flowers) that had a similar visual 
configuration as the phobic stimuli (spiders), and matched these stimuli for lower-order 
visual features. Thus, effects on neural activity of masked phobic versus fear-irrelevant 
stimuli were determined to the greatest extent possible by their emotional properties.
Second, before contrasting neural activity between groups and conditions, within each group 
and condition we first contrasted neural activity induced by the target stimuli with activity 
induced by corresponding neutral stimuli composed of scrambled fragments of the target 
stimuli - and thus many of the same lower-order visual features. Thus, each condition 
generated patterns of neural activity determined by the identity and emotional meaning of 
the target stimuli to the participants.
fMRI Task Design—Each of three conditions was presented during fMRI scanning: (1) 
very brief exposure (VBE) to masked spiders (masked, 33.4-ms stimulus duration); (2) 
clearly visible exposure (CVE) to spiders (unmasked, 117-ms duration); and (3) very brief 
flowers (VBF; control; masked, 33.4-ms duration). These conditions were manipulated 
within-subjects in order to compare their effects directly within the same participants. Thus, 
we acquired three runs, one for each condition. The six possible sequences of conditions 
(e.g., VBE → CVE → VBF) was counterbalanced across participants. The conditions were 
separated by two minutes of rest. Each condition consisted of 16 blocks of 10 target 
stimulus-mask trials alternating with 16 blocks of 10 neutral stimulus-mask trials, yielding a 
10-minute run of 16 paired blocks for each target stimulus type. In each condition, blocks of 
target stimuli (spiders or flowers) were alternated with blocks of masked neutral stimuli in 
order to contrast neural activity induced by the target stimuli with activity induced by 
masked neutral stimuli. Each neutral stimulus consisted of scrambled pieces of the 
corresponding target stimulus. Alternating individual trials of target and neutral stimuli 
would have departed from the crucial feature of VBE - repeated presentation of masked 
Siegel et al.
Page 4
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 phobic stimuli, and would have precluded on-line fear ratings, which were overriding 
considerations in study design.
Each target or neutral trial consisted of an “X” for gaze fixation (duration jittered from 1–2 
sec), followed immediately by a target stimulus (spider or flower, depending on condition) 
or corresponding neutral stimulus, followed immediately by the masking stimulus (117 ms, 
array of the repeated letters “ABCD”). Each trial (“X”/target or neutral stimulus/mask) was 
repeated 10 times to yield a block of 10 target or neutral trials in succession. There was no 
inter-trial interval. After each block of 10 target or neutral trials, participants rated levels of 
fear on a 10-point, anchored ordinal scale (3000 ms).
Before entering the scanner, and immediately before the start of each run, participants were 
told that they would be presented with a series of stimuli that they may or may not 
recognize. Their task was to maintain their focus on the stimuli, and to provide fear ratings 
on the scale that would appear after each block of stimuli (~every 12 secs).
Stimuli and Presentation—The target stimuli were 25 images each of spiders or flowers, 
400 × 300 pixels. The bottom panel of Figure 1 shows representative spider and flower 
images. To isolate the emotional effects of masked phobic stimuli on neural activity, we 
masked fear-irrelevant stimuli (flowers) with a visual configuration (central body with 
multiple radiations) that was similar to that of the spiders. The flower images were either of 
Cleome, the “spider flowers”, or Brassia Rex Sakata, the “spider orchids” - possessing a 
central body (ovary/style) with multiple long, thin radiations (petals), controlling for some of 
the edge and contour features of the spider images. The color, hue, luminance, and contrast 
of luminance of the flower images also matched those of the spider images.
Twenty-five corresponding neutral stimuli were created from the target images, which were 
cut into 1,200 squares of 10 × 10 pixels (Figure 1). The squares were randomly shuffled so 
that the features of the target images were not discernible in the neutral stimuli. The neutral 
stimuli thus retained the colors, luminance, hue, and general texture of the targets – i.e., their 
lower-order visual features, but contained multiple contours and thus lacked a perceivable 
object.
The masking stimulus was an array of the letters ABCD, 500 × 500 pixels, repeated to cover 
entirely the area of the target images. Signal detection analyses and subjective tests of 
awareness have shown the mask to be effective at preventing recognition of the spider and 
flower images when either type of stimuli was repeatedly presented for 33-ms each or less 
(Siegel, et al., 2011; Siegel & Weinberger, 2009; 2012; Weinberger & Siegel, 2011).
The stimuli were presented using Eprime (Psychology Software Tools, Inc.) on a PC 
monitor (resolution 1024 × 768, refresh rate 60 Hz), rear projected onto a 2 × 3 in. mirror 
mounted on the head coil 9 cm. in front of the eyes.
2.3 Behavioral Assessments
For detailed description of these assessments, see section SM 1 of the Supplement. The Fear 
of Spiders Questionnaire (FSQ, Szymanski & O’Donoghue, 1995) assessed the extent to 
Siegel et al.
Page 5
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 which participants believed they were fearful of spiders. Filler questions, which concerned 
other fears and sensation seeking, disguised the intent of the FSQ. A Behavioral Avoidance 
Test (BAT) was used to measure levels of avoidance of a live tarantula housed in a 10-gallon 
glass aquarium. Participants were asked to complete a series of approach tasks that brought 
them progressively closer to the tarantula (section SM1 of the Supplement). A Spider Stroop 
task was used to measure color-naming interference of spider words, an implicit measure of 
fear (Newman & McKinney, 2002; Williams, et al., 1996). Participants first named the color 
of a series of neutral words (e.g., BED appears in the color red). Then they named the color 
of a series of spider-related words (e.g., WEB), matched for word length and number of 
vowels and consonants. The difference between the times to name the colors of the spider 
vs. neutral words yielded a color-naming interference score.
A funneled stimulus interview, progressing from open-ended to specific questions, was 
conducted immediately after each of the three condition to assess knowledge of the stimuli. 
See SM1 of the Supplement for the list of questions that composed the interview.
2.4 Functional Image Acquisition and Preprocessing
Functional images were acquired on a GE Signa 3-Tesla scanner using an echo planar 
protocol. For each participant, 343 imaging volumes were collected for each of the three, 10-
minute runs, including 6 initial “dummy” volumes. Twenty T1-weighted images were 
acquired parallel to the anterior commissure-posterior commissure line, followed by a 3-
dimensional spoiled gradient recall (SPGR) image for coregistration with axial echoplanar 
images. Acquisition parameters for the axial echoplanar images were: TR= 1800ms; TE= 
28ms; flip angle= 75°; field of view = 22.4 × 22.4cm; acquisition matrix= 64 × 64; slice 
thickness= 4.0mm; gap= 0mm; effective resolution = 3.5 × 3.5 × 4.0mm; 32 slices per 
volume provided whole brain coverage.
Each participant’s functional images were first visually inspected for motion and other 
artifacts. Image preprocessing was conducted using a standard pipeline implemented in 
SPM8 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/) under MATLAB 2010B, including: (a) slice-
timing correction based on sinc function interpolation and fast Fourier transform for 
temporal realignment of slices within each volume, using the middle slice as the timing 
reference; (b) motion correction for three translational directions and three rotations, derived 
from a series of ridged-body transforms of each image volume with respect to the first image 
volume by minimizing the mean square error between the volumes; (c) spatial normalization 
by reformatting each high-resolution SPGR image to the Montreal Neurological Institute 
template ICBM 152 (2×2×2 mm3 voxels); (d) spatial smoothing of functional images with 
an 6 mm FWHM Gaussian kernel, and temporal smoothing with a Discrete Cosine 
Transform high-pass filter (basis function length = 128s).
Head Motion—During image preprocessing, we took several steps to ensure that motion 
artifacts did not confound measurement of neural activity. We used the SPM8 motion 
realignment procedure to detect 3 translation motion parameters and 3 rotation parameters 
for each fMRI run when realigning images with the first image volume. The three fMRI runs 
(VBE, CVE, VBF) of all participants were <3 mm translational motion and <3° rotational 
Siegel et al.
Page 6
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 motion. Second, we tested whether head movement during the MRI scans differed between 
the phobic and control groups in each of the three conditions by calculating an aggregate 
head motion parameter from the 6 aforementioned parameters for each participant in each 
condition: the sum of the root mean squares of the six motion parameters for each image 
volume with respect to the previous image volume. The groups did not differ in head 
motion, as indexed by this aggregate parameter, in any of the conditions (for VBE, p=.69; 
CVE, p=.21; VBF, p=.73). Third, we used ArtRepair (http://cibsr.stanford.edu/tools/human-
brain-project/artrepair-software.html) to detect and repair imaging volumes that still 
contained motion-induced spikes in fMRI signal. ArtRepair assesses the relative change in 
translational and rotational motion parameters between successive imaging volumes. When 
the square root of the squared sum of the difference of the motion parameters between the 
current and previous imaging volumes exceeds 1, the current imaging volume is replaced by 
the mean of the previous and next imaging volumes. The developers of ArtRepair suggest 
that runs containing >15% of volumes need repair are excluded from analyses. None of our 
runs surpassed this threshold.
2.5 Processing and Statistical Analysis of the Functional Imaging Data
Processing Each Participant’s fMRI data—The general linear model in SPM8 was 
used to process each participant’s fMRI data for each of the three conditions. Data were 
modeled for each participant and for each condition using a constant and four independent 
regressors corresponding to the active block (spider or flower presentation), the first fear 
rating immediately following the active block, the neutral block, and the second fear rating 
following the neutral block. The BOLD signal change for each event was generated by 
convolving a canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF) with a boxcar function 
(BCF) derived from the onsets and durations of each event. The model was estimated using 
the Restricted Maximum Likelihood (ReML) algorithm with autocorrelation in the time 
series removed using a first-order autoregressive model. Then task-related contrast images 
(e.g., VB spider vs. Neutral) were generated using the SPM8 contrast manager. Each 
participant’s contrast images of target vs. neutral blocks of stimuli were intensity-normalized 
using the respective last beta images in the fMRI time series to standardize image intensity 
across runs. A conjunction mask was applied to these contrast images of target vs. neutral 
events to ensure that only voxels without signal voids were analyzed.
Group-level Processing of the fMRI Data—Each participant’s task-related contrast 
images were then entered into a group-level, Random Effects analysis to determine 
significant BOLD response to target vs. neutral stimuli within each condition and group, 
separately. Bayesian posterior inference was used for the group-level analysis of the contrast 
images generated for each participant, specifically an in-house, MATLAB-based algorithm 
of Neumann and Lohmann’s method (2003) for inferring the posterior probability of 
detecting group effects brain-wise. We selected Neumann and Lohmann’s method (2003) of 
Bayesian analysis in order to address the recently highlighted problem of false positive 
findings associated with correcting p-values for multiple comparisons in parametric methods 
of statistical analysis. On the basis of a recent meta-analysis, Eklund et al. (2016) reported 
that parametric statistical methods that rely on spatial cluster thresholding to correct for 
multiple comparisons suffer from inflated false positive rates. Neumann and Lohmann 
Siegel et al.
Page 7
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (2003) compared results using their Bayesian method without any correction for multiple 
comparisons to the results of a conventional approach based on parametric inference (the 
standard second-level analysis in LIPSIA) thresholded at Z=3.09. The parametric method 
was performed voxelwise with Bonferroni correction; it did not employ cluster-based 
thresholding. Neumann and Lohmann (2003) showed that the “uncorrected” results of their 
Bayesian method were comparable to the results obtained using this conventional parametric 
method with a stringent threshold.
More significantly, Neumann & Lohmann’s (2003) Bauyesian method does not depend on 
spatial clusters, and so does not incur the problems of parametric methods that rely on them 
to correct for multiple comparisons. The theoretical work and numerical simulations of 
Friston and colleagues (Friston et al., 2002; Friston & Penny, 2003) have shown that 
Bayesian-inference methods do not incur multiple-comparison problems simply because 
they do not have false positives - unlike the parametric statistical methods criticized by 
Eklund et al (2016). In Bayesian-inference methods, the posterior probability estimation for 
a given voxel is equal for analyses involving a single voxel and analyses involving all brain 
voxels (Friston & Penny, 2003). Such empirical demonstrations show that Bayesian-
inference methods (including Neumann & Lohmann’s method) do not require use of cluster 
extent thresholds in calculating their posterior probability estimates. The power and utility of 
Bayesian methods in controlling false positive findings is the reason why other prominent 
studies have used Neumann and Lohmann’s implementation of Bayesian inference (see 
Klein et al., Science, 2007).
Because they do not require additional adjustments of statistical thresholds in their posterior 
probability estimates, some may assume that Bayesian approaches to fMRI statistical 
analysis are “unthresholded”. As an additional requisite for assuming statistical significance, 
however, we required positive findings to have a posterior probability greater than 97.5% (a 
more stringent threshold than that used by Klein et al. (2007) in a Science paper), and an 
extent of at least 8 contiguous voxels in all of our analyses (discarding results comprising 
few voxels, i.e., of questionable biological significance).
Our Bayesian method for group-level fMRI analysis bestowed other advantages. It allowed 
us to test our hypotheses directly (i.e., it produced a probability that our alternative 
hypotheses are correct), rather than simply reject the null hypothesis (i.e., producing a 
probability that it is acceptable to reject the null hypothesis based on how unlikely it is). 
Bayesian approaches are useful for detecting effects in groups that are heterogeneous, as can 
be the case with diagnostic samples, where the risk of missing detection of true biological 
effects (type II error) may be as important as reporting false positive findings (type I error). 
Finally, our Bayesian method is particularly reliable in comparing different groups of 
participants, minimizing the extent to which group-level effects are unduly weighted by 
individual differences in brain activity.
Analyses of Regions of Interest (ROIs)—We hypothesized that both VBE and CVE to 
spiders would both activate subcortical fear regions (amygdalae), and that VBE would 
activate ventral PFC regions that support emotion regulation more than CVE in phobic 
participants. Thus, we conducted group-level analyses of the activation time courses of the 
Siegel et al.
Page 8
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 right and left amygdala, and of the ventral medial prefrontal cortex, given their well-
documented involvement in fear activation and regulation, respectively (Delgado et al., 
2008; Phelps et al., 2004). Activity within these ROIs was assessed using small volume 
correction implemented in SPM8. A family-wise error (FWE) correction was applied to a 
local search region defined by a mask image for each ROI. The mask image was generated 
by coregistering the anatomical probability maps of ROIs from the SPM Anatomy Toolbox 
(Amunts, et al., 2005) with the MNI template ICBM152.
3. Results
3.1 Fear Ratings
Fear ratings for blocks of neutral stimuli were subtracted from those of corresponding blocks 
of target stimuli and statistically evaluated. Preliminary ANOVAs used blocks of stimuli as 
factors to test for effects of repeated measurement, and yielded no main or interaction 
effects. Thus, each participant’s fear ratings were averaged within each condition (separately 
for target and neutral stimuli). Table 1 shows mean fear ratings of the phobic and control 
groups for each of the three conditions. In a Group (Phobic or Control) x Exposure (3 
conditions) mixed model ANOVA, the main effect of Group was highly significant, F(1,40)= 
18., p=.0001, showing that fear ratings of the phobic group exceeded those of the control 
group, regardless of condition. The main effect of Exposure was also highly significant, 
F(2,80)= 16.4 p=.0001, and driven by the phobic group. In a one-way ANOVA of the phobic 
group, the main effect of Exposure was highly significant, F(2,40)= 13.2, p=.0001, Eta = .63 
(effect size). Post-hoc Tukey’s tests of the phobic group showed that clearly visible exposure 
(CVE) to spiders induced significantly more fear than both VBE to spiders, p=.001, and very 
brief flowers (VBF), p=.001. The same comparison of VBE and VBF was not significant 
(p=.30).
3.2 Imaging Findings
After presenting an overview of consistent patterns of neural activity across the diagnostic 
groups, we present the imaging findings in the order corresponding to our hypotheses in the 
introduction: first group contrasts and then condition contrasts in neural activity. We then 
present post hoc findings to aid interpretation of our findings for hypothesis testing.
Overview—Figure 2 shows patterns of activation generated by the active conditions – CVE 
and VBE to spiders – relative to neutral stimuli in the diagnostic groups. See Figure S1 in 
section SM2 of the Supplement for patterns of activity generated by VBF, for which group 
differences were virtually absent. As shown in Figure 2, the exposure conditions generated a 
variety of patterns of neural activity across and within the groups. In order to present these 
patterns efficiently, and to facilitate interpretation in terms of brain-behavior correlates, we 
present them in terms of information processing networks rather than a prohibitively 
detailed, region-by-region, reporting of findings.
The exposure task generated consistent patterns of activation across the conditions and 
groups, including neural systems subserving (1) vision, bilateral occipital and inferior 
parietal cortices, reflecting different features of the target versus neutral stimuli; (2) 
Siegel et al.
Page 9
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 attention, dorsolateral prefrontal cortices (DLPFC) and superior bilateral parietal cortices, 
reflecting the salience of the target vs. neutral stimuli; (3) affective evaluation, cortical 
regions identified by neuroimaging reviews of Specific Phobia (Del Casale et al., 2012; 
Linares et al., 2012): bilateral orbitofrontal cortices (OFC), anterior insula (AIns), anterior 
cingulate cortex (ACC), dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC), reflecting the emotional 
salience of the target stimuli; and (4) motor control, striatum and pre-motor regions, likely 
reflecting inhibition of responses to stimuli within the scanner. In the phobic group, CVE to 
spiders marginally activated the affective evaluation and pre-motor regions, and did not 
activate the striatum (putamen and caudate).
Across diagnostic groups, CVE and VBE to spiders deactivated regions associated with the 
Default Mode Network (DMN; posterior cingulate cortex, precuneus, cuneus, bilateral 
parietal cortices, medial PFC regions, middle-superior frontal gyri). However, CVE and 
VBE deactivated the DMN much more strongly in the phobic group, reflecting the greater 
salience of spiders to these participants.
Group Contrasts of the Exposure Conditions—Differences in activation between the 
phobic and control groups were strongest for CVE, intermediate for VBE (Figure 2), and 
nearly absent for VBF (Figure S1, Supplement). For locations and activation levels of brain 
regions that were differentially activated by the exposure conditions in the phobic vs. control 
groups, see Table 1 in section SM2 of the Supplement.
Contrary to our hypothesis that CVE to spiders would activate fear and visual regions more 
strongly in phobic than in control participants (see p. 4), CVE activated all of the 
aforementioned task-driven systems more strongly in the control group than the phobic 
group, and activated a subcortical system subserving rapid emotion response more strongly 
in control than in phobic participants: thalamus, amygdala, hippocampus, parahippocampal 
gyri. As predicted, CVE strongly deactivated ventral prefrontal regions that prototypically 
support emotion regulation in the phobic group (ventral medial and ventral lateral prefrontal 
cortices, VMPFC and VLPFC; Hermann et al., 2009; Phelps, et al. 2004). CVE also 
deactivated temporal regions associated with higher-order language (e.g., labeling; middle 
and superior temporal gyri, MTG and STG) and the DMN in phobic participants.
Consistent with our hypotheses (see p. 4), VBE to spiders activated the aforementioned 
subcortical emotion system, vision and attention systems, and regions supporting higher-
order language more strongly in the phobic group than in the control group. Also consistent 
with our hypotheses, VBE activated ventral prefrontal regions supporting emotion regulation 
and the cortical affective evaluation system comparably in the phobic and control groups. 
VBE also deactivated DMN regions in the phobic group strongly enough to emerge in group 
contrasts.
Direct Contrasts of the Active Exposure Conditions: CVE vs. VBE to Spiders
—This comparison identified the effects of limiting conscious recognition of the spider 
images on neural activity, while controlling for their visual and emotional properties (Figure 
3). Consistent with our hypothesis that VBE would activate ventral PFC regions more 
strongly than CVE in the phobic group, CVE deactivated and VBE activated regions 
Siegel et al.
Page 10
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 supporting emotion regulation (VLPFC) and higher-order language (MTG, STG) in the 
phobic group, effects that were absent in the control group. Consistent with our hypothesis 
that VBE would activate DLPFC regions more strongly than CVE in the phobic group, VBE 
activated the attention (LPFC/DLPFC), affective evaluation (insula, ACC, DMPFC), and 
motor control systems (striatum and pre-motor regions) much more strongly than CVE in 
the phobic group, effects that were absent or comparably marginal in the control group. 
Finally, CVE deactivated DMN regions more strongly than VBE in the phobic group, an 
effect that was absent in the control group.
In the control group, CVE to spiders activated the subcortical emotion system more strongly 
than VBE, an effect that was notably absent in the phobic group. As shown in the right-most 
column of Figure 3, all of these CVE versus VBE effects within the groups were strong 
enough to emerge in 3-way, group x condition x stimulus (target/neutral), interactions.
Direct Contrasts of the Masked Conditions: VBE to Spiders and Very Brief 
Flowers (VBF)—This comparison controls for the effects of masking the target stimuli on 
neural activity, isolating the effects of exposure to masked fear-relevant (VBE) versus fear-
irrelevant (VBF) stimuli (Figure 4). In the phobic group, VBE deactivated DMN regions, 
and activated the anterior insula (affective evaluation) and right DLPFC regions (attention) 
more strongly than did VBF. In the control group, by contrast, VBF activated occipital and 
superior parietal regions (vision/ visual attention) more than VBE.
Beta Coefficients for the Groups in Each Condition—In a subtraction paradigm, 
activations can be driven either by increased response to target stimuli or decreased response 
to neutral stimuli (and conversely for patterns of deactivation). To distinguish between these 
possibilities, we extracted beta coefficients from each participant’s contrast maps for each 
condition. Figure 5 shows bar graphs for a representative sample of brain regions. “Active” 
bars refer to the target stimuli in each condition - CV spiders, VB spiders, or VB flowers; 
“Neutral” bars refer to the neutral stimuli. In the phobic group during CVE, baseline activity 
of task-positive regions (e.g., DLPFC panel) in response to neutral stimuli was higher 
relative to target activity than in the other conditions, produced a net reduction in activation 
of those task-positive regions (Figures 2 and 3). Beta values also indicated that CV spiders 
activated the subcortical emotion system more strongly in control than phobic participants, 
and deactivated regions supporting emotion regulation and higher-order language in phobic 
participants (Figure 2), by suppressing activity of these regions in the phobic group 
(amygdalae, VMPFC, anterior VLPFC, bilateral MTG).
Beta values indicated that activations during VBE in phobic participants were driven by 
increased response to VB spiders (e.g., DLPFC and right amygdalae panels). Although 
VMPFC beta values for VB spiders exceeded those for CV spiders and VB flowers in 
phobic participants, higher baseline activity in response to neutral stimuli produced a net 
deactivation of the VMPFC in the phobic group (Figure 2).
Changes in Activation of Regions of Interest (ROIs) Across the Conditions—
The left panel of Figure 6 shows the activation time courses of ROIs that prior imaging 
studies have implicated in fear activation and regulation: the right and left amygdala, and the 
Siegel et al.
Page 11
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ventral medial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC), respectively (see Analysis of ROIs, p. 14). For 
the sake of brevity, only relevant interaction effects are presented. In phobic participants, 
activity of the right amygdala decreased significantly across blocks of VB spiders 
F(3,60)=2.86, p=.044, Eta=.35 (linearly, F(1,20)=5.19, p=.034, Eta= .45), and did not 
change across blocks of CV spiders, F(3,60)= 1.11, p=.353, or of VB Flowers, F<1. 
Contrastingly, VMPFC activity dropped precipitously from early to middle blocks of CV 
spiders in phobic participants, t(20)=2.31, p=.032, and did not change across blocks of VB 
spiders or of VB flowers (F<1).
Correlation Analyses of Behavioral Measures with Neural Activity—The right 
panel of Figure 6 shows voxel-wise correlations of neural activity of the exposure conditions 
with the explicit and implicit measures of fear: fear ratings given after each block of stimuli 
during fMRI scanning, and the Spider Stroop task given prior to fMRI scanning. Statistical 
and clustering thresholds were the same as for the functional imaging data.
Fear ratings during CVE to spiders strongly inversely correlated with activation of task 
positive regions, and positively correlated with deactivation of DMN regions. Greater fear 
was associated with less activation of the OFC and insula (affective evaluation), vlPFC and 
caudate (regulatory functions), DLPFC (attention), and with greater deactivation of DMN 
regions by CVE in the phobic group. Fear ratings of the phobic group in response to neither 
VBE to spiders nor VB flowers correlated with neural activations.
Spider Stroop scores - color-naming interference caused by spider words, an implicit 
measure of fear – were strongly, inversely correlated with activation of several regions by 
VBE to spiders in the phobic group. Greater cognitive interference was associated with less 
activation of regions by VBE: the occipital cortex (vision), DLPFC and bilateral superior 
parietal cortices (attention), insula and DMPFC (affective evaluation), superior and middle 
temporal gyri (language). Neither CVE to spiders nor VBF (control) yielded significant 
correlations of Spider Stroop scores with neural activations in phobic participants.
Phobic beliefs, as assessed by the FSQ, modestly correlated with activations by CVE to 
spiders. Approaching the tarantula modestly correlated with activations by VBE to spiders. 
See Figure S2 in section SM2 of the Supplement for brain maps of these correlations.
4. Discussion
4.1 Synthesis and Interpretation of Findings
We investigated the neural basis for the adaptive effects of very brief exposure (VBE) - the 
repeated presentation of masked phobic stimuli - by comparing the effects of VBE to 
spiders, clearly visible exposure (CVE) to the same images of spiders, and masked, very 
brief flowers (VBF; control) on the neural activity of spider-phobic and control participants. 
Counter-intuitively, CVE to spiders activated task-driven, cortical affective evaluation, and 
subcortical emotion systems more strongly in control than in phobic participants (Figure 2). 
These findings contrast with reviews of imaging studies of Specific Phobia showing that 
visible feared stimuli activate emotion systems in particular (Del Casale, et al., 2012; 
Linares, et al., 2012). Beta coefficients indicated that weaker activation of task-driven 
Siegel et al.
Page 12
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 regions (e.g., occipital cortex, DLPFC) in phobic participants during CVE than VBE was 
driven by higher baseline activity of corresponding regions in response to neutral stimuli 
during CVE (Figure 5), which reduced contrasts in neural activity between blocks of spider 
and neutral stimuli, thereby weakening activations. These findings suggest that visible 
spiders produced sustained vigilance in phobic participants - when blocks of ambiguous 
neutral stimuli (scrambled pieces of the target stimuli) were presented immediately after 
blocks of visible spiders. A substantial literature attests to hypervigilance by phobic persons 
(Bar-Haim et al., 2007; Mogg, Philippot & Bradley, 2004; Mogg & Bradley, 2002; Rinck & 
Becker, 2006; Teachman et al., 2012; Williams et al., 1997).
By contrast, beta coefficients indicated that CVE activated a subcortical emotion system 
more strongly in control participants (Figure 2) because visible spiders reduced activity of 
corresponding regions (e.g., amygdalae; Figure 5, “active task”) in phobic participants. Beta 
coefficients similarly indicated that CVE deactivated ventral PFC regions supporting 
emotion regulation and temporal regions supporting higher-order language in phobic 
participants (Figure 2) because visible spiders reduced activity of these regions (Figure 5). 
Correspondingly, CVE caused phobic participants to experience significant fear, and BOLD 
response of the VMPFC dropped precipitously in early blocks of CVE (Figure 6). 
Collectively, these findings suggest that CVE induced patterns of neural activity associated 
with deficient fear regulation.
Whereas CVE to spiders activated the subcortical emotion system more strongly in control 
than phobic participants, VBE to spiders uniquely activated this system more strongly in 
phobic than control participants – i.e., feared stimuli specifically engaged the subcortical 
emotion system when recognition of them was severely limited. (Funneled interviews given 
immediately after each condition showed that both groups were much less likely to identify 
spiders during VBE than during CVE, and as likely to identify spiders during VBE and 
VBF.) Consistently, only VBE – neither CVE nor VB flowers – activated subcortical 
emotion, vision, and attention systems, and regions supporting and higher-order language, 
more strongly in phobic participants than controls (Figure 2). That these diagnostic group 
contrasts in neural activity were specific to VBE shows that masking feared stimuli 
conferred greater exposure-related activity in phobic participants that would have otherwise 
been reduced (as occurred during CVE to spiders). Limiting recognition of feared stimuli 
facilitated their processing. Consistently, VBE did not induce fear in phobic participants, and 
generated patterns of neural activity associated with cognitive control (i.e., less cognitive 
interference, as indexed by Spider Stroop scores). These findings suggest that VBE induced 
neural activity associated with emotion regulation in phobic participants. Masking exposure 
to phobic stimuli may reduce threat vigilance, allowing the salience of phobic stimuli to 
activate and possibly desensitize fear-processing neural systems, thereby preventing the 
experience of fear.
Direct contrasts of CVE and VBE to spiders further illustrated how masking phobic stimuli 
conferred greater exposure-related processing (Figure 3). In phobic participants, VBE 
activated, and CVE deactivated, regions that prototypically support emotion regulation and 
higher-order language. Similarly, VBE activated attention, affective and motor control 
systems more strongly than CVE. The counterintuitive finding of stronger effects of weaker 
Siegel et al.
Page 13
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 – masked – stimuli are considered to be the most valid indicator of automatic processing 
(Wiens, 2006). Thus, these findings suggest that phobic participants processed spiders 
automatically during VBE. CVE and VBE to spiders showed consistent dissociations in 
effects on ROIs in phobic participants: whereas VMPFC activity dropped precipitously 
during CVE and right amygdala activity did not change, right amygdala activity significantly 
decreased during VBE and VMPFC activity did not change. Whereas CVE caused phobic 
participants to experience significant fear, and generated neural activity that strongly 
correlated with fear ratings – explicit fear, VBE did not induce fear and generated activity 
that strongly inversely correlated with color-naming interference - implicit fear (Figure 6). 
These multiple dissociations between the effects of CVE and VBE suggest that phobic 
participants consciously processed spiders during CVE, which induced fear, and 
automatically processed spiders during VBE, which was associated with fear regulation.
While contrasts in neural activity between masked phobic and fear-irrelevant stimuli – VBE 
and VBF – were not as pronounced as in prior studies, the latter stimuli - “spider-flowers” - 
were quite similar to the phobic stimuli in visual features (Figure 1). Nonetheless, VBE 
activated subcortical emotion, vision and attention systems and regions supporting higher-
order language more strongly in phobic than in control participants (Figure 2), whereas VB 
flowers did not generate group contrasts (Figure S1 in section SM2 of Supplement). In direct 
contrasts of these masked conditions in the phobic group, VBE to spiders deactivated DMN 
regions, and activated regions supporting affective processing and attention more than VB 
flowers (Figure 4). These findings suggest that the brain distinguished between similar 
phobic and fear-irrelevant stimuli despite limited conscious recognition, i.e., masking 
exposure to phobic stimuli engaged processing of emotional salience.
Relatedly, VBE and CVE to spiders both deactivated Default Mode Network (DMN) regions 
in phobic participants (Figures 2 & 3), which subserves internally focused activities (e.g., 
daydreaming). DMN activity declines when processing task-active relative to neutral stimuli, 
producing a “deactivation” of the DMN (Raichle, et al., 2001). To our knowledge, 
deactivation of the DMN by masked phobic stimuli has not been reported previously. This 
finding also suggests that masked exposure engages processing of emotional salience.
4.2 Limitations and Conclusions
These findings and interpretations must be considered in the context of limitations. Prior 
presentation of CVE to spiders may have affected responses to VBE or VBF. If so, VBE 
would have generated similar patterns of neural activity as CVE, particularly in phobic 
participants. Thus, carryover effects would weaken findings, not produce spurious ones. 
However, CVE and VBE to spiders generated quite different patterns of activity in phobic 
participants, had different effects on fear ratings, and correlated with explicit versus implicit 
measures of fear respectively, suggesting that carryover effects were minimized. Regardless, 
a limitation of the within-subjects design is that it only allows us to associate the exposure 
conditions with patterns of brain activity. It does not allow us to conclude causal 
mechanisms or directions, which would require experimental manipulation of the exposure 
conditions as in a randomized controlled trial (i.e., randomization, blinding), which will be 
the focus of future studies.
Siegel et al.
Page 14
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Another limitation was that participants did not give trial-wise responses to the stimuli. This 
was done to preserve the ecological validity of the exposure task. In VBE, phobic 
participants are instructed just to focus on – rather than respond to – repeated trains of 
masked spider images, which has been shown to reduce their avoidance of a live tarantula in 
prior studies (see Introduction). The study also lacked an objective measure of response to 
the stimuli, such as eye tracking or a physiological measure. After quickly fixating on 
spiders, phobic individuals tend to avert gaze (Rinck & Becker, 2006), which may account 
for reduced activations by CVE to spiders in this group. However, phobic participants rated 
higher levels of fear after each of sixteen blocks of CVE than VBE to spiders, suggesting 
that they attended to CV spiders. Further, beta coefficients for visual and attentional regions 
should not be significantly higher during blocks of CV spiders (Figure 6, DLPFC, “Active” 
bar) than blocks of neutral stimuli if phobic participants averted gaze when the former 
stimuli were presented. Consistently, in the funneled interview given immediately after each 
condition, phobic participants reported that they were able to remain focused when CV 
spiders were presented. We opted for a self-reported (fear rating) rather than physiological 
measure of response to the stimuli because our prior studies have shown that phobic 
participants’ subjective experience of VBE determines whether its therapeutic effects occur, 
and that CVE induces sympathetic arousal in phobic participants whereas VBE does not (see 
Introduction). On-line fear ratings provided a naturalistic, clinically relevant index of 
emotional reactivity to the stimuli.
In addition to the connection to prior behavioral studies attesting to the fear-reducing effects 
of VBE, our findings are consistent with a recent fMRI study that found that fear responses 
to conditioned stimuli (CS+s) were reduced by pairing rewards with activity patterns in the 
visual cortex matching the CS+s, even though the participants were not aware they were 
viewing these stimuli (Koizumi, Amano, et al., 2016). However, these were normal 
participants who were temporarily fear conditioned. Participants in the current study, by 
contrast, were clearly spider phobic as shown by meeting DSM-V criteria for Specific 
Phobia and by exhibiting avoidance of a live tarantula. Regardless, these converging findings 
from different research paradigms suggest that exposure procedures based on unconscious 
processing may lead to novel treatments for fear-related disorders.
In this study, less was more. The multiple dissociations between the effects of masked and 
visible exposure to phobic images – VBE and CVE – on patterns of neural activity, 
experienced fear, and correlations with explicit versus implicit measures of fear suggest that 
limiting awareness of exposure more strongly engaged the processing of phobic stimuli. 
Counter-intuitively, CVE to feared stimuli produced greater activity of emotion processing 
systems and emotion regulation regions in control than in phobic participants, and sustained 
threat vigilance and induced fear in phobic participants. Masking exposure to feared stimuli 
(VBE), by contrast, produced greater activity in emotion processing systems and regulatory 
regions and did not induce fear in phobic participants. Masking exposure may reduce 
vigilance to threat, allowing the salience of phobic stimuli to activate fear processing 
systems automatically, while simultaneously preventing the experience of fear. Future 
studies are needed to clarify the fear regulatory mechanisms of masked exposure (e.g., 
extinction, desensitization), and to test the hypothesis suggested by our findings: masked 
Siegel et al.
Page 15
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 exposure engages emotional salience processing in phobic persons for an adaptive purpose, 
the recruitment of regulatory systems that inhibit fear.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The research was made possible by the provision of MRI data by New York State Psychiatric Institute and 
Columbia University, New York, NY.
Funding Sources
This study was funded by an R21 Research Grant from the National Institute of Mental Health to Dr. Paul Siegel 
(Grant Number 7R21MH101564-02). Supplemental funding for MRI scans was provided by a Research Grant from 
the Fund for Psychoanalytic Research of the American Psychoanalytic Association, and Faculty Support Awards 
from Purchase College to Dr. Paul Siegel. Collection of crucial pilot data was funded by grants from the Society for 
Neuropsychoanalysis and from the International Psychoanalytic Association to Dr. Paul Siegel.
References
Alpers GW, Gerdes AM, Lagarie B, Tabbert K, Vaitl D, Stark R. Attention and amygdala activity: an 
fMRI study with spider pictures in spider phobia. J Neur Trans. 2009; 116:747–757.
Balderston NL, Helstetter FJ. Conditioning with masked stimuli affects the time course of skin 
conductance responses. Behav Neurosci. 2010; 4:478–489.
Bar-Haim Y, Lamy D, Pergamin L, Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ, van IJzendoorn MH. Threat-related 
attentional bias in anxious and nonanxious individuals: A meta-analytic study. Psychol Bull. 2007; 
133:1–24. [PubMed: 17201568] 
Carlsson K, Petersson KM, Lundqvist D, Karlsson A, Ingvar M, Öhman A, et al. Fear and the 
amygdala: Manipulation of awareness generates differential cerebral responses to phobic and fear-
relevant (but nonfeared) stimuli. Emotion. 2004; 4:340–353. [PubMed: 15571433] 
Del Casale A, Ferracuti S, Rapinesi C, Serata D, Piccirilli M, Savoja V. Functional neuroimaging in 
Specific Phobia. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging. 2012; 202:181–197. [PubMed: 22804970] 
Delgado MR, Nearing KI, LeDoux JE, Phelps EA. Neural circuitry underlying the regulation of 
conditioned fear and its relation to extinction. Neuron. 2008; 59:829–838. [PubMed: 18786365] 
Esteves F, Dimberg U, Öhman A. Automatically elicited fear: Conditioned skin conductance responses 
to masked facial expressions. Cog Emot. 1994; 8:393–413.
Etkin A, Klemenhagen KC, Dudman JT, Rogan MT, Hen R, Kandel ER, Hirsch J. Individual 
differences in trait anxiety predict the response of the basolateral amygdala to unconsciously 
processed fearful faces. Neuron. 2004; 44:1043–1055. [PubMed: 15603746] 
Friston KJ, Glaser DE, Henson RA, Kiebel S, Phillips C, Ashburner J. Classical and bayesian 
inference in neuroimaging: Applications. NeuroImage. 2002; 16:484–512. [PubMed: 12030833] 
Friston KJ, Penny W. Posterior probability maps and SPMs. NeuroImage. 2003; 19:1240–1249. 
[PubMed: 12880849] 
Katkin ES, Wiens S, Ohman A. Nonconscious fear conditioning, visceral perception, and the 
development of gut feelings. Psychol Sci. 2001; 12:366–370. [PubMed: 11554668] 
Klein TA, Neumann J, Reuter M, Hennig J, von Cramon DY, Ullsperger M. Genetically determined 
differences in learning from errors. Science. 2007; 318:1642–1645. [PubMed: 18063800] 
Larson CL, Schaefer HS, Siegle GJ, Jackson CA, Anderle MJ, Davidson RJ. Fear is fast in phobic 
individuals: amygdala activation in response to fear-relevant stimuli. Biol Psychiatry. 2006; 
60:410–17. [PubMed: 16919528] 
Siegel et al.
Page 16
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Leuken U, Kruschwitz JD, Muehlhan M, Siegert J, Hoyer J, Wittchen HU. How specific is specific 
phobia? Different neural response patterns in two subtypes of specific phobia. NeuroImage. 2011; 
56:363–72. [PubMed: 21316468] 
Linares IP, Trzesniak C, Chagas MN, Hallak JC, Nardi AE, Crippa JS. Neuroimaging in specific 
phobia disorder: A systematic review of the literature. Rev Bras Psiquiatria. 2012; 34:101–111.
Lipka J, Miltner WR, Straube T. Vigilance for threat interacts with amygdala responses to subliminal 
threat cues in specific phobia. Biol Psychiatry. 2011; 70:472–478. [PubMed: 21601831] 
Mogg K, Bradley BP. Selective orienting of attention to masked threat faces in social anxiety. Behav 
Res Ther. 2002; 40:1403–1414. [PubMed: 12457635] 
Mogg K, Philippot P, Bradley BP. Selective attention to angry faces in clinical social phobia. J Abnorm 
Psychol. 2004; 113:160–165. [PubMed: 14992669] 
Morris JS, Öhman A, Dolan RJ. Conscious and unconscious emotional learning in the human 
amygdala. Nature. 1998; 393:467–470. [PubMed: 9624001] 
Morris JS, Öhman A, Dolan RJ. A subcortical pathway to the right amygdala mediating “unseen” fear. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci. 1999; 96:1680–1685. [PubMed: 9990084] 
Neumann J, Lohmann G. Bayesian second-level analysis of functional magnetic resonance images. 
NeuroImage. 2003; 20:1346–1355. [PubMed: 14568503] 
Newman LS, McKinney LC. Repressive coping and threat avoidance: An idiographic stroop study. 
Pers Soc Psychol Bull. 2002; 28:409–422.
Öhman A, Mineka S. Fears, phobias, and preparedness: Toward an evolved module of fear and fear 
learning. Psychol Rev. 2001; 108:483–522. [PubMed: 11488376] 
Öhman A, Soares J. Emotional conditioning to masked stimuli: Expectancies for aversive outcomes 
following nonrecognized fear-relevant stimuli. J Exp Psychol: Gen. 1998; 127:69–82. [PubMed: 
9503652] 
Öhman A, Soares J. “Unconscious anxiety”: Phobic responses to masked stimuli. J Abnorm Psychol. 
1994; 103:231–240. [PubMed: 8040492] 
Öhman A, Soares J. On the automatic nature of phobic fear: Conditioned electrodermal responses to 
masked fear-relevant stimuli. J Abnorm Psychol. 1993; 102:121–132. [PubMed: 8436688] 
Phelps EA, Delgado MR, Nearing KI, LeDoux JE. Extinction learning in humans: Role of the 
Amygdala and vmPFC. Neuron. 2004; 43:897–905. [PubMed: 15363399] 
Raichle ME, MacLeod AM, Snyder AZ, Powers WJ, Gusnard DA, Shulman GL. A default mode of 
brain function. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2001; 98:676–682. [PubMed: 11209064] 
Rinck M, Becker ES. Spider fearful individuals attend to threat, then quickly avoid it: Evidence from 
eye movements. J Abnorm Psychol. 2006; 115:231–238. [PubMed: 16737388] 
Schweckendiek J, Klucken T, Merz CJ, Tabbert K, Walter B, Ambach W, Vaitl D, Stark R. Weaving 
the (neuronal) web: fear learning in spider phobia. NeuroImage. 2011; 54:681–688. [PubMed: 
20673801] 
Siegel P, Anderson JF, Han E. Very brief exposure II: The effects of unreportable stimuli on phobic 
behavior. Consc Cognition. 2011; 20:181–190.
Siegel P, Gallagher KA. Delaying in vivo exposure to a tarantula with very brief exposure to phobic 
stimuli. J Behav Ther Exper Psychiatry. 2015; 46:182–188. [PubMed: 25460265] 
Siegel P, Warren R. The effect of very brief exposure on the subjective experience of fear induced by in 
vivo exposure. Cog Emotion. 2013; 27:1013–1022.
Siegel P, Warren R. Less is still more: Maintenance of the very brief exposure effect one year later. 
Emotion. 2013; 13:338–344. [PubMed: 23527506] 
Siegel P, Weinberger J. Very brief exposure: The effects of unreportable stimuli on fearful behavior. 
Consc Cognition. 2009; 18:939–951.
Siegel P, Weinberger J. Less is more: The effects of very brief versus clearly visible exposure on spider 
phobia. Emotion. 2012; 12:394–402. [PubMed: 22468620] 
Straube T, Mentzel HJ, Miltner WH. Neural mechanisms of automatic and direct processing of 
phobogenic stimuli in specific phobia. Biol Psychiatry. 2006; 59:162–70. [PubMed: 16139812] 
Szymanski J, O’Donohue W. Fear of spiders questionnaire. J Behav Ther Exper Psychiatry. 1995; 
26:31–34. [PubMed: 7642758] 
Siegel et al.
Page 17
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Teachman BA, Joormann J, Steinman SA, Gotlib IH. Automaticity in anxiety disorders and major 
depressive disorder. Clin Psychol Review. 2012; 32:575–603.
Weinberger J, Siegel P, Siefert C, Drawl J. What You Can’t See Can Help You. Consc Cognition. 2011; 
20:173–180.
Whalen PJ, Rauch SL, Etcoff NL, McInerney SC, Lee MB, Jenike MA. Masked presentations of 
emotional facial expressions modulate amygdala activity without explicit knowledge. J Neurosci. 
1998; 18:411–418. [PubMed: 9412517] 
Whalen PJ, Kagan J, Cook RG, Davis FC, Kim H, Polis S, McLaren DG, Somerville LH, McLean AA, 
Maxwell JS, Johnstone T. Human amygdala responsivity to masked fearful eye whites. Science. 
2004; 306:2061. [PubMed: 15604401] 
Wiens S. Current concerns in visual masking. Emotion. 2006; 6:675–680. [PubMed: 17144759] 
Williams, JMG., Watts, FN., MacLeod, C., Mathews, A. Cognitive psychology and emotional 
disorders. 2. Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 1997. 
Williams JG, Matthews A, Macleod C. The emotional stroop task and psychopathology. Psychol Bull. 
1996; 120:3–24. [PubMed: 8711015] 
Williams LM, Das P, Liddell BJ, Kemp AH, Rennie CJ, Gordon E. Mode of functional connectivity in 
amygdala pathways dissociates level of awareness for signals of fear. J Neurosci. 2006; 26:9264–
9271. [PubMed: 16957082] 
Siegel et al.
Page 18
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
The top panel shows the fMRI task design. Each of the three 10-minute conditions consisted 
of 16 alternating blocks of 10 target stimulus-mask and 10 neutral stimulus-mask trials. 
Each trial was an X (fixation point), then either a target or a neutral stimulus (33.4-ms or 
117-ms) depending on block, followed by the masking stimulus (117-ms). The duration of 
the X was jittered from 1000 to 2000-ms to prevent expectancies about the appearance of the 
target stimuli, with no inter-trial interval. After each block of 10 target or neutral trials, a 10-
point, anchored, ordinal scale appeared for subjects to rate levels of fear. Thus, a block of 10 
target stimuli is presented, followed by the VAS, then a block of 10 neutral stimuli, followed 
by another VAS. This process was repeated 16 times in each condition. The bottom panel 
shows examples of the spider and flower images, 400 × 300 pixels, matched for color, hue, 
luminance and contrast of luminance. The flower images were either of Cleome, the “spider 
flowers”, or Brassia Rex Sakata, the “spider orchids” - possessing a central body (ovary/
style) with multiple long, thin radiations (petals), like the spider images.
Siegel et al.
Page 19
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Representative slices of the posterior probability maps generated by clearly visible exposure 
(CVE) and very brief exposure (VBE) to spiders in the phobic and control groups, and 
corresponding group contrasts. The color code at the bottom indicates the posterior 
probability of positively and negatively activated regions (from 97.5% to 99.9%). Positively 
activated regions – red to white color bar – indicate greater BOLD response to blocks of 
target than neutral stimuli; negatively activated regions – blue to green color bar - indicate 
greater BOLD response to blocks of neutral than target stimuli. Proceeding from left to right 
in each row, the region labels identify the following. z=−20: OFC = orbital frontal cortex; 
Amy = amygdala; Hip = hippocampus; ParaHip = parahippocampal gyrus. z=−2: STG = 
superior temporal gyrus; MTG = middle temporal gyrus; Occ = occipital cortex; VLPFC = 
ventral lateral prefrontal cortex; VMPFC = ventral medial prefrontal cortex; Str = striatrum 
(putamen & caudate); AIns = anterior insula. z=+8: MPFC = medial prefrontal cortex; Caud 
= caudate; Thal = thalamus. z=+28: PCC = posterior cingulate cortex; IP = inferior parietal 
cortex; Cun = cuneus; ACC = anterior cingulate cortex; LP = lateral parietal cortex; DLPFC 
= dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. z=+46: PreCu = precuneus; S-MFG = superior-middle 
frontal gyrus; PreMo = premotor cortex; SP = superior parietal cortex; DMPFC = dorsal 
medial prefrontal cortex; MFG = middle frontal gyrus; SFG = superior frontal gyrus.
Siegel et al.
Page 20
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Representative slices of the posterior probability maps generated by direct contrasts of the 
clearly visible exposure (CVE) and very brief exposure (VBE) conditions within each 
diagnostic group (phobic and control), and the corresponding condition contrasts. Coding of 
the color scales is as in Figure 2. Proceeding from left to right in each row, the labels 
identify the following. z=−20: Occ = occipital cortex; Amy = amygdala; Hip = 
hippocampus; ParaHip = parahippocampal gyrus. z=−4: VLPFC = ventral lateral prefrontal 
cortex; STG = superior temporal gyrus; MTG = middle temporal gyrus. z=+10: Caud = 
caudate; LPFC = lateral prefrontal cortex; STG = superior temporal gyrus. z=+28: ACC = 
anterior cingulate cortex; DLPFC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. LP = lateral parietal 
cortex; IP = inferior parietal cortex. z=+46: DMPFC = dorsal medial prefrontal cortex; 
PreMo = premotor cortex; MFG = middle frontal gyrus; PreCu = precuneus.
Siegel et al.
Page 21
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Representative slices of the posterior probability maps generated by direct contrasts of the 
very brief exposure (VBE) to spiders and very brief flower conditions within each diagnostic 
group (phobic and control), and the corresponding condition contrasts. Coding of the color 
scales is as in Figure 2. Proceeding from left to right in each row, the labels are: z=−20: Amy 
= amygdala; Hip = hippocampus; ParaHip = parahippocampal gyrus. z=−2: VMPFC = 
ventral medial prefrontal cortex. z=+10: A.Ins = insula; Occ = occipital cortex. z=+22: ACC 
= anterior cingulate cortex; PCC = posterior cingulate cortex; Cun = cuneus; DLPFC = 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. z=+46: S-MFG = superior-middle frontal gyrus; PreCu = 
precuneus; DMPFC = dorsal medial prefrontal cortex; SP = superior parietal cortex.
Siegel et al.
Page 22
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Mean beta coefficients for a representative sample of brain regions for each of the three 
stimulus conditions, within each diagnostic group. The green bars represent beta values for 
blocks of target stimuli (active task) in each condition; the yellow bars represent beta values 
for the blocks of neutral stimuli. CVE = clearly visible exposure to spiders. VBE = very 
brief exposure to spiders. VBF = very brief flowers. P = phobic group. C = control group.
Siegel et al.
Page 23
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
The left panel shows BOLD response of the right amygdala and of the VMPFC across 
blocks of VBE and CVE to spiders in the phobic group. BOLD response of the right 
amygdala decreased significantly across blocks of VBE in the phobic group, and did not 
change significantly across blocks of CVE or blocks of VB flowers. VMPFC activity 
dropped precipitously from early to middle blocks of CVE to spiders in the phobic group, 
and did not change significantly across blocks of VBE to spiders or of VB flowers. The right 
panel shows voxel-wise, whole-brain correlations of neural activity during CVE to spiders 
with on-line fear ratings, and of activity during VBE to spiders with scores for cognitive 
interference caused by spider words, as measured by the Spider Stroop task given prior to 
fMRI scanning. CVE = clearly visible exposure. VBE = very brief exposure. Stroop = 
Spider Stroop task. Proceeding from top to bottom in each row showing a condition-measure 
pair, the labels identify the following regions. CVE-fear ratings row: OFC = orbital frontal 
cortex; Caud = caudate; VLPFC = ventral lateral pretfrontal cortex. A.Ins = anterior insula; 
DLPFC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; MFG = middle frontal gyrus; LPar = lateral parietal 
cortex; PreCu = precuneus. VBE-Stroop row: STG = superior temporal gyrus; MTG = 
middle temporal gyrus; Ins = insula; DMPFC = dorsal medial prefrontal cortex.
Siegel et al.
Page 24
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Siegel et al.
Page 25
Table I
Mean Fear Ratings of the Phobic and Control Groups for the Three Conditions
Group
Type of Exposure
Clearly Visible Spiders
Very Brief Spiders
Very Brief Flowers
Phobic
5.40 (.43)
3.64 (.37)
2.92 (.35)
Control
1.26 (.32)
1.07 (.26)
1.03 (.25)
Note. Values outside of the parentheses represents mean fear ratings on the 1–10 scale. Values within parentheses represent standard error of 
measurement.
Hum Brain Mapp. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
