 RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY
◥
GENE EDITING
Direct CRISPR spacer acquisition
from RNA by a natural reverse
transcriptase–Cas1 fusion protein
Sukrit Silas,* Georg Mohr,* David J. Sidote, Laura M. Markham,
Antonio Sanchez-Amat, Devaki Bhaya, Alan M. Lambowitz,† Andrew Z. Fire†
INTRODUCTION: Cells use a variety of mech-
anisms to prevent the propagation of para-
sitic information. A family of adaptive immune
systems associated with CRISPRs in prokar-
yotes has been shown to protect cell popula-
tions from “selfish” DNA, including viruses
and plasmids. CRISPR-mediated immunity
begins with an “adaptation” phase, involving
the heritable acquisition of short sequence seg-
ments (spacers) from the genome of the infec-
tious agent by the host. This information is
stored within CRISPR arrays in the host ge-
nome and is used by CRISPR-associated (Cas)
nucleases in the subsequent “interference”
phase to identify and disrupt infections by the
same invader. CRISPR-Cas systems include
those capable of interfering with DNA and
RNA targets. In several characterized systems,
adaptation involves acquisition from DNA tem-
plates through the action of a subset of the Cas
proteins. One of these proteins (Cas1) plays a
catalytic role in spacer acquisition from DNA
in all systems analyzed so far.
RATIONALE: We sought to determine wheth-
er some CRISPR-Cas systems build CRISPR
arrays through the acquisition of spacer se-
quences from RNA. CRISPR systems are phy-
logenetically grouped into five types (types I
to V); in some type III CRISPR systems, Cas1 is
naturally fused to a reverse transcriptase (RT).
This suggests the possibility of a concerted
spacer integration mechanism involving Cas1
integrase activity and the reverse transcription
of RNA to DNA. This would enable the acqui-
sition of new spacers from RNA, potentially
generating adaptive immunity against RNA-
based invaders. To test this hypothesis, we
characterized the spacer acquisition machin-
eryof the RT-Cas1–containingtypeIII-B CRISPR
system in the bacterium Marinomonas medi-
terranea (MMB-1), by means of in vivo assays
and in vitro reconstitution.
RESULTS: To examine the acquisition capabi-
lities of the MMB-1 type III-B system, we over-
expressed RT-Cas1 and associated adaptation
genes from MMB-1 in the native host. The re-
sulting strains acquired a variety of new
spacer elements in their type III-B CRISPR
arrays. These sequences matched segments
from the MMB-1 genome and our expression
plasmids, with substantially more acquisitions
deriving from highly transcribed genes. The
transcription-associated acquisition of spacers
was dependent on functional Cas1 and RT do-
mains of the RT-Cas1 protein, supporting the
idea of an RNA capture mechanism that com-
bines Cas1 integrase activity with reverse tran-
scription of cellular RNA. While Cas1 catalytic
mutations abolished spacer acquisition, dele-
tion or mutational inactivation of the RT
domain yielded a system capable of integra-
tion with no transcrip-
tional bias, revealing an
alternative Cas1 activity
on DNA substrates. To
test whether the MMB-
1 system can acquire se-
quences from RNA, we
engineered a self-splicing intron into plasmid
copies of two MMB-1 genes that were well
sampled by RT-Cas1, simultaneously intro-
ducing mutations flanking the splice sites to
yield a novel exon-junction sequence that was
present as RNA but not DNA. Newly acquired
spacers containing the exon-junction sequences
confirmed that RT-Cas1 can acquire spacers
from RNA. To investigate the relationship be-
tween the integrase and RT activities of RT-
Cas1, we studied the acquisition machinery
in vitro. RT-Cas1 and the associated Cas2 pro-
tein promote the precise integration of single-
stranded RNA, single-stranded DNA, and
double-stranded DNA oligonucleotides di-
rectly into a linear CRISPR DNA substrate, indi-
cating that RT-Cas1 acquires spacers directly
from RNA. The in vitro studies are consist-
ent with a mechanism in which the Cas1-
fused RT domain then reverse-transcribes
the integrated RNA, converting it to a cDNA
sequence between CRISPR repeats. The con-
certed integrase-RT mechanism suggested
by the in vitro studies has similarities to the
genomic integration mechanism used by the
bacterial retrotransposons known as mobile
group II introns, which encode a related RT.
CONCLUSION: We showed that a natural RT-
Cas1 fusion protein in a type III CRISPR sys-
tem can enable the acquisition of new spacers
directly from RNA. With other type III CRISPR
systems known to target RNA for degradation,
RT-associated CRISPR-Cas systems would ef-
fectively generate adaptive immunity against
RNA parasites. RNA spacer acquisition could
also contribute to immune responses against
highly transcribed regions of DNA-based in-
vaders through targeted interference at both
the DNA and RNA levels.▪
RESEARCH
932
26 FEBRUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6276
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
The list of author affiliations is available in the full article online.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. E-mail: lambowitz@austin.utexas.edu
(A.M.L.); afire@stanford.edu (A.Z.F.)
Cite this article as S. Silas et al., Science 351, aad4234 (2016).
DOI: 10.1126/science.aad4234
Spacer acquisition from RNA. (Left) Small segments of invasive DNA are assimilated into
CRISPR arrays by Cas1 and Cas2 in a canonical spacer acquisition process that allows adaptive
immunity in a wide variety of bacteria and archaea. (Right) In some type III CRISPR systems, a RT
fused to Cas1 enables the acquisition of spacer sequences directly from RNA.This process might
mediate adaptive immunity against RNA-based parasites.
ON OUR WEB SITE
◥
Read the full article
at http:/
/dx.doi.
org/10.1126/
science.aad4234
..................................................
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH ARTICLE
◥
GENE EDITING
Direct CRISPR spacer acquisition
from RNA by a natural reverse
transcriptase–Cas1 fusion protein
Sukrit Silas,1,2* Georg Mohr,3* David J. Sidote,3 Laura M. Markham,3
Antonio Sanchez-Amat,4 Devaki Bhaya,5 Alan M. Lambowitz,3† Andrew Z. Fire1†
CRISPR systems mediate adaptive immunity in diverse prokaryotes. CRISPR-associated
Cas1 and Cas2 proteins have been shown to enable adaptation to new threats in type I and II
CRISPR systems by the acquisition of short segments of DNA (spacers) from invasive
elements. In several type III CRISPR systems, Cas1 is naturally fused to a reverse transcriptase
(RT). In the marine bacterium Marinomonas mediterranea (MMB-1), we showed that a RT-Cas1
fusion protein enables the acquisition of RNA spacers in vivo in a RT-dependent manner.
In vitro, the MMB-1 RT-Cas1 and Cas2 proteins catalyze the ligation of RNA segments into the
CRISPR array, which is followed by reverse transcription. These observations outline a
host-mediated mechanism for reverse information flow from RNA to DNA.
R
NA-guided host defense mechanisms as-
sociated with CRISPR arrays exist in most
bacteria and archaea (1, 2). Their target
specificity derives from a series of spacers—
many of which are identical to DNA se-
quences from phage, transposon, and plasmid
mobilomes—interspersed within CRISPR arrays
(3–5). Transcripts from these CRISPR arrays are
processed into short structured RNAs, which form
a complex with CRISPR-associated (Cas) endonu-
cleases and target invasive nucleic acids, thereby
conferring immunity (6, 7). CRISPR-Cas systems
have been phylogenetically grouped into five types
(8, 9). Homologs of the cas1 and cas2 genes are
conserved across diverse CRISPR types (9, 10), with
direct evidence for a role in the physical integra-
tionofnewspacersfrominvasiveDNAintoCRISPR
arrays in a few type I and II systems (11–14). Spacer
acquisition allows the hostto adapt to new threats.
The ability of type III systems to target RNA in
addition to DNA (15–21) raises the possibility of
natural spacer acquisition from RNA species. Di-
rect acquisition of RNA spacers would add to the
handful of known mechanisms for the reverse
flow of genetic information from RNA into DNA
genomes (22–27).
Examination of bacterial genomes has revealed
a class of CRISPR-associated coding regions in
which cas1 is fused to a putative reverse tran-
scriptase (RT) (10, 28–30). These RT-Cas1 fusions
raise the possibility of a concerted mechanism of
spacer acquisition involving reverse transcription
of RNA to DNA, a potentially host-beneficial mech-
anism for RNA-to-DNA information flow.
Common features of RT-Cas1 fusions
To examine the phylogenetic distribution of fused
RT-Cas1–encoding genes, we used the National
CenterforBiotechnologyInformation(NCBI)Con-
servedDomainArchitectureRetrievalTool(CDART)
to retrieve protein records containing both a Cas1
domain (Pfam domain PF01867) and a RT domain
of any origin (PF00078). Of 93 RT-Cas1–bearing
species, all were from bacteria and none were from
archaea. RT-Cas1 fusions were most prevalent
among cyanobacteria, with 21% of cas1-bearing
cyanobacteria carrying such fusions (Fig. 1, A and
B). RT-Cas1 fusions with sufficient flanking se-
quence for type classification were exclusively
associated with type III CRISPR systems (table
S1); conversely, ~8% of bacterial type III CRISPR
systems carried RT-Cas1 fusions.
The Cas1-fused RT domains were most closely
related to RTs encoded by mobile genetic ele-
ments (retrotransposons) known as mobile group
II introns (29, 30). We identified two related
structural families of RT-Cas1 proteins. The more
abundant family carries a canonical N-terminal
RT domain with a conserved RT-0 motif charac-
teristic of group II intron and non–long terminal
repeat (non-LTR) retrotransposon RTs (31, 32).
The other lacks the RT-0 motif, starting instead
with an additional N-terminal domain con-
taining a putative Cas6-like RNA recognition
motif of the RAMP [repeat-associated mysterious
protein (10)] superfamily. Alignments of the ret-
rovirus HIV-1 RT and a group II intron RT
[Thermosynechococcus elongatus TeI4c RT (33)]
with representatives of the twoRT-Cas1 fusionfami-
lies (from Arthrospira platensis and Marinomonas
mediterranea) revealed that both Cas1-fused RTs
contain the seven conserved sequence motifs char-
acteristic of the finger and palm regions of retro-
viral RTs. Each also sharestheRT-2amotif, whichis
conserved in group II intron RTs and related pro-
teins but not present in retroviral RTs, such as the
HIV-1 RT (31, 32). The thumb/X domain, which
is found in retroviral and group II intron RTs just
downstream of the RT domain, appears to be
missing in the Cas1-associated RTs (Fig. 1C).
The structural subcategories, limited phyloge-
netic distribution, and exclusive association with
a subset of CRISPR types are consistent with a
small number of common origins of RT-Cas1
fusions (10, 29).
Spacer acquisition by the
M. mediterranea type III-B machinery in
an E. coli host
To test whether RT-Cas1 proteins could facilitate
the acquisition of new spacers, and to determine
whether such spacers might be acquired from
RNA, we chose the type III-B CRISPR locus in
M. mediterranea (MMB-1) (34), because this is
an easily cultured, nonpathogenic member of the
well-studied g-proteobacterium class that con-
tains a RT-Cas1–encoding gene.
We first assessed spacer acquisition after
transplantation of the locus into the canonical
g-proteobacterium experimental model, Esch-
erichia coli. We constructed expression vectors
carrying the type III-B operon of MMB-1 in two
configurations, either as a single cassette consist-
ingof the CRISPR03array (35), the genes encoding
RT-Cas1 and Cas2, and an adjacent gene (encod-
ing Marme_0670) with limited homology to the
NERD (nuclease-related domain) family (36), or
together with a second cassette additionally en-
coding the remaining CRISPR-associated factors,
Cmr1 to Cmr6 and Marme_0671 (Fig. 2, A and B).
The acquisition of new spacers into CRISPR03
was evident from polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
amplification of the region between the leader
sequence and the first native spacer, followed by
high-throughput sequencing. We identified newly
acquired spacers in transformants expressing ei-
ther the full complement of Cas genes, or the
subset containing only the potential “adaptation”
genes (encoding RT-Cas1, Cas2, and Marme_0670).
Bona fide spacer acquisition is evidenced by the
precise junctions between the inserted spacer
DNA and CRISPR repeats (fig. S1A) and by the
diversity of acquired spacers (fig. S1, B and D).
Specificity was further tested by evaluating the
requirements for RT-Cas1 and Cas2 in spacer ac-
quisition. We constructed two point mutations,
E870A and E790A, in the putative Cas1 active site of
MMB-1 RT-Cas1, based on a three-dimensional ho-
mology model computed using the Archaeoglo-
bus fulgidus Cas1 crystal structure (37). Each point
mutation abolished spacer acquisition, as did a 60–
amino acid C-terminal deletion in Cas2 (Fig. 2C).
The majority (~85%) of newly acquired spacers
mapped to the E. coli genome, with the rest being
RESEARCH
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
26 FEBRUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6276
aad4234-1
1Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305, USA. 2Department of Chemical and Systems Biology,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 3Institute for
Cellular and Molecular Biology, Department of Molecular
Biosciences, University of Texas–Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.
4Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Universidad de
Murcia, Murcia 30100, Spain. 5Department of Plant Biology,
Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work. †Corresponding
author. E-mail: lambowitz@austin.utexas.edu (A.M.L.); afire@
stanford.edu (A.Z.F.)
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 derived from plasmid DNA (fig. S1D). Over 70% of
the spacers were 34 to 36 base pairs (bp) in length
(Fig. 2D). Consistent with observations of inter-
ference mechanisms in other type III CRISPR
systems (7), we found no evidence for a conserved
protospacer-adjacent motif (PAM) or other se-
quence signature associated with protospacer
choice (Fig. 2E). We observed no bias for the sense
strand among spacers acquired from annotated
E. coli genes (fig. S2A) and no enrichment of
spacers derived from highly transcribed genes
(Fig. 2F). Spacer acquisition was unhindered when
the RT domain of RT-Cas1 was mutated or deleted
(Fig. 2C), consistent with a DNA-based mech-
anism operating under these conditions. Dele-
tion of the entire 290–amino acid conserved
region of the RT domain resulted in a ~20-fold
increase in spacer acquisition frequency (38),
with no apparent differences in the character-
istics of the pool of acquired spacers (Fig. 2, C to F,
and figs. S2A and S3A).
Transcription-associated spacer
acquisition in MMB-1 is RT-dependent
Our inability to detect RNA spacer acquisition in
the ectopic E. coli assay could reflect the absence
of required factors or conditions that are present in
aad4234-2
26 FEBRUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6276
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 1. Phylogenetic distribution and domain structure of RT-Cas1 fusion
proteins. (A) Taxonomic summary of unique RT-Cas1 protein records obtained
from the NCBI CDARTengine (current as of May 2015). Shown are numbers of
Cas1 protein records and bacterial species with (left) a fused RT domain,
(center) RT and an additional N-terminal extension containing a Cas6-like
motif, and (right) Cas1 with no additional annotated domain. Only phyla con-
taining RT-Cas1 fusions are listed. (B) 16S rRNA–based tree showing major
bacterial phyla, with phyla that contain RT-Cas1 in red [adapted from (48)].
(C) Schematic showing the domain organization of HIV RT (UniProtKB/Swiss-
Prot P03366), a group II intron RT (TeI4c from T. elongatus BP-1; GenPept
WP_011056164),A.platensisRT-Cas1(WP_006620498),M.mediterraneaRT-Cas1
(WP_013659858), and E. coli Cas1 (NP_417235). Conserved RT motifs as
defined in (49) are labeled 1 to 7
. Motifs 0 and 2a are conserved in mobile group
II intron and non-LTR–retrotransposon RT
s (32).The YXDD sequence found in
motif 5 contains two aspartic acid residues at the RTactive site.Three a-helices
found in the thumb/X domain of HIV and group II intron RT
s are indicated.
Numbers below the bars indicate amino acid positions. D, DNA binding domain;
En, endonuclease domain.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 the native host, MMB-1. To assay spacer acquisition
in MMB-1, we overexpressed RT-Cas1 and Cas2
along with Marme_0670 from a broad-host-
range plasmid (pKT230), using the 100-bp se-
quence upstream of the MMB-1 16S ribosomal
RNA (rRNA) gene as a promoter (Fig. 3A). We
recovered newly acquired spacers from the ge-
nomic copy of the CRISPR03 array and found
that the vast majority (~95%) mapped to the
MMB-1 genome, with an expected proportion
mapping to the expression vector (figs. S1, C and
D, and S4). Although the endogenous type III-B
CRISPR operon was still present in these strains,
we found that plasmid-driven overexpression of
adaptation genes was critical for detectable ac-
quisition of new spacers: Parallel analysisoftrans-
conjugants in which plasmid-driven RT-Cas1 had
the mutation E870A or E790A at the putative
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
26 FEBRUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6276
aad4234-3
CRISPR03
Fig. 2. Spacer acquisition in E. coli by ectopic expression of MMB-1 type III-B CRISPR compo-
nents. (A) The MMB-1 type III-B CRISPR operon consists of an 8-spacer CRISPR array (CRISPR03),
followed by a canonical six-gene cassette putatively encoding the type III-B Cmr effector complex, two
genes of unknown function (Marme_0671 and Marme_0670), the genes encoding RT-Cas1 and Cas2,
and lastly a larger 58-spacer CRISPR array (CRISPR02). The locus is flanked by two ~200-bp direct repeats (green arrows). The black arrows indicate
promoters. (B) Arrangement of MMB-1 type III-B CRISPR components under inducible promoters (Para, Ptrc, and Plac) on pBAD vectors for ectopic expression in
E. coli. (C) Spacer detection frequency after overnight induction of E. coli carrying pBAD expression vectors with arabinose and IPTG. Wild-type RT-Cas1, RT
active site mutant (YAAA), and Cas1 domain mutants E790A and E870A were tested with or without the Plac-driven gene cassette encoding the Cmr effector
complex. Cas2 D32–92 and RTdomain D299–588 mutants (shown in the two rightmost columns) were tested without the Cmr cassette. Range bars indicate
values for two biological replicates (n.d., not determined). (D) Histogram showing normalized counts of E. coli genomic protospacers from the wild-type RT-
Cas1 and RTDspacer acquisition experiments, distributed by mappable length. Pooled data from several experiments are presented. (E) Nucleotide probabilities at
each position along the wild-type RT-Cas1–acquired protospacers in (D), including 15 bp of flanking sequence on each side. Because of varying protospacer
lengths, two panels are shown with the spacer 5′ and 3′ ends anchored at positions 15 and 35, respectively. (F) Cumulative normalized distribution of spacers in (D)
among E. coli protein-coding open reading frames (ORFs) sorted by expression level [normalized RNAseq read counts from (47); FPKM, fragments per kilobase
per million reads], with the most highly expressed genes listed first. Included are 2470 wild-type RT-Cas1– and 5569 RTD-acquired spacers mapping to E. coli
genes. Dashed black lines show the range of values from a Monte Carlo simulation with random assortment (no transcription-related bias).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Cas1 active site, or of transconjugants carrying
an empty vector, failed to identify any new
spacers (Fig. 3B). As in E. coli, most (>75%) of the
new protospacers were 34 to 36 bp in length (Fig.
3C), and we did not observe a PAM-like sequence
at either the 5′ or 3′ ends of the acquired spacers
(Fig. 3D).
In contrast to the E. coli data set, the genomic
regions most frequently sampled by the RT-Cas1
spacer acquisition machinery in MMB-1 appeared
to be genes that are typically highly expressed in
bacteria. We further investigated this association
between expression and spacer capture by obtain-
ing RNA sequencing (RNAseq) expression profiles
of two independent MMB-1 transconjugants car-
rying the RT-Cas1 expression vector. The 10% most
highly expressed genes accounted for over 50% of
newly acquired spacers, with the top 50% of ex-
pressed genes accounting for 90% of newly ac-
quired spacers (Fig. 3E). Next, we tested whether
this transcriptional association was dependent on
the RT domain of RT-Cas1. Deletion of the con-
served RT domain of RT-Cas1 abolished the pre-
ference for highly transcribed genes (Fig. 3E and
fig. S5), while maintaining a comparable length
and sequence distribution for the acquired spac-
er repertoire (Fig. 3, B and C, and figs. S2B, S3B,
and S4). Together, these data demonstrate a RT-
dependent bias toward the acquisition of spacers
from highly transcribed regions.
Spacers acquired from transcribed regions could
conceivably be integrated into the CRISPR array in
either a negative or a positive orientation. Among
spacers that mapped to MMB-1 transcripts, we
observed at most a limited preference for the sense
strand (fig. S2, B and C). The lack of a strong bias
implies a degree of directional flexibility in the
integration mechanism, potentially yielding a sys-
tem in which only a fraction of spacers is able to
protect against a single-stranded DNA or RNA
target.
RT-Cas1–mediated spacer acquisition
from RNA
The observed association between the gene ex-
pression level and the frequency of spacer acqui-
sition in MMB-1, combined with the requirement
of the RT domain for this association, is consistent
aad4234-4
26 FEBRUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6276
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 3. RT-Cas1–mediated spacer acquisition in MMB-1. (A) Arrangement of
genes encoding Marme_0670, RT-Cas1, and Cas2 on pKT230 broad-host-range
vectors under the control of the putative 16S rRNA promoter (P16S; 100-bp se-
quence upstream of the MMB-1 16S rRNA gene) for overexpression in MMB-1.
New spacers were amplified from the genomic CRISPR03 array. (B) Spacer
detection frequency after overnight growth of MMB-1 transconjugants carrying
pKT230 overexpression vectors.Two clones each from two independent conjuga-
tions carrying either wild-type RT-Cas1, Cas1 domain mutants E790A or E870A,
RTdomain D299–588 mutants, or an empty pKT230 vector were tested. Range
bars depict spacer acquisition frequencies for two transconjugants. (C) Histo-
gram showing normalized counts of MMB-1 genomic protospacers from the wild-
type RT-Cas1 and RTD spacer acquisition experiments, distributed by mappable
length. Pooled data from several experiments are presented. (D) Nucleotide
probabilities at each position along the wild-type RT-Cas1–acquired protospacers
in (C), including 15 bp of flanking sequence on each side. Because of varying
protospacer lengths, two panels are shown with the spacer 5′ and 3′ ends
anchored at positions 15 and 35, respectively. (E) Cumulative distribution of
spacers in (C) among MMB-1 genes sorted by RNAseq FPKM,with the most highly
expressed genes listed first. Included are 455 wild-type RT-Cas1– and 341 RTD-
acquired spacers mapping to MMB-1 genes. Guides are drawn along the x axis at
top-10% and top-50% genes by expression level. Monte Carlo bounds were calculated as in Fig. 2F. rRNA genes have been excluded from this analysis
because spacers were rarely acquired from rRNA.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 with an acquisition process involving reverse tran-
scription of an RNA molecule. Nonetheless, an
alternative hypothesis is that acquisition of DNA
spacers could result from increased accessibility
of DNA in regions of high transcriptional activity.
The acquisition of DNA spacer sequences from
an RNA molecule can be tested by placing a func-
tional intron into a transcript, which is spliced to
yield a ligated-exon junction sequence that is then
captured as DNA (25). To test whether the RT-
Cas1 complex could acquire spacers directly from
RNA, we used the self-splicing td group I intron,
a ribozyme that catalyzes its own excision from its
parent transcript, leaving behind a splice junction
that was not present as a DNA sequence (39).
We produced intron-interrupted versions of two
MMB-1 genes—the ssrA gene, encoding a small
noncodingRNA[transfer-messengerRNA(tmRNA)
(40)] and Marme_0982, encoding ribosomal pro-
tein S15—in both cases inserting the intron at sites
that were well sampled in our spacer libraries.
Each construct was designed with four or five
mutations to optimize the flanking exon sequen-
ces for td intron splicing. These mutations allow
us to unambiguously distinguish between spliced
(plasmid-expressed) and native (genomic) ssrA
and ribosomal protein S15 transcripts (Fig. 4A).
After confirming self-splicing in vitro (fig. S6A),
we placed the td intron–containing genes on our
RT-Cas1 overexpression plasmids and expressed
them in MMB-1 from their native promoters. To
assess the transcription level of the engineered
coding regions relative to their endogenous coun-
terparts in vivo, we performed high-throughput
sequencing of RT-PCR amplicons spanning the
splice junctions. We found that ~30% of all ribo-
somal protein S15 transcripts and ~16% of all
ssrA tmRNA transcripts were producedby splicing
in the respective transconjugants (fig. S6B).
We assayed for newly integrated spacers in
plasmid copies of CRISPR03, recovering 80,136
new spacers that map to the MMB-1 genome. The
protospacer length, sequence composition, and
bias for highly expressed genes remained consist-
ent with our previous results in MMB-1 (fig. S7).
We found two spacers spanning the splice junc-
tion of ribosomal protein S15 and six spacers span-
ning the splice junction of tmRNA from two
independent cultures of two independent trans-
conjugants, thereby confirming that the RT-Cas1
spacer acquisition machinery is capable of acquir-
ing spacers from RNA molecules (Fig. 4, B and C).
We observed both sense and antisense spacers
spanning the synthetic splice junctions from both
the ssrA and ribosomal protein S15 constructs
(Fig. 4B), further indicating flexibility in the ori-
entationof spaceracquisition relative to theleader.
We considered the possibility that these spacers
might have been acquired from an extended cDNA
copy of the spliced transcripts that was generated
through indiscriminate RT activity. Such cDNA
sequences would have been detectable by highly
sensitive targeted sequencing assays and were not
observed (fig. S6C).
Whereas these experiments demonstrate the
ability of this system to acquire spacers from RNA,
the RT-domain deletion experiments in which
spacer acquisition was not biased toward tran-
scribed regions (Fig. 3E) indicate that the system
can also acquire spacers from DNA. Nonetheless,
the strong transcriptional bias observed with wild-
type RT-Cas1 in MMB-1 indicates that most spacer
acquisitions driven by the intact RT-Cas1 fusion
protein under our conditions are from RNA.
Ligation of RNA and DNA
oligonucleotides directly into CRISPR
repeats by a RT-Cas1–Cas2 complex
The E. coli Cas1-Cas2 complex has been shown to
ligate double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) directly into
a supercoiled plasmid containing a CRISPR array
by means of a concerted cleavage-ligation (trans-
esterification) mechanism, analogous to that of
retroviral integrases (41). To investigate how
MMB-1 RT-Cas1 functions in spacer acquisition,
we reconstituted this activity in vitro using puri-
fied RT-Cas1 and Cas2 proteins. We confirmed
that wild-type RT-Cas1 protein has RT activity
that is abolished by the deletion of the RT domain
(RTD) or mutations at the RT active site (YADD to
YAAA at amino acid positions 530 to 533) (fig. S8).
To assay spacer acquisition, the purified RT-Cas1
and Cas2 proteins were incubated with (i) puta-
tive spacer precursors (protospacers) correspond-
ing to DNA or RNA oligonucleotides of different
lengths and (ii) a linear 268-bp internally labeled
CRISPR DNA substrate containing the leader, the
first two repeats, and interspersed spacer sequen-
ces from the MMB-1 CRISPR03 array (Fig. 5A).
The reactions also included deoxynucleotide tri-
phosphates (dNTPs) to enable reverse transcrip-
tion of a ligated RNA oligonucleotide.
In initial assays using a dsDNA oligonucleotide,
products derived from cleavage of the CRISPR
substrate were readily detected in the presence
of RT-Cas1 and Cas2 together but not in the pres-
ence of either protein alone (Fig. 5B). The sizes
of these products were consistent with cleavage
at the junctions between the leader and first re-
peat on the top strand and between the first re-
peat and spacer on the bottom strand, as expected
for staggered cuts that are known to occur in type
I CRISPR systems (12). Structural features at the
leader-repeat boundary might dictate cleavage at
these sites (41). Bands of the sizes expected for free
3′ fragments [148 and 155 nucleotides (nt)] were
much weaker than those for the corresponding 5′
fragments (120 and 113 nt), reflecting their re-
placement with prominent bands of the sizes
expected for ligation of the oligonucleotide to
their 5′ ends (148 and 155 nt plus oligonucelotide).
Similar products were also detected using single-
stranded DNA (ssDNA) and RNA oligonucleo-
tides of various sizes (ssDNA, 19 to 59 nt; RNA,
21 to 50 nt) (Fig. 5, B and C, and figs. S9 and S10),
presumably reflecting that the more uniform spac-
er size of 34 to 36 bp in vivo is due to processing
of the spacers prior to their integration into the
CRISPR array. Additionally, a 3′-phosphate mod-
ification of the ssDNA oligonucleotide almost
completely abolished the cleavage-ligation reac-
tion, suggesting a crucial role of the 3′OH of the
donor oligonucleotide in the integration reaction
(Fig. 5D). The ligation of both DNA and RNA oli-
gonucleotides into the CRISPR DNA was con-
firmed by their expected ribonuclease (RNase)
and/or deoxyribonuclease (DNase) sensitivity in
reactions with 5′-end–labeled oligonucleotides
and unlabeled CRISPR DNA (Fig. 5E). The ligated
RNA oligonucleotide was sensitive to RNase H,
indicating its presence in an RNA-DNA hybrid, as
would be expected if it was used as a template for
cDNA synthesis by RT-Cas1 (Fig. 5E).
Although the MMB-1 RT-Cas1–Cas2 complex
functions similarly to the E. coli Cas1-Cas2 com-
plex to site-specifically integrate putative spacer
precursors into CRISPR arrays, it differs in being
able to use a linear CRISPR DNA substrate and to
insert not only dsDNA but also ssDNA and RNA
oligonucleotides. The ligation of RNA and DNA
oligonucleotides into the CRISPR DNA substrate
differs in two respects. First, whereas the E870A
mutation at the Cas1 active site abolishes ligation
of both RNA and DNA oligonucleotides, deletion
of the RT domain (RTD) abolishes ligation of RNA
but not DNA oligonucleotides (Fig. 5F). These
findings mirror in vivo results showing that the
E870 mutation abolishes the acquisition of both
RNA and DNA spacers, whereas the RTD muta-
tion abolishes the acquisition of RNA but not DNA
spacers (Fig. 3, B and E). Second, dNTPs are re-
quired for ligation of RNA but not DNA oligo-
nucleotides, with deoxyguanosine triphosphate
(dGTP) or deoxyadenosine triphosphate (dATP)
alone sufficient to support RNA ligation (Fig. 5G).
Together, these findings suggest that the RT-Cas1
protein is modular, with the Cas1 domain cata-
lyzing ligation of both RNA and DNA spacers into
CRISPR repeats, but with ligation of RNA spacers
requiring binding by the N-terminal and/or RT
domains, possibly coupled to RT domain core
closure and/or the initiation of reverse transcrip-
tion on addition of dNTPs.
Integrated RNA oligonucleotides are
reverse-transcribed by the
RT-Cas1–Cas2 complex
We tested whether the RT-Cas1–Cas2 complex
could reverse-transcribe an integrated RNA oligo-
nucleotide in vitro to generate the cDNA precursor
of a fully integrated RNA spacer. The cleavage-
ligation reactions on either side of repeat R1
generate products with 5′ overhangs that could
potentially be substrates for target DNA-primed
reverse transcription (TPRT) reactions, in which
the 3′ end of the opposite strand is extended to
yield a DNA copy of the repeat plus the ligated
RNA oligonucleotide (Fig. 6A). To detect the syn-
thesis of such cDNAs, we incubated the CRISPR
DNA with RT-Cas1–Cas2 in the presence of a 21-nt
RNA oligonucleotide and supplied radioactive
deoxycytidine triphosphate (dCTP) and other un-
labeled dNTPs during the incubation (Fig. 6A).
cDNA synthesis during the reactions was evident
by the labeled products being of the same size as
the two ligation products, as expected for a TPRT
reaction extending through the R1 repeat and
ligated RNA. The synthesis of these cDNAs de-
pends on the presence of the RNA oligonucleotide,
the CRISPR DNA, and RT-Cas1–Cas2 (Fig. 6B).
The RTD mutant abolishes cDNA synthesis,
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
26 FEBRUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6276
aad4234-5
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 aad4234-6
26 FEBRUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6276
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 4. Spacer acquisition from RNA in the MMB-1 type III-B system.
(A) Spacers acquired from a host genome could conceivably originate from
either RNA or DNA. To test for an RNA origin, we used an engineered self-
splicing transcript, which produces an RNA sequence junction that is not en-
coded by DNA. Bases that were mutated to provide flanking exon sequences
favorable for td intron splicing were separated by the 393-bp intron in the DNA
template. After transcription and splicing,the two exons were brought together
to form a novel junction containing the identifying mutations. Newly acquired
spacers that contain this exon-junction indicate spacer acquisition from an
RNA target. (B) Alignments of some of the genome-contiguous spacers (gray)
and several newly acquired exon-junction–spanning spacers (red) to the ge-
nomic and split-gene sequences, respectively. Bases mutated to facilitate td
intron splicing are underlined in the genomic sequences. Identifying mutations
are depicted as colored bases, and the splice sites are indicated by green
triangles. The highlighted ssrA exon-junction–spanning spacer (bottom) is
antisense to the spliced tmRNA and differs from a putative DNA template by
the five expected mutations. (C) All unique spacers spanning the td intron
splice site that did not carry the engineered mutations.The maximum number
of mismatches (MM) when these spacers were mapped to the wild-type
genomic locus is indicated. None of the identifying mutations were observed
among these sporadic mismatches.The spacers in (B) were in addition to four
spacers (one for the S15 and three for the ssrA construct) that align to the
unspliced exon-intron junction and could have been derived from either DNA or
(nascent) RNA.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 SCIENCE sciencemag.org
26 FEBRUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6276
aad4234-7
Fig. 5. Site-specific CRISPR
DNA cleavage-ligation by
the RT-Cas1–Cas2 complex.
(A) Schematic of CRISPR DNA
substrates and products of
cleavage-ligation reactions.The
substrate was a 268-bp DNA
containing the leader (gray), the
first two repeats (R1 and R2,
orange) and spacers (S1 and
S2, green), and part of the third
repeat (R3, orange) of the
MMB-1 CRISPR03 array. Cleav-
ages (arrowheads) occur at the
boundaries of the first repeat
with concomitant ligation of a
DNA or RNA oligonucleotide
(oligo, blue) to the 3′ fragment,
yielding products of the sizes
shown. (B) Internally labeled
CRISPR DNA and a 33-nt
dsDNA were incubated with
no protein (lane 1), RT-Cas1
(lane 2), Cas2 (lane 3), or a 1:2
mixture of RT-Cas1 and Cas2
(lane 4).The sizes of products
determined from sequencing
ladders in parallel lanes are
indicated on the left. (C) Inter-
nally labeled CRISPR DNA was
incubated with wild-type (WT)
RT-Cas1 and Cas2 without (lane
1) or with a 21-nt RNA (lane 2),
35-nt RNA (lane 3), or 29-nt
ssDNA (lane 4). (D) Internally
labeled CRISPR DNA was incu-
bated with WT RT-Cas1 plus
Cas2 in the absence
(lane 1) or presence of a 29-nt
ssDNA with either a 3′ OH
(lane2) ora 3′ phosphate (lane 3).
(E) Nuclease digestion of
5′-end–labeled RNA and DNA
oligonucleotides ligated to
CRISPR DNA. Ligation reac-
tions were performed as in (C).
After extraction with phenol-
CIA and ethanol precipitation,
the products were incubated
with the indicated nucleases.
An asterisk indicates that the
sample was boiled to denature
the DNA before adding the
nuclease. (F) Ligation of 5′-end–
labeled RNA and DNA oligo-
nucleotides into CRISPR DNA by
WTand mutant RT-Cas1 pro-
teins. Lanes 1 and 6 show
control reactions of internally
labeled CRISPR with WT RT
-Cas1 plus Cas2 and an unlabeled 35-nt ssRNA or 29-nt
ssDNA oligonucleotide for comparison. Lanes 2 to 5 and 7 to 10 show reactions of
unlabeled CRISPR DNA with 5′-end–labeled 35-nt ssRNA and 29-nt ssDNA,
respectively, and WT
, E870A, and RTD RT
-Cas1 plus Cas2. All reactions were carried
out in the presence of dNTPs. (G) Effect of dNTPs. In the gel on the left, internally
labeled CRISPRDNAwasincubated withWT RT-Cas1plus Cas2 inthe presenceofa
29-nt ssDNA (lanes 1 and 2) or 35-nt ssRNA (lanes 3 and 4) in the absence (lanes
1 and 3) or presence of 1 mM dNTPs (1 mM each of dATP
, dCTP
, dGTP
, and dTTP;
lanes 2 and 4). In the gel on the right, internally labeled CRISPR DNAwas incubated
with WT RT-Cas1 plus Cas2 in the presence of a 35-nt ssRNA oligonucleotide in the
absence(lane10) orpresence ofdifferent dNTPs(1mM) as indicated(lanes 5to 9).
Red and black dots indicate products resulting from cleavage and ligation of
oligonucleotides at the junction of the leader and repeat 1 on the top strand and
the junction of repeat 1 and spacer 1 on the bottom strand, respectively; cyan and
purple dots indicate products of the size expected for cleavage and ligation of the
oligonucleotide at the junctions of the second CRISPR repeat (see fig. S10).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 whereas the E870A mutant, which retains RT
activity (fig. S8) but cannot integrate the RNA
oligonucleotide or create the 3′OH required for
priming cDNA synthesis (Fig. 5F), produces only
a heterogeneous background of labeled products
(Fig. 6B). The TPRT products detected in our
assays may represent an intermediate in spacer
acquisition, with additional steps potentially
including digestion of the ligated RNA spacer
strand by a host RNase H, synthesis of a full
dsDNA containing the spacer sequence by RT-
Cas1 or a host DNA polymerase, and ligation of
the unattached ends of the dsDNA into the
CRISPR array. Our in vivo and in vitro data
suggest that this can occur in either orientation
and may involve host enzymes that are present
in MMB-1 but not in E. coli.
Conclusion
We showed that the MMB1 RT-Cas1 fusion pro-
tein can mediate the direct acquisition of spacers
from donor RNA, using the Cas1 integrase activ-
ity to directly ligate an RNA protospacer into
CRISPR DNA repeats. The 3′ end generated by
cleavage of the opposite DNA strand is then poised
for use as a primer for TPRT (26). This mechanism
shares features with group II intron retrohoming,
in which the intron RNA uses its ribozyme activity
to insert itself directly into the host genome and is
then converted to an intron cDNA by using the 3′
end generated by cleavage of the opposite DNA
strand for TPRT (42). Because type III CRISPR
systems are known to target RNA for degradation,
and RT-Cas1–encoding genes are exclusively asso-
ciated with such systems, RNA spacer acquisition
makes these CRISPRs distinctively capable of gen-
erating immunity against parasitic RNA sequen-
ces, potentially including RNA phages and/or
other “selfish” RNAs that maintain themselves
through the action of host machinery (43–46).
The acquisition of RNA spacers might also con-
tribute to immune responses to highly tran-
scribed regions of DNA phages and plasmids,
by coupling spacers from such regions to an
interference system that targets DNA, RNA, or
both (15–21).
It is possible that fusion between the RT and
Cas1 domains may not be necessary to facilitate
uptake of RNA spacers; there are several examples
of CRISPR loci in which genes encoding similar
group II intron–like RTs are adjacent but not fused
to cas1 (29). Thus, the mechanisms described
herein could potentially extend to species with
separately encoded RT and Cas1 components. In
addition, RNA spacer acquisition could be involved
in gene regulation, providing a straightforward
means for bacteria to down-regulate a set of target
loci in response to activation of the CRISPR locus.
To fully assess the prevalence and importance
of CRISPR adaptation to RNA, a greater under-
standing of the impact of invasive RNAs in bac-
teria is necessary. However, our knowledge of the
abundance and distribution of RNA phages and
other RNA parasites is limited, with the vast ma-
jorityrestrictedtotheEscherichiaandPseudomonas
genera. Future research on the distribution of spac-
ers in RT-associated CRISPR loci among natural
populations of bacteria and their environments
might help shed light on this topic.
Materials and methods
RT-Cas1 genomic neighborhood analysis
The genomic neighborhoods (up to 20 kb) of RT-
Cas1–encoding genes were retrieved from 50 bac-
terial strains with a custom BioPython script that
uses the NCBI tblastn software. The HMMER 3.0
algorithm was then used to identify whether the
RT-Cas1–encoding genes were associated with
type I, II, or III CRISPR systems, using Cas3 (TIGR
01587, 01596, 02562, 02621, and 03158), Cas9
(TIGR 01865 and 3031), and Cas10 (TIGR 02577
and 02578) hidden Markov models as “signature”
genes for each type, respectively (8). Each result
was assessed manually by iterative runs of BLAST
(Basic Local Alignment Search Tool, NCBI) and the
CRISPRfinder online suite.
Monte Carlo simulation of
expected spacer acquisition
characteristics for random sampling
of all genes
We used a Monte Carlo simulation to evaluate a
null hypothesis based on random assortment of
aad4234-8
26 FEBRUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6276
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 6. cDNA synthesis using RNA ligated to CRISPR DNA. (A) Schematic showing the
CRISPR DNA substrate and the expected products of cleavage and ligation (top), followed by
TPRT of the ligated RNA oligonucleotide (blue). cDNAs are shown as black dashes, with
arrowheads indicating the direction of cDNA synthesis. (B) WTor mutant RT-Cas1 plus Cas2
proteins were incubated with 268-bp CRISPR DNA in the presence of 21-nt RNA oligonucleotide,
labeled dCTP
, and unlabeled dATP
, dGTP
, and dTTP
. The WT RT-Cas1–Cas2 complex yields
labeled bands of the sizes expected (148 and 155 nt plus oligonucleotide) for TPRTof the RNA
oligonucleotide that is ligated site-specifically at opposite boundaries of the first CRISPR DNA
repeat (R1, lane 8).The labeled products were not detected with the RTdomain (RTD, lane 9) or
Cas1 active site (E870A, lane 10) mutants, but a background of labeled products is apparent in
the E870A lane, due to the RTactivity of the protein in the absence of cleavage and ligation (see
fig. S8). Labeled products were not detected in the absence of the RNA oligonucleotide (lanes 3
to 6) or CRISPR DNA (lanes 11 and 12). Separate lanes from the same gel (lanes 1 and 2) show
the positions of cleavage-ligation products for RT-Cas1 plus Cas2 with an internally labeled
CRISPR DNA substrate. “None” indicates no protein added.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 spacer acquisitions from genomic DNA, with no
dependence on gene expression level. For each
system, a series of samples of 500 spacers each
were randomly chosen in silico from a list of all
genes, based on the sizes of the individual genes
using the stochastic universal sampling algorithm.
Sets of 1000 such trials were used to generate a
range of null relationships between gene expres-
sion and spacer acquisition. The Monte Carlo
bounds (black dotted lines in Figs. 2 and 3 and
figs. S2, S5, and S7) depict the envelope of such
simulated random assortments. Traces above
this envelope indicate preferential spacer acqui-
sition from highly expressed genes; traces below
the envelope indicate spacer acquisition from
poorly expressed genes more often than expected
by random chance. RNAseq data from E. coli K12
were obtained from (47) (data set without com-
putational background subtraction). MMB-1 ex-
pression data were generated by RNAseq analysis
of the transconjugants used in this study (Fig. 3).
Construction of expression vectors
Plasmids for inducible overexpression of the MMB-
1 type III-B CRISPR operon in E. coli were built
on the pBAD/Myc–His B backbone (Life Tech-
nologies). RT-Cas1–associated genes [Marme_0670,
Marme_0669 (RT-Cas1), and Marme_0668 (Cas2)]
and green fluorescent protein (GFP) were driven
by Para, and the CRISPR03 array was driven by
Ptrc. The other seven genes [Marme_0677 to _0672
(Cmr1 to Cmr6) and Marme_0671] and lacZa
were driven by Plac. GFP and lacZa ORFs enabled
verification of expression of the transcripts con-
taining RT-Cas1–associated adaptation genes and
Cmr effector genes, respectively. Point mutants
of the Cas1 (E790A or E870A) and RT domains
(YADD to YAAA at amino acid positions 530 to
533) of RT-Cas1 were tested with overexpression
of the RT-Cas1–associated subset, with and with-
out the remaining seven genes. Deletion mutants
of the RT domain of RT-Cas1 (D299–588), and
Cas2 [D32–92] were tested with overexpression
of the RT-Cas1–associated subset only.
Plasmids for the overexpression of the RT-
Cas1–associated genes in MMB-1 cells were built
on the pKT230 backbone (a gift from L. Banta,
Williams College). The genes were driven by the
100-bp promoter–containing sequence (posi-
tions 306,879 to 306,978) upstream of a MMB-
1 16S rRNA gene. Cas1 point mutants (E790A or
E870A) and the RTD mutant were also tested.
For experiments with td intron–containing con-
structs, a copy of the CRISPR03 array with its
leader sequence was also placed on the pKT230
vector to increase the concentration of CRISPR
arrays per unit input DNA in the PCR ampli-
fication step, and thus increase the efficiency of
our spacer detection assay.
Plasmids for protein expression and purifica-
tion were built on the pMal-c2X backbone [New
England Biolabs (NEB)] for RT-Cas1 (wild type and
mutants) and on the pET14b backbone (Novagene)
for Cas2. Variants of RT-Cas1 were expressed with
an N-terminal maltose-binding protein tag at-
tached via a noncleavable rigid linker (50). Cas2
was expressed with an N-terminal 6xHis tag.
All plasmids were verified by sequencing. Plas-
mid structures are available upon request.
Strains and culture conditions
All bacterial strains used in this study were stored
in 20% glycerol at –80°C. Two clones from each
conjugation were maintained for each plasmid
(referred to as independent transconjugants).
pBAD plasmids (AmpR) encoding MMB-1 type
III-B operon components were transformed into
chemically competent TOP10F' cells (Life Tech-
nologies). TOP10F'-derived strains were grown
at 37°C on Luria-Bertani (LB) agar plates (10 g/l
tryptone, 5 g/l yeast extract, 10 g/l NaCl, 15 g/l
agar) with 100 mg/ml of ampicillin, 0.1% w/v
arabinose, and 0.1 mM IPTG (isopropyl-b-D-
thiogalactopyranoside) overnight.
pKT230 plasmids (KanR) encoding MMB-1 type
III-B operon components were mobilized into a
spontaneous rifampicin-resistant mutant of MMB-
1 (strain ATCC 700492) from a donor E. coli strain
carrying the pRL443 conjugal plasmid (a gift from
M. Davison, Carnegie Institution), as described in
(51). All transformed MMB-1 strains were grown
on 2216 marine agar (Difco) with 50 mg/ml of
kanamycin for 16 hours at 25°C.
For experiments with MMB-1 transconjugants
carrying td intron constructs, 150-ml cultures were
subsequently prepared in 2216 broth (Difco) with
50 mg/ml of kanamycin and shaken at 26° to 27°C
in 1-liter flasks for 20 hours before midiprep.
E. coli strain DH5a (Life Technologies) was
used for cloning, and Rosetta2 and Rosetta2(DE3)
(Novagen) were used for protein expression. Bac-
teria were grown in LB medium with shaking at
200 rpm. Antibiotics were added when needed
(ampicillin, 100 mg/l; chloramphenicol, 25 mg/l).
Nucleic acid extraction
Plasmid DNA from E. coli strains was extracted
using the QIAprep Spin Miniprep Kit (QIAGEN).
Genomic DNA from MMB-1 strains was extracted
using a modified SDS–proteinase K method:
Briefly, cells were scraped from plates and re-
suspended in 1 ml of lysis buffer (10 mM tris,
10 mM EDTA, 400 mg/ml proteinase K, 0.5% SDS)
and incubated at 55°C for 1 hour. Batches of the
digest (50 to 100 ml) were subsequently purified
using the Genomic DNA Clean & Concentrator Kit
(Zymo Research).
Total RNA was extracted from MMB-1 strains
using a combined trizol–RNeasy method: Briefly,
cells were scraped from plates and homogenized
directly in 1 ml of trizol (Life Technologies) by
vortexing, and total RNA was extracted with 200 ml
of chloroform. Ethanol (500 ml) was added to an
equal volume of the aqueous phase containing
RNA, and the mixture was purified using the
RNeasy Kit (QIAGEN) with on-column DNase di-
gestion according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. This protocol selects RNA >200 nt and thus
depletes transfer RNAs.
Plasmid DNA was purified from large MMB-
1 cultures using a custom midiprep method. Cells
were harvested from 150- to 200-ml confluent cul-
tures (3000g, 30 min, 4°C) and homogenized in
12 ml of alkaline lysis buffer (40 mM glucose,
10 mM tris, 4 mM EDTA, 0.1 N NaOH, 0.5% SDS)
at 37°C by pipetting until clear (10 to 15 min).
Chilled neutralization buffer (8 ml) was added
(3 M CH3COOK, 2 M CH3COOH), and lysates
were immediately transferred to ice to prevent
digestion of genomic DNA. Samples were mixed
by inverting, and the genomic DNA–containing
precipitate was removed by centrifugation (20,000g,
20 min, 4°C). Clarified lysates were extracted twice
with a 1:1 mixture of tris-saturated phenol (Life
Technologies) and CHCl3 (Fisher Scientific) and
once with CHCl3 in heavy phase lock gel tubes
(5 Prime). Ethanol (50 ml) was added and DNA
was pelleted by centrifugation (16,000g, 20 min,
4°C), washed twice in 80% ethanol, and resus-
pended in 500 ml of elution buffer (10 mM tris,
pH 8.5). Samples were treated with 20 mg/ml
RNase A (Life Technologies) at 37°C for 30 min,
further digested with 150 mg/ml of protease K in
0.5% SDS at 50°C for 30 min, and purified by
organic extraction. Plasmid DNA was resuspended
in 0.5 ml of elution buffer, desalted with Illustra
NAP-5 G-25 Sephadex columns (GE Healthcare),
and eluted with 1 ml of water. Batches of 100 ml
were linearized with PvuII-HF (NEB) to aid dena-
turation during PCR. Last, each digest was puri-
fied using a Genomic DNA Clean & Concentrator
column (Zymo Research).
DNA and RNA preparations were quantified
using a fluorometer (Qubit 2.0, Life Technologies).
Spacer sequencing
Leader proximal spacers were amplified by PCR
from 3 to 4 ng of genomic DNA per ml of PCR mix
using forward primer AF-SS-119 (CGACGCTCT-
TCCGATCTNNNNNCTGAAATGATTGGAAAAA-
ATAAGG) anchored in the leader sequence and
reverse primer AF-SS-121 (ACTGACGCTAGTGC-
ATCACGTGGCGGAGATCTTTAA) in the first na-
tive spacer. For each sample, 96 10-ml reactions
were pooled. Sequencing adaptors were then at-
tached in a second round of PCR with 0.5 ml of
the previous reaction as a template in a 50-ml
reaction, using AF-SS-44:55 (CAAGCAGAAGAC-
GGCATACGAGAT NNNNNNNN GTGACTGGAG-
TTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCACTGACGCTA-
GTGCATCA) and AF-KLA-67:74 (AATGATACG-
GCGACCACCGAGATCTACAC NNNNNNNN ACA-
CTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT),
where the (N)8 barcodes correspond to reverse-
complemented TruSeq HT indexes D701 to D712
and D501 to D508, respectively (Illumina). Tem-
plate matching regions in primers are underlined.
Phusion High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix with HF
Buffer (Fisher Scientific) was used for all reactions.
Cycling conditions for round 1 were as follows:
one cycle at 98°C for 1 min; two cycles at 98°C for
10 s, 50°C for 20 s, and 72°C for 30 s; 24 cycles at
98°C for 15 s, 65°C for 15 s; and 72°C for 30 s; and
one cycle at 72°C for 9 min. Conditions for round
2 were one cycle at 98°C for 1 min; two cycles at
98°C for 10 s, 54°C for 20 s, and 72°C for 30 s; five
cycles at 98°C for 15 s, 70°C for 15 s, and 72°C for
30 s; and one cycle at 72°C for 9 min. The domi-
nant amplicons containing the first native spacer
from unmodified CRISPR templates after rounds
1 and 2 were 123 bp and 241 bp, respectively. We
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
26 FEBRUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6276
aad4234-9
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 prepared sequencing libraries by blind excision
of gel slices at 300 to 320 bp (70 bp above the
241-bp band, consistent with the expected size of
an amplicon from an expanded CRISPR array) af-
ter agarose electrophoresis (3%, 4.2 V/cm, 2 hours)
of the round 2 amplicons.
When amplifying spacers from plasmids, 1 ng
of DNA was used per microliter of PCR mix,
synthesis time was shortened to 15 s, and 20 and
nine cycles were used in rounds 1 and 2 instead
of 24 and five, respectively. Additionally, round
1 amplicons were purified by blind excision of gel
slices at 180 to 200 nt after denaturing PAGE
(polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis) [pre-run TBE-
Urea 10% gels (Novex), 180 V, 80 min in XCell
SureLock Mini-Cells (Life Technologies)], and
agarose gel–purified libraries were further PAGE-
purified by blind excision of gel slices at 300 to
320 nt (pre-run TBE-Urea 6% gels, 180 V, 90 min
as above). In this way, spacer detection efficiency
was increased ~100-fold. Libraries were quanti-
fied by Qubit and sequenced with MiSeq v3 kits
(Illumina) (150 cycles, read 1; 8 cycles, index 1; and
8 cycles, index 2).
Spacers were trimmed from reads using a cus-
tom Python script and considered identical if
they differed only by one nucleotide. Protospacers
were mapped using Bowtie 2.0 (“–very-sensitive-
local” alignments). These methods preserve strand
information.
Directional RNAseq profiling of
MMB-1 strains
Total RNA (1 mg) was incubated at 95°C in alka-
line fragmentation buffer (2 mM EDTA, 10 mM
Na2CO3, 90 mM NaHCO3; pH ~9.3) for 45 min and
PAGE-purified [pre-run 15% TBE-Urea precast
gels, 200 V, 45 min in Mini-PROTEAN electro-
phoresis cells (Bio-Rad)] to select 30- to 80-nt frag-
ments. RNA fragments were 3′-dephosphorylated
with T4 polynucleotide kinase (NEB) at 37°C
for 60 min in the supplied buffer, then desalted
by ethanol precipitation. Desphosphorylated
RNA was denatured again in adenylated ligation
buffer [3.3 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 10 mM
MgCl2, 10 mg/ml acetylated BSA, 8.3% glycerol,
50 mM HEPES-KOH; pH ~8.3) for 1 min at 98°C
and ligated to preadenylated adaptor AF-JA-34
(/5rApp/NNNNNNAGATCGGAAGAGCACACG-
TCT/3ddC/) at 22°C for 4 hours using 10 U T4
RNA Ligase I (NEB). The (N)6 barcode for each
RNA fragment allowed us to computationally
collapse PCR bias. Excess adaptor was removed
by treatment with 5′ deadenylase (NEB) followed
by RecJf (NEB) treatment and organic extraction
to purify ligation products. RNA was reverse-
transcribed using primer AF-JA-126 (/5Phos/AGATC-
GGAAGAGCGTCGTGT/iSp18/CACTCA/iSp18/
GTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCT)
with SuperScript II (Life Technologies) and sub-
sequently hydrolyzed in 0.2 M NaOH at 70°C for
15 min. cDNA was PAGE-purified (pre-run 10%
TBE-urea gels, 200 V, 45 min in Mini-PROTEAN
electrophoresis cells) to select 90- to 150-nt frag-
ments and circularized with 50U CircLigase I
(Epicentre). Libraries were prepared by six to 14
cycles of PCR with universal adaptor AF-JA-158
(AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACTCT-
TTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT) and index-
ing primers AF-JA-118:125 (CAAGCAGAAGACG-
GCATACGAGAT NNNNNN GTGACTGGAGTTC-
AGACGTGTGCTCTTCCG)wherethe(N)6barcodes
correspond to TruSeq LT indexes AD001 to AD008
(Illumina). Amplicons of 160 to 200 bp were gel-
purified by agarose electrophoresis.
Construction and validation of
td intron constructs
Constructs with the following features were or-
dered as gBlocks (Integrated DNA Technologies)
and cloned downstream of the T7 promoter in
pCR-Blunt II-TOPO (Life Technologies). Bases 208
to 216 (CTTAAGCGT) of the ribosomal protein
S15 gene (Marme_0982) and bases 67 to 75 (CGT-
AAATCC) of the ssrA tmRNA gene (Marme_R0008)
were replaced with the wild-type td intron splice
junction (CTTGGGT|CT). The 393-bp intron se-
quence was inserted at the exon junction ‘|’. In-
cluded were 128 bp of upstream sequence for
Marme_0982 and 183 bp of upstream sequence
and30bpofdownstreamsequenceforMarme_R0008.
Transcripts were generated from linearized plas-
mids using the MEGAscript T7 Transcription kit
(Life Technologies). Mostly unspliced RNA was
obtained by arresting the transcription reaction
after 5 min at 37°C and subsequently extracted
with acidified phenol:CHCl3 (Life Technologies).
One-third of the reaction product was incubated
in a splicing buffer (40 mM tris, pH 7.5; 6 mM
MgCl2; 100 mM KCl; 1 mM ribo-GTP) at 37°C
for 30 min and desalted by ethanol precipitation.
Spliced and unspliced transcripts were visual-
ized by 1/4x tris-acetate-EDTA native agarose gel
electrophoresis, with a 100-bp Quickload dsDNA
ladder (NEB) providing approximate sizing. Intron-
containing genes were then transferred to pKT230-
derived MMB-1 overexpression vectors carry-
ing RT-Cas1–associated genes and a copy of the
CRISPR03 array. One clone each from two inde-
pendent conjugations was isolated for each vector.
In vivo splicing efficiency was measured by
high-throughput sequencing as follows. Total RNA
was extracted and 1 mg was reverse-transcribed
(SuperScript III, high GC content protocol; Life
Technologies) with gene-specific primers down-
stream of the splice junctions that would bind
both spliced and unspliced transcripts: AF-SS-238
(CTTAGCGACGTAGACCTAGTTTTT)forMarme_0982
and AF-SS-241 (GGTTATTAAGCTGCTAAAGCG-
TAG) for Marme_R0008. cDNA was treated with
RNase H, and libraries were prepared by a two-
round PCR method adapted from the CRISPR
spacersequencingmethoddescribedabove. Round
1 of PCR was performed at annealing temperatures
of 48° and 65°C for two and 19 cycles, respectively,
with primers AF-SS-242 (CGACGCTCTTCCGATC-
TNNNNNGATTCGCATGGTAAAC) and AF-SS-243
(ACTGACGCTAGTGCATCAAACTAGTGTAACGT-
GCTG) for Marme_0982, and for two and 16 cycles,
respectively, with primers AF-SS-247 (CGACGCT-
CTTCCGATCTNNNNNCACGAACCTGAGGTG)
and AF-SS-248 (ACTGACGCTAGTGCATCACGTC-
GTTTGCGACTATATAATTGA) for Marme_R0008.
This approach simultaneously generated ampli-
cons of identical length for both spliced and un-
spliced transcripts, which were then attached to
flowcell adaptors (Illumina) with a second round
of PCR as before.
The presence of exon-junction sequences cor-
responding to the td intron constructs in DNA
form outside the CRISPR arrays was also tested
by high-throughput sequencing. Libraries con-
sisting of the ~100-bp region containing the td
intron insertion sites in Marme_R0008 and
Marme_0982 were prepared by a two-round PCR
method identical to the one described above for
measuring splicing efficiency by RT-PCR, using
100 ng of genomic DNA (~2 × 107 copies) as a
template instead of reverse-transcribed cDNA.
Round 1 of PCR was performed at annealing tem-
peratures of 57°C and 68°C for two and 16 cycles,
respectively, with primers AF-SS-318 (CGACGCT-
CTTCCGATCTNNNNNCACATTCATGACCACCA-
TTCTCG) and AF-SS-309 (ACTGACGCTAGT-
GCATCACTTCGGTCTTAGCGACGTAGAC) for
Marme_0982 and primers AF-SS-310 (CGAC-
GCTCTTCCGATCTNNNNNGGGGTGACATGG-
TTTCGACG) and AF-SS-311 (ACTGACGCTAGTG-
CATCAGCAGGTTATTAAGCTGCTAAAGCG) for
Marme_R0008. The amplicons were then at-
tached to flowcell adaptors (Illumina) with a
second round of PCR as before. Each library was
sequenced to a depth of ~5 million reads. To
ensure that the PCR was not bottlenecked, we
also included a spike-in (1 molecule per 1000
copies of the MMB-1 genome) of synthetic ssDNA
templates—AF-SS-312 (TAAAAACATTGAAGGT-
CTACAAGGTCACTTTAAAGCTCACATTCATGAC-
CACCATTCTCGTCGCNNNNNNNNNNNNAT-
GGTAAACCAACGTCGTAAGTTGTTGGATTACC-
AGCTGCGTAAAGACGCAGCACGTTACACTAGT-
TTGANNNNNNNNNNNNGTCTACGTCGCTA-
AGACCGAAG) for Marme_0982 and AF-SS-313
(GGGGTGACATGGTTTCGACGNNNNNNNNN-
NNNCCTGAGGTGCATGTCGAGAGTGATACGT-
GATCTCAGCTGTCCCCTCGTATCAATTATATA-
GTCGCAAANNNNNNNNNNNNCGCTTTAGC-
AGCTTAATAACCTGCTAGTGTGCTGCCCTCAG-
GTTGCTTGTAGCCCGAGATTCCGCAGT) for
Marme_R0008—that could be amplified con-
comitantly by the same primer sets to yield
identically sized amplicons.
The spike-in–derived reads are easily identified
by sequence, with the diversity of randomized (N)12
segments used to evaluate the degree to which
distinct reads in the amplified pool represent in-
dependent molecules from the pre-amplification
mixture. A large number of spike-in barcodes
(ideally a different barcode for every spike-in read)
indicate that a high fraction of reads from the
amplified pool represent unique molecules in the
initial sample, whereas repeated appearances of
a small number of (N)12 barcodes in the amplified
pool would be indicative of bottleneck formation
during PCR (and hence a less than optimal rela-
tionship between read counts and molecules in
the initial pool). For the purpose of estimating
the number of molecules sampled from an initial
pool, we calculated a nonredundancy fraction,
which is the ratio of spike-in–derived barcodes to
total spike-in–derived reads. The nonredundancy
aad4234-10
26 FEBRUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6276
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 fraction provides a multiplier that can be used to
correct raw read counts from an amplified pool
to obtain an estimate of the contributing number
of molecules from the initial pool. This is partic-
ularly applicable for estimating a minimal inci-
dence of a rare class (i.e., setting a detection limit
for spliced copies of the td intron–containing
DNA constructs in this work). Given nonredun-
dancy fractions of >0.45 for all samples in these
experiments, the observed totals of control (non-
spliced, genomic) sequence reads (fig. S6C) would
have been sufficient to detect the presence of
extended spliced td intron–containing DNA mol-
ecules, even at the low incidence of 10−6.
The same cultures of MMB-1 were used to as-
sess both splicing efficiency and the presence of
exon-junction sequences in DNA form.
PCR fidelity
Analyzing sequence distributions through PCR
and sequencing entails certain best practices in
terms of both experimental protocols and analy-
sis. Inparticular, several precautionswereobserved
in constructing sequencing libraries for spacer
sequencing. PCR titrations were performed to
ensure that the amplification kinetics were in the
linear range of the reactions before any size se-
lection step (e.g., band excision from native agar-
ose gels); this avoids renaturation artifacts in
complex sequence pools. The overall error rate
was empirically determined for every experiment
by analyzing the distribution of mismatches in the
sequences obtained from the first native spacer in
the CRISPR03 array; this enabled the estimation
of the error rate in the region of the sequencing
reads that contained newly acquired spacers.
PCR bottlenecking was also measured as the num-
ber of repeat occurrences of any given new spacer.
All synthetic sequences that could lead to con-
founding contamination issues were avoided:
No sequences from E. coli, MMB-1, or other
sources have been synthesized as amplifiable
substrates. As a benchmark for recovery of in-
dividual sequences, a nonbacterial sequence was
synthesized as a spacer flanked by the appro-
priate CRISPR repeats. This repeat-flanked spacer
sequence (CTGGGACATATAATATCGTCCCCG-
TAGATGCCTAT; a segment of the phage MS2)
was recovered effectively in experiments with
an E. coli transformant carrying a plasmid with
the indicated template. Appearances of MS2 se-
quences in other trials were limited to this single
sequence, indicating a likely source due to a low
level of cross-sample “bleeding.”
Protein purification
Expression plasmids were transformed into
E. coli strains Rosetta2 (pMal derivatives) or
Rosetta2(DE3) (pET14b derivatives), and single
transformed colonies were grown in LB medium
supplemented with appropriate antibiotics over
night at 37°C with shaking. Six flasks each
containing 1 liter LB were inoculated with 1% of
the overnight culture and grown at 37°C with
shaking to log phase. After the culture reached an
optical density at 600 nm of ~0.8, IPTG was added
to 1 mM final concentration and the cultures were
incubated at 19°C for 20 to 24 hours. Cells were
harvested by centrifugation, and the pellet was
dissolved in A1 buffer (25 mM KPO4, pH 7; 500 mM
NaCl; 10% glycerol; 10 mM ß-mercaptoethanol;
10 ml/g cell paste) on ice. Lysozyme was added to
1 mg/ml final concentration and incubated at 4°C
for 0.5 hours. Cells were then sonicated (Branson
Sonifier 450; three bursts of 15 s each with 15 s
between each burst). The lysate was cleared by
centrifugation (29,400g, 25 min, 4°C), and poly-
ethyleneimine (PEI) was added to the supernatant
in six steps on ice with stirring to a final concen-
tration of 0.4%. After 10 min, precipitated nucleic
acids were removed by centrifugation (29,400g,
25 min, 4°C), and proteins were precipitated from
the supernatant by adding ammonium sulfate to
60% saturation on ice and incubating for 30 min.
Proteins were collected by centrifugation (29,400g,
25 min, 4°C), dissolved in 20 ml A1 buffer, and
filtered through a 0.45-mm polyethersulfone mem-
brane (Whatman Puradisc).
Protein purification was achieved by using a
BioLogic fast protein liquid chromatography sys-
tem (BioRad). RT-Cas1 was purified by loading
the filtered crude protein onto an amylose column
(30 ml; NEB Amylose High Flow resin), washing
with 50 ml of A1 buffer, followed by 30 ml A1 plus
1.5 M NaCl and 30 ml of A1 buffer. Bound proteins
were eluted with 50 ml of 10 mM maltose in A1
buffer. Fractions containing RT-Cas1 were identi-
fied by SDS-PAGE, pooled, and diluted to 250 mM
NaCl. The protein was then loaded onto a 5-ml
heparin-Sepharose column (HiTrap Heparin HP
column; GE Healthcare) and eluted with a 0.1- to
1-M NaCl gradient. Peak fractions (~700 mM NaCl)
wereidentifiedbySDS-PAGE, pooled, anddialyzed
into A1 buffer. The dialyzed protein was concen-
trated to >10 mM using an Amicon Ultra Centrif-
ugal Filter (Ultracel-50K). The protein was stable
in A1 buffer on ice for about 3 months.
The initial steps in the Cas2 purification were
similar, except that the cell paste was resuspended
in N1 buffer (25 mM tris-HCl, pH 7.5; 500 mM
KCl; 10 mM imidazole; 10% glycerol; 10 mM DTT)
and the ammonium sulfate precipitation step
was omitted. Instead, the Cas2 PEI supernatant
was loaded directly onto a 5-ml nickel column
(HiTrap Nickel HP column; GE Healthcare) and
eluted with an imidazole gradient (60 ml 10 to
500 mM in N1 buffer). Peak fractions containing
Cas2 were identified by SDS-PAGE and pooled.
After adjusting the KCl concentration to 200 mM,
the pooled fractions were loaded onto two 5-ml
heparin-Sepharose columns arranged in tandem.
The protein was eluted with a linear KCl gradient
(50 ml, 100 mM to 1 M), and Cas2 peak fractions
(~800 mM KCl) were identified by SDS-PAGE
and stored on ice in elution buffer. The protein
was stable on ice for several months.
All protein concentrations were measured using
the Qubit Protein assay kit (Life Technologies) ac-
cording to the manufacturer’s protocol. Proteins
were >80% pure based on densitometry.
Formation of RTCas1+Cas2 complex
Purified RTCas1 (2500 pMol) was mixed with a
twofold excess of purified Cas2 in 250 mM KCl,
250 mM NaCl, and 12.5 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.5);
12.5 mM KPO4 (pH 7); 5 mM DTT; 5 mM BME; and
10% glycerol and incubated on ice for >16 hours
prior to reactions.
RT assay
RT assays with poly(rA)/oligo(dT)24 were per-
formed by preincubating poly(rA)/oligo(dT)24
(80 mM and 50 mM, respectively) in 200 mM KCl,
50 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, and 20 mM tris-HCl
(pH 7.5); 1 mM unlabeled deoxythymidine triphos-
phate(dTTP);and5mCi[a-32P]-dTTP(3000Ci/mmol;
PerkinElmer) for 2 min at the desired tempera-
ture, then initiating the reaction by adding the
RT-Cas1 proteins (1 to 2 mM final concentration).
The reactions (20 to 30 ml) were incubated for
times up to 30 min. A 3-ml sample was withdrawn
at each time point and added to 10 ml of stop
solution (0.5% SDS, 25 mM EDTA). Reaction
products were spotted onto Whatman DE81 paper
(10- × 7.5-cm sheets; GE Healthcare Biosciences),
which was then washed three times with 0.3 M
NaCl and 0.03 M sodium citrate, dried, and scanned
with a PhosphorImager (Typhoon Trio Variable
Mode Imager; GE Healthcare Biosciences)toquan-
tify the bound radioactivity.
CRISPR DNA cleavage/ligation assay
MMB-1 CRISPR DNA substrate was a PCR prod-
duct amplified with primers MMB1crisp5b (CAC-
TCGACCGGAATTATCGACGAA) and MMB1crisp3
(TCTGAAACTCTGAATACTAACGAAAAATAG)
using Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase ac-
cording to the manufacturer’s protocol (NEB or
Thermo Scientific). The resulting 268-bp PCR
fragment contains 120 bp of the leader, 35 bp of
repeat 1, 33 bp of spacer 1, 35 bp of repeat 2, 37 bp
of spacer 2, and 8 bp of repeat 3. Internally labeled
substrate was prepared by adding 25 mCi [a-32P]-
dTTP or dCTP (Perkin Elmer) and 40 mM dTTP
ordCTP, respectively,tothe PCRreactions.Labeled
DNA was purified by electrophoresis in a native
6% polyacrylamide gel, cutting out the labeled
band, and electroeluting the DNA using midi D-
Tube dialyzer cartridges (Novagen). The eluted
DNA was extracted with phenol:chloroform:iso-
amyl alcohol (phenol-CIA), ethanol-precipitated,
and quantitated using a Qubit dsDNA assay kit
(Life Technologies).
CRISPR DNA cleavage-ligation assays contained
RTCas1–Cas2 complex (500 nM final), MMB-
1 CRISPR substrate (1 nM), 20 mM tris (pH 7.5),
and 7.5 mM free MgCl2. DNA or RNA oligonu-
cleotides and an equimolar solution of dNTPs and
Mg2+ were added at 2.5 mM and 1 mM final con-
centrations as indicated for individual experi-
ments. Reactions were incubated at 37°C for1 hour
and stopped by adding phenol-CIA. The super-
natant was mixed at a 2:1 ratio with loading dye
(90% formamide, 20 mM EDTA, and 0.25 mg/ml
bromophenol blue and xyan cyanol), and nucleic
acids were analyzed in a 6% polyacrylamide 7 M
urea gel. Gels were dried and scanned with a
phosphorimager.
Labeled DNA or RNA oligonucleotide ligation
assays were performed as described above but
using 22.5 mM unlabeled CRISPR PCR fragment
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
26 FEBRUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6276
aad4234-11
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and ~0.25 mM 5′-end–labeled gel-purified oligo-
nucleotides. Control assays were performed with-
out adding CRISPR PCR fragment. For nuclease
treatment of oligonucleotide ligation to CRISPR
DNA, reactions were scaled up fourfold, treated
with phenol-CIA, and ethanol-precipitated. The
precipitated nucleic acids were dissolved in 30 ml
of water. Equal amounts were then either un-
treated or treated with RNase H (2 units, Invi-
trogen), DNase I (RNase-free, 10 units, Roche),
and RNase A/T1 mix [0.5 mg RNase A (Sigma) and
500 units RNase T1 (Ambion)] in 40 mM tris (pH
7.9), 10 mM NaCl, 6 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM CaCl2
for 20 min at 37°C. Samples were extracted
with phenol-CIA to terminate the reaction and
analyzed by electrophoresis in a denaturing poly-
acrylamide gel, as described above.
Labeled cDNA extension reactions were carried
out as above but using cold CRISPR DNA and
oligonucleotides with 0.25 mM unlabeled dATP,
dGTP, and dTTP and 5 mCi [a-32P]-dCTP (3000
Ci/mMol, PerkinElmer).
Oligonucleotides for cleavage/ligations assays
were as follows: 29-nt DNA (TTTGGATCCTCAT-
CTTTTAGGGCTCCAAG), 33-nt dsDNA-top (GA-
TGCTTATGGTTATTGCAGCTACCCTCGCCCT),
33-nt dsDNA-bottom (AGGGCGAGGGTAGCTG-
CAATAACCATAAGCATC), 21-nt RNA (GCCGCU-
UCAGAGAGAAAUCGC), and 35-nt RNA (UUA-
CGGUGCUUAAAACAAAACAAAACAAAACAAAA).
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1.
R. Barrangou et al., CRISPR provides acquired resistance
against viruses in prokaryotes. Science 315, 1709–1712 (2007).
doi: 10.1126/science.1138140; pmid: 17379808
2.
L. A. Marraffini, E. J. Sontheimer, CRISPR interference: RNA-
directed adaptive immunity in bacteria and archaea. Nat. Rev.
Genet. 11, 181–190 (2010). doi: 10.1038/nrg2749; pmid: 20125085
3.
A. Bolotin, B. Quinquis, A. Sorokin, S. D. Ehrlich, Clustered regularly
interspaced short palindrome repeats (CRISPRs) have spacers of
extrachromosomal origin. Microbiology 151, 2551–2561 (2005).
doi: 10.1099/mic.0.28048-0; pmid: 16079334
4.
F. J. Mojica, C. Díez-Villaseñor, J. García-Martínez, E. Soria,
Intervening sequences of regularly spaced prokaryotic repeats
derive from foreign genetic elements. J. Mol. Evol. 60, 174–182
(2005). doi: 10.1007/s00239-004-0046-3; pmid: 15791728
5.
C. Pourcel, G. Salvignol, G. Vergnaud, CRISPR elements in
Yersinia pestis acquire new repeats by preferential uptake of
bacteriophage DNA, and provide additional tools for
evolutionary studies. Microbiology 151, 653–663 (2005).
doi: 10.1099/mic.0.27437-0; pmid: 15758212
6.
S. J. Brouns et al., Small CRISPR RNAs guide antiviral
defense in prokaryotes. Science 321, 960–964 (2008).
pmid: 18703739
7.
J. van der Oost, E. R. Westra, R. N. Jackson, B. Wiedenheft,
Unravelling the structural and mechanistic basis of CRISPR-
Cas systems. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 479–492 (2014).
doi: 10.1038/nrmicro3279; pmid: 24909109
8.
K. S. Makarova et al., Evolution and classification of the
CRISPR-Cas systems. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 9, 467–477 (2011).
doi: 10.1038/nrmicro2577; pmid: 21552286
9.
K. S. Makarova et al., An updated evolutionary classification of
CRISPR-Cas systems. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 13, 722–736 (2015).
doi: 10.1038/nrmicro3569; pmid: 26411297
10. K. S. Makarova, N. V. Grishin, S. A. Shabalina, Y. I. Wolf,
E. V. Koonin, A putative RNA-interference-based immune
system in prokaryotes: Computational analysis of the predicted
enzymatic machinery, functional analogies with eukaryotic
RNAi, and hypothetical mechanisms of action. Biol. Direct 1, 7
(2006). doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-1-7; pmid: 16545108
11. I. Yosef, M. G. Goren, U. Qimron, Proteins and DNA elements
essential for the CRISPR adaptation process in Escherichia coli.
Nucleic Acids Res. 40, 5569–5576 (2012). doi: 10.1093/nar/
gks216; pmid: 22402487
12. K. A. Datsenko et al., Molecular memory of prior infections
activates the CRISPR/Cas adaptive bacterial immunity system.
Nat. Commun. 3, 945 (2012). doi: 10.1038/ncomms1937;
pmid: 22781758
13. Y. Wei, R. M. Terns, M. P. Terns, Cas9 function and host genome
sampling in Type II-A CRISPR-Cas adaptation. Genes Dev. 29,
356–361 (2015). doi: 10.1101/gad.257550.114; pmid: 25691466
14. R. Heler et al., Cas9 specifies functional viral targets during
CRISPR-Cas adaptation. Nature 519, 199–202 (2015).
doi: 10.1038/nature14245; pmid: 25707807
15. L. A. Marraffini, E. J. Sontheimer, CRISPR interference limits
horizontal gene transfer in staphylococci by targeting DNA.
Science 322, 1843–1845 (2008). doi: 10.1126/science.1165771;
pmid: 19095942
16. C. R. Hale et al., RNA-guided RNA cleavage by a CRISPR RNA-
Cas protein complex. Cell 139, 945–956 (2009). doi: 10.1016/
j.cell.2009.07.040; pmid: 19945378
17. C. R. Hale et al., Essential features and rational design of
CRISPR RNAs that function with the Cas RAMP module
complex to cleave RNAs. Mol. Cell 45, 292–302 (2012).
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.10.023; pmid: 22227116
18. G. Tamulaitis et al., Programmable RNA shredding by the type III-A
CRISPR-Cas system of Streptococcus thermophilus. Mol. Cell 56,
506–517 (2014). doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.09.027; pmid: 25458845
19. G. W. Goldberg, W. Jiang, D. Bikard, L. A. Marraffini,
Conditional tolerance of temperate phages via
transcription-dependent CRISPR-Cas targeting. Nature 514,
633–637 (2014). doi: 10.1038/nature13637; pmid: 25174707
20. W. Peng, M. Feng, X. Feng, Y. X. Liang, Q. She, An archaeal
CRISPR type III-B system exhibiting distinctive RNA targeting
features and mediating dual RNA and DNA interference.
Nucleic Acids Res. 43, 406–417 (2015). doi: 10.1093/nar/
gku1302; pmid: 25505143
21. P. Samai et al., Co-transcriptional DNA and RNA cleavage
during Type III CRISPR-Cas immunity. Cell 161, 1164–1174
(2015). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.04.027; pmid: 25959775
22. D. Baltimore, RNA-dependent DNA polymerase in virions of
RNA tumour viruses. Nature 226, 1209–1211 (1970).
doi: 10.1038/2261209a0; pmid: 4316300
23. H. M. Temin, S. Mizutani, RNA-dependent DNA polymerase in
virions of Rous sarcoma virus. Nature 226, 1211–1213 (1970).
doi: 10.1038/2261211a0; pmid: 4316301
24. C. W. Greider, E. H. Blackburn, Identification of a specific
telomere terminal transferase activity in tetrahymena extracts.
Cell 43, 405–413 (1985). doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(85)90170-9;
pmid: 3907856
25. J. D. Boeke, D. J. Garfinkel, C. A. Styles, G. R. Fink, Ty elements
transpose through an RNA intermediate. Cell 40, 491–500 (1985).
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(85)90197-7; pmid: 2982495
26. S. Zimmerly, H. Guo, P. S. Perlman, A. M. Lambowitz, Group II
intron mobility occurs by target DNA-primed reverse
transcription. Cell 82, 545–554 (1995). doi: 10.1016/
0092-8674(95)90027-6; pmid: 7664334
27. M. Liu et al., Reverse transcriptase-mediated tropism switching
in Bordetella bacteriophage. Science 295, 2091–2094 (2002).
doi: 10.1126/science.1067467; pmid: 11896279
28. K. K. Kojima, M. Kanehisa, Systematic survey for novel types of
prokaryotic retroelements based on gene neighborhood and
protein architecture. Mol. Biol. Evol. 25, 1395–1404 (2008).
doi: 10.1093/molbev/msn081; pmid: 18391066
29. D. M. Simon, S. Zimmerly, A diversity of uncharacterized
reverse transcriptases in bacteria. Nucleic Acids Res. 36,
7219–7229 (2008). doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn867; pmid: 19004871
30. N. Toro, R. Nisa-Martínez, Comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of
bacterial reverse transcriptases. PLOS ONE 9, e114083 (2014).
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114083; pmid: 25423096
31. H. S. Malik, W. D. Burke, T. H. Eickbush, The age and evolution
of non-LTR retrotransposable elements. Mol. Biol. Evol. 16,
793–805 (1999). doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a026164;
pmid: 10368957
32. F. J. Blocker et al., Domain structure and three-dimensional model
of a group II intron-encoded reverse transcriptase. RNA 11, 14–28
(2005). doi: 10.1261/rna.7181105; pmid: 15574519
33. G. Mohr, E. Ghanem, A. M. Lambowitz, Mechanisms used for
genomic proliferation by thermophilic group II introns. PLOS
Biol. 8, e1000391 (2010). pmid: 20543989
34. F. Solano, A. Sanchez-Amat, Studies on the phylogenetic
relationships of melanogenic marine bacteria: Proposal of
Marinomonas mediterranea sp. nov. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 49,
1241–1246 (1999). doi: 10.1099/00207713-49-3-1241;
pmid: 10425786
35. Of the two RT-Cas1–associated type III-B CRISPR arrays in this
system, CRISPR03 was chosen for spacer acquisition assays,
because the other array (CRISPR02) has unusual truncated
repeats at the leader-proximal end (1).
36. M. Grynberg, A. Godzik, NERD: A DNA processing-related
domain present in the anthrax virulence plasmid, pXO1. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 29, 106–110 (2004). doi: 10.1016/
j.tibs.2004.01.002; pmid: 15055202
37. T. Y. Kim, M. Shin, L. Huynh Thi Yen, J. S. Kim, Crystal
structure of Cas1 from Archaeoglobus fulgidus and
characterization of its nucleolytic activity. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 441, 720–725 (2013). doi: 10.1016/
j.bbrc.2013.10.122; pmid: 24211577
38. One potential contributor to increased spacer acquisition
frequency (Fig. 2C) after RT deletion could be the higher growth
rate that was observed for the cells expressing the RTD mutant.
39. M. Belfort, P. S. Chandry, J. Pedersen-Lane, Genetic delineation
of functional components of the group I intron in the phage T4
td gene. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 52, 181–192
(1987). doi: 10.1101/SQB.1987.052.01.023; pmid: 3331339
40. S. D. Moore, R. T. Sauer, The tmRNA system for translational
surveillance and ribosome rescue. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 76,
101–124 (2007). doi: 10.1146/annurev.
biochem.75.103004.142733; pmid: 17291191
41. J. K. Nuñez, A. S. Lee, A. Engelman, J. A. Doudna,
Integrase-mediated spacer acquisition during CRISPR-Cas
adaptive immunity. Nature 519, 193–198 (2015). doi: 10.1038/
nature14237; pmid: 25707795
42. A. M. Lambowitz, S. Zimmerly, Mobile group II introns.
Annu. Rev. Genet. 38, 1–35 (2004). doi: 10.1146/annurev.
genet.38.072902.091600; pmid: 15568970
43. T. Blumenthal, G. G. Carmichael, RNA replication: Function
and structure of Qbeta-replicase. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 48,
525–548 (1979). doi: 10.1146/annurev.bi.48.070179.002521;
pmid: 382992
44. C. K. Biebricher, L. E. Orgel, An RNA that multiplies indefinitely
with DNA-dependent RNA polymerase: Selection from a
random copolymer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 70, 934–938
(1973). doi: 10.1073/pnas.70.3.934; pmid: 4577140
45. M. M. Konarska, P. A. Sharp, Replication of RNA by the DNA-
dependent RNA polymerase of phage T7. Cell 57, 423–431 (1989).
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(89)90917-3; pmid: 2720777
46. R. Flores, S. Gago-Zachert, P. Serra, R. Sanjuán, S. F. Elena,
Viroids: Survivors from the RNA world? Annu. Rev. Microbiol.
68, 395–414 (2014). doi: 10.1146/annurev-micro-091313-
103416; pmid: 25002087
47. B. J. Haas, M. Chin, C. Nusbaum, B. W. Birren, J. Livny, How
deep is deep enough for RNA-Seq profiling of bacterial
transcriptomes? BMC Genomics 13, 734 (2012). doi: 10.1186/
1471-2164-13-734; pmid: 23270466
48. W. Ludwig, H. P. Klenk, in Bergey’s Manual of Systematic
Bacteriology, G. M. Garrity, Ed. (Springer, vol. 2, 2001), pp. 49–65.
49. Y. Xiong, T. H. Eickbush, Origin and evolution of retroelements
based upon their reverse transcriptase sequences. EMBO J. 9,
3353–3362 (1990). pmid: 1698615
50. S. Mohr et al., Thermostable group II intron reverse
transcriptase fusion proteins and their use in cDNA synthesis
and next-generation RNA sequencing. RNA 19, 958–970
(2013). doi: 10.1261/rna.039743.113; pmid: 23697550
51. F. Solano, P. Lucas-Elío, E. Fernández, A. Sanchez-Amat,
Marinomonas mediterranea MMB-1 transposon mutagenesis:
Isolation of a multipotent polyphenol oxidase mutant.
J. Bacteriol. 182, 3754–3760 (2000). doi: 10.1128/
JB.182.13.3754-3760.2000; pmid: 10850991
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank J. Shor, S. Cohen, M. Bagdasarian, C. Pourcel, L. Mindich,
C.P. Wolk, M. Poranen, and laboratory colleagues for help and advice;
the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Stanford for fellowship
support (S.S.); NIH (grants R01-GM37706 to A.Z.F., R01-GM37949 to
A.M.L., and R01-GM37951 to A.M.L.); and the Welch Foundation
(grant F-1607 to A.M.L.). Sequencing data are archived in the
Sequence Read Archive under SRA ID-SRP066108. S.S. and A.Z.F.
conceived the project. S.S., G.M., A.M.L., and A.Z.F. designed
experiments, analyzed data, and wrote the paper with inputs from
other authors. S.S. performed all genetics experiments. G.M., D.J.S.,
and L.M.M. performed all biochemistry experiments. A.S.-A. and D.B.
provided protocols and conceptual guidance.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencemag.org/content/351/6276/aad4234/suppl/DC1
Figs. S1 to S10
Tables S1 and S2
Reference (52)
11 September 2015; accepted 7 January 2016
10.1126/science.aad4234
aad4234-12
26 FEBRUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6276
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 protein
Cas1 fusion
−
Direct CRISPR spacer acquisition from RNA by a natural reverse transcriptase
Andrew Z. Fire
Sukrit Silas, Georg Mohr, David J. Sidote, Laura M. Markham, Antonio Sanchez-Amat, Devaki Bhaya, Alan M. Lambowitz and
DOI: 10.1126/science.aad4234
 (6276), aad4234.
351
Science 
, this issue p. 10.1126/science.aad4234; see also p. 920
Science
parasitic RNA species, or even to modulate bacterial gene expression.
capture and directly incorporate both DNA and RNA into CRISPR loci. RT-Cas1 systems could be effective against 
) (see the Perspective by Sontheimer and Marraffini). These RT-Cas1 proteins are able to
RT-Cas1
transcriptase gene (
 gene are fused to a reverse
Cas1
 discover that certain classes of the 
et al.
to target the invaders' for destruction. Silas 
immune response. DNA captured from viruses and plasmids by CRISPR-associated protein 1 (Cas1) is used by bacteria 
The CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat) system provides bacteria with an adaptive
CRISPR-Cas captures invading RNA
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/351/6276/aad4234
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/02/24/351.6276.aad4234.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/351/6276/920.full
REFERENCES
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/351/6276/aad4234#BIBL
This article cites 49 articles, 10 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science 
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
