 Original Research
Female Physicians Are Underrepresented in Recognition
Awards from the American Academy of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation
Julie K. Silver, MD, Saurabha Bhatnagar, MD, Cheri A. Blauwet, MD,
Ross D. Zafonte, DO, Nicole L. Mazwi, MD, Chloe S. Slocum, MD,
Jeffrey C. Schneider, MD, Adam S. Tenforde, MD
Abstract
Background: Medical specialty societies are important resources for physicians in advancing their careers. There is a gap in the
literature regarding gender disparities within these societies. This study assesses one area where disparities may exist: recog-
nition awards.
Objective: To determine whether female physicians are underrepresented among recognition award recipients by the American
Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation (AAPM&R).
Design: Surveillance study.
Setting and Methods: A published online list of national award recipients from the AAPM&R was analyzed. Forty-eight years of data
were included, as the list contained all major recognition award recipients from 1968 to 2015. All awards that were given exclusively
to physicians were included. There were eight award categories listed online; seven met this criterion, with a total of 264 individual
awards presented. One award category was excluded because it focused on distinguished public service and included both physician
and nonphysician (eg, public official) recipients. Awards that were not published online were also excluded.
Main Outcome Measures: Total awards given to female versus male physicians from 1968 to 2015, with awards given over the past
decade (2006-2015) assessed independently. Lectureships were also analyzed as a set. For awards given to groups of physician
recipients, analysis included gender composition of the group (eg, male only versus female only versus mixed-gender physician
groups). To assess the proportion of female versus male physiatrists over time, physician gender and specialty data from 3 sources
were used: the American Medical Association (AMA), the Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC), and the AAPM&R.
Results: Over the past 48 years, the AAPM&R presented 264 recognition awards to physicians. Award recipients were over-
whelmingly male (n ¼ 222; 84.1%). Females received 15.9% (n ¼ 42) of the total awards, although there was an upward trend in
female physician recipients to 26.8% (n ¼ 26) from 2006 to 2015. Lectureships were given to 8 female physicians (n ¼ 8 of 77,
10.4%). These results were lower than the proportion of female physicians in the field of physiatry (35% in 2013). Female phy-
sicians were more likely to receive awards if they were part of a group and less likely to be recognized if the award was given to
only 1 recipient each year or involved a lectureship with a speaking opportunity at a national meeting.
Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the first study in medicine to assess whether female physicians are underrepresented
among recipients of recognition awards presented by a national medical society. For nearly half a century, female physicians have
been underrepresented in awards presented by the AAPM&R. Although it is encouraging that the proportion of female physicians
receiving awards is increasing, further research is needed to understand why underrepresentation remains.
Level of Evidence: Not applicable.
Introduction
Awards
are
a
major
indication
of
professional
achievement, and defined processes for recognizing
individuals for special accomplishments exist in essen-
tially every sector of society, including government,
media, military, sports, and medicine. From Pulitzer Pri-
zes to Nobel Prizes, awards acknowledge accomplishment
PM R 9 (2017) 976-984
www.pmrjournal.org
1934-1482 ª 2017 by the American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pmrj.2017.02.016
 and convey prestige. In medicine, and as evidenced by the
unique section(s) dedicated to awards that are routinely
part of the curriculum vitae templates distributed to
faculty, awards are highly valued by medical school pro-
motions’ committees. In a report documenting the
underrepresentation of women in professional science
awards, Lincoln et al explained, “Awards and prizes are
close cousins of peer-reviewed publications, as they
provide important external markers of professional
achievement and are instrumental for shaping and
advancing careers, including promotion and tenure
decisions” [1].
The science of phaleristics, the study of awards, is
extensive [2], and it is important to consider the posi-
tive impact that recognition awards have on both
individuals and institutions. When focusing on benefits
conferred to individuals, it is important to note that
professional physician organizations exist in large part
to support their members’ careers. Specifically, in the
“Member Benefits” section of the AAPM&R website, the
first statement reads, “Strengthening the specialty of
PM&R and supporting members’ practices and patients,
AAPM&R offers a full depth and breadth of benefits
designed to help PM&R physicians meet new challenges
and build successful careers” [3].
There is a large body of literature demonstrating
gender inequality in science and medicine. Female
physician researchers earn less than male counterparts,
even after adjustments are made for other factors [4].
In addition, and as documented by the Society for
Women’s Health Research RAISE Project, women in
science, technology, engineering, mathematics and
medicine (STEMM) have received fewer awards than
male colleagues for more than 2 decades [5]. Although
some 2200 STEMM awards are available to both men and
women, “the clear finding is that women do not receive
recognition in a ratio anywhere near the percentage of
women in their fields” [6]. Interestingly, an additional
117 STEMM awards are designated for women only.
Although awards have been studied in STEMM fields in
general, to our knowledge this is the first report to
address whether female physicians are underrepre-
sented among recipients of recognition awards pre-
sented by a national medical specialty association that
supports
member
career
development.
This
is
an
exploratory investigation to determine the proportion of
recognition awards given to female physicians by the
AAPM&R and to evaluate whether the proportion has
increased over time as the specialty of physical medi-
cine and rehabilitation (PM&R) has grown to include a
greater proportion of female physiatrists.
Methods
During March 2016, a published online list of national
past
award
recipients
from
the
AAPM&R
[7]
was
analyzed
by
physician
researchers
specializing
in
physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R). The list
included all major award recipients from 1968 to 2015.
The study was deemed exempt from requiring institu-
tional review board approval.
Eight award recipient lists were published online,
including the following: (1) The Walter J. Zeiter Lec-
turers; (2) Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lecturers;
(3) PASSOR Legacy Award and Lectureship; (4) The Frank
H. Krusen, MD Lifetime Achievement Award; (5) The
Distinguished Member Award; (6) The Distinguished
Clinician Award; (7) Outstanding Council Service Award;
and,
(8)
The
Distinguished
Public
Service
Award.
Included in the analysis were awards characterized as
“physician only.” Of the 8 awards, 7 met this criterion.
The Frank H. Krusen, MD, Lifetime Achievement Award
was treated as “physician only” because it was over-
whelmingly given to physicians (35 physicians versus 1
male politician). Excluded from the analysis were any
awards not published online as well as The Distinguished
Public Service Award, as it was presented to a variety of
individuals, including physicians, politicians, celebrities,
family members, and others. In addition, although the
format of The Walter J. Zeiter Lecture changed in 2015,
the nonphysician male keynote speaker was not listed
online and was therefore excluded from the analysis.
Three researchers independently gathered data from
the published list of award recipients, including the
number of years that the award had been given and the
gender of each recipient. The gender of each recipient
was verified via online search. During the study period,
the researchers compared their results, and discrep-
ancies were reviewed and resolved to ensure the
accuracy of the findings. Data were compiled for all
awards as a group and in individual award categories so
that results could be reported over the association’s 48
year history, over the last decade (2006-2015) and as
trends within individual awards or groups of similar
awards. For example, because 3 of the awards included
lectureships, data were compiled to determine how
often female versus male physicians had the opportu-
nity to give these prestigious lectures to colleagues. In
addition, because 2 awards were given to multiple
recipients each year, compiled data also included the
number of times that the awards were given to groups of
male-only physicians, groups of female-only physicians,
or groups comprising both male and female physicians.
The main outcome measures were as follows: the pro-
portion of male versus female physician awardees over
the association’s 48-year history; and the proportion of
male versus female physician awardees over the past 10
years.
To assess the gender composition in the field of PM&R
over time, gender-specific data from the following 3
sources were compiled: American Medical Association
(AMA) [8], Association of American Medical Colleges
(AAMC) [9-11], and AAPM&R (e-mail communication,
April 2016).
977
J.K. Silver et al. / PM R 9 (2017) 976-984
 Results
Over the past 48 years, the AAPM&R presented 264
recognition awards to physicians. Analysis revealed that
the award recipients were overwhelmingly male physi-
cians (n ¼ 222; 84.1%) (Figure 1). In contrast, female
physicians received 15.9% (n ¼ 42) of the total awards.
Although the proportion of female physician recipients
increased during the past 10 years (2006-2015) to 26.8%
(n ¼ 26), analysis revealed that awards were still given
predominantly to male physicians (n ¼ 71, 73.2%)
(Figure 2).
Despite the proportion of female physician award
recipients increasing over the past decade, the numbers
remained below the proportion expected from mem-
bership data supplied by the AAPM&R (e-mail commu-
nication, April 2016). According to the AAPM&R, the
proportion of practicing female physiatrist members
during a similar time period (2011-2015) ranged from
33.1% to 34.4% (n¼2633 female physiatrists of the total
n ¼ 7666 in 2015), and the proportion of female
physiatrists-in-training ranged from 36.5% to 40.3% (n ¼
470 females of the total n¼1166 in 2015). The results
were also below the proportion expected from 2013
physician gender data reported by the Association of
American Medical Colleges (AAMC). In this case, 34.7%
(n ¼ 3083 females of the total n ¼ 8879) of active
specialty physicians in PM&R were reportedly female
[12]. Similarly, the American Medical Association (AMA)
reported that the membership of female physiatrists
reached the 30% mark in 1992 [8].
Three awards included invited lectureships at the
Annual Assembly of the AAPM&R. Of the total lectures
awarded from 1968 to 2015, 89.6% (n ¼ 69 of 77) were
given to male physicians (Figure 3). In contrast, 8 female
physicians (10.4%) received these awards during the
same time period. Analysis of recipient gender within
each of the individual lectureships and remaining awards
revealed similar underrepresentation (Figure 4). The
Walter J. Zeiter Lecturer was presented 46 times be-
tween 1968 and 2014, and 3 female physicians (6.5%)
were invited to deliver a Zeiter Lecture. The Richard and
Hinda Rosenthal Lecturer was given 24 times during the
26 year span from 1983 to 2008, and 4 female physicians
(16.7%) were invited to deliver this lecture. The PASSOR
Legacy Award and Lectureship was initiated in 2009; of
the 7 recipients, 1 was a female physician (14.3%). An
assessment of the number of years that female physicians
Figure 1. Total number of awards presented to physicians by the
AAPM&R from 1968 to 2015.
Figure 2. Total number of awards presented to physicians by the
AAPM&R from 2006 to 2015.
Figure 3. Number of lectureship awards presented to physicians by the
AAPM&R from 1968 to 2015.
978
Gender Disparities in AAPMR Recognition Awards
 were recognized across all lectureship categories found
that that female physicians received lectureship awards
in 8 (16.7%) of the 48 years (Figure 5). More recently,
female physicians received lectureship awards in 3 (30%)
of the past 10 years (2006-2015).
The Frank H. Krusen, MD, Lifetime Achievement Award
is described on the AAPM&R website as “the Academy’s
highest honor” [13]. Of the 35 physician award recipients
since 1972, 30 (85.7%) were male and 5 (14.3%) were
female. Since its introduction in 1994, The Distinguished
Member Award, given to individuals, was presented to 22
physicians, 5 (22.7%) of whom were female.
Two awards were given to multiple recipients each
year:
The
Distinguished
Clinician
Award
and
the
Outstanding Council Service Award (Figure 6). Since its
inception, The Distinguished Clinician Award was given
to a total of 100 recipients, comprising 84 (84%) male
physicians and 16 (16%) female physicians. However,
this award was given to more than 1 person in 34 of the
past 35 years. Among the 34 groups, 22 were all male.
Among the 12 mixed-gender groups, 8 consisted of more
male physicians than female physicians, and 4 consisted
of
more
female
physicians
than
male
physicians.
Notably, in the history of this award, there has never
been an all-female recipient group. The Outstanding
Council Service Award, first presented in 2010, was
given to groups of 5 individuals annually from 2010 to
2015. Within the 30 total recipients, 22 (73.3%) were
male physicians and 8 (26.7%) were female physicians.
Of the 6 groups, 1 group was all male (16.7%), and none
were all female. Male physicians outnumbered female
physicians in all 5 of the mixed-gender groups.
Discussion
Over the 48-year history of the AAPM&R, female phy-
sicians were most likely to receive awards when re-
cipients were honored in groups, and were less likely to
receive individual recognition, specifically awards with
an associated lectureship. For 40 years of the 48-year
Figure 4. Number of awards per category presented to physicians by the AAPM&R from 1968 to 2015.
Figure 5. Number of lectureship awards presented to physicians by the AAPM&R by year from 1968 to 2015.
979
J.K. Silver et al. / PM R 9 (2017) 976-984
 history and for 7 years of the past 10 years, no female
physician received a lectureship award. However, overall
there has been progress, and awards to female physicians
have been on the rise (Figure 7). Nevertheless, female
physicians remain less likely to receive awards in the
same proportion as female physiatrists’ membership in
the AAPM&R, especially those in the most prestigious
categoriesdawards with an associated lectureship and
speaking opportunity at a national meeting.
Numerous studies have reported on the gender gap in
peer-reviewed publications [14,15], grant funding [16],
editorial boards [17] (including PM&R journals [18]),
leadership positions [19], and scientific recognition
awards [5]. Recently, Yu et al studied the representa-
tion of women and minorities in academic leadership
positions and found that they were “grossly underrep-
resented” [20]. Nearly a decade ago, in a report from
the AAPM&R research committee looking at how gender
affects career development, Wagner et al found that
female physiatrists applied for fewer grants, had lower
publication rates, and were underrepresented at higher
academic
ranks
and
leadership
positions
when
All
Awards
Group*
Awards
Individual**
Awards
Lectures***
Only
All
Awards
Group*
Awards
Individual**
Awards
Lectures***
Only
Male
222
105
116
69
71
42
29
16
Female
42
24
18
8
26
16
10
3
15.9%
18.6%
13.4%
10.4%
26.8%
27.6%
25.6%
15.8%
84.1%
81.4%
86.6%
89.6%
73.2%
72.4%
74.4%
84.2%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
2015 % Female 
Physiatrist
Membership in 
AAPM&R
(34.4%)
*
Distinguished Clinician Award, Outstanding Council Service Award
**
Walter J. Zeiter Lecturers, Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lecturers, PASSOR Legacy Award and Lectureship, Frank H. Krusen, MD,
Lifetime Achievement Award, Distinguished Member Award 
***
Walter J. Zeiter Lectureship, Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectureship, PASSOR Legacy Award and Lectureship
1968-2015
2006-2015
Figure 6. Proportion of awards per category presented to physicians by the AAPM&R from 1968 to 2015.
Figure 7. Number of awards presented to physicians by the AAPM&R by year from 1968 to 2015.
980
Gender Disparities in AAPMR Recognition Awards
 compared to male counterparts [21]. The authors also
found that female physiatrists were compensated less.
Subsequently, Bickel wrote that this report was a
“wake-up call” for rehabilitation medicine and specif-
ically called for more “chair support and accountability”
[22]. Since these 2 reports were published nearly a
decade ago, there have been few, if any, follow-up
studies published on the gender gap in PM&R.
This is the first study to assess gender representation
in physician recognition awards presented by a medical
society. The results suggest that there has been under-
representation of female physicians among recipients of
major recognition awards presented by the AAPM&R.
Our results also suggest that, although some progress
has been made over the years, female physicians
continue to be underrepresented. Furthermore, when
female physicians did receive recognition awards, they
were less likely to be honored in the most prestigious
individual categories, namely, those with accompanying
lectureships
and
the
highest
honordthe
lifetime
achievement award.
Although all recognition awards positively affect
physicians’ careers, those associated with lectureships
deserve special consideration. These awardees receive
considerable
attention
before,
during,
and
after
receiving their award. They are given the opportunity to
speak to an audience of hundreds to thousands of col-
leagues. The audience is primed to accept the upcoming
speaker as highly regarded, interesting, and influential
through
organizational
newsletters
and
conference
brochures. The lecture itself is unique [23] and is
frequently exempt from the usual peer-review process
that didactic lectures, symposia, and workshops must
undergo at these conferences. In fact, the awardee is
often offered tremendous latitude in his or her com-
mentsdfrequently offering many opinions that may in-
fluence the future of health care [24]. Following the
lecture, the recipient is often invited to publish his or
her speech in an academic medical journal that will be
available online for many years to comedproviding still
more value by giving the awardee the opportunity to
have his or her opinions and work reach an even wider
audience [25]. This report highlights that, over the
course of 48-year history of the AAPM&R, nearly 90% of
these types of lectureships were awarded to male
physicians.
Although it seems clear that female physicians have
been underrepresented among recipients of major
awards presented by the AAPM&R, this study does not
provide any conclusions about why this is the case. We
believe that the causality is almost certainly multifac-
torial, and some of the factors have likely varied or
become more or less important over the decades.
Therefore, although we cannot speak to the particular
dynamics of this organization, in this discussion we
present information published in the current literature
to inform our findings.
First consider that, with respect to academic in-
stitutions in particular, support from department chairs
has been cited in the literature as a factor important to
improving diversity [6]. In the field of PM&R specifically,
Wagner et al reported on the persistent presence of
gender disparity in physician representation [21], and
Bickel suggested that 3 targeted areas of action would
facilitate career and leadership development in female
physiatrists. One of these was “chair support and
accountability” [22]. Chair support is an important
issue, and the Society for Women’s Health Research
RAISE Project has recommended a series of specific
steps that universities may take to better support
awards for female faculty [6]. Although this guide is very
useful, it is important to note that department chairs
and other leaders may find it challenging, resource
intensive
and
ultimately
unsuccessful
to
nominate
female faculty for recognition if the professional orga-
nizations
offering
the
awards
have
a
history
of
underrepresenting women.
Implicit bias is postulated as a leading factor in
discrimination, including awards [1]. Implicit bias is
unconscious and, in contrast to conscious explicit bias,
it may produce behavior that significantly deviates from
someone’s recognized and stated beliefs. Although
there are many resources for best practices to reduce
the likelihood of implicit bias, the American Statistical
Association (ASA) has published guidelines specifically
aimed at helping awards committees to avoid this
issue [26].
The predominantly or exclusively male composition
of awards committees has also been cited as a possible
reason for the underrepresentation of women among
award recipients [1]. According to the literature, this
may be related to diversity concepts such as perception
of an individual as an “other” [27] or a “stereotype
threat”
[28],
causing
that
individual
to
feel
less
empowered when he or she is the only one from his or
her group or is in a “token minority.” In a recently
published Spanish study, researchers investigated trends
in how awards recognizing doctors who have “an
exemplary of professional and human behavior” [29]
were allocated within the Official College of Physicians
of Barcelona from 2004 to 2012. The researchers found
that the male-to-female ratio among those who were
awarded was parallel to the gender ratio of the juries.
They concluded that the predominance of male physi-
cian award recipients did not depend as much on age as
it did on a higher ratio of male-to-female physicians on
the juries. Furthermore, they noted that, in the last 4
years of the study, an increase in the proportion of
women on the juries was followed by an increase in the
number of female physicians receiving awards.
Another explanation often cited for gender disparity
in awards is that of the “pipeline” [1]. This is a
complicated issue that can, in the case of PM&R, refer
to a variety of issues including, but not limited to, the
981
J.K. Silver et al. / PM R 9 (2017) 976-984
 proportions of female versus male physiatrists or the
number of women who have chosen to pursue academic
medicine, have actively engaged in the AAPM&R, or
have received nominations for awards. Although the
study described in this report did not focus on pipeline
theory, it is interesting to note that the number of fe-
male physicians in PM&R has remained relatively stable
with slow, gradual growth. For example, according to
the AMA, the number of female physiatrists reached the
30% mark in 1992 [8]. Similarly, the AAMC reported that
the number of female physicians in PM&R residency
training programs reached the 30% mark in 1989 [9],
and, in 2013, 34.7% [12] of physiatrists and 39.7% of
PM&R residents were female [30]. In academics, the
number of female PM&R faculty members reached the
30% mark in 1992 [9], and, in 2014, 41% [30] of full-time
faculty physiatrists were female. These statistics sug-
gest that there has been an established pipeline of
female physiatrists at or above the 30% mark for more
than 25 years. Previously, Carnes et al noted that the
usual reasons offered for the underrepresentation of
female physicians in leadership positions included that
that women have not been in the field long enough
(pipeline theory), do not want leadership positions
(work/family balance theory), or do not have the skills
necessary for leadership (leadership training theory).
Carnes et al stated that although these theories exist,
they have been challenged, and a more likely explana-
tion is systemic implicit bias [31].
Because the AAPM&R awards examined in this report
encompass all physicians working in the specialty, the
criteria for selection should be examined through the
lens of the mission of the organization. Moreover, it is
essential to assess whether implicit bias may have
affected the nomination or selection process, leading to
more
highly
published
members
being
recognized
broadly across all award categories. That is to say,
recognition awards that are not specifically focused on
research and publications may have been routinely
given to highly published individuals, which may have
inadvertently led to underrecognition of the important
contributions to the field made by female physicians
who are active in other arenas that might have better
suited the awards’ criteria. Although female physiatrists
represent
more
than
40%
of
full-time
faculty
in
academia [30], they have been reported to publish at
lower rates than their male colleagues [21].
Reward criteria and the recruitment of nominees also
warrant examination. It is not known whether the
criteria for the awards examined in this report include
any modern revisions that incorporate diversity best
practices. Ideally, all award criteria should be examined
for stipulations and/or language that may favor implicit
bias or may inhibit the nomination of excellent female
candidates. In business, companies are often charged
with improving diversity while simultaneously hiring
people with the greatest skill sets. This has led to many
businesses changing their recruitment practices from a
passive process of simply selecting new hires from a pool
of
applicants,
to
an
active
process
during
which
considerable time and resources are spent developing
the right candidate for a given role. Similarly, passive
nomination processes may not support diversity efforts,
and excellent awards candidates may never enter the
candidate pool.
Finally, one other interesting theory discussed in the
diversity literature should be addressed: the idea that
well-intentioned
individuals
or
groups
may
be
at
particularly high risk for overestimating their diversity-
inclusion
efforts.
For
example,
organizations
may
implement “diversity structures” (inclusive of training
programs, committees, and strategies) that project an
“illusion of fairness” but may counterintuitively under-
mine diversity efforts [32]. Within this context, high-
status members of the organization may erroneously
perceive the structures as indicators of efficacy, even
when data clearly suggest otherwise. Indeed, this illu-
sion of fairness may be contributing to the underrep-
resentation of women in awards in medicine and
science. Similar to any continuous quality improvement
process, it will be important to identify metrics, analyze
the results, transparently report outcomes, and address
issues that negatively affect the desired results of these
diversity efforts.
Most likely, the reasons for gender disparity in this
study are multifactorial, and further research is needed
to identify and understand them. Abbhul et al studied
faculty awards for gender equity at the University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, and wrote that faculty
awards represent a “window into the values and culture
of an institution” [33]. They suggested examining both
the recipients and the content of the awards to ensure
that they encompass evolving “ideals of leadership and
excellence.” Furthermore, the authors encouraged all
medical schools to “systematically review their award
recipients to ensure that all faculty are represented and
that processes are evaluated to minimize unintended
and unconscious bias.” However, to create true and
meaningful change, this process must be undertaken
with a thoughtful approach. For example, some in-
stitutions have created awards that are gender specific
and available only to women [6]. Although this may
seem like a good way to increase the number of awards
given to women, this approach is not fully supported in
the literature, and some authors argue that it actually
undermines true gender equality [1].
Further research is needed to understand why women
have been underrepresented by the AAPM&R, as these
awards provide value to both individuals and their
affiliated institutions. We believe that the underrepre-
sentation of female physician award recipients may be a
symptom of a more systemic diversity inclusion problem
in PM&R as well as in other medical societies. There-
fore, we recommend that all physician professional
982
Gender Disparities in AAPMR Recognition Awards
 societies assess their recognition award history and
adopt best practices for allocating awards.
This study does have limitations. It is important to
note that diversity in any organization involves many
components, and this study investigated only 1 specific
issuednamely, whether female physicians were under-
represented in receipt of recognition awards from 1
national medical specialty association. The study did
not assess other factors that are subjects of diversity
investigations, such as race, ethnicity, age, presence of
disability, or any others. Gender itself may be a limi-
tation. We categorized male and female physicians
based on their associated online gender identity (eg,
photographs and use of gender-specific pronouns such as
“he” and “she”). We were not able to account for
transgender or other gender-related variance. The
study also did not evaluate specific award criteria or
other factors such as time spent in service for the
organization or employment characteristics such as full-
time versus part-time and private practice versus aca-
demic practice.
Regarding the awards themselves, this study included
only recognition awards that were listed on the AAPM&R
website in the Past Award Recipients section. Of the 8
identified awards, only 7 “physician only” awards were
included. Given that this study deliberately focused on
the recognition awards that the professional organiza-
tion deemed important enough to publish online, it is
possible that other recognition awards were given to
physicians. For example, we did not include other
awards given by the AAPM&R such as research awards
for “Best Poster” or “Best Paper” or monetary research
awards (grants). We also did not include plenary lec-
tures or other speeches that were not part of the online
recognition awards. We are not able to account for
whether recipients may have inadvertently been left off
any of the lists published by the AAPM&R. Finally, this
preliminary review is not designed to ascribe causality
to the disparity findings; such future work would need to
characterize numerous other factors such as award
criteria and clinical, service, and academic metrics of
awarded and potential candidates, and use modifiers
based on award year.
Conclusions
To our knowledge, this is the first study to assess
whether female physicians are underrepresented among
recipients of recognition awards presented by a national
medical society. We found that female physicians have
been underrepresented in recognition awards presented
by the AAPM&R over the course of nearly half a century.
Although gains have been made over the past decade,
female specialty physicians in the field of PM&R remain
underrepresented for recognition awardsdsuggesting
an urgent need to assess every aspect of the recognition
award process. We strongly advocate for more research
in this area, as medical societies should be accountable
not only to the individual physicians that they represent
but also to the entire specialty.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to the American Academy of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation for their trans-
parency and willingness to share membership gender
data. The authors also thank Julie A. Poorman, PhD for
her help with manuscript preparation.
References
1. Lincoln AE, Pincus S, Koster JB, Leboy PS. The Matilda effect in
science: Awards and prizes in the US, 1990s and 2000s. Soc Stud Sci
2012;42:307-320.
2. Frey BS. Awards as compensation. Eur Manag Rev 2007;4:6-14.
3. American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. Member
Benefits. 2016. Available at http://www.aapmr.org/about-aapm-r/
membership/member-benefits. Accessed March 26, 2016.
4. Jagsi R, Griffith KA, Stewart A, Sambuco D, DeCastro R, Ubel PA.
Gender differences in the salaries of physician researchers. JAMA
2012;307:2410-2417.
5. Recognizing the Achievements of Women in Science, Technology,
Engineering, Mathematics, and Medicine. Society for Women’s
Health
Research,
The
RAISE
Project.
Available
at
http://
raiseproject.org/. Accessed March 27, 2016.
6. Advancing and Recognizing Women in STEMM: A Guide for Uni-
versities. The RAISE Project. Available at http://raiseproject.org/
university.php. Accessed March 27, 2016.
7. Past Award Recipients. 2016. American Academy of Physical Med-
icine and Rehabilitation. Available at http://www.aapmr.org/
about-aapm-r/volunteerism/awards-honors/past-award-recipients.
Accessed March 25, 2016.
8. Roback G, Randolph L, Seidman B, Pasko T. Physician Character-
istics and Distribution in the U.S. Chicago, IL: American Medical
Association; 1994.
9. Bickel J, Quinnie R. Women in Medicine: Statistics. Washington,
DC: Association of American Medical Colleges; 1992.
10. Table 4A: Distribution of Women M.D. Faculty by Department and
Rank, 2014. 2014. American Academy of Medical Colleges. Avail-
able
at
https://www.aamc.org/download/411788/data/2014_
table4a.pdf. Accessed September 30, 2016.
11. Table 2: Distribution of Residents by Specialty, 2003 Compared to
2013. 2012. American Academy of Medical Colleges. Available at
https://www.aamc.org/download/411784/data/2014_table2.pdf.
Accessed September 30, 2016.
12. 2014 Physician Specialty Data Book. Washington, DC: Association
of American Medical Colleges; 2015.
13. Award Descriptions. 2016. American Academy of Physical Medicine
and Rehabilitation. Available at http://www.aapmr.org/about-
aapm-r/volunteerism/awards-honors/award-descriptions#krusen.
Accessed April 1, 2016.
14. Jagsi R, Guancial EA, Worobey CC, et al. The “gender gap” in
authorship of academic medical literature—a 35-year perspective.
N Engl J Med 2006;355:281-287.
15. Long MT, Leszczynski A, Thompson KD, Wasan SK, Calderwood AH.
Female authorship in major academic gastroenterology journals: A
look over 20 years. Gastrointest Endosc 2015;81:1440-1447.
16. Ginther DK, Schaffer WT, Schnell J, et al. Race, ethnicity, and NIH
research awards. Science 2011;333:1015-1019.
17. Amrein K, Langmann A, Fahrleitner-Pammer A, Pieber TR, Zollner-
Schwetz I. Women underrepresented on editorial boards of 60
major medical journals. Gend Med 2011;8:378-387.
983
J.K. Silver et al. / PM R 9 (2017) 976-984
 18. Morton MJ, Sonnad SS. Women on professional society and journal
editorial boards. J Natl Med Assoc 2007;99:764-771.
19. Monroe AK, Levine RB, Clark JM, Bickel J, MacDonald SM, Resar LM.
Through a gender lens: A view of gender and leadership positions
in a department of medicine. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 2015;24:
837-842.
20. Yu PT, Parsa PV, Hassanein O, Rogers SO, Chang DC. Minorities
struggle to advance in academic medicine: A 12-y review of
diversity at the highest levels of America’s teaching institutions.
J Surg Res 2013;182:212-218.
21. Wagner AK, McElligott J, Chan L, Wagner EP 2nd, Segal NA,
Gerber LH. How gender impacts career development and leader-
ship in rehabilitation medicine: A report from the AAPM&R
research committee. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2007;88:560-568.
22. Bickel J. The work that remains at the intersection of gender and
career development. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2007;88:683-686.
23. Feldman SR. Looking beyond the borders of our specialty: The 2006
Clarence S. Livingood MD Lecture. Dermatol Online J 2007;13:20.
24. Smith J. PASSOR Legacy Award Lecture 2009: The past, present,
and future of musculoskeletal ultrasound in physiatry. PM R 2010;
2:6-13.
25. Becker BE. 46th Walter J. Zeiter lecture, exercise is rehabilitation
medicine: Our history and future. PM R 2015;7:345-353.
26. American Statistical Association. Avoiding implicit bias: Guidelines
for ASA awards committees. Available at http://www.amstat.org/
awards/acguidelines.cfm. Accessed March 27, 2016.
27. Pingleton SK, Jones EV, Rosolowski TA, Zimmerman MK. Silent bias:
Challenges, obstacles, and strategies for leadership development
in academic medicine—lessons from oral histories of women pro-
fessors at the University of Kansas. Acad Med 2016;91:1151-1157.
28. Burgess DJ, Joseph A, van Ryn M, Carnes M. Does stereotype threat
affect women in academic medicine? Acad Med 2012;87:506-512.
29. Bruguera M, Arrizabalaga P, Londono MC, Padros J. Professional
recognition of female and male doctors. Rev Clin Esp (Barc) 2014;
214:69-73.
30. The State of Women in Academic Medicine: The Pipeline and
Pathways to Leadership. Washington, DC: Association of American
Medical Colleges; 2014.
31. Carnes M, Morrissey C, Geller SE. Women’s health and women’s
leadership in academic medicine: Hitting the same glass ceiling?
J Womens Health (Larchmt) 2008;17:1453-1462.
32. Kaiser CR, Major B, Jurcevic I, Dover TL, Brady LM, Shapiro JR.
Presumed fair: Ironic effects of organizational diversity structures.
J Pers Soc Psychol 2013;104:504-519.
33. Abbuhl S, Bristol MN, Ashfaq H, et al. Examining faculty awards for
gender equity and evolving values. J Gen Intern Med 2010;25:57-60.
Disclosure
J.K.S. Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA; Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, 300 1st Ave, Charlestown,
MA 02025; Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA; Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston, MA. Address correspondence to: J.K.S.; e-mail: Julie_silver@
hms.harvard.edu
Disclosures outside this publication: royalties, textbooks; travel/accommoda-
tions/meeting expenses unrelated to activities listed, Grand Rounds
S.B. Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA; Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, Boston, MA; VA Boston
Healthcare System, Boston, MA
Disclosure: nothing to disclose
C.A.B. Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA; Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, Boston, MA; and Brigham
and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA
Disclosure: nothing to disclose
R.D.Z. Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA; Spaulding Rehabilitation Network, Boston, MA; Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA; Phys-
ical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA
Disclosures outside this publication: Scientific Advisory Board, Myomo, Oxeia;
royalties, Oakstone Publishing, Demos Publishing
N.L.M. Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA; Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, Boston, MA
Disclosure: nothing to disclose
C.S.S. Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA; Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, Boston, MA
Disclosure: nothing to disclose
J.C.S. Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA; Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, Boston, MA; and Massa-
chusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
Disclosures outside of this publication: grants, US Department of Health and
Human Services, National Institute on Disability, Independent Living, and
Rehabilitation Research (NIDILRR)
A.S.T. Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA; Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, Boston, MA
Disclosure: nothing to disclose
Submitted for publication October 18, 2016; accepted February 6, 2017.
984
Gender Disparities in AAPMR Recognition Awards
