 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
514 
MMWR / May 27, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 20
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
On May 20, 2016, this report was posted as an MMWR Early 
Release on the MMWR website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).
Zika virus is a cause of microcephaly and brain abnormali-
ties (1), and it is the first known mosquito-borne infection 
to cause congenital anomalies in humans. The establishment 
of a comprehensive surveillance system to monitor pregnant 
women with Zika virus infection will provide data to further 
elucidate the full range of potential outcomes for fetuses and 
infants of mothers with asymptomatic and symptomatic Zika 
virus infection during pregnancy. In February 2016, Zika 
virus disease and congenital Zika virus infections became 
nationally notifiable conditions in the United States (2). 
Cases in pregnant women with laboratory evidence of Zika 
virus infection who have either 1) symptomatic infection or 
2) asymptomatic infection with diagnosed complications of 
pregnancy can be reported as cases of Zika virus disease to 
ArboNET* (2), CDC’s national arboviral diseases surveillance 
system. Under existing interim guidelines from the Council for 
State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE), asymptomatic 
Zika virus infections in pregnant women who do not have 
known pregnancy complications are not reportable. ArboNET 
does not currently include pregnancy surveillance information 
(e.g., gestational age or pregnancy exposures) or pregnancy 
outcomes. To understand the full impact of infection on the 
fetus and neonate, other systems are needed for reporting 
and active monitoring of pregnant women with laboratory 
evidence of possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy. 
Thus, in collaboration with state, local, tribal, and territorial 
health departments, CDC established two surveillance sys-
tems to monitor pregnancies and congenital outcomes among 
women with laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection† in 
the United States and territories: 1) the U.S. Zika Pregnancy 
Registry (USZPR),§ which monitors pregnant women residing 
in U.S. states and all U.S. territories except Puerto Rico, and 
2) the Zika Active Pregnancy Surveillance System (ZAPSS), 
which monitors pregnant women residing in Puerto Rico. As 
of May 12, 2016, the surveillance systems were monitoring 
157 and 122 pregnant women with laboratory evidence of 
possible Zika virus infection from participating U.S. states 
and territories, respectively. Tracking and monitoring clinical 
presentation of Zika virus infection, all prenatal testing, and 
adverse consequences of Zika virus infection during pregnancy 
are critical to better characterize the risk for congenital infec-
tion, the performance of prenatal diagnostic testing, and the 
spectrum of adverse congenital outcomes. These data will 
improve clinical guidance, inform counseling messages for 
pregnant women, and facilitate planning for clinical and public 
health services for affected families.
Zika virus disease and congenital Zika virus infection are 
defined by the interim CSTE case definition and include 
confirmed and probable cases with laboratory evidence of 
infection (2). The clinical criteria for Zika virus disease include 
the presence of one of four symptoms (fever, rash, arthral-
gia, and conjunctivitis), or Guillain-Barré syndrome, or an 
adverse pregnancy outcome (fetal loss, or in utero findings of 
microcephaly or intracranial calcifications) in a symptomatic 
or asymptomatic mother with compatible illness or epide-
miologic risk factors for Zika virus infection. Clinical criteria 
for Zika virus congenital infection in infants include micro-
cephaly, intracranial calcifications, or other central nervous 
system abnormalities (2). Jurisdictions report cases meeting 
these criteria to ArboNET. Although jurisdictions can report 
asymptomatic infection in pregnant women without pregnancy 
complications to ArboNET, this reporting is at the discretion 
of the local jurisdiction and is not universal. Current ArboNET 
reporting includes cases of Zika virus disease that meet the 
interim CSTE case definition.
For the purposes of the USZPR and ZAPSS, laboratory 
evidence of possible Zika virus infection is defined as a positive 
Zika virus real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain 
reaction (rRT-PCR) test result (i.e., a confirmed case of Zika 
virus infection) or an equivocal or presumptive positive Zika 
virus immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody capture enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test result (3–5).¶ 
Plaque reduction neutralization testing (PRNT) performed 
* http://www.cdc.gov/westnile/resourcepages/survresources.html.
† In the surveillance systems, laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection is defined 
as a positive Zika virus real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction 
test or a positive Zika virus immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody test using the 
CDC IgM antibody capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). 
Plaque reduction neutralization testing (PRNT) performed in conjunction with 
the IgM ELISA must have Zika PRNT titers ≥10.
§ http://www.cdc.gov/zika/hc-providers/registry.html.
¶ http://www.cdc.gov/zika/hc-providers/diagnostic.html; http://www.cdc.gov/
zika/hc-providers/qa-pregnant-women.html.
Possible Zika Virus Infection Among Pregnant Women — 
United States and Territories, May 2016
Regina M. Simeone, MPH1; Carrie K. Shapiro-Mendoza, PhD2; Dana Meaney-Delman, MD3; Emily E. Petersen, MD2; Romeo R. Galang, MD4,5; 
Titilope Oduyebo, MD2,4; Brenda Rivera-Garcia, DVM6; Miguel Valencia-Prado, MD7; Kimberly B. Newsome, MPH1; Janice Pérez-Padilla, MPH8; 
Tonya R. Williams, PhD9; Matthew Biggerstaff, MPH10; Denise J. Jamieson, MD2; Margaret A. Honein, PhD1; Zika and Pregnancy Working Group
Please note: An erratum has been published for this issue. To view the erratum, please click here.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / May 27, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 20 
515
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
in conjunction with the IgM ELISA must have Zika PRNT 
titers ≥10 for inclusion. Pregnant women who meet laboratory 
criteria are included in the surveillance systems whether they 
report symptoms or not. Women are included retrospectively 
if laboratory evidence of congenital Zika virus infection is 
identified in fetal tissues, the placenta, or the infant.
The USZPR was initiated primarily to monitor outcomes 
in pregnant women returning from travel to areas with local 
Zika virus transmission (6). To date the majority of cases in 
pregnant women reported to USZPR are associated with travel, 
but it also includes cases of sexual transmission (7) and local 
transmission from the U.S. territories. ZAPSS was developed 
separately for Puerto Rico to conduct enhanced surveillance 
in pregnant women at risk for Zika virus infection as a result 
of ongoing local Zika virus transmission. Using USZPR and 
ZAPSS, CDC will report the number of pregnant women with 
laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection weekly on 
its website. Data reported by noon Eastern Standard Time each 
Thursday (for this report, May 12, 2016) will be verified and 
reported in aggregate the following Thursday. Reporting is 
subject to a lag of 1 week to verify data from each participating 
jurisdiction. Reports from Arizona and Idaho have not yet been 
verified and are excluded from the current report.
As of May 12, 2016, combined data from USZPR and 
ZAPSS include 279 reports of pregnant women with labo-
ratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection, including 
157 pregnant women residing in U.S. states and the District 
of Columbia (Figure 1) and 122 residing in U.S. territories 
(Figure 2). As of May 11, 2016, 113 pregnant women meeting 
clinical criteria for Zika virus disease were reported to CDC 
through ArboNET, 48 in U.S. states, and 65 in U.S. territories.
Among the 157 pregnant women from U.S. states and the 
District of Columbia monitored through USZPR, 73 (49%)** 
reported clinical symptoms consistent with Zika virus dis-
ease. Among these symptomatic pregnant women, 64 (88%) 
reported rash, 36 (49%) arthralgia, 37 (51%) fever, and 17 
(23%) conjunctivitis. Among all pregnancies included from 
U.S. states, Zika virus nucleic acid detection by rRT-PCR was 
reported in 39 (25%).
Among 122 pregnant residents of the U.S. territories†† 
being monitored in USZPR or ZAPSS, 80 (66%)§§ reported 
clinical symptoms consistent with Zika virus disease. Among 
these symptomatic women, 60 (75%) reported rash, 29 (36%) 
arthralgia, 27 (34%) fever, and 15 (19%) conjunctivitis. Among 
all women included from U.S. territories, Zika virus nucleic acid 
detection by rRT-PCR in serum was identified in 67 (55%).
Discussion
Through the establishment of these pregnancy surveillance 
systems, CDC, in collaboration with state, local, tribal, and 
territorial partners, is reporting and actively monitoring 
pregnant women with laboratory evidence of possible Zika 
virus infection. These surveillance systems monitor pregnant 
women at risk for adverse congenital outcomes attributable 
to possible Zika virus infection. Including pregnant women 
with laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection but 
without a reported history of symptoms more than doubles 
the number of pregnancies being monitored, compared with 
pregnancies meeting the interim CSTE case definition and 
reported by ArboNET.
Limiting surveillance to symptomatic women with con-
firmed or probable Zika virus disease or to women already 
affected by an adverse pregnancy outcome excludes a 
substantial proportion of women with asymptomatic and 
possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy. In contrast, 
the broader case definition used for the USZPR and ZAPSS 
surveillance systems might overestimate Zika virus infection 
among women screened for infection because of crossreactiv-
ity with dengue and other flaviviruses, particularly among 
residents of U.S. territories and travelers with a history of 
prior flavivirus infection or flavivirus vaccination (8), or 
nonspecific reactivity.
Case reports indicate that fetuses and infants of pregnant 
women with asymptomatic Zika virus infection might be at 
risk for microcephaly and other severe brain defects (9,10). 
Following pregnant women with laboratory evidence of pos-
sible Zika virus infection in the surveillance system, regard-
less of symptoms, allows better characterization of the full 
impact and consequences of infection to the mother and her 
offspring, and might allow for better stratification of risk for 
adverse congenital outcomes (1). An important role of the 
USZPR and ZAPSS surveillance systems is evaluating the 
range of outcomes associated with Zika virus infection during 
pregnancy. Pregnancy outcomes are currently being moni-
tored and will be shared in future reports. It is critical that 
health care providers inform state, local, tribal, and territorial 
health departments of any pregnant women with laboratory 
evidence of possible Zika virus infection under their care.
The findings in this report are subject to at least three 
limitations. First, data provided to the jurisdictions and CDC 
regarding symptoms and symptom onset might not be accu-
rate or complete because of variability in recall by patients or 
data available to jurisdictions. Second, only pregnant women 
who are tested for Zika virus infection are included, thereby 
 
** Eight missing information on symptom status.
 
†† All U.S. territories are participating.
 
§§ One missing information on symptom status.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
516 
MMWR / May 27, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 20
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
potentially underestimating the prevalence of infection and 
outcomes among all pregnant women. Finally, all states are 
not included in the USZPR, possibly affecting the represen-
tativeness of these data with regard to all pregnant women 
identified with a possible Zika virus infection.
One challenge of this Zika virus outbreak is the lack of 
understanding of the magnitude of risk and spectrum of 
outcomes associated with Zika virus infection during preg-
nancy. The USZPR and ZAPSS are surveillance systems 
established to enumerate and describe pregnancies with 
Zika virus infection and risk for adverse outcomes associated 
with infection during pregnancy. Findings from these U.S. 
surveillance systems are expected to improve understand-
ing of Zika virus infection during pregnancy, enhance risk 
assessment and counseling of pregnant women and families, 
advance clinical care, and assist states and territories to 
anticipate and plan needed resources and increase preven-
tion efforts.¶¶
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
4/26
5/17
6/7
6/28
7/19
8/9
8/30
9/20
10/11
11/1
11/22
12/13
1/3
1/24
2/14
3/6
3/27
4/17
5/8
No. of pregnant women 
Week of illness onset or specimen collection date 
Symptomatic
Asymptomatic
2015
2016
FIGURE 1. Week of illness onset for symptomatic pregnant women or specimen collection date* for asymptomatic pregnant women†,§ with laboratory 
evidence¶ of possible Zika virus infection, by symptom status (N = 142)** — 48 states†† and the District of Columbia, April 26, 2015–May 12, 2016
Abbreviations: ELISA = enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; IgM = immunoglobulin M; PRNT = plaque reduction neutralization test.
 * Date of onset of symptoms or testing.
 † Specimen collection dates for asymptomatic pregnant women might not coincide with the period of exposure or infection with Zika virus.
 § CDC issued updated interim guidelines on February 5, 2016, to include recommending serologic testing of asymptomatic pregnant women 2–12 weeks after travel 
to an affected area.
 ¶ Laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection is defined as a positive Zika virus real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction test or a positive 
Zika virus IgM ELISA test; if PRNT is performed in conjunction with the IgM ELISA, Zika PRNT titers must be ≥10 for inclusion.
 ** Excludes 15 women with missing symptom status or missing date of symptom onset.
 †† Figure includes data for U.S. states from the U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry, excluding Arizona and Idaho.
 
¶¶ http://www.cdc.gov/zika/pregnancy/question-answers.html.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / May 27, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 20 
517
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Acknowledgments
Joel Ackelsberg, New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene; Connie Austin, Illinois Department of Public Health; Ihsan 
Azzam, State of Nevada Department of Health and Human Services; 
Bryon Backenson, New York State Department of Health; Hayley D. 
Belisle-Yaglom, Arizona Department of Health Services; Sara Blosser, 
Indiana State Department of Health; John Bos, Missouri Department 
of Health and Senior Services; Kelly Broussard, Texas Department 
of State Health Services; Jen Brown, Indiana State Department of 
Health; Louisa Castrodale, Alaska Division of Public Health; Glenn 
Copeland, Michigan Department of Health and Human Services; 
Julie Coughlin, Iowa Department of Public Health; Laura Cronquist, 
North Dakota Department of Health; Alexander Davidson, New 
York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; John O. 
Davies-Cole, District of Columbia Department of Health; Mychal 
Davis, Kansas Department of Health and Environment; Stephanie 
Dearth, Indiana State Department of Health; Catherine Dentinger, 
New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; Elizabeth 
Dufort, New York State Department of Health; Cherie Drenzek, 
Georgia Department of Public Health; Dan Drociuk, South Carolina 
Department of Health and Environmental Control; Esther Ellis, U.S. 
Virgin Islands Department of Health; Brenda Esponda-Morrison, 
Connecticut Department of Public Health; Nicole Evert, Texas 
Department of State Health Services; Shawna Feinman, Georgia 
Department of Public Health; Michelle Feist, North Dakota 
Department of Health; Annie Fine, New York City Department of 
Health and Mental Hygiene; Debbie Freeman, Illinois Department 
of Public Health; Kristin Garafalo, New Jersey Department of 
Health; Ann Garvey, Iowa Department of Public Health; Carla 
Grayson, Arkansas Department of Health; Jyoti Gupta, Virginia 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
1/3
1/17
1/31
2/14
2/28
3/13
3/27
4/10
4/24
5/8
No. of pregnant women
Week of illness onset or specimen collection date
Symptomatic
Asymptomatic
2016
FIGURE 2. Week of illness onset for symptomatic pregnant women or specimen collection date* for asymptomatic pregnant women†,§ with 
laboratory evidence¶ of possible Zika virus infection, by symptom status (N = 115)** — U.S. territories,†† January 3, 2016–May 12, 2016
Abbreviations: ELISA = enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; IgM = immunoglobulin M; PRNT = plaque reduction neutralization test.
 * Date of onset of symptoms or testing.
 † Specimen collection dates for asymptomatic pregnant women might not coincide with the period of exposure or infection with Zika virus.
 § CDC issued updated interim guidelines on February 5, 2016, to include recommending serologic testing of asymptomatic pregnant living in an area with active 
Zika virus transmission in the first and second trimester.
 ¶ Laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection is defined as a positive Zika virus real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction test or a positive 
Zika virus IgM ELISA test; if PRNT is performed in conjunction with the IgM ELISA, Zika PRNT titers must be ≥10 for inclusion.
 ** Excludes seven women with missing symptom status or missing date of symptom onset.
 †† Figure includes data for U.S. territories from the U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry and the Zika Active Pregnancy Surveillance System.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
518 
MMWR / May 27, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 20
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Department of Health; Christine G. Hahn, Idaho Department of 
Health and Welfare; Dirk Haselow, Arkansas Department of Health; 
Lea Heberlein-Larson, Florida Department of Health; Preetha J. 
Iyengar, District of Columbia Department of Health; Erin Jenkins, 
Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; Loletha 
Johnson, New Jersey Department of Health; Jenna Iberg Johnson, 
Louisiana Office of Public Health; Diep Hoang Johnson, Wisconsin 
Department Health Services; Mary Knapp, New Jersey Department 
of Health; Edward Lifshitz, New Jersey Department of Health; Anna 
M. Likos, Florida Department of Health; Judy Lovchik, Indiana 
State Department of Health; Kim Machesky, Ohio Department of 
Health; Emily McGibbon, New York City Department of Health and 
Mental Hygiene; Natasha McIntosh, New York City Department of 
Health and Mental Hygiene; Nancy Mimm, New Jersey Department 
of Health; Marika Mohr, Ohio Department of Health; Christine 
L. Mulgrew, State of Montana Department of Health and Human 
Services; Betsy Negron, Pennsylvania Department of Health; 
David Neitzel, Minnesota Department of Health; Randall Nelson, 
Connecticut Department of Public Health; Candace Noonan-Toly, 
New York State Department of Health; Kara McGinnis Pilote, CDC 
and New Jersey Department of Health; Pam Pontones, Indiana State 
Department of Health; Rachel Radcliffe, South Carolina Department 
of Health and Environmental Control; Jennifer L. Rakeman, New 
York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; Joy Rende, 
New Jersey Department of Health; Sara Robeson, Kentucky 
Department for Public Health; Angela M. Rohan, Wisconsin 
Department Health Services, CDC; Sarah Scotland, Massachusetts 
Department of Public Health; Nancy Scotto-Rosato, New Jersey 
Department of Health; Lylah Seaton, Florida Department of Health; 
Lori Simmons, Arkansas Department of Health; Theresa Sokol, 
Louisiana Office of Public Health; Lisa Sollot, Virginia Department 
of Health; Jamie Sommer, New York State Department of Health; 
Mary Grace Stobierski, Michigan Department of Health and Human 
Services; Christina Tan, New Jersey Department of Health; Anthony 
Tran, New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; 
Emily Valencia, Virginia Department of Health; Warren Villagomez, 
Northern Mariana Islands Department Of Public Health; Sharon 
Watkins, Pennsylvania Department of Health; Christian Whelen, 
Hawaii Department of Health; Amie Worthington, Kansas 
Department of Health and Environment; Karen Worthington, New 
Jersey Department of Health; Bryan Buss, Martín Celaya, Tai-Ho 
Chen, Kenneth L. Dominguez, Divia Forbes, Jessica Goodell, Mary 
Goodwin, Thane Hancock, Theresa Harrington, Stacy Holzbauer, 
Tippavan Nagachinta, Alba Phippard, Kimberly Porter, Araceli Rey, 
Audilis Sanchez, Nicholas Somerville, Óscar Tarragó, CDC.
 1Division of Congenital and Developmental Disorders, National Center on 
Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; 2Division of Reproductive 
Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 
CDC; 3Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic 
Infectious Diseases, CDC; 4Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC; 5Division of 
HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, 
and Tuberculosis Prevention, CDC;  6Office of Epidemiology and Research, 
Puerto Rico Department of Health; 7Puerto Rico Birth Defects Surveillance 
and Prevention System, Puerto Rico Department of Health; 8Division of 
Vector-Borne Diseases, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious 
Diseases, CDC; 9Division of Human Development and Disability, National 
Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; 10Influenza 
Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC.
Corresponding author: Regina M. Simeone, eocbirthdef@cdc.gov, 770-488-7100.
Zika and Pregnancy Working Group
Farah Ahmed, Kansas Department of Health and Environment; 
Scott Anesi, American Samoa Department of Health; Kathryn E. 
Arnold, CDC; Danielle Barradas, CDC; Devra Barter, Colorado 
Department of Public Health and Environment; Jeanne Bertolli, 
CDC; Andrea M. Bingham, Florida Department of Health; Jan 
Bollock, South Dakota Department of Health; Trish Bosse, Maine 
Department of Health and Human Services; Kristy K. Bradley, 
Oklahoma State Department of Health; Diane Brady, Rhode 
Island Department of Health; Catherine M. Brown, Massachusetts 
Department of Public Health; Katie Bryan, Wyoming Department 
of Health; Victoria Buchanan, Indiana State Department of 
Health; Ponce D. Bullard, South Carolina Department of Health 
and Environmental Control; Alice Carrigan, Maricopa County 
Department of Public Health; Monica Clouse, Kentucky Department 
for Public Health; Sally Cook, Vermont Department of Health; 
Michael Cooper, Alaska Division of Public Health; Sherri Davidson, 
Alabama Department of Health; Ariana DeBarr, West Virginia 
Bureau for Public Health; Thomas Dobbs, Mississippi Department 
of Health; Tambra Dunams, CDC; Jeffrey Eason, Utah Department 
of Health; Amanda Eckert, Houston Health Department; Paula 
Eggers, Delaware Division of Public Health; Sascha R. Ellington, 
CDC; Amanda Feldpausch, Georgia Department of Public Health; 
Carolyn R. Fredette, New Hampshire Department of Health 
and Human Services; Julie Gabel, Georgia Department of Public 
Health; Maleeka Glover, CDC; Michael Gosciminski, Rhode Island 
Department of Health; Margarita Gay, Guam Department of Public 
Health and Social Services; Robert Haddock, Guam Department 
of Public Health and Social Services; Sheryl Hand, Mississippi 
Department of Health; Jessica Hardy, Alabama Department of 
Health; Marie E. Bottomley Hartel, Tennessee Department of 
Health; Andrew K. Hennenfent, CDC/CSTE Fellow and District 
of Columbia Department of Health; Susan L. Hills, CDC; Jennifer 
House, Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment; 
Iro Igbinosa, CDC; Lucy Im, Arkansas Department of Health; 
Hamik Jeff, Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services; 
Sumaiya Khan, CDC; Lon Kightlinger, South Dakota Department 
of Health; Jean Y. Ko, CDC; Samir Koirala, CDC and Nebraska 
Department of Health and Human Services; Lauren Korhonen, 
CDC; Vikram Krishnasamy, CDC; Katie Kurkjian, Virginia 
Department of Health; Margaret Lampe, CDC; Sandra Larson, 
State of Nevada Department of Health and Human Services; Ellen 
H. Lee, New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; 
Leah Lind, Pennsylvania Department of Health; Scott Lindquist, 
Washington State Department of Health; Jonah Long, Pennsylvania 
Please note: An erratum has been published for this issue. To view the erratum, please click here.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / May 27, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 20 
519
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Department of Health; Jennifer Macdonald, Virginia Department 
of Health; Jennifer MacFarquhar, CDC; Daniel P
. Mackie, State of 
Nevada Department of Health and Human Services; Miguella Mark-
Carew, West Virginia Bureau for Public Health; Brennan Martin, 
Vermont Department of Health; Alma Martinez-Quiñones, Puerto 
Rico Department of Health; Janice Matthews-Greer, Michigan 
Department of Health and Human Services; Sasha A. McGee, 
District of Columbia Department of Health; Joe McLaughlin, Alaska 
Division of Public Health; Valerie Mock, Florida Department of 
Health; Esther Muna, Northern Mariana Islands Department Of 
Public Health; Hanna Oltean, Washington State Department of 
Health; Josephine O’Mallan, Guam Department of Public Health 
and Social Services; H. Pamela Pagano, CDC; Sarah Y. Park, Hawaii 
Department of Health; Dallin Peterson, Utah Department of Health; 
Kara N.D. Polen, CDC; Charsey Cole Porse, California Department 
of Public Health; Carol Y. Rao, CDC; Abubakar Ropri, New Mexico 
Department of Health; Jessica Rinsky, CDC; Sara Robinson, Maine 
Department of Health and Human Services; Asher Y. Rosinger, 
CDC; Irene Ruberto, Arizona Department of Health Services; 
Elizabeth Schiffman, Minnesota Department of Health; Christine 
Scott-Waldron, Louisiana Office of Public Health; Shereen Semple, 
New Jersey Department of Health; Tyler Sharp, CDC; Kirstin 
Short, Houston Health Department; Kimberly Signs, Michigan 
Department of Health and Human Services; Sally A. Slavinski, 
New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; Taryn 
Stevens, Indiana State Department of Health; Joseph Sweatlock, New 
Jersey Department of Health; Elizabeth A. Talbot, New Hampshire 
Department of Health and Human Services; Julius Tonzel, Louisiana 
Office of Public Health; Rita Traxler, CDC; Sheri Tubach, Kansas 
Department of Health and Environment; Clayton Van Houten, 
Wyoming Department of Health; Elizabeth VinHatton, New 
Mexico Department of Health; Melissa Viray, Hawaii Department of 
Health; Daguise Virginie, South Carolina Department of Health and 
Environmental Control; Michael D. Warren, Tennessee Department 
of Health; Catherine Waters, Arkansas Department of Health; Paul 
White, Northern Mariana Islands Department Of Public Health; 
Tanya Williams, CDC; Ann I. Winters, New York City Department 
of Health and Mental Hygiene; Shelley Wood, Kentucky Department 
for Public Health; Ibrahim Zaganjor, CDC; (all of these individuals 
meet collaborator criteria).
References
 1. Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA, Petersen LR. Zika virus and 
birth defects—reviewing the evidence for causality. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:1981–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsr1604338
 2. Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists. Zika virus disease and 
congenital Zika virus infection interim case definition and addition 
to the Nationally Notifiable Diseases List. Position statement PS 
16-ID-01 (interim). Atlanta, GA: Council of State and Territorial 
Epidemiologists; 2016. https://www.cste2.org/docs/Zika_Virus_
Disease_and_Congenital_Zika_Virus_Infection_Interim.pdf
 3. Oduyebo T, Petersen EE, Rasmussen SA, et al. Update: interim guidelines 
for health care providers caring for pregnant women and women of 
reproductive age with possible Zika virus exposure—United States, 2016. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:122–7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6505e2
 4. Petersen EE, Polen KN, Meaney-Delman D, et al. Update: interim guidance 
for health care providers caring for women of reproductive age with possible 
Zika virus exposure—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2016;65:315–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6512e2
 5. CDC. Zika MAC-ELISA—for use under an emergency use authorization 
only. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC; 2016. http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/Safety/
EmergencySituations/UCM488044.pdf
 6. Meaney-Delman D, Hills SL, Williams C, et al. Zika virus infection among 
U.S. pregnant travelers—August 2015–February 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2016;65:211–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6508e1
 7. Hills SL, Russell K, Hennessey M, et al. Transmission of Zika virus 
through sexual contact with travelers to areas of ongoing transmission—
Continental United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:215–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6508e2
 8. Petersen LR, Jamieson DJ, Powers AM, Honein MA. Zika virus. N Engl 
J Med 2016;374:1552–63. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra1602113
 9. Sarno M, Sacramento GA, Khouri R, et al. Zika virus infection and stillbirths: 
a case of hydrops fetalis, hydranencephaly and fetal demise. PLoS Negl T
rop 
Dis 2016;10:e0004517. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0004517
 
10. Besnard M, Eyrolle-Guignot D, Guillemette-Artur P
, et al. Congenital cerebral 
malformations and dysfunction in fetuses and newborns following the 2013 
to 2014 Zika virus epidemic in French Polynesia. Euro Surveill 2016;21:22–30. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2016.21.13.30181
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Zika virus infection during pregnancy causes microcephaly and 
other serious brain abnormalities. However, the full range of 
outcomes of asymptomatic and symptomatic Zika virus 
infection during pregnancy are not yet well understood.
What is added by this report?
In February 2016, CDC, in collaboration with state, local, tribal, 
and territorial health departments, launched comprehensive 
surveillance systems to report and actively monitor pregnancies 
and congenital outcomes among symptomatic and asymptom-
atic women with laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus 
infection. As of May 12, 2016, there were 157 and 122 pregnant 
women with laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection 
residing in U.S. states and U.S. territories, respectively.
What are the implications for public health practice?
This report launches the weekly reporting of pregnant women 
with laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection in U.S. 
states and territories. Monitoring all pregnant women with 
possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy, whether 
asymptomatic or symptomatic, will enhance understanding of 
possible adverse outcomes and allow better estimates of the 
number of pregnancies at risk for adverse outcomes. This 
information will assist health care providers who counsel 
pregnant women and will facilitate planning services for 
affected families.
