 21 Hyler SE, Rieder RO, Williams JBW, Spitzer RL, Hendler J, Lyons M. The
Personality Diagnostic Questionnaire: development and preliminary
results. J Pers Disord 1988; 2: 229-37.
22 Hyler SE, Skodol AE, Kellman HD, Oldham J, Rosnick L. The validity of
the Personality Diagnostic Questionnaire: a comparison with two
structured interviews. Am J Psychiatry 1990; 147: 1043-8.
23 Barkham M, Evans C, Margison F, Mcgrath G, Mellor-Clark J, Milne, et
al. The rationale for developing and implementing core outcome
batteries for routine use in service settings and psychotherapy
outcome research. J Ment Health 1998; 7: 35-47.
24 Watson D, Friend R. Measurement of social-evaluative anxiety. J Consult
Clin Psychol 1969; 33: 448-57.
25 Tyrer P, Nur U, Crawford M, Karlsen S, MacLean C, Rao B, et al. The
Social Functioning Questionnaire: a rapid and robust measure of
perceived functioning. Intern J Social Psychiatr 2005; 51: 265-75.
26 Moran P, Leese M, Lee T, Walters P, Thornicroft G, Mann A.
Standardised Assessment of Personality - Abbreviated Scale
(SAPAS): preliminary validation of a brief screen for personality
disorder. Br J Psychiatry 2003; 183: 228-32.
27 Gunderson JG, Prank AF, Ronningstam EF, Watcher S, Lynch V, Wolf PJ.
Early discontinuance of borderline patients from psychotherapy. J Nerv
Ment Dis 1989; 177: 38-42.
Various terms are used to describe receivers of health
services. The General Medical Council refers to people
treated by a doctor as patients;1 the Nursing and Midwifery
Council refers to people, patients/clients and clients/
patients;2 the British Association of Social Workers refers
to service users;3 the British Psychological Society (in Code
of Ethics and Conduct) and the College of Occupational
Therapists both refer to clients.4,5 A former chairman of the
Patients’ Association suggested alternatives to patient,
considering the terms client, consumer and user, with an
overall preference for the term user.6
The National Service Framework for Mental Health
refers to service user 48 times, patient 12 times and client
twice.7 The Royal College of Psychiatrists, in its report
Mental Illness: Stigmatisation and Discrimination within
the Medical Profession, refers to patient 77 times, service
user 7 times and user (independently of service user)
twice.8 Of national mental health charities, SANE refers to
‘people
affected
by
mental
illness’
(www.sane.org.uk/
AboutSANE), whereas MIND variously refers to user,
service user or user/survivor.9
In a study of adult psychiatric out-patient clinic
attendees in London, Ritchie et al reported that of those
expressing a preference for patient or client (96%) rather
than ‘other’, 77% favoured patient and 23% client, whereas
47% disliked client and 14% disliked patient.10
In another London study, 133 people who received care
from care coordinators from community mental health
centres were asked about their preference of the terms
patient, client or service user when being addressed by
different mental health professionals.11 The survey indicated
that between 7 and 10% wished to be addressed as a service
user, 41 to 75% as a patient, and 17 to 47% as a client, the
percentage varying according to the different professional
ORIGINAL PAPERS
Pretorius et al Olive Tree community treatment centre service evaluation
Service user, patient, client, user or survivor:
describing recipients of mental health services
Peter Simmons,1 Chris J. Hawley,1,2 Tim M. Gale,1 Thanusha Sivakumaran1
The Psychiatrist (2010), 34, 20–23, doi: 10.1192/pb.bp.109.025247
1Hertfordshire Partnership NHS
Foundation Trust, Queen Elizabeth II
Hospital, Welwyn Garden City,
Hertfordshire; 2Division of Psychology,
University of Hertfordshire
Correspondence to Peter Simmons
(peter.simmons@hertspartsft.nhs.uk)
Aims and method
To determine which terms receivers of mental health services
wish to be known by (service user, patient, client, user, survivor) according to the
professional consulted (psychiatrist, nurse, psychologist, social worker, occupational
therapist). We conducted a questionnaire study to assess terms by like or dislike and
by rank order. There were 336 participants from local catchment area secondary care
community and in-patient settings in east Hertfordshire.
Results
Patient is the preferred term when consulted by psychiatrists and nurses,
but it is equally preferable to client for social workers and occupational therapists.
Service user is disliked more than liked overall, particularly by those who consulted a
health professional, but not by those who consulted a social worker. A significant
minority wish to be regarded as a survivor or user.
Clinical implications
National and local mental health services should adopt
evidence-based terminology in referring to ‘patient’ or, in some groups, ‘patient or
client’ in preference to ‘service user’.
Declaration of interest
None.
20
 discipline: 67% preferred to be called patients by psychia-
trists, but there was no significant difference in preference
for the term patient or client when used by community
psychiatric nurses, occupational therapists, psychologists or
social workers. This study did not, however, relate the
question of preference to the discipline actually consulted;
thus, the survey included an unstated proportion of
questions
relating
to
professionals
in
disciplines
not
consulted.
It was not known how receivers of mental health
services within the UK National Health Service (NHS) wish
(and do not wish) to be referred to as by professionals in
different disciplines who they consult, despite widespread
use of the term service user by the Department of Health.
Method
Objectives
We wished to identify preference rates for the terms ‘service
user’, ‘patient’, ‘client’, ‘user’, and ‘survivor’, according to
the professional discipline consulted (psychiatrist, nurse,
psychologist, social worker, occupational therapist). Prefer-
ences were determined by indicating like/dislike, and also
by ranking the different terms.
Study design
The questionnaire comprised two questions.
1
Would you like a [name of discipline specified] to
regard you as a service user, patient, client, survivor
or user? (Responses were indicated by ticking one of
the three boxes for each term: yes/no/unsure.)
2
Please rank your order of preference for the term by
which
you
would
prefer
a
[name
of
discipline
specified] to regard you as. (The five terms were
listed with guidance on how to rank them. Additional
space was included for optional comments.)
An information leaflet about the study was provided. The
question order and the order in which the terms appeared
were counterbalanced across different versions of the
questionnaire.
Ethical approval for the study was granted by the local
research ethics committee.
Setting
The study was carried out in a single-site secondary care
mental health community setting (out-patient, day hospital)
and mental health in-patient wards.
Participants
The participants were receivers of mental health services
(general adult, post-natal and old age psychiatry), most of
whom live within the catchment area of Queen Elizabeth II
Hospital in east Hertfordshire. Data were collected over two
periods of time totalling 15 months.
Inclusion criteria
We included those who consulted a trained mental health
professional in at least one of these disciplines: mental
health nurse, occupational therapist, psychiatrist, clinical
psychologist or social worker, under community or in-patient
mental healthcare, in the Queen Elizabeth II Hospital
catchment area.
Participants were allowed to contribute data more than
once, provided that each of their questionnaires related to a
different professional group.
Exclusion criteria
We excluded those who either declined to participate or
who were known not to understand that they were receiving
mental health services. Professionals were asked not to
hand the questionnaire to such individuals. (Most catch-
ment area patients are fluent in English: those who were
known not to understand that they were receiving mental
health services would be some patients with dementia.)
Questionnaires (together with an information leaflet)
were distributed
by,
or on
behalf
of, mental
health
professionals.
Participants
were
given
a
questionnaire
specific to the mental health professional they were
consulting.
Results
Main outcome measures
A total of 368 completed questionnaires were returned.
Eighteen were excluded because the participants had
returned more than one questionnaire
for the same
professional
group; in
such cases, the most
recently
completed questionnaire was retained and earlier returns
were excluded. The remaining 350 questionnaires were
spread across the five professional groups as follows: clinical
psychologist (n = 8), nurse (n = 139), occupational therapist
(n = 49), psychiatrist (n = 130), and social worker (n = 24).
The returns from those who consulted a clinical psychologist
were not analysed due to their small number.
Endorsement of terms
The first section of the questionnaire gave participants the
opportunity to endorse each of the following terms: client,
patient, service user, survivor, and user. Participants were
allowed to endorse all, some or none of these terms. A
breakdown of responses from all 350 questionnaires is
shown in Table 1. Permitted responses were ‘yes’, ‘no’ and
‘unsure’; non-responses are denoted as ‘blank’ in all the
tables. The term patient emerges as a clear favourite,
eliciting the highest percentage of positive endorsements,
the lowest percentage of negative endorsements and the
lowest percentage of uncertain or non-responses.
The same data broken down within each of the four
professional groups analysed are presented in the online
supplement to this article (and in online Table DS1). Patient
was the most frequently endorsed term in relation to the
four professional groups, emerging as the clear favourite in
relation to psychiatrists and nurses; and being slightly
preferred to client in relation to social workers and
occupational
therapists. The
terms
user and
survivor
received the fewest number of endorsements within all
professional contexts.
ORIGINAL PAPERS
Simmons et al Describing recipients of mental health services
21
 Ranking of terms
In the second part of the questionnaire, participants were
asked to rank each of the five terms in order of preference,
where 1 indicated the most preferable term and 5 indicated
the least preferable term.
After
excluding
the
questionnaires
above
(online
supplement: Results), 249/350 were eligible for analysis.
Table 2 displays the measures of central tendency for each
of the five terms across all 249 included questionnaires
(irrespective of professional group). Again, patient was the
most popular choice and was ranked significantly higher
than the next most popular choice, client (P50.0001),
whereas survivor and user were the least preferred terms.
This profile was consistent across all three measures of
central tendency.
The data were split according to professional group-
ings: online Table DS2 shows the preference for the five
terms in relation to each professional group. Data were also
analysed separately for each of the professional groups to
establish whether the most preferred term was ranked
significantly higher than its nearest competitor (online
Table DS2). For all professions, this comparison (using a
related measures t-test) was between patient and client
since these were always the first and second preferred
choices. Significant preferences were found for patient when
used by both nurses and psychiatrists. However, there were
no reliable differences between the rankings for patient and
client when used by social workers and occupational
therapists.
These two approaches to analysis (i.e. analysis by term
and professional group) converge to show that patient
emerges as the clearly preferred term to be used by
psychiatrists and nurses, but is equally preferable to client
when used by the other professions.
Participants contributing ratings for more than one
profession
A total of 14 participants contributed valid ratings for two
different professions; the data are summarised in online
Table DS3. Of those, only one changed their preference
when considering a different mental health professional.
Although this is clearly a very small subset of participants,
the data suggest that individual preferences tend to be fixed
rather than variable.
Qualitative data
Participants were invited to make additional comments or
suggest alternative terms. The relevant comments are
presented in Box 1.
ORIGINAL PAPERS
Simmons et al Describing recipients of mental health services
Table 1
Participants’ preferences by term (all questionnaires, n = 350)
User
Survivor
Client
Patient
Service user
Response
n (%)
Yes
47 (13.4)
51 (14.6)
151 (43.1)
254 (72.6)
79 (22.6)
No
158 (45.1)
158 (45.1)
89 (25.4)
39 (11.1)
116 (33.1)
Unsure
36 (10.3)
36 (10.3)
29 (8.3)
11 (3.1)
46 (13.1)
Blank
109 (31.1)
105 (30)
81 (23.1)
46 (13.1)
109 (31.1)
Table 2
Measures of central tendency for rankings across all professional groups (n = 249), where 1 = most preferred
and 5 = least preferred
User
Survivor
Client
Patient
Service user
Mean (s.d.)
3.96 (0.97)
4 (1.23)
2.22 (1.09)
1.76 (1.15)
3.06 (0.99)
Median
4
4
2
1
3
Mode
4
5
2
1
3
Box 1
Additional comments
.
‘Patient is the only title that seems relevant’
.
‘I would like [to be] referred to as patient, but I feel I am trying
hard to be a survivor’
.
‘I am NOT a user of any kind. I didn’t like any of the labels,
patient is too formal but the nearest’
.
‘I am a patient!’
.
‘Friend would be a better term’
.
‘I believe addiction is an illness. If I was in with cancer I would
expect to be called a cancer patient so what is the difference?’
.
‘I don’t care what term is used’
.
‘I believe the word ‘‘user’’ is inappropriate and would make
people feel bad about being here’
.
‘Mental health issues should be treated in a similar way to other
health issues, therefore a medical model is most appropriate in
a medical context’
.
‘I see mental health problems in the same way as physical
problems, and therefore being called a patient is appropriate for
both. I see a counsellor, for which I pay – for this I think either
patient or client is appropriate’
.
‘I regard the other terms as totally inappropriate’ [the
participant preferred the term patient]
.
‘I do not like client – it’s reminiscent of prostitutes’
22
 Discussion
This study demonstrates that the known preference of the
terms patient and client above service user in London as
shown in previous studies10,11 also applies to Hertfordshire.
In Hertfordshire, this preference applies to different mental
health disciplines consulted on the day. The term service
user is more disliked than liked among those who consult
mental health professionals except for social workers.
Despite that, the term service user is incorporated into
national and local mental health policy documents. The 5-
year review of the National Service Framework for mental
health states: ‘there is a need to ensure involvement of
mental health service users and carers at all stages of the
research process, including the identification of priorities
for research’, and further, ‘service users are now widely
involved in research – setting priorities, commenting on
research proposals, and undertaking research themselves.’12
Mental health service managers and clinicians need to
ensure that those who receive mental health services, and
who are invited to help improve upon them, are not
potentially excluded from doing so by the widespread use of
terms which are less preferred and more strongly disliked.
Before asking what ‘user involvement’ or ‘service user
involvement’12 can contribute to service development, the
terminology used to describe and involve such service
receivers needs to be as inclusive and representative as
possible.
A small but significant proportion of individuals wish to
be regarded by less popular terms such as survivor or user.
Their needs and wishes should also be considered as part of
evidence-based service development.
Further research may establish whether ‘service users’
who are invited to plan and participate in evidence-based
research and service development are representative of
those who regard themselves as patients or clients, and not
necessarily as service users.
Mental health policy makers should recognise the
evidence base for the use of the term ‘patient’ or, in some
groups, ‘patient or client’ above that of ‘service user’.
Funding
This work was supported by NHS Research and Development Support
funding awarded to Hertfordshire Partnership NHS Foundation Trust.
Ethical approval was given by East and North Hertfordshire Local Research
Ethics Committee: ENHLREC/03-09-35/M138.
About the authors
Peter Simmons is Consultant Psychiatrist at Hertfordshire Partnership NHS
Foundation Trust. Chris J. Hawley is Consultant Psychiatrist, at Hertford-
shire Partnership NHS Foundation Trust and Division of Psychology,
University of Hertfordshire. Tim M. Gale is Research and Development
Manager at Hertfordshire Partnership NHS Foundation Trust. Thanusha
Sivakumaran is Research Officer at Hertfordshire Partnership NHS
Foundation Trust.
References
1 General Medical Council. Good Medical Practice. GMC, 2006 (http:/
/
www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/good_medical_practice/duties_of_a_
doctor.asp).
2 Nursing and Midwifery Council. The Code: Standards of Conduct,
Performacne and Ethics for Nurses and Midwives. NMC, 2008 (http:/
/
www.nmc-uk.org/aDisplayDocument.aspx?documentID=5982).
3 British Association of Social Workers. The Code of Ethics for Social Work.
BASW, 2002 (http:/
/www.basw.co.uk/Portals/0/CODE%20OF%
20ETHICS.pdf).
4 British Psychological Society. Code of Ethics and Conduct. BPS, 2006
(http:/
/www.bps.org.uk/downloadfile.cfm? file_uuid=5084A882-1143-
DFD0-7E6C-F1938A65C242&ext=pdf).
5 College of Occupational Therapists. Code of Ethics and Professional
Conduct (Revised). College of Occupational Therapists, 2005 (http:/
/
www.cot.org.uk/MainWebSite/Resources/Document/Code-of-
Ethics.pdf).
6 Neuberger J. Do we need a new word for patients? Let’s do away with
‘patients’. BMJ 1999; 318: 1756–8.
7 Department of Health. National Service Framework for Mental Health.
Department of Health, 1999.
8 Royal College of Psychiatrists, Royal College of Physicians of London,
British Medical Association. Mental Illness: Stigmatisation and
Discrimination within the Medical Profession (CR91). Royal College of
Psychiatrists, 2001.
9 Mind. Mind celebrates 60 years of speaking out. 27 April 2006 (http:/
/
www.mind.org.uk/news/1836_mind_celebrates_60_years_of_speaking_
out).
10 Ritchie CW, Hayes D, Ames DJ. Patient or client? The opinions of
people attending a psychiatric clinic. Psychiatr Bull 2000; 24: 447–50.
11 McGuire-Snieckus R, McCabe R, Priebe S. Patient, client or service
user? A survey of patient preferences of dress and address of six mental
health professions. Psychiatr Bull 2003; 27: 305–8.
12 Appleby L. The National Service Framework for Mental Health – Five Years
On. Department of Health, 2004.
ORIGINAL PAPERS
Simmons et al Describing recipients of mental health services
23
