 ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 15, NO. 6 ✦ NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2017
529
Exploring Attributes of High-Value Primary Care
ABSTRACT
PURPOSE Medicare’s merit-based incentive payment system and narrowing of 
physician networks by health insurers will stoke clinicians’ and policy makers’ 
interest in care delivery attributes associated with value as defined by payers.
METHODS To help define these attributes, we analyzed 2009 to 2011 commer-
cial health insurance claims data for more than 40 million preferred provider 
organization patients attributed to over 53,000 primary care practice sites. 
We identified sites ranking favorably on both quality and low total annual per 
capita health care spending (“high-value”) and sites ranking near the median 
(“average-value”). Sites were selected for qualitative assessment from 64 high-
value sites and 102 average-value sites with more than 1 primary care physician 
who delivered adult primary care and provided services to enough enrollees to 
permit meaningful spending and quality ranking. Purposeful sampling ensured 
regional diversity. Physicians experienced in primary care assessment and 
blinded to site rankings visited 12 high-value sites and 4 average-value sites to 
identify tangible attributes of care delivery that could plausibly explain a high 
ranking on value.
RESULTS Thirteen attributes of care delivery distinguished sites in the high-
value cohort. Six attributes attained statistical significance: decision support for 
evidence-based medicine, risk-stratified care management, careful selection of 
specialists, coordination of care, standing orders and protocols, and balanced 
physician compensation.
CONCLUSIONS Awareness of care delivery attributes that distinguish their 
high-value peers may help physicians respond successfully to incentives from 
Medicare and private payers to lower annual health care spending and improve 
quality of care.
Ann Fam Med 2017;15:529-534. https://doi.org/10.1370/afm.2153.
INTRODUCTION
T
o address criticisms that the US health system rewards volume 
of service rather than value, Medicare and some private payers 
are defining and rewarding high value health care. After a 4-year 
ramp-up period, Medicare’s merit-based incentive payment system (MIPS) 
will adjust annual physician payment by as much as 9% in 2022, based 
primarily on measures of quality and efficient resource use. Physicians 
who join larger organizations participating in Medicare’s advanced alterna-
tive payment models (APMs) will face parallel pressure from within these 
organizations to improve value of health care. Recent efforts, such as the 
patient-centered medical home recognition, designed to help physicians 
improve quality, have not reliably improved quality and lowered spend-
ing.1-3 This lack of improvement may be due to the absence of evidence on 
what physicians can do to attain both low per capita spending and favor-
able quality scores for nonMedicare as well as Medicare populations. Prior 
research on total per capita health care spending and quality has used 
Medicare data to compare regions and examined larger organizations such 
as hospitals and their affiliated physicians.4 We initiated an exploratory 
study to address these limitations for physicians facing intensifying pres-
sure to improve value.
Melora Simon, MPH1
Niteesh K. Choudhry, MD, PhD2
Jim Frankfort, MD3
David Margolius, MD4
Julia Murphy, MSc1
Luis Paita, PhD3
Thomas Wang, PhD1
Arnold Milstein, MD, MPH1
1Clinical Excellence Research Center, Stan-
ford University, Stanford, California
2Center for Healthcare Delivery Sciences, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts
3QuintilesIMS, Durham, North Carolina
4Case Western Reserve University, School 
of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio
Conflicts of interest: authors report none.
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR
Arnold Milstein, MD, MPH
Clinical Excellence Research Center,  
Stanford University
75 Alta Road
Stanford, CA 94305
amilstein@stanford.edu
 HIGH- VALUE PRIMARY CARE
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 15, NO. 6 ✦ NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2017
530
METHODS
Study Design
Our hypothesis-generating mixed methods study of 
a small national sample of primary care practice sites 
sought to reveal attributes of primary care delivery asso-
ciated with high value.5-8 The study was granted exempt 
status by the Stanford Institutional Review Board.
Data Sources and Ranking of Primary Care Practices
To rank US primary care practice sites on average 
annual health care spending per patient, we used 
claims from 2009 through 2011 from the Pharmet-
ricsPlus data set that includes over 40 million US 
commercial health insurance plan enrollees.9-11 The 
OneKey data set from IMS Quintiles12 was used to 
group self-identified primary care physicians who 
practiced at the same office site.
We attributed patients to the physician practice 
with the most claims in a calendar year. We excluded 
practices with fewer than 30 attributed patients. We 
excluded practices with 1 practitioner, concerned that 
a site visit would be too disruptive. Since the absence 
of a national all-payer claims database requires analy-
sis of small patient sample sizes per site,13 we used an 
independent scientific panel to make analytic decisions 
as detailed in the Supplemental Appendix, available at 
http://www.annfammed.org/content/15/6/529/suppl/
DC1/. The panel was composed of individuals who had 
published assessments in journals with high impact fac-
tors of the validity of measures of physician resource 
use and/or quality of care or had applied such measures 
in high-impact journals.
For each practice site, we calculated an observed-
to-expected measure of total risk-adjusted spending per 
patient-year for attributed patients. We also calculated 
spending by service category. Details of our approach 
are provided in the Supplemental Appendix (avail-
able at http://www.annfammed.org/content/15/6/529/
suppl/DC1/). To rank practices on quality, we created 
a composite score based on up to 41 measures calcu-
lable with claims data and endorsed by national quality 
organizations or used by the Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid Services (CMS). These measures and 
the details of the composite formation are listed in 
the Supplemental Appendix. We assigned a practice 
to the high-value group if it ranked in the top quintile 
on both scores, and the average-value group if the 
practice ranked between the 50th percentile and 60th 
percentile on both scores.
Site Selection and Visits
We visited high- and average-value sites between May 
2013 and June 2014. In order to improve the likeli-
hood of uncovering care attributes that are widely 
replicable, highly atypical practice sites operated by 
large multi-state health care organizations primar-
ily subject to population-based payment such as the 
Veterans Health Administration and Kaiser Perma-
nente were excluded, as were practice sites that did 
not self-identify as providing adult primary care. We 
performed purposeful sampling14 to produce a list of 
17 high-value practices and 6 average-value practices. 
Purposeful sampling allowed inclusion of practices in 
all 4 census US regions, as well as regions with high 
and low penetration of managed care, and high and 
low prices for labor and nonlabor inputs as published 
by CMS. We telephoned sites from our list of selected 
sites and moved down the list when a site declined to 
be visited or did not respond to 3 calls. Twenty-nine 
percent of high-value practices and 33% of average-
value practices declined to participate or did not 
respond.
We visited 12 high-value sites, stopping when we 
reached thematic saturation.5,15 Our available funding 
allowed us to visit 4 sites in the average-value group.
Each 8-hour visit was conducted by a primary care 
physician with experience in practice assessment and 
a nonphysician qualitative researcher (J.M.). Physi-
cians were blinded as to whether each practice was 
in the high- or average-value group. A structured 
pre-visit call with each practice’s designated physi-
cian representative elicited background information. 
Visiting teams used a semistructured interview guide 
using questions suggested by an advisory panel of 
primary care improvement experts and qualitative 
researchers familiar with prior research on primary 
care performance to interview physicians, practice 
managers, nurses, medical assistants, and receptionists. 
The interviews also included open-ended questions 
aimed at identifying attributes that interviewees felt 
might account for their practice site ranking favorably. 
The team gathered physician compensation informa-
tion to compare with Medical Group Management 
Association (MGMA) norms.16 Immediately following 
the visit, 1 research team member (M.S.) debriefed the 
site visit team using a recorded structured telephone 
interview. The nonphysician took detailed field notes 
and the physician team member wrote a report listing 
attributes that could plausibly explain high value.
Analysis
Two authors (J.M., M.S.) and a research assistant 
grouped frequently observed practice attributes into 
conceptually distinct categories using content analysis 
and developed a scoring grid to assess the presence 
and degree of each attribute. If information pertaining 
to an attribute was not available in the written report, 
field notes, or debrief notes, we contacted the site’s 
 HIGH-VALUE PRIMARY CARE
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 15, NO. 6 ✦ NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2017
531
representative and used open-ended questions to score 
its presence. For example, we asked: “How do you 
manage patients’ health care needs outside of clinic 
hours?” Responses were scored on a 5-point scale—
with 5 representing the fullest implementation of an 
attribute and 1 representing its absence—or simply as 
“present” or “absent” for dichotomous attributes. The 
scoring approach is further described in the Supple-
mental Appendix.
We identified the associations between the pres-
ence of each attribute and each practice sites’ value 
cohort by using a 2-tailed comparison with a signifi-
cance threshold of P <.05. Ordinal variables were 
compared using a Mann-Whitney test. Dichotomous 
variables were compared using a Fisher’s Exact test. 
Statistical analysis was conducted using Stata version 
14.1 (StataCorp LP).
RESULTS
Practice Selection and Characteristics
Patients were attributed to 53,773 practices. After we 
excluded practices with a single practitioner, 6,546 
remained of the 9,910 practices meeting minimum 
patient sample size requirements for ranking. Of these, 
64 ranked in the top quintile for both spending and 
quality and 102 ranked in the decile above the mean. 
Nine high-value and 13 average-value practices were 
excluded because they did not primarily deliver adult 
primary care. Two additional high-value 
practices were excluded because they were 
Veteran Affairs sites.
Characteristics other than attributes 
of care delivery of the 12 high-value and 
4 average-value practices that were visited 
are displayed in Table 1. The high-value 
cohort compared with the average-value 
cohort had fewer total physicians (7.5 vs 
17.0) and primary care physicians (5.3 vs 
6.8). The practices in both cohorts were 
evenly distributed through 4 census regions 
by design. A similar distribution of practices 
from each cohort both received substantial 
value-based payment from payers and paid 
their physicians above the MGMA average 
for their specialty.
Components of Lower Spending
The largest differences in spending 
between high-value and average-value 
cohorts (Table 2) occur in inpatient surgi-
cal services, outpatient hospital visits and 
ambulatory surgical services, and outpa-
tient prescription medications, including 
infusions and other specialty pharmaceuticals not 
dispensed from retail pharmacies. Spending in other 
service categories was similar between the 2 cohorts. 
Per capita spending differences were attributable to 
differences in the frequency of service utilization. 
The contribution of differences in average unit prices 
payable per service was not significant.
Table 1. Characteristics of Visited Practice Sites Other Than 
Care Delivery Attributes
 
High-Value 
Cohort 
(n 
= 
12)
Average-Value 
Cohort 
(n 
= 
4)
No. (%) Independently owned
4 (33)
1 (25)
No. (%) Multi-specialty group practices
6 (50)
1 (25)
No. of physicians per practice, mean (SD)
7 (5)
17 (27)
No. of primary care physicians with  
attributed patients, mean (SD)
5 (6)
7 (8)
No. of attributed patients per primary  
care physician, mean (SD)
46 (405)
599 (507)
Case mix index, mean (SD)
1.3 (0.5)
1.1 (0.2)
Allowed cost clinical risk group-adjusted 
O/E spending ratio, mean (SD)
0.66 (0.11)
0.94 (0.01)
Mean number of quality measures  
applicable to each practice
24 (6)
33 (10)
Weighted quality composite index  
O/E ratio, mean (SD)
1.14 (0.04)
0.99 (0.00)
No. (%) by census region
Midwest
2 (17)
1 (25)
Northeast
3 (25)
1 (25)
South
3 (25)
1 (25)
West
4 (33)
1 (25)
O/E 
= 
Observed vs expected.
Table 2. Per-Patient Per-Month Spending Details 
by Practice Cohort
PPPM Spending,  
Mean (SD) $
High-Value 
Cohort
Average- 
Value Cohort
Total inpatient
42 (27)
63 (19)
Inpatient maternity
3 (5)
1 (3)
Inpatient medical
21 (15)
16 (14)
Inpatient surgical
19 (18)
46 (6)
Emergency department
20 (13)
21 (3)
Outpatient hospital/ambulatory 
surgery center
48 (16)
73 (39)
Office
41 (8)
39 (9)
Diagnostics
44 (13)
49 (13)
Laboratory
20 (6)
25 (5)
Imaging
24 (9)
24 (10)
Prescription medicationsa
78 (20)
111 (7)
Other
20 (9)
35 (18)
PPPM 
= 
per-patient-per-month.
a Prescription medications includes both prescription claims and office/ 
outpatient-administered medications/injections/infusions.
 HIGH- VALUE PRIMARY CARE
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 15, NO. 6 ✦ NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2017
532
Attributes More Frequently Found in  
the High-Value Cohort
We found 13 attributes associated with the high-value 
cohort (Table 3).
Distinguishing Attributes that Reached 
Statistical Significance
Despite the small sample of visited sites, 6 of the 13 
attributes reached our predetermined cut point of 
statistical significance (P <.05): decision support for 
evidence-based medicine, risk-stratified care manage-
ment, careful selection of specialists, coordination of 
care, standing orders and protocols, and balanced com-
pensation. Scores are displayed in Tables 4 and 5.
DISCUSSION
The 6 attributes that statistically distinguished high-
value primary care practice sites cohere around 3 
themes. Risk-stratified care management, careful selec-
tion of specialists, and coordination of care reflect phy-
sician recognition of the need for “care traffic control” 
to help patients with complex conditions or treatment 
plans navigate the hazardous streets of a fragmented 
US health care system. The multi-decade failure of 
payer efforts to serve effectively in this role in isolation 
from primary care sites via telephonically mediated 
nurse case managers suggests that primary care rep-
resents an advantaged platform for care coordination. 
Physician success in adopting these 3 attributes will 
require much more easily accessible information on 
all care being received by patients as well as greater 
transparency on how other physicians perform rela-
tive to peers. Public and private efforts to address both 
needs remains slow but steady as illustrated by federal 
encouragement of inter-physician exchange of data 
from electronic health records and liberalization of 
Medicare’s rules for Qualified Entities providing physi-
cian performance comparisons.
Two distinguishing attributes, decision support 
Table 3. Attributes More Frequently in High-Value Practices Relative to Average-Value Practicesa
Attribute
Description
Expanded access
Practices offer same-day appointments and accommodate walk-ins, extend evening and weekend hours, and 
often take their own after-hours calls with access to their patients’ electronic medical records.
Decision support for evi-
dence-based medicinea
The care team ensures that patients receive all evidence-based care and treatment, often by making guideline-
based reminders available to clinicians in the electronic medical record. Some practice office managers regularly 
run reports to identify care gaps to alert the care team to take action—such as a list of patients overdue for 
colorectal cancer screening. Physicians consciously avoid ordering tests that would not change management.
Risk-stratified care 
managementa
Each patient receives support that is matched to his or her unique needs. High-risk patients are monitored and 
advised by a care manager, scheduled for longer office visits, receive frequent phone checks by office staff, or 
in some cases, clinician home visits.
Shared decision-making and 
advanced care planning
When diagnostic and treatment options substantially differ in their consequences and cost such as care near the 
end of life, clinicians walk patients through likely scenarios and tradeoffs.
Complaints are gold
Complaints from patients are perceived to be as valuable as compliments, if not more so. Practices take every 
opportunity to encourage patient feedback.
Comprehensive primary care
Clinicians practice within the full scope of their expertise, including services that primary care clinicians often 
refer out, such as skin biopsies, suturing, insulin initiation and stabilization, joint injections, and IUD place-
ment. In some cases, such as treadmill testing, practices arrange training and supervision by specialists.
Careful selection of 
specialistsa
When services outside the scope of the primary care practice are necessary, primary care clinicians rely on a 
carefully selected list of specialists with whom they trust to follow evidence-based guidelines and remain in 
close contact as treatment plans develop.
Coordinated carea
Care teams monitor patients outside of primary care visits. They ensure patients complete referrals to specialists 
and schedule timely follow-up after unexpected hospitalizations. In some cases, they track medication adher-
ence by communicating with pharmacies or counting refills.
Upshifted staff roles
Physicians are supported by a team of medical assistants, front desk staff, and in some cases, nurses and 
advanced practice clinicians who practice near the full potential of their education, skills, and licensure. As a 
result, physicians devote more time to the most complex patients.
Standing orders and 
protocolsa
Practices develop standing orders and protocols for uncomplicated acute illnesses and chronic disease manage-
ment. Nonclinician team members use these standardized workflows to care for patients without requiring 
direct clinician intervention.
Shared work spaces
Care teams including clinicians and nonclinicians work together in a common work area, enabling face-to-face 
communication that facilitates problem-solving in real-time.
Balanced compensationa
Physician salary is linked to value instead of only volume. Compensation reflects performance on at least one of 
the following components: (1) quality of care, (2) patient experience, (3) resource utilization, and (4) contribu-
tion to practice-wide improvement activities.
Low overhead space and 
equipment
Practices rent modest offices and typically invest in laboratory, imaging, and other equipment only if it allows 
clinicians to provide care more efficiently than referring to outside services. Some practices partner with other 
practices to jointly operate imaging equipment at a lower cost per study.
IUD 
= 
intrauterine device.
a Attributes with a statistically significant association with high-value practices compared with average-value practices.
 HIGH-VALUE PRIMARY CARE
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 15, NO. 6 ✦ NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2017
533
for evidence-based medicine and standing orders and 
protocols, represent tools to ease cognitive burden 
for physicians and their staff. They can help tame 
the overwhelming flow of outcome studies and clini-
cal guidelines, the widening array of disease subtypes 
likely to grow quickly with planned national invest-
ments in precision medicine, and the complexity of 
treatment plans for aging populations. The 6th attri-
bute—balanced compensation—signals the usefulness 
of echoing within a practice external efforts to reward 
value rather than volume.
Differences in annual spending between the 2 
cohorts were mostly explained by differences in 
spending for inpatient surgical services, outpatient 
hospital visits and ambulatory surgical centers, and 
outpatient prescription medications. Our finding 
differs from prior studies based on Medicare benefi-
ciaries that find greater variation in population-wide 
spending for medical inpatient and home health 
services.17 The difference may reflect greater illness 
burden of Medicare patients compared with younger, 
privately insured adults.
Given the relatively small number of study sites 
examined in this exploratory, hypothesis-generating 
study and non-random selection of sites for on-site 
visits, our findings should be regarded with caution. 
High-value practices had fewer 
attributed patients than the average-
value practices. We do not know if 
this reflects smaller panel sizes or 
fewer patients represented in the 
private health insurance database 
available for this study. High-value 
practices also qualified for assess-
ment on fewer quality measures. 
This difference may reflect a differ-
ent mix of patients treated by the 
high-value cohort relative to peers. 
Though we sampled locations with 
high and low managed-care penetra-
tion and input costs, we were unable 
to sample on other characteristics, 
such as practice size, that may also 
affect rankings on value.
Though our on-site assessments revealed 
attributes applied to all patients regardless of 
payer type, our findings may have differed if 
we had been able to rank with an all-payer 
database. When, and if, a national all-payer 
claims database linked to clinical data becomes 
available to US researchers, its greater patient 
diversity and sample size per physician will 
warrant greater confidence. We are a nation 
that seeks to lower the cost of good care, 
but lacks databases required to readily identify clinical 
teams that attain high quality with less spending.
A more costly, larger follow-up study using all-
payer data and experiments to transfer these attri-
butes to less-favorably ranking clinicians is warranted. 
Meanwhile, physicians seeking to respond to payer 
incentives to improve value now may benefit from 
considering “care traffic control” and other attributes 
of their primary care peers whom we found to rank 
favorably on performance measures typically used by 
payers. While large health systems draw attention for 
leading national efforts to improve the value of care, 
our study suggests that small community-based pri-
mary care practice sites can also achieve high value. 
The 34% lower spending (Table 1) attained by the 
high-value cohort suggests that investments in primary 
care refinement are a uniquely promising step on our 
national quest for more with less.
To read or post commentaries in response to this article, see it 
online at http://www.AnnFamMed.org/content/15/6/529.
Key words: primary health care; patient care team; health care costs; 
patient-centered care; guideline adherence; chronic disease; referral and 
consultation; decision making; specialization; standing orders
Submitted March 5, 2017; submitted, revised, July 21, 2017; accepted 
August 22, 2017.
Table 4. Attribute Score Comparison–Ordinally Scored Attributesa
Attribute
High-Value  
Cohort Median  
(IQR)
Average-Value  
Cohort Median  
(IQR)
P  
(Mann- 
Whitney)
Expanded access
4 (1)
3 (0.75)
.065
Decision support for evidence-
based medicine
4 (2)
3 (0.5)
.020
Risk-stratified care management
4 (1.125)
2 (0.25)
.012
Shared decision making and 
advanced care planning
4 (0.25)
3 (0.5)
.056
Complaints are gold
3.5 (3)
2.5 (1)
.709
Comprehensive care
4 (0.25)
3.5 (1.5)
.590
Careful selection of specialists
4 (1.25)
3 (0.25)
.013
Coordinated care
4 (2)
2 (0.25)
.006
Upshifted staff roles
5 (1)
2.5 (1.5)
.058
Standing orders and protocols
3.5 (1)
1.5 (1.25)
.020
a A 5 indicated fullest implementation of the attribute; 1 indicated no implementation of the attribute.
Table 5. Attribute Presence Comparison–Yes/No
Attribute
High-Value 
Cohort 
(n 
= 
12)
Average- 
Value Cohort 
(n 
= 
4)
P (Fisher’s 
Exact Score)
Shared work spaces
42%
0
.245
Balanced compensation
92%
25%
.027
Low overhead on space 
and equipment
100%
50%
.05
 HIGH- VALUE PRIMARY CARE
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 15, NO. 6 ✦ NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2017
534
Funding support: This study and manuscript were made possible by 
a grant from the Peterson Center on Healthcare. The statements made 
and views expressed are solely the responsibility of the authors. The 
funding source played no role in design and conduct of the study, col-
lection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data, prepara-
tion, review, or approval of the manuscript and decision to submit the 
manuscript for publication.
Previous presentation: Before the completion of the analysis 
portrayed in this manuscript, an early, high-level summary of find-
ings was presented at an event hosted by the Peterson Center 
on Healthcare in Washington, DC in December 2014. The con-
tent presented, which was equivalent to abstract-level findings, 
can be found on their website at http://petersonhealthcare.org/
identification-uncovering-americas-most-valuable-care.
Author Contributions: Conception and research design: A.M., M.S., 
T.W.; Acquisition of data: J.F., J.M., L.P., M.S., T.W.; Analysis and inter-
pretation of data: A.M., J.F., L.P, T.W., J.M, M.S., N.K.C, D.M.; Drafting 
of the manuscript: D.M., M.S., T.W., A.M.; Critical revision of the manu-
script for important intellectual content: - all authors; Final approval of 
the manuscript: - all authors; Obtaining of funding: A.M., M.S.; Admin-
istrative, technical, or material support: T.W., J.M., M.S.
Acknowledgments: The authors gratefully acknowledge the contribu-
tions of measurement methodology panelists John L. Adams, PhD, MS, 
Kaiser Permanente; Ashish K. Jha, MD, MPH, Harvard University; Mark 
Rattray, MD, CareVariance; Patrick Romano, MD, MPH, FACP, FAAP, 
University of California at Davis; and J. William Thomas, PhD, MBA, 
University of Michigan, as well as Scott Robertson, M. Econ, RN for 
statistical analysis. In addition, we thank current and former members 
of our research staff and the clinicians who led our site visits. These con-
tributors were provided with financial support for the time they devoted 
to this project.
 
Supplemental Materials: Available at http://www.AnnFamMed.
org/content/15/6/529/suppl/DC1/.
References
 1. Friedberg MW, Schneider EC, Rosenthal MB, Volpp KG, Werner RM. 
Association between participation in a multipayer medical home 
intervention and changes in quality, utilization, and costs of care. 
JAMA. 2014; 
311(8): 
815-825.
 2. Berwick DM, Nolan TW, Whittington J. The triple aim: 
 care, health, 
and cost. Health Aff (Millwood). 2008; 
27(3): 
759-769.
 3. Rosenthal MB, Friedberg MW, Singer SJ, Eastman D, Li Z, Schneider 
EC. Effect of a multipayer patient-centered medical home on health 
care utilization and quality: 
 the Rhode Island chronic care sustain-
ability initiative pilot program. JAMA Intern Med. 2013; 
173(20): 
1907-1913.
 4. Fisher ES, Bynum JP, Skinner JS. Slowing the growth of health care 
costs—lessons from regional variation. N Engl J Med. 2009; 
360(9): 
849-852.
 5. Marsh DR, Schroeder DG, Dearden KA, Sternin J, Sternin M. The 
power of positive deviance. BMJ. 2004; 
329(7475): 
1177-1179.
 6. Bradley EH, Curry LA, Ramanadhan S, Rowe L, Nembhard IM, 
Krumholz HM. Research in action: 
 using positive deviance to 
improve quality of health care. Implement Sci. 2009; 
4: 
25.
 7. Sinsky CA, Willard-Grace R, Schutzbank AM, Sinsky TA, Mar-
golius D, Bodenheimer T. In search of joy in practice: a report 
of 23 high-functioning primary care practices. Ann Fam Med. 
2013;11(3):272-278.
 8. Milstein A, Gilbertson E. American medical home runs. Health Aff 
(Millwood). 2009; 
28(5): 
1317-1326.
 9. Divino V, Karve S, Gaughan A, DeKoven M, Gao G, Lanasa M. 
Healthcare utilization and costs among patients with hairy cell leu-
kemia: 
 analysis of a large US administrative claims database. Blood. 
2015; 
126(23): 
4520.
 10. McQueen R, Livingstone T, Vollmer T, Corboy J, Nair K, Campbell 
J. Decreased relapse activity for those who switch to Natalizumab 
from alternative disease modifying therapies: 
 an observational 
study. Neurology. 2015; 
84(14): 
(suppl P3.272).
 11. Edwards N, Phillips A, Locklear J. Age-, sex-, and geographic 
region-specific comorbidity in patients with multiple sclerosis. Paper 
presented at: 
 American Academy of Neurology’s 68th Annual 
Meeting; 
 April 17, 2016; 
 Vancouver, BC, Canada.
 12. McClellan SR, Casalino LP, Shortell SM, Rittenhouse DR. When does 
adoption of health information technology by physician practices 
lead to use by physicians within the practice? J Am Med Inform 
Assoc. 2013; 
20(e1): 
e26-e32.
 13. Adams JL, Mehrotra A, Thomas JW, McGlynn EA. Physician cost 
profiling—reliability and risk of misclassification. N Engl J Med. 
2010; 
362(11): 
1014-1021.
 14. Palinkas LA, Horwitz SM, Green CA, Wisdom JP, Duan N, Hoag-
wood K. Purposeful sampling for qualitative data collection and 
analysis in mixed method implementation research. Adm Policy 
Ment Health. 2015; 
42(5): 
533-544.
 15. Given L. Data saturation. In: 
 Given LM, ed. The SAGE Encyclopedia 
of Qualitative Research Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
 SAGE Publica-
tions Ltd; 
 2008.
 16. Medical Group Management Association. MGMA DataDive Provider 
Compensation 2013. Englewood, CO: 
 Medical Group Management 
Association; 2013.
 17. Gnadinger T. Health policy brief: 
 geographic variation in Medi-
care spending. Health Affairs Blog. http: 
//www.healthaffairs.org/
healthpolicybriefs/brief.php?brief_id=109. Published Mar 6, 2014.
