 SPECIAL ARTICLE
David M. Simpson, MD
Mark Hallett, MD
Eric J. Ashman, MD
Cynthia L. Comella, MD
Mark W. Green, MD
Gary S. Gronseth, MD
Melissa J. Armstrong,
MD
David Gloss, MD
Sonja Potrebic, MD, PhD
Joseph Jankovic, MD
Barbara P. Karp, MD
Markus Naumann, MD
Yuen T. So, MD, PhD
Stuart A. Yablon, MD
Correspondence to
American Academy of Neurology:
guidelines@aan.com
Supplemental data
at Neurology.org
Practice guideline update summary: Botulinum
neurotoxin for the treatment of blepharospasm, cervical
dystonia, adult spasticity, and headache
Report of the Guideline Development Subcommittee of the American
Academy of Neurology
ABSTRACT
Objective: To update the 2008 American Academy of Neurology (AAN) guidelines regarding bot-
ulinum neurotoxin for blepharospasm, cervical dystonia (CD), headache, and adult spasticity.
Methods: We searched the literature for relevant articles and classified them using 2004 AAN
criteria.
Results and recommendations: Blepharospasm: OnabotulinumtoxinA (onaBoNT-A) and incobotuli-
numtoxinA (incoBoNT-A) are probably effective and should be considered (Level B). Abobotulinum-
toxinA (aboBoNT-A) is possibly effective and may be considered (Level C). CD: AboBoNT-A and
rimabotulinumtoxinB (rimaBoNT-B) are established as effective and should be offered (Level A),
and onaBoNT-A and incoBoNT-A are probably effective and should be considered (Level B). Adult
spasticity: AboBoNT-A, incoBoNT-A, and onaBoNT-A are established as effective and should be
offered (Level A), and rimaBoNT-B is probably effective and should be considered (Level B), for upper
limb spasticity. AboBoNT-A and onaBoNT-A are established as effective and should be offered
(Level A) for lower-limb spasticity. Headache: OnaBoNT-A is established as effective and should
be offered to increase headache-free days (Level A) and is probably effective and should be consid-
ered to improve health-related quality of life (Level B) in chronic migraine. OnaBoNT-A is established
as ineffective and should not be offered for episodic migraine (Level A) and is probably ineffective for
chronic tension-type headaches (Level B). Neurology® 2016;86:1818–1826
GLOSSARY
AAN 5 American Academy of Neurology; aboBoNT-A 5 abobotulinumtoxinA; AE 5 adverse event; BDI 5 Blepharospasm
Disability Index; BoNT 5 botulinum neurotoxin; CD 5 cervical dystonia; CI 5 confidence interval; CM 5 chronic migraine;
DAS 5 Disability Assessment Scale; EM 5 episodic migraine; incoBoNT-A 5 incobotulinumtoxinA; onaBoNT-A 5 onabotu-
linumtoxinA; QOL 5 quality of life; RD 5 risk difference; rimaBoNT-B 5 rimabotulinumtoxinB; RMT 5 randomized, masked
trials; TWSTRS 5 Toronto Western Spasmodic Torticollis Rating Scale; TZD 5 tizanidine.
This article summarizes information provided in the
complete guideline, available on the Neurology® Web
site at Neurology.org. Tables e-1 through e-6 and
appendices e-1 through e-5, cited in the full guideline
(data supplement), as well as references e1 through e16,
cited in this summary, are available at Neurology.org.
In 2008, the American Academy of Neurology
(AAN) published guidelines on the uses of botulinum
neurotoxin
(BoNT).1–3
New
research
on
4
indications—blepharospasm, cervical dystonia (CD),
spasticity, and headache—prompted this update.
BoNT pharmacology is reviewed in the 2008
AAN guidelines.1–3 BoNT is commercially available
in 2 serotypes, A and B. There are 4 US Food and
Drug Administration2approved preparations of
BoNT: onabotulinumtoxinA (onaBoNT-A), abobot-
ulinumtoxinA (aboBoNT-A), incobotulinumtox-
inA (incoBoNT-A), and rimabotulinumtoxinB
(rimaBoNT-B)
(table
1).
The
regulatory-
approved indications do not necessarily correspond
to those in the evidence-based recommendations
presented here.
From the Department of Neurology (D.M.S., M.W.G.), Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; Human Motor Control Section
(M.H.), National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (B.P.K.), National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; Department of Neurology
(E.J.A.), Bronson Neuroscience Center, Bronson Methodist Hospital, Kalamazoo, MI; Department of Neurological Sciences (C.L.C.), Rush
University Medical Center, Chicago, IL; Department of Neurology (G.S.G.), University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City; Department of
Neurology (M.J.A.), University of Maryland, Baltimore; Department of Neurology (D.G.), Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA; Department of
Neurology (S.P.), Kaiser Permanente Los Angeles Medical Center, CA; Parkinson’s Disease Center and Movement Disorders Clinic (J.J.),
Department of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX; Department of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology (M.N.), Klinikum
Augsburg, Germany; Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences (Y.T.S.), Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA; and Division of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation (S.A.Y.), University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
Approved by the Guideline Development Subcommittee on November 16, 2013; by the Practice Committee on February 27, 2015; and by the
AAN Institute Board of Directors on January 19, 2016.
Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.
1818
© 2016 American Academy of Neurology
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 There are important pharmacologic differences
between BoNT preparations, including potency and
duration of action. Therefore, unlike the approach
taken in the previous guidelines, where BoNT was
evaluated for safety and efficacy as a single class, in
this update we assessed each formulation separately
for each indication. As a result, the level of support
for efficacy in the conclusions and recommendations
may be lower for the individual BoNT formulations
than it would be had BoNT been considered as a
class. Efficacy of BoNT is for symptomatic control,
as there is no evidence for disease modification.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ANALYTIC PROCESS The
AAN’s
Guideline
Development
Subcommittee
(appendices e-1 and e-2) assembled an author panel,
balanced in regard to those with and those without
potential conflicts, to develop the guideline following
the processes described in the 2004 AAN guideline
process manual.4 A nonconflicted panel member con-
firmed the rating of each study.
We performed a systematic review to identify rel-
evant studies published since the prior guidelines. In
general, only randomized, masked trials (RMTs) were
considered. To assess long-term outcomes, including
safety, we used evidence from nonrandomized trials.
Twenty-three articles on blepharospasm, 23 on
CD, 86 on spasticity, and 28 on headache met inclu-
sion criteria. Table 2 summarizes the conclusions
from this review.
ANALYSIS OF EVIDENCE Blepharospasm. Blepharo-
spasm is a dystonia that can cause disabling eyelid clo-
sure. The 2008 guideline2 concluded that BoNT as a
class is probably safe and effective on the basis of 2
Class II studies comparing onaBoNT-A with placebo,
1 Class II study comparing onaBoNT-A with
aboBoNT-A,
and
1
Class
I
study
comparing
onaBoNT-A with incoBoNT-A.
Since the 2008 publication, 1 Class I RMT found
that incoBoNT-A (doses of up to 50 U/eye)5 was
superior to placebo (difference in change in Jankovic
Rating Score6 at week 6, 1.0, 95% confidence interval
[CI] 0.5–1.4). Benefit lasted a median of 10.6 weeks.
A Class II placebo-controlled RMT7 observed that
aboBoNT-A (40 U, 80 U, or 120 U) improved dis-
ability in a dose-related manner on active treatment as
measured by the Blepharospasm Disability Index8
(BDI) (median change in BDI after 80 U 23.0,
95% CI 24.0 to 21.0). Benefit lasted 12 weeks with
40 U and up to 16 weeks with 80 U or 120 U.
A second Class I RMT comparing onaBoNT-A with
incoBoNT-A (1:1 dosing)9 found comparable magni-
tude (change in BDI 22.0, p 5 0.148) and duration of
benefit (13 weeks) between BoNT preparations.
A second Class II RMT compared onaBoNT-A
and incoBoNT-A at the same dose with injections
to one eye with one drug and the other eye with
the other drug (injected side randomly assigned).
No differences were found with multiple measures
over 5 treatment sessions.10
Commonly reported adverse events (AEs) with
BoNT injections included periorbital hematoma
(25%), ptosis (range of risk differences [RDs] 13%–
54%), dry eyes (range of RDs 7.1%–13%), and
blurred vision (RD 42%).
Four Class IV observational studies reported long-
term
outcomes.
Benefit
from
aboBoNT-A
or
onaBoNT-A was sustained for at least 15 years in
128 patients,11 onaBoNT-A for 10 years in 83
patients,12 and incoBoNT-A for 69 weeks in 82 pa-
tients.13 In 288 patients arbitrarily assigned to toxin
formulation, similar degrees of benefit were sustained
for at least 10 years (onaBoNT-A), 15 years (abo-
BoNT-A), and 5 years (incoBoNT-A).14
No
studies
meeting
inclusion
criteria
were
found for rimabotulinumtoxin for treatment of
blepharospasm.
Conclusions. OnaBoNT-A (2 Class II studies from
2008 guideline) and incoBoNT-A (1 Class I study)
are probably safe and effective, and aboBoNT-A
(1 Class II study) is possibly effective, for treating
blepharospasm. There is insufficient evidence to
determine the efficacy of rimaBoNT-B.
IncoBoNT-A and onaBoNT-A (1 Class I compar-
ative effectiveness study from the 2008 guideline and
2 more recent comparative effectiveness studies [Class
I and 1 Class II]) are equivalent in efficacy for treating
blepharospasm.
AboBoNT-A
and
onaBoNT-A
(1 Class II study from the 2008 guideline) are possi-
bly equivalent for treating blepharospasm.
Recommendations. OnaBoNT-A and incoBoNT-A
injections should be considered (Level B), and
aboBoNT-A may be considered (Level C), as treat-
ment options for blepharospasm.
Clinical context. BoNT is considered the first-line
treatment of blepharospasm by most movement
Table 1
BoNT preparations and FDA-approved indications
BoNT preparation
Brand name (manufacturer)
FDA-approved indicationsa
OnabotulinumtoxinA
Botox (Allergan, Inc., Irvine, CA)
Blepharospasm, CD, upper
extremity spasticity, lower
extremity spasticity, CM
AbobotulinumtoxinA
Dysport (Ipsen Ltd., Paris, France)
CD, upper extremity
spasticity
IncobotulinumtoxinA
Xeomin (Merz Pharmaceuticals,
Frankfurt, Germany)
Blepharospasm, CD, upper
extremity spasticity
RimabotulinumtoxinB
Myobloc Neurobloc (US
WorldMeds/Solstice Neurosciences,
Louisville, KY)
CD
Abbreviations: BoNT 5 botulinum neurotoxin; CD 5 cervical dystonia; CM 5 chronic
migraine; FDA 5 Food and Drug Administration.
a FDA approvals relevant to this review.
Neurology 86
May 10, 2016
1819
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 disorder specialists.15 All 3 type A toxins appear to
have similar efficacy and can continue to be effica-
cious over long periods.
Cervical dystonia. CD is characterized by involuntary
contractions of neck and upper shoulder muscles, re-
sulting in abnormal postures or movements (or both)
of the neck, shoulder, and head.16
The 2008 guideline2 concluded that BoNT is es-
tablished as safe and effective for CD treatment on
the basis of 1 Class I trial of onaBoNT-A, 2 Class I
trials of aboBoNT-A, and 3 Class I trials of
rimaBoNT-B. Moreover, on the basis of a single Class
I study comparing aboBoNT-A with trihexyphenidyl,
the guideline concluded that BoNT is probably more
efficacious and better tolerated than trihexyphenidyl.
Since the 2008 guideline publication, 1 placebo-
controlled Class I study17 found that incoBoNT-A
(120 U, 240 U) improved Toronto Western Spas-
modic Torticollis Rating Scale (TWSTRS)18 total
scores from baseline to week 4 (placebo 5 22.2,
120 U 5 29.9, and 240 U 5 210.9, p , 0.001).
A second study (Class II) comparing 2 doses of
incoBoNT-A (120 U or 240 U)19 demonstrated that
both doses provided significant improvements in
mean TWSTRS total scores, and in severity, disabil-
ity, and pain subscores, from each injection session to
the respective 4-week follow-up visit. There was no
significant difference in efficacy between the 2 stud-
ied doses, although the study was not powered to
demonstrate such differences. The most frequently
reported AE in the incoBoNT-A groups in this study
was dysphagia (23.4% in the 240 U dose group and
10.7% in the 120 U dose group).
Another placebo-controlled study (Class II) of
onaBoNT-A (the original Botox formulation contain-
ing 25 mg of neurotoxin complex protein per 100
U)20 found that onaBoNT-A produced greater im-
provements in the CD Severity Scale (21.81 vs
20.31 points, p 5 0.012) and Global Assessment
Scale (61.7% vs 41.6% improved, p 5 0.022). Rhi-
nitis and treatment-related dysphagia were more fre-
quent with onaBoNT-A.
Five studies compared different formulations of
BoNT. The first 2 studies (Class I)21,22 randomized
patients with CD to onaBoNT-A (1502250 U) or
rimaBoNT-B (10,000 U) and noted similar durations
of effect and no significant difference in improved
TWSTRS scores at 4 weeks. Dysphagia occurred
more frequently in the rimaBoNT-B group in both
studies (48% vs 19% in the first study and 16% vs
14.5% in the second study).
The third Class I study23 compared the effect of
onaBoNT-A 70–240 U with aboBoNT-A 240–720
U and observed no difference in the improvement of
posttreatment Tsui scores at 4 weeks (mean difference
0.2, 95% CI 20.7 to 1.1, lower scores with
aboBoNT-A). In a Class II 9-month randomized,
double-blind, multicenter, noninferiority, 2-period
crossover study with a 2.5:1 (aboBoNT-A:ona-
BoNT-A) protocol involving 103 patients with CD,
Table 2
Evidence-based conclusions and recommendations for the efficacy of various botulinum neurotoxin formulations by indication
Indication
Level Aa effective
Level Bb probably
effective
Level Cc possibly
effective
Level Ud insufficient
evidence
Level Ae
ineffective
Level Bf
ineffective
Blepharospasm
OnabotulinumtoxinA,
incobotulinumtoxinA
AbobotulinumtoxinA
RimabotulinumtoxinB
Cervical dystonia
AbobotulinumtoxinA,
rimabotulinumtoxinB
OnabotulinumtoxinA,
incobotulinumtoxinA
Upper limb
spasticityg
AbobotulinumtoxinA,
onabotulinumtoxinA,h
incobotulinumtoxinA
RimabotulinumtoxinB
Lower limb
spasticity
OnabotulinumtoxinA,
abobotulinumtoxinA
IncobotulinumtoxinA,
rimabotulinumtoxinB
Chronic migraine
OnabotulinumtoxinAi
Episodic migraine
OnabotulinumtoxinA
Tension-type
headache
OnabotulinumtoxinA
Abbreviations:
aboBoNT-A
5
abobotulinumtoxinA;
incoBoNT-A
5
incobotulinumtoxinA;
onaBoNT-A
5
onabotulinumtoxinA;
rimaBoNT-B
5
rimabotulinumtoxinB.
a Level A recommendation for effectiveness signifies intervention should be offered.
b Level B recommendation for effectiveness signifies intervention should be considered.
c Level C recommendation for effectiveness signifies intervention may be considered.
d Level U recommendation signifies insufficient evidence to support or refute effectiveness of intervention.
e Level A recommendation for ineffectiveness signifies intervention should not be offered.
f Level B recommendation for ineffectiveness signifies intervention should not be considered.
g Evidence demonstrates efficacy in reducing spasticity but is inadequate to determine improvement in active function associated with limb spasticity.
h Probably superior to tizanidine and exercise alone for reducing spasticity.
i Established as effective for decreasing the number and severity of headaches; probably effective in improvement of health-related quality of life.
1820
Neurology 86
May 10, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 94 of whom completed the study, there were no sta-
tistically significant differences between aboBoNT-A
and onaBoNT-A in mean changes in the Tsui scale
(0.8 points favoring onaBoNT-A, 95% CI 20.1 to
1.7), TWSTRS, global impression, or frequency of
AEs from baseline to 4 weeks after each injection.24 In
another comparison study (Class II), 46 patients with
CD were enrolled in a double-blind, randomized,
crossover trial of onaBoNT-A vs aboBoNT-A in 1:3
dose conversion ratios. There was no significant dif-
ference between the 2 products at week 4, but at week
12 there was a significantly shorter duration and
lower efficacy of onaBoNT-A assessed by reduction
in TWSTRS total score, suggesting that the optimal
conversion
ratio
between
onaBoNT-A
and
aboBoNT-A is lower than 1:3.25
Three long-term, prospective, open-label studies
(Class IV)26–28 evaluated the clinical response of
repeated injections of onaBoNT-A and found persis-
tent benefit for up to 2 years.
Conclusions. AboBoNT-A (2 Class I studies reviewed
in the 2008 guideline) and rimaBoNT-B (3 Class I
studies reviewed in the 2008 guideline) are established
as safe and effective for the treatment of CD.
OnaBoNT-A (1 Class I study reviewed in the
2008 guideline, 1 more recent Class II study) and
incoBoNT-A (1 more recent Class I study) are prob-
ably safe and effective for the treatment of CD.
RimaBoNT-B and onaBoNT-A (2 Class I compar-
ative effectiveness studies) are equivalent in efficacy for
treating CD. AboBoNT-A and onaBoNT-A (1 Class I
study) are probably equivalent for treating CD.
Recommendations. AboBoNT-A and rimaBoNT-B
should be offered (Level A), and onaBoNT-A and
incoBoNT-A should be considered (Level B), as op-
tions for the treatment of CD.
Clinical context. BoNT is accepted as first-line treat-
ment for CD. Although the evidence levels may differ
across BoNT serotypes and brands, all formulations
have regulatory approval and are commonly used.
There is an extensive clinical history of onaBoNT-A
and incoBoNT-A use, but the lack of additional Class
I studies led to only a Level B recommendation.
Comparative
trials
indicate
similar
efficacy
for
rimaBoNT-B and onaBoNT-A, and for aboBoNT-A
and onaBoNT-A, in the treatment of CD.
Spasticity in adults. A 2010 AAN guideline provides
recommendations for BoNT treatment of spasticity
in pediatric patient populations,29 and therefore this
review discusses only adult spasticity.
The 2008 guideline1 concludes that BoNT is
established as effective in the treatment of adult
spasticity in the upper extremity on the basis of 6
Class I studies of aboBoNT-A, 4 Class I studies of
onaBoNT-A, and 1 Class I study of rimaBoNT-B.
The guideline also concludes that BoNT is effective
in treating lower limb spasticity on the basis of 2 Class
I studies of aboBoNT-A and 1 Class I study of
onaBoNT-A. Studies demonstrated that BoNT is
effective for reducing muscle tone and improving pas-
sive function (e.g., improved range of motion) and is
probably effective for improving active function
(1 Class I study of aboBoNT-A).
Upper extremity spasticity. AboBoNT-A. Four new Class
I trials30–33 investigating aboBoNT-A demonstrated
significant reductions in upper limb tone as measured
by the modified Ashworth scale. These studies also
measured functional outcomes. The first study30
demonstrated no significant difference in quality of
life (QOL) but observed significantly greater global
benefit in patients given BoNT. The second study31
observed no significant difference between groups for
improved active arm function as measured by the
Action Research Arm Test at 1 month (RD favoring
the BoNT group 5.7%, 95% CI 23.5% to 14.6%).
However, participants treated with aboBoNT-A
showed improvement in upper limb muscle function
at 3 months as measured by the Motricity Index
(mean change in index 3.5, 95% CI 0.1 to 6.8,
greater number of points in the intervention group).
The third study32 demonstrated no significant change
in functional assessment scores. The fourth, a more
recent study,33 showed improved response rate (.1
point) on the principal target of treatment of the Dis-
ability Assessment Scale (DAS), a measure of self-
reported disability, at 4 weeks among participants
treated with 1,000 U of aboBoNT-A, but not with
500 U or placebo (62% in 1,000 U, p 5 0.0018 vs
placebo; 50% in 500 U, p 5 0.1279 vs placebo; and
39.2% in placebo). The higher-dose BoNT-A group
also demonstrated improved active range of motion in
the elbow, wrist, and fingers.
A fifth Class I study34 of patients with upper limb
spasticity focused on caregiver burden. This study
found that 67% of caregivers of patients receiving
aboBoNT-A reported a $4-point reduction on the
carer burden scale as compared with 20% of care-
givers of patients injected with saline (p 5 0.001).
OnaBoNT-A. Four studies (3 Class I,35–37 1 Class
II38) demonstrated consistent efficacy in tone reduc-
tion in the upper limb from onaBoNT-A. Scores on
the DAS improved only in patients choosing
improved limb position35,38 and dressing36 as princi-
pal treatment goals. One of the Class I studies37
enrolled 21 patients and failed to demonstrate signif-
icant effects of BoNT on many functional outcomes.
However, this study was underpowered to exclude
potentially important differences. In these studies
onaBoNT-A was well tolerated, with no significant
difference observed in the overall AE incidence
between treatment and placebo groups.
Neurology 86
May 10, 2016
1821
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Using goal attainment scaling scores as the pri-
mary endpoint measure, another Class I study (pro-
spective, double-blind) randomized participants to
1 of 2 groups: onaBoNT-A plus standard of care or
placebo plus standard of care. No difference was
found between groups with respect to achievement
of principal and secondary active functional goals.
Significantly more patients achieved their secondary
passive goal with onaBoNT-A plus standard of care
vs placebo plus standard of care at week 24, but not
at week 12 or week 52.39
IncoBoNT-A. Two new Class I trials40,e1 showed sig-
nificant
improvement
in
tone
reduction
with
incoBoNT-A. In the first trial, incoBoNT-A pro-
duced a greater proportion of participants with
$1-point improvement in the Ashworth scale score
at 4 weeks (odds ratio 3.97, 95% CI 1.9–8.3). In the
second study, participants treated with incoBoNT-A
demonstrated larger reductions in Ashworth scale
scores of muscle groups in the primary target clinical
pattern (20.9 with incoBoNT-A vs 20.5 with pla-
cebo, p , 0.001) as well as a greater proportion with
.1-point improvement (69.6% vs 37.5%, respec-
tively). Both studies also showed that incoBoNT-A
produced greater response in all domains of the DAS
and global assessment of benefit. The open-label
extension study of the first trial showed persistence
of
benefit
without
detection
of
neutralizing
antibodies.e2
RimaBoNT-B. In a newer Class I study,e3 patients
were randomized to 1 of 2 doses of rimaBoNT-B or
placebo. Patients randomized to either BoNT dose
had improved active elbow extension vs placebo
(18.3°, 95% CI 1.1°–15.5°). There was no signifi-
cant change as compared with placebo in upper limb
function as measured by the Modified Frenchay
Scale.
Conclusions.
AboBoNT-A,
incoBoNT-A,
and
onaBoNT-A are established as safe and effective for
the reduction of adult upper limb spasticity and
improvement of passive function (multiple Class I
studies for all preparations).
RimaBoNT-B is probably safe and effective for the
reduction of adult upper limb spasticity (1 Class I
study).
Data are inadequate to determine the efficacy
of
aboBoNT-A,
onaBoNT-A,
incoBoNT-A,
or
rimaBoNT-B for improvement of active function
associated with adult upper limb spasticity (Class I
studies, inconsistent results dependent on active func-
tional outcome).
Recommendations. For focal manifestations of adult
spasticity involving the upper limb, aboBoNT-A, in-
coBoNT-A, and onaBoNT-A should be offered
(Level A), and rimaBoNT-B should be considered
(Level B), as treatment options.
Lower extremity spasticity. One placebo-controlled
Class I studye4 published since the 2008 guideline
examined aboBoNT-A use in multiple sclerosis and
observed reduced pain in both legs in patients ran-
domized to aboBoNT-A (RD proportion of patients
reporting decreased pain at 12 weeks 29.9%, 95% CI
10.9%–46%). Three Class I studies of onaBoNT-A
in the treatment of adult lower limb spasticitye52e7
demonstrated significant reduction in tone but found
inconsistent results in regard to functional measures.
The literature search did not identify studies meet-
ing inclusion criteria addressing the efficacy of
incoBoNT-A or rimaBoNT-B for adult lower limb
spasticity.
Conclusions. AboBoNT-A and onaBoNT-A are es-
tablished as safe and effective for the reduction of
adult lower limb spasticity (multiple Class I studies).
Data are inadequate to determine the efficacy of
incoBoNT-A or rimaBoNT-B for improvement of
active function in adult lower limb spasticity.
Data are inadequate to determine the efficacy
of
aboBoNT-A,
onaBoNT-A,
incoBoNT-A,
or
rimaBoNT-B for improvement of active function
associated with adult lower-limb spasticity (no studies
available or inconsistent results dependent on specific
outcome from multiple Class I studies).
Recommendations. For focal manifestations of adult
spasticity involving the lower limb that warrant treat-
ment, onaBoNT-A and aboBoNT-A should be
offered (Level A) as treatment options.
There is insufficient evidence to support or refute
a benefit of incoBoNT-A or rimaBoNT-B for treat-
ment of adult lower limb spasticity.
Comparative studies. In a Class I study of patients
with adult upper limb spasticity, onaBoNT-A was
superior to tizanidine (TZD) for improving wrist
and finger flexor tone, whereas TZD showed no ben-
efit over placebo. Notably, the high incidence of AEs
with TZD limited dose titration (90.5% of patients
receiving TZD experienced one or more AEs).35
Conclusions. OnaBoNT-A is probably superior to
TZD for reducing upper extremity tone (1 Class I
study) in adult spasticity.
Recommendations. OnaBoNT-A should be consid-
ered as a treatment option before TZD for treating
adult upper extremity spasticity (Level B).
Techniques to optimize response to BoNT. Two Class I
studiese8,e9 demonstrated that high-volume injections
of onaBoNT-A and endplate targeting into proximal
upper extremity muscles are probably effective strat-
egies for enhancing tone reduction in adult spasticity.
One Class II studye10 compared 3 different tech-
niques for guiding BoNT injection placement (man-
ual needle placement, electrical stimulation, and
ultrasonography) and did not find consistent out-
comes favoring one technique.
1822
Neurology 86
May 10, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Conclusions. Both high-volume, low-potency injec-
tions of onaBoNT-A and endplate targeting into
proximal upper extremity muscles are probably effec-
tive strategies for enhancing tone reduction in adult
spasticity (1 Class I study for each technique).
There is insufficient evidence to support or refute
the superiority of specific techniques for guiding
BoNT injection placement (inconsistent outcomes
from 1 Class II study).
Recommendations. Both high-volume, low-potency
injections of onaBoNT-A and endplate targeting of
onaBoNT-A into proximal upper extremity muscles
should be considered to enhance tone reduction in
spasticity (Level B).
Clinical
context. Although
BoNT
can
reduce
increased tone in spasticity, the impact of BoNT injec-
tions on functional outcomes is mixed, suggesting that
potential functional gains are highly patient-specific.
Because of the lack of comparative trials, there is insuf-
ficient evidence to indicate that any one of the BoNT
formulations is superior to the others.
Headache. Chronic migraine. Chronic migraine (CM)
refers to migraine attacks occurring 15 days or more
monthly for at least 3 months, with attacks lasting
4 hours or more.e11 Episodic migraine (EM) refers
to migraine with a lesser frequency of attack. The
2008 guideline found inconsistent results from 4
Class II studies comparing onaBoNT-A with placebo,
resulting in insufficient evidence to support or refute
a benefit of BoNT for treatment of CM.3
Comparison of BoNT with placebo. Two Class I placebo-
controlled studiese12,e13 published since the 2008
guideline met inclusion criteria. In one study,e12
onaBoNT-A was ineffective for changes from baseline
for total headache episodes but was effective for the
secondary endpoint of change in frequency of total
headache days/28 days (mean intergroup difference
21.4 days, 95% CI 22.4 to 20.40). In the second
study,e13 onaBoNT-A was effective for reducing total
headache days/28 days from baseline to weeks 21–24
posttreatment. Nine fewer headache days were seen in
the BoNT-A group, with 6.7 in the placebo group (p ,
0.001). In both studies the placebo response was high.
Several follow-up reports describing pooled analyses
of both Class I studies have been published. One Class
I follow-up reporte14 described significant reduction in
headache impact and improvement in health-related
QOL after 24 weeks of double-blind treatment (pro-
portion of patients with severe Headache Impact Test
scores 67.6% of patients given BoNT vs 78.2% of
patients given placebo, p , 0.001).
Comparison of BoNT with other headache preventive treat-
ments. One Class III studye15 demonstrated similar effi-
cacy for onaBoNT-A and topiramate in CM. No
other studies comparing oral preventive medications
with BoNT injections met inclusion criteria. There
also are no studies comparing different BoNT sero-
types in headache.
AEs of onaBoNT-A included neck pain and mus-
cle weakness.
Conclusions. OnaBoNT-A is established as safe and
effective for reducing the number of headache days in
CM (2 Class I studies) and probably effective for
improving health-related QOL (1 Class I study).
There is insufficient evidence to compare the
effectiveness of BoNT with that of oral prophylactic
topiramate. No Class I or II studies of other formula-
tions of BoNT in CM have been published.
Recommendations. OnaBoNT-A should be offered
as a treatment option to patients with CM to increase
the number of headache-free days (Level A) and
should be considered to reduce headache impact on
health-related QOL (Level B).
Clinical context. Although the reduction of headache
days with onaBoNT-A was statistically superior to
placebo in 2 Class I studies, the magnitude of the dif-
ference is small (1.7 and 2.3).
Episodic migraine. The 2008 guideline conclusion,3
based on 2 Class I and 2 Class II studies, indicates
onaBoNT-A injection is probably ineffective for treat-
ment of EM. One Class I studye16 published since the
2008 guideline compared onaBoNT-A at doses of 75
U, 150 U, and 225 U with placebo, using 3 treatment
cycles 3 months apart. OnaBoNT-A was ineffective for
reducing migraine frequency from baseline to day 180.
Conclusion. OnaBoNT-A is ineffective for the treat-
ment of EM (3 Class I studies, 2 from the 2008
report).
Recommendation. OnaBoNT-A
should
not
be
offered as a treatment for EM (Level A).
Tension-type headache. No new studies were identi-
fied that would have changed the conclusion of the
2008 guideline.3 BoNT injection is probably ineffec-
tive for treating chronic tension-type headaches
(2 Class I studies).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
David M. Simpson: study concept and design, acquisition of data, anal-
ysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical
revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content, study super-
vision. Mark Hallett: study concept and design, acquisition of data, anal-
ysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical
revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content, study super-
vision. Eric J. Ashman: acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of
data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript
for important intellectual content. Cynthia L. Comella: acquisition of
data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript,
critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.
Mark W. Green: acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of data,
drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for
important intellectual content. Gary S. Gronseth: study concept and
design, acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/
revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content. Melissa J. Armstrong: acquisition of data, analysis or
Neurology 86
May 10, 2016
1823
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of
the manuscript for important intellectual content. David Gloss: acquisi-
tion of data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the man-
uscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual
content. Sonja Potrebic: acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation
of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manu-
script for important intellectual content. Joseph Jankovic: acquisition of
data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript,
critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. Bar-
bara P. Karp: acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of data, draft-
ing/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for
important intellectual content. Markus Naumann: acquisition of data,
analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical
revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. Yuen T. So:
acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the
manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual
content. Stuart A. Yablon: acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation
of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manu-
script for important intellectual content.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Erin Hagen, Julie Cox, and Thomas Getchius for edi-
torial assistance.
STUDY FUNDING
This guideline was developed with financial support from the American
Academy of Neurology. Authors who serve as AAN subcommittee mem-
bers or methodologists (E.J.A., G.S.G., M.J.A., D.G., S.P.) were reim-
bursed by the AAN for expenses related to travel to subcommittee
meetings where drafts of manuscripts were reviewed.
DISCLOSURE
D. Simpson has received research grants from and served as a consultant
for Allergan Inc., Ipsen Ltd., Merz Pharmaceuticals, and Acorda Thera-
peutics. M. Hallett serves as a chair of the Neurotoxin Institute Advisory
Council and has received research grants from Allergan Inc. and Merz
Pharmaceuticals. E. Ashman served as a paid editor for Neurology® from
2011 to 2013. C. Comella has received research grants from and has
served as a consultant for Allergan Inc., Ipsen Ltd., Merz Pharmaceut-
icals, and Revance Pharmaceuticals. M. Green and G. Gronseth report no
disclosures relevant to the manuscript. M. Armstrong serves on the Level
of Evidence Review Team for Neurology (not compensated financially)
and serves as an evidence-based methodologist for the AAN. She has no
conflicts of interest related to the topic of this guideline. D. Gloss and S.
Potrebic report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. J. Jankovic has
received research grants from and served as a consultant for Allergan Inc.,
Ipsen Ltd., and Merz Pharmaceuticals. B. Karp has received a research
grant from Allergan Inc. M. Naumann has served as a consultant for
Allergan Inc. and Ipsen Ltd. Y. So reports no disclosures relevant to the
manuscript. S. Yablon has served as a consultant for Allergan Inc., Ipsen
Ltd., Medtronic Inc., and Merz Pharmaceuticals. Go to Neurology.org
for full disclosures.
DISCLAIMER
Clinical practice guidelines, practice advisories, systematic reviews, and
other guidance published by the American Academy of Neurology and
its affiliates are assessments of current scientific and clinical information
provided as an educational service. The information: (1) should not be
considered inclusive of all proper treatments, methods of care, or as a
statement of the standard of care; (2) is not continually updated and
may not reflect the most recent evidence (new evidence may emerge
between the time information is developed and when it is published or
read); (3) addresses only the question(s) specifically identified; (4) does
not mandate any particular course of medical care; and (5) is not in-
tended to substitute for the independent professional judgment of the
treating provider, as the information does not account for individual var-
iation among patients. In all cases, the selected course of action should be
considered by the treating provider in the context of treating the individ-
ual patient. Use of the information is voluntary. AAN provides this infor-
mation on an as-is basis, and makes no warranty, expressed or implied,
regarding the information. AAN specifically disclaims any warranties of mer-
chantability or fitness for a particular use or purpose. AAN assumes no
responsibility for any injury or damage to persons or property arising out
of or related to any use of this information or for any errors or omissions.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The American Academy of Neurology is committed to producing inde-
pendent, critical, and truthful clinical practice guidelines (CPGs). Signif-
icant efforts are made to minimize the potential for conflicts of interest to
influence the recommendations of this CPG. To the extent possible, the
AAN keeps separate those who have a financial stake in the success or fail-
ure of the products appraised in the CPGs and the developers of the
guidelines. Conflict of interest forms were obtained from all authors
and reviewed by an oversight committee prior to project initiation.
AAN limits the participation of authors with substantial conflicts of inter-
est. The AAN forbids commercial participation in, or funding of, guide-
line projects. Drafts of the guideline have been reviewed by at least 3
AAN committees, a network of neurologists, Neurology peer reviewers,
and representatives from related fields. The AAN Guideline Author Con-
flict of Interest Policy can be viewed at www.aan.com. For complete
information on this process, access the 2004 AAN process manual.4
Received June 8, 2015. Accepted in final form December 21, 2015.
REFERENCES
1.
Simpson M, Gracies JM, Graham HK, et al; for the Ther-
apeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the
American Academy of Neurology. Assessment: botulinum
neurotoxin for the treatment of spasticity (an evidence-
based review): report of the Therapeutics and Technology
Assessment Subcommittee of the American Academy of
Neurology. Neurology 2008;70:1691–1698.
2.
Simpson M, Blitzer A, Brashear A, et al; for the Thera-
peutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the
American Academy of Neurology. Assessment: botulinum
neurotoxin for the treatment of movement disorders (an
evidence-based review): report of the Therapeutics and
Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the American
Academy of Neurology. Neurology 2008;70:1699–1706.
3.
Naumann M, So Y, Argoff CE, et al; for the Therapeutics
and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the Ameri-
can Academy of Neurology. Assessment: botulinum toxin
in the treatment of autonomic disorders and pain (an
evidence-based review): report of the Therapeutics and
Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the American
Academy of Neurology. Neurology 2008;70:1707–1714.
4.
American Academy of Neurology. Clinical Practice Guide-
lines Process Manual, 2004 ed. St. Paul, MN: The Amer-
ican Academy of Neurology; 2004. Available at: https://
www.aan.com/Guidelines/Home/UnderDevelopment.
Accessed August 1, 2011.
5.
Jankovic J, Comella C, Hanschmann A, Grafe S. Efficacy
and safety of incobotulinumtoxinA (NT 201, Xeomin) in
the treatment of blepharospasm: a randomized trial. Mov
Disord 2011;26:1521–1528.
6.
Jankovic J, Orman J. Botulinum A toxin for cranial-
cervical
dystonia:
a
double-blind,
placebo-controlled
study. Neurology 1987;37:616–623.
7.
Truong D, Comella C, Fernandez HH, Ondo WG; Dys-
port Essential Blepharospasm Study Group. Efficacy and
safety of purified botulinum toxin type A (Dysport) for the
treatment of benign essential blepharospasm: a random-
ized, placebo-controlled, phase II trial. Parkinsonism Relat
Disord 2008;14:407–414.
8.
Lindeboom R, De Haan R, Aramideh M, Speelman JD.
The blepharospasm disability scale: an instrument for the
1824
Neurology 86
May 10, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 assessment of functional health in blepharospasm. Mov
Disord 1995;10:444–449.
9.
Wabbels B, Reichel G, Fulford-Smith A, Wright N,
Roggenkamper P. Double-blind, randomised, parallel
group pilot study comparing two botulinum toxin type
A products for the treatment of blepharospasm. J Neural
Transm 2011;118:233–239.
10.
Saad J, Gourdeau A. A direct comparison of onabotuli-
numtoxinA (Botox) and incobotulinumtoxinA (Xeomin)
in the treatment of benign essential blepharospasm: a split-
face technique. J Neuroophthalmol 2014;34:233–236.
11.
Bentivoglio AR, Fasano A, Ialongo T, Soleti F, Lo
Fermo S, Albanese A. Fifteen-year experience in treating
blepharospasm with Botox or Dysport: same toxin, two
drugs. Neurotox Res 2009;15:224–231.
12.
Cillino S, Raimondi G, Guepratte N, et al. Long-term
efficacy of botulinum toxin A for treatment of blepharo-
spasm, hemifacial spasm, and spastic entropion: a multi-
centre study using two drug-dose escalation indexes. Eye
2010;24:600–607.
13.
Truong D, Gollomp S, Jankovic J, et al; Xeomin US
Blepharospasm Study Group. Sustained efficacy and safety
of repeated incobotulinumtoxinA (Xeomin) injections in
blepharospasm. J Neural Transm 2013;120:1345–1353.
14.
Kollewe K, Mohammadi B, Köhler S, et al. Blepharo-
spasm: long-term treatment with either Botox, Xeomin
or Dysport. J Neural Transm 2015;122:427–431.
15.
Hallett M, Albanese A, Dressler D, et al. Evidence-based
review and assessment of botulinum neurotoxin for the
treatment of movement disorders. Toxicon 2013;67:
94–114.
16.
Defazio G, Jankovic J, Giel JL, Papapetropoulos S.
Descriptive epidemiology of cervical dystonia. Tremor
Other Hyperkinet Mov 2013;3.
17.
Comella CL, Jankovic J, Truong DD, Hanschmann A,
Grafe S; U.S. XEOMIN Cervical Dystonia Study Group.
Efficacy and safety of incobotulinumtoxinA (NT 201,
XEOMIN, botulinum neurotoxin type A, without acces-
sory proteins) in patients with cervical dystonia. J Neurol
Sci 2011;308:103–109.
18.
Boyce MJ, Canning CG, Mahant N, Morris J, Latimer J,
Fung VS. The Toronto Western Spasmodic Torticollis
Rating Scale: reliability in neurologists and physiothera-
pists. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2012;18:635–637.
19.
Evidente VG, Fernandez HH, LeDoux MS, et al. A ran-
domized, double-blind study of repeated incobotulinum-
toxinA (Xeomin) in cervical dystonia. J Neural Transm
2013;120:1699–1707.
20.
Charles D, Brashear A, Hauser RA, Li HI, Boo LM,
Brin MF. Efficacy, tolerability, and immunogenicity of
onabotulinumtoxinA in a randomized, double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled trial for cervical dystonia. Clin Neuro-
pharmacol 2012;35:208–214.
21.
Comella CL, Jankovic J, Shannon KM, et al. Comparison
of botulinum toxin serotypes A and B for the treatment of
cervical dystonia. Neurology 2005;65:1423–1429.
22.
Pappert EJ, Germanson T; Myobloc/Neurobloc European
Dystonia Study Group. Botulinum toxin type B vs. type A
in toxin-naïve patients with cervical dystonia: randomized,
double-blind, noninferiority trial. Mov Disord 2008;23:
510–517.
23.
Odergren T, Hjaltason H, Kaakkola S, et al. A double
blind, randomised, parallel group study to investigate the
dose equivalence of Dysport and Botox in the treatment of
cervical dystonia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1998;64:
6–12.
24.
Yun JY, Kim JW, Kim HT, et al. Dysport and Botox at a
ratio of 2.5:1 units in cervical dystonia: a double-blind,
randomized study. Mov Disord 2015;30:206–213.
25.
Rystedt
A,
Zetterberg
L,
Burman
J,
Nyholm
D,
Johansson A. A comparison of Botox 100 U/mL and Dys-
port 100 U/mL using dose conversion ratio 1: 3 and 1: 1.7
in the treatment of cervical dystonia: a double-blind, ran-
domized, crossover trial. Clin Neuropharmacol 2015;38:
170–176.
26.
Truong D, Brodsky M, Lew M, et al. Long-term efficacy
and safety of botulinum toxin type A (Dysport) in cervical
dystonia. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2010;16:316–323.
27.
Brin MF, Comella CL, Jankovic J, Lai F, Naumann M;
CD-017 BoNTA Study Group. Long-term treatment with
botulinum toxin type A in cervical dystonia has low
immunogenicity by mouse protection assay. Mov Disord
2008;23:1353–1360.
28.
Jankovic J, Adler CH, Charles D, et al. Primary results
from the cervical dystonia patient registry for observation
of onabotulinumtoxinA efficacy (CD PROBE). J Neurol
Sci 2015;349:84–93.
29.
Delgado MR, Hirtz D, Aisen M, et al; for the Quality
Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of
Neurology and the Practice Committee of the Child
Neurology Society. Practice parameter: pharmacologic
treatment of spasticity in children and adolescents with
cerebral palsy (an evidence-based review): report of the
Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Acad-
emy of Neurology and the Practice Committee of the
Child Neurology Society. Neurology 2010;74:336–343.
30.
McCrory P, Turner-Stokes L, Baguley IJ, et al. Botulinum
toxin A for treatment of upper limb spasticity following
stroke: a multi-centre randomized placebo-controlled
study of the effects on quality of life and other person-
centred outcomes. J Rehabil Med 2009;41:536–544.
31.
Shaw LC, Price CI, van Wijck FM, et al; BoTULS Inves-
tigators. Botulinum toxin for the upper limb after stroke
(BoTULS) trial: effect on impairment, activity limitation,
and pain. Stroke 2011;42:1371–1379.
32.
Rosales RL, Kong KH, Goh KJ, et al. Botulinum toxin
injection for hypertonicity of the upper extremity within
12 weeks after stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Neu-
rorehabil Neural Repair 2012;26:812–821.
33.
Gracies JM, Brashear A, Jech R, et al; for the International
AbobotulinumtoxinA Adult Upper Limb Spasticity Study
Group. Safety and efficacy of abobotulinumtoxinA for
hemiparesis in adults with upper limb spasticity after
stroke or traumatic brain injury: a double-blind rando-
mised controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 2015;14:992–1001.
34.
Lam K, Lau KK, So KK, et al. Can botulinum toxin
decrease carer burden in long term care residents with
upper limb spasticity? A randomized controlled study.
J Am Med Dir Assoc 2012;13:477–484.
35.
Simpson DM, Gracies JM, Yablon SA, Barbano R,
Brashear A; BoNT/TZD Study Team. Botulinum neuro-
toxin versus tizanidine in upper limb spasticity: a placebo-
controlled study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2009;80:
380–385.
36.
Kaji R, Osako Y, Suyama K, Maeda T, Uechi Y,
Iwasaki M; GSK1358820 Spasticity Study Group. Botu-
linum toxin type A in post-stroke upper limb spasticity.
Curr Med Res Opin 2010;26:1983–1992.
Neurology 86
May 10, 2016
1825
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 37.
Marciniak CM, Harvey RL, Gagnon CM, et al. Does
botulinum toxin type A decrease pain and lessen disability
in hemiplegic survivors of stroke with shoulder pain and
spasticity? A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 2012;91:1007–1019.
38.
Jahangir AW, Tan HJ, Norlinah MI, et al. Intramuscular injec-
tion of botulinum toxin for the treatment of wrist and finger
spasticity after stroke. Med J Malaysia 2007;62:319–322.
39.
Ward AB, Wissel J, Borg J, et al; BEST Study Group.
Functional goal achievement in post-stroke spasticity pa-
tients: the BOTOX Economic Spasticity Trial (BEST).
J Rehabil Med 2014;46:504–513.
40.
Ka�
novský P, Slawek J, Denes Z, et al. Efficacy and
safety of botulinum neurotoxin NT 201 in poststroke
upper limb spasticity. Clin Neuropharmacol 2009;32:
259–265.
1826
Neurology 86
May 10, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 DOI 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002560
2016;86;1818-1826 Published Online before print April 18, 2016
Neurology 
David M. Simpson, Mark Hallett, Eric J. Ashman, et al. 
Guideline Development Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology
blepharospasm, cervical dystonia, adult spasticity, and headache: Report of the 
Practice guideline update summary: Botulinum neurotoxin for the treatment of
This information is current as of April 18, 2016
rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.
1951, it is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Neurology. All 
® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since
Neurology 
 Services
Updated Information &
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/86/19/1818.full
including high resolution figures, can be found at:
Supplementary Material
 
560.DC1
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2016/04/18/WNL.0000000000002
Supplementary material can be found at: 
References
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/86/19/1818.full#ref-list-1
This article cites 38 articles, 9 of which you can access for free at: 
Citations
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/86/19/1818.full##otherarticles
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles: 
Subspecialty Collections
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/dystonia
Dystonia
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/botulinum_toxin
Botulinum toxin
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/blepharospasm
Blepharospasm
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/all_headache
All Headache
following collection(s): 
This article, along with others on similar topics, appears in the
  
Permissions & Licensing
 
http://www.neurology.org/about/about_the_journal#permissions
its entirety can be found online at:
Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures,tables) or in
  
Reprints
 
http://n.neurology.org/subscribers/advertise
Information about ordering reprints can be found online:
rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.
1951, it is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Neurology. All 
® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since
Neurology 
