 Palliative Medicine
2017, Vol. 31(5) 437 
–447
© The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0269216316663499
journals.sagepub.com/home/pmj
What is already known about the topic?
•
•
Compassionate care is increasingly considered by patients, family members, and policymakers as a core dimension of 
quality care, particularly in palliative care.
•
•
Sympathy, empathy, and compassion are often used interchangeably within the healthcare literature despite some key 
notable differences.
Sympathy, empathy, and compassion:  
A grounded theory study of palliative  
care patients’ understandings,  
experiences, and preferences
Shane Sinclair1,2, Kate Beamer1, Thomas F Hack3,4, Susan McClement3,4, 
Shelley Raffin Bouchal1, Harvey M Chochinov3,5 and Neil A. Hagen2,6
Abstract
Background: Compassion is considered an essential element in quality patient care. One of the conceptual challenges in healthcare 
literature is that compassion is often confused with sympathy and empathy. Studies comparing and contrasting patients’ perspectives 
of sympathy, empathy, and compassion are largely absent.
Aim: The aim of this study was to investigate advanced cancer patients’ understandings, experiences, and preferences of “sympathy,” 
“empathy,” and “compassion” in order to develop conceptual clarity for future research and to inform clinical practice.
Design: Data were collected via semi-structured interviews and then independently analyzed by the research team using the three 
stages and principles of Straussian grounded theory.
Setting/participants: Data were collected from 53 advanced cancer inpatients in a large urban hospital.
Results: Constructs of sympathy, empathy, and compassion contain distinct themes and sub-themes. Sympathy was described as 
an unwanted, pity-based response to a distressing situation, characterized by a lack of understanding and self-preservation of the 
observer. Empathy was experienced as an affective response that acknowledges and attempts to understand individual’s suffering 
through emotional resonance. Compassion enhanced the key facets of empathy while adding distinct features of being motivated by 
love, the altruistic role of the responder, action, and small, supererogatory acts of kindness. Patients reported that unlike sympathy, 
empathy and compassion were beneficial, with compassion being the most preferred and impactful.
Conclusion: Although sympathy, empathy, and compassion are used interchangeably and frequently conflated in healthcare literature, 
patients distinguish and experience them uniquely. Understanding patients’ perspectives is important and can guide practice, policy 
reform, and future research.
Keywords
Sympathy, empathy, compassion, advanced cancer, palliative care, grounded theory
1Faculty of Nursing, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
2 
Department of Oncology, Cumming School of Medicine, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
3 
Manitoba Palliative Care Research Unit, CancerCare Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, MB, Canada
4 
College of Nursing, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
663499 PMJ0010.1177/0269216316663499Palliative MedicineSinclair et al.
research-article2016
Original Article
5 
Department of Psychiatry, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, 
Canada
6 
Departments of Clinical Neurosciences and Medicine, Cumming 
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
Corresponding author:
Shane Sinclair, Faculty of Nursing, University of Calgary, 2500 
University Drive NW, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada. 
Email: sinclair@ucalgary.ca
 438 
Palliative Medicine 31(5)
What this paper adds?
•
•
While there have been studies investigating the constructs of sympathy, empathy, and compassion independently, to date 
no known studies have analyzed the three constructs using direct patient accounts.
•
•
The study identifies the key elements of each construct from the perspective of patients, including unique definitions.
•
•
While sympathy was considered largely unhelpful, empathy and compassion were received positively by patients, with 
most patients preferring compassion’s orientation toward action- and virtue-based motivators.
Implications for practice, theory, or policy
•
•
Understanding patients’ perspectives on the similarities, differences, and preferences between sympathy, empathy, and 
compassion can guide patient-oriented research and optimize evidence-based, patient-centered care.
•
•
This study provides conceptual clarity for healthcare policy and system reform related to enhancing compassionate 
healthcare systems from the perspective of the individuals these systems serve.
Background
Healthcare today is paying a great deal of attention to 
patient-reported outcomes and person-centered care 
delivery.1,2 Clinicians, policymakers, patients, and their 
families are calling for healthcare providers to move 
beyond the delivery of services and to more explicitly 
consider the preferences, needs, and values of the persons 
receiving these services.3–6 Within this discussion, the 
constructs “empathy,” “sympathy,” and “compassion” are 
important principles within these models of care. But 
what exactly do these three constructs mean within the 
context of healthcare delivery? How should healthcare 
providers and researchers define, differentiate, and inte-
grate them into practice? And, more importantly, how do 
patients understand and experience these constructs 
within the delivery of their healthcare? The aim of this 
study was to investigate advanced cancer patients’ per-
spectives, understandings, experiences, and preferences 
of “sympathy,” “empathy,” and “compassion” in order to 
develop conceptual clarity for future research and to 
inform clinical practice. Understanding the similarities 
and differences between these constructs can provide con-
ceptual clarity in a field of research that often utilizes 
these terms interchangeably, thereby guiding healthcare 
policy and practice efforts to provide evidence-based, 
patient-centered care.
Sympathy, empathy, and compassion are closely related 
terms. They are often used interchangeably within health-
care policy, delivery, and research in describing some of 
the human qualities that patients desire in their healthcare 
providers.7–10 But what specifically do these terms mean, 
how are they related to one another, and what are patients’ 
perceptions and preferences toward each of them? A scop-
ing review of the literature11 revealed that, while consider-
able scholarly activity has been conducted to distinguish 
between these constructs,12–16 there is a lack of empirical 
research informing this topic. While addressing this gap is 
important throughout all of healthcare, it is perhaps most 
important within palliative care, where relief of suffering 
and providing compassion in patients with advanced ill-
ness are explicit goals of care.17,18
Sympathy has been defined in the healthcare litera-
ture as an emotional reaction of pity toward the misfor-
tune of another, especially those who are perceived as 
suffering unfairly.16,19 In contrast, empathy has been 
defined as an ability to understand and accurately 
acknowledge the feelings of another, leading to an 
attuned response from the observer.16,20,21 In general, 
researchers identify two types of empathy: cognitive 
empathy (detached acknowledgment and understanding 
of a distressing situation based on a sense of duty) and 
affective empathy, which while containing each of the 
elements of cognitive empathy, extends to an acknowl-
edgment and understanding of a person’s situation by 
“feeling with” the person.16,22 Neurological studies have 
reported that witnessing a person in suffering activates 
neural pain pathways in the brain of the empathizer.22 
Studies investigating empathy from the perspective of 
healthcare providers have identified a troubling trend—
the erosion of empathy over the course of healthcare 
education and clinical practice.23–25
Etymologically, “compassion” means to “suffer with”26 
and has been defined as “a deep awareness of the suffer-
ing of another coupled with the wish to relieve it.”27 Our 
previously published grounded theory study of patient 
perspectives of compassion, defined compassion as “a 
virtuous response that seeks to address the suffering and 
needs of a person through relational understanding and 
action.”28 Compassion seems to differ from sympathy and 
empathy in its proactive approach, the selfless role of the 
responder, and its virtuous motivators aimed at ameliorat-
ing suffering. Gilbert and Choden29 discuss the relation-
ship between these three constructs from a Buddhist 
perspective, conceptualizing sympathy as an emotional 
reaction, without conscious thought and reflection. 
Empathy is understood as a more complex interpersonal 
construct that involves awareness and intuition, while 
 Sinclair et al. 
439
compassion is defined as “a way to develop the kindness, 
support, and encouragement to promote the courage we 
need—to take the actions we need—in order to promote 
the flourishing and well-being of ourselves and others” 
(p. 98). According to Way and Tracy,30 compassion is 
marked by the following three elements: recognizing suf-
fering, relating to people in their suffering, and reacting to 
suffering. While there have been studies conducted on the 
nature of compassion from the perspective of healthcare 
providers, we could locate only two studies that included 
a patient cohort.31,32
What is certain in the healthcare literature and policy is 
that patients’ desire increased compassion within health-
care.33–38 Furthermore, research has indicated that com-
passion and empathetic care are ways of improving 
patient-reported outcomes and patient satisfaction.16 While 
there have been individual studies on sympathy, empathy, 
and compassion in a clinical setting, to date no studies 
have analyzed the three constructs using direct patient 
reports. To address that gap in the literature, we conducted 
a secondary analysis of data subset from a larger grounded 
theory study on the construct of compassion,28 which 
focused on palliative cancer patients’ understandings, 
experiences, and preferences of the constructs of sympa-
thy, empathy, and compassion.
Methods
Study population
Prior to developing the larger study protocol, the research 
team conducted a review of the literature which revealed 
a significant research gap related to the relationship 
between sympathy, empathy, and compassion. As a result 
of this review, the research team decided, at a protocol 
development meeting, to add additional questions to the 
interview guide in order to collect data and conduct a sec-
ondary analysis on this related field of inquiry (Box 1). 
The research protocol was approved by the University of 
Calgary Conjoint Health Research Ethics Board (E-24268). 
All participants provided signed informed consent to par-
ticipate in the qualitative interviews, after receiving infor-
mation on the study and after all participant questions 
were answered. Participants were eligible for the study if 
they were at least 18 years of age, able to read and speak 
English, had a terminal cancer diagnosis and a life expec-
tancy of less than 6 months, did not demonstrate evidence 
of cognitive impairment, and were able to provide written 
informed consent. Patients were excluded from the study 
if they were cognitively impaired or too ill to participate 
in the study as determined by their palliative care team. 
Patients meeting the inclusion criteria were first informed 
of the study by a member of the palliative care team and if 
interested, were then contacted by a member of the 
research team.
Participant recruitment occurred from May through 
December, 2013. Members of the palliative care team ini-
tially approached patients on an individual basis to gauge 
interest; a total of 151 patients were referred to the study 
nurse. Of those expressing initial interest, 25 were too ill to 
participate and were ineligible to participate. Among the 
126 participants, 48 were not interested in participating, 5 
were discharged, and 18 died prior to the scheduled inter-
view. Two participants were not included in the results, as 
one was transferred to hospice before the interview could 
be completed, and the other was excluded due to audio 
recorder difficulties. A final sample of 53 patients was 
needed to obtain data saturation.
Data collection
Data were collected through semi-structured, individual 
interviews (Box 1) and a demographic questionnaire 
(Table 1). In order to mitigate interview bias and the 
Hawthorne effect, all interviews were conducted by an 
experienced research nurse and held in a private space 
within the hospital. The research nurse was employed by 
the Clinical Trials Research Unit of the host hospital and 
was neither a member of patients’ clinical care team nor 
Box 1. Guiding interview questions.
1.  
What are the things that you have found to be 
important to your well-being during your illness? 
Particularly as it relates to the care you have received?
2.  
In terms of your own illness experience, what does 
compassion mean to you?
3.  
Can you give me an example of when you experienced 
care that was compassionate?
4.  
How do you know when a healthcare professional is 
being compassionate?
5.  
Since you have had cancer, has compassionate care 
always been helpful? Have been there times when 
health providers’ efforts to be compassionate missed 
the mark?
6.  
What advice would you give healthcare providers 
on being compassionate? (Do you think we can train 
people to be compassionate? If so, how)?
7.  
We have talked about compassion, another word that 
might be related to compassion is sympathy. In your 
experience are compassion and sympathy related? (Tell 
me how they are the same or different)
8.  
We have talked about compassion and sympathy, 
another word that might be related to compassion 
is empathy. In your experience are compassion and 
empathy related? (Tell me how they are the same or 
different)
9.  
How does what you have told me about compassion 
relate to your experience of spirituality?
10.  
Is there anything that that we have not talked about 
today that we have missed or you were hoping to talk 
about?
Source: Sinclair et al.28
 440 
Palliative Medicine 31(5)
participated in the data analysis. Interviews, averaging 1 h 
in length, were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim.
Data analysis
Interview data related to patients’ understandings of the 
constructs and relationship between sympathy, empathy, 
and compassion were analyzed in accordance with the three 
stages and principles of Straussian grounded theory (open, 
axial, and selective coding), using the constant comparative 
method,39,40 alongside data within a larger study aimed at 
conceptualizing, codifying, and constructing a patient-
informed empirical model of compassion (Figure 1), 
described in detail elsewhere.28 Our original rationale for 
conducting a secondary analysis on the relationship 
between these three constructs was further validated in the 
analysis process, as our large qualitative sample (n = 53) 
generated considerable substantive data warranting a sepa-
rate report which was beyond the scope of the compassion 
model.28 The three stages of Straussian grounded theory 
analysis generated codes, themes, and categories related to 
the constructs of interest which were further analyzed by 
members of the research team (S.S., T.H., S.M., S.R., and 
K.B.). The purpose of this secondary analysis was to gain 
conceptual clarity, codify the key elements of each con-
struct, determine their relationship to one another, and iden-
tify the gaps leading which are outlined (Table 3) and 
illustrated (Figure 2). The reported results of this study 
were in accordance with and met each of the consolidated 
criteria for reporting qualitative studies (consolidated crite-
ria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ)).
Results
After the data had been coded and analyzed, the three con-
structs of sympathy, empathy and compassion generated 
several themes (Table 2). While patients distinguished and 
preferred compassion to empathy, they also identified 
overlapping features. In contrast, patients identified sym-
pathy as a largely distinct and unhelpful construct based on 
pity and a lack of understanding (Table 3).
Sympathy
Most participants described sympathy as an unwanted and 
misguided pity-based response that was easily given and 
seemed to focus more on alleviating the observer’s distress 
toward patient suffering, rather than the distress of the 
patient. After comparing and contrasting individual patient 
responses, the following definition of sympathy emerged: 
a pity-based response to a distressing situation that is 
characterized by a lack of relational understanding and 
the self-preservation of the observer.
An unwanted pity-based response. Participants repeatedly 
described sympathy as a pity-based response that was 
unwelcomed and in some incidences despised by patients. 
Patients acknowledged that expressions of sympathy could 
be well-intended on the part of acquaintances and health-
care providers. Ultimately, however, they were experi-
enced as being misguided and, ironically, had a largely 
detrimental effect on patient well-being. Specifically, 
patients felt that sympathy left them feeling demoralized, 
depressed, and feeling sorry for themselves:
Table 1. Demographic information (numbers expressed as 
percentages, unless otherwise stated).
Mean age (years)
61.44
 Men
35.19
 Women
64.81
Mean (range) time between interview and 
death (days)a
79.56 (8–261)
Marital status
 Never married
3.70
 Married/common law/cohabiting
70.37
 Divorced/separated
16.67
 Widowed
7.41
 Other
1.85
Person living withb
 Spouse/partner
70.37
 Parent(s)
3.70
 Sibling(s)
1.85
 Child(ren)
31.48
 Other relative(s)
5.56
 Friend(s)
1.85
 Other
5.56
 Alone
18.52
Highest education level attained
 No formal education
0.00
 Elementary—completed
1.85
 Some high school
16.67
 High school—completed
9.26
 Some university/college/technical school
20.37
 University/college/technical school—
completed
38.89
 Post-graduate university—completed
12.96
Employment statusb
 Retired
59.26
 On sick leave
5.56
 On disability
31.48
 Working full-time
1.85
 Working part-time
5.56
Household net income
 ⩽CAD$60,000/year
29.62
 >CAD$60,000/year
70.38
Religious and spiritual status
 Spiritual and religious
53.70
 Spiritual but not religious
37.04
 Religious but not spiritual
3.70
 None
5.56
aBased on 45 patients who had died at the time of analysis.
b 
The total for these categories exceeds 100% because patients were 
permitted to provide more than one response.
 Sinclair et al. 
441
Figure 1. The compassion model.
Reprinted from Sinclair et al.28
Figure 2. Sympathy, empathy, and compassion.
 442 
Palliative Medicine 31(5)
I do not want sympathy in any way, shape or form … I don’t 
have any room to rent out to that space and I’ve said it many, 
many times to those who come and visit me and those who 
want to come and visit me. Don’t come and look like this is 
going to be the last time you’re going to see me because it’s 
not. To feel sorry for me … that is wasted energy. (Patient 5)
I prefer, you know, compassion is okay, but sympathy, I’m not 
really fond of because it might put me into a feeling sorry for 
myself mode. … too much sympathy, you don’t want that 
because that doesn’t boost you so I think compassion is, and 
empathy and compassion are the important things, but I find 
it’s got me down if anybody is too sympathetic, you know, it 
makes you cry, (Patient 4)
A shallow and superficial emotion based on self-preserva-
tion. In comparing sympathy, empathy, and compassion, 
Table 3. The relationship between sympathy, empathy, and compassion.
Sympathy
Empathy
Compassion
Definition
A pity-based response to a 
distressing situation that is 
characterized by a lack of 
relational understanding and the 
self-preservation of the observer
An affective response that 
acknowledges and attempts 
to understand an individual’s 
suffering through emotional 
resonance
A virtuous response that seeks to 
address the suffering and needs 
of a person through relational 
understanding and action
Defining 
characteristics
Observing
Reacting
Misguided
Lack of understanding
Unhelpful
Ego based
Self-preservation
Acknowledgment of suffering
Understanding the person
Affective response
Supererogatory
Non-conditional
Virtuous
Altruistic
Instrumental
Action-oriented response
Response to suffering
Acknowledgment
Acknowledgment, understanding, 
and emotional resonance
Acknowledgment, understanding, 
and emotional resonance linked 
with action aimed at understanding 
the person and the amelioration of 
suffering
Type of response
A visceral reaction to a 
distressing situation
Objective and affective response 
to a distressing situation
A proactive and targeted response 
to a distressing situation
Emotional state of 
observer
Emotional dissonance
Emotional resonance and 
emotional contagion (“feeling 
with”)
Emotional engagement and 
resilience
Motivators of 
response
Pity/ego/obligation
Circumstantial/affective state of 
observer/duty/relatedness to 
patient/deservedness of patient
Virtues/dispositional
Relationship of 
observer to suffering
External
Proximal/isomorphic
Instrumental/relational/
transmorphic
Intended outcomes
Self-preservation of observer
Objective and affective 
understanding of sufferer
Amelioration of multifactorial 
suffering
Patient-reported 
outcomes
Demoralized
Patronized
Overwhelmed
Compounded suffering
Heard
Understood
Validated
Relief of suffering
Enhanced sense of well-being
Enhanced quality of caregiving
Examples
“I’m so sorry”
“This must be awful”
“I can’t imagine what it must be 
like”
“Help me to understand your 
situation”
“I get the sense that you are 
feeling …”
“I feel your sadness”
“I know you are suffering, but 
there are things I can do to help it 
be better?”
“What can I do to improve your 
situation?”
Table 2. Major categories and themes.
Categories
Themes
Sympathy
An unwanted pity-based response
 
A shallow and superficial emotion based 
on self-preservation
 
An unhelpful and misguided reaction to 
suffering
Empathy
Engaging suffering
 
Connecting to and understanding the 
person
 
Emotional resonance: putting yourself in 
the patient’s shoes
Compassion
Motivated by love
 
The altruistic role of the responder
 
Action oriented
 
Small supererogatory acts of kindness
 Sinclair et al. 
443
participants agreed that sympathy was the easiest of the 
three responses for observers to give away. Participants 
felt this was due largely to sympathy being a shallow and 
superficial emotion that was typically exhibited by indi-
viduals who wished to remain distant from the patient’s 
situation. While sympathy often involved thoughtful 
words or gestures, it was described by patients as disin-
genuous, depersonalized, and emotionally distant and 
detached from the person in suffering. Many participants 
expressed that the detached nature of sympathy was a 
visceral reaction that was primarily concerned about the 
self-preservation of the observer, rather than an attempt 
to understand the person in need or a desire to alleviate 
suffering:
Sympathy is very easy, it’s an emotion, probably one of the 
easiest emotions to fake. I hate sympathy! (Patient 40)
If you’re thinking of looking for sympathy, you’ll find it 
between shit and syphilis in the dictionary. (Patient 34)
I hate sympathy, it feels shallow, it feels like, “Oh I’m so sorry 
you’re going through this,” and it doesn’t feel genuine to me. 
(Patient 7)
An unhelpful and misguided reaction to suffering. Patients’ 
dislike of sympathy was not merely due to its pity-based 
motivators and associated superficial responses but its lack 
of utility in relieving patient suffering. Although partici-
pants felt that sympathy was rooted in emotional distanc-
ing, it was not necessarily a passive state as it could equally 
invoke a demonstrative reaction on the part of the 
responder, leaving patients feeling overwhelmed by sym-
pathetic phone calls, a flood of get-well cards, and other 
emotionally laden, energetic expressions of concern by 
others. Unlike empathy, and especially compassion, sym-
pathy was short-lived and dissipated shortly after its initial 
expression. Participants experienced sympathy as not 
understanding their own individualized needs, but rather 
as a reaction intended to serve the needs of the observer. 
Therefore, it ultimately was not meaningful and was inef-
fective in meeting patient needs:
Sympathy is, it’s like flattery, it sounds pretty but it goes 
nowhere and it does nothing. (Patient 51)
Sympathy, I think is you’re feeling sorry for that person. I 
don’t want somebody to feel sorry for me, I want you to help 
me. (Patient 48)
When I was first diagnosed. I got all kinds of sympathy cards, 
you know well wishes from people, and you know people 
phoning that you haven’t heard from for years and things like 
that. That’s sympathy … because you know they phone you 
know, wish you well and I haven’t heard from them since. 
(Patient 13)
Empathy
Patients had a much more positive response to empathy than 
to sympathy. They described empathy as a more emotion-
ally engaged process, whereby individuals attempted to 
attune to the emotions of the patient through acknowledg-
ment of suffering. Patients experienced this as a warm, 
gentle attempt to understand their emotional state. Whereas 
patients described sympathy as a self-motivated, emotional 
reaction to someone else’s suffering based on a lack of 
understanding of the person’s needs, empathy was an affec-
tive response that acknowledges and attempts to understand 
an individual’s suffering through emotional resonance.
Engaging suffering. An essential and distinguishing feature of 
empathy was the proximity of the responder in relation to 
the suffering of the patient. Unlike sympathy, which 
involved individuals emotionally distancing themselves 
from suffering by avoidance or by an overly demonstrative 
and misguided reaction, empathy required the individual to 
approach the patient’s suffering, in a vulnerable manner:
Empathy enters into another’s suffering … it’s just the ability 
to be there. (Patient 8)
Connecting to and understanding the person. Patients identi-
fied empathetic individuals as not only engaging suffering 
but also personally connecting to patients, in ways that sym-
pathetic individuals were incapable or unwilling to do. What 
was deficient in sympathy but intrinsic to empathy was the 
notion of understanding. According to patients, a personal 
connection allowed the empathizer to develop a deeper 
understanding of the person and their individualized suffer-
ing, thereby allowing the empathizer to address patient 
issues in a more effective and personalized manner:
That’s because empathy is, for me, empathy is that personal 
connection … whereas sympathy doesn’t have to be 
personalized, it can be, it can just be, you know it’s just all 
those comments, my thoughts are with you, blah, blah, blah, 
all that kind of stuff, but empathy is where you’re actually 
connecting with the person. (Patient 46)
… I think empathy is the ability to be able to communicate on 
a visual, physical whatever level with the other individual and 
sort of make a connection with them … but there’s also sort of 
a deeper understanding of the situation and this sort of thing. 
(Patient 49)
Emotional resonance: putting yourself in the patient’s 
shoes. The metaphor of individuals “putting themselves in 
the patient’s shoes” was frequently used by patients in 
describing empathy. This metaphor speaks to healthcare 
providers’ ability to emotionally relate to what their patient 
is feeling—to engage suffering by way of understanding 
and being able to relate on an affective level:
 444 
Palliative Medicine 31(5)
… empathy is, yeah, like stepping inside somebody else’s 
shoes and, you know, trying to see what it’s like without 
actually being there … being able to slip and slide in 
somebody else’s shoes and trying to understand from their 
standpoint what it means to be going through this. (Patient 5)
Empathy is where you put yourself in the person’s shoes, and 
you try to imagine yourself walking in those shoes, and how 
you personally would react. (Patient 19)
When you empathize with people you, you’ve crawled right 
into their moccasins. (Patient 44)
Compassion
Compassion was identified as the preferred care medium 
by patients, enhancing the key aspects of engaging suffer-
ing, understanding the person and emotional resonance 
contained within empathy, while adding defining qualities 
of being motivated by love, the altruistic role of the 
responder, action, and small but supererogatory acts of 
kindness. The definition of compassion that emerged from 
the data was a virtuous response that seeks to address the 
suffering and needs of a person through relational under-
standing and action.
Motivated by love. Patients recognized compassion as an 
affective response to suffering, motivated within the virtues 
of the individual responders. While patients identified virtues 
such as kindness, genuineness, and honesty as the sources of 
a compassionate response, love was the most frequently cited 
virtue distinguishing compassion from sympathy and empa-
thy. Patients described compassionate love as non-condi-
tional, independent of patient behavior, relatedness, and 
deservedness, and not being contingent on the responder’s 
own emotional state during the clinical encounter:
Compassion I think means to me, giving me love, giving me 
love, unconditional. (Patient 45)
I think you can tell those that are there for the paycheque, or 
those that are there because they love what they do and they 
love the patients. (Patient 26)
I think it’s all about love, not getting, you know, like not 
getting hung up on what the big picture is, it’s about the now 
and ensuring that that person has been given that chance to be 
in the now. (Patient 6)
The altruistic role of the responder. A related theme that 
emerged prominently from the interview data was the abil-
ity of compassionate responders to put aside their needs to 
meet the needs of the patient. Whereas sympathy involved a 
focus on the needs of the observer and empathy involved 
responders being attuned to the needs of the patient, com-
passion involved responders using themselves as an instru-
ment in the relief of suffering. Patients felt that the selfless 
role of compassionate individuals had an enduring impact as 
their care extended beyond the clinical interaction and their 
professional role to a long-term commitment to the patient:
… I think I’ve come across a lot of people who have been 
very, very compassionate in understanding where I’m coming 
from, in accepting who and what my decisions are without, 
sort of, throwing their own feelings and empathy into this 
situation, they’re thinking about me. (Patient 5)
It’s being tender, it’s being aware of someone’s needs before 
yourself. (Patient 11)
Action oriented. Compassion, in contrast to both sympathy 
and empathy, was described by participants as action ori-
ented, aimed at ameliorating suffering. While both compas-
sion and empathy acknowledge and attempt to understand 
the needs of a person in suffering, empathy was solely a 
responsive state, while compassion added a proactive ele-
ment that aimed to augment shared suffering with action—
feeling for and doing for. In contrast to empathy where 
emotional resonance is an end point, emotional resonance 
in relation to compassion was a catalyst to a deeper emo-
tional and physical response that aimed to improve the 
situation:
Compassion is actions … sympathy are thoughts and well 
wishes. (Patient 14)
I think empathy is more of a feeling thing where you’re aware 
of somebody’s suffering, and compassion is when you act on 
that knowledge. (Patient 23)
Sympathy are words and you know, “jeez I hope you feel 
better” and “it’s terrible you got this” and compassion is 
running over and getting a barf bag. (Patient 13)
Small supererogatory acts of kindness. Whereas sympathy 
was often expressed demonstratively, whether through 
grandiose gestures of care or over-expressions of emotion, 
compassion was often conveyed by subtle acts of kindness 
that often fell outside of routine care. Patients described 
these supererogatory acts in metaphorical language of 
“going above and beyond” or “going the extra mile.” It 
was in small acts of kindness, particularly acts that were 
not duty based, non-remunerated, and not part of the job 
description, where patients felt that the true intentions and 
nature of their healthcare provider was made plainly evi-
dent. The impact that patients ascribed to these small 
supererogatory acts was immense—it relieved their suffer-
ing, enhanced their sense of well-being, and positively 
influenced their perceptions of the quality of care they 
received from their healthcare providers:
Well because they put themselves out, they’re doing it uh that 
extra little bit that you don’t normally get. (Patient 36)
 Sinclair et al. 
445
Just going that extra mile. It’s just a feeling. It’s hard to 
explain … that extra smile, that extra you know, “hi how are 
you?” Hand on your shoulder, you know, we’re here for you. 
(Patient 50)
Putting your arm around the shoulder and just letting them 
know that, “I’m here,” be it big or little, it doesn’t matter … 
(Patient 5)
Discussion
Patients living with an incurable illness are uniquely posi-
tioned to provide insights into the constructs of compas-
sion, empathy, and sympathy (Table 3). They often have 
extensive experience with the healthcare system and in 
their most vulnerable moments, are in the hands of, and at 
the mercy of, a healthcare system and its ability to respond 
to their suffering.
Sympathy
In this study, patients distinguished between the constructs of 
“sympathy,” “empathy,” and “compassion” (Table 3 and 
Figure 2). While patients acknowledged considerable overlap 
between empathy and compassion, they were unequivocal 
in identifying sympathy as a distinct and unhelpful reaction to 
patients’ suffering. Sympathy was described as a superficial 
acknowledgment of suffering, invoking a pity-based response 
that failed to sufficiently acknowledge the person who was 
suffering. Hence, sympathy appears to be a coping strategy 
that individuals invoke when exposed to situational suffering 
that they feel unable or inadequate to address.
Empathy
In contrast, empathy and compassion were welcomed and 
valued by patients. Patients felt that empathy and compas-
sion share attributes of acknowledging, understanding, and 
resonating emotionally with a person who is suffering. 
Compassion also added distinct features: action, supere-
rogatory acts, virtuous motivators, and unconditional love, 
with compassionate responders functioning in an instru-
mental fashion in the amelioration of suffering (Table 3 
and Figure 2). These results are consistent with studies 
focused on healthcare providers’ conceptualizations of 
compassion as an intensification of both cognitive and 
affective empathy coupled with the addition of action30,41 
aimed at the alleviation of suffering.16,30,41
Compassion
Neuroplasticity research is beginning to offer important 
insights on the human experiences of empathy and com-
passion. One study found differences in brain activation 
 
in participants who engaged in contemplative exercises 
focused on enhancing empathy (resonating with another 
person’s suffering) compared to participants who meditated 
on compassionate thoughts (extending caring feelings to 
others).42 Whereas conjuring empathic thoughts produced 
a negative effect in participants activating regions of the 
brain associated with aversion, compassionate feelings 
produced a positive effect, activating regions of the 
 
brain associated with reward, love, and affiliation. Taken 
together, these findings suggest that compassion may not 
only be better for patients but also for their healthcare pro-
viders, requiring a reconceptualization of the notion of 
compassion fatigue as empathetic distress.42,43
Motivators and antecedents
From the perspective of patients, compassion, sympathy, and 
empathy had distinct motivators (Table 3). Patients perceived 
sympathy as being motivated by pity, ego, and obligation, 
leading to an avoidant or over-reactive response. Empathy 
was motivated by the affective state of the healthcare pro-
vider toward the patient and a sense of duty. Compassion dif-
fered from empathy, finding its motivation in the inherent 
virtues of individuals, particularly unconditional love, gener-
ating a virtuous response and culminating in action aimed at 
the amelioration of suffering.28 The virtue-based motivators 
of compassion mean that relative to empathy, compassion is 
less dependent on a sense of duty, less dependent on the emo-
tional state of the observer, and, as has been confirmed by 
other studies, is less influenced by the perceived relatedness 
and deservedness of the patient.28,44–46 In contrast, although 
patients felt that compassion engendered relationship, they 
did not feel it was contingent on relationship, but rather the 
unconditional acceptance of the patient, even when the 
patient was at their worse.28,30,47
Implications and limitations
Results of this study shed light on different responses health-
care providers may manifest in response to suffering (Table 
3 and Figure 2). While participants believed that sympathy 
positioned individuals as “outsiders” in the clinical encoun-
ter, compassion and empathy placed the responders in a 
more vulnerable position alongside (empathy) and within 
suffering (compassion). Patient accounts of this important 
difference often used metaphorical language related to 
responders putting themselves in the patient’s shoes—to 
situate themselves in close proximity to suffering. In addi-
tion to this notion of orienting to the patients’ perspective, a 
number of patients expanded this metaphor in reference to 
compassion, which they felt also involved “walking a mile 
in a person’s shoes,” implying a long-standing commitment 
to the patient over time, regardless of the actual or antici-
pated duration of the clinical relationship. A final difference 
related to the role of compassionate carers was the altruistic 
and instrumental functions they played in ameliorating suf-
fering. These findings align with other studies that reported 
that compassionate individuals used self-effacement to meet 
the needs of another person,48,49 often through small, yet 
 446 
Palliative Medicine 31(5)
impactful supererogatory acts.8,31,50 These results highlight 
the importance of research that examines healthcare pro-
viders’ perspectives and experiences, including how their 
responses to suffering might impact their personal and pro-
fessional lives.
Our study comparing and contrasting patients’ experi-
ences of sympathy, empathy, and compassion addresses an 
important gap in the literature. One of the most compelling 
findings of this study is how patients distinguish and prefer 
compassion. Although patients appreciated empathy, they 
also noted a number of limitations, namely, that it is not 
linked to action, is conditional, and does not involve super-
erogatory acts. These results are consistent with neuroplas-
ticity research that reported that empathy activates neural 
networks that are isomorphic (mirroring) to the emotional 
state of the sufferer.22 As a result, the authors postulate that 
empathy has a potential dark side, whereby it can be used to 
find a weakness to make a person suffer or can cause empa-
thetic distress and burnout on the part of the caregiver.42,51 
While participants in our study did not identify an 
adverse effect of empathy, they did note some provocative 
differences related to the role of emotional resonance in 
each of these constructs. In contrast to empathy where emo-
tional resonance seemed to function as an end point, in rela-
tion to compassion, emotional resonance was coupled with 
an intention to transform suffering, requiring the responder 
to move from “feeling with” (empathy) to “feeling for” the 
patient—a distinguishing feature of compassion identified 
by others. Finally, in terms of study limitations, as this was 
a qualitative study, generalizability is limited, and as 72% 
of our sample had at least some university education, this 
may have resulted in an overly intellectualized understand-
ing of these three constructs.52
Conclusion
This study reports on palliative cancer patients’ experiences 
of sympathy, empathy, and compassion, including differ-
ences and their preferences between them. While these three 
constructs tend to be used interchangeably within the health-
care literature, there are marked differences according to the 
individuals who are the main recipients of these care con-
structs—patients. In contrast to sympathy, patients reported 
both empathy and compassion as having a positive effect on 
their care experiences, allowing them to feel heard, under-
stood, and validated. In addition to these patient outcomes, 
compassion was distinguished by its orientation toward 
action, its foundation in unconditional love, its expression 
through small supererogatory acts, and the altruistic role that 
compassionate carers played in this process. Deconstructing 
these terms can inform future research comparing these three 
constructs on patient quality of life, family member grief, 
and healthcare provider job satisfaction. Additionally, it pro-
vides a conceptual framework for the development of tar-
geted educational interventions that acknowledge individual 
variance in expressions (trainees) and receptivity (patients) 
of compassion.53 Ultimately, this research can inform 
 
evidence-based clinical practice to enhance this vital, but 
previously ill-defined dimension of healthcare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge Barb Gawley, research 
nurse, for her dedication and commitment to this study. They 
would also like to acknowledge and thank the research partici-
pants who were compelled to join this research study, despite 
time being precious.
Declaration of a conflict of interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect 
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support 
for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: 
This work was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health 
Research Open Operating Grant (grant number 125931).
References
 1. Epstein RM, Fiscella K, Lesser CS, et al. Why the nation 
needs a policy push on patient-centered health care. Health 
Aff 2010; 29: 1489–1495.
 2. Institute of Medicine Committee on Quality of Health Care 
in A. Crossing the quality chasm: a new health system for 
the 21st century. Washington, DC: National Academies 
Press, 2001.
 3. Attree M. Patients’ and relatives’ experiences and perspec-
tives of “Good” and “Not So Good” quality care. J Adv Nurs 
2001; 33: 456–466.
 4. American Medical Association. Code of medical ethics: princi-
ple 1. Chicago, IL: American Medical Association, 2001.
 5. Batt-Rawden SA, Chisolm MS, Anton B, et al. Teaching 
empathy to medical students: an updated, systematic review. 
Acad Med 2013; 88: 1171–1177.
 6. Paterson R. Can we mandate compassion? Hastings Cent 
Rep 2011; 41: 20–23.
 7. Francis R. Report of the Mid Staffordshire NHS 
Foundation Trust Public Inquiry. London: The Stationary 
Office, 2013.
 8. Crowther J, Wilson KC, Horton S, et al. Compassion in health-
care—lessons from a qualitative study of the end of life care of 
people with dementia. J R Soc Med 2013; 106: 492–497.
 9. Heyland DK, Cook DJ, Rocker GM, et al. Defining priori-
ties for improving end-of-life care in Canada. CMAJ 2010; 
182: E747–E752.
 
10. Institute of Medicine. Improving medical education: enhanc-
ing the behavioral and social science content of medical school 
curricula. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2004.
 
11. Sinclair S, Norris J, McConnell S, et al. Compassion: a 
scoping review of the healthcare literature. BMC Palliat 
Care 2016; 15: 1–16.
 
12. Gelhaus P. The desired moral attitude of the physician: (II) 
compassion. Med Health Care Philos 2012; 15: 397–410.
 
13. Entwistle F. Give support, not sympathy. Nurs Times 2014; 
110: 25.
 
14. Graber DR and Mitcham MD. Compassionate clinicians: 
take patient care beyond the ordinary. Holist Nurs Pract 
2004; 18: 87–94.
 Sinclair et al. 
447
 
15. Lelorain S, Bredart A, Dolbeault S, et al. How does a physi-
cian’s accurate understanding of a cancer patient’s unmet 
needs contribute to patient perception of physician empa-
thy? Patient Educ Couns 2015; 98: 734–741.
 
16. Post SG, Ng LE, Fischel JE, et al. Routine, empathic 
 
and compassionate patient care: definitions, development, 
obstacles, education and beneficiaries. J Eval Clin Pract 
2014; 20: 872–880.
 
17. World Health Organization. Definition of palliative care. 
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2011.
 
18. Canadian Hospice and Palliative Care Association. 
Definition of palliative care. Ottawa, ON, Canada: Canadian 
Hospice and Palliative Care Association, 1995.
 
19. Soanes C and Stevenson A. Sympathy. In: Stevenson A 
(ed.) Oxford English dictionary of English. 3rd ed. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2010.
 
20. Mercer SW and Reynolds WJ. Empathy and quality of care. 
Br J Gen Pract 2002; 52: S9–S12.
 
21. Soanes C and Stevenson A.Empathy. In: Stevenson A (ed.) 
Oxford English dictionary of English. 3rd ed. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2010.
 
22. Hein G and Singer T. I feel how you feel but not always: 
the empathic brain and its modulation. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
2008; 18: 153–158.
 
23. Hojat M, Vergare MJ, Maxwell K, et al. The devil is in the 
third year: a longitudinal study of erosion of empathy in 
medical school. Acad Med 2009; 84: 1182–1191.
 
24. Kane GC, Gotto JL, Mangione S, et al. Jefferson Scale of 
Patient’s Perceptions of Physician Empathy: preliminary 
psychometric data. Croat Med J 2007; 48: 81–86.
 
25. Neumann M, Edelhauser F, Tauschel D, et al. Empathy decline 
and its reasons: a systematic review of studies with medical 
students and residents. Acad Med 2011; 86: 996–1009.
 
26. Hoad T. Concise Oxford dictionary of English etymology. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
 
27. Nunberg G and Newman E. The American heritage diction-
ary of the English language. 5th ed. Boston, MA: Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2011.
 
28. Sinclair S, McClement S, Raffin Bouchal S, et al. 
Compassion in health care: an empirical model. J Pain 
Symptom Manage 2016; 51: 193–203.
 
29. Gilbert P and Choden. Mindful compassion: using the 
power of mindfulness and compassion to transform our 
lives. Little: Brown Book Group, 2013.
 
30. Way D and Tracy SJ. Conceptualizing compassion as rec-
ognizing, relating and (re)acting: a qualitative study of com-
passionate communication at hospice. Commun Monogr 
2012; 79: 292–315.
 
31. Bramley L and Matiti M. How does it really feel to be in my 
shoes? Patients’ experiences of compassion within nursing 
care and their perceptions of developing compassionate 
nurses. J Clin Nurs 2014; 23: 2790–2799.
 
32. Van der Cingel M. Compassion in care: a qualitative study 
of older people with a chronic disease and nurses. Nurs 
Ethics 2011; 18: 672–685.
 
33. Fogarty LA, Curbow BA, Wingard JR, et al. Can 40 seconds 
of compassion reduce patient anxiety? J Clin Oncol 1999; 
17: 371–379.
 
34. Roter DL, Hall JA and Katz NR. Relations between physi-
cians’ behaviors and analogue patients’ satisfaction, recall, 
and impressions. Med Care 1987; 25: 437–451.
 
35. Sinclair S, Raffin Bouchal SR, Chochinov H, Hagen N, et al. 
Spiritual care: how to do it. BMJ Support Palliat Care 2012; 2: 
319–327.
 
36. McDonagh JR, Elliott TB, Engelberg RA, et al. Family 
satisfaction with family conferences about end-of-life care 
in the intensive care unit: increased proportion of family 
speech is associated with increased satisfaction. Crit Care 
Med 2004; 32: 1484–1488.
 
37. Riggs JS, Woodby LL, Burgio KL, et al. “Don’t get weak 
in your compassion”: bereaved next of kin’s suggestions 
for improving end-of-life care in Veterans Affairs Medical 
Centers. J Am Geriatr Soc 2014; 62: 642–648.
 
38. Heyland DK, Dodek P, Rocker G, et al. What matters most 
in end-of-life care: perceptions of seriously ill patients and 
their family members. CMAJ 2006; 174: 627–633.
 
39. Glaser BG and Strauss AL. The discovery of grounded 
 
theory: strategies for qualitative research. New York: 
Aldine, 1967.
 
40. Corbin JM. Basics of qualitative research: techniques and 
procedures for developing grounded theory. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: SAGE, 2015.
 
41. Brown B, Crawford P, Gilbert P, et al. Practical compas-
sions: repertoires of practice and compassion talk in acute 
mental healthcare. Sociol Health Ill 2014; 36: 383–399.
 
42. Singer T and Klimecki OM. Empathy and compassion. Curr 
Biol 2014; 24: R875–R878.
 
43. Klimecki OM and Singer T. Empathic distress fatigue rather 
than compassion fatigue? Integrating findings from empathy 
research in psychology and social neuroscience. In: Oakley 
B, Knafo A and Madhavan G (eds) Pathological altruism. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2012, pp. 368–383.
 
44. Eisenberg N and Miller PA. The relation of empathy to proso-
cial and related behaviors. Psychol Bull 1987; 101: 91–119.
 
45. Cialdini RB, Brown SL, Lewis BP, et al. Reinterpreting the 
empathy-altruism relationship: when one into one equals 
oneness. J Pers Soc Psychol 1997; 73: 481–494.
 
46. Rudolph U, Roesch S, Greitemeyer T, et al. A meta-analytic 
review of help giving and aggression from an attributional 
perspective: contributions to a general theory of motivation. 
Cognit Emot 2004; 18: 815–848.
 
47. Vivino BL, Thompson BJ, Hill CE, et al. Compassion in 
psychotherapy: the perspective of therapists nominated as 
compassionate. Psychother Res 2009; 19: 157–171.
 
48. Gilbert P. Compassion: conceptualisations, research and 
use in psychotherapy. East Sussex: Routledge, 2005.
 
49. Goetz JL, Keltner D and Simon-Thomas E. Compassion: 
an evolutionary analysis and empirical review. Psychol Bull 
2010; 136: 351–374.
 
50. Burnell L. Compassionate care: a concept analysis. Home 
Health Care Manag Pract 2009; 42: 48–55.
 
51. Klimecki OM, Leiberg S, Ricard M, et al. Differential pattern 
of functional brain plasticity after compassion and empathy 
training. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 2014; 9: 873–879.
 
52. Halifax J. Understanding and cultivating compassion in clin-
ical settings. The A.B.I.D.E. compassion model. In: Singer 
T and Bolz M (eds) Compassion: bridging practice and 
 
science. Munich: Max Planck Society, 2013, pp. 209–228.
 
53. Sinclair S, Torres M, Raffin Bouchal S, et al. Compassion 
training in healthcare: what are patients’ perspectives on 
training healthcare providers? BMC Medical Education 
 
2016; 16: 1–10.
