 University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO;
and University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
Corresponding author: Toby C. Campbell,
MD, 3051 WIMR, 1111 Highland Ave,
Madison, WI 53705; e-mail: tcc@medicine.
wisc.edu.
Disclosures provided by the authors are
available with this article at
jop.ascopubs.org.
DOI: 10.1200/JOP.2016.014621;
published online ahead of print at
jop.ascopubs.org on January 17, 2017.
Characterizing the Nature of Scan Results Discussions:
Insights Into Why Patients Misunderstand
Their Prognosis
Sarguni Singh, Dagoberto Cortez, Douglas Maynard, James F. Cleary, Lori DuBenske, and Toby C. Campbell
PROBLEM FACED: Patients with incurable
cancer have poor prognostic awareness, which
may lead to unrealistic expectations and the
pursuit of inappropriately aggressive therapy.
Althoughithasbeendemonstratedthatpatients
have poor illness understanding, little is known
about what factors contribute to this prognostic
disconnect. Our study sought to further char-
acterize how oncologists discuss prognostic
information with patientswith advanced cancer
and to identify whether this discussion con-
tributes to patients’ misperceptions.
WHAT WE DID: We listened to 128 audio-
recordedencountersofmultiple oncologists from
four academic cancer center hospitals in the
eastern, midwestern, and southwestern United
States between 2004 and 2007. Eligible patients
wereEnglish-speakingadultswithstageIIIA,IIIB,
or IV non–small-cell lung cancer. Sixty-four of
theseaudio-recordedconversationsincludedscan
results and were subsequently categorized into
good, stable, or bad news on the basis of the
content of the recording. We used conversation
analysis,aqualitativemethodforstudyinghuman
interaction, to present a detailed examination of
the dialogue between oncologists and patients in
conversations with prognostic implications.
WHAT WE FOUND: Oncologic visits follow
a typical phase structure comprising four
central components: symptom-talk, scan-talk,
treatment-talk, and logistic-talk. Oncologists
spend little time discussing scan results and the
prognostic implications in favor of treatment-
related talk.
CONFOUNDING
FACTORS,
REAL-LIFE
IMPLICATIONS: Our analysis is specific to
oncologists and thus not necessarily reflective
of the communication practices of other cli-
nicians who care for seriously ill patients. Our
study found a need to create space within
the typical oncologic visit phase structure for
prognosis communication, and we believe
the paucity of this conversation significantly
contributes to poor prognostic awareness
demonstrated by patients with cancer. We
offer a question, “Would you like to talk about
what this means?” as a communication device
that can regularly incorporate occasions for
prognosis-talk and shared decision making.
This simple question, already aligned with the
way oncologists naturally communicate, could
meaningfully affect dialogue surrounding
prognosis, leading to enhanced prognostic
awareness.
ReCAPs (Research
Contributions Abbreviated for
Print) provide a structured,
one-page summary of each
paper highlighting the main
findings and significance of
the work. The full version of
the article is available online at
jop.ascopubs.org.
192
Volume 13 / Issue 3 / March 2017 n Journal of Oncology Practice
Copyright © 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Original Contribution
CARE DELIVERY
Original Contribution
CARE DELIVERY
 University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO;
and University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
Appendix
DOI:
10.1200/JOP.2016.
014621
DOI: 10.1200/JOP.2016.014621;
published online ahead of print at
jop.ascopubs.org on January 17, 2017.
Characterizing the Nature of Scan
Results Discussions: Insights Into
Why Patients Misunderstand
Their Prognosis
SarguniSingh,DagobertoCortez,DouglasMaynard,JamesF.Cleary,LoriDuBenske,and
Toby C. Campbell
Abstract
Introduction
Patients with incurable cancer have poor prognostic awareness. We present a detailed
analysisofthedialoguebetween oncologistsandpatientsinconversationswithprognostic
implications.
Methods
Atotalof128audio-recordedencountersfromalargemultisitetrialwereobtained,and64
involved scan results. We used conversation analysis, a qualitative method for studying
human interaction, to analyze typical patterns and conversational devices.
Results
Four components consistently occurred in sequential order: symptom-talk, scan-talk,
treatment-talk, and logistic-talk. Six of the encounters (19%) were identified as good news,
15 (45%) as stable news, and 12 (36%) as bad news. The visit duration varied by the type of
news: good, 15 minutes (07:00-29:00); stable, 17 minutes (07:00-41:00); and bad, 20
minutes (07:00-28:00). Conversational devices were common, appearing in half of
recordings. Treatment-talk occupied 50% of bad-news encounters, 31% of good-news
encounters, and 19% of stable-news encounters. Scan-talk occupied less than 10% of all
conversations. There were only four instances of frank prognosis discussion.
Conclusion
Oncologists and patients are complicit in constructing the typical encounter. Oncologists
spend little time discussing scan results and the prognostic implications in favor of
treatment-related talk. Conversational devices routinely help transition from scan-talk to
detailed discussions about treatment options. We observed an opportunity to create
prognosis-talk after scan-talk with a new conversational device, the question “Would you
like to talk about what this means?” as the oncologist seeks permission to disclose
prognostic information while ceding control to the patient.
INTRODUCTION
Patients with advanced and incurable
cancer generally overestimate their prob-
ability for long-term survival and mis-
understandthegoalsofanticancertherapy.1,2
Weeks et al3 showed that 69% of patients
with metastatic lung cancer and 81% of
patients with metastatic colorectal can-
cer incorrectly believed their chemo-
therapy was curative in intent; Rocque
et al4 found that only 65% of hospitalized
patients with advanced cancer correctly
Copyright © 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Volume 13 / Issue 3 / March 2017 n jop.ascopubs.org
e231
Original Contribution
CARE DELIVERY
 identified their cancer as incurable. In this article, we present
an analysis of the nature of talk in the cancer clinic, describing
why patients might misunderstand the incurable nature of
their disease, and then propose a simple intervention, a
question, that we anticipate will improve the quality of prog-
nostic discussions.
Poor prognostic awareness may lead to unrealistic ex-
pectations and the pursuit of inappropriately aggressive
therapy. Doctors typically convey detailed information about
a serious diagnosis only in response to direct inquiries from
patients.5-7 Fifty-seven percent of oncologists self-reported
that they sometimes, rarely, or never give a time frame for
when they think death is likely to occur.8 Barriers that hinder
understanding in conversations about prognosis and end-of-
life issues include the following: (1) bad news is bad and
inherently difficult to disclose9-11; therefore, disclosure is
often shrouded to seem more optimistic to preserve hope12-15;
(2) patients may misinterpret their prognosis, even if it is
explicitly stated by the oncologist3; (3) physicians and patients
are often complicit in withholding or ignoring important
prognostic information16-18; and (4) reporting bad news has
been shown to be a dispreferred social action.9,10,19,20 Simply
put, just as oncologists struggle to give bad news, patients
struggle to receive it.
Patient-centered health care has gained prominence as the
bestwayofprovidingmodernhealthcare.21-24 As such, shared
decisionmaking(SDM)andpatient-centeredcommunication
(PCC) are seen as the key vehicles for optimal care25-28 as both
moral imperatives and means to align treatment with a pa-
tient’s preferences. The incorporation of SDM and PCC into
regular clinical practice, however, has been met with major
impediments.29 Barriers to achieving patient-centered care,
SDM, and PCC can be organized into two general categories:
(1) thoseduetothestructureofthemedicalhealthcaresystem
itself and, most important for this article, (2) those due to the
interactions between medical staff and patients.22,23,29,30
Although it has been demonstrated that patients have poor
illness understanding, little is known about how oncologists
actually discuss prognostic information with patients and
whether that discussion contributes to patients’ misper-
ceptions. In this study, we collected a set of recordings of
conversations between oncologists and patients when scan
results were presented to analyze critical conversations with
prognostic implications. Our main objectives were to first to
observe how oncologists spend time in the room with patients
and determine patterns of communication, with a specific
focusonidentifyingexplicitandimplicitprognosisdiscussion.
Next, using conversation analysis (CA) as our main meth-
odologic approach, we assessed whether oncologists used
conversational devices that shrouded prognosis. To our
knowledge, we present a new conversational device that is
expected to create a space for discussion of prognostic in-
formation as a result of our analysis. Furthermore, it may also
help to maintain the principles of SDM and patient-centered
care and has the potential to significantly improve prognostic
communication.
METHODS
This report is a secondary analysis of data collected from a
multisite, nonblinded randomized trial testing the effective-
ness of the Web-based Comprehensive Health Enhancement
Support System31,32 for patients with lung cancer and care-
giver dyads. Dyads were recruited from four academic cancer
center hospitals in the eastern, midwestern, and southwestern
United States between September 2004 and April 2007, with
data collection ending in May 2009. Primary eligibility criteria
were English-speaking adults with stage IIIA, IIIB, or IV
non–small-cell lung cancer. A total of 518 caregiver-patient
dyads were assessed for eligibility, and 144 caregiver-patient
dyads received the Comprehensive Health Enhancement
Support System intervention.32 Our data set included audio-
recorded encounters of multiple oncologists with the dyads
from all study sites. A total of 11 physician faculty members
were audio recorded at these different institutions, of whom
three were women and eight were men. We listened to 128
recorded conversations. After excluding any conversations
that were devoid of scan results, a further reduction in data
wasmade because of theintensive nature of CA, whichbrought
us to 64 conversations. These 64 conversations were then
transcribed and analyzed using CA conventions. Our analysis
of laudable event proposals (LEP) and/or appreciation se-
quences (AS) comes from the 33 cases that we found in the 64
conversations we analyzed using CA. We categorized the type
of news delivered in each encounter as good, stable, or bad
news on the basis of the content of the recording. To describe
how oncologists and patients spend their time together, we
categorized the amount of time spent in each phase of con-
versation on the basis of the type of news delivered. The
University of Wisconsin institutional review board approved
this analysis.
The oncologist-patient interactional dynamic is extremely
complex and requires an equally intensive analysis technique:
e232
Volume 13 / Issue 3 / March 2017 n Journal of Oncology Practice
Copyright © 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Singh et al
 CA. CA is an examination of what Sacks33(p211) called “nat-
urally occurring social activities” and is a precise tool for the
study of human interaction. It is an inductive, empirically
driven approach that captures minute interactional features
and identifies reoccurring patterns. CA focuses on the or-
ganization of an interaction—how participants recognize
what the other is saying and take part in understanding one
another. Analysts uncover patterns and orderly conversa-
tional devices, which are specific utterances, phrases, or
sentences that provide the speaker with the ability to
accomplish a social action. The result is a detailed description
of the practices by which participants achieve the organization
of human interactions. To give a sense of the detail involved,
transcription of an audio file into a CA transcript requires
approximately 10 to 100 times the length of the audio file,
for example, 10 minutes of audio recording could take up to
10 hours to transcribe, including details such as prosody,
microinflections, rising and falling volume and pitch, and
pauses.34 CA is an established strategy to examine the fine
detail in nuanced conversations.
We previously described oncologists’ routine use of two
conversational devices, termed LEP and AS, as transitional
phrases to help them close out and shift from reporting scan
news to talking about treatment options.35 We uncovered and
specifically analyzed the use of these conversational devices.35
These two devices showed up in more than half (ie, 33) of the
transcripts. Panel 1 in Appendix Fig A1 (online only) dem-
onstrates an LEP, defined as an utterance that offers a
praiseworthy or favorable version of scan results. Oncologists
use this technique to recruit patients to their perspective when
the news is not exactly what the patient expected or wanted to
hear. Panel 2 in Appendix Fig A1 demonstrates an AS, an
utterance reminding patients to appreciate the fact that their
health status is relatively good and that the treatment has been
beneficial.
RESULTS
Oncology Encounter Structure Is Consistent
Medical interviews in primary care have an ordered structure
of component activities.13,35-38 We found that oncologic visits
also follow a typical phase structure. In fact, 77% of them
followed the typical phase structure (49 of 64), whereas 23%
(15 of 64) deviated from this structure. This phase structure
comprises four central components that typically follow this
order: symptom-talk, scan-talk, treatment-talk, and logistic-
talk. After initial greetings, patients and caregivers report on
physical and psychologic symptoms, which we call symptom-
talk. Next, there is a transition to reporting the most recent
imaging and laboratory results, which we call scan-talk. The
conversation then shifts to treatment-talk, where oncologists
and patients discuss chemotherapy, radiation, surgical, or
symptom management options. Finally, logistic-talk consists
of coordination and organization of care (eg, instructions for
scheduling a follow-up visit).
We call the interactional phase structure typical because
these four components appear often, and in sequential order,
acrossoncologyvisits.Infact,asshowninPanel3inAppendix
Fig A1, when a doctor or patient attempts to skip over one of
the first three phases, the attempt is often blocked or explicitly
acknowledged by the other participant, demonstrating a form
of resistance. Thus, in line with CA inquiry, participants co-
construct and maintain the social order of these oncology
visits.
Good, Stable, or Bad News
Of the 33 analyzed conversations that had an AP or LEP, six
(19%)wereidentifiedasgoodnewsdelivery,15(45%)asstable
news delivery, and 12 (36%) as bad news delivery. The average
amountoftimeoncologistsspentintheroomvariedinrelation
to the type of news delivered: for good news delivery, 15:03
minutes (range, 07:25-29:05); stable news delivery, 17:14
minutes (range, 06:50-41:19); and bad news delivery, 20:53
minutes (range, 07:1428:10).
Fig 1 depicts the time spent in each phase of conversation
in relation to the type of news delivered. More time was spent
discussing symptoms during stable (37.2%) and good news
(34.5%) delivery, whereas less time was devoted to this topic
during bad news delivery. When bad news was delivered,
approximately 50% of the conversation was devoted to
treatment-talk, whereas with good and stable news delivery,
it was 31% and 19%, respectively. Scan-talk, which is in-
disputably news of a prognostic nature, was always less than
10% of the entire conversation, regardless of the news type
delivered. Logistic-talk made up about 15% of all conversa-
tions regardless of the type of news delivered. In all cases, the
physicians spoke the vast majority of the time and demon-
strated control over the direction of the discussion, particu-
larly with regard to transitioning between different phases of
the conversation. Furthermore, although we argue that these
discussions are co-constructed, this does not ensure that each
participant has an equal say in how conversations unfold or
Copyright © 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Volume 13 / Issue 3 / March 2017 n jop.ascopubs.org
e233
Would You Like to Talk About What This Means?
 what topics are brought up and when they are introduced;
asymmetry in clinical interactions exists.39,40 The transitions
between the typical components were often quick.
Prognosis-Talk
Therewereonlyfourinstancesoffrankprognosisdiscussionin
which life expectancy was discussed, and three of these in-
stances (75%) were initiated by the patient or caregiver. We
observed significant but unexplicated prognostic information
most frequently shrouded in scan-talk, in which the size of a
tumor was characterized either explicitly (eg, grown by 5 mm)
orcategorically(“gettingbigger”).Theseinteractions weretoo
numerous to count. We also noted that patients or caregivers
tried to elicit more information about the meaning of their
scan results, presumably in an attempt to better decipher their
underlying prognosis. These instances typically occurred at
thebeginningoftreatment-talk,whenthepatientwouldpause
the discussion about treatment and attempt to transition back
to scan-talk. Some ways in which they did this included re-
iterating what physicians initially stated about the scan (“So
the scan is stable?”), asking for specifics about the size of the
malignancy and focusing on radiographic technique (eg,
contrast, type of study). The physicians’ usual way of
responding was to briefly reiterate what they had said pre-
viouslyaboutthescanandreattemptatransitiontotreatment-
talk. We anticipated quantifying explicit empathetic state-
ments, which we expected would occur during prognosis
communication, but there was a notable absence of these
statements.
Use of Conversation Devices
LEP and AS are common, appearing in nearly half of all
recordedconversations.In84%oftheseinstances,theyappear
in association with stable or bad news (Fig 2). When it did not
seem appropriate to use an LES or AS, for example, because
of dire news, there were other devices physicians used, such as
an optimistic projection.10,41 In one instance, the oncologist
described progression in the liver after second-line docetaxel
and then upgraded this news, saying, “The good news is there
there’s a lot of other options here.” In this conversation, an
optimistic projection was used to transition to treatment-talk
and functioned to obscure the nature of the bad news (Panel 4
in Appendix Fig A1).
DISCUSSION
We intended to characterize the nature of oncologist-patient
talk to better understand the observed phenomenon that
patients with cancer have poor prognostic awareness. Medical
interviews in primary care have an ordered structure of
component activities, and a similar pattern is observed in the
oncologic visit. Our analysis concludes with four primary
observations.
First, oncologists spend the shortest amount of time on the
discussion of scan news and its prognostic implications.
Oncologists seem determined to move the conversation to
treatment-talk, often using an AS or LEP as the transition
mechanism. An estimate of life expectancy was provided in
only four clinical encounters (6%), and three of those were at
therequestofpatientsorcaregivers,suggestingthatprognostic
discussions will occur when invited. This is important, con-
sidering recent findings that show that patients’ illness
understanding improves after continued prognosis discus-
sions.42 We observed only rare instances of empathic state-
ments or silence to allow processing of the serious news. The
paucity of explicit prognostic communication in the en-
counters likely contributes to the observed poor illness un-
derstanding seen nationally.1-4 This makes it difficult to
create interactional space to use the main attributes of SDM
and PCC—building a consensus about the preferred treat-
ment,43 creating a clear understanding of the information
being discussed, supporting opportunities for patient au-
tonomy, and providing emotional support as needed.44
34.5
20.7
37.2
9.2
9.0
7.9
31.1
50.2
19.8
15.0
12.9
15.0
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
90.0
100.0
Good News
Bad News
Stable News
Logistic talk
Scan talk
Treatment talk
Symptom talk
Time Spent in Each Phase of Conversation (%)
FIG 1. Time management by type of news delivery. The graph shows the
amount of time spent in each phase of conversation in relation to the type of
news being delivered. The percentages do not add up to 100% because we
excluded the small talk that often comes at the end of the clinic visit. Such
small talk includes, for example, weekend plans.
e234
Volume 13 / Issue 3 / March 2017 n Journal of Oncology Practice
Copyright © 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Singh et al
 Second,oncologistsquicklytransitiontheconversationfrom
scan-talk to treatment-talk. We observed immediate transition
to treatment-talk during the disclosures of bad news, which
potentially contributes to patients’ misinterpretation of their
prognosis and stifles any further discussions surrounding
prognosis. We also found that patients and their caregivers
rarely inquire about prognosis, suggesting this is a socially
dispreferred action, much the same way an oncologists’ dis-
closure of a poor prognosis might be. This preexisting dynamic
sets the stage for both parties to communicate in a way that
avoids explicit discussion about survival. Although avoidance
may seem emotionally preferable in the short term, poor-
prognosis discussions negatively affect illness understanding,
which can affect advance care planning, care satisfaction,3,45
and the amount of patient involvement in decision making.46
There is an opportunity after scan-talk and before treat-
ment recommendations for an intentional pause and a
question: “Would you like to talk about what this means?” By
phrasing this as a question, the oncologist seeks permission to
enter into a space where prognosis can be discussed while
ceding control of the conversation to the patient. An affir-
mative response—“Yes, I would like to know”—could em-
power oncologists to disclose the prognostic implications of
the test results. Pausing after the delivery of scan news would
also create an opportunity to express empathy, an emotion
that is both the imaginative reconstruction of another’s
perspective and the emotional resonance this creates in the
self.47 Crucially, theaddition of this question does not alter the
typical flow or organization of an oncologist-patient in-
teraction and thus has the potential to improve prognostic
communication without breaking its intrinsic structure.
Third, the routine use of conversational devices to tran-
sitionoutofscan-talkleadsthediscussiontodetailedtalkabout
anticancer treatment options, which are often optimistically
framed and possibly misleading. This tendency is most readily
apparent during the delivery of stable and bad news, which is
when we see an increased incidence of AS and LEP. This sug-
gests that oncologists realize that delivery of stable news will
be construed as bad news by patients and thus pre-emptively
attempt to convince patients of their belief that, for example,
stable disease is good news. Although this conversational
technique might seem to ease the emotional reaction to un-
wanted news in the short term, it also drives the conversation
away from prognostic communication and minimizes em-
pathic opportunities.
Fourth, when oncologists discuss the impact of treatment,
they rely on jargon (most commonly, response rates), rather
than more tangible patient outcomes. Together, these four
observed communication patterns limit patient inquiries about
“what this [scan results] means to the quality or duration of
my life” and runs counter to the main principles of SDM and
patient-centered care. Our findings contribute to this growing
body of knowledge that examines the importance of diagnostic
imaging results38,48,49; the analysis of the many impediments
hindering the implementation of SDM, PCC, and patient-
centered care23,26,29,50,51; and the literature that documents
the importance of clear prognostic discussion.3,46,52-54
There are several strengths to this study. This was a multi-
institutional study reflective of practice styles from both aca-
demic and private clinics, with oncologists trained in different
programsandpracticingindifferentpartsofthecountry,andthe
samplesizewasrelativelylargeforaCAstudy.Somelimitations
include the fact that nonverbal cues could not be identified or
commentedonbyonlylisteningtoaudiorecordings.Theaudio
recordings analyzed were 10 years old and might not reflect
current prognosis communication practices of oncologists.
Although treatmentoptionshaveevolved,wehavenoreasonto
believeoncologists’ communication behaviors have changed to
anysignificantdegreeinthelast10years.Ouranalysisisspecific
to oncologists and thus not necessarily reflective of the com-
munication practices of other clinicians.
In conclusion, oncologists communicate scan results to
patients with a natural and structured pattern of talk. A natural
16%
76%
8%
Stable news
Bad news
Good
news
FIG2.Thefrequencyoflaudableeventproposalsandappreciationsequences
by type of news. These devices are most commonly associated with stable
news and bad news, and less often seen in good news discussions.
Copyright © 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Volume 13 / Issue 3 / March 2017 n jop.ascopubs.org
e235
Would You Like to Talk About What This Means?
 collusion to avoid the prognostic implications of the scans
permeates the patient-physicianrelationship. There is a need to
create space within the typical phase structure for prognosis
communication. We propose the question “Would you like to
talk about what this means?” as a communication device that
canregularlyincorporateoccasionsforprognosis-talkandSDM
in the clinic encounters. It has the benefit of keeping the se-
quential order of the phase structure intact and maintainingthe
oncologist’s role as the lead architect of the discussion.
Although efforts should continue to support communica-
tion skills training, our research suggests a simple modification
that requires little education or training, that is aligned with
the way oncologists naturally communicate, and that could
meaningfullyaffect thedialogue.Itisourhopethat,aspatients
answer this question honestly, oncologists, too, can engage
in discussion surrounding prognosis that leads to enhanced
prognosticawarenessandimprovedillnessunderstanding.
Acknowledgment
Supported by Grant No. P50 CA095817-01A1 from the National Cancer
Institute through the Center for Health Enhancement Systems Studies at the
University of Wisconsin, the Cambia Health Foundation’s Sojourns Scholars
Leadership Program (T.C.C.), and a T32 National Research Service Award
(No. AT006956) from the National Center for Complementary and Integrative
Health at the National Institutes of Health (D.C.). These funding sources had no
role in the design, preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript for
publication. No other financial support was declared for the remaining authors.
The authors thank Gabrielle Rocque and Jamie Von Roenn for their review of a
previous version of this manuscript.
Authors’ Disclosures of Potential Conflicts of Interest
Disclosures provided by the authors are available with this article at
jop.ascopubs.org.
Author Contributions
Conceptionanddesign:SarguniSingh,DagobertoCortez,JamesF.Cleary,
Toby C. Campbell
Provision of study materials or patients: Lori DuBenske
Collection and assembly of data: James F. Cleary, Lori DuBenske, Toby C.
Campbell
Data analysis and interpretation: Sarguni Singh, Dagoberto Cortez,
Douglas Maynard, Toby C. Campbell
Manuscript writing: All authors
Final approval of manuscript: All authors
Accountable for all aspects of the work: All authors
Corresponding author: Toby C. Campbell, MD, 3051 WIMR, 1111 Highland
Ave, Madison, WI 53705; e-mail: tcc@medicine.wisc.edu.
References
1. Pronzato P, Bertelli G, Losardo P, et al: What do advanced cancer patients know of
their disease? A report from Italy. Support Care Cancer 2:242-244, 1994
2. Weeks JC, Cook EF, O’Day SJ, et al: Relationship between cancer patients’
predictions of prognosis and their treatment preferences. JAMA 279:1709-1714,
1998
3. Weeks JC, Catalano PJ, Cronin A, et al: Patients’ expectations about effects of
chemotherapy for advanced cancer. N Engl J Med 367:1616-1625, 2012
4. Rocque GB, Campbell TC, Johnson SK, et al: A quantitative study of triggered
palliative care consultation for hospitalized patients with advanced cancer. J Pain
Symptom Manage 50:462-469, 2015
5. Christakis NA: Prognostication and bioethics. Daedalus 128:197-214, 1999
6. Helft PR: Necessary collusion: Prognostic communication with advanced cancer
patients. J Clin Oncol 23:3146-3150, 2005
7. Schaepe KS: Affective Communication: Management of Bad News Following
Cancer Diagnosis & Stem Cell Transplant. Madison, WI, University of Wisconsin–
Madison, 2013
8. Daugherty CK, Hlubocky FJ: What are terminally ill cancer patients told about
their expected deaths? A study of cancer physicians’ self-reports of prognosis dis-
closure. J Clin Oncol 26:5988-5993, 2008
9. Dosanjh S, Barnes J, Bhandari M: Barriers to breaking bad news among medical
and surgical residents. Med Educ 35:197-205, 2001
10. Maynard DW: Bad News, Good News: Conversational Order in Everyday Talk
and Clinical Settings. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press, 2003
11. Taylor KM: “Telling bad news”: Physicians and the disclosure of undesirable
information. Sociol Health Illn 10:109-132, 1988
12. Per¨
akyl¨
a A, Sorjonen M-L: Emotion in interaction. Oxford, United Kingdom,
Oxford University Press, 2012
13. Heritage J, Maynard DW (eds): Communication in Medical Care: Interaction
Between Primary Care Physicians and Patients. Cambridge, United Kingdom, Cam-
bridge University Press, 2006
14. Holt E: The structure of death announcements: Looking on the bright side of
death. Int J Stud Discourse 13:189-212, 1993
15. Maynard DW, Freese J: Good news, bad news, and affect: Practical and temporal
“emotion work” in everyday life, in Per¨
akyl¨
a A, Sorjonen M-L (eds): Emotion in In-
teraction. Oxford, United Kingdom, Oxford University Press, 2012, pp 92-112
16. Leydon GM, Boulton M, Moynihan C, et al: Cancer patients’ information needs and
information seeking behaviour: In depth interview study. BMJ 320:909-913, 2000
17. The AM, Hak T, Ko¨
eter G, et al: Collusion in doctor-patient communication about
imminent death: An ethnographic study. BMJ 321:1376-1381, 2000
18. Vos MS, Berendsen HH: ’Doctor, I don’t want to know’: An investigation of denial
in lung cancer patients, in Vos MS (ed): Denial and Quality of Life in Lung Cancer
Patients. Amsterdam, Netherlands, Amsterdam University Press, 2009, pp 15-24
19. Lutfey KE, Maynard DW: Bad news in oncology: How physician and patient talk
about death and dying without using those words. Soc Psychol Q 61:321-341, 1998
20. Ptacek JT, McIntosh EG: Physician challenges in communicating bad news.
J Behav Med 32:380-387, 2009
21. Institute of Medicine Committee on Quality of Health Care in America: Crossing
the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century. Washington, DC,
National Academies Press, 2001
22. Epstein RM, Franks P, Fiscella K, et al: Measuring patient-centered communi-
cation in patient-physician consultations: Theoretical and practical issues. Soc Sci
Med 61:1516-1528, 2005
23. Mead N, Bower P: Patient-centredness: A conceptual framework and review of
the empirical literature. Soc Sci Med 51:1087-1110, 2000
24. Stewart M, Brown JB, Donner A, et al: The impact of patient-centered care on
outcomes. J Fam Pract 49:796-804, 2000
25. Barry MJ, Edgman-Levitan S: Shared decision making–pinnacle of patient-
centered care. N Engl J Med 366:780-781, 2012
26. L´
egar´
e F, Ratt´
e S, Gravel K, et al: Barriers and facilitators to implementing shared
decision-making in clinical practice: Update of a systematic review of health pro-
fessionals’ perceptions. Patient Educ Couns 73:526-535, 2008
27. L´
egar´
e F, Stacey D, Turcotte S, et al: Interventions for improving the adoption of
shared decision making by healthcare professionals. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 9:
CD006732, 2014
28. Weston WW: Informed and shared decision-making: The crux of patient-
centered care. CMAJ 165:438-439, 2001
29. Joseph-Williams N, Elwyn G, Edwards A: Knowledge is not power for patients: A
systematic review and thematic synthesis of patient-reported barriers and facili-
tators to shared decision making. Patient Educ Couns 94:291-309, 2014
e236
Volume 13 / Issue 3 / March 2017 n Journal of Oncology Practice
Copyright © 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Singh et al
 30. Ishikawa H, Hashimoto H, Kiuchi T: The evolving concept of “patient-centeredness”
in patient-physician communication research. Soc Sci Med 96:147-153, 2013
31. Gustafson DH, DuBenske LL, Namkoong K, et al: An eHealth system supporting
palliative care for patients with non-small cell lung cancer: A randomized trial. Cancer
119:1744-1751, 2013
32. DuBenske LL, Gustafson DH, Namkoong K, et al: CHESS improves cancer
caregivers’ burden and mood: Results of an eHealth RCT. Health Psychol 33:1261-
1272, 2014
33. Sacks H: Harvey Sacks lectures 1964-1965. Hum Stud 12:211-215, 1989
34. Chatwin J: Conversation analysis. Complement Ther Med 12:131-135, 2004
35. Maynard DW, Cortez D, Campbell TC: “End of life” conversations, appreciation
sequences, and the interaction order in cancer clinics. Patient Educ Couns 99:
92-100, 2016
36. Byrne PS, Long BEL: Doctors Talking to Patients: A Study of the Verbal Behavior
of General Practitioners Consulting in Their Surgeries. London, United Kingdom, Her
Majesty’s Stationary Office, 1976
37. Robinson JD: An interactional structure of medical activities during acute visits
and its implications for patients’ participation. Health Commun 15:27-57, 2003
38. Frankel RM: Talking in interviews: A dispreference for patient-initiated questions
in physician-patient encounters, in Psathas G: Interactional Competence. Washington,
DC.: International Institue for Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis & Uni-
versity Press of America, 1990, pp 231- 262
39. Maynard D: Interaction and asymmetry in clinical discourse. Am J Sociol 97:
448-495, 1991
40. Pilnick A, Dingwall R: On the remarkable persistence of asymmetry in doctor/
patient interaction: A critical review. Soc Sci Med 72:1374-1382, 2011
41. Jefferson G: On the sequential organization of troubles-talk in ordinary con-
versation. Soc Probl 35:418-441, 1988
42. Epstein AS, Prigerson HG, O’Reilly EM, et al: Discussions of life expectancy and
changes in illness understanding in patients with advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol 34:
2398-2403, 2016
43. Charles C, Gafni A, Whelan T: Decision-making in the physician-patient en-
counter: Revisiting the shared treatment decision-making model. Soc Sci Med 49:
651-661, 1999
44. Committee on Improving the Quality of Cancer Care: Patient-centered com-
munication and shared decision making, in Levit L, Balogh E, Nass S, Ganz PA (eds):
Delivering High-Quality Cancer Care: Charting a New Course for a System in Crisis.
Washington, DC, National Academies Press, 2013, pp 91-152
45. Jagosh J, Donald Boudreau J, Steinert Y, et al: The importance of physician
listening from the patients’ perspective: Enhancing diagnosis, healing, and the doctor-
patient relationship. Patient Educ Couns 85:369-374, 2011
46. Murtagh GM, Furber L, Thomas AL: Patient-initiated questions: How can doctors
encourage them and improve the consultation process? A qualitative study. BMJ
Open 3:e003112, 2013
47. Zelenski AB: Theatre-Based Empathy Training in Medicine: Exploring the Spaces
in Between. Madison, WI, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2015
48. Maynard DW: Notes on the delivery and reception of diagnostic news regarding
mental disabilities, in Helm DT, Anderson WT, Meehan AJ, et al: The Interactional
Order: New Directions in the Study of Social Order. New York, NY, Irvington, 1989,
pp 54-67
49. Per¨
akyl¨
a A: Authority and accountability: The delivery of diagnosis in primary
health care. Soc Psychol Q 61:301-320, 1998
50. Frosch DL, Singer KJ, Timmermans S: Conducting implementation research in
community-based primary care: A qualitative study on integrating patient decision
support interventions for cancer screening into routine practice. Health Expect 14:
73-84, 2011 (suppl 1)
51. Pollard S, Bansback N, Bryan S: Physician attitudes toward shared decision
making: A systematic review. Patient Educ Couns 98:1046-1057, 2015
52. Hagerty RG, Butow PN, Ellis PA, et al: Cancer patient preferences for
communication of prognosis in the metastatic setting. J Clin Oncol 22:1721-1730,
2004
53. Mack JW, Smith TJ: Reasons why physicians do not have discussions about poor
prognosis, why it matters, and what can be improved. J Clin Oncol 30:2715-2717,
2012
54. Enzinger AC, Zhang B, Schrag D, et al: Outcomes of prognostic disclosure:
Associations with prognostic understanding, distress, and relationship with
physician among patients with advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol 33:3809-3816,
2015
Copyright © 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Volume 13 / Issue 3 / March 2017 n jop.ascopubs.org
e237
Would You Like to Talk About What This Means?
 AUTHORS’ DISCLOSURES OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Characterizing the Nature of Scan Results Discussions: Insights Into Why Patients Misunderstand Their Prognosis
The following represents disclosure information provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered compensated. Relationships are
self-held unless noted. I = Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more
information about ASCO’s conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or ascopubs.org/journal/jop/site/misc/ifc.xhtml.
Sarguni Singh
No relationship to disclose
Dagoberto Cortez
No relationship to disclose
Douglas Maynard
No relationship to disclose
James F. Cleary
No relationship to disclose
Lori DuBenske
No relationship to disclose
Toby C. Campbell
No relationship to disclose
e238
Volume 13 / Issue 3 / March 2017 n Journal of Oncology Practice
Copyright © 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Singh et al
 Appendix
Laudible Event Proposal showing a physician suggetion of an
appreciable interpretation of the CT scan results.
History: The patient is a 74-year-old white female with stage IV NSCLC, currently
on a treatment break, who is seen today for surveillance scan results. The patient
holds a high school diploma and her caregiver’s education level is unknown. Her
physician is white and female.
MD: “But let me try to do it in simple terms for you. When we look at your scans,
there’s only three possible results. That it’s grown, which doesn’t take a rocket
scientist to figure out, that it’s decreased in size, which again, is fairly clear, or that
it’s stable. The stable piece is a little trickier, because you don’t know if what
you’re looking at is deadened scar tissue, because you have effectively treated the
cancer, you know, as an ongoing basis. Or if what you’re looking at could have a
component of microscopic cancer cells, that you’re just not appreciating on a scan.
The fact that you have been stable for such a nice period of time, really, is
quite nice, we like stable”
Patient: “I do too”
MD: “Anything in terms of decreases are added extras, stable is a beautiful
thing”
Patient: “Right”
MD: “In the future, and you know forever and even over the past year, your scans
are abnormal, always. They’re always going to be abnormal, because you’re
always going to have scarring, you’re always going to have, you know, the initial
abnormalities that your scans have shown us every step of the way. So that’s why
it’s really important to do the immediate prior comparison to today’s comparison.
In other words, we wouldn’t go back to last year and compare today’s chest scan,
because it wouldn’t really give us a whole lot of information. You know, what
you’re doing is trying to compare and see if there are any immediate changes
that need to be addressed, so stable is a beautiful thing”
Patient: “Oh I’ll take stable”
MD: “Yep, yep”
Patient: “I’ve been saying that right along”
MD: “Yep, absolutely”           
Appreciation sequence. A laudable event proposal, in which the
oncologist comments on the extended period of time the patient has been receiving
chemotherapy, is followed by an appreciation sequence, in which the oncologist
solicits the patient’s positive response to the laudable event proposal.
History: The patient is a 74-year-old white female with stage IV NSCLC being
treated with erlotinib. Her caregiver is her white 49-year-old daughter. The
patient holds a high school diploma and caregiver holds a graduate degree. Her
physician is white and female.
Caregiver: “Does the scan look okay?”
Physician: “It looked great”
Patient: “But the scan does look great?”
Physician: ”Umhm”
Physician: “Very stable. And I’m go-“
Patient: “So it is stable?”
Physician: So you’re…you’re…you’re sort of right on track and we’ll keep you
on…umm…what we’re doing. So you are starting your fourteenth month
Patient: “That’s right”
Physician: “Yeah”
Patient: “That is right”
Physician: “Umm which is a beautiful thing”
Patient: “Yes”
Physician: “And you, you know that and appreciate that”
Patient: “Yes, oh I know that and I’m grateful everyday”
Physician: “Umhmm”  
Blocking. This panel demonstrates how one participant can block the
attempt of another to skip one of the phases of the typical structure of an oncology
visit. In this case, the physician blocks the caregiver’s attempt to skip over
symptom-talk by telling the caregiver that they will talk about the scans after she
(physician) further evaluates and examines the patient. The bolded words show 
where the physcian blocks the attempt to transition.
History: The patient is a 69-year-old white male with stage IIIB NSCLC. He is
currently off therapy and on surveillance. His caregiver is his 67-year-old wife who
is also white. Both patient and caregiver hold associate or technical degrees. His
physician is white and female.
Physician:   Mm hm. Have you anything to eat or drink lately. Since the last
                     couple of minutes?
Caregiver:    Yes.
Patient:        Yeah, I had dinner.
Physician:    Okay.
Patient:        Yeah. I was starving. He hm hm
Caregiver:    After his CAT scans
Patient:        After my…
Caregiver:    And by the way, what did that show?
Physicians:  Well we’ll talk about it, let me just take a look at Mister X...        
Transitioning With an Optimistic Projection. This segment demonstrates
how oncologists often use optimistic projections
 and
 statements of
good news (bolded) to transition out of scan-talk and into treatment-talk.
History: The patient is a 34-year-old Asian male with stage IV
NSCLC. He is currently undergoing second-line treatment with
docetaxel. His caregiver is his 34-year-old wife who is also Asian.
The patient holds a bachelor’s degree, while his wife has a graduate
degree. His physician is white and male. The patient dies two months
after this conversation.
Physician: Unfortunately, I think that this chemo that you’ve been on
has probably done as much as it’s gonna do. We’re not seeing any
further improvement in the chest.
Caregiver: Mm hmm. 
Physician: And, in fact, we’re seeing some new areas of disease in
the liver that have come up here since the last scan. So I think that
tells us that you’ve probably gotten as much benefit as you, we’re
gonna get from this treatment.
Physician: Uhm. The good news is that there’s a lot of other options
here, okay, we have a lot of other chemotherapy options available to
us that, although there’s no guarantee that any one will work of
course, you know, they they’ve a lot to choose from, and I think
that there’s a good chance that we will see some responses to some
other, other treatments. If you’re willing to continue trying the
treatment.      
FIG A1. Examples of communication phenomena. CT, computed tomography; NSCLC, non–small-cell lung cancer.
Copyright © 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Volume 13 / Issue 3 / March 2017 n jop.ascopubs.org
e239
Would You Like to Talk About What This Means?
